NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2010 March 19; 140(6): 883–899. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.01.025.

Immunity, Inflammation, and Cancer
Sergei I. Grivennikov1, Florian R. Greten2, and Michael Karin1
1Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Departments of Pharmacology and
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA, 92093, USA.
22nd

Department of Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University Munich, Munich,
Germany.

Summary

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inflammatory responses play decisive roles at different stages of tumor development, including
initiation, promotion, malignant conversion, invasion, and metastasis. Inflammation also affects
immune surveillance and responses to therapy. Immune cells that infiltrate tumors engage in an
extensive and dynamic crosstalk with cancer cells and some of the molecular events that mediate
this dialog have been revealed. This review outlines the principal mechanisms that govern the effects
of inflammation and immunity on tumor development and discusses attractive new targets for cancer
therapy and prevention.

Keywords
Cancer; inflammation; immunity; cytokines; NF-κB; STAT3

Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The presence of leukocytes within tumors, observed in the 19th century by Rudolf Virchow,
provided the first indication of a possible link between between inflammation and cancer. Yet,
it is only during the last decade that clear evidence has been obtained that inflammation plays
a critical role in tumorigenesis, and some of the underlying molecular mechanisms have been
elucidated (Karin, 2006). A role for inflammation in tumorigenesis is now generally accepted,
and it has become evident that an inflammatory microenvironment is an essential component
of all tumors, including some in which a direct causal relationship with inflammation is not
yet proven (Mantovani et al., 2008). Only a minority of all cancers are caused by germline
mutations, whereas the vast majority (90%) are linked to somatic mutations and environmental
factors. Many environmental causes of cancer and risk factors are associated with some form
of chronic inflammation. Up to 20% of cancers are linked to chronic infections, 30% can be
attributed to tobacco smoking and inhaled pollutants (such as silica and asbestos), and 35% to
dietary factors (20% of cancer burden is linked to obesity) (Aggarwal et al., 2009).

© 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Corresponding author: Michael Karin karinoffice@ucsd.edu .
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting
proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Authors declare no competing financial interests.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although it is now well-established that the induction of inflammation by bacterial and viral
infections increases cancer risk (de Martel and Franceschi, 2009), recent work has shown that
in addition to being a tumor initiator by virtue of its high carcinogen content, tobacco smoke
is also a tumor promoter due to its ability to trigger chronic inflammation (Takahashi et al.,
2010). Likewise, obesity, whose prevalence is growing at an alarming rate, promotes
tumorigenesis in the liver (Park et al., 2010) and pancreas (Khasawneh et al., 2009). Most solid
malignancies appear in older individuals and even old age (Ershler and Keller, 2000) and cell
senescence (Rodier et al., 2009) are postulated to be tumor promoters that act through
inflammatory mechanisms. Along with its pro-tumorigenic effects, inflammation also
influences the host immune response to tumors and can be used in cancer immunotherapy
(Dougan and Dranoff, 2009) and to augment the response to chemotherapy (Zitvogel et al.,
2008). Yet, in some cases, inflammation can diminish the beneficial effects of therapy
(Ammirante et al., 2010). This review is mainly focused on the pro-tumorigenic effects of
inflammation but also touches on the relationship between inflammation and anti-tumor
immunity,

Types of inflammation and general mechanisms

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several types of inflammation—differing by cause, mechanism, outcome, and intensity—can
promote cancer development and progression (Figure 1). Persistent Helicobacter pylori
infection is associated with gastric cancer and MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue)
lymphoma. Infections with hepatitis B (HBV) or C (HCV) viruses increase the risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and infections with Schistosoma or Bacteroides species are
linked to bladder and colon cancer, respectively (Karin, 2006;Wu et al., 2009a). The
inflammatory response triggered by infection precedes tumor development and is a part of
normal host defense, whose goal is pathogen elimination. However, tumorigenic pathogens
subvert host immunity and establish persistent infections associated with low grade but chronic
inflammation. By contrast, acute inflammation induced by certain microbial preparations was
used by Coley with some success to treat cancer in the 1890s and one such preparation is
currently used in the treatment of bladder cancer (Rakoff-Nahoum and Medzhitov, 2009). What
makes bladder carcinoma uniquely sensitive to acute inflammation, even though it is promoted
by chronic inflammation, is currently unknown. This is an important problem whose solution
should reveal how to successfully deploy inflammation in cancer therapy. Another type of
chronic inflammation that precedes tumor development is caused by immune deregulation and
autoimmunity. An example is inflammatory bowel disease, which greatly increases the risk of
colorectal cancer (Waldner and Neurath, 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

However, not all chronic inflammatory diseases increase cancer risk and some of them, such
as psoriasis, may even reduce it (Nickoloff et al., 2005). It is not clear what makes IBD or
chronic hepatitis tumor promoting, in comparison with conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis
or psoriasis, which do not significantly promote tumorigenesis. One possibility could be related
to the exposure of the gastrointestinal tract and liver to dietary and environmental carcinogens,
which never make their way into joints or the skin. Chronic inflammation can also be induced
by environmental exposure. Particulate material from tobacco smoke and other irritants can
precipitate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, a condition associated with higher lung
cancer risk (Punturieri et al., 2009). Inflammatory mechanisms account for the tumor
promoting effect of exposure to tobacco smoke on lung cancer in mice (Takahashi et al.,
2010). Inhaled asbestos or silica particles also give rise to lung cancer but have no obvious
mutagenic activity. Such particles, however, can trigger inflammation through effects on prointerluekin-1β (IL-1β) processing by the inflammasome (Dostert et al., 2008) and this may
mediate their tumorigenic activity. Even obesity, which increases cancer risk by 1.6-fold (Calle,
2007), can lead to chronic inflammation (Tuncman et al., 2006) that promotes development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (Park et al., 2010). Accumulation of damaged DNA and cell

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 3

senescence can also give rise to tumor promoting chronic inflammation (Rodier et al., 2009;
Zheng et al., 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A completely different type of inflammation is the one that follows tumor development. Most,
if not all, solid malignancies trigger an intrinsic inflammatory response that builds up a protumorigenic microenvironment (Mantovani et al., 2008). In addition to cell-autonomous
proliferation, certain oncogenes, such as RAS and MYC family members, induce a
transcriptional program that leads to remodeling of the tumor microenvironment through
recruitment of leukocytes and lymphocytes, expression of tumor-promoting chemokines and
cytokines, and induction of an angiogenic switch (Soucek et al., 2007; Sparmann and Bar-Sagi,
2004). All solid malignancies, at some point outpace their blood supply and become oxygen
and nutrient deprived. This results in necrotic cell death at the tumor’s core and the release of
pro-inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1 and HMGB1 (Vakkila and Lotze, 2004). The
ensuing inflammatory response promotes neo-angiogenesis and provides surviving cancer cells
with additional growth factors, produced by newly recruited inflammatory and immune cells
(Karin, 2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other tumors, for instance lung cancer, can promote inflammation through active secretion of
molecules, such as the extracellular matrix component versican that activates macrophages
through Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 (Kim et al., 2009). Based on the continuous cell renewal
and proliferation induced by tumor-associated inflammation, tumors have been referred to as
“wounds, which never heal” (Dvorak, 1986). This type of inflammation is largely a subverted
wound healing and tissue regenerative response. Even dominant oncogenes such as v-Src or
K-Ras are unable to induce cancer in adult animals unless accompanied by injury and
subsequent tissue regeneration (Guerra et al., 2007; Sieweke et al., 1990).
Lastly, a strong tumor-associated inflammatory response can be initiated by cancer therapy.
Radiation and chemotherapy cause massive necrotic death of cancer cells and surrounding
tissues, which in turn trigger an inflammatory reaction analogous to a wound-healing response
(Zong and Thompson, 2006). The net outcome of therapy-induced inflammation is
controversial, as on one hand it can have tumor-promoting functions just like the necrosis that
accompanies rapid tumor growth (Ammirante et al., 2010; Vakkila and Lotze, 2004), but on
the other hand it can enhance the cross-presentation of tumor antigens and subsequent induction
of an anti-tumor immune response (Zitvogel et al., 2008). The latter and its importance will be
discussed below.

Immune cells in tumorigenesis
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As a result of these different forms of inflammation, the tumor microenvironment contains
innate immune cells (including macrophages, neutrophils, mast cells, myeloid derived
suppressor cells, dendritic cells, and natural killer cells) and adaptive immune cells (T and B
lymphocytes) in addition to the cancer cells and their surrounding stroma (which consists of
fibroblasts, endothelial cells, pericytes, and mesenchymal cells) (de Visser et al., 2006) (Table
1). These diverse cells communicate with each other by means of direct contact or cytokine
and chemokine production and act in autocrine and paracrine manners to control and shape
tumor growth. It is the expression of various immune mediators and modulators as well as the
abundance and activation state of different cell types in the tumor microenvironment that
dictate in which direction the balance is tipped and whether inflammation-promotes tumor
growth or anti-tumor immunity will ensue (Lin and Karin, 2007; Smyth et al., 2006). In
established tumors this balance is profoundly tilted towards pro-tumor inflammation, as
without therapeutic intervention advanced tumors rarely regress. Yet, it is difficult to
unequivocally assess the overall impact of immunity and inflammation on early tumorigenic
events, because direct in vivo models for evaluating the effects of these phenomena on initial

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

tumor growth are missing. In addition, our current knowledge is based on measurement of
tumor load at a point where malignant cells may have already escaped early surveillance
mechanisms. However, it is safe to assume that tumor promoting inflammation and anti-tumor
immunity co-exist at different points along the path of tumor progression (Figure 2) and that
environmental and microenvironmental conditions dictate the balance between the two (Bui
and Schreiber, 2007; Swann et al., 2008).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The most frequently found immune cells within the tumor microenvironment are tumorassociated macrophages (TAMs) and T cells. TAMs mostly promote tumor growth and may
be obligatory for angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis (Condeelis and Pollard, 2006), and
high TAM content generally correlates with poor prognosis (Murdoch et al., 2008). Mature T
cells are divided into two major groups based on the T cell receptors (TCR) they express: γδ
and αβ. αβT cells are further classified according to their effector functions as CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells (CTLs) and CD4+ helper T (Th) cells, which include Th1, Th2, Th17 and T regulatory
(Treg) cells, as well as natural killer T (NKT) cells. Importantly, T cells can exert both tumor
suppressive and promoting effects, as determined by their effector functions (DeNardo et al.,
2009; Langowski et al., 2007; Smyth et al., 2006). Increased T cell numbers, specifically
activated CTLs and Th cells, correlate with better survival in some cancers, including invasive
colon cancer, melanoma, multiple myeloma, and pancreatic cancer (Galon et al., 2006; Laghi
et al., 2009; Swann and Smyth, 2007). Correspondingly, T cell deficiency or disruption of
specific cytotoxic mechanisms can render experimental animals more susceptible to
spontaneous or chemical carcinogenesis (Shankaran et al., 2001; Swann and Smyth, 2007).
However, there is also evidence that many of the T cell subsets found in solid tumors are
involved in tumor promotion, progression, or metastasis, including CD8+ T cells (Roberts et
al., 2007), IFNγ-producing Th1 cells (Hanada et al., 2006), Th2 cells (Aspord et al., 2007;
DeNardo et al., 2009) and Th17 cells (Langowski et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2009). The only
cells that lack a pro-tumorigenic role, so far, are NK cells. Similar to TAMs, the tumorpromoting functions of T lymphocytes are mediated by cytokines, whereas both cytokines and
cytotoxic mechanisms mediate the anti-tumorigenic functions of T lymphocytes (Lin and
Karin, 2007; Swann and Smyth, 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Interestingly, Treg cells, which are presumed to act mostly in a pro-tumorigenic fashion
through suppression of anti-tumor immune responses (Gallimore and Simon, 2008), may also
exert an anti-tumorigenic function under certain circumstances by virtue of their ability to
suppress tumor-promoting inflammation (Erdman et al., 2005). In breast cancer, the presence
of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes with high CD4+/CD8+ and Th2/Th1 ratio is indicative of
poor prognosis (Kohrt et al., 2005). Th2 CD4+ T cells stimulate mammary cancer progression
and metastasis by educating TAMs to produce pro-angiogenic and pro-metastatic factors
(DeNardo et al., 2009). In colitis associated cancer (CAC), infiltrating T cells also appear to
play a tumor promoting function (Waldner and Neurath, 2009). What makes the same T cell
subset anti-tumorigenic in one cancer and pro-tumorigenic in another remains largely unknown
and may hold the key to the development of successful immunotherapy.
The cytokine and chemokine expression profile of the tumor microenvironment may be more
relevant than its specific immune cell content. Different cytokines can either promote or inhibit
tumor development and progression, regardless of their source (Lin and Karin, 2007). Through
activation of various downstream effectors, such as NF-κB, AP-1, STAT and SMAD
transcription factors, as well as caspases, cytokines control the immune and inflammatory
milieu to either favor anti-tumor immunity (IL-12, TRAIL, IFNγ) or enhance tumor
progression (IL-6, IL-17, IL-23) and also have direct effects on cancer cell growth and survival
(TRAIL, FasL, TNF-α, EGFR ligands, TGF-β, IL-6).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

TAMs are one of the most important players in the inflammation and cancer arena and an
important source of cytokines (Mantovani et al., 2008). In analogy to Th1 and Th2 T cells,
macrophages can be classified into M1 and M2 types (Sica et al., 2008). M1 macrophages,
activated by IFNγ and microbial products, express high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-12 or IL-23), major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and
inducible nitric oxide synthase and are capable of killing pathogens and priming anti-tumor
immune responses. By contrast, M2 or “alternatively” activated macrophages, which are
induced in vitro by IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13, downregulate MHC class II and IL-12 expression
and show increased expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, scavenger receptor
A, and arginase. Most TAMs are considered to have an M2 phenotype while promoting tumor
angiogenesis and tissue remodeling (Sica et al., 2008). However, most confirmed tumorpromoting cytokines are “M1 cytokines”, whereas IL-10, an M2 cytokine, may be tumor
suppressive as shown in in colorectal cancer (Berg et al., 1996; Lin and Karin, 2007).
Furthermore, unlike Th1 and Th2 cells, M1 and M2 macrophages are plastic and their
phenotype is defined by their gene expression prolife rather than by deterministic
differentiation pathways and lineage choices.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other immune cells also affect tumorigenesis (Table 1). Neutrophils can play both tumorpromoting and tumoricidal functions, depending on their differentiation status and the presence
of TGF-β (Fridlender et al., 2009). B lymphocytes and mast cells are also important contributors
to immune-mediated tumor growth (Ammirante et al., 2010;de Visser et al., 2006;Soucek et
al., 2007) and conventional macrophages and dendritic cells are important for antigen
presentation and T cell activation during anti-tumor immunity as well as for cytokine
production and immunosuppression in established tumors (Table 1).

Inflammation and tumor initiation
Tumor initiation is a process in which normal cells acquire the first mutational hit that sends
them on the tumorigenic track by providing growth and survival advantages over their
neighbors. In most cases, however, a single mutation is insufficient and many cancers require
at least 4-5 mutations (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990; Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). It is also
imperative that each mutation will be transmitted to the cell’s progeny, and in cancers that arise
within rapidly renewed epithelia (intestinal and skin cancers), oncogenic mutations must occur
in either long lived stem cells or transient amplifying cells rather than within differentiated
cells, which are rapidly eliminated before the next mutation can strike. Alternatively, oncogenic
mutations can occur within differentiated epithelial cells, such as hepatocytes, which are
capable of proliferation and are sufficiently long lived to allow subsequent mutational hits.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It has been suggested that an inflammatory microenvironment can increase mutation rates, in
addition to enhancing the proliferation of mutated cells. Activated inflammatory cells serve as
sources of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI) that are
capable of inducing DNA damage and genomic instability (Figure 3A). However, it is not clear
whether ROS and RNI produced and released by neutrophils or macrophages (mainly during
acute inflammation) are sufficiently long lived to diffuse through the extracellular matrix, enter
epithelial cells, cross their cytoplasm, enter the nucleus and react with DNA packaged into
chromatin. Alternatively, inflammatory cells may use cytokines such as TNF-α to stimulate
ROS accumulation in neighboring epithelial cells (Figure 3A). It has therefore been debated
whether immune-mediated mechanisms as opposed to dietary and environmental mutagens are
the critical driving forces behind tumor initiation (Hussain et al., 2003). Nonetheless, p53
mutations, presumably caused by oxidative damage, were found in both cancer cells and in
inflamed, but non-dysplastic, epithelium in CAC, suggesting that chronic inflammation causes
genomic changes (Kraus and Arber, 2009). Chronic inflammation triggered by the colonic
irritant dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) may induce DNA damage that gives rise to colonic

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 6

adenomas (Meira et al., 2008). However, on its own DSS is a poor carcinogen (Okayasu et al.,
1996).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inflammation-induced mutagenesis may also result in inactivation or repression of mismatch
repair response genes and ROS can also cause direct oxidative inactivation of mismatch repair
enzymes (Colotta et al., 2009; Hussain et al., 2003). Once the mismatch repair system has been
dismantled, inflammation-induced mutagenesis is enhanced and several important tumor
suppressors, such as Tgfbr2 and Bax, which harbor microsatellite sequences, may be
inactivated (Colotta et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another mechanism linking inflammation to oncogenic mutations is upregulation of AID
(activation-induced cytidine deaminase), an enzyme that promotes immunoglobulin gene class
switching by catalyzing deamination of cytosines in DNA (Okazaki et al., 2007). In addition
to B cells, where it was discovered, AID is overexpressed in many cancers of diverse origins
and its expression is induced by inflammatory cytokines in an NF-κB-dependent manner or by
TGFβ (Okazaki et al., 2007). AID induces genomic instability and increases mutation
probability during error-prone joining of double-stranded DNA breaks, a process found to
introduce mutations into critical cancer genes, including Tp53, c-Myc, and Bcl-6 (Colotta et
al., 2009). AID contributes to formation of lymphomas, and gastric and liver cancers (Okazaki
et al., 2007; Takai et al., 2009). Other mechanisms of inflammation-induced mutagenesis have
also been suggested, including effects of inflammation on non-homologous recombination and
NF-κB-mediated inactivation of p53-dependent genome surveillance (Colotta et al., 2009).
In Giα2 knockout mice, which develop spontaneous colonic inflammation and cancer,
enterocytes selectively lose expression of components involved in mismatch repair, namely
MLH1 and PMS2, due to histone deacetylase- and DEC-1-mediated epigenetic repression of
the Mlh1 promoter (Edwards et al., 2009). Other findings implicate epigenetic mechanisms,
including microRNA-based silencing and DNA methylation, in inactivation of tumor
suppressors, such as INK4a and APC, and other changes that accompany tumor initiation
(Cooper and Foster, 2009). Recently, inflammation has been connected to epigenetic
reprogramming by the JmjC-domain protein Jmjd3, which is encoded by an NF-κB target gene
(De Santa et al., 2007). In inflammation-associated intestinal cancer in Gpx1/2 knockout mice,
inflammation induces DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)-dependent DNA methylation and
silencing of a large cohort of Polycomb group target genes, some of which are also silenced
by methylation in human colon cancer (Hahn et al., 2008). However, it remains to be shown
that any of these inflammation-induced epigenetic mechanisms actually makes a critical
contribution to tumor initiation, either in a suitable mouse model or through prospective
analysis of human specimens.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another mechanism through which inflammation may enhance tumor initiation is the
production of growth factors and cytokines that can confer a stem-cell like phenotype upon
tumor progenitors or stimulate stem cell expansion, thereby enlarging the cell pool that is
targeted by environmental mutagens. Indeed, STAT3 is linked to both stem cell reprogramming
and stem cell renewal (Chen et al., 2008), whereas NF-κB can enhance Wnt/β-catenin signaling
in colonic crypts (Umar et al., 2009). The pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α promotes nuclear
entry of β-catenin during inflammation-associated gastric cancer in the absence of any
mutations in Wnt/β-catenin pathway components (Oguma et al., 2008).
The connection between inflammation and tumor initiation is not a one-way street and there
is also evidence that DNA damage can lead to inflammation and thereby promote
tumorigenesis. One of the best examples is provided by the model of hepatocellular carcinoma
induced by the carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DEN) in which DNA damage contributes to
necrotic cell death, resulting in an inflammatory reaction that promotes tumor development

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(Maeda et al., 2005; Sakurai et al., 2008). A number of oncoproteins (Ras, Myc, RET) can
activate signaling pathways that drive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines (IL-6, IL-8, IL-1β, CCL2, CCL20) (Mantovani et al., 2008). Genotoxic stress can
also induce expression of NKG2D family members, which serve as ligands for NK and γδT
cell receptors (Strid et al., 2008) resulting in either elimination of stressed cells or a local
inflammatory response. In the same vein, mosaic deletion of the DNA repair gene ATR and
Tp53 in the skin results in recruitment of CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells, as a part of a prototypical
immune response to “altered self” (Ruzankina et al., 2009). Defective DNA repair caused by
a deficiency of the Fen1 exonuclease also results in a tumor promoting inflammatory response
that is driven by damaged DNA, most likely through activation of a pattern recognition receptor
(Zheng et al., 2007).

Inflammation and tumor promotion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumor promotion is the process of tumor growth from a single initiated cell into a fully
developed primary tumor. Initial tumor growth depends on increased cell proliferation and
reduced cell death, both of which are stimulated by inflammation-driven mechanisms. In fact,
many of the enhancing effects of inflammation on cancer are exerted at the level of tumor
promotion and most known tumor promoters, for instance phorbol esters, are potent inducers
of inflammation (Karin, 2006). Inflammation-induced tumor promotion may occur early or
late in tumor development and can lead to activation of pre-malignant lesions that were dormant
for many years. The mechanisms through which inflammation affects tumor promotion are
numerous and in addition to increased proliferation and enhanced survival, can also involve
the so-called angiogenic switch, which allows a small dormant tumor to receive the blood
supply necessary for the next growth phase (Lewis and Pollard, 2006). Mechanisms of
inflammation-driven tumor promotion are discussed below.

Tumor promoting cytokine signaling

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Production of tumor promoting cytokines by immune/inflammatory cells that activate
transcription factors, such as NF-κB, STAT3 and AP-1, in pre-malignant cells to induce genes
that stimulate cell proliferation and survival, is a major tumor promoting mechanism (Figure
3B). Initial evidence for inflammation-mediated tumor promotion came from mouse models
of skin, colon, and liver cancer. Although counterintuitive at the time, TNF-α was found to be
required for two-stage skin carcinogenesis (Moore et al., 1999). TNF-α activates both AP-1
and NF-κB transcription factors, but in the skin its tumor promoting effects are mediated by
AP-1 (Eferl and Wagner, 2003), which was identified as a transcription factor whose activity
is stimulated by the classic tumor promoter tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA) (Angel et al.,
1987). By contrast, NF-κB inhibits the development of skin cancer (Zhang et al., 2004). Thus,
although a given cytokine may activate several transcription factors, its tumor promoting
activity may be mediated by only one of them and antagonized by another. As discussed below,
a similar situation may apply to liver cancer. Amongst the different transcription factors that
are part of this mechanism, NF-κB and STAT3 are activated in the majority of cancers and act
as non-classical oncogenes, whose activation in malignant cells is rarely the result of direct
mutations, and instead depends on signals produced by neighboring cells or more rarely on
mutational activation of upstream signaling components. NF-κB and STAT3 activate genes
that control cell survival, proliferation, and growth, as well as angiogenesis, invasiveness,
motility, chemokine, and cytokine production (Grivennikov and Karin, 2009; Yu et al.,
2009).
Oncogenic transcription factors can also be activated through pattern recognition receptors by
components of bacteria and viruses (Rakoff-Nahoum and Medzhitov, 2009). However, the
overall contribution of pattern recognition receptors on epithelial cells versus those expressed

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

by immune/inflammatory cells to tumor promotion is far from being clear and will require the
analysis of cell type specific knockout mice. Even the specific agonists that activate these
receptors in cancer are not defined. Nonetheless, the role of the cytokines that are produced in
response to damage-associated (DAMP) or pathogen-associated (PAMP) molecular patterns
in tumor development is more firmly established. For example, AP-1 activation in skin cancer
is largely dependent on TNF-TNFR1 signaling (Balkwill, 2009), whereas STAT3 activation
in cancer cells is largely dependent on a plethora of growth factors and cytokines including
IL-6, IL-11, IL-22, HGF, and EGF, and oncogenic tyrosine kinases, such as c-Met and Src
(Bollrath et al., 2009; Grivennikov et al., 2009; Naugler et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The first critical genetic evidence for inflammatory cells as a source of tumor promoting
cytokines was obtained in a mouse model of CAC, where inactivation of NF-κB in myeloid
cells reduced tumor growth and blocked production of IL-6 and other cytokines in response to
colitis (Greten et al., 2004). Subsequent work demonstrated that the effect of immune cells
(macrophages, T cells) on CAC growth is mediated through IL-6, IL-11, TNF-α and IL-1β
(Becker et al., 2004; Bollrath et al., 2009; Grivennikov et al., 2009; Popivanova et al., 2008),
as well as other cytokines, such as IL-23. IL-11 plays a similar role in gastric cancer (Ernst et
al., 2008), in which IL-1β is also a tumor promoter (Tu et al., 2008). TNF-α also promotes
HCC in mice lacking the P-glycoprotein Mdr2, which develop cholestatic inflammation
followed by hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Pikarsky et al., 2004). HCC can also be
promoted by another member of the TNF family, lymphotoxin β(Haybaeck et al., 2009). TNFα along with IL-6 contributes to obesity-mediated tumor promotion in HCC (Park et al.,
2010). The latter effect correlates with the ability of TNF-α and IL-6 to promote hepatosteatosis
and steatohepatitis (Park et al., 2010). One of the most critical tumor promoting cytokines in
HCC is IL-6. Mice deficient in IL-6 develop much less HCC in response to the chemical procarcinogen DEN and the gender-biased production of IL-6 accounts for the much higher HCC
load in males (Naugler et al., 2007). High levels of circulating IL-6, are associated with HCC
risk factors, including hepatosteatosis, obesity, and liver cirrhosis, and are the best predictors
of rapid progression from viral hepatitis to HCC in humans (Wong et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In CAC and HCC, the tumor promoting effect of IL-6 is mainly exerted via STAT3, whose
cell type specific inactivation in hepatocytes and enterocytes inhibits the development of these
malignancies in mice treated with DEN or azoxymethane (AOM) and DSS, respectively
(Bollrath et al., 2009; Grivennikov et al., 2009; Park et al., 2010). Development of CAC in
mice is also dependent on IKKβ-mediated NF-κB activation in enterocytes, whose major
function in this model is increased survival of pre-malignant cells (Greten et al., 2004). A
similar role was proposed for NF-κB in HCC development in mice deficient in Mdr2 and in
lymphotoxin-transgenic mice both of which exhibit chronic liver inflammation (Haybaeck et
al., 2009). However, in the DEN model of HCC and Helicobacter-driven gastric cancer, NFκB promotes hepatocyte and epithelial cell survival and acts as an inhibitor of tumor
development (Maeda et al., 2005; Shibata et al., 2009). Most likely, the diverse effects of NFκB in different models are determined by the mechanism of tumor induction and the type of
inflammatory response involved in tumor promotion. Mdr2 knockout and lymphotoxintransgenic mice exhibit a very low level of normal hepatocyte death, which is not enhanced by
the absence of NF-κB (Haybaeck et al., 2009; Pikarsky et al., 2004). In these mice, NF-κB in
hepatocytes is mainly responsible for propagating inflammation through induction of
chemokines, which recruit immune/inflammatory cells into the liver. By contrast, DEN treated
mice exhibit an acute inflammatory response triggered by IL-1α release from necrotic
hepatocytes (Sakurai et al., 2008). IL-1α induces IL-6 production by Kupffer cells and this
response drives the compensatory proliferation of surviving hepatocytes (a type of a woundhealing response); the greater the amount of cell death – the greater the regenerative response.
By suppressing accumulation of ROS and preventing hepatocyte necrosis, NF-κB inhibits HCC
induction in DEN treated mice (Maeda et al., 2005).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another tumor-promoting cytokine is IL-23 (Langowski et al., 2006). IL-23 is mostly
expressed by TAMs in a manner dependent on STAT3 and NF-κB (Kortylewski et al., 2009).
IL-23 blockade with neutralizing antibodies or genetic inactivation of the IL-23p19 gene
dramatically decrease tumor multiplicity and growth in the two-step model of skin
carcinogenesis (Langowski et al., 2006). In part, the pro-tumorigenic effects of IL-23 may be
mediated by IL-17 and IL-22 production by Th17 cells, but other effects of IL-23 on CTLs,
Tregs, and myeloid cells should not be discounted. A close relative of IL-23 is IL-12, which
shares with IL-23 the IL-12p40 subunit and is involved in Th1 differentiation, IFNγ production,
and activation of anti-tumor immunity (Trinchieri et al., 2003). Secretion of IL-23 and IL-12
secretion are reciprocally regulated and the switch from IL-12 to IL-23 production may be an
important tumor promoting event. STAT3 activation, PGE2, ATP, and lactic acid increase
IL-23 production by TAMs (Kortylewski et al., 2009; Shime et al., 2008). The latter two
agonists link cancer cell necrosis (induced by hypoxia or therapy) and the Warburg effect (the
switch from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis) to IL-23 production, thereby shifting antitumor immunity to tumor promotion.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A similar circuit can be executed by myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) that produce
arginase1 and indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase, which are enzymes that dampen anti-tumor
immunity through interference with T cell activation (Gabrilovich and Nagaraj, 2009). Taken
together, tumor associated inflammation drives tumor growth, angiogenesis and can perpetuate
itself through an extensive network of cytokines and chemokines, which are produced by
immune, stromal and malignant cells in response to diverse signals (Figure 3B).
Given that several cytokines (IL-1, TNF, IL-6, IL-23) and transcription factors (AP-1, NFκB, STAT3) are critical for both inflammation and tumor growth, they control hubs of protumorigenic signaling that may be targeted to curtail both tumor associated inflammation and
tumor growth (see below). Pharmacological interference with cytokine signaling decreases
tumorigenesis as well as cancer growth (Becker et al., 2004; Grivennikov et al., 2009; Hedvat
et al., 2009) and may therefore serve as a basis for preventive and therapeutic approaches.
Altogether, cytokine production by immune and inflammatory cells is an important tumor
promoting mechanism that provides malignant cells with a continuous supply of growth and
survival signals in an initially hostile microenvironment. In most cases, tumor promoting
cytokines act in a paracrine manner, yet several types of cancer cells produce their own
cytokines, including IL-6, to achieve the same effect (Gao et al., 2007).

Inflammation and angiogenesis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Growth of large tumors requires an increased intratumoral blood supply. This is triggered by
tumor hypoxia, which promotes angiogenesis and increases the probability of metastasis. In
addition to hypoxia, tumor angiogenesis depends on recruitment of TAMs, which sense
hypoxic signals and in turn produce chemokines and pro-angiogenic factors. Recruitment of
TAM precursors is largely dependent on angiogenic mediators such as angiopoetin 2 and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Important pro-angiogenic genes, such as IL-8,
CXCL1, CXCL8, VEGF and hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1α), are directly regulated
by NF-κB, STAT3 and AP-1 in TAMs, MDSCs, and other cell types (Kujawski et al., 2008;
Rius et al., 2008).
Under hypoxic conditions, HIF-1α stimulates expression of CXCL12, which activates and
recruits endothelial cells in a CXCR4-dependent manner (Sica et al., 2008). Formation of new
lymphatic vessels is regulated by VEGF-C and VEGF-D, whereas VEGF-A facilitates the
recruitment of monocytes, which activate lymphoangiogenesis (Murdoch et al., 2008). VEGFA produced by myeloid cells also inhibits pericyte maturation and endothelial coverage of
newly formed blood vessels, and its conditional ablation accelerates tumorigenesis (Stockmann

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

et al., 2008). The recruitment of Gr1+ myeloid cells (presumably MDSC and TAM precursors)
into tumors, curtails the effects of anti-VEGF therapy, presumably bypassing the requirement
for local VEGF production by cancer cells for recruitment of TAM precursors (Shojaei et al.,
2007). As most growing tumors contain some areas of hypoxia, it is not clear whether hypoxia
is the direct driver of tumor angiogenesis or whether hypoxic stimuli generate inflammatory
signals that drive angiogenesis. Inactivation of NF-κB or STAT3, neutralization of CCL2 or
CXCL12, or TAM depletion unequivocally result in disrupted angiogenesis and decreased
tumor growth, underscoring the critical role of inflammatory mediators in tumor angiogenesis
(Joyce and Pollard, 2009; Kujawski et al., 2008).

Target genes that mediate tumor promotion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Most of the genes that mediate the tumor promoting functions of NF-κB, STAT3, and AP-1
have not been fully defined and most likely the pro-tumorigenic effects of these transcription
factors are exerted through multiple effectors. Some targets may be controlled by more than
one transcription factor and may be more important in one cell type than in another. The
expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL, for instance, are promoted by both
NF-κB and STAT3 as are c-IAP1, c-IAP2, Mcl-1, c-FLIP, and survivin (Karin, 2006; Yu et
al., 2007). Whereas Bcl-XL may be the most prominent anti-apoptotic gene in enterocytes
(Greten et al., 2004), c-FLIP seems to fulfill the same function in hepatocytes (Chang et al.,
2006). Both NF-κB and STAT3 interfere with p53 synthesis and attenuate p53-mediated
genomic surveillance, representing another potential tumor promoting mechanism (Colotta et
al., 2009).
STAT3 controls expression of cyclins D1, D2 and B, as well as the proto-oncogene c-Myc,
and through them it may stimulate cell proliferation (Bollrath et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2007).
Although cyclin D and c-Myc are also thought to be regulated by NF-κB, inactivation of
IKKβ in enterocytes does not interfere with cell proliferation (Greten et al., 2004) and in
Rastransformed keratinocytes (Zhang et al., 2004) or DEN-initiated hepatocytes (Maeda et al.,
2005) NF-κB inhibition actually enhances cyclin D expression and cell proliferation. The AP-1
protein c-Jun cooperates with STAT3 in repression of Fas expression by tumor cells, thereby
attenuating their sensitivity to instructive apoptosis (Eferl and Wagner, 2003). Additional NFκB and STAT3 targets control cell and tissue resistance to stress and injury and include antimicrobial proteins (RegIIIβ, RegIIIγ, Tff3), heat shock proteins, and anti-oxidants, such as
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and ferritin heavy chain (FHC) (Bollrath et al., 2009; Karin,
2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Lastly, another category of target genes that promote tumorigenesis are chemokines and
cytokines that act in autocrine or paracrine manners to ensure the continuous recruitment of
inflammatory cells into the tumor microenvironment. The perpetuation of chronic
inflammation is largely achieved through positive feedback loops, which include inflammatory
cells producing cytokines that induce chemokine synthesis in malignant and stromal cells
leading to prolonged recruitment of inflammatory cells into the tumor microenvironment
(Figure 3). TAMs, MDSCs, Tregs, and Th17 cells are the most critical immune cell subsets in
this respect. Recruitment of myeloid cells is governed by multiple pathways, including CCL2CCR2, CCL1-CXCR2, S100A proteins-RAGE, and IL-1-IL-1R interactions (Bonecchi et al.,
2009). Signaling through CCR6 is critical for Th17 infiltration, whereas Treg cells are attracted
mostly through CCR4 and CCR7 (Bonecchi et al., 2009). In some cases, the critical chemokines
are not produced by cancer cells but are induced in tumor-associated fibroblasts upon
interaction with carcinoma cells (Liao et al., 2009;Orimo et al., 2005;Orimo and Weinberg,
2006).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 11

Inflammation and lymphoid malignancies
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chronic inflammatory conditions are also associated with lymphoid malignancies. An
excellent example is provided by mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas,
which occur in the context of chronic inflammation caused by infectious agents, such as
Helicobacter pylori (the most commonly found gastric lymphoma), Chlamydia psittacii (ocular
adnexal MALT lymphoma) and Borrelia burgdorferi (cutaneous MALT lymphoma) (Ferreri
et al., 2009). Another example is Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which is responsible for large Bcell lymphoma in immunocompromised patients, Burkitt’s lymphoma, and Hodgkin’s
lymphoma (Ferreri et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It has been proposed that repeated antigenic stimulation, autoimmunity, and inflammation are
risk factors for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common hematopoietic
malignancy that accounts for 30% of all leukemias (Chiorazzi et al., 2005). One mechanism
through which such stimuli promote CLL development is induction of B cell activating factor
(BAFF), a member of the TNF family, recently shown to accelerate development of CLL-like
disease in mice (Enzler et al., 2009). Cytokines (such as IL-4 and VEGF), chemokines (such
as SDF-1), and interactions with bone marrow stromal cells support CLL expansion and
suppress apoptosis through upregulation of Bcl-2, survivin, and MCL-1 (Granziero et al.,
2001; Pedersen et al., 2002). This occurs in lymph node pseudofollicles and bone marrow
clusters where leukemic cells interact with components of the inflammatory microenvironment
that support their survival. Another example for the role of inflammation in lymphoid
malignancies are the lymphomas that appear in GM-CSF- and IFNγ-deficient mice, which are
caused by infections and regress upon treatment with antibiotics (Enzler et al., 2003).
A similar situation may occur in multiple myeloma. Through secretion of IL-6, IGF-1, VEGF,
TNF-α, SDF-1 and BAFF, stromal elements promote the survival and migration of neoplastic
plasma cells and also confer drug resistance (Kastritis et al., 2009). IL-6 is of particular
importance, as it acts both in paracrine and autocrine manners and IL-6-deficient mice are
resistant to induction of multiple myeloma (Hodge et al., 2005). Despite constitutive NF-κB
activation, multiple myeloma remains dependent on extrinsic factors, and drugs targeting IL-6
are being evaluated in combination with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib for the treatment
of this malignancy (Kastritis et al., 2009).

Inflammation and metastasis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

From a clinical perspective, metastasis is the most critical aspect of tumorigenesis, because
over 90% of cancer mortality is caused by metastasis. Recent studies unambiguously show that
metastasis requires close collaboration between cancer cells, immune and inflammatory cells,
and stromal elements. The process of metastasis can be grossly divided into four major steps.
The first step is represented by epithelial-mesenchymal transition, in which cancer cells acquire
fibroblastoid characteristics that increase their motility and allow them to invade epithelial
linings/basal membranes and reach efferent blood vessels or lymphatics (Kalluri and Weinberg,
2009). Loss of E-cadherin expression is envisioned as a key event in the epithelialmesenchymal transition. In the second step, cancer cells intravasate into blood vessels and
lymphatics. Inflammation may promote this through production of mediators that increase
vascular permeability. This is followed by the third step in which metastasis initiating cells
survive and travel throughout the circulation. It has been estimated that only about 0.01% of
cancer cells that enter the circulation will eventually survive and give rise to micrometastases
(Joyce and Pollard, 2009). Next, integrin-mediated arrest allows the extravasation of
circulating cancer cells. Finally, single metastatic progenitors interact with immune,
inflammatory, and stromal cells and start to proliferate (Polyak and Weinberg, 2009). Some
of these cells may already be targeted to the pre-metastatic niche in response to tumor generated

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

inflammatory signals prior to the arrival of metastasis-initiating cancer cells (Kaplan et al.,
2005). One of these inflammatory signals is the extracellular matrix component versican, which
leads to macrophage activation and production of the metastasis promoting cytokine TNF-α
(Kim et al., 2009). However, it has been difficult to determine whether versican production by
metastatic cancer cells conditions the future metastatic site prior to their arrival.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

TGFβ is an anti-inflammatory cytokine produced by cancer cells, myeloid cells, and T
lymphocytes. TGFβ signaling is an important regulator of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and metastasis, and elevated TGFβ is often associated with poor prognosis (Yang
and Weinberg, 2008). TGFβ activates SMAD transcription factors and MAPKs, which control
expression of other regulators of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, such as Slug (Yang
and Weinberg, 2008). TGFβ however, also suppresses epithelial cell proliferation and early
tumor growth, causing some tumors to acquire inactivating mutations in TGFβ signaling
components (Yang and Weinberg, 2008). Despite the defects in TGFβ signaling, such tumors
can still metastasize. These opposing effects of TGFβ at different stages of tumor development
await mechanistic explanation. Disruption of TGFβ signaling in cancer cells also results in
upregulation of the SDF1 (CXCL12)-CXCR4 and CXCL5-CXCR2 chemokine:chemokine
receptor pairs and induces rapid recruitment of MDSCs that promote metastasis and dampen
anti-tumor immune responses (Yang et al., 2008). Inactivation of TGFβ signaling was proposed
to result in elevated local TGFβ concentrations that inhibit anti-tumor T cell responses and
induce differentiation of tumor-promoting Th17 cells (Langowski et al., 2007).
Another critical regulator of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition is Snail, a repressor of Ecadherin transcription in epithelial cells. Recent findings suggest that Snail is stabilized in
response to TNF-α signaling, a process that is critical for cancer cell migration and metastasis
(Wu et al., 2009b). Other mechanisms through which pro-inflammatory cytokines can affect
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition is via STAT3-mediated induction of Twist transcription
and NF-κB-mediated induction of both Twist and Kiss (Yu et al., 2009), However, these
mechanisms remain to be confirmed in vivo, and a recent report suggests that STAT3 is a
negative regulator of adenoma-carcinoma transition in colon cancer (Musteanu et al., 2009).
Cancer cell invasion requires extensive proteolysis of the extracellular matrix at the invasive
front. Inflammatory cells are important sources of proteases that degrade the extracellular
matrix. In a model of invasive colon cancer, CCR1+ myeloid cells, whose recruitment is driven
by the chemokine CCL9 produced by cancer cells, promote invasiveness through secretion of
the matrix metalloproteinases MMP2 and MMP9 (Kitamura et al., 2007). IL-1, TNF-α and
IL-6 promote MMP expression, invasiveness ,and metastasis via NF-κB and STAT3 (Yu et
al., 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A different metastatic mechanism dependent on IKKα operates in prostate and breast cancers.
As these cancers progress, their malignant cells progressively accumulate activated IKKα in
their nuclei (Luo et al., 2007). In prostate cancer, accumulation of activated nuclear IKKα
correlates with reduced expression of maspin, an inhibitor of metastasis (Luo et al., 2007).
IKKα activation in metastatic prostate and mammary cancer cells is mediated by members of
the TNF family, namely lymphotoxin and RANKL and its repressive effects on maspin
transcription are NF-κB independent (Luo et al., 2007). How these lymphocytes are recruited
into progressing breast and prostate tumors is still unknown. Recruitment of such cells may be
a consequence of tumor necrosis, but as mentioned above certain carcinomas actively secrete
factors that upregulate fibronectin and cause migration of VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1)-positive
hematopoietic progenitors to the pre-metastatic niche (Kaplan et al., 2005). However, the premetastatic niche concept is somewhat mysterious as it is not clear how primary tumor cells
direct inflammatory cells to such sites.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Alternatively, a small number of metastatic cells can interact with and activate different
myeloid cell types through secreted factors such as versican (Kim et al., 2009). Breast cancer
cells use CSF1 and CXCL12 to induce the recruitment of TAMs, which in turn produce EGF
receptor (EGFR) ligands (Joyce and Pollard, 2009). These cytokines may also mediate a
physical interaction between TAMs and carcinoma cells (Condeelis and Pollard, 2006). TAMs
can be also “programmed” by tumor infiltrating T cells, particularly Th17 cells (Wang et al.,
2009) and Th2 cells (DeNardo et al., 2009). IL-13 and IL-4 produced by tumor infiltrating
CD4+ T cells stimulate the M1 to M2 transition of TAMs and thereby support pulmonary
metastasis of mammary cancer cells (DeNardo et al., 2009). Depletion of TAMs (Joyce and
Pollard, 2009) or CD4+ T cells (DeNardo et al., 2009) dramatically reduces metastasis of mouse
mammary cancer.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Once metastatic cells enter the circulation, they need to survive in suspension and resist
detachment-induced cell death or anoikis. The survival of circulating cancer cells is affected
by inflammatory mediators released by immune cells in response to cancer-derived or
pathogen-derived stimuli (Kim et al., 2009; Luo et al., 2004). Some of these effects depend on
activation of NF-κB in either inflammatory cells or in cancer cells. A variety of cytokines
present in the tumor microenvironment, including TNF-α, IL-6, and epiregulin, can promote
the survival of circulating metastatic seeds (Nguyen et al., 2009). In addition to NF-κB and
STAT3 activation, some of these cytokines can physically link cancer cells to TAMs, allowing
them to travel together throughout the circulation (Condeelis and Pollard, 2006). On the other
hand, single metastatic cells, which are no longer present within an immunosuppressive
environment, may be targeted again by immunosurveillance. Indeed, in some cases, infiltration
of tumors by activated T cells decreases the rate of metastasis (Galon et al., 2006; Pages et al.,
2005). The interaction of circulating cancer cells with platelets or macrophages may protect
them from NK cell-mediated killing, thereby overcoming immunosurveillance (Palumbo et
al., 2007).
Intravasation is regulated by prostaglandins (which are produced in a COX2-dependent manner
and act on the epithelium), by cytokines (such as epiregulin, which increases cancer cell
survival), and by MMPs (which clear the way for the latter to migrate into capillaries (Nguyen
et al., 2009)). The migration of metastasis initiating cells is not random and is directed by
chemokine gradients sensed via CXCR4, CCR4, CCR7, CCR9 and CCR10 (Bonecchi et al.,
2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The journey of the circulating metastatic seed ends upon integrin-dependent arrest on the
endothelium, followed by extravasation. Molecules like ANGPTL4, which is regulated by
TGFβ, facilitate extravasation into lungs by mediating contact between malignant and
endothelial cells (Nguyen et al., 2009). Systemic inflammation enhances attachment of
circulating cancer cells to hepatic sinusoids and this process is governed by neutrophildependent upregulation of adhesion molecules (McDonald et al., 2009). Several
proinflammatory cytokines that are elevated in the circulation of cancer patients upregulate
expression of adhesion molecules on the endothelium or in target organs and thereby increase
the probability of metastatic cell attachment (Mantovani et al., 2008).

Immunity and tumorigenesis
As discussed above, in tumors that arise in the context of underlying inflammation or in
advanced tumors containing inflammatory infiltrates, the net effect of the immune system (both
innate and adaptive) is stimulation of tumor growth and progression. However, cancer cells
represent an “altered self” and express “non-self” antigens in the context of stress and danger
signals that can promote antigen presentation. Thus, even growing tumors may be subject to
immunosurveillance and killing by activated T and NK cells (Dunn et al., 2004). It is likely

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 14

that immunosurveillance and tumor-promoting inflammation can coexist even in the same
tumor (Bui and Schreiber, 2007) (Figure 4A).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

According to the immunosurveillance hypothesis, NK cells and CTLs engage in tumor killing
(via perforin, granzyme B, TRAIL or FasL dependent mechanisms), whereas Th1 (by virtue
of IFNγ production) and in some instances Th17 cells (via production of IL-17A) provide
important help that boosts cytotoxic immunity (Dunn et al., 2006; Dunn et al., 2004; MartinOrozco et al., 2009). On the other hand, Tregs suppress anti-tumor immune responses and are
therefore pro-tumorigenic (Dunn et al., 2004). NKT cells can also be involved in surveillance
of hematopoietic and chemically-induced tumors (Crowe et al., 2005; Smyth et al., 2000;
Swann et al., 2009). Other critical components of this system are dendritic cells and
macrophages, which present antigens and respond to danger and stress signals, as well as
immunoregulatory and cytotoxic cytokines, such as type I IFN, IFNγ, FasL, TRAIL, GM-CSF
and IL-12 (Palucka et al., 2007; Smyth et al., 2006; Swann and Smyth, 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The first experimental demonstration of tumor immunosurveillance came from analysis of
Rag2-deficient mice, which lack mature lymphocytes. These mice show enhanced
development of a variety of spontaneous cancers by 14-16 months of age (Shankaran et al.,
2001). However, even in immunocompromised mice, tumor development occurs in their postreproductive period, suggesting that the mammalian immune system is not subjected to
substantial evolutionary pressure to improve tumor recognition and elimination. Yet, in
virallyor bacterially-promoted cancers, the immune system provides considerable protection
through its ability to recognize and eliminate microbes (Smyth et al., 2006). Inactivation of
various components of the immunosurveillance system, such as perforin, granzyme, and
interferon signaling, renders mice susceptible to tumorigenesis (Bui and Schreiber, 2007; Dunn
et al., 2004). Mice lacking cytotoxic cytokines, such as membrane-bound forms of FasL or
TRAIL also show enhanced development of sarcomas and other tumors (O’ Reilly et al.,
2009; Smyth et al., 2003).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

More evidence for tumor immunosurveillance and immunoediting comes from the presence
of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (both T and B lymphocytes) that recognize tumor antigens
and the favorable prognosis for some patients whose tumors display increased infiltration with
activated T cells (Dunn et al., 2004). Such infiltration is even more noticeable in tumors that
develop microsatellite instability or have a “mutator” phenotype and therefore express tumor
antigens that exhibit greater differences from normal counterparts (Buckowitz et al., 2005;
Guidoboni et al., 2001). Additional but indirect evidence for anti-tumor immunity includes
various cases of spontaneous tumor regression accompanied by increased infiltration of
activated cytotoxic cells and presence of antibodies and T cells that recognize tumor antigens
(Swann and Smyth, 2007). The latter suggests that B and T lymphocytes have been activated
by tumor-specific antigens but does not necessarily mean that these cells are responsible for
tumor regression. Additional evidence is provided by the increased risk of lymphomas (of viral
and non-viral etiology) and some solid tumors in immunosuppressed patients (Swann and
Smyth, 2007).
Nonetheless, in the vast majority of established tumors the presence of tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes is insufficient for curtailing tumor growth. Such considerations have given rise
to a revised version of the immunosurveillance theory called immunoediting (Dunn et al.,
2004; Smyth et al., 2006). According to this concept, cancer cells constantly edit and modulate
the host anti-tumor immune response and the host immune response shapes tumor
immunogenicity and clonal selection. During this process the balance between anti-tumor and
tumor-promoting immunity can be tilted in favor of tumor growth. Before a tumor undergoes
immune escape, it may be maintained at an “equilibrium” between tumor growth and immune
destruction, and this may account for decades of tumor dormancy (Koebel et al., 2007). To tilt

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the balance in its favor, it is proposed that the cancer cell edits its repertoire of tumor antigens
towards lower immunogenicity and also re-shapes the tumor microenvironment to become
immunosuppressive. Consistent with this hypothesis, cancers that have evolved in
alymphocytic mice are more immunogenic than cancers grown in immunocompetent mice
(Shankaran et al., 2001).

Therapy induced inflammation – friend or foe?

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation are currently the major options for cancer treatment. All
three induce local or systemic inflammation triggered by tissue injury and cancer cell death.
Surgery results in activation of infectionor stress-sensing pathways, whereas chemo- and
radiotherapy kill cancer cells mostly through necrosis, a pro-inflammatory form of cell death
(Vakkila and Lotze, 2004). Inflammatory mediators released by necrotic cells include danger
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) such as ATP, nucleic acids, heat shock proteins
(Hsp70), HMGB-1, S100 calcium binding proteins, and the cytokine IL-1α. A key question is
whether therapy-induced inflammation stimulates the regrowth of residual malignant cells or
whether it improves the therapeutic outcome? (Figure 4B). In support of the first possibility,
inhibition of autophagy in apoptosis-deficient tumors stimulates tumor growth through
induction of necrosis and tumor-associated sterile inflammation (Degenhardt et al., 2006).
Tumor growth may also be stimulated in response to hypoxia-induced necrosis in the tumor’s
core (Figure 4B). It has also been found that castration-induced death of androgen-dependent
prostate cancer, despite resulting in initial tumor regression, triggers an inflammatory response
that accelerates the re-growth of castration resistant cancer (Ammirante et al., 2010). Hence,
inhibition of therapy-induced inflammation may improve the treatment of prostate cancer and
provide the patient with several more years of tumor free survival.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

However, in the case of more conventional chemotherapy, therapy-induced inflammation has
been found to stimulate antigen presentation by tumor infiltrating dendritic cells and to induce
production of cytokines that stimulate adaptive anti-tumor immunity (Apetoh et al., 2007a;
Zhang et al., 2007) (Figure 4B). Curiously, the inflammatory trigger for this beneficial response
is also the necrotic death of cancer cells, resulting in the release of HMG-B1 and ATP, which
together activate TLR4 and the inflammasome to stimulate production of IL-1β, which is
critical for adaptive anti-tumor immunity (Ghiringhelli et al., 2009). Interestingly, genetic
polymorphisms in the TLR4 and P2X7 (the ATP receptor) loci affect the outcome of
chemotherapy (Apetoh et al., 2007a; Apetoh et al., 2007b). What makes tumor necrosis either
immunostimulatory or immunosuppressive (Vakkila and Lotze, 2004) is not yet clear.
Furthermore, therapy-induced anti-tumor immunity is only seen with certain drugs, including
etoposide, oxaliplatin, and doxorubicine but not with others (Apetoh et al., 2007a; Ghiringhelli
et al., 2009). As these drugs can also kill infiltrating immune and hematopoietic stem cells,
which are necessary for a functional immune response, effective therapy-induced anti-tumor
immunity requires the use of small doses of chemotherapy to avoid immunosuppression.
Conversely, by causing the death of tumor promoting immune/inflammatory cells, chemo- and
radiotherapy may be used to destroy the tumor-promoting inflammatory microenvironment.

Anti-inflammatory drugs in cancer therapy
The findings described above provide an improved understanding of the molecular etiology of
cancer and lay the foundations for the use of anti-inflammatory drugs in cancer prevention and
therapy. One advantage of targeting the inflammatory microenvironment is that the normal
genome of inflammatory/immune cells, which unlike the cancer cell genome, is not subject to
mutational and epigenetic changes that result in drug resistance. However, in most cases, antiinflammatory therapy is not cytocidal on its own and needs to be combined with more
conventional therapies that kill cancer cells.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Despite such limitations, several anti-inflammatory drugs have been found to reduce tumor
incidence when used as prophylactics, as well as slowing down progression and reducing
mortality when used as therapeutics, particularly in the case of sporadic colon cancer (Gupta
and Dubois, 2001). Such drugs include COX2 inhibitors, aspirin, and anti-inflammatory
steroids, such as dexamethasone. In addition to its well-documented preventive effects in colon
cancer, aspirin reduces the incidence of breast cancer (Gierach et al., 2008) and reduces prostate
cancer risk, but only in individuals that carry a particular polymorphic allele at the lymphotoxin
α locus, which specifies high lymphotoxin production (Liu et al., 2006). Such findings are of
general importance because non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), such as aspirin,
are not very specific and usually have side-effects that preclude their long-term administration
except in high risk individuals. Thus, pre-screening for individuals with high cancer risk that
are more likely to benefit from such preventive strategies should greatly improve the efficacy
and utility of cancer prevention.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumor-promoting inflammation can be targeted in several different ways: 1) inhibition of
signal transducers and transcription factors that mediate survival and growth of malignant cells
in response to inflammatory cytokines; 2) sequestration of chemokines and cytokines that
recruit and sustain inflammatory cells in the tumor microenvironment; 3) reducing (or
augment) the inflammation that follows anti-cancer therapy; 4) depletion of immune and
inflammatory cells that promote tumor development and progression, while sparing cell types
and effector functions that support protective immune responses; 5) selective inhibition of
tumor promoting cytokines without an effect on expression of anti-tumorigenic cytokines.
In a few cases, a therapy targeting inflammation may be effective as a single agent. For instance,
constitutive NF-κB or STAT3 activation in certain lymphoid tumors suggests that inhibitors
of these transcription factors can be used as cytocidal agents in such cancers. However in most
cases such therapy is likely to be effective only in combination with more conventional
approaches. Furthermore, as genotoxic therapies often lead to NF-κB activation in remaining
malignant cells, it makes sense to combine genotoxic drugs with NF-κB inhibitors as a way to
overcome drug resistance. However, prolonged NF-κB inhibition can result in a severe immune
deficiency and may even lead to neutrophilia and greatly enhanced acute inflammation due to
enhanced IL-1β secretion (Greten et al., 2007). Such complications as well as increased
propensity for liver damage have hindered the clinical development of NF-κB and IKKβ
inhibitors. Another attractive target is the STAT3 transcription factor and the signaling pathway
that leads to its activation (Kortylewski et al., 2005; Yu et al., 2009). Several STAT3 and JAK2
inhibitors have been described and shown to inhibit the growth of various cancers that exhibit
STAT3 activation (Hedvat et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2009). So far, none of the complications
associated with NF-κB inhibition have been reported for STAT3 or JAK2 inhibitors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Even fewer complications should be expected from drugs that inhibit receptor binding of protumorigenic cytokines or chemokines. Several anti-cytokine drugs are already in use for the
treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases or are under clinical development for such usage.
Although cytokine inhibitors alone are unlikely to cause cancer cell death, several phase I/II
clinical trials currently evaluate the efficacy of anti-IL-6 and anti-TNF-α drugs as single agents
in various cancers (Balkwill, 2009). The effects obtained so far include disease stabilization
and partial responses, but by-and-large the therapeutic effects are modest and underscore the
necessity of evaluating such drugs in combination with conventional therapy. Anti-chemokine
drugs are also being evaluated, including receptor antagonists and blocking antibodies,
targeting CCR2, CCR4, and CXCR4 (Balkwill, 2009). IL-1 inhibition in multiple myeloma
slows tumor growth and leads to a chronic disease state, thereby preventing progression to
active myeloma (Lust et al., 2009).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Metastasis presents another important application and challenge for drugs that target tumorassociated inflammation. Recently, an anti-RANKL antibody, which was developed for the
treatment of osteoporosis, has been found effective in inhibition of bone metastasis in prostate
cancer (Hurst et al., 2009). Other experiments done in mice have shown that NF-κB inhibition
in metastatic cancer cells or neutralization of TNF-α can convert inflammation promoted
metastatic growth to inflammation-induced tumor regression, dependent on IFN-induced
TRAIL expression (Luo et al., 2004). Such findings illustrate how manipulation of cytokine
expression can be used to convert tumor- and metastasis-promoting inflammation to a strong
anti-tumor response.

Conclusions and Prospective

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inflammation can affect every aspect of tumor development and progression as well as the
response to therapy. In the past 10 years, we have learned a great deal about the different
mechanisms by which cancer and inflammation intersect, and the time is right to translate much
of the basic knowledge gained thus far and use it to add new armaments to the arsenal of cancer
therapeutics. Only by targeting every single aspect of cancer biology, can we expect to make
real gains in the fight against these currently incurable diseases. In addition to a combination
of anti-inflammatory approaches that target the tumor microenvironment with more
sophisticated and selective tumoricidal drugs, future therapies should also take notice of the
natural genetic variation that affects inflammation and immunity. Such considerations are
extremely important in the design of new preventive approaches to the reduction of cancer risk
that need to be applied to large populations composed of relatively healthy individuals. Indeed,
one of the major lessons learned from investigating the relationships between inflammation
and cancer, is that most cancers are preventable. Prevention is a much better and more economic
way to fight cancer than treating an already advanced and often intractable disease, as is done
at the present.
Text Box: Inflammation and cancer-basic facts

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1.

Chronic inflammation increases cancer risk.

2.

Subclinical, often undetectable, inflammation may be as important in increasing
cancer risk (for instance, obesity-induced inflammation).

3.

Various types of immune and inflammatory cells are frequently present within
tumors.

4.

Immune cells affect malignant cells through production of cytokines, chemokines,
growth factors, prostaglandins and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species.

5.

Inflammation impacts every single step of tumorigenesis, from initiation through
tumor promotion, all the way to metastatic progression.

6.

In developing tumors anti-tumorigenic and pro-tumorigenic immune and
inflammatory mechanisms coexist, but if the tumor is not rejected, the protumorigenic effect dominates.

7.

Signaling pathways that mediate the pro-tumorigenic effects of inflammation are
often subject to a feed-forward loop (for example, activation of NF-κB in immune
cells induces production of cytokines that activate NF-κB in cancer cells to induce
chemokines that attract more inflammatory cells into the tumor).

8.

Certain immune and inflammatory components may be dispensable during one
stage of tumorigenesis but absolutely critical in another stage.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 18

Acknowledgments
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We thank E. Koltsova for the help in figure preparation. This work was supported by Research Fellowship Award
from Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America (CCFA #1762) to S.G, by grants from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, Deutsche Krebshilfe and the Association for International Cancer Research to F.R.G. and
the National Institutes of Health and the American Association for Cancer Research to M.K., who is an American
Cancer Society Research Professor.

REFERENCES

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Aggarwal BB, Vijayalekshmi RV, Sung B. Targeting inflammatory pathways for prevention and therapy
of cancer: short-term friend, long-term foe. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:425–430. [PubMed: 19147746]
Ammirante M, Luo J-L, Grivennikov S, Nedospasov S, Karin M. B cell-derived lymphotoxin promotes
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Nature. 2010 in press.
Angel P, Imagawa M, Chiu R, Stein B, Imbra RJ, Rahmsdorf HJ, Jonat C, Herrlich P, Karin M. Phorbol
ester-inducible genes contain a common cis element recognized by a TPA-modulated trans-acting
factor. Cell 1987;49:729–739. [PubMed: 3034432]
Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Tesniere A, Criollo A, Ortiz C, Lidereau R, Mariette C, Chaput N, Mira JP,
Delaloge S, et al. The interaction between HMGB1 and TLR4 dictates the outcome of anticancer
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Immunol Rev 2007a;220:47–59. [PubMed: 17979839]
Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Tesniere A, Obeid M, Ortiz C, Criollo A, Mignot G, Maiuri MC, Ullrich E,
Saulnier P, et al. Toll-like receptor 4-dependent contribution of the immune system to anticancer
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Nat Med 2007b;13:1050–1059. [PubMed: 17704786]
Aspord C, Pedroza-Gonzalez A, Gallegos M, Tindle S, Burton EC, Su D, Marches F, Banchereau J,
Palucka AK. Breast cancer instructs dendritic cells to prime interleukin 13-secreting CD4+ T cells that
facilitate tumor development. J Exp Med 2007;204:1037–1047. [PubMed: 17438063]
Balkwill F. Tumour necrosis factor and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:361–371. [PubMed: 19343034]
Becker C, Fantini MC, Schramm C, Lehr HA, Wirtz S, Nikolaev A, Burg J, Strand S, Kiesslich R, Huber
S, et al. TGF-beta suppresses tumor progression in colon cancer by inhibition of IL-6 trans-signaling.
Immunity 2004;21:491–501. [PubMed: 15485627]
Berg DJ, Davidson N, Kuhn R, Muller W, Menon S, Holland G, Thompson-Snipes L, Leach MW,
Rennick D. Enterocolitis and colon cancer in interleukin-10-deficient mice are associated with aberrant
cytokine production and CD4(+) TH1-like responses. J Clin Invest 1996;98:1010–1020. [PubMed:
8770874]
Bollrath J, Phesse TJ, von Burstin VA, Putoczki T, Bennecke M, Bateman T, Nebelsiek T, LundgrenMay T, Canli O, Schwitalla S, et al. gp130-mediated Stat3 activation in enterocytes regulates cell
survival and cell-cycle progression during colitis-associated tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 2009;15:91–
102. [PubMed: 19185844]
Bonecchi R, Galliera E, Borroni EM, Corsi MM, Locati M, Mantovani A. Chemokines and chemokine
receptors: an overview. Front Biosci 2009;14:540–551. [PubMed: 19273084]
Buckowitz A, Knaebel HP, Benner A, Blaker H, Gebert J, Kienle P, von Knebel Doeberitz M, Kloor M.
Microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer is associated with local lymphocyte infiltration and low
frequency of distant metastases. Br J Cancer 2005;92:1746–1753. [PubMed: 15856045]
Bui JD, Schreiber RD. Cancer immunosurveillance, immunoediting and inflammation: independent or
interdependent processes? Curr Opin Immunol 2007;19:203–208. [PubMed: 17292599]
Calle EE. Obesity and cancer. Br Med J 2007;335:1107–1108. [PubMed: 17986715]
Chang L, Kamata H, Solinas G, Luo JL, Maeda S, Venuprasad K, Liu YC, Karin M. The E3 ubiquitin
ligase itch couples JNK activation to TNFa-induced cell death by inducing c-FLIP(L) turnover. Cell
2006;124:601–613. [PubMed: 16469705]
Chen X, Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL, Zhang W, Jiang J, et al. Integration
of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network in embryonic stem cells. Cell
2008;133:1106–1117. [PubMed: 18555785]
Chiorazzi N, Rai KR, Ferrarini M. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 2005;352:804–815.
[PubMed: 15728813]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Colotta F, Allavena P, Sica A, Garlanda C, Mantovani A. Cancer-related inflammation, the seventh
hallmark of cancer: links to genetic instability. Carcinogenesis 2009;30:1073–1081. [PubMed:
19468060]
Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages: obligate partners for tumor cell migration, invasion, and
metastasis. Cell 2006;124:263–266. [PubMed: 16439202]
Cooper CS, Foster CS. Concepts of epigenetics in prostate cancer development. Br J Cancer
2009;100:240–245. [PubMed: 19002169]
Crowe NY, Coquet JM, Berzins SP, Kyparissoudis K, Keating R, Pellicci DG, Hayakawa Y, Godfrey
DI, Smyth MJ. Differential antitumor immunity mediated by NKT cell subsets in vivo. J Exp Med
2005;202:1279–1288. [PubMed: 16275765]
de Martel C, Franceschi S. Infections and cancer: established associations and new hypotheses. Crit Rev
Oncol Hematol 2009;70:183–194. [PubMed: 18805702]
De Santa F, Totaro MG, Prosperini E, Notarbartolo S, Testa G, Natoli G. The histone H3 lysine-27
demethylase Jmjd3 links inflammation to inhibition of polycomb-mediated gene silencing. Cell
2007;130:1083–1094. [PubMed: 17825402]
de Visser KE, Eichten A, Coussens LM. Paradoxical roles of the immune system during cancer
development. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:24–37. [PubMed: 16397525]
Degenhardt K, Mathew R, Beaudoin B, Bray K, Anderson D, Chen G, Mukherjee C, Shi Y, Gelinas C,
Fan Y, et al. Autophagy promotes tumor cell survival and restricts necrosis, inflammation, and
tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 2006;10:51–64. [PubMed: 16843265]
DeNardo DG, Barreto JB, Andreu P, Vasquez L, Tawfik D, Kolhatkar N, Coussens LM. CD4(+) T cells
regulate pulmonary metastasis of mammary carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of
macrophages. Cancer Cell 2009;16:91–102. [PubMed: 19647220]
Dostert C, Petrilli V, Van Bruggen R, Steele C, Mossman BT, Tschopp J. Innate immune activation
through Nalp3 inflammasome sensing of asbestos and silica. Science 2008;320:674–677. [PubMed:
18403674]
Dougan M, Dranoff G. Immune therapy for cancer. Annu Rev Immunol 2009;27:83–117. [PubMed:
19007331]
Dunn GP, Koebel CM, Schreiber RD. Interferons, immunity and cancer immunoediting. Nat Rev
Immunol 2006;6:836–848. [PubMed: 17063185]
Dunn GP, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. The immunobiology of cancer immunosurveillance and immunoediting.
Immunity 2004;21:137–148. [PubMed: 15308095]
Dvorak HF. Tumors: wounds that do not heal. Similarities between tumor stroma generation and wound
healing. N Engl J Med 1986;315:1650–1659. [PubMed: 3537791]
Edwards RA, Witherspoon M, Wang K, Afrasiabi K, Pham T, Birnbaumer L, Lipkin SM. Epigenetic
repression of DNA mismatch repair by inflammation and hypoxia in inflammatory bowel diseaseassociated colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 2009;69:6423–6429. [PubMed: 19638594]
Eferl R, Wagner EF. AP-1: a double-edged sword in tumorigenesis. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:859–868.
[PubMed: 14668816]
Enzler T, Gillessen S, Manis JP, Ferguson D, Fleming J, Alt FW, Mihm M, Dranoff G. Deficiencies of
GM-CSF and interferon gamma link inflammation and cancer. J Exp Med 2003;197:1213–1219.
[PubMed: 12732663]
Enzler T, Kater AP, Zhang W, Widhopf GF 2nd, Chuang HY, Lee J, Avery E, Croce CM, Karin M, Kipps
TJ. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia of E{micro}-TCL1 transgenic mice undergoes rapid cell turnover
that can be offset by extrinsic CD257 to accelerate disease progression. Blood 2009;114:4469–4476.
[PubMed: 19755673]
Erdman SE, Sohn JJ, Rao VP, Nambiar PR, Ge Z, Fox JG, Schauer DB. CD4+CD25+ regulatory
lymphocytes induce regression of intestinal tumors in ApcMin/+ mice. Cancer Res 2005;65:3998–
4004. [PubMed: 15899788]
Ernst M, Najdovska M, Grail D, Lundgren-May T, Buchert M, Tye H, Matthews VB, Armes J, Bhathal
PS, Hughes NR, et al. STAT3 and STAT1 mediate IL-11-dependent and inflammation-associated
gastric tumorigenesis in gp130 receptor mutant mice. J Clin Invest 2008;118:1727–1738. [PubMed:
18431520]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ershler WB, Keller ET. Age-associated increased interleukin-6 gene expression, late-life diseases, and
frailty. Annu Rev Med 2000;51:245–270. [PubMed: 10774463]
Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759–767.
[PubMed: 2188735]
Ferreri AJ, Ernberg I, Copie-Bergman C. Infectious agents and lymphoma development: molecular and
clinical aspects. J Intern Med 2009;265:421–438. [PubMed: 19298458]
Fridlender ZG, Sun J, Kim S, Kapoor V, Cheng G, Ling L, Worthen GS, Albelda SM. Polarization of
tumor-associated neutrophil phenotype by TGF-beta: “N1” versus “N2” TAN. Cancer Cell
2009;16:183–194. [PubMed: 19732719]
Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as regulators of the immune system. Nat
Rev Immunol 2009;9:162–174. [PubMed: 19197294]
Gallimore AM, Simon AK. Positive and negative influences of regulatory T cells on tumour immunity.
Oncogene 2008;27:5886–5893. [PubMed: 18836469]
Galon J, Costes A, Sanchez-Cabo F, Kirilovsky A, Mlecnik B, Lagorce-Pages C, Tosolini M, Camus M,
Berger A, Wind P, et al. Type, density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal tumors
predict clinical outcome. Science 2006;313:1960–1964. [PubMed: 17008531]
Gao SP, Mark KG, Leslie K, Pao W, Motoi N, Gerald WL, Travis WD, Bornmann W, Veach D, Clarkson
B, et al. Mutations in the EGFR kinase domain mediate STAT3 activation via IL-6 production in
human lung adenocarcinomas. J Clin Invest 2007;117:3846–3856. [PubMed: 18060032]
Ghiringhelli F, Apetoh L, Tesniere A, Aymeric L, Ma Y, Ortiz C, Vermaelen K, Panaretakis T, Mignot
G, Ullrich E, et al. Activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in dendritic cells induces IL-1betadependent adaptive immunity against tumors. Nat Med 2009;15:1170–1178. [PubMed: 19767732]
Gierach GL, Lacey JV Jr. Schatzkin A, Leitzmann MF, Richesson D, Hollenbeck AR, Brinton LA.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and breast cancer risk in the National Institutes of HealthAARP Diet and Health Study. Breast Cancer Res 2008;10:R38. [PubMed: 18447943]
Granziero L, Ghia P, Circosta P, Gottardi D, Strola G, Geuna M, Montagna L, Piccoli P, Chilosi M,
Caligaris-Cappio F. Survivin is expressed on CD40 stimulation and interfaces proliferation and
apoptosis in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 2001;97:2777–2783. [PubMed: 11313271]
Greten FR, Arkan MC, Bollrath J, Hsu LC, Goode J, Miething C, Goktuna SI, Neuenhahn M, Fierer J,
Paxian S, et al. NF-kappaB is a negative regulator of IL-1beta secretion as revealed by genetic and
pharmacological inhibition of IKKbeta. Cell 2007;130:918–931. [PubMed: 17803913]
Greten FR, Eckmann L, Greten TF, Park JM, Li ZW, Egan LJ, Kagnoff MF, Karin M. IKKb links
inflammation and tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colitis-associated cancer. Cell 2004;118:285–
296. [PubMed: 15294155]
Grivennikov S, Karin E, Terzic J, Mucida D, Yu GY, Vallabhapurapu S, Scheller J, Rose-John S,
Cheroutre H, Eckmann L, et al. IL-6 and Stat3 are required for survival of intestinal epithelial cells
and development of colitis-associated cancer. Cancer Cell 2009;15:103–113. [PubMed: 19185845]
Grivennikov S, Karin M. Dangerous liasons: STAT3 and NF-κB collaboration and crosstalk in cancer.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2009 in press.
Guerra C, Schuhmacher AJ, Canamero M, Grippo PJ, Verdaguer L, Perez-Gallego L, Dubus P, Sandgren
EP, Barbacid M. Chronic pancreatitis is essential for induction of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
by K-Ras oncogenes in adult mice. Cancer Cell 2007;11:291–302. [PubMed: 17349585]
Guidoboni M, Gafa R, Viel A, Doglioni C, Russo A, Santini A, Del Tin L, Macri E, Lanza G, Boiocchi
M, et al. Microsatellite instability and high content of activated cytotoxic lymphocytes identify colon
cancer patients with a favorable prognosis. Am J Pathol 2001;159:297–304. [PubMed: 11438476]
Gupta RA, Dubois RN. Colorectal cancer prevention and treatment by inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2.
Nat Rev Cancer 2001;1:11–21. [PubMed: 11900248]
Hahn MA, Hahn T, Lee DH, Esworthy RS, Kim BW, Riggs AD, Chu FF, Pfeifer GP. Methylation of
polycomb target genes in intestinal cancer is mediated by inflammation. Cancer Res 2008;68:10280–
10289. [PubMed: 19074896]
Hanada T, Kobayashi T, Chinen T, Saeki K, Takaki H, Koga K, Minoda Y, Sanada T, Yoshioka T,
Mimata H, et al. IFNgamma-dependent, spontaneous development of colorectal carcinomas in
SOCS1-deficient mice. J Exp Med 2006;203:1391–1397. [PubMed: 16717119]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 2000;100:57–70. [PubMed: 10647931]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Haybaeck J, Zeller N, Wolf MJ, Weber A, Wagner U, Kurrer MO, Bremer J, Iezzi G, Graf R, Clavien
PA, et al. A lymphotoxin-driven pathway to hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Cell 2009;16:295–
308. [PubMed: 19800575]
Hedvat M, Huszar D, Herrmann A, Gozgit JM, Schroeder A, Sheehy A, Buettner R, Proia D, Kowolik
CM, Xin H, et al. The JAK2 Inhibitor AZD1480 Potently Blocks Stat3 Signaling and Oncogenesis
in Solid Tumors. Cancer Cell 2009;16:487–497. [PubMed: 19962667]
Hodge DR, Hurt EM, Farrar WL. The role of IL-6 and STAT3 in inflammation and cancer. Eur J Cancer
2005;41:2502–2512. [PubMed: 16199153]
Hurst LC, Badalamente MA, Hentz VR, Hotchkiss RN, Kaplan FT, Meals RA, Smith TM, Rodzvilla J.
Injectable collagenase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren’s contracture. N Engl J Med
2009;361:968–979. [PubMed: 19726771]
Hussain SP, Hofseth LJ, Harris CC. Radical causes of cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:276–285. [PubMed:
12671666]
Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:239–252.
[PubMed: 19279573]
Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Clin Invest 2009;119:1420–
1428. [PubMed: 19487818]
Kaplan RN, Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH, Vincent L, Costa C, MacDonald DD, Jin DK, Shido
K, Kerns SA, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the premetastatic niche. Nature 2005;438:820–827. [PubMed: 16341007]
Karin M. Nuclear factor-kappaB in cancer development and progression. Nature 2006;441:431–436.
[PubMed: 16724054]
Kastritis E, Palumbo A, Dimopoulos MA. Treatment of relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma. Semin
Hematol 2009;46:143–157. [PubMed: 19389498]
Khasawneh J, Schulz MD, Walch A, Rozman J, de Angelis M. Hrabe, Klingenspor M, Buck A, Schwaiger
M, Saur D, Schmid RM, et al. Inflammation and mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation link obesity
to early tumor promotion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:3354–3359. [PubMed: 19208810]
Kim S, Takahashi H, Lin WW, Descargues P, Grivennikov S, Kim Y, Luo JL, Karin M. Carcinomaproduced factors activate myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate metastasis. Nature 2009;457:102–
106. [PubMed: 19122641]
Kitamura T, Kometani K, Hashida H, Matsunaga A, Miyoshi H, Hosogi H, Aoki M, Oshima M, Hattori
M, Takabayashi A, et al. SMAD4-deficient intestinal tumors recruit CCR1+ myeloid cells that
promote invasion. Nat Genet 2007;39:467–475. [PubMed: 17369830]
Koebel CM, Vermi W, Swann JB, Zerafa N, Rodig SJ, Old LJ, Smyth MJ, Schreiber RD. Adaptive
immunity maintains occult cancer in an equilibrium state. Nature 2007;450:903–907. [PubMed:
18026089]
Kohrt HE, Nouri N, Nowels K, Johnson D, Holmes S, Lee PP. Profile of immune cells in axillary lymph
nodes predicts disease-free survival in breast cancer. PLoS Med 2005;2:e284. [PubMed: 16124834]
Kortylewski M, Kujawski M, Wang T, Wei S, Zhang S, Pilon-Thomas S, Niu G, Kay H, Mule J, Kerr
WG, et al. Inhibiting Stat3 signaling in the hematopoietic system elicits multicomponent antitumor
immunity. Nat Med 2005;11:1314–1321. [PubMed: 16288283]
Kortylewski M, Xin H, Kujawski M, Lee H, Liu Y, Harris T, Drake C, Pardoll D, Yu H. Regulation of
the IL-23 and IL-12 balance by Stat3 signaling in the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell
2009;15:114–123. [PubMed: 19185846]
Kraus S, Arber N. Inflammation and colorectal cancer. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2009;9:405–410. [PubMed:
19589728]
Kujawski M, Kortylewski M, Lee H, Herrmann A, Kay H, Yu H. Stat3 mediates myeloid cell-dependent
tumor angiogenesis in mice. J Clin Invest 2008;118:3367–3377. [PubMed: 18776941]
Laghi L, Bianchi P, Miranda E, Balladore E, Pacetti V, Grizzi F, Allavena P, Torri V, Repici A, Santoro
A, et al. CD3+ cells at the invasive margin of deeply invading (pT3-T4) colorectal cancer and risk
of post-surgical metastasis: a longitudinal study. Lancet Oncol 2009;10:877–884. [PubMed:
19656725]
Langowski JL, Kastelein RA, Oft M. Swords into plowshares: IL-23 repurposes tumor immune
surveillance. Trends Immunol 2007;28:207–212. [PubMed: 17395538]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Langowski JL, Zhang X, Wu L, Mattson JD, Chen T, Smith K, Basham B, McClanahan T, Kastelein RA,
Oft M. IL-23 promotes tumour incidence and growth. Nature 2006;442:461–465. [PubMed:
16688182]
Lewis CE, Pollard JW. Distinct role of macrophages in different tumor microenvironments. Cancer Res
2006;66:605–612. [PubMed: 16423985]
Liao D, Luo Y, Markowitz D, Xiang R, Reisfeld RA. Cancer associated fibroblasts promote tumor growth
and metastasis by modulating the tumor immune microenvironment in a 4T1 murine breast cancer
model. PLoS One 2009;4:e7965. [PubMed: 19956757]
Lin L, Amin R, Gallicano GI, Glasgow E, Jogunoori W, Jessup JM, Zasloff M, Marshall JL, Shetty K,
Johnson L, et al. The STAT3 inhibitor NSC 74859 is effective in hepatocellular cancers with disrupted
TGF-beta signaling. Oncogene 2009;28:961–972. [PubMed: 19137011]
Lin WW, Karin M. A cytokine-mediated link between innate immunity, inflammation, and cancer. J Clin
Invest 2007;117:1175–1183. [PubMed: 17476347]
Liu X, Plummer SJ, Nock NL, Casey G, Witte JS. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and decreased
risk of advanced prostate cancer: modification by lymphotoxin alpha. Am J Epidemiol
2006;164:984–989. [PubMed: 16931544]
Luo JL, Maeda S, Hsu LC, Yagita H, Karin M. Inhibition of NF-kappaB in cancer cells converts
inflammation-induced tumor growth mediated by TNFalpha to TRAIL-mediated tumor regression.
Cancer Cell 2004;6:297–305. [PubMed: 15380520]
Luo JL, Tan W, Ricono JM, Korchynskyi O, Zhang M, Gonias SL, Cheresh DA, Karin M. Nuclear
cytokine-activated IKKalpha controls prostate cancer metastasis by repressing Maspin. Nature
2007;446:690–694. [PubMed: 17377533]
Lust JA, Lacy MQ, Zeldenrust SR, Dispenzieri A, Gertz MA, Witzig TE, Kumar S, Hayman SR, Russell
SJ, Buadi FK, et al. Induction of a chronic disease state in patients with smoldering or indolent
multiple myeloma by targeting interleukin 1{beta}-induced interleukin 6 production and the
myeloma proliferative component. Mayo Clin Proc 2009;84:114–122. [PubMed: 19181644]
Maeda S, Kamata H, Luo JL, Leffert H, Karin M. IKKb couples hepatocyte death to cytokine-driven
compensatory proliferation that promotes chemical hepatocarcinogenesis. Cell 2005;121:977–990.
[PubMed: 15989949]
Mantovani A, Allavena P, Sica A, Balkwill F. Cancer-related inflammation. Nature 2008;454:436–444.
[PubMed: 18650914]
Martin-Orozco N, Muranski P, Chung Y, Yang XO, Yamazaki T, Lu S, Hwu P, Restifo NP, Overwijk
WW, Dong C. T helper 17 cells promote cytotoxic T cell activation in tumor immunity. Immunity
2009;31:787–798. [PubMed: 19879162]
McDonald B, Spicer J, Giannais B, Fallavollita L, Brodt P, Ferri LE. Systemic inflammation increases
cancer cell adhesion to hepatic sinusoids by neutrophil mediated mechanisms. Int J Cancer
2009;125:1298–1305. [PubMed: 19431213]
Meira LB, Bugni JM, Green SL, Lee CW, Pang B, Borenshtein D, Rickman BH, Rogers AB, MoroskiErkul CA, McFaline JL, et al. DNA damage induced by chronic inflammation contributes to colon
carcinogenesis in mice. J Clin Invest 2008;118:2516–2525. [PubMed: 18521188]
Moore RJ, Owens DM, Stamp G, Arnott C, Burke F, East N, Holdsworth H, Turner L, Rollins B,
Pasparakis M, et al. Mice deficient in tumor necrosis factor-alpha are resistant to skin carcinogenesis.
Nat Med 1999;5:828–831. [PubMed: 10395330]
Murdoch C, Muthana M, Coffelt SB, Lewis CE. The role of myeloid cells in the promotion of tumour
angiogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:618–631. [PubMed: 18633355]
Musteanu M, Blaas L, Mair M, Schlederer M, Bilban M, Tauber S, Esterbauer H, Mueller M, Casanova
E, Kenner L, et al. Stat3 is a negative regulator of intestinal tumor progression in ApcMin mice.
Gastroenterology. 2009 in press.
Naugler WE, Sakurai T, Kim S, Maeda S, Kim K, Elsharkawy AM, Karin M. Gender disparity in liver
cancer due to sex differences in MyD88-dependent IL-6 production. Science 2007;317:121–124.
[PubMed: 17615358]
Nguyen DX, Bos PD, Massague J. Metastasis: from dissemination to organ-specific colonization. Nat
Rev Cancer 2009;9:274–284. [PubMed: 19308067]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Nickoloff BJ, Ben-Neriah Y, Pikarsky E. Inflammation and cancer: is the link as simple as we think? J
Invest Dermatol 2005;124:x–xiv. [PubMed: 15955081]
O’ Reilly L, Tai L, Lee L, Kruse EA, Grabow S, Fairlie WD, Haynes NM, Tarlinton DM, Zhang JG,
Belz GT, et al. Membrane-bound Fas ligand only is essential for Fas-induced apoptosis. Nature
2009;461:659–663. [PubMed: 19794494]
Oguma K, Oshima H, Aoki M, Uchio R, Naka K, Nakamura S, Hirao A, Saya H, Taketo MM, Oshima
M. Activated macrophages promote Wnt signalling through tumour necrosis factor-alpha in gastric
tumour cells. EMBO J 2008;27:1671–1681. [PubMed: 18511911]
Okayasu I, Ohkusa T, Kajiura K, Kanno J, Sakamoto S. Promotion of colorectal neoplasia in experimental
murine ulcerative colitis. Gut 1996;39:87–92. [PubMed: 8881816]
Okazaki IM, Kotani A, Honjo T. Role of AID in tumorigenesis. Adv Immunol 2007;94:245–273.
[PubMed: 17560277]
Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Delaunay T, Naeem R, Carey VJ, Richardson
AL, Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote tumor
growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell 2005;121:335–348.
[PubMed: 15882617]
Orimo A, Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts in cancer: a novel tumor-promoting cell type. Cell Cycle
2006;5:1597–1601. [PubMed: 16880743]
Pages F, Berger A, Camus M, Sanchez-Cabo F, Costes A, Molidor R, Mlecnik B, Kirilovsky A, Nilsson
M, Damotte D, et al. Effector memory T cells, early metastasis, and survival in colorectal cancer.
N Engl J Med 2005;353:2654–2666. [PubMed: 16371631]
Palucka AK, Ueno H, Fay JW, Banchereau J. Taming cancer by inducing immunity via dendritic cells.
Immunol Rev 2007;220:129–150. [PubMed: 17979844]
Palumbo JS, Talmage KE, Massari JV, La Jeunesse CM, Flick MJ, Kombrinck KW, Hu Z, Barney KA,
Degen JL. Tumor cell-associated tissue factor and circulating hemostatic factors cooperate to
increase metastatic potential through natural killer cell-dependent and-independent mechanisms.
Blood 2007;110:133–141. [PubMed: 17371949]
Park EJ, Lee JH, Yu GY, He G, Ali SR, Holzer R, Osterreicher C, Takahashi H, Karin M. Dietary and
genetic obesity promote liver inflammation and tumorigenesis by enhancing IL-6 and TNF
expression. Cell. 2010 in press.
Pedersen IM, Kitada S, Leoni LM, Zapata JM, Karras JG, Tsukada N, Kipps TJ, Choi YS, Bennett F,
Reed JC. Protection of CLL B cells by a follicular dendritic cell line is dependent on induction of
Mcl-1. Blood 2002;100:1795–1801. [PubMed: 12176902]
Pikarsky E, Porat RM, Stein I, Abramovitch R, Amit S, Kasem S, Gutkovich-Pyest E, Urieli-Shoval S,
Galun E, Ben-Neriah Y. NF-kB functions as a tumour promoter in inflammation-associated cancer.
Nature 2004;431:461–466. [PubMed: 15329734]
Polyak K, Weinberg RA. Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states: acquisition of
malignant and stem cell traits. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:265–273. [PubMed: 19262571]
Popivanova BK, Kitamura K, Wu Y, Kondo T, Kagaya T, Kaneko S, Oshima M, Fujii C, Mukaida N.
Blocking TNF-alpha in mice reduces colorectal carcinogenesis associated with chronic colitis. J
Clin Invest 2008;118:560–570. [PubMed: 18219394]
Punturieri A, Szabo E, Croxton TL, Shapiro SD, Dubinett SM. Lung cancer and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: needs and opportunities for integrated research. J Natl Cancer Inst
2009;101:554–559. [PubMed: 19351920]
Rakoff-Nahoum S, Medzhitov R. Toll-like receptors and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:57–63.
[PubMed: 19052556]
Rius J, Guma M, Schachtrup C, Akassoglou K, Zinkernagel AS, Nizet V, Johnson RS, Haddad GG, Karin
M. NF-kappaB links innate immunity to the hypoxic response through transcriptional regulation of
HIF-1alpha. Nature 2008;453:807–811. [PubMed: 18432192]
Roberts SJ, Ng BY, Filler RB, Lewis J, Glusac EJ, Hayday AC, Tigelaar RE, Girardi M. Characterizing
tumor-promoting T cells in chemically induced cutaneous carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 2007;104:6770–6775. [PubMed: 17412837]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Rodier F, Coppe JP, Patil CK, Hoeijmakers WA, Munoz DP, Raza SR, Freund A, Campeau E, Davalos
AR, Campisi J. Persistent DNA damage signalling triggers senescence-associated inflammatory
cytokine secretion. Nat Cell Biol 2009;11:973–979. [PubMed: 19597488]
Ruzankina Y, Schoppy DW, Asare A, Clark CE, Vonderheide RH, Brown EJ. Tissue regenerative delays
and synthetic lethality in adult mice after combined deletion of Atr and Trp53. Nat Genet
2009;41:1144–1149. [PubMed: 19718024]
Sakurai T, He G, Matsuzawa A, Yu GY, Maeda S, Hardiman G, Karin M. Hepatocyte necrosis induced
by oxidative stress and IL-1 alpha release mediate carcinogen-induced compensatory proliferation
and liver tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 2008;14:156–165. [PubMed: 18691550]
Shankaran V, Ikeda H, Bruce AT, White JM, Swanson PE, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. IFNg and lymphocytes
prevent primary tumour development and shape tumour immunogenicity. Nature 2001;410:1107–
1111. [PubMed: 11323675]
Shibata W, Takaishi S, Muthupalani S, Pritchard DM, Whary MT, Rogers AB, Fox JG, Betz KS, Kaestner
KH, Karin M, et al. Conditional deletion of IkappaB-kinase beta (IKKbeta) accelerates
Helicobacter-dependent gastric apoptosis, proliferation and preneoplasia. Gastroenterology. 2009
in press.
Shime H, Yabu M, Akazawa T, Kodama K, Matsumoto M, Seya T, Inoue N. Tumor-secreted lactic acid
promotes IL-23/IL-17 proinflammatory pathway. J Immunol 2008;180:7175–7183. [PubMed:
18490716]
Shojaei F, Wu X, Malik AK, Zhong C, Baldwin ME, Schanz S, Fuh G, Gerber HP, Ferrara N. Tumor
refractoriness to anti-VEGF treatment is mediated by CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells. Nat Biotechnol
2007;25:911–920. [PubMed: 17664940]
Sica A, Allavena P, Mantovani A. Cancer related inflammation: the macrophage connection. Cancer Lett
2008;267:204–215. [PubMed: 18448242]
Sieweke MH, Thompson NL, Sporn MB, Bissell MJ. Mediation of wound-related Rous sarcoma virus
tumorigenesis by TGF-beta. Science 1990;248:1656–1660. [PubMed: 2163544]
Smyth MJ, Dunn GP, Schreiber RD. Cancer immunosurveillance and immunoediting: the roles of
immunity in suppressing tumor development and shaping tumor immunogenicity. Adv Immunol
2006;90:1–50. [PubMed: 16730260]
Smyth MJ, Takeda K, Hayakawa Y, Peschon JJ, van den Brink MR, Yagita H. Nature’s TRAIL--on a
path to cancer immunotherapy. Immunity 2003;18:1–6. [PubMed: 12530970]
Smyth MJ, Thia KY, Street SE, Cretney E, Trapani JA, Taniguchi M, Kawano T, Pelikan SB, Crowe
NY, Godfrey DI. Differential tumor surveillance by natural killer (NK) and NKT cells. J Exp Med
2000;191:661–668. [PubMed: 10684858]
Soucek L, Lawlor ER, Soto D, Shchors K, Swigart LB, Evan GI. Mast cells are required for angiogenesis
and macroscopic expansion of Myc-induced pancreatic islet tumors. Nat Med 2007;13:1211–1218.
[PubMed: 17906636]
Sparmann A, Bar-Sagi D. Ras-induced interleukin-8 expression plays a critical role in tumor growth and
angiogenesis. Cancer Cell 2004;6:447–458. [PubMed: 15542429]
Stockmann C, Doedens A, Weidemann A, Zhang N, Takeda N, Greenberg JI, Cheresh DA, Johnson RS.
Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates tumorigenesis. Nature
2008;456:814–818. [PubMed: 18997773]
Strid J, Roberts SJ, Filler RB, Lewis JM, Kwong BY, Schpero W, Kaplan DH, Hayday AC, Girardi M.
Acute upregulation of an NKG2D ligand promotes rapid reorganization of a local immune
compartment with pleiotropic effects on carcinogenesis. Nat Immunol 2008;9:146–154. [PubMed:
18176566]
Swann JB, Smyth MJ. Immune surveillance of tumors. J Clin Invest 2007;117:1137–1146. [PubMed:
17476343]
Swann JB, Uldrich AP, van Dommelen S, Sharkey J, Murray WK, Godfrey DI, Smyth MJ. Type I natural
killer T cells suppress tumors caused by p53 loss in mice. Blood 2009;113:6382–6385. [PubMed:
19234138]
Swann JB, Vesely MD, Silva A, Sharkey J, Akira S, Schreiber RD, Smyth MJ. Demonstration of
inflammation-induced cancer and cancer immunoediting during primary tumorigenesis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:652–656. [PubMed: 18178624]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Takahashi H, Ogata H, Nishigaki R, Broide DH, Karin M. Tobacco smoke promotes lung tumorigenesis
by triggering IKKb and JNK1 dependent inflammation. Cancer Cell. 2010 in press.
Takai A, Toyoshima T, Uemura M, Kitawaki Y, Marusawa H, Hiai H, Yamada S, Okazaki IM, Honjo
T, Chiba T, et al. A novel mouse model of hepatocarcinogenesis triggered by AID causing
deleterious p53 mutations. Oncogene 2009;28:469–478. [PubMed: 18997814]
Trinchieri G, Pflanz S, Kastelein RA. The IL-12 family of heterodimeric cytokines: new players in the
regulation of T cell responses. Immunity 2003;19:641–644. [PubMed: 14614851]
Tu S, Bhagat G, Cui G, Takaishi S, Kurt-Jones EA, Rickman B, Betz KS, Penz-Oesterreicher M,
Bjorkdahl O, Fox JG, et al. Overexpression of interleukin-1beta induces gastric inflammation and
cancer and mobilizes myeloid-derived suppressor cells in mice. Cancer Cell 2008;14:408–419.
[PubMed: 18977329]
Tuncman G, Hirosumi J, Solinas G, Chang L, Karin M, Hotamisligil GS. Functional in vivo interactions
between JNK1 and JNK2 isoforms in obesity and insulin resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2006;103:10741–10746. [PubMed: 16818881]
Umar S, Sarkar S, Wang Y, Singh P. Functional Cross-talk between {beta}-Catenin and NF{kappa}B
Signaling Pathways in Colonic Crypts of Mice in Response to Progastrin. J Biol Chem
2009;284:22274–22284. [PubMed: 19497850]
Vakkila J, Lotze MT. Inflammation and necrosis promote tumour growth. Nat Rev Immunol 2004;4:641–
648. [PubMed: 15286730]
Waldner MJ, Neurath MF. Colitis-associated cancer: the role of T cells in tumor development. Semin
Immunopathol 2009;31:249–256. [PubMed: 19495757]
Wang L, Yi T, Kortylewski M, Pardoll DM, Zeng D, Yu H. IL-17 can promote tumor growth through
an IL-6-Stat3 signaling pathway. J Exp Med 2009;206:1457–1464. [PubMed: 19564351]
Wong VW, Yu J, Cheng AS, Wong GL, Chan HY, Chu ES, Ng EK, Chan FK, Sung JJ, Chan HL. High
serum interleukin-6 level predicts future hepatocellular carcinoma development in patients with
chronic hepatitis B. Int J Cancer 2009;124:2766–2770. [PubMed: 19267406]
Wu S, Rhee KJ, Albesiano E, Rabizadeh S, Wu X, Yen HR, Huso DL, Brancati FL, Wick E, McAllister
F, et al. A human colonic commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of T helper type
17 T cell responses. Nat Med 2009a;15:1016–1022. [PubMed: 19701202]
Wu Y, Deng J, Rychahou PG, Qiu S, Evers BM, Zhou BP. Stabilization of snail by NF-kappaB is required
for inflammation-induced cell migration and invasion. Cancer Cell 2009b;15:416–428. [PubMed:
19411070]
Yang J, Weinberg RA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition: at the crossroads of development and tumor
metastasis. Dev Cell 2008;14:818–829. [PubMed: 18539112]
Yang L, Huang J, Ren X, Gorska AE, Chytil A, Aakre M, Carbone DP, Matrisian LM, Richmond A, Lin
PC, et al. Abrogation of TGF beta signaling in mammary carcinomas recruits Gr-1+CD11b+
myeloid cells that promote metastasis. Cancer Cell 2008;13:23–35. [PubMed: 18167337]
Yu H, Kortylewski M, Pardoll D. Crosstalk between cancer and immune cells: role of STAT3 in the
tumour microenvironment. Nat Rev Immunol 2007;7:41–51. [PubMed: 17186030]
Yu H, Pardoll D, Jove R. STATs in cancer inflammation and immunity: a leading role for STAT3. Nat
Rev Cancer 2009;9:798–809. [PubMed: 19851315]
Zhang B, Bowerman NA, Salama JK, Schmidt H, Spiotto MT, Schietinger A, Yu P, Fu YX,
Weichselbaum RR, Rowley DA, et al. Induced sensitization of tumor stroma leads to eradication
of established cancer by T cells. J Exp Med 2007;204:49–55. [PubMed: 17210731]
Zhang JY, Green CL, Tao S, Khavari PA. NF-kappaB RelA opposes epidermal proliferation driven by
TNFR1 and JNK. Genes Dev 2004;18:17–22. [PubMed: 14724177]
Zheng L, Dai H, Zhou M, Li M, Singh P, Qiu J, Tsark W, Huang Q, Kernstine K, Zhang X, et al. Fen1
mutations result in autoimmunity, chronic inflammation and cancers. Nat Med 2007;13:812–819.
[PubMed: 17589521]
Zitvogel L, Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Kroemer G. Immunological aspects of cancer chemotherapy. Nat
Rev Immunol 2008;8:59–73. [PubMed: 18097448]
Zong WX, Thompson CB. Necrotic death as a cell fate. Genes Dev 2006;20:1–15. [PubMed: 16391229]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Types of inflammation in tumorigenesis and cancer.
Chronic inflammation associated with infections or autoimmune disease precedes tumor
development and can contribute to it through induction of oncogenic mutations, genomic
instability, early tumor promotion, and enhanced angiogenesis. Prolonged exposure to
environmental irritants or obesity can also result in low-grade chronic inflammation that
precedes tumor development and contributes to it through the mechanisms mentioned above.
Tumor-associated inflammation goes hand in hand with tumor development. This
inflammatory response can enhance neo-angiogenesis, promote tumor progression and
metastatic spread, cause local immunosuppression, and further augment genomic instability.
Cancer therapy can also trigger an inflammatory response by causing trauma, necrosis, and
tissue injury that stimulate tumor re-emergence and resistance to therapy. However, in some
cases, therapy-induced inflammation can enhance antigen presentation, leading to immunemediated tumor eradication. Tumor promoting mechanisms are in red and anti-tumorigenic
mechanisms are in green.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

The multifaceted role of inflammation in cancer
Inflammation acts at all stages of tumorigenesis. It may contribute to tumor initiation through
mutations, genomic instability, and epigenetic modifications. Inflammation activates tissue
repair responses, induces proliferation of premalignant cells, and enhances their survival.
Inflammation also stimulates angiogenesis, causes localized immunosuppression, and
promotes the formation of a hospitable microenvironment in which pre-malignant cells can
survive, expand, and accumulate additional mutations and epigenetic changes. Eventually,
inflammation also promotes metastatic spread. Mutated cells are marked with “X”. Yellow stromal cells, Brown - malignant cells, Red - blood vessels, Blue - immune and inflammatory
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 28

cells. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition, EMT; reactive oxygen species, ROS; reactive
nitrogen intermediates (RNI)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Role of inflammation in tumor initiation and promotion
A) Tumor initiation. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI)
produced by inflammatory cells may cause mutations in neighboring epithelial cells. Also,
cytokines produced by inflammatory cells can elevate intracellular ROS and RNI in premalignant cells. In addition, inflammation can result in epigenetic changes that favor tumor
initiation. Tumor-associated inflammation contributes to further ROS, RNI and cytokine
production.
B) Tumor promotion. Cytokines produced by tumor infiltrating immune cells activate key
transcription factors, such as NF-κB or STAT3, in pre-malignant cells to control numerous
pro-tumorigenic processes, including survival, proliferation, growth, angiogenesis, and
invasion. As parts of positive feed-forward loops, NF-κB and STAT3 induce production of
chemokines that attract additional immune/inflammatory cells to sustain tumor-associated
inflammation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Immunosurveillance, tumor-promoting and therapy-induced inflammation.
A) Balance between immunosurveillance and tumor promoting inflammation in the tumor
microenvironment. Tumor promoting cytokines act on immune and malignant cells to tilt the
balance toward tumor promotion. Tumor promoting immunity dampens immunosurveillance,
which otherwise inhibits tumor growth. B) Therapy-induced inflammation. Various forms of
therapy induce death (necrosis) of malignant cells resulting in the release of necrotic products
and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that activate cytokine-producing
inflammatory cells. These cytokines activate pro-survival genes in residual cancer cells,
rendering them resistant to subsequent rounds of therapy. However, in some cases, therapyinduced inflammation augments the presentation of tumor antigens and stimulates an antitumor immune response that improves the therapeutic outcome.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

Grivennikov et al.

Page 31

Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Roles of different subtypes of immune and inflammatory cells in anti-tumor immunity and tumor-promoting
inflammation
Cell types

Anti-tumor

Tumor-promoting

Macrophages, dendritic
cells, myeloid-derived
suppressor cells

Antigen presentation
Production of cytokines (IL12 and type I IFN)

Immunosuppression
Production of cytokines,
chemokines,
proteases.
growth factors, and angiogenic
factors

Mast cells

Production of cytokines

B cells

Production of tumor specific
antibodies?

Production of cytokines
Activation of mast cells
Immunosuppression

CD8+ T cells

Direct lysis of cancer cells
Production of cytotoxic
cytokines

Production of cytokines?

CD4+ Th2 cells

CD4+ Th1 cells

Education of macrophages
Production of cytokines
B cell activation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Help to cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) in
tumor rejection

Production of cytokines

Production of cytokines
(IFNγ)
CD4+ Th17 cells
CD4+

Treg cells

Activation of CTLs

Production of cytokines

Suppression of
inflammation (cytokines and
other suppressive
mechanisms)

Immunosuppression
Production of cytokines

Natural Killer cells

Direct cytotoxicity toward
cancer cells
Production of cytotoxic
cytokines

Natural Killer T cells

Direct cytotoxicity toward
cancer cells
Production of cytotoxic
cytokines

Neutrophils

Direct cytotoxicity
Regulation of CTL
responses

Production of cytokines,
proteases, and ROS

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 March 19.

