Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Phosphorylation of apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment
domain by protein kinase CK2 contributes to chemotherapy
resistance by inhibiting doxorubicin induced apoptosis
Jianxun Wang1,*, Chang Feng2,*, Yuqi He3,*, Wei Ding4, Jianqiu Sheng3, Muhammad
Arshad2, Xiaojie Zhang2, Peifeng Li1
1

Institute for Translational Medicine, Medical College of Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266021, China

2

 ational Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
N
Beijing, 100101, China

3

Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Military General Hospital, Beijing, 100700, China

4

Affiliated Hospital, Medical College of Qingdao University, Qingdao, 266003, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Peifeng Li, e-mail: peifeng@ioz.ac.cn
Jianxun Wang, e-mail: wangjx@qdu.edu.cn
Keywords: chemotherapy resistance, ARC, CK2, apoptosis, doxorubicin
Received: February 05, 2015      Accepted: June 17, 2015      Published: June 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
The development of cancer resistance to chemotherapy is the major obstacle to
cancer therapy. Here, we identified that the phosphorylation of apoptosis repressor
with caspase recruitment domain (ARC) at threonine 149 was essential to inhibit
doxorubicin (DOX) induced apoptosis and mitochondrial fission in cancer cells.
Our further study showed that casein kinase II (CK2) inhibitors could decrease
the phosphorylation levels of ARC and make cancer cells sensitive to undergoing
apoptosis. Furthermore, CK2α and CK2α’, catalytic subunits of CK2, were observed
to translocate into nuclear in cancer cells with the treatment of DOX. Finally, the
synergistically therapeutic effect by combining DOX and CK2 inhibitor was confirmed
in tumor xenograft model. Taken together, our results revealed that CK2-mediated
phosphorylation of ARC contributed to chemotherapy resistance by inhibiting DOX
induced apoptosis and combining DOX with CK2 inhibitor could induce apoptosis of
cancer cells synergistically by down-regulating the phosphorylation of ARC. Therefore,
development of new therapeutic strategies based on ARC and CK2, is promising for
overcoming cancer resistance to chemotherapy.

and then provoke the apoptosis inducing effect to improve
the efficiency of this anticancer drug.
Apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment
domain (ARC) is an anti-apoptosis protein initially
discovered in the skeletal muscle and the heart [6]. It is
reported that ARC is highly expressed in many malignant
tumors [7, 8]. Our previous work has proved that highly
expressed ARC contributed to chemotherapy resistance
in cancer cells by targeting the mitochondrial fission
machinery [9]. We also observed that ARC expression
was down-regulated in cancer cells following DOX
treatment. Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation play a
critical role in ARC activity regulation [10, 11]. Casein
kinase II (CK2) can phosphorylate ARC at threonine-149

INTRODUCTION
The development of cancer resistance to chemo­
therapy during treatment is a major obstacle to cancer
therapy [1]. The ultimate goal of chemotherapies is
to induce tumor cell death, while the suppression of
apoptosis contributes to drug resistance in cancer cells
[2, 3]. Doxorubicin (DOX) is widely used in cancer
treatments. However, many cancers have developed
resistance to this chemotherapy drug which became major
barriers to its clinical application [4, 5]. Considering that
apoptosis associates with the development of anti-drug
characteristics, it matters a lot to reveal the underlying
mechanisms of apoptosis triggered by DOX in cancer cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27700

Oncotarget

(T149) to protect cardiomyocytes against oxidative stressinduced apoptosis [10]. Meanwhile it’s unknown whether
ARC is phosphorylated in cancer cells and whether T149
phosphorylation is essential for cancer resistance to
chemotherapy. The involvement of phosphorylated ARC
in chemoresistance needs to be further investigated.
There are arguments about the subcellular
localization of ARC in cancer cells [12, 13]. It’s reported
that ARC is predominantly distributed in the nuclei of
some human cancer cell lines [13]. However, in other
cancer cell lines such as human melanoma cell line
ARC is predominantly distributed in cytoplasm [12]
and our previous study found that ARC was localized
in cytoplasm in human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells
and human cervical carcinoma HeLa cells [9]. Another
study shows interesting results that ARC locates only
to cytoplasm in differentiated or poorly differentiated
colon adenocarcinoma, meanwhile ARC locates to both
cytoplasm and nucleus in moderately differentiated
colon adenocarcinoma [7]. All these indicate the
subcellular localization of ARC is cell type dependent.
It has been also shown that the localization of ARC is
regulated by phosphorylation. CK2 phosphorylates ARC
at T149 enabling it to translocate to mitochondria in
cardiomyocytes, whereas the non-phosphorylated ARC is
located in the cytoplasm [10, 14]. The cytolocalization and
the functions of phosphorylated ARC in cancer cells need
to be further clarified.
CK2 is a constitutively active serine/threonine kinase
ubiquitously localized in nucleus and cytoplasm. Nearly
all cancers that have been examined show increased CK2
expression [15]. The CK2 holoenzyme is composed of two
catalytic subunits (CK2α and/or CK2α’) and two regulatory
CK2β subunits while the catalytic subunits can catalyze
hundreds substrates and participates in complex cancer
regulation networks [16]. It has long been known that CK2
involved in cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis. The
specific inhibitor 4, 5, 6, 7-tetrabromobenzotriazole (TBB)
of CK2 can make prostate cancer cells more sensitized
to apoptosis and overexpression of CK2 can blocked the
apoptosis pathway [17, 18]. As CK2 can phosphorylate
ARC in cardiomyocytes to prevent apoptosis [10], it is
necessary to investigate whether CK2 can target ARC
in cancer cells to boost the tumorigenesis and induce the
chemotherapy resistance.
The present study was designed to elucidate whether
phosphorylated ARC was contributed to chemotherapy
resistance in cancer and investigate the potential molecular
mechanism. Our results showed that phosphorylated ARC
localized to mitochondria and played a major part in
chemotherapy resistance in cancer cells. Moreover, CK2
could phosphorylate ARC directly and CK2 inhibitor
made cancer cells sensitive to undergoing apoptosis.
Furthermore, CK2α and CK2α’ translocated into nuclear
in cancer cells treated by DOX. The therapy efficacy was
confirmed in xenograft tumor model by combining DOX
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and CK2 inhibitor. Our results identify a novel molecular
mechanism for chemotherapy resistance involving
phosphorylation of ARC by CK2 and provide a valuable
insight into cancer therapy.

RESULTS
ARC is phosphorylated and localizes to
mitochondria in cancer cells
Recent studies have shown that ARC contributes to
chemotherapy resistance in cancer cells [9, 19]. However,
the cytolocalization and the functions of phosphorylated
ARC in cancer cells remain largely unknown. Firstly, we
detected whether ARC is phosphorylated and whether it
locates to mitochondrion to perform its function in cancer
cell lines. Phosphorylated ARC could be detectable in
cancer cells including HeLa and SGC-7901 but not in
the normal HEK-293 cells (Figure 1A). ARC localization
was demonstrated by immunofluorescence and we found
that it was distributed throughout the perinuclear region.
It is worthwhile to note that ARC distribution pattern
coincided very closely with that of the mitoTracker in
HeLa cells (Figure 1B). A similar result was observed
in SGC-7901 cells (Figure 1C). The distribution of
ARC and phosphorylated ARC in subcellular fractions
of mitochondria-enriched heavy membranes (HM)
and cytosol was further detected. We discovered the
phosphorylated ARC only in HM but not in cytosol
(Figure 1D). Significantly expressed phosphorylated ARC
was also observed in gastric cancer tissues compared with
normal gastric tissues (Figure 1E). These results suggest
that ARC is phosphorylated and localizes to mitochondria
in cancer cells and clinical cancer tissues.

ARC requires to be phosphorylated to inhibit
DOX induced apoptosis and mitochondria fission
To study the role of phosphorylated ARC in DOX
resistance, we treated cancer cells with DOX. The
expression levels of total ARC and phosphorylated ARC
were down-regulated after DOX treatment in a timedependent manner in HeLa (Figure 2A) and SGC-7901
cells (Figure 2B), and what was noteworthy was that
phosphorylated ARC expression levels decreased more
sharply than total ARC levels. These results indicated
that the decrease of phosphorylated ARC levels was not
totally by the results of the decrease of total ARC protein
levels, as the phosphorylated ARC levels decreased
more obviously than total ARC protein levels. And these
results suggested that the phosphorylation of ARC may be
inhibited by DOX.
T149 is the functional phosphorylation site of
ARC [10]. ARC T149 phosphorylation is required for
its relocalization to mitochondria where ARC plays
the anti-apoptosis function [10, 11, 20]. To elucidate
27701

Oncotarget

Figure 1: ARC is phosphorylated and localizes to mitochondria in cancer cells. A. Analysis of total ARC and phosphorylated
ARC (p-ARC) expression levels in cancer cells including HeLa and SGC-7901 cells. HEK-293 cells served as a negative control. ARC
and p-ARC were detected by immunoblot. A representative result of three independent experiments is shown. B. Distribution of ARC was
detected in HeLa cells by immunofluorescence. HeLa cells labeled with MitoTracker (red), stained with anti-ARC antibody, and monitored
by FITC-labeled secondary antibody (green), and DAPI (blue). C. Distribution of ARC was detected by immunofluorescence in SGC-7901
cells which were analyzed as described for B. D. HeLa and SGC-7901 cells were harvested for the detection of ARC and p-ARC in the
cytosol (top) and mitochondria-enriched HM (bottom). A representative blot of three independent experiments is shown. E. Immunoblot of
ARC and p-ARC proteins in clinical samples with one normal gastric tissue (N) and four gastric tumor tissues (T).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27702

Oncotarget

Figure 2: ARC requires to be phosphorylated to inhibit DOX induced apoptosis and mitochondria fission. A–B. ARC

and p-ARC levels were detected in HeLa (A) and SGC-7901 (B) cells treated with DOX (2 μM) at the indicated time. C–D. wtARC
inhibited DOX-induced cell death. HeLa (C) and SGC-7901 (D) cells were infected with adenovirus ARC, ARC T149A mutant adenovirus
(ARC T149A) or adenovirus β-gal. 24 hours after infection they were treated with DOX (2 μM) for 36 hours. Cell death was assessed by
trypan blue exclusion. *p < 0.05 vs DOX alone. E–F. wtARC but not ARCT149A prevented DOX-induced mitochondrial fission. HeLa
(E) or SGC-7901 (F) was infected with adenovirus ARC or ARC T149A. 24 hours after infection they were treated with DOX (2 μM). 12
hours after treatment, mitochondrial fission was detected. *p < 0.05 vs DOX alone. G–H. Caspase-3 activities were detection in HeLa (G)
or SGC-7901 (H) cells which were treated as in C and D. *p < 0.05 vs DOX alone. I. Analysis of cytochrome C (Cyt-C) release in HeLa
cells treated as described in C. Data are expressed as the mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27703

Oncotarget

whether ARC depends on phosphorylation at T149 to
resist the DOX induced-apoptosis, we then compared
the effect of phosphorylatable wild type ARC (wtARC)
and nonphosphorylatable T149 mutant ARC on DOX
induced apoptosis. T149 mutant ARC refers to the
phosphorylation site threonine149 is mutated to alanine
(ARC T149A) and alanine mutation led to the loss of
phosphorylation capability of ARC. HeLa and SGC-7901
cells were infected with adenoviral ARC and ARC T149A.
Enforced expression of ARC and phosphorylated ARC
was confirmed by immunoblot (Supplementary Figure
1A and 1B). DOX-induced cell death could be attenuated
by wtARC but not ARC T149A in HeLa and SGC-7901
cells (Figure 2C and 2D). While mitochondrial fission is
related to the initiation of apoptosis and phosphorylated
ARC locates to mitochondrion, enforced expression of
ARC T149A could not inhibit mitochondrial fission as
effectively as wtARC in cancer cells (Figure 2E and 2F).
To further confirm that is apoptotic cell death, caspase-3
activity assay was performed. The results showed that
administration of wtARC but not ARC T149A could
inhibit the caspase-3 activity induced by DOX in HeLa
and SGC-7901 cells (Figure 2G and 2H). Meanwhile
wtARC could attenuate the release of cytochrome C
upon DOX treatment in HeLa cells (Figure 2I). We also
detected the cellular localization of ARC in HeLa cells
infected with wtARC or ARC T149A adenovirus, the
results suggested that wtARC but not ARC T149A could
relocate to mitochondria (Supplementary Figure 2). Taken
together, these results indicate that ARC requires to be
phosphorylated at T149 to inhibit DOX induced apoptosis
and maintain the mitochondrial morphology in cancer
cells.

and are activated in tumor cells [21, 22]. To further
explore whether other kinases can phosphorylate ARC
at threonine 149, we detected the phosphorylated ARC
protein levels in HeLa cells treated with p38, JNK or
ERK inhibitors respectively. The results suggested that
the phosphorylated ARC levels were not affected by these
kinase inhibitors (Supplementary Figure 3). When CK2
was inhibited, the phosphorylated ARC protein levels
demonstrated a decrease in the HM fractions contrasted
to the unphosphorylated ARC increased in the cytosolic
fractions in HeLa cells (Figure 3E). And we reproduced
the same results in SGC-7901 cells (Figure 3F).
Then we attempted to investigate the influence of
CK2 inhibitor on cell susceptibility to chemotherapy.
Following low-dose DOX (0.2 μM) treatment in cancer
cells, a limited amount of cells undergoing death was
observed. Whereas when we administrated with DRB
or TBB, the death cells were significantly increased in
response to the same dose of DOX (Figure 3G and 3H,
and Supplementary Figure 4A and 4B). We also found
this combination could synergistically boost caspase-3
activity (Figure 3I and 3J). Collectively, our data indicate
that inhibition endogenous ARC phosphorylation by CK2
inhibitor make cancer cells more sensitive to DOX.

CK2 regulates apoptosis through targeting ARC
As CK2 is able to phosphorylate ARC, we wondered
whether ARC regulated DOX sensitivity in cancer cells
to undergoing apoptosis depending on CK2. Enforced
expression of ARC inhibited DOX-induced mitochondrial
fission and cell death. HeLa and SGC-7901 cells
administrated with CK2 inhibitor DRB could abolish
the inhibitory effect on cell death (Figure 4A, 4B) in the
presence of exogenous ARC. However, DRB itself at
the doses used in this study could not induce apoptosis.
A similar result was obtained in cancer cells administrated
with TBB (Figure 4C, 4D).
To elucidate the direct relationship between CK2
and ARC, we performed immunoprecipitation experiment
to detect the association between CK2 catalytic subunits
CK2α and ARC. The results revealed that the binding of
CK2α and ARC sharply reduced upon DOX treatment
(Figure 4E). These data suggest that CK2 phosphorylates
ARC directly and contributes to the antagonism of cancer
cells to chemotherapy.

Inhibition endogenous ARC phosphorylation
by CK2 inhibitor sensitizes cells to undergoing
apoptosis
To better understand the phosphorylation is
required for ARC to exert its anti-apoptotic function and
exploring the potential mechanism by which ARC be
phosphorylated, we detected whether inhibit endogenous
ARC phosphorylation can control cancer cell apoptosis.
Since it has been shown that CK2 can phosphorylate
ARC at Thr149, in order to inhibit the phosphorylation
of endogenous ARC we employed CK2 inhibitors 5,
6-dichloro-1-β-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB)
and TBB, both of them can specifically inhibit the activity
of CK2. We verified that DRB could induce a decrease
of the phosphorylated form of ARC in a dose-dependent
manner in HeLa and SGC-7901 cells (Figure 3A and 3B).
TBB strengthened this statement with similar results
(Figure 3C and 3D). Protein kinases such as CK2, p38
mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38), c-Jun N-terminal
kinases (JNK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinases
(ERK) play an essential role in cancer development
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CK2α translates to nuclear in cancer cells
exposed to DOX
The prior results showed phosphorylated ARC
decreased more sharply than total ARC levels and
phosphorylation of ARC was inhibited by DOX. Thus,
we attempted to figure out whether the decrease of
phosphorylated ARC related to CK2 expression level or
activity change in cancer cells treated with DOX. Firstly,
27704

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Inhibition endogenous ARC phosphorylation by CK2 inhibitor sensitizes cells to undergoing apoptosis. A–B.

CK2 inhibitor DRB was able to inhibit endogenous ARC phosphorylation. HeLa (A) and SGC-7901 (B) were treated with DRB as
indicated concentration for 36 hours, total ARC and p-ARC were detected by immunoblotting. C–D. CK2 inhibitor TBB was able to inhibit
endogenous ARC phosphorylation in HeLa (C) and SGC-7901 (D). E–F. CK2 inhibitor prevents ARC accumulations in mitochondria. HeLa
cells (E) and SGC-7901 cells (F) were treated with DRB or TBB for 36 hours. Cells were harvested for the immunoblot analysis of ARC and
p-ARC in the cytosol and mitochondria-enriched HM. G–H. DRB sensitizes DOX to induce cell death. HeLa (G) and SGC-7901 (H) were
administrated with indicated concentration of DRB for 36 hours and then treated with DOX (0.2 μM). Cell death was analyzed 36 hours
after treatment. *p < 0.05 vs DOX alone. I–J. caspase-3 activity was boosted by combination of CK2 inhibitor and DOX at low dose of
0.2 μmol/L in HeLa (I) or SGC-7901cells (J) *p < 0.05 vs DOX alone. Data are expressed as the mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27705

Oncotarget

Figure 4: CK2 regulates apoptosis through targeting ARC. A–D. ARC-attenuated DOX induced cells death is abolished by

CK2 inhibitor. HeLa (A and C) or SGC-7901 (B and D) cells were infected with adenovirus ARC, and treated with DRB (A and B) or TBB
(C and D) for 36 hours. Cells were exposed to DOX (2 μM). Cell death was analyzed by trypan blue exclusion. *p < 0.05 vs DOX +ARC.
E. The binding of ARC to endogenous CK2α is reduced in Hela cells exposed to DOX. HeLa cells were treated with DOX (2 μM) for
6 hours and the association between ARC and CK2α was analyzed by immunoprecipitation (IP) followed by immunoblot (IB). Data are
expressed as the mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments.

we detected the expression levels of CK2 subunits in
HeLa cells treated with DOX. As shown in Figure 5A,
the protein levels of CK2α, CK2α’ and CK2β changed
indistinctively with DOX treatment. It’s reported that
the control of the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of
CK2 subunits also play an important role in regulatory
mechanism for CK2 activity [23]. And then we detected
the subcellular locations of CK2 subunits upon DOX
treatment. The levels of CK2α and CK2α’ in cytosol were
decreased upon the DOX treatment in HeLa cells and
their levels in nuclear were increased in the meantime,
nevertheless levels of CK2β in cytosol and nuclear both
remained constant (Figure 5B). Immunofluorescence
was used to further detect the localizations of CK2α and
CK2α’ in HeLa cells treated with DOX. In the control
untreated cells, CK2α was distributed throughout the
cellular. Upon DOX treatment, CK2α accumulated
into the nuclear (Figure 5C). CK2α’ showed the similar
migration pattern (Figure 5D). Corresponding to the
translocation of CK2 to nuclear, the protein level of ARC
was decreased in mitochondrial in HeLa cells treated with
DOX (Figure 5E). Thus, it seems that catalytic subunits of
CK2 translate to nuclear in cancer cells exposed to DOX
could further reduce the activity of CK2 in cytoplasm.
While nonphosphorylated ARC is predominantly localized
to cytoplasm which means that CK2 catalytic subunits
translocate to nuclear and cytosolic CK2 activity decrease
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

might contribute to abolish the phosphorylation of ARC
in cytoplasm to make cancer cells more sensitive to DOX.

DOX combines with CK2 inhibitor enhance
chemotherapeutic effect in vivo
Having demonstrated CK2 inhibitor can efficiently
attenuate the phosphorylation of endogenous ARC and
significantly increased the susceptibility of cancer cells
to DOX in vitro, we further investigated CK2 inhibitor
therapeutic potential in mouse xenograft model. HeLa
cells were subcutaneously inoculated into nude mice.
When the tumor volumes reached 250–300 mm3,
intraperitoneal delivery of DOX and/or DRB were given
every other day. High dose of DOX at 4 mg/kg and low
dose at 1 mg/kg were used in this study. We monitored
subcutaneous tumor growth and body weight of the mice
during 2 weeks of the therapy. It was found that highdose chemotherapy obviously inhibit the tumor growth,
while obvious body weight loss indicated the severe
toxicity of DOX (Figure 6A and 6B). In comparison with
high-dose DOX chemotherapy, combine low-dose DOX
and DRB successfully restrained the tumor growth as
effective as high-dose chemotherapy and did not exhibit
obvious adverse effect which indicated by slight body
weight loss (Figure 6A and 6B). Additionally, analysis
of isolated tumors from the combination treatment group
27706

Oncotarget

Figure 5: CK2α translates to nuclear in cancer cells exposed to DOX. A. Analysis of CK2 subunits protein levels in HeLa

cells treated with DOX (2 μM) as the indicated time. CK2α, CK2α’ and CK2β were detected by immunoblot. B. DOX induces CK2α
and CK2α’ accumulated in nuclear from cytosol. HeLa cells were treated with 2 μM DOX and harvested at the indicated time after
treatment for immunoblot analysis of CK2 subunits in the cytosol and nuclear. C–D. Distributions of CK2α and CK2α’ were detected
by immunofluorescence. HeLa cells were labeled with DAPI (blue), stained with anti-CK2α (C) or anti-CK2α’ (D) antibody and then
monitored by FITC-labeled secondary antibody (green) and DAPI (blue). Bar = 20 μm. E. The distribution of ARC in mitochondrial is
reduced in HeLa cells exposed to DOX. HeLa cells were treated with DOX (2 μM) for 6 hours and harvested for the immunoblot analysis
of ARC in the cytosol and mitochondria-enriched HM. A representative result of three independent experiments is shown.

showed remarkable reduction of the phosphorylated ARC
expression while the total expression of ARC remains
constant (Figure 6C). The reduction of phosphorylated
ARC may contribute to enhanced apoptosis, as assessed by
the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end
labeling (TUNEL) assay (Figure 6D) in xenograft model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

These findings were consistent with our obtained results
in vitro. In summary, our data indicate that CK2 inhibitor
combined with low-dose DOX could synergistically
down-regulate the phosphorylation of ARC and then
induce cancer cells sensitive to undergoing apoptosis
in vivo.
27707

Oncotarget

Figure 6: DOX combines with CK2 inhibitor enhance chemotherapeutic effect in vivo. A. A total of 1 × 107 HeLa cells were

injected subcutaneously into BALB/c nude mice. When tumors reached 250–300 mm3, therapeutic treatment as indicated was given every
other day. Tumor volumes were monitored during 2-week therapy (n = 6 each group) (top). At the end of this experiment, tumors were
dissected and photographed. Representative images of tumors were shown (bottom), scale bar = 1 cm. B. Body weight of the tumor bearing
mice described in A was measured during two-week therapeutic treatment (n = 6 each group). Error bars represent SD. C. Immunoblot
analysis as indicated in the xenograft tumors described in A. A representative result of three independent experiments is shown. D. Apoptosis
detected in sections of xenograft tumors described in A by TUNEL assay, n = 6 each group. *P < 0.05 compared with DOX (1 mg/kg) alone.
Error bars represent S.D.

DISCUSSION

get over this problem. Our current study found that cancer
resistance to chemotherapy has a close relationship with
the phosphorylated ARC which locates to mitochondrion
in cancer cells. CK2 inhibitors could sensitize cells to
apoptosis by lowering the ARC phosphorylation levels.
Furthermore, we identified CK2α and CK2α’ translates to
nuclear in cancer cells under DOX treatment and this may

Chemotherapy has an important role in the treatment
of a variety of cancers. However, the major problem is
that cancer cells are resistant to a variety of therapeutic
drugs such as DOX. It is urgent to explore potential
mechanisms involved in chemotherapy resistance and to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27708

Oncotarget

go a step further to lower the ARC phosphorylation level
by reducing the CK2 amount in cytoplasm. Finally, the
hypothesis that ARC phosphorylation abolished by CK2
inhibitor could make cancer cell more sensitive to DOX
was supported by the results in nude mice model.
DOX has been used for treating cancer for over
40 years [24] and has shown great treatment potential.
It has been shown that anticancer action of DOX is
elicited through DNA damage and/or reactive oxygen
species generation by redox reaction. DOX can activate
the apoptosis pathway by AMPK (AMP-activated
protein kinase inducing apoptosis) signaling [25]. Our
present study showed that DOX could make CK2α
translocate from cytoplasm to nucleus meanwhile the nonphosphorylated ARC locates to cytoplasm. This means
that ARC cannot be phosphorylated effectively as an
active anti-apoptosis state under the DOX treatment as less
catalytic CK2 available. We provide a novel explanation
for DOX inducing apoptosis by down regulating ARC
phosphorylation levels.
ARC as an endogenous apoptosis inhibitor can
antagonize both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis signaling
pathway [26]. Our previous works have proved that highly
expressed ARC contributed to chemotherapy resistance in
cancer cells and our present study revealed that ARC was
phosphorylated and localized to mitochondria in HeLa and
SGC-7901 cells. Our results further suggested the T149
phosphorylation of ARC was necessary to inhibit apoptosis
and mitochondrial fission under DOX treatment. ARC
T149 phosphorylation is required for its relocalization
to mitochondria where ARC plays the anti-apoptosis
function. To our knowledge, there are no publications that
ARC can be phosphorylated by other kinases except for
CK2. Our results suggested that p38, JNK or ERK did not
phosphorylate ARC at threonine 149. Whether ARC can
be phosphorylate by other kinase at other sites and whether
these sites affect the localization or function of ARC need
to be explored in the further study. Mitochondrial fission
is involved in the initiation of apoptosis and our previous
study has revealed ARC inhibits dynamin-related protein-1
(Drp1) accumulation in mitochondria and the consequent
mitochondrial fission [9]. It is important to clarify how
the phosphorylated ARC which localizes to mitochondrion
participates in mitochondrial fission machinery. It would
be interesting to understand the relationship between ARC
and the mitochondrial dynamic related proteins such as
Drp1, mitofusin and other factors [27].
CK2 has hundreds substrates and participates
in complex regulation networks [16]. It has long been
known involved in cell growth and proliferation,
moreover, CK2 can suppress apoptosis [28]. Elevated
CK2 activity has been associated with tumorigenesis
while the precise roles it plays remain incompletely
understood. CK2 can also regulate the activity of tumor
suppressor proteins and oncogenes. For instance, CK2
phosphorylates p53 at Ser 392 in response to DNA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

damage [29]; regulates c-myc protein stability in
lymphomagenesis [30]; promotes aberrant activation
of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) in breast cancer
cells [31]. These CK2-targeted factors have multiple
functions like the regulation of cell proliferation, growth
arrest, or apoptosis, the direct evidence as to whether
phosphorylation eventually results in the control of
apoptosis is questionable and our work showed that CK2
directly targeted ARC to inhibit apoptosis of cancer cells.
Nuclear translocation of CK2 in some cancer cells
is a common downstream response of cells subjected to
diverse types of growth stimuli, such as heat shock, UV
irradiation and chemical-stress [32, 33]. For example,
CK2 translocates to nuclear matrix with a decrease in
the cytosolic fraction in human prostate carcinoma cells
under androgens and/or growth factors stimuli [34]; CK2α
targets to nuclear matrix in response to heat shock may
serve a protective role in the cell response to stress [35];
CK2α partially localizes to perinuclear structures while a
marked nuclear translocation of CK2α’ occurs following
ionizing radiation [36]; chemical-induced apoptosis
in prostate cancer and other cells by etoposide evokes
an enhancement shutting of CK2 to the nuclear matrix
from the cytoplasmic [37]; CK2β subunits are retained
in the cytoplasm while CK2α and CK2α’ subunits are
shuttled to the nucleus upon hypoxic treatment [38].
And our present work has shown that catalytic subunits
CK2α and CK2α’ translocate to nuclear while the
regulatory subunits CK2β remain constant in cancer
cells when treated with DOX. The function of CK2
locates to nuclear is very complicated, such as regulate
cell cycle progression [39], response to DNA damage
[40], modulate the nuclear architecture [41] and so on.
Meanwhile, our results showed that the localization of
ARC in mitochondrial was decreased in cancer cells
treated with DOX. So we suppose that CK2 translocate
to nuclear will catalyze the phosphorylation of ARC less
effectively as unphosphorylated ARC predominantly
distributed in cytoplasm in cancer cells. And the decrease
of phosphorylated ARC level consequentially makes
cancer cells sensitive to apoptosis. It would be interesting
to explore the function of CK2 in nuclear under this
condition and the mechanism by which CK2α transfer to
nuclear in cancer cells in response to DOX remains to be
determined.
CK2 activity has been found to be consistently
enhanced in many human cancers. As CK2 regulates
many oncogenic pathways and processes that play
important roles in drug resistance, it’s a promising
therapeutic target for cancer therapy. As it’s mentioned
above that drug resistance and potential side effects limit
the DOX application in cancer treatment, combining
DOX with other drugs that can effectively counteract
chemotherapy resistance in cancer cells may be a worthy
way to treat cancer. It’s reported that combination therapy
with DOX even at a lower dose plus gefitinib strongly
27709

Oncotarget

suppressed neuroblastoma growth than treatment with
DOX alone [42]. There are results also demonstrate that
combination of CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 with erlotinib
(EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor) results in synergistic
killing of cancer cells by attenuating the PI3K-AktmTOR pathway [43]. More results show that TBB
treatment combined with TRAIL is a potential therapy
against androgen-refractory prostate cancer [44]. In our
study, we lowered the dose of DOX usage combined with
DRB in xenograft models and found this combination
therapy successfully restrained the tumor growth by
enhancing apoptosis. Meanwhile the therapy also did
not show severe toxicity indicated by slight body weight
loss in vivo. Our results indicate that DOX at a low dose
combined with CK2 inhibitors can increase therapeutic
efficacy while reduce the toxicity at the same time, and
this may represent a novel therapeutic concept for cancer
treatment.
Taken together, we report here that phosphorylation
of ARC by CK2 contributes to chemotherapy resistance
by inhibiting DOX induced apoptosis, whereas, CK2
inhibitor increase the sensitivity of cancer cells to DOX
by inhibiting the phosphorylation of ARC. Our results
suggest that combination therapy with DOX and CK2
inhibitor might be a promising way for the treatment of
cancers to increase therapeutic efficacy, reduce toxicity,
and decrease the incidence of drug resistance.

were collected from Beijing Military General Hospital
(Beijing, China). These patients were randomly selected
from clinical pool of the hospital’s Gastrointestinal
clinic, none of the patients received chemotherapy
or radiotherapy. Human tissues were collected at
gastroscopy and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.
The study was approved by ethics committee of the
Beijing Military General Hospital. Informed consent was
obtained from all study subjects.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Preparation of subcellular fractions

Cell viability assay and caspase-3 activity assay
Cell death was determined by Trypan
Blue
Exclusion.
The
Trypan
Blue-positive
and Trypan Blue-negative cells were counted.
Caspase-3 activity was measured using an
Apo-ONE homogeneous caspase-3/7 assay kit
(Promega, Madision, WI, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol.

Adenovirus
Adenovirus ARC, adenovirus ARC T149A mutant
and adenovirus β-galactosidase (β-gal) were as we
described [9, 10]. All adenoviruses were amplified in
HEK-293 cells. Adenoviral infection of cancer cells was
performed as we described previously [9].

Cells were washed twice with PBS and the pellet
was suspended in 0.2 mL of buffer A [20 mmol/L HEPES
(pH 7.5), 10 mmol/L KCl, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 1 mmol/L
EGTA, 1 mol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L DTT, 0.1 mmol/L
PMSF, 250 mmol/L sucrose] containing a protease
inhibitor cocktail. The cells were homogenized by 35
strokes in a Dounce homogenizer. The homogenates were
centrifuged twice at 750 g for 5 min at 4°C to collect
nuclei and debris. The supernatants were centrifuged
at 10,000 g for 15 min at 4°C to collect mitochondriaenriched heavy membrane pellet (HM). The resulting
supernatants were centrifuged to yield cytosolic
fractions.

Reagents and cell culture
DOX, DRB and TBB were purchased from Sigma
(St. Louis, MO, USA). p38 inhibitor SB203580, JNK
inhibitor SP600125 and ERK inhibitor SCH772984 were
purchased from were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology (Massachusetts, USA), Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, USA), Selleck Chemicals (Houston, USA)
respectively. Anti-ARC antibody, anti-CK2α antibody,
anti-CK2α’ antibody and anti-CK2β antibody were
obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, UK), anti-PCNA
antibody was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Texas, USA.), anti-COX IV antibody was obtained from
Cell Signaling Technology (Massachusetts, USA). AntiPhospho-T149 antibody was generated as we described
[10]. Human cervical cancer cells HeLa and human
gastric cancer cell line SGC-7901 were as we previously
described [9]. The cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY,
USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100
units/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin in a
humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C.

Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed for 1 h at 4°C in a lysis buffer
(20 mmol/L Tris pH 7.5, 2 mmol/L EDTA, 3 mmol/L
EGTA, 2 mmol/L DTT, 250 mmol/L sucrose, 0.1 mmol/L
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1% Triton X-100)
containing a protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein samples
were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred to
nitrocellulose membranes. Blots were probed using
corresponding primary antibodies. Then the horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies were used.
Antigen-antibody complexes were tested by enhanced
chemiluminescence.

Clinical gastric cancer samples
Primary gastric cancer tissues and adjacent nontumorous tissues from patients with gastric cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27710

Oncotarget

Immunoprecipitation

Statistical analysis

Cells were lysed for 1 h at 4°C in a lysis buffer.
To perform immunoprecipitation, the cell lysates were
precleared with 10% (vol/vol) protein A-agarose (Roche)
for 1 h on a rocking platform. Specific antibodies or
normal rabbit IgG as negative control were added and
rocked for 1 h. Immunoprecipitates were captured with
10% (vol/vol) protein A-agarose for another hour. The
agarose beads were spun down and washed thrice with
lysis buffer. The antigens were released and denatured by
adding SDS sample buffer.

All statistical analyses were performed using the
SPSS 13.0 statistical software package. The results are
expressed as means ± SD of at least three independent
experiments. The differences among experimental groups
were evaluated by one-way analysis of variance. Paired
data were determined by two-tailed Student’s t-test.
p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81170109 and 81370262).

Mitochondrial staining and analysis of
mitochondrial fission

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Cells were plated onto the cover-slips coated with
0.01% poly-L-lysine. After treatment they were stained
for 20 min with 0.02 μmol/L MitoTracker Red CMXRos
(Molecular Probes) and the cell nuclei were stained by
600 nM 4′, 6′-diamino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (SigmaAldrich) for 5 min. Immunofluorescence analysis of
mitochondrial fission was performed as we described with
modification [45]. The samples were imaged using a laser
scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 510 META).
Images were assessed in random order. A punctiform
mitochondrial phenotype was scored when at least 90% of
the tubular mitochondria were disintegrated.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
ARC, apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment
domain; CK2, casein kinase II; DOX, doxorubicin; TBB,
4,5,6,7-tetrabromobenzotriazole; DRB, 5,6-dichloro-1β-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole; HM, mitochondriaenriched heavy membranes; β-gal, β-galactosidase;
DAPI, 4’,6’-diamino-2-phenylindole; TUNEL, terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling.

TUNEL analysis

REFERENCES

TUNEL assay was performed using a kit from Roche
Applied Science (Hamburg, Germany). The procedures
were following the kit instructions. The samples were
imaged using a laser scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss
LSM 510 META).

1.	 Longley DB, Johnston PG. Molecular mechanisms of drug
resistance. Journal of Pathology. 2005; 205:275–292.
2.	 Kang YJ, Zhou Z-X, Wang G-W, Buridi A, Klein JB.
Suppression by metallothionein of doxorubicin-induced
cardiomyocyte apoptosis through inhibition of p38 mitogenactivated protein kinases. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
2000; 275:13690–13698.

Subcutaneous tumor xenograft model
For the combination therapy experiments in
Figure 6A, 1 × 107 HeLa cells were injected
subcutaneously into the right flanks of female BALB/c
nude mice (4–5 weeks old). When tumors reached
an average volume of 250–300 mm3, the mice were
randomly divided into 5 groups, 6 mice in each group.
According to the experimental design, intraperitoneal
delivery of DOX and/or DRB was administrated every
other day. Two different doses of DOX (1 mg/kg, 4 mg/
kg) were used. During DOX and/or DRB treatment, the
tumor size and body weight of the mice were monitored
every other day. The tumor volume was calculated using
the formula volume = length × width2/2. At the end of the
experiment, the mice were sacrificed and the tumors were
separated for further analysis. Animal experiments were
reviewed and approved by the Animal Care Committee,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese academy of Sciences.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 144:646–674.
4.	 Aas T, Borresen AL, Geisler S, SmithSorensen B,
Johnsen H, Varhaug JE, Akslen LA, Lonning PE. Specific
P53 mutations are associated with de novo resistance to
doxorubicin in breast cancer patients. Nature Medicine.
1996; 2:811–814.
5.	 Force T, Kolaja KL. Cardiotoxicity of kinase inhibitors:
the prediction and translation of preclinical models to
clinical outcomes. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 2011;
10:111–126.
6.	 Koseki T, Inohara N, Chen S, Nunez G. ARC, an inhibi­
tor of apoptosis expressed in skeletal muscle and heart
that interacts selectively with caspases. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1998; 95:5156–5160.

27711

Oncotarget

7.	 Mercier I, Vuolo M, Jasmin JF, Medina CM, Williams M,
Mariadason JM, Qian H, Xue XN, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP,
Kitsis RN. ARC (apoptosis repressor with caspase recruit­
ment domain) is a novel marker of human colon cancer.
Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:1640–1647.

caspase recruitment domain. Cell Death & Disease. 2014;
5:12.
20.	 Zhang YQ, Herman B. Expression and modification of
ARC (apoptosis repressor with a CARD domain) is dis­
tinctly regulated by oxidative stress in cancer cells. Journal
of Cellular Biochemistry. 2008; 104:818–825.

8.	 Mercier I, Vuolo M, Madan R, Xue X, Levalley AJ,
Ashton AW, Jasmin JF, Czaja MT, Lin EY, Armstrong RC,
Pollard JW, Kitsis RN. ARC, an apoptosis suppressor lim­
ited to terminally differentiated cells, is induced in human
breast cancer and confers chemo- and radiation-resistance.
Cell Death and Differentiation. 2005; 12:682–686.

21.	 Fang JY, Richardson BC. The MAPK signalling path­
ways and colorectal cancer. The Lancet Oncology. 2005;
6:322–327.
22.	 Wagner EF, Nebreda AR. Signal integration by JNK and
p38 MAPK pathways in cancer development. Nature
Reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:537–549.

9.	 Wang JX, Li Q, Li PF. Apoptosis repressor with caspase
recruitment domain contributes to chemotherapy resistance
by abolishing mitochondrial fission mediated by dynaminrelated protein-1. Cancer Research. 2009; 69:492–500.

23.	 Filhol O, Nueda A, Martel V, Gerber-Scokaert D,
Benitez MJ, Souchier C, Saoudi Y, Cochet C. Live-cell flu­
orescence imaging reveals the dynamics of protein kinase
CK2 individual Subunits. Molecular and Cellular Biology.
2003; 23:975–987.

10.	 Li PF, Li JC, Muller EC, Otto A, Dietz R, von Harsdorf R.
Phosphorylation by protein kinase CK2: A signaling switch
for the caspase-inhibiting protein ARC. Molecular Cell.
2002; 10:247–258.

24.	 Di Marco A, Gaetani M, Scarpinato B. Adriamycin (NSC123, 127): a new antibiotic with antitumor activity. Cancer
Chemotherapy Reports. . Part 11969; 53:33–37.

11.	 Tan WQ, Wang JX, Lin ZQ, Li YR, Lin Y, Li PF. Novel
cardiac apoptotic pathway: the dephosphorylation of apop­
tosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain by calci­
neurin. Circulation. 2008; 118:2268–2276.

25.	 Ji C, Yang B, Yang YL, He SH, Miao DS, He L, Bi ZG.
Exogenous cell-permeable C6 ceramide sensitizes mul­
tiple cancer cell lines to Doxorubicin-induced apoptosis
by promoting AMPK activation and mTORC1 inhibition.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:6557–6568.

12.	 Chen LH, Jiang CC, Watts R, Thorne RF, Kiejda KA,
Zhang XD, Hersey P. Inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells by the ARC
protein. Cancer Research. 2008; 68:834–842.

26.	 Ludwig-Galezowska AH, Flanagan L, Rehm M. Apoptosis
repressor with caspase recruitment domain, a multifunc­
tional modulator of cell death. Journal of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine. 2011; 15:1044–1053.

13.	 Wang M, Qanungo S, Crow MT, Watanabe M,
Nieminen AL. Apoptosis repressor with caspase recruit­
ment domain (ARC) is expressed in cancer cells and local­
izes to nuclei. FEBS Letters. 2005; 579:2411–2415.

27.	 Westermann B. Mitochondrial fusion and fission in cell life
and death. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2010;
11:872–884.

14.	 Murtaza I, Wang HX, Feng X, Alenina N, Bader M,
Prabhakar BS, Li PF. Down-regulation of catalase and oxi­
dative modification of protein kinase CK2 lead to the failure
of apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain to
inhibit cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Journal of Biological
Chemistry. 2008; 283:5996–6004.

28.	 Wang GX, Ahmad KA, Ahmed K. Modulation of death
receptor-mediated apoptosis by CK2. Molecular and
Cellular Biochemistry. 2005; 274:201–205.
29.	 Keller DM, Zeng XY, Wang Y, Zhang QH, Kapoor M,
Shu HJ, Goodman R, Lozano G, Zhao YM, Lu H. A DNA
damage-induced p53 serine 392 kinase complex con­
tains CK2, hSpt16, and SSRP1. Molecular Cell. 2001;
7:283–292.

15.	 Trembley JH, Wang G, Unger G, Slaton J, Ahmed K. CK2:
A key player in cancer biology. Cellular and Molecular Life
Sciences. 2009; 66:1858–1867.
16.	 Meggio F, Pinna LA. One-thousand-and-one substrates of
protein kinase CK2? FASEB Journal. 2003; 17:349–368.

30.	 Channavajhala P, Seldin DC. Functional interaction of
protein kinase CK2 and c-Myc in lymphomagenesis.
Oncogene. 2002; 21:5280–5288.

17.	 Wang GX, Ahmad KA, Ahmed K. Role of protein kinase
CK2 in the regulation of tumor necrosis factor-related apop­
tosis inducing ligand-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer
cells. Cancer Research. 2006; 66:2242–2249.

31.	 Romieu-Mourez R, Landesman-Bollag E, Seldin DC,
Sonenshein GE. Protein kinase CK2 promotes aberrant acti­
vation of nuclear factor-kappa B, transformed phenotype,
and survival of breast cancer cells. Cancer Research. 2002;
62:6770–6778.

18.	 Duncan JS, Turowec JP, Vilk G, Li SSC, Gloor GB,
Litchfield DW. Regulation of cell proliferation and sur­
vival: Convergence of protein kinases and caspases.
Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta-Proteins Proteomics. 2010;
1804:505–510.

32.	 Ahmed K, Gerber DA, Cochet C. Joining the cell survival
squad: an emerging role for protein kinase CK2. Trends in
Cell Biology. 2002; 12:226–230.

19.	 Li Q, Wang JX, He YQ, Feng C, Zhang XJ, Sheng JQ,
Li PF. MicroRNA-185 regulates chemotherapeutic sensi­
tivity in gastric cancer by targeting apoptosis repressor with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Faust M, Montenarh M. Subcellular localization of
protein kinase CK2. Cell and Tissue Research. 2000;
301:329–340.
27712

Oncotarget

34.	 Guo CH, Yu SH, Davis AT, Ahmed K. Nuclear matrix
targeting of the protein kinase CK2 signal as a common
downstream response to androgen or growth factor stimu­
lation of prostate cancer cells. Cancer Research. 1999;
59:1146–1151.

40.	 Guerra B, Iwabuchi K, Issinger OG. Protein kinase CK2
is required for the recruitment of 53BP1 to sites of DNA
double-strand break induced by radiomimetic drugs. Cancer
Letters. 2014; 345:115–123.
41.	 Zhang P, Davis AT, Ahmed K. Mechanism of protein kinase
CK2 association with nuclear matrix: Role of disulfide bond
formation. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry. 1998; 69:211–220.

35.	 Davis AT, Wang H, Zhang P, Ahmed K. Heat shock
mediated modulation of protein kinase CK2 in the
nuclear matrix. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry. 2002;
85:583–591.

42.	 Kawano K, Hattori Y, Iwakura H, Akamizu T, Maitani Y.
Combination therapy with gefitinib and doxorubicin inhibits
tumor growth in transgenic mice with adrenal neuroblas­
toma. Cancer Medicine. 2013; 2:286–295.

36.	 Yamane K, Kinsella TJ. CK2 inhibits apoptosis and changes
its cellular localization following ionizing radiation. Cancer
Research. 2005; 65:4362–4367.
37.	 Guo CH, Yu SH, Davis AT, Wang HM, Green JE,
Ahmed K. A potential role of nuclear matrix-associated pro­
tein kinase CK2 in protection against drug-induced apopto­
sis in cancer cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2001;
276:5992–5999.

43.	 Bliesath J, Huser N, Omori M, Bunag D, Proffitt C,
Streiner N, Ho C, Siddiqui-Jain A, O’Brien SE, Lim JKC,
Ryckman DM, Anderes K, Rice WG, et al. Combined inhi­
bition of EGFR and CK2 augments the attenuation of PI3KAkt-mTOR signaling and the killing of cancer cells. Cancer
Letters. 2012; 322:113–118.

38.	 Pluemsampant S, Safronova OS, Nakahama Ki, Morita I.
Protein kinase CK2 is a key activator of histone deacety­
lase in hypoxia-associated tumors. International Journal of
Cancer. 2008; 122:333–341.

44.	 Orzechowska E, Kozlowska E, Staron K, TrzcinskaDanielewicz J. Time schedule-dependent effect of the CK2
inhibitor TBB on PC-3 human prostate cancer cell viability.
Oncology Reports. 2012; 27:281–285.

39.	 Wang HM, Yu SH, Davis AT, Ahmed K. Cell cycle depen­
dent regulation of protein kinase CK2 signaling to the
nuclear matrix. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry. 2003;
88:812–822.

45.	 Wang JX, Jiao JQ, Li Q, Long B, Wang K, Liu JP, Li YR,
Li PF. miR-499 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by tar­
geting calcineurin and dynamin-related protein-1. Nature
Medicine. 2011; 17:71–78.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27713

Oncotarget

