Research Article

Interaction of Tomato Lycopene and Ketosamine against Rat
Prostate Tumorigenesis
1

1

1,2

Valeri V. Mossine, Pankaj Chopra, and Thomas P. Mawhinney
Departments of 1Biochemistry and 2Child Health, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri

Abstract
Prior investigations on the beneficial effect of dietary processed tomato products and lycopene on prostate cancer risk
suggested that lycopene may require the presence of other
constituents to exert its chemopreventive potential. We investigated whether ketosamines, a group of carbohydrate derivatives present in dehydrated tomato products, may interact
with lycopene against prostate tumorigenesis. One ketosamine, FruHis, strongly synergized with lycopene against
proliferation of the highly metastatic rat prostate adenocarcinoma MAT-LyLu cell line in vitro. The FruHis/lycopene
combination significantly inhibited in vivo tumor formation
by MAT-LyLu cells in syngeneic Copenhagen rats. Energybalanced diets, supplemented with tomato paste, tomato powder, or tomato paste plus FruHis, were fed to Wistar-Unilever
rats (n = 20 per group) treated with N-nitroso-N-methylurea
and testosterone to induce prostate carcinogenesis. Survival
from carcinogenesis was lowest in the control group (median
survival time, 40 weeks) and highest in the group fed the
tomato paste/FruHis diet (51 weeks; P = 0.004, versus control).
The proportions of dying rats with macroscopic prostate
tumors in the control, tomato paste, tomato powder, and
tomato paste/FruHis groups were 63% (12 of 19), 39% (5 of 13),
43% (6 of 14), and 18% (2 of 11), respectively. FruHis completely blocked DNA oxidative degradation at >250 Mmol/L
in vitro, whereas neither ascorbate nor phenolic antioxidants
from tomato were effective protectors in this assay. FruHis,
therefore, may exert tumor-preventive effect through its antioxidant activity and interaction with lycopene. [Cancer Res
2008;68(11):4384–91]

Introduction
Prostate cancer incidence differs significantly across geographic
regions and, to a large extent, may be influenced by environmental
factors such as lifestyle habits, including diet (1, 2). Epidemiologic
studies have shown an inverse relation between dietary antioxidants and prostate cancer in populations of western males.
Specifically, ingestion of lycopene, a lipid-soluble carotenoid antioxidant, which in the western diet originates mostly from consumed tomato products, was associated with reduced prostate
cancer risk (3). Mechanisms of lycopene bioactivity as a cancerpreventive agent may include its antioxidant activity, inhibition
of cell cycle progression, induction of apoptosis, increase of gapjunctional cell communication, inhibition of insulin-like growth

factor I signal transduction, inhibition of androgen activation and
signaling, etc. (4, 5).
Whereas lycopene has been hypothesized as a major candidate
compound responsible for the protective effects of tomato-based
foods (6), other constituents may contribute to the cancer prevention. There are several observations that point to tomato
processing as a possible source of still unidentified contributors
to the cancer chemoprevention. First, during processing, the content of lycopene, ascorbate, and other natural antioxidants decreases as a result of thermal degradation and isomerization (7, 8).
However, the total antioxidant activity of heat-processed tomato
juice or other products may not decrease and in fact often increases (7–9). Second, consumption of processed tomato products,
rather than fresh tomatoes, was associated epidemiologically
with a decreased risk of prostate cancer (3). Third, consumption
of tomato powder, rather than an equivalent lycopene supplement,
inhibited prostate carcinogenesis in rats (10), suggesting that, in
addition to lycopene, tomato products contain other compounds
that increase survival of the experimental animals. Most of the clinical trials with tomato products also suggest a synergistic action
of lycopene with other nutrients (11).
During food processing, multiple chemical reactions occur
between food components as a result of thermal and mechanical
treatment, dehydration, and other physical conditions. One of the
most notable and common chemical transformations is the
Maillard reaction, which is mainly responsible for browning and
specific flavoring of baked, roasted, and dried foods (12). The
Maillard reaction generally starts with the initial condensation
reaction between a reducing sugar, such as glucose, and amino
groups of amino acids or proteins, and brings about formation of
ketosamines, also referred to as Amadori rearrangement products
(Fig. 1). Dried fruits and vegetables, including processed tomato
powder, contain significant amounts of ketosamines, mostly in the
form of nondigestible fructose-amino acid conjugates (13), which
are partially absorbed into circulation but excreted unchanged.
Previously, we have established the antitumor potential of synthetic ketosamines in melanoma, breast, and prostate cancer models
(14–16). In vitro and ex vivo mechanistic studies suggested that these
compounds may act as inhibitors of homotypic and heterotypic
cancer cell adhesion, possibly targeting tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens and lectins (17, 18).
Here we show that ketosamines represent a novel class of potential
antioxidants in tomato products, which may interact with lycopene
against prostate carcinogenesis and tumor cell proliferation.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Requests for reprints: Valeri V. Mossine, Department of Biochemistry, University
of Missouri-Columbia, Agriculture Building, Room 4, Columbia, MO 65211. Phone: 573882-2608; Fax: 573-884-4631; E-mail: MossineV@missouri.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0108

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

Tomato paste. Samples of cold break (37% natural tomato soluble
solids) and hot break (30.9% natural tomato soluble solids) tomato pastes
were donated by The Morning Star Packing Co. and Rio Bravo Tomato Co.
The percentage in the paste names refers to the solids content, with the rest

4384

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Lycopene/FruHis versus Prostate Tumorigenesis

Figure 1. The initial step of the Maillard reaction in processed foods. During heating and dehydration, glucose reacts with amino groups of proteins or free amino
acids to form unstable glucosylamines, also referred to as Schiff bases. Weak organic acids catalyze transformation of glucosylamines, through the Amadori
rearrangement, into more stable ketosamines.

being water. The cold or hot break term refers to a technological process of
initial heating of raw tomatoes at 66jC or 100jC, respectively.
Tomato powder. Samples of cold break and hot break tomato powder
(TRANSA) were obtained from Henry Broch & Co.
Antioxidants and other reagents. Antioxidants and other reagents
were of analytic purity grade, purchased from reagent companies (SigmaAldrich), and used without any further purification. Crystalline lycopene
was a gift from LycoRed Natural Products Industries. Lycopene stock
solutions were prepared and stabilized with 0.025% butylated hydroxytoluene in anhydrous tetrahydrofuran. To disperse lycopene in cell culture
medium, an aliquot of the lycopene stock solution was injected into a sealed
vial containing the medium under argon gas and vortexed vigorously.
All manipulations with lycopene solutions were done under dim lights.
Fructose-amino acids. Fructose-amino acids were from a collection
previously prepared in our laboratory using published general methods
(17, 19). Their purity was confirmed chromatographically immediately
before the in vitro experiments.
Synthesis of FruHis. For this study, FruHis was prepared from an
aqueous solution of food-grade L-histidine, glacial acetic acid, and
D-glucose, and purified, as previously described (20). It was obtained as
nonhygroscopic crystalline powder (21), free of any detectable impurities.
Cell line and cell culture. Rat prostate adenocarcinoma cell line MATLyLu was obtained from American Type Culture Collection at passage 68.
To ensure that MAT-LyLu cells were Mycoplasma-free, the cells were
passaged once in a male Copenhagen rat before any in vitro and in vivo
experiments. Cells were cultured in complete RPMI 1640 at 37jC, at 100%
humidity, 5% CO2/95% air, and routinely checked for any bacterial
contamination with commercial test kits.

In vitro Antioxidant Assays
Water extracts from tomato products were prepared by centrifugation of
reconstituted 8% (percent dry weight) suspensions of tomato powder or
paste samples at 2,500  g for 20 min, followed by ultrafiltration of the
supernatants with Biomax-5 centrifugal filters (Millipore). Stock solutions of
phenolic antioxidants were prepared in dimethylformamide/water (1:1).
DNA protection. To a 200-AL solution of 50 Ag polymeric DNA/mL of
chelex-treated PBS (pH 7; polymeric DNA was from calf thymus, Sigma)
were added, in order, an aqueous tomato extract or an antioxidant, CuSO4
( final concentration, 50 Amol/L), H2O2 ( final concentration, 2 mmol/L), and
ascorbic acid ( final concentration, 2 mmol/L). The reaction was left to
proceed at room temperature for 2 h and then stopped by addition of EDTA
to a final concentration of 10 mmol/L. Ethidium bromide was added at
20 Ag/mL, and the fluorescence of the solutions was measured by FLx800
plate reader (BioTek) at 508 nm excitation/590 nm emission wavelengths.
Folin-Ciocalteau assay. Following a standard protocol (22), 10 AL of
Folin-Ciocalteau reagent (Sigma) and 10 AL of an antioxidant solution were
added to 150 AL of distilled water per well. After 3 min, 30 AL of 20% Na2CO3
were added per well, and after 3 h at room temperature, the absorbance in
the wells was read at 760 nm.
Ferric reducing/antioxidant power assay. Solutions of a test
antioxidant (10–20 AL) were added to wells containing 200 AL of the ferric

www.aacrjournals.org

reducing/antioxidant power (FRAP) reagent (23) and incubated at 37jC for
several hours. The absorbance in the wells was read at 593 nm.

In vitro Cytotoxicity
In vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated as follows: Subconfluent (70–95%) cell
monolayers were trypsinized for 5 to 10 min with 0.1% trypsin/EDTA,
washed with complete, phenol red–free RPMI 1640, resuspended in the
medium to 1.25  103 cell/mL, added to inner wells of cell culture–treated
96-well plates at 200 AL/well, and placed into an incubator. The seeded cells
were allowed to attach for 24 h, then fresh medium (150 AL/well) was
added, with or without test compounds. In 48 h, the old media/compounds
were replaced with fresh ones and the cells were incubated for the next 48 h,
thus totaling cell exposure to the agents to 4 d. Finally, the media/
compounds were removed, the cells were washed with PBS, and fresh media
were added; then 0.5 mmol/L resazurin (Sigma) was immediately added at
15 AL/well. After 6 to 9 h in an incubator, the fluorescence in the wells was
measured at 530/590 nm.

Animal Studies
All experimental protocols involving animals were initially approved by
the University of Missouri Animal Care and Use Committee.

In vivo Survival of Treated Cancer Cells
MAT-LyLu cells harvested from subconfluent monolayers were added to
plastic T75 cell culture flasks, at 5  104 per flask, and allowed to attach for
24 h in complete phenol red–free RPMI 1640. Fresh media, containing
tetrahydrofuran (control), lycopene, FruHis, or lycopene/FruHis combination, were added to the flasks, and the cells were further incubated for 4 h.
The cells were then detached by trypsin/EDTA, washed, and examined for
viability with trypan blue. Suspensions of the cells deemed >90% viable were
adjusted to 5  105/mL in sterile PBS and immediately used for injections
into experimental animals. The cell suspensions were injected s.c. (0.1 mL
per injection) into hind legs and flanks of fourteen 6-month-old, 350- to
400-g male Copenhagen rats. Each rat received four s.c. inoculations; each
of these four inoculations was from a different pool of cells (control, lycopene, FruHis, and lycopene/FruHis pretreated). The inoculation sites ( flank,
leg, right, and left) were randomized for each of the pretreated cell
suspensions. The rats were given a regular rodent diet ad libitum throughout the experiment. In 14 d, the experiment was terminated and sizes of
growing tumors were measured with a caliper. The tumor volumes were
estimated according to the following formula: V = 0.523  L  W  W.

Prostate Carcinogenesis Chemoprevention Experiment
The experiment was done using a well-established rat prostate-specific
carcinogenesis model, which was introduced by Bosland (24) and
successfully used in the most relevant work to our prostate cancer
chemoprevention study of tomato and lycopene (10), as well as in a number
of other studies (25, 26).
Animals. Experimental animals, 5-wk-old male Wistar-Unilever rats
(HsdCpb:Wu), 150 to 170 g in weight, were obtained from Harlan and
housed in polycarbonate cages (two animals per cage) with 12 h light:
12 h dark cycle. The animals were fed Teklad 2014 diet (Harlan) for 1 wk to

4385

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
adapt. The rats were then randomly assigned to four experimental diets.
Rats were weighed weekly.
Diet formulations and consumption. All rats consumed one of the
four Teklad 2014 meal–based experimental diets (Table 1). Water was added
to the formulations to balance moisture content in all diets, as well as
to prevent diets from drying completely within a day in the animal feeders
and, therefore, to minimize possible formation of additional amounts
of ketosamines in diets. The diets were prepared biweekly as meals
and stored frozen. Initially, all animals were allowed to have an unlimited
access to food and water. After 2 wk, the ad libitum amounts of daily
consumed diets per cage were measured. It was determined that, on
average, animals in the control group consumed the least amount of food,
f70 g/d/cage. From that point on and for the rest of the experiment, all
groups received daily the same amounts of diet meals, 35 g/rat, and tap
water ad libitum.
Hormone and carcinogen treatment. Starting at 6 wk of age and
continuing for the next 3 wk, all rats received 0.1-mL i.p. injections of
cyproterone acetate (Sigma Chemical) in peanut oil, daily at 50 mg/kg body
weight dose. Cyproterone inhibits androgen secretion from the testis,
thereby causing androgen starvation of the prostate epithelial cells and the
effect of chemical castration to the animals. Starting on the day after the
last injection of cyproterone, the rats received three daily 0.2-mL s.c.
injections of testosterone propionate (Sigma) in peanut oil/benzyl alcohol/
benzyl benzoate (26:1:4) at 100 mg/kg body weight to maximally stimulate
proliferation of prostatic epithelial cells. On the day after the last
testosterone injection, the rats were briefly anesthetized with isoflurane
and injected i.v. (via the tail vein) with a 10 mg/mL solution of the
carcinogen N-nitroso-N-methylurea (NMU; obtained from Sigma), at a dose
of 50 mg/kg body weight. NMU was initially saturated at 20jC in 0.1 mol/L
sodium phosphate/0.05 mol/L sodium citrate buffer (pH 5); NMU content
was determined spectrophotometrically at 395 nm; and the solution was
immediately frozen and stored at 80jC until use. Immediately before
injections, the NMU solution was thawed at 37jC and sterile filtered. One
week after NMU administration, the rats received testosterone as two
2.5-cm-long implants of Silastic laboratory tubing (1.98 mm ID  3.18 mm
OD; Dow Corning), each filled with f40 mg of crystalline testosterone
(Sigma) that had been packed into the tubing under vacuum before
the ends were sealed with silicone adhesive 732 (Dow Corning). The tubes
were sterilized in alcohol, dried under UV illumination, and inserted s.c.
in the dorsothoracic region of the back using a sterile technique, and then
the incisions were stapled.

Survival and necropsy. All rats were monitored daily, and rats showing
any signs or symptoms of morbidity, including reduced food intake or
weight loss, were killed. The remaining rats were killed at 51 wk of age,
when the study was terminated. When death happened to healthy-looking
rats, the rats were necropsied immediately on discovery. Rats that were
going to be euthanized were first anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine Rat
Cocktail at 1 mL/kg body weight. Blood was then collected by cardiac
puncture. Rats were then killed by bilateral pneumothorax puncture, and
the prostate, seminal vesicle, and other organs with suspected macroscopic
tumors were removed and preserved in 4% neutral-buffered formalin.

Statistical Analysis
For survival analysis, Kaplan-Meier survival estimates were calculated for
each diet composition group. The log-rank test was used to test the equality
of the survival curves for the treatment groups. This test weights each time
point equally in the comparison of survival curves. In this study, survival
time was defined as the number of weeks from the carcinogen injection
until death from cancer or, for those rats that were still alive at the end of
the study, 51 wk. Rats surviving until the end of the study and lacking any
macroscopic tumors on necropsy were entered into the statistical model as
censored observations. All survival analyses were conducted using
SigmaStat Software (version 3.01, SSPS, Inc.).
Differences in body weights between the rats on different diets,
differences in tumor cell survival and volumes of the MAT-LyLu tumors
receiving different in vitro pretreatments, and differences in DNA protection
in vitro were tested by one-way ANOVA. Data were rank transformed for
Kruskal-Wallis analysis if they were found to fail the normality of
distribution test. Differences between antioxidants in the in vitro assays
were probed by pairwise multiple comparisons following the Holm-Sidak
method, whereas Dunn’s method was applied for the pairwise comparisons between MAT-LyLu tumor growth inhibitors. All statistical tests were
two sided.

Results
Lycopene synergizes with FruHis against MAT-LyLu cell
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Assessment of the ability of
ketosamines to inhibit cellular growth of the highly metastatic rat
prostate adenocarcinoma MAT-LyLu line in vitro has been done in
a conventional cell proliferation assay, with cancer cell exposure to
test compounds during 4 days at standard cell culturing conditions.

Table 1. Diet formulations (parts by weight)

Teklad 2014 meal*
c
Cold break tomato paste solids
b
Cold break tomato powder solids
FruHis
Corn starch
Glucose
Fructose
Water
Total

Control

Tomato paste

Tomato powder

Paste/FruHis

70.6
—
—
—
3.5
2.1
2.2
21.6
100

70.6
7.8
—
—
—
—
—
21.6
100

70.6
—
7.8
—
—
—
—
21.6
100

70.6
7.8
—
1.5
—
—
—
20.1
100

*This diet, according to the manufacturer, ‘‘is a fixed formula, nutritionally balanced, nonautoclavable diet containing 14% protein and 3.5% fat which
supports growth and maintenance. 2014 does not contain alfalfa or soybean meal, thus minimizing the occurrence of natural phytoestrogens. Absence of
animal protein and fish meal eliminates the presence of nitrosamines.’’ The exact composition of the 2014 diet and its nutritional value are given on the
manufacturer’s website (http://www.teklad.com/globaldiet/g2014.asp).
cMain constituents of tomato paste (percent dry weight): carbohydrates (glucose, fructose, etc.), 55%; fat, 0.5%; fiber, 9%; protein, 16%; organic acids, 8%;
total ash, 9%.
bIn tomato powder, free amino acids partially combine with glucose to form up to 8% fructose-amino acids (13), including 0.04% FruHis (20), during the
tomato paste drying process at elevated temperatures.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

4386

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Lycopene/FruHis versus Prostate Tumorigenesis

Figure 2. Interaction of FruHis with lycopene against rat prostate adenocarcinoma MAT-LyLu cell line. A, cultured MAT-LyLu cells were treated with 1 Amol/L lycopene
or tomato ketosamines (2 mmol/L) or their combinations. After 4 d, the surviving cell numbers were evaluated fluorimetrically with resazurin. All experiments were
done at least in quadruplicates. The lycopene/FruHis combination produced no detectable survivors in this cytotoxicity assay. B, cultured MAT-LyLu cells were
pretreated for 4 h with 5.6 mmol/L FruHis, 20 Amol/L lycopene, or their combination. The cells were confirmed as >90% viable before being implanted s.c. into the
experimental Copenhagen rats. In 2 wk, the primary growing tumors were measured. Columns, mean tumor volume (n = 14); bars, SD. For each treatment, the percent
of tumor incidence is also shown. **, P V 0.001.

Initial profiling of ketosamines did not reveal any significant
inhibition of cancer cell proliferation at ketosamine concentrations
up to 1 mmol/L (data not shown). At 2 mmol/L, FruHis showed a
small but detectable inhibition of MAT-LyLu cell growth (Fig. 2).
However, when 2 mmol/L FruHis was combined with 1 Amol/L
lycopene, a large synergistic effect of suppression of the cancer
cell proliferation was observed, with >98% cell growth inhibition
as compared with controls or the single-agent treatments. Other
representative ketosamines that we have tested in this assay thus
far did not show such synergy with lycopene at similar concentrations of the agents (Fig. 2A).
After identifying FruHis/lycopene combination as growth
inhibitory for MAT-LyLu cells in vitro, we have investigated
whether this combination would affect survival of MAT-LyLu cells
in the syngeneic host, male Copenhagen rat. The cells, cultured
in vitro, were briefly pretreated with lycopene, FruHis, or their combination and, while still >90% viable, implanted s.c. in the animals.
As shown in Fig. 2B, there was a significant decrease in average size
of the s.c. tumors growing from lycopene/FruHis–pretreated cells
(80% decrease; P < 0.05, compared with controls).
Intake of the experimental diets. The amount of food given to
the animals daily was restricted to 35 g/rat. This amount was based
on the control diet consumption by 8-week-old rats having
ad libitum access to food. This amount of daily ingested diets
corresponds to 86 to 87 kcal/d/rat, which is close to the ad libitum
maintenance energy consumption level for adult rat (27). Body
weights (Fig. 3A) did not differ significantly between the diet
groups. Rats in the control diet group, however, were consistently
heavier than the other groups by 1% to 8% on average.
Survival from prostate tumorigenesis in the NMU/testosterone rat model. Due to a relatively small number of animals in the
experimental diet groups, we have chosen survival from dying of
nonspecific cancer as the primary outcome. Log-rank test of
Kaplan-Meier survival curves for four diet groups (Fig. 3B) showed
their inequality (P = 0.047). Statistical analysis indicated that rats
fed the tomato paste/FruHis diet experienced the longest survival

www.aacrjournals.org

from macroscopic tumorigenesis (mean survival time, 51 wk),
followed by the tomato powder, tomato paste, and control groups,
with mean survival times of 50, 45, and 40 weeks, respectively.
The pairwise comparison procedures revealed statistically significant differences between survival curves in pairs: control versus
tomato powder (P = 0.026) and control versus tomato paste/FruHis
(P = 0.004).
Because the carcinogenesis prevention experiment was designed
as a survival study, we did not attempt to interpret tumor grade
and stage due to their dependence on duration time, which was not
fixed. In addition, the proportion of tumorigenesis at sites other
than the prostate was significant and prevailed in all tomatomodified diet groups. Besides in the prostate, macroscopic tumors
were found in the jaw, Zymbal’s gland, lungs, kidneys, lymph nodes,
colon, and seminal vesicles. Therefore, histopathologic examination of the entire body for microscopic tumors was excluded from
the statistical analysis because incidence of microfocal malignancies was deemed insignificant to the clinically relevant outcome
of ‘‘dying of cancer.’’
The number of macroscopic prostate tumor-bearing rats was
largest in the control diet group and smallest in the tomato paste/
FruHis group (Fig. 3C), a 6-fold decrease. The numbers of animals
with tumors at sites other than the prostate were similar throughout all diet groups. The proportions of dying rats with macroscopic
prostate tumors in the control, tomato paste, tomato powder, and
tomato paste/FruHis groups were 63% (12 of 19), 39% (5 of 13), 43%
(6 of 14), and 18% (2 of 11), respectively.
Ketosamine FruHis shows antioxidant activity in vitro. The
initial evaluation of the antioxidant potential of water-soluble
fractions from tomato products, as well as FruHis, has been done in
a polymeric, double-stranded DNA degradation assay. The coppercatalyzed Fenton reaction was used to generate reactive oxygen
species, predominantly hydroxyl radicals, in this assay. Fluorescence of DNA-intercalated dye propidium iodide was used as a
measure of the DNA fragmentation level. The effects of the aqueous
extracts, FruHis, and other antioxidants from tomato on protection

4387

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Prevention of NMU/testosterone–induced carcinogenesis in Wistar-Unilever rats receiving energy-balanced experimental diets (Table 1): control
(group A); 10% tomato paste (group B ); 10% tomato powder (group C); 10% tomato paste + 2% FruHis (group D). A, mean of animal weights in each diet group.
No statistically significant differences are detected. B, Kaplan-Meier survival curves. Diets C and D showed statistically significant (P < 0.05) improvement of survival
from tumorigenesis. C, distribution, in each diet group, of animals with macroscopic tumors in prostate or other organs at the time of animal death or after 51 wk
following NMU injection.

of the DNA from the oxidative fragmentation are summarized in
Fig. 4A and B. Water-soluble fractions from tomato powder samples showed significantly better protection of DNA from reactive
oxygen species (ROS), as compared with those obtained from
tomato paste samples. D-Fructose showed no protection. There was
a small but evident inhibition of the DNA degradation by chlorogenic, caffeic, and p-coumaric acids at the inhibitor concentrations exceeding 1 mmol/L. L-Histidine and quercetin showed
significant inhibition activities in this assay in a concentrationdependent manner. We did not observe, however, a total inhibition
of DNA oxidative degradation by these compounds, even at concentrations as high as 1 mmol/L. In contrast, FruHis at 500 Amol/L
completely protected DNA from cleavage, whereas at lower concentrations, it exerted better protection against ROS-induced
polynucleic acid fragmentation than any of the tested antioxidants
within the entire investigated concentration range.
The antioxidant potential of FruHis was also evaluated in the
Folin-Ciocalteau and FRAP assays. In both assays, FruHis showed a
moderate reducing activity, whereas histidine and fructose were
not active, as shown in Fig. 3C and D. In the Folin-Ciocalteau assay,

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

the color-developing effect of FruHis after 3 hours was f30 times
lower than that of chlorogenic acid. FruHis was also f10 times less
potent reducing agent in the FRAP reagent as compared with
chlorogenic acid after 16 hours of incubation.

Discussion
Processing of many edible plants through heating, grinding,
mixing, drying, etc., may dramatically increase their nutritive value
to a large extent due to modification of carbohydrates that
constitute the main part of plant biomass. There is an increasing
evidence that nondigestible oligosaccharides and polysaccharides
of pectins, gums, hemicellulose, inulin, etc., are essential for normal
functioning of symbiotic microflora in the gut and are responsible
for a host of other health-beneficial effects (28), including reduced
risk of cancer (29). Ketosamines, such as FruHis, are small nondigestible carbohydrate derivatives that form as a result of
dehydration of foods. Ingested ketosamines are partially absorbed
but not metabolized (30) and, according to our data, may possess
a prevention potential against carcinogenesis in the prostate.

4388

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Lycopene/FruHis versus Prostate Tumorigenesis

We have recently evaluated FruHis in tomato products using
an optimized analysis procedure of gas-liquid chromatography/
mass spectrometry technique (20). Thus, FruHis content in
samples of cold break and hot break tomato powder was 38.2 F
0.2 and 41.4 F 0.4 mg/100 g, respectively, and correlated well
with the amounts of other D-fructose-amino acids relative to the
content of respective ‘‘parent’’ free amino acids. In contrast, FruHis
was not detected in any (cold break or hot break) tomato paste
preparations. We hypothesize that FruHis should be present in
many other dried fruits and vegetables that contain both histidine
and glucose, as well as in foods prepared with tomato powder.
Primary screening of ketosamine/lycopene combinations against
prostate cancer cell proliferation was done using the widely used
Dunning R3327 rat prostate adenocarcinoma model. The MATLyLu cell line is the most aggressive of the Dunning sublines. It is a
nondifferentiated, androgen-independent, fast-proliferating cell
line, which invariably forms primary tumors in both orthotopic
and ectopic sites and readily metastasizes into lymph nodes and
lungs from any primary site (31). This cell line is moderately
sensitive to lycopene, which accelerated the necrosis rate of
growing MAT-LyLu tumors in one study (32), supposedly through
reductions in steroid signaling and local insulin-like growth factor I

and interleukin-6 expression. In our hands, any detectable
inhibition of MAT-LyLu proliferation rate in culture after 4 days
was observed at lycopene concentrations in the medium exceeding
10 Amol/L. However, we have chosen 1 Amol/L lycopene for the
screening of ketosamines because this concentration is more
relevant to the physiologically achievable concentration in serum
(33). Of the 14 tested D-fructose-amino acids, only FruHis showed a
noticeable inhibition of cell proliferation at 2 mmol/L concentration, whereas in combination with 1 Amol/L lycopene, it produced
a remarkably strong synergistic effect against MAT-LyLu proliferation, causing >98% cell growth inhibition, as compared with the
controls. The effect of the FruHis/lycopene combination against
prostate cancer cell proliferation seems to be unique because the
only previously reported synergistic interaction of lycopene with
another antioxidant was observed for its combination with 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D3 against the HL-60 leukemia cell line (34).
Although there are no current pharmacokinetic data available for
FruHis, it is known from the studies involving humans, rats, and
other mammals that FruLys and other ingested D-fructose-amino
acids can penetrate the upper intestine by diffusion at a rate of
up to 47% within 90 minutes, and that most of the absorbed
D-fructose-amino acids get excreted in urine unchanged (30, 35).

Figure 4. A, degradative oxidation of polymeric DNA by Cu2+/H2O2/ascorbate in the presence of aqueous extracts (5,000-kDa cutoff) from cold break tomato paste,
hot break tomato paste, cold break tomato powder, and hot break tomato powder. The highest dilution value of 1 corresponds to 40 AL of the extract added per
well, as described in Materials and Methods. B, degradative oxidation of polymeric DNA by Cu2+/H2O2/ascorbate in the presence of some antioxidants from tomato
powder. C, reducing activity in the FRAP assay: AA, 20 Amol/L ascorbic acid; CA, 10 Amol/L chlorogenic acid; FH, 100 Amol/L FruHis; Fru, 40 mmol/L fructose;
His, 40 mmol/L L-histidine. D, color development in the ‘‘phenol-specific’’ Folin-Ciocalteau assay. AA, 100 Amol/L ascorbic acid; CA, 100 Amol/L chlorogenic acid;
FH, 2.5 mmol/L FruHis; Fru, 40 mmol/L fructose; His, 40 mmol/L L-histidine.

www.aacrjournals.org

4389

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

At this rate of absorption, 2 mmol/L ketosamine in blood may be
achievable, at least theoretically, for the experimental diet containing 1.5% FruHis that we used in the prostate carcinogenesis
chemoprevention experiment (Table 1).
We further showed that a short-term pretreatment of MAT-LyLu
cells with the FruHis/lycopene combination would affect their
survival in vivo. We reasoned that pulsing cancer cells with the combination might trigger a programmed cell death and/or make them
sensitive to immunosurveillance in the syngeneic animal host.
Indeed, the FruHis/lycopene combination caused a significant drop
in both tumorigenesis incidence and mean tumor volume, as compared with the control, whereas none of the single-agent pretreatments showed statistically significant tumor growth inhibition. These
experiments imply that the FruHis/lycopene combination deserves
further investigation as a potential therapeutic antitumor agent.
With the tumor cell proliferation data in hand, we conducted a
chemoprevention study using one of the most relevant rodent
models of prostate-specific carcinogenesis. Macroscopically detectable tumorigenesis rate in the prostate of NMU/testosterone–
treated control rats reached 63% after 51 weeks, which is in good
agreement with the literature (10, 26). We did not detect any signs
of systemic or organ-specific toxicity in the FruHis/tomato paste
diet group, and the animal body weight gain in this group was not
statistically significantly different from the others throughout the
entire experiment. The results of this experiment clearly showed
the chemopreventive effect in the FruHis/tomato paste diet group
as compared with the control group, in both survival from any cancer and the incidence of tumorigenesis in the prostate. The survival
of the tomato powder diet group was also statistically different
from the controls, in agreement with the previously published
results of Boileau et al. (10). Interestingly, there was no noticeable
effect of the dietary intervention from any of the tested experimental supplements on tumorigenesis in sites other than the
prostate. This observation, albeit related to a rat prostate carcinogenesis model, is in agreement with data from the epidemiologic
studies that showed the beneficial effect of tomato/lycopene-rich
diets on risk of cancer in the prostate more consistently, as
compared with other sites (36).
The chemopreventive activity of the diet supplemented with
FruHis/tomato paste and, to a lesser effect, of the diet supplemented with tomato powder lends support to the hypothesis that
ketosamines, such as D-fructose-amino acids from dried tomato,
may contribute to the lowering of tumorigenesis risk in the
prostate. The concentration of FruHis in the tomato paste/FruHis
diet, however, was about twice as high as the concentration of the
total fructose-amino acid fraction in the tomato powder–based
diet. Hence, more detailed studies would be necessary to confirm
any contribution from this particular compound to the preventive
effect of tomato powder. Other ketosamines or compounds that are
not yet identified might contribute to the beneficial effects of
processed tomato, as well. On the other hand, the present studies
show that FruHis deserves an attention as a prospective chemopreventive agent on its own.
A few recently published studies showed an advantage of
combining dietary tomato with other dietary chemopreventive
agents, such as broccoli powder (37) or vitamin E/selenium (38),
for reduction of implanted rat prostate adenocarcinoma growth, or
garlic (39, 40), for chemoprevention of other cancers. Interaction of
dietary FruHis with tomato paste in this study may be related both
to the synergistic effect of lycopene and FruHis against the cancer
cell proliferation and to a possible antioxidant activity of FruHis.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

Our in vitro experiments showed that FruHis is indeed a powerful
protector of DNA degradation by ROS in conditions where other
water-soluble antioxidants from tomato are not as effective. The
protective effect of FruHis against DNA oxidative degradation may
be partially related not only to its reducing potential, as shown by
the Folin-Ciocalteau and the FRAP assays, but also to its excellent
copper-chelating properties (20).
Antioxidant activity is the prevailing suggested mechanism for
lycopene, selenium, vitamin E, and other chemoprevention agents
that are currently being tested in clinical trials for prostate cancer
(41). ROS, generated both exogenously and endogenously, were
associated with carcinogenesis and tumor progression in prostate
and a number of other tissues. If not trapped efficiently in a tissue,
primarily by glutathione, ROS cause oxidative damage to lipids,
proteins, and nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. With age, the
prostate gradually loses the antioxidant capacity, which is manifestated through the loss of glutathione S-transferase expression
and subsequent generation of glutathione in the reduced form
(42), and this is thought as a condition that makes the prostate
epitelium sensitive to oxidative stress–induced mutation, leading
ultimately to neoplastic transformations (43). Consumption of
lycopene-rich, tomato sauce–based diet, however, led to a decrease
in DNA oxidative damage in patients with localized prostate adenocarcinoma (33).
A number of ROS-trapping antioxidants have shown a protective
potential against experimental prostate carcinogenesis, thus
confirming oxidative stress as a valid target for prostate cancer
chemoprevention (42, 44). Many of these antioxidants, including
lycopene, also act as inhibitors of cancer cell proliferation, thus
indicating that they possess the therapeutic potential as well
(45, 46). The ability of these agents to inhibit tumorigenesis, both
at the initiation stage (as antioxidants) and the progression stages
(as cancer cell proliferation inhibitors), may have secured their
initial success in the chemoprevention studies. We suggest then
that, in a similar way, the observed ability of the FruHis/tomatoenriched diet to decrease rate of prostate tumorigenesis may be
related to a combination of both the antioxidant potential of
FruHis and the inhibitory activity of FruHis/lycopene against
prostate cancer cell proliferation.
Before this study, three main classes of structurally defined
antioxidant molecules were usually recognized in tomato products:
(a) ascorbic acid (230 mg/100 g in fresh tomato; much less in
processed tomato) and other vitamins, such as tocopherol; (b)
carotenoids, including lycopene and carotene (up to 60 mg/100 g in
fresh tomato; 5% to 25% less in processed tomato); (c) phenolic
compounds (up to 550 mg/100 g), including conjugates of caffeic
and coumaric acids, flavonoids quercetin and kaempferol, etc. (47).
Ketosamines, with their total content of up to 8,000 mg/100 g dry
matter (13), may represent a novel type of potential dietary
antioxidants, albeit specific for foods prepared from reconstituted
dried tomato products.
In conclusion, this study has identified a novel, processingdefined agent in tomato products, the carbohydrate ketosamine
FruHis, which showed antitumorigenic potential in two rat
prostate cancer models. This result may introduce an additional
intrigue into an ongoing dispute over the beneficial effects of
dietary lycopene and tomato products in lowering the risk of
prostate cancer (48–50) because it suggests the presence of a
potential chemopreventive agent(s) in tomato products prepared
by rehydration of tomato powder. Whereas it is not possible to
retrospectively evaluate ketosamine content in tomato products

4390

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Lycopene/FruHis versus Prostate Tumorigenesis

from the numerous published intervention and epidemiologic studies, the assessment study of the clinically relevant effects of ketosamines from dietary tomato products in humans is warranted.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

References
1. Kamangar F, Dores GM, Anderson WF. Patterns of
cancer incidence, mortality, and prevalence across five
continents: defining priorities to reduce cancer disparities in different geographic regions of the world. J Clin
Oncol 2006;24:2137–50.
2. Chan JM, Gann PH, Giovannucci EL. Role of diet in
prostate cancer development and progression. J Clin
Oncol 2005;23:8152–60.
3. Giovannucci E. A review of epidemiologic studies of
tomatoes, lycopene, and prostate cancer. Exp Biol Med
2002;227:852–9.
4. Wertz K, Siler U, Goralczyk R. Lycopene: modes of
action to promote prostate health. Arch Biochem
Biophys 2004;430:127–34.
5. Sharoni Y, Danilenko M, Dubi N, Ben-Dor A, Levy J.
Carotenoids and transcription. Arch Biochem Biophys
2004;430:89–96.
6. Giovannucci E, Clinton SK. Tomatoes, lycopene, and
prostate cancer. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1998;218:129–39.
7. Nikoli MC, Anese M, Parpinel MT, Francesci S, Lerici
CR. Loss and/or formation of antioxidants during food
processing and storage. Cancer Lett 1997;114:71–4.
8. Gahler S, Otto K, Böhm V. Alterations of vitamin C,
total phenolics, and antioxidant capacity as affected by
processing tomatoes to different products. J Agric Food
Chem 2003;51:7962–8.
9. Dewanto V, Wu X, Adom KK, Liu RH. Thermal
processing enhances the nutritional value of tomatoes
by increasing total antioxidant capacity. J Agric Food
Chem 2002;50:3010–4.
10. Boileau TW-M, Liao Z, Kim S, Lemeshow S, Erdman
JW, Clinton SK. Prostate carcinogenesis in N-methyl-N nitrosourea (NMU)-testosterone-treated rats fed tomato
powder, lycopene, or energy-restricted diets. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2003;95:1578–86.
11. Basu A, Imrhan V. Tomatoes versus lycopene in
oxidative stress and carcinogenesis: conclusions from
clinical trials. Eur J Clin Nutr 2007;61:295–303.
12. Finot P-A. Historical perspective of the Maillard reaction in food science. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005;1043:1–8.
13. Eichner K, Reutter M, Wittmann R. Detection of
Maillard reaction intermediates by high pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and gas chromatography. In:
Finot PA, Aeschbacher HU, Hurrell RF, Liardon R,
editors. The Maillard reaction in food processing,
human nutrition and physiology. Basel (Switzerland):
Birkhäuser Verlag; 1990. p. 63–77.
14. Denisevich TV, Semyonova-Kobzar RA, Glinsky VV,
Mossine VV. The influence of synthetic aminoglycoconjugates on the aggregation ability and metastatic
potential of tumor cells. Exp Oncol 1995;17:111–7.
15. Glinsky GV, Price JE, Glinsky VV, Mossine VV,
Kiriakova G, Metcalf JB. Inhibition of human breast
cancer metastasis in nude mice by synthetic glycoamines. Cancer Res 1996;56:5319–24.
16. Glinsky VV, Glinsky GV, Glinskii OV, et al. Intravascular metastatic cancer cell homotypic aggregation at
the sites of primary attachment to the endothelium.
Cancer Res 2003;63:3805–11.
17. Glinsky GV, Mossine VV, Price JE, et al. Inhibition of
colony formation in agarose of metastatic human breast

www.aacrjournals.org

Acknowledgments
Received 1/11/2008; revised 3/10/2008; accepted 3/25/2008.
Grant support: The Prostate Cancer Foundation 2004 Competitive Award.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Steven K. Clinton for helpful discussions during the preparation of
the manuscript.

carcinoma and melanoma cells by synthetic glycoamine
analogs. Clin Exp Metastasis 1996;14:253–67.
18. Khaldoyanidi SK, Glinsky VV, Sikora L, et al. MDAMB-435 human breast carcinoma cell homo- and
heterotypic adhesion under flow conditions is mediated
in part by Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen-galectin-3
interactions. J Biol Chem 2003;278:4127–34.
19. Mossine VV, Glinsky GV, Feather MS. The preparation
and characterization of some Amadori compounds
(1-amino-1-deoxy-D-fructose derivatives) derived from
a series of aliphatic N-amino acids. Carbohydr Res 1994;
262:257–70.
20. Mossine VV, Mawhinney TP. N a-(1-Deoxy-h-D-fructopyranos-1-yl)-L-histidine (‘‘D-fructose-L-histidine’’): a
potent copper chelator from tomato powder. J Agric
Food Chem 2007;55:10373–81.
21. Mossine VV, Barnes CL, Mawhinney TP. Solubility
and crystal structure of N-(1-deoxy-h-D-fructopyranos1-yl)-L-histidine monohydrate (‘‘D-fructose-L-histidine’’).
Carbohydr Res 2007;342:131–8.
22. Singleton VL, Orthofer R, Lamuela-Reventós RM.
Analysis of total phenols and other oxidation substrates
and antioxidants by means of Folin-Ciocalteau reagent.
Methods Enzymol 1999;299:152–78.
23. Benzie IFF, Strain JJ. Ferric reducing/antioxidant
power assay. Methods Enzymol 1999;299:15–27.
24. Bosland MC. Animal models for the study of prostate
carcinogenesis. J Cell Biochem 1992;Suppl 16H:89–98.
25. Rao KVN, Johnson WD, Bosland MC, et al. Chemoprevention of rat prostate carcinogenesis by early and
delayed administration of dehydroepiandrosterone.
Cancer Res 1999;59:3084–9.
26. McCormick DL, Johnson WD, Haryu TM, Bosland
MC, Lubet RA, Steele VE. Null effect of dietary
restriction on prostate carcinogenesis in the WistarUnilever rat. Nutr Cancer 2007;57:194–200.
27. Keenan KP, Ballam GC, Dixit R, et al. The effects of
diet, overfeeding and moderate dietary restriction on
Sprague-Dawley rat survival, disease and toxicology.
J Nutr 1997;127:851–6S.
28. Meyer D, Tungland B. Non-digestible oligosaccharides and polysaccharides: their physiological effects and
health implications. In: McCleary BV, Prosky L, editors.
Advanced dietary fibre technology. Oxford (UK): Blackwell Science Ltd.; 2001. p. 455–70.
29. Pelucchi C, Talamini R, Galeone C, et al. Fibre intake
and prostate cancer risk. Int J Cancer 2004;109:278–80.
30. Hurrell RF. Influence of the Maillard reaction on the
nutritional value of foods. In: Finot PA, Aeschbacher HU,
Hurrell RF, Liardon R, editors. The Maillard reaction in
food processing, human nutrition and physiology. Basel
(Switzerland): Birkhäuser Verlag; 1990. p. 245–58.
31. Isaacs JT, Isaacs WB, Feitz WF, Scheres J. Establishment and characterization of seven Dunning rat
prostatic cancer cell lines and their use in developing
methods for predicting metastatic abilities of prostatic
cancers. Prostate 1986;9:261–81.
32. Siler U, Barella L, Spitzer V, et al. Lycopene and
vitamin E interfere with autocrine/paracrine loops in
the Dunning prostate cancer model. FASEB J 2004;18:
1019–21.
33. Chen L, Stacewicz-Sapuntzakis M, Duncan C, et al.
Oxidative DNA damage in prostate cancer patients

4391

consuming tomato sauce-based entrees as a whole-food
intervention. J Natl Cancer Inst 2001;93:1872–9.
34. Amir H, Karas M, Giat J, et al. Lycopene and 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D3 cooperate in the inhibition of cell
cycle progression and induction of differentiation in
HL-60 leukemic cells. Nutr Cancer 1999;33:105–12.
35. Erbersdobler HF, Brandt A, Scharrer E, von Wangenheim B. Transport and metabolism studies with fructose
amino acids. Prog Food Nutr Sci 1981;5:257–63.
36. Giovannucci E. Tomatoes, tomato-based products,
lycopene, and cancer: review of the epidemiologic
literature. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:317–31.
37. Canene-Adams K, Lindshield BL, Wang S, Jeffery
EH, Clinton SK, Erdman JW. Combinations of tomato
and broccoli enhance antitumor activity in Dunning
R3327-H prostate adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 2007;67:
836–43.
38. Venkateswaran V, Fleshner NE, Sugar LM, Klotz LH.
Antioxidants block prostate cancer in lady transgenic
mice. Cancer Res 2004;64:5891–6.
39. Sengupta A, Ghosh S, Das S. Modulatory influence of
garlic and tomato on cyclooxygenase-2 activity, cell
proliferation and apoptosis during azoxymethane induced colon carcinogenesis in rat. Cancer Lett 2004;208:
127–36.
40. Bhuvaneswari V, Abraham SK, Nagini S. Combinatorial antigenotoxic and anticarcinogenic effects of
tomato and garlic through modulation of xenobioticmetabolizing enzymes during hamster buccal pouch
carcinogenesis. Nutrition 2005;21:726–31.
41. Taichman RS, Loberg LD, Mehra R, Pienta KJ. The
evolving biology and treatment of prostate cancer. J Clin
Invest 2007;117:2351–61.
42. De Weese TL, Hruszkewycz AM, Marnett LJ. Oxidative stress in chemoprevention trials. Urology 2001;57:
137–40.
43. Nelson WG, DeWeese TL, DeMarzo AM. The diet,
prostate inflammation, and the development of prostate
cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2002;21:3–16.
44. Pathak SK, Sharma RA, Mellon JK. Chemoprevention
of prostate cancer by diet-drived antioxidant agents and
hormonal manipulation. Int J Oncol 2003;22:5–13.
45. Shixian Q, Dai Y, Kakuda Y, Shi J, Mittal G, Yeung D,
Jiang Y. Synergistic anti-oxidative effects of lycopene
with other bioactive compounds. Food Rev Int 2005;21:
295–311.
46. Siddiqui IA, Adhami VM, Saleem M, Mukhtar H.
Beneficial effects of tea and its polyphenols against
prostate cancer. Mol Nutr Food Res 2006;50:130–43.
47. Vinson JA, Hao Y, Su X, Zubik L. Phenol antioxidant
quantity and quality in foods: vegetables. J Agric Food
Chem 1998;46:3630–4.
48. Clinton SK. Tomatoes or lycopene: a role in prostate
carcinogenesis? J Nutr 2005;135:2057–9S.
49. Ellinger S, Ellinger J, Stehle P. Tomatoes, tomato
products and lycopene in the prevention and treatment
of prostate cancer: do we have the evidence from
intervention studies? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care
2006;9:722–7.
50. Kavanaugh CJ, Trumbo PR, Ellwood KC. The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration’s evidence-based review
for qualified health claims: tomatoes, lycopene, and
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007;99:1074–85.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (11). June 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Interaction of Tomato Lycopene and Ketosamine against Rat
Prostate Tumorigenesis
Valeri V. Mossine, Pankaj Chopra and Thomas P. Mawhinney
Cancer Res 2008;68:4384-4391.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/11/4384

This article cites 47 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/11/4384.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/11/4384.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

