2740

Liposomal Amphotericin B in Combination With
Caspofungin for Invasive Aspergillosis in Patients
With Hematologic Malignancies
A Randomized Pilot Study (Combistrat Trial)

Denis Caillot, MD1
Anne Thiebaut, MD2
Raoul Herbrecht, MD3
Stephane de Botton, MD4
Arnaud Pigneux, MD5
Frederic Bernard, MD6
Jerôme Larche, MD7
FrancE oise Monchecourt, MD8
Serge Alfandari, MD4
Lamine Mahi, MD8

BACKGROUND. Invasive aspergillosis (IA) has a poor prognosis in immunocompromised patients. Combinations of drugs that act on different targets are
expected to improve the clinical efficacy of separate compounds.

METHODS. Patients with proven or probable IA were randomized in a prospective,
open pilot study to receive either a combination of liposomal amphotericin B
(AmB) at the standard dose (3 mg/kg daily) and caspofungin at the standard
dose or monotherapy with a high-dose AmB regimen (10 mg/kg daily).

RESULTS. Thirty patients (21 men and 9 women) with hematologic malignancies
were analyzed, and there were 15 patients in each arm. The median duration of
treatment was 18 days for the combination group and 17 days for the high-dose
monotherapy group. At the end of treatment, there were significantly more favor-

1

able overall responses (partial or complete responses; P 5 .028) in the combina-

Hematology Department, Dijon University Hospital Center, Dijon, France.

tion group (10 of 15 patients; 67%) compared with the high-dose monotherapy

2

Hematology Department, Lyon University Hospital Center, Lyon, France.

group (4 of 15 patients; 27%). Survival rates at 12 weeks after inclusion were

3

the high-dose monotherapy group. A 2-fold increase in serum creatinine occurred

Hematology and Oncology Department, Strasbourg Regional University Hospital Center, Strasbourg, France.

100% and 80%, respectively. Infusion-related reactions occurred in 3 patients in
in 4 of 17 patients (23%) who received high-dose monotherapy and 1 of 15

4
Hematology Department, Lille Regional University Hospital Center, Lille, France.
5
Hematology Department, Bordeaux University
Hospital Center, Bordeaux, France.

Dr. Alfandari received honoraria from Amgen and
Gilead Sciences.

6

Drs. Mahi and Monchecourt are employees of
Gilead Sciences.

Pediatric Onco-Hematology III Department,
Montpellier University Hospital Center, Montpellier, France.
7

Medical Intensive Care Unit, Nancy University
Hospital Center, Nancy, France.
8

Gilead Sciences, Paris, France.

Supported by Gilead Sciences, France.
Dr. Caillot has acted as a consultant for Schering-Plough.
Dr. Herbrecht has acted as a consultant to Pfizer,
Schering-Plough, Gilead Sciences, MSD, and Astellas and has received research support from Pfizer.
Dr. de Botton has acted as a consultant to Schering-Plough.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

We thank Jean-FranEcois Couaillier (University Hospital Center [C.H.U.] de Dijon) and Valerie Latrabe
(C.H.U. de Bordeaux) for reviewing the computed
tomography scans, Isabelle Pascal and Aurelie
Moyne (Fovea, Paris) for data analysis, and Francis
Beauvais and Aymeric Duvivier (Gilead Sciences,
France) for their support and assistance.
Participating investigators: Denis Caillot, MD
(Service d’Hematologie, C.H.U. de Dijon, Hôpital
du Bocage, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon); Anne
Thiebaut, MD (Service d’Hematologie, Hôpital
Edouard Herriot, Lyon); Raoul Herbrecht, MD
(Service d’Hematologie et Oncologie, Hôpital de
Hautepierre, Strasbourg); Arnaud Pigneux, MD
(Service d’Hematologie, C.H.U. de Bordeaux,
Hôpital Haut Lev^eque-Centre FrancEois Magendie,

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23109
Published online 16 October 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Pessac); Stephane de Botton, MD and Serge
Alfandari, MD (Service des Maladies du Sang,
Regional C.H.U. de Lille, Hôpital Claude Huriez,
Lille); Michel Attal, MD (Service d’Hematologie,
Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse); Frederic Bernard, MD
(Onco-Hematologie-Pediatrie III, C.H.U. de Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier); Jerôme Larche, MD (Service de
Reanimation Medicale, C.H.U. de Nancy-Hôpital
de Brabois, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy); and Noel
Milpied, MD (Service d’Hematologie, C.H.U. de
Nantes-Hôtel Dieu, Nantes Cedex).
Address for reprints: Denis Caillot, MD, Service
d’Hematologie, C.H.U. de Dijon, Hôpital du Bocage,
Hôpital d’Enfants, 10, Boulevard du Marechal de Lattre de Tassigny, B.P. 1542, 21034 Dijon, France; Fax:
(011) 33-3-80-29-36-05; E-mail: denis.caillot@
chu-dijon.fr
Received May 22, 2007; revision received July 16,
2007; accepted July 24, 2007.

Amphotericin B and Caspofungin/Caillot et al.

2741

patient (7%) who received combination therapy; hypokalemia <3 mmol/L
occurred in 3 patients and 2 patients, respectively.

CONCLUSIONS. The combination of liposomal AmB and caspofungin was promising as therapy for IA compared with monotherapy. A trial that includes more
patients will be required next to confirm the results of this pilot study. Cancer
2007;110:2740–6.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: invasive aspergillosis, antifungal treatment, drug combination, liposomal amphotericin B, caspofungin.

I

nvasive aspergillosis (IA) is a major complication
with a high mortality rate in immunocompromised
patients.1 For decades, the recommended treatment
for IA has been amphotericin B (AmB) deoxycholate.
However, its toxicity led to the development of lipid
formulations. In particular, it was demonstrated that
the liposomal formulation of AmB (AmBisome) had
an improved therapeutic index and a more favorable
toxicity profile than AmB deoxycholate or AmB lipid
complex forms.2–4
Voriconazole recently was approved for first-line
therapy in IA. In a large randomized trial, voriconazole showed efficacy and survival benefits over
AmB.5 Caspofungin, which is the first of a new class
of antifungal drugs (echinocandins), has been
approved as ‘‘salvage’’ therapy for IA.6 However, despite these therapeutic advances, IA remains associated with high morbidity and an unacceptable rate
of mortality. Thus, in patients with acute leukemia
and stem cell transplantation, the IA-related mortality rate ranges from 50% to 80%.7
The large spectrum of AmB prompted new strategies to improve antifungal treatment. A first approach
was to assess higher dosing of liposomal AmB. Indeed,
the pharmacodynamic properties, preclinical data
from animal models, and response rates of patients
who received doses >3 mg/kg per day suggested that
liposomal AmB could improve outcomes and survival.4,8 However the randomized comparative study
of Cornely et al.9 did not demonstrate a greater benefit
of the 10 mg/kg daily dose over the standard dose.
The second therapeutic strategy was to combine
liposomal AmB with another antifungal drug. The
benefits of drug combination have been demonstrated largely in other infectious diseases, such as
human immunodeficiency viral infection and tuberculosis. Generally, this strategy needs to associate
drugs with different pharmacologic targets.10 Simultaneous inhibition of fungal cell wall biosynthesis
(echinocandins) and disruption of cell membrane integrity (polyenes) may result in synergistic interaction against Aspergillus spp. Recent studies in
experimental rodent aspergillosis have suggested that

the association of AmB and caspofungin decreased
tissue infection and increased survival.11,12
Despite the frequent clinical use of antifungal
combination therapy for primary or salvage therapy
of IA in many centers, to date, no randomized study
comparing monotherapy with combination therapy
has been performed. Case reports and retrospective
studies have indicated that the combination of caspofungin with a lipid formulation of AmB or an azole
may be beneficial as salvage therapy.13–18 Marr et al.
suggested an improved survival rate with combined
voriconazole and caspofungin compared with voriconazole alone.18 However, their retrospective cohort
study compared 2 groups of patients with IA who
were treated and assessed during 2 different periods.
The objective of the current study was to compare 2 new strategies of antifungal treatment (highdose liposomal AmB vs standard-dose liposomal
AmB plus caspofungin) based on the assumption
that both regimens were more effective than 3 mg/kg
per day of liposomal AmB monotherapy. The efficacy
results from the study by Cornely et al.,9 which did
not demonstrate a difference between 10 mg/kg per
day versus 3 mg/kg per day of liposomal AmB, were
not known at the time we initiated the current study.
Herein, we report the results from a prospective,
randomized pilot study comparing monotherapy on a
high-dose regimen of liposomal AmB (10 mg/kg per
day) with a combination of liposomal AmB (3 mg/kg
per day) plus caspofungin at the standard dose for initial therapy of IA in immunocompromised patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design
This was a national, multicenter, pilot, prospective,
randomized open trial (the Combistrat trial) in
patients with proven or probable IA according to criteria of the European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer/Mycosis Study Group (EORTC/
MSG).19 Patients were randomized (1:1) to receive 3
mg/kg per day liposomal AmB in combination with
caspofungin in the ‘‘combination group’’ or 10 mg/kg

2742

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

per day liposomal AmB in the ‘‘high-dose monotherapy group.’’
The protocol was conducted in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki and French law for biomedical research and was approved by the Ethics
Committee of Dijon (France). Written informed consent was obtained from each patient or from his or
her legal guardian before any study procedure. The
study has been registered in ClinicalTrials.gov under
the identifier NCT00334412.

Patient Population
Patients were eligible if they were aged 10 years,
had proven or probable IA according to the EORTC/
MSG criteria, and were immunocompromised.
Patients were not enrolled if any of the following criteria were met: life expectancy <30 days; allogeneic
stem cell transplantation recipient in the 6 previous
months; chronic invasive fungal infection (defined as
signs or symptoms of invasive fungal infection for
>4 weeks before study inclusion); prior antifungal
systemic therapy 96 hours for the current, documented IA (however, prior systemic antifungal therapy for prophylaxis or as empiric therapy for febrile
neutropenia was permissible); use of another investigational, unlicensed drug within 30 days of screening
or concurrent participation in another clinical trial;
serum creatinine level >2-fold the upper limit of normal; serum alanine or aspartate aminotransferase
levels >5-fold the upper limit of normal; pregnant or
lactating women; and history of allergy or serious
adverse reaction to any polyene antifungal agent or
echinochandin derivatives.
A proven IA diagnosis required the identification
of typical hyphal elements after histopathologic or
cytopathologic examination with evidence of associated tissue damage (either microscopically or
unequivocally by imaging) or the growth of Aspergillus organisms from a sample obtained by sterile
procedure from a normally sterile site and clinically
or radiologically abnormal site consistent with
infection (excluding urine and mucous membrane).
A probable IA diagnosis required at least 1 host factor criterion, and 1 microbiologic criterion, and 1
major (or 2 minor) clinical criteria from abnormal
site consistent with infection, and no other pathogen detected to account for the clinical or radiographic signs of infection. In a modification of
EORTC/MSG criteria and in accordance with recent
studies,5,9 the diagnosis of probable IA also included
patients with recent neutropenia (<500 neutrophils/
mm3) within 14 days of study inclusion and a
‘‘halo’’ or ‘‘air-crescent’’ signs on a chest computed
tomography (CT) scan.20 A CT scan diagnosis of IA

FIGURE 1. Disposition of patients. ITT indicates the intent-to-treat population; MITT, the modified intent-to-treat population.

was verified by a central data review board that
included 1 hematologist and 2 radiologists who confirmed IA. Serum galactomannan assay (Platelia;
Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, Calif; Bio-Rad,
Marnes-la-Coquette, France) with an optical density
index of 1.0 was considered positive.

Administration of Study Drugs
Patients who were randomized to the combination
group received a dose of 3 mg/kg per day of intravenous (iv) liposomal AmB (AmBisome) and iv caspofungin (Cancidas) (70 mg on Day 1 followed by 50
mg daily thereafter). Patients in the high-dose monotherapy group received 10 mg/kg per day of liposomal AmB (Fig. 1).
Treatment was administered for at least 14 days;
end of treatment (EOT) was defined as the time at
which, in the opinion of the investigator, study drug
could be discontinued because of at least 1 of the
following reasons: resolution of the infection was
complete, efficacy could not be improved further,
need of drug discontinuation because of toxicity,
need of other systemic antifungal agents, or clinical
and radiographic evidence of progression of invasive
fungal infection. Administration of antipyretic and/or
antihistamine medications for prevention of infusion-related reactions was allowed.
Assessment of Efficacy
A complete response was defined as the complete resolution of all signs and symptoms attributable to
the invasive fungal infection compared with baseline
and complete or near complete clearing of CT (or
magnetic resonance imaging) scan abnormalities

Amphotericin B and Caspofungin/Caillot et al.

associated with active fungal infection (or persistent
residual scarring only) and eradication of the pathogen. A partial response was defined as meaningful
improvement of all clinical signs and symptoms attributable to IA and a decrease 50% in radiographic
signs. A stable response was defined as minor or no
improvement but no worsening of attributable signs,
symptoms, radiographic, and/or bronchoscopic findings. Failure was defined as progression of infection
based on an increase in the number and/or severity
of clinical signs and symptoms attributable to the IA,
worsening of CT scan abnormalities consistent with
progressive infection, and persistently positive cultures, histopathologic findings, or Aspergillus antigen
assays.
Complete (cure) and partial (improvement) overall responses were considered favorable responses.
Stable overall response and failures were considered
unfavorable responses.

Statistical Analysis
The primary efficacy population was the modified
intent-to-treat (MITT) population, which we defined
as patients who received at least 1 dose of randomized treatment and who also had a confirmed diagnosis of proven or probable IA. All patients who
received at least 1 dose of randomized treatment
were included in the safety population.
The primary efficacy endpoint was the percentage of patients who had favorable overall responses
(partial or complete responses) at EOT. Secondary efficacy endpoints included the time to favorable overall response, the time to complete response, survival
at EOT, percentage of patients with recurrent infection (defined as failure for overall response), and survival during the 4-week posttreatment follow-up.
The chi-square test was used to compare primary endpoints of the 2 treatment groups. For
secondary endpoints, chi-square tests or CochranMantel-Haenszel tests were used for qualitative data,
and the Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate
time-to-event endpoints.

RESULTS
Patients
In total, 32 patients were enrolled between April
2004 and July 2005 in 9 sites in France. Baseline
characteristics of the 30 patients of the MITT population are presented in Table 1. The characteristics of
patients at baseline were balanced well between
treatment groups; only neutropenia duration before
inclusion was significantly longer in the combination

2743

TABLE 1
The Disposition of Patients in the Modified Intend-to-treat Population
at Inclusion
No. of patients (%)

Characteristic
Men/women, n
Mean age [range], y
Underlying condition
Acute myeloid leukemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Myeloproliferative disorders
Acute lymphoid leukemia
Hematologic status*
Remission
Stable disease
Progressive disease
Median neutropenia duration before
inclusion [range], d
Pulmonary invasive aspergillosis
Proven
Probable
Basis of diagnosis{
Halo sign
Positive galactomannan assay
(optical density index 1)§
Bronchoalveolar lavage
Positive culture
Positive cytology

High-dose monotherapy
group (n515)

Combination
group (n515)

10/5
57.3 [25–72]

11/4
49.9 [16–75]

10 (67)
3 (20)
2 (13)
0 (0)

14 (93)
0 (0)
0 (0)
1 (7)

4 (27)
3 (20)
8 (53)

2 (14)
5 (36)
7 (50)

15 [3–58]

31.5 [3–115]y

3 (20)
12 (80)

1 (7)
14 (93)

10 (67)

9 (60)

7 (47)

5 (33)

3 (20)
2 (13)

1 (7)
1 (7)

* Data were missing for 1 patient in the combination group.
y
P 5 .015 (Wilcoxon test): There was no significant difference between treatment groups for the
other characteristics.
{
In addition to neutropenia, computed tomography scan, and clinical signs.
§
Two successive positive samples.

group compared with the high-dose monotherapy
group (P 5 .015; Wilcoxon’s test).
Two patients did not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of proven or probable IA according to the central data review board (nonspecific signs of IA on CT
scan) and were disqualified for efficacy analysis
(MITT). One patient was a protocol exception who
was validated by the central data review board: His
diagnosis of IA was established by the investigator
but was not in accordance with the EORTC/MSG criteria. Indeed, this patient had no fever, neutropenia
duration was <10 days, and he did not receive corticoids during the last month; however, he received
another immunosuppressant treatment, was positive
for Aspergillus antigenemia, and had a chest CT scan
with signs that were suggestive of pulmonary IA.
Two patients in the combination group had an allograft >6 months before their inclusion (1 patient had
cutaneous and mucous graft-versus-host disease at
inclusion). All patients presented with pulmonary IA.

2744

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

TABLE 2
Study Drug Administration and Antifungal Drugs Received After End
of Treatment (Modified Intend-to-treat Population)

TABLE 3
Efficacy of Antifungal Treatment (Modified Intend-to-treat
Population)

No. of patients (%)

Parameter

High-dose
monotherapy
group (n515)

Median time on study drug [range], d
Median adherence [range], %*
Antifungal drugs received after EOT
Any systemic antifungal treatment
Intravenous or oral voriconazole
monotherapy
Combinations
Voriconazole plus caspofungin
Voriconazole plus caspofungin
plus liposomal AmB

Combination
group (n515)

17 [4–24]
100 [52–101]

18 [10–35]
100 [97–100] for AmB;
100 [94–136] for Caspo

13/15 (87)

14/15 (93)

10 (78)
3 (22)

13 (93)
1 (7)

2

0

1

1

AmB indicates amphotericin B; Caspo, caspofungin; EOT, end of treatment.
* Total drug received/total drug expected)3100.

Duration of Therapy
The median duration of study drug administration
was 17 days and 18 days in the high-dose monotherapy and combination groups, respectively (Table 2).
Treatment adherence (total drug received/total drug
expected 3 100) was near 100%. The majority of
patients received antifungal therapy after EOT (90%),
mostly voriconazole monotherapy (iv or oral), without differences between treatment groups.
Outcomes
The MITT analysis indicated that the overall response
at EOT was significantly (P 5 .028) more favorable for
patients in the combination group (10 of 15 patients;
67%) compared with patients in the high-dose
monotherapy group (4 of 15 patients; 27%) (Table 3).
At Week 12, a favorable response was obtained by 10
of 15 patients in the high-dose monotherapy group
(67%; 8 patients had a partial response and 2
patients had a complete response) and by 12 of 15
patients in the combination group (80%; 9 patients
had a partial response and 3 patients had a complete
response).
A favorable or unfavorable response at EOT was
independent of hematologic status at EOT (recurrence, remission, or stable; P 5 .442; Fisher exact
test). The survival rate at EOT was 97% (1 death had
occurred in the high-dose monotherapy group). At
Week 12, all 15 patients in the combination group
were alive, whereas 3 of 15 patients had died in the
high-dose monotherapy group. Those 3 patients died

No. of patients (%)

Parameter

High-dose
monotherapy
group (n515)

Combination
group (n515)

Overall treatment response at EOT
Favorable
Complete response
Partial response
Unfavorable
Stable response
Failure
Missing value
Time to favorable treatment response, d
Mean  SD
Median [range]
Survival at EOT
Survival at Wk 12

4 (27)
0
4
11 (73)
6
4
1
4
14  0.8
14 [13–15]
14 (93)
12 (80)y

10 (67)*
0
10
5 (33)
4
1
0
10
19.3  9.3
14 [10–38]
15 (100)
15 (100)

EOT indicates end of treatment; SD, standard deviation.
* P 5 .028 (favorable response high-dose monotherapy group vs combination group; chi-square test).
y
Three deaths were caused by progression of the underlying hematologic condition (for 1 of those
patients, fungal infection contributed to the death according to the investigator).

because of progression of the underlying hematologic
condition; and, in 1 patient, fungal infection contributed to the death according to the investigator.

Safety
All randomized patients received at least 1 dose of
study treatment and were assessable for safety analysis. Study drug-related adverse events (n 5 28 events)
were less frequent in the combination group (n 5 4
events) than in the high-dose monotherapy group (n
5 24 events). Infusion-related reactions occurred in 3
patients in the high-dose monotherapy group (flush,
cervical or thoracic pain, chills, and nausea).
Twelve serious adverse events were reported for
11 patients; 3 patients died because of aggravation of
underlying conditions with no relation to study drug
toxicity. Only 1 serious adverse event (renal disorder)
was related to study drug (high-dose monotherapy
group).
An analysis of biologic parameters indicated that
a 2-fold increase in serum creatinine levels occurred
in 4 of 17 patients (23%) in the high-dose monotherapy group and 1 of 15 patients (7%) in the combination group. Three patients in the monotherapy group
and 2 patients in the combination therapy group had
hypokalemia <3 mmol/L at least once during the
study.

Amphotericin B and Caspofungin/Caillot et al.

DISCUSSION
IA remains a serious condition, and the treatments
that have been evaluated to date have been based on
conventional strategies. Recently marketed antifungal
agents have made the concept of drug combination
possible. Until now, antifungal drug combinations
have been assessed only as add-on treatment in salvage therapy. To our knowledge, the current study
represents the first prospective randomized study
that was designed to compare monotherapy versus
combination therapy as first-line antifungal therapy
in patients with IA.
With liposomal AmB, which remains the antifungal drug with the largest spectrum, 2 therapeutic
strategies have been explored: dosage increase to 10
mg/kg per day and combination with another antifungal drug. It was reported recently by Cornely et al.
that no additional efficacy benefit was obtained with
AmB 10 mg/kg per day in patients with IA.9 It has
been suggested in case reports and retrospective studies13–18 that the combination of caspofungin and a
lipid formulation of AmB or an azole may be beneficial for patients with IA who fail on conventional
antifungal first-line monotherapy.
The current randomized study in hematologic
immunocompromised patients with IA demonstrated
that the combination of liposomal AmB (3 mg/kg per
day) and caspofungin led to a better favorable overall
response rate (67% vs 27%; P 5 .028) than monotherapy with liposomal AmB alone (high-dose regimen;
10 mg/kg per day) at EOT (primary criterion). This
favorable outcome was accompanied by high survival
rates (100% vs 93% at EOT, respectively). Although
the difference was not statistically significant, this
difference favoring combination therapy also was
observed for patient survival at 12 weeks (100% survival vs 80% in the high-dose monotherapy group).
It could be argued that the duration of neutropenia differed significantly between the treatment
groups. Indeed, patients with longer neutropenia
duration have generally less favorable outcomes, as
evidenced, for example, in the AmBiLoad study,
which included both patients with and without neutropenia.9 The baseline difference for neutropenia
duration in our study did not change the conclusion.
On the contrary, this difference confirmed the interest of the antifungal drug combination, because
patients who were supposed to have a poor outcome
were in the group with a better outcome.
A major concern with combination antifungal
drug therapy is the risk of increased toxicity, particularly renal toxicity. Retrospective studies or case
reports have suggested a good safety profile for combination antifungal drugs. This also was true in our

2745

prospective trial, in which only a single serious
adverse event was related to the study regimen.
This study presents some limitations. First, it
was a pilot study with a small number of patients.
Large, prospective, randomized studies certainly are
required but are difficult to perform, because IA is
relatively infrequent; and, until recently, only low
gains in outcomes were expected. Thus, a recent editorial estimated that, to show a 10% improvement in
survival over what is achieved with voriconazole
alone most likely will require 570 evaluable
patients.21 Thus, pilot studies are necessary to carefully design larger prospective studies. Nevertheless,
the sample size argument could be reversed, and it
could be argued that, despite the low statistical
power of the current study design, the statistically
significant difference between treatment groups
emphasizes the efficacy of the drug combination.
Another limitation was the open-label nature of
the trial, which may have affected the results. However, the study was based in centers that had extensive experience with IA management. Inappropriate
outcome evaluations are unlikely to have occurred
on a scale large enough to change the conclusions of
the study. Furthermore an expected superiority of 1
regimen over the other was not obvious for the
investigators (the results from the Ambiload study9
were not known when this study was performed).
Single-drug therapy, as either first-line or salvage
treatment, rarely obtains response rates greater than
50% to 60%. Combination therapy is an attractive
concept for treating invasive mycoses. Optimal combination regimens remain unclear. However, given its
broad spectrum encompassing difficult to treat
patients, we believe that liposomal AmB is the drug
of choice for invasive mycosis combination therapy.
In conclusion, the results of the current study
suggest that the combination of liposomal AmB and
caspofungin therapy is promising for improved efficacy in patients with IA. Next, a trial that includes
more patients will be required to confirm our results.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.

Denning DW. Therapeutic outcome in invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis. 1996;23:608–615.
Walsh TJ, Finberg RW, Arndt C, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B for empirical therapy in patients with persistent
fever and neutropenia. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group. N Engl J Med.
1999;340:764–771.
Wingard JR, White MH, Anaissie E, et al. A randomized,
double-blind comparative trial evaluating the safety of
liposomal amphotericin B versus amphotericin B lipid
complex in the empirical treatment of febrile neutropenia.
L Amph/ABLC Collaborative Study Group. Clin Infect Dis.
2000;31:1155–1163.

2746

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

4.

Leenders AC, Daenen S, Jansen RL, et al. Liposomal
amphotericin B compared with amphotericin B deoxycholate in the treatment of documented and suspected neutropenia-associated invasive fungal infections. Br J
Haematol. 1998;103:205–212.
5. Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, et al. Voriconazole
versus amphotericin B for primary therapy of invasive
aspergillosis. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:408–415.
6. Maertens J, Raad I, Petrikkos G, et al. Efficacy and safety of
caspofungin for treatment of invasive aspergillosis in
patients refractory to or intolerant of conventional antifungal therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;39:1563–1571.
7. Lin SJ, Schranz J, Teutsch SM. Aspergillosis case-fatality
rate: systematic review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis.
2001;32:358–366.
8. Walsh TJ, Goodman JL, Pappas P, et al. Safety, tolerance,
and pharmacokinetics of high-dose liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome) in patients infected with Aspergillus
species and other filamentous fungi: maximum tolerated
dose study. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2001;45:3487–
3496.
9. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Bresnik M, et al. Liposomal
amphotericin B as initial therapy for invasive filamentous
fungal infections: a randomized trial comparing a high
loading dose regimen with standard dosing (AmBiLoad
trial). Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44:1289–1297.
10. Dannaoui E, Lortholary O, Dromer F. In vitro evaluation of
double and triple combinations of antifungal drugs against
Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus terreus. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. 2004;48:970–978.
11. Sionov E, Mendlovic S, Segal E. Efficacy of amphotericin B
or amphotericin B-intralipid in combination with caspofungin against experimental aspergillosis. J Infect. 2006;
53:131–139.
12. Sivak O, Bartlett K, Risovic V, et al. Assessing the antifungal
activity and toxicity profile of amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC; Abelcet) in combination with caspofungin in

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

experimental systemic aspergillosis. J Pharm Sci. 2004;93:
1382–1389.
Castagnola E, Machetti M, Cappelli B, et al. Caspofungin
associated with liposomal amphotericin B or voriconazole
for treatment of refractory fungal pneumonia in children
with acute leukaemia or undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplant. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2004;10:255–257.
Nivoix Y, Zamfir A, Lutun P, et al. Combination of caspofungin and an azole or an amphotericin B formulation in
invasive fungal infections. J Infect. 2006;52:67–74.
Aliff TB, Maslak PG, Jurcic JG, et al. Refractory Aspergillus
pneumonia in patients with acute leukemia: successful
therapy with combination caspofungin and liposomal
amphotericin. Cancer. 2003;97:1025–1032.
Kontoyiannis DP, Hachem R, Lewis RE, et al. Efficacy and
toxicity of caspofungin in combination with liposomal
amphotericin B as primary or salvage treatment of invasive
aspergillosis in patients with hematologic malignancies.
Cancer. 2003;98:292–299.
Pancham S, Hemmaway C, New H, et al. Caspofungin for
invasive fungal infections: combination treatment with
liposomal amphotericin B in children undergoing hemopoietic stem cell transplantation. Pediatr Transplantation.
2005;9:254–257.
Marr KA, Boeckh M, Carter RA, Kim HW, Corey L. Combination antifungal therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Clin
Infect Dis. 2004;39:797–802.
Ascioglu S, Rex JH, de Pauw B, et al. Defining opportunistic
invasive fungal infections in immunocompromised patients
with cancer and hematopoietic stem cell transplants: an
international consensus. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;34:7–14.
Caillot D, Casasnovas O, Bernard A, et al. Improved management of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in neutropenic patients using early thoracic computed tomographic
scan and surgery. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:139–147.
Wheat LJ. Combination therapy for aspergillosis: is it needed,
and which combination? J Infect Dis. 2003;187:1831–1833.

