Priority Report

Clostridium perfringens Enterotoxin as a Novel-Targeted
Therapeutic for Brain Metastasis
1

2

4

1

1

1

Scott L. Kominsky, Betty Tyler, Jeffrey Sosnowski, Kelly Brady, Michele Doucet, Delissa Nell,
5
5
2
3
James G. Smedley III, Bruce McClane, Henry Brem, and Saraswati Sukumar
Departments of 1Orthopedic Surgery, 2Neurosurgery, and 3Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;
4
Department of Pathology, University of South Alabama College of Medicine, Mobile, Alabama; and 5Department of Molecular
Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

Abstract
Brain metastasis is the most commonly occurring intracranial
tumor whose incidence seems to be increasing. With standard
therapy, the average survival time of patients is f8 months,
and treatment often leads to neurologic dysfunction in longterm survivors, emphasizing the need for novel therapeutics.
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) has recently been
shown to rapidly and specifically destroy cancer cells
expressing CPE receptors claudin-3 and claudin-4. Unfortunately, the utility of CPE is precluded by systemic toxicity
because its receptors are expressed in numerous organs. Here,
we provide the first preclinical evidence that CPE may be
uniquely suited to the local treatment of brain metastasis. By
immunohistochemical analysis, claudin-3 and claudin-4 were
expressed frequently in metastases from breast (15 of 18), lung
(15 of 20), and colon (12 of 14) carcinoma, and infrequently in
metastases from renal cell carcinoma (2 of 16) and melanoma
(2 of 16). In contrast, expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4
was absent in adjacent normal brain tissue. Further examination of the central nervous system (CNS) revealed low or
undetectable levels of claudin-3 and claudin-4 in all regions
tested by Western and immunohistochemical analysis. Treatment of breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-468, NT2.5luc) and normal human astrocytes with CPE in vitro resulted
in rapid and dose-dependent cytolysis exclusively in breast
cancer cells, correlating with claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression. Moreover, intracranial CPE treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth and increased survival in two murine models
of breast cancer brain metastasis, without any apparent local
or systemic toxicity. These data suggest that CPE therapy
may have efficacy against a wide variety of brain metastases
without CNS toxicity. [Cancer Res 2007;67(17):7977–82]

Introduction
Metastases account for the majority of newly diagnosed brain
tumors, with incidence rates roughly 10 times higher than that of
primary neoplasms (1). Recent reports suggest that brain
metastasis is diagnosed in 15% to 40% of cancer patients and is
most commonly associated with cancers of the breast, lung, kidney,
skin, and colon (2). Whereas improvements in cancer therapy have
resulted in increased patient survival, the incidence of brain

Requests for reprints: Scott Kominsky, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, 720
Rutland Avenue, Ross Building, Room 209, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205. Phone: 410-502-6406; Fax: 410-502-6414; E-mail:
kominsc@jhmi.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1314

www.aacrjournals.org

metastasis has also increased, likely due to the inability of
therapeutics to cross the blood-brain-barrier (BBB; refs. 2, 3). With
standard treatment, the average survival time for patients with
brain metastasis is f8 months, and long-term survivors often
suffer damaging side effects from their treatment (4, 5). Therefore,
the development of new and safer treatment options for brain
metastasis is of immediate clinical importance.
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) has recently emerged
as a potential cancer therapeutic. CPE has been shown to elicit
rapid cytolysis of mammalian cells, occurring in as little as 5 min
(6). Furthermore, studies suggest that CPE-induced cytolysis occurs
specifically in cells expressing the tight junction proteins claudin-3
and/or claudin-4, which function as low-affinity and high-affinity
receptors for CPE, respectively (7, 8). Studies in our laboratory and
others have shown that claudin-3 and claudin-4 are expressed in
numerous organs and overexpressed in several cancers, including
breast, ovary, prostate, and pancreas, suggesting the potential of
CPE in cancer therapy (9). Subsequent animal studies examining
the antitumor effects of CPE after local delivery have shown some
success; however, systemic toxicity precludes its use (10–12).
An innovative use of this toxin would be to treat carcinoma
metastases to the brain. Recent studies show little to no claudin-3
or claudin-4 mRNA expression in whole-brain tissue, consistent
with the fact that claudin-3 and claudin-4 are expressed solely in
cells of epithelial origin, whereas most brain cells are of mesenchymal origin (11). This scenario may present a unique opportunity to treat and eliminate epithelial metastases to the brain
without harming host brain tissue. Furthermore, the BBB may
inhibit systemic exposure to CPE after local administration, thus
preventing systemic toxicity. Here, we present, for the first time,
evidence that claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression is undetectable
in central nervous system (CNS) tissues with the exception of
the ependymal cells of the choroid plexus, which display a low
level of expression. Consistent with this observation, intracranial
administration of CPE significantly inhibited tumor growth and
increased survival in mice harboring breast tumors in the brain
without any apparent toxicity to host CNS tissue. Taken together,
these data suggest that CPE may be useful in the specific
elimination of brain metastasis.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines and tissues. The breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-468, MCF-7,
and HS578T were obtained from American Type Culture Collection and
cultured according to conditions specified. The murine mammary
carcinoma cell line NT2.5 was kindly provided by Drs. R. Todd Reilly and
Elizabeth M. Jaffee (Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD). NT2.5 cells were maintained in RPMI supplemented with
20% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10 mmol/L HEPES, 1% nonessential amino
acids, 1 mmol/L sodium pyruvate, and 10 Ag/mL insulin. For in vivo

7977

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
imaging, pEF1/Myc-His (Invitrogen) containing firefly luciferase (F-luc)
was stably transfected into NT2.5 cells by electroporation using a
nucleofector II device (Amaxa Biosystems). Individual stable clones were
selected in the presence of 500 Ag/mL G418 (Sigma) and maintained in
200 Ag/mL G418 after expansion. Finite life-span normal human astrocytes
were kindly provided by Dr. Carlos Pardo (Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine). Astrocytes were maintained in Eagle’s minimal essential
medium supplemented with 10% FBS and were not used beyond 10
passages. Paraffin blocks of cancer metastasis to the brain and cancer-free
brain tissue were obtained from the Surgical Pathology Division of Johns
Hopkins Hospital, observing institutional guidelines for acquisition of such
specimens.
Cytotoxicity assay. Native CPE was isolated and purified as previously
described (13). The biological activity of CPE per microgram was assessed
by a cytotoxicity assay using our positive control cell line MCF-7. For the
current preparation of CPE, 0.1 Ag was identified as the minimum dose
required to elicit complete cytolysis of MCF-7 cells. A single preparation of
CPE was used for the completion of all in vitro and in vivo studies. For
cytotoxicity assay, breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-468, NT2.5-luc, MCF-7,
and HS578T) and finite–life span normal human astrocytes were plated

in six-well plates and grown overnight to f80% confluence in complete
medium. Old medium was then removed and replaced with complete
medium with or without CPE at concentrations ranging from 0.01 to
1 Ag/mL. Cells were then incubated at 37jC for 60 min. Floating cells
were collected and pooled with adherent cells removed by trypsinization.
Total cells were then counted using a hemocytometer, and cell viability
was determined by trypan blue dye (0.4%) exclusion. Differences in
cytotoxicity between each experimental group were compared by unpaired
Student’s t test.
Immunohistochemistry. Paraffin-embedded sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through graded ethanol. Antigen retrieval
was done by immersing sections in 0.01 mol/L sodium citrate (pH 6.0) and
boiling by microwave for 20 min. Sections were then cooled to room
temperature, and endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched by
immersing in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide for 30 min. Blocking was then done
by incubation in diluted normal goat (claudin-3) or horse (claudin-4) serum
(Vectastain kit, Vector) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Sections
were then incubated with rabbit polyclonal claudin-3 (Invitrogen) or mouse
monoclonal claudin-4 (Invitrogen) at a 1:500 dilution for a period of 16 h.
Diluted biotinylated antirabbit or antimouse IgG (Vectastain kit) was added

Figure 1. Expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 proteins in brain metastases and CNS tissue. Immunohistochemical analysis was done on paraffin-embedded
sections of human CNS tissue and brain metastases originating from primary breast carcinoma, lung carcinoma, colon carcinoma, RCC, and melanoma using claudin-3
and claudin-4 antibodies. Claudin-3 and claudin-4 proteins were visualized using DAB. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin and visualized by light
microscopy. Scale bar , 100 Am. Pkj, purkinje cells; PC , pyramidal cells; Cap, capillary; BV, blood vessel; NG, neuroglial cell; Ep, ependyma; CP, choroid plexus.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

7978

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CPE Specifically Lyses Brain Metastases
(Xenogen). Mice were observed on a daily basis for any symptoms of tumor
burden, including sluggishness, lack of grooming, hemiparesis, and weight
loss. Mice were euthanized when moribund and brains were removed and
fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for histologic examination by H&E
staining. Differences in survival between experimental groups were
analyzed using the log-rank test.

Table 1. Expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 in
carcinoma metastasis to the brain*
Origin of
metastasis

Cases with claudin-3
expression/total
cases (%)

Breast carcinoma
Lung carcinoma
Colon carcinoma
Renal cell carcinoma
Melanoma

7/9 (77.8%)
7/10 (70%)
6/7 (86%)
0/8 (0%)
1/8 (12.5%)

Cases with claudin-4
expression/total
cases (%)

Results

8/9 (88.9%)
8/10 (80%)
6/7 (86%)
2/8 (25%)
1/8 (12.5%)

NOTE: Data are compiled from immunohistochemical analysis of
whole paraffin-embedded sections.

to the sections and incubated for 30 min. Vectastain ABC reagent was then
added for 30 min. Claudin-3 and claudin-4 proteins were visualized using
3,3¶-diaminobenzidine (DAB) as per the manufacturer’s instructions
(Vector). Sections were then counterstained in hematoxylin (Richard-Allan
Scientific) for 10 s. Lastly, sections were dehydrated through graded ethanol,
cleared in xylene, mounted, and cover slipped. Images were acquired by
light microscopy.
Western blotting. Total protein was extracted from cell lines using lysis
buffer consisting of 15% glycerol, 5% SDS, and 250 mmol/L Tris-HCl
(pH 6.7). Total protein from human brain and spinal cord tissue was
obtained from BioChain. Equal amounts of protein from cell and tissue
lysates were resolved using 12% SDS-PAGE (Invitrogen). Protein was
transferred to enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) nitrocellulose membranes (Amersham). After Western transfer, membranes were probed with
antihuman claudin-3 (Invitrogen), antihuman claudin-4 (Invitrogen), or
h-actin (Amersham) antibody diluted 1:1,000 (claudin-3 and claudin-4) or
1:5,000 (h-actin). Horseradish peroxidase–conjugated antibody against
rabbit or mouse IgG (Amersham) was used at 1:1,000, and binding was
revealed using ECL (Amersham).
Animal studies. Female athymic nude mice were purchased from the
animal production area of the National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research Facility (Frederick, MD), and female neu-N mice were kindly
provided by Drs. R. Todd Reilly and Elizabeth Jaffee (Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine). Animals were maintained in specific
pathogen-free barrier animal facilities approved by the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee approval was obtained for the project. Tumors
were generated in 6-week-old to 8-week-old animals. On day 0, mice were
given 2.5  105 MDA-MB-468 or 5  103 NT2.5-luc cells in complete media
by intracranial injection. On day 5, animals were randomly assigned to two
groups of 10 mice each and given either 0.5 Ag CPE or PBS by intracranial
injection. Treatment was then repeated on days 7 and 9. Intracranial
injections were done as follows: mice were anesthetized, and a midline
incision was made, followed by a 2 mm burr hole centered 2 mm posterior
to the coronal suture and 2 mm lateral to the sagittal suture. Once the dura
was exposed, mice were transferred to a stereotactic frame, and a 26-gauge
needle containing the material to be injected in a total volume of 5 AL was
inserted into the brain to a depth of 3 mm and delivered over a 1-min
period. The needle was then removed, the area was washed with sterile
saline, and the incision was closed. Because tumor treatments were
delivered through the same burr hole as that used for tumor cell
administration, therapy was presumed to be centered on the tumor bed.
All intracranial injections were done in a biosafety cabinet conforming to
industry standards to maintain a sterile environment. For bioluminescent
imaging, anesthetized mice were given 150 mg/kg D-luciferin i.p. Five
minutes after injection, images were acquired using an IVIS 200 system
(Xenogen). Bioluminescent signal was measured as photons per second per
square centimeter in defined regions of interest using Living Image software

www.aacrjournals.org

Expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 in brain metastasis
and normal brain tissue. Several primary tumor types (e.g., breast
carcinoma) have been reported to express claudin-3 and claudin-4,
conferring sensitivity to CPE-mediated cytolysis (1). To determine
whether claudin-3 and claudin-4 are expressed after metastasis
to the brain, immunohistochemical analysis was done on cases of
human brain metastasis originating from five common sources,
including breast carcinoma, lung carcinoma, colon carcinoma,
renal cell carcinoma (RCC), and melanoma (Fig. 1). Claudin-3 and
claudin-4 were expressed in the majority of brain metastases from
breast (z77.8%), lung (z70%), and colon (86%) carcinoma, while
infrequently expressed in cases of RCC (V25%) and melanoma
(12.5%) brain metastasis (Table 1). Claudin-3 and claudin-4
expression were absent in adjacent normal brain tissue, consistent
with the restriction of claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression to
epithelial cells.
To more closely examine claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression
throughout the CNS, immunohistochemical analysis was done on

Figure 2. A, Western analysis was done on equal amounts of protein from total
cell lysates using claudin-3 (CLDN-3 ), claudin-4 (CLDN-4), and actin antibodies.
MCF-7 and HS578T breast cancer cells served as positive and negative
controls (cntl ), respectively. B, sensitivity of astrocytes, MDA-MB-468, and
NT2.5-luc breast cancer cells to CPE-mediated cytolysis in vitro . MCF-7 and
HS578T breast cancer cells served as positive and negative controls,
respectively. Cells were incubated with or without CPE at concentrations of
0.01 to 1 Ag/mL for 60 min. Total cells were pooled and counted using a
hemacytometer, and cell viability was determined by trypan blue dye (0.4%)
exclusion. Columns, percentage of cytotoxicity from representative experiments
done in triplicate; bars, SD.

7979

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

human tissues from a variety of regions of the brain and spinal
cord, including hippocampus, medulla, cerebellum, choroid plexus,
ependyma, thalamus, meninges, and spinal cord (Fig. 1). Claudin-3
and claudin-4 expression was absent in all CNS tissue with the
exception of the modified ependymal cells that make up the
epithelial lining of the choroid plexus. Although detectable,
claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression in the choroid plexus seemed
greatly reduced relative to that observed in brain metastases.
Interestingly, claudin-3 and claudin-4 were not detectable in the
ependymal cells comprising the adjacent ependyma. Consistent
with immunohistochemical analysis, claudin-3 and claudin-4
expression was low or absent in all regions of CNS tested by
Western analysis (Fig. 2A). Based on immunohistochemical
analysis, the low expression of claudin-3 observed in hippocampus,
medulla, cerebellum, and thalamus may be due to the presence of
choroid plexus in these tissues. Taken together, these data indicate
that claudin-3 and claudin-4 are frequently expressed in breast,
lung, and colon carcinoma metastasis to the brain but absent in the
majority of CNS tissue.
Susceptibility of brain cells to CPE-mediated cytolysis.
Astrocytes are the most abundant glial cell and are believed to
play a primary role in the formation of the BBB (2). By Western
analysis, astrocytes lack detectable expression of claudin-3 and
claudin-4 similar to the majority of brain cell types (Fig. 2A).
Although various cell types lacking claudin-3 and claudin-4 have
been shown to be resistant to CPE-mediated cytolysis (10, 14), the
effect of CPE on brain cells has not been characterized. To
determine whether brain cells are sensitive to CPE-mediated
cytolysis, astrocytes and breast cancer cell lines with (MCF-7,
MDA-MB-468, NT2.5-luc) and without (HS578T) detectable expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 were treated with concentrations of
CPE ranging from 0.01 to 1 Ag/mL for a period of 60 min. After CPE

treatment, all of the cells in the culture dish were counted, and
percentage of cytotoxicity was determined by trypan blue dye
exclusion (Fig. 2B). Astrocytes and HS578T cells were completely
resistant to the cytotoxic effects of CPE, corresponding with the
lack of claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression. Conversely, breast
cancer cell lines expressing claudin-3 and claudin-4 (MCF-7, MDAMB-468, NT2.5-luc) underwent rapid and virtually complete
cytolysis in a dose-dependent fashion after CPE treatment.
Furthermore, sensitivity to CPE-mediated cytolysis correlated with
the level of claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression evidenced by
increased cytolysis at lower concentrations of CPE in MCF-7 and
NT2.5-luc cells relative to MDA-MB-468 cells. Thus, consistent with
previous studies in cell lines from other tissues types (10–12),
susceptibility to CPE-mediated cytolysis seems to be directly
dependent on the expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4, rendering
the majority of brain cells resistant to the cytotoxic effects of CPE.
Efficacy of CPE in the treatment of brain metastasis. To test
the efficacy of CPE in the treatment of brain metastasis, two murine
models of breast cancer brain metastasis were developed. In the
first model, xenograft tumors were established in athymic nude
mice using the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-468. In the
second model, syngeneic tumors were established in neu-N mice
using the murine mammary carcinoma cell line NT2.5, which was
originally derived from a spontaneous mammary tumor in this
strain (15). To allow noninvasive monitoring of tumor burden in this
model by bioluminescent imaging, a NT2.5 stable clone expressing
firefly luciferase (NT2.5-luc) was generated. Stereotactic administration of MDA-MB-468 or NT2.5-luc cells into the cerebral cortex of
mice resulted in the formation of invasive tumors in all animals and
yielded survival times ranging from 18 to 20 and 22 to 27 days,
respectively. Although admittedly dissimilar from the clinical
situation, these models allow intratumoral drug administration to

Figure 3. Efficacy of CPE in the treatment
of breast cancer brain metastasis. A and B,
brain tumors were established in mice
using the human breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-468 and the murine breast
cancer cell line NT2.5-luc. Tumors were
treated by intracranial administration of
0.5 Ag CPE versus PBS on days 5, 7, and
9. C and D, for the NT2.5-luc brain tumor
model, noninvasive bioluminescent
imaging was done twice per week
beginning on day 4. Bioluminescent images
from five representative mice are shown
for each experimental group at day 19 (C ).
Photon flux was measured over the
indicated time course as an indication of
tumor growth (D). Differences in survival
between experimental groups were
analyzed using the log-rank test. Arrows
(A, B, and D ), dates of treatment.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

7980

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CPE Specifically Lyses Brain Metastases

be modeled accurately and rapidly, without the complication of
tumor development in other organs. Furthermore, because the
pattern of claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression in mice is similar to
humans and confers equivalent sensitivity to CPE in vitro, these
models allow the assessment of local and systemic toxicity of CPE.
To examine the efficacy of CPE in the treatment of breast cancer
metastasis to the brain, MDA-MB-468 and NT2.5-luc brain tumors
were established as described in Materials and Methods. Tumors
were allowed to grow for 5 days, at which time microscopic tumor
foci were evident by histologic analysis (data not shown). Mice
were then treated with a total of three doses of either 0.5 Ag CPE
or PBS given every other day by stereotactic injection at the tumor
inoculation site. This dose and schedule of CPE administration
were found to be the maximum tolerated in mice. Elevated or more
frequent dosing resulted in toxic shock within 1 to 2 h consistent
with systemic exposure as reported in prior studies (16). After
treatment, mice were observed daily over a period of 6 months
and sacrificed when moribund. After sacrifice, brains were removed
for histologic examination. CPE treatment resulted in a significant
increase in survival time relative to animals treated with PBS, with
one animal surviving the entire duration of each study (Fig. 3A and
B). With CPE treatment, animals harboring MDA-MB-468 brain
tumors showed a 33% increase in median survival time (P < 0.05)
from 12 to 16 days, whereas animals harboring NT2.5-luc brain
tumors showed a 49% increase (P < 0.001) from 25.5 to 38 days. The
increased efficacy of CPE treatment in animals harboring NT2.5-luc
versus MDA-MB-468 brain tumors correlated with the increased
sensitivity of NT2.5-luc cells to CPE-mediated cytolysis relative to
MDA-MB-468 cells observed in vitro (Fig. 2B). In addition,
bioluminescent imaging of animals harboring NT2.5-luc brain
tumors revealed a significant inhibition of tumor growth (P < 0.01)
after CPE treatment as determined by quantification of bioluminescent signal (Fig. 3C and D), consistent with the increased
survival observed in these animals (Fig. 3B).
Histologic examination of MDA-MB-468 and NT2.5-luc brain
tumors revealed large areas of necrosis in all tumors treated with
CPE compared with PBS-treated tumors, as evidenced by H&E
staining of tumor sections (Supplementary Fig. S1A and B). Importantly, no toxicity was observed in normal brain tissue including the
ependymal cells of the choroid plexus (Supplementary Fig. S1C),
which displayed low but detectable expression of the CPE receptors
claudin-3 and claudin-4 by immunohistochemical analysis (Fig. 1).
The lack of sensitivity of choroid plexus to CPE-mediated cytolysis
was not due to reduced susceptibility of murine cells to CPE because
treatment of NT2.5-luc cells resulted in rapid and virtually complete cytolysis in a dose-dependent fashion, similar to that seen in
human breast cancer cell lines (Fig. 2B). These results show that
CPE treatment of breast cancer tumors in the brain significantly
prolongs survival concordant with tumor necrosis, while causing
no appreciable local or systemic toxicity.

Discussion
Successful treatment of brain metastasis is challenged by the
ability to eliminate tumor cells without causing critical damage to
the CNS. Tantamount to achieving this goal is the identification of
molecular targets for therapy that are differentially expressed
between tumor and normal tissue. Here, we have provided evidence
that the CPE receptors claudin-3 and claudin-4 may represent such
targets. Claudin-3 and claudin-4 were consistently expressed in
breast, lung, and colon cancer brain metastasis while low or absent
throughout all regions of the CNS tested. Furthermore, intracranial

www.aacrjournals.org

administration of CPE in mice harboring breast tumors in the brain
significantly extended survival without any apparent damage to
host CNS tissue.
Despite the potential of CPE in the treatment of brain
metastasis, its clinical utility faces challenges common to that of
all protein and chemotherapeutics. The primary issue is identifying
an appropriate delivery method. Systemic administration of many
therapeutics has proved ineffective in the treatment of brain
metastasis due to the inability of drugs to effectively cross the BBB
despite leakiness caused by tumor burden. Furthermore, due to
expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 in numerous organs, systemic
administration of CPE would likely result in significant toxicity, as
had been observed in mice (16). Opportunely, local administration
into the brain may minimize this issue because the ability of CPE to
cross the BBB should be limited based on its molecular weight of
35 kDa. Thus, the BBB could provide an advantage by inhibiting
systemic exposure after intracranial CPE administration.
Although just three applications of CPE were sufficient to
prolong survival in our study, a complete response was only
achieved in 1 of 10 mice. Thus, to be effective and practical, CPE
would likely need to be delivered in a fashion allowing continued
treatment of brain metastasis while requiring minimal medical
procedures. Local drug delivery systems, such as the Ommaya
reservoir and Infusaid pump, are currently being used in the clinic
to achieve this goal, although the efficacy of these systems can be
limited by mechanical failure, obstruction of delivery, and infection.
Another approach offering localized, sustained drug delivery
without significant side effects is the use of biodegradable polymer
wafers (e.g., Gliadel), which can be implanted after surgical
resection (17). Where surgical intervention is not indicated,
biodegradable polymer nanospheres, because of their small size
(z200 nm), could be used to deliver CPE to brain tumors by
stereotactic or regional intraarterial injection (18). In the case of
leptomeningeal metastasis, delivery of CPE into the cerebrospinal
fluid by intrathecal administration may be appropriate. Although
these drug delivery methods may be effective in the treatment of
solitary metastasis, treatment of multiple brain metastases, which
occurs in 60% to 85% of patients, will likely require novel strategies.
Although the clinical application of CPE faces several challenges,
it also has several distinct advantages. The differential expression
of claudin-3 and claudin-4 between brain metastasis and CNS
tissue not only create a potential therapeutic window for CPE,
but also present the opportunity for metastasis detection and
treatment through antibody-based methods. In addition, the ability
of CPE to down-regulate the tight junction barrier through binding
to claudin-3 and claudin-4 (19) may potentiate standard chemotherapy by improving tumor penetration. In conclusion, these
preliminary studies suggest that CPE therapy may be applicable
to a wide variety of brain metastases without CNS toxicity, warranting further investigation into this treatment modality and
setting the stage for the development of effective methodology for
the slow, sustained delivery of CPE.

Acknowledgments
Received 4/10/2007; revised 6/4/2007; accepted 6/22/2007.
Grant support: Department of Defense Breast Cancer Research Program grant
BC051245 (S.L. Kominsky), NCI-SPORE P50 CA88843 (S. Sukumar and S.L. Kominsky),
and National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases R37 AI19844 (B. McClane).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Carlos Pardo for generously providing primary human astrocytes.

7981

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

References
1. Shaffrey ME, Mut M, Asher AL, et al. Brain metastases.
Curr Probl Surg 2004;41:665–741.
2. Tosoni A, Ermani M, Brandes AA. The pathogenesis
and treatment of brain metastases: a comprehensive
review. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2004;52:199–215.
3. Bradley KA, Mehta MP. Management of brain
metastases. Semin Oncol 2004;31:693–701.
4. Chang EL, Lo S. Diagnosis and management of central
nervous system metastases from breast cancer. Oncologist 2003;8:398–410.
5. Soffietti R, Ruda R, Mutani R. Management of brain
metastases. J Neurol 2002;249:1357–69.
6. McClane BA, McDonel JL. The effects of Clostridium
perfringens enterotoxin on morphology, viability, and
macromolecular synthesis in Vero cells. J Cell Physiol
1979;99:191–200.
7. Fujita K, Katahira J, Horiguchi Y, Sonoda N, Furuse M,
Tsukita S. Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin binds to
the second extracellular loop of claudin-3, a tight
junction integral membrane protein. FEBS Lett 2000;
476:258–61.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

8. Katahira J, Inoue N, Horiguchi Y, Matsuda M,
Sugimoto N. Molecular cloning and functional characterization of the receptor for Clostridium perfringens
enterotoxin. J Cell Biol 1997;136:1239–47.
9. Kominsky SL. Claudins: emerging targets for cancer
therapy. Expert Rev Mol Med 2006;8:1–11.
10. Kominsky SL, Vali M, Korz D, et al. Clostridium
perfringens enterotoxin elicits rapid and specific cytolysis of breast carcinoma cells mediated through tight
junction proteins claudin 3 and 4. Am J Pathol 2004;164:
1627–33.
11. Long H, Crean CD, Lee WH, Cummings OW, Gabig
TG. Expression of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin
receptors claudin-3 and claudin-4 in prostate cancer
epithelium. Cancer Res 2001;61:7878–81.
12. Michl P, Buchholz M, Rolke M, et al. Claudin-4: a
new target for pancreatic cancer treatment using
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. Gastroenterology
2001;121:678–84.
13. McDonel JL, McClane BA. Production, purification,
and assay of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin.
Methods Enzymol 1988;165:94–103.
14. Horiguchi Y, Uemura T, Kozaki S, Sakaguchi G. The

7982

relationship between cytotoxic effects and binding to
mammalian culture cells of Clostridium perfringens
enterotoxin. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1985;28:131–5.
15. Reilly RT, Gottlieb MB, Ercolini AM, et al. HER-2/neu
is a tumor rejection target in tolerized HER-2/neu
transgenic mice. Cancer Res 2000;60:3569–76.
16. Wallace FM, Mach AS, Keller AM, Lindsay JA.
Evidence for Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE)
inducing a mitogenic and cytokine response in vitro
and a cytokine response in vivo . Curr Microbiol 1999;
38:96–100.
17. Giese A, Kucinski T, Knopp U, et al. Pattern of
recurrence following local chemotherapy with biodegradable carmustine (BCNU) implants in patients with
glioblastoma. J Neurooncol 2004;66:351–60.
18. Fu J, Fiegel J, Krauland E, Hanes J. New polymeric
carriers for controlled drug delivery following inhalation
or injection. Biomaterials 2002;23:4425–33.
19. Sonoda N, Furuse M, Sasaki H, et al. Clostridium
perfringens enterotoxin fragment removes specific
claudins from tight junction strands: Evidence for direct
involvement of claudins in tight junction barrier. J Cell
Biol 1999;147:195–204.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Clostridium perfringens Enterotoxin as a Novel-Targeted
Therapeutic for Brain Metastasis
Scott L. Kominsky, Betty Tyler, Jeffrey Sosnowski, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:7977-7982.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/7977

This article cites 19 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/7977.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/7977.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

