Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Membrane associated cancer-oocyte neoantigen SAS1B/
ovastacin is a candidate immunotherapeutic target for uterine
tumors
Eusebio S. Pires1, Ryan S. D’Souza1, Marisa A. Needham1, Austin K. Herr1, Amir A.
Jazaeri3, Hui Li2, Mark H. Stoler2, Kiley L. Anderson-Knapp2, Theodore Thomas3,
Arabinda Mandal1, Alain Gougeon5, Charles J. Flickinger1, David E. Bruns2, Brian
A. Pollok4, John C. Herr1
1

Department of Cell Biology at the School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

2

Department of Pathology at the School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

3

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

4

Neoantigenics, Inc, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

5

CRCL, UMR Inserm-1052, CNRS-5286, Faculté de Médecine Laënnec, Lyon, France

Correspondence to:
John C. Herr, e-mail: jch7k@virginia.edu
Keywords: ASTL/SAS1B/ovastacin, cancer surface neoantigen, oocyte-specific protein, uterine tumor biomarkers, immunotherapy
target
Received: May 18, 2015      Accepted: August 07, 2015      Published: August 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
The metalloproteinase SAS1B [ovastacin, ASTL, astacin-like] was immunolocalized
on the oolemma of ovulated human oocytes and in normal ovaries within the pool of
growing oocytes where SAS1B protein was restricted to follicular stages spanning
the primary-secondary follicle transition through ovulation. Gene-specific PCR and
immunohistochemical studies revealed ASTL messages and SAS1B protein in both
endometrioid [74%] and malignant mixed Mullerian tumors (MMMT) [87%] of the
uterus. A MMMT-derived cell line, SNU539, expressed cell surface SAS1B that, after
binding polyclonal antibodies, internalized into EEA1/LAMP1-positive early and late
endosomes. Treatment of SNU539 cells with anti-SAS1B polyclonal antibodies caused
growth arrest in the presence of active complement. A saporin-immunotoxin directed
to SAS1B induced growth arrest and cell death. The oocyte restricted expression
pattern of SAS1B among adult organs, cell-surface accessibility, internalization into
the endocytic pathway, and tumor cell growth arrest induced by antibody-toxin
conjugates suggest therapeutic approaches that would selectively target tumors
while limiting adverse drug effects in healthy cells. The SAS1B metalloproteinase is
proposed as a prototype cancer-oocyte tumor surface neoantigen for development
of targeted immunotherapeutics with limited on-target/off tumor effects predicted
to be restricted to the population of growing oocytes.

metalloproteinase consists of a signal peptide, pro-peptide
motif, proteinase domain containing an active hex-box
[HEXXHXXGXXH) catalytic site motif, and a unique C
terminus [2]. The pattern of SAS1B protein expression
within the ovary is conserved in several mammalian groups
including non-human primates, canines, felines, artiodactyls,
and rodents where SAS1B protein is restricted to the pool
of growing oocytes beginning within primary-secondary
transition follicles and persisting through ovulation [2]. Other

INTRODUCTION
SAS1B (sperm acrosomal SLLP1 binding protein,
a.k.a ovastacin, astacin-like or ASTL, GenBank ID
NM_001002036.3), is a cortical granule and oocyte
surface-associated zinc matrix metallo-proteinase (MMP,
EC 3.4.24.21) with reported roles in sperm-egg interaction
[1, 2] and in the block to polyspermy [3] during eutherian
fertilization. Beginning at its N-terminus this ~46 kDa
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30194

Oncotarget

than the ovary, no normal adult tissues appear to express
SAS1B: upon interrogation of the murine EST database [4],
ASTL ESTs are annotated only in ovary, ova, zygote, and
early embryo [2, 1]. Interrogation of the NCBI human EST
database did reveal a single EST in human uterus [5], but
detailed examination of this GENBANK deposit revealed that
the cDNA sequence was from an un-classified human uterine
tumor. Based on this information, the current study was
undertaken to investigate the frequency of ASTL transcription
and translation in an exploratory cohort of uterine tumors and
to evaluate if SAS1B might offer opportunities as a target for
a novel immunotherapeutic approach.
Uterine cancer is the most prevalent gynecologic
malignancy and the 4th most prevalent cancer among
United States women, with 54,870 new cases and 10,170
deaths predicted in 2015, most occurring in women over 55
years of age [6]. The present study focused on malignant
mixed Mullerian tumors (MMMT, aka carcinosarcomas)
and on endometrioid cancers. Although the most
common endometrial cancer cell type is endometrioid
adenocarcinoma, which is composed of malignant glandular
epithelial elements, uterine carcinosarcomas were found to
have the higher incidence of SAS1B expression in this study.
Carcinosarcomas, or MMMT, are very aggressive, rare,
biphasic tumors composed of epithelial and mesenchymal
elements believed to have a monoclonal origin. Uterine
carcinosarcomas have an estimated recurrence rate of
40–60% [7], with approximately 35% of patients having
extra-uterine disease at diagnosis. Patients may undergo
comprehensive surgical excision of the tumor followed
by adjuvant therapy in the forms of chemotherapy alone
or chemo-radiotherapy in combination [8–11]. At present
there are neither routine biomarkers used to diagnose nor a
targeted immunotherapy for any uterine cancer. Results of
two randomized trials on the use of external-beam radiation
therapy (EBRT) in patients with stage I disease did not
show improved survival but did show reduced locoregional
recurrence (3%–4% vs. 12%–14% after 5–6 years’ median
follow-up, P < 0.001), however with this radiation therapy
an increase in adverse side effects was observed [12, 13,
14]. Vaginal cuff brachytherapy is associated with less
radiation-related morbidity than is EBRT and has been
shown to be equivalent to EBRT in the adjuvant setting for
patients with stage I disease [15].
The advent of effective, rationally designed, targeted
antibody-drug conjugates such as gentuzumab ozogamicin
targeting CD33 for acute myeloid leukemia [16],
trastuzumab-emtansine (TDM-1, Kadcyla) targeting Her2
for breast cancer [17], and brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris)
targeting CD30 for Hodgkin’s lymphoma and for systemic
anaplastic large cell lymphoma [18] has stimulated a search
for novel drug targets that provide new opportunities and
paradigms for immunotherapeutic intervention [19]. In
the following studies attributes of SAS1B are defined that
support its candidacy as a tumor cell-specific target antigen,
including tumor cell-surface accessibility, immunogenicity,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

internalization of immune complexes into the endosomallysosomal system, and immunotoxin delivery resulting in
tumor cell growth arrest in vitro. SAS1B is expressed in
endometrioid and MMMT uterine cancers at high incidence
while lacking expression in normal tissues with the exception
of growing oocytes. Taken together these features make
SAS1B an attractive tumor surface target for immunotherapy.

RESULTS
SAS1B is an ovary-specific protein with
expression restricted to oocytes in growing
follicles
SAS1B has been shown to be restricted to growing
oocytes in secondary follicles and subsequent stages
through ovulation in ovaries of several eutherian orders
[2]. In humans, where mono-ovular menstrual cycles
occur, the relative abundance of SAS1B mRNAs isolated
from whole ovaries is predicted to be low, since the pool of
growing oocytes in secondary follicle stages and beyond
is small and many secondary follicles undergo atresia
[20]. When SAS1B expression in human ovaries was
evaluated, 35 cycles of RT-PCR using a panel of ovarian
cDNAs revealed ASTL amplicons in each of 6 different
specimens (Figure 1A: H1-6). These amplicons were
cloned and sequenced, and showed 99% identity to the
ASTL reference sequence confirming SAS1B expression
in normal ovary. RT-PCR of a panel of normal human
tissues identified ASTL amplicons only in the ovary
(Figure 1B).
Using both a rabbit polyclonal antibody generated
to recombinant human SAS1B (IM) (Figure 1C, IM) and
a commercial ASTL pro-peptide antibody (Figure 1D),
SAS1B was immunolocalized in human ovarian
sections within oocytes in a early primary to secondary
transition follicle (Figure 1C3 and inset, black arrow,
where perinuclear staining was first detected), secondary
follicles (red arrows as in C4 and D1) and subsequent
stages but not in the ovarian reserve of primordial follicles
(green arrows, C1), in primary follicles (C2), or in any
other ovarian cell type. Pre-immune (PIM) or normal
rabbit IgG control antibodies did not stain the specimens
(represented in panel D2). Immunofluorescent staining
of two live fertilized human oocytes (Figure 1, panels
Figure 1E1 and 1E2) revealed the presence of SAS1B+
domains (green stain) exposed on the oolemma. Western
blot analysis using commercially available normal human
ovarian (HO) and normal human uterine (HU) extracts
probed with Rb IM (Figure 1F1) and Rb ASTL propeptide
pAb, PPpAb (Figure 1F2) revealed immunoreactive
bands at 46 kDa in normal human ovary but not in
normal uterus with either of the antibodies. PIM showed
no immunostaining to any proteins (Supplementary
Figure S1, blot 1) and GAPDH was used to show equal
loading (Supplementary Figure S1, blot S2, control).
30195

Oncotarget

Figure 1: ASTL/SAS1B has ovary and oocyte restricted expression among normal human tissues, and a population
of SAS1B is found on the oolemma of ovulated human oocytes. Panel A: RT-PCR analyses of 6 normal human ovarian cDNAs

(H1-H6) using a c-terminus ASTL specific primer set show 309 base pair ASTL amplicons in each specimen. Panel B: ASTL expression
was restricted to ovarian specimens (lane OVA) while other tissues (uterus, testes, placenta, adrenal, pancreas, spleen, kidney, liver and
leukocytes) were ASTL silent. GAPDH was used as a loading control for all RT-PCR assays. Panels C and D: Immunohistochemical
localization of SAS1B in human ovarian tissue sections with anti-SAS1B antibodies (C- IM antibodies and D1- PPpAb, D2- PIM
antibodies/ normal rabbit IgG). SAS1B protein was localized to oocytes in primary-secondary transition follicles (C3), early antral
follicles (C4) and beyond (D1). Oocytes within primordial follicles (C1) and small primary follicles i.e. resting follicles (C2) did not
express SAS1B (green arrows). An early developing primary-secondary transition follicle (black arrow, C3, with development of a
bilaminar layer noted at white arrow) shows initiation of SAS1B expression in the perinuclear region of the oocyte (inset) presumably in
the Golgi apparatus. Panel E: Live stained fertilized human oocytes show membrane staining of SAS1B by immunofluorescence. Top
inset shows phase image and bottom inset shows PIM control. Panel F: Western blots reveal a 46 kDa SAS1B protein (red asterisk) in
human ovarian protein extracts (HO) with IM antibodies (F1, HO) and PPpAb (F2, HO). In protein extracts from normal human uterus
(F1, HU and F2, HU) SAS1B was not detected.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30196

Oncotarget

Endometrial tumors transcribe the ASTL gene
and translate SAS1B proteins at high incidence
while normal endometrium lacks SAS1B
expression

lysate. The IM antibody identified a 46 kDa band, the
mass deduced from the primary sequence, as well as
~65 kDa and fainter ~36–37 kDa immunoreactive bands
(Figure 3F). These immunoreactive bands were not seen
with PIM antibodies (Figure 3E). Protein extracts of
MAD10-252/616 showed no SAS1B immunoreactivity
(Panel G for IM and H for PIM).

RNA samples from 38 uterine tumor specimens
and 8 normal uterine biopsy tissues were converted
to cDNAs and screened for SAS1B transcripts using
C-term ASTL primers. None of the normal uterine
biopsy specimens showed evidence of SAS1B transcripts
(Figure 2A: U1–U7; Figure 1B: UTE) However, 30/38
(78.9%) uterine tumors tested positive for ASTL RNA
(Figure 2, panels A–D) including specimens of grade
1 and grade 3 endometrioid cancers, serous papillary
carcinoma, and MMMT. Amplicons were cloned and
sequenced revealing 99% identify to the reference
sequence with only an occasional SNP. Specificity
of the primers in the PCR reaction was validated
(Supplementary Figure  S2). Paraffin embedded tumor
samples were investigated by IHC for SAS1B protein in
whole block sections and tissue microarrays (Figure 2E).
Specimens of normal proliferative and secretory phase
endometrium (Figure 2E1 and 2E2, respectively) did
not stain for SAS1B protein by IHC in either glands or
stroma. 14 of 21 endometrioid carcinomas (~66%) tested
positive by immunohistochemistry, with SAS1B protein
localized to the compartment of the adenocarcinomatous
glands (Figure 2E 3–9). In some samples (Figure 2E4)
the apical surface of the epithelial sheet was prominently
SAS1B positive and SAS1B immunoreactivity was
noted in the glandular lumen. In the case of the
MMMT specimens, 12 of 14 (~85%) tested positive
for SAS1B (Figure 2E 10–13). Cellular staining was
not uniform, in some specimens the strongest staining
was seen in the cytoplasm of mesenchymal cells (panels
11, 12), whereas other specimens displayed cytoplasmic
staining of both epithelial and mesenchymal components
(panels 10 and 13).

SAS1B protein is expressed within the cytoplasm
and appears on the plasma membrane of uterine
cancer cells
Fibronectin-adhered uterine MMMT lines SNU539
and S08-38710 and control uterine line MAD10-252/616
were tested for SAS1B protein by IIF using IM and PIM
antibodies. No immunostaining of any of the cell types was
observed with PIM antibodies under the conditions of either
live staining or cell permeabilization (Figures 3 and 4).
When IM antibody was applied to fixed permeabilized
cells, SAS1B localized throughout the cytoplasm and
was concentrated in the perinuclear region in S08-38710
(Figure 3I) and SNU539 (Figure 3J) cells, while MAD10252/616 cells (Figure 3K) were negative for SAS1B.
In live cells stained with IM antibody a population of
SAS1B (green stain) was localized on the tumor cellsurface in fibronectin-free S08-38710 (Figure 4A1) and
SNU539 (Figure 4, 4A2 and 4A3) cells. Live stained cells
obtained from primary endometrioid tumors by collagenase
treatment followed by recovery for 2–3 hours in culture
showed cell surface localization of SAS1B (Figure 4, 4A4,
red immunofluorescence). In contrast, MAD10-252/616
cell preparations showed no surface immunostaining
(Supplementary Figure S3).

Phase partitioning identifies a putative cell
surface SAS1B isoform
SNU539 cells were subjected to TX-114 extraction
and phase partitioning, and partitioned fractions were
analyzed by Western blotting with SAS1B antibodies.
Specific biomarkers were employed to validate that the
hydrophobic detergent (D) and hydrophilic aqueous
(A) fractions were correctly isolated. Positive control
albumin at 66 kDa, a known hydrophilic protein,
partitioned in the A phase (Figure 4B1). GAPDH
partitioned in the A phase although a minor amount
partitioned in the D phase (Figure 4B2) (The subcellular
localization of GAPDH is known to be principally
cytosolic but membrane forms have been reported). The
known membrane biomarker CD44 partitioned only in
the D phase (Figure 4B3). Comparisons of the SAS1B
protein banding patterns in different fractions revealed
that immunoreactive SAS1B isoforms partitioned in
both detergent (D) and aqueous (A) phases and in the
residual cellular pellets (P) following phase separation
(Figure 4B5). Use of the SAS1B IM antibodies showed

ASTL transcription and translation in cell lines
derived from uterine MMMT
Since IHC indicated that the SAS1B protein was
translated at high incidence in primary uterine MMMTs,
cell lines (SNU539 and S08-38710) derived from this
tumor type were employed for subsequent experiments,
while MAD10-252/616 was tested for SAS1B as a
potential negative control. cDNAs from these 3 lines
were examined for ASTL messages using 3 primer sets
designed against different domains of the ASTL transcript
viz., N-terminus, C-terminus, and catalytic regions
(Figure 3A, 3B and 3C respectively). ASTL amplicons
were identified only in the MMMT cell lines and were
cloned and confirmed to be ASTL with 99% identity by
DNA sequencing. Western blot analysis revealed protein
microheterogeneity of SAS1B species in the SNU539
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30197

Oncotarget

Figure 2: SAS1B expression occurs at high incidence in uterine tumors. Panel A: Normal human uterine cDNA samples U1–U7

show no ASTL expression (lack of 309 base pair amplimer). Representative image indicating SAS1B expression in tumors; E1–7 (grade 1
endometrioid tumors) are ASTL positive, while in E8–11 (grade 3 endometrioid tumors) only E10 is positive. Panel B: In this group of 15
uterine tumors (E12–E26) 11 were positive for ASTL including 10 endometrioid specimens and one MMMT (E13). Panel C: cDNAs from
myometrial tissue adjacent to the tumor (M12–26) show 5/15 positivity, likely due to tumor infiltration. Panel D: E27, 28, 30 and 32 are
endometrioid tumors (4/4 positive) and E29 and 31 are MMMT (2/2 positive). Panel E: IHC using the IM or PIM (inset) antibodies on normal
human proliferative (1) or secretory (2) endometrium showing absence of SAS1B protein. Immunohistochemical staining of SAS1B (brown
DAB reaction product) in endometrioid cancers grade 1 (Panels 3–5), endometrioid cancers grade 3 (Panels 6–9), and MMMT’s (Panels 10–13).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30198

Oncotarget

Figure 3: ASTL/SAS1B expression in MMMT derived cell lines. cDNAs from MMMT derived cell lines S08-38710 and

SNU539 along with control MAD10 cells were probed (in duplicate) for ASTL using domain specific primers (Panels A, B, C represent
ASTL amplicons of 237 base pair N-terminus, 309 base pair C-terminus and 579 base pair catalytic region, respectively). Panel D:
ASTL transcription was noted in both S08-38710 and SNU539 while MAD10 was ASTL negative. GAPDH was used as a loading
control. Panels E–H: On Western blots, major immunoreactive SAS1B protein isoforms (red asterisks, F) of ~46 kDa [predicted from
primary sequence] and ~65 kDa, and a less abundant ~36-37 kDa band, were identified in Celis extracts of SNU539 cells probed with
IM antibodies, while blots exposed to PIM antibodies (E) were negative. MAD10 protein extracts showed no specific immunoreactivity
with IM antibodies (H) or control PIM antibodies (G). In fixed S08-38710 (Panel I) and SNU539 (Panel J) cells IM antibodies localized
SAS1B in the cytoplasm with high concentrations noted in the perinuclear region (Green is SAS1B, blue is DAPI nuclear counterstain,
red is phalloidin counterstain for actin). No SAS1B immunoreactivity was noted in MAD10 cells (Panel K). Insets (I-K) show lack of
immunoreactivity with PIM antibody on the respective cell types.

Immunoprecipitation with anti-SAS1B
IM antibody recovered SAS1B protein
microsequences

the D phase was particularly enriched in the ~36–37
kDa isoform, while the 46 kDa form was faintly seen
in the D phase with the majority being concentrated in
the A phase along with the ~65 kDa SAS1B isoform.
Using the PPpAb antibody, the 46 kDa isoform was
also identified in the A phase along with other higher
molecular weight proteins (Figure 4B6). Together,
these results indicate that SAS1B isoforms partition in
TX-114 into both D and A fractions and suggest that
the ~36–37 kDa SAS1B isoform in the hydrophobic
fraction (D) may represent a dominant form of the
membrane species.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Endogenous SAS1B was immunoprecipitated by
IM antibody from SNU539 cells and analyzed by 2-D
SDS PAGE Western blots. The dominant 46 as well as
the ~65 kDa SAS1B isoforms were recovered (Figure
4C1, red circles). A parallel blot was stained with the
PPpAb antibody and detected the 46 kDa isoform
(Figure 4C2). No immunoreactivity with the PPpAb
to SAS1B was detected in immunoprecipitates stained
30199

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Membrane associated SAS1B in primary endometrioid cells and MMMT cell lines. Panel A: Live cell indirect

immunofluorescence: Using IM antibodies, surface SAS1B green signals are seen in S08-38710 (A1), SNU539 (A2), luciferase expressing
SNU539 (A3); red SAS1B signal is present in primary endometrioid tumor cells recovered from a patient (A4). Respective insets show no
staining using PIM antibody. Panel B: Results of phase partitioning of SAS1B isoforms extracted with TX-114 from SNU539 cells where D:
detergent phase; A: aqueous phase; P: pellet. Partitioning of various control proteins such as albumin in A phase (B1), GAPDH in D and A
phases (B2), and CD44 in D phase (B3) was observed in their expected fractions. The PIM antibody stained no proteins (B4). The IM antibody
showed the presence of the ~36–37 kDa form predominantly in the D phase, the ~65 kDa form was localized in the A phase and the 46 kDa
form was predominantly seen in the A phase with a relatively small portion in the D phase. Un-partitioned 46 kDa form also appeared in the
P phase (B5). The PPpAb detected the 46 kDa form in the A phase along with several other higher molecular weight proteins in the A and P
phases (B6). Panel C: Recovery of endogenous SAS1B microsequences by immunoprecipitation from SNU539 cells. Immunoprecipitated
proteins were obtained using IM antibody, run on 2-D gels, and Western blotted with IM antibodies (C1), ASTL PP antibody (C2), or PIM
sera (C3). The immunoreactive spots (red circles) were detected with both anti-SAS1B antibody reagents (C1 & C2) ranging between pI 5-6
while the immunoprecipitate stained with the PIM antibody did not contain detectable SAS1B proteins (C3). The trail in the right side of the
blots is the heavy chain of IgG detected by the secondary antibody. A duplicate immunoprecipitate was sent for mass spectrometry and the
ASTL/SAS1B peptides shown in various colors were recovered (C4), confirming reactivity of the IM antibodies with endogenous SAS1B.

with PIM antibodies (Figure 4C3) other than the heavy
and light chains detected by the secondary antibody.
Parallel SAS1B immunoprecipitates obtained with the
IM antibodies in solution were analyzed by MS/MS to
identify SAS1B peptides. The instrument was calibrated
on peptides identified in a control digest of recombinant
SAS1B. The data were analyzed by performing selected
ion chromatograms (SICs) of 3 major fragments for
each of the above MS/MS parents. Of the 6 unique
peptide sequences that were available from the control
digest of recombinant SAS1B, 5 SAS1B peptides were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

identified as perfect matches in the MS/MS spectra of
the immunoprecipitate, thereby confirming the presence
of SAS1B in the sample recovered from uterine cancer
cells (Figure 4C4).

Complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) of
MMMT cells bearing surface SAS1B
The Xcelligence impedance electrode system was
used to evaluate the effect of complement and anti-SAS1B
antibodies on cell growth. Figure 5 shows SNU539 (5A)
30200

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Complement mediated cytotoxicity with anti-SAS1B antibodies. Cells grown on impedance electrodes were used to

study the effects of antibodies and complement on cell growth. Panels A–C show SNU539 cells, while D–F depict MAD10 cells. Panels A
and D: These panels show effects of media alone, media with a control rabbit IgG, and Triton X-100 detergent on impedance. Cells incubated
with detergent lost contact with electrodes resulting in decreased impedance thus indicating growth arrest. Panels B and E: These panels show
treatment with IM and PIM antibodies in the presence of active rabbit complement proteins. SNU539 cells (B) lost contact with electrodes
and showed a drop in impedance upon treatment with IM but not with PIM antibodies, while no such effects were seen with MAD10 cells
(E). When the complement proteins were deactivated by heat in-activation at 56°C, no decreases in impedance were observed with the IM
antibodies on SNU539 cells (Panel C) and MAD10 cells (Panel F). PIM antibodies in all conditions showed no decreases in impedance.

and MAD10 cells (5D), respectively, treated with control
media and media supplemented with rabbit IgG, where
impedance increased as cells grew. Wells treated with
media containing 0.01% v/v Triton X-100 to impede
growth showed a marked decrease in impedance. In the
presence of active rabbit complement proteins, SNU539
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cancer cells exposed to IM antibodies showed cytotoxic
effects around 72 hours as indicated by a decrease in
impedance (5B), whereas cells exposed to PIM antibodies
and active complement showed no decrease (5B). Upon
addition of complement proteins that had been heat inactivated, no decrease in impedance was seen as SNU539
30201

Oncotarget

cell growth continued (5C) in the presence of either IM or
PIM antibodies (5C). The MAD10 cell line demonstrated
no changes in impedance in the presence of active (5E) or
inactive (5F) rabbit complement protein with either the IM
or the PIM antibodies.

with saporin (Figure 7A/7B). Treatment of the cultures
with Triton X-100 to induce cell death at the outset
of the incubation period was used as a positive control
(Figure 7A). After the 3 days of SAS1B IM antibody
treatment, SNU539 cells rounded, showed vacuolated
cytoplasm, and had pycnotic nuclei compared to normal
appearing cells treated with PIM antibody (Figure 7B,
9–10). Supernatants from cultures under all treatment
conditions were also assessed for LDH activity as a
marker of apoptosis. Supernatants from cultures exhibiting
high growth arrest demonstrated significantly higher LDH
levels compared to the controls, suggesting that cell death
via apoptosis occurred in those samples in which growth
arrest was detected (Supplementary Figure S5).

After antibody binding membrane associated
SAS1B was internalized in vesicles that entered
the early and late arms of the endocytic pathway
SAS1B IM and PIM antibodies were used in
immunofluorescence experiments to test if SAS1B
was internalized after antibody complexing and, if so,
to determine the temporal pattern of internalization
(Figure 6). At intervals of 15, 30 & 60 min after immunecomplex formation, intracellular entry and SAS1B
co-localization were studied using classical markers
for endocytic vesicles and lysosomes. Punctuate green
SAS1Bpos endosomes were evident just beneath the cell
membrane (6B) after 15 min incubation at 37°C with the
IM antibody. The vesicles were more numerous and were
deeper in the cytoplasm at 30 min (6C), and they appeared
to have coalesced into larger vesicles deep within the
cytoplasm by 60 min (6D). The small endocytic vesicles
comprised a distinct population just beneath the plasma
membrane at 15 min (6F & G) but as time progressed the
larger SAS1Bpos vesicles co-localized with red EEA1pos
endosomes (6J) at 30 min and with red LAMP1pos
endosomes (6M) at 60 min. Control PIM at all time periods
(e.g. at 60 min in panel A) revealed no internalization.

DISCUSSION
SAS1B is a novel tumor surface target in
endometrioid and MMMT uterine cancers
Six lines of evidence support the candidacy of
SAS1B as a novel tumor biomarker and drug target for
an immunotherapeutic approach in uterine cancer. First,
SAS1B is exposed on the surface of uterine cancer
cells where it is accessible to antibody binding. Second,
antibodies in the presence of complement arrest the
growth of SAS1Bpos uterine cancer cells. Third, after being
bound by antibodies at the cell surface SAS1B internalizes
into the endosomal-lysosomal system providing a pathway
for drug internalization and payload release. Fourth,
tumor cells expressing SAS1B can be killed by a SAS1Bdirected immunotoxin that employs a pH sensitive linker
arm and saporin payload. Fifth, SAS1B is expressed at
high incidence in endometrioid and MMMT uterine
tumors. Lastly, SAS1B’s normal restriction among normal
healthy tissues to the pool of growing oocytes in the ovary
provides a strategy for tumor selective targeting in cancers
that express this cell surface protein.

Growth of MMMT cells was arrested with an
immunotoxin targeted to SAS1B
An indirect immunotoxin assay was employed to
evaluate tumor cell growth after treatment with SAS1B
IM and PIM primary antibodies and a secondary saporinimmunoconjugate (SCS) [21] by assessing in-vitro growth
with the sulforhodamine B assay [22]. During the 72 hours
culture with SAS1B IM antibodies the growth of SNU539
cells was inhibited (Figure 7A, red bars) compared to
that of cultures exposed to PIM antibodies (Figure 7A,
blue bars). The SCS was kept constant at 5.42 nM and
the cell killing effect was evident at concentrations of
1–100 nM IM antibody (Supplementary Figure S4). This
assay showed a classic prozone effect (Hook effect) at
high primary antibody concentrations, when target cell
surface SAS1B was saturated with unlabeled antibody. At
concentrations of 0.01–0.001 uM, near the stoichiometry
of the secondary Fab-Zap conjugate (5.42 nM), growth
arrest and killing were striking (Supplementary
Figure S4). By contrast, growth of SAS1Bneg MAD10
cells was not impeded by identical concentrations of IM
or PIM antibodies (Figure 7C). Additional control cultures
showed no cell killing, including cells treated with media
alone, the SCS alone, and a normal rabbit IgG conjugated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

SAS1B is accessible on the surfaces
of tumor cells
SAS1B was detected in permeabilized ASTL
mRNA+ tumor cells throughout the cytoplasm and was
concentrated in the perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum/
Golgi region. This observation is in concert with SAS1B
translocation into the ER lumen as predicted from the
presence of an N-terminus signal peptide on each of
three ASTL splice variants in mice [1] and from the
signal peptide encoded by exon 1 of the human NCBI
reference sequence [NM_001002036]. In addition to this
intracellular population, SAS1B molecules were also
imaged by staining on the surfaces of live cells recovered
from both primary uterine tumors and established MMMT
cell lines. Western blot analysis of the SNU539 extract
reveals unique forms of the protein; an expected 46 kDa
30202

Oncotarget

Figure 6: SAS1B-antibody complexes undergo endocytosis and co-localize with classical endocytic markers. At various

time points after SAS1B antibody treatment cells were studied to evaluate intracellular entry and co-localization with markers of classical
endocytic vesicles and lysosomes. Panel A: This panel shows no internalization with control PIM antibodies after 60 min, while IM antibodies
at 15 min (Panel B), 30 min (Panel C) and 60 min (Panel D) show green immunofluorescent vesicles representing internalization of SAS1Bantibody complexes. Insets in B and D show higher magnifications. Punctuate green SAS1B+ endosomes were evident just beneath the cell
membrane after 15 min of incubation at 37oC (Panel F) and did not co-localize with red EEA1+ vesicles (Panel E and merged in Panel G).
As incubation periods increased SAS1B+ vesicles coalesced into larger vesicles deeper within the cytoplasm (Panels I and L). These larger
SAS1B+ vesicles co-localized with red EEA1+ vesicles (Panel H and merged in Panel J) at 30 min and with red LAMP1+ vesicles (Panel K
and merged in Panel M) at 60 min.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30203

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Arrest of SNU539 cell growth with a saporin-immunotoxin targeting SAS1B. Cells in culture were exposed to

varying concentrations of IM and PIM antibodies complexed with a fixed concentration of 5.42 nM secondary saporin immunoconjugate
and monitored over 72 hours. Cells were observed by light microscopy and assayed for total biomass; culture supernatants were assayed
for LDH levels. Panel A: This shows mean percent survival of SNU539 cells in the presence of IM antibody saporin conjugates (N=4
experiments). IM antibody at concentrations from 1 µM to 1 nM was used and concentrations of 1–10 nM showed significant inhibitory
effects (7A and 7B) on growth while PIM antibodies at identical concentrations did not (blue bars 7A). Triton X-100 detergent was used as
positive control to arrest growth at the outset of the treatment period (purple bar 7A). Normal rabbit IgG saporin, saporin conjugate alone
(SCS), or media alone did not demonstrate growth arrest (7A). Panel B: Deleterious effects on cells noted by light microscopy include cell
vacuolation, cell rounding, pyknosis, and death (7B9, magnified in 7B10). Panel C: Under identical conditions SAS1Bneg MAD10 cells
did not exhibit growth arrest in culture (7C) and MAD10 cells did not demonstrate deleterious microscopic effects after similar treatments
(Panel 7C1–7C3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30204

Oncotarget

form that was also identified in the human ovary total
extract and 2 other forms viz., a 65 kDa form, a potential
isoform unique to tumor cells and a 36–37 kDa form
likely the active membrane form of this metalloproteinase
deduced from losing the signal as well as pro-peptide
domains. The detection of a population of SAS1B
accessible to antibodies on the surface of uterine tumor
cells supports the concept that SAS1B can be targeted by
antibodies and antibody-drugs (Figures 3 and 4).

study with HER2-positive small-cell lung cancer cells
demonstrated that the cell surface-binding of trastuzumab
diminished with time during incubation at 37°C and was
internalized, while most trastuzumab did not internalize and
remained on the cell surface when incubated at 4°C without
warming to 37°C [26]. Our studies also indicate that a SAS1B
antibody-drug conjugate will reach the endolysosomal
compartment once internalized, and it strongly supports
SAS1B as a candidate for an immunotherapeutic approach
using payloads conjugated with linker arms sensitive to the
lysosomal environment (Figure 6).

Complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC)
In the presence of active complement SAS1B
IM antibody induced growth arrest around 72 hours,
while all controls including PIM antibody and heat
inactivated complement showed continued cell growth.
The demonstration that antibodies to SAS1B can induce
CDC further supports the surface accessibility of SAS1B
and its candidacy as an immunotherapeutic target and
suggest that production of complement-fixing monoclonal
antibodies directed to the SAS1B ectodomain should
be considered an important future goal for a “naked”
(stand-alone) monoclonal antibody approach to targeted
immunotherapy.

Uterine tumor cell growth is arrested with an
immunotoxin introduced by targeting SAS1B
Cessation of uterine tumor cell proliferation
was noted after delivery of a saporin toxin coupled to
a secondary antibody that bound to SAS1B primary
antibodies. The saporin toxin payload was linked to the
secondary antibody via a proprietary pH sensitive linker
arm that facilitated release of the ribosome-inactivating
saporin protein in the acid environment of the lysosome
[27], thus allowing it to affect protein synthesis and cause
cell death via apoptosis (Figure 7). This demonstration
opens the way for additional strategies for passive
therapeutic antibodies that target SAS1B, including the use
of various linker arms that are labile within the lysosomal
compartment, and the testing of different drug payloads.

SAS1B internalizes into the endocytic pathway
in uterine tumor cells after antibody binding
A key goal in target validation for cancer
immunotherapy is evaluation of receptor-mediated endocytic
pathways as routes for intracellular drug delivery. Subsequent
to ligand binding cell membrane proteins may internalize
through one or more entry portals including clathrin-coated
vesicles, caveoli, and lipid rafts [23, 24]. Changes in vesicle
microenvironments along the endolysosomal pathway
have been exploited for releasing cytotoxic drugs linked to
antibodies including: 1) addition of lysosomal hydrolases that
catalyze breakdown of peptide, ester, or disulfide bonds; 2)
increased redox potential due to higher concentrations of
reduced glutathione and cysteine that can reduce disulfide
bonds; and 3) the acidic pH of ~5 in the lysosome [25].
Chemistries using acid-labile hydrazone linkers, sterically
hindered disulfide linkers, and peptide linker arms have
been designed to take advantage of the endolysosomal
microenvironment for drug release. Since internalized
vesicles of all three entry pathways may converge into the
early endosome and eventually end at the lysosomes, at
various time points after restoration of membrane fluidity
SAS1B was co-localized with EEA1, a marker of the early
endosome, and with LAMP1, a marker of late endosome.
SAS1B-Ab complexes were internalized in SAS1Bpos cells
within 15 minutes and displayed discrete sub-plasmalemmal
localization in endosomal vesicles. The small endosomes
coalesced with the early endocytic compartment (EEA1) at
15–30 min, and as time progressed (to ~30–60 min) merged
with the late endosomal pathway (LAMP1). A recent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

SAS1B incidence in endometrioid and MMMT
uterine cancers
The frequency of SAS1B expression overall was
approximately 76.7% with the incidence in endometrioid
cancers being slightly lower (66%) and in the more
aggressive MMMTs somewhat higher (85%). These results
underscore the importance of considering a theranostic
paradigm in which SAS1B applications as a therapeutic
candidate and diagnostic target are co-developed, with
companion assays to identify SAS1Bpos tumors driving
the selection and stratification of patients to receive
targeted immunotherapy. Knowledge of the frequencies of
SAS1B occurrence in uterine tumors will likely become
more refined as additional tumor samples are examined
for SAS1B/ASTL translation and transcription, but the
trend is sufficiently clear from the exploratory cohorts to
compare and contrast the pattern and frequency of SAS1B
expression to established tumor surface targets.

Unique attributes of SAS1B set it apart from
other tumor associated surface antigens as a
tumor-selective target
The identification and validation of novel tumor
cell surface antigens comprises one of the most active and
promising arenas in contemporary immunotherapeutic
30205

Oncotarget

research [19]. Proteins displayed on the surfaces of tumor
cells are attractive molecules for the inhibition of key
signaling pathways by “naked” stand-alone monoclonal
antibodies [28] or for selective delivery of cytotoxic
molecules via monoclonal antibody-drug conjugates
[18, 29]. Mechanisms of therapeutic action for these
biological drugs may include producing programmed
cell death, blocking growth factor receptors, arresting
proliferation of tumor cells, inducing antibody-mediated
cell killing via antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC), complement-dependent cytotoxicity
(CDC), or the delivery of cytotoxic payloads that act to
truncate DNA synthesis or inhibit microtubules [30].
Immunotherapy using monoclonal antibodies holds
considerable promise as an anti-cancer therapeutic strategy
because of its ability to target cancer cells specifically while
sparing surrounding normal untransformed tissue [31].
Building on the completion of human genome sequencing
more than a decade ago [32] the search for novel tumor
associated surface antigens with improved properties
constitutes a major area of opportunity to optimize the
safety and efficacy of immunotherapeutics [33].
The current FDA approved immunotherapeutics
for various cancer indications target molecules found on
cancer cell surfaces but also on the surfaces of various
types of normal healthy adult cells, resulting in a variety
of on-target/off-tumor effects [34]. The human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 [Her2/neu], for example, found
on a subset (20–30%) of breast tumors [35], is a target
for Trastuzumab which, due to Her2’s wide expression
in human tissues including the adult myocardium, has a
variety of adverse drug side effects including instances of
cardiomyopathy [36]. CD30, a tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
receptor targeted by Brentuximab, is highly expressed on
Hodgkin’s lymphomas and systemic anaplastic large-cell
lymphomas; although this target’s expression is restricted
to the immune system, CD30 is also present on normal
activated T, B, NK cells, and monocytes [34]. Thus,
adverse drug effects of immunotherapeutics targeting
CD30 include neutropenia and sepsis. One promising
therapeutic target is the interleukin (IL)-13 receptor
α2 [31], which is expressed at high frequency in the
aggressive and incurable form of primary brain tumor
known as glioblastoma multiforme [37–39] and in other
solid tumors [40], while normal tissues express little to no
IL-13 Rα2 except for the testes [41].
The SAS1B metalloproteinase is unlike any
other tumor surface antigen proposed as a candidate for
immunotherapeutic strategies for cancer in that it offers
a unique opportunity for selective tumor targeting. Most
oncology drug targets (e.g., Her2, EGFR) exhibit a
quantitative expression difference between tumor and
normal tissue. In contrast, SAS1B has a qualitative and
absolute expression difference between tumor and normal
cells, with the exception of the pool of growing oocytes.
Among normal adult human tissues SAS1B translation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Figure 1) is ovary and oocyte specific, appearing in
primary-secondary transition follicles, while being
absent in the ovarian reserve of primordial follicles. This
stage specific translation of SAS1B in human ovaries is
identical to its expression pattern in other eutherians [2].
Live stained fertilized human oocytes display a population
of SAS1B molecules accessible to antibody binding on
the oolemmal surface where SAS1B appears uniformly
distributed. It is important to note that SAS1B protein
is not expressed in stem cells of the gastrointestinal
tract and ASTL messages are absent in human derived
induced pluripotent stem cells (Supplementary Figures S6
and S7 respectively). SAS1B protein is not expressed
in a variety of normal human tissues dotted in a tissue
microarray and tested by IHC using the IM antibodies
(Supplementary Figure S8) and no ASTL ESTs have been
deposited in NCBI Unigene database from normal tissues
(Supplementary Figure S9). These observations suggest
that an immunotherapeutic agent targeting SAS1Bpos
tumors may have on-target/off-tumor effects in the ovary
on the pool of growing oocytes in developing follicles,
but on-target/off tumor effects would be absent in other
normal organs. The chronology of folliculogenesis in
women indicates that ≥300 days may be required
from initial recruitment of primordial follicles through
ovulation [42, 20]. Although the exact time period
required for oocytes to ovulate following initiation of the
second granulosa cell layer (primary-secondary follicle
transition) and the exact time during folliculogenesis when
a population of SAS1B becomes accessible on the oocyte
surface are not precisely determined in women, 300 days
may be a reasonable estimate of the period required for
restoration of fertility after administration of a SAS1B
targeted immunotherapeutic. If used as a stand-alone front
line treatment, because of SAS1B’s absence in the pool of
primordial follicles, such an agent might find particular
acceptance in pre-menopausal cancer patients who have
continued interest in child bearing.

Cancer-oocyte antigens: an emerging research
field paralleling that of cancer-testis antigens
To date, SAS1B has been proposed to function
in blastocyst hatching [43], sperm-egg interaction [1],
the block to polyspermy [3], epithelial cell behaviour
during early development in chick [44], and as a
secretory protein released by oocyte activation [45].
Previously proposed translational applications of
ASTL include its use as an ovarian cyst fluid biomarker
[46] and target for an oocyte-specific contraceptive
[2]. Since the identification and cloning of the first
cancer-testis antigen [47] and LJ Old’s proposal that
reactivation of male gametogenic expression programs
is involved in the malignant transformation process
[48–51], it has become evident that somatic cell-tomale germline dysregulation is a general hallmark of
30206

Oncotarget

a wide range of human tumors. Reactivation of the
male gamatogenic expression program is associated
with highly malignant phenotypes and, along with
a tumor environment characterized by hypoxia and
inflammation, is thought to be limiting for conventional
therapy [52, 53]. SAS1B is a pioneer drug target in
a similar and emerging field termed cancer-oocyte
antigens that parallels that of cancer-testis antigens.
Cancer-oocyte antigens may be defined as molecules
restricted to the female gametogenic pathway in the
adult ovary that show aberrant expression in cancer
tissues, with SAS1B’s transcription and translation in
uterine tumors, as demonstrated in this study, being
prototypic. This unique expression profile in the pool
of growing oocytes coupled to SAS1B’s identification
as a membrane associated protein in uterine tumor cells
present an opportunity for development of selective
tumor treatments which spare both normal tissues
and the ovarian reserve. We are currently limited by
an incomplete understanding of the role of SAS1B in
tumor cell biology and if it plays a direct role in tumor
progression and metastasis. Understanding the role of
SAS1B in basic cancer biology, its splice variants and
isoforms, and developing appropriate well characterized
monoclonal antibodies for targeted therapy is of interest
to us and is being actively pursued in our laboratory.

immunohistochemistry (IHC), Western blotting, and
immunoprecipitation. For indirect immunofluorescence
(IIF) anti-rabbit Alexafluor conjugates (Molecular
Probes, USA) were employed.

Tissue processing for RNA, cDNA and proteins
Tumor biopsy tissues were used for histology and
RNA or total protein extraction. RNA was extracted using
a Qiagen kit (with DNase digestion) and cDNA was
synthesized using the Promega Improm kit. Proteins were
isolated using Celis buffer and estimated with Bradford’s
Coomassie reagent (Pierce, USA). Tissues were processed
for IHC as described earlier [2].

Immunohistochemistry
Briefly, sections were melted, deparaffinized,
quenched in methanol-hydrogen peroxide, rehydrated
[54, 55] followed by antigen retrieval (Vector Labs,
USA), and blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk (NFDM)
containing 5% normal goat serum in PBS (NGS) for
1 hour at room temperature. A 1:100 dilution or 2 μg/
ml concentration of IM or PIM antibodies was applied
to slides at 4°C overnight. Following three washes, a
1:500 dilution of GαRb HRP was added. After additional
washings, brown reaction product was developed using
3, 3′-diaminobenzidine (SIGMA, USA), followed by
hematoxylin counterstaining and imaged after mounting.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human samples

Cell culture

Tumor and control uterine biopsy samples
were obtained from the Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology under the IRB-HSR #15128 or were obtained
as processed cDNAs from Bioline, USA. Paraffin
embedded zinc-formalin fixed human uterine tumor
tissue microarrays were obtained from the Department
of Pathology. Bouin’s fixed normal human ovary sections
were obtained from the Pathology laboratory of Antoine
Beclere Hospital in Clamart, France. Two improperly
fertilized (poly-pronuclear) eggs donated under IRB
#MJH 06-017 by patients undergoing in vitro fertilization
treatment were obtained from Martha Jefferson Hospital
in Charlottesville. Tissues for deriving cell lines were
obtained from the University of Virginia Biorepository
and Tissue Procurement Facility.

Cell culture conditions for uterine MMMT-derived
SNU539 (fast growing, stable secondary cell line), a gift
to co-author Dr. Hui Li through Dr. Park at the Seoul
National University [56]; S08-38710 (very slow growing,
primary carcinosarcoma cell line); and MAD10-252/616,
hTERT immortalized postmenopausal non-cancer
endometrial derived control cell line, are described in the
Supplementary section.

Primers and RTPCR
Primers (Invitrogen, USA) were designed to
specifically amplify ASTL (NCBI gene accession number
NM_001002036) among the 134 zinc metalloproteases
in the human genome. N-terminus primers: Fw-5′GCGCCCCTGGCCTCCAGCTGCGCA-3′ and Rv-5′CACGACACCACTACCACCCATGGG-3′;
C-terminus
primers: Fw-5′-GGCTGCAGCCCAAGTGGCCCCAGG-3′
and
Rv-5′-AGCAACACCGGGGGCACCTGCTCC-3′;
catalytic domain primers: Fw-5′-GAGGTCCCCTT
CCTGCTCTCCAGC-3′ and Rv-5′-GGCATGGGACCC
TCTCCCACGGGG-3′ yielded amplimers of 237, 309, 579
base pair respectively. For PCR, AmpliTaq gold 360 buffer kit
was utilized (# 4398853, Applied Biosystems, USA).

Antibodies and other reagents
Rabbit anti-SAS1B polyclonal antibodies
(IM) and control pre-immune serum (PIM) [2]
were used either as purified IgGs (Mellon IgG
purification kit, Pierce, USA) or as diluted sera along
with rabbit pro-peptide ASTL polyclonal antibody
(PPpAb) (#ab59889 Abcam, Cambridge, MA). Fab’specific peroxidase labeled secondary antibodies
(Jackson Immunoresearch, USA) were used for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30207

Oncotarget

Western blotting

NGS. PIM/IM antibodies diluted 1:200 were added to
coverslips and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours.
Following washes, a 1:500 GαRb Alexa 488 secondary
antibody containing DAPI and red phalloidin (to stain for
actin filaments) was added for 1 hour in the dark, washed
and mounted on slides with Slowfade (Molecular Probes,
USA), dried, and imaged.

Harvested cells were lysed in Celis buffer
containing protease inhibitor cocktail [57]. Proteins were
electrophoresed and following transfer were blocked
with NFDM-PBS and incubated with a 1:1000 or 5 μg/
ml concentration of IM/PIM antibodies overnight at 4°C.
After washes in PBS with 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST), blots
were incubated with 1:5000 dilution of GαRb HRP for
1 hour, washed and immunoreactive bands were detected
by ECL (GE Healthcare, UK).

IIF of living cells
Cells were grown on coverslips without
fibronectin prior to incubation with primary antibody
for 2 hours. Following media washes, cells were fixed
in PFA and processed for subsequent steps as described
above. Immunostaining was observed at 200–400X
magnifications by fluorescent microscopy (Zeiss LSM
510-UV, Carl Zeiss, Germany). The same method was
followed for the human oocyte SAS1B staining.

Immunoprecipitation of SAS1B protein, 2D gel
electrophoresis and mass spectrometry
SAS1B was immunoprecipitated using IM anti­
bodies. Antigen-antibody complexes were validated
by 2D Western blotting [55] using IM/PIM and PPpAb
antibodies. An independent immunoprecipitate was
analyzed for ASTL peptides by mass spectrometry. Details
are described in the Supplementary section.

Endocytosis assay
SNU539 cells were grown on coverslips, starved
in serum free media for 2 hours and then incubated on
ice for 20 min to immobilize the plasma membrane [62].
Cells were incubated on ice for 1 hour with IM or PIM
antibody (1:100), washed three times with cold DPBS,
and then either stopped at time 0 by fixing cells with 4%
PFA or transferred to fresh prewarmed complete Roswell
Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI) at 37°C to allow
antibody internalization to proceed for 5, 15, 30 or 60
min. The samples were fixed in 4% PFA, washed twice
with DPBS and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in
PBS for 15 min. Next, cells were washed with DPBS and
exposed to GαRb Alexa Fluor488 secondary antibodies
diluted 1:500 for 60 min at 37°C. After final washes
with DPBS, cells were mounted in slowfade with DAPI
(Molecular Probes, OR, USA) and then imaged.

Phase partitioning of SAS1B protein isoforms
Two T300 flasks of SNU539 at 80% confluence
were harvested with 2% precondensed Triton X-114 in
Tris buffered saline (TBS) pH 7.4 on ice for 2 hours.
Insoluble matter (P) was removed by centrifugation
at 13,200 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The protein
supernatant was transferred to a clean chilled tube. Phase
separation was done as follows: the tube containing the
lysate was warmed at 37°C for 10 min and centrifuged at
13,200 rpm for 10 min at 25°C. A two phase preparation
resulted: a clear micelle poor aqueous phase (A) at the
top and an oily dense micellar rich detergent phase (D)
at the bottom of the tube. Both phases were subjected
to 4 cycles of phase separation in order to purify and
enrich D and A preparations [58–61]. Both fractions were
precipitated with acetone on ice. Precipitates were dried,
solubilized in 2X Laemmli buffer, and heated at 99°C
for 10 min. Equal amounts of D and A protein, along
with the pellet fraction, were electrophoresed followed
by Western blotting using one of several antibodies (at
1:1000 dilution): Rb pAb to BSA (Sigma, USA), 1:10,
000 dilution of mAb to GAPDH (Sigma, USA), mAb
to CD44 (Cell Signaling, USA), PIM IgG, IM IgG, and
PPpAb (Abcam, USA).

Complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC)
Twenty-five thousand SNU539 and control
MAD10-252/616 cells were plated in single wells of 16
well eplates (Roche Diagnostics, USA), and incubated
overnight in RPMI media containing heat-inactivated
fetal bovine serum (FBS, Atlanta Biologicals, USA).
Nineteen hours later, IM or PIM antibodies diluted
tenfold were added to the wells and allowed to interact
with cells for 3 hours. Inherent complement activity
in the rabbit antisera was heat inactivated by heating
at 56°C for 25 min. With careful handling, wells
containing the cells and their respective antibodies
received either 50 units of rabbit complement proteins/
well (MP Medicals, USA) or 50 units of heat inactivated
rabbit complement proteins/well. Cell growth was
assessed with impedance (a correlate of the number of
cells) using the xCELLigence system (Roche/ACEA
Biosciences, USA); data were monitored over a period
of 72–96 hours.

Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF)
IIF on fixed cells
SNU539/ S08-38710 and MAD10-252/616 cells
were grown on fibronectin coated coverslips (Sigma,
USA), and 36 hours later, cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde in DPBS (PFA) for 15 min at room
temperature, washed with DPBS and blocked with 5%
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30208

Oncotarget

Indirect saporin immunotoxin assay

Exploration Program of the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, The Wallace H. Coulter Translational Research
Partnership Endowment, The Paul Mellon Urologic
Oncology Institute in the Cancer Center at the University
of Virginia, The Virginia Center for Innovative Technology
with matching support from Neoantigenics, Inc., a Cancer
Research Institute Clinical Strategy Team Grant and The
Virginia Biosciences Health Research Corporation.

SNU539 and MAD10 cells were dissociated using
TrypLE (Invitrogen, USA), and allowed to recover for
1–2 hrs to replenish cell surface antigens prior to the assay
(details discussed in Supplementary method section). A
cell titration assay was first performed to monitor the cell
density over 72 hours in order to avoid overcrowding in the
wells during culture, and 4000 cells/well was selected as
an optimal seeding concentration (data not shown). Cells
were plated at a concentration of 4000 cells/200 μL heat
inactivated media/well in triplicate in 96 well culture plates
(Nalgene Nunc, Denmark). Cells were incubated overnight
at 37°C in 5% CO2 to accommodate to the media after
trypsinization. Next day, cells were incubated with premade
immune complexes developed by co-incubation for 45 min
of varying concentrations of primary antibody (1 μM, 0.1
μM, and 0.01 μM) and a fixed concentration of 5.42 nM
of SCS (Advanced Targeting Systems, USA, Cat #IT-57).
Controls consisted of media with SCS alone (negative
control), direct tagged rabbit IgG-saporin at 100 nM
concentration (direct conjugate negative control) (Advanced
Targeting Systems, USA, Cat # IT-35), and 0.01% Triton
X-100 (positive control) for cell lysis. After 72 hours
incubation, cells in the experimental groups were imaged by
light microscopy and then processed for bio mass estimation
using the sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. The SRB
colorimetric assay is used for cell density determination,
based on the measurement of cellular protein content.
Absorbance readings are indicative of cell proliferation with
lower absorbance indicating cell sloughing and cell lysis.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The University of Virginia has filed patent
applications on the use of the SAS1B as a cancer drug
and diagnostic target. Neoantigenics has an exclusive
license. E.P, J.H., A.M., K.A., and B.P. hold equity in
Neoantigenics.

REFERENCES
1.	 Sachdev M, Mandal A, Mulders S, Digilio LC,
Panneerdoss S, Suryavathi V, Pires E, Klotz KL,
Hermens L, Herrero MB, Flickinger CJ, van Duin M,
Herr  JC. Oocyte specific oolemmal SAS1B involved in
sperm binding through intra-acrosomal SLLP1 during fertilization. Developmental Biology. 2012; 363:40–51.
2.	 Pires ES, Hlavin C, Macnamara E, Ishola-Gbenla K,
Doerwaldt C, Chamberlain C, Klotz K, Herr AK, Khole A,
Chertihin O, Curnow E, Feldman SH, Mandal A, et al.
SAS1B protein [Ovastacin] shows temporal and spatial
restriction to oocytes in several eutherian orders and initiates translation at the primary to secondary follicle transition. Developmental Dynamics. 2013; 242:1405–26.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

3.	 Burkart AD, Xiong B, Baibakov B, Jiménez-Movilla M,
Dean J. Ovastacin, a cortical granule protease, cleaves ZP2
in the zona pellucida to prevent polyspermy. The Journal of
Cell Biology. 2012; 197:37–44.

This paper is dedicated to William D. Steers, 1955–
2015, Chairman and Professor of Urology at the University
of Virginia, who was a strong supporter of this research.
We thank Nena Fox from the Tissue Culture Core for
maintaining the cell lines and regularly testing them for
mycoplasma; Naichen Yu from Roche Diagnostics for
assistance with standardization and interpretation of the
xCELLigence impedance assay; Dennis Patrick and Ron
Newbold at Pfizer for the sulforhodamine B saporin based
assay protocol; Nick Sherman for assistance with mass
spectrometry; Sheri Vanhoose and Virginia CalinginRubianes from the Research Histology Core, Craig Rumpel
from the Biorepository and Tissue Research Facility at
UVA for processing and providing histological specimens
respectively. Kun Bi from Invitrogen provided us with
RNA sample of iPSC’s; Eliza Curnow from the University
of Washington in Seattle provided us with primate tissue.

4.	 Mouse EST dataset from GENBANK for Astl: http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/UniGene/ESTProfileViewer.cgi?uglist=
Mm.31313.
5.	 Website: human ASTL EST database, http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/nucest/14468989 and http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
UniGene/ESTProfileViewer.cgi?uglist=Hs.447993.
6.	 Website:
endometrial.

7.	 Jonson AL, Bliss RL, Truskinovsky A, Judson P, Argenta P,
Carson L, Dusenbery K, Downs LS Jr. Clinical features and
outcomes of uterine and ovarian carcinosarcoma. Gynecol
Oncol. 2006; 100:561–564.
8.	 Galaal K, Godfrey K, Naik R, Kucukmetin A, Bryant A.
Adjuvant radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy after surgery
for uterine carcinosarcoma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2011; 1:CD006812.

FUNDING
This work was supported by grants to J.C.H. from the
NIH Fogarty International Center, the Grand Challenges
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/types/

9.	 Garg G, Shah JP, Kumar S, Bryant CS, Munkarah A, Morris
RT. Ovarian and uterine carcinosarcomas: a comparative
30209

Oncotarget

analysis of prognostic variables and survival outcomes. Int
J Gynecol Cancer. 2010; 20:888–894.

20.	 Gougeon A. Regulation of ovarian follicular development
in primates: facts and hypotheses. Endocrine Review. 1996;
17:121–155.

10.	 Raji R, Guzzo F, Carrara L, Varughese J, Cocco E,
Bellone S, Betti M, Todeschini P, Gasparrini S, Ratner E,
Silasi DA, Azodi M, Schwartz P, et al. Uterine and ovarian carcinosarcomas overexpressing Trop-2 are sensitive
to hRS7, a humanized anti-Trop-2 antibody. Journal of
Experimental & Clinical Cancer Research. 2011; 30:106.

21.	 Santanche’ S, Bellelli A, Brunori M. The unusual stability
of saporin, a candidate for the synthesis of immunotoxins.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications.
1997; 234:129–132.
22.	 Vanicha V, Kanyawim K. Sulforhodamine B colorimetric
assay for cytotoxicity screening. Nature Protocols. 2006;
1:1112–1116.

11.	 Kanthan R, Senger JL. Uterine carcinosarcomas (Malignant
Mixed Müllerian Tumours): A review with special emphasis on the controversies in management. Obstetrics and
Gynecology International. 2011; 2011:1–13.

23.	 Ingle GS, Chan P, Elliott JM, Chang WS, Koeppen H,
Stephan JP, Scales SJ. High CD21 expression inhibits internalization of anti-CD19 antibodies and cytotoxicity of an
anti-CD19-drug conjugate. British Journal of Haematology.
2008; 140:46–58.

12.	 Creutzberg CL, van Putten WL, Koper PC, Lybeert ML,
Jobsen JJ, Wárlám-Rodenhuis CC, De Winter KA,
Lutgens LC, van den Bergh AC, van de Steen-Banasik E,
Beerman H, van Lent M. Surgery and postoperative radiotherapy versus surgery alone for patients with stage-1 endometrial carcinoma: multicentre randomised trial. PORTEC
study group. Post-operative radiation therapy in endometrial
carcinoma. Lancet. 2000; 355:1404–11.

24.	 Tarragó-Trani MT, Storrie B. Alternate routes for drug delivery to the cell interior: pathways to the Golgi apparatus and
endoplasmic reticulum. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2007; 59:782–97.
25.	 Mellman I, Fuchs R, Helenius A. Acidification of the endocytic and exocytic pathways. Annu Rev Biochem. 1986;
55:663–700.

13.	 Keys HM, Roberts JA, Brunetto VL, Zaino RJ, Spirtos NM,
Bloss JD, Pearlman A, Maiman MA, Bell JG. A phase III
trial of surgery with or without adjunctive external pelvic
radiation therapy in intermediate risk endometrial adenocarcinoma: a gynecologic oncology group study. Gynecol
Oncol. 2004; 92:744–51.

26.	 Minami T, Kijima T, Kohmo S, Arase H, Otani Y, Nagatomo I,
Takahashi R, Miyake K, Higashiguchi M, Morimura O, Ihara S,
Tsujino K, Hirata H, et al. Overcoming chemoresistance of
small-cell lung cancer through stepwise HER2 targeted antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and VEGF targeted
antiangiogenesis. Scientific Reports. 2013; 3:2669.

14.	 Scholten AN, van Putten WL, Beerman H, Smit VT, Koper PC,
Lybeert ML, Jobsen JJ, Wárlám-Rodenhuis CC, De Winter KA,
Lutgens LC, van Lent M, Creutzberg CL. Postoperative radiotherapy for stage 1 endometrial carcinoma: long-term outcome
of the randomized PORTEC trial with central pathology review.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005; 63:834–8.

27.	 Kohls MD, Lappi DA. Mab-Zap: A tool for evaluating antibody efficacy for use in an immunotoxin. BioTechniques.
2000; 28:162–165.

15.	 Nout RA, Smit VT, Putter H, Jürgenliemk-Schulz IM,
Jobsen JJ, Lutgens LC, van der Steen-Banasik EM,
Mens JW, Slot A, Kroese MC, van Bunningen BN,
Ansink AC, van Putten WL, et al. Vaginal brachytherapy
versus pelvic external beam radiotherapy for patients with
endometrial cancer of high-­intermediate risk (PORTEC-2):
an open-label, non-­inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet.
2010; 375:816–23.

29.	 Verma S, Miles D, Gianni L, Krop IE, Welslau M, Baselga J,
Pegram M, Oh DY, Diéras V, Guardino E, Fang L,
Lu MW, Olsen S, et al. Trastuzumab emtansine for HER2positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;
367:1783–1791.

28.	 Held G, Pöschel V, Pfreundschuh M. Rituximab for the
treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Expert Rev
Anticancer Ther. 2006; 6:1175–86.

30.	 Zhang N, Williams BR, Lu P, An Z, Chin C. Therapeutic
monoclonal antibodies (Wiley, New Jersey, ed. 1, 2009),
Part 1 chp 31, 711–762.

16.	 Crocker PR, McMillan SJ, Richards HE. CD33-related
siglecs as potential modulators of inflammatory responses.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2012;
1253:102–111.
17.	 Niculescu-Duvaz I. Trastuzumab emtansine, an antibodydrug conjugate for the treatment of HER2+ metastatic
breast cancer. Curr Opin Mol Ther. 2010; 12:350–60.

31.	 Balyasnikova IV, Wainwright DA, Solomaha E, Lee G,
Han Y, Thaci B, Lesniak MS. Characterization and immunotherapeutic implications for a novel antibody targeting interleukin (IL)-13 receptor α2. J. Biol. Chem. 2012;
287:30215–30227.

18.	 Vaklavas C, Forero-Torres A. Safety and efficacy of brentuximab vedotin in patients with Hodgkin lymphoma or
systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Therapeutic
Advances in Hematology. 2012; 3:209–225.

32.	 Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ,
Sutton GG, Smith HO, Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA,
Gocayne JD, Amanatides P, Ballew RM, et al. The sequence
of the human genome. Science. 2001; 291:1304–51.

19.	 William S. Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies: past,
present and future. Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies
­
(Wiley, New Jersey, ed. 1, 2009), Part 1, chap. 1.

33.	 Hung CF, Wu TC, Monie A, Roden R. Antigen-specific
immunotherapy of cervical and ovarian cancer. Immunol.
Rev. 2008; 222:43–69.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30210

Oncotarget

34.	 Feld J, Barta SK, Schinke C, Braunschweig I, Zhou Y,
Verma AK. Design and efficacy of antibody-drug conjugates in oncology. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:397–412.

Sperm protein 17 is expressed in human nervous system
tumours. BMC Cancer. 2006; 6:23.
50.	 Lin W, Zhou X, Zhang M, Li Y, Miao S, Wang L, Zong S,
Koide SS. Expression and function of the HSD-3.8 gene
encoding a testis-specific protein. Mol Hum Reprod. 2001;
7:811–818.

35.	 Mitri Z, Constantine T, O’Regan R. “The HER2 receptor in
breast cancer: pathophysiology, clinical use, and new advances
in therapy”. Chemother Res Pract. 2012; 2012:743193.
36.	 Guglin M, Cutro R, Mishkin JD. Trastuzumab-induced cardiomyopathy. J Cardiac Fail. 2008; 14:437–44.

51.	 Simpson AJ, Caballero OL, Jungbluth A, Chen YT, Old LJ.
Cancer/testis antigens, gametogenesis and cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2005; 5:615–25.

37.	 Debinski W, Obiri NI, Powers SK, Pastan I, Puri RK.
Human glioma cells overexpress receptors for interleukin
13 and are extremely sensitive to a novel chimeric protein
composed of interleukin 13 and pseudomonas exotoxin.
Clin. Cancer Res. 1995; 1:1253–1258.

52.	 Milane L, Duan Z, Amiji M. Role of hypoxia and glycolysis in the development of multi-drug resistance in human
tumor cells and the establishment of an orthotopic multidrug resistant tumor model in nude mice using hypoxic preconditioning. Cancer Cell Int. 2011; 14:3.

38.	 Joshi BH, Plautz GE, Puri RK. Interleukin-13 receptor
chain: a novel tumor-associated transmembrane protein in
primary explants of human malignant gliomas. Cancer Res.
2000; 60:1168–1172.

53.	 Weljie AM, Jirik FR. Hypoxia-induced metabolic shifts
in cancer cells: moving beyond the Warburg effect. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2011; 43:981–9.

39.	 Jarboe JS, Johnson KR, Choi Y, Lonser RR, Park JK.
Expression of interleukin-13 receptor 2 in glioblastoma
multiforme: implications for targeted therapies. Cancer Res.
2007; 67:7983–7986.

54.	 Pires ES, Meherji PK, Vaidya RR, Parikh FR, Ghosalkar MN,
Khole VV. Specific and sensitive immunoassays detect multiple anti-ovarian antibodies in women with infertility. Jour
Histochem & Cytochem. 2007; 55:1181–90.

40.	 Kawakami K, Terabe M, Kawakami M, Berzofsky JA,
Puri RK. Characterization of a novel human tumor antigen interleukin-13 receptor 2 chain. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:4434–4442.

55.	 Pires ES, Khole VV. A ‘block’ in the road to fertility:
autoantibodies to an immunodominant heat shock protein
90β in human ovarian autoimmunity. Fertil Steril. 2009;
92:1395–1409.

41.	 Debinski W, Slagle B, Gibo DM, Powers SK, Gillespie GY.
Expression of a restrictive receptor for interleukin 13 is
associated with glial transformation. J. Neurooncol. 2000;
48:103–11175.

56.	 Yuan Y, Kim WH, Han HS, Lee JH, Park HS, Chung JK,
Kang SB, Park JG. Establishment and characterization of
cell lines derived from uterine malignant mixed Müllerian
tumor. Gynecol Oncol. 1997; 66:464–74.

42.	 McGee EA, Hsueh AJ. Initial and cyclical recruitment of
ovarian follicles. Endocrine Reviews. 2000; 21:200–214.

57.	 Celis JE, Rasmussen HH, Madsen P, Leffers H, Honoré B,
Dejgaard K, Gesser B, Olsen E, Gromov P, Hoffmann HJ,
et al. The human keratinocyte two-dimensional gel protein
database (update 1992): Towards an integrated approach to
the study of cell proliferation, differentiation and skin diseases. Electrophoresis. 1992; 13:893–959.

43.	 Quesada V, Sánchez LM, Alvarez J, López-Otín C.
Identification and characterization of human and mouse
ovastacin. J. Biol. Chem. 2004; 279:26627–26634.
44.	 Acloque H, Lavial F, Pain B. Astacin-like metallo-­
endopeptidase Is dynamically expressed in embryonic stem
cells and embryonic epithelium during morphogenesis.
Developmental Dynamics. 2012; 241:574–582.

59.	 Brusca JS, Radolf JD. Isolation of integral membrane proteins by phase partitioning with Triton X-114 Aqueous
two-phase systems. Methods in enzymology. 1994;
228:182–194.

45.	 Peng Q, Yang H, Xue S, Shi L, Yu Q, Kuang Y. Secretome
profile of mouse oocytes after activation using mass spectrum. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2012; 29:765–71.
46.	 Kristjansdottir B, Levan K, Partheen K, Carlsohn E,
Sundfeldt K. Potential tumor biomarkers identified in ovarian cyst fluid by quantitative proteomic analysis, iTRAQ.
Clin Proteomics. 2013; 10:4.

60.	 Taguchi Y, Schätzl HM. Small-scale Triton X-114 extraction of hydrophobic proteins. Bio-protocol. 2014; 4.
61.	 Wang L, Coppel RL. Triton X-114 phase partitioning for
antigen characterization. Malaria Methods and Protocols.
Methods in Molecular Medicine. 2002; 72:581–585.

47.	 Old LJ. Cancer/testis (CT) antigens - a new link between
gametogenesis and cancer. Cancer Immun. 2001; 30:1.

62.	 Seaman MNJ. Cargo-selective endosomal sorting for
retrieval to the Golgi requires retromer. Journal of Cell
Biology. 2004; 165:111–122.

48.	 Scanlan MJ, Gure AO, Jungbluth AA, Old LJ,
Chen YT. Cancer/testis antigens: an expanding family
of targets for cancer immunotherapy. Immun Rev. 2002;
188:22–32.

63.	 Ellerström C, Strehl R, Noaksson K, Hyllner J, Semb H.
Facilitated expansion of human embryonic stem cells by
single-cell enzymatic dissociation. Stem Cells. 2007;
25:1690–1696.

49.	 Grizzi F, Gaetani P, Franceschini B, Di Ieva A, Colombo P,
Ceva-Grimaldi G, Bollati A, Frezza EE, Cobos E,
Rodriguez y Baena R, Dioguardi N, Chiriva-Internati M.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58.	 Bordier C. Phase separation of integral membrane proteins
in Triton X-114 solution. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
1981; 256:1604–1607.

30211

Oncotarget

