Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

PARP1 inhibitor olaparib (Lynparza) exerts synthetic lethal
effect against ligase 4-deficient melanomas
Małgorzata Czyż1, Monika Toma2, Anna Gajos-Michniewicz1, Kinga Majchrzak1,
Grazyna Hoser3, Janusz Szemraj4, Margaret Nieborowska-Skorska5, Phil Cheng6,
Daniel Gritsyuk5, Mitchell Levesque6, Reinhard Dummer6, Tomasz Sliwinski2,
Tomasz Skorski5
1

Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer, Medical University of Lodz, 92-215 Lodz, Poland

2

Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Lodz, 90-236 Lodz, Poland

3

Department of Flow Cytometry, Medical Center for Postgraduate Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland

4

Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical University of Lodz, 92-215 Lodz, Poland

5

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140,
USA

6

Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Zürich, and University of Zürich, CH-8952, Zürich,
Switzerland

Correspondence to: Tomasz Skorski, email: tskorski@temple.edu
Tomasz Sliwinski, email: tomsliw@biol.uni.lodz.pl
Keywords: melanoma, PARP1 inhibitor, synthetic lethality
Received: June 03, 2016     Accepted: September 16, 2016     Published: September 27, 2016

ABSTRACT
Cancer including melanoma may be ‘‘addicted” to double strand break (DSB)
repair and targeting this process could sensitize them to the lethal effect of DNA
damage. PARP1 exerts an important impact on DSB repair as it binds to both singleand double- strand breaks. PARP1 inhibitors might be highly effective drugs triggering
synthetic lethality in patients whose tumors have germline or somatic defects in
DNA repair genes. We hypothesized that PARP1-dependent synthetic lethality could
be induced in melanoma cells displaying downregulation of DSB repair genes. We
observed that PARP1 inhibitor olaparib sensitized melanomas with reduced expression
of DNA ligase 4 (LIG4) to an alkylatimg agent dacarbazine (DTIC) treatment in vitro,
while normal melanocytes remained intact. PARP1 inhibition caused accumulation
of DSBs, which was associated with apoptosis in LIG4 deficient melanoma cells. Our
hypothesis that olaparib is synthetic lethal with LIG4 deficiency in melanoma cells
was supported by selective anti-tumor effects of olaparib used either alone or in
combination with dacarbazine (DTIC) in LIG4 deficient, but not LIG4 proficient cells.
In addition, olaparib combined with DTIC inhibited the growth of LIG4 deficient human
melanoma xenografts. This work for the first time demonstrates the effectiveness of
a combination of PARP1 inhibitor olaparib and alkylating agent DTIC for treating LIG4
deficient melanomas. In addition, analysis of the TCGA and transcriptome microarray
databases revealed numerous individual melanoma samples potentially displaying
specific defects in DSB repair pathways, which may predispose them to synthetic
lethality triggered by PARP1 inhibitor combined with a cytotoxic drug.

below nine months [1]. Despite of the recent advances
in melanoma treatment, including immunotherapies
and targeted therapies, a resistance is developed in
the majority of patients [2] indicating that genotoxic
therapies might still be needed. It has been suggested

INTRODUCTION
While melanomas can be successfully treated in
the early stages, the appearance of metastasis in distant
organs worsens prognosis and drops median survival
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75551

Oncotarget

RESULTS

that cancer cells survive genotoxic stress due to
acquired abnormalities in DNA repair system [3].
The 'addiction' of cancer cells to compensatory DNA
repair mechanisms, especially double strand break
(DSB) repair, may create an opportunity to target these
pathways to eliminate malignant cells [3, 4].
DSBs are highly cytotoxic DNA lesions caused
by reactive oxygen species (ROS), ionizing radiation
and genotoxic drugs [4]. In proliferating cells DSBs are
usually repaired by two major mechanisms, BRCA1/
BRCA2-dependent homologous recombination (HR)
and DNA-PKcs-mediated non-homologous end-joining
(D-NHEJ), whereas PARP1-dependent back-up NHEJ
(B-NHEJ) serves as an alternate mechanism [5–7]. In
addition, PARP1 may decrease the number of potentially
lethal DSBs, either by stimulation of base excision repair
(BER) and single-strand break (SSB) repair and/or by
facilitation of MRE11-mediated recruitment of RAD51,
as well as, by involvement in relocation of XRCC1, an
essential protein for an effective DSB repair and restart of
stalled replication forks [8, 9].
It was reported that cells deficient in BRCA1/
BRCA2-mediated HR are sensitive to PARP1 inhibitors,
such as the recently FDA approved olaparib (Lynparza,
Astra-Zeneca) due to induction of synthetic lethality [10].
Since TCGA database analysis revealed that melanoma
samples display deregulated expression and/or mutations
of the genes encoding DSB repair proteins (Figure 1), we
hypothesize that DSB repair deficiencies could sensitize
individual melanomas to PARP1 inhibitor administered
either alone or in combination with DSB-inducing
genotoxic agents, such as dacarbazine (DTIC) [11].

Genes involved in the DSB repair pathway
are differentially expressed in patient-derived
melanoma cells and in normal melanocytes
To test the potential anti-melanoma effect of PARP1
inhibitors we established six patient-derived melanoma
cell lines. Real-time PCR was used to determine the
gene expression profile in melanoma cells and in normal
human melanocytes. Eight genes were examined, whose
products are essential for DSB repair pathways (BRCA1,
PALB2, and RAD51 in HR; PRKDC, XRCC6, and LIG4
in D-NHEJ; PARP1 and LIG3 in B-NHEJ). Significant
differences were found in the gene expression profiles
between melanoma cells and melanocytes. In particular,
all melanoma lines showed a decreased level of DNA
ligase 4 (LIG4) (Figure 2A).
Protein expression status of LIG4, RAD51, PARP1,
Ku70 was determined by Western blot analysis in
normal melanocytes and melanoma cell lines (DMBC11,
DMBC12) (Figure 2B). Both DMBC11 and DMBC12 cell
lines displayed elevated expression of RAD51, PARP1
and Ku70 proteins, whereas expression of LIG4 was
downregulated.

Olaparib used either alone or in combination
with DTIC induced cytotoxic effects in patientderived LIG4-deficient melanoma cells
To determine the influence of tested compounds
on viable cell number, plasma membrane integrity was
measured by cytometric analysis (Figure 3A). After

Figure 1: Analysis of TCGA database of 287 individual skin cutaneous melanomas. Deregulated expression (Z-score >2.0)
and/or mutations of the genes in DSB repair pathways, HR and D-NHEJ, are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75552

Oncotarget

the first 48 hours of treatment, only the combination of
olaparib and DTIC markedly reduced viability reaching
about 54% of control. The second dose and additional
incubation for 72 hours induced cell response to drugs,
used either alone or in combination. Normal melanocytes
were not affected by the treatments.
Cell death was assessed by the appearance of subdiploid fraction (subG1, Figure 3B). Sub-diploid DNA
content was found in about 55% in DMBC11 cells and 34%

in DMBC12 cells after combined treatment with olaparib
and DTIC for 48 hours, and this effect was further increased
with the next dose and prolonged treatment. This might
indicate that these compounds were more likely to induce
cell death than cytostatic effects in melanoma cells, which
was further confirmed by cell cycle analysis. Cell cycle
arrest was not clearly visible in olaparib or DTIC treated
melanoma cells, and only a modest fraction of cells treated
with olaparib + DTIC accumulated in G2/M (Figure 3C).

Figure 2: Expression profiles of DNA double-strand break repair genes in melanoma cells compared to melanocytes.
A. The transcript level of each gene was normalized to the expression of a reference gene (18S RNA). Data is presented as fold change in
melanoma cells versus melanocytes, in which expression levels of the genes were set as 1. The mean values ± SD were calculated from
3 experiments performed in triplicates. B. The protein level was normalized to the expression of a reference protein, GAPDH. Data is
presented as fold change in melanoma cells versus melanocytes, in which the expression levels of the proteins were set as 1. The means ±
SD were calculated from 3 experiments. Representative Western blot results are included.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75553

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effects of olaparib and DTIC, used alone or in combination, on viability, distribution in cell cycle and
clonogenicity of melanoma cells. A. Viability was measured using PI staining and flow cytometry, and it is shown as % of vehicle

control. Means ± SD of 2 independent experiments performed in triplicates are shown. B. Cell death was measured by accumulation of
melanoma cells in the sub-G1 fraction; mean ± SD of 2 independent experiments. C. Distribution of melanoma cells through the cell-cycle
phases was analyzed by flow cytometry. Left panel, bars represent cell distribution after 48 hours and after additional 72 hour treatments
of DMBC11 and DMBC12 populations with DTIC and olaparib, used alone or in combination. ModFit LT 3.0 software was used to
calculate the percentages of cells in each fraction; means ± SD of two independent experiments are shown. Right panel, representative
histograms of DMBC11 cells treated with two doses of indicated drugs (48 hours followed by 72 hours). D. Clonogenic assay showing the
long-term effects olaparib and/or DTIC on melanoma cell lines DMBC11 and DMBC12. Left panel, bars represent clonogenic efficiency
in drug-treated melanoma cell populations, expressed as percentages of clonogenic efficiency in vehicle-treated control; mean ± SD of 2
independent experiments. Right panel, photographs of a representative experiment are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75554

Oncotarget

Soft agar was used as a semisolid support to obtain
spatially distinct colonies. When used alone, DTIC and
olaparib reduced the number of colonies (Figure 3D).
When drugs were used in combination, the clonogenic
efficiency was further reduced.
To validate the importance of reduced level of LIG4
on the susceptibility of melanoma cells to olaparib, LIG4
was ectopically expressed in DMBC11 cell line (Figure
4A). Elevated expression of LIG4 reduced the sensitivity
of DMB11 cells to olaparib (Figure 4B). Moreover, LIG4-/pre-B cells were more sensitive to olaparib treatment than
parental cells expressing endogenous LIG4 (Figure 4C).

indicating accumulation of DSBs (Figure 5B). Moreover,
combination of olaparib and DTIC caused more DSBs that
individual drug.

Olaparib and DTIC combination reduces
melanoma growth in NSG mice
Sub-optimal doses of olaparib or DTIC did not
reduce the growth of DMBC11 cells in NSG mice (Figure
6). Interestingly, the combination of olaparib and DTIC
exerted modest, but statistically significant anti-melanoma
effect. Stronger effect would probably require optimization
of the treatment protocol.

Olaparib and DTIC, used alone or in
combination, increase the number of DSBs in
patient-derived LIG4 deficient melanoma cells

DISCUSSION
Synthetic lethality is a phenomenon occurring when
simultaneous depletion of a pair of genes or gene products
is required for cell death to occur. For example, cells
harboring BRCA1/2 inactivating mutations are sensitive
to PARP1 inhibitors [14, 15]. Therefore, PARP1 inhibitors
may be highly effective drugs in variety of tumors with
germline or somatic defects in DNA damage repair genes.
In the present study we showed that PARP1 inhibitor
olaparib applied alone and in combination with DTIC (a
drug used in melanoma treatment) was effective against
melanoma cells displaying downregulation of LIG4
without affecting normal melanocytes. This effect was
associated with accumulation of toxic DSBs, implicating
olaparib-mediated synthetic lethal effect in LIG4 deficient
melanoma cells. Downregulated LIG4 and/or Artemis were

In normal melanocytes the level of phosphorylated
γ-H2AX, which marks DSBs [12], remained unchanged
after the treatment. However, DMBC11 and DMBC12 cell
lines showed increased levels (5- or 2-fold, respectively)
of phosphorylated γ-H2AX in comparison to melanocytes
(Figure 5A). Moreover, combined treatment approximately
doubled the level of phosphorylated γ-H2AX in both
melanoma cell lines in comparison to cells treated with
either drug alone.
The neutral comet assay was also used to measure
the ability of olaparib and/or DTIC to induce DSBs
as described before [13]. DMBC11 and DMBC12 cell
lines treated with individual drugs showed increased
intensity of DNA tail in comparison to melanocytes

Figure 4: Sensitivity to olaparib depended on LIG4 expression levels. A. Quantification of normalized LIG4 levels to GAPDH

in total cell lysates obtained from GFP+ DBM11 cells transfected with expression plasmids encoding GFP or GFP and LIG4. Bars represent
mean percentage volume intensity ± SD from 3 experiments; *p < 0.001 in comparison with GFP. Representative Western blots of the
expression of LIG4 and GAPDH (loading control) are shown. B. The effect of olaparib on viability of DMBC11 cells transfected with
GFP or GFP + LIG4. Results represent mean ± SD from 3 independent experiments; **p < 0.05 in comparison with GFP. C. The effect
of olaparib on viability of Nalm6 parental and Nalm6 LIG4-/- pre-B cells. Results represent mean ± SD from 3 independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75555

Oncotarget

detected before in cell lines established from high-risk
neuroblastomas and therapy-resistant breast carcinomas
[16, 17]. However, these studies did not establish that
sensitivity to PARP1 inhibitors depended on inhibition
of LIG4. Our work for the first time demonstrates that
downregulation of LIG4 in melanoma cells is directly
responsible for enhanced sensitivity to olaparib.
Our results suggest the new therapeutic approach
against melanomas based on synthetic lethality which
exploits the reduced levels of LIG4, an essential
component of D-NHEJ that performs the final ‘end

processing' step of DSB repair [18]. When LIG4
expression is reduced, D-NHEJ repair is performed
inefficiently, and additional inhibition of PARP1-dependent
B-NHEJ, BER and/or replication fork restart by olaparib
could result in accumulation of toxic DSBs [5, 7–9].
Altogether, we postulate that D-NHEJ deficiency caused
by downregulation of LIG4 could be synthetically lethal
with B-NHEJ deficiency induced by PARP1 inhibitor.
This hypothesis is supported by the results showing that
PARP inhibitors were selectively toxic to LIG4-deficient
melanoma and leukemia cells (this work) and that they

Figure 5: Olaparib and/or DTIC induced DSBs in melanoma cell lines (DMBC11, DMBC12). Cells were treated with 5 μM

olaparib and/or 2 mM DTIC for 48 hrs (comet assay) and 120 hrs (γ-H2AX). A. The mean values ± SD of γ-H2AX were calculated from
3 ELISA experiments performed in triplicates. B. The mean percentage ± SD of DNA in the tails of comets in neutral conditions acquired
from one hundred cells/group from 3 experiments. *p<0.05 and **p<0.001 in comparison with control.

Figure 6: Combination of olaparib and DTIC reduced the growth of human melanoma in immunodeficient mice. NAG

mice were injected s.c. with DMBC11 melanoma cells followed by the treatment with olaparib (35 mg/kg twice a day), DTIC (8 mg/kg
every second day), or olaparib + DTIC. Data represent mean ± SD of tumor mass from 2 independent experiments, *p<0.05 in comparison
with untreated mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75556

Oncotarget

increased DNA damage induced by radiation exposure in
LIG4-/- HCT116 colon carcinoma cell line [19].
Although downregulation/mutation of LIG4 (and its
partner XRCC4) was detected only in approximately 7%
of cutaneous melanomas in TCGA database (Figure 1),
inhibition/inactivating mutation of other members of
D-NHEJ potentially impairing DSB repair activity by the
pathway were detected, too [20]. Moreover, transcriptome
analysis by microarrays of 229 melanoma cell lines
detected downregulation of at least one member of
D-NHEJ pathway (including LIG4) in numerous samples

established from patients manifesting different stages of
malignancy (Figure 7A). The 229 melanoma cells were
grouped by their molecular phenotype, proliferative,
intermediate and invasive. The proliferative phenotype is
defined by high expression of MITF and low expression
of WNT5A, the invasive phenotype is defined by low
expression of MITF and high expression of WNT5A,
and intermediate phenotype have approximately equal
expression of MITF and WNT5A. From the analysis,
it seems that the invasive phenotype has greater
downregulation in the D-NHEJ genes than proliferative,

Figure 7: Transcriptome microarrays analysis of expression of the genes in A. D-NHEJ pathway, and B. HR pathway
from 229 melanoma cell lines established from patients manifesting the following phenotypes: A- proliferative, Cinvasive, and B- intermediate. Percent above column color bar represents number of samples with at least one downregulated gene
within the phenotype group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75557

Oncotarget

therefore selected melanomas with an invasive phenotype
should display enhanced sensitivity to PARP1 inhibitors.
In addition, multiple melanoma samples displayed
downregulation of at least one gene in HR pathway (Figure
7B) with higher frequency in the invasive phenotype
suggesting their sensitivity to synthetic lethality triggered by
PARP1 inhibitors [21]. In concordance, inhibition of histone
deacetylases class I resulted in suppression of HR due to
down-regulation of RAD51 and FANCD2 and sensitized
malignant melanoma cells to a synthetic lethal effect of
olaparib combined with alkylating drug temozolomide [22].
Despite downregulation/mutations of DSB
repair genes detected in numerous samples in TCGA
and transcriptome microarray databases, melanomas
typically do not respond well to DNA damaging agents.
Perhaps the degree of downregulation of DNA repair
genes is not strong enough to increase the sensitivity
to chemotherapeutics in clinical settings. However, as
suggested by this work, the effect may become clinically
relevant in repair-deficient cells when a genotoxic drug is
combined with PARP1 inhibitor, which further enhances
DNA damage beyond a reparable threshold.
In summary, PARP1 inhibitor seems to offer
additional treatment opportunity to pre-selected melanomas
displaying LIG4 (and/or XRCC4) deficiency. In addition,
analyses of the already existing databases strongly
suggest that numerous melanomas could be sensitive to
personalized medicine-guided PARP1 inhibitor-mediated
synthetic lethality due to their putative deficiencies in
DNA repair pathways. This speculation is supported by
phase II study showing almost doubled (although not
statistically significant) progression-free survival of the
patients with metastatic melanoma treated with veliparib
+ temozolomide compared with placebo + temozolomide.
Perhaps personalized medicine approach is necessary
to pre-select patients with melanomas predisposed to
synthetic lethality mediated by PARP1 inhibitor.

(www.horizondiscovery.com) and cultured in RPMI
medium with 10% FBS (Lonza) and antibiotics (100 IU/
ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin (Gibco) at 37°C in
a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2.

Drug treatment
Melanoma cells and NHEMs were plated at a
density of 1 x 105 viable cells per well in a 6-well plates
one day before drug treatment. Cells were cultured with
5 μM olaparib (Selleckchem), 2 mM dacarbazine (DTIC)
(Sigma Aldrich), olaparib + DTIC, or vehicle. After
48 hours, half the cell suspension from each well was
taken to determine cell viability after propidium iodide
(PI) staining and cell cycle analysis. Following this,
1 ml of fresh medium containing drugs at appropriate
concentrations was added to the remaining cell culture for
additional 72 hours of culturing.

Clonogenic assay
Melanoma cells were first incubated with
compounds at indicated concentrations for 48 hours
and then for 72 hours. Then, 1000 single viable cells
were transferred to soft agar and clonogenic assay was
performed as previously described [23].

Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry and propidium iodide (PI)
staining was used to assess changes in viability and cell
distribution in cell cycle phases. Cells were analyzed
using a FACSVerse flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson,
San Jose, California, USA). ModFit LT 3.3 software
(Verity Software, Topsham, Minnesota, USA) was used to
calculate the percentage of cells in each cell-cycle phase
and FACSuit software (Becton Dickinson) was used to
calculate the percentages of dead cells in subG1.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Ectopic expression of LIG4

In vitro cell cultures

Melanoma DMBC11 cells were transfected with
plasmid pCMV6-AC-GFP with cloned human LIG4
cDNA (OriGene Technologies) using lipofectamine 3000
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
GFP+ cells were sorted after 48 hrs and used for the
experiments.

Melanoma cell lines derived from surgical
specimens of nodular (DMBC2, DMBC8, DMBC9,
DMBC10, DMBC12) and superficial spreading melanoma
(DMBC11) were established in the Department of
Molecular Biology of Cancer. The study was approved
by the Ethical Commission of the Medical University
of Lodz, and informed consent was obtained from all
patients. Melanoma cells were cultured in Stem Cell
Medium (SCM) as described elsewhere [23, 24]. Normal
Human Melanocytes (NHEMs – Ad, Lonza) were cultured
in Melanocyte Cell Basal Medium (MBM) (CC-3250,
Lonza) supplemented with growth supplements according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Nalm6 parental and Nalm6
LIG4-/- pre-B cells were purchased from HORIZON
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Transcriptome microarrays analysis
Microarray data was obtained from NCBI GEO and
analyzed for phenotype classes proliferative, intermediate
and invasive as described in Widmer et al [25]. Microarray
was subset for D-NHEJ genes and HR genes. Z-score
cutoffs were set at 1.5 and 2 to detect upregulated
and downregulated genes. Samples with at least one
downregulated gene were counted.
75558

Oncotarget

RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and Real-Time
PCR

a pH adjusted to 9.0 by glacial acetic acid. Electrophoresis
was conducted in this electrophoresis buffer at 4 °C for 60
min at an electric field strength of 0.41 V/cm (100 mA).
The slides were then washed in water, drained and stained
with 2 μg/ml of DAPI and examined at 200× magnification
in an Eclipse fluorescence microscope (Nikon, Tokyo,
Japan) attached to COHU 4910 video camera (Cohu,
San Diego, CA, USA) equipped with a UV-1 filter block
consisting an excitation filter (359 nm) and a barrier filter
(461 nm) and connected to a personal computer-based
image analysis system, Lucia-Comet v. 5.41 (Laboratory
Imaging, Praha, Czech Republic). Fifty images were
randomly selected from each sample and the percentage
of DNA in the tail of comets (% tail DNA) was measured.
The mean value of the % tail DNA in a particular sample
was taken as an index of DSBs in the sample.

Isolation and purification of RNA was performed
using total RNA isolation kit (A&A Biotechnology).
Subsequently, RNA was transcribed into cDNA using
SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA). qRT-PCR was
performed using TaqMan® Real-Time PCR Master Mix
(Life Technologies) and Agilent Technologies Stratagene
Mx300SP working on MxPro software. TaqMan probes
(Life Technologies) were used to analyze 8 genes whose
products are essential for DSB repair pathways (BRCA1,
LIG3, LIG4, PALB2, PARP1, PRKDC, RAD51, XRCC6),
and 18S RNA (Life Technologies) was included as the
reference gene. The cycling parameters were 95°C for 10
minutes, 30 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for
60 seconds.

Xenograft experiments
24 NSG mice were injected subcutaneously under
the right scapula with 1x105 melanoma cells previously
suspended in Matrigel. After 4 days tumor-bearing mice
were randomly assigned into four groups; untreated, and
treated intraperitoneally either with olaparib (35 mg/
kg bodyweight twice a day, diluted in DMSO), DTIC (8
mg/kg bodyweight every second day, diluted in PBS) or
olaparib with DTIC (same dosing as in monotherapy)
for 24 days. After the end of experiment tumors were
collected and weighted. The study was approved by the
local Ethical Committee.

Western blot analysis
Cell lysates were obtained by incubating a cell
pellet with RIPA buffer for 30 minutes. Lysates were
than resolved by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were
transferred onto an Immobilon-P PVDF membrane
(Millipore), which were blotted overnight with primary
antibodies recognizing GAPDH, DNA LIG4 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnologies), Ku70, RAD51 or PARP1 (ThermoFisher
Scientific). This was followed by 1 h incubation with
secondary antibodies conjugated with HRP (Anti-Mouse
and Anti-Rabbit antibodies, Cell Signaling).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ELISA measurement of γ-H2AX

This study was supported by the grant from the
Polish National Science Centre (no. DEC- 2012/07/B/
NZ7/04245) (T.Sliwinski) and NIH/NCI 1R01 CA186238
(T.Skorski).

Cell lines DMBC11, DMBC12 and NHEMs
were cultured with vehicle or with drugs on black 96well plates with a clear bottom. Analysis of the level of
phosphorylated histone γ-H2AX was performed using an
H2AX Phosphorylation Assay Kit (Millipore, Billerica,
MA, USA according to the protocol. Chemiluminescence
detection was performed using attached HRP-substrates
using a GloMax-Multi device (Promega). Bleomycin at 35
μM for 30 min was used as a control.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
There is no conflicts of interest.

Authorsʼ contributions

Neutral comet assay measurement of DSBs

M.T. performed RT-PCR, western blot, comet assay
and phosphorylated histone H2A.X experiments, analyzed
data; A.G-M. performed cell culturing and drug treatment,
clonogenic assay; K.M. performed flow cytrometric
analysis of viability and cell cycle; G.H. performed
experiments with mice; J.S. performed RT-PCR, western
blot experiments, analyzed data; M.N-S. performed
experiments with NALM 6 cells, analyzed data; P.F.C.,
D.G., M.P.L., R.D. acquired bioinformatics data; M.C.,
T.Sk., T.S. conceived the project, designed experiments,
analyzed data, wrote the manuscript.

Cells were cultured with vehicle or drugs for 48
hours and analyzed by neutral version of comet assay to
detect DSBs as described before with modifications [13].
Briefly, cells were suspended in 0.75% LMP agarose
and casted onto microscope slides precoated with 0.5%
NMP agarose. The cells were then lysed for 1 h at 4 °C
in a buffer consisting of 2.5 mM NaOH, 100 mM EDTA,
1% Triton X-100, 10 mM Tris, pH 10. After the lysis the
slides were placed in an electrophoresis unit, DNA was
allowed to unwind for 20 min in the electrophoresis buffer
consisting of 100 mM Tris and 300 mM sodium acetate at
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75559

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

14.	 Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD, Parker KM, Flower D,
Lopez E, Kyle S, Meuth M, Curtin NJ, Helleday T. Specific
killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nature. 2005;434: 913-917.

1.	 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64:9-29.

15.	 Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA,
Richardson TB, Santarosa M, Dillon KJ, Hickson I,
Knights C, Martin NM, Jackson SP, Smith GC, Ashworth
A. Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells
as a therapeutic strategy. Nature. 2005;434:917-921.

2.	 Roesch A. Tumor heterogeneity and plasticity as elusive
drivers for resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition in
melanoma. Oncogene. 2015; 34:2951–2957.
3.	 Cramer-Morales K, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Scheibner K,
Padget M, Irvine DA, Sliwinski T, Haas K, Lee J, Geng H,
Roy D, Slupianek A, Rassool FV, Wasik MA, Childers W,
Copland M, Müschen M, Civin CI, Skorski T. Personalized
synthetic lethality induced by targeting RAD52 in leukemias
identified by gene mutation and expression profile. Blood.
2013; 122:1293-1304.

16.	 Newman EA, Lu F, Bashllari D, Wang L, Opipari AW,
Castle VP. Alternative NHEJ Pathway Components Are
Therapeutic Targets in High-Risk Neuroblastoma. Mol
Cancer Res. 2015; 13:470-82
17.	 Tobin LA, Robert C, Rapoport AP, Gojo I, Baer MR,
Tomkinson AE, Rassool FV. Targeting abnormal DNA
double-strand break repair in tyrosine kinase inhibitorresistant chronic myeloid leukemias. Oncogene. 2013;
32:1784-93.

4.	 Curtin NJ. DNA repair dysregulation from cancer driver to
therapeutic target. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:801-817.
5.	 Chapman JR, Taylor MR, Boulton SJ. Playing the end
game: DNA double-strand break repair pathway choice.
Mol Cell. 2012; 47:497-510.

18.	 Davis AJ, Chen DJ. DNA double strand break repair via
non-homologous end-joining. Transl Cancer Res. 2013;
2:130-143.

6.	 Feng Z, Scott SP, Bussen W, Sharma GG, Guo G, Pandita
TK, Powell SN. Rad52 inactivation is synthetically
lethal with BRCA2 deficiency. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2011;108:686-691.

19.	 Alotaibi M, Sharma K, Saleh T, Povirk LF, Hendrickson EA,
Gewirtz DA. Radiosensitization by PARP Inhibition in DNA
Repair Proficient and Deficient Tumor Cells: Proliferative
Recovery in Senescent Cells. Radiat Res. 2016; 185:229-245.

7.	 Karanam K, Kafri R, Loewer A, Lahav G. Quantitative live
cell imaging reveals a gradual shift between DNA repair
mechanisms and a maximal use of HR in mid S phase. Mol
Cell. 2012; 47:320-329.

20.	 Mladenov E, Iliakis G. Induction and repair of DNA double
strand breaks: the increasing spectrum of non-homologous
end joining pathways. Mutat Res. 2011; 711:61-72.

8.	 Rouleau M, Patel A, Hendzel MJ, Kaufmann SH, Poirier
GG. PARP inhibition: PARP1 and beyond. Nat Rev Cancer.
2010; 10:293–301.

21.	 Konstantinopoulos PA, Ceccaldi R, Shapiro GI, D'Andrea
AD. Homologous Recombination Deficiency: Exploiting
the Fundamental Vulnerability of Ovarian Cancer. Cancer
Discov. 2015; 5:1137-54.

9.	 Ying S, Chen Z, Medhurst AL, Neal JA, Bao Z,
Mortusewicz O, McGouran J, Song X, Shen H, Hamdy
FC, Kessler BM, Meek K, Helleday T. DNA-PKcs and
PARP1 Bind to Unresected Stalled DNA Replication Forks
Where They Recruit XRCC1 to Mediate Repair. Cancer Res
2016;76:1078-1088.

22.	 Krumm A, Barckhausen C, Kücük P, Tomaszowski
KH, Loquai C, Fahrer J, Krämer OH, Kaina B, Roos
WP. Enhanced histone deacetylase activity in malignant
melanoma provokes RAD51 and FANCD2 triggered drug
resistance. Cancer Res. 2016; 76: 3067-77.

10.	 Helleday T. The underlying mechanism for the
PARP and BRCA synthetic lethality: clearing up the
misunderstandings. Mol Oncol. 2011; 5:387–393.

23.	 Sztiller-Sikorska M, Hartman ML, Talar B, Jakubowska J,
Zalesna I, Czyz M. Phenotypic diversity of patient-derived
melanoma populations in stem cell medium. Lab Invest.
2015; 95:672-683.

11.	 Roos WP, Nikolova T, Quiros S, Naumann SC, Kiedron
O, Zdzienicka MZ, Kaina B. Brca2/Xrcc2 dependent HR,
but not NHEJ, is required for protection against O(6)methylguanine triggered apoptosis, DSBs and chromosomal
aberrations by a processleading to SCEs. DNA Repair
(Amst) 2009;8:72-86.

24.	 Hartman ML, Talar B, Sztiller-Sikorska M, Nejc D, Czyz
M. Parthenolide induces MITF-M downregulation and
senescence in patient-derived MITF-Mhigh melanoma cell
populations. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:9026-9040. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7030.

12.	 Rogakou EP, Pilch DR, Orr AH, Ivanova VS, Bonner
WM. DNA double-stranded breaks induce histone H2AX
phosphorylation on serine 139. J Biol Chem. 1998;
273:5858-5868.

25.	 Widmer DS, Cheng PF, Eichhoff OM, Belloni BC, Zipser
MC, Schlegel NC, Javelaud D, Mauviel A, Dummer R,
Hoek KS. Systematic classification of melanoma cells by
phenotype-specific gene expression mapping. Pigment Cell
Melanoma Res. 2012; 25:343-353

13.	 Nieborowska-Skorska M, Stoklosa T, Datta M, Czechowska
A, Rink L, Slupianek A, Koptyra M, Seferynska I, Krszyna
K, Blasiak J, Skorski T. ATR-Chk1 axis protects BCR/ABL
leukemia cells from the lethal effect of DNA double-strand
breaks. Cell Cycle. 2006; 5:994-1000.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75560

Oncotarget

