Research Article

Genome-Wide Analysis of Aromatase Inhibitor-Resistant,
Tamoxifen-Resistant, and Long-Term Estrogen-Deprived
Cells Reveals a Role for Estrogen Receptor
1

1

1

2

2

Selma Masri, Sheryl Phung, Xin Wang, Xiwei Wu, Yate-Ching Yuan,
3
1
Lawrence Wagman, and Shiuan Chen

1
Department of Surgical Research, 2Division of Information Sciences, and 3Department of General Oncologic Surgery, Beckman Research
Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, California

Abstract
Acquired resistance to either tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors (AI) develops after prolonged treatment in a majority of
hormone-responsive breast cancers. In an attempt to further
elucidate mechanisms of acquired resistance to AIs, MCF-7aro
cells resistant to letrozole (T+LET R), anastrozole (T+ANA R),
and exemestane (T+EXE R), as well as long-term estrogen
deprived (LTEDaro) and tamoxifen-resistant (T+TAM R) lines
were generated. This is the first complete panel of endocrine
therapy–resistant cell lines, which were generated as multiple
independent biological replicates for unbiased genome-wide
analysis using affymetrix microarrays. Although similarities
are apparent, microarray results clearly show gene signatures
unique to AI-resistance were inherently different from
LTEDaro and T+TAM R gene expression profiles. Based on
hierarchical clustering, unique estrogen-responsive gene
signatures vary depending on cell line, with some genes upregulated in all lines versus other genes up-regulated only in
the AI-resistant lines. Characterization of these resistant lines
showed that LTEDaro, T+LET R, and T+ANA R cells contained
a constitutively active estrogen receptor (ER)A that does not
require estrogen for activation. This ligand-independent
activation of ER was not observed in the parental cells, as
well as T+EXE R and T+TAM R cells. Further characterization
of these resistant lines was performed using cell cycle analysis,
immunofluorescence experiments to visualize ER subcellular
localization, as well as cross-resistance studies to determine
second-line inhibitor response. Using this well-defined model
system, our studies provide important information regarding differences in resistance mechanisms to AIs, TAM, and
LTEDaro, which are critical in overcoming resistance when
treating hormone-responsive breast cancers. [Cancer Res
2008;68(12):4910–8]

Introduction
Breast cancer, in 60% of premenopausal patients and 75% of
postmenopausal patients, is a hormone-dependent disease that
relies on the mitogenic effects of estrogen to drive carcinogenesis.
Estrogens are synthesized by a cytochrome P450 enzyme complex

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Shiuan Chen, Department of Surgical Research, Beckman
Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1500 E Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010. Phone:
626-359-8111, ext. 63454; Fax: 626-301-8972; E-mail: schen@coh.org.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0303

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

called aromatase, which uses an androgen substrate in the production of estrogen. The abnormally high expression of aromatase
in breast cancer cells has been shown by aromatase activity measurement, immunohistochemical analysis, and reverse transcription-PCR analysis (1). In addition, the use of animal models have
shown that tumor xenografts that express aromatase do synthesize
estrogen in situ, which subsequently results in enhanced tumor
growth (2, 3). The production of 17h-estradiol (E2) is suggested to
mediate cell survival and proliferation of breast cancer cells via the
transcriptional program of estrogen receptor (ER) a and its target
genes (4, 5). In addition, nongenomic or membrane-initiated
signaling events have also been implicated in tumor progression,
due to ER-dependent signal transduction pathways that involve
G-protein–coupled receptors and tyrosine kinase growth factor
receptors (6, 7). Overall, ERa plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.
Treatment of hormone-responsive breast carcinomas has primarily relied on the use of tamoxifen (TAM), a selective estrogen
receptor modulator (SERM) that antagonizes ER function. However, being a SERM, TAM does have partial estrogenic activity
in the uterus and is associated with an increased incidence of
endometrial cancer, thromboembolic events, and significant rates
of disease recurrence (8–10). Moreover, aromatase inhibitors (AI),
which block estrogen synthesis, have shown good efficacy, significant increase in disease-free survival, and lengthened time to
disease recurrence in multiple clinical trials (11–13). The thirdgeneration AIs show good specificity, potency, and oral activity
and include two nonsteroidal inhibitors [letrozole (LET) and
anastrozole (ANA)] and a steroidal inhibitor [exemestane (EXE)],
which resembles and competes with the androgen substrate for
active site binding (14).
After prolonged endocrine therapy, acquired resistance to AIs
and TAM is expected to occur in a majority of breast cancer
patients, which establishes the importance of elucidating the
molecular characteristics of acquired resistance. Investigation of
TAM resistance has revealed some mechanistic details and insights
into this phenomenon. Early studies that looked at TAM resistance
using an MCF-7 cell background describe elevated levels of ERa
in the cytosol in comparison with parental cells (15) and also
report an increase in ERa transactivation potential of certain target
genes (16). More recent analysis of TAM resistance implicate the
epidermal growth factor family, primarily epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and ErbB2 (HER2), in the enhanced activation
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT, mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK), PKC, and Src kinase (17–21), in addition
to increased ER coactivator function (AIB1; ref. 22). In addition to
TAM resistance, the long-term estrogen deprivation (LTED) system
has been proposed as a model for AI resistance, due to its lack

4910

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Aromatase Inhibitor Resistance

of a hormone environment that resembles aromatase inhibition.
Several laboratories have reported an activation of the growth
factor signaling pathways in LTED cell lines, namely HER2 and
insulin-like growth factor I receptor, which crosstalk with the ER
signaling pathway resulting in an activation of various MAPKs and
PI3K/AKT involved in cell survival and proliferation (23–25). In
addition, a study by Jelovac and colleagues (26) is the first report to
directly address LET-resistance using a mouse xenograft model.
LET-resistant cells show an activation of HER2 growth factor
signaling, activating a MAPK cascade responsible for proliferation
of these resistant cells.
To further investigate resistance to AIs, our laboratory has
established cell lines that are resistant to LET (T+LET R), ANA
(T+ANA R), and EXE (T+EXE R), and for mechanistic
comparison, we have also generated LTEDaro and TAM-resistant
(T+TAM R) lines. Using affymetrix microarrays, genome-wide
analysis of gene expression profiles has established a clear
division between AI-resistant lines that does not resemble
LTEDaro or T+TAM R. Further experimental analysis was carried
out to assess differences in ERa functionality that serve to divide
these resistant lines into hormone-independent (constitutively
active) and hormone-dependent categories. This is the first
complete genome-wide study of LTEDaro, TAM, and AI-resistant
cell lines, which can provide key insight into gene expression
profiles involved in conferring resistance to endocrine therapy in
breast cancer cells.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture, compounds, and proliferation assays. MCF-7 human
breast cancer cells (ER+) that stably overexpress the aromatase gene (MCF7aro) were previously generated in this laboratory and used for resistant cell
line production (27). MCF-7aro cells were routinely cultured in MEM
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mmol/L L-Glutamine, 1 mmol/L
sodium pyruvate, 100 U/mL penicillin-streptomycin, and 100 Ag/mL G418.
Resistant cell lines were maintained in phenol red–free MEM containing
10% charcoal/dextran-treated FBS with identical supplements as parental
MCF-7aro cells. Resistant lines were continuously cultured in the presence
of the appropriate inhibitor (200 nmol/L LET, 1 Amol/L ANA, 1 Amol/L EXE,
and 1 Amol/L TAM), with the addition of 1 nmol/L testosterone (T). LET
was provided by Novartis, ANA was provided by AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, and EXE was a gift from Pharmacia Italia S.P.A. For cell proliferation
assays, MCF-7aro parental cells and resistant cell lines were cultured in
steroid-depleted medium and supplemented with hormone and inhibitor,
based on regular growth conditions. For normalization purposes, total
protein concentration was taken at 1, 4, 7, and 10 d and expressed as a
mean of triplicate wells.
Microarray analysis. The Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133
Plus 2.0 arrays were used to define gene expression profiles in each cell
line. One-cycle target labeling and hybridization were performed following
manufacturer’s recommendation at the University of California, Irvine
microarray core facility. To ensure high quality of the microarray process,
a set of quality assessment steps were applied to the data using an R/
Bioconductor package developed internally. All subsequent analysis was
performed using Partek Genomics Suite (Partek, Inc.). Raw Affymetrix
intensity measurements of all probe sets were background corrected,
normalized, and summarized into gene expression level measurements
using RMA. One-way ANOVA was performed to select target genes that
were differentially expressed between resistant cell lines and MCF-7aro
cell lines, based on a fold-change criteria of F3.5-fold and a P value of
<0.0001 [equivalent to false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%]. Hierarchical
clustering using average linkage with Pearson’s correlation was applied
to the target genes to classify the resistant cell lines. Venn diagrams
were generated using Partek Genomics Suite to examine the overlapping

www.aacrjournals.org

genes among resistant cell lines. In addition, estrogen inducibility
was determined by two different estrogen-responsive gene databases,
KBERG4 and ERTargetDB.5
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, and real-time quantitative PCR.
TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) was used for RNA isolation from MCF-7aro and
resistant cell lines. Five micrograms of total RNA was used for reverse
transcription, using 100 ng random primer (Invitrogen), 0.5 mmol/L
deoxynucleotide triphosphate mix, 40 U avian myeloblastosis virus-RT and
supplied reaction buffer (Life Sciences, Inc.), and RNase Inhibitor (Promega)
for 45 min at 42jC. Subsequently, 1 AL cDNA was used for real-time PCR
using iQ5 SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) on an iCycler IQ5 PCR machine
(Bio-Rad). All real-time PCR reactions were done in triplicate and the
housekeeping gene b-actin was used as a reference. Gene-specific primer
sequences are listed as Supplementary Data (Supplementary Table S1).
ER reporter assays. To assess ERa transcriptional activity, resistant lines
were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 2  105 cells per well and
incubated overnight in phenol red–free MEM containing 10% charcoal/
dextran-treated FBS. Cells were transfected with 0.5 Ag pGL3-ERE reporter
plasmid containing 3 tandem estrogen response elements (ERE), using
Lipofectin reagent (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. After
5 h, Opti-MEM (Invitrogen) transfection medium was replaced with phenol
red–free MEM and supplemented with either DMSO or 10 nmol/L E2 for
24 h. Cells were lysed with 1 reporter lysis buffer (Promega), protein
concentration was determined using the Bradford method (28), and 5 Ag of
protein was used for luciferase reporter assays, using the Luciferase Assay
System (Promega).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay kits were purchased from Upstate Biotechnology. Cells
were grown in phenol red–free MEM containing 10% charcoal/dextrantreated FBS without hormone or inhibitor for 5 d, serum starved for 24 h,
and treated with either 100 nmol/L E2 or DMSO for 45 min. Cells were
subsequently crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde (JT Baker), harvested, lysed
in 1 SDS lysis buffer, and sonicated with a Branson 450 sonifier six times
for 10 s at 30% amplitude. Cell lysates were precleared with 60 AL protein A
agarose beads for 3 h, followed by immunoprecipitation (IP) with either
1 Ag mouse ERa antibody or 1 Ag normal mouse IgG (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) overnight. Immunocomplexes were collected with 80 AL
protein A agarose beads for 3 h. Protein/bead complexes were eluted for
30 min at room temperature using 1% SDS and 0.1 mol/L NaHCO3. Eluates
were reverse crosslinked in the presence of 5 mol/L NaCl at 65jC for 4 h.
Proteinase K digestion was done at 45jC for 1 h, and DNA was subsequently
purified using Phenol/Chloroform. PCR amplification of the pS2 gene
promoter, containing the ERE, was done using primers listed as Supplementary Data (Supplementary Table S1).
IP and Western blotting for phospho-ER. For IP analysis, 5 mg of cell
lysate were precleared with 60 AL protein A agarose beads (Roche) and
subsequently subjected to IP with total ERa antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology). For Western blotting, equal amounts of protein were run
on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel and transferred to a Trans-blot nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad) using a Transblot SD semidry transfer system (BioRad). Membranes were blocked for 2 h in 5% milk and probed with primary
antibody overnight. The following antibodies were used for Western
blotting: phospho-ERa Ser118 (Cell Signaling), phospho-ERa Ser167, and
total mouse ERa (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Cross-resistance studies and cell cycle analysis. Resistant cell lines
were treated with testosterone in addition to LET, ANA, EXE, or TAM (with
the above-mentioned concentrations), and cell proliferation was determined by total protein concentration and expressed as a mean of triplicate
wells. Data were shown as percent growth relative to control, expressed as
an average of three independent experiments. For cell cycle analysis, MCF7aro or resistant cells were serum starved for 24 h and subsequently treated
with DMSO, 1 nmol/L testosterone, or testosterone plus inhibitor for 96 h.
Cells were harvested, washed with PBS, and fixed with 70% ethanol

4911

4
5

http://datam.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/kberg/index.php
http://bioinformatics.med.ohio-state.edu/ERTargetDB/

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
overnight. Before cell cycle analysis, cells were washed with PBS and
incubated for 1 h with propidium iodide (PI) solution (0.02 mg/mL PI,
0.2 mg/mL RNase A, and 0.1% v/v triton X-100 in PBS) at 37jC. Flow
cytometry was performed on a CyAn ADP 9-color cytometer (Dako, Inc.).
Immunofluorescence studies. Cells were seeded onto 4-well chamber
slides, grown until 50% to 70% confluent, serum starved for 24 h, and
treated with DMSO or 1 nmol/L E2 for 10 min. Slides were washed twice
with PBS and fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde for 20 min. Permeabilization
of cell membranes was done with PBS containing 1:1,000 dilution of triton
X-100, 1 mmol/L MgCl2, and 0.1 mmol/L CaCl2. Cells were stained with ERa
primary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and fluorescein-conjugated
secondary antibody (Chemicon). Slides were washed with PBS, mounted
with vectashield hardset mounting medium with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Vector Laboratories), and visualized with an upright LSM510
2-photon confocal microscope (Zeiss).

Results
Generation of acquired resistance to AIs and TAM in vitro.
MCF-7aro cells, the only adequate aromatase+/ER+ system for
these studies, were used to generate T+LET R, T+ANA R, T+EXE R,
and T+TAM R cell lines. The addition of AIs or TAM induced a
selection process, whereby a large majority of cells initially
underwent cell death until the ability to proliferate was regained
(2–8 months, depending on inhibitor). The concentrations of
inhibitors (see Materials and Methods) were chosen to assure that
hormone-dependent cell proliferation was suppressed, based on
findings from previous studies in our laboratory (29, 30). Six
independent sets of each type of inhibitor-resistant line were
generated, which are continuously cultured in the presence of the
appropriate inhibitor and testosterone. As an additional control to
the parental cells, MCF-7aro lines were cultured long-term in the
presence of testosterone alone (T-Only cells). Besides the resistant
lines, long-term estrogen-deprived cell lines were generated by
prolonged culture of parental MCF-7aro cells in steroid-depleted
medium, and are called LTEDaro. Cell proliferation assays were
done to show acquired resistance to each drug. The resistant cell
lines showed proliferation rates similar to the parental MCF-7aro
cells, suggesting that acquired resistance had been gained (1).
The effect of acquired resistance on aromatase and ERa was
determined, to eliminate the possibility of adverse changes in these
cell lines, which may interfere with subsequent results. Real-time
PCR as well as Western analysis showed that no major changes had
occurred in aromatase or ERa mRNA and protein levels in the
LTEDaro or resistant cell lines, compared with MCF-7aro, except
aromatase protein levels in T+EXE R (Supplementary Table S2).
Wang and Chen (31) have reported that in addition to its action as
a mechanism based inhibitor, EXE is also an aromatase destabilizer
on the protein level. In addition, in-cell aromatase activity assays
showed that aromatase was still enzymatically active and
responded to AI treatment in the resistant cell lines, again, with
the exception of T+EXE R lines due to mechanism based inhibition
(Supplementary Table S2). Lastly, the resistant cell lines were
responsive to ICI treatment in cell proliferation assays, especially
the LTEDaro lines that showed a high sensitivity (Table S2).
Genome-wide analysis of LTEDaro and inhibitor-resistant
lines using microarray. Genome-wide analysis of gene expression
changes is an unbiased approach to elucidate mechanistic differences among the four inhibitor-resistant lines and LTEDaro. MCF7aro parental cell lines were used as baseline and a total of 264
genes that were up or down-regulated by >3.5-fold in the resistant
cell lines were selected. Hierarchical clustering analysis revealed
that the AI-resistant lines clustered together (T+LET R, T+ANA R,

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

and T+EXE R), with the biological replicates of each type of
resistant line grouping somewhat uniformly (Fig. 1). In contrast,
the LTEDaro lines did not cluster with the AI-resistant lines,
although LTED is proposed as a model system for AI resistance.
Similarly, T+TAM R lines did not cluster with the AI-resistant lines.
In this cell culture system, hormone treatment with testosterone
is converted to E2 by aromatase, resulting in the corresponding upregulation or down-regulation of estrogen-responsive gene expression, as indicated in the T-only cell lines. As shown by Itoh
and colleagues (29), addition of AIs or TAM counter-regulates
the expression of these estrogen-responsive genes in AI/TAMresponsive cells. Importantly, we found that in resistant cell lines,
the expression of most estrogen-regulated genes was not affected
by AIs or TAM. Based on the clustering analysis in Fig. 1, three
major types of estrogen-responsive genes were observed in our
hierarchical clustering, up-regulated in all cell lines (e.g., CTSD,
TFF1, CCND1, and BIRC5), up-regulated in all lines except LTEDaro
(e.g., PGR, GJA1, GREB1, and PDZK1), and up-regulated in all
lines except LTEDaro and T+TAM R (e.g., MGP, EGR3, AREG, and
CA2). Based on microarray analysis, validation of transcript levels
of estrogen-responsive genes was done to confirm these expression profiles, with select real-time quantitative PCR analysis shown
(Fig. 2).
Based on hierarchical clustering, the top 20 up-regulated and
down-regulated genes sorted by T-only cell lines, along with their
Gene Ontology (GO) functions and subcellular localization, are
shown (Supplementary Tables S3 and S4, respectively). These top
20 up-regulated genes were primarily estrogen-responsive, and
showed high levels of expression in the AI-resistant lines, with
minimal up-regulation or even down-regulation in the LTEDaro
lines (Supplementary Table S3). Up-regulated genes sorted by
T+TAM R lines were also primarily estrogen-responsive (Supplementary Table S5). T+TAM R gene expression profiles did share
some similarity with the AI-resistant lines, but certain genes such
as ASCL1, TEX14, and MPPED2 were unique to T+TAM R lines.
Based on our previous microarray work with AI and TAM
responsive cells, we have identified ASCL1 as a TAM-responsive
gene (29). In addition, further hierarchical clustering analysis
identified a group of 70 genes that were solely up-regulated in
LTEDaro and 40% of which were estrogen-responsive, according to
the above mentioned databases. The top 20 induced genes, from
this LTEDaro 70-gene set, were listed (Table S6). These LTEDarospecific estrogen-responsive genes were not up-regulated in the
other resistant lines, suggesting a unique mechanism of ERdependent transcriptional activation that differed in the LTEDaro
lines.
Venn diagram analysis was performed to look at a more global
gene expression profile of the resistant lines using results generated
from one-way ANOVA analysis, where a fold-change of F2 and
P value criteria of 0.001 were used. It was determined that the
three AI-resistant lines (T+LET R, T+ANA R, and T+EXE R) contained the most overlap in terms of global gene expression, f48%
overlap (Fig. 3B). It is worth noting that among the AI-resistant
lines, microarray data suggested that T+LET R and T+ANA R
cells were very comparable (64%; Fig. 3A). Although these two
AI-resistant lines were not completely identical in terms of gene
expression profiles, the overall estrogen-responsive gene expression
signatures were very similar. Genes that differed, not making the
2-fold cutoff, among the nonsteroidal AI-resistant lines included
ITM2A, CDC27, COL3A1, and PLS3 (only in T+LET R) and RAB31,
SOX3, TFPI, and PMP22 (only in T+ANA R). In contrast, the

4912

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Aromatase Inhibitor Resistance

Figure 1. Hierarchical clustering of resistant cell lines. Raw intensity values were background corrected and normalized using RMA. MCF-7aro parental cells were used
for baseline correction, and one-way ANOVA was performed with a 3.5-fold up-regulated or down-regulated gene expression cutoff and a 0.0001 P value criteria
(equivalent to FDR <1%) to select 264 significant genes. Hierarchical clustering was performed using Pearson’s correlation using Partek Genomics Suite, version
6.3Beta. Biological replicates of resistant lines are shown horizontally and significant genes are vertically clustered; red, up-regulation; green, down-regulation of gene
expression. LTED (LTEDaro), TAM (T+TAM R), ANA (T+ANA R), LET (T+LET R), EXE (T+EXE R), and T (T-Only) cell lines are shown.

LTEDaro lines, compared with the T+LET R and T+ANA R lines,
showed significantly less overlap (25%; Fig. 3D). Surprisingly, the
T+TAM R lines contained more overlap with the nonsteroidal
AI-resistant lines (35%; Fig. 3C) than LTEDaro. Additionally, correlation coefficients were calculated for all resistant lines and
displayed as a similarity matrix (Supplementary Fig. S1). The
AI-resistant lines correlate highly with each other, as indicated in
red. T+TAM R lines only correlate highly with themselves, as well
as LTEDaro that show no correlation with other resistant lines.
Functional analysis of the resistant cell lines was performed
using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA), using a 1.2-fold change
criteria and a P value of <0.01. Highly significant functions and
canonical pathways, compared with MCF-7aro, are shown
(Supplementary Table S7) as well as GO functions (Supplementary
Tables S3, S4, S5, and S6). All resistant cell lines were found to have
elevated DNA replication, recombination, and repair function.
Similar profiles were seen in cell cycle control and the pyrimidine
metabolism pathway, suggesting an enhanced survival mechanism
in the resistant cells (Supplementary Table S7). According to GO, all
resistant lines showed increased signal transduction, cell-cell
signaling, extracellular matrix support, and cell growth pathways
(Supplementary Tables S3 and S4). Of particular interest, changes
were seen in cellular assembly and organization, including cell
motility, morphology, and lamellipodia, which was especially

www.aacrjournals.org

relevant in the LTEDaro lines (Supplementary Tables S6 and S7).
Additionally, T-only lines often had a fewer number of genes and
lower P values, implying these survival functions/pathways,
although shared by the resistant lines, are a unique property of
acquired resistance.
Constitutive activation of ERA in the LTEDaro, T+LET R,
and T+ANA R lines. Based on estrogen-responsive gene profiles in
Fig. 1, it was apparent that the transcriptional functionality of ERa
differed in our resistant cell lines. Therefore, endogenous ERa
transcriptional activity was assessed in the parental and resistant
cell lines using a luciferase reporter assay. Comparison of DMSO
and E2 treatment revealed an activation of ERa transcriptional
activity, without the addition of the ligand (E2), in the LTEDaro,
T+LET R, and T+ANA R lines (Fig. 4A). In contrast, this E2independent activation of ERa was not seen in the parental MCF7aro, T-only, T+EXE R, and T+TAM R lines.
Ligand-independent activation of ERa in LTEDaro, T+LET R,
and T+ANA R lines suggested the possibility of phosphorylation in
the AF-1 region of the nuclear receptor. IP with ERa was done to
enrich total protein, followed by Western analysis, which
determined that phosphorylation of serine 118 of ERa was seen
in LTEDaro, T+LET R, and T+ANA R lines (Fig. 4B). These results
with serine 118 phosphorylation of ER confirm previous results
observed in the LTED system (23). Much lower levels of serine 118

4913

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Quantitative real-time PCR for
select estrogen-responsive genes.
Real-time PCR analysis is shown for the
following estrogen-responsive genes:
CTSD, PGR, GJA1 , and CA2 . Cells were
grown in appropriate growth medium, and
RNA was isolated and reverse transcribed
to obtain cDNA. This cDNA was used for
real-time PCR analysis in a 25 AL total
reaction containing 1 AL cDNA, genespecific primer, and iQ5 SYBR Green
Supermix. All samples were run in triplicate
and multiple independent biological
replicates of each type of resistant line
were used. Gene expression was
normalized with the b-actin housekeeping
gene. SD was calculated, and normalized
gene expression values were averaged
to obtain graphs shown.

ER phosphorylation were found in T+EXE R or T+TAM R lines, with
no phosphorylation in MCF-7aro. Moreover, phosphorylation at
serine 167 of ERa was not observed in any of the resistant lines
(data not shown). Based on these results, there is a clear difference
in ERa functionality in the LTEDaro, T+LET R, and T+ANA R
lines, which contain a constitutively active ER, versus the parental
MCF-7aro, T+EXE R, and T+TAM R lines, which depend on E2 for
activation of ERa.
Based on the observation that ERa is transcriptionally active
without E2 in select resistant lines, ER promoter occupancy of an
estrogen-responsive gene (TFF1 or pS2) was performed to establish
functional relevance of this finding. ChIP assays were done in the
resistant lines, using MCF-7aro and T-only cell lines as controls.
The LTEDaro, T+LET R, and T+ANA R lines showed a ligand-

independent recruitment of ERa to the pS2 promoter at the
location of the ERE (Fig. 4C). This recruitment of ERa was seen in
the DMSO-treated cells which was comparable with E2 treatment.
The control cell lines, as well as T+EXE R and T+TAM R lines,
showed a ligand-dependent recruitment of ERa to the pS2 promoter. These ChIP results agree with ER activity assays and phosphorylation profiles of ERa, suggesting that ER is constitutively
activated only in the LTEDaro, T+LET R, and T+ANA R lines, which
differ from parental MCF-7aro, T+TAM R, and T+EXE R cells.
Further characterization: cross-resistance, cell cycle, and
immunofluorescence analysis. Cross-resistance studies were
performed to determine whether acquired resistance to one
endocrine therapy agent would confer resistance to all agents, or
if response to a different inhibitor was achievable as a second-line

Figure 3. Comparison of global gene
expression profiles of resistant cell lines.
One-way ANOVA analysis comparing gene
expression of resistant lines to control
MCF-7aro cells was performed, and Venn
diagrams were produced using top
regulated genes with Partek Genomics
Suite. T+LET R and T+ANA R lines
contained 64% gene expression overlap
(A), 48% overlap was seen among the
three AI-resistant lines (T+LET R, T+ANA
R, and T+EXE R; B ), 35% overlap was
observed between the AI and TAM
(T+TAM R) lines (C ), and 25% overlap in
gene expression among the AI and LTED
(LTEDaro) lines was observed (D).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

4914

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Aromatase Inhibitor Resistance

Figure 4. ERa functionality in the control and resistant cell lines. A, the pGL3-ERE luciferase reporter plasmid was transiently transfected for 5 h with subsequent
medium change and treatment with either DMSO or E2 for 24 h. Cells were lysed and harvested, and luciferase activity was determined and normalized with protein
concentration, using triplicate wells for each treatment condition. A minimum of three independent experiments were carried out to determine ER activity in all
independent biological replicates of the resistant cell lines, with representative data shown. RLU , relative light units. B, resistant cells were harvested and subjected
to IP using a total ERa antibody, followed by Western analysis to determine ERa phosphorylation using a phospho-serine 118 ERa antibody or total ERa antibody as
loading control. C, ChIP analysis to determine ERa recruitment to the pS2 promoter was performed. Cells were grown in steroid-depleted conditions for 5 d and serum
starved for 24 h before addition of DMSO or E2 for 45 min. Total ERa antibody was used to pull-down protein complexes and to assess their recruitment to the
ERE sequence located in the pS2 promoter by PCR. A minimum of three independent ChIP experiments were performed for each type of resistant line shown.

treatment. The AI-resistant lines showed statistically significant
growth suppression to other AIs over TAM, whereas the growth of
T+TAM R lines was almost completely inhibited by AI exposure
(Fig. 5). In contrast, the LTEDaro lines do not show statistically significant inhibition of cell growth upon treatment with an AI or TAM.
Cell cycle analysis of the resistant cell lines was done and
compared with the cell cycle profiles of parental MCF-7aro, an
extremely robust cell line. As expected, MCF-7aro cells exhibit a
testosterone-dependent increase in cell cycle, especially in G2-M,
compared with DMSO control (Table 1). In contrast, the T+LET R
lines have similar cell cycle profiles under all conditions, suggesting
the constitutive activity of ER, which is no longer hormone
dependent. Both T+LET R and T+ANA R cells show similar cell
cycle profiles, whereas the T+EXE R and T+TAM R cells require the
presence of testosterone to drive the cell cycle (representative data
shown from T+LET R). All resistant cell lines no longer respond to
the presence of the inhibitor, as these cells have acquired resistance.
Immunofluorescence experiments were carried out to look at
subcellular localization of ER in the resistant cell lines, compared

with MCF-7aro (Fig. 6A and B). Upon treatment of MCF-7aro cells
with E2, nuclear translocation of ER was apparent (Fig. 6B). This is
different from LTEDaro and T+LET R lines (representative lines
shown), where ER staining, after E2 treatment, is seen in both the
cytoplasm and the nucleus (Fig. 6B). Immunofluorescence analysis
also revealed a unique morphology to the LTEDaro lines. As shown
in Fig. 6, the LTEDaro cells exhibit long axon-like extensions, or
pseudopodia, as described by Santen and colleagues (32). These
pseudopodia were not seen in other resistant lines, or the parental
MCF-7aro.

Discussion
From the clinical viewpoint, acquired resistance to AIs or TAM
renders patients unresponsive to current modes of endocrine
treatment for hormone-responsive breast cancer. Therefore, a great
deal of laboratory research has been dedicated to understanding
the mechanisms of acquired resistance on the molecular level.
We have established a cell culture model system for AI-resistance,

Figure 5. Cross-resistance studies and
cell cycle analysis of resistant lines.
Resistant cell lines were treated second
line with either DMSO, LET, ANA, EXE,
or TAM to assess response after acquired
resistance to the first agent. Crossresistance was determined using cell
proliferation assays, with protein
concentration as a reference. Cell growth
was shown as a percent of control
(resistant line treated with same inhibitor),
with three independent experiments
shown. Student’s t test was used for
statistical analysis compared with control.
**, P < 0.001; *, P < 0.01. No T, no
testosterone.

www.aacrjournals.org

4915

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Table 1. Cell cycle analysis of MCF-7aro and T+LET R cell lines
Cell line

Treatment

MCF-7aro
MCF-7aro
MCF-7aro
T+LET R
T+LET R
T+LET R

DMSO
T
T+LET
DMSO
T
T+LET

G1
87.3
68.0
78.5
74.1
70.0
71.9

F
F
F
F
F
F

S
1.2
1.7
5.5
2.9
2.5
1.5

6.3
20.9
12.7
13.9
17.1
14.5

F
F
F
F
F
F

G2-M
1.1
1.4
3.5
1.5
1.9
1.3

5.6
10.5
8.1
11.1
12.0
12.8

F
F
F
F
F
F

0.8
1.3
1.4
1.2
1.3
0.4

NOTE: Data are shown as percent of total cell number for G1, S, and G2-M phases and is representative of three independent experiments,
with F SDs shown.

T+ LET R, T+ANA R, and T+EXE R, and for comparison, we have
also generated LTEDaro and T+TAM R cell lines. This study has
shown that acquired resistance to AIs is inherently different from
LTEDaro and T+TAM R, and that the transcriptional program of
ERa plays a critical role in these resistance mechanisms.
Our laboratory has previously carried out microarray analysis of
MCF-7aro cells treated short-term with AIs and TAM, to identify
genes that are responsive to inhibitor treatment. Genes such as
TFF1, SULF1, PDZK1, MGP, EGR3, and CTSD were up-regulated
by hormone treatment alone and down-regulated by AI or TAM
treatment (29). In contrast, MCF-7aro AI–resistant cell lines
showed an up-regulation of estrogen-responsive gene expression,
despite the presence of the inhibitor. This suggests that acquired
resistance to AIs has indeed changed the gene expression profiles
of these cells. Using hierarchical clustering and Venn diagram
analysis, the nonsteroidal AI-resistant lines, T+LET R and T+ANA
R, exhibit similar gene expression profiles, suggesting their
mechanisms of resistance may be related. The steroidal AI,
T+EXE R lines, do share some global similarity with the T+LET R
and T+ANA R lines, based on hierarchical clustering, but experiments addressing ER functionality differentiate T+EXE R from
T+LET R and T+ANA R. Based on work with EXE, we have observed
that this steroidal AI does have weak estrogenic properties (33).
EXE may bind directly to and activate ER, therefore eliminating the
need for constitutive ER activation, which was seen in the T+LET R
and T+ANA R lines. In addition, our laboratory has further
investigated EXE-resistant lines and data suggests that amphiregulin is involved in an autocrine loop, which is ER and EGFR
dependent (34).
Using hierarchical clustering and Venn diagram analysis, T+TAM
R and especially LTEDaro gene expression profiles differed
immensely from the AI-resistant lines. Our microarray as well as
ER functional studies suggest that T+TAM R lines retain estrogen
dependency and gene expression signatures between the AI- and
T+TAM R lines can be effectively differentiated. As shown in
Supplementary Tables S3 and S5, the top 20 up-regulated genes in
the T+TAM R lines are quite unique from the AI-resistant lines,
with some common estrogen-responsive genes (PDZK1, GREB1,
PGR , and TFF1). Previous microarray analysis of TAM resistance
has been quite variable, with some groups reporting an increase in
expression of HER2 or EGFR (35) with contrasting data reporting
no changes in expression levels (36). In terms of TAM resistance,
our microarray data shows slight decreases in HER2 and EGFR
expression levels, with little changes seen in MAPK expression

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

levels. Schiff and Osborne (37) have presented the idea of altered ER
coregulatory proteins in TAM resistance, such as AIB1, which can be
phosphorylated and subsequently activated by HER2 and downstream MAPK activity. The role of coactivators in TAM resistance
may serve to differentiate these cells from AI-resistant lines.
Similarly, LTEDaro showed the least overlap with AI-resistant
lines in clustering and Venn diagram analysis, and many genes upregulated in the AI-resistant lines show minimal or negative
regulation in LTEDaro. Also, significantly up-regulated genes in the
LTEDaro lines are unique from AI-resistant lines, and according to
GO function and IPA, some of these genes are involved in
membrane/cytoskeletal organization (Supplementary Tables S6
and S7), a finding that is supported by morphologic changes seen
in immunofluorescence experiments (Fig. 6). Similar to our
findings, Mackay and colleagues (38) have reported changes in
expression profiles of genes involved in extracellular matrix
remodeling in breast cancer patient samples treated short term
with LET or ANA. Interestingly, progesterone receptor (PR), a
known estrogen-responsive gene, was up-regulated in all lines
except LTEDaro, suggesting that LTEDaro may be a model for ER+/
PR breast cancers. It has been reported that loss of PR expression
may be due to growth factor activity, nongenomic ER activity, and/
or altered ER coregulator levels (37, 39, 40). The LTEDaro lines,
never being exposed to estrogen, but having a constitutively active
ER, may have undergone a survival mechanism to drive breast
cancer proliferation. Although ER is functional in LTEDaro, the
transactivation potential of ER is altered, as seen in gene
expression profiles that greatly differ from the AI-resistant lines.
Based on the importance of ERa in breast cancer progression as
well as our own microarray data of estrogen-responsive gene
profiles, we also focused on the functionality of this nuclear
receptor in our resistant cell lines. We observed that the LTEDaro,
T+LET R, and T+ANA R lines contained a constitutively active
ERa, which did not depend on the presence of E2 for activation.
Our results of ERa phosphorylation at serine 118 (ligandindependent activation) are supported by previous findings in
LTED lines (23), with different results from LET-resistance studies
that implicate serine 167 ER phosphorylation (26). In terms of
TAM resistance, there are contradictory reports regarding ERa
phosphorylation, an increase in serine 118 phosphorylation (22, 41)
with contrasting results indicating a decrease in ERa phosphorylation at serine 118 (42) and phosphorylation of ERa at serine 167
(43). Because our T+TAM R lines do seem to be E2 dependent, the
very low levels of serine 118 phosphorylation of ER does correlate

4916

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Aromatase Inhibitor Resistance

Figure 6. Immunofluorescence of resistant cell lines.
Immunofluorescene was carried out to look at
subcellular localization of ER in the resistant cell lines.
Cells were seeded onto 4-well chamber slides, serum
starved for 24 h, and treated with DMSO (A ) or
1 nmol/L E2 (B ) for 10 min. Cells were stained with
ERa primary antibody and fluorescein-conjugated
secondary antibody. Slides were washed with PBS,
mounted with vectashield hardset mounting medium
with DAPI, and visualized with an upright 2-photon
confocal microscope. ER staining, DAPI visualization,
and a merge of both images are shown.

with this observation. Yet, this phosphorylation of ER in the
LTEDaro as well as nonsteroidal AI-resistant lines does suggest the
activation of the MAPK pathway, which has been previously shown
at serine 118 of ER (23, 44, 45). This potential involvement of
MAPK, as well as the reported role of EGFR in EXE resistance (34),
support the use of signal transduction inhibitors or even pan
kinase inhibitors as combination treatment to combat endocrine
therapy resistance.
Using a well-defined model system, we believe our results
establish a fundamental difference among acquired resistance

www.aacrjournals.org

mechanisms of AIs, TAM, and LTEDaro. Based on expression
profiles, nonsteroidal AI-resistant lines are very similar, but
steroidal and nonsteroidal AI-resistant lines do differ in ER
functionality, potentially due to agonist qualities of EXE. In
addition, previous reports as well as our data suggest that TAM
resistance is inherently different from AI resistance, with ER
coregulators potentially playing an important role. Lastly,
although ER functionality seems to be similar in LTEDaro versus
AI-resistant lines, estrogen-responsive gene profiles greatly differ
and suggest changes in ER function. Therefore, we believe that ER

4917

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

is a master regulator in differentiating between LTEDaro, TAM,
and AI resistance mechanisms. This report provides valuable
information regarding acquired resistance to AIs, which may be
effective in treatment strategies to circumvent breast cancer
relapse.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
L. Wagman: Medwaves, Inc. consultant. The other authors disclosed no potential
conflicts of interest.

References
1. Chen S, Masri S, Wang X, Phung S, Yuan YC, Wu X.
What do we know about the mechanisms of aromatase
inhibitor resistance? J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2006;
102:232–40.
2. Santner SJ, Chen S, Zhou D, Korsunsky Z, Martel J,
Santen RJ. Effect of androstenedione on growth of
untransfected and aromatase-transfected MCF-7 cells in
culture. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1993;44:611–6.
3. Yue W, Wang JP, Hamilton CJ, Demers LM, Santen RJ.
In situ aromatization enhances breast tumor estradiol
levels and cellular proliferation. Cancer Res 1998;58:927–32.
4. Yager JD, Liehr JG. Molecular mechanisms of estrogen
carcinogenesis. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1996;36:
203–32.
5. Yue W, Santen RJ, Wang JP, et al. Genotoxic
metabolites of estradiol in breast: potential mechanism
of estradiol induced carcinogenesis. J Steroid Biochem
Mol Biol 2003;86:477–86.
6. Nicholson RI, McClelland RA, Robertson JF, Gee JM.
Involvement of steroid hormone and growth factor
cross-talk in endocrine response in breast cancer.
Endocr Relat Cancer 1999;6:373–87.
7. Yager JD, Davidson NE. Estrogen carcinogenesis in
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;354:270–82.
8. Jordan VC. Tamoxifen (ICI46,474) as a targeted
therapy to treat and prevent breast cancer. Br J
Pharmacol 2006;147 Suppl 1:S269–76.
9. Osborne CK, Shou J, Massarweh S, Schiff R. Crosstalk
between estrogen receptor and growth factor receptor
pathways as a cause for endocrine therapy resistance in
breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:865–70s.
10. Ring A, Dowsett M. Mechanisms of tamoxifen
resistance. Endocr Relat Cancer 2004;11:643–58.
11. Coombes RC, Hall E, Gibson LJ, et al. A randomized
trial of exemestane after two to three years of tamoxifen
therapy in postmenopausal women with primary breast
cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1081–92.
12. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. Randomized trial
of letrozole following tamoxifen as extended adjuvant
therapy in receptor-positive breast cancer: updated
findings from NCIC CTG MA.17. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;
97:1262–71.
13. Howell A, Cuzick J, Baum M, et al. Results of the
ATAC (Arimidex, tamoxifen, alone or in combination)
trial after completion of 5 years’ adjuvant treatment for
breast cancer. Lancet 2005;365:60–2.
14. Brueggemeier RW. Aromatase, aromatase inhibitors,
and breast cancer. Am J Ther 2001;8:333–44.
15. Nawata H, Bronzert D, Lippman ME. Isolation and
characterization of a tamoxifen-resistant cell line
derived from MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. J Biol
Chem 1981;256:5016–21.
16. Vignon F, Lippman ME, Nawata H, Derocq D,
Rochefort H. Induction of two estrogen-responsive
proteins by antiestrogens in R27, a tamoxifen-resistant
clone of MCF7 cells. Cancer Res 1984;44:2084–8.
17. Gutierrez MC, Detre S, Johnston S, et al. Molecular
changes in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer: relation-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Acknowledgments
Received 1/24/2008; revised 3/24/2008; accepted 3/31/2008.
Grant support: NIH predoctoral training fellowship CA123691 to S. Masri and NIH
grant CA044735 to S. Chen.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Xiaowen Wang for her technical assistance in using Partek Genomics
Suite.
Microarray data in this publication have been deposited in NCBIs Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and are accessible through GEO
Series accession number GSE10911.

ship between estrogen receptor, HER-2, and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:
2469–76.
18. Hiscox S, Morgan L, Green TP, Barrow D, Gee J,
Nicholson RI. Elevated Src activity promotes cellular
invasion and motility in tamoxifen resistant breast
cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2006;97:263–74.
Epub 2005 Dec 7.
19. Jordan NJ, Gee JM, Barrow D, Wakeling AE, Nicholson
RI. Increased constitutive activity of PKB/Akt in
tamoxifen resistant breast cancer MCF-7 cells. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2004;87:167–80.
20. Nabha SM, Glaros S, Hong M, et al. Upregulation of
PKC-y contributes to antiestrogen resistance in mammary tumor cells. Oncogene 2005;24:3166–76.
21. Schafer JM, Bentrem DJ, Takei H, Gajdos C, Badve S,
Jordan VC. A mechanism of drug resistance to
tamoxifen in breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
2002;83:75–83.
22. Shou J, Massarweh S, Osborne CK, et al. Mechanisms
of tamoxifen resistance: increased estrogen receptorHER2/neu cross-talk in ER/HER2-positive breast cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:926–35.
23. Martin LA, Farmer I, Johnston SR, Ali S, Marshall C,
Dowsett M. Enhanced estrogen receptor (ER) a, ERBB2,
and MAPK signal transduction pathways operate during
the adaptation of MCF-7 cells to long term estrogen
deprivation. J Biol Chem 2003;278:30458–68.
24. Sabnis GJ, Jelovac D, Long B, Brodie A. The role of
growth factor receptor pathways in human breast
cancer cells adapted to long-term estrogen deprivation.
Cancer Res 2005;65:3903–10.
25. Santen RJ, Song RX, Zhang Z, et al. Long-term
estradiol deprivation in breast cancer cells up-regulates
growth factor signaling and enhances estrogen sensitivity. Endocr Relat Cancer 2005;12 Suppl 1:S61–73.
26. Jelovac D, Sabnis G, Long BJ, Macedo L, Goloubeva
OG, Brodie AM. Activation of mitogen-activated protein
kinase in xenografts and cells during prolonged
treatment with aromatase inhibitor letrozole. Cancer
Res 2005;65:5380–9.
27. Sun XZ, Zhou D, Chen S. Autocrine and paracrine
actions of breast tumor aromatase. A three-dimensional
cell culture study involving aromatase transfected MCF7 and T-47D cells. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1997;63:
29–36.
28. Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for the
quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem
1976;72:248–54.
29. Itoh T, Karlsberg K, Kijima I, et al. Letrozole-, anastrozole-, and tamoxifen-responsive genes in MCF-7aro cells: a
microarray approach. Mol Cancer Res 2005;3:203–18.
30. Kijima I, Itoh T, Chen S. Growth inhibition of
estrogen receptor-positive and aromatase-positive human breast cancer cells in monolayer and spheroid
cultures by letrozole, anastrozole, and tamoxifen. J
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2005;97:360–8.
31. Wang X, Chen S. Aromatase destabilizer: novel action
of exemestane, a food and drug administration-

4918

approved aromatase inhibitor. Cancer Res 2006;66:
10281–6.
32. Santen RJ, Song RX, Zhang Z, et al. Adaptive
hypersensitivity to estrogen: mechanisms and clinical
relevance to aromatase inhibitor therapy in breast
cancer treatment. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2005;95:
155–65.
33. Masri S, Lui K, Phung S, et al. Characterization of the
weak ERa agonistic activity of exemestane [abstract
5434]. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 2008;49:1291.
34. Wang X, Masri S, Phung S, Chen S. The role of amphiregulin in exemestane-resistant breast cancer cells:
evidence of an autocrine loop. Cancer Res 2008;68:
2259–65.
35. Massarweh S, Osborne CK, Creighton CJ, et al.
Tamoxifen resistance in breast tumors is driven by
growth factor receptor signaling with repression of
classic estrogen receptor genomic function. Cancer Res
2008;68:826–33.
36. Treeck O, Zhou R, Diedrich K, Ortmann O. Tamoxifen
long-term treatment in vitro alters the apoptotic
response of MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Anticancer
Drugs 2004;15:787–93.
37. Schiff R, Massarweh SA, Shou J, et al. Advanced
concepts in estrogen receptor biology and breast cancer
endocrine resistance: implicated role of growth factor
signaling and estrogen receptor coregulators. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 2005;56 Suppl 1:10–20.
38. Mackay A, Urruticoechea A, Dixon JM, et al.
Molecular response to aromatase inhibitor treatment
in primary breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2007;9:R37.
39. Arpino G, Weiss H, Lee AV, et al. Estrogen receptorpositive, progesterone receptor-negative breast cancer:
association with growth factor receptor expression and
tamoxifen resistance. J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97:1254–61.
40. Cui X, Schiff R, Arpino G, Osborne CK, Lee AV.
Biology of progesterone receptor loss in breast cancer
and its implications for endocrine therapy. J Clin Oncol
2005;23:7721–35.
41. Britton DJ, Hutcheson IR, Knowlden JM, et al.
Bidirectional cross talk between ERa and EGFR
signalling pathways regulates tamoxifen-resistant
growth. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2006;96:131–46.
42. Kuske B, Naughton C, Moore K, et al. Endocrine
therapy resistance can be associated with high estrogen
receptor a (ERa) expression and reduced ERa phosphorylation in breast cancer models. Endocr Relat
Cancer 2006;13:1121–33.
43. Campbell RA, Bhat-Nakshatri P, Patel NM, Constantinidou D, Ali S, Nakshatri H. Phosphatidylinositol 3kinase/AKT-mediated activation of estrogen receptor a:
a new model for anti-estrogen resistance. J Biol Chem
2001;276:9817–24.
44. Bunone G, Briand PA, Miksicek RJ, Picard D.
Activation of the unliganded estrogen receptor by EGF
involves the MAP kinase pathway and direct phosphorylation. EMBO J 1996;15:2174–83.
45. Kato S, Endoh H, Masuhiro Y, et al. Activation of the
estrogen receptor through phosphorylation by mitogenactivated protein kinase. Science 1995;270:1491–4.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Genome-Wide Analysis of Aromatase Inhibitor-Resistant,
Tamoxifen-Resistant, and Long-Term Estrogen-Deprived
Cells Reveals a Role for Estrogen Receptor
Selma Masri, Sheryl Phung, Xin Wang, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:4910-4918.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/12/4910
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/06/09/68.12.4910.DC1

This article cites 45 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/12/4910.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/12/4910.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

