Oncotarget, November, Vol.4, No 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial Material

Hexokinase 2 as oncotarget.
Krushna C. Patra and Nissim Hay

majority of adult normal cells, HK2 is expressed at high levels
in many cancer cells. Perhaps a positive FDG-PET scan of
tumors in vivo is an indirect indication of high HK2 expression
in these tumor cells [4] because glucose (or FDG) entry through
glucose transporters can be reversible and its intracellular
retention is dependent on its phosphorylation.
In our recent published studies [5], we showed that HK2
expression is dramatically elevated in tumors derived from
mouse models of lung and breast cancer. By contrast HK2
expression in normal lung and mammary gland is undetectable.
Thus, HK2 expression distinguishes cancer cells from normal
cells. Importantly the high level of HK2 expression is required
for oncogenic transformation in vitro and for tumor initiation
in mouse model of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and
breast cancer. In complementary experiments we found that
HK2 is required for the tumorigenicity of human NSCLC
and breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. HK2 is required
for tumorigenicity despite the continuous expression of HK1.
However, the feasibility of targeting HK2 for cancer therapy
remains questionable especially since the germ line deletion
of Hk2 in the mouse causes embryonic lethality. Surprisingly,
systemic deletion of Hk2 in the adult mouse did not elicit any
visible overt phenotype and did not impair normal glucose
homeostasis, at least under resting conditions. Moreover the
systemic deletion of Hk2 impairs tumor progression in a mouse
model of NSCLC. These results provided a genetic proof of
concept that HK2 could be a selective therapeutic target for
cancer.

It is well established that cancer cells differ from most
somatic adult cells by their high rate of aerobic glycolysis
despite oxidative phosphorylation. This distinct property of
cancer cells is often used for tumor imaging in vivo following
the administration of the labeled glucose analog, fluoro deoxy
glucose (FDG). The high uptake of the labeled FDG in cancer
cells can then be detected by positron emission tomography
(PET). The elevated glucose metabolism in cancer cells is not
necessarily required for the generation of ATP but rather to
provide building blocks for nucleic acid, fatty acid, and protein
synthesis in the rapidly dividing cancer cells [1]. Thus, if the
high rate of glucose metabolism in cancer cells is being used
to distinguish cancer cells from normal cells, it could also be
exploited to selectively target cancer cells in cancer therapy.
However, a major challenge in targeting glucose metabolism for
cancer therapy is to identify a strategy that would selectively
target cancer cells while sparing normal cells, and that would
not dramatically impair systemic metabolic homeostasis.
Another posed question is; which enzymatic activities should be
chosen as targets for selective cancer therapy? Although several
enzymes in glycolysis and in the pathways branching from the
canonical glycolysis pathway were found to be elevated in
cancer cells, these enzymes are also expressed in the normal
cells.
In principle it would be best to target the most committed
and irreversible reactions in glucose metabolism. There are
three irreversible reactions in glycolysis. The first reaction is
catalyzed by hexokinase and the second and third reactions
are catalyzed by phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase
respectively. Ideally it would be ideal if cancer cells could
be targeted by cutting down glucose flux at the earliest step
in glucose metabolism. The first committed step in glucose
metabolism is the ATP dependent conversion of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), which is catalyzed by hexokinases
(HKs). This step determines the direction and magnitude of
glucose flux inside the cells, because G6P is at the branching
point that supports not only glycolysis but also the pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP), glycogenesis and the hexosamine
pathways [2].
In mammals, there are four hexokinase isoforms, HK1,
HK2, HK3, and HK4 (also known as glucokinase), encoded by
separate genes. While HK1, HK2, and HK3 have high affinity
for glucose, HK4 has low affinity for glucose and its expression
is restricted to the pancreas and liver. HK3 is usually expressed
at low levels and is inhibited in physiological concentrations
of glucose. HK1 and HK2 are unique with their ability to bind
the outer mitochondrial membrane. They are structurally and
functionally similar to each other and both are inhibited by their
catalytic product G6P. Both HK1 and HK2 are highly expressed
in embryonic tissues. However, while HK1 is ubiquitously
expressed in the majority of adult tissues, HK2 is expressed at
relatively high level only in adipose tissues, skeletal muscles,
and heart [3,5]. Despite its absence or low expression in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tumor
HK2 Deletion

Glucose
Glucose

Glutamine

Glutamine

Figure 1: A cartoon depicting HK2 is required for
glucose and glutamine metabolism in tumor cells.
The metabolic pathways inside the cells are like cogwheels
inside a machine, controlled by a propelling wheel. In cancer
cells, HK2 is a major propelling wheel in glucose metabolism
to support accelerated ribonucleotide synthesis and glutamine
utilization in the TCA cycle, and to fulfill anabolic demands.
HK2 ablation decelerates these pathways resulting in an
attenuated tumor growth.
1862

Oncotarget 2013; 4:

In oncogenic KRas-induced NSCLC cells, HK2 is
required, in addition to HK1, for nucleotides biosynthesis via
the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, which is a major
route of ribonucleotides synthesis in these cells. Indeed, the
deletion of HK2 reduced the incorporation glucose-derived
deoxyribonucleotides, into DNA synthesis (Fig.1). In addition,
HK2 is required for the flow of citrate, derived from glucose,
into the TCA cycle, and surprisingly for glutamine utilization in
the TCA cycle (Fig1.). The metabolomics studies also suggest
that in the absence of HK2 there is a decrease in the serine
biosynthesis pathway and fatty acids synthesis. We concluded
that while HK1 expression is sufficient for the metabolic
demand of normal cells, it could not fulfill the metabolic demand
of proliferating cancer cells, which requires the expression of
HK2.
Although targeting HK2 for cancer intervention looks
promising, the biggest challenge ahead would be to design an
isoform specific inhibitor, because of the overlapping enzymatic
properties of HK2 with the ubiquitously expressed isoform,
HK1. However although HK1 and HK2 are similar to each
other there are some differences that could be exploited for
the selective inhibition of HK2. For instance, although both
isoforms are subjected to feedback inhibition by G6P, inorganic
phosphates negate the inhibition of HK1, while sensitizing HK2
inhibition (3). Since the highly metabolic cancer cells usually
have higher levels of intracellular inorganic phosphate, a G6P
mimetic could preferentially inhibit HK2 in cancer cells.
Krushna C. Patra: Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA
Nissim Hay: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA and Research & Development
Section, Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
Correspondence: Krushna C. Patra, email kpatra@mgh.harvard.edu
Correspondence: Nissim Hay, email nhay@uic.edu
Received: October 2, 2013;
Published: October 31, 2013;

REFERENCES
1.	 Lunt SY and Vander Heiden MG. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol. 2011; 27: 441-464
2.	

Robey RB and Hay N. Oncogene 2006; 25: 4683-4696

3.	

Wilson JE. J Exp Biol. 2003; 206: 2049-2057

4.	

Fukunaga T et al. J Nucl Med. 1998; 39: 1002-1007

5.	

Patra KC et al. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24: 213-228

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1863

Oncotarget 2013; 4:

