Oncotarget, October, Vol.3, No 10

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibiting the molecular evolution of cancer through HSP90
Ana Sofia Martins, Faith E Davies and Paul Workman
Commentary on: Heat Shock Protein 90 is overexpressed in high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes and associated with higher expression and activation of Focal Adhesion Kinase. Oncotarget. 2012 Oct;3(10).

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a very
heterogeneous group of conditions affecting the
hematopoietic system. They are characterised by
inefficient maturation of haematopoietic precursors with
increased risk of evolution to acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML) (Figure 1) (1). A new study from Flandrin-Gresta
et al (2) shows the importance of the molecular chaperone
heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) and its ‘client’ proteins
in the molecular evolution of MDS and indicates the
therapeutic potential of HSP90 inhibitors in preventing
this. There are exciting broader implications for use of
HSP90 inhibitors earlier in the natural history of clinical
malignancies.
Standard of care for patients with MDS typically
includes supportive therapy (including transfusions of
the deficient cells), epigenetic drugs and/or cytotoxic
chemotherapy depending on disease subtype, genetic
abnormalities, International Prognostic Scoring System
stage and performance status (1). Stem cell transplantation
from the bone marrow of suitable donors may be a viable
alternative. Treatment options were increased recently
with approval of drugs such as lenalidomide, and there
are other new agents and drug combinations currently
undergoing clinical evaluation (1). Nevertheless, novel
agents targeted to the molecular pathogenesis of MDS are
urgently needed.
Many molecular aberrations occur in MDS,
ranging from chromosomal abnormalities, amplifications,
deletions and mutations to epigenetic changes. Genes
involved cover a variety of biological processes supporting
malignancy and include TET2, ASXL1, RUNX1, IDH1,
IDH2, EZH2, and those encoding various tyrosine kinases,
as well as NRAS, KRAS, CBL and TP53 (3).
The importance of HSP90 in cancer is well
established, in particular its role in supporting the active
conformation of many oncogenic client proteins (4).
Pharmacologic inhibition of HSP90 causes degradation
of these client proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway, profoundly inhibiting many signal transduction
pathways and inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis (5).
The therapeutically attractive ability of HSP90 inhibitors
to deplete simultaneously many cancer-causing clients,
reducing the molecular avenues via which drug resistance
can develop, has led to these agents becoming of major
pharmaceutical company interest, with ~20 inhibitors
entering clinical trials (4).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Phase I and II clinical studies have shown promising
results for HSP90 inhibitors in malignancies addicted to
particular HSP90 clients, especially HER2+ trastuzumabrefractory breast and EGFR-mutant and ALK-translocated
non small cell lung cancer, as well as other opportunities
in haematological cancers, including multiple myeloma
(where HSP90 inhibition exploits the unfolded protein
response) and leukaemias driven by HSP90 clients
(eg FLT3 in AML and BCR-ABL in chronic myeloid
leukaemia) (4).
Previous studies in a large series of AML patients
revealed an association between higher expression levels
of HSP90 and poor prognosis together with enhanced
activation of oncogenic signaling pathways involving
PI3 kinase, AKT and ERK1/2 (6). Furthermore, HSP27,
HSP70 and HSP90 are overexpressed in advanced MDS
compared to early MDS and normal bone marrow,
consistent with involvement of HSPs in the pathogenesis
and evolution of this condition (7).
In the present issue of Oncotarget, Flandrin-Gresta
and colleagues now report the clinical and biological
relevance of HSP90 and phosphorylated forms of its
protein kinase clients AKT and FAK (focal adhesion
kinase) in bone marrow mononuclear cells (dysplastic
white cells) and CD34+ cells (myeloid stem cells) from a
series of 177 patients with MDS, determined at diagnosis
and in some cases after evolution to high grade MDS or
to AML (2).
First, they observe that HSP90, FAK, phospho-FAK
and phospho-AKT are overexpressed in high risk MDS
and are associated with shorter survival and increased
risk of progression to AML. The expression levels of
all of these proteins were significantly higher after
transformation than at the time of diagnosis.
Next, the authors show that the pharmacologic
HSP90 inhibitor tanespimycin (17-AAG) reduces
viability and markedly increases apoptosis in bone marrow
mononuclear cells and CD34+ cells isolated from 39
patients. Furthermore, tanespimycin decreases expression
of FAK, phospho-FAK and phospho-AKT. Somewhat
surprisingly, HSP70 is not induced while HSP90 levels
are decreased.
Taken together, these results suggest a possible new
clinical application for HSP90 inhibitors in MDS, either
alone or combined with agents such as disease-relevant
kinase inhibitors or epigenetic therapies (8). In addition,
1054

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1054-1056

Blood stem cell

HSP90 inhibitors

HSP90 and clients

Myeloid stem cell

Lymphoid stem cell

Abnormal/dysplastic
myeloid precursors
MDS
Myeloblast

Lymphoblast

AML
Red blood cells

Platelets

White blood cells

Figure 1: Potential for HSP90 inhibition in MDS and AML. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal

haematopoietic stem cell diseases characterised by cytopenia(s), dysplasia in one or more of the major myeloid cell lines, ineffective
haematopoiesis and increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Flandrin-Gresta and colleagues (2) show that,
together with its client proteins FAK, phospho-FAK and phospho-AKT, expression of the molecular chaperone HSP90 is increased in the
progression of MDS into AML (left-hand side). Depleting these overexpressed and activated oncogenic client proteins (and others) with
HSP90 inhibitors may be a potential novel therapeutic strategy for MDS. The thickening blunt arrows on the left-hand side indicate greater
expression and potentially increasing dependence on HSP90 with progression from MDS to AML. Thus as well as having clinical potential
in AML, the suggested involvement of HSP90 and its client proteins in the molecular evolution of MDS to AML suggests the possible use
of HSP90 at an early stage to prevent disease progression. Such earlier use would be consistent with the hypothesis that HSP90 is necessary
to support initial oncogenic transformation as well as subsequent malignant progression as a general mechanism in cancer, for example by
stabilizing and preventing the proteasomal destruction of metastable oncogenic client proteins (4). Hence it is possible that the application
of HSP90 inhibitors earlier in the natural history of human malignancies may have much broader clinical applicability and may reveal
greater therapeutic impact.

HSP90, phospho-FAK and phospho-AKT may be useful
prognostic or predictive biomarkers in MDS.
Further work is needed to understand the exact
mechanisms by which HSP90 is involved in the
pathogenesis of MDS and its progression to AML,
including the contribution of chaperone support for FAK,
AKT and quite possibly other HSP90 clients, including
mutated FLT3. In addition, following termination of
tanespimycin development, preclinical and clinical studies
are now needed to assess the impact of improved, nextgeneration HSP90 inhibitors (4) in MDS.
Of particular biological as well as therapeutic
interest is that the use of HSP90 inhibitors to prevent
the molecular evolution of MDS to AML would be the
first example of their application to prevent progression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

from pre-malignant to fully malignant disease. Such
a clinical use, potentially applicable to other cancers,
would be consistent with the hypothesis that HSP90 is
essential to support initial oncogenic transformation as
well as subsequent malignant progression, for example
by preventing destruction of metastable oncogenic driver
client proteins. This would encourage treatment with
HSP90 inhibitors earlier in the natural history of other
human malignancies, with potential for even greater
clinical impact.

Conflict of Interest
The Institute of Cancer Research has a commercial
interest in HSP90 inhibitors.
1055

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1054-1056

Ana Sofia Martins: Cancer Research UK Cancer
Therapeutics Unit, The Institute of Cancer Research,
London, UK
Faith E Davies: Divisions of Cancer Therapeutics,
Molecular Pathology and Clinical Studies, The Institute of
Cancer Research, London, UK
Paul Workman: Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics
Unit, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK
Correspondence: Paul Workman, email paul.workman@icr.
ac.uk
Received: November 04, 2012;
Published: November 05, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	

Garcia-Manero G. Am J Hematol. 2012; 87: 692-701.

2.	 Flandrin-Gresta P, Solly F, Aanei CM et al. Oncotarget.
2012 	
3.	 Shih AH, Abdel-Wahab O, Patel JP et al. Nat Rev Cancer.
2012; 12: 599-612.
4.	

Neckers L, Workman P. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18:64-76.

5.	 Hostein I, Robertson D, DiStefano F et al. Cancer Res.
2001; 61:4003-9.
6.	 Flandrin P, Guyotat D, Duval A et al. Cell Stress
Chaperones. 2008;13:357-64.
7.	 Duval A, Olaru D, Campos L et al. Haematologica. 2006;
91:713-4.
8.	 George P, Bali P, Annavarapu S et al. Blood.
2005;105:1768-76.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1056

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1054-1056

