Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bortezomib induces AMPK-dependent autophagosome formation
uncoupled from apoptosis in drug resistant cells
Sajjeev
Jaganathan1,2,
Ehsan
Malek1,2,
Subrahmanya
3
Sivakumar Vallabhapurapu , James J. Driscoll1,2,3

Vallabhapurapu3,

1

 epartment of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, The Vontz Center for Molecular Studies,
D
Cincinnati, OH 45267

2

Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267

3

Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267

Correspondence to:
James J. Driscoll, e-mail: driscojs@uc.edu
Keywords: Myeloma, proteasome, drug Resistance, autophagy, apoptosis
Received: August 06, 2014 	

Accepted: October 11, 2014 	

Published: October 18, 2014

ABSTRACT
The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is an effective anti-cancer agent for the
plasma cell malignancy multiple myeloma but clinical response is hindered by the
emergence of drug resistance through unknown mechanisms. Drug sensitive myeloma
cells were exposed to bortezomib to generate drug resistant cells that displayed a
significant increase in subunits of the energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK). AMPK activity in resistant cells was increased and bortezomib resistant cells
contained a ~4-fold greater level of autophagosomes than drug sensitive cells. Realtime measurements indicated that bortezomib reduced the oxygen consumption rate
in drug sensitive cells more readily than in resistant cells. Genetic ablation of AMPK
activity reduced the bortezomib effect on autophagy. The autophagy-related gene
(Atg)5 is required for autophagosome formation and enhances cellular susceptibility
to apoptotic stimuli. Atg5 knockout eliminated bortezomib-induced autophagosome
formation and reduced susceptibility to bortezomib. Bortezomib treatment of myeloma
cells lead to ATG5 cleavage through a calpain-dependent manner while calpain
inhibition or a calpain-insensitive Atg5 mutant promoted bortezomib-resistance. In
contrast, AICAR, an AMPK activator, enhanced bortezomib-induced cleavage of ATG5
and increased bortezomib-induced killing. Taken together, the results demonstrate
that ATG5 cleavage provokes apoptosis and represents a molecular link between
autophagy and apoptosis with therapeutic implications.

the UPS to efficiently degrade short-lived and denatured
proteins [5]. Bortezomib is a potent and selective
proteasome inhibitor that exploits its pivotal biologic role
to promote cell death [6, 7]. Bortezomib has improved the
response and survival of patients with the plasma cell (PC)
malignancy multiple myeloma (MM) [8, 9]. While success
of bortezomib has emerged as standard-of-care therapy to
catapult the UPS into a position of prominence in cancer
biology, significant obstacles remain [10, 11]. Many
patients do not respond to proteasome inhibitors and
those that do inevitably develop drug resistance. There
is an urgent, unmet need to unravel the mechanism(s) of
resistance to proteasome inhibitors.

INTRODUCTION
Precisely regulated quality control systems monitor
proper folding, assembly and functionality of cellular
proteins [1, 2]. Eukaryotic cells have developed efficient
strategies to cope with misfolded, denatured or defective
proteins. Molecular chaperones refold unfolded or
denatured proteins to restore their native conformation,
but, if these systems fail, these proteins are rapidly
destroyed by the ubiquitin + proteasome system (UPS)
[3, 4]. The UPS is a highly complex network that maintains
cell viability through the selective turnover of targeted
proteins. The proteasome serves as the catalytic core of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12358

Oncotarget

The molecular events that regulate the complex
interplay between autophagy and apoptosis as
determinants of cell fate under physiologic and pathologic
conditions remain poorly understood. Cancer cells
display differential aspects of metabolism relative to
normal, differentiated cells and face enormous metabolic
challenges to meet the energetic and biosynthetic demands
of increased proliferation [12, 13]. AMPK is the major
cellular energy sensor and master regulator of metabolic
homeostasis [14]. AMPK activation is triggered by an
increase in the AMP/ATP ratio to promote ATP production,
increase catabolism and conserve ATP by switching off
anabolic pathways [15]. Pharmacologic modulation of
AMPK presents a unique opportunity to reverse cancerrelated metabolic abnormalities [16, 17].
Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved,
dynamic process that promotes cellular homeostasis
through the catabolism and recycling of intracellular
proteins and organelles [18, 19]. Autophagy requires
the concerted action of multiple cytoplasmic proteins
that generate double membrane-bound structures termed
autophagosomes. The resulting double-membrane
bound vesicles then fuse with lysosomes to deliver their
cytoplasmic cargo for lysosomal disposal. Deregulation
of autophagy contributes to numerous maladies such as
human cancers neurodegenerative diseases and aging
[20–22]. However, validated targets in this pathway are
scant and treatment strategies are limited by the lack
of effective or specific agents without pharmacologic
liabilities. Treatment of transformed cells with
chemotherapeutics triggers autophagy as a pro-survival
mechanism to remove damaged, oxidized, or aggregated
proteins [23, 24]. We reasoned that resistance to
proteasome inhibition could be achieved through metabolic
adaptation that may not only increase autophagy but also
uncouple autophagy from apoptosis. We demonstrate that
AMPK triggers bortezomib-induced autophagy linked
to the coordinated induction of cell apoptosis. ATG5 is
required for autophagy and functions in apoptosis as a
dual-functioning effectors. Calpain-mediated cleavage
eliminates the capacity of ATG5 to promote autophagy but
enhances the pro-apoptotic activity. Deregulation of ATG5
may uncouple these processes and promote drug resistance
in cancer cells.

by XTT assay (Figure 1B, C). AMPK controls nutrient
sensing and energy homeostasis and serves an essential
role in autophagy induction [26]. Western blotting
indicated that the levels of individual AMPK alpha-1,
alpha -2 and gamma -1 subunits were increased in
the bortezomib-resistant cells (Figure 1D, E). AMPK
activity was monitored by western blot using an antibody
that specifically recognized phosphorylation of the
AMPK substrate acetyl co-A carboxylase (ACC) on
serine 79 (Ser79). AMPK activity was much higher in
bortezomib-resistant cells compared to the drug-naïve
cells (Figure 1F). Resistant cells displayed IC50 values for
bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity at least >5-fold higher
than those obtained for parental (bortezomib-sensitive)
cells. We reasoned that bortezomib-mediated inhibition
of the UPS has a stimulatory effect on autophagy as a
potential compensatory protein clearance mechanism.
Cells were also treated with bortezomib, stained with a
dye specific for autophagosome detection and examined
by confocal microscopy. We observed a substantial
increase in green fluorescence within bortezomib-treated
cells (Figure 1G). A live cell-based flow cytometry then
quantitated the bortezomib effect on autophagosomes
in myeloma cells (Figure 1H). The method monitors
autophagic flux using a novel dye that selectively labels
autophagic vacuoles and eliminates the need for plasmid
transfection, drug selection and validation of fluorescent
reporters. Importantly, the number of autophagosomes
detected in bortezomib-resistant cells was significantly
higher than that seen in parental cells.
Real-time (RT) measurement of myeloma cell
bioenergetics. Cellular bioenergetics processes contribute
to the progression of disease and related to it, oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and glycolysis have
prominent roles in cancer cells. Seahorse flux analyzers
allow the measurement of oxygen consumption rates
(OCR) as a measure of OXPHOS, and extracellular
acidification rates (ECAR) as a measure of lactate
production by glycolysis. The system allows the
investigator to simultaneously interrogate the two major
energy producing pathways of the cell – mitochondrial
respiration and glycolysis - in a microplate, in real-time.
The measurement of cellular bioenergetics on live cells
enables time-resolved analysis and testing of multiple
conditions per assay well. Seahorse assays provide
increased throughput and use less sample compared to
conventional respirometry techniques. Since proteasome
inhibition increased AMPK activity, we examined
the effect of bortezomib on fundamental metabolic
parameters such OCR and ECAR in real-time using a
Seahorse analyzer. Glucose (5 mM) addition to cells
resulted in a substantial increase in both the basal OCR
and ECAR relative to cells grown in minimal glucosecontaining media (2 mM) (Figure 2A). The addition of
bortezomib reduced the OCR in cells grown in either
low or high glucose but the effect was more prominent in

RESULTS
Bortezomib-resistant myeloma cells. To investigate
the molecular mechanism of acquired resistance to
bortezomib, the myeloma cell line RPMI8226 was
subjected to successively increased concentrations of
the proteasome inhibitors bortezomib (Figure 1A).
Bortezomib-resistant cells in culture grew more
slowly than drug-naïve parental cells and were not
as sensitive as parental cells to proteasome inhibitors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12359

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Bortezomib-resistant myeloma cells. (A) Scheme used to generate bortezomib-resistant cells. (B) Growth rate comparison

of parental and drug-resistant cells as measured by trypan blue staining. (C) Viability of parental and bortezomib-resistant cells after
bortezomib addition at the indicated concentrations. Viability was determined using the XTT assay and the values represent the arithmetic
mean of triplicate measurements and error bars represent the standard deviation. (D) Western blot to compare the level of individual
AMPK subunits in the parental and bortezomib-resistant cells. Lysates from parental or resistant cells were probed using antibodies to the
AMPK alpha 1/2, beta 1/2 and gamma 1/2 subunits. (E) Western blotting to compare the level of AMPK alpha-2 subunit in parental and
bortezomib-resistant cells. (F) Western blotting to compare the level of phospho-Ser79 ACC in parental and drug-resistant myeloma cells.
(G) Confocal microscopy to detect autophagosomes. Cells treated with bortezomib, pelleted, incubated with the cyto-ID green detection
reagent, applied to a microscope slide and visualized using a Zeiss LSM170 confocal microscope . (H) Quantitation of autophagosomes
in parental and drug-resistant cells. Cells were incubated with the cyto-ID detection reagent and autophagosomes quantitated by flow
cytometry. Shown is the result of triplicate measurements.

the cells grown in high glucose (Figure 2B). ECAR did
not significantly change with bortezomib. The effect of
bortezomib on OCR was seen at drug concentrations as
low as 5 nM (Figure 2C). RT measurements indicated that
bortezomib injection into myeloma cells in suspension
rapidly reduced the OCR by 60% in 120 minutes
(Figure 2D).
Bortezomib effect on the metabolic parameters of
drug-resistant myeloma cells. We then determined that the
basal OCR was >50% higher in bortezomib-resistant cells
than parental cells (Figure 3A). Also, bortezomib-resistant
cells were less sensitive to the drug-induced effects on the
OCR (Figure 3B). Two hours after bortezomib addition,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the OCR in parental cells was reduced by ~75% while in
drug-resistant cells the OCR was reduced by only ~25%.
Effect of AMPK knockout on bortezomib-induced
autophagy. The results indicated that the protein level
and catalytic activity of AMPK was upregulated in
bortezomib-resistant cells. Since AMPK activation
promotes autophagosome formation, we determined
the effect of genetic ablation of the AMPK catalytic
subunits on bortezomib-induced autophagosome
formation (Figure  4A). The AMPK-α1/α2 catalytic
subunits were knocked out (AMPK-DKO) in in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and these MEFs were
treated with bortezomib as indicated. The results showed
12360

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Bortezomib effect on the OCR and ECAR in parental myeloma cells. (A) Glucose effect on the OCR and ECAR in

parental myeloma cells. (B) Bortezomib effect on the OCR and ECAR of parental myeloma cells. Cells were grown in minimal or 5 mM
glucose for 24 hours prior to measurements. (C) Dose-dependent effect of bortezomib on the OCR and ECAR measurements. (D) Real-time
measurements to determine the effect of bortezomib on OCR and ECAR in parental myeloma cells. Bortezomib was injected directly into
wells that contained RPMI8226 cells and recorded over 150 minutes.

that the genetic ablation of the AMPK catalytic subunits
significantly reduced the basal level of autophagosomes
in AMPK-DKO MEFs compared to AMPK-WT MEFs. In
addition, the number of autophagosomes detected
in AMPK-WT MEFs was increased by bortezomib
treatment but not in the AMPK-DKO MEFs. The lack
of a bortezomib effect was seen at concentrations up to
10 nM. The results indicate that even at relatively high
drug concentrations, genetic ablation of AMPK eliminated
the capacity to form autophagosomes.
ULK1/ATG1 is a substrate of AMPK activated
through AMPK-mediated phosphorylation to promote
formation of structural precursors of autophagosomes
called autophagophores [27, 28]. In yeast, autophagy
results in ATG13 dephosphorylation, association
between ATG13 and ATG1 and full activation of
ATG1 kinase activity. Mammalian homologues of
ATG1, e.g., ULK1/2, form a similar complex with

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the mammalian ATG13 protein, and are necessary
for proper autophagy induction. We determined the
effect of bortezomib at increased concentrations on
autophagosome formation in ULK1/2-KO MEFs
relative to ULK-WT controls. Knockout of ULK1 or both
ULK1/2 reduced bortezomib-induced autophagosome
formation compared to the ULK-WT MEFs (Figure 4B).
Across a broad concentration range, bortezomib did
not induce autophagosomes in either ULK1-KO
or ULK1/2-DKO MEFs to suggest that ULK1/2,
like AMPK, was essential for bortezomib-induced
autophagosome formation. Bortezomib treated of either
AMPK-WT MEFs, ULK-WT MEFs or CT26 colon
carcinoma cells led to a slight increase in the number
of autophagosomes. While the effect of bortezomib
across a broad concentration range was not dramatic,
it consistently trended in the same direction and was
observed in multiple cell types. While the effect of

12361

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Comparison of the bortezomib effect on parental and bortezomib-resistant cells. (A) Basal OCR measurements
in parental and bortezomib-resistant cells. (B) Parental and bortezomib-resistant cells were treated with bortezomib (10 nM) and OCR then
measured.

bortezomib across a broad concentration range was
not dramatic, the effect was consistently observed in
multiple cell types and trended in the same direction. It is
possible that the cyto-ID-based flow cytometry method
detects relatively large differences in autophagosome
numbers, e.g., the difference between AMPK-WT and
AMPK-DKO MEFs (Figure 4A), better than the subtle
differences seen after bortezomib treatment.
Enforced Atg5 expression sensitizes tumor cells to
chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo while Atg5 silencing
results in chemotherapeutic resistance [29]. Since
ATG5 was shown to enhance susceptibility to apoptotic
stimuli, we investigated the effect of Atg5 silencing
on bortezomib-induced autophagosome formation
and cell death (Figure 4C, D). CT26 colon carcinoma
cells were transfected with siRNA directed against
either scrambled, Atg5 or Atg7. Cells were treated
with bortezomib and those transfected cells with Atg5
or Atg7 siRNA did not form autophagosomes to the
same level as cells transfected with scrambled siRNA.
Cells transfected with Atg5 or Atg7 siRNA were also
less sensitive to bortezomib-induced cell death since
these cells did not demonstrate a significant increase
in autophagosomes across a broad drug concentration
range.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Bortezomib
induced
the
formation
of
autophagosome at much earlier time points than the
drug induced the generation of annexin-positive cells
(Figure  5A). Also, bortezomib treatment of the drugresistant cells led to a significantly greater increase in
autophagosomes than in parental cells (Figure 5B). We
reasoned that enhanced autophagosome formation in the
resistant cells might reflect the uncoupling of autophagy
from apoptosis. To further address these findings,
myeloma cells were treated with bortezomib at the
indicated concentrations. Bortezomib at 1 nM or 3 nM did
not induce significant death in myeloma cells (Figure 5C).
Myeloma cells were treated with the AMP analog
5-amino-1-β-D-ribofuranosyl-imidazole-4-carboxamide,
AICAR, a validated AMPK activator (Figure 5D) [30]. At
the indicated concentrations AICAR also did not induce
cell death. However, AICAR did increase the effect of
bortezomib on autophagosomes and myeloma cell death
(Figure 5E, F).
ATG5 cleavage promotes bortezomib-induced cell
death. Similar to CT26 cells, Atg5 knockdown in myeloma
cells also inhibited bortezomib-induced autophagosome
formation and cell death (Figure 6A, B). Bortezomib
promoted the covalent conjugation of ATG5 (36 kDa)
to the Ub-like modifier ATG12 (~16  kDa) to form a

12362

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of AMPK, ULK, ATG5 and ATG7 genetic knockout. (A) Effect of AMPK-alpha1/2 knockout on bortezomibinduced autophagosome formation. AMPK-WT and AMPK-alpha1/2-DKO MEFs were incubated with bortezomib at indicated
concentrations  for 18 hours and autophagosomes quantitated using the cytoID kit and flow cytometry. Shown is the average of
triplicate measurements. (B) Effect of ULK-1 and ULK-1/2 knockout on bortezomib-induced autophagosome formation. ULK-WT and
ULK-1/2-DKO MEFs were incubated with bortezomib at indicated concentrations for 18 hours and autophagosomes quantitated using
the cyto-ID method. Shown is the average of triplicate measurements. (C) CT26 cells were transfected with control siRNA or siRNA to
knockdown Atg5 or Atg7, treated with bortezomib and autophagosomes quantitated. (D) Effect of Atg5 or Atg7 silencing on bortezomibinduced cell death. Cells were treated with bortezomib at indicated concentrations and viability determined. Shown are the results of
triplicate measurements. Error bars represent standard deviations.

52 kDa product (Figure 6C). Apoptosis is triggered by
the calpain-mediated cleavage of ATG5 to generate a
truncated 24  kDa fragment. Calpain-mediated cleavage
eliminates the autophagy-inducing activity of ATG5 but
the truncated ATG5 product translocates to mitochondria
to promote apoptosis [31]. Bortezomib treatment of
myeloma cells generated the truncated 24 kDa form of
ATG5 as seen by western blot. Myeloma cells were then
treated with bortezomib in the presence or absence of the
calpain inhibitor MDL28170 and the effect of viability
determined (Fig. 6D). At relatively low doses, addition
of the calpain inhibitor MLN28170 reduced the cytotoxic
effect of bortezomib as well as carfilzomib. Myeloma
cells were also transfected plasmids that expressed either
Atg5-WT or an Atg5-T193G-T194G, a calpain-resistant
ATG5 mutant (Figure 6E). Cells that expressed the
calpain-resistant form of ATG5 were also less senstive

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to bortezomib- or carfilzomib-induced death. The results
of these experiments support the notion that the effect is
generalized to other proteasome inhibitors and not specific
to bortezomib. Finally, we found that AICAR enhanced
bortezomib-induced cell in both parental and drug-resistant
cells and enhanced the bortezomib-induced production
of the 24 kDa truncated form of ATG5 (Figure 6F, G).
Calpain-mediated cleavage has been reported to
eliminate the autophagosome-forming activity of ATG5
but to promote it’s pro-apoptotic functions. Specifically,
truncated ATG5 translocates to mitochondria and binds
and antagonizes anti-apoptotic Bcl-2. Myeloma cells
were transfected with a plasmid that expressed FLAGBcl2, treated with bortezomib and AICAR as indicated,
lysates prepared and immunoprecipitated and probed with
an ATG5 antibody. Bortezomib treatment alone did not
lead to a significant association of truncated ATG5 with

12363

Oncotarget

Figure 5: AICAR effect on bortezomib-induced cell death. (A) Time course of bortezomib effect on autophagosome formation

and apoptosis in myeloma cells. Autophagosomes were quantitated using the dye-based cytoID reagent and flow cytometry. The percentage
of annexin-positive cells was determined by flow cytometry. Shown are the results of triplicate measurements. Error bars represent the
standard deviation. (B) Autophagosome formation in drug-sensitive and drug-resistant myeloma cells. (C) Effect of bortezomib on
myeloma cell viability. Cells were treated with bortezomib at indicated concentrations and viability determined by the XTT assay. Shown
are the results of triplicate measurements. Error bars represent the standard deviations. (D) AICAR effect on myeloma cell viability.
Cells were treated with bortezomib at indicated concentrations and viability determined by the XTT assay. Shown are the results of
triplicate measurements. Error bars represent the standard deviations. (E) AICAR effect on bortezomib-induced autophagosome formation.
(F) AICAR effect bortezomib-induced cell death. Cells were treated with bortezomib at indicated concentrations and viability determined
by the XTT assay. Shown are the results of triplicate measurements. Error bars represent the standard deviations.

FLAG-tagged Bcl2. However, treatment with AICAR and
bortezomib enhanced the association of truncated ATG5 in
the FLAG-tagged Bcl2 immunoprecipitates.

that physiologically-relevant doses of bortezomib
trigger AMPK+ULK-dependent induction of autophagy.
Studies in yeast, C. elegans and higher eukaryotes
demonstrate that AMPK acts as a convergence point
to couple the cellular response to environmental cues,
nutrient availability and stress with autophagy, growth
and survival. AMPK positively regulates autophagy and
our results demonstrate that AMPK is both required
for bortezomib-induced autophagosome formation.
Genetic knockout or chemical inhibition of AMPK
reduced the effect of bortezomib at low doses to induce
autophagosome formation and was consistent with
prior studies that demonstrated that cellular response to
stressors is context-dependent.

DISCUSSION
The UPS represents the major protein degradation
pathway in eukaryotes and evidence points to active
crosstalk with the autophagy pathway [32, 33].
Inhibition of proteasomes stimulates autophagy as a
compensatory, pro-survival strategy to sequester or
eliminate unwanted protein aggregates. Likewise,
inhibition of autophagy compromises degradation of
Ub+proteasome substrates [34]. Our results indicate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12364

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of AICAR on ATG5. (A) Effect of Atg5 or Atg7 silencing in myeloma cells on bortezomib-induced autophagosome

formation. (B) Effect of Atg5 silencing in myeloma cells on bortezomib treatment and cell viability. Cells were treated with bortezomib at
indicated concentrations and viability determined by the XTT assay. Shown are the results of triplicate measurements. Error bars represent
the standard deviations. (C) Effect of bortezomib on ATG5 conjugation to ATG12 as well as cleavage of ATG5. Myeloma cells were
treated with bortezomib for indicated times, total protein precipitated and precipitates probed using an antibody specific for ATG5. Shown
is the ATG5-ATG12 conjugate (52 kDa), ATG5 (36 kDa) and truncated ATG5 form (24 kDa) detected by western blot. (D) Effect of the
calpain inhibitor MDL28170 on myeloma cells treated with bortezomib. At the concentrations of 0.1 or 1uM, MDL28170 was not toxic
to myeloma cells. Viability was determined using the XTT assay. Values represent the arithmetic mean of triplicate measurements and
error bars represent the standard deviation. (E) Effect of the calpain-resistant ATG5 mutant on bortezomib treatment of myeloma cells.
Cells were transfected with plasmids that expressed either Atg5-WT or an Atg5 mutant (T193G-T194G). Myeloma cells were treated with
bortezomib at indicated concentrations and viability was determined using the XTT assay. Values represent the arithmetic mean of triplicate
measurements and error bars represent the standard deviation. (F) Effect of AICAR addition on parental and drug-resistant myeloma cells
treated with bortezomib. Myeloma cells were treated with bortezomib at indicated concentrations and viability was determined using the
XTT assay. Values represent the arithmetic mean of triplicate measurements and error bars represent the standard deviation. (G) Myeloma
cells were transfected with a plasmid that expressed FLAG-tagged Bcl2. Cells were then treated with bortezomib, lysates prepared and
immunoprecipitated using an anti-FLAG antibody. Immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE and probed using an anti-ATG5
antibody to detect the ATG5 forms association with FLAG-tagged Bcl2.

The induction of autophagy may have opposing
effects on cell fate. Autophagy is described as a
double-edged sword since under certain conditions it
constitutes a pro-survival stress adaptation to suppress
apoptosis. In contrast, evidence also links autophagy
and many autophagy effectors to cell death pathways.
Consequently, chemotherapeutics generally invoke an
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

initial cytoprotective, autophagic response as well as
cell death. Here, we show that bortezomib can trigger
autophagy, apoptosis or both outcomes – dependent
upon the dose and duration of tumor cell exposure.
Bortezomib at low doses promoted AMPK-dependent
autophagosome formation while higher drug doses
or longer exposure triggered cell death. In related
12365

Oncotarget

studies, AMPK deficiency was shown to attenuate
ethanol-induced cardiac dysfunction through inhibition of
autophagosome formation [35]. Similarly, administration
of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), generated under conditions
of oxidative stress, to neuronal cells inhibited Akt and
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1, activated AMPKα
and induced apoptosis [36]. However, in those same
studies, the expression of a dominant negative form of
AMPKα or downregulation of AMPKα1 conferred partial
resistance to H2O2-mediated cell death and inhibition
of phosphorylation of S6K1 and 4E-BP1. The findings
support an essential role for AMPK in triggering cell
death.
Molecular and genetic lesions within tumors may
impair the induction of autophagy, prevent apoptosis and
promote tumor survival through metabolic adaptations that
promote drug-resistance. Whether promoting cell survival
or death, autophagy and apoptosis engage in a complex,
poorly understood molecular crosstalk [37, 38]. Cells
resistant to bortezomib undergo genetic reprogramming
to not only increase AMPK activity and autophagosome
formation but to also uncouple these processes from
apoptosis and promote drug resistance. Our results suggest
that this uncoupling is linked to reduced cleavage of ATG5
in drug-resistant cells. Bortezomib induced cell death
more effectively in metabolically compromised cells to
provide evidence that cellular energy status and AMPK
activation are determinants of the cellular response to
proteasomal inhibition. However, prolonged stimulation
of autophagy leads to impaired cell proliferation and,
therefore, AMPK has been directly associated with the
activation of apoptosis. Since the autophagic and apoptotic
response machineries share common effectors, e.g., ATG5,
Beclin-1, Bim, that either link or polarize the response to
stress, these adaptations can be leveraged as medically
actionable molecular vulnerabilities to increase the drug
specificity of cancer cells and spare normal cells.
The results presented here suggest that
pharmacologics that activate AMPK and energy
metabolism should enhance the anti-myeloma benefit of
proteasome inhibitors. Metabolic alterations involved
in cancer initiation, metastasis and drug resistance may
reveal novel targets, promote pharmaceutical development
and more effective cancer therapies. Reconciling the role
of autophagy as a tumor-suppressive mechanism yet also
able to promote tumor survival during stress is critical
since many current cancer therapeutics activate autophagy.
Autophagy is a validated therapeutic target in oncology
and has led to multiple early phase clinical trials to
evaluate hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) in combination with
chemotherapy or targeted agents as second-line therapy
for relapsed and/or refractory disease. However, HCQ
requires nearly millimolar levels for efficacy, lacks target
specificity and displays pharmacologic liabilities limit
clinical advancement. The identification of novel agents to
specifically target autophagy provides new opportunities
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

for drug development since more potent agents are needed
either as monotherapy or in synergistic combination.
The AMPK activators D942 and troglitazone, similar to
AICAR, were previously shown to inhibit the growth
of myeloma cells [39]. It is conceivable that potent
pharmacologic activators of AMPK (or its upstream
regulators, e.g., LKB) will drive the autophagy pathway
to overcome drug resistance and induce apoptosis.
Over the past two decades, protease inhibitors have
emerged as a highly successful anti-cancer treatment
modality [40]. However, the mechanism of action and
mechanism(s) of drug resistance remain incompletely
defined. Nonselective protease inhibitors are cytotoxic
to leukemia and other cancer cell lines and the
cytotoxicity is correlated with their potency as inhibitors
of the proteasome but not as inhibitors of calpain and
cathepsin. Bortezomib was shown to induce cell death
with an IC50 as low as 5 nM in apoptosis-prone leukemia
cells. Cell death was preceded by p21WAF1/CIP1
accumulation, an alternative marker of proteasome
inhibition, and by cleavage of PARP and Rb proteins and
nuclear fragmentation. The reintroduction of wildtype
p53 into p53-null PC3 prostate carcinoma cells did
not increase their sensitivity to proteasome inhibitors.
Likewise, comparison of parental and p21-deficient
cells demonstrated that p21WAF1/CIP1 was dispensable
for proteasome inhibitor-induced cytotoxicity. The
accumulation of wildtype p53 and induction of apoptosis
are seen as independent markers of proteasome inhibition.
U266 MM cell clones resistant to bortezomib were
generated and exhibited a similar sensitivity to various
other pro-apoptotic stimuli [41]. Pan-genomic profiling
of bortezomib-sensitive and resistant cells showed that
the small heat shock protein HSPB8 was overexpressed in
resistant cells. Finally, gain and loss of function experiment
demonstrated that HSPB8 is a key factor for bortezomib
resistance. In fact, HSPB8 may play a critical role in the
elimination of aggregates in bortezomib-resistant cells
that contributes to their enhanced survival [41]. ER stress
from unfolded proteins is associated with the proliferation
of pancreatic tumor cells, making the many regulatory
molecules of this pathway appealing targets for therapy.
The proliferation of a panel of 14 pancreatic cancer cell
lines showed a dose- and time-dependent growth inhibition
by IRE1α-specific inhibitors Growth inhibition was also
noted using a clonogenic growth assay in soft agar, as well
as a xenograft in vivo model of pancreatic cancer [41]. Cell
cycle analysis showed that these IRE1α inhibitors caused
growth arrest at either the G1 or G2/M phases and induced
apoptosis. These results suggest that an IRE1α inhibitor is a
novel approach for pancreatic cancers [42].
ATG5 is a dual-functioning molecular switch that
promotes autophagy and apoptosis- ATG5 participates
in the initial steps of autophagy through interaction
with the Ub-like ATG7 and the ATG10 conjugation
system (Figure 7). ATG5 is conjugated to ATG12 to
12366

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Model to depict ATG5 as a dual-functioning molecular effector in autophagy and apoptosis. Proteasome

inhibition promotes AMPK-dependent autophagosome formation leading to increased cellular stress. Stress increases ATG5 to ATG12
and promotes autophagosome formation and survival. The dual-functioning role ATG5 promotes autophagy but as the stress threshold is
surpassed in drug sensitive cells, ATG5 is cleaved by calpain to generate a truncated form that then associates with anti-apoptotic Bcl-2.
Certain anti-apoptotic proteins, e.g., Bcl2 and Bcl2A1, bind and repress pro-apoptotic proteins, e.g., NOXA and PUMA. Truncated ATG5
binding to the anti-apoptotic Bcl2 and Bcl2A1 may displaces these proteins from NOXA and PUMA. Truncated ATG5 derepresses NOXA
and PUMA to promote apoptosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12367

Oncotarget

form a ~52 kDa complex that binds ATG16 to structurally
re-model the developing autophagophore and recruit
activated LC3 to the elongating membrane. These
events lead to autophagosome formation and promote
cell survival. However, ATG5 is also cleaved by calpain
to generate a truncated form that translocates to the
mitochondria and induces mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization (MOMP). The precise events that
trigger the mitochondrial translocation of ATG5 as well
as the precise link to apoptosis have not been identified.
We speculate that ATG5 promotes displacement of
anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members from pro-apoptotic
Bcl2 family members, e.g., NOXA and PUMA, to facilitate
MOMP as a point of commitment to cell death through
the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Other examples of
dual-functioning effectors include the apoptotic caspases,
beclin-1, VPS34, ATG12 [43–45] and ATG5 [29, 31, 46].
The findings that bortezomib-resistant cells exhibit a
significantly greater number of autophagosomes but were
insensitive to drug pointed not only to extensive crosstalk
between these pathways but also that these process were
functionally separable. Multiple findings reported here
support the notion that ATG5 bridges these processes
through distinct functional activities. Future studies
are required to define the precise mechanism of ATG5mediated apoptosis. Dual-functioning molecules such
as ATG5 may constitute important convergence points
between autophagy and apoptosis in the complex interplay
that determines cell fate. It is reasonable to assume that
they represent crucial sites to target in oncology.

replaced by site-directed mutagenesis to encode glycine
residues. Nucleotide sequencing then confirmed that the
resultant vector encoded human Atg5-T193G/T194G-HA.
(Genewiz, South Plainfield, NJ).
Generation of PI-resistant cells. RPMI8226 cells
were exposed to successively increased concentrations
of bortezomib, ixazomib or carfilzomib to generate
resistant cells. Parental cells were cultured under the same
algorithm in vehicle (0.5% DMSO) alone.
Real-time OCR and ECAR measurements: Timeresolved analysis of cell OCR and ECAR was obtained
using the XF24 flux analyzer according to manufacturer’s
instructions (Seahorse Biosciences, Billerica, MA). Cells
were suspended in media containing the indicated glucose
or drug concentration. The plate containing the cells
was then centrifuged at 40x g, the plate rotated 180o and
centrifugation repeated at 80 g. Media was added and the
plate placed in a non-CO2 incubator for 30 minutes. The
plate was then placed in the XF-24 analyzer using a 3:2:3
(mix: wait: measure) time program.
Cell Viability Determination using the XTT Assay:
5 × 104 cells were plated in 96-well plates in RPMI media
that lacked phenol red. Cells were then treated as indicated
with drugs and incubated for 72 hours. To determine cell
viability, 50 µl of activated XTT-PMS mixture (1 mg/ml
XTT-20 µM PMS) was added to each well, plates further
incubated for 3 hours and absorbance determined using
a BMG Labtech FLUOstar OPTIMA plate reader at a
wavelength of 450 nm, position delay of 0.5 seconds and
20 flashes/well.
Quantification of Autophagosomes: 1 × 106 cells
were plated in RPMI media, treated with drugs as indicated
and autophagosomes quantitated by flow cytometry using
the Enzo cyto-ID autophagy detection kit (Enzo Life
Sciences (Farmingdale, NY). The assay comprehensively
measures autophagosomes with negligible staining of
lysosomes. Cells were pelleted, suspended cyto-ID
detection reagent, incubated in dark at 37oC and analyzed
using FL1 of a Coulter Epics XL-MCL. The assay was
optimized through the identification of titratable functional
moieties that allowed for minimal staining of lysosomes
while exhibiting bright autolysosomes. The mean FL1
signal from an autophagy inducer with CQ increases
much higher than an inducer alone, to indicate that
enhanced accumulation of autophagosomes results from
increased flux.
Quantification of Apoptosis: The annexin V-FITC
conjugate was used with 1 × 106 cells treated with drugs
as indicated and incubated at 37oC. Cells were collected,
centrifuged, washed, resuspended in 90 µl of assay buffer
and 10 µl of Annexin V, FITC conjugate. Samples were
analyzed in the FITC channel of a Coulter epics XL-MCL
flow cytometer.
Dye-based microscopy to detect autophagy- The
Cyto-ID autophagy detection kit was used to visualize

METHODS
Cell culture: RPMI8226 were from the American
Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC). The N-nitroso-Nmethylurethane-(NNMU)-induced,
undifferentiated
murine colon carcinoma cell line CT26 was transfected
with scrambled siRNA or siRNA to knockdown Atg5 or
Atg7 and provided by Laurence Zitvogel (Institut Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France). Myeloma cells were (Gibco,
Grand Island, NY), 1% pen-strep and 1% L-glutamine.
All other cells were grown in DMEM/high glucose
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% pen-strep and
1% L-glutamine. MEFs were grown in complete DMEM.
Chemical reagents- Bortezomib was from
ActiveBiochem (Maplewood, NJ) and other chemicals
were from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO).
Plasmids and Transfection: Plasmids that expressed
ATG5 wt or mutant forms were transfected into myeloma
cells using Amaxa Nucleofector. Sequence that encoded
human Atg5 bearing a carboxy-terminal HA-tag (828 base
pairs) was inserted into the vector pCI-neo. The putative
calpain-cleavage site within ATG5 was predicted using
the GPS-calpain cleavage detection software program
[25]. Threonine residue 193 and 194 in Atg5 were

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12368

Oncotarget

autophagosomes by microscopy. 1  ×  106 cells in 2 ml
media were plated and incubated overnight at 37oC. Cells
were incubated in Hank’s buffered saline solution (HBSS)
for indicated times. After incubation, cells were collected
and centrifuged at 500rpm for 5 minutes. The supernatant
discarded and the pellet resuspended in assay buffer and
centrifuged again. The supernatant was discarded and
the pellet resuspended in 0.5 mL freshly diluted Cyto-ID
detection reagent. The sample was then incubated in dark
at 37oC for 30 minutes. The samples were then analyzed
in the green channel (FL1) using a Coulter epics XL-MCL
flow cytometer.
Western blotting: 1 × 106 parental or drug-resistant
cells were pelleted and suspended in 100 µl of CelLyticM
lysis reagent (Sigma Chemical Co) placed on ice for
5 minutes, centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for 10 minutes, boiled
and loaded onto 5–20% gradient gels (Wako Laboratory
Chemicals, Richmond, VA). Proteins were transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes, blocked with nonfat
milk and incubated with primary antibodies overnight.
Blots were washed and incubated with secondary
antibody. Immunoreactive bands were visualized either
by radiographic film or Li-COR detection method.
Membrane was washed with TBS containing 0.2%
Tween (TBS-T) and incubated in Western Lightning
ECL Pro (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) for 5 minutes.
Images were visualized using a KODAK film and an
M35A X-OMAT X-Ray Film Processor. Primary rabbit
antibodies to AMPK subunits alpha-1, alpha -2, beta-1,
beta-2, gamma-1, gamma-2 and gamma-3 were from
Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). The primary
rabbit antibody to rabbit ATG5 antibody was from Novus
Biologicals) Littleton, CO. The ACC (phospho-Ser79)
antibody was from Abcam (Cambridge, MA). For Li-COR
visualization, membranes were blocked with Odyssey
blocking buffer for 1 hour and incubated with primary
antibody overnight. Membranes were then washed with
PBS containing Tween-20. Li-CoR goat anti-mouse
IgG or donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody added for
60 minutes. Membranes were washed with PBS-T and
visualized using a Li-Cor Odyssey Classic image detection
system with integrated software.

3.	 Hershko A, Ciechanover A, Varshavsky A. Basic Medical
Research Award. The ubiquitin system. Nature Med. 2000;
6:1073–81.
4.	 Komander D, Rape M. The ubiquitin code. Annual Review
of Biochemistry. 2012; 81:203–229.
5.	 Driscoll JJ, Goldberg AL. The Proteasome (Multicatalytic
Protease) is a Component of the 1,500-kDa Proteolytic
Complex which Degrades Ubiquitin-Conjugated Proteins.
J. Biol. Chem. 1990; 265:4789–92.
6.	 Nalepa G, Harper JW. Drug discovery in the ubiquitinproteasome system. Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery. 2006;
5:596–613.
7.	 Dick LR, Fleming PE. Building on bortezomib: secondgeneration proteasome inhibtors as anti-cancer therapy.
Drug Discovery Today. 2010; 15:243–249.
8.	 Richardson PG, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, Irwin D,
­Stadtmauer EA, Facon T, Harousseau JL, Ben-Yehuda D,
Lonial S, Goldschmidt H, Reece D, San-Miguel JF, Bladé J,
et al. Bortezomib or high-dose dexamethasone for relapsed
multiple myeloma. N. Engl. J. Med. 2005; 352:2487–98.
9.	 Orlowski RZ, Kuhn DJ. Proteasome inhibitors in cancer
therapy: lessons from the first decade. Clin. Cancer Res.
2008; 14:1649–57.
10.	 Richardson PG, Xie W, Jagannath S, Jakubowiak A,
­Lonial S, Raje NS, Alsina M, Ghobrial IM, Schlossman RL,
Munshi NC, Mazumder A, Vesole DH, Kaufman JL,
et al. A phase 2 trial of lenalidomide, bortezomib, and
dexamethasone in patients with relapsed and relapsed/
refractory myeloma. Blood. 2014; 6:123:1461–9.
11.	 Laubach JP, Mitsiades CS, Mahindra A, Schlossman RL,
Hideshima T, Chauhan D, Carreau NA, Ghobrial IM,
Raje N, Munshi NC, Anderson KC, Richardson PG.
­Novel therapies in the treatment of multiple myeloma.
J Natl ­Compr Canc Netw. 2009; Oct 7:947–60.
12.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G, Thompson CB.
The biology of cancer: metabolic reprogramming fuels cell
growth and proliferation. Cell Metab. 2008; 7:11–20.
13.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of Cancer: The Next
Generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–74.
14.	 Hardie DG. AMPK and autophagy get connected. EMBO J.
2011; 30:634–635.

Conflict of interest

15.	 Shackelford DB, Shaw RJ. The LKB1-AMPK pathway:
metabolism and growth control in tumour suppression.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:563–75.

The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest.

16.	 Rabinowitz JD, White E. Autophagy and Metabolism.
­Science. 2010; 330:1344–48.

REFERENCES

17.	 Cheong H, Lu C, Lindsten T, Thompson C. ­Therapeutic
targets in cancer cell metabolism and autophagy. Nat
­Biotechnol. 2012; 10:671–8.

1.	 Dill KA, MacCallum JL. The protein-folding problem,
50 years on. Science. 2012; 23:1042–1046.

18.	 Klionsky DJ, Saltiel AR. Autophagy works out. Cell Metab.
2012; 15:273–74.

2.	 Fersht AR. From the first protein structures to our current
knowledge of protein folding: delights and scepticisms. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2008; 9:650–654.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19.	 White E. Deconvoluting the context-dependent role for
­autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:401–10.

12369

Oncotarget

20.	 Kondo Y, Kanzawa T, Sawaya R, Kondo S. The role of
autophagy in cancer development and response to therapy.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:726–734.

ubiquitin–proteasome pathway substrates. Mol Cell. 2009;
33:517–27.
35.	 Guo R, Ren J. Deficiency in AMPK attenuates ethanolinduced cardiac contractile dysfunction through inhibition
of autophagosome formation. Cardiovasc. Research. 2012;
94:480–491.

21.	 Rubinsztein D, Gestwicki JE, Klionsky D. Potential
therapeutic applications of autophagy. Nat Rev Drug
­
­Discov. 2007; 6:304–12.
22.	 Dikic I, Johansen T, Kirkin V. Selective autophagy in
­cancer development and therapy. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:3431–4.

36.	 Chen L, Xu B, Liu L, Luo Y, Yin J, Zhou H, Chen W,
Shen  T, Han X, Huang S. Hydrogen peroxide inhibits
mTOR signaling by activation of AMPK-alpha leading to
apoptosis of neuronal cells. Laboratory Investigation. 2010;
90:762–773.

23.	 Amaravadi RK, Yu D, Lum JJ, Bui T, ­Christophorou MA,
Evan GI, Thomas-Tikhonenko A, Thompson CB.
­Autophagy inhibition enhances therapy-induced apoptosis
in a Myc-induced model of lymphoma. J. Clin. Invest.
2007; 117:326–336.

37.	 Maiuri MC, Zalckvar E, Kimchi A, Kroemer G. Self-eating
and self-killing: crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis.
Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2007; 8:741–52.

24.	 Amaravadi RK. Autophagy can contribute to cell death
when combining targeted therapy. Cancer Biology and
Therapy. 2007; 8:130–133.

38.	 Djavaheri-Mergny M, Maiuri MC, Kroemer G. Cross talk
between apoptosis and autophagy by caspase-mediated
cleavage of beclin-1. Oncogene. 2010; 29:1717–19.

25.	 Liu Z, Cao J, Gao X, Ma Q, Ren J, Xue Y. GPS-CCD: a novel
calpain computational program for the p
­ rediction of calpain
cleavage sites. PloS ONE. 2011; 6:e19001. doi:10.1371.

39.	 Baumann P, Mandl-Weber S, Emmerich B, Straka C,
Schmidmaier R. Inhibition of adenosine monophosphateactivated protein kinase induces apoptosis in multiple
­myeloma cells. Anti-Cancer Drugs. 2007; 18:405–410.

26.	 Klionsky DJ, Abeliovich H, Agostinis P, Agrawal DK,
Aliev G, Askew DS, Baba M, Baehrecke EH, Bahr BA,
Ballabio A, Bamber BA, Bassham DC, Bergamini E, et al.
Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays for
­monitoring autophagy in higher eukaryotes. Autophagy.
2008; 4:151–75.

40.	 An WG, Hwang SG, Trepel JB, Blagosklonny MV.
­Protease inhibitor-induced apoptosis: accumulation of
wt p53, p21WAF1/CIP1, and induction of apoptosis are
­independent markers of proteasome inhibition. Leukemia.
2000; 14:1276–1283.

27.	 Scott RC, Juhász G, Neufeld TP. (2007). Direct induction
of autophagy by Atg1 inhibits cell growth and induces
­apoptotic cell death. Curr. Biol. 17:1–11.

41.	 Hamouda MA, Belhacene N, Puissant A, Colosetti P,
Robert G, Jacquel A, Mari B, Auberger P, Luciano F. The
small heat shock protein B8 (HSPB8) confers resistance
to bortezomib by promoting autophagic removal of
misfolded proteins in multiple myeloma cells. Oncotarget.
2014; Aug15; 5:6252–66.

28.	 Zhao M, Klionsky DJ. AMPK-dependent ­phosphorylation
of ULK1 induces autophagy. Cell Metabolism. 2011;
13:119–20.

42.	 Chien W, Ding LW, Sun QY, Torres-Fernandez LA,
Tan  SZ, Xiao J, Lim SL, Garg M, Lee KL, Kitajima  S,
Takao S, Leong WZ, Sun H, Tokatly I, Poellinger L,
Gery  S, Koeffler PH. Selective inhibition of unfolded
­protein response induces apoptosis in pancreatic cancer
cells. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 15; 5:4881–94.

29.	 Yousefi S, Perozzo R, Schmid I, Ziemiecki A, Schaffner T,
Scapozza L, Brunner T, Simon HU. Calpain-mediated
cleavage of Atg5 switches autophagy to apoptosis. Nat. Cell
Biol. 2006; 10:1124–1132.
30.	 Corton JM, Gillespie JG, Hawley SA, Hardie DG.
5-­Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside: a
specific method for activating AMP-activated protein kinase
in intact cells? Eur J Biochem. 1995; 229:558–65.

43.	 Cho DH, Jo YK, Hwang JJ, Lee YM, Roh SA, Kim JC.
Caspase-mediated cleavage of ATG6/Beclin-1 links
­apoptosis to autophagy in HeLa cells. Cancer Lett. 2009;
274:95–100.

31.	 Pyo JO, Jang MH, Kwon YK, Lee HJ, Jun JI, Woo HN,
Cho DH, Choi B, Lee H, Kim JH, Mizushima N,
­Oshumi Y, Jung YK. Essential roles of Atg5 and FADD in
­autophagic cell death: dissection of autophagic cell death
into ­vacuole formation and cell death. J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:20722–20729.

44.	 Luo S, Rubinsztein DC. Apoptosis blocks Beclin
1-­dependent autophagosome synthesis: an effect rescued
by Bcl-xL. Cell Death Differ. 2010; 17:268–277.
45.	 Rubinstein AD, Eisenstein M, Ber Y, Bialik S, Kimchi A.
The autophagy protein Atg12 associates with antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 family members to promote mitochondrial apoptosis.
Mol. Cell. 2011; 44:698–709.

32.	 Kraft C, Matthias P, Hofmann K. Selective autophagy:
ubiquitin-mediated recognition and beyond. Nat. Cell Biol.
2010; 12:836–841.

46.	 Zalckvar E, Berissi H, Mizrachy L. DAP-kinase-mediated
phosphorylation on the BH3 domain of beclin 1 promotes
dissociation of beclin 1 from Bcl-XL and induction of
­autophagy. EMBO Rep. 2009; 10:285–292.  

33.	 Kirkin V, McEwan DG, Novak I, Dikic I. A role for ­ubiquitin
in selective autophagy. Mol Cell. 2009; 34:259–269.
34.	 Korolchuk VI, Mansilla A, Menzies FM, ­Rubinsztein DC.
Autophagy inhibition ompromises degradation of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12370

Oncotarget

