Research Article

Chemotherapy-Induced Thrombocytopenia Derives from the
Selective Death of Megakaryocyte Progenitors and
Can Be Rescued by Stem Cell Factor
1,2

1

1

1

Ann Zeuner, Michele Signore, Daniela Martinetti, Monica Bartucci,
1
1,2
Cesare Peschle, and Ruggero De Maria

1
Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy and 2Department of Experimental
Oncology, Istituto Oncologico del Mediterraneo, Catania, Italy

Abstract
Thrombocytopenia is a common side effect of chemotherapy,
responsible for increased risk of bleeding and delay of
treatment schedules in cancer patients. It is currently
unknown how chemotherapeutic agents affect platelet production and whether the platelet precursors megakaryocytes
represent a direct target of cytotoxic drugs. We investigated
the effects of chemotherapeutic agents on primary megakaryocytes by using a culture system that recapitulates in vitro
human megakaryopoiesis and found that cytotoxic drugs
predominantly destroyed megakaryocytic progenitors at early
stages of differentiation. Immature megakaryocytes could be
protected from chemotherapeutic agents by the cytokine stem
cell factor (SCF), which binds the c-kit receptor expressed on
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. In chemotherapytreated megakaryocytes, SCF activated Akt, neutralized the
mitochondrial apoptotic machinery, and inhibited caspase
activity. Interfering with Akt activation abrogated the antiapoptotic effects of SCF, whereas exogenous expression of
constitutively active Akt inhibited drug-induced apoptosis of
primary megakaryocytes, indicating the Akt pathway as
primarily responsible for SCF-mediated protection of megakaryocyte progenitors. These results indicate apoptosis of
megakaryocyte progenitors as a major cause of chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia and suggest that SCF may be
used to prevent platelet loss in cancer patients with c-kit–
negative tumors. [Cancer Res 2007;67(10):4767–73]

Introduction
Thrombocytopenia is a detrimental side effect of cancer
treatment, often resulting in chemotherapy dose reductions,
schedule alterations, or the need for platelet transfusions. Although
more frequent in leukemia patients, drug-induced thrombocytopenia and consequent bleeding episodes occur also in patients with
solid tumors, where they are associated with increased morbidity
and occasional mortality (1, 2). Despite the clinical importance of
chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia, its causes are still
unclear, thus considerably limiting the possibility to develop
effective remedies. In particular, the effects of chemotherapeutic

agents on the platelet precursors megakaryocytes have not been
investigated in detail, leaving open the possibility that druginduced toxicity on this cell population may represent a major
cause of thrombocytopenia in cancer patients.
Megakaryopoiesis is a peculiar process that involves the gradual
differentiation of immature megakaryocyte progenitors into diploid
megakaryocytes, which undergo a progressive polyploidization and
a subsequent process of cytoplasmic maturation leading to platelet
release in the bone marrow sinusoids. Platelet formation and
release involve a reorganization of the cytoskeleton that has
recently been shown to rely on the compartmentalized activation
of caspases (3). Caspase activation in megakaryocytes has been
shown to occur also as part of the apoptotic program, which can be
initiated either by cytotoxic agents or by activation of death
receptors expressed on the surface of megakaryocytic precursors
(3, 4). Megakaryocyte survival, proliferation, and differentiation are
coordinated by combinations of cytokines and mediators present
within specialized bone marrow niches (5). Besides thrombopoietin
(TPO), which is the essential growth factor responsible for platelet
production, several hematopoietic growth factors such as interleukin (IL)-3, IL-6, IL-11, stromal cell–derived factor 1, and stem cell
factor (SCF) have been shown to influence megakaryopoiesis at
different developmental stages (6–8). SCF, the ligand for the c-kit
tyrosine kinase receptor, has recently been shown to play an
important role in megakaryopoiesis, as mice with a double
inactivation of TPO receptor and c-kit (c-Mpl / KitWv/Wv ) display
lower levels of bone marrow megakaryocyte progenitors than
c-Mpl / mice (9).
To investigate the basis of chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia, we analyzed the sensitivity to drug-induced cytotoxicity of
primary human megakaryocytes at different maturation stages and
explored the possibility to protect megakaryocytic progenitors
from drug-induced apoptosis with the use of cytokines. We also
investigated the molecular events activated during chemotherapyinduced apoptosis of megakaryocyte progenitors and during
cytokine-mediated protection from cell death. These studies may
help understand the causes of chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia and may support the development of therapeutic strategies
to prevent platelet depletion in cancer patients.

Materials and Methods
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
M. Signore and D. Martinetti contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Ann Zeuner, Department of Hematology, Oncology and
Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome,
Italy. Phone: 39-6-4990-3121; Fax: 39-6-4938-7087; E-mail: a.zeuner@iss.it.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4303

www.aacrjournals.org

Cytokines, antibodies, and chemicals. Human recombinant SCF
and TPO were purchased from PeproTech, Inc. Anti-tubulin antibody
and chemotherapeutic drugs were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Inc.
Anti–Bcl-2 and anti–cytochrome c antibodies were from BD PharMingen.
Anti–Bcl-XL (H5), anti-Akt (C20), anti-Bad (H-168), anti–extracellular
signal–regulated kinase (ERK)-1 (K-23), anti–phospho-ERK1-2 (E-4), and
anti–Mcl-1 (S-19) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Anti–phospho-Bad

4767

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
(Ser136) and anti–phospho-Akt (Ser473) were purchased from Cell Signaling.
Anti-hemagglutinin (HA) antibody was from Babco. Anti–c-kit (AF332) was
from R&D Systems. Annexin V-FITC, MitoTracker Red CMXRos, TOTO-3,
antimouse Alexa Fluor 488, antirabbit Alexa Fluor 488, and antimouse Alexa
Fluor 633 were purchased from Invitrogen-Molecular Probes. Antirabbit
Texas red and antimouse Texas red were from The Jackson Laboratory.
LY294002 was from Sigma-Aldrich and U0126 from Promega.
Adult peripheral blood human progenitor cell purification and
culture. Adult peripheral blood was obtained from male donors after their
informed consent and approval by the institutional Committee for Human
Studies. Human CD34+ precursor cells were purified from peripheral blood
by using the midi-MACS immunomagnetic separation system (Miltenyi
Biotec). CD34+ cells were cultured in serum-free medium prepared as
previously described (10) and supplemented with 100 ng/mL TPO ( from
now on indicated as standard megakaryocyte medium) to induce unilineage
megakaryocytic differentiation. In these conditions, a progeny of cells 97%
to 99% CD61+/CD41+ is generated (11). The differentiation stage of
megakaryocytes was routinely evaluated by May-Grünwald-Giemsa staining
and cytologic analysis. Stained cells were observed through a Nikon Eclipse
E1000 transmitted light right microscope equipped with PlanFluor 40 dry
and oil objectives (numerical apertures, 0.75 and 1.3, respectively) and with
PlanApo 60 and 100 oil objectives (numerical aperture, 1.4 for both). All
objectives were from Nikon. Images were subsequently taken by using a
Nikon DXM1200 RGB camera and the Nikon ACT-1 software.
Western blotting. For detection of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bad, and Akt, protein
extracts were prepared by resuspending cell pellets in 1% NP40 lysis buffer
[20 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.2), 200 mmol/L NaCl, 1% NP40] supplemented
with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails I and
II (all from Sigma-Aldrich). For phospho-Bad detection, protein extracts
were passed trough a 26-gauge (0.45  10 mm) syringe needle, loaded on a
15% polyacrylamide gel, and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane with
0.05-Am pores. Samples were analyzed by standard immunoblot procedure
and visualized by chemiluminescence (SuperSignal West Pico, Pierce). The
intensity of bands representing relevant proteins was quantified using Scion
Image (Scion Corp.).
Production of retroviral particles and transduction of hematopoietic progenitor cells. HA-myr-Akt cDNA was cloned into a thirdgeneration lentiviral vector pRRL-CMV-PGK-GFP-WPRE called Tween (12).
Lentiviral supernatants were produced by calcium phosphate transient
cotransfection of a three-plasmid expression system in the packaging
human embryonic kidney cell line 293T. One cycle of infection with viral
supernatant (with addition of 4 Ag/mL polybrene and 100 ng/mL TPO) was
done on megakaryocytes at day 3 of unilineage culture, and green
fluorescent protein (GFP)–positive cells were separated by flow cytometry
using a FACS-Vantage (Becton Dickinson).
Evaluation of caspase activity and apoptosis. Caspase-3/caspase-7
activity in megakaryocyte progenitors stimulated with chemotherapeutic
drugs was determined with the Apo-ONE Homogeneous Caspase-3/7 Assay
(Promega) based on cleavage of the z-DEVD-Rhodamine 110 substrate.
Fluorescence values were read on a Victor 2 plate fluorometer (Wallac,
Perkin-Elmer, Inc.) at a wavelength of 485/535 nm (excitation/emission).
Apoptosis was assessed by ethidium bromide/acridine orange staining and
fluorescence microscopy, by staining with Annexin V-FITC, by terminal
deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL) staining (described below), or with the CellTiter 96 AQueous
One Solution Assay (Promega).
Immunostaining and TUNEL staining. For immunofluorescence
experiments with anti–cytochrome c and anti-Bad, megakaryocytes were
preloaded with 100 nmol/L MitoTracker CMXRos (30 min in culture
medium at 37jC), fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with
blocking buffer (0.05% saponin, 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS), and
incubated overnight at 4jC with primary and secondary antibodies (Alexa
Fluor 488 antimouse immunoglobulin G for cytochrome c and Alexa Fluor
488 antirabbit IgG for Bad). For immunofluorescence experiments with antiAkt, anti–phospho-Akt, and anti-HA, cells were cytocentrifuged on glass
slides, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with methanol at
20jC, and stained with primary and secondary antibodies (antigoat Alexa

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Fluor 633 for anti-Akt, antirabbit Texas red for anti–phospho-Akt, and
antimouse Texas red for anti-HA). Slides were mounted using the LowFade
Light Anti Fade Kit from Invitrogen-Molecular Probes. TUNEL staining was
done with the In Situ Cell Death Detection kit conjugated with FITC (Roche,
Mannheim, Germany) on megakaryocytes fixed and cytospun on glass
slides. In immunofluorescence and TUNEL experiments done on lentivirally
transduced cells, detergent-based permeabilization resulted in GFP
extraction. Consequently, GFP fluorescence became undetectable and cells
could be stained with Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibodies or
TUNEL FITC. Fluorescence images were taken by means of an Olympus
FV-500 laser scanning confocal inverted microscope equipped with Argon
ions, Green and Red Helium-Neon lasers, and with PlanApo 40 dry, 60,
and 100 oil Olympus objectives (numerical apertures, 0.85, 1.4, and 1.35,
respectively). Emission at different wavelengths was collected using the
proper filters and overriding signal was subtracted. Digital zooming was
applied where specified. Images were assembled with the Canvas 8 software
(Deneba Systems, Inc.).
Statistical analysis. The statistical significance of the results shown in
Figs. 2A, B, 3B-D, and 4B was evaluated by means of two-way ANOVA and
Bonferroni posttests. Single asterisk represents P < 0.05, double asterisk
indicates P < 0.01, and three asterisks indicates P < 0.001. All statistical
analyses were done using GraphPad Prism 4.3

Results
Megakaryocyte progenitors are the preferential target of
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Purified CD34+ cells isolated
from peripheral blood and cultivated in serum-free medium in
the presence of TPO undergo unconditional megakaryocytic
differentiation, reproducing in vitro all the stages of megakaryopoiesis (Fig. 1A; ref. 11). We used this unilineage culture system
to investigate the sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs of the
different stages of megakaryocytic maturation. To do so, we evaluated the extent of drug-induced apoptosis in CD34+ cells, megakaryocytic progenitors (megakaryoblasts and promegakaryocytes),
and immature (binucleated) and mature (multinucleated) megakaryocytes. Three chemotherapeutic drugs, cisplatin, cytosine arabinoside, and vincristine, were chosen because they can cause
thrombocytopenia in treated cancer patients. The apoptotic rate of
megakaryocytic progenitors treated with the three chemotherapeutic agents was significantly higher compared with that of
CD34+ cells and polyploid megakaryocytes (Fig. 1B), pointing to a
higher sensitivity of the early stages of megakaryopoiesis to druginduced cytotoxicity.
SCF but not TPO protects immature megakaryocytes from
drug-induced apoptosis. Because chemotherapeutic agents
seemed to preferentially target the earlier forms of megakaryocytic
maturation, we did subsequent studies on cells at day 6 of
unilineage culture, which contain mostly megakaryoblasts and
promegakaryocytes (as evaluated by morphologic features of cell
size, cytoplasm abundance, and nucleus/cytoplasm ratio). To
investigate whether drug-induced apoptosis of megakaryocytic
progenitor population could be inhibited with the use of cytokines,
we analyzed the antiapoptotic properties of TPO, the major
megakaryocytic growth factor, and of SCF, which is a potent
antiapoptotic factor for primary hematopoietic cells. Day 6
megakaryocytes were exposed to chemotherapeutic drugs in
serum-free, cytokine-free medium in the presence or absence of
TPO. However, no significant difference was observed in the
amount of cell death induced by chemotherapeutic agents in either

4768

3

http://www.graphpad.com

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Control of Chemotherapy-Induced Thrombocytopenia

Figure 1. In vitro megakaryocyte differentiation and chemosensitivity. A, highly
purified populations of megakaryocyte progenitors were obtained by unilineage
culture of peripheral blood CD34+ cells. At the indicated days of differentiation,
cells were cytospun on glass slides and stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa.
Original magnification, 600. B, CD34+ undifferentiated progenitors and
megakaryocytes at day 6 or day 12 of unilineage culture were incubated for
24 h in standard megakaryocyte medium (Con ) with 80 Amol/L cytosine
arabinoside (AraC), 0.5 Amol/L vincristine (Vin ), or 5 Ag/mL cisplatin (Cis ).
Cell death was assessed by counting cells under a fluorescence microscope
after ethidium bromide/acridine orange staining and expressed as the
percentage of dead cells of each differentiation stage over the percentage of
dead cells in the sample. Day 6 megakaryocytic cultures were used to evaluate
cell death of megakaryoblasts (MK Blasts) and promegakaryocytes (Pro MK )
whereas immature (binucleated) and mature (multinucleated) megakaryocytes
were evaluated from day 12 cultures. B, columns, mean of four independent
experiments done with cells from different donors; bars, SD.

condition (Fig. 2A). Differently, the presence of SCF in the
megakaryocyte culture medium strongly increased the survival of
megakaryocytic progenitors treated with chemotherapeutic
agents (Fig. 2B). Flow cytometric analysis of cells at day 6 of
unilineage culture showed that the presence of SCF inhibited
drug-induced phosphatidylserine externalization (Fig. 2C), whereas TUNEL staining showed that SCF reduced the amount of
damaged DNA in cells treated with chemotherapeutic agents
(Fig. 2D). Some tumor types express cytokine receptors and may
respond to hematopoietic growth factors with increased proliferation and survival. However, we did not observe c-kit
expression or any antiapoptotic effect of SCF in primary breast
cancer cells (Supplementary Fig. S1), suggesting that, in principle,
SCF could be safely administered to patients with c-kit–negative
tumors.
SCF activates Akt and inhibits the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway in immature megakaryocytes. We have previously

www.aacrjournals.org

shown that SCF protects primary erythroid progenitor cells from
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis through the up-regulation of
antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members (13). Differently, we found
that SCF treatment did not alter the expression levels of either
Bcl-2 or Bcl-XL in megakaryocyte progenitors (Fig. 3A), indicating
that the SCF receptor c-kit exploits different antiapoptotic
signaling pathways in progenitors belonging to different hematopoietic lineages. To identify the pathways involved in SCFmediated protection of megakaryocyte progenitors, we analyzed
the activation of two major mediators of c-kit signaling involved
in cell survival, Akt and ERK kinases. Treatment of day 6
megakaryocytic cultures with SCF resulted in a strong Akt
activation and consequent phosphorylation of proapoptotic Bad
on Ser136 (Fig. 3A), which results in Bad inactivation and
apoptosis inhibition. Conversely, SCF treatment resulted only in a
modest activation of ERK kinases and did not modify the levels
of Mcl-1, an important antiapoptotic mediator controlled by both
the Akt and ERK pathways (ref. 14; Fig. 3A). To confirm the
preferential involvement of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt
pathway in megakaryoblast protection, we treated megakaryocytic cultures with vincristine and SCF in the presence of
inhibitors of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and ERK pathways. Inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway
abrogated the protective effect of SCF, whereas inhibitors of the
ERK pathway interfered marginally with SCF-mediated protection
of megakaryoblasts (Fig. 3B). Mitochondria release cytochrome c
in response to most anticancer drugs, resulting in apoptosome
formation and subsequent activation of executioner caspases
(15). We analyzed the localization of cytochrome c in immature
megakaryocytes treated with anticancer drugs in the presence or
absence of SCF and found that cytochrome c was sequestered in
the mitochondria in untreated cells, released in the cytoplasm on
drug treatment, and again retained in the mitochondria in the
presence of SCF (Fig. 3C). As the presence of cytochrome c in
the cytoplasm is essential for activation of executioner caspases,
we evaluated the activation of caspase-3/caspase-7 induced by
chemotherapeutic drugs in megakaryocyte progenitors and found
that the levels of caspase activation were significantly lower in
megakaryocyte progenitors treated with chemotherapeutic drugs
in the presence of SCF (Fig. 3D). These observations suggest that
SCF-mediated megakaryocyte protection primarily relies on Akt
activation and inhibition of the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway.
Akt activation protects megakaryocyte progenitors from
drug-induced apoptosis. Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating several components of the intrinsic cell death machinery.
To address whether the antiapoptotic effect of SCF in megakaryocyte progenitors could be ascribed to Akt activation, we
retrovirally transduced a myristylated constitutively active form
of Akt (myr-Akt) in immature megakaryocytes derived from CD34+
cells. Transduced cells were then sorted on the basis of GFP
expression and the presence of phosphorylated HA-tagged Akt was
confirmed by immunostaining (Fig. 4A). Megakaryocyte progenitors transduced with myr-Akt were then exposed to chemotherapeutic agents and the extent of cell death was assessed together
with cytochrome c localization. The expression of myr-Akt
rendered immature megakaryocytic cells significantly more resistant to apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic agents (Fig. 4B and
C). Moreover, the presence of myr-Akt in drug-treated megakaryocyte progenitors resulted in retention of cytochrome c in the
mitochondria (Fig. 4D), thus explaining the increased survival

4769

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

observed in this cell population. Altogether, these results indicate
that Akt activation protects megakaryocyte progenitors from
apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs and suggest that
Akt phosphorylation mediated by SCF may be responsible for
megakaryocyte resistance to the cytotoxic action of chemotherapeutic drugs.

Discussion
Chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia is a major clinical
problem that, on estimate, affects 300,000 persons yearly worldwide
(1). Management approaches to chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia are mainly based on platelet transfusions that, however,
are associated with transfusion-transmitted disease, infection,
refractoriness, and alloimmunization. Over the past decade, several
pharmacologic agents with thrombopoietic activity have been
evaluated for the supportive therapy of cancer patients including
TPO, IL-3, IL-6, and IL-11 (16, 17). At present, IL-11 is the only
cytokine licensed in the United States for the treatment of
chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia, but its thrombopoietic
activity is modest and its use is often associated with unfavorable
side effects (17, 18). The administration of hematopoietic growth
factors after chemotherapy offers a faster recovery from myelosuppression in patients with solid tumors. However, an important
goal of anticancer therapies would be to avoid the occurrence of
myelosuppression either through more selective therapeutic
strategies that target only neoplastic cells (19) or through the use
of antiapoptotic factors that specifically protect hematopoietic
cells. The results presented in this study indicate that SCF is a
potent antiapoptotic factor for megakaryoblasts, which are the
preferential target of chemotherapeutic drugs among maturing
megakaryocytic cells, and therefore may be useful in the prevention
of drug-induced thrombocytopenia.
A potential use of SCF to prevent chemotherapy-induced
thrombocytopenia is supported by the complete hematologic
recovery and increased platelet counts observed in a cancer patient
treated with recombinant SCF (Ancestim, Amgen) in combination
with other hematopoietic growth factors (20). In this case, the use
of SCF was associated with a particularly fast platelet recovery,
possibly due to the protection of early megakaryocytic progenitors
from drug-induced depletion. Our findings that SCF protects
megakaryocyte progenitors from apoptosis by inhibiting the
mitochondrial apoptotic machinery suggest that SCF would be
mostly effective if administered simultaneously with the chemotherapeutic treatment and during all the duration of the
chemotherapy cycle to prevent the occurrence of drug-induced
apoptotic events.
The ability of SCF to protect megakaryocytic progenitors from
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis reveals a link between c-kit
signaling and thrombocytopenia that may influence the extent of

Figure 2. SCF but not TPO protects megakaryocyte progenitors from death
induced by chemotherapeutic drugs. A, megakaryocytes at day 6 of unilineage
culture were treated with chemotherapeutic agents as in Fig. 1 in serum-free
medium in the presence (+TPO ) or absence ( TPO ) of 100 ng/mL TPO. The
difference between TPO and +TPO samples treated with chemotherapeutic
agents was not statistically significant. B, megakaryocytes at day 6 of unilineage
culture were treated with chemotherapeutic agents as above in standard
megakaryocyte medium. Where indicated (+SCF ), cells were preincubated with
100 ng/mL SCF for 8 h and kept in the presence of SCF during treatment with
chemotherapeutic drugs. Columns, mean of four independent experiments done
with cells from different donors; bars, SD. P < 0.01, ANOVA. C, megakaryocytes
at day 6 of unilineage culture were treated for 24 h with 5 Ag/mL cisplatin in
standard megakaryocyte medium alone ( SCF ) or with 100 ng/mL SCF (+SCF)
added 8 h before the chemotherapeutic agent. Cells were stained with Annexin
V-FITC and analyzed on a cytofluorometer. D, megakaryocytes at day 6 of
unilineage culture were treated for 24 h with 0.5 Amol/L vincristine in standard
megakaryocyte medium alone ( SCF) or with 100 ng/mL SCF (+SCF ) added 8 h
before the chemotherapeutic agent. Staining was done with TUNEL FITC to
identify apoptotic cells and with the red nuclear dye TOTO-3 (pseudocolored in
blue). Cells were analyzed on an epifluorescence microscope (original
magnification, 200).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

4770

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Control of Chemotherapy-Induced Thrombocytopenia

Figure 3. SCF inhibits apoptosis through Akt activation and inhibition of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway in megakaryocyte progenitors. A, megakaryocyte
progenitors at day 6 of unilineage culture were treated for 8 h with (+SCF ) or without ( SCF ) 100 ng/mL SCF in standard megakaryocyte medium and then
analyzed by Western blotting for protein expression. Top, Western blot results of three independent experiments are expressed as fold increase in protein
expression as compared with untreated ( SCF ) controls. B, day 6 megakaryocyte progenitors untreated or treated with SCF as above were incubated with
0.5 Amol/L vincristine in the presence or absence of 25 Amol/L LY294002 or 10 Amol/L U0126 (both administered 1 h before the chemotherapeutic agent). Cell death
was assessed 16 h later by ethidium bromide/acridine orange staining. Columns, mean of three independent experiments; bars, SD. C, immunofluorescence
analysis of cytochrome c localization in megakaryocyte progenitors treated with 0.5 Amol/L vincristine, preloaded with MitoTracker CMXRos, and stained with
anti–cytochrome c antibody. Original magnification, 1,000, 3 zoom. D, caspase-3/caspase-7 activation in megakaryocyte progenitors kept in the presence
(+SCF ) or absence ( SCF ) of SCF as indicated above and incubated for 24 h with 80 Amol/L cytosine arabinoside, 0.5 Amol/L vincristine, or 5 Ag/mL cisplatin.
Columns, mean fold increase of caspase activity of three independent experiments done with cells from different donors, as compared with an untreated cell sample;
bars, SD. P < 0.001, ANOVA.

megakaryocyte loss during chemotherapy. According to this
hypothesis, pharmacologic agents that inhibit c-kit, such as
imatinib mesylate, frequently produce megakaryocyte loss and
thrombocytopenia in treated chronic myeloid leukemia patients
(21, 22). Thrombocytopenia is particularly evident when imatinib is
combined with standard chemotherapeutic drugs (23), suggesting

www.aacrjournals.org

that the interaction between c-kit and endogenously produced SCF
is important for megakaryocyte survival in myelosuppressive
conditions.
A prospective use of SCF to support hematopoietic protection
and recovery in cancer patients should take into account the
potential oncogenic effects of this cytokine on c-kit–expressing

4771

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Constitutively active Akt protects megakaryocyte progenitors from drug-induced apoptosis. Megakaryocyte progenitors at day 3 of unilineage culture
were transduced with a lentiviral vector carrying a myristylated constitutively active form of Akt and GFP as a reporter, sorted on the basis of GFP expression, and
analyzed after 3 additional days of culture. A, megakaryocyte progenitors transduced with the empty vector (Vector ) or with myr-Akt (myrAkt ) were immunostained
with anti-Akt (aAKT ; left ), anti–phospho-Akt (apAKT ; center ), or anti-HA (aHA ; right ). Original magnification, 400. B, cells transduced with the empty vector or
with myr-Akt were left untreated (Con ) or treated with chemotherapeutic agents as in (C ). Cell death percentage was evaluated by ethidium bromide-acridine orange
staining. Columns, mean of three experiments done with cells from different donors; bars, SD. P < 0.001, ANOVA. C, transduced megakaryocyte progenitors were
treated with 80 Amol/L cytosine arabinoside for 24 h, stained with TOTO-3 and TUNEL FITC (pseudocolored in blue and magenta, respectively), and analyzed
on a confocal microscope (original magnification, 400, 2 zoom). D, transduced megakaryocytes were treated with cytosine arabinoside, preloaded with MitoTracker
CMXRos, and stained with anti–cytochrome c . Samples were analyzed on a confocal microscope (original magnification, 1,000, 3 zoom).

tumor cells. In fact, some tumor cells, particularly from acute
leukemias and colon and gastric cancers, have been shown to
express c-kit, and some of these tumors respond to SCF with
enhanced proliferation (24–26). The potential oncogenic effect of
cytokines used in the supportive therapy of cancer patients is a
general problem, as shown by the recent discovery that many
tumors express the erythropoietin receptor and respond to
recombinant erythropoietin with proliferation and chemotherapy
resistance (27–31).4 Therefore, to avoid undesirable proliferative
and antiapoptotic effects on tumor cells, SCF should be administered exclusively to patients with c-kit–negative tumors. A recent
comprehensive study on c-kit expression in human tumors showed
that 81 of 120 tumor types examined were negative for c-kit
expression including hormone-refractory prostate carcinoma,
Kaposi’s sarcoma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, medulloblastoma,

4

Our unpublished data.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

tubular breast carcinoma, and chronic myelogenous leukemia (32),
whereas other investigators reported a complete absence of c-kit
expression in malignant brain tumors and breast and ovarian
cancers (33). Although an individual evaluation of receptor
expression on cancer cells would be desirable before the
administration of any hematopoietic cytokine, these observations
suggest that the use of SCF should be safe in many common
malignancies.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/22/2006; revised 2/22/2007; accepted 3/15/2007.
Grant support: Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC), the Italian
Health Ministry, and an AIRC fellowship (M. Bartucci).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Stefano Guida and Giusy Ruscio for technical assistance and Desirèe
Bonci (Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy) for providing the Tween vector.

4772

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Control of Chemotherapy-Induced Thrombocytopenia

References
1. Kaushansky K. The thrombocytopenia of cancer.
Prospects for effective cytokine therapy. Hematol Oncol
Clin North Am 1996;10:431–55.
2. Elting LS, Rubenstein EB, Martin CG, et al. Incidence,
cost, and outcomes of bleeding and chemotherapy dose
modification among solid tumor patients with chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia. J Clin Oncol 2001;
19:1137–46.
3. De Botton S, Sabri S, Daugas E, et al. Platelet formation is the consequence of caspase activation within
megakaryocytes. Blood 2002;100:1310–7.
4. De Maria R, Zeuner A, Eramo A, et al. Negative
regulation of erythropoiesis by caspase-mediated cleavage of GATA-1. Nature 1999;401:489–93.
5. Avecilla ST, Hattori K, Heissig B, et al. Chemokinemediated interaction of hematopoietic progenitors with
the bone marrow vascular niche is required for
thrombopoiesis. Nat Med 2004;10:64–71.
6. Debili N, Masse JM, Katz A, et al. Effects of the
recombinant hematopoietic growth factors interleukin3, interleukin-6, stem cell factor, and leukemia inhibitory
factor on the megakaryocytic differentiation of CD34+
cells. Blood 1993;82:84–95.
7. Norol F, Vitrat N, Cramer E, et al. Effects of cytokines
on platelet production from blood and marrow CD34+
cells. Blood 1998;91:830–43.
8. Guerriero R, Mattia G, Testa U, et al. Stromal cellderived factor 1a increases polyploidization of megakaryocytes generated by human hematopoietic progenitor
cells. Blood 2001;97:2587–95.
9. Antonchuk J, Hyland CD, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS.
Synergistic effects on erythropoiesis, thrombopoiesis,
and stem cell competitiveness in mice deficient in
thrombopoietin and steel factor receptors. Blood 2004;
104:1306–13.
10. Zeuner A, Pedini F, Signore M, et al. Increased death
receptor resistance and FLIPshort expression in polycythemia vera erythroid precursor cells. Blood 2006;107:
3495–502.
11. Guerriero R, Testa U, Gabbianelli M, et al. Unilineage
megakaryocytic proliferation and differentiation of

www.aacrjournals.org

purified hematopoietic progenitors in serum-free liquid
culture. Blood 1995;86:3725–36.
12. Bonci D, Cittadini A, Latronico MV, et al. ‘‘Advanced’’
generation lentiviruses as efficient vectors for cardiomyocyte gene transduction in vitro and in vivo . Gene
Ther 2003;10:630–6.
13. Zeuner A, Pedini F, Signore M, et al. Stem cell factor
protects erythroid precursor cells from chemotherapeutic agents via up-regulation of BCL-2 family proteins.
Blood 2003;102:87–93.
14. Schubert KM, Duronio V. Distinct roles for extracellular-signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) mitogenactivated protein kinases and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase in the regulation of Mcl-1 synthesis. Biochem
J 2001;356:473–80.
15. Herr I, Debatin KM. Cellular stress response and
apoptosis in cancer therapy. Blood 2001;98:2603–14.
16. Maslak P, Nimer SD. The efficacy of IL-3, SCF, IL-6,
and IL-11 in treating thrombocytopenia. Semin Hematol
1998;35:253–60.
17. Kuter DJ, Begley CG. Recombinant human thrombopoietin: basic biology and evaluation of clinical studies.
Blood 2002;100:3457–69.
18. Demetri GD. Pharmacologic treatment options in
patients with thrombocytopenia. Semin Hematol 2000;
37:11–8.
19. Blagosklonny MV, Pardee AB. Exploiting cancer cell
cycling for selective protection of normal cells. Cancer
Res 2001;61:4301–5.
20. Blaise D, Faucher C, Vey N, et al. Rescue of
haemopoiesis by a combination of growth factors
including stem-cell factor. Lancet 2000;356:1325–6.
21. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al. Activity of
a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in
the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1038–42.
22. van Deventer HW, Hall MD, Orlowski RZ, et al.
Clinical course of thrombocytopenia in patients
treated with imatinib mesylate for accelerated phase
chronic myelogenous leukemia. Am J Hematol 2002;
71:184–90.

4773

23. Gardembas M, Rousselot P, Tulliez M, et al.
Results of a prospective phase 2 study combining
imatinib mesylate and cytarabine for the treatment
of Philadelphia-positive patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in chronic phase. Blood 2003;102:
4298–305.
24. Ikeda H, Kanakura Y, Tamaki T, et al. Expression and
functional role of the proto-oncogene c-kit in acute
myeloblastic leukemia cells. Blood 1991;78:2962–8.
25. Bellone G, Carbone A, Sibona N, et al. Aberrant
activation of c-kit protects colon carcinoma cells
against apoptosis and enhances their invasive potential.
Cancer Res 2001;61:2200–6.
26. Broudy VC, Smith FO, Lin N, et al. Blasts from
patients with acute myelogenous leukemia express
functional receptors for stem cell factor. Blood 1992;
80:60–7.
27. Dagnon K, Pacary E, Commo F, et al. Expression of
erythropoietin and erythropoietin receptor in non-small
cell lung carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:993–9.
28. Arcasoy MO, Amin K, Karayal AF, et al. Functional
significance of erythropoietin receptor expression in
breast cancer. Lab Invest 2002;82:911–8.
29. Arcasoy MO, Amin K, Chou SC, et al. Erythropoietin
and erythropoietin receptor expression in head and
neck cancer: relationship to tumor hypoxia. Clin Cancer
Res 2005;11:20–7.
30. Acs G, Xu X, Chu C, Acs P, Verma A. Prognostic
significance of erythropoietin expression in human
endometrial carcinoma. Cancer 2004;100:2376–86.
31. Batra S, Perelman N, Luck LR, Shimada H, Malik P.
Pediatric tumor cells express erythropoietin and a
functional erythropoietin receptor that promotes angiogenesis and tumor cell survival. Lab Invest 2003;83:
1477–87.
32. Went PT, Dirnhofer S, Bundi M, et al. Prevalence of
KIT expression in human tumors. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:
4514–22.
33. Singer CF, Hudelist G, Lamm W, et al. Expression of
tyrosine kinases in human malignancies as potential
targets for kinase-specific inhibitors. Endocr Relat
Cancer 2004;11:861–9.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Chemotherapy-Induced Thrombocytopenia Derives from the
Selective Death of Megakaryocyte Progenitors and Can Be
Rescued by Stem Cell Factor
Ann Zeuner, Michele Signore, Daniela Martinetti, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:4767-4773.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4767

This article cites 33 articles, 20 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4767.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4767.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

