Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 35

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibition of Lyn is a promising treatment for mantle cell lymphoma
with bortezomib resistance
Areumnuri Kim1,2, Ki Moon Seong2, Hye Jin Kang3, Sunhoo Park1,2,4, Seung-Sook
Lee1,2,4
1

Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, National Radiation Emergency Medical Center, Seoul, Korea

2

Laboratory of Radiation Exposure & Therapeutics, National Radiation Emergency Medical Center, Seoul, Korea

3

Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul, Korea

4

Departments of Pathology, Korea Institute of Radiological & Medical Science, Seoul, Korea

Correspondence to:
Seung-Sook Lee, e-mail: sslee@kirams.re.kr
Keywords: B cell receptor signaling, Lyn, bortezomib resistance, mantle cell lymphoma, dasatinib
Received: May 27, 2015      Accepted: August 22, 2015      Published: October 21, 2015

ABSTRACT
Although proteasome inhibition with bortezomib (BTZ) is a validated treatment
for relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), many patients show resistance
to BTZ. However, the molecular mechanism of BTZ resistance in MCL has not been
elucidated. In the present study, we investigated BTZ-resistant MCL cells in vitro
and in vivo. We demonstrate that BTZ-resistant MCL cells showed highly increased
expression of the B-cell receptor (BCR) components CD79A and CD19. Activation
of the BCR signaling pathway enhanced the activity of Src family kinases (SFKs),
especially Lyn, and downstream kinases PI3K/AKT/mTOR in BTZ-resistant MCL cells.
Depletion of CD79A and Lyn significantly reduced several kinase activities involved in
PI3K signaling, leading to inhibition of proliferation. In addition, the SFKs inhibitor
dasatinib inhibited the proliferation of BTZ-resistant cells, preventing the binding of
CD19 with Lyn and PI3K p85. We also verified our findings with the mouse xenograft
tumor model. Dasatinib treatment significantly decreased tumor size in the mouse
bearing BTZ-resistant MCL cells, but not in the mouse bearing BTZ-sensitive MCL cells.
Collectively, our data show that overexpression of the BCR and its activated signaling
confers BTZ resistance in MCL cells. Thus, targeting BCR signaling with dasatinib
could be a novel therapeutic approach for patients with MCL that has relapsed or is
refractory to treatment with BTZ.

refractory MCL and multiple myeloma (MM). Although
30–50% of patients with relapsed MCL achieve remission
after bortezomib (BTZ) treatment, more than 50% show
innate or acquired resistance to BTZ [1]. Indeed, studies
of BTZ with other combined regimens have shown that
PFS in MCL was limited to 11.5 months [4]. Based on
the results of a phase II clinical study, lenalidomide was
approved for treatment of relapsed or refractory MCL
to BTZ [5]. Unfortunately, lenalidomide combined with
cytotoxic regimens was insufficient to achieve PFS,
implying that understanding BTZ resistance mechanisms
is necessary for the management of MCL patients with
disease progression after BTZ treatment. Some possible
mechanisms for BTZ resistance were proposed in the
previous studies, including mutation in a proteasome

INTRODUCTION
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a distinct B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. MCL is characterized by an
aggressive clinical course and a pattern of resistance and
relapse with conventional chemotherapy [1]. Although
rituximab-based chemotherapy typically leads to complete
early remission, the duration of this response is limited
and has no impact on progression-free survival (PFS)
[2, 3]. Therefore, a number of new compounds directed
against the underlying molecular mechanisms of MCL are
being tested in clinical trials.
The US Food and Drug Administration approved
bortezomib inhibits the chymotrypsin-like activity of
the proteasome complex, for the treatment of relapsed or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38225

Oncotarget

subunit gene, uncontrolled plasmacytic differentiation,
activation of AKT signaling, and increased insulin-like
growth factor receptor signaling induced tyrosine kinase.
[6–10] However, the mechanism of BTZ resistance in
MCL has not been defined clearly.
Most B-cell lymphomas highly express the B-cell
receptor (BCR) on the cell surface [11]. Activated BCR
signaling has been suggested as a critical growth pathway
in MCL, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL),
follicular lymphoma, and B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) [12–14]. Thus, novel agents are being
discovered to target BCR-associated signaling as possible
therapeutic agents for various B-cell malignancies.
Dasatinib is a multikinase inhibitor targeting
ABL and Src family kinases, which is approved for
use in imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia and
Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) [15, 16]. Recent studies report that
dasatinib is being tested in clinical trials for solid tumors,
either as a single agent or in combination with others [17].
Thus, dasatinib has the potential to treat relapsed MCL
by targeting specific Src family kinases (SFKs). In this
study, we explored the molecular mechanisms for the
BTZ-resistance in MCL with respect to BCR signaling and
assessed the efficacy of dasatinib as a therapeutic approach
for BTZ-resistant MCL patients.

their ChT-L proteasome activity (Figure 1C). To determine
whether accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins is reduced
by the increased ChT-L activity in BTZ-resistant cells,
the level of poly-ubiquitinated proteins was examined in
BTZ (10 nM) treated MCL cells. Both BTZ-resistant cell
types showed decreased accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins to be degraded by 26S proteasome. We also
found that the expression level of proteasome subunit β5
was increased in BTZ-resistant cells (Figure 1D). These
results indicate that proteasome inhibition caused by BTZ
treatment is decreased in BTZ-resistant cells, compared
with parental cells. Previously, Oerlemans et al. reported
that BTZ resistance could be acquired by mutations in
the proteasome subunit β5 (PSMB5) in BTZ-adapted
leukemia cell lines [6], but we did not find a mutation in
the PSMB5 subunit in BTZ-resistant cells (Supplementary
Figure S1). Therefore, we established BTZ-resistant cell
lines exhibiting increased proteasome activity without a
genetic mutation in the catalytic subunit of the proteasome
(PSMB5).

BCR components are highly expressed in
BTZ-resistant MCL cells
Recent studies show that activation of BCR signaling
is important for the survival and proliferation of MCL
cells [14, 20]. The BCR complex contains a heterodimer
of CD79A/B, which is critical for the stabilization of the
BCR complex [21]. Another component, CD19, is a key
co-receptor in the BCR complex [22]. Thus, we expect
that regulation of these components is a possible way to
treat refractory MCL patients.
To reveal that each component in the complex
contributes to the acquisition of BTZ-resistance, we
first investigated the expression levels of CD79A/B and
CD19 in MCL cells. mRNA levels were higher in BTZresistant MCL cells than parental cells (Figure 2A) and
the expression of CD79A and CD19 proteins on membranes
was significantly elevated in BTZ-resistant cells, compared
to parental cells (Figure 2B and Supplementary Figure S2).
These data indicated that the increased expression of BCR
components could induce the resistance for BTZ in MCL
cells. Next, we depleted the CD79A and CD19 genes
using specific siRNAs to determine if these components
are required for BTZ resistance. Depletion experiments
showed significantly decreased cell viability following
BTZ treatment (Figure 2C). We also examined BTZ
susceptibility in CD79A and CD19 depleted parent cells
(data not shown). They showed slightly reduced cell
viability compared to BTZ-resistant cells, suggesting
overexpression of BCR is necessary for BTZ-resistant
cell proliferation. In addition, we analyzed cell viability
in CD79A overexpressed Jeko1 and Mino cells treated
with BTZ. Surprisingly, we found that overexpression
of CD79A induced the resistance for BTZ in MCL cells
(Figure 2D). Taken together with the above experimental

RESULTS
Bortezomib-resistant MCL cells show increased
proteasome activity
To characterize the mechanisms of BTZ resistance
in MCL patients, we established two MCL cell lines with
acquired resistance against BTZ by continuous exposure
of Jeko1 and Mino cells to increasing concentrations of
BTZ.
We first evaluated BTZ sensitivity in parent cells
(Jeko1 and Mino) and BTZ-resistant cells (Jeko1/BTZ and
Mino/BTZ) (Figure 1A). Parental Jeko1 and Mino cells
showed high sensitivity to BTZ with an IC50 of 6.5 nM and
8.7 nM, respectively. However, Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/BTZ
cells were resistant to BTZ (IC50 of 342 nM and 380 nM,
respectively), exhibiting an IC50 40-fold higher than that
of their parental cells. BTZ inhibits the chymotrypsin-like
activity at the β5-subunit and increases poly-ubiquitinated
proteins, leading to apoptosis in cancer cells [18, 19]. To
compare the BTZ effects between parent and BTZ-resistant
cells, we measured apoptotic cell death and chymotrypsinlike (ChT-L) proteasome activity. As shown in Figure 1B,
BTZ effectively increased apoptosis in Jeko1 (65%) and
Mino (42.1%), but not in BTZ-resistant cells. Additionally,
bortezomib decreased ChT-L proteasome activity in Jeko1
cells to 30–36% of the control level and in Mino cells to
22–27% of the control level. However, Jeko1/BTZ cells
retained 55–62% and Mino/BTZ cells retained 43–52% of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38226

Oncotarget

Figure 1: PSMB5 mutation is not associated with bortezomib (BTZ)-resistant MCL cells. A. MCL cells (Jeko1 and Mino)

and MCL cells with acquired BTZ-resistance (Jeko/BTZ and Mino/BTZ) were incubated with various doses of BTZ for 72 hr. Inhibition
of cell growth was measured by the MTT assay. B. BTZ-sensitive cells (Jeko1 and Mino) and BTZ-resistant cells (Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/
BTZ) were treated with 10 nM BTZ for 24 hr. Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. C. ChT-L activity was measured by fluorescence
activity after 24 hr in BTZ (10 nM and 20 nM) -treated or –untreated Jeko1 or Mino cells and their BTZ-resistant cells. D. Expression level
of ubiquitin and PSMB5 in Jeko1, Mino, and their BTZ-resistance cells were assessed by Western blotting. β-actin was used as a protein
loading control.

evidence, high expression of CD79A and CD19 is
necessary for resistance to BTZ in MCL cells.

activity in BTZ-resistant cells, compared to parent cells.
We specifically analyzed the expression of phosphorylated
Lyn, Lck, and Yes in BTZ-resistant cells and found
increased phosphorylation in response to BTZ treatment
(Figure 3C). We also examined the activities of other
SFKs of BCR signaling in the BTZ-resistant cells, such
as Src, Syk, Fyn, and Btk. The activities of those kinases
were not changed by BTZ treatment (Supplementary
Figure S3). Furthermore, Btk inhibitor (ibrutinib) and Syk
inhibitor (fostamatinib) did not decreased cell viability of
the BTZ-resistant cells (Supplementary Figure S4). Taken
together, these data indicated that SFKs are activated in
BTZ-resistant cells, moreover, their activities are enhanced
by BTZ treatment. Because Lyn has an essential role in
initial BCR activation, we depleted it in BTZ-resistant
cells and evaluated subsequent susceptibility to BTZ. Lyndepleted BTZ-resistant cells showed concomitant downregulated activation of Lck and Yes and decreased cell

Src family kinases are significantly activated in
BTZ-resistant MCL cells
BCR stimulation is known to induce intracellular
tyrosine kinases activation, including Src, Lyn, Syk, and
Btk [23]. Considering our above findings, we compared
the expression level of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins
between BTZ-resistant and parental MCL cells (Figure
3A). BTZ-resistant MCL cells showed strong expression
of a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein of approximately 55
to 60 kDa, consistent with the molecular weight of SFKs.
To specify which kinase in BCR signaling is involved
in BTZ-resistant MCL cells, we performed a human
phospho-kinase array in BTZ-sensitive and -resistant
cells. As shown in Figure 3B, most kinases had increased
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38227

Oncotarget

Figure 2: BTZ-resistant MCL cells showed overexpression of CD79A and CD19 level. A. mRNA levels of CD79A and
CD79B were assessed by RT-PCR in Jeko1, Mino, and BTZ-resistant MCL cell lines (left panel). The data are presented relative to
expression in control cells after normalization to GAPDH (right panel). B. Surface expression of CD79A and CD19 in Jeko1, Mino, and
BTZ-resistant cells was evaluated by flow cytometry. (representative mean fluorescence intensity; MFI). C. Parental MCL cells (Jeko and
Mino) and BTZ-resistant cells (Jeko/BTZ and Mino/BTZ) were transfected with control siRNA, CD79A siRNA, or CD19 siRNA for 24 hr
and then treated with 10 nM BTZ for an additional 24 hr. Cell viability was measured using the MTT assay (left). Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/
BTZ cells were transfected with control siRNA, CD79A siRNA, or CD19 siRNA for 24 hr, followed by treatment with 10 nM BTZ for an
additional 24 hr. After each siRNA transfection, expression of CD79A and CD19 in whole cell lysates was measured by Western blotting.
β-actin was used as a protein loading control (right). *p < 0.05, compared with CD79A siRNA or CD19 siRNA-transfected cells. D. MCL
cells (Jeko1 and Mino) were transfected with a gene encoding CD79A (LeCD79A) or a control virus (LeEmpty). These cells were incubated
with BTZ (5 nM and 10 nM) for 48 hr. Cell viability was measured by the MTT assay. *p < 0.05, compared with LeCD79A-transfected
cells. Following transfection with LeEmpty or LeCD79A in Jeko1 and Mino cells, cells were treated with BTZ (10 nM) for 24 hr. Western
blotting showed alteration of CD79A level.
viability following BTZ treatment (Figure 3D). Thus, these
results show that Lyn is a critical kinase in the resistance to
BTZ in MCL cells. To confirm that SFKs are major signal
mediators responding to BTZ after BCR activation, we
treated BTZ-sensitive Jeko1 cells with anti-IgM to mimic
the BCR activation. Upon antigen engagement with antiIgM, phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motifs (ITAMs) of CD79A and CD79B leads to
activation of tyrosine kinases such as SFKs in B cells. AntiIgM treatment increased the phosphorylation of tyrosine
residues in many proteins, including SFKs in Jeko1 cells, but
BTZ toxicity was not blocked by IgM stimulation (Figure 3E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

These data imply that although SFKs are required for the
resistance to BTZ, transient activation of SFKs by BCR
engagement does not affect BTZ sensitivity.

BTZ-resistant cells are sensitive to inhibition of
PI3K signaling
Activation of PI3K signaling is activated primarily
by Lyn in BCR signaling [24]. Activated PI3K/Akt/
mTOR signaling promotes survival and proliferation of
MCL cells. In Figure 4A, we observed that BTZ inhibited
PI3K/Akt/mTOR activation in BTZ-sensitive cells, but
38228

Oncotarget

Figure 3: BTZ treatment induces activation of Src-family kinases (SFKs) through BCR signaling in BTZ-resistant
cells. A. The level of phosphorylated tyrosine kinases was determined in Jeko1, Mino, and BTZ-resistant cells using Western blotting.

The arrow indicates the location of SFKs at approximately 55–60 kDa. B. Expression of phospho-kinase arrays by Western blotting from
MCL cells of whole lysates incubated with membrane containing antibodies. The Lyn dot blots were indicated from membranes shown.
C. Comparison of p-Src and p-Lyn level was assessed using flow cytometry following treatment with 10 nM BTZ for 12 hr in BTZ-treated
or -untreated BTZ-resistant cells. D. Jeko/BTZ and Mino/BTZ cells were transfected with control siRNA or Lyn siRNA. After 24 hr, cells
were treated with 10 nM BTZ for an additional 24 hr. Cell viability was measured using the MTT assay. Whole cell lysates were used to
detect p-Lyn, p-Lck, and p-Yes and their basal protein expression using Western blotting. β-actin was used as a protein loading control.
*p < 0.005, compared with Lyn siRNA-transfecred cells. E. BCR in Jeko cells was stimulated by pre-incubation with F(ab’)2 goat antihuman IgM (10 μg/ml, 10 min) followed by BTZ treatment (10 nM, 3 hr). Expression of p-tyrosine and p-Src family was evaluated by
Western blotting. β-actin was used as a protein loading control. Jeko1 and Mino cells were treated with anti-human IgM (BCR) and BTZ
(10 nM), alone or in combination, for 24 hr. Cell viability was determined by the MTT assay.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38229

Oncotarget

Figure 4: BTZ-resistant cells respond to BCR-related signaling. A. Jeko1, Mino, and BTZ-resistant cells were incubated with

10 nM BTZ for 12 hr. Phosphorylation levels of PI3K, Akt, mTOR, and p70S6K were assessed by Western blotting. β-actin was used to as
a loading control. Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/BTZ cells were transfected for 24 hr using control siRNA, or B. CD79A siRNA, or C. Lyn siRNA
followed by 10 nM BTZ for an additional 24 hr. Whole cell lysates were used to detect p-PI3K, p-Akt, p-mTOR, PI3K, Akt, and mTOR
expression using Western blotting. β-actin was used as a protein loading control.

not in BTZ-resistant cells. Instead, the phosphorylation
in BTZ-resistant cells was even more enhanced by BTZ
treatment. To assess whether PI3K signaling involved
in BTZ-susceptibility is activated by CD79A/CD19 and
Lyn, PI3K/Akt/mTOR were examined in CD79A and Lyn
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

depleted BTZ-resistant cells, respectively. As shown in
Figure 4B, knockdown of CD79A decreased the activation
of PI3K/Akt/mTOR. Lyn-depleted cells also showed
decreased activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR (Figure 4C).
Taken together, these results indicate that overexpression
38230

Oncotarget

consequently enhanced the binding of CD19 to PI3K
p85. However, dasatinib prevented this binding in both
BTZ-resistant cell lines (Figure 5B). Immunofluorescence
staining revealed that dasatinib and additional treatment
with BTZ reduced the colocalization of CD19 and p85,
compared with BTZ alone (Figure 5C). We also performed
an in situ protein ligation assay (PLA) to analyze the
binding between CD19-PI3K p85 in cells. Treatment
with BTZ alone increased the PLA signal compared with
untreated cells, whereas dasatinib blocked the interaction
of CD19 and PI3K p85 (Figure 5D). These results show
that dasatinib inhibits binding of CD19 to Lyn and p85 and
reduces cell viability of BTZ-resistant cells.
We examined the in vivo efficacy of dasatinib using
a mouse xenograft model bearing Jeko1- and Jeko1/BTZinduced tumors. To validate the anti-tumor effect of BTZ
and dasatinib in vitro, mice were treated with BTZ (1 mg/
kg) or dasatinib (20 mg/kg). Consistent with the in vitro
data, Jeko1-bearing mice showed delayed tumor growth
following BTZ treatment whereas dasatinib treatment did
not significantly inhibit tumor growth. On the other hand,
in the Jeko1/BTZ xenograft model, BTZ did not suppress
tumor growth, but dasatinib dramatically decreased tumor
growth (Figure 5E).
To evaluate alterations in kinase levels following
treatment with dasatinib, we measured expression of pLyn, p-PI3K, p-Akt, and p-mTOR in tumor tissues of
the Jeko1/BTZ xenografted model (Figure 5F). Tumor
tissues from untreated and BTZ-treated mice showed no
changes in their expression whereas kinases activation
was significantly reduced in the dasatinib-treated group.
These results indicate that dasatinib enhances the antitumor effect in the BTZ-resistant model through inhibition
of Lyn, suggesting that dasatinib treatment could have
potential therapeutic value in BTZ-resistant MCL.

of BCR contributes to the growth and survival of BTZresistant MCL cells through activation of PI3K signaling.

Dasatinib efficiently inhibits growth of
BTZ-resistant MCL cells in vitro and in vivo
Our findings showed that targeted depletion of
key components in BCR signaling is a plausible way to
overcome resistance to BTZ in BTZ-resistant cells. To
examine the clinical application of down-regulation of
signaling molecules in BTZ-resistant cells, we treated both
BTZ-sensitive and -resistant cells with several inhibitors.
BTZ-resistant cells showed even more sensitive responses
to SFKs inhibitor (PP2), PI3Ks inhibitor (LY294002),
and mTORs inhibitor (Rapamycin), compared with BTZsensitive cells. Values of IC50 for each inhibitor treatment
in BTZ-resistant cells were much lower than in BTZsensitive cells (Table 1). However, there was no significant
difference in cytotoxicity to DNA damaging agents
(doxorubicin and vincristine) between BTZ-sensitive and
-resistant cells. We hypothesized that one of the Src family
kinase inhibitors, dasatinib, can inhibit growth of BTZresistant MCL cells. As shown in Figure 5A, increasing
doses of dasatinib effectively reduced the growth of BTZresistant cells, but only slightly inhibited the growth of
BTZ-sensitive cells. We also examined that sensitivity
to dasatinib treatment in other MCL cells such as Jeko1,
Mino, Rec1, and Granta519 (Supplementary Figure S5).
Surprisingly, these BTZ-sensitive cells showed the strong
resistance to dasatinib (IC50 > 1000 nM), compared to
BTZ-resistant cells (Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/BTZ) (IC50 <
100 nM, Figure 5A).
In addition, dasatinib induced G1 phase arrest
in BTZ-resistant cells, unlike BTZ-sensitive cells
(Supplementary Figure S6). To characterize the molecular
mechanism regarding how dasatinib inhibits cell viability
in BTZ-resistant cells, we investigated the correlation
between the p85 subunit of PI3K and CD19, which is
activated by the Lyn kinase following BCR signaling
activation. As shown in our immunoprecipitation data,
BTZ increased tyrosine phosphorylation of Lyn and

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we demonstrate that activated BCR
signaling is associated with BTZ resistance in MCL in vitro
and in vivo. We found that BTZ-resistant MCL cells showed

Table 1: Inhibition of target agents in MCL cell lines
Drug

IC50
Jeko1

Mino

Jeko1/BTZ

Mino/BTZ

Doxorubicin (μM)

0.703

0.215

0.63

0.21

Vincristine (nM)

0.638

0.631

0.47

0.43

PP2 (μM)

43.516

37.742

15.947

8.745

LY294002 (μM)

15.342

17.854

6.743

8.962

Rapamycin (μM)

>5

>5

0.086

0.103

The IC50 value of various anti-cancer agents (BTZ, Doxorubicin, Vincristine, PP2, LY294002, and Rapamycin) for 72 hr
treatment of Jeko1, Mino, and BTZ-resistant cells was determined using the MTT assay.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38231

Oncotarget

overexpression of BCR components, contributing to the
increased levels of phosphorylated Lyn. Additionally, dasatinib
led to anti-tumor activity in a BTZ-resistant tumor model but
not a BTZ-sensitive tumor model. Our data indicate that the
expression level of BCR components serves as a potential
marker of BTZ resistance and suggests targeting of Lyn as an
attractive therapeutic strategy for BTZ-resistant MCL.
Alteration in the PSMB5 gene mediates BTZ
resistance in hematopoietic malignancy cells [6, 7]. In
contrast to this finding, our results did not show mutations
in PSMB5 in BTZ-resistant MCL cell lines (Figure 1).
Moreover, the catalytic subunit ß5 was significantly
increased in BTZ-resistant cells. Although BTZ-resistant
cell lines show a high frequency of PSMB5 mutations,
there are many clinical specimens obtained from BTZresistant patients without any mutation in PSMB5
[25, 26]. Thus, these results imply that our established
BTZ-resistant cells could be useful for the investigation
of general mechanisms for BTZ-resistance other than
PSMB5 mutations.
Using our cell lines, we demonstrate that BCR
signaling is a valuable therapeutic target for BTZresistant MCL. In particular, the highly expressed BCR
components CD79A and CD19 induced BTZ-resistance
whereas their depletion decreased cell viability during
BTZ treatment (Figure 2C). In accordance with our data,
previous studies indicate that a targeting strategy for these
molecules has a clinical benefit in the treatment of MCL.
A CD79B monoclonal antibody-drug conjugate showed
high efficacy in a phase I clinical trial of MCL [27]. In
phase I/II trials, treatment with the anti-CD19/anti-CD3
monoclonal antibody caused tumor regression, particularly
in MCL patients [28]. We also observed that CD79A
overexpression induces resistance to BTZ in BTZ-sensitive
cells (Figure 2D). In another study on DLBCL by Davis
and colleagues, the presence of mutations in the BCR coreceptors CD79A/B was associated with the pathogenicity
of DLBCL [12]. However, we did not find mutations in
the ITAM motif of CD79A in cells with acquired BTZresistance (Supplementary Figure S7). Therefore, our
results imply that up-regulation of BCR expression levels,
rather than mutations, confers BTZ resistance in MCL.
Engagement of the BCR by an antigen initiates
a signal transduction pathway activating SFKs and
downstream kinases including Lyn, Syk, and Btk,
leading to BCR-dependent survival and growth in B cell
malignancies [29]. Previous studies on DLBCL, CLL, and
Burkitt’s lymphoma have implicated BCR signaling-related
kinases as potential novel pharmacologic targets [30–32].
Early clinical results showed promising effects
of the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib for CLL, DLBCL, and
MCL treatment. More recently, a phase II trial reported
that ibrutinib showed a high response rate in relapsed
MCL resistant to BTZ [33]. This clinical study strongly
supports our finding that activated BCR signaling confers
BTZ resistance and that BCR inhibition is a potential
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

therapeutic target in BTZ-resistant MCL. Moreover, novel
agents that blocks BCR signaling have been investigated
in relapsed patients with MCL such as Syk inhibitor
(fostamatinib) [34] and PI3Kδ inhibitor (idelalisib)
[35]. We found that some SFKs including Lyn, Lck, and
Yes were activated and treatment with the broad SFKs
inhibitor PP2 significantly decreased cell viability in BTZresistant cells (Table 1).
SFKs directly interact with PI3K to mediate cell
survival [36]. Our study showed that PI3K inhibitor
(LY294002) and mTOR inhibitor (Rapamycin) treatments
also reduced cell viability in BTZ-resistant MCL cells.
These findings could be explained by our previous
results that BTZ-resistant cells show up-regulation of
the Akt/mTOR pathway and that inhibition of PI3K/
mTOR greatly enhances the growth inhibitory effect in
BTZ-resistant cells, compared with BTZ-sensitive cells.
Furthermore, other studies show that the IGF/IGFR axis
[10] or c-Met [37] is involved with BTZ resistance, of
which downstream PI3K/mTOR are potential therapeutic
targets to overcome BTZ resistance. Together, these
findings indicate that BTZ sensitivity could be modulated
by the SFK function alone or the SFK interacting signal
molecule, PI3K/mTOR, increasing therapeutic value of
targeting SFKs.
We also observed that other BCR-associated kinases
such as Src, Fyn, Syk, and Btk, which were slightly
increased in BTZ-resistant cells compared with BTZsensitive cells. However, inhibition of Syk and Btk with
each target inhibitor has insufficient effect to induce cell
growth inhibition of BTZ-resistant cells (Supplementary
Figure S3 and S4).
Lyn is thought to be a major SFK. Lyn activation
triggers a cascade of signaling events resulting in
subsequent recruitment and activation of other tyrosine
kinases [23]. When Lyn was depleted with specific siRNA,
other important kinases, including PI3K, Akt, and mTOR
were also inactivated (Figure 4C). This finding indicates
that Lyn inhibition is a possible clinical approach for the
treatment of BTZ-resistant MCL patients.
In this regard, dasatinib, a SFKs inhibitor, is
effective when treating chronic myeloid leukemia patients
with resistance or intolerance to imatinib, a BCR-ABL
tyrosine kinase inhibitor [16]. Dasatinib targets the ATP
binding pocket of Lyn, which inhibits the activation of
Lyn and downstream kinases [38]. Dasatinib also turns off
BCR signaling by inhibiting the activity of a BTK [39]. In
addition, dasatinib treatment enhanced the anti-tumor effect
in an in vivo model using breast cancer overexpressing Lyn
[40]. We observed that the BCR signaling was significantly
down-regulated by dasatinib, leading to growth
suppression of BTZ-resistant cells through accumulation
of cells in G1 phase (Supplementary Figure S6). We also
found that inhibition of Lyn by dasatinib did not induce
cell death in BTZ sensitive cells, suggesting that dasatinib
discriminately inhibits cell viability of BTZ-resistant cells
38232

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Dasatinib enhanced cell growth inhibition and antitumor effects in BTZ-resistant cells in vitro and in vivo. A. MCL
cells and BTZ-resistant MCL cells were treated with increasing doses of dasatinib for 72 hr. Cell viability was measured by the MTT assay.
B. Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/BTZ cells were treated with 10 nM BTZ, 500 nM dasatinib, or their combination for 24 hr. The lysates were subjected to
immunoprecipitation with CD19, followed by Western blot analysis with antibodies against p-tyrosine, PI3K (p85), and Lyn. C. Immunofluorescence
staining of p-Lyn and PI3K (p85) in Jeko1/BTZ cells 24 hr after the addition of 500 nM dasatinib and 10 nM BTZ. Scale bars represent 10 μm.
D. Jeko1/BTZ cells were incubated with BTZ (10 nM), dasatinib (500 nM), or their combination for 24 hr. The phosphorylation status of Lyn
was detected by in situ proximity ligation assay (PLA, red dots) using rabbit antibodies directed against a pan-phospho-tyrosine-specific mouse
monoclonal antibody. Scale bars represent 10 μm. Quantification of the number of signals per cell in Jeko1/BTZ cells for BTZ, dasatinib, or
combination treatment. E. Mice with established Jeko1 and Jeko1/BTZ xenografts were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with BTZ (1 mg/kg on days
1, 4, 8 and 11), orally treated 5 times a week for a total of 4 weeks with dasatibin (20 mg/kg), or treated with vehicle. The mice were sacrificed 30
days after inoculation, and representative images of tumors were obtained from mice that were treated with BTZ or dasatinib. Data represent mean
tumor volumes and SD. *p < 0.005. Representative images show tumors from Jeko1 or Jeko1/BTZ tumor-bearing mice at 30 days. F. p-Src, p-Lyn,
p-Akt (Ser473 and Thr308), and p-mTOR levels were analyzed by Western blotting in three mice per group. β-actin was used as a loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38233

Oncotarget

from BTZ-sensitive cells (Supplementary Figure S8).
Other BTZ-sensitive cell lines (Jeko1, Mino, Rec1 and
Granta519) were resistant to dasatinib compared with
BTZ-resistnat cells. (Supplementary Figure S5). These
findings could be explained that the highly activated BCR
signaling, especially increased Lyn activity enhanced the
sensitivity to dasatinib of BTZ-resistant cells.
Dasatinib interfered with the interaction between
Lyn and CD19 or PI3K p85, resulting in reduced
phosphorylation of Akt/mTOR in BTZ-resistant cells and
significant inhibition of tumor size in a BTZ-resistant
xenograft in mouse (Figure 5). Moreover, BTZ-resistant
cells treated with dasatinib showed decreased activation
of these kinases in the presence of BTZ.
The Btk inhibitor Ibrutinib shows promising clinical
activity in relapsed MCL resistant to BTZ [33]. However,
in this study, we found that ibrutinib did not suppress
cell growth of BTZ-resistant MCL cells (Supplementary
Figure S4). Thus, dasatinib has the ability to block Lyn,
which leads to cell growth inhibition of BTZ-resistant
cells, but not Btk inhibition. Additionally, we recently
reported that activation of PI3K and its downstream
mTOR/p70S6K pathway contribute to BTZ resistance in
MCL, demonstrating that inhibition of PI3K and mTOR
is essential to overcome BTZ resistance [43]. Therefore,
our data suggest that inhibition of Lyn by dasatinib has
clinical significance for relapsed MCL patients with BTZ
failure. Our study implicates activated BCR signaling as a
possible mechanism of acquired resistance to BTZ in MCL
patients. Activation of SFKs, in particular Lyn, in response
to BCR activation confers resistance to BTZ in MCL cells.
We suggest that inhibition of kinases in BCR signaling by
dasatinib is a novel approach to the treatment of patients
with relapsed or BTZ-resistant MCL.

BTZ for 12 hr before stimulation with goat F(ab’)2 anti–
human IgM (Fc fragment chain specific; Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA) at a final concentration of 10 μg/mL
for 6 hr.

Chymotrypsin-like activity assay
Cells were seeded and treated with or without
10 nM BTZ for 48 hr. To measure chymotrypsin-like
activity, cells were washed with PBS and assessed
following the manufacturer’s suggested protocol for
Proteasome-Glo™ Chymotrypsin-Like Assay (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA).

DNA sequencing
Total RNA was extracted from MCL cell lines,
following previously reported protocols [44]. Exon II of the
PSMB5 gene was amplified by PCR using the following
primer. Forward, 5′-TTCCGCCATGGAGTCATA-3′
and reverse 5′-GTTGGCAAGCAGTTTGGA-3′. The
PCR product was sequenced by the ABI377 (Applied
Biosystems, Grand Island, NY, USA).

Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR)
Total RNA was isolated using RNeasy (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA, USA) and cDNA was synthesized using
the SuperScriptTM III First-Strand Synthesis System
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) and Choice-Taq
Blue Mastermix (Denville Scientific Inc., Metuchen,
NJ, USA). To amplify the CD79A, CD79B and CD19
genes, RT-PCR was performed as described previously
[45, 46] using the following primers: CD79A, forward,
5-ATGAAGTGAGTGAAGGGTGGG-3 and reverse,
5-AGAATGTCCCAGGGAAGTGAG-3; CD79B, forward,
5-TAGGTGGCTGTCTGGTCAATG-3 and reverse,
5-TGTTCTTGCAGAATGCACCTC-3; CD19, forward, 5GGAGAGTCTGACCACCATGCC ACCT-3and reverse,
5- AAGGGGACTGGAAGTGTCACTGGCAT-3; GAPDH,
forward, 5-GGCATCCTCACCCTGAAGTA-3 and reverse,
5-GGGGTGTTGAAGGTCTCAAA-3. Reaction products
were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis and the
intensity of the DNA bands was measured using ImageJ
software and normalized to that of GAPDH.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
Human MCL cell lines Jeko1 and Mino were
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA, USA). We established BTZ-resistant
Jeko1 and Mino cell lines by continuous exposure to
increasing concentrations of BTZ over 6 months. The
resulting stable BTZ-resistant cell lines were designated
Jeko1/BTZ and Mino/BTZ. All cells were cultured in
RPMI-1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum. BTZ
and dasatinib were purchased from LC Laboratories
(Boston, MA, USA) and stored as 10 mM stock solutions
at −70°C. The Src kinase inhibitor PP2 was purchased
from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA, USA).

Cell viability and apoptosis assay
Measurement of cell viability and apoptosis were
done as previously described [47].

Flow cytometric analysis

BCR stimulation

For quantification of CD79A/B expression, cells
were washed and blocked in 5% serum for 30 min at room
temperature before staining with PE-conjugated anti-

Cells were seeded in 60-mm culture dishes at a
density of at 3 × 105 cells/dish and treated with 10 nM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38234

Oncotarget

CD79A antibody, FITC-conjugated anti-CD79B antibody,
PE-conjugated anti-CD19, and control antibody (goat
immunoglobulin, Thermo Scientific, Grand Island, NY,
USA). To measure intracellular expression of phosphoLyn, phospho-Btk, phospho-Syk, and phospho-PI3K,
cells were washed, fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde for 10
min at room temperature, and permeabilized with 0.1%
saponin. Cells were incubated with antibody against
phospho-Lyn, phospho-Btk, or phospho-PI3K (Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA) and a secondary goat anti-rabbit
Cy5-conjugated antibody (Thermo Scientific) or phosphoSrc (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA) and
secondary goat anti-rabbit FITC-conjugated antibody
(Thermo Scientific) for 30 min each at room temperature.
Flow cytometric data were acquired on a FACSCanto and
analyzed using FlowJo software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR,
USA).

the flask and the cells were incubated for two days. For
selection of stable cells, the antibiotic chloramphemicol
was used in RPMI1640 medium. These cells were treated
with BTZ for 24 hr and cell growth inhibition was
measured by the MTT assay. Alteration of protein level
was determined by Western blotting.

Western blotting and immunoprecipitation
analysis

In situ proximity ligation assay

Immunofluorescence staining
Samples were prepared and stained as described
previously [47]. Cells were treated with 10 nM BTZ,
100 nM dasatinib, or their combination for 24 hr. The
primary antibodies used were specific for CD19 (Cell
Signaling Technology) and PI3K p85 (Abcam). Images
of immunostained slides were observed using a confocal
laser scanning microscope (Leica, Bannockburn, IL,
USA).

To investigate the interaction of CD19 and PI3K
(p85), we used an in situ proximity ligation assay
(PLA, Olink Bioscience, location). Jeko/BTZ cells were
treated with BTZ, dasatinib, or their combination for
24 hr, fixed with 4% formaldehyde, and permeabilized
with Triton-X100. Cells were incubated overnight with
primary antibody directed against CD19 (Cell Signaling
Technology) or PI3K p85 (Abcam), respectively. In situ
PLA was performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Each individual pair of proteins generated a
spot that could be visualized using fluorescent microscopy.
Images were taken using a Leica confocal laser scanning
microscope.

Western blotting was performed as described
previously [47] using primary antibodies against the
following proteins: p-tyrosine, p-Src family, p-Src,
p-Lyn, Src, p-AKT (Ser473), and CD79A (Cell Signaling
Technology); Lyn, Akt, mTOR, and β-actin (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA); PI3K p85 and p-mTOR
(Ser2448) (Abcam).
Cell lysates containing 0.5 mg protein were
incubated for 4 hr with 5 μg of anti-CD19 antibody
followed by incubation with 50 μg of protein A-Sepharose
beads (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) overnight at
4°C. Immunoprecipitates were collected and washed three
times with PBST, resuspended in SDS sample buffer, and
subjected to Western blot analysis.

Mouse xenograft model
Four-week-old female C.B-17 SCID mice were
obtained from SLC (Shizuoka, Japan). Mice were
acclimated for at least 7 days before handling. To
determine the effect of BTZ or dasatinib on tumors in
vivo, Jeko1 (1 × 107) and Jeko1/BTZ (1 × 107) cells were
harvested and resuspended in 100 μl of a 1:1 mixture
of PBS and Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA,
USA). The cell suspension was subcutaneously injected
in the flank of each mouse using a 23-gauge needle (7–8
mice per group). One week after implantation mice
were randomly divided into three groups (control, BTZ
treatment, or dasatinib treatment). According to the
group, mice were injected intraperitoneally with vehicle
(sterile saline) or BTZ (1 mg/kg on days 1, 4, 8, and 11).
Dasatinib was dissolved in propyleneglycol:water (1:1)
and orally administered (20 mg/kg/day) five times a week
for 4 weeks. Tumor sizes were measured every 4 days with
a caliper, and tumor volumes were calculated using the
formula: (length × width2) × 0.5. The Korea Institute of
Radiological and Medical Science approved the animal
studies.

siRNA transfection assay
Jeko/BTZ cells (2 × 105) and Mino/BTZ cells (3 ×
10 ) were seeded in 6-well plates and transfected with 30
nM CD79A siRNA (Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO, USA), 50
nM CD19 siRNA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or control
non-targeting siRNA (Dharmacon) by the Magnetofection
system using 1.0 μg DNA and 1.0 μl of PolyMAG according
to the manufactures protocol (Chemicell, Berlin, Germany).
After 12 hr, cells were treated with 10 nM BTZ for a further
24 hr and cell viability was analyzed using the MTT assay.
Whole cell lysates were subjected to Western blotting.
5

CD79A transfection
The CD79A-carrying lentivirus (pLenti-C-mGFP)
was purchased from OriGene technologies (Rockville,
MD, USA). Jeko1 and Mino cells were maintained in
complete culture medium in 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere
in a T75 flask. When the cell population reached 70–80%
confluence, recombinant lentiviruses were added to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38235

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

7.	 Oerlemans R, Franke NE, Assaraf YG, Cloos J, van
Zantwijk I, Berkers CR, Scheffer GL, Debipersad K,
Vojtekova K, Lemos C, van der Heijden JW, Ylstra B,
Peters GJ, et al. Molecular basis of bortezomib resistance: proteasome subunit beta5 (PSMB5) gene mutation and overexpression of PSMB5 protein. Blood. 2008;
112:2489–2499.

This study was supported by a grant No. 50411-2015
from the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology,
Republic of Korea.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

8.	 Chen KF, Yeh PY, Yeh KH, Lu YS, Huang SY, Cheng AL.
Down-regulation of phospho-Akt is a major molecular determinant of bortezomib-induced apoptosis in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Cancer research. 2008;
68:6698–6707.

All authors have no conflict of interest to report.

REFERENCES

9.	 Perez-Galan P, Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Shaffer AL 3rd,
Rizzatti EG, Chapman CM, Mo CC, Stennett LS, Rader C,
Liu P, Raghavachari N, Stetler-Stevenson M, Yuan C, et al.
Bortezomib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma is associated with plasmacytic differentiation. Blood. 2011;
117:542–552.

1.	 Diefenbach CS, O’Connor OA. Mantle cell lymphoma in
relapse: the role of emerging new drugs. Current opinion in
oncology. 2010; 22:419–423.
2.	 Forstpointner R, Dreyling M, Repp R, Hermann S, Hanel A,
Metzner B, Pott C, Hartmann F, Rothmann F, Rohrberg R,
Bock HP, Wandt H, Unterhalt M, et al. The addition of
rituximab to a combination of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, mitoxantrone (FCM) significantly increases the
response rate and prolongs survival as compared with FCM
alone in patients with relapsed and refractory follicular and
mantle cell lymphomas: results of a prospective randomized
study of the German Low-Grade Lymphoma Study Group.
Blood. 2004; 104:3064–3071.

10.	 Kuhn DJ, Berkova Z, Jones RJ, Woessner R, Bjorklund CC,
Ma W, Davis RE, Lin P, Wang H, Madden TL, Wei C,
Baladandayuthapani V, Wang M, et al. Targeting the
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor to overcome bortezomib resistance in preclinical models of multiple myeloma.
Blood. 2012; 120:3260–3270.
11.	 Kuppers R. Mechanisms of B-cell lymphoma pathogenesis.
Nature reviews. Cancer. 2005; 5:251–262.
12.	 Davis RE, Ngo VN, Lenz G, Tolar P, Young RM, Romesser
PB, Kohlhammer H, Lamy L, Zhao H, Yang Y, Xu W,
Shaffer AL, Wright G, et al. Chronic active B-cell-receptor
signalling in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Nature. 2010;
463:88–92.

3.	 Witzig TE, Geyer SM, Kurtin PJ, Colgan JP, Inwards DJ,
Micallef IN, LaPlant BR, Michalak JC, Salim M, Dalton RJ,
Moore DF Reeder Jr, CB North Central Cancer Treatment
Group. Salvage chemotherapy with rituximab DHAP for
relapsed non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a phase II trial in the
North Central Cancer Treatment Group. Leukemia & lymphoma. 2008; 49:1074–1080.

13.	 Deglesne PA, Chevallier N, Letestu R, Baran-Marszak F,
Beitar T, Salanoubat C, Sanhes L, Nataf J, Roger C, VarinBlank N, Ajchenbaum-Cymbalista F. Survival response to
B-cell receptor ligation is restricted to progressive chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells irrespective of Zap70 expression. Cancer research. 2006; 66:7158–7166.

4.	 Kouroukis CT, Fernandez LA, Crump M, Gascoyne RD,
Chua NS, Buckstein R, Turner R, Assouline S, Klasa RJ,
Walsh W, Powers J, Eisenhauer E. A phase II study of bortezomib and gemcitabine in relapsed mantle cell lymphoma
from the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical
Trials Group (IND 172). Leukemia & lymphoma. 2011;
52:394–399.

14.	 Baran-Marszak F, Boukhiar M, Harel S, Laguillier C,
Roger C, Gressin R, Martin A, Fagard R, Varin-Blank N,
Ajchenbaum-Cymbalista F, Ledoux D. Constitutive and
B-cell receptor-induced activation of STAT3 are important signaling pathways targeted by bortezomib in leukemic mantle cell lymphoma. Haematologica. 2010;
95:1865–1872.

5.	 Goy A, Sinha R, Williams ME, Besisik SK, Drach J,
Ramchandren R, Robertson MJ, Avivi I, Rowe JM,
Herbrecht R, Van Hoof A, Egyed M, Zhang L. Phase II multicenter study of single-agent lenalidomide in subjects with
mantle cell lymphoma who relapsed or progressed after or
were refractory to bortezomib: The MCL-001 “EMERGE”
study. ASH annual meeting abstract. 2012; 120:905.

15.	 Foa R, Vitale A, Vignetti M, Meloni G, Guarini A, De
Propris MS, Elia L, Paoloni F, Fazi P, Cimino G, Nobile F,
Ferrara F, Castagnola C, et al. Dasatinib as first-line treatment for adult patients with Philadelphia chromosomepositive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2011;
118:6521–6528.

6.	 Lu S, Yang J, Song X, Gong S, Zhou H, Guo L, Song N,
Bao X, Chen P, Wang J. Point mutation of the proteasome
beta5 subunit gene is an important mechanism of bortezomib resistance in bortezomib-selected variants of Jurkat T
cell lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia line. The Journal
of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 2008;
326:423–431.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Radich JP, Kopecky KJ, Appelbaum FR, Kamel-Reid S,
Stock W, Malnassy G, Paietta E, Wadleigh M, Larson RA,
Emanuel P, Tallman M, Lipton J, Turner AR, et al. A randomized trial of dasatinib 100 mg versus imatinib 400 mg in

38236

Oncotarget

newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2012; 120:3898–3905.

infusion of 60 μg/m2/d is tolerable and highly effective.
Blood. 2010; 116:2880.

17.	 Montero JC, Seoane S, Ocana A, Pandiella A. Inhibition of
SRC family kinases and receptor tyrosine kinases by dasatinib: possible combinations in solid tumors. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2011; 17:5546–5552.

29.	 Saijo K, Schmedt C, Su IH, Karasuyama H, Lowell CA,
Reth M, Adachi T, Patke A, Santana A, Tarakhovsky A.
Essential role of Src-family protein tyrosine kinases in
NF-kappaB activation during B cell development. Nature
immunology. 2003; 4:274–279.

18.	 Daniel KG, Kuhn DJ, Kazi A, Dou QP. Anti-angiogenic
and anti-tumor properties of proteasome inhibitors. Current
cancer drug targets. 2005; 5:529–541.

30.	 Naylor TL, Tang H, Ratsch BA, Enns A, Loo A, Chen L,
Lenz P, Waters NJ, Schuler W, Dorken B, Yao YM,
Warmuth M, Lenz G, et al. Protein kinase C inhibitor
sotrastaurin selectively inhibits the growth of CD79 mutant
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Cancer research. 2011;
71:2643–2653.

19.	 Hideshima T, Richardson P, Chauhan D, Palombella VJ,
Elliott PJ, Adams J, Anderson KC. The proteasome inhibitor PS-341 inhibits growth, induces apoptosis, and overcomes drug resistance in human multiple myeloma cells.
Cancer research. 2001; 61:3071–3076.

31.	 Buchner M, Baer C, Prinz G, Dierks C, Burger M, Zenz T,
Stilgenbauer S, Jumaa H, Veelken H, Zirlik K. Spleen tyrosine kinase inhibition prevents chemokine- and integrinmediated stromal protective effects in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Blood. 2010; 115:4497–4506.

20.	 Pighi C, Gu TL, Dalai I, Barbi S, Parolini C, Bertolaso A,
Pedron S, Parisi A, Ren J, Cecconi D, Chilosi M,
Menestrina F, Zamo A. Phospho-proteomic analysis of
mantle cell lymphoma cells suggests a pro-survival role of
B-cell receptor signaling. Cellular oncology (Dordrecht).
2011; 34:141–153.

32.	 Schmitz R, Young RM, Ceribelli M, Jhavar S, Xiao W,
Zhang M, Wright G, Shaffer AL, Hodson DJ, Buras E, Liu X,
Powell J, Yang Y, et al. Burkitt lymphoma pathogenesis and
therapeutic targets from structural and functional genomics.
Nature. 2012; 490:116–120.

21.	 Clark MR, Campbell KS, Kazlauskas A, Johnson SA, Hertz M,
Potter TA, Pleiman C, Cambier JC. The B cell antigen receptor complex: association of Ig-alpha and Ig-beta with distinct
cytoplasmic effectors. Science. 1992; 258:123–126.

33.	 Wang ML, Rule S, Martin P, Goy A, Auer R, Kahl BS,
Jurczak W, Advani RH, Romaguera JE, Williams ME,
Barrientos JC, Chmielowska E, Radford J, et al. Targeting
BTK with ibrutinib in relapsed or refractory mantle-cell
lymphoma. The New England journal of medicine. 2013;
369:507–516.

22.	 Wang K, Wei G, Liu D. CD19: a biomarker for B cell development, lymphoma diagnosis and therapy. Experimental
hematology & oncology. 2012; 1:36. 3619-1-36.
23.	 Kim LC, Song L, Haura EB. Src kinases as therapeutic targets
for cancer. Nature reviews.Clinical oncology. 2009; 6:587–595.

34.	 Friedberg JW, Sharman J, Sweetenham J, Johnston PB,
Vose JM, Lacasce A, Schaefer-Cutillo J, De Vos S, Sinha R,
Leonard JP, Cripe LD, Gregory SA, Sterba MP, et al.
Inhibition of Syk with fostamatinib disodium has significant
clinical activity in non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2010; 115:2578–2585.

24.	 Jou ST, Carpino N, Takahashi Y, Piekorz R, Chao JR,
Carpino N, Wang D, Ihle JN. Essential, nonredundant role
for the phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110delta in signaling by
the B-cell receptor complex. Molecular and cellular biology. 2002; 22:8580–8591.

35.	 Kahl B, Byrd JC, Flinn IW, Wagner-Johnston N, Spurgeon S,
Benson DM Jr, Furman RR, Brown JR, Coutre S, Lannutti B,
Giese NA, Ulrich RG, Webb HK. Clinical safety and activity in phase 1 study of CAL-101, an isoform-selective
inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase P110 {delta},
in patients with relapsed or refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma. ASH annual meeting abstracts. 2010; 116:1777.

25.	 Chapman MA, Lawrence MS, Keats JJ, Cibulskis K,
Sougnez C, Schinzel AC, Harview CL, Brunet JP,
Ahmann GJ, Adli M, Anderson KC, Ardlie KG, Auclair D,
et al. Initial genome sequencing and analysis of multiple
myeloma. Nature. 2011; 471:467–472.
26.	 Politou M, Karadimitris A, Terpos E, Kotsianidis I,
Apperley JF, Rahemtulla A. No evidence of mutations of
the PSMB5 in a case of myeloma with clinical resistance to
Bortezomib. Leukemia research. 2006; 30:240–241.

36.	 Parsons SJ, Parsons JT. Src family kinases, key regulators
of signal transduction. Oncogene. 2004; 23:7906–7909.

27.	 Palanca-wessels MC, Salles GA, Czuczman MS, Assouline SE,
Flinn IW, Sehn LS. Final results of a phase I study of the
anti-CD79b antibody-drug conjugate DCDS4501A in
relapsed or refractory (R/R) B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL). Blood. 2013; 122:4400.

37.	 Que W, Chen J, Chuang M, Jiang D. Knockdown of
c-Met enhances sensitivity to bortezomib in human multiple myeloma U266 cells via inhibiting Akt/mTOR
activity. APMIS : Acta Pathologica, Microbiologica, et
Immunologica Scandinavica. 2012; 120:195–203.

28.	 Viardot A, Goebeler M, Scheele JS, Zugmaier G, Noppeney R,
Knop S. Treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) with CD19/CD3 bispesific antibody blinatumimab (MT103): double-step dose increase to continuous

38.	 Williams NK, Lucet IS, Klinken SP, Ingley E, Rossjohn J.
Crystal structures of the Lyn protein tyrosine kinase domain
in its Apo- and inhibitor-bound state. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2009; 284:284–291.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38237

Oncotarget

39.	 Hantschel O, Rix U, Schmidt U, Burckstummer T, Kneidinger M,
Schutze G, Colinge J, Bennett KL, Ellmeier W,
Valent P, Superti-Furga G. The Btk tyrosine kinase is a major
target of the Bcr-Abl inhibitor dasatinib. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2007; 104:13283–13288.

43.	 Kim A, Park S, Lee JE, Jang WS, Lee SJ, Kang HJ, Lee SS.
The dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 exhibits
anti-proliferative activity and overcomes bortezomib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma cells. Leukemia research.
2012; 36:912–920.
44.	 Ri M, Iida S, Nakashima T, Miyazaki H, Mori F, Ito A,
Inagaki A, Kusumoto S, Ishida T, Komatsu H, Shiotsu Y,
Ueda R. Bortezomib-resistant myeloma cell lines: a role
for mutated PSMB5 in preventing the accumulation of
unfolded proteins and fatal ER stress. Leukemia. 2010;
24:1506–1512.

40.	 Schwarz LJ, Fox EM, Balko JM, Garrett JT, Kuba MG, Estrada MV,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Mills GB, Red-Brewer M, Mayer IA,
Abramson V, Rizzo M, Kelley MC, et al. LYN-activating mutations mediate antiestrogen resistance in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2014;
124:5490–5502.

45.	 Yan Q, Huang Y, Watkins AJ, Kocialkowski S, Zeng N,
Hamoudi RA, Isaacson PG, de Leval L, Wotherspoon A,
Du MQ. BCR, and TLR signaling pathways are recurrently
targeted by genetic changes in splenic marginal zone lymphomas. Haematologica. 2012; 97:595–598.

41.	 Morschhauser F, Seymour JF, Kluin-Nelemans HC, Grigg A,
Wolf M, Pfreundschuh M, Tilly H, Raemaekers J, van’t
Veer MB, Milpied N, Cartron G, Pezzutto A, Spencer A,
et al. A phase II study of enzastaurin, a protein kinase C
beta inhibitor, in patients with relapsed or refractory mantle
cell lymphoma. Annals of Oncology : Official Journal of
the European Society for Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2008;
19:247–253.

46.	 Mahmoud MS, Fujii R, Ishikawa H, Kawano MM. Enforced
CD19 expression leads to growth inhibition and reduced
tumorigenicity. Blood. 1999; 94:3551–3558.
47.	 Kim A, Lee JE, Lee SS, Kim C, Lee SJ, Jang WS, Park S.
Coexistent mutations of KRAS and PIK3CA affect the
efficacy of NVP-BEZ235, a dual PI3K/MTOR inhibitor, in
regulating the PI3K/MTOR pathway in colorectal cancer.
International journal of cancer.Journal international du cancer. 2013; 133:984–996.

42.	 Fowler N, Sharman JP, Smith SM, Boyd T, Grant B,
Kolibaba KS, Furman RR, Buggy J, Loury D, Hamdy A,
Advani R. The Btk inhibitor, PCI-32765, induces durable
responses with minimal toxicity in patients with relapsed/
refractory B-cell malignancies: results from a phase I study.
ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts. 2010; 116:964.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38238

Oncotarget

