Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 24

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Targeted photo-chemo therapy of malignancy on the chest
wall while cardiopulmonary avoidance based on Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites
Haijun Zhang1, Liting Guo2, Shuang Ding1, Jian Xiong1, Baoan Chen2
1

Department of Oncology, Zhongda Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, People’s Republic of China

2

Department of Hematology, Zhongda Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, People’s Republic of China

Correspondence to: Haijun Zhang, e-mail: zhanghaijunseu@163.com
Baoan Chen, e-mail: baoanchen88@sina.com
Keywords: Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites, photo-chemo therapy, targeted therapy

Received: October 21, 2015     Accepted: April 18, 2016     Published: May 2, 2016

ABSTRACT
Treatment of malignancies on the chest wall, like chest wall recurrence of
tumor, advanced cutaneous neoplasm and lymphoma, is still a challenge due to
the involvement of the critical structures of heart and lung by the conventional
strategy. The aim of the current study was to investigate targeted photo-chemo
therapy mediated by Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites for malignancy on the chest wall
while cardiopulmonary avoidance. Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites, the synthesis
of the core-shell Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites followed by loading doxorubicin
(Dox), were prepared to act as multifunctional drug delivery system (DDS). The
synergistic anticancer effects on tumor on the chest wall and protection performance
of heart and lung were evaluated in vitro and in vivo using cell viability assay,
apoptosis detection, histopathologic examination, and serum biochemistry tests.
Our observations demonstrated that Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites, could play
the role of magnetic drug targeting to deliver Dox into tumor tissues and cells to
enhance its chemotherapeutic efficiency. Besides, with ultraviolet (UV) illumination,
Fe3O4@ZnO showed the excellent property of photosensitizer, further attacking the
cancer cells by photodynamic therapy (PDT). Thus, apoptosis was synergistically
induced by the photo-chemo therapy, resulting in a distinct improvement in anticancer
activity. Since UV has a limited penetration distance in tissue, causing PDT to fail
in the critical structures of heart and lung, cardiopulmonary hurt could be avoided
during the treatment. Therefore, targeted photo-chemo therapy mediated by Fe3O4@
ZnO nanocomposites may have promise as a potent treatment option for superficial
malignancies on the chest wall while cardiopulmonary avoidance.

radiotherapy to the chest wall could carry the risks of
radiation-related toxicity such as pneumonitis, lung fibrosis,
and coronary heart disease because considerable volumes of
heart and lung are likely to receive high doses [2]. Although
modern radiation therapy techniques have been introduced
to avoid high dose exposure to surrounding and underlying
healthy tissue, their clinical benefit is still a matter of debate
[1]. Chemotherapy is usually obstructed mainly by low
selectivity of the anticancer drugs towards the cancer cells,
which causes severe side effects and systemic toxicity [3].
With that in mind, efforts should be made to develop new
strategies of target coverage and cardiopulmonary sparing
for malignancies on the chest wall.

INTRODUCTION
Due to the critical structures of heart and lung,
treatment of malignancies on the chest wall, like chest
wall recurrence of tumor, advanced cutaneous neoplasm
and lymphoma, is still a challenge [1]. Conventional
treatments consist of surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or
a combination of the above. Generally, wide local excision
can be adequate for small superficial lesions. But, when
the recurrence of tumor on the chest wall occurs, advanced
cutaneous neoplasm and lymphoma, patients are not
amenable to wide local excision with negative margins
due to the bulk and extent of the tumor [2]. Meanwhile,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36602

Oncotarget

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an approved new
modality for the treatment of superficial solid tumor
recurrent/refractory to conventional treatment based on
photosensitizers exposed to light of specific wavelength
[4, 5]. Among the photosensitizers, ZnO nanomaterials
are regarded as the potential photosensitizing agents
for PDT due to their unique phototoxic effect upon the
irradiation [6-8]. With ultraviolet (UV) illumination, ZnO
nanomaterials can generate cytotoxic reactive oxygen
species (ROS) to kill tumor cells. Usually, the limitation
of PDT to superficial malignant neoplasm is considered as
its shortcoming since the UV light cannot penetrate deeply
into human tissues [9-13]. However, just as fire is a good
servant but a bad master, it is precisely the point of interest
in the study. Thus, PDT mediated by ZnO nanomaterials
exposed to UV illumination is especially desirable for
superficial malignancy on the chest wall, since UV has
a limited penetration distance in tissue, causing PDT to
fail in the critical structures of heart and lung which are
located far from the surface.
Multimodality treatment is a basic cancer treatment
principle, and can enhance therapeutic outcomes [1421]. Coincidentally, ZnO nanomaterials have emerged
as ideal multimodal nanomedicine platforms, acting as
not only drug carrier of Doxorubicin (Dox), a routine
chemotherapeutic agent, to increase intracellular
therapeutic agent, but also the photosensitizer in PDT
of cancer, which were well illustrated in our previous
studies [6, 7]. Thus, photo-chemo therapy mediated by
ZnO nanomaterials, the combination of chemotherapy
and PDT, has become an alternative to improve anticancer
activity. However, the photo-chemo therapy is not specific
for the target tissue. Thus, targeted drug delivery systems
(DDS) are preferred, which have been used to increase the
efficiency of drug delivery to specific tissues as well as to
decrease its side effects [22-26]. One way to achieve it is
by using magnetic carriers that allow the manipulation of
pharmacodynamic properties using an external magnetic
field [27, 28]. Magnetic drug targeting (MDT) is a
novel solution for targeted delivery of drugs to tumors
with minimal systemic toxicity, in which nanoparticles
comprise of magnetic cores (such as Fe3O4) and shells
loaded with drugs [29-31]. An external magnetic field
applied at the tumor site localizes these core–shell
particles at the tumor site enabling precise drug delivery.
To this end, Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites,
the synthesis of the core-shell Fe3O4@ZnO followed by
loading chemotherapeutic drug of Dox, were prepared in
this study as multifunctional nanomedicine platforms for
malignancy on the chest wall. In this case, the magnetic
core of Fe3O4 upon an external magnetic field is applied
for targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drug of Dox to
tumors. Moreover, the nature of PDT based on ZnO under
UV illumination to superficial tumor further attacks the
cancer cells, while sparing the critical structures of heart
and lung. The in vitro and in vivo anticancer property and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cardiopulmonary preservation of the targeted photo-chemo
therapy were investigated in the xenograft model in which
hepatocarcinoma SMMC-7721 cells were inoculated
subcutaneously into the chest wall of the nude mice as the
superficial malignancy.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Structure and properties of the Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites
Biocompatible and multifunctional Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites could provide an innovative platform for
cancer theranostics combined favorable magnetic targeting
ability and photodynamic therapy [32-34]. In this study,
the Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites were fabricated by the
stepwise growth approach. Firstly, Fe3O4 nanoparticles
were synthesized as nucleate seeds by coprecipitation
of ferric and ferrous salt in alkaline medium. Secondly,
the ZnO shell was growing on the surface of the cores
by the addition of Zn(NO3)2, followed by a heating and
aging process. From the transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) image (Figure 1A), we can see that the synthesized
Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites display the core/shell
structure, consisting of the black Fe3O4 core and the light
colored ZnO shell. The high resolution transmission
electron microscopy (HRTEM) image, and the
corresponding reverse fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the
HRTEM images taken from the areas (marked with a green
square for ZnO and a red square for Fe3O4) are shown in
Figure 1B. It can be found that the lattice fringes and the
corresponding lattice spacing are 0.25 nm and 0.48 nm,
which are in good agreement with the (101) plane of ZnO
and the (111) plane of Fe3O4, respectively. The scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) image shows the homogeneous
morphology (Figure 1C), and Figure 1D shows the size
distribution of Fe3O4@ZnO determined by dynamic light
scattering (Zetasizer, Malvern Instruments, UK). The
mean size of the Fe3O4@ZnO is 183.98 ± 36.16 nm. The
peaks corresponding to Fe, Zn and O are observed in the
energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) patterns (Figure
1E), further confirming the Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites
were formed. The magnetization curve of Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites are drawn in Figure 1F, demonstrating
that the samples were superparamagnetic because there
was no hysteresis and both their remanence and coercivity
were zero. Thus, Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites endow
a promising application in biomedical fields including
magnetic drug targeting and PDT.

Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites as photosensitizers
in PDT for cancer involved ROS upstream
PDT is a promising new modality for the treatment
of cancer because it promises a better selectivity for tumor
that is accessible to light and low systemic toxicity with
36603

Oncotarget

fewer side effects as compared to the radiation therapy
and chemotherapy [4-8]. As evidently illustrated in
Figure 2A, the lack of cytotoxicity of the Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites themselives against SMMC-7721 cells
ensures a wide potential range of biomedical applications.
The UV irradiation itself only showed a little cytotoxic
effect on SMMC-7721 cells, whose surviving fraction was
about 80%. However, when SMMC-7721 cells treated
by Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites accompanied with
UV irradiation, the cell viability decreased remarkably
with a dose-dependent manner, which indicates that the
photocatalytic activity of Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites
under UV irradiation could promote mortality of cancer
cells. ZnO, a semiconductor with band gap energy of 3.36
eV, will produce a hole (h+) in the valence band and an
electron (e-) in the conduction band, namely the electron/
hole pairs, under UV irradiation [6]. These electron/hole
pairs will induce a series of photochemical reactions to
generate ROS, due to the generation of hydroxyl radicals
(OH·) by h+ abstracting electrons from water and/or
hydroxyl ions and the production of the superoxide
anion O2- by e- reducing O2, which is displayed in the

Figure 2B. In this study, under UV irradiation, Fe3O4@
ZnO nanocomposites could induced ROS within SMMC7721 cells while there was no ROS production in the
absence of UV irradiation and UV alone (Figure 2C). The
formation of ROS could result in the cascade of cellular
and molecular events relevant to tumor destruction, which
is believed to be responsible for the promoting mortality
of cancer cells [8].

Magnet-guided targeted drug delivery and
smart pH-responsive release of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox
nanocomposites
Due to the metal binding sites of the quinone and
the phenolic oxygen molecules on both sides of the Dox
aromatic moiety, ZnO nanomaterials can act as a drug
carrier to self-assemble Dox [6, 7, 35]. Figure 3A shows
a proposed schematic representation of Dox loading
onto Fe3O4@ZnO through the formation of Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox nanocomposites as a DDS. When Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox formed, the Zeta potentia decreased from –
18mV to -2 mV before and after the preparation, which

Figure 1: Characterizations of Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites. A. TEM image. B. HRTEM and the corresponding reverse FFT of
the HRTEM images taken from the areas. C. SEM image. D. Size distribution. E. EDS spectrum. F. Magnetization curves.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36604

Oncotarget

In vitro photo-chemo therapy of Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox

strongly supported the fact that Dox was nicely combined
with Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites. The encapsulation
efficiency and loading efficiency were assessed and
calculated to be 69.02± 4.83% and 19.71% ±2.36%,
respectively. The release property of drug molecules
was shown in Figure 3B, displaying pH and time
depended manner. Dox release at lower pH of the tumor
microenvironment, with approximately 65% (pH 6.3) and
83% (pH 5.2), was much faster than that about 16% at
pH 7.4 of normal physiological conditions. The “smart”
pH-triggered drug release behavior is favourite in practical
cancer treatment, enabling more intelligent controlled
release and enhancing chemotherapeutic efficiency [36].
We thus examined magnet-guided delivery of the Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox using a permanent magnet. The fluorescent Dox
allowed an easy observation of cellular uptake of Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox by the SMMC-7721 cells through fluorescence
microscopy without the need for additional markers. In
our study, the optical microscopic observations of Dox
fluorescence revealed the high uptake of Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox by the cancer cells above the magnet, with little Dox
fluorescence seen in cells far from the magnet in the same
culture dish after 6 h of incubation. These results clearly
showed that Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites are better
suited for magnetic induced targeted drug delivery in
cancer therapy.

Since single modality has not always been
sufficiently effective, combinations of cancer therapy
modalities are attracting increasing attention to improve
the outcome of treatment [6]. In the current study, as
well illustrated above, Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites
could not only be the photosensitizers for PDT but also
play the role of the drug carrier for chemotherapy. To
explore the possibility of the combination of PDT and
chemotherapy, the anticancer effect of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox
nanocomposites were investigated as a strategy of photochemo therapy for human hepatocarcinoma SMMC7721 cells. We cultured SMMC-7721 cells with Fe3O4@
ZnO, Dox alone, or Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox (with equivalent
Dox concentration of (0.5 μg/mL), with or without UV
irradiation, for 48 h. Cells without any treatments were
used as control. The cytotoxicity results were estimated
by CCK-8 assay and shown in Figure 4A. Compared with
those receiving Dox alone, the viability of the SMMC7721 cells treated with Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox was decreased,
especially Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox with UV irradiation. The
obviously increased cytotoxicity attracted to the PDT
activity of Fe3O4@ZnO promoting mortality of cells in
addition to those mortality effects induced by Dox. The

Figure 2: The photodynamic activity of the Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites. A. SMMC-7721 cell viability treated with Fe3O4@
ZnO nanocomposites in the absence and presence of UV irradiation. B. Scheme of mechanism of ROS production by Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites under UV irradiation. C. The intracellular production of ROS analyzed by the flow cytometer.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36605

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Magnetical targeted drug delivery and drug release property. A. scheme for the Dox-loaded Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposite. B. In vitro Dox release behavior at pH 7.4, 6.0, and 5.0. C. Fluorescence microscopy images of cells incubated with
Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites right above the magnet and far from magnet.

Figure 4: In vitro photo-chemo therapy of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox. A. Cytotoxic effect of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites in the absence
or presence of UV irradiation against SMCC-7721 cells. B. Microscopic images of SMCC-7721 cells after different treatments for 48 h. C.
Microscopic images of the magnetically targeted photo-chemo therapy of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox right above the magnet and far from magnet.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36606

Oncotarget

optical microscopic observations confirmed the results of
CCK-8 assay (Figure 4B), which was obvious that Fe3O4@
ZnO with UV irradiation could cause more significant
morphological changes. The cancer cell morphology
treated by the magnetically targeted Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox was
shown in Figure 4C due to that CCK-8 assay could not be
carried out in the same culture dish in vitro. The optical
microscopic observations revealed that Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox under the magnetic field with UV irradiation could
selectively kill cancer cells that were localized close to the
magnet, without little change of cell morphology far from
the magnetic field. Taken together, the synergistic effect
of anticancer activity demonstrated that Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox
could mediate targeted photo-chemo therapy for cancer.

of targeted photo-chemo therapy of malignancy on the
chest wall using the subcutaneous xenograft model
while cardiopulmonary avoidance by Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox nanocomposites. After sacrificing the animals with
different treatments at the end of the study for 14 days,
the tumor appearance and the relative tumor volume were
shown in Figure 5A and 5B. It was found that mice in the
saline control group and treated by Fe3O4@ZnO showed
severe tumour burden. Mice treated with Dox alone
showed a brief reduction in tumor load. The Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox showed better inhibition effect than DOX alone at
the equivalent dose. Compared with other groups, mice
treated with Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites with
the aid of magnet showed considerable slow down of
tumor growth. This desired treatment effect might be
attributed to magnetic drug targeting, allowing the DOX
to accumulate selectively in the tumor tissues. In contrast,
UV irradiation could clearly enhance suppression of tumor
growth than that without UV irradiation, demonstrating
that photo-chemo therapy mediated by Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox
can promote tumor inhibition. Induced apoptosis is a
popular anticancer strategy, which is the consequence of
a series of precisely regulated events that are frequently
altered in tumor cells, and resulted in the activation of

Photo-chemo therapy enhanced the growth
suppression of malignancy on the chest wall in
nude mice
Tumor recurrence is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in cancer [37], especially the recurrence of tumor
on the chest wall due to the involvement of the critical
structures of heart and lung [1]. Motivated by the above
in vitro results, we then carried out in vivo investigation

Figure 5: Targeted photo-chemo therapy mediated by Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox for metastatic tumor on the chest wall.
Appearance of tumor body at the end of the observation after 14 days treatment A. and relative tumor volume B. and the protein expression
of Bax, Bcl-2 and Capase 3 C. and relative intensity of the protein expression after normalization by corresponding β-actin expression D.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36607

Oncotarget

caspases [7]. Caspase 3 is the most characterized effector
caspase, and its activation leads to the final stages of
cell death [6]. Therefore, we examined the changes in
the protein expression levels of the apoptosis-regulating
genes, including Bax, Bcl-2, and Caspase 3, to explore the
possible signaling pathways through which Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox mediate photo-chemo therapy for metastatic tumor on
the chest wall. As shown in Figure 5C and 5D, when mice
were treated by Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox with the aid of magnet,
the levels of Bax and Caspase 3 protein were significantly
upregulated compared with other treatments. In contrast,
UV irradiation could clearly enhance their expression than
that without UV irradiation. Regarding to Bcl-2 protein,
compared with other treatments, the levels in mice treated
with Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox with the aid of magnet were
significantly downregulated. What’s more, UV irradiation
could clearly decrease their expression than that without
UV irradiation. Therefore, Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites
could mediate targeted photo-chemo therapy of metastatic
tumor on the chest wall.

inflammatory profile [38]. Chemotherapy, such as Dox,
the first line treatment for hematological malignancies
and solid tumors due to broad spectrum of anticancer
activity, is limited by its harmful side effects, especially
its cardiotoxicity, which can lead to cardiomyopathy and
congestive heart failure [39]. In addition, radiotherapy
is associated with the development of pulmonary
toxicity [1]. Therefore, effort should be made to
improve anticancer efficiency while preserving normal
tissue function. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the photo-chemo property of Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox nanocomposites of the magnetic drug targeting
and low penetration of UV photodynamic on superficial
malignancy on the chest wall while sparing the critical
structures of heart and lung. C-reactive protein (CRP)
is a non-specific, acute-phase protein, primarily
synthesized in the liver in response to cytokines,
which be elevated in most forms of tissue damage,
infection, inflammation [40]. CRP is a sensitive marker
of the systemic inflammatory response [40]. Thus we
quantitatively determined the levels of CRP to evaluate
the cardiopulmonary injury. As shown in Figure 6A,
there was no apparent histopathologic damage to heart
and lung after different treatments. Meanwhile, the
resulting serum biochemistry tests were shown in Figure
6B and 6C. There were also no apparent changes of CRP
in all treatments. However, due to its cardiotoxicity, Dox

Cardiopulmonary avoidance
The therapeutic management of malignancy on the
chest wall often induces cardiopulmonary injury [38].
Surgery, even though conventionally considered minor,
has been associated with the indirect induction of a pro-

Figure 6: Histopathologic examination to determine the toxicity of heart and lung after different treatments at the end
of the experiments A. Serum biochemistry data CRP for acute-phase response B. and CK-MB for cardiac function C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36608

Oncotarget

Conclusions

alone may lead to rise of Creatine kinase MB isoenzyme
(CK-MB), the indicators for cardiac function [41]. These
indicate that the targeted photo-chemo therapy mediated
by Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites could improve
anticancer efficacy while avoiding its toxic side effects
on normal tissues. The great performance makes it a
promising candidate for superficial malignancy on the
chest wall while cardiopulmonary avoidance.
Consequently, based on the above studies, Figure 7
schematically illustrates the possible processes of Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox mediated targeted photo-chemo therapy of
malignancy on the chest wall while cardiopulmonary
avoidance. Firstly, the synthesis of the core-shell Fe3O4@
ZnO nanocomposites, followed by loading Dox, were
prepared to act as multifunctional anticancer platform,
in which Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites have the dual
functions, i.e., not only the role of magnetic drug targeting
carrier to deliver Dox into the targeted cancer cells and
tissues, but also the photosensitizer under UV irradiation
for the PDT of malignancy on the chest wall. Thereby,
the increased intracellular drug enhanced the anticancer
efficiency of chemotherapeutic agent. Moreover, the
excellent photosensitizer activity of Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites further attack the cancer cells, while
avoiding to hurt lung and heart due to low penetration of
UV. Then the apoptosis, a preferred mode of killing the
cancer cells, is induced synergistically by the photo-chemo
therapy.

In summary, in this study targeted photo-chemo
therapy was designed for malignancy on the chest wall
while cardiopulmonary avoidance based on Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox nanocomposites. The results demonstrated that Fe3O4@
ZnO nanocomposites can delivery Dox into the targeted
tumor cells and tissues with the aid of magnet to enhance
its chemotherapeutic efficiency and reduce the side effect.
In addition, Fe3O4@ZnO is as one of adjuncts to PDT under
UV irradiation. Since UV has a limited penetration distance
in tissue, causing PDT to fail in the critical structures of
heart and lung, cardiopulmonary could be avoided to be
hurt during the treatment. Therefore the Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox
nanocomposites could present a promising strategy for
malignancy on the chest wall, like chest wall recurrence of
tumor, advanced cutaneous neoplasm and lymphoma, while
cardiopulmonary avoidance.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
FeCl2·4H2O,
FeCl3·6H2O,
diethyleneglycol
(DEG), Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, and NaOH were purchased
from Shanghai Chemical Reagents Co (Shanghai,
China). Dox was acquired from Hisun Phamaceuticals,
Zhejiang, China. Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and
2’,7’-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) were

Figure 7: Schematic illustration of the process of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites mediated targeted photo-chemo
therapy of metastatic tumor on the chest wall while cardiopulmonary avoidance.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36609

Oncotarget

penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37°C in a
humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. The cells were
treated with different concentrations of Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites (0, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, 100 μg/mL) for
48 h. UV irradiation (0.1 mW/cm2) was administrated by
a UV lamp for 3 min at 6 h of cell culture. The relative
cytotoxicity of Fe3O4@ZnO, UV irradiation, and Fe3O4@
ZnO accompanied with UV irradiation were assessed
with CCK-8 assays. Briefly, after cells with different
treatments, CCK-8 (10 μL) were added to each well and
incubated for additional 4 h. Optical density (OD) at 450
nm was recorded by the multi-well spectrophotometer
reader (Thermo Labsystems, Vantta, Finland), then cell
viability was calculated.

obtained from Sigma (St Louis, MO). RPMI-1640 culture
medium, fetal bovine serum (FBS), and cultured plate
were purchased from Gibco (Gibco/BRL, Carlsbad, CA).
The antibodies of Bax, Bcl-2, Casepase 3, β-actin and
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG antibody were
obtained from Nanjing KeyGen Biotech. Inc (Nanjing,
China). All other reagents were of analytical grades.

Self-assembled synthesis of the core-shell
Fe3O4@ZnO nanoparticles
Initially, 2.0 mmol FeCl2·4H2O and 4.0 mmol of
FeCl3·6H2O were dissolved in 50 mL DEG in a flask under
protection with nitrogen gas, respectively. Meanwhile,
16 mmol of NaOH was dissolved in 25mL DEG. Then
the solution of NaOH was added to a solution of metal
chlorides with stirring at temperature 80°C, causing
an immediate color change from bright yellow to deep
green-brown. After reaction for 1 h, the temperature of
the solution was raised to 200°C and then kept constant
for 8 h in the temperature of 200°C in an autoclave.
The solid product was isolated by cooling the reaction
mixture to room temperature and centrifuging, and
washed with ethanol five times and a mixture of ethanol
and ethylacetate (1:1, v/v) five times to remove the excess
of DEG. The above obtained Fe3O4 nanomaterial was
dispersed in 50 mL of deionized water in a flask (250 mL).
2g Zn(NO3)2·6H2O was dissolved in 20 mL of deionized
water and 1.48g tris was dissolved in 20 mL of deionized
water. Then the solution of Zn(NO3)2 and tris were added
to a solution of Fe3O4 with stirring at room temperature. At
last, 0.4g PVP (Polyvinylpyrrolidone) was dissolved in 10
ml of deionized water and added to above solution, then
the temperature slowly rose to 80°C and kept constant
for 3 h in the temperature of 80°C. A precipitation was
obtained and washed with ethanol five times and with
deionized water five times.

ROS measurement
After a 6 h incubation of SMMC-7721 cells in
the dark with Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites, the culture
media was changed and photosensitized cells treated with
or without UV irradiation, followed by addition of ROS
probe of DCFH-DA into the cells for 20 minutes. Then, the
cells were harvested by trypsinization and resuspended in
PBS after washed for 3 times. The intracellular production
of ROS was analyzed by the FACSCalibur flow cytometer,
where the gate was arbitrarily set for the detection of green
fluorescent DCF due to the oxidation of DCFH-DA by
ROS.

Preparation of Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites
as drug delivery system
According to our previous study [6, 7], Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox nanocomposites were prepared as drug delivery
system due to the metal binding sites of the quinone and
the phenolic oxygen molecules on both sides of the Dox
aromatic moiety. In the typical experiments, 2 mL aqueous
solution of Dox (2 mg/mL) was added to a 1 mL aqueous
suspension of the obtained Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites
(10 mg/mL) in the dark overnight to construct Fe3O4@
ZnO/Dox nanocomposites as drug delivery system.
When the above DDS was collected by centrifugation,
unbounded Dox in the supernatant were calculated
by measuring the absorbance at 490 nm, allowing
the estimation of the drug encapsulation and loading
efficiency. In vitro magnetic targeting experiments were
conducted by placing a round magnet under the center of
the cell culture dish during incubation after Fe3O4@ZnO/
Dox nanocomposites added into the cell culture. The cells
were then observed by fluorescent microscopy (λex 488
nm, λem 515 nm) to visualize the cellular uptake of Dox.
The release property of Dox was investigated at pH 7.4,
6.3 and 5.2 according to our previous study [6, 7]. Briefly,
Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox nanocomposites were dispersed in PBS
(pH 7.4, 5 mL) and transferred into a dialysis bag, which
were then immersed in 95 mL PBS at pH 7.4, 6.3, or 5.2,

Characterization of Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites
The morphology of the as-synthesized Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites were observed by using transmission
electron microscopy (TEM, Tokyo JEOL, Japan) and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-5900).
The magnetization property at the room temperature
of Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposites in powder form was
investigated by vibrating sample magnetometr (VSM,
Model 7407, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc., OH, USA).

In vitro the efficiency of Fe3O4@ZnO
nanocomposites for cancer PDT
The human hepatocarcinoma SMMC-7721 cells,
obtained from Shanghai Institute of cells, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, were cultured in a RPMI 1640
medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/mL
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36610

Oncotarget

Serum biochemistry tests

and continuously agitated with a stirrer at 50 g and 37°C.
At predetermined time intervals, 2 mL of the external
medium was collected and replaced with the same fresh
PBS. The amount of released Dox in the medium was then
determined by high-performance liquid chromatography
(LC-310; Skyray Instrument, Nanjing, China).

The blood was collected before the mice were
sacrificed, and serum biochemistry tests of C-reactive
protein (CRP) and Creatine kinase MB isoenzyme (CKMB), were performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Model of malignancy on the chest wall in nude
mice

Statistical analysis
All the data are presented as the mean ± standard
deviation. The F-test was used for significance testing,
and P<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
All tests were performed using the Statistical Package
for Social Science version 19.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL,
USA).

Four-week age BALB/c nude mice, weighing 16–
22 g, from the Shanghai National Center for Laboratory
Animals, were maintained in a specific pathogen-free
facility. All the animal experiments were conducted under
protocols approved by the animal ethics committee of
the Medical School, Southeast University. 1×107 human
hepatocarcinoma SMMC-7721 cells suspended in 0.2 mL
of RPMI-1640 medium were inoculated subcutaneously
into the chest wall of the nude mice to establish the model
of metastatic tumor on the chest wall. When the tumor size
reached to ~50mm3, the tumor-bearing nude mice were
assigned randomly and then intravenously administered
via tail veins every three days with 200 mL of saline
as control, Fe3O4@ZnO, Dox alone, Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox
or Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox under the magnetic field, with or
without UV irradiation. A magnet was gently placed in
contact with the top of the tumor mass and held in the
place for three hours to generate a magnetic field for drug
delivery. This process was repeated every day for 14 days.
When localized in the target tissue, Fe3O4@ZnO/Dox was
activated with UV irradiation (300m J cm2) to produce
ROS that destroy target tumor. On the 14th day, the mice
were killed, and the organs of heart and lung as well as the
tumors were taken out, and the rate of tumor inhibition
was calculated. To evaluate anticancer efficiency, two
diameters of tumor were measured with digital calipers,
and then tumor size was calculated using the following
formulae: V = 1/2 × a × b2, where V is tumor volume,
a is the longest diameter, and b is the shortest diameter.
RTV (%) = Vtest/Vcontrol × 100, where RTV is relative tumor
volume at the end of experiment, Vcontrol represents volume
in control group, and Vtest represents volume after different
treatments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (31200750, 81371678)
and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province
(BK2012332).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Gauer T, Engel K, Kiesel A, Albers D, Rades D.
Comparison of electron IMRT to helical photon IMRT and
conventional photon irradiation for treatment of breast and
chest wall tumours. Radiother Oncol. 2010;94:313-8.
2.	 Oksuz DC, Ozdemir S, Kaydihan N, Dervisoglu S, Hiz
M, Tuzun H, et al. Long-term treatment results in soft
tissue sarcomas of the thoracic wall treated with pre-orpostoperative radiotherapy-a single institution experience.
Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15:9949-53.
3.	 Sersa G, Cufer T, Paulin SM, Cemazar M, Snoj M.
Electrochemotherapy of chest wall breast cancer recurrence.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2012;38:379-86.
4.	 Zhao B, He YY. Recent advances in the prevention and
treatment of skin cancer using photodynamic therapy.
Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2010;10:1797-809.

Histopathologic examination of tumor and organ
tissue

5.	 Bhuvaneswari R, Ng QF, Thong PS, Soo KC. Nimotuzumab
increases the anti-tumor effect of photodynamic therapy
in an oral tumor model. Oncotarget. 2015;6:13487-505.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3622.

After the mice were sacrificed, the organs of the
heart and lung were quickly removed and fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde, dehydrated in a graded series of
alcohol, and then embedded in paraffin. Tissue sections
(4 μm thick) were prepared and stained with hematoxylin
and eosin. Thereafter, the sections were examined by using
Olympus IX51 microscope (400×; Olympus Corporation,
Tokyo, Japan).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6.	 Zhang H, Chen B, Jiang H, Wang C, Wang H, Wang X.
A strategy for ZnO nanorod mediated multi-mode cancer
treatment. Biomaterials. 2011;32:1906-14.
7.	 Deng Y, Zhang H. The synergistic effect and mechanism
of doxorubicin-ZnO nanocomplexes as a multimodal
36611

Oncotarget

agent integrating diverse anticancer therapeutics. Int J
Nanomedicine. 2013;8:1835-41.

delivered by multifunctional theranostic gold nanorodloaded microcapsules. Nanoscale. 2015;7:8884-97.

8.	 Zhang H, Shan Y, Dong L. A comparison of TiO2 and ZnO
nanoparticles as photosensitizers in photodynamic therapy
for cancer. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2014;10:1450-7.

21.	 Ji Y, Jiang C, Zhang X, Liu W, Gao M, Li Y, Wang J,
Wang Q, Sun Z, Jiang X, Yao N, Wang X, Fang Z, Yin
Z, Ni Y, Zhang J. Necrosis targeted combinational
theragnostic approach using radioiodinated Sennidin A
in rodent tumor models. Oncotarget. 2014;5:2934-46.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1728.

9.	 Hartl BA, Hirschberg H, Marcu L, Cherry SR.
Characterizing low fluence thresholds for in vitro
photodynamic therapy. Biomed Opt Express. 2015;6:770-9.

22.	 Wang Y, Song D, Costanza F, Ji G, Fan Z, Cai J, Li Q.
Targeted delivery of tanshinone IIA-conjugated mPEGPLGA-PLL-cRGD nanoparticles to hepatocellular
carcinoma. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2014;10:3244-52.

10.	 Chen G, Qiu H, Prasad PN, Chen X. Upconversion
nanoparticles: design, nanochemistry, and applications in
theranostics. Chem Rev. 2014;114:5161-214.
11.	 Wang C, Cheng L, Liu Z. Upconversion nanoparticles
for photodynamic therapy and other cancer therapeutics.
Theranostics. 2013;3:317-30.

23.	 Tang Y, Hu H, Zhang MG, Song J, Nie L, Wang S,
Niu G, Huang P, Lu G, Chen X. An aptamer-targeting
photoresponsive drug delivery system using “off-on”
graphene oxide wrapped mesoporous silica nanoparticles.
Nanoscale. 2015;7:6304-10.

12.	 Mortensen LJ, Faulknor R, Ravichandran S, Zheng H,
DeLouise LA. UVB Dependence of Quantum Dot Reactive
Oxygen Species Generation in Common Skin Cell Models.
J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2015;11:1644-52.

24.	 Huxford-Phillips RC, Russell SR, Liu D, Lin W. Lipidcoated nanoscale coordination polymers for targeted
cisplatin delivery. RSC Adv. 2013;3:14438-43.

13.	 Portilho FA, Cavalcanti CE, Miranda-Vilela AL, Estevanato
LL, Longo JP, Almeida Santos Mde F, Bocca AL, Martins
OP, Simioni AR, Morais PC, Azevedo RB, Tedesco
AC, Lacava ZG. Antitumor activity of photodynamic
therapy performed with nanospheres containing zincphthalocyanine. J Nanobiotechnology. 2013;11:41.

25.	 Boekhoven J, Zha RH, Tantakitti F, Zhuang E, Zandi R,
Newcomb CJ, Stupp SI. Alginate-peptide amphiphile coreshell microparticles as a targeted drug delivery system. RSC
Adv. 2015;5:8753-6.
26.	 Joseph MM, Aravind SR, George SK, Pillai KR, Mini S,
Sreelekha TT. Galactoxyloglucan-modified nanocarriers of
doxorubicin for improved tumor-targeted drug delivery with
minimal toxicity. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2014;10:3253-68.

14.	 Cai Q, Chen Y, Zou D, Zhang L, Badillo M, Zhou S, Lopez
E, Jiang W, Huang H, Lin T, Romaguera J, Wang M.
Clinical outcomes of a novel combination of lenalidomide
and rituximab followed by stem cell transplantation
for relapsed/refractory aggressive B-cell non-hodgkin
lymphoma. Oncotarget. 2014;5:7368-80. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2255.

27.	 Yang HW, Liu HL, Li ML, Hsi IW, Fan CT, Huang CY,
Lu YJ, Hua MY, Chou HY, Liaw JW, Ma CC, Wei KC.
Magnetic gold-nanorod/PNIPAAmMA nanoparticles for dual
magnetic resonance and photoacoustic imaging and targeted
photothermal therapy. Biomaterials. 2013;34:5651-60.

15.	 Han Y, Zhang Y, Li D, Chen Y, Sun J, Kong F. Transferrinmodified nanostructured lipid carriers as multifunctional
nanomedicine for codelivery of DNA and doxorubicin. Int
J Nanomedicine. 2014;9:4107-16.

28.	 Chandra S, Nigam S, Bahadur D. Combining unique
properties of dendrimers and magnetic nanoparticles
towards cancer theranostics. J Biomed Nanotechnol.
2014;10:32-49.

16.	 Lei T, Manchanda R, Fernandez-Fernandez A, Huang
YC, Wright D, McGoron AJ. Thermal and pH Sensitive
Multifunctional Polymer Nanoparticles for Cancer Imaging
and Therapy. RSC Adv. 2014;4:17959-68.

29.	 Wang C, Xu H, Liang C, Liu Y, Li Z, Yang G, Cheng L,
Li Y, Liu Z. Iron oxide @ polypyrrole nanoparticles as a
multifunctional drug carrier for remotely controlled cancer
therapy with synergistic antitumor effect. ACS Nano.
2013;7:6782-95.

17.	 Fan W, Shen B, Bu W, Chen F, He Q, Zhao K, Zhang
S, Zhou L, Peng W, Xiao Q, Ni D, Liu J, Shi J. A smart
upconversion-based mesoporous silica nanotheranostic
system for synergetic chemo-/radio-/photodynamic
therapy and simultaneous MR/UCL imaging. Biomaterials.
2014;35:8992-9002.

30.	 Yang C, Xiong F, Dou J, Xue J, Zhan X, Shi F, Li M, Wu S,
Luo S, Zhang T, Zhang Y, Ming J, Gu N. Target therapy of
multiple myeloma by PTX-NPs and ABCG2 antibody in a
mouse xenograft model. Oncotarget. 2015;6:27714-24. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.4663.

18.	 Wang P, Wang B, Chung S, Wu Y, Henning SM, Vadgama
JV. Increased chemopreventive effect by combining
arctigenin, green tea polyphenol and curcumin in prostate
and breast cancer cells. RSC Adv. 2014;4:35242-50.

31.	 Shen S, Wu L, Liu J, Xie M, Shen H, Qi X, Yan Y, Ge
Y, Jin Y. Core-shell structured Fe3O4@TiO2-doxorubicin
nanoparticles for targeted chemo-sonodynamic therapy of
cancer. Int J Pharm. 2015;486:380-8.

19.	 Li L, Liu T, Fu C, Liu H, Tan L, Meng X. Multifunctional
silica-based nanocomposites for cancer nanotheranostics. J
Biomed Nanotechnol. 2014;10:1784-809.

32.	 Peng H, Cui B, Li G, Wang Y, Li N1, Chang Z,
Wang Y. A multifunctional β-CD-modified Fe3O4@
ZnO:Er(3+),Yb(3+) nanocarrier for antitumor drug delivery

20.	 Chen H, Di Y, Chen D, Madrid K, Zhang M, Tian C, Tang
L, et al. Combined chemo- and photo-thermal therapy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36612

Oncotarget

and microwave-triggered drug release. Mater Sci Eng C
Mater Biol Appl. 2015;46:253-63.

metastasis of breast cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:10016-29. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3540.

33.	 Nikazar M, Alizadeh M, Lalavi R, Rostami MH. The
optimum conditions for synthesis of Fe3O4/ZnO core/shell
magnetic nanoparticles for photodegradation of phenol. J
Environ Health Sci Eng. 2014;12:21-6.

38.	 Piperis M, Provatopoulou X, Sagkriotis A, Kalogera E,
Ampatzoglou E, Zografos GC, Athanasiou E, Gounaris
A. Effect of breast cancer adjuvant therapies on potential
biomarkers of pulmonary inflammation. Anticancer Res.
2012;32:4993-5002.

34.	 Singh SP. Multifunctional magnetic quantum dots for
cancer theranostics. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2011;7:95-97.
35.	 Barick KC, Nigam S, Bahadur D. Nanoscale assembly of
mesoporous ZnO: A potential drug carrier. J Mater Chem.
2010;20:6446–52.

39.	 Chen Y, Wan Y, Wang Y, Zhang H, Jiao Z. Anticancer
efficacy enhancement and attenuation of side effects of
doxorubicin with titanium dioxide nanoparticles. Int J
Nanomedicine. 2011;6:2321-26.

36.	 Zhang H, Wang C, Chen B, Wang X. Daunorubicin-TiO2
nanocomposites as a “smart” pH-responsive drug delivery
system. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:235-42.

40.	 Labarrere CA, Zaloga GP. C-reactive protein: from
innocent bystander to pivotal mediator of atherosclerosis.
Am J Med. 2004;117:499-507.

37.	 Lee HT, Xue J, Chou PC, Zhou A, Yang P, Conrad CA,
Aldape KD, Priebe W, Patterson C, Sawaya R, Xie K7,
Huang S. Stat3 orchestrates interaction between endothelial
and tumor cells and inhibition of Stat3 suppresses brain

41.	 Polat B, Suleyman H, Sener E, Akcay F. Examination
of the effects of thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate
on Doxorubicin-induced experimental cardiotoxicity. J
Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2015;20:221-9.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36613

Oncotarget

