Review

Targeting Cancer with Bugs and Liposomes: Ready, Aim, Fire
Ian Cheong, Xin Huang, Katherine Thornton, Luis A. Diaz, Jr., and Shibin Zhou
The Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Baltimore, Maryland

Abstract
One of the major challenges facing cancer therapy today is
achieving specificity. Current efforts to meet this challenge
are focused on developing targeted therapeutics specific to
the cancer cell. An alternative approach is to selectively
deliver cytotoxic agents to the tumor site. With this end in
mind, liposomes optimized for physical robustness have been
developed and used clinically as drug delivery vehicles.
Paradoxically, the effectiveness of these liposomes is hampered by the suboptimal release of bioavailable drug. This
article will highlight the recent advance in using a novel lipase
secreted by the tumor-colonizing anaerobic bacterium Clostridium novyi-NT to induce the targeted release of liposomal
payloads within tumors. [Cancer Res 2007;67(20):9605–8]

Liposomal Bullets
The goal of cancer therapy is to kill cancer cells and spare
healthy ones. This is easier said than done. Cancer cells are often
insensitive to particular therapies. Yet, increasing doses to achieve
a therapeutic effect is not an option if toxicity to healthy tissues
becomes limiting. One early attempt to reduce systemic toxicity
used liposomes to encapsulate cytotoxic drugs (1). However, these
liposomes were rapidly eliminated by the mononuclear phagocyte
system. This limitation was abrogated by the use of a unique
liposomal formulation combining PEGylated phospholipids, high
cholesterol content (40–50% mol/mol), and hydrogenated phospholipids (2). These liposomes, called sterically stabilized liposomes (SSL), had several characteristics. The abundant cholesterol
and use of hydrogenated phospholipids resulted in a high bilayer
phase-transition temperature and general physical rigidity, thus
preserving the physical integrity of these liposomes as they
traversed the circulation (3, 4). Additionally, PEGylation markedly
reduced the uptake of these liposomes by the mononuclear
phagocyte system, resulting in an improved circulation half-life
(5). This extended circulation time opened a new possibility—
exploiting the fenestrations in tumor vessels resulting from
aberrant angiogenesis. These pores, varying between 100 and 780
nm in diameter, are significantly larger than the gaps found
in normal endothelium, which are typically <6 nm wide (6).
Liposomes could thus be sized large enough to be excluded from
normal tissues, yet small enough to passively infiltrate tumor
endothelium and deliver their cargo. This phenomenon, called
the enhanced permeability and retention effect was found to
incrementally increase the exposure of tumor to the liposomal drug
(5). Thus, SSLs exhibited low toxicity and consequently, the ability

Requests for reprints: Shibin Zhou, The Johns Hopkins Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center, 1650 Orleans Street/Room 520, Baltimore, MD 21231. Phone: 410-9558886; E-mail: sbzhou@jhmi.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1565

www.aacrjournals.org

to be administered at higher drug doses. Doxil, a clinically used SSL
formulation of doxorubicin with a greatly improved cardiotoxicity
profile, is the prototype example. More recently, tumor-targeting
molecules (e.g., antibodies, integrins, folate) have been conjugated
to these liposomes to improve their retention within tumors
expressing their cognate molecular targets (7).
Paradoxically, the physical robustness of SSLs, a desirable trait
for keeping the drug compartmentalized and sequestered, also
proved to be a double-edged sword. SSLs retained in tumors
degraded at a slow rate, leaking their therapeutic cargo over a
prolonged period of time, making it difficult to achieve the high
concentrations necessary for provoking a therapeutic response (4).
This explains why the inherent low toxicity of the SSL approach
did not intuitively translate into dramatically improved efficacy,
even though greater treatment doses than before were now
possible (8). Consequently, a recent direction of liposome research
has been to engineer liposomes that would be selectively destabilized within tumors.
One approach to effect this destabilization is to dope the
liposomal bilayer with pH-sensitive phospholipids and ligands that
bind internalizing receptors highly expressed on tumor cells.
Binding of these targeted liposomes to their cognate receptors
initiates internalization of the liposomes by receptor-mediated
endocytosis. Subsequently, the pH-sensitive liposomal components
become destabilized within acidified endosomal compartments
augmenting the release of encapsulated drugs (9). These liposomal
formulations (even with the inclusion of PEGylated lipids) have
significantly shorter circulation times than SSLs, but this is offset
by the potential benefit of more liposomal drug being released and
thus made bioavailable. A second example exploits phospholipase
A2 (PLA2), a lipid-metabolizing enzyme elevated in tumor tissue
(10). However, PLA2 is not expressed exclusively in tumor tissue.
Another limitation of this approach is that PLA2 is unable to
degrade SSLs because of their high (f50%) cholesterol content.
Decreasing this cholesterol level to 20% or less would make SSLs
degradable by PLA2, but would also decrease their rigidity and drug
retention capability. Alternative approaches depend on an external
source of destabilization directed toward the tumor. This destabilization may be caused by physical means, for example,
ultrasound, light, or hyperthermia directed from external sources
(7). The drawback to these approaches is that prior knowledge of
tumor location is required, which makes this method unsuitable for
treating disseminated disease.
The above examples collectively define the challenge for
liposomal drug design—to achieve targeted and rapid drug release
in tumors without compromising the need for low toxicity. A
unique opportunity for achieving this goal emerged from recent
research on tumor-colonizing anaerobic bacteria.

Clostridium novyi-NT, the Scope
The tumor microenvironment is not physiologically homogeneous but harbors hypoxic regions (11, 12). Because these regions

9605

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

are highly inaccessible to systemic therapy and resistant to
radiation, tumor hypoxia is a prognostic indicator of poor
treatment outcomes. On the flip side, hypoxia is a defining
characteristic of solid tumors that can be exploited for cancer
therapy (12). One approach involves the use of anaerobic bacteria
that selectively proliferate in hypoxic tumor tissues (13). Anaerobic
bacteria have been used as anticancer agents for more than half a
century. In 1947, Parker et al. (14) treated mice bearing transplanted sarcomas with Clostridium histolyticum spores. Subsequently, a strain of the anaerobic bacterium Clostridium sporogenes
was isolated and tested in animal tumor models (15). Tumor lysis
was observed in spore-treated animals. These encouraging results
eventually led to clinical trials in which the C. sporogenes spores
were used to treat a limited number of patients with different
cancer types (16). Although initially promising, these early studies
did not show substantial therapeutic benefit and sometimes
showed excessive toxicity.
Clostridium novyi-NT (C. novyi-NT) is a Clostridium strain that has
shown substantial therapeutic potential in preclinical models. Wildtype C. novyi was first chosen for further investigation from a panel of
candidate therapeutic bacterial species because of its ability to invade
necrotic/hypoxic tumor tissue after germination (17). However,
C. novyi was found too toxic and thus engineered to generate an
attenuated strain, C. novyi-NT, in which the lethal a-toxin gene was

deleted (17). When administered i.v., C. novyi-NT spores geminate
only within tumors and spread rapidly throughout necrotic/hypoxic
tumor tissue, causing hemorrhagic necrosis and tumor regression
(18, 19). Although effective against cells in hypoxic regions, C. novyiNT alone is inefficient when encountering the well-perfused and
oxygen-rich tumor tissue located in the tumor rim. Consequently, the
tumor rims often grow back, leading to relapse. This suggested that
an ideal therapeutic regimen should include components that target
both well-perfused and hypoxic tumor compartments. Indeed, when
combined with chemotherapy, C. novyi-NT treatment could cure a
considerable fraction of tumor-bearing animals (17, 20). However,
the drug doses required for such efficacy often generated substantial
toxicities. Fortuitously, C. novyi-NT possessed a unique device,
allowing targeted release of SSL-encapsulated drugs in tumors,
thereby increasing efficacy while diminishing the toxicity of
chemotherapy delivered in conjunction with C. novyi-NT.

Liposomase, the Trigger
It is well documented that C. novyi is a hemolytic bacterium. We
hypothesized that this membrane-disrupting property could be
exploited to enhance the release of liposome-encapsulated drugs
within tumors. Consistent with this idea, culture medium
conditioned by the growth of C. novyi-NT was able to cause the
release of doxorubicin from Doxil (21). When mice bearing large,

Figure 1. Phylogenetic relationship of liposomase to other lipases. A multiple sequence alignment of the indicated lipases was done using the Clustal W algorithm, and
the corresponding dendrogram was generated using the TreeView software. Inset, structure of liposomase as predicted by the CPHmodels 2.0 server based on
sequence homology with B. stearothermophilus lipase (AF237623).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

9606

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Liposomase

established tumors were treated with C. novyi-NT plus a single dose
of SSL-encapsulated doxorubicin or irinotecan, complete regression of tumors was observed in all mice and more than two thirds
of the animals were cured. In comparison, treatment with C. novyiNT or SSL-encapsulated drugs alone did not show sustained
therapeutic effects. Notably, all mice treated with C. novyi-NT plus
free doxorubicin died within 2 weeks, underscoring the importance
of liposomal encapsulation for reducing systemic toxicity. The
secreted factor responsible for liposomal disruption was purified by
chromatographic methods and identified as a new lipase (termed
liposomase), not a conventional hemolysin. Interestingly, the
secreted liposomase was found to act through physical perturbation of membrane lipid order and not through catalytic
degradation of membrane lipids, suggesting a novel mechanism
for liposomal drug release. Nine commercially available enzymes
with well-defined lipase activities were tested and none exhibited
liposome-disrupting activity, demonstrating that this phenomenon
was not a general characteristic of lipases.
Phylogenetic analysis of these nine lipases reveals that they are
relatively distant to liposomase and this may account for their lack
of liposome-disrupting activity (Fig. 1, green box). In comparison,
the closest relatives to liposomase as identified by the BLAST
algorithm and plotted on the same dendrogram include lipases
from Clostridium tetani and various thermophilic bacilli (Fig. 1, blue
box). These lipases are not commercially available and it would be
interesting to see if their similarity to liposomase correlates with
liposome-disruption capability.
One of these close relatives of liposomase, Bacillus stearothermophilus lipase, recently had its structure elucidated by X-ray
crystallography, thus enabling the prediction of a theoretical
structure for liposomase by homology modeling (Fig. 1, inset). As is
consistent with lipases in general, the liposomase model features
a stretch of hydrophobic residues forming a lid that conceals the
catalytic site (Fig. 1, inset, catalytic residues in green). In other
lipases, this lid plays a key role by adopting an ‘‘open-lid’’
conformation upon contact with a water-lipid phase boundary to
allow access of lipids to the catalytic center. One tantalizing
possibility is that physical interaction between the open hydrophobic lid of one liposomase molecule and the exposed catalytic
area of another open molecule might enable the self-assembly of
liposomase molecules into multimeric structures able to disrupt
lipid membranes (22). This remains a hypothesis to be tested.

Acknowledgments

Implications and Future Directions
Recent advances in molecular biology have allowed the
engineering of tumor-targeting bacterial strains that express

References
1. Gregoriadis G, Wills EJ, Swain CP, Tavill AS. Drugcarrier potential of liposomes in cancer chemotherapy.
Lancet 1974;1:1313–6.
2. Papahadjopoulos D, Allen TM, Gabizon A, et al.
Sterically stabilized liposomes: improvements in pharmacokinetics and antitumor therapeutic efficacy. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:11460–4.
3. Allen TM, Cleland LG. Serum-induced leakage of
liposome contents. Biochim Biophys Acta 1980;597:418–26.
4. Horowitz AT, Barenholz Y, Gabizon AA. In vitro
cytotoxicity of liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin: dependence on liposome composition and drug release.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1992;1109:203–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

heterologous proteins (13, 23, 24). For example, different Bifodobacterium, Clostridium, and Salmonella strains have been engineered with therapeutic genes for prodrug-converting enzymes (e.g.,
thymidine kinase, cytosine deaminase, nitroreductase), immunomodulatory factors (e.g., interleukin 2, tumor necrosis factor-a), and
angiogenesis inhibitors (e.g., endostatin). Liposomase does not
replace any of these approaches and could potentially complement
and improve their potency. For example, bacteria engineered to
express both liposomase and prodrug-converting enzymes would
simultaneously enable the specific release and metabolic activation
of liposome-encapsulated prodrugs within tumors.
Other implications of this research are worth noting. First, now
that liposomase has been identified and cloned, it can be used in a
variety of other targeted therapies in addition to those using bacteria.
For example, liposomase could be attached to antibodies or ligands
that have an affinity for specific tumor markers. Alternatively, the
liposomase gene could be incorporated into gene therapy vectors. As
most drugs can be packaged within liposomes, these approaches
would have general utility. Second, approaches using liposomase may
be particularly relevant for delivering toxic biologics, such as
cytokines and toxins. SSL encapsulation coupled with targeted
liposomase-mediated drug release could minimize the systemic
inflammation and toxicity that currently limits their clinical use
while achieving therapeutic concentrations at the disease site. Third,
the mechanism underlying liposome disruption by liposomase is
currently a black box. Understanding this physical phenomenon may
allow us to design liposomes or other polymeric carriers that are
more susceptible to liposomase, further increasing its therapeutic
value. Fourth, this study shows that balancing the desire for drug
efficacy against the need to minimize toxicity is not necessarily a
zero-sum game if specific drug delivery can be achieved.
Most cancer drugs fail in clinical studies not because they are
ineffective in killing cancer cells. Rather, the problem is that one
cannot give doses high enough to eradicate the tumor without also
killing the patient. In essence, a rifle, not a shotgun, is needed in
cancer therapy. The use of liposomase secreted by the tumorcolonizing C. novyi-NT as a molecular trigger for targeting the
release of liposomal drugs is one way to build this precision
weapon. Because this technology is not limited to any one
particular tumor type or drug, its potential to ‘‘rescue’’ toxic drugs
and improve already successful drugs is therefore very broad.

Received 5/1/2007; revised 7/3/2007; accepted 7/9/2007.
Grant support: Virginia and D.K. Ludwig Fund for Cancer Research, the
Commonwealth Foundation, the Miracle Foundation, and NIH grant CA062924.

5. Yuan F, Leunig M, Huang SK, Berk DA, Papahadjopoulos
D, Jain RK. Microvascular permeability and interstitial penetration of sterically stabilized (stealth) liposomes in a human tumor xenograft. Cancer Res 1994;
54:3352–6.
6. Drummond DC, Meyer O, Hong K, Kirpotin DB,
Papahadjopoulos D. Optimizing liposomes for delivery
of chemotherapeutic agents to solid tumors. Pharmacol
Rev 1999;51:691–743.
7. Andresen TL, Jensen SS, Kaasgaard T, Jorgensen K.
Triggered activation and release of liposomal prodrugs
and drugs in cancer tissue by secretory phospholipase
A2. Curr Drug Deliv 2005;2:353–62.
8. White SC, Lorigan P, Margison GP, et al. Phase II study
of SPI-77 (sterically stabilised liposomal cisplatin) in

advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Br J Cancer 2006;
95:822–8.
9. Simoes S, Moreira JN, Fonseca C, Duzgunes N, de Lima
MC. On the formulation of pH-sensitive liposomes with
long circulation times. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004;56:947–65.
10. Davidsen J, Vermehren C, Frokjaer S, Mouritsen OG,
Jorgensen K. Drug delivery by phospholipase A(2)
degradable liposomes. Int J Pharm 2001;214:67–9.
11. Bettegowda C, Dang LH, Abrams R, et al. Overcoming
the hypoxic barrier to radiation therapy with anaerobic
bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:15083–8.
12. Brown JM, Wilson WR. Exploiting tumour hypoxia in
cancer treatment. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:437–47.
13. Ryan RM, Green J, Lewis CE. Use of bacteria in anticancer therapies. Bioessays 2006;28:84–94.

9607

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
14. Parker RC, Plummer HC, Siebenmann CO, Chapman
MG. Effect of histolyticus infection and toxin on
transplantable mouse tumors. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
1947;66:461.
15. Mose JR, Mose G. Oncolysis by Clostridia. I. Activity
of Clostridium butyricum (M-55) and other nonpathogenic clostridia against the Ehrlich carcinoma. Cancer
Res 1964;24:212–6.
16. Carey RW, Holland JF, Whang HY, Neter E, Bryant
B. Clostridial oncolysis in man. Eur J Cancer 1967;3:
37–46.
17. Dang LH, Bettegowda C, Huso DL, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B. Combination bacteriolytic therapy for the

treatment of experimental tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2001;27:27.
18. Agrawal N, Bettegowda C, Cheong I, et al. Bacteriolytic therapy can generate a potent immune response
against experimental tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2004;101:15172–7.
19. Diaz LA, Jr., Cheong I, Foss CA, et al. Pharmacologic
and toxicologic evaluation of C. novyi-NT spores. Toxicol
Sci 2005;88:562–75.
20. Dang LH, Bettegowda C, Agrawal N, et al. Targeting
vascular and avascular compartments of tumors with
C. novyi-NT and anti-microtubule agents. Cancer Biol
Ther 2004;3:326–37.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

9608

21. Cheong I, Huang X, Bettegowda C, et al. A bacterial
protein enhances the release and efficacy of liposomal
cancer drugs. Science 2006;314:1308–11.
22. Palomo JM, Fuentes M, Fernandez-Lorente G, Mateo
C, Guisan JM, Fernandez-Lafuente R. General trend of
lipase to self-assemble giving bimolecular aggregates
greatly modifies the enzyme functionality. Biomacromolecules 2003;4:1–6.
23. Minton NP, Mauchline ML, Lemmon MJ, et al.
Chemotherapeutic tumour targeting using clostridial
spores. FEMS Microbiol Rev 1995;17:357–64.
24. Van Mellaert L, Barbe S, Anne J. Clostridium spores
as anti-tumour agents. Trends Microbiol 2006;14:190–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting Cancer with Bugs and Liposomes: Ready, Aim,
Fire
Ian Cheong, Xin Huang, Katherine Thornton, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9605-9608.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/20/9605

Cited articles

This article cites 24 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/20/9605.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

