Research Article

Anti-HER2 Cationic Immunoemulsion as a Potential Targeted Drug
Delivery System for the Treatment of Prostate Cancer
1

3

4

1,2

Danny Goldstein, Ofer Gofrit, Abraham Nyska, and Simon Benita
1

Pharmaceutics Department, The School of Pharmacy; 2David R. Bloom Center for Pharmacy, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem;
Urology Department, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; and 4Sackler School of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
3

extensively investigated to improve the survival of metastatic
prostate cancer patients (4, 5). Paclitaxel exhibits a wide spectrum
of antitumor activity. However, its therapeutic application in
cancer therapy is limited, in part, due to its low water solubility
that necessitates the use of Cremophor EL, which is known to
induce hypersensitivity reactions (6). Therefore, novel methods are
needed that would allow for delivery of effective concentrations of
paclitaxel over extended time intervals while minimizing systemic
toxicity especially to advanced cancer patients. Targeting drugs to
disseminated prostate metastases is one of the most challenging
goals in prostate cancer therapy. Drug colloidal carriers (nanoemulsions, liposomes, and nanoparticles) have shown great
potential as improved delivery systems for an increasing number
of active molecules (7). Although capable of enhanced accumulation in the target tissue, these carriers cannot provide marked
targeting unless specific ligands are attached to them (8–10).
Preclinical and clinical data show that the activation of the HERkinase axis is important for the progression of prostate cancer to
androgen-independent disease. It has recently been shown that
overexpression of HER-2/neu can allow androgen-independent
growth in androgen-dependent xenograft models (11–13). Among
HER family receptors, HER2 activation is particularly important in
breast cancer, as HER2 gene amplification is associated with a
distinct clinical course and response to treatment with a HER2directed therapy using trastuzumab, a humanized anti-HER2
monoclonal antibody (mAb; ref. 14). Although HER2 is overexpressed in metastatic prostate cancer (42% of the tested patients
were positive), it was found that trastuzumab is not effective as a
single agent for the treatment of these patients (15). However, the
coupling of trastuzumab molecules to the surface of oil droplets
containing appropriate cytotoxic agent concentrations in oil/water
nanoemulsions will open the possibility of targeting such droplets
to specific disseminated cells overexpressing HER2 receptor, as is
the case in metastatic prostate cancer.
Emulsions can incorporate significant doses of lipophilic and
hydrophobic active ingredients. Cationic emulsions have been
proven capable of escaping from the reticulum endothelial system
uptake and have shown prolonged blood circulation. The lack of
toxic effects of the cationic emulsions was reported showing the
safety of the cationic emulsions following i.v. injection (16, 17).
Furthermore, there is no unwanted opsonization due to steric
hindrance induced by the poloxamer copolymer molecules
comprised in the combined mixed emulsifier film at the oil/water
interface of the oil droplets of the cationic emulsion and oriented
towards the external aqueous phase. This was again confirmed in a
recent study on in vitro adsorption of plasma proteins onto the
surface (charges)–modified submicron emulsions for i.v. administration (18).
In a previous study (19), optimal experimental conditions for the
coupling of AMB8LK mAb to cationic emulsions containing the

Abstract
Present management of metastatic prostate cancer, which
includes hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy,
are frequently palliative. Taxanes, and specifically docetaxel,
are being extensively investigated to improve the survival of
metastatic prostate cancer patients. Although paclitaxel
exhibits a wide spectrum of antitumor activity, its therapeutic
application is limited, in part, due to its low water solubility
that necessitates the use of Cremophor EL, which is known to
induce hypersensitivity reactions. Therefore, the objective of
this present study was to assess the efficiency of paclitaxel
palmitate–loaded anti-HER2 immunoemulsions, a targeted
drug delivery system based on cationic emulsion covalently
linked to anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody (Herceptin), in a
well-established in vivo pharmacologic model of metastatic
prostate cancer that overexpresses the HER2 receptor. It was
clearly noted that the cationic emulsion and immunoemulsion
did not activate the complement compared with the commercial and paclitaxel palmitate hydroalcoholic formulations. In
addition, 10 mg/kg of paclitaxel palmitate–loaded immunoemulsion once weekly over 3 weeks inhibits the tumor growth
in severe combined immunodeficient mice much more than
the cationic emulsion (P < 0.05) and the paclitaxel palmitate
formulation (P < 0.01). The histopathologic analysis suggested
a therapeutic improvement trend in favor of the immunoemulsion. However, there was no significant difference in
antimetastatic activity between the emulsion and the immunoemulsion despite the affinity of the immunoemulsion
towards the HER2 receptor. Although the tumor growth was
not fully inhibited, the actual results are encouraging and may
lead to an improved therapeutic strategy of metastatic
prostate cancer treatment. [Cancer Res 2007;67(1):269–75]

Introduction
Hormone-refractory prostate cancer is the second leading cause
of cancer-related death for man in the United States (1). Present
management of metastatic prostate cancer includes hormonal
therapy, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, which are frequently
palliative. The failure of a variety of regimens to show significant
responses and survival benefits in the hormone-refractory population led many researchers to believe that chemotherapy should
not be considered standard for advanced prostate cancer patients
(2, 3). Recently, taxanes, and more specifically docetaxel, are being

Requests for reprints: Simon Benita, Pharmaceutics Department, The School of
Pharmacy, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12065, Jerusalem 91120,
Israel. Phone: 972-2-6758668; Fax: 972-2-6757140; E-mail: benita@cc.huji.ac.il.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2731

www.aacrjournals.org

269

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
done by reaction of the maleimide group on the surface of the droplet with
the free thiol groups on the mAb. Unreacted maleimide groups were
blocked using 2-mercaptoethanol (2 mmol/L) over 30 min. Emulsion
bearing surface-attached antibodies were separated from unconjugated
mAbs by dialysis using a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane with
molecular weight cut-off of 500,000 Da (Spectrum Laboratories, Breda, The
Netherlands). The total amount of mAb conjugated to emulsions was
evaluated with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce).
Conjugated antibodies were examined using a conjugate of a 12-nm gold
goat anti-human secondary antibody. Anti-HER2 immunoemulsion (1:20
dilution equivalent to 0.25% oil phase) was incubated with IgG gold
conjugate (1:20 dilution) in ddH2O. Specimens for transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) visualization were prepared by mixing two drops of the
sample with one droplet of phosphotungstic acid 2% (w/v; pH 6.4) for
negative staining. The sample was then adsorbed to 300 mesh formvarcoated copper grids, left to dry, and examined by TEM (Philips Tecnai F20
100 kV).
Assay of in vitro complement activation. To measure complement
activation in vitro, the increase of the complement product SC5b-9 was
determined using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay kit (Quidel Co., San
Diego, CA) as described in detail elsewhere (21, 22). Briefly, free drugs or
paclitaxel palmitate–loaded emulsions/immunoemulsions were incubated
with undiluted human serum (taken from two different donors) over 30 min
at 37jC (in triplicates), at an activator-to-serum volume ratio of 1:4. The
reaction was terminated by the dilution of serum with ‘‘specimen diluents’’
provided in the kit. Zymozan was used as a control to ensure the presence
of functional complement system in human sera. In all experiments, 10
mmol/L PBS (pH 7.4) was used as a control.
Cell culture. The human prostate cancer cell line PC3 was purchased
from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD) and were
maintained in RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD) with 10
mmol/L HEPES buffer. Medium was supplemented with 10% FCS (Life
Technologies), penicillin/streptomycin solution (Biological Industries,
Kibbutz Beit HaEmek, Israel), and fungizone (Life Technologies). Cells were
cultured as monolayers in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2
at 37jC.
Cell transfection. PC3.38 is a derivative of the PC3 cell line carrying the
luc gene. PC3 cells were infected with a recombinant rLNC/Luc retrovirus
and selected by G418 (270 Ag/mL), generating stable PC3.38/Luc clone. The
recombinant retrovirus rLNC/Luc was generated by packaging pLNC/Luc in
HEK293T cells cotransfected with the packaging plasmid pCL (23).
Mouse strain and animal care. Strict animal care procedures set forth
by The Authority for Animals Facilities of The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem based on guidelines from the NIH guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals were followed for all experiments (approval no. MD
105.03-4). All animals used in the study were male severe combined
immunodeficient/beige mice, 8 weeks old (Harlan, Jerusalem, Israel).
Orthotopic prostate model and therapeutic studies. Male mice were
anesthetized by i.m. injection of 120 mg/kg ketamine hydrochloride plus 6
mg/kg xylazine, and 5  105 PC3.38/Luc cells suspended in 50 AL sterile
DPBS were injected into the dorsolateral prostate lobes after surgical
exposure of the prostate. Treatment began after 3 weeks from cell injection,
allowing tumors to grow, establish, and overexpress the HER2 receptor.
Mice were randomly assigned to different treatment groups (5–8 mice
per group). Paclitaxel palmitate–loaded cationic emulsion and paclitaxel
palmitate–loaded cationic immunoemulsion were injected via tail vein once
weekly for 3 weeks at dose of 10 mg/kg. Paclitaxel palmitate solubilized in a
vehicle similar to the marketed Taxol vehicle was also injected at the same
dose as in the various emulsion formulations to evaluate the intrinsic effect
of each formulation and component. Tumors were measured once weekly
by bioluminescent imaging.
In vivo imaging and light detection. For the continuous detection and
quantification of tumor size in live mice, a cooled charged coupled device
(CCCD) camera was employed as previously described (23). In brief, the
CCCD system is comprised of a Roper Chemiluminescence Imaging System,
which contains a CCCD model LN/CCD-1300EB equipped with an ST-133
controller and a 50-mm Nikon lens (Roper Scientific, Princeton Instrument,

lipophilic marker coumarin-6 were identified in an attempt to
achieve efficient targeted drug delivery system. The objectives of
this study were to assess the efficiency of anti-HER2 immunoemulsions loaded with paclitaxel palmitate in a well-established
in vivo pharmacologic model of prostate cancer that overexpresses
the HER2 receptor and to examine whether or not in can activate
the complement system.

Materials and Methods
Synthesis of paclitaxel palmitate. Paclitaxel palmitate was synthesized
from paclitaxel (Farmachem, Lugano, Switzerland) and palmitoyl chloride
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in a single step that coupled palmitate to paclitaxel
at the 2¶-hydroxyl position. To a solution of paclitaxel (35 mg,
41 Amol) in methylene chloride (2.5 mL) under argon were added
4-dimethylaminopyridine (5 mg, 41 Amol), 1,3-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
(16.9 mg, 82 Amol), and palmitoyl chloride (13.5 mg, 41 Amol). The reaction
mixture was stirred at ambient temperature for 2 h. After dilution with
diethyl ether, the reaction mixture was washed with 5% aqueous
hydrochloric acid, water, and saturated aqueous sodium chloride. The
mixture was dried (sodium sulfate) and concentrated. Radial chromatography (silica gel, ethyl acetate-hexane) of the residue gave 45 mg (94%) of
solid paclitaxel palmitate. Product was analyzed using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, TLC, and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods. In all experiments presented here, both paclitaxel and
paclitaxel palmitate were formulated in 10% Cremophor EL/10% ethanol/
80% normal saline.
Emulsion preparation and characterization. The cationic blank
emulsion was prepared according to the method previously described (18).
Briefly, the oil and aqueous phases were prepared separately and heated at
70jC and then mixed and stirred with a magnetic stirrer. The final
emulsions were obtained after mixing and homogenization in Silent
Crusher S (Heidolph Instruments, Schwabach, Germany) under eight
microfluidization cycles, each for 2 min. The formulations (w/w) consisted
of medium chain triglycerides (5%), Lipoid E-80 (1%), a-tocopherol (0.01%),
stearylamine (0.25%), poloxamer (1%), glycerol (2.25%), and double-distilled
water (ddH2O) to 100. All ingredients used were of pharmaceutical grade.
When indicated, 0.4 g of the prodrug paclitaxel palmitate was added to the
oil phase. pH of the emulsion was adjusted to 7.4 with 1 N HCl, and, finally,
emulsion was filtered through a 0.45-Am filter membrane. Droplet size
measurements were carried out using an ALV Noninvasive Back Scattering
High-performance Particle Sizer (ALV-NIBS HPPS, Langen, Germany) at
25jC using water as the solvent. The sensitivity range was 0.5 nm to 5 Am.
Zeta potential measurements of the emulsions were done with the
Malvern zetasizer (Malvern, United Kingdom) diluted in ddH2O (150 mV).
Drug content was determined using an adequate HPLC method (20) and
was f93%.
Immunoemulsion preparation. Trastuzumab (Herceptin, Roche, Basel,
Switzerland, batch no. 1743) was mixed with 2-iminothiolane, also known as
Traut’s reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL) at a molar ratio of 1:30 in Borate buffer
(pH 8) for 1 h. The solution was purified from excess Traut’s reagent by gel
filtration using Sephadex G-25 column (PD-10 column, Amersham
Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden). Antibodies were collected in 0.3-mL fractions.
Fractions containing mAb were determined using UV at 280 nm and pooled
together and kept under nitrogen atmosphere at 4jC until coupling to
emulsions. For immunoemulsion preparation, 0.02% (w/w) of the synthesized linker octadecyl-4-(maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-carboxylic amide
was added to the oil phase of the emulsion. The pH of freshly prepared
emulsion was adjusted to 6.5 up to 7. Adequate concentrations of Traut’s
reagent–modified trastuzumab (1.5 mg) were added to 3 mL of emulsion
corresponding to the initial preselected antibody density of 50 antibody
molecules per droplet. The average number of mAb molecules per emulsion
oil droplet was calculated assuming a droplet size of 180 nm and a
molecular weight of 150 kDa for trastuzumab as already shown elsewhere
(19). Incubation was carried out overnight at 4jC in a nitrogen environment
under mild shaking. Coupling of trastuzumab to emulsion droplets was

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

270

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anti-HER2 Immunoemulsions in Metastatic Prostate Cancer
(Nichirei) for 10 min. Slides were rinsed in water, counterstained with
Mayer’s hematoxylin (Pioneer Research Chemicals, Colchester, United
Kingdom), rehydrated through a series of graded alcohols, and coverslipped
with GVA mounting solution (Zymed).
Statistical analysis. Treatments effects were compared using one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey post-test for tumor volume at each time point
using Instat GraphPad Software. Differences were considered significant if
P < 0.05.

Results
Emulsion and immunoemulsion characterization. The wellestablished emulsion manufacturing method yielded cationic
nanoemulsions containing 4% paclitaxel palmitate exhibiting an
average droplet size of 160 F 30 nm and a positive zeta potential
value of 50 F 10 mV. The concentration of paclitaxel palmitate was
monitored using HPLC, and 93% recovery was observed (i.e., final
observed concentration of 3.72% w/w). The experimental conditions were controlled because high reproducibility was achieved
upon preparation of three replicate batches with a range variation
of F12.5%.
Paclitaxel palmitate immunoemulsions exhibited an average
mean droplet diameter of 160 to 180 nm and a positive zeta
potential value of +50 mV identical to the zeta potential value of
the unconjugated drug-loaded cationic emulsion. The paclitaxel
palmitate incorporation yield was similar to the yield achieved with
the unconjugated emulsion formulation.
The total amount of mAb conjugated to emulsions was
evaluated with the BCA protein assay kit, and conjugation
efficiency ranging from 60% to 70% was observed. Conjugated
antibodies were visualized by TEM following incubation of antiHER2 immunoemulsion with a conjugate of a 12-nm gold goat
anti-human secondary antibody. The dark spots detected on the
surface of the oil droplets (Fig. 1) suggest that trastuzumab
molecules were covalently linked to the maleimide anchor present
at the oil/water interface of preformed emulsions. An in vitro
binding study to SK-BR3 cells (breast cancer cells), which are well
known to overexpress the HER2 receptor, elicited good binding
results for these immunoemulsions compared with unconjugated
cationic emulsions and showed the qualitative mAb affinity to the

Figure 1. TEM of anti-HER2 immunoemulsion with observed density of 50
antibodies per droplet negatively stained with phosphotungstic acid solution,
following incubation with a goat anti-human IgG secondary antibody conjugated
with 12-nm gold particle.

Trenton, NJ). A pseudocolor image represents light intensity (blue being the
least intense and red being the most intense). In all experiments, mice were
anesthetized with 4% chloral hydrate (0.2 mL/100 g of body weight; FlukaSigma, Rehovot, Israel), and 5 min before monitoring light emission, the
animals were injected i.p. with Beetle luciferin (Promega Corp., Madison,
WI) in PBS (126 mg/kg body weight). The animals were placed in a dark box
supplemented with a controller light to take pictures of the background
mouse image or using the CCCD camera. The light measurements were
taken under consistent conditions, which included the same exposure time
(2 min) and distance of lenses from the mice. The integration light was, in
all cases, the result of a 2-min exposure and acquisition. Recorded
measurements were the total sum of integrated signal, subtracted from the
background area of equal size.
Histopathology. For toxicology safety evaluation of emulsions formulations and assessment of potential metastasis, the following organs were
taken from three representative mice at the end of the experimentation
(after 60 days): colon, duodenum, heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, spleen,
stomach, and prostate. All organs listed were fixed and preserved in 10%
neutral buffered formalin (f4% formaldehyde solution) for histopathologic
examination. Organ/tissues are then trimmed, embedded in paraffin,
sectioned at f5 Am thickness, and stained with H&E. The histologic
examination of all tissues includes a detailed examination of all tissue
compartments, and histologic abnormalities were recorded and scored
according to the compartment in which they are identified (24).
Indirect enzymatic immunohistochemical peroxidase method was used
for HER2 receptor detection. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
blocks were cut (4 Am) and attached to the slides. The sections were stained
using antibodies to HER2 (28-8003; Zymed, San Francisco, CA). Positive
control was human breast carcinoma graded +3 (strong complete
membrane staining of >10% of the tumor cells), according to the HercepTest
from DAKO (Carpinteria, CA). Following dehydration through a series of
graded alcohols, slides were blocked for endogenous peroxidase activity
with 3% H2O2 for 10 min. Epitope retrieval was conducted by incubating the
slides in Ficin Sol’ (Zymed) for 10 min at 37jC. Slides were rinsed in distilled
water and placed in wash buffer (BioGenex, San Ramon, CA). All
incubations were conducted in a humidified box at room temperature.
The HER2 antibody (1:1,000) was applied for 1 h. Slides were washed in
wash buffer (BioGenex) for 5 min, incubated with HISTOFINE simple stain
MAX PO for 30 min (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan), washed again, and color
development was achieved using the HISTOFINE simple stain AEC Sol’

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 2. Complement activation analysis by measuring SC5b-9
concentration in human sera following incubation with PBS, zymozan, Taxol,
paclitaxel palmitate (PP ), paclitaxel palmitate–loaded cationic emulsion, and
immunoemulsion.

271

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

HER2 receptor despite the chemical modification and coupling
process (data not shown).
In vitro complement activation studies. The results of the
complement activation determination that measure the concentration of SC5b-9 in human serum are depicted in Fig. 2. It can be
clearly noted that the unconjugated cationic emulsion and the antiHER2 immunoemulsion did not activate the complement and even
yielded significantly lower value than the market free drug Taxol
and the paclitaxel palmitate solution in two different sera.
Zymozan serves as a positive control and elicited a significantly
higher value than the cationic emulsions and immunoemulsions.
The substantial individual variation of SC5b-9 response was already
observed and discussed by other authors when investigating the
complement activation of various Taxol solutions (22).
Orthotopic animal model validation. Before the initiation of
the animal experimentation, the PC3.38/Luc cells were tested for
the expression of HER2 receptor by flow cytometry following
incubation with trastuzumab. It was clearly noted that the cells did
express the receptor (data not shown). In addition, the HER2
expression pattern in the animal prostate implemented with the
cells was examined. It can be deduced from the results presented in
Fig. 3 that the in vivo model is valid because the cancerous cells did
overexpress HER2 receptors.
Pharmacologic evaluation. The inoculation of PC3.38/Luc
tumor cells induced human prostate cancer, the growth of which
was monitored noninvasively as noted in the saline control group
(Fig. 4). Furthermore, the response of tumors and metastasis
before, during, and after treatment was assessed. The longitudinal
evaluation of bioluminescent tumor and metastatic development
within the same groups of animals permitted sensitive and
quantitative assessment of both primary and metastatic prostate
tumor response in vivo. It can clearly be deduced from the data
depicted in Fig. 4 that the paclitaxel palmitate–loaded immunoemulsion inhibits the tumor growth much more than the cationic
emulsion and the paclitaxel palmitate formulation. In addition, it

Figure 4. Detection and quantification of tumor size in live mice (5–8 animals
in a group) by luciferase assay using a CCCD camera. Paclitaxel palmitate–
loaded immunoemulsion inhibits the tumor growth much more than the cationic
emulsion (P < 0.05) and the paclitaxel palmitate solution (P < 0.01) at day 56.
Mice pictures were taken at day 42. Arrows, treatment schedules.

was qualitatively noted during the image analysis at day 56 from
the cell injection that numerous metastases are visible in the saline
group, whereas few are visible in the cationic emulsion group, and
no metastases were detected in the immunoemulsion group.
However, the presence of metastases in the various organs cannot
be excluded based on the image analysis only. Thus, histopathologic
analysis of the various organs in the different groups was carried
out. The data indicated the presence of metastases in the lungs and
kidneys of all the groups tested, and some sporadic metastases
were observed in the stomach of the saline and emulsion groups
(Table 1). It is interesting to note that no metastases were detected
in the heart of the cationic emulsion and immunoemulsion groups,
whereas metastases were observed in the saline and paclitaxel
palmitate groups (Fig. 5). Most importantly, no compound-related
toxicity lesions were seen in any of the organs examined.

Discussion
We have recently reported the results of the conjugation of an
anti-ferritin mAb (AMB8LK) to oil droplets of cationic nanoemulsions (19). It was shown that the processes used for the
preparation of these immunoemulsions did not affect the
physicochemical properties of the emulsions (average droplet size
of f120 nm with a zeta potential of +50 mV) and did not alter the
immunoreactivity of the mAb. This was again confirmed in the
present study with respect to the conjugation of trastuzumab to
cationic emulsions because the trastuzumab immunoemulsion was
significantly bound to the well-known breast cancer cell line SKBR3 overexpressing the HER2 receptor. In addition, the stability over
storage time in room temperature was followed up during all the
period of the animal experimentation. Before any injection, the
size, potential zeta, pH, and drug content were determined and
found unchanged. Paclitaxel is a highly promising drug against
advanced and refractory cancers, such as breast and ovarian
carcinomas. However, there is a need for development of an i.v
formulation of the drug, which is safer and better tolerated than

Figure 3. Immunohistochemistry for HER2 receptor detection in orthotopic
prostate tumor model following implantation with PC3 cells. A, H&E staining of
healthy mouse prostate. Arrows, single layer of epithelial cells lining the acini.
Magnification, 20. B, epithelial cells lining at the acini are negative to HER2
receptor. Magnification, 600. C, H&E staining of mouse prostate injected
with PC3 cells. Arrows, irregularly arranged cords of carcinomatous cells.
Magnification, 20. D, membranes of the cancer cells are distinctly positive for
HER2 receptor. Magnification, 600.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

272

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anti-HER2 Immunoemulsions in Metastatic Prostate Cancer

Table 1. Individual metastases detection and histopathologic findings 56 days after injection of three different paclitaxel
palmitate formulations in severe combined immunodeficient/beige mice bearing orthotopic prostate cancer
Organ*

Paclitaxel palmitate formulations
Saline

Heart
Metastatic prostate carcinoma
Prostate
Carcinoma
Lung
Metastatic prostate carcinoma
Very large nodules
Kidney
Metastatic prostate carcinoma
Papilla, necrosis
Stomach
Metastatic prostate carcinoma
Spleen
White pulp lymphoid cell-reduced cellularity

M1

M2

+

+

+

+

+
+
+

Solution
M3

Emulsion

M1

M2

M3

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+
+

+
3

+

+

M1

M2

M3

M1

M2

M3

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
1

Immunoemulsion

+

+

+
2

2

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

NOTE: +, presence of metastases; , no metastases. Histopathologic changes were described and scored using semiquantitative grading of five grades
(0–4), taking into consideration the severity of the changes (0, unremarkable; 1, minimal; 2, mild; 3, moderate; 4, marked). Three mice from each group
were examined (M1, M2, and M3).
*
No metastases or histopathologic findings were detected in liver, duodenum, and colon.

It is important to evaluate the emulsion formulations for
complement activation as part of potential toxicity and side effect
induction. In addition, complement activation decreases the
plasma circulation time of colloidal systems. Complement
activation determination was done using the Quidel SC5b-9
(TCC) Enzyme Immunoassay kit, which measures the concentration of SC5b-9 in human serum and plasma, thereby giving an
indication of the status of the terminal complement pathway in the
specimen. It can clearly be noted that the cationic emulsion and
immunoemulsion did not activate the complement compared with
the commercial and paclitaxel palmitate formulations that
contained Cremophor EL, known to activate the complement (6).
It should also be noted that trastuzumab injected at the doses of
the present study did not activate the complement in a separate
independent study. The substantial individual variation noted in
the present study (Fig. 2) is not different from the variation
reported by other authors for Taxol formulations who stated that
the wide variation of SC5b-9 response to Taxol was probably
multifactorial and due to individual differences in C3 conversion,
C3b inactivation, and terminal complex formation (22).
The selection of the appropriate in vivo test system is crucial to
establishing the worth of active molecules. A major drawback of
animal models that use s.c. tumor implants is that they clearly do
not reproduce the primary site of the common human cancer nor
do they represent the common sites of metastasis (27, 28). Thus, it
is now well accepted that s.c. growing human tumors in
immunodeficient mice do not represent clinical cancer, especially
with regard to metastasis and drug sensitivity (29). In an attempt to
address these issues, orthotopic transplantation of tumor material
to the appropriate site has been established. In fact, some authors
have already reported about the noninvasive imaging technique for

the present Cremophor EL–based preparation (Taxol). Reformulation could also provide a possibility to improve the efficacy of
paclitaxel-based anticancer therapy. Paclitaxel is difficult to
formulate for i.v administration because of its poor aqueous
solubility and general hydrophobicity. Indeed, paclitaxel can be
incorporated into the internal oil phase of an emulsion (7).
However, upon i.v. administration, the emulsion formulation is
diluted infinitely, and the paclitaxel partitioned in favor of the
serum owing to its log P of 4.7. Thus, the biofate of paclitaxel in the
emulsion is similar to the biofate of paclitaxel in the commercial
product (25). It has already been reported by other authors that for
a drug to be retained in an emulsion following i.v. administration,
the log P should be >7 (26); otherwise, the drug will be released
rapidly in the serum, loosing the advantage of long blood
circulation and possibility of organ-passive targeting. To allow
paclitaxel to remain entrapped in the internal oil phase of an
emulsion, paclitaxel lipophilicity should be markedly increased by
esterification with a fatty acid as recently reported by Lundberg
et al. (7) who entrapped in an anionic emulsion paclitaxel oleate. In
the present study, paclitaxel palmitate (calculated log P of 9) was
synthesized and incorporated into the cationic emulsion before
antibody conjugation. It should be emphasized that in preliminary
animal studies using the orthotopic prostate cancer model,
paclitaxel palmitate was compared with paclitaxel using an
identical vehicle consisting of Cremophor EL and ethanol (1:1).
Each drug formulation was injected to a group of four animals 24
h following inoculation with PC3.38/Luc cancer cells. Both drugs
behaved similarly and prevented the growth of the prostate tumors
over a testing period of 30 days at a dose of 10 mg/kg following
three consecutive weekly injections. It could then be deduced that
the esterification of paclitaxel did not affect the antitumor activity.

www.aacrjournals.org

273

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

detected in the immunoemulsion animal group. However, histopathologic analysis clearly showed the presence of metastases in all
the organs tested, with the exception of the heart in cationic
emulsion and immunoemulsion as shown in Fig. 5. There was no
difference in antimetastatic activity between the emulsion and the
immunoemulsion despite the affinity of the immunoemulsion
towards the HER2 receptor. This can be attributed to the low
efficiency of paclitaxel palmitate in treating prostate metastases
generated from PC3 cell as reported by El Hillali et al. (31). These
authors also reported that paclitaxel is effective in reducing
prostate tumor growth but cannot eradicate prostate metastases as
a single agent. A similar behavior for paclitaxel palmitate can be
envisioned in the present study. Furthermore, the results of clinical
trials in prostate cancer using trastuzumab alone or in combination with docetaxel or paclitaxel have been disappointing (15, 32).
Although the tumor growth was not fully inhibited, these results
are encouraging and need to be further investigated. It has been
shown (33, 34) that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
induction and its release from cells are stimulated immediately in
breast cancer cells and prostate cancer cells when exposed to
estrogens and androgens, respectively. Thus, when the prostate
cancer becomes hormone independent, VEGF and its receptors
play a crucial role in the neovascularization and progression of
cancer. The abnormal features (leakage, hemorrhage, and tortuosity) of the tumor vasculature decrease markedly the cytotoxic drug
delivery within the tumor tissue. Indeed, an antiangiogenic mAb
should be aimed to normalize these tumor vessels, resulting in an
increase of cytotoxic drug delivery within the tumor tissue. This
hypothesis is supported by the findings showing that antibodies to
VEGF slow tumor growth in androgen-independent prostate
cancer xenograft models, an effect that was augmented with the
addition of chemotherapy (35, 36). Apparently, a more improved
specific drug delivery system to prostate tumor and disseminated
prostate metastases is needed in terms of targeting and
intracellular uptake. It is intended to conjugate an additional
mAb to the actual immunoemulsion that exhibits antiangiogenic
activity. Thus, the novel bifunctional immunoemulsions will elicit a
more efficient effect than the actual encouraging targeted drug
delivery system, allowing for specificity to the prostate cancer cells,
whereas the antiangiogenic mAb will diminish the resistance of the
cancer cells and should enhance the cell uptake of paclitaxel
palmitate.
Nevertheless, the actual results are encouraging and may lead to
an improved therapeutic strategy of metastatic prostate cancer
treatment.

Figure 5. A, histologic section of the heart: paclitaxel palmitate cationic
emulsion (no abnormality detected in the heart). Arrow, intact pericardium.
Magnification, 4. B, magnification, 40. C, histologic section of the heart:
paclitaxel palmitate solution. Arrow, presence of metastatic prostatic carcinoma
growing on the pericardium. Magnification, 4. D, magnification, 40.
E, histologic section of the heart: paclitaxel palmitate immunoemulsion
(no abnormality detected in the heart). Magnification, 4. F, magnification, 40.

monitoring luciferase-expressing human prostate tumors and
metastasis in nude mice after i.p. inoculation of luciferin (30), as
also done in the present study.
The longitudinal evaluation of bioluminescent tumor and
metastatic development within the same groups of animals
permitted sensitive and quantitative assessment of both primary
and metastatic prostate tumor response in vivo. It can clearly be
deduced from the data depicted in Fig. 4 that the paclitaxel
palmitate–loaded immunoemulsion inhibits the tumor growth
much more than the cationic emulsion (P < 0.05) and the paclitaxel
palmitate formulation (P < 0.01) at day 56. It was not possible to
carry a thorough statistical analysis of the data before day 56. The
limited number of tumor bearing animals in each treatment group
and the greater-than-anticipated variability in control tumor
growth prevented the apparent increase in the cationic immunoemulsion efficacy from reaching statistical significance before day
56. In addition, it was qualitatively noted during the image analysis
at day 56 from the cell injection that numerous metastases are
visible in the saline group, whereas few are visible in the cationic
and paclitaxel palmitate formulation, and no metastases can be

References
1. Weir HK, Thum MJ, Hankey BF, et al. Annual report to
the nation on the status of cancer 1975–2000, featuring
the uses of surveillance data for cancer prevention and
control. J Natl Cancer Inst 2003;95:1276–99.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Acknowledgments
Received 7/24/2006; revised 9/29/2006; accepted 10/31/2006.
Grant support: The Israel Science Foundation grant 622/04.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Reuven Reich (Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy,
Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel) for his useful advice.

2. Sonpavde G, Huston TE. New approaches in hormone
refractory prostate cancer. Am J Clin Oncol 2006;29:
196–201.
3. Fong L, Small EJ. Immunotherapy for prostate cancer.
Curr Urol Rep 2006;7:239–46.
4. Petrylak DP. The current role of chemotherapy in

274

metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Urology
2005;65:3–8.
5. Silvestris N, Leone B, Numuco G, et al. Present status
and perspectives in the treatment of hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Oncology 2005;69:273–82.
6. Hennenfent KL, Govindan R. Novel formulations of

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anti-HER2 Immunoemulsions in Metastatic Prostate Cancer
taxanes: a review. Old wine in a new bottle? Ann Oncol
2006;17:735–49.
7. Lundberg BB, Risovic V, Ramaswamy M, Wasan KM. A
lipophilic paclitaxel derivative incorporated in a lipid
emulsion for parenteral administration. J Control
Release 2003;86:93–100.
8. Zamboni WC. Liposomal, nanoparticle, and conjugated formulations of anticancer agents. Clin Cancer Res
2005;11:8230–4.
9. Neerman MF. Enhancing the site-specific targeting of
macromolecular anticancer drug delivery systems. Curr
Drug Targets 2006;7:229–35.
10. Sapra P, Tyagi P, Allen TM. Ligand-targeted liposomes
for cancer treatment. Curr Drug Deliv 2005;2:369–81.
11. Craft N, Shostak Y, Carey M, Sawyers CL. A
mechanism for hormone-independent prostate cancer
through modulation of androgen receptor signaling
by the HER-2/neu tyrosine kinase. Nat Med 1999;5:
280–5.
12. Signoretti S, Montironi R, Manola J, et al. Her-2-neu
expression and progression toward androgen independence in human prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
2000;92:1918–25.
13. Thalmann GN, Sikes RA, Wu TT, et al. LNCaP
progression model of human prostate cancer: androgenindependence and osseous metastasis. Prostate 2000;44:
91–103.
14. Polsker GL, Keam SJ. Trastuzumab: a review of its use
in the management of HER2-positive metastatic and
early-stage breast cancer. Drugs 2006;66:449–75.
15. Morris MJ, Reuter VE, Kelly WK, et al. HER-2 profiling
and targeting in prostate carcinoma: a phase II trial of
trastuzumab alone and with paclitaxel. Cancer 2002;94:
980–6.
16. Tamilvanan S, Benita S. The potential of lipid
emulsion for ocular delivery of lipophilic drugs. Eur J
Pharm Biopharm 2004;58:357–68.
17. Yang SC, Benita S. Enhanced absorption and drug
targeting by positively charged submicron emulsions.
Drug Dev Res 2000;50:476–86.

www.aacrjournals.org

18. Tamilvanan S, Schmidt S, Muller RH, Benita S. In vitro
adsorption of plasma proteins onto the surface (charges)
modified-submicron emulsions for intravenous administration. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2005;59:1–7.
19. Goldstein D, Nassar T, Lambert G, Kadouche J, Benita
S. The design and evaluation of a novel targeted drug
delivery system using cationic emulsion-antibody conjugates. J Control Release 2005;108:418–32.
20. Andreeva M, Niedman PD, Binder L, et al. A simple
and reliable reverse-phase high-performance liquid
chromatographic procedure for determination of paclitaxel (Taxol) in human serum. Ther Drug Monit 1997;19:
327–32.
21. Moghimi SM, Hunter AC, Dadswell CM, et al.
Causative factors behind poloxamer 188 (Pluronic F68,
Flocor)-induced complement activation in human sera.
A protective role against poloxamer-mediated complement activation by elevated serum lipoprotein levels.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1689:103–13.
22. Szebeni J, Alving CR, Savay S, et al. Formation of
complement-activating particles in aqueous solutions of
Taxol: possible role in hypersensitivity reactions. Int
Immunopharmacol 2001;1:721–35.
23. Honigman A, Zeira E, Ohana P, et al. Imaging
transgene expression in live animals. Mol Ther 2001;4:
239–49.
24. Detre S, Saclani Jotti G, Dowsett M. A ‘‘quickscore’’
method for immunohistochemical semiquantitation:
validation for oestrogen receptor in breast carcinomas.
J Clin Pathol 1995;48:876–8.
25. Lee IH, Park YT, Ron K, Chung H, Kwon IC, Jeong SY.
Stable paclitaxel formulations in oily contrast medium.
J Control Release 2005;102:415–25.
26. Takino T, Konishi K, Takakura Y, Hashida M. Long
circulating emulsion carrier systems for highly lipophilic
drugs. Biol Pharm Bull 1994;17:121–5.
27. Kerbel RS. Human tumor xenografts as predictive
preclinical models for anticancer drug activity in
humans: better than commonly perceived-but they can
be improved. Cancer Biol Ther 2003;2:134–9.

275

28. Bibby MC. Orthotopic models of cancer for preclinical drug evaluation: advantages and disadvantages. Eur
J Cancer 2004;40:852–7.
29. Hoffman RM. Orthotopic metastatic mouse models
for anticancer drug discovery and evaluation: a bridge to
the clinic. Invest New Drugs 1999;17:343–59.
30. El Hilali N, Rubio N, Blanco J. Noninvasive in vivo
whole body luminescent analysis of luciferase labeled
orthotopic prostate tumors. Eur J Cancer 2004;40:
2851–8.
31. El Hilali N, Rubio N, Blanco J. Different effect of
paclitaxel on primary tumor mass, tumor cell contents,
and metastases for four experimental human prostate
tumors expressing luciferase. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:
1253–8.
32. Lara PN, Jr., Chee KG, Longmate J, et al. Trastuzumab plus docetaxel in HER-2/neu -positive prostate
carcinoma: final results from the California Cancer
Consortium Screening and Phase II Trial. Cancer 2004;
100:2125–31.
33. Duque JL, Loughlin KR, Adam RM, et al. Plasma
levels of vascular endothelial growth factor are
increased in patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
Urology 1999;54:523–7.
34. Bok RA, Halabi S, Fei DT, et al. Vascular endothelial
growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor urine
levels as predictors of outcome in hormone-refractory
prostate cancer patients: a cancer and leukemia group B
study. Cancer Res 2001;61:2533–6.
35. Fox WD, Higgins B, Maiese KM, et al. Antibody to
vascular endothelial growth factor slows growth of an
androgen-independent xenograft model of prostate
cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:3226–31.
36. Sweeney P, Karashima T, Kim SJ, et al. Anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2 antibody reduces
tumorigenicity and metastasis in orthotopic prostate
cancer xenografts via induction of endothelial cell
apoptosis and reduction of endothelial cell matrix
metalloproteinase type 9 production. Clin Cancer Res
2002;8:2714–24.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anti-HER2 Cationic Immunoemulsion as a Potential Targeted
Drug Delivery System for the Treatment of Prostate Cancer
Danny Goldstein, Ofer Gofrit, Abraham Nyska, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:269-275.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/269

Cited articles

This article cites 35 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/269.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

