Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 42

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

SRC family kinase FYN promotes the neuroendocrine phenotype
and visceral metastasis in advanced prostate cancer
Murali Gururajan1,*, Karen A. Cavassani1,*, Margarit Sievert1, Peng Duan1, Jake
Lichterman1, Jen-Ming Huang1, Bethany Smith1, Sungyong You1,2, Srinivas
Nandana1, Gina Chia-Yi Chu1, Sheldon Mink1, Sajni Josson1, Chunyan Liu1, Matteo
Morello1,3, Lawrence W. M. Jones4, Jayoung Kim1,3, Michael R. Freeman1,3, Neil
Bhowmick3, Haiyen E. Zhau1,2, Leland W.K. Chung1,2, Edwin M. Posadas1,2
1

 rologic Oncology Program/Uro-Oncology Research Laboratories, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, CedarsU
Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA

2

Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA

3

ancer Biology Program, Departments of Surgery, Medicine, and Biological Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
C
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA

4

Urological Research, Huntington Medical Research Institutes, Pasadena, CA 91101, USA

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Edwin Posadas, e-mail: Edwin.Posadas@csmc.edu
Keywords: SRC kinase, NEPC, metastasis, neuroendocrine, prostate cancer
Received: September 06, 2015	

Accepted: November 14, 2015	

Published: November 26, 2015

ABSTRACT
FYN is a SRC family kinase (SFK) that has been shown to be up-regulated in
human prostate cancer (PCa) tissues and cell lines. In this study, we observed
that FYN is strongly up-regulated in human neuroendocrine PCa (NEPC) tissues
and xenografts, as well as cells derived from a NEPC transgenic mouse model.
In silico analysis of FYN expression in prostate cancer cell line databases revealed
an association with the expression of neuroendocrine (NE) markers such as CHGA,
CD44, CD56, and SYP. The loss of FYN abrogated the invasion of PC3 and ARCaPM
cells in response to MET receptor ligand HGF. FYN also contributed to the metastatic
potential of NEPC cells in two mouse models of visceral metastasis with two different
cell lines (PC3 and TRAMPC2-RANKL). The activation of MET appeared to regulate
neuroendocrine (NE) features as evidenced by increased expression of NE markers in
PC3 cells with HGF. Importantly, the overexpression of FYN protein in DU145 cells was
directly correlated with the increase of CHGA. Thus, our data demonstrated that the
neuroendocrine differentiation that occurs in PCa cells is, at least in part, regulated by
FYN kinase. Understanding the role of FYN in the regulation of NE markers will provide
further support for ongoing clinical trials of SFK and MET inhibitors in castrationresistant PCa patients.

INTRODUCTION

In some cases of PCa, patients exhibit a clinical
phenotype dominated by NE behavior. These NE prostate
cancers (NEPCs) do not typically express androgen
receptor (AR). Because PSA is a target gene of AR,
patients with NEPC typically have very low serum PSA
concentrations. Clinically, NEPCs exhibit aggressive
metastatic properties leading to disease spread to
visceral organs such as the liver and lung. This pattern
of clinical behavior has been strongly associated with
shortened overall survival [3, 4]. NEPC is distinguished
by the expression of markers including chromogranin A

Over 90% of prostate cancers (PCa) occur in the
form of adenocarcinomas, which are characterized by
dysregulated growth of the epithelial cells that typically
secrete prostate specific antigen (PSA). Many of these are
tractable when treated with currently available therapies
even though nearly every PCa contains a subpopulation of
neuroendocrine (NE) cancer cells scattered throughout the
tumor that make up 1% or less of the total tumor volume
[1, 2].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44072

Oncotarget

(CHGA), chromogranin B (CHGB), synaptophysin (SYP),
CD44, and CD56 [5]. In addition, AURKA and MYCN
amplifications in primary prostatic adenocarcinoma have
been described to predict the differentiation of NEPC
[6, 7]. Since the introduction of next-generation ARinhibitors, there appears to have been an increase in the
incidence of NEPC, which is thought to arise during the
development of resistance. NEPCs are typically treated
with cytotoxic chemotherapy with platinum-containing
regimens, but these therapies are non-curative and
relatively toxic. As such, they represent an urgent and
unmet clinical and translational problem.
We have determined that the FYN kinase (one of the
nine identified SFKs) is overexpressed in PCa [8–10]. Our
published studies have shown that FYN plays an important
role in cellular motility in cancer [9], particularly when
driven by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), which is
found in abundance in the plasma of patients with both
acinar prostatic adenocarcinomas and NEPC [9, 11, 12].
Data from our group and others have demonstrated
particular importance of FYN and other SFKs in later
events in PCa progression. However, these studies did not
directly address the role of FYN in NEPC. The role of
SFKs, particularly the FYN kinase, in NEPC has not been
characterized. Fyn knockout mice develop neurological
defects such as blunted long-term potentiation (LTP),
impaired special learning, and altered hippocampal
development, suggesting a neuronal role for FYN kinase
and a potential role in cancers that have NE features
[13]. Recent evidence suggests that nerves innervate the
prostate microenvironment in unique fashion. Moreover,
there is evidence to show that neuronal cells and endocrine
factors promote tumor generation and progression of
NEPC [14].
In the present study, FYN kinase expression was
associated with neuroendocrine biomarkers in PCa cell
lines and PCa liver metastasis derived cells. In vitro and
in vivo data demonstrate that FYN promoted the invasion
and metastasis of NEPC cells. Together, these data
highlight the importance of FYN in the regulation of NE
markers, NEPC invasion and metastasis.

PC3 cells for FYN expression and observed that PC3 cells
have greater expression of FYN compared to LNCaP cells
(a more acinar or non-NE cell line) consistent with our
previous published observations [9] (Figure 1A and 1B).
FYN expression correlated with the expression of markers
of NE differentiation (Figure 1A and 1B) and QD analysis
of human PCa patient tissues expressing NE markers
including CHGA, CD44, CD56, and SYP confirmed coexpression of FYN (Figure 1C and 1D). In particular, FYN
expression was approximately 4-fold higher in NEPC
patient tissues compared with a standard adenocarcinoma.
Together, these observations suggested that there was a
strong correlation between FYN and NEPC.

RESULTS

The impact of FYN on the growth and invasive
potential of PCa cells was determined using standard
Matrigel invasion assays. To perform these assays, we
generated PCa cell lines in which FYN was depleted
via shRNA targeting approaches. FYN knockdown
was confirmed by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis
(Figure 3A and 3B). The relative mRNA expression of
FYN shows that the total FYN levels in PC3 are significant
higher when compared with ARCaPM cells. Also, FYN
levels on PC3 and ARCaPM are significantly higher than
DU145 cells (Supplementary Figure 1).
We next analyzed the role of FYN in the
proliferation index of ARCaPM. The lack of FYN impairs

FYN expression is associated with NE marker
expression in PCa
We next examined whether FYN expression was
associated with NE tumor marker expression lines
cataloged in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE,
http://www.broadinstitute.org/ccle). Analysis of mRNA
expression across the CCLE lines revealed that FYN was
expressed at higher levels in the cell lines derived from the
tumors such as neuroblastoma, small cell lung cancer, and
medulloblastoma. Although the PCa cell lines included
in the CCLE were characterized with low expression of
FYN, when compared to most of the NE cell lines, this
was not unexpected as the majority of cell lines used in
PCa research are of an acinar adenocarcinoma phenotype.
However, NCI-H660 cells (a well-defined NEPC cell
line [16, 17]) showed the highest expression of FYN and
PC3 showed third highest expression among the 8 PCa
cell lines in CCLE (Figure 2A). The correlation between
FYN and NE markers including NSE, CHGA, CHGB,
AURKA, SCG3, and MYCN was next analyzed using
gene expression profiles obtained from four public datasets
[18–21]. All NE markers showed significant correlation
with FYN in at least one of the datasets (Figure 2B).

FYN regulates growth and invasion of PC3 and
ARCaPM cells in vitro

FYN is overexpressed in NEPC cell lines and
tissues
Our previous studies identified that FYN expression
is increased in PCa [9] although FYN kinase is typically
associated exclusively with neuronal activity. This
observation led us to hypothesize that FYN expression
might be detectable in a subset of PCa with NE features.
Accordingly, Huang and colleagues have reported that the
PC3 cell line is a bonafide prostatic small cell carcinoma
with NE features [15]. In the present study, we examined

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44073

Oncotarget

the full ability of the cells to proliferate when compared
with NT cells (intact FYN control). After 4 days of culture,
there was a 28% decrease on ARCaPM FYN- cells growth
when compared with ARCaPM NT cells (Figure 3C). In
addition, we observed a decrease in invasive capacity in
response to HGF-stimulation for the FYN depleted cells
as compared to their corresponding controls (Figure 3D
and 3E). These findings demonstrate that FYN activation
regulates PCa cell invasion not only in PC3 cells but in
ARCaPM cells as well.

and had to be sacrificed at earlier time points as shown in
the Kaplan-Meier Survival Curve Analysis (Figure 4A).
At 30 days after inoculation, we observed an increase
in tumor growth in the control group but not in the PC3
FYN- group (Figure 4B). Interestingly, non-osseous
metastases were detected by imaging, indicating that FYN
expression promoted visceral metastasis. This observation
was confirmed at necropsy during which tumors were
detected within the lung parenchyma (Figure 4C).
Histopathological analysis revealed massive tumor cell
infiltration in the lungs of mice inoculated with PC3 NT
cells with near loss of lung architecture (Figure 4D).
Conversely, the lung architecture was intact in mice that
received PC3 FYN- cells, suggesting that FYN expression
in NEPC cells was responsible for metastatic colonization
(Figure 4D).
In a parallel study, we stably expressed RANKL,
a bone tropic factor in TRAMPC2 cells [22–26] derived
from the TRAMP model of murine PCa (TRAMPC2RANKL). Transcript levels showed that TRAMPC2RANKL cells overexpress FYN (Figure 4F), SYP and
CHGA (Supplementary Figure 2). The inoculation
of this tumor line via the intracardiac route led to
metastasis and lethality in immune intact C57BL/6 mice
(Figure  4G–4H). Histological analysis showed that the

FYN promotes visceral metastasis of NEPC cells
in vivo
On the basis of the above in vitro work and
our previous studies [9], we hypothesized that FYN
depletion would reduce the metastatic potential in tumor
cells. To address this hypothesis, luciferase-tagged PC3
NT and PC3 FYN- were introduced into SCID mice
via intracardiac injection and tracked periodically by
bioluminescent imaging. Mice injected with PC3 FYNcells developed fewer metastatic lesions and exhibited
increased survival when compared to mice injected
with PC3 NT cells (Figure 4A and 4B). Mice that were
inoculated with PC3 NT cells became extremely moribund

Figure 1: FYN kinase co-expressed with neuroendocrine biomarkers in primary PCa with neuroendocrine phenotype
and in PCa liver metastasis. Analysis of NE markers (CD44, CD56, and CHGA) and FYN in cell and tissues were performed by
multiplexed quantum dot labeling method. (A) Metastatic human PC3 cells expressed higher FYN, and NE markers than the indolent
LNCaP cells. (B) Relative fluorescence quantification of FYN and NE biomarkers in PC-3 and LNCaP cells. (C and D) Biopsy samples
from patients with neuroendocrine PCa: (C) Primary tumor (D) Pleural biopsy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44074

Oncotarget

tumor load was much greater in the lungs of mice that
received TRAMPC2-RANKL compared to the control
group. (Figure 4I). Thus, these results demonstrate that
FYN is highly expressed in NEPC cells and appears to
dictate the propensity to PCa to metastasize to visceral
organs including the lung.

analyzed the expression of NE markers, CHGA, CHGB,
SCG3, SYP, MYCN, AURKA, and NSE in PC3 NT and
PC3 FYN- cells. In the absence of HGF, PC3 FYN- cells
exhibited lower expression of NE markers (Figure 6A–6F).
The addition of HGF increased MET phosphorylation
and resulted in a significant increase in mRNA levels of
CHGA, CHGB on PC3 cells (Figure 6A–6E). Protein
levels of CHGA, SYP and NSE were analyzed by Western
blot (Figure 6F). Furthermore, HGF stimulation increased
SYP and AURKA in PC3 FYN- suggesting that MET
activation may have an indirect effect on NE markers and
it is independent of FYN expression in the PC3 system
(Figure 6).
The analysis of NE markers was performed in
ARCaPM cells (Figure 6G–6J). As observed in PC3 cells,
the knockdown of FYN expression inhibited the transcript
levels of CHGA, CHGB, SYP, and AURKA. Specifically on
these cells, the regulation of NE markers was dependent of
FYN but independent of MET phosphorylation.
To verify the direct effect of FYN expression on
NE markers, our next set of experiments were performed
using DU145 Fyn-EV (characterized by undetectable
levels of FYN expression as shown in Supplementary
Figure 1 and Figure 7A), and DU145 Fyn-SIL, that
overexpress FYN (Figure 7A and 7D). Confirming
our hypothesis, the expression of CHGA and CHGB
were directly associated with the expression of FYN on

FYN expression is directly associated with the
regulation of NE markers
Recognizing that HGF is a growth factor found in
excess in the plasma of patients with NE cancers, and the
in vitro phenotypes of HGF-stimulated PCa cells (see
Figure 3D and 3E) [9], we next examined the impact of
FYN on MET activation. To characterize the relationship
between FYN and MET using FYN-manipulated lines,
FYN knockdown was used to suppress MET activation.
In fact, PC3 and ARCaPM FYN- cells have an attenuated
ability to phosphorylate MET (Figure 5A and 5B). Next,
using a PC3 subline with rescued expression of FYN (PC3
FYN- SIL) and a control line containing GFP (PC3 FYNEV), it was apparent that the overexpression of FYN in
PC3 cells led to the restoration of MET phosphorylation
(Figure 5C).
We then asked if there was a correlation between
FYN/MET signaling axis and the regulation of NE
markers in PCa cells. To answer this question, we

Figure 2: Association analysis of FYN expression with NE phenotype. (A) Bar graphs showing normalized intensities of
FYN in 8 PCa cell lines characterized in CCLE. (B) Heatmap showing Spearman’s rho of FYN with expression of NE biomarkers in four
independent datasets derived from human PCa tissues.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44075

Oncotarget

DU145 cells, and it was independent of HGF stimulation
(Figure 7B–7E). These findings strongly suggest that FYN
regulates the expression of NE markers in prostate cancer
cells. Also, the expression of FYN on these cells led to
phosphorylation of MET, independent of HGF stimulation
(Figure 7F and 7G). At this point, it is still unclear if the
NEPC differentiation requires MET/FYN axis signaling,
however these studies identify the direct association of
FYN and NEPC phenotype.

including the appearance of visceral metastasis. In fact,
most patients who develop NEPC survive less than 1
year after diagnosis [27, 28]. The biology of NEPC is a
new and growing ara of interest. The biological drivers
for growth, differentiation, and metastasis have not yet
been clearly delineated, though several studies have
raised both traditional and non-traditional biomarkers,
and targets based on the better-studied and more common
gastrointestinal forms of neuroendocrine tumors (NETs).
These tumors are often identified by the presence
of biochemical features indicating neuroendocrine
differentiation such as CHGA, CHGB, SYP, and CD56.
Non-gastrointestinal forms of neuroendocrine cancer,
while bearing these features, do not necessarily have the
same biology and hence may not have the same clinical
behavior. Understanding the biological drivers of

DISCUSSION
NEPC is an aggressive subtype of PCa that remains
an urgent and growing clinical problem. It is universally
recognized as a form of PCa that has a rapidly evolving
natural history punctuated by aggressive clinical features

Figure 3: FYN promotes invasion of PCa cells in vitro in response to HGF stimulation. (A–B) RT-PCR assays and

Immunoblot of FYN expression in PC3 and ARCaPM variants confirming decreased expression of FYN in the knockdown line. (C) 4-day
growth curves comparing ARCaPM FYN- to ARCaPM NT. Error bars represent standard error of the mean with 3 replicates for each day.
(D–E) Matrigel invasion assays of PC3 (NT and FYN-) at 16 hours or ARCaPM (NT and FYN-) at 48 h post incubation with or without
50 ng/ml of rhHGF. Following incubation, the cells that had invaded and attached to the lower surface of the membrane were fixed and
stained with hematoxilin. Cell numbers were counted in 4 different randomly chosen microscope field per membrane and analyzed using
Image J software. Duplicates were performed. Data are representative of two independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 when FYNwas compared with NT.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44076

Oncotarget

non-gastrointestinal NETs such as NEPC remains
an important translational task. Our group has
already demonstrated the capacity for FYN to drive
metastasis and growth in prostate cancer [9]. The
initial and current studies on FYN have focused on
its impact on the biology of the PC3 line, which has
been characterized as NEPC/SCPC [15]. A better
characterization of mechanisms/factors implicated in
NE differentiation is likely to lead to the identification
of new targets. In the present study, we report the

following: (1) FYN is overexpressed in NEPC; (2)
knockdown of FYN has reduced the expression of
NE markers and metastatic potential of NEPC, and;
(3) FYN regulates expression of NE markers in three
different PC cell lines.
To date, the standard of care for men with NEPCs
remains the use of platinum based chemotherapy. This form
of treatment is associated with commonly feared adverse
events including nausea, vomiting, alopecia, neuropathy,
and cytopenias given its diffuse and potent cytoxic effects.

Figure 4: FYN promotes invasion and metastasis of NEPC cells in vivo. Luciferase tagged PC3 cells were introduced into
SCID mice via intracardiac injection. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curve of mice (n = 5/group) injected with PC3 NT and PC3 FYN-.
(B) Bioluminescent signal of PC3 NT and PC3 FYN- at 4 weeks after intracardiac injection. (C) Necropsy analysis and (D) Histological
analysis of lungs from PC3 NT and PC3 FYN- intracardiac injections in SCID mice. (E) Western blotting of RANKL expression, and
(F) RT-PCR analysis of FYN expression of TRAMPC2 -Control and TRAMPC2-RANKL cells *p < 0.05. (G) Kaplan-Meier survival curve
of C57BL/6 mice (n = 5/group) injected with TRAMPC2 and TRAMPC2-RANKL cells. (H) Bioluminescence signal and (I) H&E sections
of lungs from mice injected with TRAMPC2 and TRAMPC2-RANKL cells at day 30 post-injection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44077

Oncotarget

Despite its common use, however, there is little data to
support its continued use in this subset of prostate cancers
[3, 29]. As such, there continues to be an urgent need for

improved therapeutics. At this time, a select few kinase
inhibitors have been explored, but to date none have
demonstrated clear activity or benefit (such as alisertib).

Figure 5: FYN promotes MET activation and phosphorylation in PC3 and ARCaPM cells. (A–B) Immunoblot analysis of

the phospho-MET profile of NT and FYN- cells after 20 minutes of rhHGF stimulation. (C) phospho-MET profile of PC3 FYN- EV, PC3
FYN- SIL cells without rhHGF stimulation.

Figure 6: FYN signaling regulates the expression of NE markers in PC3 and ARCaPM cells. PC3 and ARCaPM cells were

starved overnight on 0.1% BSA RPMI or T medium, respectively. Cells were stimulated with or without 50 ng/ml of rhHGF for 20 min.
(A–E) Quantitative real-time PCR (TaqMan) for NE markers (CHGA, CHGB, SYP, and AURKA) in PC3 NT and FYN- cells (+/− HGF
stimulation). (F) Protein expression of CHGA, SYP, and NSE in PC3 NT (+/− HGF), PC3 FYN- (+/− HGF). (G–J) Transcript levels of
CHGA, CHGB, SYP and AURKA on ARCaPM cells. Data represent the means ± SEM. Statistically significant differences are indicated
(*p < 0.05), **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.0001).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44078

Oncotarget

The Src-family kinases (SFKs) have been
recognized as promising targets for cancer therapy given
their capacity to synergize with other signaling pathways
[9, 10, 30–33]. They have been particularly appealing
targets given the availability of well-tolerated agents that
can be used to suppress their activation such as dasatinib,
saracatinib, and bosutinib. Treatment with SFK inhibitors
has been associated with a number of biological effects
including reduction of metastatic potential as exhibited
in vivo [34]. Early pre-clinical and clinical studies
with SFK inhibitors such as dasatinib showed potent

biological effects [35, 36]. The subsequent Phase 3 study
combining SFK inhibition (using dasatinib) with docetaxel
chemotherapy in an unselected pool of men with mCRPC
did not yield an improvement in overall survival [31]. This
disappointing clinical result is presumably the consequence
of two major caveats in the trial design. First, the clinical
pairing with docetaxel may not have been optimal since
no agent to date has shown the capacity to improve
upon the taxane effect [37] Second, there is tremendous
molecular heterogeneity in this patient group. It is likely
that were patients with varying degrees of dependence on

Figure 7: FYN expression is directly associated with NEPC phenotype. DU145 Fyn-EV and DU145 Fyn-SIL were starved

overnight on RPMI 0.1% BSA. 50 ng/ml of rhHGF was added for 20 min and cells were analyzed. (A–C) Transcript levels of FYN, CHGA,
and CHGB by Taqman assay. Data represent the mean ± SEM of triplicate wells. (D–G) Immunoblots of DU145 Fyn-EV and DU145 FynSIL (+/− rhHGF) show the expression of CHGA, FYN, pMET and total MET. (E–G) The data in (B and F) were quantified by densitometry
analysis using Image J Software. Data represent the mean ± SEM of triplicate wells. Statistically significant differences are indicated
(*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44079

Oncotarget

Cell culture

FYN or other SFKs, thus focusing on a more optimized
clinical patient subgroup may lead to a clearer benefit (e.g.
providing trastuzumab in a HER-2 negative breast cancer
population versus as HER-2 overexpressing population).
Our findings suggest the possibility of a role for
FYN inhibition in NEPC growth and visceral metastasis.
RNA-sequencing data from NEPC patient tissues and
treatment resistant NEPC PDX models reveal specific
up-regulation of FYN kinase but not c-SRC or LYN [38].
These observations in human clinical samples reveal
that FYN could be a potential biomarker and therapeutic
target for NEPC. Refining patient selection based on the
expression of FYN or related molecular signals (i.e. MET)
especially in patients subgroups with NEPC features
represents a more refined clinical approach that may
have reveal the benefit of FYN inhibition. In addition,
combining FYN inhibition with other therapeutics such
as those which inhibit MET activation (e.g. cabozantinib)
might also hold promise in the treatment advanced PCa
and overcome limitation of single agent approaches.
According to our results, FYN regulates the expression of
MYCN suggesting that a combinatory therapy strategies
targeting MYCN, FYN, and/or MET activation. Clearly,
future experiments are required to elucidate the direct
molecular mechanisms that drive NEPC activation and
metastasis.
In summary, our studies demonstrate that FYN plays
an important role in NEPC metastasis and progression in
a xenograft tumor model. Our findings of FYN expression
and function in NEPC are timely given and assume great
significance due to the reported frequency of 25% of NEPC
in advanced PCa patients who have de novo or emerging
resistance to next-generation AR-targeted therapies.
Thus, our findings demonstrate that FYN is an important
biomarker and therapeutic target worthy of further
exploration that may reshape care for men in NEPC.

TRAMPC2 and ARCaPM cells were cultured in
T-medium (GibcoBRL) supplemented with 5% heat
inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Omega Scientific,
Inc). PC3, LNCaP and DU145 were cultured in RMPI
1640 with 10% FBS. Each had 50 IU/mL penicillin and
50 μg/mL streptomycin (GibcoBRL) in 5% CO2 at 37°C.
All cells were negative for mycoplasma contamination
(MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection kit from Lonza).

Lentiviral transduction
FYN-altered lines were generated as previously
described by our group [9]. In brief, PC3 cell lines were
transduced with lentivirus with an shRNA targeted against
FYN (FYN-) or a GC-content matched, non-targeting
shRNA control (NT), each construction containing
puromycin resistance gene. Lentiviral preparation and
transduction of cell lines were performed as per the
manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO). Cells were selected in puromycin (for FYN
shRNA) before experiments were performed. A rescue/
overexpressing PC3 and DU145 lines were created using
another lentivirus containing a FYN construct with a silent
mutation to avoid the shRNA effect from knockdown
named FYN-SIL. The corresponding empty vector
control for the FYN- background was called FYN-EV.
Both constructs contained a blasticidin resistance gene.
TRAMPC2 cells were transduced with a retroviral vector
with RANKL gene cloned into the pIRES-GFP-Puromycin
vector and cells were selected for puromycin expression.

Histopathology and Multiplexed QD Labeling
(mQDL)
We performed mQDL procedures, multi-spectral
image acquisition, signal unmixing and quantification as
described in our published protocol [13]. The cell or tissue
specimens were subjected to sequential labeling of CD44,
FYN, CD56 and CHGA or SYP as follows: 1) ant-CD44
(1:100), QD655 (1:100), 2 hr at 37°; 2) anti-FYN (1:50),
QD605 (1:100), overnight at 4°; 3) ant-CD56 (1:50),
QD625 (1:150), 2 hr at 37°; and 4) anti-CHGA or SYP
(1:100), QD585 (1:100) overnight at 4° and completed
with 4′6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) mounting
(Vector Laboratories) for imaging. Negative controls
were performed in parallel by replacing the species and
dilution matched immunoglobulin subtypes applied to an
immediately adjacent tissue section. Image acquisition
and deconvolution or unmixing, signal quantification,
and statistical analyses were performed as described
previously [12, 13, 15, 16]. Human tissues analyzed in
this study were collected and characterized under CSMC
IRB-approved protocols after obtaining informed consent
in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Usage

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
PC3 cells were a generous gift from Dr. Carrie
Rinker-Schaeffer. TRAMPC2, DU145, and LNCaP cells
were purchased from ATCC, and ARCaPM obtained
from Novicure Biotechnology. PC3 and ARCaPM cell
line variants were generated as previously described [9].
Antibodies used for Western blot analysis or multiplexed
quantum dot labeling (mQDL) were: anti-FYN antibody
(Cell Signaling #4023 or Santa Cruz #sc16), phosphoMET (#3126) and total MET (#4560) obtained from Cell
Signaling. Anti-CD44 (sc-7297); anti-CD56 (sc-7326);
anti-CHGA (sc-13090), anti-SYP (sc-17750), all obtained
from Santa Cruz. Other common reagents for mQDL
were used as described previously [39, 40]. Recombinant
human HGF was purchased from Calbiochem (Millipore).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44080

Oncotarget

In vivo metastasis assay

of clinical specimens was approved by the Institutional
Research Board (IRB# Pro00025216).

The bioluminescent human PC3 and mouse
TRAMPC2 prostate carcinoma cell lines were generated
by stable retroviral transduction of MSCV-Luc-Hygro
vector. PC3 NT or PC3 FYN- cells (0.5 × 106) were injected
via intracardiac route into SCID mice (Strain Code: 236,
Charles River Laboratories). The TRAMP2 control and
TRAMPC2-RANKL cells were injected via intracardiac
route into C57BL/6 mice (Jackson laboratories). Briefly,
cells were injected into the left ventricle of the heart as
an experimental metastasis model. Mice were monitored
on a weekly basis by bioluminescence imaging for
in vivo growth of tumors and metastasis after injection for
4 weeks. For histological analysis, excised lung samples
were fixed with 10% buffered formalin and processed using
routine histological techniques. Tissue sections were stained
with H&E. The Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Institutional
Animal Care and Utilization Committee approved all
protocols regarding animal procedures and care.

Correlation analysis of FYN and NE markers in
human PCa
To compute Spearman’s correlation coefficients
between FYN and NE markers such as Neuron specific
enolase (NSE), Chromogranin A (CHGA), Chromogranin
B (CHGB), Aurora Kinase A (AURKA), N-Myc (MYCN),
and Secretogranin 3 (SCG3). We used global gene
expression profiles derived from human PCa tissues. Four
independent datasets [18–21] were downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. These datasets were
selected by the criteria that each dataset contains more
than 50 samples of primary PCa. The intensities in each
dataset were normalized by quantile normalization method
[41]. Given the normalized intensities of the whole genes
in the dataset, the intensities of FYN, NSE, CHGA,
CHGB, AURKA, and SCG3 in primary PCa samples were
extracted and utilized to compute Spearman’s correlation
coefficients.

Statistics
Statistical differences were detected using the
unpaired Student’s t-test. Values are presented as
mean ± SEM. P values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. For in vivo metastasis studies, Kaplan-Meier
Survival Curve Analysis was applied to assess the
differences in the survival between the two groups of mice.
Calculations were performed using the Prism 5.0 software
program for Apple Computers (GraphPad Software).

Growth, invasion and migration assays
ARCaPM were grown in 12 well plates and
counted on day 4. PC3 NT and FYN invasion assay was
performed in the BD BioCoat tumor invasion system
(24 multi-well plate with 8 μm; BD Biosciences)
according to the manufacture’s instructions. ARCaPM
NT and FYN were starved on T medium 0.1% BSA.
1 × 105 cells were applied to chamber well 8-micron.
The bottom chamber contained medium with or without
50 ng/ml of rhHGF. Cells were incubated for 48 h and
the cells that had invaded and attached to the lower
surface of the membrane was fixed and stained with
hematoxilin.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Odessa Schillaci for technical advice
regarding matrigel invasion assay.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the following
funding sources: Prostate Cancer Foundation: 2010
Stewart Rahr– PCF Young Investigator Award; 2011
Challenge Award- Targeting Cell Death Programs in
the Tumor and its Microenvironment; Department of
Defense CDMRP Prostate Cancer Research Program:
W81XWH-11–1–0422, W81XWH-08–1–0470; Steven
Spielberg Discovery Fund in Prostate Cancer Research;
St. Anthony Discovery and Research Fund; CD McKinnon
Memorial Fund for Neuroendocrine Prostate Cancers;
Michael and Patricia Berns Family Fund for Prostate
Cancer Research.

Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was isolated from confluent monolayers
of cells using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) RNA
was converted to cDNA using Superscript®III reverse
transcriptase (Life Technologies) or iScript™ cDNA
Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad). Messenger RNA expression
levels were determined RT-PCR assay and SYBR Green
Dye (Applied Biosystems), and mRNA expression was
normalized to GAPDH. The fold change in transcript
expression was calculated over the expression of
non- targeting shRNA control (NT) or empty vector
(FYN- EV) without stimulation. CHGA, CHGB, SYP,
AURKA, MYCN primers were designed and synthesized at
Integrated DNA Technologies. FYN primer was purchased
from Applied Biosystems.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

44081

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

Identification of novel growth factor-responsive genes in
neuroendocrine gastrointestinal tumour cells. Br J Cancer.
2005; 92:1506–1516.

1.	 Lipianskaya J, Cohen A, Chen CJ, Hsia E, Squires J, Li Z,
Zhang Y, Li W, Chen X, Xu H, Huang J. Androgendeprivation therapy-induced aggressive prostate cancer with
neuroendocrine differentiation. Asian J Androl. 2014.

12.	 Wulbrand U, Wied M, Zofel P, Goke B, Arnold R,
Fehmann H. Growth factor receptor expression in human
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. European
journal of clinical investigation. 1998; 28:1038–1049.

2.	 Li Z, Chen CJ, Wang JK, Hsia E, Li W, Squires J, Sun Y,
Huang J. Neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer.
Asian J Androl. 2013; 15:328–332.

13.	 Babus LW, Little EM, Keenoy KE, Minami SS, Chen E,
Song JM, Caviness J, Koo SY, Pak DT, Rebeck GW,
Turner RS, Hoe HS. Decreased dendritic spine density and
abnormal spine morphology in Fyn knockout mice. Brain
Res. 2011; 1415:96–102.

3.	 Flechon A, Pouessel D, Ferlay C, Perol D, Beuzeboc P,
Gravis G, Joly F, Oudard S, Deplanque G, Zanetta S,
Fargeot P, Priou F, Droz JP, et al. Phase II study of
carboplatin and etoposide in patients with anaplastic
progressive metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC) with or without neuroendocrine differentiation:
results of the French Genito-Urinary Tumor Group
(GETUG) P01 trial. Ann Oncol. 2011; 22:2476–2481.

14.	 Magnon C, Hall SJ, Lin J, Xue X, Gerber L, Freedland SJ,
Frenette PS. Autonomic nerve development contributes to
prostate cancer progression. Science. 2013; 341:1236361.
15.	 Tai S, Sun Y, Squires JM, Zhang H, Oh WK, Liang CZ,
Huang J. PC3 is a cell line characteristic of prostatic small
cell carcinoma. Prostate. 2011; 71:1668–1679.

4.	 Papandreou CN, Daliani DD, Thall PF, Tu SM, Wang X,
Reyes A, Troncoso P, Logothetis CJ. Results of a phase II
study with doxorubicin, etoposide, and cisplatin in patients
with fully characterized small-cell carcinoma of the
prostate. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:3072–3080.

16.	 Baca SC, Prandi D, Lawrence MS, Mosquera JM, Romanel A,
Drier Y, Park K, Kitabayashi N, MacDonald TY, Ghandi M,
Van Allen E, Kryukov GV, Sboner A, et al. Punctuated
evolution of prostate cancer genomes. Cell. 2013; 153:
666–677.

5.	 Sargos P, Ferretti L, Gross-Goupil M, Orre M, Cornelis F,
Henriques de Figueiredo B, Houede N, Merino C,
Roubaud G, Dallaudiere B, Richaud P, Flechon A.
Characterization of prostate neuroendocrine cancers and
therapeutic management: a literature review. Prostate
Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2014; 17:220–226.

17.	 Beltran H, Rickman DS, Park K, Chae SS, Sboner A,
MacDonald TY, Wang Y, Sheikh KL, Terry S, Tagawa ST,
Dhir R, Nelson JB, de la Taille A, et al. Molecular
characterization of neuroen­
docrine prostate cancer and
identification of new drug targets. Cancer Discov. 2011;
1:487–495.

6.	 Mosquera JM, Beltran H, Park K, MacDonald TY,
Robinson BD, Tagawa ST, Perner S, Bismar TA,
Erbersdobler A, Dhir R, Nelson JB, Nanus DM, Rubin MA.
Concurrent AURKA and MYCN gene amplifications are
harbingers of lethal treatment-related neuroendocrine
prostate cancer. Neoplasia. 2013; 15:1–10.

18.	 Grasso CS, Wu YM, Robinson DR, Cao X,
Dhanasekaran SM, Khan AP, Quist MJ, Jing X,
Lonigro RJ, Brenner JC, Asangani IA, Ateeq B,
Chun SY, et al. The mutational landscape of lethal
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Nature. 2012; 487:
239–243.

7.	 Beltran H, Rickman DS, Park K, Chae SS, Sboner A,
MacDonald TY, Wang Y, Sheikh KL, Terry S, Tagawa ST,
Dhir R, Nelson JB, de la Taille A, et al. Molecular
characterization of neuroen­
docrine prostate cancer and
identification of new drug targets. Cancer Discov. 2011;
1:487–495.
8.	

Posadas EM, Al-Ahmadie H, Robinson VL, Jagadeeswaran R,
Otto K, Kasza KE, Tretiakov M, Siddiqui J, Pienta KJ,
Stadler WM, Rinker-Schaeffer C, Salgia R. FYN is
overexpressed in human prostate cancer. BJU Int. 2009;
103:171–177.

9.	

Jensen AR, David SY, Liao C, Dai J, Keller ET, Al-Ahmadie H,
Dakin-Hache K, Usatyuk P, Sievert MF, Paner GP, Yala S,
Cervantes GM, Natarajan V, et al. Fyn is downstream of
the HGF/MET signaling axis and affects cellular shape and
tropism in PC3 cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:3112–3122.

19.	 Pressinotti NC, Klocker H, Schafer G, Luu VD,
Ruschhaupt M, Kuner R, Steiner E, Poustka A, Bartsch G,
Sultmann H. Differential expression of apoptotic genes
PDIA3 and MAP3K5 distinguishes between low- and highrisk prostate cancer. Mol Cancer. 2009; 8:130.
20.	 Prueitt RL, Yi M, Hudson RS, Wallace TA, Howe TM,
Yfantis HG, Lee DH, Stephens RM, Liu CG, Calin GA,
Croce CM, Ambs S. Expression of microRNAs and proteincoding genes associated with perineural invasion in prostate
cancer. Prostate. 2008; 68:1152–1164.
21.	 Wallace TA, Prueitt RL, Yi M, Howe TM, Gillespie JW,
Yfantis HG, Stephens RM, Caporaso NE, Loffredo CA,
Ambs S. Tumor immunobiological differences in prostate
cancer between African-American and European-American
men. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:927–936.

10.	 Saito YD, Jensen AR, Salgia R, Posadas EM. Fyn: a novel
molecular target in cancer. Cancer. 2010; 116:1629–1637.

22.	 Shukla S, Bhaskaran N, Maclennan GT, Gupta S.
Deregulation of FoxO3a accelerates prostate cancer
progression in TRAMP mice. Prostate. 2013; 73:1507–1517.

11.	 Hofsli E, Thommesen L, Yadetie F, Langaas M,
Kusnierczyk W, Falkmer U, Sandvik AK, Laegreid A.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44082

Oncotarget

23.	 Tang Y, Wang L, Goloubeva O, Khan MA, Lee D, Hussain A.
The relationship of neuroendocrine carcinomas to antitumor therapies in TRAMP mice. Prostate. 2009; 69:
1763–1773.

33.	 Kopetz S, Lesslie DP, Dallas NA, Park SI, Johnson M,
Parikh NU, Kim MP, Abbruzzese JL, Ellis LM, Chandra J,
Gallick GE. Synergistic activity of the SRC family kinase
inhibitor dasatinib and oxaliplatin in colon carcinoma cells
is mediated by oxidative stress. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:
3842–3849.

24.	 Foster BA, Gingrich JR, Kwon ED, Madias C,
Greenberg NM. Characterization of prostatic epithelial
cell lines derived from transgenic adenocarcinoma of the
mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:
3325–3330.

34.	 Park SI, Zhang J, Phillips KA, Araujo JC, Najjar AM,
Volgin AY, Gelovani JG, Kim SJ, Wang Z, Gallick GE.
Targeting SRC family kinases inhibits growth and lymph
node metastases of prostate cancer in an orthotopic nude
mouse model. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3323–3333.

25.	 Uchida K, Masumori N, Takahashi A, Itoh N, Kato K,
Matusik RJ, Tsukamoto T. Murine androgen-independent
neuroendocrine carcinoma promotes metastasis of human
prostate cancer cell line LNCaP. Prostate. 2006; 66:
536–545.

35.	 Yu EY, Massard C, Gross ME, Carducci MA, Culine S,
Hudes G, Posadas EM, Sternberg CN, Wilding G, Trudel GC,
Paliwal P, Fizazi K. Once-daily dasatinib: expansion of
phase II study evaluating safety and efficacy of dasatinib in
patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Urology. 2011; 77:1166–1171.

26.	 Bethel CR, Bieberich CJ. Loss of Nkx3.1 expression in
the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate model.
Prostate. 2007; 67:1740–1750.

36.	 Yu EY, Wilding G, Posadas E, Gross M, Culine S, Massard C,
Morris MJ, Hudes G, Calabro F, Cheng S, Trudel GC,
Paliwal P, Sternberg CN. Phase II study of dasatinib in
patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:7421–7428.

27.	 Beltran H, Tagawa ST, Park K, MacDonald T, Milowsky MI,
Mosquera JM, Rubin MA, Nanus DM. Challenges in
recognizing treatment-related neuroendocrine prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:e386–389.
28.	 Scheble VJ, Braun M, Beroukhim R, Mermel CH,
Ruiz C, Wilbertz T, Stiedl AC, Petersen K, Reischl M,
Kuefer R, Schilling D, Fend F, Kristiansen G, et al. ERG
rearrangement is specific to prostate cancer and does not
occur in any other common tumor. Mod Pathol. 2010;
23:1061–1067.

37.	 Antonarakis ES, Eisenberger MA. Phase III trials with
docetaxel-based combinations for metastatic castrationresistant prostate cancer: time to learn from past
experiences. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:1709–1712.
38.	 Lin D, Wyatt AW, Xue H, Wang Y, Dong X, Haegert A,
Wu R, Brahmbhatt S, Mo F, Jong L, Bell RH, Anderson S,
Hurtado-Coll A, et al. High fidelity patient-derived xenografts
for accelerating prostate cancer discovery and drug
development. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:1272–1283.

29.	 Culine S, El Demery M, Lamy PJ, Iborra F, Avances C,
Pinguet F. Docetaxel and cisplatin in patients with
metastatic androgen independent prostate cancer and
circulating neuroendocrine markers. J Urol. 2007; 178:
844–848; discussion 848.

39.	 Gao X, Cui Y, Levenson RM, Chung LW, Nie S. In vivo
cancer targeting and imaging with semiconductor quantum
dots. Nature Biotechnology. 2004; 22:969–976.

30.	 Gururajan M, Posadas EM, Chung LW. Future perspectives
of prostate cancer therapy. Translational andrology and
urology. 2012; 1:19–32.

40.	 Hu P, Chung LW, Berel D, Frierson HF, Yang H, Liu C,
Wang R, Li Q, Rogatko A, Zhau HE. Convergent RANKand c-Met-mediated signaling components predict survival
of patients with prostate cancer: an interracial comparative
study. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e73081.

31.	 Araujo JC, Mathew P, Armstrong AJ, Braud EL, Posadas E,
Lonberg M, Gallick GE, Trudel GC, Paliwal P, Agrawal S,
Logothetis CJ. Dasatinib combined with docetaxel for
castration-resistant prostate cancer: results from a phase 1–2
study. Cancer. 2012; 118:63–71.

41.	 Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP. A
comparison of normalization methods for high density
oligonucleotide array data based on variance and bias.
Bioinformatics. 2003; 19:185–193.

32.	 Dayyani F, Gallick GE, Logothetis CJ, Corn PG. Novel
therapies for metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011; 103:1665–1675.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44083

Oncotarget

