Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Metformin suppresses hypoxia-induced stabilization of HIF-1`
through reprogramming of oxygen metabolism in hepatocellular
carcinoma
Xinke Zhou1,*, Jitao Chen1,2,*, Gao Yi1,*, Min Deng2, Hao Liu2, Min Liang1, Boyun
Shi1, Xin Fu3, Yuqin Chen3, Liangcai Chen1,2, Zhimin He2, Jian Wang3, Jifang Liu1,2
1

D
 epartment of Respiratory Medicine and Cancer Center, The 5th Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou, PR China

2

Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, PR China

3

S
 tate Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
PR China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Jian Wang, e-mail: jianwang1986@yahoo.com
Jifang Liu, e-mail: yzhbb2012@126.com
Keywords: HIF-1α, metformin, metabolic reprogramming, hypoxia, hepatocellular carcinoma
Received: June 28, 2015 	Accepted: November 16, 2015 	          Published: November 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Overexpression of hypoxia-induced factor 1` (HIF-1`) has been shown to be
involved in the development and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
HIF-1` should therefore be a promising molecular target for the development of
anti-HCC agents. Metformin, an established antidiabetic drug, has proved to also
be effective in treating cancer although the precise underlying mechanisms of this
activity are not fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects
of metformin on the expression of HIF-1` and oxygen metabolism in HCC. The results
showed that metformin inhibited hypoxia-induced HIF-1` accumulation and activation
independent of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Moreover, this decrease in HIF1` accumulation was accompanied by promotion of HIF-1` protein degradation. In
addition, metformin significantly decreased oxygen consumption, ultimately leading to
increased intracellular oxygen tension and decreased staining with the hypoxia marker
pimonidazole. In vivo studies demonstrated that metformin delayed tumor growth and
attenuated the expression of HIF-1` in HCC tumor xenografts. Together, these findings
suggest that metformin decreases hypoxia-induced HIF-1` accumulation by actively
suppressing mitochondrial oxygen consumption and enhancing cellular oxygenation
ability, providing a fundamental mechanism of metformin activity against HCC.

including HCC, and an important microenvironmental
factor influencing development of a malignant phenotype
[1]. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a heterodimer
consisting of α and β subunits, is a key transcription
factor regulating the cellular response to hypoxia [2].
HIF-1α has been found to be upregulated in a variety of
human malignancies, leading to an increased capacity for
metastasis and an unfavorable prognosis [3, 4]. Whereas
HIF-1β is a constitutive nuclear protein, HIF-1α is tightly
regulated according to oxygen availability through its
protein stability. In the presence of abundant oxygen, HIF1α is rapidly degraded by polyubiquitination via the VonHippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein and subsequent

INTRODUCTION
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most
prevalent fatal cancers worldwide and the second leading
cause of death in China. Multiple environmental and
genetic risk factors are associated with the high incidence
of HCC development and progression and unsatisfactory
mortality rate. Thus, a better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms governing hepatocarcinogenesis
and HCC progression will contribute to identification of
new therapeutic strategies for this highly malignant tumor.
Increasing evidence suggests that intratumor
hypoxia is a common phenomenon of solid tumors,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

873

Oncotarget

proteasomal degradation [5]. Under hypoxic conditions,
HIF-1α is stabilized and translocates to the nucleus, where
it dimerizes with HIF-1β and activates the expression of a
broad range of target genes including glucose transporter
1 (Glut1) and carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), facilitating
tumorigenesis and cancer progression [6–8].
Metformin, a commonly prescribed biguanide, has
been used as a first-line treatment for type II diabetes
for over 50 years. It efficiently and safely lowers blood
glucose levels without serious side effects [9, 10].
Recently, increasing lines of epidemiologic evidence
have revealed that diabetic patients who are treated with
metformin have reduced cancer incidence and mortality
[11, 12]. In addition, a great number of in vitro and in
vivo studies have revealed a direct action of metformin
on many types of cancer cell, including HCC [13–15].
Metformin may therefore be a potential therapeutic
agent for the treatment of HCC, although its mechanism
of anticancer action remains unclear. Recently, several
studies have demonstrated that metformin inhibits HIF1α expression in patients with breast cancer [16] or
hepatocellular carcinoma Bel-7402/5-fluorouracil (BelFu) cells [17]. However, the mechanism of such regulation
remains to be elucidated. Moreover, metformin has been
found to activate AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK),
a major sensor of the energetic status of the cell [18], via
a mechanism dependent on liver kinase B1 (LKB1) [19,
20]. The LKB1–AMPK–mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) pathway is a key moderator of HIF-1-targeted
genes and HIF-1-mediated cellular metabolism [21].
Therefore, we questioned whether metformin, which is
a known AMPK activator, regulates the expression of
HIF-1α protein in HCC cells. The present study aims to
explore the effect of metformin on HIF-1α expression and
activation in HCC cells and xenografts.

of metformin, the accumulation of HIF-1α was also
diminished in another HCC cell line, Huh7, by treatment
with metformin at a concentration of 1 mmol/L (Figure 1c
and 1d). In addition, CoCl2, a hypoxia-mimicking reagent,
induced accumulation of HIF-1α and this increase could
also be decreased by metformin (Figure 1e). In contrast,
HIF-1α mRNA levels were not reduced by metformin
under hypoxic conditions (Figure 1f), suggesting that
metformin decreased HIF-1α protein expression via posttranslational mechanisms.

Metformin inhibits hypoxia-induced HIF-1α
transactivation activity
To further determine whether metformin-mediated
inhibition of HIF-1α protein expression leads to functional
suppression of HIF-1α, we measured the transcriptional
activity of HIF-1α in HepG2 cells transiently transfected
with HIF-1α reporter vector and pEGFP-C2. As shown in
Figure 2a, hypoxic stress increased luciferase activity up
to 17-fold compared with the normoxic condition, whereas
metformin significantly inhibited hypoxia-induced
luciferase activity by 52.9%. We next verified whether
inhibition of HIF-1α alters the transcriptional activation
of HIF-1α target genes. Pretreatment with 1 mmol/L
metformin significantly reduced the hypoxic induction
of specific HIF-1α downstream genes CAIX and Glut1,
as measured by quantitative RT-PCR (Figure 2b). These
results were confirmed in Huh7 cells, which also showed a
significant decrease in HIF-1α transactivation activity after
metformin treatment (Figure S1).

Metformin suppresses hypoxia-induced HIF-1α
expression independent of AMPK
Numerous reports have shown that metformin
inhibits tumorigenesis in a manner dependent on AMPK
[22, 23]. To investigate the effect of AMPK on the
inhibitory activity of metformin on hypoxia-induced HIF1α protein accumulation, we took a genetic or chemical
approach to inhibit AMPK activity under hypoxic
conditions. As shown in Figure 3, decreasing the level of
AMPKα protein using specific siRNA or AMPK inhibitor
did not affect hypoxia-induced HIF-1α expression and
failed to restore the inhibitory effects of metformin on
hypoxia-induced HIF-1α expression in both HepG2 and
Huh7 cell lines, implying that metformin inhibited hypoxiainduced HIF-1α protein expression independent of AMPK.

RESULTS
Metformin represses hypoxia-induced
accumulation of HIF-1α protein in
hepatoma cells
To examine the effect of metformin on HIF1α protein content, time-course and dose-response
experiments were conducted to determine alterations in
HIF-1α protein in the presence of metformin. As expected,
HIF-1α protein was undetectable in HepG2 cells under
normoxia, but its expression markedly increased under
hypoxia. In the presence of metformin, HIF-1α protein
content was dramatically diminished and this decrease
persisted as long as the drug was present for at least up to
24 h under hypoxic conditions (Figure 1a). Dose-response
experiments demonstrated that metformin attenuated
hypoxia-induced HIF-1α protein expression in HepG2 cells
in a dose-dependent manner, with complete abrogation
at 10 mmol/L (Figure 1b). Further confirming the effect
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Metformin promotes protein degradation of
HIF-1α
In general, the accumulation of HIF-1α is
dependent on the balance between its protein synthesis
and degradation. HIF-1α is degraded mainly through the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway [24, 25]. To investigate the
874

Oncotarget

involvement of proteasomal degradation in metformintreated cells, we treated HepG2 and Huh7 cells with
MG132 (a proteasomal inhibitor) for 4 h, followed
by co-incubation with metformin for 4 h in hypoxic
conditions. As shown in Figure 4a, MG-132 restored the
inhibitory effect of metformin on hypoxia-induced HIF1α accumulation. To further confirm the involvement
of metformin in the degradation of HIF-1α, the half-life
of HIF-1α was examined in normoxia with or without
metformin treatment. HepG2 and Huh7 cells were
pretreated in hypoxia for 4 h and then co-incubated
with cycloheximide (CHX, a global protein synthesis
inhibitor) and metformin for 0, 15, 30, and 60 min under
normoxic conditions. These results demonstrated that the
protein degradation rate of HIF-1α was not significantly
altered in metformin-treated and control cells at 15 min
whereas HIF-1α protein was completely degraded in

the metformin-treated cells at 30 min, in sharp contrast
to HIF-1α in the control cells (Figure 4b). Collectively,
these data show that the inhibitory effect of metformin on
HIF-1α accumulation is mediated by an increase in protein
degradation.

Decreased oxygen consumption correlates with
degradation of HIF-1α protein in metformintreated cells
In earlier work, we found that a low dose of
metformin decreased mitochondrial respiratory chain
complex I activity, leading to depletion of intracellular
ATP levels [26]. To address the underlying mechanisms
responsible for the metformin-mediated increase
in HIF-1α protein degradation, we investigated the
effect of metformin on mitochondrial biogenesis,

Figure 1: Metformin decreases HIF-1α protein levels in HCC cells. a. and b. Western blot analysis of HIF-1α protein in HepG2

cells treated for different times or with various concentrations of metformin as indicated under normoxia or hypoxia. c. and d. Expression
of HIF-1α protein was detected using western blot and immunofluorescence analysis, respectively, in Huh7 cells with or without metformin
treatment under normoxic or hypoxic conditions. Scale bars: 50 μm. e. HepG2 cells were pretreated with 100 μmol/L CoCl2 for 3 h before
incubation with 1 mmol/L metformin for 12 h and the protein expression of HIF-1α was assayed by western blotting. f. Relative expression
of HIF-1α mRNA was examined by real-time RT-PCR in HepG2 cells in the presence or absence of metformin. β-actin was used as the
internal loading control. Con, control; Met, metformin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

875

Oncotarget

mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I activity,
oxygen consumption, and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production. As shown in Figure 5a and 5b, metformin
had no significant effect on mitochondrial morphology
and number in HepG2 cells compared with controls under
hypoxic conditions. In accordance with our previous study
[26], metformin significantly inhibited complex I activity
in hypoxia (Figure 5c). Oxygen consumption was also
measured in HepG2 cells treated with 1 mmol/L metformin
under normoxic and hypoxic conditions for 4 h. As shown
in Figure 5d, hypoxia decreased oxygen consumption to
71.7% that of the control in normoxia, which was similar to
the results of the previous study [27]. Of note, metformin
significantly blunted oxygen consumption compared with
control cells under hypoxic conditions. To further explore
whether ROS production is implicated in the inhibitory
effects of metformin on HIF-1α expression, we examined
DHE staining, which produces a red fluorescence in a
typically nuclear localization when oxidized to ethidium
bromide by O2, in HepG2 cells. As shown in Figure 5e,
hypoxia decreased DHE-associated fluorescence compared
with normoxic conditions. However, metformin increased
DHE staining independent of oxygen tension, as reported
by Anedda et al. [28], suggesting that intracellular ROS
production was not involved in the inhibitory effect of
metformin on HIF-1α expression. Intriguingly, treatment
of HepG2 cells with metformin significantly attenuated
the intensity of pimonidazole staining (a hypoxiasensitive marker), suggesting that metformin rescues the

hypoxic state and increases intracellular oxygen tension
under hypoxic conditions (Figure 5f). Additionally,
hypoxia appeared to induce nuclear expression of HIF1α compared with normoxic conditions, and metformin
inhibited hypoxia-induced HIF-1α nuclear staining
(Figure 5f). Similarly, cellular oxygen consumption
was significantly lower in metformin-treated Huh7 cells
than in control cells (Figure S2). Taken together, these
results indicate that downregulation of cellular oxygen
consumption via the induction of mitochondrial respiration
dysfunction by metformin at least partially contributes to
the O2-dependent degradation of HIF-1α.

Metformin decreases HIF-1α expression in HCC
xenografts
To further investigate the effect of metformin on
the expression of HIF-1α in vivo, we treated nude mice
bearing HCC xenografts with 250 mg/kg body weight
of metformin for 35 days. As expected, treatment of
subcutaneously implanted HepG2 cell tumor xenografts
with metformin obviously prevented tumor growth and
proliferation, as measured by Ki67 expression (Figure
6 and Figure S3). As shown in Figure 6a, mice treated
with metformin exhibited smaller tumors in the HepG2
xenograft compared with vehicle-treated control mice.
Measurement of tumors every 5 d showed that tumor
growth was dramatically reduced in metformin-treated
mice (Figure 6b). In line with these results, tumor weight

Figure 2: Effect of metformin on transactivation activity of HIF-1α in HepG2 cells. a. Luciferase activity was measured

in HepG2 cells that were transiently transfected with a HIF-1α reporter gene and then treated with 1 mmol/L metformin for 12 h under
normoxic or hypoxic conditions. *P < 0.05 compared with cells transfected with HIF-1α reporter without metformin treatment in hypoxia.
b. Real-time RT-PCR analyses of CAIX and Glut1 mRNA expression in HepG2 cells with or without metformin treatment under normoxic
and hypoxic conditions. The relative amounts of CAIX and Glut1 mRNA were normalized to β-actin expression. Hypoxia significantly
induced CAIX and Glut-1 mRNA expression in HepG2 cells, and 1 mmol/L metformin inhibited the induction of these mRNAs in hypoxia.
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01 compared with control under hypoxic conditions. All experiments were performed three times. Data shown
represent the means ± SD. Con, control; Met, metformin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

876

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

at the end of the study was significantly diminished
by metformin treatment (Figure 6c). A remarkable
reduction in the protein levels of HIF-1α, Glut1, and
CAIX was also observed in immunohistochemical
analysis of sections of tumor tissue from mice treated
with metformin (Figure 6d and 6e). These results
confirmed that downregulation of HIF-1α by metformin
significantly contributes to the inhibition of tumor
growth in HCC xenografts.

In this study, we showed that metformin decreases
hypoxia-induced HIF-1α protein content by promoting
protein degradation rather than through reduction of
protein synthesis or mRNA transcription. Suppression
of mitochondrial oxygen consumption by metformin
was found to be involved in the degradation of HIF1α. Furthermore, metformin decreased the expression
of HIF-1α in HCC xenografts. These results reveal a

Figure 3: Metformin suppresses HIF-1α protein levels independent of AMPK. a. and b. Western blot analyses of HIF-1α,

AMPKα, and phosphorylated form of AMPKα (p-AMPKα). HepG2 and Huh7 cells were transiently transfected with AMPKα1 siRNA or
treated with Compound C (CC; AMPK inhibitor), and then incubated with 1 mmol/L metformin for 12 h under hypoxic conditions before
immunoblotting with specific antibodies as indicated. β-actin was used as the internal loading control. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01 vs. untreated
cells; #, P < 0.05; ##, P < 0.01 vs. control siRNA-transfected or vehicle-treated cells; $, P < 0.05; $$, P < 0.01 vs. AMPKα1-siRNA or CCtreated cells. Results from three independent experiments are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

877

Oncotarget

Sahra et al. similarly reported that metformin inhibited
prostate cancer cell proliferation independent of AMPK
activation [32]. Consistent with these observations, our
present study showed that metformin inhibits hypoxiainduced HIF-1α protein accumulation independent of
AMPK activation.
Intracellular HIF-1α protein content could be
regulated at the level of protein translation or stability. In
the present study, hypoxia-dependent HIF-1α stabilization
was observed in the presence of the proteasome inhibitor
MG-132, which suppresses the degradation of HIF1α. In contrast, addition of cycloheximide to inhibit
protein synthesis led to a much slower decline in HIF1α, indicating that metformin does not inhibit HIF-1α
synthesis but rather stimulates its degradation. The protein
stability of HIF-1α is modulated by environmental oxygen
concentration or intracellular ROS level [33, 34]. Although
previous studies showed that mitochondria-generated ROS
promote protein stability of HIF-1α [35, 36], in our study
the protein stability of HIF-1α was not obviously changed
by ROS, as measured by DHE staining. Interestingly,
metformin efficiently reduces mitochondrial respiration, in
accordance with a previous study showing that metformin
impairs complex I of the respiratory chain leading to a
marked decrease in respiration and tumorigenesis in
colon cancer [37]. These data implied that a decrease in
mitochondrial oxygen consumption of hepatoma cells in
the presence of metformin involves the destabilization of
hypoxia-induced HIF-1α.

mechanism by which metformin downregulates HIF-1α
in HCC cells.
Like other solid tumors, HCC tumors have
large hypoxic regions and hypoxia is an important
microenvironmental factor in promoting HCC progression
and metastasis. Adaptation of tumor cells to hypoxia is
mainly regulated by HIF-1α, which has been reported to
be upregulated in HCC [1]. Interestingly, Ling et al. [17]
found that metformin treatment led to decreased HIF-1α
expression in Bel-Fu cells, which was consistent with
the previous observation that metformin therapy reduced
serum levels of HIF-1α in patients with breast cancer
[16]. Suppression of HIF-1α expression would open
a new perspective for HCC therapy, but little is known
about the mechanism of action of HIF-1α. A recent study
demonstrated that metformin improves tumor oxygenation
and radiotherapy outcomes [29]. Our data are consistent
with this report and expand these findings by suggesting
a mechanism by which metformin exerts its antitumor
effect.
The currently proposed molecular mechanism for
the anticancer action of metformin is primarily associated
with inhibition of the mTOR pathway, dependent on or
independent of AMPK activation. Significant inhibition
of mTOR, and an increase in phosphorylated AMPK,
was observed in pancreatic tissue of mice fed with
metformin [30]. However, Memmott et al. demonstrated
that metformin inhibited induction of the mTOR pathway
in the absence of AMPK in mice lung cancer cells [31].

Figure 4: Effects of metformin on protein stability of HIF-1α. a. The proteasomal inhibitor MG-132 (10 μmol/L) rescued the
inhibitory effect of 1 mmol/L metformin on HIF-1α protein accumulation in hypoxia. b. HepG2 and Huh7 cells were cultured in hypoxia
for 4 h, and then treated with CHX (4 μg/ml; a translational inhibitor) and metformin for 0, 15, 30, and 60 min in normoxia. The results
indicated that metformin speeds up the degradation of HIF-1α protein.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

878

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of metformin on mitochondrial biogenesis and oxygen metabolism. a. Representative transmission electron

microscopy images of mitochondria in HepG2 cells. b. Fluorescence microscopy analysis of mitochondrial mass in HepG2 cells after
staining with mitotracker red. c. Changes in mitochondrial complex I activity in response to metformin treatment in hypoxia. The control
value was set at 100%. *P < 0.05 versus the control. d. Metformin inhibited mitochondrial respiratory functions of HepG2 in normoxia and
hypoxia. Cells were treated with 1 mmol/L metformin in normoxia or hypoxia for 4 h and then resuspended in normoxic medium. Oxygen
consumption was measured in a sealed chamber using a Clark-type electrode. *P < 0.05 compared with control in hypoxia. e.  Effect
of metformin on ROS production measured with DHE. HepG2 cells were treated with 1 mmol/L metformin for 4 h under normoxic or
hypoxic conditions and then incubated with 2.5 μmol/L DHE and viewed under a fluorescence microscope. f. Detection of hypoxic state
and HIF-1α expression in HepG2 cells by immunocytochemical analysis. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Scale bars: 50 μm. All results are
representative of three independent experiments. Values are given as the mean ± SD. Con, control; Met, metformin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

879

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Metformin administration inhibits HCC xenograft tumor growth. a. Representative image of tumors dissected from

vehicle-treated control mice and metformin-treated mice at 35 d. b. Tumor growth in vehicle-treated control mice and metformin-treated
mice. After tumor formation, mice were treated daily with intraperitoneal injection of metformin (250 mg/kg). c. Quantification of tumor
weight 35 days post-tumor formation. Metformin significantly delayed tumor growth. d. Expression of HIF-1α, Glut1, and CAIX in tumor
tissues was assessed by immunostaining and statistical graphs e. are shown. Scale bars: 50 μm. Data are represented as means ± SD of each
group. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 compared with control. Con, control; Met, metformin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

880

Oncotarget

In summary, metformin facilitates protein
degradation of HIF-1α in HCC via suppression of
mitochondrial oxygen consumption. These findings
expand our understanding of the mechanism underlying
the anticancer activity of metformin, and may help to
optimize the treatment of HCC.

ABI 7500 Sequence Detector (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA, USA) using the SYBR Green Universal PCR
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). Specific primers for
HIF-1α (forward 5′-AGTGTACCCTAACTAGCCG-3′,
reverse 5′- CACAAATCAGCACCAAGC-3′), CAIX
(forward
5′-TGTGCTCCTGGTTCTGTTCT-3′,
reverse 5′-GCTCCTCGGGTGTCTTGT-3′), Glut1
(forward 5′-CGCCTTTGCCAGAGTTGA-3′, reverse
5′-TTCTTCCAAGCGAGACAGC-3′), and β-actin
(forward 5′-GGCATGGGTCAGAAGGATT-3′, reverse
5′-CTTCTACAATGAGCTGCGTGTG-3′) were used in
this study. The PCR reaction was performed at 95°C for
30 s, followed by 40 cycles at 95°C for 5 s and 58°C for
30 s. For each sample, the relative quantity of product was
calculated using the 2-ΔΔC(T) method.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Two human hepatoma cell lines (HepG2 and Huh7)
obtained from the Cell Bank of Shanghai Institutes of
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences were
cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin
(Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). Cell lines were maintained
in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 at
37°C. Hypoxic culture conditions were achieved with a
hypoxia incubator containing a gas mixture of 94% N2,
5% CO2, and 1% O2.

Oxygen consumption measurements
Cells were incubated under normoxic (21% O2)
or hypoxic (1% O2) conditions and then treated with or
without drugs for 4 h. The average intracellular oxygen
consumption rate was measured in a sealed chamber using
a Clark-type electrode according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Reagents and antibodies

Transfection with siRNA

Metformin (1,1 dimethylbiguanide-hydrochloride),
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), MG132, cobalt chloride
(CoCl2), Compound C (CC), cycloheximide (CHX)
and oxidative fluorescent dihydroethidium (DHE)
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. A pimonidazole
hydrochloride kit was purchased from Hypoxyprobe Inc.
(Burlington, MA, USA). The primary antibodies against
AMPKα, phospho-AMPK(Thr172), CAIX, Glut1, Ki67
and β-actin were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology
(Beverly, MA, USA), and HIF-1α antibody was from
Abcam Company (Cambridge, MA, USA).

Silencing of AMPKα1 gene expression was achieved
by the siRNA strategy as described previously [38]. At 48
h after transfection, HepG2 and Huh7 cells were treated
with 1 mmol/L metformin and subsequently incubated in
hypoxia for 4 h. Protein levels were detected by western
blot analysis.

Luciferase assay
Cells (2 × 105) were seeded in a 6-well plate and
incubated overnight. Cells were transfected with 0.5 μg
HIF-1α luciferase reporter vector designed to measure
intracellular HIF-1α (Panomics, CA, USA) and 0.5
μg p-EGFP-C2 using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. At 24 h after
co-transfection, cells were treated with metformin
and incubated under hypoxia for 12 h. Luciferase was
measured using the luciferase assay system (Promega,
Madison, MI, USA). pEGFP-C2 vector was used for
normalization of transfection efficiency, and relative
luciferase activity (defined as reporter activity) was
calculated as the ratio of luciferase/EGFP activity.

Western blotting
Aliquots of cell lysate containing 30–50 μg of protein
from cells incubated under normoxic or hypoxic conditions
were resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE and electrophoretically
transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore Corporation,
Billerica, MA, USA) in a transfer buffer. The membrane
was washed and incubated with specific primary antibodies
of interest followed by appropriate secondary antibodies,
and visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence reagent
(Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).

Quantitative real-time RT-PCR

Determination of mitochondrial complex I
activity

Total RNA extraction was conducted using Trizol
reagent (Invitrogen). First-strand cDNA synthesis
was performed using a RevertAid First Strand cDNA
synthesis kit (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. Each cDNA sample was analyzed
for gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR with an
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Complex I activity was determined using the
Dipstick Assay kit (MitoSciences, Eugene, OR, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s protocols, as previously
described [26].
881

Oncotarget

Imaging of reactive oxygen species

were two-tailed. P < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

Dihydroethidium (DHE) was used to evaluate the
intracellular production of superoxide. Briefly, HepG2
cells were cultured in the presence or absence of 1 mmol/L
metformin for 4 h under normoxic and hypoxic conditions,
washed with DMEM lacking serum and phenol red, and
incubated with 2.5 μmol/L DHE. After incubation for 30
min in the dark, the cells were washed with cold PBS and
examined by fluorescence microscopy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81402011), Department of Science and Technology of
Guangdong Province (No. 2013B021800178), Pearl River
S&T Nova Program of Guangzhou (No. 2012J2200032),
Department of Education of Guangdong Province (No.
2015001), and Outstanding Young Teachers of Guangdong
Province (No. B158030).

Detection of cellular hypoxia
Cellular hypoxia was detected by addition of
pimonidazole hydrochloride, a marker of hypoxia
that binds to cells according to oxygen pressure (pO2)
levels. HepG2 cells treated with 1 mmol/L metformin
were exposed to hypoxia for 4 h and then subjected to
pimonidazole staining according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

In vivo study

1.	 Wilson GK, Tennant DA and McKeating JA. Hypoxia
inducible factors in liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma: current understanding and future directions. J
Hepatol. 2014; 61:1397–1406.

All animal procedures were approved by the
Animal Experimentation Ethics Committee of Guangzhou
Medical University. Male nude mice (BALB/c, 4–6
weeks old) were purchased from the Laboratory Animal
Services Center of Guangdong Province. To obtain HCC
xenografts, 5 × 106 cells were injected subcutaneously
into the right flank of each mouse. At 12 days after
cell implantation, the mice were randomly divided into
groups (six mice/group). Mice in the experimental group
were intraperitoneally injected with metformin at a dose
of 250 mg/kg body weight per day whereas the control
group received an equal volume of normal saline. Tumor
volume was calculated every 5 days using the equation:
[length×(width)2/2]. The mice were sacrificed after
35 days and the tumors were weighed and then fixed in
10% formalin for immunohistochemical staining.

2.	 Wilson WR and Hay MP. Targeting hypoxia in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:393–410.
3.	 Lu X and Kang Y. Hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factors:
master regulators of metastasis. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:5928–5935.
4.	 Liu L, Zhu XD, Wang WQ, Shen Y, Qin Y, Ren ZG, Sun
HC and Tang ZY. Activation of beta-catenin by hypoxia
in hepatocellular carcinoma contributes to enhanced metastatic potential and poor prognosis. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:2740–2750.
5.	 Semenza GL. Regulation of oxygen homeostasis by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Physiology (Bethesda). 2009;
24:97–106.
6.	 Amann T, Maegdefrau U, Hartmann A, Agaimy A,
Marienhagen J, Weiss TS, Stoeltzing O, Warnecke C,
Scholmerich J, Oefner PJ, Kreutz M, Bosserhoff AK and
Bosserhoff AK. GLUT1 expression is increased in hepatocellular carcinoma and promotes tumorigenesis. Am J
Pathol. 2009; 174:1544–1552.

Immunohistochemistry
Paraffin-embedded, formalin-fixed tissues were
immunostained for HIF-1α, CAIX, and Glut1 protein using
standard immunohistochemistry procedures according to
the manufacturers’ instruction. Immunostained slides were
evaluated independently by two pathologists in a doubleblind manner. Negative controls were prepared in the same
way but without primary antibodies.

7.	 McIntyre A, Patiar S, Wigfield S, Li JL, Ledaki I, Turley
H, Leek R, Snell C, Gatter K, Sly WS, Vaughan-Jones
RD, Swietach P and Harris AL. Carbonic anhydrase IX
promotes tumor growth and necrosis in vivo and inhibition enhances anti-VEGF therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18:3100–3111.

Statistical analyses
The SPSS 16.0 and Sigmaplot 10.0 programs were
used for general statistical analysis. Experimental data
were expressed as the mean ± SD. Differences between
groups were assessed by Student t test for comparison of
only two groups, or using one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) for more than two groups. All tests performed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8.	 McDonald PC, Winum JY, Supuran CT and Dedhar S.
Recent developments in targeting carbonic anhydrase IX
for cancer therapeutics. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:84–97.
9.	 Kasznicki J, Sliwinska A and Drzewoski J. Metformin in
cancer prevention and therapy. Ann Transl Med. 2014; 2:57.
882

Oncotarget

10.	 Bailey CJ and Turner RC. Metformin. N Engl J Med. 1996;
334:574–579.

metformin-induced apoptosis in human gastric cancer cell.
Cancer Biol Ther. 2015; 16: 77-87.

11.	 Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, Alessi DR and
Morris AD. Metformin and reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. BMJ. 2005; 330:1304–1305.

24.	 Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2003; 3:721–732.
25.	 Wang GL and Semenza GL. Purification and characterization of hypoxia-inducible factor 1. J Biol Chem. 1995;
270:1230–1237.

12.	 Chlebowski RT, McTiernan A, Wactawski-Wende J,
Manson JE, Aragaki AK, Rohan T, Ipp E, Kaklamani VG,
Vitolins M, Wallace R, Gunter M, Phillips LS, Strickler H,
et al. Diabetes, metformin, and breast cancer in postmenopausal women. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:2844–2852.

26.	 Liu J, Hou M, Yuan T, Yi G, Zhang S, Shao X, Chen J,
Jia X and He Z. Enhanced cytotoxic effect of low doses of
metformin combined with ionizing radiation on hepatoma
cells via ATP deprivation and inhibition of DNA repair.
Oncol Rep. 2012; 28:1406–1412.

13.	 Sesen J, Dahan P, Scotland SJ, Saland E, Dang VT, Lemarie
A, Tyler BM, Brem H, Toulas C, Cohen-Jonathan Moyal E,
Sarry JE and Skuli N. Metformin inhibits growth of human
glioblastoma cells and enhances therapeutic response. PLoS
One. 2015; 10:e0123721.

27.	 Papandreou I, Cairns RA, Fontana L, Lim AL and Denko
NC. HIF-1 mediates adaptation to hypoxia by actively
downregulating mitochondrial oxygen consumption. Cell
Metab. 2006; 3:187–197.

14.	 Zhao D, Long XD, Lu TF, Wang T, Zhang WW, Liu YX,
Cui XL, Dai HJ, Xue F and Xia Q. Metformin decreases
IL-22 secretion to suppress tumor growth in an orthotopic
mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer.
2015; 136:2556–2565.

28.	 Anedda A, Rial E and Gonzalez-Barroso MM. Metformin
induces oxidative stress in white adipocytes and raises
uncoupling protein 2 levels. J Endocrinol. 2008; 199:33–40.
29.	 Zannella VE, Dal Pra A, Muaddi H, McKee TD, Stapleton
S, Sykes J, Glicksman R, Chaib S, Zamiara P, Milosevic
M, Wouters BG, Bristow RG and Koritzinsky M.
Reprogramming metabolism with metformin improves
tumor oxygenation and radiotherapy response. Clin Cancer
Res. 2013; 19: 6741-6750.

15.	 Li J, Hernanda PY, Bramer WM, Peppelenbosch MP, van
Luijk J and Pan Q. Anti-Tumor Effects of Metformin in
Animal Models of Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0127967.
16.	 Ece H, Cigdem E, Yuksel K, Ahmet D, Hakan E and
Oktay TM. Use of oral antidiabetic drugs (metformin and
pioglitazone) in diabetic patients with breast cancer: how
does it effect serum Hif-1 alpha and 8Ohdg levels? Asian
Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13:5143–5148.

30.	 Mohammed A, Janakiram NB, Brewer M, Ritchie RL,
Marya A, Lightfoot S, Steele VE and Rao CV. Antidiabetic
Drug Metformin Prevents Progression of Pancreatic
Cancer by Targeting in Part Cancer Stem Cells and mTOR
Signaling. Transl Oncol. 2013; 6:649–659.

17.	 Ling S, Tian Y, Zhang H, Jia K, Feng T, Sun D, Gao Z, Xu
F, Hou Z, Li Y and Wang L.Metformin reverses multidrug
resistance in human hepatocellular carcinoma Bel-7402/
5-fluorouracil cells. Mol Med Rep. 2014;10:2891–29897.

31.	 Memmott RM, Mercado JR, Maier CR, Kawabata S, Fox
SD and Dennis PA. Metformin prevents tobacco carcinogen—induced lung tumorigenesis. Cancer Prev Res (Phila).
2010; 3:1066–1076.

18.	 Viollet B and Andreelli F. AMP-activated protein kinase
and metabolic control. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2011;
203:303–330.

32.	 Ben Sahra I, Regazzetti C, Robert G, Laurent K,
Le Marchand-Brustel Y, Auberger P, Tanti JF, GiorgettiPeraldi S and Bost F. Metformin, independent of AMPK,
induces mTOR inhibition and cell-cycle arrest through
REDD1. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:4366–4372.

19.	 Shaw RJ, Lamia KA, Vasquez D, Koo SH, Bardeesy N,
Depinho RA, Montminy M and Cantley LC. The kinase
LKB1 mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic effects of metformin. Science. 2005; 310:1642–1646.

33.	 Wilson WR and Hay MP. Targeting hypoxia in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:393–410.

20.	 Algire C, Amrein L, Bazile M, David S, Zakikhani M and
Pollak M. Diet and tumor LKB1 expression interact to
determine sensitivity to anti-neoplastic effects of metformin
in vivo. Oncogene. 2011; 30:1174–1182.

34.	 Robertson ED, Semenchenko K, and Wasylyk B. Crosstalk
between Mdm2, p53 and HIF1-alpha: distinct responses to
oxygen stress and implications for tumour hypoxia. Subcell
Biochem. 2014; 85:199–214.

21.	 Shackelford DB, Vasquez DS, Corbeil J, Wu S, Leblanc M,
Wu CL, Vera DR and Shaw RJ. mTOR and HIF-1alphamediated tumor metabolism in an LKB1 mouse model of
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;
106:11137–11142.

35.	 Foretz M, Guigas B, Bertrand L, Pollak M and Viollet B.
Metformin: from mechanisms of action to therapies. Cell
Metab. 2014; 20:953–966.
36.	 Mansfield KD, Guzy RD, Pan Y, Young RM, Cash TP,
Schumacker PT and Simon MC. Mitochondrial dysfunction resulting from loss of cytochrome c impairs cellular
­oxygen sensing and hypoxic HIF-alpha activation. Cell
Metab. 2005;1:393–399.

22.	 Li W, Saud SM, Young MR, Chen G and Hua B. Targeting
AMPK for cancer prevention and treatment. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:7365–7378.
23.	 Han G, Gong H, Wang Y, Guo S and Liu K. AMPK/
mTOR-mediated inhibition of survivin partly contributes to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

883

Oncotarget

37.	 Zhang Y, Guan M, Zheng Z, Zhang Q, Gao F and Xue Y.
Effects of metformin on CD133+ colorectal cancer cells in
diabetic patients. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e81264.

induces a p53-dependent senescence in hepatoma cells
via activation of the AMPK pathway. Int J Oncol. 2013;
43:1503–1510.

38.	 Yi G, He Z, Zhou X, Xian L, Xian L, Yuan T, Jia X,
Hong J, He L and Liu J. Low concentration of metformin

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

884

Oncotarget

