Original Article

Histologic Changes Associated With
False-Negative Sentinel Lymph Nodes After
Preoperative Chemotherapy in Patients With
Confirmed Lymph Node-Positive Breast
Cancer Before Treatment
Alexandra S. Brown, MD1; Kelly K. Hunt, MD2; Jeannie Shen, MD2; Lei Huo, MD1; Gildy V. Babiera, MD2;
Merrick I. Ross, MD2; Funda Meric-Bernstam, MD2; Barry W. Feig, MD2; Henry M. Kuerer, MD2;
Judy C. Boughey, MD2; Christine D. Ching, MD2; and Michael Z. Gilcrease, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: A wide range of false-negative rates has been reported for sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy after
preoperative chemotherapy. The purpose of this study was to determine whether histologic findings in negative SLNs
after preoperative chemotherapy are helpful in assessing the accuracy of SLN biopsy in patients with confirmed
lymph node-positive disease before treatment. METHODS: Eighty-six patients with confirmed lymph node-positive
disease at presentation underwent successful SLN biopsy and axillary dissection after preoperative chemotherapy at
a single institution between 1994 and 2007. Available hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections from patients with
negative SLNs were reviewed, and associations between histologic findings in the negative SLNs and SLN status
(true negative vs false negative) were evaluated. RESULTS: Forty-seven (55%) patients had at least 1 positive SLN,
and 39 (45%) patients had negative SLNs. The false-negative rate was 22%, and the negative predictive value was
67%. The negative SLNs from 17 of 34 patients with available slides had focal areas of fibrosis, some with associated
foamy parenchymal histiocytes, fat necrosis, or calcification. These histologic findings occurred in 15 (65%) of 23
patients with true-negative SLNs and in only 2 (18%) of 11 patients with false-negative SLNs (P ¼.03, Fisher exact test,
2-tailed). The lack of these histologic changes had a sensitivity and specificity for identifying a false-negative SLN of
82% and 65%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Absence of treatment effect in SLNs after chemotherapy in patients with
lymph node-positive disease at initial presentation has good sensitivity but low specificity for identifying a falseC 2010 American Cancer Society.
negative SLN. Cancer 2010;116:2878–83. V
KEYWORDS: sentinel lymph node, breast cancer, lymph node positive, preoperative chemotherapy, treatment effect.

Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy have become routine procedures for patients with early
stage breast cancer, as they provide a minimally invasive method of assessing axillary lymph node status.1-5 Patients with
negative SLNs have a low likelihood of having metastases in nonsentinel axillary lymph nodes, so such patients can be
spared the morbidity of an axillary lymph node dissection. Even in patients who receive preoperative chemotherapy, also
known as neoadjuvant or induction chemotherapy, SLN biopsy has been reported to be an accurate method for staging
the axilla.6,7 However, there has also been concern that lymphatic fibrosis or tumor debris could alter lymphatic draining
patterns and decrease the accuracy of SLN biopsy in these patients.
The false-negative rates for SLN biopsy after preoperative chemotherapy have been reported to range from 0% to
6,8-14
33%.
Although the number of patients in each series is relatively small, a recent meta-analysis concluded that the
SLN biopsy is accurate after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.7 Most investigators have focused on patients who present with
Corresponding author: Michael Z. Gilcrease, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Unit 85, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713)792-5532; mgilcrease@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Dr. Brown is currently an Assistant Professor of Pathology at the University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25066, Received: April 24, 2009; Revised: September 13, 2009; Accepted: September 17, 2009, Published online April 6, 2010 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

2878

Cancer

June 15, 2010

False-Negative SLNs After Chemotherapy/Brown et al

clinically lymph node-negative disease before chemotherapy, and have largely excluded patients with confirmed
lymph node-positive disease at initial presentation.8-14 At
our institution, we have noted a higher false-negative rate
for SLN biopsy after chemotherapy in patients with confirmed lymph node-positive disease before treatment.15
We hypothesized that particular histologic features in negative SLNs after preoperative chemotherapy in this patient
population might help to predict the likelihood of a falsenegative SLN.
Histologic findings indicative of treatment effect,
such as fibrosis, characteristically occur at the site of a tumor that undergoes a partial or complete pathologic
response to chemotherapy.16,17 Positive SLNs that
undergo a complete pathologic response to chemotherapy
would be expected to have similar histologic findings. In
patients with a fine-needle aspiration (FNA)-proven positive lymph node before chemotherapy, the SLN might
not be the same as the FNA-proven positive lymph node.
However, non-SLNs are expected to be positive only
when the SLN is also positive. Therefore, all patients with
an FNA-proven positive lymph node are expected to have
had positive SLNs. A positive SLN after treatment is
expected to have fibrosis or other treatment-related
changes. If fibrosis or other changes associated with tumor
response are not observed in the SLN after chemotherapy
in a patient with confirmed lymph node-positive disease
before treatment (ie, in a patient expected to have had a
positive sentinel lymph node before treatment), the apparent SLN might not be the true SLN. Treatment-induced
lymphatic fibrosis or tumor debris could have altered the
normal lymphatic draining pattern. Therefore, the
absence of such histologic changes in a negative SLN after
chemotherapy in a patient with confirmed lymph nodepositive disease before treatment should raise the possibility of a false-negative SLN.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether
histologic findings in negative SLNs after chemotherapy can
predict the accuracy of SLN biopsy in patients who present
initially with confirmed lymph node-positive disease.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Eighty-six patients with operable breast cancer (T1-T3)
and lymph node-positive disease (N1-N3) confirmed by
ultrasound-guided FNA were treated on prospective preoperative chemotherapy protocols, and underwent successful SLN biopsy and concomitant axillary dissection as
components of their surgical treatment at The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center between 1994
Cancer

June 15, 2010

and 2007. Intraoperative lymphatic mapping was performed after peritumoral injection (4 injections around
the primary tumor site) of isosulfan blue dye alone, technetium-labeled sulfur colloid alone, or a combination of
both. Nonpalpable tumors were injected under mammographic or ultrasound guidance. Clinicopathologic features of a subset of these patients were reported
previously.15
The sentinel lymph nodes were serially sectioned at
2-mm intervals, and all of the lymph node sections were
routinely processed and embedded in paraffin blocks for
histologic evaluation. A single hematoxylin and eosin (H
& E) section from each block was prepared. Immunohistochemical stains for keratin were not evaluated in this
study, as patients with isolated tumor cells in SLNs are
currently staged as N0(iþ) and treated as lymph node negative at our institution. Moreover, in a recent analysis
from our institution, the presence of occult keratin-positive tumor cells in axillary lymph nodes after chemotherapy in patients with positive lymph nodes at initial
presentation did not impact disease-free or overall
survival.18
For this retrospective study, the available H & E sections of both the true- and false-negative SLNs were
retrieved from The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center surgical pathology archives for review. A
true-negative SLN was defined as a negative SLN after
chemotherapy in a patient with negative non-SLNs. A
false-negative SLN was defined as a negative SLN after
chemotherapy in a patient with metastatic carcinoma in 1
or more of the non-SLNs. In this setting, a false-negative
SLN could have resulted either from misidentification of
the SLN or from complete response in the SLN but less
than complete response in 1 or more non-SLNs. Histologic evidence of treatment effect, including fibrosis with
or without calcification, a parenchymal foamy histiocytic
infiltrate with partial obliteration of lymph node architecture, or fat necrosis was recorded for both the true- and
false-negative SLNs. Associations between histologic findings and SLN status (true negative vs false negative) were
evaluated using 2-tailed Fisher exact test.

RESULTS
Of the 86 lymph node-positive patients in this study who
underwent successful SLN biopsy and concomitant axillary dissection after preoperative chemotherapy, the median number of SLNs identified was 2 (range, 1-10).
Forty-seven (55%) patients had at least 1 positive SLN.

2879

Original Article
Table 1. Status of SLNs and Non-SLNs in Lymph NodePositive Patients After Preoperative Chemotherapy

Table 2. Histologic Findings Suggestive of Treatment Effect
in True-Negative and False-Negative SLNs

Lymph
Nodes

Negative
Non-SLNs

Positive
Non-SLNs

Total

Negative SLNs
Positive SLNs
Total

26
14
40

13
33
46

39
47
86

SLN indicates sentinel lymph node; TP, true positive; TN, true negative; FN,
false negative.
False negative: FN/(TP þ FN) ¼ 13/60 ¼ 22%; negative predictive value: TN/
(TN þ FN) ¼ 26/39 ¼ 67%.

Treatment Effect

TrueNegative
SLNs

FalseNegative
SLNs

Fibrosis (5%)
Fibrosis (5%) & calcification
Fibrosis (>5% but <50%)
Fibrosis (>5 but <50%)
& fat necrosis
Fibrosis (50%)
Parenchymal histiocytes
None
Total

5
1
3
1

1
0
0
0

3
2
8
23

1
0
9
11

SLN indicates sentinel lymph node.

Table 3. Association Between Histologic Evidence of
Treatment Effect and SLN Status

Effect

True-Negative False-Negative Total
SLNs
SLNs

Treatment effect
No treatment
effect
Total

15
8

2
9

17
17

23

11

34

SLN indicates sentinel lymph node.
P ¼.03, Fisher exact test, 2-tailed.

Figure 1. Representative photomicrographs of sentinel lymph
nodes in patients with invasive breast cancer after preoperative chemotherapy show (A) no detectable histologic change,
(B) a parenchymal histiocytic infiltrate, (C) focal subcapsular
fibrosis, and (D) diffuse parenchymal fibrosis.

Thirty-nine (45%) patients had negative SLNs, of which
13 were found to be false negatives. This resulted in a
false-negative rate of 22% and a negative predictive value
of 67% (Table 1). The false-negative rate appeared to be
related to the number of SLNs removed. In the 56
patients with 3 SLNs identified, the false-negative rate
was 33%, and in the 30 patients with 4 SLNs identified,
the false-negative rate was 5%.
The H & E sections were available for 34 (87%) of
the 39 patients with negative SLNs. Seventeen (50%) of
the 34 patients with negative SLNs available for review
had histologic evidence of treatment effect in at least 1 of
the SLNs. These included 7 patients with focal areas of
fibrosis (5% of the SLN), including 1 with associated
calcification, 4 with moderate amounts of fibrosis (>5%
but <50% of the SLN), including 1 with associated fat
necrosis, 4 with diffuse fibrosis (50%), and 2 with

2880

parenchymal infiltration by foamy histiocytes with partial
obliteration of lymph node architecture (Fig. 1).
Of the 17 patients with histologic findings suggestive of treatment effect, 15 were patients with true-negative SLNs, and 2 were patients with false-negative SLNs
(Table 2). Histologic changes suggestive of treatment
effect were observed in 15 (65%) of 23 patients with truenegative SLNs and 2 (18%) of 11 patients with false-negative SLNs (Table 3). The association between histologic
findings suggestive of treatment effect and SLN status
(true negative vs false negative) was statistically significant
(P ¼ .03, Fisher exact test, 2-tailed). The absence of histologic changes suggestive of treatment effect resulted in a
sensitivity for identifying a false-negative SLN of 82%
and a specificity of 65%.

DISCUSSION
Chemotherapy is known to induce characteristic histologic changes at the site of a primary breast carcinoma
when the tumor undergoes either a partial or complete
response to therapy. There is generally marked fibrosis,
often accompanied by a foamy histiocytic infiltrate and
hemosiderin deposition.16,17 Similar changes also occur
in the regional lymph nodes at the site of metastasis when
Cancer

June 15, 2010

False-Negative SLNs After Chemotherapy/Brown et al

the metastatic tumor undergoes a partial or complete
response to chemotherapy.17,19,20 The patients in this
study had confirmed lymph node-positive disease before
treatment. For some patients, the SLN might not have
been the same as the FNA-proven positive lymph node.
However, non-SLNs are expected to be positive only
when the SLN is also positive. Therefore, as all patients in
this study had an FNA-proven positive lymph node, all
are expected to have had positive SLNs. A positive SLN
after treatment is expected to have fibrosis or other treatment-related changes. If fibrosis or other changes associated with tumor response are not observed in the SLN
after chemotherapy in a patient with confirmed lymph
node-positive disease before treatment (ie, in a patient
expected to have had a positive SLN before treatment),
the apparent SLN might not be the true SLN. Treatmentinduced lymphatic fibrosis or tumor debris could have
altered the normal lymphatic draining pattern. Our findings in patients with confirmed lymph node-positive disease at presentation support this concept, as absence of
treatment effect in the SLNs after chemotherapy had
increased sensitivity for identifying a false-negative SLN.
A recent meta-analysis included 21 studies involving
a total of 1273 patients who received preoperative chemotherapy followed by SLN biopsy and completion axillary
dissection. The analysis found that the average SLN identification rate and false-negative rate were 91% and 12%,
respectively.7 The false-negative rate was only slightly
higher than that reported in meta-analyses of SLN biopsy
without preoperative chemotherapy, which ranged from
5.1% to 9%.21-23 A report on a subgroup of patients from
the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project
(NSABP) B-27 trial, 1 of the largest studies to date on
SLN biopsy after chemotherapy, recently reported similar
findings.6 The purpose of NSABP B-27 was to compare 3
chemotherapy regimens: neoadjuvant doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide versus neoadjuvant doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide followed by neoadjuvant docetaxel versus
neoadjuvant doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide followed by
adjuvant docetaxel. Level I and II axillary dissection was
required. Although SLN biopsy was not required, some
surgeons performed lymphatic mapping and SLN biopsy
as part of the surgical procedure. A total of 343 patients in
the NSABP B-27 trial underwent SLN biopsy with concomitant axillary dissection after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and the SLN identification rate and false-negative
rate were 84.8% and 10.7%, respectively.6 Although the
NSABP investigators concluded that SLN biopsy is applicable after preoperative chemotherapy, the investigators

Cancer

June 15, 2010

did not distinguish between patients with lymph nodepositive disease and lymph node-negative disease at
presentation.
We have noted a higher false-negative rate for SLN
biopsy after chemotherapy in patients with confirmed
lymph node-positive disease at initial presentation at our
institution.15 A false-negative SLN would provide inaccurate information about residual nodal disease and thus
might inappropriately impact the decision for additional regional therapy in these patients. However, the clinical
impact of a false-negative SLN in this clinical setting is not
entirely clear. A false-negative SLN does not affect the decision to give chemotherapy to these patients, who by definition have undergone preoperative chemotherapy after
confirmation of axillary lymph node positivity. The 25year follow-up data from the NSABP B-04 trial failed to
show a significant survival advantage from removing clinically occult positive nodes at the time of initial surgery, as
long as axillary dissection was performed later for patients
who subsequently developed axillary nodal disease.24 Omitting additional regional therapy because of a false-negative
SLN might not impact survival, but the standard of care is
to perform an axillary lymph node dissection if an SLN is
found to be positive, before or after chemotherapy.
The false-negative SLN rate in our study appeared
to be related to the number of SLNs removed. The overall
false-negative rate of 22% that we observed is at the upper
end of the range reported in other studies of SLN biopsy
after preoperative chemotherapy. Our study included
only patients with documented regional lymph node
involvement before chemotherapy, whereas the lower
false-negative rates cited in most studies are for patients
who underwent SLN biopsy after preoperative chemotherapy, irrespective of the initial lymph node status.6,8-14
Although the NSABP B-27 subgroup analysis found that
the false-negative rate was independent of clinical lymph
node status, some patients classified with clinically positive lymph nodes based on physical examination alone
may not have confirmed lymph node metastases by FNA
or core biopsy. The inclusion of only patients with documented FNA-positive axillary lymph nodes in our study
should provide a more accurate assessment of this specific
patient population. In contrast to our study, some
patients in the NSABP B-27 trial underwent lymphatic
mapping before and after chemotherapy, and there was
no standardized method for the histologic evaluation of
the SLNs in the NSABP study.
Our data suggest that in biopsy-proven lymph
node-positive breast cancer patients who undergo

2881

Original Article

preoperative chemotherapy and subsequent axillary SLN
biopsy, a negative SLN with no histologic changes to suggest treatment effect, such as fibrosis or a parenchymal histiocytic infiltrate, appears to have a higher likelihood of
being a false-negative SLN compared with a negative SLN
with these histologic changes. If a patient or clinician were
reluctant to pursue a SLN biopsy in this clinical setting
because of concern that the false-negative rate may be
unacceptably high, the presence of treatment effect in the
SLN might be reassuring, whereas the absence of treatment effect would raise concern about a false-negative
SLN. If future studies confirm our findings, a lymph
node-positive patient could undergo lymphatic mapping
and SLN biopsy after chemotherapy, and a decision to
perform axillary dissection could be based on the presence
of residual metastatic disease or the absence of treatment
effect in the SLN, either of which would indicate an
increased likelihood of residual metastatic disease in the
axilla.
Although the absence of treatment effect appears to
have good sensitivity for identifying a false-negative SLN,
it has a low specificity. If a negative SLN were required to
have treatment effect as a necessary component of a successful SLN biopsy in lymph node-positive patients after
preoperative chemotherapy, our study suggests that
approximately half of the biopsies with negative SLNs
would be regarded as unsuccessful, and these patients (in
addition to patients with positive SLNs) would require
completion axillary dissection. Extrapolating from the
data in our study, although almost a quarter of all lymph
node-positive patients after chemotherapy would have
unsuccessful SLN biopsy procedures, the false-negative
rate would be reduced from 22% (13 false negatives per
60 positives, including 47 true positives and 13 false negatives) to a more acceptable rate of 4.1% (2 false negatives
per 49 positives, including 47 true positives and 2 false
negatives).
Despite the absence of randomized clinical trials
evaluating SLN biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy,
it appears likely that SLN biopsy after preoperative chemotherapy will become routine based on retrospective analyses from single institutions and multicenter series of
patients who underwent SLN biopsy followed by completion axillary dissection. Clinicians and patients who pursue SLN biopsy in this clinical setting will need to accept a
somewhat higher false-negative SLN rate or find a method
to predict the likelihood of a false-negative SLN in individual patients. Assessing treatment effect in a negative
SLN after chemotherapy from a patient with lymph node-

2882

positive disease at initial presentation might be 1 such
method, but future studies are needed to confirm its
potential clinical utility.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Albertini JJ, Lyman GH, Cox C, et al. Lymphatic mapping
and sentinel node biopsy in the patient with breast cancer.
JAMA. 1996;276:1818-1822.
2. Giuliano AE, Jones RC, Brennan M, Statman R. Sentinel
lymphadenectomy in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:
2345-2350.
3. Krag D, Weaver D, Ashikaga T, et al. The sentinel node in
breast cancer—a multicenter validation study. N Engl J
Med. 1998;339:941-946.
4. Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Galimberti V, et al. Sentinel-node
biopsy to avoid axillary dissection in breast cancer with clinically negative lymph-nodes. Lancet. 1997;349:1864-1867.
5. Yi M, Meric-Bernstam F, Ross MI, et al. How many sentinel lymph nodes are enough during sentinel lymph node
dissection for breast cancer? Cancer. 2008;113:30-37.
6. Mamounas EP, Brown A, Anderson S, et al. Sentinel node
biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer:
results from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel
Project Protocol B-27. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:2694-2702.
7. Xing Y, Foy M, Cox DD, Kuerer HM, Hunt KK, Cormier
JN. Meta-analysis of sentinel lymph node biopsy after preoperative chemotherapy in patients with breast cancer. Br J
Surg. 2006;93:539-546.
8. Nason KS, Anderson BO, Byrd DR, et al. Increased false
negative sentinel node biopsy rates after preoperative chemotherapy for invasive breast carcinoma. Cancer. 2000;89:
2187-2194.
9. Breslin TM, Cohen L, Sahin A, et al. Sentinel lymph node
biopsy is accurate after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3480-3486.
10. Julian TB, Patel N, Dusi D, et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. Am
J Surg. 2001;182:407-410.
11. Fernandez A, Cortes M, Benito E, et al. Gamma probe sentinel node localization and biopsy in breast cancer patients
treated with a neoadjuvant chemotherapy scheme. Nucl Med
Commun. 2001;22:361-366.
12. Stearns V, Ewing CA, Slack R, Penannen MF, Hayes DF,
Tsangaris TN. Sentinel lymphadenectomy after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer may reliably represent the
axilla except for inflammatory breast cancer. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2002;9:235-242.
13. Haid A, Tausch C, Lang A, et al. Is sentinel lymph node
biopsy reliable and indicated after preoperative chemotherapy in patients with breast carcinoma? Cancer. 2001;92:
1080-1084.
14. Miller AR, Thomason VE, Yeh IT, et al. Analysis of sentinel lymph node mapping with immediate pathologic review
in patients receiving preoperative chemotherapy for breast
carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2002;9:243-247.
15. Shen J, Gilcrease MZ, Babiera GV, et al. Feasibility and
accuracy of sentinel lymph node biopsy after preoperative

Cancer

June 15, 2010

False-Negative SLNs After Chemotherapy/Brown et al

16.

17.

18.

19.

chemotherapy in breast cancer patients with documented axillary metastases. Cancer. 2007;109:1255-1263.
Fisher ER, Wang J, Bryant J, Fisher B, Mamounas E,
Wolmark N. Pathobiology of preoperative chemotherapy:
findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and
Bowel (NSABP) protocol B-18. Cancer. 2002;95:681695.
Sharkey FE, Addington SL, Fowler LJ, Page CP, Cruz AB.
Effects of preoperative chemotherapy on the morphology
of resectable breast carcinoma. Mod Pathol. 1996;9:893900.
Loya A, Guray M, Hennessy BT, et al. Prognostic significance
of occult axillary lymph node metastases after chemotherapyinduced pathologic complete response of cytologically proven
axillary lymph node metastases from breast cancer. Cancer.
2009;115:1605-1612.
Aktepe F, Kapucuoglu N, Pak I. The effects of chemotherapy on breast cancer tissue in locally advanced breast cancer.
Histopathology. 1996;29:63-67.

Cancer

June 15, 2010

20. Cohen LF, Breslin TM, Kuerer HM, Ross MI, Hunt KK, Sahin
AA. Identification and evaluation of axillary sentinel lymph
nodes in patients with breast carcinoma treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Am J Surg Pathol. 2000;24:1266-1272.
21. Fraile M, Rull M, Julian FJ, et al. Sentinel node biopsy as a
practical alternative to axillary lymph node dissection in
breast cancer patients: an approach to its validity. Ann
Oncol. 2000;11:701-705.
22. Miltenburg DM, Miller C, Karamlou TB, Brunicardi FC.
Meta-analysis of sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast
cancer. J Surg Res. 1999;84:138-142.
23. Kim T, Giuliano AE, Lyman GH. Lymphatic mapping and
sentinel lymph node biopsy in early-stage breast carcinoma:
a metaanalysis. Cancer. 2006;106:4-16.
24. Fisher B, Jeong JH, Anderson S, Bryant J, Fisher ER, Wolmark N. Twenty-five-year follow-up of a randomized trial
comparing radical mastectomy, total mastectomy, and total
mastectomy followed by irradiation. N Engl J Med. 2002;
347:567-575.

2883

