Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Quantum dots implementation as a label for analysis of early stages
of EGF receptor endocytosis: a comparative study on cultured cells
Anna V. Salova1, Tatiana N. Belyaeva1, Ekaterina A. Leontieva1, Maria V. Zlobina1,4,
Marianna V. Kharchenko1, Elena S. Kornilova1,2,3
1

Institute of Cytology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia

2

Peter the Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia

3

St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia

4

Central European Institute of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic

Correspondence to: Elena S. Kornilova, e-mail: lenkor@mail.cytspb.rssi.ru
Keywords: EGF receptor, quantum dots, endocytosis, EEA1, HRS
Received: July 28, 2015	

Accepted: November 25, 2015	

Published: December 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
EGF complexed to fluorescent photostable quantum dots by biotin-streptavidin
system (bEGF-savQD) is attractive for both the basic research and therapeutic
application such as targeted drug delivery in EGF-receptor (EGFR) expressing cancers.
However, compared to native EGF, the large size of QD and its quasi-multivalency can
have unpredictable effects on EGFR endocytosis changing the internalization portal
and/or endosomal processing tightly bound to EGF signaling. We have found that
bEGF-savQDs enter HeLa cells via the temperature-dependent clathrin-mediated EGFreceptor-specific pathway characteristic for native EGF. We also found that EGF-to-QD
concentration ratios used for the complex preparation and the level of EGF receptor
expression affect the number and integral densities of the formed endosomes. So, at
EGF-to-QD ratio from 4:1 to 12:1 (at nanomolar bEGF concentrations) on average 100
bright endosomes per HeLa cell were formed 15 min after the complex addition,
while 1:1 ratio resulted in formation of very few dim endosomes. However, in A431
cells overexpressing EGFR 1:1 ratio was effective. Using dynamin inhibition and
Na-acidic washout we showed that bEGF-savQDs bind surface receptors and enter
clathrin-coated pits slower than the same ligands without QD. Yet, the bEGF-savQD
demonstrated similar to native EGF and bEGF-savCy3 co-localization dynamics with
tethering protein EEA1 and HRS, the key component of sorting ESCRT0 complex. In
conclusion, our comparative study reveals that in respect to entrapment into coated
pits, endosomal recruitment, endosome fusions, and the initial steps of endosomal
maturation, bEGF-savQD behaves like native EGF and QD implementation does not
affect these important events.

INTRODUCTION

[1, 2]. These properties provide the basis for numerous
applications, such as the simultaneous visualization of
several intracellular targets excited by a single source,
long-lived labeling of the cells of interest, monitoring
the behavior of internalized proteins in live cells and
control of addressed drug delivery [3–5]. To provide the
specificity of QD binding to the cell, a certain ligand
or antibody against plasma membrane (PM) proteins
should be attached to the particle. Numerous studies
concerning cell delivery, toxic effects, intracellular
fate of internalized ligands have been conducted using

During the last decades the progress in cell
studies is considerably based on the development of
light microscopy techniques and fluorescent markers
with advanced optical properties. A new type of
fluorophores, non-organic semiconductor nanocrystals
known as quantum dots (QDs), became quite popular
due to their high quantum yield, excitation in the UVblue range common to all QDs, and size-tunable narrow
emission spectra, combined with high photostability
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6029

Oncotarget

streptavidin-conjugated QDs (savQDs) with biotinylated
EGF (bEGF) as the most popular ligand [6–10].
The interest in the EGF-receptor (EGFR) system
is explained by its involvement in the regulation of
important cell processes such as embryonic development,
proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and cell motility
in many cell types [11, 12]. EGF effects are mediated
by a highly specific transmembrane receptor possessing
intrinsic tyrosine kinase (TK) located in the cytoplasmic
domain of the protein. EGF binding to the receptor
activates its TK, thus stimulating numerous signaling
cascades and, in parallel, internalization of EGF-receptor
complexes by clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Internalized
EGF-receptor complexes pass through early and late
endosomal compartments and are finally delivered to
lysosomes for degradation; however, recycling is also
possible. The balance between degradation and recycling
determines amplitude, duration and endosomal signaling
specificity [13–15]. Though the EGF-EGFR system can
be considered the most well-studied among different
growth factors’ families, many important aspects of EGFR
functioning are still unclear. Nevertheless, it is established
that dysfunction of the EGF-receptor signaling and/or
traffic often results in malignization. About one third of
human epithelial tumors of the head, neck, lung or colon
correlates with receptor overexpression or mutations, so
EGFR is deservedly called an “oncoprotein” [16].
Still remaining an important object of basic
research, EGFR, at the same time, is a very attractive
target for anticancer therapy [17, 18]. Obviously, that a
certain application has its own requirements toward a label
used which are surprisingly poorly discussed. In basic
research the label should not affect the native behavior
of the molecule of interest in any way to avoid artifacts.
However, when EGF-QD particles with multiple binding
sites are used for anticancer drug delivery, the label can
alter the course of events but we must know what exactly
these changes are. This will help to develop the most
efficient design of the labeled particle.
Despite obvious advantages of QDs as a label and
delivery vehicle, there are serious doubts in its neutrality.
First, the size of a QD bearing several streptavidin
tetramers with a molecular mass of about 80 kDa each is
much higher than that of native EGF (molecular mass of 6
kDa). According to the manufacturer’ estimation the size
of savQD is about 15–20 nm [19]. It is well established
that all known endocytic portals have specific spatial
characteristics, and the clathrin-coated pit (CCP) used
by native EGF-receptor complexes for internalization is
quite a rigid structure of about 120–150 nm in diameter
in human epithelial cells [20, 21]. Second, savQD
possesses numerous binding sites for bEGF, making
bEGF-savQD complexes quasi-multivalent. However, it
is widely recognized now that one EGF molecule binds
one receptor molecule [22], but dimerization and possibly
tetramerization of 1:1 EGF-receptor complexes is strongly
required for internalization and further TK activation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Some lines of evidence suggest an even more complicated
mechanism of ligand-receptor complex activation, but this
issue is still under debate [9, 23–25].
It can be supposed that the ability of small free
ligands and the same ligands bound to comparably
large units with numerous spatially different binding
sites to form oligomeric receptor complexes with
active conformations in the plane of PM can be quite
different, and implementation of such a particle can have
unpredictable effects on this process – from stabilization
of EGFR oligomers to prevention of proper receptor
clustering. This may also result in the changing of the way
of entry or slowing down the bEGF-savQD internalization
as well as disturbance of further early events. The bulk
of current knowledge on early endocytic events has come
from immunofluorescent imaging of cells stimulated to
endocytose native EGF for different time periods and
then stained with antibody upon cell fixation [26, 27]. The
efficacy of endocytosis depends on the rate and degree
of the label accumulation in the coated pits and early
endosomes (EE) and is proportional to the integral density
and the number of endosomes per cell. Any changes in
these parameters will manifest changes in the dynamics of
the early stages of endocytosis.
The main aim of this work was to study possible
impacts of QD-bound EGF on the early stages of EGFreceptor endocytosis. First, we have evaluated whether the
amount of EGF bound to a QD (EGF-to-QD ratio) and
the level of EGF receptor expression in the cell affect the
number and integral densities of the formed endosomal
structures; second, we have analyzed the dynamics of
ligand binding, CCP and endosome formation; third,
we have estimated the degree and dynamics of colocalization of receptor-containing structures with the
markers of consecutive early endocytic events: clathrin
(internalization), tether protein EEA1 (early endosome
fusions) and ESCRT0 key protein HRS (entering
the lysosomal degradative pathway). To estimate the
contribution of QD implementation per se, we included
bEGF labeled with streptavidin-bound Cy3 (bEGFsavCy3) in the analysis. This panel of labels allows to
reveal the effect of the size and quasi-multivalency of QD
and limitations due to the receptor expression level and
capacity of coated pits. To the best of our knowledge, such
combined data are still unavailable.

RESULTS
bEGF-savQD complexes enter HeLa cells via
EGFR-specific pathway
To confirm that EGF complexed to QDs follows
exactly the same pathway as native EGF at the very early
endocytic stages, we tested several key characteristics
of the ligand interaction with HeLa cells. First, it was
shown that savQDs failed to bind the cell membrane in
the absence of bEGF, either after 15 min or 90 min of
6030

Oncotarget

incubation with the cells (Figure 1A, left column). Second,
it is known that EGF binds its receptor at the plasma
membrane at 4°C, but internalization requires higher
temperatures, with an optimum at 37°C [13]. Indeed, the
preformed bEGF-savQD complexes were localized only at
PM at 4°C, but were clearly detected intracellularly after
warming up to 37°C (Figure 1A, second column). Third,
the clathrin-dependent mechanism of internalization was
proven in two ways: by the destruction of clathrin lattice
at high sucrose concentrations and the specific inhibition
of atypical GTPase dynamin, a key component of
clathrin-coated pit constriction, by dynasore (Figure 1A).
The images presented in the two right columns
demonstrate that 30 min incubation with both drugs results
in exclusively membrane localization of the complexes.
The washout of sucrose or dynasore followed by 30 min
incubation in drug-free culture medium results in the
formation of QD-labeled structures in the juxtanuclear
region of the cell, which is typical for endocytosis of
native EGF. The analysis of cells, allowed to internalize

bEGF-savQDs for 15 min and then stained with an
antibody against EGF receptor (Figure 1B), showed
that practically all bEGF-savQDs-positive vesicles were
co-localized with EGF receptor (M1 – 0.94 ± 0.05).
Co-localization of EGFR-containing structures with QD
was insignificantly lower (M2 – 0.67 ± 0.04), which may
indicate a portion of uninternalized unbound receptors
under the conditions used or some endosomes loaded
by QD-unbound bEGF. However, in the cell presented
in Figure 1B as well as in all 60 analyzed cells such
endosomes were very few. Thus, we can conclude that the
preformed bEGF-savQD complexes bind HeLa cells by
the EGF-EGFR-specific mechanism and are internalized
by the temperature-dependent, clathrin-mediated pathway
characteristic for native EGF.
Importantly, the dual detection of both the QDlabeled EGF and EGFR in fixed cells also shows that
the bEGF-savQD:EGFR ratio varies from endosome to
endosome (Figure 1B): the plot profile of the selected
area including 4 endosomes indicates that in vesicle

Figure 1: Specificity of bEGF-savQD entry into the cells. (A) HeLa cells were incubated with savQD (0.5 nM) or bEGF-savQD

(2:0.5 nM) for the indicated periods under different conditions. Live cells were analyzed. The images are presented as single sections
from the region of maximal cell spreading. (B) HeLa cells were incubated with bEGF-savQD (2:0.5 nM) for 15 min at 37°C, fixed
and immunostained with anti-EGFR antibody (Alexa 488) before confocal microscopy. The image is the projection of Z-series onto a
single image using a max intensity method (ImageJ). Manders’ coefficients were 0.94 ± 0.05 (M1, bEGF-savQD overlapping EGFR) and
0.67 ± 0.04 (M2, EGFR overlapping bEGF-savQD). Enlarged views (8.8 ×) of boxed region are shown in the next images. The plot
profile of the allocated area including 4 endosomes shows the intensities of bEGF-savQD and EGFR-Ab in each endosome. Each image is
representative of at least three independent experiments. Scale bars: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6031

Oncotarget

№3, the mean intensity of EGFR staining is higher than
that of QD, while the opposite is observed for vesicle
№1. Most probably, this reflects the non-uniform mode
of bEGF binding to savQD, and the abovementioned
stoichiometric problems in EGF/EGFR dimer formations,
possibly associated with the relatively large size of savQD
particles.
To find out whether the QD size affects the surface
receptor binding and internalization efficacy, we have
compared the distribution of bEGF-savQD and bEGFsavCy3 on PM after prebinding at 4°C and after 15 min
of endocytosis stimulated by shifting the cells to 37°C
medium. Note that unlike relatively small savCy3, savQD
possesses 5–10 streptavidins according to manufacturer’s
estimations. We have found that the two prebound markers
were detected in clusters distributed relatively uniformly
onto membrane domains oriented towards the culture
medium (Figure 2A), but the smaller ligand bEGF-savCy3
more extensively labeled the cell surface oriented towards
the coverslip (see Z-section at 0.5 μm), while bEGFsavQDs were mostly concentrated “apically” (at 6.5 μm)
and close to the cell edge (at 2.5 and 4.5 μm). Quantitative
estimations of the prebound label gave a higher number of
separate structures for savCy3 than for savQD (maximal
intensity projection protocol shows 1565 separate
structures versus 471, respectively). This may reflect the
formation of small but numerous clusters by savCy3 and
larger but fewer clusters by savQD.
Despite this difference, in 15 min of endocytosis, a
similar number of EGF-positive endosomes was detected
for both labels (141 and 107, respectively). Interestingly, at
15 min, the simple summation of numbers of the detected
endosomes in all optical slices produced higher results
for QD- compared to Cy3-labeled structures (Figure 2B),
while the number estimation according to the protocol of
maximal intensity projections gave lower values for QDs.
This indicates that QD is brighter and the same structure
can be seen in more than one neighboring slice made with
2 μm steps along the Z axis, even though the physical size
of an endosome is barely more than 1 μm. Importantly,
endosome formation in the case of bEGF-savCy3 occurs
mostly from basal and lower parts of the lateral domains
of PM, whereas bEGF-savQDs preferred conventionally
apical PM domain, which corresponded to the initial
distribution of the labels (Figure 2A and scheme B).
Probing EGF receptor distribution with an antibody
shows more diffuse pattern (Figure 2C), and at low EGF
concentrations (0.05 nM) strong signal from the PM
makes it difficult to reliably detect endosomes. Even at
0.5 nM EGF, there is still a significant portion of receptors
remaining at the PM, producing high background.
Therefore, at such non-saturating EGF concentrations
unligated receptors are localized out of specific domains
that are able to concentrate them, like CCPs. Only at
2 nM of EGF on HeLa cells all surface receptors
become internalized into endosomes, thus abolishing the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

background signal. It should also be noted that detection
of PM receptors by externally applied labeled ligands
makes it possible to follow the fate of only ligated
receptors in comparison with the traditional determination
using antibody staining of the total receptor population.
However, in the receptor overexpressing cells like A431,
even saturating EGF concentrations (about 20–30 nM) fail
to promote redistribution of all receptors to endosomes,
thus producing a high background signal (data not shown).

The efficacy of internalization depends on bEGF
to savQD ratio and EGF receptor expression level
When bEGF-savQD complexes were added to the
cells according to the pulse-chase protocol (which is more
physiological than prebinding at 4°C followed by warming
the cells up to 37°C), several different processes go in
parallel smoothing the outcome: association/dissociation
of EGF and its receptor at non-steady state conditions,
dimerization/clasterization of already bound complexes,
their recruitment into clathrin-coated pits, assembly
of clathrin-coated vesicles, pinching them off into the
cytoplasm, possibly fusions of just formed endosomes and
their recycling. To visualize these early events in live cells
we have used PAE A11 epithelial line for two reasons.
First, these cells express a high number of EGF receptors
fused to GFP [28], which allows to detect simultaneously
EGF-receptor positive structures and QDs. Second,
PAE A11 cells are very flat (2–3 μm) at the periphery
regions, so the formed CCPs/endosomes practically did
not come out of the focal plane that is important for
estimating the behavior of EGF-receptor complexes.
Due to light microscopy resolution limitations and the
non-planar profile of the plasma membrane, one cannot
differentiate between QD particles: (i) localized in close
neighborhood with PM; (ii) already attached to PM; or
(iii) just false background signals. Supplementary Figure
1A demonstrates that bEGF-savQD in PAE A11 cells
is localized only in receptor-positive structures 15 min
after endocytosis, which is proved by high Manders’ colocalization coefficient (M1) and indicates the specificity
of bEGF-savQD internalization. However, live cell
imaging study (Figure 3 presents a series of frames from
a corresponding Supplementary Video) shows the highly
dynamic meshwork of dimmed fluorescent dots appearing
and disappearing in the area close to the cell edge during
the first 5–10 min after the addition of bEGF-savQD to
the cells. Despite the dotted pattern of QD signal, the data
from the green channel registering the EGFR-GFP signal
demonstrated a rather uniform distribution of the receptor
in the membrane (see Supplementary Video). Additionally,
it can be seen that the high density of PM-localized EGF
receptors does not allow to detect structures with low GFP
signal concentration. Both the red and green structures of
such low intensity are excluded at background thresholds
used for particle analysis by standard software programs
6032

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Investigation of bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD distribution on PM and after internalization into the cells.

(A) HeLa cells were incubated with bEGF-savCy3 (2 nM) or bEGF-savQD (2:0.5 nM) using prebinding (0 min) at 4°C and endocytosis
stimulation by shifting the cells to 37°C medium (15 min); then the cells were fixed before confocal microscopy. Z-series optical sections
were taken at 0.5-μm intervals (14–16 sections). The images represent 4 single sections from Z-stacks and a projection of Z-stack onto a
single image obtained by max intensity method (ImageJ). The number of labeled structures is indicated for each section and max intensity
projection. (B) Z-stack analysis of relative number of labeled structures upon 15 min of endocytosis from (A) is represented. (C) HeLa
cells were incubated with indicated concentrations of EGF using pulse-chase (15 min) protocol, fixed and immunostained with anti- EGFR
antibody (Alexa 488) before confocal microscopy. The images represent the projection of Z-stacks onto a single image. These data are
typical of at least three independent experiments. Scale bars: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6033

Oncotarget

like ImageJ. However, only after 5–15 min relatively
bright stable QD-positive spots behaving as single
entities can be reliably detected. They could be clathrincoated pits (CCPs) as well as primary endosomes, but
they undoubtedly contain a highly concentrated cargo.
Importantly, the video clearly demonstrated that QD
signals are stable during all the experiment, while the
GFP signal undergoes very fast bleaching, and could
be detected only in QD-positive structures thus proving
EGFR concentration there. Thus, to reliably estimate the
characteristics of QD-positive structures using imaging
analysis programs, the 15-min time point was chosen for
the majority of further experiments. It must be underlined
that according to the numerous studies formation of an
endosome takes about 2 min [29]. A delay in appearance
of bright structures indicates that the process of bEGFsavQD binding to the receptor and formation of stable
complexes takes a significant amount of time. A high
level of ligand concentration in the structures recorded
at 15 min together with the earlier data on endocytosis
dynamics [29, 30] indicates that the majority of QDcontaining structures are endosomes.
The movie presented illustrates fast photobleaching
of GFP fluorescence. Comparing QD-labeled endosomes
with those stained with another fluorophores used in our
study, Cy3 and Alexa488, we also detected a significant
decrease in the intensities of endosomes in fixed HeLa cells
only for Cy3 and Alexa488 (Supplementary Figure 2). The

degree of photobleaching was proportional to the surface
power density. Importantly, the fluctuations of intensity
of the indicated QD-labeled endosomes with time have
a character which is often interpreted as photoblinking
and gives the grounds to claim that the fluorescence is
produced by a single QD. In this study we demonstrate that
such a conclusion may be incorrect because: (i) not only
one but several QDs can cause such flickering; and (ii)
the same pattern is demonstrated by bEGF-savCy3 which
does not possess any quantum properties. Besides, as was
discussed above, Figure 3 (see also Supplementary Video)
has proved that single bEGF-savQD particles initially
interacting with surface receptors are hardly seen before
they become concentrated in endosomes.
As mentioned above, bEGF-savQD unlike native
EGF is a quasi-multivalent ligand for EGF receptors:
a QD particle bears 5–10 streptavidins each of which
has 4 binding sites for biotin; so there could be spatial
problems hampering efficient dimer formation. Obviously,
the efficacy of dimer formation should grow with the
increase in bEGF to savQD ratio. To test this assumption,
complexes preformed at variable ratios of bEGF to QD
concentrations were used to evaluate the number and
integral density of CCP/EE 15 min after endocytosis
stimulation (Figure 4). Starting with low concentrations
of bEGF far from receptor saturation in HeLa cells,
we found that 0.5 nM bEGF added to 0.5 nM of QDs
(1:1 ratio) was not effective for CCP/EE formation: the

Figure 3: Early stages of endosome formation. Frames from a representative time-lapse video (see Supplementary Video) illustrating

the formation of endosomes after the addition of bEGF-savQD (2:0.5 nM) complexes to PAE A11 cells (11 min duration). Note the highly
dynamic meshwork of fluorescent dots appearing and disappearing in areas close to the cell edge marked in the first frame by a dotted line
and emerging bright structures indicated by arrows. Scale bar: 1 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6034

Oncotarget

number and brightness of QD-positive structures were
very low, which is clearly seen in the representative image
and corresponding quantitative evaluation (Figure 4A
and 4C). However, free EGF at 0.5 nM was efficiently
internalized (Figure 4D, compare two left columns).
The increase in bEGF concentration up to 2 nM (4:1
ratio) resulted in a drastic increase in the number of
QD-positive structures and their mean integral intensity,
which is proportional to the fluorophore concentration
in the structure. However, bEGF at a concentration of 6
nM (12:1 ratio) insignificantly increased the number of
QD-positive structures which, as in the previous case,
had a high integral density. A further increase in bEGF
concentration (up to 24:1 ratio) led to a pronounced drop
in both the number and brightness of CCP/EE, which is
most probably due to the exceeding the limit of binding
sites on savQDs and thus appearing of unbound bEGF
in the incubation medium. This free bEGF molecules
displace QD-complexes from the receptors. Our data
suggest that the majority of savQD used in this series
was conjugated to significantly fewer than 6 streptavidin
tetramers each or that the attachment of bEGF to each
binding site of streptavidin tetramer is not a rule even in
the situation of the bEGF excess.
This assumption is in agreement with the data on
the strong competitive effect of free EGF versus QDlabeled ligand. EGF added in 1.5 nM concentration to the
cells together with bEGF-savQD (preformed by mixing
2 and 0.5 nM, respectively) significantly decreased the
ability of QD-labeled EGF to bind the cells and form
CCP/EE (Figure 4A and 4C). The decrease was seen even
at a bEGF to savQD ratio of 6:0.5 (Figure 4A and 4C).
Importantly, when the cells treated with 2 nM bEGF
together with 1.5 nM EGF were fixed and stained with
antibodies against EGFR, the total number of detected
receptor-positive structures was found to be the same
as that with 2 nM bEGF only (Figure 4D, light grey
columns). This indicates that native EGF has a higher
affinity for receptors compared to its complex with QD
or that the concentration of bEGF-savQDs capable of
forming complexes with the receptor is significantly
lower than the designated one. Our data also show that
free EGF behaves as a competitor rather than a promoter
of the formation of dimers/oligomers with bEGF-savQD
during receptor binding. The difference in affinity is not
due to biotinylation as EGF and bEGF behave similarly
(not shown).
In the next series, we raised both bEGF and savQD
concentrations 4-fold, keeping an effective ratio of 4:1
(8  nM bEGF to 2 nM savQD). The total number of
detected receptor-positive structures containing bEGFsavQD and EGFR-Ab was found to be the same and has
grown by 30% (Figure 4D). However, in the case of free
bEGF the mean integral density of CCP/EE was found to
be maximal even at 2 nM (Figure 4D, light grey columns),
while the mean integral density of QD-labeled structures
reached the maximum only at 8 nM (ratio 4:1) (Figure 4D,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

dark grey columns). Taking into account that 2 nM of EGF
is lower than the saturating concentration, while 8 nM of
EGF is oversaturating for HeLa cells possessing about
3–4 × 105 receptors per cell, it is possible to suggest that
native EGF fills CCPs to the maximal concentration faster
than in the case of the QD-labeled ligand. Although the
design of the experiment does not provide the possibility
to distinguish between CCPs and endosomes, a similar
number of structures at 15 min of endocytosis suggests
that the number of areas allowed for CCP formation is
limited.
Another parameter that can influence the
internalization efficacy is the level of receptor expression.
If HeLa cells have about 3–4 × 105 receptor molecules
on PM which become saturated at EGF concentration of
about 4 nM, the human epidermoid carcinoma cell line
A431 possesses about 2–3 × 106 EGFR per cell which
become saturated at about 25–30 nM of EGF. Due to this
property A431 cells have been the most popular model for
EGFR studies since 1980th. We have found that bEGFsavQD at the concentration used enter A431 cells by the
EGFR-specific pathway (Supplementary Figure 1B).
However, a high receptor density in these cells results
in the significant level of internalization of unoccupied
non-activated receptors [31]. Indeed, we have found
that bEGF-savQD at internalization ratio ineffective
for HeLa cells (1:1) bound and entered A431 cells with
efficacy compared with the 4:1 complex (Figure 4B and
4E). Changing the ratio to 24:1 (12 nM bEGF to 0.5 nM
savQD) resulted in the same effect as for HeLa cells
due to free bEGF excess, but an 8-fold increase in QD
concentration (12 nM bEGF to 4 nM savQD) produced
a 2-fold increase in the number of CCPs/EEs and more
than 2-fold growth of the QD concentration per labeled
structure (Figure 4E). Therefore, it can be concluded
that in the cells overexpressing EGFR, (i) the maximal
number of CCPs/EEs that can be formed is higher than in
non-overexpressing cells, but this number is not linearly
proportional to the total receptor amount, and (ii) the most
internalization efficient concentrations of EGF and QD
can be higher than for cells with a relatively low receptor
number. However, the rule of “internalization effective
ratio” of bEGF and savQD also works.

Differentiation of PM-bound and internalized
bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD
In the protocol used above, we did not differentiate
between bEGF-savQD complexes clustered at PM,
accumulated in CCPs and those internalized into
endosomes during a 15 min pulse. To investigate the
influence of QDs on these consecutive stages in more
detail, we compared parameters of the structures labeled
by bEGF-savCy3 or bEGF-savQDs. To distinguish
between PM-bound and internalized Cy3 and QD we used
dynasore that inhibits activity of dynamin [32] – the key
protein involved in the constriction of CCP and pinching
6035

Oncotarget

off of CCP-derived vesicles into the cytoplasm. Inhibition
of clathrin-dependent endocytosis was combined with the
standard procedure of EGF washout by acetic buffer with
a pH of 4.0, which was shown to effectively dissociate
EGF-receptor complexes [26].

Prebinding of bEGF-savCy3 at 4°C (when
internalization is blocked) to HeLa cells resulted in the
formation of EGF-receptor complexes visualized as
numerous randomly distributed small spots with low
integral fluorescence, reflecting a low degree of label

Figure 4: The influence of variable ratios of bEGF to savQD concentrations on the formation of CCP/EE in the cells.
(A) HeLa cells were incubated with bEGF-savQD (the concentration of bEGF varied from 0.5 to 12 nM with the addition of 1.5 nM free
EGF in some cases and the concentration of savQD was 0.5 nM) using pulse-chase (15 min) protocol and fixed before confocal microscopy.
(B) A431 cells were incubated with the indicated concentration ratios of bEGF to savQD using the pulse-chase (15 min) protocol and fixed
before confocal microscopy. (C) The number of endosomes and their integrated intensity (for HeLa cells from the experiment described
in (A) were calculated from max intensity projections of the cells for every bEGF to savQD ratio using ImageJ. (D) HeLa cells were
incubated with bEGF-savQD (0.5:0.5, 2:0.5 or 8:2 nM) or bEGF (0.5, 2 or 8 nM) using the pulse-chase (15 min) protocol; in some cases,
1.5 nM of free EGF was added, then the cells were fixed and in the case of bEGF immunostained with anti-EGFR antibody (Alexa 488)
before confocal microscopy (images are not shown). The number of endosomes and their integrated intensity were calculated from the max
intensity projections of the cells for every concentration using ImageJ. (E) The number of endosomes and their integrated intensity (for
A431 cells from experiment described in (B) were calculated from max intensity projections of the cells for every bEGF to savQD ratio
using ImageJ. Each image is representative of at least three independent experiments. The inverted images are projections of Z-series onto
single images obtained by max intensity method (ImageJ). Scale bars: 10 μm. Data presented as the mean ± 95% confidence interval of
three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6036

Oncotarget

concentration (Figure 5A, Prebinding). Acidic washout of
these cells led to a dramatic decrease in both the number
and brightness of these spots demonstrating the easy
availability of the label for outside treatment. Quantitative
image analysis showed that the initial number of Cy3positive structures dropped about 10-fold and the integral
density of the structures became close to background
values (Figure 5B, Prebinding). These data favor bEGFsavCy3-receptor complex localization at the PM in small
clusters, mainly located outside CCPs. Stimulation of
bEGF-savCy3 endocytosis in such control cells for
5 and 15 min of 37°C pulse resulted in an increase in size
and brightness of the labeled structures and decrease in
their number (Figure 5A and 5B, Pulse). They became
practically unavailable for acetic buffer washout; this
indicates that these labeled structures are endosomes
which underwent fusions.
It could be expected that inhibition of dynamin
preventing CCP constriction would result in an increase
in both CCP number and availability of yet uninternalized
bEGF-savCy3 to acidic washout. However, compared to
control cells, dynasore produced only 15–20% increase in
CCP number 15 min after endocytosis stimulation (Figure
5B). At the same time, dynasore practically abolished
ligand concentrating in CCPs after 5 min pulse but failed to
prevent its accumulation by 15 min; however, the integral
intensity of CCP reached only about one third of this value
in control cells (Figure 5B). Thus, dynasore significantly
slowed down the rate of bEGF-savCy3 accumulation
in CCPs compared to control. Additionally, the labeled
structures were more randomly distributed on the cell
surface (Figure 5A). This difference may be explained
by internalization of a portion of CCPs and further
concentration of the labeled EGF-receptor complexes
due to endosome-to-endosome fusions in control versus
dynasore-treated cells, when the ligand was located only
on PM both non-associated and associated with CCPs.
To prove this assumption, we compared the effect of
ubiquitously used acidic buffer washout procedure on the
control and dynasore-treated cells. Surprisingly, no reliable
difference was found except for the label distribution in
dynasore-treated cells: acetic washout removed the most
dimmed spots localized primarily at the edge of cells, so
that their contribution to mean integral density value was
negligible (Figure 5A and 5B). Besides, binarization of the
images as a necessary step of particle analysis resulted in
the apparent disappearance of the structures having small
size and low brightness.
Interestingly, quasi-multivalent ligand of bigger size,
bEGF-savQD behaved similarly to smaller bEGF-savCy3
in control and dynasore-treated cells (Figure 5C and 5D).
However, in contrast to bEGF-savCy3, in the presence of
dynasore acetic washout removed 20–30% of the bound
bEGF-savQDs even at 15 min (Figure 5D). It means that
QD-labeled ligand enters CCPs slower than bEGF-savCy3
and more bEGF-savQD-receptor complexes stay out of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CCPs even at 15 min. The comparison of brightness of
QD-positive structures in control and dynasore-treated
cells at that time point (Figure 5D) also confirms that
accumulation of the label in CCPs goes slower than of the
ligand without QD.

bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD co-localization
with early endosomal markers
To further investigate whether the structures we
register are still clathrin-coated pits or already early
endosomes, we analyzed their co-localization with
clathrin, early endosomal autoantigen EEA1 and the key
component of the first sorting ESCRT0 complex, HRS,
which are believed to mark consecutive steps of EGF
receptor endocytosis.
The probing of EGFR localization with specific
antibody in cells stimulated with bEGF (2 nM) for 5 min
and 15 min pulses (Figure 6A) shows two main types
of EGF receptor-containing structures: (1) peripherally
located dot-like receptor positive structures many but not
all of which are co-localized with clathrin at 5 min, and
(2) large vesicles or structures of more complicated shape,
located in juxtanuclear areas and containing high level of
clathrin at 15 min. Our estimations of two markers’ colocalization show that about 60–70% of pixels positive
for total EGFR also contain clathrin signal (Figure 6C).
However, only two thirds of this co-localization can be
attributed to CCPs, because dynasore treatment results in
a 1/3 to 1/2 decrease (by 5 and 15 min, correspondingly)
in M1 value, thus indicating that a significant portion of
EGF-receptor complexes rapidly becomes endocytosed
into endosomes associated with flat clathrin coats reported
to participate in the early steps of cargo concentration and
sorting to degradative pathway [32, 33]. Enlargement of
these structures and their translocation to the juxtanuclear
area with time (Figure 6A) support this view. It must be
mentioned that in the case of Ab staining of fixed cells, colocalization degree can be underestimated due to detection
of the total but not only activated receptor pool.
Indeed, in the case of bEGF-savCy3, which labels
only activated receptors, co-localization (M1) was very
high at 5 min of pulse and only slightly decreased later on,
and was higher than in the case of bEGF alone (Figure 6B
and 6C). However, dynasore treatment resulted in a drastic
decrease in label co-localization with clathrin (Figure 6C,
images are not shown) suggesting that in control, about
two thirds of bEGF-savCy3 bound to activated receptor
were already internalized at 5 min pulse. In control
cells, a number of peripheral bEGF-savCy3 vesicles can
be seen that were negative for clathrin staining, as was
the case for bEGF alone (Figure 6A and 6B, 5 min).
Analysis of x-z sections demonstrated that such vesicles
localize very close to PM. More probably, these structures
present already pinched off uncoated primary endocytic
vesicles that are not yet captured by microtubules and
6037

Oncotarget

only at 15 min we can clearly see intracellular localization
of enlarged endosomes, even at the optical resolution
limitations of x-z projection (Figure 6B, bottom image).
This view is supported by our data on the insensitivity of
the label to acidic washout at 5 min (Figure 5A and 5B).
Importantly, bEGF-savCy3 prebound to PM at 4°C

(which was sensitive to acidic washout) demonstrated
a very low level of co-localization with clathrin (Figure
6B, upper image). Thus, in control cells bEGF-savCy3
rapidly undergoes internalization into small primary
endosomes that later on fuse and become associated with
clathrin sorting platforms, so that high co-localization at

Figure 5: Differentiation of PM-bound and internalized bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD. (A) Control or dynasore-treated
(80 μM) HeLa cells were incubated with bEGF-savCy3 (2 nM) using prebinding (0 min) or pulse-chase (5 and 15 min) protocols, followed
by fixation or acidic washout with pH 4.0 buffer (0.2 M acetic acid/0.5 M NaCl) and fixation. (B) The number of structures and their
integrated intensity for the cells (from experiment described in A) without or after acidic washout were calculated from max intensity
projections for every condition using ImageJ. (C) Control or dynasore-treated (80 μM) HeLa cells were incubated with bEGF-savQD
(2:0.5 nM) using pulse-chase (5 and 15 min) protocol, followed by fixation or by acidic washout with pH 4.0 buffer and fixation. (D) The
number of structures and their integrated intensity for the cells (from the experiment described in C) without or after acidic washout were
calculated from max intensity projections for every condition using ImageJ. Each image is representative of at least three independent
experiments. The inverted images are projections of Z-series onto single images obtained by max intensity method (ImageJ). Scale bars: 10
μm. Data presented as the mean ± 95% confidence interval of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6038

Oncotarget

15 min and later on is mostly due to intracellularly located
processes. On the contrary, longer incubation of dynasoretreated cells with bEGF-savCy3 results in stabilization of
activated ligand-receptor complexes in PM-located CCPs
(Figure 6C).
Although these results are in line with our
abovementioned data, it should be concluded that clathrin
is not a very good marker for discrimination between
PM-bound and internalized ligands, not only because

it is located on numerous different structures except
CCPs and endosomes [34–36]. Indeed, the high level of
cytoplasmically located clathrin can produce some false
signals leading to incorrect estimations of the degree of
co-localization.
According to established views, soon after endosome
detachment, the EEA1 tether protein becomes associated
with its membrane, allowing the process of early endosomal
homotypic fusions to start [37]. In contrast to clathrin, no

Figure 6: Immuno-co-localization of EGFR or bEGF-savCy3 with clathrin. (A) Control or dynasore-treated (80 μM) HeLa

cells were incubated with bEGF (2 nM) using pulse-chase (5 and 15 min) protocol, fixed and immunostained with anti-EGFR (Alexa
568) and anti-clathrin heavy chain (Alexa 488) antibodies before confocal microscopy. Insets represent enlarged views (2.6 × ) of boxed
region. (B) HeLa cells were incubated with 2 nM bEGF-savCy3 (red) using prebinding (0 min) or pulse-chase (5 and 15 min) protocols,
fixed and immunostained with anti-clathrin heavy chain antibody (Alexa 488) before confocal microscopy. Each image is also represented
as sections in the x-z plane taken from the region indicated by a dotted line. Insets represent enlarged views (3 ×) of boxed region.
(C) Co-localizations between EGFR-Ab or bEGF-savCy3 and clathrin in control (open columns) and dynasore-treated (shaded columns)
cells were quantified using the Manders’ coefficient (M1: red pixels overlapping green). Data presented as the mean ± 95% confidence
interval of three independent experiments. Each image is representative of at least three independent experiments. The images are single
sections from the region of maximal cell spreading. Scale bars: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6039

Oncotarget

co-localization of bEGF-savCy3 and EEA1 was detected
at the prebinding step (Figure 7B and 7D, 0 min), and the
same was previously shown by us for EGF [38]. At 5 and 15
min of incubation, bEGF, bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD
demonstrated equally high co-localization with EEA1;
however, it was increased by 15 min for the first 2 ligands,
except bEGF-savQD (Figure 7D). Interestingly, dynasore
treatment practically blocked EEA1 association with
EGFR-containing structures 5 min after ligand addition,
but EEA1 interaction with them increased about 2–3 fold
at 15 min (Figure 7). Also, in the presence of dynasore,
co-localization of bEGF-savCy3 at 5 min was lower and
at 15 min was higher than for two other ligands, but the

reasons for this are not clear (Figure 7D). Nevertheless,
in dynasore-treated cells, EEA1-positive structures were
localized at the cell periphery while in the control they
become translocated more juxtanuclearly (Figure 7A–7C).
Additionally, dynasore prevented significant enlargement
of vesicles in all cases. These data indicate that EEA1 can
be recruited not only onto separated endosomes but also to
PM-associated CCP structures, possibly partially uncoated
but unable to fuse with each other.
Furthermore, we have analyzed the co-localization
of ligand-receptor complexes with HRS, the component
of ESCRT0 complex, the first complex that meets EGFR
to sort it to the degradative pathway. No co-localization

Figure 7: Immuno-co-localization of EGFR, bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD with EEA1. Control or dynasore-treated

(80 μM) HeLa cells were incubated with (A) 2 nM bEGF, (B) 2 nM bEGF-savCy3 or (C) bEGF-savQD (2:0.5 nM) using prebinding
(0 min) or pulse-chase (5 and 15 min) protocols and fixed. Then, for A, the cells were immunostained with anti-EGFR (Alexa 568) and
anti-EEA1 (Alexa 488) antibodies before confocal microscopy. For (B and C), the cells were immunostained with anti-EEA1 (Alexa 488)
antibody. (D) Co-localizations between EGFR-Ab, bEGF-savCy3 or bEGF-savQD and EEA1 in control (open columns) and dynasoretreated (shaded columns) cells were quantified using the Manders’ coefficient (M1: red pixels overlapping green). Data presented as the
mean ± 95% confidence interval of three independent experiments. Each image is representative of at least three independent experiments.
The images are projections of Z-series onto single images using max intensity method (ImageJ). Insets represent enlarged views (2.2 ×) of
boxed region. Scale bars: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6040

Oncotarget

was found for pre-bound bEGF-savCy3 at 4°C (Figure 8B
and 8D, 0 min), but a significant portion of the label was
associated with this marker at 5 min, showing a further slight
increase by 15 min for the two quasi-multivalent ligands
(bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD). In all cases, small
yellow structures seen at 5 min were converted by 15 min
into enlarged multidomain organelles or organelles clusters
localized juxtanuclearly (Figure 8A–8C). Importantly,
dynasore has drastically reduced co-localization for all
ligands at both 5 and 15 min, thus indicating a HRS
association with exceptionally intracellular structures. The
existence of co-localization (M1 = 0.4) at 5 min, similar
for all three studied ligands, may indicate that populations

of bEGF-savQD complexes which have already become
internalized at 5 min are equivalent with respect to the
recognition by the sorting machinery, despite the differences
in their initial steps of interactions with the cell.

DISCUSSION
The implementation of QD as a label, in the case
of targeting molecules such as the small EGF peptide
undergoing internalization, could obviously have two
shortcomings: a large size of functionalized QD and quasimultivalency due to multiple EGF-binding sites on a QD

Figure 8: Immuno-co-localization of EGFR, bEGF-savCy3 and bEGF-savQD with HRS. Control or dynasore-treated

(80 μM) HeLa cells were incubated with (A) 2 nM bEGF, (B) 2 nM bEGF-savCy3 or (C) bEGF-savQD (2:0.5 nM) using prebinding (0 min)
or pulse-chase (5 and 15 min) protocols and fixed. Then, for A, the cells were immunostained with anti-EGFR (Alexa 568) and anti-HRS
(Alexa 488) antibodies before confocal microscopy. For (B and C), the cells were immunostained with anti-HRS antibody (Alexa 488)
before confocal microscopy. (D) Co-localizations between EGFR-Ab, bEGF-savCy3 or bEGF-savQD and HRS in control (open columns)
and dynasore-treated (shaded columns) the cells were quantified using the Manders’ coefficient (M1: red pixels overlapping green).
Data presented as the mean ± 95% confidence interval of three independent experiments. Each image is representative of at least three
independent experiments. The images are projections of Z-series onto single images using max intensity method (ImageJ). Insets represent
enlarged views (2.5 ×) of boxed region. Scale bars: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6041

Oncotarget

particle. For such an enlarged ligand, the size of EGFspecific portal, CCP, which has a diameter of about 120–
150 nm in mammalian epithelial cells [6, 20, 21], can be
a limiting factor for proper packing in coated vesicles and
further formation of primary endosomes. It also could be
expected that QD implementation would produce essential
changes in the dynamics of early endocytic events the
correctness of which depends on the receptor dimerization
and activation stimulated by ligand binding. However,
there are very few detailed studies of the influence of the
abovementioned factors on the biological relevance of
QD-labeled EGF in respect of dynamics of early endocytic
stages [10, 39].
According to the aims of our study, we first tested
the way by which bEGF-savQDs enter HeLa cells. No
differences between native EGF behavior described earlier
[40, 41] and that of bEGF-savQDs was found: QD-labeled
EGF enters the cells via clathrin- and dynamin-dependent,
temperature-sensitive, EGFR-specific pathway (Figure 1).
We also show that two other epithelial cell lines, A431
and PAE A11, internalize bEGF-savQD also through the
EGFR-mediated mechanism (Supplementary Figure 1).
One of the most important factors is quasimultivalency of bEGF-savQDs. As mentioned earlier,
native EGF binds its receptor at a ratio of 1:1 [22], but
it was established that dimerization of EGF-receptor
complexes is strongly required for effective internalization
and TK activation [23–25]. It was also demonstrated that
EGF receptors may exist on the plasma membrane both in
monomeric and inactive dimeric forms, and the ratio of the
two populations is proportional to the number of surface
receptors [42]. Obviously, EGF molecules bound to any
artificial carriers need to be able to match the distance
between two receptors in a dimer, which, according to the
existing estimations, may range from 1.5 to11 nm [43, 44],
depending on a certain conformation. In our case EGF
bounds to QD through streptavidin-biotin system,
where each QD particle contains several streptavidins
and streptavidin per se is a homotetramer with no cooperativity in biotin molecules binding [45]. Therefore,
practically all versions of streptavidin tetramers can be
found on the same QD particle, from unligated ones to
those associated with 1–4 bEGF molecules, with distances
of about 2–3.5 nm for bound biotins [46]. These distances
are of the same order of magnitude as in the case of
receptor binding sizes. So it is expected that at least some
of QD-localized bEGFs can successfully form proper
complexes with EGF receptors.
Taking this into account, it can be supposed that
the more bEGF binds a QD, the more the probability
that bEGF-savQD will form a ligand-receptor dimer. To
check this assumption we have analyzed how the number
of bound bEGF per a QD particle will affect the number
and intergral intensity of endosomes formed during 15 min
of internalization of bEGF-savQD complexes prepared at

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

variable concentrations of bEGF and savQDs. In HeLa
cells bEGF-to-savQD concentration ratios ranging from
4:1 to 12:1, in contrast to 1:1 ratio, were “endocytotically
efficient” and resulted in the formation of about 100
endosomes per cell on average 15 min after the ligand
addition (Figure 4A and 4C). Additionally, very efficient
competition of comparable concentration of free EGF
with bEGF-savQD and the inhibiting effect of high (24:1)
ratio used in the complex preparation (Figure 4A and 4C)
as well as the observed non-uniform receptor content in
bEGF-savQD-positive structures (Figure 1B) indicate that
QD-labeled EGF can form numerous configurations of
ligand-receptor complexes. Most of these configurations
are binding-defective. Thus, it must be taken into
consideration that nominal bEGF concentration even in
the case of optimal ratios actually means a significantly
lower acting bEGF concentration.
Importantly, in our study bEGF-savQD complexes
formed at a 1:1 ratio were “endocytotically inefficient”
in HeLa cells: after 15 min pulse very few endosomes
with low integral intensity could be found. However,
1:1 complexes were internalized successfully by A431
cells overexpressing EGFR (Figure 4B and 4E). This
ratio seems attractive for single molecule labeling, and
was previously reported to be endocytotically active [7];
however, the cited work was also fulfilled on A431 cells.
Overexpression of EGFR usually results in high receptor
density on the PM and is known to correlate with high
level of ligand-independent internalization [13, 14, 47].
We suppose that the ability of bEGF-savQD complexes
prepared at 1:1 ratio to enter the cells can be used as a
marker for cells with very high receptor density typical
of many transformed cells. However, for the cell lines
expressing medium receptor number (about 105 molecules
per cell) with a low level of basal receptor internalization
only endocytotically effective ratios provide a high
probability of receptor dimerization and subsequent
internalization.
Light microscopy limitations makes it difficult to
differentiate between QD entrapped in coated pit and in
fully detached vesicle just near the surface. Moreover, our
data presented in the video (see Supplementary Video)
in combination with our experiments on endocytosis
inhibition by dynasore (Figure 5), which prevents the
detachment of CCPs [32], suggest that bEGF-savQDs
can hardly be detected in CCP in the absence of the drug
due to a low degree of the label concentration there.
Dynasore treatment data also support the idea that the
bright, reliably detected structures at early stages are
endosomes (Figure 5). We quite expectedly found that in
the control cells the brightness of the labeled structures
increased with time, which reflects cargo concentration
during endosomes formation and the following fusions.
However, in the presence of dynasore this increase was
significantly slower. This indicates that though some

6042

Oncotarget

concentration of the label occurs in coated pits, the main
sites of cargo concentration are fusing endosomes. These
data are in agreement with the dynamics of native EGFR
endocytosis described earlier elsewhere [26, 30].
However, some differences were revealed between
bEGF-savQD, a ligand of bigger size, and the smaller
bEGF-savCy3 in the dynamics of their interaction with
the cell surface at early stages. First, the two ligands
have different preferable areas for binding (Figure 2).
If the exclusion of QDs from the basal domain of PM
can be explained by size limitations of bEGF-savQD
penetration into a narrow space full of extracellular
matrix between the cell bottom and coverslip, the
reasons for different distributions of bEGF-savCy3
and bEGF-savQD onto the rest of the PM are not clear.
Second, the QD-labeled EGF binds the receptors and
enters CCPs slower than bEGF-savCy3 which behaves
similarly to native EGF. This conclusion is supported
by experiments showing that acidic washout efficiently
dissociates the ligand-receptor complexes localized
outside coated pits (Figure 5), because it was established
[48, 49] that entrapment into coated pits makes EGFEGFR complexes more stable, possibly due to additional
interaction with CCP components. In our study the QDlabeled ligand turns to be more sensitive to this washout
than bEGF-savCy3. By our estimations about 25% of
bEGF-savQD-receptor complexes stay out of coated
pits even at 15 min (Figure 5D). Also, the comparison
of brightness dynamics for Cy3- and QD-labeled
endosomes in dynasore-treated cells that can accumulate
the ligand only in CCPs has revealed a slower
accumulation rate for bEGF-savQD-positive structures
(Figure 5B and 5D). Yet, though these differences are
statistically reliable, they are not significant.
Our data also demonstrate that clathrin is not a
good marker for solving the problem of differentiation
between CCPs and already detached vesicles for two
reasons. First, the amount of both the free and membranebound clathrin in HeLa cells is very high, providing
sufficient background signals. Second, clathrin lattices
were reported to be associated not only with PM and
Golgi, but also with early endosomal membranes [34–36].
In our experiments co-localization of EGFR, as well
as of bEGF-savCy3, with clathrin was comparable or
even higher in the cells allowed to internalize ligandreceptor complexes for 15  min than in the cells with
inhibited internalization (Figure 6). This result suggests
that uncoated early endosomal vesicles become again
associated with clathrin several minutes after their
detachment from PM.
Association of receptor complexes, formed by all
three ligands, with a widely used early endosome marker
tether protein EEA1 was found to be similar. Interestingly,
though this process was strongly inhibited by dynasore
at 5 min pulse, we have found that dynasore does not
prevent the accumulation of EEA1 on receptor-containing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

structures by 15 min (Figure 7). This may reflect a
previously unknown ability of this protein, which mediates
the first stage of homotypic endosome fusion, to recognize
undetached vesicles, possibly partially uncoated. However,
we can not also exclude the possibility of incomplete
inhibition of endocytosis by dynasore during a relatively
long incubation.
We have demonstrated that in control cells colocalization of all 3 ligands and HRS even at 5 min
was relatively high and it was completely inhibited
by dynasore (Figure 8). The dynamics of HRS colocalization with the ligands tested was also similar in
all 3 cases. Thus, only at the stage of HRS recruitment a
reliable differentiation between internalized vesicles and
those associated with PM is possible. Considering that
internalization is controlled by the receptor dimerization
rather than its TK activation, while the latter is necessary
for both the association with HRS as a component
of ESCRT0 complex and proper receptor signaling
[23, 25, 41, 50], we can conclude that despite some
slowing down of very early steps of QD-labeled EGF
binding with the cells, a high degree of co-localization
of bEGF-savQD and HRS at 15 min indicates that both
the cargo sorting and endosomal maturation processes
develop properly.
In conclusion, the data presented show that in
comparison with the behavior of small size monovalent
native EGF the implementation of large size quiasimulivalent fluorophore bEGF-savQD as a label causes
insignificant differences only at the stage of binding
to the surface EGF receptors and formation of dimers
necessary for efficient internalization. Keeping the
concentration ratio of bEGF to QD in the range of
4:1 – 12:1 significantly increases the probability of the
dimer formation and consequently provides the normal
process of packing the cargo into the forming vesicles
and their detachment. Furthermore, the early stages of
endosomes functioning, like homotypic fusions and sorting
of the cargo to degradative pathway by ESCRT complexes
are similar for all 3 ligands tested. Thus, QD can be
used as a perfect tool to study many aspects of EGFRdependent intracellular processes in basic research. Due
to the high specificity of QD-labeled EGF interaction with
the cells and demonstrated here preferable accumulation of
the label in the cells overexpressing EGF receptors, it can
be used for target delivery of multifunctional therapeutic
drugs in case of cancers with high level of EGF receptors.
However, it can be supposed that QD-labeled EGF is
able to form receptor complexes with variable signaling
efficacy. It means that the receptor activation may be
different in differently organized receptor complexes and
there are numerous data on the significance of the EGFR
activation pattern for endocytic pathway and signaling
outcome (reviewed in [51]). Therefore, direct studies of
this problem are necessary for the final assesment of the
biological relevancy of QD implementation.
6043

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Stimulation of endocytosis
The pulse-chase protocol was chosen to stimulate
endocytosis under physiological conditions. Cells were
washed twice with warm (37°C) DMEM and pulsed for
5 min with bEGF, bEGF-savCy3 or bEGF-savQD at 37°C.
Then, the unbound ligands were intensively washed out
with warm DMEM and the cells were fixed (this point
is further designated as 5 min pulse) or chased for an
additional 10 min at 37°C before fixation (15 min pulse).
To analyze EGF interaction with only the surface
receptors in the absence of internalization, we used the
prebinding protocol. Where indicated, the cells were
washed twice with cold (4°C) DMEM, placed on ice and
bEGF (2 nM) in DMEM was added for 40 min. Unbound
ligand was then washed out by 3 rinses with cold DMEM.
Then, cells were incubated on ice for 40 min with savCy3
or savQD, washed and fixed.

Reagents and antibodies
Epidermal growth factor biotin conjugate (bEGF),
CdSe/ZnS Qdot streptavidin conjugate with emission
maximum at 655 nm (savQD) and Cy3-streptavidin
(savCy3) were purchased from Invitrogen (USA). Mouse
native EGF, dynasore and Hoechst 33258 were from
Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Rabbit polyclonal anti-EGFR
antibody (#2232) was from Cell Signaling Technology
(USA), mouse monoclonal anti-EEA1 antibody (#610457)
was from BD Transduction Lab (USA), mouse monoclonal
anti-clathrin heavy chain antibody X22 (#CP45) was
from Merck Millipore (Germany) and mouse monoclonal
anti-HRS antibody (#ALX-804-382-C050) was from
EnzoLifeSciences (USA). Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti-rabbit
IgG and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG were from
Invitrogen (USA). Other chemicals were from SigmaAldrich unless otherwise stated.

Incubation under inhibitory conditions
Hypertonic sucrose solution (0.45 M) preventing
normal clathrin lattice assembly was used to inhibit
clathrin-dependent endocytosis and dynasore (80 μM) was
used to inhibit GTP-ase activity of dynamin and prevent
the separation of coated pits from the PM. For this, the
cells were incubated for 30 min with a drug. Afterward,
the cells were exposed to a solution containing the same
drug concentration plus bEGF, bEGF-savCy3 or bEGFsavQDs for the indicated time.

Cell culture
Human cervix epidermoid carcinoma HeLa cells
and squamous carcinoma A431 cells (Russian Cell Culture
Collection, Institute of Cytology RAS, St. Petersburg,
Russia) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle
medium (DMEM, Biolot, Russia) with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Biolot, Russia) and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (GIBCO, USA) incubated at 37°C with 5%
CO2. Porcine aortic endothelial (PAE) A11 cells stably
expressing EGF-receptor-GFP (EGFR-GFP) (a kind gift of
Dr. Sorkin, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, USA) were grown in DMEM/F12 containing
10% fetal bovine serum, antibiotics and 500 ng/ml
geneticin (G418) (Mediatechnic, USA). Cells were seeded
in Lab-Tek borosilicate coverglass-bottomed chambered
slides (Nunc) for live cell imaging or on Petri dishes with
glass coverslips (Nunc). Cells were starved (0.1% FBS)
overnight. Experiments were held at 60–70% confluent,
48 h after seeding.

Acidic washout
After incubation with bEGF-savCy3 or bEGFsavQD for the indicated time, the cells were placed on
ice and washed with cold acetic buffer (0.2 M acetic
acid/0.5 M NaCl, pH 4.0) 3 times for 2 min to remove
surface-bound EGF, followed by 4 rinses with DMEM.
Then, the cells were fixed for imaging and analysis.

Immunofluorescent staining
The cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
for 15 min, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for
15 min and blocked with 1% BSA for 1 h. Fluorescence
of bEGF-Cy3 and bEGF-QD was detected directly. To
reveal EGFR localization the fixed cells were incubated
with primary anti-EGFR antibody (1:100) for 24 h at 4°C
and then for 1 h with Alexa 568 or 488 goat anti-rabbit
IgG (1:500). For co-localization analysis the cells were
additionally incubated for 1 h at room temperature with
primary antibodies of choice (anti-clathrin heavy chain
antibody in 1:2000 or anti-HRS in 1:500 dilutions, antiEEA1 antibody at 0.25 μg/ml concentration) and for 1 h
with secondary antibodies (Alexa 488 goat anti-mouse

Ligand preparation
bEGF-savCy3 or bEGF-savQD complexes were
prepared in vitro in PBS at 4°C by mixing for 30 min.
The bEGF-savCy3 complex was prepared using 2 nM of
bEGF and 30-fold excess of savCy3 considering to obtain
1:1 ratio of the bEGF to savCy3. To prepare the bEGFsavQDs complex used in most experiments, 2 nM of bEGF
was mixed with 0.5 nM of savQDs. To study the influence
of variable bEGF to savQD ratios on endocytosis,
concentrations were used as indicated in Figure 4. Free
EGF or bEGF was added at the concentrations indicated
in corresponding figure legends.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6044

Oncotarget

IgG, 1:500). After immunostaining the cells were mounted
into Fluorescent Mounting Medium (Dako Cytomation,
Denmark).

background of each channel was subtracted and, in
some cases, brightness/contrast was adjusted only for
presentation. No filter was applied in quantitative analyses.
Z-stacks were projected onto single images (projections)
using the max intensity method (ImageJ). Then, single
sections or projections were exported to Adobe Photoshop
5.0 for final image processing.
Analysis of Region of Interest (ROI) intensities
was carried out using ImageJ. The number and integrated
intensities of endosomes were measured from max
intensity projections using ImageJ (menu command
Analyze). The quantitative co-localization analysis was
performed using ImageJ JACoP Plugin [52] to determine
Manders’ coefficient (M1: red pixels overlapping green
pixels). Thresholds were set by a visually estimated value
for each channel.
For all quantitative analyses, the results are
presented as the mean ± 95% confidence interval for at
least fifteen cells. The column charts were created using
Microsoft Office Excel 2007.

Confocal microscopy
The cells were examined with Leica TCS SP5
inverted laser scanning confocal microscope (Germany)
equipped with solid-state lasers for excitation (405, 488
and 543 nm). QD fluorescence was excited at 405 or
488 nm and registered in the 640–670 nm channel;
Cy-3 fluorescence was excited at 543 nm and registered
in the 560–620 nm range. Alexa 488 and Alexa 568
were excited at 488 nm and 543 nm and registered in the
500–550 and 580–660 nm ranges, respectively. GFP was
excited at 488 nm and registered in the 500–550 nm range.
Hoechst fluorescence was excited at 405 nm and registered
in the 430–480 nm range. Specimens were observed with
a × 40 oil immersion objective, followed by a 4 digital
zoom magnification with an image size of 1024 × 1024
pixels. Images were taken in one or two spectral channels
by sequential scanning mode, where only one laser was
active at a time, to avoid spectral overlap. To optimize
the signal to noise ratio, the final image was an average
of three consequent runs. Z-series optical sections were
taken at 0.5-μm intervals from the bottom to the top
(14–16 sections). Images were acquired for at least 5
fields of view selected randomly per coverslip. Data
were collected by Leica software as raw *.lif files and
transferred as a series of tiff files for further analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Sergei
A. Krolenko (04.08.1930 - 04.11.2014) who devoted his
career to the Institute of Cytology of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, and who inspired this work. His enthusiasm,
sound and useful criticism and great personal charm were
very helpful for the successful progression of our study.
He enjoyed the affection and respect of his colleagues.
We are also grateful to Dr. Alexander Sorkin for his
kind gift of PAE A11 cells.

Live cell imaging
The cells seeded in Lab-Tek chambers and incubated
with bEGF-savQD at indicated conditions were analyzed
with Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope equipped with
temperature and gas control chamber (37°C and 5% CO2).
Specimens were observed with a × 40 oil immersion
objective, followed by a 4 digital zoom magnification
with image size of 1024 × 1024 pixels. Simultaneous
confocal images of QD and brightfield images of cells
were obtained. For the vital staining of nuclei, Hoechst
33258 was used at a concentration of 1.6 μM for 5 min.
For time-lapse video, PAE A11 cells were imaged at 1
frame per 5 sec for an 11 min period (148 images). The
movie was compressed to 10 frames per second.

FUNDINGS
This study was supported by a grant from the
Russian Science Foundation (14-50-00068). Experiments
on live cell imaging using PAE A11 cells were supported
by the Program of the Russian Academy of Sciences #1
“Nanostructures”.

Abbreviations
QDs, Quantum dots; EGFR, epidermal growth
factor receptor; b, biotin; sav, streptavidin; EEA1, early
endosome antigen 1; ESCRT, endosomal sorting complex
required for traffic; HRS, hepatocyte growth factorregulated tyrosine kinase substrate; TK, tyrosine kinase;
PEG, polyethylene glycol; CCP, clathrin-coated pit; EE,
early endosome; PM, plasma membrane.

Image and statistical analysis
All data were obtained from at least three
independent experiments. In each experiment, 4–5 fields
containing 15–20 cells totally were imaged for each time
point. The images were processed and analyzed using
Leica Confocal Software (Germany) and ImageJ software
(National Institute of Health). In confocal images, the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

6045

Oncotarget

REFERENCES
  1.	 Biju V, Itoh T, Anas A, Sujith A, Ishikawa M. Semiconductor
quantum dots and metal nanoparticles: syntheses, optical
properties, and biological applications. Anal Bioanal Chem.
2008; 391:2469–2495.

14.	 Skarpen E, Johannessen LE, Bjerk K, Fasteng H,
Guren TK, Lindeman B, Thoresen GH, Christoffersen T,
Stang E, Huitfeldt HS, Madshus IH. Endocytosed epidermal
growth factor (EGF) receptors contribute to the EGFmediated growth arrest in A431 cells by inducing a sustained
increase in p21/CIP1. Exp Cell Res. 1998; 243:161–172.

  2.	 Hild WA, Breunig M, Goepferich A. Quantum dots
– nanosized probes for the exploration of cellular and
intracellular targeting. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2008;
68:153–168.

15.	 Nishimura Y, Takiguchi S, Ito S, Itoh K. EGF-stimulated
AKT activation is mediated by EGFR recycling via an
early endocytic pathway in a gefitinib-resistant human lung
cancer cell line. Int J Oncol. 2015; 46:1721–1729.

  3.	 Delehanty JB, Mattoussi H, Medintz IL. Delivering
quantum dots into cells: strategies, progress and remaining
issues. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2009; 393:1091–1105.

16.	 Kari C, Chan TO, Rocha de Quadros M, Rodeck U.
Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor in cancer:
apoptosis takes center stage. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:1–5.

  4.	 Rosenthal SJ, Chang JC, Kovtun O, McBride JR, Tomlinson ID.
Biocompatible quantum dots for biological applications.
Chem Biol. 2011; 18:10–24.

17.	 Jo U, Park KH, Whang YM, Sung JS, Won NH, Park JK,
Kim YH. EGFR endocytosis is a novel therapeutic
target in lung cancer with wild-type EGFR. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:1265–1278. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.1711.

  5.	 Belyaeva TN, Kornilova ES, Krolenko SA, Leontieva EA,
Mozhenok TP, Salova AV. Interaction of Quantum Dots
with Cells. In: Ciftja O, editor. Quantum Dots: Applications,
Synthesis and Characterization. New York: Nova Science
Publishers. 2012; 137–155.

18.	 De Santis R, Rosi A, Anastasi AM, Chiapparino C,
Albertoni C, Leoni B, Pelliccia A, Santapaola D, Carollo V,
Marra E, Aurisicchio L, Arseni B, Pacello ML, et al.
Efficacy of aerosol therapy of lung cancer correlates
with EGFR paralysis induced by AvidinOX-anchored
biotinylated Cetuximab. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9239–9255.
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.2409.

  6.	 Lidke DS, Nagy P, Heintzmann R, Arndt-Jovin DJ,
Post JN, Grecco HE, Jares-Erijman EA, Jovin TM.
Quantum dot ligands provide new insights into erbB/HER
receptor-mediated signal transduction. Nat Biotechnol.
2004; 22:198–203.

19.	 https://www.lifetechnologies.com.
20.	 Bretscher MS, Thomson JN, Pearse BM. Coated pits act
as molecular filters. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980;
77:4156–4159.

  7.	 Lidke DS, Lidke KA, Rieger B, Jovin TM, Arndt-Jovin DJ.
Reaching out for signals: filopodia sense EGF and respond
by directed retrograde transport of activated receptors. J
Cell Biol. 2005; 170:619–626.

21.	 McMahon HT, Boucrot E. Molecular mechanism and
physiological functions of clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:517–533.

  8.	 Kriete A, Papazoglou E, Edrissi B, Pais H, Pourrezaei K.
Automated quantification of quantum-dot-labelled
epidermal growth factor receptor internalization via
multiscale image segmentation. J Microsc. 2006;
222:22–27.

22.	 Brown PM, Debanne MT, Grothe S, Bergsma D,
Caron M, Kay C, O'Connor-McCourt MD. The extracellular
domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Studies
on the affinity and stoichiometry of binding, receptor
dimerization and a binding-domain mutant. Eur J Biochem.
1994; 225:223–233.

  9.	 Kawashima N, Nakayama K, Itoh K, Itoh T, Ishikawa M,
Biju V. Reversible dimerization of EGFR revealed by
single-molecule fluorescence imaging using quantum dots.
Chemistry. 2010; 16:1186–1192.

23.	 Schlessinger J. Ligand-induced, receptor-mediated
dimerization and activation of EGF receptor. Cell.
2002; 110:669–672.

10.	 Li H, Duan ZW, Xie P, Liu YR, Wang WC, Dou SX,
Wang PY. Effects of paclitaxel on EGFR endocytic
trafficking revealed using quantum dot tracking in single
cells. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e45465.

24.	 Clayton AH, Walker F, Orchard SG, Henderson C, Fuchs D,
Rothacker J, Nice EC, Burgess AW. Ligand-induced dimertetramer transition during the activation of the cell surface
epidermal growth factor receptor-A multidimensional
microscopy analysis. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:30392–30399.

11.	 Carpenter G. Receptors for epidermal growth factor and
other polypeptide mitogens. Annu Rev Biochem. 1987; 56:
881–914.

25.	 Wang Q, Villeneuve G, Wang Z. Control of epidermal
growth factor receptor endocytosis by receptor dimerization,
rather than receptor kinase activation. EMBO Rep.
2005; 6:942–948.

12.	 Duh G, Mouri N, Warburton D, Thomas DW. EGF regulates
early embryonic mouse gut development in chemically
defined organ culture. Pediatr Res. 2000; 48:794–802.
13.	 Sorkin A, Kornilova E, Teslenko L, Sorokin A, Nikolsky N.
Recycling of epidermal growth factor-receptor complexes
in A431 cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989; 1011:88–96.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Beguinot L, Lyall RM, Willingham MC, Pastan I. Downregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor in KB
cells is due to receptor internalization and subsequent

6046

Oncotarget

degradation in lysosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984;
81:2384–2388.

40.	 Vieira AV, Lamaze C, Schmid SL. Control of EGF receptor
signaling by clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Science. 1996;
274:2086–2089.

27.	 Good MJ, Hage WJ, Mummery CL, De Laat SW, Boonstra J.
Localization and quantification of epidermal growth
factor receptors on single cells by confocal laser scanning
microscopy. J Histochem Cytochem. 1992; 40:1353–1361.

41.	 Sorkin A, Goh LK. Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking
of ErbBs. Exp Cell Res. 2008; 314:3093–3106.
42.	 Nagy P, Claus J, Jovin TM, Arndt-Jovin DJ. Distribution
of resting and ligand-bound ErbB1 and ErbB2 receptor
tyrosine kinases in living cells using number and
brightness analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;
107:16524–16529.

28.	 Carter RE, Sorkin A. Endocytosis of functional epidermal
growth factor receptor-green fluorescent protein chimera. J
Biol Chem. 1998; 273:35000–35007.
29.	 Mooren OL, Galletta BJ, Cooper JA. Roles for actin
assembly in endocytosis. Annu Rev Biochem. 2012; 81:
661–686.

43.	 Webb SE, Roberts SK, Needham SR, Tynan CJ, Rolfe DJ,
Winn MD, Clarke DT, Barraclough R, Martin-Fernandez ML.
Single-molecule imaging and fluorescence lifetime
imaging microscopy show different structures for high- and
low-affinity epidermal growth factor receptors in A431
cells. Biophys J. 2008; 94:803–819.

30.	 Kornilova
ES,
Sorkin
AD,
Nikol’skii
NN.
Compartmentalization dynamics of the epidermal growth
factor in A431 cells. Tsitologiia. 1987; 29:904–910.
31.	 Kornilova E, Sorkina T, Beguinot L, Sorkin A. Lysosomal
targeting of epidermal growth factor receptors via a
kinase-dependent pathway is mediated by the receptor
carboxyl-terminal residues 1022–1123. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271:30340–30346.

44.	 Garrett TP, McKern NM, Lou M, Elleman TC, Adams TE,
Lovrecz GO, Zhu HJ, Walker F, Frenkel MJ, Hoyne PA,
Jorissen RN, Nice EC, Burgess AW, Ward CW. Crystal
structure of a truncated epidermal growth factor receptor
extracellular domain bound to transforming growth factor
alpha. Cell. 2002; 110:763–773.

32.	 Macia E, Ehrlich M, Massol R, Boucrot E, Brunner C,
Kirchhausen T. Dynasore, a cell-permeable inhibitor of
dynamin. Dev Cell. 2006; 10:839–850.

45.	 Jones ML, Kurzban GP. Noncooperativity of biotin
binding to tetrameric streptavidin. Biochemistry. 1995;
34:11750–11756.

33.	 Myromslien FD, Grøvdal LM, Raiborg C, Stenmark H,
Madshus IH, Stang E. Both clathrin-positive and -negative
coats are involved in endosomal sorting of the EGF
receptor. Exp Cell Res. 2006; 312:3036–3048.

46.	 Fairhead M, Krndija D, Lowe ED, Howarth M. Plug-andplay pairing via defined divalent streptavidins. J Mol Biol.
2014; 426:199–214.

34.	 Raiborg C, Wesche J, Malerød L, Stenmark H. Flat clathrin
coats on endosomes mediate degradative protein sorting by
scaffolding Hrs in dynamic microdomains. J Cell Sci. 2006;
119:2414–2424.

47.	 D’iakononova MIu, Nikol'skiĭ NN. An immunocytochemical
study of the spontaneous and ligand-induced endocytosis of
EGF-receptor complexes in A431 cells. Tsitologiia. 1994;
36:850–60.

35.	 Sorkina T, Bild A, Tebar F, Sorkin A. Clathrin, adaptors and
eps15 in endosomes containing activated epidermal growth
factor receptors. J Cell Sci. 1999; 112:317–327.

48.	 Klein P, Mattoon D, Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J. A
structure-based model for ligand binding and dimerization
of EGF receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;
101:929–934.

36.	 Raiborg C, Bache KG, Mehlum A, Stang E, Stenmark H.
Hrs recruits clathrin to early endosomes. EMBO J. 2001;
20:5008–5021.

49.	 Chung I, Akita R, Vandlen R, Toomre D, Schlessinger J,
Mellman I. Spatial control of EGF receptor activation
by reversible dimerization on living cells. Nature. 2010;
464:783–787.

37.	 Lawe DC, Chawla A, Merithew E, Dumas J, Carrington W,
Fogarty K, Lifshitz L, Tuft R, Lambright D, Corvera S.
Sequential roles for phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate and
Rab5 in tethering and fusion of early endosomes via their
interaction with EEA1. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:8611–8617.

50.	 Chin LS, Raynor MC, Wei X, Chen HQ, Li L. Hrs interacts
with sorting nexin 1 and regulates degradation of epidermal
growth factor receptor. J Biol Chem. 2001; 276:7069–7078.

38.	 Zlobina MV, Kharchenko MV, Kornilova ES. Analysis
of EGF receptor endocytosis dynamics based on
semiquantitative processing of confocal immunofluorescent
images of fixed cells. Cell Tissue Biol. 2013; 7:382–391.

51.	 Ceresa BP. Spatial regulation of epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling by endocytosis. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;
14:72–87.
52.	 Manders E, Verbeek F, Aten J. Measurement of colocalization of objects in dual-colour confocal images. J
Microsc. 1993; 169:375–382.

39.	 Rajan SS, Liu HY., Vu TQ. Ligand-bound quantum dot
probes for studying the molecular scale dynamics of
receptor endocytic trafficking in live cells. ACS Nano.
2008; 2:1153–1166.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6047

Oncotarget

