Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

PPARγ agonists promote differentiation of cancer stem cells by
restraining YAP transcriptional activity
Upal Basu-Roy1,*, Eugenia Han2,*, Kirk Rattanakorn1, Abhilash Gadi1, Narendra
Verma1, Giulia Maurizi1, Preethi H. Gunaratne3, Cristian Coarfa4, Oran D. Kennedy5,
Michael J. Garabedian1,2, Claudio Basilico1,2 and Alka Mansukhani1,2
1

Department of Microbiology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA

2

Perlmutter Cancer Center, Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA

3

Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA

4

Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA

5

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Alka Mansukhani, email: alka.mansukhani@med.nyu.edu
Keywords: osteosarcoma, thiazolidinediones, cancer stem cells, osteoblast lineage, adipocyte
Received: July 15, 2016	

Accepted: August 01, 2016	

Published: August 12, 2016

Abstract
Osteosarcoma (OS) is a highly aggressive pediatric bone cancer in which most
tumor cells remain immature and fail to differentiate into bone-forming osteoblasts.
However, OS cells readily respond to adipogenic stimuli suggesting they retain
mesenchymal stem cell-like properties. Here we demonstrate that nuclear receptor
PPARγ agonists such as the anti-diabetic, thiazolidinedione (TZD) drugs induce growth
arrest and cause adipogenic differentiation in human, mouse and canine OS cells
as well as in tumors in mice. Gene expression analysis reveals that TZDs induce
lipid metabolism pathways while suppressing targets of the Hippo-YAP pathway,
Wnt signaling and cancer-related proliferation pathways. Significantly, TZD action
appears to be restricted to the high Sox2 expressing cancer stem cell population and
is dependent on PPARγ expression. TZDs also affect growth and cell fate by causing
the cytoplasmic sequestration of the transcription factors SOX2 and YAP that are
required for tumorigenicity. Finally, we identify a TZD-regulated gene signature based
on Wnt/Hippo target genes and PPARγ that predicts patient outcomes. Together, this
work highlights a novel connection between PPARγ agonist in inducing adipogenesis
and mimicking the tumor suppressive hippo pathway. It also illustrates the potential
of drug repurposing for TZD-based differentiation therapy for osteosarcoma.

INTRODUCTION

the standard of care, provides approximately one-year of
overall survival [5].
Osteosarcomas are frequent tumor in patients with
hereditary retinoblastoma (Rb mutations) and with LiFraumeni syndrome (p53 mutations) [6]. Spontaneous
osteosarcomas originate at high frequency in mice with
a knock-out (KO) of the Rb-1 and p53 genes in the
osteoblastic lineage and mimic human disease [7, 8].
Murine and human osteosarcoma contain multipotent
cancer stem cells (CSCs) that grow in anchorageindependent conditions as osteospheres, possess tumorinitiating properties, and exhibit enhanced resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs [8-10]. The stem cell transcription
factor, Sox2, is overexpressed in several mouse and human

Osteosarcoma is the most common type of primary
bone cancer and is a major cause of cancer-related
deaths in children and adolescents. The disease is often
advanced at presentation, and despite improvements in
chemotherapy and surgery over the last few decades,
the overall survival rate for metastatic osteosarcoma
is only about 30% [1-3]. The prognosis for metastatic
and relapsed disease has remained poor for decades and
alternate approaches for treatment are needed [3, 4]. The
incidence of osteosarcoma is 10-times higher in dogs than
in humans and amputation followed by chemotherapy,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60954

Oncotarget

osteosarcoma cells as well as patient tumor samples, and
its expression portends poor survival in patients [11]. Sox2
also plays a significant role in maintaining CSCs in other
tumors [12-14]. In osteosarcoma, we showed that high
Sox2 expression marks and maintains tumor-initiating
CSCs [15]. Knockdown of Sox2 reduced their transformed
properties as well as their ability to form tumors [15]. Sox2
depleted cells exhibit increased Hippo signaling, a tumor
suppressive pathway that restrains YAP function and that
is inactivated in several cancers [16]. These cells show
decreased YAP expression with a concurrent increase in
the Hippo pathway activators, Nf2 and WWC1. Thus, our
previous work demonstrates that Sox2 antagonizes Hippo
signaling in osteosarcoma [17]. YAP is also required for
tumorigenicity in OS cells and its knockdown mimics that
of Sox2 [17].
Osteosarcoma is thought to arise from mesenchymal
lineage stem cells or osteoprogenitors and is considered
a disease of defective differentiation in which the cells
are blocked in their ability to form mature, bone-forming
osteoblasts [7]. As the lack of terminal differentiation
is associated with high cell proliferation, driving
differentiation and subsequently inhibiting tumor growth
presents a potential therapeutic strategy for osteosarcoma.
This differentiation therapy (DT) is free of the toxicities
associated with chemotherapy and circumvents the
chemoresistance issues that often arise in standard therapy
[18]. Unlike traditional chemotherapy that targets all
proliferating cells, DT is restricted to only those cells that
respond to the differentiation-inducing stimulus. DT has
been implemented for various cancers notably retinoids
for acute promyelocytic leukemia [18].
Though spontaneous primary murine osteosarcoma
cell lines are unable to differentiate into mature
osteoblasts, they retain the capacity to differentiate into
adipocytes [15]. This high adipogenic potential is restricted
to the high Sca-1/ high Sox2 expressing CSC population
[15]. This led us to hypothesize that adipogenesis may
be induced in osteosarcomas via targeted stimulation
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARγ), a nuclear receptor that activates genes essential
for fat formation [19, 20]. Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are
a class of small-molecule activators of PPARγ. They act as
insulin sensitizers, and several TZDs, such as pioglitazone
(Pio) and rosiglitazone (Rosi), are used in the treatment
of T2 diabetes mellitus. Binding of TZDs to PPARγ leads
to heterodimerization with RXR, akin to the activity of
endogenous ligands. [19, 21, 22]. It has also been reported
that TZDs have anti-cancer effects in lung, colon, and
breast cancers [22, 23 ]. Given the mesenchymal origin
of osteosarcoma cells and their ability to respond to
adipogenic stimuli, we assessed the potential of TZDs in
DT of osteosarcoma as they can be easily transitioned to
the clinic through drug repurposing.
In this study we demonstrate that TZDs can inhibit
growth and migration of human, mouse and dog OS cells,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and induce their adipogenic differentiation. RNA-SEQ
analysis reveals that the TZD rosiglitazone induces PPARγ
targets and lipid metabolism genes in osteosarcoma cells,
while reducing the expression of several cancer-related
genes. Interestingly, genes which are targets of YAP are
decreased in TZD-treated cells with a concurrent decrease
in the nuclear localization of Sox2 and YAP, suggesting
that TZD treatment in osteosarcomas restores the effect
of tumor suppressive Hippo signaling. We demonstrate
that TZDs target the CSC population that express high
PPARγ compared to the non-CSC population. TZDs
can also cooperate with pharmacological YAP inhibition
to inhibit osteosarcoma cell growth. TZD treatment
of mice implanted with osteosarcoma cells resulted
in reduced growth and increased adipogenesis in the
tumors in vivo and improved surrounding bone quality
around intrafemoral tumors. These studies provide
proof of principle that TZDs could have a role as an
adjuvant differentiation-inducing therapy in combination
with chemotherapeutic agents in the management of
osteosarcoma.

RESULTS
TZDs inhibit growth and migration and induce
adipogenesis of osteosarcoma cells
Osteosarcomas contain undifferentiated tumor
initiating cells or CSCs that express high levels of Sox2
are more efficient at inducing tumor formation and are
believed to be responsible for relapse and reseeding
of the disease [24]. We reasoned that TZDs may act on
this population and stimulate differentiation thereby
inhibiting cell growth. To test this, mouse and human
osteosarcoma cell lines were treated over a time course
with rosiglitazone (Rosi), a PPARγ agonist and analyzed
for growth. The murine osteosarcoma cell line mOS-482
and human cells Saos2-LM7 exhibited a concentrationdependent decrease in cell number at 48 and 72 hours of
treatment (Figure 1A). Growth arrest was also seen in the
human osteosarcoma cell lines OS187 (not shown) and
with another TZD, pioglitazone (Pio) (SI1).
The ability of cancer cells to migrate is highly
correlated with their tumorigenicity and metastatic
potential. To assess the effects of TZDs on osteosarcoma
cell migration, an in vitro scratch assay was used to
monitor the migration of Rosi or DMSO-treated cells
across a gap wound made in the cell monolayer. Rosi
treatment significantly decreased the migration of mOS482 and LM7 cells (Figure 1B, 1C). Thus, in addition to
growth arrest, the TZDs also inhibit cell migration.
Rosi treated cells also showed a decrease in DNA
synthesis measured by BrdU incorporation (Figure 1D).
There was no detectable change in apoptosis assessed by
60955

Oncotarget

TUNEL assay between the control and treated mouse or
human cells, suggesting the TZD-induced growth arrest is
primarily due to a decrease in proliferation (SI2).
We had previously demonstrated that OS cells
are impaired in their ability to undergo osteogenic
differentiation, but paradoxically still retain the ability to
undergo adipogenesis [15]. While it is known that TZDs
influence adipose-lineage cells and regulate adipose
tissue, their effect on adipogenesis in osteosarcoma cells
has not been explored [25, 26] We examined whether
TZDs Rosi and Pio induced adipogenesis in mouse OS
cells. Figure 2A shows that compared to adipogenic

media alone, Rosi or Pio treated OS cells undergo
enhanced adipogenic differentiation as assessed by an
increase in intracellular lipids stained with Oil-Red-O.
Increased adipogenesis was confirmed by measuring the
expression of the adipocyte-marker genes FABP4 (Figure
2A). This enhanced adipogenesis was also seen in human
LM7 cells (SI3). Thus, in vitro treatment of mouse and
human osteosarcoma cells with the TZDs inhibits cell
proliferation and migration, while stimulating adipogenic
differentiation.
Canine osteosarcoma shares many similarities
with the human disease, including extreme genetic

Figure 1: TZD treatment decreases cell proliferation and migration in osteosarcoma cells. A. Growth of mOS-482 (mouse)
and LM7 (human) cells after treatment with control (DMSO), or increasing concentrations of Rosiglitazone at 48- and 72-hours. B.
Migration scratch assay in mOS-482 cells and LM7 cells, treated for 24 hours with DMSO and Rosiglitazone (mOS-482: 50uM; LM7:
150uM). Photomicrographs of scratch wounds in cell layers shown at time-point 0 hours and 24 hours. C. Quantitation of migrating cells
counted within the scratch gap averaged over five fields. D. Proliferation assay: mOS-482 cells were treated with Rosiglitazone (50 and 100
uM) and DNA synthesis was measured by BrdU incorporation. A representative image of DAPI (top) and BrdU-positive (bottom) cells;
magnification = 20X; bar - 200 microns * = p < 0.05
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60956

Oncotarget

heterogeneity [5, 27]. Canine osteosarcomas also contain
a putative CSC population that expresses high levels of
Sox2. To determine whether dog OS cells responded to
TZDs as the human and mouse cells, OSA2, a spontaneous
dog osteosarcoma cell line was treated with Rosi. OSA2
cells also exhibited concentration dependent decrease
in growth (SI4). Adipogenic differentiation with Rosi
also showed increased Oil-Red-O stain in Rosi-treated
dog cells (SI4), confirming that the anti-proliferative
and pro-differentiating effects of TZDs is applicable to
osteosarcoma across multiple species.
The endocrine factor fibroblast growth factor 21
(FGF21) is being explored as a potential treatment for
obesity and diabetes as it enhances insulin sensitivity and
decreases triglyceride levels [28, 29]. Mechanistically,
this endocrine factor activates the MAP kinase cascade
by binding to an FGFR along with the cofactor β-Klotho
[30]. FGF21 stimulates adipogenesis in bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells via potentiating the effects of
PPARγ [28]. Though both FGF21 and TZDs have been
found to enhance adipogenesis in mesenchymal stem cells
[28], their cooperative effects on the differentiation process
in osteosarcoma cells have not been elucidated. We found
that co-treatment of mOS-482 cells with TZDs Rosi or Pio

and FGF21 showed increased adipogenesis and enhanced
expression of adipocyte-specific gene (FABP4) compared
to the TZDs alone (SI5). Similar results were seen with
human osteosarcoma cells Saos2-LM7 and OS187 cells.
These findings implicate PPARγ induction by TZD and
FGF21 treatment as a strong promoter of adipogenesis in
osteosarcoma cells and support the finding that activation
of this nuclear receptor is sufficient for adipogenesis. [20,
21].

TZDs action requires PPARγ in osteosarcoma
cells
TZDs can have effects on cell physiology that
are unrelated to their function as PPARγ [31]. To better
pinpoint the mechanisms through which TZDs affect the
phenotype of OS cells, we knocked out the PPARγ gene
in mouse OS cells using CRISPR/CAS technology and
determined the response of the PPARγ knockout (KO)
cells to TZDs. The results shown in Figure 2B indicate
that cells expressing CAS9 and a guide RNA targeting
PPARγ are resistant to the growth inhibitory effects of
TZDs (Figure 2B) as well as to adipogenic differentiation.

Figure 2: TZD treatment induces adipogenesis in osteosarcoma cells in part through PPARγ activation. A. Oil Red-O

lipid stain of mOS-cells grown in adipogenic media or Rosiglitazone (Rosi) 10uM or Pioglitazone (Pio) 10 uM for 3 days. Mag 40X.
Right panel - Relative fold change in mRNA expression of FABP4 measured by qRT-PCR relative to actin as a control. B. mOS control,
Cas9-expressing or Cas9-PPARγ knockout cells were treated with increasing concentrations of Rosi, as indicated and cell number was
determined after 48 hours. Right Panel - Western blot confirming PPARγ deletion in mOS cells expressing PPARγ specific guide RNA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60957

Oncotarget

This resistance is not seen in control cells expressing
cas9 alone. Sequencing of the PPARγ in isolated clones
exhibiting resistance to TZDs revealed deletions starting
in exon 3 where the guide RNA is targeted in the PPARγ
gene (SI6). Thus these results demonstrate that the TZD
effects on osteosarcoma cells are mediated by PPARγ
activation and not by unrelated or off-target mechanisms.

that high tumor forming capacity resided in the Sca-1-Hi
cells which comprise the cancer stem cell population [17].
We determined whether TZD treatment differentially
affected the Sca-1/Sox2 Hi- and Sca-1/Sox2 Loexpressing cells. Cells were FACS-sorted based on Sca-1
expression, treated with Rosi and evaluated for growth and
expression of adipocytic genes. As seen in Figure 3A, the
cells with high-expression of Sca-1 show concentration
dependent growth inhibition with Rosi treatment that is
not evident in Sca-1 negative cells. Sca-1 Hi cells exhibit
concomitant induction of FABP4 mRNA, a marker of
adipogenesis while there is no induction of FABP4 gene
expression in the Sca-1 Low cells treated with Rosi (Figure
3B). We then examined if the two fractions have differing
levels of PPARγ. Figure 3C shows that indeed the Sca-1
Hi cells express much higher levels of PPARγ accounting

TZDs target osteosarcoma cancer stem cells
We have previously shown that in murine
osteosarcoma cell lines, Sox2 nuclear expression
correlates with expression of the cell surface antigen Sca-1
[15]. The Sca-1Hi fraction has a higher propensity to form
adipocytes and is impaired in osteogenic differentiation,
compared to their Sca-1 Lo counterparts [15]. We showed

Figure 3: TZDs target the cancer stem cell population of osteosarcomas. mOS-482 cells were fractionated into Sca-1High and

Sca-1Low fractions by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). The two fractions were treated with 50 or 100 uM Rosiglitazone (Rosi),
and A., cell proliferation and B., expression of adipocyte-marker FABP4 by qRT-PCR, were measured. C. Relative fold change in mRNA
expression of PPARγ measured by qRT-PCR relative to actin as a control. D. Flow cytometric analysis of membrane Sca-1 expression of
phycoerythrin-labeled (Sca-1-PE) mOS-482 cells before and after treatment with 100 µM Rosi for 72 hours. The histogram shows mean
fluorescence intensity of the indicated cells. Y axis is maximum mean fluorescence intensity. X axis is IgG-phycoerythrin stained cells
(-phycoerythrin-conjugated - anti Sca-antibody).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60958

Oncotarget

for their higher sensitivity to TZD. To assess whether
TZD treatment affected the fraction of Sca-1 Hi cells, we
determined the proportion of Sca-1 Hi cells before and
after TZD treatment. Figure 3D shows that Rosi treatment
led to a reduction in the Sca-1 Hi population from 75%
to 56%. This suggests that the effects of TZD on growth,
proliferation and adipogenesis seen within the entire tumor
cell population are specifically attributable to the cancer
stem cell fraction which expresses higher levels of PPARγ
and that TZD treatment reduces the proportion of CSCs in
the tumor population.

with seven mice per group. Mice were administered
Rosiglitazone (100mg/kg) orally five times a week for
four weeks upon cell implantation and tumor volume was
measured bi weekly for 4 weeks. The dosage was selected
in line with previously published studies [32, 33]. Figure
4A shows that Rosi treatment significantly delayed tumor
growth as evidenced by reduced tumor volumes over
the same time period. To determine proliferation, tumor
sections were immunostained with an antibody to Ki67, a
marker of proliferation. Rosi treatment led to a reduction
of Ki67 positive cells on both the periphery and center of
the tumors (Figure 4B-4D). The harvested tumors were
also stained to monitor adipocytic differentiation. Figure
4E, 4F shows increased Oil Red O staining in the treatment
group and consistent with this finding is the increased
expression of adipocyte-marker genes, adiponectin and
FABP4. Rosi treatment is known to increase bone marrow
adipocytes. [34]. We also found that Rosi treated animals
had increased marrow adipocytes (SI8). In line with the in
vitro data, tumors from Rosi-treated animals did not show
any increased apoptosis (SI8). Together, these experiments
indicate that the effect of TZDs on osteosarcoma cells in

Rosiglitazone decreases proliferation and induces
adipogenesis in a subcutaneous xenograft model
of osteosarcoma
To further determine the feasibility of DT, we
investigated the effect of TZD treatment on osteosarcoma
in vivo via a tumorigenesis assay in NOD/SCID mice.
Mice were implanted subcutaneously with 100,000
mOS-482 cells and two treatment groups were assigned

Figure 4: TZD treated mice have reduced tumor volume and increased adipogenesis. NOD-SCID female mice (8 weeks old)
were transplanted with 105 mOS-482 cells and subsequently administered vehicle or Rosiglitazone (Rosi) orally five times a week for three
weeks after implantation. A. Average tumor volume of treatment and control groups over time. B., C., D. Cell proliferation by Ki67 staining
showing representative image of decreased Ki67 positive cells at the periphery and center of the tumors in Rosi treated tumors (mag 10X,
inset- 40X). 10 fields for each area (n = 6) were counted. *, P < 0.05. E., F. Oil Red O staining of the tumors shows increased adipogenesis
in the treatment groups. Representative image at 40X is shown. mRNA expression of adipogenic genes in Rosi treated tumors compared to
control by qRT-PCR (n = 4). *, P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60959

Oncotarget

vitro can be replicated in vivo where Rosi reduces cell
proliferation and stimulates adipogenesis.

model demonstrates that Rosi treatment reduces tumor
growth, it does not capture the role of the specific tumor
microenvironment in osteosarcomas. Bone tumors are
unique in that they are in close contact with the MSC/
osteoclast niche and cause extensive osteolysis of
surrounding bone leading to additional complications
for patients. We determined whether Rosi affected the
bone content of the tumor, and the surrounding bone

Rosiglitazone decreases tumor bone volume and
surrounding bone in an intrafemoral tumor model
TZDs are known to have effects on bone and
the MSC niche [34]. While the sub-cutaneous tumor

Figure 5: Rosiglitazone affects osteosarcoma tumor size and bone mineralization in orthotopic bone xenografts. Four
NOD/SCID mice per group were injected with 6x105 mOS-482 cells into a unilateral distal femur. Mice were fed vehicle (control), or
Rosiglitazone (Rosi) 100mg/kg from once daily, for 5 days per week from the start of implantation. Femurs were harvested at 3-weeks and
cross-section images obtained by microCT. A. 2D reconstructed distal femoral cross-sectional images from control and Rosi treated animals
in gray scale (left) and color-coded (right) to highlight decreased mineralized tumor tissue (blue) in the Rosi treated group. B. Total Bone
Volume (BV), was also measured and found to be reduced by Rosi treatment, this value was then normalized to total volume (TV), from
which the bone volume fraction was calculated (BV/TV), which showed a similar reduced level following Rosi treatment C. Porosity and
bone surface density measurements. Representative MicroCT images of cortical bone from control and Rosi-treated femurs. Yellow arrows
point to open pores and green arrows point to closed (intracortical) pores. Graphs show the porosity measurements, expressed as Closed
Pore Number, Closed Porosity Closed Pore Volume. Average measurements from 4 animals per group *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60960

Oncotarget

quality. mOS-482 cells were implanted orthotopically
into the femurs of NOD/SCID mice and animals were
administered vehicle or 100 mg/kg Rosi orally from the
start of implantation as described in Figure 5A. After 3
weeks, the affected limbs were harvested and microCT
imaging was used to analyze changes in mineralized
morphology of the tumor [35]. Rosi treated mice showed a
62% decrease in tumor-specific bone volume fraction (BV/
TV), and a 41% decrease in tumor-specific bone surface
density (BS/TV) compared to control tumors (Figure 5A
5B). Extra-cortical bone tumor volume (blue areas) within
the tumors is decreased overall in the Rosi-treated group.
We also assessed bone microarchitectural changes
using a series of porosity measurements. Porosity is
inversely proportional to several mechanical properties of

bone such as strength and stiffness [36]. Porosities in the
cortical bone (green and yellow arrows) were observed
to be significantly reduced in the Rosi group compared
to controls (Figure 5C). Quantitatively, the reduction in
‘number of pores’, ‘overall closed porosity’ and ‘pore
volume’ all reflect the reduced tissue degradation that
was present in the Rosi treated group (Figure 5D). Lipid
accumulation in the bone marrow was also apparent
in Rosi treated animals (not shown). These findings
(discussed later) suggest that Rosi treatment can improve
surrounding bone quality in an orthotopic model of
osteosarcoma.
We also found that rosiglitazone treatment delayed
initial dissemination of Saos2-LM7 human cells in an
intravenous injection model of metastases (SI9).

Figure 6: Gene expression analysis of rosiglitazone-treated cells. A. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) plots. GSEA plots
showing normalized enrichments scores (NES) for Rosi induced and suppressed genes in mOS482 osteosarcoma cells with genes up
or down regulated by knockdown of Sox2 in osteosarcoma cells (OS shRNA UP and DOWN), osteoblasts (OB KO UP and DOWN),
as well as Rosi-treated 3T3L1 preadipocytes (Rosi 3T3L1 UP and DOWN) and C3H10T1/2 cells ( Rosi C3H10T1/2 Up and DOWN).
B. Common down-regulated pathways in mOS482, C3H10T1/2 and 3T3L1 Rosi-treated cells. C. Common up-regulated pathways in
mOS482, C3H10T1/2 and 3T3L1 Rosi-treated cells .
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60961

Oncotarget

Rosiglitazone induces adipogenesis genes and
reduces cell cycle-related and YAP target gene
expression

processed for RNA sequencing (RNA-SEQ) analysis as
described in the methods. We have previously described
a Sox2-regulated gene signature in osteoprogenitors and
osteosarcoma cells where we found that Sox2 promotes
cell cycle and stemness-related genes and suppresses
Wnt signaling [17, 37]. These expression profiles were
compared using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)

To determine the TZD-induced gene expression
profile in osteosarcoma, mOS-482 cells were treated with
Rosiglitazone (50uM for 24 and 48-hours) in triplicate and

Figure 7: Rosiglitazone decreases YAP nuclear localization and YAP-dependent transcription in osteosarcoma cells.

A. Expression of canonical YAP target genes in mOS-482 cells treated with 100 uM rosiglitazone for 48 hours. B. Western blot of YAP
and phospho-YAP C. Immunofluorescence using Sox2 , YAP and RNA Pol II antibody on mOS-482 cells treated with Rosi or adipogenic
media for 48 hours. Images were taken using a Leica DM5500 immunofluorescence microscope at 63x magnification. D. YAP localization
by TZD is dependent on PPARγ. Quantification of YAP immunostaining in CAS9 (control) and PPARγ knockout cells treated with 50 µM
Rosi for 24 hours. Images were taken using a Leica DM5500 immunofluorescence microscope at 63x magnification. Ten fields in each
condition were counted and average percentage of cells showing exclusively nuclear (N), exclusively cytoplasmic (C), or both nuclear and
cytoplasmic (N+C) is shown in histogram. *p < 0.05 E. Growth of mOS482 (mouse), LM7 (human) and OSA2 (dog) osteosarcoma in
medium supplemented with (DMSO), verteporfin - vert (250 nM ) , Rosi (10 µM -for mouse and 50 µM for human and dog) or both Rosi
and Vert cells for 48 hours. Graph shows growth relative to DMSO control averaged from three replicates in each condition.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60962

Oncotarget

with the Rosi induced gene expression profiles. GSEA
analysis in Figure 6A shows a significant correlation of
Rosi-induced genes with those repressed by Sox2 both in
osteosarcoma (OS) and in normal osteoprogenitor (OB)
cells. This finding fits with the notion that TZDs act on
stem cells and repress stemness properties in osteosarcoma
cells, as we have shown is achieved by the deletion of
Sox2.
We also compared gene expression profiles of Rosi
treated osteosarcoma cells with previously published
gene expression data of Rosi treated cells (C3H 10T1/2
MSCs and 3T3L1 preadipocytes at 48 hours). [38]. As
indicated in Figure 6A, the Rosi transcriptome response
in our experiment matches significantly and in the same
direction (Q < 0.25) with the Rosi response in C3H
10T1/2 MSCs and 3T3-L1.Analysis of common pathways
analysis shown in Figure 6B point to a down regulation
of pro osteogenic pathways such as Wnt signaling and
collagen synthesis with a concurrent upregulation of lipid
metabolism and fatty acid synthesis pathways. Common
signatures of induced genes include genes required for
adipogenesis and fatty acid metabolism (e.g. PDK4
and PPARγ ) (Figure 6C). Furthermore, expression of
osteogenic differentiation markers such as osteoglycin was
strongly downregulated after Rosi treatment in all three
cell lines. These findings suggest that osteosarcoma cells

retain the ability to respond to PPARγ activation as do
their normal counterparts and corroborates the reciprocity
of the osteo-adipo lineages [39, 40]. Importantly, TZD
treatment of OS cells leads to a downregulation of
tumorigenic/cancer-related genes in osteosarcoma cells.
Thus gene expression analysis also indicates that TZD
treatment drives adipogenesis in osteosarcoma cells and
reduces their growth and tumorigenic properties.

Regulation of YAP1 by TZDs
We also observed in the gene expression analysis
that genes that are bonafide targets of YAP such as BDNF,
DYN3, CTGF LOX and CYR61 have reduced expression
upon TZD treatment only in osteosarcoma cells. We had
previously validated a set of YAP targets by knockdown
of YAP in osteosarcoma [17], and we verified that these
genes are indeed down regulated by TZD treatment by
qRT-PCR (Figure 7A).
YAP is the downstream effector of the tumor
suppressive Hippo signaling pathway that is necessary
for the regulation of organ size and cell proliferation
[16, 41]. YAP acts as a transcriptional co-activator by
associating with TEA-domain family member (TEAD)
and subsequently regulating expression of target genes

Figure 8: A CTGF-PPARγ-TIMP3 signature correlates with clinical outcome in osteosarcoma. Kaplan-Meier survival

curves for CTGF, PPARγ and TIMP3 illustrating that higher CTGF, and PPARγ and low TIMP3 expression correlates with worse outcomes,
and the reverse pattern of expression correlates with better outcome in two independent datasets. Distribution of patients for this data set
has been previously published. Survival probability and P values calculated using Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional hazards methods.
DFS = Disease-free survival in Kelly, OS = Overall survival in TCGA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60963

Oncotarget

necessary for cell proliferation. YAP is transcriptionally
inactivated by Hippo signaling via phosphorylation and
sequestered in the cytoplasm [42, 43]. We have previously
shown that Hippo signaling is repressed by SOX2 in
osteosarcomas and these tumors have high YAP that is
required for tumorigenesis [17]. We therefore determined
whether SOX2 and YAP are affected by TZD treatment.
While we did not detect any differences in Sox2 or YAP
RNA levels (data not shown), the protein level of YAP was
reduced in TZD-treated cells while YAP phosphorylation
was enhanced (Figure 7B).
Immunofluorescence of SOX2 and YAP in mouse
osteosarcoma cells shows that these transcription factors
lose their nuclear localization and are detectable in the
cytoplasm under adipogenic conditions and that treatment
with Rosi caused a similar change in localization (Figure
7C), in line with the increased phosphorylation of YAP.
RNA Pol II expression remained confined to the nucleus
suggesting that Rosi treatment does not compromise the
integrity of the nuclear membrane in osteosarcoma cells.
Similar results were seen with human LM7 and OS182
cells and with pioglitazone treatment (data not shown).
Together, these data highlight an additional mechanism
in TZD-induced adipogenesis where the transcriptional
activity of YAP is decreased upon cytoplasmic
sequestration. The effects of TZDs on YAP localization
are abrogated in PPARγ knockdown OS cells in which
YAP remains exclusively nuclear upon Rosi treatment,
suggesting that PPARγ expression is required for the
effect on YAP localization and transcriptional activity
(Figure 7D). This finding is corroborated by a decrease in
expression of canonical YAP target genes and suggests that
TZDs affect YAP-dependent transcription and activation
of Hippo signaling in osteosarcoma cells. Importantly
Rosi shows synergistic growth inhibitory effects when
combined with verteporfin, an inhibitor of YAP-TEAD
mediated transcription [44] in mouse human and dog
osteosarcoma cells (Figure 7E). These data demonstrate
the importance of reducing YAP function in the antitumor
effects of TZDs in osteosarcoma.

population of differentiated, less stem-like osteosarcoma
cells.
Based on these in vitro results, we developed a
dichotomized gene expression signature -(CTGFLow
PPARγLow and TIMP3High) or (CTGFHigh PPARγHigh and
TIMP3Low) and correlated the signature to good and poor
outcomes (time in days from diagnosis) by conducting
Kaplan-Meier analysis. Overall survival data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and disease-free survival
data from Kelly et al. were used for this analysis [45].
As shown in Figure 8, patients with CTGFLow PPARγLow
TIMP3High tumors had higher overall survival, or disease
free survival in the two databases respectively whereas
patients with CTGFHigh PPARγHigh TIMP3Low cancer had
poorer prognosis. This is probably because high TIMP3
and low CTGF and PPARγ expression indicates a more
differentiated and less stem-like osteosarcoma sub-type
with high Wnt and Hippo signaling. In this view, patients
with the CTGFHigh PPARγHigh TIMP3Low signature may be
better candidates for TZD-induced differentiation therapy.

DISCUSSION
Osteosarcomas are genetically highly heterogeneous
with multiple oncogenic drivers which has been a major
obstacle in developing targeted therapy for this tumor type
[46-49]. In this study, we present proof of principle for
differentiation therapy for osteosarcoma which relies on
the use of TZDs to stimulate adipogenesis in these cells.
Across species, osteosarcoma cells demonstrate growth
inhibition and enhanced adipogenesis when treated with
the TZDs, Pio or Rosi. Additionally we report a novel
mode of action of TZDs in osteosarcoma in promoting the
nuclear exclusion of SOX2 and YAP transcription factors.
TZDs also decreased tumorigenicity of osteosarcoma cells
in xenotransplantation assays. The effects of TZDs are
independent of the origins or driver mutations, suggesting
the broad therapeutic potential of these agents for the
treatment of osteosarcoma. Gene expression analysis of
TZD -treated cells led to the identification of a signature
that is predictive of patient outcomes. This study provides
pre-clinical rationale for an osteosarcoma differentiation
therapy with a targeted agent.

A Wnt-Hippo-PPARγ gene expression signature
predicts outcomes in osteosarcoma

PPARγ activation in cancer stem cells has antineoplastic effects in osteosarcomas

From the results presented it is apparent that a TZD
mediated differentiation therapy would target specifically
the OS stem cell population. Our previous analysis had
revealed that Wnt signaling is low in CSCs that express
Sox2 and form osteospheres. Sox2-depleted cells have
higher Wnt signaling, as evidenced by an increase in
canonical Wnt targets, such as TIMP3 [15, 37]. We also
found that YAP target genes such as CTGF and CYR61
are highly expressed in the CSCs and are reduced in Sox2
and YAP depleted cells [17]. Thus high Wnt signaling
and low YAP target genes (high Hippo signaling) mark a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DT represents an attractive alternative to
conventional treatment for osteosarcomas by inducing
terminal differentiation of CSCs. By utilizing TZDs that
function as high-affinity agonists of PPARγ [20], we
demonstrate that TZD-induced activation of this nuclear
receptor exerts anti-proliferative effects via promoting
adipogenic differentiation in osteosarcoma cells. Unlike
troglitazone that requires RXR activation [50], we find that
60964

Oncotarget

TZDs induce a gene signature in osteosarcoma
cells that is predictive of patient outcomes

the effect of TZD in osteosarcomas cells does not require
exogenous RXR ligands. PPARγ-null osteosarcoma cells
do not respond to TZDs, thereby highlighting that PPARγ
is essential for anti neoplastic effects of TZDs.
The Sca-1- expressing CSC population of
osteosarcoma that are responsible for tumor seeding,
recurrence and metastasis is more responsive to TZD
treatment These cells have elevated expression of PPARγ
which probably accounts for this effect. In clinical
practice, however, TZD treatment would likely be used
as an adjuvant or neo-adjuvant treatment modality, along
with surgery and/or chemotherapy. This two-pronged
strategy would ensure tumor debulking (through surgery
or chemotherapy) and CSC depletion, such that relapse
through persistence of osteosarcoma stem cells is
minimized.
We also found that cotreatment with the liverderived hormone FGF21 that stabilizes PPARγ, enhances
TZD-induced adipogenesis. [30]. FGF21 also acts on bone
marrow mesenchymal cells to promote differentiation into
adipocytes rather than osteoblasts.[28] Future experiments
will assess this hormone’s effect on osteo-adipo lineage
fate and if its effects are similarly potentiated by
concomitant treatment with TZDs.

RNA-Seq analysis of TZD treatment of mOS cells
re-confirmed the reciprocal antagonistic relationship
between Wnt and PPARγ signaling in the mesenchymal
lineage. Even more striking was the down regulation of
Hippo targets in the osteosarcoma cells. This could be due
to the fact that osteosarcoma cells are addicted to YAP
expression that needs to be down-regulated for adipogenic
differentiation to occur, unlike normal mesenchymal and
pre-adipocytic cells.
The gene expression signature we developed reflects
the unique interplay between Hippo, Wnt and PPARγ
signaling. Low TIMP3 (Wnt target), and high CTGF (YAP
target) and PPARγ expression suggest a more aggressive
osteosarcoma sub-type with low Wnt and Hippo signaling,
and a higher propensity to adipocytic differentiation as
reflected by high PPARγ expression. Interestingly, in both
the databases queried, we found that TIMP3High CTGFLow
PPARγLow (more differentiated and less aggressive
osteosarcoma sub-type) cancers was associated with better
survival using two independent cohorts. This analysis
recapitulates the antagonistic relationship described
between Wnt and PPARγ signaling in normal bone, in the
context of osteosarcoma development.
In view of the results presented above, it may
seem counterintuitive that high levels of an adipogenic
factor (PPARγ), low activity of an antiadipogenic, proosteogenic pathway (Wnt), and low Hippo function
would characterize highly aggressive tumors with poor
prognosis. Low Wnt activity, high levels of PPARγ and
low Hippo pathway activity characterize the CSC fraction
of the osteosarcoma cell population, where high Sox2
expression antagonizes the Hippo pathway, represses
the Wnt pathway and regulates PPARγ expression. We
therefore believe that the survival analyses reflect the
fact that the least differentiated, most aggressive tumors
contain a larger proportion of CSC than the more benign
tumors, a conclusion previously reached by an analysis
of lung and breast cancers [52]. In this view the most
aggressive osteosarcomas would be the ones that could
mostly benefit from a CSC targeted differentiation
therapy. Of particular interest is the fact that this signature
is predictive of survival in two different data sets and is
independent of the tumor heterogeneity of osteosarcomas.
Despite the therapeutic potential of TZDs for DT,
their clinical use has been challenged because of their
safety profile with long-term use as in diabetes.[19] This
includes significant weight gain, bone loss, and increased
risk of fracture and bladder cancer. However, a more
recent and larger study has determined that pioglitazone
use was not associated with an increased risk to bladder
cancer [53]. The relationship between exposure duration
and adverse effects makes it important to modulate
treatment to maximize the benefit-risk ratio. Unlike the

TZDs mimic reactivation of Hippo signaling in
osteosarcoma cells
Hippo signaling has been identified as a tumor
suppressive pathway in tumors of both epithelial and
mesenchymal origin cancers. When active, the pathway
phosphorylates and suppresses the transcriptional coactivators YAP and TAZ/WWTR1. We have previously
demonstrated that osteosarcomas have high YAP
activity,which maintains CSCs. Loss of YAP decreases the
stem cell fraction and restores osteogenic differentiation
[17]. The other transcriptional co-activator, TAZ/WWTR1,
targeted by the Hippo signaling pathway is expressed at
very low levels in mOS-482 cells.
Treatment of osteosarcoma cells with TZDs leads
to YAP phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion, with a
decrease in canonical YAP target genes, suggesting that
TZDs exert their tumor suppressive activity in part through
a mechanism akin to activation of the Hippo pathway.
While the exact mechanism of this re-activation remains
to be deciphered, experiments in 3T3-L1 cells suggest
that TZD treatment activates Lats2, one of the upstream
kinases that phosphorylate YAP [51]. Hippo signaling
is probably not the only mechanism of action of TZDs.
TZDs synergizes with verteporfin, an agent interfere
with YAP-TEAD interaction, to block osteosarcoma
growth. This points to a novel combination of drugs to
target osteosarcomas. Like the TZDs, verterporfin is
also in clinical use thus providing a rationale for drug
repurposing.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60965

Oncotarget

In vivo tumorigenicity assay

use of TZDs for the treatment of T2D that is typically
low-dose and long-term, we anticipate that TZD use in
DT would be high-dose, short-term in turning aggressive
tumor cells to less proliferative fat cells. This along with
the emergence of second-generation TZDs maintains its
promising outlook [19]. Thus DT via TZD treatment may
be a potential adjuvant therapy for osteosarcoma and other
cancers of the mesenchymal lineage. DT would also be
applicable to other cancers such as gliomas where CSCs
have been identified.

Tumorigenesis studies were performed at the
Antitumor Assessment Facility at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center (IACUC Protocol Number
A3311-01). 106 cells were injected subcutaneously into
female NOD/SCID mice . Animals were monitored and
weighed twice weekly. Tumor volumes were measured by
Vernier calipers. Two treatment groups were established
with ten mice per group. Mice were gavage-fed vehicle
or rosiglitazone (100 mg/kg) five days a week for of four
weeks. For orthotopic intrafemoral tumor assays, 106
cells mOS-482 cells were injected intrafemorally above
the knee joint in 6-8 week old NOD-SCID female mice.
5 mice in each group were fed orally with vehicle or
rosiglitazone (100mg/kg) at the start of transplantation
(five days a week for three weeks) and were monitored for
tumor growth by palpation and weekly by X-ray. Upon
sacrifice femurs were analyzed by micro CT (Skyscan) at
the NYU School of Dentistry micro CT core.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
The mouse osteosarcoma cell line mOS-482 was
attained from a spontaneous osteosarcoma and previously
described [7]. The human osteosarcoma cell line OS-187
and Saos-2-LM7 were obtained from Dr. N. Gordon,
and Dr. E. Kleinerman respectively, MD. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX. Cells were maintained at
37ºC in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and
antibiotics.

In vitro growth assay
OS cells were plated at a density of 5,000 cells/well
in 24-well plates in supplemented DMEM. Cells were
treated with various concentrations of TZDs (Cayman
Chemicals, stock = 100 mM) in triplicate prepared in
DMSO solvent. FGF21 (stock = 2.4 mg/mL) dilutions
were prepared in a 50% glycerol buffer. Cell counts were
attained using a hemocytometer after 48 and 72 hours at
37ºC.

Survival analysis
Survival analysis was carried out for a proposed
subset of genes using the Cox-proportional hazards models
as implemented survival package in R. We employed the
following patient cohorts: the sarcoma patients cohort
collected by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; https://
tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/) and an osteosarcoma cohort
collected by Kelly at al. For a gene signatures and a patient
cohort, using a previously proposed methodology [54]: by
computing an activity score for each patient in the cohort
as follows: all genes are z-score transformed, then for
each sample we add the z-score for up-regulated genes
and subtract it for down-regulated genes. Specimens were
sorted by activity score, then survival association was
evaluated using R.

Immunohistochemistry
Tissues were fixed and embedded in paraffin.
Paraffin-embedded sections were deparaffinized in
Citrosolv and then rehydrated in an ethanol series. Antigen
retrieval was performed at pH 6, 10mM sodium citrate
buffer and slides were blocked in goat serum. Antibodies
used - Ki67 antibody at 1:200 dilution (Thermo Scientific),
SOX2 at 1:200 dilution (Millipore), or anti YAP at 1:400
dilution (Santa Cruz). Staining was visualized using a
Vectastain Elite ABC Kit (Vector Labs). Control IgG was
used as a negative control.

In vitro scratch assay

Adipogenic differentiation

106 cells were plated in six-well plates and grown
to confluency. Cells were subsequently serum-starved and
a scratch was made on the monolayer using a pipette tip.
Cells were then treated with TZD prepared in serum-free
DMEM for 18h cells were briefly stained with Hoechst
33342. Images were taken using a Carl Zeiss AxioCam
MRc camera.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24- well plates were seeded at 50,000 cells/well
in supplemented DMEM. Cells in duplicate wells were
treated with adipogenic induction media and grown in a
37ºC incubator for various time points over several days.
Adipogenic medium contains 100µM indomethacin,
10µg/µl insulin, 100nM dexamethasone, and 250µM
isobutylmethylxanthine. Adipogenesis was detected by
60966

Oncotarget

staining with Oil-Red-O (Sigma).

R. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was carried out
using the GSEA software package [56]. We integrated the
transcriptome profiling of C3H 10T1/2 MSCs and 3T3L1
response to Rosi generated by Rong et al; we derived the
gene signatures of Rosi response using t-test (p < 0.05)
and fold change exceeding 1.5x.

Western blotting
Cells were grown in supplemented DMEM in a 37ºC
incubator until confluent. The medium was changed every
three days and lysed in radio-immunoprecipitation assay
(RIPA) buffer containing protease inhibitors. Samples
were kept on ice for thirty minutes and after centrifugation
at 13,000 rpm for twenty minutes, the supernatants were
collected. After determining the protein concentrations
of the cell extracts using a Bio-Rad DC protein assay,
samples were run on a SDS-PAGE gel. The separated
proteins were transferred overnight to a polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) membrane at 4ºC. The following day, the
membrane was blocked via application of 5% nonfat dry
milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.05% Tween-20 (TBST)
for an hour at room temperature. Membranes were probed
with primary antibodies (all at 1:1000 dilutions) for
SOX2 (Cell Signaling), β-catenin (Millipore) and PPARγ
(Cell Signaling). Anti-tubulin antibodies were used as a
normalization control. Following secondary probing with
monoclonal anti-mouse or polyclonal anti-rabbit antibody
probes, protein blots were visualized with an enhanced
chemiluminesence detection reagent (Amersham),
exposed to an X-ray film, and developed.

Survival analysis
Survival analysis was carried out for a proposed
subset of genes using the Cox-proportional hazards models
as implemented survival package in R. We employed the
following patient cohorts: the sarcoma patients cohort
collected by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; https://
tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/) and an osteosarcoma cohort
collected by Kelly at al. For a gene signatures and a patient
cohort, using a previously proposed methodology [54]: by
computing an activity score for each patient in the cohort
as follows: all genes are z-score transformed, then for
each sample we add the z-score for up-regulated genes
and subtract it for down-regulated genes. Specimens were
sorted by activity score, then survival association was
evaluated using R.

Micro-CT analysis
Changes in localized bone microstructure were
assessed using a microCT system (SkyScan 1172; Bruker
microCT, Belgium) where projections (4000x4000 pixels)
of the distal femur were acquired at a nominal isotropic
resolution of 9 um. To reduce the variability in the beam
intensity profiles across the image, the approximate
centerline of each bone was aligned to the axis of rotation
of the system. A 10W power energy setting (100 kV and
100mA) and a 0.5-mm aluminum filter were used to
minimize beam hardening effects by filtering out lowenergy photons. An alignment procedure and flat-field
detector calibration were performed to minimize ring
artifacts and increase signal-to-noise ratio. Then, 180°
degree scans were performed with five X-ray projections
acquired every 0.3 degrees, each with an exposure time
of 1070 ms. These scanning parameters, were chosen
in accordance with the guidelines for mCT analysis of
rodent bone structure [35]. A modified back-projection
reconstruction algorithm (v.1.6.5, NRecon, SkyScan;
Bruker microCT, Belgium) [36] was used to generate
cross-sectional images from the X-ray projections.
Images were optimized and corrected for ring artifacts and
further beam hardening correction was achieved using the
NRecon software to check that the X-ray intensity profiles
across the bone cross-section remained linear. Using
manufacturer software (CtAn, Bruker microCT, Belgium)
the tumor regions were re-oriented such that regions of
interest (ROIs) could be defined and compared in the
transverse plane. 3D parameters were assessed to describe

Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy mini kit
(Qiagen) and treated with DNase using the manufacturer’s
protocol. 0.5µg of purified RNA was reverse transcribed
at 42 degrees for 65min using SuperScript II RT and
Oligo(dT) as a primer in a final volume of 20µL. 2µL
was used as a template for amplification using gene
specific primers sets. RT-PCR was carried out on a Light
Cycler Instrument using the DNA Master SYBR Green
I dye intercalation assay (Roche). Actin was used as a
normalization control.

Transcriptomic data analysis
Total RNA from triplicate plates of control (DMSO)
treated or Rosi treated cells was prepared using RNeasy
columns. Illumina libraries and were prepared with the
TruSeq protocol and sequenced on Illumina Hi Seq 2000
at the NYULMC Genome Technology Center. Reads were
mapped with TopHat to the University of California Santa
Cruz (UCSC) mouse genome mm10 genome assembly
[55]. Gene expression was quantified with Cufflinks 2.0
software [55]; significant changes were assessed using
T-test for statistical significance (p < 0.05) and fold
change of 1.5, using the R statistical analysis system.
Unsupervised clustering visualization was generated using
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60967

Oncotarget

the mineralized microstructure in the region: bone volume
(BV), total volume (TV), from which the bone volume
fraction was calculated (BV/TV), bone surface area (BS),
as well as total porosity and more refined derivatives
including closed porosity, open porosity and pore number/
volume. The standard trabecular bone microstructural
parameters are not reported here since this is a pathological
bone formation system, and those measurements are not
easily interpretable in this setting.

osteosarcoma: a naturally occurring disease to inform
pediatric oncology. ILAR J. 2014; 55:69-85.
6.	 Helman LJ and Meltzer P. Mechanisms of sarcoma
development. Nature reviews Cancer. 2003; 3:685-694.
7.	 Walkley CR, Qudsi R, Sankaran VG, Perry JA, Gostissa
M, Roth SI, Rodda SJ, Snay E, Dunning P, Fahey FH,
Alt FW, McMahon AP and Orkin SH. Conditional mouse
osteosarcoma, dependent on p53 loss and potentiated by
loss of Rb, mimics the human disease. Genes Dev. 2008;
22:1662-1676.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Berman SD, Calo E, Landman AS, Danielian PS, Miller
ES, West JC, Fonhoue BD, Caron A, Bronson R, Bouxsein
ML, Mukherjee S and Lees JA. Metastatic osteosarcoma
induced by inactivation of Rb and p53 in the osteoblast
lineage. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2008; 105:11851-11856.

We thank Dr Elisa de Stanchina of MSKCC
antitumor facility for in vivo experiments. We wish to
thank Roger Cui for help with early studies that lead to this
study and the efforts of the Genomics and Histopathology
core services at NYU Langone Medical Center as well as
the micro CT imaging core at NYU College of Dentistry.
Dog osteosarcoma cells OSA2, were a gift from Dr Maria
Rescigno (IEO, Milan, Italy).

9.	 Basu-Roy U, Ambrosetti D, Favaro R, Nicolis SK,
Mansukhani A and Basilico C. The transcription factor
Sox2 is required for osteoblast self-renewal. Cell Death
Differ. 2010; 17:1345-1353.
10.	 Gibbs CP, Kukekov VG, Reith JD, Tchigrinova O, Suslov
ON, Scott EW, Ghivizzani SC, Ignatova TN and Steindler
DA. Stem-like cells in bone sarcomas: implications for
tumorigenesis. Neoplasia. 2005; 7:967-976.

CONFLICTs OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

11.	 Martins-Neves SR, Paiva-Oliveira DI, Wijers-Koster PM,
Abrunhosa AJ, Fontes-Ribeiro C, Bovee JV, Cleton-Jansen
AM and Gomes CM. Chemotherapy induces stemness in
osteosarcoma cells through activation of Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling. Cancer letters. 2016; 370:286-295.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by NCI grant NIH/
NC1-R21 CA186031 and by NYSTEM C029560.

12.	 Riggi N, Suva ML, De Vito C, Provero P, Stehle JC,
Baumer K, Cironi L, Janiszewska M, Petricevic T, Suva
D, Tercier S, Joseph JM, Guillou L and Stamenkovic I.
EWS-FLI-1 modulates miRNA145 and SOX2 expression
to initiate mesenchymal stem cell reprogramming toward
Ewing sarcoma cancer stem cells. Genes Dev. 2010;
24:916-932.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

13.	 Bass AJ, Watanabe H, Mermel CH, Yu S, Perner S, Verhaak
RG, Kim SY, Wardwell L, Tamayo P, Gat-Viks I, Ramos
AH, Woo MS, Weir BA, Getz G, Beroukhim R, O’Kelly
M, et al. SOX2 is an amplified lineage-survival oncogene
in lung and esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. Nature
genetics. 2009; 41:1238-1242.

REFERENCES
1.	 Heare T, Hensley MA and Dell‘Orfano S. Bone tumors:
osteosarcoma and Ewing’s sarcoma. Curr Opin Pediatr.
2009; 21:365-372.

14.	 Favaro R, Appolloni I, Pellegatta S, Sanga AB, Pagella
P, Gambini E, Pisati F, Ottolenghi S, Foti M, Finocchiaro
G, Malatesta P and Nicolis SK. Sox2 is required to
maintain cancer stem cells in a mouse model of high-grade
oligodendroglioma. Cancer research. 2014; 74:1833-1844.

2.	 Marina N, Gebhardt M, Teot L and Gorlick R. Biology
and therapeutic advances for pediatric osteosarcoma.
Oncologist. 2004; 9:422-441.
3.	 Smith MA, Seibel NL, Altekruse SF, Ries LA, Melbert
DL, O’Leary M, Smith FO and Reaman GH. Outcomes for
children and adolescents with cancer: challenges for the
twenty-first century. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:2625-2634.
4.	

15.	 Basu-Roy U, Seo E, Ramanathapuram L, Rapp TB,
Perry JA, Orkin SH, Mansukhani A and Basilico C.
Sox2 maintains self renewal of tumor-initiating cells in
osteosarcomas. Oncogene. 2012; 31:2270-2282.

Rainusso N, Wang LL and Yustein JT. The adolescent and
young adult with cancer: state of the art — bone tumors.
Curr Oncol Rep. 2013; 15:296-307.

16.	 Yu FX, Zhao B and Guan KL. Hippo Pathway in Organ
Size Control, Tissue Homeostasis, and Cancer. Cell. 2015;

5.	 Fenger JM, London CA and Kisseberth WC. Canine
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60968

Oncotarget

RT, Mangelsdorf DJ and Kliewer SA. Fibroblast Growth
Factor-21 Regulates PPAR gamma Activity and the
Antidiabetic Actions of Thiazolidinediones. Cell. 2012;
148:556-567.

163:811-828.
17.	Basu-Roy U, Bayin NS, Rattanakorn K, Han E,
Placantonakis DG, Mansukhani A and Basilico C. Sox2
antagonizes the Hippo pathway to maintain stemness in
cancer cells. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6411.

31.	 Wei S, Yang J, Lee SL, Kulp SK and Chen CS.
PPARgamma-independent
antitumor
effects
of
thiazolidinediones. Cancer letters. 2009; 276:119-124.

18.	 Cruz FD and Matushansky I. Solid tumor differentiation
therapy - is it possible? Oncotarget. 2012; 3:559-567. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.512.

32.	 Panigrahy D, Singer S, Shen LQ, Butterfield CE, Freedman
DA, Chen EJ, Moses MA, Kilroy S, Duensing S, Fletcher
C, Fletcher JA, Hlatky L, Hahnfeldt P, Folkman J and
Kaipainen A. PPARgamma ligands inhibit primary tumor
growth and metastasis by inhibiting angiogenesis. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2002; 110:923-932.

19.	 Cariou B, Charbonnel B and Staels B. Thiazolidinediones
and PPARgamma agonists: time for a reassessment. Trends
Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 23:205-215.
20.	 Wagner ER, He BC, Chen L, Zuo GW, Zhang W, Shi Q,
Luo Q, Luo X, Liu B, Luo J, Rastegar F, He CJ, Hu Y,
Boody B, Luu HH, He TC, et al. Therapeutic Implications
of PPARgamma in Human Osteosarcoma. PPAR Res.
2010; 2010:956427.

33.	 Cellai I, Petrangolini G, Tortoreto M, Pratesi G, Luciani
P, Deledda C, Benvenuti S, Ricordati C, Gelmini S, Ceni
E, Galli A, Balzi M, Faraoni P, Serio M and Peri A. In
vivo effects of rosiglitazone in a human neuroblastoma
xenograft. British journal of cancer. 2010; 102:685-692.

21.	 Tontonoz P and Spiegelman BM. Fat and beyond: the
diverse biology of PPARgamma. Annu Rev Biochem.
2008; 77:289-312.

34.	 Lazarenko OP, Rzonca SO, Hogue WR, Swain FL, Suva LJ
and Lecka-Czernik B. Rosiglitazone induces decreases in
bone mass and strength that are reminiscent of aged bone.
Endocrinology. 2007; 148:2669-2680.

22.	 Soccio RE, Chen ER and Lazar MA. Thiazolidinediones
and the promise of insulin sensitization in type 2 diabetes.
Cell Metab. 2014; 20:573-591.

35.	 Bouxsein ML, Boyd SK, Christiansen BA, Guldberg RE,
Jepsen KJ and Muller R. Guidelines for assessment of
bone microstructure in rodents using micro-computed
tomography. J Bone Miner Res. 2010; 25:1468-1486.

23.	 Blanquicett C, Roman J and Hart CM. Thiazolidinediones
as anti-cancer agents. Cancer Ther. 2008; 6:25-34.
24.	 Tang N, Song WX, Luo J, Haydon RC and He TC.
Osteosarcoma development and stem cell differentiation.
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2008; 466:2114-2130.

36.	 Palacio-Mancheno PE, Larriera AI, Doty SB, Cardoso L
and Fritton SP. 3D assessment of cortical bone porosity
and tissue mineral density using high-resolution microCT:
effects of resolution and threshold method. J Bone Miner
Res. 2014; 29:142-150.

25.	 Tang W, Zeve D, Seo J, Jo AY and Graff JM.
Thiazolidinediones regulate adipose lineage dynamics. Cell
Metab. 2011; 14:116-122.
26.	 Step SE, Lim HW, Marinis JM, Prokesch A, Steger DJ, You
SH, Won KJ and Lazar MA. Anti-diabetic rosiglitazone
remodels the adipocyte transcriptome by redistributing
transcription to PPARgamma-driven enhancers. Genes Dev.
2014; 28:1018-1028.

37.	 Seo E, Basu-Roy U, Zavadil J, Basilico C and Mansukhani
A. Distinct functions of sox2 control self-renewal and
differentiation in the osteoblast lineage. Mol Cell Biol.
2011; 31:4593-4608.
38.	 Rong JX, Klein JL, Qiu Y, Xie M, Johnson JH, Waters KM,
Zhang V, Kashatus JA, Remlinger KS, Bing N, Crosby RM,
Jackson TK, Witherspoon SM, Moore JT, Ryan TE, Neill
SD, et al. Rosiglitazone Induces Mitochondrial Biogenesis
in Differentiated Murine 3T3-L1 and C3H/10T1/2
Adipocytes. PPAR Res. 2011; 2011:179454.

27.	 Angstadt AY, Motsinger-Reif A, Thomas R, Kisseberth
WC, Guillermo Couto C, Duval DL, Nielsen DM, Modiano
JF and Breen M. Characterization of canine osteosarcoma
by array comparative genomic hybridization and RT-qPCR:
signatures of genomic imbalance in canine osteosarcoma
parallel the human counterpart. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer. 2011; 50:859-874.

39.	 Kang S, Bennett CN, Gerin I, Rapp LA, Hankenson
KD and Macdougald OA. Wnt signaling stimulates
osteoblastogenesis of mesenchymal precursors by
suppressing CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma. J Biol
Chem. 2007; 282:14515-14524.

28.	 Wei W, Dutchak PA, Wang XD, Ding XS, Wang XQ,
Bookout AL, Goetz R, Mohammadi M, Gerard RD,
Dechow PC, Mangelsdorf DJ, Kliewer SA and Wan
YH. Fibroblast growth factor 21 promotes bone loss by
potentiating the effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2012; 109:31433148.

40.	Takada I, Kouzmenko AP and Kato S. Wnt and
PPARgamma signaling in osteoblastogenesis and
adipogenesis. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2009; 5:442-447.
41.	 Halder G and Johnson RL. Hippo signaling: growth control
and beyond. Development. 2011; 138:9-22.

29.	 Potthoff MJ, Kliewer SA and Mangelsdorf DJ. Endocrine
fibroblast growth factors 15/19 and 21: from feast to famine.
Genes Dev. 2012; 26:312-324.

42.	 Zhao B, Li L, Lei Q and Guan KL. The Hippo-YAP
pathway in organ size control and tumorigenesis: an

30.	 Dutchak PA, Katafuchi T, Bookout AL, Choi JH, Yu
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60969

Oncotarget

50.	 He BC, Chen L, Zuo GW, Zhang W, Bi Y, Huang J, Wang
Y, Jiang W, Luo Q, Shi Q, Zhang BQ, Liu B, Lei X, Luo
J, Luo X, Wagner ER, et al. Synergistic antitumor effect of
the activated PPARgamma and retinoid receptors on human
osteosarcoma. Clinical cancer research. 2010; 16:22352245.

updated version. Genes & development. 2010; 24:862-874.
43.	 Pan D. The hippo signaling pathway in development and
cancer. Developmental cell. 2010; 19:491-505.
44.	 Liu-Chittenden Y, Huang B, Shim JS, Chen Q, Lee
SJ, Anders RA, Liu JO and Pan D. Genetic and
pharmacological disruption of the TEAD-YAP complex
suppresses the oncogenic activity of YAP. Genes Dev.
2012; 26:1300-1305.

51.	 An Y, Kang Q, Zhao Y, Hu X and Li N. Lats2 modulates
adipocyte proliferation and differentiation via hippo
signaling. PloS one. 2013; 8:e72042.

45.	 Kelly AD, Haibe-Kains B, Janeway KA, Hill KE, Howe
E, Goldsmith J, Kurek K, Perez-Atayde AR, Francoeur N,
Fan JB, April C, Schneider H, Gebhardt MC, Culhane A,
Quackenbush J and Spentzos D. MicroRNA paraffin-based
studies in osteosarcoma reveal reproducible independent
prognostic profiles at 14q32. Genome Med. 2013; 5:2.

52.	 Pece S, Tosoni D, Confalonieri S, Mazzarol G, Vecchi M,
Ronzoni S, Bernard L, Viale G, Pelicci PG and Di Fiore PP.
Biological and molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers
correlates with their cancer stem cell content. Cell. 2010;
140:62-73.
53.	 Lewis JD, Habel LA, Quesenberry CP, Strom BL, Peng
T, Hedderson MM, Ehrlich SF, Mamtani R, Bilker W,
Vaughn DJ, Nessel L, Van Den Eeden SK and Ferrara A.
Pioglitazone Use and Risk of Bladder Cancer and Other
Common Cancers in Persons With Diabetes. JAMA. 2015;
314:265-277.

46.	 Chen X, Bahrami A, Pappo A, Easton J, Dalton J, Hedlund
E, Ellison D, Shurtleff S, Wu G, Wei L, Parker M, Rusch
M, Nagahawatte P, Wu J, Mao S, Boggs K, et al. Recurrent
somatic structural variations contribute to tumorigenesis in
pediatric osteosarcoma. Cell Rep. 2014; 7:104-112.
47.	 Kovac M, Blattmann C, Ribi S, Smida J, Mueller NS,
Engert F, Castro-Giner F, Weischenfeldt J, Kovacova M,
Krieg A, Andreou D, Tunn PU, Durr HR, Rechl H, Schaser
KD, Melcher I, et al. Exome sequencing of osteosarcoma
reveals mutation signatures reminiscent of BRCA
deficiency. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8940.

54.	 Taylor BS, Schultz N, Hieronymus H, Gopalan A, Xiao
Y, Carver BS, Arora VK, Kaushik P, Cerami E, Reva B,
Antipin Y, Mitsiades N, Landers T, Dolgalev I, Major JE,
Wilson M, et al. Integrative genomic profiling of human
prostate cancer. Cancer cell. 2010; 18:11-22.
55.	 Trapnell C, Williams BA, Pertea G, Mortazavi A, Kwan
G, van Baren MJ, Salzberg SL, Wold BJ and Pachter L.
Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals
unannotated transcripts and isoform switching during cell
differentiation. Nat Biotechnol. 2010; 28:511-515.

48.	 Perry JA, Kiezun A, Tonzi P, Van Allen EM, Carter SL,
Baca SC, Cowley GS, Bhatt AS, Rheinbay E, Pedamallu
CS, Helman E, Taylor-Weiner A, McKenna A, DeLuca
DS, Lawrence MS, Ambrogio L, et al. Complementary
genomic approaches highlight the PI3K/mTOR pathway as
a common vulnerability in osteosarcoma. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2014; 111:E5564-5573.

56.	 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S,
Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub
TR, Lander ES and Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment
analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2005; 102:15545-15550.

49.	 Moriarity BS, Otto GM, Rahrmann EP, Rathe SK, Wolf
NK, Weg MT, Manlove LA, LaRue RS, Temiz NA,
Molyneux SD, Choi K, Holly KJ, Sarver AL, Scott MC,
Forster CL, Modiano JF, et al. A Sleeping Beauty forward
genetic screen identifies new genes and pathways driving
osteosarcoma development and metastasis. Nature genetics.
2015; 47:615-624.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60970

Oncotarget

