Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Delivery of improved oncolytic adenoviruses by mesenchymal
stromal cells for elimination of tumorigenic pancreatic cancer
cells
Adam Kaczorowski1, Katharina Hammer2, Li Liu1, Sabine Villhauer1, Clifford
Nwaeburu1, Pei Fan1, Zhefu Zhao1, Jury Gladkich1, Wolfgang Groß1, Dirk
M. Nettelbeck2, Ingrid Herr1
1

 urgical Research Section, Molecular OncoSurgery, Department of General and Transplantation Surgery, University of
S
Heidelberg and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

2

Oncolytic Adenovirus Group, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

Correspondence to: Ingrid Herr, e-mail: i.herr@uni-heidelberg.de
Keywords: TRAIL, virus therapy
Received: October 05, 2015     Accepted: January 15, 2016     Published: January 27, 2016

ABSTRACT
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is one of the most aggressive
malignancies and has poor therapeutic options. We evaluated improved oncolytic
adenoviruses (OAds), in which the adenoviral gene E1B19K was deleted or a TRAIL
transgene was inserted. Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) served as
carriers for protected and tumor-specific virus transfers. The infection competence,
tumor migration, and oncolysis were measured in cancer stem cell (CSC) models
of primary and established tumor cells and in tumor xenografts. All OAds infected
and lysed CSCs and prevented colony formation. MSCs migrated into PDA spheroids
without impaired homing capacity. Xenotransplantation of non-infected PDA cells
mixed with infected tumor cells strongly reduced the tumor volume and the expression
of the proliferation marker Ki67 along with a necrotic morphology. Adenoviral capsid
protein was detected in tumor xenograft tissue after intravenous injection of infected
MSCs, but not in normal tissue, implying tumor-specific migration. Likewise, direct in
vivo treatment correlated with a strongly reduced tumor volume, lower expression
of Ki67 and CD24, and enhanced activity of caspase 3. These data demonstrate that
the improved OAds induced efficient oncolysis with the OAd-TRAIL as most promising
candidate for future clinical application.

released, which then infect and lyse neighboring tumor
cells. The therapeutic potential involves the activation
of endogenous tumor immune responses [6]. A major
advantage of OAds is their excellent safety profile, which
has been demonstrated in multiple studies of patients with
ovarian cancer, melanoma, soft tissue or primary bone
sarcoma and other neoplasms [3-5, 7-12]. In engineered
OAds, the virus capsid is modified to improve binding to
tumor cells [13]. Virus carriers have been studied to shield
viruses against inactivation by neutralizing antibodies
present in many patients from earlier adenovirus infections
[14]. Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) have been used
as carriers due to their reported tumor-specific homing
capacity, which enables the protected transfer and release
of the viruses on site [14–17]. Castleton and colleagues

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is one of
the most aggressive malignancies [1]. The poor prognosis
is attributed to cancer stem cells (CSCs), which survive
conventional cytotoxic therapy due to defense and survival
mechanisms [2].
Viral treatment of cancer is an old concept that has
been revisited in recent years using genetically modified
viruses, including oncolytic adenoviruses (OAds). OAds
are in clinical development for the treatment of various
cancers because the replication of the viruses can be
restricted to malignant cells [3–5]. OAds replicate in
tumor cells; at the end of the viral replication cycle,
the cell is lysed, and new infectious virus particles are
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9046

Oncotarget

RESULTS

[18] provided evidence that MSCs can be efficiently used
as carriers for systemic delivery of oncolytic measles
virus to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia, even in the
presence of high-titer neutralizing antibodies. Of particular
interest is a small pilot study of OAd-delivery by MSCs
in four children with metastatic neuroblastoma refractory
to front-line therapies [19]. The patients received several
doses of autologous MSCs carrying ICOVIR-5, an
AdΔ24RGD-derivative OAd with tumor specificity that
was designed to increase replication potency in tumor cells
[20]. The tolerance to the treatment was excellent, and a
complete clinical response was documented in one case.
The child remained in complete remission 3 years after
this therapy. Current efforts concentrate on increasing the
efficacy of OAds, e.g., by inserting therapeutic genes [21]
to support tumor lysis by inducing apoptosis or an antitumor immune response [6].
Recently, we genetically engineered adenoviruses
for improved delivery by MSCs with the aim of enhancing
oncolysis and improving virus production in PDA
cells [22]. In this prior study, the capsid of adenovirus
serotype 5, from which regular OAds are derived, was
modified, resulting in consistently strong infection of
PDA cells and MSCs [22]. The adenovirus was modified
by inserting the chimeric Ad5/3 fiber, in which the knob
domain with the HAdV-5 fiber has been replaced by the
corresponding domain of the HAdV-3 fiber, binding to
the widely expressed desmoglein-2 [22]. Thus, cell entry
is independent of coxsackievirus-adenovirus receptor
(CAR), which is poorly expressed on the cell surface of
PDA cells and MSCs [22]. In addition, the replication
and release of OAds in infected cells was improved by
deleting the pro-apoptotic early adenoviral gene E1B19K
or expression of the full-length human TRAIL gene from
a viral transcription unit. The deletion of E1B19K has
been reported to increase viral release and spread and,
consequently, the therapeutic efficacy in experimental
PDA models [23]. TRAIL was inserted because this
tumor-specific death ligand induces paracrine apoptosis
in neighboring tumor cells by eliminating non-infected
tumor cells and autocrine effects presumably responsible
for improved viral cell lysis and release in infected MSCs
and PDA cells. Also, TRAIL exhibited low side effects
in phase I/II clinical studies [24]. The resulting viruses
Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc and Ad5/3-TRAIL demonstrated
strongly increased total viral particle production and
release from MSCs compared to the parental virus Ad5/3Luc [22].
In the present study, we investigated the therapeutic
efficacy of the improved OAds in established and primary
CSC marker-enriched PDA cell lines after administration
alone or via MSC carriers by in vitro invasion assays
and xenotransplantation studies. The Ad5/3-TRAIL
construct enabled effective tumor invasion by OAdMSCs in spheroids and xenografts and significant in vivo
elimination of tumorigenic cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Oncolytic adenoviruses infect primary
pancreatic CSCs
To study the influence of OAd constructs on
the potential for self-renewal, MIA-PaCa2 cells were
infected, and live cells were re-seeded at clonogenic
density 24 h later. After 2 weeks, the non-infected cells
had formed colonies, but no colonies were detected in
cells infected with the regular OAd construct Ad5/3Luc or with the improved OAd constructs Ad5/3-Δ19K-.
Luc or Ad5/3-TRAIL (Figure 1A, compare to Table 1),
suggesting that the cells were already completely lysed
by the parental virus. To evaluate the invasion potential
of the OAd constructs in three-dimensional (3D), primary
CSC spheroids, tumor cells were isolated from patientderived PDA tissue by serial transplantation in mice and
subsequent spheroidal culture (Figure 1B). These primary
tumor spheroids are highly enriched in CSC markers [25].
The spheroids were infected, and 24 h later, the presence
of adenoviral capsid protein, which reflects the amount
and location of viruses, was detected by staining with a
specific antibody. In addition, the expression of the CSC
marker c-Met was detected by double immunofluorescence
staining. Green-fluorescent-labeled adenoviral capsid
protein was detected only in infected cells and not noninfected control cells (Figure 1C). By contrast, the redfluorescent c-Met protein was present in infected and
non-infected cells, demonstrating the CSC character of
the spheroidal cell model. Double-stained, adenoviral
capsid and c-Met-positive, yellow fluorescent cells were
present in high amounts. These results indicate that all
tested OAds successfully prevent colony formation and
spread in 3D primary CSC spheroids, and no advantage
of the improved OAds was detectable under these in vitro
conditions.

OAd-infected MSC carriers invade tumor
spheroids
For protected and tumor-specific transfer, we used
as carriers MSCs that were isolated from the bone marrow
of different healthy donors, expanded, and selected. In
passage 3, the progenitor cell character of the MSCs was
confirmed according to the minimal criteria for defining
multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells of the International
Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT). Thus, the MSC
were plastic-adherent in standard culture conditions, they
expressed a characteristic surface marker pattern of CD34, CD45-, CD166-, CD44+, CD90+ and CD105+ and they
differentiated to osteoblasts, adipocytes and chondroblasts
in vitro (SFig. 1). Therefore, the MSCs were used for
further experiments between passages 4 and 8.
To evaluate the attraction of OAd-infected MSCs
to tumor spheroids in vitro, MSCs attached to the bottom
9047

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Infection of pancreatic CSCs by OAds. A. MIA-PaCa2 cells were infected at a titer of 200 TCID50 with Ad5/3-Luc

(Luc), Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc (Δ19K-) or Ad5/3-TRAIL (TRAIL), or were left uninfected (CO). Twenty-four hours later, the cells were replated at a low density (400 cells/well) in 6-well plates. After two weeks, colonies containing more than 50 cells were counted using a
dissecting microscope. The number of surviving colonies in the control was set to 1, and the survival fraction is presented. B. Tumor cells
were freshly isolated from a mouse xenograft derived from the primary, low-passage, CSC-enriched human PDA xenograft cell line T30.
The morphologies of the patient tumor and its mouse xenograft in passage 9 were detected by H&E staining and immunohistochemistry.
The cells were cultured in an anchorage-independent manner as spheroids in vitro, which promotes the growth of CSCs (photograph on
the right). C. Primary tumor spheroids were uninfected (CO) or infected at a titer of 200 TCID50 with Ad5/3-Luc (Luc), Ad5/3-Δ19K-.
Luc (Δ19K-) or Ad5/3-TRAIL (TRAIL). Spheroids were fixed and centrifuged on slides 42 h after infection. Adenoviral capsid protein
(green), expression of the CSC marker c-Met (red), or both together (merge, yellow) were detected using specific antibodies and double
immunofluorescence staining. The cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). Representative images at 400× magnification are
shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9048

Oncotarget

Table 1: Properties of the used OAd constructs
Virus name

Abbreviation

Properties

Reference

Ad5/3

-

-

Ad5/3-Luc

Luc

Luciferase gene fused via IRES to the fiber gene.

[23]

Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc

Luc/19K-

Luciferase gene fused via IRES to the fiber gene,
deletion of E1B19K.

[23]

Ad5/3-TRAIL

TRAIL

Human TRAIL gene fused via IRES to the fiber gene.

[23]

present work

All viruses have a 24 amino acid deletion in E1A for tumor-selectivity, an E3-deletion, an Ad5/3 chimeric fiber for
enhanced cell entry and a GFP gene upstream of RITR, expressed from the major late promoter.
of 24-well plates were marked with the red fluorescent
dye PKH26. Twenty-four hours later, the MSCs were
infected or left uninfected with parental Ad5/3-Luc or the
improved Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc or Ad5/3-TRAIL viruses,
and the cells were covered with a gel layer on which
spheroids from PaCaDD183 or MIA-PaCa2 cells were
seeded and co-incubated for 16 h (Figure 2). Forty-two
hours after infection, that is, 6 h before viral lysis [22],
the spheroids were separated, and the integration of red
MSCs was analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy.
Red fluorescent MSCs were detected in all co-incubated
spheroids, suggesting that infected- and non-infected
MSCs were attracted. However, double-fluorescent,
yellow, virus-expressing MSCs were only detected in
spheroids co-incubated with infected MSCs, as expected.
This result suggests the successful migration of MSCs in
3D spheroidal structures.

calculation of the percentage of engrafted xenografts
and tumor volumes. The tumor take rate was 86% in
the control group and 90% for tumor cells containing
1% infected MIA-PaCa2 cells but decreased to 58%
in the presence of 5% infected cells. The adenoviral
capsid protein was present in tumor samples of infected
xenografts, as shown by immunohistochemistry (Figure
3B). Simultaneously, the progression marker CD24
was reduced in infected tumors compared to uninfected
controls, demonstrating the reduction of CD24-expressing
tumor cells by the OAd virus. In addition, proliferation
was strongly reduced in 1% infected cells and nearly
undetectable in 5% infected cells, as concluded from
double immunofluorescence microscopy with the humanspecific markers Ki67 and cytokeratin 19 (Figure 3C).
Moreover, DAPI staining of the cell nuclei revealed
strongly shriveled nuclei in tumors containing 5% infected
cells, indicating complete elimination of tumorigenic cells.
Interestingly, the morphology of xenograft tissue from
infected cell mixtures differed from that of uninfected
control xenografts and contained densely packed,
small cells located in cluster-like structures (Figure 4),
suggesting that these are the regions in which the virus
spread and lysed the cells.

OAd in vitro infection prevents tumorigenicity
To assess the influence of OAd infection on
tumorigenicity, we first used a control Ad5/3 construct to
establish the detection of viral spread in xenograft tumors.
MIA-PaCa2 cells were xenotransplanted in fertilized
chick eggs. This method is an in vivo replacement
method for mouse studies. Chick embryos are naturally
immunodeficient because full immunocompetence in birds
develops only after hatching at day 21 of development
[26]. Xenografted tumors are well supplied by blood
vessels from the CAM, and chick fibroblasts participate
in the formation of the tumor stroma. Most importantly,
the CAM of the chick embryo is not innervated; therefore,
unlike mice, the embryo does not feel pain during
transplantation and tumor growth. Favorably, this system
has no administrative barriers, it is inexpensive and well
suited for short-term in vivo xenograft studies. MIAPaCa2 cells were transplanted in the CAM of fertilized
chick eggs, either as uninfected cells or in cell mixtures
containing 1% or 5% infected cells. Tumor xenografts
developed rapidly from uninfected control cells 9 days
after transplantation (Figure 3A). The embryos were
humanely euthanized, followed by tumor resection and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

OAd-TRAIL is most therapeutically significant
virus in vivo
To compare the invasion, spread and lysis mediated
by the systemic delivery of infected MSCs, Mia-PaCa2
cells were transplanted to the CAM of fertilized chick
eggs. Seven days later, the xenografted eggs were left
untreated, or the CAM vessels were injected with virusinfected MSCs or the Ad5/3-TRAIL virus without carrier
(Figure 5). Two days later, the tumors were resected to
examine the virus distribution in the xenograft tissue.
Tissue sections were prepared and stained with a specific
antibody to detect adenoviral capsid protein. Positive
signals were detected in xenograft tissue from eggs
injected with virus-infected MSCs but not in xenografts
from eggs injected with Ad5/3-TRAIL virus alone or in
control xenografts. By contrast, adenoviral capsid protein

9049

Oncotarget

was not detectable in the xenografts of non-injected eggs,
as expected, or in xenografts from eggs injected with the
Ad5/3-TRAIL-GFP virus alone without MSC carriers.
This result suggests that the delivery of virus with MSCs
was more efficient, and most likely several particles were
present in the same tumor region and thereby enabled the
detection by immunohistochemistry. We cannot rule out
that virus particles were also present in tumor tissue after
transfer of the virus alone, but the isolated particles may

have been too tiny and thus under the detection limit of
immunohistochemistry. Because significant oncolysis
occurred after delivery of virus without MSCs, the virus
must have been replicated and spread with a time delay
compared to MSC-delivered virus (Figure 6A). As a
control for tumor-specific virus distribution, we stained
normal chick embryonal tissue with an antibody for
adenoviral capsid protein, but we were not able to detect
virus particles in liver, heart and lung after virus delivery

Figure 2: OAd-infected MSC carriers invade tumor spheroids. MSCs growing as a monolayer in 24-well plates were stained

with the red fluorescent dye PKH26; 2 μM dye solution (provided by the manufacturer) was added per well. MSCs were infected with
Ad5/3-Luc (Luc), Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc (Δ19K-) or Ad5/3-TRAIL (TRAIL) at a titer of 2000 TCID50 24 h later. Two hours after viral infection,
the MSCs were covered with a 1:1:1 mixture of Matrigel, collagen and methylcellulose in DMEM medium supplemented with 2% FCS.
Immediately afterward, tumor spheroids prepared from the primary, PDA cell line PaCaDD in passage 10 or from the established PDA
cell line MIAPaCa-2 were seeded on top of the gel layer. The cells were co-incubated for 16 h to allow invasion of the MSCs into the
spheroids through the gel layer. The spheroids were then transferred into new culture plates using a pipette and cultivated until 42 h
after infection. Invasion was evaluated by detection of adenoviral capsid protein (green) by staining with a specific antibody and double
immunofluorescence microscopy. Bright field (left), fluorescence (right: Adenoviral capsid protein: green; MSCs: red; Merge: yellow).
Representative images at 400× magnification are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9050

Oncotarget

with or without MSCs (data not shown), suggesting that
the delivery was tumor-specific. Also, we were not able to
prove the presence of MSCs in tumor tissue, due to a lack
of a specific single marker that would distinguish MSCs
from tumor fibroblasts. However, the fact that adenoviral
capsid protein was detectable in tumor tissue after transfer

by MSCs only strongly supports the conclusion that virusinfected MSCs migrated into the tumors.
To assess tumor inhibition, MIA-PaCa2 cells were
transplanted, but the therapy was injected later than
before, at day 11, in CAM blood vessels to allow virus
spread and lysis until the tumors were resected at day 18

Figure 3: OAd-infected PDA cells exhibit reduced tumorigenicity. A. MIA-PaCa2 cells were uninfected or infected with

Ad5/3. Two hours later, 5 × 105 uninfected cells (CO) or ratios of 99:1 (1) or 95:5 (5) 5 × 105 uninfected:infected MIA-PaCa2 cells were
transplanted to the CAM of fertilized chick eggs at day 9 of development (15 eggs per group). The results for xenografted eggs with live
chick embryos were evaluated. The black arrow marks tumor xenograft formed by uninfected MIA-PaCa-2 cells at day 18 of development.
The engraftment efficiency expressed as the % tumor take of transplanted tumors and the tumor volumes were determined, and the single
data points and the means of each group are shown (**P < 0.01). B. The presence of adenoviral capsid protein (Ad-Capsid) and of the
CSC marker CD24 was evaluated by staining with specific antibodies and immunohistochemistry. To evaluate expression levels, a semiquantitative scoring system was used based on the determination of the percentage of positive cells by visual inspection: high (+++),
medium (++), low (+) and absent (-). C. Double immunofluorescence staining of xenograft tissue with a human-specific antibody against
cytokeratin 19 (Cyt19, green) and the proliferation marker Ki67 (red). Cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). Representative
images at 400× magnification are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9051

Oncotarget

(Figure 6A). This strategy resulted in a strong reduction
of the engraftment rate from 89% in the control group to
62% and 58% in the groups that received MSC carriers
with Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc or Ad5/3-TRAIL, respectively.
However, MSC carriers with the parental Ad5/3-Luc virus
or application of the Ad5/3-TRAIL virus alone reduced the
tumor take rate only minimally. The Ad5/3-TRAIL virus
effectively reduced the tumor volume whether transferred
with or without MSCs, suggesting that the virus alone also
homed to the tumor xenografts, but viral spread and lysis
occurred with a time delay. Toxicity to the chick embryos
was not observed, as expected due to the human-specific
nature of the OAds. Immunohistochemistry of tumor
sections demonstrated that all groups treated with OAds
had reduced viability, as determined by Ki67 staining, and

the strongest inhibition was mediated by the two improved
OAds Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc and Ad5/3-TRAIL transferred
by MSCs (Figure 6B). Similarly, the Ad5/3-TRAIL virus
transferred by MSCs was superior at inducing apoptosis,
as shown by staining of the active fragment of caspase-3.
Additionally, all virus-treated groups had reduced
expression of the progression marker CD24, with strongest
and comparable effects in xenografts of eggs injected with
OAds in MSC carriers. Taken together, our findings reveal
that MSC delivery of OAds is superior to the delivery of
OAds alone in tumor therapy. Among the two improved
OAds tested, the Ad5/3-TRAIL virus was superior, most
likely due to the paracrine induction of apoptosis in
parallel to virus-induced tumor cell lysis.

Figure 4: OAd treatment leads to clustered cell regions. MIA-PaCa2 cells were uninfected or infected with Ad5/3. Two hours

later, 5×105 uninfected cells (CO) or ratios of 99:1 (1) or 95:5 (5) 5×105 uninfected:infected MIA-PaCa2 cells were transplanted to the CAM
of fertilized chick eggs at day 9 of development (15 eggs per group). Tissue sections from the resected xenograft tumors were prepared
and stained with a human-specific antibody against cytokeratin 19 (Cyt19). Representative images are shown at 40× magnification, and
compact, cluster-like structures are marked with red arrows. Details of cluster-like structures (Clustered Tissue) and normal tissue structures
(Normal Tissue) are shown at 400× magnification.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9052

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

adenoviral lysis of primary CSCs derived from breast
cancer was observed both in vitro and in orthotopic tumors
in mice [27]. These results support the suitability of OAds
for future therapeutic targeting of CSCs, in agreement
with a recent review article suggesting oncolytic viral
therapy for the targeting of CSCs [28]. Because CSCs
are suggested to be the root of cancer growth, spread
and recurrence [29], only the elimination of these tumor
progenitors may provide a cure for patients with PDA.
Recent clinical studies have demonstrated inefficient
delivery of oncolytic viruses by systemic application.
This inefficiency is due to inactivation of viruses by
the immune system and clearance from the blood by
liver macrophages [30]. To circumvent this problem,
we transferred the engineered OAds via MSC carriers
because these progenitor cells have tumor tropism [31],
sustain the replication of OAds [22], especially of the
improved OAds used here [22], and were recently shown
to release infectious particles in orthotopic lung and breast
tumors [32]. The positive results of our invasion assays, in
which infected MSC virus carriers successfully integrated
through a gel layer into 3D spheroidal cultures of primary
and established PDA cell lines, demonstrate that MSCs
retain their tumor tropism and migration activity to
overcome connective tissue-like structures despite OAd
infection. This finding is particularly important because
the extremely dense fibrotic matrix of PDA prevents even
small therapeutic molecules from entering and perfusing
[33] and is likely responsible for the marked resistance to
chemo- and radiotherapy [34]. Another in vitro study has
highlighted the advantage of adenoviral vector delivery

In the present preclinical study, we investigated the
therapeutic suitability of improved OAds with the aim
of targeting highly therapy-resistant pancreatic stem-like
tumor cells. The genetic engineering of OAds specific
for PDA and MSC carriers and their infection and lysis
efficiency were recently described by us [22]. The present
study focused on the elimination of tumorigenicity,
tumor growth and progression markers in vivo after
administration of the improved OAds alone or via MSC
carriers. We examined the Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc construct,
which features a deletion of the viral gene E1B19K to
permit increased viral release and spread [23], and the
Ad5/3-TRAIL construct to exploit viral lysis by autocrine
TRAIL activity and complement it with inducing paracrine
apoptosis in neighboring, non-infected tumor cells.
Whereas our former publication demonstrated the
successful infection of spheroidal growing established
PDA cell lines [22], the present study showed the
successful OAd infection of primary CSC spheroids from
PDA patient tumors. The OAd constructs completely
prevented the self-renewal potential, which is further
underlined by our observation that no colonies were
formed after infection of the established PDA cell
line MIA-PaCa2. No obvious differences among the
three viruses used were detectable under these in vitro
conditions. The present data extend our prior findings
demonstrating the successful infection of spheroidal
cultures formed by MIA-PaCa2 cells [22]. Moreover,
these data confirm recent reports in which an effective

Figure 5: OAd-infected MSCs invade tumors in vivo. At developmental day 9, 5×105 MIA-PaCa2 cells were transplanted to the

CAM of chick embryos (18 eggs per group). At day 16, the CAM was injected with 100 μL of cell culture medium (CO), 1×108 TCID50
Ad5/3-TRAIL in 100 μL of cell culture medium, or 5×104 MSCs in 100 μL of cell culture medium 2 h after infection with 2000 TCID50 of
Ad5/3-Luc (Luc), Ad5/3-Δ19K-.Luc (Δ19K-) or Ad5/3-TRAIL (TRAIL). The tumor xenografts were resected at day 18. Tissue sections
were prepared and paraffin-embedded, and the expression of adenoviral capsid protein (red) was detected by immunohistochemistry.
Representative images at 400× magnification are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9053

Oncotarget

Figure 6: MSC-delivered OAds reduce tumor growth in vivo. A. Experimental procedure: MIA-PaCa2 cells (5×105) were

transplanted to the CAM of chick embryos at developmental day 9 (20 eggs per group), followed by therapeutic injection at day 11, as
described in Figure 5, and tumor resection at day 18. The tumor take rate and the volume of the resected xenografts were determined,
and the single data points and the means of each group are shown (**P<0.01) along with representative images of tumor xenografts of
each group. B. Sections were prepared from the xenograft tumors and paraffin-embedded, and the expression of Ki67, cleaved fragment
of Caspase 3 (Casp3) and CD24 were examined by immunohistochemistry. Representative images are shown at 400× magnification. The
expression levels were evaluated by a semi-quantitative scoring system as described in Figure 4B.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9054

Oncotarget

by MSCs and observed increased delivery to breast and
ovarian tumor xenografts in mice, with negligible levels
of systemic toxicity compared with administration of
adenovirus alone [35]. In preparation for a phase I clinical
trial in ovarian cancer, significantly prolonged survival
was observed in ovarian cancer-bearing mice treated with
measles virus-infected MSCs from the adipose tissue of
healthy donors and ovarian cancer patients but not those
treated with the virus alone [36].
To detect differences between our OAd constructs,
we examined the viral efficiency in a chick egg tumor
xenograft model. Compared to mice, the egg system
has several advantages, when used for short-time
transplantation of 10 days. The tumor cells are transplanted
to the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), which is a wellvascularized extra-embryonic tissue located underneath
the eggshell. According to our experience, the chick blood
vessels quickly supply the tumor cells with blood. The
chick embryo is naturally immunodeficient and the CAM
readily supports the engraftment of tumor cells. Up to
day 18 of chick development an animal application is not
required, and the costs for the chick system are much lower
compared to the mouse system. The experiments can be
performed in a normal laboratory by the use of inexpensive
egg incubators. Tumor xenografts growing on eggs have
a pronounced tumor stroma, which consists of human
tumor cells, chick fibroblasts, chick vessels and other host
cells and thus provide the advantage of a tumor stroma,
similar to the mouse xenotransplantation system. In a first
approach, we evaluated the effect of a regular OAd virus
infected in vitro, followed by xenotransplantation of a
small amount of infected cells mixed with uninfected cells.
This strategy was chosen because the uninfected cells
can form tumors until the virus from the infected cells
starts to replicate, lyse and spread to neighboring tumor
cells embedded in the protective tissue structure. Indeed,
we observed strongly decreased tumor engraftment and
tumor volume as well as morphological changes in the
virus-bearing tumor tissues, characterized by clusters of
dense tissue. These dense clusters are likely the result
of a cytopathic virus effect, which has been reported in
response to adenovirus infection [37]. Consistent with
these effects, the proliferation and expression of the CSC
marker CD24 was decreased, and hardly any CD24positive or proliferating cells were found in the dense
clusters. We proceeded to transfer the OAd viruses, either
alone or in MSCs, by systemic injection into blood vessels
a few days after the tumor xenografts were transplanted.
Viral capsid protein was detected in tumor tissue two
days after injection, suggesting successful transfer by
MSCs. By contrast, adenoviral capsid protein could not
be detected in tumor tissue after the transfer of virus alone,
or in embryonic tissue, suggesting that the virus transfer
without MSC was less efficient and the delivery by MSC
was specific for tumor tissue. Similar observations were
made in a previous study demonstrating homing of viruswww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

infected MSCs to different tumor types, including tumors
with poor accessibility, such as glioma [15, 38]. Our
results indicate that both of the improved OAds strongly
reduced the expression of markers for stemness (CD24)
and progression (Ki67) and enhanced the presence of the
apoptosis marker “cleaved fragment of active caspase-3”
after delivery by MSCs in vivo. Although our recent in
vitro data suggested that the improved 19K-depleted
OAd was superior regarding virus replication and release
[22], the present in vivo data show that the OAd-TRAIL
exhibited a superior effect after MSC delivery compared
to delivery of OAd-TRAIL alone or compared to MSCs
infected with the 19K-depleted OAd or with regular
OAds. This conclusion was based on the strong and
significant potential to reduce the tumor take rate and
tumor volume and demonstrates the prominent bystander
effect mediated by OAd-TRAIL. The enhanced efficiency
of OAds expressing TRAIL is supported by other studies
in which the viruses were not transferred by MSCs [39,
40]. Another advantage of TRAIL transfer by OAds is the
known potential of TRAIL to induce apoptosis in senescent
and malignant cells while showing no cytotoxicity in
untransformed cells [41]. This finding is important because
prior studies have suggested a tumorigenic potential of
MSCs [42, 43]. However, this can be prevented by our
strategy: MSCs are lysed by OADs after tumor-specific
transfer. To address the toxicity and virus distribution in
individuals with advanced PDA, an initial phase I dose
escalation study using intratumoral injections of the OAd
VCN-01 with or without gemcitabine has just started in
Spain and is recruiting patients (NCT02045589). Similar
to our OAd-TRAIL, the VCN-01 construct combines
selective tumor replication with an improved tropism by
insertion of the integrin-binding RGD peptide into the
fiber. Instead of TRAIL, it expresses the hyaluronidase
gene to degrade the dense extracellular tumor matrix and
belongs to human adenovirus serotype 5 [44].
Taken together, our results demonstrate that
delivery of the new OAd Ad5/3-TRAIL construct by
MSC carriers induces a strong anti-tumor response in our
experimental system. This therapeutic approach was even
effective in tumorigenic cells with CSC characteristics,
which do not respond to conventional chemotherapy. An
important advantage of OAd Ad5/3-TRAIL is the selective
replication in MSCs and PDA cells and the expression of
TRAIL to induce tumor-specific apoptosis in non-infected
cells. Oncolysis and the induction of apoptosis may induce
an advanced inflammatory response and thus “open” the
tumor microenvironment for conventional cytotoxic
therapy or innate immune attacks. The clinical feasibility
of such systemic MSC-OAd therapy warrants clinical
investigation and may be understood as an initial aid to
disrupt the dense tumor stroma for tumor cell eradication
by innate immune responses and/or cytotoxic tumor
therapy.

9055

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

5/3 chimera with the shaft of serotype 5 and the knob
domain of serotype 3. All constructs contain a GFP gene
in the E4 locus. Other properties of the virus constructs are
described in Table 1.

Cell lines
The established human PDA cell line MIA-PaCa2
was obtained from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, LGC Standards, Molsheim Cedex, France) and
cultured in DMEM (18 mmol/l glucose) supplemented
with 10% FCS and 5% HEPES. Human primary bone
marrow-derived MSCs and the primary PDA cell line
PaCaDD183 were isolated and cultured as previously
described [45, 46]. The primary PDA xenograft line T30
was isolated from surgical non-diagnostic specimens by
serial transplantation in mice and subsequent anchorageindependent in vitro culture, resulting in the selection of
a CSC population as previously described [26]. All cells
were grown in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5%
CO2 and authenticated throughout culture by their typical
morphology. To maintain the authenticity of the cell lines,
frozen stocks were prepared initially, and every three
months a new frozen stock was used for experiments.
MIA-PaCa2 cells were recently authenticated by a
commercial service (Multiplexion, Heidelberg, Germany).
Mycoplasm-negative cultures were ensured by performing
monthly mycoplasm tests.

Colony-forming assay
Twenty-four hours after OAd infection of MIAPaCa2 cells with 200 TCID50, 400 cells/well in 6-well
tissue culture plates were re-seeded in complete medium
and incubated for 2 weeks without changing the medium.
The cells were then fixed with 3.7% PFA for 10 min and
70% ethanol for 10 min. After washing with distilled
water, the cells were stained with 0.05% Coomassie Blue
for 5 min. Then, the cells were washed with distilled water
and dried overnight. Colonies with more than 50 cells
were counted under a dissecting microscope.

Establishment and infection of primary tumor
spheroids
Spheroids obtained from the primary xenograft line
T30 were cultured in NeuroCult NS-A basal serum-free
medium (human) (StemCell Technologies, Vancouver,
Canada) supplemented with 2 μg/ml heparin (StemCell
Technologies, Vancouver, Canada), 20 ng/ml hEGF
(R&D Systems, Wiesbaden-Nordenstadt, Germany), 10
ng/ml hFGF-b (PeproTech, Hamburg, Germany) and 10%
NeuroCult NS-A Proliferation Supplements (StemCell
Technologies, Vancouver, Canada) and were used for
experiments within 7 d after isolation. The cells were
resuspended in DMEM medium containing 2% FCS for
infection and incubated with 200 TCID50 (50% tissue
culture infective dose) for 2 h before use in experiments.

Isolation of human MSCs from bone marrow
and culture
Human bone marrow was harvested from the
iliac crest of 2 young healthy donors between 20 and 30
years old. 40 mL bone marrow aspirate were collected
in a syringe containing 10,000 IU heparin to prevent
coagulation. The mononuclear cell fraction was isolated
by Biocoll density-gradient centrifugation (d = 1.077 g/
cm3; Biochrom, Berlin, Germany). Cells were plated on
fibronectin (10 ng/mL, Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany)coated cell culture flasks and selected by plastic adherence
upon culture in MSC-NH expansion medium (Miltenyi
Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).

Invasion of MSC-delivered OAds into spheroidal
tumor cells
PaCaDD or MIA-PaCa2 cells were seeded in
DMEM cell culture medium containing 2% heatinactivated FCS and 0.25% methylcellulose (PureCol,
Biomaterials, Fremont, USA) in a 96-well suspension
culture plate (Greiner Bio-One, Frickenhausen, Germany)
with a density of 10,000 cells/well for spheroid formation.
The cells were used for co-incubation experiments with
infected MSCs 72 h later. MSCs were stained with the
PKH26 red fluorescent cell linker kit for general cell
membrane labeling (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany),
and 5 × 104 MSCs/well were seeded in a 24-well plate in
DMEM cell culture medium supplemented with 2% FCS.
The MSCs were infected 24 h later with a virus titer of
2000 TCID50. Two hours after infection, the MSCs were
overlaid with a gel layer of methylcellulose, Matrigel
and collagen (PureCol, Biomaterials, Fremont, USA) at
a ratio of 1:1:1 in DMEM supplemented with 2% FCS.
PaCaDD183 or MIA-PaCa2 spheroids were seeded on top

Flow cytometry (FACS) analysis of MSC marker
expression
FACS analysis of marker expression was performed
as described [45].

Recombinant oncolytic adenoviruses
Improved OAds were constructed as described
[22]. The new OAd construct Ad-5/3 was cloned in the
present study by inserting a GFP gene (from plasmid
pEGFP-N1, Clontech, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France)
into the plasmid pSΔ24 [47], followed by homologous
recombination with plasmids containing the Ad5/3ΔE3
genome. In all virus strains, the capsid contains a fiber
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9056

Oncotarget

In vivo transplantation experiments in fertilized chick
eggs were performed twice with similar outcomes, and
representative experiments are shown (15 to 20 eggs/
group). The significance of the differences between
the tumor volumes of OAd-infected tumors or tumors
treated with adenovirus-infected MSCs were evaluated
by Student’s t test, or as shown in Figure 4, with a nonparametric Mann-Whitney test with Bonferroni-Holm
correction for multiple testing. P<0.05 (*) and P<0.01 (**)
were deemed statistically significant.

of the gel layer and co-incubated with MSCs for 16 h.
Next, the spheroids were transferred with a cut tip of a
10 μl pipette into new 96-well suspension culture plates.
Forty-two hours after infection, images of non-fixed
spheroids were acquired under a BIOREVO BZ-9000
microscope (Keyence, Neu-Isenburg, Germany).

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
staining
Paraffin-embedded 6-μm xenograft sections or
spheroids fixed in 4% PFA and centrifuged in suspension
onto slides in a CytoSpin 4 cytocentrifuge (Thermo
Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) were stained as previously
described [26]. Samples were stored at −20°C prior to
further analysis. The primary antibodies were rabbit
polyclonal antibodies against human c-Met (Enzo Life
Science, Lörrach, Germany), cytokeratin 19, Ki67 (both
from Abcam, Cambridge, UK), and the cleaved fragment
of active human caspase-3 (R&D Systems, Abingdon, UK)
and mouse monoclonal antibodies against human CD24
(SW11 hybridoma, kindly provided by Dr. P. Altevogt)
and adenovirus-capsid (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt,
Germany). Biotinylated goat anti-rabbit or anti-mouse
IgG (Vector Laboratories, Peterborough, UK) was used
as the secondary antibody for immunohistochemistry.
The primary antibodies were omitted in the negative
control. Goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 IgG and goat
anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 (Molecular Probes, Karlsruhe,
Germany) were used as the secondary antibodies for
immunofluorescence staining. The signals were detected
with a Leica DMRB fluorescence microscope (Leica,
Wetzlar; Germany). Images of representative fields were
captured with a SPOT™ FLEX 15.2 64 Mp shifting pixel
digital color camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Inc. USA)
and analyzed with SPOT Basic/Advanced 4.6 software.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. P. Schemmer for providing bone
marrow form healthy donors and E. Aleksandrowicz
for helpful discussions of the in vivo experiments. This
study was supported by grants from the German Research
Community (DFG HE 3186/11-1, DFG NE 832/4-1),
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF
031A213), Heidelberger Surgery Foundation, Foundation
for Cancer- and Scarlet-Research, Dietmar HoppFoundation and the Hanns A. Pielenz-Foundation.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Author contributions
IH, DN: Concept and design; AK, KH: Development
of methodology; AK, KH, SV, CN, PF, ZZ, JG: Acquisition
of data; AK, KH, WG, DN, IH: Analysis and interpretation
of data; IH, LL, AK, KH, DN: Writing, review, and/or
revision of the manuscript.

Abbreviations

Tumor xenotransplantation to the CAM of
fertilized chick eggs

Cancer stem cells (CSCs); Chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM); Epithelial mesenchymal transition
(EMT); Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs); Oncolytic
adenoviruses (AOds); Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA).

Tumor cells were transplanted to the chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) of fertilized eggs from genetically
identical hybrid LB chicks, followed by treatment and
humane euthanasia of the chick embryo as described [26,
48]. After resection, the tumor take rates were calculated
from the percent of transplanted tumors that engrafted and
the tumor volumes according to the formula Volume = 4/3
× π × r3 (r = 1/2 × square root of diameter 1 × diameter 2)
[49]. Tumor tissue was fixed in Roti Histofix (Carl Roth,
Karlsruhe, Germany) for 2-3 days and embedded in
paraffin for further analysis.

REFERENCES
1.	 Oberstein PE, Saif MW. First-Line Treatment for Advanced
Pancreatic Cancer. Highlights from the “2011 ASCO
Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium”. San Francisco, CA,
USA. January 20-22, 2011. Jop. 2011; 12: 96-100.
2.	 Rasheed ZA, Kowalski J, Smith BD, Matsui W. Concise
review: Emerging concepts in clinical targeting of cancer
stem cells. Stem Cells. 2011; 29: 883-887.

Statistical analysis

3.	 Alemany R, Balague C, Curiel DT. Replicative adenoviruses for cancer therapy. Nat Biotechnol. 2000; 18:
723-727.

Experiments with established and primary PDA cell
lines were performed three times with similar outcomes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9057

Oncotarget

4.	 Nettelbeck DM. Virotherapeutics: conditionally replicative
adenoviruses for viral oncolysis. Anticancer Drugs. 2003;
14: 577-584.

16.	 Beckermann BM, Kallifatidis G, Groth A, Frommhold D,
Apel A, Mattern J, Salnikov AV, Moldenhauer G, Wagner
W, Diehlmann A, Saffrich R, Schubert M, Ho AD, et al.
VEGF expression by mesenchymal stem cells contributes
to angiogenesis in pancreatic carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2008;
99: 622-631.

5.	 Yamamoto M, Curiel DT. Current issues and future directions
of oncolytic adenoviruses. Mol Ther. 2010; 18: 243-250.
6.	 Pol J, Bloy N, Obrist F, Eggermont A, Galon J, Cremer
I, Erbs P, Limacher JM, Preville X, Zitvogel L, Kroemer
G, Galluzzi L. Trial Watch:: Oncolytic viruses for cancer
therapy. Oncoimmunology. 2014; 3: e28694.

17.	 Kallifatidis G, Beckermann BM, Groth A, Schubert M,
Apel A, Khamidjanov A, Ryschich E, Wenger T, Wagner
W, Diehlmann A, Saffrich R, Krause U, Eckstein V, et al.
Improved lentiviral transduction of human mesenchymal
stem cells for therapeutic intervention in pancreatic cancer.
Cancer Gene Ther. 2008; 15: 231-240.

7.	 Bramante S, Koski A, Kipar A, Diaconu I, Liikanen I,
Hemminki O, Vassilev L, Parviainen S, Cerullo V, Pesonen
SK, Oksanen M, Heiskanen R, Rouvinen-Lagerstrom N,
et al. Serotype chimeric oncolytic adenovirus coding for
GM-CSF for treatment of sarcoma in rodents and humans.
Int J Cancer. 2014; 135: 720-730.

18.	 Castleton A, Dey A, Beaton B, Patel B, Aucher A, Davis
DM, Fielding AK. Human mesenchymal stromal cells
deliver systemic oncolytic measles virus to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the presence of humoral immunity.
Blood. 2014; 123: 1327-1335.

8.	 Liikanen I, Ahtiainen L, Hirvinen ML, Bramante S, Cerullo
V, Nokisalmi P, Hemminki O, Diaconu I, Pesonen S,
Koski A, Kangasniemi L, Pesonen SK, Oksanen M, et al.
Oncolytic adenovirus with temozolomide induces autophagy and antitumor immune responses in cancer patients.
Mol Ther. 2013; 21: 1212-1223.

19.	 Garcia-Castro J, Alemany R, Cascallo M, MartinezQuintanilla J, Arriero Mdel M, Lassaletta A, Madero L,
Ramirez M. Treatment of metastatic neuroblastoma with
systemic oncolytic virotherapy delivered by autologous
mesenchymal stem cells: an exploratory study. Cancer Gene
Ther. 2010; 17: 476-483.

9.	 Kanerva A, Nokisalmi P, Diaconu I, Koski A, Cerullo V,
Liikanen I, Tahtinen S, Oksanen M, Heiskanen R, Pesonen
S, Joensuu T, Alanko T, Partanen K, et al. Antiviral
and antitumor T-cell immunity in patients treated with
GM-CSF-coding oncolytic adenovirus. Clin Cancer Res.
2013; 19: 2734-2744.

20.	 Cascallo M, Alonso MM, Rojas JJ, Perez-Gimenez A,
Fueyo J, Alemany R. Systemic toxicity-efficacy profile
of ICOVIR-5, a potent and selective oncolytic adenovirus
based on the pRB pathway. Mol Ther. 2007; 15: 1607-1615.

10.	 Kim KH, Dmitriev IP, Saddekni S, Kashentseva EA,
Harris RD, Aurigemma R, Bae S, Singh KP, Siegal GP,
Curiel DT, Alvarez RD. A phase I clinical trial of Ad5/3Delta24, a novel serotype-chimeric, infectivity-enhanced,
­conditionally-replicative adenovirus (CRAd), in patients
with recurrent ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2013; 130:
518-524.

21.	 Cody JJ, Douglas JT. Armed replicating adenoviruses for
cancer virotherapy. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009; 16: 473-488.

11.	 Bramante S, Kaufmann JK, Veckman V, Liikanen I,
Nettelbeck DM, Hemminki O, Vassilev L, Cerullo V,
Oksanen M, Heiskanen R, Joensuu T, Kanerva A, Pesonen
S, et al. Treatment of melanoma with a serotype 5/3 chimeric oncolytic adenovirus coding for GM-CSF: Results in
vitro, in rodents and in humans. Int J Cancer. 2015.

23.	 Oberg D, Yanover E, Adam V, Sweeney K, Costas C,
Lemoine NR, Hallden G. Improved potency and selectivity
of an oncolytic E1ACR2 and E1B19K deleted adenoviral
mutant in prostate and pancreatic cancers. Clin Cancer Res.
2010; 16: 541-553.

22.	 Hammer K, Kazcorowski A, Liu L, Behr M, Schemmer
P, Herr I, Nettelbeck DM. Engineered adenoviruses combine enhanced oncolysis with improved virus production
by mesenchymal stromal carrier cells. Int J Cancer. 2015;
137: 978-990.

24.	 Tolcher AW, Mita M, Meropol NJ, von Mehren M, Patnaik
A, Padavic K, Hill M, Mays T, McCoy T, Fox NL, Halpern
W, Corey A, Cohen RB. Phase I pharmacokinetic and biologic correlative study of mapatumumab, a fully human
monoclonal antibody with agonist activity to tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor-1. J Clin
Oncol. 2007; 25: 1390-1395.

12.	 Liu TC, Galanis E, Kirn D. Clinical trial results with oncolytic virotherapy: a century of promise, a decade of progress. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2007; 4: 101-117.
13.	 Glasgow JN, Everts M, Curiel DT. Transductional targeting
of adenovirus vectors for gene therapy. Cancer Gene Ther.
2006; 13: 830-844.

25.	 Forster T, Rausch V, Zhang Y, Isayev O, Heilmann K,
Schoensiegel F, Liu L, Nessling M, Richter K, Labsch S,
Nwaeburu CC, Mattern J, Gladkich J, et al. Sulforaphane
counteracts aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer driven by
dysregulated Cx43-mediated gap junctional intercellular communication. Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 1621-1634. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.1764.

14.	 Willmon C, Harrington K, Kottke T, Prestwich R, Melcher
A, Vile R. Cell carriers for oncolytic viruses: Fed Ex for
cancer therapy. Mol Ther. 2009; 17: 1667-1676.
15.	 Xia X, Ji T, Chen P, Li X, Fang Y, Gao Q, Liao S, You L,
Xu H, Ma Q, Wu P, Hu W, Wu M, et al. Mesenchymal stem
cells as carriers and amplifiers in CRAd delivery to tumors.
Mol Cancer. 2011; 10: 134.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9058

Oncotarget

26.	 Zhang Y, Liu L, Fan P, Bauer N, Gladkich J, Ryschich
E, Bazhin AV, Giese NA, Strobel O, Hackert T, Hinz U,
Gross W, Fortunato F, et al. Aspirin counteracts cancer
stem cell features, desmoplasia and gemcitabine resistance
in pancreatic cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 9999-10015. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.3171.

38.	 Sonabend AM, Ulasov IV, Tyler MA, Rivera AA, Mathis
JM, Lesniak MS. Mesenchymal stem cells effectively
deliver an oncolytic adenovirus to intracranial glioma. Stem
Cells. 2008; 26: 831-841.
39.	 Cao X, Yang M, Wei RC, Zeng Y, Gu JF, Huang WD,
Yang DQ, Li HL, Ding M, Wei N, Zhang KJ, Xu B, Liu
XR, Qian QJ, Liu XY. Cancer targeting Gene-Viro-Therapy
of liver carcinoma by dual-regulated oncolytic adenovirus
armed with TRAIL gene. Gene Ther. 2011; 18: 765-777.

27.	 Eriksson M, Guse K, Bauerschmitz G, Virkkunen P,
Tarkkanen M, Tanner M, Hakkarainen T, Kanerva A,
Desmond RA, Pesonen S, Hemminki A. Oncolytic adenoviruses kill breast cancer initiating CD44+CD24-/low cells.
Mol Ther. 2007; 15: 2088-2093.

40.	 Li X, Mao Q, Wang D, Zhang W, Xia H. A fiber chimeric CRAd vector Ad5/11-D24 double-armed with TRAIL
and arresten for enhanced glioblastoma therapy. Hum Gene
Ther. 2012; 23: 589-596.

28.	 Smith TT, Roth JC, Friedman GK, Gillespie GY. Oncolytic
viral therapy: targeting cancer stem cells. Oncolytic
Virother. 2014; 2014: 21-33.

41.	 Stuckey DW, Shah K. TRAIL on trial: preclinical advances
in cancer therapy. Trends Mol Med. 2013; 19: 685-694.

29.	 Abbott A. Cancer: the root of the problem. Nature. 2006;
442: 742-743.

42.	 Spaeth EL, Dembinski JL, Sasser AK, Watson K, Klopp A,
Hall B, Andreeff M, Marini F. Mesenchymal stem cell transition to tumor-associated fibroblasts contributes to fibrovascular network expansion and tumor progression. PLoS
ONE. 2009; 4: e4992.

30.	 Ferguson MS, Lemoine NR, Wang Y. Systemic delivery
of oncolytic viruses: hopes and hurdles. Adv Virol. 2012;
2012: 805629.
31.	 Brennen WN, Denmeade SR, Isaacs JT. Mesenchymal stem
cells as a vector for the inflammatory prostate microenvironment. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013; 20: R269-290.

43.	 Wang Y, Huso DL, Harrington J, Kellner J, Jeong DK,
Turney J, McNiece IK. Outgrowth of a transformed cell
population derived from normal human BM mesenchymal
stem cell culture. Cytotherapy. 2005; 7: 509-519.

32.	 Hakkarainen T, Sarkioja M, Lehenkari P, Miettinen
S, Ylikomi T, Suuronen R, Desmond RA, Kanerva A,
Hemminki A. Human mesenchymal stem cells lack tumor
tropism but enhance the antitumor activity of oncolytic adenoviruses in orthotopic lung and breast tumors. Hum Gene
Ther. 2007; 18: 627-641.

44.	 Rodriguez-Garcia A, Gimenez-Alejandre M, Rojas JJ,
Moreno R, Bazan-Peregrino M, Cascallo M, Alemany R.
Safety and efficacy of VCN-01, an oncolytic adenovirus
combining fiber HSG-binding domain replacement with
RGD and hyaluronidase expression. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;
21: 1406-1418.

33.	 Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, Gopinathan A,
McIntyre D, Honess D, Madhu B, Goldgraben MA,
Caldwell ME, Allard D, Frese KK, Denicola G, Feig C,
et al. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery
of chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Science. 2009; 324: 1457-1461.

45.	 Apel A, Groth A, Schlesinger S, Bruns H, Schemmer P,
Buchler MW, Herr I. Suitability of human mesenchymal
stem cells for gene therapy depends on the expansion
medium. Exp Cell Res. 2009; 315: 498-507.

34.	 Gukovskaya AS, Pandol SJ. Cell death pathways in pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. Pancreatology. 2004; 4:
567-586.

46.	 Ruckert F, Aust D, Bohme I, Werner K, Brandt A,
Diamandis EP, Krautz C, Hering S, Saeger HD, Grutzmann
R, Pilarsky C. Five primary human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines established by the outgrowth method. J Surg
Res. 2012; 172: 29-39.

35.	 Dembinski JL, Spaeth EL, Fueyo J, Gomez-Manzano C,
Studeny M, Andreeff M, Marini FC. Reduction of nontarget
infection and systemic toxicity by targeted delivery of conditionally replicating viruses transported in mesenchymal
stem cells. Cancer Gene Ther. 2010; 17: 289-297.

47.	 Suzuki K, Alemany R, Yamamoto M, Curiel DT. The presence of the adenovirus E3 region improves the oncolytic
potency of conditionally replicative adenoviruses. Clin
Cancer Res. 2002; 8: 3348-3359.

36.	 Mader EK, Butler G, Dowdy SC, Mariani A, Knutson KL,
Federspiel MJ, Russell SJ, Galanis E, Dietz AB, Peng KW.
Optimizing patient derived mesenchymal stem cells as virus
carriers for a phase I clinical trial in ovarian cancer. J Transl
Med. 2013; 11: 20.

48.	 Aleksandrowicz E, Herr I. Ethical euthanasia and shortterm anesthesia of the chick embryo. ALTEX. 2015; 32:
143-147.
49.	 Balke M, Neumann A, Szuhai K, Agelopoulos K, August
C, Gosheger G, Hogendoorn PC, Athanasou N, Buerger
H, Hagedorn M. A short-term in vivo model for giant cell
tumor of bone. BMC Cancer. 2011; 11: 241.

37.	 White E, Stillman B. Expression of adenovirus E1B mutant
phenotypes is dependent on the host cell and on synthesis
of E1A proteins. J Virol. 1987; 61: 426-435.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9059

Oncotarget

