Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 36

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification of the β-catenin/JNK/prothymosin-alpha axis as
a novel target of sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma cells
Yi-Te Lin1, Chuck C.-K. Chao1,2
1

 raduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan, Republic
G
of China

2

 epartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan,
D
Republic of China

Correspondence to:
Chuck C.-K. Chao, e-mail: cckchao@mail.cgu.edu.tw
Keywords: apoptosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, β-catenin, prothymosin, sorafenib
Received: June 04, 2015      Accepted: October 09, 2015      Published: October 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
Sorafenib is a kinase inhibitor used as anticancer drug against various
human tumors, including advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). β-Catenin and
prothymosin alpha (PTMA) are overexpressed in HCC and other tumors. Previous
studies have shown that PTMA expression modulates the response of HCC cells
to sorafenib. However, the underlying mechanism of PTMA activity in this context
remains unclear. We show here that sorafenib inhibits both β-catenin and PTMA in
a dose-dependent manner. Silencing β-catenin reduces PTMA level and sensitizes
HCC cells to sorafenib. In contrast, ectopic expression of β-catenin induces PTMA
expression and cell resistance to the drug. Sorafenib inhibits PTMA expression at
the transcriptional level by inhibiting the β-catenin pathway. Nucleotide deletion
analysis of the PTMA gene promoter reveals that a DNA segment lying 1,500–1,600
bp upstream of the PTMA transcription start site represents an AP-1-binding site that
is critical for β-catenin modulation of gene transcription in response to sorafenib.
In addition, chemical inhibitors that target JNK abrogate β-catenin/AP-1 binding to
the endogenous PTMA gene and reduces PTMA transcription and protein expression.
Silencing of β-catenin or c-Fos induces similar effects on gene regulation and these
are reversed by ectopic expression of β-catenin. Mutations in the PTMA promoter at
the predicted β-catenin/AP-1 binding site partly abrogate sorafenib’s effects on PTMA
transcription. These results indicate that PTMA is induced by the oncoprotein β-catenin
and protects HCC cells against sorafenib-induced cell death. The β-catenin/JNK/PTMA
axis may thus represent a novel target for chemotherapy against HCC.

showed that the anti-apoptotic protein HURP (hepatoma
upregulated protein) and PTMA (prothymosin-α) [2, 3],
which are upregulated in human HCC [4, 5], represent
important targets of sorafenib in HCC cells cultured
in vitro [3, 6].
β-Catenin is involved in the development of many
tumors, including HCC. Previous studies have shown
that the β-catenin protein can be modified by mutations,
by inactivated APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) or
the Wnt signaling pathway. These modifications induce
β-catenin accumulation in the nucleus and up-regulation
of factors that act downstream of β-catenin, such as
TCF (T-cell factor) family-associated genes (c-Myc

INTRODUCTION
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a complex liver
disease associated with high mortality and prevalency
worldwide, including in Southeast Asia and Taiwan [1].
HCC patients often respond poorly to current clinical
therapies, including chemotherapy. Poor prognosis and
high mortality rates are attributed in part to the difficulty
in obtaining a diagnosis at an early stage. Alterations,
up-regulations and mutations in genes and cellular
signaling pathways have been shown to promote
hepatocarcinogenesis, even leading to protection of cancer
cells against clinical treatment. Our previous studies

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38999

Oncotarget

RESULTS

and cyclin D1), leading to initiation of carcinogenesis
and cancer progression [7–9]. A previous study also
revealed that β-catenin mutations are observed in
different transgenic mouse HCC cell lines obtained by
overexpression of the oncogenes c-myc or H-ras [10].
β-Catenin containing activating mutations is prevalent
in human HCC patients and cancer cell lines [7, 11–13],
with a frequency of around 16% [13]. β-Catenin
activation by extracellular Wnt family signals is also
likely to promote cancer invasion and resistance to
chemotherapy [14]. Therefore, targeting β-catenin may
represent an attractive option for the development of
novel clinical therapies [15].
Sorafenib is a standard therapy for advanced
HCC but provides limited survival benefits. This
drug represents an anti-angiogenic multiple kinase
inhibitor that induces cell death by targeting the RAF/
MEK/ERK pathway, as well as VEGFR (vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor), PDGFR (platelet
derived growth factor receptor)-β, KIT, FLT-3, RET,
and Wnt/β-catenin [16–18]. Some studies have shown
that inhibition of β-catenin by sorafenib is observed in
HCC cell lines, liver cancer stem cells, and mice bearing
HepG2 cell-derived tumors [19–21]. A recent study also
shows that a combination of sorafenib and β-catenin
inhibitors produces synergistic effects in hepatoma
cells [22], suggesting that this strategy may represent
a potential novel anti-cancer treatment. However, the
detailed molecular mechanism of β-catenin inhibition in
sorafenib-induced cell death remains unclear.
In a previous report, PTMA expression and
localization was shown to vary during hepatocyte
proliferation and apoptosis in rat hepatocytes [23]. In
addition, PTMA was found to be highly expressed in
human HCC [5]. However, the mechanism underlying
regulation of PTMA expression and the possibility
that this protein might produce anti-apoptotic effects
in sorafenib-treated HCC cells have not been studied.
High levels of PTMA and c-Myc co-expression were
detected in various human tumors, including HCC
[24–26]. c-Myc was initially found to upregulate
PTMA transcription [27], and c-Myc-binding sites were
identified in the proximal promoter and first intron of the
PTMA gene [28–30]. We recently found that PTMA may
play a role in the development of human HCC as c-Mycbinding sites were detected in the proximal promoter of
PTMA [6].
In the present study, we show that PTMA is
upregulated by β-catenin and that PTMA upregulation
is inversely correlated with sorafenib sensitivity in HCC
cells such as Mahlavu and J7. Notably, we identify a
sorafenib-responsive element in the PTMA promoter,
and demonstrate that sorafenib inhibits PTMA expression
at the transcriptional level through inactivation of the
β-catenin/JNK pathway.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Sorafenib-induced apoptosis is associated with
down-regulation of β-catenin and anti-apoptotic
proteins
To examine how sorafenib induces apoptosis in
HCC cell lines, we monitored the proteins involved in the
intrinsic and mitochondrial apoptosis pathways, including
pro-apoptotic proteins (Bad, Bax, Bim, Bid, and PUMA)
and anti-apoptotic proteins (survivin, Mcl-1, Bcl-XL, Bcl2, and PTMA). While Bax and Bid protein levels were
slightly upregulated by sorafenib (at 20 μM but not 10 μM) in
Mahlavu cells, the anti-apoptotic proteins survivin, Mcl-1 and
PTMA were considerably down-regulated by the drug (Figure
1A). Furthermore, the extrinsic apoptosis pathway, which is
associated with activation of cell surface death receptor, was
activated to a low degree by sorafenib, as revealed by slight
fragmentation of the anti-apoptotic protein FLIP and cleavage
of caspase-8. Sorafenib also activated caspase-9 and caspase-3
in a dose-dependent manner in Mahlavu cells (Figure 1B).
These results suggest that sorafenib may kill HCC cells by
activating the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway.
Previous studies have shown that β-catenin may
represent a target of sorafenib and a potential transcription
factor that promotes chemoresistance through regulation of
anti-apoptotic signals, such as survivin and Mcl-1 [31–33].
We observed that a lethal dose of sorafenib down-regulated
β-catenin, survivin, Mcl-1, and PTMA in non-cancerous
Chang liver and HCC cells (Huh7, SK-Hep1, Mahlavu,
and J7) (Figure 1C, note that Mcl-1 increased in Huh7
cells). IC50 values produced by sorafenib varied in the HCC
cell lines tested (the values are shown at the bottom of each
Western blots in Figure 1C). Among the anti-apoptotic
proteins tested, PTMA protein levels positively correlated
with IC50 values (R2 = 0.76, Figure 1C and 1D; see also
ref. [6]). Decreased protein levels and nuclear translocation
of β-catenin were detected following sorafenib treatment
(Figure 1E and 1F). While β-catenin levels in whole cell
extracts did not show a high degree of correlation with
PTMA, β-catenin in nuclear extracts showed excellent
correlation with PTMA (Figure 1G, 1H). Co-reduction
of β-catenin and PTMA was observed in the HCC cells
examined (except Huh7, in which no change of β-catenin
levels was observed); yet, a substantial reduction of PTMA
levels was noted following sorafenib treatment. Nuclear
β-catenin levels (or β-catenin activity) and PTMA levels
were inversely correlated with sorafenib sensitivity in
most HCC cell lines. These results suggest that sorafenibinduced apoptosis in HCC cells may be attributed to downregulation of β-catenin and anti-apoptotic proteins and to
activation of the caspase-9-dependent apoptosis pathway.
Notably, total and nuclear β-catenin levels were not
reduced by ERK inhibition in HCC cells (Supplementary
Figure S1), an observation which contrasts with a previous

39000

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Sorafenib inhibits β-catenin levels and induces mitochondrial apoptotic pathways. A. PTMA and other

antiapoptotic proteins are down-regulated by sorafenib. PTMA, Mcl-1 and survivin protein levels were severely reduced in HCC
Mahlavu cells exposed to sorafenib. B. Activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3 in sorafenib-treated Mahlavu cells. The cells were treated
with sorafenib at the indicated concentrations for 24 hrs and caspase activities in cell lysates were measured using a colorimetric assay.
C. Co-inhibition of β-catenin and PTMA by sorafenib in HCC cells. Cell lines indicated on top were treated or not with 10 μM sorafenib
for 24 hrs and processed for immuno-blotting. IC50 values (the concentration of sorafenib that inhibits 50% of cell growth) for each
cell line are indicated below the panels. D. Relative PTMA level correlated with the IC50 values of HCC cell lines. Correlation between
survivin/Mcl-1 and IC50 values is also shown. Correlation index, R2 = 0.76, for PTMA was greater than for the two other proteins.
E. Reduction of nuclear β-catenin by sorafenib. Mahlavu cells were treated with the indicated concentration of sorafenib for 24 hrs and
cell extracts were prepared. F. Statistical plot of experiments shown in (E) (G) Reduction of nuclear β-catenin by sorafenib in HCC cell
lines. H. Relative nuclear β-catenin level correlated with relative PTMA level. Plot of experiments shown in (C and G). Results of three
experiments are expressed as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Fifty μg of proteins from each sample were processed
for immuno-blotting.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39001

Oncotarget

study showing that the RAF1-p-ERK-β-catenin pathway is
required for expansion of breast cancer-initiating cells and
enhanced cancer malignancy [19].

the detailed mechanism underlying PTMA regulation
remains unknown. To assess the role of β-catenin in
sorafenib-induced apoptosis, we silenced the β-catenin
gene (CTNNB1) using shRNA (shCTNNB1) in
Mahlavu cells which express high levels of PTMA
(Figure 1C). Our results showed that CTNNB1 silencing
induces a decrease of PTMA protein levels in sorafenibtreated cells (Figure 2A and 2B). While caspase-9
and caspase-3 activity increased following sorafenib

Silencing of β-catenin down-regulates PTMA
and enhances sorafenib-induced apoptosis
Previous work showed that β-catenin silencing
decreases PTMA mRNA levels in glioma cells [34], but

Figure 2: β-catenin silencing down-regulates PTMA protein level and potentiates sorafenib-induced cell death in
HCC cells. A. Down-regulation of PTMA protein level by β-catenin silencing (shCTNNB1) and sorafenib. Silencing caused
inhibition of β-catenin by 50%. Fold change, relative to the control (first lane), is indicated. B. Quantification of PTMA protein
level of (A) The relative protein level indicated (each lane was first normalized to GADPH) was calculated against the shLuc
control. Increased activation of caspase-9 C. and caspase-3 D. by sorafenib following β-catenin silencing in Mahlavu cells.
E. Sensitization of Mahlavu cells to sorafenib following β-catenin silencing. Cell sensitivity was assessed using the MTT
assay. IC50 and sensitization factor (SF50) are indicated. SF50 was calculated by dividing the IC50 of control shLuc cells by that
of shCTNNB1 cells. F. Enhancement of sorafenibinduced sub-G1 cells following β-catenin silencing. G. Ectopic expression
of PTMA rescues sorafenib sensitivity in shCTNNB1-expressing Mahlavu cells. H. Reduction of sorafenib-induced sub-G1
cells following PTMA overexpression in shCTNNB1-expressing Mahlavu cells. (Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39002

Oncotarget

Figure 2: (Continued) β-catenin silencing down-regulates PTMA protein level and potentiates sorafenib-induced
cell death in HCC cells. I. Enhancement of PTMA following overexpression of β-catenin in J7 cells. J. Quantification of PTMA
protein level of (I) Increased activation of caspase-9 K. and caspase-3 L. by sorafenib following β-catenin silencing in Mahlavu cells.
M. Ectopic expression of β-catenin protects J7 cells against sorafenib. N. Reduction of sorafenib-induced sub-G1 cells following
β-catenin overexpression. O. Sensitization of β-catenin-expressing J7 cells to sorafenib following PTMA silencing. P. Enhancement
of sorafenib-induced sub-G1 cells in β-catenin-overexpressing J7 cells by PTMA silencing. Fold change between treatments is also
indicated. Results of three experiments are expressed as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.

treatment in Mahlavu cells, β-catenin silencing induced
the activity of the two caspases in untreated cells
(Figure 2C and 2D). We also observed that shCTNNB1
sensitized HCC cells to sorafenib compared to shLuc
control (Figure 2E). Sensitization was quantified using
a sensitization factor (SF50), which was calculated by
dividing the IC50 of control cells by that of shCTNNB1
cells (Figure 2E, SF50 = 1.98). Sorafenib induced the
accumulation of sub-G1 cells in a dose- and timedependent manner, and silencing of CTNNB1 further
enhanced the effects of sorafenib on sub-G1 cell levels
(Figure 2F). In contrast, ectopic expression of PTMA
partly rescued shCTNNB1-induced sensitization to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the drug as assessed by cell viability assay (with a
resistance factor, RF50 = 1.57) or sub-G1 cell analysis
(Figure 2G and 2H). These results indicate that the
sensitization effect of β-catenin silencing to sorafenib
involves PTMA.

Ectopic expression of β-catenin up-regulates
PTMA and reduces sorafenib-induced apoptosis
To verify the role of β-catenin and PTMA in
regulating sorafenib-induced apoptosis, we overexpressed
β-catenin in HCC J7 cells which express low levels
of PTMA (Figure 1C). PTMA protein level increased
39003

Oncotarget

following ectopic expression of β-catenin (Figure 2I
and 2J). While β-catenin level was overexpressed 3.4 fold,
PTMA protein levels doubled in the absence of sorafenib
(Figure 2I, compare lanes 1 and 3; Figure 2J). Similar to
the results obtained for Mahlavu cells, sorafenib reduced
β-catenin levels by 80% in J7 cells expressing the control
pcDNA3 vector (Fig, 2I, lanes 1 and 2). PTMA protein
level was upregulated 3.9 fold following overexpression of
β-catenin in the presence of sorafenib (Figure 2I, compare
lanes 2 and 4; Figure 2J). These results suggest that
β-catenin may be required, but not sufficient, for PTMA
up-regulation. Sorafenib-induced caspase-9 and caspase-3
activities, which both increased 2 fold, were partially
inhibited by β-catenin overexpression (Figure 2K and 2L).
Sorafenib-induced inhibition of cell viability and sorafenibinduced sub-G1 cell accumulation were both significantly
reversed by β-catenin overexpression (Figure 2M and 2N).
Furthermore, induction of cell resistance to sorafenib by
β-catenin overexpression was significantly reversed by

PTMA silencing (Figure 2O and 2P). These results indicate
that ectopic expression of β-catenin up-regulates PTMA
and induces resistance to sorafenib-induced apoptosis. In
addition, these findings suggest that PTMA mediates the
effects of β-catenin on HCC cells.

β-catenin silencing down-regulates PTMA
mRNA level and PTMA promoter activity
We have recently demonstrated that sorafenib
down-regulates PTMA at the transcription level through
c-Myc and that this phenomenon plays a significant role
in regulating HCC cell sensitivity to the drug [6]. Here, we
found that β-catenin plays an important role in up-regulating
PTMA transcription. To assess the role of β-catenin
in the regulation of PTMA expression, we monitored
PTMA mRNA levels in HCC cells following silencing or
overexpression of β-catenin. Sorafenib treatment (10 μM)
or β-catenin silencing (shCTNNB1) reduced PTMA mRNA

Figure 3: Sorafenib and β-catenin silencing attenuates PTMA expression through inhibition of mRNA expression.

A. Suppression of PTMA mRNA expression by sorafenib or β-catenin silencing in Mahlavu cells. PTMA mRNA levels were evaluated by
qPCR. mRNA levels were compared to DMSO control. B. Restoration of PTMA mRNA expression by β-catenin overexpression in J7 cells.
C. Reduction of PTMA promoter activity by β-catenin silencing. Relative luciferase activity of the PTMA promoter (pGL3-PTMA, see
“Materials and Methods”) in β-catenin silencing (shCTNNB1) Mahlavu cells was divided by the luciferase activity of shControl cells, by
setting shControl cells as 100%. D. Enhancement of PTMA promoter activity by β-catenin overexpression. Relative luciferase activity of
the PTMA promoter in β-catenin overexpressing Mahlavu or J7 cells was divided by the luciferase activity of GFP overexpressing control
cells, by setting GFP cells as 100%. Results of three experiments are expressed as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01; ns, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39004

Oncotarget

Identification of a putative β-catenin-responsive
element in the PTMA gene promoter

levels by almost 50% in Mahlavu cells (Figure 3A). PTMA
mRNA levels were not further reduced in cells expressing
shCTNNB1 (Figure 3A). Similar results were obtained
when PTMA protein levels were monitored (Figure 2B).
Sorafenib also reduced PTMA mRNA levels in J7 cells
(Figure 3B). In addition, we detected a significant increase
of PTMA mRNA levels following ectopic expression of
β-catenin in J7 cells (Figure 3B). The effects produced
by sorafenib or β-catenin on PTMA mRNA levels were
similar to that observed earlier for the PTMA protein in
J7 cells (Figure 2J). Notably, inhibition of PTMA mRNA
and protein levels by sorafenib could be rescued by ectopic
expression of β-catenin. While silencing of β-catenin
(shCTNNB1) down-regulated the transactivation activity
of the isolated PTMA promoter pGL3-PTMA by 30% (P <
0.05) [6] compared to control Mahlavu cells (shCtl), ectopic
expression of β-catenin enhanced the promoter activity by
over 3.5 fold (P < 0.01) compared to control (GFP) (Figure
3C and 3D). Up-regulation of PTMA promoter by β-catenin
overexpression was also observed in J7 cells (P < 0.05)
(Figure 3D, 1.5 fold). These results indicate that downregulation of PTMA transcription by sorafenib is mediated
by β-catenin. Our findings also suggest that the control of
PTMA expression by sorafenib occurs mainly via the action
of β-catenin on transcription.

To identify putative β-catenin-responsive
elements in the PTMA promoter, we performed a
series of deletion from the 5′-end of the pGL-PTMA
promoter (2.5 kb) in Mahlavu cells (Figure 4A).
Basal transcription analysis revealed negatively- and
positively-regulated elements in the –2023/–1639 and
–1503/–1027 segments, respectively (Figure 4B). While
activity of the 1.6 kb promoter was significantly downregulated by β-catenin silencing (shCTNNB1) compared
to shCtl control, the 1.5 kb promoter showed activity
similar to that of the 2.5 kb promoter (Figure 4C),
suggesting that the –1639/–1503 segment may contain
a putative β-catenin-responsive element (Figure 5A).
Basal expression pattern of these plasmid truncates, with
similar negatively- and positively-regulated elements,
was also found in J7 cells (Figure 4D). While the 1.6
kb truncated plasmid displayed significant activation
following β-catenin overexpression, the 1.5 kb plasmid
showed significant reduction in transactivity (Figure
4E). These results suggest that the –1639/–1503 segment
of the PTMA promoter is critical for the response to
β-catenin.

Figure 4: Determination of β-catenin responsive element in the PTMA promoter. A. Schematic representation of the PTMA
promoter. Full-length PTMA promoter contains regions of 2.5-kbp upstream of the transcription start site. Mutants are truncated from the
5′-end with nucleotides upstream of the transcription start site indicated. Transcription factor binding sites are also indicated. B. Relative
luciferase activities of each promoter in Mahlavu cells. Luciferase activity of the full-length PTMA promoter (2.5 kb) was taken as 100%.
Other plasmids corresponding to each mutant are indicated. C. Fold change of PTMA promoter activity following β-catenin silencing
in Mahlavu cells. Fold change was calculated by dividing the luciferase activity of each promoter in shCTNNB1-treated cells by the
luciferase activity of shCtl control cells. D. Relative luciferase activities of each promoter in J7 cells. E. Fold change of PTMA promoter
activity following β-catenin silencing in J7 cells. Results of three experiments are expressed as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and
***P < 0.001; ns, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39005

Oncotarget

Figure 5: β-catenin responsive element overlapped with AP-1 binding element of the PTMA promoter. A. Schematic

representation of the PTMA promoter and flanking regions. The scheme summarizes the results of Figure 4. Positions of nucleotides
relative to the transcription start site and predicted regions for β-catenin responsive, basal positive and negative regulation elements are
indicated. Transcription factor binding sites are also indicated. B. Partial loss of response to sorafenib in mutant PTMA promoter. Partial
sequences of wild-type (wt) and mutated (mt) plasmids are listed on top. Luciferase activity of the PTMA promoter with mutated site for
AP-1 (mAP-1), TCF4 (mTCF4), both (mAP1+mTCF4), or CREB (mCREB) was also measured, taking the wild-type (wt) PTMA promoter
as 100%. Fold change was calculated by dividing the luciferase activity of each promoter in DMSO control cells by the luciferase activity
of sorafenib-treated cells (shown at the bottom). C. Partial loss of response to silencing β-catenin in mutant PTMA promoter in Mahlavu
cells. Luciferase activity of wild-type PTMA promoter was inhibited by silencing β-catenin (shCTNNB1). Fold change was calculated by
dividing the luciferase activity of each promoter in shCtl control cells by the luciferase activity of shCTNNB1-treated cells (shown at the
bottom). Other symbols are the same as in (B). D. Partial loss of response to β-catenin overexpression in mutant PTMA promoter in J7
cells. Luciferase activity of wild-type PTMA promoter was increased to 1.42 fold by overexpressing β-catenin. Fold change was calculated
by dividing the luciferase activity of each promoter in β-catenin plasmid-treated cells by the luciferase activity of pcDNA3-treated cells
(shown at the bottom). Averaged results of three experiments are shown. n.s., not significant; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, ***, P < 0.005.

Characterization of the β-catenin-responsive
element in PTMA promoter activation: overlap
with AP-1 and TCF4 enhancers

promoter was identified (see above). The PTMA promoter
region contains a few major transcription factor sites
(Figure 5A). The β-catenin-responsive region appears to
overlap with AP-1, C/EBPβ and CREB elements. β-catenin
always regulates gene expression by interacting with other
transcription factors, such as TCF4 [35]. To verify the

Transcription activity and critical segments for
basal and regulated expression of the 2.5-Kb PTMA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39006

Oncotarget

involvement of β-catenin and other transcription factors
in activating the PTMA promoter, we created mutations
in these predicted transcription factor-binding sites in
the PTMA promoter, including for mAP1, mCREB, and
mTCF4 (Figure 5B). While wild-type promoter activity
was suppressed 0.48 fold by sorafenib in Mahlavu cells,
the activity of the AP1, TCF4 and combined AP1/TCF4
mutant promoters was suppressed 0.60 fold, 0.82 fold and
1.00 fold, respectively (Figure 5B). On the other hand,
the CREB mutant promoter activity displayed the same
level of sorafenib-induced suppression as the wild-type
promoter. These results indicate that mutation in AP1 and
TCF4 binding sequences reduced the suppression induced
by the drug. Suppression of promoter activity of mAP1,
mTCF4 and combined mAP1/mTCF4, but not mCREB,
was significantly reduced by β-catenin silencing (Figure
5C). Furthermore, potentiation of promoter activity by
β-catenin overexpression was reduced for mAP1, mTCF4
and combined mAP1/mTCF4, but not for mCREB,
compared to wild-type promoter in J7 cells (Figure 5D).
These results indicate that AP1 and TCF4 binding sites
are involved in the regulation of PTMA gene expression
by sorafenib and β-catenin. Early studies have identified
physical interactions between β-catenin and AP1 in
stimulating TCF4-dependent gene expression [36, 37].
The promoter with double mutations at the AP1 and
TCF4 binding sites displayed greater reduction of activity
following sorafenib treatment than the single mutant AP1
or TCF4, suggesting that AP1 and TCF4 enhancers may
overlap with β-catenin on the PTMA gene.

These binding activities were not detected in the exon-5
region where no such binding sequences exist. Binding of
the β-catenin/TCF4/c-Fos complex to the PTMA promoter
and inhibition by sorafenib treatment (10 μM) was also
investigated using re-ChIP assay. IP was performed
from nuclear extracts first with the β-catenin or c-Fos
antibody, followed by treatment with the indicated second
antibodies. The results revealed binding of β-catenin/
TCF4 or β-catenin/c-Fos complexes to both AP1BS and
TCF4BS in Mahlavu and J7 cells, and these effects were
significantly reduced by sorafenib (P < 0.05; Figure 6B
and Supplementary Figure S3B). We noted that β-catenin/
TCF4 binding at AP1BS was 3.5 fold higher than binding
at TCF4BS. As seen in ChIP assays, the binding results
observed in re-ChIP assays were not detected in the
negative control immunoprecipitated with either IgG or
PCR at exon 5. In addition, β-catenin did not interact with
CREB in CREB-binding element of the PTMA gene,
indicating that CREB was not involved in this regulation.
In contrast, using c-Fos as first antibody to conduct IP
followed by β-catenin as second antibody also resulted
in strong binding to the AP1BS, and less binding to the
TCF4BS. Both β-catenin/c-Fos binding were inhibited
by sorafenib in Mahlavu and J7 cells (Figure 6C and
Supplementary Figure S3C). These results suggest that
down-regulation of PTMA transcription by sorafenib may
depend on β-catenin/TCF4/AP1 complex binding to the
enhancer AP1BS as well as TCF4BS.

Inhibition of AP-1 down-regulates PTMA protein
and mRNA levels and potentiates sorafenibinduced apoptosis

Characterization of β-catenin-responsive element
in the PTMA gene using ChIP assay: sorafenibinduced inhibition of β-catenin, AP-1 and TCF4
binding separately or in combination

Our previous study showed that the JNK pathway is
involved in PTMA expression [6]. To verify if the effects
of β-catenin on PTMA transcription involves JNK/AP1,
we performed experiments to inhibit JNK/AP1. First, we
examined whether c-Fos regulates PTMA expression.
PTMA protein and mRNA levels decreased following
c-Fos silencing in Mahlavu cells compared to shLucexpressing cells (Figure 7A– 7C). β-catenin protein levels
also decreased after c-Fos silencing (Figure 7A). While
β-catenin level was dramatically reduced by sorafenib,
the level of c-Fos protein remained unchanged (Figure
7A, compare lanes 1 and 2; lanes 3 and 4). Caspase-3
activation was enhanced by sorafenib treatment in cells in
which c-Fos was silenced compared to shLuc expressing
cells (Figure 7D). Furthermore, induction of sub-G1
cells and inhibition of cell viability by sorafenib were
potentiated by c-Fos silencing in Mahlavu cells (Figure
7E and 7F). These results indicate that silencing of c-Fos
reduces β-catenin and PTMA expression levels and
sensitizes cells to sorafenib.
To assess the importance of JNK/AP1 in β-cateninmediated regulation of PTMA expression, we inhibited
AP1 activity in J7 cells using JNK inhibitor (JNKi).

ChIP assays were used to verify binding of the
transcription factors to the promoter region of PTMA gene
(the location of PCR primers is shown in Figure 5A). We
found that β-catenin, TCF4, c-Fos, and CREB interacted
with both AP1-binding sequence (AP1BS or 1500–1600bp region) and TCF4-binding sequence (TCF4BS or 1000–
1100-bp region) upstream of the transcription start site
(Figure 6A). Significant decrease in the binding of these
factors to both regions was observed following sorafenib
treatment (10 μM), except for TCF4 in the TCF4BS
region (Figure 6A and Supplementary Figure S3A). These
results indicate that binding of β-catenin, TCF4, and c-Fos
to AP1BS is inhibited by sorafenib. Interestingly, TCF4
interacted better with AP1BS than TCF4BS (over 10
fold). However, TCF4 binding at TCF4BS was increased,
and binding at the AP1BS was inhibited by sorafenib.
These results suggest that TCF4 binding to AP1BS may
occur through formation of a complex with AP-1 and/or
β-catenin. c-Myc binding was used as a control that could
be detected at the TCF4BS region but not at AP1BS [6].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39007

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Inhibition of β-catenin and associated c-Fos binding to PTMA promoter by sorafenib using ChIP assay
in Mahlavu cells. Quantified average binding activities of the indicated factors to site of AP-1 (AP1BS), TCF4 (TCF4BS) or exon
5 (as shown in % input) by qPCR were calculated (see “Materials and Methods”). A. Inhibition of β-catenin and other transcription
factors binding to the PTMA promoter by sorafenib using single ChIP assay. B. Inhibition of β-catenin and associated transcription factors
binding to the PTMA promoter by sorafenib using re-ChIP assay. Cell protein extracts were first immunoprecipitated (IP) for β-catenin,
followed by a second IP for the indicated transcription factors or IgG. Quantified average binding activities by qPCR were calculated. C.
Inhibition of c-Fos and associated β-catenin binding to the PTMA promoter by sorafenib using re-ChIP assay. Cell protein extracts were
first immunoprecipitated for c-Fos followed by second IP for β-catenin or other transcription factors or IgG. The difference is calculated
between averages of three experiments. n.s., not significant; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, ***, P < 0.005.

β-Catenin and PTMA protein and mRNA levels were
reduced by JNKi in cells expressing the pcDNA3 vector
or β-catenin (Figure 7G–7I). Notably, increase of PTMA
protein and mRNA levels was prevented following
ectopic expression of β-catenin and JNKi treatment.
While caspase-3 activity increased following JNKi
treatment in J7 cells, ectopic expression of β-catenin
moderately reduced caspase-3 activity (Figure 7J).
Sub-G1 cells increased in a dose-dependent manner in
sorafenib-treated cells. JNKi treatment further enhanced
the levels of sub-G1 cells in the J7 cell line (Figure 7K,
left panel). Ectopic expression of β-catenin reversed the
level of sub-G1 cells compared to control vector (Figure
7K, right panel). While cell viability decreased in a
dose-dependent manner following sorafenib treatment
in J7 cells, JNKi treatment sensitized the cells to the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cytotoxic effects of sorfenib in cells overexpressing
either the vector or β-catenin (Figure 7L, left panel, SF50
= 1.54, and right panel, SF50 = 1.35, respectively). IC50
values of 3.54 μM and 6.61 μM in control and β-cateninoverexpressing cells were observed, respectively, with
resistance factor of 1.87, indicating the protective
role of β-catenin in this context. Resistance factor of
2.12 (IC50 = 4.88 divided by IC50 = 2.30) in β-cateninoverexpressing cells was observed in the presence
of JNKi. These effects were unlikely to represent
off-target activities since the specificity of JNK
inhibitor was tested in Mahlavu cells (Supplementary
Figure S4). These results suggest that PTMA expression
is stimulated by JNK-dependent β-catenin expression,
and that the expression level of these genes is critical to
determine cell sensitivity to sorafenib.
39008

Oncotarget

Figure 7: β-catenin and c-Fos are involved in the regulation of PTMA gene and HCC cell sensitivity by sorafenib. A. Reduction

of PTMA and β-catenin protein levels by c-Fos silencing. Noted that both PTMA and β-catenin, but not c-Fos, protein levels were inhibited by
sorafenib. B. Quantification of PTMA protein reduction by c-Fos silencing of (A). C. Reduction of PTMA mRNA level by c-Fos silencing.
D. Increased activation of caspase-3 by sorafenib in Mahlavu cells following c-Fos silencing. E. Enhancement of sorafenib-induced sub-G1 cell
accumulation following c-Fos silencing. Fold change between treatments is indicated. F. Sensitization of Mahlavu cells to sorafenib following
c-Fos silencing. Cell sensitivity was assessed using the MTT assay. SF50 was calculated by dividing the IC50 of control shLuc cells by that of shFos
cells. G. Accumulation of PTMA protein level by β-catenin overexpression and its reduction by JNK inhibitor in J7 cells. Noted that both PTMA
and β-catenin protein levels were inhibited by JNK inhibitor. H. Quantification of the reduction of β-catenin-induced PTMA protein level JNK
inhibitor of (G). I. Reduction of β-catenin-induced PTMA mRNA level by JNK inhibition/c-Fos silencing in J7 cells. J. Reduced caspase-3 activity
by 20 μM JNKi in J7 cells following β-catenin overexpression. K. Reduced sorafenib-induced sub-G1 cell accumulation following β-catenin
overexpression (right panel) or pcDNA3 control (left panel) and reversal by JNK inhibition/c-Fos silencing. L. Protection of Mahlavu cells against
sorafenib following β-catenin overexpression and reversal by JNK inhibition/c-Fos silencing. Cell viability was assessed using the MTT assay.
Differences are calculated as averages of three experiments. Symbols are the same as for Figure 2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39009

Oncotarget

Sorafenib potentiates the degradation
of β-catenin mRNA

could not fully explain cancer sensitivity to the drug. In
addition, correlation between β-catenin and PTMA mRNA
levels was poor in these clinical tumors (Supplementary
Figure S6G, S6H). A study of the nuclear expression of
β-catenin protein and/or its activity is required to elucidate
the possible role of this protein in regulation of PTMA
expression and sorafenib sensitivity in clinical tumors.
Although only a few HCC cell lines were tested in this
study, these cell lines (except Huh7) displayed good
correlation between β-catenin activity and PTMA protein
levels. This observation suggests that their expression
level may serve a potential marker of sorafenib sensitivity.

The protein level of β-catenin following treatment
with cycloheximide (CHX), an inhibitor of protein
synthesis, for 12 or 24 hrs did not vary in the absence or
presence of sorafenib (Figure 8A). However, different
protein levels were observed after 48 hrs of CHX
treatment (Figure 8A), indicating that the degradation
rate of β-catenin was slightly enhanced by sorafenib.
Previous studies have shown that dysregulation of the
Wnt pathway which involves β-catenin and p-GSK3β is
critical for β-catenin degradation in HCC [15]. To further
assess the regulation of β-catenin expression by sorafenib,
we examined the possible upstream kinase signal pathway
that may regulate β-catenin expression. While the protein
levels of β-catenin and PTMA were down-regulated in a
dose-dependent manner by sorafenib (24 hrs) in Mahlavu
cells, the phosphorylated form of GSK3β(p-GSK3β)
increased (Figure 8B).
We also found a slight increase of PTMA protein
level in cells treated with the GSK3β inhibitor, whereas
β-catenin protein levels remained unchanged (Figure 8C).
These results suggest that the decrease of PTMA in
sorafenib-treated Mahlavu cells is unlikely to be due to
enhanced degradation of β-catenin via GSK3β activity.
On the other hand, we found decreased β-catenin mRNA
levels and enhanced mRNA degradation rate following
sorafenib treatment as revealed by the reduced mRNA
levels in cells treated with the transcription inhibitor
actinomycin D (Act. D) (Figure 8D and 8E). While the
total levels of β-catenin mRNA and protein were downregulated by JNK inhibitor, the nuclear translocation of
β-catenin protein and the degradation rates of β-catenin
mRNA and protein were not affected (Supplementary
Figure S5). These results demonstrate that downregulation of β-catenin expression by sorafenib is
controlled by enhancement of mRNA degradation, in
addition to inhibition of transactivation of the gene.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we found that down-regulation of
PTMA in response to sorafenib occurs through inhibition
of the β-catenin pathway and that this process contributes
to the cell killing effects of sorafenib in HCC cells.
Induction of caspase-9 and caspase-3 and the cell
killing effects of sorafenib are associated with PTMA
levels in HCC cells. Furthermore, silencing of β-catenin
results in down-regulation of PTMA expression and cell
sensitization to the drug, effects which can be rescued by
PTMA overexpression. These observations support the
conclusion that the β-catenin/PTMA pathway plays an
important role in modulating HCC sensitivity to sorafenib.
We further demonstrated that the regulation of PTMA
expression by β-catenin occurs at the transcription level,
specifically in processes involving gene transactivation
and maintenance of mRNA stability. As evidenced by
the gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments
described here, we identified that the PTMA gene is
activated by β-catenin in cooperation with AP-1 targeting
to the AP-1 enhancer of the PTMA gene segment where
the mediator TCF4 [15] is also involved. In the presence
of sorafenib, β-catenin is likely to be down-regulated
at the transcription level, and the β-catenin/AP1/TCF4
complex may fail to form, leading to inhibition of PTMA
gene transactivation (Figure 8F). During this process,
TCF4 is also involved in β-catenin/AP-1 complex binding
to AP1BS for PTMA gene activation. Interestingly,
the binding of TCF4 to AP1BS in the PTMA gene is
stronger than the binding to TCF4BS. In the presence
of sorafenib, the binding of TCF4 to AP1BS is inhibited
whereas binding to TCF4BS is induced (Figure 6A). This
is probably due to down-regulation of β-catenin/AP-1 by
the drug since β-catenin/AP-1 complex binding to AP1BS
is sensitive to the drug (Figure 6B). Thus, activation of
PTMA gene involves the β-catenin/AP-1/TCF4 complex
and is negatively regulated by sorafenib in HCC cells. Our
findings provide evidence linking the surviving/oncogenic
protein β-catenin to the antiapoptotic factor PTMA.
Inhibition of this axis sensitizes HCC cells to sorafenib,

High levels of β-catenin and PTMA in clinical
tumors
Whether our findings in cell lines can be
extrapolated to clinical samples and cancer patients
remains to be examined. However, we observed that
RNA levels of CTNNB1, PTMA, and c-Myc correlate
with poor survival in HCC patients (Supplementary
Figure S6A–S6C). In addition, the expression level of
CTNNB1 and PTMA was higher in HCC than in control
healthy liver tissues (Supplementary Figure S6D–S6E).
As for CTNNB1 and PTMA, the expression level of
c-Myc was also higher in advanced HCC compared to
early tumors (Supplementary Figure S6F). Apparently,
the observation that RNA levels of CTNNB1 and PTMA
were higher in HCC than in control healthy liver tissues
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39010

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Effects of GSK3β signal pathway on β-catenin and PTMA expression. A. Degradation rate of β-catenin protein in

sorafenib-treated Mahlavu cells. Cells were pre-incubated with cycloheximide (CHX), an inhibitor of protein synthesis, followed by the
indicated incubation. Linear regressions of the kinetic pattern of PTMA protein level are shown at bottom. B. Decreased GSK3β signaling
in sorafenib-treated Mahlavu cells. GSK3β inactivation is shown based on the phosphorylated form of the kinase by sorafenib in a dosedependent manner. Simultaneous decrease of PTMA protein level was observed in the same treatment cells. C. Lack of reduction of
β-catenin and PTMA protein level following treatment with GSK3β inhibitor (GSK3βi) for the indicated time. Cells were treated with 50
nM of GSK3β inhibitor for the time indicated. Fold change, relative to untreated control, is indicated. D. Reduction of CTNNB1 mRNA
level by sorafenib in Mahlavu cells. E. Increased degradation rate of the CTNNB1 mRNA in sorafenib-treated Mahlavu cells. Cells were
pre-incubated with actinomycin D (Act. D), an inhibitor of RNA synthesis, followed by the indicated incubation. Results are shown as
linear regression of the kinetic pattern of CTNNB1 mRNA level. F. Working model for the involvement of the β-catenin/JNK/PTMA
and ERK/c-Myc/Max/PTMA axes in HCC sensitivity to sorafenib. In the absence of sorafenib (left panel, untreatment), β-catenin acts in
concert with TCF4 and the AP-1/JNK pathway to stimulate PTMA transcription. In the presence of sorafenib (right panel), β-catenin was
degraded and the components AP-1/TCF4 were dissociated, leading to downregulation of PTMA transcription. The ERK/c-Myc/Max axis
in regulation of PTMA previously identified [6] is also included.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39011

Oncotarget

suggesting that this strategy may help control the growth
of this cancer.
We also found that sorafenib down-regulates
PTMA expression in HCC cells, a process which depends
on nuclear accumulation of β-catenin, a hallmark of
Wnt pathway activation. While phosphorylation of
GSK3βincreases following sorafenib treatment, β-catenin
and PTMA are down-regulated in sorafenib-treated
HCC cells (Figure 8). The canonical Wnt/β-catenin
signaling pathway appears to be a prominent target of
sorafenib in HCC. Indeed, 40–70% of HCCs harbor
nuclear accumulation of the β-catenin protein [38–40].
As seen for other tumors, Wnt/β-catenin signaling is a
critical contributor to HCC pathogenesis, and proteins
identified in this pathway are potential candidates for
pharmacological interventions [15]. However, our results
did not elucidate the effects of β-catenin mutations
which may affect cell functions such as oncogenesis and
treatment efficacy. Activating mutations in the β-catenin
gene (CTNNB1) occur in 8–30% of tumors, while lossof-function/mutations in APC and Axin genes occur
in 1–3% and 8–15%, respectively, and are mutually
exclusive to CTNNB1 mutations [10, 38, 41–45]. While
some observations suggest that CTNNB1 mutations could
be a late event during hepatocarcinogenesis, β-catenin
accumulation was detected in the early stage during the
development of HCC, suggesting that other mechanisms
could contribute to β-catenin stabilization [43, 46]. The
cell lines used in the present study were derived from
advanced HCC cases and they express various levels
of β-catenin. Although silencing CTNNB1 (which led
to reduction of PTMA levels) sensitized HCC cells
to sorafenib, we still do not know whether CTNNB1
mutations occurred in these HCC cell lines.
A recent review summarized the potential Wntcomponent targets for therapeutic intervention on tumor
development and growth [15]. While β-catenin activation
may cooperate with non-canonical pathways such as insulin/
IGF-1/IRS-1/MAPK during hepatocarcinogenesis in mice
[47], our study on sorafenib-induced apoptosis in HCC cell
lines reveals the involvement of β-catenin and MAPK/AP-1.
Inhibition of AP-1 by shRNA or chemical inhibitor downregulates β-catenin protein levels, suggesting that β-catenin
acts downstream of AP-1. These two pathways may be
muturally regulated and thus be impaired by downregulation
of either one. Accordingly, β-catenin activation may
cooperate with MAPK/AP-1 to potentiate PTMA
transcription. In this context, the mechanisms underlying
the development of chemoresistance may partly overlap
with that of β-catenin-associated oncogenesis. Additionally,
we found that oncogenic c-Myc activates PTMA and
represents a potent target of sorafenib in HCC cells [6].
These results support the notion that activation of oncogenes
and/or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes during tumor
development reduce treatment sensitivity, and are potential
therapeutic targets to reduce chemoresistance [48].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We present new findings linking β-catenin activity
with expression of the PTMA protein. We showed
previously that PTMA modulates the sensitivity of HCC
cells to the kinase inhibitor sorafenib [6]. Sorafenib was
shown to downregulate β-catenin and β-catenin activity
through the JNK pathway, a process which was associated
with suppressed PTMA activity. We also found that
CTNNB1 mRNA level is downregulated by sorafenib
through inhibition of the AP-1/JNK pathway, possibly via
transactivation inhibition. However, the mechanism by
which β-catenin is altered by sorafenib remains unclear.
These cellular processes enhance apoptosis and partly
overcome drug resistance. A simplified model is presented
and includes the effects of the β-catenin/AP-1/TCF4
axis and the c-Myc/Max axis in the regulation of PTMA
transactivation (Figure 8F). Nevertheless, how these
molecules interact and contribute to PTMA expression
still remains to be elucidated. As for the down-regulation
of PTMA, we also found that sorafenib down-regulates
the anti-apoptotic proteins survivin and Mcl-1 in HCC
cells. We have previously demonstrated the protective
role of HURP (which acts upstream of survivin) and Mcl-1
against sorafenib in HCC and endometrial carcinoma cells,
respectively [3, 49]. The possible involvement of these
proteins in modulating sorafenib response in HCC cells
and the link between such proteins and β-catenin need to
be examined in further studies.
In conclusion, our observation that PTMA plays a
critical role in HCC progression and drug resistance is
an important finding that may lead to the development
of novel cancer therapies. Compounds such as sorafenib
that potently interfere with signaling pathways and
effectors (e.g., PTMA) that are required for HCC
progression may be used to treat selected human
patients and improve current therapies against HCC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell cultures and reagents
Primary Chang liver cells and hepatocellular
carcinoma cells (Huh7, J7, SK-Hep1, and Mahlavu;
kindly provided by Prof. K.-H. Lin, Chang Gung
University) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Gibco, Gaithersburg, MD,
USA) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum
(FBS), penicillin (100 U/ml; Gibco), and streptomycin
(100 mg/ml; Gibco). All cells were incubated at 37°C
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 (v/v) in air.
The reagents used included antibodies against Bad,
pBad, Bid, β-catenin, pc-Jun, CREB, pGSK3β, GSK3β
(Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), PUMA, PTMA,
survivin, Mcl-1, Bcl-XL, Bcl-2, Bax, Bim, GAPDH,
lamin A/C, VDAC, c-Myc, FLIP, caspase-8, and c-Jun/
AP1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA,
USA). Kinase inhibitors of JNK (SP600125) (Santa
39012

Oncotarget

Cruz Biotechnology) and GSK3β (GSK3β inhibitor
II; Cell Signaling) were also used. Sorafenib (Bayer
Health Care AG, Berlin, Germany) was kindly provided
by Dr. T.-C. Chang (Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Taoyuan, Taiwan). The other chemicals were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich.

by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), transferred onto PVDF
membranes, prior to incubation with antibodies
according to the instructions of the manufacturer.
Protein signals were revealed using enhanced chemilu­
minescence according to the specifications of the
supplier (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Intensity of
the protein bands was determined using a scanning
densitometer (Personal Densitometer SI: Amersham
Biosciences, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

Plasmids and cell transfection
The pcDNA3 plasmid was used as a negative
control. pcDNA3-PTMA and a 2,500-bp functional
promoter segment of the PTMA gene isolated from
Mahlavu cell genomic DNA and 5′-truncated promoter
segments of PTMA, inserted in the pGL3-basic reporter
vector (Promega), were constructed as previously
described [6]. The pcDNA3-β-catenin expression plasmid
was kindly provided by Dr. J.J.-C. Lin (Department of
Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA) [50].
Site-specific mutations of the PTMA promoter were
constructed by PCR-directed mutagenesis using synthetic,
mismatched oligonucleotides, resulting in pGL3-PTMAAP1(mt) [51], pGL3-PTMA-TCF4(mt) [52], and
pGL3-PTMA-CREB(mt) [53]. Plasmid construction
and preparation was performed according to standard
protocols [54]. Cells were transfected with plasmids using
Lipofectamine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according
to the instructions provided by the supplier. Transfected
cells were incubated 48 hrs for overexpression of the
plasmids.

Silencing of selected genes using short-hairpin
RNA
pLKO.1 plasmids expressing shRNA were purchased
from the National RNAi Core Facility. Luciferase shRNA
(TRCN0000072244) was used as a negative control.
Transient transfection was done by adding 2 μg/well
(unless indicated otherwise) of shRNA plasmids along
with 5 μl/well of Lipofectamine (Invitrogen) into cell
suspensions kept in six-well plates (1.5 (104 cells/well)
as described before [56]. The plasmids used included
PTMA
(TRCN0000135421),
CTNNB1/β-catenin
(TRCN0000314991), and c-Fos (TRCN0000016004).
Stable clones expressing shRNA plasmids via lentivirus
as vector were established in HCC cells.

Fractionation of nucleus and cytosol
Cells were washed once with PBS, prior to lysis
in extraction buffer (10 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES,
pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol,
0.5 mM DTT). Following incubation on ice for 15 min,
cell lysates were mixed by pipeting several times and
centrifuged 1 min at 14,000 rpm to pellet nuclei. The
supernatant was centrifuged under the same conditions.
The final supernatant was partitioned in tubes and
centrifuged 5 min at 14,000 rpm. The supernatant
containing cytosolic proteins was collected. The nuclear
pellet was washed once with extraction buffer, prior to
lysis in nuclear extraction buffer (500 mM KCl, 20 mM
HEPES, pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10%
glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail;
BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and centrifuged
5 min as above. The entire purification process was
performed at 4°C.

Quantitative real-time reverse transcriptionPCR (qRT-PCR)
qRT-PCR, or in short qPCR, was performed on total
RNA extracted with Trizol (Invitrogen) and 200 nM of
primers as described [55]. The primers used were as follows:
PTMA, forward, 5′-CGAAATCACCACCAAGGACT-3′;
reverse,
5′-GTCGGTCTTCTGCTTCTTGG-3′;
and
CTNNB1, forward, 5′-GGCGCCATTTTAAGCCTCTC-3′;
reverse,
5′-TGGCCATGTCCAACTCCATC-3′;
and
GAPDH, forward, 5′-TCCTGCACCACCAACTGCTT-3′;
reverse,
5′-GAGGGGGCCATCCACGTCTT-3′.
All
unknown samples and controls were done in triplicate.
Relative quantification was calculated using the ∆∆Ct method
and normalized against GAPDH as before [56]. Namely, the
∆Ct for each candidate was calculated as ∆Ct (candidate) =
[Ct (candidate) – Ct (GAPDH)]. Relative abundance of the
candidate gene X was shown as 2∆Ct(X) – ∆Ct(GAPDH).

Analysis of cell viability and apoptosis
Cells were treated with sorafenib in culture medium
for three days unless indicated otherwise. Cell viability
was determined using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) colorimetric
assay [58]. Percentage of viable cells was calculated as
the ratio of OD570 nm values for treated cells divided by the
OD570 nm values for control cells. To evaluate apoptosis,

Western blot analysis
Whole cell protein extracts were prepared for
immunoblotting as before [57]. Protein concentration
was determined using the Bradford assay and the
BioRad dye reagent (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Proteins (50 μg) from each sample were separated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39013

Oncotarget

sub-G1 cells were measured as before [59]. Stained nuclei
were analyzed using the BD FACScan Flow Cytometer
(Becton & Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) with 10,000
events/determination. The LYSYS II software was used to
assess cell cycle distribution. Unless indicated otherwise,
samples were prepared in quadruplicate and three
independent experiments were performed.

3.0 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). TCF4
and CREB-binding sites were described previously
[53, 62, 63]. The primers used included: primer pair for
c-Myc and TCF4-binding site in the promoter region,
forward, 5′-TTCTGGTCCTTTTTCCCACA-3′ and
reverse, 5′-TTTAGAGAACCATGCGGAGC-3′, yielded
a 200-bp product; primer pair for AP-1 and CREBbinding site, forward, 5′-AGACTGCGTGCTAAGCTC-3′
and reverse, 5′-AGCTGGGAATGGGGAAAAC-3′,
yielded a 178-bp product; primer pair 3 for the exon-5
region, forward, 5′-GATGACACGCGCTCTCCAC-3′
and reverse, 5′- TCCGAAGGCTGGTTTGGTCA-3′,
produced a 214-bp product. Re-ChIP was performed with
the same procedure using double immunoprecipitation
with two antibodies before PCR. ChIP-qPCR was
performed using a qPCR kit and the same primer pairs.
The ∆Ct for each candidate was calculated as ∆Ct
(normalized ChIP) = [Ct (ChIP) – Ct (Input)]. The %
input was shown as 2[-∆Ct(normalized ChIP)].

Caspase activity assay
Caspase-3 and caspase-9 activity was monitored
using a commercial colorimetric assay kit (BioVision,
Milpitas, CA). Cells were treated with sorafenib (10 and
20 μM), JNKi (20 μM), or DMSO for 24 hrs. Cells were
resuspended in 50 μl of cold cell lysis buffer and incubated
on ice for 10 min. Following centrifugation for 1 min at
12,000 rpm, supernatants corresponding to cytosolic
extracts were transferred to new tubes and incubated on
ice for immediate assay or aliquoted and stored at –80°C
for future use. Cytoplasmic proteins (100 μg) and 5 μl of
substrate were added to 50 μl of 2× reaction buffer, prior
to incubation at 37°C for 2 hrs. Color was read at OD405 nm
in a micro-plate reader.

Statistical analysis
Data were reported as mean values ± Standard
deviation (SD). Three independent experiments were
performed unless indicated otherwise. Statistical significance
(p value) was calculated with a two-tailed Student’s t test
for single comparison. The symbols *, **, and *** denote
p < 0.05, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively.

Luciferase promoter analysis
HCC cells were transfected with 2 μg of pGL3PTMA reporter plasmid. Two μg of the Renilla luciferase
plasmid pGL4.74 [hRluc/TK] (Promega; kindly provided
by Dr. J. Horng, Chang Gung University) was included
with each reporter plasmid for normalization. HCC
cells transfected with the plasmids were incubated 48
hrs. Transcriptional activity was monitored using a dual
luciferase reporter assay (Promega) and a luminescence
reader (LMaxII384, Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale,
CA, USA) according to the instructions provided by the
manufacturers. For each experiment, luciferase activity
was normalized to Renilla luciferase.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We would like to thank the members of the
Chao Laboratory, especially T.-C. Kuo, for important
discussions regarding the topic presented here, as
well as N.-K. Sun for technical assistance. This study
was supported by Chang Gung University and Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital (grants CMRPD180023 and
CMRPD1C0262), and the National Science Council of
Taiwan (grant NSC102–2321-B-182–001).

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Formaldehyde cross-linking and ChIP assays
of tissue culture cells were performed based on a
modified protocol [60] as described before [61] using a
commercial kit (Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, NY,
USA). Chromatin was sonicated on ice to obtain DNA
fragments of 0.3–1.5 kbp and averaging 600 bp. Twenty
percent of total supernatant was used as a total-input
control. Following removal of bound proteins, immunoprecipitated DNA was subjected to qPCR or regular PCR
(35 cycles). The products amplified by regular PCR were
separated on a 1.5%-agarose gel and visualized using
ethidium bromide staining. AP-1 (activator protein-1) and
c-Myc-binding sites on the endogenous PTMA promoter
on chromosome 2 (NC_000002) were predicted using
TFSearch (http://www.cbrc.jp/research/db/TFSEARCH.
html; Tokyo, Japan). Primers were designed using Primer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
C/EBPβ, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta;
ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; CREB, c-AMP
responsive element binding protein; DMSO, dimethyl
sulfoxide; ERK, extracellular regulated protein kinase;
FBS, fetal bovine serum; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GFP, green fluorescent
protein; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HURP,
hepatoma upregulated protein; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal
kinases; Luc, luciferase; MAPK, mitogen-activated
protein kinase; MTT, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,539014

Oncotarget

diphenyltetrazolium bromide; PARP, poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; PCR,
polymerase chain reaction; PTMA, prothymosin alpha;
PVDF, polyvinylidene fluoride; qRT-PCR, quantitative
real-time reverse transcription-PCR; SDS-PAGE, sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis;
shRNA, short hairpin RNA; VDAC, voltage-dependent
anion channels.

carcinomas by somatic alterations involving exon 3. Cancer
research. 1998; 58:2524–2527.
12.	 Cieply B, Zeng G, Proverbs-Singh T, Geller DA,
Monga SP. Unique phenotype of hepatocellular cancers
with exon-3 mutations in beta-catenin gene. Hepatology.
2009; 49:821–831.
13.	 Kan Z, Zheng H, Liu X, Li S, Barber TD, Gong Z, Gao H,
Hao K, Willard MD, Xu J, Hauptschein R, Rejto PA,
Fernandez J, Wang G, Zhang Q, Wang B, et al. Wholegenome sequencing identifies recurrent mutations in
hepatocellular carcinoma. Genome research. 2013;
23:1422–1433.

REFERENCES
1.	 Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2005;
55:74–108.

14.	 Sun Y, Campisi J, Higano C, Beer TM, Porter P, Coleman I,
True L, Nelson PS. Treatment-induced damage to the
tumor microenvironment promotes prostate cancer therapy resistance through WNT16B. Nature medicine. 2012;
18:1359–1368.

2.	 Jiang X, Kim H-E, Shu H, Zhao Y, Zhang H, Kofron J,
Donnelly J, Burns D, Ng S-c, Rosenberg S, Wang X.
Distinctive roles of PHAP proteins and prothymosin-alpha
in a death regulatory pathway. Science. 2003; 299:223–226.

15.	 Pez F, Lopez A, Kim M, Wands JR, Caron de Fromentel C,
Merle P. Wnt signaling and hepatocarcinogenesis: molecular targets for the development of innovative anticancer
drugs. Journal of hepatology. 2013; 59:1107–1117.

3.	 Kuo TC, Lu HP, Chao CC. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor
sorafenib sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma cells to taxol
by suppressing the HURP protein. Biochemical pharmacology. 2011; 82:184–194.

16.	 Wilhelm S, Chien DS. BAY 43–9006: preclinical data.
Current pharmaceutical design. 2002; 8:2255–2257.

4.	 Tsou AP, Yang CW, Huang CY, Yu RC, Lee YC,
Changx  CW, Chen BR, Chung YF, Fann MJ, Chi CW,
Chiu JH, Chou CK. Identification of a novel cell cycle regulated gene, HURP, overexpressed in human hepatocellular
carcinoma. Oncogene. 2003; 22:298–307.

17.	 Wilhelm SM, Carter C, Tang L, Wilkie D, McNabola A,
Rong H, Chen C, Zhang X, Vincent P, McHugh M,
Cao  Y, Shujath J, Gawlak S, Eveleigh D, Rowley B,
Liu L, et al. BAY 43–9006 exhibits broad spectrum oral
antitumor activity and targets the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway and receptor tyrosine kinases involved in tumor
progression and angiogenesis. Cancer research. 2004;
64:7099–7109.

5.	 Wu CG, Habib NA, Mitry RR, Reitsma PH, van Deventer SJ,
Chamuleau RA. Overexpression of hepatic prothymosin
alpha, a novel marker for human hepatocellular carcinoma.
British journal of cancer. 1997; 76:1199–1204.

18.	 Carlomagno F, Anaganti S, Guida T, Salvatore G,
Troncone G, Wilhelm SM, Santoro M. BAY 43–9006 inhibition of oncogenic RET mutants. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute. 2006; 98:326–334.

6.	 Lin YT, Lu HP, Chao CC. Oncogenic c-Myc and prothymosin-alpha protect hepatocellular carcinoma cells against
sorafenib-induced apoptosis. Biochemical pharmacology.
2015; 93:110–124.

19.	 Chang CJ, Yang JY, Xia W, Chen CT, Xie X, Chao CH,
Woodward WA, Hsu JM, Hortobagyi GN, Hung MC.
EZH2 promotes expansion of breast tumor initiating cells
through activation of RAF1-beta-catenin signaling. Cancer
cell. 2011; 19:86–100.

7.	 Polakis P. The oncogenic activation of beta-catenin. Current
opinion in genetics & development. 1999; 9:15–21.
8.	 Farazi PA, DePinho RA. Hepatocellular carcinoma pathogenesis: from genes to environment. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;
6:674–687.

20.	 Galuppo R, Maynard E, Shah M, Daily MF, Chen C,
Spear BT, Gedaly R. Synergistic inhibition of HCC and
liver cancer stem cell proliferation by targeting RAS/
RAF/MAPK and WNT/beta-catenin pathways. Anticancer
research. 2014; 34:1709–1713.

9.	 Shibata T, Aburatani H. Exploration of liver cancer
genomes. Nature reviews Gastroenterology & hepatology.
2014; 11:340–349.
10.	 de La Coste A, Romagnolo B, Billuart P, Renard CA,
Buendia MA, Soubrane O, Fabre M, Chelly J, Beldjord C,
Kahn A, Perret C. Somatic mutations of the beta-catenin
gene are frequent in mouse and human hepatocellular carcinomas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 1998; 95:8847–8851.

21.	 Lachenmayer A, Alsinet C, Savic R, Cabellos L, Toffanin S,
Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Minguez B, Newell P, Tsai HW,
Barretina J, Thung S, Ward SC, Bruix J, Mazzaferro V,
Schwartz M, et al. Wnt-pathway activation in two molecular classes of hepatocellular carcinoma and experimental modulation by sorafenib. Clinical cancer research : an
official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2012; 18:4997–5007.

11.	 Miyoshi Y, Iwao K, Nagasawa Y, Aihara T, Sasaki Y,
Imaoka S, Murata M, Shimano T, Nakamura Y. Activation
of the beta-catenin gene in primary hepatocellular

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39015

Oncotarget

22.	 Muche S, Kirschnick M, Schwarz M, Braeuning A.
Synergistic effects of beta-catenin inhibitors and
sorafenib in hepatoma cells. Anticancer research. 2014;
34:4677–4683.

34.	 Augustin I, Goidts V, Bongers A, Kerr G, Vollert  G,
Radlwimmer B, Hartmann C, Herold-Mende C,
Reifenberger G, von Deimling A, Boutros M. The Wnt
secretion protein Evi/Gpr177 promotes glioma tumourigenesis. EMBO molecular medicine. 2012; 4:38–51.

23.	 Barbini L, Gonzalez R, Dominguez F, Vega F. Apoptotic
and proliferating hepatocytes differ in prothymosin alpha
expression and cell localization. Molecular and cellular biochemistry. 2006; 291:83–91.

35.	 Ozawa M, Baribault H, Kemler R. The cytoplasmic
domain of the cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin
associates with three independent proteins structurally
related in different species. The EMBO journal. 1989;
8:1711–1717.

24.	 Mori M, Barnard GF, Staniunas RJ, Jessup JM, Steele GD
Jr, Chen LB. Prothymosin-alpha mRNA expression correlates with that of c-myc in human colon cancer. Oncogene.
1993; 8:2821–2826.

36.	 Nateri AS, Spencer-Dene B, Behrens A. Interaction of
phosphorylated c-Jun with TCF4 regulates intestinal cancer
development. Nature. 2005; 437:281–285.
37.	 Toualbi K, Guller MC, Mauriz JL, Labalette C, Buendia MA,
Mauviel A, Bernuau D. Physical and functional cooperation
between AP-1 and beta-catenin for the regulation of TCFdependent genes. Oncogene. 2007; 26:3492–3502.

25.	 Shibuta K, Mori M, Mimori K, Inoue H, Nakashima H,
Baba K, Haraguchi M, Karimine N, Ueo H, Akiyoshi T.
Expression of prothymosin-alpha and c-myc mRNA in
human gastric cancer. International journal of oncology.
1996; 9:247–251.

38.	 Lachenmayer A, Alsinet C, Savic R, Cabellos L, Toffanin S,
Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Minguez B, Newell P, Tsai HW,
Barretina J, Thung S, Ward SC, Bruix J, Mazzaferro V,
Schwartz M, et al. Wnt-pathway activation in two molecular
classes of hepatocellular carcinoma and experimental modulation by sorafenib. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:4997–5007.

26.	 Sasaki H, Sato Y, Kondo S, Fukai I, Kiriyama M,
Yamakawa Y, Fujii Y. Expression of the prothymosin a
mRNA correlated with that of N-myc in neuroblastoma.
Cancer letters. 2001; 168:191–195.
27.	 Eilers M, Schirm S, Bishop JM. The MYC protein activates
transcription of the alpha-prothymosin gene. The EMBO
journal. 1991; 10:133–141.

39.	 Wong CM, Fan ST, Ng IO. beta-Catenin mutation and overexpression in hepatocellular carcinoma: clinicopathologic
and prognostic significance. Cancer. 2001; 92:136–145.

28.	 Gaubatz S, Meichle A, Eilers M. An E-box element localized in the first intron mediates regulation of the prothymosin alpha gene by c-myc. Molecular and cellular biology.
1994; 14:3853–3862.

40.	 Huang H, Fujii H, Sankila A, Mahler-Araujo BM, Matsuda
M, Cathomas G, Ohgaki H. Beta-catenin mutations are frequent in human hepatocellular carcinomas associated with
hepatitis C virus infection. The American journal of pathology. 1999; 155:1795–1801.

29.	 Mol PC, Wang R-H, Batey DW, Lee LA, Dang CV,
Berger SL. Do products of the myc proto-oncogene play
a role in transcriptional regulation of the prothymosin alpha gene? Molecular and cellular biology. 1995;
15:6999–7009.

41.	 Laurent-Puig P, Legoix P, Bluteau O, Belghiti J, Franco D,
Binot F, Monges G, Thomas G, Bioulac-Sage P, ZucmanRossi J. Genetic alterations associated with hepatocellular
carcinomas define distinct pathways of hepatocarcinogenesis. Gastroenterology. 2001; 120:1763–1773.

30.	 Gaubatz S, Imhof A, Dosch R, Werner O, Mitchell P,
Buettnerl R, Eilers M. Transcriptional activation by Myc is
under negative control by the transcription factor AP-2. The
EMBO journal. 1995; 14:1508–1519.
31.	 Ponce DP, Yefi R, Cabello P, Maturana JL, Niechi I,
Silva E, Galindo M, Antonelli M, Marcelain K, Armisen R,
Tapia JC. CK2 functionally interacts with AKT/PKB to promote the beta-catenin-dependent expression of survivin and
enhance cell survival. Molecular and cellular biochemistry.
2011; 356:127–132.

42.	 Guichard C, Amaddeo G, Imbeaud S, Ladeiro Y,
Pelletier  L, Maad IB, Calderaro J, Bioulac-Sage P,
Letexier M, Degos F, Clement B, Balabaud C, Chevet E,
Laurent A, Couchy G, Letouze E, et al. Integrated analysis
of somatic mutations and focal copy-number changes identifies key genes and pathways in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Nature genetics. 2012; 44:694–698.

32.	 Iqbal S, Zhang S, Driss A, Liu ZR, Kim HR, Wang Y,
Ritenour C, Zhau HE, Kucuk O, Chung LW, Wu D. PDGF
upregulates Mcl-1 through activation of beta-catenin and
HIF-1alpha-dependent signaling in human prostate cancer
cells. PloS one. 2012; 7:e30764.

43.	 Park JY, Park WS, Nam SW, Kim SY, Lee SH, Yoo NJ,
Lee JY, Park CK. Mutations of beta-catenin and AXIN I
genes are a late event in human hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Liver international : official journal of the International
Association for the Study of the Liver. 2005; 25:70–76.

33.	 Shen L, Zhang X, Hu D, Feng T, Li H, Lu Y, Huang J.
Hepatitis B virus X (HBx) play an anti-apoptosis role in
hepatic progenitor cells by activating Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway. Molecular and cellular biochemistry. 2013;
383:213–222.

44.	 Taniguchi K, Roberts LR, Aderca IN, Dong X, Qian C,
Murphy LM, Nagorney DM, Burgart LJ, Roche PC,
Smith DI, Ross JA, Liu W. Mutational spectrum of betacatenin, AXIN1, and AXIN2 in hepatocellular carcinomas
and hepatoblastomas. Oncogene. 2002; 21:4863–4871.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39016

Oncotarget

45.	 Amaddeo G, Guichard C, Imbeaud S, Zucman-Rossi J.
Next-generation sequencing identified new oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes in human hepatic tumors.
Oncoimmunology. 2012; 1:1612–1613.

54.	 Sambrook J, Russell D.W. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
(3rd ed)2001; .
55.	 Sun CL, Chao CC. Cross-resistance to death ligandinduced apoptosis in cisplatin-selected HeLa cells associated with overexpression of DDB2 and subsequent
induction of cFLIP. Molecular pharmacology. 2005;
67:1307–1314.

46.	 Suzuki T, Yano H, Nakashima Y, Nakashima O, Kojiro M.
Beta-catenin expression in hepatocellular carcinoma: a possible participation of beta-catenin in the dedifferentiation
process. Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology. 2002;
17:994–1000.

56.	 Wu ZZ, Lu HP, Chao CC. Identification and functional analysis of genes which confer resistance to cisplatin in tumor
cells. Biochemical pharmacology. 2010; 80:262–276.

47.	 Longato L, de la Monte S, Kuzushita N, Horimoto M,
Rogers AB, Slagle BL, Wands JR. Overexpression of
insulin receptor substrate-1 and hepatitis Bx genes causes
premalignant alterations in the liver. Hepatology. 2009;
49:1935–1943.

57.	 Kamarajan P, Sun NK, Sun CL, Chao CC. Apaf-1 overexpression partially overcomes apoptotic resistance in
a cisplatin-selected HeLa cell line. FEBS letters. 2001;
505:206–212.

48.	 Lowe SW, Lin AW. Apoptosis in cancer. Carcinogenesis.
2000; 21:485–495.

58.	 Chao CC, Huang SL, Huang HM, Lin-Chao S. Cross-resistance
to UV radiation of a cisplatin-resistant human cell line: overexpression of cellular factors that recognize UV-modified, DNA.
Molecular and cellular biology. 1991; 11:2075–2080.

49.	 Sun NK, Huang SL, Chang TC, Chao CC. Sorafenib
induces endometrial carcinoma apoptosis by inhibiting
Elk-1-dependent Mcl-1 transcription and inducing Akt/
GSK3beta-dependent protein degradation. Journal of cellular biochemistry. 2013; 114:1819–1831.

59.	 Tsai SY, Sun NK, Lu HP, Cheng ML, Chao CC.
Involvement of reactive oxygen species in multidrug resistance of a vincristine-selected lymphoblastoma. Cancer
­science. 2007; 98:1206–1214.

50.	 Wang Q, Lu TL, Adams E, Lin JL, Lin JJ. Intercalated
disc protein, mXinalpha, suppresses p120-catenin-induced
branching phenotype via its interactions with p120-catenin
and cortactin. Archives of biochemistry and biophysics.
2013; 535:91–100.

60.	 Shang Y, Hu X, DiRenzo J, Lazar MA, Brown M. Cofactor
dynamics and sufficiency in estrogen receptor-regulated
transcription. Cell. 2000; 103:843–852.

51.	 Risse G, Jooss K, Neuberg M, Bruller HJ, Muller R.
Asymmetrical recognition of the palindromic AP1 binding
site (TRE) by Fos protein complexes. The EMBO journal.
1989; 8:3825–3832.
52.	 Lin SY, Xia W, Wang JC, Kwong KY, Spohn B, Wen Y,
Pestell RG, Hung MC. Beta-catenin, a novel prognostic marker
for breast cancer: its roles in cyclin D1 expression and cancer
progression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2000; 97:4262–4266.
53.	 Tinti C, Yang C, Seo H, Conti B, Kim C, Joh TH,
Kim KS. Structure/function relationship of the cAMP
response element in tyrosine hydroxylase gene transcription. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1997;
272:19158–19164.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61.	 Wu ZZ, Chow KP, Kuo TC, Chang YS, Chao CC. Latent
membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus sensitizes cancer
cells to cisplatin by enhancing NF-kappaB p50 homodimer formation and downregulating NAPA expression.
Biochemical pharmacology. 2011; 82:1860–1872.
62.	 Hallikas O, Palin K, Sinjushina N, Rautiainen R, Partanen J,
Ukkonen E, Taipale J. Genome-wide prediction of mammalian enhancers based on analysis of transcription-factor
binding affinity. Cell. 2006; 124:47–59.
63.	 Bottomly D, Kyler SL, McWeeney SK, Yochum GS.
Identification of {beta}-catenin binding regions in colon
cancer cells using ChIP-Seq. Nucleic acids research. 2010;
38:5735–5745.

39017

Oncotarget

