Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 24

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Combined targeting of EGFR/HER promotes anti-tumor efficacy
in subsets of KRAS mutant lung cancer resistant to single EGFR
blockade
Ijeoma
Adaku
Umelo1,
Olivier
De
Wever2,
Peter
Kronenberger1,3,
Jan Van Deun2, Alfiah Noor1, Kshitiz Singh4, Erik Teugels1, Gang Chen1,
Marc Bracke2, Jacques De Grève1
1

aboratory of Molecular Oncology and Department of Medical Oncology, Oncologisch Centrum, Universitair Ziekenhuis
L
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

2

aboratory of Experimental Cancer Research and Department of Radiotherapy, Universitair Ziekenhuis Gent, Brussels,
L
Belgium

3

Laboratory of Biotechnology, Department of Healthcare, Erasmushogeschool Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

4

Laboratory of Gene Therapy & Regenerative Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

Correspondence to:
Jacques De Grève, e-mail: Jacques.Degreve@uzbrussel.be
Keywords: lung cancer, KRAS, EGFR, HER, targeted therapy
Received: December 09, 2014 	

Accepted: May 05, 2015 	Published: May 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
KRAS is a frequently mutated oncogene in lung cancer and among the most
refractory to EGFR targeted therapy. Recently, preclinical evidence in pancreatic
cancer has demonstrated that mutant KRAS can be regulated by EGFR. However, the
distinct correlation between the EGFR/HER family members and mutant KRAS has not
been investigated. Here, we show that non-small cell lung cancer cell lines harboring
differing isoforms of mutant KRAS, can be broadly divided into EGFR/HER dependent
and EGFR/HER independent groups. Combined therapeutic targeting of EGFR, HER2
and HER3 in isoforms regulated by extracellular growth signals promotes in vitro and
in vivo efficacy. We also provide evidence that depletion of EGFR via RNA interference
specifically abolishes the EGFR/KRAS interaction in the dependent subset. Taken
together, these findings suggest that upstream inhibition of the EGFR/HER receptors
may be effective in treating a subset of KRAS mutant lung cancers.

GTP-ase activity, and hence constitutively activating downstream signaling molecules independent of ligand- mediated
EGFR activation [4]. Current knowledge suggests that this
downstream activation renders upstream EGFR inhibition
irrelevant in the context of possible therapeutic intervention.
Moreover these cancers are consistently wild-type EGFR
which on itself precludes significant therapeutic efficacy
from single EGFR inhibition.
There is currently no established therapy
available for KRAS mutant cancers [5]. Various efforts
to specifically target KRAS with farnesyl transferase
inhibitors (FTIs), which block RAS membrane attachment
and RAS signaling, have failed to show a significant
enzyme inhibitory activity needed for clinical activity,
which may explain the limited therapeutic effect of FTIs
in phase II lung cancer trials [6]. Other strategies to
specifically target the activity of oncogenic RAS have also

INTRODUCTION
The identification and characterization of genetic
abnormalities attributed to the development of lung cancer
has enabled advancement in understanding the biology and
pathophysiology of the disease. The most common genetic
alterations observed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
occur in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
gene, a member of the HER family (Human Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor) of transmembrane receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs), and in KRAS - a member of the
Ras family of small GTPases, which also includes HRAS
and NRAS [1]. Oncogenic KRAS missense mutations
are found in approximately 10–30% of lung carcinomas
where they typically cluster around codon 12, codon 13
or more rarely codon 61 [2–3]. These substitutions have
been described to deregulate RAS signaling by decreasing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20132

Oncotarget

provided no significant therapeutic benefit, although this
still remains an active area of research [7–8]. Currently,
downstream targeting of the RAS pathway (MEK
inhibition) is under clinical investigation [9–11].
While multiple reports have described the
constitutively active oncogenic KRAS to be independent
of EGFR [12–13], recent evidence in pancreatic cancer
has indicated that signaling by mutant KRAS may be
dependent on upstream activation of EGFR [14–15].
Moreover, Young et al, recently proposed that oncogenic
KRAS may also be regulated by upstream activation of
several receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) [16]. Besides
EGFR the distinct role of other HER receptor members,
such as HER2 and HER3, in modulating mutant KRASdriven tumorigenesis is not known. We therefore examined
the collective contribution of EGFR, HER2 and HER3 in
the molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis
of KRAS mutant lung cancer. We present divergent
cellular mechanisms associated with RTK-dependent
and RTK-independent cell lines and provide in vitro and
in vivo evidence demonstrating the anti-tumor efficacy
of targeting EGFR/HER in the RTK-dependent subset.
Our model suggests that in a group of mutant KRAS
lung cancers, EGFR is not the major upstream signaling
activator, but that this role is also played by HER2 and
HER3. Multi-targeting the HER receptors may thus have
positive implications for the treatment of tumors that
harbor these specific mutant KRAS isoforms.

72 hrs (MTS assay), while a ~15% reduction was observed
after wild-type KRAS siRNA treatment (Fig. 1b). Similar
observations were seen with H23 (KRASG12C; EGFRwt)
cells (Fig. S1a). H1650 cells, carrying an activating EGFR
mutation, demonstrated a ~15% significant reduction in cell
growth after respective siRNA treatment with either wildtype or mutant KRAS (Fig. 1b). This observation could be
as a result of the relatively enhanced levels of active KRAS
seen in H1650 cells (Fig. 1a); possibly related to the absence
of the PTEN phosphatase in this cell line [18]. No significant
inhibitory effects were observed on the cellular growth
of either H1975 cells carrying the EGFRT790M resistance
mutation or H292 control cells after similar treatments
(Fig. 1b).
To determine the molecular changes associated
with the decrease in cellular growth, we examined
KRAS protein expression and effector signaling. A
siRNA-mediated depletion of the wild-type KRAS
isoform reduced the expression of KRAS in the
control cell line as well as in the two EGFR mutant
cell lines (Fig.  1c). In contrast, while knockdown of
wild-type KRAS did not significantly reduce KRAS
protein expression in H358 cells, mutant-specific
knockdown potently and specifically reduced KRAS
protein expression (Fig.  1c). Depletion of oncogenic
KRAS impaired AKT phosphorylation in H358 cells,
but resulted in a more robust induction of STAT3
phosphorylation at Tyr 705, compared to wild-type
KRAS knockdown (Fig.  1c), indicating a feedback
activation of STAT3. Similar results were also observed
with the H23 cells harboring the same KRAS mutation
(Fig. S1b). Our results show a modest reduction in
phosphorylated STAT3 levels at Tyr 705 in H292
control cells with mutant KRAS G12C knockdown
(Fig. 1c). The reduction of STAT3 could be the result of
an miRNA effect [19], since sequence alignment of the
mutant specific KRAS siRNA and EGFR reveals partial
homologies, e.g. within the 3′ untranslated region of
EGFR beginning at position 2098 (data not shown). In
H1650 mutant EGFR cells, mutant KRAS knockdown
also reduced KRAS protein levels but without a
significant effect on the downstream signal transduction
pathways (Fig. 1c). Again, this could be related to the
relatively high levels of active KRAS seen in this cell
line (Fig. 1a). The absence of effects on the downstream
pathways was also observed in the H1975 cells.
To examine the effect of wild-type or mutant specific
KRAS siRNA on the survival of the NSCLC cell lines,
Hoechst 33342/Propidum Iodide (PI) double chromatin
staining was performed to detect DNA condensation in cell
cultures 72 hrs post-transfection. The number of apoptotic
cells was calculated by microscopic examination of cells
displaying blue nuclear fragmentation (Hoechst) and red
nuclear fragmentation (PI), indicating the induction of early
and late apoptosis. As shown in Fig. 1d, siRNA-mediated
depletion of wild-type and mutant KRAS had an impact

RESULTS
Silencing oncogenic KRAS in KRAS-dependent
NSCLC cells
Four human NSCLC cell lines with differing
KRAS and EGFR mutational status, H292 (KRASwt;
EGFRwt), H358 (KRASG12C; EGFRwt), H1650 (KRASwt;
EGFRΔE746-A750) and H1975 (KRASwt; EGFRL858R + T790M),
were assessed for RAS-GTP activity by a Raf ‘pull down
assay’ using the RAS-binding domain of Raf-1. H358 cells
harboring oncogenic KRAS displayed elevated levels of
active KRAS-GTP (isoform specific) and pan-RAS-GTP
when compared to the other NSCLC cell lines (Fig. 1a).
Interestingly, although H1650 cells express lower levels
of total KRAS compared to the other cell lines, the
normalized ratio of active KRAS-GTP to total KRAS was
relatively high- a calculated ratio of 2.42 compared to a
ratio of 2.62 for H358 cells (Fig. 1a). However, the overall
KRAS-GTP signal observed in H1650 cells remains very
low compared to H358 cells.
To also examine the respective roles of wild-type and
mutant KRAS in the growth of H358 cells, siRNAs specific
to wild-type KRAS and mutant KRAS G12C isoforms [17]
were utilized in functional experiments. As shown in
Fig.  1b, H358 cells exposed to mutant-specific KRAS
siRNA displayed a ~40% reduction in cellular growth after
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20133

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Silencing oncogenic KRAS in KRAS-addicted NSCLC cells. a. Ras-GTP levels in NSCLC cells expressing mutant

KRAS, mutant EGFR or their wild-type form were measured with a pull-down assay (PD). GTP-bound Ras, isolated from the PD and
total cell lysate (TCL) subjected to immunoblot analysis are shown. Values represent normalized ratios of active RAS to total RAS levels,
quantified by Image J analysis. b. NSCLC cells transiently transfected with wild-type KRAS or mutant KRAS (G12C) siRNA for 72 hrs
were assessed for cell growth by MTS (values are representative of mean ± SEM of three independent experiments) and c. immunoblot
analysis with the indicated antibodies. d. Cellular apoptosis was quantified by Hoechst 33342 (blue) and propidium iodide (red) double
fluorescent chromatin staining on cell cultures 72 hrs post siRNA transfection. Representative images of two independent experiments from
3 to 5 randomly selected microscopic fields are shown (40× magnification). Also see Supplementary Figure S1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20134

Oncotarget

on the survival of H358 cells with a respective increase
of 8.4 ± 0.2% (wild-type) and 14.8 ± 1.0% (mutant) in the
number of apoptotic cells relative to control. In addition,
H23 NSCLC cells treated under similar conditions
displayed comparable results (Fig. S1c). No significant
apoptotic effects were observed with the other NSCLC
cell lines after similar siRNA treatment (Fig. 1d). Taken
together, these results indicate that although knock down
of KRAS G12C in dependent NSCLC cells causes growth
inhibition and a modest induction of apoptosis, this effect
may be attenuated by the upregulation of phosphorylated
STAT3 and hence the increase of survival signals.

(A549) groups (as evaluated in Fig. 2). The cells were
transfected with the shRNA plasmids, enriched in medium
containing puromycin; followed by assessments of active
KRAS-GTP and EGFR/HER levels. shRNA-mediated
knockdown of EGFR in H358 cells potently reduced,
by approximately five-fold, active KRAS-GTP levels
compared to shRNA targeting the luciferase control gene,
as well as HER2 and HER3 (Fig. 3a & 3b). For A549
cells, treatment with the HER shRNAs did not induce
a significant depletion in KRAS-GTP levels (Fig. 3a &
3b). Combined knockdown of EGFR and HER2 potently
reduced KRAS-GTP levels in H358 cells, while similar
shRNA treatment enhanced KRAS-GTP levels in A549
cells (Fig. S2a).
EGFR and HER3 shRNA-mediated knockdown
in H358 cells potently reduced phosphorylated and total
levels of EGFR compared to control (Fig.  3c  &  3d).
Importantly, combined knockdown of EGFR and
HER2 also produced a marked decrease in levels of
phosphorylated and total EGFR in H358 cells (Fig. S2b).
Although a potent reduction in EGFR phosphorylation
was observed in A549 cells after EGFR or HER3 shRNA
treatment, a corresponding increase in total EGFR
levels was also observed in this cell line (Fig. 3c & 3d).
Furthermore, treatment with HER2 shRNA in A549
increased both phosphorylated and total levels of EGFR
(Fig. 3c & 3d), while the combination of EGFR and
HER2 shRNA also correlated with an increase in EGFR
expression levels (Fig. S2b). The reason behind these
observations remain unclear, but could be linked to an
unknown feedback mechanism between the HER receptors
that render mutant KRAS independent of EGFR/HER
regulation in A549 cells.

EGFR/HER-dependent and EGFR/
HER-independent isoforms of KRAS
mutant NSCLC
KRAS is central to multiple signaling cascades and
has been shown to induce growth-factor independence and
constitutively activate downstream signaling effectors in
its oncogenic form [13]. To further investigate whether
oncogenic KRAS activity could be influenced by
stimulation of EGF or other HER-family related ligands,
a panel of mutant KRAS NSCLC cells - H358 (KRASG12C;
EGFRwt), H23 (KRASG12C; EGFRwt) , A427 (KRASG12D;
EGFRwt) and A549 (KRASG12S; EGFRwt amplification) - were
serum starved overnight and then stimulated with
epidermal growth factor (EGF) or neuregulin 1β (NRG1β)
for ten minutes. As shown in Fig. 2, acute stimulation of
H358 cells with EGF, strongly enhanced KRAS-GTP and
pan-RAS-GTP loading, while treatment with NRG1β, the
ligand for HER3, mostly enhanced pan-RAS GTP levels.
In contrast, although EGF stimulation enhanced panRAS-GTP levels in H23 cells bearing the same KRASG12C
mutation as H358 cells, it was NRG1β stimulation that
mostly enhanced active KRAS levels (Fig. 2). These
data indicate that H358 and H23 cells are dependent on
extracellular growth signals from EGFR or HER2/HER3
for enhanced KRAS GTP-loading. Examination of active
RAS levels in the two other KRAS mutant isoforms (A427
and A549) did not reveal an increase in either KRAS or
pan-RAS GTP loading upon EGF stimulation (Fig.  2),
pointing to a EGFR-independent phenotype in these cells.
To the contrary, NRG1β stimulation even decreased their
active KRAS and pan-RAS levels further indicating that
A427 and A549 cells are differentially influenced by
upstream stimulation of the EGFR/HER receptors.

Effect of combined HER inhibition in KRAS and
EGFR mutant NSCLC cell lines
Oncogenic KRAS and its related signaling effectors
are thus readily activated by upstream HER stimulation
in certain KRASG12C NSCLC cells (see above and Fig. 2).
We subsequently investigated the effect of targeting
oncogenic KRAS activity indirectly, by combined
inhibition of the HER family of receptors with the EGFR
small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib, and
with the HER2- specific monoclonal antibody pertuzumab.
Pertuzumab prevents HER2 from dimerizing with its other
HER partners thereby blocking signaling [20]. The same
panel of KRAS mutant NSCLC cells (H358, H23, A427
and A549) previously tested (Fig. 2), was compared to
mutant EGFR NSCLC cells (H1650 and H1975) that have
a wild-type KRAS status.
The NSCLC cells were treated for five days
with erlotinib (100 nM), pertuzumab (25 μg/ml), their
combination, or vehicle control and biological effects
were examined. All of the NSCLC cell lines display
resistance to clinical achievable doses of single-agent

Silencing the EGFR/HER in KRAS mutant
NSCLC cells
To evaluate how KRAS-driven NSCLC cells are
regulated by the HER receptors, we performed short
hairpin (shRNA) -mediated knockdown of EGFR, HER2
and HER3 on two candidate cell lines from the EGFR/
HER-dependent (H358) and EGFR/HER independent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20135

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effects of acute growth factor stimulation on RAS activity in mutant KRAS NSCLC cells. NSCLC cells were

serum starved for 16 hrs and stimulated for 10 minutes with the indicated ligands. Ras-GTPlevels were measured with a pull down (PD)
assay and total cell lysates (TCL) were subjected to immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies.

erlotinib or pertuzumab (data not shown). As shown in
Fig. 4a, combined treatment significantly reduced in vitro
cellular growth of H358 cells compared to single treatment
conditions and a more modest reduction in the growth of
H23 and A549 cells. In contrast, combination treatment
yielded no growth inhibition in A427 cells (Fig. 4a).
Combination treatment in H358 cells reduced EGFR
and HER2/3 phosphorylation resulting in the suppression
of downstream effectors: STAT3, AKT and ERK1/2
(Fig. 4c; also see summary table - Table S1). In H23 cells,
active levels of EGFR/HER and downstream signaling
effectors were unaffected (Fig. 4c). In A549 cells, erlotinib
had a paradoxical effect of stimulating the phosphorylation
status of EGFR and HER3, while the combination with
pertuzumab caused only some inhibition of active HER3
levels, but not of EGFR or HER2 (Fig. 4c; Table S1). This
further indicates that an unknown feedback mechanism
affecting EGFR/HER2 could be active in these KRAS
mutant cells bearing an EGFR amplified status or that
the dose of erlotinib employed was insufficient to block
the overexpressed EGFR protein. In the same vein, an
increase in active levels of all three HERs was observed in
A427 cells upon pertuzumab treatment, while combination
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

treatment yielded no significant effects on active levels of
HER and downstream effector proteins AKT and ERK1/2
(Fig. 4c; Table S1).
The dual effect of erlotinib and pertuzumab on
growth and EGFR/HER activity of H1650 and H1975
EGFR mutant NSCLC cells was less evident. No
pronounced effects were observed in comparison to single
treatment conditions (Fig. 4b and 4d).

Combined HER inhibition promotes antitumor efficacy in EGFR/HER-dependent KRAS
mutant NSCLC
Combined erlotinib and pertuzumab treatment
severely reduced KRAS and pan-RAS GTP loading in
H358 cells, significantly more than either treatment alone
(Fig. 5a; H358). Interestingly, KRAS protein expression
was strongly upregulated in H358 cells (doublet band in
Fig. 5a; H358) upon combined treatment. In H23 cells,
there was also a reduction in both KRAS and pan-RAS GTP
levels compared to single treatment conditions (Fig. 5a).
We further examined the impact of combined HER
inhibition on the invasive capabilities of H358 and H23
20136

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Silencing EGFR/HER in mutant KRAS NSCLC cells. Cells were transfected with shRNA targeting Luciferase,

EGFR, HER2 and HER3 and enriched with puromycin (see Materials and Methods). Ras-GTP levels were measured with a pull down
(PD) assay and total cell lysates (TCL) were subjected to immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies a, c. b, d. Values of KRASGTP and phosphorylated EGFR levels from the immunoblot analyses in (a, c) are shown in histograms. Values are normalized relative to
Luciferase shRNA treatment as quantified by Image J analysis. Also see Supplementary Figure S2.

cells, by culturing the cells on a type I collagen substrate
in the presence of the inhibitors or their combination. Of
note, H358 cells typically form colonies on top of collagen
whereas H23 cells attach and form invasive extensions
inside the substrate. Combining erlotinib and pertuzumab
reduced the tendency of H358 cells to form colonies on a
type I collagen matrix (Fig. 5b); with a six-fold reduction
in colony size observed after combined treatment (Fig. 5c).
The invasive growth of H23 cells was attenuated after 48
hrs post combination treatment, as depicted by the reduced
number of invasive extensions (Fig. 5d). Quantification
demonstrated that combined treatment exerted a
17.02  ±  1.2% (p < 0.01) or a four-fold decrease in the
invasive capacity of H23 cells compared to vehicle control 
(Fig.  5e).
Finally, to evaluate the in vivo anti-tumor efficacy
of combined erlotinib and pertuzumab treatment in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

NSCLC-derived mutant KRASG12C, we examined a
mouse model bearing xenografts of H358 cells. Tumor
bearing mice were randomized into individual groups
(n = 8) and treated with either vehicle, single or sequential
combination  treatment ([erlotinib 60 mg/kg/oral;
pertuzumab 7 mg/kg/i.p.] 3x weekly) for 17 days. As
shown in Figures 6a, 6b and 6c, sequential combination
treatment reduced tumor volume and tumor weight after 17
days. In addition, a 50 ± 12.9% reduction in tumor volume
was observed in the combination treatment group already
within seven days of treatment (Fig. 6b). Histological
analysis of the xenografted tissue revealed a lower amount
of the epithelial component and higher amount of stroma
in the combined treatment group compared to the other
groups (Fig. 6d). This observation further demonstrates
reduced tumor cell growth in this dual treatment cohort.
In addition, some tumor sections from the combination
20137

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of erlotinib and pertuzumab combination on growth and EGFR/HER signalling in KRAS and EGFR
mutant NSCLC cells. Cells were treated with erlotinib (100 nM), pertuzumab (25 μg/ml) or their combination for five days. a, b.
Growth inhibition was determined by the SRB in vitro toxicology assay. Data are expressed relative to control and are representative of
mean ± SEM of two to three independent experiments c, d. Total cell lysates were subjected to immunoblot analysis with the indicated
antibodies. Also see summary table (Table S1).

treatment group exhibited pyknotic nuclei, suggesting the
induction of apoptosis. This observation was not made in
analyzed tumor sections from the other treatment groups.
Moreover, quantification of the epithelial to stromal ratio
confirmed that this ratio was strongly decreased in the
combined treatment group, approximately 12 fold when
compared to vehicle control, and approximately 5 and 6
fold when compared to erlotinib and pertuzumab treatment
groups respectively (Fig. 6e). Ki67 cellular proliferation
immunostaining was also performed on the tumor sections,
but did not display any distinct variation across the four
groups (data not shown). The Ki67 index was low in all
treatment groups. The mouse tumor sections were further
analyzed for the presence of DNA fragmentation and
late apoptosis using a TUNEL-based assay. The analysis
revealed a modest 1.5 to 2- fold increase in TUNEL
positive cells in the combined treatment group compared
to the other respective groups (Fig. S3c).
To determine the status of active EGFR/HER and
active KRAS/pan-RAS levels across all treatment groups,
we performed both immunoblot analysis and a Raf ‘pull
down assay’ on cell lysates extracted from crude tumor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tissue. Comparison of active EGFR/HER levels in the
individual treatment groups demonstrated that combined
treatment potentiated a decrease in phosphorylated
EGFR at activating residues (Tyr 1068 and Tyr 1173)
as well as a corresponding decrease at the activating Tyr
1248 residue of HER2 (Fig. S3a). Importantly, levels of
active EGFR/HER were higher in the single treatment
groups compared to vehicle control (Fig. S3a). As shown
in Fig. S3b, active KRAS levels were severely reduced
in the combination treatment group, consistent with our
results obtained in vitro. Surprisingly, active pan-RAS
levels remained unaffected across all groups suggesting
that EGFR/HER inhibition is specific to the KRASaddicted phenotype of H358 cells.

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we investigated upstream events
that may influence the mutant KRAS signaling pathway
in NSCLC. We found that EGF or NRG1β stimulation can
strongly enhance the amount of active RAS in NSCLC
20138

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Anti-tumor efficacy of erlotinib and pertuzumab combination in EGFR/HER-dependent KRAS mutant
NSCLC cells. H358 and H23 NSCLC cells were treated with erlotinb (100 nM), pertuzumab (25 μg/ml) or their combination for five

days. a. Active bound Ras-GTP levels in mutant KRAS H358 cells were measured with a pull-down (PD) assay, and total cell lysate (TCL)
subjected to immunoblot analysis are shown. b. H358 cells were cultured for 21 days on a collagen type I gel in the presence of the indicated
inhibitors. Colonies were fixed and stained with crystal violet and bright-field images are representative of 20× magnification (Bar, 100 μm)
c. Quantification of colonies formed by H358 cells after inhibitor treatment. d. Phase contrast images of H23 cells cultured on a collagen
type I gel for 48 hrs in the presence of the indicated inhibitors. Arrows indicate invasive extensions and images are representative of 40×
magnification (Bar, 50 μM). e. Invasive index quantification of H23 cells after inhibitor treatment. Values from (c) and (e) are representative
of mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20139

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Anti-tumor efficacy of sequential erlotinib/pertuzumab treatment in KRAS mutant xenografts. KRAS mutant
H358 cells were implanted subcutaneously into nude mice until tumors reached a volume of approximately 100 mm3. Xenografts (n = 8)
were randomized and received vehicle, 60 mg/kg erlotinib, 7 mg/kg pertuzumab or their combination three days a week for 17 days.
a. Representative images of tumor bearing mice and resected tumors from respective treatment groups. Scale bar, 10 mm b. Change in
tumor volume of individual treatment groups. c. Comparison of tumor weight from respective treatment groups. d. Representative H&E
stained mouse tumor sections from respective treatment groups. Scale bar, 100 μM e. Quantification of epithelial to stromal ratio of
H&E stained tumor sections from individual treatment groups. Values from (b), (c) and (e) are representative of mean ± SEM. Also see
Supplementary Figure S3.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20140

Oncotarget

cells harboring oncogenic KRASG12C. In accordance with
our findings, a recent report demonstrates that oncogenic
KRAS requires EGF stimulation for enhanced activity
in pancreatic cancer cells: EGF induced a prolonged
activity of oncogenic KRAS, whereas only transient
effects are seen in cells with wild type KRAS  [15].
Surprisingly, while EGF stimulation had no effect in
increasing the levels of KRAS-GTP in some other
examined mutant isoforms of KRAS, NRG1β treatment
reduced active levels of KRAS in these cell lines. The
explanation for this remains unclear, but this observation
could be in accordance with previous data that indicate
a possible tumor suppressor function of NRG1  [21].
Our observations disagree with previous reports which
describe oncogenic KRAS as solely constitutively active
and independent from upstream activation by EGFR
or other RTKs [13, 22–25]. Although this is the case in
some RAS mutant tumor types, including some of the
NSCLC tested here, our work indicates that some KRAS
mutant cancers retain sensitivity to upstream stimuli
emanating from extracellular signaling in particular via
the HER pathway. These data therefore indicate that
mutant KRAS isoforms can be classified into two groups:
(1) EGFR/HER/RTK -dependent or (2) EGFR/HER/RTKindependent. To our knowledge, this is the first report that
clearly delineates HER dependent or independent groups
in the context of NSCLC-derived mutant KRAS.
We found that silencing oncogenic KRAS in EGFR/
HER-dependent NSCLC cells reduced cellular growth,
and also induced a modest apoptotic signal. These findings
are consistent with previous reports on pancreatic cancer
cell models [17, 26]. While the depletion of KRAS
expression by mutant-specific siRNA was accompanied by
a reduction in AKT phosphorylation levels in the EGFR/
HER-dependent subset, it was also followed by robust
activation of STAT3. These results suggest a feedback
loop via STAT3 that re-establishes oncogenic signaling,
compensating for the loss of AKT survival signals.
Our results are compatible with findings of Sunaga
et al. [27], who showed that there is a feedback loop
involving autocrine secretion of TGFβ, and subsequent
phosphorylation of EGFR and STAT3.
The sole silencing of oncogenic KRAS may thus
not be an effective therapeutic strategy in KRAS-addicted
cancers, since upstream events and feedback loops are
likely to attenuate or annul the effects of the therapeutic
intervention. To further determine how mutant KRAS
is regulated by EGFR and other HER members, we
investigated shRNA-mediated knockdown of EGFR,
HER2 and HER3 in cell lines classified as EGFR/
HER-dependent or independent. Contrary to the current
model of a constitutively active mutant KRAS, we found
that knockdown of EGFR, successfully reduced active
KRAS-GTP levels in the cell line representing the EGFR/
HER-dependent subset. Importantly, we also show that
knockdown of the HER receptors potently suppressed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

phosphorylated and total levels of their proteins in the
dependent subset. In contrast, while shRNA-mediated
knockdown of EGFR/HER had no significant effects
in reducing KRAS-GTP levels in the A549 cell line
representing the EGFR/HER independent subset,
knockdown of HER2 led to the robust upregulation of
pEGFR and total EGFR in this cell line. We do not have
a mechanistic explanation for this observation but our
data suggest a feedback between the HER receptors that
makes the mutant KRAS independent from EGFR/HER
regulation.
We and others have previously shown that NSCLC
cells carrying an oncogenic KRAS mutation exhibit
primary resistance to anti-EGFR therapy with small
molecule inhibitors such as erlotinib, and propose that
these KRAS-addicted cells subvert upstream signals
emanating from EGFR [28]. To confront these earlier
findings with our current data, we inhibited EGFR, HER2
and HER3 with a combination of erlotinib and pertuzumab
leading to the suppression of in vitro growth and the
inhibition of receptor signaling and downstream signaling
effectors in the dependent subset. In contrast we found
a paradoxical increase in phosphorylated EGFR levels
after dual treatment in KRAS mutant A549 cells that
harbor a wild-type EGFR amplification. Consistent with
these molecular observations, we also did not observe
a significant suppression of in vitro cellular growth in
these cells. While amplification of the EGFR has been
reported to predict response to EGFR TKIs [29], its
concomitance with oncogenic KRAS seemingly acts as
a driver of resistance. KRAS mutant A427 (EGFR/HERindependent) cells were highly unresponsive to the drug
combination treatment and also rather showed an increase
in active HER receptor levels compared to vehicle control.
These cell lines thus represent KRAS mutant NSCLC that
are EGFR/HER independent, at least from a therapeutic
perspective.
We confirmed the anti-tumor effects of a combined
HER blockade, in mouse xenografts specifically affecting
the epithelial component of the xenografts. Consistent
with our findings, erlotinib combined with pertuzumab
has been shown to surpass single therapy in inhibiting
tumor activity in a NSCLC xenograft model with high
EGFR protein expression (QG-56 cells) [30]. Moreover,
preliminary observations from a small phase Ib clinical
trial (n = 15) have revealed that erlotinib and pertuzumab
combination therapy is well tolerated and could be
suitable for further clinical testing in phase II [31].
Further exploration in larger cohorts should include the
assessment of biomarkers such as KRAS mutation status
and preferably be performed in patients that are early
enough in their disease course and have a sufficient life
expectancy to allow for a correct evaluation of treatment
responses and outcome.
Possibly in line with our observations, Metro et al.
recently found a differential clinical outcome for specific
20141

Oncotarget

KRAS oncogene substitutions when treated with single
agent erlotinib only [32]. They concluded that although
EGFR-TKI intervention may not be effective in the mutant
KRAS/wild-type EGFR NSCLC cohort as a whole, it
may still beneficial to patients harboring specific KRAS
mutations. The clinical experiment was not ideal to test
the efficacy of targeted therapies as this was in end-stage
NSCLC patients with a very limited life expectancy.
Nevertheless one of two responders was in a patient
harboring a KRASG12C mutation in their tumor similar to
our EGFR/HER dependent cells. The other responder was
in a KRASG12A bearing tumor, not represented in the panel
examined in our study.
In conclusion, our results point to the important
role of the EGFR/HER interaction in KRAS activation
and strongly suggest that in a subset of NSCLCs, mutant
KRAS is not an independent and constitutive signal
transduction molecule. A multi-targeted strategy that can
abrogate the EGFR/HER/KRAS interaction may thus have
a therapeutic perspective. This strategy should thus be
explored in a clinical setting using molecular characterized
NSCLCs and possibly in other cancer types as well.

phospho-HER3 (Tyr  1289), phosphor-STAT3 (Tyr 705),
EGFR, HER2, HER3, ERK1/2, AKT/PKB, STAT3 from
Cell Signaling, phospho-ERK1/2 (Tyr185/187), phosphoAKT/PKB (Ser 473) from Invitrogen, and β-actin from
Sigma-Aldrich. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) - conjugated
secondary antibodies (GE Healthcare; Cell Signalling) and
a chemoluminescent detection kit (Perkin-Elmer) were used
to detect the indicated proteins.
For RAS-GTP pull down assays, cells were cultured,
collected and lysed. RAS-GTP was pulled down using
the RAS-binding domain (RBD) of Raf-1 from the RAS
activation kit (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions with modifications. An isoform-specific
KRAS antibody and a pan-RAS antibody were used for
protein detection by western blot.

Drug inhibition
The effect of drug treatment on cellular growth was
assessed by the MTT based Sulforhodamine B (SRB)
in vitro toxicology assay (Sigma). Briefly, cells were
seeded in clear-bottomed 96-well plates at a density of
2 × 103 cells/well in triplicates and treated after 24 hrs with
concentrations of the indicated drugs or their combination.
After the indicated time periods, the numbers of viable
cells were fixed (trichloroacetic acid) and then stained
with SRB. The wells were measured at an absorbance of
490 nm using a 96-well microplate reader (Labsystems)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All drug
treatment conditions were compared to the vehicle control.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
The human NSCLC cell lines H292 (CRL-1848™),
H358 (CRL-5807™), H23 (CRL-5800™), A427 (HTB53™), H1650 (CRL-5883™) and H1975 (CRL-5908™)
were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection,
while the A549 NSCLC cell line was obtained from
Sigma. All cell lines were genotyped by STR analysis.
The inhibitors, erlotinib and pertuzumab were provided
by Roche.

RNA interference
Wild-type and mutant-specific KRAS siRNA
were synthesized (Eurogentec) according to a
previously described sequence [17]. The following
oligonucleotide sequences were used for KRAS,
5′-GUUGGAGCUGGUGGCGUAG-3′ and for KRAS
G12C, 5′-GUUGGAGCUUGUGGCGUA-3′. Briefly, cells
were seeded in clear-bottomed 24-well or 96-well plates
at a density of 0.7 to 1.5 × 105 cells/well (24 well plate) or
2 to 8 × 103 cells/well (96 well plate) respectively. 24 hrs
later, cells were transfected with 100 nmol/L of siRNA
(or 50 nmol/L for their combinations) using Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Transfected cells were cultured at 37°C for
the indicated time periods and collected and lysed for
immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies or
analyzed for cell growth by MTS analysis (Promega).
ShRNA constructs were based on the pKAR1/
Pur plasmid (Addgene plasmid # 23105); a gift
from Randy Poon [33]. Specific shRNA constructs
were created by cloning the following pairs of
oligonucleotides into the BbsI and XbaI sites of pKAR1/
Pur: EGFR: 5′-GAGGAAAUAUGUACUACGA-3′,
HER2:5′-GGACGAAUUCUGCACAAUG-3′,

Western blot analysis and antibodies
To analyze tyrosine phosphorylation of the HER
receptors, their downstream signalling targets and KRAS
signalling effectors, NSCLC cells were seeded in clearbottomed 24 well plates at a density of 2 × 105. After
24  hrs, all cells received fresh media with or without
inhibitor or their combination and were further incubated
for an additional 48 hrs; receiving fresh media and inhibitor
daily. Cells were lysed in a Tris- buffer [25 mmol/L TrisHCL (pH 7.4), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% Triton-x, 5 ug/ml
leupeptin] containing a protease and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail (Sigma). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation
and protein concentration was determined by the Bradford
protein assay kit (Bio-Rad) and equivalent amount of
protein were loaded on an 8.5% resolving acrylamide
gel and blotted on a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane
(PVDF). The membrane was then subjected to an
immunodetection procedure using the indicated antibodies:
phospho-EGFR (Tyr 1086) phospho-HER2 (Tyr 887),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20142

Oncotarget

HER3:5′GCAGUGGAUUCGAGAAGUG-3′ and Luciferase:
5′ GCCAT TCTATCCTCTAGAGGATG  3′. The shRNAexpressing plasmids were transfected into the NSCLC cells
using Lipofectamine 2000 as described. After 48 hrs,
medium was replaced with fresh medium containing
0.5 μg/ml puromycin to enrich the transfected cells.
Puromycin containing medium was removed after
36 hrs and cells were grown in standard growth medium
for 3 days. Cell lysates were collected and analyzed for
RAS-GTP pull down and immunoblot analysis using the
indicated antibodies.

measurements using a prolate ellipsoid equation [Tumor
Volume mm3 = (length × width2) × 0.5]. All studies were
conducted after review by the Universiteit Gent Animal
Care and Use Ethical Committee, in accordance with
institutional guidelines.

Immunohistochemistry
Xenografted tumor tissue was excised 21 days
post dose, fixed in 10% formalin and paraffin-embedded.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) assessment for general
morphology was subsequently performed.

Hoechst 3342/propidium iodide staining

Statistical analysis

The effects of wild-type or mutant (G12C) KRAS
siRNA treatment on apoptosis and nuclear morphology
in the NSCLC cells was assessed by Hoechst 33342
and propidium iodide (PI) double fluorescent chromatin
staining as described [28].

Results are representative of three independent
experiments unless stated otherwise. Values are presented
as the mean ± standard error of mean (SEM). The unpaired
two tailed t-test was utilized to compare the means of two
groups and the Chi-Square test was utilized for group
comparison in the single cell collagen invasion  model.
Statistical significance is reported as follows: *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001.

Collagen assay
The Collagen assay was performed as
described  [34]. Briefly, cells (1 × 105) were seeded on
a collagen type I gel with or without treatment of the
indicated inhibitors or their combination for the indicated
time period. Collagen matrices were imaged under a
phase-contrast light microscope and the invasive index
was determined by manual counting of the number of
invading cells (invasive extensions) and non-invading
cells present in 5–10 randomly selected microscopic fields.
For the 21 day collagen assay, collagen matrices
were fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde and stained with
a 0.001% crystal violet solution followed by imaging
under a light microscope with 10–15 randomly selected
200× microscopic fields in each well. Quantification of
colony size was performed by counting the number of
pixels by computerized Photoshop CS6 analysis (Adobe).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National
Cancer Plan-Project 29-039 (Belgium) (JDG), the
Stichting Tegen Kanker (Belgium) (JDG) and a Vrije
Universiteit Brussel PhD fellowship (IAU). We gratefully
acknowledge Hugo Vandenplas for excellent technical
assistance and Lore Lapeire for outstanding assistance in
the xenograft study.

REFERENCES
1.	 Reuther GW, Der CJ. The Ras branch of small GTPases:
Ras family members don’t fall far from the tree. Curr Opin
Cell Biol. 2000; 12:157–65.

Xenograft studies

2.	 Pao W, et al. KRAS mutations and primary resistance of
lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib. PLoS Med.
2005; 2:e17.

Approximately 4.5 × 106 cultured H358 NSCLC
cells were subcutaneously injected into the flank of
female athymic Swiss nu/nu mice (6 weeks old). Tumorbearing mice were randomized into four experimental
groups at 8 mice per group when the mean tumor volume
was approximately 80 to 100 mm3. Randomized groups
were treated with erlotinib by oral gavage at a dose of
60 mg/kg/every 3 days in 0.5% methylcellulose (Sigma).
Pertuzumab was administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) at a
dose of 7 mg/kg/ every 3 days. In combination studies,
groups of tumor-bearing mice received both erlotinib
(60 mg/kg/ every 3 days, orally) and pertuzumab (3 mg/
every 3 days, i.p). Control animals were given both
vehicles. Tumors were measured with vernier calipers
and tumor volume estimated from 2-dimensional
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Hirsch FR, et al. Molecular predictors of outcome with
gefitinib in a phase III placebo-controlled study in
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;
24:5034–42.
4.	 Schubbert S, Shannon K, Bollag G. Hyperactive Ras in
developmental disorders and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;
7:295–308.
5.	 Gysin S, et al. Therapeutic strategies for targeting ras
­proteins. Genes Cancer. 2011; 2:359–72.
6.	 Johnson BE, Heymach JV. Farnesyl transferase inhibitors for patients with lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;
10:4254s–4257s.

20143

Oncotarget

7.	 Baines AT, Xu D, Der CJ. Inhibition of Ras for cancer
treatment: the search continues. Future Med Chem. 2011;
3:1787–808.

for the 8p tumour suppressor gene. Oncogene. 2009;
28:4041–52.
22.	 Karnoub AE, Weinberg RA. Ras oncogenes: split personalities. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 9:517–31.

8.	 Ostrem JM, et al. K-Ras(G12C) inhibitors allosterically
control GTP affinity and effector interactions. Nature. 2013;
503:548–51.

23.	 Huang M, et al. Rottlerin suppresses growth of human
pancreatic tumors in nude mice, and pancreatic cancer
cells isolated from Kras (G12D) mice. Cancer Lett. 2014;
353:32–40.

9.	 Martinez-Garcia M, et al. First-in-human, phase I doseescalation study of the safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of RO5126766, a first-in-class dual MEK/
RAF inhibitor in patients with solid tumors. Clin Cancer
Res. 2012; 18:4806–19.

24.	 Kim YG, et al. Effect of constitutively active Ras overexpression on cell growth in recombinant Chinese hamster
ovary cells. Biotechnol Prog. 2011; 27:577–80.

10.	 Banerji U, et al. The first-in-human study of the ­hydrogen
sulfate (Hyd-sulfate) capsule of the MEK1/2 inhibitor
AZD6244 (ARRY-142886): a phase I open-label multicenter trial in patients with advanced cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2010; 16:1613–23.

25.	 Kent, OA, Fox-Talbot K, Halushka MK. RREB1 repressed
miR-143/145 modulates KRAS signaling through downregulation of multiple targets. Oncogene. 2013; 32:2576–85.
26.	 Brummelkamp TR, Bernards R, Agami R. Stable suppression of tumorigenicity by virus-mediated RNA interference.
Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:243–7.

11.	 Adjei AA, et al. Phase I pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of the oral, small-molecule mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase 1/2 inhibitor AZD6244 (ARRY142886) in patients with advanced cancers. J Clin Oncol.
2008; 26:2139–46.

27.	 Sunaga N, et al. Knockdown of oncogenic KRAS in nonsmall cell lung cancers suppresses tumor growth and sensitizes tumor cells to targeted therapy. Mol Cancer Ther.
2011; 10:336–46.

12.	 Adjei AA. Blocking oncogenic Ras signaling for cancer
therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001; 93:1062–74.

28.	 Chen G, et al. Targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor in non-small cell lung cancer cells: the effect of combining RNA interference with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or
cetuximab. BMC Med. 2012; 10:28.

13.	 Pylayeva-Gupta, Y, Grabocka E, Bar-Sagi D. RAS oncogenes: weaving a tumorigenic web. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011;
11:761–74.

29.	 Bell DW, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor mutations and gene amplification in non-small-cell lung cancer:
molecular analysis of the IDEAL/INTACT gefitinib trials.
J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:8081–92.

14.	 Navas C, et al. EGF receptor signaling is essential for k-ras
oncogene-driven pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer
Cell. 2012; 22:318–30.
15.	 Huang H, et al. Oncogenic K-Ras requires activation for
enhanced activity. Oncogene. 2014; 33:532–5.

30.	 Friess T, Scheuer W, Hasmann M. Combination treatment
with erlotinib and pertuzumab against human tumor xenografts is superior to monotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:5300–9.

16.	 Young A, Lou D, McCormick F. Oncogenic and wildtype Ras play divergent roles in the regulation of mitogenactivated protein kinase signaling. Cancer Discov. 2013;
3:112–23.

31.	 Felip E, et al. A phase Ib, dose-finding study of erlotinib
in combination with a fixed dose of pertuzumab in patients
with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin Lung
Cancer. 2012; 13:432–41.

17.	 Fleming JB, et al. Molecular consequences of silencing
mutant K-ras in pancreatic cancer cells: justification for
K-ras-directed therapy. Mol Cancer Res. 2005; 3:413–23.

32.	 Metro G, et al. Impact of specific mutant KRAS on ­clinical
outcome of EGFR-TKI-treated advanced non-small cell
lung cancer patients with an EGFR wild type genotype.
Lung Cancer. 2012; 78:81–6.

18.	 Sos ML, et al. PTEN loss contributes to erlotinib resistance in EGFR-mutant lung cancer by activation of Akt and
EGFR. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:3256–61.
19.	 Doench JG, Petersen CP, Sharp PA. siRNAs can function
as miRNAs. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:438–42.

33.	 Ma HT, et al. An inducible system for expression and validation of the specificity of short hairpin RNA in mammalian
cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007; 35:e22.

20.	 Metzger-Filho O, Winer EP, Krop I. Pertuzumab: optimizing HER2 blockade. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:5552–6.

34.	 De Wever O, et al. Modeling and quantification of
­cancer cell invasion through collagen type I matrices.
Int J Dev Biol. 2010; 54:887–96.

21.	 Chua YL, et al. The NRG1 gene is frequently silenced by
methylation in breast cancers and is a strong candidate

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20144

Oncotarget

