Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Carnosic acid sensitized TRAIL-mediated apoptosis through
down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression at the post
translational levels and CHOP-dependent up-regulation of DR5,
Bim, and PUMA expression in human carcinoma caki cells
Kyong-Jin Jung1,*, Kyoung-jin Min1,*, Jae Hoon Bae2, Taeg Kyu Kwon1
1

Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South Korea

2

Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu 704-701, South Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Taeg Kyu Kwon, e-mail: kwontk@dsmc.or.kr
Keywords: Carnosic acid, TRAIL, Bcl-2, c-FLIP, CHOP
Received: September 19, 2014   

Accepted: November 08, 2014    

Published: January 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
Carnosic acid is a phenolic diterpene from rosmarinus officinalis, and has multiple
functions, such as anti-inflammatory, anti-viral, and anti-tumor activity. In this study,
we examined whether carnosic acid could sensitize TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in
human renal carcinoma Caki cells. We found that carnosic acid markedly induced
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in human renal carcinoma (Caki, ACHN, and A498), and
human hepatocellular carcinoma (SK-HEP-1), and human breast carcinoma (MDAMB-231) cells, but not normal cells (TMCK-1 and HSF). Carnosic acid induced downregulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression at the post-translational levels, and the
over-expression of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 markedly blocked carnosic acid-induced TRAIL
sensitization. Furthermore, carnosic acid induced death receptor (DR)5, Bcl-2
interacting mediator of cell death (Bim), and p53 up-regulated modulator of apoptosis
(PUMA) expression at the transcriptional levels via CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteinhomologous protein (CHOP). Down-regulation of CHOP expression by siRNA inhibited
DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression, and attenuated carnosic acid plus TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. Taken together, our study demonstrates that carnosic acid enhances
sensitization against TRAIL-mediated apoptosis through the down-regulation of
c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression, and up-regulation of ER stress-mediated DR5, Bim, and
PUMA expression at the transcriptional levels.

of death receptors (DR4 and DR5) is related with TRAIL
resistance. Second, expression of anti-apoptotic proteins,
including c-FLIP, the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins
(Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL) and the inhibitor of apoptosis proteins
(IAPs) were up-regulated. Third, expression of proapoptotic proteins, such as Bax, Bim, and PUMA, were
reduced [1–5]. Finally, PI3K/Akt and NF-κB signaling
pathways, which is involved in cellular survival, are
activated [6, 7]. Therefore, strategy of combination
treatment to overcome TRAIL resistance is needed.
Carnosic acid is a major polyphenolic diterpene of
rosemary, and has been known as a multiple functions,
including anti-inflammatory [8, 9] and anti-virus [10].

INTRODUCTION
Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL) binds to death receptors (DR4 and DR5)
and non-apoptosis-inducing decoy receptors (DcR1 and
DcR2). TRAIL induces apoptosis in various cancer cells
but has no effect in the majority of normal cells, which
is supported by the presence of large numbers of death
receptors (DR4 and DR5) on cancer cells [1]. However,
many cancer cells have resistance to TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis. A number of studies reported the mechanisms
of TRAIL resistance in cancer cells. First, down-regulation

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1556

Oncotarget

Recently, several properties of carnosic acid have
been reported for its anti-tumor effects [11, 12]. For
examples, carnosic acid inhibited growth in multiple
cancer cell lines [11], and induced apoptosis in human
neuroblastoma cells [12] and human prostate carcinoma
cells [13]. In neuroblastoma cells, carnosic acid induced
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and then increased
p38 MAPK phosphorylation, leading to induction of
apoptosis [12]. In prostate carcinoma cells, carnosic acid
induced protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity, and
then blocked Akt and NF-κB activation [13]. Carnosic
acid also inhibited proliferation and migration capacity
in human colorectal cells through inhibition of urokinase
plasminogen activation and metalloproteinase secretion
[14]. Furthermore, anti-cancer effects of carnosic acid are
promoted by combination treatment with other drugs. For
examples, carnosic acid plus curcumin induced apoptosis
in acute myeloid leukemia cells via caspase-8-mediated
Bid cleavage [15]. Carnosic acid also enhanced arsenic
trioxide-induced apoptosis through inhibition of upregulation of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted
on chromosome ten (PTEN)-mediated Akt signaling
[16]. Therefore, carnosic acid could be candidate, which
improves anti-cancer effects by combination treatment.
In this study, we investigated effect of carnosic acid
on TRAIL-mediated apoptosis and molecular mechanisms
of TRAIL-sensitization in human renal carcinoma
Caki cells.

activation is involved in carnosic acid-induced TRAIL
sensitization. Combination treatment with carnosic acid
and TRAIL markedly induced caspase−3, −8, and −9
activation (Figure 1G and Supplementary Figure 1), and
pan-caspase inhibitor (z-VAD) blocked carnosic acid plus
TRAIL-induced apoptosis and PARP cleavage (Figure
1H). These data indicated that carnosic acid sensitized
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis through caspase activation.

Effect of carnosic acid on mitochondria
membrane potential
The role of the mitochondria in combined treatment
with carnosic acid and TRAIL-mediated apoptosis was
investigated by examining the effect on mitochondrial
membrane potential (MMP) and cytochrome c release into
cytoplasm. Carnosic acid markedly reduced MMP levels, and
increased cytosolic cytochrome c level in TRAIL-treated cells
(Figure 2A and 2B). Bax plays important role on apoptosis
through changes of MMP levels and release of cytochrome c.
To investigate the effect of carnosic acid on Bax activation,
we examined conformational change of Bax in carnosic acidtreated cells and oligomerization of Bax. As shown in Figure
2C and 2D, carnosic acid increased conformational change
of Bax and Bax oligomerization. These results suggest
that carnosic acid reduces the MMP levels and induces
cytochrome c release via activation of Bax.

Effects of carnosic acid on apoptosis-related
proteins

RESULTS

To further determine the molecular mechanisms
underlying carnosic acid-mediated TRAIL sensitization,
we investigated apoptosis-related proteins expression,
including anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and
Mcl-1), pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family (Bim and PUMA),
inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family (XIAP and cIAP2),
constituents of DISC [cellular FLICE-inhibitory protein
(c-FLIP)], and death receptors (DR5). Carnosic acid
markedly induced down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2
expression, whereas expression of DR5, BIM, and PUMA
was up-regulated (Figure 3A). Carnosic acid had no
effect on c-FLIP and Bcl-2 mRNA expression (Figure 3B
and 3C), whereas carnosic acid induced down-regulation
of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 protein expression within 3 and 12 h,
respectively. Therefore, we investigated whether carnosic
acid modulates the protein stability of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 in
Caki cells. Cells were treated with cycloheximide (CHX),
an inhibitor of de novo protein synthesis, in the presence or
absence of carnosic acid. CHX gradually decreased c-FLIP
and Bcl-2 protein expression, but co-treatment with CHX
and carnosic acid more reduced both protein expression
(Figure 3D and 3E). Previous studies reported that c-FLIP
and Bcl-2 mainly degraded by ubiquitin-proteasome
system [17, 18]. Therefore, we investigated whether

Carnosic acid sensitizes to TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis
It has been known that carnosic acid has anticancer effects in multiple cancer cells, including prostate
carcinoma, colorectal carcinoma, and neuroblastoma
cells [12–14]. Therefore, we investigated whether
carnosic acid could sensitize TRAIL-mediated apoptosis
in human renal carcinoma Caki cells. First, we checked
sub-G1 population and PARP cleavage to determine
apoptosis. As shown in Figure 1A and 1B, carnosic acid
alone and TRAIL alone had no effect on apoptosis, while
combination treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL
markedly increased sub-G1 population and PARP cleavage
in dose dependent manner. Next, we examined whether
combined treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL have
synergistic effects. The isobologram analysis suggested
that combined treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL
have synergistic effects (Figure 1C). As shown in Figure
1D, combined treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL
markedly inhibits cell viability. Furthermore, carnosic
acid plus TRAIL induced chromatin damage in the nuclei
(Figure 1E), and cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA
fragments (Figure 1F). Next, we tested whether caspase

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1557

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Carnosic acid sensitizes Caki cells to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. (A and B) Caki cells were treated with 50 ng/

ml TRAIL in the presence or absence of the indicated concentrations of carnosic acid for 24 h. The sub-G1 fraction was measured by
flow cytometry as an indicator of the level of apoptosis. The protein expression levels of PARP and actin were determined by Western
blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading control. (C) Isoboles were obtained by plotting the combined concentrations of each drug
required to produce 50% cell death. The straight line connecting the IC50 values obtained for two agents when applied alone corresponds
to an additivity of their independent effects. Values below this line indicate synergy, whereas values above this line indicate antagonism.
(D) Caki cells were treated with 50 ng/ml TRAIL in the presence or absence of the indicated concentrations of carnosic acid for the
indicated time periods. Cell viability was analyzed by trypan blue exclusion. (E–G) Caki cells were treated with 50 ng/ml TRAIL in the
presence or absence of 20 μM carnosic acid for 24 h. The condensation and fragmentation of the nuclei were detected by 4’,6’-diamidino-2phenylindole staining (E). The cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments were determined by a DNA fragmentation detection kit (F).
Caspase activities were determined with colorimetric assays using caspase-3 (DEVDase) assay kits (G). (H) Caki cells were treated with
20 μM carnosic acid plus 50 ng/ml TRAIL for 24 h in the presence or absence of 20 μM z-VAD-fmk (z-VAD). The sub-G1 fraction was
measured by flow cytometry. The protein expression levels of PARP and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was
used as a loading control. The values in (A, D, F, G and H) represent the mean ± SD from three independent samples. *p < 0.01 compared
to the carnosic acid treatment alone. #p < 0.01 compared to the co-treatment of carnosic acid and TRAIL.

proteasome is associated with degradation of c-FLIP and
Bcl-2. When cells were treated with proteasome inhibitor
(MG132), expression of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression
was reversed (Figure 3F). Furthermore, we found that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

carnosic acid increased proteasome activity in Caki cells
(Figure 3G). We checked expression levels of two critical
proteasome subunits, 20S proteasome subunit alpha type
5 (PSMA5) and 26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory
1558

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of carnosic acid on mitochondria membrane potential. (A) Caki cells were treated with 20 μM carnosic

acid plus 50 ng/ml TRAIL for 3 h. The mitochondrial membrane potential was measured using a Flow cytometer. (B) Caki cells were
treated with 20 μM carnosic acid plus 50 ng/ml TRAIL for the indicated time periods. Cytosolic extracts were prepared as described under
Materials and Methods. The protein expression levels of cytochrome c and MnSOD were determined by Western blotting. The level of
MnSOD was used as a mitochondria fraction marker. (C) Caki cells were treated 20 μM carnosic acid for 6 h and stained for active Bax
using conformation-specific antibodies (6A7). The fluorescence intensity was detected by flow cytometry. (D) For Bax oligomerization
assay, Caki cells were treated 20 μM carnosic acid for the indicated time periods. After treatment, Bax monomers and oligomers were
detected by Western blotting.

Carnosic acid induces CHOP-mediated
up-regulation of DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression

subunit 4 (PSMD4/S5a) [19], but carnosic acid had no
effect on expression of both subunits (Figure 3H). These
data suggest that carnosic acid induces down-regulation of
c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression at the post-translational level
via ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.
To investigate the importance of down-regulation of
c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression on carnosic acid plus TRAILmediated apoptosis, Caki cells were treated with TRAIL
in the absence or presence of carnosic acid in c-FLIP and
Bcl-2-overexpressing cells, Caki/c-FLIP and Caki/Bcl-2,
respectively. As shown in Figure 4A and 4B, combination
treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL markedly induced
apoptosis in Caki/vector cells, whereas carnosic acid plus
TRAIL did not induce apoptosis and PARP cleavage in
Caki/c-FLIP and Caki/Bcl-2 cells. Therefore, these data
indicated that down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2
has important roles on carnosic acid-mediated TRAIL
sensitization.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As shown in Figure 3A, carnosic acid induced
DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression. We investigated how
carnosic acid modulates expression of DR5, Bim, and
PUMA. Carnosic acid increased DR5, Bim, and PUMA
mRNA expression within 3, 6, and 9 h, respectively, and
then sustained up to 24 h (Figure 5A). Among transcription
factors, it has been known that p53 is associated with
DR5 expression [20]. Therefore, we examined whether
carnosic acid induces DR5 expression by p53. We found
that carnosic acid increases DR5 expression in p53
wild-type and p53 −/− HCT116 cells, and p53 inhibitor
(pifithrin-α) had no effect on carnosic acid-induced DR5
expression (Figure 5B and 5C). These data indicated that
carnosic acid induced up-regulation of DR5 expression in
p53-independent manner.

1559

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Casnosic acid induced down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression at the post-translational levels.
(A) Caki cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of carnosic acid for 24 h. The protein expression levels of c-FLIP, Bcl-2, BclxL, Mcl-1, DR5, PUMA, Bim, XIAP, cIAP2 and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading control.
(B and C) Caki cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of carnosic acid for the indicated time periods. The mRNA and protein
expression levels of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 were determined by RT-PCR (B and C) and Western blotting (C), respectively. The level of actin was
used as a loading control. (D and E) Caki cells were treated with or without 20 μM carnosic acid in the presence of cyclohexamide (CHX)
(20 μg/ml) for the indicated time periods. The protein expression levels of c-FLIP, Bcl-2, and/or actin were determined by Western blotting.
The level of actin was used as a loading control. The band intensities of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 protein were measured using the public domain
JAVA image-processing program ImageJ. (F) Caki cells were pretreated with 0.5 μM MG132, and then added 20 μM carnosic acid for
24 h. The protein expression levels of c-FLIP, Bcl-2 and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading
control. (G) Caki cells were treated with 20 μM carnosic acid for the indicated time periods. The cells were lysed, and proteasome activity
was measured as described in the Materials and Methods section. (H) Caki cells were treated with 20 μM carnosic acid for the indicated
time periods. The protein expression levels of PSMA5, PSMD4/S5a and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was
used as a loading control. *p < 0.01 compared to the control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1560

Oncotarget

Figure 4: The down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 by carnosic acid is associated with the induction of TRAILmediated apoptosis. (A and B) Vector cells (Caki/vector), c-FLIP overexpressed cells (Caki/cFLIP), and Bcl-2 overexpressed cells
(Caki/Bcl-2) were treated with 50 ng/ml TRAIL in the presence or absence of 20 μM carnosic acid for 24 h. The level of apoptosis was
analyzed by the sub-G1 fraction using flow cytometry (upper panel). The protein expression levels of PARP, c-FLIP, Bcl-2 and/or actin were
determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading control (lower panel).

In previous study, rosemary extract including
carnosic acid promoted endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
[21], and among ER stress-related proteins, CCAATenhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP)
could modulate expression of DR5, Bim, and PUMA
[22–24]. Therefore, we investigated whether carnosic acid
induces ER stress-related proteins, including Grp78, ATF4
and CHOP. As shown in Figure 5D, protein levels of Grp78
were not altered in response to carnosic acid. However,
protein levels of ATF4 and CHOP were increased by
carnosic acid in dose-dependent manner (Figure 5D). We
examined whether carnosic acid-induced CHOP expression
is involved in DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression. Downregulation of CHOP by siRNA markedly reduced carnosic
acid-induced DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression (Figure
5E). In addition, ATF4 is also transcription factor, and
could modulate CHOP expression [25, 26]. Therefore,
we investigated whether ATF4 is also associated with
expression of DR5, Bim, and PUMA. Down-regulation
of ATF4 by siRNA inhibited carnosic acid-induced DR5,
Bim, and PUMA expression, as well as CHOP (Figure 5F).
Previous studies reported that dysregulation of Ca2+
homeostasis is associated with ER stress [27]. Therefore,
we tested whether carnosic acid could increase cytosolic
Ca2+ concentrations. As shown in Supplement Figure 2A,
carnosic acid elevated [Ca2+]i in absence or presence of Ca2+
in a dose-dependent manner. Next, we investigated which

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

receptors are involved in carnosic acid-mediated induction
of cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptor (IP3R) and ryanodine receptor (RyR) plays key
roles on induction of cytosolic Ca2+ release, and IP3R is
activated by IP3 via phospholipase C (PLC) [28]. PLC
inhibitor (U73122) markedly blocked carnosic acid induced
cytosolic Ca2+ levels, but not RyR inhibitor (Dantrolene)
(Supplementary Figure 2B). These data suggested that
IP3R is more important on induction of cytosolic Ca2+
concentrations than RyR in carnosic acid-treated cells, and
carnosic acid might be induced DR5, Bim, and PUMA
expression via ER stress by up-regulation of intracellular
Ca2+ concentrations. Finally, we investigate whether
carnosic acid-induced CHOP expression is associated with
TRAIL sensitization. Down-regulation of CHOP by siRNA
markedly reduced apoptosis and PARP cleavage in carnosic
acid plus TRAIL-treated cells (Figure 5G and 5H).

Carnosic acid sensitizes to TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis in other cancer cells, but not normal
cells
To further confirm the effect of carnosic acid on
TRAIL sensitization, we investigated carnosic acid plus
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in other carcinoma cells.
As shown in Figure 6A, combination treatment with
carnosic acid and TRAIL markedly induced apoptosis

1561

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Carnosic acid induced ATF4 and CHOP-mediated DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression. (A) Caki cells were treated

with 20 μM carnosic acid for the indicated time periods. The mRNA expression levels of DR5, Bim, and PUMA were determined by
RT-PCR. (B) p53 wild-type and p53-/- HCT116 cells were treated with 20 μM carnosic acid for 24 h. The protein expression of DR5,
p53 and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading control. (C) Caki cells were pretreated with
the indicated concentrations of pifithrin-α, and then treated with 20 μM carnosic acid for 24 h. The protein expression of DR5 and actin
were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading control. (D) Caki cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of carnosic acid for 12 h. The protein expression of Grp78, ATF4, CHOP, and actin were determined by Western blotting.
The level of actin was used as a loading control. (E and F) Caki cells were transiently transfected control (Cont. siRNA), CHOP siRNA
(E), or ATF4 siRNA (F). Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were treated with 20 μM carnosic acid for 24 h. The protein expression
levels of CHOP, ATF4, PARP, DR5, Bim, PUMA and/or actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was used as a loading
control. (G and H) Caki cells were transiently transfected control (Cont. siRNA) or CHOP siRNA. Twenty-four hours after transfection,
cells were treated with 20 μM carnosic acid and 50 ng/ml TRAIL for 24 h. The level of apoptosis was analyzed by the sub-G1 fraction using
flow cytometry (G). The protein expression levels of CHOP, PARP and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was
used as a loading control (H). (I) Schematic models of carnosic-mediated TRAIL sensitization.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1562

Oncotarget

in renal carcinoma ACHN and A498 cells. In addition,
carnosic acid sensitized TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in
human hepatocellular carcinoma (SK-HEP1) and human
breast carcinoma (MDA-MB-231) cells (Figure 6B).
Furthermore, carnosic acid induced down-regulation
of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression, and up-regulation
of DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression in ACHN and
SK-Hep1 cells (Figure 6C). In contrast, combination
treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL had no effect
on morphological change and apoptosis in normal mouse
kidney cells (TMCK-1) and the normal human skin
fibroblasts (HSF) cells (Figure 6D and 6E). Therefore,
these data indicated that carnosic acid might sensitize
TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in multiple cancer cells, but
not normal cells.
Collectively, our results demonstrate that carnosic
acid sensitizes to TRAIL-induced apoptosis through downregulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 at the post-translational
levels, and CHOP-dependent up-regulation of DR5, Bim,
and PUMA expression at the transcriptional levels.

Bip/Grp78 did not change (Figure 5A). In prostate cancer,
down-regulation of CHOP and Bip/Grp78 inhibited
rosemary extract-induced apoptosis [21]. However,
although carnosic acid alone induced up-regulation of
CHOP and ATF4 expression, carnosic acid (20 μM) had
no effect on apoptosis in renal carcinoma Caki cells.
We reported that high concentrations of carnosic acid
(40 μM) also induced apoptosis, and up-regulation of
CHOP and ATF4 by high concentrations of carnosic acid
was related with apoptosis in Caki cells [31]. However,
low concentration of carnosic acid (20 μM) induced upregulation of DR5, Bim, and PUMA though induction
of CHOP, and only combined treatment with carnosic
acid and TRAIL induced apoptosis. Therefore, effect of
carnosic acid on apoptosis is dependent on cell type and
concentration. Although rosemary extracts has been known
as an ER stress inducer, the mechanism is not clear. ER
stress was induced by intracellular calcium store depletion,
inhibition of protein glycosylation, overexpression of
mutant and misfolded proteins [32–34]. Among them, the
dysregulation of Ca2+ transport systems, which located
within the ER, mitochondria, and plasma membrane,
leads to a disruption of intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis and
sustains Ca2+ induced ER stress. In our study, we found
that carnosic acid induced cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations
in dose-dependent manner, and up-regulation of Ca2+
concentrations came from intracellular organelle, such
as ER (Supplementary Figure 2). We firstly identify the
mechanism of carnosic-acid-induced ER stress.
In our study, we found that carnosic acid specifically
induced TRAIL sensitization in cancer cells, but not
normal cells. Therefore, we investigated how carnosic
acid-mediated TRAIL sensitization in cancer cells. First,
carnosic acid induced down-regulation of Bcl-2 and
c-FLIP expression, and up-regulation of DR5, Bim, and
PUMA expression in human renal carcinoma ACHN cells
and human hepatoma SK-Hep1 cells Figure 6C. Second,
we examined the effect of carnosic acid on expression of
apoptosis-related proteins in normal cells (mouse kidney
cells and human fibroblasts). Previous studies reported
that cancer cells highly expressed the death receptors
(DR4 and DR5), but normal cells highly express the
decoy receptors rather than the death receptors [35]. We
also found that death receptor (DR5) and anti-apoptotic
proteins were highly expressed in Caki cells. Furthermore,
carnosic acid has no effect on c-FLIP expression in HSF
cells (Supplementary Figure 3). These data indicated
that carnosic acid sensitized TRAIL-mediated apoptosis
through cancer specific pathways.
Taken together, our results suggest that carnosic
acid sensitizes TRAIL-mediated apoptosis through the
down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression, and
up-regulation of DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression.
Therefore, carnosic acid might be overcome TRAIL
resistance in cancer cells.

DISCUSSION
In our study, we identified the mechanisms of
carnosic-mediated TRAIL sensitization. Carnosic acid
increased proteasome activity, and induced downregulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 expression at the posttranslational levels. In addition, carnosic acid induced
ER stress by up-regulation of cytosolic Ca2+ levels,
followed by induction of CHOP and ATF4 expression.
Up-regulation of DR5, Bim, and PUMA expression by
CHOP and ATF4 plays important roles on carnosic acid
and TRAIL-induced apoptosis (Figure 5I). Furthermore,
carnosic acid sensitized TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in
multiple cancer cells, but not normal cells. Therefore, our
results suggest that carnosic acid could be candidate to
sensitize TRIAL-mediated apoptosis.
Carnosic acid induced down-regulation of c-FLIP
and Bcl-2 expression at the post-translational levels
(Figure 3D and 3E). Both-c-FLIP and Bcl-2 is mainly
degraded by ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In our
study, proteasome inhibitor (MG132) markedly reversed
carnosic acid-mediated down-regulation of c-FLIP and
Bcl-2 expression (Figure 3F) and proteasome activity was
increased by carnosic acid (Figure 3G). Recently, although
Bcl-2 specific E3 ligase has not known, E3 ligases of
c-FLIP were identified. Cbl [29] and Itch [30] increase
ubiquitination of c-FLIP, and then promoted degradation
by proteasome. However, carnosic acid did not induce Cbl
and Itch expression in Caki cells (data not shown).
Petiwala et al., reported that oil-soluble rosemary
extract including carnosic acid induced apoptosis through
up-regulation of ER stress-induced CHOP and Bip/Grp78
expression in prostate cancer cells [21]. In our study,
carnosic acid induced CHOP and ATF4 expression, but

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1563

Oncotarget

Figure 6: The effects of combined treatment with carnosic acid and TRAIL on apoptosis in other carcinoma and normal
cells. (A and B) Renal carcinoma (ACHN and A498), hepatocellular carcinoma (SK-HEP1), and breast carcinoma (MDA-MB-231) cells
were treated with 50 ng/ml TRAIL in the presence or absence of 20 μM carnosic acid for 24 h. The level of apoptosis was measured by the
sub-G1 fraction using flow cytometry. The protein expression levels of PARP and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of
actin was used as a loading control. (C) ACHN and SK-Hep1 cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of carnosic acid for 24 h.
The protein expression levels of c-FLIP, Bcl-2, DR5, Bim, PUMA, and actin were determined by Western blotting. The level of actin was
used as a loading control. (D and E) Caki, TMCK-1, and HSF cells were treated with 50 ng/ml TRAIL in the presence or absence of 20 μM
carnosic acid for 24 h. The cell morphology was examined using interference light microscopy (D). The level of apoptosis was analyzed by
measuring the sub-G1 fraction by flow cytometry (E). The values in (A, B, and E) represent the mean ± SD from three independent samples.
*p < 0.01 compared to the carnosic acid treatment alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1564

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1% NP-40, 0.25%
Na-deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, and
1 mM NaF) containing protease inhibitors (100 μM
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 10 μg/ml leupeptin,
10 μg/ml pepstatin, and 2 mM EDTA). The lysates were
centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and the
supernatant fractions were collected. The proteins were
separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and transferred
to Immobilon-P membranes. The specific proteins were
detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL)
Western blotting kit according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Cell culture and materials
Human renal carcinoma (Caki, ACHN, A498), human
hepatocellular carcinoma (SK-Hep1), human, human breast
carcinoma cells (MDA-MB-231) were obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA).
The mouse kidney cells (TMCK-1) was a gift from Dr. T.J.
Lee (Yeungnam University, Korea). The normal human skin
fibroblasts (HSFs) cells were purchased form Korea Cell
Line Bank (Seoul, Korea). HCT116 p53-/- cells were kindly
provided by Dr Bert Vogelstein (Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA). The culture medium used
throughout these experiments was Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM) or RPMI containing 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS), 20 mM HEPES buffer and 100 μg/mL
gentamycin. Carnosic acid was purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). The recombinant
human TRAIL was purchased from KOMA Biotech (Seoul,
Korea), and z-VAD-fmk was obtained from Calbiochem
(San Diego, CA, USA). MG132 and cycloheximide were
purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Anti-DR5, anti-Bcl-2, anti-Bcl-xL, anti-Mcl-1, anti-cIAP2,
anti-XIAP, anti-CHOP, anti-ATF4, anti-p53, anti-PUMA
and anti-PARP antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Anti-c-FLIP antibody
was obtained from ALEXIS Corporation (San Diego, CA).
Anti-Bim and anti-MnSOD antibodies were purchased from
Millipore Corporation (Billerica, MA, USA). Anti-PSMD4/
S5a, and anti-PSMA5 antibodies were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA). Anti-Grp78 antibody
was purchased from ENZO (Enzo Biochem Inc., NY). Anticytochrome c, anti-Bax, and anti-Bax (6A7) antibodies were
purchased from BD Biosciences (Bedford, MA). Anti-actin
antibody was obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).

Cell viability assay and determination of synergy
The number of viable cells was determined by
trypan blue exclusion at the indicated time interval using a
hemocytometer. The possible synergistic effect of carnosic
acid and TRAIL was evaluated using the isobologram
method. In brief, the cells were treated with different
concentrations of carnosic acid and TRAIL alone or in
combination. After 24 h, XTT assay was employed to
measure the cell viability using WelCount Cell Viability
Assay Kit (WelGENE, Daegu, Korea). In brief, reagent
was added to each well and was then measured with a
multi-well plate reader (at 450 nm/690 nm). Relative
survival was assessed and the concentration effect
curves were used to determine the IC50 (the half-maximal
inhibitory concentration) values for each drug alone and
in combination with a fixed concentration of the second
agent [36].

4′,6′-Diamidino-2-phenylindole staining (DAPI)
for nuclei condensation and fragmentation
To examine cellular nuclei, the cells were fixed with
1% paraformaldehyde on glass slides for 30 min at room
temperature. After the fixation, the cells were washed
with PBS and a 300 nM 4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole
solution (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was added to the
fixed cells for 5 min. After the nuclei were stained, the
cells were examined by fluorescence microscopy.

Flow cytometry analysis
For flow cytometry, the cells were resuspended in
100 μl of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and 200 μl
of 95% ethanol was added while the cells were being
vortexed. The cells were then incubated at 4°C for
1 h, washed with PBS, resuspended in 250 μl of 1.12%
sodium citrate buffer (pH 8.4) with 12.5 μg of RNase and
incubated for an additional 30 min at 37°C. The cellular
DNA was then stained by adding 250 μl of a propidium
iodide solution (50 μg/ml) to the cells for 30 min at
room temperature. The stained cells were analyzed by
fluorescent-activated cell sorting on a FACScan flow
cytometer to determine the relative DNA content, which
was based on the red fluorescence intensity.

The DNA fragmentation assay
The cell death detection ELISA plus kit (Boerhringer
Mannheim; Indianapolis, IN) was used to determine the
level of apoptosis by detecting fragmented DNA within
the nuclei of carnosic acid-treated cells, TRAIL-treated
cells, or cells that had been treated with a combination of
carnosic acid and TRAIL. Briefly, each culture plate was
centrifuged for 10 min at 200 × g, the supernatant was
removed, and the cell pellet was lysed for 30 min. Then,
the plate was centrifuged again at 200 × g for 10 min, and
the supernatant that contained the cytoplasmic histoneassociated DNA fragments was collected and incubated
with an immobilized anti-histone antibody. The reaction

Western blot analysis
For the Western blotting experiments, the cells
were washed with cold PBS and lysed on ice in modified
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1565

Oncotarget

products were incubated with a peroxidase substrate for
5 min and measured by spectrophotometry at 405 and 490
nm (reference wavelength) with a microplate reader. The
signals in the wells containing the substrate alone were
subtracted as the background.

centrifuged at 12,000 x g at 4°C for 10 min to obtain the
supernatants (cytosolic extracts free of mitochondria)
and the pellets (fraction that contains mitochondria). The
resulting cytosolic fractions were used for western blot
analysis with an anti-cytochrome c antibody.

Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-ase (DEVDase) activity assay

Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR)

To evaluate DEVDase activity, cell lysates were
prepared after their respective treatments with TRAIL
in the presence or absence of carnosic acid. Assays were
performed in 96-well microtiter plates by incubating
20 μg of cell lysates in 100 μl of reaction buffer (1%
NP-40, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 137 mM NaCl, 10%
glycerol) containing a caspase substrate [Asp-GluVal-Asp-chromophore-p-nitroanilide (DVAD-pNA)] at
5 μM. Lysates were incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Thereafter,
the absorbance at 405 nm was measured with a
spectrophotometer.

Total RNA was isolated using the TriZol reagent
(Life Technologies; Gaithersburg, MD), and the cDNA
was prepared using M-MLV reverse transcriptase (GibcoBRL; Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturers’
instructions. The following primers were used for the
amplification of human c-FLIP, Bcl-2, DR5, Bim, PUMA
and actin: c-FLIP (sense) 5′- CGG ACT ATA GAG TGC
TGA TGG -3′ and (antisense) 5′- GAT TAT CAG GCA
GAT TCC TAG -3′, Bcl-2 (sense) 5′- GGT GAA CTG GGG
GAG GAT TGT-3′ and (antisense) 5′- CTT CAG AGA
CAG CCA GGA GAA-3′, DR5 (sense) 5′- AAG ACC CTT
GTG CTC GTT GT-3′ and (antisense) 5′- GAC ACA TTC
GAT GTC ACT CCA-3′, Bim (sense) 5′- ATG GCA AAG
CAA CCT TCT GA-3′ and (antisense) 5′- CTG TCT GTG
TCA AAA GAG-3′, PUMA (sense) 5′- GTC CTC AGC
CCT CGC TCT-3′ and (antisense) 5′- CAC CTA ATT GGG
CTC CAT CT-3′, and actin (sense) 5′- GGC ATC GTC ACC
AAC TGG GAC -3′ and (antisense) 5′- CGA TTT CCC
GCT CGG CCG TGG -3′. The PCR amplification was
carried out using the following cycling conditions: 94°C
for 3 min followed by 17 (actin) or 23 cycles (c-FLIP, Bcl2, DR5, Bim, and PUMA) of 94°C for 45 s, 58°C for 45 s,
72°C for 1 min, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min.
The amplified products were separated by electrophoresis
on a 1.5% agarose gel and detected under UV light.

Assay for BAX activation and oligomerization
For the analysis of Bax activation, a primary
antibody specific for the Bax N-terminal domain was
applied in flow cytometry. Caki cells were harvested by
trypsinization, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min,
and incubated for 1 h at 4°C with the Bax-(6A7) antibody
(1:100) in PBS/1% FCS + 0.1% saponine. After incubation
with the secondary antibody, washing and re-suspension
in PBS/1% FCS, cells were measured by flow cytometry.
For Bax oligomerization, the cells were suspended by
conjugation buffer with 10 mM EDTA. The cell lysates
were incubated with 0.2 mM bismaleimide (Thermo
Scientific, Hudson, NH) at room temperature for 1 h and
then extracted by lysis buffer for Western blot analysis.

Proteasome activity assay

Determination of the mitochondrial membrane
potential by DiOC6

Chymotryptic proteasome activities were measured
with Suc-LLVY-AMC (chymotryptic substrate, Biomol
International, Plymouth Meeting, PA). Lysate from
carnosic acid-treated cells was prepared. A mixture
containing 1 μg cell lysate protein in 100 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0), 10 mM MgCl2, and 2 mM ATP was incubated at
37°C for 30 min with 50 μM Suc-LLVY-AMC. Enzyme
activity was measured with a fluorometric plate reader
at an excitation wavelength of 380 nm and an emission
wavelength of 440 nm.

DiOC6
(3,3-dihexyloxacarbocyanine
iodide,
Molecular Probes) uptake by mitochondria is directly
proportional to its membrane potential. Caki cells were
incubated with DiOC6 (1 μM) for 10 min in dark at
37°C. The cells were harvested and suspended in PBS.
The mitochondrial membrane potential was subsequently
analyzed using a Flow cytometer (Becton- Dickinson,
Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) with excitation and emission
settings of 488 and 525 nm, respectively.

Construction of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 stable Caki cells

Analysis of cytochrome c release

The Caki cells were stably transfected with pMAXBcl-2 (provided by Dr. Rakesh Srivastava, NIH/NIA),
pcDNA 3.1-c-FLIP or control plasmid pcDNA 3.1 vector
using LipofectAMINE2000 as recommended by the
manufacturer (Invitrogen Carlsbad, CA). After 48 h of
incubation, transfected cells were selected in cell culture

Cells were harvested, washed once with ice-cold PBS
and gently lysed for 2 min in 80 μl ice-cold lysis buffer
[250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.2),
1 mM DTT, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 5 μg/ml pepstatin
A, 10 μg/ml leupeptin and 2 μg/ml aprotinin]. Lysates were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1566

Oncotarget

medium containing 700 μg/ml G418 (Invitrogen). After 2
or 3 weeks, to eliminate the possibility of clonal differences
between the generated stable cell lines, the pooled Caki/
pcDNA 3.1 and Caki/Bcl-2, Caki/c-FLIP clones were
tested for Bcl-2 and c-FLIP expression by immunoblotting,
and the cells were used in this study.

3.	 Ng CP, Zisman A, Bonavida B. Synergy is achieved by
complementation with Apo2L/TRAIL and actinomycin D in
Apo2L/TRAIL-mediated apoptosis of prostate cancer cells:
role of XIAP in resistance. Prostate. 2002; 53:286–299.
4.	 Walczak H, Bouchon A, Stahl H, Krammer PH. Tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand retains
its apoptosis-inducing capacity on Bcl-2- or Bcl-xLoverexpressing chemotherapy-resistant tumor cells. Cancer
Res. 2000; 60:3051–3057.

Small interfering RNA (siRNA)
The siRNA duplexes used in this study were
purchased from Invitrogen (Calsbad, CA) and had the
following sequences: CHOP, AAG ACC CGC GCC GAG
GUG AAG; and green fluorescent protein [GFP (control)],
AAG ACC CGC GCC GAG GUG AAG. ATF4 siRNA was
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz,
CA). Cells were transfected with siRNA oligonucleotides
using Oligofectamine reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA)
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.

5.	 Zhang Y, Zhang B. TRAIL resistance of breast cancer cells
is associated with constitutive endocytosis of death receptors 4 and 5. Mol Cancer Res. 2008; 6:1861–1871.
6.	 Kandasamy K, Srivastava RK. Role of the phosphatidylinositol 3’-kinase/PTEN/Akt kinase pathway in tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2002;
62:4929–4937.
7.	 Franco AV, Zhang XD, Van Berkel E, Sanders JE,
Zhang XY, Thomas WD, Nguyen T, Hersey P. The role
of NF-kappa B in TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells. J Immunol.
2001; 166:5337–5345.

Densitometry
The band intensities were scanned and quantified
using the gel analysis plugin for the open source software
ImageJ 1.46 (Imaging Processing and Analysis in Java;
http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij).

8.	 Yu YM, Lin HC, Chang WC. Carnosic acid prevents the
migration of human aortic smooth muscle cells by inhibiting the activation and expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9. Br J Nutr. 2008; 100:731–738.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Poeckel D, Greiner C, Verhoff M, Rau O, Tausch L,
Hornig  C, Steinhilber D, Schubert-Zsilavecz M, Werz
O. Carnosic acid and carnosol potently inhibit human
5-lipoxygenase and suppress pro-inflammatory responses of
stimulated human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2008; 76:91–97.

The data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA
and post-hoc comparisons (Student-Newman-Keuls) using
the Statistical Package for Social Sciences 22.0 software
(SPSS Inc.; Chicago, IL).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Shin HB, Choi MS, Ryu B, Lee NR, Kim HI, Choi HE,
Chang J, Lee KT, Jang DS, Inn KS. Antiviral activity of
carnosic acid against respiratory syncytial virus. Virol J.
2013; 10:303.

This work was supported by an NRF grant funded by
the Korea Government (MSIP) (2014R1A5A2010008) and
a 2014 Scholar Research Grant from Keimyung University.

11.	 Yesil-Celiktas O, Sevimli C, Bedir E, Vardar-Sukan F.
Inhibitory effects of rosemary extracts, carnosic acid and
rosmarinic acid on the growth of various human cancer cell
lines. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2010; 65:158–163.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

12.	 Tsai CW, Lin CY, Lin HH, Chen JH. Carnosic acid, a
rosemary phenolic compound, induces apoptosis through
reactive oxygen species-mediated p38 activation in human
neuroblastoma IMR-32 cells. Neurochem Res. 2011;
36:2442–2451.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jin Z, McDonald ER 3rd, Dicker DT, El-Deiry
WS. Deficient tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosisinducing ligand (TRAIL) death receptor transport to the
cell surface in human colon cancer cells selected for resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:35829–35839.

13.	 Kar S, Palit S, Ball WB, Das PK. Carnosic acid modulates
Akt/IKK/NF-kappaB signaling by PP2A and induces intrinsic and extrinsic pathway mediated apoptosis in human prostate carcinoma PC-3 cells. Apoptosis. 2012; 17:735–747.
14.	 Barni MV, Carlini MJ, Cafferata EG, Puricelli L,
Moreno  S. Carnosic acid inhibits the proliferation and
migration capacity of human colorectal cancer cells. Oncol
Rep. 2012; 27:1041–1048.

2.	 Kelly MM, Hoel BD, Voelkel-Johnson C. Doxorubicin
pretreatment sensitizes prostate cancer cell lines to TRAIL
induced apoptosis which correlates with the loss of c-FLIP
expression. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002; 1:520–527.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1567

Oncotarget

15.	 Pesakhov S, Khanin M, Studzinski GP, Danilenko M.
Distinct combinatorial effects of the plant polyphenols
curcumin, carnosic acid, and silibinin on proliferation and
apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia cells. Nutr Cancer.
2010; 62:811–824.

transcription factor (ATF)/cAMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB) interact with the CCAAT/enhancerbinding protein (C/EBP)-ATF composite site to regulate
Gadd153 expression during the stress response. Biochem
J. 1999; 339:135–141.

16.	 Wang R, Cong WH, Guo G, Li XX, Chen XL, Yu XN,
Li  H. Synergism between carnosic acid and arsenic trioxide
on induction of acute myeloid leukemia cell apoptosis is
associated with modulation of PTEN/Akt signaling pathway. Chin J Integr Med. 2012; 18:934–941.

26.	 Harding HP, Zhang Y, Zeng H, Novoa I, Lu PD, Calfon  M,
Sadri N, Yun C, Popko B, Paules R, Stojdl DF, Bell JC,
Hettmann T, Leiden JM, Ron D. An integrated stress
response regulates amino acid metabolism and resistance to
oxidative stress. Mol Cell. 2003; 11:619–633.

17.	 Fukazawa T, Fujiwara T, Uno F, Teraishi F, Kadowaki  Y,
Itoshima T, Takata Y, Kagawa S, Roth JA, Tschopp J,
Tanaka N. Accelerated degradation of cellular FLIP protein
through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in p53-mediated apoptosis of human cancer cells. Oncogene. 2001;
20:5225–5231.

27.	 Schroder M. Endoplasmic reticulum stress responses. Cell
Mol Life Sci. 2008; 65:862–894.
28.	 Irvine RF. Nuclear lipid signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2003; 4:349–360.
29.	 Kundu M, Pathak SK, Kumawat K, Basu S, Chatterjee  G,
Pathak S, Noguchi T, Takeda K, Ichijo H, Thien CB,
Langdon WY, Basu J. A TNF- and c-Cbl-dependent FLIP(S)-degradation pathway and its function in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced macrophage apoptosis. Nat Immunol. 2009; 10:918–926.

18.	 Dimmeler S, Breitschopf K, Haendeler J, Zeiher AM.
Dephosphorylation targets Bcl-2 for ubiquitin-dependent
degradation: a link between the apoptosome and the proteasome pathway. J Exp Med. 1999; 189:1815–1822.
19.	 Groll M, Huber R. Substrate access and processing by the
20S proteasome core particle. Int J Biochem Cell Biol.
2003; 35:606–616.

30.	 Chang L, Kamata H, Solinas G, Luo JL, Maeda S,
Venuprasad K, Liu YC, Karin M. The E3 ubiquitin ligase
itch couples JNK activation to TNFalpha-induced cell death
by inducing c-FLIP(L) turnover. Cell. 2006; 124:601–613.

20.	 Wu GS, Burns TF, McDonald ER 3rd, Meng RD, Kao G,
Muschel R, Yen T, el-Deiry WS. Induction of the TRAIL
receptor KILLER/DR5 in p53-dependent apoptosis but not
growth arrest. Oncogene. 1999; 18:6411–6418.

31.	 Min KJ, Jung KJ, Kwon TK. Carnosic Acid Induces
Apoptosis Through Reactive Oxygen Species-mediated
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Induction in Human Renal
Carcinoma Caki Cells. Journal of cancer prevention. 2014;
19:170–178.

21.	 Petiwala SM, Berhe S, Li G, Puthenveetil AG, Rahman O,
Nonn L, Johnson JJ. Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis)
extract modulates CHOP/GADD153 to promote androgen
receptor degradation and decreases xenograft tumor growth.
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e89772.

32.	 Lee AS. The glucose-regulated proteins: stress induction
and clinical applications. Trends in biochemical sciences.
2001; 26:504–510.

22.	 Yamaguchi H, Wang HG. CHOP is involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis by enhancing DR5
expression in human carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:45495–45502.

33.	 Pahl HL. Signal transduction from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell nucleus. Physiological reviews. 1999;
79:683–701.
34.	 Kaufman RJ. Stress signaling from the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum: coordination of gene transcriptional
and translational controls. Genes & development. 1999;
13:1211–1233.

23.	 Puthalakath H, O’Reilly LA, Gunn P, Lee L, Kelly PN,
Huntington ND, Hughes PD, Michalak EM, McKimmBreschkin J, Motoyama N, Gotoh T, Akira S, Bouillet P,
Strasser A. ER stress triggers apoptosis by activating BH3only protein Bim. Cell. 2007; 129:1337–1349.
24.	 Ishihara T, Hoshino T, Namba T, Tanaka K, Mizushima  T.
Involvement of up-regulation of PUMA in non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced apoptosis. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2007; 356:711–717.

35.	 Ashkenazi A, Pai RC, Fong S, Leung S, Lawrence DA,
Marsters SA, Blackie C, Chang L, McMurtrey AE,
Hebert  A, DeForge L, Koumenis IL, Lewis D, Harris L,
Bussiere J, Koeppen H, et al. Safety and antitumor activity
of recombinant soluble Apo2 ligand. The Journal of clinical
investigation. 1999; 104:155–162.

25.	 Fawcett TW, Martindale JL, Guyton KZ, Hai T,
Holbrook  NJ. Complexes containing activating

36.	 Tallarida RJ. Drug synergism: its detection and applications. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2001; 298:865–872.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1568

Oncotarget

