Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A poxviral-based cancer vaccine targeting the transcription
factor twist inhibits primary tumor growth and metastases in
a model of metastatic breast cancer and improves survival in a
spontaneous prostate cancer model
Anna R. Kwilas1, Andressa Ardiani1, Ulrike Dirmeier2, Cornelia Wottawah2,
Jeffery Schlom1,*, James W. Hodge1,*
1

 aboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
L
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

2

Bavarian Nordic, Martinsried, Germany and Mountain View, CA, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
James W. Hodge, e-mail: jh241d@nih.gov
Keywords: twist, vaccine, metastasis, TRICOM, immunotherapy
Received: January 21, 2015      Accepted: June 23, 2015      Published: July 06, 2015

ABSTRACT
Several transcription factors play a role in the alteration of gene expression that
occurs during cancer metastasis. Twist expression has been shown to be associated with
the hallmarks of the metastatic process, as well as poor prognosis and drug resistance
in many tumor types. However, primarily due to their location within the cell and the
lack of a hydrophobic groove required for drug attachment, transcription factors such
as Twist are difficult to target with conventional therapies. An alternative therapeutic
strategy is a vaccine comprised of a Modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA), incorporating
the Twist transgene and a TRIad of COstimulatory Molecules (B7-1, ICAM-1, LFA-3;
TRICOM). Here we characterize an MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccine that induced both
CD4+ and CD8+ Twist-specific T-cell responses in vivo. In addition, administration
of this vaccine reduced both the primary tumor growth and metastasis in the 4T1
model of metastatic breast cancer. In the TRAMP transgenic model of spontaneous
prostate cancer, MVA-TWIST/TRICOM alone significantly improved survival, and
when combined with the androgen receptor antagonist enzalutamide, the vaccine
further improved survival. These studies thus provide a rationale for the use of active
immunotherapy targeting transcription factors involved in the metastatic process and
for the combination of cancer vaccines with androgen deprivation.

Similarly, brachyury expression has been associated with
EMT as well as poor prognosis in lung, colon and breast
cancer, suggesting a need for targeted therapeutics [18–
20]. However, the cellular location of transcription factors
and their lack of a hydrophobic groove for drug binding
make them difficult to target with conventional therapies.
In addition, brachyury is neither expressed by normal
murine tissues nor most murine tumor cell lines, making it
difficult to evaluate the efficacy of vaccines targeting this
transcription factor in preclinical murine tumor models
[21]. Due to the similar expression profiles of brachyury
and Twist, in their given species, and similar roles in
metastatic progression, however, vaccines targeting Twist
can serve as models for the use of vaccines targeting either

INTRODUCTION
The metastatic process is governed by multiple
alterations in tumor cell phenotype and gene expression.
Several transcription factors, including Twist, Snail, Slug
and brachyury, have been found to play a role in the
alteration of gene expression that occurs during metastasis
[1–4]. Twist and brachyury, in particular, have been
implicated in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
angiogenesis, inhibition of apoptosis and chromosomal
instability, all of which are involved in the metastatic
process [5–9]. In addition, studies have linked expression
of Twist and brachyury to poor prognosis in multiple tumor
types and to the generation of drug resistance [10–17].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28194

Oncotarget

Twist or brachyury in both monotherapy and combination
therapy settings.
Modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA), a highly attenuated
vaccinia virus with an extensive safety profile, is used as
an alternative vaccine against smallpox. In Europe, MVA
is approved for administration to all individuals, including
those with compromised immune systems. Previously,
we have demonstrated the ability of MVA to express
the tumor-associated antigen carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) as well as a TRIad of COstimulatory Molecules
(TRICOM, consisting of B7-1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3). This
cancer vaccine (MVA-CEA/TRICOM) induced significant
antitumor immune responses [22]. MVA-based cancer
vaccines have been evaluated clinically in lung, colon
and renal cancer and are currently under investigation in
breast and prostate cancer [23–27]. The TRICOM vaccine
platform is currently being examined clinically in multiple
cancer settings, including prostate, breast, colorectal,
bladder and pancreatic carcinomas among other tumor
types [28–31]. We sought to determine the ability of an
MVA-TRICOM-based platform to express Twist and
stimulate Twist-specific antitumor immune responses in
two spontaneously metastasizing murine tumor models
where Twist is a “self” tumor-associated antigen. Previous
studies have shown low level Twist expression in normal
murine tissues including lung, heart, muscle and spleen;
however, Twist is overexpressed by most murine tumor cell
lines including 4T1 and TRAMP cell lines [21]. Despite
this expression pattern, no autoimmunity was observed
when a yeast-based Twist vaccine was administered [32].
Here, we demonstrate the ability of MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM to induce both CD4+ and CD8+ Twist-specific
immune responses. The vaccine significantly reduced
primary tumor growth and metastatic spread in the orthotopic
4T1 metastatic breast cancer model; in a setting of more
advanced disease, MVA-TWIST/TRICOM also significantly
reduced the degree of metastasis. In the TRAMP (transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate) model of prostate
cancer, MVA-TWIST/TRICOM treatment significantly
increased overall survival in TRAMP transgenic (TRAMPTg) mice. This effect was amplified in this model when
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM was combined with enzalutamide,
an FDA-approved second-generation androgen receptor
(AR) antagonist. These data support the ability to
immunologically target tumor-associated transcription
factors as well as the use of therapeutic cancer vaccines in
combination with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT).

MC38 cells were used to test the expression of these
transgenes due to their lack of expression of Twist as well
as the components of TRICOM (B7-1, ICAM-1, LFA-3).
MC38 cells were infected with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
or MVA-TRICOM, or left untreated. Untreated MC38
cells showed no Twist expression by western blot as
indicated by the absence of a doublet band at ~26 and ~21
kDa. Flow cytometric analysis of untreated MC38 cells
indicated that the cells also lacked expression of murine
B7-1, ICAM-1, and LFA-3 (Figure 1A). MC38 cells
infected with MVA-TRICOM maintained a lack of Twist
expression, again indicated by the lack of bands at ~26
and ~21 kDa in the western blot. However, these cells did
display B7-1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3 expression as shown by
histogram (Figure 1B). As expected, MC38 cells infected
with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM displayed Twist expression,
as shown by the presence of bands at ~26 and ~21 kDa
in the western blot, as well as cell surface expression of
B7-1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3 as determined by flow
cytometry (Figure 1C). GAPDH was used as a loading
control for the western blots.

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM elicits Twist-specific
T-cell responses in non-tumor bearing mice
The ability of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM to induce
Twist-specific T-cell responses was evaluated in both
BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice where Twist is a “self”
antigen. To determine if MVA-TWIST/TRICOM could
induce Twist-specific CD4+ T-cell responses, BALB/c
and C57BL/6 mice were vaccinated at weekly intervals
three times with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM or left untreated.
Three weeks following the last vaccination, mice were
euthanized; their splenic CD4+ cells were purified and
plated with antigen-presenting cells (APCs) from naïve
mice in the presence of Twist peptide. CD4+ T cells
from BALB/c (Figure 2A) as well as C57BL/6 (Figure
2B) mice vaccinated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
proliferated to a significantly greater extent in the presence
of Twist peptide (P = 0.0151 and 0.0038, respectively)
than those from untreated mice. To assess the ability
of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM to induce Twist-specific
CD8+ T cell responses, BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice were
vaccinated at weekly intervals three times with MVATWIST/TRICOM or MVA-TRICOM, or left untreated.
Three weeks following the last vaccination, mice were
euthanized and their splenocytes were harvested and
stimulated with Twist peptide. IFN-γ production by
CD8+ T cells was measured following restimulation. In
both BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice there was a significant
increase in IFN-γ secretion from CD8+ T cells from MVATWIST/TRICOM vaccinated vs. control mice (Figure
2C and  2D, respectively). In MVA-TWIST/TRICOMtreated BALB/c mice, IFN-γ secretion increased 1.7fold. In treated C57BL/6 mice, secretion increased 4-fold
compared to that of untreated mice. Administration of

RESULTS
Transgenes are efficiently expressed in cells
infected with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
The efficiency of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM transgene
expression was determined by western blot and flow
cytometric analysis of infected MC38 murine tumor cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28195

Oncotarget

Figure 1: MVA-TWIST/TRICOM expresses Twist and a TRiad of COstimulatory Molecules (TRICOM). Western blot

and flow cytometric analysis of MC38 cells treated with A. no treatment, B. MVA-TRICOM or C. MVA-TWIST/TRICOM for 24 hours.
Antibodies against Twist and GAPDH were used for western blots. Antibodies against murine B7-1, ICAM-1, LFA-3 and isotype controls
were used for flow cytometry. Inserts: percent of cells positive for the indicated marker and its mean fluorescent intensity (MFI). Data are
representative of two independent experiments.

MVA-TRICOM alone also induced a significant increase
in IFN-γ production in response to Twist peptide from
CD8+ T cells from both BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice;
however, this increase was significantly lower than the
levels seen with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccination (data
not shown). In addition, following restimulation, CD8+ T
cells from MVA-TWIST/TRICOM-vaccinated BALB/c
mice (Figure 2E, P = 0.0002) and C57/BL6 mice (Figure
2F, P = 0.025) were able to lyse target cells pulsed with
Twist peptide to a significantly greater degree than CD8+
T cells from untreated animals.
The effect of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM on the
presence of Twist-specific, activated and memory immune
cells in the spleens of BALB/c mice was examined further
by flow cytometry. BALB/c mice were vaccinated twice
at weekly intervals with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM or left
untreated. Seventeen days following the last vaccination,
mice were euthanized and their spleens were evaluated for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

immune cell composition. Analysis indicated that while
the percentage of CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells and dendritic
cells did not change, the percentage of effector memory
CD8+ T cells, Twist-specific CD8+ T cells and activated
dendritic cells did significantly increase after vaccination
with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (Table 1).

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM elicits Twist-specific
T-cell responses in 4T1-tumor bearing mice
It is largely accepted that the presence of cancer
causes immune dysfunction in the host [33, 34]. The effect
of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM on the composition of immune
cells in the spleens of tumor bearing BALB/c mice was
examined by flow cytometry. Four days following
orthotopic implantation of 4T1 breast cancer cells,
BALB/c mice were administered two weekly vaccinations
with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM or left untreated. Seventeen
28196

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Administration of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM induces Twist-specific T-cell responses. A. BALB/c mice and

B. C57BL/6 mice were treated with three weekly doses of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (black bars) or left untreated (open bars). The level
of CD4+ T-cell proliferation was determined by [3H]-thymidine incorporation in the presence of irradiated antigen-presenting cells and
Twist peptide. C. BALB/c mice and D. C57BL/6 mice were treated with three weekly doses of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (black bars) or left
untreated (open bars). The level of CD8+ T-cell activity was determined by the amount of secreted IFN-γ following 7 days of in vitro Twist
peptide stimulation. The lytic ability of the CD8+ T cells from E. BALB/c mice and F. C57BL/6 mice treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
(black bars) or left untreated (open bars) was evaluated against peptide-pulsed p815 target cells. Error bars indicate mean ± S.E.M. from
triplicate measurements. Statistical analyses for CD4+ T-cell proliferation were done by Student’s t-test, * = P < 0.05. For IFN-γ secretion,
significance was determined by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Data are representative of three independent experiments.

days following the last vaccination, mice were euthanized
and their splenocytes were harvested and evaluated for
immune cell composition. The percentage of CD4+ T cells
and CD8+ T cells as well as effector memory CD8+ T cells
and central memory CD8+ T cells did significantly increase
after vaccination with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (Table 2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

However, there was no alteration in the percentage of
dendritic cells, activated dendritic cells, T regulatory cells,
myeloid derived suppressor cells or natural killer cells
(Table 2 and data not shown).
The ability of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM to induce
Twist-specific T-cell responses in the presence of tumor
28197

Oncotarget

Table 1: Splenic immune cell subset changes in non-tumor bearing BALB/c mice after administration
of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
CD4+ T cells

CD8+ T cells

Effector
Memory
CD8+ T cells

Twist
Tetramer+
CD8+ T cells

Dendritic cells

No Treatment

26.10 (1.017)

MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM

26.78 (0.5093)

Activated
Dendritic cells

10.92 (0.2853)

0.7470
(0.0473)

2.43

1.390 (0.1243)

0.2592
(0.0762)

12.22 (0.2131)

1.56 (0.1597)*

3.83*

1.410
(0.07629)

0.5564
(0.0702)*

Flow cytometric analysis of splenic immune cell subsets in BALB/c mice (n = 5/group). Animals were administered
two weekly vaccinations with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM or left untreated. Spleens were harvested 17 days after the last
vaccination. Data represented as “mean (SEM)” percentage of viable splenocytes. CD4+ T cells (CD3+ CD4+), CD8+ T
cells (CD3+ CD8+), Effector Memory cells (CD3+CD8+CD44+CD62L-), Dendritic cells (CD11c+MHCII+) and Activated
Dendritic cells (CD11c+MHCII+CD40+).
*= p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

Table 2: Splenic immune cell subset changes in 4T1-tumor bearing BALB/c mice after administration
of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
CD4+ T cells

CD8+ T cells

Effector
Memory
CD8+ T cells

Central
Dendritic cells
Activated
Memory CD8+
Dendritic cells
T cells

No Treatment

7.854 (1.396)

3.212 (0.4886)

0.5732 (0.116)

1.182 (0.1463)

1.090 (0.1974)

0.3352
(0.0745)

MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM

14.10 (1.684)* 6.224 (0.9233)* 1.411 (0.2882)* 2.484 (0.4521)* 1.166 (0.1646)

0.3026
(0.0736)

Flow cytometric analysis of splenic immune cell subsets in 4T1-tumor bearing BALB/c mice (n = 5/group). Four
days post-tumor implantation, mice were administered two weekly vaccinations with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
or left untreated. Spleens were harvested 17 days after the last vaccination. Data represented as “mean (SEM)”
percentage of viable splenocytes. CD4+ T cells (CD3+ CD4+), CD8+ T cells (CD3+ CD8+), Effector Memory cells
(CD3+CD8+CD44+CD62L-), Central Memory cells (CD3+CD8+CD44+CD62L+), Dendritic cells (CD11c+MHCII+) and
Activated Dendritic cells (CD11c+MHCII+CD40+).
*= p < 0.01 as determined by Student’s t test.

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccination improves
T-cell infiltration into the tumor microenvironment

was also evaluated in the BALB/c 4T1 orthotopic breast
cancer model. CD4+ cells were purified from harvested
splenocytes and plated with naïve APCs in the presence
of Twist peptide. CD4+ T cells from vaccinated BALB/c
mice (Figure 3A) proliferated to a significantly greater
extent in the presence of Twist peptide (P = 0.0054) than
those from untreated mice. Non-purified splenocytes
were stimulated with a Twist peptide or a non-vaccine
encoded AH-1 peptide for 7 days after which IFN-γ
production was measured. A significant increase in
IFN-γ secretion was observed from CD8+ T cells from
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccinated vs. control mice in
response to Twist peptide (Figure 3B). Increased IFN-γ
secretion was also observed from CD8+ T cells from
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccinated mice in response
to AH-1 peptide (Figure 3C). IFN-γ secretion increased
1.7-fold with Twist peptide stimulation and 2.9-fold with
AH-1 peptide stimulation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Since MVA-TWIST/TRICOM altered the compo­
sition of splenic immune cell populations in 4T1
tumor bearing BALB/c mice, we sought to determine
if this translated into improved infiltration of immune
cells into the tumor microenvironment. Four days
following implantation of 4T1 cells, BALB/c mice
were administered two weekly vaccinations with MVATWIST/TRICOM or left untreated. Seventeen days
following the last vaccination, mice were euthanized
and their tumors were harvested and evaluated for
immune cell infiltration by immunohistochemistry and
flow cytometry. There was no difference in the tumoral
infiltration of CD3+ lymphocytes (P = 0.8622) between
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM and untreated animals as
determined by immunohistochemistry and confirmed
28198

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Treatment with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM induces Twist-specific T-cell responses in 4T1 tumor-bearing
BALB/c mice. BALB/c mice (n = 5/group) were implanted s.c. with 5 × 104 4T1 cells. Four days post-tumor implantation, mice received

the first of two weekly MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (black bars) or were left untreated (open bars). A. The level of CD4+ T-cell proliferation
was determined by [3H]-thymidine incorporation in the presence of irradiated antigen-presenting cells and Twist peptide. B. The level of
CD8+ T-cell activity was determined by the amount of secreted IFN-γ following 7 days of in vitro Twist peptide stimulation. C. The level
of CD8+ T-cell activity was determined by the amount of secreted IFN-γ following 7 days of in vitro AH-1 peptide stimulation. Error bars
indicate mean ± S.E.M. from triplicate measurements. Statistical analyses for CD4+ T-cell proliferation were done by Student’s t-test, * =
P < 0.05. For IFN-γ secretion, significance was determined by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccination inhibited
primary tumor growth and metastases

by flow cytometry (Figure 4A and data not shown).
Tumors from mice treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
also did not show a significant increase in CD4+ T-cell
infiltration compared to tumors from untreated mice
(Figure 4B, P = 0.0567); however, they did show a
significant increase in the number of infiltrating CD8+
T cells (Figure 4B, P = 0.0185). Tumors from mice
treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM also displayed
increased infiltration of effector memory (P = 0.0135)
and central memory (P = 0.0144) CD8+ T cells
compared to tumors from untreated mice (Figure 4B).
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM administration did not alter
the infiltration of T regulatory cells, myeloid derived
suppressor cells, natural killer cells or dendritic cells
as determined by flow cytometric analysis (data not
shown). Taken together, these data indicate that MVATWIST/TRICOM induces a more immune-stimulatory
environment, both in the periphery and at the tumor site.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The ability of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM to inhibit
tumor growth and metastasis was also evaluated in the
BALB/c 4T1 orthotopic breast cancer model as Twist
has been shown to play a role in metastatic spread in this
model [1]. Twist expression was validated by RT-PCR
in primary tumor tissue as well as lung metastases from
untreated mice. Twist expression was significantly higher
(P = 0.0083) in the lung metastases of 4T1 tumor-bearing
mice compared to that of the primary tumors (Figure
5A, insert). This upregulation of Twist expression in the
metastases suggests that MVA-TWIST/TRICOM could
have a greater effect on the inhibition of metastasis than
primary tumor growth in this model. 4T1 tumor-bearing
mice were given three weekly doses of MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM or MVA-TRICOM starting 4 days post-tumor
28199

Oncotarget

Figure 4: MVA-TWIST/TRICOM administration improves tumor infiltration of immune effector cells. BALB/c mice
(n = 5/group) were implanted s.c. with 5 × 104 4T1 cells. Four days post-tumor implantation, mice received the first of two weekly MVATWIST/TRICOM vaccinations or were left untreated. Seventeen days following the last vaccination, tumors were harvested and analyzed
by immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. A. CD3+ lymphocyte infiltration as determined by immunohistochemistry. Inserts: Isotype
control staining and percentage of tumor composed of CD3+ cells. B. Percentage of CD4+ T cells (CD3+ CD4+), CD8+T cells (CD3+
CD8+), Central Memory (CM, CD3+ CD8+CD44+CD62L+) and Effector Memory (EM, CD3+ CD8+CD44+CD62L-) cells present in
the tumor as determined by flow cytometric analysis. Error bars indicate mean ± S.E.M. from five measurements. Statistical analyses were
done by Student’s t-test, * = P < 0.05.

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccination maintained
anti-metastatic efficacy in more advanced disease

implantation, when tumors become palpable, or left
untreated. Twenty-one days after tumor implantation,
mice were euthanized and their lungs were harvested for
examination of metastasis. Mice receiving MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM displayed significantly reduced primary tumor
growth compared to mice receiving either no treatment
or MVA-TRICOM (Figure 5A). More strikingly, mice
receiving MVA-TWIST/TRICOM had significantly fewer
clonogenic metastatic cells in their lungs compared to
mice receiving either no treatment (P = 0.0036) or MVATRICOM (P = 0.0004) (Figure 5B). There was no toxicity
associated with treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Delaying treatment in the 4T1 model provides
more time for primary as well as metastatic disease to
progress, making it a more stringent model for evaluating
treatments in the setting of advanced disease. To determine
if postponing MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccination would
reduce its antitumor efficacy, 4T1 tumor-bearing mice
were given two weekly doses of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
starting 7 or 15 days post-tumor implantation or left
untreated. Treatment groups in this study were euthanized
28200

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Treatment with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM inhibits primary tumor growth and spontaneous lung metastasis
in the 4T1 metastatic breast cancer model. BALB/c mice (n = 10/group) were implanted s.c. with 5 × 104 4T1 cells. Four days

post-tumor implantation the first of three weekly vaccinations was given, as indicated by arrows. A. Primary tumor growth in mice treated
with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (closed squares) or MVA-TRICOM (closed circles) or left untreated (open circles). Insert: Twist expression
in 4T1 primary tumor and lung metastases as determined by RT-PCR (n = 3). B. Enumeration of clonogenic metastatic cells in the lungs
of mice treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (closed squares) or MVA-TRICOM (closed circles) or left untreated (open circles) obtained
21 days post-tumor implantation. Tumor dimensions were measured weekly. Clonogenic metastatic cells/lung were determined by plating
a single cell suspension of lung cells in the presence of 6-thioguanine for 10–14 days after which colonies were enumerated. Error bars
indicate mean ± S.E.M. Statistical analyses were done by Student’s t-test, * = P < 0.005 vs. either no treatment or MVA-TRICOM alone.
Data are representative of three independent experiments.

and their lungs were harvested when the average tumor
volume of the group breached 1000 mm3. Examining
the mice for metastatic disease when primary tumor
volumes were equivalent eliminated the possibility that
reduced metastatic disease was due to smaller primary
tumors. Figure 6 shows the growth of individual tumors
in mice receiving no treatment (panel A) or MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM beginning 7 (panel B) or 15 (panel C) days
post-tumor implantation. Prior to receiving treatment
on either day 7 or day 15 post-tumor implantation,
tumor volumes were equivalent between the treated
and untreated groups. Despite a setting of increased
tumor burden when initiating MVA-TWIST/TRICOM 7
days post-implantation, primary tumor growth was still
reduced (Figure 6B, insert). Delaying vaccination to day
15, however, eliminated this effect on the primary tumor
(Figure 6C, insert). In addition to significantly reducing
primary tumor growth when administered 7 days postimplantation, MVA-TWIST/TRICOM also significantly
(P = 0.001) impacted metastatic disease (Figure 6E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

When administered 15 days post-tumor implantation,
even though MVA-TWIST/TRICOM did not significantly
inhibit primary tumor growth, vaccination maintained a
significant reduction in clonogenic metastatic cells (P =
0.0001) (Figure 6F). There was no significant difference
in the reduction of primary or metastatic disease between
mice treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM 7 days or 15
days post-tumor implantation.

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM significantly increased
the survival of TRAMP-Tg mice when
administered alone or in combination
with enzalutamide
The TRAMP model of spontaneous prostate cancer,
wherein tumor development resembles disease progression
in humans, from prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
to metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
[35–38], provided a second tumor model to evaluate
the antitumor efficacy of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM. The
28201

Oncotarget

Figure 6: MVA-TWIST/TRICOM administration reduces the formation of lung metastases when treatment is
initiated up to 15 days post-tumor implantation. BALB/c mice (n = 15/group) were implanted s.c. with 5 × 104 4T1 cells. Graphs

show primary tumor growth in mice treated with A. no treatment, B. MVA-TWIST/TRICOM beginning 7 days post-tumor implantation
or C. MVA-TWIST/TRICOM beginning 15 days post-tumor implantation. Vaccinations are indicated by arrows. Inserts: Average tumor
growth per group compared to group receiving no treatment. Enumeration of clonogenic metastatic cells, obtained when the group average
tumor volume reached 1000mm3, in the lungs of mice treated with D. no treatment, E. MVA-TWIST/TRICOM beginning on day 7 posttumor implantation or F. MVA-TWIST/TRICOM beginning on day 15 post-tumor implantation. Tumor dimensions were measured weekly.
Clonogenic metastatic cells were determined as in previous experiment. Error bars indicate mean ± S.E.M. Statistical analyses were done
by Student’s t-test, * = P < 0.01 vs. no treatment. Data are representative of two independent experiments.

expression of Twist in the prostates of TRAMP-Tg mice
was validated by RT-PCR. Analysis indicated that Twist
expression was significantly higher in the prostates of
TRAMP-Tg mice than in prostates of wild-type C57BL/6
mice, suggesting a rationale for the use of this vaccine
in this model (Figure 7A, insert). In this study, agematched groups of TRAMP-Tg mice were treated with
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM with or without enzalutamide,
an FDA-approved androgen receptor (AR) antagonist
and first-line therapy for men with metastatic CRPC [39].
Mice receiving MVA-TWIST/TRICOM alone displayed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a significant increase in median survival compared to
untreated controls (19 vs. 4 weeks, P = 0.048), as did
mice receiving enzalutamide alone (24 vs. 4 weeks,
P = 0.001, Figure 7). Mice receiving the combination of
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM and enzalutamide also exhibited
a significant increase in median survival compared to
untreated animals (>36 vs. 4 weeks, P < 0.0001) as well
as compared to mice receiving MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
(>36 vs. 19 weeks, P < 0.0001) or enzalutamide (>36 vs.
24 weeks, P = 0.0004) alone (Figure 7). Median survival
of the group receiving the combination of MVA-TWIST/
28202

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Combining MVA-TWIST/TRICOM with anti-androgen therapy significantly increases survival in TrampTg mice. Tramp-Tg mice were age-matched and randomized to receive one of the indicated treatment regimens. Indicated mice began
receiving enzalutamide and received the first of three weekly vaccinations with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM simultaneously on day 0. A. Overall
survival of Tramp-Tg mice receiving no treatment (open circles), MVA-TWIST/TRICOM (closed squares), enzalutamide (open squares)
or the combination of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM and enzalutamide (closed circles). Insert: Twist expression in the prostates of wild-type C5/
BL6 and Tramp-Tg mice as determined by RT-PCR (n = 12). Statistical analyses were done by Student’s t-test relative to indicated group.

TRICOM and enzalutamide was not met by 40 weeks
post-treatment initiation, when animals in all other groups
were deceased (Figure 7). There was no toxicity associated
with treatment.

transcription factors are suitable targets for vaccinemediated immunotherapy. We utilized two mouse
strains, BALB/c and C57BL/6, and two tumor models,
the 4T1 metastatic breast cancer model and TRAMP-Tg
spontaneous prostate cancer model, to evaluate whether
the MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccine platform could
induce anti-Twist immune responses leading to antitumor
efficacy.
We first sought to determine if MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM could induce Twist-specific CD4+ and CD8+
T-cell responses. We observed that both BALB/c and
C57BL/6 mice treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
exhibited significantly increased CD4+ T-cell proliferation
in response to Twist peptide compared to that of untreated
mice (Figure 2A and 2B). In addition, mice receiving
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM demonstrated significantly
increased CD8+ T cell-mediated IFN-γ production

DISCUSSION
A recent report described the ability of a recom­
binant yeast-based vaccine to induce an immune response
against the self-antigen Twist [32]. Those studies indicated
that yeast-Twist induced an antitumor immune response
in the 4T1 model in the absence of autoimmunity, even
though Twist expression was confirmed in normal tissue
of BALB/c mice. The yeast and pox-TRICOM platforms
have previously been shown to be quite different in terms
of the types of T cells and cytokines induced [40–42].
Here we sought to confirm that metastasis-associated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28203

Oncotarget

in response to Twist peptide (Figure 2C and 2D). As
indicated by the difference in scale, both vaccinated
and unvaccinated BALB/c mice exhibited significantly
greater Twist-specific T-cell responses compared to those
of C57BL/6 mice (Figure 2A and 2C). This observation
could be due to slight differences in the peptides used to
stimulate the T cells of the different mouse strains or to
the possible presence of an underlying endogenous T-cell
response to Twist in BALB/c mice. However, the increase
in lytic capacity of CD8+ T cells taken from MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM treated mice was similar for both BALB/c and
C57BL/6 mice (Figure 2E and 2F), indicating that this
vaccine has a similar immune-stimulatory effect regardless
of mouse strain. Further evaluation of the splenic immune
cell composition of BALB/c mice revealed an increase
in effector memory and Twist-specific CD8+ T cells
(Table 1) supporting the observed increase in CD8+ T cell
functionality in the BALB/c mouse. The observed increase
in activated dendritic cells in MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
treated mice (Table 1) indicated a possible mechanism for
this increase in highly functional Twist-specific CD8+ T
cells. The observation that immune responses against what
is considered an “undruggable” target could be induced
by vaccination with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM was quite
intriguing. By expressing it as a transgene from MVA,
Twist was uniquely produced in the cytoplasm of infected
cells leading to peptide presentation at the cell surface
and, with the aid of TRICOM, the stimulation of a robust
immune response.
Many studies have indicated that there is significant
alteration in the functionality of the immune system in
patients with cancer [33, 34, 43]. In order to determine
if MVA-TWIST/TRICOM was capable of inducing
Twist-specific immune responses in the setting of tumor
induced immune dysfunction, immune function assays
were conducted in MVA-TWIST/TRICOM treated and
untreated 4T1 tumor bearing BALB/c mice. Unlike nontumor bearing mice, 4T1-bearing mice displayed increased
splenic percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, in addition
to the increased percentages of effector and central CD8+
T cells (Tables 1 and 2). These alterations occurred in
the absence of an increase in activated dendritic cells,
however (Table 2). This is not completely surprising,
given that MVA-TWIST/TRICOM has the capacity to
convert any infected cell into a more competent antigenpresenting cell through its expression of the costimulatory
molecules B7-1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3. In the case of
tumor bearing mice, these increased splenic percentages,
in response to MVA-TWIST/TRICOM administration,
correlated with increased tumor infiltration of CD8+ T
cells, as well as effector and central CD8+ T cells even
in the absence of altered total lymphocytic infiltration
(Figure 4A and 4B). When the functionality of splenic
immune cells from tumor bearing mice was examined,
it was observed that 4T1-bearing mice treated with
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM exhibited improved CD4+
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

T-cell proliferation and CD8+ T-cell secretion of IFN-γ
in response to Twist peptide compared to untreated
animals (Figure 3A and 3B). The degree of CD4+ T cell
proliferation achieved in response to Twist peptide after
treatment with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM was very similar
between tumor bearing and non-tumor bearing animals,
however, the degree of background response was much
higher in non-tumor bearing mice (Figures 2A and 3A).
In addition, the degree of IFN-γ release was much lower
in tumor-bearing mice compared to non-tumor bearing
mice (Figures 2C and 3B). These observations support
the concept of tumor-mediated immune dysfunction and
display the suppressive environment in which MVATWIST/TRICOM is successful at inducing an immune
response. The ability of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM to
stimulate a successful antitumor immune response is
further supported by its ability to induce antigen cascade.
MVA-TWIST/TRICOM treated BALB/c mice bearing
4T1 tumors exhibited improvement in IFN-γ secretion
in response to the AH-1 peptide (Figure 3C). AH-1 is
the BALB/c recognized epitope of the endogenous GP70
antigen, which is expressed by the 4T1 cell line but is
not included in the MVA-TWIST/TRICOM vaccine.
The ability of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM to induce antigen
cascade is highly significant as it has been suggested that
the ability to stimulate immune responses to cascade
antigens correlates better with antitumor efficacy than the
ability to induce an immune response to the antigen being
delivered by the vaccine [44, 45].
Previous studies have demonstrated the importance
of Twist’s role in the metastatic process in the 4T1 model
of metastatic breast cancer [1, 46]. Innovative studies from
the same group showed that treatment of 4T1 cells with
the antibiotic salinomycin, a blocker of EMT, inhibited
their ability to efficiently form tumors [47]. Here we
have shown in this model that vaccination with MVATWIST/TRICOM exhibits efficacy even when used to
treat established tumors. Administration of this vaccine
significantly reduced both primary 4T1 tumor growth
and metastasis when administered 4 days post-tumor
implantation compared to no treatment or vaccination with
MVA-TRICOM (Figure 5A and 5B). When treatment was
postponed to 7 days post-tumor implantation to mimic
more advanced disease, primary tumor growth was still
retarded (Figure 4B, insert); however, further delay of
treatment resulted in no significant reduction in primary
tumor growth (Figure 6C). This was not the case with
metastatic disease. Regardless of the delay in treatment
with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM, there was a significant
reduction in the degree of lung metastasis (Figure 6E and
6F). One explanation for this observation is the significant
increase in Twist expression exhibited by the lung
metastases (Figure 5A, insert), which presumably made
them more favorable targets for T-cell-mediated lysis. It
has been observed that cells from human breast cancer
metastases display increased Twist expression, suggesting
28204

Oncotarget

that a vaccine targeting Twist would more specifically
target the destruction of metastatic cells [1]. The data
presented herein highlight the control of metastasis,
which is a unique feature of targeting Twist. In situations
where primary tumors may be removed by surgery, the
ability to target metastases by the immune system is highly
applicable. Since metastatic disease is extremely difficult
to manage, especially in the setting of breast cancer, a
vaccine targeting Twist may be of significant clinical
importance. Of note, there was a significant increase in
clonogenic metastatic cells in the lungs of 4T1 tumorbearing mice when lungs were not harvested until the
average group tumor volume breached 1000 mm3 (Figure
6D), compared to the previous experiment where all lungs
were harvested on the same day when tumor volumes were
significantly below 1000 mm3 (Figure 3B), illustrating the
immense metastatic capability of this model.
Androgen deprivation therapy is a standard of care
for prostate cancer [48, 49]. However, most patients
eventually develop CRPC. It has been demonstrated
that CRPC remains dependent on androgen signaling for
growth and that CRPC is sensitive to further manipulation
of androgen signaling [50]. Enzalutamide is an FDAapproved AR antagonist that blocks androgens from
binding to the AR and prevents nuclear translocation and
coactivator recruitment of the ligand-receptor complex.
The utility of enzalutamide has been demonstrated in
clinical trials [51–53], including the AFFIRM trial where
it mediated a 4.8-month advantage in overall survival
compared to placebo [53]. Here, focusing on mice
bearing moderately differentiated to poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma, MVA-TWIST/TRICOM alone signifi­
cantly improved survival in the TRAMP-Tg model
of spontaneous prostate cancer. However, combining
the vaccine with the AR antagonist enzalutamide not
only significantly increased survival in this model, but
the median overall survival was not reached before
termination of the study, indicating the high degree of
efficacy of this therapeutic regimen (Figure 7). This
contrasts with studies of the yeast-based Twist vaccine,
which did not show efficacy as a monotherapy and
displayed less efficacy when combined with enzalutamide
in this model, even with the administration of many more
vaccinations (18 vs. 3) [35]. Enzalutamide has previously
been shown to mediate thymic regeneration as well as an
increase in the sensitivity of TRAMP C2 cells to immunemediated killing [35]. This immunomodulatory capacity of
enzalutamide partially explains the data reported here and
supports the clinical evaluation of ADT in combination
with active immunotherapy for the treatment of metastatic
prostate cancer.
Although the data presented here demonstrate
the successful targeting of Twist for the treatment of
cancer, it is unclear whether Twist is a valid target for
immunotherapy or other types of cancer treatment. Twist
expression has been identified in several normal human
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

adult tissues including the testis, ovary, placenta, thymus,
colon, lung and brain, possibly reducing its ability to
be targeted without detriment to the patient [21]. The
transcription factor brachyury has been shown to play a
major role in EMT, a key process in the dissemination of
cancer cells, leading to the formation of distant metastases,
in a wide range of human carcinomas [4, 31, 54, 55]. In
addition, brachyury is differentially expressed in human
carcinomas vs. normal human adult tissue, perhaps making
it a safer target than Twist in humans [21]. However,
the lack of brachyury expression in the mouse makes
it difficult to evaluate the efficacy of vaccines targeting
this transcription factor [21]. The functional homology
between brachyury and Twist, however, allows vaccines
targeting Twist to serve as models for vaccines targeting
brachyury in preclinical murine tumor models. Based on
the preclinical data obtained by using Twist as a model
target antigen, two brachyury vaccines are currently being
evaluated clinically, including an MVA-TRICOM-based
brachyury vaccine (MVA-brachyury/TRICOM) expressing
human transgenes for B7-1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3 [56, 57].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Eight- to 12-week-old female BALB/c and C57BL/6
mice were obtained from the National Cancer Institute’s
Frederick Cancer Research Facility, Frederick, MD.
TRAMP-Tg mice on the C57BL/6 background were
bred and maintained at the National Institutes of Health
(Bethesda, MD) [58]. Age-matched male TRAMP-Tg
mice were used for the antitumor study. Mice were housed
and maintained in microisolator cages under specific
pathogen-free conditions in accordance with Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care guidelines. All experimental studies were approved
by the National Cancer Institute’s Intramural Animal Care
and Use Committee.

Tumor cells
4T1 murine metastatic breast carcinoma, MC38
murine colon carcinoma and P815 murine lymphoblastlike mastocytoma cell lines were purchased from American
Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) and cultured in
complete medium (RPMI or DMEM supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 1 mM HEPES
buffer, 50 μg/mL gentamicin, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 μg/
mL streptomycin and 300 μg/mL G418) at 37°C/5% CO2.

Poxviral vaccine constructs
MVA containing transgenes for the murine
costimulatory molecules B7-1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3
(MVA-TRICOM) has been previously described [22].
28205

Oncotarget

MVA-TWIST/TRICOM was designed, constructed
and manufactured by Bavarian Nordic (BN) under a
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement with
the National Cancer Institute. Twist was optimized for
expression and MVA-BN was used as the backbone [59].
For in vivo studies, two to three weekly doses of 1 × 108
infectious units/mouse/dose of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
were administered s.c [24].

Enzalutamide (Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX)
was admixed with standard rodent diet (Research Diets
Inc., New Brunswick, NJ) at a concentration of 85.7 mg/
kg of diet in order to deliver 10 mg/kg bw/day to the
animals, a dose that achieves clinical serum concentrations
[35]. Animals began receiving enzalutamide diet on day
0 and continued on the diet for the duration of the study.

non-tumor bearing BALB/c mice 17 days after receiving
two vaccinations with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM or being left
untreated (n = 5/group). Vaccination of tumor bearing mice
began 4 days post-implantation of 5 × 104 4T1 mammary
tumor cells. Spleens were prepared and stained as
described previously [60], using the following antibodies:
CD3e-V500, t-APC, CD8a-Pacific Blue, CD25-FITC,
CD44- PerCP-Cy5.5 CD11b-V500, Gr-1-APC, CD11cPerCP-Cy5.5, CD40-FITC (BD Biosciences); CD62LPE-Cy7, FoxP3-PE, MHC II-efluor450 (eBioscience, San
Diego, CA); and CD49b-PE-Cy7 (Biolegend, San Diego,
CA). Tetramer staining (Beckman Coulter, Pasadena, CA)
was performed on splenocytes from non-tumor bearing
mice following 7 days of in vitro stimulation with 1.0
μg/mL Twist peptide (BALB/c - LYQVLQSDEL). All
samples were acquired on a BD Verse flow cytometer. All
marker expression was determined using FlowJo software
(TreeStar, Inc., Ashland, OR).

Western blotting

Murine CD4+ T-cell proliferation

Twist expression was determined by western blot
using rabbit polyclonal antibodies to Twist (Abcam,
Cambridge, MA) and GAPDH (Cell Signaling, Danvers,
MA). MC38 cells treated with 10 MOI (multiplicity of
infection) MVA-TRICOM or MVA-TWIST/TRICOM,
or left untreated for 24 hours were lysed using Cell
Lysis Buffer containing 1 mM PMSF (Cell Signaling)
and 10 μL/mL HALT Protease/Phosphatase Inhibitor
Cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein concentration
was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo
Scientific). Aliquots containing 50 μg of protein were
run on a Bolt 4%–12% gradient Bis-Tris gel in a Bolt
Mini Gel Tank and transferred to a PVDF membrane
using the iBLOT Transfer System (Life Technologies,
Grand Island, NY). Membranes were blocked for 1 hour
at room temperature with PBS containing 5% BSA and
0.05% Tween20, then incubated with primary antibodies
overnight at 4°C in block. Membranes were then incubated
with an IRDye-labeled goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody
(LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE) at a 1:10000 dilution
in block for 1 hour at room temperature. Membranes were
imaged using the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LICOR Biosciences).

To assess the effect of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM on
CD4+ T-cell proliferation, in non-tumor bearing mice,
female BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice (n = 5/group) were given
three weekly vaccinations or left untreated. Three weeks
following the last vaccination, mice were euthanized and
splenocytes were collected and pooled. For analysis in
tumor bearing mice, BALB/c mice were administered
two weekly vaccinations or left untreated beginning
4 days after implantation of 5 × 104 4T1 mammary
tumor cells. Splenocytes were collected and pooled 17
days following the last vaccination. CD4+ T cells were
purified and Twist-specific proliferation was measured
as described previously [32]. Briefly, the level of CD4+
T-cell proliferation was determined by [3H]-thymidine
incorporation in the presence of irradiated APCs (2000 rad)
and Twist peptide (BALB/c - QQPASGKRGARKRRS,
6.25 μg/mL; 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c - 12.5 μg/mL;
C57BL6 - FSVWRMEGAWSMSAS, 5.0 μg/mL). Cells
were harvested using a Tomtec cell harvester (Wallac
Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). [3H]-thymidine incorporation
was measured using a Wallac 1205 Betaplate MicroBeta
counter (Wallac Inc.).

Flow cytometry

To assess the effect of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM on
CD8+ T-cell activity, in non-tumor bearing mice, female
BALB/c or C57BL/6 mice (n = 5/group) were given three
weekly vaccinations of MVA-TRICOM or MVA-TWIST/
TRICOM, or left untreated. Three weeks following the last
vaccination, mice were euthanized and splenocytes were
collected and pooled. For analysis in tumor bearing mice,
BALB/c mice were administered two weekly vaccinations
or left untreated beginning 4 days after implantation of
5 × 104 4T1 mammary tumor cells. Splenocytes were
collected and pooled 17 days following the last vaccination.

Enzalutamide administration

Murine CD8+ T-cell responses

Expression of B7-1, ICAM-1, and LFA-3 was
determined by flow cytometry. Treated MC38 cells were
stained with FITC-labeled antibodies to CD80 (B7-1),
CD54 (ICAM-1) and CD48 (LFA-3) (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA). Cells were incubated with antibodies for
30 min at 4°C. Samples were acquired on a FACScan
flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ).
The effect of MVA-TWIST/TRICOM on splenic immune
cell populations was examined in tumor bearing and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28206

Oncotarget

The level of CD8+ T-cell activity was determined by the
amount of secreted IFN-γ following 7 days of in vitro
stimulation with 1.0 μg/mL Twist peptide (BALB/c LYQVLQSDEL [61], C57BL6 - TQSLNEAFL [35]). The
response to a non-vaccine encoded self-antigen, GP70, was
also analyzed in tumor bearing BALB/c mice using the AH-1
peptide (SPSYVYHQF). Interferon (IFN)-γ production from
pooled splenocytes was measured as previously described
[32]. Data were acquired using a FACScan flow cytometer
and analyzed using BD CBA analysis software (Becton
Dickinson). T-cell lytic capacity was also measured as
previously described [32]. Briefly, following 6 days of in
vitro stimulation with 1.0 μg/mL Twist peptide, splenocytes
from non-tumor bearing mice were incubated for 5 hours
with indium-111 labeled p815 target cells pulsed with 12.5
μg/mL Twist peptide. Lytic capacity was calculated as
[(experimental cpm – spontaneous cpm) / (maximum cpm –
spontaneous cpm)] × 100.

mammary tumor cells. Four, 7 or 15 days post-tumor
implantation, mice received 2–3 weekly injections of
MVA-TRICOM or MVA-TWIST/TRICOM, or were left
untreated. Primary tumor dimensions were measured twice
weekly and tumor volumes were calculated as (length ×
width2)/2. Mice were euthanized either on day 21 or when
the average tumor volume in each group breached 1000
mm3. The degree of lung metastasis was determined as
described previously [32]. Briefly, lungs were homogenized
to a single cell suspension using gentleMACS™ C Tubes
(Miltenyi Biotec); cells were then plated in the presence
of 6-thioguanine. After 10–14 days, colonies were
enumerated yielding “clonogenic metastatic cells/lung.”
For TRAMP-Tg studies, male TRAMP-Tg mice were
divided into four age-matched groups (n = 13–16/group,
aged 20–36 weeks; representing moderately differentiated
to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma [35]) and received
(a) no treatment, (b) MVA-TWIST/TRICOM alone, (c)
enzalutamide alone and (d) MVA-TWIST/TRICOM plus
enzalutamide. Mice treated with MVA-TWIST/TRICOM
received three weekly vaccinations; mice treated with
enzalutamide were fed enzalutamide-containing diet
throughout the study.

Tumor immunohistochemistry and
flow cytometry
BALB/c mice (n = 5/group) were administered two
weekly vaccinations or left untreated beginning 4 days
following 4T1 tumor implantation. On day 28, post-tumor
implantation, tumors were harvested with a portion of
each tumor being fixed with Z-Fix (Anatech Ltd., Battle
Creek, MI) and the rest being dissociated according to the
protocol for preparation of single-cell suspensions from
implanted mouse tumors (Miltenyi Biotec San Diego, CA).
Fixed tumor sections were stained with a rabbit polyclonal
antibody to CD3 (Dako) at 1:1000. Control sections were
stained with a matched isotype antibody. Entire tumor
sections were digitally scanned by an Aperio ScanScope
CS scanning system and analyzed by Aperio ImageScope
Viewer software (Aperio Technologies Inc., Vista, CA).
Positive cells were identified using the Positive Pixel
Count v9 algorithm. Dissociated tumor was stained for
flow cytometric analysis using the same antibodies and
protocol as in the splenic immune cell population analysis.

Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism 5 statistical software (Version 5;
GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) was used to measure
2-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests for differences between
groups, with a 95% confidence interval. All data with error
bars represent the mean ± S.E.M. for the indicated number
of replicates or individual mice. FlowJo software was used
to determine significant differences in the distribution of
flow cytometry data using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Marion Taylor for excellent
technical assistance and Bonnie L. Casey for editorial
assistance in the preparation of this manuscript.

RNA isolation, quantitative RT-PCR

REFERENCES

4T1 primary tumors and lung metastases were
isolated from untreated BALB/c mice (n = 3) and prostates
were collected from untreated TRAMP-Tg and wild-type
C57BL/6 mice (n = 3 from each age group). Cell lysates
were obtained, RNA was isolated and quantitative RTPCR was performed as previously described [32]. PCR
was performed on the 7300 Real-Time PCR System
(Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). Twist expression is
represented relative to GAPDH, the endogenous control.

1.	 Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, Ramaswamy S,
Itzykson  RA, Come C, Savagner P, Gitelman I,
Richardson A, Weinberg RA. Twist, a master regulator of
morphogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor metastasis.
Cell. 2004; 117:927–939.
2.	 Alves CC, Carneiro F, Hoefler H, Becker KF. Role of
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulator Slug in
primary human cancers. Frontiers in bioscience. 2009;
14:3035–3050.

Antitumor studies

3.	 Wang Y, Shi J, Chai K, Ying X, Zhou BP. The Role of
Snail in EMT and Tumorigenesis. Current cancer drug targets. 2013; 13:963–972.

For 4T1 orthotopic tumor studies, female BALB/c
(n = 10–15/group) were injected s.c. with 5 × 104 4T1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28207

Oncotarget

4.	 Fernando RI, Litzinger M, Trono P, Hamilton DH,
Schlom  J, Palena C. The T-box transcription factor
Brachyury promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
human tumor cells. The Journal of clinical investigation.
2010; 120:533–544.

in colorectal carcinomas and predicts patient survival. PloS
one. 2011; 6:e18023.
15.	 Kajiyama H, Shibata K, Umezu T, Mizuno M, Suzuki S,
Yamamoto E, Fujiwara S, Kikkawa F. Expression of Twist
enhances risk of poor oncologic outcome in patients with
stage Ib to II cervical carcinoma with lymphovascular space
involvement. Human pathology. 2013; 44:181–188.

5.	 Niu RF, Zhang L, Xi GM, Wei XY, Yang Y, Shi YR,
Hao XS. Up-regulation of Twist induces angiogenesis and
correlates with metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Journal of experimental & clinical cancer research: CR.
2007; 26:385–394.

16.	 Jiang W, Pang XG, Wang Q, Shen YX, Chen XK, Xi JJ.
Prognostic role of Twist, Slug, and Foxc2 expression in
stage I non-small-cell lung cancer after curative resection.
Clinical lung cancer. 2012; 13:280–287.

6.	 Vesuna F, van Diest P, Chen JH, Raman V. Twist is a
transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin gene expression in
breast cancer. Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2008; 367:235–241.

17.	 Ru GQ, Wang HJ, Xu WJ, Zhao ZS. Upregulation of Twist
in gastric carcinoma associated with tumor invasion and
poor prognosis. Pathology oncology research: POR. 2011;
17:341–347.

7.	 Mironchik Y, Winnard PT Jr, Vesuna F, Kato Y, Wildes F,
Pathak AP, Kominsky S, Artemov D, Bhujwalla Z, Van
Diest P, Burger H, Glackin C, Raman V. Twist overexpression induces in vivo angiogenesis and correlates with chromosomal instability in breast cancer. Cancer research. 2005;
65:10801–10809.

18.	 Palena C, Roselli M, Litzinger MT, Ferroni P, Costarelli L,
Spila A, Cavaliere F, Huang B, Fernando RI, Hamilton DH,
Jochems C, Tsang KY, Cheng Q, Kim Lyerly H, Schlom J,
Guadagni F. Overexpression of the EMT driver brachyury in breast carcinomas: association with poor prognosis.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2014; 106.

8.	 Alexander NR, Tran NL, Rekapally H, Summers CE,
Glackin C, Heimark RL. N-cadherin gene expression in
prostate carcinoma is modulated by integrin-dependent
nuclear translocation of Twist1. Cancer research. 2006;
66:3365–3369.

19.	 Haro A, Yano T, Kohno M, Yoshida T, Koga T,
Okamoto  T, Takenoyama M, Maehara Y. Expression of
Brachyury gene is a significant prognostic factor for primary lung carcinoma. Annals of surgical oncology. 2013;
20:S509–516.

9.	 Tran PT, Shroff EH, Burns TF, Thiyagarajan S, Das ST,
Zabuawala T, Chen J, Cho YJ, Luong R, Tamayo P, Salih T,
Aziz K, Adam SJ, Vicent S, Nielsen CH, Withofs N, et al.
Twist1 suppresses senescence programs and thereby accelerates and maintains mutant Kras-induced lung tumorigenesis. PLoS genetics. 2012; 8:e1002650.

20.	 Kilic N, Feldhaus S, Kilic E, Tennstedt P, Wicklein D,
Wasielewski R, Viebahn C, Kreipe H, Schumacher U.
Brachyury expression predicts poor prognosis at early
stages of colorectal cancer. European journal of cancer.
2011; 47:1080–1085.

10.	 Chen Y, Li L, Zeng J, Wu K, Zhou J, Guo P, Zhang D,
Xue Y, Liang L, Wang X, Chang LS, He D. Twist confers chemoresistance to anthracyclines in bladder cancer
through upregulating P-glycoprotein. Chemotherapy. 2012;
58:264–272.

21.	 Hamilton DH, Litzinger MT, Fernando RI, Huang B,
Palena C. Cancer vaccines targeting the epithelial-mesenchymal transition: tissue distribution of brachyury and other
drivers of the mesenchymal-like phenotype of carcinomas.
Seminars in oncology. 2012; 39:358–366.

11.	 Vesuna F, Lisok A, Kimble B, Domek J, Kato Y, van der
Groep P, Artemov D, Kowalski J, Carraway H, van Diest P,
Raman V. Twist contributes to hormone resistance in
breast cancer by downregulating estrogen receptor-alpha.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:3223–3234.

22.	 Hodge JW, Poole DJ, Aarts WM, Gomez Yafal A,
Gritz  L, Schlom J. Modified vaccinia virus ankara
recombinants are as potent as vaccinia recombinants in
diversified prime and boost vaccine regimens to elicit
therapeutic antitumor responses. Cancer research. 2003;
63:7942–7949.

12.	 Wang X, Ling MT, Guan XY, Tsao SW, Cheung HW,
Lee DT, Wong YC. Identification of a novel function of
TWIST, a bHLH protein, in the development of acquired
taxol resistance in human cancer cells. Oncogene. 2004;
23:474–482.

23.	 Harrop R, Chu F, Gabrail N, Srinivas S, Blount D,
Ferrari A. Vaccination of castration-resistant prostate cancer patients with TroVax (MVA-5T4) in combination with
docetaxel: a randomized phase II trial. Cancer immunology,
immunotherapy: CII. 2013; 62:1511–1520.

13.	 Riaz M, Sieuwerts AM, Look MP, Timmermans MA,
Smid M, Foekens JA, Martens JW. High TWIST1 mRNA
expression is associated with poor prognosis in lymph nodenegative and estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer and is co-expressed with stromal as well as ECM related
genes. Breast cancer research: BCR. 2012; 14:R123.

24.	 Amato RJ, Hawkins RE, Kaufman HL, Thompson  JA,
Tomczak P, Szczylik C, McDonald M, Eastty S,
Shingler  WH, de Belin J, Goonewardena M, Naylor S,
Harrop R. Vaccination of metastatic renal cancer patients
with MVA-5T4: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-­
controlled phase III study. Clinical cancer research: an
official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2010; 16:5539–5547.

14.	 Gomez I, Pena C, Herrera M, Munoz C, Larriba MJ,
Garcia V, Dominguez G, Silva J, Rodriguez R, Garcia de
Herreros A, Bonilla F, Garcia JM. TWIST1 is expressed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28208

Oncotarget

25.	 Harrop R, Connolly N, Redchenko I, Valle J, Saunders M,
Ryan MG, Myers KA, Drury N, Kingsman SM,
Hawkins RE, Carroll MW. Vaccination of colorectal cancer patients with modified vaccinia Ankara delivering the
tumor antigen 5T4 (TroVax) induces immune responses
which correlate with disease control: a phase I/II trial.
Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2006; 12:3416–3424.

33.	 Finn OJ. Immuno-oncology: understanding the function
and dysfunction of the immune system in cancer. Annals
of oncology: official journal of the European Society for
Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2012; 23:viii6–9.
34.	 Whiteside TL. Immune suppression in cancer: effects on
immune cells, mechanisms and future therapeutic intervention. Seminars in cancer biology. 2006; 16:3–15.
35.	 Ardiani A, Farsaci B, Rogers CJ, Protter A, Guo Z, King
TH, Apelian D, Hodge JW. Combination therapy with a
second-generation androgen receptor antagonist and a
metastasis vaccine improves survival in a spontaneous
prostate cancer model. Clinical cancer research: an official
journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2013; 19:6205–6218.

26.	 Quoix E, Ramlau R, Westeel V, Papai Z, Madroszyk A,
Riviere A, Koralewski P, Breton JL, Stoelben E, Braun D,
Debieuvre D, Lena H, Buyse M, Chenard MP, Acres B,
Lacoste G, et al. Therapeutic vaccination with TG4010 and
first-line chemotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer: a controlled phase 2B trial. The Lancet Oncology.
2011; 12:1125–1133.

36.	 Gingrich JR, Barrios RJ, Kattan MW, Nahm HS,
Finegold  MJ, Greenberg NM. Androgen-independent
prostate cancer progression in the TRAMP model. Cancer
research. 1997; 57:4687–4691.

27.	 Oudard S, Rixe O, Beuselinck B, Linassier C, Banu E,
Machiels JP, Baudard M, Ringeisen F, Velu T, LefrereBelda MA, Limacher JM, Fridman WH, Azizi M, Acres B,
Tartour E. A phase II study of the cancer vaccine TG4010
alone and in combination with cytokines in patients with
metastatic renal clear-cell carcinoma: clinical and immunological findings. Cancer immunology, immunotherapy: CII.
2011; 60:261–271.

37.	 Gingrich JR, Barrios RJ, Morton RA, Boyce BF,
DeMayo  FJ, Finegold MJ, Angelopoulou R, Rosen JM,
Greenberg NM. Metastatic prostate cancer in a transgenic
mouse. Cancer research. 1996; 56:4096–4102.
38.	 Greenberg NM, DeMayo F, Finegold MJ, Medina D,
Tilley  WD, Aspinall JO, Cunha GR, Donjacour AA,
Matusik RJ, Rosen JM. Prostate cancer in a transgenic
mouse. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 1995; 92:3439–3443.

28.	 Kantoff PW, Schuetz TJ, Blumenstein BA, Glode LM,
Bilhartz DL, Wyand M, Manson K, Panicali DL, Laus R,
Schlom J, Dahut WL, Arlen PM, Gulley JL, Godfrey
WR. Overall survival analysis of a phase II randomized controlled trial of a Poxviral-based PSA-targeted
immunotherapy in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2010;
28:1099–1105.

39.	 Beer TM, Armstrong AJ, Rathkopf DE, Loriot Y,
Sternberg  CN, Higano CS, Iversen P, Bhattacharya S,
Carles J, Chowdhury S, Davis ID, de Bono JS, Evans CP,
Fizazi K, Joshua AM, Kim CS, et al. Enzalutamide in
metastatic prostate cancer before chemotherapy. The New
England journal of medicine. 2014; 371:424–433.

29.	 Lou E, Marshall J, Aklilu M, Cole D, Chang D, Morse M.
A phase II study of active immunotherapy with PANVAC
or autologous, cultured dendritic cells infected with
PANVAC after complete resection of hepatic metastases
of colorectal carcinoma. Clinical colorectal cancer. 2006;
5:368–371.

40.	 Garnett CT, Greiner JW, Tsang KY, Kudo-Saito C,
Grosenbach DW, Chakraborty M, Gulley JL, Arlen PM,
Schlom J, Hodge JW. TRICOM vector based cancer vaccines. Curr Pharm Des. 2006; 12:351–361.
41.	 Bernstein MB, Chakraborty M, Wansley EK, Guo Z,
Franzusoff A, Mostbock S, Sabzevari H, Schlom J,
Hodge  JW. Recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(yeast-CEA) as a potent activator of murine dendritic cells.
Vaccine. 2008; 26:509–521.

30.	 Mohebtash M, Tsang KY, Madan RA, Huen NY, Poole DJ,
Jochems C, Jones J, Ferrara T, Heery CR, Arlen PM,
Steinberg SM, Pazdur M, Rauckhorst M, Jones EC,
Dahut WL, Schlom J, et al. A pilot study of MUC-1/CEA/
TRICOM poxviral-based vaccine in patients with metastatic breast and ovarian cancer. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2011; 17:7164–7173.

42.	 Boehm AL, Higgins J, Franzusoff A, Schlom J, Hodge JW.
Concurrent vaccination with two distinct vaccine platforms
targeting the same antigen generates phenotypically and
functionally distinct T-cell populations. Cancer immunology, immunotherapy: CII. 2010; 59:397–408.

31.	 Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S, Yang J.
Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis.
Cancer cell. 2012; 22:725–736.

43.	 Ohm JE, Carbone DP. Immune dysfunction in cancer
patients. Oncology. 2002; 16:11–18.
44.	 Gulley JL, Arlen PM, Bastian A, Morin S, Marte J,
Beetham P, Tsang KY, Yokokawa J, Hodge JW, Menard C,
Camphausen K, Coleman CN, Sullivan F, Steinberg SM,
Schlom J, Dahut W. Combining a recombinant cancer
vaccine with standard definitive radiotherapy in patients

32.	 Ardiani A, Gameiro SR, Palena C, Hamilton DH,
Kwilas  A, King TH, Schlom J, Hodge JW. Vaccinemediated immunotherapy directed against a transcription
factor driving the metastatic process. Cancer research.
2014; 74:1945–1957.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28209

Oncotarget

with localized prostate cancer. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2005; 11:3353–3362.
45.	 Madan RA, Mohebtash M, Arlen PM, Vergati M,
Rauckhorst M, Steinberg SM, Tsang KY, Poole DJ,
Parnes HL, Wright JJ, Dahut WL, Schlom J, Gulley JL.
Ipilimumab and a poxviral vaccine targeting prostate-­
specific antigen in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: a phase 1 dose-escalation trial. The Lancet
Oncology. 2012; 13:501–508.
46.	 Yang J, Mani SA, Weinberg RA. Exploring a new twist
on tumor metastasis. Cancer research. 2006; 66:4549–4552.
47.	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of selective inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening. Cell.
2009; 138:645–659.

54.	 Brabletz T. EMT and MET in metastasis: where are the cancer stem cells? Cancer cell. 2012; 22:699–701.
55.	 Imajyo I, Sugiura T, Kobayashi Y, Shimoda M, Ishii K,
Akimoto N, Yoshihama N, Kobayashi I, Mori Y. T-box
transcription factor Brachyury expression is correlated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and lymph node metastasis in oral squamous cell carcinoma. International journal of
oncology. 2012; 41:1985–1995.
56.	 ClinicalTrials.gov. Safety and Tolerability of a Modified
Vaccinia Ankara (MVA)-Based Vaccine Modified to
Express Brachyury and T-cell Costimulatory Molecules
(MVA-Brachyury-TRICOM). http://clinicaltrialsgov/ct2/
show/NCT02179515?term=brachyury&rank = 1.

48.	 Huggins C. Endocrine-induced regression of cancers.
Cancer research. 1967; 27:1925–1930.

57.	 ClinicalTrials.gov. Open Label Study to Evaluate the
Safety and Tolerability of GI-6301 (Whole Heat-Killed
Recombinant Yeast Modified to Express Brachyury Protein)
in Adults With Solid Tumors. https://clinicaltrialsgov/ct2/
show/NCT01519817?term=brachyury&rank = 2.

49.	 Huggins C, Stevens S, Hodges C. Studies on prostate cancer: II. The effects of castration on advanced carcinoma of
the prostate gland. Arch Surg (Chicago). 1941; 43:209–223.
50.	 Ryan CJ, Tindall DJ. Androgen receptor rediscovered: the new
biology and targeting the androgen receptor therapeutically.
Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2011; 29:3651–3658.

58.	 Hurwitz AA, Foster BA, Allison JP, Greenberg NM and
Kwon ED. The TRAMP mouse as a model for prostate ­cancer. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2001; Chapter 20:
Unit 20 25.

51.	 Tran C, Ouk S, Clegg NJ, Chen Y, Watson PA, Arora V,
Wongvipat J, Smith-Jones PM, Yoo D, Kwon  A,
Wasielewska T, Welsbie D, Chen CD, Higano CS,
Beer TM, Hung DT, et al. Development of a second-generation antiandrogen for treatment of advanced prostate cancer.
Science. (New York, NY). 2009; 324:787–790.

59.	 Suter M, Meisinger-Henschel C, Tzatzaris M,
Hulsemann  V, Lukassen S, Wulff NH, Hausmann J,
Howley P, Chaplin  P. Modified vaccinia Ankara strains
with identical coding sequences actually represent complex
mixtures of viruses that determine the biological properties
of each strain. Vaccine. 2009; 27:7442–7450.

52.	 Scher HI, Beer TM, Higano CS, Anand A, Taplin ME,
Efstathiou E, Rathkopf D, Shelkey J, Yu EY, Alumkal J,
Hung D, Hirmand M, Seely L, Morris MJ, Danila DC,
Humm J, et al. Antitumour activity of MDV3100 in
­castration-resistant prostate cancer: a phase 1–2 study.
Lancet. 2010; 375:1437–1446.

60.	 Kwilas AR, Ardiani A, Donahue RN, Aftab DT, Hodge JW.
Dual effects of a targeted small-molecule inhibitor (cabozantinib) on immune-mediated killing of tumor cells and
immune tumor microenvironment permissiveness when
combined with a cancer vaccine. Journal of translational
medicine. 2014; 12:294.

53.	 Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, Taplin ME, Sternberg CN,
Miller K, de Wit R, Mulders P, Hirmand M, Selby B, de
Bono JS. Effect of MDV3100, an androgen receptor signaling inhibitor (ARSI), on overall survival in patients with

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

prostate cancer postdocetaxel: Results from the phase III
AFFIRM study. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2012;
30. abstr LBA1.

61.	 Wang B, Santori FR and Demaria S. A metastasis regulator
is a target of CD8+ anti-tumor T cells. Proc Amer Assoc
Cancer Res. 2006; 47:Abstract #2241.

28210

Oncotarget

