Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Increased hepatic receptor interacting protein kinase 3
expression due to impaired proteasomal functions contributes
to alcohol-induced steatosis and liver injury
Shaogui Wang1,2, Hong-Min Ni2, Kenneth Dorko2, Sean C. Kumer3, Timothy M.
Schmitt3, Atta Nawabi3, Masaaki Komatsu4, Heqing Huang1, Wen-Xing Ding2
1

Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006,
China

2

Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

3

Department of General Surgery, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA

4

Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine Niigata University, Chuo-ku Niigata 951-8510, Japan

Correspondence to: Heqing Huang, e-mail: huangheq@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Wen-Xing Ding, e-mail: wxding@kumc.edu
Keywords: alcohol, RIP3, steatosis, necroptosis, liver injury
Received: July 28, 2015     Accepted: December 23, 2015     Published: January 12, 2016

ABSTRACT
Chronic alcohol exposure increased hepatic receptor-interacting protein kinase
(RIP) 3 expression and necroptosis in the liver but its mechanisms are unclear. In the
present study, we demonstrated that chronic alcohol feeding plus binge (Gao-binge)
increased RIP3 but not RIP1 protein levels in mouse livers. RIP3 knockout mice had
decreased serum alanine amino transferase activity and hepatic steatosis but had no
effect on hepatic neutrophil infiltration compared with wild type mice after Gao-binge
alcohol treatment. The hepatic mRNA levels of RIP3 did not change between Gaobinge and control mice, suggesting that alcohol-induced hepatic RIP3 proteins are
regulated at the posttranslational level. We found that Gao-binge treatment decreased
the levels of proteasome subunit alpha type-2 (PSMA2) and proteasome 26S subunit,
ATPase 1 (PSMC1) and impaired hepatic proteasome function. Pharmacological or
genetic inhibition of proteasome resulted in the accumulation of RIP3 in mouse
livers. More importantly, human alcoholics had decreased expression of PSMA2 and
PSMC1 but increased protein levels of RIP3 compared with healthy human livers.
Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of RIP1 decreased Gao-binge-induced hepatic
inflammation, neutrophil infiltration and NF-κB subunit (p65) nuclear translocation
but failed to protect against steatosis and liver injury induced by Gao-binge alcohol. In
conclusion, results from this study suggest that impaired hepatic proteasome function
by alcohol exposure may contribute to hepatic accumulation of RIP3 resulting in
necroptosis and steatosis while RIP1 kinase activity is important for alcohol-induced
inflammation.

intrinsic (mitochondrial) and extrinsic (death receptor
regulated) apoptotic pathways [3–5]. Chronic ethanol
feeding also depletes mitochondrial glutathione (GSH),
increases the expression of CD95, induces the onset of
mitochondrial permeability transition, and sensitizes
cultured rat hepatocytes to tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα)-induced apoptosis [6, 7]. Furthermore, recent evidence
also suggests that ethanol-induced endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress activates interferon regulator factor 3 (IRF3)
in order to initialize ethanol-induced hepatocyte apoptosis

INTRODUCTION
Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is a major
worldwide health problem [1, 2]. Alcohol induces both
apoptotic and necrotic cell death, which also contribute
to the pathogenesis of ALD. However, the mechanisms
regulating alcohol-induced cell death in the case of
necrotic cell death are poorly understood.
Accumulating evidence suggests that alcohol
induces apoptosis in hepatocytes by activating both
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17681

Oncotarget

in mice, which contrasts with the role of IRF3 in innate
immunity regulation and inflammation [8].
In addition to apoptosis, cells can also die by
necrosis. Necrosis is generally considered as a type
of sudden cell death characterized by swollen cell,
permeabilized plasma membrane and often accompanied
with inflammation in vivo. Biochemically, caspase
normally is not activated in necrotic cells. However,
recent evidence suggests that necrotic cell death can also
be tightly regulated, a process termed as necroptosis.
Necroptosis is similar in nature to necrosis, but is a
caspase-independent programmed form of cell death that
depends on receptor interacting protein kinase 1 (RIP1)
or 3 (RIP3) [9–14]. TNF-α binds to TNF-α receptor 1
(TNFR1) and triggers the binding of RIP1 with RIP3
through the RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM),
when cellular caspases are inhibited and inhibitor of
apoptosis proteins (cIAPs) are depleted. RIP1 and RIP3
then form an amyloid-like structure termed necrosome,
which is stabilized by phosphorylated RIP1 and RIP3.
Activated RIP3 then recruits and phosphorylates the
mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) protein to
promote its oligomerization and translocation to the
plasma membranes resulting in eventual membrane
rupture and necrosis [15, 16]. In addition to regulating
necrosis, RIP1 also regulates NF-κB activation through
cIAP1 and cIAP2-induced polyubiquitination of RIP1.
Activated NF-κB upregulates the expression of FLICElike inhibitory proteins (FLIP) and inhibits caspase-8
activation and apoptosis. Intriguingly, in the absence of
cIAPs, RIP1, RIP3, FADD, Caspase-8 and FLIPL form a
complex known as ripoptosome which activates caspase-8
to trigger apoptosis independent of pronecrotic kinase
activities and MLKL [17–19]. The latter is supported by
the observation that while RIP1 kinase-dead knock-in
mice are viable, RIP3 kinase-dead D161N knock-in mice
die via caspase-8 mediated apoptosis [20]. These findings
suggest that both RIP1 and RIP3 can also induce apoptosis
in addition to their roles in necroptosis.
Recently, Dr. Nagy’s group found that chronic ethanol
feeding induced RIP3 expression in mouse livers [21].
Moreover, RIP3 knockout (KO) mice had less liver injury,
steatosis, and inflammation compared to control mice after
chronic ethanol feeding, implicating the importance of RIP3
in ethanol-induced liver injury and progression of ALD
[21]. However, the molecular mechanisms of how ethanol
induces hepatic RIP3 expression are not clear. In the present
study, we found that chronic alcohol feeding plus binge
(Gao-binge) treatment increased RIP3 but not RIP1 protein
levels in mouse livers. RIP3 KO mice had decreased serum
alanine amino transferase (ALT) activity and steatosis but
unchanged neutrophil infiltration compared to that of wild
type mice after Gao-binge alcohol treatment. Furthermore,
we found that Gao-binge alcohol treatment decreased
the levels of proteasome subunit alpha type-2 (PSMA2)
and proteasome 26S subunit, ATPase 1 (PSMC1) as well
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

as hepatic proteasome activity. In line with the findings
from the animal experiments, we also found decreased
expression of PSMA2, PSMC1 and increased protein levels
of RIP3 in human alcoholic liver tissues compared to the
levels in healthy human livers. Our results thus suggest that
impaired hepatic proteasome function by alcohol exposure
may contribute to alcohol-induced steatosis and liver injury
by inducing necroptosis through blocking proteasomal
degradation of RIP3.

RESULTS
Induction of RIP3 protein by alcohol/ethanol in
mouse livers and primary hepatocytes
To determine the changes of hepatic RIP3 in the
Gao-binge alcohol model, total liver lysates from mice
that were fed with ethanol diet followed by ethanol
binge (ED+E) or pair-fed control liquid diet followed by
maltose dextrin binge (CD+M) were subjected to western
blot analysis. We found that the levels of hepatic RIP3
increased almost 2-fold in Gao-binge alcohol-treated
mouse livers compare to the control mouse livers (Figure
1A & 1B). Immunohistochemistry analysis of liver
tissues also revealed a marked induction of RIP3 in Gaobinge alcohol-treated mouse livers compared to control
(CD+M)-treated mouse livers. RIP3 staining increased
robustly in hepatocytes and displayed speckles in the
cytosol after Gao-binge alcohol treatment, which may
reflect the formation of necrosomes (Figure 1C). These
results are in general agreement with a previous study
that showed increased RIP3 induction in mice that were
fed with an ethanol-containing diet for 25 days [22]. We
next determined the expression levels of RIP3 and RIP1
in different mouse tissues. We found that both RIP3 and
RIP1 were predominantly expressed in mouse thymus
and spleen but were almost undetectable in other tissues
including muscle, heart, kidney and brain. Both RIP3
and RIP1 proteins were detected in the liver although
the expression levels were much lower compared with
the thymus and spleen. The lack of 55KD signal in the
extract from the RIP3 knockout mouse liver suggests that
the antibody that we used for RIP3 is specific (Figure 1D).
To determine whether ethanol could affect the expression
of RIP3 directly in hepatocytes, primary cultured mouse
and human hepatocytes were treated with ethanol (80 mM)
for 6 hours. Under these conditions, we have previously
demonstrated that ethanol induces expression of many
autophagy-related genes [32]. Interestingly, we also found
that ethanol treatment increased RIP3 protein levels in
both mouse and human primary hepatocytes (Figure 1E
& 1F). Taken together, these results indicate that hepatic
RIP3 proteins are induced by alcohol in mice that were
exposed to a clinical relevant chronic plus binge condition.
Ethanol directly induces RIP3 protein in mouse and human
hepatocytes independent of other cell types.
17682

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Alcohol treatment induces RIP3 expression in mouse liver, primary mouse and human hepatocytes. Male C57BL/6J

WT mice were fed ad libitum with the Lieber-DeCarli ethanol liquid diet (10 days,35.5%) followed by a single dose of ethanol (ED+E, 5 g/kg) or
pair-fed control liquid diet followed by one dose of maltose dextrin (CD+M, 9 g/kg). Mice were sacrificed 8 hours later after the gavage. A. Total
liver lysates were subjected to western blot analysis. B. Densitometry analysis of (A). The levels of RIP3 were normalized to the loading control
(β-Actin). Values represent means±S.E. (n = 3 different mice). C. Paraffin-embedded liver tissues were subjected to immunohistochemistry for
RIP3. Boxed area was enlarged and showed in the top panel. D. Total lysates that were extracted from a wild type mouse muscle (M), heart (H),
brain (B), kidney (K), thymus (T), spleen (S) and liver (L) were subjected to western blot analysis. The liver lysate from a RIP3 KO mouse was
used as a negative control. E. Primary cultured mouse and human hepatocytes were treated with ethanol (EtOH, 80 mM) for 6 hours and total cell
lysates were subjected to western blot analysis. The liver lysate from a RIP3 KO mouse was used as a negative control. F. Densitometry analysis
of (E). The levels of RIP3 were normalized to the loading control (β-Actin). Values represent means±S.E. (n = 3 independent experiments).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17683

Oncotarget

RIP3 knockout mice have less liver injury
and steatosis in response to Gao-binge alcohol
treatment

to affect the expression of some inflammatory genes (IL-6,
MCP-1 and TNF-α) at the basal level and after Gao-binge
alcohol treatment, the neutrophil infiltration is likely not
associated with RIP3.

We found that the serum ALT levels were
significantly elevated in Gao-binge-treated wild type
mice, while such an elevation was diminished in RIP3 KO
mice (Figure 2A). Moreover, Gao-binge alcohol treatment
also significantly increased hepatic triglyceride levels in
wild type mice while this increase was inhibited in RIP3
KO mice (Figure 2B). Histological analysis by H & E
staining also revealed increased steatosis as demonstrated
by increased lipid vacuoles in Gao-binge alcohol-treated
wild type mice (arrows, Figure 2C), which was markedly
attenuated in RIP3 KO mice.These findings were further
confirmed by diminished Oil Red O staining for hepatic
lipids in Gao-binge alcohol-treated RIP3 KO mouse livers
compared to wild type mouse livers (Figure 2D & 2E).
It is known that alcohol consumption can induce hepatic
cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) expression. Indeed, we
also found that Gao-binge alcohol treatment markedly
increased the expression of hepatic CYP2E1 in both wild
type and RIP3 KO mice. These data suggest that ethanol
induces CYP2E1 independent of RIP3. While Gao-binge
alcohol treatment increased the protein levels of RIP3 in
the mouse livers, no RIP3 expression was detected in the
RIP3 KO mouse livers (Figure 2F), confirming again that
the antibody that we used for RIP3 is specific for mouse
RIP3. Collectively, these results indicate that RIP3 KO
mice are more resistant to Gao-binge alcohol treatmentinduced liver injury and steatosis compared to wild type
mice.

7-Cl-O-Nec-1 treatment attenuates Gao-binge
alcohol-mediated inflammation but not liver
injury
7-Cl-O-Nec-1 (7-Nec1) is a more potent and specific
RIP1 inhibitor, which can suppress RIP1 kinase activity
without affecting IDO compared to the old generation
of RIP1 kinase inhibitor Necrostatin 1 [34]. If ethanolinduced liver injury is also dependent on RIP1 in addition
to RIP3, 7-Nec1 should be able to inhibit liver injury
induced by alcohol. To test this hypothesis, the ethanol
fed mice were treated with 7-Nec1 before giving a binge
of ethanol at the last day of feeding. 7-Nec1 administration
did not attenuate ethanol-induced elevation of serum ALT
levels (Figure 4A). While the levels of hepatic TG induced
by Gao-bine alcohol treatment were reduced by 7-Nec1 by
approximately 30%, this reduction did not reach statistical
significance (Figure 4B). Histological analysis by H & E
staining (Figure 4C) and Oil Red O staining (Figure 4D
& 4E) for hepatic lipids showed significantly decreased
steatosis in 7-Nec1-treated mice compared to the Gaobinge-treated mice. Moreover, increased expressions of
inflammatory genes (IL-6, MCP-1 and TNF-α) by Gaobinge alcohol treatment were also significantly blunted by
7-Nec1 treatment (Figure 5A). Similarly, increased hepatic
neutrophil infiltration by Gao-binge alcohol treatment was
also markedly suppressed by 7-Nec1 treatment (Figure
5B & 5C). The number of cells with nuclear staining for
NF-κB subunit p65 (brown staining), a marker to indicate
the activation of NF-kB, was increased by Gao-binge
treatment but this increase was significantly suppressed by
7-Nec1 treatment (Figure 5D & 5E). These results suggest
that RIP1 Kinase may not be essential for Gao-binge
alcohol-induced necropotosis but may promote alcoholinduced hepatic steatosis and inflammation.

Changes of hepatic inflammation after Gaobinge alcohol treatment in wild type and RIP3
knockout mice
One of the important features of alcoholic liver
disease is increased hepatic inflammation, which can
be found in the mouse livers after Gao-binge alcohol
treatment [1, 25, 33]. Since necrotic cell death often
leads to inflammation, we next determined the hepatic
expression of several inflammatory genes in wild type
and RIP3 KO mice after Gao-binge treatment. Gaobinge alcohol treatment increased the hepatic expression
of IL-6, MCP-1 and TNF-α but not Ly6g in wild type
mice, which was significantly blunted in RIP3 KO mice
despite the basal hepatic expression levels of IL-6, MCP1 and TNF-α were higher in RIP3 KO mice compared to
wild type control mice (Figure 3A). We found that Gaobinge alcohol treatment increased the number of hepatic
neutrophils by almost 3-fold compared to control treatment
but the numbers of hepatic neutrophils between wild type
and RIP3 KO mice were similar (Figure 3B & 3C). These
data suggest that Gao-binge alcohol treatment may cause
mild hepatic inflammation. While the lack of RIP3 seems
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Gao-binge alcohol treatment decreases hepatic
RIP1 expression in mice
The lack of protection of 7-Nec1 against Gao-binge
alcohol treatment-induced liver injury led us to wonder
whether Gao-binge alcohol treatment would affect hepatic
RIP1 levels. In contrast to RIP3, we found that the protein
levels of hepatic RIP1 were markedly decreased in Gaobinge alcohol-treated mouse livers compare to the control
mouse livers (Figure 6A & 6B). Moreover, we found
that Gao-binge alcohol treatment significantly decreased
the mRNA levels of hepatic RIP1 while did not affect
the expression of hepatic RIP3 gene (Figure 6C). These
data suggest that the levels of hepatic RIP1 and RIP3 are
differentially regulated by alcohol. Alcohol may regulate
17684

Oncotarget

Figure 2: RIP3 KO mice are resistant to Gao-binge alcohol-induced liver injury and steatosis. Serum ALT A. and liver

triglyceride levels B. were measured from WT and RIP3 KO mice after Gao-binge treatment. Data shown are means ± S.E. (n = 3-4 mice
per group. *p<0.05; ** p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA). C. Representative H&E images from the WT and RIP3 KO mice after Gao-binge
treatment. Lower panel is a photograph from the boxed area. Arrow denotes lipid droplets. D. Representative images are shown for Oil
Red O staining for the Gao-binge treatment (200x magnification) and Oil Red O staining was quantified using ImageJ software E. At least
6 images from each mouse were quantified and data were normalized to the control group. Data shown are means ± S.E. (n = 3 mice per
group. *p<0.05; ** p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA). F. Total liver lysates were analyzed by western blot analysis (n = 3 different mice).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17685

Oncotarget

hepatic RIP1 at the transcriptional level but may largely
regulate hepatic RIP3 at the posttranslational level. To
determine whether inhibition of RIP1 by 7-Nec1 may
switch cell death to apoptosis, we determined caspase-3
activation after Gao-binge alcohol treatment in the
absence and presence of 7-Nec1. We did not detect cleaved
caspase-3 forms in all the treatment groups (Figure 6D).
The caspase-3 activities remained unchanged either after
Gao-binge alcohol treatment or after Gao-binge alcohol
with 7-Nec1 treatment (Figure 6E). Moreover, 7-Nec1
treatment did not affect the hepatic RIP3 levels regardless
of the alcohol treatment although it slightly increased
RIP1 levels after Gao-binge treatment (Figure 6F & 6G).
To determine whether caspase-3 and apoptosis could be
activated in the early time points, we also determined
the caspase-3 activation after the chronic feeding and

gavaged with either maltose or ethanol for 4 hours. We
found that ethanol feeding with maltose gavage (ED+M)
did not alter the serum ALT levels, but ethanol feeding
with one single ethanol gavage (ED+E) for 4 or 8 hours
significantly increased serum ALT levels (Figure 7A).
However, no changes on caspase-3 activities or caspase-3
cleavage were detected either by western blot analysis
or immunostaining after Gao-binge treatment (Figure
7B–7D). TUNEL staining is generally used to detect cells
with DNA breakage/fragmentation and can also be used to
differentiate apoptosis vs necrosis in hepatocytes [35]. As
can be seen, in acetaminophen (APAP)-induced necrosis,
TUNEL staining displayed a diffuse pattern in hepatocytes
due to the leakage of the fragmented DNA into the cytosol
from the nuclei (Figure 7E). In contrast, in LPS/GalNinduced apoptosis, TUNEL staining mainly occurred in the

Figure 3: RIP3 KO mice decrease the hepatic expression of inflammatory cytokine genes but have no effects on Gaobinge alcohol-induced neutrophil infiltration. WT and RIP3 KO mice were treated with the Gao-binge model. A. RNA from mouse

livers was used to measure gene expression by qPCR. Results were normalized to β-actin and expressed as fold change compared to WT
control. Data shown are means ± S.E (n = 3-4 mice per group. *p<0.05; by one-way ANOVA). B. Representative images were shown from
Ly6B immunohistochemistry after Gao-binge treatment. Arrows denote the Ly6B positive neutrophils. C. The number of Ly6B positive
neutrophils was counted from at least 22 areas (400 X magnification) each mouse. Results shown are means ± S.E. (n = 4-6 mice per group.
**p<0.01 compared to WT control by one-way ANOVA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17686

Oncotarget

Figure 4: 7-Nec1 does not protect against Gao-binge alcohol treatment-induced liver injury and steatosis. WT mice

were treated with Gao-binge model. At the last day of feeding, mice were either injected with 7-Nec1 (i.p., 5 mg/kg) or vehicle (4%
methy-β-cyclodextran in PBS, pH7.4) before ethanol (5 g/kg) or maltose dextrin (9 g/kg) gavage. A. Serum ALT levels were determined
and B. hepatic triglyceride contents were measured using whole liver homogenates. Data shown are means ± S.E. (n = 4-6 mice per
group. *p<0.05; ** p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA). C. Representative H&E images and D. Oil Red O staining images are shown (200x
magnification). Oil Red O staining was quantified using ImageJ software E. At least 6 images from each mouse were quantified and data
were normalized to the control group. Data shown are means ± S.E. (n = 3 mice per group. *p<0.05; ** p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17687

Oncotarget

Figure 5: 7-Nec1 decreases hepatic inflammation induced by Gao-binge alcohol treatment. A. RNA from mouse livers was

used to measure gene expression by qPCR. Results were normalized to β-actin and expressed as fold change compared to WT control.
Data shown are means ± S.E (n = 4-5 mice per group. *p<0.05; **p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA). B. Representative images are shown from
Ly6B immunohistochemistry. Arrows denote the Ly6B positive neutrophils. C. The number of Ly6B positive neutrophils was counted
from at least 20 areas (400 X magnification) each mouse. Results shown are means ± S.E. (n = 3-5 mice per group. *p<0.05 compared to
WT control by one-way ANOVA). D. Paraffin-embedded liver tissues were subjected to immunohistochemistry for NF-κB subunit p65.
Representative images were shown after Gao-binge alcohol treatment with or without 7-nec1. Boxed areas were enlarged and shown in the
lower panel. The arrowheads represent light brown staining of p65, the chevrons show brown staining of p65 and the arrows indicate dark
brown staining of p65 in hepatocyte nuclei. E. The percentage of different intensities of p65 staining. Results are presented as means± S.E.
(n = 3-4, *p<0.05; **p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA). N.D., not detected.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17688

Oncotarget

nuclei. We found that TUNEL staining mainly showed a
diffuse pattern in Gao-binge alcohol-treated mouse livers,
which is very similar to APAP-induced necrosis (Figure 7E

arrows). The number of necrotic cells increased at 4 and
8 hours after ethanol binge, which was reduced more than
60% in RIP3 KO mice compared to WT mice although it

Figure 6: Gao-binge treatment decreases RIP1 expression and 7-Nec1 treatment does not affect RIP1 and RIP3
expression as well as caspase-3 activation. WT mice were treated with Gao-binge model. A. Total liver lysates were subjected

to western blot analysis. B. Densitometry analysis of (A). The levels of RIP1 were normalized to the loading control (β-Actin). Values
represent means±S.E. (n = 3). C. RNA from mouse livers was used to measure gene expression by qPCR. Results were normalized to
β-actin and expressed as fold change compared to WT control. Data shown are means ± S.E (n = 3-4 mice per group. *p<0.05 by one-way
ANOVA). D. Total liver lysates were subjected to western blot analysis (an LPS/GalN-treated mouse liver lysate was used as a positive
control (P.C.) for cleaved caspse-3). E. Caspase-3 activities were measured using total liver lysates. Values represent means±S.E. (n = 3, no
statistical significant difference). F. Total liver lysates were subjected to western blot analysis. G. Densitometry analysis of (F) (n = 3 mice,
a RIP3 KO mouse liver lysate was used as a negative control).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17689

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Gao-binge treatment induces necrosis but not apoptosis in mouse livers. WT mice were fed with control or

ethanol diet for 10 days and at day 10 the mice were either gavaged with maltose or ethanol for 4 or 8 hours. A. Serum ALT levels were
determined. (n = 4, *p<0.05, **p<0.01 by one-way ANOVA). B. Total liver lysates were subjected to western blot analysis (an LPS/GalNtreated mouse liver lysate was used as a positive control for cleaved caspase-3). C. Caspase-3 activities were measured using total liver
lysates. Values represent means±S.E. (n = 4, no statistical significant difference). D. Representative images of immunohistochemistry for
cleaved caspase-3. A mouse liver from LPS/GalN treatment served as a positive control. E. Paraffin-embedded liver tissues were subjected
to immunohistochemistry for TUNEL staining. APAP group and LPS/GalN group served as positive controls for necrosis and apoptosis,
respectively. F. The numbers of TUENL positive nuclei were counted from at least 8 areas (200 X magnification) each mouse. Results
shown are means ± S.E. (n = 3-5 mice per group. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 compared to WT control by one-way ANOVA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17690

Oncotarget

did not reach statistic difference (Figure 7F). These data
suggest that Gao-binge alcohol treatment predominantly
induces necrosis but not apoptosis in mouse livers.
Inhibition of RIP1 by 7-Nec1 does not induce caspase-3
mediated-apoptosis in the mouse liver.

PSMC1 KO mouse livers compared with the matched
control WT mice. The protein level of RIP1 also increased
in liver-specific PSMC1 KO mouse livers although to a
less extent compared to the levels of RIP3 (Figure 8D &
8E). The marked reduction of PSMC1 protein levels in
liver-specific PSMC1 KO mouse livers compared with the
matched control WT mice indicated the successful deletion
of PSMC1 in mouse livers (Figure 8D & 8E). To further
determine whether blocking proteasomal functions could
affect RIP1 and RIP3 proteins in hepatocytes, we treated
mice with Bortezomib, a potent and specific proteasome
inhibitor. We found that Bortezomib treatment increased
both RIP1 and RIP3 protein levels in the mouse livers
(Figure 9A & 9B). Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1 (MCL-1)
is an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein whose level is
known to be regulated by the proteasome [37, 38]. We
found that Bortezomib treatment also markedly increased
hepatic MCL-1 levels, suggesting that Bortezomib
inhibits proteasomal functions effectively in the mouse
liver (Figure 9A & 9B). In line with these in vivo
findings, we found that ethanol or Bortezomib treatment
increased RIP3 protein levels in primary cultured mouse
hepatocytes. Ethanol plus Bortezomib treatment together

Alcohol treatment decreases hepatic proteasomal
function
Since we found that alcohol treatment did not alter
the hepatic mRNA levels of RIP3, we hypothesized that
alcohol-induced hepatic RIP3 proteins may be regulated at
the posttranslational level. We first determined the changes
of hepatic proteasome after alcohol treatment since both
RIPK1 and RIPK3 are known to be ubiquitinated by the E3
ligases cIAP1 and cIAP2 [36]. We found that the hepatic
protein levels of PSMA2 and PSMC1 but not PSMB5
decreased after Gao-binge alcohol treatment compared
to the control group mice (Figure 8A & 8B). As a result,
Gao-binge alcohol treatment significantly decreased
hepatic proteasomal activities compared to the control
group mice (Figure 8C). Furthermore, the protein level of
RIP3 markedly increased (almost 10 fold) in liver-specific

Figure 8: Alcohol impairs hepatic proteasome function and genetic inhibition of proteasome increases protein levels of
hepatic RIP1 and RIP3. WT mice were treated with Gao-binge model. A. Total liver lysates were subjected to western blot analysis.

B. Densitometry analysis of (A). The levels of PSMA2, PSMC1 and PSMB5 were normalized to the loading control (β-Actin). Values
represent means±S.E. (n = 3). C. Twenty micrograms of total liver lysates were used to measure the 20S proteasomal activities using a
fluorogenic substrate. Results are presented as means± S.E. (n = 3, *p<0.05 by Student t test). D. Total liver lysates from PSMC1 flox/flox,
albumin Cre negative (PSMC1 f/f) and PSMC1 flox/flox, albumin Cre positive (PSMC1 f/f Alb) were subjected to western blot analysis.
E. Densitometry analysis of (D). Values represent means±S.E. (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17691

Oncotarget

further enhanced RIP3 protein levels slightly (Figure 9C
& 9D). These data indicate that increased hepatic RIP3
protein by alcohol is likely due to the impaired hepatic
proteasomal functions induced by alcohol.

activities also decreased in human ALD livers compared
to the normal human livers although this decrease did not
reach statistical difference (Figure 10C). These results
suggest that the impaired proteasomal function and
increased hepatic RIP3 by alcohol exposure in mice may
also occur in human ALD.

Impaired proteasomal functions and increased
hepatic RIP3 protein levels in human ALD

DISCUSSION

We next determined the hepatic RIP3 protein levels
and proteasomal functions in liver samples obtained from
human ALD and normal liver tissues. In agreement with
our findings from Gao-binge alcohol-treated mouse livers,
we found that the hepatic RIP3 protein levels markedly
increased whereas RIP1 protein levels decreased in human
ALD livers compared to normal human livers (Figure
10A & 10B). Furthermore, we also found that the protein
levels of PSMA2, PSMC1 and PSMB5 decreased slightly
in human ALD livers compared to normal human livers
(Figure 10A & 10B). Similarly, hepatic proteasomal

Liver cell death including apoptosis and necrosis
has been documented in experimental and human
ALD, and is associated with the progression of ALD.
In a chronic alcohol feeding mouse model, inhibition of
apoptosis either by genetic deletion of Bid (a BH3-only
pro-apoptotic protein) or using a pan-caspase inhibitor
VX166, did not protect against alcohol-induced liver
injury and steatosis [39]. These data suggest that other
forms of cell death are also involved in the pathogenesis
of ALD in addition to apoptosis. Here, using a recent

Figure 9: Pharmacological inhibition of proteasome increases protein levels of hepatic RIP1 and RIP3. A. WT mice were

either injected with Bortezomib (i.p., 1 mg/kg) or vehicle (0.02% DMSO in PBS) for 24 hours followed by a second booster injection for
another 6 hours. Total liver lysates were subjected to western blot analysis. B. Densitometry analysis of (A). The levels of RIP3, RIP1 and
MCL-1 were normalized to the loading control (β-Actin). Values represent means±S.E. (n = 3). C. Primary cultured mouse hepatocytes
were treated with ethanol (80 mM) in the presence or absence of Bortezomib (200 nM) for 6 hours. Total cell lysates were subjected to
western blot analysis. A liver lysate from RIP3 KO mouse liver was used as a negative control. D. Densitometry analysis of (C). Values
represent means±S.E. (n = 3 independent experiments).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17692

Oncotarget

established chronic plus binge alcohol model (Gao-binge
model), we showed that RIP3 but not RIP1 was induced
in mouse livers. Moreover, serum ALT activity and
hepatic steatosis but not hepatic neutrophil infiltration was
reduced in RIP3 KO mice compared to wild type mice.
Furthermore, the protein levels of PSMA2 and PSMC1
as well as hepatic proteasome activity decreased in Gaobinge alcohol-treated mouse livers. More importantly,
we also found decreased expression of PSMA2 and
PSMC1 but increased protein levels of RIP3 in human
alcoholic liver tissues compared to the levels in healthy
human livers. These results suggest that impaired hepatic
proteasome function by alcohol exposure may lead to the
stabilization of RIP3 proteins and contribute to alcoholinduced steatosis and liver injury.
It is well known that alcohol consumption increases
the gut permeability resulting in increased levels of hepatic
portal lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and production of TNF-α
in the liver [40, 41]. TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) KO mice
are resistant to alcohol-induced liver injury and steatosis,
underlying the critical role of TNF-α in the pathogenesis of

ALD [42]. TNF-α is a pleiotropic cytokine with multiple
functions in inflammation, cell survival and cell death. For
cell death, depending on the cellular context, TNF-α can
induce caspase-dependent apoptosis and RIP-mediated
necroptosis. Although there are two TNF receptors that
have been identified, the diverse effects of TNF-α mainly
depends on TNFR1. Upon binding with TNFR1, TNF-α
triggers the formation of the complex including TRADD,
TRAF2, cIAP1, cIAP2, linear ubiquitin chain assembly
complex (LUBAC) and RIP1, which leads to the highly
ubiquitination of RIP1 resulting in NF-κb activation to
promote gene transcription for inflammation and cell
survival. Under conditions that RIP1 is deubiquitinated,
TNF-α then triggers two programmed cell death: apoptosis
or necroptosis. Deubiquitinated RIP1 forms a complex
with FADD, FLIP and caspase-8 to trigger caspase-8
activation and subsequent apoptosis. Apoptosis generally
blocks the necroptosis by caspase-8-mediated cleavage of
RIP1 and RIP3 to inactivate RIP1 and RIP3. Upon caspase
inhibition, RIP1 and RIP3 interact with each other through
their RHIM domain and further recruit MLKL to trigger

Figure 10: Human ALD livers have altered protein levels of RIP1, RIP3 and proteasome subunit proteins compared
to healthy human livers. A. Total liver lysates from normal human liver and human ALD were subjected to western blot analysis.

B. Densitometry analysis of (A). The levels of each protein were normalized to the loading control (β-Actin). Values represent means±S.E.
(n = 5-6). C. Twenty micrograms of total liver lysates were used to measure the 20S proteasomal activities using a fluorogenic substrate.
Results are presented as means± S.E. (n = 5, *p<0.05 by Student t test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17693

Oncotarget

necroptosis [15, 16]. As alcohol consumption increases
levels of TNF-α in the liver, therefore, it is not surprising
that inflammation, apoptosis and necrosis can all be
associated with the pathologies in both experimental and
human ALD.
In the present study, we found that alcohol treatment
increased the protein levels of RIP3 but not RIP1 in mouse
livers, primary cultured mouse and human hepatocytes
as well as alcoholic human livers. Interestingly, we
found that Gao-binge alcohol treatment did not affect
the hepatic mRNA levels of RIP3 but decreased hepatic
mRNA levels of RIP1 in mouse livers. While it remains
to be studied in the future how alcohol differentially
regulates the transcription of RIP1 and RIP3 in the liver,
these data clearly suggest that alcohol regulates RIP3 at
the posttranslational but not at the transcriptional level.
Indeed, we found that Gao-binge alcohol treatment
decreased the protein levels of proteasome subunit
PSMA2, PSMC1 and hepatic proteasome activity, which
imply that impaired proteasomal degradation of RIP3 may
be one underlying mechanism for RIP3 accumulation after
alcohol exposure. The finding that pharmacological and
genetic inhibition of proteasome in mouse livers increased
RIP3 protein levels may further support this notion. It is
known that acetaldehyde, one of the ethanol metabolites,
is highly reactive and can modify protein structure and
form protein adducts. It remains to be determined whether
acetaldehyde may modify RIP3 structure and affects RIP3
protein stability and turnover. It should be noted that the
basal hepatic expression levels of both RIP1 and RIP3
are quite low compared to the spleen and thymus in mice,
suggesting that RIP1 and RIP3 may have critical roles in
regulating immune response at the normal physiological
conditions. However, under stress conditions such as the
exposure to alcohol, RIP3 levels can be elevated due to the
impaired proteasomal mediated turnover of RIP3 and may
in turn trigger RIP3-mediated necroptosis.
In the present study, we found that blocking
the kinase activity of RIP1 by 7-Nec1 did not affect
Gao-binge alcohol treatment-induced cell death but
significantly suppressed alcohol-induced expression of
inflammatory genes, hepatic neutrophil infiltration and
nuclear p65 translocation. These data suggest that the
kinase activity of RIP1 is important for alcohol-induced
inflammation but may be dispensable for alcohol-induced
RIP3-mediated necroptosis. It should be noted that RIP1
protein levels already decreased in Gao-binge alcoholtreated mouse livers and in human ALD. However, this
decrease is likely regulated at its transcriptional level since
Gao-binge alcohol treatment decreased hepatic mRNA
levels of RIP1. RIP1 can also be regulated by proteasome
at the posttranslational level since blocking proteasome
activity by a proteasome inhibitor increased both RIP1
and RIP3 protein levels. The decreased mRNA levels of
RIP1 but not RIP3 after Gao-binge alcohol treatment may
explain why only RIP3 protein levels were increased in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hepatocytes after alcohol exposure despite of the alcoholinduced inhibition of hepatic proteasome functions. It
should be noted that RIP3 KO mice already had increased
basal hepatic inflammation compared with WT mice
although hepatic inflammation was not different between
WT and RIP3 KO mice after Gao-binge treatment. It is
likely that the increased basal inflammation in RIP3 KO
mice may also activate adaptive responses in RIP3 KO
mice that cause RIP3 KO mice to be less sensitive to Gaobinge alcohol treatment. Nevertheless, our data suggest
that RIP1 and RIP3 may differentially regulate different
processes of alcohol-induced liver pathogenesis. RIP3
seems to be more important for mediating alcohol-induced
necroptosis but RIP1 in particular its kinase activity seems
to be more important for alcohol-induced inflammation.
In addition to ALD, increasing evidence indicates
that RIP1-RIP3-mediated necroptosis occurs in many
pathologically and physiologically relevant conditions.
For instance, RIP1-RIP3-mediated necroptosis has been
implicated in ischemic brain injury [43], ischemicreperfusion-induced myocardial injury [44], kidney
injury [45], pancreatitis [12], skin inflammation [46] and
immune response against certain viral infections [12, 47].
In addition, we and others also recently reported that RIP3
and MLKL3 are important in acetaminophen-induced
necrosis in mouse liver [48, 49]. A recent study reported
that neither RIP3 nor MLKL was important but RIP1 was
critical in acetaminophen-induced liver injury [50]. While
different mouse strain or housing environment may be
partially accountable for these contradicting observations,
these data also highlighted the possible differential roles
of RIP1 vs RIP3 in regulating different form of cell death
and other cellular processes such as inflammation. For
ALD, perhaps one of the intriguing puzzling questions
is how both apoptosis and necroptosis are associated
with the pathogenesis of ALD because apoptosis would
normally suppress necroptosis by caspase-mediated
cleavage of RIP3. It is possible that different cell death
modes could predominate in different stages of ALD
pathogenesis. For instance, apoptosis may occur in early
ALD, such as in steatosis, whereas necroptosis may
occur in late stages of ALD, such as in acute alcoholic
hepatitis. These possibilities need to be further studied in
the future. Moreover, the roles of several other RIP1 and
RIP3 downstream players such as MLKL or PGAM5 in
ALD also need to be further studied. Nevertheless, the
possible switch between apoptosis and necroptosis raises
concerns on the current ongoing clinical trial using a pancaspase inhibitor for ALD [51]. Therefore, combination
of small molecules that inhibit caspase and RIP1 as well
as RIP3 may be a better approach for treating ALD than
targeting either only apoptosis or necroptosis. Due to the
differential role of RIP1 and RIP3 in regulating multiple
cellular processes that are associated with ALD such as
apoptosis, necroptosis and inflammation, it would also be
better to target both RIP1 and RIP3 simultaneously.
17694

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

histopathological analysis or frozen in liquid nitrogen
for biochemical assays. Liver injury was assessed by
measuring serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity
as we described previously [26]. For the proteasome
inhibition experiments, mice were treated with DMSO
or Bortezomib (1 mg/kg, i.p.) for 24 hours followed by
a second booster treatment for another 6 hours. Mice
were euthanized and liver tissues were collected. Total
liver lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer (1% NP40,
0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl (lauryl)
sulfate).

Reagents
Antibodies used in this study were β-actin (#A5441)
from Sigma-Aldrich, Cleaved Caspase 3 (#9661L) and
RIP1 (#3493) from Cell Signaling, RIP3 (#2283) from
ProSci, CYP2E1 (#Ab19140), p65 (#sc-372) from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, PSMA2 (#Ab109525) and PSMB5
(#Ab3330) from Abcam, PSMC1(#A303-821A) from
Bethyl, anti-lymphocyte antigen B superfamily (Ly6B,
#MCA771G) from AbD Serotec, MCL-1 (#600-401-394)
from Rockland. Horseradish peroxidase—conjugated
secondary antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratory. Ethanol was from Pharmaco, RIP1 Inhibitor
7-Cl-O-Nec-1 (7-Nec1, 504297) from Calbiochem and
all other chemicals were from Sigma, Invitrogen or
Calbiochem.

Histology and immunohistochemistry
Paraffin-embedded liver sections were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for pathological evaluation.
Frozen liver sections were dyed with Oil Red O staining
for measuring fat accumulation as we described previously
[25]. The images were further quantified by ImageJ using
pixel number as the quantitative measurement as described
previously [27]. Briefly, the pictures were first converted
from RGB to grayscale formats, a threshold was set
according to the staining and the integrated density was
measured. Data were presented as the fold of control.
Immunostaining for NF-κB subunit p65, RIP3, cleaved
caspase-3 and Ly6B positive neutrophils was performed
The percentage of hepatocytes that stained positive with
different staining intensity for p65 was quantified. TUNEL
staining was performed as we described previously [28].

Animals
Wild type (WT) male C57Bl/6J mice (Jackson
Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) were used in this study.
RIP3 KO mice were generously provided by Dr. Vishva
Dixit (Genentech) as we described previously [22].
Liver-specific PSMC1 (RPT2) KO mice and matched
control mice were described previously [23]. All mice
were housed in cages (5 mice per cage) receiving a 12hour light/dark cycle. All procedures were approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the
University of Kansas Medical Center.

Primary hepatocytes culture
Murine hepatocytes were isolated by a retrograde,
non-recirculating perfusion of livers with 0.05%
Collagenase Type IV (Sigma) as described previously
[29]. Cells were cultured in William’s medium E with
10% fetal bovine serum, but no other supplements, for 2
hours to allow for attachment. Human hepatocytes were
isolated and cultured according to the methods described
previously by Gramignoli, et.al [30]. All cells were
maintained in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2. All human
liver specimens were obtained in accordance with the
KUMC Human Subjects Committee approved protocol #
13513.

Mouse Gao-binge alcohol treatment
Gao-binge alcohol treatment was performed as
previously described [2, 24, 25], which was designed to
mimic alcoholic liver injury in patients that had chronic
alcohol abuse and binge drinking history. Briefly, male WT
and RIP3 KO mice were fed ad libitum Lieber-DeCarli
liquid (Bioserv # F1258SP) control diet for the first 5 days
to adapt to the liquid diet. Then they sustained on a 5%
(vol/vol) ethanol diet for the following 10 days. The 5%
(vol/vol) ethanol diet provided 35.5% of total calories
in the diet (10 days, 35.5%). Food consumption was
recorded daily and weight was recorded every other days.
The pair-fed mice received an isocaloric nonalcoholic
control diet. On morning of the final day, mice were
treated with 5 g/kg ethanol (Ethanol diet+ethanol, ED+E)
or a 45% (w/v) maltose solution (Control diet+maltose,
CD+M) via gavage. For some experiments, on the final
day, one dose of 7-Nec-1 (5 mg/kg dissolved in 4%
methyl-β-cyclodextrin in saline, i.p.) or vehicle (4%
methyl-β-cyclodextrin in saline, i.p.) was given before a
binge of ethanol (5 g/kg). Mice were euthanized 8 hours
after the gavage, and blood samples and liver tissues
were collected. Livers were extracted and weighed, and
some portions of the liver were fixed in formalin for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunoblot analysis
Twenty micrograms of protein from each sample
were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF
membranes. The membranes were immunoblotted
with primary antibodies followed by secondary
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies. The
membranes were developed with SuperSignal West
Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce). Densitometry
analysis was performed using Un-Scan-It software and
normalized with β-actin. All the densitometry data were
presented as means±SEM.
17695

Oncotarget

Analysis of proteasome and caspase-3 activity

TNF-α forward: 5′-CGTCAGCCGATTTGCT ATCT-3′ and
TNF-α reverse: 5′-CGGACTCCGCAAAGTCTAAG-3′;

Total liver lysate (10 μg) was used for proteasome
activity analysis using Suc-LLVY-AMC substrate (Enzo)
as we described previously [31]. Briefly, lysates were
diluted to 10 μg each per 15 μL of RIPA buffer and added
to a white 96-well flat bottom plate. AMC substrate (20
nM) was added to each well along with 100 μL of assay
buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 25 mM KCL, 10 mM NaCl,
and 1 mM MgCl2 diluted in dH2O). Proteasome activity
was determined by measuring AMC release using an
excitation/emission 380/460 test filter on a Tecan plate
reader after 1 hour. Data were expressed as fold of the
control. Caspse-3 activity was measured using Ac-DEVDAFC fluorescent substrate (Enzo) with 20 μg of protein
from mouse liver lysates after designated treatment as we
previously described [29].

Statistical analysis
All experimental data were expressed as means ± SE
and subjected to Student t-test or one-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni post hoc test where appropriate. *p<0.05 was
considered significant.

Abbreviations
ALD: Alcoholic liver disease; ALT: Alanine
aminotransferase; CD+M: Control diet+maltose; cIAPs:
inhibitor of apoptosis proteins; CYP2E1: Cytochrome
P450 2E1; ED+E: Ethanol diet+ethanol; FLIPs: FLICE-like
inhibitory proteins; GSH: glutathione; H & E: heamatoxylin
and eosin; IRF3: interferon regulator factor 3; KO:
knockout; Ly6B: anti-lymphocyte antigen B superfamily;
MCL-1: Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1; MLKL: mixed lineage
kinase domain-like; 7-Nec1: 7-Cl-O-Nec-1; PSMA2:
proteasome subunit alpha type-2; PSMB5: proteasome
subunit beta type-5; PSMC1: proteasome 26S subunit,
ATPase 1; RHIM: RIP homotypic interaction motif; RIP1:
Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1;
RIP3: Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase
3; TG: Triglycerides; TNF-α: tumor necrosis factor-α.

Triglyceride (TG) analysis
Hepatic TG extraction was performed as described
previously [32]. Frozen liver tissues (50—100 mg) were
crushed into powder using a mortar and pestle. One mL
of a chloroform-methanol mixture (2:1) was added to
the liver powder and shaken at room temp for 1 hour.
Then 200 μL of ddH2O was added to the sample, and the
mixture was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 3000g. The lower
lipid phase was collected and dried, and the pellet was
re-dissolved in Tert-Butanol-Triton X-114-methanol mix
(2:3). TG analysis was carried out using a commercial kit
(Pointe Scientific, Inc. GPO-Triglyceride Reagent Set)
following the manufacturer’s instructions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was supported in part by the NIAAA
funds R01 AA020518, R01 DK102142, National Center
for Research Resources (5P20RR021940), the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (8P20 GM103549),
an Institutional Development Award (IDeA) from the
National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the
National Institutes of Health (P20 GM103418) and an
award received in an internal Lied basic science grant
program of the KUMC Research Institute, with support
from a NIH Clinical and Translational Science Award
grant (UL1TR000001, formerly UL1RR033179).
The authors would like to thank Dr. Vishva M. Dixit
(Genentech, San Francisco, CA) for providing us the RIP3
KO mice. The human liver specimens used in this study
were derived from samples collected and provided by the
KU Liver Center Tissue Bank.

Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR)
RNA was extracted from mouse liver using
Trizol (Invitrogen) and reverse transcribed into cDNA
by RevertAid reverse transcriptase (Fermentas). Realtime PCR was performed on a Bio-Rad CFX384™
real-time PCR detection system using iTaq™ Universal
SYBR® Green Supermix (Bio-Rad). Expression
of β-actin, RIP1, RIP3, Ly6B.2, IL-6, MCP-1 and
TNF-α was quantified using qRT-PCR analysis.
Primers sequences were as follows: β-actin forward:
5′-TGTTACCAACTGGGACGACA-3′ and β-actin
reverse: 5′-GGGGTGTTGAAGGTCTCAAA-3′; RIP1
forward: 5′-CCTGCTGGAGAAGACAGACC-3′ and
RIP1 reverse 5′-CATCATCTTCCCCTCTTCCA-3′; RIP3
forward: 5′-ACACGGCACTCCTTGGTATC-3′ and RIP3
reverse: 5′-CCGAACTGTGCTTGGTCATA-3′; Ly6G
forward: 5′-TGCGTTGCTCTGGAGATAGA-3′ and Ly6G
reverse: 5′-CAGAGTAGTGGGGCAGATGG-3′; IL-6
forward: 5′-ACAACCACGGCCTTCCCTACTT-3′ and
IL-6 reverse: 5′-CATTTCCACGATTTCCCAGAGA-3′;
MCP-1 forward: 5′-CCAGCCTACTCATTGGGAT-3′ and
MCP-1 reverse: 5′-ACATCCTGTATCCACACGGCAG-3′;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Gao B and Bataller R. Alcoholic liver disease: pathogenesis and new therapeutic targets. Gastroenterology. 2011;
141:1572–1585.
17696

Oncotarget

2.	 Williams JA, Manley S and Ding WX. New advances in
molecular mechanisms and emerging therapeutic targets
in alcoholic liver diseases. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;
20:12908–12933.

expanding network of non-apoptotic cell death pathways.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 15:135–147.
17.	 Dillon CP, Weinlich R, Rodriguez DA, Cripps JG, Quarato
G, Gurung P, Verbist KC, Brewer TL, Llambi F, Gong YN,
Janke LJ, Kelliher MA, Kanneganti TD and Green DR.
RIPK1 blocks early postnatal lethality mediated by caspase-8 and RIPK3. Cell. 2014; 157:1189–1202.

3.	 Malhi H, Guicciardi ME and Gores GJ. Hepatocyte death:
a clear and present danger. Physiological reviews. 2010;
90:1165–1194.
4.	 Casey CA, Nanji A, Cederbaum AI, Adachi M and
Takahashi T. Alcoholic liver disease and apoptosis. Alcohol
Clin Exp Res. 2001; 25:49S–53S.

18.	 Mandal P, Berger SB, Pillay S, Moriwaki K, Huang C,
Guo H, Lich JD, Finger J, Kasparcova V, Votta B,
Ouellette M, King BW, Wisnoski D, et al. RIP3 induces
apoptosis independent of pronecrotic kinase activity.
Molecular cell. 2014; 56:481–495.

5.	 Feldstein AE and Gores GJ. Apoptosis in alcoholic and
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Frontiers in bioscience. 2005;
10:3093–3099.

19.	 Tenev T, Bianchi K, Darding M, Broemer M, Langlais C,
Wallberg F, Zachariou A, Lopez J, MacFarlane M, Cain K
and Meier P. The Ripoptosome, a signaling platform that
assembles in response to genotoxic stress and loss of IAPs.
Molecular cell. 2011; 43:432–448.

6.	 Colell A, Garcia-Ruiz C, Miranda M, Ardite E, Mari M,
Morales A, Corrales F, Kaplowitz N and Fernandez-Checa
JC. Selective glutathione depletion of mitochondria by
ethanol sensitizes hepatocytes to tumor necrosis factor.
Gastroenterology. 1998; 115:1541–1551.

20.	 Newton K, Dugger DL, Wickliffe KE, Kapoor N, de
Almagro MC, Vucic D, Komuves L, Ferrando RE, French
DM, Webster J, Roose-Girma M, Warming S and Dixit
VM. Activity of protein kinase RIPK3 determines whether
cells die by necroptosis or apoptosis. Science. 2014;
343:1357–1360.

7.	 Minana JB, Gomez-Cambronero L, Lloret A, Pallardo FV,
Del Olmo J, Escudero A, Rodrigo JM, Pelliin A, Vina JR,
Vina J and Sastre J. Mitochondrial oxidative stress and
CD95 ligand: a dual mechanism for hepatocyte apoptosis
in chronic alcoholism. Hepatology. 2002; 35:1205–1214.

21.	 Roychowdhury S, McMullen MR, Pisano SG, Liu X and
Nagy LE. Absence of receptor interacting protein kinase
3 prevents ethanol-induced liver injury. Hepatology. 2013;
57:1773–1783.

8.	 Petrasek J, Iracheta-Vellve A, Csak T, Satishchandran A,
Kodys K, Kurt-Jones EA, Fitzgerald KA and Szabo G.
STING-IRF3 pathway links endoplasmic reticulum stress
with hepatocyte apoptosis in early alcoholic liver disease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:16544–16549.

22.	 Ramachandran A, McGill MR, Xie Y, Ni HM, Ding WX
and Jaeschke H. Receptor interacting protein kinase 3 is a
critical early mediator of acetaminophen-induced hepatocyte necrosis in mice. Hepatology. 2013; 58:2099–2108.

9.	 Degterev A, Huang Z, Boyce M, Li Y, Jagtap P, Mizushima
N, Cuny GD, Mitchison TJ, Moskowitz MA and Yuan J.
Chemical inhibitor of nonapoptotic cell death with therapeutic potential for ischemic brain injury. Nat Chem Biol.
2005; 1:112–119.

23.	 Kageyama S, Sou YS, Uemura T, Kametaka S, Saito T,
Ishimura R, Kouno T, Bedford L, Mayer RJ, Lee MS,
Yamamoto M, Waguri S, Tanaka K and Komatsu M.
Proteasome dysfunction activates autophagy and the Keap1Nrf2 pathway. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:24944–24955.

10.	 Zhang DW, Shao J, Lin J, Zhang N, Lu BJ, Lin SC, Dong
MQ and Han J. RIP3, an energy metabolism regulator that
switches TNF-induced cell death from apoptosis to necrosis. Science. 2009; 325:332–336.

24.	 Bertola A, Mathews S, Ki SH, Wang H and Gao B. Mouse
model of chronic and binge ethanol feeding (the NIAAA
model). Nat Protoc. 2013; 8:627–637.

11.	 Cho YS, Challa S, Moquin D, Genga R, Ray TD, Guildford
M and Chan FK. Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the
RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed necrosis and
virus-induced inflammation. Cell. 2009; 137:1112–1123.

25.	 Ni HM, Bhakta A, Wang S, Li Z, Manley S, Huang H,
Copple B and Ding WX. Role of hypoxia inducing factor1beta in alcohol-induced autophagy, steatosis and liver
injury in mice. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e115849.

12.	 He S, Wang L, Miao L, Wang T, Du F, Zhao L and
Wang X. Receptor interacting protein kinase-3 determines cellular necrotic response to TNF-alpha. Cell. 2009;
137:1100–1111.

26.	 Ni HM, Bockus A, Boggess N, Jaeschke H and Ding WX.
Activation of autophagy protects against acetaminopheninduced hepatotoxicity. Hepatology. 2012; 55:222–232.

13.	 Vucic D, Dixit VM and Wertz IE. Ubiquitylation in apoptosis: a post-translational modification at the edge of life and
death. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:439–452.

27.	 Mehlem A, Hagberg CE, Muhl L, Eriksson U and Falkevall
A. Imaging of neutral lipids by oil red O for analyzing the
metabolic status in health and disease. Nat Protoc. 2013;
8:1149–1154.

14.	 Zhou Z, Han V and Han J. New components of the necroptotic pathway. Protein Cell. 2012; 3:811–817.
15.	 Weinlich R and Green DR. The two faces of receptor interacting protein kinase-1. Molecular cell. 2014; 56:469–480.

28.	 McGill MR, Du K, Xie Y, Bajt ML, Ding WX and Jaeschke
H. The role of the c-Jun N-terminal kinases 1/2 and receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 in furosemide-induced liver
injury. Xenobiotica. 2015; 45:442–449.

16.	 Vanden Berghe T, Linkermann A, Jouan-Lanhouet S,
Walczak H and Vandenabeele P. Regulated necrosis: the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17697

Oncotarget

29.	 Ding WX, Ni HM, DiFrancesca D, Stolz DB and Yin XM.
Bid-dependent generation of oxygen radicals promotes
death receptor activation-induced apoptosis in murine hepatocytes. Hepatology. 2004; 40:403–413.

40.	 Szabo G. Gut-liver axis in alcoholic liver disease.
Gastroenterology. 2015; 148:30–36.
41.	 Hartmann P, Seebauer CT and Schnabl B. Alcoholic liver
disease: the gut microbiome and liver cross talk. Alcohol
Clin Exp Res. 2015; 39:763–775.

30.	 Gramignoli R, Green ML, Tahan V, Dorko K, Skvorak KJ,
Marongiu F, Zao W, Venkataramanan R, Ellis EC, Geller
D, Breite AG, Dwulet FE, McCarthy RC and Strom SC.
Development and application of purified tissue dissociation enzyme mixtures for human hepatocyte isolation. Cell
Transplant. 2012; 21:1245–1260.

42.	 Yin M, Wheeler MD, Kono H, Bradford BU, Gallucci
RM, Luster MI and Thurman RG. Essential role of tumor
necrosis factor alpha in alcohol-induced liver injury in mice.
Gastroenterology. 1999; 117:942–952.
43.	 Northington FJ, Chavez-Valdez R, Graham EM, Razdan S,
Gauda EB and Martin LJ. Necrostatin decreases oxidative
damage, inflammation, and injury after neonatal HI. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 2011; 31:178–189.

31.	 Williams JA, Hou Y, Ni HM and Ding WX. Role of intracellular calcium in proteasome inhibitor-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress, autophagy, and cell death. Pharm Res.
2013; 30:2279–2289.

44.	 Smith CC, Davidson SM, Lim SY, Simpkin JC, Hothersall
JS and Yellon DM. Necrostatin: a potentially novel cardioprotective agent? Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2007;
21:227–233.

32.	 Ni HM, Du K, You M and Ding WX. Critical role of
FoxO3a in alcohol-induced autophagy and hepatotoxicity.
Am J Pathol. 2013; 183:1815–1825.
33.	 Bertola A, Mathews S, Ki SH, Wang H and Gao B. Mouse
model of chronic and binge ethanol feeding (the NIAAA
model). Nat Protoc. 2013; 8:627–637.

45.	 Linkermann A, Brasen JH, Darding M, Jin MK, Sanz AB,
Heller JO, De Zen F, Weinlich R, Ortiz A, Walczak H,
Weinberg JM, Green DR, Kunzendorf U and Krautwald
S. Two independent pathways of regulated necrosis mediate ischemia-reperfusion injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2013; 110:12024–12029.

34.	 Takahashi N, Duprez L, Grootjans S, Cauwels A, Nerinckx
W, DuHadaway JB, Goossens V, Roelandt R, Van
Hauwermeiren F, Libert C, Declercq W, Callewaert N,
Prendergast GC, Degterev A, Yuan J and Vandenabeele P.
Necrostatin-1 analogues: critical issues on the specificity,
activity and in vivo use in experimental disease models.
Cell death & disease. 2012; 3:e437.

46.	 Bonnet MC, Preukschat D, Welz PS, van Loo G, Ermolaeva
MA, Bloch W, Haase I and Pasparakis M. The adaptor protein FADD protects epidermal keratinocytes from necroptosis in vivo and prevents skin inflammation. Immunity. 2011;
35:572–582.

35.	 Jaeschke H, Williams CD and Farhood A. No evidence for
caspase-dependent apoptosis in acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. Hepatology. 2011; 53:718–719.

47.	 Upton JW, Kaiser WJ and Mocarski ES. Virus inhibition
of RIP3-dependent necrosis. Cell Host Microbe. 2010;
7:302–313.

36.	 Walczak H. TNF and ubiquitin at the crossroads of
gene activation, cell death, inflammation, and cancer.
Immunological reviews. 2011; 244:9–28.

48.	 Ramachandran A, McGill MR, Xie Y, Ni HM, Ding WX
and Jaeschke H. Receptor interacting protein kinase 3 is a
critical early mediator of acetaminophen-induced hepatocyte necrosis in mice. Hepatology. 2013; 58:2099–108. doi:
10.1002/hep.26547.

37.	 Nijhawan D, Fang M, Traer E, Zhong Q, Gao W, Du F and
Wang X. Elimination of Mcl-1 is required for the initiation of apoptosis following ultraviolet irradiation. Genes &
development. 2003; 17:1475–1486.

49.	 Sharma M, Gadang V and Jaeschke A. Critical role for
mixed-lineage kinase 3 in acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity. Mol Pharmacol. 2012; 82:1001–1007.

38.	 Williams JA, Ni HM, Haynes A, Manley S, Li Y, Jaeschke
H and Ding WX. Chronic Deletion and Acute Knockdown
of Parkin Have Differential Responses to Acetaminopheninduced Mitophagy and Liver Injury in Mice. J Biol Chem.
2015; 290:10934–10946.

50.	 Dara L, Johnson H, Suda J, Win S, Gaarde W, Han D
and Kaplowitz N. Receptor Interacting protein kinase-1
mediates murine acetaminophen toxicity independent of
the necrosome and not through necroptosis. Hepatology.
2015; 62:1847–57. doi: 10.1002/hep.27939.

39.	 Roychowdhury S, Chiang DJ, Mandal P, McMullen MR,
Liu X, Cohen JI, Pollard J, Feldstein AE and Nagy LE.
Inhibition of apoptosis protects mice from ethanol-mediated
acceleration of early markers of CCl4 -induced fibrosis but
not steatosis or inflammation. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2012;
36:1139–1147.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51.	 Singal AK, Kamath PS, Gores GJ and Shah VH. Alcoholic
Hepatitis: Current Challenges and Future Directions. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014; 12:555-64; quiz e31–2. doi:
10.1016/j.cgh.2013.06.013.

17698

Oncotarget

