1003

COMMENTARY

Informing Prospective Research
Subjects of the Influence of
Regulatory Requirements for
Drug Approval on the Design
of Clinical Trials in Oncology
Maurie Markman,

MD

Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas

I

Address for reprints: Maurie Markman, MD,
Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Mail Box 121, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX
77030; Fax: (713) 563-9586; E-mail: mmarkman@
mdanderson.org
Received November 27, 2006; revision received
November 29, 2006; accepted December 6,
2006.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

t is a well-established tenet of ethical clinical research that individuals being considered for entry into a therapeutic trial must be
provided with all data that might influence their willingness to enter
the study. Such information would certainly include the potential
benefits of the particular regimen(s), possible side effects of the
treatment program, any additional time, effort, or costs associated
with participation, and any perceived ‘‘conflict-of-interest’’ surrounding the conduct of the trial (eg, institutional financial investment in a ‘‘start-up’’ biotech company sponsoring the study). In
addition, if any information becomes available during the course of
the conduct of the study that could alter the decision of the individual to continue in the trial, such as the finding of a previously
unrecognized side effect of an experimental drug that was discovered in another study exploring the agent, this must be provided to
the research subject.
Therefore, considering the recognized importance of a thorough
disclosure of all issues considered to possibly be relevant in a prospective research subject’s decision to enter, or to continue participation in, a clinical trial, it is rather striking that there has been
limited discussion in the literature regarding the ethical responsibility of investigators to inform these individuals of the nature and
impact of specific requirements of drug regulatory agencies on the
design of certain studies.
What follows are 3 examples, taken from the oncology arena, of
ethical concerns that may result from the failure of clinical researchers
to fully inform patients of this influence. While the issues raised in this
commentary are certainly not isolated to cancer-related pharmaceutical
agents, the potential ethical difficulties are perhaps most relevant here
due to the recognized toxicity of the drugs being examined, and the often profound impact of oncology management on both the quality-oflife and survival of patients with a malignancy.
Whereas the first description deals with potential ethical concerns surrounding a published trial, the second and third examples
relate to ongoing cancer studies. Therefore, whereas the first ‘‘case
study’’ will be specifically referenced, the last 2 situations will be

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22491
Published online 20 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1004

CANCER

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

discussed in more general terms, although the examples are based on actual studies, and are far from
‘‘theoretical.’’

EXAMPLE 1
In the process of obtaining regulatory approval in
the early 1990s for an oral form of ondansetron (an
antiemetic agent known at that time to be highly
effective when delivered by the intravenous route),1 a
double-blind randomized trial was conducted in
patients receiving ‘‘moderately emetogenic’’ chemotherapy that compared this agent to a placebo control.2
This commentator does not know the reasons why
the decision was made to employ a ‘‘placebo control’’ in this trial, since previously published Phase III
trial data had documented that the short-term delivery of corticosteroids was highly effective in preventing emesis in this precise clinical setting.3,4 However,
it is reasonable to speculate that US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) requirements led to the use of
the ‘‘placebo control,’’ due to the fact there were no
pharmaceutical agents that had been ‘‘officially’’
approved by the agency as of that date for this specific indication.
Whereas the study confirmed the utility of ondansetron, patients randomized to the placebo arm in
this trial were subjected to a greater risk of clinically
relevant nausea and vomiting that had a high probability of being able to be prevented, based on the
known benefits at that time of an inexpensive commercially available pharmaceutical agent (corticosteroids).3,4
Thus, the questions to be asked are: Should the
investigators who agreed to enter patients into this
trial have been required to inform patients that while
the study mandated that approximately one-quarter
of individuals receive a ‘‘placebo,’’ there was solid
evidence in the medical literature that the risk of
considerable short-term discomfort resulting from
chemotherapy-induced emesis in this exact setting
might be substantially lessened if they received a
treatment program that was not permitted to be
administered to participants in this trial? Further,
assuming a physician would personally administer
an antiemetic agent to such patients who were not
entered into this trial, what were the obligations of
this particular physician-investigator to inform potential research subjects of this fact?

EXAMPLE 2
Following regulatory approval, and the introduction
of new antineoplastic agents into standard oncologic
practice, clinical investigators frequently explore meth-

ods to both further improve the efficacy, and decrease the toxicity, of this class of drugs. The issue of
chemotherapy-related side effects is particularly relevant as patients entered into the initial trials are often not truly representative of individuals encountered
in routine clinical practice (eg, age, comorbid medical conditions). Of note, the determination of doses
and schedules that maintain efficacy and reduce the
toxicities of treatment are especially important when
such therapy is being delivered in the palliative
(rather than curative) setting.
For example, based on both prospective Phase II
studies and retrospective evaluations of the outcome
of patients treated in large institutional series, the
chemotherapeutic agents liposomal doxorubicin and
topotecan, standard drugs used in the ‘‘second-line
setting’’ for women with resistant ovarian cancer,5,6
are now routinely employed in programs quite different (eg, lower dose, alternative schedules) from
those associated with trials where initial regulatory
approval was granted.7–14 Whereas definitive Phase
III study results regarding the modified schedules are
lacking, available published data in the peer-reviewed literature demonstrate similar efficacy and
substantially less toxicity associated with the use of
these palliative chemotherapy agents with the doses
and schedules adapted for current standard clinical use.
Yet when a ‘‘control arm’’ is required in a randomized trial exploring a novel treatment for ovarian
cancer, and either topotecan or liposomal doxorubicin is employed for this regulatory purpose, it is the
initial ‘‘FDA-approved dose level and schedule’’ that
is included in the study. Therefore, the questions are:
Should investigators be required to inform patients
considered for entry into such a trial that the
‘‘control arm’’ involves a dose and/or schedule of the
drug the physician would not employ if the patient
was receiving the agent outside the setting of this
study? Further, should the ‘‘informed consent process’’ require investigators to explain to prospective
research subjects the specific reasons they would not
routinely use the dose or schedule (ie, greater risk of
toxicity) of the agent as it is being employed in the
particular trial? Finally, in this setting should investigators be required to explain why they consider it
‘‘acceptable’’ for this specific individual to possibly
receive this potentially more toxic regimen if she
agrees to enter the study?

EXAMPLE 3
In certain clinical settings physicians will now routinely employ serum biomarkers (eg, prostate-specific

Informing Prospective Research Subjects/Markman

antigen [PSA] in prostate cancer, CA-125 antigen in
ovarian cancer) to help define disease progression,
and to assist in the overall management of the malignancy.15,16 These tests may be particularly useful in
individuals who are asymptomatic, who also have no
measurable tumor masses, and where there is a desire to learn if the antineoplastic agent being administered is actually producing a favorable impact on
the malignant cell population.
For example, while a patient will very reasonably
elect to discontinue receiving a drug that is producing moderately severe side effects in the presence of
a ‘‘progressively rising tumor marker,’’ a very different conclusion may be reached by the same individual with a similar degree of toxicity when the
‘‘tumor markers have declined from very high levels
into the normal range.’’ As a result, use of certain
biomarkers in particular settings has appropriately
become an accepted component of ‘‘standard’’ disease management.
Specifically, in ovarian cancer, measurement of
the CA-125 antigen level to document disease progression has become ‘‘routine’’ in both the conduct
of clinical trials and community practice.16 However,
as of this date the FDA has not permitted a documented rising serum CA-125 antigen level to be an
acceptable endpoint for disease progression in ovarian cancer trials that are being conducted to secure
regulatory approval of a new antineoplastic agent.
Thus, currently a patient without other clinical or radiographic (eg, new computed tomography [CT] scan
findings) evidence of progression being treated on
such a study who experiences a rise in the CA-125
antigen level that would satisfy acceptable criteria for
progression (as defined by data in the peer-reviewed
literature and widely accepted in the academic gynecologic cancer community)17 would either be required to continue treatment or, if removed from the
study, would be considered a ‘‘protocol violation.’’
Thus, the questions to be asked are: Should
investigators entering ovarian cancer patients into a
trial that does not include ‘‘CA-125 progression criteria’’ be required to inform prospective research subjects that this management approach does not
conform to what would be employed if they were not
being treated on this trial? Further, what is the ethical justification for the investigator to agree to present the study to the patient if he/she does not
believe use of the trial’s ‘‘progression criteria’’ is in
the patient’s ‘‘best interest,’’ based on existing data in
the medical literature?
An additional concern with differences in interpretation of the nature of acceptable criteria for
‘‘disease progression’’ relates to the issue of the

1005

requirement for a ‘‘placebo control.’’ It is possible a
regulatory agency will state that the endpoint of disease progression in a particular setting is unacceptably subjective, such that the only mechanism to
ensure objectivity in the analysis of ‘‘time to progression’’ in a Phase III trial is to ‘‘blind’’ both patients
and physicians as to who is receiving the active agent
or a ‘‘placebo.’’
However, if the individual investigator does not
accept the opinion of the regulatory agency regarding the need for a placebo in a particular trial, specifically to ensure ‘‘objectivity’’ in determining the
specific date of disease progression, does that investigator have an ethical obligation to inform the prospective research subject that the ‘‘placebo’’ is being
employed solely to satisfy a regulatory requirement,
which the investigator does not believe is necessary?
This issue is particularly relevant in the current
era of solid tumor oncology, where many ‘‘treatments’’ (active or placebo) continue for longer than a
year. It is appropriate to inquire if the major inconvenience (time, effort) associated with the ‘‘placebo
arm’’ is justified. What is the role of the physician/investigator in this setting to provide adequate ‘‘informed
consent’’?

Conclusions
It must be clearly stated that the intent of this commentary is not to claim, or even suggest, that there is
an inherent ethical concern associated with the conduct of trials that have been designed to specifically
address drug regulatory agency requirements. Rather,
the fundamental question being raised here is that of
the adequacy of ‘‘informed consent’’ when a trial is
developed for this purpose and the prescribed management is not consistent with how patients are treated in routine oncologic practice.
It is reasonable to suggest that the issues discussed above have not been routinely considered, either by clinical investigators or Institutional Review
Boards. However, in the opinion of this commentator
it is absolutely essential that prospective research
subjects are clearly and thoroughly informed of any
major differences (comparable to the examples provided in this article) from the oncologist’s ‘‘standard
care’’ that are mandated as a result of a patient’s participation in such a clinical research protocol. Is that
not what ‘‘informed consent’’ is all about?

REFERENCES
1.

Marty M, Pouillart P, School S, et al. Comparison of the 5hydroxytryptamine3 (serotonin) antagonist ondansetron
(GR 38032F) with high-dose metoclopramide in the control

1006

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

CANCER

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

of cisplatin-induced emesis. N Engl J Med. 1990;322:816–
821.
Beck TM, Ciociola AA, Jones SE, et al. Efficacy of oral
ondansetron in the prevention of emesis in outpatients
receiving cyclophosphamide-based chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med. 1993;118:407–413.
Cassileth PA, Lusk EJ, Torri S, et al. Antiemetic efficacy of
dexamethasone therapy in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. Arch Intern Med. 1983;143:1347–1349.
Markman M, Sheidler V, Ettinger DS, et al. Antiemetic
efficacy of dexamethasone—randomized, double-blind,
crossover study with prochlorperazine in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy. N Engl J Med. 1984;311:549–
552.
Gordon AN, Fleagle JT, Guthrie D, et al. Recurrent epithelial ovarian carcinoma: a randomized phase III study of
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin versus topotecan. J Clin
Oncol. 2001;19:3312–3322.
ten Bokkel Huinink W, Gore M, Carmichael J, et al. Topotecan versus paclitaxel for the treatment of recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:2183–2193.
Campos SM, Penson RT, Mays AR, et al. The clinical utility
of liposomal doxorubicin in recurrent ovarian cancer.
Gynecol Oncol. 2001;81:206–212.
Markman M, Kennedy A, Webster K, et al. Phase II trial of
liposomal doxorubicin (40 mg/m2) in platinum/paclitaxelrefractory ovarian and fallopian tube cancers and primary
carcinoma of the peritoneum. Gynecol Oncol. 2000;78:369–
372.
Rose PG, Maxson JH, Fusco N, et al. Liposomal doxorubicin in ovarian, peritoneal and tubal carcinoma: a retro-

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

spective comparative study of single-agent dosages.
Gynecol Oncol. 2001;82:323–328.
Rodriguez M, Rose PG. Improved therapeutic index of
lower dose topotecan chemotherapy in recurrent ovarian
cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2001;83:257–262.
Mitchell SK, Carson LF, Judson P, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of lower-dose topotecan in recurrent ovarian cancer:
a retrospective case review. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2005;15:
793–798.
Herzog TJ, Powell MA, Rader JS, et al. Phase II evaluation
of a 3-day infusion of topotecan in patients with recurrent
ovarian or primary peritoneal cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;
103:637–641.
Levy T, Inbar M, Menczer J, et al. Phase II study of weekly
topotecan in patients with recurrent or persistent epithelial
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;95:564–569.
O’Malley DM, Azodi M, Makkenchery A, et al. Weekly topotecan in heavily pretreated patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol. 2005;98:242–248.
Lieberman R. Evidence-based medical perspectives: the
evolving role of PSA for early detection, monitoring of
treatment response, and as a surrogate end point of efficacy for interventions in men with different clinical risk
states for the prevention and progression of prostate cancer. Am J Ther. 2004;11:501–506.
Rustin GJS, Bast RJ Jr, Kelloff GJ, et al. Use of CA-125 in
clinical trial evaluations of new therapeutic drugs for ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:3919–3926.
Vergote I, Rustin GJS, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors
(Ovarian Cancer). J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1534–1535.

