Original Article

Perifosine-Induced Inhibition of Akt
Attenuates Brain-Derived Neurotrophic
Factor/TrkB-Induced Chemoresistance In
Neuroblastoma In Vivo
Zhijie Li, MD, PhD; Doo-Yi Oh, PhD; Katsuya Nakamura, MD, PhD; and Carol J. Thiele, PhD

BACKGROUND: Neuroblastoma (NB) tumors expressing high levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and
its receptor TrkB or activated Akt are associated with decreased event-free or overall survival in patients with NB. In
the current study, the effect of perifosine, an Akt inhibitor, on the chemosensitivity of TrkB-expressing NB cells or
tumors was evaluated. METHODS: A tetracycline-regulated TrkB-expressing isogenic NB cell model system was
tested. In this system, NB cells were treated with etoposide and/or perifosine both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of
the target by perifosine was evaluated by Western blot analysis or kinase activity assay. Cell survival and tumor
growth were investigated. RESULTS: In vitro BDNF treatment induced Akt phosphorylation and rescued cells from
etoposide-induced cell death in cells with high TrkB expression, but not in cells with low TrkB expression. Pretreatment of high TrkB-expressing TB3 cells with perifosine blocked BDNF/TrkB-induced Akt phosphorylation and inhibited BDNF’s protection of TB3 cells from etoposide treatment. In vivo, tumors with high TrkB expression were found
to have elevated levels of phosphorylated Akt and were less sensitive to etoposide treatment compared with tumors
with low TrkB expression. Mice treated with a combination of perifosine and etoposide were found to have a statistically significant decrease in tumor growth compared with mice treated with either etoposide or perifosine alone.
Activation of Akt through the BDNF/TrkB signaling pathway induced chemoresistance in NB in vivo. CONCLUSIONS:
Perifosine-induced inhibition of Akt increased the sensitivity of NB to chemotherapy. The results of the current study
support the future clinical evaluation of an Akt inhibitor combined with cytotoxic drugs for the improvement of treatC 2011 American Cancer Society.
ment efficacy. Cancer 2011;117:5412–22. V
KEYWORDS: neuroblastoma, Akt, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, TrkB, perifosine, etoposide.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in childhood that is derived from neural crest
precursor cells.1 It accounts for nearly 8% of pediatric malignancies, yet is responsible for approximately 15% of all pediatric cancer deaths.2,3 Spontaneous regression, differentiation, and a good response to current therapeutic regimens such as
surgery and chemotherapy are common in infants or those with low-risk tumors. However, children, typically those aged
> 18 months, fail to achieve sustained responses to intensive multimodality chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation.4
Although patients may initially have a response to chemotherapy, they eventually develop disease recurrence with multifocal metastatic disease and resistance to chemotherapy. Despite the aggressive treatment, the prognosis of these patients is
poor and their long-term survival is < 40%.4 More effective treatment strategies are urgently needed for this high-risk
group of patients with NB.
A better understanding of the genetics and biologic behavior of poor-prognosis NB tumors should lead to new molecular targets that can be used to develop more specific, more effective, and less toxic cancer therapies. After reports that
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its tyrosine kinase receptor TrkB are often detected in NB tumors in
Corresponding author: Zhijie Li, MD, PhD, Cell and Molecular Biology Section Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Dr MSC-1928, Bldg 10/CRC 1-3940, Bethesda, MD 20892; Fax: (301) 451-7052; lizhijie@mail.nih.gov
Cell and Molecular Biology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland
We thank Keryx Biopharmaceuticals and Dr. Enrique Poradosu (Keryx Biopharmaceuticals) and Dr. Sherry S. Ansher (Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program) for coordinating the supply of perifosine. We thank Lauren Marks for programmatic assistance and other members of the Cellular and Molecular Biology Section at the
National Cancer Institute for their thoughtful review of this study.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26133, Received: December 15, 2010; Revised: February 10, 2011; Accepted: February 18, 2011, Published online May 16, 2011 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

5412

Cancer

December 1, 2011

Perifosine Attenuates NB Chemoresistance/Li et al

patients with an unfavorable prognosis,5 we identified
that BDNF activation of TrkB attenuated the sensitivity
of NB cells to chemotherapy.6 We later identified phosphatidylinositol-3 (PI3) kinase and its downstream target,
Akt serine/threonine kinase, as critical mediators of activated TrkB-induced chemoresistance in NB cells.7,8 In
addition to BDNF/TrkB, specific ligand-induced activation of other tyrosine kinase receptors, such as insulin-like
growth factor receptor (IGFR),9 platelet-derived growth
factor receptor (PDGFR),10 and vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor (VEGFR),11 are known to activate
Akt and affect NB cell survival. Studies have shown that
IGF protects NB cells from chemotherapy-induced or
osmolarity-induced cell death in NB cells via activation of
Akt.12 PDGF, a potent mesenchymal cell-derived mitogen, also activates Akt in PDGFR-expressing NB cells and
stimulates cell proliferation, chemotaxis, and neurite
extension. PDGFR inhibitors block PDGFR-induced
phosphorylation of Akt and induce apoptosis in NB
cells.10 Gastrin-releasing peptide receptor is a G proteincoupled receptor whose upregulation in patients with
advanced stage NB is accompanied by increased levels of
activated Akt.13 Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is a
tyrosine kinase and its mutation or amplification is associated with Akt activation in patients with poor-prognosis
NB.14 In drug resistance models, cathespin D-induced resistance to doxorubicin is mediated by activated Akt.15
Recently, a study of tumors from 116 patients with NB
demonstrated that activated Akt is correlated with poor
prognosis and advanced disease stage in patients with primary NB, as well as those with unfavorable biological
markers in NB such as MYCN amplification and 1p36
aberrations.16 It is obvious that Akt is a critical survival
signaling node in many signal transduction pathways and
the association between activated Akt and poor prognosis
and advanced stage disease in patients with NB makes it
an important target for treatment.
Although Akt inhibitors have been developed and
tested in many adult tumor model systems,17 to the best
of our knowledge our recent study was the first to systematically evaluate an Akt inhibitor as a single agent in pediatric NB.18 Because therapeutic studies implicating a role
for Akt in chemoresistance in NB have been performed
for the most part using in vitro models, in the current
study we used a tetracycline(TET)-regulated TrkB expression system to demonstrate that increased expression of
TrkB is associated with elevated levels of activated Akt in
vivo and reduced sensitivity to etoposide. Moreover, the
current study demonstrated that using the Akt inhibitor

Cancer

December 1, 2011

perifosine increased the sensitivity of NB tumors to etoposide and caused regression of NB tumors.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture
Human NB cells (TB3) that have a transfected TET-regulated rat TrkB7 and NGP, LAN5, and SY5Y cells were
used in the current study. Puromycin (0.5 lg/mL) and
TET (1 lg/mL) were added to the TB3 cells for maintenance of selection pressure and repression of the TrkB
gene. TB3 and NGP cells were cultured in RPMI-1640
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM of glutamine, and antibiotics as described previously.7
Reagents and Antibodies
Recombinant human BDNF was obtained from PeproTech, Inc (Rocky Hill, NJ). Puromycin and TET were
purchased from Sigma Chemical Company, Inc (St Louis,
Mo). Etoposide was obtained from Bedford Laboratories
(Bedford, Ohio). The Akt inhibitor perifosine was a gift
from Keryx Biopharmaceuticals (New York, NY). The
pan Trk antibody, TrkB antibody, and phosphorylated
tyrosine (P-Tyr) antibody were purchased from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc (Santa Cruz, Calif). The total
Akt antibody (T-Akt), phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt,
Ser473, Thr308) antibody, total S6 antibody (T-S6), PS6 (Ser235/236) antibody, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) antibody, and an Akt kinase
assay kit were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology
(Beverly, Mass).
Treatment
TB3 cells were cultured in the presence of TET (1 lg/mL)
for 3 days to repress TrkB expression. To study the activation of TrkB, TB3 cells were treated with BDNF (100 ng/
mL) for 15 minutes. To study the response to etoposide
or perifosine, TB3 cells were treated with different concentrations of etoposide or perifosine for 24 hours and
cell survival was assessed using an MTS assay. To study
perifosine’s blockage of BDNF-induced phosphorylation
of Akt, TB3 cells were pretreated with perifosine (2.5 lm,
5 lm) for 6 hours or 24 hours, and then treated with
BDNF (100 ng//mL) for 15 minutes. To study perifosine’s effect on BDNF-induced cell survival, TB3 cells
were first treated with perifosine (5 lM) for 6 hours,
followed by treatment with BDNF and etoposide for
24 hours.

5413

Original Article
Real-Time Quantitative Polymerase Chain
Reaction
Total RNA was isolated using a Qiagen Extraction Kit
procedure (Valencia, Calif). Equal amounts of total RNA
(1 lg) were reverse-transcribed using the Superscript
First-Strand Synthesis System for reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
Calif), and the resulting first-strand cDNA was diluted
and used as a template in real-time, quantitative PCR
analysis. All measurements were performed in duplicate.
Actin served as an internal control and was used to
normalize variances in input cDNA. The following
gene-specific primer pair was designed: TrkB-sense: 50 CTCAGCAAATCGCAGCAGG-30 ; TrkB-antisense: 50 AGTAGTCGGTGCTGTATA-30 . The specificity of
each primer was determined using the National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) module. Detection of
TrkB expression was performed with SYBR Green
(Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, Calif) and an ABI PRISM
7700 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems).
Immunoprecipitation/Western Blot Analysis
After treatment, TB3 cells were harvested and protein was
extracted with protein lysis buffer as described previously.7 Protein concentrations were determined using a
Bradford assay kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,
Calif). For immunoprecipitation of TrkB and P-Tyr, 500
lg of protein from each lysate were immunoprecipitated
with polyclonal anti–pan-Trk rabbit antibody and protein
A agarose (Life Technologies, Inc, Carlsbad, Calif).
Immunoprecipitates were electrophoresed in 6% sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, (SDSPAGE) gels, transferred to nitrocellulose, and subsequently probed with an anti–P-Tyr antibody or TrkB
antibody. For Western blot analysis, 30 lg of protein
from each lysate were loaded onto 10% SDS-PAGE gels,
transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed with the anti–
Akt antibody, anti–P-Akt (Ser473) antibody, anti–S6
antibody, or anti–P-S6 (Ser235/236) antibody. Signals
were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence
reagents (Amersham Life Science, Arlington Heights, Ill).
Akt Kinase Assay
TB3 cells were lysed in lysis buffer provided by the Akt kinase assay kit. Protein concentrations were determined
using the Bradford assay kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Akt
kinase activity was assessed using an Akt kinase assay kit
(Cell Signaling Technology Inc) according to the manu-

5414

facturer’s instructions. Briefly, protein (200 lg) from
lysate samples was immunoprecipitated with P-Akt
(Ser473) antibody conjugated with beads overnight at
4 C. The immunoprecipitates were washed twice with
lysis buffer and twice with kinase buffer. The samples
were resuspended in 50 lL of kinase buffer containing 1
lL of 10 mM ATP and kinase substrate GSK-3 fusion
protein and allowed to proceed at 30 C for 30 minutes.
Reaction products were resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE gels
followed by Western blot analysis with a phosphorylated
GSK-3a/b antibody (P–GSK-3a/b antibody).
Immunohistochemical Staining
Tumor tissues were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded
with paraffin, and processed to slides with a thickness of 5
lm. The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for histology observation, or slides were stained with
P-Akt (Ser473; 1:50 dilution) antibody or P-S6 (Ser235/
236) antibody following the manufacturer’s instructions.
The immune complex was visualized using3,30 -diaminobenzidine (DAB). The sections were counterstained with
hematoxylin and mounted and observed under a microscope at a magnification of  20 or  63.
Cell Survival Analysis
The MTS assay (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-5-[3-carboxymethoxyphenyl]-2-[4-sulfophenyl]-2H-tetrazolium,
inner salt assay) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The percentage of cell survival (survival rate) was calculated by dividing the absorbance value
of the treated samples by the absorbance value of the
untreated control within each group. All experiments
were repeated 2 to 3 times.
In Vivo Animal Model
TB3 and NGP cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 and
10% FBS media, harvested, washed with Hank balanced
salt solution (HBSS), and resuspended in HBSS and
Matrigel (Trevigen Inc, Gaithersburg, Md). A total of
100 lL of cell suspension containing 4  106 TB3 cells or
2  106 NGP cells were implanted into the subcutaneous
tissue of the right flank of female nude mice ages 4-5
weeks (Taconic, Germantown, NY). For TB3 xenografts,
mice were given water supplemented with placebo (sucrose) or TET (with sucrose) 1 week before tumor implantation and this was continued throughout the
experiment. Treatment was initiated when tumors reached
approximately 200 mm3. Etoposide was given 3 times a
week for approximately 3 weeks at doses of 10 mg/kg and

Cancer

December 1, 2011

Perifosine Attenuates NB Chemoresistance/Li et al

20 mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection. Perifosine was given
by oral gavage for 30 days. For the combination of etoposide
and perifosine, the mice were given etoposide (10 mg/kg) 3
times a week, whereas perifosine was administered at a dose
of 15 mg/kg (TB3 tumors) or 17 mg/kg (NGP tumors) by
oral gavage daily for 30 days. Protein and RNA were
extracted from tumors to detect TrkB levels in TB3 tumors.
The dimensions of the resulting tumors were determined at
least 3 times a week using a digital caliper and the tumor
volume (mm3) was calculated as (L  W2)/4, in which L
indicates length in mm and W indicates width in mm. All
mice were euthanized by asphyxiation with regulated carbon
dioxide, and their tumors were excised and immediately frozen at 80 C or fixed in 10% formalin.
Statistical Analysis
Comparisons between the 2 groups were performed using
the Student t test; comparisons among  3 groups were
performed using 1-way analysis of variance with Bonferroni correction. The results were shown as the means 
the standard error.

RESULTS
TET-Regulated TrkB-Expressing Cell Line
To study the role of BDNF/TrkB-Akt in the response of
NB to chemotherapy, we used a TET (TET off)-suppressible TrkB expression cell line, TB3.7 The presence of
TET inhibited expression of TrkB, whereas the absence of
TET induced expression of TrkB. In the absence of TET,
there was a 3.6-fold increase in TrkB mRNA levels (Fig.
1A) and a 2.5-fold increase in TrkB protein levels (Fig.
1B) (densitometric analysis of the Western blot analysis
result). Consistent with previous results,7 BDNF treatment induced an increase in the phosphorylation of TrkB
only in TrkB-expressing cells (TET-) (Fig. 1B), and this
was accompanied by an increase in levels of P-Akt (Ser473
and Thr308) (3.8-fold and 2-fold, respectively) (Fig. 1C).
An Akt activity assay detected increased Akt activity indicated by P–GSK-3a/b (Ser21/9) in TrkB-expressing cells
treated with BDNF (Fig. 1C). There was no difference in
the levels of phosphorylated TrkB (P-TrkB) or P-Akt
between TETþ and TET- conditions in the absence of
BDNF. These data indicate that in our model system,
TET regulated TrkB mRNA and protein levels and
BDNF stimulation induced an increase in TrkB phosphorylation and induction of its downstream target Akt in
NB cells with high TrkB expression.

Cancer

December 1, 2011

To compare the response to etoposide between
cells with high TrkB expression and those with low
TrkB expression, TB3 cells were treated with etoposide
in the presence or absence of TET. Etoposide induced
a decrease in cell survival in both high and low TrkBexpressing cells, but there was no difference noted with
regard to their sensitivity to etoposide (Fig. 1D). To
evaluate the response to etoposide after activation of
the TrkB signaling pathway, we pretreated the cells
with BDNF before the initiation of etoposide. The
addition of BDNF to the cells with low TrkB expression did not appear to change the response to etoposide (Fig. 1E), but the addition of BDNF to the cells
with high TrkB expression caused a nearly 40%
increase in cell survival after treatment with etoposide
(Fig. 1F).
The Akt Inhibitor Perifosine Blocked
BDNF-Induced Protection of TB3 Cells From
Etoposide
In a previous study, we demonstrated that constitutively
active Akt attenuated the cytotoxic effects of etoposide on
NB cells and the use of a small-molecule inhibitor targeting the Pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of Akt restored
sensitivity to etoposide.8 Using an Akt inhibitor, perifosine, which is currently in phase 2 clinical trials in adults
and has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of NB, we treated the high
TrkB-expressing TB3 cells with perifosine and evaluated
cell growth. We found that perifosine treatment induced
cell death in a dose-dependent manner at 24 hours
(Fig. 2A), which was accompanied by an increase in caspase 3/7 activity (Fig. 2A). We selected concentrations of
perifosine (2.5 lM and 5 lM) that did not alter cell
growth at 24 hours to assess whether perifosine inhibited
BDNF/TrkB-induced phosphorylation of Akt. Pretreatment of high TrkB-expressing TB3 cells with perifosine
(2.5 lM or 5 lM) followed by BDNF treatment led to a
22% or 36% block, respectively, of the increase in P-Akt
(Ser473) at 6 hours. At 24 hours, perifosine at a dose of
2.5 lM induced a 60% and a dose of 5 lM induced a
100% block in a BDNF-induced increase in P-Akt
(Ser473) (Fig. 2B). Similar results were found in another
phosphorylated site of Akt (Thr308) (Fig. 2B). Pretreatment with perifosine blocked BDNF activation of
TrkB-induced phosphorylation of S6, a downstream target of activated Akt (Fig. 2B). A 24-hour pretreatment
with perifosine completely blocked Akt activity, as indicated by a decrease in phosphorylation of the Akt

5415

Original Article

Figure 1. TrkB expression is regulated by tetracycline (TET) in vitro and affects the neuroblastoma (NB) cell response to chemotherapy. TB3 cells were cultured for 3 days in the presence or absence of TET (1 lg/mL) and (A) total RNA was extracted and
treated with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (100 ng/mL) for 15 minutes. (B and C) Total protein was then extracted,
(D) treated with etoposide (Etop), or (E and F) a combination of BDNF and Etop for 24 hours. (A) Total RNA (1 lg) was reversetranscribed (RT) into cDNA followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for TrkB mRNA. (B) Protein
lysates (500 lg/mL) were immunoprecipitated with anti–pan-Trk antibody and subjected to Western blot analysis for evaluation
of TrkB and phosphorylated tyrosine (P-Tyr). (C) Total protein (30 lg) was immunoblotted for phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt)
(Ser473), P-Akt (Thr308), and total Akt (T-Akt). In vitro Akt kinase activity was assessed by immunoprecipitating with P-Akt
(Ser473) antibody, and GSK-3 was then used as a substrate to measure Akt activity indicated by phosphorylated GSK-3a/b
(Ser21/9). (D, E, and F) The MTS assay was used to determine cell survival at the end of treatment. IP indicates immunoprecipitation; IB, immunoblotting; TETþ, media with TET; TET-, media without TET. *P < .05 for the combination of BDNF plus etoposide
versus etoposide alone.

substrate GSK-3a/b (Ser21/9) as assessed using an Akt activity assay (Fig. 2B). To determine whether perifosine
altered BDNF/TrkB protection of TB3 cells from etoposide-induced cell death, we pretreated high TrkB-expressing TB3 cells with a concentration of perifosine (5 lM),
which inhibits activation of both Akt and its downstream
target S6, followed by etoposide (1 lg/mL) treatment in
the absence or presence of BDNF (100 ng/mL) for an
additional 24 hours. The results indicated that etoposideinduced cell death was blocked by pretreatment with
BDNF. However, prior treatment with perifosine blocked
the BDNF/TrkB-mediated rescue of TB3 cells from etoposide-induced cell death (Fig. 2C). These data indicate
that perifosine blocks Akt phosphorylation and attenuates
BDNF/TrkB-induced resistance to etoposide.

5416

TET-Regulated TrkB-Expressing Tumors
In Vivo
To determine whether increased TrkB expression and resistance to chemotherapy determined in in vitro models
were relevant in an in vivo model system, we injected TB3
cells into nude mice that had been given access to water
with TET plus sucrose (TETþ) or water with sucrose
alone (TET-). The results indicated that the levels of
TrkB mRNA in tumors from TET- mice were nearly 3fold higher than TrkB levels in tumors from TETþ mice.
The levels of TrkB protein expression and the levels of PTyr in tumors from TET- mice were higher than the levels
detected in tumors from TETþ mice (Fig. 3B). Hematoxylin and eosin staining of tumor tissues demonstrated that
tumors from both groups of mice had the characteristic

Cancer

December 1, 2011

Perifosine Attenuates NB Chemoresistance/Li et al

Figure 2. Perifosine blocked brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)/TrkB-induced protection of TB3 cells from etoposide. (A)
TB3 cells cultured in the absence of tetracycline (TET) were treated with different concentrations of perifosine for 24 hours. The
MTS assay was used to detect cell survival (Left) or if treated with perifosine for 16 hours then caspase 3/7 activity was detected
(Right). (B) TB3 cells cultured in the absence of TET were treated with perifosine (2.5 lm, 5 lm) for 6 hours or 24 hours followed
by a 15-minute treatment with BDNF (100 ng/mL); total proteins were extracted. The expression of phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt)
(Ser473), P-Akt (Thr308), total Akt (T-Akt), P-S6 (Ser235/236), and total S6 (T-S6) were analyzed by Western blot analysis. In
vitro Akt kinase activity was assessed as described in Figure 1C. (C) TB3 cells cultured in the absence of TET were first pretreated
with perifosine (5 lM) for 6 hours and then treated with BDNF (100 ng/mL) for 1 hour followed by etoposide (1 lg/mL) treatment
for 24 hours. The MTS assay was used to assess cell survival. IP indicates immunoprecipitation; IB, immunoblotting; TETþ, media
with TET; TET-, media without TET.

Original Article

Figure 3. Tetracycline (TET)-regulated TrkB-expressing system in vivo is shown. Subcutaneous xenografts were established as
described. (A) mRNA was extracted from the tumor tissues. Total RNA (1 lg) was reverse-transcribed into cDNA followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis for TrkB mRNA levels. (B) Total protein was extracted from tumor tissues, and protein
lysates (500 lg/mL) were immunoprecipitated with anti–pan-Trk antibody and subjected to Western blot analysis for the evaluation
of TrkB and phosphorylated tyrosine (P-Tyr). (C and D) Tumor tissues were stained with (C) hematoxylin and eosin or (D) phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt) (Ser473) by immunohistochemical staining. IP indicates immunoprecipitation; IB, immunoblotting; TETþ, water
with TET plus sucrose; TET-, water with sucrose alone (original magnifications,  63 [upper row] and 20 [lower row]).

histology of small, round, blue cell tumors of childhood
typical of NB tumors (Fig. 3C). Immunohistochemical
staining analyses demonstrated that the relative levels of
P-Akt were higher in tumors expressing high TrkB from
TET- mice compared with those in low TrkB-expressing
tumors from TETþ mice (Fig. 3D). These data indicate
that in the absence of TET, TrkB expression is induced in
vivo and this is associated with increased expression of PAkt.
Tumors With High TrkB Expression Are More
Resistant to Etoposide Than Tumors With
Low TrkB Expression
To study the sensitivity of tumors with low and high
TrkB expression to etoposide in vivo, we initiated etoposide treatment in mice (at doses of 10 mg/kg and 20 mg/
kg) when tumor volumes reached approximately 200
mm3. In the mice with low TrkB-expressing tumors
(TETþ), treatment with etoposide at either a dose of 10
mg/kg or a dose of 20 mg/kg caused an up to 47%
decrease in tumor growth compared with placebo treat-

5418

ment (Fig. 4A). However, in the mice with tumors demonstrating high expression of TrkB (TET-), only
etoposide at a dose of 20 mg/kg caused an up to 39%
decrease in tumor growth, whereas the growth of tumors
treated with etoposide at a dose of 10 mg/kg was not
found to be significantly different from tumor growth in
the mice treated with placebo (Fig. 4B). These data are
consistent with a model in which the tumors with high
TrkB expression are more resistant to etoposide treatment
than the tumors with low TrkB expression.
Perifosine Sensitized High TrkB-Expressing
TB3 Tumors to Etoposide Treatment
Because high TrkB-expressing TB3 tumors have elevated
levels of P-Akt (Fig. 3D) and are more resistant to etoposide (Fig. 4), we next examined whether the Akt inhibitor
perifosine would affect the sensitivity of high TrkBexpressing tumors to etoposide. We first tested the
response of tumors to different doses of perifosine (10
mg/kg, 15 mg/kg, and 20 mg/kg). There was an antitumor growth effect of perifosine at a dose of 20 mg/kg, but

Cancer

December 1, 2011

Perifosine Attenuates NB Chemoresistance/Li et al

Figure 4. Tumors with high TrkB expression are less sensitive
to etoposide than tumors with low TrkB expression. Mice with
tumors were treated with vehicle or etoposide at a dose of 10
mg/kg or 20 mg/kg for 21 days. The size of the tumors from
the group treated with etoposide was compared with that of
the control group. TETþ indicates water with TET plus sucrose; TET-, water with sucrose alone. #P < .05 for the group
treated with 10 mg/kg of etoposide versus the control group.
*P < .05 for the group treated with 20 mg/kg of etoposide
versus the control group.

treatment with 10 mg/kg or 15 mg/kg of perifosine did
not appear to cause a statistically significant difference in
tumor growth compared with the placebo treatment (Fig.
5A). When we examined the tumors using immunohistochemical staining to assess expression of P-Akt (Ser 473)
and P-S6 (Ser235/236) in mice treated with 15 mg/kg of
perifosine, we found decreased expression of P-Akt and PS6 in these tumors compared with tumors from placebotreated mice (Fig. 5B). Therefore, we evaluated whether
perifosine at a dose (15 mg/kg/day) sufficient to inhibit
Akt activation would alter the sensitivity of TB3 tumors
to etoposide (10 mg/kg). Although neither drug at these
doses, as a single agent, caused a statistically significant
alteration in tumor growth, the combination of perifosine
(15 mg/kg) and etoposide (10 mg/kg) resulted in an 80%
decrease in tumor growth compared with the placebo
(Fig. 5C). These data indicate that perifosine treatment

Cancer

December 1, 2011

Figure 5. Perifosine (Peri) increased the sensitivity of high
TrkB-expressing TB3 tumors to treatment with etoposide. (A)
Mice were treated with vehicle or Peri at doses of 10 mg/kg,
15 mg/kg, or 20 mg/kg for 30 days. The tumor size in the
treated groups was compared with that of the control group.
#P < .05 for the group treated with Peri (20 mg/kg) versus
the control group. (B) Tumor tissues were stained with phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt) (Ser473) and P-S6 (Ser235/236) by
immunohistochemical staining (original magnification,  63).
(C) Mice were treated with vehicle, Peri (15 mg/kg), etoposide (Etop) (10 mg/kg), or a combination of Peri (15 mg/kg)
and Etop (10 mg/kg). The tumor size in treated groups was
compared with that of the control group. * P < .05 for group
treated with Peri plus Etop versus the control group. TETindicates water with sucrose alone.

inhibits Akt phosphorylation in tumor tissues and
increases the sensitivity of TB3 NB tumors to etoposide
treatment. To determine whether perifosine could synergize with etoposide in another TrkB-expressing NB cell

5419

Original Article

Figure 6. Perifosine (Peri) increased the sensitivity of NGP tumors to treatment with etoposide (Etop). (A) Proteins from NGP,
LAN5, and SY5Y cells were extracted and expression of TrkB, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt) (Ser473), and total Akt (T-Akt) was analyzed by Western blot analysis. (B, C, and D) NGP tumors were treated
with (B) Etop (10 mg/kg or 20 mg/kg) or (C) Peri (10 mg/kg, 17 mg/kg, or 24 mg/kg) individually or (D) a combination of Etop
(10 mg/kg) and Peri (17 mg/kg). The tumor size in treated groups was compared with that of the control group. Panel B: *P < .05
for the group treated with Etop (20 mg/kg) versus the control group. Panel C: #P < .05 for the group treated with Peri (24 mg/
kg) versus the control group. Panel D: *P < .05 for the group treated with Peri (17 mg/kg) and Etop (10 mg/kg) versus the control group.

line, we tested 3 cell lines (NGP, LAN5, and SY5Y) and
found that NGP cells expressed TrkB and activated Akt
(Fig. 6 A). The in vivo sensitivities of NGP xenografts to
etoposide (Fig. 6B) and perifosine (Fig. 6C) were established. Mice were then treated with a combination of etoposide (10 mg/kg) and perifosine (17 mg/kg) at doses that
individually did not have a statistically significant effect
on tumor growth. We found that this combination of etoposide and perifosine induced an 85% inhibition of tumor growth compared with placebo (Fig. 6D).

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we established an in vivo tumor
model system using a TET-repressible TrkB-expressing
isogenic cell model to study the influence of the TrkB/Akt
signaling pathway on the response of NB tumors to chemotherapy. We found tumor xenografts with elevated TrkB
had increased levels of activated TrkB (P-Tyr-TrkB) and
Akt (P-Akt). Consistent with our in vitro studies, tumors
expressing elevated activated TrkB and Akt were found to

5420

be more resistant to etoposide. Finally, the sensitivity of
NB tumors expressing elevated TrkB levels to etoposide
was restored if mice were treated with a concentration of
perifosine sufficient to inhibit activated Akt in tumor xenografts. These findings indicate that targeting Akt in NB
tumors may increase their sensitivity to cytotoxic therapy.
Clinical observation has indicated that TrkB and
BDNF are expressed in a subset of aggressive or unfavorable NB.19 To understand how activation of the BDNF/
TrkB pathway affected the biology of NB tumors, we and
other investigators determined that BDNF activation of
TrkB did not significantly alter NB cell growth but
enhanced cell survival under stress conditions such as serum starvation.20,21 Later, we reported that BDNF activation of TrkB induced NB cell resistance to the cytotoxic
drug vinblastine in vitro6 and subsequent studies demonstrated similar results using cytotoxic drugs such as etoposide, cisplatin, and paclitaxel.7,8 Given the role of TrkB in
the biological and clinical behavior of NB, it was reasonable to pursue inhibition of the TrkB receptor as an important adjunct to therapy. Lestaurtinib (CEP-701) is a Trk-

Cancer

December 1, 2011

Perifosine Attenuates NB Chemoresistance/Li et al

selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor that blocks activated
Trk and has shown efficacy alone or in combination with
conventional chemotherapy in an NB cell model system
using constitutive TrkB expression.22,23 Recently, another
Trk inhibitor, AZ623, was found to inhibit activation of
TrkB in vitro and NB cell growth in vivo.24 However, neither of these studies demonstrated the inhibition of target
in vivo. In addition to Trk, other receptors tyrosine kinases (RTK) such as VEGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor, and IGFR1 have also been implicated in NB
pathogenesis or malignant behavior.9-11 Use of a Trk inhibitor would only target those cells dependent on activated Trks, whereas cells not dependent on Trks could
survive and even those that may initially be dependent on
Trks may develop resistance or co-opt other tyrosine receptor kinases for survival. Therefore, the advantage of
targeting the Akt pathway over tyrosine receptor kinasespecific targeting strategies is that it would have a broader
specificity against multiple tyrosine receptor kinases that
activate the PI3 kinase/Akt pathway and stimulate tumor
cell survival. Therefore, it would not be necessary to know
if a given tumor relied on a specific tyrosine kinase receptor, as long as its survival and/or other malignant characteristics were dependent on Akt.25
To our knowledge to date, several types of Akt
inhibitors have been investigated, including phosphatidylinositol analog inhibitors, allosteric Akt kinase inhibitors,
ATP-competitive inhibitors, and alkylphospholipids.26
However, the use of these inhibitors is limited either by
high toxicity or low bioavailability and stability in vivo.26
Perifosine, an alkylphospholipid, acts at the cell membrane, which makes it distinct from conventional chemotherapeutic drugs that mainly target DNA. In adult
clinical trials, perifosine has been found to have no hematological toxicity and the only dose-limiting toxicity was
gastrointestinal, which was readily ameliorated with prophylactic medicine.27 More recently, we found that perifosine had an antitumor growth effect in all NB xenograft
tumor models tested and this effect was noted using NB
cell lines that carried several genetic alterations that characterize NB tumors, such as MYCN amplification, TP53
mutation, and ALK mutation. The phase 1 clinical trial of
perifosine in pediatric solid tumors used 3 doses of perifosine (25 mg/m2/day, 50 mg/m2/day, and 75 mg/m2/day),
with serum levels reaching 17 to 32 lM and no dose-limiting toxicities observed.28 Our preclinical perifosine dosing
of 24 mg/kg/day would be equivalent to a phase 1 dosing
of 72 mg/m2/day,29 and in our in vitro studies, doses of
perifosine from 20 to 30 lM induced at least a 70% inducCancer

December 1, 2011

tion of cell death in all NB cell lines evaluated. From these
data, it can be noted that the doses used in the preclinical in
vitro and in vivo models are achievable in patients.
Although clinical response is not an aim of phase 1 trials,
approximately 67% of patients with stage 4 (defined by
International Neuroblastoma Staging System) multiply
recurrent NB achieved stable disease for up to 55 weeks.28
As effective as a targeted monotherapy may be, it is
usually enhanced when combined with traditional cytotoxic reagents. We found a synergistic response and an
80% decrease in tumor growth when mice bearing xenografts were administered the combination of perifosine and
etoposide using doses at which either agent alone had no significant effect on tumor growth. Using a dose of perifosine
(15 mg/kg/day, equal to 45 mg/m2/day) that inhibited Akt
activity but had little effect on tumor growth in TB3 tumors,
we found the sensitivity of NB tumors to treatment with etoposide was greatly increased. We did not observe any side
effects using these low doses of perifosine and etoposide (10
mg/kg) in combination. An important goal of therapy is to
not only increase treatment efficacy but also decrease toxicity. The results of the current study are similar to those
reported using the Trk inhibitor.22,23 To our knowledge, no
study to date has reported the combined use of an Akt inhibitor and chemotherapeutic drugs in pediatric solid tumors in
vivo, although perifosine has been shown to increase the sensitivity of medulloblastoma to radiation in vitro.30 In adult
cancer studies, perifosine is reported to sensitize endometrial
cancer cells to cisplatin therapy.31 In clinical trials, perifosine
is reported to have a synergistic antitumor growth effect
when combined with tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)32 in the treatment of patients
with multiple myeloma. Based on the results of our preclinical studies and those in adults, we have reason to believe that
treatment with perifosine in combination with conventional
therapy will be a good strategy with which to improve the
treatment efficacy in patients with NB.

FUNDING SOURCES
Supported by the Intramural Research Program, Center for Cancer
Research at the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Brodeur GM, Pritchard J, Berthold F, et al. Revisions of
the international criteria for neuroblastoma diagnosis,

5421

Original Article

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.
14.
15.

16.
17.

staging, and response to treatment. J Clin Oncol. 1993;11:
1466-1477.
Maris JM, Matthay KK. Molecular biology of neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:2264-2279.
Brodeur GM. Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:203-216.
Maris JM, Hogarty MD, Bagatell R, Cohn SL. Neuroblastoma. Lancet. 2007;369:2106-2120.
Nakagawara A, Arima-Nakagawara M, Scavarda NJ, Azar
CG, Cantor AB, Brodeur GM. Association between high levels of expression of the TRK gene and favorable outcome in
human neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:847-854.
Scala S, Wosikowski K, Giannakakou P, et al. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor protects neuroblastoma cells from vinblastine toxicity. Cancer Res. 1996;56:3737-3742.
Jaboin J, Kim CJ, Kaplan DR, Thiele CJ. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor activation of TrkB protects neuroblastoma cells from chemotherapy-induced apoptosis via phosphatidylinositol 30 -kinase pathway. Cancer Res. 2002;62:
6756-6763.
Li Z, Jaboin J, Dennis PA, Thiele CJ. Genetic and pharmacologic
identification of Akt as a mediator of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor/TrkB rescue of neuroblastoma cells from chemotherapy-induced cell death. Cancer Res. 2005;65:2070-2075.
Seo JH, Ahn Y, Lee SR, Yeol Yeo C, Chung Hur K. The
major target of the endogenously generated reactive oxygen species in response to insulin stimulation is phosphatase and tensin
homolog and not phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI-3 kinase) in the
PI-3 kinase/Akt pathway. Mol Biol Cell. 2005;16:348-357.
Servidei T, Riccardi A, Sanguinetti M, Dominici C, Riccardi R. Increased sensitivity to the platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF) receptor inhibitor STI571 in chemoresistant
glioma cells is associated with enhanced PDGF-BB–mediated signaling and STI571-induced Akt inactivation. J Cell
Physiol. 2006;208:220-228.
Beierle EA, Nagaram A, Dai W, Iyengar M, Chen MK.
VEGF-mediated survivin expression in neuroblastoma cells.
J Surg Res. 2005;127:21-28.
Van Golen CM, Feldman EL. Insulin-like growth factor I is
the key growth factor in serum that protects neuroblastoma
cells from hyperosmotic-induced apoptosis. J Cell Physiol.
2000;182:24-32.
Kim S, Hu W, Kelly DR, Hellmich MR, Evers BM, Chung
DH. Gastrin-releasing peptide is a growth factor for human
neuroblastomas. Ann Surg. 2002;235:621-629.
George RE, Sanda T, Hanna M, et al. Activating mutations
in ALK provide a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma. Nature. 2008;455:975-978.
Sagulenko V, Muth D, Sagulenko E, Paffhausen T, Schwab
M, Westermann F. Cathepsin D protects human neuroblastoma cells from doxorubicin-induced cell death. Carcinogenesis. 2008;29:1869-1877.
Opel D, Poremba C, Simon T, Debatin KM, Fulda S. Activation of Akt predicts poor outcome in neuroblastoma.
Cancer Res. 2007;67:735-745.
Porta C, Figlin RA. Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway and kidney cancer, and the therapeutic
potential of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt inhibitors. J
Urol. 2009;182:2569-2577.

5422

18. Li Z, Tan F, Liewehr DJ, Steinberg SM, Thiele CJ. In vitro
and in vivo inhibition of neuroblastoma tumor cell growth
by AKT inhibitor perifosine. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;102:
758-770.
19. Asgharzadeh S, Pique-Regi R, Sposto R, et al. Prognostic
significance of gene expression profiles of metastatic neuroblastomas lacking MYCN gene amplification. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2006;98:1193-1203.
20. Nakagawara A, Azar CG, Scavarda NJ, Brodeur GM.
Expression and function of TRK-B and BDNF in human
neuroblastomas. Mol Cell Biol. 1994;14:759-767.
21. Matsumoto K, Wada RK, Yamashiro JM, Kaplan DR,
Thiele CJ. Expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
and p145TrkB affects survival, differentiation, and invasiveness of human neuroblastoma cells. Cancer Res. 1995;55:
1798-1806.
22. Evans AE, Kisselbach KD, Liu X, et al. Effect of CEP-751
(KT-6587) on neuroblastoma xenografts expressing TrkB.
Med Pediatr Oncol. 2001;36:181-184.
23. Iyer R, Evans AE, Qi X, et al. Lestaurtinib enhances the
antitumor efficacy of chemotherapy in murine xenograft
models of neuroblastoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16:14781485.
24. Zage PE, Graham TC, Zeng L, et al. The selective Trk inhibitor AZ623 inhibits brain-derived neurotrophic factormediated neuroblastoma cell proliferation and signaling
and is synergistic with topotecan. Cancer. 2011;117:13211391.
25. Brodeur GM. Getting into the AKT. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2010;102:747-749.
26. Barnett SF, Bilodeau MT, Lindsley CW. The Akt/PKB
family of protein kinases: a review of small molecule inhibitors and progress towards target validation. Curr Top Med
Chem. 2005;5:109-125.
27. Knowling M, Blackstein M, Tozer R, et al. A phase II study
of perifosine (D-21226) in patients with previously
untreated metastatic or locally advanced soft tissue sarcoma:
a National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group
trial. Invest New Drugs. 2006;24:435-439.
28. Becher OJ, Trippett TM, Kolesar J, et al. Phase I study of
single-agent perifosine for recurrent pediatric solid tumors.
J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(15 suppl):9540.
29. Freireich EJ, Gehan EA, Rall DP, Schmidt LH, Skipper
HE. Quantitative comparison of toxicity of anticancer
agents in mouse, rat, hamster, dog, monkey, and man. Cancer Chemother Rep. 1966;50:219-244.
30. Kumar A, Fillmore HL, Kadian R, Broaddus WC,
Tye GW, Van Meter TE. The alkylphospholipid perifosine induces apoptosis and p21-mediated cell cycle
arrest in medulloblastoma. Mol Cancer Res. 2009;7:
1813-1821.
31. Engel JB, Honig A, Schonhals T, et al. Perifosine inhibits
growth of human experimental endometrial cancers by
blockade of AKT phosphorylation. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol. 2008;141:64-69.
32. Tazzari P, Papa V, Ricci F, et al. Synergistic proapoptotic
activity of recombinant TRAIL plus the Akt inhibitor perifosine in acute myelogenous leukemia cells. Cancer Res.
2008;68:9394-9403.

Cancer

December 1, 2011

