NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 18.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2013 July 18; 499(7458): . doi:10.1038/499291a.

Calculated treatment
NATALIA L. KOMAROVA and
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California
92697, USA
C. RICHARD BOLAND
Department of Gastroenterology, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas 75246, Texas, USA

Abstract
Mathematical modelling linked with patient data suggests that combination therapy is more
effective than sequential treatment at preventing drug resistance in cancer. This predictive
approach may pave the way for personalized therapies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In a study published in eLIFE, Bozic et al.1 use a mathematical approach to examine tumour
evolution and response to chemotherapy. In one example, they describe a patient who had
the skin cancer melanoma characterized by an estimated tumour burden of 9.8 × 1010 cells
and 8 metastatic lesions. Their modelling predicts a 0% chance of disease control using a
single drug, but that the likelihood of successful treatment could rise to 88% during
combined therapy with two drugs. The approach offers a brave, quantitative look at
designing targeted therapy for cancer.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The search for cancer treatments has traversed a long and thorny path, with more failures
and disappointments than glimpses of success. A major breakthrough was achieved with the
development of a drug called imatinib in the 1990s. This inhibitor of tyrosine kinase
enzymes showed breathtaking success for treating chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML).
Imatinib and other small-molecule inhibitors ‘recognize’ and attack cancer cells, but spare
normal cells, thereby reducing side effects compared with traditional chemotherapy. Since
the discovery of imatinib, dozens of other such inhibitors have been developed for treating
different cancers. However, the initial excitement surrounding these drugs was tempered by
the appearance of drug resistance — the phenomenon in which disease returns a few months
after initial treatment success2.
Cancer is a process of Darwinian evolution played out in a particular organ. Normal cells
divide and die, and each division brings a small chance of genetic change. Most such
mutations are deleterious, and the cells die without leaving offspring, but some confer new
properties that promote growth or survival and can lead to cancer. The greatest challenge for
drugs targeted at such cells is the further evolution of mutations that confer drug resistance.
Combining multiple drugs that have distinct mechanisms of action might provide a solution
to this problem. The concept of a ‘drug cocktail’ was introduced in 1996 in the context of
treating AIDS. There, the emergence of viral strains resistant to single drug treatments
rendered all previous attempts to control the disease unsuccessful. Viral evolution in a
patient is conceptually similar to the evolution of cancer cells, so similar treatment strategies
might work well for both diseases.

komarova@uci.edu

KOMAROVA and BOLAND

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Current common practice for treating cancers with small-molecule inhibitors is to administer
the agents sequentially, starting with a ‘first-line’ drug and switching to ‘second-line’
therapies if the tumour relapses. Bozic et al. assessed the effectiveness of this approach
using sophisticated mathematical techniques and data from patients with melanoma or with
pancreatic or colorectal cancers. They convincingly demonstrate that a sequential strategy
“precludes any chance for cure”, even in the best-case scenario in which no single mutants
confer resistance to both drugs. However, they show that simultaneously combining two or
more drugs can provide much-needed hope for patients.
As demonstrated last year3, drug-resistant mutants typically exist at low levels in tumours
before the beginning of treatment. Treatment with a single drug gives a competitive
advantage to mutants resistant to that drug, such that by the time of the switch to a secondline therapy, there is a high chance that a mutant that is also resistant to the second drug (a
doubly resistant mutant) has already emerged (Fig. 1). But combination therapy eliminates
cells that are singly resistant to either drug and therefore — because the likelihood of a
doubly mutated cell emerging in such a population is low — greatly increases the chance of
success.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The greatest obstacle for combination treatments is the phenomenon of cross-resistance, in
which a single mutation confers resistance to more than one drug. But even if such mutants
are generated, the authors estimate that combination treatment can be beneficial in some
cases, whereas single-drug and sequential strategies offer no hope.
Previous mathematical analyses have also shown4 that cyclic treatments are ineffective
compared with combination treatments, and have led to the proposal5 that a combination of
three anticancer drugs would be needed to treat CML. It has also already been argued6 that,
even in the presence of cross-resistant mutations in CML, combination treatments give
patients a better chance of cure than do single-drug treatments. And in-vitro studies7 that
compared CML cells treated with one small-molecule inhibitor with those treated with a
combination of two or three demonstrated that the combined therapy suppressed cell
proliferation more effectively. But with Bozic and colleagues’ success in synthesizing
theoretical and experimental methods and applying the analysis to solid tumours, these
modelling studies have taken a leap forward.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Even more significantly, the authors’ paper outlines a roadmap for future personalized
therapies, by showing that specific parameters for a patient can be measured and used in a
mathematical model to calculate the probability of treatment success and to design the best
possible treatment strategy. The authors extracted tumour parameters — including its size at
presentation, cellular division and death rates, and changes in the associated kinetic
parameters following treatment — from 20 patients with melanoma who were treated with
the small-molecule inhibitor vemurafenib. With this information, they were able to predict
the most likely outcome of single, dual and triple therapies for each patient.
There is a bright future for this approach. As new drugs and more information on the exact
mechanisms of drug action become available, the model can be iteratively improved. For
example, there is currently a strong research focus on cellular plasticity, the heterogeneity of
cells within a tumour and the role of cancer stem cells. But it is not known how the presence
of cancer cells with differing properties affects a tumour’s susceptibility to targeted
treatments. Moreover, the evolutionary costs of resistance for a cell have not been quantified
in most cases, nor have mutation rates for molecular changes of various kinds, although
estimates have been made for the number of mutations conferring resistance to certain drugs
in CML7,8. The potential complications of drug cocktails — including toxicity and
undesirable drug interactions — must also be taken into account. But the overall message is

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 18.

KOMAROVA and BOLAND

Page 3

loud and clear: mathematics can help to calculate treatment strategies, and the best hope so
far lies in combination therapies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

REFERENCE
1. Bozic I, et al. eLIFE. 2013; 2:e00747. [PubMed: 23805382]
2. Zhang J, Yang PL, Gray NS. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:28–39. [PubMed: 19104514]
3. Diaz LA Jr, et al. Nature. 2012; 486:537–540. [PubMed: 22722843]
4. Katouli AA, Komarova NL. Bull. Math. Biol. 2011; 73:549–584. [PubMed: 20396972]
5. Komarova NL, Wodarz D. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2005; 102:9714–9719. [PubMed: 15980154]
6. Komarova NL, Katouli AA, Wodarz D. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e4423. [PubMed: 19204794]
7. Bradeen HA, et al. Blood. 2006; 108:2332–2338. [PubMed: 16772610]
8. Katouli AA, Komarova NL. PLoS ONE. 2010; 5:e12300. [PubMed: 20808800]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 18.

KOMAROVA and BOLAND

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Single-drug versus combination therapy

a, During therapy with one drug alone, a cell that acquires a mutation that confers resistance
to that drug will be at a proliferative advantage. By the time this is recognized and treatment
with a second drug is started, it is likely that a cell resistant to both drugs will already have
emerged. b, Starting therapy with both drugs simultaneously means that cells acquiring
single resistance will be immediately eliminated by the other drug. Bozic et al.1 use
mathematical modelling to show that this approach increases the chance of effective
treatment.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 18.

