Commentary

Seize the Opportunity
Underutilization of Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy to Inform Targeted Cancer
Therapy Decisions
Douglas P. Clark, MD

Two years ago, Krishnamurthy presented a comprehensive review on the applications of molecular techniques to fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy samples, noting ‘‘the excellent potential of using material
procured from FNAB for almost any type of molecular test.’’1 She further observed that ‘whereas few of
these tests alone are used for patient care, some of them have the potential for clinical use in the near
future’’ and ‘‘most of the molecular tests using FNAB specimens are currently investigational.’’ This article
will provide an update on the current utilization of FNA-based tests to inform targeted cancer therapy
decisions, making the case that FNAs are underutilized for such testing. The emphasis will be on solid
tumors rather than sarcomas or lymphoma. Some of the major impediments to the widespread clinical utilization of FNAs for molecular tests will also be identified and possible solutions will be presented.
Molecularly Targeted Agents and Biomarkers

The recent emergence of targeted therapeutics for cancer offers the hope of personalized cancer care. By
definition, ‘‘targeted cancer therapies use drugs that block the growth and spread of cancer by interfering
with molecular and cellular changes that are specific to cancer.’’2 Although some might consider selective
estrogen receptor modulators for breast cancer to be targeted therapy, trastuzumab (Herceptin) is widely
regarded as the first true molecularly targeted agent. Since the approval of trastuzumab for advanced breast
carcinoma in 1998, 10 additional molecularly targeted agents have been approved for treatment of solid
tumors (Table 1). There is growing recognition that these therapies are most effective when given to the
subpopulations of patients whose tumors contain the molecular defect targeted by the drug.3 In general,
these molecular defects, or ‘biomarkers,’’ are broadly defined as follows: ‘‘a characteristic that is objectively
measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacological responses to a therapeutic intervention.’’4 Biomarker assays that determine whether a person’s cancer will respond to a specific treatment are termed predictive tests. These should be distinguished from tests
that simply assess an individual’s likelihood of disease progression or death, which are termed prognostic
tests. To date, predictive tests for solid tumors have focused primarily on the detection of defects in HER2,
EGFR, and KRAS (Table 1). These molecular defects may include protein expression (or overexpression)

Corresponding author: Douglas P. Clark, MD, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Rm. 406 Pathology Bldg., 600 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287;
Fax: (410) 614-9556; dclark@jhmi.edu
Departments of Oncology and Pathology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
Received: July 9, 2009; Revised: July 9, 2009; Accepted: July 29, 2009
Published online August 26, 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/cncy.20045, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

289

Commentary
Table 1. FDA-Approved Molecularly Targeted Therapies for Solid Tumors

Drug

Target

Indication

Biomarker Assay

Gefitnib (Iressa)
Erlotinib (Tarceva)

EGFR
EGFR

EGFR Gene Mutation; EGFR Protein Expression (IHC)
EGFR Gene Mutation; EGFR Protein Expression (IHC)

Sorafenib (Nexavar)
Sunitinib (Sutent)
Lapatinib (Tykerb)

RAF, VEGFR, PDGFR
PDGFR, VEGFR, c-KIT, FLT3
EGFR, HER2, ERK1/2, AKT

NSCLC
NSCLC; Pancreatic
Carcinoma
RCC; HCC
RCC, GIST
Breast Carcinoma

Temsirolimus (Torisel)
Everolimus (Afinitor)

mTOR
mTOR

RCC
RCC

Trastuzumab (Herceptin)

HER2

Breast Carcinoma

Bevacizumab (Avastin)

VEGF

Cetuximab (Erbitux)
Panitumumab (Vectibix)

EGFR
EGFR

CRC; NSCLC;
Breast Carcinoma
CRC; SCCHN
CRC

Small molecule antagonists

None
None
HER2 Protein Overexpression (IHC);
HER2 Gene Amplification (FISH)
None
None

Monoclonal antibodies
HER2 Protein Overexpression (IHC);
HER2 Gene Amplification (FISH)
None
EGFR Protein Expression (IHC); KRAS Gene Mutation
EGFR Protein Expression (IHC); KRAS Gene Mutation

CRC indicates colorectal cancer; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FLT3, Fms-related tyrosine kinase 3; GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumor; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; NSCLC, nonsmall cell lung carcinoma; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; RCC,
renal cell carcinoma; SCCHN, squamous cell carcinoma head and neck; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor.
Sources: http://www.cancer.gov/drugdictionary/; http://www.fda.gov

detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC), gene amplification detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), or the identification of specific mutations within
the genes themselves. There are also emerging tests based
on mRNA expression profiles derived from panels of multiple genes.
Identification of Target Expression and
Overexpression
HER2

One of the most widely used molecularly targeted
agents, trastuzumab, and the newer drug, lapatinib, are
indicated for HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast carcinoma. HER2 overexpression is detected in approximately 20% of breast cancers, and approximately 50%
of these women have an objective response to trastuzumab.5-8 Accurate identification of HER2 overexpressing
tumors has historically been challenging, and flawed testing has resulted in inappropriate therapy for patients.
Flaws in the IHC test have ranged from variable fixation
to subjectivity in interpretation.9 Lessons learned from
this experience have highlighted the paradigm shift in the
role of IHC from a qualitative test to characterize tumors
to a semiquantitative test to guide therapy.10
290

Recent American Society of Clinical Oncology
guidelines have stated that samples for HER2 IHC testing
should be fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for at
least 6 hours and no more than 48 hours. Any changes in
the test conditions ‘‘such as use of alternate fixatives’’ must
be validated against standard methods to demonstrate
concordance.5 Because the standardization of IHC-based
HER2 testing was based on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) core biopsies or surgically excised tissue,
cytopathologists have faced hurdles in extending HER2
IHC testing to FNA samples. One of the most commonly
utilized FDA-approved kits for HER2 IHC, the
HercepTest (Dako), was developed and validated for ‘routinely processed paraffin-embedded specimens that have
been fixed in neutral buffered formalin or Bouin’s fixative.’’11 The kit has not been validated for other fixatives.
In fact, alcohol-based fixatives, like those commonly used
in cytologic specimens, even cell block preparations, may
cause false positive results.12 Other commonly used cytologic preparation techniques such as direct smears or
monolayer preparations have not been validated for the
HercepTest kit. Although such preparations may yield
results, heightened expectations for reproducible and
accurate performance characteristics demand extensive
and thorough validation.
Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

Seize the Opportunity/Clark

Other features of the HER2 IHC test that create
challenges for cytologic specimens are the interpretation
criteria, which are based on histologic sections. Specifically, the HER2 score is based exclusively on the extent of
membrane staining, as opposed to cytoplasmic staining.
Such distinction may be extremely difficult in cytologic
preparations other than cell blocks. The relatively small
number of tumor cells in an FNA sample, compared with
an excised tumor, may also create scoring problems for
HER2 IHC because specimens near a cutoff of 10% positive tumor cells should have a minimum of 100 tumor
cells counted, according to the kit manufacturer.
FISH or chromogenic ISH-based HER2 tests are
indicated for breast tumors that are HER2 2 þ on IHC to
determine true HER2 overexpressing tumors through the
identification of HER2 gene amplification. It has been
suggested that FISH testing be utilized as the primary tool
for determining HER2 overexpressing tumors rather than
IHC.13 Like IHC-based tests, these, too, have been
developed and validated for FFPE samples rather than
noncell block cytologic preparations. The cell numbers
required for analysis (20-30 cells) are compatible with
typical FNA yields, but because of intra-tumoral heterogeneity in the degree of amplification, sampling artifacts
may affect the scoring.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
In addition to HER2, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a common target for several molecularly
targeted agents, including gefitinib, erlotinib, panitumumab and cetuximab. The monoclonal antibodies, panitumumab, and cetuximab, are indicated for EGFRexpressing metastatic colorectal carcinoma (CRC), which
represents approximately 75% of cases. Like HER2 overexpressing breast carcinoma, EGFR-expressing CRC can
be identified by IHC. The EGFR IHC test also presents
similar challenges as HER2 IHC test for cytologic samples. The FDA-approved EGFR IHC test, EGFR
PharmDx (Dako), was developed and validated only for
FFPE specimens.14 The interpretive criteria require evaluation of circumferential staining of cell membranes and
exclusion of cytoplasmic staining. Such criteria are not
readily transferred to traditional cytologic preparations
because of the lack of cell sectioning. In addition, membrane staining in 1% of tumor cells is considered an
Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

EGFR-expressing tumor, for purposes of cetuximab or
panitumumab therapy eligibility. Given the relatively limited sampling by FNA, this raises the possibility of false
negative results in limited samples and inappropriate
denial of cetuximab or panitumumab therapy.

Gene Mutation Tests
EGFR

EGFR mutations are predictive markers for response
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (gefitinib and erlotinib) in nonsmall cell lung cancer, and they are detected in
approximately 10% of lung cancer patients in the United
States. Of these, approximately 55%-75% of patients
demonstrate a complete or partial response in prospective
studies.15,16 Testing for EGFR mutations typically
involves sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)amplified EGFR DNA from areas known to harbor mutations. To avoid false negative results, sequencing-based
tests may require up to 50%-70% tumor cells in a sample.
Such testing may be provided by commercial laboratories,
such as Genzyme Genetics, or through individual laboratory developed tests. Genzyme Genetics’ Web site states
that it will accept ‘‘core needle biopsies, FNAs and pleural
effusions.’’17 They go on to state that ‘‘the smaller amount
of tissue usually present in these specimens can lower the
success rate of the assay.’’ Other more sensitive assays,
such as TheraScreen EGFR29 (DxS, Ltd.), are emerging
that may provide advantages over sequencing-based tests.
The methods used in this kit can purportedly detect <10
copies of mutant DNA in a sample containing just 1% tumor. But such exquisitely sensitive tests raise the concern
of detecting rare background mutations that are not relevant to therapeutic choices.
Unfortunately, it appears that relatively few EGFR
mutation tests are actually performed on FNA samples. In
a recent publication, Smouse et al reviewed 239 samples
from the Brigham and Women’s Hospital over 2 years
and found that only 4 of these samples were from FNAs
(plus 7 pleural fluids and 1 BAL).18 Similarly, we have
reviewed our experience at The Johns Hopkins Hospital
and found that of 59 specimens tested in 2008, only 6 of
these were from FNAs (plus 7 pleural fluids). In contrast,
a Swiss study of 84 consecutive cytologic specimens (35
transbronchial FNAs, 15 bronchial washings, 13 bronchial brushes, 5 bronchoalveolar lavages, and 16 pleural
291

Commentary

effusions) from nonsmall cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC),
which utilized DNA sequencing on laser capture microdissected tumor cells from cytologic preparations, was
able to achieve results from 93% of the samples and
obtain the best results from samples that contained at least
100 tumor cells.19 A group from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center has experience in the development
and application of EGFR mutation testing of both tissue
sections and cytologic clinical samples.20 In their summary of 334 lung cancer samples from a consecutive 12month period, they were able to use ‘‘some’’ cell bocks
from FNA samples (number not specified) and even 1
case of air-dried, Giemsa-stained FNA smears. Unfortunately, the only 2 samples that gave no result were from
FNA cell blocks.
A report from the Molecular Assay in NSCLC
Working Group of American Society of Clinical Oncology notes that ‘‘larger tumor samples are generally preferred’’ for NCSLC molecular assessment, while
acknowledging that minimally invasive biopsies such as
FNAs are often the only tumor samples available.21
Despite this, the recommendations from this Working
Group highlight further impediments to the utilization of
FNAs for this testing. In the preanalytical phase, they state
the following: ‘‘cytology smears are not acceptable for
IHC and FISH’’; ‘‘at least 3 representative areas should be
assessed per tumor section’’; ‘‘tissue block preferred’’;
‘‘minimum sample size is  2000 cells for IHC/mutation
analysis’’; ‘‘EGFR sequencing requires high tumor cell
content (50%-70% tumor cells)’’; ‘‘FFPE is standard.’’
These preanalytical requirements are reasonable, but such
recommendations from high-profile National working
groups create challenges for the future inclusion of FNA
samples into clinical trials and, consequently, into subsequent clinical care.
KRAS

KRAS mutations are found in approximately 40%
of CRCs, and a retrospective review of 5 trials of cetuximab or panitumumab has recently shown that patients
whose tumors harbor KRAS mutations will not benefit
from therapy utilizing these EGFR-targeting monoclonal
antibodies. This has lead the American Society of Clinical
Oncology to recommend KRAS mutation testing in all
CRC patients who are candidates for anti-EGFR antibody
therapy.22 The College of American Pathologists has also
292

issued a report detailing the appropriate sample types and
testing methods.23 Although much of this testing will be
performed on resected primary tumor samples of CRC,
metastatic lesions may also be used, which may be more
relevant to the cytopathologist. Like many other predictive molecular tests, the approved sample processing
methods include only fresh, frozen, or FFPE material. A
pathologist must confirm that the sample contains a sufficient number and percentage of tumor cells that is acceptable for the assay being used. Samples that do not contain
a sufficiently high percentage of tumor cells may have to
be enriched by macrodissecting areas of tumor on slides
for DNA extraction.
There is currently no FDA-approved test for KRAS
mutation detection, so validated laboratory developed
tests performed in CLIA-approved labs must be utilized.
Each test may have different sensitivities, and so sample
preparation will have to be matched to individual tests.
Several of the large CRC clinical trials utilized a test kit
(TheraScreen KRAS; DxS, Ltd.) that combines allele-specific PCR with real-time PCR technology for detection of
7 different mutations within codons 12 and 13 of KRAS.
This test can purportedly detect 1% of mutant KRAS in a
wild-type background. The exclusion of FNA samples
processed with traditional alcohol-based fixatives is not
due to the quality of the DNA within the fixed sample. In
fact, alcohol-based fixatives are significantly better fixatives for DNA than formalin, which can damage
DNA.24,25 Such damage may even result in artifacts that
yield false positive mutation detection, particularly when
using small amounts of DNA, such as that which might
be found in a cell block preparation from an FNA sample.26 Gaining a better understanding of this type of testing is essential because other gene mutations, such as
those from BRAF, may also begin to play an important
predictive role in CRC and other tumors, such as papillary
thyroid carcinoma.
Emerging mRNA-Based Profiling Tests

If pathologists are struggling to apply relatively simple tests to samples, such as PCR-based detection of isolated KRAS mutations, imagine the challenges presented
by the complex, multi-analyte, and mRNA-based tests
that are emerging.27 The most clinically relevant of these
include Oncotype DX (Genomic Health, Inc.) and Mammaprint (Agendia). Oncotype DX is a multi-gene
Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

Seize the Opportunity/Clark

expression profile test that may be utilized to determine
which women with early-stage, lymph node-negative
breast carcinoma will benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy. Similarly, Mammaprint is a 70-gene profile that
determines the risk for recurrence in early-stage breast
cancer patients. These complex tests fall under the FDA
heading of an in vitro diagnostic multivariate index assay.
To date, single commercial laboratories develop, validate, and exclusively offer such tests because of the strict
control necessary to produce valid test results. Neither
Oncotype DX nor Mammaprint is validated for FNA
samples; Mammaprint is validated for fresh or FFPE tissue and OncoType DX for FFPE tissue only. This is
despite the finding that FNAs might actually provide a
higher quality and quantity of mRNA from some samples than an FFPE core biopsy. Because the indications
for these tests are currently for early-stage breast cancer,
which is rarely biopsied via FNA in the United States,
it is unlikely that these commercial suppliers will invest
in the validation required for FNA samples. This
unfortunately sets another precedent for the exclusion of
FNA samples from an important class of predictive molecular testing.

Impediments to FNA-Based
Predictive Tests
FNA Biospecimen Issues

There is increasing awareness that the quality of biospecimens, such as FNAs, has a profound influence on
downstream molecular diagnostic test results. As stated by
the newly created National Cancer Institute Office of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research: ‘‘The reliability of
molecular data derived from . . . new analysis platforms is
dependent on the quality and consistency of biospecimens
being analyzed.’’28 Unfortunately, there are very few studies that rigorously compare the cellular composition of
FNA samples with the quantity and quality of the desired
analyte (DNA, mRNA, or protein) or the robustness of
the biomarker test utilizing the sample. As has been discussed in the section on EGFR mutation testing, sample
size and heterogeneity may have a profound effect on the
downstream molecular test results. Centeno et al utilized
‘‘benchtop’’ FNAs on a relatively small and diverse set of
surgically excised tumors to explore the role of needle
gauge and excursion number on the sample composition,
Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

RNA yield, and suitability for microarray analysis.29 They
found that the samples comprised 47%-98% tumor cells,
yielded cell counts that ranged from 10,000-1 million
cells per pass, and 0.92 ug-12 ug of total RNA. A multidisciplinary group at The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center has extensively used FNA samples of primary breast cancers for gene expression profiling. Such FNA samples typically contained 80% tumor
cells and yielded a mean of 3.6 ug of total RNA, which
was frequently suitable for microarray analysis.30 Far
more studies of this nature are necessary to elucidate the
molecular composition and biomolecule integrity of FNA
samples to consistently connect FNA samples to downstream molecular diagnostics.
In addition to the sample composition, the specimen preanalytical handling and processing methods have
a profound impact on biomolecules within the sample
and the quality of molecular tests based upon these molecules. As previously discussed, variability in the FFPE fixation and processing methods has historically confounded
HER2 IHC testing. Unfortunately, FNA samples are
exposed to an even greater variety of cytopreparation
methods than resected tissue. For example, samples may
be fixed in methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, formalin, or
some combination of these. Samples may be processed as
direct smears, cytospins, monolayer preparations, or cell
blocks. Historically, cytopreparation methods have been
geared toward optimization of cytomorphology to facilitate accurate microscopic diagnosis. Even Dr. Papanicolaou recognized the importance of cytopreparation and
preanalytical variability on the quality of cytologic diagnoses. In the 1940s, when challenged by an individual
who claimed that cytologic diagnoses were not possible,
Dr. Papanicolaou reviewed that individual’s prepared
samples and stated that he agreed: ‘‘I couldn’’t make a
cytologic diagnosis from such poor technical preparations.’’31 The science of cytopreparation was furthered in
the 1960s and 1970s by individuals like Dr. John K. Frost
and Gary Gill at Johns Hopkins, culminating in the
foundation of our currently utilized techniques.32 We
now need a new generation of cytotechnologists and
cytopathologists who are dedicated to optimizing and
standardizing FNA sample preparation methods not only
for cytomorphology, but also to preserve biomolecular integrity to enable seamless integration into molecular
testing.
293

Commentary

Predictive Test Development
When considering the impediments to FNA-based biomarker tests, it is useful to put them in the context of the
developmental pathways recently proposed by the NCI’s
Translational Working Group, specifically the Developmental Pathway for Biospecimen-Based Assessment
Modalities.33 The first step in this pathway is the definition of the clinical goals that are driving the biomarker development. One obvious goal is the development of
prognostic tests to determine outcome and tests predictive
of response to targeted therapies. This will require cytopathologists to be significantly engaged with the clinical
and therapeutic aspects of cancer care to be knowledgeable
partners in this process (Tables 2 and 3). Once specific
biomarker goals have been defined, a credentialing step is
necessary to determine which fundamental research observations yield candidate biomarkers with clinical potential.

In designing and conducting studies to determine the
diagnostic accuracy of any test, guidelines developed by
the Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy steering committee should be followed.34 The next step in the
developmental pathway is the identification of technical
challenges that require new enabling technologies. This
might involve the development of novel FNA processing
devices that are standardized and optimized for molecular
testing of FNA samples. In addition, to utilize specimens
obtained from minimally invasive biopsies, such as FNAs,
analytical technologies that are highly sensitive and permit
multiplexing will be required.
To move credentialed biomarkers forward, an
assessment modality, or biomarker assay, will then need
to be developed. Ideally, this assay development will be
aimed toward an assay that has the necessary performance
characteristics to implement in a clinical laboratory, not

Table 2. Glossary of Terms Relevant to Molecularly Targeted Agents and Biomarkers

Term

Definition

Adjuvant therapy
Analyte
Biomarker

Treatment given after the primary treatment to increase the chances of a cure.
The part of the sample that a test is designed to find or measure.
A characteristic that is objectively measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal
biological processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacological responses to a
therapeutic intervention.
An IVDMIA employs data, derived in part from one or more in vitro assays and an
algorithm that usually, but not necessarily, runs on software, to generate a result
that diagnoses a disease or condition or is used in the cure, mitigation, treatment,
or prevention of disease.
A test developed by a clinical laboratory for use only by that laboratory.
In cancer treatment, substances that kill cancer cells by targeting key molecules
involved in cancer cell growth.
Treatment given as a first step to shrink a tumor before the main treatment, usually
surgery, is given.
A condition or finding that can be used to help predict whether a person’s cancer
will respond to a specific treatment.
A situation or condition, or a characteristic of a patient, which can be used to
estimate the chance of recovery from a disease or the chance of the
disease recurring.

In vitro diagnostic multivariate index assay (IVDMIA)

Laboratory-developed test
Molecularly targeted therapy
Neoadjuvant therapy
Predictive factor
Prognostic factor

Sources: http://www.cancer.gov/dictionary; http://www.fda.gov

Table 3. Resources Relevant to Molecularly Targeted Agents and Biomarkers

Topic

Website

National Cancer Institute drug dictionary
FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Office of Oncology Drug Products
FDA in vitro diagnostics

http://www.cancer.gov/drugdictionary/
http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/CDER/

National Cancer Institute Office of Biorepositories
and Biospecimen Research
Oncology clinical practice guidelines

294

http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
ProductsandMedicalProcedures/InVitroDiagnostics/default.htm
http://biospecimens.cancer.gov/
http://www.nccn.org; http://www.asco.org

Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

Seize the Opportunity/Clark

just a research setting. For traditional biomarkers, this often utilizes archival specimens for retrospective studies. It
is the molecular diagnostics industry that oftentimes has
the necessary resources and expertise to facilitate such
complex method development and validation.35 Once
this analytical validation is complete, the biomarkers are
ready for clinical validation in clinical trials. It is important to note that while a biomarker test result might make
intuitive sense as a predictor of response, the ultimate
proof resides in clinical validation. It is also important to
note that a biomarker that is a clinically validated predictor in one tumor type or for a given drug may not be predictive in another tumor type, or for another drug of the
same class. Finally, different biomarker tests might have
very different performances so each biomarker test and
clinical indication needs to be individually validated.

Opportunities for the Future
One clear entry point for FNA-based predictive tests for
cancer is in the advanced disease setting. The first indications for most new molecularly targeted agents are typically in locally advanced or metastatic disease. Such
patients are often not surgical candidates, and so tissue
access for molecular characterization through a minimally
invasive approach, such as FNA is ideal. Many cancer
patients present with such advanced disease, including
approximately 50% of lung cancers, 20% of colon cancers, and 50% of pancreatic cancers.36 Recurrent disease
in lymph nodes or liver is also an obvious target for FNA
sampling. In metastatic breast cancer, it has been demonstrated that expression of estrogen/progesterone receptors
and EGFR may be significantly different in metastatic
lesions than in the primary tumor, which may impact
therapeutic decisions.37 In addition to this advanced disease setting, patients receiving neoadjuvant therapy may
be good candidates for molecular testing of FNA samples.
Such patients may demonstrate a complete pathologic
response to the therapy upon surgical resection, with minimal or no residual tumor, placing increased importance
on the molecular characterization of the initial biopsy.
Finally, the minimally invasive nature of FNA biopsies
opens the opportunity for serial sampling of an individual’s tumor, over time, to assess the efficacy of a targeted
therapy through molecular characterization, or to identify
molecular markers of resistance.
Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

FNA cytology needs to move beyond its perceived
second-class status to histologic sampling and establish
itself as an independent diagnostic modality to guide therapy. This will be accomplished by coupling cytomorphology with molecular characterization. Such independence
will also fuel creative new uses of FNA samples. For example, new techniques may be developed to exploit the finding that FNAs can procure a suspension of tumor cells
that are alive. This has been utilized to facilitate flow cytometric phenotyping of lymphomas, but it also opens the
door for the analysis of ‘‘ex vivo biomarkers,’’ ie, biomarkers that are evoked from live tumor cells outside the
body to reveal functional information about the tumor.
This has already been applied in the research setting to
characterize lymphoma and leukemia, as well as FNA
samples from solid tumors.38,39
If cytopathologists fail to rise to the challenge of molecular cytopathology, the information necessary to select
targeted therapy will be acquired from sources other than
FNAs. For example, circulating tumor cells can already
provide prognostic information about metastatic breast,
colorectal, and prostate cancers, and they can potentially
yield information about EGFR mutation status of lung
cancers.40–43 The field of proteomics promises to identify
protein markers in peripheral blood that serve as surrogates for tissue-based biomarkers.44 And advances in molecular imaging are increasingly producing noninvasive
radiologic tests to monitor tumor function and response
to therapy.45 Cytopathology is indeed both an art and a
science; however, we must increasingly strive to become
more scientific if we are to provide the high-quality,
value-added results, which are required to participate in
the current age of targeted cancer therapy.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
Dr. Clark is entitled to a share of equity as a founder of BioMarker
Strategies, LLC. He currently is an officer for the company. The
terms of this arrangement are being managed by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with its conflict of interest policies.

References
1.

Krishnamurthy S. Applications of molecular techniques to
fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Cancer. 2007;111:106-122.

2.

National Cancer Institute. Targeted cancer therapies NCI
fact sheet. Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/
factsheet/Therapy/targeted. Accessed July 3, 2009.

3.

Sawyers CL. The cancer biomarker problem. Nature. 2008;
452:548-552.

295

Commentary
4.

Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints: preferred definitions
and conceptual framework. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2001;
69:89-95.

5.

Wolff AC, Hammond ME, Schwartz JN, et al. American
Society of Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists guideline recommendations for human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 testing in breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25:118-145.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Use of chemotherapy plus a monoclonal antibody against HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER2. N Engl J
Med. 2001;344:783-792.
Vogel
safety
ment
J Clin

CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, et al. Efficacy and
of trastuzumab as a single agent in first-line treatof HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer.
Oncol. 2002;20:719-726.

Cobleigh MA, Vogel CL, Tripathy D, et al. Multinational
study of the efficacy and safety of humanized anti-HER2
monoclonal antibody in women who have HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer that has progressed after
chemotherapy for metastatic disease. J Clin Oncol.
1999;17:2639-2648.
Perez EA, Suman VJ, Davidson NE, et al. HER2 testing
by local, central, and reference laboratories in specimens
from the North Central Cancer Treatment Group
N9831 intergroup adjuvant trial. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:
3032-308.

10. Moeder CB, Giltnane JM, Moulis SP, Rimm DL.
Quantitative, fluorescence-based in-situ assessment of
protein expression. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;520:
163-175.
11. Dako. Dako herceptest package insert. Available at: http://
www.dakousa.com/prod_downloadpackageinsert.pdf?objectid¼
114972004. Accessed July 7, 2009.
12. Williams SL, Birdsong GG, Cohen C, Siddiqui MT. Immunohistochemical detection of estrogen and progesterone
receptor and HER2 expression in breast carcinomas: comparison of cell block and tissue block preparations. Int J
Clin Exp Pathol. 2009;2:476-480.
13. Sauter G, Lee J, Bartlett JM, Slamon DJ, Press MF. Guidelines for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing:
biologic and methodologic considerations. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:1323-1333.
14. Dako. Dako EGFR pharmDX package insert. Available at:
http://www.dakousa.com/prod_downloadpackageinsert.pdf?
objectid¼108133004. Accessed July 7, 2009.

17. GenzymeGenetics. Available at: www.genzymegenetics.com
Accessed July 7, 2009.
18. Smouse JHC, Cibas ES, Janne PA, Joshi VA, Zou KH,
Lindeman NI. EGFR mutations are detected comparably in
cytologic and surgical pathology specimens of nonsmall cell
lung cancer. Cancer Cytopathology. 2009;117:67-72.
19. Savic S, Tapia C, Grilli B, et al. Comprehensive epidermal
growth factor receptor gene analysis from cytological specimens
of non-small-cell lung cancers. Br J Cancer. 2008; 98:154-160.
20. Li AR, Chitale D, Riely GJ, Pao W, Miller VA, Zakowski
MF, et al. EGFR mutations in lung adenocarcinomas: clinical testing experience and relationship to EGFR gene copy
number and immunohistochemical expression. J Mol
Diagn. 2008;10:242-248.
21. Eberhard DA, Giaccone G, Johnson BE. Biomarkers of
response to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors in
Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Working Group: standardization for use in the clinical trial setting. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26:983-994.
22. Allegra CJ, Jessup JM, Somerfield MR, et al. American
Society of Clinical Oncology provisional clinical opinion:
testing for KRAS gene mutations in patients with metastatic
colorectal carcinoma to predict response to anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:2091-206.
23. CAP Technology Assessment Committee. KRAS mutation
testing for colorectal cancer (CRC). Available at: http://
www.cap.org/POET Accessed July 3, 2009.
24. Srinivasan M, Sedmak D, Jewell S. Effect of fixatives and
tissue processing on the content and integrity of nucleic
acids. Am J Pathol. 2002;161:1961-1971.
25. Akbari M, Hansen MD, Halgunset J, Skorpen F, Krokan
HE. Low copy number DNA template can render polymerase chain reaction error prone in a sequence-dependent
manner. J Mol Diagn. 2005;7:36-39.
26. Williams C, Ponten F, Moberg C, et al. A high frequency
of sequence alterations is due to formalin fixation of
archival specimens. Am J Pathol. 1999;155:1467-1471.
27. van’t Veer LJ, Bernards R. Enabling personalized cancer
medicine through analysis of gene-expression patterns.
Nature. 2008;452:564-570.
28. National Cancer Institute Office of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research. Available at: www.biospecimens.cancer.
gov Accessed July 7, 2009.

15. Rosell R, Perez-Roca L, Sanchez JJ, et al. Customized treatment in non-small-cell lung cancer based on EGFR mutations and BRCA1 mRNA expression. PLoS ONE. 2009;
4:e5133.

29. Centeno BA, Enkemann SA, Coppola D, Huntsman S,
Bloom G, Yeatman TJ. Classification of human tumors
using gene expression profiles obtained after microarray
analysis of fine-needle aspiration biopsy samples. Cancer.
2005;105:101-109.

16. Sequist LV, Martins RG, Spigel D, et al. First-line gefitinib
in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harboring somatic EGFR mutations. J Clin Oncol. 2008;
26:2442-249.

30. Symmans WF, Ayers M, Clark EA, et al. Total RNA yield
and microarray gene expression profiles from fine-needle
aspiration biopsy and core-needle biopsy samples of breast
carcinoma. Cancer. 2003;97:2960-2971.

296

Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

Seize the Opportunity/Clark

31. Graham R. The Cytologic Diagnosis of Cancer. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1963:335.
32. Gill GW. Cytopreparation for the pathologist. Available at:
http://www.cytopathology.org:80/website/download.asp?id¼
867 Accessed July 3, 2009.
33. Srivastava S, Gray JW, Reid BJ, Grad O, Greenwood A,
Hawk ET. Translational Research Working Group developmental pathway for biospecimen-based assessment modalities. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:5672-567.
34. Bossuyt PM, Reitsma JB, Bruns DE, et al. Towards
complete and accurate reporting of studies of diagnostic accuracy: the STARD initiative. Standards for
Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy. Clin Chem. 2003;49:
1-6.

38. Irish JM, Kotecha N, Nolan GP. Mapping normal and
cancer cell signalling networks: towards single-cell proteomics. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;6:146-155.
39. Rubio-Viqueira B, Mezzadra H, Nielsen ME, et al. Optimizing the development of targeted agents in pancreatic
cancer: tumor fine-needle aspiration biopsy as a platform
for novel prospective ex vivo drug sensitivity assays. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2007;6:515-523.
40. Maheswaran S, Sequist LV, Nagrath S, et al. Detection of
mutations in EGFR in circulating lung-cancer cells. N Engl
J Med. 2008;359:366-377.
41. Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ, et al. Circulating
tumor cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:781-791.

35. Lee JW, Devanarayan V, Barrett YC, et al. Fit-for-purpose method development and validation for successful biomarker measurement. Pharm Res. 2006;23:312328.

42. Cohen SJ, Punt CJ, Iannotti N, et al. Relationship of circulating tumor cells to tumor response, progression-free survival, and overall survival in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3213-3221.

36. National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology and
End Results (SEER) Program. Available at: www.seer.
cancer.gov Accessed July 7, 2009.

43. de Bono JS, Scher HI, Montgomery RB, et al. Circulating
tumor cells predict survival benefit from treatment in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2008;14:6302-639.

37. Wu JM, Fackler MJ, Halushka MK, et al. Heterogeneity of
breast cancer metastases: comparison of therapeutic target
expression and promoter methylation between primary
tumors and their multifocal metastases. Clin Cancer Res.
2008;14:1938-1946.

Cancer Cytopathology

October 25, 2009

44. Hanash SM, Pitteri SJ, Faca VM. Mining the plasma proteome for cancer biomarkers. Nature. 2008;452:571-579.
45. Weissleder R, Pittet MJ. Imaging in the era of molecular
oncology. Nature. 2008;452:580-589.

297

