Research Article

Whole-Body Subcellular Multicolor Imaging of Tumor-Host
Interaction and Drug Response in Real Time
1

1

1,2

Meng Yang, Ping Jiang, and Robert M. Hoffman
1

AntiCancer, Inc. and 2Department of Surgery, University of California, San Diego, California

Abstract
To noninvasively image cancer cell/stromal cell interaction in
the tumor microenvironment and drug response at the
cellular level in live animals in real time, we developed a
new imageable three-color animal model. The model consists
of green fluorescent protein (GFP)–expressing mice transplanted with dual-color cancer cells labeled with GFP in the
nucleus and red fluorescent protein in the cytoplasm. The
Olympus IV100 Laser Scanning Microscope, with ultra-narrow
microscope objectives (‘‘stick objectives’’), is used for threecolor whole-body imaging of the two-color cancer cells
interacting with the GFP-expressing stromal cells. In this
model, drug response of both cancer and stromal cells in the
intact live animal is also imaged in real time. Various in vivo
phenomena of tumor-host interaction and cellular dynamics
were imaged, including mitotic and apoptotic tumor cells,
stromal cells interacting with the tumor cells, tumor vasculature, and tumor blood flow. This new model system enables
the first cellular and subcellular images of unperturbed
tumors in the live intact animal. New visible real-time targets
for novel anticancer agents are provided in this model,
including the color-coded interacting cancer and stromal
cells, tumor vasculature, and blood flow. This imageable
model should lead to many new insights of in vivo cancer
cell biology and to novel drug discovery. [Cancer Res 2007;
67(11):5195–200]

Introduction
Fluorescent proteins can be used to visualize primary tumor
growth, tumor cell motility and invasion, metastatic seeding and
colonization, angiogenesis, and the interaction between the tumor
and its microenvironment (tumor-host interaction; refs. 1–6).
Fluorescent proteins of many different colors have now been
characterized, and these can be used to color-code cancer cells of a
specific genotype or phenotype. For example, the behavior of highly
metastatic cancer cells labeled with green fluorescent protein
(GFP) and low metastatic cancer cells labeled with red fluorescent
protein (RFP) can be directly compared in vivo (7). Alternatively,
the host and the tumor can be differentially labeled with
fluorescent proteins. For example, a transgenic mouse expressing
GFP in all of its cells, or in specific cells such as endothelial cells,
transplanted with tumor cells expressing RFP enables the
interaction between the tumor cells and the host cells to be

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Robert M. Hoffman, AntiCancer, Inc., San Diego, CA 92111.
Phone: 858-654-2555; Fax: 858-268-4175; E-mail: all@anticancer.com.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4590

www.aacrjournals.org

visualized in real time (8, 9). Real-time tracking of tumor growth
and metastasis can be carried out in the intact animal (1, 6). For
single-cell resolution, reversible acute skin flaps have been used
over many parts of the body (skin, brain, lung, liver, etc.; ref. 10).
Real-time imaging with fluorescent proteins is especially important
when evaluating the efficacy of therapeutics on metastasis and
tumor recurrence (11, 12).
Fluorescent proteins have very high extinction coefficients
ranging from 6,500 up to f95,000 (13). In addition, they have
very high quantum yields ranging from 0.24 up to 0.8 (14). These
properties make fluorescent proteins very bright. The large twophoton absorption of GFP is important for in vivo applications (14).
Another important feature is the spectral distinction between
many members of the family of fluorescent proteins; thus, a set of
multicolor fluorescent proteins can be used simultaneously for
multifunctional in vivo imaging. These properties make fluorescent
proteins optimal for cellular imaging in vivo.
Our laboratory pioneered the use of GFP for in vivo imaging in
1997 (5). With the use of GFP, individual cancer cells could be
observed in fresh unstained tissue or even the live animal for the
first time. In 2000, we showed that GFP could be used for wholebody imaging (6). The present report shows the use of GFP as well
as RFP to whole-body image color-coded interacting cancer and
stromal cells.
Cancer cells coexist in a complex association with host-stromal
tissue cells. The stroma provides the vascular supply to the tumor
in the angiogenesis process as well as many other cell types and
functions. The factors that regulate the development of the stromal
elements, as well as the influences these constituents have on the
tumor, are poorly understood. The lack of information about the
interaction between tumor and stroma can be attributed in part to
lack of suitable models (15). Tumor progression is a multistep
process accompanied by the accumulation of mutations in cancer
cells. However, it is now becoming clear that the tumor
microenvironment is also critical for malignancy, which is in part
the product of interaction between different cancer and host cell
types (16).
The heterogeneous and structurally complex nature of the
interactive tumor microenvironment is little understood. The
relative amount of stroma and its composition vary considerably
from tumor to tumor and vary within a tumor over the course of
tumor progression. The interaction between cancer cells and
stromal cells largely determines the phenotype of the tumor. For
example, recent studies have shown that the growth, invasiveness,
and angiogenesis of human breast tumor xenografts in mice
depend on the presence of stromal fibroblasts (17).
The tumor microenvironment is a potential therapeutic target.
Advantages to targeting the stroma cells are that the cells are
genetically stable unlike cancer cells and are therefore less likely to
develop drug resistance (18, 19). For example, anti–vascular endothelial growth factor antibodies, which inhibit formation of new blood
vessels in the tumor, are used to treat colorectal cancer (20).

5195

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

We developed a simple yet powerful technique for delineating
the morphologic events of tumor-induced angiogenesis and other
tumor-induced host processes with dual-color fluorescence. The
method clearly imaged implanted tumors and adjacent stroma,
distinguishing unambiguously the host and tumor-specific components of the malignancy in fresh tissue samples. The dual-color
fluorescence imaging was effected by using RFP-expressing tumors
growing in transgenic mice that express GFP in essentially all
nucleated cells. This model showed with great clarity the details of
the tumor-stroma interaction, especially tumor-induced angiogenesis and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (8).
To noninvasively visualize cellular and subcellular events in the
tumor microenvironment in real time in the live mouse, we used a
laser scanning microscope with a 0.3-mm-diameter stick objective
that is up to 2 cm in length. The system allows an imaging depth
that extends to at least 200 Am. This novel imaging system, coupled
with the use of the dual-color cancer cells and transgenic GFP
mouse, has enabled noninvasive in vivo imaging of the cancer and
stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment at the subcellular
level, the subject of the current report.

Materials and Methods
Production of RFP retroviral vector. For RFP retrovirus production,
the HindIII/NotI fragment from pDsRed2 (Clontech Laboratories, Inc.),
containing the full-length RFP cDNA, was inserted into the HindIII/NotI site
of pLNCX2 (Clontech Laboratories) that has the neomycin resistance gene
to establish the pLNCX2-DsRed2 plasmid. PT67, an NIH3T3-derived

packaging cell line (Clontech Laboratories) expressing the 10 Al viral
envelope, was cultured in DMEM (Irvine Scientific) supplemented with 10%
heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gemini Bio-products). For vector
production, PT67 cells, at 70% confluence, were incubated with a
precipitated mixture of LipofectAMINE reagent (Life Technologies, Inc.,
Grand Island, NY) and saturating amounts of pLNCX2-DsRed2 plasmid for
18 h. Fresh medium was replenished at this time. The cells were examined
by fluorescence microscopy 48 h after transduction. For selection of a clone
producing high amounts of a RFP retroviral vector (PT67-DsRed2), the cells
were cultured in the presence of 200 to 1,000 Ag/mL G418 (Life
Technologies) for 7 days (7).
Production of histone H2B-GFP vector. The histone H2B gene has no
stop codon, thereby enabling the ligation of the H2B gene to the 5¶-coding
region of the Aequoria victoria EGFP gene (Clontech Laboratories). The
histone H2B-GFP fusion gene was then inserted at the HindIII/ClaI site of
the pLHCX (Clontech Laboratories) that contains the hygromycin resistance
gene. To establish a packaging cell clone producing high amounts of a
histone H2BGFP retroviral vector, the pLHCX histone H2B-GFP plasmid
was transfected in PT67 cells using the same methods described above for
PT67-DsRed2. The transfected cells were cultured in the presence of 200 to
400 Ag/mL hygromycin (Life Technologies) for 15 days to establish stable
PT67 H2B-GFP packaging cells (7).
RFP gene transduction of cancer cells. For RFP gene transduction,
70% confluent mouse mammary tumor (MMT) cells or Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC) cells were used. To establish dual-color cells, clones of
cancer cells expressing RFP in the cytoplasm were initially established.
In brief, cancer cells were incubated with a 1:1 precipitated mixture of
retroviral supernatants of PT67-RFP cells and RPMI 1640 (Mediatech, Inc.)
containing 10% FBS for 72 h. Fresh medium was replenished at this time.
Cells were harvested with trypsin/EDTA 72 h after transduction and sub-

Figure 1. Whole-body, noninvasive,
three-color subcellular imaging of cancer
cell/stromal cell interaction in the live GFP
mouse. A, whole-body image of cancer
cell/stromal cell interaction of dual-color
MMT mouse mammary cancer cells.
B, whole-body image of cancer cell/
stromal cells interaction of dual-color LLC
cells. Dual-color cancer cells were injected
in the footpad of the GFP transgenic nude
mice. Whole-body images were acquired
with the Olympus IV100 laser scanning
microscope using the 3-mm stick
objective 14 d after cell injection. The
Olympus IV100 was also used for
whole-body optical sectioning at 10 Am
per section. C , a section 30 Am from
the surface of the Lewis lung tumor.
D , a section 80 Am from the surface. Note
the interdispersal of the dual-color cancer
cells among the GFP host stromal cells.
Bar, 20 Am.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

5196

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Noninvasive Imaging of the Tumor Microenvironment

Figure 2. Whole-body, noninvasive,
subcellular imaging of drug response of
dual-color mouse mammary cancer cells
and GFP stromal cells in the live GFP nude
mouse with and without doxorubicin.
Dual-color MMT cells were injected in the
footpad of GFP transgenic nude mice as
described in Fig. 1. A, whole-body image
of untreated dual-color MMT cells in the
footpad of a live GFP mouse. Note the
numerous spindle-shaped dual-color MMT
cells interdispersed among the GFP host
cells. B, whole-body image of MMT
dual-color cancer cells in a live GFP nude
mouse 12 h after treatment with
doxorubicin (10 mg/kg). The cancer cells
lost their spindle shape, and the nuclei
appear contracted. C, whole-body image
of dual-color MMT tumor. Numerous
dual-color spindle-shaped MMT cells
interacted with GFP-expressing host cells.
Well-developed tumor blood vessels and
real-time blood flow were visualized by
whole-body imaging (arrows ). D, in vivo
drug response of dual-color MMT tumor
12 h after i.v. injection of 10 mg/kg
doxorubicin. All of the visible MMT cells lost
their spindle shape. Many of the cancer
cells fragmented (arrows ). Tumor blood
vessels were damaged (dashed black
lines), and the number of cancer cells
was dramatically reduced 12 h after
chemotherapy. Bar, 20 Am.

cultured at a ratio of 1:15 in selective medium, which contained 200 Ag/mL
G418. The level of G418 was increased stepwise up to 800 Ag/mL. RFPexpressing cancer cells were isolated with cloning cylinders (Bel-Art Products)
using trypsin/EDTA and amplified by conventional culture methods (7).
Establishment of dual-color cancer cells. For establishing dual-color
cells, RFP-expressing cancer cells were then incubated with a 1:1
precipitated mixture of retroviral supernatants of PT67 H2B-GFP cells
and culture medium. To select the double transformants, cells were
incubated with hygromycin 72 h after transfection. The level of hygromycin
was increased stepwise up to 400 Ag/mL. Clones of dual-color cancer cells
were isolated with cloning cylinders under fluorescence microscopy. These
clones were amplified by conventional culture methods. These sublines
stably expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP in cytoplasm (7).
Transgenic GFP nude mice. Transgenic C57/B6-GFP mice were originally obtained from Prof. Masaru Okabe (Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan). C57/B6-GFP mice express GFP
under the control of the chicken h-actin promoter and cytomegalovirus
enhancer. All of the tissues from this transgenic line, with the exception of
erythrocytes and hair, express GFP. Ten-week-old transgenic GFP female
C57/B6 mice were crossed with 6- to 8-week-old BALB/c nu/nu or NCR
nu/nu male mice (Harlan). Male F1 mice were crossed with female F1
C57/B6 GFP mice to obtain GFP nude mice. When female F2 immunocompetent GFP mice were crossed with male GFP nude mice, or when F2
GFP nude male mice were back-crossed with female F1 immunocompetent
GFP mice, f50% of their offspring were GFP nude mice. GFP nude mice
can be consistently produced by the methods described above (9).
Footpad injection model. Dual-color cancer cells were washed thrice
with serum-free cold medium. GFP nude mice were injected with 1  106

www.aacrjournals.org

cells in a total volume of 20 AL serum-free medium into the right hind
footpad. Cells were injected within 30 min of harvest (7).
Laser scanning microscope. The Olympus IV100 microscope is a
scanning laser microscope. A 488-nm argon laser was used. The novel stick
objectives (as small as 1.3 mm) were designed specifically for this laser
scanning microscope. The very narrow objectives deliver very high resolution images (21). A PC computer running FluoView software (Olympus
Corp.) was used to control the microscope. All images were recorded and
stored as proprietary multilayer 16-bit Tagged Image File Format files (21).
All animal studies were conducted in accordance with the principles and
procedures outlined in the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Animals under
assurance A3873-1. Animals were kept in a barrier facility under HEPA
filtration. Mice were fed an autoclaved laboratory rodent diet (Tecklad LM485, Western Research Products).

Results and Discussion
Noninvasive color-coded imaging of tumors at the subcellular level in the live unperturbed mouse. Tumors that
developed from dual-color cancer cells in the footpad of GFP
nude mice are visualized at the cellular and subcellular level
in their microenvironment in Fig. 1. The cancer cells are the
MMT (Fig. 1A) and LLC (Fig. 1B). The cancer cells are doublelabeled expressing GFP in the nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm. The nuclei of the cancer cells appear yellow because
they are surrounded by RFP cytoplasm. The green cells are the
host cells because they express GFP only. Although both tumor

5197

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Whole-body, noninvasive,
subcellular imaging of drug response of
dual-color Lewis lung carcinoma cells and
GFP stromal cells in the live GFP nude
mouse. A to C , dual-color Lewis lung
carcinoma cells responding to taxol.
A, whole-body image of untreated
dual-color Lewis lung carcinoma cells in the
footpad of a live GFP mouse. Note the
numerous highly heterogenic dual-color
Lewis lung carcinoma cells interdispersed
among the GFP host stromal cells. Tumor
blood vessels also can be seen (dashed
black lines ). B, drug-induced cell death can
be seen in a live GFP nude mouse day
5 after treatment with taxol (5 mg/kg).
The tumor cells frequently fragmented with
separation of nucleus and cytoplasm
(arrows ). C, the number of cancer cells
was dramatically reduced by day 7 after
treatment with taxol (arrows ). D to F ,
dual-color Lewis lung carcinoma cells
responding to cisplatin. D, whole-body
image of untreated dual-color Lewis lung
carcinoma cells in the footpad of a live GFP
mouse. E, whole-body image of in vivo
drug response of dual-color Lewis lung
carcinoma day 2 after i.v. injection of
10 mg/kg cisplatin. Many Lewis lung
carcinoma cells lost their original shape.
The nuclei were condensed and the
cells were dying (white arrows ). These
dying tumor cells were surrounded by
lymphatic-like host cells (blue arrows).
F, the number of cancer cells was
dramatically reduced by day 3 after
treatment with cisplatin. Only a few dying
cancer cells and cell fragments can be
visualized (arrows ). Bar, 20 Am.

types contain numerous green stromal cells, the MMT tumor
seems more enriched in stromal cells. In both tumors, cancer cells are interdispersed between the stromal cells. The
stromal cells form a very significant portion of the tumor. The
stromal cells seem more heterogeneous in the Lewis lung
tumor. Dividing cancer cells can be visualized by their two
juxtaposed nuclei. Blood vessels are prominently seen in the
MMT tumor. They appear dark due to absorption of light by
hemoglobin in the red cells that do not express GFP. These are
the first images of tumors in the unperturbed live animal at
subcellular resolution.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Noninvasive color-coded scanning imaging of unperturbed
tumors in the live animal. Figure 1C and D shows the LLC-GFPRFP tumor being scanned from the outer surface to the inner. The
outer surface is mostly GFP host cells. Numerous host GFP
dendritic as well as other cell types can be seen at the surface. Other
stromal cells seem prominent as scans are made at 10-Am intervals.
At 80-Am depth, cancer cells become more predominant. Mitotic
cancer cells can be discerned by juxtaposed nuclei. Stromal cells are
observed in close proximity to cancer cells throughout the tumor.
Noninvasive color-coded imaging of the effects of chemotherapy in real time on cancer and stromal cells. In the

5198

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Noninvasive Imaging of the Tumor Microenvironment

Table 1. Efficacy of doxorubicin on cancer cells in a tumor determined by color-coded whole-body imaging
Condition
Before chemotherapy
After chemotherapy

Total area of cancer cells (pixels) per field

Cancer cells/tumor (pixels) per field

Total cancer cell number per field

54,223
22,194

54,223/194,697 (28%)
22,194/194,697 (11%)

50
28

NOTE: GFP transgenic mice were implanted with MMT cells expressing GFP in the nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm. Mice were treated with
doxorubicin and whole body imaged as described in Materials and Methods. Quantitative data were derived from Fig. 2A and B.

MMT tumor model, the cancer cells are sensitive to doxorubicin
(10 mg/kg, i.v.). The cancer cells lose their spindle shape, and
the nuclei tend to contract soon after treatment (Fig. 2A and B).
Tumor blood vessels could be visualized in the MMT tumor in the
live mouse (Fig. 2C). Twelve hours after treatment with doxorubicin, the cytoplasm seemed to fragment away from the tumor
cells, and the number of tumor cells was significantly reduced. The
GFP host stromal cells become highly elongated in some cases
(Fig. 2D). The data in Fig. 2A and B are quantitated in Table 1. In
the Lewis lung tumor, cancer cells are sensitive to taxol (5 mg/kg,
i.v.) and cisplatin (10 mg/kg, i.v.). Color-coded interacting cancer
and stromal cells and tumor blood vessels were imaged before
chemotherapy (Fig. 3A and D). On day 5 after treatment
with taxol, the cytoplasm seemed to fragment from the cancer
cells (Fig. 3B), and the number of cancer cells was significantly
reduced by day 7 after treatment (Fig. 3C). In the case of cisplatin,
the nuclei of the cancer cells condensed. The shape of the cancer
cells changed by day 2 after treatment, and they become surrounded by lymphatic-like GFP host stromal cells (Fig. 3E). On day
3 after treatment, the number of cancer cells was dramatically
reduced (Fig. 3F). The three-color imaging model described here
allows for the first time the ability to noninvasively observe drug
response at the subcellular level in tumors in the living animal.
Noninvasive color-coded imaging of tumor blood flow before
and after chemotherapy. Before treatment, numerous GFPexpressing host cells can be seen in the tumor blood flow. After
treatment, the number of GFP-expressing host cells in the blood
flow was greatly reduced, and RFP cytoplasmic fragments were
observed, which were stripped from the cancer cells due to chemotherapy. See Supplementary Material for movies for whole-body
imaging of tumor blood flow before and after chemotherapy.
The results described here are a significant improvement from
the inserted-window models of Jain et al. (22) or of the skin flap
models we have previously developed to image tumors (8, 23).
A striking observation is the interdispersal of cancer cells among
the host stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment. Such
observations were made possible by using the Olympus IV100
Intravital Laser Scanning Microscope, a ubiquitously-expressing
GFP mouse as a host, and cancer cells expressing RFP in the

References
1. Hoffman RM. The multiple uses of fluorescent
proteins to visualize cancer in vivo . Nat Rev Cancer
2005;5:796–806.
2. Hoffman RM, Yang M. Subcellular imaging in the live
mouse. Nature Protocols 2006;1:775–82.

www.aacrjournals.org

cytoplasm and GFP in the nucleus that appears yellow due to the
surrounding RFP cytoplasm. We also showed the usefulness of this
model to noninvasively image chemotherapy of tumors in real time
at the subcellular level, which distinguishes efficacy on cancer and
stromal cells. Tumor blood flow was readily imaged, and striking
changes were observed after chemotherapy. The ultra-narrow
objectives of this scanning imager enable the very high resolution
whole-body images obtained in the present study.
The new technology described in this report enables clear colorcoded distinction of cancer and stromal cells without perturbing
the tumor or the animal. Future experiments will develop techniques to differentially label cancer and stromal cells in cancer
patients’ surgical specimens in order to transplant and image
cancer cell/stromal cell interactions in patient tumors as we did for
the tumor cell lines in the present study. The patient specimens
will give further opportunity to screen for new drugs that specifically target stromal cells that play a critical role in tumor behavior,
in particular, malignancy.
The results described here are also an improvement on the study
previously done with the IV100 where the ‘‘stick’’ objective was
inserted into the animal (21). Although this was a useful
application of this instrument, the present report shows that the
IV100 can be used for whole-body, completely noninvasive colorcoded imaging at the subcellular level with very high resolution.
The Supplementary Movies strikingly show the power of this
technology to noninvasively image color-coded cancer and stroma
cells in real time in the unperturbed tumor, including tumor blood
flow. This capability depends on having a model expressing multiplecolored fluorescent proteins. This new technology opens many new
possibilities for studying cancer cell/stromal cell interactions in the
microenvironment noninvasively at the cellular level and as a new
approach for in vivo cell biology and drug discovery.

Acknowledgments
Received 12/13/2006; revised 2/14/2007; accepted 3/16/2007.
Grant support: National Cancer Institute grants CA103563 and CA099258
(AntiCancer).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

3. Hoffman RM, Yang M. Color-coded fluorescence
imaging of tumor-host interactions. Nature Protocols
2006;1:928–35.
4. Hoffman RM, Yang M. Whole-body imaging with
fluorescent proteins. Nature Protocols 2006;1:1429–38.
5. Chishima T, Miyagi Y, Wang X, et al. Cancer invasion
and micrometastasis visualized in live tissue by green

5199

fluorescent protein expression. Cancer Res 1997;57:
2042–7.
6. Yang M, Baranov E, Jiang P, et al. Whole-body optical
imaging of green fluorescent protein-expressing tumors
and metastases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:1206–11.
7. Yamamoto N, Jiang P, Yang M, et al. Cellular dynamics
visualized in live cells in vitro and in vivo by differential

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

dual-color nuclear-cytoplasmic fluorescent-protein expression. Cancer Res 2004;64:4251–6.
8. Yang M, Li L, Jiang P, et al. Dual-color fluorescence
imaging distinguishes tumor cells from induced host
angiogenic vessels and stromal cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2003;100:14259–62.
9. Yang M, Reynoso J, Jiang P, et al. Transgenic nude mouse
with ubiquitous green fluorescent protein expression as a
host for human tumors. Cancer Res 2004;64:8651–6.
10. Yang M, Baranov E, Wang J-W, et al. Direct external
imaging of nascent cancer, tumor progression, angiogenesis, and metastasis on internal organs in the
fluorescent orthotopic model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2002;99:3824–9.
11. Katz MH, Bouvet M, Takimoto S, et al. Selective
antimetastatic activity of cytosine analog CS-682 in a
red fluorescent protein orthotopic model of pancreatic
cancer. Cancer Res 2003;63:5521–5.
12. Katz MH, Bouvet M, Takimoto S, et al. Survival

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

efficacy of adjuvant cytosine-analogue CS-682 in a
fluorescent orthotopic model of human pancreatic
cancer. Cancer Res 2004;64:1828–33.
13. Verkhusha V, Lukyanov KA. The molecular properties
and applications of Anthozoa fluorescent proteins and
chromoproteins. Nat Biotechnol 2004;22:289–96.
14. Zimmer M. Green fluorescent protein (GFP): applications, structure and related photophysical behavior.
Chem Rev 2002;102:759–81.
15. Folkman J. Angiogenesis and apoptosis. Semin
Cancer Biol 2003;13:159–67.
16. Paget S. The distribution of secondary growths in
cancer of the breast. Lancet 1889;133:571–3.
17. Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, et al. Stromal
fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas
promote tumor growth and angiogenesis through
elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell 2005;121:335–48.
18. Ferrara N, Kerbel RS. Angiogenesis as a therapeutic
target. Nature 2005;438:967–74.

5200

19. Kerbel RS. A cancer therapy resistant to resistance.
Nature 1997;390:335–6.
20. Chen HX, Mooney M, Boron M, et al. Phase
II multicenter trial of bevacizumab plus fluorouracil and leucovorin in patients with advanced
refractory colorectal cancer: an NCI Treatment
Referral Center Trial TRC-0301. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:
3354–60.
21. Alencar H, Mahmood U, Kawano Y, Hirata T,
Weissleder R. Novel multiwavelength microscopic scanner for mouse imaging. Neoplasia 2005;7:977–83.
22. Jain RK, Munn LL, Fukumura D. Dissecting tumour
pathophysiology using intravital microscopy. Nat Rev
Cancer 2002;2:266–76.
23. Yamauchi K, Yang M, Jiang P, et al. Development of
real-time subcellular dynamic multicolor imaging of
cancer cell trafficking in live mice with a variablemagnification whole-mouse imaging system. Cancer Res
2006;66:4208–14.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Whole-Body Subcellular Multicolor Imaging of Tumor-Host
Interaction and Drug Response in Real Time
Meng Yang, Ping Jiang and Robert M. Hoffman
Cancer Res 2007;67:5195-5200.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5195
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/06/07/67.11.5195.DC1

This article cites 23 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5195.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 14 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5195.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

