Correspondence

Reply to Treatment Decisions and
Outcome in Very Elderly Patients
With Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma
We appreciate the insightful letter by Fabbri et al regarding
our article.1 Because patients aged >80 years have the highest incidence of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
yet are rarely included in studies, we sought to characterize
treatment and survival patterns in this population. We
found that in patients with DLBCL who were aged >80
years (1156 patients), treatment with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone
(R-CHOP) was associated with the longest survival, even
after controlling for potential confounders such as performance status and comorbidity.
Although the data from our study suggested that age
alone should not be a contraindication to effective treatment, we agree with Fabbri et al that anthracycline toxicity is
a major concern in very elderly patients given their decreased
functional and physiologic reserve. Indeed, a recent study
found that approximately one-third of elderly patients with
DLBCL who received anthracycline-based therapy experienced toxicity requiring treatment modification.2 As alternatives, Fabbri et al have thoughtfully suggested reduced doses
of R-CHOP, non-anthracycline-based regimens, and nonpegylated liposomal doxorubicin in this population.
In addition to the aforementioned treatment modifications, radiotherapy also may be beneficial for elderly
patients with DLBCL. A recent study revealed that elderly
patients with limited-stage DLBCL who were treated with
abbreviated R-CHOP and radiotherapy (359 patients)
had a decreased risk of second-line therapy and febrile
neutropenia compared with patients treated with fullcourse R-CHOP alone (515 patients); overall survival was
similar between the 2 groups.3 These results suggest that
abbreviated R-CHOP with radiotherapy may be better
tolerated in elderly patients with limited-stage DLBCL,
and future studies should further investigate this treatment
regimen. In conclusion, we agree with the points raised by
Fabbri et al and advocate for further studies examining alternative DLBCL treatment regimens for elderly patients
who cannot tolerate standard therapy with R-CHOP.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported by National Cancer Institute grant R21 CA158686 (to
Dr. Flowers) and an American Society of Hematology Clinical
Scholars Award.
3748

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Flowers has acted as a paid consultant for Spectrum, Celgene,
Optum Rx, and Seattle Genetics and as an unpaid consultant for
Genentech, Biogen-Idec, Roche, and Millennium/Takeda for work
performed outside of the current study. Dr. Flowers has received
research funding from AbbVie, Acerta Pharma, Celgene, Gilead
Sciences, Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Millennium/Takeda, Spectrum, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, and Pharmacyclics for work performed outside of the current study. Dr.
Flowers has also received payment from Clinical Care Options and
Educational Concepts for the development of educational
presentations.

REFERENCES
1. Williams JN, Rai A, Lipscomb J, Koff JL, Nastoupil LJ, Flowers CR.
Disease characteristics, patterns of care, and survival in very elderly
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Cancer. 2015;121:18001808.
2. Davis CC, Cohen JB, Shah KS, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of
anthracycline-based therapy in elderly patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2015;15:270277.
3. Odejide OO, Cronin AM, Davidoff AJ, LaCasce AS, Abel GA.
Limited stage diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: comparative effectiveness
of treatment strategies in a large cohort of elderly patients. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56:716-724.

Jessica N. Williams MD, MPH
Emory University School of Medicine
Atlanta, Georgia

Jean L. Koff, MD
Department of Hematology and Oncology
Winship Cancer Institute
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia

Christopher R. Flowers MD, MS
Department of Hematology and Oncology
Winship Cancer Institute
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29508, Published online June 25, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

The Long and Winding Road in
Cancer Survivorship Care
Primary care providers (PCPs) are playing a central role in
cancer survivorship. This is a consequence of an increasing
number of cancer survivors (in 2010 in Italy, a total of
2,587,347 patients survived after a cancer diagnosis1) and
the impossibility of oncologists following patients even after active phases of treatment, due to reduced staff numbers and the amount of time available for each individual
patient.
The choice of Dawes et al2 to focus their attention on those PCPs who practice outside of major
Cancer

October 15, 2015

