Original Article

Antimetastatic Activity of Honokiol in
Osteosarcoma
Patrick Steinmann, MD, MSc1; Denise K. Walters, PhD1; Matthias J. E. Arlt, PhD1; Ingo J. Banke, MD1; Urs Ziegler, PhD2;
Bettina Langsam, TA1; Jack Arbiser, MD, PhD3,4; Roman Muff, PhD1; Walter Born, PhD1; and Bruno Fuchs, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: Metastasizing osteosarcoma has a mean 5-year survival rate of only 20% to 30%. Therefore, novel
chemotherapeutics for more effective treatment of this disease are required. METHODS: The antineoplastic activity
of honokiol, which was demonstrated previously in numerous malignancies, was studied in vivo in C3H mice subcutaneously injected with syngeneic b-galactosidase bacterial gene (lacZ)-expressing LM8 osteosarcoma (LM8-lacZ) cells.
In vitro cytotoxic effects of honokiol were investigated in 8 human and 2 murine osteosarcoma cell lines with different in vivo metastatic potential. RESULTS: Seven days after subcutaneous flank injection of LM8-lacZ cells, daily intraperitoneal treatment of mice with 150 mg/kg honokiol reduced the number of micrometastases in the lung by 41%
and reduced the number of macrometastases in the lung and liver by 69% and 80%, respectively, compared with control. Primary tumor growth was not inhibited. In osteosarcoma cell lines, honokiol inhibited the metabolic activity
with a half-maximal concentration (IC50) between 8.0 lg/mL and 16 lg/mL. Cyclosporin A partially reversed the inhibition of metabolic activity in LM8-lacZ cells. Cell proliferation and wound healing migration of LM8-lacZ cells were
inhibited by honokiol with an IC50 between 5.0 lg/mL and 10 lg/mL. Higher concentrations caused rapid cell death,
which was distinct from necrosis, apoptosis, or autophagy but was associated with swelling of the endoplasmic reticulum, cytoplasmic vacuolation, and morphologically altered mitochondria. CONCLUSIONS: Honokiol exhibited prominent antimetastatic activity in experimental osteosarcoma and caused rapid cell death in vitro that was unrelated to
necrosis, apoptosis, or autophagy. The authors concluded that honokiol has considerable potential for the treatment
C 2011 American Cancer Society.
of metastasizing osteosarcoma. Cancer 2012;118:2117-27. V
KEYWORDS: cytotoxicity, honokiol, metastasis, osteosarcoma.

INTRODUCTION

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant bone tumor predominantly occurring in childhood and
adolescence. Current therapy includes surgical tumor resection and multiagent chemotherapy. The introduction of (neo)adjuvant chemotherapy has increased the 5-year survival rate for localized disease by greater than 50% compared with surgery alone. In contrast, patients who present with metastases at diagnosis continue to have a poor prognosis with 5-year
survival rates of 20% to 30%.1,2 Moreover, currently approved agents exhibit major side effects (for reviews, see Longhi et
al and Marina et al1,2). Thus, the development of novel agents with increased efficiency and reduced toxicity for the treatment of osteosarcoma and metastatic disease in particular is essential.
Honokiol, a biphenolic compound present in Magnolia tree extracts, has been used for centuries in traditional Chinese and Japanese medicine to treat anxiety, thrombotic stroke, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Cardioprotective,3,4 antimicrobial,5 anti-inflammatory,6,7 and antiangiogenic8,9 properties also have been reported. It is noteworthy that honokiol
has demonstrated antineoplastic properties in vitro against a variety of cancers.8-18 Furthermore, honokiol was effective in
vivo in angiosarcoma,8 colorectal carcinoma,14 breast cancer,17 and gastric cancer18 and inhibited bone metastasis in a murine prostate cancer model.16 Moreover, honokiol potentiated the effects of various other chemotherapeutic drugs in
vitro9,11,16 and in vivo16 and demonstrated the ability to overcome chemoresistance in human multiple myeloma cells.9
Several studies with tumor cells suggested that the cytotoxicity of honokiol is brought about predominantly through
Corresponding author: Bruno Fuchs, MD, PhD, Department of Orthopedics, Balgrist University Hospital, Forchstrasse 340, 8008 Zurich, Switzerland; Fax: (011)
41-44-386-1669; research@balgrist.ch
1
Laboratory for Orthopedic Research, Department of Orthopedics, University of Zurich, Switzerland; 2Center for Microscopy and Image Analysis, University of Zurich, Switzerland; 3Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; 4Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical Center, Atlanta, Georgia

The first 3 authors contributed equally to this article.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26434, Received: March 17, 2011; Revised: June 15, 2011; Accepted: June 16, 2011, Published online September 20, 2011 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

April 15, 2012

2117

Original Article

activation of distinct apoptotic mechanisms.8,9,13,14,16
Honokiol is well tolerated,8,14,16 has good bioavailability
in vivo,14 and is available orally,19,20 making it an attractive novel agent for the treatment of patients with
osteosarcoma.
In the current study, the antineoplastic properties of
honokiol were examined in the syngeneic LM8/C3H
mouse osteosarcoma model.21,22 Mice that were injected
subcutaneously into the flank with b-galactosidase bacterial gene (LacZ)-transduced LM8 (LM8-LacZ) cells,
developed local primary tumors, which metastasized to
lung and liver. Daily intraperitoneal treatment of the mice
with honokiol inhibited metastasis to both lung and liver.
The promising antineoplastic activity of honokiol
observed in this mouse osteosarcoma model was investigated further in vitro in 1 more mouse cell line and in 8
human osteosarcoma cell lines with differing metastatic
activities. Mechanistically, the cytotoxic effects of honokiol in LM8 cells were investigated by transmission electron microscopy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tissue Culture and Reagents
The human osteosarcoma cell lines SAOS-2 (HTB-85),
HOS, and 143B and the human embryonic kidney cell
line HEK293-T were obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection (Rockville, Md). SAOS-2-derived
LM5 cells were provided by E. S. Kleinerman (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Tex). The human osteosarcoma MG-63 cell line was
obtained from G. Sarkar (Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minn), and the MG-63 M8 cell subline was obtained
from W. T. Zhu (Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China). The mouse
osteosarcoma cell lines Dunn and LM8 were provided by
T. Ueda (Osaka National Hospital, Osaka, Japan). All of
these cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco Modified Eagle
Medium/Ham F12 medium (1:1 dilution; Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, Calif) containing 10% fetal calf serum (tissue
culture medium), 1 U/mL penicillin G, and 1 lg/mL
streptomycin (Invitrogen). The human osteosarcoma cell
lines HU09 and HU09 M132 were provided by M. Tani
(National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan) were
grown in RPMI medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with
10% fetal calf serum, 1 U/mL penicillin G, and 1 lg/mL
streptomycin. All cells were cultured in a tissue culture incubator at 37 C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2.

2118

Honokiol and cyclosporin A were purchased from SigmaAldrich Chemical Company (St. Louis, Mo).
Antineoplastic Activity of Honokiol in the
LM8 Mouse Osteosarcoma Model
Eight-week-old female C3H/HeNCrl mice (20 g average
body weight) obtained from Charles River Laboratories
(Wilmington, Mass) were housed according to the guidelines of the Federal Veterinary Office (FVO) and the
experiments were approved by the authorities of the Canton of Zurich. Syngeneic LM8 osteosarcoma cells were
transduced retrovirally with a cytomegalovirus promoterdriven lacZ gene (LM8-lacZ cells) to facilitate and
improve their identification and localization in primary
tumors and metastases as reported previously.23 On experimental day 0, 107 LM8-lacZ cells in 200 lL phosphate-buffered saline were injected subcutaneously into
the left flank of the mice. On experimental day 7, the
length and width of the primary tumors were measured
with a caliper, and the tumor volume (length  width2/2)
was calculated. The mice were then divided randomly
into 2 groups of equal number, which were treated daily
with intraperitoneal honokiol (150 mg/kg) in 300 lL
Intralipid (vehicle) (Fresenius Kabi, Bad Homburg, Germany) or with 300 lL vehicle alone. The health of the
mice was monitored daily, and the tumor size was measured once weekly. On experimental day 25, the mice were
killed, and the primary tumor, the lungs, and the liver
were prepared as recently reported.23 The left lobe of the
lung and the 2 upper and the middle lobes of the liver
were stained with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-D-galactoside (X-gal), and the lacZ-expressing metastases were
quantified as described below.
Quantification of LM8-LacZ Cell-Derived
Lung and Liver Metastases
Tissues were treated as described previously.23 Stained
lungs and livers were photographed with a Kappa PS 20 C
digital camera (Kappa Opto-Electronics GmbH, Gleichen, Germany) connected to an OpMi-1 binocular
microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany), and the
images were imported as TIF files into Power Point software (MicroSoft Inc., Redmond, Wash). Then, macrometastases on organ surfaces, defined as indigo bluestained foci >0.1 mm in greatest dimension, were
counted. Micrometastases on organ surfaces, defined as
indigo blue-stained foci <0.1 mm in greatest dimension,
were counted in 10 randomly selected close-up images of
individual organs in an area of 1 mm2 defined by a

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Honokiol in Experimental Osteosarcoma/Steinmann et al

superimposed counting grid. Close-up images of 10 mm2
were taken with the Kappa PS 20 C digital camera connected to an Eclipse E600 microscope (Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) and imported as TIF files into Power
Point software.
Metabolic Proliferation Assay
Individual cell lines that had been seeded into 96-well
plates at a density of 3000 cells per well and grown overnight were incubated for indicated periods in the absence
or presence of honokiol at indicated concentrations. A
potential protective action of cyclosporine A counteracting the cytotoxic activity of honokiol was investigated in
cells that were seeded at 5000 to 10,000 cells per well and
grown for 24 hours. The cells were preincubated for 2
hours with 10 lM cyclosporin A and then incubated for 2
hours with honokiol in the presence of cyclosporin A. The
metabolic activity of drug-treated and nontreated cells
was assessed after 2 to 3 hours of incubation with 10 lL
per well WST-1 reagent (Roche Diagnostics Corp., Indianapolis, Ind ), which is cleaved to formazan by mitochondrial dehydrogenases in metabolizing cells. Formazan was
quantified at 415 nm with a scanning multiwell spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, Calif). Metabolic activity was expressed as the percentage of formazan formation
in honokiol-treated cells compared with the percentage of
formation in untreated control cells set to 100%. The
half-maximal growth inhibitory concentration (IC50) of
honokiol was calculated with Prism 4 network software
(GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, Calif).
Proliferation Assay
For the proliferation assay, 105 LM8-lacZ cells were
seeded in 12.5-cm2 flasks. After adhesion for 3 hours, the
cells were treated or were left untreated (control cells) at
the indicated concentrations of honokiol for 45 hours.
Nontreated control cells reached approximately 50% confluence. The total number of cells per flask was counted
with a Neubauer chamber. The recovery of the cells from
honokiol treatment was assessed by seeding the remaining
cells at a density of <105 cells per 25-cm2 flask. Cells
treated with 10 lg/mL honokiol or with 12.5 lg/mL to
20 lg/mL honokiol were then allowed to grow in the absence of honokiol for 3 days or for up to 11 days, respectively, and then were counted as described above.
Doubling times (t1/2; hours) were calculated according to
the equations N ¼ No ekt and t1/ 2 ¼ ln2/k (N ¼ cell
number; No ¼ number of seeded cells; t ¼ time; k ¼ variable parameter).

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Figure 1. Honokiol does not affect subcutaneous primary tumor growth of b-galactosidase bacterial gene (lacZ)-expressing LM8 mouse osteosarcoma (LM8-lacZ) cells in syngeneic
C3H mice. (A) Mice were treated daily with intraperitoneal
injections of vehicle (triangles) or 150 mg/kg honokiol
(circles). Data are expressed as the mean  standard error of
the mean (n ¼ 9; P > .05 at all time points). (B) These are
representative images of LM8-lacZ cell-derived subcutaneous
tumors in C3H mice that were treated daily with (i) vehicle or
(ii) 150 mg/kg honokiol.

Wound-Healing Migration Assay
Cells were seeded into 24-well plates at approximately
40% confluence. At confluence, the cells were preincubated in the absence (control) or in the presence of indicated concentrations of honokiol at 37 C for 3 hours. A
wound that measured between 0.6 mm and 1 mm in
width and approximately 1 cm in length was then applied,
and cell debris was removed by washing with tissue culture
medium. Homogenous wound areas were marked with a
Nikon object marker attached to a Nikon Diaphot microscope (Fig. 1B). The widths of the wounds in marked
areas were measured with a Nikon ocular with a graded 1mm scale immediately after wounding (Do) and after

2119

Original Article

further incubation under prewounding conditions for 20
hours (Dt). Migration rates (lm/hour) were calculated
with the equation (Do  Dt)/2  20 hours.
Microscopic Examination of Honokiol-Evoked
Vacuolation
Cells were seeded (1:10) on coverslips in 24-well plates
and allowed to grow for 2 days. After preincubation in the
absence or in the presence of 10 lM cyclosporin A, the
cells were incubated with 15 lg/mL honokiol for 2 hours
and then fixed with 10% formalin for 10 minutes. Then,
the cells were mounted with ImmuMount (Thermo Scientific, Fremont, Calif ) and photographed with an AxioCam MrC camera (Zeiss) attached to a Zeiss Observer.Z1
microscope with a 40 objective.
Transmission Electron Microscopy
Cells were seeded on carbon-coated cover slides in 6-well
plates at a density of 10,000 cells per cm2 and allowed to
adhere for 24 hours. Then, the cells were left untreated
or were treated with 15 lg/mL honokiol for either 1.5
hours or 6 hours. Cells were first fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde and sequentially treated with 1% OsO4 and
1.5% K4Fe(CN)6 in 100 mM sodium phosphate, pH
7.2, for 30 minutes. The cells were dehydrated in an
ethanol series and embedded in Epon (Catalys, Dubendorf, Switzerland ). Ultrathin (50 nm) sections were contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and were
examined with a CM100 transmission electron microscope (Philips, Amsterdam, the Netherlands).
Statistical Analysis
The results are presented here as means  standard errors
of the mean. Statistical analysis of in vivo data was performed with the Mann-Whitney rank-sum test, and the
t test was used to analyze in vitro data. P values < .05 were
considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
Honokiol Inhibits Spontaneous Lung and
Liver Metastasis but Does Not Inhibit Primary
Tumor Growth
In the current study, the antineoplastic properties of honokiol were examined in a syngenic LM8 mouse osteosarcoma model. In this model, subcutaneous inoculation of
LM8-lacZ cells in the flank of C3H mice resulted in the
formation of local primary tumors and spontaneous metastasis, predominantly to the lung and the liver. Indeed,
all mice injected with 1  107 LM8-lacZ cells developed

2120

local primary tumors within 7 days and had an average tumor volume of 79.9  5.7 mm3. Subsequent daily intraperitoneal bolus injections of 150 mg/kg honokiol did not
inhibit progressive primary tumor growth. The increase
in tumor volume over time was indistinguishable in honokiol-treated mice and vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 1). At sacrifice, tumors in honokiol-treated mice appeared even
slightly larger than those in untreated animals and tumor
necrosis was not observed (results not shown).
However, the antimetastatic activity of honokiol
became evident when spontaneous metastasis of LM8-lacZ
cells to the lung and the liver were compared in tumorbearing, honokiol-treated mice and in vehicle-treated control animals. The mean number of X-gal-stained macrometastases (>0.1 mm in greatest dimension) on lung surfaces
decreased significantly by 69.6%  9.2% from 116.5 
14.9 macrometastases in vehicle-treated control mice to
35.4  10.7 macrometastases in honokiol-treated animals
(P < .01) (Fig. 2). The mean number of micrometastases
(<0.1 mm in greatest dimension) per 10 mm2 lung surface
also decreased significantly (P < .05) by 41.4%  7.3%
from 202  21 micrometastases in control mice to
118  27 micrometastases in honokiol-treated animals. In
the liver, honokiol treatment reduced the mean number of
macrometastases even more effectively than in the lung
by >80% from 40.5  9.8 lesions in control mice to
8.0  2.4 lesions in honokiol-treated animals (P < .01),
but the number of micrometastases was not significantly
reduced. Remarkably, the density of micrometastases on
the liver surface of untreated mice was <10% of the density
on the surface of the lungs.
Honokiol Inhibits the Metabolic Activity of
Osteosarcoma Cell Lines in Vitro
In 1977, Fidler and Kripke24 proposed that primary
tumors of various malignancies, including osteosarcoma,
are comprised of heterogeneous cell populations, which,
we now know, vary in both gene expression pattern and
degree of malignancy. Consequently, next, we wanted to
examine the in vitro effect of honokiol on 8 human and 2
murine osteosarcoma cell lines that possess low and high
metastatic activity and distinct gene expression profiles
(unpublished observations).
The cytotoxic effects of honokiol were examined
with the WST-1 assay, which indicates the metabolic activity of viable cells. The different cell types were treated
with honokiol for 72 hours according to protocols from
studies that established the antineoplastic activity of this
natural compound in other tumor types. Honokiol

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Honokiol in Experimental Osteosarcoma/Steinmann et al

Table 1. Half-Maximal Growth Inhibitory Concentrations of
Honokiol in Human and Mouse Osteosarcoma Cell Lines

Cell Linea

IC50, lg/mL

HUO9
HUO9 M132b
HOS
143Bc
MG-63
MG-63 M8d
SAOS-2
LM5e
Dunn
LM8f

15.8
8.5
13.7
11.1
9.3
9.3
12.9
8.0
9.6
8.3

Abbreviations: IC50, half-maximal growth inhibitory concentration.
a
All cell lines were treated with honokiol for 72 hours. The results are
means from at least 4 independent experiments performed in triplicate.
b
HUO9 is a highly metastatic subline of the parental HU09 cell line.
c
143B is a highly metastatic subline of the parental HOS cell line.
d
MG-63 M8 is a highly metastatic subline of the parental MG-63 cell line.
e
LM5 is a highly metastatic subline of the parental SAOS-2 cell line.
f
LM8 is a highly metastatic subline of the parental Dunn cell line.

inhibited the metabolic activity of all osteosarcoma cell
lines at comparable IC50 values between 8.0 l/mL and 16
lg/mL (Table 1).

Figure 2. Honokiol inhibits metastasis of b-galactosidase bacterial gene (lacZ)-expressing LM8 mouse osteosarcoma
(LM8-lacZ) cells to the lung and the liver. (A) These are representative photographs of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-Dgalactoside (X-gal)-stained metastases in wholemounts of (i,
iii) lungs and (ii, iv) livers in (i, ii) vehicle-treated mice and (iii,
iv) honokiol-treated mice. Scale bars ¼ 1 mm in i and iii, 5
mm in ii and iv. (B) The percentage of macrometastases (>0.1
mm) and micrometastases (<0.1 mm) on lung and liver surfaces in honokiol-treated mice (n ¼ 9) are compared with the
mean number of respective metastases set to 100% in vehicle-treated control animals (n ¼ 9). Data are expressed
as the mean  standard error of the mean compared with
controls. A single asterisk indicates P < .05; double asterisks,
P < .01.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Honokiol Inhibits Proliferation and Migration
of LM8-LacZ Cells
Our observation that the cytotoxic effects of honokiol
were relatively similar among our diverse panel of osteosarcoma cell lines suggested that honokiol must affect a
common target(s) within these cells. Consequently, the
LM8-lacZ cell line, which also was used in our murine osteosarcoma model, was considered representative of all of
the other cell lines and, thus, was used in all subsequent
experiments designed to further elucidate the antineoplastic action of honokiol.
Treatment of LM8-lacZ cells with honokiol for 45
hours inhibited proliferation dose-dependently with an
IC50 of approximately 5 lg/mL (Fig. 3A). The calculated
doubling time of 14.0  0.2 hours (n ¼ 8) in nontreated
LM8-lacZ cells increased to 23.9  1.1 hours (n ¼ 7; P <
.0001) in cells that were treated with 5 lg/mL honokiol,
and an almost complete inhibition of proliferation was
observed at a concentration of 10 lg/mL honokiol. Concentrations >10 lg/mL lowered the number of surviving
cells below the number of seeded cells because of cell death.
The recovery of LM8-lacZ cells from the 45-hour
honokiol treatment was assessed after reseeding and culturing the cells between 3 days and 11 days in the absence
of honokiol. Cells that were treated with up to 10 lg/mL
honokiol demonstrated post-treatment doubling times
that were indistinguishable from those of naive LM8-lacZ

2121

Original Article

Figure 3. Honokiol inhibits proliferation and wound healing migration of b-galactosidase bacterial gene (lacZ)-expressing LM8
mouse osteosarcoma (LM8-lacZ) cells. (A) This chart illustrates the dose-dependent inhibition of LM8-lacZ cell proliferation by
honokiol. In this experiment, 8000 cells/cm2 were seeded, allowed to adhere for 3 hours, and then incubated in the absence
(control) or presence of the indicated concentrations of honokiol for 45 hours. Proliferation is indicated as the fold increase in
cell number normalized to the number of seeded cells indicated by the dashed line. Results are expressed as the means  standard error of the mean of 3 independent experiments that were carried out in duplicate. Asterisks indicate P < .05 compared with
control. (B) This bar chart illustrates the recovery of proliferation after treatment with honokiol for 48 hours. Honokiol-treated
cells were allowed to recover, and the doubling times were calculated as described in the text (see Materials and Methods). The
results are expressed as the means of 2 independent experiments. (C) This chart illustrates dose-dependent inhibition of the
migration rate by honokiol. Cells were treated for 23 hours with the indicated concentrations of honokiol, and the migration rates
were determined as outlined in the text (see Materials and Methods). Results are expressed as the means  standard error of the
mean from 4 independent experiments that were carried out in triplicate. Asterisk indicate P < .05 compared with controls. (D)
These are views of representative wounds that were examined microscopically (i, iii) immediately after wounding and after incubation for 20 hours (ii) in the absence or (iv) in the presence of 15 lg/mL honokiol.

cells (Fig. 3B), suggesting that these cells had fully recovered from treatment with honokiol. Cells that were
treated with honokiol concentrations >10 lg/mL, conversely, recovered poorly with doubling times that were 2fold to 3-fold higher compared with the doubling times in
untreated cells.
The effect of honokiol on migration, which is considered an indicator of metastatic potential, was investigated in a wound-healing migration assay (Fig. 3C,D).
LM8-lacZ cells were cultured in the absence (control cells)
or in the presence of indicated concentrations of honokiol
for 3 hours before wounds were applied and measured.

2122

Wounded control cells and honokiol-treated cells were
then incubated for an additional 20 hours under the respective prewounding conditions. Honokiol treatment
dose-dependently reduced the migration rate of LM8-lacZ
cells with an IC50 value between 5 lg/mL and 10 lg/mL
(Fig. 3C). Concentrations of honokiol 15 lg/mL inhibited migration almost completely. This was in agreement
with the observed suppression of metabolic activity in
LM8-lacZ cells at these honokiol concentrations. It is noteworthy that cells treated with 15 lg/mL honokiol
remained attached at the border of the wound but rounded
up and had partial loss of cell-cell contacts (Fig. 3D).

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Honokiol in Experimental Osteosarcoma/Steinmann et al

Figure 4. Honokiol inhibits metabolic activity and causes cytoplasmic vacuolation in b-galactosidase bacterial gene (lacZ)expressing LM8 mouse osteosarcoma (LM8-lacZ) cells in vitro. (A) Dose-dependent inhibition of metabolic activity by honokiol in
cells that were preincubated in the absence (open bars) or in the presence (solid bars) of 10 lM cyclosporin A was assessed with
the WST-1 reagent as described in the text (see Materials and Methods). The results expressed as the percentage of nonhonokioltreated controls are the means  standard error of the mean from 6 independent experiments. Asterisks indicate P < .05 compared with the effects of honokiol alone. (B) These are representative phase-contrast microscopic images of cells that were (i, iii)
left untreated or (ii, iv) treated with 15 lg/mL honokiol for 2 hours after preincubation for 2 hours (i, ii) in the absence or (iii, iv)
in the presence of 10 lM cyclosporin A. Scale bar ¼ 50 lm in B.

Honokiol Provokes Fast Cell Death, Partially
Inhibited by Cyclosporin A, and Concomitant
Cytoplasmic Vacuolation With No Signs of
Apoptosis or Necrosis
The results from the proliferation and migration experiments suggested that honokiol inhibited key cellular activities faster than initially demonstrated in the current study
and in previous studies with cell lines of various tumor
types. Consequently, we reinvestigated the metabolic
response of LM8-lacZ cells to honokiol with the WST-1
assay and shortened the treatment from 72 hours to 4
hours. It is worth noting that these short-time incubations
with honokiol inhibited the metabolic activity of LM8lacZ cells almost as effectively as the 72-hour treatment.
This was reflected by an IC50 value for honokiol of 15 lg/
mL, which was only 2 times higher than that observed for
the 72-hour treatment (Fig. 4A, Table 1) and, again, was
representative of the other cell types that initially were
investigated with the 72-hour protocol.
It has been demonstrated that cyclosporin A protects
against honokiol-induced cell death in esophageal carcinoma, breast cancer, and acute myeloid leukemia
cells.25,26 Likewise, we also observed this effect with LM8lacZ cells. The inhibition of metabolic activity by honokiol could be reversed in part by preincubation of the cells
with 10 lM cyclosporin A for 2 hours (Fig. 4A). Microscopic inspection of the cells as early as 1 hour after the beginning of honokiol treatment revealed extensive
cytoplasmic vacuolation (Fig. 4Bii), which also has been

Cancer

April 15, 2012

reported in human leukemia cells.26,27 It is noteworthy
that the vacuolation provoked by 15 lg/mL honokiol
could not be prevented by a 2-hour pretreatment of LM8lacZ cells with 10 lM cyclosporin A (Fig. 4Biv). Cyclosporine A alone had no effect on cell morphology (Fig.
4Biii). All observations taken together suggested that
rapid inhibition of metabolic activity and early vacuolation in honokiol-treated LM8-lacZ cells were not
interdependent.
To further exclude the possibility that the unexpected observation of honokiol-evoked vacuolation was
related to apoptosis or necrosis, we induced apoptosis in
LM8-LacZ cells with staurosporine and induced necrosis
with H2O2 to compare morphologic and nuclear changes
in these cells with the changes in cells that were treated
with honokiol. Incubation of LM8-LacZ cells with 1 lM
staurosporine for 6 hours induced apoptosis, as indicated
by cell rounding, the formation of apoptotic bodies, chromatin condensation observed by 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining, and karyopyknosis revealed by
a 24% reduction of the nuclear area compared with control cells (P < .0001; results not shown). The treatment of
LM8-LacZ cells with 1 mM H2O2 for 6 hours also
resulted in cell rounding and in uptake of propidium
iodide in >95% of the cells, indicating loss of membrane
integrity and necrosis (results not shown). Apoptotic
bodies were not observed. The percentage of propidium
iodide-stained control cells and staurosporine-treated cells
was <1% and <5%, respectively, of the percentage of

2123

Original Article

Figure 5. Honokiol-provoked vacuolation in b-galactosidase
bacterial gene (lacZ)-expressing LM8 mouse osteosarcoma
(LM8-lacZ) cells was observed by transmission electron microscopy. Cells were (a,b) left untreated or (c,d) treated with
15 lg/mL honokiol for 1.5 hours or (e,f) 6 hours. Arrowheads
indicate endoplasmic reticulum; arrows, viral particles; asterisks, mitochondria. Scale bar ¼ 5 lm in a, c, and e; 0.5 lm in
b, d, and f.

cells recognized in H2O2-treated cells. It is important to
note that the vacuoles observed in honokiol-treated cells
were not observed in cells that were incubated with staurosporine or H2O2. All of these findings taken together indicate that honokiol-provoked vacuolation and cell death in
LM8-LacZ cells is unrelated to necrosis and apoptosis.
Honokiol Induces Morphologic Changes in the
Endoplasmic Reticulum and in Mitochondria
The subcellular morphologic changes observed after treatment of LM8-lacZ cells with honokiol were investigated
further by transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 5).
LM8-lacZ cells that were treated with 15 lg/mL honokiol
for 1.5 hours had vacuoles in the cytoplasm that varied

2124

considerably in size and measured up to 5 lm in greatest
dimension (Fig. 5c,d). The ultrastructure of these
vacuoles, which increased in size and number during honokiol treatment for up to 6 hours, showed enlarged, swollen endoplasmic lumen (Fig. 5d,f). Cells that were treated
with 15 lg/mL honokiol for 1.5 hours and 6 hours also
had changes in the morphology of cristae in mitochondria
(Fig. 5b,d,f) that appeared well organized in nontreated
cells (Fig. 5b). The morphology of the nuclei and the
cytoplasm, conversely, was indistinguishable in nontreated and honokiol-treated LM8-lacZ cells. Moreover,
honokiol-treated cells did not have damaged cell membranes or cytoplasm, indicators of necrosis, or condensed
nuclear DNA and an electron-dense cytoplasm characteristic of apoptosis, or autophagosomes with visible cellular
or membranous constituents that would point to autophagy. Thus, honokiol dose-dependently provoked rapid
cell damage and eventually cell death of highly malignant
osteosarcoma cells in vitro by triggering cell destructive
processes different from the well characterized cascades of
mechanisms that can cause cell death.
Unexpectedly, in both treated and nontreated LM8lacZ cells, retroviral particles were observed in the endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 5b,f, arrows), but budding viruses
at the plasma membrane or in the extracellular space were
not observed. These findings were consistent with those
from previous morphologic studies in Dunn cells,28
which are the parental cells of the LM8 cell line.

DISCUSSION
In the current study, the therapeutic effect of honokiol on
osteosarcoma primary tumor growth and spontaneous
lung and liver metastasis was examined in a syngeneic
LM8/C3H mouse model,22 which was refined in our laboratory.23 The cytotoxic activity of honokiol was investigated further in vitro in 8 human and 2 murine
osteosarcoma cell lines with various metastatic potential,
reflecting in part the heterogeneity of cell populations
present in primary osteosarcoma tumor tissue. The results
indicated indistinguishable cytotoxic potential of honokiol in all osteosarcoma cell lines that we investigated.
Therefore, the highly metastatic LM8 mouse osteosarcoma cell line that we used in the in vivo study was considered representative of all cell lines in additional
experiments investigating in vitro antineoplastic properties of honokiol and mechanistic aspects.
The treatment of mice suffering from subcutaneous
LM8-LacZ cell-derived primary tumors and spontaneous
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Honokiol in Experimental Osteosarcoma/Steinmann et al

metastases in the lung and liver with honokiol revealed
unexpected findings. However, these findings were comparable to those obtained in the LM8/C3H model with
parthenolide, a natural inhibitor of nuclear factor-jB.29
In that model, primary tumor growth also was not
affected by intraperitoneal administration of the compound, whereas lung metastasis was reduced when parthenolide was administered concurrently with tumor cell
injection. By contrast, the ability of honokiol to inhibit
primary tumor growth has been demonstrated in subcutaneous xenograft models of colorectal carcinoma,14 breast
cancer,17 and gastric cancer.18 It is noteworthy that the
concentration of honokiol used in these 3 studies was either slightly lower or comparable to the dose administered
in the current study. In a recent preliminary pharmacologic study in our laboratory in BALB/c mice, intraperitoneal administration of 150 mg/kg honokiol revealed
plasma levels between 38 lg/mL and 90 lg/mL at 1 hour
and between 9 lg/mL and 22 lg/mL 3 hours after injection of the compound (unpublished results). This is consistent with an estimated half-life of 1 hour assuming firstorder kinetics for the clearance of honokiol from the circulation. Although the possibility cannot be excluded that
honokiol has a longer half-life in BALB/c mice than in
C3H mice, the data obtained in BALB/c mice provide
good evidence that, in the current study, the concentrations of honokiol in the circulation during the first 2
hours after administration were within the cytotoxic range
of the compound assessed in vitro for 4-hour and 45-hour
treatments. Consequently, metastasizing LM8-lacZ cells
in the circulation and in well vascularized liver and lung
tissue were exposed to honokiol concentrations that
affected their viability; however, the concentrations in the
already established subcutaneous LM8-lacZ cell-derived
primary tumor may have been too low and the time of exposure too short to cause cell death. To this end, the
results of a recent study indicated that honokiol administered intravenously reached the highest levels in the lung,
followed by the levels measured in the circulation and in
the liver.30 These data support the hypothesis that honokiol treatment applied in the current study mainly affected
metastasizing cells in the circulation and, notably, in the
lung early during primary tumor development. This likely
explains the predominant suppressive effect of honokiol
on the formation of macrometastases, which presumably
arose from early metastasizing cells. Accordingly, at the
dose used in the current study, honokiol appears to
become less effective during unlimited late progression of
the primary tumor, resulting in an overflow of metastasiz-

Cancer

April 15, 2012

ing cells in the circulation and, consequently, in numerous
micrometastases in the lung and the liver, which may be
inhibited in outgrowth because of some saturation of the
tissue with honokiol.
Encouraged by the promising antimetastatic activity
of honokiol in the LM8/C3H mouse osteosarcoma
model, we investigated the cytotoxicity of honokiol in a
variety of osteosarcoma cell lines that differed in their
metastatic activity and, to some extent, represented the
heterogeneity of tumor cells in osteosarcoma. The sensitivity of the investigated osteosarcoma cell lines to honokiol was within the range of that reported previously for
other human tumor cell lines, such as lung cancer cells13
and colorectal carcinoma cells.14 Remarkably, we
observed that the osteosarcoma cell lines with high in vivo
metastatic potential were equally sensitive or even more
sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of honokiol than their respective low-metastatic parental cell lines. These findings
differ from those from a previous study, in which the resistance of MG63 and MG63 M8 cells to cisplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide reportedly was correlated with
increasing metastatic potential.31
Reduced activity of mitochondrial dehydrogenases
compared with controls, as assessed with the WST-1 assay
in cells that were treated with honokiol for several hours,
can indicate inhibition of cell proliferation or a cytotoxic
response that causes cell death. Our findings in LM8-lacZ
cells demonstrate that honokiol at concentrations <10
lg/mL inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent and
reversible manner, as demonstrated in the experiments
that examined the recovery of LM8-lacZ cells from honokiol treatment. Concentrations >10 lg/mL caused cell
death, as indicated by the lower cell density at the end of
the experiment compared with the density after cell seeding. The threshold of 10 lg/mL between antiproliferative
and cytotoxic activity of honokiol in LM8-lacZ cells was
confirmed in the wound-healing migration experiments.
Studies investigating the mechanism(s) of action of
honokiol have demonstrated apoptotic activity in cells of
different tumor types,9,11,13,16 but necrosis and induction
of autophagy also have been reported (for review, see
Fried et al32). Here, cytotoxic concentrations of honokiol
caused rapid subcellular morphologic changes in LM8lacZ cells that were recognized by phase-contrast and
transmission electron microscopy. Most prominent but
atypical changes for apoptosis, autophagy, and necrosis
were recognized as early as 1.5 hours after the beginning
of honokiol treatment and included swelling of the endoplasmic reticulum and disintegration into cytoplasmic

2125

Original Article

vacuoles and morphologically altered mitochondria
with distorted and enlarged cisternae. Rapid vacuolation provoked by honokiol also was observed in almost
all of the osteosarcoma cell lines listed in Table 1 of
this study (results not shown). Vacuolation and mitochondrial morphologic changes, together with some necrotic features, also have been observed in human
HL60 leukemia cells upon treatment with 15 lg/mL
honokiol for 6 hours.26 It is noteworthy that, in HL60
cells, cell death was inhibited almost completely by cyclosporin A, an inhibitor of cyclophilin D, which is a
component of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. A key role of the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore in honokiol-induced cytotoxicity also
was described for esophageal adenocarcinoma cells.25
In the currently investigated LM8-lacZ cells, cyclosporin A indeed also reversed in part the honokiol dosedependent decrease in mitochondrial activity, but
vacuolation was not affected by cyclosporin A. It is important to note that these experiments also revealed
that the metabolic activity-inhibitory potency of honokiol decreased only 2-fold when the treatment period
was reduced from 72 hours to 4 hours. All of these
observations together suggest that honokiol, when
applied in vitro at cytotoxic concentrations to LM8lacZ cells, evokes very rapid, irreversible damage in the
endoplasmic reticulum and in mitochondria that leads
to rapid cell death distinct from apoptosis and/or
autophagy.
In conclusion, honokiol is a rather potent antimetastatic compound in the syngeneic LM8/C3H mouse osteosarcoma model. In vitro, honokiol evokes cytotoxic
effects in osteosarcoma cells distinct from apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy. Further studies in vitro and in vivo
are needed to investigate how honokiol affects primary tumor growth and metastasis of osteosarcoma in combination with conventional drugs in an orthotopic
osteosarcoma mouse model. Considering the reported
lack of severe side effects of honokiol in animals and in
humans and the predominant antimetastatic activity demonstrated in the current study, honokiol appears to be a
promising novel chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of osteosarcoma particularly in patients who have
metastases at diagnosis and a poor prognosis.

FUNDING SOURCES
This study was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF); the Schweizerischer Verein Balgrist; the University
of Zurich; the Krebsliga Zurich; a grant from the Walter L. and

2126

Johanna Wolf Foundation, Zurich, Switzerland; the Margolis
Foundation; and the Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical
Center.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Longhi A, Errani C, De Paolis M, Mercuri M, Bacci G.
Primary bone osteosarcoma in the pediatric age: state of the
art. Cancer Treat Rev. 2006;32:423-436.
2. Marina N, Gebhardt M, Teot L, Gorlick R. Biology and
therapeutic advances for pediatric osteosarcoma. Oncologist.
2004;9:422-441.
3. Tsai SK, Huang CH, Huang SS, Hung LM, Hong CY.
Antiarrhythmic effect of magnolol and honokiol during
acute phase of coronary occlusion in anesthetized rats: influence of L-NAME and aspirin. Pharmacology. 1999;59:227233.
4. Tsai SK, Huang SS, Hong CY. Myocardial protective effect
of honokiol: an active component in Magnolia officinalis.
Planta Med. 1996;62:503-506.
5. Ho KY, Tsai CC, Chen CP, Huang JS, Lin CC. Antimicrobial activity of honokiol and magnolol isolated from Magnolia officinalis. Phytother Res. 2001;15:139-141.
6. Chiang CK, Sheu ML, Hung KY, Wu KD, Liu SH. Honokiol, a small molecular weight natural product, alleviates experimental mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis. Kidney
Int. 2006;70:682-689.
7. Ou HC, Chou FP, Lin TM, Yang CH, Sheu WH. Protective effects of honokiol against oxidized LDL-induced cytotoxicity and adhesion molecule expression in endothelial
cells. Chem Biol Interact. 2006;161:1-13.
8. Bai X, Cerimele F, Ushio-Fukai M, et al. Honokiol, a small
molecular weight natural product, inhibits angiogenesis in
vitro and tumor growth in vivo. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:
35501-35507.
9. Ishitsuka K, Hideshima T, Hamasaki M, et al. Honokiol
overcomes conventional drug resistance in human multiple
myeloma by induction of caspase-dependent and -independent apoptosis. Blood. 2005;106:1794-1800.
10. Nagase H, Ikeda K, Sakai Y. Inhibitory effect of magnolol
and honokiol from Magnolia obovata on human fibrosarcoma HT-1080. Invasiveness in vitro. Planta Med. 2001;
67:705-708.
11. Battle TE, Arbiser J, Frank DA. The natural product honokiol induces caspase-dependent apoptosis in B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cells. Blood. 2005;106:690697.
12. Hibasami H, Achiwa Y, Katsuzaki H, et al. Honokiol induces apoptosis in human lymphoid leukemia Molt 4B cells.
Int J Mol Med. 1998;2:671-673.
13. Yang SE, Hsieh MT, Tsai TH, Hsu SL. Down-modulation
of Bcl-XL, release of cytochrome c and sequential activation
of caspases during honokiol-induced apoptosis in human
squamous lung cancer CH27 cells. Biochem Pharmacol.
2002;63:1641-1651.
14. Chen F, Wang T, Wu YF, et al. Honokiol: a potent chemotherapy candidate for human colorectal carcinoma. World J
Gastroenterol. 2004;10:3459-3463.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Honokiol in Experimental Osteosarcoma/Steinmann et al

15. Wang T, Chen F, Chen Z, et al. Honokiol induces apoptosis through p53-independent pathway in human colorectal
cell line RKO. World J Gastroenterol. 2004;10:2205-2208.
16. Shigemura K, Arbiser JL, Sun SY, et al. Honokiol, a natural
plant product, inhibits the bone metastatic growth of
human prostate cancer cells. Cancer. 2007;109:1279-1289.
17. Wolf I, O’Kelly J, Wakimoto N, et al. Honokiol, a natural
biphenyl, inhibits in vitro and in vivo growth of breast cancer through induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Int
J Oncol. 2007;30:1529-1537.
18. Sheu ML, Liu SH, Lan KH. Honokiol induces calpainmediated glucose-regulated protein-94 cleavage and apoptosis in human gastric cancer cells and reduces tumor growth
[serial online]. PLoS ONE. 2007;2:e1096.
19. Kuribara H, Kishi E, Hattori N, Okada M, Maruyama Y.
The anxiolytic effect of 2 oriental herbal drugs in Japan
attributed to honokiol from magnolia bark. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2000;52:1425-1429.
20. Kuribara H, Stavinoha WB, Maruyama Y. Behavioural
pharmacological characteristics of honokiol, an anxiolytic
agent present in extracts of Magnolia bark, evaluated by an
elevated plus-maze test in mice. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1998;
50:819-826.
21. Mitta B, Rimann M, Fussenegger M. Detailed design and
comparative analysis of protocols for optimized production
of high-performance HIV-1-derived lentiviral particles.
Metab Eng. 2005;7:426-436.
22. Asai T, Ueda T, Itoh K, et al. Establishment and characterization of a murine osteosarcoma cell line (LM8) with high
metastatic potential to the lung. Int J Cancer. 1998;76:418422.
23. Arlt MJ, Banke IJ, Walters DK, et al. LacZ transgene
expression in the subcutaneous Dunn/LM8 osteosarcoma

Cancer

April 15, 2012

24.
25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.

31.
32.

mouse model allows for the identification of micrometastasis. J Orthop Res. 2011;29:938-946.
Fidler IJ, Kripke ML. Metastasis results from preexisting
variant cells within a malignant tumor. Science. 1977;197:
893-895.
Chen G, Izzo J, Demizu Y, et al. Different redox states in
malignant and nonmalignant esophageal epithelial cells and
differential cytotoxic responses to bile acid and honokiol.
Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009;11:1083-1095.
Li L, Han W, Gu Y, et al. Honokiol induces a necrotic cell
death through the mitochondrial permeability transition
pore. Cancer Res. 2007;67:4894-4903.
Wang Y, Yang Z, Zhao X. Honokiol induces paraptosis and
apoptosis and exhibits schedule-dependent synergy in combination with imatinib in human leukemia cells. Toxicol
Mech Methods. 2010;20:234-241.
Urist MR, Nakata N, Felser JM, et al. An osteosarcoma cell
and matrix retained morphogen for normal bone formation.
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1977;124:251-266.
Kishida Y, Yoshikawa H, Myoui A. Parthenolide, a natural
inhibitor of nuclear factor-kappaB, inhibits lung colonization of murine osteosarcoma cells. Clin Cancer Res.
2007;13:59-67.
Wang X, Duan X, Yang G, et al. Honokiol Crosses BBB
and BCSFB, and Inhibits Brain Tumor Growth in Rat 9L
Intracerebral Gliosarcoma Model and Human U251 Xenograft Glioma Model. PLoS One. 2011;6:e18490.
Walters DK, Steinmann P, Langsam B, Schmutz S, Born
W, Fuchs B. Identification of potential chemoresistance
genes in osteosarcoma. Anticancer Res. 2008;28:673-679.
Fried LE, Arbiser JL. Honokiol, a multifunctional antiangiogenic and antitumor agent. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009;11:
1139-1148.

2127

