Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Combination of exercise training and erythropoietin prevents
cancer-induced muscle alterations
Fabrizio Pin1,*, Silvia Busquets2,3,*, Miriam Toledo2, Andrea Camperi1, Francisco J.
Lopez-Soriano2,3, Paola Costelli1, Josep M. Argilés2,3,** and Fabio Penna1,**
1

Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy

2

Cancer Research Group, Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain
3

Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain

*

First author equal contribution

**

Last author equal contribution

Correspondence to: Fabio Penna, email: fabio.penna@unito.it
Keywords: cancer cachexia, exercise training, erythropoietin, PGC-1α, mitochondria, Pathology Section
Received: August 07, 2015	

Accepted: November 21, 2015	

Published: November 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cancer cachexia is a syndrome characterized by loss of skeletal muscle mass,
inflammation, anorexia and anemia, contributing to patient fatigue and reduced
quality of life. In addition to nutritional approaches, exercise training (EX) has been
proposed as a suitable tool to manage cachexia. In the present work the effect of
mild exercise training, coupled to erythropoietin (EPO) administration to prevent
anemia, has been tested in tumor-bearing mice. In the C26 hosts, acute exercise
does not prevent and even worsens muscle wasting. Such pattern is prevented by
EPO co-administration or by the adoption of a chronic exercise protocol. EX and EPO
co-treatment spares oxidative myofibers from atrophy and counteracts the oxidative
to glycolytic shift, inducing PGC-1α. LLC hosts are responsive to exercise and their
treatment with the EX-EPO combination prevents the loss of muscle strength and the
onset of mitochondrial ultrastructural alterations, while increases muscle oxidative
capacity and intracellular ATP content, likely depending on PGC-1α induction and
mitophagy promotion. Consistently, muscle-specific PGC-1α overexpression prevents
LLC-induced muscle atrophy and Atrogin-1 hyperexpression. Overall, the present
data suggest that low intensisty exercise can be an effective tool to be included in
combined therapeutic approaches against cancer cachexia, provided that anemia is
coincidently treated in order to enhance the beneficial action of exercise.

INTRODUCTION

feature of cachexia. Such a pattern results in progressive
reduction of muscle strength, endurance and exercise
capacity [2], and cannot be fully reversed by conventional
nutritional support.
A frequent comorbidity of cancer is anemia
(hemoglobin level < 12 g/dl), that occurs in approximately
40% of cancer patients. Its incidence depends on a number
of variables such as tumor site and origin, progression,
stage, extent of disease and cancer treatment [3]. Anemia
potentially promotes the progression of wasting in
cachectic patients [4]. In this regard, a direct correlation
between hemoglobin levels and the quality of life of

Cancer cachexia is a multifactorial syndrome
frequently occurring in association with different types
of cancers. It is characterized by a complex interplay
of factors, resulting in poor quality of life, decreased
tolerance to anticancer therapies and reduced survival
[1]. The pathophysiology of cachexia includes increased
protein catabolism, systemic inflammation, hormonal
disturbances and down-regulation of anabolic signals.
Depletion of the skeletal muscle mass, not necessarily
associated with the loss of fat mass, is the most relevant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43202

Oncotarget

cancer patients has been established, the onset of anemia
being related to decreased functional status and survival
[3]. Anemia and muscle wasting are mainly responsible for
fatigue, hampering patient daily activities and independent
life. In peripheral tissues, skeletal muscle included,
anemia can cause hypoxia, with consequent intracellular
acidification and reduction of oxidative metabolism. These
changes might result, respectively, in increased protein
degradation and cell damage, eventually leading to muscle
wasting [5].
The most effective pharmacological treatment
for anemia is erythropoietin (EPO), an endogenous
cytokine/hormone able to stimulate erythropoiesis. EPO
acts binding to its specific receptor (EPO-R), belonging
to the family of cytokine receptors characterized by a
single transmembrane domain [6]. EPO has pleiotropic
functions, since EPO-R expression is not restricted to
hematopoietic cells, but is present in heart [7], skeletal
muscle [6] and adipose tissue [8]. In this regard, in the
skeletal muscle of EPO-deficient mice the expression of
genes related to mitochondrial function is low, while genes
involved in proteolysis and hypoxia are overexpressed,
suggesting that EPO plays a relevant role in muscle tissue
[9]. Consistently, EPO administration to rats rapidly
stimulates glucose metabolism and muscle anabolism
[10]. Recently, EPO and EPO-R have been involved in
muscle regeneration. Indeed, mice with high circulating
EPO show an improved recovery from muscle injury and,
conversely, muscles lacking EPO-R display an increased
susceptibility to cardiotoxin-induced damage [11]. Finally,
several studies demonstrate that EPO promotes a shift
from glycolytic to oxidative metabolism [6]. A protective
action of EPO against muscle wasting could be inferred
from these observations, glycolytic myofibers being those
preferentially affected in cancer cachexia [12].
The mechanisms underlying cachexia are still poorly
understood, and the availability of effective interventions
is quite limited. In this regard, exercise training has
been proposed as a mean to improve the quality of life
of cachectic patients [13]. Indeed, the beneficial effect of
exercise in counteracting fatigue and exhaustion has been
extensively demonstrated [14]. According to the adopted
protocol, exercise training can either increased muscle
mass or improve cardiovascular function, stimulating
specific pathways; as a consequence, muscle atrophy or
fatigue in cancer patients could be improved [13, 15].
Since tumor growth induces several metabolic changes
in the skeletal muscle such as reduced ATP synthesis,
mitochondrial alterations and shift from oxidative to
glycolytic metabolism [4], endurance exercise might well
be proposed to reverse or attenuate all these alterations,
resulting in prevention/delay of cancer-induced muscle
wasting.
Aim of the present study was to verify whether the
adoption of a low intensity endurance exercise protocol
could counteract the loss of muscle mass and function
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

occurring in experimental cancer cachexia. Exercise has
been associated with EPO administration in order to test
if, beyond affecting anemia, EPO could further improve
exercise effects on muscle wasting.

RESULTS
We previously showed that moderate aerobic
exercise associated with eicosapentaenoic acid
administration partially prevented the loss of muscle mass
and strength in mice bearing the Lewis Lung Carcinoma
(LLC; [16]), while the same exercise protocol worsened
muscle wasting in mice hosting the C26 carcinoma [17].
Anemia occurs in both LLC or C26 hosts [8] and could
negatively modulate the response to exercise. To clarify
this point, in the present study two different exercise
protocols have been associated with EPO administration
to tumor-bearing mice.
Confirming previous observations [18], the growth
of the C26 tumor results in reduced body weight, food
intake, muscle strength and mass (Figure 1A, 1B, S1,
S2). Such a wasting pattern cannot be rescued, or can be
even worsened, by two weeks of low intensity endurance
exercise, while the association with EPO improves body
and heart weight in comparison to trained C26 hosts
(Figure 1A, S1A). In a second experiment the animals
have been exercised for eight weeks (6 before and 2 after
tumor injection). Such a schedule likely results in mice
adaptation to exercise, allowing to test the susceptibility
to cachexia in mildly trained animals. At sacrifice, 14
days after tumor implantation, no differences in body and
muscle weight can be observed in tumor-bearing mice,
irrespective of the treatment (exercise with or without
EPO; Figure 1B, Figure S2A), while the association of
exercise with EPO partially prevents C26-induced heart
depletion (Figure 1B). While the two week exercise
protocol does not affect, or even reduces, food intake
in the C26 hosts (Figure S1B), eight week training
prevents C26-induced anorexia (Figure S2B). As for
muscle function, the reduced muscle strength found in
tumor-bearing animals is not modified by the two week
exercise protocol, independently of EPO treatment (Figure
S1C). By contrast, the eight week training improves grip
strength, only when combined with EPO (Figure S2C). In
both experiments EPO administration restores hematocrit
to normal values (Figure S3B, S4B).
C26-bearing animals present with spleen hyperplasia
(Figure S3A, S4A) and high circulating IL-6 levels (Figure
S3C, S4C). While spleen mass is reduced by both exercise
protocols (two or eight weeks; Figure S3A, S4A), only
acute (2 weeks) exercise decreases IL-6 concentrations,
an effect that is enhanced by co-treatment with EPO
(Figure S3C, S4C). As for the other tissues examined, the
two week exercise protocol does not affect liver mass,
even when associated with EPO administration, while the
combination EPO-exercise partially prevents the loss of
43203

Oncotarget

adipose tissue (Figure S3A), confirming previous results
[8]. The eight week training produces a comparable,
though not totally overlapping, pattern (Figure S4A).
In order to check if two weeks of low intensity
endurance exercise and EPO treatment could affect
muscle fiber type composition and size, myofiber CSA
has been assessed on SDH stained section (Figure 2A),
virtually separating the tibialis muscle into two zones,
according to the prevalence of oxidative or glycolytic
fibers. C26 growth leads to a significant CSA reduction
in both oxidative and glycolytic fibers (Figure 2B, S5),
while the combination of exercise and EPO restores CSA
in the former, though not in the latter. The presence of
the tumor also drives an oxidative to glycolytic fiber
shift, that is reversed by the combined treatment (Figure
2C). Finally, the expression levels of PGC-1α, a factor
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and function, have
been evaluated in the skeletal muscle of treated and
untreated tumor-bearing mice. The results show that PGC1α expression does not change between controls and C26

hosts, despite previous observations showing a reduction
in the latter [18]. Consistently with the increased number
of oxidative myofibers, the combined treatment EX-EPO
significantly enhances PGC-1α expression in the skeletal
muscle of the C26-bearing mice (Figure 2D).
Since exercise and EPO partially improve cachexia
in the C26 hosts, such combined approach has been tested
also in the LLC-bearing mice, where anemia is markedly
severe. Moreover, four weeks of LLC growth are required
to lose animal muscle mass and strength (Figure 3A, 3B),
allowing to adopt an exercise protocol more extended
than the one used during C26 growth. The results show
that the low intensity endurance exercise adopted does
not improve muscle mass in LLC-bearing mice (Figure
3A), while it is able to rescue muscle strength (Figure
3B). Cardiac hypertrophy and anemia occur in the LLC
hosts (Figure 3A, 3C). The former tends to decrease after
exercise or EPO alone and is completely reversed by the
combined treatment (Figure 3A), while EPO partially
corrects the latter (Figure 3C).

Figure 1: Exercise training and EPO do not prevent C26-induced muscle loss. A. Gastrocnemius (GSN), tibialis and heart

weight in control (C), and C26-bearing mice (C26). C26 groups were subdivided in sedentary, exercised (EX), and exercised EPO-treated
(EX EPO). B. GSN, tibialis and heart weight in control (C), and C26-bearing mice (C26). C26 groups were subdivided in untreated,
exercised (EX), EPO-treated (EPO) and exercised EPO-treated (EX EPO) for eight weeks (of exercise). Data (mean±SD) are expressed as
percentages of C. Significance of the differences: *p < 0,05 vs C, **p < 0,01 vs C, ***p < 0,001 vs C, $p < 0,05 vs C26.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43204

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Exercise training and EPO counteract oxidative fiber atrophy and glycolytic shift stimulating PGC-1α
expression. A. SDH (succinate dehydrogenase) staining in cross sections of tibialis muscle from control (C), C26-bearing (C26) and
C26 exercised EPO-treated (EX EPO) mice (2 weeks of exercise). The two micrographs for each group represent two regions with distinct
frequency of oxidative (Ox) and glycolytic (Glyc) fibers. B. Morphometric analysis of myofiber CSA (cross-sectional area) performed on
SDH stained sections. Data (mean±SD) are expressed as percentages of controls. C. Quantification of fiber type frequency in the tibialis
muscle. Data (mean±SD) are expressed as relative percentages. D. PGC-1α nuclear protein expression in the tibialis muscles. Densitometric
quantifications were normalized according to GAPDH levels. Data (mean±SD) are expressed as percentages of controls. Significance of the
differences: *p < 0,05 vs C, **p < 0,01 vs C, ***p < 0,001 vs C, $p < 0,05 vs C26, $$p < 0,01 vs C26.

Figure 3: Exercise training and EPO partially prevent cachexia in LLC-bearing mice. Gastrocnemius (GSN), tibialis and
heart weight A., voluntary grasping strength B. and hematocrit C., in control (C) and LLC-bearing mice (LLC). LLC groups were subdivided
in sedentary, EPO-treated (EPO), exercised (EX) and exercised EPO-treated (EX EPO)for four weeks. Data (mean±SD) expressed as
percentages of controls except for hematocrit (absolute values). Significance of the differences: *p < 0,05 vs C, **p < 0,01 vs C, ***p <
0,001 vs C, $p < 0,05 vs LLC, $$p < 0,01 vs LLC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43205

Oncotarget

Muscle mitochondria ultra-structure has been
analyzed in the LLC hosts, in order to investigate
the effects of exercise and EPO on myofiber energy
metabolism. In both EDL (glycolytic) and soleus
(oxidative) muscles LLC growth results in the appearance
of swollen mitochondria (Figure 4A), similarly to previous
observations reported in both C26-bearing mice [19] and
AH-130-bearing rats [20]. Other alterations, previously
reported in the AH-130 model [20], such as disrupted
triads and increased mitochondrial area were observed,
however no quantitative data were obtained. Treatment
with EPO in association with exercise allows a qualitative
(Figure 4A) and, despite the limitations imposed by
sample size and area assayed, quantitative (Figure S6)
recovery of mitochondrial structure in the skeletal muscle
of LLC-bearing mice. In accordance with the above
reported mitochondrial damage, myofiber oxidative
capacity (SDH activity) is reduced in untreated LLC hosts
while is restored to physiological values by both EPO

and exercise, alone or combined (Figure 4B). Of interest,
exercise, associated or not with EPO, increases SDH
activity also in comparison with control mice, suggesting
that the tumor-bearing condition is permissive for muscle
mitochondrial biogenesis. Dysfunctional mitochondria
could lead to impaired intracellular energy stores (ATP),
also due to mitochondrial energy uncoupling and increased
glycolysis [4]. Consistently, muscle ATP intracellular
content in tumor-bearing mice is decreased (Figure 4C).
The administration of EPO alone restores the ATP content
to control values, while no significant differences can
be observed in exercised LLC host, in the absence or
in the presence of EPO. This latter observation is quite
unexpected, in view of the above reported results showing
that EPO associated with exercise promotes mitochondrial
structure recovery (see above).
From a mechanistic point of view, the recovery of
mitochondrial structure and function can be explained
again by PGC-1α induction, since both protein (Figure

Figure 4: Exercise training and EPO restore mitochondrial morphology in LLC-bearing mice. A. Transmission electron
microscope images of EDL and soleus longitudinal sections, in control (C), LLC-bearing mice (LLC) and exercised EPO-treated (EX
EPO). Black arrows indicate altered mitochondria. Scale bar = 500 nm. Quantification of SDH (succinate dehydrogenase) activity in tibilais
B. and ATP intracellular content in gastrocnemius (GSN) muscle (C., expressed as % of control) of control (C) and LLC-bearing mice
(LLC). LLC groups were subdivided in sedentary, EPO-treated (EPO), exercised (EX), and exercised EPO-treated (EX EPO). Significance
of the differences: *p < 0,05 vs C, **p < 0,01 vs C, ***p < 0,001 vs C $$p < 0,01 vs LLC, $$$p < 0,001 vs LLC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43206

Oncotarget

5A) and mRNA (Figure 5B) levels increase in the muscle
of LLC-bearing mice after EX and EPO. Dysfunctional
mitochondria are normally degraded by mitophagy [21].
The results shown in the present study demonstrate that
in the muscle of the LLC hosts a shift from microtubuleassociated (I) to autophagosome-associated LC3B (II)
occurs. This is paralleled by increased expression of the
mitophagy regulator Bnip3, suggesting the accumulation
of damaged mitochondria. In the EX EPO group, both
LC3B isoforms are makedly reduced and Bnip3 level
is normalized, in line with an efficient mitochondrial
clearance (Figure 5A).
The gene expression analysis (Figure 5B) shows that
EPO action increases EPO-R, while exercise stimulates
myoglobin (MB), probably due to the increased oxygen
demand. As a hallmark of protein catabolism, atrogin-1
expression increases in the LLC-bearing mice, and

consistently with the unaffected muscle mass, no treatment
proves able to prevent such increase. Consistently with
PGC-1α levels, exercise, combined or not with EPO,
promotes the expression of the mitochondrial biogenesis
related gene NRF1, while no changes occur in the levels
of PGC-1β mRNA. The promotion of mitochondrial
biogenesis by EX and EPO is paralleled by the increase
of Nix and Bnip3 mRNA. As for Bnip3, such qualitative
difference with protein levels suggests that this regulator
of mitophagy can be modulated at the post-translational
level. Finally, the transcript levels of two important
regulators of mitochondrial fission, namely DRP-1 and
Fis-1, that per se could induce muscle atrophy [22], are
unchanged in all the experimental conditions.
The effects of endurance exercise can be mimicked
by overexpression of PGC-1α, that was shown to prevent
atrophy induced by denervation, diabetes, uremia and

Figure 5: Exercise training and EPO regulate bioenergetics-related gene and protein expression in LLC-bearing mice.
A. Protein expression analysis of PGC-1α, LC3B (either in native or lipidated form, -I and -II, respectively) and Bnip3 corrected for tubulin
abundance in gastrocnemius (GSN) muscle of control (C) and LLC-bearing mice (LLC). LLC groups were subdivided in sedentary, EPOtreated (EPO), exercised (EX), and exercised EPO-treated (EX EPO). Data (mean±SD) expressed as % of controls. B Gene expression
analysis of EPOR, myoglobin (MB), Atrogin-1, PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, NRF1, Nix, Bnip3, DRP-1 and Fis-1 in the tibialis anterior
muscle. Specific mRNA abundance was corrected for the mean of TBP (TATA box-binding protein) and β-actin levels on individual
samples. Data (mean±SE) are compared by 2-way ANOVA. Significance of the differences: *p < 0,05 vs C, **p < 0,01 vs C, ***p < 0,001
vs C, $p < 0,05 vs LLC, $$p < 0,01 vs LLC, $$$p < 0,001 vs LLC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43207

Oncotarget

unloading [23-25]. No information are available about
the effectiveness of PGC-1α hyperexpression on cancerinduced muscle wasting. For this reason, male and female
transgenic mice overexpressing PGC-1α specifically in
the skeletal muscle have been injected with LLC cells.
As for male LLC hosts, the resulting tumors are markedly
larger than in wild-type littermates (6.08 ± 2.42 g vs 3.34 ±
1.52 g, respectively; n = 8, p = 0.015). By contrast, tumor
mass is comparable in wild type or transgenic female mice
(3.20 ± 2.30 g vs 3.01 ± 2.23 g, respectively; n = 8, p =
0.874), which is not consistent with previous data [26].
Nonetheless, irrespective of the increased tumor size, the
loss of muscle mass is comparable in transgenic and in
wild-type male mice (Figure S7A). Not only, myofiber
CSA is even larger in transgenic LLC-bearing male mice
than in wild-type tumor hosts (Figure S7B). The other way
round, PGC-1α overexpression in the skeletal muscle of
LLC-bearing female mice restores both tibialis muscle
weight and myofiber CSA to the control value (Figure
6A, 6B). A similar, although not complete, rescue can

be observed for the GSN mass (Figure 6A), despite this
muscle weights markedly less in control PGC-1α than in
WT mice, likely due to the distinct fiber composition in
transgenic mice presenting almost the totality of oxidative
fibers, known to be smaller than the glycolytic ones.
As for tumor-induced heart hypertrophy, this was not
affected or was even increased by the transgene, PGC1α mice presenting with a mild heart hypertrophy even
in the absence of the tumor (Figure 6A). Consistently
with the protection against muscle wasting, in the PGC1α transgenic females the increase of muscle atrogin-1
levels is less marked than in WT animals (Figure 6C). Of
interest, the expression of both muscle-specific ubiquitin
ligases atrogin-1 and MuRF1 is reduced in healthy PGC1α transgenic mice with respect to wild-type controls
(Figure 6C).

DISCUSSION
Effective treatments for the prevention of cachexia

Figure 6: PGC-1α overexpression prevents cachexia in LLC-bearing mice. Gastrocnemius (GSN), tibialis (TIB) and heart

weight A. and tibialis fiber CSA B. in female control WT (C WT), PGC (C PGC) and LLC-bearing mice WT (LLC WT) and PGC (LLC
PGC). Data (mean±SD) are expressed as percentages of C WT. C. Gene expression analysis of Atrogin-1 and MuRF1 transcripts. Specific
mRNA abundance was corrected for the mean of TBP (TATA box-binding protein) and β-actin levels on individual samples. Data (means
± SE) are compared by 2-way ANOVA. Significance of the differences: *p< 0,05 vs C WT, **p < 0,01 vs C WT, ***p < 0,001 vs C WT, $p
< 0,05 vs LLC WT, #p < 0,05 vs C PGC, ##p < 0,01 vs C PGC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43208

Oncotarget

are lacking. In this regard, several clinical trials are
ongoing, however most of them are based on the use of
nutritional and pharmacological (mainly orexigenic)
interventions aimed at preventing body weight loss
and muscle wasting. By contrast, the effect of exercise
training has been explored only marginally [15], even
in experimental models of cachexia [17], despite in
physiological conditions exercise is the most effective
strategy to improve muscle mass and function.
Muscle strength and endurance are markedly
impaired in cachexia and many cancer patients experience
chronic fatigue, as a consequence of the tumor and/or
of the superimposed anti-neoplastic therapies. Chronic
fatigue and comorbidities, such as anemia and cardiac
dysfunctions, are limiting factors for practicing physical
activity [17]. Consistently, the data reported in the present
study show that exercise does not improve skeletal
muscle wasting in the C26-bearing mice, in which
cachexia is associated with anemia (present work) and
cardiac alterations [27]. In this regard, cardiovascular
perturbations have been reported also in colorectal
cancer patients, independently from chemotherapy
[28], while anemia has been proposed to depend on a
direct action of the tumor, on anti-cancer treatment, or
both [3]. Considering that anemia occurs in about 40%
of cancer patients or even more after chemotherapy [3]
and that potentially limits the beneficial effects exerted

by exercise, its correction should be achieved before
suggesting exercise as a mean to prevent/correct cachexia.
Indeed, our observations show that EPO administration to
exercised C26 hosts partially prevents both CSA reduction
in oxidative myofibers and the shift from oxidative to
glycolytic fiber type.
EPO is not free from side effects, mainly
cardiovascular events reported in patients affected by
heart or chronic kidney diseases, undergoing prolonged
EPO administration [29, 30]. For these reasons, safety
evaluation in cachectic cancer patients would be required.
However the schedule proposed for EPO administration in
the present study is ‘acute’ and would be carried out only
in anemic cancer patients to allow exercise practicing.
The mechanisms accounting for EPO effectiveness
could go beyond the stimulation of erythropoiesis.
Indeed, plenty of data are available about the cardioprotective action of EPO [30], and recent results suggest
that different regions of the EPO molecule account for the
erythropoietic and the immunomodulatory action [31].
The results shown in the present study demonstrate that
both EPO and exercise are required to restore the normal
heart weight in LLC-bearing mice, where anemia is more
severe than in the C26 hosts, suggesting an additive and
coordinated action of the two treatments. However, LLCbearing mice are hyporesponsive to EPO since the severe
anemia could only partially be corrected, possibly due

Figure 7: Proposed mechanism of action of exercise, EPO and PGC-1α in counteracting tumor-induced muscle
alterations. See text for further details.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43209

Oncotarget

to inflammation that antagonizes erythropoiesis and/or
excessive erythrocyte cytolysis[32].Being the pathogenesis
of cachexia a multifactorial process, it is likely that EPO
and exercise act on different targets, improving anemia
and muscle strength, respectively. In addition, both could
positively impinge on heart function.
The inflammatory response is another crucial event
in the pathogenesis of cancer cachexia. In this regard,
the data shown in the present study confirm previous
observations indicating that the levels of circulating IL6, a pro-inflammatory cytokine that plays a pivotal role
in the onset and progression of cachexia [33], markedly
increase in tumor-bearing mice. Further supporting
the idea that a combined treatment is the best choice to
address cancer cachexia, the association between exercise
and EPO reduces circulating IL-6, even though such effect
is lost when exercise starts long before tumor injection,
likely due to an adaptation to the exercise protocol in the
absence of a reinforcement in running speed and time. The
anti-inflammatory action of exercise is well-established
and has been demonstrated in both healthy subjects [34]
and cancer patients at early stages of the disease [35].
In cachectic cancer patients, an exercise-mediated antiinflammatory action would be clinically relevant, since
the occurrence of inflammation negatively impinges on
diagnosis, staging of cachexia [1, 36], and patient survival
[37].
The occurrence of muscle mitochondrial dysfunction
in cachexia has been demonstrated by a number of studies
[20, 38, 39]. The data here reported confirm that both
mitochondrial structure and function are altered in the
skeletal muscle of tumor-bearing mice, and that such
changes can be rescued by the combined treatment with
EPO and exercise. In this regard, several studies suggest
that EPO plays a role in the regulation of mitochondrial
function: it has been shown to stimulate muscle fat
oxidation and to prevent diet-induced obesity in mice
[40], to promote muscle mitochondrial biogenesis in rats
[41] and to enhance mitochondrial function (oxidative
phosphorylation and electron transport capacity) in
humans [42]. These observations are consistent with the
glycolytic to oxidative myofiber shift observed in the C26bearing mice as well as with the increased SDH activity
occurring in the LLC hosts, both suggesting that the
combination of EPO and exercise stimulates mitochondrial
biogenesis. Of interest, EPO alone is unable to prevent
the accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria in LLCbearing mice, suggesting that between EPO and exercise,
the latter is leader in driving the action on mitochondria,
consistently with a previous report showing reduced
mitochondrial damage in exercised doxorubicin-treated
rats [43].
In addition to reduced muscle mass, also contractile
dysfunction has been proposed to drive both muscle
weakness and fatigue occurring in the C26-bearing mice
[44]. In this regard, protein hypercatabolism mainly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

accounts for muscle depletion, while impaired muscle
‘quality’ leads to contractile dysfunction; this latter, in
particular, mainly depends on the lack of energy, i.e. ATP
intracellular content. So far, most of the interventions
proposed to prevent cachexia are aimed to preserve
muscle mass, while the rescue of muscle quality, even
if seldom pursued, would prevent the loss of ATP
production, restoring muscle energetics. No alterations
in the efficiency of ATP synthesis have been found in the
skeletal muscle of cachectic rats with peritoneal carcinosis
[38], while in vivo ATP synthesis rate is markedly reduced
in LLC-bearing mice [45]. Our results confirm the strong
reduction of ATP intracellular storage, that is reversed by
EPO administration, though not by exercise, supporting a
direct role of EPO in the regulation of muscle energetics.
Such a role is further supported by the observation that
EPO alone is sufficient to increase PGC-1α expression,
confirming similar results reported in healthy rats [41].
Regarding mitochondrial dynamics, our gene study
shows that, while mitochondrial fission-related transcripts
are not affected by exercise, combined or not with EPO,
those related to mitophagy are increased, likely allowing
the removal of damaged mitochondria. Such hypothesis
is strengthened by the recent demonstration that PGC1α plays a regulatory role on mitophagy in the skeletal
muscle [21]. Moreover, our observations suggest that
the exercise protocol adopted is well tolerated in LLCbearing mice. Indeed when endurance exercise is
excessive, mitochondrial fission increases in the absence
of mitophagy induction [46]. Our results are partially
confirmed by a study performed in APC Min/+ cachectic
mice, where the reduction of mitochondrial content is
associated with PGC-1α and mitochondrial fusion protein
repression, that is effectively prevented by either IL-6
blockade or exercise [39]. Most of the studies describing
muscle mitochondrial alterations confer to PGC-1α
reduced expression a causative role. Consistently, PGC1α overexpression has been shown to effectively prevent
muscle atrophy in certain conditions [23], acting as an
exercise mimetic. In agreement with these observations,
the present study shows that PGC-1α overexpression
proves effective in preventing LLC-induced muscle
wasting. Such a result does not comply with a previous
report suggesting that skeletal muscle hypertrophy and
resistance to LLC-induced muscle wasting is exclusively
regulated by PGC-1α4, a non-canonical resistance
training-induced splice variant of the PGC-1α gene [47].
However, recent data obtained in humans question the
specificity of PGC-1α4 in mediating exercise-induced
hypertrophy, since all PGC-1α isoforms are induced after
exercise regardless of the mode [48]. Nonetheless, the
mode of exercise could be relevant to the effectiveness of
such an approach in cancer patients, resistance favoring
the maintenance of muscle mass and endurance improving
muscle quality. It is likely that the integration of both
components will provide the most beneficial effect.
43210

Oncotarget

In conclusion, our results highlight the importance
of a combined approach in order to target at least some
of the alterations occurring in cachectic patients (Figure
7). On a first line, EPO administration would prevent
cancer-induced anemia and boost exercise effectiveness,
counteracting fatigue. As for the skeletal muscle, the
association of EPO administration to moderate exercise
could promote, through stimulation of PGC-1α expression,
both mitochondrial biogenesis and turnover, improving
muscle quality and function. Such approach looks
feasible and provides the scientific bases and mechanistic
support for translating the preclinical data into clinical
trials exploring, in a combined therapeutic strategy, the
effectiveness of exercise for countering cachexia.

week starting the day after tumor injection for both C26
and LLC. In a subsequent experiment on C26 mice, the
animals were exercised starting 6 weeks before tumor
injection until sacrifice. Mice ran for 45 minutes at the
speed of 14 m/minute (see [16] for details).
Animal weight and food intake were recorded daily,
starting from the day of tumor implantation. Control and
tumor-bearing mice were sacrificed under anesthesia 14
or 28 days after C26 or LLC implantation, respectively.
Several muscles and tissues were rapidly excised,
weighed, frozen in melting isopentane and stored at -80°C
for further analysis.

Grip force assessment

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Muscle strength was assessed by the grip-strength
test as previously described [16] using a Panlab-Harvard
Apparatus device. Three measurements were taken for
each mouse on both baseline and sacrifice day.

Animals and experimental design

Hematocrit

Male 6 week old Balb/C or C57BL/6 (Interfauna,
Spain) and both male and female C57BL/6-Tg(CkmPpargc1a)31Brsp/j (overexpressing PGC-1α1 in the
skeletal muscle [49]; the Jackson Laboratory, USA)
mice were maintained on a regular dark-light cycle
(light from 08:00 to 20:00), with free access to food and
water during the whole experimental period. Animals
were cared for in compliance with the Policy on Human
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (ILAR 2011). The
Bioethical Committees of the University of Barcelona and
Torino approved the experimental protocols. All animal
manipulations were made in accordance with the European
Community guidelines for the use of laboratory animals.
Mice were randomized and divided into two groups,
namely controls (C) and tumor bearers (TB). TB mice were
inoculated subcutaneously in the back with 5x105 Colon26
(C26) or Lewis Lung carcinoma (LLC) cells. C26 and
LLC cells were maintained in vitro in DMEM (Invitrogen)
supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100
µg/ml streptomycin, 100 µg/ml sodium pyruvate, 2 mM
L-glutamine, at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5%
CO2 in air. The day of tumor implantation, cells were
trypsinized, resuspended in sterile saline, and implanted
in the back of the animals. Tumor-bearing mice were
divided into different groups: sedentary (C26 and LLC),
submitted to endurance exercise (C26 EX and LLC
EX), treated every three days with an intraperitoneal
injection of recombinant human EPO (100 IU, see [50];
C26 EPO and LLC EPO) and submitted to endurance
exercise and erythropoietin treatment (C26 EX EPO and
LLC EX EPO). Transgenic mice were randomized and
divided into two groups, namely controls (C PGC) and
tumor bearers (LLC PGC). As for the exercise protocol,
mice were exercised on a Panlab/Harvard-Apparatus
treadmill (Barcelona, Spain). Mice were exercised 5 days/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Blood was collected from anaesthetized mice
by cardiac puncture. A drop was used to fill hematocrit
capillary tubes that were centrifuged in a specific
centrifuge for 5 min at 800 x g. Hematocrit was expressed
as volume percentage of erythrocytes in the blood.

Histology, SDH staining and total activity
During sacrifice, both tibialis muscles from each
animal were rapidly excised. One was snap frozen in
liquid nitrogen for enzymatic activity and western blotting,
the other was mounted in OCT and frozen in melting
isopentane for histology. Transverse sections (10 μM)
were cut on a cryostat and stained for SDH (succinate
dehydrogenase). Briefly, cryosection were incubated for
30 min at 37°C with 1 mg/ml NTB (nitrotetrazolium blue
chloride) and 27 mg/ml Na-succinate in PBS, washed three
times in PBS, mounted with glycerol and photographed.
Fiber cross-sectional area (CSA) was determined using
the Image J software on randomly chosen 100 individual
fibers in the two regions of the muscle composed mainly
by oxidative or glycolytic fibers, respectively. As for the
total SDH activity, the muscles were homogenized (5% wt/
vol) in ice-cold 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, 0.1 mM
EGTA and centrifuged 5 min at 800 x g. The supernatant
was collected and total protein content measured using
the BCA protein assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
USA). Protein homogenates (50 μl) were incubated with
200 µl reaction buffer containing 10 mM Na-succinate,
50 µg/ml DCPIP, 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), 2
mM KCN, 10 mM CaCl2, 0.05% BSA. The absorbance
at 600 nm was measured after 0, 3 and 20 min. The rate of
43211

Oncotarget

absorbance decrease between 3 and 20 min was corrected
for the protein loading and used to calculate the SDH
content.

NaCl, 0.2mM EDTA and 25% glycerol, with freshly added
protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails, incubated
on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 3000 x g for 5 min at
4°C, and the supernatant collected as nuclear extract.
Protein concentration was measured using the BCA
protein assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).
Equal amounts of nuclear protein (20 µg) were heatdenaturated in sample-loading buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 6.8, 100 mM DTT, 2% SDS, 0.1% bromophenol blue,
10% glycerol), resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad, USA). The filters
were blocked with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing
0.05% Tween and 5% non-fat dry milk and then incubated
overnight with an antibody directed against PGC-1α
(Millipore, USA). Peroxidase-conjugated IgG (Bio-Rad,
USA) were used as secondary antibodies. Membranebound immune complexes were detected by an enhanced
chemiluminescence system (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
USA) on a photon-sensitive film (Hyperfilm ECL, GE
Healthcare, Italy). Protein loading was normalized
according to GAPDH (Santa Cruz biotechnology, USA)
expression. Quantification of the bands was performed by
densitometric analysis using a specific software (TotalLab,
NonLinear Dynamics, UK).

Electron microscopy
EDL and soleus muscle specimens of 1 mm3 were
prepared under a stereomicroscope and fixed for 24 h at
4°C with 2% parafomaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde
in phosphate buffer. After washing, samples were
postfixed with 1% osmium tetroxide and 0.8% potassium
ferricyanide at 4°C and finally dehydrated in acetone,
infiltrated with Epon resin during 48 h, embedded in
the same resin positioned to obtain longitudinal sections
and polymerised at 60°C during 48 h. After semi-thin
sectioning and field selection, ultrathin sections were
obtained using a Leica Ultracut UC6 ultramicrotome and
mounted on Formvar-coated copper grids. Sections were
stained with 2% uranyl acetate in water and lead citrate
and observed in a JEM-1010 electron microscope (Jeol,
Japan) equipped with a CCD camera SIS Megaview III and
the AnalySIS software. Intermyofibrillar mitochondrial
morphology was classified into unchanged and altered
(swelling-related ultrastructural changes). Mitochondrial
counting was performed computing the average number of
altered mitochondria in 3 randomly taken micrographs per
sample and 3 samples per experimental group.

RT-PCR
Total RNA was obtained using the TriPure reagent
(Roche, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions.
RNA concentration was determined fluorometrically using
the Ribogreen reagent (Invitrogen, USA). Total mRNA
was retro-transcribed using the i-Script cDNA synthesis
kit (Bio-Rad, USA). Transcript levels were determined by
real-time PCR using the SsoFast Evagreen Supermix and
the MiniOpticon thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, USA). Primer
sequences are given in the supplemental material section.

Intracellular ATP content
ATP was determined by bioluminescence using
a commercially available kit (ATP Bioluminescence
Assay Kit CLS II; Roche) according to manufacturer’s
recommendations. Briefly, gastrocnemius muscles were
homogenized in PBS (10% wt/vol). Muscle homogenates
were then diluted 10 times in 100 mM Tris, 4 mM
EDTA (pH 7.75 ), incubated 2 minutes at 100°C, and
centrifuged 1 minute at 1000 x g and the supernatant
collected. An aliquot of sample (50 μl) was added to 50
µL of the luciferase reagent in a multiwell black plate (96
wells - Packard). The luminescence was measured in a
Luminometer at 562 nm with an integration time of 10
seconds. ATP concentrations were obtained from a log-log
plot of the standard curve data.

Data analysis and presentation
All the results are expressed as means ± SD, except
for gene expression (means ± SEM). The significance
of the differences was evaluated by analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s test.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Western blotting

No potential conflicts of interest to be disclosed.

Tibialis muscles were homogenized in 10 mM
HEPES, pH 7.5, containing 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM KCl,
0.1mM EDTA and 0.1% Triton X-100, with freshly added
protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails, centrifuged
at 3000 x g for 5 min at 4°C, and the supernatant collected
as cytosolic extract. The pellet was resuspended in 20 mM
HEPES, pH 7.9, containing 1.5 mM MgCl2, 500 mM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT
Work supported by Ministerio de Ciencia y
Tecnología, Spain (Grant SAF2011-26091 to JMA) and by
the Italian Association for Cancer Research, Milano, Italy
(Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro; IG9153
to PC); University of Torino, Torino, Italy (ex-60% funds
43212

Oncotarget

to FP and PC). FP was an AIRC/Marie Curie fellow during
part of the study.

Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Oct;45:2191-9.
13.	 Alves CRR, da Cunha TF, da Paixão NA, Brum PC.
Aerobic exercise training as therapy for cardiac and cancer
cachexia. Life Sci. 2015 Mar 15;125:9-14.

REFERENCES

14.	 Li JL, Wang XN, Fraser SF, Carey MF, Wrigley T
V, McKenna MJ. Effects of fatigue and training on
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) regulation in human skeletal
muscle. J Appl Physiol. 2002 Mar;92:912-22.

1.	 Fearon K, Strasser F, Anker SD, Bosaeus I, Bruera E,
Fainsinger RL, Jatoi A, Loprinzi C, MacDonald N,
Mantovani G, Davis M, Muscaritoli M, Ottery F, Radbruch
L, Ravasco P, Walsh D, Wilcock A, Kaasa S, Baracos
VE. Definition and classification of cancer cachexia:
An international consensus. Lancet Oncol. Elsevier Ltd;
2011;12:489-95.

15.	 Khamoui A V, Kim JS. Candidate mechanisms underlying
effects of contractile activity on muscle morphology and
energetics in cancer cachexia. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl).
2012 Mar;21:143-57.

2.	 Grande AJ, Silva V, Riera R, Medeiros A, Vitoriano
SGP, Peccin MS, Maddocks M. Exercise for cancer
cachexia in adults. Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2014
Jan;11:CD010804.
3.	

16.	 Penna F, Busquets S, Pin F, Toledo M, Baccino FM, LópezSoriano FJ, Costelli P, Argilés JM. Combined approach to
counteract experimental cancer cachexia: Eicosapentaenoic
acid and training exercise. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle.
2011 Jun;2:95-104.

Knight K, Wade S, Balducci L. Prevalence and outcomes of
anemia in cancer: a systematic review of the literature. Am
J Med. 2004 Apr 5;116 Suppl :11S - 26S.

17.	 Argilés JM, Busquets S, López-Soriano FJ, Costelli P,
Penna F. Are there any benefits of exercise training in
cancer cachexia? J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2012
Jun;3:73-6.

4.	 Argilés JM, Busquets S, Stemmler B, López-Soriano FJ.
Cancer cachexia: understanding the molecular basis. Nat
Rev Cancer. Nature Publishing Group; 2014;14:754-62.

18.	 Penna F, Bonetto A, Muscaritoli M, Costamagna D,
Minero VG, Bonelli G, Fanelli FR, Baccino FM, Costelli
P, Rossi Fanelli F, Baccino FM, Costelli P. Muscle atrophy
in experimental cancer cachexia: Is the IGF-1 signaling
pathway involved? Int J Cancer. 2010 Oct 1;127:1706-17.

5.	 Mustafa I, Leverve X. Metabolic and nutritional disorders
in cardiac cachexia. Nutrition. 2001 Sep;17:756-60.
6.	 Lamon S, Russell AP. The role and regulation of
erythropoietin (EPO) and its receptor in skeletal muscle:
how much do we really know? Front Physiol. 2013
Jan;4:176.

19.	 Shum AMY, Mahendradatta T, Taylor RJ, Painter AB,
Moore MM, Tsoli M, Tan TC, Clarke SJ, Robertson
GR, Polly P. Disruption of MEF2C signaling and loss of
sarcomeric and mitochondrial integrity in cancer-induced
skeletal muscle wasting. Aging (Albany NY). 2012
Feb;4:133-43.

7.	 Tada H, Kagaya Y, Takeda M, Ohta J, Asaumi Y, Satoh
K, Ito K, Karibe A, Shirato K, Minegishi N, Shimokawa
H. Endogenous erythropoietin system in non-hematopoietic
lineage cells plays a protective role in myocardial ischemia/
reperfusion. Cardiovasc Res. 2006 Aug 1;71:466-77.

20.	 Fontes-Oliveira CC, Busquets S, Toledo M, Penna F, Paz
Aylwin M, Sirisi S, Silva AP, Orpí M, García A, Sette A,
Inês Genovese M, Olivan M, López-Soriano FJ, Argilés JM.
Mitochondrial and sarcoplasmic reticulum abnormalities
in cancer cachexia: altered energetic efficiency? Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1830:2770-8.

8.	 Penna F, Busquets S, Toledo M, Pin F, Massa D, LópezSoriano FJ, Costelli P, Argilés JM. Erythropoietin
administration partially prevents adipose tissue loss
in experimental cancer cachexia models. J Lipid Res.
2013;54:3045-51.

21.	 Vainshtein A, Desjardins EM, Armani A, Sandri M, Hood
DA. PGC-1α modulates denervation-induced mitophagy in
skeletal muscle. Skelet Muscle. 2015 Jan;5:9.

9.	 Mille-Hamard L, Billat VL, Henry E, Bonnamy B, Joly
F, Benech P, Barrey E. Skeletal muscle alterations and
exercise performance decrease in erythropoietin-deficient
mice: a comparative study. BMC Med Genomics. 2012
Jan;5:29.

22.	 Romanello V, Guadagnin E, Gomes L, Roder I, Sandri C,
Petersen Y, Milan G, Masiero E, Del Piccolo P, Foretz M,
Scorrano L, Rudolf R, Sandri M. Mitochondrial fission and
remodelling contributes to muscle atrophy. EMBO J. 2010
May 19;29:1774-85.

10.	 Caillaud C, Mechta M, Ainge H, Madsen AN, Ruell P, Mas
E, Bisbal C, Mercier J, Twigg S, Mori TA, Simar D, Barrès
R. Chronic erythropoietin treatment improves diet-induced
glucose intolerance in rats. J Endocrinol. 2015 May;225:7788.

23.	 Sandri M, Lin J, Handschin C, Yang W, Arany ZP, Lecker
SH, Goldberg AL, Spiegelman BM. PGC-1alpha protects
skeletal muscle from atrophy by suppressing FoxO3 action
and atrophy-specific gene transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2006 Oct 31;103:16260-5.

11.	 Jia Y, Suzuki N, Yamamoto M, Gassmann M, Noguchi CT.
Endogenous erythropoietin signaling facilitates skeletal
muscle repair and recovery following pharmacologically
induced damage. FASEB J. 2012 Jul;26:2847-58.

24.	 Brault JJ, Jespersen JG, Goldberg AL. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha or
1beta overexpression inhibits muscle protein degradation,

12.	 Ciciliot S, Rossi AC, Dyar KA, Blaauw B, Schiaffino S.
Muscle type and fiber type specificity in muscle wasting.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43213

Oncotarget

induction of ubiquitin ligases, and disuse atrophy. J Biol
Chem. 2010 Jun 18;285:19460-71.

C, Collin A, Tesseraud S, Couet C, Servais S. Cancer
cachexia is associated with a decrease in skeletal muscle
mitochondrial oxidative capacities without alteration of
ATP production efficiency. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle.
2012 Dec;3:265-75.

25.	 Cannavino J, Brocca L, Sandri M, Bottinelli R, Pellegrino
MA. PGC1-α over-expression prevents metabolic
alterations and soleus muscle atrophy in hindlimb unloaded
mice. J Physiol. 2014 Oct 15;592:4575-89.

39.	 White JP, Puppa MJ, Sato S, Gao S, Price RL, Baynes JW,
Kostek MC, Matesic LE, Carson JA. IL-6 regulation on
skeletal muscle mitochondrial remodeling during cancer
cachexia in the ApcMin/+ mouse. Skelet Muscle. 2012
Jan;2:14.

26.	 Wang X, Pickrell AM, Zimmers TA, Moraes CT. Increase
in muscle mitochondrial biogenesis does not prevent muscle
loss but increased tumor size in a mouse model of acute
cancer-induced cachexia. PLoS One. 2012 Jan;7:e33426.

40.	 Hojman P, Brolin C, Gissel H, Brandt C, Zerahn B, Pedersen
BK, Gehl J. Erythropoietin over-expression protects against
diet-induced obesity in mice through increased fat oxidation
in muscles. PLoS One. 2009 Jan;4:e5894.

27.	 Tian M, Nishijima Y, Asp ML, Stout MB, Reiser PJ, Belury
MA. Cardiac alterations in cancer-induced cachexia in
mice. Int J Oncol. 2010 Aug;37:347-53.
28.	 Cramer L, Hildebrandt B, Kung T, Wichmann K, Springer
J, Doehner W, Sandek A, Valentova M, Stojakovic
T, Scharnagl H, Riess H, Anker SD, von Haehling S.
Cardiovascular function and predictors of exercise capacity
in patients with colorectal cancer. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014
Sep 30;64:1310-9.

41.	 Martinez-Bello VE, Sanchis-Gomar F, Romagnoli M,
Derbre F, Gomez-Cabrera MC, Viña J. Three weeks
of erythropoietin treatment hampers skeletal muscle
mitochondrial biogenesis in rats. J Physiol Biochem. 2012
Dec;68:593-601.
42.	 Plenge U, Belhage B, Guadalupe-Grau A, Andersen PR,
Lundby C, Dela F, Stride N, Pott FC, Helge JW, Boushel
R. Erythropoietin treatment enhances muscle mitochondrial
capacity in humans. Front Physiol. 2012 Jan;3:50.

29.	 Mastromarino V, Musumeci MB, Conti E, Tocci G, Volpe
M. Erythropoietin in cardiac disease: effective or harmful?
J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2013 Dec;14:870-8.
30.	 Wilhelm-Leen ER, Winkelmayer WC. Mortality risk of
darbepoetin alfa versus epoetin alfa in patients with CKD:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis.
2015 Jul;66:69-74.

43.	 Ascensão A, Magalhães J, Soares J, Ferreira R, Neuparth
M, Marques F, Oliveira J, Duarte J. Endurance training
attenuates doxorubicin-induced cardiac oxidative damage
in mice. Int J Cardiol. 2005 Apr 28;100:451-60.

31.	 Yuan R, Wang B, Lu W, Maeda Y, Dowling P. A
Distinct Region in Erythropoietin that Induces Immuno/
Inflammatory Modulation and Tissue Protection.
Neurotherapeutics. 2015 Oct;12:850-61.

44.	 Roberts BM, Frye GS, Ahn B, Ferreira LF, Judge AR.
Cancer cachexia decreases specific force and accelerates
fatigue in limb muscle. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2013 Jun 7;435:488-92.

32.	 van der Putten K, Braam B, Jie KE, Gaillard CAJM.
Mechanisms of Disease: erythropoietin resistance in
patients with both heart and kidney failure. Nat Clin Pract
Nephrol. 2008 Jan;4:47-57.

45.	 Tzika AA, Fontes-Oliveira CC, Shestov AA, Constantinou
C, Psychogios N, Righi V, Mintzopoulos D, Busquets S,
Lopez-Soriano FJ, Milot S, Lepine F, Mindrinos MN,
Rahme LG, Argiles JM. Skeletal muscle mitochondrial
uncoupling in a murine cancer cachexia model. Int J Oncol.
2013 Sep;43:886-94.

33.	 Narsale AA, Carson JA. Role of interleukin-6 in cachexia:
therapeutic implications. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care.
2014 Dec;8:321-7.

46.	 Jamart C, Benoit N, Raymackers J-M, Kim HJ, Kim CK,
Francaux M. Autophagy-related and autophagy-regulatory
genes are induced in human muscle after ultraendurance
exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2012 Aug;112:3173-7.

34.	 Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Stensel DJ, Lindley MR, Mastana
SS, Nimmo MA. The anti-inflammatory effects of exercise:
mechanisms and implications for the prevention and
treatment of disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11:60715.

47.	 Ruas JL, White JP, Rao RR, Kleiner S, Brannan KT,
Harrison BC, Greene NP, Wu J, Estall JL, Irving BA, Lanza
IR, Rasbach KA, Okutsu M, Nair KS, Yan Z, Leinwand
LA, Spiegelman BM. A PGC-1α isoform induced by
resistance training regulates skeletal muscle hypertrophy.
Cell. 2012 Dec 7;151:1319-31.

35.	 Betof AS, Dewhirst MW, Jones LW. Effects and potential
mechanisms of exercise training on cancer progression: a
translational perspective. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Mar;30
Suppl:S75-87.
36.	 Argilés JM, López-Soriano FJ, Toledo M, Betancourt A,
Serpe R, Busquets S. The cachexia score (CASCO): a
new tool for staging cachectic cancer patients. J Cachexia
Sarcopenia Muscle. 2011 Jun 15;2:87-93.

48.	 Lundberg TR, Fernandez-Gonzalo R, Norrbom J, Fischer
H, Tesch PA, Gustafsson T. Truncated splice variant PGC1α4 is not associated with exercise-induced human muscle
hypertrophy. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2014 Oct;212:142-51.

37.	 McMillan DC. The systemic inflammation-based Glasgow
Prognostic Score: a decade of experience in patients with
cancer. Cancer Treat Rev. 2013 Aug;39:534-40.

49.	 Lin J, Wu H, Tarr PT, Zhang C-Y, Wu Z, Boss O, Michael
LF, Puigserver P, Isotani E, Olson EN, Lowell BB, BasselDuby R, Spiegelman BM. Transcriptional co-activator

38.	 Julienne CM, Dumas J-F, Goupille C, Pinault M, Berri
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43214

Oncotarget

PGC-1 alpha drives the formation of slow-twitch muscle
fibres. Nature. 2002 Aug 15;418:797-801.
50.	 Hamed S, Egozi D, Kruchevsky D, Teot L, Gilhar A,
Ullmann Y. Erythropoietin improves the survival of fat
tissue after its transplantation in nude mice. PLoS One.
2010 Jan;5:e13986.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43215

Oncotarget

