Analysis Shows CT Lung Cancer Screening Is Cost Effective

L

ow-dose computed tomography (CT) screening
can be cost-eﬀective when compared with no
screening among aging smokers, according to a
recent analysis of results from the National Lung
Cancer Screening Trial.1
The trial, which involved more than 53,000
smokers aged 55 to 74 years, concluded that
helical CT scanning reduced mortality from lung
cancer by 20% when compared with chest X-rays.
The recently published analysis of the
trial results was conducted by researchers at
Brown University School of Public Health in
Providence, Rhode Island, and the Geisel School
of Medicine at Dartmouth College in Hanover,
New Hampshire. The researchers examined the
ﬁnancial implications of screening versus not screening by
calculating a ratio of the costs of CT screening per person as
well as the number of “quality-adjusted life-years added” per
person across the population. The latter distinguishes between
individuals living in good health and those living with major
health problems.
The result was a cost of $81,000 per quality-adjusted lifeyear added, which is considered cost-eﬀective (any sum less
than $100,000 is considered cost-eﬀective). Among subgroups,
CT screening was more cost-eﬀective in women than men and
more economical among patients with high-risk compared with
those with low-risk disease.
The researchers noted that the cost-eﬀectiveness of CT
lung screenings outside the trial may vary depending on how

screenings are implemented. That is because they
used many assumptions in calculating the ratio.
For example, the investigators assumed that
there was no life-prolonging medical beneﬁt to
CT screening other than detecting lung cancer.
However, when they assumed that other serious
conditions would be detected and treated, the
ratio fell to $54,000 per quality-adjusted lifeyear added.
However, other changes in assumptions
brought the ratio to nearly $100,000 or
higher. The researchers included the future
health costs for survivors (assuming higher costs
than in the study for screening, follow-up, or
treatment) or more pessimistic assumptions
regarding survival or quality of life. When the cost
of the test reached $500 (compared with $285 in the National
Lung Cancer Screening Trial), cost-eﬀectiveness declined, the
researchers noted.
Second author Ilana Gareen, PhD, of Brown University,
says that among the additional issues that need to be addressed
are how frequently patients should be screened, determining
the optimal interval between screenings, and whether screening
results should impact future screening frequency.

Reference
1. Black WC, Gareen IF, Soneji SS, et al; National Lung Screening Trial Research
Team. Cost-effectiveness of CT screening in the National Lung Screening
Trial. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1793-1802.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29343

A

shorter course of androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) combined with
radiotherapy (RT) leads to a quicker
recovery of normal testosterone levels in
patients with prostate cancer, resulting in
better quality of life without aﬀecting longterm outcomes, new research has found.
The research, presented at the
American Society for Radiation Oncology
annual meeting (held in September, 2014
in San Francisco, California), analyzed data from 561 patients
with high-risk prostate cancer in a multicenter, randomized
phase 3 trial in Canada. Patients were randomized into 2
groups: one receiving 18 months of ADT and RT and the
other receiving 36 months of ADT and RT. RT was initiated 4
months after the start of ADT in both groups.
With a median follow up of 84 months, 55.7% of patients
in the 18-month ADT group recovered to normal testosterone

levels compared with 44.9% of patients in
the 36-month ADT group. Furthermore,
the median time to testosterone recovery
was shorter in the patients receiving 18
months versus those receiving 36 months
of ADT (47.2 months vs 73.2 months).
Patients completed quality-of-life
questionnaires prior to treatment, every
6 months during ADT, at 4 months after
ADT, and then once a year for 5 years
after treatment. As determined by the questionnaires, patients
who had testosterone recovery had a better quality of life than
those who did not.
Currently, the ADT duration guideline for patients with
high-risk prostate cancer is between 2 to 3 years. Because of the
improvement in testosterone recovery and quality of life, the
researchers say that 2 years of ADT may be a good step until
ﬁnal results are obtained.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29285

© MAKSYM YEMELYANOV, GEOTHEA / FOTOLIA.COM

Quality of Life in Patients With High-Risk Prostate Cancer
Improves With Shorter Course of Androgen Deprivation Therapy

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

April 1, 2015

971

