Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Downregulation of c-SRC kinase CSK promotes castration
resistant prostate cancer and pinpoints a novel disease subclass
Chih-Cheng Yang1,2, Ladan Fazli6, Salvatore Loguercio3,7, Irina Zharkikh4, Pedro
Aza-Blanc2, Martin E. Gleave6, Dieter A. Wolf1,3,5
1

Tumor Initiation & Maintenance Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

2

Functional Genomics Core, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

3

San Diego Center for Systems Biology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

4

Tumor Analysis Core, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

5

School of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Center for Stress Signaling Networks, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China

6

Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6H 3Z6

7

Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

Correspondence to:
Dieter A. Wolf, e-mail: dwolf@sanfordburnham.org; dwolf@xmu.edu.cn
Chih-Cheng Yang, e-mail: ccyang@sanfordburnham.org
Keywords: castration-resistant prostate cancer, c-SRC kinase CSK, mouse xenografts, human prostate cancer tissue samples, siRNA screen
Received: April 10, 2015      Accepted: June 08, 2015      Published: June 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
SRC kinase is activated in castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC),
phosphorylates the androgen receptor (AR), and causes its ligand-independent
activation as a transcription factor. However, activating SRC mutations are
exceedingly rare in human tumors, and mechanisms of ectopic SRC activation
therefore remain largely unknown. Performing a functional genomics screen, we
found that downregulation of SRC inhibitory kinase CSK is sufficient to overcome
growth arrest induced by depriving human prostate cancer cells of androgen. CSK
knockdown led to ectopic SRC activation, increased AR signaling, and resistance to
anti-androgens. Consistent with the in vitro observations, stable knockdown of CSK
conferred castration resistance in mouse xenograft models, while sensitivity to the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib was retained. Finally, CSK was found downregulated
in a distinct subset of CRPCs marked by AR amplification and ETS2 deletion but lacking
PTEN and RB1 mutations. These results identify CSK downregulation as a principal
driver of SRC activation and castration resistance and validate SRC as a drug target
in a molecularly defined subclass of CRPCs.

Whereas androgen signaling maintains the differ­
entiation and inhibits the proliferation of normal luminal
prostate epithelial cells [1, 2], it is rewired in cancer cells
such as to stimulate their proliferation and survival in a
cell autonomous fashion [3]. Castration therefore initially
inhibits the growth and induces apoptosis of tumor cells;
prolonged androgen withdrawal, however, will lead to CR.
This transition is typically marked by a gain of function
in androgen receptor (AR) signaling [4], although the
transcriptional read-out of such gain may be different from
that elicited by AR signaling in hormone-sensitive prostate
cancer cells (Wang et al., 2009). It has nevertheless
become clear that most CRPCs express high levels of the
androgen receptor (AR) and are, in fact, addicted to the

INTRODUCTION
While the bulk of prostate cancers initially
depend on androgen, progression to castration resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) under androgen deprivation
therapy is inevitable. The obligatory progression to
castration resistance (CR) is one of the most significant
challenges in the management of advanced disease.
Once CR has occurred, the cancer has typically
metastasized, and no life extending treatment options
are currently available. The molecular pathways
leading to CR remain ill defined, however, thus
hampering the development of effective drugs for
advanced prostate cancer.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22060

Oncotarget

AR protein even in the absence of ligand [5]. Mechanisms
of ectopic AR activation identified in CRPC include AR
gene amplification (~30%), mutations in the AR ligandbinding domain conferring promiscuity for other ligands,
increased co-activator or reduced co-repressor recruitment
(~15%), upregulation of AR mRNA, and upregulation of
intra-tumoral testosterone synthesis [4–7].
In addition, several growth factor and kinase
signaling pathways impinge on the AR leading to
its ectopic activation [7]. For example, SRC kinase
whose activity is upregulated in a significant fraction
of CRPCs [8–10], interacts with the AR and directly
phosphorylates and activates it in a ligand independent
manner [9, 11]. SRC also potentiates AR transactivation
[12] and synergizes with the AR in a reconstituted
prostate carcinogenesis mouse model [13]. Conversely,
depletion of SRC curtails the growth of prostate cancer
xenografts in castrated mice [9]. A transcriptomic analysis
has indicated SRC-AR synergism also in human CRPC
[14]. Since activating SRC mutations are rare in human
tumors [15, 16], increased SRC activity might arise from
paracrine and/or autocrine activation of growth factor
receptors [3, 9, 17] or from yet unidentified mechanisms.
Significantly, a functional understanding of these kinase
pathways has validated some of them as novel targets for
rational intervention in CRPC. For example, the tyrosine
kinase inhibitor dasatinib has undergone clinical testing in
this disease [18–20].
Systematic attempts of identifying pathways
contributing to CR have employed large scale profiling
methods such as transcriptomics, immunoblotting, and
immunohistochemistry to pinpoint expression changes
in advanced prostate cancer [21]. More recently, genome
sequencing has begun to reveal the genomic heterogeneity
of human prostate cancer with several recurrent gene
mutations and large scale rearrangements [22–24]. Exome
sequencing has begun to identify genomic alterations
specific to CRPC [25, 26]. While highly valuable, these
genomic approaches are complicated by the uncertainty
whether the observed changes are cause or consequence
of the CR phenotype. Likewise, these techniques cannot
assess differences in protein (enzyme) activity; for
example, those that may arise from post-translational
modifications. Finally, such profiling data may be skewed
due to varying stromal-epithelial ratios of the samples
examined. Such distinctions are essential, however, for
exploiting CR pathways for the development of novel
therapeutic modalities.
Causal relationships can readily be inferred de novo
by loss-of-function genomic screening, but thorough
validation is required [27]. Since CR is thought of as a
cell autonomous phenotype of prostate cancer cells [3],
we have developed a functional genomics screen in human
prostate cancer cells to pinpoint signaling pathways
implicated in the development of CR. Utilizing this
unbiased platform, we have pinpointed downregulation of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the SRC inhibitory kinase CSK as a promoter of castration
resistance, validated SRC kinase as a target in CRPC, and
identified a distinct subclass of human CRPCs marked
by low levels of CSK that may be responsive to SRC
inhibition.

RESULTS
Functional genomics screen implicates CSK in
castration resistance
Considering the cell autonomous nature of the
castration resistant phenotype [3, 4], we used the androgen
responsive prostate cancer cell line LNCaP [28] to
develop a loss-of-function screen to delineate signaling
pathways promoting androgen-independent proliferation.
Cells were switched to androgen-depleted media to
arrest proliferation, and transfected with a library of
siRNAs targeting 704 kinases and kinase regulators (the
“kinome”), followed by determination of cell proliferation
(Supplementary Figure S1A). The synthetic androgen
R1881 was used as a positive control for stimulation
of cell proliferation, while non-targeting siRNA was
used as a negative control. Duplicate screens rendered
31 statistically significant hits. In a network analysis based
on the STRING 9.1 interactome and a price collecting
Steiner Forest algorithm, 28 of these hits clustered into an
optimal network that featured the AR as the central node
(Supplementary Figure S1B). Considering the preeminent
pro-oncogenic role of the AR in CRPC [4], the network
analysis provided orthogonal affirmation of the biological
and medical relevance of the screen.
One of the top ranking screening hits was
C-terminal SRC kinase (CSK, Supplementary Figure
S1C), an enzyme that inhibits SRC family kinases
(SFKs) by phosphorylating a C-terminal tyrosine
(Y530 in human SRC [29]). Knockdown of CSK in
androgen depleted LNCaP cells with three distinct
siRNAs of varying efficiencies (Figure 1A, 1D, 1E) led
to increases in cell proliferation, cell number, and the
fraction of cells in S phase, similar in extent to what
was achieved with the positive control R1881 (Figure
1B, 1C; Supplementary Figure S1D). Cell cycle entry
mediated by CSK knockdown coincided with increased
levels of cyclin A, cyclin D1 and RB phosphorylation,
whereas cyclin E levels remained largely unchanged
(Figure 1D). Consistent with increased SRC activity, the
inhibitory phosphorylation on Y530 was reduced whereas
the activating phosphorylation on Y419 was increased
upon knockdown of CSK (Figure 1D, 1E). Treatment
of cells with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib and
overexpression of the dominant negative SRC mutant
SRC-K295M were used to authenticate the Y530 and
Y419 species (Figure 1D).
Elevated SRC activity was also indicated by tyrosine
phosphorylation of known downstream targets such as focal
22061

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of CSK knockdown on androgen-independent proliferation and SRC activity in LNCaP cells. A. LNCaP
cells were depleted of androgen for 72 h, followed by transfection of different siRNAs targeting CSK. After 48 h, cells were harvested
for determination of knockdown efficiency by Q-PCR. B, C. Cell proliferation was determined with the MTS assay and by cell counting.
The synthetic androgen R1881 was used as positive control. Error bars represent standard deviations of 3 – 6 replicate measurements.
Significance of the differences to the siControl sample (grey bar) was assessed by calculating p values using an unpaired t-test, two-tailed
distribution, assuming equal variance. Asterisks denote significant differences. D, E. Protein lysates obtained under the same conditions
were probed with antibodies for cell cycle markers and markers of SRC activity. Dasatinib treatment and overexpression of the dominant
negative SRC-K295M mutant was used to confirm the identity of the pSRC Y419 and Y530 bands, both of which were eliminated by
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor. F. The anti-androgen bicalutamide was added to cells at the time of siRNA transfection to determine the
dependence of cell proliferation induced by CSN knockdown on AR signaling. Error bars represent standard deviations of 7 replicate
measurements. Significance of the differences to the androgen depleted sample (black bar) was assessed by calculating p values using an
unpaired t-test, two-tailed distribution, assuming equal variance. Asterisks denote significant differences relative to the siControl values
(black bars).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22062

Oncotarget

adhesion kinase (FAK, Y925; [30]) and the AR (Y534;
Figure 1E). Notably, SRC-mediated phosphorylation of
the AR on Y534 was previously shown to confer ligandindependent AR activation [9]. In addition, knockdown
of CSK increased PSA secretion (Supplementary Figure
S1D), further suggesting ectopic AR activation via SRC.
Whereas cell proliferation induced by R1881 was inhibited
by the AR blocker bicalutamide, proliferation mediated by
CSK knockdown was not (Figure 1F). This observation
suggests that ectopic AR activation in response to CSK
knockdown occurs in a ligand-independent fashion. The
above effects were most pronounced with CSK siRNA #1,
which showed the strongest and most consistent activity in
suppressing CSK levels (Figure 1A, 1D, 1E). This apparent
dose dependence suggests a specific on-target effect of the
relevant siRNA [27].
The effects of CSK knockdown on androgenindependent proliferation were corroborated in another
androgen responsive prostate cancer cell line, LAPC4. As
in LNCaP cells, CSK siRNA #1 led to an increase in cell
numbers and the fraction of cells in S phase under androgen
deprived conditions (Figure 2A, 2B). In addition, stable
knockdown of CSK by lentiviral transduction of shRNA
led to downregulation of CSK and activation of SRC as
indicated by a decrease in the inhibitory phosphorylation on
Y530 (Figure 2C). Stable knockdown of CSK also allowed
LAPC4 cells to proliferate more efficiently in androgen
depleted media than control knockdown cells (Figure 2D).
Importantly, androgen-independent proliferation was still
inhibited by dasatinib (Figure 2D).
Like CSK knockdown, transfection of LNCaP
cells with constitutively active SRC-Y527F (where the
CSK target tyrosine is mutated and therefore cannot
be phosphorylated), but not with dominant negative
SRC-K295M, was able to promote the proliferation
of androgen-depleted LNCaP cells (Figure 3A). Of
note, dominant negative SRC-K295M was unable to
augment downregulation of cyclin A expression and RB
phosphorylation beyond the level obtained by androgen
depletion, suggesting that hormone withdrawal led to
maximal SRC suppression (Figure 1D). In contrast, the
tyrosine kinase inhibitors dasatinib and bosutinib largely
prevented cell proliferation induced by CSK knockdown
and R1881 administration (Figure 3B, 3C). Dasatinib also
prevented SRC phosphorylation on Y419 and upregulation
of cyclin A levels and RB phosphorylation as a
consequence of CSK knockdown (Figure 3D). These data
firmly suggest that androgen-independent proliferation of
LNCaP cells induced by knockdown of CSK is mediated
through increased SRC-mediated AR activation.

stably downregulated through either one of three lentivirally
delivered shRNAs. Cells from clone 3-2, which exhibited
the most efficient downregulation of CSK (Figure 4A)
failed to arrest proliferation upon androgen depletion and
were only minimally stimulated by R1881 (Supplementary
Figure S2). When CSK knockdown cells were injected
subcutaneously into male SCID mice, tumors formed from
CSK knockdown cells (shCSK) appeared earlier and grew
to larger sizes than those obtained with control knockdown
cells (shControl; Figure 4B). Upon castration, shControl
tumors either regressed or stopped growing, whereas shCSK
LNCaP tumors continued to increase in size (Figure 4C).
Likewise, tumors derived from LAPC4 cells in which CSK
was stably knocked down (Figure 2C) grew in a castration
resistant manner (Supplementary Figure S3A). These
tumors displayed low levels of CSK and correspondingly
low levels of pSRC Y530 (Supplementary Figure S3B).
When castrated mice bearing castration resistant shCSK
LNCaP tumors were dosed with dasatinib (50 mg/kg p. o.,
once daily), tumor growth was suppressed relative to mock
treated animals (Figure 4D). Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that downregulation of CSK is sufficient
to confer a castration resistant phenotype to androgen
responsive prostate cancer cells in vivo. At the same time,
regimens directed toward inhibiting SRC activity appear
efficacious in the treatment of CRCP.

Low CSK defines a subclass of human CRPCs
While an increase in SRC activity has been reported
in CRPC, it remained unclear how this might occur [10].
Since mutational activation of SRC is exceedingly rare
[15, 16], we considered the possibility that CSK might
be downregulated in a subset of CRPCs. A search in
the Oncomine database revealed frequent CSK copy
number losses specifically in CRPCs as compared to
primary prostate cancer (Figure 5A; data from [25]).
A similar observation was made with an independent
dataset (Supplementary Figure S4A; [31]) as well as for
the CSK-related tyrosine kinase MATK (Supplementary
Figure S4B). CSK copy number loss was correlated with
poor survival, AR amplification, and deletion/mutation
of several tumor suppressors (ETS2, ZFHX3, and TP53;
[25]). Negative correlations were seen with mutational
inactivation of other regulators previously implicated in
CRPC such as PTEN and RB1 [32–34]. No correlation
with ERG rearrangements or deletion of CDH was
apparent (Figure 5A), suggesting that CRPCs with CSK
copy number loss may constitute a distinct subclass.
We next performed immunohistochemistry on
a panel of prostate cancer tissue samples representing
different disease stages (localized, metastatic, castration
resistant). Using siRNA-mediated knockdown of CSK in
LNCaP cells that were subsequently embedded in paraffin,
we first established the specificity of a commercially
available CSK antibody in immunohistochemistry

Stable knockdown of CSK confers castration
resistance in prostate cancer xenograft models
To test the effect of CSK downregulation in CRPC
in vivo, we prepared LNCaP cell lines in which CSK was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22063

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of CSK knockdown on androgen-independent proliferation and SRC activity in LAPC4 cells. A. LAPC4

cells were maintained in androgen-depleted media, followed by knockdown of CSK or re-addition of androgen (R1881). Cell numbers
were determined. Error bars represent standard deviations of 12 replicate measurements. Significance of the differences to the siControl
sample (grey bar) was assessed by calculating p values using an unpaired t-test, two-tailed distribution, assuming equal variance. Asterisks
denote significant differences. B. Same experiment as in (A) but the fraction of cells in S phase was determined by flow cytometry. Error
bars represent standard deviations of 2 replicate measurements. Significance of the differences to the siControl sample (grey bar) was
assessed by calculating p values using an unpaired t-test, two-tailed distribution, assuming equal variance. Asterisks denote significant
differences. C. Immunoblot to document the effect of various siRNAs targeting CSK upon transfection into LAPC4 cells. The signal
obtained for actin is shown as a reference. D. Immunoblot to demonstrate efficient knockdown of CSK upon infection of LAPC4 cells with
lentiviruses driving the expression of shRNA directed against CSK relative to Control shRNA. Blots were also probed with a marker of
SRC activity (SRC Y530). Actin is shown as a reference. E. The LAPC4 cells with stable shRNA-mediated knockdown of CSK shown in
(C) were grown in media containing charcoal-stripped and thus androgen-deprived FBS, and cell numbers were determined at the indicated
times (Error bars represent standard deviations of 2 replicates). Dasatinib was added at the time indicated, demonstrating that androgenindependent proliferation promoted by CSK knockdown is reversed by the tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Significance of the differences between
the shControl and shCSK samples was assessed by calculating p values using an unpaired t-test, two-tailed distribution, assuming equal
variance. Time points showing significant differences between shCOntrol and shCSK cells are highlighted by stating the respective p values.

(Supplementary Figure S5A). Staining of the prostate
cancer progression panel with this validated antibody
revealed a significant decrease in average CSK reactivity in
metastatic prostate cancer and CRPCs relative to primary
prostate cancers (Figure 5B, Supplementary Figure S5B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As reported previously [9, 10], pSRC Y419 and pAR Y534
were higher in CRPC than in primary prostate cancers
(Figure 5B, Supplementary Figure S5B). The same was
true for another SRC target, pFAK Y925. Total SRC, AR,
and FAK levels were not significantly changed in the
22064

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Androgen-independent growth induced by CSK knockdown is mediated by SRC activity. A. LNCaP cells

were androgen-depleted for 72 h, followed by transfection with plasmids driving the expression of constitutively active SRC-Y527F
or dominant negative SRC-K295M. Cells numbers were counted after 72 h. Expression of GFP was used as a negative control. Error
bars represent standard deviations of 2 replicates. Significance of the differences to the GFP transfected control sample (black bar) was
assessed by calculating p values using an unpaired t-test, two-tailed distribution, assuming equal variance. Asterisks denote significant
differences. B, C. The indicated doses of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors dasatinib or bosutinib were added at the time of CSK knockdown
and cell numbers were determined. Error bars represent standard deviations from 12 - 16 measurements. Significance of the differences
to the siControl sample (grey bar) was assessed by calculating p values using an unpaired t-test, two-tailed distribution, assuming equal
variance. Asterisks denote significant differences. D. CSK knockdown cells were treated with dasatinib, and the indicated markers were
assayed by immunoblotting.

progression series (Figure 5B). Comparative analysis of
individual CRPC cores revealed an apparent subclass of
tumors marked by low levels of CSK and high activity
of SFKs as determined by pSRC Y419, pFAK Y925, and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

pAR Y534 intensity (Figure 5C). These data suggest that
CSK protein expression is downregulated in a sizeable
subclass of CRPCs (~50% of CRPC cores) thus resulting
in increased SFK activity.

22065

Oncotarget

Figure 4: CSK knockdown confers castration resistance in vivo. A. Immunoblot to demonstrate efficient knockdown of CSK

upon infection of LNCaP cells with lentiviruses driving the expression of CSK relative to Control shRNA. B. shCSK knockdown LNCaP
cells (clone 3-2) were injected into SCID mice, and tumor growth was monitored for the indicated periods of time. Each line represents
tumor sizes in a single animal over time. C. Mice were castrated at the indicated tumor volumes and tumor growth was followed for the
indicated periods. Each line represents tumor sizes in a single animal over time. D. An independent set of mice was injected with shCSK3-2
cells, followed by castration when tumors had reached a volume of ~200–300 mm3. At the time of castration, tumor bearing mice were
dosed with dasatinib (50 mg/ml p.o. daily) for the indicated periods, and tumor growth was monitored. Dasatinib suppressed the growth
of LNCaP cells rendered castration resistant through knockdown of CSK. Each line represents tumor sizes in a single animal over time.

DISCUSSION

The mechanisms of CSK downregulation at the
transition to CRPC remain unknown, but our mining of
published datasets implicates allelic loss while not excluding
complimentary events such as promoter methylation, miR
overexpression, and increased proteolytic turn-over of CSK
protein amongst others. Regardless, our observations that (i.)
knockdown of CSK abolishes the growth inhibitory effects
of the androgen receptor blocker bicalutamide, and (ii.) CSK
protein is upregulated in response to androgen withdrawal in
LNCaP and LAPC4 cells (Figure 1D, 2C) strongly suggest
that commonly administered androgen deprivation therapy
may impose selective pressure on tumor cells to downregulate
CSK levels/activity for progression to castration resistance.
Using an entirely unbiased genetic loss-of-function
strategy, our findings have reinforced the preclinical
evidence suggesting SRC as a valid drug target in CRPC
[8–10, 13, 14]. This concept gained initial momentum
by encouraging results in multiple phase II clinical trials
with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib [18–20].
Nevertheless, dasatinib, a drug that successfully controlled
castration-resistant shCSK knockdown tumors in our

The data obtained in our unbiased loss-of-function
screen indicate CSK downregulation as a prominent
driver of progression to castration resistance. Castration
resistance of androgen sensitive LNCaP and LAPC4 cells
in response to CSK knockdown is likely mediated through
activation of SRC or a SRC family kinase, because it is
abolished by tyrosine kinase inhibitors dasatinib and
bosutinib in vitro and in vivo. Our immunohistochemical
studies also indicate downregulation of CSK as a
predominant mechanism of SRC activation in a significant
fraction of CRPCs. Together, the results suggest CSK
as a tumor suppressor, a role that has previously been
inferred from the observation of CSK downregulation in
hepatocellular carcinoma [35]. Since overexpression of
CSK inhibits SRC-mediated AR tyrosine phosphorylation
[11], ectopic AR phosphorylation and activation, as
indicated by increased PSA secretion, is the most likely
mechanism driving castration resistance in response to
CSK downregulation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22066

Oncotarget

Figure 5: CSK expression in human CRPC. A. CSK gene copy number data from Grasso et al. (Ref. [25]) were drawn from the
Oncomine database. Shown are events that are positively (blue) or negatively (red) correlated with loss of CSK. Uncorrelated events are
shown in black type. B. The indicated markers were quantified in a panel of prostate cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry. Scoring
was on a scale from 0 to 3 (see Materials and Methods). Error bars represent 2 standard errors which correspond approximately to 95%
confidence intervals (CI). Significance was estimated by assessing the extent of overlap of the CI bars, considering that for n ≥ 10, an
overlap of 0.5 indicates a p value of ~0.05, whereas an overlap of 0 corresponds to a p value of ~0.01 [40]. In the experiment shown, n in
each group = 25 – 52 cores, see Table S1. Thus, * denotes p ≈ 0.05, **p ≈ 0.01. PPCa = primary prostate cancer; mets = metastases. C. The
scores of 42 informative CRPC cores were clustered (similarity metric: absolute correlation uncentered, clustering method: single linkage),
and visualized as an intensity map. SFK = SRC Family Kinase.

xenograft experiments, has disappointed in a recently
concluded phase III trial in chemotherapy naïve patients.
The primary endpoint was overall survival of CRPC patients
treated with a combination of dasatinib and docetaxel
relative to docetaxel alone [36]. The rationale for combining
dasatinib with docetaxel has subsequently been questioned
noting the limited preclinical evidence supporting additive
or synergistic effects [37]. An added limitation of the failed
Phase III trial was that it neither assessed the status of SRC
activity in enrolled CRPC patients nor the effect of dasatinib
on SRC activity upon treatment.
Our results support a renewed interest in the
potential of SRC inhibitors in CRPC by suggesting CSK
downregulation as a novel marker for sensitivity of CRPCs
to dasatinib or more advanced SRC inhibitors. Whereas
SRC activation may not be a rate-limiting factor in all
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CRPCs, it may be a critical bottleneck in CRPCs displaying
CSK downregulation as suggested by our xenograft studies.
Secondly, our data suggest pathways for intervention in
combination with SRC inhibitors for which there exists
a stronger rationale than for docetaxel. For example, loss
of CSK appears to correlate with wildtype RB1 status.
Given the critical role of RB1 inactivation in CRPC [33],
tumors with low CSK may inactivate the RB1 pathway
through other means such as overexpression of cyclin D or
downregulation of p15 and p16 [34, 38, 39], which lead to
CDK4-dependent RB1 phosphorylation and inactivation of
its E2F1 repressive activity. Thus, CSK low CRPCs may be
sensitive to a combination of SRC and CDK4 inhibition.
Our data also suggest that CSK low CRPCs might respond
to inhibition of pathways and cellular processes set into
motion by loss of ETS2 and ZFHX3 function, two tumor
22067

Oncotarget

suppressors specifically involved in the transition to CRPC
[25], although regimens to do so remain to be discovered.

reagents to each well. After 2 hours incubation, reactions
were stopped by adding 10 µl of 10% SDS and plates were
read in a Flexstation 3 plate reader at 490 nm (Molecular
Devices). For plate normalization, quantification data
was converted to Z scores using 48 unique non-targeting
siRNAs included to each plate as references: Z score =
(X i – median of 48 control siRNAs)/1.4826 × MAD of
48 control siRNAs, where X i is quantification data and
MAD is median absolute deviation. Genes were defined
as primary screening hits if Z scores ≥ 1.8. Thirty one
genes were selected for the follow-up confirmation screen
(Supplementary Figure S1A).
The 31 hit genes were further studied by network
analysis based on the STRING 9.1 interactome and a price
collecting Steiner Forest algorithm with the screening Z
scores set as node prizes and the edge weights set as the
edge costs. Randomization analysis with 1000 iterations
revealed a p value of 0.045 for enrichment of the AR in
a network built from the protein interactions of 31 hit
kinases relative to 31 random kinases. In addition, the AR
node contained in the network identified with the 31 hit
kinases had a betweenness centrality of 0.0415, which
was higher than that obtained for the AR in any of the
corresponding random networks.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tissue culture, plasmids, viruses, antibodies
The human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP was
obtained from ATCC and maintained in RPMI 1640
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 units/
ml penicillin, and 50 units/ml streptomyc in (Life
Technology). The SRC Y527F and K295M expression
plasmids were gifts from Dr. Sara Courtneidge. The
siRNAs against CSK were purchase from Ambion (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY, #1 ID: 511; #2 ID:
513; #3 ID: s3612) or from GE Dharmacon (#6 ID: Cat#
D-003110-06). The shRNAs against CSK were from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO; #1 ID: TRCN0000000804;
#3 ID: TRCN0000010009 and #5 ID: TRCN0000199500).
For DNA transfection, LNCaP cells were grown to
50−70% confluence on a 100 mm dish and transfected with
10 ug of plasmid DNA using Lipofectamin 2000 reagent
according to the recommendations of the manufacturer
(Life technologies, Grand Island, NY).
The following antibodies were used: CSK
mouse monoclonal (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA),
cyclin A (Clone 6E6) and cyclin E (HE12) was from
Thermo Fisher (Waltham, MA). Rabbit polyclonal cyclin
D1 (#2922) , pRB (#9307) , pSRC Y530 (#2105), pSRC
Y419 (#6943), SRC (#2123), pFAK Y925 (#3284),
FAK (#3285) and mouse monoclonal RB (#9309) were
purchased from Cell Signaling. Mouse monoclonal AR
antibody (441) was from Santa Cruz,
R1881 was obtained from PerkinElmer (Waltham,
MA), bicalutamide, dasatinib and busotinib were
purchased from LC Laboratories (Woburn, MA)

Confirmation screen
For the confirmation screen, 31 genes were
selected from the primary screen based on their Z score
(Z >  1.86). LNCaP cells (2,000 cells per well) were
hormone-deprived and individually transfected with the
siRNAs that were present in the original pool used in
the primary screen. 4 additional distinct siRNAs from
Dharmacon (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for these genes
were also included. The confirmation screen was based on
measurement of (1) the MTS proliferation assay and (2)
cell counts using Celigo cytometer. Genes were defined
as confirmed if at least three siRNAs showed Z scores
≥ 1.8. 12 genes were selected based on these criteria.

High-throughput RNAi screens and network
analysis
A human kinome library (Ambion, Life technologies,
Grand Island, NY) containing siRNAs targeting 704 kinases
and kinase regulators was used for screening. Assay plates
(384-well plate with optical bottom; Greiner) were spotted
with 1 μl of 0.5 μM pooled siRNAs (4 siRNAs per gene in
duplicate) using the Valocity 11-Bravo Pipettor with a 384
ST head. R1881 was used as positive control and included
in all plates. Reverse transfection was performed using
Lipofectamine RNAiMAX; final siRNA concentration was
10 nM. LNCaP cells were suspended in RPMI 1640 media
maintained in 10% charcoal stripped FBS for 2 days and
seeded onto assay plates using the Matrix-Well Mate (2,000
cells in 40 μl medium for each well). Cells were incubated
in sealed assay plates in a 37°C incubator for four days.
MTS Cell Proliferation Assay (Promega) was used for
monitoring cell proliferation by adding 10 µl of MTS/PMS
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry analysis of cell cycle distribution
was performed in LNCaP cells following transfection with
siRNAs. LNCaP cells (200,000 per well) were cultured in
androgen deprived media for 2 days, followed by reverse
transfection with 10 nM siRNAs in duplicate in 6-well
plates. After 48 hours, cells were trypsinized, washed with
PBS twice and then fixed with 70% ethanol overnight at
−20°C. For FACS analysis, cells were resuspended by
vortexing in 250 μl staining solution (PBS, 1% Tween 20,
10 μg/ml RNase A (Sigma), 50 μg/ml propidium iodide)
and incubated for 1 hour. Samples were analyzed by
flow cytometry (FACSCalibur with CellQuest software),
collecting 20,000 total (ungated) events with threshold
= 10 and FL2 voltage ~430 (adjusted for each sample so
22068

Oncotarget

that 2N peak on DNA-area histogram was centered at 200).
Cell cycle analysis was performed on histograms of gated
counts per DNA-area (FL2-A) by the Watson (pragmatic)
curve-fitting algorithm to determine the distribution of
2N, 4N and > 4N cells using FlowJo software (Tree Star,
Ashland, OR).

animals were castrated, and tumor growth was monitored
for 2–3 weeks. For dasatinib treatment, animals were
dosed by oral gavage daily (50 mg/kg p. o.). Mice were
monitored daily for signs of distress and euthanized
within 24 hours in case of distress or when tumors
reached a diameter of 2 cm.

Cell staining and fluorescence-based assays using
Celigo

Immunohistochemistry
This study was done on the total of 76 prostate cancer
specimens obtained from the Vancouver Prostate Centre
Tissue Bank. The H&E slides were reviewed and the
desired areas were marked on them and their correspondent
paraffin blocks. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were manually
constructed (Beecher Instruments, MD, USA) by punching
duplicate cores of 1 mm diameter for the tumor specimens.
All specimens were from radical prostatectomy except the
28 CRPC samples which were obtained by transurethral
resection of the prostate (TURP). Supplementary Table 1
shows detailed information on the Progression Array, 2011.
Immunohistochemical staining was conducted
by Ventana autostainer model Discover XT™ (Ventana
Medical System, Tuscan, Arizona) with enzyme
labeled biotin streptavidin system and solvent resistant
DAB Map kit. The antibodies are described above.
TMA slides were scanned in a Leica digital imaging
system, and images were viewed using Digital Image
Hub, Slide Path, Digital Pathology Solution (Dublin,
Ireland). Values on a four-point scale were assigned
to each sample. Descriptively, 0 represents no staining
of any tumor cells, 1 represents faint or focal staining,
2 represents a strong signal in a minority of cells, and
3 represents a strong signal in the majority of cells.
Staining scores were averaged across all cores of each
tumor class and displayed in a bar graph with 95%
confidence intervals indicated. The scores of individual
CRPC cores were clustered (similarity metric: absolute
correlation uncentered, clustering method: single
linkage), and visualized as an intensity map.

To determine cell numbers after siRNA transfection
in 384 well plates, 2000 cells were plated as described
above, incubated for three days and nuclei were stained
with Hoechst 33342. Plates were read using the adherent
cell cytometer, Celigo Imaging Cell Cytometer (Brooks
Life Science Systems) equipped with a brightfield and
three fluorescence channels. Gating parameters were
adjusted to exclude background and other non-specific
signals. The total cell number in one well was equal to the
total counts of gated events.

RNA extraction and Q-RT-PCR
RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini kit
(Qiagen). RT-PCR was performed using Power Sybr
Green Mastermix (Ambion, Foster City, CA) and a
Stratagene™ Mx3000p Q-RT-PCR system (Stratagene,
La Jolla, CA). Primers used for detecting CSK
expression were (GGCTCTACATCGTCACTGAG and
CTCAGACACCAGCACATTG). GAPDH was used for
internal control. Gene knockdown was calculated using
the ΔΔ-Ct method.

Generation of stable clones
The 293T producer cell line was transfected with
shRNA expressing lentiviral constructs and packaging
plasmid mix (System Biosciences) using Lipofectamine
2000 (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). shCSK
lentiviral vectors (TRCN0000000804, TRCN0000010008,
TRCN0000010009, TRCN0000199031, TRCN0000199500)
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Supernatants were
collected 48 h after transfection, filtered using a 0.45-μmpore-size nitrocellulose filter, and applied to LNCaP and
LAPC4 cells. After 48 h, the cells were selected in puromycin
(2 ug/ml) containing media. As a control, cells were infected
with a lentivirus expressing scrambled control shRNA
(Sigma-Aldrich).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Dr. Yun Qiu for providing anti­
bodies to pAR Y534. We thank Dr. Sara. Courtneidge for
plasmids, advice, and critical reading of the manuscript.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict.

Xenograft study

GRANT SUPPORT

8 week old male NOD/SCID mice were subcut­
aneously injected in one spot over the flank with a
volume of 0.2 ml of prostate cancer cells (LNCaP
and LAPC4 derivatives as indicated in the figures) in
50% Matrigel (BD Biosciences). Tumor growth was
monitored daily using external calipers. If applicable,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CCY is the recipient of a Prostate Cancer Training
award from the Department of Defense Prostate Cancer
Research Program (W81XWH-09-1-0423) and a trainee on
the NCI-sponsored T32 Training Grant CA121949. Parts
22069

Oncotarget

of this work were funded by P30 grants CA030199-32 and
GM085764-03.

transactivation function and invasion of androgen-inde­
pendent prostate cancer C4–2 cells. Oncogene. 2008;
27:3596–3604.
13.	 Cai H, Babic I, Wei X, Huang J, Witte ON. Invasive
Prostate Carcinoma Driven by c-Src and Androgen
Receptor Synergy. Cancer Research. 2011; 71:862–872.

REFERENCES
1.	 Litvinov IV: Is the Achilles’ Heel for Prostate Cancer
Therapy a Gain of Function in Androgen Receptor Signaling?
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2003;
88:2972–2982.

14.	 Mendiratta P, Mostaghel E, Guinney J, Tewari AK,
Porrello  A, Barry WT, Nelson PS, Febbo PG. Genomic
Strategy for Targeting Therapy in Castration-Resistant
Prostate Cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2009;
27:2022–2029.

2.	 Niu Y, Chang T-M, Yeh S, Ma W-L, Wang YZ, Chang C.
Differential androgen receptor signals in different cells
explain why androgen-deprivation therapy of prostate
­cancer fails. Oncogene. 2010; 29:3593–3604.

15.	 Nilbert M, Fernebro E. Lack of Activating c-SRC Mutations
at Codon 531 in Rectal Cancer. Cancer Genetics and
Cytogenetics. 2000; 121:94–95.

3.	 Vander Griend DJ, D’Antonio J, Gurel B, Antony L,
DeMarzo AM, Isaacs JT. Cell-autonomous intracel­
lular androgen receptor signaling drives the growth of
human prostate cancer initiating cells. The Prostate. 2010;
70:90–99.

16.	 Wang NM, Yeh K-T, Tsai C-H, Chen S-J, Chang J-G. No
evidence of correlation between mutation at codon 531 of
src and the risk of colon cancer in Chinese. Cancer Letters.
2000; 150:201–204.
17.	 DaSilva J, Gioeli D, Weber MJ, Parsons SJ. The
Neuroendocrine-Derived Peptide Parathyroid HormoneRelated Protein Promotes Prostate Cancer Cell Growth
by Stabilizing the Androgen Receptor. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:7402–7411.

4.	 Chen CD, Welsbie DS, Tran C, Baek SH, Chen R,
Vessella R, Rosenfeld MG, Sawyers CL. Molecular deter­
minants of resistance to antiandrogen therapy. Nature
Medicine. 2004; 10:33–39.
5.	 Attard G, Cooper CS, de Bono JS. Steroid Hormone
Receptors in Prostate Cancer: A Hard Habit to Break?
Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:458–462.

18.	 Twardowski PW, Beumer JH, Chen CS, Kraft AS,
Chatta GS, Mitsuhashi M, Ye W, Christner SM, Lilly MB.
A phase II trial of dasatinib in patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer treated previously with
chemotherapy. Anticancer Drugs. 2013; 24:743–753.

6.	 Attar RM, Takimoto CH, Gottardis MM. Castrationresistant prostate cancer: locking up the molecular escape
routes. Clinical Cancer Research. 2009; 15:3251.

19.	 Araujo JC, Mathew P, Armstrong AJ, Braud EL, Posadas
E, Lonberg M, Gallick GE, Trudel GC, Paliwal P,
Agrawal S, Logothetis CJ. Dasatinib combined with
docetaxel for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Cancer.
2012; 118:63–71.

7.	 Lamont KR, Tindall DJ. Minireview: Alternative Activation
Pathways for the Androgen Receptor in Prostate Cancer.
Mol Endocrinol 2011.
8.	 Drake JM, Graham NA, Lee JK, Stoyanova T, Faltermeier CM,
Sud S, Titz B, Huang J, Pienta KJ, Graeber TG, Witte ON.
Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer reveals intrapa­
tient similarity and interpatient heterogeneity of therapeutic
kinase targets. PNAS. 2013; 201319948.

20.	 Yu EY, Wilding G, Posadas E, Gross M, Culine S,
Massard  C, Morris MJ, Hudes G, Calabrò F, Cheng S,
Trudel GC, Paliwal P, Sternberg CN. Phase II Study of
Dasatinib in Patients with Metastatic Castration-Resistant
Prostate Cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:7421–7428.

9.	 Guo Z, Dai B, Jiang T, Xu K, Xie Y, Kim O, Nesheiwat I,
Kong X, Melamed J, Handratta VD, Njar VCO, Brodie
AMH, Yu L-R, Veenstra TD, Chen H, Qiu Y. Regulation
of androgen receptor activity by tyrosine phosphorylation.
Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:309–319.

21.	 Varambally S, Yu J, Laxman B, Rhodes DR, Mehra R,
Tomlins SA, Shah RB, Chandran U, Monzon FA,
Becich  MJ, Wei JT, Pienta KJ, Ghosh D, Rubin MA,
Chinnaiyan AM. Integrative genomic and proteomic
­analysis of prostate cancer reveals signatures of metastatic
progression. Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:393–406.

10.	 Tatarov O, Mitchell TJ, Seywright M, Leung HY,
Brunton VG, Edwards J. SRC family kinase activity is upregulated in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Clinical
Cancer Research. 2009; 15:3540–3549.

22.	 Baca SC, Prandi D, Lawrence MS, Mosquera JM,
Romanel  A, Drier Y, Park K, Kitabayashi N,
MacDonald TY, Ghandi M, Van Allen E, Kryukov GV,
Sboner A, Theurillat J-P, Soong TD, Nickerson E,
Auclair D, Tewari A, Beltran H, Onofrio RC, Boysen G,
Guiducci C, Barbieri CE, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A,
Carter SL, Saksena G, Voet D, Ramos AH, Winckler W,
et al. Punctuated Evolution of Prostate Cancer Genomes.
Cell. 2013; 153:666–677.

11.	 Kraus S, Gioeli D, Vomastek T, Gordon V, Weber MJ.
Receptor for Activated C Kinase 1 (RACK1) and Src
Regulate the Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Function of the
Androgen Receptor. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:11047–11054.
12.	 Asim M, Siddiqui IA, Hafeez BB, Baniahmad A,
Mukhtar H. Src kinase potentiates androgen receptor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22070

Oncotarget

23.	 Barbieri CE, Baca SC, Lawrence MS, Demichelis F, Blattner
M, Theurillat J-P, White TA, Stojanov P, Allen EV, Stransky
N, Nickerson E, Chae S-S, Boysen G, Auclair D, Onofrio RC,
Park K, Kitabayashi N, MacDonald TY, Sheikh K, Vuong T,
Guiducci C, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A, Carter SL, Saksena G,
Voet D, Hussain WM, Ramos AH, Winckler W, Redman MC,
et al. Exome sequencing identifies recurrent SPOP,
FOXA1 and MED12 mutations in prostate cancer. Nat Genet.
2012;44:685-9.

Consequences for Tumor Cell Behavior. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:1335–1342.
31.	 Taylor BS, Schultz N, Hieronymus H, Gopalan A, Xiao Y,
Carver BS, Arora VK, Kaushik P, Cerami E, Reva B.
Integrative Genomic Profiling of Human Prostate Cancer.
Cancer Cell. 2010; 18:11–22.
32.	 Mulholland DJ, Dedhar S, Wu H, Nelson CC. PTEN,
and GSK3β: key regulators of progression to androgen-­
independent prostate cancer. Oncogene. 2006; 25:329–337.

24.	 Berger MF, Lawrence MS, Demichelis F, Drier Y,
Cibulskis K, Sivachenko AY, Sboner A, Esgueva R,
Pflueger D, Sougnez C, Onofrio R, Carter SL, Park K,
Habegger L, Ambrogio L, Fennell T, Parkin M, Saksena G,
Voet D, Ramos AH, Pugh TJ, Wilkinson J, Fisher S,
Winckler W, Mahan S, Ardlie K, Baldwin J, Simons JW,
Kitabayashi N, MacDonald TY, et al. The genomic com­
plexity of primary human prostate cancer. Nature. 2011;
470:214–220.

33.	 Sharma A, Yeow W-S, Ertel A, Coleman I, Clegg N,
Thangavel C, Morrissey C, Zhang X, Comstock CES,
Witkiewicz AK, Gomella L, Knudsen ES, Nelson PS,
Knudsen KE. The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor controls
androgen signaling and human prostate cancer progression.
J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:4478–4492.
34.	 Beltran H, Yelensky R, Frampton GM, Park K,
Downing SR, MacDonald TY, Jarosz M, Lipson D,
Tagawa  ST, Nanus DM, Stephens PJ, Mosquera JM,
Cronin  MT, Rubin MA. Targeted Next-generation
Sequencing of Advanced Prostate Cancer Identifies
Potential Therapeutic Targets and Disease Heterogeneity.
European Urology. 2013; 63:920–926.

25.	 Grasso CS, Wu Y-M, Robinson DR, Cao X,
Dhanasekaran SM, Khan AP, Quist MJ, Jing X, Lonigro RJ,
Brenner JC, Asangani IA, Ateeq B, Chun SY, Siddiqui J,
Sam L, Anstett M, Mehra R, Prensner JR, Palanisamy N,
Ryslik GA, Vandin F, Raphael BJ, Kunju LP, Rhodes DR,
Pienta KJ, Chinnaiyan AM, Tomlins SA. The mutational
landscape of lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Nature. 2012; 487:239–243.

35.	 Masaki T, Okada M, Tokuda M, Shiratori Y, Hatase O,
Shirai M, Nishioka M, Omata M. Reduced C-terminal
Src kinase (Csk) activities in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatology. 1999; 29:379–384.

26.	 Kumar A, White TA, MacKenzie AP, Clegg N, Lee C,
Dumpit RF, Coleman I, Ng SB, Salipante SJ, Rieder MJ,
Nickerson DA, Corey E, Lange PH, Morrissey C,
Vessella RL, Nelson PS, Shendure J. Exome sequencing
identifies a spectrum of mutation frequencies in advanced
and lethal prostate cancers. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2011; 108:17087–17092.

36.	 Araujo JC, Trudel GC, Saad F, Armstrong AJ, Yu  EY,
Bellmunt J, Wilding G, McCaffrey J, Serrano SV,
Matveev VB. Docetaxel and dasatinib or placebo in
men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(READY): a randomised, double-blind phase 3 trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2013;14:1307-16.
37.	 Lara PN, Evans CP. Dasatinib and docetaxel in
advanced prostate cancer. The Lancet Oncology. 2013;
14:1248–1249.

27.	 Sigoillot FD, King RW. Vigilance and Validation: Keys to
Success in RNAi Screening. ACS Chemical Biology. 2011;
6:47–60.

38.	 Chakravarti A, DeSilvio M, Zhang M, Grignon D,
Rosenthal S, Asbell SO, Hanks G, Sandler HM, Khor L-Y,
Pollack A, Shipley W. Prognostic Value of p16 in Locally
Advanced Prostate Cancer: A Study Based on Radiation
Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 9202. JCO. 2007;
25:3082–3089.

28.	 Horoszewicz JS, Leong SS, Kawinski E, Karr JP,
Rosenthal H, Chu TM, Mirand EA, Murphy GP. LNCaP
Model of Human Prostatic Carcinoma. Cancer Res. 1983;
43:1809–1818.
29.	 Okada M. Regulation of the Src Family Kinases by
Csk. International Journal of Biological Sciences. 2012;
:1385–1397.

39.	 Drobnjak M, Osman I, Scher HI, Fazzari M, CordonCardo C. Overexpression of Cyclin D1 Is Associated with
Metastatic Prostate Cancer to Bone. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;
6:1891–1895.

30.	 Brunton VG, Avizienyte E, Fincham VJ, Serrels B, Metcalf
CA, Sawyer TK, Frame MC. Identification of Src-Specific
Phosphorylation Site on Focal Adhesion Kinase: Dissection
of the Role of Src SH2 and Catalytic Functions and Their

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40.	 Cumming G, Fidler F, Vaux DL. Error bars in experimental
biology. J Cell Biol. 2007; 177:7–11.

22071

Oncotarget

