Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Cancer
Research

Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

Temporary Disruption of the Blood–Brain Barrier by Use of
Ultrasound and Microbubbles: Safety and Efﬁcacy Evaluation
in Rhesus Macaques
Nathan McDannold1, Costas D. Arvanitis1, Natalia Vykhodtseva1, and Margaret S. Livingstone2

Abstract
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) prevents entry of most drugs into the brain and is a major hurdle to the use of
drugs for brain tumors and other central nervous system disorders. Work in small animals has shown that
ultrasound combined with an intravenously circulating microbubble agent can temporarily permeabilize the
BBB. Here, we evaluated whether this targeted drug delivery method can be applied safely, reliably, and in a
controlled manner on rhesus macaques using a focused ultrasound system. We identiﬁed a clear safety window
during which BBB disruption could be produced without evident tissue damage, and the acoustic pressure
amplitude where the probability for BBB disruption was 50% and was found to be half of the value that would
produce tissue damage. Acoustic emission measurements seem promising for predicting BBB disruption and
damage. In addition, we conducted repeated BBB disruption to central visual ﬁeld targets over several weeks in
animals trained to conduct complex visual acuity tasks. All animals recovered from each session without
behavioral deﬁcits, visual deﬁcits, or loss in visual acuity. Together, our ﬁndings show that BBB disruption can be
reliably and repeatedly produced without evident histologic or functional damage in a clinically relevant animal
model using a clinical device. These results therefore support clinical testing of this noninvasive-targeted drug
delivery method. Cancer Res; 72(14); 3652–63. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
Many systemically administered therapeutic agents are not
effective in the central nervous system (CNS) because they are
blocked by the blood–brain barrier (BBB). This barrier restricts
the passage of substances except for small, hydrophobic molecules, preventing most small-molecule drugs and essentially all
large-molecule drugs from reaching the brain interstitial space
(1, 2). It is the primary hurdle to the development and use of
drugs in the CNS. Most methods that have been tested to
circumvent the BBB are invasive, nontargeted, or require the
development of new drug carriers that use endogenous transport mechanisms (3, 4).
Because of the BBB, chemotherapy has not generally been a
very effective option for malignant brain tumors. Although the
vessels in most brain tumors do not have a fully intact BBB and
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Department of Radiology, Brigham & Women's
Hospital, and 2Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke or the NIH.
Corresponding Author: Nathan McDannold, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115.
Phone: 617-278-0605; Fax: 617-525-7450; E-mail: njm@bwh.harvard.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3652

can be permeable, inﬁltrating cancer cells and small metastatic
seeds may be protected by the BBB in the surrounding intact
tissue (5). Furthermore, it is known that tumor vasculature
permeability is heterogeneous and that there are additional
barriers to drug delivery, such as increased interstitial pressures (6). For example, work in mice suggests that the blood–
tumor barrier (BTB) is only partially compromised in breast
cancer metastases, and that toxic concentrations of chemotherapy agents are only achieved in a small subset of highly
permeable metastases (7).
Ultrasound combined with circulating microbubbles can
induce temporary BBB disruption (8, 9). Acoustic waves can be
noninvasively focused deeply into tissue to target the disruption to discrete regions. The mechanical interaction between
the ultrasound, the microbubbles, and the vasculature transiently disassembles tight junctional complexes (10, 11) and
induces active transport (12), allowing agents to be delivered to
the brain parenchyma. Studies in small animals have shown
that this method is repeatable, is possible over a wide range of
ultrasound parameters (13–16), and is capable of increasing
the permeability of the BTB (17). The method can enhance
delivery of therapeutics to the brain (18–20) and has been
shown to improve outcomes in brain tumor and Alzheimer's
disease animal models (21, 22). Most of these small animal
studies found that barrier function is restored after a few hours
(8–10).
This technique has the potential for use with chemotherapy
in brain tumors, through enhanced drug delivery to the tumor
via BTB permeabilization and to inﬁltrating cells through

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption via Focused Ultrasound

disrupting the BBB of the surrounding brain. It is noninvasive,
and thus can be readily repeated to match chemotherapy
schedules, and it targets the drug to only desired regions. This
approach may be beneﬁcial even in inﬁltrating tumors such as
glioma, as studies have shown that most recurrence occurs
within a few centimeters of the original tumor (23–25).
Before clinical translation, devices that are compatible
with human use and feasibility studies in relevant large
animal models are needed. Ultrasound systems designed
for thermal ablation (without injected microbubbles) have
been developed that compensate for the human skull and
can focus high-intensity ultrasound accurately and noninvasively into the brain (26, 27). These systems operate inside
an MRI under real-time guidance and are currently being
tested in clinical trials (28, 29). These systems have 500 to
1,000 array elements, and by varying the phase of the
different elements they can compensate for the distortion
of the ultrasound beam caused by the irregularly-shaped
human skull (30) and can steer the beam away from the
geometric focus of the array. Volumes are treated by steering
the beam to multiple overlapping targets.
These ablation systems can be used for BBB disruption.
Because the ultrasound intensity required for BBB disruption is several orders of magnitude lower than that needed
for thermal ablation, skull heating is not a risk for this
technique. Moreover, both the targetable extent of the brain
and the sonication rate can be substantially increased
without risk of excessive skull heating. However, the use of
microbubbles introduces different risks. When microbubbles are sonicated at high intensities, they expand and
ultimately collapse violently, a phenomenon known as inertial cavitation. Sonication with microbubbles will cause
vascular damage when exposure levels exceed inertial cavitation threshold. It is unknown whether the presence of
microbubbles would increase the likelihood of damage along
the beam path. Regions with high microbubble concentrations such as large blood vessels and highly vascularized
structures may be at particular risk. Regions near the skull,
where reﬂections may increase acoustic intensity, may also
be at risk. Such beam path effects can only be assessed in a
large animal model. In small animals, the brain is not large
enough to determine whether sonications can be targeted to
deep brain structures without causing damage along the
ultrasound beam path. The large focal area produced at the
low ultrasound frequencies used in clinical systems make
this particularly challenging. Furthermore, small animal
models permit only limited evaluation of potential functional deﬁcits induced by the BBB disruption. Although feasibility tests of BBB disruption have been reported for nonhuman primates, to date they have not attained reproducible, safe, and predictable BBB opening (31).
Our goal was to evaluate BBB disruption induced by focused
ultrasound in conjunction with a microbubble-based ultrasound contrast agent (USCA) in nonhuman primates using
a clinical transcranial MRI-guided focused ultrasound
(TcMRgFUS) system. We aimed to identify safe exposure levels
for BBB disruption, to test MRI and acoustic methods for
monitoring the efﬁcacy and safety of the procedure, and to

www.aacrjournals.org

evaluate histologic, behavioral, and cognitive effects of repeated sonication.

Materials and Methods
Animals
All experiments were done in accordance with procedures
approved by the Harvard Medical School Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee. Tests were conducted in 7 adult
rhesus macaques (6 male, 1 female; weight: 5–12 kg). Each
animal was anesthetized with ketamine (15 mg/kg/h i.m.) and
xylazine (0.5 mg/kg/h i.m.) or with 4 mg/kg/hr ketamine and
dexmeditomidine (0.01–0.02 mg/kg/h) and intubated. The
head was shaved and a catheter was placed in a leg vein.
During the procedure the heart rate, blood oxygenation levels,
and rectal temperature were monitored. Body temperature
was maintained with a heated water blanket.
Device
The device tested was the ExAblate 4000 low-frequency
TcMRgFUS system (InSightec). It consists of a 30-cm-diameter
hemispherical 1,024-element phased array transducer operating at 220 kHz coupled with a 1,024-channel driving system, a
treatment planning workstation, and a water cooling/circulation/degassing system. The driving system allows for individual control of the phase and amplitude for each phased array
element to steer the focal point to different targets. The focal
half-intensity width and length produced by the transducer in
water were provided by the manufacturer and were 3.0 and 5.8
mm, respectively. Details on the calibration procedure used to
estimate the in vivo pressure amplitudes are provided in the
Supplementary Methods. The system was integrated with a
clinical 3T MRI unit (GE Healthcare). Imaging was conducted
with a 14-cm-diameter receive-only surface coil (constructed
in-house). For clinical use, the hemisphere transducer is
mounted on its side and coupled to a patient's head via a
water-tight membrane (28); here the transducer was rotated 90
degrees so that it could be simply ﬁlled with water like a bowl.
The animal was placed supine on the table with its head tilted
backward so that the top of the head was submerged (Supplementary Fig. S1A).
Two 4.0  0.7 cm passive cavitation detectors (center frequency: 610  20 kHz) were constructed and mounted in the
water on each side of the head to monitor the acoustic
emission produced during sonication. The signals from these
detectors were ampliﬁed, ﬁltered, and recorded to a computer
using a high-speed digitizing card (PXI-5124; National Instruments). The time signal, frequency spectra, and magnitude of
the emission at different harmonics were displayed in real-time
during each sonication using software developed in-house in
Matlab and stored for later analysis.
Sonications
Sonications were applied transcranially under MRI guidance
(see Supplementary Methods, for parameters). In monkeys 1 to
3 (4 sessions), burst sonications were delivered to individual
points in the brain (35 targets overall). In the subsequent 26
sessions (monkeys 4 to 7), 9 locations in a 3  3 grid in a single

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3653

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

McDannold et al.

plane were targeted during each sonication (Supplementary
Fig. S1B and S1C). During these volumetric sonications, 10 ms
bursts were applied in sequence to the 9 locations. The focal
point was advanced to the next location every 100 to 400 ms,
yielding an effective pulse repletion frequency at each location
of 1.1 to 0.28 Hz. Spacing between the targets in these volumetric sonications was 2 mm, yielding a roughly cubic region of
BBB disruption with dimensions of 1 cm3.
Overall, 185 locations or volumes were sonicated in the 7
monkeys. In monkeys 1 to 4, a range of acoustic power levels,
microbubble injection/infusion parameters, and brain targets
were evaluated. Targets included the thalamus, putamen,
cingulate cortex, visual cortex, hippocampus, and white matter
structures. Sonications centered on the lateral geniculate
nucleus (LGN) included the hippocampus and part of the optic
tract. The third animal was tested twice over 2 weeks, and the
4th was tested 13 times over 26 weeks.
In the trials that targeted single locations per sonication and
in 45 volumetric sonications, the microbubble USCA (Deﬁnity,
Lantheus Medical Imaging) was injected as a bolus at the start
of each sonication (dose: 10 mL/kg). These sonications consisted of 10 ms bursts applied at 1 Hz for 70 seconds. Subsequent tests at 82 locations with volumetric sonication used an
infusion pump (Spectra Solaris EP, Medrad) to deliver microbubbles throughout the exposures. Most (67/82) sonications
with infusion used a 20 mL/kg microbubble dose and a 150
seconds total sonication duration; see Supplementary Methods for more details on the infusion protocol.
Functional testing
Monkeys 5 to 7 received 5 treatments each over 5 to 9 weeks
with bilateral targets in the hippocampus/LGN. As the resulting MRI signal enhancement at this target was relatively weak
after Gd-DPTA administration, additional bilateral targets in
the primary visual cortex were sonicated in sessions 3 to 5 in
monkey 5 and in all sessions in monkeys 6 to 7. The exposure
level in these animals was initially determined based on
acoustic emission measurements obtained with the passive
cavitation detectors. If initial sonications did not result in an
increase in harmonic emission, which was found previously to
correlate with BBB disruption (32), sonication was repeated at
increased power until an increase was observed. If wideband
acoustic emission, a signature for the collapse of the microbubbles that occurs at higher energy (inertial cavitation;
ref. 33) was observed, the power was reduced in later sessions.
Additional sonications were also tested in monkeys 5 to 7 in
the cingulate cortex and amygdala as part of the study evaluating BBB disruption and damage thresholds.
Monkeys 5 to 7 underwent behavioral testing before and
after the sonications to evaluate their visual acuity and higherorder cognitive abilities using an automatic touchscreen apparatus for training monkeys to conduct visual discrimination
tasks (34). For several hours each day, in a section of their home
cages, the monkeys were given choices between 2 simultaneously presented symbols; they chose one by touching it, and
were given a ﬂuid reward based on the correct choice. This
testing should be sensitive to any sonication-induced functional deﬁcits in motor or visual function, memory, and

3654

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

learning. To test visual acuity, the symbols displayed were
varied in size. At the smallest size tested, the monkeys would
need to use their central visual ﬁelds to discriminate the
symbols, so any damage to central vision would be apparent
as increased errors for the smaller symbols.
Histology
Monkeys 1 to 4 were sacriﬁced for histologic examination at
24 hours, 2 weeks, 48 hours, and at 2 hours after the last
sonication session, respectively. The animals were anesthetized with ketamine (15 mg/kg i.m.) and then euthanized with
an overdose of pentothal (100 mg/kg). They were then perfused
transcardially with 1 L 0.9% NaCl, followed by 2 L 10% buffered
formalin phosphate. The brains were removed and placed in
either sucrose for frozen sectioning (monkeys 1–3) or in 10%
buffered formalin phosphate for parafﬁn sectioning (monkey
4). Frozen sections (50 mm) were stained with Nissl; parafﬁn
sections (5 mm) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E). Additional sections from monkey 4 were also stained
with Nissl (for neurons), Luxol Fast Blue (H&E-LFB; for myelin), Bielschowsky's silver stain (for axons), and Prussian blue
(for hemosiderin). Several sections were also stained with
TUNEL to detect DNA fragmentation suggesting apoptosis.
Monkey 4 was injected after the sonications in the last session
with trypan blue, a dye used to visualize the BBB disruption
after euthanasia (35). 0.08 g trypan blue powder (MP Biomedical) was dissolved in 2.5 mL of 0.45% NaCl and heated until
boiling. This solution was then passed through a ﬁlter (MILX
GV.22UM PVDF, Millipore) and slowly injected intravenously
at a dose of 0.1 g trypan blue per kg of body weight (35).
Data analysis
Postsonication MRI was examined to determine whether
contrast enhancement was evident in the T1-weighted MRI at
each targeted location or volume. No scoring metric was
necessary, as this enhancement (or lack of it) was obvious.
We also examined the T2 -weighted imaging for hypointense
areas produced by petechaie that occur in the case of inertial
cavitation (36). To aid in distinguishing between damaged
spots and anatomy that is hypointense in T2 -weighted imaging, rigid registration was conducted in monkeys 4 to 7
between the pre- and postultrasound T2 -weighted images
using 3D-Slicer (37, 38). By alternating between data sets, the
presence or lack of sonication-induced damage could be
determined. However even with this aid, changes apparent
after some sonications were subtle; those cases were categorized as suspicious. The enhancement and T2 -weighted
imaging analysis was used to estimate the threshold for BBB
disruption and severe petechaie as a function of acoustic
power. These thresholds, along with error estimates, were
determined by ﬁtting the data using logistic regression.

Results
Summary ﬁndings
Noninvasive transcranial sonications were applied over a
range of acoustic pressure amplitudes to evaluate the thresholds for BBB disruption and tissue damage (Fig. 1A). Initial

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption via Focused Ultrasound

Figure 1. A, estimation of the thresholds for BBB disruption and tissue damage in gray matter targets, as reﬂected in enhancement in contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted imaging and hypointense spots in T2 -weighted imaging, respectively. The individual data points show measured occurrences at the
different exposure levels tested, which ranged from 100 to 700 kPa (acoustic power: 0.2–10 W). Solid lines show logistic regression of the data (dotted lines,
95% conﬁdence intervals). A narrow window for BBB disruption without production of MRI-evident petechaie was found. B–D, acoustic emission measured
during sonications at locations where MRI contrast enhancement was not observed (B), was observed (C), and was accompanied by small dark spots
in T2 -weighted imaging, presumably from petechaie (D). Each location was sonicated twice, once without the microbubble USCA and once with
microbubbles. Without microbubbles, only small spectral peaks were observed at the second and third harmonics of the TcMRgFUS device. With
microbubbles, sonicated locations where MRI contrast extravasation was observed showed a marked increase in this harmonic activity. The third harmonic
signal magnitude was enhanced by 22 and 28 times on average with microbubbles for the examples shown in B and C, respectively; no enhancement
was observed after the sonication shown in A. When dark spots were seen in T2 -weighted imaging, additional emission was observed in the sensitive region
of our detector (650 kHz, identiﬁed with an  ), indicating that wideband emission—a signature of inertial cavitation—had occurred. Subharmonic and
ultraharmonic emission (at 1/2, 3/2, and 5/2 of the TcMRgFUS frequency) was also observed in this example. The top and middle examples were in white
matter and cortex targets, respectively, from one of the volumetric sonications shown in Fig. 4 (223 kPa). The bottom example was from a location in a
volumetric sonication at 193 kPa in the visual cortex in monkey 5. The average of 20 spectra is shown in each case. a.u., arbitrary units.

tests targeted individual locations during each sonication (35
sonicated spots in monkeys 1 to 3). In subsequent tests,
ultrasound bursts were delivered sequentially to 9 locations
in a 3  3 grid with 2 mm spacing during each sonication
(Supplementary Fig. S1B and S1C) to produce volumetric BBB
disruption (150 sonicated volumes in monkeys 4–7). We

www.aacrjournals.org

assessed BBB disruption by comparing T1-weighted images
before and after administration of an MRI contrast agent (GdDPTA); only if the BBB is disrupted does this agent diffuse into
the brain and produce signal enhancement. Tissue damage was
assessed by comparing pre- and posttreatment T2 -weighted
images. On the basis of prior work (36) and histologic

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3655

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

McDannold et al.

examination of these animals (see later), small hypointense
regions that appear in this imaging usually correspond to
extravasated erythrocytes resulting from capillary damage.
Local MRI signal enhancement after Gd-DPTA injection,
indicative of successful BBB disruption, was observed in 163 of
the 185 targeted locations or volumes. Small dark spots were
seen in 28 of these locations in the T2 -weighted images, 11 of
which were barely detectable and were classiﬁed as suspicious. The pressure amplitude where the probability for BBB
disruption was 50% was 149 kPa (95% CI, 125–163 kPa); the
pressure amplitude where the probability of observing tissue
damage was 50% and was 300 kPa (CI, 278–341 kPa). This latter
threshold was conservative and included cases where the T2 weighted imaging was suspicious; when only locations with
deﬁnitive changes in T2 -weighted imaging were considered,
the 50% threshold increased to 358 kPa (CI, 317–451 kPa). The
lowest pressure amplitudes that produced evident changes in
T2 -weighted imaging were for sonications in the thalamus
(193 kPa) and visual cortex (187 kPa).
The acoustic emissions produced during sonication were
monitored with 2 ultrasound receivers mounted on either side
of the monkey's head (Fig. 1B–D). Sonications that produced a
marked increase in emission at the second and third harmonics of the TcMRgFUS device resulted in signal enhancement
after Gd-DPTA administration; those that also produced wideband emission resulted in hypointense spots in T2 -weighted
imaging. Sonications without microbubbles and sonications
with microbubbles but where MRI contrast enhancement was
not observed (including in white matter; see later) showed only
a small or no increase in harmonic emission, and no wideband
emission.
MRI ﬁndings
When single points were targeted during each sonication,
the resulting BBB disruption appeared as discrete enhancing
spots (dimensions: 3–6 mm, length: 5–10 mm) in T1-weighted
imaging after Gd-DPTA injection (Fig. 2). No BBB disruption or
other MRI-evident effects were observed away from the target

areas, in the ultrasound beam path, or at the skull base, except
for leakage of contrast agent that was sometimes evident in
sulci or ventricles when they were included in the targeted area.
Even at the highest exposure levels evaluated (444–700 kPa,
tested in the ﬁrst animal), where extensive petechaie and
severe vascular damage was observed in histology, the effects
were constrained to the focal region, and no effects were found
in MRI or histology outside of the targeted region. MRI signal
enhancement was not detected after Gd-DPTA injection after
sonication in white matter targets (N ¼ 9).
Similar results were found with volumetric sonication. When
volumes were targeted in gray matter structures such as the
thalamus or putamen, contiguous volumes of signal enhancement with dimensions of 1 cm3 were observed after Gd-DPTA
injection (Fig. 3A–C). However, this enhancement was not
observed in white matter when it was included in the sonication volume (Fig. 3D–G). As was the case with single-location
sonications, no effects were observed outside of the target
volumes, even when the target was deep and close to the skull
base (such as the putamen target in Fig. 3A–C) or in superﬁcial
targets, such as the visual cortex. Signal enhancement from
a larger, albumin-bound contrast agent (gadofosveset trisodium) was observed, but at a substantially lower level than
with Gd-DTPA (Fig. 4A and B). When the sonications overlapped sulci, the resulting enhancement was higher than in
the parenchyma (Fig. 4C). Disruption was achieved with both
bolus injections and continuous infusions of microbubbles.
To investigate further whether BBB disruption did occur in
white matter but below the detection threshold of MRI, trypan
blue was administered after the sonications in the last session
in monkey 4. Three volumes were targeted centered on the
boundary between the cingulate cortex and white matter
lateral to it. Again, Gd-DPTA extravasation was only evident
in the cortical gray matter component of the sonicated volume
(Fig. 4D). However, in post-mortem examination of the brain,
the targeted white matter was found to be stained lightly blue
(Fig. 4E), showing that BBB disruption had occurred. Gray
matter was found to be deeply blue-stained in comparison.

Figure 2. BBB disruption in monkey 3 after targeting individual points with focused ultrasound and microbubbles. The disruption was showed by delivery of
an MR contrast agent (Gd-DPTA) that does not normally extravasate in the brain. A, sagittal contrast-enhanced MRI showing BBB disruption at 6 targeted
locations (þ) in the right hemisphere. The enhancement was contained to the targeted region except for small enhancement in a sulcus (circled) that
was close to the most superﬁcial location, which overlapped the lateral ventricle. Even though the same exposure level (314 kPa) was used for each sonication
in this hemisphere, the size and magnitude of the different disruptions varied. C, axial view of locations on left hemisphere was targeted at 223 to 273 kPa. D,
axial view of T2-weighted image showing edema formation at the 2 targets in the thalamus (arrows). E, T2 -weighted image showing hypointense spots at the
thalamic targets as well as in a target in the putamen that was not evident in T2-weighted imaging (scale bar, 1 cm).

3656

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption via Focused Ultrasound

Figure 3. Extravasation of Gd-DPTA after volumetric BBB disruption in the putamen and visual cortex in monkey 4 (223 kPa). Volumes were
targeted by systematically steering to different locations in a 3  3 grid during the sonication. A, axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted image showing
homogeneous Gd-DPTA extravasation in the putamen, but inhomogeneous delivery in the visual cortex locations (outlined). B and C, coronal and
sagittal views of volumetric Gd-DPTA extravasation in putamen. Note that no effects were observed at the beam path or at the skull base. D, T2-weighted
image with the enhancing areas observed in the visual cortex in A superimposed. E, segmentation of D into white matter (dark gray), gray matter
(light gray), and cerebral spinal ﬂuid (white). The areas of enhancement overlapped almost perfectly with the gray matter components of the sonication.
F, sagittal view of enhancement in visual cortex. G, same view in T2-weighted image (inset, segmentation) showing enhancement only in gray matter. Histology
ﬁndings from the enhancing area indicated by the  in A are shown in Fig. 5G–J (scale bar, 1 cm).

Histology
Monkeys 1 to 4 were euthanized to evaluate histologic
effects after sonication at different exposure levels; monkeys
1 to 3 to evaluate acute changes (particularly those associated
with T2 evidence of damage), and monkey 4 to evaluate both
short- and long-term effects and to assess the impact of
repeated BBB disruption. Sonicated regions with normalappearing T2 -weighted imaging showed no signiﬁcant
changes in histologic examination, even after repeated sonication over several months. Representative examples of such
cases in the cingulate and visual cortices are shown in Fig. 5.
In the cingulate targets (Fig. 5A–F), the sonicated cortical
areas appeared normal overall after BBB disruption (Fig. 5A).
Adjacent white matter also appeared unaffected, with normal-

www.aacrjournals.org

appearing ﬁbers (Fig. 5B) and no evidence of demyelination
(Fig. 5C). The only observed changes were a very small number
of damaged capillaries, which was evidenced by tiny clusters of
extravasated erythrocytes (Fig. 5D) that were presumably
produced during sonication 2 hours earlier. Isolated deposits
of hemosiderin were also found (Fig. 5E), most likely remnants
of these petechaie from sonications months earlier. Prussian
blue staining conﬁrmed that these deposits contained iron. A
few dark, presumably ischemic neurons were observed in a
small region in the cingulate cortex (Fig. 5F). TUNEL staining
was conducted in a section adjacent to this region and in
several other locations. No apoptotic bodies were found.
In the visual cortex (Fig. 5G–I), the sonicated region also
appeared unaffected after BBB disruption, with normal

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3657

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

McDannold et al.

Figure 4. Delivery of different
tracers to the cingulate cortex in
monkey 4. A–C, contrastenhanced T1-weighted MRI after
volumetric BBB disruption at 6
locations in the cingulate cortex
(223 kPa). A, low-level
enhancement observed with
gadofosveset trisodium, an MR
contrast agent that binds to
albumin in the blood (MW of
albumin, 50 kDa); it was
administered before sonication. B,
enhancement after injection of GdDPTA (MW, 938 Da). The inset in B
shows the same view in T2weighted imaging. The
enhancement patterns correspond
to regions of cortical gray matter
visible in T2-weighted imaging.
C, sagittal view of Gd-DTPA
enhancement, which included
leakage of agent into a sulcus
(arrow). D–E, volumetric BBB
disruption (223 kPa) at 3 targets
centered on the boundary between
the cingulate cortex and white
matter from the last session in
monkey 4. D, T1-weighted MRI
showing Gd-DPTA extravasation in
the cingulate cortex, but not in the
white matter. E, photograph of
formalin-ﬁxed brain showing
trypan blue extravasation into both
the cingulate cortex and white
matter. The white matter
component of 2 of these targets is
shown with increased image
contrast in the inset to better
visualize low-level trypan blue
extravasation. Histology ﬁndings
for the middle target ( ) are shown
in Fig. 5A–F. No signiﬁcant tissue
damage was found as a result of
these sonications (scale bars,
1 cm).

appearing cortical tissue and subcortical white matter, and no
abnormalities found in or around the sulci (Fig. 5G and H). No
erythrocyte extravasation or hemosiderin deposits were found
in this location. Neurons appeared healthy in Nissl (Fig. 5I). The
brain surface also appeared generally normal (Fig. 5J), except
for some hemosiderin deposits in the meninges or adjacent
tissue (Fig. 5J, inset). Because the ultrasound beam passed
through the entire outer brain surface, we could not identify
which sonication was responsible for these effects. Additional
examples showing histologic ﬁndings after BBB disruption in
the hippocampus/LGN are shown in Supplementary Fig. S2.
When hypointense spots in T2 -weighted imaging were
observed, more extensive petechaie were found in histology
obtained shortly after sonication. However, damage to the
surrounding brain parenchyma was minimal and the nearby
neurons appeared mostly unaffected. At the highest exposure

3658

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

levels tested (444–700 kPa, monkey 1), more severe vascular
and parenchymal damage was observed. In monkey 3, hemorrhagic tissue was observed in the lateral ventricle after 2
bilateral sonications (315 and 223 kPa) in the thalamus.
Hypointense spots were evident in the sulcus in the visual
cortex in monkey 4 after 1 session; 6 months later, a few
hemosiderin-ﬁlled macrophages were observed in the meninges along with parenchymal damage in the adjacent cortex.
The most severe dark spots, produced in sonications in the
thalamus, persisted for several months; parenchymal damage,
macrophage accumulation, and clusters of hemosiderin deposits were observed in histology in these cases (Supplementary
Fig. S3).
T2 -weighted imaging was more sensitive to damage than
T2-weighted imaging, as small changes that were evident in
T2 -weighted imaging were not found in T2-weighted imaging.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption via Focused Ultrasound

A

D

E

B

C
F

G

H

I

J

Figure 5. Microphotographs showing representative histologic ﬁndings after volumetric BBB disruption when abnormalities were not observed
in T2 -weighted imaging. A–F, treatment site, middle cingulate cortex and adjacent white matter indicated by an  in Fig. 4E. This area was
sonicated 8 times over a period of several months. A, normal cingulate cortex; neurons and glia cells appear intact with no inﬂammatory cells
present. B, Bielschowsky's silver impregnation reveals normal axonal morphology within adjacent white matter at high magniﬁcation. C, H&E-LFB
shows preserved myelin. Evidence of the sonications was limited to a few injured capillaries (D–F). D, a small group of extravasated red blood
cells, presumably induced by sonication approximately 2 hours earlier. Very few of such petechaie were observed in the whole section (4 in
this case). E, two macrophages containing hemosiderin, presumably remnants from petechaie induced during an earlier session months. F,
dark, shrunken (ischemic) neurons and a slightly vacuolated neuropil found within a small (200–300 mm) affected area. G–J, treatment site, visual
cortex þ subcortical white matter and sulcus, indicated by an  in Fig. 3. This area was sonicated 3 times over several months. G and H,
normal appearing cortex (pink) around a sulcus; intact white matter (blue) is seen at the right of the images. I, no abnormalities were found in
cortical gray under higher magniﬁcation. J, the brain surface a few millimeters away from the targeted visual cortex appeared unaffected
except for a few tiny hemosiderin deposits in the meninges or adjacent tissue, such as that shown in the inset. The cortical tissue just below
the surface appeared normal. A, D–F, and J, H&E; B, Bielschowsky's silver stain; C, G, and H, H&E-LFB; I, Nissl. Scale bars: G, 1 mm; others,
50 mm).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3659

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

McDannold et al.

Figure 6. A, two monkeys
conducting a visual discrimination
test using in-cage touchscreen.
They choose between 2 symbols
representing different amounts of
juice. Symbol size was reduced
from 4.5 cm to 2 mm over time to
test acuity. Left, monkey 5
choosing a 4.5 cm "U" (worth 15
drops) over "3" (3 drops); his mouth
is on the juice tube. Middle,
monkey 5 choosing a 2 mm "W" (12
drops) over "7" (7 drops). right,
monkey 6 choosing a 4 mm
"A" (24 drops) over "K" (18 drops).
The juice tube was 25 cm from the
screen, so the 4.5 cm symbols
subtended about 10 degrees of
visual angle and 2 mm symbols
subtended 0.5-degree visual
angle. These video images were
made 2 months after the last of 5
BBB disruptions in monkey 5 and
48 hours after the last of 5 BBB
disruptions in monkey 6. B, daily
performance of monkeys 5 to 7
before and after each of 5 sessions
of BBB disruption to bilateral LGN
and foveal visual cortex
(arrowheads). The different symbol
sizes are represented as indicated
in the left graph. For monkey 5, the
symbol size was gradually
decreased between treatments;
and for monkey 6, the second
smallest symbol size was used
throughout the treatment series.
No decline in function or acuity was
observed for any animal. Contrastenhanced T1-weighted MRI
showing bilateral volumetric BBB
disruption in the gray matter
components of the primary visual
cortex over 5 successive sessions
are shown for monkeys 6 and 7
(scale bars, 1 cm). In addition,
volumes centered in the LGN were
sonicated.

However, 2 locations in monkey 3 had signiﬁcant erythrocyte
extravasations that were not detected in MRI. Note that we did
not obtain pretreatment images in that animal, which made it
difﬁcult to distinguish damage from other tissue structures
(sulci, etc.) that were also hypointense in T2 -weighted imaging. In subsequent sessions, comparing pre- and postsonication T2 -weighted imaging enabled us to detect even small
changes that were not evident without the context provided by
presonication images.
Functional tests
Monkeys 1 to 4 all recovered with no apparent behavioral
deﬁcits induced by procedures. Monkeys 1 to 2 had 1 BBB
disruption session each, monkey 3 had 3 sessions, and monkey
4 had 13 sessions. The animals appeared normal the day after

3660

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

each session, eating and drinking, reaching for food items held
in front of them, and displaying normal aggressive behavior to
caretakers. We therefore undertook more extensive behavioral
testing that would be more sensitive to neuronal damage.
Monkeys 5 to 7 were trained to use touchscreens in their
home cages to choose between pairs of stimuli to select a
reward amount (Fig. 6). They chose between pairs of symbols
and received a ﬂuid reward corresponding to the chosen
symbol. Numerals 0 to 9 corresponded to 0 to 9 drops and
the letters X-Y-W-C-H-U-T-F-K-L-N-R-M-E-A-J represented 10
to 25 drops. New symbols were introduced in order, and over a
period of several months all monkeys learned to accurately
distinguish between 26 symbols in that they almost always
chose the larger of the 2 choices. Accurate performance of the
task thus requires motor skill, the ability to remember all 26

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption via Focused Ultrasound

symbols, and the ability to see and recognize the symbols.
Furthermore, we tested these monkeys with symbols varying in
height from 2.2 mm to 4.5 cm. Thus, we could also evaluate the
monkeys' acuity. We then repeatedly targeted BBB disruption
bilaterally to the LGN and in the foveal conﬂuence of primary
visual cortex and secondary visual areas (V1, V2, V3, V4) over
several weeks. If damage occurred to the LGN or central visual
cortex, visual acuity should be reduced, which would be
apparent as a loss of ability to discriminate the smallest
symbols. Results from functional testing are shown in Fig. 6.
After 5 sessions of volumetric BBB disruption centered on
these targets, no changes were observed in the performance of
the visual task, and visual acuity was unaffected. Here, the
acoustic emission signal was used to guide the exposure level.
In 72 of 75 targeted volumes in these animals, no abnormalities
were evident in T2 -weighted imaging; in 2 of the targeted
volumes we observed tiny hypointense spots in the lunate
sulcus; 1 other target near the LGN showed a faint hypointense
spot that was categorized as suspicious.

Discussion
This work shows the feasibility of reliably and repeatedly
inducing focal BBB disruption without signiﬁcant vascular
or brain tissue damage in a clinically-relevant animal model
using a TcMRgFUS system designed for human use. The
disruption was possible at both deep and superﬁcial targets,
and it was always contained within the sonicated volume.
Other than occasional appearance of MRI contrast in the
nearby sulci, no effects were observed in the acoustic beam
path, and there were no signs of internal reﬂections or
standing waves within the intact skull that led to unexpected
results. Furthermore, the animals recovered without evident
behavioral effects and no changes were found in visual
acuity after repeated BBB disruption at targets in the visual
pathway, suggesting that the procedure did not cause functional damage.
We anticipate that the ﬁrst clinical tests of this technique
will be for brain tumors, where current treatment options are
limited. The level of histologic and functional examination
used here, which showed that no signiﬁcant structural or
functional changes were induced by the sonications, was
sufﬁcient in our view to support clinical translation for such
patients. However, we expect that the technology can have
application to a broader spectrum of brain diseases and
disorders, including those that are not life-threatening. Future
work evaluating more subtle histologic or functional effects
may be prudent before such treatments are initiated. In
particular, studies should validate that no neuronal loss occurs
as a result of the procedure. Although no cell loss was evident
here, because we sonicated both hemispheres in each animal
we were unable to compare cell counts in sonicated versus
nonsonicated structures. Advanced methods for detecting BBB
disruption below what we could detect using MRI contrast and
trypan blue may also be warranted to ensure that the barrier
was fully intact outside of the targeted tissue volumes. The
safety of delivering any given pharmaceutical agent into the
brain should also be assessed before clinical tests.

www.aacrjournals.org

These results conﬁrm prior experiments in small animals,
in which a safe window has been repeatedly found where
BBB disruption is possible without tissue damage evident in
light microscopy (32, 39, 40). This safe window was clear in
this work, despite uncertainties in estimating the in vivo
pressure amplitudes because of the effects of the skull, which
were not corrected for here. The estimated threshold for
BBB disruption, (50% probability at 149 kPa) is lower than
the 272 kPa expected value based on similar analysis from
small animal studies (14). This disparity may reﬂect issues
with our acoustic calibrations, differences in the sonication
parameters compared with earlier studies, or differences in
thresholds that may exist between small animals and primates. The fact that trypan blue extravasation was observed
in white matter but Gd-DPTA extravasation was not suggests that the BBB disruption threshold was lower than our
estimates, as clearly there was a level that we could not
detect using MRI.
The BBB disruption varied substantially from location-tolocation, even using the same exposure level. This was found
both for single-target (see Fig. 2, for example) and volumetric
sonications. This variability was probably because of uncertainties in our estimates for the in vivo acoustic pressure
amplitude because of the skull. Although skull-induced aberration is expected to be minor at 220 kHz (41), there are brain
regions where it may be more signiﬁcant because of the
incident angles between the transducer elements and the skull.
Beyond a critical angle of 25 degrees, the entire incident
longitudinal acoustic wave is reﬂected (42). At more oblique
angles, energy can be transmitted into the brain via shear
waves generated in the skull, with more attenuation, but less
beam aberration (42). At central locations, such as the thalamus and putamen, most transducer elements will have incident angles less than the critical angle, and at very superﬁcial
targets such as the visual and cingulate cortices, most elements
will have highly oblique incident angles. We observed good
BBB disruption at both extremes, even without aberration
correction. In contrast, the disruption achieved in deep, lateral
targets such as the hippocampus/LGN was generally patchy
and weak. Such targets had a large dispersion of incident
angles, resulting in longitudinal and shear mode transmission
for different parts of the transducer, potentially leading to poor
focusing.
In addition to uncertainties in estimating the in vivo
exposure levels, local differences in vascularity and consequent microbubble concentration may have played a role in
the observed variability. Such differences could explain why
Gd-DPTA extravasation was evident only in gray matter,
which is highly vascularized compared with white matter.
Future efforts in treatment planning would need to account
for both the transmission through the skull and the local
tissue vascularity. More sensitive contrast imaging than
what was used here will also be needed to detect BBB
disruption in white matter.
More consistent results could also be achieved with effective
guidance and monitoring to control the ultrasound exposure
level in real-time. These results show that monitoring acoustic
emission is a promising mechanism for such control. We found

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3661

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

McDannold et al.

that transcranial acoustic monitoring was feasible with this
device, and acoustic emissions correlated with both contrast
enhancement (with increased harmonic emission) and vascular damage (with wideband acoustic emission). These ﬁndings
conﬁrm previous small animal studies from our laboratory
(32). In our ongoing tests of this device, we now routinely use
this acoustic feedback to guide the exposure levels, and we plan
to implement automated control over the sonication system to
ensure safe and effective BBB disruption. Detailed analysis of
the acoustic emissions will be presented in a subsequent
manuscript.

Conclusion
We showed that focal BBB disruption can be reliably
and repeatedly produced in a clinically-relevant animal
model using a TcMRgFUS system designed for patient
treatments, and that this disruption can be achieved without signiﬁcant tissue damage or functional deﬁcits. BBB
disruption was found to be substantially less in white
matter, where Gd-DPTA delivery was not detected with
MRI. Behavioral testing indicates that function remains
normal, even after multiple repeated BBB disruption sessions. These results are supportive of conducting initial
clinical tests of this noninvasive method for targeted drug
delivery in the brain, at least for life-threatening conditions
such as brain tumor.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
N. McDannold holds 2 patents on the ultrasound technique evaluated in this
work. No conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by the other authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: N. McDannold, N. Vykhodtseva, M.S. Livingstone
Development of methodology: N. McDannold, C.D. Arvanitis, N. Vykhodtseva,
M.S. Livingstone
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): N. McDannold, N. Vykhodtseva, M.S. Livingstone
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): N. McDannold, C.D. Arvanitis, N. Vykhodtseva
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: N. McDannold, C.D.
Arvanitis, N. Vykhodtseva, M.S. Livingstone
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): N. McDannold
Study supervision: N. McDannold

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Yongzhi Zhang and Vladimir Berezovskii for histology, Ron
Watkins and Ehud Schmidt for their help with our MRI coil, and Omer Brokeman
and Eyal Zadicario for their technical assistance with these experiments. The
focused ultrasound system was supplied by InSightec.

Grant Support
This work was supported by award number RC2NS069413 from the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Additional support was provided by a
gift from Betty Brudnick. C. Arvanitis was supported by NIH grant R25CA089017.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received January 16, 2012; revised April 4, 2012; accepted April 19, 2012;
published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012.

References
1.

Abbott NJ, Romero IA. Transporting therapeutics across the bloodbrain barrier. Mol Med Today 1996;2:106–13.
2. Misra A, Ganesh S, Shahiwala A, Shah SP. Drug delivery to the central
nervous system: a review. J Pharm Pharm Sci 2003;6:252–73.
3. Kroll RA, Neuwelt EA. Outwitting the blood-brain barrier for therapeutic
purposes: osmotic opening and other means. Neurosurgery 1998;42:
1083–99.
4. Pardridge WM. Blood-brain barrier delivery. Drug Discov Today
2007;12:54–61.
5. Eichler AF, Chung E, Kodack DP, Loefﬂer JS, Fukumura D, Jain RK.
The biology of brain metastases-translation to new therapies. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol 2011;8:344–56.
6. Fukumura D, Jain RK. Tumor microenvironment abnormalities:
causes, consequences, and strategies to normalize. J Cell Biochem
2007;101:937–49.
7. Lockman PR, Mittapalli RK, Taskar KS, Rudraraju V, Gril B, Bohn KA,
et al. Heterogeneous blood-tumor barrier permeability determines
drug efﬁcacy in experimental brain metastases of breast cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 2010;16:5664–78.
8. Hynynen K, McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, Jolesz FA. Noninvasive MR
imaging-guided focal opening of the blood-brain barrier in rabbits.
Radiology 2001;220:640–6.
9. Hynynen K, McDannold N, Sheikov NA, Jolesz FA, Vykhodtseva N.
Local and reversible blood-brain barrier disruption by noninvasive
focused ultrasound at frequencies suitable for trans-skull sonications.
Neuroimage 2005;24:12–20.
10. Sheikov N, McDannold N, Sharma S, Hynynen K. Effect of focused
ultrasound applied with an ultrasound contrast agent on the tight
junctional integrity of the brain microvascular endothelium. Ultrasound
Med Biol 2008;34:1093–104.
11. Shang X, Wang P, Liu Y, Zhang Z, Xue Y. Mechanism of low-frequency
ultrasound in opening blood-tumor barrier by tight junction. J Mol
Neurosci 2010;43:364–9.

3662

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

12. Sheikov N, McDannold N, Jolesz F, Zhang YZ, Tam K, Hynynen K.
Brain arterioles show more active vesicular transport of blood-borne
tracer molecules than capillaries and venules after focused ultrasoundevoked opening of the blood-brain barrier. Ultrasound Med Biol
2006;32:1399–409.
13. McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, Hynynen K. Effects of acoustic parameters and ultrasound contrast agent dose on focused-ultrasound
induced blood-brain barrier disruption. Ultrasound Med Biol 2008;34:
930–7.
14. McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, Hynynen K. Blood-brain barrier disruption induced by focused ultrasound and circulating preformed
microbubbles appears to be characterized by the mechanical index.
Ultrasound Med Biol 2008;34:834–40.
15. Choi JJ, Selert K, Gao Z, Samiotaki G, Baseri B, Konofagou EE.
Noninvasive and localized blood-brain barrier disruption using
focused ultrasound can be achieved at short pulse lengths and low
pulse repetition frequencies. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010;31:
725–37.
16. Chopra R, Vykhodtseva N, Hynynen K. Inﬂuence of exposure time and
pressure amplitude on blood-brain-barrier opening using transcranial
ultrasound exposures. ACS Chem Neurosci 2010;1:391–8.
17. Yang FY, Lin GL, Horng SC, Chang TK, Wu SY, Wong TT, et al. Pulsed
high-intensity focused ultrasound enhances the relative permeability
of the blood-tumor barrier in a glioma-bearing rat model. IEEE Trans
Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control 2011;58:964–70.
18. Kinoshita M, McDannold N, Jolesz FA, Hynynen K. Noninvasive
localized delivery of Herceptin to the mouse brain by MRI-guided
focused ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier disruption. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:11719–23.
19. Treat LH, McDannold N, Zhang Y, Vykhodtseva N, Hynynen K.
Targeted delivery of doxorubicin to the rat brain at therapeutic levels
using MRI-guided focused ultrasound. Int J Cancer 2007;121:
901–7.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Blood–Brain Barrier Disruption via Focused Ultrasound

20. Mei J, Cheng Y, Song Y, Yang Y, Wang F, Liu Y, et al. Experimental
study on targeted methotrexate delivery to the rabbit brain via magnetic resonance imaging-guided focused ultrasound. J Ultrasound
Med 2009;28:871–80.
21. Liu HL, Hua MY, Chen PY, Chu PC, Pan CH, Yang HW, et al. Bloodbrain barrier disruption with focused ultrasound enhances delivery of
chemotherapeutic drugs for glioblastoma treatment. Radiology 2010;
255:415–25.
22. Jordao JF, Ayala-Grosso CA, Markham K, Huang Y, Chopra R,
McLaurin J, et al. Antibodies targeted to the brain with image-guided
focused ultrasound reduces amyloid-beta plaque load in the
TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. PLoS One 2010;5:
e10549.
23. Minniti G, Amelio D, Amichetti M, Salvati M, Muni R, Bozzao A, et al.
Patterns of failure and comparison of different target volume delineations in patients with glioblastoma treated with conformal radiotherapy
plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide. Radiother Oncol
2010;97:377–81.
24. Dobelbower MC, Burnett Iii OL, Nordal RA, Nabors LB, Markert JM,
Hyatt MD, et al. Patterns of failure for glioblastoma multiforme following concurrent radiation and temozolomide. J Med Imaging Radiat
Oncol 2011;55:77–81.
25. Chamberlain MC. Radiographic patterns of relapse in glioblastoma. J
Neurooncol 2011;101:319–23.
26. Hynynen K, Clement GT, McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, King R, White
PJ, et al. 500-element ultrasound phased array system for noninvasive
focal surgery of the brain: a preliminary rabbit study with ex vivo human
skulls. Magn Reson Med 2004;52:100–7.
27. Pernot M, Aubry JF, Tanter M, Boch AL, Marquet F, Kujas M, et al. In
vivo transcranial brain surgery with an ultrasonic time reversal mirror. J
Neurosurgery 2007;106:1061–6.
28. McDannold N, Clement GT, Black P, Jolesz F, Hynynen K. Transcranial
magnetic resonance imaging-guided focused ultrasound surgery of
brain tumors: initial ﬁndings in 3 patients. Neurosurgery 2010;66:
323–32.
29. Martin E, Jeanmonod D, Morel A, Zadicario E, Werner B. High-intensity
focused ultrasound for noninvasive functional neurosurgery. Ann
Neurol 2009;66:858–61.
30. Clement GT, Hynynen K. A non-invasive method for focusing
ultrasound through the human skull. Phys Med Biol 2002;47:
1219–36.

www.aacrjournals.org

31. Tung YS, Marquet F, Teichert T, Ferrera V, Konofagou EE. Feasibility of
noninvasive cavitation-guided blood-brain barrier opening using
focused ultrasound and microbubbles in nonhuman primates. Appl
Phys Lett 2011;98:163704.
32. McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, Hynynen K. Targeted disruption of the
blood-brain barrier with focused ultrasound: association with cavitation activity. Phys Med Biol 2006;51:793–807.
33. Lele PP. Effects of ultrasound on "solid" mammalian tissues and
tumors in vivo. In:Repacholi MH, Grondolfo M, Rindi A, editors.
Ultrasound: medical applications, biological effects and hazard
potential. New York, NY: Plenum Publishing Corporation; 1987.
p. 275–306.
34. Livingstone MS, Srihasam K, Morocz IA. The beneﬁt of symbols:
monkeys show linear, human-like, accuracy when using symbols to
represent scalar value. Anim Cogn 2010;13:711–9.
35. Bakay L, Hueter TF, Ballantine HT, Sosa D. Ultrasonically produced
changes in the blood-brain barrier. Arch Neurol 1956;76:457–67.
36. McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, Raymond S, Jolesz FA, Hynynen K.
MRI-guided targeted blood-brain barrier disruption with focused ultrasound: histological ﬁndings in rabbits. Ultrasound Med Biol 2005;
31:1527–37.
37. slicer.org [Internet]. Available from: http://www.slicer.org [cited May 1,
2012].
38. Gering DT, Nabavi A, Kikinis R, Grimson WEL, Hata N, Everett P, et al.
An integrated visualization system for surgical planning and guidance
using image fusion and interventional imaging. Int Conf Med Image
Comput Comput Assist Interv 2012;2:819.
39. Hynynen K, McDannold N, Vykhodtseva N, Raymond S, Weissleder R,
Jolesz FA, et al. Focal disruption of the blood–brain barrier due to 260kHz ultrasound bursts: a method for molecular imaging and targeted
drug delivery. J Neurosurgery 2006;105:445–54.
40. Tung YS, Vlachos F, Choi JJ, Defﬁeux T, Selert K, Konofagou EE. In
vivo transcranial cavitation threshold detection during ultrasoundinduced blood-brain barrier opening in mice. Phys Med Biol 2010;
55:6141–55.
41. Yin X, Hynynen K. A numerical study of transcranial focused ultrasound beam propagation at low frequency. Phys Med Biol 2005;50:
1821–36.
42. Clement GT, White PJ, Hynynen K. Enhanced ultrasound transmission
through the human skull using shear mode conversion. J Acoust Soc
Am 2004;115:1356–64.

Cancer Res; 72(14) July 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3663

Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128

Temporary Disruption of the Blood−Brain Barrier by Use of
Ultrasound and Microbubbles: Safety and Efficacy Evaluation in
Rhesus Macaques
Nathan McDannold, Costas D. Arvanitis, Natalia Vykhodtseva, et al.
Cancer Res 2012;72:3652-3663. Published OnlineFirst May 2, 2012.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2012/07/10/0008-5472.CAN-12-0128.DC1

This article cites 40 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/14/3652.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/14/3652.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

