665

COMMENTARY

Rationale for Combination Use of
Targeted Agents in Ovarian
Cancer
Do We Have One?
Robert L. Coleman,
Elise C. Kohn, MD2

MD

1

1
Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.
2
Molecular Signaling Section, Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

O

See referenced original article on pages 723-32,
this issue.
Address for reprints: Robert L. Coleman, MD,
Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
1155 Herman Pressler Drive, Houston, TX 77030;
Fax: (713) 792-7586; E-mail: rcoleman@
mdanderson.org
Received April 18, 2008; accepted April 21,
2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

ne of the most exciting (and harrowing) situations in solid tumor therapeutics has been the explosive development and availability of agents that provide specific or promiscuous targeting to
biologic processes that mediate the survival of cells in the microenvironment. The successes of agents, such as trastuzumab in breast
cancer1; bevacizumab in colon, breast, and lung cancers2-4; sunitinib5 and sorafenib6 in renal cell cancer; and imatinib in gastrointestinal stromal tumors,7 are a few examples of the next iteration in
evolutionary progress for targeted therapy. In some of these cases,
patients were selected because their tumors expressed a targetable
abnormality, which effectively was inhibited by the novel agent;
and, in phase 3 investigation, the maneuver proved efficacious relative to those with a similar profile denied the drug. In others, unselected populations were administered the agent or agent combined
with chemotherapy, and clinical investigation demonstrated a significant improvement in outcome relative to usual practice standards.
But these advances stand on scores of negative clinical studies in tumor types with similar target expression, promising in vitro and in
vivo preclinical data, and acceptable safety profiles in their early
clinical development. This conundrum leaves us as investigators
with the task of deciding whether the agent is truly ‘inactive’ or
‘inappropriate for this tumor type’ or was ‘handicapped’ by . . . (fill
in the blank: study design, statistical endpoints, patient selection,
patient tumor burden, route of administration, schedule, dose, etc),
all of which are problematic and leave a somewhat sophomoric
overview of the cancer treatment process. Furthermore, the clinical
scenario under which some of the agents received their approvals
complicates our inference of treatment effect. Imatinib, sunitinib,
and sorafenib received their indications as single agents that
demonstrated therapeutic benefit. Conversely, bevacizumab, perhaps the most broadly used agent other than the taxanes, had only

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23604
Published online 11 July 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

666

CANCER

August 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 4

a very modest effect as a single agent in the diseases
for which it currently is approved. Did bevacizumab
itself have an effect on the tumor in those patients,
or did it somehow augment the efficacy of, or overcome resistance to, the chemotherapy? Thus, the key
questions to advancing in this era of plenty become:
 Is the target necessary or sufficient for activity of
the agent?
 Was the combination based on biochemical or
molecular rationale?
 Must the targeted agent have activity of its own
in the combination or must the combination
‘work’ in some fashion?
 If the target and rationale were present, then why
was this combination and rationale preferred over
other potential choices?
 Was the potential for interactive on- and off-target toxicities considered?
A good example of miscue in this regard is the
story of gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase small-molecule inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Early clinical investigation suggested that
the activity of this agent was promising based on frequent target overexpression and single-arm, phase 2
studies demonstrating ‘unexpected’ clinical efficacy,
particularly in patients with previously treated, refractory disease.8 On May 3, 2003, the United States Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) granted accelerated
approval to gefitinib requiring additional phase 3 studies to define and clarify its disease-specific role. At
the time, 2 randomized, controlled clinical studies of
gefitinib in combination with platinum-based regimens in patients with primary, advanced NSCLC
proved no benefit and were available. On December
17, 2004, the FDA was informed that a placebo-controlled, phase 3 study of approximately 1700 patients
demonstrated no improvement in overall survival.
This prompted the FDA to amend its approval language on June 17, 2005, limiting drug use to only those
patients for whom their treating physicians believed it
would be beneficial.9 Fortunately, return to the laboratory demonstrated that patients who had activating
mutations in the adenosine triphosphate-binding domain stood the most to gain with the agent.10,11 Subsequent
analyses
have
teased
out
other
clinicopathologic factors (never smoker, Asian heritage, ras mutation) that highlight the subpopulations
of lung cancer patients most likely to benefit from
agents in this class.12,13 A similar finding also was
recognized in patients with ovarian cancer after
reports of low response rates to erlotinib and gefitinib

(5.8% and 3%, respectively) in Gynecologic Oncology
Group phase 2 studies.14,15 In the latter study, the lone
responder was identified as the only patient who harbored an activating mutation in EGFR.15
In the current issue of Cancer, Matei et al from the
Hoosier Oncology Group evaluate the combination
imatinib mesylate and weekly docetaxel in women with
recurrent and previously treated ovarian cancer.16 Their
prospective, open-label, clinical study was designed
based on the observations that c-kit, platelet-derived
growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and c-abl (targets of
imatinib) frequently are over expressed, either alone or
in combination, on ovarian cancer cells and that the
clinical activity of taxanes is well established in the disease. Efficacy rationale for that study also was ‘supported’ by preclinical observations that imatinib
inhibited the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells in
vitro; and rationale for dosing, schedule, and safety
were derived from a modular phase 1 study in patients
with prostate cancer who were treated with the combination. The investigation required expression of c-kit or
PDGFR-b for patient eligibility and allowed any number of prior therapies. Although weekly administration
of docetaxel is untested in ovarian cancer, conceptually,
the schedule is desirable from a metronomic standpoint. Weekly paclitaxel has been evaluated in a randomized, phase 2 study of patients with recurrent ovarian
cancer relative to every-3-week paclitaxel infusion and
in 2 phase 2 studies of patients with paclitaxel-resistant, recurrent ovarian cancer demonstrating clinical efficacy. The novel combination regimen reported by
Matei, et al, did produce responses, notably in a few
complete responders; however, the authors conclude
that the regimen has only modest activity.16
In fact, concern for toxicity of this combination
may be warranted based on the frequent identification
of edema for both agents individually and fluid accumulation (as ascites, effusions, etc) observed with
imatinib as a single agent in patients with ovarian cancer.17 Further compounding the issue of observed
treatment effect is the realization that these clinical
features also may be part of the natural history of disease progression. A hypothesis for the imatinib effect
lies in the indiscriminant PDGFR-b targeting of pericytes, which, under normal conditions, provide structural integrity to vessels in the microenvironment.
Nevertheless, sequential and directed targeting to
pericytes, tumor cells, and endothelial cells indeed
may provide the most promising approach to therapy
for this disease. In the current article, metronomic taxanes had demonstrated effects on tumor endothelial
cells, and imatinib had demonstrated effects on pericytes and on some tumor cells; and, potentially, combined with an antivascular endothelial growth factor

Commentary/Coleman and Kohn

molecule, as hypothesized by Pietras and Hanahan,
may provide an optimal approach to microenvironment cytotoxicity.18 The rationale is generated
mechanistically and is not reliant on potentially insignificant aspects, such as mere target over expression.
The real dangers in the interpretation of studies
such as that by Matei et al16 are 1) discarding a relevant therapeutic agent that may be integral to a regimen rationally designed to the survival mechanisms
of the microenvironment, 2) missing a potential therapeutic benefit of a targeted agent because of empiric
combination rather than rational design, and 3) misleading patients with incomplete or incorrect interpretation of clinical trial rationale. Given the limited
number of patient resources available, future investigations necessarily will need to be vetted in representative preclinical models, linked with relevant
biomarkers, designed statistically to optimize patient
resources, and prioritized by potential efficacy. The
expanding menu of effective compounds vastly outpaces this process and further challenges us as investigators and treating physicians to develop an
appropriate rationale for developing novel regimens.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Robert N, Leyland-Jones B, Asmar L, et al. Randomized
phase III study of trastuzumab, paclitaxel, and carboplatin
compared with trastuzumab and paclitaxel in women with
HER-2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2006;24:2786-2792.
Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al. Bevacizumab
plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2335-2342.
Miller KD. E2100: a phase III trial of paclitaxel versus paclitaxel/bevacizumab for metastatic breast cancer. Clin Breast
Cancer. 2003;3:421-422.
Jain RK, Duda DG, Clark JW, et al. Lessons from phase III
clinical trials on anti-VEGF therapy for cancer. Nat Clin
Pract Oncol. 2006;3:24-40.
Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, et al. Sunitinib versus
interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2007;356:115-124.
Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. Sorafenib in advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007;
356:125-134.

15.

16.

17.

18.

667

Verweij J, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, et al. Progression-free
survival in gastrointestinal stromal tumours with highdose imatinib: randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;364:11271134.
Cohen MH, Williams GA, Sridhara R, et al. FDA drug approval summary: gefitinib (ZD1839) (Iressa) tablets. Oncologist. 2003;8:303-306.
Cohen MH, Williams GA, Sridhara R, et al. United States
Food and Drug Administration drug approval summary:
gefitinib (ZD1839; Iressa) tablets. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:
1212-1218.
Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, et al. Activating mutations
in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J
Med. 2004;350:2129-2139.
Sordella R, Bell DW, Haber DA, et al. Gefitinib-sensitizing
EGFR mutations in lung cancer activate anti-apoptotic
pathways. Science. 2004;305:1163-1167.
Lee DH, Han JY, Lee HG, et al. Gefitinib as a first-line
therapy of advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of
the lung in never-smokers. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:30323037.
Chang A, Parikh P, Thongprasert S, et al. Gefitinib (IRESSA)
in patients of Asian origin with refractory advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer: subset analysis from the ISEL study.
J Thorac Oncol. 2006;1:847-855.
Blank SV, Chang R, Muggia F. Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors for the treatment of epithelial ovarian
cancer. Oncology (Williston Park). 2005;19:553-559; discussion 560-562, 567.
Schilder RJ, Sill MW, Chen X, et al. Phase II study of gefitinib in patients with relapsed or persistent ovarian or primary peritoneal carcinoma and evaluation of epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations and immunohistochemical expression: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005;11:5539-5548.
Matei D, Emerson RE, Schilder J, et al. Imatinib mesylate
in combination with docetaxel for the treatment of
patients with advanced, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer
and primary peritoneal carcinomatosis: a Hoosier Oncology Group trial. Cancer. 2008;113:723-732.
Posadas EM, Kwitkowski V, Kotz HL, et al. A prospective
analysis of imatinib-induced c-KIT modulation in ovarian
cancer: a phase II clinical study with proteomic profiling.
Cancer. 2007;110:309-317.
Pietras K, Hanahan D. A multitargeted, metronomic, and
maximum-tolerated dose ‘‘chemo-switch’’ regimen is antiangiogenic, producing objective responses and survival
benefit in a mouse model of cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:939-952.

