Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Resistance to anticancer vaccination effect is controlled by a
cancer cell-autonomous phenotype that disrupts immunogenic
phagocytic removal
Abhishek D. Garg1, Sanne Elsen2, Dmitri V. Krysko3,4, Peter Vandenabeele3,4,
Peter de Witte2, Patrizia Agostinis1
1

 ell Death Research & Therapy (CDRT) Unit, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven University of
C
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

2

Laboratory for Molecular Biodiscovery, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

3

Molecular Signaling and Cell Death Unit, Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium

4

Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

Correspondence to:
Patrizia Agostinis, e-mail: patrizia.agostinis@med.kuleuven.be
Keywords: immunogenic cell death, calreticulin, patient, predictive biomarker, prognostic biomarker
Received: May 26, 2015 	Accepted: July 10, 2015 	Published: July 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
Immunogenic cell death (ICD) is a well-established instigator of ‘anti-cancer
vaccination-effect (AVE)’. ICD has shown considerable preclinical promise, yet
there remain subset of cancer patients that fail to respond to clinically-applied ICD
inducers. Non-responsiveness to ICD inducers could be explained by the existence of
cancer cell-autonomous, anti-AVE resistance mechanisms. However such resistance
mechanisms remain poorly investigated. In this study, we have characterized for
the first time, a naturally-occurring preclinical cancer model (AY27) that exhibits
intrinsic anti-AVE resistance despite treatment with ICD inducers like mitoxantrone
or hypericin-photodynamic therapy. Further mechanistic analysis revealed that this
anti-AVE resistance was associated with a defect in exposing the important ‘eat me’
danger signal, surface-calreticulin (ecto-CRT/CALR). In an ICD setting, this defective
ecto-CRT further correlated with severely reduced phagocytic clearance of AY27 cells
as well as the failure of these cells to activate AVE. Defective ecto-CRT in response
to ICD induction was a result of low endogenous CRT protein levels (i.e. CRTlowphenotype) in AY27 cells. Exogenous reconstitution of ecto-rCRT (recombinant-CRT)
improved the phagocytic removal of ICD inducer-treated AY27 cells, and importantly,
significantly increased their AVE-activating ability. Moreover, we found that a subset
of cancer patients of various cancer-types indeed possessed CALRlow or CRTlow-tumours.
Remarkably, we found that tumoural CALRhigh-phenotype was predictive of positive
clinical responses to therapy with ICD inducers (radiotherapy and paclitaxel) in lung
and ovarian cancer patients, respectively. Furthermore, only in the ICD clinical setting,
tumoural CALR levels positively correlated with the levels of various phagocytosisassociated genes relevant for phagosome maturation or processing. Thus, we reveal
the existence of a cancer cell-autonomous, anti-AVE or anti-ICD resistance mechanism
that has profound clinical implications for anticancer immunotherapy and cancer
predictive biomarker analysis.

recent times [1]. For most cell-based anticancer vaccines,
“whole cancer cells” (induced to undergo cell death)
represent the central element [2]. Thus not surprisingly,
a significant effort has also been invested in increasing
the immunogenicity of dying cancer cells used for vaccine

INTRODUCTION
The field of anticancer immunotherapies
encompassing “active” cell-based vaccines has
experienced an unprecedented level of development in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26841

Oncotarget

production [3–5]. The field has rapidly moved from simple
induction of freeze-thawing-based necrosis (which is not
highly immunogenic) to more sophisticated methodologies
for increasing the “whole cancer cell” immunogenicity
[5, 6]. One such emerging methodology is ‘immunogenic
cell death (ICD)’ [7–9].
ICD exhibits high immunogenicity owing to the
spatiotemporally-defined emission of damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs) capable of acting as
immunogenic danger signals [7–9]. Such DAMPs include
the surface exposed (ecto-), endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) chaperone, calreticulin (CRT), secreted ATP and
post-apoptotic released molecules like high-mobility
group box-1 (HMGB1) protein [7–10]. Amongst these
DAMPs, the immunogenic ‘eat me’ signal, ecto-CRT
tends to exclusively associate with ICD [6, 11–14]. In an
operational sense, ICD activates ‘anti-cancer vaccination
effect (AVE), i.e., cancer cells undergoing ICD in vitro
and administered in vivo are capable of eliciting potent
tumour-rejecting immunity (demonstrated in number of
mice models) [7]. Moreover, tumour cells undergoing ICD
in vivo can also activate an “in situ” AVE that “primes” the
immune system to specifically eliminate residual cancer
cells [7, 15].
It is noteworthy that, several ICD inducers have
been applied for clinical treatment of cancer patients,
either as experimental therapies (e.g. Hypericin-based
Photodynamic Therapy/Hyp-PDT) or as standards-of-care
and palliative-care therapies (e.g. radiotherapy,
mitoxantrone, paclitaxel) [1, 7, 9]. However, despite
treatment with ICD inducers, there remains a subset
of patients showing refractoriness to therapy [16–18].
Considering the strong preclinical evidence of ICDelicited immunity, it is possible that the above subset
of patients exhibit poor prognosis at least partially due
to the failure of anti-tumour immunity. Such resistance
mechanisms need to be urgently characterized since they
represent major stumbling blocks for the clinical success
of ICD.
So far, the major naturally-occurring anti-ICD or
anti-AVE resistance mechanisms have been described
on the level of host immune system (e.g. mutations in
immune-receptors that disrupt immunogenicity-sensing)
[4, 8, 15]. However, considering the centrality occupied by
cancer cells in the vaccination set-up, it is absolutely vital
to uncover cancer cell-autonomous mechanisms that reduce
immunogenicity – an area seldom investigated. Of note,
our recent meta-analysis advocated the existence of cancer
cell-autonomous mechanisms ablating immunogenic
danger signalling [4, 8]. The impact that such resistance
mechanisms can have, has been confirmed mostly through
synthetic gene-knockdown/knockout strategies (e.g.
RNAi) [6, 12, 14, 15]. However, such synthetic strategies
either harbour the risk of off-target effects or are not
representative of intrinsic mechanisms  [19]. Thus the
existence of a naturally-occurring experimental model
exhibiting intrinsic anti-AVE or anti-ICD resistance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

would be critical. Such a model could lead to a better
understanding of similar resistance mechanisms in a subset
of patients showing poor prognosis following treatment
with ICD inducers.
While broad resistance mechanisms not affected by
ICD inducer-to-inducer differences may exist yet it has
been proposed that Hyp-PDT might be comparatively less
susceptible to various resistance mechanisms compared to
chemotherapy or radiotherapy [4, 20, 21]. Owing to this
we envisaged that an experimental model showing in vivo
resistance to Hyp-PDT treatment has the possibility of
exhibiting the broadest possible AVE-resistant phenotype.
To this end, we did a literature survey and found one such
experimental model that fitted this criteria i.e. AY27 rat
bladder cancer model [22, 23]. Previous studies showed
that established AY27 tumours in rats exhibited strong
initial responses to Hyp-PDT treatment, characterized
by massive tumour-debulking. However, 1–3 weeks
after treatment, these tumours relapsed thus indicating
their refractoriness to Hyp-PDT treatment [22, 23]. This
observation stands in stark contrast to the well-established
ability of Hyp-PDT to induce bona fide ICD, AVE
and robust anti-tumour immunity [6, 12, 13, 24, 25]
e.g. treatment of established CT26 tumours [9] in mice with
Hyp-PDT was associated with 100% eradication of these
tumours and not accompanied by relapse, such that even
re-challenge of these mice with live CT26 cells prevented
new tumour growth [9, 25]. As a whole this suggests that
through as-yet-unknown phenomena, AY27 cancer cells
display the ability to resist the action of a bona fide ICD
inducer thereby making it an interesting experimental
model for studying anticancer vaccination resistance.
To this end, the primary aim of this study was
to investigate whether AY27 is a naturally-occurring
experimental model of intrinsic resistance to AVE.
Furthermore, we wished to uncover the mechanism
underlying this resistance (i.e. ICD based or not). We also
aimed to investigate, through retrospective meta-analysis
of publicly available datasets, whether subset of cancer
patients may exhibit similar disparity. Finally, we wanted
to ascertain whether the above characterized mechanisms
of AVE resistance may serve as a ‘predictive biomarker(s)’
of the efficacy of ICD inducers in clinical settings.

RESULTS
Rat bladder cancer AY27 cells exhibit intrinsic
resistance to ‘anticancer vaccination effect’
Based on the findings showing AY27-tumor’s
tendency to relapse despite treatment with the
prototypical ICD-inducing agent, Hyp-PDT [22, 23];
we decided to examine whether this failure was due to
the AY27 cells’ inability to activate AVE. In absence
of a bona fide ICD-susceptible rat cancer model, for
comparative purposes, we used the CT26 murine cancer
cells [6, 13]. CT26 cancer model is a well-established
26842

Oncotarget

AVE/ICD-susceptible model [14, 25, 26]. We exposed
both CT26 and AY27 cells to two prototypical inducers
of AVE i.e. Hyp-PDT and the chemotherapeutic,
mitoxantrone (MTX) for 24 h. The resulting preparations
of similarly dead or dying, apoptotic, CT26 (Suppl. Fig.
S1A–S1B) or AY27 cells (Suppl. Fig. S1A–S1B) were
injected subcutaneously into left flank of syngeneic
immune-competent BALB/c mice (Fig. 1A) and Fischer
344 rats (Fig. 1B), respectively. Post-vaccination, these
rodents were re-challenged with live CT26 (Fig. 1A)
or AY27 (Fig.  1B) cells as applicable, in the opposite

flank(s). Thereafter, protection against tumour growth
at the re-challenge site was interpreted as a sign of
antitumor vaccination, as described previously [6, 13].
The ICD-susceptible CT26 cells exhibited high efficiency
in activating AVE such that 70–100% BALB/c mice
‘vaccinated’ with MTX or Hyp-PDT treated CT26 cells
exhibited efficient tumour-rejecting responses (Fig. 1C).
In a stark contrast, none of the rats ‘vaccinated’ with
MTX or Hyp-PDT treated AY27 cells exhibited tumourrejecting responses, such that all of them developed
tumours at the re-challenge site (Fig. 1C).

Figure 1: Rat bladder carcinoma AY27 cells exhibit resistance to ‘anticancer vaccination effect’ associated with ICD
inducers. CT26 cells A. or AY27 cells B. were treated in vitro with Hyp-PDT (150 nM Hyp incubated for 16 h followed by irradiation
with light fluence of 2.70 J/cm2) or mitoxantrone (MTX; 1 μM), followed by recovery at 24 h post-treatment. These treated CT26 and AY27
cells were then injected subcutaneously into BALB/c mice (PBS, n = 10 mice; Hyp-PDT, n = 18 mice; MTX, n = 6 mice) and Fischer
344 rats (PBS, n = 6 rats; Hyp-PDT, n = 6 rats; MTX, n = 6 rats), respectively. Eight to ten days post-vaccination, the mice and rats were
challenged in contra-lateral flank with live CT26 (A) and live AY27 (B) cells, respectively. Mice or rats injected with PBS were utilized as
placebo-controls. C. This was followed by monitoring of tumour incidence at the challenge site. Statistical analysis was performed using
the Fischer’s exact test; statistical significance between conditions is indicated by the bars (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26843

Oncotarget

Rat bladder cancer AY27 cells exhibit disruption
in calreticulin surface exposure and inefficient
phagocytic removal by professional phagocytes

In  line with its non-ICD functionality, topotecan failed
to induce ecto-CRT in both CT26 and AY27 cells (Fig. 2E).
In aggregate, these results indicate that, compared to CT26
cells, AY27 cells exhibit defects in ecto-CRT presentation
in response to ICD inducers, which correlates with their
inability to undergo efficient phagocytic removal.

The inability of AY27 cells treated with ICDinducers to elicit AVE raised a possibility that perhaps
these cells have some defect in ICD-associated danger
signalling. To address this possibility, we decided to
investigate the most important hallmarks of ICD i.e.
secretion of ATP, release of HMGB1, ecto-CRT and
efficient phagocytic removal by professional phagocytes.
Analysis of secreted ATP showed that, following
treatment with MTX or Hyp-PDT, both CT26 and AY27
cancer cells exhibited increased ATP secretion (Fig. 2A).
As reported previously [6, 12], Hyp-PDT treatment
induced rapid ATP secretion (detectable as soon as, 1 h
post-treatment) in both cell types. On the other hand,
MTX-elicited ATP secretion was comparatively late (24 h
post-treatment) (Fig. 2A). ATP secretion by AY27 cells
after Hyp-PDT was considerably higher than in CT26 cells
(Fig. 2A); whereas MTX induced similar levels of ATP
secretion from both cancer cell lines (Fig. 2A). Following
treatment with MTX or Hyp-PDT, both cancer cell-types
exhibited increased release of HMGB1 (Fig. 2B), a DAMP
associated to cell’s secondary necrosis, following a trend
that paralleled the accumulation of secondary necrotic cells
in response to these ICD inducers (Suppl. Fig. S1A–S1B).
Next, we analysed the ability of these ICD inducers
to elicit ecto-CRT. CT26 cancer cells efficiently and
rapidly mobilized CRT at their surface after both MTX
and Hyp-PDT treatments (detectable as soon as, 1 h posttreatment) (Fig. 2C). In stark contrast, ecto-CRT levels
were strongly reduced (but not nil) in AY27 cancer cells,
after treatment with both MTX and Hyp-PDT (Fig. 2C).
This disparity in AY27 cells was also confirmed by cell
surface protein biotinylation analysis (data not shown).
As ecto-CRT serves as a potent ‘eat-me signal’, we
next analysed the ability of these treated cancer cells to
undergo phagocytic removal by professional phagocytes.
MTX or Hyp-PDT treated CT26 cells underwent highly
efficient phagocytosis by the J774 murine phagocytes [27]
(Fig. 2D). In stark contrast, MTX or Hyp-PDT treated
AY27 cells were barely phagocytosed by the RMW rat
phagocytes [28] (Fig. 2D).
We then wondered whether failure to mobilize
ecto-CRT by the AY27 cells, was a common feature of
other anticancer therapies known to induce ICD, such
as radiotherapy [14, 26] or paclitaxel [29]. Moreover
we expanded our analysis in CT26 and AY27 cells
also to a prototype of non-ICD inducers, e.g. topotecan
(a camptothecin analogue) [14]. To this end, we treated
CT26 and AY27 cells with the above agents and analysed
ecto-CRT. Similar to the above trends, while radiotherapy
and paclitaxel both efficiently induced ecto-CRT in CT26
cells (Fig. 2E) yet these ICD inducers failed to elicit
similar amounts of ecto-CRT in AY27 cells (Fig. 2E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Reconstitution of exogenous calreticulin in AY27
cells increases their phagocytic removal and their
ability to elicit ‘anticancer vaccination effect’
A correlation analysis of the above data showed that
across CT26 and AY27 systems, there was a strong, positive
linear correlation (p < 0.05) between the levels of ecto-CRT
and efficient phagocytic removal (Fig. 3A) as well as AVEinducing capacity (Fig. 3B). This reaffirmed the activity of
ecto-CRT as an ‘eat me’ signal and an immunogenicitydefiner. To this end, it was imperative to confirm whether
the disparity in ecto-CRT levels was behind AY27 cells’
inefficient phagocytosis and resistance to AVE.
To address this, we analysed the ability of treated
AY27 cells (post-incubated or not, with exogenously
‘reconstituted’ recombinant CRT/rCRT) to undergo
phagocytic removal by professional phagocytes. In line
with the above observations (Fig. 2D), phagocytosis
of MTX or Hyp-PDT treated AY27 cells by the RMW
rat phagocytes was insignificant (Fig. 3C). However,
reconstitution of ecto-rCRT, statistically significantly
increased the phagocytic clearance of treated AY27 cells
by RMW rat phagocytes (Fig. 3C).
Next, we decided to probe the possible functional link
between the lack of ecto-CRT and AVE-resistance in AY27
cells. To this end, we exposed AY27 cells to Hyp-PDT
and MTX for 24 h; and the resulting mixture of dead and
dying AY27 cells was incubated or not, with exogenously
‘reconstituted’ ecto-rCRT followed by their injection into
Fischer 344 rats. This was followed by re-challenging with
live AY27 cells in the contra-lateral flank (Fig. 3D). In line
with the above observations (Fig. 1C), rats ‘vaccinated’
with MTX or Hyp-PDT treated AY27 cells again failed
to reject AY27 tumours at the re-challenge site (Fig. 3E).
However interestingly, injection with vaccines reconstituted
with ecto-rCRT, significantly increased the number of rats
(by approximately 50%) capable of resisting AY27 tumour
growth at the re-challenge site (Fig. 3E). The latter results
establish low ecto-CRT as a chief defect behind AY27 cell’s
inability to activate AVE.

Low endogenous levels of calreticulin
cause disruption in calreticulin surface
exposure capacity
Ecto-CRT exposure is mediated by a multi-factorial
signalling pathway [4, 8, 30]. In case of MTX, secondary
non-lethal ER stress activation and caspases activity
are required for ecto-CRT [4, 8, 30]. On the other hand,
26844

Oncotarget

Figure 2: AY27 cancer cells treated with ICD inducers exhibit disruption in the ability to surface expose CRT and
undergo inefficient engulfment by phagocytic cells. CT26 cells or AY27 cells were treated or not (i.e. untreated controls/CNTR)

with Hyp-PDT (150 nM Hyp incubated for 16 h followed by irradiation with light fluence of 2.70 J/cm2) or MTX (1 μM). This was followed
by – A. analysis of extracellular ATP at indicated time points such that the data is presented as relative light units (RLU) values (n = 3;
mean ± s.e.m.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 as indicated by bars; Student’s t-test); B. analysis of extracellularly released HMGB1
in 24 h post-treatment conditioned media via immunoblotting (a graph indicating the mean densitometry intensity of HMGB1 is presented;
media-only values have been subtracted; n = 3; mean ± s.d.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, versus respective CNTR; Student’s t-test); C. and
analysis for surface exposed calreticulin in non-permeabilised cells, performed at indicated time-points, such that the data is presented as
mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 versus respective CNTR, ###p < 0.0001 as
indicated by bars and N.S = non-significant with respect to CNTR; One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s test for comparison with respective
CNTR and Bonferroni’s test for comparison between other conditions). D. In another case, the phagocytic engulfment of JADE+CT26 and
JADE+AY27 cancer cells (recovered 1 h post-treatment) by NIR780+J774 and NIR780+RMW phagocytic cells, respectively, was measured
after 4 h of co-incubation. Amount of cancer cells phagocytosed by phagocytes were scored by determining the percentage of double
positive events in FACS analysis (i.e. NIR780+/JADE+, representing phagocytosed cancer cells; data is expressed as fold change with
respect to/w.r.t. average of respective CNTR; n = 3; mean ± s.e.m.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 as indicated by the bars; Oneway ANOVA with Dunnett’s test for comparison with respective CNTR and Bonferroni’s test for comparison between other conditions).
E. CT26 or AY27 cells were treated or not (i.e. untreated controls/CNTR) with paclitaxel (1 μM), radiotherapy (75 Gy) and topotecan
(2 μM) followed by analysis for surface exposed calreticulin in non-permeabilised cells, performed at 12 h post-treatment time-point. Data
is presented as mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) (n = 3; mean ± s.e.m.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 and N.S = non-significant as
indicated by bars; One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26845

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Reconstituting exogenous CRT in AY27 cancer cells, treated with ICD inducers, improves their ability to
undergo phagocytosis in vitro and exhibit ‘anticancer vaccination effect’. A correlation analysis was carried out between the

amount of surface exposed CRT as evident in Fig. 2C and either in vitro phagocytosis of cancer cells by innate immune cells as evident in
Fig. 2D A. or in vivo anticancer vaccination effect as evident in Fig. 1C B. (*p < 0.05 or **p < 0.01; correlation coefficient and p values
are mentioned on the graph; Student’s t-test). C–E. Rat bladder carcinoma AY27 cells were treated or not (i.e. untreated controls/CNTR)
with Hyp-PDT (150 nM Hyp incubated for 16 h followed by irradiation with light fluence of 2.70 J/cm2) or MTX (1 μM). C. Phagocytic
engulfment of JADE+AY27 cancer cells (recovered 1 h post-treatment and first incubated, or not, with recombinant CRT (rCRT)) by
NIR780+RMW phagocytic cells was measured after 4 h of co-incubation. Amount of cancer cells phagocytosed by phagocytes were
scored by determining the percentage of double positive events in FACS analysis (i.e. NIR780+/JADE+, representing phagocytosed cancer
cells; data is expressed as fold change with respect to/w.r.t. average of CNTR; n = 3; mean ± s.d.; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001
as indicated by the bars; One-way ANOVA with Newman-Keuls test). In another case (D-E), AY27 cells treated in vitro with Hyp-PDT
or MTX (as described above), were recovered 24 h post-treatment. These cells were incubated (or not) with rCRT for 30 min, washed
and injected subcutaneously into Fischer 344 rats (PBS, n = 5 rats and PBS+rCRT, n = 5 rats; Hyp-PDT n = 6 rats and Hyp-PDT+rCRT,
n = 6 rats; MTX, n = 6 rats and MTX+rCRT, n = 6 rats), respectively. Eight to ten days post-vaccination, the rats were rechallenged in
contra-lateral flank with live AY27 cells D. Rats injected with PBS or PBS plus rCRT were utilized as placebo-controls (5 rats each). This
was followed by monitoring of tumour incidence at the rechallenge site E. Statistical analysis was performed using the Gehan-BreslowWilcoxon Test; statistical significance is indicated by the bars (*p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26846

Oncotarget

Hyp-PDT–induced ecto-CRT, requires lethal ER stress
but is not reliant on caspase activation [4, 6, 8, 31]. Thus,
it was imperative to characterize whether these broad
signalling events were intact in AY27 cells.
Analysis of the apoptotic module showed that
both MTX and Hyp-PDT induced increase in the
amount of cleaved caspase-3 and downstream cleavage
of PARP (molecular markers of intrinsic apoptosis)
with similar efficiency in both cancer cell-types (Suppl.
Fig. S2A). Analysis of ER stress module showed that
relative to CT26 cells, ER stress responses (marked by
eIF2α phosphorylation, Suppl. Fig. S2B; BiP/GRP78
up-regulation and CHOP activation, Suppl. Fig. S2C)
were not reduced in AY27 cancer cells but were even
accentuated to a certain extent (especially in case of eIF2α
phosphorylation, Suppl. Fig. S2B), thus indicating that
activation of the apoptotic module and ER stress was
intact in both cancer cell-types. Moreover, inhibition of
caspases signalling through the pan-caspase inhibitor,
zVAD-fmk [32], and attenuation of ER stress through a
well-characterized chemical chaperone, TUDCA [32],
improved cell survival after Hyp-PDT treatment, in both
cancer cell-types (Suppl. Fig. S3). In contrast, only pretreatment with zVAD-fmk, but not TUDCA, improved
cellular survival after MTX treatment for both cancer celltypes (Suppl. Fig. S3). Overall, these results clearly show
that the activation and signalling functions of ER stress,
which is mandatory for ecto-CRT emission, is intact in the
AY27 cells. Of note, these results are substantiated by our
recent observations of morphological ER stress signatures
in Hyp-PDT treated AY27 tumours, in vivo [33].
Interestingly, a recent study reported that cells with
low endogenous levels of CRT show inability in exposing
ecto-CRT [34]. Interestingly, immunoblotting analysis
revealed that AY27 cells indeed exhibit approximately
50%–60% less endogenous CRT expression compared
to the ICD-susceptible CT26 cells (Fig. 4A). In line
with this, correlation analysis across different cell lines
(AY27/CT26) and treatments (CNTR/MTX/Hyp-PDT),
showed that a strong, positive linear correlation (r = 0.84)
existed between the endogenous CRT levels and the ability
to expose ecto-CRT (Fig. 4B) [34]. Similar correlation
was not found for endogenous actin levels and ecto-CRT
(r = −0.52), a ‘negative control’ analysis (Fig. 4C).
To further confirm the validity of the above
conclusions, we decided to stably knock-down the overall
CRT levels in CT26 cancer cells (via shRNA), to levels
approximately similar to AY27 cells. Reducing overall CRT
levels in CT26 cells by 50%–60% (Fig. 4D) significantly
compromised the ability of these cells to present ecto-CRT
after MTX or Hyp-PDT treatment (Fig. 4E). Moreover, in
line with the above analysis, correlation analysis across
different CT26 clones (CO-shRNA/CRT-shRNA) and
treatments (CNTR/MTX/Hyp-PDT), showed that a strong,
positive linear correlation (r = 0.88) existed between the
endogenous CRT levels and the ability to expose ecto-CRT
(Fig. 4F) but not between endogenous actin levels and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ecto-CRT (r = 0.19) (Fig. 4G). Of note, several previous
studies have shown that knocking down CRT in CT26 cells
compromises their ability to activate AVE [14, 30, 35, 36],
an observation that we also confirmed in our CT26 CRTshRNA set-up (data not shown).
Taken together these results show that endogenous
CRT levels positively correlate with the ability of a cell
to expose ecto-CRT. Moreover, AY27 cells possess a “low
endogenous CRT expression” phenotype, which is probably
a major factor behind their inability to present ecto-CRT.

A subset of patients, belonging to various
cancer-types, exhibit low tumoural
expression levels of calreticulin
Based on our above preclinical findings, indicating
that low endogenous levels of CRT could be a crucial
cell autonomous factor compromising AVE potential;
we set out to determine whether, a subset of patients
of various cancer types could show reduced or low
tumoural expression levels of CRT/CALR. Firstly,
we carried out a data-mining exercise of publicly
available DNA sequencing or microarray datasets in
the Oncomine database [37]. We compared CALR
levels between tumour tissue and corresponding normal
tissue (of the same tissue-type), in order to obtain
Oncomine profiles/analyses with significant CALR
over/under-expression ratios for each combination,
which are shown in respective boxes [38]. Of note, each
analysis represents a logical grouping of samples based
on standardized sample facts [38]. Through this analysis
we found that a subset of patients of various cancer types
have a tendency to show either CALR gene copy-number
deletions (8 out of 94 total analyses; especially in kidney
cancer and lung cancer) or, more importantly, CALR
mRNA under-expression (44 out of 360 total analyses;
especially in bladder cancer, colorectal cancer, head and
neck cancer, leukaemia, liver cancer, lymphoma, ovarian
cancer and sarcoma) in tumoural tissues relative to
corresponding normal tissues (Fig. 5A).
Next, we decided to confirm whether this phenotype
i.e. tumoural CALRlow is also “phenocopied” at the protein
level (i.e. tumoural CRTlow). A data-mining exercise of
publicly available mass spectrometry-based proteomics
datasets carried out in the dbDEPC database [39] found
that certain cohorts of patients for various cancer-types
have a tendency to show down-regulation of CRT protein
expression i.e. tumoural CRTlow (between 0.20–0.60
fold less expression than corresponding normal tissue in
case of thyroid cancer, hepatocellular cancer and breast
cancer) (Fig. 5B). Of note, the coverage of dbDEPC in
terms of number of cancer-types is much more limited
than Oncomine owing to user-driven, curated submission
model. In order to increase this coverage, we decided to
analyse the publicly available tissue-microarray based
immunohistochemistry datasets in the Human Protein
Atlas database [40]. We found that there was indeed
26847

Oncotarget

Figure 4: AY27 cancer cells exhibit low endogenous levels of CRT which are associated with a proportionally low
surface exposure of CRT in response to ICD inducers. CT26 cells or AY27 cells were treated or not (i.e. untreated controls/

CNTR) with Hyp-PDT (150 nM Hyp incubated for 16 h followed by irradiation with light fluence of 2.70 J/cm2) or MTX (1 μM). This was
followed by immunoblotting analysis for CRT, 1 h post-treatment A. The calculations based on band densitometry analysis are mentioned
as applicable i.e. ratio of endogenous levels of CRT to Actin and the fold-change in this ratio relative to CNTR. Moreover, the bands for
CRT and Actin in A for all the conditions were quantified for their integrated density followed by correlation analysis between the amount
of surface exposed calreticulin (as evident in Fig. 2C) and endogenous total CRT levels B. or endogenous total Actin levels C. (*p < 0.05;
correlation coefficient and p value are mentioned on the graph; Student’s t-test). Next, we stably transfected CT26 cancer cells with controlshRNA (CO-shRNA) or shRNA targeting CRT (CRT-shRNA) and the respective clones thus obtained were treated (or not) as described
above. This was followed by immunoblotting analysis for CRT, 1 h post-treatment D. The calculations based on band densitometry analysis
are mentioned as applicable i.e. fold-change in the ratio of endogenous levels of CRT to Actin, relative to CNTR. Analysis for surface
exposed calreticulin in non-permeabilized (treated or untreated) CT26 CO-shRNA or CRT-shRNA cells, was performed at 1 h post-treatment
time-point, such that the data is presented as mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) (n = 3; mean ± s.d.; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001 or N.S = nonsignificant as indicated by bars; One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s test for comparison with respective CNTR and Bonferroni’s test for
comparison between other conditions). Bands for CRT and Actin in (D) for all the conditions were quantified for their integrated density
followed by correlation analysis between the amount of surface exposed calreticulin E. and endogenous CRT levels F. or endogenous Actin
levels G. (*p < 0.05; correlation coefficient and p value are mentioned on the graph; Student’s t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26848

Oncotarget

Figure 5: A subset of patients, of various cancer types, show low or reduced overall endogenous levels of CRT/CALR. A.

Differential CALR gene copy numbers or CALR mRNA levels between tissues derived from various cancer types and corresponding normal
tissues were analysed using the Oncomine database (p-value threshold was set at less than 0.01; all fold changes were deemed valid). Overexpression or under-expression in the top 1, 5 and 10% are color-coded according to the legend. B. Ratio of differential CRT protein levels
between tissues derived from various cancer types and corresponding normal tissues were analysed using the dbDEPC 2.0 proteomics
database. C. Overall CRT protein levels determined in human tumour tissues via tissue microarray analysis-based immunohistochemistry
were retrieved using the Human Protein Atlas database. Here, the level or overall intensity of antibody-based staining has been used to
generate three annotated protein expression patterns i.e. high, medium, and low, and no detection levels (colour coded here, in the legend,
where the intensity of colour indicates the level of expression/staining).

Tumoural CALR levels predict the clinical
efficacy of immunogenic cell death-inducing
anticancer therapies in lung or ovarian
cancer patients

a tendency for a certain subset of patients, for various
different cancer-types, to show a tumoural CRTlow
phenotype (especially, skin cancer, renal cancer, glioma
and breast cancer) (Fig. 5C).
Taken together, our analysis of publicly available
DNA sequencing, microarray, proteomics and tissuemicroarray datasets, showed that at least a subset of
patients of various different cancer-types show low
tumoural expression of CALR/CRT.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

On the basis of above results, we set out to determine
whether CALR expression could predict the tendency of a
subset of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (hereafter
refer to as lung cancer) or ovarian cancer to respond to
26849

Oncotarget

Tumoural CALR levels positively correlate with
levels of phagocytosis-related genes specifically
in cancer patients treated with immunogenic cell
death-inducing anticancer therapy

ICD-inducers but not non-ICD inducers. Of note, reliable
publicly available datasets for such analysis were not
available for Hyp-PDT and MTX treatment however such
datasets were available for radiotherapy (for lung cancer),
paclitaxel and topotecan (for ovarian cancer); and hence
analysis proceeded with respective patients left untreated or
treated with these latter ICD inducers and non-ICD inducer.
In a setting of untreated lung cancer patients, the differential
tumoural CALR expression levels (Suppl. Fig. S4A) were
not significantly relevant in defining the overall survival
(OS) of patients. However, untreated patients with CALRlow
tumours tended to show better OS (HR = 1.41, 95%
CI 0.87–2.27) albeit this trend was not significant (Fig. 6A).
On the other hand, lung cancer patients treated with the
ICD inducer radiotherapy and having CALRhigh tumours
(Suppl. Fig. S4B), tended to have significantly better OS
than radiotherapy-treated patients with CALRlow tumours
(HR  =  0.28, 95% CI  0.1–0.81) (Fig. 6B). Moreover, in
ovarian cancer patients treated with the non-ICD inducer
topotecan the differential tumoural CALR expression levels
(Suppl. Fig.  S4C, S4E) were not significant in defining
either the OS (Fig. 6C) or progression-free survival (PFS)
(Fig. 6E) of these patients. In stark contrast, ovarian
cancer patients treated with the ICD inducer paclitaxel and
having CALRhigh tumours (Suppl. Fig. S4D, S4F), exhibited
significantly better OS (Fig. 6D) as well as significantly
better PFS (Fig. 6F) than paclitaxel treated patients with
CALRlow tumours (for OS: HR = 0.54, 95% CI 0.33–0.87;
for PFS: HR = 0.57, 95% CI 0.39–0.83).
Next we evaluated the predictive value of CALR
expression when the patients are categorized into different
cohorts according to the different tumour stages. Since
there were not enough radiotherapy-treated lung cancer
patients available to allow for such categorization in an
objective manner, we confined this analysis to ovarian
cancer. Interestingly, all the patient cohorts based on
different stages of ovarian cancer showed similar trend
i.e. Stage 2/3 (Fig. 7A), Stage 3 (Fig. 7C) and Stage
3/4 (Fig. 7E) ovarian cancer patients treated with the
ICD inducer paclitaxel and having CALRhigh tumours,
exhibited significantly better PFS than paclitaxel-treated
patients with CALRlow tumours (Fig. 7A, 7C, 7E). Very
interestingly, this positive association between CALRhigh
tumours and paclitaxel treatment, became stronger
and more statistically significant as the ovarian cancer
stages advanced further (for Stage 2/3: HR = 0.67, 95%
CI 0.46–1.00, p-value = 0.047; for Stage 3: HR = 0.62,
95% CI 0.42–0.92, p-value = 0.018; and for Stage 3/4:
HR  =  0.51, 95% CI 0.35–0.75, p-value = 0.00057)
(Fig. 7A, 7C, 7E). On the other hand, the stage of ovarian
cancer under consideration did not change the inability of
tumoural CALR expression levels in predicting the patient
responses to topotecan (Fig. 7B, 7D, 7F).
Together, the above results suggest that high tumoural
CALR expression predisposes patients with lung and
ovarian cancer to improved clinical responses following
radiotherapy or paclitaxel-based anticancer therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Taken together, our experimental data suggested
that low endogenous CRT levels leads to reduced ectoCRT, which in turn impairs phagocytic removal and
AVE inducing potential, in ICD settings. In clinical
terms, we then wondered whether tumoural CALR
levels in cancer patients treated with ICD inducers (e.g.
radiotherapy-treated lung or paclitaxel-treated ovarian,
cancer patients) or not (untreated lung or topotecantreated ovarian, cancer patients) had a direct association
with levels of phagocytosis-related genes. Phagocytosisrelated genes utilized for this co-expression analysis
included those involved in phagosome maturation (PLD1
[41], RAB5A [42], RAB7A [43], VAMP7 [44], WAS [45])
and phagosome processing (CRK [46], PLA2G4A [46],
PLA2G5 [47], STAB2 [46], TNFSF11 [48]) in order to
get as close as possible to active phagocytosis process
rather than mere presence of phagocytes in the tumour
(Fig. 8). Interestingly, this correlation analysis showed
that mainly in the ICD clinical settings tumoural CALR
levels positively correlated with the tumoural levels of
phagocytosis-associated genes (especially PLA2G5, PLD1,
RAB5A, VAMP7, STAB2) (Fig. 8). On the other hand, in
non-ICD settings, the tumoural CALR levels either didn’t
or even negatively correlated with the tumoural levels of
phagocytosis-associated genes (Fig. 8). Moreover, within
the ICD clinical setting, this positive correlation between
CALR and phagocytosis-associated genes was higher
for radiotherapy-treated lung cancer patients than for
paclitaxel-treated ovarian cancer patients (Fig. 8).
In conclusion, tumoural CALR levels tend to
positively correlate with levels of tumoural phagocytosisassociated genes, only in the ICD clinical settings.

DISCUSSION
In the current study we characterized, for the first
time, a naturally-occurring cancer cell-model that exhibits
intrinsic resistance towards anticancer vaccination
(Fig. 9). We went onto characterize that the reason behind
this is a defect in ecto-CRT-based immunogenicity,
which makes these cells resistant to ICD-induced
AVE (Fig.  9). Primary (if not the only) reason behind
this disparity in AY27 cells seemed to be the relatively
reduced endogenous protein levels of CRT (Fig. 9).
Moreover, these interesting preclinical findings and the
existence of tumours displaying lower CRT expression
were also supported by the observation that a subset of
patients of various cancer-types presented CALRlow or
CRTlow tumours (Fig. 9). Even more importantly, we
went onto demonstrate that CALR expression levels
were pivotally predictive of patient clinical responses
to ICD-inducing anticancer therapies – an observation
26850

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Cancer patients exhibiting low tumoural CALR levels show poor clinical prognosis in response to paclitaxel
and radiotherapy. A, B. Lung cancer patients not treated with any therapy (i.e. untreated, n = 227) (A) or treated with radiotherapy
only (n = 23) (B) were stratified into high (red lines) or low (black lines) expression-based “risk-groups” by considering the median of the
overall transcript-expressions of CALR (untreated – low n = 63, high n = 164; radiotherapy – low n = 15, high n = 8). This was followed by
Kaplan-Meier plotting of the patient’s overall survival (OS) (Y-axis). C–D. Ovarian cancer patients treated with topotecan only (n = 119)
(C) or treated with paclitaxel only (n = 220) (D) were stratified into high (red lines) or low (black lines) expression-based “risk-groups” by
considering the median of the overall transcript-expressions of CALR (topotecan – low n = 67, high n = 52; paclitaxel – low n = 69, high
n = 151). This was followed by Kaplan-Meier plotting of the patient’s OS (Y-axis). E–F. Ovarian cancer patients treated with topotecan only
(a = 118) (E) or treated with paclitaxel only (n = 229) (F) were stratified into high (red lines) or low (black lines) expression-based “riskgroups” by considering the median of the overall transcript-expressions of CALR (topotecan – low n = 75, high n = 43; paclitaxel – low
n = 57, high n = 172). This was followed by Kaplan-Meier plotting of the patient’s progression-free survival (PFS) (Y-axis). In all the above
graphs, respective log-rank test p-values and hazard ratios (HR; with its 95% confidence interval in parenthesis) are displayed. Statistical
significance (i.e. p < 0.05 or p < 0.001) is indicated through an asterisk (* or **).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26851

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Paclitaxel treated cancer patients with tumoural CALRlow phenotype, show cancer stage-independent poor
clinical prognosis. A, B. Stage 2/3 ovarian cancer patients treated with paclitaxel (n = 188) (A) or topotecan (n = 103) (B) were stratified

into high (red lines) or low (black lines) expression-based “risk-groups” by considering the median of the overall transcript-expressions
of CALR (paclitaxel – low n = 64, high n = 124; topotecan – low n = 25, high n = 78). This was followed by Kaplan-Meier plotting of the
patient’s progression-free survival (PFS) (Y-axis). C–D. Stage 3 ovarian cancer patients treated with paclitaxel (n = 177) (C) or topotecan
(n = 100) (D) were stratified into high (red lines) or low (black lines) expression-based “risk-groups” by considering the median of the
overall transcript-expressions of CALR (paclitaxel – low n = 62, high n = 115; topotecan – low n = 66, high n = 34). This was followed by
Kaplan-Meier plotting of the patient’s PFS (Y-axis). E–F. Stage 3/4 ovarian cancer patients treated with paclitaxel (n = 217) (E) or treated
with topotecan (n = 113) (F) were stratified into high (red lines) or low (black lines) expression-based “risk-groups” by considering the
median of the overall transcript-expressions of CALR (paclitaxel – low n = 54, high n = 163; topotecan – low n = 73, high n = 40). This
was followed by Kaplan-Meier plotting of the patient’s PFS (Y-axis). In all the above graphs, respective log-rank test p-values and hazard
ratios (HR; with its 95% confidence interval in parenthesis) are displayed. Statistical significance (i.e. p < 0.05 or p < 0.0001) is indicated
through an asterisk (* or ***).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26852

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Overall tumoural CALR levels positively correlate with expression levels of phagocytosis-related genes
only in cancer patients treated with ICD-inducing therapies. Generation of gene co-expression profiles was accomplished by

correlating the expression profiles of phagocytosis-related genes (CRK, PLA2G4A, PLA2G5, PLD1, RAB5A, VAMP7, STAB2, TNFSF11,
WAS, RAB7A) with CALR expression levels for the respective scenarios indicated in the Fig. and Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) was
used for indicating tendency to co-express. Thereafter the correlation profiles were clustered and represented through a heat map. The
colour code is represented as legend.

with possibly vital clinical implications (Fig. 9). In fact
we also observed that, only in the ICD clinical setting,
tumoural CALR levels positively correlated with the levels
of phagocytosis-associated genes relevant for phagosome
maturation/processing. This is a novel observation,
which at least partially substantiates the pre-clinically
well-established role of CRT (i.e. ecto-CRT) in mediating
cancer cell phagocytosis, in clinical samples. Although, a
more targeted analysis of phagocytosis in clinical tumour
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tissue samples via immunohistochemistry is required to
further validate these results comprehensively.
AVE-resistance mechanisms represent major
stumbling blocks for anticancer immunotherapy [4, 49].
Thus, in our opinion, approaches striving to characterize
intrinsic ICD/AVE ‘resistant phenotypes’ are important for
future research [1]. For instance, a similar approach taken
on the host immune system-level, led to the discovery
that naturally-occurring Tlr4 mutation in C3H/HeJ mice
26853

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Overall endogenous CRT levels within cancer/tumoural cells dictate the in vivo anti-cancer vaccination effect
and clinical efficacy of ICD-inducing anticancer therapies. Cancer cells possessing normal or high CRT levels (e.g. CT26), when

treated with ICD inducing therapies, undergo efficient phagocytosis by phagocytes and activate potent anti-cancer vaccination effect
(AVE). On the other hand, cancer cells possessing low CRT levels (e.g. AY27), when treated with ICD inducing therapies, undergo
inefficient phagocytosis by phagocytes and are incapable of activating AVE. However, exogenous “reconstitution” of ecto-CRT through
addition of recombinant-CRT (rCRT) increases the efficiency of phagocytic clearance and increases AVE-activating capacity of the latter
cancer cells. In a similar manner, lung or ovarian cancer patients treated with ICD inducers (like radiotherapy or paclitaxel) and having
CALRhigh tumours, tend to exhibit good clinical prognosis. On the contrary, lung or ovarian cancer patients treated with ICD inducers and
having CALRlow tumours, tend to exhibit poor clinical prognosis. ATP – adenosine triphosphate, CALR – calreticulin mRNA/transcript,
CRT – calreticulin protein, HMGB1 – high mobility group box 1, OS – overall survival, PFS – progression-free survival.

caused failure of ICD/AVE – an observation that paved
way for eventual characterization of a subset of breast
cancer patients possessing TLR4 SNP polymorphism
(+896A/G → Asp299Gly) that associated with poor
prognosis under treatment with ICD inducers [50, 51].
This, taken together with the complex and multifactorial
nature of anticancer vaccination responses [1, 2], reveals
that several as-yet-uncharacterized experimental models
with intrinsic resistance to ICD/AVE might exist [52].
Our study advocates the systematic identification of such
models since these can help explain the failure of certain
subset of patients in responding to ICD-inducers, as
demonstrated here.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Remarkably, except for ecto-CRT, AY27 cells
emitted all the other important DAMPs recently shown
to be crucial for AVE like secreted ATP and released
HMGB1 [7, 8] (Fig. 9). This shows the pivotal position
occupied by ecto-CRT at the interface between the cancer
cells and the host immune system [7, 8]. Moreover, these
observations prove that amongst this constellation of ICDassociated DAMPs, ecto-CRT is probably by far the most
important DAMP – a point suggested partially by other
studies from our [6, 12, 24] as well as other laboratories
[11, 14, 53, 54]. For instance, melphalan-treated B78
melanoma cells used as “vaccines” were found to exhibit
reduced AVE responses despite the ability of these cells to
26854

Oncotarget

secrete ATP and present ecto-HSP90 –a defect that could
only be corrected by exogenous addition of rCRT [32]. All
this advocates the integration of rCRT in future anticancer
vaccination paradigms.
The defective CRT protein expression-level in AY27
cells observed in this study, is also corroborated by another
study showing that in vivo, AY27 tumours display reduced
ability to modulate CALR expression [55]. Moreover, the
AY27 cells also exhibited a relatively heightened ER stress
response, a phenomenon that could be a consequence
of reduction in endogenous CRT protein levels [56].
The mechanism that “created” the CRTlow phenotype in
AY27 cells is not immediately clear. Notably, a recent
study documented an immune-surveillance mechanism
that tends to counter-select for cancer cells with reduced
capacity to expose ecto-CRT [29]. Moreover, certain posttranslational (e.g. sumoylation) or epigenetic mechanisms
(e.g. microRNA or long non-coding RNA) have also
been contextually characterized to increase or decrease
CRT expression-levels [34, 57, 58]. Whether such
mechanisms are applicable to AY27 cells is a matter of
speculation and needs further systematic investigation in
future. Of note, although addition of ecto-rCRT increased
the phagocytosis of AY27 cells and their AVE-inducing
capacity yet these increases were still relatively partial in
comparison to CT26 cell model. This could be because
other as-yet-unknown DAMPs or immunostimulators
might also be disrupted in AY27 cells – a hypothesis that
needs urgent verification in near future. This hypothesis
though receives some support from an independent study
showing that the in vivo markers of immunogenicity (e.g.
increased infiltration of CD3+ or CD45RA+ lymphocytes)
are reduced within AY27 tumours compared to the peritumoural normal tissue [55].
In clinical terms, our observation of CALR expression
levels being predictive of clinical responses to ICD inducers
like radiotherapy/paclitaxel (Fig. 9) but not to untreated or
non-ICD inducer treated patients is fascinating – owing to
the recent contradictory evidences surrounding the validity
of CALR levels as predictive or prognostic biomarker. It has
been observed that based on the study under consideration,
high CALR/CRT expression level could have either positive
[59, 60] or negative [53, 61] prognostic impact, or, either
robust [62] or non-discernible [63] predictive effect. We
shed further light on this subject by showing that tumoural
CALR expression is in fact a context-dependent predictive
biomarker of anticancer therapy response in cancer patients.
Such that, while tumoural CALRhigh is predictive of positive
therapy responses in patients treated with ICD inducers,
yet differential CALR expression is not predictive of
responses in untreated or non-ICD inducer treated patients.
Importantly, a combination of tumoural CALRhigh phenotype
and application of ICD inducing therapies is what dictates
better patient survival. Moreover, we also provide the
first glimpses that tumoural CALR levels might regulate
phagocytosis in tumours, only in ICD but not non-ICD
clinical settings. These findings may have important clinical
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

implications that need to be further elaborated. It would
be also important to examine whether tumoural CALR
expression levels could be exploited for clinical stratification
or decision-making strategies regarding the type of
anticancer therapy to be applied for patient treatment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials and reagents
Hypericin was prepared/purified/stored as described
in the past [64]. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) was
purchased from Merck-Millipore (Darmstadt, Germany)
while Z-Val-Ala-Asp(OMe)-fmk (zVAD-fmk) was
purchased from Bachem (Weil am Rhein, Germany).
Mitoxantrone (MTX) and Anti-actin antibody was
purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Topotecan
and paclitaxel were kind gifts from Prof. Johan Swinnen/
Niamat Ali Khan (KULeuven, Belgium). Antibodies
against CHOP/P-eIF2α/Total eIF2α/cleaved caspase 3/
PARP/HSP90/Bip/GRP78 were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Anticalreticulin antibody (for immunoblotting) was purchased
from Stressgen (Victoria, BC, Canada). Antibody against
HMGB1 was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, UK).
Anti-HSP70 antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz
Antibodies (San Francisco, USA). Secondary antibodies
conjugated to horseradish peroxidase were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA)/
Abcam (Cambridge, UK). Also, the following secondary
antibodies were used: goat anti-mouse-DyLight680/goat
anti-rabbit-DyLight800 (Thermo Scientific, Belgium).

Cell lines and induction of immunogenic
cell death
CT26, AY27, J774 and RMW cells were cultured at
37°C under 5% CO2 in DMEM containing 4.5 g/L glucose
and 0.11 g/L sodium pyruvate and supplemented with 2 mM
glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/L streptomycin
and 10% fetal bovine serum. For induction of immunogenic
cell death, the cells were cultured in the presence of
mitoxantrone, radiotherapy or paclitaxel (concentrations
and incubation timings are mentioned in respective
figure legends). For Hyp-PDT the cells were incubated with
150 nM Hypericin (for 16 h) followed by light irradiation
(2.70 J/cm2) performed as described previously [65].

Generation of CALR-shRNA stable clones of
CT26 cells
All the TRC1 shRNA clones were in lentiviral
pLKO.1-puro vector (Sigma-Aldrich) and were
obtained from the BCCM/LMBP Plasmid collection,
Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent
University,
Belgium
(http://bccm.belspo.be/about/
lmbp.php). An empty pLKO.1-puro control vector
26855

Oncotarget

was used as a control (CO-shRNA) (BCCM/LMBP
Plasmid collection). Three shRNAs targeted against
murine CALR mRNA were used i.e. CALR shRNA-1:
CCGGGAGTGTAAGAACTACAAACAACTCG
AGTTGTTTGTAGTTCTTACACTCTTTTT
(Clone
ID NM_007591.2–1823s1c1), CALR shRNA-2:
CCGGGCTGGGTCGAATCCAAACATACTCGAGTA
TGTTTGGATTCGACCCAGCTTTTT
(Clone
ID
NM_007591.2–176s1c1)
and
CALR
shRNA-3:
CCGGGCAAATATCTATGCCTATGATCTCGAG
ATCATAGGCATAGATATTTGCTTTTT (Clone ID
NM_007591.2–976s1c1). Briefly, to generate lentivirus
particles, HEK 293T cells were seeded in 25 cm2 flasks at
1.3 × 106 cells per 4 ml and transfected the following day by
the calcium phosphate method with 4 μg of pLKO.1-puro
carrying the respective shRNAs or with empty pLKO.1puro. Each transfection also included 1.2 μg of a plasmid
encoding VSV-G (pMD2-VSV-G, Tronolab) and 2.6 μg
of a plasmid encoding packaging proteins (pCMVdR8.9,
Tronolab). For more detailed protocol please refer to
Garg et al. EMBO J (2012) [6]. Knockdown of CRT was
confirmed by immunoblotting and for further analysis only
that clone was selected which showed a 50–60% knockdown of CRT (i.e. clone expressing shRNA-3).

phagocytes and RMW phagocytes were detached with
TrypLE™ Express (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). J774/RMW phagocytes were labelled with
CellVue® NIR780 and CT26/AY27 cells with CellVue®
Jade (eBioscience, Vienna, Austria). Respective cancer
cells and phagocytes (CT26:J774 and AY27:RMW)
were then incubated at a 1:5 ratio for 4 h. Cells were
then harvested using TrypLE™ Express and analysed
on flow cytometer (Attune, Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA, USA). The percentage of cancer cells that were
phagocytosed was calculated by dividing the number of
double-positive cell number by the number of the JADE
positive cells. In some cases as applicable, the treated
cancer cells were pre-coated with rCRT by incubating the
cells with 3 μg/106 cells rCRT (Abcam) for 30 min and
washed thereafter, before co-incubation with phagocytes.

Immunoblotting
Cell lysate preparation for immunoblotting, protein
concentration analysis and the respective immunoblotting
analysis was carried out as described previously [6, 32].
The detection of signal was done using the Odyssey
infrared-imaging system (Li-Cor Biosciences, Lincoln,
NE, USA) or ChemidocTM MP system (Bio-Rad, Nazareth
Eke, Belgium), as applicable. Densitometric analyses were
generated using Image J.

Anticancer vaccination experiments
All mice or rats were maintained in pathogen-free
conditions and the experiments were performed according
to the guidelines of the local Ethics Committee of the KU
Leuven or the UGent. CT26/AY27 cells were incubated
with either MTX or exposed to Hyp-PDT. After a 24 h
recovery, 3 × 106 of these cells were injected subcutaneously
(s.c.) in 200 μl of PBS into the left flank of 7–8 weeks-old
female BALB/c mice (in case of CT26 cells) from Janvier
(Bio Services BV, The Netherlands) or 150–175 g female
Fischer 344 rats (in case of AY27 cells) from Charles
River Laboratories (Lyon, France). Control mice/rats
were injected with 200 μl PBS only. Mice/rats were then
challenged with 5 × 105 live untreated CT26/AY27 cells
in the other (right) flank 7-days after immunization. The
‘communication’ of the tumour antigenic-memory to the
adaptive immune system was studied by scoring tumours’
incidence at the challenge site (i.e. in the right flank). For
this, the mice/rats were monitored every 5–6 days (postchallenge) for the presence of tumours and the experiment
was stopped shortly before the tumours in control mice/rats
could reach either 10% of the total mice weight or a volume
of 2 cm3 (about 20–50 days). In some cases as applicable,
the treated cancer cells were pre-coated with rCRT (Abcam)
by incubating the cells with 3 μg/106 cells rCRT for 30 min
and washed thereafter, before injection.

Cell viability and apoptosis/cell death analysis
Cells were seeded at 5000 cells per well of a 96-well
plate. After treatment, cells were analysed via MTS
assay (Promega), as per the manufacturer’s instructions.
Annexin-V-APC and SytoxGreen (SyGr) staining for
apoptosis/cell death analysis and its FACS-based analysis
was done as described previously [32].

Measurement of damage-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs)
After treatment, cells were collected with TrypLE
Express (Life Technologies, Belgium), washed with
PBS and with FACS (Flow Cytometry) buffer (2% FBS,
1% BSA in PBS), incubated for 1 hr at 4°C with antiCRT antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), washed and
incubated for 1 hr at 4°C with goat anti-rabbit-Alexa
Fluor®647 (Invitrogen, Belgium). After final washes
cells were incubated in FACS buffer including 1 μM
Sytox Green (Life Technologies, S7020) for 15 min and
analysed on Attune Flow Cytometer (Life Technologies).
The permeabilised cells were excluded from the analysis,
and the mean fluorescence intensity (MFIs) for ectoCRT was analysed. On the other hand, in another case,
after treatment, extracellular ATP was measured in the
conditioned media using an ATP Bioluminescent assay
kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) based on luciferinluciferase conversion, as described previously [6, 12, 24].

In vitro phagocytosis assay
Cancer cells were treated as described above
and recovered after 1 h. CT26 cells, AY27 cells, J774
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26856

Oncotarget

Bioluminescence was assessed by optical top reading
via FlexStation 3 microplate reader (Molecular Devices
Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Last but not least, for
analysis of post-death released DAMPs, the ‘conditioned’
culture media (5–8 ml), were collected and concentrated
to 200–500 μl via centrifugation (3500 × g for 25–45 min)
using Pierce Concentrator 7ml/9K filters (Pierce),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. They were
then analysed by immunoblotting as described below.

Correlation (uncentered) as the similarity metric and a
centroid linkage clustering criteria.

Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using either
Prism software (GraphPad Software, USA) or GraphPad
QuickCalcs online software (http://www.graphpad.com/
quickcalcs/index.cfm). Student’s t-test, Fischer’s test
and One-way ANOVA were used for statistical analysis,
as applicable and unless otherwise mentioned, with
significance level set at p < 0.05.

Clinical dataset and patient survival analysis
For characterization of differential CALR expression
in patients, analysis was done for - DNA copy-number
aberrations/mRNA expressions using the Oncomine
database (http://www.oncomine.org) [37], proteomicsbased protein expression analysis using the dbDEPC
2.0 database (http://lifecenter.sgst.cn/dbdepc/index.do)
[39] and tissue microarray-based immunohistochemical
protein-expression using the Human Protein Atlas (http://
www.proteinatlas.org) [40].
For predictive biomarker analysis, the respective
microarray gene expression data and clinical survival
information from TCGA, EGA or GEO databases were
analysed through the KMPlotter platform [66] for lung
and ovarian cancer patients. The respective patients were
stratified into two risk-groups i.e. patient group showing
high CALR expression and patient group showing low
CALR expression by considering the median expression
over the entire dataset. Biased arrays were excluded. The
effect of differential gene expression was estimated on the
overall survival (OS) or progression-free survival (PFS)
of the patients (as applicable) by plotting Kaplan-Meier
curves. Hazard ratio (and its 95% confidence intervals)
and logrank P values were calculated (P values less than
0.05 were considered to be statistically significant). Of
note, the respective results were selected only if two out of
three CALR microarray probes supported the same patient
survival patterns and representative probes or patterns out
of the final two, were selected on the basis of statistical
significance (logrank p < 0.05). Patients surviving over the
follow-up threshold were censored.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the contribution
of Lien Vandenberk for her help with radiotherapy
treatments. We would also like to thank Dr. Michael
Rory Daws (University of Oslo, Norway) for the RMW
phagocytes and Dr. Jakub Golab (Medical University of
Warsaw) for the J774 phagocytes.

Authors’ contributions
ADG performed most of the experiments,
experimental-designing, data-analysis, data-interpretation,
patient retrospective meta-analysis/bioinformatics analysis,
fig. production and writing of the manuscript. SE helped
in performing the rat experiments and PDW supervised
these studies and helped with data-interpretation analysis
and evaluation of the manuscript. DVK and PV helped
in performing the mice experiments and production of
calreticulin-shRNA transduced clones. PA supervised the
study, experimental designing, data-interpretation and
carried out critical evaluation/revision of the manuscript.

FUNDING
A.D.G. is supported by the FWO post-doctoral
fellowship from the Research Foundation Flanders (FWOVlaanderen). This work is supported by FWO (G0584.12N
and K202313N) and GOA/11/2009 grant of the KU
Leuven to P.A. This paper represents research results of
the IAP7/32 Funded by the Interuniversity Attraction
Poles Programme, initiated by the Belgian State.

Analysis of correlation between CALR levels and
phagocytosis-related genes’ levels
For generating gene co-expression profiles for
CALR vs. phagocytosis-related genes in respective
tumoural samples, the expression profiles of individual
phagocytosis-related genes were correlated with CALR
as applicable and Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) was
used for indicating tendency to co-express. Thereafter, the
respective correlation coefficient values were “pooled”
and hierarchical clustering of these respective correlationbased gene co-expression profiles was implemented as
described elsewhere [67] through Cluster 3.0 [68] and
visualized as a heatmap through TreeView [69] with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest pertaining to this manuscript.

Abbreviations
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; AVE, anticancer
vaccination effect; CALR, calreticulin (mRNA/gene); CRT,
calreticulin (protein); DAMP, damage-associated molecular
patterns; Ecto, surface exposure; ER, endoplasmic
26857

Oncotarget

reticulum; HMGB1, high mobility group box-1;
HSP, heat shock protein; Hyp-PDT, Hypericin-based
photodynamic therapy; ICD, immunogenic cell death.

12.	 Garg AD, Dudek AM, Ferreira GB, Verfaillie T,
Vandenabeele P, Krysko DV, Mathieu C, Agostinis P.
ROS-induced autophagy in cancer cells assists in evasion
from determinants of immunogenic cell death. Autophagy.
2013; 9:1292–1307.

REFERENCES

13.	 Garg AD, Krysko DV, Vandenabeele P, Agostinis P.
Hypericin-based photodynamic therapy induces surface
exposure of damage-associated molecular patterns like
HSP70 and calreticulin. Cancer Immunol Immunother.
2012; 61:215–221.

1.	 Galluzzi L, Vacchelli E, Bravo-San Pedro JM, Buque A,
Senovilla L, Baracco EE, Bloy N, Castoldi F, Abastado JP,
Agostinis P, Apte RN, Aranda F, Ayyoub M, Beckhove P,
Blay JY, Bracci L, et al. Classification of current anticancer
immunotherapies. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:12472–12508.

14.	 Obeid M, Tesniere A, Ghiringhelli F, Fimia GM, Apetoh L,
Perfettini JL, Castedo M, Mignot G, Panaretakis  T,
Casares  N, Metivier D, Larochette N, van Endert P,
Ciccosanti F, Piacentini M, Zitvogel L, et al. Calreticulin
exposure dictates the immunogenicity of cancer cell death.
Nature medicine. 2007; 13:54–61.

2.	 Palucka K, Banchereau J. Dendritic-cell-based therapeutic
cancer vaccines. Immunity. 2013; 39:38–48.
3.	 Adkins I, Fucikova J, Garg AD, Agostinis P, Spisek R.
Physical modalities inducing immunogenic tumor cell
death for cancer immunotherapy. Oncoimmunology. 2014;
3:e968434.

15.	 Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Zitvogel L. Immunogenic
cell death in cancer therapy. Annual review of immunology.
2013; 31:51–72.

4.	 Krysko DV, Garg AD, Kaczmarek A, Krysko O,
Agostinis  P, Vandenabeele P. Immunogenic cell death
and DAMPs in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;
12:860–875.

16.	 Pusztai L, Asmar L, Smith TL, Hortobagyi GN. Relapse
after complete response to anthracycline-based combination
chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer. Breast cancer
research and treatment. 1999; 55:1–8.

5.	 Chiang CL, Benencia F, Coukos G. Whole tumor antigen
vaccines. Semin Immunol. 2010; 22:132–143.

17.	 Mac Manus MP, Rainer Bowie CA, Hoppe RT. What is the
prognosis for patients who relapse after primary radiation
therapy for early-stage low-grade follicular lymphoma? Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998; 42:365–371.

6.	 Garg AD, Krysko DV, Verfaillie T, Kaczmarek  A,
Ferreira  GB, Marysael T, Rubio N, Firczuk M,
Mathieu  C, Roebroek AJ, Annaert W, Golab J, de
Witte  P, Vandenabeele P, Agostinis P. A novel pathway ­combining calreticulin exposure and ATP secretion in immunogenic cancer cell death. EMBO J. 2012;
31:1062–1079.

18.	 Rook AH, Wood GS, Duvic M, Vonderheid EC, Tobia A,
Cabana B. A phase II placebo-controlled study of photodynamic therapy with topical hypericin and visible light irradiation in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and
psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010; 63:984–990.

7.	 Kepp O, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Vacchelli E, Adjemian S,
Agostinis P, Apetoh L, Aranda F, Barnaba V, Bloy N,
Bracci L, Breckpot K, Brough D, Buqué A, Castro MG,
Cirone M, et al. Consensus guidelines for the detection
of immunogenic cell death. Oncoimmunology. 2014;
3:e955691.

19.	 Iorns E, Lord CJ, Turner N, Ashworth A. Utilizing RNA
interference to enhance cancer drug discovery. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2007; 6:556–568.
20.	 Garg AD, Agostinis P. ER stress, autophagy and immunogenic cell death in photodynamic therapy-induced anticancer immune responses. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2014;
13:474–487.

8.	 Garg AD, Martin S, Golab J, Agostinis P. Danger signalling
during cancer cell death: origins, plasticity and regulation.
Cell Death Differ. 2014; 21:26–38.

21.	 Garg AD, Maes H, van Vliet AR, Agostinis P. Targeting
the hallmarks of cancer with therapy-induced endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Molecular & Cellular Oncology.
2015; 2:e975089.

9.	 Dudek AM, Garg AD, Krysko DV, De Ruysscher D,
Agostinis P. Inducers of immunogenic cancer cell death.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2013; 24:319–333.
10.	 Martin S, Dudek-Peric AM, Maes H, Garg AD,
Gabrysiak  M, Demirsoy S, Swinnen JV, Agostinis P.
Concurrent MEK and autophagy inhibition is required
to restore cell death associated danger-signalling in
Vemurafenib-resistant melanoma cells. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2015; 93:290–304.

22.	 Zupko I, Kamuhabwa AR, D’Hallewin MA, Baert L, De
Witte PA. In vivo photodynamic activity of hypericin in
transitional cell carcinoma bladder tumors. Int J Oncol.
2001; 18:1099–1105.
23.	 Kamuhabwa AA, Roskams T, D’Hallewin MA, Baert L,
Van Poppel H, de Witte PA. Whole bladder wall photodynamic therapy of transitional cell carcinoma rat bladder
tumors using intravesically administered hypericin. Int J
Cancer. 2003; 107:460–467.

11.	 Koks CA, Garg AD, Ehrhardt M, Riva M, Vandenberk L,
Boon L, De Vleeschouwer S, Agostinis P, Graf N, Van
Gool SW. Newcastle disease virotherapy induces long-term
survival and tumor-specific immune memory in orthotopic
glioma through the induction of immunogenic cell death. Int
J Cancer. 2015; 136:E313–325.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24.	 Garg AD, Dudek AM, Agostinis P. Calreticulin surface
exposure is abrogated in cells lacking, chaperone-mediated
26858

Oncotarget

autophagy-essential gene, LAMP2A. Cell Death Dis.
2013; 4:e826.

36.	 Tesniere A, Schlemmer F, Boige V, Kepp O, Martins  I,
Ghiringhelli F, Aymeric L, Michaud M, Apetoh L,
Barault  L, Mendiboure J, Pignon JP, Jooste V, van
Endert P, Ducreux M, Zitvogel L, et al. Immunogenic death
of colon cancer cells treated with oxaliplatin. Oncogene.
2010; 29:482–491.

25.	 Sanovic R, Verwanger T, Hartl A, Krammer B. Low
dose hypericin-PDT induces complete tumor regression in BALB/c mice bearing CT26 colon carcinoma.
Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2011; 8:291–296.

37.	 Rhodes DR, Yu J, Shanker K, Deshpande N, Varambally R,
Ghosh D, Barrette T, Pandey A, Chinnaiyan AM.
ONCOMINE: a cancer microarray database and integrated
data-mining platform. Neoplasia. 2004; 6:1–6.

26.	 Obeid M, Panaretakis T, Joza N, Tufi R, Tesniere A,
van Endert P, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. Calreticulin exposure is required for the immunogenicity of gamma-irradiation and UVC light-induced apoptosis. Cell Death Differ.
2007; 14:1848–1850.

38.	 Rhodes DR, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Mahavisno V,
Varambally R, Yu J, Briggs BB, Barrette TR, Anstet MJ,
Kincead-Beal C, Kulkarni P, Varambally S, Ghosh D,
Chinnaiyan AM. Oncomine 3.0: genes, pathways, and networks in a collection of 18, 000 cancer gene expression profiles. Neoplasia. 2007; 9:166–180.

27.	 Lam J, Herant M, Dembo M, Heinrich V. Baseline mechanical characterization of J774 macrophages. Biophys J. 2009;
96:248–254.
28.	 Lobato-Pascual A, Saether PC, Dahle MK, Gaustad P,
Dissen E, Fossum S, Daws MR. Rat macrophage C-type
lectin is an activating receptor expressed by phagocytic
cells. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e57406.

39.	 He Y, Zhang M, Ju Y, Yu Z, Lv D, Sun H, Yuan W, He F,
Zhang J, Li H, Li J, Wang-Sattler R, Li Y, Zhang G, Xie L.
dbDEPC 2.0: updated database of differentially expressed
proteins in human cancers. Nucleic acids research. 2012;
40:D964–971.

29.	 Senovilla L, Vitale I, Martins I, Tailler M, Pailleret C,
Michaud M, Galluzzi L, Adjemian S, Kepp O, NisoSantano M, Shen S, Marino G, Criollo A, Boileve A, Job B,
Ladoire S, et al. An immunosurveillance mechanism controls cancer cell ploidy. Science. 2012; 337:1678–1684.

40.	 Uhlen M, Fagerberg L, Hallstrom BM, Lindskog C,
Oksvold P, Mardinoglu A, Sivertsson A, Kampf C,
Sjostedt E, Asplund A, Olsson I, Edlund K, Lundberg E,
Navani S, Szigyarto CA, Odeberg J, et al. Proteomics.
Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science. 2015;
347:1260419.

30.	 Panaretakis T, Kepp O, Brockmeier U, Tesniere A,
Bjorklund AC, Chapman DC, Durchschlag M, Joza N,
Pierron G, van Endert P, Yuan J, Zitvogel L, Madeo F,
Williams DB, Kroemer G. Mechanisms of pre-apoptotic
calreticulin exposure in immunogenic cell death. EMBO J.
2009; 28:578–590.

41.	 Corrotte M, Chasserot-Golaz S, Huang P, Du G,
Ktistakis  NT, Frohman MA, Vitale N, Bader MF,
Grant  NJ. Dynamics and function of phospholipase D
and phosphatidic acid during phagocytosis. Traffic. 2006;
7:365–377.

31.	 Verfaillie T, Rubio N, Garg AD, Bultynck G, Rizzuto R,
Decuypere JP, Piette J, Linehan C, Gupta S, Samali A,
Agostinis P. PERK is required at the ER-mitochondrial
­contact sites to convey apoptosis after ROS-based ER
stress. Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19:1880–1891.

42.	 Kitano M, Nakaya M, Nakamura T, Nagata S, Matsuda M.
Imaging of Rab5 activity identifies essential regulators for
phagosome maturation. Nature. 2008; 453:241–245.

32.	 Dudek-Peric AM, Ferreira GB, Muchowicz A, Wouters J,
Prada N, Martin S, Kiviluoto S, Winiarska M, Boon L,
Mathieu C, van den Oord J, Stas M, Gougeon ML, Golab J,
Garg AD, Agostinis P. Antitumor immunity triggered by
melphalan is potentiated by melanoma cell surface-associated
calreticulin. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1603–1614.

43.	 Rupper A, Grove B, Cardelli J. Rab7 regulates phagosome
maturation in Dictyostelium. Journal of cell science. 2001;
114:2449–2460.
44.	 Sakurai C, Hashimoto H, Nakanishi H, Arai S, Wada Y,
Sun-Wada GH, Wada I, Hatsuzawa K. SNAP- regulates
phagosome formation and maturation in macrophages. Mol
Biol Cell. 2012; 23:4849–4863.

33.	 Verfaillie T, van Vliet A, Garg AD, Dewaele M, Rubio N,
Gupta S, de Witte P, Samali A, Agostinis P. Pro-apoptotic
signaling induced by photo-oxidative ER stress is amplified
by Noxa, not Bim. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013;
438:500–506.

45.	 Marion S, Hoffmann E, Holzer D, Le Clainche C,
Martin M, Sachse M, Ganeva I, Mangeat P, Griffiths G.
Ezrin promotes actin assembly at the phagosome membrane and regulates phago-lysosomal fusion. Traffic. 2011;
12:421–437.

34.	 Musahl AS, Huang X, Rusakiewicz S, Ntini E, Marsico A,
Kroemer G, Kepp O, Orom UA. A long non-coding RNA
links calreticulin-mediated immunogenic cell removal to
RB1 transcription. Oncogene. 2015.

46.	 Das R, Ganapathy S, Settle M, Plow EF. Plasminogen
promotes macrophage phagocytosis in mice. Blood. 2014;
124:679–688.

35.	 Panaretakis T, Joza N, Modjtahedi N, Tesniere A, Vitale I,
Durchschlag M, Fimia GM, Kepp O, Piacentini  M,
Froehlich KU, van Endert P, Zitvogel L, Madeo F,
Kroemer G. The co-translocation of ERp57 and calreticulin
determines the immunogenicity of cell death. Cell Death
Differ. 2008; 15:1499–1509.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47.	 Giannattasio G, Fujioka D, Xing W, Katz HR, Boyce JA,
Balestrieri B. Group V secretory phospholipase A2 reveals
its role in house dust mite-induced allergic pulmonary
inflammation by regulation of dendritic cell function.
Journal of immunology. 2010; 185:4430–4438.
26859

Oncotarget

48.	 James DE, Nestor BJ, Sculco TP, Ivashkiv LB, Ross FP,
Goldring SR, Purdue PE. The relative timing of exposure
to phagocytosable particulates and to osteoclastogenic cytokines is critically important in the determination of myeloid
cell fate. Journal of immunology. 2010; 185:1265–1273.

59.	 Peng RQ, Chen YB, Ding Y, Zhang R, Zhang X, Yu XJ,
Zhou ZW, Zeng YX, Zhang XS. Expression of calreticulin
is associated with infiltration of T-cells in stage IIIB colon
cancer. World journal of gastroenterology : WJG. 2010;
16:2428–2434.

49.	 Garg AD, Dudek AM, Agostinis P. Cancer immunogenicity, danger signals, and DAMPs: what, when, and how?
Biofactors. 2013; 39:355–367.

60.	 Hsu WM, Hsieh FJ, Jeng YM, Kuo ML, Chen CN, Lai DM,
Hsieh LJ, Wang BT, Tsao PN, Lee H, Lin MT, Lai HS,
Chen WJ. Calreticulin expression in neuroblastoma—a
novel independent prognostic factor. Annals of oncology : official journal of the European Society for Medical
Oncology / ESMO. 2005; 16:314–321.

50.	 Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Tesniere A, Criollo A, Ortiz C,
Lidereau R, Mariette C, Chaput N, Mira JP, Delaloge S,
Andre F, Tursz T, Kroemer G, Zitvogel L. The interaction between HMGB1 and TLR4 dictates the outcome of
anticancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Immunol Rev.
2007; 220:47–59.

61.	 Lwin ZM, Guo C, Salim A, Yip GW, Chew FT, Nan J,
Thike AA, Tan PH, Bay BH. Clinicopathological significance of calreticulin in breast invasive ductal carcinoma.
Mod Pathol. 2010; 23:1559–1566.

51.	 Vacchelli E, Galluzzi L, Rousseau V, Rigoni A, Tesniere A,
Delahaye N, Schlemmer FD, Menger L, Sukkurwala AQ,
Adjemian S, Martins I, Michaud M, Dunant A, Kepp O,
Brambilla E, Soria JC, et al. Loss-of-function alleles of
P2RX7 and TLR4 fail to affect the response to chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer. Oncoimmunology. 2012;
1:271–278.

62.	 Vaksman O, Davidson B, Trope C, Reich R. Calreticulin
expression is reduced in high-grade ovarian serous carcinoma effusions compared with primary tumors and solid
metastases. Hum Pathol. 2013; 44:2677–2683.
63.	 Wemeau M, Kepp O, Tesniere A, Panaretakis T, Flament C,
De Botton S, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G, Chaput N. Calreticulin
exposure on malignant blasts predicts a cellular anticancer
immune response in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
Cell Death Dis. 2010; 1:e104.

52.	 Ciampricotti M, Hau CS, Doornebal CW, Jonkers J, de
Visser KE. Chemotherapy response of spontaneous mammary tumors is independent of the adaptive immune system.
Nature medicine. 2012; 18:344–346. author reply 346.

64.	 Buytaert E, Callewaert G, Hendrickx N, Scorrano L,
Hartmann D, Missiaen L, Vandenheede JR, Heirman I,
Grooten J, Agostinis P. Role of endoplasmic reticulum
depletion and multidomain proapoptotic BAX and BAK
proteins in shaping cell death after hypericin-mediated photodynamic therapy. Faseb J. 2006; 20:756–758.

53.	 Chao MP, Jaiswal S, Weissman-Tsukamoto R,
Alizadeh  AA, Gentles AJ, Volkmer J, Weiskopf K,
Willingham SB, Raveh T, Park CY, Majeti R, Weissman IL.
Calreticulin is the dominant pro-phagocytic signal on multiple human cancers and is counterbalanced by CD47. Sci
Transl Med. 2010; 2:63ra94.

65.	 Vantieghem A, Assefa Z, Vandenabeele P, Declercq W,
Courtois S, Vandenheede JR, Merlevede W, de Witte P,
Agostinis P. Hypericin-induced photosensitization of HeLa
cells leads to apoptosis or necrosis. Involvement of cytochrome c and procaspase-3 activation in the mechanism of
apoptosis. FEBS Lett. 1998; 440:19–24.

54.	 Pawaria S, Binder RJ. CD91-dependent programming of
T-helper cell responses following heat shock protein immunization. Nature communications. 2011; 2:521.
55.	 Arum CJ, Anderssen E, Viset T, Kodama Y, Lundgren S,
Chen D, Zhao CM. Cancer immunoediting from immunosurveillance to tumor escape in microvillus-formed niche:
a study of syngeneic orthotopic rat bladder cancer model in
comparison with human bladder cancer. Neoplasia. 2010;
12:434–442.

66.	 Gyorffy B, Surowiak P, Budczies J, Lanczky A. Online
survival analysis software to assess the prognostic value of
biomarkers using transcriptomic data in non-small-cell lung
cancer. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e82241.

56.	 Dey S, Matsunami H. Calreticulin chaperones regulate functional expression of vomeronasal type 2 pheromone receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:16651–16656.

67.	 Mukherjee S, Heinonen M, Dequvire M, Sipila T,
Pulkkinen  P, Yrjala K. Secondary succession of bacterial communities and co-occurrence of phylotypes in oilpolluted Populus rhizosphere. Soil Biol Biochem. 2013;
58:188–197.

57.	 Hisaoka M, Matsuyama A, Nakamoto M. Aberrant calreticulin expression is involved in the dedifferentiation of dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Am J Pathol. 2012;
180:2076–2083.

68.	 de Hoon MJ, Imoto S, Nolan J, Miyano S. Open source
clustering software. Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:1453–1454.

58.	 Lim Y, Lee D, Kalichamy K, Hong SE, Michalak M,
Ahnn  J, Kim do H, Lee SK. Sumoylation regulates ER
stress response by modulating calreticulin gene expression
in XBP-1-dependent mode in Caenorhabditis elegans. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2014; 53:399–408.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69.	 Saldanha AJ. Java Treeview—extensible visualization of
microarray data. Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:3246–3248.

26860

Oncotarget

