Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Cancer
Research

Review

Cell-of-Origin of Cancer versus Cancer Stem Cells:
Assays and Interpretations
Kiera Rycaj1 and Dean G. Tang1,2

Abstract
A tumor originates from a normal cell that has undergone
tumorigenic transformation as a result of genetic mutations.
This transformed cell is the cell-of-origin for the tumor.
In contrast, an established clinical tumor is sustained by
subpopulations of self-renewing cancer cells operationally
called cancer stem cells (CSC) that can generate, intraclonally,
both tumorigenic and nontumorigenic cells. Identifying and
characterizing tumor cell-of-origin and CSCs should help elucidate tumor cell heterogeneity, which, in turn, should help
understand tumor cell responses to clinical treatments, drug

resistance, tumor relapse, and metastatic spread. Both tumor
transplantation and lineage-tracing assays have been helpful
in characterizing these cancer cell populations, although each
system has its strengths and caveats. In this article, we brieﬂy
review and summarize advantages and limitations of both
assays in support of a combinatorial approach to accurately
deﬁne the roles of both cancer-initiating and cancer-propagating cells. As an aside, we also wish to clarify the deﬁnitions of
cancer cell-of-origin and CSCs, which are often interchangeably used by mistake. Cancer Res; 75(19); 4003–11. 2015 AACR.

Introduction

during tumor formation as evidenced by recent progress in
identifying CSCs in solid tumors.

Epithelial cancers are complex and exhibit intertumoral and
intratumoral heterogeneity. Identifying speciﬁc cell types that
initiate and sustain tumorigenesis is key to addressing tumor
cell heterogeneity and other outstanding tumor biology questions. Cancer-initiating cell, or the cell-of-origin of cancer, is the
normal cell that receives the ﬁrst cancer-causing mutations. In
other words, the cancer-initiating cell founds a future clinical
tumor. Cancer stem cells (CSC), on the other hand, are the cells
that maintain tumor propagation (1–3). Aptly referred to as
cancer-propagating cells, CSCs are deﬁned by two attributes,
self-renewal and multipotency. The phenotypes between cancer-initiating cells and cancer-propagating cells may differ and
dynamically change and, in most cases, the relationship
between the two is not well understood. Two assays have been
helpful in characterizing these two cell types: transplantation
assays and lineage-tracing assays (Fig. 1). The serial tumor
transplantation assay is the current "gold standard" for identifying CSCs because it can assess both self-renewal and multipotency. Transplantation assays can also be used to determine
the cell-of-origin of cancers. Lineage tracing is the current gold
standard for deﬁning the cell-of-origin of transformation in
mouse models. Lineage tracing is also being used to provide
insight into the proliferative potential and fate of stem cells

1
Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville,Texas. 2Cancer
Stem Cell Institute, Research Center for Translational Medicine, East
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Corresponding Author: Dean G. Tang, Department of Epigenetics and Molecular
Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Science
Park, 1808 Park Road 1C, Smithville, TX 78957. Phone: 512-237-9575; Fax: 512237-2475; E-mail: dtang@mdanderson.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

The Transplantation Assay
In the transplantation assay, tumor cell populations are fractionated and xenografted into immunocompromised mice. When
identifying CSCs, cancer cell subpopulations are sorted using
FACS based on relatively speciﬁc or presumed CSC markers
followed by limiting dilution assay (LDA) and serial tumor
transplantations to determine the CSC frequency and multilineage potential of a given marker phenotype (Fig. 1A, a). Populations of CSC marker–positive cells that give rise to serially transplantable tumors that histologically recapitulate the cellular heterogeneity of the parental tumors can therefore be classiﬁed as
CSCs, whereas populations of CSC marker–negative cells with no
or limited tumor-propagating activity can be excluded from the
CSC candidates (Fig. 1A, a). These assays have demonstrated the
existence of CSCs in human cancers, including acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), breast cancer,
glioblastoma, colorectal cancer, and others (1–3).
Historically, in the early 1950s, it was shown that a small
fraction of cells in murine tumors could withstand freezethawing as indicated by proliferation in vitro, providing early
evidence for functional heterogeneity in sarcoma cell subpopulations (4). Subsequent quantitative transplantation assays
determined that 1 of 27 viable cells was capable of giving rise
to a tumor when cells from a murine sarcoma tumor, S37, were
xenotransplanted into 4- to 6-week-old albino mice (5). Direct
proof for the existence of leukemic stem cells (LSC) was provided in the mid-1990s (reviewed in ref. 3), and in the 2000s,
evidence for CSCs was extended to human solid tumors. It was
ﬁrst shown that in human breast cancer, as few as 100 cells
bearing the CD44þCD24/lowLin cell surface marker proﬁle
could regenerate serially transplantable tumors in mice (6).
Shortly thereafter, xenotransplantation assays evinced CSCs in
human brain tumors, with the CD133þ tumor cell fraction

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

4003

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Rycaj and Tang

A

B

Transplantation assay
(a)
Marker+

Lineage tracing

(b)
Marker–

Cancer cell populations

(a)

Normal cell
populations

Marker+

(b)

Lineage traced
normal epithelium

Lineage traced
tumors

Marker–
Lin marker+

Lin marker–

Oncogenic
events
LDA

Marker+

Marker–

Tumors that
histologically
resemble patient
tumors

No tumor

Conditionally expressing
oncogenes or deleting
tumor suppressor genes

LDA & serial tumor
transplantations

Lin marker+

Lin marker–

Multilineage potential

Serially transplantable tumors
that histologically recapitulate
the cellular heterogeneity of
parental tumors

Tumors that
histologically
resemble patient
tumors

No tumor

CSCs
(cancer-propagating cells)

CSCs
(cancer-propagating cells)

Potential
cell-of-origin

No or limited
tumor-propagating
activity

Potential
cell-of-origin

© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 1.
A comparison of transplantation and lineage-tracing assays. A, tumor transplantation assay. LDA can be used in combination with serial transplantations
to assess CSC abundance and properties in a candidate marker–positive tumor cell population (a). The transplantation assay can also be used to determine
cell-of-origin in cancers (b). B, lineage-tracing assay. This is most commonly used to determine the potential cell-of-origin for a cancer. In a speciﬁc
normal cell population, transformation events can be introduced via activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Labeled tumors
can then be traced back to a speciﬁc cell-of-origin (a). Lineage tracing can also be used to determine and/or authenticate the CSC properties of the marked
cell population in the established, traced tumor (b).

containing cells capable of tumor regeneration in nonobese
diabetic/severe combined immunodeﬁciency (NOD/SCID)
mouse brains (7).
The key elements in properly using the xenotransplantation
assay to identify and characterize CSCs in human tumors are to
perform rigorous LDA and serial tumor transplantations (Fig.
1A, a). In the LDA, CSC frequency is measured by transplanting
increasingly diluted single-cell preparations. After tumor regeneration is evaluated for each cell dose, the frequency of cancer
cells present in a given cell population that can regenerate a
xenograft tumor can be approximated. For this reason, CSCs are
also frequently called tumor-initiating cells, which is actually
not very accurate and should rather be termed tumor-regenerating cells. In subsequent serial transplantations, true CSCs or

4004 Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

CSC-enriched population should be able to perpetuate the
xenograft tumors for multiple generations, thus attesting that
these particular cells have an inherently unlimited life span
when propagated in vivo (Fig. 1A, a). Important, LDA combined
with serial tumor transplantations helps assess one of the most
important biologic traits of CSCs, that is, self-renewal in vivo.
As an example, in a recent study, prostate-speciﬁc antigen
(PSA)-positive (PSAþ) and PSA/lo human prostate cancer cells
were separated and used in serial tumor transplantations (8).
The study revealed that the PSA/lo population could regenerate
and propagate xenograft tumors virtually indeﬁnitely, whereas
the PSAþ prostate cancer cell population could only propagate
xenograft tumors for about three generations (8). This study
illustrates that the serial tumor transplantation assay has the

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Cancer Cell-of-Origin and Cancer Stem Cells

ability to compare isogenic subpopulations under identical
experimental conditions to determine differences in tumor
regeneration and long-term tumor-propagating capacities.
Similar serial transplantation studies have demonstrated that
human breast (6) and colon (9) CSCs can initiate serially
transplantable tumors and thus can self-renew in immunodeﬁcient mice.
Transplantation assays can be used to probe the potential cellof-origin of cancer as well (Fig. 1A, b). In this scenario, normal cell
subpopulations are sorted via FACS based on speciﬁc markers
followed by introduction of oncogenic events (overexpressing
oncogenes and/or knocking out tumor suppressor genes) and
subsequent survey of differential tumor formation in xenotransplantation assays. When a marker-positive population gives rise to
tumors that histologically resemble parental or patient tumors,
cells within this population can then be considered as a potential
cell-of-origin for that speciﬁc type of cancer (Fig. 1A, b). One
example comes from a recent study that demonstrates that the
basal epithelial cells from primary benign human prostate tissue,
upon tumorigenic transformation, can initiate prostate cancer in
immunodeﬁcient mice (10). The authors developed a system
whereby na€ve adult human prostate epithelium is directly transformed with genetic alterations commonly found in human
prostate cancer. When primary human prostate basal and luminal
cells transduced with lentivirus carrying red ﬂuorescent protein
were combined with murine urogenital sinus mesenchyme cells
in Matrigel and injected subcutaneously into NOD/SCID/IL2Rg null (NSG) mice, outgrowths were observed only from basal
cells (10). Important, when the lentivirus cocktail included both
activated (myristoylated) AKT and ERG, basal cell but not luminal
cell–derived lesions fulﬁlled the histologic criteria for the diagnosis of high-grade precursor lesion (10). With the addition of
AR (androgen receptor) to the mix, adenocarcinomas developed
from transformed basal cells but not luminal cells (10). This study
(10) thus indicates that the human basal prostate epithelial
cells can function as a potential cell-of-origin for prostate cancer.
Using similar transplantation assays, Taylor and colleagues
also demonstrated that basal epithelial cells could act as cellsof-origin for prostate cancer (11). One word of caution when
using transplantation assays to study cancer cell-of-origin is that a
positive outcome only indicates that a speciﬁc cell population
CAN function as the target of tumorigenic transformation but
may not necessarily BE the actual cell-of-origin for cancer in vivo.
For obvious reasons, human tumor cells can only be xenotransplanted to immunodeﬁcient mice to assess their inherent
CSC properties. As a result, a major disadvantage of cell
transplantation assays is that dissociated single cells may not
behave the same way as they do in their natural tissue microenvironment (i.e., niche), thereby misrepresenting the existence or abundance of CSCs (see below). By teasing apart the
intact tissue to resolve subpopulations, we inevitably change
the cells' metabolism, their apparent role in the tissue hierarchy, and potentially their developmental trajectory. Therefore,
it may not be certain whether transplantation assays demonstrate selection of phenotypically plastic cells that survive and
proliferate in the new environment or whether they are actually
assaying the implicit CSC traits. In addition, solid tumor cells
exist in complex microenvironments that are not readily modeled by transplantation because xenotransplants differ in architecture and stroma compared with their native environment.
Another caveat associated with xenotransplantations lies in the

www.aacrjournals.org

lack of an immunocompetent microenvironment such that
many have argued that the transplantation-based CSC assays
may not assess the intrinsic properties of stem cells but may
instead be assessing the ability of transplanted human cancer
cells in evading immune surveillance. However, this may be a
circular argument—it is precisely because CSCs lack the expression of differentiation markers such as MHC molecules that
they can better escape host immune–mediated attack, take root,
and initiate and propagate human tumors in mice (12).
Understandably, the outcome of xenotransplantation experiments can be inﬂuenced by many variables, including the level
of malignancy (or differentiation) of donor human tumors
and the level of immunodeﬁciency of recipient mice (2). For
instance, the frequency of human melanoma CSCs was found
to be as high as 15% to 25% when assayed in NSG mice
compared with 1 in 105 cells in NOD/SCID mice (13). The
high frequency of melanoma CSCs in NSG mice has been
interpreted by many as evidence for lack of tumorigenic hierarchy in melanoma. However, in that study (13), most melanoma samples used were very advanced high-grade tumors and
it is well-known that advanced, undifferentiated human cancers are highly enriched in CSCs (1–3, 8). Indeed, when early
stages of melanoma specimens were later used in CSC studies,
it was found that CD271þ melanoma cells identify rare melanoma CSCs (14). Along the same line, in a syngeneic transplantation study of pre-B/B lymphoma cells from Em-myc
transgenic mice, a very high frequency of the tumor-initiating
cells was observed (15), which again was construed by many
as evidence to refute the CSC concept. However, the Em-myc
lymphoma cells are known to be extremely aggressive, resembling undifferentiated human tumors in which CSCs are
greatly enriched. Recent lineage-tracing studies in mouse models of tumors have also provided direct evidence for CSCs
(see below).

The Lineage-Tracing Assay
The lineage-tracing assay is mostly commonly used to determine the potential cell-of-origin of tumors (Fig. 1B, a), although it
can also be used to study CSCs (Fig. 1B, b). In the lineage-tracing
assay, use of different cell-speciﬁc promoters allows distinct cell
subpopulations to be labeled, allowing tracking of a single cell–
derived clone in animals (see below). The ability to resolve
individual cell fate is the greatest advantage of this assay. To
determine cell-of-origin, normal (epithelial) cells are genetically
labeled followed by introduction of activating and inactivating
mutations in various oncogenes and tumor suppressors in the
same cell type. The fully transformed cell that forms a tumor can
then be traced and identiﬁed as the cellular source of the tumor
(Fig. 1B, c). On the other hand, in the established, traced tumors,
single marked tumor cells can be puriﬁed out and used in the
LDA and serial tumor transplantations to determine whether the
lineage-traced tumor cells have true CSC properties, that is, selfrenewing and long-term tumor-propagating activity (Fig. 1B, d).
This latter tracing strategy can also be adapted to dissect tumor
cell heterogeneity in cultured cancer cells and human xenograft
tumors. For example, a PSA promoter was used to drive reporters
(GFP and RFP) in a lentiviral vector, which was used to infect
cultured as well as xenograft prostate cancer cells and to separate
the PSA/lo and PSAþ prostate cancer cells (8). When traced
in vitro and in vivo, the PSA/lo prostate cancer cells were found

Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

4005

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Rycaj and Tang

A

Establishing bigenic line
Line 1: Cell-speciﬁc promoter directs expression of Cre or Cre-ERT2
Line 2: Reporter expresses GFP when the stop cassette is excised by Cre
Cell speciﬁc
promotor

Cre

ERT2

(line 1)

+

Rosa26

Stop

GFP

(line 2)

Bigenic line
Tamoxifen

B

Cell speciﬁc
GFP
promotor

Introducing oncogenic events
1. Expression of an oncogene
2. Deletion of a tumor supressor gene
3. Exposure to chemical carcinogens

C

Figure 2.
Schematic for a lineage-tracing
study. Three main steps are outlined.
See text for detailed descriptions.

Observing outcome
Most cells in the
tumor are not GFP+

Suggesting that the starting cell
type has limited ability to function
as a tumor cell-of-origin

All cells in a tumor clone
or entire tumor are GFP+

Suggesting that the starting
cell type can function as
a tumor cell-of-origin

Purify out single
GFP+ cells and
perform serial
transplantations

Suggesting that lineage
traced GFP+ cells
possess CSC properties
© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

to be able to undergo asymmetric cell division generating PSAþ
cells under time lapse microscopy as well as in serially transplanted tumors (8). Similarly, a Wnt reporter was used to trace
colorectal CSCs and to demonstrate that the secreted soluble
molecules from the neighboring myoﬁbroblasts activate the Wnt
signaling in these CSCs (16).
Figure 2 depicts a basic scheme for performing a lineagetracing study. The ﬁrst step is to establish a bigenic mouse line
by crossing an inducible Cre line, which expresses the Cre
recombinase, with a "generic" reporter line to achieve cellspeciﬁc labeling (Fig. 2A). For the inducible Cre transgenic
(Tg) line, a cell-type–speciﬁc gene promoter is used to drive the
expression of modiﬁed, tamoxifen-inducible Cre (CreER or
CreERT2). The gene promoters can be stem cell–speciﬁc (e.g.,
p63, Lrig1, Lgr5, Sox9, Nkx3.1, etc.) or the ones active in
differentiated lineages (e.g., K8 and K18). Promoter can be
endogenous, in which CreER or CreERT2 expression cassette is
knocked into the endogenous promoter locus. Alternatively, an
exogenous promoter can be used to drive Cre expression in a
conventional Tg line. An example is the use of human PSA gene

4006 Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

promoter to drive Cre expression in a Tg model to show that
regenerated prostatic epithelial cells upon castration—androgen supplementation—were derived from the pre-existent
luminal cells (17). In the second mouse line, a reporter (either
ﬂuorogenic such as GFP and RFP or colorigenic such as b-galactosidase) is ﬂanked by a loxP-STOP-loxP sequence (Fig. 2A). In
the bigenic mice, tamoxifen activates Cre expression via excising loxP-STOP-loxP, which in turn activates the reporter in cells
that express the promoter activity (Fig. 2A). Doxycycline-inducible TetO-Cre system or orthotopic adenoviral delivery of
lineage-speciﬁc Cre recombinases (AdCre) can also be used to
express Cre in speciﬁc cell types.
To study tumor development, the second step is to introduce
oncogenic events, which can be either genetic or chemical, to
the speciﬁcally labeled cell types (Fig. 2B). For genetic
approaches, this is accomplished by crossing the above bigenic
line with the third Tg line that overexpresses certain oncogenes
(Myc, Ras, Tcf, etc), or has some tumor suppressors (e.g., Pten,
Rb, p53) deleted. For chemical carcinogenesis, the bigenic
animals are challenged by chemical carcinogens (e.g., DMBA)

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Cancer Cell-of-Origin and Cancer Stem Cells

known to cause cancer in the speciﬁc tissues/cells. The molecular basis of chemical carcinogenesis is still genetic—for
instance, DMBA mainly causes mutations in K-ras. In the ﬁnal
step of lineage tracing (Fig. 2C), tumor development is
observed by monitoring the expression pattern of the trace
label. For instance, if all cells in a tumor clone or the entire
tumor is label (e.g., GFP)-positive, it suggests that the speciﬁc
cell type marked by GFP CAN function as a cancer cell-of-origin
in that speciﬁc context. These GFPþ tumor cells can be puriﬁed
out in serial tumor transplantations to further demonstrate
their CSC or tumor-propagating activities (Fig. 2C). On the
other hand, if the majority of tumor cells are GFP, it would
suggest that the initially traced cell type does not function as the
cell-of-origin for the tumor development (Fig. 2C).
Recently, three lineage-tracing studies (18–20) provided support for the CSC model across three different types of solid
tumors—skin, intestinal, and brain (Fig. 3). In one study (18),
lineage tracing was used to pinpoint a putative endogenous
glioma stem cell population that plays a pivotal role in tumor
maintenance and recurrence after chemotherapy (Fig. 3A). A
nestin-DTK-IRES-GFP transgene labeled quiescent subventricular
zone (SVZ) adult neural stem cells and the labeled GFPþ cells
could be ablated by ganciclovir (GCV) through the action of the
truncated thymidine kinase (TK; Fig. 3A, a). When this Tg line was
crossed with glioma-prone mouse line called Mut7 (induced by
concerted deletion of three tumor suppressors, i.e., Nf1, p53, and
Pten in GFAP-expressing cellular compartment), a subset of
endogenous glioma tumor cells was also labeled by GFP and these
GFPþ cells could also be ablated by GCV (Fig. 3A, b). Interestingly,
most GFPþ glioma cells were Sox2þ and not dividing (i.e., Ki67)
whereas most Ki67þ glioma cells were GFP (Fig. 3A, b). Temozolomide, a drug used to treat patients with glioma, eliminated
most GFP/Ki67þ tumor cells leaving behind a signiﬁcant fraction of GFPþ/Ki67 quiescent mouse glioma cells, which mediated recurrent tumor formation (Fig. 3A, b). Remarkably, ablation
of the GFPþ cells with chronic GCV administration signiﬁcantly
retarded tumor growth, leading to extended animal survival, and
combined temozolomide and ganciclovir treatment impeded
tumor development (Fig. 3A, c; ref. 13). GCV administration also
reduced tumor growth in secondary tumor transplants (Fig. 3A,
d). This lineage-tracing study demonstrates that a relatively
quiescent subset of endogenous glioma cells, with properties
similar to those proposed for CSCs, is responsible for sustaining
long-term tumor growth.
In the second study (19), use of a multicolor Cre reporter
R26R-Confetti and the b-naphtoﬂavone–inducible Ah-Cre
mouse strain demonstrated that the crypt stem cell marker
Lgr5 also marked a subpopulation of adenoma cells induced
by loss of Apc (Fig. 3B, a). When R26R-Confetti was crossed into
the Lgr5 knock-in Cre-expressing mouse strain, tamoxifen
injection allowed single Lgr5þ stem cells to randomly adopt
one of the four ﬂuorescent colors encoded in the R26R-Confetti
allele. The formation of adenomas was derived from individual
Apc-mutant stem cells. In addition, the location of the labeled
Lgr5þ cells was near the base of the wedge-shaped adenoma
segments, concurrent with the crypt stem cell niche (Fig. 3B, a).
Transcriptional proﬁles and clonogenic potential of Lgr5-GFPhi
cells suggested that this population constituted multipotent
stem cells. The fate of Lgr5þ adenoma cells in individual clones
was back-traced in vivo, and it was concluded that the cells were
derived from a single adenoma stem cell (Fig. 3B, b).

www.aacrjournals.org

The third lineage-tracing study used a classical chemical
2-stage carcinogenesis model (20), in which skin papillomas
were initiated by the carcinogen DMBA and then propagated by
tumor promoter TPA (Fig. 3C, a). The bigenic line, K14CreER/
Rosa-YFP, was created by crossing K14-driven CreER line with
the Rosa26-YFP reporter line (Fig. 3C, a). In the presence of
tamoxifen, all K14-expressing basal keratinocytes would be
labeled as YFPþ. Upon DMBA/TPA treatment and tamoxifen
application, cells within the papillomas were labeled and the
YFPþ tumor cells were capable of generating all cell types that
comprised the tumor (Fig. 3C, a). Interestingly, the majority of
labeled tumor cells in benign papillomas had limited proliferative potential, whereas a particular fraction had the capacity to
persist long term (20). Speciﬁcally, the more persistent population displayed stem cell–like characteristics and cycled twice
per day, whereas a slower cycling transient population gave rise
to terminally differentiated tumor cells. Data from 3-dimensional (3D) reconstruction using confocal analyses of clones
indicated that papillomas were sustained by a cellular hierarchy
in which a minor population of tumor cells with stem cell–like
properties gave rise to a more transient progenitor cell pool
(Fig. 3C, c).
Lineage tracing has now been used to identify probable
cells-of-origin for many mouse models of cancers, including
intestinal, prostate and basal cell carcinomas, brain and breast
tumors, as well as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In prostate cancer, for example, the lineage-tracing assay was used to
identify a rare luminal epithelial population, termed CARNs
(castration-resistant Nkx3.1-expressing cells) with stem cell
properties during prostate regeneration in mice (21). These
cells were marked using a genetically engineered mouse line
in which an inducible CreERT2 recombinase was put under the
control of the endogenous promoter for Nkx3.1, a prostate
tumor suppressor. After Cre activation by tamoxifen treatment
in castrated Nkx3.1CreERT2/þ; R26R-YFP/þ male mice, YFP
expression was observed in luminal epithelial cells, corresponding to lineage-marked CARNs. All CARNs in the regressed
prostate were strictly luminal and growth-quiescent. However,
after regeneration upon testosterone treatment, the percentage
of lineage-marked cells increased 9-fold, indicating their proliferative potential, and, important, basal cells appeared, indicating that CARNs contained bipotential progenitors. Subsequent single-cell transplantation of lineage-marked CARNs
further indicated the multipotency of these cells. The authors
further demonstrated that by crossing the compound reporter
mice with Pten mutant mice, the CARNs could function as cellsof-origin for prostate cancer (21). The same group later showed
that basal cells, upon loss of Pten, gave rise to tumors with
luminal phenotypes, but they noted that these basal cells
displayed substantial phenotypic plasticity when removed
from their endogenous tissue microenvironment (22). Hence,
the authors stressed that transplantation-based assays have a
tendency to overestimate the frequency of putative stem cells
and that genetic lineage tracing in vivo should be preferably
used for identiﬁcation of potential tumor cell-of-origin (22).
Another group genetically marked mouse prostate basal cells
and luminal cells in adult mice using K14-CreER and K8-CreERT2,
respectively, to further interrogate the cellular origin of prostate
cancer (23). It was found that prostate basal cells only generated
basal cells, whereas luminal cells only generated luminal cells,
suggesting that adult prostate epithelial lineages are maintained

Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

4007

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Rycaj and Tang

A Chen et al (18)
a

~5.6 kb rat nestin
promoter

HSV Δ TK

IRES

GFP

Nestin
2nd intron

Small subset

b

GFP+/Sox2+/Ki-67–
GFP–/Ki-67+

Mut7 (hGFAP-Cre;
Nf1ﬂ/+; p53ﬂ/ﬂ; Ptenﬂ/+);
Nes-ΔTK-GFP

c

Pulse chase assay
with residual tumors

Percent survival at 4.5 mo after birth (%)

Treatment
start

GCV

Genotype

Treatment
span

0

2 mo

d

GCV

Mut7; Nes-ΔTK- Dissociated
GFP gliomas cells injected s.c

GCV ablates GFP+ cells (i.e., nestin+).
TMZ targets proliferating GFP–/Ki-67+ glioma cells
but not GFP+ quiescent cells.
Quiescent Nes-ΔTK-GFP+ cells are the source of
proliferating and eventually non-dividing tumor
cell derivatives.

Survival compared to saline (days)

GCV Saline

Mut7;Nes-ΔTK 44.4

8 wk

Nes-ΔTK-GFP
transgenic mice

Reduction of cells in
tumors & NSC niches

TMZ

+

Nes-Δ-GFP transgene expressed in SVZ quiescent
and proximal progentior cells.

Genotype

GCV

Mut7

1.5

Mut7;Nes-ΔTK 31.5
Signiﬁcantly
smaller tumors

Saline

Chronic GCV progressively ablates the quiescent
GFP+ tumor cell population.
Elimination of Nes-ΔTK-GFP+ cells at early/pretumorigenic stages prevents development of
high-grade gliomas.
Ablation of GFP+ cells via GCV slows tumor
growth after transplantation.

Nude

B Schepers et al (19)
Culture system

a

Lgr5-GFPhi

Lgr5EGFP-lresCreERT2/Apcﬂ/ﬂ

×

Lgr5-GFPlo
30-day-old
adenomas

20× greater
colony-forming
Comparative
effciency
gene
+ expression
analysis
Rare growth

Intestinal adenoma formed from Apc-deletd Lgr5+
stem cells.
Lgr5+ adenoma cells located next to Paneth cells,
suggesting an adenoma stem cell niche.
Lgr5-GFPhi cells represent multipotent stem cells.

R26R-Confetti

b

Tamoxifen

Lgr5+ cells are derived from a single adenoma
cell.

+
Lgr5EGFP-lres-CreERT2/Apcﬂ/ﬂ
/R26R-Confetti mice

Retracing
Confocal

Lgr5-GFP+ cells are the multipotent stem cells
of adenomas.

C Driessens G et al (20)
a
K14

Bigenic
strain

Cre ER

×
Stop

DMBA TPA Surgical excision of tumors

+
YFP

Papilloma “Promotion”
“initiation”

Characterizations:
• Immunophenotyping;
• YFP positivity;
• Proliferation
(Edu labeling)

Only a fraction of proliferative tumor cells possess
long-term self-renewal potential.

Invasive
tumors

Loss rate of terminally differentiated cells is slow
compared to cell division rate of YFP+ tumor cells.

b
Clonal size of
a limited
number of clones

YFP+ labeled tumor cells are capable of generating
all cell types in the tumor.

Single-cell resolution
via 3D reconstruction
& confocal analysis

7-wk course

+

Double-labeling
pulse-chase assay
K14CREER/Rosa-YFP

Size distribution gives evidence for proliferative
heterogeneity.
Papillomas are sustained by a cellular heirarchy
with a small population that exhibits self-renewal
ability to generate cell progeny.
© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 3.
Summary of three recent lineage-tracing studies providing support for the CSC model. Details for each study are discussed in the text. The lineage-tracing tumor
models are presented on the left and main outcomes and conclusions summarized on the right.

4008 Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Cancer Cell-of-Origin and Cancer Stem Cells

by unipotent progenitors or self-duplication of epithelial cells.
Pten was then knocked out in both cell types, and interestingly,
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, a precursor lesion to prostate cancer, appeared in both mice but only after a long latency
in the K14-CreER mice, suggesting that basal cells had to
convert into luminal cells in the context of tumor development
by Pten deletion. This study demonstrates that both prostate
basal and luminal cells can serve as the cellular origin for
prostate cancer.
As in all other techniques, there are caveats and problems
associated with lineage tracing. First of all, lineage tracing can
only be conducted in mice and there are fundamental differences
between human and rodent organs and cells. Take prostate again,
mouse prostate has four distinct lobes that do not exist in the
human counterpart. Mouse prostate does not even express PSA,
the most "important" molecule in deﬁning the prostate as a male
glandular organ and in deﬁning fully differentiated luminal
epithelial cells. Also, somatic mouse cells possess high telomerase
activity and express signiﬁcantly longer telomeres than the human
cells, suggesting that mouse cells in most lineages may never
undergo true terminal differentiation. These latter molecular
features underlie the reasons why rodent cells are highly susceptible to spontaneous immortalization as well as experimental
tumorigenic transformation. Consequently, results with mouse
studies should never be directly equated to human systems and
always be put in appropriate context.
Second, the labeling efﬁciency in lineage-tracing studies is
highly variable depending on the Cre- or reporter-driving
promoters and generally low and the results may oftentimes
be subject to alternative interpretations. When endogenous
promoters are used, the promoter activity in less differentiated
cells may not be strong enough to turn on the transgene,
leading to low efﬁciency and spurious interpretations. In the
example presented in Fig. 4, when CreER is driven by the

endogenous k5 promoter, lineage-tracing studies in adult mice
may lead to the conclusion that k5-expressing (basal) cells
can only regenerate more k5-positive basal cells. However, in
multipotent progenitor cells that have the ability to differentiate into not just k5 cells but also luminal or even neuroendocrine cells because they have just started expressing k5
mRNA and the k5 promoter activity in these progenitor cells
is too weak to activate the Cre, these cells will not be labeled
(Fig. 4). In other words, only more differentiated cells that have
already undergone lineage speciﬁcation will be tagged by the
reporter (Fig. 4), leading to inaccurate or even erroneous
conclusions. Along this line, when exogenous or heterologous
promoters are used in lineage tracing, they will randomly
integrate into the genome, resulting in patterns of expression
different from the endogenous gene. Furthermore, such promoters are likely regulated by quite different mechanisms than
the endogenous promoters. In some cases, promoters exhibit
some expression in tissues outside of those predicted, due to
regulatory elements or read-through transcripts at the site of
insertion.
Third, when lineage tracing is combined with mouse tumor
models to elucidate cell-of-origin, there exists another problem.
Most human epithelial cancers develop through decades of clonal
evolution and accumulation of genetic mutations and epigenetic
alterations. However, in mouse models of human cancer, the
promoter is instantly turned on, leading to all-at-once genetic
defects in an entire population of cells, a phenomenon fundamentally unlike the sequential acquisition of mutations found
in most human cancers. Ideally, a cancer model should recapitulate the natural history of the disease by introducing a low
frequency of sporadic mutations at a deﬁned time.
Finally, the remaining construct and its insertional effects
must be optimized. In most inducible lines, in which there is a
single element to control Cre, the system frequently becomes

Luminal cells

Figure 4.
Potential problems associated with
lineage tracing. In this example,
primitive stem cells with selfrenewing activity do not express k5,
whereas more mature progenitor
cells start expressing low levels of k5
mRNA but the promoter activity is
not strong enough to drive Cre or
reporter gene expression. Hence, the
promoter strength in less
differentiated cells may not be strong
enough to reach the labeling
threshold, thereby failing to label the
true primitive stem cells that possess
the ability to undergo multilineage
differentiation. NE, neuroendocrine.

k5

k5

k5

k5
Basal
cells

Stem cells
(primitive)

Progenitor cells
(more mature)

The ability of the promoter to
drive Cre or reporter expression
NE cells

K5 promoter strength/mRNA expression
© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

4009

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Rycaj and Tang

leaky, having minor but detectable Cre activity in the absence of
the inducer, resulting in spontaneous background recombination. In some cases, an alternative transgenic line, AhcreERT,
can be used to eliminate background recombination via controlling Cre activity transcriptionally both by Ah promoter
and by tamoxifen binding (24). In addition, transgene insertion of Cre recombinase under the control of a speciﬁc promoter may alter the function of the endogenous locus via
activation or silencing. Incomplete incorporation of regulatory
elements into the driver construct or alternatively unexpected excision can also occur (25). LoxP-ﬂanked target genes
can differ dramatically with respect to their sensitivity to
Cre-mediated recombination (26). Finally, Cre activity can be
modiﬁed by strain genetic background and variable maternal/
paternal germline expression can occur, highlighting the need
for animal model optimization.

ated cancer cells can dedifferentiate into cells resembling embryonic stem cells that organize into vessel-like structures (30). In
breast cancer, CSCs exist in distinct mesenchymal-like and epithelial-like states (27). Remarkably, these two populations of
CSCs manifest different locations in the tumors and functional
activities: while mesenchymal-like CSCs (CD24CD44þ) are
mainly localized at the invasive tumor front and are largely
quiescent, the epithelial-like CSCs (ALDHþ) are located more
centrally and are highly proliferative (30). Understanding the
plasticity of CSCs and identifying the subpopulations of nonCSCs that are poised to convert to CSCs (2) should greatly
facilitate the efforts in dissecting tumor cell heterogeneity and
developing CSC-speciﬁc therapeutics. It has become clear that to
eradicate cancer and prevent relapse, both CSCs and their less
tumorigenic progeny must be targeted.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

Concluding Remarks and Perspectives
The preceding discussions highlight the varying conclusions
that may reﬂect differences and limitations in each assay used. A
combinatorial approach of the two assays has the potential to lead
to a better understanding of the cellular origins of cancer and CSCs
and the development of more effective cancer therapies. A major
consideration in performing both CSC and tumor cells-of-origin
studies is the emergence of CSCs via cellular dedifferentiation
(reviewed in detail in ref. 2). Several recent studies have demonstrated that non-CSCs can acquire CSC-like activity under certain
conditions (27–30). For instance, many aggressive CSCs within
individual tumors can be newly derived from their non-CSC
counterparts, and this dedifferentiation may occur continually
during the development of the tumor. In melanoma, differenti-

No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank colleagues in the Tang laboratory for helpful discussions
and advice and Joi Holcomb for graphical assistance. They apologize to authors
whose work could not be cited because of space constraint.

Grant Support
Work in the authors' laboratory was supported, in part, by grants from NIH
(R01-CA155693), Department of Defense (W81XWH-13-1-0352 and
W81XWH-14-1-0575), CPRIT (RP120380), and MDACC Center for Cancer
Epigenetics (all to DGT). K. Rycaj was supported in part by an NIH postdoctoral
fellowship.
Received March 22, 2015; revised May 18, 2015; accepted May 18, 2015;
published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015.

References
1. Visvader JE. Cells of origin in cancer. Nature 2011;469:314–22.
2. Tang DG. Understanding cancer stem cell heterogeneity and plasticity.
Cell Res 2012;22:457–72.
3. Kreso A, Dick JE. Evolution of the cancer stem cell model. Cell Stem Cell
2014;14:275–91.
4. Passey RD, Dmochowski L, Lasnitzki I, Millard A. Cultivation in vitro of
frozen and desiccated mouse tumour tissues. Br Med J 1950;2:1134–6.
5. Hewitt HB. Studies of the quantitative transplantation of mouse sarcoma.
Br J Cancer 1953;7:367–83.
6. Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF.
Prospective identiﬁcation of tumorigenic breast cancer cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003;100:3983–8.
7. Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J, Hide T, et al.
Identiﬁcation of human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature 2004;432:
396–401.
8. Qin J, Liu X, Lafﬁn B, Chen X, Choy G, Jeter CR, et al. The PSA(-/lo) prostate
cancer cell population harbors self-renewing long-term tumor-propagating
cells that resist castration. Cell Stem Cell 2012;10:556–69.
9. O'Brien CA, Pollett A, Gallinger S, Dick JE. A human colon cancer cell
capable of initiating tumor growth in immunodeﬁcient mice. Nature
2007;445:106–10.
10. Goldstein AS, Huang J, Guo C, Garraway IP, Witte ON. Identiﬁcation of a
cell of origin for human prostate cancer. Science 2010;329:568–71.
11. Taylor RA, Toivanen R, Frydenberg M, Pedersen J, Harewood L, Australian Prostate Cancer B, et al. Human epithelial basal cells are cells of
origin of prostate cancer, independent of CD133 status. Stem Cells
2012;30:1087–96.
12. Domingo-Domenech J, Vidal SJ, Rodriguez-Bravo V, Castillo-Martin M,
Quinn SA, Rodriguez-Barrueco R, et al. Suppression of acquired docetaxel

4010 Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

resistance in prostate cancer through depletion of notch- and hedgehogdependent tumor-initiating cells. Cancer Cell 2012;22:373–88.
Quintana E, Shackleton M, Sabel MS, Fullen DR, Johnson TM, Morrison SJ.
Efﬁcient tumour formation by single human melanoma cells. Nature
2008;456:593–8.
Boiko AD, Razorenova OV, van de Rijn M, Swetter SM, Johnson DL, et al.
Human melanoma-initiating cells express neural crest nerve growth factor
receptor CD271. Nature 2010;466:133–7.
Kelly PN, Dakic A, Adams JM, Nutt SL, Strasser A. Tumor growth need not
be driven by rare cancer stem cells. Science 2007;317:337.
Vermeulen L, De Sousa E, Melo F, van der Heijden M, Cameron K, de Jong
JH, Borovski T, et al. Wnt activity deﬁnes colon cancer stem cells and is
regulated by the microenvironment. Nat Cell Biol 2010;12:468–76.
Liu J, Pascal LE, Isharwal S, Metzger D, Ramos Garcia R, Pilch J, et al.
Regenerated luminal epithelial cells are derived from preexisting luminal
epithelial cells in adult mouse prostate. Mol Endocrinol 2011;25:1849–57.
Chen J, Li Y, Yu TS, McKay RM, Burns DK, Kernie SG, et al. A restricted cell
population propagates glioblastoma growth after chemotherapy. Nature
2012;488:522–6.
Schepers AG, Snippert HJ, Stange DE, van den Born M, van Es JH, van de
Wetering M, et al. Lineage tracing reveals Lgr5þ stem cell activity in mouse
intestinal adenomas. Science 2012;337:730–5.
Driessens G, Beck B, Caauwe A, Simons BD, Blanpain C. Deﬁning the mode
of tumour growth by clonal analysis. Nature 2012;488:527–30.
Wang X, Kruithof-de Julio M, Economides KD, Walker D, Yu H, Halili MV,
et al. A luminal epithelial stem cell that is a cell of origin for prostate cancer.
Nature 2009;461:495–500.
Wang ZA, Mitrofanova A, Bergren SK, Abate-Shen C, Cardiff RD, Califano
A, et al. Lineage analysis of basal epithelial cells reveals their unexpected

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Cancer Cell-of-Origin and Cancer Stem Cells

plasticity and supports a cell-of-origin model for prostate cancer heterogeneity. Nat Cell Biol 2013;15:274–83.
23. Choi N, Zhang B, Zhang L, Ittmann M, Xin L. Adult murine prostate
basal and luminal cells are self-sustained lineages that can both
serve as targets for prostate cancer initiation. Cancer Cell 2012;21:
253–65.
24. Kemp R, Ireland H, Clayton E, Houghton C, Howard L, Winton DJ.
Elimination of background recombination: somatic induction of Cre by
combined transcriptional regulation and hormone binding afﬁnity.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004;32:e92.
25. Heffner CS, Herbert Pratt C, Babiuk RP, Sharma Y, Rockwood SF,
Donahue LR, et al. Supporting conditional mouse mutagenesis with
a comprehensive cre characterization resource. Nat Commun 2012;
3:1218.

www.aacrjournals.org

26. Schmidt-Supprian M, Rajewsky K. Vagaries of conditional gene targeting.
Nat Immunol 2007;8:665–8.
27. Liu S, Cong Y, Wang D, Sun Y, Deng L, Liu Y, et al. Breast cancer stem cells
transition between epithelial and mesenchymal states reﬂective of their
normal counterparts. Stem Cell Reports 2013;2:78–91.
28. Gupta PB, Fillmore CM, Jiang G, Shapira SD, Tao K, Kuperwasser C, et al.
Stochastic state transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in populations of cancer cells. Cell 2011;146:633–44.
29. Roesch A, Fukunaga-Kalabis M, Schmidt EC, Zabierowski SE, Brafford PA,
Vultur A, et al. A temporarily distinct subpopulation of slow-cycling
melanoma cells is required for continuous tumor growth. Cell 2010;
141:583–94.
30. Hendrix MJ, Seftor EA, Hess AR, Seftor RE. Molecular plasticity of human
melanoma cells. Oncogene 2003;22:3070–5.

Cancer Res; 75(19) October 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

4011

Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

Cell-of-Origin of Cancer versus Cancer Stem Cells: Assays and
Interpretations
Kiera Rycaj and Dean G. Tang
Cancer Res 2015;75:4003-4011. Published OnlineFirst August 19, 2015.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0798

This article cites 30 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/19/4003.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/19/4003.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

