Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Quantitative proteomics reveals the novel co-expression signatures
in early brain development for prognosis of glioblastoma multiforme
Xuexin Yu1, Lin Feng2, Dianming Liu1, Lianfeng Zhang4, Bo Wu5, Wei Jiang1, Zujing
Han3, Shujun Cheng1,2
1

College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China

2

 tate Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Etiology and Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute and Hospital,
S
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100021, China

3

BGI Tech Solutions Co. Ltd., Yantian District, Shenzhen 518083, China

4

Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100021, China

5

 epartment of Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069,
D
China

Correspondence to: S
 hujun Cheng, e-mail: chengshj@263.net.cn
	
Zujing Han, e-mail: hanzujing@genomics.org.cn
	
Wei Jiang, e-mail: jiangwei@hrbmu.edu.cn
Keywords: brain development, co-expression, glioblastoma multiforme, prognosis, chemoresponse
Received: October 23, 2015	

Accepted: January 29, 2016	

Published: February 15, 2016

ABSTRACT
Although several researches have explored the similarity across development
and tumorigenesis in cellular behavior and underlying molecular mechanisms, not
many have investigated the developmental characteristics at proteomic level and
further extended to cancer clinical outcome. In this study, we used iTRAQ to quantify
the protein expression changes during macaque rhesus brain development from
fetuses at gestation 70 days to after born 5 years. Then, we performed weighted
gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) on protein expression data of brain
development to identify co-expressed modules that highly expressed on distinct
development stages, including early stage, middle stage and late stage. Moreover,
we used the univariate cox regression model to evaluate the prognostic potentials
of these genes in two independent glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) datasets. The
results showed that the modules highly expressed on early stage contained more
reproducible prognostic genes, including ILF2, CCT7, CCT4, RPL10A, MSN, PRPS1,
TFRC and APEX1. These genes were not only associated with clinical outcome, but
also tended to influence chemoresponse. These signatures identified from embryonic
brain development might contribute to precise prediction of GBM prognosis and
identification of novel drug targets in GBM therapies. Thus, the development could
become a viable reference model for researching cancers, including identifying novel
prognostic markers and promoting new therapies.

INTRODUCTION

chemotherapy [7], the median survival of these patients
is only 15 months [8]. In past decades, substantial
research effort has focused on identification markers
of genetic alterations in GBMs that may associate with
prognosis and may help to define subclasses of GBM
patients [9, 10], such as TP53 mutation, EGFR mutation
and PTEN mutation [11–13]. While these resources all
have their own merit for uncovering the mechanism

Malignant gliomas are the most lethal and
common brain tumor in adults. The most biologically
aggressive subtype is glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
[1–4]. Its prognosis remains extremely poor [5, 6],
even after the standard treatment for GBMs-surgical
resection followed by adjuvant radiation therapy and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14161

Oncotarget

RESULTS

of malignant gliomas and promoting related therapies,
they all focus on tumor samples and not concern other
processes correlated with tumor progression such as
brain development.
There are clear analogies between tumor and
embryonic cells. The behavior of tumor cells in terms
of growth, infiltration and suppression of immune
system is similar to embryonic cells [14, 15]. Moreover,
the mechanisms of antigenic loss, production of
immunosuppressive cytokines and induction of apoptosis
in infiltrating lymphocytes are the same as those found in
embryonic cells [16, 17]. Thus, analysis the characteristics
of brain developmental process may be able to provide
useful information for the development of new integrated
cancer therapeutic strategies and discovering novel
prognosis markers. For example, the BrainSpan project has
focused on studying transcriptional mechanisms involved
in human brain development and providing the early roots
of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders [18]. At
the present stage, they just obtain the transcriptome data, in
consideration of the disagreement between mRNA level and
protein level [19, 20], the proteome data could provide some
novel and essential information.
Furthermore, for the developmental time series
data, more and more researchers have found that coexpression module analysis could assist us to discovery a
set of co-expression genes, which share a common function
[21, 22]. Various studies have demonstrated the significance
of co-expression genes in addressing biological problem
[23, 24]. For instance, Jeremy A. and colleagues use
weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA)
to identify a set of modules for elucidating the details of
human brain developmental mechanism [25].
We therefore hypothesized that the protein expression
signatures co-expressed across brain development could
provide more novel and essential information. In this study,
we used isobaric tags for relative and solute quantitation
(iTRAQ) technique [26] to quantify the relative protein
expression level during macaque rhesus brain development
from fetuses at gestation 45 days to after born 5 years. We
firstly demonstrated that the protein expression profiles
were better reflected the proteins’ interaction compared
with mRNA expression profiles from the co-expression
perspective. Then, using the WGCNA package [27] in R,
we found co-expression protein modules across brain
developmental time points. These modules were highly
expressed in different development stages and dominated
distinct biological processes. Moreover, from the modules
that were highly expressed in early brain development,
we identified some genes that were associated with GBM
patients overall survival in mRNA expression level and also
involved in chemoresponse. Thus, these signatures derived
from brain development may complement conventional
clinical markers for outcome prediction, and may become
new therapeutic targets in GBM therapy.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Summary of RNA-seq and iTRAQ Data
For nine rhesus macaque’s samples, the proteome
data were generated by iTRAQ of the above nine
samples. Through searching Mascot (version 2.3.02), the
final 1078 proteins were identified in the nine samples
(protein expression data was deposited in Table S1).
	
The transcriptome data were obtained by RNA-seq
by Illumina HiSeq™ 2000 sequencing platform. The clean
reads were mapped to the rheMac3 genome by SOAP2 [28].
The gene expression level was normalized by converting
the number of mapped reads per gene into RPKM that was
stored in the Table S2.
Moreover, we performed the multi-step analysis
to identify survival-associated signatures (Figure 1). The
detailed information of each step was described in the
following sections.

Relationship between the protein/mRNA
expression profiles and protein-protein
interactions
Through searching Mascot, the final 1078 proteins
were identified in the nine samples used in the following
analysis. Interacting proteins are more likely to be involved
in similar biological functions and thus they are more
likely to be co-expressed [29]. Therefore, we extracted
3544 interactions among 1078 proteins from STRING
database (in Methods) and calculated the PCC for every
interacted protein using the protein expression profiles,
which contained 1078 proteins with 9 time points. For the
same interacted proteins, we also computed their PCCs
using the mRNA expression profiles. The mean PCC
(rmean = 0.478) for protein expression profiles was higher than
the mean PCC (rmean = 0.416) for mRNA expression profiles.
Furthermore, the statistical significance for the difference
between the above PCCs was measured by paired student
t-test and the P value was less than 2.2 × 10-16 (Figure 2A).
We also used the quantitle-quantitle (Q-Q) plot to
show the difference between the PCCs of mRNA and
protein expression level (Figure 2B). The result suggested
that the protein expression profiles were better reflected the
proteins’ interaction from the co-expression perspective.

Identification of time-dependentco-expression
modules
To identify the principle features of the developing
brain proteome, we performed weighted gene co-expression
network analysis (WGCNA) on all 1078 proteins with nine
time points, and identified 12 modules of co-expressed
proteins (Figure 3A). WGCNA clustered proteins with
similar expression patterns in an unbiased manner, allowing

14162

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The workflow chart.

Figure 2: Disagreement of Pearson coefficient correlation (PCC) for each interaction in mRNA and protein expression
level. (A) The box plot represents the distribution of Pearson coefficient correlation for interactions in mRNA and protein expression level
respectively. Each dot indicates the PCC of each interaction. (B) the Q-Q plot of PCCs in mRNA and protein expression level.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14163

Oncotarget

a biological interpretation of these patterns (biological
process ,disease and so on) [25, 30–32]. Here, to distinguish
one module to another, each was assigned a number from
1 to 12. The modules ranged in size from 5 proteins in
module 12 to 175 proteins in module 6. Moreover, we
further filtered the proteins of each module and just
reserved these proteins, which co-expressed in protein
expression level and interacted with each other based on
STRING database. The filtered modules could possess
more significant biological sense. The original module 12
had 5 proteins, but these proteins did not interact with each
other. Thus, the module 12 was omitted in the following
analysis. The sizes of the rest 11 modules were shown in
Table S3.
The 11 modules had different expression patterns
across the brain developmental time points (Figure 3B). In
order to quantify the expression patterns, each module was
scored to assess its activity in each time point, defined by
averaging its protein expression values. Furthermore, we
performed the hierarchical clustering on the activity matrix
and we identified three groups of modules, including the
first group was highly expressed at early brain development
(module 2, 3 and 6, named early group), the second group
was highly expressed after birth (module 4, 8 and 10,
named late group), and the third group was a mixed group
as transition (module 1, 5, 7, 9 and 11, named middle
group) (Figure 4). Here, we used DAVID [33, 34] to find
the biological process (BP) terms of genes in each module.
As a result, we found that the genes of modules in three
groups dominated different biological processes (Table S4).
For example, module 6 contained proteins associated
with neuron recognition, neural tube closure, primary
neural tube formation, and positive regulation of neuron
differentiation. The proteins of module 4, 8, and 10 tended
to highly expressed after birth, and the functions of these
three modules were associated with some brain disorders,
such as Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and
Alzheimer’s disease. Moreover, the functions of the proteins
in module 1 contained synaptic transmission, regulation of
neurological system process, and regulation of neurological
system process.

early, middle and late group respectively. In order to verify
the reproducibility, we then validated the prognostic impact
of these significantly genes in one independent GBM set
by the same method and parameter, namely the TCGA
GBM set (n = 524). As a result, there were 8, 4 and 3 genes
showed consistent correlations between their expression
and overall survival. Notably, the early group statistically
significant contained the survival-associated genes
(P = 0.0086 in 10000 permutations), and the eight genes
were ILF2, CCT7, CCT4, RPL10A, MSN, PRPS1,
TFRC and APEX1 (Table S5). For each gene, we divided
the samples into two groups, including high group and
low group, based on the median gene expression value.
Furthermore, we performed log rank test to evaluate the
difference of overall survival in the two group samples
(Figure S1). Representative graphs from the eight genes
were presented in Figure 5A and 5B. We observed that
that the eight genes were capable of accurately stratifying
patients according to expression level for each gene. We
also used univariate cox regression model with the same
parameter to evaluate the association between these eight
genes expression and progression-free survival (PFS) in
GSE74187, we found the six of eight genes were significant
(P < 0.05), while the rest two genes’ expression were also
weakly related with PFS (0.05 < P < 0.1) in Figure 5C.
Here, TFRC and APEX1 were the known drug
targets of ganite and lucanthone that were approved by
FDA respectively. Particularly, lucanthone was used as
a radiation sensitizer in the treatment of brain cancer
[35, 36]. In order to evaluate the effect of the eight genes
for the mode of action of drugs, we used NCI-60 data to
assess whether these genes’ expression was associated with
chemoresponse (see in Material and Methods). In Figure 6A,
we showed the eight genes and the associated drugs. For
example, the expression level of MSN was related with four
drugs’ chemoresponse, including Carboplatin, Pipamperone,
Estramustine and Ixabepilone (Figure 6B). Importantly,
Carboplatin was used to treat the central nervous system
tumor [37, 38]. Furthermore, we also found that some genes
were related with the same drug’s chemoresponse. Thus, we
deduced that the eight genes might be potential drug targets
for brain tumors and these drugs might be repositioned for
brain tumor treatment.

Co-expression modules of early brain
development associated with survival in patients
with GBM

DISCUSSION

Based on the above three groups module genes, we
further tested whether these genes had predictive power in
clinical outcome among GBM patients in two independent
data sets including GSE74187 and TCGA GBM data,
wherein the 60 GBM samples in GSE74187 were collected
by ourselves. For GSE74187 dataset, we performed
univariate cox regression model to evaluate the significance
of the correlations between individual gene expression and
overall survival (OS) and identified 18, 11 and 17 genes
significantly (P < 0.05) related with overall survival time, in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Comparing with the transcriptome data, studying
the developing macaque rhesus brain in protein expression
level could provide more novel and essential information for
elucidating the details of brain formation and function, and
for understanding developmental mechanisms underlying
brain disorders such as autism and brain tumor. The
similarities between tumor and pregnancy go further than
the mechanism of immune escape and predictably extend to
intermediate metabolism process [14, 27]. Thus, a careful
study of the well-known mechanisms of development used
14164

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Co-expression analyses of brain development. (A) WGCNA cluster dendrogram on 9 brain development samples groups

proteins into 12 distinct modules (represents by different colors). (B) the 12 co-expression modules expression changes throughout the nine
developmental time points, each module represents by one color that is the same as Figure 2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14165

Oncotarget

by the embryo could provide fresh ideas on designing new
cancer therapies. Several recent studies have focused on this
issue and explored the relationship between development
and tumor on gene expression level [39]. At present, these
researches have only investigated the developmental process
on transcriptome level. While we use iTRAQ to measure
the protein expression during the macaque rhesus brain
development from fetuses at gestation 70 days to after born
5 years. This data resource could complement the present
brain development data pool.
In this study, we utilized the protein expression data
during macaque rhesus brain development to depict the
brain function formation and changes by co-expression
modules. We also found that the protein expression of early
developmental stage was significantly positive correlated
with the mRNA expression of GBM. Furthermore, we found
that the protein expression better reflected the proteins’
interaction compared with mRNA expression. Importantly,

the modules that highly expressed on early brain
development contained more markers associated with GBM
patient’s outcome. We not only performed univariable cox
regression, but also used multivariate cox regression model
for adjusting the age, gender and race information, the eight
genes were significant in both two regression models. These
findings might provide fresh ideas for understanding GBM
and providing new therapy targets. In particular, the low
expression level of MSN associated with poor prognosis
in GBM patients, and also related with chemoresponse
of Carboplatin, so we deduced that Carboplatin could use
for treating the GBM patients with lower MSN expression
level. Moreover, the method of the drug sensitivity analysis
could be used in similar project to explore whether the genes
have influence on the drug sensitivity.
With the increasing volume of developmental data,
the analysis of tumor and development relationships in
methylation or non-coding RNA level will be considered

Figure 4: Clustering co-expression modules into different developmental stages. The heatmap represents the three module
groups and the color of each cell describes the mean expression value divided by the number of genes in this module.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14166

Oncotarget

Figure 5: The co-expression signatures in early brain development predictsOS as well as PFS in GBM patients. (A) and

(B) shows representative OS curves based on data analyzed from GSE74187 and TCGA GBM datasets respectively. (C) shows respective
representative PFS curves based on data analyzed from GSE74187.

Figure 6: Signature genes associated with some drugs’ chemoresponse. (A) The eight genes associates with different number

drugs’ chemoresponse. (B) The example of MSN expression level in sensitive and resistant cell lines for four drugs, including carboplatin,
pipamperone, estramustine and ixabeilone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14167

Oncotarget

in the future works. It is our expectation that the study
of development–cancer associations will provide fresh
ideas for understanding tumor pathological systems and
ultimately improve therapeutics.

proteins more precisely. Searches were made against the
NCBI Macaca protein database (53990 sequences). Spectra
from the 12 fractions were combined into one MGF (Mascot
generic format) file after the raw data were loaded, and
the MGF file was searched. The search parameters were:
i) trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with one missed
cleavage allowed; ii) the fixed modifications of
carbamidomethylation were set as Cys, and variable
modifications of oxidation as Met; iii) peptide tolerance was
set as 0.05 Da, and MS/MS tolerance was set as 0.1 Da. The
peptide charge was set as Mr, and monoisotopic mass was
chosen. An automatic decoy database search strategy was
employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). The
FDR was calculated as the false positive matches divided
by the total matches. In the final search results, the FDR
was less than 1.5%. The iTRAQ 8-plex was chosen for
quantification during the search. The search results were
passed through additional filters before data exportation.
For protein identification, the filters were set as follows:
significance threshold P, 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and
ion score or expected cutoff less than 0.05 (with 95%
confidence). For protein quantitation, the filters were set
as follows: “median” was chosen for the protein ratio type
(http://www.matrixscience.com/help/quant_config_help.
html); the minimum precursor charge was set to 2 and
minimum peptides were set to 2; only unique peptides were
used to quantify proteins. The median intensities were set
as normalization, and outliers were removed automatically.
The peptide threshold was set as above for identity.
At last, there were 1078 proteins with protein
expression at each sample.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rhesus macaques and samples
The present study was approved by the ethics
committee at Institute of Laboratory Animal Science,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) &
Peking Union Medical College (PUMC). All experiments
were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines
and regulations. Rhesus macaques at nine different
developmental time points, including fetuses at gestation
70 days, 100 days, 137 days, 157 days, 163 days (T70d,
T100d, T137d, T157d, T163d), after born 4 days, 5 days,
7 days (B4d, B5d, B7d) and after born 5 years (B5y). All
rhesus were raised at the Institute of Laboratory Animal
Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) &
Peking Union Medical College (PUMC). Caesarean sections
were performed to obtain fetuses from pregnant rhesus at
given developmental time point. Organ was isolated by
manual dissection after euthanasia of living animals. For
younger fetuses, dissection was completed with the aid of
a dissecting microscope (Nikon, Japan). The brain samples
from each rhesus were individually prepared for RNA and
protein extraction.

Protein extraction and peptide labeled by
iTRAQ

GBM patient gene expression and clinical data

The harvested cells were lysed in the buffer,
containing 8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 10 mM dithiotreitol,
and 40 m MTris-HCl, pH 8.0, with sonication in ice. After
centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C, the supernatants were
reduced and alkylated by 10 mM dithiotreitol and 55 mM
iodoacetamide. The treated proteins were precipitated in 80%
acetone at −20°C overnight, and the precipitants were resuspended in 0.8 M urea and 500 mM tetraethylammonium
bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. The protein concentrations
were determined using the Bradford method followed by a
16 h trypsin digestion at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were
labeled by the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex, Foster
City, CA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. After 2 h
of labeling reactions, the reaction solvents were removed by
Speed-vacuum, and the labeled peptides were dissolved in
20 mM NH4FA, pH 10, for the following experiments.

Sixty GBM samples with OS and PFS information
were obtained during surgical resection from Tian Tan
Hospital from 2008 to 2010. All donors signed informed
consent forms. The use of human tissue samples and the
experimental procedures for this study were reviewed and
approved by the Ethics Committee of the Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.
Total RNA was isolated with Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen, CA, USA), and those allocated for microarray
detection were purified with an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, MD,
USA). RNA was quantitated with ND-1000 UV-VIS
Spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, DE, USA)
and the integrity of RNA was assessed using the RNA 6000
Labchip kit in combination with the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer
(Agilent, CA, USA). Purified total RNA samples were
labeled and hybridized to Agilent 4 × 44 K Whole Human
Genome Oligo Microarrays according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Furthermore, the raw and processed gene
expression data and clinical information of the sixty
GBM samples have been deposited in Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database with the series accession
numbers GSE74187.

Database searches for peptide and protein
identification
The 2.3.02 version of Mascot software (Matrix
Science, Boston, MA) was used to simultaneously identify
and quantify proteins. In this version, only unique peptides
used for protein quantification were chosen to quantify
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14168

Oncotarget

Protein-protein interaction data

were defined as resistant to the compound, whereas those
with log10 (IC50) values that were less than μ−SD were
regarded as sensitive. Cell lines with values for log10 (IC50)
within μ ± SD were considered to be intermediate and
were then eliminated from further analysis. The following
analysis was performed for compounds that had at least
10 sensitive and 10 resistant cell lines. Of the 20,503
compounds evaluated in Developmental Therapeutics
Program (DTP), 5,688 met these criteria, including 38
drugs that were approved by FDA.
For the 38 FDA approved drugs, we used t-test to
determine whether the gene differential expressed between
sensitive and resistant cell lines for each drug. If the P value
< 0.05, we defined this gene expression was associated
with chemoresponse of the given drug.

The rhesus macaque protein-protein interaction
(PPI) data were obtained from STRING database v9.1. We
obtained 3544 interactions among the 1078 proteins that
are experimentally verified (experimental scores > 200) and
have total scores (> 400).

Quantification of the relationship between
protein/mRNA expression and PPI
We used Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) as the
measure of relationship between protein/mRNA expression
and protein interactions. For the 3544 interactions, we
computed the PCC for each interaction in protein and
mRNA expression profiles respectively.
In order to quantitative comparison the PCC in protein
expression profiles with the PCC in mRNA expression
profiles, we used paired student t-test to determined whether
the above two PCC sets were different. If the P value
was less than 0.05, it suggests that the two data sets were
significantly different.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the National High
Technology Research and Development Program of
China (863 Program, Grant Nos. 2014AA021102 and
2014AA020602), the Funds for the Graduate Innovation
Fund of Heilongjiang Province (YJSCX2014-20HYD).

Identification of co-expression modules by
WGCNA

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

We used the WGCNA package in R to construct
unsigned co-expression network. There were 1078 proteins
in this network. Network construction was performed
using blockwiseModules function in the WGCNA.
For each set of genes, pair-wise correlation matrix was
computed, and adjacency matrix was calculated by
raising the correlation matrix to a power (power = 10).
The topological overlap measure was used to measure the
network interconnectedness, which was calculated based
on the adjacency matrix. Furthermore, the topological
overlap based dissimilarity was then used as input for
average linkage hierarchical clustering. Finally, modules
were identified on the dendrogram using Dynamic Tree Cut
algorithm [40].

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

REFERENCES
1.	

Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK, Burger PC,
Jouvet A, Scheithauer BW, Kleihues P. The 2007 WHO
classification of tumours of the central nervous system. Acta
neuropathologica. 2007; 114:97–109.

2.	 Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher B,
Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:987–996.

Survival analysis

3.	 Aldape K, Zadeh G, Mansouri S, Reifenberger G, von
Deimling A. Glioblastoma: pathology, molecular mechanisms
and markers. Acta neuropathologica. 2015; 129:829–848.

Univariable Cox Proportional Hazards regression
model was used to evaluate the association of a given gene
expression with survival. P values < 0.05 were considered
statistically significant. The above analysis was performed
using the R package “survival”.

4.	 Prados MD, Byron SA, Tran NL, Phillips JJ, Molinaro AM,
Ligon KL, Wen PY, Kuhn JG, Mellinghoff IK, de Groot JF,
Colman H, Cloughesy TF, Chang SM, et al. Toward precision
medicine in glioblastoma: the promise and the challenges.
Neuro-oncology. 2015; 17:1051–1063.
5.	

Determination of the gene expression associated
with chemoresponse

6.	 Lamborn KR, Chang SM, Prados MD. Prognostic factors
for survival of patients with glioblastoma: recursive
partitioning analysis. Neuro-oncology. 2004; 6:227–235.

For NCI-60, the 60 cell lines were previously assayed
for their responses to a variety of compounds, which were
measured by the IC50. For each compound, the log10 (IC50)
values were normalized across the 60 cell lines. Cell lines
with value of log10 (IC50) that were greater than μ + SD
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Huse JT, Holland E, DeAngelis LM. Glioblastoma: molecular
analysis and clinical implications. Annual review of medicine.
2013; 64:59–70.

7.	

14169

Carlsson SK, Brothers SP, Wahlestedt C. Emerging treatment
strategies for glioblastoma multiforme. EMBO molecular
medicine. 2014; 6:1359–1370.
Oncotarget

8.	 Mischel PS, Cloughesy TF. Targeted molecular therapy of
GBM. Brain Pathol. 2003; 13:52–61.

22.	 Ernst J, Nau GJ, Bar-Joseph Z. Clustering short time series
gene expression data. Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:i159–168.

9.	 Brennan C, Momota H, Hambardzumyan D, Ozawa T,
Tandon A, Pedraza A, Holland E. Glioblastoma subclasses
can be defined by activity among signal transduction
pathways and associated genomic alterations. PloS one. 2009;
4:e7752.

23.	 Yang Y, Han L, Yuan Y, Li J, Hei N, Liang H. Gene coexpression network analysis reveals common system-level
properties of prognostic genes across cancer types. Nature
communications. 2014; 5:3231.
24.	 Pierson E, Consortium GT, Koller D, Battle A, Mostafavi S,
Ardlie KG, Getz G, Wright FA, Kellis M, Volpi S,
Dermitzakis ET. Sharing and Specificity of Co-expression
Networks across 35 Human Tissues. PLoS computational
biology. 2015; 11:e1004220.

10.	 Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH,
Wu TD, Misra A, Nigro JM, Colman H, Soroceanu L,
Williams PM, Modrusan Z, Feuerstein BG, et al. Molecular
subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate
a pattern of disease progression, and resemble stages in
neurogenesis. Cancer cell. 2006; 9:157–173.

25.	 Voineagu I, Wang X, Johnston P, Lowe JK, Tian Y, Horvath S,
Mill J, Cantor RM, Blencowe BJ, Geschwind DH.
Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent
molecular pathology. Nature. 2011; 474:380–384.

11.	 Parsons DW, Jones S, Zhang X, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P,
Mankoo P, Carter H, Siu IM, Gallia GL, Olivi A, McLendon R,
Rasheed BA, et al. An integrated genomic analysis of human
glioblastoma multiforme. Science. 2008; 321:1807–1812.

26.	 Ross PL, Huang YN, Marchese JN, Williamson B, Parker K,
Hattan S, Khainovski N, Pillai S, Dey S, Daniels S,
Purkayastha S, Juhasz P, Martin S, et al. Multiplexed protein
quantitation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using aminereactive isobaric tagging reagents. Molecular & cellular
proteomics. 2004; 3:1154–1169.

12.	 Bredel M, Scholtens DM, Harsh GR, Bredel C, Chandler JP,
Renfrow JJ, Yadav AK, Vogel H, Scheck AC, Tibshirani R,
Sikic BI. A network model of a cooperative genetic
landscape in brain tumors. JAMA. 2009; 302:261–275.
13.	 Mosrati MA, Malmstrom A, Lysiak M, Krysztofiak A,
Hallbeck M, Milos P, Hallbeck AL, Bratthall C, Strandeus M,
Stenmark-Askmalm M, Soderkvist P. TERT promoter
mutations and polymorphisms as prognostic factors in
primary glioblastoma. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:16663–16673.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4389.

27.	 Langfelder P, Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for
weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics.
2008; 9:559.

14.	 Ridolfi L, Petrini M, Fiammenghi L, Riccobon A, Ridolfi R.
Human embryo immune escape mechanisms rediscovered
by the tumor. Immunobiology. 2009; 214:61–76.

29.	 Deng M, Sun F, Chen T. Assessment of the reliability of
protein-protein interactions and protein function prediction.
Pac Symp Biocomput. 2003:140–151.

15.	 Ma Y, Zhang P, Wang F, Yang J, Yang Z, Qin H. The
relationship between early embryo development and
tumourigenesis. Journal of cellular and molecular medicine.
2010; 14:2697–2701.

30.	 Hawrylycz MJ, Lein ES, Guillozet-Bongaarts AL, Shen EH,
Ng L, Miller JA, van de Lagemaat LN, Smith KA, Ebbert A,
Riley ZL, Abajian C, Beckmann CF, Bernard A, et al. An
anatomically comprehensive atlas of the adult human brain
transcriptome. Nature. 2012; 489:391–399.

28.	 Li R, Yu C, Li Y, Lam TW, Yiu SM, Kristiansen K, Wang J.
SOAP2: an improved ultrafast tool for short read alignment.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1966–1967.

16.	 Bubanovic I, Najman S. Failure of anti-tumor immunity in
mammals—evolution of the hypothesis. Acta Biotheor. 2004;
52:57–64.

31.	 Zhang B, Horvath S. A general framework for weighted
gene co-expression network analysis. Stat Appl Genet Mol
Biol. 2005; 4:Article17.

17.	 Soeters PB, Grimble RF. The conditional role of inflammation
in pregnancy and cancer. Clin Nutr. 2013; 32:460–465.

32.	 Oldham MC, Konopka G, Iwamoto K, Langfelder P, Kato T,
Horvath S, Geschwind DH. Functional organization of the
transcriptome in human brain. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:
1271–1282.

18.	 Miller JA, Ding SL, Sunkin SM, Smith KA, Ng L, Szafer A,
Ebbert A, Riley ZL, Royall JJ, Aiona K, Arnold JM, Bennet C,
Bertagnolli D, et al. Transcriptional landscape of the prenatal
human brain. Nature. 2014; 508:199–206.

33.	 Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic
and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID
bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:44–57.

19.	 Chen G, Gharib TG, Huang CC, Taylor JM, Misek DE,
Kardia SL, Giordano TJ, Iannettoni MD, Orringer MB,
Hanash SM, Beer DG. Discordant protein and mRNA
expression in lung adenocarcinomas. Molecular & cellular
proteomics. 2002; 1:304–313.

34.	 Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics
enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional
analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:1–13.

20.	 Pascal LE, True LD, Campbell DS, Deutsch EW, Risk M,
Coleman IM, Eichner LJ, Nelson PS, Liu AY. Correlation of
mRNA and protein levels: cell type-specific gene expression
of cluster designation antigens in the prostate. BMC
genomics. 2008; 9:246.

35.	 Luo M, Kelley MR. Inhibition of the human apurinic/
apyrimidinic endonuclease (APE1) repair activity and
sensitization of breast cancer cells to DNA alkylating agents
with lucanthone. Anticancer research. 2004; 24:2127–2134.
36.	 Del Rowe JD, Bello J, Mitnick R, Sood B, Filippi C, Moran J,
Freeman K, Mendez F, Bases R. Accelerated regression of
brain metastases in patients receiving whole brain radiation

21.	 Bar-Joseph Z. Analyzing time series gene expression data.
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:2493–2503.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14170

Oncotarget

and the topoisomerase II inhibitor, lucanthone. International
journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics. 1999;
43:89–93.

39.	 Soundararajan R, Paranjape AN, Barsan V, Chang JT,
Mani SA. A novel embryonic plasticity gene signature that
predicts metastatic competence and clinical outcome. Sci
Rep. 2015; 5:11766.

37.	 Tyson RM, Siegal T, Doolittle ND, Lacy C, Kraemer DF,
Neutwelt EA. Current status and future of relapsed primary
central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL). Leukemia &
lymphoma. 2003; 44:627–633.

40.	 Langfelder P, Zhang B, Horvath S. Defining clusters from a
hierarchical cluster tree: the Dynamic Tree Cut package for
R. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24:719–720.

38.	 Kushner BH, Kramer K, Modak S, Kernan NA, Reich LM,
Danis K, Cheung NK. Topotecan, thiotepa, and carboplatin for
neuroblastoma: failure to prevent relapse in the central nervous
system. Bone marrow transplantation. 2006; 37:271–276.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14171

Oncotarget

