Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

Cancer
Research

Integrated Systems and Technologies

Pulsed High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound
Enhances Delivery of Doxorubicin in
a Preclinical Model of Pancreatic Cancer
Tong Li1, Yak-Nam Wang1, Tatiana D. Khokhlova2, Samantha D'Andrea2, Frank Starr1,
Hong Chen1, Jeannine S. McCune3,4, Linda J. Risler3,4, Afshin Mashadi-Hossein5,
Sunil R. Hingorani6, Amy Chang6, and Joo Ha Hwang2

Abstract
Pancreatic cancer is characterized by extensive stromal desmoplasia, which decreases blood perfusion and impedes chemotherapy delivery. Breaking the stromal barrier could both
increase perfusion and permeabilize the tumor, enhancing
chemotherapy penetration. Mechanical disruption of the stroma can be achieved using ultrasound-induced bubble activity—
cavitation. Cavitation is also known to result in microstreaming
and could have the added beneﬁt of actively enhancing diffusion into the tumors. Here, we report the ability to enhance
chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin penetration using ultrasound-induced cavitation in a genetically engineered mouse
model (KPC mouse) of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. To
induce localized inertial cavitation in pancreatic tumors, pulsed
high-intensity focused ultrasound (pHIFU) was used either
during or before doxorubicin administration to elucidate the
mechanisms of enhanced drug delivery (active vs. passive drug

diffusion). For both types, the pHIFU exposures that were
associated with high cavitation activity resulted in disruption
of the highly ﬁbrotic stromal matrix and enhanced the normalized doxorubicin concentration by up to 4.5-fold compared
with controls. Furthermore, normalized doxorubicin concentration was associated with the cavitation metrics (P < 0.01),
indicating that high and sustained cavitation results in
increased chemotherapy penetration. No signiﬁcant difference
between the outcomes of the two types, that is, doxorubicin
infusion during or after pHIFU treatment, was observed, suggesting that passive diffusion into previously permeabilized
tissue is the major mechanism for the increase in drug concentration. Together, the data indicate that pHIFU treatment of
pancreatic tumors when resulting in high and sustained cavitation can efﬁciently enhance chemotherapy delivery to pancreatic tumors. Cancer Res; 75(18); 3738–46. 2015 AACR.

Introduction

pancreatic cancer patients has been disappointing (9, 10). Despite
this, it is still the standard chemotherapy used to treat pancreatic
cancer.
There are a number of characteristics of pancreatic cancer that
make it difﬁcult to treat with chemotherapy; most importantly,
is the presence of a dense stroma that separates cancer cells from
the blood vessels and signiﬁcantly decreases tissue permeability
(11, 12). The dense stroma has been shown to cause high interstitial pressures that collapse the blood vessels in the tumor,
leading to limited blood perfusion and insufﬁcient drug delivery
(13). The main reason for the discrepancy in gemcitabine efﬁciency between human trials and many preclinical animal studies
is thought to be due to the absence of a desmoplastic stroma in the
xenograft and syngenic autograft models. Recently, a transgenic
mouse model of PDAC, that is, KrasLSL.G12D/þ; p53R172H/þ;
PdxCretg/þ (KPC) mouse, was developed that closely recapitulates the genetic mutations, clinical symptoms, and histopathology found in human pancreatic cancer (14). This mouse model is
considered one of the most appropriate models for studying drug
delivery in pancreatic cancer, because it provides a much more
realistic model to evaluate the potential for clinical translation
(15). Studies in the KPC mouse model have demonstrated that
breaking down the stromal matrix by the administration of
smoothened inhibitor, IPI-926, increases delivery of gemcitabine
into the tumors (14, 16). It also results in an increase in intratumoral vascular density and intratumoral concentration of gemcitabine 4 days after treatment, leading to stabilization of disease

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States (1, 2). In
2013, more than 45,000 Americans were diagnosed with pancreatic cancer (2). Unlike many other cancers, the survival rate for
PDAC has not improved substantially, with the 5-year relative
survival rate for pancreatic cancer increasing from 2% to only 6%
since 1975. Although gemcitabine, a deoxycytosine analogue, has
been shown to be effective in inducing apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro and in arresting tumor growth in xenograft (3)
and syngeneic mouse models (4–8), its effectiveness in treating
1
Center for Industrial and Medical Ultrasound, Applied Physics Laboratory,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. 2Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
3
Department of Pharmacy, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
4
Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
5
Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
6
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Joo Ha Hwang, University of Washington, 1959 Northeast Paciﬁc Street, Box 356424, Seattle, WA 98195. Phone: 206-685-2283; Fax:
206-221-3992; E-mail: Jooha@medicine.washington.edu.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3738 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

pHIFU Enhances Doxorubicin Delivery to Pancreatic Tumor

and an extended survival from 11 to 25 days. In spite of these
promising results, IPI-926 performed poorly in pancreatic cancer
clinical trials, resulting in more aggressive tumors, with heightened proliferation, indicating that stromal elements may also
restrain tumor growth (17). Thus, the development of efﬁcient
strategy for chemotherapeutic drug delivery to pancreatic tumors
remains an unmet challenge.
High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) therapy is commonly used as a noninvasive treatment that kills diseased tissue with
heat (ablation) or mechanical distruption (cavitation). In HIFU,
powerful ultrasound waves from an extracorporeal source are
focused transcutaneously to induce thermal or mechanical tissue
damage at the focus without affecting surrounding tissues. Most
HIFU treatments use the thermal effect resulting from absorption
of continuous ultrasound waves by tissue and have been used to
ablate various solid tumors, including pancreatic cancer (18).
Alternatively, pulsed HIFU (pHIFU) treatments may be used to
promote the mechanical effects, primarily acoustic cavitation—
formation and ultrasound-driven activity of micron-sized bubbles in tissue. Although live tissue does not initially contain gas
bubbles, tiny gas bodies dispersed in cells may serve as cavitation
nuclei that grow into bubbles when subjected to sufﬁciently large
rarefactional pressure, that is, a cavitation threshold (19). The
violent collapses of the cavitation bubbles, termed inertial cavitation, can disrupt tissue due to the accompanying high shear
forces that are generated, and thus increase tissue and/or vascular
permeability (20). In recent years, there has been an increasing
interest in using pHIFU with and without microbubbles to
enhance drug delivery to solid tumors by permeabilizing the
tissue through cavitation (21, 22). However, studies on measuring
cavitation activity during in vivo studies have been scarce (23).
In a recent study by Tinkov and colleagues (24), ultrasoundinduced targeted destruction of doxorubicin-loaded microbubbles was used to enhance localized drug delivery in a rat model
with subcutaneously grafted pancreatic carcinoma. A 12-fold
higher tissue concentration of doxorubicin and a signiﬁcantly
lower tumor growth in the targeted tumor compared with the

contralateral control tumor was observed. However, the animal
model used in the study is not ideal for evaluating clinical
translation due to the absence of the desmoplastic reaction.
Unlike most other studies on cavitation-enhanced drug delivery, the study described in this article was based on nucleating and
sustaining cavitation in the tumor tissue itself, without systemic
administration of ultrasound contrast agents (UCA). This choice
was dictated by the characteristics of pancreatic cancer—poor
vascularization and high interstitial pressure, which made it
unlikely for the UCAs to be circulating through the tumor in
large enough numbers. Moreover, UCAs are conﬁned to vasculature and may not cause sufﬁcient permeabilization of the
stromal matrix, the main obstacle to drug delivery. As cavitation
is a stochastic phenomenon, the cavitation threshold, as well as
the correlation between drug penetration and the cavitation
activity metrics is difﬁcult to establish and is still controversial
(21, 25, 26). In our previous studies, we developed a methodology for quantiﬁcation of cavitation activity in pancreatic tumors
during pHIFU using passive cavitation detection (PCD; ref. 23).
Here, we aimed to correlate the corresponding cavitation metrics
with the enhancement of the chemotherapy uptake, speciﬁcally
doxorubicin, by the tumor in the KPC mouse model.
Another goal of this study was to investigate the mechanism of
pHIFU-enhanced drug delivery: Active diffusion of the drug
facilitated by acoustic streaming that accompanies bubble activity
versus passive diffusion into permeabilized tissue. We thus compared the drug uptake in two different administration sequences
that use either of the mechanisms: Doxorubicin infusion during
or after pHIFU treatment.

Materials and Methods
pHIFU system
A preclinical focused ultrasound system (VIFU 2000; Alpinion
Medical Systems), was used for pHIFU exposures, treatment
planning, and cavitation monitoring. The system, shown in Fig.
1A, was used with either of the two alternative HIFU transducers—

Figure 1.
A, schematic illustration of the pHIFU treatment system. The HIFU transducer, a ring-shaped transducer for PCD, and an ultrasound imaging probe were aligned
confocally and coaxially, and built into the side of the acrylic water tank. The anesthetized KPC mouse was placed in a custom holder attached to a
3D positioning system during treatment. B, B-mode ultrasound image of a mouse pancreatic tumor (dashed line). B-mode image guidance was used during
treatment to align the targeted tumor region with the HIFU focus. C, the HIFU focal area was scanned in two transverse directions during treatment to cover
the tumor region.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3739

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

Li et al.

a 1.1-MHz transducer (64-mm aperture and radius of curvature)
and a 1.5-MHz transducer (64-mm aperture and 45-mm radius
of curvature). Both transducers had a circular central opening of
38-mm diameter, which was ﬁtted with a focused ring-shaped
transducer for PCD and an ultrasound imaging probe (C4-12
phased array, center frequency: 7-MHz, Alpinion Medical Systems) for in-line targeting of the tumor. The geometric foci of
the PCD and the HIFU transducers were aligned in the axial
direction, so that the overlap of the focal areas was maximized
(23). The transducers were mounted in a water tank attached to
a water conditioning system for continuous degassing and
heating. HIFU focal pressures were applied between 1.6–12.4
MPa and 2.2–17 MPa for the 1.1- and 1.5-MHz transducers,
respectively (27).
Cavitation detection and quantiﬁcation
The broadband noise emissions associated with inertial cavitation during each pHIFU pulse were received by the PCD transducer, ampliﬁed by 20 dB (Panametrics PR5072) as shown
in Fig. 1A, recorded by a digital oscilloscope (Picoscope 4424;
Pico Technology) and processed as previously reported (23).
Brieﬂy, each signal was ﬁltered in the frequency domain to
eliminate the signal associated with HIFU waves backscattered
from tissue. The ﬁltered PCD signal was further analyzed in time
domain to obtain two metrics: A binary evaluation of whether a
cavitation event took place within the HIFU pulse and, if a
cavitation event was observed, a measure of the cavitation activity
in the form of the broadband noise amplitude. The cavitation
event was considered observed if the signal amplitude was distinguishable from the maximum amplitude of the background
noise by a simple statistical variation of the background noise
with a 98% conﬁdence level (28). The measure of cavitation
activity was obtained by integration over the broadband noise
components in the frequency domain. This metric is similar to
that used by Hwang and colleagues (29).
The cavitation metrics obtained for each pulse of a pHIFU
treatment were batch-processed to extract the following indicators
of cavitation activity at each treated spot: Cavitation persistence
and mean broadband noise amplitude. Cavitation persistence
was deﬁned as the percentage of the HIFU pulses that induced a
cavitation event among the pulses delivered at a single-treatment
spot; it was then averaged over all pHIFU focus locations in the
tumor.
According to the measurements performed in our previous
work, the peak-rarefactional pressure corresponding to the cavitation threshold for the pancreatic tumors in KPC mice (i.e., the
probability of inducing a cavitation event at any given spot in the
tumor is 50%) at 1.1 MHz was 3 MPa, whereas cavitation
persistence reached 50% level at 7 MPa, 75% level at 8.5 MPa
and 100% at 11 MPa. Similar preliminary measurements were
performed for the 1.5-MHz transducer following the same methodology (23), and the cavitation threshold was found to be 11.5
MPa, with persistence reaching 50% at 13 MPa, 75% at 14.5 MPa
and 100% at 16.5 MPa.
Although thorough measurements of cavitation activity were
performed previously, there was no estimate of the minimally
required cavitation activity to enhance drug penetration into the
pancreatic tumor. A preliminary experiment was, therefore, performed, in which the drug was administered during pHIFU
exposure of a subcutaneous tumor, and the peak-negative focal
pressure varied among treatment spots. The cavitation metrics

3740 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

were recorded at each spot, and the drug penetration was evaluated. On the basis of the results of the preliminary experiment,
three acoustic output settings were determined for drug delivery
experiments that resulted in low-cavitation dose (cavitation persistence less than 25%), medium-cavitation dose (cavitation
persistence of 25%–75%), and high-cavitation dose (cavitation
persistence of 75%–100%).
Animal model and experimental design
A KPC transgenic mouse model of PDAC was used. This model
closely recapitulates the genetic mutations, clinical symptoms,
and histopathology found in human pancreatic cancer, unlike
subcutaneous or orthotopic models (14). The tumors have a
moderately differentiated ductal morphology with extensive
dense stromal matrix and poorly developed vasculature. All of
the animal experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of
Washington. KPC mice were closely monitored and imaged by
high-resolution diagnostic ultrasound to screen for pancreatic
tumor development (30); when the tumor size reached 1 cm,
the animal was enrolled in the study.
In this study, doxorubicin was used as a chemotherapeutic agent
and served as a proxy to gemcitabine because it is conveniently
detectable by ﬂuorescent imaging. The molecular weight of gemcitabine is lower than doxorubicin. Therefore, it should be easier
for gemcitabine to pass through the vasculature (31, 32). The
animals received intravenous infusion of 30 mg/kg doxorubicin
via the tail vein either during or after pHIFU treatment. The
infusion duration corresponded to that of the pHIFU treatment.
A total of 31 mice were used in this study. All animals were
divided into groups (n ¼ 5–8) randomly according to the cavitation dose to be delivered during pHIFU treatment—low, medium, or high—and the time of the doxorubicin administration—
during or after the pHIFU treatment. The control group received
doxorubicin administration only. Mice (n ¼ 5) that had large
acoustically treatable areas were subject to both types of treatment. In these cases, pHIFU treatment during doxorubicin administration was performed before the pHIFU treatment after doxorubicin administration and each treatment was located in distinctly separate regions of the tumor.
In the preliminary experiment, the lowest acoustic output level
and the corresponding cavitation dose, which yields noticeably
enhanced penetration of drug into the tumor was determined
using a subcutaneous model of pancreatic cancer due to the
comparative ease of targeting. Cell lines with epithelial morphology derived from liver metastases (LMP cells) from KPC mice (2 
106 cells/mL) were injected s.c. in the ﬂank of the WT mouse, and
used when tumor sized reached 1 cm (33).
Experimental procedures
The study animal was anesthetized by inhalation of isoﬂurane,
and the abdomen was shaved and depilated. High-resolution
ultrasound imaging was performed (L8-17 linear array, center
frequency: 12 MHz, Alpinion) to measure the dimensions of the
pancreatic tumor and to identify the acoustic window appropriate
for the pHIFU treatment (Fig. 1A). Gas-ﬁlled bodies are highly
reﬂective to ultrasound, and therefore intestinal loops and the
stomach was avoided. To decrease the potential risk of cavitation
on the skin in the treatment path, isopropyl alcohol was used to
wipe the area before being submerged into the heated water tank
(at 37 C) for treatment planning.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

pHIFU Enhances Doxorubicin Delivery to Pancreatic Tumor

Treatment planning was performed under ultrasound image
guidance. The HIFU focus was aligned with the center of the tumor
in the axial direction. An example of tumor image is outlined
in Fig.1B. The pHIFU treatment grid in the two transverse dimensions was generated to cover the acoustically accessible tumor
region (Fig. 1C). Treatment spots were separated by 2 mm.
During the pHIFU treatment, the mouse holder was moved to
position the HIFU focus at each of the planned treatment spots.
The same pulsing protocol was used at each spot: A series of 60
pulses of 1 ms duration were delivered at a pulse repetition
frequency of 1 Hz. The output power was set at the level corresponding to the desired cavitation dose—low, medium, or high.
The 1 ms pulse duration and the low duty factor (0.001) were
chosen to avoid thermal effects, especially at the larger focal
pressure levels, yet retain cavitation. The temperature elevation
per pulse and averaged over the 60-second exposure were estimated following the approach in ref. 23 and were 11.9 C and
6 C, correspondingly for the highest output levels (23). The
calculation does not account for tissue perfusion, thus, the
heating levels are expected to be even lower.
An average surface projection of the tumor area was 1 cm2, the
average pHIFU treatment time was 30 minutes and the average
doxorubicin infusion duration was 30 minutes for both treatment
types. Immediately after pHIFU treatment and doxorubicin infusion, mice were removed from the water bath. The abdomen of the
animal was surgically opened, the vasculature was ﬂushed with
saline and the tumor was collected for examination.
Multispectral imaging
The excised tumor was immediately examined with a ﬂuorescent imaging system (Maestro in vivo Imaging System; CRi) to
obtain the overall distribution of doxorubicin. Ex vivo multispectral image cubes were acquired using a dual-ﬁlter protocol (445 to
490 nm Ex/515 nm long pass Em; 503 to 555 nm Ex/580 nm long
pass Em). The tunable ﬁlter was automatically stepped in 10 nm
increments and the camera captured images at each wavelength
interval with constant exposure. The spectral ﬂuorescence images
consisting of the doxorubicin spectra and tumor autoﬂuorescence
were unmixed on the basis of their spectral patterns using the
provided software and standard protocols (CRi). The resulting
distribution of volumetric ﬂuorescent intensity directly showed
the distribution of doxorubicin (yellow) in the targeted area
versus control area (pink).
However, this measurement was only qualitative. For the
quantitative assessment, small (2 mm in diameter) segments of
the tumor in the treated and the control area were collected using a
biopsy punch, which were analyzed for doxorubicin concentration by high-pressure liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
(LC/MS-MS).
Fluorescent microscopy and histologic examination
After multispectral imaging, the samples were immediately
embedded in optimum cutting temperature medium and frozen
in isopentane cooled on dry ice. Serial sections of 8-mm thickness
were taken at various locations throughout the tumor using a Leica
CM 1950 Cryostat (Leica Biosystems). At each location, the ﬁrst
section was evaluated by ﬂuorescent microscopy, using a custom
ﬁlter set (480/40 nm Ex; 605/50 nm Em; dichroic, 505 lp), to
visualize the distribution of doxorubicin. The second section was
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for structural mor-

www.aacrjournals.org

phology (34). The third section was stained with Masson's trichrome stain for ﬁbrosis evaluation (35). Masson's trichrome stain
was used to characterize the potential damage caused by pHIFU to
the collagen in the stromal matrix. All slides were visualized with an
upright microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i; Nikon).
Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry
analysis
The doxorubicin concentration in tumor samples was measured using high-pressure LC/MS-MS, as previously described
(36) with minor modiﬁcations (Supplementary LC/MS-MS
analysis).
Because doxorubicin uptake in tumor tissue varied drastically
from one mouse to another due to the differences in vasculature
density, heterogeneity, and intratumoral pressure, the doxorubicin concentration in the treated area was normalized to the
doxorubicin concentration of nontreated area from the same
tumor. In this way, the baseline variance across different mice
was justiﬁed. The association of this normalized uptake with
cavitation activity metrics recorded during pHIFU treatments was
evaluated.
Statistical analysis
A generalized estimating equation (GEE) was used to estimate
the effect of cavitation metrics on doxorubicin uptake (37), as well
as the effect of treatment types on the doxorubicin uptake due to
the repeated measurement (both treatment types were applied on
separate tumor regions on mice with large acoustic windows) on a
number of the mice. Two linear models were used: One to
evaluate the association between drug uptake and the cavitation
metrics and the other to estimate the difference in uptake between
the two treatment types. A similar model was developed for
cavitation persistence (Supplementary Statistical Analysis for
Cavitation Persistence).
The ﬁrst model was used to compare the efﬁcacy of the two
treatment types as measured by the normalized doxorubicin
concentration.
E½normalized doxorubicin concentrationjCN; Trt
¼ a0 þ a1 CN þ a2 Trt

ð1Þ

Here, CN is the cavitation noise level, and Trt is an indicator
variable that equals 1 when pHIFU and doxorubicin treatment
were delivered simultaneously and is 0 otherwise. In this model,
a2 is the parameter of interest, which captures the average difference in doxorubicin uptake between the two treatment schemes
for a given cavitation noise level.
The second model was used to compare the rate of local uptake
of doxorubicin as a function of increase in cavitation noise level
between the two treatment types.
E½normalized doxorubicin concentrationjCN; Trt
¼ b0 þ b1 CN þ b2 Trt þ b3 CN  Trt

ð2Þ

where b1 quantiﬁes the association between changes in cavitation
noise level and the uptake of doxorubicin for the sequential
treatment scheme and b1 þ b3 characterizes the association
between changes in cavitation noise level and doxorubicin
uptake for the simultaneous treatment. Therefore, b3 captures
how the association between doxorubicin uptake and cavitation
noise level differs between the two treatment types; b1 and b3 are
the parameter of interest.

Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3741

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

Li et al.

The GEE analyses were performed using the statistical package
geepack in R version 3.1 (38). A P value of less than 0.05 was
deemed signiﬁcant. Before this analysis, a single data point with a
value beyond the typical range was identiﬁed and was excluded
from the analysis.

Results
Preliminary experiment
Mice bearing subcutaneous tumors were used for a pilot measurement of the association of doxorubicin uptake on cavitation
activity. The doxorubicin distribution was visualized using multispectral imaging and corresponded to the planned treatment
pattern (two columns of 9 treatment spots each), shown as blue
colored circles with black lines (Supplementary Fig. S1A). The
intensity of blue color corresponded to increasing peak-rarefactional pressure levels in the range from 5 to 11 MPa, as shown in
the color bar. Cavitation noise level (Supplementary Fig. S1B), as
well as cavitation persistence (Supplementary Fig. S1C) increased
with the rise in HIFU peak-rarefactional pressure. According to the
multispectral image (Supplementary Fig. S1A), doxorubicin
uptake, indicated by yellow color, became noticeable when
peak-rarefactional pressure became larger than 8 MPa. The ﬂuorescence from doxorubicin was more intense and consistent when
peak-rarefactional pressure became larger than 9.5 MPa. These
data suggest that noticeable improvement in doxorubicin uptake
may be achieved if cavitation persistence exceeds 50%, and more
considerable enhancement is associated with cavitation persistence of at least 75%. Thus, in the following experiments, pressure
levels just below, equal to or larger than this level were used to
cover all the potential cavitation doses (the correlation between
treatment levels and cavitation were described in Materials and
Methods).
Multispectral imaging
Multispectral imaging demonstrated that the distribution of
drug uptake matched well with the targeted treatment area in
tumors that had cavitation persistence and noise levels above 75%
and 25 mV, respectively. However, there was no difference
between areas that were treated with pHIFU during or before
doxorubicin administration. Representative photographs and
corresponding multispectral images of KPC tumors from control
and animals treated at levels resulting in high cavitation persistence and noise levels are shown (Fig. 2). Control tumors (Fig. 2A
and B) did not show any evidence of hemorrhage or damage, and
the multispectral image did not indicate a signiﬁcant doxorubicin
uptake. Macroscopic evaluation (Fig. 2C) of treated tumors (treated with both types) often revealed hemorrhagic areas corresponding to the treatment region (white dashed line). These areas
also showed enhanced ﬂuorescent intensity compared with the
nontreated region (Fig. 2D).
Fluorescent microscopy
Examples of ﬂuorescent microscopy images of tumor sections
from the control group and the treated group representing the
distribution of doxorubicin uptake are shown in Fig. 3. All of the
images were compared with sequential sections stained with
Masson's trichrome to correlate the drug uptake with structural
and histomorphologic changes. Fluorescent evaluation of the
control tumor tissues indicated a lack of drug uptake in all tumors
(Fig. 3A and B). A representative ﬂuorescent image (Fig. 3A), and

3742 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Figure 2.
Photographs and multispectral images of an in vivo KPC tumor from the
control group (A and B) in which only doxorubicin was administered to the
mouse without any pHIFU treatment and treatment group (C and D) in which
doxorubicin was administered immediately after pHIFU treatment. The mice
were ﬂushed with saline right after euthanasia. In the control example, the
photograph (A) and the multispectral image (B) of the tumor showed no
signiﬁcant doxorubicin uptake. The yellow spots that showed some
doxorubicin presence corresponded to superﬁcial blood vessels of the tumor
that were not successfully ﬂushed (B). In the treatment example, the pHIFUtargeted region (white dashed line) showed signiﬁcant hemorrhage area in
the tumor photograph (C). The ﬂuorescent distribution of doxorubicin
(yellow) showed enhanced uptake and corresponds to the targeted area
(white dashed line; D).

the corresponding trichrome-stained section (Fig. 3B) are shown.
The latter shows an example of a moderately differentiated tumor
with the characteristic inﬁltrative pattern of desmoplastic stroma
observed in KPC mice. A higher magniﬁcation image is shown
in Fig. 3C. Conversely, tumors that had treatments that resulted in
high cavitation persistence and noise levels showed evidence of
nuclear doxorubicin uptake in treated regions. There was no
obvious distinction between the two different treatment
types. Figure 3D–F shows representative images from such a
treated tumor; a uniform distribution of nuclear doxorubicin
uptake is evident (Fig. 3D), and corresponds to an area of disrupted stromal tissue (Fig. 3E). Evaluation at a higher magniﬁcation revealed signiﬁcant damage of the collagen ﬁbers in the
form of disorientation and separation of the dense collagen
bundles in addition to evidence of fraying of collagen ﬁbers (Fig.
3F). This damage is in contrast with untreated tumors where
stromal tissue appears uniform and compact (Fig. 3B). Not only
was doxorubicin uptake observed in tumor tissue boundary but
also in regions immediately adjacent to areas of large stromal
disruption (Fig. 3G–I). Tumors that had treatments resulting in
low cavitation persistence and noise levels did not show any
evidence of stromal disruption, nor was there evidence of doxorubicin uptake.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

pHIFU Enhances Doxorubicin Delivery to Pancreatic Tumor

Figure 3.
In the ﬁrst row, ﬂuorescent image (A) and Masson's
trichrome stained image (B) of sequential sections in
a nontreated KPC mouse tumor. No signiﬁcant
doxorubicin uptake was observed. The magniﬁcation
of the Masson's trichrome image (C; higher
magniﬁcation) showed a dense stromal matrix
containing collagen characteristic of pancreatic
tumors. In the second row, ﬂuorescent image (D)
and Masson's trichrome staining image (E) were
taken from sequential sections from a treated KPC
mouse tumor. Signiﬁcant doxorubicin uptake was
shown toward the boundary of the tumor (dashed
yellow line), but also penetrated into the inner part
of the tumor. Masson's trichrome–stained section
(E) showed disorientation and separation of the
collagen matrix (blue), with fraying of collagen
ﬁbrils (F; higher magniﬁcation). The nuclear uptake
of doxorubicin (D) coincided with this area of
stromal disruption. In the third row, representative
examples of ﬂuorescent microscopy image (G) and
Masson's trichrome–staining image (H) of sequential
sections from a treated KPC mouse tumor are
shown. A localized area of the tumor disruption
by pHIFU was observed (yellow dashed line). The
collagen in this area was separated and showed
evidence of fraying of the collagen in
higher-magniﬁcation evaluation (I). Both the area
of disruption and the region adjacent to the
disrupted area revealed signiﬁcant nuclear
doxorubicin uptake, as shown in G and H.

Doxorubicin uptake into tumors and cavitation metrics
The association of the tumor doxorubicin concentrations,
normalized per tumor, with cavitation noise level and cavitation
persistence in the control group, and two treatment types groups
are shown in scatter plots in Fig. 4A and B, correspondingly. As
seen, doxorubicin uptake tends to increase with the increase in
both cavitation noise level and cavitation persistence. When the
GEE model was applied, the lines corresponding to the GEE
solution were plotted, respectively, for the simultaneous treat-

ment and sequential treatment groups (Fig. 4A; Supplementary
Fig. S2).
According to the ﬁrst model, where a
^ 2 estimates the average
(across all cavitation noise level) difference in the uptake of
doxorubicin between the two treatment types, the P value of
^ 2 was estimated to be 0.52 (Supplementary Table S1), which
a
suggested the difference in the overall drug uptake between
the two treatment types were not signiﬁcant at the 0.05
level.

Figure 4.
Scatter plot of normalized doxorubicin (Dox) concentration (the outcome) versus cavitation noise level (A) and cavitation persistence (B). The outcomes tend to
increase with both the persistence and the noise level. The data from the control group (squares), outcomes from the simultaneous treatment group
(circles), as well as from the sequential treatment group (triangles) are shown. The result lines from the GEE model of cavitation noise level (A) and
cavitation persistence (Supplementary Fig. S2) were also plotted for the simultaneous pHIFU treatment and doxorubicin administration (dashed line), and the
doxorubicin administration after pHIFU treatment (solid line).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3743

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

Li et al.

^1 is
The estimated coefﬁcients from the second model shows b
signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (P < 0.01), suggesting that cavitation
noise level was associated with the doxorubicin uptake (Supple^ 1 being positive is in line with the hypothesis
mentary Table S2).b
that the more intense the collapse of pHIFU-induced bubbles, the
^ 3 suggests that under
higher the doxorubicin uptake. The value of b
the simultaneous pHIFU and doxorubicin treatment, the doxorubicin uptake rate per cavitation noise level was in average 0.04
lower than that of the sequential treatment. This estimate was
signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (P ¼ 0.01).
Statistical results were generated for testing the association
between cavitation persistence and normalized doxorubicin concentration using a model similar to model 2 (Supplementary
^1 is also signiﬁcant at the 0.05
Equation S1). This estimate of b
level (P < 0.01), suggesting that cavitation persistence is associated
with the doxorubicin uptake, that is, when cavitation bubbles were
consistently produced by every pHIFU pulse, drug diffusion was
signiﬁcantly enhanced. The longer the cavitation bubbles persisted,
the larger drug uptake it resulted. However, the outcome is not
^3 ; P ¼ 0.75).
statistically different between two treatment types (b

Discussion
The efﬁcacy and mechanism of pHIFU for enhancing drug
delivery to in vivo pancreatic tumors were evaluated in a realistic
animal model—the KPC mouse model. The results showed that
the cavitation metrics (cavitation persistence and cavitation noise
level) were associated with an increase in doxorubicin uptake.
Multispectral images showed that drug penetration corresponded
to the pHIFU-targeted area. Fluorescent microscopy in combination with histologic examination showed that the areas of
enhanced doxorubicin uptake were adjacent to and/or in areas
where there was evidence of stromal damage. At the highest pHIFU
levels, cavitaion noise levels and persistence was found to be
consistently above 25 mV and 75%, respectively; at these levels,
the drug concentration in the tumor was enhanced 1.5– to 4.5-fold
relatively to the untreated areas of the tumor. Hemorrhage was
grossly observed in the treated areas, suggesting microvascular
rupture inside the tumor. Although intravascular cavitation is
known to have the potential of causing capillary rupture, there
was no evidence of signiﬁcant acute bleeding in this study (39).
Future studies should analyze the beneﬁts and risks of microvascular rupture in the tumor as it relates to safety and drug delivery.
The results from the two administration sequences (pHIFU
treatment followed by drug administration and pHIFU treatment
during drug administration) were not statistically different. Two
recent publications reported that dense stromal matrix in the
tumor applies stress and compresses tumor vessels, and thus
restricts perfusion, preventing chemotherapeutic drugs from circulating, and therefore reaching malignant cells (13, 40). We
speculate that, in our study, pHIFU-induced cavitation reduced
the stress surrounding the tumor vessels by disrupting the stromal
matrix, resulting in an increase in tissue perfusion and drug
delivery to previously hypoxic areas. With sequential administration of pHIFU followed by doxorubicin, once pHIFU-induced
cavitation disrupted the highly ﬁbrotic stromal matrix, tumor
perfusion, and permeability could increase, facilitating circulation of the doxorubicin and passive diffusion into the tumor upon
drug infusion. With concurrent administration of pHIFU with
doxorubicin, when pHIFU treatment was delivered at the same

3744 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

time as doxorubicin infusion, the cavitation-induced streaming,
that is, the rapid movement of ﬂuid around the cavitation bubbles
could actively enhance drug diffusion from vasculature to stromal
tissue, in addition to passive diffusion through gradually permeabilized stromal matrix. The results from both administration
sequences demonstrated that the active diffusion by streaming
did not result in additional uptake. Therefore, passive drug
diffusion through permeabilized tissue was likely the dominant
effect for drug delivery. This result has important implications for
the clinical implementation of the method in that the tumor can
be pretreated with pHIFU, and the drug administration may be
performed later without the loss of efﬁciency. This approach is
much simpler and much more feasible logistically compared with
the simultaneous administration of pHIFU treatment and drug
infusion.
In this work, the combination of multispectral imaging, ﬂuorescent microscopy and LC/MS-MS analysis provided a complementary perspective on the drug delivery by pHIFU in pancreatic
tumors. The multispectral imaging detected an integrated ﬂuorescent intensity from doxorubicin over the entire volume of the
tumor tissue. The method was used to image overall doxorubicin
distribution immediately after the mouse was sacriﬁced and to
conﬁrm whether the distribution corresponded to the targeted
region. In all treated tumors with high cavitation noise and
persistence levels, enhanced ﬂuorescent intensity corresponding
to doxorubicin ﬂuorescence was observed in the treated region as
expected. The ﬂuorescent microscopy allowed evaluating the
distribution of doxorubicin in the tumor body. Histologic analysis by Masson's trichrome stain showed that the stromal matrix
consisting of collagen was disrupted by pHIFU treatment. The
doxorubicin uptake observed in the ﬂuorescent imaging was
either immediately adjacent or directly corresponded to at the
areas of disrupted structure, suggesting that doxorubicin perfused
through stromal matrix and penetrated further into the tumor
tissue. The results showed that at high cavitation persistence and
noise levels resulted in stromal disruption and drug was successfully delivered to cells within the tumor. LC/MS-MS allowed the
quantiﬁcation of doxorubicin concentration in the tumor and
showed that pHIFU resulting in high cavitation persistence and
high noise level produced the highest doxorubicin uptake by the
tumor cells. The spatial distribution of cavitation is likely to be
heterogeneous due to the stochastic processes involved and the
heterogeneity of the tumor. However, the widespread stromal
disruption and doxorubicin uptake observed would suggest that
the treatments applied, speciﬁcally those with high cavitation
persistence and high noise level, allowed sufﬁcient doxorubicin
extravasation and penetration to cover the entire treatment region.
In addition, it is possible that the spatial distribution of cavitation
occurrence can be monitored in real time using a number of new
techniques (41, 39), allowing for treatment feedback to help
insure that enough stromal tissue is disrupted to enable sufﬁcient
diffusion and penetration of the drug.
This study shows that pHIFU can be effective at enhancing
the penetration of doxorubicin to pancreatic tumors by stromal
disruption. However, further studies must be carried out to
evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment in survival studies. It
was recently reported that by reducing stromal desmoplasia,
tumors exhibited undifferentiated histology but increased vascularity, which may lead to more aggressive tumor growth.
However, this could be potentially restrained by antiangiogenesis treatment (17).

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

pHIFU Enhances Doxorubicin Delivery to Pancreatic Tumor

Conclusion
In this work, we demonstrated that pHIFU-induced cavitation
enhances the concentration of the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin in KPC mouse pancreatic tumors by up to 4.5-fold by
disrupting the stromal matrix. Normalized doxorubicin concentration was associated with the cavitation metrics and was the
largest when pHIFU-induced cavitation persistence reached
100%, that is, cavitation occurred at every delivered HIFU pulse,
irrespective of focus location in the tumor, and the broadband
noise level during each pulse was large. The study also demonstrated that passive drug diffusion through previously permeabilized tumor tissue is the main mechanism of drug delivery.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): T. Li, Y.-N. Wang, T.D. Khokhlova, S. D'Andrea,
F. Starr, H. Chen, S.R. Hingorani, J.H. Hwang
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): T. Li, Y.-N. Wang, T.D. Khokhlova, J.S. McCune,
A. Mashadi-Hossein, J.H. Hwang
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: T. Li, Y.-N. Wang,
T.D. Khokhlova, H. Chen, J.S. McCune, J.H. Hwang
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): Y.-N. Wang, S. D'Andrea, L.J. Risler, A. Chang
Study supervision: J.H. Hwang

Grant Support
This work was supported by the NIH grants 1R01CA154451 and
1K01EB015745 and Washington State Life Sciences Discovery Fund.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked
advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate
this fact.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: H. Chen, J.S. McCune, S.R. Hingorani, J.H. Hwang
Development of methodology: T. Li, Y.-N. Wang, T.D. Khokhlova,
F. Starr, H. Chen, J.S. McCune, L.J. Risler, J.H. Hwang

Received February 1, 2015; revised May 27, 2015; accepted June 30, 2015;
published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015.

References
1. Vincent A, Herman J, Schulick R, Hruban RH, Goggins M. Pancreatic cancer.
Lancet 2011;378:607–20.
2. Society AC. Cancer facts and ﬁgures 2013. Cancer Facts Fig 2013. Society,
American Cancer; 2013.
3. Jimeno A, Feldmann G, Suarez-Gauthier A, Rasheed Z, Solomon A, Zou
G-M, et al. A direct pancreatic cancer xenograft model as a platform for
cancer stem cell therapeutic development. Mol Cancer Ther 2009;8:310–4.
4. Burris HA, Moore MJ, Andersen J, Green MR, Rothenberg ML, Modiano MR,
et al. Improvements in survival and clinical beneﬁt with gemcitabine as
ﬁrst-line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized
trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2403–13.
5. Matano E, Tagliaferri P, Libroia A, Damiano V, Fabbrocini A, De Lorenzo S,
et al. Gemcitabine combined with continuous infusion 5-ﬂuorouracil in
advanced and symptomatic pancreatic cancer: a clinical beneﬁt-oriented
phase II study. Br J Cancer 2000;82:1772–5.
6. Hertel LW, Boder GB, Kroin JS, Rinzel SM, Poore GA, Todd GC, et al.
Evaluation of the antitumor activity of Gemcitabine (20 20 -diﬂuoro-20 deoxycytidine). Cancer Res 1990;50:4417–22.
7. Merriman RL, Hertel LW, Schultz RM, Houghton PJ, Houghton JA, Rutherford PG, et al. Comparison of the antitumor activity of gemcitabine and araC in a panel of human breast, colon, lung and pancreatic xenograft models.
Invest New Drugs 1996;14:243–7.
8. Suzuki E, Sun J, Kapoor V, Jassar AS, Albelda SM. Gemcitabine has
signiﬁcant immunomodulatory activity in murine tumor models independent of its cytotoxic effects. Cancer Biol Ther 2007;6:880–5.
9. Oberstein PE, Olive KP. Pancreatic cancer: why is it so hard to treat? Therap
Adv Gastroenterol 2013;6:321–37.
10. Hidalgo M. Pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1605–17.
11. Jacobetz MA, Chan DS, Neesse A, Bapiro TE, Cook N, Frese KK, et al.
Hyaluronan impairs vascular function and drug delivery in a mouse model
of pancreatic cancer. Gut 2012;62:112–20.
12. Erkan M, Hausmann S, Michalski CW, Fingerle A, Dobritz M, Kleeff J, et al.
The role of stroma in pancreatic cancer: diagnostic and therapeutic implications. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;9:454–67.
13. Jain RK. An indirect way to tame cancer. Sci Am 2014;310:46–53.
14. Olive K, Jacobetz M, Davidson C. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling
enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Science 2009;324:1457–61.
15. Olive KP, Tuveson DA. The use of targeted mouse models for preclinical
testing of novel cancer therapeutics. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:5277–87.
16. Feldmann G, Dhara S, Fendrich V, Bedja D, Beaty R, Mullendore M, et al.
Blockade of hedgehog signaling inhibits pancreatic cancer invasion and

www.aacrjournals.org

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

metastases: a new paradigm for combination therapy in solid cancers.
Cancer Res 2007;67:2187–96.
Rhim AD, Oberstein PE, Thomas DH, Mirek ET, Palermo CF, Sastra SA,
et al. Stromal elements act to restrain, rather than support, pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. Elsevier Inc 2014;25:735–47.
Khokhlova TD, Hwang JH. HIFU for palliative treatment of pancreatic
cancer. J Gastrointest Oncol 2011;2:175–84.
Coussios CC, Roy RA. Applications of acoustics and cavitation to noninvasive therapy and drug delivery. Annu Rev Fluid Mech 2008;40:395–420.
Pitt WG, Husseini GA, Staples BJ. Ultrasonic drug delivery—a general
review. Nature 2004;1:37–56.
Khaibullina A, Jang B-S, Sun H, Le N, Yu S, Frenkel V, et al. Pulsed highintensity focused ultrasound enhances uptake of radiolabeled monoclonal
antibody to human epidermoid tumor in nude mice. J Nucl Med 2008;
49:295–302.
O'Neill BE, Vo H, Angstadt M, Li KPC, Quinn T, Frenkel V. Pulsed high
intensity focused ultrasound mediated nanoparticle delivery: mechanisms
and efﬁcacy in murine muscle. Ultrasound Med Biol 2009;35:416–24.
Li T, Chen H, Khokhlova T, Wang Y-N, Kreider W, He X, et al. Passive
cavitation detection during pulsed HIFU exposures of ex vivo tissues and in
vivo mouse pancreatic tumors. Ultrasound Med Biol 2014;40:1523–34.
Tinkov S, Coester C, Serba S, Geis NA, Katus HA, Winter G, et al. New
doxorubicin-loaded phospholipid microbubbles for targeted tumor therapy: in vivo characterization. J Control Release 2010;148:368–72.
Hynynen K. Ultrasound for drug and gene delivery to the brain. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 2008;60:1209–17.
Yuh EL, Shulman SG, Mehta SA, Xie J, Chen L, Frenkel V, et al. Delivery of
systemic chemotherapeutic agent to tumors by using focused ultrasound:
study in a murine model. Radiology 2005;234:431–7.
Bessonova O V, Khokhlova VA, Canney MS, Bailey MR, Crum LA. A
derating method for therapeutic applications of high intensity focused
ultrasound. Acoust Phys 2010;56:354–63.
Rose A. Human and electronic vision. New York: Plenum Press; 1974.
Hwang JH, Tu J, Brayman AA, Matula TJ, Crum LA. Correlation between
inertial cavitation dose and endothelial cell damage in vivo. Ultrasound
Med Biol 2006;32:1611–9.
Sastra SA, Olive KP. Quantiﬁcation of murine pancreatic tumors by high
resolution ultrasound. In:Su GH, editor. Methods Mol Biol. Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press; 2013. p. 1–13.
Doxorubicin [Internet]. Natl. Cent. Biotechnol. Information.PubChem
Compd. Database;CID¼31703. [cited 2015 Apr 23]. Available from:
http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/31703#section¼Top

Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3745

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

Li et al.

32. gemcitabine | C9H11F2N3O4 - PubChem [Internet]. [cited 2015 Apr
23]. Available from: http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
60750#section¼Top
33. Tseng WW, Winer D, Kenkel JA, Choi O, Shain AH, Pollack JR, et al.
Development of an orthotopic model of invasive pancreatic cancer in an
immunocompetent murine host. Clin Cancer Res 2010;16:3684–95.
34. Fischer AH, Jacobson KA, Rose J, Zeller R. Hematoxylin and eosin staining
of tissue and cell sections. CSH Protoc 2008;2008:pdb.prot4986.
35. Vonlaufen A, Joshi S, Qu C, Phillips PA, Xu Z, Parker NR, et al. Pancreatic
stellate cells: partners in crime with pancreatic cancer cells. Cancer Res
2008;68:2085–93.
36. Arnold RD, Slack JE, Straubinger RM. Quantiﬁcation of doxorubicin and
metabolites in rat plasma and small volume tissue samples by liquid

3746 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

chromatography/electrospray tandem mass spectroscopy. J Chromatogr B
Anal Technol Biomed Life Sci 2004;808:141–52.
Hanley JA. Statistical analysis of correlated data using generalized wstimating equations: an orientation. Am J Epidemiol 2003;157:364–75.
R Project for Statistical Computing. 2008.
Gy€
ongy M, Coussios C-C. Passive cavitation mapping for localization and
tracking of bubble dynamics. J Acoust Soc Am 2010;128:EL175–L180.
Chauhan VP, Jain RK. Strategies for advancing cancer nanomedicine. Nat
Mater 2013;12:958–62.
Li T, Khokhlova TD, Sapozhnikov OA, O'Donnell M, Hwang JH. A new
active cavitation mapping technique for pulsed hifu applications—
bubble Doppler. IEEE Trans Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control 2014;61:
1698–708.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer
Research

Correction

Correction: Pulsed High-Intensity Focused
Ultrasound Enhances Delivery of Doxorubicin
in a Preclinical Model of Pancreatic Cancer
In this article (Cancer Res 2015;75:3738–46), which appeared in the September 15,
2015, issue of Cancer Research (1), Sunil R. Hingorani and Amy Chang have been
added as the 10th and 11th authors. The correct author listing is as follows:
Tong Li, Yak-Nam Wang, Tatiana D. Khokhlova, Samantha D'Andrea, Frank Starr,
Hong Chen, Jeannine S. McCune, Linda J. Risler, Afshin Mashadi-Hossein, Sunil R.
Hingorani, Amy Chang, and Joo Ha Hwang
S.R. Hingorani and A. Chang's afﬁliation is Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington.
The online version of the article has been corrected and no longer matches the print.

Reference
1. Li T, Wang Y-N, Khokhlova TD, D'Andrea S, Starr F, Chen H, et al. Pulsed high-intensity focused
ultrasound enhances delivery of doxorubicin in a preclinical model of pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res
2015;75:3738–46.
Published online May 15, 2017.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-0402
Ó2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

www.aacrjournals.org

2771

Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296

Pulsed High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound Enhances Delivery of
Doxorubicin in a Preclinical Model of Pancreatic Cancer
Tong Li, Yak-Nam Wang, Tatiana D. Khokhlova, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:3738-3746. Published OnlineFirst July 27, 2015.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/07/29/0008-5472.CAN-15-0296.DC1

This article cites 35 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/18/3738.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/18/3738.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

