Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Targeting PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer
Brooke M. Emerling1 and Argun Akcakanat2

Abstract
The American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Special Conference on Targeting PI3K/mTOR
Signaling in Cancer was held in San Francisco, California from February 24 to 27, 2011. The meeting was
cochaired by Drs. Lewis C. Cantley, David M. Sabatini, and Funda Meric-Bernstam. The main focus of this
event was the therapeutic potential of drugs targeting the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway for the treatment of
cancer. This article summarizes the recent discoveries in the ﬁeld, with particular emphasis on the major
themes of the conference. Cancer Res; 71(24); 7351–9. 2011 AACR.

Introduction

PI3K/mTOR Signaling

The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) family of lipid kinases
phosphorylate the 30 -hydroxyl group of phosphoinositides (1).
There are 3 classes of PI3K, each with distinct lipid products
and substrate speciﬁcity (1). To date, the class IA PI3Ks are the
most widely implicated class in human cancers (2). PI3K
activation initiates a signal transduction pathway that promotes cancer cell growth, metabolism, and survival (Fig. 1).
Akt, a serine–threonine kinase that is directly activated in
response to PI3K, is a crucial effector of PI3K in tumorigenesis.
Activation of Akt leads to increased cellular growth and
survival. One of the key downstream effectors of Akt is mTOR
complex 1 (mTORC1). The regulation of mTORC1 is complex in
that the PI3K/Akt signaling is not the only means of regulating
mTORC1. mTORC1 is under the control of many pathways,
including growth factor signaling, nutrient and oxygen availability, and the energy state of the cell. Therefore, from a
therapeutic standpoint, the regulation of mTORC1 is crucial
as some PI3K inhibitors will block both PI3K and mTOR
signaling, whereas others will only target PI3K itself. The
importance of targeting the PI3K/mTOR for cancer therapy
was highlighted at the recent American Association for
Cancer Research (AACR) Special Conference on Targeting
PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer in San Francisco from
February 24 to 27, 2011. This meeting underscored the challenge that those in the PI3K/mTOR ﬁeld face in developing
dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors and emphasized this exciting era
of targeted therapies for cancer. In this short article, we review
some of the key presentations from this meeting.

It is well recognized that the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway
is vital for the growth and survival of cancer cells. With the
rapid pace that PI3K/mTOR inhibitors are entering the clinic,
there was no shortage of scientiﬁc research and clinical data to
go through at this meeting. To start off the meeting, the
keystone address was given by Jose Baselga (Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA), who presented PI3K mutations
in cancer and their contribution to resistance to hormonal
therapy. The ﬁrst agents targeting the PI3K pathway were
rapamycin analogues, and breast cancer patients who received
RAD001 in combination with endocrine therapy showed a
clinical beneﬁt. Among the new inhibitors now under development are BEZ235 (PI3K, mTORC1/2 inhibitor), BKM120
(PI3K inhibitor), XL147 (selective class I PI3K inhibitor), and
BYL719 (alpha isoform–speciﬁc PI3K inhibitor). Dr. Baselga
emphasized the need to change the way clinical trials are done.
Trials need to be smaller and smarter, and combinational
approaches need to be taken. In addition, screening for
mechanisms of resistance to PI3K inhibition via short hairpin
RNA screens and other types of screens are needed. Moreover,
novel therapies need to be incorporated earlier into disease
treatment. Dr. Baselga gave an informative introduction to
targeting the PI3K pathway and elucidated the future of
targeted therapies to PI3K/mTOR, particularly combination
treatments.
Lewis C. Cantley (Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA) started the morning addressing PI3K and cancer
cell metabolism. Dr. Cantley underscored the need for coclinical trials with mouse models. Even when agents are already
in clinical trials, mouse models give invaluable insights. For
example, in animal models, antitumor effects of PI3K inhibitors correlate very well with positron emission tomography
(PET) response, suggesting 2[18F]ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose
(FDG) PET may be an important early marker of response in
the clinic. However, when PI3K is shut off with drug but glucose
uptake is not completely shut off as measured by PET, these
tumors will rebound aggressively. Dr. Cantley showed convincing PET images of mice to highlight this point. Also, he
showed that PTEN mutant prostate mice tumors respond to

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical
School and Division of Signal Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts; and 2Department of Surgical Oncology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
Corresponding Author: Argun Akcakanat, Department of Surgical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-563-7530; Fax: 713-794-4830; E-mail:
aakcakanat@mdanderson.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699
2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

7351

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Emerling and Akcakanat

Figure 1. The PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. Arrows represent activation and bars represent inhibition. PI3K is induced by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK),
which are receptors for growth factors and insulin. Nutrient status and energy regulates mTOR signaling. 4EBP1, 4E-binding protein 1; BAD, Bcl-2–associated
death promoter; FOXO, forkhead box 1; GSK3b, glycogen synthase kinase 3b; MDM2, mp53 binding protein homolog; mLST8, mTOR-associated
protein, LST8 homolog; mTORC1, mTOR complex 1; mTORC2, mTOR complex 2; PDK1, phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol
(4,5) biphosphate; PIP3, phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5) triphosphate; PRAS40, proline-rich Akt substrate 40; Raptor, regulatory associated protein
of mTOR; Rheb, Ras homolog enriched in brain; Rictor, rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR; S6K, ribosomal S6 kinase; SIN1, mitogen-activated
protein kinase–associated protein 1; TSC1, tuberous sclerosis complex 1; TSC2, tuberous sclerosis complex 2. (Image provided by The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.)

the GlaxoSmithKline PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, but the tumor
does not go away completely. Combination therapy with a
MAP/extracellular signal–regulated kinase (MEK) inhibitor is
needed to achieve complete tumor regression and complete
inhibition of FDG uptake. Furthermore, one of the best predictors of relapse was reemergence of PET signal. Of importance also is to use mice with known mutational backgrounds
and see what therapy will be successful and to uncover
resistance mechanisms. Furthermore, Dr. Cantley discussed
that the heterogeneity in PI3K activity is beneﬁcial to normal
tissues by restricting PI3K activation to only a subset of cells.
This work was reported recently by Yuan and colleagues, who
elegantly showed that this heterogeneity might serve to protect
the population as a whole from overactivation of the PI3K
pathway, which ultimately can lead to cellular senescence or
cancer (3).
Bart Vanhaesebroeck (Queen Mary University of London
Institute of Cancer, London, UK) introduced the 8 isoforms of
PI3K in mammals and showed that by using genetic and
pharmacologic approaches, his laboratory has uncovered isoform-selective roles of the PI3K isoforms. Interestingly, Foukas
and colleagues derived primary cell lines from their PI3K-deadknock-in mice, which carry a mutation within the ATP binding
site leading to inactivation of the kinase, and showed that in
reality, cells can proliferate effectively with greater than 90%
of p85-associated PI3K activity gone (4). This implies that
inhibiting PI3K alone may not be effective in cancer cells.

7352

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

Therefore, there may be a role for inhibitors that target the
tumor stroma. p110d-null knock-in mice have reduced growth
and metastasis of solid tumors in syngeneic B16 and 4T1
xenograft models. Moreover, the main effect of the d inhibitor
PI-3065 in the 4T1 model in the knock-in mice is on adaptive
immunity (B/T cells), and less so on innate regression
(macrophages, neutrophils). The real take-home message of
Dr. Vanhaesebroeck's presentation was that p110d inhibition is
not immunosuppressive and is a potential target in cancer
inﬂammation and immunity. Langdon Miller (Calistoga Pharmaceuticals Inc., Seattle, WA) underscored the importance of
constitutive PI3Kd pathway in driving the overgrowth of
malignant B cells and showed striking evidence that selective
inhibition of this pathway in the clinic can safely abrogate
aberrant PI3Kd signaling with the CAL-101 drug, which is an
oral, small-molecule PI3Kd inhibitor with a low nanomolar
EC50 and greater than 200-fold selectivity for PI3Kd relative to
the other PI3K isoforms. Phase I trials showed high levels of
durable antitumor activity in mantle cell lymphoma, indolent
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and chronic lymphocytic lymphoma
patients who have received extensive prior chemoimmunotherapy. Reversible lymphoid depletion was observed as a
side effect. These ﬁndings show that CAL-101 holds signiﬁcant
promise as a therapeutic option for patients with lymphoid
malignancies. Phase II/III trials of CAL-101 are planned for
indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic
lymphoma.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Targeting PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer

The ﬁrst talk of the meeting speciﬁcally addressing mTOR
was by David M. Sabatini (Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA). mTOR is the target of the immunosuppressive drug rapamycin and is a vital player in nutrient
and growth factor signaling. Recently, members of the Rag
family of GTPases were shown to be amino acid–speciﬁc
regulators of the mTORC1 pathway (5, 6). Sancak and colleagues from the laboratory of Dr. Sabatini identiﬁed a new
trimetric protein complex, which they termed Ragulator (7).
The Ragulator is encoded by the MAPKSP1, ROBLD3, and
c11orf59 genes and interacts with the Rag GTPases. They
further showed that the Ragulator recruits the Rag GTPases
to the lysosomes, which also induces translocation of mTORC1
to lysosomes and is crucial for the activation of mTORC1 by
amino acids through Rheb (7). Interestingly, individuals with
partial loss of function of a component of the Ragulator are
small, immunosuppressed, and very young-looking. Ragulator
null cells thus have very low mTOR signaling and are absolutely
sensitive to rapamycin. Sancak and colleagues showed that one
could rescue this effect by forcing mTOR to the lysosome,
where proteins are degraded and amino acids are made. It thus
makes sense that mTOR needs to be around the storage centers
of amino acids. Moreover, RagAGTP/GTP mice die perinatally
with slightly decreased size, which very nicely phenocopies the
Atg5/ autophagy–deﬁcient mice, who die of starvation (8).
Thus, it seems like there is a loss of amino acid sensing in these
mice. Dr. Sabatini further introduced the identiﬁcation of the
mTOR-dependent phosphoproteome. They deﬁned the mTOR
phosphoproteome by looking at cells under starvation, insulin
stimulated, rapamycin- and Torin-treated (mTORC1/2 inhibitor) conditions. On the basis of global phospho proﬁle, mTOR
inhibition mimics serum starvation. Rapamycin-resistant
Torin sensitive sites seem to be downstream of mTOR signaling. In addition, they identiﬁed Grb10 as a novel mTORC1
substrate. Grb10 is a known negative regulator of insulin-like
growth factor (IGF) signaling. They propose an intriguing
model in which mTOR activates Grb10, which negatively
regulates the pathway by acting on receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTK) and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), possibly embellishing the classical negative feedback through S6K loop.
Next, Brendan D. Manning (Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA) focused on the biologic effects of mTORC signaling. Dr. Manning reported on his team's investigation of the
downstream targets and functions in cancer and in human
diseases. They carried out a simple, clean genetic and metabolomics assessment of wild-type, tuberous sclerosis complex
(Tsc)1/2/ mouse embryo ﬁbroblast (MEF) and Tsc1/2/
MEF cell lines treated with rapamycin, which stimulated
transcription factors controlling metabolic pathways. They
found that mTOR seems to be exerting its biggest effects on
metabolism through inﬂuencing the oxidative branch of the
pentose phosphate pathway through sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1) to upregulate lipid and sterol
biosynthesis (9). SREBP trafﬁcs to the Golgi, where it is cleaved
and translocates to the nucleus to function as a transcription
factor, activating genes such as fatty acid synthase. Duvel and
colleagues found that mTORC1 acts in the processing of
SREBP1 and SREBP2 through S6K1 (9). Furthermore, they

www.aacrjournals.org

proposed that mTORC1 has 2 major roles: through hypoxiainducible factor (HIF) to induce glucose uptake and glycolysis
and through SREBP to ramp up the pentose phosphate pathway. In addition to playing a role in protein synthesis, mTORC1
promotes speciﬁc bioenergetics and anabolic cellular processes. TSC1 knockout mice are protected from age- and dietinduced hepatic steatosis. In hepatocytes, mTORC1 activation
is necessary but not sufﬁcient to activate lipogenesis; SREBP1
and 2 are required for mTORC1-driven proliferation.
Akt activates SREBPs and regulates expression of enzymes
involved in cholesterol and lipid biosynthesis. Caroline A.
Lewis (CRUK London Research Institute, London, UK) presented that mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin blocked induction of
SREBP target genes in immortalized human retinal pigment
cells, whereas activated mTORC1 increased the level of nuclear
SREBP1 and also regulated the transcriptional activity of
SREBP1. Glioblastoma multiforme is associated with mTOR
pathway activation and hypoxia. In U87 glioblastoma cells, in
response to hypoxia, expression of a subset of SREBP target
genes, as well as SREBP1 protein, decreases, which results in a
decrease in de novo lipid synthesis. However, another subset of
genes involved in lipid uptake and transport are increased,
such as stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD). The mechanism of
differential expression is not known yet.
Cheryl L. Walker [The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX (MDACC)] presented progress in
the ﬁeld of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced ATM signaling. ATM is the gene mutated in the genetic disease ataxia
telangiectasia and is the cellular damage sensor that plays a
crucial role in signaling to DNA repair machinery and the cellcycle checkpoints. Recently, Alexander and colleagues identiﬁed a cytoplasmic pathway for oxidative stress–induced ATM
activation of tumor suppressor TSC2 to regulate mTORC1
signaling and autophagy (10, 11). ROS play an important role
in many physiologic and pathophysiologic processes, including
cancer. Upon elevated ROS, ATM activates TSC2 through the
LKB1/AMP kinase metabolic sensing pathway in the cytoplasm to repress mTORC1 and induce autophagy. She showed
that TSC signaling is regulated by ROS at the peroxisome. TSC1
and 2 both contain PTS1 sequences to be transferred to the
peroxisome and PTS1 mutations result in TSC disease. mTOR
suppression by TSC2 requires localization to peroxisome. ATM
acts at the peroxisome as a local sensor of ROS. This also
explains the induction of autophagy after exposure to H2O2
or etoposide via the ATM/AMPK/TSC2/mTORC1 pathway
because of mTOR suppression. Elucidation of this stress pathway offers a molecular role for ATM in the cytoplasm and
shows that ATM is more than a DNA repair protein; it functions
in different cellular compartments.
Alexandra Newton (University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA) discussed the balance that is needed between kinases
and phosphatases in cancer. Lipid second messenger pathways
are strictly controlled by the kinases protein kinase C (PKC)
and Akt and the serine–threonine phosphatase PH domain
leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP). Basically,
PHLPP provides "the brakes" for Akt and PKC signaling,
whereas PDK1 and mTORC2 phosphorylate them. Both are
central players in cancer cell proliferation. PHLPP controls

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

7353

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Emerling and Akcakanat

cellular levels of PKC, and in cells PKC is almost always
phosphorylated. PHLPP also suppresses epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and controls amplitude of agoniststimulated EGFR kinase activity. PHLPP knockdown increases
p-Akt, p-ERK, and EGFR. Unlike the well-known PTEN, which is
somatically mutated in cancer, the PHLPP phosphatases are
actually functional in many cancer cell lines examined thus far.
There is a delicate balance between phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation states which may lead to cancer. Consequently, PHLPP phosphatase activity could be modulated for
the treatment of cancer. Speciﬁc inhibitors that activate
PHLPP may inhibit multiple cancer signaling pathways that
are activated by PKC and Akt. The laboratory of Dr. Newton
currently focuses on the function of the PHLPP phosphatases
in modulating signaling via Akt and PKC, with the hope of
developing small-molecule inhibitors for the treatment of
cancer.
Jean J. Zhao (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA)
presented elegant work using genetic mouse models in targeting PI3K in cancer. The 2 commonly expressed class 1a
catalytic isoforms of PI3K are p110a and p110b. To date, in
most cell types studied, p110a is the major player in the PI3K
signaling through RTKs, although p110b is necessary for
signaling via G protein–coupled receptors. In the mouse,
p110a and p110b have been shown to be more essential in
some processes and dispensable for others. Unexpectedly, Dr.
Zhao's laboratory discovered that p110a and p110b actually
play opposing roles in the normal development and pathology
of mammary tissue. The absence of p110a during breast
development impaired mammary duct outgrowth, whereas
mice deﬁcient in p110b in mammary tissue triggered developmental hypertrophy. Thus, p110 isoform–speciﬁc inhibition
may potentially be a therapeutic strategy in the future. Dr. Zhao
also presented a mouse model of breast cancer that conditionally expressed an H1047R oncogenic allele of PIK3CA to
address resistance mechanisms to PI3K-targeted therapy. This
model initiates hyperplasia, followed by palpable tumors and
metastasis. If the mutation is removed, tumors sometimes
show partial regression but may keep on growing. If recurrent
tumor relies on high p-Akt levels, then it responds to PI3K
inhibitor treatment. Interestingly, genomic analysis revealed
Met, c-Myc, and Mdm2 ampliﬁcation in recurrence; thus,
tumors recur via both PI3K pathway–dependent and PI3K
pathway–independent mechanisms, highlighting the challenges for the development of therapeutic agents that target
the PI3K pathway in cancer.
To wrap up the PI3K/mTOR signaling part of the meeting,
Davide Ruggero (UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive
Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA) discussed the pharmacogenetic targeting of the translational machinery downstream
of oncogenic mTOR signaling. Dr. Ruggero provided insight
into the postgenomic mechanisms of prostate cancer
development regulated by mTOR signaling and showed data
indicating that ATP active site inhibitors of mTOR perturb
the aberrant translation program in prostate cancer. For
example, the potent and selective TORC1/2 inhibitor, INK128
(Intellikine, Inc.) decreased prostate tumors in mice and was
more effective than various rapalogs, which only interfere

7354

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

with TORC1 activity. With the use of a new technology,
ribosome proﬁling, the translational state of prostate cancer
was assessed. Inhibition of mTOR regulated 148 target
genes, and YB-1 was identiﬁed as a major posttranslational
regulon, which was regulated both by rapamycin and PP242
(mTORC1/2 inhibitor). YB-1 is involved in cancer cell invasion
and PI3K/mTOR/eIF4E/YB1 axis regulates epithelial–mesenchymal transition genes. Interestingly, YB-1 expression is
reduced at the translational level by mTORC1/2 in vivo.

PI3K Pathway Aberrations in Human Cancer
When cancer cell lines are addicted to RTKs, usually PI3K or
MEK pathway inhibitors inhibit growth. However, it is not clear
if PI3K inhibitors alone will be successful in the clinic. Jeffrey A.
Engelman (Massachusetts General Hospital) reported on strategies for targeting PI3K when using combination therapy. Dr.
Engelman stressed that the need to inhibit both the PI3K and
MEK signaling hinges on the key concept of inducing apoptosis, not just inducing cytostasis. MEK regulates BIM and PI3K
regulates MCL-1, a key factor in inducing tumor regression.
KRAS tumors are inherently difﬁcult because they activate
both PI3K and MEK. In the KRAS mutant lung cancer model,
the PI3K inhibitor BEZ235 failed to shrink the tumor, but the
combination with MEK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244 (ARRY-142886)
inhibited both pathways, leading to an apoptotic response.
Another approach would be to inhibit both pathways indirectly, so as to avoid toxicities to patients. For example, for
EGFR mutations, hitting the RTK is an indirect method to
inhibit both signaling events. The combination IGF-IR and
MEK inhibition may be a good strategy for colorectal KRAS
mutant tumors. Dr. Engelman showed data that in a large panel
of patient samples, p85 is immunoprecipitated consistently
with IRS1, indicating that this is a commonly engaged network
in colorectal cancers to activate PI3K signaling. The data
support that in KRAS mutated tumors, PI3K signaling is critical
for KRAS-driven tumor growth in the early stages, but as the
tumor progresses, its reliance on signaling comes more from
the RTKs. Dr. Engelman further emphasized the dynamics of
resistance mechanisms and showed very intriguing and
impressive patient data (12). In non–small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), patients who were originally responsive to the EGFR
inhibitors geﬁnitib or erlotinib but whose disease starts to
progress, through multiple biopsies, it can be shown that there
is acquisition of other mutations such as EGFR T790M or
PIK3CA mutations. These patients are taken off the targeted
therapy, put on chemotherapy alone for 1 year, and as mutations disappear, they can become sensitive to EGFR-targeted
therapy again. It remains unclear whether resistant mechanisms are acquired or whether they preexist, affecting a small
fraction of cells. Resistance is probably due to both and is a
major challenge in designing treatment strategies for targeting
the PI3K pathway.
Ramon Parsons (Columbia University, New York, NY) outlined the history of PTEN, the most commonly mutated tumor
suppressor to date, which was discovered in 1997. Dr. Parsons
and his colleagues found that adenoviral expression of PTEN
could lead to apoptosis in cancer cells. Furthermore, they

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Targeting PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer

screened for PTEN-regulated genes (that were FOXO-regulated
in a PI3K-dependent manner) and identiﬁed NFIL3 (nuclear
factor, interleukin 3 regulated)/E4BP4. NFIL3 binds to the
endogenous TRAIL promoter and represses transcription. It
also has effects on numerous other FOXO target genes such as
FasL and GADD45. Increased expression of NFIL3 correlates
with poor prognosis in breast cancer, glioblastoma multiforme,
and ovarian cancer, and high NFIL3 mRNA correlates with
PTEN-negative status in breast cancer. Dr. Parsons underscored the following model: PI3K activates Akt, which in turn
activates NFIL3, a transcriptional repressor. NFIL3, in association with histone deacetylase 2, can inhibit FOXO transcription of its target genes by the remaining pool of nuclear FOXO.
Thus, correlating with the data from Dr. Engelman, the goal of
cancer therapy should be to induce cell death.
Eric C. Holland (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY) further emphasized that the loss of PTEN in
gliomas induces transcriptional changes (13). In normal
brain, ABCG2 transporter activity generates "side population"
phenotype, and this phenotype marks stem-like cells. Loss of
PTEN increases PI3K/Akt (but not mTOR), which induces
ABCG2 activity, which in turn increases tumorigenicity and
chemoresistance (14). Dr. Holland presented a new technology,
translating ribosome afﬁnity puriﬁcation (TRAP), which allows
isolation of ribosome-bound mRNA and measures translational efﬁciency under different conditions or treatments. Six hours
of radiation exposure of glioma enriched for p53 and E2F1
transcriptional targets. At 2 hours, p53 targets are activated
and at 6 hours E2F1 targets are lost. In a following experiment
with PTEN loss, 255 genes were downregulated and 98 genes
were upregulated; however, differential gene expression proﬁles of radiation and PTEN loss did not show overlapping
genes. Radiation and mTOR blockage showed overlaps but at
the transcriptional level only.
Carlos L. Arteaga (Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN) discussed the importance of signaling feedback upon
inhibition of PI3K and the implications this has for clinical
trials. Dr. Arteaga presented data on XL147 (an ATP-competitive reversible PI3K inhibitor from Exelixis, Inc.) against a
panel of breast cancer cell lines harboring alterations, such as
HER2 gene ampliﬁcation. XL147 decreases Akt activity but
leads to the upregulation of the HER3 transcript. In HER2þ
cells, PI3K inhibition is followed by an increase in expression
and phosphorylation of RTKs, including HER3. This increase is
suppressed by knocking down FoxO1 and FoxO3a. In HER2þ
cells, HER3 siRNA knockdown or HER2 inhibition by trastuzumab or lapatinib combined with XL147 shows a synergistic
effect in vitro and in vivo. p-HER3 and p-Akt are lower compared with tumors treated with single agents. It seems that in
HER2þ breast tumors, PI3K inhibitors used in combination
with HER2/3 inhibitors can stop compensatory feedback
mechanisms, which may limit therapeutic efﬁcacy of PI3K
inhibitors alone. Overall, in HER2þ cancers, PI3K inhibitors will
have limited clinical activity if used as single agents, and in
HER2 cancers, activated pathways in response to PI3K inhibitor therapy are not clear yet.
Lloyd C. Trotman (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY) noted that Pten/ Phlpp/ compound

www.aacrjournals.org

mutants cause a worse outcome than signal deﬁciencies in
mouse prostate models. Moreover, PHLPP gene loss (approximately 40%) is about as frequent as PTEN and p53 in patient
prostate samples. Interestingly, the compound PTEN/PHLPP
mutant acquires massive Akt activation late in tumor development, correlating to loss of p53. PTEN and PHLPP combined
loss triggers p53 activation and senescence arrest. Consistent
with this, human metastatic prostate tumors are the only
samples that show the PTEN þ PHLPP þ p53 triple deletion,
which rarely occurs in primary tumors. Both PHLPP proteins
(1 and 2) compensate for PTEN loss initially, and this feedback
response depends on PI3K pathway activation.
Gordon Mills (MDACC) introduced the endometrial cancer
mutation program and showed that PIK3CA mutations and
PTEN loss are the driving mutations in endometrial cancer.
Unlike most other cancers, loss of PTEN and PIK3CA mutation
may coexist or at least one of them is detected in 80% of
cancers. The PI3K pathway is frequently hyperactivated in this
disease, and Dr. Mills focused on somatic mutations of PI3K
regulatory subunit 1 (p85a; PIK3R1). p85 homodimerizes when
there is an excess of p110 and binds to PTEN via the RhoGAP
domain of p85 and the C2 domain of PTEN. p85 gain of function
mutations in endometrial cancers are unable to bind PTEN,
thereby leading to PTEN degradation and pathway activation.

Development of Novel PI3K/mTOR Pathway
Inhibitors
Kevan Shokat (University of California, San Francisco, CA)
began the session on the development of novel PI3K/mTOR
pathway inhibitors by introducing chemical genetic investigations of protein and lipid kinase signaling. They tested PP242
(ATP site mTORC1/2 inhibitor) in a xenotransplantation model of human liver tumors serially passaged in mice. This model
maintains the integrity of the tumor model quite nicely. They
found that cell lines that had wild-type KRAS/PI3K responded
to the drug, yet tumor lines with mutant KRAS and wild-type or
mutant PI3K responded poorly. Even more speciﬁcally, wildtype PI3K was less responsive than lines with H1047K mutant
PI3K. From this, Dr. Shokat proposed the model that mutant
KRAS drives some mTOR activity, yet when there is a PI3K
mutation as well, mTOR activity is rewired to a strong PI3Kdriven route, thereby making it more acutely sensitive to
PP242. Dr. Shokat also presented the kinase suppressor of Ras
(KSR), which is a scaffolding protein and assembles Raf–MEK–
ERK complexes, facilitating MEK phosphorylation (15). Furthermore, mass spectrometry identiﬁed MEK1 Ser24 and Ser72
as KSR-dependent phosphorylation sites.
After a summary of PI3K pathway regulation, William R.
Sellers (Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research) presented
data on new inhibitors: BEZ235, BKM120, and BYL719. Dr.
Sellers described an exciting research initiative, The Cell Line
Encyclopedia. Novartis screened 1,000 cancer cell lines (characterized their expression proﬁles, genetics, and single-nucleotide polymorphisms), and their sensitivity/resistance to various compounds. Amazingly, they can proﬁle approximately
500 cell lines in 3 months and 1,300 compounds in more than
500 cell lines. This will reveal biomarkers to sensitivity of

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

7355

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Emerling and Akcakanat

particular compounds. In addition, one can ask for a speciﬁc
genotype and select what is the best compound to treat it with.
However, this system is only screening cell growth inhibition by
cell counts, not taking into account migration, invasion, and
other characteristics of tumor cells. The next step will be the
generation of an encyclopedia of human tumors that have been
serially passaged and maintained in mice. To date Novartis has
received 1,281 human tumors and established almost 300
xenografts of the tumors in mice. The goal of this project will
be to make this information available online to the science
community.
Robert T. Abraham (Pﬁzer Biopharmaceuticals, Pearl
River, NY) discussed current inhibitors and dosing strategies. Rapamycin, in addition to inhibiting cell growth, inhibits HIF-1 and VEGF expression. Rapamycin-resistant mTOR
mutants do not bind to rapamycin in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines and are relatively insensitive
to growth inhibitory effect of rapamycin in vitro (16). Furthermore, in xenograft models, rapamycin treatment does
not inhibit the in vivo tumor growth of rapamycin-resistant
mTOR mutant models, suggesting that the primary tumor
effect of rapamycin is through its direct antitumor effect,
rather than its effects on the vasculature. Dr. Abraham also
introduced WYE-112132 (WYE-132), an ATP-competitive
inhibitor of mTOR. WYE-132 is potent, and against a panel
of cell lines its IC50 is in the nanomolar range (17).
Joel Greshock (GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA) presented
data on a pan-PI3K pyridylsulfonamide inhibitor, GSK2126458.
This is a reversible, ATP-competitive inhibitor of wild-type and
mutated forms of p110a. In a wide panel of human cancer cell
lines, bladder, ovarian, and, particularly, PIK3CA activating
mutations harboring breast cancer cell lines were responsive to
growth inhibition. Colon cancer cell lines show moderate level
sensitivity and KRAS mutations predict decreased sensitivity.
Combination with a MEK inhibitor shows strong synergy. Yi
Liu (Intellikine, Inc., La Jolla, CA) introduced INK1117, a potent
and selective PI3Ka inhibitor that shows a greater than 100fold selectivity relative to other class 1 PI3K family members
and mTOR. Through structure-guided drug design, Dr. Lieu
and his colleagues discovered INK1117, which is proving to be
an efﬁcacious PI3Ka inhibitor. In addition, in vitro and in vivo,
INK1117 blocks VEGF signaling and angiogenesis but shows
much less activity in PTEN-deﬁcient tumors, which have
constitutive activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway independent of PI3Ka. This drug does not impair glucose homeostasis or B- and T-cell functions. This new therapeutic
approach of selectively targeting PI3Ka offers a novel strategy
for the treatment of cancers. Moreover, preclinical data show
that isoform-selective inhibitors may be more effective in
cancers with PIK3CA activation along with a better safety
proﬁle.

Targeting mTOR
Funda Meric-Bernstam (MDACC) presented some of the
ongoing studies to determine the mechanism of rapamycin
action and markers for rapamycin response/resistance. Preclinical studies have suggested that activation of Akt/mTOR

7356

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

signaling may be a predictor of response. However, there have
been challenges in validating these markers clinically as predictors of response. By immunohistochemistry, comparison of
p-Akt and p-4E-BP1 expression in primary and matched distant metastases of breast tumors showed poor concordance,
which might reﬂect tumor heterogeneity or challenges in doing
immunohistochemistry on archived tissue (18). Dr. MericBernstam presented modulation of downstream signaling by
rapamycin and novel pharmacodynamic markers of response.
Rapamycin-regulated transcriptome predicts survival in breast
cancer patients, showing the importance of the pathway in
human cancer biology (19). Rapamycin also was shown to
regulate the expression of SCD1, a critical enzyme in fatty acid
metabolism SCD1 knockdown decreases, and SCD1 overexpression increases breast cancer cell growth; thus, rapamycinmediated downregulation of SCD1 may play an important role
in its antitumor effect (20). Studies are ongoing to determine
the role SCD1 in cancer biology and as a pharmacodynamic
marker. Dr. Meric-Bernstam also presented work in functional
proteomics approaches to identify predictors and pharmacodynamic markers of response. These studies showed that
baseline Akt pathway activation is associated with response,
but interestingly, feedback loop activation of Akt is also
associated with response. Similar data are emerging from
clinical trial specimens. These studies highlight a great need
for additional work on the mechanism of action of rapamycin
and its analogues, as well as, predictors and pharmacodynamic
markers of response to these agents.
Robert J. Schneider (New York University Cancer Institute,
New York, NY) has shown that inﬂammatory breast cancer is
resistant to radiation, in part, because of overexpression of
eIF4GI and constitutively active mTOR pathway. In response to
ionizing radiation, expression of DNA damage response (DDR)
proteins increase and protect inﬂammatory breast cancer
cells. In vitro, reducing high levels of eIF4GI sensitizes nontransformed breast epithelial cells to ionizing radiation, but
surprisingly increases the cancer stem cell population. Overall,
there is no enhancement in radiation sensitivity. Next, using an
inﬂammatory breast cancer cell line, SUM149, these investigators compared everolimus (allosteric mTOR inhibitor),
PP242 (mTORC1/2 inhibitor), and eIF4GI silencing. PP242 and
eIF4GI siRNA knockdown, but not everolimus, prevented
growth of inﬂammatory breast cancer xenografts, enhanced
radiosensitivity, decreased clonogenic survival, inhibited Akt
activation, and more efﬁciently inhibited downstream targets
and translation of mRNAs involved in DDR. In vivo, treatment
of SUM149 xenografts with PP242 and ionizing radiation led to
better tumor control and longer survival. Dr. Schneider concluded that eIF4G silencing or mTORC1/2 inhibition might
also sensitize cancer stem cells to ionizing radiation.
Sylvie M. Guichard (AstraZeneca R&D, Macclesﬁeld, UK)
introduced AZD8055, an ATP-competitive inhibitor of mTOR
kinase activity (21). Cell-line experiments show that AZD8055
dephosphorylates p-4E-BP1 Thr37/46 completely and, compared with rapamycin, has a greater effect on inhibition of capdependent translation, affects major cyclins as well as p27 and
p21, and results in a profound G1 arrest. Animal experiments
show that AZD8055 primarily targets tumor growth, has a

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Targeting PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer

limited effect on tumor vasculature, and inhibits tumor
growth more than rapamycin. As Akt is inhibited, glucose
uptake by tumor cells decreases. Uptake of glucose analogue
2[18F]ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose, observed by PET scanning, is
correlated with tumor growth and used as a biomarker. Dr.
Guichard justiﬁed combination treatment by 2 examples: in
HER2-ampliﬁed breast cancer cell lines, AZD8055 increases pHER3, and combination of AZD8055 and HER2 inhibitor
lapatinib is synergistic. Second, AZD8055 results in a temporary increase in p-MEK. Combination of AZD8055 and the MEK
inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244) produces cell death and
tumor regression in NSCLC xenografts.
Neil Rosen (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center) classiﬁed PI3K signaling pathway as "pathway activation without
ERK dysregulation (prostate, breast cancer), with coexisting
ERK dysregulation (colorectal cancer, melanoma), and harboring multiple mutations (endometrial)." Next, Dr. Rosen
analyzed the failures in clinical trials as "not good patient
selection, suboptimal drugs, inadequate inhibition, and adaption release of feedback inhibition." He focused on feedback
inhibition, mainly use of a non-ATP–competitive Akt1- and
Akt2-selective inhibitor, Akti-1/2 (22). In multiple cell lines,
not only in breast cancer cell lines with HER2 overexpression,
Akti-1/2 treatment activates p-HER3, p-INSR (insulin receptor), p-IGF-IR, whereas expression of HER2 does not change or
decrease. Several other RTKs, including HER4, show an
increase, which is postulated to be lack of inhibition of FOXO
proteins because of Akt inhibition.

Late-Breaking Research/Hot Topics
This session of the meeting was ﬁlled with short talks that
were proffered from abstract submissions. To start, William C.
Cobb (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC) presented
his research on IKK-dependent phosphorylation of PI3K,
which induces nutrient deprivation–induced autophagy. IKK
phosphorylates p85a in response to starvation in vivo, which
leads to feedback inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway,
promoting autophagy. This cross-talk between IKK/NF-kB and
PI3K/AKT probably will have signiﬁcant implications for
inﬂammation-associated pathologies, such as cancer.
Next, Jonathan Ross Hart (The Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, CA) described an elegant SILAC screen (stable-isotope
labeling by amino acids in cell culture) in which he identiﬁed
STAT3 targets as a major group of proteins that are overexpressed during PI3K-mediated oncogenic transformation.
PI3K activates the Tec family of tyrosine kinases, which in
turn phosphorylates and activates STAT3. Inhibition of Tec
kinases/STAT3 interferes with oncogenic transformation
induced by p110a H1047R.
Nathan T. Ihle (MDACC) showed that speciﬁc amino acid
substitutions in mutant KRAS effect PI3K signaling and may
predict patient survival and their response to targeted therapies. NSCLC KRAS G12C and colon or pancreas cancer G12D
amino acid substitutions are common. Analysis of NSCLC cell
lines with G12D showed activation of the PI3K/Akt and MEK
pathways, whereas G12C mutants have a weak activation of
PI3K but strong activation of RAL signaling. In NSCLC patients,

www.aacrjournals.org

G12C mutations reveal a worse progression-free survival
compared with other mutations, including G12D mutation,
which shows that different mutations may require different
inhibitors.
Devin T. Worster (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA)
described research showing that the loss of p57Kip2 increases
the PI3K/AKT oncogenic signaling pathway. p57Kip2 is a cyclindependent kinase inhibitor that is induced under conditions
such as IGF-I or insulin stimulation. Interestingly, p57Kip2 is
downregulated in response to EGF and EGF induces proliferation in the mammary epithelial cell line, MCF10a. Also,
knockdown of p57Kip2 releases acini from standard growth
arrest during morphogenesis of mammary epithelia cell in 3dimensional culture. p57Kip2 is activated by Akt but inhibited
by ERK, sensitive to Akt/ERK ratio, resulting in cell-cycle arrest
if the ratio is high. Remarkably, the p57Kip2 locus is silenced in
many breast cancers, which frequently show hyperactivation of
the PI3K pathway. p57Kip2 level may help to identify targeted
therapy against ERK and PI3K pathways. This interesting
hypothesis needs to be prospectively validated in the clinic.
Both the PI3K and MEK pathways contribute to PHLPPdependent proliferation. Matt J. Niederst (University of California, San Diego) showed that not only do the PHLPP family
phosphatases regulate the PI3K pathway via their effect on Akt,
but they also regulate growth factor receptor signaling. PHLPP
suppresses Ras activation and PHLPP knockdown increases
EGFR protein levels and activity, as well as transcription of
other growth factors such as VEGF receptor 1, MET, plateletderived growth factor 1a, and IGF receptor II. Many cancers
overexpress growth factor receptors, such as EGFR, thereby
making regulation of PHLPP an attractive therapeutic strategy.
APC loss results in WNT signaling activation and WNT
activation is important in intestinal regeneration, particularly
crypt growth. William J. Faller (Beatson Institute for Cancer
Research, Glasgow, UK) presented research in mice that raptor
knockout or rapamycin treatment inhibits tumor growth
induced by APC and PTEN deletion within the LGR5-positive
stem cell population. This growth effect is mediated through
S6K1 and indicates that the mTOR pathway mediates effects of
WNT activation in intestine.
Olga K. Mirzoeva (University of California, San Francisco)
showed that in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, inhibiting
PI3K or mTOR induces growth inhibition, whereas inhibiting
both induces cell death. Use of PI103, XL765 (dual inhibitors),
or combination of PIK90, XL147 (p110a inhibitors) with rapamycin or with PP242 (mTOR inhibitors) resulted in apoptosis
but induced autophagy. Inhibiting autophagy by chloroquine
enhanced apoptosis. Thus, combining PI3K/mTOR inhibitors
with autophagic inhibitors may promote pancreatic cancer
treatment.

Novel PI3K/mTOR Pathway Inhibitors in Clinical
Trials
Ana Maria Gonzalez-Angulo (MDACC) discussed molecular
marker–based clinical trial designs and once again emphasized
a general theme of the meeting—that clinical trials need to be
smaller, shorter, cheaper, and individualized. Evidence-based

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

7357

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Emerling and Akcakanat

medicine is generally practiced today, and this is best for the
average population but not speciﬁc for individuals. Treatments
for individual patients should be personalized on the basis of
molecular characteristics of their tumor and their genetic map.
For selection of correct markers, Dr. Gonzalez-Angulo stressed
the importance of identifying pathway drivers, understanding
limitations of marker research, and the fact that pathway
signatures may be superior to single markers. Even if a
marker is technically valid and scientiﬁcally reasonable, clinical validation may come later, even in the trial. Thereby,
carefully matching patients and speciﬁc single agents or
combination therapies will improve our likelihood of accomplishment. Furthermore, Dr. Gonzalez-Angulo discussed
molecular marker–based clinical trials targeting the PI3K/
Akt/mTOR pathway, promising results of combination therapies, and speciﬁc challenges to clinical trials, such as time from
sample acquisition to processing, additional time needed for
patient enrollment, high cost, and extensive regulations.
Li Yan (Merck & Co., Rahway, NJ) presented data about MK2206, an oral allosteric AKT inhibitor. In a phase I study, it was
shown to be fairly well tolerated, with widespread rash as the
major toxicity, and resulted in a decrease in AKT signaling but
increase in p-ERK and p-MEK. Rationale combination trials are
currently ongoing with MK-2206 in combination with chemotherapies as well as targeted agents, such as MEK inhibitors,
to make the most of the overall clinical outcome.
Razelle Kurzrock (MDACC) presented the PREDICT program, in which all patients are screened for common oncogenic
mutations (PIK3CA, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, EGFR, PTEN loss, etc.)
with the goal of enhancing efﬁcacy of personalized targeted
agents tested in phase I trials.
Mark R. Lackner (Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA)
further emphasized this point and highlighted that we need to
follow tumor genetics to optimize therapy for cancer patients.
Genentech has several clinical trials in progress that strive to
identify patients likely to beneﬁt from targeted therapy in
which they are testing putative predictive signatures.
Joanne J. Lager (Sanoﬁ-Aventis, Cambridge, MA) described
early clinical studies of XL147 (pan-PI3K inhibitor) and XL765
(pan PI3K/mTORC1/2 inhibitor). Interestingly, XL147 inhibits
not only p-Akt but also p-MEK and this is evident across many
tumor types with no change in total MEK or ERK. In addition as
a single agent, there are antiproliferative effects but no apoptosis. XL765 passes the blood–brain barrier and also inhibits
p-Akt and p-ERK with no change in total MEK or ERK levels.

Dr. Lager postulates that the p-ERK effect is not unique to these
PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors. Furthermore, p-ERK inhibition likely lags behind Akt inhibition, indicating that combination with a MEK inhibitor may be more effective than these
compounds as monotherapies.
Ryan J. O. Dowling (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, ON,
Canada) presented the biologic effects of metformin in earlystage breast cancer. Metformin is a ﬁrst-line therapy for
type 2 diabetes that reduces circulating insulin and glucose
levels. Metformin has emerged as a potential anticancer
agent because it can activate AMPK and decrease mTOR
signaling, leading to a decrease in proliferation in cancer
cells. Dowling and colleagues conducted a neoadjuvant,
single-arm, "window of opportunity" clinical trial to treat
breast cancer patients with metformin prior to breast surgery. Their interim analysis showed that metformin
decreased proliferation; there were no changes in p-AMPK,
but there was a decrease in p-Akt; together, these ﬁndings
suggest that there may be an indirect mechanism of metformin that provides its antitumor effects.

Summary
This conference highlighted the fact that although there has
been a large amount of research done on the PI3K/mTOR
signaling pathway over the years, there is still a great deal of
work to do to better understand how to effectively use the
inhibitors of this pathway in the clinic. Moreover, we need to
intimately understand the oncogenic mechanisms of individual tumors, allowing us to treat patients more effectively, with
the least toxicity. These are exciting times in cancer research,
particularly in the PI3K/mTOR signaling ﬁeld. We look forward
to the next AACR Special Conference on Targeting PI3K/mTOR
Signaling in Cancer.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
National Cancer Institute 1R01CA112199 (A. Akcakanat), SUC2-AACR-DT0209
01 (A. Akcakanat).
Received May 18, 2011; revised September 5, 2011; accepted September 28,
2011; published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

7358

Cantley LC. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. Science 2002;
296:1655–7.
Engelman JA, Luo J, Cantley LC. The evolution of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinases as regulators of growth and metabolism. Nat Rev Genet
2006;7:606–19.
Yuan TL, Wulf G, Burga L, Cantley LC. Cell-to-cell variability in PI3K
protein level regulates PI3K-AKT pathway activity in cell populations.
Curr Biol 2011;21:173–83.
Foukas LC, Berenjeno IM, Gray A, Khwaja A, Vanhaesebroeck B.
Activity of any class IA PI3K isoform can sustain cell proliferation and
survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:11381–6.

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

5.

6.

7.

Kim E, Goraksha-Hicks P, Li L, Neufeld TP, Guan KL. Regulation of
TORC1 by Rag GTPases in nutrient response. Nat Cell Biol 2008;10:
935–45.
Sancak Y, Peterson TR, Shaul YD, Lindquist RA, Thoreen CC,
Bar-Peled L, et al. The Rag GTPases bind raptor and mediate
amino acid signaling to mTORC1. Science 2008;320:1496–
501.
Sancak Y, Bar-Peled L, Zoncu R, Markhard AL, Nada S, Sabatini DM.
Ragulator-Rag complex targets mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface
and is necessary for its activation by amino acids. Cell 2010;141:
290–303.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Targeting PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Kuma A, Hatano M, Matsui M, Yamamoto A, Nakaya H, Yoshimori T,
et al. The role of autophagy during the early neonatal starvation period.
Nature 2004;432:1032–6.
Duvel K, Yecies JL, Menon S, Raman P, Lipovsky AI, Souza AL, et al.
Activation of a metabolic gene regulatory network downstream of
mTOR complex 1. Mol Cell 2010;39:171–83.
Alexander A, Kim J, Walker CL. ATM engages the TSC2/mTORC1
signaling node to regulate autophagy. Autophagy 2010;6.
Alexander A, Cai SL, Kim J, Nanez A, Sahin M, MacLean KH, et al. ATM
signals to TSC2 in the cytoplasm to regulate mTORC1 in response to
ROS. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:4153–8.
Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D, Digumarthy S, Turke AB,
Fidias P, et al. Genotypic and Histological Evolution of Lung Cancers
Acquiring Resistance to EGFR Inhibitors. Sci Transl Med 2011;3:
75ra26.
Huse JT, Brennan C, Hambardzumyan D, Wee B, Pena J, Rouhanifard
SH, et al. The PTEN-regulating microRNA miR-26a is ampliﬁed in highgrade glioma and facilitates gliomagenesis in vivo. Genes Dev
2009;23:1327–37.
Bleau AM, Hambardzumyan D, Ozawa T, Fomchenko EI, Huse JT,
Brennan CW, et al. PTEN/PI3K/Akt pathway regulates the side population phenotype and ABCG2 activity in glioma tumor stem-like cells.
Cell Stem Cell 2009;4:226–35.
Brennan DF, Dar AC, Hertz NT, Chao WC, Burlingame AL, Shokat KM,
et al. A Raf-induced allosteric transition of KSR stimulates phosphorylation of MEK. Nature 2011;472:366–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

16. Amornphimoltham P, Patel V, Leelahavanichkul K, Abraham RT, Gutkind JS. A retroinhibition approach reveals a tumor cell-autonomous
response to rapamycin in head and neck cancer. Cancer Res
2008;68:1144–53.
17. Yu K, Shi C, Toral-Barza L, Lucas J, Shor B, Kim JE, et al. Beyond
rapalog therapy: preclinical pharmacology and antitumor activity of
WYE-125132, an ATP-competitive and speciﬁc inhibitor of mTORC1
and mTORC2. Cancer Res 2010;70:621–31.
18. Akcakanat A, Sahin A, Shaye AN, Velasco MA, Meric-Bernstam F.
Comparison of Akt/mTOR signaling in primary breast tumors and
matched distant metastases. Cancer 2008;112:2352–8.
19. Akcakanat A, Zhang L, Tsavachidis S, Meric-Bernstam F. The rapamycin-regulated gene expression signature determines prognosis for
breast cancer. Mol Cancer 2009;8:75.
20. Luyimbazi D, Akcakanat A, McAuliffe PF, Zhang L, Singh G, GonzalezAngulo AM, et al. Rapamycin regulates stearoyl CoA desaturase 1
expression in breast cancer. Mol Cancer Ther 2010;9:2770–84.
21. Chresta CM, Davies BR, Hickson I, Harding T, Cosulich S, Critchlow
SE, et al. AZD8055 is a potent, selective, and orally bioavailable
ATP-competitive mammalian target of rapamycin kinase inhibitor
with in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity. Cancer Res 2010;70:
288–98.
22. Cherrin C, Haskell K, Howell B, Jones R, Leander K, Robinson R, et al.
An allosteric Akt inhibitor effectively blocks Akt signaling and tumor
growth with only transient effects on glucose and insulin levels in vivo.
Cancer Biol Ther 2010;9:493–503.

Cancer Res; 71(24) December 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

7359

Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699

Targeting PI3K/mTOR Signaling in Cancer
Brooke M. Emerling and Argun Akcakanat
Cancer Res 2011;71:7351-7359. Published OnlineFirst October 10, 2011.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2011/12/13/0008-5472.CAN-11-1699.DC1

This article cites 20 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/24/7351.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/24/7351.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

