Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Targeting lemurs against cancer metastasis
Yichen Xu, Hua Zhang and Georgios Giamas
with the adaptor protein GRB2, activate RAS-GTPase
family members subsequently leading to upregulated
serum response factor (SRF) activity, resulting in increased
ITGA5 and ITGB1 gene transcription. A set of gain- and
loss-of-function experiments showed that LMTK3 could
stimulate SRF indirectly through its action on cell division
control protein 42 homolog (CDC42). However, other
alternative mechanisms merit investigation, including the
possibility that LMTK3 might activate SRF through direct
phosphorylation. In support of this hypothesis, in silico
analysis revealed potential phosphorylation sites of SRF
targeted by LMTK3 that are currently under examination.
Moreover, the topology of LMTK3 (cytoplasmic, nuclear
and to a lesser degree in the cell membrane), implies that
LMTK3 may be capable of shuttling between subcellular
compartments upon specific stimuli (i.e. posttranslational
modifications) and other cellular conditions. Therefore,

Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
cancer and the leading cause of mortality in females
worldwide. Despite the great improvement in survival
rates the last two decades, relapsed disease with metastasis
still remains the most poorly understood aspect of cancer
pathogenesis [1]. Consequently, there is a growing need
to identify so-called new ‘players’ implicated in this
process. Lemur tyrosine kinase 3 (LMTK3), a member
of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family, has been
previously identified as a central protein involved in
breast cancer growth and endocrine resistance and it has
also been subjected to Darwinian positive selection as
described [2-5]. Moreover, increased LMTK3 expression
associates with poor overall and disease-free survival,
indicative of a potential involvement of LMTK3 in breast
cancer progression.
Cell migration and invasion are the early steps
of the metastatic process controlled by cellular signals
that stimulate changes in cell adhesion and cytoskeleton
formation [6]. We have now reported that LMTK3 is
highly expressed in triple negative breast cancers and
it is implicated in actin cytoskeleton remodeling, focal
adhesion formation and increased cell motility [7]. In
vitro experiments showed that overexpression of LMTK3
accelerates the dispersion and invasion of breast cancer
cells towards the matrigel and collagen, while it increases
actin protrusions and focal adhesion formations on the edge
of migrating cells. To address the underlying molecular
mechanisms, a stable isotope labeling by amino acids
in cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics analysis was
implemented to investigate the downstream components
of LMTK3-regulated cascade. Interestingly, integrin
subunits α5 (ITGA5) and β1 (ITGB1), central receptors
in metastatic signal relay, were positively regulated by
LMTK3, while high LMTK3 levels were also correlated
with increased ITGB1 expression in breast cancer patient
samples. In support of the role of LMTK3 in metastatic
progression, a proof-of-concept in vivo metastatic mouse
model was generated, after injecting parental T47D breast
cancer cells and T47D cells overexpressing LMTK3 into
the mammary fat pads of female NOD/SCID mice. Our
preliminary results revealed that only the T47D-LMTK3
mice developed metastasis in the mammary fat pad
after 7 weeks, suggesting the contribution of LMTK3 in
metastatic potential (unpublished data).
Similar to other RTKs, LMTK3 can directly interact
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fig 1: Targeting LMTK3 against cancer metastasis. In

response to various stimuli (i.e ligands binding, regulation by
kinases or phosphatases, etc) LMTK3 activates Ras-GTPase
family through GRB2, enhancing the activity of the SRF
transcription factor. In parallel, LMTK3 might activate SRF
through direct phosphorylation that eventually results in the
activation of integrins transcription, which subsequently leads to
increased cancer cell invasion and metastasis.
5192

Oncotarget

understanding the exact role(s) of LMTK3 in different
cellular compartments is imperative. In order to
characterize substrates phosphorylated by LMTK3, a
high-throughput in vitro kinase assay screen is in progress
that will further help us uncover the signaling pathways
that LMTK3 is implicated in and decipher its contribution
in disease.
Furthermore, elucidating the upstream mechanisms
of LMTK3-regulation is also essential. Till now, there are
no studies regarding the existence of any LMTK3-specific
ligand(s) or other proteins (i.e. kinases, phosphatases, etc.)
that can directly activate/inactivate the catalytic activity
of LMTK3. Unraveling the upstream signaling and
cross-talk pathways of LMTK3 would greatly improve
our understanding of the underlying mechanisms that
contribute to the regulation of LMTK3 and its involvement
in invasion and metastasis (Fig 1).
In aggregate, based on our results so far, LMTK3
appears to be a promising new target against breast cancer
progression and metastasis. Additional work is required to
broaden our knowledge of LMTK3 functions at molecular
and cellular levels. In parallel, a drug screening program
will facilitate the identification of specific LMTK3
inhibitors, which could eventually aid to tackle breast
cancer metastasis and endocrine resistance.
Georgios Giamas: Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Division of Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, UK.
Correspondence: Georgios Giamas, email g.giamas@imperial.ac.uk
Received: July 9, 2014;
Published: July 25, 2014;

REFERENCES
1.	 Chaffer CL and Weinberg
331(6024):1559-1564.

RA.

Science.

2011;

2.	

Giamas G et al. Nat Med. 2011; 17(6):715-719.

3.	

Stebbing J et al. Oncogene. 2013; 32(28):3371-3380.

4.	

Stebbing J et al. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012; 132(2):537544.

5.	

Stebbing J et al. Oncotarget. 2011; 2(6):428-429.

6.	

Wan L et al. Nat Med. 2013; 19(11):1450-1464.

7.	

Xu Y et al. Sci Signal. 2014; 7(330):ra58. 1.	

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5193

Oncotarget

