Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

STB-HO, a novel mica fine particle, inhibits the teratomaforming ability of human embryonic stem cells after in vivo
transplantation
Soon Won Choi1,2,*, Tae-Hoon Shin1,2,*, Md. Hafiz Uddin1,2, Ji-Hee Shin1,2, Tae-Wook
Kang2,3, Byung-Chul Lee1,2, Hyung-Sik Kim1,2, Yoojin Seo1,2, Sulaiman Shams1,4,
Yeon-Kwon Jung5 and Kyung-Sun Kang1,2
1

Adult Stem Cell Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

2

Research Institute for Veterinary Science, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea
3

Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine in Kangstem Biotech, Biomedical Science Building, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
4

Stem Cells Regenerative Medicine Lab, Department of Biochemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Pakistan
5

Seobong BioBesstech Co., Ltd., Yeoksam-dong, Kangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Kyung-Sun Kang, email: kangpub@snu.ac.kr
Keywords: STB-HO, mica fine particle, teratoma formation, pluripotent stem cell, apoptosis
Received: June 16, 2015	

Accepted: November 25, 2015	

Published: December 04, 2015

ABSTRACT
Although pluripotent stem cell (PSC) therapy has advantages for clinical
applications because of the self-renewal and multi-lineage differentiation abilities
of PSCs, it also has disadvantages in terms of the potential for PSCs to undergo
malignant transformation or unexpected differentiation. The prevention of teratoma
formation is the largest hurdle of all. Despite intensive studies that have investigated
ways to block teratomas, such methods have yet to be further developed for clinical
use. Here, a new approach has focused on exerting anti-tumorigenic effects using a
novel mica fine particle (MFP) designated STB-HO. Treatment with STB-HO regulated
pluripotency- and apoptosis-related genes in differentiating human embryonic stem
(hES) cells, while there is no effects in undifferentiated hES cells. In particular,
STB-HO blocked the anti-apoptotic gene BIRC5 and activated p53, p21 and the proapoptotic proteins Bim, Puma and p-Bad during early spontaneous differentiation.
Moreover, STB-HO-pretreated differentiating hES cells did not give rise to teratomas
following in vivo stem cell transplantation. Our in vitro and in vivo results suggest a
method for teratoma prevention in the context of PSC-derived cell transplantation.
This novel MFP could break through the limitations of PSC therapy.

INTRODUCTION

cells under proper cell culture conditions. Recently, such
cell-specific differentiation protocols have improved and
have been developed to obtain therapeutically relevant cell
types from human PSC sources [4]. Most importantly, the
generation of lineage-specific cells using PSCs has been
investigated as a promising approach to understand and
cure degenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s disease,
which involves dopamine neurons [5, 6], and Huntington’s
disease, which involves striatal neurons [7], as well as
non-neural cell types in the liver [8] and pancreatic islets

Stem cell therapy has emerged as a therapeutic
strategy with great potential in the last few years. The
ultimate goals of stem cell therapy are tissue replacement
and regeneration in degenerative diseases [1-3]. Stem
cells, particularly human pluripotent stem cell (PSC), selfrenew indefinitely and can differentiate into all cell types
of the human body. With this excellent potential, they can
be induced to differentiate into tissue-specific functional
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2684

Oncotarget

[9]. Despite excellent cell sources for the replacement
of degenerative tissues, the clinical application of PSC
therapies is strongly limited due to the potential for PSCs
to form teratomas [10, 11]. Unless this risk is eliminated
before transplantation, the teratoma issue is a central
safety hurdle for the application of PSC therapies in
regenerative medicine.
For PSC therapy, undifferentiated cells are
differentiated in vitro toward certain tissue-specific cell
types. During this differentiation process, PSCs can
remain in an undifferentiated state in a mixture with
their differentiated progeny and spontaneously give rise
to teratomas after in vivo transplantation [12]. Therefore,
numerous techniques have been attempted to prevent
teratoma formation, and reduced incidence rates have
been achieved, for example, via genetic modification of
the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene [13] and
sorting of undifferentiated cells using SOX1 or SSEA-5
[14] as well as long-term culture during differentiation
[15]. However, those techniques are not feasible solutions
for clinical use. Alternative approaches have also been
employed, such as the selective elimination of residual
undifferentiated PSCs via transient treatment with
monoclonal antibody 84 [16] as well as small molecules
to target the remaining undifferentiated PSCs [17, 18], as
recently reported.
Postulating that undifferentiated cells can be
selectively eliminated in vitro before cell transplantation,
the underlying mechanism must be understood for
employment in PSC therapy. According to seminal studies,
undifferentiated PSCs are very sensitive to DNA damage
and are therefore fragile, undergoing programmed cell
death (apoptosis). The promotion of apoptosis is caused
not only by the tumor suppressor protein p53 but also
by mitochondrial priming with the Bcl-2 protein family,
which consists of initiators (BH3-only proteins), guardians
(the pro-survival proteins) and effectors (the pro-apoptotic
proteins) [9, 19]. Importantly, mitochondrial priming that
exceeds the apoptotic threshold differs between PSCs and
differentiated cells. A reliable study reported that BH3only proteins were highly expressed in PSCs and were
then gradually down-regulated upon differentiation [20].
Exploring new approaches to induce the selective
elimination of undifferentiated cells, we tested a mica
fine particle (MFP). In many previous studies, mica
was studied in the context of immune regulation and
demonstrated immune enhancing effects by activating
macrophages [21, 22]. Another recent study investigated
global cell responses of macrophages to a newly
developed MFP using a microarray approach [23]. This
microarray analysis reported huge changes in gene
expression after treatment with MFP. Interestingly, MFP
treatment markedly down-regulated genes related to the
cell cycle (Mybl2, Cdc20, Rrm2, Ccne2), cell proliferation
(Ki67), DNA replication (Mcm5, Mcm6) and DNA repair
(Rad54l), whereas apoptosis-related genes (Gadd45a,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Gadd153, Cd274) were increased by more than 8-fold.
Although this study utilized the murine leukemic
monocyte macrophage line RAW 264.7, the results implied
that MFP could be involved in the selective elimination
of undifferentiated cells, which are characterized by
mitochondrial priming.
STB-HO is one of the MFP and recently developed
to have the anti-tumor and the immune-stimulatory effects.
A cancer study using STB-HO has reported chemopreventive effects of STB-HO, blocking cell cycle and
proliferation in colorectal cancers [24]. Moreover, MFP
has been studied for enhancing immune activity and
recently reported in many studies. Administrations of such
MFP as feed supplements could be induced to in crease
immune responses against viral infections [25-27]. As
previously reported that the immune-stimulatory ability
of MFP can be efficiently suppressed tumors, most studies
have investigated MFP for the anti-tumor and the immunestimulatory effects in cancer stem cells.
Here, we determined the effects of a novel MFP,
designated STB-HO, on the teratoma formation of human
embryonic stem (hES) cells. First, we investigated whether
the effects of STB-HO influenced only undifferentiated
cells or differentiated cells as well. We found that STBHO treatment regulated pro- and anti-apoptotic factors,
particularly in early differentiating hES cells; however,
the effects of STB-HO were limited in EBs. We next
investigated changes in the Bcl-2 protein family. STB-HO
treatment of early differentiating hES cells up-regulated
pro-apoptotic proteins and pro-apoptotic caspases.
Finally, we performed a teratoma formation assay
using STB-HO-pretreated differentiating hES cells and
showed their preventative effects following subcutaneous
transplantation.

RESULTS
Changes in pluripotency- and apoptosis-related
gene expression upon STB-HO treatment in early
differentiating hES cells
We hypothesized that STB-HO could influence the
teratoma formation of hES cells by stimulating apoptosis.
To identify the suppressive effects of STB-HO, we first
cultured hES cells on feeder cells and characterized them
based on their alkaline phosphatase activity, which is a
well-known, typical characteristic of ES cells. Next, we
spontaneously differentiated hES cells, which formed
colonies. These spontaneously differentiated hES cell
colonies were treated with STB-HO and characterized
by quantitative RT-PCR. We assessed changes in gene
expression with increasing chemical doses of STBHO. The gene expression of three pluripotent markers,
OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG, demonstrated a tendency
2685

Oncotarget

toward reduction at all doses (Figure S1A). In particular,
the expression of both the OCT4 and SOX2 genes was
significantly reduced at the 10 µg/ml dose. In contrast to
the three pluripotent markers, two oncogenes, c-MYC and
KLF4, which are well-known as iPS-inducing factors,
exhibited no particular trend in terms of gene expression

with increasing chemical doses of STB-HO (Figure S1B).
The oncogenes showed decreased gene expression at the
10 µg/ml dose and increased gene expression at the 100
µg/ml dose. Based on this, we therefore used the 10 µg/
ml dose for the following experiments with differentiating
and undifferentiated hES cells.

Figure 1: Dynamic changes of pluripotency- and apoptosis-related gene expression patterns upon STB-HO treatment
of differentiating hES cells. A. Undifferentiated hES cells were spontaneously differentiated into following cell types: 1-day and

3-day differentiating hES cells (left) and sphere-shaped hEBs (right). B.-C. Early spontaneous differentiating hES cells in naïve (B; left)
and STB-HO-treated (B; right) colonies were characterized by alkaline phosphatase activity B. and by gene expression patterns C. D.-E.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of pluripotent marker genes (OCT4 and NANOG), an endodermal differentiation marker gene
(AFP) and apoptosis-related genes (BCL10, BIRC5, p53 and p21) was performed on 1-day and 3-day differentiating hES cells and hEBs
treated with 10 µg/ml STB-HO. hDFs are shown as controls for fully differentiated cells. Scale bar = 200 µm. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2686

Oncotarget

To better understand the effects of STB-HO in
hES cells, we induced the spontaneous differentiation of
hES cells and examined changes in alkaline phosphatase
activity and gene expression. As shown in Figure 1A,
hES cells can be induced to commence spontaneous
differentiation upon withdrawal of FGF2 and can further
give rise to sphere-shaped embryoid bodies (EBs) in a
suspension culture during the early differentiation stage. In
this manner, we differentiated hES cells and individually
compared three differentiating hES cell types: 1-day and
3-day differentiating hES cells as well as hEBs. During
the early spontaneous differentiation of hES cells,
differentiating hES cell colonies showed extended loss
of alkaline phosphatase activity after STB-HO treatments
(Figure 1B). Nevertheless, the gene expressions of iPS
inducing factors excluding OCT4 were not significantly
changed (Figure 1C). In detail, the gene expression of
OCT4 was rapidly reduced in the 1-day differentiating hES
cells, and the gene expression of NANOG was gradually
reduced in the hEBs (Figure 1D). With STB-HO, NANOG
expression was decreased even in the 3-day differentiating
hES cells, and furthermore, the gene expression of alphafetoprotein (AFP), an early endodermal lineage marker,
was dramatically increased in the hEBs (Figure 1E). These
data suggest that STB-HO treatment induced a rapid loss
of pluripotency and/or undifferentiated hES cells in early
differentiation cultures.
Recently, it has been reported that two antiapoptotic factors, BIRC5 and BCL10, are preferentially
expressed in hES cells [17]. We therefore monitored
the gene expression patterns of these two anti-apoptotic
factors to determine whether their expression changed
during the spontaneous differentiation of hES cells.
The gene expression levels of BIRC5 and BCL10 did
not differ between vehicle- and STB-HO-treated hEBs,
but they were significantly changed in 1-day and 3-day
differentiating hES cells (Figure 1F). BCL10 expression
was up-regulated by 3.9- and 4.5-fold. Conversely,
BIRC5 expression was remarkably decreased and was not
detected, respectively. These data led us to presume that
STB-HO may stimulate apoptosis in differentiating hES
cells by diminishing anti-apoptotic factors, which prevents
the activation of apoptosis.
As reported in many studies, the tumor suppressor
protein p53 demonstrates differential sensitivity to
DNA damage, which leads to apoptosis in hES cells
and differentiated cells [29, 30]. However, p53 triggers
(activates) mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in hES
cells. The up-regulation of p53 and its down-stream
target p21 was identified 3 days after the spontaneous
differentiation of hES cells (Figure 1G). Interestingly,
spontaneous differentiation of hES cells with STB-HO
resulted in a rapid change in the gene expression of p53
and p21. In 1-day differentiating hES cells with STB-HO,
gene expression levels were approximately 1000-fold
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

higher than the levels without STB-HO. These increases
in the gene expression levels of the 1-day differentiating
hES cells were significant. Gene expression was not
significantly different in other differentiating hES cell
types. These findings prompted us to hypothesize that the
selective apoptosis of undifferentiated hES cells occurs
during early spontaneous differentiation via the activation
of p53 and p21, and furthermore, it might be accelerated
in the presence of STB-HO.

No suppressive effects of STB-HO on pluripotency
in undifferentiated hES cells
Now, it is a valid and important question, whether
STB-HO does effect on undifferentiated hES cells or not.
To answer this issue, we analyzed alkaline phosphatase
activity and gene expression patterns with untreated and
treated hES cells in the undifferentiated stage (Figure
2A). The hES cells were positively stained for alkaline
phosphatase, whereas the feeder cells were negatively
stained. The experiments of alkaline phosphatase
activity indicated that STB-HO does not influence the
undifferentiated state to decrease undifferentiated cell
populations in hES cell colonies. By gene expression
patterns of iPS-inducing factors, the gene expression
of the pluripotent markers SOX2 and NANOG showed
no changes by STB-HO treatments, while quercetin
treatments dramatically decreased both gene expressions
(Figure 2C). In contrast to the differentiating hES cells,
two oncogenes c-MYC and KLF4 exhibited no particular
trend like two pluripotent markers. In addition, we
analyzed further gene expression patterns of apoptosisrelated factors, such as p53, p21, BCL10 and BIRC5
(Figure S2). Like iPS-inducing factors, these genes
showed not significant changes following STB-HO
treatments. After repeated gene expression experiments,
we figured out that STB-HO does not influence the
undifferentiated stage of hES cells to change pluripotencyand apoptosis-related factors.

STB-HO regulates commitment to mitochondriacontrolled apoptosis in early differentiating hES
cells
To determine whether the selective apoptosis of
remaining undifferentiated hES cells in the differentiating
populations can be triggered by STB-HO treatment, we
first investigated the molecular mechanisms in vehicleand STB-HO-treated differentiating hES cells. Similar
to the findings described above, expression of the p53
protein and its down-stream target p21 was increased 3.5fold and 11.7-fold by STB-HO treatment, respectively
(Figure 3A). However, the effects of STB-HO on p53 and
p21 expression have not been observed in human dermal
2687

Oncotarget

fibroblasts (hDFs). As much is known about the role of p53
as a direct regulator of mitochondrial apoptotic proteins
[31, 32], we next tested and compared the Bcl-2 protein
family in vehicle- and STB-HO-treated differentiating
hES cells. Interestingly, the Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3)-only
proteins, such as Bim, Puma and Bad, were stimulated by
STB-HO and were highly expressed in differentiating hES
cells but not in hDFs (Figure 3B). A 4-fold increase in
Bim, a 2-fold increase in Puma and a 13-fold increase in
phosphorylated-Bad (p-Bad) were sufficient to exceed the
apoptotic threshold and commit the differentiating hES
cells to apoptosis. This pro-apoptotic switching resulted
in activation of the critical effectors Caspase-9 and
Caspase-3 (Figure 3C).

Then, we further analyzed the effect of STB-HO
on undifferentiated hES cells in protein level. Repeated
protein expression experiments indicated that STB-HOtreated undifferentiated hES cells have no expression
changes of apoptosis-related factors excluding p53 and
Bim, which were decreased after STB-HO treatments
(Figure S3). Consequently, the decreased levels of both
pro-apoptotic factors does not influence undifferentiated
hES cells to exceed the apoptotic threshold. Therefore,
we concluded that STB-HO treatment of differentiating
hES cells could reduce the remaining undifferentiated
hES cells, which can give rise to teratomas upon stem cell
transplantation.

Figure 2: Harmless effects of STB-HO on pluripotency in undifferentiated hES cells. A. A representative phase-contrast

image of hES cells growing on STO feeder cells is shown. B. Characterization of hES cells based on alkaline phosphatase activity was
performed on naïve (left) and STB-HO-treated (right) undifferentiated hES cell colonies. C. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of
pluripotent marker genes (OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG), tumorigenic reprogramming factors (c-MYC and KLF4) and a differentiation
marker (α-SMA) was performed in undifferentiated hES cells with treatment of STB-HO and quercetin. Scale bar = 200 µm. *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2688

Oncotarget

Figure 3: STB-HO regulates commitment to mitochondria-controlled apoptosis in early differentiating hES cells.
Western blot analyses of A. apoptosis-related proteins (p53 and p21), B. the Bcl-2 protein family (Bim, Puma, p-Bad) and C. apoptosis
stimulators (Caspase-3 and Caspase-9) in differentiating hES cells and hDFs were performed and compared between treatment with vehicle
and 10 µg/ml STB-HO. Representative western blot bands were quantified using ImageJ as well as bar graphs, normalizing to the housekeeping protein GAPDH.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2689

Oncotarget

STB-HO pre-treatment prevents teratoma
formation after in vivo transplantation of
differentiating hES cells

from the implantation site (Figure 4A). To histologically
determine the characteristics of the obtained tumors, we
stained tissue sections with hematoxylin and eosin and
histologically detected typical structures of teratomas that
develop from injected hES cells (Figure 4B). To further
determine whether teratomas were developed from
injected human cells or host tissues, teratoma sections
were immunohistochemically stained using human
mitochondria-specific antigen HuMi. In teratomas, HuMiexpressing cells mixed with host cells were detected
(Figure 4C).
These teratomas could be divided into two
categories: 1) mature teratomas, which were globular
shaped and bigger than 5 mm in diameter, and 2)
immature teratomas, which were smaller and not a
typical globular shape [33]. In this manner, the incidence
of teratoma formation in the following five groups was
determined (Table 1). In the group transplanted only with
differentiating hES cells, the incidence as 30%, and all
three teratomas were determined to be mature teratoma

As shown above, our data indicated that STB-HO
treatment induces the selective apoptosis of remaining
undifferentiated hES cells in differentiating populations.
Based on these promising results, we performed in
vivo experiments to determine whether STB-HO pretreatment of differentiating hES cells could prevent
teratoma formation after transplantation. To address
this, we used two cell types: differentiating hES cells
and hDFs as a negative control. We treated these
cells with STB-HO or quercetin for two days before
transplantation and subcutaneously injected 1x106 cells
into immunosuppressed mice. At two months posttransplant, we assessed teratoma formation in recipient
subcutaneous tissues. After sacrificing the mice, we
could morphologically detect tumors and isolated them

Figure 4: STB-HO pre-treatment prevents teratoma formation after in vivo transplantation of differentiating hES
cells. A. After in vivo transplantation of differentiating hES cells, tumors were detected at 8 weeks post-transplant. B. All tumors were

cryosectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Then, tumors were identified as mature teratoma cases based on whether they were
globular shaped and bigger than 5 mm in diameter or as immature teratoma cases if they were smaller and not a typical globular shape. A
composite image of a mature teratoma case reveals an entire section of a teratoma that contains elements of three distinct germ layers. C.
Immunohistochemical images showed human mitochondria-specific marker (HuMi)-positive cells (green) in teratomas developed after
xenotransplantations. D. The incidence of teratoma formation after in vivo transplantation of differentiating hES cells, which were pretreated with vehicle (n = 10), 50 µM quercetin (n = 6) or 10 µg/ml STB-HO (n = 15), is shown. Scale bar = 1 mm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2690

Oncotarget

Table 1: Teratoma formation after subcutaneous injection in mice
Group

Cells injected

1

Differentiating hESCs

2

Differentiating hESCs

3

Differentiating hESCs

4

hDFs

5

hDFs

Pre-treatment

No. of animals

Teratomas formed

10

30% (3 out of 10)

10 μg/ml STB-HO

15

0% (0 out of 15)

50 μM quercetin

6

33% (2 out of 6)

7

0% (0 out of 7)

3

0% (0 out of 3)

10 μg/ml STB-HO

Group 1 comprised all 3 mature teratoma cases and group 3 comprised two immature teratoma cases.
cases (Figure 4D). In sharp contrast, no teratomas
developed from the STB-HO-pretreated differentiating
hES cells at the implantation site in 15 recipients. As a
control, we performed identical in vivo experiments with
hDFs and detected no teratomas in 10 recipients for both
STB-HO-exposed and STB-HO-unexposed hDF groups.
In addition, we compared the inhibitory effects of STBHO and quercetin on teratoma formation; quercetin has
recently been reported to be an effective small molecule
for the prevention of teratoma formation from remaining
undifferentiated pluripotent cells [17, 34]. However, the
quercetin-pretreated differentiating hES cells induced
2 immature teratoma cases out of 6 independent
experiments. Taken together, these results strongly support
the notion that pre-treatment of differentiating hES cell
cultures with STB-HO could inhibit teratoma formation
after stem cell transplantation.

(Table 1). This cell population consists primarily of
undifferentiated hES cells, which are characterized
by alkaline phosphatase activity and the expression
of pluripotent marker genes as well as the ability to
form teratomas. This teratoma formation of early
differentiating hES cells is theoretically expected to
occur with a rate of 100%. However, teratoma formation
by hES cells according to routine laboratory tests does
not demonstrate the theoretical rate, particularly with
xenotransplantation. An early study showed that the
tumorigenesis of undifferentiated murine ES cells in rats
was rare [35]. This in vivo study further mentioned that
the xenotransplantation of murine ES cells induced no
tumor development in intact rats, whereas homologous
transplantation induced 95% tumor development. It is
therefore likely that the 30% can represent a feasible rate
of teratoma formation by xenotransplantation of early
differentiating hES cells. Accordingly, we reduced the rate
of teratoma formation from 30% (3 out of 10 recipients) to
zero (0 out of 15 recipients) by pre-treating with STB-HO.
This study did not fully determine how to induce
the selective apoptosis of undifferentiated hES cells.
However, we identified key components of mechanisms to
regulate apoptosis in hES cells. As it is commonly known,
human ES cells, unlike adult stem cells, are vulnerable
to DNA damage and consequently are prone to apoptosis.
This differential DNA damage sensitivity in hES cells
is caused by the apoptotic threshold, which is a balance
between cytoplasmic pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins
[19, 29]. When pro-apoptotic proteins outnumber antiapoptotic proteins, hES cells undergo apoptosis. In this
apoptotic threshold model, the tumor suppressor p53 plays
a crucial role. Departing from its role as a transcription
factor, p53 acts to directly interact with pro- and antiapoptotic proteins in the mitochondria [31]. Consistent
with previous findings, STB-HO-mediated activation of
p53 induced increases in the expression of its down-stream
target p21 and its apoptotic target Puma (Figure 3A-3B),
suggesting that the activation of apoptosis dependent on
STB-HO was induced by mitochondrial priming.

DISCUSSION
Does STB-HO, a novel MFP, reduce teratoma
formation after stem cell transplantation? To answer
this question, we first investigated the in vitro effects of
STB-HO on hES cells. STB-HO regulated pluripotencyand apoptosis-related genes in undifferentiated and also
differentiating hES cells. In particular, the expression
of the Bcl-2 protein family was markedly changed in
early differentiating hES cells after STB-HO treatment.
These mitochondrial pro-apoptotic proteins control the
up-regulation of the expression of the apoptosis-related
proteins p53, p21, and Caspase-3 and -9. Next, we
investigated the in vivo effects of STB-HO-pretreated
hES cells on teratoma formation. The incidence of
teratoma formation from differentiating hES cells was
30%, whereas no teratomas developed in 15 recipients that
received STB-HO-pretreated hES cells. Thus, our in vitro
and in vivo results might answer the question of whether
STB-HO prevents teratomas during stem cell therapy.
In our in vivo experiments, the rate of teratoma
formation was 30% for early differentiating hES cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2691

Oncotarget

Conversely, STB-HO treatment regulated BCL10
and BIRC5 (encoding survivin), particularly in the early
differentiating hES cells. As mentioned above, hES cells
are in close proximity to the apoptotic threshold, which
is balanced between pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins,
including Puma, Bim, Bad and Bcl-2. These proteins are
expressed at higher abundances in hES cells compared
to differentiated cells [20, 36]. This apoptotic threshold
rapidly disappears during differentiation and then is unable
to offer a rapid and direct route to apoptosis [37]. BCL10
and BIRC5 are well-known anti-apoptotic genes and were
recently reported to be hES cell-specific expressed proteins
[17]. Although it induced a 4-fold up-regulation of BCL10
expression, STB-HO treatment of early differentiating
hES cells almost completely inhibited the expression of
the BIRC5 gene. These phenomena were observed only in
early differentiating hES cells, not in EBs. Taken together,
inhibition of BIRC5 by STB-HO implies its ability to
rapidly induce the apoptosis of undifferentiated hES cells.
Regarding its effects on differentiation, we
administered STB-HO not only to early differentiating
hES cells but also to EBs. In general, the endoderm lineage
marker AFP is expressed first during the differentiation
of hES cells. As expected, AFP expression was
detected in EBs. This AFP expression was dramatically
elevated after STB-HO treatment, while the apoptosisrelated proteins p53, p21, BCL10 and BIRC5 were not
significantly changed (Figure C-E). Furthermore, the
effects of STB-HO on fully differentiated cells were
tested. We treated hDFs with STB-HO and analyzed
the expression of these apoptosis-related proteins. Most
of them were not expressed and were not up-regulated
by STB-HO treatment. Puma was expressed in hDFs
but did not change. Our present findings indicate
that STB-HO treatment of differentiated cells did not
activate apoptosis-related proteins and stimulated the
spontaneous differentiation of hES cells. However, the
precise mechanism underlying these effects in terms of
differentiation and apoptosis remains elusive.
In our cancer study, we investigated the therapeutic
effect of STB-HO against cancers, particularly breast
cancer [39]. STB-HO treatments exhibited significant
suppressive effects on cell growth of MCF-7 breast cancer
cell line in a xenotransplantation model, whereas STB-HO
did not affect the proliferation and apoptosis of MCF7cells in cell culture system. Next, the interaction of MCF7 cells with complex milieu, which consists of tumor
microenvironment, was analyzed. Interestingly, STB-HO
not only increased the susceptibility of MCF-7 cells to
natural killer cells, but also stimulated macrophages and
dendritic cells to prevent cancer cells. Thus, these data
demonstrate an anti-tumorigenic effect of STB-HO on
the suppression of cancer cell growth by regulating of
interactions between tumor cells and anti-tumor immune
cells.
In conclusion, we focused on the anti-tumorigenic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

effects of a novel MFP in hES cells. STB-HO could
be administered to hES cell cultures and naturally
removed when cell colonies were passaged for further
differentiation. This short-term STB-HO treatment
rapidly induced the selective apoptosis of remaining
undifferentiated hES cells in early differentiation cultures.
STB-HO blocked an anti-apoptotic gene, BIRC5, and
activated p53, p21 and the pro-apoptotic proteins Bim,
Puma and p-Bad during early spontaneous differentiation.
It can be concluded that STB-HO treatment of early
differentiating hES cells can eliminate the remaining
undifferentiated hES cells, which are balanced between
anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins. Importantly, STB-HOpretreated differentiating hES cells did not give rise to
teratomas with in vivo stem cell xenotransplantation.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that pre-treatment
of differentiating hES cell cultures with STB-HO can
prevent teratoma formation after stem cell transplantation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
hES cell culture
hES cell lines (SNUhES3, SNUhES4, SNUhES31;
Institute of Reproductive Medicine and Population,
Medical Research Center, Seoul National University
Hospital, Republic of Korea) were maintained in hES
cell medium containing DMEM/F12 supplemented with
20% Knock-out serum replacement, 0.1 mM non-essential
amino acids, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 50 units/ml
penicillin, 50 µg/ml streptomycin and 4 ng/mL bFGF2
on mitomycin C-treated mouse embryonic fibroblast
STO (CRL-1503 purchased from ATCC, USA). For
spontaneous differentiation, hES cells were cultured with
media containing 10% FBS and without bFGF. After 1
week, hES cell colonies were transferred into non-coating
dish and further incubated in suspension culture to form
hEBs. This study of hES cell lines was approved by the
ethics committee SNUIRB (1312/001-006; Seoul National
University, Republic of Korea).

Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from SNUhES3,
SNUhES4 and SNUhES31 cells using TRIzol reagent
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cDNA
synthesis and real-time RT-PCR were performed as
described previously [38]. Each gene expression was
normalized by GAPDH as housekeeping control and
relative gene expression levels were calculated using
2—ΔΔCt method. Apoptosis-related primers were used as
following: BCL10 (5-TCCTCTCCTTCTTCCCCATT-3,
5-GGCGTCCTTCTTCACTTCAG-3);
BIRC5
(5-GGACCACCGCATCTCTACAT-3,
2692

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

5-GCACTTTCTTCGCAGTTTCC-3);
p53
(5-GGCCCACTTCACCGTACTAA-3,
5-GTGGTTTCAAGGCCAGATGT-3);
p21
(5-ATGAAATTCACCCCCTTTCC-3,
5-CCCTAGGCTGTGCTCACTTC-3).

The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

REFERENCES

Immunoblotting analysis
Extraction of whole-cell protein lysates and western
blotting were performed as described previously [38].
Primary antibodies were used as following; mouse
monoclonal p53 (Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit
monoclonal Bim, pBad, Caspase-3 (Cell Signaling
Technology), rabbit polyclonal p21 (Abcam), Puma,
Caspase-9 (Cell Signaling Technology).

1.	

Hanna JH, Saha K and Jaenisch R. Pluripotency and cellular
reprogramming: facts, hypotheses, unresolved issues. Cell.
2010; 143:508-525.

2.	

Yu J and Thomson JA. Pluripotent stem cell lines. Genes &
development. 2008; 22:1987-1997.

3.	 Klimanskaya I, Rosenthal N and Lanza R. Derive and
conquer: sourcing and differentiating stem cells for
therapeutic applications. Nature reviews Drug discovery.
2008; 7:131-142.
4.	

Teratoma formation and cryosectioning

Tabar V and Studer L. Pluripotent stem cells in regenerative
medicine: challenges and recent progress. Nat Rev Genet.
2014; 15:82-92.

To transplant a mixed population of undifferentiated
and differentiated hES cells, SNUhES3 and SNUhES4
cells were spontaneously differentiated in the presence
or absence of 10 µg/ml STB-HO for 2 days. 1 x 106
cells were harvested and injected subcutaneously into
BALB/cSlc-nu mice (Japan SLC, Inc., Japan). Twelve
weeks after injection, xenograft masses were isolated
from the skin tissue and fixed for 24 hours in PBS with
4 % paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany).
Following fixation, tissues were kept in PBS with 16 %
glucose (Applichem, Germany), embedded in TissueTek
O.C.T. (Sakura Finetek, Heppenheim, Germany) and
frozen at -80oC. 10 µm tumor sections were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin.

5.	 Xi J, Liu Y, Liu H, Chen H, Emborg ME and Zhang SC.
Specification of midbrain dopamine neurons from primate
pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cells. 2012; 30:1655-1663.

Statistical analysis

8.	

6.	 Kirkeby A, Grealish S, Wolf DA, Nelander J, Wood J,
Lundblad M, Lindvall O and Parmar M. Generation of
regionally specified neural progenitors and functional
neurons from human embryonic stem cells under defined
conditions. Cell Rep. 2012; 1:703-714.
7.	 Delli Carri A, Onorati M, Lelos MJ, Castiglioni V, Faedo
A, Menon R, Camnasio S, Vuono R, Spaiardi P, Talpo F,
Toselli M, Martino G, Barker RA, Dunnett SB, Biella G
and Cattaneo E. Developmentally coordinated extrinsic
signals drive human pluripotent stem cell differentiation
toward authentic DARPP-32+ medium-sized spiny neurons.
Development. 2013; 140:301-312.

All of the experiments were conducted at least in
triplicate (n = 3), and the results are expressed as the mean
± SD. Statistical analyses were conducted via Student’s
t-test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered significant (*P
< 0.05; **P < 0.01).

Touboul T, Hannan NR, Corbineau S, Martinez A, Martinet
C, Branchereau S, Mainot S, Strick-Marchand H, Pedersen
R, Di Santo J, Weber A and Vallier L. Generation of
functional hepatocytes from human embryonic stem cells
under chemically defined conditions that recapitulate liver
development. Hepatology. 2010; 51:1754-1765.

9.	 Kelly OG, Chan MY, Martinson LA, Kadoya K, Ostertag
TM, Ross KG, Richardson M, Carpenter MK, D’Amour
KA, Kroon E, Moorman M, Baetge EE and Bang AG.
Cell-surface markers for the isolation of pancreatic cell
types derived from human embryonic stem cells. Nature
biotechnology. 2011; 29:750-756.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Seobong Biobestech (Republic of Korea)
for suppling STB-HO (Korea Patent Registration; 100454200). This work was carried out with the support of
“Cooperative Research Program for Agriculture Science &
Technology Development (Project No. PJ011002)” Rural
Development Administration, Republic of Korea and
partially supported by the Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University (SNU, Republic of
Korea).

10.	 Cunningham JJ, Ulbright TM, Pera MF and Looijenga
LH. Lessons from human teratomas to guide development
of safe stem cell therapies. Nature biotechnology. 2012;
30:849-857.
11.	 Knoepfler PS. Deconstructing stem cell tumorigenicity: a
roadmap to safe regenerative medicine. Stem Cells. 2009;
27:1050-1056.
12.	 Blum B and Benvenisty N. The tumorigenicity of human
embryonic stem cells. Adv Cancer Res. 2008; 100:133-158.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2693

Oncotarget

13.	 Chung S, Shin BS, Hedlund E, Pruszak J, Ferree A, Kang
UJ, Isacson O and Kim KS. Genetic selection of sox1GFPexpressing neural precursors removes residual tumorigenic
pluripotent stem cells and attenuates tumor formation after
transplantation. J Neurochem. 2006; 97:1467-1480.

25.	 Jung M, Park HT, Park JH, Lee KN, Shin SW, Shin
MK, Sung KY, Jung YK, Kim B and Yoo HS. Effects
of germanium biotite supplement on immune responses
of vaccinated mini-pigs to foot-and-mouth disease virus
challenge. Immunol Invest. 2015; 44:101-112.

14.	 Tang C, Lee AS, Volkmer JP, Sahoo D, Nag D, Mosley
AR, Inlay MA, Ardehali R, Chavez SL, Pera RR, Behr B,
Wu JC, Weissman IL and Drukker M. An antibody against
SSEA-5 glycan on human pluripotent stem cells enables
removal of teratoma-forming cells. Nature biotechnology.
2011; 29:829-834.

26.	 Jung BG, Lee JA and Lee BJ. Antiviral effect of dietary
germanium biotite supplementation in pigs experimentally
infected with porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome virus. J Vet Sci. 2013; 14:135-141.
27.	 Jung BG, Toan NT, Cho SJ, Ko JH, Jung YK and Lee BJ.
Dietary aluminosilicate supplement enhances immune
activity in mice and reinforces clearance of porcine
circovirus type 2 in experimentally infected pigs. Vet
Microbiol. 2010; 143:117-125.

15.	 Wolber W, Ahmad R, Choi SW, Eckardt S, McLaughlin
KJ, Schmitt J, Geis C, Heckmann M, Sirén A-L and Müller
AM. Phenotype and Stability of Neural Differentiation of
Androgenetic Murine ES Cell-Derived Neural Progenitor
Cells. Cell Medicine. 2013; 5:29-42.

28.	 Brody H. Cancer prevention. Nature. 2011; 471:S1.
29.	 Liu JC, Lerou PH and Lahav G. Stem cells: balancing
resistance and sensitivity to DNA damage. Trends Cell
Biol. 2014; 24:268-274.

16.	 Choo AB, Tan HL, Ang SN, Fong WJ, Chin A, Lo J, Zheng
L, Hentze H, Philp RJ, Oh SK and Yap M. Selection against
undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells by a cytotoxic
antibody recognizing podocalyxin-like protein-1. Stem
Cells. 2008; 26:1454-1463.

30.	 Akdemir KC, Jain AK, Allton K, Aronow B, Xu X, Cooney
AJ, Li W and Barton MC. Genome-wide profiling reveals
stimulus-specific functions of p53 during differentiation
and DNA damage of human embryonic stem cells. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2014; 42:205-223.

17.	 Lee MO, Moon SH, Jeong HC, Yi JY, Lee TH, Shim SH,
Rhee YH, Lee SH, Oh SJ, Lee MY, Han MJ, Cho YS,
Chung HM, Kim KS and Cha HJ. Inhibition of pluripotent
stem cell-derived teratoma formation by small molecules.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:E3281-3290.

31.	 Green DR and Kroemer G. Cytoplasmic functions of the
tumour suppressor p53. Nature. 2009; 458:1127-1130.
32.	 Grandela C, Pera M and Wolvetang E. p53 is required for
etoposide-induced apoptosis of human embryonic stem
cells. Stem cell research. 2008; 1:116-128.

18.	 Richards M, Phoon CW, Goh GT, Seng EK, Guo XM, Tan
CM, Chan WK and Lee JM. A new class of pluripotent stem
cell cytotoxic small molecules. PloS one. 2014; 9:e85039.

33.	 Lai PH, Hsu SS, Lo YS and Ho JT. Mature teratoma of
the lateral ventricle in adulthood: preoperative CT and MRI
diagnosis. Neurology. 2006; 66:E25-26.

19.	 Czabotar PE, Lessene G, Strasser A and Adams JM. Control
of apoptosis by the BCL-2 protein family: implications for
physiology and therapy. Nature reviews Molecular cell
biology. 2014; 15:49-63.

34.	 Russo M, Spagnuolo C, Tedesco I, Bilotto S and Russo GL.
The flavonoid quercetin in disease prevention and therapy:
facts and fancies. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012; 83:6-15.

20.	 Liu JC, Guan X, Ryan JA, Rivera AG, Mock C, Agrawal
V, Letai A, Lerou PH and Lahav G. High mitochondrial
priming sensitizes hESCs to DNA-damage-induced
apoptosis. Cell Stem Cell. 2013; 13:483-491.

35.	 Erdo F, Buhrle C, Blunk J, Hoehn M, Xia Y, Fleischmann
B, Focking M, Kustermann E, Kolossov E, Hescheler J,
Hossmann KA and Trapp T. Host-dependent tumorigenesis
of embryonic stem cell transplantation in experimental
stroke. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism.
2003; 23:780-785.

21.	 Holian A, Uthman MO, Goltsova T, Brown SD and
Hamilton RF, Jr. Asbestos and silica-induced changes in
human alveolar macrophage phenotype. Environ Health
Perspect. 1997; 105 Suppl 5:1139-1142.

36.	 Madden DT, Davila-Kruger D, Melov S and Bredesen DE.
Human embryonic stem cells express elevated levels of
multiple pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family members. PloS one.
2011; 6:e28530.

22.	 Ueki A, Yamaguchi M, Ueki H, Watanabe Y, Ohsawa
G, Kinugawa K, Kawakami Y and Hyodoh F. Polyclonal
human T-cell activation by silicate in vitro. Immunology.
1994; 82:332-335.

37.	 Dumitru R, Gama V, Fagan BM, Bower JJ, Swahari V,
Pevny LH and Deshmukh M. Human embryonic stem cells
have constitutively active Bax at the Golgi and are primed
to undergo rapid apoptosis. Molecular cell. 2012; 46:573583.

23.	 Jung M, Shin MK, Jung YK and Yoo HS. Modulation
of macrophage activities in proliferation, lysosome, and
phagosome by the nonspecific immunostimulator, mica.
PloS one. 2015; 10:e0117838.
24.	 Cho SY, Lee HJ, Cho SM, Kim B, Jung YK and Kim SH.
Particled Mica, STB-HO has chemopreventive potential
via G1 arrest, and inhibition of proliferation and vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2 in HCT colorectal
cancer cells. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013; 13:189.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38.	 Choi SW, Kim J-J, Seo M-S, Park S-B, Kang T-W, Lee
JY, Lee B-C, Kang I, Shin T-H and Kim H-S. miR-410
Inhibition Induces RPE Differentiation of Amniotic
Epithelial Stem Cells via Overexpression of OTX2 and
RPE65. Stem Cell Reviews and Reports. 2014:1-11.
2694

Oncotarget

39.	 Kang T-W, Kim H-S, Lee B-C, Shin T-H, Choi SW, Kim
Y-J, Lee H-Y, Jung Y-K, Seo K-W, Kang K-S. Mica
Nanoparticle, STB-HO Eliminates the Human Breast
Carcinoma Cells by Regulating the Interaction of Tumor
with its Immune Microenvironment. Scientific Reports.
2015; 5:17515.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2695

Oncotarget

