Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 47

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Blocking hepatic metastases of colon cancer cells using an
shRNA against Rac1 delivered by activatable cell-penetrating
peptide
Ying Bao1,*, Huihui Guo1,*, Yongliang Lu2, Wenming Feng1, Xinrong Sun1, Chengwu
Tang1, Xiang Wang1, Mo Shen3
1

Department of Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Huzhou University, The First People’s Hospital of Huzhou, Huzhou, 313000,
China

2

Department of Medicine, Huzhou University, Huzhou, 313000, China

3

Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University,Wenzhou, 325000, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Xiang Wang, email: wangxiang004@163.com
Mo Shen, email: moshen1977@sina.cn
Keywords: cell penetrating peptide, Rac1, metastasis, adhesion, tumor targeting nanoparticle
Received: September 06, 2016     Accepted: October 14, 2016     Published: October 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Hepatic metastasis is one of the critical progressions of colon cancer. Blocking this
process is key to prolonging survival time in cancer patients. Studies on activatable cellpenetrating peptides (dtACPPs) have demonstrated their potential as gene carriers.
It showed high tumor cell-targeting specificity and transfection efficiency and low cytotoxicity
in the in vitro settings of drug delivery. However, using this system to silence target genes
to inhibit metastasis in colorectal cancer cells has not been widely reported and requires
further investigation. In this study, we observed that expression of Rac1, a key molecule for
cytoskeletal reorganization, was higher in hepatic metastatic tumor tissue compared with
prime colon cancer tissue and that patients with high Rac1-expressing colon cancer showed
shorter survival time. Base on these findings, we created dtACPP-PEG-DGL (dtACPPD)/
shRac1 nanoparticles and demonstrated that they downregulated Rac1 expression in colon
cancer cells. Moreover, we observed inhibitory effects on migration, invasion and adhesion
in HCT116 colorectal cancer cells in vitro, and our results showed that Rac1 regulated colon
cancer cell matrix adhesion through the regulation of cytofilament dynamics. Moreover,
mechanically, repression of Rac1 inhibiting cells migration and invasion by enhancing cell
to cell adhesion and reducing cell to extracellular matrix adhesion. Furthermore, when
atCDPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles were administered intravenously to a HCT116 xenograft
model, significant tumor metastasis to the liver was inhibited. Our results suggest that
atCDPP/shRac1 nanoparticles may enable the blockade of hepatic metastasis in colon cancer.

BACKGROUND

The metastatic process is complicated, including
invasion of local tumor cells, entering into the blood and
lymphatic circulation, as well as colonizing into distal
organs, which requires collaborations from a variety
of molecules, such as E-cadherin, Rho GTPases, and
metalloprotease (MMPs) [3, 4].
Rac1 belongs to the Rho GTPase family, which is
thought to be involved in the regulation of actin dynamics
[5]. Rac1 is responsible for the formation of lamellipodia
at the leading edge [6] and affects cell motility by
regulating cytoskeletal reorganization [7]. Ji found that
Rac1 was related to invasiveness and is a promising

Colorectal cancer ranks the third most common
cancer in the world. Metastasis is the major course of
cancer mortality. Liver metastases are very common
in people with advanced colon cancer [1], which is the
major cause of death, and the prognosis of these patients
was so poor that it was uncertain whether any treatment
should be recommended for their primary cancer. Some
patients received chemotherapy simply for the sake of
doing something in regards to treatment, despite little if
any benefit for the patient [2].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77183

Oncotarget

therapeutic target for treatment of gastric cancer [8].
Overexpression and overactivation of Rac1 resulted in
increased cell proliferative and metastatic capacities in
gastric cancer cells. A Rac1 inhibitor, which inhibited
Rac1 activity, abrogated cell migration in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cells (HNSCC) [9].
RNA interference (RNAi), a potential technique in
treatment of cancer, can suppress the expression of target
genes and improve the outcome of chemotherapeutics
[10]. Successful inhibition of Rac1 expression using RNAi
leads to decrease of blood vessel density and slower of
tumor growth [11]. Many materials have been developed
to deliver shRNA vectors in vivo. However, how to target
the tumors specifically is a remaining barrier.
MMPs, secret by cancer cells [12], are required to
digest molecules of cell adhesion including E-cadherin
and degrade ECM proteins and are therefore important
for the migration and invasion of cancer cells.
Huang et al. developed an activatable cell-penetrating
peptide (dtACPP) that is dual-activated by the specific
tumor microenvironment, including reduced pH
(pH 5.8-7.2) and overexpressed MMP2 [13]. In this
system, via R-malemidyl-ω-N-hydroxysuccinimidyl
polyethyleneglycol (MAL-PEG-NHS), dtACPP was
conjugated to the surface of poly-L-lysine (DGL), which
has been used to deliver gene into tumor cells, due to its
ability to encapsulate DNA to form nanoparticles, which
provides a tool to target specific genes in tumor cells [13],
and shows the EPR (enhanced permeability and retention)
effect. Although this system showed a promising efficacy
in the induction of anti-angiogenesis and apoptosis, it did
not show an anti-invasion effect in colon cancer cells.
In this study, we employed dtACPPD/shRac1
nanoparticles, evaluated their therapeutic efficacy in vitro
and in vivo, and investigated the underlying mechanisms
both in vitro and in vivo.

the invasive behavior [19]. We therefore compared MMP2
expression in normal colon mucosa, prime colon cancer
tissue and metastasis cancer tissue. MMP2 expression was
hardly observed in normal colon mucosa, but markedly
high in prime colon cancer and much higher in metastasis
cancer tissue in colon cancer patients (Figure 1C).

Preparation and characterization of dtACPPD/
shRac1 nanoparticles
In the tumor microenvironment, the overexpressing
MMP2 and reduced pH were commonly combined
used to improve the tumor targeting and cellular
internalization [19]. The dtACPPD nanoparticle system
was developed and identified as it is triggered by the
tumor microenvironment.13 Therefore, in this study, we
employed the dtACPPD/ shRac1 system and evaluated its
anti-metastatic capacity in colorectal cancer cells.
Cationic polymer nonviral vectors dtACPPD were
constructed according to a previous report by Huang
et al. 2013. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
images showed that the dtACPPD/shRac1 particles
were analogous spherical shapes (Figure 2A). The size
of dtACPPD/shRac1 particles was 113.6 ± 2.9 nm with
a narrow distribution. This size range was suitable for
tumor-targeting delivery because the size was able to
perform the EPR effect and prolong the existence of blood
circulation by not only penetrating into the tumor tissue
and avoiding reticuloendothelial system (RES)-mediated
clearance, but also reducing renal filtration. The zetapotential value was 2.1 ± 0.7 mV.
The in vitro stability of the dtACPPD/shRac1
particles was evaluated in the presence of 1%, 5% and 10%
bovine serum albumin (BSA). Particles were suspended in
a series of concentrations of BSA at 37°C for different
durations of time. The particles were enlarged when the
BSA concentrations were increased and incubation time
was prolonged (Figure 2B). The particle size did not
change significantly within 24 h of incubation, indicating
the particles were stable in 1% BSA. However, the size
of particles increased when incubated with 5% and 10%
BSA. However, the particles showed good dispersibility.
In addition, the zeta potential of particles incubated with
different concentrations of BSA was constant (Figure 2C).

RESULTS
Rac1 is related to the metastasis and survival
time of colon cancer
Rac1 is a key molecule that regulates cell
motility [7]. Rac1 expression and activity are both
enhanced in colon cancer and could speed up the
metastasis of cancer cells [18]. In this study, we compared
Rac1 expression in in situ colon cancer tissue to hepatic
metastatic tumor tissue. The detail information for 66
patients was showed in Table 1. The results showed that
Rac1 expression in metastatic tumor tissue was much
higher than in prime cancer tissue (Figure 1A). A 5-year
follow-up after surgery and/or chemotherapy suggests
that patients with high Rac1 levels in their tumors have
a shorter survival than those with tumors with low Rac1
levels (Figure 1B). MMP2 was highly express in cancer
cells to enable cells to break down surrounding tissue for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cellular uptake study and knock down efficacy
of dtACPPD/ shRac1 nanoparticles
The cellular uptake study was used to measure
the efficacy of in vitro internalization. The shRNA
against Rac1 was constructed with the enhanced green
fluorescence (EGFP) gene. The efficacy of dtACPPD/
shRac1 delivery was then studied in HCT116 cells at pH
7.4 or pH 6.8. Figure 3A shows green fluorescence in the
nucleus of cells with incubation of dtACPPD/shRac1 at
pH 6.8, indicating the Rac1 shRNA was integrated into the
77184

Oncotarget

Table 1: Detailed information regarding the 66 colon patient specimens
Detailed information
Gender
 Male
 Female
Age (years)
  > 60
  ≤ 60
Grade
  Well differentiated
  Moderately differentiated
  Poorly differentiated
Depth of tumor invasion
  Mucous layer
  Muscular layer
  Serous layer

No. of tumor specimens (N = 66)
42
20
45
11
9
29
28
1
9
56

cellular genome after incubation of dtACPPD/shRac1 in an
acidic environment for 24 h, suggesting the acid-sensitive
ability of the dtACPPD structure. Furthermore, the level
of Rac1 expression was analyzed by western blot, which is
shown in Figure 3B. The dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles
showed significant silencing efficiency of Rac1 expression
at pH 6.8 (89.2% down-regulation, p < 0.01) compared
to that at pH 7.4 (5.6% down-regulation) (Figure 3B). As
Rac1 is a key molecule in the regulation of cytoskeletal
reorganization, we assessed the cytoskeleton of HCT-116
cells after exposure to dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles for
72 h. Immunofluorescent staining showed a disorganized
cytoskeleton when cells were treated with nanoparticles
at pH 6.8 following the down-regulation of Rac1;

meanwhile, the cytoskeleton did not show obvious
alterations at pH 7.4 (Figure 3C). The results suggested
that dtACPPD/shRac1 showed good tumor target ability
and internalization efficacy.

In vivo biodistribution of dtACPPD/ shRac1
nanoparticles
The in vivo biodistribution, tumor-targeting
characteristics and Rac1 silencing efficacy of dtACPPD/
shRac1 were investigated in an HCT-116 cell tumor model
in BALB/c nude mice. Figure 3 showed that, forty-eight
hours after intravenous administration, the distribution
of EGFP labeled Rac1 shRNA showed very high

Figure 1: Rac1 expression was elevated in human metastatic colon cancer. (A) Expression of Rac1 in human colon cancer

tissue. Human colon cancer tissue was collected and western blotting was used to test the expression of Rac1. Equal amounts of cell lysate
from in situ cancer tissue (lanes I) and hepatic metastasis tissue (lanes M) from patients. (B) Survival curves for colon cancer patients with
either high or low Rac1 expression (P < 0.01). (C) Expression of MMP2 in normal colon mucosa, prime colon cancer tissue and metastasis
cancer tissue in patients. Protein was extracted from patients and subjected to western blot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77185

Oncotarget

accumulation in the tumors, benefiting from the en- hanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect (Figure 3D).
Furthermore, within the tumor, expression of EGFP was
observed in the tumor cells, indicating the successful
intratumoral injection of particles and gene transfection
(Figure 3E). These results suggested that dtACPPD/
shRac1 nanoparticles can accumulate in tumors, benefiting
from the two triggers, reduced pH and overexpressed
MMP2. When dtACPP is activated prematurely to expose
CPP in the circulation, nanoparticles accumulated instantly
in the main metabolic and highly perfused organs to
perform the EPR effect [13]; therefore, the particles was
found distributed in the liver, kidney and lung.
After systemic administration, tumors were removed
and protein was extracted from tumors. Western blot
analysis showed that Rac1 was down-regulated in tumors
treated with dtACPPD/shRac1 (76.4% down-regulation,
p < 0.01) (Figure 3F), suggesting the ideal tumor-targeting
ability of the dtACPPD/shRac1nanoparticles.

migration was investigated by scratch assay and evaluated by
Cell-IQ system. Figure 4A and 4B showed that dtACPPD/
shRac1 significantly blocked cell migration compared with
empty vector nanoparticles and control untreated cells.
Cell migration was tracked by random migration analysis.
Figure 4C showed that cells moved in a directed manner
when incubated with empty nanoparticles; on the other
hand, cells moved randomly and lost polarity when incubated
with dtACPPD/shRac1, which can significantly abolish
directional migration in cells. Moreover, dtACPPD/shRac1
strikingly blocked HCT-116 invasive ability (Figure 4D).
These results suggested dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles are
capable of inhibiting colon cancer cell motility and invasion.

Regulation of dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles
on MMPs and EMT in colon cancer cells
To undergo invasion, cancer cells need to produce
enzymes, such as MMPs, which play a role in digesting
cell adhesion molecules and ECM proteins, [20]. We next
assessed the expression of MMP2 and MMP9 in HCT-116
cells. Figure 5 showed that dtACPPD/shRac1 incubation
did not alter MMP2 and MMP9 expression in cells, which
potentially suppressed the breakdown of the surrounding
of tissue. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
enhances the mobility of cancer cells, facilitating their
distant metastasis [21], showing suppression of epithelial
markers, such as E-cadherin, as well as the overexpression
of mesenchymal markers, such as N-cadherin and
Vimentin. In our study, E-cadherin expression in HCT-116

In vitro cell migration, polarity and invasion
of colon cancer cells after treatment with
dtACPPD/ shRac1 nanoparticles
Given the fact that dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles can
target and accumulate in tumor cells, we next studied whether
dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles affect cellular features that
are crucial for metastasis of cancer cells. HCT-116 cells were
incubated with dtACPPD/shRac1 for 48 h at pH 6.8, and cell

Figure 2: In vitro characterization of dtCDDP/shRNA. (A). Scanning electron micrographs of dtCDDP/ control shRNA NPs and
dtCDDP/shRac1 NPs. (B). The influence of serum concentration on the size of NPs. (C). The influence of serum concentration on Zeta
potential.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77186

Oncotarget

cells at pH of 6.8 was elevated by incubation of dtACPPD/
shRac1 nanoparticles, whereas N-cadherin and Vimentin
were reduced, indicating that EMT was inhibited after
silencing Rac1 by nanoparticles. Inhibition of EMT could
result in retardation of metastasis of colon cancer cells.

locations during metastasis [22]. Regulation of cell to
ECM adhesion may play important roles in cell motility.
Pasapera reported that activated Rac1 promoted focal
adhesion and thereby enhanced cell migration. In our
study, dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles were effective
in impeding the adhesive potential of colon cancer
cells to matrix substrates, fibronectin and collagen-I
compared to BSA as a negative control (Figure 6A).
The dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles down-regulated
the expression of integrin αv and β1 (Figure 6B), which
are crucial for cancer cells to ECM adhesion [23]. Flow
cytometry results indicated that dtACPPD/shRac1
nanoparticles also decreased integrin αvβ6, which is

Cell to extracellular matrix adhesion
Metastatic cancer cells needs to establish new
contact points between a cell and its underlying substrate
ECM to provide the necessary adhesion required to
move forward. Therefore, cell to ECM adhesion is a
key step when cancer cells plant themselves in distant

Figure 3: Penetration of dtACPPD/shRNA nanoparticles in colon cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. (A). Florescence image

of colorectal cancer cells treated with dtACPPD/shRNA nanoparticles under pH 7.4 or 6.8. Scale bar is 50 μm. (B). Expression of Rac1 after
penetration of dtACPPD/shRNA nanoparticles as tested by western blot. (C) Cytoskeletal organization was detected by immunofluorescent
staining using an antibody against phalloidin (red). DAPI was used to stain nuclei. Arrows showed the lamellipodias. Scale bar is 20 μm.
(D) Tumor bearing mice were treated with dtACPPD/shRNA nanoparticles. Fluorescence imaging showed the in vivo distribution. The
corresponding exposed main organs were excised at 24 h after administration. The intensity of the signal dark red is the strongest, while
dark blue is the weakest, as shown by the bar. (E) Tumor sections showed the accumulation of DNA at the interior of the tumors (Green).
Scale bar is 100 μm. (F) Proteins of tumors with different treatments were lysed and Rac1 expression was detected by western blot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77187

Oncotarget

important for cell to ECM adhesion and metastasis of
colon cancer [24].
Figure 6B, 6C showed that dtACPPD/shRac1
nanoparticles markedly reduced focal adhesion in HCT116
cells. Meanwhile, FAK expression was suppressed when
cells were incubated with dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles,
which could be the reason underlying the reduced focal

adhesion. Suppression of Rac1 expression inhibited FAK
expression, resulting in blocked focal adhesion in HCT116
cells (Figure 6D). This could reduce the adhesive ability to
remote organs for colorectal cancer cells.
We next proceeded to determine the mechanism
by which Rac1 regulates cell to matrix organization.
Rac1 is important for filament dynamics and cytoskeletal

Figure 4: Motility of colorectal cancer cells after treatment with dtACPPD /shRNA nanoparticles. (A) Cell migration
ability after different treatments was tested by a wound-healing assay in HCT116 cells. (B) Quantification from Cell-IQ showing wound
width as the mean with SD for percent closure of the original wound in triplicate plates. Similar results were obtained in three experiments.
(C) Treated cells were plated sparsely and monitored by time-lapse microscopy for 16 h. The migration of cells was tracked from 15 random
cells. (D) The invasive ability of cells was tested by an invasion assay. Invading cells were quantified.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77188

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effects of dtACPPD/shRNA nanoparticles on metastasis and EMT related markers. HCT116 cells were treated
by atCDDP/shRNA nanoparticles for 24 h. Expression of indicated markers was detected by corresponding antibodies.

Figure 6: Adhesion of colorectal cancer cells after treatments with dtACPPD/shRNA nanoparticles. (A) Adhesion assay

comparing HCT116 cell adhesion to fibronectin, collagen I or BSA (negative control) coated wells. (B) Cell lysates were immunoblotted
with antibodies against indicated proteins. (C) αvβ6 expression in HCT116 cells was tested by flow cytometry. (D) Focal adhesion was
detected by immunofluorescent staining using an antibody against FAK (red). DAPI was used to stain nuclei. Scale bar is 20 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77189

Oncotarget

reorganization. Cytoskeletal organization is a process
of depolymerization of filamentous actin (F-actin) and
polymerization of G-actin. We found that incubation of
dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles dramatically increased
G-actin content, suggesting the enhanced depolymerization
of actin (Figure 7A). To further confirm whether the
increased content of G-actin is responsible for cell to
matrix adhesion, we then enhanced Rac1 expression by
Rac1 CA plasmid with or without addition of pure G-actin
(whose polymerization was blocked by latrunculin B).
The results showed that overexpression of Rac1 elevated
the integrin αv and β1 levels (Figure 7B), corresponding
to higher cell to matrix adhesion (Figure 7C).
However, additional incubation with G-actin markedly
downregulated integrin αv and β1 levels, corresponding
to lower cell to matrix adhesion. This alteration could be
partially impaired by overexpression of Rac1.

administrated to the mice. The metastatic lesions were
found in the livers when tumors reached this size.
dtACPPD/shRac1 was then given to the mice 3 times a
week for 3 weeks after the 21st day post injection of cells.
The treatment with dtACPPD/shRac1 showed slightly
inhibited the primary tumor growth (Figure 8A). However,
dtACPPD/shRac1 treatment led to a significant decrease
in the number of tumor nodules observed on the liver
surface (Figure 8B). HE staining showed that both the
size and number of tumors inside the liver were reduced
in dtACPPD/shRac1-treated mice (Figure 8C). These
results confirmed that dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles
significantly inhibit tumor metastasis in vivo.

DISCUSSION
As a key molecule that regulates cytoskeleton
reorganization, Rac1 is crucial for cell motility [7].
Mounting evidence showed that Rac1 expression and
activity are both increased in many cancer types, including
colon cancer and it enhanced the metastasis in cells [18]. In
this study, we found that Rac1 was related to the metastasis
and survival time of colon cancer. Therefore, inhibition
of Rac1 specifically in cancer cells would be a strategy
to retard metastasis. As to undergo invasion, cancer cells

dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles reduced hepatic
metastasis of colon cancer in vivo
To evaluate the potential efficiency of dtACPPD/
shRac1 on final metastatic cancer, mice were injected
subcutaneously with HCT116 cells, until tumors grew
bigger than 1000 mm3 before dtACPPD/shRac1 was

Figure 7: Rac1 regulates cell to matrix adhesion via cytoskeletal reorganization. (A) F-actin and G-actin fractions were

prepared and subjected to Western blotting. (B) HCT116 cells were transfected with control plasmid, Rac1 CA (constitutive active Rac1),
incubated with additional G-actin, or Rac1 CA and G-actin. Cell lysates were immunoblotted with antibodies against the indicated proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77190

Oncotarget

need to produce enzymes, such as MMPs, to degrade
cell adhesion molecules and ECM proteins. We further
demonstrated that MMP2 was high expressed in colon
cancer cells. This gave us a target to recognize colon cancer
cells. We therefore used the dtACPPD system that was
designed to recognize MMP2 in cancer cells, by means of

it to target cancer cells. Another advantage of this system
is that it is easier to deliver genes into cells with lower pH
environment, such as cancer cells. Indeed, Figures 3 and 4
showed that dtACPPD/shRac1 was expressed in cancer
cells in vitro or in vivo, suggesting that dtACPPD/shRac1
can target colon cancer cells. Moreover, the knock down

Figure 8: dtACPPD /shRNA nanoparticles inhibited the growth of colon cancer xenografts and liver metastasis in
nude mice. (A) The weight and volume of tumors at the end of drug treatment. The drugs were administered 3 times/week for 3 successive

weeks. (B) Representative livers at the end of drug treatment. The number of tumors on liver surfaces were calculated. (C) Representative
typical histopathological images of liver (H&E staining, × 400 magnification).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77191

Oncotarget

efficiency was satisfactory using this system. On the other
hand, dtACPPD/shRac1was also found distribute in vital
organs such as heart, liver, kidney and spleen as shown
in Figure 3. This remained a concern of toxic effects of
dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles. In the 3-week treatment
of colon cancer xenograft in mice, we did not find obvious
pathological phenomena in vital organs (data not shown).
These demonstrated that dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles
are effective and safe to use.
Cancer cells mobility was decided by complex
effectors, such as cytoskeleton organization, cell to cell
adhesion, cell to matrix adhesion, etc. EMT plays a crucial
role in cancer cells metastasis. Although dtACPPD/shRac1
nano-particles did not affect MMP2 and MMP9 expression
unexpectly, it effectively inhibited cells migration and
invasion as shown in Figure 4. This could due to the
impairment of cytoskeleton reorganization (Figures 3 and 7)
and inhibition of EMT in colon cancer cells after treatment
of dtACPPD/shRac1 nano-particles (Figure 5).
The process of cancer metastasis is related to
increased cell invasion and cellular focal adhesion.
FAK, a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, plays central roles
in regulating focal adhesion formation, actin-myosin
dynamics, EMT, migration, and invasion [25], highlighting
its importance in tumor progression and metastasis. The
increased expression of FAK has been found in several
types of human cancer and was associated with the
enhanced metastasis of various solid tumors and poor
prognosis [26, 27]. Moreover, FAK signaling regulates
cancer growth and metastasis [28]. dtACPPD/shRac1
nanoparticles markedly reduced cell to extracellular matrix
adhesion and focal adhesion in HCT116 cells (Figure 6).
Meanwhile, FAK expression was suppressed when cells
were incubated with dtACPPD/shRac1 nanoparticles,
which could be the reason underlying the reduced focal
adhesion. This could reduce the adhesive ability to remote
organs for colorectal cancer cells, thereby reduce the
anchor and growth of tumor.
Due to above reasons, administration of dtACPPD/
shRac1 nanoparticles inhibited colon cancer metastasis
into liver. Using dtACPPD/shRac1 system to deplete Rac1
expression in colorectal cancer cells markedly inhibited
cells migration and invasion in vitro, as well as metastasis
in vivo by impairing cytoskeleton reorganization and
adhesion of cell-to-extracellular matrix. dtACPPD/shRac1
nanoparticles showed a potential usage on treat advance
colorectal cancer.

purchased from ATCC (Middlesex, UK). DMEM medium
and fetal calf serum (FCS) were supplied by Lonza
(Wokingham, UK).

Preparation of nanoparticles
The freshly prepared nanocarrier was diluted to an
appropriate concentration, and then the shRNA (100 μg
DNA/mL in 50 mM sodium sulfate solution) was added
and immediately vortexed for 30 s. The complex was
then exposed to UV light (365 nm) for 1 h, followed
by precipitation by means of adding ethanol at a final
concentration of 30% (v/v). The precipitate was collected
by centrifugation and re-dissolved in 50 mM sodium
sulfate solution.

Nanoparticle characterization
The size distribution and zeta potential of dtACPPD
/shRNA were measured using a Zetasizer (ZS90,
Malvern, U.K.) with a scatter angle of 90° at 25°C. The
morphology of nanoparticles was observed by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) (JEOL JSM T330A).

Tissue collection
Fresh tissue samples of 66 colon cancers with
hepatic metastasis tumor tissues were collected from
surgical resections and endoscopic biopsies in the First
Affiliated Hospital, Huzhou University (Huzhou, China).
All tissues were stored at −80°C. All samples were
obtained from patients who gave informed consent to
use excess pathological specimens for research purposes.
All tissues had a definitive pathological diagnosis.
The protocols used in the study were approved by the
Hospital’s Protection of Human Subjects Committee. The
use of human tissues was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of the Wenzhou Medical University and
was performed in accordance with international guidelines
for the use of human tissues.

Colorectal cancer xenograft experiments
Five-week-old female BALB/c Nu/Nu athymic nude
mice (Biotechology & Cell Biology Shanghai, China)
were housed under pathogen-free conditions according
to Wenzhou Medical University animal care guidelines,
and the animal experiments were reviewed and approved
by the Ethical Committee. HCT116 cells (5 × 105) were
subcutaneously injected. After 3 weeks, the tumor bearing
mice were randomly subdivided into 3 groups (8 mice/
group): control; dtACPPD /control shRNA (50 μg DNA);
and dtACPPD /shRac1 (50 μg DNA). The animals were
treated 3 times/week (i.v) for successive 3 weeks. At the
end of the experiments, the animals were sacrificed. The
tumors were removed, photographed and subjected to
further analysis. The tumor volume was calculated by the

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
atCDDP was synthesized according to Huang et al.
EGFP-tagged shRNA plasmid and constitutive active Rac1
(Rac1 CA) plasmid were purchased from Genepharm.
Co. Ltd. The colorectal cancer cell lines HCT116 were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77192

Oncotarget

Immunofluorescence

following formula: V = (L × W2) × 0.5, where L is the
length and W is the width of the tumor.

In brief, cells were washed with PBS, fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton
X-100, and blocked in 2% BSA before staining with
anti-phalloidin and anti-FAK antibodies (both from
Cell Signaling). Nuclear DNA was visualized with 4′,
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma). Images
were collected with a confocal microscope (Leica
Microsystems).

In vivo distribution and gene transfection
At the 21st day after implantation, tumor-bearing
mice were injected intravenously through the tail vein with
200 μL dtACPPD/ DNA at a dose of 50 μg DNA. Then,
24 h after administration, the mice were anesthetized and
visualized by a Cambridge Research & Instrumentation
in vivo imaging system (CRi, MA, USA). After that, mice
were sacrificed and the main organs (heart, liver, spleen,
lung, and kidneys) were excised carefully to compare the
relative accumulation.

Cell adhesion assay
As described previously [16], prior to plating the
cells, 96 well plates were coated with matrix proteins
(fibronectin, 1 μg/well; collagen 1, 10 μg/well; and BSA,
1 μg/well, all from Sigma) and dried at room temperature.
HCT116 cells with or without dtACPPD /shRNA
treatment were added to each well and incubated at 37°C
for 1 h. PBS was added to remove non-adherent cells.
Then, adhesive cells were fixed with 3% formaldehyde
and then stained with 0.1% crystal violet (038-17792;
Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan).
After washing with PBS, 10% acetic acid was added,
and the absorbance at 570 nm was determined using an
ELISA plate reader (iMark™ Microplate Reader; Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA).

Western blot
Rac1 expression was tested using western blot
according to a standard protocol [7]. In brief, lysates from
cells or tumor tissues were prepared. Protein was resolved
by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membrane, and
immunoblot analysis was performed. The following
antibodies were applied overnight at 4°C: anti-Rac1
(1:1,000 dilution) and mouse anti-actin (1:50,000). All of
antibodies were purchased from Cell Singlling Technology
Co. Blots were than incubated with secondary horseradish
peroxidase–conjugated IgG and visualized with enhanced
chemiluminescence reagents.

G-actin purification

Wound healing assay

Actin was purified from rabbit muscle as described
[17], dialyzed against G buffer (2 mM Tris pH 8, 0.2 mM
ATP, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM NaN3), blocked
from further polymerization by incubation with a fivefold
molar excess of Latrunculin B (#428020, Calbiochem),
and used in biochemical and structural studies.

Cell migration was analyzed by a wound healing
assay. Cells were grown to confluency and starved
overnight. Then, a scratch wound in the monolayer was
performed by dragging a 1-ml pipette tip across the layer.
Cells were cultured as described above, and wound closure
was followed by microscopy at 0 h and 48 h after wound
infliction. Experiments were repeated three times.

Cellular F-actin/G-actin assays
F-actin and globular actin (G-actin) fractions were
obtained using an F-actin/G-actin assay kit (BK 037,
Cytoskeleton).

Invasion assay
As described previously [14],briefly, 3 × 104 cells in
serum free DMEM were seeded into the upper chambers
of 8-μM pore Transwells. For assay of invasion through
a Matrigel barrier, cells were allowed to migrate for 36 h.
Migrated cells were fixed, stained, counted from six random
fields and averaged. Experiments were repeated three times.

H&E staining
Paraffin-embedded liver slides were deparaffinized,
hydrated, and then stained with hematoxylin for 1 minute.
After rinsing, the slides were stained with eosin for
1 minute, followed by more rinsing, and coverslips
were mounted onto slides with Permount (Fisher Sci,
Loughborough, UK).

Random migration analysis
HCT116 cells were plated sparsely (3 × 104 cells) and
treated following a previous report [15]. Cells were incubated
overnight in culture medium at 37°C and 5% CO2. Phasecontrast images were taken every 15 min on a Widefield
CCD system (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.). Tracks of
individual cells were analyzed using ImageJ software
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
The statistical significance of treatment outcomes
was assessed using the Student’s t-test; p < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant in all analyses.
77193

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

10.	 Hu Q, Li W, Hu X, Hu Q, Shen J, Jin X, Zhou J, Tang G,
Chu PK. Synergistic Treatment of Ovarian Cancer by
Co-Delivery of Survivin shRNA and Paclitaxel via
Supramolecular Micellar Assembly. Biomaterials. 2012;
33:6580–6591.

We thank Dr. Christine Tachibana for language editing.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Vader P, van der Meel R, Symons MH, Fens MH, Pieters E,
Wilschut KJ, Storm G, Jarzabek M, Gallagher WM,
Schiffelers RM, Byrne AT. Examining the Role of Rac1 in
Tumor Angiogenesis and Growth: A Clinically Relevant
RNAi-Mediated Approach. Angiogenesis. 2011; 14:457–466.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

FUNDING

12.	 van Zij F, Krupitza G, Mikulits W. Initial Steps of
Metastasis: Cell Invasion and Endothelial Transmigration.
Mutat Res. 2011; 728:23–34.

This study was financially supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81501830) and
Zhejiang Province Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. LY16H160041) and Huzhou science and technology
project (2014GZ11, 2015GZ16).

13.	 Huang S, Shao K, Liu Y, Kuang Y, Li J, Guo Y, Ma H, Jiang C.
Tumor-Targeting and Microenvironment-Responsive Smart
Nanoparticles for Combination Therapy of Antiangiogenesis
and Apoptosis. ACS Nano. 2013; 7:2860–2871.

REFERENCES

14.	 Wang Z, Liu L, Wang M, Shen M, Li J, Liu J, Li C, Xin C,
Zhu S, Mei Q, Wang Y. NOTCH1 Regulates Migration and
Invasion of Skin Cancer Cells by E-cadherin Repression.
Mol Cell Biochem. 2012; 362:35–41.

  1.	 Sheth KR, Clary BM. Management of Hepatic Metastases
from Colorectal Cancer. Clin Colon Rect Surg. 2005;
18:215–223.
  2.	 Nordlinger B, Rougier P. Liver Metastases from Colorectal
Cancer: The Turning Point. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:
1442–1445.
  3.	 Appolloni I, Barilari M, Caviglia S, Gambini E, Reisoli E,
Malatesta PA. Cadherin Switch Underlies Malignancy in
High-grade Gliomas. Oncogene. 2015; 34:1991–2002.
  4. 	 Karlsson R, Pedersen ED, Wang Z, Brakebusch C. Rho
GTPase Function in Tumorigenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2009; 1796:91–98.
  5.	 Yamazaki D, Kurisu S,Takenawa T. Regulation of Cancer
Cell Motility through Actin Reorganization. Cancer Sci.
2005; 96:379–386.
 6.	 Fukumoto Y, Kaibuchi K, Hori Y, Fujioka H, Araki S,
Ueda T, Kikuchi A, Takai Y. Molecular Cloning and
Characterization of a Novel Type of Regulatory Protein
(GDI) for the Rho Proteins, Ras p21-like Small GTPBinding Proteins. Oncogene. 1990; 5:1321–1328.
  7.	 Wang Z, Pedersen E, Basse A, Lefever T, Peyrollier  K,
Kapoor S, Mei Q, Karlsson R, Chrostek-Grashoff A,
Brakebusch C. Rac1 is Crucial for Ras-Dependent
Skin Tumor Formation by Controlling Pak1-Mek-Erk
Hyperactivation and Hyperproliferation in Vivo.Oncogene.
2010; 29:3362–3373.
  8.	 Ji J, Feng X, Shi M, Cai Q, Yu Y, Zhu Z, Zhang J. Rac1 is
Correlated with Aggressiveness and a Potential Therapeutic
Target for Gastric Cancer. Int J Oncol. 2015; 46:1343–1353.
  9.	 Arnold CR, Abdelmoez A, Thurner G, Debbage P, Lukas P,
Skvortsov S, Skvortsova II. Rac1 as a Multifunctional
Therapeutic Target to Prevent and Combat Cancer
Metastasis. Oncoscience. 2014; 1:513–521. doi: 10.18632/
oncoscience.74.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15.	 Wang Z, Zhu S, Shen M, Liu J, Wang M, Li C, Wang Y, Mei Q.
STAT3 is involved in esophageal carcinogenesis through
regulation of Oct-1. Carcinogenesis. 2013; 34:678–688.
16. Suzuki O, Abe M, Hashimoto Y. Sialylation by βgalactoside
α2,6sialyltransferase and Nglycans Regulate Cell Adhesion
and Invasion in Human Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma.
Int J Oncol. 2015; 46:973–980.
17.	 Pardee JD, Aspudich J. Purification of Muscle Actin.
Methods Enzymol. 1982; 85:164–181.
18.	 de Toledo M, Anguille C, Roger L, Roux P, Gadea G.
Cooperative Anti-Invasive Effect of Cdc42/Rac1 Activation
and ROCK Inhibition in SW620 Colorectal Cancer Cells
with Elevated Blebbing Activity. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e48344.
19.	 Egeblad M, Werb Z. New Functions for the Matrix
Metalloproteinases in Cancer Progression. Nat Rev Cancer.
2002; 2:161–174.
20.	 Bourboulia D, Han H, Jensen-Taubman S, Gavil N,
Isaac B, Wei B, Neckers L, Stetler-Stevenson WG. TIMP-2
Modulates Cancer Cell Transcriptional Profile and Enhances
E-cadherin/beta-catenin Complex Expression in A549 Lung
Cancer Cells. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:163–173. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.801.
21.	 Satow R, Hirano T, Batori R, Nakamura T, Murayama Y,
Fukami K. Phospholipase Cδ1 Induces E-cadherin
Expression and Suppresses Malignancy in Colorectal Cancer
Cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:13505–13510.
22.	 Wang H, Zhu Y, Zhao M, Wu C, Zhang P, Tang L,
Zhang H, Chen X, Yang Y, Liu G. miRNA-29c Suppresses
Lung Cancer Cell Adhesion to Extracellular Matrix
and Metastasis by Targeting integrin β1 and Matrix
metalloproteinase2 (MMP2). PLoS One. 2013; 8:e70192.

77194

Oncotarget

23.	 Balcioglu HE, van Hoorn H, Donato DM, SchmidtT,
Danen  EHJ. The Integrin Expression Profile Modulates
Orientation and Dynamics of Force Transmission at CellMatrix Adhesions. J Cell Sci. 2015; 128:1316–1326.

26.	 Kolli-Bouhafs K, Sick E, Noulet F, Gies J, De Mey J,
Rondé P. FAK Competes for Src to Promote Migration
against Invasion in Melanoma Cells. Cell Death Dis. 2014;
5:e1379.

24.	 Niu Z, Wang J, Muhammad S, Niu W, Liu E, Peng C, Liang B,
Sun Q, Obo S, He Z, Liu S, Zou X, Niu J. Protein Expression
of eIF4E and Integrin αvβ6 in Colon Cancer can Predict
Clinical Significance, Reveal their Correlation and Imply
Possible Mechanism of Interaction. Cell Biosci. 2014; 4:23.

27.	 Meng XN, Jin Y, Yu Y, Bai J, Liu GY, Zhu J, Zhao YZ,
Wang Z, Chen F, Lee KY, Fu SB. Characterisation of
Fibronectin-Mediated FAK Signalling Pathways in Lung
Cancer Cell Migration and Invasion. Br J Cancer. 2009;
101:327–334.

25.	 Provenzano PP, Keely PJ. Mechanical Signaling through the
Cytoskeleton Regulates Cell Proliferation by Coordinated
Focal Adhesion and Rho GTPase Signaling. J Cell Sci.
2011; 124:1195–1205.

28.	 Pasapera A, Plotnikov S, Fischer R, Case L, Egelhoff T,
Waterman C. Rac1-Dependent Phosphorylation and Focal
Adhesion Recruitment of Myosin IIA Regulates Migration
and Mechanosensing. Curr Biol. 2015; 25:175–186.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77195

Oncotarget

