www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 50), pp: 82170-82184
Research Paper

Multifunctional near-infrared light-triggered biodegradable
micelles for chemo- and photo-thermal combination therapy
Jie Cao1,*, Dan Chen1,*, Shanshan Huang1, Dawei Deng1, Liping Tang2, Yueqing Gu1
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Engineering, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China

2

Department of Bioengineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas, USA

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Yueqing Gu, email: guyueqingsubmission@hotmail.com
Keywords: near-infrared light-triggered nanomicelles, photo-thermal therapy, chemotherapy, tumor targeting, paclitaxel
Received: March 01, 2016     Accepted: May 12, 2016     Published: June 29, 2016

ABSTRACT
A combination of chemo- and photo-thermal therapy (PTT) has provided a
promising efficient approach for cancer therapy. To achieve the superior synergistic
chemotherapeutic effect with PTT, the development of a simple theranostic
nanoplatform that can provide both cancer imaging and a spatial-temporal
synchronism of both therapeutic approaches are highly desired. Our previous study has
demonstrated that near-infrared (NIR) light-triggered biodegradable chitosan-based
amphiphilic block copolymer micelles (SNSC) containing light-sensitive 2-nitrobenzyl
alcohol and NIR dye cypate on the hydrophobic block could be used for fast lighttriggered drug release. In this study, we conjugated the SNSC micelles with tumor
targeting ligand c(RGDyK) and also encapsulated antitumor drug Paclitaxel (PTX).
The results show that c(RGDyK)-modified micelles could enhance the targeting and
residence time in tumor site, as well as be capable performing high temperature
response for PTT on cancer cells and two-photon photolysis for fast release of
anticancer drugs under NIR irradiation. In vitro release profiles show a significant
controlled release effort that the release concentration of PTX from micelles was
significantly increased with the exposure of NIR light. In vitro and in vivo antitumor
studies demonstrate that, compared with chemo or PTT treatment alone, the combined
treatment with the local exposure of NIR light exhibited significantly enhanced antitumor efficiency. These findings indicate that this system exhibited great potential in
tumor-targeting imaging and synchronous chemo- and photo-thermal therapy.

INTRODUCTION

with minimal invasiveness by generating the localized
heat within a tumor site upon the absorption of specific
light wavelength [8]. Those near-infrared (NIR) resonant
nanomaterials are chosen due to the optimal transmission
to tissue in the NIR region. However, there are still
challenges for clinical applications. Some studies have
shown that PTT alone will not destroy all malignant cells
and may allow residual cells to survive after photo-thermal
injury. To overcome this limitation, combined PTT with
chemotherapy in a single platform is expected to generate
a synergistic effect and decrease cancer recurrence
rates [9–13]. The addition of imaging abilities to such
a combinatorial modality also allows the identification
of microscopic cancer tumors for a more precise and
highly efficient treatment [14]. Currently, the widely

Multifunctional nanomaterials, where therapeutic
and imaging features are integrated within a single
nanoplatform, has offered a promising opportunity for
concurrent diagnosis and treatment of cancer tumors
[1–3]. Up to now, cancer therapy relying on an individual
therapeutic modality is generally undesirable; usually
causing incomplete tumor destruction thus allows tumor
regrowth in the long term. Combination therapy based on
two or more different therapeutic mechanisms provides
a highly efficient approach to treat neoplastic tissues [4].
Recently, nanoparticles with photo-thermal therapeutic
capabilities have attracted tremendous attention in the
treatment of tumor cells [5–7]. PTT destroys cancer cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82170

Oncotarget

studied nanocarriers for chemo-photo-thermal therapy are
mostly based on mesoporous silica-coated gold or carbon
materials [15, 16]. However, the drug release profiles
cannot be controlled precisely and only a limited amount
of drug can be released in these systems over a long
period even at an elevated temperature. It may prevent the
superior synergistic chemotherapeutic effect with PTT.
Consequently, the development of a simple theranostic
nanoplatform that can provide both cancer imaging and a
spatial-temporal synchronism of PTT and chemotherapy
are highly desired.
Increasing interest has been showed on developing
nanomedicine for cancer therapy by designing
nanomicelles capable of carrying therapeutic agents to
the target tissues/organs while possessing triggered drug
release property. Stimuli-responsive nanocarriers (pH-,
thermo-, ultrasound-, enzyme- and light-sensitive) which
could control micelle dissociation and triggered drug
release in response to the pathological environmentspecific stimuli and/or externally applied signals provide
advantages of regulating the therapy process both spatially
and temporally [17–22]. Among them, light-responsive
micelles have become a favorable choice that can be
disrupted by illumination. It is conceivable that if the
release of encapsulated agents is triggered by light, the
time and the location of release can determined by applied
irradiation [23–26]. Because most of the light-triggered
nanocarriers are activated by UV and visible light, while
the photo-thermal agents are activated by a NIR laser, the
combination of light-triggered chemotherapy and PTT
needs two different light wavelengths. The sequential
irradiation based on two lasers prolongs the treatment time
and requires precise alignment of the two light beams.
In addition, the UV/Vis light may cause skin damage
and limit its deep tissue application. Hence, it remains
challenging to develop a platform for combined PTT and
chemotherapy that can be synchronously controlled by a
single NIR laser with controlled drug release. Our previous
study has successfully constructed a biocompatible nearinfrared light-breakable chitosan-based amphiphilic
block copolymer micelles (SNSC) containing lightsensitive 2-nitrobenzyl alcohol on the hydrophobic
block for drug delivery [27]. Two-photon photolysis of
the micelles could be triggered by NIR light (765 nm).
It is demonstrated that, once the release of encapsulated
agents is triggered by light, the time and the duration
of release could be controlled by applied near-infrared
irradiation. To accelerate the dissociation of the micelles
under NIR illumination, a NIR dye cypate (Ex/Em:
780/808 nm) was encapsulated into the hydrophobic
core of the micelles. When irradiated by NIR light
(765 nm), the emission light (808 nm) of cypate could
be re-absorbed by the 2-nitrobenzyl groups in the core of
micelles, accelerating the dissociation of the hydrophobic
core to lead the collapse of the micelles. In this case, a
dual NIR emission made the two-photon cleavage reaction
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

faster, resulting in faster dissociation of the nanomicelles
and faster concomitant release of co-loaded hydrophobic
species.
Despite intensive research efforts on developing
light-sensitive nanocarriers for cancer theranostics, the use
of such drug-loaded micelles with active-tumor-targeting
capability, as well as PTT-chemotherapy combination for
tumor treatment has not been fully explored yet. Hence,
in this study, to get the highest drug concentration to the
tumor tissue as possible, we developed a multifunctional
micellar drug delivery platform with the capability of
active tumor targeting, NIR light-triggered anticancer drug
release for two-photon stimulated combination of PTT and
chemotherapy, as well as NIR imaging. The nanoplatform
was designed for co-loading cypate as an imaging agent
as well as a photo-thermal agent, and paclitaxel (PTX) as
a chemotherapeutic drug into the inner core of the SNSC
micelles, with cyclic RGD as an active targeting ligand
conjugated to the surface of the micelles to increase the
selectivity for tumor cells and enhance intracellular drug
delivery, while reducing systemic toxicity and adverse
side effects compared to untargeted micelles and systemic
chemotherapy.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Synthesis and characterization of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX
As described in the method section, the cyclic
RGD was reacted with succinyl anhydride to form amide
bond. The carboxyl group was activated by EDC and
NHS system and then reacted with the amino group of
NIR triggered chitosan micelles to synthesize tumortargeted c(RGDyK)-modified SNSC micelles (Figure 1A).
The mass spectrometry of the conjugation of cyclic
RGD and succinyl anhydride was shown in Figure S1A.
The peak of 704.2 proves the successful conjugation of
succinyl anhydride (MWc(RGDyK)-SUC = 704.3). Furthermore,
by comparing the FTIR spectra of SNSC and c(RGDyK)SNSC (Figure S1B), the sharpening and strengthening of
the 3427.5 cm−1 peak is attributed to stretching vibration of
secondary amides and free hydroxyl groups of c(RGDyK).
The increasing of carboxyl groups of the compound made
the peak 1675.9 cm−1 strengthen and the intensified inplane bending vibration peak of 1527.6 cm−1 was shown in
Figure S1B. In addition, the vibration of the benzene ring
skeleton supports the successful conjugation of c(RGDyK)
with benzene ring and series of -NH.
As described, cypate (Ex/Em: 780/808 nm) and
PTX were encapsulated into the hydrophobic core of
the micelles to form nanostructure c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX. When the molar ratio of PTX and drugloading system was 1:4, the micelles exerted the best drug
loading property with highest drug loading content (DLC)
and encapsulation efficiency (EE) (Table 1). According
82171

Oncotarget

Photo-physical properties of c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX

to the size measurement, the hydrodynamic diameter of
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX was 122.5 nm (122.5 ±
27.6 nm, mean ± standard deviation) (Figure 2A). Thus,
the nanocarriers have a hydrodynamic size within the
desired range of 10-200 nm to prevent elimination by the
kidneys (> 10 nm) and enhance tumor-targeted delivery via
the EPR effect (< 200 nm). The NIR-triggered destruction
of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX was observed by TEM
(Figure 2B–2D). As shown, c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX micelles were dispersed nearly spherical with an
average diameter of around 100  nm (Figure 2B). After
illumination by a NIR laser (765 nm, 400 mW) for 10 min,
most of the particles were aggregated into larger condensed
nanospheres possibly following hydrophobic interaction,
while some parts collapsed under the irradiation (Figure
2C). The micelles were completely destroyed after 1 h
irradiation (Figure 2D), making the platform useful for
light-controlled drug release.

The distinct absorption and fluorescence spectra of
different components in the nanocarrier further confirmed
the conjugation of c(RGDyk) and encapsulation of
cypate and PTX onto the light-sensitive nanocarrier. The
adsorption spectra (Figure 2E) illustrated characteristic
absorption peak of PTX and cypate in c(RGDyK)-SNSC
micelles at 227 nm and 700–780 nm, respectively. It should
be mentioned that absorption spectrum of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX had broad peak from 700 to 800 nm,
due to the formation of aggregates such as H-aggregates
in aqueous conditions when compared to monomeric
cypate (blue line). The photoluminescence measurement
(Figure 2F) showed overlapping emission profile between
cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX, inferring
that encapsulation of PTX had no significant influence

Figure 1: Synthetic scheme and structures of targeted NIR light sensitive nanoplatform c(RGDyK)-SNSC and αvβ3mediated binding of tumor cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82172

Oncotarget

Table 1: The DLC and EE of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX and c(RGDyK)-SNSC- cypate-PTX (n = 3)
Sample
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX

DLC%
14.17 ± 0.43
10.26± 0.58

EE%
64.37 ± 2.17
54.86 ± 2.35

Figure 2: Size distribution and optical properties of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX. (A) Size distribution of c(RGDyK)-

SNSC-cypate-PTX micelles; (B) Transmission electron microscope pictures of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX; TEM images of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX after NIR illumination (765 nm, 400 mW/cm2) for 10 min (C) and 1 h (D). (E) Absorption spectra of PTX, c(RGDyK)SNSC-PTX, cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX; (F) Photoluminescence spectra of cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC -cypate-PTX;
(G) Temperature change curves of 500 μL water (black), free cypate in DMSO (red), c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX (blue) and c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX (green) exposed to NIR light (765 nm, 400 mW/cm2) for 20 min; (H) Photostability of cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX, which was obtained by irradiation of cypate or c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX under NIR light (765 nm, 400 mW/cm2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82173

Oncotarget

on the optical property of cypate. In the development of
an effective cypate-based theranostic agent, strong NIR
absorption and distinct fluorescence emission are required.
However, the extensive aggregation of cypate in aqueous
media is a major factor in the quenching of their excited
state. The obtained data revealed that encapsulation of
cypate within the hydrophobic interior of SNSC micelles
decrease cypate aggregation and preserves fluorescence
intensity after dispersion in water solution.
Our previous work have demonstrated that under
765 nm light irradiation, the emission light (808 nm) of
cypate could be re-absorbed by the 2-nitrobenzyl group in
the core of SNSC micelles, accelerating the dissociation of
the hydrophobic core to lead the collapse of the micelles.
In this study, to further investigate the effect of cypate
on fast photocleavage of nanomicelles, we measured the
temperature changes of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX
under NIR light irradiation (Figure 2G). The temperature
profile of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX had a quick
rising phase during the first 6 min followed by a sustained
plateau at 60ºC. Under the same experimental conditions,
the water control showed a temperature increase of only
1.0ºC. The c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX solution showed a
slow increase rate, mainly due to the photoreaction of
2-nitrobenzyl is a exothermal reaction under NIR light
irradiation. These results clearly clarify that cypate can
efficiently convert absorbed light energies into heat and
raise the temperature of the surrounding medium. Free
cypate dissolved in DMSO was able to increase the
temperature of the solution to only 40ºC, which indicate
that encapsulation of cypate into the micelles interior
and J-aggregate formation significantly improve its
photothermal properties in comparison with free cypate
[28]. It is noted that raising and maintaining an elevated
temperature at tumor site is one of the key factors for an
efficient photothermal therapy as protein denaturation,
disruption of the cellular membrane and ablation of tumor
tissues occur at temperature > 40–43ºC. Based on the data
we obtained, the c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX could
increase the local temperature significantly enough to
cause irreversible photothermal damage to the tumor cells.
Hence, intense fluorescence and photothermal properties
of cypate provide a significant potential for application in
both fluorescence bioimaging and photothermal therapy
in a fast NIR light-triggered drug release nanocarrier in
deep tissues.
The photostability of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX was further evaluated and compared to cypate. Both
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate- PTX and cypate solution were
continuously irradiated by a semiconductor laser at 765 nm
(light intensity = 400 mW) and their photoluminescence
emission intensities were monitored over a period of
60 min by a S2000 eight-gap optical fiber spectrometer.
As shown in Figure 2H, the emission intensity of cypate
dropped rapidly in the first 20 min, and then decreased
gradually to 41.2% of its initial value within 60 min,
which is consistent with previous observations [29].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In contrast, the photostability of cypate was significantly
enhanced after being entrapped by c(RGDyK)-SNSC
under the same experimental conditions. Over 60 min, the
photoluminescence (PL) emission of c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX was relatively stable. The enhancement of the
photostability indicates a highly stable optically as well as
thermally, making the real-time monitoring of the dynamic
process of NIR light-sensitive micelles in mouse model for
a relatively longer time.

In vitro study
Cell uptake of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX
To evaluate the tumor targeting capability of
micelles, integrin αvβ3-positive (MDA-MB-231) and
negative (MCF-7) cell lines were used [29]. After
incubated with SNSC-cypate or c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate
for 8 hours, the images of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells
were taken by laser confocal fluorescence microscope
(Figure 3). The blue image showed cell nucleus counter
stained with Hochest and the red image showed the
intracellular micelles with encapsulated cypate. As
shown, we found the MDA-MB-231 cells associated with
c(RGDyK)-SNSC -cypate showed brighter fluorescence
than that with SNSC-cypate (Figure 3A and 3B).
In addition, the merged fluorescence images indicate that
both SNSC-cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate are
mainly located within the cytoplasm region rather than
in nuclei, which can be clearly observed by staining the
cell nuclei with Hochest. The enhanced cellular uptake
of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate is a clear evidence of its
tumor-targeting ability. In contrast, with low expression
of integrin αvβ3, MCF-7 cells have a very weak affinity to
both SNSC-cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate (Figure
3D and 3E). These results confirmed that c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate target cancer cells mainly by triggering the
receptor mediated endocytosis of the micelles.
The specificity of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate uptake
via integrin αvβ3 was conducted and displayed in Figure 3C.
As shown, the uptake of c(RGDyK)-SNSC- cypate
was significantly inhibited by c(RGDyK) (50 mmol/L)
in the MDA-MB-231 cells. The corresponding mean
fluorescence intensity of the MDA-MB-231 cells
incubated with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate in the absence
and presence of c(RGDyK), as shown in Figure 3F, further
indicated that the uptake was mostly mediated by integrin
αvβ3. Therefore, the enhanced tumor uptake of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate has potential to increase delivered anticancer
drug amount to the tumor sites.

In vitro antitumor efficacy of c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX
Before investigating the in vitro antitumor efficacy
of c(RGDyK)-SNSC- cypate-PTX, the cumulative
release profile of PTX from c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX and
82174

Oncotarget

c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX micelles in the presence
or absence of NIR illumination was studied (Figure 4A).
As shown, due to the adsorption of PTX to the surface
of the micelles during the synthetic process, the drug
release profiles of all the test samples displayed similar
two-phase profiles, with initial burst release followed by a
slower release regardless of NIR light exposure. However,
the release of PTX from c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate or
c(RGDyK)-SNSC was substantially increased with
NIR illumination. Specifically, 69.6% of encapsulated
PTX was released from c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate while
47.59% was released from c(RGDyK)-SNSC under
NIR light irradiation (765 nm, 800 mW) for the first 20
min. In contrast, only 43.29% of encapsulated PTX was
released from c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate and 34.2% from
c(RGDyK)-SNSC without NIR exposure at the first 20
min, respectively. As expected, the PTX release from
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate under NIR irradiation is much
faster than that from c(RGDyK)-SNSC with or without
NIR irradiation. More than 95% of PTX released from
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate with NIR irradiation at 30 h
post-dialysis. It should be mentioned that the release of
PTX from both c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate and c(RGDyK)SNSC is much slower without NIR irradiation. This may
due to the strong binding force of PTX to the micelle
because of its high hydrophobicity. The release profiles
support that the release of PTX from c(RGDyK)-SNSC
could be accelerated by co-loading with cypate under NIR
illumination, which could shorten treatment period and

reduce side effects on normal tissues as well as increase
its efficacy in tumors.
To evaluate the combinatorial photothermal therapy
and chemotherapy efficacy of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX, cell viability assays were carried out in cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7). As anticipated, the higher
the drug loading concentrations were, the stronger the
growth inhibition effect exerted (Figure 4B and 4C).
We revealed the high efficacy of combinatorial PTT and
chemotherapy of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX under
NIR irradiation in integrin-positive MDA-MB-231 cells,
with more than 85% cells deaths when the concertration
of PTX reached 100 μg/mL (Figure 4B), in comparison
with PTX (45.87 ± 1.53% cell viability), c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX without irradiation (30.02 ± 1.76%
cell viability), and SNSC-cypate-PTX with (28.13 ±
1.8 % cell viability) or without NIR irradiation (69.4 ±
0.82% cell viability) at the same PTX concentration. The
NIR irradiation could make the dissociation of SNSC
nanocarrier faster and accelerate concomitant release of
PTX. The modification by cyclic peptides c(RGDyK)
of drug carrier increased the targeting capability for
integrin-positive tumor cells and enhanced cell uptake
to improve antitumor efficacy. In contrast, without
c(RGDyK) modification and NIR irradiation, SNSCcypate-PTX showed the worst antitumor efficacy, mainly
due to slow drug release and low cell uptake without
integrin targeting. Consequently, our results support the
following conclusions: (1) The conjugation of c(RGDyK)

Figure 3: The laser confocal fluorescence microscopy images of αvβ3-positive MDA-MB-231 and αvβ3-negative MCF-7
cells incubated with SNSC-cypate. (A, D), c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate (B, E) at 37°C for 8 h; (C) Blocking experiments of c(RGDyK)-

SNSC-cypate in MDA-MB-231 cells in the presence of c(RGDyK) (50 mmol/L); Scale bars correspond to 50 µm. (F) Mean fluorescence
intensity of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells, incubated with SNSC-cypate or c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate in the absence or presence of
c(RGDyK). Data are given as mean ± SD (n = 5). *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82175

Oncotarget

In vivo study

increased the cell targeting and growth inhibition of SNSC
nanocarriers; (2) The inhibitory effect increased with NIR
illumination.
Similarly, the samples inhibitory effect on MCF-7
cells was enhanced by NIR irradiation (Figure 4C).
Compared with the samples without NIR illumination,
SNSC nanocarrier with NIR illumination showed higher
efficacy supporting that these micelles released more drug
in accord with the results of in vitro drug release. The
results also inferred that there was no significant difference
of inhibitory effects on integrin-negative cells between
SNSC-cypate-PTX and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate- PTX
regardless of NIR irradiation, further confirmed the cell
uptake of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX was mediated by
integrin receptor.
To further confirm the efficacy of c(RGDyK)
targeted NIR illuminated PTX-loaded SNSC micelles in
tumor cells, the cell uptake and cell morphology were
displayed after incubated in MDA-MB-231 cells for 6 h
(Figure 4E), with cells only treated with NIR light for 6 h
as control. As shown, there’s no obvious change of cell
morphology in the control group (Figure 4E1). However,
the morphologic characteristics of apoptosis cells, such as
cell shrinkage, and fragmentation were observed after the
cells incubated with PTX (Figure 4E2), c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX with or without NIR irradiation. Especially,
the cells incubated with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX
(Figure 4E4) after NIR light showed more apoptosis,
indicating the fast cleavage of SNSC micelles after NIR
illumination and the combinatorial efficacy of PTT and
chemotherapy of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX. These
results were consistent with MTT assay, further confirmed
the effectiveness of our c(RGDyK) targeted NIR lighttriggered micelles for integrin positive tumor cells.
The temperature measurement was also performed
to confirm the PTT mechanisms was activated under
exposure of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX-treated cancer
cells to 765 nm laser light of 800 mW power density.
After exposure, the MDA-MB-231 cells incubated with
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX exhibit rapid heating with
a starting temperature of 35ºC. The maximum temperature
reached as high as 55ºC (Figure 4D, red curve), while the
temperature change for non-transfected cells was less
than 1ºC (Figure 4D, black curve). Besides, the achieved
cellular temperature of cells incubated with c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX continuously increased during the
required periods of time under NIR light exposure.
However, switching off the laser resulted in the rapid
cooling of cells to 37ºC in 10 min. The above data clearly
indicate that c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX perform
a high efficacy to cancer cells in the presence of NIR
light, which have potential to minimize side effects and
maximize delivery of the active component to the targeted
tumors via both EPR effect and integrin-receptor.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo targeting ability
After in vitro results, we constructed in vivo
studies to evaluate the NIR imaging targeting ability and
therapeutic efficacy of the newly developed theranostic
nanoplatform. The in vivo targeting ability c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate was assessed in mice implanted with αvβ3positive MDA-MB-231. As shown in Figure 5A, the
tumor region of nude mice injected with non-c(RGDyK)modified SNSC (SNSC-cypate) appeared with some
fluorescence signal. The signal reached its maximum 48 h
after injection, and then cleared from the tumor site at
around 96 h. The weak fluorescent signal at the tumor site is
possibly attibuted to EPR effect, specifically, nanoparticles
detained passively in tumor tissue via hyper-permeability
or leakage of tumor blood vessel. When MDA-MB-231
bearing nude mice were treated with c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate, the micelles were accumulated in the tumor
region 4 h after injection, and the fluorescence signal
continuously increased with maximal accumulation at
around 24 h (Figure 5B). The fluorescent signal remained
strong in the tumor tissue for more than 96 h and can be
explained by receptor clustering. Also, a maximum tumor
to normal tissue NIR fluorescence ratio of 5.76 ± 0.85
was attained at 24 h post injection of c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate compared with fluorescence ratio of 2.31± 0.56
for SNSC-cypate treated mice (Figure 5F). Furthermore,
in vivo blocking experiment was conducted and displayed
in Figure 5C. As shown, the tumor uptake of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate was significantly inhibited by c(RGDyK) in
the MDA-MB-231 tumor bearing mice. The corresponding
tumor/normal tissue ratio was 1.57 ± 0.29. In contrast, the
results in αvβ3-negative MCF-7 bearing mice treated with
SNSC-cypate or c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate (Figure 5D
and 5E) showed substantially weaker florescent signal
at the tumor sites, with the tumor to normal tissue
fluorescence ratio of (2.5 ± 0.52, 1.83 ± 0.3) (Figure 5F),
supporting that the increasing distribution of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate in tumor tissue was mediated by the active
targeting capability of integrin receptor.

In vivo combination antitumor efficacy
To evaluate the anticancer efficacy of in vivo
combinatorial PTT and chemotherapy, MDA-MB-231
tumors treated with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX were
exposed for 20 min to a 765 nm laser at a power density
of 800 mW. SNSC-cypate-PTX and PTX MDA-MB-231
tumors were as control. The anti-tumor effects of various
treatments were then quantified based on tumor volume,
animal weight change, and survival rate (Figure 6A–6C).
Under irradiation, the intratumoral temperature changes

82176

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (A) Cumulative release rate of paclitaxel (PTX) from c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX micelles

with and without NIR illumination (Ex: 765 nm, 800 mW/cm2). The cell viability of (B) αvβ3-positive MDA-MB-231 cells and (C) αvβ3negative MCF-7 cells were determined following the incubation with free PTX (as control), and SNSC micelles loaded with various PTX
concentration (0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, and 100 µg/ml) with or without NIR irradiation (Ex: 765 nm, 800 mW/cm2, 20 min). (D) Dynamic temperature
profile of MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX and exposed to NIR laser light (Ex: 765 nm, 800 mW/cm2).
Non-treated cells exposed to NIR light were as control. The arrows indicate when the laser turned on and off, respectively. (E) Cell uptake
and morphology after incubating PTX or c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX with or without NIR irradiation (Ex: 765 nm). n = 5 for all groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82177

Oncotarget

were also recorded. As shown, the temperature increased
rapidly from 36ºC to 40.5ºC within 2 min, reaching
42.7ºC plateaus after 10 min (Figure 6D, red curve).
In comparison, the temperature of the tumor without
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate- PTX treatment had almost no
changes under the same 765 nm irradiation conditions
(Figure 6D, black curve). Thus, compared with the control
group (saline injection), drug-treated groups, including
PTX, SNSC-cypate-PTX and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX with or without NIR illumination significantly
reduced MDA-MB-231 tumor volume, among which
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX under NIR illumination
exerted the best inhibitory efficacy (Figure 6A),
in consistent with the results of tumor size of the mice
treated with different samples after 15-day post injection
(Figure 6E). There are several potential causes for such
effects, namely, 1) c(RGDyK)-modified micelles were
positively targeted tumor tissue by integrin receptor, thus
increasing the tumor inhibitory chemo-effect of micelles; 2)
Under NIR illumination, the cypate entrapped micelles
exerted better inhibitory effects on tumor growth. Upon
irradiation, cypate in micelles has increased the local
temperature significantly enough to cause irreversible
photothermal damage to the tumor tissue.
Body weight and survive rate usually reflect the
health condition of the treated mice. The treatments have
different effects on the changes of animal weight during

the therapeutic process (Figure 6B). Animal weight of
control saline group reduced after rising first. Weight
of free PTX groups reduced by 21.43% after two-week
treatment compared with the initial weight, indicating
the potential systemic toxicity of PTX. Animal weight
of other groups either with or without NIR illumination
after two-week treatment increased slowly, supporting
the potential therapeutic effect of various micelles. It
is likely that micelles can enhance PTX distribution in
tumor tissues and reduce distribution in other normal
organs, thus reducing side effects of chemotherapy.
15-day survival rates of mice in control and PTX-treated
groups reduce to 50 % and 63%, respectively (Figure 6C).
None of the mice died in 765 nm irradiated c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX treated group. Survival rates of mice
in the SNSC-cypate-PTX with or without NIR irradiation
and non-NIR irradiation c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX treated group reach to 75%, 88% and 88%. These
results further demonstrated the low cytotoxicity of PTX
after encapsulated into micelles and indicated that after
irradiation, combinatorial PTT and chemotherapy based
on c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX can effectively improve
the survival quality of mice and prolong their lifetime.
To further confirm the therapy efficacy of micelles
on the subject animals, the tumors were excised one
week after micelles treatment for pathological evaluation
(Figure 6F). Histological analysis reveals that no damage

Figure 5: In vivo targeting behavior of c(RGDyK)-SNSC micelles in tumor bearing animals for 1 to 96 hours. Fluorescence

images of αvβ3-positive MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mice after systemic injection of (A) SNSC-cypate and (B) c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate
micelles; (C) c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate micelles with blocking dose of c(RGDyK). In comparison, Fluorescence images of αvβ3-negative
MCF-7 tumor-bearing mice after injection of (D) SNSC-cypate and (E) c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate micelles. (F) Tumor/normal tissue ratio
(T/N ratio = [tumor signal – background signal]/[normal signal (muscle) – background signal] × 100%) calculated from the ROIs at 24 h
post-injection of SNSC-cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate micelles with or without blocking dose of c(RGDyK). Data are given as
mean ± SD (n = 5). *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82178

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Combinatorial PTT and chemotherapy efficacy of various samples in eradicating MDA-MB-231 tumors
implanted in nude mice was determined. Test samples include saline (as negative control), PTX (as control), SNSC-cypate-PTX
(with or without NIR light irradiation), c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX (with or without NIR light irradiation). Various treated micelles and
controls were administered via intravenous injection and the therapeutic effect of various samples was determined by measuring (A) tumor
volumes, (B) animal weight, (C) 14-day survival rates of MDA-MB-231 tumors-bearing mice, and (E) tumor size of the mice with different
samples sacrificed after 14-day post-injection. (D) Temperature changes inside the tumor treated with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX and
exposed to NIR laser light (Ex: 765 nm, 800 mW/cm2). Untreated tumor exposed to NIR light were as control. The arrows indicate when the
laser turned on and off, respectively. (F) H&E stained tissue samples excised from animals treated with saline (F1), PTX (F2), c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate-PTX (without (F3) or with NIR irradiation (F4)) micelles. Image magnification is 200× and n = 8 in all groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82179

Oncotarget

was found in tumors of control mice (Figure 6F1).
However, the treatment of free PTX (Figure 6F2) and
administered with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX without
or with irradiation (Figure 6F3, 6F4) showed serious
injury in the form of cellular edema and nuclear swelling,
with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX under illumination
showed markedly increased apoptotic and necrotic tumor
cells, further indicating that the efficacy of the micelles
is due to the release of PTX after the dissociation of the
micelles under NIR illumination. Besides, cyclic RGD
could enhance the accumulation of the micelles, thus
increase the anticancer efficacy of the micelles.

tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) were purchased from InvitrogenLife Technologies (Carlsbad, CA, USA). All other
analytical reagent grade chemical reagents used in
the study were commercially acquired from Shanghai
Chemical Reagent Company (Shanghai, China).
Human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7), human
glioma cell lines (U87MG) and human breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231) were all purchased from American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA).
Kunming normal mice (male and female) and Athymic
nude mice (nu/nu CD-1 male and female) were purchased
from SLAC Laboratory Animal Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Preparation of c(RGDyK)-modified NIR lighttriggered chitosan micelles (c(RGDyK)-SNSC)

Materials

The c(RGDyK)-modified photoactive amphiphilic
diblock copolymer was synthesized as depicted in Figure 1.
First, the cyclic peptides c(RGDyK) reacted with succinic
anhydride (Step 1). Then the activated product was
synthesized with SNSC (Step 2). Specifically, c(RGDyK)
(5 mg) and succinic anhydride (3 mg, SUC) were first
dissolved in 2 mL DMF and reacted for 18 h at room
temperature and the mass spectrum (MS) was scanned
to identify the product. Second, the -COOH group of the
product was activated with DDC/NHS catalyst systems
(molar ratio of c(RGDyK)-SUC:EDC:NHS=1:1.5:1.5)
under continuous stirring for 24 h. Then, the activated
c(RGDyK)-SUC was dissolved in 1 mL acetic acid and

Chitosan was purchased from Aoxing Biotechnology
Co. Ltd. (Zhejiang, China), with deacetylation degrees
of 90% and an average molecular weight (MW) of
50 kDa. N,N’-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC),
N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), 2-nitrobenzyl alcohol,
pyridine were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, USA). Indocyanine Green (ICG) derivative
cypate (MW 689) was prepared in our laboratory. Cyclic
RGD (c(RGDyK)) was purchased from Shanghai Jier
Biochemistry Co. Methyl thiazolyltetrazolium (MTT),
RPMI 1640 medium and fetal bovine serum (FBS),
penicillin, streptomycin, trypsin and ethylenediamine

Table of Contents Graphic

A multifunctional micellar drug delivery system with the capability of active tumor targeting, imaging and lighttriggered release for combination photo-thermal and chemo-therapy was developed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82180

Oncotarget

was added dropwise into prepared N-succinyl-chitosan
acetic acid solution with stable stirring for another
24 h. Afterwards, the activated light-sensitive group
4-(2-nitrobenzyloxy)-succinyl ester was added to the above
acetic acid solution with continuous stirring for another 18
h. After that, the product was purified by dialysis (MWCO
10000) against distilled water for 2–3 d. After dialysis, the
solution was self-assembled with sonication at P = 300
W for 50 times and then centrifuged. The supernatant
c(RGDyK)- N-succinyl-N′-4-(2-nitrobenzyloxy)-succinyl
chitosan (c(RGDyK)-SNSC) micelles were kept at room
temperature for further research.

instrument corporation, Shanghai, China). S2000 eightchannel optical fiber spectrographotometer (Ocean
Optics corporation, America), and a NL-FC-2.0-763
semiconductor laser (λ = 605 nm or λ = 765 nm, Enlight,
China) light were utilized for fluorescence spectra
detection. All optical measurements were performed at
room temperature.

Temperature evaluation induced by NIR laser
irradiation
A continuous NL-FC-2.0-763 semiconductor laser
(λ = 765 nm, Enlight, China) light was employed. To
evaluate the lased induced temperature increase, 500 μL
of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX aqueous solution
was irradiated under NIR light for 20 min, while the
temperature was monitored with a temperature sensor at
designated time intervals. In addition, 500 μL of water
or cypate were irradiated at the same laser settings for
temperature recording.

Uploading near-infrared dye cypate and
antitumor drug paclitaxel (PTX)
Our previous study has shown that the dissociation
of the NIR fluorescent dye cypate-encapsulated micelles
was accelerated under NIR (765 nm) illumination. The
NIR emission triggered the photo-cleavage reaction,
resulting in accelerated dissociation of SNSC micelles
and concomitant release of co-loaded hydrophobic
species. Here, we encapsulated cypate and antitumor
drug PTX to the NIR light-triggered c(RGDyK)-SNSC
nanocarrier. Specifically, 1 mg cypate dissolved in 100
μL DMSO was added dropwise into 2 mL c(RGDyK)SNSC or SNSC micelles. Likewise, we added 2 mg
PTX of 100 μL DMSO into micelles. The solution
was stirred continuously for 10 min and sonicated at
200 W for 30 times. Then the solution was purified by
dialysis in a dialysis tube (MWCO 10000) against
distilled water and centrifuged (10000 rpm, 10 min)
to remove free PTX. The entrapment efficiency and
loading content were calculated according to the following
Equation: Entrapment efficiency = (mass of drug loaded
in micelles/mass of drug fed initially) × 100%; Loading
content = (mass of drug loaded in micelles/mass of drug
loaded micelles) × 100%.

Photostability
For the study of photostability, c(RGDyK)-SNSCcypate-PTX or cypate aqueous solution were continuously
irradiated by a semiconductor laser at 765 nm
(light intensity = 400 mW) and their photoluminescence
emission intensities were monitored over a period of
60 min by a S2000 eight-gap optical fiber spectrometer.

In vitro study
In vitro cell targeting ability of c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate
To evaluate the integrin αυβ3 receptor specificity of
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate, integrin αυβ3 highly expressed
tumor cells MDA-MB-231 was used. On the other hand,
MCF-7 with low integrin αυβ3 expression was served as
negative control. Briefly, MDA-MB-231 or MCF-7 cells
(3 × 105 cells/mL) were seeded at the confocal petri dish
and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. 200 µL of SNSC-cypate or
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate solution (1 mmol/L) were added
into cell culture media. After cultured for 8 h, the adherent
cells were washed with PBS thrice and the cells’ nucleus
were stained with Hochest (12 µg/mL) for 0.5 h and then
imaged using laser confocal microscopy.
To confirm the integrin αυβ3 receptor mediation,
in vitro receptor blocking experiment with cyclic RGD
(c(RGDyK)) was conducted on MDA-MB-231 cells. After
cultured the MDA-MB-231 cells at 37°C for 24 hours,
c(RGDyK) (50 mmol/L) was preliminarily added to the
cells for 30-minute incubation. Subsequently, c(RGDyK)SNSC-cypate was added to the dishes and cultured for
another 8 h. After washing with PBS, the cells were
imaged using laser confocal microscopy.

Characterization of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX
The Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectra
of c(RGDyK)-SNSC micelles was recorded by FTIR
spectrometer (Nicolet ECO2000, USA). The average
diameters and distribution of c(RGDyK)-SNSC,
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate and c(RGDyK)-SNSC- cypatePTX were measured by a Mastersizer 2000 Laser Particle
Size Analyzer (LPSA, Malvern, British) with a helium–
neon laser (10 mW max, wand wavelength of 633 nm)
as the light source at the scattering angle of 90°. The
available detecting size interval is 2 nm–3 μm.

Absorption and fluorescence measurement
The UV-Vis spectra were acquired by 754-PC
UV-Vis spectrophotometer (JingHua technological
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82181

Oncotarget

In vitro drug release

In vivo study

The release profiles of paclitaxel (PTX) from
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate micelles in vitro were tested
by a dialysis method. SNSC-cypate-PTX or c(RGDyK)SNSC- cypate-PTX micelles (2 mL) were dialyzed in
dialysis tubes against phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (pH
7.4, 100 mL, containing 0.1% tween 80) at 37.5°C and
30 rpm with or without the exposure of NIR light (765 nm,
800 mW). The released drug in the incubation buffer was
collected and the aliquots taken from the dialysate were
replaced with fresh PBS (containing 0.1% tween 80) at
pre-determined time intervals to keep the volume constant
during the assay. Remove water by a freeze-drying
method and re-dissolve the drug by methanol for High
Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) analysis.

In vivo dynamic distribution and tumor targeting
of the nanoconstruct
Thymus defect nude mice (evenly, male and
female animals aged 5~6 weeks, weighed 18~22 g, breed
in a GLP laboratory) were used in this investigation.
For in vivo study, tumor cell MDA-MB-231 or MCF-7
suspension (100 μL, about 3 × 106 cells) was injected into
the mice subcutaneously after the mice were anesthetized
by isoflurane. When the volume of the tumor reaches
to 100 ~ 200 mm3, they were used for in vivo targeting
experiments.
The tumor bearing mice were divided into 2 groups
(5 mice per group), which was intravenously injected
with either SNSC-cypate-PTX solution (0.2 mL, control)
or c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX solution (0.2 mL)
via the tail vein. To capture the real time dynamics and
biodistributions of the c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX in
the tumor bearing mice, a custom-constructed NIR imaging
system was used. The vivo fluorescence images of animal
were obtained at designated time intervals (1–96 h).

In vitro drug effect of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX
To assess the in vitro drug efficacy of c(RGDyK)SNSC-PTX, MTT assay was conducted following the
standard protocol reported previously [30]. The MDAMB-231 and MCF-7 were chosen as the target cells. In
detail, 200 mL of MDA-MB-231 (or MCF-7) in RPMI
1640 (2.5 × 103 cell) with 10% FCS (serum) was added
into each well in a 96-well plate and incubated for 24 h
in humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37.0ºC.
The culture medium in each well was replaced by 200
mL of RPMI 1640 containing c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX with particular concentrations (0.01, 0.1, 1, 10,
100 µg/mL). The mixture was then exposed to the laser
diode (765 nm, 800 mW, 20 min) and the temperature
changes were measured by fiber optic temperature probe.
After light irradiation, the cells were incubated for another
48 h. Finally, the medium was replaced by 180 mL of fresh
RPMI 1640 and 20 mL of MTT solution (5 mg/mL). After
incubating for another 4 h, the medium containing MTT
was removed from each well and 200 mL of DMSO was
added and shaken at room temperature. The optical density
(OD) was measured at 570 nm with a Microplate Reader
(Biorad, USA). The viable rate could be calculated by
the following equation: viable rate = (ODtreated/ODcontrol)
× 100%, where ODtreated was obtained in the presence of
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX and ODcontrol was obtained
in the absence of c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate- PTX.
Furthermore, the following control groups were employed
in the study to evaluate the efficacy of combinatorial of
PTT and chemotherapy: untreated cells, cells treated with
PTX, SNSC-cypate-PTX, c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypatePTX under dark conditions, cells treated with SNSCPTX, SNSC-cypate-PTX and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-PTX
exposed to the laser diode (765 nm, 800 mW, 20 min).
In addition, the morphological changes of cells treated
with c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX under irradiation
were imaged using laser confocal microscopy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo combinatorial PTT and chemotherapy
effect
The tumor bearing mice were divided into 6 groups
(8 mice per group), shown in Table 2. When the volume
of tumor reached 100 mm3, drug or saline was given every
other day. During this period, we recorded the weight and
volume of the tumor.
All of the groups were intravenously injected with
samples (5 mg/kg body weight at an equivalent dose of
free PTX) via the tail vein, respectively. The E-H group
were irradiated by NIR laser (765 nm, 800 mW, 20 min)
at 6 h post-injection. Tumor volume (TV) is calculated
by the equation: TV = 1/2*a*b2, where a represents the
length of the tumor and b represents the width of the
tumor. The relative tumor volume (RTV) is found by the
equation: RTV = Vt/V0, where Vt represents the tumor
volume before administration and V0 represents the
recorded tumor volume. Relative tumor inhibitory rate
(T/C) is the assessment of antitumor activity of human
xenograft tumor model and is calculated by the equation
T/C(%)=TRTV/CRTV×100%, where TRTV is obtained by
RTV of control group and CRTV of treatment group.

Histology examination
To confirm the combinatorial PTT and chemotherapy
efficacy of c(RGDyK)- SNSC-cypate-PTX for tumor
therapy, histology analysis of tumor tissues was performed
after treatment. Tumor tissues were separated and fixed
with 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in
paraffin (n = 8). The sliced organs were stained with H&E
and examined under a microscope.
82182

Oncotarget

Table 2: The tumor bearing mice were divided into 6 groups (A–F) and each group mice were
intravenously injected with different samples
Sample
A
B
C
D
E
F

Saline
PTX
SNSC-cypate-PTX
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX
SNSC-cypate-PTX
c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX

NIR light irradiation (765 nm, 800 mW, 20 min)
×
×
×
×
√
√

For the mice injected with SNSC-cypate-PTX (Group E) and c(RGDyK)-SNSC-cypate-PTX (F), the NIR laser (765 nm, 800 mW)
was applied to the tumors for 20 min post injection.

Statistical analysis

No.81000666, No.81171395, No.81220108012 and
61335007), Joint Research Fund for Overseas Young
Scholars (No. 81328012), the major project from the
Ministry of Science and Technology for new drug
development (2009ZX09310-004), the Natural Science
Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK 2011634), the
Graduate Innovation Project of Jiangsu Province
(CXLX11_0795).

Data was expressed as mean ± standard deviation.
Statistical analysis was performed by using students’ t-test
with statistical significance assigned for P value of <0.05.

CONCLUSIONS
In this manuscript, we developed NIR lighttriggered micelles that could simultaneously deliver
anticancer drug PTX and NIR dye cypate to tumor sites
for combined chemo-photothermal therapy. Cypate as a
NIR imaging agent not only enhanced the dissociation
of the micelles under irradiation, but also revealed high
temperature response for PTT. Conjugation of cyclic
peptide RGD to the micelle surface enhanced the uptake of
the micelles to integrin receptor-positive breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB-231, and the results further confirmed that
active targeting ability was mediated by integrin receptor.
To investigate the anti-tumor effect, we first investigate the
in vitro drug release of the micelles. Experimental results
show that, under exposure of NIR light, the release rate
of PTX increased significantly from micelle and exerted
significant controlled release effect. In vitro and in vivo
anti-tumor studies revealed that the micelles exhibit an
excellent PTT and synergistic chemotherapy of cancer
via NIR light-triggered release of PTX from micelles,
eventually resulting in decreased cancer recurrence rates.
Our results support that this NIR light-triggered targeted
therapeutic system has the advantages of precisely locating
on tumor sites, sensitive imaging for diagnosis, controlled
drug release and accurate therapy. This novel system has
huge potential in the new era of combination therapies for
tumor treatment.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that no conflicts of interest
exists in the present study.

REFERENCES
 1.	 Gao J, Zhang W, Huang P, Zhang B, Zhang X, Xu B.
Intracellular spatial control of fluorescent magnetic
nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008; 130:3710–3711.
  2.	 Yu MK, Jeong YY, Park J, Park S, Kim JW, Min JJ, Kim K,
Jon S. Drug-loaded superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles for combined cancer imaging and therapy
in vivo. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2008; 47:5362–5365.
  3.	 Lee JH, Schneider B, Jordan EK, Liu W, Frank JA.
Synthesis of Complexable Fluorescent Superparamagnetic
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles (FL SPIONs) and Cell Labeling
for Clinical Application. Adv Mater. 2008; 20:2512–2516.
  4.	 Lane D. Design combination therapy for cancer. Nat.
Biotechnol. 2006; 24:163–164.
 5.	 Alivisatos AP. The use of nanocrystals in biological
detection. Nat. Biotechnol. 2004; 22:47–52.
 6.	 Huang X, El-Sayed IH, Qian W, El-Sayed MA. Cancer
cell imaging and photothermal therapy in the near-infrared
region by using gold nanorods. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006;
128:2115–2120;
 7.	 Chen J, Wang D, Xi J, Au L, Siekkinen A, Warsen A,
Li ZY, Zhang H, Xia Y, Li X. Immuno gold nanocages
with tailored optical properties for targeted photothermal
destruction of cancer cells. Nano Lett. 2007; 7:1318–1322.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was financially supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81071194,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82183

Oncotarget

  8.	 Hirsch LR, Stafford RJ, Bankson JA, Sershen SR, Rivera B,
Price RE, Hazle JD, Halas NJ, West JL. Nanoshell-mediated
near-infrared thermal therapy of tumors under magnetic
resonance guidance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2003;
100:13549–13554.

19.	Sirsi SR, Borden MA. State-of-the-art materials for
ultrasound-triggered drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev.
2014; 72:3–14;
20.	 Brazel C. Magnetothermally-responsive nanomaterials:
combining magnetic nanostructures and thermally-sensitive
polymers for triggered drug release. Pharm Res. 2009;
26:644–656.

  9.	 Zheng M, Yue C, Ma Y, Gong P, Zhao P, Zheng C, Sheng Z,
Zhang P, Wang Z, Cai L. Single-step assembly of DOX/
ICG loaded lipid-polymer nanoparticles for highly effective
chemo-photothermal combination therapy. ACS Nano.
2013; 7:2056–2067.

21.	 Aathimanikandan SV, Savariar EN, Thayumanavan S.
Temperature-sensitive dendritic micelles. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2005; 127:14922–14929.

10.	 Yuan Y, Wang Z; Cai P, Liu J, Liao LD, Hong M, Chen X,
Thakor N, Liu B. Conjugated polymer and drug coencapsulated nanoparticles for chemo- and photo-thermal
combination therapy with two-photon regulated fast drug
release. Nanoscale. 2015; 7:3067–3076.

22.	 Shao Y, Shi C, Xu G, Guo D, Luo J. Photo and redox dual
responsive reversibly crosslinked nanocarrier for efficient
tumor-targeted drug delivery. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces.
2014; 6:10381–10392.
23.	 Fomina N, Sankaranarayanan J, Almutairi A. Photochemical
mechanisms of light-triggered release from nanocarriers.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2012; 64:1005–1020.

11.	 Menon JU, Jadeja P, Tambe P, Vu K, Yuan B, Nguyen KT.
Nanomaterials for photo-based diagnostic and therapeutic
applications. Theranostics. 2013; 3:152–166.

24.	 Zhao Y. Light-responsive block copolymer micelles.
Macromolecules. 2012; 45:3647–3657.

12.	 Wu L, Wu M, Zeng Y, Zhang D, Zheng A, Liu X, Liu J.
Multifunctional PEG modified DOX loaded mesoporous
silica nanoparticles@CuS nanohybrids as photo-thermal
agent and thermal-triggered drug release vehicle for
hepatocellular carcinoma treatment. Nanotechnology. 2015;
26:025102.

25.	 Zhao Y. Photocontrollable block copolymer micelles: what
can we control? J Mater. Chem. 2009; 19:4887–4895.
26.	 Zhao Y. Light-responsive block copolymer micelles.
Macromolecules. 2012; 45:3647–3657.
27.	 Cao J, Huang S, Chen Y, Li S, Li X, Deng D, Qian Z, Tang
L, Gu Y. Near-infrared light-triggered micelles for fast
controlled drug release in deep tissue. Biomaterials. 2013;
34:6272–6283.

13.	 Ren F, Bhana S, Norman DD, Johnson J, Xu L, Baker DL,
Parrill AL, Huang X. Gold nanorods carrying paclitaxel for
photothermal-chemotherapy of cancer. Bioconjugate Chem.
2013; 24:376–386.

28.	 Taratula O, Schumann C, Duong T, Taylor KL. Dendrimerencapsulated naphthalocyanine as a single agent-based
theranostic nanoplatform for near-infrared fluorescence
imaging and combinatorial anticancer phototherapy.
Nanoscale. 2015; 7:3888–3902.

14.	 Muthu MS, Leong DT, Mei L, Feng SS. Nanotheranosticsapplication and futher development of nanomedicine
strategies for advanced theranostics. Theranostics 2014;
4:660–677.
15.	 Wang Y, Wang K, Zhao J, Liu X, Bu J, Yan X, Huang R.
Multifunctional mesoporous silica-coated graphene
nanosheet used for chemo-photothermal synergistic targeted
therapy of glioma. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013; 135:4799–4804.

29.	 Cao J, Wan S, Tian J, Li S, Deng D, Qian Z, Gu Y. Fast
clearing RGD-based near-infrared fluorescent probes for
in vivo tumor diagnosis. Contrast. Media. Mol. Imaging.
2012; 7:390–402.

16.	 Zhang Z, Wang L, Wang J, Jiang X, Li X, Hu Z, Ji Y, Wu X,
Chen C. Mesoporous silica-coated gold nanorods as a
light-mediated multifunctional theranostic platform for
cancer treatment. Adv. Mater. 2012; 24:1418–1423.

30.	 Du C, Deng D, Shan L, Wan S, Cao J, Tian J, Achilefu S,
Gu Y. A pH-sensitive doxorubicin prodrug based on
folate-conjugated BSA for tumor-targeted drug delivery.
Biomaterials. 2013; 34:3087–3097.

17.	 Wu H, Zhu L, Torchilin VP. pH-sensitive poly(histidine)PEG/DSPE-PEG co-polymer micelles for cytosolic drug
delivery. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:1213–1222.
18.	 Chen J, Ouyang J, Kong J, Zhong W, Xing MM. Photocross-linked and pH-sensitive biodegradable micelles for
doxorubicin delivery. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 2013;
5:3108–3117.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82184

Oncotarget

