Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The structural basis for cancer treatment decisions
Ruth Nussinov1,2, Hyunbum Jang1, Chung-Jung Tsai1
1

 ancer and Inflammation Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
C
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, U.S.A.

2

 ackler Inst. of Molecular Medicine, Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel
S
Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

Correspondence to:
Dr. Ruth Nussinov, e-mail: NussinoR@helix.nih.gov
Keywords: Cancer treatment decisions, driver mutations, driver genes, redundant pathways, parallel pathways, computational
biology, protein structure, cellular network, oncogenic mutations
Received: July 28, 2014	 Accepted: September 03, 2014	 Published: September 12, 2014

ABSTRACT
Cancer treatment decisions rely on genetics, large data screens and clinical
pharmacology. Here we point out that genetic analysis and treatment decisions may
overlook critical elements in cancer development, progression and drug resistance.
Two critical structural elements are missing in genetics-based decision-making:
the mechanisms of oncogenic mutations and the cellular network which is rewired
in cancer. These lay the foundation for the structural basis for cancer treatment
decisions, which is rooted in the physical principles of the molecular conformational
behavior of single molecules and their interactions. Improved tumor mutational
analysis platforms and knowledge of the redundant pathways which can take over
in cancer, may not only supplement known actionable findings, but forecast possible
cancer progression and resistance. Such forward-looking can be powerful, endowing
the oncologist with mechanistic insight and cancer prognosis, and consequently more
informed treatment options. Examples include redundant pathways taking over after
inhibition of EGFR constitutive activation, mutations in PIK3CA p110α and p85, and
the non-hotspot AKT1 mutants conferring constitutive membrane localization.

these statistical trends exist and why the correlations are
observed. Since each record contains many variables, it is
difficult to fully interpret the observed biases. Thus, while
enormously useful, this restricts the predictive power
for individual patients [7], and hampers personalized
drug regimes. The second, complementary way through
which computations contribute to cancer research is by
revealing the mechanism through which particular genetic
or acquired aberration works. To understand mechanisms,
and design or computationally screen drugs, structures are
needed. The 2013 Nobel Prize in Chemistry underscored
the significance of computational structural biology,
noting “Computer models mirroring real life have
become crucial for most advances made in chemistry
today… Today the computer is just as important a tool
for chemists as the test tube. Simulations are so realistic
that they predict the outcome of traditional experiments”
[8]. Further, computations are able to reach a level of

INTRODUCTION
Computational biology tackles cancer in two
distinct ways. The first involves analysis of massive
quantities of genomic, proteomic, microarray, cell and
tissue imaging data produced by experiments, as well as
clinical data relating to the tumors, the patients and the
results of clinical trials [1–4]. These data are compiled
and organized effectively in targeted databases, and
diverse software tools are developed to sift through the
voluminous compilations to exploit them. The collected
data and analyses are immensely important. Databases
store vast amount of information, which, if well
organized, curated, managed and shared, can produce
robust statistical trends. If the number of records is large,
they allow correlating basic experimental data with
outcomes [5, 6]. However, these are statistical studies;
as such, they are not able to provide an insight into why

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7285

Oncotarget

Treatment Decisions in the Clinic

mechanistic detail that is hard for experiments to attain.
They are able to integrate and interrogate data across a
range of scales, introduce and test hypotheses, and most
importantly, the results are quantified. Within these active
areas of research, here we focus on this second aspect.
We aim to put forward what we consider are the major
ways through which structural biology, and in particular
computational structural biology, contributes to the
foundation for cancer treatment decisions. The first step
is a definition of cancer: cancer is a breakdown of normal
physiological tissue homeostasis due to loss-of-function
or gain-of-function. There are multiple ways for each to
evolve [9–43].
Cancer can be described by its genetic makeup and
expression profiles [44]. This epitomizes personalized
medicine, which aims to tailor disease treatment as much
as possible to an individual patient [45]. It drives studies
of the cancer’s genetic features to determine how best to
apply the knowledge in the clinic, and calls for genetic
testing for inherited cancer risk [46–50]. The complexity
of cancer genetics and expression profiles across multiple
scales is evident. One example is the histopathological
heterogeneity in lung adenocarcinoma which has been
classified into subtypes differing in metastatic potential
and survival illustrates. No molecular profiles exist to
explain these differences. Analysis of discrete areas of
the different subtypes, screening for mutations in hotspot
regions of the EGFR, KRAS and BRAF genes observed
that KRAS and BRAF mutations could be confined
to morphological domains of higher grade. However,
EGFR driver mutations were observed in all histological
subtypes in each tumor. Taken together, this suggests that
small biopsies may not adequately represent a tumor’s
full mutational profile, particularly for later arising but
prognostically important mutations such as those in the
KRAS and BRAF genes [51]. Despite this, decisions need
to address the mutational cause, not the histopathological
imaging.
Here our premise is that cancer treatment decisions
would benefit from marrying the genetic basis for cancer
treatment with the structural basis, which to date has
largely been overlooked. The structural basis should
be thought of as not only helping to understand the
genetics of individual mutations in cancer, but instead as
capable of tailoring, innovating and improving the way
the disease is treated. Structural considerations argue
for a modification of the binary ‘passenger’ and ‘driver’
mutational paradigm. Rather than a mutation classified
into one of the two, a ‘passenger’ mutation can become
a ‘driver’ if a cooperative mutation takes place during
cancer development. Identifying ‘latent driver’ mutations
and their expected emergent cohorts in the unstable
cancer landscape can inspire more potent personalized
treatments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effective personalized cancer treatment requires
information. Much of it is available and known to be
crucial; some of the rest may be compiled but hidden
in the massive amount of data generated by cancer
genome sequences, their analyses and patients’ genetic
tests. Among the key problems facing physicians are the
enabling technology and the time to diagnose actionable
findings in the patient’s genome – as compared to
cancer genomes – and clinical data that will improve
treatment decisions for the patient; in addition looms
the question whether the actionable data have been
a priori identified as such. Current cancer treatment
decisions largely rest on identification of the patient’s
driver gene and driver mutations through comparisons
to those determined statistically across populations of
patients. Ideally, a  cancer diagnostic platform should
help the oncologist to rapidly translate all relevant
and available clinical, molecular, and drug data into
effective treatment choices for individual patients.
However, diagnostic platforms generally assume that
actionable driver mutations have been unraveled, and
that these are the ones that appear most frequently
in cancer. A  mutation is classified as either a driver
or a passenger. If the latter, it is of no interest to the
treating oncologist. By contrast, here our premise is that
actionable mutations (and thus also proteins) should
be thought of  as not only those diagnosed as drivers,
but also some of those presumed  to  be passengers.
A passenger mutation may have no observable clinical
effect; however, combined with another presumed
passenger mutation, or some external factor (like
infection) it can become a driver. Such pre-existing
‘latent driver’ mutations may additively lead to an
outcome resembling driver mutations. Diagnosis
of the patient’s actionable ­pre-existing latent driver
mutations may arm the oncologist with foreknowledge
of cancer progression, resistance and more effective
drug combinations. Since the  mutational environment
differs across a patient and cancer population, such a
prognostic foresight can lead to more targeted patientspecific therapies.
Oncologists are faced with the challenge of
deciphering molecular data and determining the treatment
implications. Each tumor presents a distinct set of
genetic aberrations among which are driver and latent
driver mutations. These can influence the drug’s mode
of action and its aftermath. The latent drivers’ concept
calls for reevaluation of genetic decision platforms which
are exploited by physicians and powered by high end
computing. Because identification of latent drivers rests
on residue combinations, larger statistics will be required
posing a major challenge.

7286

Oncotarget

An Overview of Cancer: the Preeminent Role of
the Cellular Network

metabolism and evading immune destruction [60].
Cancer cells achieve these abilities mainly by rewiring
existing cellular programmes that normally take place
during development to coordinate cell proliferation,
migration, polarity, apoptosis, and differentiation during
embryogenesis and tissue homeostasis. The Darwinian
character of cancer cells confers the ability to proliferate
and survive through random mutations and epigenetic
changes followed by selection of resistant variants [61]
under circumstances that would normally be deleterious.

Homeostasis provides an intricate balance of cell
proliferation and death. Tipping the scale toward cell
growth causes cancer. A normal cell is transformed into a
tumor cell primarily through alterations in genes regulating
cell growth and apoptosis. These involve oncogenes with
gain-of-function and tumor suppressor genes with loss-offunction, respectively. Oncogenes promote cell growth and
survival. Activating mutations in the Ras protein at codons
12, 13, and 61 [52, 53] promote oncogenesis. In contrast,
tumor suppressor genes arrest cell division or induce
apoptosis. Cancer typically results from genetic alterations
involving a combination of uncontrolled growth and
failed anti-proliferative cellular responses, underscoring
the involvement of the cellular signaling network. That
the cellular network is chief player is also indicated
by experiments: genome-wide analysis of DNA copy
number and somatic mutation frequencies in melanoma
BRAF data [54] revealed significant differences. These
allowed classification into four groups with 70% accuracy,
indicating that distinct genetic pathways result in distinct
melanoma cancer types. Another example concerns PI3K,
whose link to cancer is among the strongest in the cell
[55, 56]. PI3K integrates growth and survival signals from
RTKs and Ras to the mTOR, MAPK, FOXO1 and GSK3β
signaling pathways. Class I PI3Ks have a regulatory
subunit (p85 α, β, or γ) and a catalytic subunit (p110 α,
β, or γ). Constitutive activation of the PI3Ks in the p110α
subunit is observed in 30% in the human breast, colon and
endometrial cancer patient population. A subpopulation
(~10%) of colorectal cancer patients presents inactivating
mutations in the p85 regulatory subunit. While
imidazopyridine-based drugs J124 and J128 strongly
inhibited growth in vitro in the nM range as well as in
medulloblastoma cell lines, only modest effects on tumor
growth inhibition were observed in vivo. These data beg
the question of which PI3Kα-dependent processes impact
the spread of the primary tumor. Thus, linking genetic
alterations to signaling pathways in cancer cells is the very
first step toward targeted therapeutic development [57],
as well as in battling drug resistance [58]. Cancer cells
exploit redundant pathways to overcome drug action.
Cancer is a complex genetic disease. Hannahan
and Weinberg formulated a useful framework consisting
of a set of common capabilities acquired by cancer cells
through mutagenesis [59]. These include sustaining
proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors,
resisting cell death, enabling replicative immortality,
inducing angiogenesis, activating invasion and metastasis.
These hallmarks reflect genome instability, which
generates genetic diversity, and inflammation. Recently
they extended the concept of cancer biology by including
two enabling characteristics of reprogramming energy

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Types of Cellular and Molecular Events
Leading to Cancer
Cancer-causing scenarios are diverse; they include
genetic and epigenetic changes in cancer cell genomes.
Genetic events cover large scale aberrations in the genome
such as gain-of-function or loss-of-function mutations,
deletions, fusions, rearrangements and gene duplications,
such as CNVs (copy number variations) [62–66]. Tumor
suppressor genes may be deleted and regions harboring
oncogenes may be amplified, as for example for p16 and
myc, respectively [67, 68]. Rearrangements, inversions
and translocations, can result in tumor-driving fusion
products as in the case of BCR-Abl [69–71] and the
Philadelphia Chromosome [72, 73] as well as fusion
events in solid tumors [74, 75]. Epigenetic alterations
do not involve changes in the nucleotide sequence
[76–78]. They influence gene expression through
chromatin reorganization and gene accessibility, via
alteration of DNA methylation patterns, silencing,
posttranscriptional regulation of signaling molecules
by microRNAs, histone modifications, alternative RNA
splicing, and more. Epigenetics can work through overor under- gene expression. Cancer-causing scenarios
similarly include over/under protein degradation. All
bypass normal growth controls.
Computational cancer biology focuses on analyzing
molecules and processes that play a major role in cancer,
including those above. It uses genome-scale measurements
(genomic, proteomic, and metabolomic) to assemble
models of cellular processes and disease which can
provide blueprints of normal and diseased cell functions.
Methods often rely on high-throughput data. They aim
at relationships between molecular characteristics of
cells, such as how do genome aberrations and changes in
copy number, a result of increased genome instability in
cancer, affect gene expression as well as elements such
as miRNAs, and how the changes affect the function
of related proteins. Considerable research focuses on
biomarkers, at the genome, transcriptome or proteome
levels that are prognostic of cancer progression or
predictive of response to specific therapeutic agents [59,
60, 79]. Interpreting copy number data, the effect of
genome changes on the transcriptome and proteome level

7287

Oncotarget

profiles, epigenetic changes, somatic evolution, gene sets
in specific cancer types, mutational landscape statistics,
such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and data
that measure the effects of drugs are major strategies in
computational cancer biology.
Collectively, these embrace diverse areas of
research. Below, we address key questions in cancer
biology that relate to structure. From the standpoint
of structural biology, two problems stand out: the
mechanisms of mutations and deciphering the network that
governs cellular response under physiological conditions
and its rewiring in cancer. The examples below underscore
the limitations of an approach based solely on genetics,
and the significance of complementing it by structural
insight in making treatment decisions.

dampen the signaling flux and are observed in several
cancers [85]. However, use of small molecule inhibitors
of this pathway remains limited due to the presence of
compensatory feedback loops such that inhibition of one
molecule often leads to activation of another resulting in
chemoresistance. Via negative feedback mTOR activation
inhibits PI3K proliferative signaling. The inhibition (e.g.
by rapamycin) increases PI3K/Akt/PKB activity, crippling
its antiproliferative effects [86, 87]. Another example is
provided by the Ras protein, an activator of a number of
signaling pathways, including Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk (Fig. 1).
Oncogenic Ras mutations (involving G12, G13 and Q61)
abolish the GTP→GDP hydrolysis reaction, retaining Ras
in a constitutive GTP-loaded active state [88].

Cancer Can Hijack Signal Integration

Cancer Cell Signaling Deregulates the
Cellular Network

Each protein (node) in the cellular network
receives concomitant signals from more than one source,
e.g. phosphorylation and a binding event, multiple posttranslational modifications (PTMs), or two or more
binding events. Each event is an allosteric effector. The
recipient protein node integrates the incoming signals and
transmits an output response, which reflects its resultant
conformational distribution. The mechanisms of signal
integration and output response are expressed by proteins
forming or quenching interactions [89]. There are three
possible mechanisms to switch a node from an OFF state
to an ON state [89, 90]: (i) incremental activation by a
graded switch, with full activation requiring all events.
Src kinases, which belong to the nonreceptor tyrosine
kinase family, can provide an example. Activation takes
place through dephosphorylation of the C-terminal tail,
phosphorylation of the activation loop, binding of a
ligand to the SH2 domain, and binding of ligands to the
SH3 domain. Each event leads to a higher level of activity.
(ii) AND-gate, an all-or-none switch with only two types
of responses: inactivity or full activity. All signaling
events are required for activation. The Tec family kinases,
where both phosphorylation of the loop and intramolecular
binding of the SH2-kinase linker to the kinase are required
for activation provide an example. (iii) OR-gate, an all-ornone switch with two types of responses, where one set of
events is sufficient for full activation. Syk tyrosine kinase
activation, which takes place by either phosphorylation
in the SH2-kinase linker or by binding of phosphorylated
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs
(ITAMs), provides an example. The presence of both
stimuli does not enhance the kinase activity beyond each
stimulus alone. Structural data on the ON- and OFF- states
are required to annotate the logic gate type. However,
in the absence of experimental data, assigning the logic
gate type is challenging. Oncogenic and drug resistance
mutations interfere with native signal integration resulting
in loss of control. To constitutively activate a node in the

Proliferation can result from upstream or
downstream deregulation of signaling. Upstream signaling
can be perturbed by overexpression of growth factors
[80,  81], elevated levels of receptors at the cancer cell
surface, somatic mutations in the receptors that result
in structural changes that facilitate ligand-independent
firing, and constitutive activation of proteins in signaling
pathways downstream, which bypass ligand-mediated
receptor activation. One example is Protein kinase C (PKC)
which activates the MEK-ERK pathway, independent of
Ras activation and dependent on Raf [82]. Downstream
mutations are also common: 40% of human melanomas
contain mutations in the B-Raf protein, constitutively
activating signaling through the mitogen-activated protein
(MAP)-kinase pathway [83]. Another example concerns
drug resistant mutations in Raf’s catalytic domain leading
to Ras-independent Raf dimerization [84]. Cancer typically
involves co-occurring mutations.
Deregulation typically takes place by interfering
with molecular checkpoint switches which control the
transitions between and within cell cycle phases. Under
normal conditions, multiprotein switches generate robust
transitions and trigger stable oscillations. The scales are
tipped to cancer when the switch is abolished [57]. To
capture the protein in its physiological environment, we
consider proteins as nodes in the cellular network. Their
switches are controlled by two inherent and related factors:
the network motif and the signal integration mechanism.
One example of the effect of network motif concerns
the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway (Fig. 1). PTEN, a tumor
suppressor gene, negatively regulates the pathway through
its lipid phosphatase activity. It counteracts PI3-kinase by
degrading its phosphatidylinositol (3, 4, 5) trisphosphate
(PIP3) product, thereby keeping a check on cell growth
and proliferation. Loss-of-function PTEN mutants, or
underexpression due to promoter methylation fail to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7288

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Ras signaling pathways. Ras signaling is involved in numerous cellular functions, including cell proliferation, apoptosis,

migration, fate specification, and differentiation. A key Ras effector pathway is the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Raf-MEKERK pathway. EGF binds to the extracellular domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK).
The signal is transmitted through the transmembrane domain resulting in EGFR dimerization and activation. Activated EGFR recruits the
son of sevenless (SOS), a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF), to its phosphorylated C-terminal tail via the adaptor proteins, SH2adaptor protein (SHC) and growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2). GEF exchanges GDP by GTP, activating Ras. Active, GTPloaded Ras dimerizes and binds Raf, thereby promoting Raf dimerization and activation. Active Raf dimer phosphorylates and activates
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 and 2 (MEK1/2), which induces ERK1/2 activation. Transcription factor Elk-1 is among ERK1/2
many downstream phosphorylation targets. Elk-1 binds to its cofactor, a dimer of serum response factor (SRF), leading to transcription
activation and cell proliferation. Active GTP-bound Ras regulates a number of signaling pathways; among these is phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K). PI3K is a heterodimer with a regulatory (p85) and catalytic (p110) subunits (not shown here). RTKs recruit the p85
subunit of PI3K. Ras activates p110 independently of p85 [172]. PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3), a process which can be reversed by the action of phosphatase and tensin homologue
(PTEN). PIP3 recruits Phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) that phosphorylates a serine/threonine kinase, Akt (also known as
PKB, protein kinase B) in the plasma membrane. This further induces the activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex,
one of the major pathways leading to cell growth. This pathway plays important roles in Ras-mediated cell survival and proliferation.

cellular network, oncogenic mutations are likely to be
more frequent and effective in the OR gate than in the
Graded and AND gates, with single (or fewer) mutations
hijacking control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Oncogenic and drug resistance mutations can
hijack the signal integration mechanism resulting in
loss of control. One example relates to deregulation of
the Ras-Raf-Mek-Erk pathway by mutations in B-RAF.
7289

Oncotarget

Raf  activation requires formation of an asymmetric
dimer configuration. Under normal physiological
conditions,
Ras-GTP-membrane
recruitment,
dephosphorylation of Ser259, and dissociation of
14–3–3 result in stabilization of an open conformation
of Raf monomer, which favors dimer formation. Gainof-function mutations in the B-RAF gene, the most
oncogenic of which is B-RAFV600E, induce ERK activity
independently of the normal EGFR-Ras signals [84,
91–93], by allosterically shifting the population [94–
98] of the ensemble toward dimer-favored monomer
conformation. Vemurafenib treatment results in deletion
mutant p61B-RAFV600E with enhanced dimerization
and activity through a similar allosteric mechanism.
It is also possible that binding of the drug to one
p61B-RAFV600E monomer inhibits drug binding to the
other, resulting in one active monomer per dimer and
abolishing drug resistance.

GTP hydrolysis, thus retaining Ras in a constitutively
activated state (Fig. 2). Nonetheless, why G12C and
G12V K-Ras mutations in lung adenocarcinoma
preferentially activate the Ras’ RalGDS pathway,
whereas G12D prefers the Raf/mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) and PI3K pathways [105, 106] is still
unclear. One possibility is that allostery plays a role [104,
107–110]. Besides their direct effects, these mutations
are established to induce allosteric effects at the effector
binding site. Q61 is a key allosteric  residue [111,
112], as is Y64 [113]. Another question concerns the
mode of the specific inhibition of K-Ras4B, a highly
oncogenic splice variant  of the K-Ras isoform, by
calmodulin and its enigmatic signaling consequences.
To understand the mechanism of oncogenic mutations
requires conformational detail, achievable with the
help of molecular dynamics simulations. EGFR
provides remarkable example [103, 104, 114–116].
However, questions such as why mutations in certain
isoforms which are highly similar in sequence and
structure are much more frequent than in others may
not necessarily relate to protein conformations; instead
the answer may  lie in over- (under-) expression as
could be in the case of K- versus H- and N-Ras [117,
118], underscoring the importance of the three types of
data above.
Identifying the location of the mutations and their
stabilizing/destabilizing actions may provide clues to
their ‘driver’ or ‘passenger’ properties [119–123]. Highthroughput somatic missense mutations detected in tumor
sequencing can be mapped onto structures to provide
first-hand information. In protein-protein interfaces
they may abolish a specific interaction or enhance it
[124, 125]. Conformational analysis may distinguish
between tumorigenic ‘driver’ mutations from their neutral
passenger counterparts.
The single most confounding question is how
a cancer cell escaping drug treatment is able to rapidly
adapt and rewire its network toward uncontrolled
growth. Another, on a different level, is how proteins
escape degradation. Tumor cells avoid apoptosis and
promote survival in a number of ways [126–128];
among these is loss of TP53 tumor suppressor function,
up-regulating antiapoptotic (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL) or downregulate proapoptotic (Bax, Bim, Puma) regulators,
aborting the extrinsic ligand-induced death pathway and
interfering with programmed cell death by shifting the
balance in favor of survival [129]. They may also evade
the immune surveillance. Inflammation can support
the tumor microenvironment [130]. Constructing the
complex structural pathways [131–137] would further
aid therapeutic targeting to mitigate drug resistance [58].
Negative feedback loops can recoil cancer. For example,
there are many ways to activate Erk through receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs), T-cell receptors (TCRs), and

Key Questions from the Structural Standpoint
The model of cancer argues that the first
consideration is that the experimental data include
information on whether the malignancy is the outcome
of (i) over- or under expression; if overexpression
it can be reflected for example in a higher gene copy
number or differential regulation of gene expression.
(ii) Normal expression, however with gain- or lossof-function mutations. Most oncogenic mutations
result in gain-of-function; loss-of-function mutations
can take place in repressors with a similar outcome.
(iii) Aberrant protein degradation. The first step involves
verification of the oncogenic mutation through available
structural data; if absent, via high quality modeled
structures. This allows approaching questions such as
what is the mechanism of the oncogenic mutation on
the protein conformational level and how it affects its
interactions [99–101] which are the oncogenic ‘driver’
versus ‘passenger’ mutations and why [102]; why a
specific mutation can have a more profound effect
when the protein is bound to a specific effector as in
the case of Raf influencing Ras’ intrinsic hydrolysis;
how the mutations affect the circuitry and its rewiring
in different types of cancers and under different
(individuals, tissues, cell types) conditions; and related
to this why specific mutations may activate specific
pathways; which are the isoform-specific pathways,
and how do these work. Further, cancers often involve
multiple different clones impeding therapeutics; do these
collaborate and if so how.
A mutation can constitutively activate (or
repress) by stabilizing the active (or destabilizing the
inactive) state, as in the case of the EGFR [103, 104].
Alternatively, it may block a reaction, as in the case
of Ras G12, G13 and Q61 mutations which hamper

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7290

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The structural basis of an oncogenic mutation. The figure illustrates how an oncogenic mutation can work on the

structural level. Ras the most common mutated oncogene in cancer is shown as an example. Wild type Ras acts as a binary signal switch
cycling between active and inactive states. Ras only binds its effectors in its GTP-bound active state. Ras is activated by the son of sevenless
(SOS) nucleotide exchange factor (GEF). In contrast, the GTP→GDP hydrolysis, helped by GTPase-activating protein (GAP) inactivates
Ras. A key oncogenic mechanism aborts the hydrolysis reaction, keeping Ras in a constitutively active GTP-bound state. Residues most
prone to these mutations are G12, G13 and Q61. Mutation of G12 K-Ras is most prevalent and oncogenic in colon cancer [173]. G12C
and G12V K-Ras mutants activate the Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator (RaLGDS) pathway, whereas G12D preferentially
activates the PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways [105, 106]. The reason for this differential preferred activation is still unclear. Figure
(A) sketches Ras regulation under normal conditions (on the left hand-side) and constitutive activation (right hand-side). The constitutively
active conformation of Ras harboring these mutations does not permit formation of the transition state required for catalysis upon binding
to GAP. Under normal conditions, the flexibility of G12 allows the Arg789 side-chain (Arg finger) on the finger loop of GAP to insert into
Ras active site. However, G12 mutants with bulkier or charged residue prevent the Arg finger insertion, blocking the transition state with
GAP [174]. It is also likely that these mutations allosterically differentially affect the effector binding sites (not shown). (B) This panel
illustrates native Ras in complex with GAP, poised for the catalytic reaction. The crystal structure of GDP-H-Ras/RasGAP complex (PDB
code 1WQ1) is remodeled with the GTP-K-Ras crystal structure (PDB code 3GFT). The finger loop of RasGAP is in blue (taken from the
complex, PDB code 1WQ1). The Arg finger is highlighted as a blue stick, positioned at the Ras active site, near the G12 residue in green
mesh. (C) This panel clarifies why mutation of G12 prevents hydrolysis through a steric clash mechanism in which the G12C residue in
green mesh prevents the insertion of Arg finger. Crystal structure of G12C GTP-H-Ras mutant (PDB code 4L9W) is remodeled to G12C
GTP-K-Ras mutant.

Redundant Pathways and Therapeutics

GPCRs. Blocking EGFR may lead to other pathways
taking over (Fig. 3). Figuring out the network and its
robust regulatory motifs and circuitry requires structural
data. Given its sheer complexity and its multiple celland tissue-wide effects, this is perhaps the paramount
challenge facing structural biology.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Deliberately targeting specific proteins has been a
major strategy. The emergence of drug resistance fostered
an alternative, involving drug combinations either for
the same protein or to a lesser extent different proteins

7291

Oncotarget

Figure 3: A structural view of redundant pathways taking over during drug resistance. Ras is normally activated in

response to the binding of extracellular ligands to various receptors. Among these is epidermal growth factor (EGF) binding to its cognate
receptor EGFR, as shown in Figure 1. Upon EGF binding to the extracellular domain of EGFR, the intracellular domain of EGFR forms an
asymmetric dimer in the cytosol. EGFR and its ERBB receptor family members can form homo- or hetero-dimers. Downstream signaling
proceeds through Ras in the Raf-MEK-ERK and/or PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathways. The figure provides a sequence of events induced by
a constitutive mutation taking place in EGFR, keeping it in an active state even in the absence of its ligand. Drug treatment abolishes
EGFR signaling; however, a drug resistant mutation leads to overexpression of another receptor, populating an otherwise low-activity
second receptor. (A)  L858R mutation in EGFR kinase (the circled R) causes non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by constitutively
activating its kinase domain [175]. Under normal conditions EGFR largely populates its inactive state. The mutation shifts the free
energy landscape of EGFR stabilizing its active with respect to its inactive conformation even in the absence of a bound EGF. (B) Drugs
such as the 4-anilinoquinazolines gefitinib (Iressa) [176] and erlotinib (Tarceva) [177] can inhibit the activity of EGFR L858R mutant.
(C) However, tumors develop resistance, in this case one possibility is through overexpression of MET [178]. Overexpressed MET leads
to phosphorylation of ERBB3 which interacts with ERBB2. The ERBB2/ERBB3 receptor can activate Ras and thus its PI3K-Akt signaling
pathway, independent of EGFR. A key question is how the blockage of an addicted growth pathway is able to rewire the oncogenic cellular
network within a short period, leading to MET’s overexpression and ERBB3 activation.

albeit usually in the same pathway [138]. Two strategies
can further expand the repository. The first, ‘allo-network
drugs’ can bolster the repertoire of targets with proteins
that can work by transmitting the effects to target proteins
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in the pathway allosterically across protein-protein
interfaces [139–142]. The second accounts for redundant
pathways. Compiling a repertoire of combinations of
redundant pathways and targets within them would
7292

Oncotarget

facilitate systematic evaluation. A sufficiently robust
compilation can uncover and stockpile ‘drug cocktails’
[58] to alleviate the almost-inevitable relapse.
Growing experimental evidence supports the
partially redundant signaling pathways (Fig. 3). Thus, a
targeted therapy inhibiting one pathway in a tumor may
not completely shut off cancer cell survival. Surviving
cancer cells adapt to the therapy through mutations,
epigenetic reprogramming, or remodeling of the stromal
microenvironment, eventually provoking renewed
tumor growth, abrogating the drug’s efficacy. Since the
number of parallel signaling pathways supporting a given
function can be expected to be limited, targeting all of
these therapeutically, through a strategy such as the one
described above can be achievable. However, while in
principle possible, compiling the repertoire of parallel
pathways accounting for negative feedback loops is a yet
another highly challenging task confronting structural
biology [58].

structural data can be a first step toward a ‘pathway
drug cocktail’ [58]. The National Cancer Institute has
published a summary of drug combinations, as well
as common combinations for colon and rectal cancer.
5,000 combinations of 100 existing cancer drugs have
been tested. High-throughput screening techniques led
to 150  drugs that were genotype-selective for Ras or
B-Raf mutations. These were searched for pairs that could
inhibit metastasized melanoma. While such exhaustive
strategies can obtain beneficial results, a strategy based on
more structural information of the cellular network may
be expected to allow for more accurate and deliberate
targeting of specific cancers at a fraction of the cost.
Finally, structural data can be critical in elucidating
mutations that on their own are ‘passengers’; however,
when combined become ‘drivers’. To date, a mutation
has been classified as either a ‘driver’ or a ‘passenger’.
However, the AND and Graded logic gate integration
mechanisms discussed above (but not OR) argue that
allosteric mutations can work like allosteric binding
events cooperating to constitutively activate (or, inactivate
in the case of a repressor) a cellular network node [89].
We reason that whether a mutation is a ‘passenger’ or a
‘driver’ is likely to depend on the mutational landscape
of the protein. This is in line with successive stepwise
cancer development and progression [145–150]. Preexisting latent mutational population can combinatorially
merge with other newly acquired genetic alterations.
This can be tested experimentally and statistically. In
principle, structural analysis should be able to annotate
the mutational data and identify ‘latent driver’ mutations.
Forecasting which existing ‘passengers’ will turn into
‘drivers’ and upon which mutational changes could
establish more powerful treatments.

Outline of the Components of the Strategy
Mapping guidelines implementing the structural
basis for treatment is not straightforward. Broadly, two
elements are needed: (i) a detailed structural model of
the oncogenic driver mutations and (ii) a repertoire of
redundant pathways in the cell to allow judicious ‘drug
cocktail’ combinations.
For the first, via sequence alignments the mutation
can be identified. Molecular dynamics simulations
can verify its mechanism. EGFR provides a good
example [57]. The kinase catalytic domain is allosterically
activated by formation of an asymmetric dimer in which
the C-lobe of the ‘activator’ kinase domain interacts with
the N-lobe of a second ‘receiver’ kinase domain [143]. In
contrast, in symmetric dimers, both kinases are in inactive
conformations. Unliganded EGFR fluctuates between
the monomer and dimer states [144]. Structural data
indicated that in normal cells the kinase domain of EGFR
is mostly populated either in a stabilized autoinhibited
monomer or in an inactive symmetric dimer, making
the formation of the asymmetric dimer possible, but not
favorable. EGF binding, induces a conformational change
in the extracellular domain which facilitates the kinase
asymmetric dimer association. Oncogenic mutations in
the juxtamembrane region that stabilize the dimer (such
as Δ746–750 or L858R) can either destabilize the inactive
conformation and/or stabilize the active conformation as
shown by simulations [114].
For the second, which pathways to combine (to
avoid alternative routes by drug resistant mutations,
Fig. 3) and which protein targets to select within these
(to minimize toxicity) present a daunting challenge.
An organized redundant pathway resource based on

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Intrinsic and Extrinsic Influence
Redundant pathways can be intrinsic or extrinsic.
At a higher level, the signaling circuitry describes the
intercommunication between multiple distinct cell types
that collaborate to progressively form malignant stages
of cancer. It also includes signaling between microbiota
and the human cell. Recent data indicate the tight linkage,
arguing for studies of a metaorganism at the structural
regulatory level.
Compelling evidence points to tumors as highly
heterogeneous populations derived from a common
progenitor [151]. The multiple cancer cell clones and
combinations of co-existing mutations in the same cell
including splicing variants of the same isoform [152],
may be the reason why current pharmaceutical strategies
involving targeted magic bullets toward a specific protein
and mutation not only fail but may incite more resistant
aggressive cells. By accounting for populations of cells,

7293

Oncotarget

the complex dynamic circuitry, and population shifts in
response to changing conditions, computational structural
biology may foment and chart new territory [153]. Even
living things must conform to the laws of quantum
mechanics and structural chemistry.

mutations is indeed the informatics-definition platforms
and the associated clinical trials; however, that definition
should improve to account for the latent driver repository
and redundant signaling pathways in cancer prognosis
and drug cocktail treatment regimes. It is difficult to
estimate the percentage of patients that would benefit from
improved decision platforms incorporating latent drivers.
Even though it can be low compared to the high frequency
of driver mutations – in cancer treatment decisions they
cannot be overlooked.

The Structural Basis for Improving Decision
Platforms for the Clinic
Treatment decisions are based on data and its
interpretation. Data sources, types and volume increase
rapidly. This is particularly the case in cancer. Not only
is there a rapid increase in the number of sequenced
cancer genomes across a population, but in addition,
the mutational rates and the microenvironment evolve
rapidly. The NIH has recognized the need for assembling
and organizing platforms for ‘big data’ – and within such
a framework, cognitive capabilities that ‘understand’
the context, uncover answers, and continuously learn
from experiences – in the battle against cancer. The
unprecedented breadth and depth of clinical oncology
data and knowledge guide informed decisions. However,
extracting actionable insights from this information still
poses significant challenges. Beyond the valuable day-today patient care data and clinical trials – often trapped in
disparate and remote databases and established routines for
identification of key genomic factors – there is a need to
step back and reconsider basic premises. It is clear that the
identified driver mutations in genomic cancer screens are
of paramount importance. The question is – are we certain
that mutations labeled as passengers are expendable?
Biology has long taught us that it does not follow a binary
‘Yes’ or ‘No’ definition; conditions matter and these work
by shifting the expression of mutations on the structural –
and thus functional – level. A mutation can be classified
into a driver, latent driver which can be expressed in
combination with other mutation, and true passengers.
Because latent driver mutations pre-exist in the cancer
mutational load, their detection equips the oncologist with
a mechanistic perception, permitting prediction of the
potential cancer evolution. A comprehensive gene testing to
evaluate genetic changes in a patient’s tumor can thus help
oncologists to more effectively manage treatment options.
Early on most tumors were treated according to
what they looked like under the microscope; over the
past decade focus shifted to the molecular reasons for
why cancer grows. There is a consensus that informed
cancer medicine can help clinicians tailor anticancer
treatment to individual patient tumor characteristics. This
represents a significant shift in the ability to understand,
and respond to, vast amounts of ‘big data’ and may have
enormous potential to improve decision making for health
care. Here we take a further step toward forecasting
tumor evolution. Our thesis is that the basis of actionable

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Examples of Low Frequency Mutations
Acting as Drivers
Two recent examples related to the AKT1 gene
illustrate that low frequency mutations can act as
drivers mimicking the same structural mechanisms,
underscoring the need to reconsider decision strategies
based solely on cancer genome statistics. Mutational
activation of the PI3-kinase-Akt-mTOR pathway is the
most frequent oncogenic event in breast cancer. The
hotspot AKT1 E17K mutation occurs in approximately
3% of primary breast cancers. The mutation confers
constitutive plasma membrane localization in the
absence of growth factor stimulation, leading to
increased Akt1 activation and phosphorylation of
downstream target proteins. Functional analysis of
large scale breast cancer sequencing studies identified
six non-hotspot AKT1 pleckstrin homology domain
mutants. Three of these cause constitutive activation of
Akt1 [154]. Of note, like the hotspot E17K mutation,
these mutants confer constitutive membrane localization
of Akt1. These same three mutants also showed
oncogenic activity in a cellular transformation assay.
The other three mutants were inactive. These findings
not only validate novel driver mutations in AKT1 and
extend the number and type of mutations that activate
the PI3-kinase pathway in human breast cancers, they
also point out that genetics-based identification of driver
mutations is incomplete. Non-hotspot, lower frequency
mutations are not necessarily passengers, and may act
via similar mechanisms. A second study discovered
somatic mutations at the pleckstrin homology (PH)
domain-kinase domain (KD) interface. These mutations
abolish the interactions between the domains which are
essential for maintaining AKT in an inactive state. These
AKT1 somatic mutants are constitutively active, leading
to oncogenic signaling. Also, the AKT1 mutants are not
effectively inhibited by allosteric AKT inhibitors, in
agreement with the requirement for an intact PH-KD
interface for allosteric inhibition [155]. Allosteric drugs
emerge as an advantageous therapeutic strategy due to
their higher specificity and thus lower toxicity [156].

7294

Oncotarget

CONCLUSIONS

repertoires of redundant pathways combinations, may be
helped by such innovative concepts.

Personalized treatment decisions are fraught with
bottlenecks. The genetic basis for cancer treatment rests on
knowledge of the personal cancer mutation spectrum [157]
and its comparison with known statistical trends across
primary and metastasized tumors. However, distinguishing
between driver and passenger mutations is difficult and it
is still unclear how many mutations are active at any given
stage of a tumor.
Consideration of pathways through which resistance
can take place is not straightforward either. Pathways may
appear simple and linear; however, this is not the case,
particularly not in the complex circuitry of cell survival,
differentiation, growth and death. That a simple pathway
diagram is not good enough can be seen from the Raf
dimer example [158–160]. Pathways are also poorly
understood at the level of detail required to shut them
down effectively. Coupled to this is the deployment of the
immune system. Innate immunity pathways are intimately
linked to proliferative signaling, energy metabolism,
angiogenesis, invasion, and survival pathways, sharing
major cellular circuits [124, 161–167].
The structural basis for cancer treatment decisions
focuses on unveiling the mechanism of the mutation on
the conformational level and deciphering the redundant
pathways that can be rewired in drug resistant mutants
to increase the likelihood of avoiding relapse. Decision
making rests on therapy combinations based on this
information. ‘Latent driver’ mutations can be thought of
not only as bearing on the question of why common adult
tumors, such as pancreatic, breast and brain cancer, often
have three to six mutated genes while several tumors have
only one or two driver gene mutations [168], but also on
how the blocking of an addicted growth pathway is able to
rewire the oncogenic cellular network within a short time
period in drug resistance.
Cancer
research
encompasses
phenotypic
complexities; however, these may manifest a small set
of underlying organizing principles [60]. Computational
structural biology is a powerful quantitative science. It
combines biology and chemistry/physics of single molecules
and their interactions in atomic detail and on a large scale.
Together with experiment and statistical ‘big data’ genetic
and clinical analysis, it may help in laying the foundation
for new paradigms in the biological sciences to elucidate
the basis of cancer and abate malignant transformations.
Combining the structural basis, the genetic basis and clinical
data can revitalize personalized treatment regimes.
Matching targets for selective cancer therapy is
difficult [169, 170]. Nonetheless, recently strategies
have been proposed to restrict the combinatorial space,
minimize toxicity, and increase the precision and power of
such restrictive combinations, altogether leading to drugs
that could be tested in clinical trials [171]. Leveraging
the enhanced identification of drug targets, including
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project has been funded in whole or in part
with Federal funds from the National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, under contract number
HHSN261200800001E. The content of this publication
does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of
the Department of Health and Human Services, nor
does mention of trade names, commercial products, or
organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.
This research was supported (in part) by the Intramural
Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute,
Center for Cancer Research.

REFERENCES
1.	 Yakhini Z, and Jurisica I. Cancer computational biology.
BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12:120.
2.	 Hogeweg P. The roots of bioinformatics in theoretical
­biology. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011; 7:e1002021.
3.	 Winter C, Kristiansen G, Kersting S, Roy J, Aust D,
Knosel T, Rummele P, Jahnke B, Hentrich V, Ruckert F,
Niedergethmann M, Weichert W, Bahra M and et al.
Google goes cancer: Improving outcome prediction for
cancer patients by network-based ranking of marker genes.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2012; 8:e1002511.
4.	 Mathew JP, Taylor BS, Bader GD, Pyarajan S, Antoniotti M,
Chinnaiyan AM, Sander C, Burakoff SJ, and Mishra B.
From bytes to bedside: Data integration and computational
biology for translational cancer research. PLoS Comput
Biol. 2007; 3:e12.
5.	 Bilal E, Dutkowski J, Guinney J, Jang IS, Logsdon BA,
Pandey G, Sauerwine BA, Shimoni Y, Moen ­Vollan HK,
Mecham BH, Rueda OM, Tost J, Curtis C and et al.
Improving breast cancer survival analysis through
­competition-based multidimensional modeling. PLoS
­Comput Biol. 2013; 9:e1003047.
6.	 Payne PR. Chapter 1: Biomedical knowledge integration.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2012; 8:e1002826.
7.	 Raphael BJ. Chapter 6: Structural variation and medical
genomics. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012; 8:e1002821.
8.	 Nussinov R. The significance of the 2013 nobel prize in
chemistry and the challenges ahead. PLoS Comput Biol.
2014; 10:e1003423.
9.	 Grove CS and Vassiliou GS. Acute myeloid leukaemia:
A paradigm for the clonal evolution of cancer? Dis Model
Mech. 2014; 7:941–951.
10.	 Resendis-Antonio O, Gonzalez-Torres C, ­Jaime-Munoz G,
Hernandez-Patino CE, Salgado-Munoz CF. ­Modeling
metabolism: A window toward a comprehensive
7295

Oncotarget

i­nterpretation of networks in cancer. Semin Cancer Biol.
2014: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2014.1004.1003.

through collective rate control. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;
10  e1003438.

11.	 Jones JA and Byrd JC. How will b-cell-receptor-­targeted
therapies change future cll therapy? Blood. 2014; 123:
1455–1460.

26.	 Zinovyev A, Kuperstein I, Barillot E and Heyer WD.
­Synthetic lethality between gene defects affecting a single
non-essential molecular pathway with reversible steps.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2013; 9:e1003016.

12.	 Fratta E, Sigalotti L, Covre A, Parisi G, Coral S and Maio M.
Epigenetics of melanoma: Implications for immune-based
therapies. Immunotherapy. 2013; 5:1103–1116.

27.	 Cheng WY, Ou Yang TH and Anastassiou D. ­Biomolecular
events in cancer revealed by attractor metagenes. PLoS
Comput Biol. 2013; 9:e1002920.

13.	 Sette C. Alternative splicing programs in prostate cancer.
Int J Cell Biol. 2013; 2013:458727.

28.	 Thomas LF and Saetrom P. Single nucleotide polymorphisms can create alternative polyadenylation signals and
affect gene expression through loss of microrna-regulation.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2012; 8:e1002621.

14.	 Sutton LA, Agathangelidis A, Belessi C, Darzentas N,
Davi  F, Ghia P, Rosenquist R and Stamatopoulos K.
­Antigen selection in b-cell lymphomas-tracing the evidence.
Semin ­Cancer Biol. 2013; 23:399–409.

29.	 Hsu HY, Lin TY, Wu YC, Tsao SM, Hwang PA, Shih YW,
Hsu J. Fucoidan inhibition of lung cancer in vivo and in
vitro: Role of the smurf 2-dependent ubiquitin proteasome
pathway in tgfbeta receptor degradation. Oncotarget. 2014:
in press.

15.	 Misso G, Zappavigna S, Castellano M, De Rosa G,
Di ­Martino MT, Tagliaferri P, Tassone P and Caraglia M.
Emerging pathways as individualized therapeutic target of
multiple myeloma. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2013; 13 Suppl 1:
S95–109.

30.	 Zatula N, Wiese M, Bunzendahl J, Birchmeier W, Perske C,
Bleckmann A, Brembeck FH. The bcl9–2 proto-oncogene
governs estrogen receptor alpha expression in breast
­tumorigenesis. Oncotarget. 2014: in press

16.	 Garagnani P, Pirazzini C and Franceschi C. Colorectal
­cancer microenvironment: Among nutrition, gut ­microbiota,
inflammation and epigenetics. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;
19:765–778.

31.	 Tsai YS, Lai CL, Lai CH, Chang KH, Wu K, Tseng SF,
Fazli L, Gleave M, Xiao G, Gandee L, Sharifi N, Moro L,
Tzai TS and et al. The role of homeostatic regulation between
tumor suppressor dab2ip and oncogenic skp2 in prostate cancer growth. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:6425–6436.

17.	 Fendler B and Atwal G. Systematic deciphering of cancer
genome networks. Yale J Biol Med. 2012; 85:339–345.
18.	 Swanton C. Intratumor heterogeneity: Evolution through
space and time. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:4875–4882.

32.	 Miller MS, Schmidt-Kittler O, Bolduc DM, Brower ET,
Chaves-Moreira D, Allaire M, Kinzler KW, Jennings IG,
Thompson PE, Cole PA, Amzel LM, Vogelstein B and
Gabelli SB. Structural basis of nsh2 regulation and lipid
binding in pi3kalpha. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:5198–5208.

19.	 Sleeman JP. The metastatic niche and stromal progression.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31:429–440.
20.	 Shibata D. Molecular tumor clocks to study the evolution of
drug resistance. Mol Pharm. 2011; 8:2050–2054.
21.	 Manfredi JJ. The mdm2-p53 relationship evolves: Mdm2
swings both ways as an oncogene and a tumor suppressor.
Genes Dev. 2010; 24:1580–1589.

33.	 Shin EA, Sohn EJ, Won G, Choi JU, Jeong M, Kim B,
Kim MJ and Kim SH. Upregulation of microrna135a-3p
and death receptor 5 plays a critical role in tanshinone i
sensitized prostate cancer cells to trail induced apoptosis.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:5624–5636.

22.	 Hoivik EA, Kusonmano K, Halle MK, Berg A, Wik  E,
­Werner HM, Petersen K, Oyan AM, Kalland KH,
­Krakstad C, Trovik J, Widschwendter M and Salvesen HB.
Hypomethylation of the ctcfl/boris promoter and aberrant
expression during endometrial cancer progression suggests
a role as an epi-driver gene. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:1052–1061.

34.	 Soutto M, Chen Z, Saleh MA, Katsha A, Zhu S, Zaika A,
Belkhiri A and El-Rifai W. Tff1 activates p53 through
down-regulation of mir-504 in gastric cancer. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:5663–5673.

23.	 D’Costa ZC, Higgins C, Ong CW, Irwin GW, Boyle D,
McArt DG, McCloskey K, Buckley NE, Crawford NT,
Thiagarajan L, Murray JT, Kennedy RD, Mulligan KA and
et al. Tbx2 represses cst6 resulting in uncontrolled legumain activity to sustain breast cancer proliferation: A novel
­cancer-selective target pathway with therapeutic opportunities. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:1609–1620.

35.	 Samartzis EP, Gutsche K, Dedes KJ, Fink D, Stucki  M
and Imesch P. Loss of arid1a expression sensitizes ­cancer
cells to pi3k- and akt-inhibition. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:5295–5303.
36.	 Shahbazi J, Scarlett CJ, Norris MD, Liu B, Haber M,
Tee AE, Carrier A, Biankin AV, London WB, ­Marshall GM,
Lock RB and Liu T. Histone deacetylase 2 and n-myc
reduce p53 protein phosphorylation at serine 46 by repressing gene transcription of tumor protein 53-induced nuclear
protein 1. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:4257–4268.

24.	 Colak R, Kim T, Michaut M, Sun M, Irimia M, Bellay J,
Myers CL, Blencowe BJ and Kim PM. Distinct types of
disorder in the human proteome: Functional ­implications
for alternative splicing. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;
9:e1003030.

37.	 Treude F, Kappes F, Fahrenkamp D, Muller-Newen G,
­Dajas-Bailador F, Kramer OH, Luscher B and ­Hartkamp J.

25.	 Verbruggen P, Heinemann T, Manders E, von Bornstaedt G,
van Driel R and Hofer T. Robustness of DNA repair
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7296

Oncotarget

Caspase-8-mediated par-4 cleavage is required for
­tnfalpha-induced apoptosis. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2988–2998.

review and meta-synthesis of primary qualitative research.
J Genet Couns. 2010; 19:330–342.

38.	 Le Grand M, Rovini A, Bourgarel-Rey V, Honore S,
­Bastonero S, Braguer D and Carre M. Ros-mediated eb1
phosphorylation through akt/gsk3beta pathway: Implication in cancer cell response to microtubule-targeting agents.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:3408–3423.

50.	 Euhus D. Genetic testing today. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014:
10.1245/s10434–10014–13906–10430
51.	 Wright GM, Do H, Weiss J, Alam NZ, Rathi V,
­Walkiewicz  M, John T, Russell PA and Dobrovic A.
Mapping of actionable mutations to histological subtype
domains in lung adenocarcinoma: Implications for precision medicine. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2107–2115.

39.	 Leontieva OV, Demidenko ZN and Blagosklonny MV.
Contact inhibition and high cell density deactivate the
mammalian target of rapamycin pathway, thus suppressing
the senescence program. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;
111:8832–8837.

52.	 Forbes SA, Bindal N, Bamford S, Cole C, Kok CY, Beare D,
Jia M, Shepherd R, Leung K, Menzies A, Teague  JW,
Campbell PJ, Stratton MR and et al. Cosmic: Mining complete cancer genomes in the catalogue of somatic mutations
in cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:D945–950.

40.	 Tran EJ, King MC and Corbett AH. Macromolecular transport between the nucleus and the cytoplasm: Advances in
mechanism and emerging links to disease. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2014; 1843:2784–2795.

53.	 Prior IA, Lewis PD and Mattos C. A comprehensive
survey of ras mutations in cancer. Cancer Res. 2012;
72:2457–2467.

41.	 Noguchi M, Hirata N and Suizu F. The links between akt
and two intracellular proteolytic cascades: ­Ubiquitination
and autophagy. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1846:
342–352.

54.	 Curtin JA, Fridlyand J, Kageshita T, Patel HN, Busam KJ,
Kutzner H, Cho KH, Aiba S, Brocker EB, LeBoit PE,
­Pinkel D and Bastian BC. Distinct sets of genetic alterations in melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 353:2135–2147.

42.	 Serviss JT, Johnsson P and Grander D. An emerging role
for long non-coding rnas in cancer metastasis. Front Genet.
2014; 5:234.

55.	 Zawel L. P3kalpha: A driver of tumor metastasis?
­Oncotarget. 2010; 1:315–316.

43.	 Janich P, Meng QJ and Benitah SA. Circadian control of
­tissue homeostasis and adult stem cells. Curr Opin Cell
Biol. 2014; 31C:8–15.

56.	 Schmidt-Kittler O, Zhu J, Yang J, Liu G, Hendricks W,
Lengauer C, Gabelli SB, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B,
Huso  DL and Zhou S. Pi3kalpha inhibitors that inhibit
metastasis. Oncotarget. 2010; 1:339–348.

44.	 Leiserson MD, Blokh D, Sharan R and Raphael BJ.
­Simultaneous identification of multiple driver pathways in
cancer. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013; 9:e1003054.

57.	 Tsai CJ and Nussinov R. The molecular basis of targeting
protein kinases in cancer therapeutics. Semin Cancer Biol.
2013; 23:235–242.

45.	 Jia P and Zhao Z. Varwalker: Personalized mutation network analysis of putative cancer genes from next-generation
sequencing data. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003460.

58.	 Nussinov R, Tsai CJ and Mattos C. ‘Pathway drug ­cocktail’:
Targeting ras signaling based on structural p
­athways.
Trends Mol Med. 2013; 19:695–704.

46.	 Patel JD, Krilov L, Adams S, Aghajanian C, Basch E,
Brose MS, Carroll WL, de Lima M, Gilbert MR, Kris MG,
Marshall JL, Masters GA, O’Day SJ and et al. Clinical
cancer advances 2013: Annual report on progress against
­cancer from the american society of clinical oncology.
J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:129–160.

59.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell. 2000; 100:57–70.
60.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: The
next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
61.	 Greaves M and Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer.
Nature. 2012; 481:306–313.

47.	 Nelson HD, Fu R, Goddard K, Mitchell JP, Okinaka-Hu L,
Pappas M, Zakher B: Risk assessment, genetic counseling, and genetic testing for brca-related cancer: ­Systematic
review to update the us preventive services task force
­recommendation. Rockville (MD), 2013.

62.	 Solomon E, Borrow J and Goddard AD. Chromosome
­aberrations and cancer. Science. 1991; 254:1153–1160.
63.	 Frohling S and Dohner H. Chromosomal abnormalities in
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:722–734.

48.	 Nelson HD, Pappas M, Zakher B, Mitchell JP,
­Okinaka-Hu L and Fu R. Risk assessment, genetic counseling, and genetic testing for brca-related cancer in women:
A systematic review to update the u.S. Preventive services
task force recommendation. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 160:
doi: 10.7326/M7313–1684.

64.	 Sadikovic B, Al-Romaih K, Squire JA and Zielenska M.
Cause and consequences of genetic and epigenetic alterations in human cancer. Curr Genomics. 2008; 9:394–408.
65.	 Hallberg B and Palmer RH. Mechanistic insight into alk
receptor tyrosine kinase in human cancer biology. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2013; 13:685–700.

49.	 Chivers Seymour K, Addington-Hall J, Lucassen AM and
Foster CL. What facilitates or impedes family communication following genetic testing for cancer risk? A systematic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66.	 Bunting SF and Nussenzweig A. End-joining, translocations
and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:443–454.

7297

Oncotarget

67.	 Villanueva T. Genome instability: Chrombling into pieces.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:82.

84.	 Poulikakos PI, Persaud Y, Janakiraman M, Kong X, Ng C,
Moriceau G, Shi H, Atefi M, Titz B, Gabay MT, Salton M,
Dahlman KB, Tadi M and et al. Raf inhibitor resistance is
mediated by dimerization of aberrantly spliced braf(v600e).
Nature. 2011; 480:387–390.

68.	 Hermeking H. The myc oncogene as a cancer drug target.
Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2003; 3:163–175.
69.	 Melo JV, Gordon DE, Cross NC and Goldman JM. The ablbcr fusion gene is expressed in chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 1993; 81:158–165.

85.	 Song MS, Salmena L and Pandolfi PP. The functions and
regulation of the pten tumour suppressor. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2012; 13:283–296.

70.	 Advani AS and Pendergast AM. Bcr-abl variants: ­Biological
and clinical aspects. Leuk Res. 2002; 26:713–720.

86.	 O’Reilly KE, Rojo F, She QB, Solit D, Mills GB, Smith D,
Lane H, Hofmann F, Hicklin DJ, Ludwig DL, Baselga J and
Rosen N. Mtor inhibition induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and activates akt. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:1500–1508.

71.	 Panjarian S, Iacob RE, Chen S, Engen JR and Smithgall TE.
Structure and dynamic regulation of abl kinases. J Biol
Chem. 2013; 288:5443–5450.
72.	 Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Talpaz M, O’Brien  S,
­Garcia-Manero G, Verstovsek S, Rios MB, Hayes K,
­Glassman A, Bekele BN, Zhou X and Cortes J. Imatinib mesylate ­therapy may overcome the poor prognostic ­significance of
deletions of derivative chromosome 9 in patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia. Blood. 2005; 105:2281–2286.

87.	 Sudarsanam S and Johnson DE. Functional consequences
of mtor inhibition. Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel. 2010;
13:31–40.
88.	 Hobbs GA, Gunawardena HP, Baker R and Campbell SL.
Site-specific monoubiquitination activates ras by impeding
gtpase-activating protein function. Small GTPases. 2013;
4:186–192.

73.	 Achkar WA, Wafa A, Mkrtchyan H, Moassass F and Liehr T.
A rare case of philadelphia ­chromosome-­positive chronic
myelogenous leukemia with inversion in ­chromosome 9 and
t(10;17). Oncol Lett. 2010; 1:793–795.

89.	 Nussinov R and Tsai CJ. Free energy diagrams for protein
function. Chem Biol. 2014; 21:311–318.

74.	 Shaw AT, Hsu PP, Awad MM and Engelman JA. Tyrosine
kinase gene rearrangements in epithelial malignancies. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:772–787.

90.	 Bradshaw JM. The src, syk, and tec family kinases:
­Distinct types of molecular switches. Cell Signal. 2010; 22:
1175–1184.

75.	 Aman P. Fusion genes in solid tumors. Semin Cancer Biol.
1999; 9:303–318.

91.	 Lavoie H and Therrien M. Cancer: A drug-resistant duo.
Nature. 2011; 480:329–330.

76.	 Jones PA and Baylin SB. The fundamental role of epigenetic events in cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 2002; 3:415–428.

92.	 Bollag G, Hirth P, Tsai J, Zhang J, Ibrahim PN, Cho H,
Spevak W, Zhang C, Zhang Y, Habets G, Burton EA,
Wong B, Tsang G and et al. Clinical efficacy of a raf inhibitor needs broad target blockade in braf-mutant melanoma.
Nature. 2010; 467:596–599.

77.	 Forde PM, Brahmer JR, Kelly RJ. New strategies in lung
­cancer: Epigenetic therapy for non-small-cell lung cancer
Clin ­Cancer Res. 2014 doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2014.1002.1002

93.	 Lavoie H, Thevakumaran N, Gavory G, Li JJ, Padeganeh A,
Guiral S, Duchaine J, Mao DY, Bouvier M, Sicheri F and
Therrien M. Inhibitors that stabilize a closed raf kinase
domain conformation induce dimerization. Nat Chem Biol.
2013; 9:428–436.

78.	 Rothbart SB, Strahl BD. Interpreting the language of histone and DNA modifications. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014:
doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.1003.1000
79.	 Anderson NL. The clinical plasma proteome: A survey
of clinical assays for proteins in plasma and serum. Clin
Chem. 2010; 56:177–185.

94.	 Bryngelson JD, Onuchic JN, Socci ND and Wolynes PG.
Funnels, pathways, and the energy landscape of protein
folding: A synthesis. Proteins. 1995; 21:167–195.

80.	 Tan B, Anaka M, Deb S, Freyer C, Ebert LM, Chueh AC,
Al-Obaidi S, Behren A, Jayachandran A, Cebon J, Chen W
and Mariadason JM. Foxp3 over-expression inhibits
­melanoma tumorigenesis via effects on proliferation and
apoptosis. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:264–276.

95.	 Miyashita O, Onuchic JN and Wolynes PG. Nonlinear elasticity, proteinquakes, and the energy landscapes of functional transitions in proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2003; 100:12570–12575.

81.	 Li Z, Wang Y, Qiu J, Li Q, Yuan C, Zhang W, Wang D,
Ye J, Jiang H, Yang J and Cheng J. The polycomb group
protein ezh2 is a novel therapeutic target in tongue cancer.
Oncotarget. 2013; 4:2532–2549.

96.	 Jenik M, Parra RG, Radusky LG, Turjanski A, Wolynes PG
and Ferreiro DU. Protein frustratometer: A tool to localize
energetic frustration in protein molecules. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2012; 40:W348–351.

82.	 Ueda Y, Hirai S, Osada S, Suzuki A, Mizuno K and
Ohno S. Protein kinase c activates the mek-erk pathway in
a manner independent of ras and dependent on raf. J Biol
Chem. 1996; 271:23512–23519.

97.	 Korkmaz EN, Nussinov R and Haliloglu T. Conformational
control of the binding of the transactivation domain of the
mll protein and c-myb to the kix domain of creb. PLoS
Comput Biol. 2012; 8:e1002420.

83.	 Davies MA and Samuels Y. Analysis of the genome to­
­personalize therapy for melanoma. Oncogene. 2010;
29:5545–5555.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7298

Oncotarget

98.	 Ma B, Tsai CJ, Haliloglu T and Nussinov R. Dynamic
allostery: Linkers are not merely flexible. Structure. 2011;
19:907–917.

113.	 Lin WC, Iversen L, Tu HL, Rhodes C, Christensen SM,
Iwig JS, Hansen SD, Huang WY and Groves JT.
H-ras forms dimers on membrane surfaces via a protein-­
protein interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:
2996–3001.

99.	 Liu J and Nussinov R. The role of allostery in the
­ubiquitin-proteasome system. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol.
2013; 48:89–97.

114.	 Shan Y, Eastwood MP, Zhang X, Kim ET, Arkhipov A,
Dror RO, Jumper J, Kuriyan J and Shaw DE. Oncogenic
mutations counteract intrinsic disorder in the egfr kinase
and promote receptor dimerization. Cell. 2012; 149:
860–870.

100.	 Liu J and Nussinov R. Flexible cullins in cullin-ring e3
ligases allosterically regulate ubiquitination. J Biol Chem.
2011; 286:40934–40942.
101.	 Liu J and Nussinov R. The mechanism of ubiquitination
in the cullin-ring e3 ligase machinery: Conformational
control of substrate orientation. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009;
5:e1000527.

115.	 Sutto L and Gervasio FL. Effects of oncogenic ­mutations
on the conformational free-energy landscape of egfr
kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:10616–
10621.

102.	 Liu J and Nussinov R. Allosteric effects in the marginally stable von hippel-lindau tumor suppressor protein and
allostery-based rescue mutant design. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2008; 105:901–906.

116.	 Koland JG. Coarse-grained molecular simulation of
­epidermal growth factor receptor protein tyrosine kinase
multi-site self-phosphorylation. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;
10:e1003435.

103.	 Tsai CJ and Nussinov R. The free energy landscape in
translational science: How can somatic mutations result in
constitutive oncogenic activation? Phys Chem Chem Phys.
2014; 16:6332–6341.

117.	 Potenza N, Vecchione C, Notte A, De Rienzo A, Rosica A,
Bauer L, Affuso A, De Felice M, Russo T, ­Poulet R,
­Cifelli G, De Vita G, Lembo G and et al. Replacement of
k-ras with h-ras supports normal embryonic development
despite inducing cardiovascular pathology in adult mice.
EMBO Rep. 2005; 6:432–437.

104.	 Nussinov R and Tsai CJ. Allostery in disease and in drug
discovery. Cell. 2013; 153:293–305.
105.	 Ihle NT, Byers LA, Kim ES, Saintigny P, Lee JJ,
­Blumenschein GR, Tsao A, Liu S, Larsen JE, Wang J,
Diao L, Coombes KR, Chen L and et al. Effect of kras
­oncogene substitutions on protein behavior: Implications
for signaling and clinical outcome. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2012; 104:228–239.

118.	 To MD, Wong CE, Karnezis AN, Del Rosario R,
Di Lauro R and Balmain A. Kras regulatory elements and
exon 4a determine mutation specificity in lung cancer.
Nat Genet. 2008; 40:1240–1244.
119.	 Raphael BJ, Dobson JR, Oesper L and Vandin F.
­Identifying driver mutations in sequenced cancer
genomes: Computational approaches to enable precision
medicine. Genome Med. 2014; 6:5–25.

106.	 Stephen AG, Esposito D, Bagni RK and McCormick F.
Dragging ras back in the ring. Cancer Cell. 2014;
25:272–281.

120.	 Carter H and Karchin R. Predicting the functional
­consequences of somatic missense mutations found in
tumors. Methods Mol Biol. 2014; 1101:135–159.

107.	 Nussinov R, Ma B, Tsai CJ and Csermely P. ­Allosteric
­conformational barcodes direct signaling in the cell.
­Structure. 2013; 21:1509–1521.

121.	 Jiao Y, Pawlik TM, Anders RA, Selaru FM, Streppel MM,
Lucas DJ, Niknafs N, Guthrie VB, Maitra A, Argani P,
Offerhaus GJ, Roa JC, Roberts LR and et al. Exome
sequencing identifies frequent inactivating mutations in
bap1, arid1a and pbrm1 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1470–1473.

108.	 Nussinov R, Tsai CJ and Ma B. The underappreciated role
of allostery in the cellular network. Annu Rev Biophys.
2013; 42:169–189.
109.	 Akimoto M, Zhang Z, Boulton S, Selvaratnam R,
­VanSchouwen B, Gloyd M, Accili EA, Lange OF,
­Melacini  G. A mechanism for the auto-inhibition of
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (hcn)
channel opening and its relief by camp. J Biol Chem. 2014
10.1074/jbc.M1114.572164.

122.	 Gartner JJ, Parker SC, Prickett TD, Dutton-Regester  K,
­Stitzel ML, Lin JC, Davis S, Simhadri VL, Jha S, ­Katagiri N,
Gotea V, Teer JK, Wei X and et al. ­Whole-genome
­sequencing identifies a recurrent functional synonymous
mutation in melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;
110:13481–13486.

110.	 Tsai CJ and Nussinov R. A unified view of “how allostery
works”. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003394.
111.	 Gorfe AA, Babakhani A and McCammon JA. Free energy
profile of h-ras membrane anchor upon membrane insertion. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2007; 46:8234–8237.

123.	 Niknafs N, Kim D, Kim R, Diekhans M, Ryan M,
­Stenson PD, Cooper DN and Karchin R. Mupit ­interactive:
Webserver for mapping variant positions to ­annotated,
interactive 3d structures. Hum Genet. 2013; 132:
1235–1243.

112.	 Buhrman G, Holzapfel G, Fetics S and Mattos C.
­Allosteric modulation of ras positions q61 for a direct
role in catalysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:
4931–4936.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7299

Oncotarget

124.	 Acuner Ozbabacan SE, Gursoy A, Nussinov R and
­Keskin  O. The structural pathway of interleukin 1
(il-1) ­initiated signaling reveals mechanisms of oncogenic
­mutations and snps in inflammation and cancer. PLoS
­Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003470.

139.	 Nussinov R, Tsai CJ and Csermely P. Allo-network
drugs: Harnessing allostery in cellular networks. Trends
­Pharmacol Sci. 2011; 32:686–693.
140.	 Szilagyi A, Nussinov R and Csermely P. Allo-network
drugs: Extension of the allosteric drug concept to proteinprotein interaction and signaling networks. Curr Top Med
Chem. 2013; 13:64–77.

125.	 Guven Maiorov E, Keskin O, Gursoy A and Nussinov R.
The structural network of inflammation and cancer: Merits
and challenges. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013; 23:243–251.

141.	 Csermely P, Nussinov R and Szilagyi A. From allosteric
drugs to allo-network drugs: State of the art and trends of
design, synthesis and computational methods. Curr Top
Med Chem. 2013; 13:2–4.

126.	 Putzer BM and Engelmann D. E2f1 apoptosis counterattacked: Evil strikes back. Trends Mol Med. 2013; 19:
89–98.
127.	 Larsson LG. Oncogene- and tumor suppressor gene-­
mediated suppression of cellular senescence. Semin
­Cancer Biol. 2011; 21:367–376.

142.	 Csermely P, Korcsmaros T, Kiss HJ, London G and
­Nussinov R. Structure and dynamics of ­molecular
­networks: A novel paradigm of drug discovery:
A ­comprehensive review. Pharmacol Ther. 2013;
138:333–408.

128.	 Ansieau S, Courtois-Cox S, Morel AP and Puisieux A.
­Failsafe program escape and emt: A deleterious partnership. Semin Cancer Biol. 2011; 21:392–396.

143.	 Zhang X, Gureasko J, Shen K, Cole PA and Kuriyan J.
An allosteric mechanism for activation of the kinase
domain of epidermal growth factor receptor. Cell. 2006;
125:1137–1149.

129.	 Powell E, Piwnica-Worms D, Piwnica-Worms H,
­Contribution of p53 to metastasis. Cancer Discov. 2014:
10.1158/2159–8290.CD-1113-0136.

144.	 Chung I, Akita R, Vandlen R, Toomre D, Schlessinger J
and Mellman I. Spatial control of egf receptor activation
by reversible dimerization on living cells. Nature. 2010;
464:783–787.

130.	 Quail DF and Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation
of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat Med. 2013;
19:1423–1437.
131.	 Baspinar A, Cukuroglu E, Nussinov R, Keskin O and
­Gursoy A. Prism: A web server and repository for prediction of protein-protein interactions and modeling their 3d
complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:W285–289.

145.	 Kobayashi S, Nakano K, Watanabe E, Ishigaki T, Ohno N,
Yuji K, Oyaizu N, Asanuma S, Yamagishi M, ­Yamochi T,
Watanabe N, Tojo A, Watanabe T and et al. Cadm1
expression and stepwise downregulation of cd7 are closely
associated with clonal expansion of htlv-i-infected cells in
adult t-cell leukemia/lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;
20:2851–2861.

132.	 Cukuroglu E, Gursoy A, Nussinov R and Keskin O. Nonredundant unique interface structures as templates for
­modeling protein interactions. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e86738.
133.	 Kuzu G, Keskin O, Nussinov R and Gursoy A. Modeling
protein assemblies in the proteome. Mol Cell Proteomics.
2014; 13:887–896.

146.	 Jin J and Pawson T. Modular evolution of
­phosphorylation-based signalling systems. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2012; 367:2540–2555.

134.	 Kuzu G, Gursoy A, Nussinov R and Keskin O. ­Exploiting
conformational ensembles in modeling protein-protein
interactions on the proteome scale. J Proteome Res. 2013;
12:2641–2653.

147.	 Mobley AK, Braeuer RR, Kamiya T, Shoshan E and
­Bar-Eli M. Driving transcriptional regulators in melanoma
metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31:621–632.
148.	 Shimizu T, Marusawa H, Endo Y and Chiba T.
­Inflammation-mediated genomic instability: Roles of
activation-induced cytidine deaminase in carcinogenesis.
Cancer Sci. 2012; 103:1201–1206.

135.	 Kuzu G, Keskin O, Gursoy A and Nussinov R.
­Constructing structural networks of signaling pathways
on the proteome scale. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2012;
22:367–377.

149.	 Berg M and Soreide K. Genetic and epigenetic traits as
biomarkers in colorectal cancer. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;
12:9426–9439.

136.	 Acuner Ozbabacan SE, Keskin O, Nussinov R and
­Gursoy  A. Enriching the human apoptosis pathway by
predicting the structures of protein-protein complexes.
J Struct Biol. 2012; 179:338–346.

150.	 Fan T, Tian F, Yi S, Ke Y, Han S, Zhang L and Liu H.
Implications of bit1 and aif overexpressions in ­esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma. Tumour Biol. 2014; 35:
519–527.

137.	 Tuncbag N, Gursoy A, Nussinov R and Keskin O.
­Predicting protein-protein interactions on a proteome
scale by matching evolutionary and structural similarities
at interfaces using prism. Nat Protoc. 2011; 6:1341–1354.

151.	 Almendro V, Marusyk A and Polyak K. Cellular
­heterogeneity and molecular evolution in cancer. Annu
Rev Pathol. 2013; 8:277–302.

138.	 Melisi D, Piro G, Tamburrino A, Carbone C and
­Tortora  G. Rationale and clinical use of ­multitargeting
anticancer agents. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2013;
13:536–542.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

152.	 Eisfeld AK, Schwind S, Hoag KW, Walker CJ,
­Liyanarachchi S, Patel R, Huang X, Markowitz J,

7300

Oncotarget

­ uan  W, Otterson GA, Carson WE, 3rd, Marcucci  G,
D
Bloomfield  CD and et al. Nras isoforms differentially
affect downstream pathways, cell growth, and cell transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014: 10.1073/
pnas.1401727111.

164.	 Elinav E, Nowarski R, Thaiss CA, Hu B, Jin C and
­Flavell  RA. Inflammation-induced cancer: Crosstalk
between tumours, immune cells and microorganisms. Nat
Rev ­Cancer. 2013; 13:759–771.
165.	 Hoesel B and Schmid JA. The complexity of nf-kappab
signaling in inflammation and cancer. Mol Cancer. 2013;
12:86.

153.	 Nussinov R and Wolynes PG. A second molecular ­biology
revolution? The energy landscapes of biomolecular
­function. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2014; 16:6321–6322.

166.	 Acuner-Ozbabacan E, Engin B, Guven-Maiorov  E,
Kuzu  G, Muratcioglu S, Baspinar A, Chen Z,
Van Waes C, Gursoy A, Keskin O and Nussinov R. The
structural ­network of interleukin-10 and its implications
in ­inflammation and cancer. BMC Genomics. 2014;
15(Suppl 4):S2.

154.	 Yi KH, Axtmayer J, Gustin JP, Rajpurohit A and
­Lauring  J. Functional analysis of non-hotspot akt1
mutants found in human breast cancers identifies novel
driver mutations: Implications for personalized medicine.
­Oncotarget. 2013; 4:29–34.
155.	 Parikh C, Janakiraman V, Wu WI, Foo CK, Kljavin NM,
Chaudhuri S, Stawiski E, Lee B, Lin J, Li H, Lorenzo MN,
Yuan W, Guillory J and et al. Disruption of ph-kinase
domain interactions leads to oncogenic activation of akt
in human cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:
19368–19373.

167.	 Guven-Maiorov E, Acuner-Ozbabacan SE, Keskin  O,
­Gursoy A and Nussinov R. Structural pathways of
­cytokines may illuminate their roles in regulation of
­cancer development and immunotherapy. Cancers (Basel).
2014; 6:663–683.
168.	 Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, Zhou S,
Diaz LA, Jr., and Kinzler KW. Cancer genome landscapes. Science. 2013; 339:1546–1558.

156.	 Nussinov R and Tsai CJ. The different ways through
which specificity works in orthosteric and allosteric drugs.
Curr Pharm Des. 2012; 18:1311–1316.

169.	 Blagosklonny MV. Matching targets for selective cancer
therapy. Drug Discov Today. 2003; 8:1104–1107.

157.	 Dancey JE, Bedard PL, Onetto N and Hudson TJ. The
genetic basis for cancer treatment decisions. Cell. 2012;
148:409–420.

170.	 Blagosklonny MV. Antagonistic drug combinations that
select against drug resistance: From bacteria to cancer.
Cancer Biol Ther. 2007; 6:1013–1014.

158.	 Sievert AJ, Lang SS, Boucher KL, Madsen PJ,
Slaunwhite  E, Choudhari N, Kellet M, Storm PB and
Resnick AC. Paradoxical activation and raf inhibitor resistance of braf protein kinase fusions characterizing ­pediatric
­astrocytomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:
5957–5962.

171.	 Blagosklonny MV. “Targeting the absence” and
­therapeutic engineering for cancer therapy. Cell Cycle.
2008; 7:1307–1312.
172.	 Cully M, You H, Levine AJ and Mak TW. Beyond pten
mutations: The pi3k pathway as an integrator of ­multiple
inputs during tumorigenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;
6:184–192.

159.	 Poulikakos PI, Zhang C, Bollag G, Shokat KM and
Rosen N. Raf inhibitors transactivate raf dimers and erk
signalling in cells with wild-type braf. Nature. 2010;
464:427–430.

173.	 Guerrero S, Casanova I, Farre L, Mazo A, Capella G and
Mangues R. K-ras codon 12 mutation induces higher
level of resistance to apoptosis and predisposition to
anchorage-independent growth than codon 13 mutation
or proto-oncogene overexpression. Cancer Res. 2000;
60:6750–6756.

160.	 Rajakulendran T, Sahmi M, Lefrancois M, Sicheri F and
Therrien M. A dimerization-dependent mechanism drives
raf catalytic activation. Nature. 2009; 461:542–545.
161.	 Sahin E, Haubenwallner S, Kuttke M, ­Kollmann I,
Halfmann A, Dohnal AB, Chen L, Cheng P, Hoesel B,
­Einwallner E, Brunner J, Kral JB, Schrottmaier WC and
et al. Macrophage pten regulates expression and secretion of arginase i modulating innate and adaptive immune
responses. J Immunol. 2014: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302167.

174.	 Scheffzek K, Ahmadian MR, Kabsch W, Wiesmuller L,
Lautwein A, Schmitz F and Wittinghofer A. The ras-­
rasgap complex: Structural basis for gtpase activation
and its loss in oncogenic ras mutants. Science. 1997; 277:
333–338.

162.	 Wang H, Flannery SM, Dickhofer S, Huhn S, George J,
Kubarenko AV, Lascorz J, Bevier M, Willemsen J,
­Pichulik T, Schafmayer C, Binder M, Manoury B and
et al. A coding irak2 variant compromises tlr signaling
and is associated with colorectal cancer survival. J Biol
Chem. 2014:

175.	 Gajiwala KS, Feng J, Ferre R, Ryan K, Brodsky O,
­Weinrich S, Kath JC and Stewart A. Insights into the
aberrant activity of mutant egfr kinase domain and drug
recognition. Structure. 2013; 21:209–219.
176.	 Wakeling AE, Guy SP, Woodburn JR, Ashton SE,
Curry BJ, Barker AJ and Gibson KH. Zd1839 (iressa):
An orally active inhibitor of epidermal growth factor
­signaling with potential for cancer therapy. Cancer Res.
2002; 62:5749–5754.

163.	 Mishra A, Sullivan L and Caligiuri MA. Molecular
­pathways: Interleukin-15 signaling in health and in cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:2044–2050.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7301

Oncotarget

177.	 Pollack VA, Savage DM, Baker DA, Tsaparikos KE,
Sloan DE, Moyer JD, Barbacci EG, Pustilnik LR,
­Smolarek TA, Davis JA, Vaidya MP, Arnold LD, Doty JL
and et al. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptorassociated tyrosine phosphorylation in human carcinomas
with cp-358,774: Dynamics of receptor inhibition in situ
and antitumor effects in athymic mice. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 1999; 291:739–748.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

178.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y,
Hyland C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X,
Christensen J, Kosaka T, Holmes AJ and Rogers AM and
et al. Met amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in
lung cancer by activating erbb3 signaling. Science. 2007;
316:1039–1043.

7302

Oncotarget

