1312

Overexpression of Claudin-3 and Claudin-4
Receptors in Uterine Serous Papillary Carcinoma
Novel Targets for a Type-Specific Therapy Using Clostridium
perfringens Enterotoxin (CPE)

Alessandro D. Santin, MD1
Stefania Bellone, PhD1
Moira Marizzoni, PhD1
Michela Palmieri, MS1
Eric R. Siegel, MS2
Jesse K. McKenney, MD3
Leah Hennings, PhD3
Fabrizio Comper, PhD1
Elisabetta Bandiera, PhD4
Sergio Pecorelli, MD4
1

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division
of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.

BACKGROUND. Uterine serous papillary carcinoma (USPC) represents a highly
aggressive variant of endometrial cancer. Using gene expression profiling, we
recently identified high expression of the claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptors in a
limited set of USPC. These tight junction proteins represent the low- and highaffinity receptors, respectively, for the cytotoxic Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) and are sufficient to mediate CPE binding and trigger subsequent
toxin-mediated cytolysis. The potential for targeting this pathway in the treatment of USPC was explored.

METHODS. Claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptor expression was analyzed at the
mRNA and protein levels in flash-frozen and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissue from 20 consecutive USPC patients. The potential of recombinant CPE as
a novel therapy against primary, metastatic, and chemotherapy-resistant USPC
cell lines was also investigated in vitro. Finally, the in vivo therapeutic effect of
sublethal doses of CPE was studied in SCID mouse xenografts harboring subcuta-

2

Department of Biostatistics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.

neous and intraperitoneal USPC that expressed claudin-3 and claudin-4.

3

overexpressed 1 or both CPE receptors by quantitative reverse-transcriptase poly-

Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.
4

Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University of
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

RESULTS. In all, 100% (20 out of 20) of the primary flash-frozen USPC tested
merase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Membranous immunoreactivity for claudin-4
protein expression was documented in the majority of USPC specimens tested by
immunohistochemistry, whereas only a low level of membranous staining was
found in normal endometrial control tissue samples. When primary and metastatic short-term USPC cell lines were incubated with different concentrations of
CPE in vitro, a dose-dependent cytotoxic effect was demonstrated. In vivo, intratumoral injections of well-tolerated doses of CPE in large subcutaneous USPC
xenografts led to large areas of tumor cell necrosis and tumor disappearance in
all the treated animals, whereas sublethal intraperitoneal injections of CPE had a
significant inhibitory effect on tumor progression, with extended survival of animals harboring chemotherapy-resistant intra-abdominal USPC carcinomatosis.

Supported in part by grants from the Mary Kay
Ash Foundation; the Angelo Nocivelli; the Camillo
Golgi and the Berlucchi foundations, Brescia,
Italy; and the Istituto Superiore di Sanita’ (Italian
National Institute of Health, Programma Oncotecnologico), Rome, Italy.
Address for reprints: Alessandro D. Santin, MD,
UAMS Medical Center, Department of Obstetrics
& Gynecology, 4301 W. Markham, Slot 518, Little
Rock, AR, 72205-7199; Fax: (501) 686-8091.
E-mail: santinalessandrod@uams.edu
Received October 23, 2006; revision received
December 15, 2006; accepted December 21, 2006.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

CONCLUSIONS. Claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptors may offer promising targets for
the use of CPE as a novel type-specific therapy against this highly aggressive and
chemotherapy-resistant variant of endometrial cancer. Cancer 2007;109:1312–22.
 2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: uterine serous carcinoma, Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin, claudin-3 and -4.

C

ancer of the uterine corpus represents the most prevalent gynecologic tumor in women, with an estimated 40,880 cases and
7310 deaths in the US in 2005.1 Two subtypes of endometrial carcinoma, namely, Type I and Type II tumors, have been described,

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22536
Published online 26 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

CPE-Mediated Therapy for USPC/Santin et al.

based on both clinical and histopathologic features.2
Type I endometrial cancers, which account for the
majority of cases, are usually well differentiated and
endometrioid in histology. These neoplasms are frequently diagnosed in younger women and are associated with a history of hyperestrogenism as the
main risk factor, and typically have a favorable prognosis with appropriate therapy. In contrast, Type II
endometrial cancers are poorly differentiated tumors,
often with serous papillary or clear cell histology.
Although Type II tumors account for only a minority
of endometrial cancers, about 50% of all recurrences
occur in this group of patients.3
Our group recently used microarray technology
to analyze the genetic fingerprints of uterine serous
papillary carcinomas (USPC), the biologically more
aggressive variant of Type II endometrial cancer.4
Among the several candidate target genes identified,
genes encoding tight junction (TJ) proteins claudin-3
and claudin-4 were consistently found as 2 of the
most highly up-regulated genes in USPC. Importantly, claudin-3 and claudin-4 proteins have recently
been shown to represent the natural receptors for
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE), and to be
the only family members of the transmembrane tissue-specific claudin proteins capable of mediating
CPE binding and cytolysis.5,6 CPE is a single polypeptide of 35 kDa comprised of 319 amino acids that is
associated with C. perfringens type A food poisoning,
the second most commonly reported food-borne illness in the US.7 CPE triggers lysis of epithelial cells
through interaction with claudin-3 and claudin-4,
with resultant initiation of massive permeability
changes, osmotic cell ballooning, and lysis.5–7 Mammalian cells that do not express either claudin-3
and/or claudin-4 fail to bind CPE and are not susceptible to CPE cytotoxicity 7. The CPE structure/
function relation has been extensively investigated,
mainly by characterizing the functional properties of
enterotoxin fragments and point mutants.8–10 The
CPE290-319 COOH-terminus fragment is sufficient
for high-affinity binding to target cell receptor and
small complex formation, although this fragment is
incapable of initiating large complex formation and
cytolysis. Furthermore, the CPE290-319 COOH-terminus fragment inhibits cytolysis of susceptible target
cells by full-length CPE. Residues 45-116 of CPE are
essential for large complex formation and cytotoxicity, whereas deletion of the NH2 terminus generates
a CPE45-319 fragment with enhanced large membrane complex formation and cytotoxic activity.
In this study we quantified the expression levels
of claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptors by real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in freshly explanted

1313

USPC. In addition, we analyzed claudin-4 receptor
expression at the protein level by immunohistochemistry in a set of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
USPC. Finally, we tested the ability of recombinant
CPE to kill several primary, metastatic, and chemotherapy-resistant USPC cell lines in vitro as well as in
vivo. Here we report that USPC highly overexpress
the claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptors and that these
biologically aggressive tumors, regardless of their resistance to chemotherapy, are highly sensitive to CPE
treatment in vitro as well as in vivo. CPE-mediated
therapy may thus represent a novel, potentially
highly effective strategy for the treatment of USPC
refractory to standard treatment modalities.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning and Purification of NH2 Terminus His-Tagged CPE
Clostridium perfringens strain 12917, obtained from
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas,
Va), was grown from a single colony and used to prepare bacterial DNA with the InstaGene kit according
to manufacturer’s directions (Bio-Rad, Hercules,
Calif). The bacterial DNA fragment encoding the fulllength CPE gene (GenBank AJ000766) was PCRamplified (primer 1, 50 -AGA TGT TAA TGG ATC CAT
GCT TAG TAA CAA TTT AAA TCC-30 ; primer 2, 50 -AAA
GCT TTT AAA ATT TTT GAA ATA ATA TTG AAT AAG
GG-30 ). The PCR products were digested with the
restriction enzymes NdeI/BamHI and cloned into an
NdeI/BamHI-digested pET-16b expression vector
(Novagen, Madison, Wis) to generate an in-frame
NH2-terminus His-tagged CPE expression plasmid,
pET-16b-10xHIS-CPE. His-tagged CPE toxin was prepared from pET-16b-10xHIS-CPE transformed Escherichia coli M15. Transformed bacteria were grown at
378C to 0.3-0.4 optical density at 600 nm, after which
CPE protein expression was induced overnight with
1 mM isopropyl b-D-thio-galactoside and the cells
harvested, resuspended in 150 mM NaH2PO4, 25 mM
Tris-HCL, and 8 M urea pH 8.0 buffer, and lysed by
centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 30 minutes. The
fusion protein was isolated from the supernatant on
a Poly-Prep Chromatography column (Bio-Rad). Histagged CPE was washed with 300 mM NaH2PO4, 25
mM Tris-HCl, and 10 M urea pH 6.0, and eluted
from the column with 200 mM NaH2PO4, 25 mM
Tris-HCl, and 8 M urea pH 6.0. In order to reduce
the level of endotoxin from His-tagged CPE protein,
10 washings with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) with Triton X-114 (from 1% to 0.1%) and 10
washings with ice-cold PBS alone were performed.
Dialysis (Mr 3500 cutoff dialysis tubing) against PBS
was performed overnight. Purified CPE protein was

1314

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

then sterilized by 0.2 mm filtration and frozen in aliquots at 708C.

Flash-Frozen Biopsies and Primary Cell Lines
Twenty flash-frozen biopsy specimens containing
>75% neoplastic cells were obtained from USPC
patients at the time of primary surgery and 6 primary USPC cell lines (3 generated from tumor samples obtained from the primary uterine site and 3
from metastatic intra-abdominal disease or ascites)
were evaluated for claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression by real-time PCR. Patient characteristics from
which primary specimens were obtained are depicted
in Table 1. Among the 20 USPC cases, 16 were pure
forms, whereas 4 were admixed with endometrioid
or clear cell histology. Specimens containing less
than 25% tumor cells with serous papillary features
were considered mixed USPC. Two of the 6 USPC
specimens established as short-term cultures (ie,
USPC-4 and USPC-6) were confirmed to be highly
resistant to multiple chemotherapeutic agents when
measured as percentage cell inhibition (PCI) by in
vitro Extreme Drug Resistance (EDR) assay (Oncotech, Irvine, Calif).11 Specifically, USPC-4 and USPC6 were found highly resistant by EDR to the following
drugs: taxol, cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, and
the combination cisplatin þ gemcitabine). Control
cell lines evaluated in the CPE assays included Vero
cells (purchased from ATCC), normal endometrial
cells (NEC), normal cervical keratinocytes, peripheral
blood lymphocytes (PBL), Epstein-Barr-transformed
B lymphocytes (LCL), and human fibroblasts. With
the exception of normal cervical keratinocytes, which
were cultured in serum-free keratinocyte medium,
supplemented with 5 ng/mL epidermal growth factor
and 35 to 50 mg/mL bovine pituitary extract (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) at 378C, 5% CO2, all other
fresh specimens were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Invitrogen) containing 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS; Gemini Bio-products, Calabasas, Calif), 200 U/mL
penicillin, and 200 mg/mL streptomycin. All samples were obtained with appropriate consent according to Institutional Review Board (IRB) guidelines.
Tumors were staged according to the FIGO operative
staging system. Tumor debulking included a total
abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingooophorectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy
in all USPC patients, whereas normal tissues were
obtained from consenting donors undergoing surgery
for benign pathology. Tumors and normal primary
control tissues were established after sterile processing of the samples from surgical biopsies as previously described.4,12 Briefly, viable tumor tissue was
mechanically minced in RPMI 1640 to portions no

TABLE 1
Clinical and Pathological Characteristics of the Patients
USPC Patients

Age

Race

Stage

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

62*
63*
83*
64y
43y
75y
65
61
78
75
84
61
48
79
84
60
47
84
73
71

Black
Black
White
Black
White
White
White
Black
White
Black
White
Black
White
White
White
White
Black
White
White
White

IV
III
IV
IV
III
III
IV
III
III
IV
IV
III
IB
IV
IV
III
IB
III
III
III

Histology
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Mixed
USPC Pure
USPC Mixed
USPC Pure
USPC Mixed
USPC Pure
USPC Mixed
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure
USPC Pure

USPC indicates uterine serous papillary carcinoma.
* Patients from which primary USPC short-term cell lines were established to be used for in vitro
and in vivo Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) sensitivity studies.
y
Patients from which metastatic USPC short-term cell lines were established to be used for in vitro
and in vivo CPE sensitivity studies.

larger than 1-3 mm3 and washed twice with RPMI
1640. The portions of minced tumor were then
placed into 250-mL flasks containing 30 mL of
enzyme solution (0.14% collagenase Type I and
0.01% DNAse 2000 KU/mg; Sigma, St. Louis, Mo) in
RPMI 1640, and incubated on a magnetic stirring apparatus overnight at 48C. Enzymatically dissociated
tumor was then filtered through 150-mm nylon mesh
to generate a single cell suspension. The resultant
cell suspension was then washed twice in RPMI 1640
plus 10% FBS. The epithelial nature and the purity of
epithelial tumor cultures was verified by immunohistochemical staining and flow cytometric analysis
with antibodies against cytokeratin as previously
described.4,12 In USPC cell lines RNA extraction was
performed at a tumor cell confluence of 50% to 80%
after a minimum of 2 to a maximum of 10 passages
in vitro. Only primary cultures which had at least
90% viability and contained >99% epithelial cells
were used to test sensitivity to CPE in vitro.

RNA Extraction and Quantitative Real-Time PCR
RNA isolation from flash-frozen and primary cell
lines was performed using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Quantitative (q-PCR) was performed with an ABI

CPE-Mediated Therapy for USPC/Santin et al.

Prism 7000 Sequence Analyzer using the manufacturer’s recommended protocol (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, Calif) to evaluate expression of claudin-3
and claudin-4 in all the samples. Each reaction was
run in triplicate. Briefly, 1 mg of total RNA from each
sample was reverse-transcribed using SuperScript III
first-strand cDNA synthesis (Invitrogen). Five mL of
reverse-transcribed RNA samples (from 500 mL of
total volume) were amplified by using the TaqMan
Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) to
produce PCR products specific for claudin-3 and
claudin-4. The primers for claudin-3 and claudin-4
were obtained from Applied Biosystems as Assay-onDemand products. Assay IDs were Hs00265816_s1
(claudin-3) and Hs00533616_s1 (claudin-4). The
comparative threshold cycle (CT) method (PE
Applied Biosystems) was used to determine gene
expression in each sample relative to the value
observed in the lowest nonmalignant endometrial
epithelial cell sample, using GAPDH (Assay-onDemand Hs99999905_m1) RNA as internal controls.

Claudin-4 Immunostaining of Formalin-Fixed
Tumor Tissues
USPC were evaluated by standard immunohistochemical staining on formalin-fixed tumor tissue for
claudin-4 surface expression. Study blocks were
selected after histopathologic review by a surgical pathologist. The most representative hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E)-stained block sections were used for
each specimen. Briefly, immunohistochemical stains
were performed on 4-mm-thick sections of formalinfixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. After pretreatment
with 10 mM citrate buffer at pH 6.0 using a steamer,
they were incubated with mouse anti-claudin-4 antibodies (Zymed Laboratories, San Francisco, Calif).
Antigen-bound primary antibody was detected using
standard avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase complex
(Dako, Carpinteria, Calif). Cases with less than 10%
membranous staining in tumor cells were considered
negative for claudin expression. The intensity of
membranous immunoreactivity for claudin-4 in
tumor cells was subjectively scored as follows: a)
1þ, weak staining; b) 2þ, medium staining; and c)
3þ, intense staining. Negative controls, in which the
primary antibodies were not added, were processed
in parallel.
CPE Treatment of Cell Lines and Trypan
Blue Exclusion Test
Tumor samples and normal control cells were seeded
at a concentration of 1 3 105 cells/well into 6-well
culture plates (Costar, Cambridge, Mass) with the
appropriate medium. Adherent tumor samples, fibro-

1315

blasts, and normal epithelial control cell lines were
grown to 80% confluence. After washing and renewal
of the medium, CPE was added to final concentrations ranging from 0.03 to 3.3 mg/mL. After incubation for 60 minutes to 24 hours at 378C, 5% CO2,
floating cells were removed and stored and attached
cells were trypsinized and pooled with the floating
cells. After staining with Trypan blue, viability was
determined by counting the number of Trypan bluepositive cells and the total cell number.

SCID Mouse Tumor Xenografts and CPE Treatment
C.B-17/SCID female mice 5–7 weeks old were
obtained from Harlan Sprague-Dawley (Indianapolis,
Ind) and housed in a pathogen-free environment at
the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
(UAMS). They were given commercial basal diet and
water ad libitum. The experimental protocol for the
use of these animals for these studies was approved
by the UAMS Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee. Animals were used to generate subcutaneous and intraperitoneal USPC xenografts. Briefly,
for subcutaneous xenografts 10 3 106 USPC-6 cells
in 0.1 mL normal saline were injected subcutaneously into the left flank in groups of 3 to 5 mice.
Eight to 10 weeks after USPC-6 injection, when tumor size was approximately 2 cm in diameter, 1 mg
CPE dissolved in 100 mL 0.9% NaCl or saline alone
was injected intratumorally daily in the large tumor
area for 5 consecutive days for 2 weeks. On Day 15
some mice were euthanized to determine tumor size,
whereas others were followed to evaluate survival
and possible tumor reappearance. Explanted tumors
were stored in 2% formaldehyde and stained with
H&E for histologic examination. For intraperitoneal
(i.p.) xenografts USPC-6 cells were injected at a dose
of 15 3 106 into C.B-17/SCID mice in groups of 5.
One week after i.p. tumor injection mice were
injected i.p. with 6.0 mg of CPE dissolved in 1 mL of
sterile saline at 96-hour intervals for a total of 5
injections. All animals were observed twice daily and
weighed weekly and survival was monitored. In addition, groups of mice injected i.p. at a dose of 15
3 106 USPC-6 tumor cells were sacrificed at 1, 2, 3,
and 4 weeks for necropsy and pathologic analysis.
The remaining animals were euthanized and examined when they became moribund due to i.p. carcinomatosis and malignant ascites.
Statistics
Claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression between the
treatment and control groups were compared using
the unpaired t-test. For the USPC-6 animal model,
survivals were plotted using Kaplan-Meier methods

1316

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

and compared using the log-rank test. A P value less
than .05 was used for statistical significance.

RESULTS
Claudin-3 and Claudin-4 Transcript Levels in USPC
We used q-RT-PCR assays to get highly sensitive
measurements of claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression
in 20 USPC flash-frozen specimens, 6 short-term
USPC cultures, and several flash-frozen normal tissues and cell lines. Both claudin-3 and claudin-4
genes were highly expressed in USPC when compared with NEC, normal cervical keratinocytes, EBVtransformed B cells (LCL), and human fibroblasts
(Fig. 1A). With no exception, all USPC samples (20
out of 20 ¼ 100%) were found positive for claudin-3
and claudin-4 expression by RT-PCR (Fig. 1B). In
contrast, only low levels of claudin-3 and claudin-4
gene expression were found in the NEC control cultures tested (Fig. 1A,B).
When claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptor expression was compared by RT-PCR between primary cell
lines established from tumors obtained from the endometrial cavity (USCP-1, -2, and -3) vs primary cell
lines established from metastatic sites of disease (ie,
USPC-4, -5, and -6), metastatic USPC were found to
express significantly higher levels of claudin-3 and
claudin-4 receptors (Fig. 1C; P < .05).
Claudin-4 Expression by Immunohistochemistry
on USPC and NEC Tissue Blocks
To determine whether the high expression of the
claudin-4 gene detected by q-RT-PCR assays in primary USPC cell lines is the result of a selection of a

3
FIGURE 1. (A) Quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression. Y-axis, mRNA
copy number relative to normal endometrial cell (NEC) expression. X-axis,
each sample tested for claudin-3 (upper panel) and claudin-4 (lower panel).
1: Normal cervical keratinocytes (mean  SEM of 3 samples); 2: normal
human fibroblasts (mean  SEM of 3 samples); 3: Epstein-Barr-transformed
B lymphocytes (LCL) (mean  SEM of 3 samples); NEC: normal endometrial
epithelium (mean  SEM of 3 samples); USPC: uterine serous papillary carcinomas (mean  SEM of 20 samples). (B) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of
claudin-3 and claudin-4 mRNA copy number in individual NEC controls and
USPC samples. The first 2 bars represent normal endometrial epithelium.
The following 20 bars represent primary uterine serous papillary carcinoma
samples.322 (C) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of claudin-3 and claudin-4
expression in primary vs metastatic USPC. The Y-axis represents the fold
induction relative to normal endometrial cell expression. The X-axis represents each sample tested for claudin-3 and claudin-4. 1 (primary uterine
cancers ¼ 3

USPC

samples,

mean  SEM);

2

cancer ¼ 3 USPC samples, mean  SEM) (P < .05).

(metastatic

uterine

CPE-Mediated Therapy for USPC/Santin et al.
TABLE 2
Claudin-4 Staining
Patient

Claudin-4 Positivity

NEC 1
NEC 2
NEC 3
USPC 1
USPC 2
USPC 3
USPC 4
USPC 5
USPC 6
USPC 7
USPC 8
USPC 9
USPC 10
USPC 11
USPC 12
USPC 13
USPC 14
USPC 15
USPC 16
USPC 17
USPC 18
USPC 19
USPC 20

1þ
1þ
1þ
3þ
3þ
3þ
2þ
3þ
2þ
3þ
1þ
3þ
3þ
3þ
3þ
1þ
2þ
3þ
2þ
3þ
3þ
2þ
3þ

USPC indicates uterine serous papillary carcinoma; NEC, normal endometrial cells.

subpopulation of cancer cells present in the original
tumor, or whether in vitro expansion conditions may
have modified gene expression, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of claudin-4 protein expression on formalin-fixed tumor tissue from the
uncultured primary surgical specimens from which
fresh USPC cancers were derived as well as a separate set of USPC. As shown in Table 2 and representatively in the lower panel of Figure 2, moderate to
heavy membranous staining for claudin-4 protein
expression was noted in the cancer specimens that
overexpressed the claudin-4 transcript as well as in
the separate set of USPC tested. In contrast, a much
lower intensity staining pattern was found in the
NEC specimen tested by immunohistochemistry
(Table 2, Fig. 2). Normal mesothelial cells from the peritoneal cavity were nonreactive for claudin-4 (Fig. 2).

Effects of CPE on Primary and Metastatic USPC and
Normal Control Cells
On the basis of the high expression of claudin-3
and/or claudin-4 on primary USPC cell lines, it was
expected that USPC tumors expressing either claudin-3 or claudin-4 would be sensitive to CPEmediated lysis. However, it was important to demonstrate this directly on fresh human USPC carcinoma
cells, particularly in a clinically relevant setting of

1317

USPC disease for which current salvage therapies are
ineffective (ie, metastatic/chemotherapy-resistant
disease). For this reason we examined and tested the
sensitivity of short-term in vitro cultures of USPC
obtained either from the primary endometrial site
(USPC-1 to -3) or from metastatic locations (USPC-4
to -6) to scalar doses of CPE. The sensitivity of these
primary USPC tumor cultures to CPE-mediated cytolysis was tested along with an appropriate claudin-3
and claudin-4-expressing positive control (ie, Vero
cells), and negative controls which do not express
detectable levels of either claudin-3 or claudin-4. As
representatively shown in Figure 3 for USPC-6, a
metastatic tumor cell line found highly resistant to
chemotherapy in vivo as well as in vitro by EDR
(data not shown), dramatic morphological alterations
of tumor cells including rapid detachment and ‘‘bleb
balloon’’ formation were evident after 5 minutes exposure to concentrations of CPE as low as 0.8 mg/mL.
Importantly, all USPC tested, regardless of their
primary or metastatic origin or their resistance to
chemotherapy, were highly sensitive to CPE-mediated cytolysis (Fig. 4). The cytotoxic effect was
dose-dependent and correlated positively with the
levels of either claudin-3 or claudin-4 expression as
tested by RT-PCR in tumor samples. With the single
exception of the USPC-3 cell line, which was partially
resistant to CPE (ie, 58% tumor killing at 24 hours
CPE exposure), all remaining USPC cultures including those derived from metastatic/chemotherapy resistant disease (USPC-4 to -6) were highly sensitive
to the exposure to CPE (Fig. 4). In contrast, all normal control cells tested including NEC, cervical keratinocytes, human fibroblasts, and mononuclear cells
lacking claudin-3 or claudin-4 expression were not
affected by CPE (Fig. 4).

Effect of CPE on Xenografted Chemotherapy-Resistant
USPC Cells In Vivo
For in vivo confirmation of our in vitro data, we
established subcutaneous and intraperitoneal USPC
xenografts in SCID mice by injection of claudin-3
and claudin-4 expressing USPC-6, a metastatic and
highly chemotherapy-resistant USPC cell line. In subcutaneous experiments, after the formation of large
subcutaneous tumors (ie, 2 cm in diameter), animals
were treated with a total of 10 injections of CPE or
saline directly into the tumor over a 2-week period.
After 15 days from the beginning of CPE therapy,
some animals were killed and the tumors were examined histologically. Tumor size was compared by
measuring the tumor volume before treatment and
upon death. As representatively shown in Figure 5,
subcutaneous CPE-treated USPC-6 tumors showed a

1318

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

FIGURE 2. Representative immunohistochemical staining for (A) claudin-4 on normal endometrial cell (NEC) 1 paraffin-embedded specimen, (B) human mesothelial cells, and (C,D) 2 USPC specimens. NEC 1 and mesothelial cells showed light to negligible membrane staining for claudin-4, whereas both USPC showed
strong cytoplasmic and membranous reactivity for claudin-4. Original magnification 3400.

dramatic reduction in tumor size, with clinical disappearance of the disease in all CPE-treated animals.
In contrast, animals treated with saline control injections developed rapidly progressing disease and had
to be euthanized 12 to 14 weeks after tumor injection. All animals examined for histologic confirmation of regression after CPE treatment showed large
necrotic areas comprising up to 90% of the histologic
sections (Fig. 6). In contrast, we found no necrosis in
the histologic sections of all control animals injected
with saline (not shown).
Because USPC, like ovarian serous papillary
tumors, may rapidly spread to the abdominal cavity
and induce a lethal peritoneal carcinomatosis in
humans, we established a further xenograft tumor
model in SCID mice by i.p. injection with the metastatic chemotherapy-resistant USPC-6 cell line. Primary USPC-6 tumor cells grew progressively as
numerous serosal nodules adherent to virtually all

intra-abdominal organs (peritoneum, omentum, diaphragm, bowel, liver, pancreas, spleen) and exhibited
the capacity for local tissue invasion and formation
of malignant ascites after 2 to 3 weeks from injection. Tumors first appeared grossly by the second
week as small nodules on the omentum and continuously grew to form a confluent omental mass by the
time the animals died (Fig. 7). Necropsies revealed
massive hemorrhagic ascites and numerous tumor
nodules, measuring 1 to 15 mm in diameter, studding the entire peritoneal surface and implanting the
serosa of virtually all intra-abdominal organs (Fig. 7).
Because in a previous report we found 6 mg of CPE
administered i.p. in 1 mL of saline to be a well-tolerated and safe dose in 100% of the animals (ie,
16.5  1.0 g female SCID mice),13 mice harboring
USPC-6 (a week after tumor injection with 15 3 106
cells) were treated with 6 mg of CPE administered i.p.
in 1 mL of saline every 96 hours for a total of 5 injec-

CPE-Mediated Therapy for USPC/Santin et al.

1319

FIGURE 4. Representative dose dependent Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE)-mediated cytotoxicity of uterine serous papillary carcinoma
(USPC) cell lines compared with positive control Vero cells or negative controls (ie, normal cells) after 24 hours exposure to CPE. Vero, positive control
cells. USPC-1 to USPC-6 uterine serous tumors. NEC, normal endometrial
cells; norm CX, normal cervix keratinocytes; fibroblast, normal human fibroblasts; LCL, Epstein-Barr-transformed B lymphocytes; PBL, normal peripheral
blood lymphocytes.

FIGURE 3. Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE)-mediated cytotoxicity
of uterine serous papillary carcinoma (USPC)-6 chemotherapy-resistant tumor
cells. Upper panel: Typical phenotype of primary monolayer USPC-6 tumor
cells in vitro before CPE exposure. Lower panel: USPC-6 cell line after 5-minute exposure to 0.8 mg/mL of CPE. Note the dramatic morphological alterations of USPC-6 tumor cells, which are now partially detached, nonviable,
and characterized by a ‘‘bleb balloon’’ formation.

tions. CPE injections were well tolerated and no
adverse events were observed throughout the complete treatment protocol either in control mice
receiving CPE alone or CPE-treated mice harboring
tumors. Importantly, whereas mice harboring i.p.
USPC-6 treated with saline all died within 9 weeks of
tumor injection (Fig. 8), animals treated with 5 CPE
injections survived significantly longer than control
animals did (P < .002, Fig. 8).

DISCUSSION
Our group has recently evaluated the genetic fingerprint of USPC,4 the most biologically aggressive and
chemotherapy-resistant variant of endometrial can-

cer. Claudin-3 and claudin-4, the natural receptors
for CPE, were found among the highest differentially
expressed genes in USPC. Because USPC are histologically similar to high-grade ovarian serous tumors
in their ability to rapidly spread to the abdominal
cavity and, in addition, are notorious for their high
resistance to chemotherapy,4,14–16 these findings
imply that USPC refractory to standard treatment
modalities may be susceptible to CPE-based therapeutic approaches. In this study we carefully evaluated the expression of CPE receptors at both the
RNA and protein levels in multiple flash-frozen
USPC biopsies and primary USPC cell lines. In addition, we studied the sensitivity of primary, metastatic,
and chemotherapy-resistant USPC cell lines to CPE
treatment in vitro. Finally, we tested the in vivo efficacy of local/regional CPE administrations as novel
therapy in 2 SCID mouse xenograft models harboring
established USPC refractory to chemotherapy.
Our studies demonstrated that 100% (20 out of
20) of the USPC tested for claudin-3 and claudin-4
expression by quantitative RT-PCR overexpress both
the high-affinity CPE receptor (claudin-4) as well as
the low-affinity CPE receptor (claudin-3). Importantly, USPC cell lines established from metastatic
foci of disease were found to express significantly
higher levels of claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptors
when compared with USPC cell lines established
from biopsies obtained from the primary tumor site

1320

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

FIGURE 6. Intratumoral injections of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin
(CPE) in uterine serous papillary carcinoma (USPC)-6 subcutaneous xenografts. After H&E staining, large necrotic areas comprising up to 90% of the
histologic section were detected in CPE-treated animals harboring chemotherapy-resistant disease (3200 magnification).

FIGURE 5. Gross appearance of subcutaneous uterine serous papillary
carcinoma (USPC)-6 xenografts in SCID mice (A) before and (B) after Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) treatment. Note the almost complete
disappearance of the large tumor nodule after multiple intratumoral CPE
injections.

(ie, endometrial cavity). Although the biological reasons for these differences in claudin-3 and claudin-4
receptor expression between primary and metastatic
sites of disease are not well understood, in highgrade serous papillary ovarian cancer (OSPC), a tumor histologically indistinguishable from USPC,
overexpression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 has
recently been associated with an increase in tumor
cell motility, invasion capability, and tumor cell survival.17 These data are consistent with our results in
USPC and suggest that high expression of claudin-3
and claudin-4 receptors in serous papillary uterine
and ovarian tumors may represent a marker of biological aggressiveness that correlates with the metastatic process. Importantly, the extremely high
expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 detected in all
metastatic USPC cell lines evaluated so far, including

USPC-6, a highly chemotherapy-resistant tumor cell
line, suggests that biologically aggressive USPC disease may be particularly susceptible to CPEmediated killing in vitro as well as in vivo. In agreement with this view, with a single exception (ie,
USPC-3), no USPC cell line was found viable after 24
hours exposure to CPE at the concentration of 3.3
mg/mL, a dose well tolerated when administered i.p.
in animal models harboring chemotherapy-resistant
USPC xenografts overexpressing claudin-3 and claudin-4 receptors. Importantly, in 5 out of 6 USPC cell
lines we found that exposure to CPE doses as low as
0.8 mg/mL was able to induce massive ‘‘bleb ballooning’’ and tumor cell death throughout USPC cultures
within minutes, demonstrating the dramatic sensitivity of these biologically aggressive tumors to CPE.
These results were in strong contrast with the lack of
sensitivity of normal endometrial epithelium as well
as other normal control cells to CPE-mediated cytolysis. These findings are likely explained by a limited
expression of claudin-3 and claudin-4 in normal epithelia compared with uterine serous tumor cells.
In vivo, multiple injections of well-tolerated
doses of CPE administered intratumorally led to
massive tumor necrosis and dramatically inhibited
subcutaneous tumor growth in claudin-3 and claudin-4-expressing USPC-6 SCID mouse xenografts.
Importantly, these results were obtained by challenging mice harboring extremely large tumor xenografts of USPC (ie, 10-week established tumors).
Furthermore, 5 i.p. injections of sublethal doses of
CPE had a significant inhibitory effect on tumor pro-

CPE-Mediated Therapy for USPC/Santin et al.

1321

FIGURE 7. Typical necropsy specimen from C.B-17/SCID mice after 8 to 9 weeks from the intraperitoneal injection of 15 3 106 viable uterine serous papillary carcinoma (USPC)-6 cells. Note the large omental and pelvic tumor masses and the presence of superficial liver implants.

FIGURE 8. Survival of C.B-17/SCID Mice after intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection
of 15 3 106 viable uterine serous papillary carcinoma (USPC)-6 tumor cells.
Animals harboring 1 week established USPC-6 xenografts were injected i.p.
with a total dose of 6 mg of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) in
1 mL of sterile saline solution as described in Materials and Methods. CPE
was administered i.p. every 96 hours for a total of 5 times. Mice were evaluated on a daily basis and sacrificed when moribund. The log-rank test
yielded P < .002 for the differences in survival.

the gut, lungs, and kidney,18 the potential high toxicity of CPE at doses used for systemic cancer therapy
in animal models may ultimately limit its use in
humans to regional applications. In this regard,
unlike previous toxin-based anticancer approaches,
such as antibody-based targeting strategies to deliver
activated forms of protein synthesis directed toxins
(for example, Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin),19
CPE is a membrane integrity-directed toxin with a
very different intrinsic mechanism of sensitivity and
toxicity.6–8,18 Taken together, our results suggest that
the local/regional administration of well-tolerated
doses of CPE may have great potential as a novel
treatment modality in patients harboring surgically
unresectable chemotherapy-resistant USPC. The
future design and implementation of Phase I clinical
trials in patients harboring chemotherapy-resistant
USPC will determine the feasibility and validity of
this novel therapeutic approach.

REFERENCES
1.

gression, with extended survival of animals harboring
established chemotherapy-resistant USPC in the abdominal cavity. It is worth noting, however, that
because claudin-3 and/or claudin-4 may be
expressed in some normal human tissues, including

2.
3.

Jemal A, Murray T, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2005.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:10–30.
Bohkman JV. Two pathogenetic types of endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol. 1983;15:10–17.
Santin AD, Bellone S, O’Brien TJ, Pecorelli S, Cannon MJ,
Roman JJ. Current treatment options for endometrial cancer. Exp Rev Anticancer Ther. 2004;4:679–689.

1322
4.

CANCER

April 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 7

Santin AD, Zhan F, Bellone S, et al. Discrimination between uterine serous papillary carcinomas and ovarian serous papillary tumours by gene expression profiling. Br J
Cancer. 2004;90:1814–1824.
5. Katahira J, Inoue N, Horiguchi ,Y, Matsuda M, Sugimoto N.
Molecular cloning and functional characterization of the
receptor for Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. J Cell
Biol. 1977;136:1239–1247.
6. Katahira J, Sugiyama H, Inoue N, Horiguchi Y, Matsuda M,
Sugimoto N. Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin utilizes
two structurally related membrane proteins as functional
receptors in vivo. J Biol Chem. 1997;272:26652–26658.
7. McClane BA. An overview of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. Toxicon. 1996;34:1335–1343.
8. Kokai-Kun JF, McClane BA. Evidence that a region(s) of the
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin molecule remains exposed on the external surface of the mammalian plasma
membrane when the toxin is sequestered in small or large
complexes. Infect Immun. 1996;64:1020–1025.
9. Kokai-Kun JF, McClane BA. Determination of functional
regions of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin through deletion analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 1977;25(Suppl 2):S165-167.
10. Kokai-Kun JF, McClane BA. Deletion analysis of the Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. Infect Immun. 1997;65:1014–
1022.
11. Holloway RW, Mehta RS, Finkler NJ, et al. Association
between in vitro platinum resistance in the EDR assay and
clinical outcomes for ovarian cancer patients. Gynecol
Oncol. 2002;87:8–16.

12. Santin AD, Diamandis EP, Bellone S, et al. Human kallikrein 6: a new potential serum biomarker for uterine serous
papillary cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:3320–3325.
13. Santin AD, Cane S, Bellone S, et al. Treatment of chemotherapy-resistant human ovarian cancer xenografts in C.B17/SCID mice by intraperitoneal administration of Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. Cancer Res. 2005;65:4334–
4342.
14. Levenback C, Burke TW, Silva E, Gershenson D. Uterine
papillary serous carcinoma (USPC) treated with cisplatin,
doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (PAC). Gynecol Oncol.
1992;46:317–32.
15. Nicklin JL, Copeland LJ. Endometrial papillary serous carcinoma: pattern of spread and treatment. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 1996;39:686–695.
16. Trope C, Kristensen GB, Abeler VM. Clear-cell and papillary
serous cancer: treatment options. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol. 2001;15:433–446.
17. Agarwal R, D’Souza T, Morin PJ. Claudin-3 and claudin-4
expression in ovarian epithelial cells enhances invasion
and is associated with increased matrix metalloproteinase2 activity. Cancer Res. 2005;65:7378–7385.
18. Michl P, Buchholz M, Rolke M, et al. Claudin-4: a new target for pancreatic cancer treatment using Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. Gastroenterology. 2001;121:678–684.
19. Mansfield E, Amlot P, Pastan I, FitzGerald DJ. Recombinant
RFB4 immunotoxins exhibit potent cytotoxic activity
for CD22-bearing cells and tumors. Blood. 1997;90:2020–
2026.

