Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Double autophagy modulators reduce 2-deoxyglucose uptake in
sarcoma patients
Mau-Shin Chi1,3, Cheng-Yen Lee1, Su-Chen Huang1, Kai-Lin Yang1, Hui-Ling Ko1,
Yen-Kung Chen2, Chen-Han Chung3, Kuang-Wen Liao3, Kwan-Hwa Chi1,4
1
2

Department of Radiation Therapy and Oncology, Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

3

Institue of Molecular Medicine and Bioengineering, National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan

4

chool of Medicine and Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, National Yang-Ming University,
S
Taipei, Taiwan

Correspondence to:
Kwan-Hwa Chi, e-mail: M006565@ms.skh.org.tw
Keywords: hydroxychloroquine, sirolimus, soft tissue sarcoma
Received: April 21, 2015      Accepted: August 26, 2015      Published: September 07, 2015

ABSTRACT
Rationale: According to the metabolic symbiosis model, cancer stromal
fibroblasts could be hijacked by surrounding cancer cells into a state of autophagy
with aerobic glycolysis to help provide recycled nutrients. The purpose of this study
was to investigate whether combined treatment with the autophagy inhibitor:
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and the autophagy inducer: sirolimus (rapamycin, Rapa)
would reduce glucose utilization in sarcoma patients.
Methods: Ten sarcoma patients who failed first-line treatment were enrolled in
this study. They were treated with 1 mg of Rapa and 200 mg of HCQ twice daily for two
weeks. The standardized uptake values (SUV) from pretreatment and posttreatment
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) scans were
reviewed, and changes from the baseline SUVmax were evaluated.
Results: Based on FDG PET response criteria, six patients had a partial response;
three had stable disease, and one had progressive disease. Nevertheless, none of
them showed a reduction in tumor volume. The mean SUVmax reduction in the 34
lesions evaluated was − 19.6% (95% CI = −30.1% to −9.1%), while the mean
volume change was +16.4% (95% CI = +5.8% to + 27%). Only grade 1 toxicities
were observed. Elevated serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase were detected after
treatment in most metabolic responders.
Conclusions: The results of reduced SUVmax without tumor volume reduction
after two weeks of Rapa and HCQ treatment may indicate that non-proliferative
glycolysis occurred mainly in the cancer associated fibroblast compartment, and
decreased glycolytic activity was evident from Rapa + HCQ double autophagy
modulator treatment.

between a tumor and its microenvironment, which triggers
chemo-resistance, might be of importance [2]. Cancerassociated fibroblasts (CAFs), which constitute a substantial
volume in a tumor microenvironment, are closely associated
with invasiveness, drug resistance, and metastasis to
fibroblasts, endothelial cells, or adipose tissue [3, 4].
Martinez-Outschoorn et al. proposed the autophagic
tumor stroma model and reported that cancer cells could
be seen as “metabolic parasites” for using oxidative stress

INTRODUCTION
The reported worldwide incidence rate of soft tissue
sarcoma ranges from 1.8 to 5 per 100,000 people per year
[1]. Multimodality treatment is often provided to patients
with primary disease, whereas chemotherapy is given to
those with metastatic disease. Unfortunately, sarcoma
is usually chemo-insensitive. In addition to the intrinsic
chemo-insensitivity of sarcoma cells, the interaction
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29808

Oncotarget

to extract recycled nutrients from adjacent stromal cells
[5, 6]. CAFs could produce high-energy nutrients (e.g.,
lactate and ketones) that fuel mitochondrial biogenesis
and oxidative metabolism in cancer cells. This novel
energy transfer mechanism is termed the “reverse
Warburg effect” [7, 8]. Autophagy in the tumor stroma
serves as a “battery” to fuel tumor growth, progression,
and metastasis, often independent of angiogenesis
[5]. Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) or other autophagy/
lysosome inhibitors may be useful to therapeutically
restore the “normal” CAFs by blocking their state of
hyper-autophagy. Furthermore, induction of sarcoma cell
autophagy with sirolimus (rapamycin, Rapa) could prevent
them from using recycled nutrients [5]. Thus, concurrent
administration of the two above-mentioned agents might
block the metabolic parasite relationship within a sarcoma
tumor microenvironment [5, 8]. Such a strategy may
effectively “starve” cancer cells, rendering them more
vulnerable to cytotoxic therapy. The metabolic modulation
and change in bioenergetic homeostasis of the tumor
microenvironment could affect mitochondrial electron
transport complexes and glycolysis-related pathways in
cancer cells, thus altering reactive oxygen species and
adenosine triphosphate synthesis, and decreasing their
survival capability under chemotherapy stress [9, 10].
Since CAFs usually have the largest increase in
glucose uptake, [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG PET) of tumors might
specifically detect the tumor stroma rather than the tumor
cells [11]. The purpose of this study was to demonstrate
that a decrease in glucose metabolism could mirror the
attenuating metabolic-parasite relationship between CAFs
and sarcoma cells by Rapa and HCQ treatment.

to − 9.1%), and the median was − 23.7% (interquartile range,
− 41.8% to 4.1%). The changes of SUVmax versus volume
changes form the ten enrolled patients are shown in
Figure 2. The mean change of SUVmax was −31.3% (95%
CI = −51.9% to – 10.6%) while the mean volume change
on the same lesion was + 16.4% (95%CI = + 5.8% to +
27.0%). The disparity between glucose consumption rate
and proliferation need in the tumors suggested a metabolic
reprogramming process might have occurred. According to
the EORTC 1999 criteria, six patients had a partial response,
three had a stable disease, and one had a progressive
disease. The biochemical profile changes before and after
two weeks of Rapa and HCQ treatment are shown in Figure
3. Overall, there were no significant changes in the fasting
plasma glucose, total cholesterol, or triglyceride levels.
However, as shown in Figure 3B, the lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) level was significantly increased after treatment.
Interestingly, most patients with elevated LDH levels were
metabolic responders (Figure 4).

DISCUSSION
This study demonstrated for the first time that a
metabolic symbiosis relationship between CAFs and
sarcoma cells might be altered by Rapa and HCQ treatment.
An inhibition of glycolysis within the tumors without tumor
growth was noted.
According to the metabolic symbiosis theory,
cancer cells induce oxidative stress in adjacent fibroblasts,
resulting in the onset of a myofibroblastic pro-autophagic
phenotype [13]. This pro-autophagic phenotype in
fibroblasts leads to a loss of mitochondria via autophagy,
forcing CAFs to undergo aerobic glycolysis and provide
lactate as energy source for cancer cells. Autophagy in the
tumor stroma is also used by adjacent epithelial cells to
fuel tumor growth via oxidative mitochondrial metabolism
[14, 15]. The autophagy inhibitor chloroquine (or HCQ)
blocks the process in CAFs and stops the energy flow to
sarcoma cells, while the autophagy inducer, Rapa, inhibits
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and
induces autophagy in cancer cells to reduce tumor growth
rate. The so-called autophagy paradox by concurrent
administration of an autophagy inducer and inhibitor could
be explained by the two-compartment model in which
the two drugs were suggested to have different target
preferences [16]. However, Rapa and HCQ combination
may have a synergistic effect on the same target. As
shown in Figure 5, the inhibition of the mTOR signal
by RAPA decreased hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha
(HIF-α) and glucose uptake and therefore decreased
glycolysis. The decreased glycolysis activated more
autophagy in glycolysis-dependent cells and rendered
them more vulnerable to HCQ treatment by accumulation
of wasted products in lysosomes. The decreased glycolytic
activity without a concomitant decreased proliferation
rate suggested that the Rapa and HCQ combination might

RESULTS
The primary end point of this study was the
SUVmax change after two weeks of Rapa and HCQ
treatment. The secondary end point was the response rate
after eight weeks of treatment. However, most patients
discontinued treatment before response assessment
because of progression of disease and slow recruitment of
cases (13 patients from August 2012 to June 2014), so the
study was closed prematurely. Ten patients were evaluable
by sequential [18F]-FDG PET images at baseline and after
two weeks of treatment. Patient characteristics of these ten
patients are shown in Table 1. All of the patients tolerated
Rapa and HCQ treatment well with only mild grade 1
adverse events and were observed after a median of two
weeks treatment (range two to four weeks) (Table 2).
There were 34 lesions evaluable for changes of
SUVmax; these changes are presented in Figure 1. The
mean baseline SUVmax was 13.5 (95% confidence
interval [CI] = 10.1–16.9), and the mean posttreatment
value was 9.9 (95% CI = 7.5–12.3; p < 0.003). The mean
reduction in SUVmax was − 19.6% (95% CI = − 30.1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29809

Oncotarget

Table 1: Patient characteristics (n = 10)
n

%

  Male

5

50

   Female

5

50

   Liposarcoma

2

20

   Leiomyosarcoma

2

20

  Osteosarcoma

1

10

   Angiosarcoma

1

10

   Fibrosarcoma

1

10

  Sarcomatoid carcinoma

1

10

   Malignant fibrous histiocytoma

1

10

   Endometrioid stromal sarcoma

1

10

Median

Range

63

17–80

Grade 1 (n)

%

Mucositis

0

0

Skin rash

2

20

Hair loss

0

0

Nausea

3

30

Diarrhea

1

10

Constipation

1

10

Dyspnea

0

0

Somnolence

0

0

Asthenia

0

0

Fever

0

0

Variables
Sex

Pathology

Age (years)

Table 2: Toxicities (n = 10)
Adverse effect

not be able to block the proliferative signals in sarcoma
cells. Figure 6 shows the coexistence of oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) sarcoma cells and glycolytic
sarcoma cells, similar to the metabolic coupling model
proposed from osteosarcoma [17, 18]. Although the Rapa
and HCQ combination decreased the glycolytic activity,
the decreased lactate supply may have compensated by
stimulating the OXPHOS function in the mitochondriarich sarcoma cells, based on the observed tumor
proliferation and decreased glycolytic activity.
The inhibition of glucose metabolism assessed by
[18F]-FDG PET without a decrease in tumor proliferation
after Rapa plus HCQ treatment in sarcoma patients is
somewhat surprising, because reduction of both SUVmax
and SUV (mean) are generally regarded as indicative
of decreased tumor viability. The observed decrease
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in glucose consumption on tumor area may have been
largely due to the tumor microenvironment and therefore
independent of tumor viability. This finding was novel in
certain aspects. Firstly, this is the first report on the effect
of combined Rapa and HCQ on glucose metabolism
in cancer patients. To our knowledge, no publication
is available regarding the effect of combined double
autophagy modulators on glucose metabolism measured
by [18F]-FDG PET in cancer patients. A Rapa analogue,
everolimus, has been reported to decrease glucose
uptake in few type of cancers [19, 20]. The decrease in
glucose uptake by everolimus has not been linked to the
inhibition of glycolysis rather than cytotoxicity in any
study. Secondly, our results provide functional image
evidence of the metabolic parasite relationship proposed
by Lisanti’s group, namely that catabolic fibroblasts
29810

Oncotarget

Figure 1: A waterfall plot of posttreatment changes in SUVmax from baseline for thirty-four evaluable lesions.

Figure 2: Maximum post treatment SUVmax versus tumor volume changes from baseline for each enrolled patient.
(■ indicates SUVmax change, □ indicates tumor volume change).

donate the necessary fuels to anabolic cancer cells [7, 8].
The non-proliferative and mitochondrial-poor stromal
cells are probably dominant in the sarcoma tumor
microenvironment, where CAFs usually have the largest
increase in glucose uptake. [9] Thirdly, the MartinezOutschoorn’s theory of “battery-operated tumor growth”
might not be reversed by Rapa and HCQ treatment
because the discrepancy of decreased glucose uptake with
increased tumor volume may indicate that proliferative
and mitochondrion-rich cancer cells still thrive after
autophagy modulation therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Rapa and newer generation mTOR inhibitors have
limited clinical activity, except in certain tumor types with
heavy dependence on mTOR [20, 21]. Sarcoma is not one
of them. Recently, either a Rapa analogue or HCQ has been
used as an adjunctive anti-cancer agent in clinical trials
[22–24]. The median decrease in SUVmax of −23.7% by
Rapa and HCQ treatment in our patient cohort cannot be
considered an effective sarcoma treatment modality based on
the current results. Since cancer cells use autophagy as a prosurvival mechanism during chemotherapy, we hypothesized
that a strategy of combined Rapa, HCQ, and chemotherapy
29811

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Calibration plots of fasting plasma glucose A. lactate dehydrogenase B. total cholesterol C. and triglyceride
D. levels before and after two weeks of hydroxychloroquine and sirolimus treatment.
as a triplet combination should be more synergistic than only
Rapa and HCQ doublet combination and might reverse drug
resistance for the following reasons: (1.) The use of Rapa
and chemotherapy might promote cancer cells (including
sarcoma) to a higher autophagy state, while HCQ blocks their
final autolysosome pathway and switches the pro-survival
to pro-death process as an example of synthetic lethality
[25], (2.) Systemic HCQ might block the vicious cycle of
energy supply from the tumor microenvironment through
the inhibition of CAF’s autophagy, and (3.) The metabolic
uncoupling of oxidative cancer cells from glycolytic stroma
by Rapa and HCQ may render cancer cells more vulnerable
to mitochondria-targeted drugs or oxidative stresses.
As shown in Figure 4, LDH levels significantly
increased after treatment, which might indicate a compen­
satory process when aerobic glycolysis was inhibited by
Rapa and HCQ. LDH levels might be used as surrogate
biomarkers in future clinical trials. It has been reported
that a dose-dependent rise in LDH after treatment with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

everolimus and octreotide correlated with better progressionfree survival on neuroendocrine tumors. [26] A rise in LDH
in association with mTOR inhibition has been reported to
be associated anti-angiogenesis associated hypoxia [27].
An everolimus and chloroquine combination has also been
reported to inhibit angiogenesis [28]. Recent studies showed
that the endothelial cells were one of the most critical tissues
depending on aerobic glycolysis [29]. The rise in LDH
shortly after treatment with autophagy modulators provide
more evidence to suggest that a direct anti-glycolysis effect
from the Rapa and HCQ doublet combination occurs in the
tumor microenvironment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
This study was reviewed and approved by our
institutional review board. All patients provided written
29812

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Correlation between SUVmax and lactate dehydrogenase level changes after two weeks of hydroxy­
chloroquine and sirolimus treatment.
informed consent before participation. It was registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov under registration No. NCT01842594.
Patients with histologically confirmed sarcoma who failed
first-line treatment were eligible. In addition, the eligibility
criteria included at least one measurable lesion (>2 cm), an
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of
0–2, as well as adequate hepatic, renal, and hematological
functions (levels of serum bilirubin ≤ 25 mg/dL, aspartate
aminotransferase ≤ 5 x institutional upper limit of normal,
serum creatinine ≤ 2.0 mg/dL, absolute neutrophil count
≥ 1.5 × 109/L, and platelet count ≥ 100 × 109/L). Patients
were required to be free from any previous chemotherapy
for more than five weeks before entering this study. Those
with clinically significant cardiovascular diseases such as
uncontrolled hypertension, myocardial infarction, unstable
angina, or congestive heart failure of New York Heart
Association grade II and higher were excluded.

least eight hours before the PET/CT scan. PET attenuation
correction factors were calculated from CT images using
low-dose CT (120 keV and 20 mAs) in shallow inspiration.
The scanner had an average spatial resolution of 4.4 mm
at 1 cm and 5.0 mm at 10 cm from the transverse field
of view (FOV) and a maximum sensitivity of 8.1 kcps/
MBq at center of FOV. Its axial FOV was 21.6 cm. After
intravenous administration of 185 MBq (5 mCi) of [18F]FDG, PET images were acquired for three minutes per bed
position. The uptake period between the FDG injection and
the beginning of PET scan was 60 ± 10 minutes (range,
50–70 minutes). The PET/CT scan started from the head
and moved toward the pelvis; a head pillow and knee
cushion were used to render positioning comparable in
both scanners. Images were reconstructed via proprietary
Siemens HD PET software using the iterative TrueX and
time of flight ordered-subsets expectation maximization
(TOF OSEM) method. They were displayed in three
orthogonal projections and as a whole-body maximumpixel-intensity reprojection image for visual interpretation.
SUVs were calculated for all lesions. Regions
of interest (ROI) were contoured to represent tumors
(>2 cm) and organs (lungs, spleen, and liver) on all
transaxial and coronal slices. ROIs were normalized for
injection dose and body weight, and the maximum voxel
value was recorded for each region or organ. The highest
SUV measured with increased uptake was considered the
SUVmax. Correlative diagnostic CT examinations were
used for accurate localization. The most intense uptake at
baseline was identified as the index lesion and evaluated
for treatment response.
Two medical physicists independently analyzed
the changes in SUVmax between baseline and post

Procedures
All of the patients underwent a physical examination
and laboratory assessment of hematological, hepatic, and
renal functions before entering the study. A baseline wholebody [18F]-FDG PET was performed before therapy
initiation. Patients received 1 mg of Rapa and 200 mg of
HCQ twice a day before meal. A second [18F]-FDG PET was
performed two weeks later. Toxicity was assessed according
to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology
Criteria version 3.0. No dose modification was allowed.
All of the PET scans were conducted using a Siemens
Biograph mCt PET/CT scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions
Inc., Molecular Imaging, IL, USA) with extended axial field
of view (TrueV). The patients were required to fast for at
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29813

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Synergistic effect of Rapa and HCQ combination. CAF cells are glycolytic-dependent cells. The combined use of Rapa
and HCQ has synergistic effect on reducing glucose consumption rate.

treatment PET scans. Metabolic response after two weeks
of treatment was evaluated according to the European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC 1999) guidelines [12]. A complete response
was defined as the complete resolution of [18F]-FDG
uptake within the tumor volume. A partial response was
defined as a reduction of 25% or greater in tumor [18F]FDG uptake, whereas stable disease was defined as an
increase or decrease in [18F]-FDG uptake of less than
25%. Progressive disease was defined as an increase in
[18F]-FDG uptake of 25% or higher, or as the appearance
of a new [18F]-FDG uptake focus.
The CT images were forward to the Pinnacle
treatment planning system, version 9.8 (Philips, Fitchburg,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

WI, USA) where tumor sizes were measured on a
digitalized image. An independent radiation oncologist
ensured that the same lesions on SUVmax were measured
and evaluated at pretreatment and on follow-up scans.

Statistical analysis
Percent changes from baseline SUVmax and tumor
volume after Rapa and HCQ treatment were plotted as a
waterfall chart. Differences in the results of comparative
tests were determined by t-test and considered significant if
the two-sided p < 0.05. All statistical analysis was performed
using the Statistical Application System software, SAS
Version 9.1.3(SAS institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA).
29814

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Model of uncoupling energy transfer within sarcoma tumor. Rapa and HCQ combination will inhibit the aerobic
glycolysis and reduce the energy transfer from CAFs to OXPHOS sarcoma cells and glycolytic sarcoma cells. The decreased lactate supply
has little effect on OXPHOS sarcoma cells due to their independent energy sources, their mitochondria.

CONCLUSIONS

2.	 Klemm F, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of
therapeutic response in cancer. Trends Cell Biol. 2015;
25:198–213.

The cancer metabolism pathway compartmen­
talization model (oxidative vs glycolytic) is still in its
infancy due to limited clinical methods for direct study.
The combination treatment with Rapa and HCQ in
sarcoma patients by [18f]-FDG-PET revealed a reduction
of 2-deoxyglucose uptake while increasing tumor volume,
which fits the catabolic tumor fibroblasts and anabolic
cancer cells model well. The reversal of “reversed
Warburg effect” in CAFs by the combination of autophagy
inducers (Rapa) and autophagy inhibitor (HCQ) may
offer opportunities for treatment strategies targeted on the
deregulated metabolism in tumor microenvironment.

3.	 Valcz G, Sipos F, Tulassay Z, Molnar B, Yagi Y.
Importance of carcinoma-associated fibroblast-derived
proteins in clinical oncology. J Clin Pathol. 2014;
67:1026–1031.
4.	 Madar S, Goldstein I, Rotter V. ‘Cancer associated fibroblasts’—more than meets the eye. Trends Mol Med. 2013;
19:447–453.
5.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Whitaker-Menezes D, Pavlides S,
Chiavarina B, Bonuccelli G, Casey T, Tsirigos A, Migneco G,
Witkiewicz A, Balliet R, Mercier I, Wang C, Flomenberg N,
Howell A, Lin Z, Caro J, et al. The autophagic tumor
stroma model of cancer or “battery-operated tumor growth”:
A simple solution to the autophagy paradox. Cell Cycle.
2010; 9:4297–4306.

REFERENCES

6.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Pavlides S, Howell A, Pestell RG,
Tanowitz HB, Sotgia F, Lisanti MP. Stromal-epithelial
metabolic coupling in cancer: integrating autophagy and
metabolism in the tumor microenvironment. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2011; 43:1045–51.

1.	 Farhidzadeh H, Zhou M, Goldgof DB, Hall LO, Raghavan M,
Gatenby RA. Prediction of treatment response and metastatic disease in soft tissue sarcoma. SPIE 9035, Medical
Imaging 2014: Computer-Aided Diagnosis, 903518; doi:
10.1117/12.2043792.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29815

Oncotarget

7.	 Lisanti MP, Sotgia F, Pestell RG, Howell A, MartinezOutschoorn UE. Stromal glycolysis and MCT4 are hallmarks of DCIS progression to invasive breast cancer. Cell
Cycle. 2013; 12:2935–2936.

16.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Lisanti MP, Sotgia F. Catabolic
cancer-associated fibroblasts transfer energy and biomass to
anabolic cancer cells, fueling tumor growth. Semin Cancer
Biol. 2014; 25:47–60.

8.	 Lisanti MP, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Sotgia F. Oncogenes
induce the cancer-associated fibroblast phenotype: metabolic symbiosis and “fibroblast addiction” are new therapeutic targets for drug discovery. Cell Cycle. 2013;
12:2723–2732.

17.	 Sotgia F, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Lisanti MP. The
reverse Warburg effect in osteosarcoma. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:7982–7983.
18.	 Bonuccelli G, Avnet S, Grisendi G, Salerno M, Granchi D,
Dominici M, Kusuzaki K, Baldini N. Role of mesenchymal
stem cells in osteosarcoma and metabolic reprogramming of
tumor cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:7575–7588.

9.	 Kinnaird A, Michelakis ED. Metabolic modulation of cancer: a new frontier with great translational potential. J Mol
Med (Berl). 2015; 93:127–42.

19.	 Nogova L, Boellaard R, Kobe C, Hoetjes N, Zander T,
Gross SH, Dimitrijevic S, Pellas T, Eschner W, Schmidt K,
Bangard C, Hayes W, Thomas RK, Dietlein M, Giaccone G,
Hoekstra OS, et al. Downregulation of 18F-FDG uptake in
PET as an early pharmacodynamic effect in treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer with the mTOR inhibitor everolimus. J Nucl Med. 2009; 50:1815–1819.

10.	 Martinez-Outschoorn U, Sotgia F, Lisanti MP. Tumor
microenvironment and metabolic synergy in breast cancers: critical importance of mitochondrial fuels and function. Semin Oncol. 2014; 41:195–216.
11.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Lin Z, Trimmer C, Flomenberg N,
Wang C, Pavlides S, Pestell RG, Howell A, Sotgia F,
Lisanti MP. Cancer cells metabolically “fertilize” the tumor
microenvironment with hydrogen peroxide, driving the
Warburg effect: Implications for PET imaging of human
tumors. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:2504–2520.

20.	 Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Oudard S, Hutson TE, Porta C,
Bracarda S, Grunwald V, Thompson JA, Figlin RA,
Hollaender N, Urbanowitz G, Berg WJ, Kay A, Lebwohl D,
Ravaud A. Efficacy of everolimus in advanced renal cell
carcinoma: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled
phase III trial. Lancet. 2008; 372:449–456.

12.	 Young H, Baum R, Cremerius U, Herholz K, Hoekstra O,
Lammertsma AA, Pruim J, Price P. Measurement
of clinical and subclinical tumour response using
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography: review and EORTC recommendations. European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) PET Study Group. Eur J Cancer. 1999;
35:1773–1782.

21.	 Hasskarl J. Everolimus. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2014;
201:373–392.
22.	 Andre F, O’Regan R, Ozguroglu M, Toi M, Xu B, Jerusalem G,
Masuda N, Wilks S, Arena F, Isaacs C, Yap YS,
Papai Z, Lang I, Armstrong A, Lerzo G, White M, et al.
Everolimus for women with trastuzumab-resistant, HER2positive, advanced breast cancer (BOLERO-3): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:580–591.

13.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Balliet RM, Rivadeneira DB,
Chiavarina B, Pavlides S, Wang C, Whitaker-Menezes D,
Daumer KM, Lin Z, Witkiewicz AK, Flomenberg N,
Howell A, Pestell RG, Knudsen ES, Sotgia F, Lisanti MP.
Oxidative stress in cancer associated fibroblasts drives
tumor-stroma co-evolution: A new paradigm for understanding tumor metabolism, the field effect and genomic
instability in cancer cells. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:3256–3276.

23.	 Sotelo J, Briceno E, Lopez-Gonzalez MA. Adding chloroquine to conventional treatment for glioblastoma multiforme: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Ann Intern Med. 2006; 144:337–343.
24.	 Rangwala R, Chang YC, Hu J, Algazy KM, Evans TL,
Fecher LA, Schuchter LM, Torigian DA, Panosian JT,
Troxel AB, Tan KS, Heitjan DF, DeMichele AM,
Vaughn DJ, Redlinger M, Alavi A, et al. Combined MTOR
and autophagy inhibition: phase I trial of hydroxychloroquine and temsirolimus in patients with advanced solid
tumors and melanoma. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1391–1402.

14.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Trimmer C, Lin Z, WhitakerMenezes D, Chiavarina B, Zhou J, Wang C, Pavlides S,
Martinez-Cantarin MP, Capozza F, Witkiewicz AK,
Flomenberg N, Howell A, Pestell RG, Caro J, Lisanti MP,
et al. Autophagy in cancer associated fibroblasts promotes
tumor cell survival: Role of hypoxia, HIF1 induction and
NFKB activation in the tumor stromal microenvironment.
Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:3515–3533.

25.	 Wang Y-S, Huang Y-C, Fong W-L, Chi M-S, Chi K-H.
Abstract 5611: A synthetic lethality combination with chloroquine and rapamycin on chemosensitization Proceedings:
AACR 103rd Annual Meeting 2012; Chicago, IL.

15.	 Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Pavlides S, Whitaker-Menezes D,
Daumer KM, Milliman JN, Chiavarina B, Migneco G,
Witkiewicz AK, Martinez-Cantarin MP, Flomenberg N,
Howell A, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP, Sotgia F. Tumor cells
induce the cancer associated fibroblast phenotype via
caveolin-1 degradation: implications for breast cancer and
DCIS therapy with autophagy inhibitors. Cell Cycle. 2010;
9:2423–2433.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Yao JC, Phan AT, Chang DZ, Wolff RA, Hess K, Gupta S,
Jacobs C, Mares JE, Landgraf AN, Rashid A, Meric-Bernstam
F. Efficacy of RAD001 (everolimus) and octreotide LAR in
advanced low- to intermediate-grade neuroendocrine tumors:
results of a phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:4311–4318.

29816

Oncotarget

27.	 Lukacova S, Sorensen BS, Alsner J, Overgaard J, Horsman MR.
The impact of hypoxia on the activity of lactate dehydrogenase in two different pre-clinical tumour models. Acta Oncol.
2008; 47:941–947.

and Chloroquine on Endothelial Cell Number Reduction Is
Paralleled by Increased Apoptosis and Reduced Autophagy
Occurrence. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e79658.
29.	 Stapor P, Wang X, Goveia J, Moens S, Carmeliet P.
Angiogenesis revisited - role and therapeutic potential
of targeting endothelial metabolism. J Cell Sci. 2014;
127:4331–41.

28.	 Grimaldi A, Balestrieri ML, D’Onofrio N, Di Domenico G,
Nocera C, Lamberti M, Tonini G, Zoccoli A, Santini D,
Caraglia M, Pantano F. The Synergistic Effect of Everolimus

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29817

Oncotarget

