Original Article

A Phase 2 Clinical Trial of Sequential Neoadjuvant
Chemotherapy With Ifosfamide, Doxorubicin, and Gemcitabine
Followed by Cisplatin, Gemcitabine, and Ifosfamide in Locally
Advanced Urothelial Cancer
Final Results
Arlene O. Siefker-Radtke, MD1; Colin P. Dinney, MD2; Yu Shen, PhD3; Dallas L. Williams, RN1;
Ashish M. Kamat, MD2; H. Barton Grossman, MD2; and Randall E. Millikan, PhD, MD1

BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves the survival of patients with high-risk urothelial cancer. However, the lack of curative alternatives to cisplatin-based chemotherapy is limiting for patients with neuropathy or hearing loss. Sequential chemotherapy
also has not been well studied in the neoadjuvant setting. The authors explored sequential neoadjuvant ifosfamide-based chemotherapy in a patient cohort at high risk of noncurative cystectomy. METHODS: Patients with muscle-invasive cancer and lymphovascular
invasion, hydronephrosis, clinical T3b and T4a (cT3b-4a) disease (defined as a 3-dimensional mass on examination under anesthetic
or invasion into local organs), micropapillary tumors, or upper tract disease received 3 cycles of combined ifosfamide, doxorubicin,
and gemcitabine followed by 4 cycles of combined cisplatin, gemcitabine, and ifosfamide. The primary endpoint was downstaging to
pT1N0M0 disease or lower. RESULTS: At a median follow-up of 85.3 months, the 5-year overall survival (OS) and disease-specific survival (DSS) rates for all 65 patients were 63% and 68%, respectively (95% confidence interval: 5-year OS rate, 0.52%-0.76%; 5-year
DSS rate, 0.58%-0.81%). Pathologic downstaging to pT1N0 disease or lower occurred in 50% of patients who underwent cystectomy
and in 60% of patients who underwent nephroureterectomy and was correlated with the 5-year OS rate (pT1N0 disease or lower,
87%; pT2-pT3aN0 disease, 67%; and pT3b disease or higher or lymph node-negative disease, 27%; P  .001 for pT1 or lower vs pT2 or
higher). Variant histology was associated with an inferior 5-year DSS rate (50% vs 83% in pure transitional cell carcinoma; P ¼ .02).
The most frequent grade 3 toxicities were infection (38%), febrile neutropenia (22%), and mucositis (18%). There were 3 grade 4 toxicities (myocardial infarction, thrombocytopenia, and vomiting) and 1 grade 5 toxicity in a patient who refused antibiotics for pneumonia. CONCLUSIONS: Sequential therapy was active and maintained the historic expectation of achieving a cure. The current results
strongly reinforced previous experience suggesting that pathologic downstaging to pT1N0 disease or less is a useful surrogate for
C 2012 American Cancer Society.
eventual cure in patients with urothelial cancer. Cancer 2013;119:540-7. V
KEYWORDS: bladder cancer, urothelial cancer, clinical trial, chemotherapy, surgery, neoadjuvant, ifosfamide, gemcitabine,
doxorubicin, sequential.

INTRODUCTION
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the standard for treating surgically resectable, invasive urothelial cancer1,2 However, neoadjuvant chemotherapy remains largely underused because of concern that the risks, especially the toxic effects of chemotherapy, may outweigh the benefits of treatment. At a previous plenary session of the American Society of Clinical Oncology,
the merits of neoadjuvant chemotherapy were debated.3,4 Much work is needed to improve survival and reduce toxicity
for our patients with bladder cancer.
Sequential chemotherapy, as one potential method of improving survival, has not yet been explored in the neoadjuvant setting. Clinical trials in the metastatic setting have not observed any definitive benefit and have been limited by their
fixed schedules.5 Using a sequence incorporating a for-cause determination, in which chemotherapy that is working is continued longer and is switched early when there is a lack of response, may provide additional benefit.6 By using a for-cause,
sequential approach in the metastatic setting, we have observed a potential improvement in surgical consolidation of
lymph node metastases.7
Corresponding author: Arlene O. Siefker-Radtke, MD, Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
1155 Herman Pressler Boulevard, Unit 1374, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 745-1625; asiefker@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Urology, The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Presented at the 2008 Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology; May 30 to June 3, 2008; Chicago, IL.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27751, Received: April 4, 2012; Revised: June 9, 2012; Accepted: June 12, 2012, Published online August 22, 2012 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

540

Cancer

February 1, 2013

Sequential Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy/Siefker-Radtke et al

On the other side of the neoadjuvant debate is the
toxicity of therapy. With the understanding that many
patients are not candidates for cisplatin-based chemotherapy as a result of pre-existing peripheral neuropathy and/
or hearing loss, we developed chemotherapy regimens
using the alkylating agent ifosfamide as the backbone.
Preclinical data suggested that there was enhanced DNA
damage with combinations that incorporated a nucleoside
(gemcitabine) with an alkylating agent (ifosfamide or cisplatin).8 Two combinations arose from this process, 1
that maximized the alkylating agent and minimized the
nucleoside (combined ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and gemcitabine [IAG]),9 and the other that maximized the
nucleoside agent gemcitabine with much lower doses of
alkylating agents (combined cisplatin, gemcitabine, and
ifosfamide [CGI]).10 By using this combination sequentially, we hoped to overcome potential chemotherapy-resistant cells, with the objective of improving response and
enhancing the long-term survival for these patients. In
addition, because this sequence used a much lower cumulative dose of cisplatin, we hoped to avoid peripheral neuropathy and provide an alternative active regimen for
patients with pre-existing peripheral neuropathy or baseline hearing loss.
Previous work from our group also suggested that
clinical and pathologic features predict for a high likelihood of extra-organ extension with pathologic upstaging
in up to 86% of patients.11 This suggests the existence of a
group of patients at particularly high risk from their cancer who would be candidates for aggressive sequential
chemotherapy. Here, we the report final results from this
phase 2 clinical trial of sequential neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with high-risk, surgically resectable urothelial cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
From August 2001 to April 2006, 65 patients enrolled
onto this M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Institutional
Review Board-approved clinical trial. All patients had surgically resectable urothelial carcinoma and were selected
because they had a high risk of undergoing noncurative
resection by virtue of the following features: a 3-dimensional mass on examination under anesthesia performed
after thorough transurethral resection (TUR); tumor
invasion into the prostatic stroma, vagina, or uterus (clinical T4a [cT4a] disease); lymphovascular invasion; hydronephrosis; micropapillary histology; or high-grade upper
tract cancer of the ureter or renal pelvis. Patients who were
not conventionally considered resectable with curative
intent (those with tumors fixed to the pelvic sidewall
Cancer

February 1, 2013

[cT4b disease] or with any evidence of lymph node
involvement or distant metastases) were not eligible for
this clinical trial. No prior systemic chemotherapy was
allowed; however, patients may have received any prior
intravesical therapy.
Patients had adequate physiologic reserve, with a
Zubrod performance status 2, or 3 if of recent onset and
caused entirely by the cancer and not by a comorbid medical condition. Adequate bone marrow reserve was defined
as an absolute neutrophil count >1800/lL at baseline
and a platelet count >150,000. Adequate liver function
required a transaminase 3 times the upper limit of normal with a conjugated bilirubin 1.5 mg/dL or total bilirubin 2.5 mg/dL. Patients were required to have a
creatinine clearance either measured or calculated with
the Cockcroft-Gault equation of 45 mL/minute.
Patients who had an abnormal electrocardiogram or a history of heart disease were required to have an ejection faction 50% to be eligible for this trial.
Chemotherapy

Sequential chemotherapy consisted of 3 cycles of IAG followed by 4 cycles of CGI. If an inadequate response was
observed during the repeat 6 week cystoscopy, then
patients were switched after 2 cycles IAG to 6 cycles of
CGI.
Initially, patients received the following doses for
IAG: ifosfamide 2000 mg/m2 daily with 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate sodium (MeSNa) on days 1 through 4,
doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 on day 3, and gemcitabine at 200
mg/m2 on days 2 and 4. However, 4 of the first 10
patients experienced toxicity, especially myelosuppression, necessitating a dose reduction. The starting doses
were modified in subsequent patients as follows: ifosfamide 1500 mg/m2 infused over 3 hours daily on days 1
through 4; MeSNa 225 mg/m2 infused over 15 minutes
at hours zero, 3, 7, and 11 daily on days 1 through 4; doxorubicin 45 mg/m2 over 15 minutes as a peripheral intravenous infusion or over 12 to 18 hours infused through a
central line on day 3 only; and gemcitabine 150 mg/m2
infused over 30 minutes on days 2 and 4 only.
While they were receiving IAG, patients were
hydrated aggressively, frequently using a sodium acetate
infusion. Patients received methylene blue with or without albumin in the event of neurologic toxicity, and the
ifosfamide dose was reduced in subsequent cycles if neurologic symptoms recurred despite treatment with methylene blue. Serum creatinine was monitored on a daily
basis, and treatment was withheld if renal insufficiency
developed. Nearly all patients with hydronephrosis had a
541

Original Article

nephrostomy tube placed before chemotherapy, even in
the setting of normal serum creatinine, to help maintain
renal function. This inpatient regimen was repeated at 3week intervals with growth factor support.
Patients received the following doses for CGI: gemcitabine 900 mg/m2 over 90 minutes on day 1, ifosfamide
1000 mg/m2 over 60 minutes on day 1, followed by cisplatin 50 mg/m2 in 500 mL normal saline with 12.5 g
Mannitol over 3 hours on day 1. MeSNa was not required
with this low dose of ifosfamide. The cisplatin typically
was followed by a mannitol infusion consisting of 5%
dextrose quarter-normal saline with mannitol 40 g/L for
at least 2 or 3 L. This inpatient or outpatient regimen was
repeated at 2-week intervals with growth factor support as
necessary.
Clinical Evaluation

Within 6 weeks of study entry, patients had either a computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging scans
of the abdomen and pelvis, a chest x-ray or computed tomography scan of the chest, and an electrocardiogram
within 6 months. A baseline bone scan was only required
in the presence of bone pain or elevated calcium or alkaline phosphatase levels. Before registration, all patients
were required to undergo examination by a member of
the Department of Urology, to undergo cystoscopy with a
thorough TUR of bladder tumor, and to be examined
under anesthesia to evaluate for the presence of a 3dimensional mass and for bladder mobility. After 6 weeks
of treatment, patients underwent repeat cystoscopy and
TUR to evaluate for response. All patients were recommended for cystectomy regardless of the degree of
response observed in the bladder.
Response Criteria

A major response was defined as downstaging to pathologic T1N0 (pT1N0) disease or lower at the time of cystectomy. Responses of lesser magnitude were scored as
treatment failures. Progression was counted as any objective sign of recurrent or progressive disease. If symptoms
predated histologic or radiographic confirmation of recurrence, then the date of progression was taken as the date of
onset of symptoms.
Statistical Considerations

The primary endpoint of this trial was downstaging to
pT1N0 disease or lower after chemotherapy, an endpoint
well described as a surrogate for eventual cure. The Simon
2-stage minimax design was used.12 Assuming an a priori
response rate of 35% (P0 ¼ .35) with an expected
response rate of 50% (P1 ¼ .50) with neoadjuvant therapy, this study required 49 patients to provide 80% power
542

Table 1. Patient Characteristics

Characteristic

No. of
Patients (%)

Age: Median [range], y

62.5 [34-82]

Sex
Men
Women

50 (77)
15 (23)

Zubrod performance status
41 (63)
24 (37)

0
1

Site of primary tumor
Bladder/urethra
cT2
cT3b
cT4a

Renal pelvis/ureter

60
37
18
5
5

(92)
(62)
(30)
(8)
(8)

37
28
13
34
14

(57)
(43)
(20)
(57)
(22)

Histology at diagnosis
TCC only
TCC and variant
Micropapillary
LVI
Hydronephrosis

Abbreviations: cT, clinical tumor classification; LVI, lymphovascular invasion;
TCC, transitional cell carcinoma.

with a ¼ .10. In the second stage, the study required at
least 22 responses in 49 patients to be considered successful for further study. An additional 16 patients were accrued
to account for patients who refused surgery, those who progressed to unresectable tumors, or those who received treatment for upper-tract urothelial cancer. All patients who
received any chemotherapy were included in the final analysis. The probability of early termination under P0 was P0 ¼
.46, and the expected sample size was 40.8.
Kaplan-Meier curves were used to estimate the distribution of overall survival (OS) and disease-specific survival (DSS). The 5-year survival probability and its
corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were provided for each study cohort. Nonparametric log-rank tests
were used to compare survival curves according to pathologic stage or histology. A multivariate Cox proportional
hazards model was used to explore the effects of tumor
characteristics on survival. The proportional hazards
assumption was verified using the test statistic based on
weighted residuals. All statistical tests were 2-sided at a
significance level of P ¼ .05.
RESULTS
Patient Characteristics

Baseline characteristics for all 65 patients are listed in Table 1. Please note that all patients had at least 1 of the
high-risk features noted above (see Materials and
Cancer

February 1, 2013

Sequential Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy/Siefker-Radtke et al

Table 2. Clinical Versus Pathologic Stage at Cystectomy

Pathologic Stage:
No. of Patients
Clinical pT0N0 pT1N0 pT2N0 pT3/T4aN0 pT4b, N1,
Stagea
or M1
cT2N0
cT3bN0
cT4aN0

20
6
0

3
0
1

3
3
1

0
5
0

9
3
1

Abbreviations: cT, clinical tumor classification; Mþ, positive for metastasis;
Nþ, positive lymph node status; N0, negative lymph node status; pT, pathologic tumor classification.
a
Two patients with cT4aN0 disease and 2 patients with cT2N0 disease
refused surgery, and there was 1 toxic death (a patient with cT3bN0
disease).

Methods). All patients had a histologic diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma; and 43% of patients had another variant histology, such as micropapillary, squamous,
adenocarcinoma, or sarcomatoid changes associated with
their urothelial tumor. In all instances, except in the setting of micropapillary tumors, the variant histology must
have been present in <50% of the tumor specimen to be
considered eligible for this trial.
Response and Survival

Overall, pathologic downstaging to pT1 disease or lower
occurred in 30 of 60 patients (50%) who had primary
bladder tumors (Table 2) and in 3 of 5 patients who had
primary tumors of the renal pelvis, with pT0 rates of 43%
and 0%, respectively. Downstaging was correlated with 5year OS (log-rank P  .001): Patients who were downstaged to pT1N0 disease or lower, to pT2-T3aN0 disease,
and to pT3b disease and lower or lymph node-negative
disease had 5-year OS rates of 87%, 67%, and 27%,
respectively (Fig. 1). For patients who completed 3 cycles
of IAG before CGI, the rates for those with pT0N0 disease and pT1N0 disease or lower were 60% and 65%,
respectively. For those who received 2 cycles of IAG and
switched early to CGI because of a lack of response or toxicity, the rates for pT0N0 disease and for pT1N0 disease
or lower were 17% and 26%, respectively. This likely
reflects the poor biology observed in nonresponding
patients, who typically had aggressive tumors and poor
outcomes. There were only 2 patients who failed to
respond to IAG and had pT0 disease after CGI. The absence of residual disease on repeat, postchemotherapy cystoscopy is not a guarantee of achieving pT0N0 status, as
observed in other studies. In our experience, even when
there was no visible tumor remaining on repeat cystoscopy, 42% of patients had residual tumor present at
cystectomy.
Cancer

February 1, 2013

Figure 1. Overall survival (OS) distribution is illustrated
according to pathologic stage in patients with urothelial cancer. For all enrolled patients, pathologic downstaging to
pT1N0 disease or lower occurred in 51% of patients. Downstaging was correlated with an improvement in OS (P < .001
comparing pT3aN0 disease and lower vs either pT3b and
greater or lymph node-positive [Nþ] disease). Patients who
were downstaged to pT1N0 disease and lower, pT2-T3aN0
disease, and pT3b disease and higher or Nþ disease had 5year OS rates of 86%, 67%, and 27%, respectively. CI indicates
confidence interval; surv. prob., survival probability.

For all enrolled patients, the combined 5-year OS
and DSS rates were 63% and 68%, respectively (95% CI:
5-year OS rate, 52%-76%; 5-year DSS rate, 58%-81%;
median follow-up, 85.3 months) (Fig. 2). In the patients
who underwent lymph node dissection for primary bladder tumors, the median number of lymph nodes removed
was 12 (range, 3-39 lymph nodes). Three patients did not
undergo lymph node dissection because of previous abdominal surgery or previous lymph node dissection (ie,
previous prostate cancer). All patients who progressed did
so within 18 months of their surgery except for 1 late progression in the lung at 53 months. There was some concern that the lung finding reflected a second primary
cancer; however, because the scans were not available for
review at our institution, we counted this patient as having
progressive urothelial cancer.
The presence of variant histology was associated
with an inferior 5-year DSS rate of 50% (95% CI, 35%72%) compared with 83% (95% CI, 71%-96%) for pure
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) (log-rank P ¼ .02)
(Fig. 3). Although there was a similar trend of histology
for OS, the difference in OS was not statistically significant (log-rank P ¼ .1451). The presence of micropapillary
543

Original Article

Figure 2. Overall survival distribution is illustrated. For all enrolled patients, the 5-year overall survival rate was 63%. CI
indicates confidence interval; surv. prob., survival probability.

histology was associated with a 5-year OS and DSS rate of
54% (95% CI, 33%-89%).
In the multivariate Cox model, whether a patient
with primary bladder cancer (n ¼ 60) was downstaged to
pT1N0M0 disease or lower after chemotherapy was a statistically significant predictor (relative risk, 0.13; 95% CI,
0.04-0.40 for downstaging vs no downstaging; P < .001),
and pure TCC histology also was a significant factor
affecting DSS (relative risk, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.14-0.89 for
TCC vs mixed histology; P ¼ .03); whereas other tumor
characteristics (clinical stage at diagnosis, hydronephrosis,
micropapillary tumor, lymphovascular invasion, and performance status) were not statistically significant in the
multivariate models. The proportional hazards model
assumption was satisfied for both risk factors. In the multivariate Cox model, tumor histology (TCC vs mixed) did
not have a statistically significant association with the OS
endpoint, whereas patient downstaging was always associated significantly with the OS endpoint. Similar findings
were observed when patients with upper-tract urothelial
cancer were included in the analysis (n ¼ 65), in which a
final pathology of pT1N0M0 disease or lower remained
statistically significant (P < .001), whereas pure TCC histology was marginally significant (P ¼ .07).
Toxicity

In total, the 65 patients received 166 cycles of IAG and
196 cycles of CGI. The only treatment-related death was
from pneumonia during neutropenia, which occurred in
Cycle 1. This patient refused additional therapy, includ544

Figure 3. Disease-specific survival (DSS) is illustrated according to histology. For all enrolled patients, those who had pure
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) histology had a longer DSS
compared with those who had tumors that expressed variant
histology (DSS rate, 83% and 50%, respectively; log-rank P ¼
.02). CI indicates confidence interval; surv. prob., survival
probability.

ing antibiotics, and quickly died of the pneumonia. Three
patients experienced grade 4 toxicities (myocardial infarction, platelet transfusion, and vomiting). The most frequent grade 3 toxicities (Table 3) were infection (38%),
febrile neutropenia (22%), mucositis 18%, and platelet
transfusion (12%). It is noteworthy that no patients developed peripheral neuropathy as a result of this chemotherapy. Three patients discontinued IAG after their first
cycle, including 1 who experienced a fatal toxicity as
described earlier, a second patient who developed renal
insufficiency, and a third patient who had rapid tumor
progression. Eleven patients required dose reductions of
IAG, whereas 10 patients required dose reductions of
CGI. Forty patients completed all 3 cycles of IAG. Of the
25 patients who transitioned early to CGI, 13 transitions
were because of the lack of response, 3 transitions were by
patient choice, and 9 transitions were because of toxicity
or physician concern about the patient’s ability to complete all 3 cycles. Seven of these 9 patients received an ifosfamide dose of 2000 mg/m2. After the first 10 patients
were treated, the ifosfamide dose was decreased to 1500
mg/m2, which was much more tolerable.
Surgical Complications

The median hospital stay for the patients who underwent
cystectomy was 8 days (range, 4-38 days) (Table 4,). There
Cancer

February 1, 2013

Sequential Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy/Siefker-Radtke et al

Table 3. Chemotherapy-Related Toxicity

Chemotherapy-Related
Toxicity

Table 4. Surgical Parameters and Perioperative Morbidity

No. of
Patients (%)

Grade 5

No. of Patients (%)

Surgical parameters
Hospital stay: Median [range], d

Infectiona

8 [4-38]

1 (2)

Diversion type

Grade 4
Myocardial infarction
Platelet transfusion
Vomiting

1 (2)
1 (2)
1 (2)

Grade 3b

Ileal conduit
Orthotopic neobladder
Indiana pouch
Nephroureterectomy

24
22
4
5

(44)
(40)
(7)
(9)

Positive margins

Infection
Febrile neutropenia
Mucositis
Platelet transfusion
Catheter-related thrombus
Dehydration
Fatigue
Nausea/vomiting
PRBC transfusion
Catheter-related infection
Chest pain
Diarrhea
Pain

25
14
12
8
5
5
5
4
3
2
2
2
2

(38)
(22)
(18)
(12)
(8)
(8)
(8)
(6)
(5)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)

Abbreviations: PRCB, packed erythrocytes.
a
Neutropenic fever/pneumonia developed in 1 patient who refused additional treatment, including antibiotics.
b
Additional grade 3 toxicities that occurred in 1 patient each were arthralgia,
dyspnea, rash, hallucination, thrombosis/embolus, and vasovagal reaction.

were no perioperative deaths. Six patients received 5 or
more units of packed erythrocytes postoperatively; however,
most of those patients were anemic as a result of their neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Two patients underwent repeat surgery within the perioperative period, including 1 surgery for
a bowel obstruction that required lysis of adhesions with an
area of bowel torsion and 1 surgery for a patient who
required embolectomy of an arterial thrombus in their aortofemoral graft. A full listing of perioperative complications
within a 30-day period are listed in Table 4. Ten patients
did not undergo surgery: Six patients declined surgery despite our firm recommendation, whereas 4 patients progressed (2 in the bone and 2 elsewhere in the bladder and
lung). Unfortunately, all patients who declined surgery had
a relapse of their cancer.
DISCUSSION
Overall, 69% of patients in our study were cured of their
high-risk bladder cancer. It is noteworthy that our results
confirmed that neoadjuvant chemotherapy resulting in no
residual muscle-invasive cancer in the cystectomy specimen is highly associated with OS and DSS. Our current
results are similar to the findings from our previous
randomized trial of neoadjuvant versus adjuvant methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (M-VAC)
Cancer

Postsurgery, N 5 55

February 1, 2013

Serosal
Perioperative mortality

1 (2)
0 (0)

Postoperative complications
Cardiovascular
Ischemia
Arrhythmia

1 (2)
1 (2)

Thrombotic
Pulmonary embolus
Arterial thrombusa

1 (2)
1 (2)

Gastrointestinal
Ileusb
Small bowel obstructionc
Pancreatitis

4 (7)
1 (2)
1 (2)

Infection
Pneumonia
Urinary tract
Wound
No obvious source

4
1
2
3

(7)
(2)
(4)
(5)

Transfusion of 5 U PRBCs

6 (11)

Acute renal insufficiency

2 (4)

Surgical complications
Urine leak
Skin dehiscence
Fascial dehiscence
Rectal laceration
Obturator nerve damage

Reason for declining surgery
Patient decision
Bone metastases
Progression, bladder and lung

2
6
0
2
1

(4)
(11)
(0)
(4)
(2)

10
6
2
2

Abbreviations: PRCBs, packed erythrocytes.
a
One patient with aortobifemoral grafts required embolectomy.
b
Ileal complications were those that required a delay in discharge >10
days after surgery.
c
Small bowel obstructions were adhesions and bowel torsion that required
surgery.

in a similar high-risk cohort11 and to the findings from
the Southwest Oncology Group Intergroup Study,1
which was a retrospective study that demonstrated a survival benefit for patients with pT1N0 disease or lower.13
The consistency of these findings firmly establishes that a
pathologic response is a useful, early surrogate for achieving an eventual cure.
545

Original Article

In the current trial, we used sequential chemotherapy in the hopes of enhancing pathologic response and
overall cure. Compared with other trials in the metastatic
setting in which fixed sequences were used,5 in the current
trial, we used a for-cause approach for switching to the second sequence.6 Patients underwent repeat cystoscopy after
the first 2 cycles of chemotherapy and, if they responded,
then received additional IAG; nonresponders were
switched earlier to CGI. However, the similar pathologic
downstaging rates and survival in previous neoadjuvant
trials suggested that there was no additional benefit from
this sequential approach. It is possible that patients who
did not respond to chemotherapy had such poor biology
that they would not have responded to any chemotherapy.
Only 2 of our patients who were switched early for failing
to respond to IAG had pT0 disease after they received
CGI. It is also possible that the combination of CGI,
which uses lower doses of cisplatin and ifosfamide, may
not be sufficient to overcome resistance to the initial
chemotherapy. Therefore, sequencing with a high-dose
ifosfamide/low-dose gemcitabine regimen and a low-dose
ifosfamide/high-dose gemcitabine regimen may not have
been as complementary as we had originally anticipated.
Although IAG was associated with toxicity, it is
noteworthy that there was no peripheral neuropathy. Despite the toxicity, 100% of patients received at least 1 cycle
of IAG, 93% received at least 2 cycles, and 61% received
3 cycles. Although the sequential therapy we investigated
does not appear to be suitable for use outside the setting of
dedicated, multispecialty care, IAG may be an attractive
option for fit patients with pre-existing peripheral neuropathy or hearing loss who are at risk for worsening of these
conditions with the receipt of cisplatin-based chemotherapy. However, our experience suggests that, to tolerate
high-dose ifosfamide in this elderly patient group,
patients must have adequate renal function (defined as a
creatinine clearance of approximately 50 mL/minute),
and nephrostomy tubes must be used in the setting of
obstructed kidneys. We also observed that this regimen is
difficult for most patients in their 80s to tolerate, and we
would not recommend its use in this age group.
We used clinical criteria to select for patients with a
higher risk of having extra-organ extension or lymph node
involvement at cystectomy. In a previous clinical trial in
which patients were randomized either to undergo initial
cystectomy or to receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the
presence of these high-risk features was associated with
clinical up-staging in 86% of patients who underwent initial surgery.11 Patients who had muscle-invasive tumors
only (without high-risk features) were not eligible for this
546

trial; and, at our institution, these patients traditionally
have undergone initial cystectomy followed by the receipt
of adjuvant chemotherapy in the presence of extra-organ
extension or lymph node involvement. A retrospective
review of our experience with this strategy suggests that
we can achieve similar long-term outcomes, sparing many
patients from the toxicity of systemic chemotherapy (article in preparation). This is especially important when
avoiding toxicity of chemotherapy in a population of
patients that frequently includes elderly individuals with
comorbid medical conditions.
However, the application of our high-risk criteria
may be difficult to apply in the community setting. For
example, distinguishing between lymphovascular invasion
and a retraction artifact in a TUR specimen requires an
experienced pathologist. Examination under anesthesia to
determine whether there is tumor beyond the wall of the
bladder requires a urologist skilled in this examination
and a thorough TUR. The treatment we describe is a truly
multidisciplinary collaboration between urologists, pathologists, and genitourinary medical oncologists that may be
difficult to achieve outside the context of a tertiary center.
Although the current results may be slightly better
than historic expectation, it is clear that the cohort we
studied continues to have a disappointing prognosis despite very aggressive application of chemotherapy and surgery. Current treatment fails for approximately 33% of
patients with high-risk bladder cancer, and those who
have persistent extravesical or lymph node disease despite
receiving primary chemotherapy have an especially poor
prognosis. The ability to identify patients who are
unlikely to benefit from primary chemotherapy would
allow us to explore alternative strategies and is an important research objective. One such alternative, based on our
previous finding that vascular endothelial growth factor
expression is a powerful predictor of outcome in this
cohort,14 is the combination of bevacizumab with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. This is the current strategy under
investigation in our center.
In conclusion, similar response and survival were
observed with the sequential IAG/CGI combination in
our patients as compared with clinical trials with neoadjuvant M-VAC in a similar historical cohort. The toxicity
profile of the sequential combination provides a useful alternative in the setting of peripheral neuropathy or hearing loss. However, the use of high-dose ifosfamide can be
difficult in this patient population, requiring dedicated
toxicity management, and it may be more suitable to a tertiary care facility. The presence of advanced disease despite preoperative chemotherapy continues to indicate a
Cancer

February 1, 2013

Sequential Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy/Siefker-Radtke et al

poor prognosis, and the ability to select these patients
before chemotherapy would provide a cohort for initial
surgery or chemotherapy combinations to overcome their
resistance pathways. These results reinforce previous experience suggesting that pathologic downstaging to
<pT1N0 or lower is a useful surrogate for achieving an
eventual cure.
FUNDING SOURCES
This work was supported by funding from the M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center Charlene Curley Fund.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy alone for locally
advanced bladder cancer [see comment; erratum appears in N Engl
J Med. 2003;349:1880]. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:859–866.
2. International Collaboration of Trialists; Medical Research Council
Advanced Bladder Cancer Working Party (now the National Cancer
Institute Bladder Cancer Clinical Studies Group); European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Genito-Urinary Tract
Cancer Group, et al. International phase III trial assessing neoadjuvant cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine chemotherapy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer: long-term results of the BA06 30894
trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:2171–2177.
3. Bajorin DF. Plenary debate of randomized phase III trial of neoadjuvant MVAC plus cystectomy versus cystectomy alone in patients
with locally advanced bladder cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19(18
suppl):17S–20S.
4. Sternberg CN, Parmar MK. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is not (yet)
standard treatment for muscle-invasive bladder cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2001;19(18 suppl):21S–26S.

Cancer

February 1, 2013

5. Milowsky MI, Nanus DM, Maluf FC, et al. Final results of sequential doxorubicin plus gemcitabine and ifosfamide, paclitaxel, and cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with metastatic or locally advanced
transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:4062–4067.
6. Logothetis CJ, Siefker-Radtke A. Words of wisdom. Re: final results
of sequential doxorubicin plus gemcitabine and ifosfamide, paclitaxel, and cisplatin chemotherapy in patients with metastatic or
locally advanced transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium. Eur
Urol. 2010;57:728–729.
7. Siefker-Radtke AO, Kamat AM, Williams DL, et al. A phase II
randomized 4-regimen selection trial incorporating response for sequential chemotherapy in metastatic, unresectable urothelial cancer:
final results from the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center [abstract].
J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(15S). Abstract 5071.
8. Plunkett W, Ghandi, V. Nucleoside analogs: cellular pharmacology,
mechanisms of action and strategies for combination therapy. In:
Cheson BKM, Plunkett W, eds. Nucleoside Analogs in Cancer
Therapy.New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 1997:1–35.
9. Millikan RE, Plunkett WK, Smith TL, Williams DL, Logothetis
CJ. Gemcitabine modulation of alkylator therapy: a phase I trial of
escalating gemcitabine added to fixed doses of ifosfamide and doxorubicin. Cancer. 2001;92:194–199.
10. Pagliaro LC, Millikan RE, Tu SM, et al. Cisplatin, gemcitabine,
and ifosfamide as weekly therapy: a feasibility and phase II study of
salvage treatment for advanced transitional-cell carcinoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2002;20:2965–2970.
11. Millikan R, Dinney C, Swanson D, et al. Integrated therapy for
locally advanced bladder cancer: final report of a randomized trial
of cystectomy plus adjuvant M-VAC versus cystectomy with both
preoperative and postoperative M-VAC. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:
4005–4013.
12. Simon R. Optimal 2-stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Control
Clin Trials. 1989;10:1–10.
13. Sonpavde G, Goldman BH, Speights VO, et al. Quality of pathologic response and surgery correlate with survival for patients with
completely resected bladder cancer after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Cancer. 2009;115:4104–4109.
14. Slaton JW, Millikan R, Inoue K, et al. Correlation of metastasis
related gene expression and relapse-free survival in patients with
locally advanced bladder cancer treated with cystectomy and chemotherapy. J Urol. 2004;171(2 pt 1):570–574.

547

