majority of patients have not experienced such dramatic results.
In addition, the latest immunotherapy drugs are expensive—in
the range of $120,000 to $150,000.
That leaves physicians trying to balance their optimism
with realistic expectations. “This is one of the most exciting
ﬁndings in cancer in the last 5 to 10 years,” says Walter Stadler,
MD, section chief of hematology/oncology at the University of
Chicago Medicine in Illinois. “But we have dealt with this for
as long as I’ve been in this business in terms of communicating
the hopefulness and promise we see in new drugs while at the
same time articulating the challenges. This is not going to make
everyone’s cancer go away.”

PD-1 Inhibitors

New Immunotherapies
Show Promise in Some
Patients
Physicians try to balance optimism with
realistic expectations

W

hen Therese Bocklage, MD, a 55-year-old pathologist at
the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, learned
the superﬁcial melanoma that she’d had removed from the back
of her leg 21 years earlier had returned as stage IV disease, she
immediately began exploring her options.
She soon heard about medical oncologist Antoni Ribas,
MD, PhD, of Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at the
University of California at Los Angeles, and his work with
immunotherapy. She remembers well their ﬁrst meeting. “I
pretty much thought I had a year to live,” says Dr. Bocklage,
“but when Toni told me, ‘This could give you decades,’ it was
like an electric volt. Of course, nothing is guaranteed, but he
just had this air of conﬁdence and hope.”
Dr. Bocklage joined a clinical trial at the University of
California at Los Angeles for the new immunotherapy drug
pembrolizumab. She commuted every 2 weeks from New Mexico
for nearly 2 years to receive the treatment, completing the trial in
December 2013. After 6 months, the tumors were gone and she
continues to remain cancer free. Her worst side eﬀect was fatigue.
“I’ve certainly learned you can really have a revolution that comes
from an area people had pretty much dismissed,” she says.
Although patients such as Dr. Bocklage have shown
remarkable responses to the latest types of immunotherapies, the

Cancer
CANCER

April 15, 2015
APRIL 15, 2015

For many years, scientists have researched techniques to help
the immune system ﬁght cancer. In the 1990s, interferon-_2b and interleukin-2 were developed to trigger the immune
system to attack melanoma and several other types of cancers.
However, they had to be given in massive doses and were very
toxic, helping approximately 1 in 10 people, says Dr. Ribas.
More recently, scientists have learned that blocking certain
immune system checkpoints enables the immune system to ﬁght
cancer. These eﬀorts led to approval by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 2011 of ipilimumab, a monoclonal
antibody that blocks the activity of a checkpoint protein called
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4).
In addition, in 2014 the FDA granted accelerated approval to
2 new monoclonal antibodies, nivolumab and pembrolizumab,
which block another immune checkpoint, the programmed
cell death protein 1 (PD-1) pathway, or its ligands, PD-L1 and
PD-L2.
Approximately 10% to 15% of patients treated with
CTLA4 have a signiﬁcant immune response, Dr. Ribas notes,
adding that one of his patients who received the drug has been
cancer free for 12 years. However, approximately 1 in 5 of these
patients experience serious side eﬀects in which the immune
system begins attacking normal organs, causing a host of
problems.
Although all the ﬁnal data are not yet available regarding
the PD-1 inhibitors, Dr. Ribas believes they appear even more
promising than ipilimumab. “We’re getting higher response
rates in the range of a third of the patients, and we’re having
long-lasting responses—1.5 to 2 years—with fewer side eﬀects,”
he says.
For example, in a recent randomized controlled study of
418 patients with previously untreated metastatic melanoma,
the overall survival rate was 72.9% in the group treated with
nivolumab compared with 42.1% in the group treated with
1155
1

© FRESHIDEA / FOTOLIA.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

chemotherapy (dacarbazine).1 The most commonly reported
side eﬀects were fatigue, itching, and nausea. Dr. Ribas says the
study had to be closed early to allow patients in the control
group to receive the PD-1 inhibitor.
One theory as to why these anti-PD-1 drugs may be more
eﬀective than ipilimumab is that they are more speciﬁc to the
immune system cells that are attempting to ﬁght the cancer, Dr.
Ribas says, although it is worth noting that to date the 2 types of
drugs have not been compared in a head-to-head study.

Every single company is developing
these drugs—it’s a remarkable
change in the ﬁeld of immunooncology, and it’s like cracking the door
open. Now we have to learn more.
—Antoni Ribas, MD, PhD
The impact of PD-1 inhibitors is likely to go far beyond
melanoma. This class of antibodies is being developed in
some 30 cancers and has shown clear activity in patients with
cancers of the lung, head and neck, bladder, and kidney as well
as Hodgkin disease. Dr. Ribas says he expects to see approvals
for the drugs in the treatment of lung cancer, bladder cancer,
and Hodgkin disease this year. What the cancers that have
responded to the drugs appear to have in common is that they
are induced either virally or by carcinogens, altering the cells’
DNA and thereby allowing the immune system to recognize the
cancer as being diﬀerent from normal cells, he adds.
“At Yale, we have some 4-year or longer survivors in lung
cancer who normally have months to live,” says Roy Herbst,
MD, PhD, chief of medical oncology at the Yale Cancer Center
in New Haven, Connecticut. “We’re all pretty excited—people
are coming from all over to receive these therapies. But the one
thing we have to remember is it’s not working for every patient.”
At the University of Chicago, Dr. Stadler is treating patients
with bladder and kidney cancers with the PD-1 inhibitors
nivolumab, pembrolizumab, and MPDL3280A. “We’re seeing
tumors shrink where we never expected them to, in diseases
that were not expected to be responsive to immunotherapy,”
he says.

Managing Expectations
Nevertheless, Drs. Stadler and Herbst say they make an eﬀort
to foster realistic expectations in patients. “I have a very honest
conversation and share with patients what we know and that

we’re still trying to learn whether patients are going to live
longer and better on these drugs,” Dr. Stadler says.
Although he understands why some patients with advancedstage cancer might take the attitude that they have “nothing to
lose” by trying an experimental therapy, he says that it is not
always the case. “There are a lot of things you can lose, including
the time it takes to go back and forth to the physician’s oﬃce
and exposing yourself to side eﬀects and toxicities that can
actually be worse than doing nothing,” Dr. Stadler says.
Still, he and his colleagues encourage patients to participate
in clinical trials when possible and continue to design trials for
many diﬀerent types of patients to answer speciﬁc questions.
One of the keys to better understanding speciﬁcally which
patients will beneﬁt from these immunotherapies is ﬁnding
biomarkers that predict who will respond, Dr. Herbst says. He
and his colleagues recently published an article highlighting a
biomarker that was predictive of 78% of patients who had a
response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A. The biomarkers
will require further validation studies.2 “We know the therapy is
eﬀective, but we need to make it more eﬀective by identifying
the right groups and the right combinations of therapy,” Dr.
Herbst says.
As these new drugs are approved and discussed at
professional meetings, it is important to educate the medical
community about their toxicities and how to work with
patients who do not respond, he says. “Every single company
is developing these drugs—it’s a remarkable change in the ﬁeld
of immunooncology, and it’s like cracking the door open,” Dr.
Ribas says. “Now we have to learn more.”
Meanwhile, his patient, Dr. Bocklage, is back to doing
the activities she enjoys while encouraging other patients with
cancer to consider participating in immunotherapy clinical
trials. She tells other patients, “Try to be as informed as possible
and ﬁnd out what treatments are available. You don’t have to
give up.”
She invites patients and physicians to contact her at
tbocklage@salud.unm.edu if they have questions about her
experience.

References
1. Robert C, Long GV, Brady B, et al. Nivolumab in previously untreated
melanoma without BRAF mutation. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:320-330.
2. Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, et al. Predictive correlates of response to the
anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature. 2014;515:563-567.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28992

FDA Approves Gardasil 9 for More Types of HPV

I

n December 2014, the FDA approved Gardasil 9 (human
papillomavirus [HPV] 9-valent vaccine recombinant) (Merck
and Company, Kenilworth, NJ) for the prevention of certain
diseases caused by 9 types of HPV. The new vaccine covers 5
more HPV types than the previously approved formulation of
Gardasil.
1156

The new vaccine is approved for use in females aged 9 to
26 years and males aged 9 to 15 years. It has the potential to
prevent approximately 90% of cervical, vulvar, vaginal, and anal
cancers. Speciﬁcally, it is approved to prevent those cancers that
are caused by HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 and for
the prevention of genital warts caused by HPV types 6 or 11. The

Cancer

April 15, 2015

