www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 15716-15731
Research Paper

A long term, non-tumorigenic rat hepatocyte cell line and its
malignant counterpart, as tools to study hepatocarcinogenesis
Maria Maddalena Angioni1,*, Kevin Bellofatto2,*, Simone Merlin2, Silvia Menegon3,
Andrea Perra1, Annalisa Petrelli3, Pia Sulas1, Silvia Giordano3, Amedeo Columbano1,
Antonia Follenzi2
1

Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, 09124 Cagliari, Italy

2

Department of Health Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale, 28100 Novara, Italy

3

Department of Oncology, University of Torino School of Medicine, Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo,
Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Antonia Follenzi, email: antonia.follenzi@med.uniupo.it
Amedeo Columbano, email: columbano@unica.it
Silvia Giordano, email: silvia.giordano@unito.it
Keywords: resistant hepatocyte, CD90.1, CD24, HCC cell lines, immortalized non-tumorigenic cells
Received: March 03, 2016     Accepted: January 03, 2017     Published: February 01, 2017

ABSTRACT
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide
and the second cause of cancer-related death. Search for genes/proteins whose
expression can discriminate between normal and neoplastic liver is fundamental for
diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic purposes. Currently, the most used in vitro
hepatocyte models to study molecular alterations underlying transformation include
primary hepatocytes and transformed cell lines. However, each of these models
presents limitations. Here we describe the isolation and characterization of two rat
hepatocyte cell lines as tools to study liver carcinogenesis. Long-term stable cell lines
were obtained from a HCC-bearing rat exposed to the Resistant-Hepatocyte protocol
(RH cells) and from a rat subjected to the same model in the absence of carcinogenic
treatment, thus not developing HCCs (RNT cells). The presence of several markers
identified the hepatocytic origin of both cell lines and confirmed their purity. Although
morphologically similar to normal primary hepatocytes, RNT cells were able to
survive and grow in monolayer culture for months and were not tumorigenic in vivo.
On the contrary, RH cells displayed tumor-initiating cell markers, formed numerous
colonies in soft agar and spheroids when grown in 3D and were highly tumorigenic
and metastatic after injection into syngeneic rats and immunocompromised mice.
Moreover, RNT gene expression profile was similar to normal liver, while that of RH
resembled HCC. In conclusion, the two cell lines here described represent a useful
tool to investigate the molecular changes underlying hepatocyte transformation and
to experimentally demonstrate their role in HCC development.

most of their features, such as their proliferative capacity
following specific growth factor stimulation or expression
of drug/xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes [3]. Thus, to
improve the maintenance of hepatocyte function and the
longevity of the cultures, several alternatives have been
developed, but still several problems need to be overcome.
Some conditions were identified to improve in vitro
culture, including continuous medium and oxygen supply,
and metabolite removal [4, 5]. In addition, various hollow

INTRODUCTION
Primary cultures of normal hepatocytes are widely
used to study the biochemical/molecular events involved
in cell death, proliferation and differentiation [1, 2].
However, several disadvantages limit their use: 1) high
inter-individual variability due to differences of the liver of
origin (age, gender, healthy/pathological status, xenobiotic
treatment); 2) the ability to retain only for a short period
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15716

Oncotarget

fiber bioreactor systems were developed using hepatocytes
of several species [6]. In these systems, cells attach to the
surface of fibers or membranes and reorganize themselves
into three-dimensional structures that may result in a
hepatocyte microenvironment closely resembling the
physiological one. Unfortunately, the described cell
culture systems are not yet standardized and cannot be
easily transferred to other laboratories.
To overcome limitations that negatively regulate
human hepatocyte viability and functionality, isolated
rodent hepatocytes have been increasingly used as a tool
to identify pharmacological and toxicological responses
to drugs. Primary rat hepatocytes represent a useful
experimental model as their isolation is a relatively
easy procedure, guaranteeing a good success rate and
an adequate degree of reproducibility. In addition, this
procedure provides a large number of cells from a single
rat liver. Nevertheless, their use cannot be exploited for
studying the biochemical/molecular events leading to cell
transformation, as primary hepatocytes survive in culture
no longer than 1 week. Even though long-lasting HCC
cell lines are useful for drug screening and/or molecular
manipulation of gene expression, a major limit in their use
is the lack of a normal counterpart for reference.
In the present study, taking advantage of the
Resistant Hepatocyte model of rat hepatocarcinogenesis
(R-H) [7], we generated and characterized a long-term,
non-tumorigenic hepatocyte cell line (RNT), and the
corresponding fully transformed cell line (RH). These
matched cell lines represent a valuable model to study
hepatocarcinogenesis, through genetic engineering aimed
at reproducing the multistep process of liver cancer
development.

contact inhibition when growing in monolayer (Figure 1A,
1C, 1E). On the opposite, a more elongated morphology
(fibroblast-like) characterizes RH cells (Figure 1B, 1D),
that are able to proliferate under suboptimal culture
conditions (low serum, Figure 1E), losing cell-cell
contact inhibition and continuing to divide and forming
multilayered foci.
Next, we further characterized RNT and RH cells
for the expression of hepatocyte and non-hepatocyte
markers. Both cell lines were positive for glycogen (as
shown by PAS staining), a classical marker of hepatocyte
function (Figure 2A). Immunofluorescence and flow
cytometry analysis showed that both cell types were
also positive for canonical hepatocyte cell markers, such
as albumin (Alb, >90%) and cytokeratin-18 (KRT18,
>95%) (Figure 2A, 2B), Moreover, immunofluorescence
for transthyretin (TTR), hepatocyte nuclear factor
4-alpha (HNF4A) and transferrin further confirmed
the hepatocytic nature of the cells (Figure 3A-3C and
Supplementary Figure 2). Performing the analysis for
non-hepatocyte markers, we found that only the RH cell
line displayed positivity for cytokeratin-19 (KRT19), a
typical marker of bile ductular cells and of the so-called
oval cells, emerging in pathological conditions [8, 9],
including pre- and neoplastic stages (Figure 2A, 2B) [10,
11]. Interestingly, the intermediate filament vimentin - a
marker of mesenchymal origin/feature [12] and involved
in epithelial-mesenchimal transition (EMT) - was strongly
expressed in RH cells, while it was almost completely
absent in RNT cells (Figure 4A).
To rule out the presence of non-parenchymal cells,
which could have grown together with hepatocytes, we
performed immunofluorescent staining for alpha-smooth
muscle actin (SMA) (Figure 4B), a marker of activated
hepatic stellate cells [13], and for desmin (Figure 4C),
a typical intermediate filament in cardiac, skeletal and
smooth muscles [13]. The results showed that neither RH,
nor RNT exhibited positivity for these non-hepatocyte
markers. Lack of desmin, α-SMA and vimentin expression
was confirmed by flow cytometry analysis (Figure 4E).
Tie-2, the tyrosine kinase receptor for angiopoietin 1 [14,
15], is expressed almost exclusively in endothelial cells, in
a fraction of monocytes and hematopoietic stem cells [14,
15]. Immunofluorescent staining for this receptor showed
that neither RNT nor RH cells did express it (Figure 4D).
Additionally, flow cytometry analysis revealed no
expression in either cell line of intracellular and
extracellular CD68, a macrophage marker (Figure 4E).
Moreover, to prove the hepatocytic nature of the
two cell lines, we transduced them with lentiviral vectors
expressing GFP under the transcriptional regulation
of either hepatocyte-specific promoter or ubiquitous,
endothelial- and myeloid-specific promoters. Since
transthyretin (TTR) is a hepatocyte secreted protein,
its promoter specifically drives transgene expression
in hepatocytes [16]. At Multiplicity of Infection (MOI)

RESULTS
Isolation and characterization of RNT and RH
cell lines
The R-H model consists of a single injection of
DENA followed by a brief exposure to a promoting
environment (2-AAF + PH). HCCs arise 10-14 months
after DENA treatment (the protocol scheme is shown in
Supplementary Figure 1). Control rats exposed to 2-AAF
+ PH in the absence of DENA, do not develop tumors.
RH and RNT cells were obtained from a rat exposed
to the full R-H protocol and from a rat not exposed to
DENA, respectively. Briefly, cells were isolated from
liver rats through collagenase perfusion by portal vein and
maintained in culture. Both cell lines were vital after more
than 50 passages in conventional 2D culture dishes, and
did not change their morphology and behavior. Therefore,
they can be defined as “spontaneously immortalized” cells.
RNT cells exhibit a clear hepatocyte morphology,
as they show a typical polygonal architecture and big
rounded nuclei; these cells are serum-dependent and show
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15717

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Morphological characterization and growth rate of RNT and RH cells. Phase-contrast microscopy and H&E

staining of cultured RNT A., C. and RH B., D. cells. Magnification 20x. For the experimental procedure followed to obtain the cell lines,
see Materials and Methods. E. The growth rate of the two cell lines in adherent conditions, in optimal (10% serum) and suboptimal (2%
serum) growing conditions, was measured at the indicated times. Cells were fixed and stained with crystal violet; the dye retained by the
cells was solubilized in 10% acetic acid and the Optical Density (570nm) was measured. On the X axis is shown the fold change increase
of cell number, compared to time zero. ** P<0.01; ****P<0.0001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15718

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Profiling of typical hepatocyte markers in RNT and RH cells. A. Microphotographs showing positivity for glycogen

(PAS staining); A., B. Staining for Albumin (Alb), Cytokeratin 18 (KRT18) and Cytokeratin 19 (KRT19) was assessed by IF (A) and flow
cytometry B. analysis in both cell lines. Bars = 25 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15719

Oncotarget

of 1, in cultured RH and RNT cells, the percentage of
GFP positive cells was similar to those transduced with
a lentiviral vector containing a ubiquitously expressed
promoter, the phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1)
promoter (respectively 76% and 91% for TTR, 69%
and 83% for PGK1), confirming the hepatocytic origin

of these cells (Figure 5). On the contrary, promoters
specific for endothelial and myeloid cells showed low
levels of GFP expression (15% and 26% for VEC and
11% and 15% for CD11b), further demonstrating that the
isolated cells were hepatocyte-derived. At the 0.1 MOI
the differences were even more pronounced, in line with

Figure 3: Expression of transferrin, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha and transthyretin in RNT and RH cells. Co-

expression of Transferrin (green) A., hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) (green) B., transthyretin (TTR) (green) C. and cytokeratin
18 (KRT18; red) in RNT and RH cells. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Merge of the different stainings is shown in the last column on the
right. Bars = 25 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15720

Oncotarget

the demonstration that these cells are indeed hepatocytes
(Supplementary Figure 3A). To validate the specificity
of expression of the different described Lentiviruses, we
transduced hepatocytic (C1C7), endothelial (MS1) and
monocytic (U937) cell lines as controls (Supplementary
Figure 3B).
All together, these results demonstrate the
hepatocytic nature of cultured RNT and RH cells and rule
out a possible contamination by endothelial, macrophages
or stellate cells.

self-renewal, differentiation, and metastasis of tumors and
to significantly impact patients’ clinical outcome [21].
Therefore, we investigated by flow cytometry the presence
of T-ICs-like cells in both rat cell lines.
As shown in Figure 6A–6D, a small percentage of
these two cell lines expressed EpCAM (RNT 5% and RH
6%), CD24 (RNT 6% and RH 10%) and CD90.1 (RNT
0% AND RH 1%). Interestingly, while EpCAM- and
CD24- cells co-expressed albumin and cytokeratin 18,
EpCAM+ and CD24+ cells were negative for these
differentiation markers, further supporting their stem-like
nature. Moreover, only RH cells were double positive for
CD90.1/CD24, (Figure 6D), as CD90.1 was not detected
in the immortalized-non tumorigenic RNT cell line (Figure
6C). These findings show that only RH cells contain tumor
stem-like cells, as defined by the double expression of
CD90.1 and CD24, in agreement with the results obtained
from human samples [21].

RH but not RNT cells express tumor stem cell
markers
Recently, putative liver tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs)
have been identified by several cell surface antigens,
such as CD90.1, EpCAM and CD24 [17–20]. T-ICs
have been suggested to be critical for the maintenance,

Figure 4: Panel of non-hepatocyte markers in RNT and RH cells. Immunofluorescent staining for Vimentin A., alpha-SMA B.,
Desmin C. and Tie-2 D. Magnification 20X. E. Flow cytometry analysis of the expression of alpha-SMA, Desmin, Vimentin and the intra/
extracellular macrophage marker CD68.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15721

Oncotarget

To further characterize the two cell lines, we
analyzed their growth ability in 3D cultures. We thus
generated spheroids and found that RH cells gave rise to
more numerous spheroids than RNT cells (Figure 7A).
Notably, both cell lines maintained in 3D culture the
expression of hepato-specific markers, such as albumin
and cytokeratin 18 (Figure 7B, 7D), and of the hepatic
precursor marker CD24 (Figure 7C). In the RNT cells
CD24 was less represented and the staining for KRT19
(Figure 7B, 7C) was negative confirming the result
obtained in the 2D culture of RNT cells (Figure 2A–2B).
To evaluate the gene expression profile of these two
cell types we used the Rat Liver Cancer RT² Profiler PCR
Array and found that 44 out of the 84 genes present in the
Array were differentially regulated between RH and RNT
cells (Threshold = fold change +/-2) (Supplementary Table
1). As shown in Figure 8, while the Heat Map displayed
only minimal differences in each cell type at different
culturing passages (20, 40, 60), the dendrogram clearly
separated RH from RNT. Furthermore, by comparing the
expression profile of RH and RNT with normal livers and
primary HCCs, we found that RNT clustered together with
control livers, while RH were much closer to the HCC
sub-cluster (Supplementary Figure 4). Quantitative RTPCR validation performed on randomly selected genes
(Birc5, Igfbp1, Myc, Tert, Cnnd1 and Met) confirmed the
microarray expression data for all the examined genes
(Supplementary Figure 5).
DAVID Functional Analysis of genes altered in RH
cells and HCC vs. their respective controls revealed that
most of the dysregulated genes are involved in Ubiquitin
conjugation, Apoptosis, Phosphoprotein, Glycoprotein

and Signal (Supplementary Figure 6A). Pathway analysis
also underlined common modifications between RH
cells and HCCs (Pathways in Cancer, MicroRNA in
cancer, Hepatitis B, PI3K-AKT-signaling pathway)
(Supplementary Figure 6B).
Collectively, these results show that RH and RNT
cells not only exhibit a distinct expression profile, but they
also maintain features displayed in vivo by transformed
and normal hepatocytes, respectively.

RH cells, but not RNT, are endowed with a
transformed/tumorigenic potential
Cell immortalization can be accompanied by
transformation. Thus, for both the cell lines, we assessed
the transformed/tumorigenic potential typically associated
in vitro with the acquisition of anchorage-independent
growth ability and in vivo with the capacity to generate
tumors when grafted.
When plated in soft agar, RH cells were able to
form numerous and large colonies within seven days,
while RNT cells did not, even after 3 weeks. (Figure
9A). Moreover, while RH cells were able to form tumor
masses in 30 days, when inoculated into the posterior flank
of syngeneic rats, RNT cells were completely devoid of
tumorigenic ability (Figure 9B, 9C); these tumors showed
morphological features of HCC (Figure 9D) and were
strongly positive for KRT19 (Figure 9E), thus maintaining
the same features of the cells grown in vitro.
As RH cells display EMT features, we wondered
if they were able to form metastases. Indeed, one month
after grafting, we observed the appearance of lung macro-

Figure 5: Lentiviral transduction and FACS analysis for promoter-characterization. RNT and RH cells were transduced
with four different Lentiviruses (LVs) containing the GFP transgene under the control of ubiquitous (PGK) or cell-specific promoters
(TTR, hepatocyte-specific; VEC, endothelial-specific; CD11b, myeloid cells-specific) at MOI 1. GFP expression was evaluated by FACS
analysis 72 hours after transduction. GFP expression driven by the hepatocyte-specific TTR promoter in both cell types is comparable to
the expression driven by the ubiquitous PGK promoter, while VEC and CD11b promoters were less active in both cell types, confirming
the hepatocyte phenotype of these cells. MFI = mean fluorescent intensity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15722

Oncotarget

metastases (Figure 9F). H&E and immunohistochemical
staining on serial sections of lung metastases showed the
maintenance of primary HCC morphology and KRT19
positivity. As expected, RNT cells were unable to originate
metastases up to 3 months after grafting (data not shown).
To investigate whether CD24+ stem-like cells are
involved in tumor formation, 5x105 to 3x106 CD24+

and CD24- RH and RNT cells were injected s.c. into
the posterior flank of NOD-SCID yNull mice (n=5),
immediately after isolation. While both CD24 positive
and negative RNT cells did not give rise to tumors up to 3
months, CD24+ RH cells generated tumors with a similar
size within 14 days in all tested conditions (Figure 9G).
As controls we injected 107 unselected RH and RNT cells

Figure 6: Identification of stem cell-like markers in RNT and RH cells. RNT A and C. and RH B and D. cells were analyzed by

flow cytometry for the expression of mature hepatocyte markers (Alb and KRT18), hepatocyte precursor markers (EpCAM and CD24) or
the cancer stem cell marker (CD90.1). Numbers indicate the mean of at least 5 different analysis performed ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15723

Oncotarget

and only the RH cells formed tumors similar in size to
those observed with CD24 positive RH cells. Interestingly,
CD24- RH cells did not give rise to tumors, confirming
that tumorigenic cells are in the CD24+ fraction (data
not shown). Of note, we found that among the CD24+
RH cells, 7±2% were also CD90.1+, suggesting that this
subpopulation could be responsible for the tumorigenic
potential of RH cells. In agreement, the CD24+ RNT
cells did not contain any CD90.1+ cell (Supplementary
Figure 7).

As previously published [24], the NRF2 pathway is
already activated in early preneoplastic lesions and along
tumor progression. NRF2 silencing in RH cells inhibits
their tumorigenic ability, both in vitro and in vivo [25],
demonstrating that activation of this pathway is necessary
to sustain the malignant phenotype. To investigate if
NRF2 activation is “sufficient” to confer transforming
ability to RNT cells, we transduced them with a lentiviral
vector containing NRF2 cDNA and evaluated their in
vitro transforming ability. As shown in Figure 10A, overexpression of NRF2 was not sufficient to confer to the
cells the ability to grow in an anchorage-independent
manner.
We previously showed that Nrf2/Keap1 mutations
are present in 59.3% of HCCs developed in the R-H
model [25]. Interestingly, while RNT cells are wild
type for NRF2, RH cells display an activating mutation
(Figure 10B). Therefore, to further stress the system, we
transduced RNT cells with constitutively activated forms
of this gene, as consequence of activating mutations
(Supplementary Figure 8). Transduction of RNT cells with
two different NRF2 mutated forms did not confer them in
vitro tumorigenic ability. However, RNT cells could be

RNT/RH cells as a tool to investigate the
molecular mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis
The two cell lines we have established represent
two different stages of the hepatocarcinogenic process.
To provide a proof of concept that they can be used to
study the role of candidate molecules in HCC progression,
we focused our interest on NRF2. NRF2 is an integrated
redox sensitive signaling system that regulates 1%-10% of
human genes and is negatively controlled by the ubiquitin
ligase KEAP1, which promotes NRF2 proteasomemediated degradation [22, 23].

Figure 7: Generation of RNT and RH spheroids. A. The two cell lines were grown in stem medium and low attachment

conditions; cell viability was measured at the indicated times. Pictures in the right part of the graph represent RH (upper figure) and RNT
spheroids (lower figure) at day 7 (magnification 10X). The X axis shows the fold change increase in cell viability, compared to time zero.
Immunofluorescence showing expression of hepatocytes markers KRT18 B. and Alb D. in spheroids of both cell types; on the contrary,
KRT19 is present only in RH spheroids (B). A small percentage of RH and RNT spheroids are positive for CD24 C. the number of CD24+
spheroids is higher in RH cells (C). Scale bar = 25 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15724

Oncotarget

transformed by transduction of a well-known oncogene,
such as the active (G12V) KRAS (Figure 10A).
All together, these experiments show that NRF2
activation is necessary to sustain the tumorigenic status
but is not sufficient per se to induce it.

Both cell lines display features typical of
hepatocytes as they are glycogen-positive, produce
albumin and express KRT18, and are not contaminated
by other cell types usually present in the liver, such
as macrophages, stellate cells, and endothelial cells.
However, obvious differences exist between them, as
RNT cells display a typical hepatocytic morphology, while
RH cells show a fibroblastoid shape, with signs of EMT.
EMT is a critical event in the induction of cell motility and
invasion, both in physiological conditions - like wound
healing or development - and in malignant transformation
– when tumor cells acquire invasive/metastatic properties.
Indeed, vimentin - an intermediate filament protein
characteristically upregulated in cells undergoing
EMT [12, 26, 27] - was only weakly expressed in RNT
cells, while it was strongly up-regulated in RH cells, in

DISCUSSION
In the present paper, we report the in vitro
establishment and the functional characterization of two
novel rat immortalized hepatocytic cell lines: RH and
RNT. Both cell lines were obtained by perfusion of rat
livers exposed to the Resistant-Hepatocyte protocol, in the
presence or in the absence of carcinogenic treatment, and
could be maintained in culture for more than 50 passages,
without signs of senescence (data not shown).

Figure 8: Hierarchical clustering of 84 genes in RNT and RH cells. Each row represents the expression profile of a gene. Only

mRNAs whose expression was dysregulated at least by 2-fold were considered. Red and green colors represent higher or lower expression
levels of the mRNA (median-centered), respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15725

Oncotarget

agreement with their fibroblastoid shape and increased
metastatic ability.
The performed gene expression profiling showed not
only that many of the evaluated genes were differentially
expressed, but also that RNT cells display a profile similar
to normal livers while RH are very similar to HCCs.
Another relevant difference concerns the expression
of KRT19 that was observed only in RH tumorigenic
cells. In normal liver, hepatocytes express KRT8 and
KRT18, whereas biliary epithelial cells express KRT7
and KRT19 [8, 9]. However, the presence of KRT19+
hepatocytes has been demonstrated in a subset of human
HCCs characterized by the worst prognosis among all
HCC subclasses, suggesting that KRT19 is a negative
prognostic marker [11, 28]. Moreover, in the Resistant-

Hepatocyte model, although KRT19+ lesions represent a
minority of the total preneoplastic lesions, most HCCs are
KRT19+, further suggesting that KRT19+ preneoplastic
hepatocytes preferentially progress to malignancy [10,
24]. Furthermore, KRT19+ HCCs show significantly
increased EMT features and expression of invasion-related
molecules, suggesting that they are endowed with higher
invasive ability, compared to KRT19- HCCs [28].
Another important difference between the two cell
lines is the presence of tumor stem-like cells only in the
RH cell line. We have investigated three markers that
have been associated to T-ICs, namely CD90.1, CD24
and EpCAM [17–20]. The CD90.1 (Thy-1) antigen
is expressed in bone-marrow derived stem cells and
hepatic stem/progenitor cells (both in adult and fetal

Figure 9: Biological assays and tumorigenesis. A. The ability to grow in anchorage-independent conditions was assessed by soft

agar assay. Colonies were photographed after two weeks. B. Representative photographs of syngeneic rats injected with RH (left) or RNT
(right) cells. RH and RNT cells were inoculated into the posterior flank of syngeneic rats (1.5*106 cells/injection); C. Graph showing the
tumor volume of rats, 19 days after injection with RH or RNT. The results represent the mean ± SD of 5 animals/group; D. Microphotograph
showing H&E staining of a HCC developed 19 days after injection of RH cells; E. Microphotograph illustrating a strong positivity of
KRT19 in the same HCC; F. (Left) Macroscopic photograph of a lung from a rat injected with RH cells and killed 30 days after grafting.
A metastasis is shown by the arrow. (Right) Microphotographs of the metastasis shown in F, stained for H&E (top) and KRT19 (bottom;
Magnification 10x); G. Unselected (Tot) and CD24+ RH cells were inoculated into the posterior flank of NOD-SCID γNull mice (107 cells/
injection for unselected RH cells and 5x105, 1 x 106 and 3 x106 for CD24+ RH cells). The graph shows tumor growth in mice up to 14 days
after injection. The results represent the mean ± SD of 5 animals/group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15726

Oncotarget

livers, but not in adult hepatocytes)[29]. In the liver,
CD90.1 expression was found preferably in poorly
differentiated HCCs and associated with a poor prognosis
[30]. Moreover, only CD90.1+ cells obtained from HCCs
displayed tumorigenic and metastatic capacity when
injected into immunodeficient mice [31]. CD24, which is
overexpressed in various human malignancies [32, 33],
was expressed at higher level in RH than in RNT cells.
More interestingly, the CD90.1 marker was present only
in RH cells, where it is co-expressed within the CD24+
population. Actually, both markers were reported to be
involved in CSC differentiation in HCC [34]. Interestingly,
only the CD24+ RH population (containing also CD90.1+
cells) was endowed with tumorigenic ability, while
neither CD24- RH cells nor CD24+ RNT cells (that do not
display CD90.1+), gave rise to tumors after subcutaneous
implantation in mice.
A critical difference between the two cell lines is that
only RH cells displayed the typical behavior of malignant
transformed cells, as in vitro they grow in anchorageindependent manner and do not show contact inhibition, and
in vivo are strongly tumorigenic and metastatic. Interestingly,

RNT cells are immortalized but not tumorigenic. Thus,
they represent a critical “normal” counterpart of RH
transformed cells. As these two cell lines epitomize
two steps in the natural history of tumor development,
they can therefore be used to study the molecular
mechanisms underlying tumor progression. Indeed, we
have shown that NRF2 silencing in RH cells reverted their
phenotype toward that of RNT cells, demonstrating that
activation of the NRF2 pathway is required to maintain
the transformed phenotype [25]. However, exogenous
expression of NRF2 - or even of activated forms of
this gene - did not promote the progression toward a
transformed phenotype. On the other hand RNT cells
could be transformed by transduction with an oncogenic
form of KRAS, thus proving their susceptibility to become
tumorigenic. All together, these results suggest that
NRF2 constitutive activation is not sufficient to promote
the transformation of the immortalized liver cells. The
analysis of differentially expressed and mutated genes
in RH vs. RNT cells can thus help in the identification
of the genes that complement NRF2 in promoting
transformation. Exogenous expression/silencing of

Figure 10: NRF2 transduction is not sufficient to transform RNT cells. A. RNT cells were transduced with the indicated constructs

(mock vector, wild type NRF2, NRF2 constructs bearing activating mutations, activated KRAS). The ability to grow in anchorage-independent
conditions was assessed by soft agar assay. Colonies were photographed after two weeks. RH cells were used as positive controls for the
growth in soft agar. B. Pherograms showing the presence of a NRF2 activating mutation (D38G) in RH but not in RNT cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15727

Oncotarget

selected genes will allow to experimentally prove the results
obtained in silico.
In conclusion, the two cell lines here described
represent a useful tool for investigating the molecular
changes underlying hepatocyte transformation and
to experimentally demonstrate their role in HCC
development.

plastic dish for additional 10-20 min in the presence of
collagenase: after incubation, tumor masses present in
the remaining parenchyma were mechanically disrupted.
Cells were recovered and washed several times in
serum-free medium; then hepatocytes were maintained
in petri dishes coated with rat tail collagen 0,2%, in
10% FBS DMEM.
Murine peritoneal macrophages were collected by
intraperitoneal injection of RPMI-1640 and maintained in
5% FBS RPMI-1640.
Cultured RNT and RH cells were maintained in
10% FBS RPMI with P/S (100U/ml Penicillin, 100mg/l
Streptamicin), and L-Glutamine (2mM). C1C7 (murine
HCC cell line), MS1 (murine endothelial cell line), U937
(human macrophage cell line) and HTC (rat hepatoma cell
line) were maintained in 10% FBS DMEM.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and treatment
Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
were followed during the investigation. All animal
procedures were approved by the Ethical Commission
of the University of Cagliari and the Italian Ministry of
Health. Male Fischer F-344 rats (100-125 g) purchased
from Charles River (Milan, Italy) and NOD.CgPrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (γNull) were originally by
Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA). Animals
were kept on a laboratory diet (Ditta Mucedola, Milan,
Italy) and given food and water ad libitum with a 12-hour
light/dark daily cycle.
HCC was induced according to the Resistant
Hepatocytes (R-H) model [7]. Rats were injected
intraperitoneally with the chemical carcinogen
diethylnitrosamine (DENA, Sigma, MO) at a dose of 150
mg/kg body weight. After a 2-week recovery, rats were
fed a diet containing 0.02% 2-acetylaminofluorene (2AAF, Sigma, MO) for 1 week followed by a two-thirds
partial hepatectomy (2/3 PH), and an additional week
of 2-acetylaminofluorene diet. The animals were then
returned to the basal diet and euthanized at 14 months
(Supplementary Figure 1). Rats exposed to 2-AAF and
2/3 PH, but in the absence of carcinogen, were used as
controls.

RNT and RH spheroids
To obtain spheroids from RNT and RH cells, cells
were seeded in low-attachment 24-well plates (104 cells/
well) in stem medium conditions (0% FBS DMEM-F12
medium, supplemented with EGF, bFGF, insulin and B-27
supplement). After the formation of spheroids, they were
seeded in low-attachment 96-well plates and cell viability
was evaluated at days 0, 3 and 7 after seeding, using
CellTiterGlo assay (Promega).

Periodic acid-schiff (PAS) stain for glycogen
Culture dishes containing cells were fixed in ethanol
- acetic acid (99:1) for 10 minutes at 4°C, incubated with
Schiff reagent for 5 minutes and washed twice with
periodic acid (Carlo Erba).

Immunofluorescence (IF) analysis
Cells were seeded on collagen-coated coverslips
for 48h, subsequently rinsed with PBS and subjected
to immunofluorescence. RNT and RH spheroids were
prepared by cyto-spin at 1000 rpm for 5 min. Cells were
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich) or
with methanol (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature
and permeabilized with PBS containing 0.1% Triton
X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). After blocking with 5%
goat serum (Sigma Aldrich), cells were subjected
to immunofluorescence staining with primary antibodies
diluted in PBS containing 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton
X-100 and 2% goat serum, as listed in Supplementary
Table 2.
Cells were finally incubated with either secondary
anti-mouse, anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 488-conjugated or
AlexaFluor 546-conjugated antibodies (dilution 1:500,
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for 1 h in PBS containing 1%
BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100. Nuclei were stained with
DAPI (Sigma Aldrich). As a control, staining of RNT and
RH was performed with the secondary antibody alone

Cell isolation and culturing
RNT (Rat Not Tumorigenic) and RH (Resistant
Hepatocytes) cells were obtained from rats treated with
2-AAF + PH (rats with no tumors) or DENA + 2-AAF
+ PH (tumor bearing rats), respectively. Livers were
perfused at 10 ml/min via portal vein for 5 minutes
with Leffert’s buffer (at 37°C) containing 1.9 mg/ml
EGTA, for 2 minutes with buffer lacking EGTA, and
for 10-15 minutes with buffer containing 0.03% (w/v)
collagenase (Worthington Biochemical Corp.) and 5 mM
CaCl2.2H2O, as described [35], with modification for rat
liver. The perfusion buffer contained 10 mmol/l HEPES,
3 mmol/l KCl, 130 mmol/l NaCl, 1 mmol/l NaH2PO4.
H2O, and 10 mmol/l d-glucose, pH 7.4). The livers were
dissociated in Leffert’s buffer, and cells were passed
through Dacron fabric with 80-μm pores and centrifuged
under 50 g for 5 minutes to recover hepatocytes. For
livers containing tumors, digestion continued in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15728

Oncotarget

Cell growth

(Supplementary Figure 9). Cells were examined by
fluorescence microscopy (Olympus America Inc, Center
Valley, PA). Images were acquired as sets of colorimages and prepared using Photopaint and Photoshop
software.

RNT and RH cells were seeded in 96-well plates
(4000 cells/well) at two different concentrations of serum
(2% and 10%). Cells were fixed in 11% glutaraldehyde
and stained with crystal violet at days 1, 3 and 6 after
seeding. The dye retained by the cells was then solubilized
in 10% acetic acid and the Optical Density (570nm)
was measured using a Multilabel Reader (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MT, USA).
For evaluation of anchorage-independent growth,
3000 cells/well were seeded in 10% FBS RPMI 0.5%
soft agar and maintained in the presence of medium for
15 days. Grown colonies were visualized by staining with
crystal violet and pictures acquired as sets of b/w images
by microscope.

Cytofluorimetric analysis
To analyze extracellular markers, cells were
re-suspended in staining buffer (PBS, 1% FBS, 0.1%
NaN3) followed by incubation with specific antibodies
for 30 minutes on ice. For intracellular markers, cells
were re-suspended in staining buffer containing 1%
paraformaldehyde for 5 minutes, incubated with
Perm wash buffer (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA)
for 5 minutes, followed by incubation with primary
antibody in Perm/Wash buffer for 30 minutes on ice.
Finally, cells were washed twice in Perm/Wash buffer
(BD Biosciences) and re-suspended in staining buffer.
Specific antibodies used are listed in Supplementary
Table 3.

RH and RNT expression profile by qRT-PCR
Total RNA from cultured RH and RNT at different
culturing passages and from normal rat livers and
HCCs was first extracted by using TRIzol® reagent
(Invitrogen) and further purified using the RNeasy
Micro Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was obtained from 1 μg
of RNA using the RT2 First Strand Kit (Qiagen). Gene
expression profile of RH, RNT, normal livers and
tumors was analyzed by real-time qPCR using the Rat
Liver Cancer RT2 Profiler™ PCR Array (Qiagen), that
evaluates 84 genes. Analysis was performed using
the Web-based PCR Array Data Analysis Software
available at SAB website (www.SABiosciences.com/
pcrdataanalysis.php). B2m was used as housekeeping
gene. Only mRNAs whose expression was dysregulated
by at least 2-fold compared to their controls were
considered modified.

Lentiviral transduction
Four different lentiviral vectors expressing the
green fluorescence protein (GFP) under the control
of PGK (Phosphoglycerate kinase, ubiquitous), TTR
(Transthyretin, hepatocyte specific), VEC (VascularEndothelial Cadherin, endothelial specific) and CD11b
(Integrin alpha M, ITGAM, myeloid cells specific)
promoters were used to transduce RH and RNT cells. As
controls we used the following cell lines: C1C7 murine
hepatocytes, MS1 murine endothelial cells, U937 human
monocytes. Cells were transduced with a multiplicity
of infection (MOI) of 1 and 0.1. Expression level and
stability of the GFP expression was evaluated by flow
cytometry 72 h after transduction.
RNT cells were stably transduced with an empty
lentiviral vector (mock), with an NRF2 lentiviral construct
(217EX-T3128-Lv157; GeneCopoeia, Rockville, MD),
with the mutant forms of NRF2 (V32E and E82G),
obtained using the QuikChange II XL Site-Directed
Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent Technologies), and with a
lentiviral construct expressing the activated form of KRAS
G12V.

QRT-PCR validation
Analysis of Birc5, Igfbp1, Myc, Tert, Cnnd1 and Met
expression was performed using specific TaqMan probes
(Applied Biosystems); GAPDH was used as endogenous
control. The results are the mean of three different
samples/group.
Pathway and functional analysis by means of the
DAVID bioinformatics resources software
The functional enrichment analysis of the
differentially expressed genes was performed with the
Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery (DAVID), including gene ontology (GO)
function analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. Analysis of
pathways and functions was based on the number of genes
significantly dysregulated (fold difference cutoff + 2.0).
In KEGG pathway analysis, enriched pathways were
identified according to the hypergeometric distribution
with a P-value < 0.01.

CD24+ cells isolation
For CD24+ cells isolation, RH and RNT cells were
first incubated for 20 min at 4°C with anti-rat CD24 PEconjugated antibody (Miltenyi Biotec) followed by a
second incubation with anti-PE Microbeads (Miltenyi
Biotec) for 20 min at 4°C and finally immunomagnetically
separated using magnetic columns (Miltenyi Biotec). Cell
purity was verified by flow cytometry. Freshly isolated
cells were then counted and immediately injected s.c. into
yNull mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15729

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

In vivo experiments
The rat in vivo experiments were performed by
inoculating s.c.1.5 × 106 cells (suspended in sterile PBS/
Matrigel ratio 1:1) into the posterior flank of F344 male
rats. For experiments performed in mice, 107 unselected
RH or RNT cells or 5x105 – 3x106 CD24+ or CD24- RH
or RNT cells were inoculated in the same manner in
γNull mice. Tumor masses were measured with a caliper.
Tumors were then resected and analyzed by H&E stain
and IF. Lungs were surgically removed to histologically
verify the presence of metastases.

1.	 Lake BG, Price RJ, Giddings AM, Walters DG. In vitro
assays for induction of drug metabolism. Methods in
molecular biology. 2009; 481:47-58.
2.	 Swift B, Pfeifer ND, Brouwer KL. Sandwich-cultured
hepatocytes: an in vitro model to evaluate hepatobiliary
transporter-based drug interactions and hepatotoxicity. Drug
metabolism reviews. 2010; 42:446-471.
3.	 Guguen-Guillouzo C, Guillouzo A. General review on in
vitro hepatocyte models and their applications. Methods in
molecular biology. 2010; 640:1-40.
4.	 Gomez-Lechon MJ, Castell JV, Donato MT. An update on
metabolism studies using human hepatocytes in primary
culture. Expert opinion on drug metabolism & toxicology.
2008; 4:837-854.

Abbreviations
R-H:
resistant-hepatocyte
model;
DENA:
diethylnitrosamine; AAF: acetylaminofluorene; PH: partial
hepatectomy; RH cells: rat hepatocarcinoma cells; RNT
cells: rat non-tumorigenic cells; HCC: hepatocellular
carcinoma; KRT19: cytokeratin 19; TTR: transthyretin;
PGK1: phosphoglycerate kinase 1; GFP: green fluorescent
protein; HNF4A: hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha; EMT:
epithelial-mesenchimal transition; NRF2:nuclear factor
(erythroid-derived 2)-like 2; VEC: Vascular-Endothelial
Cadherin, endothelial specific); CD11b: Integrin alpha M,
ITGAM, myeloid cells specific.

5.	 Nishikawa M, Kojima N, Komori K, Yamamoto T, Fujii
T, Sakai Y. Enhanced maintenance and functions of rat
hepatocytes induced by combination of on-site oxygenation
and coculture with fibroblasts. Journal of biotechnology.
2008; 133:253-260.
6.	 Busse B, Gerlach JC. Bioreactors for hybrid liver support:
historical aspects and novel designs. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences. 1999; 875:326-339.
7.	 Solt DB, Medline A, Farber E. Rapid emergence of
carcinogen-induced hyperplastic lesions in a new model
for the sequential analysis of liver carcinogenesis. The
American journal of pathology. 1977; 88:595-618.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest to declare.

8.	 Moll R, Franke WW, Schiller DL, Geiger B, Krepler R.
The catalog of human cytokeratins: patterns of expression
in normal epithelia, tumors and cultured cells. Cell. 1982;
31:11-24.

GRANT SUPPORT

9.	 Strnad P, Stumptner C, Zatloukal K, Denk H. Intermediate
filament cytoskeleton of the liver in health and disease.
Histochemistry and cell biology. 2008; 129:735-749.

This work was supported by grants from
Associazione Italiana Ricerca sul Cancro (Grants IG15279 to AC, IG-15464 to SG, IG-13166 to AF), Ministero
Università e Ricerca Scientifica, R.A.S. 2012 to AC and
Fondazione Banco di Sardegna to AC, and AP. ERC start
up grant n. 261176 to AF.

10.	 Andersen JB, Loi R, Perra A, Factor VM, LeddaColumbano GM, Columbano A, Thorgeirsson SS.
Progenitor-derived hepatocellular carcinoma model in the
rat. Hepatology. 2010; 51:1401-1409.
11.	 Govaere O, Komuta M, Berkers J, Spee B, Janssen C,
de Luca F, Katoonizadeh A, Wouters J, van Kempen LC,
Durnez A, Verslype C, De Kock J, Rogiers V, van Grunsven
LA, Topal B, Pirenne J, et al. Keratin 19: a key role player
in the invasion of human hepatocellular carcinomas. Gut.
2014; 63:674-685.

Authors̕ contributions
MMA, AF: isolation and maintenance of RH and
RNT cells; MMA, KB, SMer: Immunohistochemistry
and Immunofluorescence; KB, SMer: tumor grafting
of RH and RNT cells in immunocompromised mice,
lentiviral transduction, flow cytometry analysis and RNA
extraction for superarray preparation and analysis; AP:
tumor grafting in rats; SMen, APet: growth curve, soft
agar assays and spheroids generation; PS: acquisition and
analysis of qRT-PCR data; AF, AC, SG: study concept
and design, analysis and interpretation of data, drafting
of the manuscript. All Authors discussed the results and
commented the manuscript.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12.	 Vuoriluoto K, Haugen H, Kiviluoto S, Mpindi JP, Nevo
J, Gjerdrum C, Tiron C, Lorens JB, Ivaska J. Vimentin
regulates EMT induction by Slug and oncogenic H-Ras and
migration by governing Axl expression in breast cancer.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:1436-1448.
13.	 Kisseleva T, Uchinami H, Feirt N, Quintana-Bustamante
O, Segovia JC, Schwabe RF, Brenner DA. Bone marrowderived fibrocytes participate in pathogenesis of liver
fibrosis. Journal of hepatology. 2006; 45:429-438.
15730

Oncotarget

14.	 De Palma M, Venneri MA, Galli R, Sergi Sergi L, Politi LS,
Sampaolesi M, Naldini L. Tie2 identifies a hematopoietic
lineage of proangiogenic monocytes required for tumor
vessel formation and a mesenchymal population of pericyte
progenitors. Cancer cell. 2005; 8:211-226.

GM, Terracciano L, Giordano S, Columbano A. Nrf2,
but not beta-catenin, mutation represents an early event
in rat hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatology. 2015; 62:851-862.
26.	 Dong Q, Zhu X, Dai C, Zhang X, Gao X, Wei J, Sheng
Y, Zheng Y, Yu J, Xie L, Qin Y, Qiao P, Zhou C, et al.
Osteopontin promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
of hepatocellular carcinoma through regulating vimentin.
Oncotarget. 2016; 7:12997-3012. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7016.

15.	 Tang Y, Harrington A, Yang X, Friesel RE, Liaw L. The
contribution of the Tie2+ lineage to primitive and definitive
hematopoietic cells. Genesis. 2010; 48:563-567.
16.	 Vigna E, Amendola M, Benedicenti F, Simmons AD,
Follenzi A, Naldini L. Efficient Tet-dependent expression of
human factor IX in vivo by a new self-regulating lentiviral
vector. Molecular therapy. 2005; 11:763-775.

27.	 Zhai X, Zhu H, Wang W, Zhang S, Zhang Y, Mao
G. Abnormal expression of EMT-related proteins,
S100A4, vimentin and E-cadherin, is correlated with
clinicopathological features and prognosis in HCC. Medical
oncology. 2014; 31:970.

17.	 Ji J, Wang XW. Clinical implications of cancer stem cell
biology in hepatocellular carcinoma. Seminars in oncology.
2012; 39:461-472.

28.	 Kawai T, Yasuchika K, Ishii T, Katayama H, Yoshitoshi
EY, Ogiso S, Kita S, Yasuda K, Fukumitsu K, Mizumoto
M, Hatano E, Uemoto S. Keratin 19, a Cancer Stem
Cell Marker in Human Hepatocellular Carcinoma. Clinical
cancer research. 2015; 21:3081-3091.

18.	 Yamashita T, Ji J, Budhu A, Forgues M, Yang W, Wang
HY, Jia H, Ye Q, Qin LX, Wauthier E, Reid LM, Minato
H, Honda M, Kaneko S, Tang ZY, Wang XW. EpCAMpositive hepatocellular carcinoma cells are tumor-initiating
cells with stem/progenitor cell features. Gastroenterology.
2009; 136:1012-1024.

29.	 Dennis JE, Esterly K, Awadallah A, Parrish CR, Poynter
GM, Goltry KL. Clinical-scale expansion of a mixed
population of bone-marrow-derived stem and progenitor
cells for potential use in bone-tissue regeneration. Stem
cells. 2007; 25:2575-2582.

19.	 Yang W, Wang C, Lin Y, Liu Q, Yu LX, Tang L, Yan HX,
Fu J, Chen Y, Zhang HL, Tang L, Zheng LY, He YQ, Li
YQ, Wu FQ, Zou SS, et al. OV6(+) tumor-initiating cells
contribute to tumor progression and invasion in human
hepatocellular carcinoma. Journal of hepatology. 2012;
57:613-620.

30.	 Herrera MB, Bruno S, Buttiglieri S, Tetta C, Gatti S,
Deregibus MC, Bussolati B, Camussi G. Isolation and
characterization of a stem cell population from adult human
liver. Stem cells. 2006; 24:2840-2850.

20.	 Yang ZF, Ho DW, Ng MN, Lau CK, Yu WC, Ngai P, Chu
PW, Lam CT, Poon RT, Fan ST. Significance of CD90+
cancer stem cells in human liver cancer. Cancer cell. 2008;
13:153-166.

31.	 Lazaro CA, Croager EJ, Mitchell C, Campbell JS, Yu C,
Foraker J, Rhim JA, Yeoh GC, Fausto N. Establishment,
characterization, and long-term maintenance of cultures of
human fetal hepatocytes. Hepatology. 2003; 38:1095-1106.

21.	 Lee TK, Castilho A, Cheung VC, Tang KH, Ma S, Ng IO.
CD24(+) liver tumor-initiating cells drive self-renewal
and tumor initiation through STAT3-mediated NANOG
regulation. Cell stem cell. 2011; 9:50-63.

32.	 Kristiansen G, Denkert C, Schluns K, Dahl E, Pilarsky C,
Hauptmann S. CD24 is expressed in ovarian cancer and is
a new independent prognostic marker of patient survival.
The American journal of pathology. 2002; 161:1215-1221.

22.	 Jaramillo MC, Zhang DD. The emerging role of the Nrf2Keap1 signaling pathway in cancer. Genes & development.
2013; 27:2179-2191.

33.	 Kristiansen G, Winzer KJ, Mayordomo E, Bellach J,
Schluns K, Denkert C, Dahl E, Pilarsky C, Altevogt P,
Guski H, Dietel M. CD24 expression is a new prognostic
marker in breast cancer. Clinical cancer research. 2003;
9:4906-4913.

23.	 Kobayashi A, Kang MI, Okawa H, Ohtsuji M, Zenke Y,
Chiba T, Igarashi K, Yamamoto M. Oxidative stress sensor
Keap1 functions as an adaptor for Cul3-based E3 ligase to
regulate proteasomal degradation of Nrf2. Molecular and
cellular biology. 2004; 24:7130-7139.

34.	 Yamashita T, Honda M, Nakamoto Y, Baba M, Nio K, Hara
Y, Zeng SS, Hayashi T, Kondo M, Takatori H, Yamashita
T, Mizukoshi E, Ikeda H, Zen Y, Takamura H, Wang XW,
et al. Discrete nature of EpCAM+ and CD90+ cancer stem
cells in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2013;
57:1484-1497.

24.	 Petrelli A, Perra A, Cora D, Sulas P, Menegon S, Manca
C, Migliore C, Kowalik MA, Ledda-Columbano GM,
Giordano S, Columbano A. MicroRNA/gene profiling
unveils early molecular changes and nuclear factor
erythroid related factor 2 (NRF2) activation in a rat model
recapitulating human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Hepatology. 2014; 59:228-241.

35.	 Follenzi A, Benten D, Novikoff P, Faulkner L, Raut S,
Gupta S. Transplanted endothelial cells repopulate the
liver endothelium and correct the phenotype of hemophilia
A mice. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2008;
118:935-945.

25.	 Zavattari P, Perra A, Menegon S, Kowalik MA, Petrelli A,
Angioni MM, Follenzi A, Quagliata L, Ledda-Columbano

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15731

Oncotarget

