Research Article

Tumor-Induced Oxidative Stress Perturbs Nuclear Factor-KB
Activity-Augmenting Tumor Necrosis Factor-A–Mediated
T-Cell Death: Protection by Curcumin
1

1

1

1

1

Sankar Bhattacharyya, Debaprasad Mandal, Gouri Sankar Sen, Suman Pal, Shuvomoy Banerjee,
1
2
2
1
1
Lakshmishri Lahiry, James H. Finke, Charles S. Tannenbaum, Tanya Das, and Gaurisankar Sa
1
Animal Physiology Section, Bose Institute, Calcutta, India and 2Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute,
The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio

p105/p50 (NF-nB1), RelA (p65), RelB, cRel, etc. (1, 2). In resting
cells, NF-nB proteins are retained in the cytoplasm as inactive
forms via the association with inhibitory InB molecules. The classic
induction of p50-p65 NF-nB heterodimers involves activation of the
InB kinase (IKK) complex, the large multisubunit complexes that
phosphorylate two NH2-terminal serine residues of InB, resulting
in phosphorylation- and ubiquitin-dependent degradation of InB,
with InBa being most predominant (3). As a consequence, NF-nB
complexes translocate to the nucleus and regulate expression
of nB target genes (4, 5). DNA-binding activity of NF-nB is
rapidly induced in all cell types in response to proinflammatory
cytokines and the byproducts of microbial and viral infections. It is
therefore anticipated that NF-nB–induced transcription would
play a central role in host defense and inflammatory responses (3).
In fact, importance of NF-nB in host immunity, lymphoid organ
development, and antiapoptotic gene expression has been well
established (6, 7).
Thymus is the major site for T-cell maturation, which plays a
pivotal role in the internal defense system. CD8+ CTLs are major
effector cells involved in immunologically specific tumor destruction, and CD4+ T cells are essential for ‘‘helping’’ CD8+ T cell–
dependent tumor eradication (8). Recently, tumor-induced thymic
atrophy is being considered as a part of the immune evasion
strategy of the developing tumor (9, 10). Because T-cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis take place in thymus,
aberration in one or more of these processes due to tumor may
therefore result in thymic atrophy. Several observations indicate
that a chronic inflammatory condition develops in patients with
advanced cancer, causing oxidative stress that can shut off immune
functions. Increased oxidative stress has further been detected as
one of the causes of tumor-induced T-cell depletion (11, 12). There
are contradictory reports about the effect of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) on NF-nB activation. Some reports claim that ROS is
a common intermediate in the activation of NF-nB by diverse
agents (1, 13), whereas others claim oxidative stress–induced
NF-nB inhibition (14–17). The latter reports are further supported
by the fact that NF-nB is down-regulated/inhibited in T cells of
tumor-bearing mice and cancer patients (18, 19). It is acknowledged that many tumors secrete tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a
(TNF-a), which is cytocidal for thymic T cells (20). TNF-a regulates
immune responses, inflammation, and apoptosis by exerting its
diverse biological activities by activating multiple signaling pathways, including IKKs, c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), and
caspases (21). IKK activation inhibits TNF-a–induced apoptosis
through the transcription factor NF-nB, whose target genes include
those that encode inhibitors of caspases and JNK (22). Moreover,
NF-nB not only antagonizes apoptotic signals of TNF-a but also
activates its prosurvival pathway (3). Thus, any perturbation in

Abstract
Cancer patients often exhibit loss of proper cell-mediated
immunity and reduced effector T-cell population in the
circulation. Thymus is a major site of T-cell maturation, and
tumors induce thymic atrophy to evade cellular immune
response. Here, we report severe thymic hypocellularity along
with decreased thymic integrity in tumor bearer. In an effort
to delineate the mechanisms behind such thymic atrophy, we
observed that tumor-induced oxidative stress played a critical
role, as it perturbed nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB) activity.
Tumor-induced oxidative stress increased cytosolic IKBA
retention and inhibited NF-KB nuclear translocation in thymic
T cells. These NF-KB–perturbed cells became vulnerable to
tumor-secreted tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-A (TNF-A)–
mediated apoptosis through the activation of TNF receptorassociated protein death domain–associated Fas-associated
protein death domain and caspase-8. Interestingly, TNF-A–
depleted tumor supernatants, either by antibody neutralization or by TNF-A-small interfering RNA transfection of tumor
cells, were unable to kill T cell effectively. When T cells were
overexpressed with NF-KB, the cells became resistant to
tumor-induced apoptosis. In contrast, when degradationdefective IKBA (IKBA super-repressor) was introduced into
T cells, the cells became more vulnerable, indicating that
inhibition of NF-KB is the reason behind such tumor/TNF-A–
mediated apoptosis. Curcumin could prevent tumor-induced
thymic atrophy by restoring the activity of NF-KB. Further
investigations suggest that neutralization of tumor-induced
oxidative stress and restoration of NF-KB activity along with
the reeducation of the TNF-A signaling pathway can be the
mechanism behind curcumin-mediated thymic protection.
Thus, our results suggest that unlike many other anticancer
agents, curcumin is not only devoid of immunosuppressive
effects but also acts as immunorestorer in tumor-bearing host.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(1):362–70]

Introduction
Transcription factor nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB) is one of
the major antiapoptotic transcription factors that regulate f150
genes, including several cytokine genes. NF-nB consists of multiple
proteins belonging to Rel family that includes proteins, such as

Requests for reprints: Gaurisankar Sa, Animal Physiology Section, Bose Institute,
P-1/12 CIT Scheme VII M, Calcutta 700054, India. Phone: 91-33-2355-9416/9219/9544;
Fax: 91-33-2334-3886; E-mail: gauri@bic.oseinst.ernet.in.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2583

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

362

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor-Induced Oxidative Stress Perturbs NF-kB Activity
Tumor supernatants freed from cellular components were used in 1:1
ratio with RPMI 1640 to study the effect of tumor supernatant on T cells
in the absence or presence of 10 Amol/L curcumin. To study the role of
TNF-a exposure and inhibition of NF-nB in tumor-induced T-cell killing,
1  106 cells were treated with neutralizing TNF-a antibody (2 Ag/mL;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and/or NF-nB inhibitor SN50
(50 ng/mL; Calbiochem, Minneapolis, MN) and/or recombinant TNF-a (10
ng/mL; R&D Systems, La Zola, CA). In separate experiments, to test the role
of preexposure to oxidative stress in NF-nB inhibition, T cells were treated
with low dose of H2O2 (100 Amol/L) for longer time (12 h) to induce
oxidative stress followed by 10 ng/mL TNF-a (26), and after 24 h, cells were
harvested for further experiments.
Plasmids, small interfering RNA, and transfections. The cDNA
encoding p65 subunit of human NF-nB, InBa, InBa-32A/36A [InBa superrepressor (InBa-SR), kind gift from Dr. J. Didonato, The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation], TNFR1, and TNF-a was subcloned into the pcDNA3.1 vector
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The resulting HA-NF-nB, HA-InBa, HA-InBa-SR,
and HA-TNFR1-pcDNA3.1 plasmids (4 Ag each/million cells) were
introduced separately into isolated T cells using T-cell nucleofector kit
(Amaxa, Koein, Germany). TNF-a-pcDNA3.1 plasmid (2 Ag/million cells)
was added to SK-RC-45 cell lines for transfection of stable cell lines with
LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen). Isolation of stably expressing clones were
obtained by limiting dilution and selection with G418 sulphate (Cellgro,
Kansas City, MO) at a concentration of 1 Ag/mL and cells surviving this
treatment were cloned and assessed for NF-nB, InBa, InBa-SR, TNFR1, and
TNF-a expression by immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis.
Ehrlich’s ascites carcinoma (EAC), SK-RC-26B (RCC), and CCF-52 (GBM)
cells were transfected with 300 pmol TNF-a/control double-stranded small
interfering RNA (ds-siRNA; active 5¶-GACAACCAACUAGUGGUGCdTdT-3¶
or inactive 5¶-GACAACCAGGGCGUGGUGC-dTdT-3¶; Dharmacon, Lafayette,
CO) and LipofectAMINE 2000 separately for 24 h. TNF-a expression in
mRNA as well as protein level were estimated by reverse transcription-PCR,
Western blotting, and quantitative immunofluorescence.
Flow cytometry. For the determination of cell death, T cells were stained
with propidium iodide (PI) and Annexin V-FITC and analyzed on flow
cytometer (FACSCalibur, Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA), equipped
with 488 nm argon laser light source, 515 nm bandpass filter for FITC
fluorescence, and 623 nm bandpass filter for PI fluorescence, using CellQuest
software (23). For the determination of cell surface TNFR1 expression,
thymic T cells were incubated with FITC-conjugated TNFR1 antibody or
isotype-matched IgG (2 Ag/mL; BD PharMingen, San Diego, CA) followed
by flow cytometric analysis. For determination of intracellular TNF-a level,
tumor cells were incubated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (10 ng/mL),
ionomycin (1 Amol/L), and brefeldin A (10 Ag/mL; Sigma) for 4 h. Cells
were fixed, labeled with FITC-conjugated TNF-a (2 Ag/mL; BD PharMingen),
and analyzed on flow cytometer. For the measurement of intracellular
ROS, thymic T cells were incubated with 10 Amol/L 5,6-carboxy-2¶,7¶-dichlorofluorescein-diacetate (CM-H2DCFDA; Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, CA) for
1 h. Cells were analyzed flow cytometrically for DCFDA fluorescence.
Western blotting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Nuclear
and cytosolic fractions as well as whole-cell lysates were prepared as described
(23–25). The protein of interest was visualized by direct Western blot analysis.
For the determination of direct interaction between two proteins, IKKa/
IKKh–associated phospho-InBa or TNFR-associated protein death domain
(TRADD)–associated Fas-associated protein death domain (FADD)/caspase8 was immunopurified from cell lysates with anti-TRADD/IKKa/IKKh
antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and protein A-Sepharose beads. The
immunopurified protein was detected by Western blot using specific
antibodies. Equal protein loading was confirmed by reprobing the blots with
a-actin/histone H1 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; ref. 23). For
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), double-stranded NF-nB nuclear
binding consensus oligonucleotides (5¶-AGTTGAGGGGACTTTCCCAGGC-3¶)
were end labeled by T4-polynucleotide kinase. Nuclear protein-DNA
complexes were separated by 4% PAGE. Twenty-fold unlabeled oligonucleotide competitor was used to confirm specific protein-DNA binding
(25). The gel was dried and exposed to a PhosphorImager screen (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA).

NF-nB activity by developing tumor may make T cells susceptible
to tumor-secreted TNF-a–induced apoptosis. Because such tumorinduced thymic disorder can abate the cellular defense mechanism,
any therapeutic regimen that can protect thymus from tumor
assault will be helpful to protect substantial peripheral T-cell pull in
the tumor-bearing host.
The present study was conducted to delineate the mechanisms of
tumor-induced thymic T-cell depletion and the effect of curcumin
(diferuloylmethane, a known antioxidant with proven antitumor
activity; ref. 23) in prevention of tumor-induced thymic degeneration. We observed severe hypocellularity and structural disintegration of the thymus of tumor-bearing animals. A search for the
mechanisms of tumor-induced thymic demise revealed critical roles
of elevated oxidative stress and down-regulated NF-nB activity.
Earlier, we reported that curcumin induces apoptosis in tumor cells
(23–25). Here, we evaluated the effectiveness of curcumin in the
prevention of tumor-induced thymic atrophy. In fact, curcumin
administration restored tumor-induced depression in NF-nB
activity in thymic T cells through the reduction of oxidative stress.
Simultaneously, it normalized TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) expression
in thymic T cells and decreased TNF-a production by tumor cells.
Concerted effects of all these finally resulted in T-cell survival. Our
study suggests the therapeutic possibility of curcumin, as it is a
known anticancer agent with strong immunomodulatory effect.

Materials and Methods
Treatment of animals. Animal experiments were done following the
‘Principles of laboratory animal care’ (NIH publication no. 85-23, revised in
1985) as well as Indian laws on ’Protection of Animals’ under the prevision
of authorized investigators. Swiss albino mice (National Center for
Laboratory Animal Sciences, Hyderabad, India) weighing 25 to 27 g were
divided into four groups of 10 animals each including normal set (non–
tumor bearing), tumor-bearing set (which were i.p. injected with 1  105
exponentially grown ascites carcinoma), curcumin-treated set (non–tumor
bearing), and curcumin-treated tumor-bearing set. Curcumin (treatment
started 7 days after tumor inoculation) was fed orally (50 mg/kg body
weight every alternate day; ref. 24). For low-TNF-a–secreting tumor, 1  105
exponentially grown sarcoma-180 tumor cells were introduced ascitically.
Cell culture. At day 21 of tumor inoculation, thymus was removed, and
single-cell suspension was made in RPMI 1640. Macrophages were allowed
to adhere at 37jC for 1 h. Peripheral blood collected from mice and from
healthy human volunteers with informed consent (Institutional Review
Board 1382) were centrifuged over Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient
(Amersham Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) to obtain total leukocytes.
T cells were purified from total leukocytes and thymocytes by negative
magnetic selection using human T-cell enrichment cocktail (Stemcell
Technologies, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada). Viable cell numbers
were determined by trypan blue exclusion test. T cell isolated procedure
yielded >97% positive for CD3 cells as defined by immunocytometry.
Isolated cells ware maintained in complete RPMI 1640 supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 37jC in humidified
incubator containing 5% CO2.
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cell lines, SK-RC-45 and SK-RC-26B, were
obtained from Dr. N. Bander (The New York Hospital, Cornell University
Medical College, New York, NY). The normal kidney epithelial (NKE) cell line
was established from the uninvolved kidney tissue of a patient with RCC
and immortalized by transfection with the gene for telomerase (obtained
from Dr. A.V. Gudkov of The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH).
Tissue from primary lesions of RCC and glioblastoma (GBM) were provided
by the Cooperative Human Tissue Network. Informed consent was obtained
from all patients with localized disease. Tissues were digested and primary
RCC and GBM cells were allowed to adhere overnight and the adherent cells
were maintained in complete RPMI 1640 (RCC) or DMEM (GBM) and
allowed to reach confluence before use.

www.aacrjournals.org

363

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
ELISA, histology, and enzyme assay. TNF-a levels were quantified
using ELISA kit (BD PharMingen). For histology sections, similar thymic
lobes were fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, cut in 5-Am sections,
and stained with H&E. In-gel (nondenaturing PAGE) enzyme assay was used
to determine the activities of superoxide dismutases (SOD) and catalase.
The achromatic band intensities indicated the enzyme activities (27).
Statistical analysis. Values are shown as SE, except otherwise indicated.
Data were analyzed and, when appropriate, significance (P < 0.05) of the
differences between mean values was determined by a Student’s t test.

prompted us to investigate NF-nB status in this organ. Western blot
analysis with p65 and p50 NF-nB antibodies showed severe
impairment in NF-nB nuclear translocation and activity in thymus
of tumor bearers (Fig. 2A). Gel shift assay with NF-nB oligoprobe
supported the immunoblot data because tumor-induced reduction
in DNA-binding activity of thymic nuclear extract also indicated
perturbation in NF-nB nuclear translocation (Fig. 2B). It is known
that InBa inhibits NF-nB nuclear translocation and proteosomal
degradation of InBa leads to NF-nB activation. In our assay system,
we observed that the level of InBa in the cytosolic fraction of
thymic T cells was increased in tumor-bearing mice compared with
its normal counterpart, indicating blockage in InBa degradation
leading to inhibition of NF-nB activity. The phosphorylation status
of InBa was also impaired in these cells by growing tumor (Fig. 2A).
Among two InBa kinases (i.e., IKKa and IKKh), IKKh phosphorylation as well as its association with phospho-InBa were more
reduced in T cells of tumor-bearing mice (Fig. 2B). All these results
indicate that decreased IKK activity can be the cause behind
tumor-induced NF-nB perturbation. Interestingly, although optimum dose of curcumin had little or no effect on basal NF-nB
activity in normal thymus, it restored nuclear translocation as well
as DNA-binding activity of NF-nB in the thymus of tumor-bearing
mice (Fig. 2A and C). In this experiment, higher doses of curcumin
failed to improve NF-nB activity in T cells of tumor bearers while
inhibiting the same in normal T cells, indicating the existence of a
dose window in curcumin-induced NF-nB regulation (data not
shown). All these results restricted us to use 50 mg/kg body weight
dose for further studies. We also observed that curcumin
normalized the level of InBa, phospho-InBa, and IKK activity
(Fig. 2A and B), thus improving the nuclear translocation of
NF-nB compared with untreated tumor bearers where increased
level of InBa inhibits NF-nB activity. Similar results were obtained
when thymic T cells were exposed to cell-free tumor supernatants
in vitro (data not shown).
Tumor-induced oxidative stress neutralization in T cell by
curcumin. To further understand the mechanism by which

Results
Tumor induces disruption of thymic integrity. Thymus of
tumor-bearing mice was reduced in size and showed severe
hypocellularity compared with its normal counterparts as was
evident from total cell counts (Fig. 1A). Histologic pattern of
thymus from tumor-bearing mice revealed a severe disintegration
of thymic architecture with massive depletion of cortical region
and disappearance of corticomedullary junctions. Curcumin given
at a dose of 50 mg/kg body weight (the optimum dose with least
toxicity and maximum tumoricidal activity; ref. 24) restored thymic
cellularity along with improved thymic architectural integrity
(Fig. 1B). Higher doses of curcumin not only failed to protect
thymus from tumor insult but also caused immunotoxicity to
normal mice where as lower doses were ineffective. Similarly, a
significant decrease in CD3+ T-cell population was also observed in
peripheral blood of tumor bearer that could be restored back to
normal level by curcumin (Fig. 1A). Our flow cytometry data also
revealed that in tumor-bearing mice, the number of Annexin V/PI–
positive cells was significantly increased (P < 0.005) in T cells,
indicating increased cellular death. Administration of curcumin to
tumor-bearing animals reduced the percentage of cell death in this
organ (Fig. 1C). All these results suggested that curcumin has
immunoprotective ability during carcinogenesis.
Tumor induces perturbation of T-cell NF-KB activity. NF-nB
plays an important role in maintaining the integrity of thymus
(28, 29). Our observations that tumor induced thymus atrophy

Figure 1. Curcumin protects thymic atrophy in
tumor-bearing mice. A, CD3+ T cells from thymus
and peripheral blood (PBL) and from untreated or
curcumin-treated normal and tumor-bearing mice
were counted. Columns, mean of five independent
experiments; bars, SE. B, sections of similar thymic
lobes stained with H&E. Magnification, 400.
C, thymic T cells labeled with Annexin V-FITC and
PI were analyzed flow cytometrically. Dot plot,
Annexin V-FITC fluorescence (X axis ) versus PI
fluorescence (Y axis ). Annexin V/PI–positive cells
were regarded as apoptotic cells. *, P < 0.005 for
control versus tumor and tumor versus tumor +
curcumin.

Control

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

364

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor-Induced Oxidative Stress Perturbs NF-kB Activity

Figure 2. Curcumin prevents tumorinduced inhibition of NF-nB nuclear
translocation and neutralizes oxidative
stress in thymic T cells. Thymic T cells from
normal and tumor-bearing mice (Fcurcumin)
were harvested. A, nuclear (for p50 and
p65 NF-nB) or cytosolic [for InBa and
phospho-InBa (p-IjBa )] fractions from
T cells were Western blotted using
specific antibodies. B, cell lysates were
immunoprecipitated (IP ) with anti-IKKa or
anti-IKKh antibodies and Western blotted
with antibodies against phospho-serine
(p-Ser ; Sigma), phospho-InBa, IKKa, and
IKKh. C, nuclear extracts were subjected to
EMSA analysis using NF-nB DNA-binding
sequence. D, intracellular ROS in T cells
was measured by DCFDA-dependent flow
cytometry. E, cytosolic fractions of T cells
were subjected to in-gel enzyme assay
for Mn and Cu/Zn SODs and catalase.
*, P < 0.005 for control versus tumor and
tumor versus tumor + curcumin.

be due to the decreased production and secretion of TNF-a by the
tumor cells on curcumin treatment because the levels of TNF-a in
ascites fluid and in tumor cells were decreased to normal level by
curcumin (Fig. 3A).
It is recognized that caspase-8 cascades play important role in
TNFR1-mediated apoptosis (1). We, thus, next intended to find the
role of this protease in tumor-induced thymic T-cell apoptosis.
Caspase-8 activity, as was evident from the processing of
procaspase-8, was increased in thymic T cells of tumor-bearing
mice, whereas the level of caspase-8 inhibitory protein FLIP (both
long and short form) was decreased in T cells (Fig. 3B). Thymic
T cells from tumor-bearing animals also showed increased amount
of TRADD-associated FADD and caspase-8 (Fig. 3B), suggesting
that the activation of caspase-8 was due to the switching on of
TNF-a–mediated apoptotic signaling. Curcumin treatment blocked
TNF-a secretion, normalized TNFR1 expression, inhibited caspase8 activation as well as amount of TRADD-associated caspase-8,
reduced FADD recruitment to TRADD, and also improved FLIP
levels, thereby protecting thymic T cells from tumor-induced death
(Fig. 3A and B).
Our results showed that tumor-induced T-cell death and
secreted high level of TNF-a. Moreover, it is known that increased
TNF-a exposure can make T cell susceptible to apoptotic onslaught
(1). We therefore next attempted to correlate these phenomena.
To test our assertion, we first neutralized TNF-a in tumor supernatant with antibody and then used those supernatants to estimate
their T-cell killing activity. Results of these experiments (Fig. 3C, left)
supported our notion because TNF-a antibody dramatically decreased tumor-induced killing of T cells. Such inhibition of killing
was consistent with curcumin-mediated inhibition, thereby raising
the possibility that curcumin might be blocking tumor-induced

curcumin restores NF-nB activity, we investigated the status of ROS
in thymic T cells of tumor-bearing mice, as reports indicate that
increased and chronic oxidative stress can deactivate or perturb
NF-nB activity (13). Flow cytometric study of CM-H2DCFDA–
loaded thymic T cells revealed significant increase in DCFDA
fluorescence (Fig. 2D), indicative of the increased oxidative stress
in thymic T cells due to tumor burden. Curcumin was found to
reduce the oxidative stress rendered by tumor. Thymic T cells of
the tumor bearer also showed decrease in the activities of two vital
antioxidant enzymes (i.e., catalase and SOD), and curcumin was
found to restore these depressed antioxidant enzymes (Fig. 2E).
When isolated T cells were challenged with tumor supernatant,
curcumin was found to lessen elevated ROS production and to
improve NF-nB activity in vitro (data not shown). All these results
indicate that curcumin acts as an antioxidant to neutralize chronic
oxidative stress incurred by growing tumor in the thymus and thus
protects NF-nB activity.
Role of TNF-A/TNFR1 in tumor-induced T-cell death. Most
of the cells are protected from TNF-a cytotoxicity, presumably by
NF-nB–mediated induction of protective genes (30, 31), and TNF-a
itself can induce NF-nB activation via IKK pathway (18). Because
our data indicated impairment in NF-nB nuclear translocation and
activity in thymus of tumor bearers, we next aimed at investigating
the status of TNF-a and its receptor in our assay system. Our flow
cytometric and immunoblotting data revealed that there was an
up-regulation of TNFR1 on the surface of thymic T cell of tumor
bearer that could be normalized to basal level after curcumin
treatment (Fig. 3A, left). It was also found that tumor insult
elevated TNF-a level significantly (P < 0.001) in serum (Fig. 3A,
middle) through the production of high level of TNF-a by the
tumor (Fig. 3A, right). The decrease in TNF-a level in serum might

www.aacrjournals.org

365

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

with high-TNF-a–secreting ascites tumor (59  106 cells in normal
versus 20  106 cells), thereby further strengthening the role of
TNF-a in tumor-induced thymic demise.
To reestablish that curcumin improves thymic integrity and
protects T cells via down-regulation of TNF-a/TNFR1, we overexpressed TNFR1 in T cells (Fig. 3D) and challenged those cells
with tumor supernatant. It was found that these cells became more
susceptible to supernatant-induced apoptosis than the control
vector-expressing cells (Fig. 3D, left). Interestingly, human primary
tumor cells (RCC and GBM) also showed similar pattern, indicating
the fact that observed results are not exclusive for murine tumor

T-cell killing by down-regulating TNF-a production. These results
were further confirmed by TNF-a-siRNA transfection experiments.
When EAC, RCC, or GBM cells were transfected with ds-siRNA
against TNF-a, the cell-free supernatant of these tumor cells
failed to induce substantial T-cell killing compared with control
ds-siRNA–transfected tumor cell supernatants (Fig. 3C, right). Our
immunoblotting data further suggested that ds-siRNA could
efficiently and specifically knocked down TNF-a in those cells.
Interestingly, we observed that ascitically grown sarcoma-180 cells
that secrete low level of TNF-a failed to cause severe thymic
atrophy (59  106 cells in normal versus 45  106 cells) compared

Figure 3. Inhibition of TNF-a exposure confers protection to T cell from tumor assault. Thymus from normal and tumor-bearing mice (Fcurcumin) was harvested.
A, left, flow cytometric determination of TNFR1 expression on thymic T cells surface. Inset, immunoblotting of TNFR1 (T cells from 1, normal mice; 2, curcumin-treated
mice; 3 , tumor-bearing mice; 4, curcumin-treated tumor-bearing mice). Middle, TNF-a levels in serum and cell-free tumor supernatant were determined by ELISA.
Right, intracellular TNF-a levels in tumor cells were determined by flow cytometry and immunoblotting. Inset, 1, untreated tumor cells; 2, curcumin-treated tumor cells.
B, top, T-cell lysates were Western blotted for the determination of caspase-8 activation and cFLIP level; bottom, TRADD-associated FADD and caspase-8 was
detected by coimmunoprecipitation and Western blotting. C, left, T cells were treated with tumor supernatant in the presence or absence of neutralizing TNF-a antibody
or curcumin. Percentage cell death was determined flow cytometrically. Right, EAC, RCC, or GBM cells were transfected with control or TNF-a-siRNA and tumor
supernatants were incubated with T cells to determine percentage cell death. Bottom, immunobloting of TNF-a expression in siRNA-transfected cells. D, left, Tumor
(EAC/RCC/GBM) or NKE supernatants were incubated with empty vectors or TNFR1-transfected T cells to determine percentage cells death; middle, immunoblotting
of TNFR1/TNF-a expression in vector or TNFR1/TNF-a–transfected cells; right, normal T cells were incubated with SK-RC-45 or TNF-a–overexpressing clone 13
supernatants to determine percentage cell death. *, P < 0.005 for control versus tumor, tumor versus tumor + curcumin, control IgG versus +anti-TNF-a, control siRNA
versus TNF-a-siRNA, vector versus TNFR1, SK-RC-45 versus clone 13, and clone 13 versus clone 13 + curcumin.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

366

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor-Induced Oxidative Stress Perturbs NF-kB Activity

systems but human tumors also exploit similar mechanism to
induce T-cell death. We further experimented with RCC cell lines
SK-RC-45 and its TNF-a–overexpressing SK-RC-45 clone 13; the
parental cell incidentally expresses low level of TNF-a. Consistent
with the TNF-a expression pattern, clone 13 induced more T-cell
death, indicating the role of TNF-a in tumor-mediated T-cell
death (Fig. 3D, right). Interestingly, curcumin administration
could prevent clone 13–mediated T-cell death apparently via
inhibition of TNF-a secretion from tumor cells (Fig. 3D). All
these results suggest that tumor-mediated T-cell death mechanism involves the participation of TNF-a–induced apoptotic
pathways, thus reduction in tumor TNF-a level and normalization of TNFR1 expression pattern in thymus can be one of the
mechanisms behind curcumin-induced thymic protection in the
tumor-bearing host.
NF-KB inhibition potentiates tumor-induced T-cell death.
Our earlier in vivo results suggested that the mechanism of
tumor-induced thymic cell death might include perturbation in
thymic NF-nB activity and increased exposure to TNF-a. To
reconfirm the role of NF-nB inhibition in tumor-induced
thymic demise, two approaches were undertaken. In the first
approach, we pretreated T cells in vitro with cell-permeable
NF-nB inhibitor peptide SN50 and then incubated the cells with
tumor supernatant. Under this NF-nB–inhibited condition, tumor
supernatant could kill more T cells than that of untreated
or alone SN50-treated cells (Fig. 4A ). Interestingly, when
TNF-a–neutralized supernatant was added to the NF-nB–
inhibited condition, the T-cell death was decreased dramatically
(P < 0.001). In parallel experiment, the cells were pretreated with
SN50 and then challenged with recombinant TNF-a. It was found
that the rate of death has gone up to 55% in the cells treated with
both SN50 and TNF-a from TNF-a alone (16.9%) or SN50 alone
(7.8%; Fig. 4A), suggesting that NF-nB plays crucial role in thymic
T-cell survival from TNF-a exposure.
In the second approach, T cells were overexpressed with
NF-nB or InBa/InBa-SR (Fig. 4C) and then incubated with EAC/
RCC/GBM cell–free supernatants. In the first case, when T cells
were overexpressed with p65-NF-nB, the cells became more
resistant to tumor-induced death compared with the control
vector-transfected cells (Fig. 4B). On the other hand, when T
cells were transfected with wild-type (WT) IjBa gene, the cells
became susceptible to tumor-induced death. When InBa-SR
(InBa-32A/36A) was introduced into T cells, this degradationresistant InBa subunit rendered T cells more susceptible to
tumor-induced death (Fig. 4B) that could not be successfully
prevented by curcumin administration (data not shown). All
these observations indicate that perturbation in NF-nB activity
made thymic T cells susceptible to tumor/TNF-a–induced
death.
Preexposure to oxidative stress renders thymic T cells
susceptible to TNF-A–induced cell death. Our observation
from in vivo results raised the possibility that chronic tumorinduced oxidative stress might be the cause behind observed
decrease in NF-nB activation in T cells and these unprotected T
cells might have died from increased TNF-a exposure. To prove
the same, T cells were preexposed for longer time to low dose of
H2O2, in presence or absence of curcumin, and then incubated
with TNF-a. A significant (P < 0.001) increase in the level of
Annexin V/PI–positive (dead) T cells was observed when the
cells were challenged with both H2O2 and TNF-a compared
with that of control or those treated with either H2O2 or

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 4. Tumor-induced thymic T-cell killing involves inhibition of NF-nB
activity. A, T cells were preincubated with control vehicle or SN50 for 3 h followed
by coincubation with medium alone or with tumor supernatant (Sup ; pretreated
with FTNF-a antibody; left ). In parallel experiments, SN50-pretreated T cells
were incubated with TNF-a (right ) followed by flow cytometric determination of
percentage cell death. B, T cells transfected with NF-nB, InBa, or InBa-32A/36A
(InBa-SR) were incubated with EAC, RCC, or GBM supernatants to determine
percentage cell death. C, Western blot representation of NF-nB and InBa
expression pattern in NF-nB–, InBa-, and InBa-SR–transfected T cells.
*, P < 0.005 for tumor supernatant versus +curcumin, tumor supernatant +SN50
versus tumor supernatant +SN50+anti-TNFa, TNFa versus TNFa +SN50,
and control vector versus NF-nB/InBa-SR; **, P < 0.05 for tumor supernatant
versus +anti-TNFa and control vector versus InBa.

TNF-a (Fig. 5A). The cells that were pretreated with curcumin
and H2O2 and then exposed to TNF-a showed lesser number of
dead cells compared with those not pretreated with curcumin
(Fig. 5A).
Impaired NF-nB nuclear translocation activity (both p65 and p50
isotypes) was also observed in the cells treated with H2O2 in
contrast to those of control or cells treated with TNF-a or
curcumin (Fig. 5B). When T cells were treated with TNF-a alone,
there was slight induction of NF-nB activity. However, when TNF-a
was applied in combination with curcumin, activity was brought
back to normal level. We also observed decreased InBa degradation
in cells treated with H2O2 alone or in combination with TNF-a.
Interestingly, curcumin could reduce InBa retention in all the
H2O2-treated sets (Fig. 5B). In fact, H2O2 treatment predominantly
reduced phosphorylation status of IKKh subunit in T cells that
could be successfully prevented by curcumin, indicating that
oxidative stress–mediated IKK inactivation can be the cause
underlying increased InBa retention (data not shown). Oxidative
stress and TNF-a exposure together showed highest amount of
caspase-8 activation in T cells, whereas TNF-a activated this
protease moderately. Curcumin pretreatment blocked caspase8 activation in those cells exposed to TNF-a alone or in
combination with H2O2 (Fig. 5B). All these observations indicate
that preexposure to oxidative stress can render T cells more
susceptible to TNF-a–mediated death as it perturbs NF-nB nuclear
translocation and activity via decreased InBa degradation.
Administration of curcumin helps to neutralize the oxidative stress
and prevents T cells from TNF-a–mediated apoptosis, indicating
that the observed protective effects of curcumin on T cells could be
due to the neutralization of oxidative stress and reduced TNF-a
exposure and may not be due its direct effect on physiologic
immune activity.

367

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Discussion

but also favors antiapoptotic TNF-a signaling (36). Interestingly,
two cellular responses to TNF-a have been well documented, the
induction of cell death through caspase cascade and the activation
of gene transcription for cell survival via activation of NF-nB
(18, 19), although apoptogenic activity of this cytokine also
associates with a block in NF-nB–mediated cell survival signals
(37). NF-nB also blunts ROS accumulation, which themselves are
pivotal elements for TNF-a–induced apoptosis, whereas chronic
exposure to oxidative stress inhibits NF-nB nuclear translocation
activity in T cells (14, 36). On the contrary, redox regulation of
NF-nB–inducing kinase is mechanistically important in cytokine
induction of NF-nB activation (38) and reduction in oxidative stress
was found to inhibit nuclear binding of NF-nB (39), indicating
the complexity of cross-talk among TNF-a, NF-nB, and ROS.
Thus, to understand the mechanisms underlying tumor-induced
thymic atrophy and its protection by curcumin, we investigated
the relationship between these deciding factors in our model
system.
Our results indicated severe impairment in NF-nB nuclear
translocation in thymic T cell of tumor bearer, which might have
resulted in T-cell death. Supporting our notion, p65-NF-nB–
overexpressed T cells developed resistance to tumor-induced
death, whereas T cells treated with cell-permeable NF-nB nuclear
translocation inhibitor peptide (SN50) were vulnerable to tumorinduced death, thereby highlighting the role of NF-nB inhibition in
tumor-induced thymic disruption. Next, the status of InBa was
monitored in T-cell cytosol because inhibition in proteosomal
degradation of InBa blocks NF-nB nuclear translocation and
activation. In fact, dramatic increase in InBa in thymic T-cell
cytosol indicated reduced degradation of InBa in tumor-bearing
mice. To directly correlate such perturbation in NF-nB activity to
tumor-induced thymic T-cell death, cells were engineered with WT
InBa or its degradation-resistant mutant InBa-32A/36A (InBa-SR;
ref. 40). In both cases, cells became vulnerable to tumor-induced
death; particularly in case of InBa-SR, death was dramatically
increased and was not successfully prevented by curcumin. There
are reports showing tumor-induced block in NF-nB activation in
circulatory and splenic T cells, where T cells are mature in nature
(15, 16). However, this is the first report showing tumor-induced
perturbation in NF-nB activity in thymus, the primary organ for
T-cell development. Abnormal T-cell development and decreased
thymic cellularity were reported in transgenic mice with lymphocyte-specific defect in NF-nB activation, suggesting the critical
role of NF-nB in thymic development and in differentiation of
CD4+CD8+ to CD4+ or CD8+ effector T cells (28, 29). Thus, tumorinduced perturbation in thymic NF-nB activity might be one of the
causes of observed thymic atrophy. Curcumin, on the other hand,
normalized InBa status in cytosol and restored thymic NF-nB
activity.
There are diverse reports about the effect of ROS in NF-nB
activation (11–14, 38). In line with the growing evidences (9, 10),
we observed tumor-induced increase in ROS in thymic T cells of
tumor bearer with parallel inhibition in antioxidant systems. To
correlate such ROS formation to NF-nB activity, oxidative stress
was induced by H2O2 in thymic T cells. This exogenous oxidative
stress also inhibited IKK activity, InBa degradation, and NF-nB
nuclear translocation. These observations are consistent with the
report indicating H2O2-induced inhibition of NF-nB through
inactivation of IKK (13) and not only suggest cell- and situationspecific effects of oxidative stress on NF-nB but also explain

Our study shows the potential mechanisms by which cancer cells
induce T-cell apoptosis. Developing tumor secreted high level of
TNF-a as well as induced oxidative stress that increased cytosolic
InBa retention and inhibited NF-nB nuclear translocation in
T cells. Perturbation in NF-nB distribution promoted TNF-a–
mediated T-cell apoptosis through TRADD-associated caspase8 activation resulting in thymic atrophy. Tumor growth-associated
changes in thymic architecture and cellularity suggest that tumor
cells target thymus possibly as a mechanism to diminish antitumor
immune response (32). Curcumin neutralized such tumor-induced
oxidative stress, restored back NF-nB activity, and inhibited TNF-a
production, thereby minimizing tumor-induced T-cell apoptosis.
All these observations point toward a cross-talk between NF-nBROS-TNF-a in deciding the fate of T cells in tumor microenvironment and the intervening role of curcumin.
It is well recognized that NF-nB/Rel plays crucial role in immune
system by controlling many cytokine genes and responding to
various signals required for immune cell survival (1, 33, 34). NF-nB
not only antagonizes TNF-a–induced programmed cell death (35)

Figure 5. Preexposure to oxidative stress renders T cell more susceptible to
TNF-a–mediated death. A, T cells, pretreated with or without curcumin, were
exposed to H2O2 and then with TNF-a to determine percentage cell death.
B, nuclear (for p50 and p65 NF-nB) or cytosolic (for InBa and procaspase-8)
fractions of T cells from above experimental conditions were Western blotted
using specific antibodies. *, P < 0.005 for TNF-a versus H2O2 + TNF-a and
H2O2 + TNF-a-curcumin versus H2O2 + TNF-a + curcumin.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

368

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor-Induced Oxidative Stress Perturbs NF-kB Activity

hypothesize that curcumin may not be a universal ‘‘inhibitor’’ or
‘‘activator’’ of NF-nB activity but maintains the normal status of
this important transcription factor. To prove our hypothesis, we
undertook following approach. When normal T cells were treated
with TNF-a, there was induction of NF-nB activity. However, when
TNF-a was applied in combination with curcumin, activity was
brought back almost to the normal level (Fig. 5B ). These
observations are consistent with other reports showing inhibition
of stimulus-induced NF-nB activity by curcumin. In case of cancer
cells, for example, where NF-nB activity is highly increased
compared with normal (44), curcumin inhibits the same (42, 43).
Inhibition in NF-nB activity in normal T cells at higher doses
indicated the existence of an optimum dose beyond which
curcumin perturbs NF-nB activity. We also observed curcumininduced decrease in NF-nB nuclear translocation in RCC cells, in
which NF-nB activity was much higher than its normal counterpart.3 Even in normal dendritic and splenic cells, when NF-nB
activity is increased/induced, curcumin brings back the level almost
to normal one (45, 46). So, the effect of curcumin on NF-nB therefore
may not be a universal phenomenon but might be dose specific, cell
specific, and depends on the microenvironment of the concerned
cell. On the other hand, in our model, because tumor-induced
oxidative stress inhibited NF-nB activity in thymic T cell, curcumin
released the inhibition and brought back the activity to the normal
level by neutralizing the oxidative stress. Further support to our
hypothesis came from the report that in untreated normal
peripheral blood lymphocytes, NF-nB status remained unchanged
up on curcumin treatment (47). Even in our system, optimum dose
of curcumin failed to alter NF-nB activity in thymic T cells of normal
mice. After analyzing all our results in the light of other reports, we
came to the conclusion that the observed augmentation in thymic
NF-nB activity by curcumin may be due to its antioxidant property
that frees NF-nB from inhibitory effects of tumor-induced ROS. We
have already reported that curcumin can successfully reduce tumor
load in vivo (24, 48) in a dose-dependent manner. Taken together,
antioxidant property of curcumin along with its role in reducing
TNF-a level as well as tumor load may be the possible mechanisms
behind curcumin-induced thymic protection.

why growing tumors down-regulate NF-nB in T cells. In fact,
defective activation of NF-nB that affects cytokine production
and functionality of T cells (1, 33) and makes it susceptible to
apoptosis (30, 31) was reported in T cells from tumor-bearing
mice and cancer patients (15, 16). Because many tumors secrete
TNF-a that is cytocidal for thymocytes (17), next TNF-a status
and its role in tumor-induced thymic T-cell apoptosis were
examined. We observed high level of TNF-a in the serum and
down-regulation of caspase-8 inhibitory protein FLIP in the
thymic T cell of tumor bearers along with increased TNFR1
expression and TRADD-associated FADD and caspase-8 activation
in thymic T cells, thereby confirming the involvement of TNF-a–
mediated death pathway in thymic atrophy. To further correlate
TNF-a to tumor-induced thymic regression, we treated T cells
with TNF-a–depleted tumor supernatants. Interestingly, unlike
untreated tumor supernatants, TNF-a–depleted tumor supernatants were unable to kill T cells effectively. In contrast, RCC
variants overexpressing TNF-a instigated more T-cell death than
low-TNF-a–expressing RCC, indicating that increased TNF-a
exposure produced by the tumor microenvironment can make
T cells susceptible to apoptosis. Thus, when TNFR1-overexpressing T cells were treated with tumor supernatant, those
engineered cells became more vulnerable. Curcumin reduced
serum TNF-a level and inhibited thymic T-cell TNFR1 expression,
thereby preventing TRADD-mediated caspase-8 activation in
these cells of tumor bearer. These findings directly correlate
TNF-a status to tumor-induced thymic disruption and protective
role of curcumin.
Next, to better understand the cross-talk between TNF-a and
NF-nB, we treated thymic T cells with TNF-a in presence of specific
NF-nB inhibitor. Results showed great enhancement in T-cell
killing, indicating that impaired NF-nB activity rendered thymic
T cells susceptible to TNF-a–mediated apoptosis. These findings
are in line with the reports that NF-nB activation is required to
counterbalance apoptotic effect of TNF-a (30, 31). Finally, to
confirm directly whether oxidative stress–induced loss in NF-nB
activity along with increased exposure to TNF-a are the reasons
behind tumor-induced thymic T-cell death, we treated H2O2–
preexposed thymic T cells with TNF-a and noted dramatic increase
in cell death. H2O2 alone or in combination with TNF-a drastically
inhibited InBa degradation as well as NF-nB activation and
initiated caspase-8 cascades. These results clearly show that tumorinduced ROS played an important role in blocking InBa
degradation and thereby retaining NF-nB in cytosol. Under this
‘‘NF-nB–inhibited’’ situation, tumor-secreted TNF-a induced T-cell
apoptosis, leading to thymic atrophy. Curcumin, a known
antioxidant (23, 41), at its physiologic dose counteracted these
entire phenomena efficiently.
It is important to discuss in detail that in contrary to our findings,
many existing reports have shown NF-nB inhibitory action of
curcumin (42, 43). These reports as well as our results led us to

References
1. Dijkstra G, Moshage H, Jansen LM. Blockade of NF-nB
activation and donation of nitric oxide: new treatment
options in inflammatory bowel disease? Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl 2002;236:37–41.
2. Gómez J, Domingo DG, Martı́nez-AC, Rebollo A. Role
of NF-KB in the control of apoptotic and proliferative
responses in IL-2-responsive T cells. Front Biosci 1997;2:
d49–60.

www.aacrjournals.org

Acknowledgments
Received 7/13/2006; revised 9/28/2006; accepted 11/2/2006.
Grant support: Department of Science and Technology and Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, Government of India grants.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Drs. J. Didonato and A.V. Gudkov for NF-nB and InBa clones and NKE
cells, Dr. N. Bander for various RCC cells, and P. Raymen and U. Ghosh for technical
help.

3

Unpublished data.

3. Karin M, Lin A. NF-KB at the cross roads of life and
death. Nat Immunol 2002;3:221–7.
4. Pahl HL. Activators and target genes of Rel/NFnB
transcription factors. Oncogene 1999;18:6853–66.
5. Karin M, Ben-Neriah Y. Phosphorylation meets
ubiquitination: the control of NFnB activity. Annu Rev
Immunol 2000;18:621–63.
6. Alcamo E, Mizgerd JP, Horwitz BH, et al. Targeted
mutation of TNF receptor I rescues the RelAdeficient mouse and reveals a critical role for NF-

369

nB in leukocyte recruitment. J Immunol 2001;167:
1592–600.
7. Jeremias I, Kupatt C, Baumann B, Herr I, Wirth T,
Debatin KM. Inhibition of nuclear factor nB activation
attenuates apoptosis resistance in lymphoid cells. Blood
1998;91:4624–31.
8. Shiku H. Importance of CD4+ helper T-cells in antitumor immunity. Int J Hematol 2003;77:435–8.
9. Yangxin FU, Paul RD, Wang Y, Lopez DM. Thymic
involution and phenotypic alterations induced by

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
murine mammary adenocarcinomas. J Immunol 1989;
143:4300–7.
10. Shankar A, Singh SM, Sodhi A. Ascitic growth of a
spontaneous transplantable T cell lymphoma induces
thymic involution. Alterations in the CD4/CD8 distribution in thymocytes. Tumour Biol 2000;21:288–98.
11. Mellqvist UH, Hansson M, Brune M, Dahlgren C,
Hermodsson S, Hellstrand K. Natural killer cell dysfunction and apoptosis induced by chronic myelogenous
leukemia cells: role of reactive oxygen species and
regulation by histamine. Blood 2000;96:1961–8.
12. Kono K, Salazar-Onfray F, Petersson M, et al.
Hydrogen peroxide secreted by tumor-derived macrophages down-modulates signal-transducing ~ molecules
and inhibits tumor-specific T cell-and natural killer cellmediated cytotoxicity. Eur J Immunol 1996;26:1308–13.
13. Flohe ÂL. Brigelius-Flohe ÂR, Saliou C, Traber MG,
Packer L. Redox regulation of NF-nB activation. Free
Radic Biol Med 1997;22:1115–26.
14. Bowie A, O’Neill LA. Oxidative stress and nuclear
factor nB activation: a reassessment of the evidence in
the light of recent discoveries. Biochem Pharmacol 2000;
59:13–23.
15. Hayakawa M, Miyashita H, Sakamoto I, et al.
Evidence that reactive oxygen species do not mediate
NF-nB activation. EMBO J 2003;22:3356–66.
16. Korn SH, Wouters EF, Vos N, Janssen-Heininger YM.
Cytokine-induced activation of nuclear factor-n B is
inhibited by hydrogen peroxide through oxidative
inactivation of InB kinase. J Biol Chem 2001;276:
35693–700.
17. Malmberg KJ, Arulampalam V, Ichihara F, et al.
Inhibition of activated/memory (CD45RO+) T cells by
oxidative stress associated with block of NFnB activation. J Immunol 2001;167:2595–601.
18. Ghosh P, Sica A, Young HA, et al. Alterations in
NFnB/Rel family proteins in splenic T-cells from tumorbearing mice and reversal following therapy. Cancer Res
1994;54:2969–72.
19. Ling W, Rayman P, Uzzo RG, et al. Impaired
activation of NFnB in T cells from a subset of renal
cell carcinoma patients is mediated by inhibition of
phosphorylation and degradation of the inhibitor InB.
Blood 1998;92:1334–41.
20. Stuelten CH, Byfield SD, Arany PR, Karpova TS,
Stetler-Stevenson WG, Roberts AB. Breast cancer cells
induce stromal fibroblasts to express MMP-9 via
secretion of TNF-a and TGF-h. J Cell Sci 2005;118:
2143–53.
21. Varfolomeev EE, Ashkenazi A. Tumor necrosis factor:
an apoptosis JuNKie? Cell 2004;104:491–7.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

22. Tang G, Minemoto Y, Dibling B, et al. Inhibition of
JNK activation through NF-nB target genes. Nature 2001;
414:265–6.
23. Choudhuri T, Pal S, Das T, Sa G. Curcumin selectively
induces apoptosis in deregulated cyclin D1-expressed
cells at G2 phase of cell cycle in a p53-dependent
manner. J Biol Chem 2005;280:20059–68.
24. Pal S, Choudhuri T, Chattopadhyay S, et al. Mechanisms of curcumin-induced apoptosis of Ehrlich’s
ascites carcinoma cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2001;288:58–65.
25. Choudhuri T, Pal S, Agwarwal ML, Das T, Sa G.
Curcumin induces apoptosis in human breast cancer
cells through p53-dependent Bax induction. FEBS Lett
2002;512:334–40.
26. Liu H, Ma Y, Pagliari LJ, et al. TNFa induced
apoptosis of macrophages following inhibition of NFnB:
B: a central role for disruption of mitochondria.
J Immunol 2004;160:1354–8.
27. Carter AB, Tephly LA, Venkataraman S, et al. High
Levels of catalase and glutathione peroxidase activity
dampen H2O2 signaling in human alveolar macrophages. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2004;31:43–53.
28. Esslinger CW, Wilson A, Sordat B, Beermann F,
Jongeneel CV. Abnormal T lymphocyte development
induced by targeted overexpression of InBa. J Immunol
1997;158:5075–8.
29. Hettmann T, Leiden JM. NFnB is required for the
positive selection of CD8+ thymocytes. J Immunol 2000;
165:5004–10.
30. Senftleben U, Li ZW, Baud V, Karin M. IKKh is
essential for protecting T cell from TNFa-induced
apoptosis. Immunity 2001;14:217–30.
31. Beg A, Baltimore D. An essential role of NFnB in
preventing TNFa induced cell death. Science 1996;274:
782–4.
32. Lopez DM, Charyulu V, Adkins B. Influence of breast
cancer on thymic function in mice. J Mammary Gland
Biol Neoplasia 2002;7:191–9.
33. Baeuerle PA, Henkel T. Function and activation of
NF-nB in the immune system. Annu Rev Immunol 1994;
12:141–79.
34. Mercurio F, Manning AM. NF-nB as a primary regulator
of the stress response. Oncogene 1999;18:6163–71.
35. Bubici C, Papa S, Pham CG, Zazzeroni F, Franzoso G.
The NF-nB-mediated control of ROS and JNK signaling.
Histol Histopathol 2006;21:69–80.
36. Feuerhake F, Kutok JL, Monti S, et al. NFnB activity,
function, and target-gene signatures in primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma subtypes. Blood 2005;106:1392–9.

370

37. Butt AJ, Dickson KA, Jambazov S, Baxter RC.
Enhancement of tumor necrosis factor-a-induced
growth inhibition by insulin-like growth factorbinding protein-5 (IGFBP-5), but not IGFBP-3 in
human breast cancer cells. Endocrinology 2005;146:
3113–22.
38. Li Q, Engelhardt JF. Interleukin-1h induction of
NFnB is partially regulated by H2O2-mediated activation of NFnB-inducing kinase. J Biol Chem 2006;281:
1495–505.
39. Shapiro H, Ashkenazi M, Weizman N, Shahmurov M,
Aeed H, Bruck R. Curcumin ameliorates acute thioacetamide-induced hepatotoxicity. J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2006;21:358–66.
40. Jobin C, Panja A, Hellerbrand C, et al. Inhibition of
proinflammatory molecule production by adenovirusmediated expression of a nuclear factor nB superrepressor in human intestinal epithelial cells. J Immunol
1998;160:410–8.
41. Campbell FC, Collet GP. Chemopreventive properties
of curcumin. Future Oncol 2005;1:405–14.
42. Deeb D, Jiang H, Gao X, et al. Curcumin sensitizes
prostate cancer cells to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand/Apo2L by inhibiting nuclear
factor-nB through suppression of InBa phosphorylation.
Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:803–12.
43. Bharti AC, Donato N, Singh S, Aggarwal BB.
Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) down-regulates the constitutive activation of nuclear factor-nB and InBa kinase
in human multiple myeloma cells, leading to suppression of proliferation and induction of apoptosis. Blood
2003;101:1053–62.
44. Rayet B, Gelinas C. Aberrant rel/nfkb genes and
activity in human cancer. Oncogene 1999;18:6938–47.
45. Kim JY, Kim KH, Lee SH, et al. Curcumin inhibits
immunostimulatory function of dendritic cells: MAPKs
and translocation of NF-nB as potential targets.
J Immunol 2005;174:8116–24.
46. Ranjan Dl, Chen Cl, Johnston TD, Jeon Hl, Nagabhushan
M. Curcumin inhibits mitogen stimulated lymphocyte
proliferation, NFnB activation, and IL-2 signaling. J Surg
Res 2004;121:171–7.
47. Gertsch J, Guttinger M, Heilmann J, Sticher O.
Curcumin differentially modulates mRNA profiles in
Jurkat T and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Bioorg Med Chem 2003;20:1057–63.
48. Pal S, Bhattacharyya S, Choudhuri T, Datta GK, Das T,
Sa G. Amelioration of immune cell number depletion
and potentiation of depressed detoxification system of
tumor-bearing mice by curcumin. Cancer Detect Prev
2005;29:470–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor-Induced Oxidative Stress Perturbs Nuclear Factor-κB
Activity-Augmenting Tumor Necrosis Factor- α−Mediated
T-Cell Death: Protection by Curcumin
Sankar Bhattacharyya, Debaprasad Mandal, Gouri Sankar Sen, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:362-370.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/362

This article cites 46 articles, 20 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/362.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 8 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/362.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

