Research Article

Clioquinol, a Therapeutic Agent for Alzheimer’s Disease, Has
Proteasome-Inhibitory, Androgen Receptor–Suppressing,
Apoptosis-Inducing, and Antitumor Activities in Human
Prostate Cancer Cells and Xenografts
1,2

1,2

1,2

4

Di Chen, Qiuzhi Cindy Cui, Huanjie Yang, Raul A. Barrea, Fazlul H. Sarkar,
1,2
5
1,2,3
1,2
Shijie Sheng, Bing Yan, G. Prem Veer Reddy, and Q. Ping Dou

1,2

1
Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute and 2Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University; 3Vattikuti Urology
Institute, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan; 4Biophysics Collaborative Access Team, Department of Biological Chemical and
Physical Sciences, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois; and 5School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Institute of
Environmental Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, PR China

Abstract
Tumor growth and metastasis depend on angiogenesis that
requires the cofactor copper. Consistently, high levels of copper
have been found in many types of human cancers, including
prostate, breast, colon, and lung. Recent studies suggest that
copper could be used as a novel selective target for cancer
therapies. Clioquinol is capable of forming stable complexes
with copper and currently used in clinics for treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease. Most recently, it has been reported that
clioquinol possesses antitumor effects. However, the underlying
molecular mechanism is unclear. We report here that after
binding to copper, clioquinol can inhibit the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity, repress androgen receptor (AR)
protein expression, and induce apoptotic cell death in human
prostate cancer LNCaP and C4-2B cells. In addition, clioquinol
alone exhibits similar effects in prostate cancer cell lines with
elevated copper at concentrations similar to those found in
patients. Addition of dihydrotestosterone did not affect
clioquinol-mediated proteasome inhibition in both prostate
cancer cell lines. However, dihydrotestosterone partially
inhibited clioquinol-induced AR suppression and apoptosis
only in androgen-dependent LNCaP cells. Animal studies show
that clioquinol treatment significantly inhibits the growth of
human prostate tumor C4-2B xenografts (by 66%), associated
with in vivo proteasome inhibition, AR protein repression,
angiogenesis suppression, and apoptosis induction. Our study
provides strong evidence that clioquinol is able to target tumor
proteasome in vivo in a copper-dependent manner, resulting in
formation of an active AR inhibitor and apoptosis inducer that
is responsible for its observed antiprostate tumor effect.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(4):1636–44]

Introduction
Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed neoplasm and
the second leading cause of death in men in industrialized
countries (1). The androgen receptor (AR) is a transcription factor
that mediates the action of androgens in target tissues and

Requests for reprints: Q. Ping Dou, The Prevention Program, Barbara Ann
Karmanos Cancer Institute, and Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Wayne
State University, 640.1 HWCRC, 4100 John R Road, Detroit, MI 48201. Phone: 313-5768301; Fax: 313-576-8307; E-mail: doup@karmanos.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3546

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

expressed in nearly all prostate cancers (2, 3). Concurrent AR
overexpression was associated with a higher clinical stage, higher
levels of prostate-specific antigen, an AR-transcribed gene product
(2, 3), and earlier relapse after radical prostatectomy (4). It has been
reported that several naturally occurring chemopreventive agents,
such as isoflavones, curcumin, and ( )-epigallocatechin-3-gallate,
can inhibit AR expression (5, 6). New approaches in therapies for
prostate cancer are focused on down-regulating AR expression and
overcoming difficulties associated with commonly used forms of
antiandrogen (7, 8).
The ubiquitin/proteasome system plays an important role in the
degradation of cellular proteins. This proteolytic system involves
two distinct steps: ubiquitination and degradation (9, 10). The
eukaryotic proteasome contains several known activities, all of
which are associated with its h subunits (9, 10). We and others have
reported that inhibition of the proteasomal chymotrypsin-like, but
not trypsin-like activity, is associated with induction of apoptosis in
tumor cells (11, 12).
Tumor growth and metastasis depend on angiogenesis that
requires growth factors, proteases, and copper (13–16). The
following four lines of research suggest that copper could be used
as a novel selective target for cancer therapies. (a) Copper, but not
other metals, is a cofactor essential for tumor angiogenesis (13–16).
(b) High tissue or serum levels of copper have been found in many
types of human cancers, including prostate, breast, colon, lung, and
brain (17–21). (c) In normal organs (e.g., liver) of human and
mammals, there are no known adverse effects observed when the
bioavailability of copper is decreased up to 80% from the baseline
(22). (d) Therapies using the strong copper chelator tetrathiomolybdate not only are well tolerated but also stabilize advanced
kidney cancer (23, 24). It is important to note that tetrathiomolybdate therapy was found to prevent disease progression only in
patients who became copper deficient. In other patients, the
disease advanced before copper levels were sufficiently lowered
(13, 14, 23). Thus, passive copper chelating may not be sufficient to
eliminate tumors.
Clioquinol or 5-chloro-7-iodo-8-hydroxyquinoline (Fig. 1A), a
lipophilic compound capable of forming stable complexes with
copper(II) ions (25), was used as an antibiotic for treating diarrhea
and skin infection (26). Although clioquinol use was thought to be
associated with occurrence of subacute myelo-optic neuropathy in
Japan (25–27), this conclusion was not supported by the
subsequent epidemiologic analysis (28). Instead, decreased levels
of vitamin B12 may play a role in this syndrome (26). In fact,
clioquinol may be used safely in humans with vitamin B12

1636

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Copper-Dependent Proteasome Inhibition by Clioquinol

Figure 1. In vitro proteasome-inhibitory
activity and structure analysis of
clioquinol-copper complex. A, color change
when clioquinol is mixed with CuCl2
and proteasomal inhibition by the
clioquinol-copper complex. Clioquinol
(CQ, colorless ) was mixed with CuCl2
(Cu, light green ), both dissolved in DMSO
at 20 mmol/L, in a 1:1 molar ratio to form
clioquinol-copper complex (CQ-Cu,
orange ). Inhibition of the chymotrypsin-like
activity of purified rabbit 20S proteasome
by CuCl2, clioquinol, and clioquinol-copper
was measured. Purified 20S rabbit
proteasome was incubated with the
peptide substrate for the proteasomal
chymotrypsin (CT )-like activity in the
presence of CuCl2, clioquinol, and
clioquinol-copper at indicated
concentrations, as described in Materials
and Methods. B, copper K edge XANES
spectra. Copper metal foil and CuCl2 are
references for copper oxidation state.
Black line, copper metal foil; purple line,
CuCl2. In contrast, the copper in
clioquinol-copper mixture showed a
change in its copper oxidation state
(green line ). C, EXAFS spectra at
the copper K edge of CuCl2 and
clioquinol-copper mixture. D, Fourier
transform of the clioquinol-copper EXAFS
data. Magnitude and imaginary part are
shown along with their respective fitting
curves (red ). The measured bond distance
and coordination number of the copper site
and other elements are not shown.

supplementation (29). Recent studies also show the potential use of
clioquinol for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease (30) and Huntington’s disease (31). Two clioquinol clinical trials for Alzheimer’s
disease showed no toxicity in any patients and some clinical
benefit in some patients (29, 32). Most recently, it was reported that
in an in vivo lymphoma xenografts mouse model, clioquinol
inhibited tumor growth (33), although the detailed mechanism of
action is unclear.
We have reported that certain classes of copper-containing
compounds act as potent proteasome inhibitors (34, 35). In the
current study, we report that clioquinol was capable of binding
copper and forming a complex, as verified by X-ray absorption
near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) and by extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (EXAFS). The clioquinol-copper
complex possessed proteasome-inhibitory, AR-suppressive, and
apoptosis-inducing activities in both androgen-dependent
(LNCaP) and androgen-independent (C4-2B) human prostate
cancer cell lines (36, 37). When used in prostate cancer cells
containing a cellular copper level similar to those found in
cancer patients, clioquinol alone had such activities. When administered to mice bearing C4-2B xenografts, clioquinol potently
inhibited the tumor growth associated with in vivo proteasome
inhibition, AR suppression, angiogenesis reduction, and apoptotic
cell death.

www.aacrjournals.org

Materials and Methods
Materials. Clioquinol, CuCl2, ammonium tetrathiomolybdate, and
Cremophor were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Fluorogenic peptide substrates Suc-LLVY-AMC and Ac-DEVD-AMC were obtained
from Calbiochem, Inc. (San Diego, CA). The peptide substrate Z-GGL-AMC
was from Biomol International LP (Plymouth Meeting, PA). Apoptag
Peroxidase In situ Apoptosis Detection kit was from Chemicon International, Inc. (Temecula, CA).
XAFS experiments in copper solutions. EXAFS and XANES at the
copper K edge have been done at the 18-ID beamline of the Biophysics
Collaborative Access Team facility (38, 39) at the Advance Photon
Source, Argonne National Laboratory. The samples were 1 mmol/L of
CuCl2, clioquinol, and clioquinol-CuCl2 solutions. Copper foil was also
used as a reference. A Si(111) double crystal monochromator and a Si
glass mirror comprise the main beamline optics. Both monochromator
and mirror provide doubly focusing capabilities, the focused beam size
being 160 Am H  100 Am V ( full width at half maximum). The
excitation energy was scanned in the copper K edge energy region
according to the standard procedures. To minimize X-ray dose and
reduce the risk of radiation damage, samples were mounted in custommade sample cells, quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen, and mounted in a
Displex cryostat at 40K. Samples were placed in vertical and horizontal
positions; thus, each sample spot was only exposed to X-rays for 60 s.
The measurements were then repeated 100 times on different sample
spots. Data were analyzed using IFEFFIT, Athena, and Artemis software
(40, 41).

1637

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Cell cultures and whole-cell extract preparation. Human prostate
cancer LNCaP and C4-2B cells were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum and maintained at 37jC and 5% CO2. A whole-cell
extract was prepared as described previously (11, 34) for all the following
procedures.
Color change reactions. Clioquinol and CuCl2, each of which was
dissolved in DMSO to a final concentration of 20 mmol/L, were mixed in a
1:1 ratio for color change.
Cellular morphologic analysis. A Zeiss Axiovert 25 microscope was
used for microscopic imaging with phase contrast for cellular morphology.
Cell proliferation assay. LNCaP and C4-2B cells were seeded in
triplicate in a 96-well plate and grown until 70% to 80% confluence, followed
by treatment with indicated agents for 24 h. After that, the 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was
done as described previously (35).
Western blot analysis. The cell or tissue extracts were separated by
SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose blotting membrane. Western
blot analysis was done using specific antibodies against ubiquitin, AR, p27,
Bax, InB-a, or h-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA) or
poly(ADP)ribose polymerase (PARP; Biomol International LP), followed by
visualization using the enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Amersham
Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ).
Inhibition of purified 20S proteasome activity by copper chloride
and the clioquinol-copper mixture. The chymotrypsin-like activity of
purified 20S proteasome was measured as described previously (34). Briefly,
17.5 ng of purified 20S proteasome were incubated in 100 AL of assay buffer
[50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)] with or without different concentrations of
copper chloride, clioquinol, or the clioquinol-copper mixture and 10 Amol/L
fluorogenic peptide substrate Suc-LLVY-AMC ( for the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity) for 2 h at 37jC. After incubation, production
of hydrolyzed AMC groups was measured using a Wallac Victor3 multilabel
counter with an excitation filter of 365 nm and an emission filter of 460 nm.
Proteasomal chymotrypsin-like and caspase-3/7 activity assays
using cell or tissue extracts. Total lysates (10 Ag per reaction) of cells
or tissue from human prostate tumor xenograft were incubated for 60 min
at 37jC in 100 AL of assay buffer [50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)] with 20
Amol/L of fluorogenic substrate Suc-LLVY-AMC ( for the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity in cell extracts) or Z-GGL-AMC ( for specific
chymotrypsin-like activity in tumor tissues) or Ac-DEVD-AMC ( for caspase3/7 in tumor tissues), followed by measurement of AMC group release, as
described above.
Human prostate tumor xenograft experiments. Five-week-old male
athymic nude mice were purchased from Taconic Research Animal
Services (Hudson, NY) and housed under pathogen-free conditions
according to Wayne State University animal care guidelines. The protocols
of animal experiments were reviewed and approved by Institutional
Laboratory Animal Care and Use Committee of Wayne State University.
C4-2B cells (5  106) were injected s.c. at one flank of the mice. Tumor
size was measured every other day by a caliper. Tumor volume (V ) was
determined by the following equation V = (L  W 2)  0.5, where L is the
length and W is the width of the tumor. When xenografts reached
volumes of f200 mm3, the mice bearing tumors were randomly assigned
to control or clioquinol group administered daily using either vehicle
control (mixture of Cremophor/PBS/ethanol/DMSO, 5:2:2:1) or 10 mg/kg/d
of clioquinol. When the control tumors reached f1,500 mm3 (on day 15),
the experiment was terminated and the mice were sacrificed. The tumors
were removed and photographed, and the tumor tissues were then used
for multiple assays to measure proteasome inhibition and apoptotic cell
death.
Terminal deoxyribonucleotide transferase–mediated nick-end
labeling assay. Tumor tissues were paraffin-embedded and stained
according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, after deparaffinization
and hydration, the tissue sections were incubated with working strength
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase enzyme and working strength stop/
wash buffer, conjugated with antidigoxigenin, and then stained by
peroxidase substrate. Finally, the tissue sections were mounted under a
glass coverslip in Permount and viewed under microscope.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Immunohistochemistry. Tumor tissues were paraffin-embedded and
sectioned. After deparaffinization and hydration, the slide was blocked by
3% hydrogen peroxide, incubated with primary antibody to p27 (1:20;
Novocastra Laboratories Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom) or
CD31, and then biotinylated with secondary antibody or anti-mouse IgG
(H + L), followed by incubation in avidin and biotinylated horseradish
peroxidase complex reagent (DAKO Laboratories, Cambridgeshire, United
Kingdom). Finally, the slide was mounted with 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine and
visualized under microscope.
H&E staining assay. Paraffin-embedded tissue slides were deparaffinized and hydrated, and then stained with hematoxylin for 1 min. After
rinsing, the slides were stained with eosin for 1 min, rinsed thoroughly, and
mounted with Permount.
Statistical analysis. Statistical analysis was done with Microsoft Excel
software. Student’s t test for independent analysis was applied to evaluate
differences between treatment and control.

Results
In vitro proteasome-inhibitory activity and structural
analysis of the clioquinol-copper(II) complex. It has been
shown that clioquinol is capable of binding to copper (25). Indeed,
when a solution of clioquinol was mixed with a solution of CuCl2 at
1:1 molar ratio, dramatic color change was observed (Fig. 1A),
indicating that a chemical reaction has occurred that involves
formation of a clioquinol-copper complex.
To examine whether the complex of clioquinol-copper is capable
of inhibiting the proteasome activity, we incubated CuCl2,
clioquinol alone, or the clioquinol-copper mixture at various
concentrations with a purified rabbit 20S proteasome. The results
showed that both CuCl2 and clioquinol-copper complex inhibit the
chymotrypsin-like activity of the purified 20S proteasome with IC50
values of 5.1 and 2.5 Amol/L, respectively (Fig. 1A), indicating that
the complexed copper has increased proteasome-inhibitory
activity. In a sharp contrast, clioquinol alone at even 20 Amol/L
had little effect (Fig. 1A). This is consistent with our hypothesis
(34, 35) that clioquinol is able to carry the copper ion into tumor
cells and that the copper ion is responsible for inhibiting the
proteasome activity (see below).
To further verify that clioquinol reacts with copper and forms a
stable complex, a series of samples, including clioquinol, CuCl2, and
a mixture of clioquinol and CuCl2, were analyzed by XANES and
EXAFS. Clioquinol was measured to ensure it was free of copper.
The result of XANES experiment (Fig. 1B) shows that the
clioquinol-copper mixture has a different copper oxidation state
(green line) from those of CuCl2 (purple line) and metal copper
(black line), confirming that copper ion interacted with clioquinol
in solution and suggesting the formation of a new complex
between CuCl2 and clioquinol.
EXAFS data from the clioquinol-copper mixture also showed
that the copper ion was coordinated to six-neighbor atoms at a
distance of 2.36 Å in an octahedral configuration (Fig. 1C and D;
data not shown), whereas in the CuCl2 sample, four chlorine
atoms were configured in a tetrahedral arrangement at a
distance of 2.19 Å (Fig. 1C and D; data not shown). Therefore,
both XANES and EXAFS results showed that the newly formed
octahedral clioquinol-copper complex was distinct from the
inorganic CuCl2.
The clioquinol-copper complex inhibits the proteasome
activity, reduces AR expression, suppresses cell proliferation,
and induces apoptotic cell death in human prostate cancer
cells. To test whether the clioquinol-copper complex was an active
proteasome-inhibitory complex in intact prostate cancer cells,

1638

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Copper-Dependent Proteasome Inhibition by Clioquinol

androgen-dependent LNCaP and androgen-independent C4-2B cell
lines were treated for 24 h with 20 Amol/L of CuCl2, clioquinol, or
the clioquinol-copper complex, using DMSO, tetrathiomolybdate,
and tetrathiomolybdate-copper complex as controls. After the
treatment, cells were collected and protein extracts were prepared
for analysis of proteasome inhibition by two assays: the
chymotrypsin-like activity assay (Fig. 2A) and the accumulation
of ubiquitinated and target proteins by Western blotting (Fig. 2B).
We found that the clioquinol-copper complex significantly
inhibited the proteasome activity in both LNCaP (by 82%) and
C4-2B (by 83%) cell lines (Fig. 2A). Consistently, the accumulation
of ubiquitinated proteins and the proteasome target protein Bax
was observed in both cell lines treated with the clioquinol-copper
complex (Fig. 2B, lanes 4 and 10). In parallel, copper or clioquinol
alone did not cause proteasome inhibition (Fig. 2A and B, lanes 2,
3, 8, and 9). In addition, neither tetrathiomolybdate nor the
tetrathiomolybdate-copper complex was able to inhibit the
proteasome activity in both cell lines (Fig. 2A and B). Our data
support that tetrathiomolybdate acts as a passive copper chelator/
eliminator and that tetrathiomolybdate-copper is an inactive
complex against the proteasome (35).
It has been shown that inhibition of the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity is associated with growth inhibition
and apoptosis induction in tumor cells (11, 12). To determine
whether proteasome inhibition by the clioquinol-copper complex
causes suppression of cell proliferation, LNCaP and C4-2B cells
were treated for 24 h with copper, clioquinol, clioquinol-copper
complex, tetrathiomolybdate, the tetrathiomolybdate-copper complex (all at 20 Amol/L), or the vehicle DMSO. We found that the
clioquinol-copper complex inhibited proliferation of LNCaP and
C4-2B cells by 83% and 85%, respectively (Fig. 2C). In contrast, all

the other treatments had very little or no inhibitory effect on cell
proliferation of both lines (Fig. 2C).
To determine whether the proteasome-inhibitory effect of the
clioquinol-copper complex was associated with apoptosis, two
specific assays, PARP cleavage and cellular morphologic changes,
were done. The cleavage of PARP was detected in both LNCaP and
C4-2B cell lines treated with the clioquinol-copper complex
(Fig. 2B, lanes 4 and 10). Furthermore, both cells lines treated
with the clioquinol-copper complex became spherical and
detached (Fig. 2D), indicating apoptotic cell death. In a sharp
contrast, neither PARP cleavage nor cellular rounding/detachment
were observed when cells were treated with copper, clioquinol
alone, tetrathiomolybdate alone, or tetrathiomolybdate-copper
complex (Fig. 2B and D).
For reasons that are not completely clear, inhibition of the
proteasome activity has been shown to reduce AR protein (42). To
determine the effects of the clioquinol-copper complex and other
treatments on AR expression, aliquots of the cell lysates were
analyzed by Western blotting. The AR protein was significantly
decreased in cells of both lines treated with the clioquinol-copper
complex (Fig. 2B, lanes 4 and 10). However, all other treatments
had little or no effect on the AR protein levels (Fig. 2B). These
results indicate that the proteasome-inhibitory clioquinol-copper
complex down-regulates AR protein expression, which, in turn, may
contribute to increased growth arrest and apoptosis. Indeed, a
kinetic experiment showed that AR reduction (as early as 30 min)
preceded apoptosis that did not start until 6 h after the clioquinolcopper treatment (data not shown).
Copper-enriched prostate cancer LNCaP and C4-2B cells are
sensitive to treatment with clioquinol alone. Fundamental to
the potential clinical utility of the nontoxic clioquinol ligand is its

Figure 2. Inhibition of proteasome activity,
cell proliferation, and AR expression as well
as induction of apoptosis in LNCaP and
C4-2B prostate cancer cells by clioquinolcopper complex. LNCaP and C4-2B
prostate cancer cells were treated with
20 Amol/L of copper (Cu ), clioquinol
(CQ ), clioquinol-copper complex
(CC ), tetrathiomolybdate (TM), and
tetrathiomolybdate-copper complex (TC ),
using DMSO (D ) as a control. After 24 h of
treatment, cellular morphologic pictures
were taken, and cells were collected and
analyzed for proteasome inhibition and
Western blotting. A, the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity was significantly
decreased in both cell lines treated with
clioquinol-copper complex compared with
others. **, P V 0.01. B, Western blot
analysis showed accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins (Ub-Prs ) and Bax,
decreased AR protein levels, and PARP
cleavage in both cell lines treated with
clioquinol-copper complex but not other
treatments. The h-actin was used as
loading control. C, MTT assay. LNCaP and
C4-2B cells were treated with 20 Amol/L of
copper, clioquinol, clioquinol-copper complex,
tetrathiomolybdate, tetrathiomolybdatecopper complex, or DMSO (D ) as control
for 24 h, followed by MTT assay as
described in Materials and Methods.
Columns, mean of three experiments; bars,
SD. **, P < 0.01. D, morphologic analysis.
Cell death–associated morphologic
changes (spherical and detached ) were
found in both cell lines treated only with
clioquinol-copper.

www.aacrjournals.org

1639

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Copper-enriched LNCaP human
prostate cancer cells were sensitive to
treatment of clioquinol alone, protectable
by dihydrotestosterone. LNCaP cells were
cultured in medium containing 50 Amol/L
of copper for 7 d, then maintained in
normal growth medium containing either
dihydrotestosterone (+DHT ) or the same
amount of ethanol ( DHT ) for 12 h,
followed by treatment with 30 to 50 Amol/L
of clioquinol, tetrathiomolybdate, or vehicle
DMSO for 24 h. A, the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity was decreased
in cells treated with clioquinol alone
whether pretreated with or without
dihydrotestosterone. **, P V 0.01.
Tetrathiomolybdate has no such
effect. B, Western blot analysis using
antibodies to ubiquitin (for ubiquitinated
proteins), Bax, AR, PARP, and h-actin.
C, caspase-3/7 activity. Fluorescent
detection of caspase-3/7 activity was
measured using an activity assay
(see Materials and Methods). All data are
representatives of independent triplicate
experiments. Columns, fold caspase-3/7
activity; bars , SD. D, morphologic analysis.
For details, see Fig. 2.

ability to bind with elevated endogenous copper in a tumor cell to
form a complex that can inhibit the proteasome activity, suppress
AR expression, and selectively induce tumor cell apoptosis.
Although tumor tissues contain high level of copper (17–21), the
cultured prostate tumor cell lines contain undetectable copper
levels (34, 35). To mimic the in vivo situation, both LNCaP and
C4-2B cell lines were cultured in medium containing 50 Amol/L
CuCl2 for 7 days and then cultured in normal copper-free growth
medium. This CuCl2 pretreatment led to increased cellular copper
concentration by severalfold (34, 35), comparable with the copper
levels found in patients (0.3-20 Amol/L; refs. 17, 18).
The CuCl2-pretreated LNCaP (Fig. 3) and C4-2B (Fig. 4) cell lines
were then treated with 50 Amol/L clioquinol or tetrathiomolybdate
for 24 h, followed by measurement of proteasome inhibition, AR
expression, and apoptosis induction. Both copper-enriched LNCaP
and C4-2B cell lines were sensitive to treatment of clioquinol but
not tetrathiomolybdate. The clioquinol treatment of the copperenriched prostate cancer cells caused significant proteasome
inhibition, as shown by the decreased proteasomal chymotryptic
activity (Figs. 3A and 4A, columns 2) and by the increased levels of
ubiquitinated proteins and Bax (Figs. 3B and 4B, lanes 2). In
contrast, tetrathiomolybdate treatment had no significant effect
(Figs. 3 and 4). Treatment with clioquinol, but not tetrathiomolybdate, also greatly reduced the levels of AR protein in both cell
lines (by 52% and 82%, respectively; Figs. 3B and 4B, lanes 2). In
addition, clioquinol, but not tetrathiomolybdate, induced apoptotic
cell death of both LNCaP and C4-2B lines, as shown by PARP
cleavage (Figs. 3B and 4B, lanes 2) and the cell rounding/
detachment morphologic changes (Figs. 3D and 4D, first three
panels). These results support the hypothesis that clioquinol is
capable of binding prostate tumor cellular copper, resulting in
proteasome inhibition, AR suppression, and apoptosis induction in
both androgen-dependent and androgen-independent prostate
cancer cells.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Androgen has greater protective effect in LNCaP than in
C4-2B cells. To further study the function of AR in cell sensitivity
to the proteasome inhibition–induced apoptosis, the copperenriched LNCaP cells (Fig. 3) were treated with 10 nmol/L
dihydrotestosterone for 12 h, followed by a further treatment with
30 to 50 Amol/L of clioquinol, tetrathiomolybdate, or equal volume
of DMSO for 24 h. The end points, proteasome activity, AR protein
level, and cell death, were then measured. Pretreatment and
cotreatment with dihydrotestosterone did not affect clioquinolinduced proteasome inhibition in these LNCaP cells because
similar levels of the proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity were
found after clioquinol treatment with or without dihydrotestosterone (Fig. 3A, column 7 versus column 2). Consistently, high levels
of ubiquitinated proteins and Bax protein were found in LNCaP
cells cotreated with dihydrotestosterone and clioquinol, comparable with that of clioquinol treatment without dihydrotestosterone
(Fig. 3B, lane 7 versus lane 2). In parallel, tetrathiomolybdate
exhibited no proteasome-inhibitory effect (Fig. 3B). Importantly, the
AR decrease induced by clioquinol was inhibited by dihydrotestosterone treatment (52% versus 32% decrease; Fig. 3B, compare lane 2
with lane 1 versus lane 7 with lane 4). This result suggests that
proteasome inhibition by the clioquinol-copper complex occurs
before the activation of AR by dihydrotestosterone. Consistent with
the report that AR is an apoptosis inhibitor (7, 8), clioquinolinduced apoptotic cell death was also inhibited by dihydrotestosterone treatment of these cells, as shown by the decrease of PARP
cleavage (73% versus 25% cleavage; Fig. 3B, lane 2 versus lane 7),
caspase activation (18-fold versus 11-fold; Fig. 3C), and rounding/
detachment phenotypical changes (99% versus 60%; Fig. 3D).
Copper-enriched, androgen-independent C4-2B cells were also
tested (Fig. 4). As with LNCaP cells, pretreatment and cotreatment
with dihydrotestosterone did not affect clioquinol-induced proteasome inhibition, because similar low levels of the proteasomal
chymotrypsin-like activity and similar high levels of ubiquitinated

1640

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Copper-Dependent Proteasome Inhibition by Clioquinol

proteins and Bax were found after clioquinol treatment with or
without dihydrotestosterone (Fig. 4A and B). However, unlike the
results with LNCaP cells (Fig. 3B), AR repression induced by
clioquinol in C4-2B cells was not inhibited by dihydrotestosterone
treatment (82% versus 78% decrease; Fig. 4B). In fact, in the
presence of dihydrotestosterone, clioquinol still induced AR
decrease (up to 78%) in C4-2B cells in a dose-dependent manner
(Fig. 4B). These results indicated that dihydrotestosterone had less
protective effect in C4-2B than in LNCaP cells against AR decrease
(Figs. 4B versus 3B). This is consistent with the report that
dihydrotestosterone can induce AR expression in androgendependent LNCaP but not in androgen-independent C4-2B cells
(36). More importantly, clioquinol-induced apoptotic cell death in
C4-2B cells was also uninhibited by dihydrotestosterone treatment,
as shown by the comparable levels of PARP cleavage (58% versus
53%; Fig. 4B, lane 7 versus lane 2), caspase activation (15-fold
versus 18-fold; Fig. 3C), and the number of cells with apoptotic
morphology (99% versus 99%; Fig. 3D) to those in the absence of
dihydrotestosterone. These data further support that AR is an
inhibitor of prostate cancer cell death and that the clioquinolcopper proteasome inhibitor induces apoptosis in hormonerefractory human prostate cancer cells, at least in part, by
repressing AR.
Clioquinol inhibits tumor proteasome activity, suppresses
AR, induces apoptosis, and inhibits angiogenesis in vivo. The
aforementioned in vitro data showed that the clioquinol-copper
complex (in LNCaP and C4-2B cells; Fig. 2) or clioquinol (in the
copper-enriched cell lines; Figs. 3 and 4) inhibits proteasome
activity, represses AR expression, and induces apoptosis. High
levels of copper are found in tumor tissues and serum samples of
cancer patients, including prostate, breast, colon, lung, and brain
(17–21). It has also been shown that treatment with strong copper
chelator tetrathiomolybdate inhibits the growth of human prostate,

breast, and lung tumors in various mouse models (43, 44),
indicating that human tumor xenografts in mice also contain high
levels of copper.
To test whether clioquinol alone could have antitumor activity
in AR-dependent, androgen-insensitive prostate cancer cells
in vivo, we implanted C4-2B cells s.c. in male nude mice, followed
by daily treatment with clioquinol at 10 mg/kg. We found that
clioquinol treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth compared with the control (by 66%, P < 0.01; Fig. 5A). Proteasomal
activity assay using tumor tissue extracts showed that clioquinol
treatment significantly inhibited the proteasomal chymotrypsinlike activity (by 69%, P < 0.01, Fig. 5B). Consistently, Western blot
analysis showed increased levels of ubiquitinated proteins and the
natural proteasome target proteins, Bax, InB-a, and p27, in
clioquinol-treated C4-2B tumors (Fig. 5D). Immunostaining further
confirmed the increase of p27 in tumors treated with clioquinol
(Fig. 6A). Consistent with in vitro data, a significant decrease in AR
protein levels was observed in C4-2B tumors treated with
clioquinol (Fig. 5D).
The clioquinol-induced proteasome inhibition and AR suppression
were associated with increased apoptosis, as shown by increased
levels of caspase-3/7 activity (by 2.6-fold, P < 0.01; Fig. 5C), PARP
cleavage (Fig. 5D), terminal deoxyribonucleotide transferase–
mediated nick-end labeling (TUNEL) positivity (Fig. 6B), and
condensed nuclei (Fig. 6C). Finally, treatment of C4-2B tumors
with clioquinol significantly inhibited the expression of CD31
(Fig. 6D), an endothelial marker in blood microvessels (45),
demonstrating the antiangiogenic effect of clioquinol. Altogether,
we have shown that clioquinol treatment significantly inhibits the
growth of prostate cancer C4-2B xenografts and this tumorspecific toxicity is associated with inhibition of the proteasomal
activity, AR expression, and angiogenesis and induction of
apoptosis in vivo.

Figure 4. Copper-enriched C4-2B human
prostate cancer cells were sensitive to
treatment of clioquinol alone, which cannot
be protected by dihydrotestosterone.
Similar to Fig. 3, C4-2B cells were cultured
in medium containing 50 Amol/L of copper
for 7 d, then maintained in normal
growth medium containing either
dihydrotestosterone or the same amount of
ethanol for 12 h, followed by treatment
with 30 to 50 Amol/L of clioquinol,
tetrathiomolybdate, or vehicle DMSO for
24 h. A, the proteasomal chymotrypsin-like
activity. **, P V 0.01. B, Western blot
analysis using antibodies to ubiquitin
(for ubiquitinated proteins), Bax, AR,
PARP, and h-actin. C, caspase-3/7
activity. D, morphologic analysis.

www.aacrjournals.org

1641

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Discussion
Because clioquinol is a potent copper-binding compound (25),
we hypothesized that the clioquinol-copper complex may act as a
proteasome inhibitor. In the current study, we tested this
hypothesis in vitro and in vivo by using human prostate cancer
as a model. We reported that clioquinol was capable of binding
copper and forming a complex, as verified by XANES and EXAFS.
The clioquinol-copper complex possessed proteasome-inhibitory,
AR-suppressive, and apoptosis-inducing activities in both androgen-dependent (LNCaP) and androgen-independent (C4-2B)
human prostate cancer cell lines. When used in prostate cancer
cells containing a cellular copper level similar to those found in
cancer patients, clioquinol alone inhibited the proteasome activity
and AR protein expression and induced apoptosis. Addition of
dihydrotestosterone in these prostate cancer cell lines did not
affect clioquinol-mediated proteasome inhibition, but inhibited
clioquinol-induced AR suppression and apoptosis only in androgen-dependent LNCaP cells. Furthermore, when administered to
mice bearing human prostate cancer C4-2B xenografts, clioquinol
potently inhibited the tumor growth associated with in vivo
proteasome inhibition, AR suppression, angiogenesis reduction,
and apoptotic cell death. Our study shows that inhibition of the
proteasome activity in human prostate cancer can be achieved by
targeting tumor cellular copper and suggests the potential use of
clioquinol as a novel anti-AR agent for prostate cancer prevention
and treatment.

The most serious problem associated with many currently used
anticancer drugs is their inability to distinguish normal cells from
tumor cells. To develop novel selective anticancer agents, it is of
paramount importance to explore the distinct properties or
features of cancer cells from normal cells. One unique feature
of tumors is the elevated levels of copper, which has been found in
many types of human cancers, including prostate, breast, colon,
lung, and brain (17–21). Accumulated evidence has shown that
copper, but not other transition metals, is a cofactor essential for
tumor angiogenesis (13, 14).
In searching for new proteasome inhibitors with high potency
and low toxicity, we found that several organic copper complexes,
including clioquinol-copper, possessed a high potency in inhibiting
the proteasomal activity in tumor, but not normal cells (34, 35). In
the current study, we found that clioquinol could interact with
copper and form a new complex that was a proteasome inhibitor,
an AR suppressor, and an apoptosis inducer in cultured human
prostate cancer LNCaP and C4-2B cells.
Under the in vivo mimic condition, clioquinol alone, but not
tetrathiomolybdate, could inhibit proteasome activity, suppress AR
protein, and induce apoptosis in copper-enriched human prostate
cancer LNCaP and C4-2B cells (Figs. 3 and 4). The results support
our hypothesis that the organic ligand clioquinol could interact
with tumor cellular copper and form an active, specific proteasome-inhibitory complex, which leads to AR repression and
apoptosis induction (Figs. 3 and 4). Although the strong metal

Figure 5. Clioquinol treatment inhibits tumor growth in mice bearing C4-2B xenografts, associated with inhibition of proteasome activity, suppression of AR protein
expression, and induction of apoptosis in vivo . Male athymic nude mice were xenografted by injection of C4-2B cells. When tumor size reached to f200 mm3, the mice
were divided into two groups and treated with either solvent (Sol ) control or clioquinol (10 mg/kg/d; n = 8). Tumors were collected after 15-d treatment, and the
prepared tissue samples were used for the proteasomal and caspase-3/7 activity assays and Western blotting as well as immunohistochemistry. A, tumor growth
chart. Clioquinol inhibited tumor growth by up to 66% after 15-d treatment when compared with control. Points, mean of tumor volume in each experimental group;
bars, SD. **, P < 0.01. B, proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity assay. The chymotrypsin-like activity was inhibited by 69% in the tissue extract of tumors treated
with clioquinol when compared with control. Columns, chymotrypsin-like activity (RFU, relative fluorescence unit); bars, SD. **, P < 0.01. C, caspase-3/7 activity
assays. An increase of 2.6-fold in caspase-3/7 activity was found in the tissue extract of tumors treated with clioquinol when compared with control. Columns,
caspase-3/7 activity; bars, SD. **, P < 0.01. D, Western blot analysis of tumor tissue extracts. The accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, Bax, InB-a, and p27, and
cleavage of PARP were shown in the tissue extracts of tumors treated with clioquinol.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1642

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Copper-Dependent Proteasome Inhibition by Clioquinol

Figure 6. Immunohistochemistry, TUNEL,
and H&E staining assays using mouse
tumor samples. Tumors were collected
after 15-d treatment (see Fig. 5 legend),
and the prepared tissue slides were used
for immunostaining with antibodies to p27
or CD31, and for TUNEL and H&E staining
assays. The images showed stronger
or/and more p27-positive cells (A ),
more TUNEL-positive nuclei (B), more
apoptotic-condensed nuclei (Apo with
arrow ), and more necrotic tumor cells
(Nec with arrow ; C ) in tumor tissues
from mice treated with clioquinol
(A-C ; magnification, 400). Much less
formation of blood vessels, measured by
CD31 staining, was also shown in tumors
treated with clioquinol compared with
solvent control (D ; magnification, 100).

chelator tetrathiomolybdate should bind to copper in cancer
cells, the resulting complex seems inactive against the proteasome
(Figs. 3 and 4).
AR plays an important role in both androgen-dependent and
androgen-independent prostate cancer cells because AR continues
to be expressed in androgen-independent tumors and the AR
signaling pathway remains functional in these tumors (2, 3). In the
current study, we examined the effect of the clioquinol-copper
complex on both LNCaP and C4-2B cell lines and whether addition
of androgen could alter clioquinol-induced effects in both cell lines.
Our results showed that dihydrotestosterone played a more
protective role in androgen-dependent LNCaP cells than in
androgen-independent C4-2B cells on clioquinol-induced AR
suppression and apoptosis induction (Figs. 3 and 4).
Our in vivo data support the conclusion that clioquinol can react
with endogenous copper within tumor tissue and form an active
complex that exhibits antitumor activity. Indeed, clioquinol
significantly inhibited tumor growth in mice bearing C4-2B tumor
xenografts (by 66%; Fig. 5A). It is important to note that the
antitumor activity of clioquinol was tightly associated with its
proteasome-inhibitory abilities because clioquinol treatment
resulted in the inhibition of proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity
in tumors (by 69%; Fig. 5B) and accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins and proteasome target proteins Bax, InB-a, and p27
(Figs. 5D and 6A). The in vivo results further supported the idea
that inhibition of the proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity was
associated with induction of apoptosis in tumors (11, 12), as shown
by the clioquinol treatment–induced apoptosis in C4-2B implant
tumor (i.e., increased caspase-3/7 activity, by 2.6-fold; Fig. 5C),
PARP cleavage (Fig. 5D), TUNEL positivity (Fig. 6B), and condensed
nuclei (Figs. 6C). In addition, clioquinol treatment also caused
repression of AR expression (Fig. 5D) and inhibition of angiogen-

6

D. Chen and Q. P. Dou, unpublished data.

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2006.
CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:106–30.
2. Dorkin TJ, Neal DE. Basic science aspects of prostate
cancer. Semin Cancer Biol 1997;8:21–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

esis in tumor tissue as measured by CD31 immunohistochemistry
(Fig. 6D). Most recently, it was reported that in an in vivo
lymphoma xenograft mouse model, clioquinol inhibited tumor
growth and its role as a zinc ionophore was suggested as a
potential mechanism (33). We have found that a clioquinol-zinc
complex is also a proteasome inhibitor, although its potency is
weaker than that of the clioquinol-copper complex.6 Our data
presented here have provided an alternative mechanistic interpretation for their findings (33) and showed the requirement of
proteasome inhibition for the antitumor activity of clioquinol.
Our finding supports the novel concept of using elevated copper
level and proteasome activity in cancer cells and tissues as selective
targets for cancer chemotherapy. Cancer cells and tissues that
contain elevated copper and more dependent on proteasome
activity for their survival should be very sensitive to treatment of
clioquinol. In contrast, normal cells and tissues that contain trace
amounts of copper and have basal level of proteasome activity
should be much more resistant to clioquinol treatment. Clioquinol
should have such a tumor-selective activity, which is supported by
the observation that it exhibits no toxicity in the animals. Taken
together, our finding suggests that clioquinol may serve as an
excellent anti-AR agent and a novel anticancer drug for prostate
cancer prevention and treatment.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/27/2006; revised 11/22/2006; accepted 12/1/2006.
Grant support: Karmanos Cancer Institute of Wayne State University, Department
of Defense Breast Cancer Research Program awards W81XWH-04-1-0688 and
DAMD17-03-1-0175, and National Cancer Institute grant CA112625 (Q. P. Dou); and
the National Cancer Institute/NIH Cancer Center Support grant (Karmanos Cancer
Institute). The Biophysics Collaborative Access Team is a NIH-supported research
center, RR08630. Use of the Advanced Photon Source was supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Basic Energy Science, Office of Energy Research, under contract
no. W-31-109-Eng-38.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

3. Arnold JT, Isaacs JT. Mechanisms involved in the
progression of androgen-independent prostate cancers:
it is not only the cancer cell’s fault. Endocr Relat Cancer
2002;9:61–73.
4. Henshall SM, Quinn DI, Lee CS, et al. Altered
expression of androgen receptor in the malignant

epithelium and adjacent stroma is associated with
early relapse in prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2001;61:
423–7.
5. Sarkar FH, Li Y. Cell signaling pathways altered by
natural chemopreventive agents. Mutat Res 2004;555:
53–64.

1643

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
6. Mukhtar H, Ahmad N. Mechanism of cancer chemopreventive activity of green tea. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
1999;220:234–8.
7. Miyamoto H, Messing EM, Chang C. Androgen
deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: current status
and future prospects. Prostate 2004;61:332–53.
8. Scher HI, Buchanan G, Gerald W, et al. Targeting the
androgen receptor: improving outcomes for castrationresistant prostate cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer 2004;11:
459–76.
9. Hochstrasser M. Ubiquitin, proteasomes, and the
regulation of intracellular protein degradation. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 1995;7:215–23.
10. Ciechanover A. The ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic
pathway. Cell 1994;79:13–21.
11. An B, Goldfarb RH, Siman R, et al. Novel dipeptidyl
proteasome inhibitors overcome Bcl-2 protective function and selectively accumulate the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27 and induce apoptosis in transformed, but not normal, human fibroblasts. Cell Death
Differ 1998;5:1062–75.
12. Lopes UG, Erhardt P, Yao R, et al. p53-Dependent
induction of apoptosis by proteasome inhibitors. J Biol
Chem 1997;272:12893–6.
13. Brem S. Angiogenesis and cancer control: from
concept to therapeutic trial. Cancer Control 1999;6:
436–58.
14. Brewer GJ. Copper control as an antiangiogenic
anticancer therapy: lessons from treating Wilson’s
disease. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 2001;226:665–73.
15. Theophanides T, Anastassopoulou J. Copper and
carcinogenesis. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2002;42:57–64.
16. Daniel KG, Harbach RH, Guida WC, et al. Copper
storage diseases: Menkes, Wilsons, and cancer. Front
Biosci 2004;9:2652–62.
17. Habib FK, Dembinski TC, Stitch SR. The zinc and
copper content of blood leucocytes and plasma from
patients with benign and malignant prostates. Clin
Chim Acta 1980;104:329–35.
18. Nayak SB, Bhat VR, Upadhyay D, et al. Copper and
ceruloplasmin status in serum of prostate and colon
cancer patients. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 2003;47:
108–10.
19. Huang YL, Sheu JY, Lin TH. Association between
oxidative stress and changes of trace elements in patients
with breast cancer. Clin Biochem 1999;32:131–6.

20. Rizk SL, Sky-Peck HH. Comparison between concentrations of trace elements in normal and neoplastic
human breast tissue. Cancer Res 1984;44:5390–4.
21. Turecky L, Kalina P, Uhlikova E, et al. Serum
ceruloplasmin and copper levels in patients with
primary brain tumors. Klin Wochenschr 1984;62:187–9.
22. Goodman VL, Brewer GJ, Merajver SD. Copper
deficiency as an anti-cancer strategy. Endocr Relat
Cancer 2004;11:255–63.
23. Brewer GJ, Dick RD, Grover DK, et al. Treatment of
metastatic cancer with tetrathiomolybdate, an anticopper, antiangiogenic agent: phase I study. Clin Cancer Res
2000;6:1–10.
24. Redman BG, Esper P, Pan Q, et al. Phase II trial of
tetrathiomolybdate in patients with advanced kidney
cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:1666–72.
25. Di Vaira M, Bazzicalupi C, Orioli P, et al. Clioquinol, a
drug for Alzheimer’s disease specifically interfering with
brain metal metabolism: structural characterization of
its zinc(II) and copper(II) complexes. Inorg Chem 2004;
43:3795–7.
26. Yassin MS, Ekblom J, Xilinas M, et al. Changes in
uptake of vitamin B([12]) and trace metals in brains of
mice treated with clioquinol. J Neurol Sci 2000;173:40–4.
27. Richards DA. Prophylactic value of clioquinol against
travellers’ diarrhoea. Lancet 1971;1:44–5.
28. Meade TW. Subacute myelo-optic neuropathy and
clioquinol. An epidemiological case-history for diagnosis. Br J Prev Soc Med 1975;29:157–69.
29. Regland B, Lehmann W, Abedini I, et al. Treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease with clioquinol. Dement Geriatr
Cogn Disord 2001;12:408–14.
30. Ritchie CW, Bush AI, Masters CL. Metal-protein
attenuating compounds and Alzheimer’s disease. Expert
Opin Investig Drugs 2004;13:1585–92.
31. Nguyen T, Hamby A, Massa SM. Clioquinol downregulates mutant huntingtin expression in vitro and
mitigates pathology in a Huntington’s disease mouse
model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:11840–5.
32. Ritchie CW, Bush AI, Mackinnon A, et al. Metalprotein attenuation with iodochlorhydroxyquin (clioquinol) targeting Ah amyloid deposition and toxicity in
Alzheimer disease: a pilot phase 2 clinical trial. Arch
Neurol 2003;60:1685–91.
33. Ding WQ, Liu B, Vaught JL, et al. Anticancer activity
of the antibiotic clioquinol. Cancer Res 2005;65:3389–95.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1644

34. Daniel KG, Gupta P, Harbach RH, et al. Organic
copper complexes as a new class of proteasome
inhibitors and apoptosis inducers in human cancer
cells. Biochem Pharmacol 2004;67:1139–51.
35. Daniel KG, Chen D, Orlu S, et al. Clioquinol and
pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate complex with copper to
form proteasome inhibitors and apoptosis inducers in
human breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res 2005;7:
R897–908.
36. Thalmann GN, Anezinis PE, Chang SM, et al.
Androgen-independent cancer progression and bone
metastasis in the LNCaP model of human prostate
cancer. Cancer Res 1994;54:2577–81.
37. Zhang Y, Wang Z, Ahmed F, et al. Down-regulation of
Jagged-1 induces cell growth inhibition and S phase
arrest in prostate cancer cells. Int J Cancer 2006;119:
2071–7.
38. Barrea RA, Fischetti R, Stepanov S, et al. Biological
XAFS at the BioCAT Undulator Beamline 18ID at the
APS. Physica Scripta 2005;T115:867–9.
39. Fischetti R, Stepanov S, Rosenbaum G, et al. The
BioCAT undulator beamline 18ID: a facility for biological
non-crystalline diffraction and X-ray absorption spectroscopy at the Advanced Photon Source. J Synchrotron
Radiat 2004;11:399–405.
40. Ravel B, Newville M. ATHENA, ARTEMIS, HEPHAESTUS: data analysis for X-ray absorption spectroscopy
using IFEFFIT. J Synchrotron Radiat 2005;12:537–41.
41. Newville M. IFEFFIT: interactive XAFS analysis and
FEFF fitting. J Synchrotron Radiat 2001;8:322–4.
42. Lin HK, Altuwaijri S, Lin WJ, et al. Proteasome
activity is required for androgen receptor transcriptional
activity via regulation of androgen receptor nuclear
translocation and interaction with coregulators in
prostate cancer cells. J Biol Chem 2002;277:36570–6.
43. van Golen KL, Bao L, Brewer GJ, et al. Suppression of
tumor recurrence and metastasis by a combination of
the PHSCN sequence and the antiangiogenic compound
tetrathiomolybdate in prostate carcinoma. Neoplasia
2002;4:373–9.
44. Pan Q, Kleer CG, van Golen KL, et al. Copper deficiency
induced by tetrathiomolybdate suppresses tumor growth
and angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2002;62:4854–9.
45. Weidner N, Semple JP, Welch WR, et al. Tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis-correlation in invasive
breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Clioquinol, a Therapeutic Agent for Alzheimer's Disease, Has
Proteasome-Inhibitory, Androgen Receptor −Suppressing,
Apoptosis-Inducing, and Antitumor Activities in Human
Prostate Cancer Cells and Xenografts
Di Chen, Qiuzhi Cindy Cui, Huanjie Yang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:1636-1644.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1636

This article cites 45 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1636.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 12 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1636.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

