Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 22

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Senescence of tumor cells induced by oxaliplatin increases
the efficiency of a lipid A immunotherapy via the recruitment
of neutrophils
Cédric Seignez1, Amandine Martin1, Claire-Emmanuelle Rollet1, Cindy Racoeur1,
Alessandra Scagliarini1, Jean-François Jeannin1, Ali Bettaieb1, Catherine Paul1
1

EPHE Cancer Immunotherapy Laboratory, EA7269 EPHE-University of burgundy, Dijon, F-21000, France

Correspondence to:
Catherine Paul, e-mail: catherine.paul@u-bourgogne.fr
Keywords: senescence, colorectal cancer, immunotherapy associated chemotherapy, neutrophil
Received: August 07, 2014	

Accepted: September 30, 2014	

Published: October 16, 2014

ABSTRACT
Management of advanced colorectal cancer is challenging due to the lack of efficient
therapy. The lipid A, OM-174 exhibited antitumor activity in colorectal cancer. We
explored the anticancer efficacy of this compound in rats bearing large colorectal tumors
in combination with the platinum derivative drugs oxaliplatin and cisplatin. While each
drug used alone exhibited partial antitumor activity, sequential treatment with oxaliplatin
or cisplatin for one week followed by lipid A injections induced a great regression of
colorectal tumors, with more than 95% of rats cured from their tumors. This potent
antitumor efficacy of the combined treatments was correlated to the sequential induction
of cellular senescence by oxaliplatin, and of apoptosis, mainly triggered by the lipid A.
Moreover, a recruitment of Tumor-Associated Neutrophils with N1 phenotype as attested
by the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase was observed with combination of
oxaliplatin and lipid A. Neutrophil recruitment within tumor microenvironment was due
to oxaliplatin and lipid A-dependent release of neutrophil specific chemoattractants
such as cxcl1 and 2. However the N1 phenotype is only dependent of lipid A treatment.
These results suggest that the combination of chemotherapy with an immunotherapy
is a promising approach to treat patients with advanced colorectal cancer.

proteases called caspases [4] or their senescence, a process
leading to irreversible arrest of cell division. Cells can
undergo senescence through three separate pathways [5]:
(i) replicative senescence, induced through shortening
of telomere; (ii) stress-induced premature senescence,
triggered by cellular stress, such as elevated oxygen
levels or cytotoxic agents leading to extensive DNA
damage; and (iii) overexpression or hyperactivation of
oncogenes, such as Ras, c-myc, or BRAF. The activation
of any of these senescence pathways triggers a permanent
arrest of growth of transformed cells and thus prevents
carcinogenesis. Even though senescent cells cannot
proliferate they are still metabolically active and release
a broad variety of cytokines and chemokines that modify
the microenvironment.
Despite the improvement of overall survival
of patients with mCRC treated with these cytotoxic
chemotherapies and biological agents, the development

INTRODUCTION
Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause
of death in Northern countries [1]. Despite significant
developments in the treatment of this disease by using
new cytotoxic chemotherapies and novel biological
agents, it still causes considerable mortality particularly
in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) [2].
Several drugs used as single agent or in various
combinations are available to treat mCRC, including
fluoropyrimidines (5FU, capecitabine), irinotecan,
oxaliplatin, the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
antibody bevacizumab, the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab,
and others [3]. The antitumor efficacy of these drugs has
been ascribed to their ability to block the growth of tumors
through different mechanisms. They can induce apoptosis
of tumor cells by the activation of series of cysteine

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11442

Oncotarget

of resistances has been observed. Introduction of new
treatment regimens is thus required to maximize therapeutic
impact and tailor the toxicity profile in patients suffering
from mCRC. Significant progress in understanding the
tumor-induced immune suppression mechanisms allows
the development of new immunological therapeutic
strategies. To date the most effective immunological
anti-tumor responses have been observed with active
nonspecific approaches, such as Bacillus Calmette-Guérin
(BCG) [6]. Moreover, recent data demonstrate that the
immune infiltrates of the tumor such as T-lymphocytes
are determinant for the outcome of patients bearing a solid
cancer [7]. This suggests that patient prognosis can be
estimated by the evaluation of the immune component of
the tumor microenvironment. Furthermore, there is growing
evidence that combination of conventional chemotherapy
with immunomodulation strategies is of critical importance
for efficient tumor eradication [8].
We have previously shown that an analog of lipid A,
OM-174 (the active component of lipopolysaccharides) exerts,
in experimental models, antitumor effect against different
tumor types including colon, breast cancers and melanoma
[9, 10]. In a model of peritoneal carcinomatosis induced in
rats by intraperitoneal injection of syngeneic colon cancer
cells, administration of lipid A induced complete regression
of tumors and hemorrhagic ascites in 95% of cases  [9].
This antitumor activity was associated with inflammatory
cytokine secretion and inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) activation [11]. However, lipid A, which safety and
tolerance have been demonstrated in a phase I clinical trial in
patients suffering from cancer [12], was not effective in rats
bearing large tumors (21 days post-injection of cancer cells).
In the current study, we investigated the antitumor
activity of platinum derivative oxaliplatin and cisplatin
in combination with this analogue of lipid A in large
peritoneal carcinomatosis. Moreover, we explored the
mechanism of their action in vitro and in vivo, by studying
their effects on apoptosis and senescence of tumor cells,
and by assessing their ability to promote the recruitment of
immune cells within tumors. We have shown that platinum
derivatives induce tumor cell senescence which, when
combined to lipid A, allows the recruitment of antitumoral
neutrophils (N1), characterized by iNOS expression,
within the tumors. Our findings indicate that combination
of platinum derivative with lipid A is highly promising for
the treatment of advanced colorectal tumors.

in rats) were randomized into 6 groups: control (vehicle),
oxaliplatin or cisplatin (3 mg/kg), lipid A (1 mg/kg), and
the combination of lipid A with each platinum derivative.
Treatment with one dose of oxaliplatin or cisplatin was
started at day 21 post-tumor cell injection. One week later,
the rats were treated with lipid A three times per week,
during five weeks. Figure 1A shows that the combination
increased drastically the life span of rats since 95% of rats
treated with oxaliplatin and lipid A were alive on day 150
and were cured of their affection (data not shown),
while only 33–40% of rats treated with either lipid A
or oxaliplatin and 3% of untreated rats were still alive
at the same date. Furthermore, on day 70, all the rats of
the control group or treated with cisplatin only were dead
while all the rats treated with the combination cisplatin
and lipid A were alive (Figure 1B). We also confirmed
the antitumor efficacy of oxaliplatin and lipid A in the
syngenic colon cancer CT26 mouse model. As shown in
Figure 1C, 50% of mice were alive after 45 days of their
treatment with oxaliplatin and lipid A while nearly all
mice were died when left untreated or treated with drugs
when taken alone. These results indicate that sequential
treatment with platinum derivative and lipid A increased
the life span of rats and mice bearing large tumors.

Lipid A induced apoptosis of cancer cells
which was increased by oxaliplatin
We have explored the mechanisms involved in
the antitumor efficacy of platinum derivative/lipid A
combination. We analyzed the ability of lipid A and
oxaliplatin to induce apoptosis in tumor (TUNEL
staining) and more precisely in tumor cells (M30 staining)
(Figure  2A and B). The lipid A induced apoptosis in
tumors after 24h time period treatment of rats. Oxaliplatin
had little effect on this type of cell death induction but
increased the rate of apoptosis induced by lipid A. Our
results also indicated that triggering and increasing of
apoptosis by lipid A and oxaliplatin, respectively, were
correlated to caspase-3 activation as attested by the
elevated rate of M30, the caspase 3-dependent cleaved
form of cytokeratin 18.

Oxaliplatin induced cellular senescence in
colon cancer cell lines
We also examined the ability of lipid A and
oxaliplatin to induce senescence in the rat PROb and
mouse CT26 colon cancer cells. The senescenceassociated β-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) activity in cells
was determined by cytochemical detection using the
X-Gal substrate or by fluorescence detection using the
DDAOG substrate [13]. Lipid A did not trigger senescence
either in PROb (Fig 3A) or in CT26 (data not shown)
tumors. However, oxaliplatin induced senescence into

RESULTS
Association of platinum derivatives with an
analogue of lipid A eradicated large colorectal
tumors in syngeneic rats
BD IX rats bearing large syngeneic tumors due to
PROb colon cancer cells (21 days after cell inoculation

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11443

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Oxaliplatin or cisplatin in combination with lipid A increased the lifespan of tumor-bearing rats or
mice. Tumor-bearing rats were treated by oxaliplatin/lipid A (A) or cisplatin/lipid A (B) combination. Twenty-one days after i.p. injection
of 106 PROb cells, rats were treated by oxaliplatin or cisplatin or saline solution (control). At twenty eight days, rats were treated with a lipid
A or saline solution 3 times per week for 5 weeks. Figure A represented data from 3 independent experiments. Figure B was representative
of 3 experiments with 7 animals per group. (C) Five days after i.p. injection of CT26 cells, mice were treated by oxaliplatin or saline
solution (control). At ten days, mice were treated with a lipid A or saline solution five times, every five days.

the PROb cells in vivo (Figure 3A and B) and in the two
cell lines, PROb and CT26, in vitro (Figure 3 C and D).
Results obtained with X-Gal staining (Figure 3 A and C)
were confirmed with DDAOG staining, another method to
detect cellular senescence, visualized by epifluorescence
microscopy (Figure 3B) or by flow cytometry analysis
(Figure 3D). It is worthy to note that senescence in
tumors occurred in cancer cells as some epithelial
cells (cytokeratin positive cells) became senescent
after oxaliplatin treatment (Figure 3B). Oxaliplatinmediated cellular senescence was also characterized
by the analysis of senescent-associated gene expression
(SASP). As shown in Figure 4A, in rats bearing PROb
tumors, oxaliplatin induced the expression, at the protein
level, of interferon gamma (IFNγ), interleukin(IL)-1β
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α (Figure 4A). This
expression occurred 24 h after treatment and persisted
at least 9 days. Some other SASP have been induced by
oxaliplatin at the level of mRNA such as IL6, IL8 and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 3 (Figure 4B). These
results indicate that oxaliplatin but not lipid A is a potent
inducer of senescence in vivo.

Oxaliplatin induced chemokines production and
recruitment of N1 tumor-associated neutrophils
Since senescence has been often associated with
pro-inflammatory status, we analyzed the ability of
oxaliplatin to induce an increased expression of cytokines
in blood of tumor-bearing rats. Using a cytokine array,
we determined that treatment of rats with oxaliplatin for
eight days induced the high expression of CXCL1 and
IL-8, two chemokines involved in the recruitment of some
immune cells, particularly the neutrophils (Figure  5A).
Determination of neutrophil-specific chemokines
expression by RT-PCR confirmed that oxaliplatin
increased cxcl1, cxcl2 and il-8 gene expression in colon
tumors (Figure 5B). Immunohistostaining techniques and

11444

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Lipid A induced apoptosis in tumor cells in vivo, increased by oxaliplatin. Tumor-bearing rats were treated at

day 21 with oxaliplatin or saline solution (control). At day 28, rats were treated with lipid A or saline solutions. Tumors were harvested at
day 29. (A) Apoptosis in tumors was detected by TUNEL staining (brown staining, upper panel). (B) Apoptosis in tumor cells was detected
by M30 immunostaining (red staining, lower panel). Images are representative of 3 independent experiments with 3 animals per group.
Percentage of apoptotic area on slides was represented in the lower graph. Significant differences were determined by an Anova followed
by a Bonferroni test.,**p < 0.01.

immunohistofluorescence showed that treatment of rats
with oxaliplatin for 1 to 4 days triggered the recruitment of
neutrophils into tumor microenvironment as attested by the
expression of HIS-48, a specific plasma membrane antigen
of rat neutrophils (Figure 5C). Neutrophils recruitment
was confirmed by the increased expression of neutrophil
cytolytic factor 1 (ncf1) and 2 (ncf 2), two components
of phagocyte NADPH oxidase expressed by neutrophils
(Figure 5D). The density of neutrophils was higher
inside the tumors from rats treated with the combination
oxaliplatin and lipid A than from rats treated with
oxaliplatin or lipid A alone (Figure 5E). The neutrophil
infiltration is maintained during the lipid A treatment, at
least until day 43 (data not shown). Interestingly, lipid A

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

but not oxaliplatin induced the expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in a fraction of tumorassociated neutrophils (Figure 5E). These results indicated
that oxaliplatin induced the recruitment of neutrophils
into tumors through the induction of neutrophil specific
chemokines. In addition, a part of these neutrophils
exhibited a lipid A-dependent expression of an antitumor
neutrophil phenotype (N1) that may participate to the
antitumor efficacy of oxaliplatin and lipid A. Neutrophils
were not the only leucocytes that infiltrated tumor
microenvironment. We also observed the recruitment of
macrophages and lymphoid cells but at a less extend than
neutrophils and occurred later in the case of lymphocytes,
9 days after oxaliplatin treatment (data not shown).

11445

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Oxaliplatin induced senescence of tumor cells in vivo and in vitro. Oxaliplatin induced PROb cell senescence in

tumors (A-B). Tumor-bearing rats were treated by oxalipatin or saline solution (control) at day 21. (A) X-Gal staining (blue) of senescent
cells in tumors at day 29 (black bar, 100µm). (B) Staining of tumor cells (anti-cytokeratin Ab, blue) and senescent cells (DDAO, red) in
tumors at day 29. Images are representative of 3 independent experiments with 3 rats per group. Oxaliplatin induced tumor cell senescence
in vitro (C-D). PROb or CT26 cells were treated for 5 days with oxaliplatin. (C) Senescent cells in culture were visualized by X-Gal staining
(blue). (D) Quantification of DDAO+ cells by flow cytometry 8 days after treatment by oxaliplatin. Bars are means ± SEM Significant
differences were determined by Mann-Whitney U test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.

DISCUSSION

inoculation. It was shown that the treatment with lipid A
analog alone induced iNOS expression and tumor cell
apoptosis within 24 hours [9, 11, 15]. Here, we show that
the antitumor efficacy of the lipid A analog alone was
strongly decreased when the treatment started later, i.e. on
day 28 post-cell inoculation (Figure 1). However, lipid A
maintained its ability to induce tumor cell apoptosis in
large tumors sensitized by platinum derivatives (Figure 2).
It has been reported for some cancers that TLR4 agonists
represent promising vaccine adjuvants on the one hand and
are successfully and safely used in classical monotherapy
on the other hand. Indeed, clinical benefit was observed in
a randomized Phase III trial after vaccinating CRC patients
with autologous tumor cells and BCG as adjuvant [16].
Monophosphoryl lipid A is also used as vaccine adjuvant
with excellent safety and immunogenicity in several
cancers [17, 18]. Additional TLR2/TLR4 agonists such
as picibanil have been shown to be well tolerated and

The life span of rats bearing large nodules of
colon cancer was greatly increased when animals were
treated with the platinum derivative drugs cisplatin or
oxaliplatin, together with an analog of lipid A. When
treated animals were submitted to autopsy, most of them
were free of nodules. This observation demonstrates that
the treatment induced the regression of large peritoneal
tumor nodules. Indeed, peritoneal carcinomatosis on the
one hand and large colon cancer nodules on the other
hand are associated with poor clinical outcome [14].
Thus the antitumor efficacy of these drugs combination
arises as a new, promising strategy in the fight against
cancer progression. In earlier studies, this lipid A analog
was shown to induce tumor regression and the recovery
of rats bearing macroscopic peritoneal carcinomatosis of
colon cancer when treatment started on day 14 post-cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11446

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Expression of senescence-associated genes after oxaliplatin treatment in vivo and in vitro. Tumor bearing rats

were treated with oxaliplatin or saline solution (control) at day 21. (A) At days 22 or 29, tumors were harvested and IFN-γ, IL-1β and TNF-α
concentrations were determined by ELISA. (B) Ninety six hours later injection, tumors were harvested and expression level of il-6, il-8 and
mmp3 mRNAs was determined by RT-PCR and normalized to gapdh gene expression. Bars are means ± SEM. Significant differences were
determined by Mann-Whitney U test. *p < 0.05.

effective as an adjuvant to cisplatin in a cohort of patients
with malignant pleural effusions [19]. Moreover, our team
also performed a phase I clinical trial with the synthetic
lipid A OM-174 in which its safety and tolerance was
demonstrated in patients suffering from cancer [12].
Our results also showed that although lipid A
induced cancer cell apoptosis, it failed to increase cellular
senescence, contrarily to oxaliplatin which did not act on
apoptosis but was a potent inducer of cellular senescence.
Even though we did not demonstrate the involvement of
apoptosis and senescence in tumor regression, one can
speculate that these two pathways should contribute to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the antitumor efficacy of oxaliplatin and lipid A, since
abundant evidence points to a crucial physiological
role for apoptosis and senescence in counteracting
tumorigenesis. Recent studies reported that chemotherapyinduced senescence is one of key determinants of tumor
response to therapy. For example, cisplatin has been
demonstrated to induce cellular senescence in various
cancer cells [20, 21]. Oxaliplatin also induced cell
senescence in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines [22]. To
our knowledge, there are no data in the literature about the
ability of oxaliplatin to induce senescence in colon cancer
cells. It was recently reported that 5-FU/leucovorin-treated
11447

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Oxaliplatin induced chemokine production which associated with lipid A, induced the iNOS-expressingneutrophil recruitment. (A) Eight days after injection of oxaliplatin or saline solution (control), blood was collected and plasma level

of chemokines was analysed by cytokine array. The relative abundance of CXCL1 and IL-8 was expressed as a percentage of an internal
control. (B) Tumor-bearing rats were treated by oxaliplatin or saline solution (control) at day 21. Ninety six hours later, tumors were
harvested and expression levels of cxcl1, cxcl2 and Il-8 mRNAs were determined by RT-PCR and normalized to gapdh gene expression.
(C) The recruitment of neutrophils in tumors from control or oxaliplatin-treated rats was determined by immunostaining (anti-HIS48 Ab,
red) of tumors harvested at day 22 and 25. (D) As in (B), tumors were harvested and RNA was extracted. Expression levels of ncf1 and ncf2
were determined by RT-PCR and normalized to gapdh gene expression. Bars are means ± SEM. Significant differences were determined
by Mann-Whitney U test. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (E) Tumors from control, oxaliplatin, lipid A or oxaliplatin + lipid A rats were removed at
day 29, fixed, cut into 5-mm cryosections and stained for neutrophil (anti-HIS48 Ab, red) and iNOS (anti-iNOS Ab, green). Merged signals
(yellow) are pointed with white arrows in the overlay pictures. (C and E) are representatives of 3 independent experiments with 3 animals
per group (scale bars = 50 µm).

CRC patients achieved a significantly longer progression
free survival when presenting with senescence indexpositive tumors before treatment [23]. Based on these
data, we can speculate that CRC patients with positive
senescence index may represent a cohort of patients with a
favorable outcome when treated with lipid A or conversely
that CRC patients with negative senescence index may
represent good candidates for oxaliplatin/lipid A treatment.
Even though we did not analyze the molecular
mechanisms by which oxaliplatin induced cellular
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

senescence, several mechanisms have been reported
in the literature. Recent evidence emerges that the
mammalian target of rapamycine (mTOR) pathway is
involved in cellular senescence [24]. Indeed, inhibition
of this pathway, for example, by hypoxia [25], by
contact inhibition or by high cell density [26] suppresses
senescence program. Further, reactivation of mTOR in
quiescent cells causes senescence after treatment with
DNA damaging agents [27]. In our case, mTOR activation
could be at the origin of oxaliplatin-mediated cellular
11448

Oncotarget

senescence. Recently, it has been reported that treatment
of cholangiocarcinoma cells with oxaliplatin increased the
phosphorylation of mTOR [28].
Our results also showed that the antitumor
efficacy of oxaliplatin and lipid A was correlated to
tumor infiltration of neutrophils. This recruitment
within tumors could be due to the induction of cellular
senescence by oxaliplatin. Accordingly, it has been
observed infiltration of neutrophils, macrophages and
NK cells in regressing tumor triggered by p53 activation
and thus induction of cellular senescence [29]. Some
of these neutrophils expressed iNOS, one hallmark of
N1 phenotype of neutrophils. These cells in tumor may
have differential states of activation/differentiation, thus
taking an antitumorigenic (‘‘N1’’) versus a protumorigenic
(‘‘N2’’) phenotype [30]. Interestingly, the acquisition of
the N1 phenotype after lipid A treatment was also found
in neutrophils from bone marrow and spleen (data not
shown). Thus, our data show that activation with lipid A
could promote the conversion from tumor-promoting to
tumor-suppressing neutrophils which could participate to
the antitumor efficacy of oxaliplatin and lipid A.
In summary this study describes a new therapeutical
strategy to eradicate advanced colon cancers by combining
chemotherapeutic agents such as platinum derivatives
with immunomodulators such as lipid A analogs. This
association is linked with the induction of senescence and
apoptosis of tumor cells in vivo and with the recruitment
of neutrophils with an N1 phenotype.

10 days after carcinomatosis induction and consisted of
5 injections of lipid A (8 mg/kg, i.v. injections) or of saline
solution for controls over a 20-day period. All animal
procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of the
University of Burgundy (protocols 2006 and 3904).

Antibodies and reagents
Mouse anti-HIS48 antibody (Ab) (Santa Cruz) was
used to characterize tumor-infiltrating rat neutrophils.
Tumor cells were identified using a mouse anti-cytokeratin
antibody (DakoCytomation). The following Abs were
also used: a rabbit anti-iNOS Ab (BD Transduction
Laboratories) and a mouse anti-M30 fragment (Roche).
Secondary anti-mouse or anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 568 or
488 conjugates antibodies were purchased from Molecular
Probes, Invitrogen. X-Gal (Roche) and DDAOG (Life
Technologies) were used to characterize SenescenceAssociated-β-Galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) activity into the
cells. The lipid A analog OM-174 was kindly provided by
OM Pharma (Meyrin, Switzerland).

Detection of cytokines by Ab array
Blood was collected by heart puncture under
isoflurane anesthesia. The same volume of plasma was
applied onto antibody-coated membranes for rat cytokine
array (R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Arrays were scanned as digital images and signal
intensity was quantified with ImageJ software.

METHODS

Detection of cytokines by ELISA

Cell culture

IFN-γ, Il-1β and TNF-α concentrations in tumor
lysates were detected by ELISA (Uscn Life Science Inc)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Absorbance was
read on a spectrophotometer (Asys UVM 340) at 450 nm
wavelength.

PROb colon cancer cells were harvested from a
colon carcinoma induced in BD-IX rat [31]. CT26 murine
colon cancer cells were obtained from the ATCC. PROb
and CT26 cells were maintained at 37°C in HAM’s F10
and RPMI medium, respectively, supplemented with 10%
FBS (Lonza).

RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from tumors and
cell lines using the TRIzol reagent (Gibco-BRL)
according to the manufacter’s instructions. RT-PCRs
were performed with the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR kit
(Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The
rat primers used (Invitrogen) were the following: cxcl1 (f)
5ʹ-GAGAAAGAAGATAGATTGCACCGATG-3ʹ
and
(r) 5ʹ-TTCTTCCCGCTCAACACCTTC-3ʹ; cxcl2 (f)
5ʹ-GTGACACTGAAGAGTTACGATGTCAG-3ʹ  and  (r)
5ʹ- CCTGAGGCTCCATAAATGAAAGA-3ʹ; ncf1 (f)
5ʹ-CACCGAGATCTACGAGTTCC-3ʹ
and 
(r)
5ʹ-TCCCATGAGGCTGTTGAAGTAC-3ʹ;
ncf2
(f)
5ʹ-GAAAGCATGAAGGATGCCTGG-3ʹ
and
(r)
5ʹ- ATAGCACCAAGATCACATCTCCTTCC-3ʹ; il-6 (f)
5ʹ- TTCTCTCCGCAAGAGACTTCCAGCC-3ʹ and (r)
5ʹ- AAACGGAACTCCAGAAGACCAGAGC-3ʹ; il-8 (f)

Animal tumor models and treatments
Male BD-IX rats (2–3 month-old) were purchased
from Charles River (L’arbresle, France). Carcinomatosis
in BD-IX rats was induced by i.p. injection of 1.106 colon
cancer PROb cells as previously described [9]. Oxaliplatin
or cisplatin treatment (3mg/kg, single i.p. injection) was
performed 21 days later; control treatment consisted
of saline injection. Immunotherapy treatment began
28 days after carcinomatosis induction and consisted of
15 injections of lipid A (1 mg/kg, i.v. injections) or of saline
solution for controls over a 5-week period. Carcinomatosis
in Balb/C mice was induced by i.p. injection of 5.105 CT26
cells. Oxaliplatin treatment (3mg/kg, single i.p. injection)
was performed 5 days later; control treatment consisted
of saline injection. Immunotherapy treatment began
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11449

Oncotarget

5ʹ- AGCGGTTCCATCTCGCCATTCATGC-3ʹ and (r)
5ʹ- TGAACACTGGCCGTTCTTTCCACTGC-3ʹ; mmp3 (f)
5ʹ- GTACGGCTGTGTGCTCATCCTACC-3ʹ and (r)
5ʹAAGTCTCCATGTTCTTCAACTGCAAAGG-3ʹ.
To standardize the cDNA samples, expression of the
housekeeping gene gapdh was tested with primer pair (f)
5ʹ-GGCACAGTCAAGGCTGAGAATG-3ʹ
and
(r)
5ʹ-ATGGTGGTGAAGACGCCAGTA-3ʹ. The PCR
products were stained with ethidium bromide (Invitrogen)
and analyzed by gel electrophoresis. All densitometry
analyses were performed using ImageJ software.
Signal intensities were normalized to gapdh used as
housekeeping gene.

60 minutes. Slides were then washed with PBS. Images
were captured on a Nikon Eclipse E400 epifluorescent
microscope at 40x magnification. Cells fixed with 2% PFA
were incubated with a 10 µM DDAOG solution for
60 minutes and washed with PBS before flow cytometry
analysis (FACSCalibur, BD Biosciences).

Statistical analyzes
Experimental data are expressed as means ± SEM.
Statistical analysis was performed using R software. The
Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare data between
two treatment groups. Differences were considered
statistically significant as follows: *P ≤ 0.05 and
**P ≤ 0.01.

Histological analysis
Paraffin-embedded samples were cut into 5 µm thick
sections. Sections were deparaffined, rehydrated before
antigen retrieval by 20-min incubation at 96°C in citrate
buffer at pH 7.3 and nonspecific sites were blocked with
5% BSA. For immunohistochemistry (IHC), endogenous
peroxidase was inhibited by incubation with 3% H2O2,
the slides were then successively incubated with primary
antibodies, biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies and
HRP-conjugated streptavidin in PBS with 0.1% Tween
and 1% BSA before incubation with AEC solution (Vector
Laboratories) and counterstaining with hematoxylin.
Apoptotic cells were detected by TUNEL assay using the
ApopTag plus Peroxidase In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit
(Millipore). For immunohistofluorescence (IHF), the slides
were successively incubated with primary antibodies and
fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies in PBS
with 0.1% Tween and 1% BSA and were finally mounted
using Prolong Gold (Invitrogen). IHC and IHF images
were captured on a Nikon Eclipse E400 microscope at
a 40x magnification in the visible or fluorescence mode,
respectively.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Thomas Gautier (Inserm UMR866,
University of burgundy, Dijon) and Sabrina Romagny
(EA7269 EPHE-University of burgundy) for writing
assistance and Julien Colas (Inserm UMR866, University
of burgundy, Dijon) for help in microscopy analyses.

GRANT SUPPORT
This project was supported by the grants from Ligue
Contre le Cancer, comités Saône et Loire and Côte d’Or.
CS was supported by a grant from Conseil Régional
de Bourgogne and Ligue National Contre le Cancer, AM
from EPHE, and AS by a grant from INCA.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Hao Y, Xu J, Murray T,
Thun MJ. Cancer statistics, 2008. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;
58:71–96.
2.	 Segal NH, Saltz LB. Evolving treatment of advanced colon
cancer. Annu Rev Med. 2009; 60:207–219.

X-Gal staining
Tumors were fixed in PBS with 20% sucrose
and embedded in OCT (Labonord). Samples were cut
into 5-µm thick sections and fixed with 2% PFA before
incubation with a 1 mg/mL X-Gal solution (Roche) [13]
for 24h. Slides were then washed with PBS. Cells fixed
with 2% PFA were incubated with a 1 mg/mL X-Gal
solution for 24h and washed with PBS. Images were
captured on a Zeiss primovert microscope with an
AxioCam at 40X magnification.

3.	 Hohla F, Winder T, Greil R, Rick FG, Block NL,
Schally AV. Targeted therapy in advanced metastatic
colorectal cancer: current concepts and perspectives. World
J Gastroenterol. 2014; 20:6102–6112.
4.	 Fiandalo MV, Kyprianou N. Caspase control: protagonists
of cancer cell apoptosis. Exp Oncol. 2012; 34:165–175.
5.	 Campisi J, d’Adda di Fagagna F. Cellular senescence: when
bad things happen to good cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2007; 8:729–740.
6.	 Alexandroff AB, Nicholson S, Patel PM, Jackson  AM.
Recent
advances
in
bacillus
Calmette-Guerin
immunotherapy in bladder cancer. Immunotherapy. 2010;
2:551–560.

DDAOG staining
Tumors were fixed in PBS with 20% sucrose and
embedded in OCT (Labonord). Samples were cut into 5-µm
thick sections and fixed with 2% PFA before incubation
with a 10 µM DDAOG solution (LifeTechnologies) for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	 Galon J, Costes A, Sanchez-Cabo F, Kirilovsky A,
Mlecnik  B, Lagorce-Pagès C, Tosolini M, Camus  M,

11450

Oncotarget

Berger  A, Wind P, Zinzindohoué F, Bruneval P,
Cugnenc  PH, Trajanoski Z, Fridman WH, Pagès F.
Type, density, and location of immune cells within human
colorectal tumors predict clinical outcome. Science. 2006;
313:1960–1964.

Intrapleural chemo- and hyperthermotherapies for
malignant pleural effusion: a randomized prospective study.
Cancer Invest. 2012; 30:126–130.
20.	 Wang X, Wong SC, Pan J, Tsao SW, Fung KH, Kwong DL,
Sham JS, Nicholls JM. Evidence of cisplatin-induced
senescent-like growth arrest in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
cells. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:5019–5022.

8.	 Zitvogel L, Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, André F, Tesniere A,
Kroemer G. The anticancer immune response: indispensable
for therapeutic success? J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:1991–2001.

21.	 Fang K, Chiu CC, Li CH, Chang YT, Hwang HT. Cisplatininduced senescence and growth inhibition in human
non-small cell lung cancer cells with ectopic transfer of
p16INK4a. Oncol Res. 2007; 16:479–488.

9.	 Onier N, Hilpert S, Arnould L, Saint-Giorgio V, Davies JG,
Jeannin JF. Cure of colon cancer metastasis in rats with
the new lipid A OM 174. Apoptosis of tumor cells and
immunization of rats. Clin Exp Metastasis. 1999; 17:299–306.

22.	 Qu K, Xu X, Liu C, Wu Q, Wei J, Meng F, Zhou L,
Wang Z, Lei L, Liu P. Negative regulation of transcription
factor FoxM1 by p53 enhances oxaliplatin-induced
senescence in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Lett. 2013;
331:105–114.

10.	 Gautier T, Paul C, Deckert V, Desrumaux C, Klein A,
Labbé J, Le Guern N, Athias A, Monier S, Hammann A,
Bettaieb A, Jeannin JF, Lagrost L. Innate immune response
triggered by triacyl lipid A is dependent on phospholipid
transfer protein (PLTP) gene expression. FASEB J. 2010;
24:3544–3554.

23.	 Haugstetter AM, Loddenkemper C, Lenze D, Gröne J,
Standfuss C, Petersen I, Dörken B, Schmitt CA. Cellular
senescence predicts treatment outcome in metastasised
colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2010; 103:505–509.

11.	 Onier N, Hilpert S, Reveneau S, Arnould L, Saint-Giorgio V,
Exbrayat JM, Jeannin JF. Expression of inducible nitric
oxide synthase in tumors in relation with their regression
induced by lipid A in rats. Int J Cancer. 1999; 81:755–760.

24.	 Berman AE, Leontieva OV, Natarajan V, McCubrey JA,
Demidenko ZN, Nikiforov MA. Recent progress in genetics
of aging, senescence and longevity: focusing on cancerrelated genes. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:1522–1532.

12.	 Isambert N, Fumoleau P, Paul C, Ferrand C, Zanetta S,
Bauer J, Ragot K, Lizard G, Jeannin JF, Bardou M. Phase I
study of OM-174, a lipid A analogue, with assessment of
immunological response, in patients with refractory solid
tumors. BMC Cancer. 2013; 13:172.

25.	 Leontieva OV, Natarajan V, Demidenko ZN, Burdelya LG,
Gudkov AV, Blagosklonny MV. Hypoxia suppresses
conversion from proliferative arrest to cellular senescence.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:13314–13318.

13.	 Debacq-Chainiaux F, Erusalimsky JD, Campisi J,
Toussaint O. Protocols to detect senescence-associated
beta-galactosidase (SA-betagal) activity, a biomarker of
senescent cells in culture and in vivo. Nat Protoc. 2009;
4:1798–1806.

26.	 Leontieva OV, Demidenko ZN, Blagosklonny MV.
Contact inhibition and high cell density deactivate the
mammalian target of rapamycin pathway, thus suppressing
the senescence program. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;
111:8832–8837.

14.	 Glehen O, Mohamed F, Gilly FN. Peritoneal
carcinomatosis from digestive tract cancer: new
management by cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal
chemohyperthermia. Lancet Oncol. 2004; 5:219–228.

27.	 Leontieva OV, Blagosklonny MV. DNA damaging agents
and p53 do not cause senescence in quiescent cells, while
consecutive re-activation of mTOR is associated with
conversion to senescence. Aging. 2010; 2:924–935.

15.	 Larmonier CB, Arnould L, Larmonier N, Baumann S,
Moutet M, Saint-Giorgio V, Pance A, Jeannin JF. Kinetics
of tumor cell apoptosis and immune cell activation during
the regression of tumors induced by lipid A in a rat model
of colon cancer. Int J Mol Med. 2004; 13:355–361.

28.	 Leelawat K, Narong S, Udomchaiprasertkul W, Leelawat S,
Tungpradubkul S. Inhibition of PI3K increases oxaliplatin
sensitivity in cholangiocarcinoma cells. Cancer cell
international. 2009; 9:3.

16.	 Vermorken JB, Claessen AM, van Tinteren H, Gall HE,
Ezinga R, Meijer S, Scheper RJ, Meijer CJ, Bloemena E,
Ransom JH, Hanna MG, Pinedo HM. Active specific
immunotherapy for stage II and stage III human colon
cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet. 1999; 353:345–350.

29.	 Xue W, Zender L, Miething C, Dickins RA, Hernando E,
Krizhanovsky V, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW. Senescence
and tumour clearance is triggered by p53 restoration
in murine liver carcinomas. Nature. 2007; 445:
656–660.

17.	 Adams S. Toll-like receptor agonists in cancer therapy.
Immunotherapy. 2009; 1:949–964.

30.	 Fridlender ZG, Sun J, Kim S, Kapoor V, Cheng G, Ling L,
Worthen GS, Albelda SM. Polarization of tumor-associated
neutrophil phenotype by TGF-beta: “N1” versus “N2”
TAN. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:183–194.

18.	 Vacchelli E, Eggermont A, Sautès-Fridman C, Galon J,
Zitvogel L, Kroemer G, Galluzzi L. Trial Watch: Toll-like
receptor agonists for cancer therapy. Oncoimmunology.
2013; 2:e25238.

31.	 Martin F, Caignard A, Jeannin JF, Leclerc A, Martin M.
Selection by trypsin of two sublines of rat colon cancer
cells forming progressive or regressive tumors. Int J Cancer.
1983; 32:623–627.

19.	 Chen WJ, Yuan SF, Yan QY, Xiong JP, Wang SM,
Zheng  WE, Zhang W, Sun HY, Chen H, Wu LL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11451

Oncotarget

