Review

Antiangiogenic Strategies on Defense: On the Possibility of Blocking
Rebounds by the Tumor Vasculature after Chemotherapy
Yuval Shaked and Robert S. Kerbel
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Molecular and Cellular Biology Research, and Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Abstract
Rapid or accelerated tumor cell repopulation after significant
tumor cell killing induced by various cytotoxic agents often
compromises the expected therapeutic benefit of such tumor
responses. Here, we discuss the concept that tumor cell
repopulation after certain cytotoxic therapies, using vascular
disrupting agents as an example, may be aided by a reactive,
systemic host response involving the mobilization of bone
marrow–derived circulating cells, including endothelial progenitor cells, which subsequently home to the vasculature
of treated tumors and promote tumor neovascularization.
These vasculogenic ‘‘rebounds’’ can be blocked, at least in
some cases, by treatment with an antiangiogenic drug. There
is limited preliminary evidence that maximum tolerated dose
chemotherapy causes a similar effect. This could constitute
one way by which antiangiogenic therapy could increase the
efficacy of conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens; it
also raises the specter of new molecular targets for systemic
cancer therapies which are involved in therapy-induced bone
marrow–derived cell mobilization, homing to tumors, and
tumor retention. [Cancer Res 2007;67(15):7055–8]

Introduction
The recent clinical success of a number of antiangiogenic drugs
(1–3) has raised a somewhat ironic question: how do they actually
work to cause a clinical benefit? The common perception is that
they ‘‘starve’’ tumors of the oxygen and nutrients necessary for
survival and relentless growth. If so, it would follow that
antiangiogenic drug therapy on its own should have a significant
clinical benefit, including prolonging survival even in the setting of
advanced metastatic disease. This might turn out to be the case
with ‘‘multitargeting’’ small molecule receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors such as sorafenib or sunitinib in the treatment of renal
cell carcinoma (3, 4) and other cancers such as hepatocellular
carcinoma. However, given the multiple kinases targeted by such
drugs, there is the possibility that some of the therapeutic benefits
are caused by mechanisms independent of antiangiogenesis. In the
case of specific antibody-targeting drugs, such as bevacizumab,
the humanized monoclonal antivascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) antibody, clinical benefit in some randomized phase III
trials is observed when it is combined with chemotherapy, e.g.,
5-fluorouracil/leucovorin and irinotecan for metastatic colorectal
cancer (2) or paclitaxel and carboplatin for non–small cell lung
cancer (1). Even then, the survival benefits are fairly modest (in the
Requests for reprints: Robert S. Kerbel, Sunnybrook and Women’s College Health
Sciences Centre, S-217 Research Building, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M4N 3M5. Phone: 416-480-5711; Fax: 416-480-5884; E-mail: Cassandra.
Cheng@swri.ca.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0905

www.aacrjournals.org

range of months). The bevacizumab results have stimulated
discussion and debate about how this drug increases the efficacy
of chemotherapy (5, 6).

Diverse Theories to Account for Antiangiogenic
Drug–Mediated Increases in Chemotherapy Efficacy
Perhaps the best known proposed mechanism is the ‘‘vessel
normalization’’ hypothesis of Jain and colleagues (6). Essentially,
this refers to the effect of an antiangiogenic agent to transiently
reverse some of the characteristics of the chaotic and dysfunctional
tumor vasculature, and hence, certain features of the tumor
microenvironment associated with such abnormal vasculature
which may act to reduce the efficacy of chemotherapy. These
features include high interstitial fluid pressures in tumors caused
by the leakage of high molecular weight plasma proteins from the
hyperpermeable tumor vasculature (which can be caused by the
strong vascular permeability function of VEGF), sluggish/suboptimal blood flow of many tumor vessels which would increase tumor
hypoxia, and thus, reduce cell proliferation of tumor cells in such
hypoxic regions. In addition to causing some pruning of the
immature vasculature, antiangiogenic agents can cause normalization/maturation of some of the remaining tumor vasculature,
thus reducing high intratumoral interstitial fluid pressures and
transiently reducing tumor hypoxia at the same time, and thus,
increasing tumor cell proliferation (7). If chemotherapy is
administered during the periods of antiangiogenic drug–induced
tumor vascular normalization, there is the possibility of not only
increased intratumoral drug delivery within tumors, but also an
increase in the number of proliferating tumor cells that would be
expected to be more sensitive to chemotherapy (7). It is of interest
that this could also possibly lead not only to an increase in
generalized tumor cell killing, but also to enhanced targeting of
the tumor stem cell or the stem cell–like minor subpopulation.
This may be particularly relevant in situations in which tumor stem
cells are thought to reside in a vascular niche (8). Disruption of the
vascular niche by an antiangiogenic drug could compromise tumor
stem cell survival, and chemotherapy could conceivably enhance
the susceptibility of the compromised stem cell subpopulation to
chemotherapy (9). This proposed chemotherapy effect might be
enhanced by vascular normalization.
An alternative, although not necessarily mutually exclusive,
theory is that the tumor cell repopulation, which can often be quite
robust (10, 11) following cytotoxic therapy, can be slowed as a
result of the presence of an antiangiogenic agent during the drugfree break periods between successive cycles of chemotherapy drug
administration (10). This is based on the reasonable assumption
that surviving and repopulating/dividing tumor cells would require
angiogenesis for optimal tumor cell survival and growth conditions.
We have been investigating a new aspect of this hypothesis, i.e.,
the rate of tumor cell repopulation, which is known to become

7055

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

increasingly rapid with successive cycles of cytotoxic (e.g. radiation)
therapy (11), can be inadvertently assisted by host-mediated
systemic proangiogenic and vasculogenic processes (12). Based
on our findings, following administration of certain cytotoxic
agents, there can be a rapid (e.g., within hours) and marked
mobilization of bone marrow–derived circulating endothelial
progenitor cells (CEP), which subsequently enter the peripheral
blood circulation as can be seen in Fig. 1A. These cells home to
treated tumor sites, and in some fashion, promote and amplify
the process of tumor angiogenesis (12). This was the subject of a
recent report from our group, in collaboration with several others,
in which this paradigm was studied using vascular disrupting
agents (VDA) as a model of an anticancer ‘‘cytotoxic’’ drug (12).

Biology of VDAs
VDAs represent one of the two major classes of vascular
targeting agents (13). In contrast to antiangiogenic drugs such as
anti-VEGF or anti–VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) antibodies, which
act primarily by preventing new blood vessel formation as well as

targeting recently formed immature blood vessels, VDAs target the
existing, more established but abnormal vasculature in tumors by a
process likely involving the induction of endothelial cell apoptosis
(14). This can lead to a rapid shutdown in tumor blood flow (within
hours), and subsequently, massive intratumoral cell death (14).
However, a rim of viable tumor tissue remains from which tumors
can rapidly repopulate (13, 14), accompanied by robust angiogenesis. Consequently, investigators such as Siemann and colleagues
have proposed, and subsequently showed, that the combination of
a VEGF or VEGFR-2 targeting antiangiogenic drug with a VDA such
as combretastatin could have complementary antitumor effects and
therefore bring about an overall improved therapeutic benefit (15).
The ability of the surviving tumor cells to rapidly repopulate
tumors after VDA treatment is conceptually similar to tumor cell
repopulation after an initially effective cytotoxic chemotherapy or
radiation treatment regimen. In this regard, using VDAs, we
recently reported that the ability of tumors to repopulate after
therapy with such a drug was significantly facilitated by an acute
outflow of cells from the bone marrow, which then home through
the blood circulation to the remaining viable tumor rim; some of

Figure 1. CEPs are mobilized from the bone marrow to peripheral blood, and subsequently home to the viable tumor rim remaining after treatment with a VDA. A, mice
treated with a cytotoxic drug, either a VDA (OXi-4503) or cyclophosphamide (CTX), were bled from the retro-orbital sinus at several time points. CEPs were evaluated
using four-color flow cytometry. A ‘‘spike’’ in CEPs in the peripheral blood was observed 4 h after OXi-4503 treatment, or several days after CTX treatment which
involves 3 injections over a 6-d cycle of treatment. B, sections from Lewis lung carcinoma tumors grown in C57Bl/6 that were previously lethally irradiated and
transplanted with GFP-positive–tagged bone marrow cells (green ), were stained for VEGFR-2 (red ). A massive invasion and infiltration of GFP-positive bone marrow–
derived cells into the viable tumor rim site was observed within days after treatment with OXi-4503, most of which were also VEGFR-2–positive, as indicated by
the colocalization of GFP and VEGFR-2. Treatment with DC101, a monoclonal antibody to mouse VEGFR-2, before VDA treatment, however, prevented colonization of
most of the VEGFR-2–positive/GFP-positive cells at the tumor site normally induced by VDA treatment [reproduced from Shaked et al. (12) with permission from
the publishers]. Scale bar: 50 Am.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

7056

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Improving Therapy by Preventing Systemic Vasculogenic Rebounds

these cells subsequently incorporate into the lumens of the tumor
vasculature. That some of these cells were endothelial progenitor
cells which differentiate into mature endothelial cells after
incorporation into the lumen—a process known as adult or
postnatal vasculogenesis—was implicated by several experimental
approaches. One was to evaluate the effects of VDA treatment on
tumors transplanted into recipient mutant mice, which are unable
to mobilize endothelial progenitor cells, i.e., Id1 /+ Id3 / mice
(16). In such a host background, the effect of the VDA in inducing
tumor cell necrosis was significantly enhanced. Similarly, we
undertook a pharmacologic ‘‘knockout’’ experiment, i.e., administered a targeted antiangiogenic drug, such as an antibody to
VEGFR-2, 1 day prior to the administration of the VDA,
combretastatin, or a second-generation derivative called OXi-4503
(12), both of which are microtubule-inhibiting agents. The spike in
peripheral blood CEPs, along with their ability to home in large
numbers to the viable rim of VDA-treated tumors, was almost
completely blocked by the antiangiogenic agent. An example of this
is shown in Fig. 1B. In this experiment, C57Bl/c mice were lethally
irradiated and reconstituted with green fluorescent protein (GFP)–
tagged bone marrow cells. The mice were allowed to recover and
then used as recipients for s.c. injection of Lewis lung carcinoma
cells. Once the tumors reached a certain size (e.g., 500 mm3), the
mice were treated with an antiangiogenic drug, DC101 (an anti–
VEGFR-2 antibody) or a VDA (OXi-4503). The tumors from VDAtreated mice clearly ‘‘light up’’, i.e., contain large numbers of
infiltrating GFP-positive bone marrow cells (which we sometimes
call the ‘‘Christmas tree’’ effect), some of which were found to
incorporate into the lumens of tumor-associated blood vessels, and
thus seem to be endothelial progenitor cells. In contrast, the
tumors of untreated control mice contained very few GFP-positive
cells, as was the case for DC101-treated tumors. Importantly, the
strong GFP-positive signal in the VDA-treated tumors could be
almost entirely obliterated by prior treatment with the DC101
antiangiogenic antibody. In other words, the Christmas tree ‘‘lights’’
were turned off by treatment with DC101. This may also suggest
that most of the bone marrow–derived (GFP-positive) cells
invading the tumor site after treatment were VEGFR-2–positive
(Fig. 1B). Moreover, this treatment combination was accompanied
by enhanced overall antiangiogenesis, enhanced tumor hypoxia,
enhanced levels of tumor necrosis, decreased tumor blood flow,
and enhanced overall antitumor growth effect (12).
In our study, we also noted that many of the GFP-positive bone
marrow cells were located immediately adjacent to blood vessels.
Some of these cells may stimulate angiogenesis by paracrine mechanisms such as VEGF secretion. In this regard, a variety of proangiogenic cell types having hybrid ‘‘vascular leukocyte’’ properties
have been described recently (17), which express the CD45 hematopoietic marker as well as various endothelial cell and myeloid/
monocytic markers (18–20). These cell populations are not endothelial progenitor cells but nevertheless can be mobilized from the
bone marrow. It will be of interest to determine whether any of these
cell types might also be mobilized by cytotoxic anticancer therapies,
and home to the viable tumor tissue that remains after such therapy.

Do the Results Have Implications for Other
Cytotoxic Anticancer Drugs Such as
Chemotherapeutics?
There are a number of potential implications for these results.
First, they may not only apply to cytotoxic VDAs, but also to

www.aacrjournals.org

conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs administered at or
near maximum tolerated doses. Although this is very speculative,
and VDAs are quite different in nature from chemotherapeutic
drugs, it should be noted that we previously reported the ability of
maximum tolerated dose chemotherapy, using cyclophosphamide,
to cause a rapid rebound of CEPs, following an initial decline, soon
after the completion of a cycle of therapy, as shown in Fig. 1A (21).
We did not, however, evaluate whether such CEPs homed to treated
tumors and subsequently contributed to tumor angiogenesis and
regrowth, but this would not seem to be an unreasonable
possibility. Of note, there is some limited evidence to suggest that
similar CEP vasculogenic rebounds could be detected in patients
receiving conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy (22). It will
therefore be of considerable interest to evaluate the effects of
different chemotherapy drugs, and classes of such drugs, for their
relative effects in inducing mobilization and intratumoral homing
of bone marrow–derived cell populations which have the potential
to stimulate tumor neovascularization. If some chemotherapy
drugs are found to have an effect that is similar in nature to
that described in our VDA studies, it will naturally be important
to assess whether combination therapy with an antiangiogenic
drug such as bevacizumab or a small molecule antiangiogenic
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor can block such proangiogenic/
provasculogenic (and hence potentially tumor growth–promoting)
rebounds.
Also of interest is the fact that cytotoxic chemotherapy is
sometimes accompanied by hematopoietic growth factor support
using recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) to
accelerate recovery from myelosuppression by mobilizing hematopoietic stem cell progenitors from the bone marrow. However,
there is evidence that G-CSF can also mobilize CEPs (23, 24).
Thus, cytotoxic chemotherapy–induced mobilization of CEPs might
be amplified by coadministration of G-CSF. If so, the use of
antiangiogenic drugs in such treatment settings, e.g., ‘‘dose dense’’
chemotherapy with G-CSF for adjuvant therapy of early stage breast
cancer (25), would seem logical.
A second implication of our results concerns the continuing
controversy about the contribution of bone marrow–derived
endothelial progenitor cells to tumor angiogenesis. The controversy
stems in significant part from conflicting findings regarding the
relative contribution of endothelial progenitor cells to new blood
vessel formation in tumors (24). Some studies have reported high
proportions of such cells in newly forming blood vessels (e.g.,
20–50%), but many others report much lower numbers, often 5% or
less (24, 26). The results in Fig. 1B are consistent with the view that
in many tumors, the relative contribution of such cells may indeed
be minor, although this can change with such factors as tumor
stage, size, degree of hypoxia, and other factors (24). However, as
also shown in Fig. 1B, this contribution can suddenly and
dramatically increase after a cytotoxic therapy. In this regard, it
is important to note that all previously published studies dealing
with the detection and enumeration of CEPs in tumor-associated
blood vessels dealt with untreated tumors, or tumors that had
been treated a long time before their removal and analysis (27).
Acute mobilization of CEPs might be analogous to instances of
ischemic cardiovascular disease in which there can be a sudden
and marked increase of endothelial progenitor cells from the bone
marrow, which home to sites of damaged blood vessels, ostensibly
to repair such damage and regenerate new vessels (28). Such acute
mobilization may be a part of an ‘‘SOS’’ host response, which,
unfortunately, may also occur with respect to damaged vessels

7057

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

in tumors, caused not only by VDA, but possibly cytotoxic
chemotherapy regimens (29).
Finally, a third implication of the results is that they may be
exploited for uncovering new targets for various antiangiogenic or
other types of drug. For example, the molecular mechanisms
responsible for the acute mobilization, homing, and retention within
tumors of bone marrow–derived cell populations could clearly
implicate new targets for anticancer agents (30), some of which may
already be developed, or which could be developed in the future.
In summary, there are multiple possible mechanisms to explain
how an antiangiogenic drug such as bevacizumab, and likely other
antiangiogenic agents, can amplify the efficacy of chemotherapy.
We have focused our comments on one particular mechanism. It is
clearly possible that different mechanisms may predominate in

References
1. Sandler A, Gray R, Perry MC, et al. Paclitaxelcarboplatin alone or with bevacizumab for non-smallcell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;355:2542–50.
2. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al.
Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med
2004;350:2335–42.
3. Motzer RJ, Michaelson MD, Redman BG, et al. Activity
of SU11248, a multitargeted inhibitor of vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor and platelet-derived
growth factor receptor, in patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:16–24.
4. Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. Sorafenib in
advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med
2007;356:125–34.
5. Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: a universal chemosensitization strategy for cancer? Science 2006;312:
1171–5.
6. Jain RK, Duda DG, Clark JW, et al. Lessons from phase
III clinical trials on anti-VEGF therapy for cancer. Nat
Clin Pract Oncol 2006;3:24–40.
7. Batchelor TT, Sorensen AG, di Tomaso E, et al.
AZD2171, a pan-VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, normalizes tumor vasculature and alleviates edema
in glioblastoma patients. Cancer Cell 2007;11:83–95.
8. Calabrese C, Poppleton H, Kocak M, et al. A
perivascular niche for brain tumor stem cells. Cancer
Cell 2007;11:69–82.
9. Folkins C, Man S, Shaked Y, et al. Therapies combining a
targeted antiangiogenic drug and cytotoxic or metronomic chemotherapy reduce the tumor stem-like cell fraction
in glioma xenograft tumors. Cancer Res 2007;67:3560–4.
10. Hudis CA. Clinical implications of antiangiogenic
therapies. Oncology (Huntingt) 2005;19:26–31.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

different circumstances, or may even work simultaneously. For
example, an antiangiogenic drug may simultaneously enhance
chemotherapy efficacy by mechanisms associated with vascular
normalization while at the same time blunting vasculogenic/
angiogenic systemic rebounds.

Acknowledgments
Received 3/7/2007; revised 4/18/2007; accepted 6/19/2007.
Grant support: The work in Dr. Kerbel’s lab was supported by grants from the
National Institutes of Health, USA (CA-41233), the National Cancer Institute of
Canada, and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
We thank numerous colleagues who have been involved in the work summarized in
this review. They include Drs. Francesco Bertolini, Robert Benezra, David Chaplin, and
Daniel J. Hicklin, as well as a number of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.
We also sincerely thank Cassandra Cheng for her excellent secretarial assistance.

11. Kim JJ, Tannock IF. Repopulation of cancer cells
during therapy: an important cause of treatment failure.
Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:516–25.
12. Shaked Y, Ciarrocchi A, Franco M, et al. Therapyinduced acute recruitment of circulating endothelial
progenitor cells to tumors. Science 2006;313:1785–7.
13. Siemann DW, Bibby MC, Dark GG, et al. Differentiation and definition of vascular-targeted therapies. Clin
Cancer Res 2005;11:416–20.
14. Tozer GM, Kanthou C, Baguley BC. Disrupting
tumour blood vessels. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:423–35.
15. Siemann DW, Rojiani AM. Antitumor efficacy of
conventional anticancer drugs is enhanced by the
vascular targeting agent ZD6126. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 2002;54:1512–7.
16. Lyden D, Hattori K, Dias S, et al. Impaired
recruitment of bone-marrow-derived endothelial and
hematopoietic precursor cells blocks tumor angiogenesis and growth. Nat Med 2001;7:1194–201.
17. Conejo-Garcia JR, Buckanovich RJ, Benencia F, et al.
Vascular leukocytes contribute to tumor vascularization. Blood 2005;105:679–81.
18. De Palma M, Venneri MA, Galli R, et al. Tie2 identifies
a hematopoietic lineage of proangiogenic monocytes
required for tumor vessel formation and a mesenchymal
population of pericyte progenitors. Cancer Cell 2005;8:
211–26.
19. Grunewald M, Avraham I, Dor Y, et al. VEGF-induced
adult neovascularization: recruitment, retention, and
role of accessory cells. Cell 2006;124:175–89.
20. Udagawa T, Puder M, Wood M, et al. Analysis of
tumor-associated stromal cells using SCID GFP transgenic mice: contribution of local and bone marrowderived host cells. FASEB J 2006;20:95–102.
21. Bertolini F, Paul S, Mancuso P, et al. Maximum
tolerable dose and low-dose metronomic chemotherapy

7058

have opposite effects on the mobilization and viability
of circulating endothelial progenitor cells. Cancer Res
2003;63:4342–6.
22. Furstenberger G, von Moos R, Lucas R, et al.
Circulating endothelial cells and angiogenic serum
factors during neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary
breast cancer. Br J Cancer 2006;94:524–31.
23. Natori T, Sata M, Washida M, et al. G-CSF stimulates
angiogenesis and promotes tumor growth: potential
contribution of bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;297:
1058–61.
24. Bertolini F, Shaked Y, Mancuso P, et al. The
multifaceted circulating endothelial cell in cancer: from
promiscuity to surrogate marker and target identification. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:835–45.
25. Citron ML. Dose density in adjuvant chemotherapy
for breast cancer. Cancer Invest 2004;22:555–68.
26. Shaked Y, Bertolini F, Man S, et al. Genetic
heterogeneity of the vasculogenic phenotype parallels
angiogenesis: implications for cellular surrogate marker
analysis of antiangiogenesis. Cancer Cell 2005;7:101–11.
27. Peters BA, Diaz LA, Polyak K, et al. Contribution of
bone marrow-derived endothelial cells to human tumor
vasculature. Nat Med 2005;11:261–2.
28. Duan H, Cheng L, Sun X, et al. LFA-1 and VLA-4
involved in human high proliferative potential-endothelial progenitor cells homing to ischemic tissue. Thromb
Haemost 2006;96:807–15.
29. Browder T, Butterfield CE, Kraling BM, et al.
Antiangiogenic scheduling of chemotherapy improves
efficacy against experimental drug-resistant cancer.
Cancer Res 2000;60:1878–86.
30. Rafii S, Lyden D, Benezra R, et al. Vascular and
haematopoietic stem cells: novel targets for antiangiogenesis therapy? Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:826–35.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Strategies on Defense: On the Possibility of
Blocking Rebounds by the Tumor Vasculature after
Chemotherapy
Yuval Shaked and Robert S. Kerbel
Cancer Res 2007;67:7055-7058.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7055

This article cites 30 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7055.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 17 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7055.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

