Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Circulating Tumor Cell Isolation and Diagnostics: Toward
Routine Clinical Use
Anja van de Stolpe1, Klaus Pantel2, Stefan Sleijfer3, Leon W. Terstappen4, and Jaap M.J. den Toonder1

Abstract
From February 7–11, 2011, the multidisciplinary Lorentz Workshop Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC) Isolation and
Diagnostics: Toward Routine Clinical Use was held in Leiden (The Netherlands) to discuss progress and define
challenges and potential solutions for development of clinically useful circulating tumor cell (CTC) diagnostics.
CTCs, captured as "liquid biopsy" from blood, for counting and characterization using pathology and molecular
assays, are expected to replace metastatic tissue biopsies to be used to predict drug response and resistance and
to monitor therapy response and cancer recurrence. CTCs are highly heterogeneous; therefore, cancer type–
specific isolation technologies, as well as complex clinical interpretation software, are required. Cancer Res;
71(18); 5955–60. 2011 AACR.

Introduction
Since their first description, enumeration and characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTC) are thought to hold great
promise (1). CTCs in blood originate from both primary and
metastatic lesions, having acquired properties enabling migration into the circulation. A small subset of CTCs probably has
the capability to establish metastatic growth after seeding in a
tissue niche–supporting survival and clonal proliferation.
These cells may have undergone epithelial–mesenchymal
transition (EMT), acquired stem cell characteristics enabling
self-renewal and creation of differentiated progeny, and may
have become relatively resistant to standard chemotherapy.
Whether, and where, a CTC succeeds in establishing a metastasis depends on its molecular profile, which is not necessarily
the same as found in the primary tumor.
Driven by technical progress, both CTC enumeration and
molecular characterization are expected to increasingly provide clinical information on prognosis, therapy choice, and
effectiveness, as well as drug resistance, while also being of
interest for drug development and biomarker discovery.
CTC diagnostics
In recent years, numerous assays to detect CTCs have
been described. So far, the CellSearch system is the only
Authors' Affiliations: 1Philips Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands;
2
€tsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institut fu
€r Tumorbiologie,
Universita
Hamburg, Germany; 3Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, Rotterdam; and
4
Faculty of Science and Technology, Medical Cell Biophysics, University
of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
Corresponding Author: Anja van de Stolpe, Philips Research, High Tech
Campus 12b, p.104, 5656AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands. Phone: 31-612784841; Fax: 31-4027-42944; E-mail: anja.van.de.stolpe@philips.com
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254
2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

validated assay that has been cleared by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration as an aid to monitor patients with
metastatic breast, prostate, and colon cancer. Using antiEpCAM–coated magnetic beads, CTCs are extracted from
blood, fixed/stained, and manually counted. The assay is
prognostic in patients with metastatic breast, prostate, and
colon cancer, and recently also non–small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), and is being reimbursed by some insurance
companies in the United States. Apart from counting, characterization of CTCs is of interest for companion diagnostic
purposes (2). Aberrant functioning of specific intracellular
signaling pathways drives cancer cell division and tumor
growth. Many novel cancer drugs specifically target the
responsible pathway—so-called targeted drugs. Consequently, assessment of whether or not a specific drug target
is present in tumor cells becomes increasingly important. An
example is trastuzumab, which inactivates the Her2/Neu
pathway in breast cancer patients with overexpressed Her2/
Neu protein. Unfortunately, targeted treatment inevitably
leads to drug resistance, due to an alternative oncogenic
signaling pathway taking over, requiring renewed tumor
analysis to redefine (targeted) treatment. In line with this,
in patients with metastatic Her2-positive primary cancer,
following the first line of trastuzumab treatment, U.S. breast
cancer guidelines require reassessment of Her2 status by
tissue biopsy of a metastatic tumor. Unfortunately, this is
not always possible and is often difficult and cumbersome.
Moreover, metastases can differ from each other within one
patient.
CTCs potentially provide a solution to circumvent this
problem: Pathology and molecular analysis are expected to
enable prediction of drug response, equivalent to a tissue
biopsy. In line with this, using CellSearch, several pathology
stainings (Her2, ER/PR, EGFR, AR, IGF1-R) are tested in
clinical trials, and preliminary results indicate clinical utility
(3–5).

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5955

Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

van de Stolpe et al.

Challenges
Despite the promising results obtained so far, numerous
important issues related to CTC definition, identification,
isolation, diagnostics, clinical utility, and validation remain
to be solved (6–8). During a 5-day workshop, 60 invited
participants with clinical oncology, pathology, various diagnostic, engineering (including microfluidics and microfabrication), pharma, and regulatory backgrounds discussed how
to define clinical utility, challenges, and potential solutions
for CTC diagnostics (Fig. 1). Details on workshop presentations can be found at http://www.lorentzcenter.nl/lc/web/
2011/442/abstracts.pdf. In the following text, conference presenters are referred to by name, with citations added for the
related published work.

The Lorentz CTC Workshop: Facing the
Challenges
The "true" CTC
CTCs in blood are very rare, with counts up to a few
hundred per milliliter depending on available detection/
isolation technology and CTC definition used, the latter
being difficult in view of heterogeneity, presence of apoptotic CTCs, and circulating tumor fragments. Processing
large sample volumes (1–30 mL blood) within an acceptable time frame, without damaging these vulnerable cells,
is not trivial. Many CTCs currently may escape analysis,
lacking a detectable characteristic such as EpCAM and
cytokeratins, or because of damage or loss during the
isolation process.
CTC heterogeneity between different cancers. Leon
Terstappen and colleagues showed, using retrospective analysis of CTC images to define phenotypic CTC criteria, that
different "CTC" definitions result in different CTC counts with
varying degrees of clinical significance (9). Therefore, a "standard" CTC definition is clinically important. The CellSearch
definition is considered the current standard: A nucleated
circulating cell larger than 4 mm, expressing epithelial proteins
EpCAM and cytokeratins 8, 18, and/or 19, while being negative
for the leukocyte-specific antigen CD45. Many workshop
contributions provided evidence for CTCs not obeying this
definition, and the general consensus was that CTCs are
heterogeneous and can differ between different cancers, as
well as within one patient. No single parameter, such as size,
cytomorphology, protein, or FISH biomarker staining, was
considered essential or sufficiently distinctive to define the
"true" CTC, each showing overlap with normal leukocytes and
presence in normal volunteers. Combining parameters
increases specificity, however at the cost of sensitivity (initials
within parentheses in the text refer to presenters at the workshop, who are listed at the end of the article; LT, KP, JB, MM).
EpCAM is widely used in many CTC-detecting techniques.
However, Sieuwerts and colleagues showed that breast cancer
cell lines, specific subtypes, such as normal-like, lack EpCAM
expression (10). CD146 may serve as an alternative marker to
detect these EpCAM-negative cells, which frequently harbor
stem cell characteristics, and a clinical study is ongoing to
explore the clinical relevance of this CTC subset (11). CTCs

5956

Cancer Res; 71(18) September 15, 2011

Figure 1. The Lorentz Workshop breathed a very relaxed, friendly, and
scientific atmosphere, highly stimulatory for creative thinking, beautifully
illustrated by this "doodle" drawing, created during one of the interactive
sessions by Larry Norton from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in
New York.

may also be detected using properties other than membrane
markers, such as size. Matthew Krebs and colleagues presented data on ISET filter–enriched CTCs of lung cancer
patients (12). Chwee Teck Lim and colleagues found
EpCAM-negative CTCs, when selected on the basis of cell
size and stiffness, for various cancer types (13). It is important
to realize that there is currently no gold standard to determine
the actual CTC count, that it is unlikely that one test will be
able to detect all CTCs, and that CTC properties will differ
across cancer types. In line, Marielena Mata suggested a CTC
nomenclature/definition coupling CTCs to their cancer type
of origin.
CTC heterogeneity within one patient. In addition to
differences across cancer types, there is also heterogeneity

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

Progress in Circulating Tumor Cell Diagnostics

within individuals. In addition to EpCAM-positive, EpCAMnegative CTCs can be present, possibly influenced by
disease stage, increasing in number with disease progression (JM, MK, JC, SJ, CL). EpCAM-negative CTCs can
express stem cell markers such as vimentin, CD24/44,
SNAIL/SLUG, ALD-1, and CD146, making them prime
suspects for establishing metastases (ref. 10; JC, SJ, MK,
JM, RK, LN). Furthermore, workshop participants presented evidence for cells expressing CD45 together with
either Her2 (JM) or epithelial markers such as cytokeratin
in a number of patients with different types of cancer (e.g.,
prostate, breast, head and neck; JB, JC, SJ, RK). Ruth Katz
reported a high frequency of lung cancer–specific genomic
rearrangements (FISH confirmed) in CD45-positive mononuclear cells in lung cancer patients. One can only speculate as to the meaning of CD45-positive cells with
epithelial characteristics—could they be cancer stem cells
differentiated along the hematopoietic lineage, or CTCs
phagocytosed by leukocytes? The latter may be supported
by the observation of mixed leukocyte/CTC-containing cell
clusters (JC, SJ, RK, PK) and explain why live CTC counts
diminish with time (SJ). Although some clusters have
characteristic elongated forms, suggesting successful passing
of capillary narrowings in vivo, clusters may also represent an
in vitro artifact (SS); on the other hand, clusters may be lost
during specific enrichment/isolation approaches (PK). If proven real, clusters could conceivably seed as micrometastasis in
capillaries. Taken together, a CTC sample may be more heterogeneous than previously assumed.
Biological relevance
Larry Norton and colleagues showed how red and green
fluorescent breast cancer cells, transplanted at different locations in a mouse, with time result in mixed red and green
tumors, showing that aggressive CTCs migrate between
tumors. Attracted by a combination of tissue and inflammatory factors (IL-6, IL-8), metastatic cells may repopulate the
primary tumor (acting as a "sponge") or seed a recurrent
tumor in breast tissue—the "self-seeding" hypothesis (14).
After removal of the primary tumor, only locations outside
the primary tumor niche are left to be seeded, which may
explain why metastases expand following primary cancer
surgery. On the basis of this hypothesis, a novel immunotherapeutic approach is being developed aiming at inducing
an inflammatory response in the tumor to attract CTCs, which
should act as immunogenic triggers for corecruited immune
cells.
Jim Hicks and colleagues compared sequencing-based
copy number variation profiles of single nuclei from different parts of a heterogeneous primary breast cancer to create
a phylogenetic tree based on shared breakpoints. This
approach revealed that functional cancer evolution takes
"jumps" rather than proceeding gradually, with one cancer
cell clone being largely responsible for populating both
primary tumor and metastases (15). The remarkable similarity between complex genomic patterns observed in
metastases and primary tumor is intriguing and compatible
with the "self-seeding" hypothesis.

www.aacrjournals.org

Clinical utility
Several prerequisites have to be met before an assay can be
implemented into clinical care: for example, robustness,
reproducibility, cost-effectiveness, but above all "clinical utility," meaning a clinically relevant decision can be taken based
on assay result—this requires rigorous clinical validation (JB,
KP, SS, LT, HS).
CTC enumeration for prognosis, recurrence, and therapy
response monitoring. The clinical utility of the prognostic
information provided by the CellSearch assay is still
debated, having had no impact on treatment strategy yet,
in part due to the disputed clinical meaning of CTC counts
around the cutoff value. Future improvements may lie in
adding exosome counting, present in 20-fold higher numbers, and by implementing algorithm-based feature recognition for automated counting which eliminates operator
bias (16).
CellSearch is also used to monitor cancer recurrence/progression, as a patient friendly substitute for a regular CT scan
(ML). On the basis of initial clinical trials, it moreover promises high clinical utility in monitoring therapeutic effectiveness. This is increasingly needed to rapidly terminate
ineffective treatment to prevent side effects and unnecessary
cost, for example with (neo)adjuvant and targeted therapy in
breast cancer (KP).
CTC characterization for companion diagnostics.
Given differences between primary and metastatic lesions,
a significant number of patients with metastatic cancer may
receive the wrong treatment when based on primary cancer
tissue pathology (ref. 17; JM, HG). CTCs have potential clinical
utility as a noninvasive, serial "liquid" biopsy to substitute for
biopsies from metastases. For companion diagnostics, CTC
morphology (18) and multiple pathology stainings for protein,
RNA and DNA biomarkers are considered relevant, as well as
genome (SJ, HS) and transcriptome (JM) analysis. In addition,
CTC analysis may reveal novel companion diagnostic biomarkers that can be assayed for example as free DNA in blood
(GC, EM).
CTC diagnostics for correct patient stratification during
early clinical trials to prevent costly late drug failure is of high
value for pharma—if sufficiently sensitive, validated, and
against an acceptable price (GC, HG, KP, DS, RD, PL).
The ideal CTC companion diagnostics platform should
reliably capture CTCs representative for all metastases present, in sufficient numbers and quality to conduct—and
clinically interpret—companion biomarker assay(s), preferably on single-cell basis in view of CTC heterogeneity.
A "pathology-friendly" imaging-based CTC characterization platform may enable rapid clinical adoption (PK,
DB), while not requiring CTC purification. Integration with
Digital Pathology platforms, currently being developed to
digitize, store, and process scanned images of pathology
slides, may facilitate unbiased comparison between CTC
and tissue pathology results (19). In addition to standard
pathology stainings, in situ staining technologies for DNA/
mRNA analysis, with single molecule resolution, are becoming available (20), further expanding possibilities of pathology diagnostics.

Cancer Res; 71(18) September 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5957

Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

van de Stolpe et al.

Isolation and careful handling of pure CTCs will be
required for molecular diagnostic characterization (PCR,
microarray, sequencing) on single CTC basis. Blood cells
other than CTCs interfere with mRNA profiling, although
restriction to epithelial-specific mRNAs may partially bypass
this problem (21).
How to get hold of CTCs?
Considering CTC heterogeneity, requirements for a CTC
assay will differ according to tumor type and are dependent on
the ultimate goal: enumeration or characterization. The rarity
and heterogeneity of CTCs define the challenge of isolating an
extremely small number of CTCs from a huge amount of other
cells in a large blood volume (typically 7.5 mL). Multiple
different isolation approaches will probably be required, possibly consisting of combinations of less specific enrichment
steps, followed by more specific isolation techniques (MK, PK,
MM, SS).
Negative selection of non-CTCs may be useful to reduce
sample volume; erythrocytes can be removed by selective
lysis or filtration, and leukocytes by filtration or depletion by
using antibodies not believed to be present on CTCs such as
CD45 (ref. 22; DB, SJ, MK, BK, PG). All selection strategies
carry a risk of introducing bias due to loss of CTCs. For this
reason, a nonselective approach might be favored, for example by direct high-definition scanning and identification of
CTCs among leukocytes on a substrate (18). An alternative
approach, though at lower throughput yet, is image flow
cytometry (23).
Positive CTC selection approaches are based on the premise that the targeted antigen is present on the CTCs, most
commonly the EpCAM antigen as used by the CellSearch
system. "MagSweeper" uses a similar approach with antiEpCAM–coated magnetic beads dispersed in the sample and
collected by sweeping magnetic rods (24). Microchip technologies from Harvard Medical School utilize microfluidic
flow cells with either microposts or herringbone mixing
channels (25) coated with EpCAM antibodies, generating
flow patterns to optimize cell antibody contact while preserving cell viability. Brian Kirby and colleagues presented
the "GEDI" microfluidic device containing PSMA (prostatespecific membrane antigen) antibody-coated obstacles
arranged in patterns to create size-dependent particle trajectories favoring CTC capture and leukocyte rejection (26).
Jean-Louis Viovy and colleagues used a microfluidic flow cell
and antibody-coated magnetic beads, self-assembling into
micropillars in an external magnetic field (27). The IMEC
system is unique in integrating immunomagnetic bead
capture with dielectrophoresis-based transport and a PCR
assay (28). As EpCAM is not expressed by all tumor cells,
future use of antibodies directed toward other markers,
either alone or in mixture, is expected to yield more CTCs.
Isolation based on physical characteristics. Quite
another approach is to separate CTCs on the basis of
physical rather than biological characteristics such as size,
stiffness (associated with a different cytoskeletal structure
of cancer cells, compared with blood cells), or electrical
properties.

5958

Cancer Res; 71(18) September 15, 2011

Filtering techniques use difference in size and deformability
of CTCs compared to blood cells, exemplified by the 8-mm
pore, pressure-driven, polycarbonate ISET filter (29) and 3dimensional parylene microfilter containing homogeneous
pores, presented by Ram Datar and colleagues, both enabling
direct CTC visualization/analysis on the filter (30). Chwee
Teck Lim and colleagues described their use of crescentshaped microstructures (13) to efficiently capture viable CTCs,
which by flow reversal can be retrieved, analyzed, and cultured—as shown for actual patient samples.
Dielectrophoresis can manipulate cells according to their
dielectric properties in an inhomogeneous electrical field,
which differ depending on size and membrane properties.
Peter Gascoyne and colleagues developed a dielectrophoretic
field-flow fractionation (DEP-FFF) device, enabling enrichment of viable CTCs (31). Hywel Morgan and colleagues built
a microfluidic impedance cytometer for single-cell analysis to
recognize CTCs based on differences in electrical impedance
properties (32).
Finally, the EpiSpot technology, a functional cell culture
assay based on counting CTCs by detection of secreted marker
proteins, may be especially suited for drug development
purposes (33).

Perspectives and Summary
Toward 2015, for (companion) diagnostics, one could envision a CTC characterization pathology platform enabling
direct in situ comparison between CTC and tissue pathology,
with smart algorithms for automated clinical interpretation,
complemented later by single CTC DNA/RNA sequencing.
Future CTC enrichment/isolation technologies may need to
be tuned to specific (categories of) cancer types, whereas for
drug development purposes, CTC culture presents an additional challenge.
While enabling repeated drug response prediction in
patients with metastatic disease, CTC enumeration could
be envisioned to monitor responses and recurrence. Adding
CTC counting/diagnostics to early cancer diagnostics programs might improve the specificity of early detection and
provide prognostic information.
To get there, in addition to novel CTC capture molecules,
technologies are needed to deal with high sample volumes,
and improve enrichment, purification, and characterization,
using both physical and biological CTC parameters.
Technologies should enable integration of various sample
processing steps for subsequent diagnostic assays. Clinical
interpretation requires complex software to deal with multiplex pathology staining or molecular assay results from a
varying number of heterogeneous CTCs. Automated recognition of CTCs and objective staining quantification algorithms
should be the standard, facilitating objective interpretation.
Enabling clinical decisions based on CTC analysis and
obtaining regulatory clearance requires rigorous clinical
trials. We conclude this report by stating that we believe
that we speak for all workshop participants in saying that
CTCs are on their way toward fulfilling their diagnostic
promise in oncology.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

Progress in Circulating Tumor Cell Diagnostics

Workshop Participants
Initials within parentheses in the text refer to presenters at
the workshop, who are listed below: DB, David A. Basiji (Amnis
Corporation, Seattle, Washington); JB, Johan De Bono (The
Institute of Cancer Research and The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, Sutton, United Kingdom); JC, Jeffrey Chalmers (Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio); GC, Glen Clack
(AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Mereside, Macclesfield Cheshire, United Kingdom); RD, Ram Datar (University of Miami
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida); HG,
Humphrey Gardner (Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts); PG, Peter Gascoyne
(M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston,
Texas); SJ, Stefanie Jeffrey (Stanford School of Medicine,
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California); RK, Ruth Katz
(M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston,
Texas); BK, Brian Kirby (Cornell University, Ithaca, New York);
MK, Matthew Krebs (Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Manchester, United Kingdom); PK, Peter Kuhn (The Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, California); PL, Phil Lefebvre
(Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, Illinois); CL, Chwee Teck
Lim (National University of Singapore, Singapore); ML, Minetta Liu (Georgetown Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, District of Columbia); JM, John

Martens (Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands); MM, Marielena Mata (J&J, Raritan, New Jersey); EM,
Evelyn McKeegan (Abbott Park, Illinois); LN, Larry Norton
(Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York); KP, Klaus Pantel (Universitätsklinikum HamburgEppendorf, Hamburg, Germany); HS, Howard Scher (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York); DS,
David R. Shalinsky (Pfizer, San Diego, California); SS, Stefan
Sleijfer (Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands); LT, Leon Terstappen (University of Twente, Enschede,
The Netherlands).
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
J.M.J. den Toonder and A. van de Stolpe: employment, Philips Research. K.
Pantel: honoraria, Veridex, Novartis, AMGEN, Bayer, Prometheus, Cell Signaling
Technologies, BD, and Roche. S. Sleijfer: research funding, J&J. L.W. Terstappen:
scientific advisor, Veridex (J&J).

Acknowledgments
The authors thank all presenters and participants of the workshop for their
valuable contributions to the discussions and Freek van Hemert and Rob in't
Groen for critically reading the manuscript.
Received April 20, 2011; revised June 23, 2011; accepted June 23, 2011;
published OnlineFirst September 6, 2011.

References
res C, Riethdorf S. Cancer micrometastases.
Pantel K, Alix-Panabie
Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2009;6:339–51.
2. Bianchini D, Zivi A, Sandhu S, de Bono JS. Horizon scanning for novel
therapeutics for the treatment of prostate cancer. Ann Oncol 2010;21
Suppl 7:vii43–55.
3. Meng S, Tripathy D, Shete S, Ashfaq R, Haley B, Perkins S, et al. HER2 gene amplification can be acquired as breast cancer progresses.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:9393–8.
€ller V, Aktas B, Janni W, Schneeweiss A, Stickeler E, et al.
4. Fehm T, Mu
HER2 status of circulating tumor cells in patients with metastatic
breast cancer: a prospective, multicenter trial. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 2010;124:403–12.
5. Attard G, Swennenhuis JF, Olmos D, Reid AHM, Vickers E, A’Hern R,
et al. Characterization of ERG, AR and PTEN status in circulating
tumor cells from patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Cancer Res 2009;69:2912–8.
6. Sleijfer S, Gratama JW, Sieuwerts AM, Kraan J, Martens JW,
Foekens JA, et al. Circulating tumour cell detection on its way to
routine diagnostics implementation? Eur J Cancer 2007;43:
2645–50.
7. Pantel K. Circulating tumour cells in cancer patients: challenges and
perspectives. Trends Mol Med 2010;16:398–406.
8. den Toonder JMJ. Circulating tumor cells: the grand challenge. Lab
Chip 2011;11:375–7.
9. Coumans F, Doggen CJM, Attard G, de Bono JS, Terstappen LW. All
circulating EpCAMþCD45-CKþ but not EpCAMþCD45þCKþ
objects predict overall survival in castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Ann Oncol 2010;21:1851–7.
10. Sieuwerts AM, Kraan J, Bolt J, van der Spoel P, Elstrodt F, Schutte M,
et al. Anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule antibodies and the detection of circulating normal-like breast tumor cells. J Natl Cancer Inst
2009;101:61–6.
11. Mostert B, Kraan J, Bolt-de Vries J, van der Spoel P, Sieuwerts AM,
Schutte M, et al. Detection of circulating tumor cells in breast cancer
may improve through enrichment with anti-CD146. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 2011;127:33–41.
1.

www.aacrjournals.org

12. Krebs MG, Sloane R, Priest L, Lancashire L, Hou JM, Greystoke A,
et al. Evaluation and prognostic significance of circulating tumor cells
in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 2011;
29:1556–63.
13. Tan SJ, Lakshmi RL, Chen PF, Lim WT, Yobas L, Lim CT. Versatile
label free biochip for the detection of circulating tumor cells from
peripheral blood in cancer patients. Biosens Bioelectron 2010;26:
1701–5.
14. Kim M-Y, Oskarsson T, Acharyya S, Nguyen DX, Zhang X H.-F, Norton
L, et al. Tumor self-seeding by circulating cancer cells. Cell
2009;139:1315–26.
15. Navin N, Kendall J, Troge J, Andrews P, Rodgers L, McIndoo J, et al.
Tumor evolution inferred by single cell sequencing. Nature 2011;472:
90–4.
16. Ligthart SJ, Coumans FAW, Attard G, Mulick Cassidy A, de Bono JS,
Terstappen LW. Automated identification of circulating tumor cells.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; 2011. Abstract nr 4683.
17. Dupont Jensen J, Laenkholm AV, Knoop A, Ewertz M, Bandaru R, Liu
W, et al. PIK3CA mutations may be discordant between primary and
corresponding metastatic disease in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res
2011;17:667–77.
18. Marrinucci D, Bethel K, Luttgen M, Bruce RH, Nieva J, Kuhn P.
Circulating tumor cells from well-differentiated lung adenocarcinoma
retain cytomorphologic features of primary tumor type. Arch Pathol
Lab Med 2009;133:1468–71.
19. Philips Digital Pathology. Available from: http://www.research.philips.
com/initiatives/digitalpathology.
€ derberg O, Nilsson M. In situ detection and
20. Larsson C, Grundberg I, So
genotyping of individual mRNA molecules. Nat Methods 2010;7:
395–7.
21. Sieuwerts AM, Kraan J, Bolt-de Vries J, van der Spoel P, Mostert B,
Martens JW, et al. Molecular characterization of circulating tumor cells
in large quantities of contaminating leukocytes by a multiplex realtime PCR. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2009;118:455–68.
22. Balasubramanian P, Yang L, Lang JC, Jatana KR, Schuller D, Agrawal
A, et al. Confocal images of circulating tumor cells obtained using a

Cancer Res; 71(18) September 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5959

Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

van de Stolpe et al.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

5960

methodology and technology that removes normal cells. Mol Pharm
2009;6:1402–08.
ImageStream flow cytometer. Available from: https://www.amnis.
com/papers.html.
Talasaz AH, Powell AA, Huber DE, Berbe JG, Roh K-H, Yu W, et al.
Isolating highly enriched populations of circulating epithelial cells and
other rare cells from blood using a magnetic sweeper device. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:3970–5.
Stott SL, Hsu C-H, Tsukrov DI, Yu M, Miyamoto DT, Waltman BA,
et al. Isolation of circulating tumor cells using a microvortex-generating herringbone-chip. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:
18392–7.
Gleghorn JP, Pratt ED, Denning D, Liu H, Bander NH, Tagawa ST, et al.
Capture of circulating tumor cells from whole blood of prostate cancer
patients using geometrically enhanced differential immunocapture
(GEDI) and a prostate-specific antibody. Lab Chip 2010;10:27–9.
Saliba A-E, Saias L, Psycharia E, Minc N, Simon D, Bidard F-C, et al.
Microfluidic sorting and multimodal typing of cancer cells in selfassembled magnetic arrays. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:
14524–9.

Cancer Res; 71(18) September 15, 2011

28. Stakenborg T, Liu C, Henry O, O’Sullivan CK, Fermer C, Roeser T,
et al. Lab-on-a-chip for the isolation and characterization of circulating
tumor cells. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2010;2010:292–4.
€tze K, et al. ISET,
29. Vona G, Sabile A, Louha M, Sitruk V, Romana S, Schu
isolation by size of epithelial tumor cells: a new method for isolation,
immunomorphological and molecular characterization of circulating
tumor cells. Am J Pathol 2000;156:1–7.
30. Zheng S, Lin HK, Lu B, Williams A, Datar R, Cote RJ, et al. 3D
microfilter device for viable circulating tumor cell (CTC) enrichment
from blood. Biomed Microdevices 2011;13:203–13.
31. Gascoyne PR, Noshari J, Anderson TJ, Becker FF. Isolation of rare
cells from cell mixtures by dielectrophoresis. Electrophoresis 2009;30:
1–11.
32. Holmes D, Pettigrew D, Reccius CH, Gwyer JD, van Berkel C, Holloway J, et al. Leukocyte analysis and differentiation using high speed
microfluidic single cell impedance cytometry. Lab Chip 2009;9:
2881–9.
res C, Rebillard X, Brouillet JP, Barbotte E, Iborra F, Segui
33. Alix-Panabie
B, et al. Detection of circulating prostate-specific antigen-secreting
cells in prostate cancer patients. Clin Chem 2005;51:1538–41.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

Circulating Tumor Cell Isolation and Diagnostics: Toward Routine
Clinical Use
Anja van de Stolpe, Klaus Pantel, Stefan Sleijfer, et al.
Cancer Res 2011;71:5955-5960. Published OnlineFirst September 13, 2011.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1254

This article cites 30 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/18/5955.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/18/5955.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

