Editorial

Reducing Bladder Cancer Deaths
The Preemptive Cystectomy Approach
Badrinath R. Konety, MD, MBA

Despite advances in diagnosis and the advent of new therapies over the past 30 or 40 years, mortality
from bladder cancer of all stages has stagnated at approximately 50%. The precise reasons for this apparent
lack of progress are unclear, but various causes and solutions have been postulated. With an improved
understanding of the biology and therapeutic efficacy of a variety of new agents, several strategies have
been proposed in an effort to reduce the mortality rate from bladder cancer. Bladder cancer is expected to
have affected approximately 68,000 individuals in 2008 and resulted in 14,000 deaths.1 Approximately
75% of all newly diagnosed patients have nonmuscle-invasive disease, whereas the remaining 25% of
patients present with muscle-invasive disease.2 Some 15% to 20% of patients will progress from nonmuscle-invasive to muscle-invasive disease. To improve survival from bladder cancer, we could 1) screen
patients with a high risk of developing bladder cancer and identify them in the nonmuscle-invasive stage;
2) identify those who have nonmuscle-invasive disease and are likely to progress, or who are in the early
stages of progression, to muscle-invasive disease in an effort to treat them early; and 3) aggressively treat
those with advanced disease and develop new therapies for this subgroup of patients.
Although theoretical analysis indicates that it is cost–effective,3 screening for bladder cancer still is not of
proven benefit and could be very expensive. We appear to be stalling in terms of treating metastatic disease; and,
to date, no new agents or regimens have proven better than the old combination of methotrexate, vinblastine,
doxorubicin, and cisplatin. Hence, the focus has currently shifted to identifying those patients with nonmuscleinvasive disease who are likely to progress, or are in the early stages of progression, to muscle-invasive disease to
treat them aggressively before they develop regionally extensive or metastatic disease. This is the preemptive cystectomy approach. The analysis by Morris et al4 reported in this issue of Cancer attempts to assess the potential
benefit of this approach by using retrospective patient cohorts drawn from their own institution and from a population based dataset, namely, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)-Medicare. By using certain
defined decision rules, they have calculated that 32% of bladder cancer deaths (ostensibly in patients with nonmuscle-invasive disease) at their institution could have been prevented. In the SEER-Medicare dataset, which is
more population based, they determined that 49% of all bladder cancer deaths potentially were preventable.
These data are alarming at first glance. However on closer scrutiny, that alarm is tempered by the several
caveats that need to be acknowledged when interpreting these data. Let us first consider the institutional data.
Corresponding author: Badrinath R. Konety, MD, MBA, Department of Urology, University of California at San Francisco, Box 1695, 1600 Divisadero
Street, San Francisco CA 94143; Fax: (415) 885-7443; bkonety@urology.ucsf.edu
Department of Urology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California
See referenced original article on pages 1011-20, this issue.
Received: September 22, 2008; Accepted: September 23, 2008
C 2009 American Cancer Society
Published online: January 17, 2009, V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24137, www.interscience.wiley.com

914

Cancer

March 1, 2009

Editorial/Konety

The authors propose that a full 32% of patients who
sought care at their institution and died of bladder cancer
were deemed to have died avoidable deaths. To be fair to
the authors, all patients may not have heeded the advice
given at their institution or consented to receiving any further treatment at that institution, thereby not allowing the
authors to have full control over executing a more aggressive therapeutic approach. It is easy to concur with the
authors’ observation that each patient who presents with
muscle-invasive disease and does not undergo cystectomy
despite the lack of contraindications potentially represents
an avoidable death. This also is somewhat alarming, in
that there are patients who actually are not receiving ‘gold
standard’ therapy without an obvious explanation. Prior
analysis of SEER data indicate that the rate of cystectomy
within 12 months of diagnosis is approximately 80 per
1000 bladder cancer patients.5 On the basis of an estimate that 25% of all new cancers (equal to 250 of every
1000 cases) are muscle invasive at the time of diagnosis,2 a majority of such patients may not be undergoing
cystectomy because they are too sick to tolerate it; they
are receiving alternative therapy (eg, chemoradiation);
they are not receiving any treatment; or they have been
subjected to another, undetermined management paradigm. It is imperative to determine the therapeutic fate
of these patients to ensure compliance with standards of
care and perhaps decrease some of these preventable
deaths.
Most concerning is that the observed deaths were
among patients who had nonmuscle-invasive disease,
because, theoretically, these deaths are preventable.
Strictly speaking, patients with high-grade T1 disease are
the ones that we are most worried about. The authors
examined the number of preventable deaths among
patients with stage I disease who died of bladder cancer.
They did not provide information regarding the number
of patients with nonmuscle-invasive disease who did not
undergo cystectomy and then went on to die of bladder
cancer. How many of these patients with nonmuscle-invasive bladder cancer need to undergo cystectomy to avoid
each ‘preventable’ death? This is a critical numberneeded-to-treat (NNT) analysis that is required to put
things into proper perspective. The risk of mortality for
patients with low-grade Ta disease is paltry6 and, for those
with high-grade Ta or carcinoma in situ (TIS), it also is
10%. The reported 5-year disease-specific survival rates
Cancer

March 1, 2009

for patients with T1 disease are approximately 69% to
83%.7-9 Assuming that survival would be 100% in
patients with T1 disease if all underwent cystectomy, the
NNT is between 3 patients and 6 patients who need to
undergo cystectomy to for each prevented death. For Ta
and CIS, the NNT would be 10 cystectomies per saved
life. Although these data may appear to favor cystectomy
for T1 disease at least, it is a morbid procedure that, in
and of itself, can result in mortality as well as significant
short-term and long-term complications. Hence, these
issues must be considered before embarking on preemptive cystectomy for patients who have nonmuscle-invasive
disease.
In the institutional dataset analysis reported by Morris et al,4 54 of 126 patients (43%) had nonmuscle-invasive disease. Among those patients, 32 deaths (60%) were
considered avoidable by the investigators’ assessment.
Only 14 of 54 patients (26%) received more than 1 course
of intravesical therapy. It appears from their report that
persistence with intravesical therapy, although an easy target, does not explain the majority of avoidable deaths.
The finding that 1 of 3 of patients (32.5%) whose deaths
were deemed avoidable did not undergo surgery at all is
more concerning. In the absence of more detail, it is difficult to decipher whether inordinate use of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy or other aggressive therapy (presumably
chemoradiation) could have contributed to some of these
avoidable deaths among patients with nonmuscle-invasive
disease. These data need further deliberation and analysis
of root cause for failure to treat before we can advocate the
increased use of preemptive cystectomy in patients with
nonmuscle-invasive disease.
If Morris et al had performed cystectomies on all 32
patients with nonmuscle-invasive disease at their institution whose deaths were deemed avoidable, then they
would have had to perform 6 or 7 additional cystectomies
per year during the 5 years of their study. This is not a
large number of cystectomies for a tertiary referral center.
However, the average volume of cystectomies ranges from
1 to 4 per year for low-volume hospitals and is at least 11
per year for high-volume hospitals.10 Increasing the number of cystectomies in all hospitals by 6 per year would
mean an increase ranging from 150% to 50%. The average cost of hospital admission for a cystectomy is $41,000
per stay. Given the decreasing reimbursement rates and
increased rates of referral of complex procedures such as
915

Editorial

cystectomies to higher volume tertiary centers,11 increasing the number of cystectomies would have enormous financial and resource utilization implications for these
mostly academic medical centers, which also must be considered. Hence, before advocating widespread changes in
clinical practice, which would have obvious patient- and
health system-level implications, the true benefit of more
cystectomies must be ascertained, and clear patient-level
criteria must be established for instituting such aggressive
therapy.
The SEER-Medicare data analysis performed by
Morris et al is less robust, because the investigators have
applied decision rules, which they acknowledge are somewhat arbitrary. Shorter time to cystectomy, although it is
a predictor of survival, does not guarantee it. Hence, it is
overly optimistic to assume that all patients who underwent cystectomy in <3 months could avoid bladder cancer-related mortality. Furthermore, this time interval
observation holds true only for patients with muscle-invasive disease, and it is unclear whether there are any data
supporting a similar link between the time to cystectomy
and survival in patients with nonmuscle-invasive disease
who received intravesical therapy and then went on to
undergo cystectomy.12 What has demonstrated relevance
is a delay >2 years from diagnosis to cystectomy among
patients with T1 disease, which was not evaluated by
Morris et al.13
One other aspect of treatment these data indicate we
should consider is the role of systemic therapy in patients
with very aggressive, nonmuscle-invasive disease. These
data as well as a secondary analysis of the Southwest Oncology Group Study 8507 reveal that patients who
undergo cystectomy for T2 disease after failing intravesical therapy have worse survival than patients who undergo
cystectomy for TIS or T1 disease.14 The presence of
micrometastatic disease may be 1 explanation for the
observed phenomenon. Systemically delivered neoadjuvant chemotherapy clearly has demonstrated benefit in
patients with muscle-invasive transitional cell carcinoma.15 More routine use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy
before proceeding with cystectomy in patients who fail
intravesical therapy may be 1 strategy for improving survival in this subgroup of patients. It is even conceivable
that combined systemic and intravesical therapy could be
considered in patients who have with recurrent, high-risk,
nonmuscle-invasive disease.
916

Despite concerns about the retrospective study
design and the validity of administrative data, the report
by Morris et al4 is extremely important and serves as a
call to arms. These data implore us to be more aware
that earlier cystectomy or other aggressive therapy can
save the lives of some patients with nonmuscle-invasive
disease. It is imperative that we develop criteria for performing preemptive cystectomy in patients with nonmuscle-invasive disease who have failed intravesical
therapies. The role of combined-modality therapy in
this patient population has to be elucidated better to
determine whether such approaches can improve
survival.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The author made no disclosures.

References
1.

Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:71–96.

2.

Messing EM. Urothelial tumors of the urinary bladder. In:
Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA,
eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology. 9th ed. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders-Elsevier; 2007:2407–2407.

3.

Lotan Y, Svatek RS, Sagalowsky AI. Should we screen for
bladder cancer in a high-risk population? A cost per lifeyear saved analysis. Cancer. 2006;107:982–990.

4.

Morris DS, Weizer AZ, Ye Z, Dunn RL, Montie JE, Hollenbeck BK. Understanding bladder cancer death: tumor
biology versus physician practice. Cancer. 2009;115:1011–
1020.

5.

Konety BR, Joyce GF, Wise M. Bladder and upper tract
urothelial cancer. J Urol. 2007;177:1636–1345.

6.

Holmang S, Hedelin H, Anderstrom C, Holmberg E,
Busch C, Johansson SL. Recurrence and progression in low
grade papillary urothelial tumors. J Urol. 1999;162:702–
707.

7.

Thalmann GN, Markwalder R, Shahin O, Burkhard FC,
Hochreiter WW, Studer UE. Primary T1G3 bladder cancer: organ preserving approach or immediate cystectomy?
J Urol. 2004;172:70–75.

8.

Dinney CP, Babkowski RC, Antelo M, et al. Relationship
among cystectomy, microvessel density and prognosis in
stage T1 transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. J Urol.
1998;160:1285–1290.

9.

Millan-Rodriguez F, Chechile-Toniolo G, SalvadorBayarri J, Palou J, Algaba F, Vicente-Rodriguez J. Primary superficial bladder cancer risk groups according to
progression, mortality and recurrence. J Urol. 2000;164:
680–684.

Cancer

March 1, 2009

Editorial/Konety

10. Konety BR, Allareddy V. Influence of post-cystectomy
complications on cost and subsequent outcome. J Urol.
2007;177:280–287.

13. Herr HW, Sogani PC. Does early cystectomy improve the
survival of patients with high risk superficial bladder
tumors? J Urol. 2001;166:1296–1299.

11. Cooperberg MR, Modak S, Konety BR. Trends in regionalization of inpatient care for urological malignancies, 1988
to 2002. J Urol. 2007;178:2103–2108.

14. Lerner SP, Tangen CM, Sucharew H, Wood D, Crawford
ED. Patterns of recurrence and outcomes following induction bacillus Calmette-Guerin for high risk Ta, T1 bladder
cancer. J Urol. 2007;177:1727–1731.

12. Sanchez-Ortiz RF, Huang WC, Mick R, Van Arsdalen
KN, Wein AJ, Malkowicz SB. An interval longer than 12
weeks between the diagnosis of muscle invasion and cystectomy is associated with worse outcome in bladder carcinoma. J Urol. 2003;169:110–115.

Cancer

March 1, 2009

15. Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy
alone for locally advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:859–866.

917

