Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dynamic cellular and molecular modulations of diabetes mediated
head and neck carcinogenesis
Chung-Ji Liu1,2,4,*, Wan-Jung Chang4,*, Chang-Yi Chen4, Fang-Ju Sun2,3, Hui-Wen
Cheng2, Tsai-Ying Chen4, Shu-Chun Lin4,5, Wan-Chun Li4
1

Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

2

Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

3

Mackay College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Taipei, Taiwan

4

Institute of Oral Biology and Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan

5

Department of Stomatology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Wan-Chun Li, e-mail: wcli@ym.edu.tw
Keywords: cell malignancy, diabetes mellitus, head and neck cancer, lymph node metastasis, prognosis
Received: March 31, 2015      Accepted: August 11, 2015      Published: August 21, 2015

ABSTRACT
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the most prevalent
neoplasms worldwide. While numerous potent dietary insults were considered as
oncogenic players for HNSCC development, the impact of metabolic imbalance was less
emphasized during HNSCC carcinogenesis. Previous preclinical and epidemiological
investigations showed that DM could possibly be correlated with greater incidence and
poorer prognosis in HNSCC patients; however, the outcomes from different groups are
contradictive and underlying mechanisms remains elusive. In the present study, the
changes of cellular malignancy in response to prolonged glucose incubation in HNSCC
cells were examined. The results demonstrated that hyperglycemia enhanced HNSCC
cell malignancy over time through suppression of cell differentiation, promotion of cell
motility, increased resistance to cisplatin, and up-regulation of the nutrient-sensing
Akt/AMPK-mTORC1 pathway. Further analysis showed that a more aggressive tongue
neoplastic progression was found under DM conditions compared to non-DM state
whereas DM pathology led to a higher percentage of cervical lymph node metastasis
and poorer prognosis in HNSCC patients. Taken together, the present study confirms
that hyperglycemia and DM could enhance HNSCC malignancy and the outcomes are
of great benefit in providing better anti-cancer treatment strategy for DM patients
with HNSCC.

mutations in a human lymphoblastoid cell line revealing
an important underlying mechanism for hyperglycemiamediated carcinogenesis [5]. Another study showed that
hyperglycemia enhanced invasive and migratory activity
in pancreatic cancer cells via the oxidative stress mediated
stimulation of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)
further confirmed that an increased glucose level upregulated malignant phenotypes [6]. Clinically, diabetes
mellitus (DM) and neoplasms are both top ranking global
healthcare issues affecting millions people [7]. It has long
been known that DM and cancer are more frequently
diagnosed within the same individuals [8]; however, due
to the complex pathogenesis of both disease, it is still

INTRODUCTION
While glucose is a major source for cellular
energy and bio-molecules, it has long been found that
overdosed glucose incubation had deleterious impacts
for non-neoplastic cells and could lead to a numbers of
adverse complications clinically [1]. In contrast, most
cancerous cells are highly addicted to glucose and it
is suspected that prolonged high-glucose environment
might otherwise provide growth advantage to adopt
harsh environment for neoplastic cells [2–4]. Previous
study found that high glucose concentration induced gene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29268

Oncotarget

difficult to clearly differentiate the interplays between them
[9]. More recently, DM has been considered as a potential
risk factor, mainly based on the epidemiologic studies, for
many neoplasms including head and neck, liver, pancreatic,
endometrium, colon/rectum, breast, ovarian and bladder
cancers while it may otherwise negatively correlated to
prostate cancer [10–14]. Several lines of evidence indicated
that DM pathophysiology significantly increased mortality
of cancer patients suggesting that DM could also serve
as a potential prognostic risk factor for cancer [15–17].
Nevertheless, there is still a lack of experimental data to
evaluate dynamic changes and underlying cellular and
molecular mechanisms of hyperglycemia mediated tumor
development and DM related cancer mortality.
Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
(HNSCC) is referred to as carcinomas arising from the
epithelium lining the sinonasal tract, oral cavity, pharynx
and larynx and has become one of the most rapid-growing
and poor prognostic neoplasms worldwide [18, 19]. While
various factors including alcohol consumption, smoking,
areca nut chewing and infection of oncogenic human
papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) could trigger aberrant
genetic accumulation, defective epigenetic regulation
and tumorous microenvironment resulting in pathological
transformation during head and neck carcinogenesis
[20–23], the association between imbalanced metabolism,
such as DM, and HNSCC development is less emphasized.
A retrospective analysis for more than 600 patients with
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and 574 control
cases demonstrated that DM is more frequently detected in
the oral cancer group than in the control group (24.3% vs
11.1%) [24]. More recently, it was found that DM patients
with OSCC tend to have poorer prognosis based on the
detection of a lower overall survival, recurrence-free
survival and cancer-specific survival rates compared with
non-DM patients [16]. On the contrary, DM duration was
not significantly associated with oral cancer prevalence
using multivariable adjustment in another study as the
statistical analysis using the Taiwanese National Health
Insurance database found that use of glucose lowering
agent pioglitazone has no noticeable association with
oral cancer after adjustment for potential confounders
[25]. The null link was also reported in a Barcelona casecontrol cohort showing none of tested DM treatments
(insulin glargine, metformin, sulfonylureas, repaglinide,
thiazolidinediones, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors and
alpha glucosidase inhibitors) influenced oral cancer risk
[26]. Interestingly, a recent analysis of over 4.5-million
US veterans showed a significantly lower percentage of
oral cancer in DM patients implying a negative correlation
between DM and oral carcinogenesis [27]. These
inconsistent findings from various investigations could
possibly result from the differential genetic background
of the study populations.
The inconsistent results from former studies might
also result from a lack of adjustment for identical aging
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and dietary associated confounders (obesity, smoking,
alcohol consumption, betel nut chewing and hormones)
and inaccessibility of biochemical parameters (blood
glucose level and hemoglobin A1C) during analysis which
lead to a difficulty in precisely correlating DM pathology
with HNSCC development. Additionally, to the best of our
knowledge, no study has yet reported temporally defined
hyperglycemia-mediated regulations during head and
neck carcinogenesis. To this end, the current study aims to
dynamically examine cellular and molecular modulations
in response to differential glycemic treatment using
HNSCC cells in vitro and to determine the progression of
oral cancerous lesions in diabetic mice in vivo. Clinically,
the influence of DM on the overall survival rates and
cancer-specific survival rates of HNSCC patients with or
without DM was also retrospectively analyzed. The results
demonstrated that prolonged hyperglycemic incubation
facilitated cell malignancy both in vitro and in vivo.
HNSCC patients with DM showed worse survival rates
compared with non-DM subjects as the DM population
with neck lymph node status exhibited the worst cancerspecific survival rates among groups, suggesting DM
physiology plays an important role to synergistically
regulate HNSCC metastasis.

RESULTS
Differential glucose levels modulated cell growth,
differentiation and cisplatin resistance in
HNSCCs
Based on former studies, incubation of insulin-target
cells such as podocytes and endothelial cells in 25 mM
glucose in vitro could result in DM-mediated pathological
effects [28, 29]. HNSCC cells SAS (tongue), FaDu
(hypopharynx) and OECM1 (oral squamous epithelium)
in medium containing 25 mM D-glucose for various
periods of time to recapitulate progressive hyperglycemic
stimulations were cultivated. There were no significant
morphological changes in Fadu and OECM-1 cells in
response to glycemic alterations; SAS cells, in contrast,
showed clear-edged cell colonies under exposure of
lower-glucose environment suggesting SAS cells may
become more steady and immobile in hypoglycemic
condition (Figure 1A). MTT (Figure 1B) and trypan blue
exclusion (Supplementary Figure S1A) assays showed
that the changes from physiological to higher glucose
concentrations resulted in a distinct reduction in cell
growth in FaDu cells. Further examination confirmed
that long-term high glucose incubation could result in
increased cell apoptosis and significant G2/M cell cycle
arrest in FaDu cells, but not in SAS and OECM1 cells
(Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S1B). The cellular
variance among SAS, FaDu and OECM1 cells could
possibly explained by the distinct glucose uptake capacity,
determined by differential intracellular 2-NBDG intake
29269

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Differential cell growth, decreased cell differentiation and upregulated ABCG2-mediated cisplatin resistance
under prolonged high-glucose treatments in HNSCC cells. A. Glucose switch resulted in cell morphological changes in SAS
cells, but not in FaDu and OECM1 cells. SAS cells exhibited less-spiky cell morphology after incubation of prolonged low glucose.
Magnification = 200×; Long-term high glucose treatment results in B. decreased cell growth using MTT assay and C. G0/G1 cell cycle
arrest in FaDu cells. There was no significant changes of cell growth and cell cycle distribution in SAS and OECM1 cells in medium
containing different glucose levels; D. Down-regulated involucrin protein expression was detected under high-glucose environment in
HNSCC cells. The involucrin expression was normalized by β-actin protein levels using Image J analysis software; E. The significant
greater cisplatin IC50 and F. increased mRNA expression for the ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 2 (ABCG2) in HNSCC cells
was detected in long-term hyperglycemic cultures. Data are presented as Mean ± SEM (N ≥ 3). **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05.

and mRNA expression for glucose transporters (Gluts), in
different HNSCC cells (Supplementary Figure S2).
In addition to deregulated cell growth, loss of cell
differentiation is also one of the hallmarks during head and
neck carcinogenesis as differentiation grading of HNSCC
tissues serves as a prognostic indicator clinically [30, 31].
In molecular basis, the specified keratins and epithelial
cell-cell interacting proteins serve as differentiation
markers [32]. Among them, involucrin was expressed
in the granular and upper spinous layers and absent in
the basal layer of normal oral mucosa [30]. Papillomas
exhibited regular involucrin expression - similar to that
in normal squamous epithelium while squamous cell
carcinomas showed an irregular distribution of involucrin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[33]. The differentiation, based on the involucrin
expression, of HNSCC cells under environments with
different glucose concentrations was examined to
determine glycemia-mediated regulation for cellular
differentiation. Despite different cell growth patterns in
response to glycemic changes in HNSCC cells, decreased
involucrin protein expression was detected in HNSCC
cells incubated in high-glucose medium in a time-course
manner implying that hyperglycemia progressively
impaired cell differentiation (Figure 1D).
HNSCC patients undergoing surgical resection of
tumor lesions are often adjuvantly treated with radiation
and/or chemotherapy clinically; most patients, however,
show loco-regional relapse within five years leading
29270

Oncotarget

to poor post-surgical outcomes [34]. Recent studies
reported that a stem-like HNSCC cell population, referred
to as cancer initiating cells (HNSCC-CICs), and ATPbinding cassette (ABC) protein-mediated drug efflux
in HNSCC cells might be key molecular regulators for
drug sensitivity [35, 36]. To further examine whether
high-glucose treatment alters drug sensitivity in HNSCC
cells, half maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50)
of cisplatin (CDDP), one of the most commonly used
platinum-containing chemotherapeutic drugs, of HNSCC
cells incubated in different glycemic environments were
determined. Higher IC50 levels were detected in HNSCC
cells treated with prolonged hyperglycemia suggesting
that high glucose inputs could protect HNSCC cells from
cisplatin-mediated cytotoxicity (Figure 1E), probably
via significant increased expression of the drug-resistant
mediator ABCG2 mRNA (Figure 1F). Interestingly, there
are no significant changes in CIC populations determined
by aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH) [37]
and Oct4 mRNA expression in HNSCC cells cultured
in differential glucose environments (Supplementary
Figure S2) indicating hyperglycemia facilitated cisplatin
resistance in whole HNSCC cells rather than solely in
HNSCC-CICs.

exacerbates motility and invasiveness of many cell
types and is often considered a prerequisite for tumor
infiltration and metastasis [38]. In addition, recent
studies also demonstrated that EMT is essential for
metastatic phenotype during HNSCC progression
[39]. Quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot analysis
showed increased E-cadherin expression and reduced
N-cadherin and Snail levels predominantly in SAS
cells, but not in FaDu and OECM1 cells, cultivated
in a lower-glucose medium providing a potential
mechanistic cue of glucose-mediated regulation for
HNSCC cell motility (Figure 2E, 2F and Supplementary
Figure S3A).
Cancer metastasis is a multi-stage process
involving in invasion into surrounding tissue,
intravasation, migration into blood or lymph
circulating systems, extravasation and growth at a new
site [40]. During metastasis, cell motility could be
driven by dynamic polymerization of actin molecules
into polarized filaments, termed F-actin [41]. In
molecular basis, Formin homology (FH) molecule
and Enabled/Vasodilator-stimulated phsphoproteins
(Ena/VASP) could promote the generation of spiky
filopodia and Actin related proteins 2 and 3 (Arp2/3)
protein regulated arc-like sheets of F-actin leading
to lamellipodia formation [42]. It was shown that the
cellular F-actin level was positively correlated with
bladder cancer risk clinically implying up-regulated
F-actin expression and structural organization might
be one of the indicators of tumor malignancy [43]. To
further correlate the cytoskeletal rearrangement with
glycemia-mediated cellular motility, the fluorescently
conjugated phalloidin was used to visualize expression
and organization of F-actin in HNSCC cells treated
with high/low glucose concentrations. While F-actin
expression is not significantly different in SAS
cells cultured in different glycemic conditions, the
obvious change from filopodia-enriched cells (in
25 mM glucose) into lamellipodia-edged cells (in
5.5 mM glucose) was detected (Figure 2G, upper
row). In contrast, the dramatically increased F-actin
expression and enriched filopodia-like protrusions
were found in FaDu cells under hyperglycemic cultures
(Figure 2G, middle row) suggesting that cytoskeletal
rearrangement could be another underlying mechanism
for differential cell migratory activity in response
to glycemic stimulation. Strikingly, 3-dimensional
Confocal microscopic analysis showed vertical multicellular stacks in FaDu cells cultured in long-term
hyperglycemic condition, implying that extrinsic
high-glucose challenge could trigger multi-directional
migration for FaDu cells, but not for SAS or OECM1
cells (Figure 2H and Supplementary Figure S3B).
As tumor cell aggregation is a key component of the
metastatic process in either seed-and-soil hypothesis

Elevated glucose level promotes cell motility
via epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
cytoskeletal rearrangement
Being mobile is a key step for cancer cell metastasis.
Using a transwell-based assay, cell migration and invasion
as well as soft-agar mediated anchorage-independent
growth of HNSCC cells cultured in different glucose
levels were analyzed. The results showed that SAS cells
exhibited decreased migration under 1-week incubation
in lower-glucose conditions (Figure 2A) and migration
and invasion activity remained minimal in prolonged
low-glucose cultures (up to 99 days) (Figure 2A and 2B).
Further analysis for anchorage-independent growth for
SAS cells cultured in lower-glucose medium demonstrated
that less environmental glucose led to slower growth of
SAS cells on soft-agar (Figure 2C). In contrast, FaDu cells
showed significantly greater cell motility in response to
high glucose while external glucose is insufficient to alter
cell migration/invasion of OECM1 cells after long-term
culture (Figure 2A and 2B). Interestingly, the glycemiamediated changes for cell migration in SAS and FaDu cells
could be rapidly attenuated when the cells were switched
back into parental conditions (Figure 2D) indicating that
regulation for HNSCC cell motility by extrinsic glucose
input is highly dynamic and reversible.
For most carcinomas, distant invasion is often
initiated by loss of epithelial intercellular contacts and
a shift towards a mesenchymal phenotype, referred
to as epithelial mesenchymal Transition (EMT),

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29271

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Hyperglycemia increased cell motility via up-regulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
F-actin rearrangement. Transwell-based A. migration, B. invasion assay and C. anchorage-independent growth showed greater cell
motility in SAS and FaDu cells, but not OECM1 cells, in response to prolonged hyperglycemic cultures compared with cells incubated in
low-glucose environments; D. Cell migration was modulated after switching back to parental medium in SAS and FaDu cells; E. Realtime RT-PCR and F. Western blot analysis for EMT markers showed up-regulated E-cadherin and suppressed N-cadherin and Snail in SAS
cells cultured with low-glucose medium over time. The relative expression of EMT proteins was normalized with β-actin protein levels
using Image J analysis software; G. Filopodia-like (yellow arrows) and lamellipodia-like (white arrows) F-actin were detected in SAS
and FaDu cells in hyperglycemic condition and low-glucose medium, respectively; H. The enriched F-actin expression and vertical multicellular stack indicated by green arrows was detected in FaDu cells under high-glucose culture. Data are presented as Mean ± SEM (N ≥ 3).
***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; n.s.= non-significant.

or mechanical trapping theory [44], the unique pattern
of FaDu cells in response to high-glucose cultures
confirmed that enhanced F-actin could be essential
supporting greater cell-cell contact to form cell
aggregates, like metastatic tumors in vivo.

The Cytochrome c mediated apoptosis pathway
was further emphasized. Cytochrome c resides in
the mitochondrial intermembrane serving as a redox
carrier for electric transport chain [45]. Previous studies
demonstrated that release of Cytochrome c could trigger
downstream caspase activity resulting in formation of
apoptosomes leading to subsequent cell death in HNSCC
both in vitro and ex vivo [46]. Western blot analysis
showed that major components involving in Cytochrome
c mediated apoptotic pathways including Cytochrome c,
Apaf-1, Caspase 9 and Caspase 3/7 were down-regulated
in FaDu cells (Figure 3C) and SAS cells (Supplementary
Figure S5A) cultivated in high-glucose environment
suggesting long-term hyperglycemia protected HNSCC
cells from Cytochrome c mediated cytotoxicity. The Akt/
AMPK-mTORC1 pathway, one of the common molecular
pathways underlying HNSCC pathogenesis, was also
examined [47]. It was shown that aberrant overactivation
of epidermal growth factor receptor or insulin-like growth
factor receptor signals trigger phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt protein kinases leading to a sequential
phosphorylation of PRAS40 that in turn binds to 14-3-3
protein in cancer cells. The complex could then facilitate
mTORC1 activity and modulate downstream ribosomal
protein S6 (S6) and eIF4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1)
proteins thereby resulting in up-regulated cell growth [48].

Multiple molecular mechanisms involved in
glycemia-mediated promotion for HNSCC
malignancy
To further elucidate glycemia-mediated regulatory
players for HNSCC malignancy, proteomic analysis
of HNSCC cells cultured in low- and high-glucose
medium using large throughput antibody arrays were
performed (Figure 3A, Figure 3B and Supplementary
Figure S4). The results showed that heat shock protein
70 (HSP 70), A disintegrin and metalloprotease with
thrombospondin motifs 1 (ADAMTS1), Beta-catenin
as well as phosphorylated proline-rich Akt substrate
of 40 kDa (PRAS40), WNK Lysine-deficient protein
kinase 1 (WNK1) and Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) were up-regulated in high-glucose
treated HNSCC cells. In contrast, higher expression of
mitochondrial apoptosis mediator Cytochrome c and cell
cycle regulator phosphorylated p53 proteins were found
in HNSCC cells cultured under lower glucose conditions.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29272

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Molecular regulation of hyperglycemia-mediated carcinogenic promotion in head and neck cancer cells.

A. Mitochondrial redox sensor Cytochrome c is down-regulated in high-glucose culture condition in HNSCC cells using Human Cell Stress
Antibody Array; B. Up-regulated expression of AKT/PKB substrate phospho-PRAS40 (T246) was shown in high-glucose treated FaDu
cells using Human Phospho-Kinase Array; C. Western blot analysis showed Cytochrome c and its downstream molecules Apaf-1, caspase 9
and caspase 7 are down-regulated in FaDu cells cultured in high-glucose medium. The relative expression Cytochrome c, Apaf1, caspase 9
and cleaved caspase 7 was normalized with β-actin protein levels using Image J analysis software; D. Western blot analysis for molecules in
Akt/AMPK-mTORC pathway showed differential expression in SAS and FaDu cells under various glycemic environments. The expression
of active Akt, PRAS40 and mTORC1 downstream regulator p70S6K and its direct target S6 proteins were upregulated under high-glucose
treatment while the increased active LKB1, AMPK and Raptor proteins were detected in SAS and FaDu cells treated with prolonged lowglucose condition. The activity of different proteins was defined as the ratios of phosphorylated protein expression to total protein levels
using Image J analysis software; E. Western blot analysis showed successful establishment of Akt and LKB1 deficient SAS and FaDu cells
using shRNA-mediated method. The knockdown efficiency was determined by Akt/LKB1 to β-actin protein expression ratio using Image J
analysis software; F. Glycemia-mediated migration activity is abolished in Akt and LKB1 deficient SAS and FaDu cells. Data are presented
as Mean ± SEM (N ≥ 3). ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; G. Summary of glycemia-mediated molecular regulations in HNSCC cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29273

Oncotarget

On the other hand, nutrition deprivation activates 5′ AMPactivated protein kinase (AMPK) phosphorylation by
liver kinase B1 (LKB1) and active AMPK phosphorylates
Raptor protein stimulating 14-3-3 association leading
to suppressed mTORC1 activity [49]. Taken together,
nutrient inputs could regulate the Akt/AMPK-mTORC1
pathway that would possibly contribute to glycemiamediated cancer malignancy. Western blot analysis for
proteins involving in Akt/AMPK-mTORC1 pathway in
HNSCC cells incubated in different glucose showed that
high-glucose environment activated Akt, PRAS40 but
inhibited LKB, AMPK1 and Raptor proteins (Figure 3D).
The combined Akt- and AMPK-dependent regulations
up-regulated phosphorylated S6 expression promoting
protein translation to support cell growth (Figure 3D
and Supplementary Figure S5B). To further validate the
glycemic regulations of Akt/AMPK-mTORC1 pathways,
the changes of migratory activity of shRNA-mediated Akt
and LKB1 deficient SAS and FaDu cells (Figure 3E and
Supplementary Figure S7) under low- and high-glucose
culture conditions were examined. While there are no
significant morphological and growth difference for Akt/
LKB1 deficient cells compared with shLuc control cells
(Supplementary Figure S8), glycemia-mediated cell
migration was abolished in Akt/LKB1 deficient SAS and
FaDu cells in response to glycemic changes (Figure 3F)
supporting the significance of Akt/AMPK-mTORC1
pathways in regulating glycemia-mediated head and
neck tumorigenesis. In summary, the Cytochrome c
mediated apoptosis and Akt/AMPK-mTORC1 pathway
play important roles in controlling cellular malignancy in
HNSCC cells under prolonged treatment of differential
glucose levels (Figure 3G).

transformation of oral epithelium (Figure 4B, 4C).
The insulin-producing pancreatic islet beta cells were
destroyed and elevated blood glucose levels were
detected within 2 weeks after 5-day consecutive low-dose
(50 mg/kg) STZ injection and remained hyperglycemia
until sacrifice (Supplementary Figure S6). Histological
analysis for tissue sections from mouse tongues under
different treatments showed that a greater percentage
of progressive tongue tumor lesions were detected in 8and 12-week treated DM mice compared with non-DM
groups suggesting DM physiology facilitated 4-NQOinduced tumorigenesis (Figure 4D). Interestingly, the
enriched expression of mTORC1 downstream effector
phospho-S6 protein was detected in 4-NQO induced
tongue neoplastic lesions further confirming the
oncogenic role of mTORC1 associated components
(Figure 4E).

Diabetes is associated with risk of mortality
and cancer-specific survival rates in patients
with HNSCC
Potential clinic significance of DM on patients with
HNSCC was retrospectively examined. The database
with 613 HNSCC patients containing 126 DM patients
(115 males and 11 females) and 487 non-DM subjects
(454 males and 33 females) were analyzed. Different
clinical factors including gender, smoking and drinking
habits, median follow-up time, tumor size, tumor site,
cell differentiation and perineural invasion were all
similar between DM and non-DM groups (Supplementary
Table S2). By using univariant analysis, cervical lymph
node status, tumor stage, perivascular permeation and
survival status were different between DM and nonDM groups as the multivariate logistical regression
analysis showed that age, survival status and lymph
node status were associated with DM (Table 1A). While
our data also revealed a hazard ratio of 2.89 for overall
mortality in DM patients (Supplementary Table S3),
DM may be an independent factor for cervical lymph
node metastasis, the most important clinical factor for
the cancer-specific survival rates (CSS) of HNSCC
patients (Table 1A). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
indicated that DM patients had worse CSS (Figure
5A) and disease-free survival rates (DFS, Figure 5B).
Interestingly, a cut-off value of 7.5% of pre-operative
hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) could also be a significant
determinant for CSS in this cohort (Figure 5C).
Further analysis for potential confounding factors for
DM-mediated mortality in HNSCC patients was also
performed and the results using multivariate logistical
regression analysis indicated that only lymph node status
is related to DM-related CSS (Table 1B); whether lymph
node status acts as an independent risk factor for DMassociated CSS was therefore examined. All participants
were classified into 4 groups based on DM and nodal

Hyperglycemia/diabetic condition facilitated
4-NQO induced tongue neoplastic progression
via activation of mTORC1 effector
Recent studies found that DM could activate the
erbB2/B3-Ras/Raf/MAPK signaling pathway which
leads to increased cell proliferation in oral tumors using a
4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4-NQO) treated rat model [50];
nevertheless, it remains unknown whether cell growth and
molecular cues of early precancerous lesions could also
be modulated under hyperglycemic/diabetic conditions.
It was previously shown that the neoplastic tumors
could be detected under treatment of 50–100 μg/ml
4-NQO in drinking water for 20–26 weeks [51], in
order to induce early cancerous lesions, 4-,8- and 12week 4-NQO treatments to stimulate precancerous oral
lesions was first applied followed by streptozotocin
(STZ) injection to elicit DM (Figure 4A). Histological
analysis, based on H&E staining and Ki67 expression,
confirmed that hyperplastic/dysplastic tongue epithelium
could be detected after 8-week and 12-week treatments
of 50 μg/ml 4NQO indicating effective 4-NQO induced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29274

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Diabetic conditions promoted oral carcinogenesis in vivo. A. Experimental scheme to establish DM mice with 4NQO

induced oral cancer. All animals were sacrificed after 20 weeks of initial 4-NQO feeding. The number of animals for each experimental
group was shown in parenthesis. Histological analysis for B. Hematoxylin & Eosin, C. Ki67 and E. mTORC1 downstream regulator
phosphorylated S6 protein showed that the more aggressive oncogenic lesions were detected in DM mice compared with time-matched
non-DM animals; D. Quantification of precancerous/tumor incidence in mice treated with STZ and 4-NQO.

status and Cox regression models showed no significant
difference between lymph node negative patients with
or without DM while DM patients with lymph nodes
status exhibited the worst CSS implying that DM and
lymph node status could synergistically regulate HNSCC
prognosis (Figure 5D).

carcinogenesis were examined. The results demonstrated
that overdosed glucose promoted HNSCC malignancy in
time-course manner via various cellular and molecular
mechanisms including modulation of cell growth,
inhibition of cell differentiation, enhanced cell motility,
increased drug resistance and upregulation of nutrientmediated oncogenic pathways. Moreover, the detection
of the more aggressive 4-NQO induced tongue neoplastic
lesions in DM mice and worsened HNSCC prognosis in
DM patients further confirmed that diabetic pathology
facilitated oral tumorigenesis. It is worth noting that
prolonged high-glucose incubation had an adverse impact
for cell growth in FaDu cells as the remaining cells
exhibited greater malignant phenotype and activated antiapoptotic molecular profile compared to cells cultivated
in low-glucose conditions, suggesting that hyperglycemia

DISCUSSION
Numbers of preclinical and epidemiological studies
showed that DM could possibly be correlated with
greater incidence and poorer prognosis in patients with
HNSCC; nevertheless, the outcomes are contradictive and
underlying mechanisms remains elusive. In the present
study, the dynamic regulations for cellular malignancy in
HNSCC cells and the impact of DM on head and neck
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29275

Oncotarget

Table 1: DM-associated Factors for HNSCC Prognosis.

A. Univariant analysis for tumor onset age, smoking and drinking habits, cervical lymph node status, cancer stage, lymphovascular
permeation and survival status were different between DM and non-DM groups. Multivariate logistical regression analysis
showed age, survival status and lymph node status were associated with DM.
Non-DM (N = 487)
N

%

DM (N = 126)
N

Total (N = 613)
N

%

P-value

P-value

OR

95% C.I.

1.04

1.02–1.06
1.65–4.05 p < 0.001

%

Gender

0.449

Male

454

93.2%

115

91.3%

569

92.8%

Female

33

6.8%

11

8.7%

44

7.2%

Tobacco smoking

0.4

Daily

290

59.5%

70

55.6%

360

58.7%

Non-smoker

197

40.5%

56

44.4%

253

41.3%

Alcohol abuse

0.6

Daily

51

10.5%

15

11.9%

66

10.8%

None or social

436

89.5%

111

88.1%

547

89.2%

Age (yr)

52.46 ± 11.30

56.42 ± 9.46

53.28 ± 11.06

Survival status

p < 0.001
p < 0.001

Dead

128

26.3%

70

55.6%

198

32.3%

2.59

Survival

359

73.7%

56

44.4%

415

67.7%

1.00

N status

p < 0.001

N=0

317

65.4%

55

43.7%

372

60.9%

1.00

N>0

168

34.6%

71

56.3%

239

39.1%

1.68

Tumor size

1.01–2.79

0.044

0.081

T1 – T3

215

44.3%

45

35.7%

260

42.6%

T4

270

55.7%

81

64.3%

351

57.4%

Tumor stage

p < 0.001

I–II

126

26.0%

14

11.1%

140

22.9%

1.00

III–IV

359

74.0%

112

88.9%

471

77.1%

1.55

0.8–3.03

0.196

0.51–1.54

0.669

Lymphovascular
permeation

0.031

Positive

81

16.9%

31

25.4%

112

18.6%

0.89

Negative

398

83.1%

91

74.6%

489

81.4%

1.00

Cell
differentation

0.572

Well

178

36.6%

42

33.3%

220

35.9%

Moderate

278

57.1%

73

57.9%

351

57.3%

Poor

31

6.4%

11

8.7%

42

6.9%

Perineural
invasion

0.306

Negative

381

78.9%

91

74.6%

472

78.0%

Positive

102

21.1%

31

25.4%

133

22.0%
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29276

Oncotarget

B. Multivariate logistical regression analysis determined the risk factors associated with mortality in DM and non-DM subjects.
DM
OR

Non-DM

95% C.I.

P-value

OR

95% C.I.

P-value

1.02–3.04

0.042

1.79–6.45

p < 0.001

N status
N=0

1.00

N>0

4.19

1.00
1.67–10.53

0.002

1.76

Tumor size
T1–T3

1.00

T4

2.22

1.00
0.81–6.1

0.12

3.40

Stage
I–II

1.00

1.00

III–IV

1.10

0.2–5.98

0.911

1.60

0.61–4.17

0.337

Positive

1.74

0.62–4.93

0.295

1.36

0.72–2.58

0.339

Negative

1.00

1.00

Well

1.00

1.00

Moderate

1.22

0.5–2.97

0.666

1.96

1.18–3.26

0.009

Poor

2.94

0.48–18.03

0.243

2.39

0.97–5.88

0.057

0.89–2.62

0.123

Lymphovascular permeation

Cell differentation

Perineural invasion
Negative

1.00

Positive

0.82

1.00
0.3–2.2

0.69

might provide a growth advantage for more aggressive
HNSCC cells over less malignant ones. In addition,
our results also indicated that hyperglycemia-mediated
promotion for HNSCC cell malignancy is reversible
while the hyperglycemia-mediated promotion for cell
motility in SAS and FaDu cells was abolished when the
cells were switched to a lower-glucose environment.
Clinically, it was shown that proper glucose control leads
to better clinical outcomes in breast cancer patients [52]
highlighting the significance to tightly control blood
glucose in DM patients with neoplastic lesions.
The Akt/AMPK-mTORC1 pathway was defined as
one of the potential glucose related regulatory signaling
cues for HNSCC cell development in the current study.
Indeed, numerous studies were reported as showing
differential anti-cancer effects of routine DM medication
metformin, an AMPK activator, on various cancer types
[53, 54]. One of the working mechanisms of anti-cancer
impacts of metformin is to specifically target metabolic
differences between normal and tumorous physiology. For
example, metformin might regulate tumorigenesis through
the systemic reduction of growth factor insulin and the
induction of energetic stress by oxidative phosphorylation
[55]. For HNSCC, metformin administration was effective
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1.53

to modulate cell growth via global protein translational
regulation in vitro as well as to inhibit mTORC1mediated cell proliferation in oral epithelial basal cells
in vivo implying its significance as anti-neoplastic and
anti-diabetic medication in DM patients with HNSCC
[56, 57]. Interestingly, a very recent study found that
metformin facilitated autophagy and triggered apoptosis
by down-regulation of oncogenic factor STAT3, one of
the glycemia-mediated regulators revealed using the
protein array in this study (Supplementary Figure S4B),
in esophageal SCC [58] further suggesting potential
interplays between different glycemic oncotargets.
In addition to Cytochrome c mediated apoptosis
and Akt/AMPK-mTORC pathways, the molecular cues
differentially expressed in HNSCC cells under low- and highglucose environments revealed by human antibody array
analysis (Supplementary Figure S4C) could also be important
glycemia-mediated malignant determinants. HSP70 is
a protein chaperon abundantly expressed in malignant
tumors and mainly assists with structural folding of newly
synthesized polypeptide, while its expression correlates
with increased cell proliferation, poor differentiation, lymph
node metastases and poor prognosis [59]. Beta-catenin, a
downstream regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, targets
29277

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Poorer survival rates in head and neck cancer patients with diabetes and lymph node metastasis. KaplanMeier survival analysis for A. cancer-specific survival rates and B. disease free survival rates between DM (N = 126) and non-DM subjects
(N = 487) (p < 0.0001) and cumulative cancer-specific survival rates of C. DM patients with differential HbA1c status (p < 0.001) and D.
groups associated with neck lymph node status in DM patients and non-DM subjects (p < 0.0001).

genes regulating cell proliferation and apoptosis thereby
mediating cancer initiation and progression. Previous
studies showed that high glucose levels could enhance
WNT/β-catenin signaling in cancer cells leading to increased
proliferation, survival and senescence bypass whereas nuclear
beta-catenin expression is correlated with tumor malignancy
in oral cancer tissues [60]. ADAMTS1 could bind and degrade
extracellular matrix components and plays an important role
in triggering pulmonary metastasis of mammary carcinoma
[61]. The detection of up-regulated ADAMTS1 expression in
high-glucose cultured HNSCC cells could therefore be one
of the molecular promoters for hyperglycemia-mediated cell
motility. Another hyperglycemia activated phospho-protein,
WNK1, could regulate multiple signaling pathways related to
cell proliferation, ion channel regulation and protein synthesis
[62]. It was shown that phosphorylated WNK1 is involved in
the regulation of GLUT1 in noninsulin target cells suggesting
its role in controlling Warburg metabolism in cancer cells
[63]. Differential phosphorylation of tumor suppressor p53
was detected in OECM1 cells treated with lower glucose.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Recent studies have shown that phosphorylation of p53
protein (s15) may play a critical role in the stabilization
and functional activation of p53 under cellular stress. The
p53 phosphorylation by the DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK) in vitro led to reduced binding to its negative
regulator, MDM2, and undergoes G1 arrest in response to
DNA damage [64]. In summary, the protein array analysis
uncovered candidate glycemia-mediated regulatory signals
in a larger-scale manner, as future validation for candidate
molecular pathways is required.
While the clinical analysis and the present finding
showed the impact of DM as a strong prognostic factor
for survival of HNSCC patients after curative surgical
intervention [16, 24], the DM-mediated modulations for
HNSCC development were also evident in a number of
previous studies. Early investigations found that the Oral
Leukoplakia (OL) prevalence was higher in DM patients
than in non-DM subjects (6.2% vs 2.2%) [65]. A larger
cohort, The Study of Health in Pomerania (SHIP), also
showed greater Hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) level in OL
29278

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

subjects revealing the potential correlation of DM and
OL prevalence [66]. In contrast, a cohort study analyzing
population with oral cancer in Kerala, India, showed no
significant association between DM and premalignant
lesion Oral Submucous Fibrosis (OSF) in men but a
correlation was detected among women suggesting a
sex-dependent manner for DM-mediated regulation of
early head and neck neoplasm development [67]. Several
DM associated clinicopathological parameters were also
reported to correlate survival rates in HNSCC subjects [68].
For example, A study from The Netherlands analyzing the
2-year, 5-year survival and age-standardized incidence of
HNSCC in the Dutch population from 1989 to 2011 showed
that incidence of oral, oropharyngeal and hypopharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma has increased and survival rates
was improved whereas the laryngeal carcinoma incidence
changes vary in gender and the survival rate remained
unchanged [69]. Another study reported that the secondary
primary malignancy occurred in patients with laryngeal and
hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma but exhibited
different pattern and survival rates indicating potential sitespecific HNSCC prognosis [70]. The site-specific variant
HNSCC prognosis was examined in our database and the
result showed no significant difference among patients with
different disease sites and their survival status (unpublished
data). In the present cohort, a number of variables including
age, tumor stage, tumor size, cell differentiation state,
vascular permeation and cervical lymph nodal status were
adjusted to eliminate potential bias in exploring independent
determinants for DM-mediated HNSCC development.
Among all candidate predictors, the lymph node status is
the only factor associated with disease prognosis indicating
that DM may affect the metastasis to some extent. Indeed,
in vitro results did show significantly greater cell motility
in HNSCC cells cultured under prolonged high-glucose
environments supporting the theory that DM could be a
risk factor for HNSCC progression and cervical lymph node
metastasis. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that the in vitro
data are not completely corresponding to in vivo or clinical
observations in the present study suggesting that, in contrast
to hyperglycemia-mediated malignancy changes, the
underlying mechanisms for DM-associated tumorigenesis
or poor prognosis in patients with HNSCCs would likely to
be more complicated.
In summary, we concluded that long-term cultivation
under high-glucose environments promoted HNSCC
malignancy both in vitro and in vivo. Clinical analysis
further supported that DM pathogenesis could be an
independent factor for worsening lymph nodal metastasis
and poorer patient survival. The overall outcomes are not
only beneficial in understanding how hyperglycaemic
insult regulates head and neck carcinogenesis but also in
supporting the requirement of tight glycemic control for
clinical practice to achieve better prognostic outcomes for
DM patients with neoplasms.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

General reagents
Primers for RT-PCR and antibodies for immu­
nostaining and Western blot analysis were summarized in
Supplementary Table S1.

Cell cultures and clinical information
Culture conditions for human HNSCC OECM1,
SAS and FaDu cells were previously described [71–73].
The clinical study was approved by the Institutional
Review Boards of MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taiwan.

Establishment of Akt/LKB1 deficient
HNSCC cells
The plasmids encoding small hairpin RNA (shRNA)
targeting Akt/LKB1 genes purchased from National RNAi
Core Facility (NRCF), Academic Sinica, Taiwan, were
amplified following the standard protocol provided NRCF.
The lentiviral vectors containing shAkt/shLKB1 and the
control shRNA targeting Luciferase (shLuc) or betagalactosidase (shLacZ), were generated in 293T cells. Akt
and LKB1 deficient SAS and FaDu cells were cultured
in medium containing 4 μg/ml puromycin for further
experiments.

2-NBDG glucose uptake assay
For glucose uptake assays, cells were grown for
24  hrs and 10 mg/ml 2-NBDG (Life Technology) was
added to the media for 1 hr and the fluorescence was
visualized under a Zeiss Axio Vert A1 fluorescence
microscope in the Instrumentation Resource Center in
National Yang-Ming University.

Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis
For cell cycle analysis, 1 × 106 cells were suspended
in PBS and fixed in 70% ethanol at −20°C for 1 hr.
Fixed cells were re-suspended in propiodium iodide (PI)
staining solution for 30 minutes at room temperature. Cell
apoptosis/necrosis was determined using Annexin V-FITC
Apoptosis Detection Kit (Strong Biotech Corporation).
The number of 1 × 106 cells was used for assay. Cells were
stained with fluorescently labeled buffer containing 1 μg/ml
PI and Annexin V FITC in dark at room temperature for
15 minutes. The cell cycle and apoptosis were analyzed
on Beckman Coulter Cytomics FC500 Flow Cytometry
at Instrumentation Resource Center, National Yang-Ming
University, Taiwan.

Migration/invasion assay
The transwell based migration/invasion assays were
performed to evaluate cell motility. As for migration assay,
29279

Oncotarget

the number of 5 × 104~105 cells were seeded onto 8 μmpore transwell chambers 16 hours before experiment.
The cells in upper chamber were incubated in serum-free
medium while the medium containing 30% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) was applied in lower chamber. To identify
migrating cells, the cells on upper side (non-migrating
cells) of membrane were removed using Q-tips as the cells
attached on the bottom of membranes were fixed in 4%
Paraformaldehyde (PFA) and stained with crystal violet
for 2 hr. For invasion assay, the similar protocol is applied.
The transwell chambers were coated with 50 μg/ml
matrigel diluted in cold serum-free medium as for 2.5 μg/ml
and the incubation time is for 24~48 hours. The number
of migrating/invading cells from 5–8 different microscopic
areas of each membrane was analyzed and the results are
presented as Mean ± SEM.

system at Instrumentation Resource Center, National YangMing University was used to visualize protein signals.

Cisplatin treatment & MTT assay
HNSCC cells were treated with various
concentrations (0 to 40 μM) of cisplatin for 48 hours and
the relative viable cells were determined by MTT method.
In brief, the drug-treated cells were washed with PBS and
incubated with 1 mg/ml 3- (4,5-cimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) dissolved in the
culture medium for 3 hours. After removal of the culture
medium, cells were then lysed with DMSO and OD 570
was measured by a microplate reader.

ALDH assay
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity
was measured using ALDEFLUOR™ Kit (Stemcell
technologies). In brief, testing cells were incubated in
Aldefluor assay buffer containing reaction substrate,
BODIPY-aminoacetaldehyde (BAAA), at 37°C for 30
min. ALDH+ cells catalyzed BAAA to its fluorescent
product, BODIPY-aminoacetate (BAA) and analyzed
using Beckman Coulter Cytomics FC500 Flow Cytometry
at Instrumentation Resource Center, National Yang-Ming
University. As for negative control, a specific ALDH
inhibitor, Diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB) was used
to define background ALDH activity.

Anchorage-independent growth assay
Cells were suspended in 1.3% methylcellulose in
culture media at a density of 1 × 105 per well and plated on
a layer of 0.9% agarose in culture media containing 15%
FBS. Cells were then cultured at 37°C incubator for 10 or
14 days. The number of colonies present with diameters
>50 μm in more than five fields per well using triplicate
experiments was counted and the results are presented as
Mean ± SEM.

Reverse transcription and polymerase chain
reactions (RT-PCR)

Human antibody array

Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified RNA
concentration was measured by NanoDrop TM 1000
spectrophotometer; reverse transcription was carried out using
SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen).
Quantitative PCR reactions containing cDNA, KAPA SYBR
FAST ABI PRISM 2x qPCR Master Mix, sense and antisense
primers were processed in StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR
System (ABI Biosystems) at Instrumentation Resource
Center, National Yang-Ming University.

The Human Cell stress and Phospho-antibody
arrays (R&D System Inc.) were used to identify potential
molecular pathways in response to glycemic challenge
following the manufacturer’s procedure. The amount of
600 μg protein lysates were used for each run and signals
were analyzed using FUJIFILM Luminescence Imaging
System LSA-4000 system at Instrumentation Resource
Center, National Yang-Ming University.

Western blot analysis

All animal studies were conducted in accordance
with the National Yang-Ming University Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). The
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO, Sigma) solution was
made freshly by dissolved in 1,2-propylene glycol (Sigma)
and added directly to water to a final concentration of 100
μg/ml. Water was changed weekly. For STZ-induced DM,
daily injection of 50mg/kg STZ was given in 6–8 weeks
old male C57/BL6 intraperitoneally for 5 consecutive
days. Control mice were injected with buffer alone. Blood
glucose levels were followed after the final injection
weekly using a glucometer (Optium Xceed, Abbott). Mice
with blood glucose levels greater than 350 mg/dl were
considered hyperglycemia.

Animal procedure

Protein lysates were isolated using RIPA lysis
buffer. For protein analysis, equal amount of proteins
were denatured by incubation at 95°C for 10 minutes and
separated in 10–12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. The proteins were
then transferred to PVDF membrane and blocked with 5%
non-fat milk in PBS-T for 1 hour at room temperature to
reduce background staining. The indicated primary antibody
was applied at 4°C for 16–20 hours and the membrane is
incubated with horseraddish peroidase (HRP) conjugated
secondary antibody in PBS-T with 5% non-fat milk for
1 hour at room temperature. The ECL based system and
FUJIFILM Luminescence Imaging System LSA-4000
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29280

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

evaluated as having DM. We divided the oral cancer
patients into 2 groups: patients with DM (DM group)
and those without DM (non-DM group). Patients were
followed for an average period of 54.5 months.

Cells were seeded on 20 × 20 mm cover slides and
cultured in indicated medium. The cells cultured on cover
slides were fixed with 4% PFA for 20–30 minutes and
incubated with PBS in 4°C until use. The primary and
secondary antibodies were sequentially applied onto the
cells and DAPI was used as counter stain to define cell
nuclei. Stainings were examined using Leica DM 6000B
fluorescence microscope or Olympus FV1000 Confocal
microscope at Instrumentation Resource Center, National
Yang-Ming University. Final images were processed
using Adobe Photoshop. For F-actin staining, cells were
treated and fixed as previous Immunohistochemistry assay.
Cellular F-actin staining has been developed as alternative
fluorescent marker for actin cytoskeleton in living cells.
The primary components of staining was phalloidin,
which was purified from a mixture of mushroom toxins
residual. F-actin staining was applied on cells than follow
with DAPI staining. For quantification of 4-NQO induced
tumor lesions, the H&E staining for at least 3 individual
tongue tissue sections apart from each other by at least
50microns from same animal were examined to determine
the tumor index. All stainings were examined using Leica
DM 6000B fluorescence microscope or Olympus FV1000
Confocal microscope at Instrumentation Resource Center,
National Yang-Ming University. Final images were
processed using Adobe Photoshop.

Statistical analysis
All analyses were performed using statistical software
program package Prism 5 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA) and
SPSS 18.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). The differences in the
clinical characteristics between two groups were analyzed by
a Chi-square test and student’s t test. Overall survival (OS)
was calculated from the day of definite surgery to the date
of death from any cause or the date of the last follow-up.
Disease free survival (DFS) was defined as the time from
the day of surgery till progression or death. OS and DFS
were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. The Cox
proportional hazards regression model was used to determine
statistical significant variables related to survival. Differences
were assumed to be significant when p-value < 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors would like to thank Professor Chang
Kuo-Wei (Department of Dentistry, National Yang-Ming
University) for the valuable comments as well as Dr Jude
Clapper (Taipei American School) and Ms Courtney Anne
Curtis for critical review and English corrections for the
manuscript.

Clinical information

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

A consecutive cohort of 869 patients from January
1st, 2002 to December 31st, 2007 was retrieved from
Taipei MacKay Memorial Hospital. Patients were
enrolled for the study when the following inclusion
criteria were met; (1) histologically diagnosed as
squamous cell carcinoma and (2) received definitive
surgical intervention as the initial treatment modality.
The exclusion criteria were: (1) recurrent or metastatic
disease, (2) previously treated with radiation or
chemotherapy, and (3) history of synchronous or
metachronous cancers. Based on these criteria, 613
patients were enrolled for subsequent analysis. Tumor
staging was defined according to the American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC 7th) system of tumor, node,
metastasis (TNM) classification. Patients with positive
cervical lymph nodes, perineural invasion, perivascular
or perilymphangenic invasion, nodal extracapsule spread
and closed margin had received post-operative adjuvant
concurrent chemo/radiation treatment according to the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)
guidelines. DM was determined by a fasting plasma
glucose (FPG) level over 126 mg/dL, a non-FPG level
over 200 mg/dl or an pre-operative HbA1c level over
6.5%. Patients received medications for diabetes and
those with a history of such drugs therapy were also
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work is supported by grants NSC-99-2628B-195-002-MY3, NSC-99-2628-B-010-013-MY3, NSC102-2314-B-010-010-, Most-103-2314-B-010-024-MY3
and MOST-102-2314-B-195-007-MY3 from Ministry
of Science and Technology, the grant MMH-10189 and
MMH-E-104-12 from Taipei MacKay Memorial Hospital
and a grant from Ministry of Education, Aiming for the
Top University Plan.

REFERENCES
1.	 Weir GC, Bonner-Weir S. Five stages of evolving beta-cell
dysfunction during progression to diabetes. Diabetes. 2004;
53:S16–21.
2.	 Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science. 1956;
123:309–314.
3.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033.
29281

Oncotarget

4.	 Dang CV. Links between metabolism and cancer. Genes &
development. 2012; 26:877–890.

18.	 Lo WL, Kao SY, Chi LY, Wong YK, Chang RC. Outcomes
of oral squamous cell carcinoma in Taiwan after surgical
therapy: factors affecting survival. Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 2003; 61:751–758.

5.	 Zhang Y, Zhou J, Wang T, Cai L. High level glucose
increases mutagenesis in human lymphoblastoid cells.
International journal of biological sciences. 2007; 3:375–379.

19.	 Lambert R, Sauvaget C, de Camargo Cancela M,
Sankaranarayanan R. Epidemiology of cancer from the oral
cavity and oropharynx. European journal of gastroenterology & hepatology. 2011; 23:633–641.

6.	 Li W, Ma Q, Li J, Guo K, Liu H, Han L, Ma G.
Hyperglycemia enhances the invasive and migratory
activity of pancreatic cancer cells via hydrogen peroxide.
Oncology reports. 2011; 25:1279–1287.

20.	 Reichart PA, Mohr U, Srisuwan S, Geerlings H,
Theetranont C, Kangwanpong T. Precancerous and other
oral mucosal lesions related to chewing, smoking and drinking habits in Thailand. Community dentistry and oral epidemiology. 1987; 15:152–160.

7.	 Muoio DM, Newgard CB. Mechanisms of disease:
Molecular and metabolic mechanisms of insulin resistance
and beta-cell failure in type 2 diabetes. Nature reviews
Molecular cell biology. 2008; 9:193–205.
8.	 Joslin EP, Lombard HL, Burrows RE, Manning MD.
Diabetes and cancer. The New England journal of medicine.
1959; 260:486–488.

21.	 Yang YY, Koh LW, Tsai JH, Tsai CH, Wong EF, Lin SJ,
Yang CC. Involvement of viral and chemical factors with
oral cancer in Taiwan. Japanese journal of clinical oncology. 2004; 34:176–183.

9.	 Giovannucci E, Harlan DM, Archer MC, Bergenstal RM,
Gapstur SM, Habel LA, Pollak M, Regensteiner JG, Yee D.
Diabetes and cancer: a consensus report. Diabetes care.
2010; 33:1674–1685.

22.	 Liu SA, Tsai WC, Wong YK, Lin JC, Poon CK, Chao SY,
Hsiao YL, Chan MY, Cheng CS, Wang CC, Wang CP.
Nutritional factors and survival of patients with oral cancer.
Head & neck. 2006; 28:998–1007.

10.	 Bansal D, Bhansali A, Kapil G, Undela K, Tiwari P. Type
2 diabetes and risk of prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of
observational studies. Prostate cancer and prostatic diseases.
2013; 16:151–158. S151.

23.	 Li WC, Lee PL, Chou IC, Chang WJ, Lin SC, Chang KW.
Molecular and cellular cues of diet-associated oral
­carcinogenesis-with an emphasis on areca-nut-induced oral
­cancer development. Journal of oral pathology & medicine :
­official ­publication of the International Association of Oral
Pathologists and the American Academy of Oral Pathology.
2015; 44:167–177.

11.	 Elena JW, Steplowski E, Yu K, Hartge P, Tobias GS,
Brotzman MJ, Chanock SJ, Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ, Arslan
AA, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Helzlsouer K, Jacobs EJ,
LaCroix A, Petersen G, Zheng W, Albanes D, et al. Diabetes
and risk of pancreatic cancer: a pooled analysis from the pancreatic cancer cohort consortium. Cancer causes & control :
CCC. 2013; 24:13–25.

24.	 Ujpal M, Matos O, Bibok G, Somogyi A, Szabo G, Suba Z.
Diabetes and oral tumors in Hungary: epidemiological correlations. Diabetes care. 2004; 27:770–774.

12.	 Setiawan VW, Hernandez BY, Lu SC, Stram DO, Wilkens LR,
Le Marchand L, Henderson BE. Diabetes and racial/ethnic
differences in hepatocellular carcinoma risk: the multiethnic
cohort. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2014; 106.

25.	 Tseng CH. Oral cancer in Taiwan: is diabetes a risk factor?
Clinical oral investigations. 2013; 17:1357–1364.
26.	 Simo R, Plana-Ripoll O, Puente D, Morros R, Mundet X,
Vilca LM, Hernandez C, Fuentes I, Procupet A, Tabernero JM,
Violan C. Impact of glucose-lowering agents on the risk of
cancer in type 2 diabetic patients. The Barcelona case-control
study. PloS one. 2013; 8:e79968.

13.	 Tseng CH. Pioglitazone and oral cancer risk in patients with
type 2 diabetes. Oral oncology. 2014; 50:98–103.
14.	 Zhou Y, Zhang X, Gu C, Xia J. Influence of diabetes mellitus on mortality in breast cancer patients. ANZ journal of
surgery. 2014.

27.	 Atchison EA, Gridley G, Carreon JD, Leitzmann MF,
McGlynn KA. Risk of cancer in a large cohort of U.S. veterans with diabetes. International journal of cancer Journal
international du cancer. 2011; 128:635–643.

15.	 Barone BB, Yeh HC, Snyder CF, Peairs KS, Stein KB, Derr RL,
Wolff AC, Brancati FL. Long-term all-cause mortality in
cancer patients with preexisting diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA : the journal of the
American Medical Association. 2008; 300:2754–2764.

28.	 Faour WH, Thibodeau JF, Kennedy CR. Mechanical stretch
and prostaglandin E2 modulate critical signaling pathways in
mouse podocytes. Cellular signalling. 2010; 22:1222–1230.

16.	 Wu CH, Wu TY, Li CC, Lui MT, Chang KW, Kao SY.
Impact of diabetes mellitus on the prognosis of patients with
oral squamous cell carcinoma: a retrospective cohort study.
Annals of surgical oncology. 2010; 17:2175–2183.

29.	 Venkatesan B, Valente AJ, Das NA, Carpenter AJ, Yoshida T,
Delafontaine JL, Siebenlist U, Chandrasekar B. CIKS (Act1
or TRAF3IP2) mediates high glucose-induced endothelial
dysfunction. Cellular signalling. 2013; 25:359–371.

17.	 De Bruijn KM, Arends LR, Hansen BE, Leeflang S, Ruiter R,
van Eijck CH. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the
association between diabetes mellitus and incidence and
mortality in breast and colorectal cancer. The British journal
of surgery. 2013; 100:1421–1429.

30.	 Brysk MM, Arany I, Brysk H, Chen SH, Calhoun KH,
Tyring SK. Gene expression of markers associated with
proliferation and differentiation in human keratinocytes
cultured from epidermis and from buccal mucosa. Archives
of oral biology. 1995; 40:855–862.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29282

Oncotarget

31.	 Hansen O, Overgaard J, Hansen HS, Overgaard M, Hoyer M,
Jorgensen KE, Bastholt L, Berthelsen A. Importance of overall
treatment time for the outcome of radiotherapy of advanced
head and neck carcinoma: dependency on tumor differentiation.
Radiotherapy and oncology : journal of the European Society
for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology. 1997; 43:47–51.

42.	 Chhabra ES, Higgs HN. The many faces of actin: matching
assembly factors with cellular structures. Nature cell biology. 2007; 9:1110–1121.
43.	 Rao JY, Hemstreet GP 3rd, Hurst RE, Bonner RB, Min KW,
Jones PL. Cellular F-actin levels as a marker for cellular
transformation: correlation with bladder cancer risk. Cancer
research. 1991; 51:2762–2767.

32.	 Heyden A, Huitfeldt HS, Koppang HS, Thrane PS, Bryne M,
Brandtzaeg P. Cytokeratins as epithelial differentiation markers in premalignant and malignant oral lesions.
Journal of oral pathology & medicine : official publication
of the International Association of Oral Pathologists and
the American Academy of Oral Pathology. 1992; 21:7–11.

44.	 Glinsky VV, Glinsky GV, Glinskii OV, Huxley VH, Turk
JR, Mossine VV, Deutscher SL, Pienta KJ, Quinn TP.
Intravascular metastatic cancer cell homotypic aggregation at the sites of primary attachment to the endothelium.
Cancer research. 2003; 63:3805–3811.

33.	 Sumitomo S, Kumasa S, Iwai Y, Mori M. Involucrin
expression in epithelial tumors of oral and pharyngeal
mucosa and skin. Oral surgery, oral medicine, and oral
pathology. 1986; 62:155–163.

45.	 Jiang X, Wang X. Cytochrome C-mediated apoptosis.
Annual review of biochemistry. 2004; 73:87–106.
46.	 Hwang H, Biswas R, Chung PS, Ahn JC. Modulation of
EGFR and ROS induced cytochrome c release by combination of photodynamic therapy and carboplatin in human
cultured head and neck cancer cells and tumor xenograft in
nude mice. Journal of photochemistry and photobiology B,
Biology. 2013; 128:70–77.

34.	 Jacobs C, Lyman G, Velez-Garcia E, Sridhar KS, Knight W,
Hochster H, Goodnough LT, Mortimer JE, Einhorn LH,
Schacter L, et al. A phase III randomized study comparing
cisplatin and fluorouracil as single agents and in combination for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 1992; 10:257–263.

47.	 Amornphimoltham P, Patel V, Sodhi A, Nikitakis NG, Sauk JJ,
Sausville EA, Molinolo AA, Gutkind JS. Mammalian target
of rapamycin, a molecular target in squamous cell carcinomas
of the head and neck. Cancer research. 2005; 65:9953–9961.

35.	 Rasheed ZA, Kowalski J, Smith BD, Matsui W. Concise
review: Emerging concepts in clinical targeting of cancer
stem cells. Stem cells. 2011; 29:883–887.

48.	 Fonseca BD, Smith EM, Lee VH, MacKintosh C, Proud CG.
PRAS40 is a target for mammalian target of rapamycin
complex 1 and is required for signaling downstream of
this complex. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2007;
282:24514–24524.

36.	 Tonigold M, Rossmann A, Meinold M, Bette M, Marken M,
Henkenius K, Bretz AC, Giel G, Cai C, Rodepeter FR,
Benes V, Grenman R, Carey TE, Lage H, Stiewe T,
Neubauer A, et al. A cisplatin-resistant head and neck
cancer cell line with cytoplasmic p53(mut) exhibits ATPbinding cassette transporter upregulation and high glutathione levels. Journal of cancer research and clinical oncology.
2014; 140:1689–1704.

49.	 Gwinn DM, Shackelford DB, Egan DF, Mihaylova MM,
Mery A, Vasquez DS, Turk BE, Shaw RJ. AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a metabolic checkpoint.
Molecular cell. 2008; 30:214–226.
50.	 Vairaktaris E, Goutzanis L, Yapijakis C, Vassiliou S,
Spyridonidou S, Vylliotis A, Nkenke E, Lazaris AC,
Strantzias P, Patsouris E. Diabetes enhances the expression
of H-ras and suppresses the expression of EGFR leading to
increased cell proliferation. Histology and histopathology.
2009; 24:531–539.

37.	 Chen YC, Chen YW, Hsu HS, Tseng LM, Huang PI, Lu KH,
Chen DT, Tai LK, Yung MC, Chang SC, Ku HH, Chiou SH,
Lo WL. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 is a putative marker
for cancer stem cells in head and neck squamous cancer.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications.
2009; 385:307–313.

51.	 Vitale-Cross L, Czerninski R, Amornphimoltham P, Patel V,
Molinolo AA, Gutkind JS. Chemical carcinogenesis models
for evaluating molecular-targeted prevention and treatment
of oral cancer. Cancer prevention research. 2009; 2:419–422.

38.	 Christiansen JJ, Rajasekaran AK. Reassessing epithelial to mesenchymal transition as a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metastasis. Cancer research. 2006;
66:8319–8326.

52.	 Richardson LC, Pollack LA. Therapy insight: Influence
of type diabetes on the development, treatment and outcomes of cancer. Nature clinical practice Oncology. 2005;
2:48–53.

39.	 Yang WH, Lan HY, Huang CH, Tai SK, Tzeng CH, Kao
SY, Wu KJ, Hung MC, Yang MH. RAC1 activation mediates Twist1-induced cancer cell migration. Nature cell biology. 2012; 14:366–374.

53.	 Blagosklonny MV. Rapalogs in cancer prevention: antiaging or anticancer? Cancer biology therapy. 2012;
13:1349–1354.

40.	 Olson MF, Sahai E. The actin cytoskeleton in cancer
cell motility. Clinical & experimental metastasis. 2009;
26:273–287.

54.	 Blagosklonny MV. TOR-centric view on insulin resistance
and diabetic complications: perspective for endocrinologists
and gerontologists. Cell Death Disease. 2013; 4:e964.

41.	 Pollard TD. The cytoskeleton, cellular motility and the
reductionist agenda. Nature. 2003; 422:741–745.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29283

Oncotarget

55.	 Pernicova I, Korbonits M. Metformin—mode of action
and clinical implications for diabetes and cancer. Nature
reviews Endocrinology. 2014; 10:143–156.

Journal of oral pathology & medicine : official publication
of the International Association of Oral Pathologists and the
American Academy of Oral Pathology. 1992; 21:364–366.

56.	 Sikka A, Kaur M, Agarwal C, Deep G, Agarwal R.
Metformin suppresses growth of human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma via global inhibition of protein
translation. Cell cycle. 2012; 11:1374–1382.

66.	 Meisel P, Dau M, Sumnig W, Holtfreter B, Houshmand
M, Nauck M, Kocher T. Association between glycemia,
serum lipoproteins, and the risk of oral leukoplakia: the
­population-based Study of Health in Pomerania (SHIP).
Diabetes care. 2010; 33:1230–1232.

57.	 Vitale-Cross L, Molinolo AA, Martin D, Younis RH,
Maruyama T, Patel V, Chen W, Schneider A, Gutkind JS.
Metformin prevents the development of oral squamous cell
carcinomas from carcinogen-induced premalignant lesions.
Cancer prevention research. 2012; 5:562–573.

67.	 Dikshit RP, Ramadas K, Hashibe M, Thomas G,
Somanathan T, Sankaranarayanan R. Association between
diabetes mellitus and pre-malignant oral diseases: a
cross sectional study in Kerala, India. International
journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2006;
118:453–457.

58.	 Feng Y, Ke C, Tang Q, Dong H, Zheng X, Lin W, Ke J,
Huang J, Yeung SC, Zhang H. Metformin promotes autophagy and apoptosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
by downregulating Stat3 signaling. Cell death & disease.
2014; 5:e1088.

68.	 Rodrigues PC, Miguel MC, Bagordakis E, Fonseca FP, de
Aquino SN, Santos-Silva AR, Lopes MA, Graner E, Salo T,
Kowalski LP, Coletta RD. Clinicopathological prognostic
factors of oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma: a retrospective study of 202 cases. International journal of oral and
maxillofacial surgery. 2014; 43:795–801.

59.	 Tavassol F, Starke OF, Kokemuller H, Wegener G, MullerTavassol CC, Gellrich NC, Eckardt A. Prognostic significance of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) in patients with oral
cancer. Head & neck oncology. 2011; 3:10.

69.	 Chu PY, Chang SY, Huang JL, Tai SK. Different patterns
of secondary primary malignancy in patients with squamous
cell carcinoma of larynx and hypopharynx. American journal of otolaryngology. 2010; 31:168–174.

60.	 Lee CH, Hung HW, Hung PH, Shieh YS. Epidermal growth
factor receptor regulates beta-catenin location, stability, and
transcriptional activity in oral cancer. Molecular cancer.
2010; 9:64.

70.	 Braakhuis BJ, Leemans CR, Visser O. Incidence and survival trends of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in
the Netherlands between 1989 and 2011. Oral oncology.
2014; 50:670–675.

61.	 Ricciardelli C, Frewin KM, Tan Ide A, Williams ED,
Opeskin K, Pritchard MA, Ingman WV, Russell DL. The
ADAMTS1 protease gene is required for mammary tumor
growth and metastasis. The American journal of pathology.
2011; 179:3075–3085.

71.	 Tseng YH, Yang CC, Lin SC, Cheng CC, Lin SH, Liu CJ,
Chang KW. Areca nut extract upregulates vimentin
by activating PI3K/AKT signaling in oral carcinoma.
Journal of oral pathology & medicine : official publication of the International Association of Oral Pathologists
and the American Academy of Oral Pathology. 2011;
40:160–166.

62.	 Moniz S, Jordan P. Emerging roles for WNK kinases in
cancer. Cellular and molecular life sciences : CMLS. 2010;
67:1265–1276.
63.	 Mendes AI, Matos P, Moniz S, Jordan P. Protein kinase
WNK1 promotes cell surface expression of glucose transporter GLUT1 by regulating a Tre-2/USP6-BUB2-Cdc16
domain family member 4 (TBC1D4)-Rab8A complex. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2010; 285:39117–39126.

72.	 Lu SY, Chang KW, Liu CJ, Tseng YH, Lu HH, Lee SY,
Lin SC. Ripe areca nut extract induces G1 phase arrests and
senescence-associated phenotypes in normal human oral
keratinocyte. Carcinogenesis. 2006; 27:1273–1284.

64.	 Shieh SY, Ikeda M, Taya Y, Prives C. DNA damageinduced phosphorylation of p53 alleviates inhibition by
MDM2. Cell. 1997; 91:325–334.

73.	 Lu HH, Kao SY, Liu TY, Liu ST, Huang WP, Chang KW,
Lin SC. Areca nut extract induced oxidative stress and
upregulated hypoxia inducing factor leading to autophagy
in oral cancer cells. Autophagy. 2010; 6:725–737.

65.	 Albrecht M, Banoczy J, Dinya E, Tamas G Jr. Occurrence
of oral leukoplakia and lichen planus in diabetes mellitus.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29284

Oncotarget

