NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2013 April 25; 153(3): 666–677. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.021.

Punctuated Evolution of Prostate Cancer Genomes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sylvan C. Baca1,2,3, Davide Prandi6, Michael S. Lawrence2, Juan Miguel Mosquera8,
Alessandro Romanel6, Yotam Drier2,7, Kyung Park8, Naoki Kitabayashi8, Theresa Y.
MacDonald8, Mahmoud Ghandi2, Eliezer Van Allen2,3, Gregory V. Kryukov1,2,13, Andrea
Sboner8,9, Jean-Philippe Theurillat2, T. David Soong9, Elizabeth Nickerson2, Daniel
Auclair2, Ashutosh Tewari10,11, Himisha Beltran12, Robert C. Onofrio2, Gunther Boysen8,
Candace Guiducci2, Christopher E. Barbieri8,11, Kristian Cibulskis2, Andrey Sivachenko2,
Scott L. Carter2, Gordon Saksena2, Douglas Voet2, Alex H Ramos1,2, Wendy Winckler2,
Michelle Cipicchio2, Kristin Ardlie2, Philip W. Kantoff1,3, Michael F. Berger14, Stacey B.
Gabriel2, Todd R. Golub2,4,5,15, Matthew Meyerson1,2,3,4, Eric S. Lander1,2,16,17, Olivier
Elemento9, Gad Getz2, Francesca Demichelis6,9,*, Mark A. Rubin8,11,*, and Levi A.
Garraway1,2,3,4,*
1Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2The

Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

3Department
4Center

for Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA

5Department
6Centre

of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA

of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA

for Integrative Biology, University of Trento, Povo, Trento, 38123, Italy

7Department

of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100,

Israel
8Department

of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
New York, 10065, USA
9Institute

for Computational Biomedicine, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York, 10065, USA
10Lefrak

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Center of Robotic Surgery & Center for Prostate Cancer Research & Clinical Care, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, 10065, USA
11Brady

Foundation Department of Urology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
10065, USA
12Department

of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, 10065, USA
13Division

of Genetics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Correspondence: levi_garraway@dfci.harvard.edu (L.A.G.), rubinma@med.cornell.edu (M.A.R.), demichelis@science.unitn.it (F.D.).
*These authors contributed equally to this work
ACCESSION NUMBERS
Binary sequence alignment/map (BAM) files from WGS data, as well as RNAseq and SNP array data were deposited in the database
of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP; phs000447.v1.p1)
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Baca et al.

Page 2

14Department

of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065,

USA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

15Howard

Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, 20815, USA

16Department
17Whitehead

of Biology, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA

Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

SUMMARY

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The analysis of exonic DNA from prostate cancers has identified recurrently mutated genes, but
the spectrum of genome-wide alterations has not been profiled extensively in this disease. We
sequenced the genomes of 57 prostate tumors and matched normal tissues to characterize somatic
alterations and to study how they accumulate during oncogenesis and progression. By modeling
the genesis of genomic rearrangements, we identified abundant DNA translocations and deletions
that arise in a highly interdependent manner. This phenomenon, which we term “chromoplexy”,
frequently accounts for the dysregulation of prostate cancer genes and appears to disrupt multiple
cancer genes coordinately. Our modeling suggests that chromoplexy may induce considerable
genomic derangement over relatively few events in prostate cancer and other neoplasms,
supporting a model of punctuated cancer evolution. By characterizing the clonal hierarchy of
genomic lesions in prostate tumors, we charted a path of oncogenic events along which
chromoplexy may drive prostate carcinogenesis.

INTRODUCTION
Though often curable at early stages, clinically advanced prostate cancer causes over
250,000 deaths worldwide annually (Jemal et al., 2011). Identifying prostate cancers that
require aggressive treatment and gaining durable control of advanced disease comprise two
pressing public health needs. A deeper understanding of the molecular genetic changes that
occur during the development of invasive and metastatic tumors may provide useful insights
into these problems.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Genetic studies of prostate cancer have revealed numerous recurrent DNA alterations that
dysregulate genes involved in prostatic development, chromatin modification, cell cycle
regulation and androgen signaling, among other processes (Baca and Garraway, 2012).
Chromosomal deletions accumulate early in prostate carcinogenesis and commonly
inactivate tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) such as PTEN, TP53 and CDKN1B (Shen and
Abate-Shen, 2010). In addition, recent exome sequencing of localized and castrationresistant prostate cancer has identified base-pair mutations in genes such as SPOP, FOXA1
and KDM6A, which implicate a range of deregulated cellular processes in prostate tumor
development (Barbieri et al., 2012; Grasso et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2011).
Structural genomic rearrangements also play a critical role in prostate carcinogenesis.
Roughly half of prostatic adenocarcinomas overexpress an oncogenic ETS transcription
factor gene (most commonly ERG) due to somatic fusion with a constitutively active or
androgen-regulated promoter (Tomlins et al., 2007; Tomlins et al., 2005). In addition,
disruptive rearrangements may inactivate TSGs such as PTEN or MAGI2 (Berger et al.,
2011). Interestingly, analysis of prostate cancer genomes has revealed complex “chains” of
rearrangements, which may result when broken DNA ends are shuffled and re-ligated to one
another in a novel configuration (Berger et al., 2011). In theory, these DNA-shuffling events
could simultaneously dysregulate multiple cancer genes, but the prevalence and
consequences of rearrangement chains could not be assessed with the small panel of tumors
sequenced.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Given the importance of structural genomic alterations in prostate cancer genesis and
progression, we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) and DNA copy number
profiling of 57 prostate cancers to define a spectrum of oncogenic events that may operate
during prostate tumor development. Through computational modeling of rearrangements
and copy number alterations, we inferred that the chromosomal disarray in a typical tumor
may accumulate over a handful of discrete events during tumor development. We employ
the term “chromoplexy” to describe this putative phenomenon of complex genome
restructuring (from the Greek pleko, meaning to weave or to braid). These complex
rearrangement events occur in the majority of prostate cancers and may commonly
inactivate multiple tumor-constraining genes in a coordinated fashion. This knowledge
informs a model for punctuated tumor evolution relevant to prostate cancer and possibly
other malignancies.

RESULTS
The Landscape of Genomic Rearrangement in Prostate Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We sequenced the genomes of 55 primary prostate adenocarcinomas and two
neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) metastases that developed following castrationbased therapy, along with paired normal tissue. We selected treatment-naïve
adenocarcinomas across a range of clinically relevant tumor grades and stages (Gleason
score 6 through 9; pathological stage pT2N0 through pT4N1; Table S1). Roughly 1.68×1013
sequenced base pairs aligned uniquely to the hg19 human reference genome (Table S2).
Sequencing of tumor and normal DNA to mean coverage depths of 61x and 34x,
respectively, revealed 356,136 somatic base-pair mutations, with an average of 33 non-silent
exonic mutations per primary tumor (Figure 1 and Table S3A). We profiled somatic DNA
copy number alterations (SCNAs) with high-density oligonucleotide arrays (Table S3B).
Additionally, we conducted transcriptome sequencing on 20 tumors, along with matched
benign prostate tissue for 16 cases.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To identify genomic rearrangements, we analyzed paired-end sequencing reads that map to
the reference genome in unexpected orientations using the dRanger algorithm (Berger et al.,
2011). We observed 5596 high-confidence rearrangements that were absent from normal
DNA in both this cohort and an extended panel of 172 non-cancerous genome sequences
(Figure 1 and Table S3C). We validated 113 rearrangements by re-sequencing and/or PCR
amplification of tumor and normal DNA (Table S3C). We did not discover novel recurrent
gene fusions, but observed several singleton events that may lead to overexpression of
oncogenes. For example, sense-preserving fusions joined NRF1 to BRAF (PR-4240) and
CRKL to the ERK-2 kinase gene MAPK1 (P04-1084; Figure S1A), leaving the kinase
domains of BRAF and MAPK1 primarily intact. Several genes underwent recurrent
disruptive rearrangements with potential biological consequence, such as PTEN, RB1,
GSK3B and FOXO1 (Figure S1 and Table S4). Thus, rearrangement of these genes may
contribute to the development of localized prostate cancer.
DNA Deletions and Rearrangements Reveal Signatures of Complex Genome-Restructuring
Events
Rearrangements involving cancer gene loci often occurred in the context of a “chain”, in
which the two rearrangement breakpoints map to the reference genome near breakpoints
from other rearrangements (Figure 2A, left). Such characteristic breakpoint distributions
were observed in our initial study of seven prostate cancer genomes (Berger et al., 2011) and
appear to reflect collections of broken DNA ends that are shuffled and ligated to one another
in an aberrant configuration. Given the involvement of prostate cancer genes in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 4

rearrangement chains, we set out to survey chained rearrangements systematically to clarify
their prevalence and potential biological consequences.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We first determined whether additional chains could be identified by integrative analysis of
chromosomal deletions and rearrangements. Although rearrangement chains may arise with
minimal loss of genetic material, substantial DNA deletions were often evident at the fusion
junctions of chained rearrangements (Figure 2A, right). When these deletions are overlaid
with somatic rearrangement locations on the reference genome, the deletions create
“bridges” that span the sequence between breakpoints from two different fusions (Figure
2A, bottom right). In all informative tumors in our cohort, the breakpoints at either end of a
deletion were more often fused to novel partners rather than to each other (thus creating
“deletion bridges”, rather than “simple deletions”; Figure S2A). Importantly, this
observation indicates that the many rearrangements demonstrating DNA loss near a
breakpoint may be linked by deletion bridges to additional rearrangements in a chain.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We next considered whether rearrangements in a chain might arise independently of one
another, for instance, at loci that are predisposed toward fusion due to DNA secondary
structure or nuclear proximity (Burrow et al., 2010; De and Michor, 2011). To investigate
this, we created a probabilistic model for the independent generation of detectible
rearrangements across the genome (Figure S2B). Using this model, we calculated the
probability that any pair of neighboring DNA breakpoints X and Y would arise
independently of each other (PXY) based on (1) their reference genome distance and (2) the
local rate of rearrangements observed in our tumor panel (Figure 2B). As a control, we
created ten simulated genomes for each tumor, with rearrangement locations matched for
chromosome, local gene expression levels, sequence guanine/cytosine content and DNA
replication timing, among other factors (Supplemental Experimental Procedures). In
addition, we generated “scrambled” genomes by combining rearrangements from distinct
tumors, preserving locus-specific effects that may promote double strand breakage. The
observed rearrangements, but not the simulated or scrambled data, showed marked deviation
from the independent model (Figure S2C) and statistical enhancement of chain-like patterns
(Figure 2B). For 50% of rearrangements, the reference genome locations of both breakpoints
were nearer to breakpoints of additional rearrangements than would be expected by chance
(p < 10−4 for observed versus simulated or scrambled PXY values). To the extent that our
model correctly predicts the genomic distribution of independent rearrangements, these
results suggest that rearrangement chains are unlikely to arise from independent events, thus
raising the hypothesis that they occur by a coordinated process.
“Chromoplexy” Generates Chained Chromosomal Rearrangements and Deletions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Having identified chained patterns of rearrangements that may result from interdependent
alterations, we created an algorithm called ChainFinder to search for such events
systematically (Figures 3A and S3). ChainFinder employs a statistically based search rooted
in graph theory to identify genomic rearrangements and associated deletions that deviate
significantly from our independent model described above, and thus appear to have arisen in
an interdependent fashion (Supplemental Experimental Procedures).
We used ChainFinder to survey our panel of prostate tumors for rearrangement chains.
Strikingly, this analysis revealed numerous chains involving widely variable numbers of
rearrangements. Some chains involved only three fusions, while others contained more than
forty rearrangements that wove together five or more chromosomes (Table S5A; Figure 3B
and S3C). We have termed the putative process of genomic restructuring that produces these
complex chains “chromoplexy” (from the Greek pleko, meaning “to weave” or “to braid”).
Chromoplectic chains of five or more rearrangements (ten or more breakpoints) were
detected in 50 out of 57 tumors (88%; Table S5B and Figure S3C), while 36 tumors (63%)
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

contained two or more such chains. Overall, 39% of rearrangements participated in chains,
while ChainFinder detected chains in only 2.8% and 0.2% of rearrangements from simulated
or scrambled genomes, respectively (Figure 3C–D). Thus, our statistical analysis of
breakpoint distributions suggests that chromoplexy frequently generates multiple structural
alterations in a coordinated fashion.
We noted profound phenotypic differences in chromoplexy in subsets of prostate cancers.
Chromoplexy in tumors harboring oncogenic ETS fusions (ETS+) produced significantly
more inter-chromosomal rearrangements than ETS− tumors (p < 10−4) and involved a
greater maximum number of chromosomes in a single event (p = 0.009; Figure 4A–C).
Interestingly, oncogenic ERG fusions frequently arose in the setting of chromoplexy (15 of
26 cases, 58%). Given that fusion of TMPRSS2 and ERG occurs in the setting of androgen
receptor-driven transcription (Haffner et al., 2010), the intricate chains in ETS+ tumors
could reflect DNA injury at transcriptional hubs occupied by loci from multiple
chromosomes. Consistent with this possibility, chromoplexy in ETS-positive nuclei
primarily affected regions of the genome that are highly expressed in prostate tumors
(Figure 4D) and that co-localize in interphase nuclei (Figure S4A). Thus, chromoplexy in
ETS+ tumors appears to reflect a distinct process of genome restructuring that may be
coupled to transcriptional processes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast, chromoplexy in a subset of ETS-negative cancers resembled chromothripsis
(Rausch et al., 2012; Stephens et al., 2011), a process of chromatin shattering yielding
extensive DNA rearrangement, often of one or two focal chromosomal regions. In particular,
seven ETS− tumors contained up to seven-fold more rearrangements than the whole-cohort
average (Figure S4B). These tumors harbored focal deletions or disruptive rearrangements
involving the chromatin-modifying enzyme gene CHD1, a putative tumor-suppressor gene
that may regulate genomic stability (Huang et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2012). The
rearrangements in CHD1del tumors were predominantly intra-chromosomal both within
chains (p = 2×10−4) and overall (p = 4×10−4; Figure S4C). Moreover, the rearrangements in
CHD1del samples arose in late-replicating DNA with low guanine and cytosine content
(Figure S4B), generally corresponding to gene-poor heterochromatin. An extended cohort of
199 prostate adenocarcinomas revealed that CHD1 loss was associated with an increased
number of recurrent SCNAs (p = 1.5×10−8) (Figure S4C). Given the postulated roles of
CHD1 in genome stability and maintenance of chromatin architecture (Gaspar-Maia et al.,
2009), these findings raise the possibility that CHD1 deletion may contribute to the
distinctive patterns of genomic instability observed in CHD1del tumors.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We investigated whether chromoplexy is unique to prostate cancer by analyzing a panel of
59 additional tumor genomes including melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma, and breast adenocarcinoma (Table S5B and Figure S3C).
Every tumor type demonstrated multiple instances of chains involving 5 or more
rearrangements. Thus, a small number of chromoplectic events may account for the wide
array of rearrangements and deletions in several common cancers.
Chromoplexy Commonly Dysregulates Cancer Genes
To assess the role of chromoplexy in prostate cancer development, we examined the
genomic regions altered by deletion or disruptive rearrangements in the context of chains.
Using a list of 17 potential prostate tumor suppressor genes from the KEGG database
(Kanehisa et al., 2012), we found that 26 of the 57 tumors (46%) have either deletion or
rearrangement of at least one gene in a chain of three or more rearrangements (Table S5C).
Inclusion of the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and 10 putative prostate cancer genes added 9 more
samples. Several cancer genes were recurrently deleted or rearranged by chromoplexy,
including PTEN (9 cases), NKX3-1 (8 cases), CDKN1B (3 cases), TP53 (4 cases), and RB1
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 6

(2 cases). Thus, chromoplexy may conceivably influence prostate carcinogenesis by
disrupting tumor suppressor genes and creating oncogenic fusions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The concurrent shuffling and deletion of multiple regions across the genome that appears to
underlie chromoplexy could simultaneously inactivate tumor suppressor genes that are
geographically distant from each other (i.e. on separate chromosomes). We noted several
examples where multiple cancer genes were apparently disrupted by a single instance of
chromoplexy. For instance, a chain of 27 rearrangements across 6 chromosomes included
the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion (21q) as well as a disruptive rearrangement of the prostate tumor
suppressor gene SMAD4 (18q) (Ding et al., 2011) (Figures 5A and S5). In a second
example, the adjacent CDKN1B/ETV6 tumor suppressor genes (12p) and the ETV3 locus
(1q) were lost in the context of deletion bridges within one chain (Figure 5B). Additional
instances of chromoplexy disrupted interacting genes in the same pathway: for instance, codeletion of PIK3R1 (5q) with PTEN (10q) and TP53 (17p) with CHEK2 (22q) occurred in
two chains (Table S5C). Thus, chromoplexy may simultaneously dysregulate multiple
cancer genes across the genome. Such events may provide selective advantages to incipient
cancer cells, particularly given that the loss of some TSGs promotes prostate cancer only in
the context of specific accompanying molecular lesions (Chen et al., 2005).
Clonal Evolution Reveals Paths of Prostate Cancer Progression

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To provide additional insight into the genomic evolution of prostate tumors, we analyzed the
clonal status of mutations and deletions in our cohort. Using an approach related to
previously described methods (Carter et al., 2012; Nik-Zainal et al., 2012), we exploited the
extensive germline SNP genotype data provided by WGS to assess tumor purity and the
clonal status of genomic lesions (Figures 6A and S6). Our estimates of tumor purity based
on WGS matched those produced by ABSOLUTE analysis of SNP array data (Carter et al.,
2012) (R2 = 0.99; p<10−4), with the exception of two samples where admixed normal DNA
was detected only from sequencing data (Table S1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We first compared the clonality of deletions involving prostate cancer genes, reasoning that
lesions that arise early in tumorigenesis or that foster rapid outgrowth would tend to be
clonal, while late-arising deletions would more often be subclonal. Several common
deletions were strictly clonal, including NKX3-1 and the 3Mb region of chromosome 21q
that is frequently deleted to produce the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion (Perner et al., 2006) (Figure
6B and Figure S6). These events are among the earliest detectible alterations in prostate
cancer and are frequently observed in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), a prostate
cancer precursor lesion (Emmert-Buck et al., 1995; Perner et al., 2007). By contrast,
deletions of PTEN were often subclonal (p = 10−5 for comparison with NKX3-1 deletion
clonality), as were CDKN1B deletions (Figure 6C). This finding suggests that PTEN and
CDKN1B inactivation promotes the early progression of prostate cancer, consistent with the
association of these events with higher-stage disease (Barbieri et al., 2012; Halvorsen et al.,
2003).
We next used our clonality assessments to deconvolve the sequence of oncogenic events that
gives rise to a typical prostate tumor. Reasoning that clonal alterations must originate prior
to subclonal alterations within the same tumor, we examined pairs of genes that were deleted
in the same sample across multiple tumors to determine the directionality of the clonalsubclonal hierarchy (Figure 6D). Where possible, we confirmed these relationships in
independent exome-sequenced tumors. A “consensus path” of progression emerged,
beginning with events including deletion of NKX3-1 or FOXP1 and fusion of TMPRSS2
and ERG. These lesions may disrupt normal prostate epithelial differentiation (Bhatia-Gaur
et al., 1999; Sun et al., 2008) and effect other oncogenic perturbations. Thereafter, lesions in
CDKN1B or TP53 accumulate; these alterations may lead to enhanced proliferation,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

genomic instability and/or evasion of apoptosis. Finally, loss of PTEN may provide a gating
event in the development of aggressive prostate cancers. A similar assessment of point
mutation clonality (Figure 6B, lower) revealed higher overall rates of subclonal events, with
the exception of early mutations as in SPOP and FOXA1. Together, these results imply that
prostate carcinogenesis favors the dysregulation of cancer genes in defined sequences, as has
been suggested by studies of developing tumors in colon cancer (Fearon and Vogelstein,
1990).
Next, we investigated whether chromoplexy might continue after cancer initiation, and
thereby contribute to the progression of a tumor down an oncogenic path. Interestingly,
several chains appeared to involve strictly subclonal deletion bridges (Figure S7A),
indicating that tumors may sustain multiple rounds of chromoplexy. Together with the
observation that chromoplexy may affect both early and late genes in the consensus path
(e.g., ERG and PTEN) these findings suggest that chromoplexy also occurs in tumor
subclones that emerge later during cancer evolution.
Prostate Cancer Genomic Derangement Increases with Histological Grade

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, we considered whether tumors with high-grade histology (indicative of high clinical
risk) might occupy positions further along the consensus path. To this end, we quantified
recurrent SCNAs in each genome by counting amplifications and deletions that overlapped
with regions of significant SNCAs identified by GISTICv2 analysis (e.g., the TP53 and
PTEN loci) across 199 tumors reported here and in a previous study (Barbieri et al., 2012;
Mermel et al., 2011). Tumors with predominantly Gleason score (GS) 4 histology were
significantly enriched for recurrent SCNAs compared to GS 3 tumors (p = 0.0059; Figure
6E) beyond the overall extent of SCNAs, despite similar purity of cancer DNA and
mutational burden between the two groups. Altogether, these findings suggest that structural
alterations affecting cancer genes, many of which result from chromoplexy, may contribute
to the aggressive clinical behavior of high-grade prostate tumors.

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We have characterized somatic alterations across the genomes of 57 prostate tumors. By
systematically profiling rearrangements and copy number alterations, we identified
chromoplexy as a common process by which multiple geographically-distant genomic
regions may be disrupted at once. Like other classes of complex genomic alterations
(Stephens et al. 2011; Forment et al. 2012), chromoplexy was inferred from computational
modeling, and its mechanistic underpinnings will need to be addressed experimentally.
Chromoplexy is evident in several solid tumor types and in the majority of prostate cancers.
In multiple instances, chromoplexy altered more than one cancer gene coordinately. In the
future, systematic assessment of chromoplexy from WGS data could reveal groups of cancer
gene alterations that confer a selective advantage when sustained all at once, but activate
tumor-suppressing safeguards if sustained individually.
Although chained rearrangements could theoretically arise over multiple cellular generations
by a “sequential-dependent” mechanism, where the occurrence of each subsequent event
depends on the presence of a prior event (Figure S7B), such a mechanism seems unlikely. In
particular, a sequential-dependent model fails to account for the many complete or “closed”
chains we detected. For a closed chain to arise in a sequential-dependent manner, multiple
junctions from ancestral somatic fusions would have to be re-broken precisely and fused to
each other (Figure S7B) to complete the chain. Even if breakpoints in a chain could only
fuse to one another, to generate the 121 observed closed chains in a sequential-dependent
process would require immensely elevated rates of rearrangement in a focused region of the
genome (up to ~103 times the maximum observed rate; Figure S7C–D). While we cannot
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 8

exclude this possibility, plausible biological mechanism(s) could parsimoniously account for
chained rearrangements within a single cell cycle, as discussed below.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A unifying feature of chromoplectic alterations is that they occur in a non-independent
fashion; however multiple mechanisms may account for chromoplexy. Along these lines,
our analyses have revealed distinctive patterns of chromoplexy in ETS−, CHD1del tumors.
Tumors with deletion of CHD1 demonstrated an excess of intrachromosomal chained
rearrangements and gene deletions, with DNA breakpoints enriched in GC-poor, latereplicating and non-expressed DNA. Previous reports have proposed that similar patterns
may result from major DNA damaging events within heterochromatic nuclear compartments
(Drier et al 2013). These tumors showed abundant, clustered rearrangements often affecting
only one or two chromosomes with two alternating copy number states, perhaps indicating a
chromothripsis-like process.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast, chromoplexy in ETS+ tumors differed in the aggregate from chromothripsis in
several critical ways. For example, single events joined DNA from dispersed regions of six
or more chromosomes in multiple tumors, whereas chromothripsis frequently involves focal
rearrangement of one or two chromosomes (Forment et al., 2012). Overall, chromoplexy
appears more prevalent in ETS+ prostate cancer than chromothripsis is in any neoplasm
(Stephens et al., 2011, Forment et al., 2012). Chromoplexy frequently involves fewer
rearrangements than the “catastrophic” chromothripsis defined by Stephens et al., but may
continue throughout tumor development. Our analysis of breakpoint locations in ETS+
tumors suggests that chromoplexy in this setting may be linked to proposed transcriptional
DNA-damaging processes (Lin et al., 2009), potentially related to androgen receptor
signaling. We stress that this hypothesis awaits experimental validation, which could involve
FISH or chromosome conformation capture (3C) before and after inducing a predicted colocalizing event (e.g., testosterone exposure in prostate epithelial cells). Our findings align
with the observation that ERG-overexpressing cancer cells accumulate DNA damage and
are sensitive to poly ADP-ribose polymerase inhibition (Brenner et al., 2011). Chromoplexy
is active prior to ETS gene fusions, however, and generated ERG fusions in many instances.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whole genome analysis also clarified the chronology of oncogenic events in prostate cancer
progression, driven in part by chromoplexy. Genome-wide sequence coverage of germline
SNPs allowed us to identify DNA lesions that arose after the founder clone was established.
Subsequently, we demonstrated a progression of events within primary tumors that expands
upon array-based SCNA co-occurrence studies (Demichelis et al., 2009). A consensus path
of tumor evolution begins with events such as loss of NKX3-1 or fusion of TMPRSS2 and
ERG. The path proceeds with the loss of CDKN1B, TP53, PTEN, and other progressionassociated lesions. We found that the histological grade of cancer may partially reflect its
progression down this path.
A Continuum Model for Tumor Evolution
Tumorigenesis is classically understood to progress by a gradual accumulation of oncogenic
alterations in the genome of a pre-cancerous cell. This textbook view was recently
challenged by the discovery of chromothripsis, in which catastrophic rearrangements are
incurred by “shattering” and reassembly of focal regions of the genome (Forment et al.,
2012; Rausch et al., 2012; Stephens et al., 2011).
We propose an expanded model for the evolution of prostate cancer, which may also apply
to other cancers (Figure 7). As classically understood, passenger and driver alterations can
accumulate in a cancer genome gradually over numerous cell divisions, via point mutations,
simple translocations and focal copy-number alterations. On the opposite end of the
spectrum, extreme instances of chromothripsis can induce massive (albeit relatively
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

localized) DNA damage at once, often with oncogenic consequences (Rausch et al., 2012;
Stephens et al., 2011). Between these two extremes lies a broad continuum across which
chromoplexy may often restructure cancer genomes. We propose that oncogenic events
along this continuum reflect “punctuated” tumor evolution, drawing an analogy from the
observation that “punctuated” evolution of species may occur rapidly between periods of
relative mutational equilibrium (Gould, 1977). By analogy, a tumor genome may sustain
considerable damage over several sequential and punctuated events. Importantly, this
framework accords with the observation that chromoplexy events (1) are common, (2) may
involve a wide-ranging number of rearrangements, and (3) may continue after cancerinitiating lesions such as NKX3-1 deletion (Figure S7).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A cancer might operate at any point along the continuum of progression at a given time.
Tumors that develop primarily at the “catastrophic” end may require fewer events and could
progress more quickly, because each such event could disrupt multiple cancer-constraining
processes. At the same time, catastrophic events that cover diffuse genomic territory are
more liable to disrupt essential or beneficial genes, thus imparting a selective disadvantage
to (pre)malignant clones that sustain such events. Consequently, the model predicts that
survivable chromoplexy (particularly near the catastrophic regime) is likely to involve
oncogenic alterations that compensate for the incidental inactivation of essential genes
(Figure 7, bottom). This prediction accords with the observation that most tumors show
disruption of one or more putative prostate cancer genes within a chain. Moreover, this
model raises the possibility that disruption of putative cancer genes by chromoplexy may
heighten the probability that such genes represent “driver” events for that particular tumor.
If so, this framework may portend important implications for the use of whole-genome
sequencing in diagnostic and clinical studies.
In summary, this study highlights the potential for WGS data to capture aspects of the
“molecular archeology” of cancer development that are missed by gene- or exome-level
sequencing. The characterization of clonal progression and chromoplexy in emerging large
panels of cancer genomes may provide insights about cancer initiation and progression, with
implications for cancer detection, prevention and therapy.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Sample Acquisition

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Prostate tumors were obtained under Institutional Review Board-approved protocols from
consented patients undergoing radical prostatectomy or excision of soft-tissue metastases
(PR-4240 and PR-7520). Normal DNA derived either from histologically benign prostate
tissue or peripheral blood cells. Specimens were collected at Weill Cornell Medical College
(WCMC) by A.T. and at various medical centers in Western Australia in conjunction with
Uropath Pty LTD (Perth, Australia).
DNA Library Construction and WGS
Tissue cores were extracted from cancerous foci of frozen or paraffin-embedded tumor
nodules. After tissue homogenization and lysis, DNA was extracted and assessed for quality
(Berger et al., 2011). Following library construction, paired-end sequencing reads of 101
nucleotides were generated with an Illumina GAIIx instrument. Sequencing data were
aligned to the hg19 human reference genome using BWA (Li and Durbin, 2009) and
processed by the Picard pipelines (http://picard.sourceforge.net).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 10

Detection and Validation of Genomic Alterations

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Somatic point mutations, small indels and rearrangements were detected by comparison of
tumor and paired normal genome sequences using MuTect (Cibulskis et al. 2013) and
Indelocator Sivachenko et al., in preparation) (www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/) and
dRanger (Berger et al., 2011), respectively. dRanger was used as described previously,
(Berger et al., 2011), except that high-confidence rearrangements required support from four
or more high-quality sequencing reads and were filtered against a panel of 176 normal tissue
genomes. Somatic fusion breakpoints were located at basepair resolution where possible
with the BreakPointer algorithm (Drier et al., 2013). Paired-end reads from rearrangements
affecting cancer genes or participating in long chains were inspected manually. A subset of
rearrangements was validated by resequencing and/or PCR amplification of tumor and
normal DNA.
Chromosomal Copy Number Profiling
Segmented copy number profiles were generated from Affymetrix SNP 6.0 human SNP
microarray (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) data as described previously (Barbieri et al.,
2012). Sites of significant recurrent copy number alterations were identified by GISTICv2
(Mermel et al. 2011), with a log2 threshold of +/− 0.1 for amplification/deletion signals.
Identification of Chained Rearrangements and Deletions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The ChainFinder algorithm was implemented to detect chromoplexy from the combined
analysis of somatic fusion breakpoints and segmented copy number profiles. ChainFinder
considers breakpoints as nodes in a graph that are connected by edges corresponding to (a)
fusions, (b) deletion bridges or (c) breakpoint adjacency that deviates significantly from the
null model of independent breakpoints (Figure S3). Over several steps, the algorithm
evaluates potential deletion bridges and adjacently mapping breakpoints to assign
rearrangements to chains.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

First, ChainFinder identifies potential deletion bridges by searching for distinct breakpoints
that plausibly correspond to the boundaries of deletion events observed in copy number
profiles. Next, a statistical analysis of all nearest-neighbor breakpoint pair distances
identifies chain-like distributions of rearrangements. The local rate of expected independent
breaks per nucleotide (μ) is calculated for 1Mb genomic windows based on (1) the
rearrangement frequency within the window across a panel of tumor genomes and (2) the
total number of breaks in the genome under consideration. Given μ, ChainFinder models the
probability PXY of observing two independently arising fusion breakpoints within the
observed distance L of each other on the reference genome (i.e., the p-value under the null
model of independent breaks):

If PXY is rejected with a false-discovery rate of 10−2 (Benjamini, 1995), the corresponding
breakpoints are linked in a chain.
The graph is also searched for closed paths (cycles) through nodes and connecting edges.
For each cycle, all possible scenarios are considered by which the contained breakpoints
could have arisen independently. Breakpoints in the cycle are assigned to the same chain if p
values for every scenario can be rejected with a family-wise error rate (FWER) below 10−2.
Lastly, the graph is finalized by assigning additional sets of edges corresponding to deletion
bridges that could not be assigned uniquely in the first step. The search maximizes the

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

number of deletion bridges in cycles to find solutions that account most fully for the overlap
of fusion breakpoints with boundaries of deletion segments on the reference genome. A
complete description of ChainFinder is provided in the Supplemental Experimental
Procedures. ChainFinder can be downloaded at www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/
chainfinder.
Assessment of Stromal DNA Admixture and Clonality
We used the sequence coverage from germline SNPs at sites of somatic deletion to assess
levels of stromal DNA admixture in sequenced samples and to infer the clonal status of
mutations and deletions by applying CLONET (CLONality Estimate in Tumors;
Supplemental Experimental Procedures). We assessed the allelic fractions of SNP reads
within hemizygously-deleted DNA to determine the apparent proportions of DNA from
normal cells at the deleted locus. Deletions with the lowest apparent proportions of normal
DNA reads were considered clonal. For all other deletions, we estimated the percentage of
tumor cells harboring the deletion to infer the clonality of the lesion using simulation-based
error estimates. For point mutations, the tumor allelic fraction was corrected for stromal
DNA admixture and subclonality was inferred when the corrected fraction differed
significantly from the expected value. Lesions present in 80% of cancer cells or less were
considered subclonal.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Statistical Analyses
Quantitative comparisons of groups (e.g. numbers of rearrangements or SCNAs) were
conducted with the rank-sum Mann-Whitney test, unless indicated otherwise. Box plots
indicate median values and middle quartiles.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We thank the members of the Broad Institute Genome Sequencing Platform for their part in this work. This study
was supported by the US National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) Large Scale Sequencing Program
(U54 HG003067 to the Broad Institute, E.S.L.), the Kohlberg Foundation (L.A.G.), the Starr Cancer Consortium
(M.A.R., F.D., A.T., G.G., and L.A.G), the Prostate Cancer Foundation (M.A.R.), US Department of Defense
Synergy Awards (PC101020 to F.D., L.A.G. and M.A.R.) and New Investigator Award (PC094516 to F.D.), the
Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center Prostate Cancer SPORE (US National Institutes of Health (NIH) P50
CA090381), the US National Cancer Institute, Early Detection Research Network (U01CA111275 and NCI EDRN
to F.D. and M.A.R.), the US National Cancer Institute (R01 CA125612 to F.D. and M.A.R.), the Fondazione
Trentina per la Ricerca sui Tumori (F.D.) the Swiss Science Foundation (PASMP3_134379/1 to J.-P.T.), the
National Institute of General Medical Sciences award number T32GM007753 (S.C.B.) and a US NIH Director’s
New Innovator Award (DP2OD002750 to L.A.G.). L.A.G. is an equity holder and consultant in Foundation
Medicine, a consultant to Novartis and Millenium/Takeda, and a recipient of a grant from Novartis.

References
Baca SC, Garraway LA. The genomic landscape of prostate cancer. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne).
2012; 3:69. [PubMed: 22649426]
Barbieri CE, Baca SC, Lawrence MS, Demichelis F, Blattner M, Theurillat JP, White TA, Stojanov P,
Van Allen E, Stransky N, et al. Exome sequencing identifies recurrent SPOP, FOXA1 and MED12
mutations in prostate cancer. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:685–689. [PubMed: 22610119]
Benjamini, YaHY. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple
testing. J Roy Statist Soc. 1995; 57:289–300.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Berger MF, Lawrence MS, Demichelis F, Drier Y, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko AY, Sboner A, Esgueva
R, Pflueger D, Sougnez C, et al. The genomic complexity of primary human prostate cancer.
Nature. 2011; 470:214–220. [PubMed: 21307934]
Bhatia-Gaur R, Donjacour AA, Sciavolino PJ, Kim M, Desai N, Young P, Norton CR, Gridley T,
Cardiff RD, Cunha GR, et al. Roles for Nkx3.1 in prostate development and cancer. Genes Dev.
1999; 13:966–977. [PubMed: 10215624]
Burrow AA, Marullo A, Holder LR, Wang YH. Secondary structure formation and DNA instability at
fragile site FRA16B. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:2865–2877. [PubMed: 20071743]
Carter SL, Cibulskis K, Helman E, McKenna A, Shen H, Zack T, Laird PW, Onofrio RC, Winckler W,
Weir BA, et al. Absolute quantification of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat
Biotechnol. 2012; 30:413–421. [PubMed: 22544022]
Chen Z, Trotman LC, Shaffer D, Lin HK, Dotan ZA, Niki M, Koutcher JA, Scher HI, Ludwig T,
Gerald W, et al. Crucial role of p53-dependent cellular senescence in suppression of Pten-deficient
tumorigenesis. Nature. 2005; 436:725–730. [PubMed: 16079851]
Cibulskis K, Lawrence MS, Carter SL, Sivachenko A, Jaffe D, Sougnez C, Gabriel S, Meyerson M,
Lander ES, Getz G. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous
cancer samples. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:213–219. [PubMed: 23396013]
De S, Michor F. DNA replication timing and long-range DNA interactions predict mutational
landscapes of cancer genomes. Nat Biotechnol. 2011; 29:1103–1108. [PubMed: 22101487]
Demichelis F, Setlur SR, Beroukhim R, Perner S, Korbel JO, Lafargue CJ, Pflueger D, Pina C, Hofer
MD, Sboner A, et al. Distinct genomic aberrations associated with ERG rearranged prostate
cancer. Gene Chromosome Canc. 2009; 48:366–380.
Ding Z, Wu CJ, Chu GC, Xiao Y, Ho D, Zhang J, Perry SR, Labrot ES, Wu X, Lis R, et al. SMAD4dependent barrier constrains prostate cancer growth and metastatic progression. Nature. 2011;
470:269–273. [PubMed: 21289624]
Drier Y, Lawrence MS, Carter SL, Stewart C, Gabriel SB, Lander ES, Meyerson M, Beroukhim R,
Getz G. Somatic rearrangements across cancer reveal classes of samples with distinct patterns of
DNA breakage and rearrangement-induced hypermutability. Genome Res. 2013; 23:228–235.
[PubMed: 23124520]
Emmert-Buck MR, Vocke CD, Pozzatti RO, Duray PH, Jennings SB, Florence CD, Zhuang Z,
Bostwick DG, Liotta LA, Linehan WM. Allelic loss on chromosome 8p12–21 in microdissected
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Cancer Res. 1995; 55:2959–2962. [PubMed: 7606709]
Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell. 1990; 61:759–767.
[PubMed: 2188735]
Forment JV, Kaidi A, Jackson SP. Chromothripsis and cancer: causes and consequences of
chromosome shattering. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:663–670. [PubMed: 22972457]
Gaspar-Maia A, Alajem A, Polesso F, Sridharan R, Mason MJ, Heidersbach A, Ramalho-Santos J,
McManus MT, Plath K, Meshorer E, et al. Chd1 regulates open chromatin and pluripotency of
embryonic stem cells. Nature. 2009; 460:863–868. [PubMed: 19587682]
Gould SJ, Eldrige Niles. Punctuated equilibria: the tempo and mode of evolution reconsidered.
Paleobiology. 1977; 3:115–151.
Grasso CS, Wu YM, Robinson DR, Cao X, Dhanasekaran SM, Khan AP, Quist MJ, Jing X, Lonigro
RJ, Brenner JC, et al. The mutational landscape of lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Nature. 2012; 487:239–243. [PubMed: 22722839]
Halvorsen OJ, Haukaas SA, Akslen LA. Combined loss of PTEN and p27 expression is associated
with tumor cell proliferation by Ki-67 and increased risk of recurrent disease in localized prostate
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:1474–1479. [PubMed: 12684422]
Huang S, Gulzar ZG, Salari K, Lapointe J, Brooks JD, Pollack JR. Recurrent deletion of CHD1 in
prostate cancer with relevance to cell invasiveness. Oncogene. 2011
Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D. Global cancer statistics. CA-Cancer J Clin.
2011; 61:69–90. [PubMed: 21296855]
Kanehisa M, Goto S, Sato Y, Furumichi M, Tanabe M. KEGG for integration and interpretation of
large-scale molecular data sets. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:D109–114. [PubMed: 22080510]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kumar, a; White, Ta; MacKenzie, aP; Clegg, N.; Lee, C.; Dumpit, RF.; Coleman, I.; Ng, SB.;
Salipante, SJ.; Rieder, MJ., et al. Exome sequencing identifies a spectrum of mutation frequencies
in advanced and lethal prostate cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108
Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168]
Lin C, Yang L, Tanasa B, Hutt K, Ju BG, Ohgi K, Zhang J, Rose DW, Fu XD, Glass CK, et al.
Nuclear receptor-induced chromosomal proximity and DNA breaks underlie specific
translocations in cancer. Cell. 2009; 139:1069–1083. [PubMed: 19962179]
Liu W, Lindberg J, Sui G, Luo J, Egevad L, Li T, Xie C, Wan M, Kim ST, Wang Z, et al.
Identification of novel CHD1-associated collaborative alterations of genomic structure and
functional assessment of CHD1 in prostate cancer. Oncogene. 2012; 31:3939–3948. [PubMed:
22139082]
Mermel CH, Schumacher SE, Hill B, Meyerson ML, Beroukhim R, Getz G. GISTIC2.0 facilitates
sensitive and confident localization of the targets of focal somatic copy-number alteration in
human cancers. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R41. [PubMed: 21527027]
Nik-Zainal S, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Alexandrov LB, Greenman CD, Lau KW, Raine K, Jones D,
Marshall J, Ramakrishna M, et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 149:994–1007.
[PubMed: 22608083]
Perner S, Demichelis F, Beroukhim R, Schmidt FH, Mosquera JM, Setlur S, Tchinda J, Tomlins Sa,
Hofer MD, Pienta KG, et al. TMPRSS2:ERG fusion-associated deletions provide insight into the
heterogeneity of prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:8337–8341. [PubMed: 16951139]
Perner S, Mosquera JM, Demichelis F, Hofer MD, Paris PL, Simko J, Collins C, Bismar TA,
Chinnaiyan AM, De Marzo AM, et al. TMPRSS2-ERG fusion prostate cancer: an early molecular
event associated with invasion. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007; 31:882–888. [PubMed: 17527075]
Rausch T, Jones DT, Zapatka M, Stutz AM, Zichner T, Weischenfeldt J, Jager N, Remke M, Shih D,
Northcott PA, et al. Genome sequencing of pediatric medulloblastoma links catastrophic DNA
rearrangements with TP53 mutations. Cell. 2012; 148:59–71. [PubMed: 22265402]
Shen MM, Abate-Shen C. Molecular genetics of prostate cancer: new prospects for old challenges.
Genes Dev. 2010; 24:1967–2000. [PubMed: 20844012]
Stephens PJ, Greenman CD, Fu B, Yang F, Bignell GR, Mudie LJ, Pleasance ED, Lau KW, Beare D,
Stebbings LA, et al. Massive genomic rearrangement acquired in a single catastrophic event
during cancer development. Cell. 2011; 144:27–40. [PubMed: 21215367]
Sun C, Dobi A, Mohamed A, Li H, Thangapazham RL, Furusato B, Shaheduzzaman S, Tan SH,
Vaidyanathan G, Whitman E, et al. TMPRSS2-ERG fusion, a common genomic alteration in
prostate cancer activates C-MYC and abrogates prostate epithelial differentiation. Oncogene.
2008; 27:5348–5353. [PubMed: 18542058]
Tomlins SA, Laxman B, Dhanasekaran SM, Helgeson BE, Cao X, Morris DS, Menon A, Jing X, Cao
Q, Han B, et al. Distinct classes of chromosomal rearrangements create oncogenic ETS gene
fusions in prostate cancer. Nature. 2007; 448:595–599. [PubMed: 17671502]
Tomlins SA, Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun XW, Varambally S, Cao X,
Tchinda J, Kuefer R, et al. Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in
prostate cancer. Science. 2005; 310:644–648. [PubMed: 16254181]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 14

HIGHLIGHTS

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

•

Interdependent DNA rearrangements may coordinately remodel prostate cancer
genomes

•

”Chromoplexy” defines a distinct class of complex structural rearrangements

•

Multiple prostate cancer genes may be dysregulated coordinately

•

Clonal evolution reveals paths of prostate cancer progression

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Somatic Alterations in 57 Prostate Tumor Genomes

WGS was conducted on 55 prostate adenocarcinomas and two lung metastases from
neuroendocrine prostate cancers (NEPC, *) along with paired normal DNA to detect somatic
rearrangements and mutations. Gains and losses of DNA copy number at sites of recurrent
SNCAs were detected with Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays (recurrent SCNAs were not assessed
for sample P07-144, hatched lines). Bottom, cancer DNA purity was evaluated by assessing
allelic ratios from sequence reads covering heterozygous single-nucleotide polymorphisms
at sites of chromosomal deletion (Supplemental Experimental Procedures). ETS gene
fusions (ERG, ETV1) were detected by sequencing and validated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH).
See also Tables S1–4 and Figure S1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Integrated Analysis of Genomic Deletions and Rearrangements Reveals Signatures of
Concurrent Alterations

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Three scenarios by which multiple DNA double-strand breaks may be repaired.
Concerted repair with minimal loss of DNA (left) results in fusion breakpoints that map to
adjacent positions in the reference genome. Loss of DNA at sites of double-strand breaks
may result in simple deletions (middle) or “deletion bridges” (right) that span breakpoints
from distinct fusions on the reference genome. Adjacent breakpoints or deletion bridges may
provide evidence for chained rearrangements.
(B) For the two breakpoints of each rearrangement (labeled A and B), the probability P of a
second independently generated breakpoint (a or b) falling within the observed distance (L)
was assessed based on the expected local rate of rearrangements (μlocal). The x- and ycoordinates represent the negative log of P for the two breakpoints in each fusion.
Rearrangements near the upper right corner of the plot are unlikely to have arisen
independently of other rearrangements. Observed rearrangements are compared to simulated
and scrambled data.
See also Figure S2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. The ChainFinder Algorithm

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) ChainFinder creates a graph representation of genomic breakpoints that may be linked in
chains by somatic fusions, statistical adjacency or deletion bridges. ChainFinder assigns two
neighboring breakpoints to the same chain if the p-value for their independent generation (P)
is rejected with a false-discovery rate below 10−2. For each cycle (closed path) within the
graph, all scenarios are considered where one or more rearrangements in the cycle could
have arisen independently. All rearrangements in a cycle are assigned to the same chain if
every such scenario is rejected with a family-wise error rate below 10−2 across all scenarios.
Please see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for additional details.
(B) Circos plot of chained rearrangements in a prostate adenocarcima (P09-1042).
Rearrangements depicted in the same color arose within the same chain; fusions in gray
were not assigned to a chain. The inner ring depicts copy number gains and losses in blue
and red, respectively.
(C) The false positive rate of ChainFinder was assessed using simulated and scrambled
genomes based on observed rearrangements.
(D) For observed, simulated and scrambled genomes, the longest chain was compared along
with the portion of breakpoints in any chain. Median values, middle quartiles, and range are
indicated.
See also Figure S3.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Manifestations of Chromoplexy Vary by ETS Fusion Status

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Circos plots of rearrangement chains in representative tumors, grouped by the presence
of ETS rearrangements and CHD1 disruption. Rearrangements in the same chain are
depicted in one color. Rearrangements in gray were not assigned to a chain. The inner ring
shows copy number gain and loss in red and blue, respectively.
(B) Rearrangement chains in ETS+ tumors contain a greater proportion of interchromosomal fusions than chains in ETS− tumors. In (B) and (D), box plots indicate median
values, middle quartiles, and range.
(C) The maximum number of chromosomes involved in a single rearrangement chain (yaxis), grouped by ETS status. The total number of breakpoints in chains in each tumor is
depicted on the x-axis to allow comparison of tumors with similar degree of detectable
chromoplexy.
(D) ETS+ chromoplexy breakpoints are enriched near DNA that is highly expressed in 16
prostate tumor transcriptomes.
See also Figure S4.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Chromoplexy May Coordinately Dysregulate Multiple Cancer Genes

(A) Chromoplectic chain of 27 somatic rearrangements across 6 chromosomes in tumor
P05-3852, involving fusion of TMPRSS2 and ERG and disruptive rearrangement of

SMAD4.
(B) The putative tumor suppressor genes CDKN1B, ETV6 and ETV3 were lost in the
context of deletion bridges in a 25-rearrangement chain affecting 3 chromosomes in
PR-05-3595. In both panels, selected rearrangements were assessed by PCR of tumor and
normal DNA.
See also Figure S5 and Table S5C.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 6. Clonality and Evolution of Prostate Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Schematic representation of the clonality assessment. The allelic fractions (AFs) of
sequencing reads covering heterozygous SNPs were analyzed in order to assess the clonality
of somatic DNA alterations. A hypothetical tumor is shown, composed of normal cells, a
caner clone and a derivative subclone. The histograms indicate the expected SNP AFs
within two deleted genes, A and B. The subclonal deletion of B yields a distinct distribution
of AFs compared to the clonal deletion of A.
(B) Selected deletions (top) and mutations (bottom) were classified as clonal or subclonal.
Proportion test p-value is listed for the indicated comparisons. Independent samples
(Barbieri et al., 2012) are included for support.
(C) Example of clonal (TMPRSS2-ERG) and subclonal (CDKN1B) deletions from the same
tumor. Histograms show the proportion of sequencing reads containing the reference allele
for heterozygous SNPs in the deleted regions. A representative immunohistochemical stain
for the CDKN1B protein p27 shows discrete subclonal positivity in prostate cancer.
(D) Patterns of tumor evolution were inferred based on clonality estimates. Arrows indicate
the direction of clonal-subclonal hierarchy between genes that are deleted in the same
sample in multiple cases. Deleted genes are represented by circles with size and color
intensity reflecting the frequency of overall deletions and subclonal deletions, respectively.
Ratios along the arrows indicate the number of samples demonstrating directionality of the

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

hierarchy out of samples with deletion of both genes (ratios in parentheses refer to additional
samples; Barbieri et al., 2012). The inset shows a similar analysis of point mutations
(Barbieri et al., 2012).
(E) The number of recurrent SCNAs and cancer DNA purity were compared across tumors
with major Gleason pattern 4 versus 3.
See also Figure S6.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

Baca et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 7. A Continuum Model for the Genomic Evolution of Prostate Cancer

Oncogenic aberrations may accumulate in cancer genomes gradually (left), by punctuated
progression (middle) or in a single catastrophic event (right). Chromoplectic rearrangements
and deletions induce a modest to large degree of genomic derangement over several
successive events. As indicated at bottom, larger-scale rearrangements that affect broader
swaths of the genome may be more difficult for a cell to survive, and may tend to require cooccurring oncogenic lesions to become fixed in a tumor.
See also Figure S7.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 April 25.

