Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

In vivo selection of novel biotherapeutics
Giulia Ruozi and Mauro Giacca
There is an impelling demand to develop
novel therapeutics against degenerative disorders.
Approximately 30% of people over 80 years of age
develop a dementia and 1-3% of those over 65 years have
Parkinson’s disease. Over 17 million patients suffer from
heart failure, mostly as a consequence of lack of cardiac
regeneration after ischemic cardiomyocyte death. After
75 years of age, 30% of individuals undergo age-related
macular degeneration, a major cause of irreversible
blindness, and 50% develop presbycusis.
All these degenerative conditions have at least three
features in common: first, the function and structure of
the affected tissues deteriorate over time; second, the
functional cells in these organs (cardiomyocytes, neurons,
retinal cells, neuroepithelial cells of the inner ear) are
incapable of significant regeneration in adult life; third,
there are no effective therapies slowing the progressive
loss of these cells and, even less, promoting their
regeneration.
Despite the lack of curative therapies, notable
progress has been achieved in understanding the cellular
and molecular mechanisms leading to tissue degeneration.
Thus, there is hope that novel biological therapeutics,

able to specifically interfere with the different molecular
mechanisms of disease onset and progression, might
offer therapeutic opportunities. How to identify these
therapeutics, however, remains a formidable challenge.
The screening of genetic libraries for a given
function directly in vivo (thus moving from biochemical or
phenotypic selection in vitro towards functional selection
in vivo) would represent an exceptional asset for the
identification of novel therapeutic factors, in the absence
of any a priori, possibly biased, information on their
molecular function. In contrast to phenotypic selection,
however, functional screening of genetic libraries for
degenerative conditions is still in its infancy, especially
due to the intrinsic difficulty of delivering genes to postmitotic tissues.
Indeed, functional selection in vivo demands a gene
delivery vector that i) can be produced at very high titers;
ii) infects resting or post-mitotic cells very efficiently, and
iii) persists in these cells for prolonged periods of time
in the absence of significant transgene silencing. Vectors
based on the Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) appear to suit
all these requirements. These are relatively small vectors
(viral capsid ~20 nm, genome size < 5 kb) that transduce

Figure 1: Outline of the AAV-based in vivo functional selection procedure (FunSel) for the identification of novel
biological therapeutics for degenerative disorders. Cf. text for description.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26556

Oncotarget

post-mitotic cells in vivo at high efficiency, such as heart,
brain and retina, and drive persistent transgene expression
in these organs [1].
Our recent work [2] reports on the development of
an innovative procedure for in vivo functional selection,
which we named FunSel, in which arrayed AAV vector
gene collections are used to iteratively transduce a given
tissue to find potential therapeutic leads. A pool of AAV
vectors, each one coding for a specific factor, is injected
in vivo to transduce permissive cells (e.g. cardiomyocytes,
skeletal muscle fibers, retinal cells, pancreas β-cells); each
vector enters a different cell. After a few weeks, a selective
stimulus is applied (e.g. coronary or femoral artery
ligation, or chemical induction of cell death). Then, vector
cDNA inserts are recovered and used to generate a new
AAV preparation, which is submitted to additional cycles
of selection. This iterative procedure leads to the selection
of viral transgenes exerting a protective or regenerative
effect on the expressing tissues (Figure 1).
To provide proof-of-principle evidence of FunSel
efficacy, we screened 100 factors from the murine
secretome (including various cytokines, growth factors,
hormones and extracellular matrix proteins) for their
capacity to protect skeletal muscle and heart against acute
ischemia. Using the analysed set of genes, FunSel led to
the identification of ghrelin as a powerful myoprotective
factor. Ghrelin is a 28-amino acid circulating hormone,
physiologically produced by the stomach in conditions of
starvation, and exerting a powerful secretagogue function
eventually leading to the release of growth hormone from
the pituitary [3]. Indeed we found that both the major
circulating form of the peptide, which is octanoylated on
serine 3 [4], and the unmodified peptide expressed from
our AAV vectors, protect both skeletal muscle fibers and
cardiomyocytes from ischemic cell death and preserve
cardiac function over time.
Why was ghrelin selected by our functional
screening? In principle, the tissue protective functions
selected by FunSel could ensue from different molecular
mechanisms, including inhibition of apoptosis, induction
of neovascularization, protection from inflammation or

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

immune response, among others. We found that a major
function of ghrelin was to inhibit apoptosis through the
induction of autophagy, a process exerting a fundamental
role in both normal homeostasis and after tissue insult. In
particular, autophagy specifically protects from ischemic
damage by removing dysfunctional organelles through
the lysosomal degradative pathway [5]. Under stressful
conditions, particularly in the heart [6], autophagy is
induced as an adaptive response to avoid cell death.
In principle, FunSel can be applied using arrayed
genetic collections encoding for any kind of proteins,
ranging from transcription factors to membrane receptors.
The use of genetic libraries encoding for genes from
the secretome (approximately 2,000 genes [7]) offers
the important advantage of permitting the identification
of factors that could eventually exert their therapeutic
function once administered as recombinant proteins. This
appears to be an important step towards the generation of
new injectable, biological drugs targeting degenerative
conditions.
Mauro
Giacca:
Molecular
Medicine
Laboratory,
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy
Correspondence to: Mauro Giacca, email giacca@icgeb.
org
Keywords: Chromosome Section, AAV vectors, biological
therapeutics, secretome, regeneration
Received: August 07, 2015
Published: August 22, 2015

REFERENCES

26557

1.	

Zacchigna S, et al. Circ Res. 2014; 114: 1827-1846.

2.	

Ruozi G, et al. Nat Commun. 2015; 6: 7388.

3.	

Kojima M, et al. Nature. 1999; 402: 656-660.

4.	

Yang J, et al. Cell. 2008; 132: 387-396.

5.	

Mizushima N, et al. Cell. 2011; 147: 728-741.

6.	

Kanamori H, et al. Cardiovasc Res. 2011; 91: 330-339.

7.	

Grimmond SM, et al. Genome Res. 2003; 13: 1350-1359.

Oncotarget

