1643

E D I T O R I A L

High-dose Chemotherapy for
Recurrent Medulloblastoma
Time for a Reappraisal
Amar Gajjar,

MD

Division of Neuro-Oncology, Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.

M

See referenced original article on pages 1805 11,
this issue.
Address of reprints: Amar Gajjar, MD, Division of
Neuro-Oncology, Department of Oncology, St.
Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 332 N. Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN 38105-2729; Fax:
(901) 495-3695; E-mail: amar.gajjar@stjude.org
Received October 15, 2007; accepted November
7, 2007.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

ore than a decade ago, Finlay et al. published a landmark article in which they demonstrated that a subset of patients with
recurrent brain tumors of diverse histologic diagnosis could be salvaged with high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem
cell rescue.1 The preparatory regimen included only 2 drugs: thiotepa and etoposide. Hematopoietic growth factors were used to
enhance count recovery. Observations from this early series suggested that patients with minimal residual disease at the time of
high-dose chemotherapy may be the appropriate candidates for this
retrieval strategy. Patients with bulky, metastatic recurrent disease
or disease that has not responded to retrieval chemotherapy may
not be the best candidates for this intervention. The toxicity of this
approach was also a concern in this early series. Overall, 5 of the 45
patients (11%) were long-term survivors and all of them had highgrade gliomas.
Subsequent publications from these and other investigators
have further deﬁned the role of high-dose chemotherapy in
patients with recurrent medulloblastoma.2–4 Dunkel et al. suggested that patients treated with prior combined modality therapy
(ie, radiotherapy and chemotherapy) had a worse outcome compared with patients who were treated with chemotherapy only
(25 6 15% vs 43 6 16%).2 In the series by Gururangan et al., 12 of
the 20 patients (60%) were irradiated after high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow rescue and 7 of these 12
patients were long-term survivors. 3 Taken together, these data
suggest that a select group of patients may be able to achieve durable disease control; this subgroup consists of young patients
treated with chemotherapy alone as initial therapy followed by
high-dose chemotherapy and radiotherapy at the time of disease
recurrence. In a large prospective French series, infants with local
recurrences of medulloblastoma after initial treatment with surgical resection and chemotherapy alone could be salvaged with surgical resection, high-dose chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. In
contrast, patients with metastatic recurrent disease had a much
worse outcome.4

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23352
Published online 27 February 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1644

CANCER April 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 8

Mahoney et al.5 used a cyclophosphamidebased, high-dose chemotherapy regimen and conﬁrmed in a prospective series that patients with
minimal residual disease who are responsive to
chemotherapy are the patients most likely to beneﬁt from high-dose chemotherapy at the time of
disease recurrence. Based on the encouraging data
in pediatric patients with recurrent medulloblastomas, the adult neuro-oncology community has
adopted high-dose chemotherapy as an approach
in the treatment of adult patients with recurrent
embryonal tumors. In this issue of Cancer, Gill
et al. demonstrated, in a retrospective institutional
series spanning 31 years, that patients with recurrent medulloblastoma who are treated with highdose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation enjoy a longer duration of disease
control and overall survival compared with patients
treated with standard-dose chemotherapy at the
time of disease recurrence.6 The authors pointed
out the inherent problems with their study and
recognized the difﬁculties in conducting an adequately sized, prospective, randomized trial in
adults, given that this disease is rare in this age
group. However, several important observations of
their study population are worth noting. All the
patients in their series were treated with surgical
resection and radiotherapy alone as part of their
original treatment. In addition, not all patients
were treated with craniospinal irradiation; some
patients were treated with cranial irradiation only
(5 patients). Unlike the treatment of children, in
whom combined modality therapy is considered
the standard of care,7 radiotherapy alone is commonly used in the treatment of adult medulloblastoma patients. Hence the ﬁnding that the patients
included in the series by Gill et al.6 were chemotherapy-naive may have tipped the scales in favor
of chemotherapy as a retrieval strategy for patients
with recurrent disease.
The burden of bulky metastatic disease in the
neuraxis (5 patients) and extraneural disease (4
patients) was much higher in the group treated
with conventional-dose chemotherapy compared
with 1 patient with neuraxis dissemination and 3
patients with extraneural disease in the group treated with high-dose chemotherapy.6 Although 54%
of the patients treated with conventional-dose
chemotherapy received some form of repeat irradiation at the time of recurrent disease, no
patients in the high-dose chemotherapy group
received additional radiotherapy. Lastly, 50% of the
patients in the high-dose chemotherapy group
underwent macroscopic total resection at the time

of disease recurrence compared with 1 of the 13
patients in the group treated with conventionaldose chemotherapy.6 In summary, the factors that
are believed to be important predictors of outcome
in pediatric patients with recurrent medulloblastoma could not be evaluated in this adult series
because of the retrospective nature of the study.
These include 1) minimal residual disease at the
time of transplantation, 2) local recurrence, 3)
chemotherapy-responsive disease, 4) the use of
radiotherapy after high-dose chemotherapy, and 5)
patients who are minimally treated at the time of
the original diagnosis. Hence, the conclusions from
the study by Gill et al. are to be interpreted with
caution.
Our current understanding of the pathogenesis
of medulloblastoma is undergoing a rapid and dramatic transformation because of the discoveries of
important signal transduction pathways that are responsible for normal development of the cerebellum.8 There also are early data to indicate that
medulloblastoma is not a single disease entity but
actually consists of a compendium of different,
molecularly distinct diseases that may have a similar
morphologic appearance under the microscope.9
Based on these discoveries, there is a possibility that
in the future we will not be treating medulloblastoma as a single disease entity. Instead, we may well
be tailoring our therapy to the underlying molecular
aberrations and hence increasing our chances of
cure with minimally toxic therapy and reducing the
possibility of long-term morbidities.10

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Finlay JL, Goldman S, Wong MC, et al. Pilot study of
high-dose thiotepa and etoposide with autologous bone
marrow rescue in children and young adults with
recurrent CNS tumors. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:2495–
2503.
Dunkel IJ, Boyett JM, Yates A, et al. High-dose carboplatin,
thiotepa and etoposide with autologous stem-cell rescue
for patients with recurrent medulloblastoma. J Clin Oncol.
1998;16:222–228.
Gururangan S, Dunkel IJ, Goldman S, et al. Myeloablative
chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow rescue in
young children with recurrent malignant brain tumors.
J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:2486–2493.
Grill J, Sainte-Rose C, Jouvet A, et al. Treatment of medulloblastoma with postoperative chemotherapy alone: an
SFOP prospective trial in young children. Lancet Oncol.
2005;6:573–580.
Mahoney DH, Strother D, Camitta B, et al. High–dose melphalan and cyclophosphamide with autologous bone marrow rescue for recurrent/progressive malignant brain
tumors in children: a pilot Pediatric Oncology Group
Study. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:382–388.

Editorial/Gajjar
6.

7.

Gill P, Litzow M, Buckner J, et al. High-dose chemotherapy
with autologous stem cell transplantation in adults with
recurrent embryonal tumors of the central nervous system.
Cancer. 2008;112:1805–1811.
Gajjar A, Chintagumpala M, Ashley D, et al. Risk-adapted craniospinal radiotherapy followed by high-dose chemotherapy
and stem-cell rescue in children with newly diagnosed medulloblastoma (St Jude Medulloblastoma–96): long-term results from
a prospective, multicenter trial. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:813–820.

8.

1645

Gilbertson RJ. Medulloblastoma: signaling a change in
treatment. Lancet Oncol. 2004;5:209–218.
9. Thompson MC, Fuller C, Hogg T, et al. Genomics identiﬁes medulloblastoma subgroups that are enriched for
speciﬁc genetic alterations. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:1924–
1931.
10. Gilbertson R, Gajjar A. Molecular biology of medulloblastoma: will it ever make a difference to clinical management? J Neurooncol. 2005;75:273–278.

