Meeting Report

On the Eve of Personalized Medicine in Oncology
1

2

3

4

Timothy J. Yeatman, James Mule, William S. Dalton, and Dan Sullivan
1

Total Cancer Care, 2Translational Research, 3Administration, and 4Clinical Investigations, H. Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, Florida

Introduction
The future of cancer care and treatment lies in the concept
of ‘‘personalized medicine,’’ a model that focuses on the individual, not just the disease. Personalized medicine in cancer
care will need to use molecular signatures to match the right
patients to the right drugs, first in clinical trials, then in clinical
practice. This is a new paradigm in which information technology, science, and clinical treatment are combined to improve
health outcomes and patient satisfaction. It will require unusually
large databases, relating both molecular and clinical data, such
that patients can be proactively selected for the most appropriate
therapies.
There is consensus building among clinicians, scientists, and
information technology professionals on seven principal areas that
could dramatically affect the way therapeutics are developed and
delivered to patients.

Whole Genome Profiling/Sequencing
Largely limited in the past by cost, both whole genome
sequencing and gene expression analyses now hold promise in
helping classify patients and their tumors. This segmentation can
be leveraged and exploited to target the right drug therapy for
individual patients.
New technologies will likely reduce costs (ultimately less than an
estimated $1,000 per genome assessment) and times in the near
future, making sequence analyses of somatic tumors and human
genomes, on a population basis, feasible. Candidate gene and exon
sequencing approaches will dominate first, but whole genome
sequencing will have value in pharmaceutical development and
clinical trial matching (the right drug for the right patient). Other
technologies, including microRNA, epigenetic, and proteomic analysis, may also have value on a whole genome basis.

Diagnostic and Prognostic Testing
Molecular tests, such as Her2Neu amplification or c-Kit or Ras
mutation assessments, that will assist and guide physicians in
therapeutic decisions, are now becoming commercially available.
These tests are expected to proliferate rapidly over the next 5 years,
particularly as companion diagnostics to therapeutics. Use of these
tests may ultimately be driven by insurers desirous of reducing
health care costs for therapies without predictable benefit.
Note: Based the first Total Cancer Care Summit: The Future of Personalized
Medicine, hosted by the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer & Research Institute and held Oct. 24 to
28, 2007, in the Bahamas. The conference focused on the current practice of cancer
patient care, the vision for the next 5 years, and the development of ‘‘blue sky’’
opportunities for the future of personalized medicine.
Requests for reprints: Timothy Yeatman, SRB-TCC, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa,
FL 33612. Phone: 813-979-7292; Fax: 813-632-1433; E-mail: timothy.yeatman@
moffitt.org.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1374

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (18). September 15, 2008

Commercial signatures are already available to predict outcomes
for breast cancer patients (1). Soon, a lung cancer signature will be
available to predict the best chemotherapy doublet for the patient
(2). And the ability to predict individual tumor radiosensitivity,
for example, is central to the development of personalized treatment strategies in radiation oncology. Scientists have developed
and biologically validated a systems biology model of tumor radiosensitivity in 48 human cancer cell lines. The implications of a
successful radiosensitivity predictive assay are broad and significant because it will allow for better selection of patients for
radiation protocols and, thus, could potentially improve the ability
of physicians to individualize therapy.

Molecular Imaging
Molecular imaging is an emerging field in which molecular and
cell biology are joined to modern technology for noninvasive
imaging. This involves developing the necessary assays and
technologies for the smallest molecular changes in specific
molecular pathways in vivo. Molecular imaging will allow us to
better understand the biological processes of cancer and other
diseases, leading to improved diagnosis and disease management.
Current imaging technologies have substantial room for
improvement. Newer hardware and wetware solutions will be
required to metabolically image tumors such that responses can
be evaluated in hours to days, rather than months. The use of
biosensors that precisely monitor the timing of cell division
may allow for the screening of more anticancer compounds and
allow scientists to observe and measure cellular processes in
real-time rather than through after-the-fact images. Using these
newer techniques, clinicians can see not only where a tumor is
in the body, but also observe specific molecular and biological
processes (proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogensis) that influence
tumor behavior and responses to therapy. This could play a critical role in cancer detection, drug development, and individualized treatment.

Information Technology
Personalized medicine requires substantial information technology solutions that support storage and linkage of large amounts
of clinical, research, and genomic data. This will require the
development of solutions that target the complete data pipeline,
including collection, storage, and delivery.
To realize the promise of personalized medicine, it is essential
that physicians standardize how they evaluate patients and how
they represent this information in the medical record, preferably in
an electronic format. A first step is establishing both common data
sets and a common vocabulary for describing the data. An ontology
is a type of vocabulary that not only describes preferred terms and
their meanings but also how these terms relate to one another
semantically. Using an ontological representation of health data

7250

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Personalized Medicine in Oncology

will allow physicians to infer relationships in the data that are not
explicitly defined in the database record. The Open Biomedical
Ontologies Foundry is assuming a set of these ontologies, built
upon a common set of design principles, which cover entities for
the entire biomedical domain, including anatomic structures, cells,
genes, proteins, chemicals, diseases, and clinical findings. These
universal approaches will be a key step toward linking databases
and data sources from multiple hospitals. Linking data across
hospitals has always been a major challenge and is currently the
subject of national projects such as CaBig.

Drug Development
Currently, there is a prolonged timeline for drug development
because of a lack of preclinical systems that accurately predict
efficacy and toxicity, as well as the frequent failure rate of new
drugs. About 5% of investigational new drug (IND) applications for
new molecular entities (NME) submitted to the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) progress beyond the investigational phase,
and there is more than a 50% failure rate of agents in phase III
trials. The cost of an NME is estimated at >$800 million, which,
combined with the cost of patient and professional resources for
drug development, certainly encourages the development of novel,
cost-, and resource-conscious trial approaches.
A recent approach to improving the efficiency of drug
development, initiated and supported by both the FDA and the
National Cancer Institute, is an exploratory IND that allows the
conduct of ‘‘phase 0’’ trials. These trials require up-front
development of robust and validated pharmacokinetic (PK)
and biomarker assays that are used in studies in which low doses
of the drug are escalated to achieve the desired drug exposure or target modulation over a limited dosing period. Phase 0
trials require fewer patients, have as their end points target
modulation and PK analyses, and may allow for earlier Go/No
Go decisions.
Although phase 0 trials are not yet widely accepted, they have
the potential to allow investigators to collect a wealth of PK and
pharmacodynamic data regarding molecularly targeted agents
that will better inform subsequent phase I and II trials; examine
the schedule or sequence effects of drugs in combination trials;
facilitate the selection of a lead agent for clinical development
among a group of candidates; and allow the early application of
molecular-imaging studies.

Gene-Based Clinical Trial Matching
Substantial changes in the way clinical trials are designed,
reviewed, opened, accrued, and closed will be required to
effectively offer patients the best genetically matched trial
opportunities. Trial matching holds promise to radically change
the method and timing of early phase I/II clinical trials.
A not-too-distant approach to personalized cancer care is
matching the patient to a molecularly targeted drug. In Florida,
there is a massive translational project under way, called ‘‘Total
Cancer Care,’’ designed to obtain demographic, clinical, and tumor
gene expression profiles from tens of thousands of cancer patients.
These patients will be followed for life, and all of their clinical and
genetic information will be entered into and stored discretely in a
data warehouse. Although ideally, these patients would be accrued
to a regimented clinical trial with strict entry and exclusion
criteria, this approach is not truly feasible on a large scale across

www.aacrjournals.org

multiple tumor types, and does not recapitulate the ‘‘real world’’
practice of oncology, where many patients are treated with
variations of rigorous trial standards. There is still considerable
value in collecting accurate data from a very large population of
patients treated with standard of care approaches. As the number
of patients in this trial increases, there will be a steady-state
number of patients with a specific malignancy that could be
matched to a drug that has shown preclinical efficacy associated
with a specific gene expression profile. A significant number
of patients with this predictive profile could be rapidly available
for an early-phase trial with a new agent, with perhaps a greater
assurance of response than is seen with the traditional early phase
trial approach.

Industry and Academic Partnerships
No one academic institution or industry has the capacity or
capability to single-handedly accomplish the mission of personalized medicine. A ‘‘syndicate’’ of interested and willing parties must
meet the challenges ahead in this new paradigm of care.
New approaches to sharing data, biospecimens, and intellectual property will be required if such a syndicate is to be
successful. A contract research organization, for example, could
be established to function as the infrastructure to facilitate
multicenter research, from hypothesis to publication. The CRO
could bridge the best of the critical elements of successful
clinical research, including connecting sponsors-investigators,
research sites, and funding entities. Although this infrastructure
is crucial, it must be scalable to meet the requirements of the
various types of research it will manage, and the variables of its
operation must be carefully considered. In addition, a comprehensive information system, accessible by researchers, clinicians,
and patients, which will contain molecular analyses results
paired with clinical outcome data are being constructed. The
goal is to develop personalized therapy, identify molecular
signatures for prognoses, and establish an evidence-based
approach for cancer treatment.
One example of how personalized medicine can is through the
Molecular Analysis Directed Individualized Therapy trial for
patients with non–small cell lung cancer, which tailors the
selection of chemotherapy drug combinations to fit a patient’s
distinctive genetic profile. The trial uses standard treatments but
with chemotherapy assigned according to a novel algorithm.
Investigators have seen tumor response rates in excess of 50%.
The future for personalized medicine—not just for cancer care,
but other diseases as well—is bright. Commercially available
diagnostic and prognostic molecular tests are available. Prescreening for clinical trials is becoming more commonplace. Molecular
imaging initiatives are becoming more prevalent.
One thing is clear—the patient experience will continue to
benefit from these personalized medicine approaches, particularly
as each patient becomes more closely involved in his or her own
care. This is being achieved, in part, through streamlining the
consent process by means of secure patient Web portals. There, a
patient can schedule appointment, renew prescriptions, etc. This
allows collection of data into the corresponding database in realtime, thus streamlining all processes, and making information
accessible for future use in clinical studies. It is also believed
that Web portals designed for patients will augment the

7251

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (18). September 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

participation of patients in the data collection processes key to
making personalized medicine a success story.
And although such things as trial matching using a populationbased approach and ‘‘signatures of response’’ that can help select
patients for therapy may take several years to make their way
into the mainstream of medical care, we continue to overcome
challenges one at a time.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
T.J. Yeatman: Expert testimony, Merck & Co. and RedPath, Inc. W.S. Dalton:
Commercial research grants, Merck & Co. and Pfizer. The other authors disclosed no
potential conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgments
Received 4/11/2008; revised 5/16/2008; accepted 5/19/2008.

References
1. Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifentreated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2817–26.
2. Zheng Z, Chen T, Li X, Haura E, Sharma A, Bepler G. DNA synthesis and repair
genes RRM1 and ERCC1 in lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2007;356:800–8.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (18). September 15, 2008

7252

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

On the Eve of Personalized Medicine in Oncology
Timothy J. Yeatman, James Mule, William S. Dalton, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:7250-7252.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/18/7250

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

