Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Cancer
Research

Review

Chemotherapeutic Targeting of Cancer-Induced
Immunosuppressive Cells
Darya Alizadeh1 and Nicolas Larmonier1,2

Abstract
The expansion of immunosuppressive cells represents a cardinal strategy deployed by tumors to escape from
detection and elimination by the immune system. Regulatory T lymphocytes (Treg) and myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC), major components of these inhibitory cellular networks, have drawn intense scrutiny
in recent years. In patients with cancer and in animal tumor models, these suppressor cells accumulate in the
tumor microenvironment, secondary lymphoid tissues, and in the blood. Equipped with the ability to suppress
innate and adaptive anticancer immunity, these cells also foster disease development by promoting tumor
neoangiogenesis and by enhancing cancer metastasis. They therefore represent major impediments for
anticancer therapies, particularly for immune-based interventions. Recent work has provided evidence that
beyond their direct cytotoxic or cytostatic effects on cancer cells, several conventional chemotherapeutic drugs
and agents used in targeted therapies can promote the elimination or inactivation of suppressive Tregs or MDSCs,
resulting in enhanced antitumor immunity. We analyze ﬁndings pertinent to this concept, discuss the possible
molecular bases underlying the selective targeting of these immunosuppressive cells by antineoplastic agents, and
consider current challenges and future prospects related to the integration of these molecules into more efﬁcient
anticancer chemoimmunotherapeutic strategies. Cancer Res; 74(10); 2663–8. Ó2014 AACR.

The Immune System, Cancer, and
Chemotherapeutic Agents: "The Good, the Bad,
and the Ugly?"
For decades, the ﬁeld of cancer biology has almost entirely
centered upon malignant cells themselves, with limited consideration (if any) given to non-neoplastic cellular elements of
the tumor microenvironment. However, compelling evidence
has emerged that this network of nontransformed cells (mainly
endothelial, stromal, or immune cells) considerably inﬂuences
tumor development. Ignored for many years in oncology, the
complex interactions between cancer cells and immune cells
have more recently been subjected to intensive scrutiny. It has
become clear that the immune system is endowed with the
paradoxical ability to exert both tumor-suppressing and
tumor-promoting effects, well described in the seminal concept of cancer immunoediting (1). The demonstration that
immune-mediated mechanisms can lead to the speciﬁc recognition and killing of tumor cells has opened the door to the
ﬁeld of cancer immunotherapy. However, it has also become
evident that developing tumors commonly avoid immune

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Cancer Biology Graduate Program; and 2Arizona
Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics and Immunobiology, College of
Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
Corresponding Author: Nicolas Larmonier, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Arizona, 1501 N. Campbell Ave., PO Box 245073, Tucson,
AZ 85724-5073. Phone: 520-626-0012; Fax: 520-626-6986; E-mail:
nrlarmon@email.arizona.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301
Ó2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

destruction by inducing an immunosuppressive environment
permissive to the emergence of immune-resistant cancer cell
variants. As a result, in cancer-bearing hosts, immune cells are
profoundly altered phenotypically and functionally and are
therefore incapable of orchestrating efﬁcient antitumoral
immune responses (2, 3). The recognition of tumor escape
from immune elimination as an emerging additional hallmark
of cancer has constituted one of the major paradigm shift in the
ﬁeld (1–3). Multiple mechanisms of cancer immune evasion
and immunoinhibitory pathways have been identiﬁed (3). In
the context of the current discussion, it has been well established that tumors can promote immunosuppressive cells,
primarily regulatory T lymphocytes (Treg), myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC), alternatively activated macrophages
(M2), or immature/tolerogenic dendritic cells (DC). These cells
inhibit anticancer immunity and signiﬁcantly compromise the
efﬁcacy of immune-based therapies (3–5). They also play a role
in tumor angiogenesis, cancer cell survival, proliferation, and
metastatic potential. Their elimination and/or inactivation
have become a major therapeutic objective to alter the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and uncover anticancer immunity.
As initial research efforts almost entirely focused on decrypting the biologic and genetic characteristics of malignant cells, it
is not surprising that most anticancer therapies were originally
developed based on the exclusive targeting of tumor cells. In
this perspective, conventional chemotherapeutic drugs were
selected for their direct cytotoxic effects against highly proliferative cancer cells. These antineoplastic molecules, such as
anthracyclines, DNA-alkylating agents, or anti-microtubes
compounds, are however associated with signiﬁcant toxicities

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2663

Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Alizadeh and Larmonier

and their efﬁcacy is limited by the emergence of drug-resistant
tumor cell clones (6). With the growing understanding of cancer
cell biology at the molecular level, more speciﬁc antineoplastic
agents were developed and referred to as targeted therapeutic
agents (6, 7). Typically, molecular-targeted therapies are
designed to inhibit oncogenic pathways essential for the proliferation and survival of tumor cells. This approach has sparked
considerable hope and has led to the development of many
small-molecule inhibitors, with imatinib mesylate, a BCR-ABL
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), as an archetype (6). The therapeutic efﬁcacy of these molecules as single agents is, however,
limited by the acquisition of secondary mutations, leading to
drug-resistant tumor clones and patient relapse.
Recent studies have lent support to the notion that the
antitumoral efﬁcacy of many chemotherapeutic drugs or targeted agents may be partially or substantially mediated by
immune-dependent mechanisms (6). For instance, the promotion of anticancer immune responses by anthracyclines has
been related to the induction of an immunogenic type of tumor
cell death associated with immune-activating "danger" signals.
This fosters the antigen processing and presenting function of
DCs (responsible for the initiation and regulation of immune
responses), leading to enhanced priming and activation of
tumor-speciﬁc T lymphocytes. Several anticancer agents (for
instance, platinum-based molecules, alkylating agents, anthracyclines, or nucleoside analogues) are also capable of enhancing the proliferation and function of antitumoral CTL, natural
killer (NK), and Th cells (6). In addition, drugs such as doxorubicin or cisplatin may sensitize tumor cells to CTL-mediated
killing. Cisplatin has also recently been shown to promote the
accumulation of CD11cþ DC in the tumor beds, which after
intratumoral delivery of tumor antigens are capable to induce
tumor-speciﬁc CTLs (8). The aforementioned immunomodulatory effects of antineoplastic agents have been extensively
reviewed elsewhere (6). Evidence has emerged that these
molecules may also enhance anticancer immunity by blocking
immunoinhibitory cellular networks (Fig. 1). In the current
review, we examine this concept, focusing on two major
immunosuppressive cell populations, Tregs and MDSCs. The
possible molecular mechanisms underlying the selective targeting of these suppressive cells and the prospect of exploiting
the multifaceted properties of anticancer agents in more
efﬁcient chemoimmunotherapeutic strategies are discussed.

Targeting Tregs and MDSCs Using
Antineoplastic Agents
Treg elimination or inactivation
CD4þCD25þ Tregs represent a subpopulation of T cells
characterized by the expression of FoxP3, a forkhead/winged
helix transcription factor essential for their development and
function. Tregs control immune responses by suppressing
conventional effector T lymphocytes, NK, DCs or macrophages
through different mechanisms (9). Tregs are produced during
T-cell development in the thymus or are generated in the
periphery from na€ve CD4þ T lymphocytes. Compelling studies
in mice and human have demonstrated that many cancers can
induce the proliferation of Tregs and/or promote their gen-

2664

Cancer Res; 74(10) May 15, 2014

eration from na€ve T cells, resulting in the accumulation of
these cells in the tumor beds and in the periphery (5). Importantly, the elimination and/or functional inactivation of
tumor-induced Tregs can promote antitumor immunity and
enhance the efﬁcacy of immunotherapy.
Treg targeting using chemotherapeutic drugs. Cyclophosphamide (an alkylating agent used to treat some lymphoma, leukemia, multiple myeloma, neuroblastoma, or breast or
ovarian cancers) was one of the ﬁrst drugs reported for its
ability to interfere with suppressive T cells and to improve
immunotherapy (10). We demonstrated in a rat colon cancer
model that cyclophosphamide eliminates CD4þCD25þ Tregs
and improves overall survival when combined with immunotherapy (11). However, in this model, cyclophosphamide
administration results in a nonselective elimination of both
suppressor and effector T cells. Of therapeutic relevance,
effector T lymphocytes reconstitute earlier than Tregs and for
a deﬁned window of time, low Treg to effector CD4þ and CD8þ
T lymphocyte ratios allow efﬁcient immunotherapy (11). A
later report indicated that low-dose cyclophosphamide triggers mouse Treg apoptosis in vitro and in vivo without affecting
conventional CD4þCD25 T-cell viability. In this study, cyclophosphamide also impairs Treg-suppressive function by downregulating FoxP3 and glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related
protein (12). The possibility of combining cyclophosphamide-mediated elimination of Tregs with tumor-speciﬁc vaccination was further conﬁrmed in different mouse models (13).
Interestingly, the association of this drug with an agonistic
antibody against the costimulatory receptor OX40 was shown
to eliminate intratumoral, but not peripheral, Tregs (14). Along
these lines, cyclophosphamide was proven effective in reducing Treg number and restoring T and NK cell effector functions
in patients with different types of advanced stage cancers (15).
The mechanism(s) behind the preferential elimination of Tregs
by cyclophosphamide remain to be fully elucidated. Because
this alkylating agent primarily affects highly proliferative cells,
it is possible that the higher proliferation rate of Tregs (as
compared with other cells) in the context of growing tumor
makes them ideal targets. Similarly, the preferential depletion
of intratumoral Tregs (as opposed to peripheral Tregs)
observed in some studies may reﬂect differential characteristics of Tregs (such as their proliferation status) depending on
their location. It should also be underlined that in most studies,
the immunostimulatory effects of cyclophosphamide were
observed only at low, "metronomic" doses, whereas at high
doses, this drug is immunosuppressive. In addition, cyclophosphamide-mediated depletion of Tregs is usually transient and a
new Treg pool, with antigen recognition speciﬁcities skewed
toward cancer antigens, eventually reconstitutes, mainly as a
result of tumor-driven conversion of CD4þCD25FoxP3 T
cells (5). Therefore, in a chemoimmunotherapeutic perspective, careful considerations should be given to the dosing of this
agent and to the timing of immunotherapy performed postcyclophosphamide administration. These parameters are still
in need of further optimization.
Paclitaxel, a mitotic inhibitor, has been reported to selectively reduce Treg number and function while sparing effector
T lymphocytes in patients with advanced non–small cell lung

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Immunosuppressive Cell Targeting with Anticancer Agents

Reprogramming into
Reprogramming into
nonsuppressive cell
nonsuppressive cell
subsets
subsets
Conventional
Impaired
Impaired
chemotherapeutic
drugs/
suppressive
suppressive
targeted anticancer agents
function
function
?
Cell death

Cell death

Tumor cells
Induction of Tregs
and MDSCs
MDSCs

Tregs

Immunosuppressive cells
Increased
sensitivity to
killing by
ICD - Ag release
immune cells

Tumor cell lysis

DC
Ag uptake - DC
maturation

CD4+Th

T-cell priming
and activation

Conventional
chemotherapeutic drugs/
targeted anticancer agents
CD8+CTLs

NK

ϒδ T cells

Immune effectors

© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 1. Elimination, inactivation, or reprogramming of tumor-induced Tregs and MDSCs by conventional chemotherapeutic drugs or targeted therapeutic
agents. Tregs and MDSCs critically contribute to the immunosuppressive environment associated with developing cancers. These cells blunt antitumor
þ
þ
immunity by suppressing effector CD4 Th, CD8 CTL, NK, macrophages, or dendritic cells. Several conventional chemotherapeutic drugs or
targeted therapeutic molecules are endowed with the ability to promote antitumor immunity and foster the efﬁcacy of immunotherapeutic interventions
by enhancing the function of immune effector cells or by reversing immunosuppression induced by Tregs and MDSCs. Antineoplastic agents can
selectively trigger death of suppressive cells, inhibit their function, or foster their differentiation into proinﬂammatory subsets devoid of inhibitory properties.
Ag, tumor-derived antigens; ICD, immunogenic cell death.

cancer (16). The selective induction of Treg apoptosis by
paclitaxel was attributed to the upregulation of the cell death
receptor Fas on Tregs but not on effector cells (16). In a mouse
lung carcinoma model, paclitaxel was shown to induce Treg
but not effector cell apoptosis, possibly by selectively inducing
the downregulation of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 and
the upregulation of Bax (a proapoptotic factor; ref. 17). The
anticancer molecules, lenalidomide and pomalidomide, may
also alter Treg proliferation and function by reducing FoxP3
expression through unclear molecular mechanisms (18). Lenalidomide has also recently been shown to reduce both Treg and
MDSC number in the A20 lymphoma model (19). In addition,
low-dose metronomic regimens of temozolomide, an alkylating agent, can reduce Treg to total CD4þ T-lymphocyte ratios
and impair Treg-suppressive activity in glioma-bearing rats

www.aacrjournals.org

(20). Importantly, high doses of this agent have no effect on
Tregs, further underlining that chemotherapeutic drugs exert
distinct immunomodulatory effects depending on their concentration. Temozolomide has also been reported to speciﬁcally reduce Tregs in advanced melanoma patients (21)
Inﬂuence of agents used in targeted therapies on Tregs.
Several TKIs have been described for their ability to impair
Tregs. Sunitinib, a multityrosine kinase inhibitor, has been
reported to decrease the number of peripheral and tumorinﬁltrating Tregs in patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC;
ref. 22). Sunitinib also reduces Tregs in the mouse CT26 tumor
model through targeting of the VEGF-VEGFR axis (23). Similar
effects of the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib on Tregs were
observed (24). We have reported that imatinib mesylate
(a BCR-ABL TKI, which also blocks c-KIT, a oncogenic tyrosine

Cancer Res; 74(10) May 15, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2665

Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Alizadeh and Larmonier

kinase receptor and platelet-derived growth factor receptor)
reduces Treg number, impairs their suppressive function, and
promotes the efﬁcacy of dendritic cell-based vaccination in a
lymphoma mouse model (25). Imatinib interferes with early
TCR/CD28 signaling events, leading to the downregulation of
FoxP3. In line with this result, it has recently been demonstrated that dasatinib (a second-generation TKI used against
imatinib-resistant leukemia and malignancies characterized
by c-KIT mutations) decreases the frequency of circulating
Tregs in a mastocytoma mouse model (26). Importantly, the
reduction of Treg number was transient and these cells reconstituted quickly after drug removal. In this study, dasatinib
efﬁciently synergizes with immunotherapy (agonistic antiOX40), resulting in improved antitumor effects (26). The
increased sensitivity of Tregs to imatinib and dasatinib compared with effector T cells may be explained by a higher
dependence of Tregs on Lck, an essential tyrosine kinase in
TCR signaling, and potential target of these TKI.
The apparent ability of the aforementioned antineoplastic
agents to affect multiple immunologic processes has sparked
some criticism as it relates to their usefulness as direct Tregtargeting agents. Whether the improvement of anticancer
immunity may result from Treg depletion or from the concomitant enhancement of effector immune cell function by
these molecules remains indeed difﬁcult to ascertain. A more
reﬁned identiﬁcation of the molecular bases underlying the
mode of action of these agents on Tregs will certainly help to
address this issue. Nonetheless, although antibody-based
approaches such as anti-CTLA4 or anti-OX40 have shown
promise to impair Tregs, a universal optimized strategy to
selectively target these cells is still needed. In this context, the
possibility of using conventional chemotherapeutic molecules
or targeted therapeutic agents to interfere with these immunosuppressive lymphocytes remains an appealing strategy.
MDSC elimination, inactivation, and/or differentiation
into proinﬂammatory cells
MDSCs have been described as a heterogeneous population of
immature myeloid cells endowed with the capacity to inhibit
innate and adaptive immunity (4). In mice, two main populations equipped with dedicated mechanisms of suppression
and functions can be distinguished: monocytic CD11bþ
Ly6GLy6Chigh and granulocytic CD11bþLy6GþLy6Clow MDSCs
(4). Typically, solid tumors mainly induce the expansion of the
granulocytic subset. Human MDSCs are primarily deﬁned by a
CD33þCD11bþHLA-DRneg/low phenotype. The accumulation of
these cells in the periphery and tumor microenvironment results
from the stimulation of myelopoiesis and from the blockade of
the differentiation of immature into mature myeloid cells by
several tumor-derived factors which also promote MDSC-suppressive function (4). Multiple studies conducted in rodents and
patients with different types of cancer have demonstrated
that MDSC elimination, inhibition, or the induction of their
differentiation into proinﬂammatory cells using anticancer
agents enhance antitumor immunity and foster the response
to immunotherapy.
Targeting MDSCs with conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs. Gemcitabine, an antimetabolite drug (nucleoside

2666

Cancer Res; 74(10) May 15, 2014

analogue), used for the treatment of pancreatic, breast, ovarian, and lung cancers, has been reported to deplete MDSCs in
tumor-bearing mice, resulting in enhanced antitumor immunity (27). Another antimetabolite, 5-ﬂuorouracil, used at low
doses, has also been shown to induce MDSC apoptosis (27).
Interestingly, MDSCs are more sensitive to these molecules
than other immune cells or than tumor cells. This selective
effect was explained by a lower expression of thymidylate
synthase by MDSCs (27). The DNA-demethylating agent
5-azacytidine may also reduce the accumulation and function
of MDSCs induced in the mouse TC-1/A9 and TRAMP-C2
tumor models (28). Docetaxel, (a mitotic inhibitor, semisynthetic analogue of paclitaxel) was shown to impair MDSCsuppressive function, predominantly by blocking Stat3 phosphorylation and by promoting MDSC differentiation into M1
macrophages (29). Similarly, it has also been reported that lowdose paclitaxel promotes MDSC differentiation into dendritic
cells in vitro (30).
The anthracycline doxorubicin has been described for its
plethoric immunostimulatory effects (6). We have recently
demonstrated in different mouse cancer models that this drug
selectively, but however transiently, eliminates and inactivates
MDSCs (31). This preferential targeting of MDSCs translates
into increased effector lymphocyte to immunosuppressive
MDSC ratios and is associated with enhanced CD4þ, CD8þ,
and NK cell activation and proinﬂammatory cytokine production, fundamental prerequisites to efﬁcient immunotherapy. A
chemoimmunotherapeutic regimen consisting of doxorubicin
and adoptive transfer of CD4þ Th lymphocytes impairs tumor
development, metastatic spreading, and improves survival. It is
noteworthy that MDSC number remains low over time in
animals receiving the combination treatment, whereas these
cells expanded de novo posttherapy in mice administered with
doxorubicin alone. This observation further underlines the
possibility, and importance, of combining chemotherapeutic
approaches with immmunostimulation (31). The selective
effect of doxorubicin may again be partly explained by the
preferential targeting of highly proliferative cells (in untreated
tumor-bearing mice, MDSC proliferation status is higher than
that of T or NK cells). Another possibility is that doxorubicin
may enhance the already high production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) by MDSCs (compared with other cell subsets),
leading to ROS-dependent apoptosis.
Impact of molecules used in targeted therapies on tumorinduced MDSCs. Sunitinib, has been shown to reduce circulating MDSC number and suppressive function in patients
with RCC, which correlates with improved T-cell function (32).
Again, this effect was selective because T cells exposed to
concentrations of sunitinib that impair MDSCs were viable and
functional. Although the molecular mechanisms remain to be
fully deciphered, it has been speculated that this agent, known
to interfere with tyrosine kinases of the VGEFR1-3 or c-KIT
family, may inhibit VEGF and/or c-KIT–mediating signaling in
MDSCs, pathways that participate in the tumor-driven expansion of these cells (32, 33). An additional mode of action of
sunitinib may include Stat3 inhibition (34). Because stem-cell
factor (c-KIT ligand) contributes to MDSC accumulation, one
should expect that other c-KIT–targeting TKI such as

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Immunosuppressive Cell Targeting with Anticancer Agents

dasatinib, imatinib, or sunitinib may also effectively interfere
with this suppressive cell population.
Reticences raised by the absence of deﬁnitive mechanistic
grounds explaining the selectivity of antineoplastic agents on
MDSCs have eroded the exploitation of this immunomodulatory strategy. In addition, MDSC elimination with these molecules is, as for Tregs, usually transient and a narrow therapeutic
window is available for immunostimulatory interventions.
Many pathways involved in MDSC generation and suppressive
activity can be targeted with several other inhibitors such as
celecoxib (COX-2 inhibitor) or sildenaﬁl (phosphodiesterase-5
inhibitor). A systematic comparison of the efﬁcacy of these
reagents with that of low noncytotoxic doses of antineoplastic
agents to impact the multiple aspects of MDSC immunobiology is undeniably needed.

Future Directions and Concluding Remarks
The discovery that many conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs and molecules used in targeted therapies can blunt the
immunosuppressive cellular networks induced by tumors has
sparked a new promising area of research, at the interface
between traditional cancer therapies and immune-based
strategies. It is, however, noteworthy that the long-term
immunologic consequences of anticancer agent administration are not always therapeutically beneﬁcial and essentially
depend on parameters such as the nature of the considered
molecule(s), the dosing, and scheduling, which all require
further optimization.
In this context, the identiﬁcation of additional speciﬁc
anticancer agents endowed with the ability to impede suppressive cells such as Tregs and MDSCs while sparing (or
promoting) antitumoral immune effectors is of paramount
importance. Along these lines, a more reﬁned understanding of
the interference(s) of these compounds with speciﬁc molecular
pathways in suppressive cells should help decipher the
mechanisms underlying the selective targeting of these cells.
It should also be underlined that in most cases, antineoplastic
molecules only curtail suppressive cells for a transient period
of time. This imposes a regular monitoring to identify a speciﬁc
window of time associated with high effector to suppressor
ratios, permissive for efﬁcient immunotherapeutic interventions. Conceivably, as different molecules may affect different
suppressive cell populations (for instance, cyclophosphamide

primarily targets Tregs, whereas doxorubicin mainly impacts
MDSCs), the identiﬁcation of the immunoinhibitory cell subset
predominantly expanded in a considered cancer patient
should guide the choice of the optimal agent(s).
An additional important question relates to the notion of
Treg "reprogramming." The plasticity of FoxP3þTregs and the
possibility to induce their trans-differentiation into effector
nonsuppressive cells such as Th17 have been described (35).
Although a recent study has indicated that cyclophosphamideinduced generation of Th17 does not depend on Treg reprogramming (36), the possibility that other agents may foster the
conversion of already polarized Tregs into effector subsets, or
reroute the differentiation of na€ve T cells toward effector
T lymphocytes instead of Tregs remains to be addressed.
A signiﬁcant advance in our understanding of the plethoric
immunomodulatory properties of many conventional chemotherapeutic drugs and targeted therapeutic agents has been a
driving force behind the design and development of chemoimmunotherapeutic strategies. Selected antineoplastic agents, by
inducing rapid tumor shrinkage, reversing cancer-induced
immunosuppression, and promoting antitumor cytotoxic
immune effectors may create a favorable environment, allowing
immune-based therapies to elicit long lasting memory immune
responses capable of controlling relapse due to drug-resistant
disease and metastatic spreading (Fig. 1). Although the dose for
each therapeutic arm and the sequence of administration
require additional reﬁnements, the combination of these two
modalities, operating by distinct but complementary and overlapping mechanisms, represents arguably a promising emerging anticancer strategy.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
We apologize to all the authors whose work could not be cited due to space
limitation.

Grant Support
This work was supported, in part, by the Cancer Biology Training Grant
T32CA009213, AZ Cancer Center Support Grant CA023074, and NIH grant R01
CA104926.
Received January 31, 2014; revised March 19, 2014; accepted March 20, 2014;
published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

Dunn GP, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. The three Es of cancer immunoediting.
Annu Rev Immunol 2004;22:329–60.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation.
Cell 2011;144:646–74.
Zitvogel L, Tesniere A, Kroemer G. Cancer despite immunosurveillance: immunoselection and immunosubversion. Nat Rev Immunol
2006;6:715–27.
Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as regulators of the immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 2009;9:162–74.
Colombo MP, Piconese S. Regulatory-T-cell inhibition versus depletion: the right choice in cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer
2007;7:880–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

6.

7.

8.

9.

Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. The secret ally: immunostimulation by anticancer drugs. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2012;11:
215–33.
Vanneman M, Dranoff G. Combining immunotherapy and targeted therapies in cancer treatment. Nat Rev Cancer 2012;12:
237–51.
Kang TH, Mao CP, Lee SY, Chen A, Lee JH, Kim TW, et al. Chemotherapy acts as an adjuvant to convert the tumor microenvironment
into a highly permissive state for vaccination-induced antitumor immunity. Cancer Res 2013;73:2493–504.
Shevach EM. Mechanisms of foxp3þ T regulatory cell-mediated
suppression. Immunity 2009;30:636–45.

Cancer Res; 74(10) May 15, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2667

Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Alizadeh and Larmonier

10. North RJ. Cyclophosphamide-facilitated adoptive immunotherapy of
an established tumor depends on elimination of tumor-induced suppressor T cells. J Exp Med 1982;155:1063–74.
11. Ghiringhelli F, Larmonier N, Schmitt E, Parcellier A, Cathelin D, Garrido
C, et al. CD4þCD25þ regulatory T cells suppress tumor immunity but
are sensitive to cyclophosphamide which allows immunotherapy of
established tumors to be curative. Eur J Immunol 2004;34:336–44.
12. Lutsiak ME, Semnani RT, De Pascalis R, Kashmiri SV, Schlom J,
Sabzevari H. Inhibition of CD4(þ)25þ T regulatory cell function implicated in enhanced immune response by low-dose cyclophosphamide.
Blood 2005;105:2862–8.
13. Taieb J, Chaput N, Schartz N, Roux S, Novault S, Menard C, et al.
Chemoimmunotherapy of tumors: cyclophosphamide synergizes with
exosome based vaccines. J Immunol 2006;176:2722–9.
14. Hirschhorn-Cymerman D, Rizzuto GA, Merghoub T, Cohen AD, Avogadri F, Lesokhin AM, et al. OX40 engagement and chemotherapy
combination provides potent antitumor immunity with concomitant
regulatory T cell apoptosis. J Exp Med 2009;206:1103–16.
15. Ghiringhelli F, Menard C, Puig PE, Ladoire S, Roux S, Martin F, et al.
Metronomic cyclophosphamide regimen selectively depletes
CD4þCD25þ regulatory T cells and restores T and NK effector functions in end stage cancer patients. Cancer Immunol Immunother 2007;
56:641–8.
16. Zhang L, Dermawan K, Jin M, Liu R, Zheng H, Xu L, et al. Differential
impairment of regulatory T cells rather than effector T cells by paclitaxel-based chemotherapy. Clin Immunol 2008;129:219–29.
17. Liu N, Zheng Y, Zhu Y, Xiong S, Chu Y. Selective impairment of
CD4þCD25þFoxp3þ regulatory T cells by paclitaxel is explained by
Bcl-2/Bax mediated apoptosis. Int Immunopharmacol 2011;11:212–9.
18. Galustian C, Meyer B, Labarthe MC, Dredge K, Klaschka D, Henry J,
et al. The anti-cancer agents lenalidomide and pomalidomide inhibit
the proliferation and function of T regulatory cells. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 2009;58:1033–45.
19. Sakamaki I, Kwak LW, Cha SC, Yi Q, Lerman B, Chen J, et al.
Lenalidomide enhances the protective effect of a therapeutic vaccine
and reverses immune suppression in mice bearing established lymphomas. Leukemia 2014;28:329–37.
20. Banissi C, Ghiringhelli F, Chen L, Carpentier AF. Treg depletion with a
low-dose metronomic temozolomide regimen in a rat glioma model.
Cancer Immunol Immunother 2009;58:1627–34.
21. Ridolﬁ L, Petrini M, Granato AM, Gentilcore G, Simeone E, Ascierto PA,
et al. Low-dose temozolomide before dendritic-cell vaccination
reduces (speciﬁcally) CD4þCD25þþFoxp3þ regulatory T-cells in
advanced melanoma patients. J Transl Med 2013;11:135.
22. Adotevi O, Pere H, Ravel P, Haicheur N, Badoual C, Merillon N, et al. A
decrease of regulatory T cells correlates with overall survival after
sunitinib-based antiangiogenic therapy in metastatic renal cancer
patients. J Immunother 2010;33:991–8.
23. Terme M, Pernot S, Marcheteau E, Sandoval F, Benhamouda N,
Colussi O, et al. VEGFA-VEGFR pathway blockade inhibits tumor-

2668

Cancer Res; 74(10) May 15, 2014

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

induced regulatory T-cell proliferation in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res
2013;73:539–49.
Desar IM, Jacobs JH, Hulsbergen-vandeKaa CA, Oyen WJ, Mulders
PF, van der Graaf WT, et al. Sorafenib reduces the percentage of
tumour inﬁltrating regulatory T cells in renal cell carcinoma patients. Int
J Cancer 2011;129:507–12.
Larmonier N, Janikashvili N, LaCasse CJ, Larmonier CB, Cantrell J,
Situ E, et al. Imatinib mesylate inhibits CD4þ CD25þ regulatory T cell
activity and enhances active immunotherapy against BCR-ABLtumors. J Immunol 2008;181:6955–63.
Yang Y, Liu C, Peng W, Lizee G, Overwijk WW, Liu Y, et al. Antitumor Tcell responses contribute to the effects of dasatinib on c-KIT mutant
murine mastocytoma and are potentiated by anti-OX40. Blood
2012;120:4533–43.
Vincent J, Mignot G, Chalmin F, Ladoire S, Bruchard M, Chevriaux A,
et al. 5-Fluorouracil selectively kills tumor-associated myeloid-derived
suppressor cells resulting in enhanced T cell-dependent antitumor
immunity. Cancer Res 2010;70:3052–61.
Mikyskova R, Indrova M, Vlkova V, Bieblova J, Simova J, Parackova Z,
et al. DNA demethylating agent 5-azacytidine inhibits myeloid-derived
suppressor cells induced by tumor growth and cyclophosphamide
treatment. J Leukoc Biol 2014 Jan 3. [Epub ahead of print].
Kodumudi KN, Woan K, Gilvary DL, Sahakian E, Wei S, Djeu JY. A novel
chemoimmunomodulating property of docetaxel: suppression of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in tumor bearers. Clin Cancer Res
2010;16:4583–94.
Michels T, Shurin GV, Naiditch H, Sevko A, Umansky V, Shurin MR.
Paclitaxel promotes differentiation of myeloid-derived suppressor
cells into dendritic cells in vitro in a TLR4-independent manner.
J Immunotoxicol 2012;9:292–300.
Alizadeh D, Trad M, Hanke NT, Larmonier CB, Janikashvili N, Bonnotte
B, et al. Doxorubicin eliminates myeloid-derived suppressor cells and
enhances the efﬁcacy of adoptive T-cell transfer in breast cancer.
Cancer Res 2014;74:104–18.
Ko JS, Zea AH, Rini BI, Ireland JL, Elson P, Cohen P, et al. Sunitinib
mediates reversal of myeloid-derived suppressor cell accumulation in renal cell carcinoma patients. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:
2148–57.
Ozao-Choy J, Ma G, Kao J, Wang GX, Meseck M, Sung M, et al. The
novel role of tyrosine kinase inhibitor in the reversal of immune
suppression and modulation of tumor microenvironment for
immune-based cancer therapies. Cancer Res 2009;69:2514–22.
Xin H, Zhang C, Herrmann A, Du Y, Figlin R, Yu H. Sunitinib inhibition of
Stat3 induces renal cell carcinoma tumor cell apoptosis and reduces
immunosuppressive cells. Cancer Res 2009;69:2506–13.
Bailey-Bucktrout SL, Bluestone JA. Regulatory T cells: stability revisited. Trends Immunol 2011;32:301–6.
Viaud S, Flament C, Zoubir M, Pautier P, LeCesne A, Ribrag V, et al.
Cyclophosphamide induces differentiation of Th17 cells in cancer
patients. Cancer Res 2011;71:661–5.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

Chemotherapeutic Targeting of Cancer-Induced
Immunosuppressive Cells
Darya Alizadeh and Nicolas Larmonier
Cancer Res 2014;74:2663-2668. Published OnlineFirst April 28, 2014.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0301

This article cites 35 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/10/2663.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/10/2663.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

