www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 51), pp: 84439-84452
Research Paper

Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate treatment targets the copper
transporter ATP7A and enhances sensitivity of breast cancer to
cisplatin
Cristine L. Chisholm2,*, Haitao Wang1,*, Ada Hang-Heng Wong1, Guelaguetza
Vazquez-Ortiz2, Weiping Chen3, Xiaoling Xu1, Chu-Xia Deng1,2
1

Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China

2

Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland MD, USA

3

Genomics Core Facility, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland MD, USA

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Chu-Xia Deng, email: cxdeng@umac.mo
Keywords: cisplatin, breast cancer, ATP7A, copper, resistance, sequestering
Received: August 23, 2016     Accepted: October 12, 2016     Published: October 31, 2016

ABSTRACT
Cisplatin is an effective breast cancer drug but resistance often develops over
prolonged chemotherapy. Therefore, we performed a candidate approach RNAi screen
in combination with cisplatin treatment to identify molecular pathways conferring
survival advantages. The screen identified ATP7A as a therapeutic target. ATP7A is a
copper ATPase transporter responsible for intercellular movement and sequestering
of cisplatin. Pharmaceutical replacement for ATP7A by ammonium tetrathiomolybdate
(TM) enhanced cisplatin treatment in breast cancer cells. Allograft and xenograft
models in athymic nude mice treated with cisplatin/TM exhibited retarded tumor
growth, reduced accumulation of cancer stem cells and decreased cell proliferation as
compared to mono-treatment with cisplatin or TM. Cisplatin/TM treatment of cisplatinresistant tumors reduced ATP7A protein levels, attenuated cisplatin sequestering
by ATP7A, increased nuclear availability of cisplatin, and subsequently enhanced
DNA damage and apoptosis. Microarray analysis of gene ontology pathways that
responded uniquely to cisplatin/TM double treatment depicted changes in cell cycle
regulation, specifically in the G1/S transition. These findings offer the potential to
combat platinum-resistant tumors and sensitize patients to conventional breast
cancer treatment by identifying and targeting the resistant tumors’ unique molecular
adaptations.

INTRODUCTION

that causes cell death primarily via adduct-formation
through adjacent guanine residues [8–10]. Cisplatin may
also induce cell death by damaging cytoplasmic proteins,
inducing apoptosis at the execution phase level [8, 9, 11].
Platinum agents are highly effective in combating
BRCA1-associated breast cancer because there is defect
in the homology-directed DNA repair capability of
these tumors that contributes to genomic instability
[12, 13]. Unfortunately, resistance to platinum agents
often develops, through cellular adaptations that result in
reduced drug uptake, increased efflux and sequestering,
and enhanced detoxification, contributing to metastasis

Breast cancer affects approximately one in eight
women in Western countries. In the U.S., more than 200,000
new breast cancer cases are diagnosed each year, with
about 5% of which is caused by mutations in breast cancer
associated gene 1 (BRCA1) and breast cancer associated
gene 2 (BRCA2) [1–4]. Platinum drugs such as cisplatin
(cis-[PtCl2(NH3)2], cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II),
cDDP), carboplatin and oxaliplatin serve as conventional
treatment for breast cancer and other solid tumors [5–7].
Cisplatin is a crosslink-inducing DNA-damaging agent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84439

Oncotarget

was achieved with combined treatment of ATP7A siRNA
and cisplatin in all cell lines (Figure 1B). Increased
protein levels of ATP7A or ATP7B (both are copper export
pumps) were reported to correlate to cisplatin resistance
a in several human cancer cell lines examined [24, 25].
Studies also showed that ATP7A sequesters cisplatin into
cell vesicles (such as lysosomes) [26, 27]. Therefore, we
chose to study the role of ATP7A in cisplatin resistance.

and overall treatment failure [14, 15]. Previous studies also
indicate that altered gene expression, DNA copy number
changes, and substantial genomic instability contribute to
cisplatin resistance [9, 15, 16]. This underscores the need
for identification of alternative and ameliorative treatments
that re-sensitize cells to platinum agents.
In this study, we conducted an RNAi library
screening combined with cisplatin treatment in human
and mouse breast cancer cell lines to identify potential
therapeutic agents. The copper transporting P-type
ATPase, ATP7A [17], was one of the candidates that
emerged from our screen. Herein, we describe how ATP7A
specifically contributes to cisplatin resistance in breast
cancer, and how combining cisplatin and ammonium
tetrathiomolybdate (TM), which degrades ATP7A, to
sensitizes breast tumor cells to cisplatin.

Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate treatment
sensitizes breast cancer cells to cisplatin
We first tested three metal chelating agents:
neucoprine
([C14H12N2],
2,9-dimethyl-1,10phenanthroline),
ammonium
tetrathiotungstate
([(NH4)2WS4], TT), and ammonium tetrathiomolybdate
([(NH4)2MoS4], TM). While neucoprine and TT treatment
alone or in combination with cisplatin on the four cell lines
under investigation did not have significant effect on cell
survival, our results indicated that double treatment with
TM and cisplatin significantly sensitized breast cancer
cells to a level comparable to that attained with ATP7A
siRNA (data not shown). Furthermore, we plotted a dose
response curve of TM in the MB-MDA-231 human breast
cancer cell line at its cisplatin IC30 dose of 10 µM, or in
the absence of cisplatin. A 20% decrease in overall cell
survival was observed after cisplatin/TM treatment as
compared to the predicted additive curve (Figure 1C). It
is noteworthy that the synergy between TM and cisplatin
occurred at very low TM concentration, which had
virtually very low or no effect on cell viability (Figure 1C).
TM is designated an orphan drug in the U.S., and
was first used therapeutically in the treatment of copper
toxicosis and Wilson's disease [28, 29]. TM serves as
an attractive anti-cancer compound on the basis of its
ability to act as both an angiogenesis inhibitor and copper
trafficking protein inhibitor [30, 31], and is currently being
tested in clinical trials in combination with doxorubicin
and alone for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer
[32]. We hypothesized that TM exerts distinct ameliorative
effects in combination with conventional platinum
chemotherapy independent of its effects on tumor
vascularization.

RESULTS
Candidate RNAi screen revealed ATP7A as a
target for inducing cisplatin sensitivity
To identify specific gene and pathway targets
that confer to cisplatin sensitivity upon knockdown, we
utilized RNAi library screen combined with cisplatin
treatment in human breast cancer cell lines. This screen
was carried out in three human breast cancer cell lines,
MDA-MB-231, T47D and MCF7, respectively. These
cell lines were determined to be resistant to cisplatin
by National Cancer Institute (NCI) In Vitro Cell Line
Screening Project (IVCLSP). Cells were treated with
cisplatin alone at its IC50 (50% lethality) dose of 10 µM
for MCF-7 and 36 µM for MDA-MB-231 and T47D, or
in combination with a human siRNA siGENOME library
(Thermo Dharmacon). Our RNAi library comprised of
siRNA against 55 custom-selected genes (Supplementary
Table S1), including genes identified in the common
genomic gain regions found in the cisplatin resistant
breast cancer cells and associated with poor prognosis in
breast cancer, which are located on chromosomes 6p12,
6p21, 11q13, 20q13.2 and several regions of 14q [18–21].
Additionally, we included siRNA targeting genes related
to stem cell maintenance, such as SOX2 and OCT3/4,
as well as drug detoxifying enzymes, and transporters
involved in drug and metal flux.
In our RNAi screen, 14 out of 55 (25.5%) of
the candidates exhibited synergy in cell killing when
combined with cisplatin at corresponding cisplatin
IC50 dose (Figure 1A), some of which were reported to
contribute to cisplatin resistance when overexpressed,
such as STAT3, MDR1 and ATP7A [22, 23]. To validate
the RNAi result, the human breast cancer cell lines T47D,
MDA-MB-231 and MCF7, as well as the BRCA1-mutant
mouse breast cancer cell line 69, were treated with
cisplatin alone or in combination with ATP7A siRNA
respectively. Indeed, significantly enhanced cytotoxicity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cisplatin and TM synergistically inhibit tumor
progression through inhibition of cancer stem
cells accumulation and proliferation
Afterwards, we tested the effect of cisplatin/TM
double treatment in vivo utilizing athymic nude mice
implanted with breast cancer cells. For this experiment,
1 × 106 BRCA1-mutant mouse breast cancer cells were
implanted in the bilateral 4th mammary fat pads of athymic
nude mice at 6–10 weeks of age. Tumors became visible
7–14 days post-implantation, and drug administration
was initiated when tumor reached 200 mm3. Mice were
84440

Oncotarget

intraperitoneally (IP) injected with cisplatin at 6 mg/kg
body weight with or without oral administration of TM at
0.030 mg/mL in drinking water. Tumor volume of cisplatin/
TM double treated mice (Cis/TM) was significantly smaller
than untreated (Untr) and mono-treated (TM or Cis)
groups in 69 allograft model (Figure 2A). Mice treated
with cisplatin alone had smaller tumor volume and longer
survival than the mice treated with TM alone (data not
shown). Similar tumor progression profile was observed in
MDA-MB-231 xenograft mice (Figure 2B).
We have previously shown that prolonged
treatment of cisplatin induces cisplatin resistance that is
accompanied by accumulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
[13]. This was observed in cisplatin mono-treated 69
allograft tumors harvested at 45 days post-treatment, as
seen by the stark rise of tumor growth curve (Figure 2A).
Thus, we refer to this tumor as the cisplatin mono-treated
resistant tumor (CisR) hereafter. Flow cytometry analysis
of 69 allograft tumor-dissociated cells revealed an
elevation of CD24hi CD49fhi CSC population in cisplatin
mono-treated resistant tumors (CisR) as compared to

untreated tumors (Untr), whereas a decline of CSC
population was observed in cisplatin/TM double treated
tumors (Cis/TM) (Figure 2C).
Using these 69 allograft tumors, we analyzed cell
proliferation using Ki67, a common biomarker used for
the diagnosis of aggressiveness of many types of cancers,
including breast cancer. Immunostaining of 69 allograft
mouse tumor sections showed increased Ki67 antibody
staining on untreated mouse tumor (Untr) and cisplatin
mono-treated resistant tumors (CisR), as compared to
cisplatin/TM double treated tumors (Cis/TM) (Figure 2D).
Quantification of Ki67 staining depicted over 20%
reduction in Ki67 staining in cisplatin mono-treated
resistant tumors (CisR) as compared to cisplatin/TM
double treated tumors (Cis/TM) (Figure 2E). Furthermore,
the increase in Ki67 staining in cisplatin mono-treated
resistant tumors (CisR) as compared to untreated tumors
(Untr) in this experiment (Figure 2E) suggested that
acquisition of cisplatin resistance correlated to increased
cell proliferation. Conversely, cisplatin/TM double treated
tumors had retarded tumor growth, less CSCs and lower

Figure 1: Identification and validation of a target pathway that affects cisplatin response in human breast cancer.

(A) 14 out of 55 candidate gene siRNAs that exhibited synergistic effect with cisplatin upon double treatment in T47D cells were shown.
Cell survival rate was measured by ATP release assay after treatment with 36 µM (IC50) cisplatin with or without siRNA, and normalized
to both the non-targeting siRNA and vehicle control. (B) Validation of synergistic effect of cisplatin and ATP7A knockdown in three human
breast cancer cell lines T47D, MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7, and one mouse breast cancer cell line 69 using RNAi pools distinct from the
initial candidate screen. (C) Dose response curve of MDA-MB-231 upon TM treatment in the absence or presence of 10 µM cisplatin. MTT
assay was used to determine cell survival rate after 3 days drug treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84441

Oncotarget

Ki67 levels. Taken together, our allograft model suggested
that TM overcomes cisplatin resistance through inhibition
of cancer stem cells accumulation and cell proliferation.
Aside from CSC accumulation and cell proliferation,
we also performed terminal dUTP nicked end labeling
(TUNEL) assay and immunohistochemical staining of
antibodies against γH2AX and 53BP1, in order to assess
apoptosis through DNA fragmentation and DNA damage.
Results showed that cisplatin mono-treatment resulting in
resistance emergence (CisR) led to more TUNEL-positive
staining and γH2AX foci as compared to untreated mouse
allograft tumors (Untr), whereas further elevation was
observed in cisplatin/TM double treated mouse allograft
tumors (Cis/TM) (Figure 3A), suggesting that TM
promotes apoptosis and DNA damage. Quantification
of the stained sections showed that the number of

TUNEL-positive cells (Figure 3B) in cisplatin/TM double
treated tumors (Cis/TM) was positively correlated to
the percentage of γH2AX-positive cells (Figure 3C)
and increased γH2AX foci (Figure 3D), as compared
to cisplatin mono-treated resistant tumors (CisR) and
untreated tumors (Untr). Consistent with this, elevated
foci of 53BP1, which is recruited to sites of aberrant
fork structures to suppress homologous recombination
and facilitate non-homologous end joining [33], was
observed in cisplatin/TM double treated tumors (Cis/TM)
as compared to cisplatin mono-treated resistant tumors
(CisR) and untreated control (Untr) (Figure 3A). Taken
together, these data suggested that TM enhances tumor
apoptosis synergistically with cisplatin and overcomes
cisplatin resistance by increasing platinum-induced DNA
damage and cell death in breast cancer.

Figure 2: Cisplatin/TM combined therapy inhibits cancer growth and cancer stem cell accumulation in vivo.

(A, B) Average tumor volumes were measured in athymic nude mice implanted with allografts of BRCA1-mutant mouse 69 breast cancer
cells (A) or xenografts of human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells (B). Mice received cisplatin (Cis), TM, cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM), or
no treatment (Untr) (N = 5 per group). (C) Percentage of CD24hi and CD49fhi cells was profiled using combination of CD24 and CD49f
antibodies. Flow cytometry analysis of 69 allograft tumor-dissociated cells revealed an elevation of CD24hiCD49fhi CSC population in
cisplatin mono-treated resistant tumors (CisR) as compared to untreated tumors (Untr), whereas a decline of CSC population was observed
in cisplatin/TM double treated tumors (Cis/TM) (D, E) Ki67 positive cells were detected by immunohistochemical staining with an
antibody against Ki67 (D) and shown as percentage of total cells (E). *P < 0.05 by Student’s T-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84442

Oncotarget

Microarray analysis reveals changes in
gene expression unique to cisplatin and TM
combinatorial treatment

two time points induced expression change of 3,539 and
2,119 genes respectively, while cisplatin and TM double
treatment induced expression change of 5,665 and 2,088
genes at 12 hours and 24 hours post-treatment respectively
(Supplementary Table S3). Next, we used the Venn
diagram to identify genes whose expression was altered at
both 12 hours and 24 hours under each treatment condition.
Data indicated that 3,156 genes (2,355 upregulated
and 801 downregulated genes) overlapped at both time
points upon cisplatin treatment (Figure 4A); 1,836 genes
(1,449 upregulated and 387 downregulated genes)
overlapped at both time points upon TM treatment
(Figure 4B); and 1,576 genes (1,143 upregulated and 433

To study the mechanism underlying synergistic
action between cisplatin and TM on tumor growth, we
compared changes in gene expression using microarray
and conducted pathway analysis to investigate changes in
gene expression profiles in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells under treatment with TM, cisplatin and cisplatin/TM.
Our data revealed that cisplatin treatment for 12 hours
and 24 hours induced expression change of 5,884 genes
and 4,127 genes, respectively. TM treatment at these

Figure 3: TM enhances cisplatin sensitivity in cisplatin/TM combined therapy in athymic nude mouse models through
enhancement of DNA damage and apoptosis. (A) Apoptosis and DNA damage was revealed by immunohistochemical analysis of

tumor sections from allografted mice that developed resistance to cisplatin or responded to cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) treatment with tumor
regression. (B) Number of TUNEL+ cells per arbitral area in untreated (Untr), cisplatin resistant (CisR) and cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) treated
tumors. I, II and III represent three different cancers. (C) Number of γH2AX+ cells per arbitral area in untreated (Untr), cisplatin resistant
(CisR) and cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) treated tumors. (D) Number of γH2AX foci per nucleus in untreated (Untr), cisplatin resistant (CisR)
and cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) treated tumor cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84443

Oncotarget

downregulated genes) overlapped at both time points upon
cisplatin/TM double treatment (Figure 4C). Enrichment of
KEGG pathway analysis of these common genes (including
both upregulated and downregulated genes) identified
pathways that were significantly changed in cisplatin,
TM and cisplatin/TM treated tumors (Supplementary
Figure S2). Inspection of the top 10 upregulated pathways
under these treatment conditions identified 3 pathways
in common, i.e. RNA polymerase, proteasome, and
DNA replication, together with a number of pathways
involved in DNA damage repair (Figure 4D–4F). Because
double treatment of cisplatin and TM is most effective
in triggering DNA damage, apoptosis, and inhibition of
cancer growth, we first focused on the pathways changed
in the double treated cells. Of note, the majority of the top
10 pathways is involved in cell cycle, DNA repair and
damage response (i.e. DNA replication, RNA polymerase,
homologous recombination, mismatch repair, base excision
repair, nucleotide excision repair and p53 signaling), which
may be accountable for the phenotypes observed in these
cells (Figure 4G). Analysis of the microarray data using
enrichment of biological functions highlighted changes
in DNA replication, DNA damage repair, and cell cycle
regulation and checkpoint (Figure 4H), which also attribute
to the phenotype observed in the cisplatin/TM double
treated cells. On the other hand, inspection of the top 10
downregulated pathways under cisplatin/TM treatment
did not reveal such a causal relationship between drug
treatment and phenotype (data not shown).
These pathways also exhibited more extensive
changes (both in the number of genes and their expression
levels) in the cisplatin/TM double treated cells than
cisplatin or TM mono-treated cells (Figure 4G and 4H,
and Supplementary Figure S3), which is consistent to the
synergy between these two drugs as demonstrated in this
study. Further analysis indicated that 21 genes are involved
in various aspects of DNA damage (Supplementary
Figure S4A), 47 in DNA damage response (DDR)
(Supplementary Figure S4B), 26 in cell cycle regulation
and checkpoint (Supplementary Figure S4C), and 33 in cell
death (Supplementary Figure S4E). Real-time quantitative
PCR (RT-qPCR) validation confirmed expression patterns
of these genes (Figure 4I). Thus, cisplatin and TM double
treatment significantly enhances DNA damage, activates
DDR and multiple cell cycle checkpoints, leading to cell
cycle arrest allowing cells to repair DNA damage, or
cell death if the DNA damage cannot be repaired. Taken
together, the result of microarray analysis is consistent
with our observation in mouse allograft tumor.

chelation and angiogenesis inhibition [30, 31, 34, 35]. We
did not see an obvious connection between angiogenesis
inhibition and the markedly enhanced DNA damage in the
cisplatin/TM double treated cells. Instead, we believed this
might be associated with nuclear availability of cisplatin
upon combined treatment with TM.
To investigate this, we engrafted BRCA1-mutant
69 mouse breast cancer cells in athymic nude mice. Monotreatment with cisplatin alone resulted in cisplatin resistant
tumors that grew rapidly to 3,000 mm3 in 32 days, while
cisplatin/TM double treated tumors exhibited retarded
growth at 1,000 mm3 60 days post-treatment (data not
shown). Freshly isolated cisplatin mono-treated resistant
(CisR) and cisplatin/TM double treated (Cis/TM) mouse
allograft mammary tumors were subject to comparative
analyses by ImageStream multi-spectral imaging flow
cytometry.
We observed key differences between cisplatin
localization, and ATP7A protein expression and
distribution in the mammary tumor cells. In cisplatin
resistant cells (CisR), ATP7A expression was high, while
cisplatin intensity (Pt) is low and is mainly excluded
from the nucleus (Figure 5A). In contrast, cells isolated
from cisplatin/TM double treated mammary tumors had
significantly lower amounts of ATP7A and the protein
was frequently observed to be localized in distinct,
punctuate regions of the cell (Figure 5B). Coherently, the
amount of cisplatin co-localization with nuclear DNA
(DAPI) in cisplatin/TM doubled treated cells (Cis/TM)
is significantly greater (Figure 5B) than that observed in
cisplatin resistant cells (CisR) (Figure 5A).
Co-localization between ATP7A and cisplatin was
further analyzed and plotted as normalized frequency
against an arbitrary similarity scale from ”low” to ”high”
using ImageStream's Quantitative Mean Similarity Score.
The results showed that the cisplatin resistant tumor
cells (CisR) exhibited extensive co-localization between
cisplatin and ATP7A in the cytoplasm (Figure 5C),
suggesting that ATP7A sequesters cisplatin and prevents
it from getting into the nucleus. Cisplatin/TM double
treated cells (Cis/TM) prevailed the lowest co-localization
score, while untreated cells (Untr) displayed intermediate
levels of cisplatin and ATP7A localization (Figure 5C).
This observation supports the notion that ATP7A prevents
the nuclear localization of cisplatin by sequestering and
pumping it out of cells.

TM promotes cisplatin localization in cell
nucleus

TM was reported to reduce the copper transporter
CTR1 in cervical and ovarian carcinoma [36, 37]. Thus,
we hypothesized that TM may also decrease ATP7A
protein expression level through copper chelation. Copper
staining of allograft tumor sections showed high copper
levels in both untreated (Untr) and cisplatin mono-treated

TM reduces ATP7A protein level but not gene
transcription

Next, we sought to understand the mechanism of how
TM enhances DNA damage in breast cancer. It was reported
that TM inhibits tumor growth through its role in copper
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84444

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Microarray analysis of MDA-MB-231 cells treated with cisplatin (Cis), TM or cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM).

(A–C) Venn diagrams depicting the number of unique upregulated or downregulated genes in cisplatin (Cis) (A), TM (B) and cisplatin/
TM (Cis/TM) (C) treatment groups. (D–F) Bar graphs showing the top 10 enriched pathways by KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
to demonstrate the difference in gene enrichment in cisplatin (Cis) (D), TM (E) and cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) (F) treatment groups.
(G) KEGG pathway enrichment heatmap to demonstrate the top10 upregulated pathway in cisplatin/TM treated cells and their changes in
other treatment conditions. (H) GO function enrichment heatmap to highlight the enrichment of upregulated genes in the DNA Damage and
Cell Cycle related functions under different treatment conditions. (I) Validation of gene expression by RT-qPCR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84445

Oncotarget

resistant (CisR) mouse tumors, while cisplatin/TM double
treated (Cis/TM) mouse tumors prevailed low copper
levels (Figure 6A). In concert to lower copper levels,
immunohistochemical staining of antibody against ATP7A
on mouse tumor sections showed that cisplatin/TM double
treatment (Cis/TM) reduced ATP7A protein levels as
compared to untreated control (Untr) (Figure 6B).
We next asked whether ATP7A protein
downregulation is due to inhibition of ATP7A’s gene
transcription. Relative luciferase activity of ATP7A -224
HIF2 promoter was tested with cisplatin addition in the
presence or absence of TM in cells with no significant
changes in promoter activity in TM treated (TM) group
as compared to negative control (Vehicle), whereas
cisplatin (Cis), cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) and hypoxiainducing desferrioxamine mesylate (Dfx) treated groups
showed 1.3, 1.2 and 1.4 fold increase in ATP7A promoter

activity respectively (Figure 6C). This result suggested
that TM alone or in combination with cisplatin does not
significantly induce or inhibit ATP7A’s promoter activity.
In contrast to ATP7A’s promoter activity, in vitro
treatment of cell cultures with drugs showed that addition
of TM (TM) slightly reduced ATP7A protein levels 8 hours
post-treatment, whereas cisplatin/TM double treatment
(Cis/TM) led to ATP7A protein downregulation 6 hours
post-treatment; alternatively, cisplatin treatment alone (Cis)
resulted in no changes in ATP7A protein levels as compared
to vehicle control (Vehicle) (Figure 6D). Therefore, this data
suggested that ATP7A downregulation upon cisplatin/TM
double treatment occurred at protein level. Taken together,
TM reduces ATP7A protein level in vitro and in vivo,
without significant effect on ATP7A gene transcription.
Collectively, this data supports a model that
increased ATP7A sequestering of cisplatin contributes

Figure 5: Co-localization between ATP7A, cisplatin and cell nucleus. (A, B) ImageStream analysis of co-localization
between ATP7A, cisplatin (Pt) and cell nucleus (DAPI) in mouse 69 allograft breast cancer cells. (C) Frequency plot of similarity scores
to demonstrate ATP7A and cisplatin co-localization in untreated, cisplatin resistant and cisplatin/TM treated mouse 69 allograft breast
cancer cells after ImageStream analysis. X-axis shows arbitrary similarity scale from ”low” (lower degree of co-localization) to ”high”
(greater degree of co-localization) between ATP7A and cisplatin. Y-axis is normalized frequency reflecting the quantity of cells scored. TM
treatment significantly reduced the co-localization between ATP7A and cisplatin. Over 5,000 cells were analyzed for each group of sample.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84446

Oncotarget

to resistance by preventing it from reaching the nucleus,
and TM treatment, which effectively reduces ATP7A,
may reverse this process, leading to enhanced nuclear
localization of cisplatin and consequently, DNA damage
and apoptosis.

In this study, we focused on elucidation of the
specific biological roles of ATP7A in cisplatin resistant
breast cancer. We observed a significant increase in drug
efficacy in platinum resistant breast cancer cells when
we combined RNAi directed at ATP7A with cisplatin.
In an effort to target the copper transport pathway
pharmacologically, we found treatment of cells with TM
could achieve comparable cytotoxicity yielded from ATP7A
knockdown. TM is an active copper chelating agent used
to treat disorders of copper metabolism, such as Wilson’s
disease, and serves as an anti-angiogenesis agent [28, 31].
It has been shown that TM-copper chelation has a good
therapeutic effect for a number of solid tumors [34, 35].
It was previously shown that TM could increase
cisplatin sensitivity and efficacy in cervical and ovarian
cancer cells in a CTR-1 dependent manner [36]. However,
our study revealed additional effects of TM on transport

DISCUSSION
The development of drug resistance presents a major
impediment to the treatment of breast cancer [7, 38, 39].
BRCA1-mutant breast cancers respond well to platinum
agent therapy, which induces DNA crosslinking, as the
tumors are deficient in DNA repair; however, cisplatin
resistance often develops [12, 13, 40–43]. Platinum
resistance was caused by numerous reasons, mainly
covering the influx and efflux of platinum, and overcome
of cytotoxicity mechanisms [9, 15, 16].

Figure 6: Investigation of ATP7A downregulation by TM in cisplatin resistant breast cancer. (A) TM treatment reduces

copper level in cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM) treated cancers compared with untreated (Untr) and cisplatin mono-treated tumors (CisR).
(B) Immunohistochemical staining of ATP7A in untreated and cisplatin/TM treated mouse allograft tumors showed that cisplatin/TM (Cis/TM)
treated tumors had significantly less ATP7A than untreated tumors (Untr). (C) Relative luciferase activity assay demonstrated no significant
change in ATP7A minimal promoter activity regardless of 24 hours treatment with vehicle, TM, cisplatin, cisplatin/TM, or the hypoxiainducing Dfx. (D) Western blot against ATP7A in MDA-MB-231 cells under treatment with 36 µM cisplatin, and/or 10 µM TM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84447

Oncotarget

downstream of CTR-1 and the exact contribution of
ATP7A, a protein attributed to platinum efflux and
implicated in platinum sequestering, to platinum resistance
[44–46]. We demonstrated that the ability of TM to
increase tumor sensitivity to cisplatin primarily through
effects on ATP7A, i.e. by reducing the amount of ATP7A
protein in cisplatin resistant tumor cells. We suspected that
DNA damage was caused by increased nuclear localization
of cisplatin. The reduction in ATP7A was also associated
with reduced colocalization between ATP7A and labeled
platinum, and increased colocalization between nuclear
DNA and labeled platinum, suggesting that lower levels
of ATP7A resulted in less sequestering of platinum.
We have previously shown that prolonged treatment
with cisplatin triggers accumulation of cisplatin resistant
CSCs [13]. We now found that the combination of TM
and cisplatin could prevent accumulation of CSCs,
accompanied by widespread DNA damage and apoptosis.
To uncover the mechanism underlying the synergistic
actions between cisplatin and TM, we performed
microarray analysis. It revealed that combined treatment of
cisplatin and TM induced changes both in gene expression
level and the number of genes that are involved in DNA
damage repair (DDR), cell cycle checkpoint and apoptosis
at much higher frequency than the treatment of either drug
alone. This finding provides the molecular basis for the
synergy between these two drugs.
In summary, our data revealed that ATP7A plays
a critical role in creating platinum resistance through
sequestering cisplatin in the cytoplasm and pumping it out
of the cell. TM treatment reduces ATP7A concentration
and facilitates cisplatin localization to the nucleus in order
to trigger DNA damage. This, in turn, triggers activation
of DNA damage response involving ATM/ATR signaling
that activates p53. The activation of p53 activates multiple
cell cycle checkpoints and triggers cell cycle arrest, which
allows cells to repair damaged DNA. Meanwhile, p53
also triggers apoptosis if the damage is too extensive to
be repaired, resulting in reduced cell proliferation and
inhibition of cancer growth (Figure 7). As cisplatin is
widely used for cancer therapy and cisplatin resistance
is a common problem associated with chemotherapy,
our finding provides a clue to combat platinum resistant
tumors and sensitize patients to conventional breast cancer
treatment strategies.

cancer cells and associated with poor-prognosis breast
cancer, including 6p12, 6p21, 11q13, 20q13.2 and several
regions of 14q [18–21]. Additionally, we added siRNA
targeting genes related to stem cell maintenance to the
candidate screen, such as SOX2 and OCT3/4, predicting
that a small cancer stem cell population maintained
or evolved in cisplatin treated tumors could drive or
contribute to resistance. Finally, we included several
siRNAs to knock down drug detoxifying enzymes as well
as drug and metal transporters.
This screen utilized several human breast cancer
cell lines that were determined to be resistant to cisplatin
by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) In Vitro Cell Line
Screening Project (IVCLSP) (http://dtp.nci.nih.gov/
branches/btb/ivclsp.html).

Cell transfection
For RNAi screen, T47D, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231
human breast cancer cells (ATCC) were transfected with
55 distinct siRNA pools using Dharmfect4 at 25 nM in
96-well plates seeded with 5,000 cells/well in triplicate.
RNAi transfections were performed both with and
without cisplatin treatment at 10 µM for MCF7 and
36 µM for MDA-MB-231 and T47D, and knockdown
was validated by Western blot and quantitative RTPCR with a consistent 88–92% knockdown efficiency
achieved in three distinct human breast cancer cell lines
(Supplementary Figure S1). Cells were analyzed for
ATP7A expression by quantitative RT-PCR using the
following primers: 5ʹ GCTCCTATCCAGCAGTTTGC 3ʹ
and 5ʹ ACAGGGACATGCGATACACA 3ʹ. Sensitivity to
cisplatin was assayed by ATP release using the Promega
Cell Titer Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay Kit
and/or the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphehyl-2Htetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Lamin positive controls
and a non-target control were run with each assay.
For pharmacological replacement, 5,000 cells/
well of the indicated cell lines was seeded into a 96-well
plate in triplicate. 16 hours cultures were added with
gradient concentrations of ammonium tetrathiomolybdate
(TM) (Sigma-Aldrich, cat# 323446) as indicated in
corresponding figures in the absence or presence of
10 µM cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich, cat# P4394). Cells
were incubated at 37°C at 5% CO2 for 72 hours after
drug addition. MTT assay was performed as instructed
by manufacturer’s protocol (Roche Diagnostics cat.
11465007001). All raw data was normalized to DMSO
control. Predicted addictive curve was calculated by
multiplying normalized mean cell viability of TM monotreatment by mean cell viability of cisplatin monotreatment used in this study, which is 70%. For example
for doses of TM that generate 80% and 50% viability,
respectively, the addictive point is 56% (70% × 80%),
and 35% (70% × 50%), respectively. Graphs were plotted
using GraphPad Prism 6.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human RNAi candidate screen
A small-scale screen of a Thermo Dharmacon human
custom siRNA siGENOME library comprised of 55 handselected breast cancer chemotherapy resistance-related
gene targets was carried out in vitro (Supplementary
Table  S1). These genes were identified in the common
genomic gain regions found in the cisplatin resistant breast
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84448

Oncotarget

Allograft and xenograft mouse models

Isolation and staining of mouse tumor cells for
imagestream analysis

Adherence to the NIH Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals was followed for all in vivo
experiments. All allograft and xenograft in vivo experiments
followed protocols described earlier [13]. Briefly,
6–10 weeks old female aythymic nude mice were implanted
with BRCA1 mutant breast cancer cells in the bilateral
4th mammary fat pads. 1 × 106 cells were implanted
subcutaneously and tumors became visible 7–14 days postimplantation. TM and cisplatin treatment was initiated
when tumors reached 200 mm3. Mice were intraperitoneally
injected with cisplatin at a dose of 6 mg/kg body weight
twice per week with or without TM treatment at
0.015–0.030 mg/ml continuously in drinking water. Tumor
volume was measured 2–4 times per week and compared
between different treatment groups of mice (N = 10–12
tumors per group). Tumor volume was calculated using
the formula: V = ab2/2, where a and b is tumor length and
width, respectively. In vivo experiments were performed in
triplicate with 5–6 mice per treatment group.

Mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and tumors
excised to create single cell suspensions. Tumor tissue was
finely minced under sterile conditions in DMEM (Cellgro
Mediatech) containing 10% FBS, 1% glutamine, 10 ng/mL
epidermal growth factor (EGF) (Invitrogen), and 5 µg/mL
insulin (Sigma-Aldrich), and passed through a 45 micron
nylon cell strainer (BD Falcon) to create single cell
suspension. Cells were pelleted and plated on 100 mm
polystyrene plates (Corning) at a concentration of 3 × 106
cells per plate in 5 mL of DMEM media described above.
Cells were left undisturbed and allowed to attach in a
37°C incubator with 5 percent CO2 for 3 days and then
passaged or frozen in liquid nitrogen. 1 × 106 live tumor
cells at passage 2 or younger were incubated for 1–2 hours
on ice in dark with cisplatin labelled with Kreatech
Platinum Bright 570 Red/Orange Reagent (Kreatech/
BioMicroSystems) in PSS buffer containing phosphate
buffered saline pH 7.2, 0.5% bovine serum albumin,

Figure 7: Summary of the mechanism regarding synergy between cisplatin and TM. Cisplatin resistant tumors express

increased levels of ATP7A that sequester cisplatin in the cytoplasm to prevent its nuclear localization and also pump cisplatin out of
cells. The presence of TM reduces intracellular ATP7A levels, facilitates nuclear localization of cisplatin, enhances DNA damage, hence
sensitizes cisplatin resistant tumor to cisplatin therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84449

Oncotarget

and 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). The
labeled cisplatin is comprised of mono-reactive cisplatin
derivatives that react at the N7 positions of guanine
moieties in DNA. After incubation, cells were washed
again in PSS buffer and fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde
and stained with anti-ATP7A primary antibody produced
in chicken (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30–60 minutes on ice in
dark, then an anti-chicken Alexa488 secondary antibody
(Molecular Probes) for 30 minutes on ice in dark and
nuclei were stained with 4ʹ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI).

identify differentially expressed genes between different
treatment samples and control samples at each time point
[48]. The list of differentially expressed genes at each
time point of each treatment group was further filtered by
the criteria of P < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5 to identify
the set of significant differentially expressed genes in
each group. Gene function enrichment was analyzed
using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher’s exact
test. Unless otherwise stated, P values were considered
significant if P < 0.05. Error bars represent SEM of
3 experiments unless otherwise stated. All statistical
analysis was performed using R Statistical Software
(version 3.1.2; R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria).

Imaging flow cytometry
Localization and similarity analyses were performed
on Amnis ImageStream X multi-spectral imaging flow
cytometer. Alexa488-labeled ATP7A and fluorophorelabeled cisplatin were excited by a 488nm laser and collected
in channels containing 470–560 nm and 560–595 nm
filters, respectively. DAPI was excited by a 405 nm laser
and collected in the channel containing 430–505 nm filter.
5000–10,000 cells were imaged and data were compensated
and analyzed using Amnis IDEAS software. The degree of
co-localization between ATP7A and cisplatin (Pt), ATP7A
and DAPI, and cisplatin (Pt) and DAPI was assessed using
the Similarity Feature included in the software package,
based on single, focused cells. The Similarity Feature is a
measure of the degree to which two input images within
a masked region are linearly correlated and is a pixel by
pixel comparison based on the log transformed Pearson’s
coefficient. The ImageStream analyses were performed in
triplicate utilizing cell populations from at least 3 tumors
for each treatment group.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We thank members of the Deng laboratory for
critical review of the manuscript and technical advice.
We are grateful for the technical assistance of Ms. Leigh
Samsel in the Flow Cytometry Core Facility, National
Heart Lung and Blood Institute, NIH. This work was
supported, in part, by the Intramural Research Program
of the NIDDK, NIH and by Chair Professor Grant (CPG)
and Startup Research Grant (SRG) granted to CXD by
University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest.

Authors’ contributions
C.L.C. and C.X.D. conceived this research.
C.L.C., H.W., A.H.W., G.V.O. and X.X. conducted the
experiments. H.W. and W.C. processed and analyzed the
microarray analysis. C.L.C., H.W., A.H.W. and C.X.D.
prepared the manuscript. All authors reviewed the
manuscript.

Microarray analysis
1.0 × 105 basal type MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells (ATCC) were treated with 36 µM cisplatin (Sigma),
10 µM TM, both drugs, or a vehicle control in triplicate
in 6-well plates and harvested at 12 and 24 hours. RNA
was prepared from cell pellets using the Qiagen RNeasy
RNA purification kit. RNA quality was determined by
2100 Bioanalyzer analysis (Agilent Technologies) and
microarray was performed in triplicate for each drug
treatment group using Affymetrix gene Chip Human Gene
1.0 ST Arrays (901086). ANOVA and pathway analysis
was performed by the NIDDK Genomic Core Facility. The
microarray data have been submitted to the GEO database
under the accession number GSE77515.

REFERENCES
1.	 Alberg AJ, Lam AP, Helzlsouer KJ. Epidemiology,
prevention, and early detection of breast cancer. Curr Opin
Oncol. 1999; 11:435–441.
2.	 Brody LC, Biesecker BB. Breast cancer susceptibility
genes. BRCA1 and BRCA2. Medicine (Baltimore). 1998;
77:208–226.
3.	 Deng CX. BRCA1: cell cycle checkpoint, genetic
instability, DNA damage response, and cancer evolution.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:1416–1426.

Statistical analysis
Raw intensity data were normalized by the Robust
Multi-array Average (RMA) method [47] using the
‘affy’ package in R-Bioconductor. Normalized data were
performed in R–Bioconductor using ‘limma’ package to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4.	

84450

Tung N, Lin NU, Kidd J, Allen BA, Singh N, Wenstrup RJ,
Hartman AR, Winer EP, Garber JE. Frequency of Germline
Mutations in 25 Cancer Susceptibility Genes in a Sequential
Series of Patients With Breast Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016.
Oncotarget

  5.	 Agrawal LS, Mayer IA. Platinum agents in the treatment of
early-stage triple-negative breast cancer: is it time to change
practice? Clinical advances in hematology & oncology.
2014; 12:654–658.

20.	 Santos GC, Zielenska M, Prasad M, Squire JA.
Chromosome 6p amplification and cancer progression.
J Clin Pathol. 2007; 60:1–7.
21.	 Johnson N, Speirs V, Curtin NJ, Hall AG. A comparative
study of genome-wide SNP, CGH microarray and protein
expression analysis to explore genotypic and phenotypic
mechanisms of acquired antiestrogen resistance in breast
cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008; 111:55–63.
22.	 Ikuta K, Takemura K, Kihara M, Nishimura M, Ueda N,
Naito S, Lee E, Shimizu E, Yamauchi A. Overexpression of
constitutive signal transducer and activator of transcription
3 mRNA in cisplatin-resistant human non-small cell lung
cancer cells. Oncol Rep. 2005; 13:217–222.
23.	 Niu X, Liu W, Wang Y, Liu X, Zhang H, Li Z, Li H, Iwakura Y,
Deng W. IL-17A exacerbates cisplatin-based resistance of
OVCA via upregulating the expression of ABCG2 and MDR1
through Gli1-mediated Hh signaling. Oncotarget. 2016 July 18.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10655. [Epub ahead of print].

  6.	 Tan X, Wang H, Luo G, Ren S, Li W, Cui J, Gill HS,
Fu SW, Lu Y. Clinical significance of a point mutation in
DNA polymerase beta (POLB) gene in gastric cancer. Int J
Biol Sci. 2015; 11:144–155.
  7.	 Cobleigh MA. Other options in the treatment of advanced
breast cancer. Semin Oncol. 2011; 38:S11–16.
 8.	 Gonzalez VM, Fuertes MA, Alonso C, Perez JM. Is
cisplatin-induced cell death always produced by apoptosis?
Mol Pharmacol. 2001; 59:657–663.
 9.	 Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Michels J, Martins I,
Kepp O, Castedo M, Kroemer G. Molecular mechanisms of
cisplatin resistance. Oncogene. 2012; 31:1869–1883.
10.	 Ahmad S. Platinum-DNA interactions and subsequent
cellular processes controlling sensitivity to anticancer
platinum complexes. Chemistry & biodiversity. 2010;
7:543–566.

24.	 Katano K, Kondo A, Safaei R, Holzer A, Samimi G,
Mishima M, Kuo YM, Rochdi M, Howell SB. Acquisition
of resistance to cisplatin is accompanied by changes in
the cellular pharmacology of copper. Cancer Res. 2002;
62:6559–6565.
25.	 Komatsu M, Sumizawa T, Mutoh M, Chen ZS, Terada K,
Furukawa T, Yang XL, Gao H, Miura N, Sugiyama  T,
Akiyama S. Copper-transporting P-type adenosine
triphosphatase (ATP7B) is associated with cisplatin
resistance. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:1312–1316.
26.	 Safaei R, Katano K, Larson BJ, Samimi G, Holzer AK,
Naerdemann W, Tomioka M, Goodman M, Howell SB.
Intracellular localization and trafficking of fluoresceinlabeled cisplatin in human ovarian carcinoma cells. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005; 11:756–767.
27.	 Safaei R, Larson BJ, Cheng TC, Gibson MA, Otani S,
Naerdemann W, Howell SB. Abnormal lysosomal
trafficking and enhanced exosomal export of cisplatin in
drug-resistant human ovarian carcinoma cells. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2005; 4:1595–1604.

11.	 Perez RP. Cellular and molecular determinants of cisplatin
resistance. Eur J Cancer. 1998; 34:1535–1542.
12.	 Turner N, Tutt A, Ashworth A. Hallmarks of ‘BRCAness’ in
sporadic cancers. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:814–819.
13.	 Vassilopoulos A, Xiao C, Chisholm C, Chen W, Xu X,
Lahusen TJ, Bewley C, Deng CX. Synergistic therapeutic
effect of cisplatin and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
inhibitors in cancer growth and metastasis of Brca1 mutant
tumors. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:24202–24214.
14.	 Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance
in cancer: role of ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2002; 2:48–58.
15.	 Amable L. Cisplatin resistance and opportunities for
precision medicine. Pharmacol Res. 2016; 106:27–36.
16.	 Shen DW, Pouliot LM, Hall MD, Gottesman MM. Cisplatin
resistance: a cellular self-defense mechanism resulting from
multiple epigenetic and genetic changes. Pharmacological
reviews. 2012; 64:706–721.

28.	 Brewer GJ, Hedera P, Kluin KJ, Carlson M, Askari F,
Dick RB, Sitterly J, Fink JK. Treatment of Wilson disease
with ammonium tetrathiomolybdate: III. Initial therapy in
a total of 55 neurologically affected patients and follow-up
with zinc therapy. Archives of neurology. 2003; 60:379–385.

17.	 La Fontaine SL, Firth SD, Camakaris J, Englezou A,
Theophilos MB, Petris MJ, Howie M, Lockhart PJ,
Greenough M, Brooks H, Reddel RR, Mercer JF. Correction
of the copper transport defect of Menkes patient fibroblasts
by expression of the Menkes and Wilson ATPases. J Biol
Chem. 1998; 273:31375–31380.

29.	 Khan G, Merajver S. Copper chelation in cancer therapy
using tetrathiomolybdate: an evolving paradigm. Expert
Opin Investig Drugs. 2009; 18:541–548.

18.	Moncur JT, Park JP, Memoli VA, Mohandas TK,
Kinlaw WB. The “Spot 14” gene resides on the telomeric
end of the 11q13 amplicon and is expressed in lipogenic
breast cancers: implications for control of tumor
metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:6989–6994.

30.	 Nickel W. The mystery of nonclassical protein secretion.
A current view on cargo proteins and potential export
routes. European journal of biochemistry / FEBS. 2003;
270:2109–2119.

19.	 Ito E, Honma R, Yanagisawa Y, Imai J, Azuma S, Oyama T,
Ohwada S, Akiyama T, Nomura N, Inoue J, Watanabe S,
Semba K. Novel clusters of highly expressed genes
accompany genomic amplification in breast cancers. FEBS
Lett. 2007; 581:3909–3914.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31.	 Alvarez HM, Xue Y, Robinson CD, CanalizoHernandez MA, Marvin RG, Kelly RA, Mondragon A,
Penner-Hahn JE, O’Halloran TV. Tetrathiomolybdate
inhibits copper trafficking proteins through metal cluster
formation. Science. 2010; 327:331–334.
84451

Oncotarget

32.	 Pan Q, Bao LW, Kleer CG, Brewer GJ, Merajver SD.
Antiangiogenic tetrathiomolybdate enhances the efficacy
of doxorubicin against breast carcinoma. Mol Cancer Ther.
2003; 2:617–622.
33.	Renaud E, Barascu A, Rosselli F. Impaired TIP60mediated H4K16 acetylation accounts for the aberrant
chromatin accumulation of 53BP1 and RAP80 in Fanconi
anemia pathway-deficient cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;
44:648–656.
34.	 Hyvonen MT, Ucal S, Pasanen M, Peraniemi S, Weisell J,
Khomutov M, Khomutov AR, Vepsalainen J, Alhonen L,
Keinanen TA. Triethylenetetramine Modulates Polyamine
and Energy Metabolism and Inhibits Cancer Cell
Proliferation. Biochem J. 2016.
35.	 Garber K. BIOMEDICINE. Targeting copper to treat breast
cancer. Science. 2015; 349:128–129.
36.	 Ishida S, McCormick F, Smith-McCune K, Hanahan D.
Enhancing tumor-specific uptake of the anticancer drug
cisplatin with a copper chelator. Cancer Cell. 2010;
17:574–583.
37.	 Kalayda GV, Wagner CH, Buss I, Reedijk J, Jaehde U.
Altered localisation of the copper efflux transporters ATP7A
and ATP7B associated with cisplatin resistance in human
ovarian carcinoma cells. BMC Cancer. 2008; 8:175.
38.	 Connolly EC, Freimuth J, Akhurst RJ. Complexities of
TGF-beta targeted cancer therapy. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;
8:964–978.

Godlewski D, Lubinski J, Narod SA. Pathologic complete
response to neoadjuvant cisplatin in BRCA1-positive breast
cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014; 147:401–405.
41.	 Masuda T, Xu X, Dimitriadis EK, Lahusen T, Deng CX.
“DNA Binding Region” of BRCA1 Affects Genetic
Stability through modulating the Intra-S-Phase Checkpoint.
Int J Biol Sci. 2016; 12:133–143.
42.	 Venkitaraman AR. Cancer suppression by the chromosome
custodians, BRCA1 and BRCA2. Science. 2014;
343:1470–1475.
43.	 Deng CX, Wang RH. Roles of BRCA1 in DNA damage
repair: a link between development and cancer. Hum Mol
Genet. 2003; 12:R113–123.
44.	 Inesi G, Pilankatta R, Tadini-Buoninsegni F. Biochemical
characterization of P-type copper ATPases. Biochem J.
2014; 463:167–176.
45.	 Kilari D, Guancial E, Kim ES. Role of copper transporters
in platinum resistance. World journal of clinical oncology.
2016; 7:106–113.
46.	Calandrini V, Arnesano F, Galliani A, Nguyen TH,
Ippoliti E, Carloni P, Natile G. Platination of the copper
transporter ATP7A involved in anticancer drug resistance.
Dalton transactions. 2014; 43:12085–12094.
47.	 Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP. A
comparison of normalization methods for high density
oligonucleotide array data based on variance and bias.
Bioinformatics. 2003; 19:185–193.

39.	 Berrada N, Delaloge S, Andre F. Treatment of triplenegative metastatic breast cancer: toward individualized
targeted treatments or chemosensitization? Ann Oncol.
2010; 21:vii30–35.

48.	 Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W,
Smyth GK. limma powers differential expression analyses
for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2015; 43:e47.

40.	 Byrski T, Huzarski T, Dent R, Marczyk E, Jasiowka M,
Gronwald J, Jakubowicz J, Cybulski C, Wisniowski R,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84452

Oncotarget

