Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Myeloma cells can corrupt senescent mesenchymal stromal cells
and impair their anti-tumor activity
Servet Özcan1,5, Nicola Alessio2, Mustafa Burak Acar1,6, Güler Toprak1, Zeynep
Burcin Gönen1, Gianfranco Peluso4, Umberto Galderisi1,2,3
1

Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKOK), Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey

2

Department of Experimental Medicine, Biotechnology and Molecular Biology Section, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy

3

Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

4

Institute of Bioscience and Bioresources, CNR, Naples, Italy

5

Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey

6

Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey

Correspondence to:
Umberto Galderisi, e-mail: tud23058@temple.edu
Keywords: Gerotarget, mesenchymal stem cells, senescence, secretome, apoptosis, cancer
Received: July 13, 2015      Accepted: October 05, 2015      Published: October 16, 2015

ABSTRACT
Senescent cells secrete several molecules that help to prevent the progression
of cancer. However, cancer cells can also misuse these secreted elements to survive
and grow. Since the molecular and functional bases of these different elements remain
poorly understood, we analyzed the effect of senescent mesenchymal stromal cell
(MSC) secretome on the biology of ARH-77 myeloma cells. In addition to differentiating
in mesodermal derivatives, MSCs have sustained interest among researchers by
supporting hematopoiesis, contributing to tissue homeostasis, and modulating
inflammatory response, all activities accomplished primarily by the secretion of
cytokines and growth factors. Moreover, senescence profoundly affects the composition
of MSC secretome. In this study, we induced MSC senescence by oxidative stress, DNA
damage, and replicative exhaustion. While the first two are considered to induce acute
senescence, extensive proliferation triggers replicative (i.e., chronic) senescence. We
cultivated cancer cells in the presence of acute and chronic senescent MSC-conditioned
media and evaluated their proliferation, DNA damage, apoptosis, and senescence. Our
findings revealed that senescent secretomes induced apoptosis or senescence, if not
both, to different extents. This anti-tumor activity became heavily impaired when
secretomes were collected from senescent cells previously in contact (i.e., primed)
with cancer cells. Our analysis of senescent MSC secretomes with LC-MS/MS followed
by Gene Ontology classification further indicated that priming with cancer profoundly
affected secretome composition by abrogating the production of pro-senescent and
apoptotic factors. We thus showed for the first time that compared with cancer-primed
MSCs, naïve senescent MSCs can exert different effects on tumor progression.

the proliferation of transformed cells. It may also contribute
to other biological processes such as development, tissue
repair, and aging [1, 2].
Though cellular senescence has been deemed a
unique intracellular event triggered by the activation of
cytoplasmic signaling circuitry, it is now evident that
senescent cells secrete dozens of molecules, for which the
term senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP)
has been proposed. The secreted factors contribute to

INTRODUCTION
Confronted with endogenous and exogenous stresses,
cells may respond by becoming senescent. Genomic
stressors such as the shortening of chromosome telomeres,
non-telomeric DNA damage, excessive mitogenic signals,
and non-genotoxic stress such as perturbations to chromatin
organization are all considered to be damaging events.
In response, senescence bars the onset of cancer by blocking
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39482

Oncotarget

mechanisms are considered to induce acute senescence,
extensive proliferation triggers replicative (i.e., chronic)
senescence [1, 2].
We cultivated cancer cells in the presence of acute
and chronic senescent MSC-conditioned media (CM) and
evaluated their proliferation, DNA damage, apoptosis,
and senescence. Our findings indicated that senescent
secretomes induced apoptosis or senescence, if not both,
to different extents. However, this anti-tumor activity
became heavily impaired when secretomes were collected
from senescent cells previously in contact (i.e., primed)
with cancer cells.

cellular proliferative arrest through autocrine/paracrine
pathways [3–5].
SASP released by senescent cells can signal danger
that sensitizes normal surrounding cells to senesce,
thereby improve the likelihood that damaged cells enter
senescence. Senescent secretome contains cytokines that
attract and activate cells of the immune system, which
can in turn dispose of the senescent cells. However,
SASP can also exert deleterious effects, for the presence
of senescent cells in tissue can contribute to impairing its
functions by triggering the senescence of healthy cells as
well. The secretome of senescent cells can also contain
numerous inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, and
proteases that can render the tissue microenvironment
favorable for tumor growth, since some tumor cells misuse
SASP for their own growth [2, 5, 6]. The secretome of
senescent cells can also facilitate angiogenesis and
epithelial–mesenchymal transition, as well as promote the
proliferation of cancer cells [3, 6–9].
For the above reasons, the study of SASP produced
by mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) is of great interest.
MSCs contain a subpopulation of stem cells able to
differentiate in mesodermal derivatives (e.g., adipocytes,
chondrocytes, osteocytes) and can also contribute to the
homeostatic maintenance of several organs [10, 11]. MSCs
execute their multiple functions by secreting a range of
cytokines and growth factors [12]. Senescence greatly
alters the composition of this secretome, namely by
changing levels of proteins involved in extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodeling and in key regulators of insulin growth
factor-signaling pathways. Both processes are known to
contribute to the initiation of senescence and cancer [5, 13].
To date, however, no studies have reported the
effects of senescent MSC secretome upon the biology of
cancer cells. In this sense, the importance of our findings
rests in our observation that healthy MSCs have been
associated with tumor progression. MSC secretome can
contribute to tumor growth in several ways: by promoting
angiogenesis, creating a niche to support cancer stem cells
survival, modulating the organism’s immune response
against cancer cells, and by promoting the formation
of metastasis [14]. To contribute to these findings, we
investigated the effects of senescent MSC secretome upon
the in vitro behavior of ARH-77 cells, which constitute a
useful model of myeloma.
Different genotoxic stressors induce phenotypically
different cellular senescent states with features both
common and specific, though primarily concerning
expressed genes and secreted factors. Furthermore,
acquiring a senescent phenotype constitutes a progressive
process that is reversible before transient cell-cycle arrest
becomes stable [1, 2].
In this study, we induced MSC senescence by
using three different mechanisms: oxidative stress, DNA
damage, and replicative exhaustion. While the first two

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Naïve senescent MSC secretomes reduced the
cycling capacity of ARH-77 and promoted
senescence and apoptosis
Naïve senescent secretomes affected the cell
cycle profile of ARH-77 cells (Figure 1A). In particular,
replicative and H202 senescent secretomes (Naïve-R and
Naïve-H, respectively) induced a significant reduction of
cells in the S phase compared with the cell count of the
controls. By contrast, senescent secretome doxorubicin
(Naïve-D) primarily caused G2/M arrest. Consistent with
these data, a decline in cycling (Ki-67+) cells was also
observed when cultures were incubated with senescent
secretomes (Figure 1B).
Annexin V assay showed that unlike all other
CM, only Naïve-D induced a significant increase in the
percentage of apoptosis in ARH-77 cultures (Figure 1C).
These data were confirmed by evaluating active caspase
9 (data not shown). At the same time, all naïve senescent
secretomes promoted senescence to high levels in cultures
incubated with Naïve-D (Figure 1E and 1F).
Increased senescence and apoptosis induced by
treatment with naïve senescent secretomes suggest
both that DNA damages subsequent to genotoxic stress
were incompletely repaired and that the cells may have
persistent foci with damaged DNA (DNA-SCARS).
Indeed, in the nuclei of ARH-77 cells treated with Naïve-D
and Naïve-H, we detected several phosphorylated H2AX
(gamma-H2AX) foci, which can indicate damaged DNA
(Figure 1D). In cells incubated with Naïve-R, the foci did
not increase compared with those in the control group.
More importantly, this finding suggests that naïve
senescent MSC secretomes lack any stimulus for cancer
cell growth. This possibility is of great interest, since other
findings have indicated that the secretome of senescent
cells may promote cancer growth [3, 7–9, 15, 16]. All
experiments reported above were also conducted on
Kasumi-1 cells derived from a human acute myeloblastic
leukemia. Results overlapped those obtained with the
ARH-77 cell line (data not shown).

39483

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Biological effects of senescent MSC secretomes on myeloma cells. Panel A. Histograms depict the cell cycle profiles

of ARH-77 cells incubated with control (C) or senescent secretomes; D, H, and R indicate groups treated with secretomes obtained from
doxorubicin- or H202-treated and replicatively senescent MSCs, respectively. Panel B. Percentage of cycling (Ki-67+) ARH-77 cells in the
presence of different secretomes. Panel C. Percentage of apoptotic ARH-77 cells following incubation with control or senescent secretomes.
Panel D. Graph purporting the degree of H2AX phosphorylation evaluated by counting the number of gamma-H2AX immunofluorescent
foci per cell; each foci number was determined for 200 cells; each dot represents an individual cell, while black bars indicate the mean value
for each category. Panel E. Representative microscopic fields of acid β-galactosidase (blue) in ARH-77 cells; arrows indicate senescent
cells. Panel F. Graph showing the mean percentage value of senescent cells. All data are shown with standard deviation. For experiments
depicted in each panel, we performed one-way analysis of variance followed by Bonferroni tests for multiple comparisons. The null
hypothesis assumed no difference between the experimental (D, H, R) and control groups (*p < .05, **p < .01).

Cancer-primed senescent MSC secretomes have
an impaired ability in controlling cancer growth

increase in apoptosis in ARH-77 cultures observed with
Naïve-D (Figure 1C). The significant rise in senescence
detected with naïve secretomes did not emerge in cancer
cultures incubated with primed secretomes. In fact, in all
tested conditions, senescence did not differ significantly
from that of the control group (Figure 1E–1F).

To gain further insights into the effect of senescent
MSC secretomes upon cancer growth, we investigated
another crucial aspect of MSC function: its priming
effect on MSCs. Different toll-like receptors can polarize
MSCs into two distinct populations that express either
pro-inflammatory or suppressive factors [17–19]. In this
scenario, senescent cells primed with cancer cells may
be forced to produce cytokines and other factors for their
survival and growth. In evaluating the effect of cancerprimed senescent MSC secretomes on the in vitro behavior
of ARH-77 myeloma cells, we observed that priming
abrogated the cell cycle of naïve senescent secretomes
(Figure 1A). Specifically, primed doxorubicin- and H202treated senescent secretomes (Primed-D and Primed-H,
respectively) induced an increase in S phase compared
with the control group. By contrast, primed replicatively
senescent secretome (Primed-R) showed a cell cycle
profile similar to that of the control cultures (Figure 1A).
Notably, the incubation of cancer cells with primed
senescent secretomes did not reduce the percentage of
cycling cells (Ki-67+) detected with naïve secretomes
(Figure 1B). Furthermore, Primed-D did not induce the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Secretome analysis of naïve and primed
senescent MSCs
To identify molecules possibly responsible for the
anti-tumor properties in naïve senescent secretomes and
to examine how priming affects secretome composition,
we conducted LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses on peptides from
the tryptic digestion of secretome proteins. Using highresolution MS in a search of the Protein Metrics database, we
identified 482, 1,087, and 521 proteins in Naïve-R, Naïve-D,
and Naïve-H, respectively (Supplementary File S1). By
extension, in our analysis of primed secretomes, we identified
517, 348, and 319 proteins in Primed-R, Primed-D, and
Primed-H, respectively (Supplementary File S2).
A preliminary analysis of secretome composition
indicated that a fraction of proteins in the secretomes
lacked the signal peptide for the classical endoplasmic
reticulum–Golgi secretion pathway. It is reasonable to
39484

Oncotarget

hypothesize that they come from non-classical secretion
pathways, including those of exosomes and microvesicles,
extracellular vesicles that represent a recently discovered
means of intercellular communication for the transfer of
membrane-bound and cytosolic proteins, lipids, and RNA
among cells [20, 21].
In correlating the secretome profiles with biological
phenomena observed, we considered that the antitumor effect of naïve secretomes (i.e., cell cycle arrest,
apoptosis, and senescence) represented a shared function
of the three different senescent types. Accordingly, we
focused on proteins common among the three senescent
secretomes, since this collated set of molecules should
include factors responsible for the shared biological
activities. Venn diagram analysis identified 264 proteins
shared among Naïve-R, Naïve-D and Naïve-H (Figure 2)
and 217 proteins shared among primed secretomes that
could be associated with the loss of anti-tumor capacity.
To refine our results, we used Venn analysis to determine
which of the 264 proteins shared in naïve secretomes were
expressed exclusively in naïve cells, as well as which
of the 217 proteins present in primed secretomes were
expressed only in primed cells. We ultimately identified
102 proteins present exclusively in naïve secretomes and
55 exclusively in primed ones (Figure 2).
Gene Ontology (GO) and network analyses were
performed on proteins detected exclusively in either naïve
or primed secretomes. Shown in Table 1, results from
the Protein Analysis through Evolutionary Relationships
(PANTHER) database exhibited striking differences
between naïve and primed secretomes, as Supplementary

File S3 describes in greater detail. For example, naïve
secretomes were enriched for proteins involved in
biological functions such as translation, proteolysis,
and protein metabolic processes. By contrast, primed
secretomes contained proteins involved in morphogenesis
and developmental processes. Shown also in Table 1, in
the naïve secretome we identified hundreds of proteins
associated with cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix
remodeling, which Supplementary File S3 describes in
greater detail.
During the manual inspection, we could further
analyze the components of each ontological class to
better understand whether proteins were associated with
SASP functions. According to recent findings, SASP
factors can be divided into soluble signaling factors
(i.e., interleukins, chemokines, and growth factors),
secreted proteases that remodel the extracellular matrix
(ECM), ECM components, and proteins involved in
anabolic and catabolic processes [16, 22, 23]. Indeed, in
naïve secretomes, we found proteins belonging to all four
SASP categories, while in primed secretomes we identified
only components of ECM (Table 1).
Since annotations in GO databases are often
redundant, functional annotation charts of GO analysis
show relevant annotations repeatedly. This circumstance
complicated identifying the most significant ontological
class or classes in a given experimental condition.
Fortunately, bioinformatics from the Database
for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID) now provides a functional annotation tool
(i.e., functional annotation clustering) to reduce redundancy.

Figure 2: Venn diagram analysis. Top left: Venn diagram showing common and specific proteins among naïve secretomes obtained

from (D) doxorubicin- or (H) H202-treated and (R) senescent replicative MSCs. Top right: Comparison of primed secretomes. Bottom:
Venn diagram comparing the 264 proteins common among naïve secretomes with the 217 proteins common among primed secretomes.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39485

Oncotarget

Table 1: Summary of Gene Ontology analysis performed with GO slims (PANTHER)
GO Slim biological processes

GO Slim molecular functions

Naïve Primed

Naïve Primed

Actin binding

◊

Ribosomal

◊

Cytoskeletal protein
binding

◊

Actin family

◊

◊

◊

Calcium ion binding

◊

Cytoskeleton

◊

◊

◊

Structural molecular
actin

◊

◊

◊

◊

M SP SF

Proteolysis

M SP SF

Primary metabolic
process

Naïve Primed

◊

Translation

Protein metabolic
process

Go Slim protein classes

M

M

E

Cellular component
morphogenesis

◊

Structural constituents
cytoskeleton

Anatomical structural
morphology

◊

Protein binding

Developmental process

◊

E

E

E

E

◊

M

E

E

E

E

E

E

◊
E

Ontological terms classified as biological processes, molecular functions, and molecular classes; diamonds indicate the presence
of a specific ontological term in either naïve or primed secretomes. The manual inspection of proteins represented with each
ontological term assisted the identification of factors of the protein dataset belonging to secreted protease (SP), ECM components
(E), soluble signaling factors (SF), and proteins involved in anabolic or catabolic processes (M).
This tool displays similar annotations together in order
to determine GO terms that are either over- or underrepresented in a given dataset. Functional annotation
clustering identified 44 clusters in naïve secretomes and 29
in primed ones (Supplementary File S4). In this analysis,
each cluster receives a group enrichment score, and topranked clusters are most likely to have consistently lower
p values for their annotation members and thus indicate
which ontology or ontologies could factor into specific
conditions. In naïve secretomes, we found several clusters
possibly associated with catabolic or anabolic processes,
cytoskeleton and ECM remodeling, senescence, apoptosis,
and autophagic activities (Figure 3; Supplementary File S4).
In primed secretomes, however, we found no clusters
associated with senescence or apoptosis. Clusters associated
with ECM and cytoskeletons contain members previously
described as regulators of cancer progression and metastasis
(Figure 3; Supplementary File S4). Globally, the results of
this analysis agreed with those found using PANTHER.
Since ontology analysis cannot rank individual
proteins based on their significance in a process of interest,
we used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) for a preliminary
evaluation of protein networks in our datasets. We focused
on pathways possibly related to ontological classes identified
by using the PANTHER database and DAVID. In naïve
secretomes, we found several proteins belonging to networks
potentially associated with senescence, apoptosis, and
autophagy, including ARPC1B, ARPC3, ARPC5, ACTR2,
BAX, CTSD, CSTS, and GNB1 (Figure 4). In primed
secretomes, however, these networks were absent. We found
pathways of epithelial adherens junction signaling, RhoGDI
signaling, and Rac signaling, among others, that can relate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to ECM formation and remodeling in both naïve and primed
secretomes. In naïve secretomes, several of these proteins are
involved in senescence-associated ECM remodeling. On the
contrary, in primed samples we found some ECM-related
proteins that contribute to cancer growth and progression
(Figure 4). Lastly, in naïve secretomes, we identified several
networks associated with catabolic or anabolic functions
with numerous proteins described to factor into senescence,
apoptosis, and autophagy (Figure 4).

DISCUSSION
The principal result of our findings is that the
evaluated naïve senescent MSC secretomes lack any
stimulus for cancer cell growth. At the same time, the
senescent secretomes obtained with different stressors
induced senescence or apoptosis, if not both. The induction
of apoptosis was associated with foci of persistent DNA
damage in the cancer cell nuclei, suggesting that such
damage is a prerequisite for the phenomenon. On the
contrary, the accumulation of heavy DNA damage may be
unnecessary for triggering senescence, possibly indicating
that even if cells could repair DNA, such repair showed no
fidelity and thus triggered senescence. In particular, ARH-77
cells mutated the p53 protein [24], implying that molecular
controls of growth arrest, senescence, and apoptosis may
occur through p53-independent pathways [1, 25, 26].
The great majority of research on the role of SASP in
cancer has focused on the fact that cancer cells may misuse
the secretome of senescent cells. For instance, SASPs from
senescent fibroblasts have been involved with fostering cancer
growth [3, 7–9, 15, 16]. Nevertheless, other findings have
39486

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Summary of functional annotation clustering analysis (DAVID). The clustering of ontological terms found in the
naïve secretome dataset and related to A. anabolic and catabolic processes, B1. senescence and B2. apoptosis, and C. ECM formation and
remodeling; D. The clustering of ontological terms found in the primed secretome dataset and related to ECM formation and remodeling.
revealed that senescent fibroblasts may trigger the growth
arrest and apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro, as we detected
with naïve MSC secretomes in the present study [27]. These
contradictory findings can be reconciled by considering that
pro-growth effects observed were obtained with senescent
cells co-cultivated in the presence of cancer cells. In other
experiments, senescent cells were injected in vivo and reached
tumor stroma. In both cases, senescent cells were primed
with cancer cells, which may have forced senescent cells to
produce cytokines and factors for survival and growth.
We sought to confirm this hypothesis by priming
senescent cells with cancer and evaluating the effect of
their secretomes upon cancer growth. Priming senescent
cells with cancer cells modified their secretome
composition in a way that rendered senescent MSCs
ineffective in blocking cancer growth.
Our data concerning the importance of preliminary
interaction between cancer cells and senescent cells are
further supported by the pioneering studies of Nefedova
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

et al. [28]. Their research has shown that CM from
mononuclear bone marrow cells alone was insufficient for
protecting myeloma cells from drug-induced apoptosis,
whereas soluble factors produced during co-culture stimulated
the proliferation of the cells. Moreover, depending on whether
the priming procedure involved direct cell–cell contact,
senescent cells produced different effects on myeloma cells.
Our results seem to indicate how cancer cells
can misuse senescent secretome: they have to induce
a change in protein production by interacting with
senescent cells. Indeed, this interaction profoundly
modified the composition of secretomes. Globally,
priming induced the production of 55 proteins and
repressed the expression (or secretion) of 102 others.
Repressed ones belonged to networks associated
with senescence, apoptosis, and catabolic or anabolic
processes, while expressed ones belonged to ECM
networks involved in cancer growth and the promotion
of metastasis. Importantly, instead of promoting the
39487

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Canonical pathways identified with IPA. Pathways in the naïve secretome dataset associated with A. senescence and

apoptosis, B. ECM formation and remodeling, and C. anabolic and catabolic processes; in green are proteins with a clear role in senescence
and/or apoptosis according to data from the literature; D. Pathways in the primed secretome dataset associated with ECM formation and
remodeling; in green are proteins with a clear role in cancer growth and metastasis formation.

production of factors boosting cancer growth, priming
appeared to preclude the release of anti-cancer factors
that could induce senescence or apoptosis.
To the best of our knowledge, we have thus shown for
the first time that naïve senescent MSCs may have different
effects on tumor progression compared with cancer-primed
MSCs.

activity of naïve secretomes remain unidentified, as
do factors released by cancer cells that affect senescent
MSC functions. Moreover, it is unclear whether direct
contact among cancer cells and senescent MSCs is a prerequisite for priming. Two other questions are whether
naïve senescent MSC secretomes arrest the growth of
other cancer types and whether priming influences other
senescent cell types such as fibroblasts. By contrast, it is
possible that senescent fibroblasts are more prone to foster
cancer growth than MSCs? Lastly, the role of secretome
RNA components has yet to be pinpointed and its effects
explained.

Further studies and perspectives
Our findings raise some other issues. For one, key
factors that may promote the abrogation of anti-tumor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39488

Oncotarget

CONCLUSIONS

serum-free culture medium for overnight incubation.
Afterward, CM containing the MSC secretion were
collected and used to supplement the in vitro cultivation
of cancer cells.
We collected secretomes from acutely senescent
MSCs (passage 2 cells treated with H2O2 or doxorubicin)
and replicatively senescent MSCs (passage 10 cells).
Using in situ senescence-associated β-galactosidase assay,
we confirmed that our treatments induced senescence in
MSC cultures. For a control culture, we collected CM
from naïve healthy MSCs (passage 2).
To prepare CM from cancer-primed cells, we cocultivated in a 1:1 ratio acutely or chronically senescent
MSCs in direct contact with ARH-77 cells for 24
hours. Thereafter, ARH-77 cells were discarded and the
senescent MSC cultures purified with PBS. The ARH-77primed senescent MSCs were subsequently transferred to
a chemically defined medium for overnight incubation, as
also done with naïve senescent cells to produce CM. For
a control culture, we collected CM from cancer-primed
healthy MSCs (passage 2).

In sum, the senescent secretome of naïve adiposederived MSCs promoted senescence or apoptosis in
myeloma cells. Both acute and chronic senescent
secretomes demonstrated an ability to impair cancer cell
growth, suggesting that such is a specific, conserved, core
activity of naïve senescent MSCs. Cancer priming of
senescent MSCs also abolished their anti-tumor activity.
Lastly, that senescent MSC secretome may engage in protumorigenic activity if these cells come into contact with
cancer cells could constitute a critical threat to the safety
of MSC transplants for therapeutic purposes in patients
with cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
MSC cultures
Lipoaspirates were obtained from healthy donors
undergoing plastic surgery after they provided their
informed consent. The dispersion of adipose tissue
was achieved via collagenase digestion, after which
the lipid-filled adipocytes’ ability to float caused them
to separate from the stromal vascular fraction by way
of centrifugation. Stromal pellets were washed with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and further purified on
a density gradient (Histopaque, GE Healthcare, UK).
Mononuclear cells fractions were collected and cultivated
in in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing
10% fetal bovine serum. These cells (passage 0) were
further amplified to conduct experiments at passages 2 and
10 (i.e., replicative senescence).

Cancer cell lines and treatment with CM
ARH-77 multiple myeloma were grown exponen­
tially in RPMI-1640 medium of 10% serum. To evaluate
the effect of CM on the in vitro behavior of cancer cells,
exponentially growing cultures were incubated in their
respective media supplemented with 50% CM obtained
from both naïve and primed senescent MSCs. After cancer
cells stayed in these conditions for 48 hours, we performed
the biological assays described below.

Cell cycle analysis

Acute senescence induction

For each assay, cells were collected, fixed in 70%
ethanol, washed with PBS, and dissolved in a hypotonic
buffer containing propidium iodide. Samples were
collected using a flow cytometer (Muse EasyCyte, Merck
Millipore, Germany) and analyzed with EasyCyte software
according to the standard procedure.

We previously demonstrated that H2O2 or
doxorubicin treatments can induce MSC senescence
[29]. Following methods used in that study, adipose MSC
cultures (passage 2) were treated with 300 μM H2O2 for
30 min, after which the medium was removed and the
complete medium added. After 24 hours, the cells were
used to prepare the CM.
To induce double-strand DNA breaks, MSCs were
incubated for 16 hours with 1 μM doxorubicin. Following
treatment, the medium was removed and the complete
medium added. After 24 hours, the cells were also used to
prepare the CM.

Annexin V assay
Apoptotic cells were detected by using a fluoresceinconjugated annexin V kit on a Muse EasyCyte flow
cytometer following the manufacturer’s instructions.

In situ senescence-associated β-galactosidase
assay

Preparation of CM from naïve and primed
senescent MSCs

The percentage of senescent cells was calculated by the
number of blue, β-galactosidase-positive cells among at least
500 cells in different microscopic fields, as both previously
reported [30] and detailed in Supplementary File S5.

To harvest naïve senescent MSC secretomes,
80% confluent MSC cultures were washed extensively
with PBS and transferred to a chemically defined,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39489

Oncotarget

Immunocytochemistry for detecting gammaH2AX and Ki-67

http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov), and IPA (http://www.
ingenuity.com/product/ipa).
Using PANTHER, protein classification was
performed according to three ontological terms:
biological processes, molecular functions, and molecular
classes. For PANTHER analysis, we used statistics
overrepresentation (i.e., the default setting) to compare
classifications of multiple clusters of lists with a
reference list to statistically identify the over- or underrepresentation of PANTHER ontologies. Significance
was set to a p value of 0.05.
With DAVID, we used functional annotation
clustering to identify proteins in the most important
biological functional groups. In this database, a
significant enrichment score for any group indicates
that its proteins are involved in a cluster with a possibly
significant function in a given dataset. The parameters for
clustering referred to medium classification stringency
(EASE enrichment threshold: 1.0). Clusters were ranked
according a group enrichment score calculated from the
geometric mean of a member’s p values in a corresponding
annotation cluster.
Differentially expressed proteins were imported
into IPA to identify canonical pathways present
exclusively in either naïve or primed secretomes.
Fischer’s exact test was used to calculate a p value that
would determine the probability that the association
between genes in the dataset and canonical pathway
could be explained by chance alone. Significance was
set to 0.05.

Phosphorylated H2AX (gamma-H2AX) and Ki-67
were detected according to manufacturers’ protocols.
Cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 and observed
using a fluorescence microscope (Leica Italia, Italy).
The percentage of Ki-67-positive cells was calculated by
counting at least 500 cells among the different microscopic
fields, and the degree of H2AX phosphorylation was
evaluated by counting the number of gamma-H2AX
immunofluorescent foci per cell. Each foci number was
determined for 200 cells (Supplementary File S5).

CM preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis
Without disturbing the attached cells, 5 mL of naïve
or ARH-77-primed MSC secretomes were collected from
culture dishes and culture debris removed by centrifugation
at 10,000 g. Supernatants were used for protein pooling with
resin (StrataClean, Agilent Technology, CA, USA) using
dried beads mixed with 1× Laemmli gel loading buffer and
run on a gradient gel 4–15% SDS-PAGE (Criterion TGX
Stain-Free Precast Gels, Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Following
electrophoresis at 100 V, the gels were stained with
Coomassie Brilliant Blue and gel lanes of interest excised
for in-gel digestion, as previously described [31, 32].
After digestion, peptides were eluted from the gel
matrix by immersing the reaction tube in an ultrasonic bath
for 5 min with a sequential elution of 0.4% formic acid in
3% ACN, 0.4% formic acid in 50% ACN, and 100% ACN.
The supernatant containing the peptides was centrifuged,
transferred to low binding tubes, and desalted by using
pipette tips (ZipTip C18, Merck Millipore, Germany).
Following that, extracted peptides were dried and stored
at −80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis was performed.
A more detailed protocol of CM preparation appears in
Supplementary File S5.

Statistical analysis
Statistical significance was determined by using
one-way analysis of variance followed by Bonferroni’s
tests. Mixed-model variance analysis was used for data
with continuous outcomes. All data were analyzed with a
statistics software package (GraphPad Prism version 5.01,
GraphPad, CA, USA).

LC-MS/MS analysis
Tandem mass spectrometric analysis was carried
out using AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+ instrument (AB
SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA) coupled to Eksigent
expert nano-LC 400 system (AB SCIEX). MS and MS/MS
data was acquired using Analyst® TF v.1.6 (AB SCIEX).
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed by using
ProteinPilot 4.5 Beta (AB SCIEX) for the peptide
identifications. Detailed protocol in Supplementary File S5.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited
to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [33] via the PRIDE
partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD003018.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This paper has been partially supported by the
Scientific and Technological Research Council of
Turkey (TÜBİTAK project no. 114S873) and the Erciyes
University Research Project Fund (project no. BAPFYL-2015-5616). We thank Mrs Donna Sue Özcan for
editing the manuscript and for administrative assistance.
We thank Mrs Maria Rosaria Cipollaro for technical
assistance.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

GO and network analyses

There are no conflicts of interest to declare.

Proteins expressed in secretomes were analyzed
with PANTHER (http://www.pantherdb.org), DAVID,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39490

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

15.	 Bavik C, Coleman I, Dean JP, Knudsen B, Plymate S,
Nelson PS. The gene expression program of prostate fibroblast senescence modulates neoplastic e­ pithelial cell proliferation through paracrine mechanisms. Cancer research.
2006; 66:794–802.

1.	 Campisi J, d’Adda di Fagagna F. Cellular senescence: when
bad things happen to good cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2007; 8:729–740.

16.	 Coppe JP, Desprez PY, Krtolica A, Campisi J. The
­senescence-associated secretory phenotype: the dark side
of tumor suppression. Annual review of pathology. 2010;
5:99–118.

2.	 van Deursen JM. The role of senescent cells in ageing.
Nature. 2014; 509:439–446.
3.	 Coppe JP, Patil CK, Rodier F, Sun Y, Munoz DP,
Goldstein J, Nelson PS, Desprez PY, Campisi J. Senescenceassociated secretory phenotypes reveal cell-nonautonomous
functions of oncogenic RAS and the p53 tumor suppressor.
PLoS biology. 2008; 6:2853–2868.

17.	 Mastri M, Lin H, Lee T. Enhancing the efficacy of mesenchymal stem cell therapy. World journal of stem cells.
2014; 6:82–93.
18.	 Waterman RS, Tomchuck SL, Henkle SL, Betancourt AM.
A new mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) paradigm: polarization
into a pro-inflammatory MSC1 or an Immunosuppressive
MSC2 phenotype. PloS one. 2010; 5:e10088.

4.	 Fumagalli M, d’Adda di Fagagna F. SASPense and
DDRama in cancer and ageing. Nature cell biology. 2009;
11:921–923.
5.	 Kuilman T, Peeper DS. Senescence-messaging secretome:
SMS-ing cellular stress. Nature reviews Cancer. 2009;
9:81–94.

19.	 Yan H, Wu M, Yuan Y, Wang ZZ, Jiang H, Chen T.
Priming of Toll-like receptor 4 pathway in mesenchymal
stem cells increases expression of B cell activating factor.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications.
2014; 448:212–217.

6.	 Velarde MC, Demaria M, Campisi J. Senescent cells and
their secretory phenotype as targets for cancer therapy.
Interdisciplinary topics in gerontology. 2013; 38:17–27.

20.	 Raposo G, Stoorvogel W. Extracellular vesicles: exosomes,
microvesicles, and friends. J Cell Biol. 2013; 200:373–383.

7.	 Coppe JP, Kauser K, Campisi J, Beausejour CM. Secretion
of vascular endothelial growth factor by primary human
fibroblasts at senescence. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2006; 281:29568–29574.

21.	 Villarreal L, Mendez O, Salvans C, Gregori J, Baselga J,
Villanueva J. Unconventional secretion is a major contributor of cancer cell line secretomes. Mol Cell Proteomics.
2013; 12:1046–1060.

8.	 Krtolica A, Parrinello S, Lockett S, Desprez PY, Campisi J.
Senescent fibroblasts promote epithelial cell growth
and tumorigenesis: a link between cancer and aging.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2001; 98:12072–12077.

22.	 Quijano C, Cao L, Fergusson MM, Romero H, Liu J,
Gutkind S, Rovira II, Mohney RP, Karoly ED, Finkel T.
Oncogene-induced senescence results in marked metabolic and bioenergetic alterations. Cell Cycle. 2012;
11:1383–1392.

9.	 Liu D, Hornsby PJ. Senescent human fibroblasts increase
the early growth of xenograft tumors via matrix metalloproteinase secretion. Cancer research. 2007; 67:3117–3126.

23.	 Salama R, Sadaie M, Hoare M, Narita M. Cellular senescence and its effector programs. Genes Dev. 2014;
28:99–114.

10.	 Galderisi U, Giordano A. The gap between the physiological and therapeutic roles of mesenchymal stem cells.
Medicinal research reviews. 2014; 34:1100–1126.

24.	 Drewinko B, Mars W, Minowada J, Burk KH, Trujillo JM.
ARH-77, an established human IgG-producing myeloma
cell line. I. Morphology, B-cell phenotypic marker profile, and expression of Epstein-Barr virus. Cancer. 1984;
54:1883–1892.

11.	 Giordano A, Galderisi U, Marino IR. From the laboratory
bench to the patient’s bedside: an update on clinical trials
with mesenchymal stem cells. Journal of cellular physiology. 2007; 211:27–35.

25.	 Amaral JD, Xavier JM, Steer CJ, Rodrigues CM. The role
of p53 in apoptosis. Discovery medicine. 2010; 9:145–152.

12.	 Ranganath SH, Levy O, Inamdar MS, Karp JM. Harnessing
the mesenchymal stem cell secretome for the treatment of
cardiovascular disease. Cell stem cell. 2012; 10:244–258.

26.	 Liebermann DA, Hoffman B, Steinman RA. Molecular
controls of growth arrest and apoptosis: p53-dependent and
independent pathways. Oncogene. 1995; 11:199–210.

13.	 Severino V, Alessio N, Farina A, Sandomenico A,
Cipollaro M, Peluso G, Galderisi U, Chambery A.
Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins 4 and 7
released by senescent cells promote premature senescence in mesenchymal stem cells. Cell death & disease.
2013; 4:e911.

27.	 Vjetrovic J, Shankaranarayanan P, Mendoza-Parra MA,
Gronemeyer H. Senescence-secreted factors activate Myc
and sensitize pretransformed cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Aging cell. 2014; 13:487–496.
28.	 Nefedova Y, Landowski TH, Dalton WS. Bone marrow
stromal-derived soluble factors and direct cell contact contribute to de novo drug resistance of myeloma cells by distinct mechanisms. Leukemia. 2003; 17:1175–1182.

14.	 Galderisi U, Giordano A, Paggi MG. The bad and the good
of mesenchymal stem cells in cancer: Boosters of tumor
growth and vehicles for targeted delivery of anticancer
agents. World journal of stem cells. 2010; 2:5–12.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39491

Oncotarget

29.	 Zanichelli F, Capasso S, Di Bernardo G, Cipollaro M,
Pagnotta E, Carteni M, Casale F, Iori R, Giordano A,
Galderisi U. Low concentrations of isothiocyanates ­protect
mesenchymal stem cells from oxidative injuries, while
high concentrations exacerbate DNA damage. Apoptosis:
an international journal on programmed cell death. 2012;
17:964–974.

32.	 Bonn F, Bartel J, Büttner K, Hecker M, Otto A, Becher D.
Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect
and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a r­ eproducible
and highly efficient manner. Analytical Chemistry.
2014; 86:7421–7427.
33.	 Vizcaíno JA, Deutsch EW, Wang R, Csordas A,
Reisinger F, Ríos D, Dianes JA, Sun Z, Farrah T, Bandeira
N, Binz PA, Xenarios I, Eisenacher M, Mayer G, Gatto L,
Campos A, Chalkley RJ, Kraus HJ, Albar JP, MartinezBartolomé S, Apweiler R, Omenn GS, Martens L, Jones AR,
Hermjakob H. ProteomeXchange provides globally
co-ordinated proteomics data submission and dissemination. Nature Biotechnology. 2014; 30:223–226.

30.	 Alessio N, Bohn W, Rauchberger V, Rizzolio F,
Cipollaro M, Rosemann M, Irmler M, Beckers J,
Giordano A, Galderisi U. Silencing of RB1 but not of
RB2/P130 induces cellular senescence and impairs the
differentiation potential of human mesenchymal stem
­
cells. Cellular and molecular life sciences: CMLS. 2013;
70:1637–1651.
31.	 Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M. In-gel
digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins
and proteomes. Nature protocols. 2006; 1:2856–2860.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39492

Oncotarget

