PMC Canada Author Manuscript

PubMed Central CANADA
Author Manuscript / Manuscrit d'auteur
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 December 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2008 November 4; 14(5): 351–353. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2008.10.013.

Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3 and Cancer: Good cop, bad cop?
SATISH PATEL and JIM WOODGETT1
Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5

Abstract
Wang et al. in a recent study in Nature shed new and contrasting insights into the role of GSK-3 as
a negative regulator of proliferation and self-renewal.

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

GSK-3 was originally identified and later embodied as a member of the insulin-signalling
pathway responsible for phosphorylation and inactivation of glycogen synthase, a major
regulatory enzyme of glycogen metabolism. But it was soon recognized that this kinase
paints with far broader strokes and influences processes that govern cell metabolism,
polarity, transcription, cell cycle division, apoptosis, development and cell fate. In
mammals, GSK-3 exists as two isoforms, encoded by separate genes. GSK-3α (51 kDa) and
GSK3-β (47 kDa) are highly conserved and widely expressed kinases that share 98%
sequence identity within their catalytic domains [1]. While structurally related, these
isoforms are not functionally equivalent.
Unlike most protein kinases, GSK-3 is active under resting conditions and is rapidly
inhibited by diverse stimuli. For example, insulin, via PI3/AKT/PKB, induces the
inactivation of GSK-3. Many of its cellular targets are held in an inactive state through
inhibitory phosphorylation. Phosphorylation by GSK-3 can also promote the ubiquitination
and degradation of target proteins. Dysregulation of GSK-3, or the pathways that control it,
have been implicated in various human diseases, such as muscle hypertrophy, diabetes,
cancer, bipolar mood disorder, schizophrenia, and neurodegenerative diseases [2].

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

The therapeutic potential of GSK-3 inhibitors in these disease states has been actively
pursued and several potent, chemical inhibitors of GSK-3 have been developed, most of
which are ATP-competitive and do not discriminate between GSK-3α and GSK-3β.
Administration of these inhibitors improves glucose homeostasis and insulin action in rodent
models of diabetes and obesity and there is evidence that the inhibitors may be useful for
conditions associated with inflammation such as ischemia, sepsis and colitis as well as
neurodegenerative accumulation of hyperphosphorylated Tau [2]. Cumulatively, these data
suggest a promising future for GSK-3 antagonists. However, their progress into clinical
trials has been clouded by the concern that inhibition of GSK-3 will promote oncogenesis.
GSK-3 is a key suppressor of the Wnt, Hedgehog and Notch pathways that control cellular
fate determination and stem cell maintenance. Within these pathways, GSK-3 serves to
phosphorylate the pro-oncogenic molecules β-catenin, c-Myc and c-Jun targeting them for
degradation or inactivation, thereby inhibiting proliferation and self-renewal. However,
these pathways are commonly deregulated in human cancers and, furthermore, gain-offunction mutations in these three proteins that interfere with GSK-3 inhibition have been
found in cancers of the skin, colon, prostate and liver [3]. Thus, GSK-3 inhibition could
mimic ectopic signalling of these pathways and promote tumorigenesis. However, no direct
in vivo evidence has indicated that such a phenomenon occurs upon administration of

1

Woodgett@lunenfeld.ca.

PATEL and WOODGETT

Page 2

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

GSK-3 inhibitors. Rather, recent studies in prostate, pancreatic and colorectal cancer cell
lines indicate GSK-3 inhibitors leads to significant reduction in cell growth and proliferation
[2,4], suggesting that inhibiting GSK-3 may actually be beneficial for the treatment of
specific cancers.
Here, Wang et al. [5] have provided strong evidence demonstrating that GSK-3 activity is
essential for maintenance of a subset of leukemias driven by the translocation of the MLL
(mixed lineage leukemia) proto-oncogene. Leukemias that harbor MLL rearrangements are
found in approximately 10% of human cases, with > 70 % frequency of occurrence in infant
leukemia. Over 50 different translocation fusion partners have been identified. Patients with
MLL fusions often have a poor clinical outcome and thus much effort has focused on
seeking new treatments [6].

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

Using a pharmacological screen, Wang et al. [5] found that selective inhibitors of GSK-3
(GSK-3 IX, SB216763 and Alsterpaullone) specifically inhibited the growth of human MLL
but not non-MLL leukaemia cells. In addition, GSK-3 inhibitors reduced clonogenic
potential and proliferation of MLL-transduced murine myeloid or B cell progenitors.
Importantly, normal primary myeloid progenitors and progenitors transduced by non-MLL
fusions, displayed little sensitivity to drug treatment. These authors demonstrated that this
inhibitor effect is indeed mediated by GSK-3, as genetic ablation of GSK-3β and shRNAmediated knockdown of GSK-3α phenocopied the reduced self-renewing capacity of MLLtransformed progenitors in vitro and leukemogenesis in transplanted mice. The Wang et al.
study also demonstrated that both GSK-3β and GSK-3α play redundant roles in maintenance
of MLL transformed leukemias and that greater than 75% reduction in kinase activity is
required to invoke impairment of leukemogenicity. This resembles the functionally
redundant role of GSK-3 within the Wnt pathway in maintaining low cytoplasmic levels of
β-catenin in resting cells, such that removal of at least 3 of the 4 GSK-3 alleles is required
for any significant Wnt signaling [7]. Mechanistically, GSK-3 inhibitors expectedly
increased β-catenin levels. While the extent of β-catenin stabilization was similar in both
non- and MLL-human leukaemia cell lines, they observed that inhibition of GSK-3 induced
expression of the p27Kip1 CDK inhibitor in only MLL-transformed cells. Furthermore,
shRNA-p27Kip1 prevented GSK-3 inhibitor-induced growth arrest of MLL-leukemic cells
(figure 1).

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

These findings shed new and contrasting insights into the role of GSK-3 as a negative
regulator of proliferation and self-renewal. GSK-3 has been shown to modulate human stem
cells (HSC) activity in vivo, suggesting that administration of GSK-3 inhibitors may directly
enhance the repopulating capacity of transplanted HSCs [8]. Recent data indicate that certain
leukemias are maintained by a population of self-renewal leukemia stem cells (LSC), and
that they originate from transformed HSC and committed myeloid progenitors. A major
concern is whether LSCs can be specifically targeted without affecting normal HSC. Wang
et al. provide compelling evidence that inhibitors of GSK-3 could indeed be useful in
targeting specifically the LSC population with MLL rearrangements without perturbing the
normal HSC compartment [5]. There are some interesting questions that arise from their
studies. Firstly, why are MLL-rearranged- but not non-MLL leukemia cells vulnerable to
GSK-3 inhibitors? Wang et al. show that the abundance of the MLL-fusion oncogenes is not
altered by GSK-3 inhibition, but the mechanism by which these cells are sensitized remains
unclear, as does the molecular means by which GSK-3 influences p27Kip1. Recently, it was
shown that a set of non-MLL leukemia cells exhibited over-expression of c-Myc and that the
capacity of GSK-3 to associate and target Myc for degradation was reduced. This ‘GSK-3
resistance’ may offer an explanation as to why non-MLL cells are insensitive to GSK-3
inhibitors [9].

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 December 21.

PATEL and WOODGETT

Page 3

PMC Canada Author Manuscript
PMC Canada Author Manuscript

Secondly, what is the molecular mechanism by which GSK-3 supports MLL-induced
oncogenesis? The authors allude to the existence of an Akt/GSK-3/p27Kip1 pathway within
these cells. They show that a constitutively active Akt mutant suppresses MLL-positive cells
and this is abolished by co-expression of a GSK-3 mutant that can no longer be
phosphorylated/inhibited by Akt (figure 1). It would be of interest to determine whether
MLL-induced leukemogenesis can occur in GSK-3α/β knockin mice expressing non-Aktinhibitable mutants of GSK-3 [10] and if so, the status of p27Kip1 expression in the tumor
cells. Thirdly, and most importantly, what are the long-term effects of high level GSK-3
inhibition as a therapy for MLL leukemias? This new study raises the possibility that
activation of p27Kip1 and its growth inhibitory action will trump pro-oncogenic effects on
proteins such as β-catenin. Wang et al. also demonstrated that exposure of animals with
MLL leukaemia-like leukemia to lithium, which inhibits GSK-3, prolonged the survival of
the treated mice by 40–50%. For decades, lithium has been widely used for the treatment of
bipolar disorder, and there has been no evidence that these patients have increased
incidences of cancers. Indeed, mice that have enhanced Wnt signaling and multiple
intestinal polyps due to mutation of one copy of APC do not show further increased numbers
of polyps when treated with lithium [reviewed in 1]. Thus, it appears that, despite initial
concerns that long-term use of GSK3 inhibitors may promote oncogenesis, there is evidence
accumulating to suggest that these drugs may, in fact, be effective in the treatment of certain
cancers.

Acknowledgments
S.P. and J.W. are supported by funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Canadian Diabetes
Association.

References

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

1. Doble BW, Woodgett JR. GSK-3: tricks of the trade for a multi-tasking kinase. J Cell Sci
2003;116:1175–1186. [PubMed: 12615961]
2. Martinez A. Preclinical efficacy on GSK-3 inhibitors: towards a future generation of powerful
drugs. Medicinal Research Reviews 2008;28:773–796. [PubMed: 18271054]
3. Polakis P. The many ways of Wnt in cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2007;17:45–51. [PubMed:
17208432]
4. Ougolkov AV, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Bilim VN, Smyrk TC, Chari ST, Billadeau DD. Aberrant
nuclear accumulation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in human pancreatic cancer: association
with kinase activity and tumor dedifferentiation. Clinical Cancer Research 2006;12:5074–5081.
[PubMed: 16951223]
5. Wang Z, Smith KS, Murphy M, Piloto O, Somervaille TC, Cleary ML. Glycogen synthase kinase 3
in MLL leukaemia maintenance and targeted therapy. Nature. 2008 in press.
6. Krivtsov AV, Armstrong SA. MLL translocations, histone modifications and leukaemia stem-cell
development. Nature Reviews Cancer 2007;7:823–833.
7. Doble BW, Patel S, Wood GA, Kockeritz LK, Woodgett JR. Functional redundancy of GSK-3alpha
and GSK-3beta in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling shown by using an allelic series of embryonic stem
cell lines. Dev Cell 2007;12:957–971. [PubMed: 17543867]
8. Holmes T, O’Brien TA, Knight R, Lindeman R, Symonds G, Dolnikov A. The role of glycogen
synthase kinase-3beta in normal haematopoiesis, angiogenesis and leukaemia. Curr Med Chem
2008;15:1493–1499. [PubMed: 18537625]
9. Malempati S, Tibbitts D, Cunningham M, Akkari Y, Olson S, Fan G, Sears RC. Aberrant
stabilization of c-Myc protein in some lymphoblastic leukemias. Leukemia 2006;20:1572–1581.
[PubMed: 16855632]
10. McManus EJ, Sakamoto K, Armit LJ, Ronaldson L, Shpiro N, Marquez R, Alessi DR. Role that
phosphorylation of GSK3 plays in insulin and Wnt signalling defined by knockin analysis. EMBO
J 2005;24:1571–1583. [PubMed: 15791206]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 December 21.

PATEL and WOODGETT

Page 4

PMC Canada Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

The model of Wang et al demonstrates that GSK-3 supports the maintenance of MLL
leukemia cells by continuous degradation of the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor, p27Kip1.
Suppression of GSK-3 leads to the stabilisation of p27Kip1 and subsequent growth arrest in
MLL but not non-MLL leukemic or normal cells.

PMC Canada Author Manuscript
PMC Canada Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 December 21.

