Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Center of Cancer Systems Biology Second Annual
Workshop—Tumor Metronomics: Timing and Dose
Level Dynamics
Philip Hahnfeldt, Lynn Hlatky, and Giannoula Lakka Klement

Abstract
Metronomic chemotherapy, the delivery of doses in a low, regular manner so as to avoid toxic side effects, was
introduced over 12 years ago in the face of substantial clinical and preclinical evidence supporting its tumorsuppressive capability. It constituted a marked departure from the classic maximum-tolerated dose (MTD)
strategy, which, given its goal of rapid eradication, uses dosing sufﬁciently intense to require rest periods between
cycles to limit toxicity. Even so, upfront tumor eradication is frequently not achieved with MTD, whereupon a de
facto goal of longer-term tumor control is often pursued. As metronomic dosing has shown tumor control
capability, even for cancers that have become resistant to the same drug delivered under MTD, the question arises
whether it may be a preferable alternative dosing approach from the outset. To date, however, our knowledge of
the coupled dynamics underlying metronomic dosing is neither sufﬁciently well developed nor widely enough
disseminated to establish its actual potential. Meeting organizers thus felt the time was right, armed with new
quantitative approaches, to call a workshop on "Tumor Metronomics: Timing and Dose Level Dynamics" to
explore prospects for gaining a deeper, systems-level appreciation of the metronomics concept. The workshop
proved to be a forum in which experts from the clinical, biologic, mathematical, and computational realms could
work together to clarify the principles and underpinnings of metronomics. Among other things, the need for
signiﬁcant shifts in thinking regarding endpoints to be used as clinical standards of therapeutic progress was
recognized. Cancer Res; 73(10); 2949–54. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
The second of a series of annual workshops organized by
the Center of Cancer Systems Biology and supported by the
National Cancer Institute's (NCI) Integrative Cancer Biology
Program took place this last July in Boston. The goal of these
annual workshops is to bring together oncologists, cancer
biologists, mathematicians, and computational scientists to
reexamine a critical cancer issue from a multiscale systems
perspective. This year, the goal was to examine the biologic
and quantitative ramiﬁcations of metronomic chemotherapeutic dosing on tumor dynamics. The concept of metronomic chemotherapy, the administration of low, uniform
doses of an agent over time with no rest periods between
dosing cycles, was ﬁrst introduced more than 12 years ago
(1–4). It represents a possible alternative address of the
troubling fact that, unlike the successes achieved with
maximum tolerated doses (MTD) of chemotherapy for leu-

Authors' Afﬁliation: Center of Cancer Systems Biology, Steward St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts
Corresponding Author: Philip Hahnfeldt, Center of Cancer Systems
Biology, Steward St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA. Phone: 617-789-2998; Fax: 617-562-7142;
E-mail: Philip.Hahnfeldt@tufts.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

kemias (5), over 50 years of applying the same regimens for
solid tumors has not provided similar successes despite
sometimes impressive initial tumor regressions. One explanation for this conundrum may lie in the fact that solid
tumors, unlike hematologic malignancies, have a long occult
prodrome during which many host survival reactions can be
hijacked to promote tumor growth, and that growth of
these cancers therefore relies in large part on protracted
tumor–host dynamics. Conceptually, a suitable therapeutic
response might therefore be to apply a similarly protracted
treatment to enable and perhaps encourage a reversal of
these same dynamics, that is, metronomic chemotherapy. To
explore this notion, plenary lectures reviewing the issues
from clinical and quantitative perspectives were supplemented by small-group breakout sessions intended to reconcile
disparate points of view about the metronomic concept.
The overall goal was to unify thinking, identify inconsistencies, and start on the road of building predictive frameworks
leading to more productive directions for clinical
implementation.

Proceedings
Setting the stage and providing context for the workshop
lectures, Dan Gallahan, Deputy Director of the Cancer
Biology Division of the NCI and head of NCI's Integrative
Cancer Biology Program, presented an insightful overview
of the promise and potential of cancer systems biology to

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2949

Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Hahnfeldt et al.

offer quantitative approaches to deal with many of the
complexities of cancer development and cancer treatment.
In the opening lecture by Barton Kamen (The Cancer
Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
New Brunswick, NJ), the histories of traditional and metronomic chemotherapies were summarized. In Dr. Kamen's
lecture, we were reminded of the shortcomings of the concept
of log-kill ﬁrst introduced by Skipper and colleagues in the
1970s in the context of leukemia (6). He reviewed reasons why
this model is not easily transferable to the more highly heterogeneous solid tumor subpopulations, including its development in vitro and its subject population being a homogeneous population of nonmutagenic/nonadaptable cells in
exponential phase. He reviewed the involvement of immune
cells in cancer (7, 8) and put forward several reasons for the
implausibility of eradicating the reactive inﬂammatory
response with high doses of chemotherapy (9, 10). He
recounted how even in childhood leukemias, the most commonly noted oncologic successes, it was not the early dose
intensiﬁcation that had delivered improvements in outcomes
(POG Study 9006; ref. 11). Quite possibly, it was rather the
introduction of 18 months of low-dose, continuous "maintenance" chemotherapy to the protocols that improved the
survival rates of these patients. Reinforcing this notion, shortening the low-dose maintenance period led to increased
recurrence rates. Thus, from a pharmacologic perspective,
metronomic dosing arguably makes extension of time of drug
delivery the more critical factor in treatment success than
intensiﬁcation of drug delivery over a ﬁxed time.
Philip Hahnfeldt (Center of Cancer Systems Biology, Steward
St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA) and Urszula Ledzewicz (Department
of Mathematics and Statistics, Southern Illinois University,
Edwardsville, IL) next discussed quantitative models of tumor
dynamics under high- and low-dose chemotherapy. Dr. Hahnfeldt described how target heterogeneity favors a metronomic
approach, showing formally how the presence of heterogeneity
argues for a diametrically different dosing scheme than that
embodied in the MTD standard (12). He showed how this
follows from recognizing (i) that the target of drug therapy is a
multicompartment population of intercommunicating cells,
heterogeneous in both proliferation rate and drug sensitivity,
and (ii) that the optimal way to suppress the combined
population is by uniformly suppressing its various subcompartments together to minimize cross-compartment negative
feedback resistance to drug action. Through metronomic dose
delivery, the overall population "resensitization" that takes
place between increments of dose is optimized. As a corollary,
it was shown that, as endothelium should be more efﬁcient at
"resensitization" than tumor cells, it stands to reason the
adoption of metronomic dosing will lead to greater antiangiogenic efﬁcacy. Looking forward, Dr. Hahnfeldt argued that the
more realistic goal of best long-term suppression of cancer will
require correspondingly longer-term standards, beyond standard short-term partial and complete response criteria, for
identifying superior drug performance.
Dr. Ledzewicz addressed the question of how much, how
often, and in what sequence anticancer drugs should be

2950

Cancer Res; 73(10) May 15, 2013

administered. She formulated this mathematically as an optimal control problem that considered chemotherapy, both with
cytotoxic and cytostatic agents, angiogenic inhibitors, and
immunotherapy, alone or in combination (13). Her conclusion
was that the way a given dose is administered over time makes
a signiﬁcant difference as far as the shrinkage of the tumor and
cumulative side effects are concerned (14). It was seen that
"more is not better" is not always true, that is to say, MTD is not
necessarily the best way to achieve the goal of tumor suppression, but that a properly designed, constant, or even variable
lower dose rate may provide a better outcome. This in turn
would suggest that metronomic drug delivery, which shows
much promise judging from the available clinical data, may
well be a more efﬁcient means of drug administration. So while
the general principle seems validated, it is proposed that the
tools of optimal control theory can further reﬁne the issue to
provide insight into how, in terms of the dose level, duration,
presence, or absence of rest periods, a metronomic protocol
should be designed.
Eddy Pasquier (Children's Cancer Institute Australia for
Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, and a cofounder of the
Metronomics Global Health Initiative) opened the second day
by discussing how the type of endothelial cell response
depends on dose, focusing on the unique involvement of
cytoskeletal dynamics. Dr. Pasquier showed that high concentrations of microtubule-targeting drugs (e.g., taxanes and vinca
alkaloids) suppress microtubule dynamics, but low concentrations can do the reverse (15, 16), impairing the motility and
angiogenic potential of endothelial cells without cell killing
(17). To illustrate, he compared vinblastine, an antimicrotubule drug, to VP16 and mafosfamide. Although differential
effects could be achieved with low-dose (1 nmol/L) versus
high-dose (20 nmol/L) vinblastine, 0.5 versus 50 mmol/L topoisomerase/VP16, or 2.5 versus 50 mmol/L mafosfamide, only
vinblastine showed differential effects at nmol/L concentrations. He went on to show that repeated exposure to high-dose
chemotherapy led to increased proliferation rates and refractoriness of endothelial cells, whereas repeated exposure to lowdose metronomic chemotherapy impaired the angiogenic
capacity of endothelial cells and increased chemosensitivity
through downregulation of MRP2, bII, and bIII tubulin expression. An intriguing incidental ﬁnding was preliminary evidence
that the expression of VEGFR2 increases with MTD but
decreases with low-dose metronomic chemotherapy (18).
Considering that the remaining VEGFR2 receptors following
low-dose chemotherapy should have an improved efﬁciency
per receptor on account of the now relatively greater abundance of ligand, additional direct inhibition of the receptor
should enhance overall tumor suppression. If so, this would
offer one explanation for the previously observed synergistic
activity of the combination of low-dose continuous chemotherapy and VEGFR2 inhibition (2, 19). A stimulating discussion about the differential effect of low protracted doses of
chemotherapy versus high doses with prolonged periods of
interruptions ensued.
Citing both preclinical data and evidence from clinical trials,
Carl Panetta (Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences at St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN) proposed

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Tumor Metronomics: Timing and Dose Level Dynamics

that "protracted" doses possess a very different mechanism of
action compared with high doses coupled with prolonged dose
interruptions. Data supported the differential effect of varying
the frequency based on interruptions to allow for bone marrow
recovery (usually every 3–4 weeks), versus protracted dosing
regimens without interruption. He summarized the clinically
applicable mathematical modeling methods currently used to
describe the complex effects of chemotherapy, concluding that
quantitative models provide an efﬁcient means to anticipate
the implications of tumor heterogeneity in the consideration of
alternative treatment schedules. He included 3 examples of
agents that have been modeled in the clinical setting: methotrexate and asparaginase, which are used in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; refs. 20, 21), and topotecan (22),
used in pediatric neuroblastoma. In each case, mathematical
models were developed to describe the disposition and mechanism of action of the agent, and these models were then
used to help deﬁne effective doses and treatment schedules.
These model-predicted treatments were validated using current and historical clinical data, and in particular, suggested a
superiority of topotecan in protracted regimens. Dr. Panetta
concluded by advocating that drug pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics be considered in the planning of speciﬁc
metronomic regimens.
Sebastian Benzekry (Center of Cancer Systems Biology,
Steward St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA) presented a novel mathematical
model for combination cytotoxic and antiangiogenic therapies
in the treatment of metastatic cancers. Using tumor size and
vascular carrying capacity as critical variables in a transport
equation construct, he focused on the effect of varying drug
scheduling on the response of the tumor-metastasis system. He
showed that the therapeutic response of metastases is likely
different than that of the primary. He went on to present a
novel simulation of the dynamical differences of MTD versus
metronomic dose and frequency regimens and a model for
time to development of metastases, their distribution, size, and
carrying capacity (23). He further showed how this construct
can be used to theoretically study the effects of scheduling of
anticancer drugs (both cytotoxic and antiangiogenic) on the
treatment of disseminated cancer (18). He emphasized the
differences between the treatment of an isolated lesion and a
population of metastases and derived the theoretical "optimal
schedule" that showed a superior effect on the total metastatic
mass by a continuous metronomic regimen versus a classical
MTD scheme in which the dose is given as one concentrated
administration.
Starting out the third day, Nicolas Andre (Aix-Marseille
University Medical School, Marseille, France, and a cofounder
of the Metronomics Global Health Initiative) pointed out that
metronomic chemotherapy was initially thought to be "antiangiogenic" by deﬁnition, likely a carryover from earlier studies
that emphasized this aspect [e.g., (1, 3)], but noted we now
appreciate a broader involvement of the microenvironment
beyond the endothelial component (15, 16). He reminded us
that using metronomic chemotherapy/biologic response modiﬁer combinations might be less toxic and more effective than
MTD implementations that have historically failed due to

www.aacrjournals.org

toxicity limitations. He recalled several successful experiences
with low-dose chemotherapy, including (i) pediatric cases
dating back to the 1960s; (ii) maintenance purinethol-methotrexate regimens used in ALL; and (iii) the use of low-dose oral
etoposide in palliative management of incurable brain tumors
(24), sarcomas (25–27), and pediatric refractory tumors
(25, 28, 29). He recounted how, despite the renewed focus on
metronomic dosing and reports of its antiangiogenic effect
(2, 19, 30, 31), it has been difﬁcult to evaluate clinical trials. He
attributed part of this to the fact that, in traditional chemotherapeutic regimens, efﬁcacy is measured by immediate
tumor shrinkage, whereas in metronomic chemotherapy,
effect is only evident after 6 to 8 months. Other problems
include the paucity of response biomarkers and models for
multidrug regimens. Dr. Andre, who leads several metronomic
trials in France, summarized key considerations for proper
metronomic protocol design. These include endpoints to use in
lieu of classic partial or complete response, the value of single
versus combination therapies, evaluation of synergism/antagonism between two agents, the value of avoiding dosing breaks,
the use of MTD efﬁcacy standards in the metronomic context,
the existence of a universal metronomic scheduling standard,
and the extrapolation of single-agent drug information to a
multidrug dosing setting.
Heinz Schaettler (Department of Electrical and Systems
Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO) discussed
mathematical models for various combinations of chemotherapeutic strategies using multiple agents, or chemotherapy/
radiation given with an antiangiogenic treatment. He presented how these models can be used to determine optimal
tumor burden control and minimize the cancer volume.
Addressed was the challenge that arises in the search for
optimal protocols of combination therapies. As more than
one agent is involved, in addition to the natural question of
timing and dosage, there is also the important question of
proper sequencing. Thus, the question "in what order" can
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the outcome. Discussed were detailed
mathematical models for various combination therapies such
as multidrug chemotherapy and antiangiogenic treatment
combined with cytotoxic agents or radiotherapy. These models
were reviewed as optimal tumor control problems. Depending
on the model construct and treatment speciﬁcs, different
optimal scenarios were seen to arise that include mixtures of
singular controls corresponding to varying lower-dose regimens, and so-called "bang-bang" controls corresponding to
maximum dose treatments with rest periods in between. The
combination of an initial cytoreductive MTD (bang-bang)
regimen followed by metronomic chemotherapy, which Dr.
Schaettler called a chemoswitch strategy and suggested may be
the optimal strategy, has already been used both in preclinical
studies in vivo (2) and in humans (in current ALL protocols).
David Waxman (Division of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Boston University, Boston, MA) presented on the topic of
innate immunity-induced tumor regression by metronomic
chemotherapy. He stressed that metronomic chemotherapy
regimens are often antiangiogenic, reﬂecting the high chemosensitivity of tumor endothelial cells to the metronomic
schedules of cytotoxic drugs (32). He also presented data

Cancer Res; 73(10) May 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2951

Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Hahnfeldt et al.

using preclinical brain tumor xenograft models in which
cyclophosphamide given in a 6-day repeating metronomic
schedule activated potent antitumor innate immunity (33),
leading to tumor ablation. Unexpectedly, VEGFR-selective
inhibitors blocked these responses, suggesting that the use of
VEGFR inhibitors in the clinic may inhibit tumor immunosurveillance. Using wild-type and immunocompromised
mouse models, he showed how immunosurveillance suppression can be avoided by instead using antiangiogenic agents
that act by means other than VEGFR inhibition. In contrast,
traditional high-dose chemotherapy induced an innate
immune response that was transient and weak, suggesting
that sustained drug-induced stress and its associated cytokine
response are required for immune-facilitated tumor regression
(33, 34). In his closing remarks, Dr. Waxman emphasized that
the timing and frequency of metronomic drug treatment was
critical. The innate immune response leading to tumor regression was lost when the frequency of metronomic administration of a given total amount of drug was increased from once
every 6 days to every 3 days, or daily. A very lively discussion
ensued after Dr. Waxman's suggestion that "metronomic chemotherapy may also beneﬁt from breaks and that daily, or
every 3 days, may be too frequent." Opinions expressed on this
and other potential intricacies relating to implementation of
the metronomics concept reﬂected the difﬁculty faced testing
various regimens in the clinic without harming patients, and
the increasing difﬁculty justifying preclinical experiments with
dose- or frequency-ﬁnding goals. As an alternative, the group
agreed on the need to develop additional quantitative modeling tools to evaluate the consequences of different frequencies
of metronomic chemotherapies on innate immunity, angiogenesis, and various populations within the tumor.
In her presentation delving into hindrances to translation of
metronomic chemotherapy to the clinic, Giannoula Lakka
Klement argued that the main obstacle may be our reluctance
to change. Even though the advent of anticancer chemotherapy
some 75 years ago brought about a striking increase in survival
rates, it was done at a very high cost to patients. Moreover,
although the survival rates for childhood ALL rose from 25% in
1960 to 95% in 2012, a number of leukemia subtypes and stages,
for example, the MLL-AF4 fusion variant of ALL and post–blast
crisis chronic myelogenous leukemia, carry dismal prognoses.
Similarly, for many solid tumors of the central nervous system
or disseminated sarcomas, the survival rates, while rising from
8% to more than 60% in the 70s, have not further improved.
Unfortunately, many of the newer biologic response modiﬁers
that were developed over the last 40 years have not performed
well in the setting of standard dose chemotherapy. Such agents
interfere with host physiologic responses recruited by the
cancer, thereby stripping the cells (both normal and cancerous) of many of their survival mechanisms and thus enhancing
the toxic effects of chemotherapy. Thus, it is often the case that
when standard MTD doses are used, the outcome of adding a
biologic response modiﬁer is increased toxicity. This is one
reason why many clinical trials that use standard endpoint
measurements, for example, overall survival or event-free
survival, eventually fail despite meaningful initial tumor regressions. Biologic response modiﬁers (e.g., antiangiogenic agents,

2952

Cancer Res; 73(10) May 15, 2013

cox-2, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and antibodies against protumor factors) are particularly suited to combinations with
metronomic chemotherapy, as their ability to inhibit stromal
reaction can give rise to a synergistic habitualization of the
microenvironment. Dr. Klement reminded us that when dealing with resistant cancers, even myeloablative doses requiring
peripheral stem cell rescue rarely succeed at eradication, and
increasing the dose leads to unnecessary toxicity. Furthermore,
although the cancer cells develop drug resistance, normal host
cells keep responding, and their damage manifests as bone
marrow suppression, hair loss, etc. throughout the chemotherapeutic course. This persistent sensitivity of normal cells, this
"resistance to resistance," can be exploited with a combination
of low-dose metronomic chemotherapy and a biologic
response modiﬁer. In particular, the "resistance" of normal
endothelial cells to developing resistance makes them an
excellent target for therapy (35). If endothelial cells are less
prone to developing resistance and if they are sensitive to very
low doses of chemotherapy, then the addition of an antiangiogenic agent to extremely low doses of chemotherapy could
result in a superior, nontoxic strategy unlikely to develop drug
tolerance. Clinical trials support the use of maintenance
chemotherapy in solid tumors, particularly those at high risk
for relapse. A recent Canadian experience in children with
Ewing sarcoma suggests that the combination of vinblastine/
celecoxib metronomic therapy following standard treatment
results in statistically signiﬁcant event-free survival (36). Dr.
Klement went on to suggest that the availability of a plethora of
new targeted agents is likely to change the culture of oncology,
with treatments moving from treating advanced disseminated
cancers with highly toxic combinations to intervening early in
carcinogenesis with minimally toxic, albeit slower acting, drug
combinations.
The keynote lecture was given by Dr. Larry Norton (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY) and
addressed the difﬁculty with our search for the ultimate single
drug sought by pharmaceutical companies, physicians, and
patients alike. As one of the ﬁrst investigators to point out
limitations with the traditional MTD implementation of the
log-kill theory of Skipper, Schabel, and Wilcox, he reminded us
that fast-growing tumors are killed fast, and slow tumors are
killed slowly (37, 38), and how this translates to the same speed
of recurrence. He shared experimental evidence that adjusting
dose densities and sequence can lead to improved responses
compared with myeloablative doses requiring time for bone
marrow recovery (39–42). The 20 years that passed since this
simple observation, he said, were committed to ﬁnding the
"right drug" because the idea of having ever more potent single
agents against cancers was more conceptually accessible than
the formidable dynamical understanding that would be needed
to match dose schedules to tumor dynamics. As a strong
advocate for including tumor dynamical considerations in
treatment planning, Dr. Norton gave further examples of the
importance of early leukocyte migration into tumors, of tumor
"self-seeding" (43), and the ability to infer tumor progression
from genomic heterogeneity (44, 45). He suggested that ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) amounts to a breast cancer that has
not developed pathways to self-seed, and that DCIS may

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Tumor Metronomics: Timing and Dose Level Dynamics

therefore be a good setting for using antimigration agents, for
example, antiCXCR2, rather than methods like cryoablation,
which may be counterproductive because it leads to macromolecular debris. He pointed out that cancer cells overexpressing CXCL1 and 2 attract CD11bþ myeloid cells into
the tumor, where they produce cytokines that promote
cancer cell survival. He closed with the thought-provoking
suggestion that chemotherapy should be given in a doseand frequency-speciﬁc manner so as to target the tumorpromoting myeloid CD11bþ cells, and that the optimal time
to apply chemotherapy is when the tumor is undergoing the
most change.

Conclusions
The Workshop conﬁrmed the urgent need for collaboration
between the biomathematical and biomedical arenas in the
effort to optimize therapeutic dosing strategies. On the last day,
breakout groups, each consisting of biologists, MDs, and
mathematicians, presented their consensus views on the vital
questions surrounding optimum frequency and dose administration for chemotherapeutic agents, and what might be an
appropriate surrogate endpoint for the evaluation of treatment
efﬁcacy. Melds of the viewpoints of group members were
presented, ranging from testable quantitative models, to general roadmaps connecting clinical and preclinical data on doserelevant parameters, to potential optimal clinical implementation. Novel points of view emerged from the group discussions as well as the discussion in the large plenary forums.
With respect to impact on perspective and clinical applications, it was noted that progress in less toxic approaches to
cancer therapy may have been hindered by the unfortunate
expectation, of patients and physicians alike, that any
approach should lead to immediate tumor eradication. It
seems inevitable, however, with the ever-increasing evidence
attesting to the efﬁcacy of low, uniform dosing, metronomic
therapy, a shift away from the common expectation of "immediate regression" that accompanies high-dose therapy will
eventually occur. Indeed, a search for the word "metronomic"

in the NIH ClinicalTrials.gov online database (http://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term¼metronomic&Search ¼
Search) presently yields 104 trials, 56 of which are open, and
more than 90% of which are in combination with a targeted
biologic agent. Hopefully, with further development of molecularly based cancer therapies, this change may gain additional
momentum. Looking forward, it is anticipated that as we work
to overcome the frustrating fact that combining targeted
therapies with already maximally toxic standard therapies
often leads to unacceptable toxicities without the offsetting
beneﬁt of prevention of relapse, the embrace of metronomic
chemotherapy will grow. A combination of targeted treatments
and metronomic chemotherapy may represent a marriage of
two goals—the ability to optimize selection for the cancer cells
of interest, while at the same time anticipating and minimizing
untoward physiologic reactions of the host.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
This Workshop Proceedings Report is dedicated to Dr. Barton Kamen, whose
relentless work, enthusiasm, and collegial spirit has been the source of inspiration for colleagues and junior scientists alike. Several of us were driven to
appreciate the importance of lower-dose scheduling only after many stimulating
discussions with Barton. He was the force that, almost single-handedly, kept the
ﬁeld of metronomics alive through a time of great resistance to clinical
acceptance. His participation in the workshop was a testimonial to his selﬂess
commitment to the cause, timed as it was after Barton had already become ill.
Although he was not able to review our recollections in this report, the authors
felt his presence in every thought and discussion we have here related. The
essence of a most supportive and encouraging mentor, Barton passed to us his
legacy of "the good ﬁght," inspiring us to move forward with the challenges the
paradigm-shifting ﬁeld of metronomics has placed upon us.

Grant Support
This workshop was supported by National Cancer Institute grant #U54CA149233 (L. Hlatky).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received October 1, 2012; revised March 1, 2013; accepted March 6, 2013;
published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

Hanahan D, Bergers G, Bergsland E. Less is more, regularly: metronomic dosing of cytotoxic drugs can target tumor angiogenesis in
mice. J Clin Invest 2000;105:1045–7.
Klement G, Baruchel S, Rak J, Man S, Clark K, Hicklin DJ, et al.
Continuous low-dose therapy with vinblastine and VEGF receptor-2
antibody induces sustained tumor regression without overt toxicity.
J Clin Invest 2000;105:R15–24.
Browder T, Butterﬁeld CE, Kraling BM, Shi B, Marshall B, O'Reilly MS,
et al. Antiangiogenic scheduling of chemotherapy improves efﬁcacy
against experimental drug-resistant cancer. Cancer Res 2000;60:
1878–86.
Kamen BA, Rubin E, Aisner J, Glatstein E. High-time chemotherapy or
high time for low dose. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:2935–7.
Skipper HE, Schabel FM Jr, Bell M, Thomson JR, Johnson S. On the
curability of experimental neoplasms. I. Amethopterin and mouse
leukemias. Cancer Res 1957;17:717–26.
Skipper HE, Schabel FM Jr, Mellett LB, Montgomery JA, Wilkoff LJ,
Lloyd HH, et al. Implications of biochemical, cytokinetic, pharmacologic, and toxicologic relationships in the design of optimal therapeutic
schedules. Cancer Chemother Rep 1970;54:431–50.

www.aacrjournals.org

7.

DeNardo DG, Johansson M, Coussens LM. Inﬂaming gastrointestinal
oncogenic programming. Cancer Cell 2008;14:7–9.
8. DeNardo DG, Coussens LM. Inﬂammation and breast cancer. Balancing immune response: crosstalk between adaptive and innate immune
cells during breast cancer progression. Breast Cancer Res 2007;
9:212.
9. Frost P, Kamen BA. The bullseye of cancer therapy: a moving target.
Curr Opin Pharmacol 2003;3:335–7.
10. Weitman SD, Glatstein E, Kamen BA. Back to the basics: the
importance of concentration x time in oncology. J Clin Oncol
1993;11:820–1.
11. Lauer SJ, Shuster JJ, Mahoney DH Jr, Winick N, Toledano S, Munoz
L, et al. A comparison of early intensive methotrexate/mercaptopurine with early intensive alternating combination chemotherapy
for high-risk B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a Pediatric
Oncology Group phase III randomized trial. Leukemia. 2001;15:
1038–45.
12. Hahnfeldt P, Folkman J, Hlatky L. Minimizing long-term tumor burden:
the logic for metronomic chemotherapeutic dosing and its antiangiogenic basis. J Theor Biol. 2003;220:545–54.

Cancer Res; 73(10) May 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

2953

Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Hahnfeldt et al.

€ttler H. Optimal bang-bang controls for a two13. Ledzewicz U, Scha
compartment model in cancer chemotherapy. J Optim Theory Appl.
2002;114:609–37.
€ttler H. Drug resistance in cancer chemotherapy as
14. Ledzewicz U, Scha
an optimal control problem. Discrete Contin Dyn Syst Ser B 2006;6:
129–50.
15. Pasquier E, Andre N, Braguer D. Targeting microtubules to inhibit
angiogenesis and disrupt tumour vasculature: implications for cancer
treatment. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2007;7:566–81.
16. Pasquier E, Kavallaris M, Andre N. Metronomic chemotherapy: new
rationale for new directions. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2010;7:455–65.
17. Pasquier E, Andre N. New therapeutic advances and perspectives in
tumour angiogenesis. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2010;10:877–8.
18. Pasquier E, Tuset MP, Street J, Sinnappan S, Mackenzie KL, Braguer
D, et al. Concentration- and schedule-dependent effects of chemotherapy on the angiogenic potential and drug sensitivity of vascular
endothelial cells. Angiogenesis 2013;16:373–86.
19. Klement G, Huang P, Mayer B, Green SK, Man S, Bohlen P, et al.
Differences in therapeutic indexes of combination metronomic
chemotherapy and an anti-VEGFR-2 antibody in multidrug-resistant
human breast cancer xenografts. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:
221–32.
20. Panetta JC, Gajjar A, Hijiya N, Hak LJ, Cheng C, Liu W, et al. Comparison of native E. coli and PEG asparaginase pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2009;86:651–8.
21. Panetta JC, Sparreboom A, Pui CH, Relling MV, Evans WE. Modeling
mechanisms of in vivo variability in methotrexate accumulation and
folate pathway inhibition in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. PLoS
Comput Biol 2010;6:e1001019.
22. Hubbard KE, Schaiquevich P, Bai F, Fraga CH, Miller L, Panetta JC,
et al. Application of a highly speciﬁc and sensitive ﬂuorescent HPLC
method for topotecan lactone in whole blood. Biomed Chromatogr
2009;23:707–13.
 N, Benabdallah A, Ciccolini J, Faivre C, Hubert F,
23. Benzekry S, Andre
et al. Modeling the impact of anticancer agents on metastatic
spreading. Math Model Nat Phenom 2012;7:306–6.
24. Peyrl A, Chocholous M, Kieran MW, Azizi AA, Prucker C, Czech T, et al.
Antiangiogenic metronomic therapy for children with recurrent embryonal brain tumors. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2012;59:511–7.
25. Ferrari A, Grosso F, Stacchiotti S, Meazza C, Zafﬁgnani E, Marchiano
A, et al. Response to vinorelbine and low-dose cyclophosphamide
chemotherapy in two patients with desmoplastic small round cell
tumor. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2007;49:864–6.
26. Andre N, Abed S, Orbach D, Alla CA, Padovani L, Pasquier E, et al. Pilot
study of a pediatric metronomic 4-drug regimen. Oncotarget 2011;2:
960–5.
27. Kebudi R, Gorgun O, Ayan I. Oral etoposide for recurrent/progressive
sarcomas of childhood. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2004;42:320–4.
28. Inoue S, Onwuzurike N. Venorelbine and methotrexate for the treatment of Rosai-Dorfman disease. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2005;45:84–5;
author reply 86.
29. Kuttesch JFJr, Krailo MD, Madden T, Johansen M, Bleyer A. Phase II
evaluation of intravenous vinorelbine (Navelbine) in recurrent or refractory pediatric malignancies: a Children's Oncology Group study.
Pediatr Blood Cancer 2009;53:590–3.

2954

Cancer Res; 73(10) May 15, 2013

30. Kerbel RS, Klement G, Pritchard KI, Kamen B. Continuous low-dose
anti-angiogenic/metronomic chemotherapy: from the research laboratory into the oncology clinic. Ann Oncol 2002;13:12–5.
31. Kerbel RS, Yu J, Tran J, Man S, Viloria-Petit A, Klement G, et al.
Possible mechanisms of acquired resistance to anti-angiogenic drugs:
implications for the use of combination therapy approaches. Cancer
Metastasis Rev 2001;20:79–86.
32. Ma J, Waxman DJ. Modulation of the antitumor activity of metronomic
cyclophosphamide by the angiogenesis inhibitor axitinib. Mol Cancer
Ther 2008;7:79–89.
33. Doloff JC, Waxman DJ. VEGF receptor inhibitors block the ability of
metronomically dosed cyclophosphamide to activate innate immunity-induced tumor regression. Cancer Res 2012;72:1103–15.
34. Jia L, Waxman DJ. Thrombospondin-1 and pigment epitheliumderived factor enhance responsiveness of KM12 colon tumor to
metronomic cyclophosphamide but have disparate effects on tumor
metastasis. Cancer Lett. 2013;330:241–9.
35. Folkman J, Hahnfeldt P, Hlatky L. Cancer: looking outside the genome.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2000;1:76–9.
36. Felgenhauer JL, Nieder ML, Krailo MD, Bernstein ML, Henry DW,
Malkin D, et al. A pilot study of low-dose anti-angiogenic chemotherapy in combination with standard multiagent chemotherapy for
patients with newly diagnosed metastatic Ewing sarcoma family of
tumors: A Children's Oncology Group (COG) Phase II study
NCT00061893. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2013;60:409–14.
37. Norton L, Simon R. Tumor size, sensitivity to therapy, and design of
treatment schedules. Cancer Treat Rep 1977;61:1307–17.
38. Norton L, Simon R. Growth curve of an experimental solid tumor
following radiotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 1977;58:1735–41.
39. Sugarman S, Wasserheit C, Hodgman E, Coglianese M, D'Alassandro
A, Fornier M, et al. A pilot study of dose-dense adjuvant paclitaxel
without growth factor support for women with early breast carcinoma.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2009;115:609–12.
40. Fornier M, Norton L. Dose-dense adjuvant chemotherapy for primary
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2005;7:64–9.
41. Fornier MN, Seidman AD, Theodoulou M, Moynahan ME, Currie V,
Moasser M, et al. Doxorubicin followed by sequential paclitaxel and
cyclophosphamide versus concurrent paclitaxel and cyclophosphamide: 5-year results of a phase II randomized trial of adjuvant dosedense chemotherapy for women with node-positive breast carcinoma.
Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:3934–41.
42. Citron ML, Berry DA, Cirrincione C, Hudis C, Winer EP, Gradishar WJ,
et al. Randomized trial of dose-dense versus conventionally scheduled
and sequential versus concurrent combination chemotherapy as postoperative adjuvant treatment of node-positive primary breast cancer:
ﬁrst report of Intergroup Trial C9741/Cancer and Leukemia Group B
Trial 9741. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:1431–9.
43. Kim MY, Oskarsson T, Acharyya S, Nguyen DX, Zhang XH, Norton L,
et al. Tumor self-seeding by circulating cancer cells. Cell 2009;139:
1315–26.
44. Hicks J, Krasnitz A, Lakshmi B, Navin NE, Riggs M, Leibu E, et al. Novel
patterns of genome rearrangement and their association with survival
in breast cancer. Genome Res 2006;16:1465–79.
45. Navin N, Krasnitz A, Rodgers L, Cook K, Meth J, Kendall J, et al.
Inferring tumor progression from genomic heterogeneity. Genome Res
2010;20:68–80.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807

Center of Cancer Systems Biology Second Annual Workshop−−
Tumor Metronomics: Timing and Dose Level Dynamics
Philip Hahnfeldt, Lynn Hlatky and Giannoula Lakka Klement
Cancer Res 2013;73:2949-2954. Published OnlineFirst March 14, 2013.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2013/03/14/0008-5472.CAN-12-3807.DC1

This article cites 45 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/10/2949.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/10/2949.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

