Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

The pancreatic niche inhibits the effectiveness of sunitinib
treatment of pancreatic cancer

Neus Martínez-Bosch1, Pedro Enrique Guerrero1, Mireia Moreno1, Anabel José2,3,
Mar Iglesias4, Jessica Munné-Collado4, Héctor Anta1,5, Joan Gibert1, Carlos Alberto
Orozco1, Judith Vinaixa1, Cristina Fillat2,3, Francesc Viñals6, Pilar Navarro1
1

Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain

2

Biomedical Research Institute August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain

3

Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain

4

Pathology Service, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain

5

Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain

6

Catalan Institute of Oncology-IDIBELL, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain

Correspondence to: Pilar Navarro, email: pnavarro@imim.es
Keywords: sunitinib, pancreatic cancer, PDA, acinar carcinoma, fibrosis
Received: January 14, 2016     Accepted: June 06, 2016     Published: June 21, 2016

ABSTRACT
Current treatments for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) are ineffective,
making this the 4th leading cause of cancer deaths. Sunitinib is a broad-spectrum
inhibitor of tyrosine kinase receptors mostly known for its anti-angiogenic effects.
We tested the therapeutic effects of sunitinib in pancreatic cancer using the Ela-myc
transgenic mouse model. We showed that Ela-myc pancreatic tumors express PDGFR
and VEGFR in blood vessels and epithelial cells, rendering these tumors sensitive to
sunitinib by more than only its anti-angiogenic activity. However, sunitinib treatment
of Ela-myc mice with either early or advanced tumor progression had no impact on
either survival or tumor burden. Further histopathological characterization of these
tumors did not reveal differences in necrosis, cell differentiation, angiogenesis,
apoptosis or proliferation. In stark contrast, in vitro sunitinib treatment of Ela-myc–
derived cell lines showed high sensitivity to the drug, with increased apoptosis and
reduced proliferation. Correspondingly, subcutaneous tumors generated from these
cell lines completely regressed in vivo after sunitinib treatments. These data point
at the pancreatic tumor microenvironment as the most likely barrier preventing
sunitinib treatment efficiency in vivo. Combined treatments with drugs that disrupt
tumor fibrosis may enhance sunitinib therapeutic effectiveness in pancreatic cancer
treatment.

and only minimally improve patient survival, such that
new therapeutic strategies with improved efficiency are
urgently needed. In contrast, other types of less-frequent
pancreatic tumors, such as acinar cell carcinomas [3] and
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors [4], are associated with
better prognosis and longer survival rates.
Sunitinib is a broad-spectrum receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK) inhibitor whose targets include VEGFR-1,-2,-3,
PDGFR-α,-β [5], stem cell factor receptor (c-KIT), Fmslike tyrosine kinase-3 receptor, the glial cell line derived
neurotrophic factor receptor (RET) and colony-stimulating
factor type 1 receptor (CSF-1R) [5–7]. Sunitinib inhibits
endothelial cell proliferation and therefore is considered

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the most
common pancreatic tumor (accounting for more than 90%
of cases). PDA is aggressive and difficult to detect at an
early stage, with few effective treatments and low survival
rates, making it a major challenge for biomedical research.
Indeed, this adenocarcinoma is predicted to become the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
States by 2020 [1, 2]. Current therapies for unresectable
tumors, which are the most common ones, include
chemotherapy administration based on gemcitabine,
folifirinox or nab-paclitaxel, but these are very inefficient
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48265

Oncotarget

alteration driving pancreatic cancer, c-Myc appears to have
a key role in PDA development and progression [25–27]
and has also been linked with K-Ras in this pathology
[28, 29]. To test the effects of sunitinib in this model of
pancreatic cancer, we first analyzed the expression of
sunitinib-targeted RTK in acinar and ductal tumor areas
from Ela-myc mice (Figure 1). Immunohistochemical
analyses showed that VEGFR2, PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β
were expressed in pancreatic tumors, both acinar (Figure
1a–1f) and ductal areas (Figure 1g–1l). Importantly, these
receptors were expressed not only in blood vessels and
tumor stroma (Figure 1, arrows) but also in epithelial
cancer cells (Figure 1, arrowheads). These data suggested
a potential sunitinib sensitivity of Ela-myc tumors, which
could be due not only to its well-known anti-angiogenic
effect but also to its effects on the RTK that are expressed
in pancreatic tumor cells.

as an anti-angiogenic drug [8]. However, the expression
of sunitinib-targeted RTKs in other stromal cells, as well
as in the tumor epithelium, suggests that it could have a
more extended mechanism of action with potential multiple
effect in these different cells [5, 9, 10]. Sunitinib treatment
has given impressive results in neuroendocrine pancreatic
tumors, and its use for this pathology was recently approved
by the FDA [11, 12]. In contrast, phase II clinical trials to
test sunitinib for treating PDA have consistently shown
its failure, either when sunitinib was combined with
gemcitabine for patients with advanced or metastatic PDA
[13] or when it was given as a second-line therapy after
gemcitabine failure [14].
The reasons behind this inefficacy of sunitinib
treatment in PDA patients are not well understood. Several
in vitro and in vivo reports on pancreatic ductal tumor cell
lines and xenografts showed encouraging results, suggesting
that sunitinib could potentially be used to improve standard
chemotherapeutical treatments [10, 15–20]. In vivo sunitinib
treatment in transgenic mouse models of pancreatic cancer
was ineffective for k-ras–driven PDA yet successful
for a neuroendocrine preclinical model (RIP-Tag) [21].
Understanding these apparently contradictory results thus
requires further studies to elucidate the precise mechanistic
roles and potential uses of sunitinib in PDA therapy.
Here, we have tested sunitinib effects in the Ela-myc
transgenic mouse model of pancreatic cancer, both in vitro
and in vivo. Ela-myc mice develop acinar tumors that can
undergo acinar-to-ductal metaplasia and progress to ductal
adenocarcinomas, mimicking human PDA progression
[22–24]. In contrast to xenograft models, transgenic mice
can better recapitulate tumor onset, tumor progression and
tumor-stroma crosstalk, the latter of which is particularly
important in pancreatic cancer. This study using the
Ela-myc model complements the only one previously
published preclinical report of sunitinib in pancreatic
cancer that used transgenic mice (with a k-ras–based
model) [21]. Using the Ela-myc model, we were able
to analyze sunitinib effects in ductal as well as, for the
first time, in acinar tumors. Our in vivo and in vitro data
provide new insights into the therapeutic use of sunitinib
for exocrine pancreatic cancer.

Sunitinib treatment effects on survival, tumor
burden, differentiation and necrosis in Ela-myc
mice
Next, we analyzed the effects of sunitinib treatment
in tumor progression and survival of Ela-myc mice. These
mice develop pancreatic cancer with 100% penetrance
between 2 and 7 months of age. Ela-myc mice with
advanced tumors (4.5 months old) were treated by oral
administration of sunitinib or control vehicle for 15 days.
After this treatment, animals were followed until endpoint
disease as determined by strict ethical guidelines (Figure
2A). Sunitinib treatment had no significant effect on Elamyc mice survival, as determined by Kaplan-Meier curve
analyses (Figure 2B). Similarly, Ela-myc tumors from
sunitinib-treated mice did not display differences in tumor
mass (Figure 2C). Finally, further histopathologic analyses
of tumor samples to evaluate tumor differentiation, as
determined by the percentage of acinar versus ductal
component in each tumor (Figure 2D) and by necrosis
(Figure 2E), failed to detect significant differences between
sunitinib-treated and control mice. These data indicate
that sunitinib therapy is inefficient in well-established
pancreatic tumors in the Ela-myc cancer model.
To determine if mice at earlier stages of pancreatic
tumorigenesis were sensitive to sunitinib therapy,
2-month-old Ela-myc mice (which usually have incipient
tumors) were treated with sunitinib in a similar manner as
the older mice (Figure 2F). However, sunitinib treatment
did not significantly affect animal survival (Figure 2G)
tumor weight (Figure 2H), differentiation (Figure 2I) or
necrosis (Figure 2J).

RESULTS
Ela-myc tumors express sunitinib-targeted
tyrosine kinase receptors in both stromal and
cancer cells
The Ela-myc transgenic mouse model overexpresses
the oncogene c-myc under the control of the elastase
promoter, which leads to acinar pancreatic tumors.
Importantly, approximately 50% of these tumors progress
to ductal tumors, which are associated with abundant
stroma—one of the principle hallmarks of human PDA
[22, 23]. Although mutation of K-Ras is the most frequent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Sunitinib treatment effects on tumor
angiogenesis in Ela-myc mice
As sunitinib treatment inhibits blood vessel
formation in cancer, we tested for an anti-angiogenic
48266

Oncotarget

Sunitinib treatment effects on cancer cells
in Ela-myc mice

effect on Ela-myc mice by analyzing the number of
blood vessels in pancreatic tumors using von Willebrand
factor immunohistochemical staining (Figure 3). Elamyc pancreatic ductal tumor areas displayed higher
vascularization as compared to acinar ones (Figure 3;
compare a with c), suggesting increased susceptibility to
sunitinib anti-angiogenic effects. However, quantification
of the number of blood vessels did not show any
differences between vehicle-treated (control) and
sunitinib-treated mice, either in acinar or ductal tumor
areas (Figure 3, right panel). These data indicate that
Ela-myc pancreatic tumors are not responsive to the antiangiogenic effects of sunitinib.

Considering the high expression of sunitinibtargeted RTKs found in Ela-myc pancreatic cancer cells
(Figure 1), we next aimed to determine whether sunitinib
treatment may directly impact cancer cells, by either
inducing apoptosis or blocking tumor cell proliferation.
To evaluate sunitinib effects on cancer cell apoptosis, we
analyzed cleaved caspase 3 staining of both acinar and
ductal tumor areas (Figure 4A). As previously reported
[30], acinar tumors showed increased cell apoptosis
compared to ductal ones (Figure 4A, compare a with

Figure 1: Ela-myc tumors express tyrosine kinase receptors that can be targeted by sunitinib. Immunohistochemical
analyses of Ela-myc mice pancreatic tumors were performed to detect tyrosine kinase receptors known to be sunitinib targets, such as
VEGFR2, PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β. Scale bars for a–c. and g–i., 50 μm; for d–f. and j–l., 20 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48267

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The effects of sunitinib administration on tumor progression and survival in the Ela-myc mice model. A. Ela-

myc mice with well-established pancreatic tumors (4.5-months old) were treated daily with sunitinib (80 mg/kg; n = 20) or control vehicle
(n = 20) for 15 days. Mice were sacrificed at endpoint based on ethical guidelines to study animal survival. B. A Kaplan-Meier survival
plot showing no significant differences between control or sunitinib-treated animals. C. Box-and-whisker plot showing tumor weight at
the moment of sacrifice. The asterisk present in the sunitinib treated group is not referring to significance but indicating an extreme outlier.
D. Pie charts showing the percentage of ductal (white) and acinar (grey) areas in control or sunitinib-treated animal. E. Box-and-whisker
plot showing tumor necrosis in acinar areas, as determined histopathologically. F. Sunitinib administration scheme in 2-month-old Ela-myc
mice harboring incipient tumors. Similar to treatment of 4.5-month-old mice, no statistically significant differences were observed between
treated and control mice regarding survival G., tumor weight H., tumor differentiation I. or necrosis J.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48268

Oncotarget

c), although quantification of cleaved caspase 3 positive
areas showed no significant differences between control
and sunitinib-treated animals (Figure 4A, right panel).
Subsequently, we tested whether sunitinib treatment could
inhibit tumor cell growth by measuring cell proliferation
using P-Histone H3 for acinar tumors (Figure 4B, a and
b) and Ki67 immunostaining for ductal tumors (Figure
4B, c and d) (see Material and Methods). No significant
differences in the proliferative rate of acinar or ductal
pancreatic tumor lesions were detected between vehicletreated and sunitinib-treated animals (Figure 4B, right
panels).
Altogether, these data indicate that in vivo sunitinib
treatment in the Ela-myc model has no effect on tumor
angiogenesis, cell proliferation or apoptosis, with no
impact on tumor progression or animal survival.

showed impaired viability as compared to vehicle-treated
cells, as determined by bright field microscopy (Figure
5B). Kinetic quantification of cell viability by MTT
detection clearly showed that in vitro sunitinib treatment
of Emyc-1 cells was strongly cytotoxic, in a specific and
dose-dependent manner, as compared to vehicle treatment
(Figure 5C). We then analyzed whether the sunitinibinduced cytotoxicity was a consequence of increased
apoptosis, decreased proliferation, or both, by detecting the
active form of caspase 3 and P-Histone H3, respectively.
In vitro treatment of Emyc-1 cells with sunitinib resulted
in increased apoptosis, shown by immunofluorescence and
Western blot detection of cleaved caspase 3 (Figure 5D),
and in a dose-dependent reduction of cell proliferation,
shown by immunofluorescence staining and quantification
of P-Histone H3 (Figure 5E). Similar dose-dependent
susceptibility to sunitinib treatment was observed in
Emyc-10 cells (data not shown).
Thus, in vitro, sunitinib increases cell death and
reduces cell proliferation of Ela-myc–derived pancreatic
cancer cell lines. This suggests that the lack of effects
observed in vivo may be due to impaired drug delivery
to the pancreatic tumor, rather than cell insensitivity to
the drug.

Sunitinib increases cell death and inhibits cell
proliferation in Ela-myc tumor-derived cell lines
Fibrotic stroma is one of the major hallmarks of
pancreatic cancer, and its role in hindering efficient
drug delivery and promoting therapy resistance is well
known [31]. To determine if the lack of effects in vivo
of sunitinib treatment in Ela-myc mice could be due to
impaired drug delivery because of this pancreatic fibrotic
barrier, we tested sunitinib in vitro on two distinct Ela-myc
pancreatic tumor–derived cell lines (Emyc-1 and Emyc10). Similar to Ela-myc pancreatic tumors in vivo, these
cells expressed the sunitinib-targeted RTKs VEGFR2,
PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β (Figure 5A). Next, we tested the
susceptibility of these cells in vitro to different doses of
sunitinib. Emyc-1 cells treated with sunitinib (1 to 4 μM)

Sunitinib treatment affects subcutaneous
tumors established from Ela-myc tumor-derived
cell lines
We next tested the efficiency of sunitinib in vivo
on tumors from Emyc-1 cells injected subcutaneously
in the dorsal flanks of immunosuppressed mice. Once
tumors reached 0.5 cm2, animals were orally treated

Figure 3: Sunitinib effects on Ela-myc pancreatic tumor angiogenesis. Tumor angiogenesis was evaluated for pancreatic
tumors in control (Ctl) and sunitinib-treated Ela-myc mice by von Willebrand Factor (vWF) staining, in both acinar and ductal regions.
Quantification of positive areas is shown on the right. Scale bars, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48269

Oncotarget

with sunitinib or control vehicle, and evaluated for drug
effects. After a daily treatment with sunitinib or vehicle
for 15 days mice were sacrificed and tumors analyzed
(Figure 6A). Interestingly, sunitinib administration caused
complete tumor regression (Figure 6B, 6C). H&E and
histopathological analysis revealed subcutaneous tumors
only in mice treated with control vehicle, whereas in mice
treated with sunitinib we only observed an inflammatory
abscess with no presence of tumor cells (Figure 6D).
These data suggest that the ineffectiveness of
sunitinib treatment in Ela-myc transgenic mice was due

to the pancreatic tumor localization. This most likely due
to its abundant desmoplastic stroma, as tumors derived
from this model in a non-pancreatic niche were highly
responsive to the drug in vivo.

DISCUSSION
Gemcitabine was already in use as a first-line PDA
therapy by 1997, but without high success rates [32].
Patient survival has slightly improved since then through
the use of novel chemotherapy combinations [33, 34], but

Figure 4: Sunitinib effects in Ela-myc pancreatic tumor cell apoptosis and proliferation. Tumor cell apoptosis and

proliferation was analyzed for pancreatic tumors in control (Ctl) and sunitinib-treated Ela-myc mice. A. Tumor cell apoptosis was evaluated
through cleaved caspase 3 (active form) staining. B. Tumor cell proliferation was evaluated through P-Histone H3 staining in acinar lesions,
or Ki67 in ductal ones. Box-and-whisker plot quantifications are shown on the right (A, B). Scale bars, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48270

Oncotarget

these new treatments are still unable to reach one year as
patient median overall survival, leaving PDA as one of
the tumors with the worst prognosis. Thus, new effective
therapies are urgently needed to treat this pathology. The
multi-target inhibitor of RTKs, sunitinib, recently emerged
as a possible hope for PDA therapy. However, although
sunitinib therapy has improved treatment of tumors like
renal cell cancer and gastrointestinal stromal tumors, it
has not led to improvements for PDA patients [13, 14].
Using a preclinical mouse model of pancreatic cancer, we
now provide insights to the failure of sunitinib treatment in
this pathology as well as potential ways in which this can
be overcome. Specifically, we have reported a preclinical
study that addresses the impact of sunitinib in pancreatic
ductal and acinar tumors using a transgenic mouse model
of pancreatic cancer. We found no significant differences
on tumor progression or hallmarks or on survival between
sunitinib-treated animals and control ones (Figure 7).

However, tumor derived cell lines did respond to sunitinib
in vitro in a dose-dependent manner. Further, allografts
from subcutaneous injections of Ela-myc tumor–derived
cells regressed after sunitinib treatment, suggesting that
the complex tumor microenvironment present in the
pancreatic niche impairs sunitinib effects in the Ela-myc
model (Figure 7).
One of the best characterized effects of sunitinib as
an anti-cancer therapy is its ability to inhibit angiogenesis
by targeting VEGFR on tumor endothelial cells. As
angiogenesis is a key contributor to tumor progression
and metastasis in most solid tumors, a large number of
preclinical and clinical studies have focused on targeting
tumor vasculature as an anti-cancer therapy [35]. However,
tumor vessels are sparse and poorly functional in PDA,
and whether angiogenesis is important for its progression
is controversial. On the one hand, hypovascularization of
PDA should render these tumors very dependent on this

Figure 5: Cells derived from Ela-myc pancreatic tumors are sensitive to sunitinib in vitro. A. Analysis by Western blot of

the expresssion of the sunitinib-targeted receptors VEGFR2, PDGFR-α and PDGFR–β in two different cell lines derived from Ela-myc
pancreatic tumors. B. Bright field images showing Emyc-1 cell sensitivity to different doses of sunitinib (1, 2 or 4 μM) in vitro, as compared
to cells treated with vehicle (DMSO). Scale bars, 100 μm. C. MTT experiments were performed to quantify cell viability upon sunitinib
treatment (1, 2 or 4 μM) in the Emyc-1 cell line, observing a dose-dependent effect. D. Left, immunofluorescence of cleaved caspase 3, to
detect cell apoptosis upon sunitinib treatment (1, 2 or 4 μM). Scale bars, 20 μm. Right, Western blot analysis of the levels of cleaved caspase
3 in Emyc-1 cell line treated with sunitinib. Tubulin levels are shown as the loading control. E. Left, Immunofluorescence of P-Histone
H3, to show cell growth arrest upon sunitinib treatment (1, 2 or 4 μM) in Emyc-1 cells. Scale bars, 50 μm. Right, Bar plots showing
quantification of P-Histone H3 immunofluorescence experiments on the right. *p < 0.05 (Student’s t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48271

Oncotarget

limited vascular network and therefore highly sensitive to
anti-angiogenic therapies. Accordingly, several preclinical
studies have gathered data showing the benefits of antiangiogenic treatments in PDA [15, 36, 37]. On the other
hand, recent data have shown that increasing blood
perfusion and normalizing the vasculature development
favor drug delivery and survival in PDA animal models
[38]. Moreover, in PDA patients, clinical trials using antiangiogenic drugs have repeatedly failed [39–41].
An important advantage of sunitinib as compared
to standard anti-angiogenic treatments is that it exerts
additional anti-tumor effects [42, 43]. Thus, sunitinib can
impair tumor desmoplasia by targeting PDGF-dependent
fibroblasts proliferation [44] and can block tumor growth

by inhibiting several RTKs in cancer cells [5, 6, 42]. Indeed,
sunitinib has shown excellent results both in preclinical and
clinical settings for different tumors [5, 8, 42, 45, 46] and
has gained FDA approval for several neoplasms [11, 47].
However, despite its multi-bullet targeting, sunitinib
has not proven effective for PDA. In preclinical mouse
models using pancreatic xenografts, the overall survival
rate was not improved by treatment of sunitinib alone
[10] but was improved when sunitinib was combined
with chemotherapy [10, 15–20], radiotherapy [19, 48]
or miRNA strategies [49]. In contrast, sunitinib failed
to increase survival rates in either the k-ras or the c-myc
genetically engineered mouse models ([21] and this
manuscript), even in combination with gemcitabine [21].

Figure 6: Ela-myc–derived subcutaneous tumors are sensitive to sunitinib. A. Schematic representation of the design of the

in vivo subcutaneous experiment. SCID Beige animals were injected with 3 x 106 Emyc-1 cells per flank and, when tumors reached 0.5
cm2 (at 1 week), animals were orally administered with sunitinib or control vehicle for 15 days (10 mice, thus 20 tumors per condition).
After treatment, tumors were collected and analysed. B. Representative images of mice with Ela-myc–derived subcutaneous tumors after
15 days of treatment with vehicle or sunitinib. C. Box plot showing tumor size distribution of sunitinib- (green) or vehicle-treated (blue)
animals before treatment (week 1), during (week 2) and after (week 3) drug delivery. Green circles label outliers and green asterisks extreme
outliers. *p < 0.05 (Mann Whitney test). D. H&E staining of Ela-myc allografts after treatment with control vehicle (panels a, c) or sunitinib
(panels b, d). Scale bars, 100 μm (a, b), 20 μm (c, d).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48272

Oncotarget

Here, it is important to note that k-ras– and c-myc–driven
pancreatic cancer mouse models, in contrast to xenograft
models, recapitulate histopathology and progression
of human pancreatic cancer, including acinar-to-ductal
metaplasia and a strong desmoplastic reaction [23, 38,
50]. In fact, fibrotic stroma has been reported to act as
a mechanical barrier hampering chemotherapy delivery

in PDA [31], which could explain the lack of response
after sunitinib treatment in these transgenic models. In
support of this hypothesis, we found that even though
sunitinib treatment had no effects on tumor volume or
histopathological hallmarks in Ela-myc mice in vivo,
cancer cells derived from these tumors were highly
sensitive to the drug in vitro. Further, after injecting cells

Figure 7: Working model of the in vivo and in vitro effects of sunitinib in the Ela-myc mouse model. Sunitinib treatment of

Ela-myc pancreatic acinar and ductal tumors does not show any significant effect in vivo (left). In contrast, Ela-myc–derived tumor cell lines
are highly sensitive to sunitinib in vitro, with increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation (center). Importantly, subcutaneous injection
of these cells in SCID Beige mice forms tumors that are highly sensitive to sunitinib treatment (right). These data may help understand
sunitinib failure for PDA patients and suggest that a combination of sunitinib and an anti-stromal drug may be a promising strategy for
successfully treating this pathology in the clinics.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48273

Oncotarget

derived from these tumors into a non-pancreatic niche
in the mouse, sunitinib was highly effective in vivo,
suggesting that sunitinib exerts its anti-cancer effects if
it can efficiently reach the tumor (Figure 7). Importantly,
therapeutic targeting of the tumor stroma has given
encouraging results in preclinical studies and is now
being tested in clinical trials [38, 51, 52]. Moreover, one
of the few improvements in managing human PDA in
the last 20 years has been by treating with a combination
of gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel, which compromises
the stromal architecture to increase perfusion [34].
Preliminary data from mice xenograft PDA models
combining nab-paclitaxel with sunitinib are positive [17],
although further future preclinical experiments using
sunitinib in combination with stromal disrupting drugs
are required to better understand the anti-tumor effects of
sunitinib in PDA therapy.
In agreement with a lack of sunitinib effectiveness
in the k-ras and c-myc genetically engineered mouse
models ([21] and this manuscript), sunitinib failed in
human PDA treatments when administered as a secondline therapy [14] or in combination with gemcitabine [13].
These data reinforce the idea that xenograft animal models
have a low predictive value as compared to genetically
engineered models in preclinical studies [53] and highlight
the necessity of obtaining extensive preclinical data before
moving to patients. In fact, an important meta-analysis of
preclinical studies with sunitinib showed that only 2%
of these had used genetically engineered mouse models
[54]. These data encouraged us to replenish the lack of
preclinical information with transgenic models for PDA
pathology, using Ela-myc mice as a different transgenic
pancreatic tumor model from the previously published
k-ras model [21].
The molecular complexity of PDA tumors, which are
genetically heterogenous, can explain why sunitinib gave
positive results in maintenance therapy in metastatic PDA
that had achieved disease control with first-line therapy
(a very rare subset of PDA patients) [55]. Likewise, a case
report has documented an impressive extended survival
after treating with gemcitabine and sunitinib [56]. Thus,
the lack of patient selection in published clinical trials
may have underestimated the sunitinib potential for PDA
treatment, highlighting the importance of personalized
medicine in identifying patients who can benefit from
sunitinib.
Finally, even though PDA is the most common
type of pancreatic cancer, there are patients with other
less frequent pancreatic neoplasms who respond poorly
to conventional treatments and who might benefit from
sunitinib therapy. For instance, patients with pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, which represent around 1.3% of
pancreatic cancers, have shown a very good response to
sunitinib in preclinical models [21, 43, 57] and clinical
trials [11, 58, 59]. Indeed, sunitinib has been recently
approved by the FDA for the treatment of these tumors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[11]. These differences in sunitinib response between
neuroendocrine and PDA tumors might be explained
by the high vascularization of the former and/or by the
dense desmoplasic reaction that hampers drug delivery
in PDA. Another uncommon pancreatic cancer is acinar
cell carcinoma, which accounts for 1% to 2% of all
pancreatic tumors in adults and up to 15% in infancy.
Surgical resection is the only chance of cure for acinar
cancer, and there is a lack of systemic successful therapies
for advanced non-resectable tumors [60]. Research on
acinar cancer treatment has been handicapped by the low
number of acinar cell lines available, which has limited
the in vitro laboratory tools, compromised the use of
xenografts in vivo and resulted in a lack of preclinical
studies addressing acinar tumor therapy. Moreover, as
this pancreatic cancer type is very rare [61], clinical trials
are unfeasible, limiting studies to small sample sizes and
case reports. The transgenic Ela-myc mouse model, which
develops mixed acinar and ductal tumors, now provides
the first tool for studying sunitinib treatment of pancreatic
acinar cell carcinomas. Our data show that, similar to PDA
tumors, acinar tumors do not respond in vivo to sunitinib
in this preclinical model. Unfortunately, we cannot test in
vitro sunitinib effects on acinar cells derived from Ela-myc
tumors, as these cells undergo acinar-to-ductal metaplasia
in culture. Therefore, whether this lack of sunitinib
efficacy in Ela-myc acinar tumors in vivo is due to
inefficient drug delivery into the tumor, or to insensitivity
of acinar cells to the drug, requires further investigation.
The data reported here fit with previous preclinical
results with sunitinib in PDA transgenic models and,
more importantly, with unselected clinical trials for this
pathology. Overall, these results stress the importance
of using genetically engineered mouse models rather
than xenograft mouse models in preclinical studies. We
hypothesize that combining sunitinib with agents targeting
the stroma (rather than with the conventional gemcitabine)
and segregating patient cohorts using personalized
medicine could result in the successful use of this drug for
PDA patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice and sunitinib treatments
Animal procedures were approved by the PRBB
Ethical Committee for Animal Experimentation. Founder
Ela-myc mice (C57Bl/6 genetic background) were kindly
provided by E. Sandgren (University of WisconsinMadison, WI). Mice were housed and fed ad libitum as
previously described [22, 62]. Genotyping primers: c-myc
(5′-CAC CGC CTA CAT CCT GTC CAT TCA AGC-3′
and 5′-TTA GGA CAA GGC TGG TGG GCA CTG-3′),
resulting in a 200 bp band. SCID Beige mice were obtained
from the PRBB Animal Facility. Emyc-1 cells (3 × 106)
were injected subcutaneously in the two dorsal lateral
48274

Oncotarget

flanks of 20 SCID Beige mice. Sunitinib (kindly provided
by Pfizer) was prepared in a vehicle solution (0.5%
carboxymethylcellulose, 1.8% NaCl, 0.4% Tween-80,
0.9% benzyl alcohol) and kept in the dark. Mice (n = 10
for each condition) were treated for 15 days by oral
administration daily with 80 mg/Kg of sunitinib malate
(corresponding to 60 mg/Kg of the active ingredient)
or vehicle solution, according to the manufacturer
instructions. Ela-myc mice were treated when they were
2- or 4.5-months old, for incipient or advanced tumors,
respectively; SCID Beige mice were treated when tumors
reached 0.5 cm2.
Ela-myc mice were sacrificed when tumors
compromised animal well-being, as judged by the protocol
of Morton and Griffiths [63]. SCID Beige mice were
treated with sunitinib or the control vehicle for 15 days
and tumor size in all mice was measured weekly with a
caliper. Mice were sacrificed, tumors were weighed, fixed
in buffered formalin for 24 h, dehydrated and embedded
in paraffin.

described [62]. For quantification, the percentage of Ki67
(in acinar regions) or P-Histone H3 positive cells (in ductal
regions) were obtained by relating the area corresponding
of nuclei positive for Ki67 or P-Histone H3 to the total
nuclei area (positive for hematoxylin).

Cell lines
Emyc-1 and Emyc-10 cell lines were obtained from
Ela-myc tumors as previously described [64, 65]. Cells
were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at
5% CO2 and 37°C.

Western blots
Whole cell extracts were prepared with Laemmli
buffer, and samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins
were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose
filters for Western blot analysis. The primary antibodies used
were: anti-VEGFR2 (Cell Signaling Technology), antiPDGFR-α and anti-PDGFR-β (Santa Cruz), anti-cleaved
caspase 3 (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-P-Histone H3
(Ser10) (Millipore) and anti-tubulin (Sigma). Specie-specific
secondary antibodies conjugated to HRP (Dako) and ECL
detection (Amersham) were used for band visualization.

Histopathology and immunohistochemistry
For histopathological analysis, tumor sections from
mice treated with sunitinib or control vehicle were stained
with H&E and evaluated by two expert pathologists (M.I.
and J.M-C.) to determine acinar ductal differentiation and
the necrotic index [30, 62].
For immunohistochemistry, 5-μm sections from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were
deparaffined and boiled with 0.01 M citrate buffer (pH
6.0) at 120°C for 10 min in a pressure cooker. Endogenous
peroxidase activity was quenched with 3% H2O2, and
samples were blocked in PBS with 1% BSA. Primary
antibodies were added overnight at 4°C. Antibodies
used for specific tissue immunostaining included antiVEGFR2 (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-PDGFR-α
(R&D) anti-PDGFR-β (Cell Signaling Technology),
anti-vWF (Neomarkers), anti-cleaved caspase 3 (R&D
systems) anti-P-Histone H3 (Ser10) (Millipore) and antiKi67 (Novo Castra). Negative controls were performed
with pre-immune rabbit serum. As secondary antibodies,
peroxidase-conjugated (Envision+, Dako) anti-rabbit
Ig reagents were used. Reactions were developed using
3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) as chromogenic substrate
(Dako). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin,
dehydrated and mounted. An Olympus BX61 microscope
was used for visualization, and images were acquired
using CellSens software.
For quantification, 10 images were acquired at
10× for each tumor and analyzed with ImageJ software.
To quantify angiogenesis and apoptosis, the area stained
positive for vWF or active caspase 3, as indicated, was
related to total area. Due to intrinsic differences in their
proliferation, ductal and acinar cells were immunostained
with Ki67 or P-Histone H3, respectively, as previously
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell viability
In vitro cell viability of Emyc-1 cells was assessed
with 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide staining (MTT). Cells were seeded in 96-well
plates in quintuplicate at a density of 1000 cells per
well and grown in 2% FBS with the sunitinib vehicle
(DMSO) or in the presence of sunitinib in increasing
concentrations (at 1, 2, or 4 μM). Cell viability was
measured daily by incubating cells with MTT (1 mg/
mL) for 4h. The formazan precipitate was extracted with
DMSO:isopropanol (1:4), and absorbance was taken at
570 nm on a multiwell-plate reader.

Immunofluorescence to detect apoptosis
and proliferation
Cells seeded over sterile coverslips and grown in
10% FBS were fixed in 4% PFA. Cells were permeabilized
with 0.2% Triton in PBS and blocked with 5% BSA, 0.1%
Tween-20. Coverslips were incubated overnight with
rabbit anti-P-Histone H3 (Ser10) (Millipore) to determine
proliferation or with rabbit anti-cleaved caspase 3 (R&D)
to determine apoptosis. Negative controls were incubated
with an irrelevant rabbit IgG (data not shown). An antirabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) was used as the
secondary antibody. Coverslips were mounted with DAPI
Fluoromont-G (Southern Biotech), and IF was detected
with an Olympus BX61 Microscope. Ten fields were
quantified per coverslip at 10×. The number of P-Histone
H3 positive cells was manually counted and compared
48275

Oncotarget

to the total number of cells (DAPI positive) for each
experiment, which was quantified using an ImageJ macro
developed in the CRG Advanced Light Microscopy Unit
facility (CRG, Barcelona).

and Insights into the Molecular Pathology. Front Med
(Lausanne). 2015; 2:41.
4.	 Ito T, Igarashi H, Jensen RT. Therapy of metastatic
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs): recent insights
and advances. J Gastroenterol. 2012; 47:941-960.

Statistical analysis

5.	 Mendel DB, Laird AD, Xin X, Louie SG, Christensen JG,
Li G, Schreck RE, Abrams TJ, Ngai TJ, Lee LB, Murray LJ,
Carver J, Chan E, Moss KG, Haznedar JO, Sukbuntherng J,
Blake RA, Sun L, Tang C, Miller T, Shirazian S, McMahon
G, Cherrington JM. In vivo antitumor activity of SU11248,
a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting vascular
endothelial growth factor and platelet-derived growth
factor receptors: determination of a pharmacokinetic/
pharmacodynamic relationship. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;
9:327-337.

Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS
version 12.0. Statistical significance cut-off was
considered as p < 0.05. Kaplan-Meier analyses were used
to establish survival curves, and comparisons were made
using the log-rank test. The Student’s t-test was used with
normally distributed data (in vitro) and the Mann-Whitney
test was used in other occasions (in vivo).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

6.	 Abrams TJ, Lee LB, Murray LJ, Pryer NK, Cherrington JM.
SU11248 inhibits KIT and platelet-derived growth factor
receptor beta in preclinical models of human small cell lung
cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003; 2:471-478.

The authors would like to thank J.M. Caballero
(PRBB Animal Facility, Barcelona) for help in sunitinib
administration and F.X. Real (CNIO, Madrid) and J. Luna
(IDIBAPS, Barcelona) for help with Ela-myc mice. We
are very grateful to R. Peña and A.G. de Herreros (IMIM,
Barcelona) for providing critical reagents, X. Sanjuán
(CRG Advanced Light Microscopy Unit, Barcelona) for
editing software for image analysis, A. Martínez from
the Medical Oncology Department (Hospital del Mar,
Barcelona) for clinical advice, G. Gil for critical reading
of the manuscript, L. Fàbregas for technical assistance, A.
Flotats from Science&Design for help in graphic design
and V. Raker for English proofreading and editing.

7.	 O'Farrell AM, Abrams TJ, Yuen HA, Ngai TJ, Louie SG,
Yee KW, Wong LM, Hong W, Lee LB, Town A, Smolich
BD, Manning WC, Murray LJ, Heinrich MC, Cherrington
JM. SU11248 is a novel FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitor
with potent activity in vitro and in vivo. Blood. 2003;
101:3597-3605.
8.	 Chow LQ, Eckhardt SG. Sunitinib: from rational design to
clinical efficacy. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:884-896.
9.	 Seandel M, Shia J, Linkov I, Maki RG, Antonescu CR,
Dupont J. The activity of sunitinib against gastrointestinal
stromal tumor seems to be distinct from its antiangiogenic
effects. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:6203-6204.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Awasthi N, Schwarz MA, Schwarz RE. Antitumour
activity of sunitinib in combination with gemcitabine in
experimental pancreatic cancer. HPB (Oxford). 2011;
13:597-604.

The authors do not have any conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

11.	 Blumenthal GM, Cortazar P, Zhang JJ, Tang S, Sridhara
R, Murgo A, Justice R, Pazdur R. FDA approval summary:
sunitinib for the treatment of progressive well-differentiated
locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors. Oncologist. 2012; 17:1108-1113.

Supported by Spanish Ministerio de Economía y
Competitividad/ ISCIII-FEDER (PI14/00125), RETIC
Cancer RD12/0036/0051/FEDER, and the “Generalitat
de Catalunya” (2014/SGR/143) to P.N., and Spanish
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad/ISCIII-FEDER
(BIO2014-57716-C2-2-R, IIS10/00014) to C.F.

12.	 Vinik AI, Raymond E. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors:
approach to treatment with focus on sunitinib. Therap Adv
Gastroenterol. 2013; 6:396-411.

REFERENCES

13.	 Bergmann L, Maute L, Heil G, Russel J, Weidmann E,
Koberle D, Fuxius S, Weigang-Kohler K, Aulitzky WE,
Wormann B, Hartung G, Moritz B, Edler L, Burkholder I,
Scheulen ME, Richly H. A prospective randomised phase-II
trial with gemcitabine versus gemcitabine plus sunitinib in
advanced pancreatic cancer: a study of the CESAR Central
European Society for Anticancer Drug Research-EWIV.
Eur J Cancer. 2015; 51:27-36.

1.	 Rahib L, Smith BD, Aizenberg R, Rosenzweig AB,
Fleshman JM, Matrisian LM. Projecting cancer incidence
and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver,
and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:2913-2921.
2.	 Garrido-Laguna I, Hidalgo M. Pancreatic cancer: from
state-of-the-art treatments to promising novel therapies. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol. 2015; 12:319-334.

14.	 O'Reilly EM, Niedzwiecki D, Hall M, Hollis D, BekaiiSaab T, Pluard T, Douglas K, Abou-Alfa GK, Kindler
HL, Schilsky RL, Goldberg RM. A Cancer and Leukemia
Group B phase II study of sunitinib malate in patients with

3.	 La RS, Sessa F, Capella C. Acinar Cell Carcinoma of
the Pancreas: Overview of Clinicopathologic Features
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48276

Oncotarget

previously treated metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma
(CALGB 80603). Oncologist. 2010; 15:1310-1319.

26.	 Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, Lin JC, Leary RJ,
Angenendt P, Mankoo P, Carter H, Kamiyama H, Jimeno
A, Hong SM, Fu B, Lin MT, Calhoun ES, Kamiyama M,
Walter K, Nikolskaya T, Nikolsky Y, Hartigan J, Smith DR,
Hidalgo M, Leach SD, Klein AP, Jaffee EM, Goggins M,
Maitra A, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Eshleman JR, Kern SE,
Hruban RH, Karchin R, Papadopoulos N, Parmigiani G,
Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE, Kinzler KW. Core signaling
pathways in human pancreatic cancers revealed by global
genomic analyses. Science. 2008; 321:1801-1806.

15.	 Yokoi K, Sasaki T, Bucana CD, Fan D, Baker CH, Kitadai
Y, Kuwai T, Abbruzzese JL, Fidler IJ. Simultaneous
inhibition of EGFR, VEGFR, and platelet-derived growth
factor receptor signaling combined with gemcitabine
produces therapy of human pancreatic carcinoma and
prolongs survival in an orthotopic nude mouse model.
Cancer Res. 2005; 65:10371-10380.
16.	 Awasthi N, Zhang C, Ruan W, Schwarz MA, Schwarz
RE. Evaluation of poly-mechanistic antiangiogenic
combinations to enhance cytotoxic therapy response in
pancreatic cancer. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e38477.

27.	 Hessmann E, Schneider G, Ellenrieder V, Siveke JT. MYC
in pancreatic cancer: novel mechanistic insights and their
translation into therapeutic strategies. Oncogene. 2016;
35:1609-1618.

17.	 Awasthi N, Zhang C, Schwarz AM, Hinz S, Schwarz MA,
Schwarz RE. Enhancement of nab-paclitaxel antitumor
activity through addition of multitargeting antiangiogenic
agents in experimental pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer Ther.
2014; 13:1032-1043.

28.	 Skoudy A, Hernandez-Munoz I, Navarro P. Pancreatic
Ductal Adenocarcinoma and Transcription Factors: Role of
c-Myc. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2011; 42:76-84.
29.	 Ischenko I, Zhi J, Moll UM, Nemajerova A, Petrenko O.
Direct reprogramming by oncogenic Ras and Myc. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:3937-3942.

18.	 Tran Cao HS, Bouvet M, Kaushal S, Keleman A, Romney
E, Kim G, Fruehauf J, Imagawa DK, Hoffman RM,
Katz MH. Metronomic gemcitabine in combination with
sunitinib inhibits multisite metastasis and increases survival
in an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2010; 9:2068-2078.

30.	 Martinez-Bosch N, Iglesias M, Munne-Collado J, MartinezCaceres C, Moreno M, Guerra C, Yelamos J, Navarro P.
Parp-1 genetic ablation in Ela-myc mice unveils novel
roles for Parp-1 in pancreatic cancer. J Pathol. 2014;
234:214-227.

19.	 Casneuf VF, Demetter P, Boterberg T, Delrue L, Peeters
M, Van DN. Antiangiogenic versus cytotoxic therapeutic
approaches in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer: an
experimental study with a multitarget tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (sunitinib), gemcitabine and radiotherapy. Oncol
Rep. 2009; 22:105-113.

31.	 Mahadevan D, Von Hoff DD. Tumor-stroma interactions in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;
6:1186-1197.
32.	 Burris HA, III, Moore MJ, Andersen J, Green MR,
Rothenberg ML, Modiano MR, Cripps MC, Portenoy RK,
Storniolo AM, Tarassoff P, Nelson R, Dorr FA, Stephens
CD, Von Hoff DD. Improvements in survival and clinical
benefit with gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients
with advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. J Clin
Oncol. 1997; 15:2403-2413.

20.	 Blansfield JA, Caragacianu D, Alexander HR, III,
Tangrea MA, Morita SY, Lorang D, Schafer P, Muller
G, Stirling D, Royal RE, Libutti SK. Combining agents
that target the tumor microenvironment improves the
efficacy of anticancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;
14:270-280.

33.	 Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouche O, Guimbaud
R, Becouarn Y, Adenis A, Raoul JL, Gourgou-Bourgade S,
de la Fouchardiere C, Bennouna J, Bachet JB, KhemissaAkouz F, Pere-Verge D, Delbaldo C, Assenat E, Chauffert
B, Michel P, Montoto-Grillot C, Ducreux M. FOLFIRINOX
versus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl
J Med. 2011; 364:1817-1825.

21.	 Olson P, Chu GC, Perry SR, Nolan-Stevaux O, Hanahan
D. Imaging guided trials of the angiogenesis inhibitor
sunitinib in mouse models predict efficacy in pancreatic
neuroendocrine but not ductal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2011; 108:E1275-E1284.
22.	 Sandgren EP, Quaife CJ, Paulovich AG, Palmiter RD,
Brinster RL. Pancreatic tumor pathogenesis reflects the
causative genetic lesion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991;
88:93-97.

34.	 Von Hoff DD, Ervin T, Arena FP, Chiorean EG, Infante
J, Moore M, Seay T, Tjulandin SA, Ma WW, Saleh
MN, Harris M, Reni M, Dowden S, Laheru D, Bahary
N, Ramanathan RK, Tabernero J, Hidalgo M, Goldstein
D, Van CE, Wei X, Iglesias J, Renschler MF. Increased
survival in pancreatic cancer with nab-paclitaxel plus
gemcitabine. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369:1691-1703.

23.	 Grippo PJ, Sandgren EP. Acinar-to-ductal metaplasia
accompanies c-myc-induced exocrine pancreatic cancer
progression in transgenic rodents. Int J Cancer. 2012;
131:1243-1248.

35.	 Hayes AJ, Li LY, Lippman ME. Anti-vascular therapy:
a new approach to cancer treatment. West J Med. 2000;
172:39-42.

24.	 Maitra A, Hruban RH. Pancreatic cancer. Annu Rev Pathol.
2008; 3:157-188.
25.	 Schleger C, Verbeke C, Hildenbrand R, Zentgraf H, Bleyl
U. c-MYC activation in primary and metastatic ductal
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: incidence, mechanisms,
and clinical significance. Mod Pathol. 2002; 15:462-469.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Hotz HG, Gill PS, Masood R, Hotz B, Buhr HJ, Foitzik
T, Hines OJ, Reber HA. Specific targeting of tumor
vasculature by diphtheria toxin-vascular endothelial growth
48277

Oncotarget

factor fusion protein reduces angiogenesis and growth of
pancreatic cancer. J Gastrointest Surg. 2002; 6:159-166.

47.	 Goodman VL, Rock EP, Dagher R, Ramchandani RP,
Abraham S, Gobburu JV, Booth BP, Verbois SL, Morse DE,
Liang CY, Chidambaram N, Jiang JX, Tang S, Mahjoob K,
Justice R, Pazdur R. Approval summary: sunitinib for the
treatment of imatinib refractory or intolerant gastrointestinal
stromal tumors and advanced renal cell carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2007; 13:1367-1373.

37.	 Buchler P, Reber HA, Ullrich A, Shiroiki M, Roth M,
Buchler MW, Lavey RS, Friess H, Hines OJ. Pancreatic
cancer growth is inhibited by blockade of VEGF-RII.
Surgery. 2003; 134:772-782.
38.	 Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, Gopinathan A,
McIntyre D, Honess D, Madhu B, Goldgraben MA,
Caldwell ME, Allard D, Frese KK, Denicola G, Feig C,
Combs C, Winter SP, Ireland-Zecchini H, Reichelt S,
Howat WJ, Chang A, Dhara M, Wang L, Ruckert F,
Grutzmann R, Pilarsky C, Izeradjene K, Hingorani SR,
Huang P, Davies SE, Plunkett W, Egorin M, Hruban RH,
Whitebread N, McGovern K, Adams J, Iacobuzio-Donahue
C, Griffiths J, Tuveson DA. Inhibition of Hedgehog
signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse
model of pancreatic cancer. Science. 2009; 324:1457-1461.

48.	 Cuneo KC, Geng L, Fu A, Orton D, Hallahan DE,
Chakravarthy AB. SU11248 (sunitinib) sensitizes pancreatic
cancer to the cytotoxic effects of ionizing radiation. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008; 71:873-879.
49.	 Passadouro M, Pedroso de Lima MC, Faneca H. MicroRNA
modulation combined with sunitinib as a novel therapeutic
strategy for pancreatic cancer. Int J Nanomedicine. 2014;
9:3203-3217.
50.	 Tuveson D, Hanahan D. Translational medicine: Cancer
lessons from mice to humans. Nature. 2011; 471:316-317.

39.	 Kindler HL, Ioka T, Richel DJ, Bennouna J, Letourneau R,
Okusaka T, Funakoshi A, Furuse J, Park YS, Ohkawa S,
Springett GM, Wasan HS, Trask PC, Bycott P, Ricart AD,
Kim S, Van CE. Axitinib plus gemcitabine versus placebo
plus gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic
adenocarcinoma: a double-blind randomised phase 3 study.
Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:256-262.

51.	 Provenzano PP, Cuevas C, Chang AE, Goel VK, Von Hoff
DD, Hingorani SR. Enzymatic targeting of the stroma
ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:418-429.

40.	 Cabebe E, Fisher GA. Clinical trials of VEGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in pancreatic cancer. Expert Opin
Investig Drugs. 2007; 16:467-476.

53.	 Becher OJ, Holland EC. Genetically engineered models
have advantages over xenografts for preclinical studies.
Cancer Res. 2006; 66:3355-3358.

52.	 Rucki AA, Zheng L. Pancreatic cancer stroma:
understanding biology leads to new therapeutic strategies.
World J Gastroenterol. 2014; 20:2237-2246.

41.	 Cardin DB, Goff L, Li CI, Shyr Y, Winkler C, DeVore
R, Schlabach L, Holloway M, McClanahan P, Meyer K,
Grigorieva J, Berlin J, Chan E. Phase II trial of sorafenib
and erlotinib in advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer Med.
2014; 3:572-579.

54.	 Henderson VC, Demko N, Hakala A, MacKinnon N,
Federico CA, Fergusson D, Kimmelman J. A meta-analysis
of threats to valid clinical inference in preclinical research
of sunitinib. Elife. 2015; 4: e08351.
55.	 Reni M, Cereda S, Milella M, Novarino A, Passardi
A, Mambrini A, Di LG, Aprile G, Belli C, Danova M,
Bergamo F, Franceschi E, Fugazza C, Ceraulo D, Villa
E. Maintenance sunitinib or observation in metastatic
pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a phase II randomised trial. Eur
J Cancer. 2013; 49:3609-3615.

42.	 de BS, Herlin P, Christensen JG, Lemoisson E, Gauduchon
P, Raymond E, Guillamo JS. Antiangiogenic and antiinvasive effects of sunitinib on experimental human
glioblastoma. Neuro Oncol. 2007; 9:412-423.
43.	 Bergers G, Song S, Meyer-Morse N, Bergsland E, Hanahan
D. Benefits of targeting both pericytes and endothelial
cells in the tumor vasculature with kinase inhibitors. J Clin
Invest. 2003; 111:1287-1295.

56.	 Bharthuar A, Pearce L, Litwin A, LeVea C, Kuvshinoff B,
Iyer R. Metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma and renal cell
carcinoma treated with gemcitabine and sunitinib malate. A
case report. JOP. 2009; 10:523-527.

44.	 Jaster R. Molecular regulation of pancreatic stellate cell
function. Mol Cancer. 2004; 3:26.

57.	 Pietras K, Hanahan D. A multitargeted, metronomic, and
maximum-tolerated dose “chemo-switch” regimen is
antiangiogenic, producing objective responses and survival
benefit in a mouse model of cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:939-952.

45.	 Prenen H, Cools J, Mentens N, Folens C, Sciot R, Schoffski
P, Van OA, Marynen P, Debiec-Rychter M. Efficacy of the
kinase inhibitor SU11248 against gastrointestinal stromal
tumor mutants refractory to imatinib mesylate. Clin Cancer
Res. 2006; 12:2622-2627.

58.	 Kulke MH, Lenz HJ, Meropol NJ, Posey J, Ryan DP, Picus
J, Bergsland E, Stuart K, Tye L, Huang X, Li JZ, Baum CM,
Fuchs CS. Activity of sunitinib in patients with advanced
neuroendocrine tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:3403-3410.

46.	 Faivre S, Delbaldo C, Vera K, Robert C, Lozahic S, Lassau
N, Bello C, Deprimo S, Brega N, Massimini G, Armand
JP, Scigalla P, Raymond E. Safety, pharmacokinetic, and
antitumor activity of SU11248, a novel oral multitarget
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in patients with cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:25-35.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59.	 Wiedmann MW, Mossner J. Safety and efficacy of sunitinib
in patients with unresectable pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors. Clin Med Insights Oncol. 2012; 6:381-393.

48278

Oncotarget

60.	 Lowery MA, Klimstra DS, Shia J, Yu KH, Allen PJ,
Brennan MF, O'Reilly EM. Acinar cell carcinoma of the
pancreas: new genetic and treatment insights into a rare
malignancy. Oncologist. 2011; 16:1714-1720.

63.	 Morton DB, Griffiths PH. Guidelines on the recognition of
pain, distress and discomfort in experimental animals and
an hypothesis for assessment. Vet Rec. 1985; 116:431-436.
64.	 Biliran H, Jr., Wang Y, Banerjee S, Xu H, Heng H, Thakur
A, Bollig A, Sarkar FH, Liao JD. Overexpression of cyclin
D1 promotes tumor cell growth and confers resistance to
cisplatin-mediated apoptosis in an elastase-myc transgeneexpressing pancreatic tumor cell line. Clin Cancer Res.
2005; 11:6075-6086.

61.	 Wisnoski NC, Townsend CM, Jr., Nealon WH, Freeman
JL, Riall TS. 672 patients with acinar cell carcinoma of
the pancreas: a population-based comparison to pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Surgery. 2008; 144:141-148.
62.	 Martinez-Bosch N, Fernandez-Barrena MG, Moreno M,
Ortiz-Zapater E, Munne-Collado J, Iglesias M, Andre
S, Gabius HJ, Hwang RF, Poirier F, Navas C, Guerra C,
Fernandez-Zapico ME, Navarro P. Galectin-1 Drives
Pancreatic Carcinogenesis through Stroma Remodeling
and Hedgehog Signaling Activation. Cancer Res. 2014;
74:3512-3524.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65.	 Jose A, Sobrevals L, Miguel Camacho-Sanchez J, Huch
M, Andreu N, Ayuso E, Navarro P, Alemany R, Fillat C.
Intraductal delivery of adenoviruses targets pancreatic
tumors in transgenic Ela-myc mice and orthotopic
xenografts. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:94-105. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.795

48279

Oncotarget

