HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 June 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13; 23(5): 570–572. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.024.

Releasing the Block: Setting Differentiation Free with Mutant IDH
Inhibitors
Christopher J. Pirozzi1, Zachary J. Reitman1, and Hai Yan1,*
1The

Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at Duke, Pediatric Brain Tumor Foundation
Institute at Duke, Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710
USA

Author Manuscript

Abstract
Hotspot mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 cause a differentiation block that can promote
tumorigenesis. Two recent papers reported that small molecules targeting mutant IDH1 or mutant
IDH2 release this differentiation block and/or impede tumor growth, providing a proof-of-concept
that mutant IDHs are therapeutically targetable and that their effects are reversible.

Main Text

Author Manuscript

The isocitrate dehydrogenases IDH1 and IDH2 are mutated in a variety of cancers, including
progressive gliomas and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). These mutations cause IDH1
or IDH2 to produce R-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), an oncometabolite responsible for global
changes to DNA methylation, inhibition of histone lysine demethylases, blocks to cellular
differentiation, and ultimately, tumorigenesis (Figueroa et al., 2010; Lu et al., 2012; Sasaki
et al., 2012; Turcan et al., 2012). The presence of IDH mutations in a wide variety of
cancers together with the hotspot nature of these mutations makes them attractive
therapeutic target candidates. Recently, two studies published in Science characterized the
use of small molecules that specifically target mutant IDH1 or mutant IDH2 (Rohle et al.,
2013; Wang et al., 2013).The inhibitors restored 2HG levels to normal physiological levels
and reversed several of the biological and epigenetic phenotypes exerted by IDH mutations.
These proof-of-concept studies showing IDH mutations are targetable by small molecules
highlight a promising therapeutic avenue that necessitates further investigation.

Author Manuscript

The understanding of the complexities underlying IDH mutations have evolved since their
discovery in progressive gliomas (Yan et al., 2009). Pioneering studies in AML and
progressive gliomas show that IDH mutations induce a promoter-associated CpG-island
methylator phenotype with direct effects on gene expression (Figueroa et al., 2010;
Noushmehr et al., 2010). The gene expression profile of mutant cells confers a block to the
normal differentiation program, leading to an expansion of progenitor cells that is thought to
be a critical step in cancer pathogenesis (Duncan et al., 2012; Turcan et al., 2012). These
observations raised the possibility that inhibiting IDH mutants might reverse their

*

Correspondence: yan00002@mc.duke.edu.

Pirozzi et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

tumorigenic effects (Jin et al., 2012) and that design of effective inhibitors would need to
take into account the complex downstream effects of IDH mutations.

Author Manuscript

To assess this therapeutic possibility in the glioma context, Rohle et al. used AGI-5198, a
small molecule inhibitor of the most common IDH mutation in gliomas, IDH1-R132H.
Treatment of an oligodendroglioma cell line harboring an endogenous IDH1-R132H
mutation with this inhibitor reduced growth in soft agar by 40-60% and impeded growth of
xenograft tumors derived from that cell line in mice. Analysis of these tumors showed a
reduction in proliferative markers but no change in apoptosis, suggesting that the altered
tumor growth was due to failure to proliferate as opposed to cell death. Following treatment,
several genes involved in glial differentiation were upregulated and found to have lost
repressive histone marks H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 at their promoters, implying that the
mutant IDH1 inhibitor is capable of erasing histone modifications that influence gene
expression. This study therefore demonstrated that, in this model, targeting mutant IDH1 can
impair glioma growth in vivo and this growth inhibition is linked to changes in
differentiation.

Author Manuscript

Concurrently, Wang et al. designed AGI-6780, a small molecule that inhibits the most
commonly occurring IDH mutation in AML, IDH2-R140Q, by holding the protein in an
open conformation (Figure 1). They then used this inhibitor to explore the effects of
inhibiting mutant IDH in cells of the hematopoietic system. Treatment with this inhibitor
lowered 2HG to normal physiological levels in an erythroleukemia cell line ectopically
expressing IDH2-R140Q. The inhibitor also released these cells from the block to
differentiation following induction with erythropoietin that was exerted by IDH2-R140Q
expression. Complementary studies treating IDH2-mutated primary human AML cells
showed a similar reduction in 2HG levels. However, in the mutant primary cells, a burst of
proliferation resulted followed by an increase in mature cell types at the expense of
progenitor cells. These results imply that mutant IDH2 inhibition can be used to promote
differentiation of mutated AML cells. This was similar to the Rohle et al. finding where
genes involved in differentiation were expressed following treatment with the inhibitor,
suggesting that mutant IDH imparts a block to differentiation that is released upon treatment
with inhibitor. The mutant IDH2 inhibitor's ability to reduce 2HG to baseline levels coupled
with its differentiating effects on the AML cells opens up avenues to treat AML and to
determine the efficacy of this small molecule inhibitor alone or in combination with other
therapeutics. The well-characterized nature of the hematopoietic system will permit many
eloquent and exciting studies analyzing AGI-6780's effectiveness in an in vivo animal
context.

Author Manuscript

Several hurdles must be overcome before the strategy of targeting IDH mutations can be
translated to the clinic. These inhibitors were tested on a select few cell lines, and in the case
of the mutant IDH1 inhibitor, only on one glioma cell line. Whether that inhibitor will work
similarly in an astrocytic glioma line as it did in an oligodendroglial line, or in a glioma line
of a lower or higher tumor grade, will need to be established. Examination of long-term
mutant IDH inhibition will be necessary to determine whether growth inhibition can be
maintained over time or can be used together with conventional therapeutics. Additionally,
all glioma xenografts in the mutant IDH1 inhibitor studies were heterotopic. Though it is

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 June 13.

Pirozzi et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

promising that the inhibitor was capable of reducing intratumoral 2HG levels in these
subcutaneous tumors, its ability to cross the blood-brain-barrier and inhibit glioma growth in
the brain is imperative for its success. Though genetically engineered mouse models that
express mutant IDH1 in the brain would be an ideal system to assess the efficacy of the
IDH1 inhibitor, such models have been unsuccessful in generating tumors. However,
orthotopic xenograft models would be a viable option to address this issue. In addition,
although the mutant IDH1 inhibitor inhibited glioma cell growth, its inability to induce
apoptosis is concerning from a therapeutic standpoint. Determining the long-term fate of
those cells exhibiting growth inhibition will be critically important. In the case of the mutant
IDH2 inhibitor, these in vitro findings must be verified in animal models of IDH2-mutated
AML.

Author Manuscript

Nevertheless, the proof-of-concept experiments presented by Rohle et al. and Wang et al.
contribute greatly to the field by showing the potential for targeting IDH mutations through
small molecule inhibitors. Especially encouraging is the fact that cells without IDH
mutations were tolerant to treatment with the inhibitors. Intriguingly, promotion of cellular
differentiation was a major component of the therapeutic response in all of the above
experiments: the in vitro and in vivo ablation of excessive 2HG allows the IDH mutantmediated differentiation block to be lifted, permitting expression of normal differentiation
programs. Given the prevalence of IDH mutations in a variety of cancers, the demonstration
that efficient and selective targeting of these mutations can be achieved, and can act as a
therapeutic strategy, holds great promise for a large number of patients. Though further
analysis is required to generalize the efficacy of these inhibitors in reversing the
differentiation block and oncogenic effects imparted by 2HG, the contribution of these tools
to understanding the biology of IDH mutations is invaluable.

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript

Duncan CG, Barwick BG, Jin G, Rago C, Kapoor-Vazirani P, Powell DR, Chi JT, Bigner DD, Vertino
PM, Yan H. A heterozygous IDH1R132H/WT mutation induces genome-wide alterations in DNA
methylation. Genome Res. 2012; 22:2339–55. [PubMed: 22899282]
Figueroa ME, Abdel-Wahab O, Lu C, Ward PS, Patel J, Shih A, Li Y, Bhagwat N, Vasanthakumar A,
Fernandez HF, et al. Leukemic IDH1 and IDH2 Mutations Result in†a Hypermethylation
Phenotype, Disrupt TET2 Function, and Impair Hematopoietic Differentiation. Cancer cell. 2010;
18:553–567. [PubMed: 21130701]
Jin G, Pirozzi CJ, Chen LH, Lopez GY, Duncan CG, Feng J, Spasojevic I, Bigner DD, He Y, Yan H.
Mutant IDH1 is required for IDH1 mutated tumor cell growth. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:774–782.
[PubMed: 22885298]
Lu C, Ward PS, Kapoor GS, Rohle D, Turcan S, Abdel-Wahab O, Edwards CR, Khanin R, Figueroa
ME, Melnick A, et al. IDH mutation impairs histone demethylation and results in a block to cell
differentiation. Nature. 2012; 483:474–478. [PubMed: 22343901]
Noushmehr H, Weisenberger DJ, Diefes K, Phillips HS, Pujara K, Berman BP, Pan F, Pelloski CE,
Sulman EP, Bhat KP, et al. Identification of a CpG island methylator phenotype that defines a
distinct subgroup of glioma. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:510–522. [PubMed: 20399149]
Rohle D, Popovici-Muller J, Palaskas N, Turcan S, Grommes C, Campos C, Tsoi J, Clark O, Oldrini
B, Komisopoulou E, et al. An Inhibitor of Mutant IDH1 Delays Growth and Promotes
Differentiation of Glioma Cells. Science. 2013

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 June 13.

Pirozzi et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Sasaki M, Knobbe CB, Munger JC, Lind EF, Brenner D, Brustle A, Harris IS, Holmes R, Wakeham A,
Haight J, et al. IDH1(R132H) mutation increases murine haematopoietic progenitors and alters
epigenetics. Nature. 2012; 488:656–659. [PubMed: 22763442]
Turcan S, Rohle D, Goenka A, Walsh LA, Fang F, Yilmaz E, Campos C, Fabius AW, Lu C, Ward PS,
et al. IDH1 mutation is sufficient to establish the glioma hypermethylator phenotype. Nature. 2012;
483:479–483. [PubMed: 22343889]
Wang F, Travins J, Delabarre B, Penard-Lacronique V, Schalm S, Hansen E, Straley K, Kernytsky A,
Liu W, Gliser C, et al. Targeted Inhibition of Mutant IDH2 in Leukemia Cells Induces Cellular
Differentiation. Science. 2013
Yan H, Parsons DW, Jin G, McLendon R, Rasheed BA, Yuan W, Kos I, Batinic-Haberle I, Jones S,
Riggins GJ, et al. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in gliomas. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:765–773.
[PubMed: 19228619]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 June 13.

Pirozzi et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Small molecule inhibitor AGI-6780 binds to mutant IDH2 and releases a block to
differentiation

IDH mutations induce a block to normal differentiation programs leading to accumulation of
progenitor cells, as shown in the Waddington differentiation diagram on the left. AGI-6780,
shown in green, binds allosterically at the mutant IDH2 homodimer interface and holds the
enzyme in the catalytically inactive open conformation (middle). Each member of the IDH2
homodimer pair is shown in purple and teal, respectively, with the R140Q mutation in
yellow. Inhibition of mutant IDH2 releases the block and induces differentiation (right).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 June 13.

