Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725

Cancer
Research

Review

Enhancing Reproducibility in Cancer Drug Screening: How
Do We Move Forward?
Christos Hatzis1,3, Philippe L. Bedard10,11, Nicolai J. Birkbak13, Andrew H. Beck4, Hugo J.W.L. Aerts5,7,
David F. Stern2,3, Leming Shi8,14,15, Robert Clarke9, John Quackenbush5,6, and Benjamin Haibe-Kains10,12

Abstract
Large-scale pharmacogenomic high-throughput screening (HTS) studies hold great potential for generating
robust genomic predictors of drug response. Two recent large-scale HTS studies have reported results of such
screens, revealing several known and novel drug sensitivities and biomarkers. Subsequent evaluation, however,
found only moderate interlaboratory concordance in the drug response phenotypes, possibly due to differences in
the experimental protocols used in the two studies. This highlights the need for community-wide implementation
of standardized assays for measuring drug response phenotypes so that the full potential of HTS is realized. We
suggest that the path forward is to establish best practices and standardization of the critical steps in these assays
through a collective effort to ensure that the data produced from large-scale screens would not only be of high
intrastudy consistency, so that they could be replicated and compared successfully across multiple laboratories.
Cancer Res; 74(15); 4016–23. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
Pharmacogenomic high-throughput screening (HTS; see
deﬁnitions box) offers tremendous promise in the rational
development of targeted therapies, but its full potential will not
be realized unless experimental protocols and analysis methods are standardized through a collective effort.
With dropping costs of genetic testing, cutting-edge
sequencing technologies are now at the forefront of new cancer
drug development. Yet, how to fully incorporate the presence of
individual mutations and other speciﬁc genomic features to

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Section of Medical Oncology, Yale University
School of Medicine; 2Department of Pathology, Yale University School of
Medicine; 3Yale Cancer Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut;
4
Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and
Harvard Medical School; 5Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology and Center for Cancer Computational Biology; 6Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute; 7Department of Radiation
Oncology and Radiology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;
8
National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas; 9Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC; 10Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health
Network; 11Faculty of Medicine; 12Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 13Department of Systems
Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark; 14State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and MOE Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Schools of
Life Sciences and Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai; and 15Zhanjiang
Center for Translational Medicine, Shanghai, China
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: B. Haibe-Kains, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University Health Network, 101 College Street, Toronto, ON
M5G 1L7, Canada. Phone/Fax: 14165818626; E-mail:
bhaibeka@uhnresearch.ca
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4016

inform personalized therapeutic decisions remains a major
challenge. Pharmacogenomics has emerged as a promising
strategy to rapidly elucidate the link between genes and drugs
by systematically characterizing the effects of pharmacologic
agents on whole biologic systems, allowing concurrent identiﬁcation of therapeutic targets and discovery of drug candidates (1).
Advancements in molecular biology and the genomic technologies have had a profound impact on drug discovery, and
together with the advent of automated HTS have dramatically
changed the drug development endeavor (2). Pharmacogenomic HTS presents both opportunities and challenges. The
goal is to measure the response of hundreds or thousands of
cell lines to drugs or other perturbations and to associate the
response with the genomic characteristics of each cell line. The
extensive data generated from such efforts provide opportunities to search for biomarkers and to explore the mechanism
associated with the underlying response. Two recent pharmacogenomic HTS studies, the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE; ref. 3) and Cancer Genome Project (CGP; ref. 4) evaluated an impressive array of cell lines and drugs (1,036 cell lines
and 24 drugs, and 727 cell lines and 138 drugs, respectively),
generating gene-expression proﬁles and drug-sensitivity data
for each combination. A subsequent comparative analysis of
the CCLE and CGP found that although the gene-expression
proﬁles were highly concordant between studies, the measured
cell line drug sensitivities were inconsistent (5), which has been
further conﬁrmed by an independent research group (6).
Although the apparent variability in drug response presents
a serious barrier to the ultimate goal of such studies—to
develop signatures predictive of response—the high degree
of correlation in the gene-expression measures provides
hope for a potential path forward. Here, we review potential
explanations for these ﬁndings and extend recommendations

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Path to Improve Concordance in Cancer Drug Screening

for improving the reproducibility of pharmacogenomic HTS
studies.

replication, or cell death. Associating these changes with druginduced transcriptomic alterations can identify cellular processes that are affected by a given treatment. A key advantage
of pharmacogenomic screening is that it can compress the
timeline of conventional HTS. By using systems biology methods, at least partial functional characterization and initial
validation of the speciﬁcity/selectivity of a given compound
can be obtained.
Given the complexity of HTS assay, there are many sources
of experimental noise that should be carefully controlled to
provide sufﬁcient power to detect reliable "hits" (16). Occasional false-positive hits passing through the primary screen
will likely be caught in secondary screening steps. However, the
biologic outcomes measured by pharmacogenomic HTS assays
are often associated with increased variability, which reduces
our ability to detect weaker target–drug–genotype associations in a single step. Several sources of variation affect these
assays and may limit their power to reliably detect a broad
range of biologic associations, especially where a compound is
effective against multiple potential targets in one or more
pathways, or when the overall cytotoxic effect reﬂects crosstalk among interconnected biologic pathways.

Pharmacogenomics in Cancer Drug
Development

Lack of Concordance in Large
Pharmacogenomic Studies

With more than 900 new cancer drugs in clinical testing (7)
and better technologic tools to characterize patient populations and modulation of drug targets, the paradigm of oncology
drug development is shifting (8, 9). A new drug must now
demonstrate proof of concept that it can be beneﬁcial as early
as possible in clinical development. Preclinical pharmacogenomic HTS could identify genomic predictors allowing investigators to enrich early-phase clinical studies for those patients
most likely to receive beneﬁt. An early signal of proof-ofconcept activity, such as vemurafenib in BRAF V600 mutant
melanoma (10) and crizotinib in ALK fusion non–small cell
lung cancer (11), can rapidly reduce the time to clinical testing
and subsequent market approval. With a growing repertoire of
potential drug combination partners, HTS could help to prioritize genotype-selective drug combinations for clinical testing (12). Genomic predictors developed from HTS data can
support this new paradigm when the number of false-positive
leads is contained.
HTS has become one of the primary scientiﬁc tools used in
the pharmaceutical industry to generate new leads (13). Very
large compound libraries are screened for "hits" against a target
(14). Hits are generally target-speciﬁc active small molecules,
which are further characterized for dose–response effects in
secondary screens. Functional characterization and validation
in animal models leads to selection of candidates for clinical
testing. Pharmacogenomic screening extends the conventional
HTS screening by using high-throughput approaches to evaluate the effect of compounds on large panels of cancer cell
lines; this approach enables to identify simultaneously druggable targets and biologically active compounds (1, 15). Effectiveness of a compound is assessed by functional assays that
measure changes in such activities as cell proliferation, DNA

For pharmacogenomics to realize its full potential, the
assessment of drug response needs to be robust, reliable, and
reproducible. The CCLE and CGP drug screening studies are
the largest public pharmacogenomic screens to date. To the
credit of the investigators, they shared important details of
their experimental protocols and all the pharmacogenomic
data generated, allowing a careful reanalysis. Fifteen drugs and
471 cancer cell lines were screened in both studies (Fig. 1A).
These studies provided a unique opportunity to assess the
consistency of both the raw data and the set of signiﬁcant
associations between genomic features, deﬁned by geneexpression measurements or mutation calls, and measures of
drug response (5).
The experimental protocols used to proﬁle the transcriptomes at baseline before drug treatments were very similar in
both studies, with the exception of the different density of the
Affymetrix chips used (Fig. 1A). Transcriptional proﬁles from
replicate samples within the same study and between identical
cell lines across studies were highly correlated, suggesting that
the high level of standardization for gene-expression proﬁling
and analysis enabled reproducible ﬁndings. Only moderate
concordance was observed in mutations detected in 64 genes
in the 471 common cell lines between CCLE and CGP, which
could be due to differences in the platforms used for mutational proﬁling (Fig. 1A), or as a result of genetic divergence of
the cell lines during passaging.
CCLE and CGP studies generated large amounts of drugsensitivity data using experimental protocols that differed in
many important aspects (Fig. 1B; Supplementary Table S1 and
Supplementary Information), including the speciﬁc pharmacologic assay used [adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–based
vs. reductase-based metabolic activity for CCLE and CGP,

Deﬁnitions
*

*

*

Pharmacogenomics: the use of genetic information
from populations to inform drug design and development
or from individual patients to inform the clinical
management of pharmacotherapy, including drug
selection, dosing, and analysis of drug toxicities. Here,
this term is used more broadly to include
experimentation on model systems.
(Conventional) High-Throughput Screening: highly
automated methodology that heavily relies on robotics,
liquid handling devices, and automated detection to
quickly conduct millions of pharmacologic tests, typically
on speciﬁc protein targets
In vitro cell-based/pharmacogenomic HTS:
extension of conventional HTS to include large panel of
cancer cell lines to assess in vitro drug response.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

4017

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Hatzis et al.

A

Cell line panel

mRNA profiling

DNA sequencing

Drug sensitivity
profiling

1,036 cancer
cell lines

Affymetrix HGU133PLUS2
19,173 genes

Hybrid capture
sequencing
1,651 genes (exon)

ATP-based
metabolic assay
24 drugs

471 cell lines

12,153 genes
high concordance

64 genes
moderate
concordance

15 drugs
low concordance

727 cancer
cell lines

Affymetrix
HG-U133A
12,153 genes

Sanger capillary
sequencing
68 genes (exon)

Reductase-activity
metabolic
assay 138 drugs

Gene–drug
associations

Broad Institute/
Novartis

12,153 genes +
15 drugs
low concordance

Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute/Massachusetts
General Hospital

B
Cell line selection
and annotation

Growth medium

Cross contamination
and synonymous
cell lines

Optimal cell number
measurement

Storage of
compounds

Plating cells

Drug concentration
range

Colony formation
assay

Adherent
cells

Suspension
cells

Cell viability
assay

Controls

Reproducibilty

Modeling of drugdose–response curve

Statistic for
drug sensitivity

Similar between CCLE and CGP

Different between CCLE and CGP

Unspecified in CCLE
© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 1. A, comparison of the Cancer Genome Project (4) and The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (3) as published by Haibe-Kains and colleagues (5). Our
comparative study revealed a high degree of concordance between the gene-expression datasets, moderate concordance for the mutation data, but
low concordance between drug-sensitivity assays; such inconsistency propagates into the gene–drug associations found by the two studies. B, main steps
in the experimental protocols used in the CCLE and CGP studies; each step is further described in Supplementary Table S1. The choice of experimental
procedures vastly differs between the two studies, illustrating the lack of standardization in large pharmacogenomic studies.

respectively]. Although the two studies were not designed
speciﬁcally to address interlaboratory reproducibility, the differences reﬂect a lack of consensus for pharmacogenomic
HTS protocols. For 13 of the 15 drugs tested in common in
CCLE and CGP (87%), a high level of inconsistency between
drug-sensitivity measurements was observed (Spearman
rank correlation <0.5), regardless of which characteristic of
the drug-dose–response curve was used to summarize drug
potency (Fig. 1A). Intriguingly, when the same protocol was
used at two different sites in the CGP study, only a fair intersite

4018

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

correlation for sensitivity to camptothecin was observed
[Spearman rank correlation for the half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) value of 0.57]. These results led us to
conclude that the two experimental protocols are not equivalent and that measuring drug response is a complex and
poorly reproducible process. Although compounds were
assayed at least in duplicate for each cell line, unfortunately,
the raw data from these technical replicates were not publicly
released by either study, preventing a direct assessment of
assay analytical reproducibility.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Path to Improve Concordance in Cancer Drug Screening

To conﬁrm our ﬁndings, we compared the data for two
drugs, lapatinib and paclitaxel, against a third-large pharmacogenomic dataset generated by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) that
used the same ATP-based assay as in the CCLE study (17). As
expected, the correlation was higher between CCLE and GSK
compared with CGP and GSK, suggesting that the choice of
assay has a major impact on drug response measurements.
However, the correlation between GSK and CCLE drug-sensitivity data was still only fair (Spearman correlation <0.51),
implying that the drug-sensitivity assay used is not the only
source of inconsistency (5).
The primary goal of CCLE and CGP studies was to
discover new associations between genomic and transcriptomic features of cancer cells and drug response that could
advance our understanding of drug sensitivity and allow
development of robust genomic predictors of response.
Thus, we tested whether these associations were consistent
across studies. We observed that, although we were able to
validate the strongest associations identiﬁed in both studies,
coupling consistent transcriptomic data with inconsistent
drug-sensitivity measurements resulted in inconsistent
pharmacogenomic associations for most of the investigated
drugs. Hence, any single study may not be able to identify
robust predictors of drug response because a strong association observed in one study may not necessarily be evident
in independent studies (5).

In Vitro Cell-Based Drug Screening: What Can
Affect Assay Consistency?
When considered independently, both the CCLE and CGP
studies approached their experimental design, implementation, and data analysis with apparently adequate care and
rigor; however, there were methodologic differences between
the two studies (Supplementary Information). Several factors
could introduce variability in the results of in vitro cell-based
assays. It is important to establish best practices on how the
chemical compound collection is managed, maintained, and
delivered to the assay plates for screening (18). Critical factors
include compound handling to ensure accuracy in the amount
of the compound transferred to the master solution, maximal
solubility in the solvent used (usually DMSO), optimal storage
conditions to ensure compound integrity, and to minimize
liquid loss through evaporation or leaching of the test compounds through the storage containers (19). Because of such
potential artifacts, the purity, integrity, and concentration of
the compound stock solutions should be veriﬁed before being
used in the assay. Of the two studies, only CCLE reported
preassay compound library validation. Furthermore, the type
of the liquid transfer system can affect the accuracy of the
amount of compound and cell culture stocks delivered to the
recipient plates (20). Tip-based serial dilution and dispensing
could lead to larger IC50 values for some compounds, resulting
in more than 100-fold underestimation of their potency compared with acoustic dispensing methods (21).
Minor variations in cell culture conditions, including
seeding density, plating efﬁciency, growth rate, and cellcycle distribution, may affect cell metabolism and drug

www.aacrjournals.org

responsiveness. The number of cells per well at the time of
pharmacologic testing also has a major impact on the
dynamic range and sensitivity of the assay, and this variable
depends both on the seeding density and on the growth rate
of the cells. Several of these variables are affected by cell
culture conditions, including substrate, choice of cell culture
medium (including relative concentrations of glucose, glutamine, and amino acids), and serum (ﬁnal concentration,
type, source, and batch effects). Other factors affecting the
cell lines include their reference source, passage number,
and the quality of the stock cultures used to seed the
experiments. Even cell lines obtained from the same reference source may diverge enormously unless similar passages
from the reference culture are used. Both the CCLE and CGP
groups appropriately attempted to reduce the contribution
of several of these variables, which would help control
intrastudy variability. However, these actions do not necessarily improve interstudy comparability.
Adaptive responses to the stress of drug treatment can
occur within the transcriptome, proteome, metabolome,
kinome, and methylome; some of these changes may be
detected in hours or less of the initiation of exposure to a
drug. Where rapid drug-induced changes in cells reﬂect
common and/or evolutionarily conserved stress response
pathways, key features that drive proﬁle changes may seem
qualitatively more similar than different across studies.
Thus, it is likely that, provided the cell lines are of the same
origin, the genomic data will appear broadly similar. If the
same cell lines respond in the same way to the same drugs,
selective features of the transcriptomes might be expected to
exhibit at least qualitatively similar changes. These observations are broadly consistent with the ﬁndings of our comparative study (5).
The type of cytotoxicity assay used in assessing drug sensitivity could signiﬁcantly affect the measured phenotypic
response. Among the several assays compatible with HTS
(22, 23), bioluminescent detection of ATP is one of the most
sensitive and reliable methods (24) and has been used extensively in HTS studies (Table 1). CCLE used an ATP detection
cell proliferation assay, but CGP used two different cell viability assays, a ﬂuorescent nucleic acids stain and a redox
indicator dye to assess drug inhibition (for details see Supplementary Information). A recent study by Chan and colleagues
directly compared cell viability assays based on quantifying
total amount of nucleic acid using ﬂuorescent DNA-binding
dyes (similar to the SYTO 60 assay used in the CGP study)
versus ATP-dependent luminescence (CellTiter-Glo assay also
used in the CCLE study; ref. 25). The study shows that the ATPdependent luminescence assay is prone to underestimation of
drug potency and efﬁcacy, particularly for DNA synthesis–
targeting agents (25). The ATP-dependent luminescence and
ﬂuorescent DNA-binding assays are measuring different
aspects of the drug response phenotype, and, therefore, it is
not surprising that the assays show only moderate correlation
in our comparative analysis (5). Given the limitations of each
assay it has been suggested that multiparameter testing,
incorporating complementary cell-viability assays, yields the
most robust and informative phenotypic measures (23).

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

4019

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Hatzis et al.

Table 1. Comparison of available pharmacological assays for measuring cell viability
Cell
viability assay

Type of assay

Pros

Cons

Suitable
for HTS

CellTiter-Glo
(Promega)

Viability, membrane
integrity, ATP

Nontoxic, does not require
ﬁxing or washing steps

Yes
ATP could be reduced by
metabolic interferences,
leading to false-positive
results; underestimation of
drug effect by DNA-targeting
agents, in which cells may be
incapacitated but intact

CCLE,
GSK,
FIMM,
SU2C,
NTP

Syto60
(Invitrogen)

Proliferation; ﬂuorescent
DNA stain

Simple

Requires ﬁxation, washing;
could stain DNA of intact
but not-viable cells

CGP

BromodeoxyuridineELISA (CytoSelect,
Cell BioLabs)

Proliferation, DNA
synthesis

Only live and replicating
cells can incorporate
bromodeoxyuridine

Assay is time consuming and No
cost prohibitive in highthroughput format

DAPI

Proliferation, nucleic
acids stain

Simple

Could stain nonviable cells if
DNA is intact

MTT, MTS, XTT

Viability, metabolic
reduction of tetrazolium
dye

Simple colorimetric assay

Formazan product insoluble No
in aqueous media; secondary
step required to solubilize it
before optical detection

NCI60

SRB

Proliferation, anionic
general biomass stain

Simple colorimetric assay;
stable for extended periods;
differentiates cell kill from
growth inhibition

Requires ﬁxation, washing
steps

Yes

NCI60

Resazurin
(CellTiter-Bue;
Promega)

Viability, cell permeable
redox indicator

Simple and inexpensive;
more sensitive than
tetrazolium assays

Potentially cytotoxic;
requires long incubation 1–4
h; could underestimate toxic
effect

Yes

GF-AFC
(CellTiter-Fluor;
Promega)

Viability; penetrates live
cells where cytoplasmic
cytopeptidase activity
releases AFC that
ﬂuoresces; protease
becomes inactive upon
cell death

Nontoxic, does not require
Potential underestimation of Yes
ﬁxing or washing steps; short drug effect by DNA-targeting
incubation time <1 h
agents, in which cells may be
incapaciated but intact

Ruthenium dye

Proliferation; the
Nontoxic, simple, rapid assay Narrow dynamic range;
Yes
ﬂuorescence of the dye is
signal depends on metabolic
quenced by oxygen;
activity
proliferating cells reduce
external oxygen and
increase ﬂuorescence

LDH (CytotoxONE; Promega)

Cytotoxity; released LDH
is measured by
enzymatically coupled
reagent chemistry

Yes

Yes

Used ina

GSK

Reagents compatible with
Susceptible to background
Yes
viable cells; quick incubation; signal from serum sources of
cost effective
LDH in growth media or from
compounds inhibiting LDH
activity

a

CCLE (3); CGP (4); FIMM, Institute for Molecular Medicine, Finland (38); GSK, GlaxoSmithKline Study (17); NCI60, National Cancer
Institute (39); NTP: National Toxicology Program (40); SU2C, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (41).

4020

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Path to Improve Concordance in Cancer Drug Screening

Primary phenotypic responses measured in pharmacogenomic studies include dose–response curves and two related
measures of drug potency: the IC50 value and the area under the
dose–response curve (AUC). These measures can be estimated
using many different laboratory assays and analytic methods—
no standard "best practices" have been shown to be either
highly reproducible or generally reﬂective of the response in
humans (26). The shape of the dose–response curve, and, thus,
the estimates for both AUC and IC50, depends not only on the
drug–cell line combination but also on the range of drug
concentrations tested, which was not identical in the two
studies. More broadly, the physiologic deﬁnitions of AUC and
IC50, originally intended to describe the mass-action law of a
single-substrate competitive inhibition enzyme kinetics (27),
might not provide similarly meaningful measures of growth
inhibition kinetics in whole-cell systems. Cell population heterogeneity and cell-to-cell variability in drug response may
affect the shape of the dose–response curve, yielding shallow
curves with reduced steepness or Hill slope (26). An independent reanalysis of the two studies found that in the CCLE study
a drug could be assessed both as effective or ineffective against
a cell line depending on whether the assessment of drug
sensitivity was based on an IC50 or AUC (6). Thus, it may not
be a simple task to obtain meaningful quantitative, and perhaps even qualitative, comparisons of responsiveness to many
drugs across studies.

standards. Data preprocessing tools such as dChip (30) and
RMA (31) provided the means to compare large-scale assays,
methods for removing batch effects (32, 33) helped to
facilitate meta-analysis across experimental datasets, and
approaches to creating robust biomarkers (34–37) have
provided a framework to use expression data to make more
reliable predictions of disease phenotypes.
It is clear that there is a need for a similar standardization
of drug response measurements in addition to the development of new, robust drug-sensitivity assays that can both be
replicated across studies and that are physiologically relevant for the treatment of human disease. Lack of standardization may limit the potential of high-throughput drug
screening studies for discovering novel drug sensitivities.
Although gene-expression and genome sequencing data may
be reliable measures of the individual cell lines being
screened, the lack of a robust phenotypic anchor for developing and validating predictive models can limit the use
of data from HTS studies. A community-based effort, similarly to that undertaken by MGED, and an investment of
resources to support the development of common standards
to facilitate comparisons, would pay a huge dividend in
establishing HTS as a valuable tool in drug discovery and
could enable a host of robust and reproducible clinical and
translational applications.

Standardization of In Vitro Cell-Based HTS

Community-wide Assessment for
Standardization

Reproducibility is a fundamental prerequisite for any scientiﬁc study, and this requirement becomes even more critical
when experimental results affect medical decision-making. As
large panels of genomically annotated cancer cell lines (such as
those in the CCLE and CGP studies) are being used to screen
cancer drugs and guide treatment selection for patients whose
cancers show similar genomic alterations, it is important to
ensure the reproducibility of cell line–based drug-sensitivity
data from HTS assays. The unexpectedly low concordance in
the results of the CCLE and CGP studies also illustrates a
broader challenge. Scientiﬁcally appealing, novel highthroughput analytic methods often become widely used before
the factors that affect assay performance are well understood.
Because of the substantial experimental costs, limited funding,
and lower priority assigned to this type of technology assessment, parameters that inﬂuence the results may not be established and standardized until after widespread use of the
method.
When DNA microarray analysis was ﬁrst introduced in the
1990s, there was great excitement about the potential of
genome-wide expression proﬁling. The initial euphoria soon
evaporated as many studies failed to be replicated. In 1999,
the Microarray Gene Expression Data Society (MGED) was
formed to address the need for standardization in microarray experiments and the reporting of experimental data
and metadata. The group produced the Minimal Information
about a Microarray Experiment standard (28, 29) and,
through a series of meetings and workshops, helped to
catalyze development of experimental and data analysis

Given the complexity of HTS assays, a community-wide
consortium effort with multiple stakeholders from industry,
academia, and government working together may be needed to
reach consensus on best practices and strategies for objective
quality assessment and intersite reproducibility of drug-sensitivity data. HTS assays are complex, multistep processes with
many options; however, the respective advantages, limitations,
and intersite reproducibility of the alternative protocols have
not been adequately evaluated. Noise introduced at any step
could seriously limit the robustness of an entire experiment.
For the objective assessment of quality control of cell-based
HTS assays, a community-wide consortium effort ("HTSQC")
similar to the MAQC-I (37) could be invaluable.
We offer some initial ideas for further consideration. A
common panel of cancer cell lines whose identity would be
veriﬁed genomically, and a collection of standardized anticancer compounds could be used as common "reference
materials" for assessing the performance of each participating HTS platform and testing laboratory, providing a common ground to support meaningful comparisons. The reference materials (cell lines and compounds) could be maintained under strict quality control and could be used with
deﬁned protocols at a centralized location before being
distributed to testing laboratories. Specifying deﬁned cultured media and conditions, number of passages, seeding
densities, and duration of assays could help establish common assay protocols. Similarly, reagents required for a given
HTS platform could be kept as consistent as possible among
the testing laboratories.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

4021

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Hatzis et al.

The same HTS platform could be tested in at least three
independent laboratories using the same reference materials
and the same lots of reagents with multiple replicates in the
same laboratory, allowing both inter- and intra-laboratory
reproducibility, and cross-platform comparability to be
assessed. All study protocols and experimental details would
be recorded and submitted along with raw experimental data
to designated data analysis teams for independent analysis,
allowing variability among data analysis methods to be
assessed.
Finally, members of the consortium should share and discuss the results transparently, and publish the results in a peerreviewed journal as a consortium consensus. Raw data and
experimental details should be deposited in a public repository
such as PubChem, to allow the community to replicate, further
evaluate, and improve HTS assays and data analysis
approaches. Such a consortium effort would provide an estimate of the overall reproducibility of current HTS assays,
develop best practices, and provide an upper limit of the
robustness of measured drug response phenotypes. If executed
properly, this project could provide critical information for
industry, academia, and regulatory agencies to objectively
assess the implications of the limits of consistency of HTS
assay results in drug discovery and development.

Conclusion
Although our evaluation suggests caution when considering
the data generated from large-scale pharmacogenomic HTS
studies, our results do not undermine the value of such studies.
Indeed, large-scale pharmacogenomic HTS studies hold great
potential for generating robust genomic predictors of drug
response. However, this potential will not be fully realized until

improvements are made in the design, application, and community-wide implementation of robust, standardized assays for
measuring drug response phenotypes. Efforts should be made to
promote transparency and availability of raw assay data for HTS
studies. These data will be critical to identify the sources and
magnitudes of experimental uncertainties, and for developing
methods to reduce their impact. One proven path forward is the
establishment of best practices and standardization of the
critical steps in these assays through a collective effort. Such
an approach could ensure that the data produced from largescale efforts can be replicated over a broad range of conditions
and compared successfully across multiple laboratories.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the investigators of the Cancer Genome
Project, the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia, and the GlaxoSmithKline cell line
study who have made their invaluable data available to the scientiﬁc community.

Grant Support
C. Hatzis was supported by Yale University. P.L. Bedard was supported by a
grant from the United States National Institute of Health (UM1 CA186644).
N. Juul Birkbak was funded by The Villum Kann Rasmussen Foundation. A.H.
Beck was supported by an award from the Klarman Family Foundation and by
support from US National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant CA087969. D.F. Stern
was supported by the NIH National Cancer Institute (NCI) under award number
R01CA80065. R. Clarke was supported by Public Health Service grants (U54
CA149147 and R01 CA131465) from the NIH. J. Quackenbush was supported by
grants from the NCI GAME-ON Cancer Post-GWAS initiative (5U19 CA148065)
and the NHLBI (5R01HL111759). B. Haibe-Kains was supported by the Gattuso
Slaight Personalized Cancer Medicine Fund at Princess Margaret Cancer Centre.

Received March 10, 2014; revised April 29, 2014; accepted April 30, 2014;
published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

4022

Bredel M, Jacoby E. Chemogenomics: an emerging strategy for rapid
target and drug discovery. Nat Rev Genet 2004;5:262–75.
Drews J. Drug discovery: a historical perspective. Science 2000;287:
1960–4.
Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim
S, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 2012;483:603–7.
Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau
KW, et al. Systematic identiﬁcation of genomic markers of drug
sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature 2012;483:570–5.
Haibe-Kains B, El-Hachem N, Birkbak NJ, Jin AC, Beck AH, Aerts HJ,
et al. Inconsistency in large pharmacogenomic studies. Nature 2013;
504:389–93.
Jang IS, Neto EC, Guinney J, Friend SH, Margolin AA. Systematic
assessment of analytical methods for drug sensitivity prediction from
cancer cell line data. Pac Symp Biocomput 2014;19:63–74.
Pharmaceutical Reserarch and Manufacturers of America. More than
900 medicines and vaccines in clinical testing offer new hope in the
ﬁght against cancer. Medicines in development for cancer 2012.
Available from: http://www.phrma.org/research/new-medicines.
Tan DS, Thomas GV, Garrett MD, Banerji U, de Bono JS, Kaye SB, et al.
Biomarker-driven early clinical trials in oncology: a paradigm shift in
drug development. Cancer J 2009;15:406–20.
Yap TA, Sandhu SK, Workman P, de Bono JS. Envisioning the future
of early anticancer drug development. Nat Rev Cancer 2010;10:
514–23.

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

10. Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB, Ribas A, McArthur GA, Sosman JA,
et al. Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in metastatic melanoma. N
Engl J Med 2010;363:809–19.
11. Kwak EL, Bang YJ, Camidge DR, Shaw AT, Solomon B, Maki RG, et al.
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibition in non–small cell lung cancer. N
Engl J Med 2010;363:1693–703.
12. Held MA, Langdon CG, Platt JT, Graham-Steed T, Liu Z, Chakraborty
A, et al. Genotype-selective combination therapies for melanoma
identiﬁed by high-throughput drug screening. Cancer Discov 2013;
3:52–67.
13. Macarron R, Banks MN, Bojanic D, Burns DJ, Cirovic DA, Garyantes T,
et al. Impact of high-throughput screening in biomedical research. Nat
Rev Drug Discov 2011;10:188–95.
14. Walters WP, Namchuk M. Designing screens: how to make your hits a
hit. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2003;2:259–66.
15. Melnick JS, Janes J, Kim S, Chang JY, Sipes DG, Gunderson D, et al.
An efﬁcient rapid system for proﬁling the cellular activities of molecular
libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:3153–8.
16. Malo N, Hanley JA, Cerquozzi S, Pelletier J, Nadon R. Statistical
practice in high-throughput screening data analysis. Nat Biotechnol
2006;24:167–75.
17. Greshock J, Bachman KE, Degenhardt YY, Jing J, Wen YH, Eastman S,
et al. Molecular target class is predictive of in vitro response proﬁle.
Cancer Res 2010;70:3677–86.
18. Matson SL, Chatterjee M, Stock DA, Leet JE, Dumas EA, Ferrante CD,
et al. Best practices in compound management for preserving

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Path to Improve Concordance in Cancer Drug Screening

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

compound integrity and accurately providing samples for assays.
J Biomol Screen 2009;14:476–84.
McDonald GR, Hudson AL, Dunn SM, You H, Baker GB, Whittal RM,
et al. Bioactive contaminants leach from disposable laboratory plasticware. Science 2008;322:917.
Marx V. Pouring over liquid handling. Nat Methods 2014;11:
33–8.
Ekins S, Olechno J, Williams AJ. Dispensing processes impact apparent biological activity as determined by computational and statistical
analyses. PLoS ONE 2013;8:e62325.
Slater K. Cytotoxicity tests for high-throughput drug discovery. Curr
Opin Biotechnol 2001;12:70–4.
Niles AL, Moravec RA, Riss TL. In vitro viability and cytotoxicity testing
and same-well multi-parametric combinations for high-throughput
screening. Curr Chem Genomics 2009;3:33–41.
Crouch SP, Kozlowski R, Slater KJ, Fletcher J. The use of ATP
bioluminescence as a measure of cell proliferation and cytotoxicity.
J Immunol Methods 1993;160:81–8.
Chan GK, Kleinheinz TL, Peterson D, Moffat JG. A simple highcontent cell-cycle assay reveals frequent discrepancies between
cell number and ATP and MTS proliferation assays. PLoS ONE
2013;8:e63583.
Fallahi-Sichani M, Honarnejad S, Heiser LM, Gray JW, Sorger PK.
Metrics other than potency reveal systematic variation in responses to
cancer drugs. Nat Chem Biol 2013;9:708–14.
Chou T. Relationships between inhibition constants and fractional inhibition in enzyme-catalyzed reactions with different numbers of reactants, different reaction mechanisms, and different
types and mechanisms of inhibition. Mol Pharmacol 1974;10:
235–47.
Ball CA, Sherlock G, Parkinson H, Rocca-Sera P, Brooksbank C,
Causton HC, et al. Standards for microarray data. Science 2002;
298:539.
Brazma A, Hingamp P, Quackenbush J, Sherlock G, Spellman P,
Stoeckert C, et al. Minimum information about a microarray experiment
(MIAME)-toward standards for microarray data. Nat Genet 2001;
29:365–71.

www.aacrjournals.org

30. Li C, Wong WH. Model-based analysis of oligonucleotide arrays:
model validation, design issues and standard error application.
Genome Biol 2001;2:RESEARCH0032.
31. Bolstad B, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP. A comparison of normalization methods for high density oligonucleotide array data based
on variance and bias. Bioinformatics 2003;19:185–193.
32. Leek JT, Scharpf RB, Bravo HC, Simcha D, Langmead B, Johnson WE,
et al. Tackling the widespread and critical impact of batch effects in
high-throughput data. Nat Rev Genet 2010;11:733–9.
33. Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch effects in microarray
expression data using empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics 2007;
8:118–27.
34. Prat A, Parker JS, Fan C, Perou CM. PAM50 assay and the three-gene
model for identifying the major and clinically relevant molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2012;135:301–6.
35. Haibe-Kains B, Desmedt C, Loi S, Culhane AC, Bontempi G, Quackenbush J, et al. A three-gene model to robustly identify breast cancer
molecular subtypes. J Natl Cancer Inst 2012;104:311–25.
36. Beck AH, Knoblauch NW, Hefti MM, Kaplan J, Schnitt SJ, Culhane AC,
et al. Signiﬁcance analysis of prognostic signatures. PLoS Comput
Biol 2013;9:e1002875.
37. Shi L, Reid LH, Jones WD, Shippy R, Warrington JA, et al. The
MicroArray quality control (MAQC) project shows inter- and intraplatform reproducibility of gene expression measurements. Nat Biotechnol 2006;24:1151–61.
38. Pemovska T, Kontro M, Yadav B, Edgren H, Eldfors S, Szwajada A,
et al. Individualized systems medicine strategy to tailor treatments for
patients with chemorefractory acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Discov
2013;12:1416–29.
39. Shoemaker RH. The NCI60 human tumour cell line anticancer drug
screen. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;10:813–23.
40. Xia M, Huang R, Witt KL, Southall N, Fostel J, Cho MH, et al. Compound cytotoxicity proﬁling using quantitative high-throughput
screening. Environ Health Perspect 2008;3:284–91.
41. Heiser LM, Wang NJ, Talcott CL, Laderoute KR, Knapp M, Guan Y,
et al. Integrated analysis of breast cancer cell lines reveals unique
signaling pathways. Genome Biol 2009;3:R31.

Cancer Res; 74(15) August 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

4023

Cancer
Research

Correction

Correction: Enhancing Reproducibility in Cancer
Drug Screening: How Do We Move Forward?
In this article (Cancer Res 2014;74:4016–23), which appeared in the August 1, 2014,
issue of Cancer Research (1), an author's name was misspelled. The correct author
listing is below. The publisher regrets this error.
The online version has been modiﬁed and no longer matches the print.
Christos Hatzis, Philippe L. Bedard, Nicolai J. Birkbak, Andrew H. Beck, Hugo
J.W.L. Aerts, David F. Stern, Leming Shi, Robert Clarke, John Quackenbush, Benjamin
Haibe-Kains.

Reference
1. Hatzis C, Bedard PL, Birkbak NJ, Beck AH, Aerts HJWL, Stern DF, et al. Enhancing reproducibility
in cancer drug screening: how do we move forward? Cancer Res 2014;74:4016–23.
Published OnlineFirst August 29, 2014.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2275
Ó2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

5348

Cancer Res; 2014

Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725

Enhancing Reproducibility in Cancer Drug Screening: How
Do We Move Forward?
Christos Hatzis, Philippe L. Bedard, Nicolai J. Birkbak, et al.
Cancer Res 2014;74:4016-4023. Published OnlineFirst July 11, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/07/23/0008-5472.CAN-14-0725.DC1

This article cites 40 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/15/4016.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/15/4016.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research.

