Editorial

Posttreatment Interleukin-2 in Patients With Acute Myeloid
Leukemia
The End of a Long Road for Patients and Clinical Trials?
Dolores Grosso, DNP, CRNP and Mark A. Weiss, MD

In this issue of Cancer, Kolitz et al1 report outcomes from the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) trial 19808, part
of a series of trials examining outcomes among patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in first complete remission.
After induction and consolidation therapy, patients in this trial were randomized to receive posttreatment interleuken-2
(IL-2) for 90 days versus observation to assess the effect of additional treatment with IL-2 on disease-free survival. The
higher-than-expected rate of refusal to initiate or complete IL-2 therapy in the subset of patients randomized to that arm
resulted in a lack of power to conclusively assess the primary outcome.
We agree with the compelling concept presented by Kolitz et al that patient “treatment fatigue” was a substantial
contributing factor to the failure to adequately accrue to and complete therapy on the IL-2 arm. Frontline therapy for
AML is arguably one of the most intensive treatment programs in medicine. The juxtaposition of almost daily injections
of IL-2 for 90 days with a long and rigorous chemotherapy program understandably challenges the ability of patients to
emotionally accommodate further disruptions to their quality of life. This approach is particularly precarious in the context of disease remission. How much gain for the pain is an important question for both patients and designers of clinical
trials. Treatment fatigue, a largely underrecognized phenomenon, is more likely to occur when the duration and intensiveness of therapy, as well as the impact on quality of life, do not justify perceived benefits. A meta-analysis of patients with
breast cancer demonstrated that < 25% of patients in a high-risk cohort complied with posttreatment chemoprevention,
with 2 studies reporting an unwillingness to trade adverse effects in the present for future unknown benefits.2 The lessons
of the CALGB 19808 trial should not be forgotten and should be used to aid in the design of future clinical trials.
Although it may be difficult to control the intensity of therapy, impact on quality of life and the duration of treatment are
potentially more flexible variables that could be exploited to make it easier for patients to complete therapy. The impact of
treatment fatigue, especially when driven by the absence of tangible benefit, should be considered in the planning phase of
every trial.
One of the most difficult tasks in conducting a clinical trial is to maintain a scientific standard that prevents final
analysis and publication before data are mature enough to be clinically meaningful, while ensuring that the scientific findings when known are not so old as to be eclipsed by newer, more efficacious therapies, a term we refer to as “trial fatigue.”
The CALGB 19808 trial does not completely pass muster in the latter respect. We noted that only 11% of patients in the
trial received postremission therapy with allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation (HSCT), despite the finding that all
the patients were aged < 60 years and only a subgroup of patients had favorable cytogenetics. Since the inception of
CALGB 19808, innovations in HSCT therapy including the development of T cell-containing haploidentical approaches
at our institution and others, the use of double umbilical cord transplants, and the continued refinement in unrelated donor selection have enabled an ever-expanding group of patients with AML to undergo HSCT as postremission therapy.
The multiplicity of HSCT options combined with the availability of trials using newer, targeted therapies that are potentially useful in this context, such as FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 receptor inhibitors, suggests that the limited pool of available patients and the desire to place these patients on higher-priority, more modern studies would preclude a similar IL-2
trial today. Because trial fatigue correlates with the pace of new scientific discovery, designers of clinical trials are
Corresponding author: Mark Weiss, MD, Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, 834 Chestnut St, Suite 320, Philadelphia, PA 19107; Fax:
(215) 955-9641; mark.weiss@jefferson.edu
Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
See referenced original article on pages 1010-7, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28514, Received: October 17, 2013; Revised: November 19, 2013; Accepted: November 19, 2013, Published online December 31, 2013 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

940

Cancer

April 1, 2014

Editorial/Grosso and Weiss

challenged to not only produce scientifically rigorous
results but to do so in less time. Trial fatigue could be
avoided by structuring clinical trials to close early for significant nonadherence or by designing shorter phase 2 trials in which a higher level of outcome significance offsets
smaller subject numbers.
Does the outcome of the CALGB 19808 trial represent the end of a long road of investigation regarding the
benefit of IL-2 as remission maintenance therapy for
patients with AML in first remission? A meta-analysis that
combined patient data from 6 randomized clinical trials
failed to demonstrate any benefit for IL-2 immunotherapy in extending disease-free or overall survival.3 Considering the lack of positive results in any of the individual
trials including the earliest one published 13 years ago,
one could argue that the end of this road was reached long
ago. However, given the heterogeneity of patient populations and IL-2 doses and schedules in historical trials, we
acknowledge that it is possible that IL-2 maintenance
therapy may provide some degree of benefit in selected
patients. “Investigator fatigue” as a result of years of

Cancer

April 1, 2014

negative or, in the case of the CALGB 19808 trial, inconclusive results will likely prevent the initiation of another
trial, and therefore we are left with a likely but not completely certain conclusion regarding the lack of efficacy of
IL-2 as immunotherapy for patients with AML.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Kolitz JE, George SL, Benson DM, et al. Recombinant interleukin-2
in patients aged younger than 60 years with acute myeloid leukemia
in first complete remission: results from CALGB 19808. Cancer.
2014;120:1010-1017.
2. Ropka ME, Keim J, Philbrick JT. Patient decisions about breast cancer chemoprevention: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin
Oncol. 2010;28:3090-3095.
3. Buyse M, Squifflet P, Lange BJ, et al. Individual patient data metaanalysis of randomized trials evaluating IL-2 monotherapy as remission maintenance therapy in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2011;
117:7007-7013.

941

