Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Antimetabolite TTL-315 selectively kills glucose-deprived cancer
cells and enhances responses to cytotoxic chemotherapy in
preclinical models of cancer
James DuHadaway1 and George C. Prendergast1,2
1

Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, Wynnewood, PA, USA

2

Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelpia, PA, USA
Correspondence to: George C. Prendergast, email: prendergast@limr.org
Keywords: cancer metabolism, tumor microenvironment, thiol homeostasis, pentose phosphate cycle, chemotherapy
Received: October 02, 2015	

Accepted: January 23, 2016	

Published: January 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
Maintaining thiol homeostasis is an imperative for cancer cell survival in
the nutrient-deprived microenvironment of solid tumors. Despite this metabolic
vulnerability, a selective approach has yet to be developed to disrupt thiol homeostasis
in solid tumors for therapeutic purposes. In this study, we report the identification
of 2-mercaptopropionyl glycine disulfide (TTL-315) as a novel antimetabolite that
blocks cell survival in a manner conditional on glucose deprivation. In the presence
of glucose, TTL-315 lacks cytotoxic effects in normal cells where it is detoxified
by reduction to 2-mercaptopropionyl glycine, a compound with known clinical
pharmacologic and safety profiles. In several rodent models of aggressive breast,
lung and skin cancers, TTL-315 blocked tumor growth and cooperated with the DNA
damaging drug cisplatin to trigger tumor regression. Our results offer preclinical proof
of concept for TTL-315 as a novel antimetabolite to help selectively eradicate solid
tumors by exploiting the glucose-deprived conditions of the tumor microenvironment.

INTRODUCTION

blood vasculature. Indeed, cancer cells in the solid tumor
microenvironment evolve responses to survive the stresses
of glucose deprivation which overlaps with hypoxic
regions of the tumor to significant extent [6-8]. Glucose
deprivation places a great strain on thiol homeostasis in
all cells because of the reliance of the OPPC pathway
on glucose to produce NADPH, a critical factor in thiol
homeostasis. Second, cancer cells rely heavily on DNA
repair functions regulated by thiol redox, such as Ku or
DNA-PK, which are involved in double strand break
repair [4, 5, 9]. Overall, the acute need of cancer cells for
glucose/NADPH-dependent thiol homeostasis in the solid
tumor microenvironment highlights a general selective
metabolic weakness that can be exploited for therapeutic
ends.
Recently, new evidence of the vital connection
between NADPH production, thiol homeostasis and
cancer cell survival under glucose-deprived conditions
was illustrated in cell biochemistry studies with the
compound hydroxylethyldisulfide (HEDS) [10], a
substrate of the glutathione-dependent enzyme thioredoxin

Therapeutic strategies to attack common
metabolic aberrations in cancer, including the use of
antimetabolites, offer appeal because of their potentially
broad applications in the treatment of patients with cancer.
It is widely appreciated that glycolysis is activated in
most solid tumors, but it is less known that the same is
true for the oxidative pentose phosphate cycle (OPPC), a
metabolic branch in the glycolysis pathway downstream
of hexokinase. OPPC is responsible for generating
much of the NADPH for which cancer cells require to
maintain reduced glutathione at levels sufficient for thiol
homeostasis and cell survival [1-5]. Solid tumors the
requirement of solid tumors for thiol homeostasis is greater
than normal tissues for at least two reasons. First, there is a
heavier reliance on cell survival mechanisms in the highly
oxidized nutrient-deprived microenvironment of a solid
tumor. Glucose depletion occurs commonly in regions
of bulky tumors, owing to high glucose metabolism
combined with poor perfusion due to a disorganized
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7372

Oncotarget

[10]. Based on this unique activity, in vivo tests of HEDS
were explored but this direction was judged impractical
due to safety concerns from systemic toxicity of the HEDS
bioreductant ß-ME. In considering other structurally
related disulfides with less toxic bioreductive products,
we explored the novel compound 2-mercaptopropionyl
glycine disulfide (TTL-315), a dimer of the approved
clinical drug 2-mercaptopropionyl glycine, tiopronin
(also known as thiola), as a potentially safe candidate for
analysis (Figure 1).
Following upon studies of HEDS response in colon
cancer cells [10], we explored dose responses to TTL315 in normal and oncogene-transformed variants of the
established rat intestinal cell line RIE and in rat MATBIII cells, which are derived from an aggressive mammary
carcinoma (Figure 2). The transformed character of the
RIE/neuT cells were confirmed by their capability for
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar culture (Suppl.
Figure 1), as compared to the non-transformed RIE/neo
cells and transformed RIE/Kras cells which have been
described previously [13]. For experiments investigating
TTL-315, equal numbers of cells were seeded into normal
growth media and then fed the next day with growth
media that included or lacked glucose. Four hours later,
TTL-315 or vehicle only was added to the cultures and
cells were incubated 24 hr before being subjected to a
viability assay that monitors thiol homeostasis [14]. The
results presented in Figure 2 show that TTL-315 reduced
cell viability unless detoxified by disulfide bioreduction,
a condition requiring glucose in the culture media. In the
presence of glucose, addition of TTL-315 caused cell
growth arrest, whereas in its absence the compound was
cytotoxic. Non-transformed RIE/neo cells did not display
toxicity to TTL-315 in the presence of glucose, which was
also the case to some lesser extent in the transformed RIE/
Kras and RIE/neuT cells and the cancer-derived MATBIII cells. However, in the absence of glucose TTL-315
was universally cytotoxic, with the transformed cells
exhibiting relatively greater sensitivity. The cytotoxic
properties of TTL-315 in glucose-deprived cell cultures
was confirmed in other standard cell viability assays (data
not shown), arguing against a misleading interpretation
of the primary assay. Although further work was needed

reductase [11]. Under normal glucose conditions, HEDS is
reduced to ß-mercaptoethanol (ß-ME) without toxic effect,
but under conditions of glucose deprivation, HEDS adds
a stress to thiol homeostasis that was sufficient to trigger
p53-independent cell death [10]. Earlier studies of HEDS
confirm its relationship with OPPC and thiol homeostasis
as a probe of OPPC-dependent thiol oxidative stress and
Ku-dependent DNA double strand break repair [3-5, 12],
but only recently did it become apparent that HEDS is
cytotoxic to cancer cells when glucose is deprived [10].
The need for thiol homeostasis to support DNA
repair functions increases interest in dithiol compounds
that might leverage the efficacy of DNA damaging
therapies including chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Where the interface between thiol homeostasis and
metabolism has been investigated in cancer it has mainly
been in the context of hypoxia rather than nutrient
deprivation. Moreover, strategies to develop selective
cancer therapies in this area remain inchoate. Cancer cells
located in hypoxic, glucose-deprived regions are well
known for their recalcitrance to therapy, comprising a
wellspring for stem-like, drug-resistant and pro-metastatic
cell populations most often responsible for the demise
of cancer patients. Thus, compounds that can sensitize
glucose-deprived cancer cells to destruction may offer
useful alternatives, alone or as adjuvants for radiotherapy
or chemotherapy. In this study, we further develop this
concept by offering evidence of the antitumor properties
of a novel disulfide compound, TTL-315, which is more
potent than similar disulfides studied previously and
suited to consider for translation into the clinical oncology
setting for patient treatment.

RESULTS
TTL-315 is a cytotoxin conditional on glucose
deprivation
Glucose is a critical nutrient for detoxification of
the disulfide compound HEDS which under glucosedeprived conditions in vitro triggers cancer cell death

Figure 1: Chemical structure of TTL-315 and its bioreductive relationship with 2-mercaptopropionyl glycine
(tiopronin). TTL-315 is the oxidized disulfide of the generic clinical drug tiopronin (2-mercaptopropionyl glycine). Under normative
tissue reducing conditions where glucose is available, tiopronin is the bioreductant of TTL-315.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7373

Oncotarget

to fully understand the detoxification reaction, the results
suggested that like HEDS itself [10] a latent cytotoxic
property of TTL-315 was unmasked in settings of glucose
deprivation.

we found that as little as three doses of TTL-315 (40 mg/
kg) administered every other day one week after treatment
began was sufficient to fully prevent outgrowth of MATBIII tumors (Figure 3A). If tumors were allowed to grow
to a bulky size (>2400 mm3) before drug administration,
TTL-315 adminstered at the same dose slowed but did
not block outgrowth (Figure 3B). However, in striking
contrast, in bulky tumors where cisplatin chemotherapy
was also limited in efficacy, co-administration of TTL315 at the same dose as before was sufficient to trigger
dramatic regressions (Figure 3C).
We sought to extend and confirm these observations
in a different preclinical model of breast cancer, namely,
the transgenic MMTV-neu mouse model of HER2-driven
breast carcinoma. Multiparous female MMTV-Neu
mice, maintained as previously described [15], present
with a high incidence of autochthonous mammary gland
carcinomas akin to the human experience in that different
secondary ‘hits’, epigenetic pathways and immunoediting
events are taken in different individual animals during

TTL-315 blocks the growth of tumors and induces
tumor regression when combined with cisplatin
To begin to assess the conditional cytotoxic effects
of TTL-315 in the setting of solid tumors, we embarked on
a series of experiments in various established preclinical
rodent models of breast, lung and skin cancer. MATBIII is an aggressive rat mammary carcinoma the rapid
growth of which produces a highly nutrient-deprived
tumor microenvironment. In an initial test of the ability
of TTL-315 to block tumor growth, we treated MATBIII tumor-bearing mice as tumors became palpable
(prevention design). Initial dose and scheduling in pilot
experiments ranged empirically. Employing this design,

Figure 2: TTL-315 exhibits glucose-dependent cytotoxic properties similar to HEDS. Equivalent numbers of cells from the
cell population indicated were seeded in growth media and refed the following day with growth media that included or lacked glucose.
Four hours later, TTL-315 or vehicle control was added at the concentrations indicated and cells were incubated for 24 hr before analysis
as described in the Materials and Methods. The Y-axis presents the relative surviving fraction as a proportion of viable cells counted in
replicate cultures (n = 3) at the time of TTL-315 or vehicle addition. Data was evaluated by Student’s T test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7374

Oncotarget

Figure 3: TTL-315 blocks the growth of MATB-III mammary carcinoma and cooperates with cisplatin to trigger
regression of bulky established tumors. Tumor volumes comparing control and experimental cohorts relative to the starting day
of treatment is shown on the Y-axis in all panels. A. Prevention design. MATB-III tumor-bearing F344 rats with palpable tumors were
administered 40 mg/kg TTL-315 or vehicle only (0.1 ml) by tail vein injection on the days indicated. Mean tumor volume at the start of
treatment was 139±4 mm3 for mice in the control cohort (n = 5) and 127±12 mm3 for mice in the experimental cohort (n = 5). B. Treatment
design. Rats with bulky tumors >2000 mm3 were treated as before on the days indicated. Mean tumor volume at the start of treatment was
2837±204 mm3 for mice in the control cohort (n = 5) and 2848±538 mm3 for mice in the experimental cohort (n = 5). C. Cooperation with
cisplatin. Rats with bulky tumors were subjected to the treatment design protocol as before except for the addition of cisplatin (2 mg/kg)
which was administered at the times indicated to both cohorts. Mean tumor volume at the start of treatment was 2948±180 mm3 for mice
in the control cohort (cisplatin only) (n=5) and was 2402±218 mm3 for mice in the experimental cohort (cisplatin + TTL-315) (n = 5). Data
was evaluated by Student’s T test.

Figure 4: TTL-315 blocks the growth of MMTV-neu mammary carcinoma and cooperates with cisplatin to promote
regression of established tumors. Tumor volumes comparing control and experimental cohorts relative to the starting day of treatment
is shown on a logarithmic scale on the Y-axis. Each dot represents a subject on trial (n). Horizontal bars in each dataset shows the mean of
the data. Statistical significance was analyzed by ANOVA. MMTV-neu mice with spontaneously arising palpable mammary tumors (5001000 mm3) were recruited longitudinally to a trial in which TTL-315 (100 mg/kg), cisplatin (1 mg/kg) or vehicle only (0.1 ml volume) was
administered by i.p. injection on days 1, 3, 5 of a two-week response trial.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7375

Oncotarget

tumor development. MMTV-neu mice were enrolled
randomly into control and experimental treatment groups
when tumors reached ~500-1000 mm3. Mice in different
cohorts received vehicle only, TTL-315 (100 mg/kg),
cisplatin (1 mg/kg) or both drugs on days 1,3,5 of a twoweek tumor response assay, a design described in detail
in this model for other drug trials elsewhere [16-18]. Two
weeks following initiation of the treatment, mice were
euthanized for measurement of the final tumor sizes. A
comparison of each subject in the cohorts relative to the
starting day of treatment confirmed the antitumor activity
of TTL-315 and its ability to leverage the efficacy of
cisplatin in this model (Figure 4). In this model, TTL-315
was quite potent with 3/10 subjects receiving this agent
showed either no tumor growth or frank tumor regression.
In combination with cisplatin, which produced no
regressions by itself, TTL-315 elicited tumor regressions
in 7/11 subjects.
We further explored the antitumor properties
of TTL-315 in the established Lewis lung carcinoma
model (LLC1), where the potential for cooperation with
radiotherapy was of interest based on studies of HEDS as
a radiosensitizer [3-5, 19, 20]. In pilot trials, we obtained
results from tests of TTL-315 (100 mg/kg) administered
i.p. in the LLC1 lung tumor model that were similar to
those reported above (Suppl. Figure 2A). LLC1 tumors
did not respond to low doses of ionizing radiation tested
(2 or 4 Gy), but at 8 Gy which slowed tumor growth
the administration of TTL-315 on the same dose and
schedule cooperated modestly to attenuate growth further
(Suppl. Figure 2B). Overall, the results obtained in
three established preclinical models of breast and lung
carcinoma that are known for their aggressive properties
supported the conclusion that TTL-315 could inhibit tumor
growth, enhance the efficacy of DNA damaging therapies

and trigger tumor regressions.

TTL-315 activity does not rely on host
immunocompetence or evident systemic toxicity
Given emerging evidence of the importance
of glucose metabolism on tumor immunity [21, 22],
we asked whether the antitumor properties of TTL315 might be seated in immune alterations. For this
direction, we employed B16 murine melanoma based
on the importance of immune modulation in melanoma
growth and therapeutic response. In this model system,
i.p. administration of TTL-315 (40 mg/kg) on a similar
schedule at 7, 10, and 13 days after palpable tumor-bearing
mice were enrolled yielded tumor growth inhibitions in
both immune-competent syngeneic C57BL6 hosts as well
as in immune-incompetent nude mouse hosts (Figure
5). While tumor growth differed subtly in each host, no
significant differences in the growth inhibition elicted by
TTL-315 were apparent. While combinations were not
explored in this model, at a first level of investigation it did
not appear as though TTL-315 relied upon T cell immunity
for its in vivo activity, given the similar antitumor effects
in these host animals. In a similar vein, we did not obtain
evidence of systemic toxicity associated with TTL-315
treatment as a conduit of its antitumor properties, based
on observations from exploratory 7 and 28 day toxicity
studies in mice (Suppl. Figure 3) and rats (data not shown)
or comparisons of the weights of mice treated with TTL315 at doses of 40-100 mg/kg (single or multiple dosing).
These data reinforced the conclusion that TTL-315 is
safely tolerated in preclinical models without evidence of
gross toxicity on its own or as bioreductively cleared to the
monomeric form 2-mercaptopropionyl glycine (tiopronin).

Figure 5: Antitumor properties of TTL-315 do not vary with host immunocompetency. C57BL6/J syngeneic hosts (BL6) or

immunodeficient nude mice (nu/nu) were injected s.c. with 1 x 105 B16F10 cells (day 0) and enrolled randomly in control or experimental
cohorts (n = 10 all cohorts). On days 7, 10, 13 mice were administered by i.p. injection vehicle only or 40 mg/kg TTL-315 (0.1 ml total
volume). Tumor volumes based on calculations from caliper measurements were determined with an endpoint of 24 days in the experiment.
Data was evaluated by Student’s T test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7376

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

model which illustrates its tumor-selective antimetabolic
effects, which are based on glucose insufficiency in solid
tumor tissue. The strain imposed by TTL-315 in solid
tumors is extended still further by the co-administration
of DNA damaging therapies which tax the same thiol
redox-dependent functions, suggesting a basis to
explain the antitumor cooperativity that was observed in
multiple preclinical models of cancer. In summary, our
observations are consistent with the interpretation that
TTL-315 attacks a metabolic weakness in solid tumors,
one which is associated with limited safety risks based on
the established safety and pharmacotoxicogical profile of
its bioreductant monomer, tiopronin.
NADPH is critically needed to sustain the relatively
fragile state of thiol homeostasis in solid tumors. Thus,
it is intriguing to consider whether this need may help
explain the widespread activation of glycolysis in cancer
cells, insofar as the OPPC pathway generating NADPH
relies on glucose-6-phosphate synthesized as the first
step in glycolysis. As noted above, hypoxic regions of
tumors that are notoriously resistant to radiotherapy or
chemotherapy are also glucose deprived [8]. Additionally,
studies of tissue ischemia indicate that tissue damage
occurs as much a result of glucose deprivation as hypoxia
[25]. A connection between tissue ischemia, glucose
deprivation, and cell death can be understood because
under hypoxic conditions NADPH production through

The results presented in this study offer an
initial preclinical proof of concept for TTL-315 as an
antimetabolite with potent antitumor activity. TTL-315
is a disulfide, a thiol dimer, of the approved generic
drug tiopronin (aka thiola) which has been used in
clinic for many years to treat the disease cystinuria [23,
24]. Bioreduction of TTL-315 yields two monomers of
tiopronin, the pharmacology and toxicology for which
has been well established clinically. Consistent with the
results of preliminary exploratory toxicology conducted
in rats and mice, the reduced form of TTL-315, tiopronin,
is known to be safe. Therefore, one would expect the
safety risks for TTL-315 development to be mitigated to
a significant extent. Under normal conditions in healthy
tissues, which are provided with sufficient nutrients, TTL315 is reduced relatively quickly to tiopronin. In contrast,
accumulation of TTL-315 in the glucose-deprived
microenvironment of a solid tumor, where it is not reduced
quickly to tiopronin, would intensify competition for the
precious glucose/OPPC/NADPH-dependent thiol-reducing
activity which is critical to sustain cancer cell survival
in the hostile tumor microenvironment. By stressing a
system that is already strained in solid tumors, TTL-315
impairs many local thiol redox-dependent functions,
including DNA repair functions. Figure 6 presents a

Figure 6: TTL-315 response model. TTL-315 is proposed to interfere with thiol redox homeostasis and elicit cell death in glucose-

deprived cells where its detoxification is inefficient. A detailed discussion of the bioreductive/detoxification pathways involved have been
discussed elsewhere [10]. In the solid tumor microenvironment, the high glucose metabolism combined with a poor blood vasculature
leads to glucose deprivation, low OPPC activity and reduced NADPH generation. This situation strains the levels of glutathione needed
to preserve thiol homeostasis, which as a result becomes vulnerable to the additional stress created by dithiols that would be reduced by
glutathione-dependent redox processes. By intensifying the competition for these processes, thiol redox control of critical cell proteins
including DNA repair proteins is compromised. DNA-damaging chemotherapy and radiotherapy provide further strains that cooperate to
heighten cellular demise. In attacking this weak point, TTL-315 as a dithiol stressor in glucose-deprived solid tumors may offer additional
benefits to cancer management through production of its bioreductive product 2-mercaptopropionyl glycine (tiopronin), as discussed in the
text.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7377

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

the glucose-dependent OPPC pathway is compromised
to an extent that protein thiol homeostasis is threatened.
The notion that the OPPC pathway is a point of metabolic
vulnerability in solid tumors is supported by this study
of TTL-315, and extended still further by more detailed
cell biochemistry investigations of HEDS indicating that
(i.) it is possible to selectively depress NADPH levels in
glucose-deprived cancer cells, and (ii.) that this effect
sensitizes cancer cells to cytotoxic chemotherapy by
compromising thiol-dependent DNA repair proteins [3].
Under normal glucose conditions, TTL-315 is rapidly
reduced to its monomeric form tiopronin, eliminating its
cytotoxic bioactivity and deactivating its ability to attack
a vulnerability only present in the inherently glucosedeprived status of a solid tumor.
As an oxidative cytotoxin, the relative specificity
of TTL-315 for glucose-deprived cells seems unique in
the literature. As noted elsewhere [10], most chemical
oxidants exert their toxicity by general oxidation of lipids,
proteins and DNA, lacking specificity for thiols and
depleting non-protein thiols in the presence of glucose.
Unlike other oxidants, TTL-315 was not expected to be
especially toxic to protein or non-protein thiols [3, 4, 19].
Glutathione is the chief non-protein thiol in cells, helping
maintain intracellular redox status by scavenging reactive
oxygen species or serving as a substrate for enzymes that
reduce oxidatively modified proteins, e.g. glutathionylated
proteins [3, 19]. It is uncertain as yet the extent to which
glutathione redox processes may be affected by TTL-315.
However, under conditions of normal glucose levels, cells
with normal OPPC activity reduce TTL-315 to tiopronin
with little effect on protein and non-protein thiols, much
like HEDS to ß-mercaptoethanol as discussed in detail
elsewhere [10].
The production of tiopronin (2-mercaptopropionyl
glycine) in normal tissues is an intriguing feature since
it may yield additional benefits for cancer treatment. In
human cancer cells, this compound exhibits collateral
sensitization in relieving multidrug resistance (MDR)
through a P-glycoprotein-independent mechanism where
glutathione peroxidase has been implicated [26, 27].
Additionally, in a variety of preclinical model systems it
has been reported to reduce emesis produced by widely
used emetogenic chemotherapies like cisplatin [28-30].
Lastly, evidence has been presented in preclinical models
that tiopronin can mitigate chemotherapy-induced liver
and kidney toxicity [31-33], probably through antioxidant
effects. Although these properties were not examined in
the present work, their consideration as useful features of
TTL-315 pharmacology offer a further impetus for future
study of this unique compound.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Chemicals
TTL-315 was obtained by contract synthesis
from Bio-101 and its structure was verified by mass
spectroscopy. Stock solutions of each compound were
prepared freshly as needed for dilution in cell culture or
animal experiments in glucose-free DMEM.

Cell culture
Rat intestinal epithelial (RIE) cell lines RIE/neo
and RIE/Kras were generated and cultured as described
previously [13] in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) and antibiotics. RIE/neuT cells were generated
by transformation with a mutant rat neu/Her-2 cDNA
(neu-T) expression vector [34]. Cells were passaged 48
hr after transfection in media containing 0.5 mg/ml G418
and drug-resistant cells were pooled to confirm transgene
expression by Western analysis along with anchorageindependent growth capability (data not shown). Equal
numbers of cells were seeded in multiwell dishes the
day before replenishing with normal or glucose-deprived
media. TTL-315 or control vehicle (DMSO) was added
4 hr later and viable cell numbers were determined at
times indicated by the HEDS-based assay CellCountEZ
[14] (Rockland Immunochemicals). Glucose-deprived
media was glucose-free DMEM containing 5%
FBS and antibiotics. 13762 MATB-III rat mammary
adenocarcinoma cells (ATCC) were cultured in McCoy’s
5A modified medium supplemented with 10% FBS and
antibiotics. LLC-1 murine Lewis lung carcinoma cells
(ATCC) and B16F10 murine melanoma cells (ATCC)
were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
and antibiotics.

Tumor models and treatments
Established preclinical models of cancer employed
in this study included the Fischer rat mammary
adenocarcinoma MATB-III, murine Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC-1), murine melanoma B16F10 (B16) and murine
MMTV-neu mammary carcinoma. All studies were
reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of the Lankenau Institute for Medical
Research and were conducted in a vivarium accredited
by the American Association for the Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC). MATB-III tumors
were initiated by orthotopic injection of Fischer 344
rats (Charles River) with 1 x 105 cells suspended in PBS
into a mammary fat pad. LLC-1 or B16 tumors were
7378

Oncotarget

initiated by subcutaneous injection of C57BL6/J mice
(Jackson Laboratory) of 1x106 or 1x105 cells suspended in
PBS, respectively. The transgenic mouse strain FVB/NTg(MMTVneu)202Mul/J abbreviated here as MMTV-neu
(Jackson Laboratory) harbors homozygous copies of a
rat c-Neu transgene controlled by the mouse mammary
tumor virus promoter [35] MMTV-neu mice maintained
by in-house husbandry were employed as described in
detail elsewhere [16, 36]. Tumor size was determined by
caliper measurements. Tumor volumes in the B16 and
MMTV-neu models were calculated based on the formula
for determining a prolapsed elliptoid (d2_l/0.52) where
d is the shorter of the two orthogonal measurements.
Tumor volumes in the MATB-III and LLC-1 models
were calculated based on caliper measurements in three
mutually perpendicular diameters (A,B,C) volume
determined as V = (p/6)xAxBxC. For TTL-315 treatments
as indicated, tumor-bearing mice with similarly sized
tumors were randomized into control and experimental
groups before administration of compounds prepared in
cell growth media via tail vein injection (MATB-III) or
intraperitoneal injection (LLC-1, B16, MMTV-neu).

encoding glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD):
G6PD is dispensable for pentose synthesis but essential for
defense against oxidative stress. EMBO J. 1995; 14:52095215.
3.	 Ayene IS, Koch CJ, Tuttle SW, Stamato TD, Perez
ML and Biaglow JE. Oxidation of cellular thiols by
hydroxyethyldisulphide inhibits DNA double-strand-break
rejoining in G6PD deficient mammalian cells. Int J Radiat
Biol. 2000; 76:1523-1531.
4.	 Ayene IS, Stamato TD, Mauldin SK, Biaglow JE, Tuttle
SW, Jenkins SF and Koch CJ. Mutation in the glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase gene leads to inactivation of Ku
DNA end binding during oxidative stress. J Biol Chem.
2002; 277:9929-9935.
5.	 Biaglow JE, Ayene IS, Koch CJ, Donahue J, Stamato TD
and Tuttle SW. G6PD deficient cells and the bioreduction
of disulfides: effects of DHEA, GSH depletion and
phenylarsine oxide. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000;
273:846-852.
6.	

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

7.	 Rajendran JG, Mankoff DA, O’Sullivan F, Peterson LM,
Schwartz DL, Conrad EU, Spence AM, Muzi M, Farwell
DG and Krohn KA. Hypoxia and glucose metabolism in
malignant tumors: evaluation by [18F]fluoromisonidazole
and
[18F]fluorodeoxyglucose
positron
emission
tomography imaging. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:22452252.

We acknowledge contributions from Wei Du, Jie Li,
Kathleen M. Ward, Eswarkumar Dayanandam, Donglan
Zhang, Erika Sutanto-Ward, Albert DeNittis and Iramoudi
S. Ayene to this work. We thank Maurice Hampton for
comments on the text.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

8.	 Sonveaux P, Vegran F, Schroeder T, Wergin MC, Verrax
J, Rabbani ZN, De Saedeleer CJ, Kennedy KM, Diepart
C, Jordan BF, Kelley MJ, Gallez B, Wahl ML, Feron O
and Dewhirst MW. Targeting lactate-fueled respiration
selectively kills hypoxic tumor cells in mice. J Clin Invest.
2008; 118:3930-3942.

G.C.P. is a co-inventor on U.S. Patent No. 8,586,636
assigned to the Lankenau Institute for Medical Research,
which claims the structure and uses of TTL-315 and
related novel compounds for cancer treatment.

9.	 Shen H, Schultz MP and Tew KD. Glutathione conjugate
interactions with DNA-dependent protein kinase. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1999; 290:1101-1106.

GRANT SUPPORT
Funding for this work was provided by grants
from the National Institutes of Health (R03 CA159315),
Pennsylvania Department of Health/CURE Program,
Lankenau Medical Center Foundation and Main Line
Health.

10.	 Li J, Ward KM, Zhang D, Dayanandam E, Denittis AS,
Prendergast GC and Ayene IS. A bioactive probe of the
oxidative pentose phosphate cycle: novel strategy to reverse
radioresistance in glucose deprived human colon cancer
cells. Toxicol in vitro. 2013; 27:367-377.
11.	 Biaglow JE, Ayene IS, Tuttle SW, Koch CJ, Donahue J and
Mieyal JJ. Role of vicinal protein thiols in radiation and
cytotoxic responses. Radiat Res. 2006; 165:307-317.

REFERENCES
1.	 Salvemini F, Franze A, Iervolino A, Filosa S, Salzano
S and Ursini MV. Enhanced glutathione levels and
oxidoresistance mediated by increased glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase expression. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274:27502757.

12.	 Biaglow JE, Ayene IS, Koch CJ, Donahue J, Stamato TD,
Mieyal JJ and Tuttle SW. Radiation response of cells during
altered protein thiol redox. Radiat Res. 2003; 159:484-494.
13.	 Zeng PY, Rane N, Du W, Chintapalli J and Prendergast GC.
Role for RhoB and PRK in the suppression of epithelial cell
transformation by farnesyltransferase inhibitors. Oncogene.

2.	 Pandolfi PP, Sonati F, Rivi R, Mason P, Grosveld F and
Luzzatto L. Targeted disruption of the housekeeping gene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Aronen HJ, Pardo FS, Kennedy DN, Belliveau JW, Packard
SD, Hsu DW, Hochberg FH, Fischman AJ and Rosen BR.
High microvascular blood volume is associated with high
glucose uptake and tumor angiogenesis in human gliomas.
Clin Cancer Res. 2000; 6:2189-2200.

7379

Oncotarget

2003; 22:1124-1134.

sensitivity of multidrug-resistant cells to tiopronin. J Biol
Chem. 2014; 289:21473-21489.

14.	 Li J, Zhang D, Ward KM, Prendergast GC and Ayene IS.
Hydroxyethyl disulfide as an efficient metabolic assay for
cell viability in vitro. Toxicol In Vitro. 2012; 26:603-612.

28.	 Gupta YK and Sharma SS. Antiemetic activity of
antioxidants against cisplatin-induced emesis in dogs.
Environmental toxicology and pharmacology. 1996; 1:179184.

15.	 Muller AJ, Duhadaway JB, Donover PS, SutantoWard E and Prendergast GC. Inhibition of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase, an immunoregulatory target of the cancer
suppression gene Bin1, potentiates cancer chemotherapy.
Nat Med. 2005; 11:312-319.

29.	 Sharma SS, Gupta SK, Kochupillai V, Seth SD and Gupta
YK. Cisplatin-induced pica behaviour in rats is prevented
by antioxidants with antiemetic activity. Environmental
toxicology and pharmacology. 1997; 3:145-149.

16.	 Banerjee T, Duhadaway JB, Gaspari P, Sutanto-Ward E,
Munn DH, Mellor AL, Malachowski WP, Prendergast GC
and Muller AJ. A key in vivo antitumor mechanism of
action of natural product-based brassinins is inhibition of
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Oncogene. 2008; 27:28512857.

30.	 Bhanumathy P, Kumar S and Vasudevan DM. Role of
2’-mercaptopropionylglycine (MPG) against toxicity of
cyclophosphamide in normal and tumour-bearing mice.
Indian J Exp Biol. 1986; 24:767-770.
31.	 Li XP, Wen F, Yang W, Deng YB, Li M, Zhang PF,
Tang RL, Li Q and Wei YQ. The role of tiopronin for
the prevention of chemotherapy-related liver toxicity
in advanced colorectal cancer patients treated with
mFOLFOX7: a prospective analysis. Tumori. 2014;
100:446-451.

17.	 Hou DY, Muller AJ, Sharma MD, DuHadaway J, Banerjee
T, Johnson M, Mellor AL, Prendergast GC and Munn DH.
Inhibition of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase in dendritic cells
by stereoisomers of 1-methyl-tryptophan correlates with
antitumor responses. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:792-801.
18.	 Malachowski WP, Metz R, Prendergast GC and Muller
AJ. A new cancer immunosuppression target: indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). A review of the IDO mechanism,
inhibition, and therapeutic applications. Drugs Fut. 2005;
30:897-813.

32.	 Viale M, Zhang JG, Pastrone I, Mariggio MA, Esposito
M and Lindup WE. Cisplatin combined with tiopronin or
sodium thiosulfate: cytotoxicity in vitro and antitumor
activity in vivo. Anti-cancer drugs. 1999; 10:419-428.
33.	 Zhang JG, Viale M, Esposito M and Lindup WE. Tiopronin
protects against the nephrotoxicity of cisplatin in the rat.
Human & experimental toxicology. 1999; 18:713-717.

19.	 Ayene IS, Biaglow JE, Kachur AV, Stamato TD and Koch
CJ. Mutation in G6PD gene leads to loss of cellular control
of protein glutathionylation: mechanism and implication. J
Cell Biochem. 2008; 103:123-135.

34.	 Bargmann CI, Hung MC and Weinberg RA. Multiple
independent activations of the neu oncogene by a point
mutation altering the transmembrane domain of p185. Cell.
1986; 45:649-657.

20.	 Li J, Ayene R, Ward KM, Dayanandam E and Ayene IS.
Glucose deprivation increases nuclear DNA repair protein
Ku and resistance to radiation induced oxidative stress in
human cancer cells. Cell Biochem Funct. 2009; 27:93-101.

35.	 Guy CT, Webster MA, Schaller M, Parsons TJ, Cardiff RD
and Muller WJ. Expression of the neu protooncogene in the
mammary epithelium of transgenic mice induces metastatic
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992; 89:10578-10582.

21.	 Finlay DK. Metabolic regulation of natural killer cells.
Biochem Soc Trans. 2015; 43:758-762.
22.	 Park BV and Pan F. Metabolic regulation of T cell
differentiation and function. Mol Immunol. 2015 ;68(2 Pt
C):497-506.

36.	 Muller AJ, DuHadaway JB, Sutanto-Ward E, Donover
PS and Prendergast GC. Inhibition of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase, an immunomodulatory target of the tumor
suppressor gene Bin1, potentiates cancer chemotherapy.
Nature Med. 2005; 11:312-319.

23.	 Kallistratos G, Mita I and Vadaloyka-Kalfakakou V.
Management of cystinuric disorders with sulfhydryl drugs.
Prog Clin Biol Res. 1979; 34:255-263.
24.	 Pahira JJ. Management of the patient with cystinuria. Urol
Clin North Am. 1987; 14:339-346.
25.	 Fisher AB. Reactive oxygen species and cell signaling with
lung ischemia. Undersea Hyperb Med. 2004; 31:97-103.
26.	 Goldsborough AS, Handley MD, Dulcey AE, Pluchino
KM, Kannan P, Brimacombe KR, Hall MD, Griffiths G
and Gottesman MM. Collateral sensitivity of multidrugresistant cells to the orphan drug tiopronin. J Med Chem.
2011; 54:4987-4997.
27.	 Hall MD, Marshall TS, Kwit AD, Miller Jenkins LM,
Dulcey AE, Madigan JP, Pluchino KM, Goldsborough
AS, Brimacombe KR, Griffiths GL and Gottesman MM.
Inhibition of glutathione peroxidase mediates the collateral
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7380

Oncotarget

