Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Predicting the cell death responsiveness and sensitization of
glioma cells to TRAIL and temozolomide
Birgit C. Weyhenmeyer1,2,*, Janis Noonan1,2,*, Maximilian L. Würstle1,2, Frank A.
Lincoln1,2, Grainne Johnston1,2, Markus Rehm1,2,3,4,**, Brona M. Murphy1,2,**
1

Department of Physiology & Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland

2

Centre for Systems Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland

3

Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology, Faculty of Energy-, Process- and Biotechnology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart,
Germany

4

Stuttgart Research Center Systems Biology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

**

These authors share senior authorship

Correspondence to: Markus Rehm, email: mrehm@rcsi.ie
Brona M. Murphy, email: bronamurphy@rcsi.ie
Keywords: glioblastoma, TRAIL, temozolomide, apoptosis, systems biology
Received: December 08, 2015     Accepted: July 18, 2016     Published: August 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Genotoxic chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ) is a mainstay of treatment for
glioblastoma (GBM); however, at best, TMZ provides only modest survival benefit to
a subset of patients. Recent insight into the heterogeneous nature of GBM suggests
a more personalized approach to treatment may be necessary to overcome cancer
drug resistance and improve patient care. These include novel therapies that can be
used both alone and with TMZ to selectively reactivate apoptosis within malignant
cells. For this approach to work, reliable molecular signatures that can accurately
predict treatment responsiveness need to be identified first. Here, we describe the
first proof-of-principle study that merges quantitative protein-based analysis of
apoptosis signaling networks with data- and knowledge-driven mathematical systems
modeling to predict treatment responsiveness of GBM cell lines to various apoptosisinducing stimuli. These include monotherapies with TMZ and TRAIL, which activate
the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis pathways, respectively, as well as combination
therapies of TMZ+TRAIL. We also successfully employed this approach to predict
whether individual GBM cell lines could be sensitized to TMZ or TRAIL via the selective
targeting of Bcl-2/Bcl-xL proteins with ABT-737. Our findings suggest that systems
biology-based approaches could assist in personalizing treatment decisions in GBM
to optimize cell death induction.

cell death by causing DNA double strand breaks that
eventually lead to growth arrest and activation of cellular
apoptosis [4].
To date, the only significant prognostic marker of
GBM patient response to TMZ is promoter methylation of
the gene encoding for MGMT [5, 6]; specifically, promoter
methylation has been identified as a feature of favorable
outcome in patients undergoing TMZ therapy for both
newly diagnosed GBM and recurrent disease [7]. In the
elderly sub-population of patients, MGMT testing is now
recommended for routine clinical decision making with
regards to stratification of therapy; this follows the results

INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma (GBM), the most common form of
primary brain tumor in humans, is typically aggressive,
highly infiltrative, and resistant to conventional therapy.
Despite improvements in surgical technique and the
addition of temozolomide (TMZ) to the armamentarium,
patient median survival remains dismal at 14.6 months,
with most experiencing tumor relapse within 7 months
of treatment onset [1] and a large proportion gaining no
survival advantage to TMZ therapy at all [2, 3]. When
successful, this oral alkylating drug induces glioma
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61295

Oncotarget

of two phase 3 clinical trials that clearly demonstrate
‘unmethylated’ patients benefit more from radiotherapy
alone while ‘methylated’ patients benefit more from
TMZ chemotherapy alone [8, 9]. In the non-elderly
sub-population of GBM patients, however, discordant
responses between ‘methylated’ and ‘unmethylated’ subgroups of patients exist, indicating that the treatment
decision to use TMZ in these patients should not be based
on this biomarker alone. Nevertheless, MGMT testing
has become commonplace for patient selection within
clinical trials [6] [10–13] and is frequently requested as a
prognostic biomarker during patient clinical workup [14].
Irrespective of patient responsiveness to TMZ,
the dismal prognosis associated with GBM makes it
clear that other therapeutic strategies are required, both
as stand-alone treatment options and as sensitizing
therapies that can be combined with TMZ to overcome
current treatment resistance. In line with this, due to the
extremely heterogeneous nature of these tumors [15, 16],
it is becoming increasingly evident that such treatment
strategies ought to be individualized and tailored to the
needs of each GBM patient. Recent efforts in personalizing
anti-cancer treatments have focused on therapies that
selectively reactivate apoptosis within malignant cells,
such as those that promote apoptosis via the Bcl-2 family
of regulatory proteins and those that act by binding to
death receptors expressed on the surface of the cell.
Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL), the natural ligand for the apoptotic
receptors, DR4 and DR5, is one anti-cancer therapy
that has been gaining momentum in recent years [17,
18]. Using extrinsic agents like TRAIL has two putative
advantages over intrinsic agents: firstly, TRAIL can trigger
apoptosis independently of p53, which is commonly
mutated in primary (28%) and secondary (65%) GBM
patients [19], contributing, in part, to TMZ resistance
[20]; and secondly, TRAIL can kill cancer cells without
conferring significant toxicity to normal cells [21, 22].
Several TRAIL-based therapies, including the human
recombinant TRAIL ligand (dulanermin), which targets
both DR4 and DR5, and agonistic antibodies against DR4
(mapatumumab) and DR5 (drozitumab, lexatumumab,
tigatuzumab, LBY-135, and conatumumab) have been
assessed within clinical trials [17, 23]. Unfortunately,
while these agents are reportedly well tolerated in patients,
both alone and in combination with standard therapies,
only isolated responses have been observed. It should
be noted, however, that these trials involved no degree
of patient pre-selection and thus may not reflect a true
clinical evaluation of TRAIL-based therapies, which
might be efficacious but only for a subset of patients.
With regards to GBM, most glioma cells are resistant
to TRAIL monotherapy, although several promising
combination treatments to overcome this resistance have
been described [24–28]. Particularly encouraging in vitro
and in vivo findings come from the combination of TRAIL
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and TMZ, which evoke concomitant stimulation of the
intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways [29–31]. Used
together, these agents should, in theory, enhance both the
likelihood of apoptosis induction as well as the strength of
the apoptotic signal. TMZ might also play the role of TRAIL
‘sensitizer’, overcoming resistance by up-regulating the
expression of death receptors, leading in turn to substantial
caspase activation [29, 30]. Other mechanisms of TRAIL
and TMZ resistance are shared, such as an up-regulation of
anti-apoptotic and down-regulation of pro-apoptotic Bcl-2
proteins and an over-expression of inhibitor of apoptosis
(IAP) proteins [23, 32].
Small molecules that antagonize pro-survival Bcl-2
proteins, namely BH3 mimetics, are currently under preclinical and clinical evaluation as single agent anti-cancer
therapies and as sensitizers to apoptosis-inducing drugs
[33, 34]. One of the most advanced and well characterized
small molecule inhibitors is the BH3 mimetic, ABT-737,
which predominantly binds to Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL to induce
or sensitize cells to apoptosis through the intrinsic pathway.
As a single agent, ABT-737 has shown anti-tumor activity
in GBM cells in vitro [35], while in concert with TRAIL,
it has demonstrated efficacious results in an in vivo model
of GBM [27]. Recently, ABT-737 has also been shown to
sensitize gliomas cells to TMZ-induced apoptosis [36].
Despite these promising studies, molecular marker
signatures that could facilitate reliable predictions on
the responsiveness of individual GBM cases to TMZ
and TRAIL alone or in combination currently do
not exist. Likewise, tools to predict ABT-737-based
sensitization of GBM cells to TMZ or TRAIL have not
yet been developed. Here, we addressed these problems
in a first pre-clinical proof-of-principle study in which
we merged quantitative experimental studies with dataand knowledge-driven mathematical system modeling to
predict treatment responsiveness of GBM cell lines.

RESULTS
Defining and parameterizing functional groups
of cell death regulators for knowledge- and
data-driven systems modeling
We previously demonstrated that a knowledge- and
data-driven mathematical modeling approach is capable
of generating reliable predictions of melanoma cell line
responsiveness to both TRAIL- and genotoxic druginduced cell death, outperforming classical statistical
procedures [37]. As part of this approach, biological
pathway information on linear and non-linear interplay
between cell death regulatory proteins is integrated into
data obtained from quantitative measurements of these
proteins. This is achieved by defining “functional groups
(FGs)” in which multiple proteins are related to each other
by simple arithmetic rules (sums, products, or ratios of a
small number of proteins), multivariate statistical analysis,
61296

Oncotarget

proteins may need to be transcriptionally induced or posttranslationally modified in response to TMZ, either alone or
in combinations, the relevance of their baseline expression
levels with regards to determining cell death responsiveness
is not yet clear [51–53]. It is also possible that these proteins
functionally differ in their capacity to activate/antagonize
pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins [54, 55]. Thus,
keeping these proteins as separate variables allowed us to
better understand their respective impact on the model’s
performance. Of note, in the subsequent results we did not
observe a notable improvement in model performance when
merging these proteins into one FG (not shown). To define
the caspase-9-activating apoptosome complex, we multiplied
the protein concentrations of Apaf-1 and caspase-9;
this multiplication ensured that the value for this group
approached zero when either Apaf-1 or caspase-9 expression
was low or absent. We applied the same reasoning to the
grouping of DR4, DR5 and FADD; this group represented
the DISC. FGs of apoptotic caspases and their antagonists
(cFLIP and caspase-8; XIAP and caspase-3) were defined as
ratios. SMAC remained as a single protein and accordingly
was kept as an individual variable.
To parameterize these 11 FGs with protein data,
we carried out quantitative flow cytometry to determine
the cell surface expression of death receptors 4 and 5 as
well as quantitative immunoblotting to determine the
relative protein expression of the other 17 key players of
the apoptotic pathways activated by TRAIL and TMZ
(Supplementary Table S1). An overview, based on a total
of 627 quantifications in 11 cell lines, is provided in Figure
1C. The resulting quantities for the FGs are provided in
Supplementary Table S2. The cell lines chosen for this
study included both commercially available cell lines, A172,
U87, U251, U343, and U373 and a cohort of lines derived
from patient GBMs, including both primary (MZ18, MZ51,
MZ294, MZ327) and recurrent (MZ256, MZ304) tumors. All
of the commercially available lines expressed a methylated
MGMT promoter whilst among the patient derived cell lines,
MZ18, MZ51 and MZ294 expressed a methylated promoter
and MZ304, MZ256 and MZ327 expressed an unmethylated
promoter. Of note, statistical analysis comparing the relative
expression of apoptotic proteins, as listed in Supplementary
Table S1, in “methylated” versus “unmethylated” cell lines
revealed no relationship between protein expression profiles,
methylation status and response to treatment (not shown).

and the application of pattern recognition algorithms [37–
39]. To apply this approach to the TRAIL- and TMZ-based
treatments in GBM, the relevant signaling pathways and
the respective FGs first needed to be defined.
The apoptosis pathway activated by TRAIL is well
characterized and depicted in Figure 1A. Briefly, TRAIL
binds to death receptors, DR4 and DR5, on the surface
of the cell, resulting in the recruitment of the adaptor
protein, Fas-associated death domain (FADD), through
death effector domain (DED) interactions. FADD, in turn,
recruits pro-caspase-8, pro-caspase-10 and/or cellularFLIP (cFLIP), thereby forming the multi-protein deathinducing signaling complex (DISC) [40]. Pro-caspase-8
recruitment to the DISC results in its autocatalytic
processing to the active caspase-8 enzyme; however,
c-FLIP proteins can inhibit this process. If activated,
caspase-8 can subsequently go on to activate effector
caspases such as caspase-3 to execute the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway [41]. Alternatively, caspase-8 can
activate the intrinsic pathway via cleavage of the BH3only protein, Bid. The truncated active form of Bid,
tBid, engages with Bax or Bak to induce mitochondrial
outer membrane permeabilisation (MOMP) and release
of cytochrome c and second mitochondria-derived
activator of caspases (SMAC) into the cytosol [42]. This
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis, which involves
additional BH3-only proteins, such as Bim, Puma and
Noxa [43, 44], is also the entry point for cell death signals
triggered by chemotherapeutics like TMZ [4, 45–48].
The function of BH3-only proteins and activated Bax or
Bak is antagonized by the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
proteins, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1. Once in the cytosol,
cytochrome c interacts with apoptotic protease activating
factor 1 (Apaf-1) to form the heptameric backbone of the
apoptosome complex, which in turn recruits and activates
caspase-9 [49]. At the same time, SMAC neutralizes
the caspase-inhibitory function of X-linked inhibitor
of apoptosis protein (XIAP) to assist in the ultimate
activation of effector caspases like caspase-3 [50].
We used this knowledge of pathway topology to
group the above-mentioned proteins into FGs based on their
relationships within the signaling network (Figure 1B). For
example, we grouped together Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 by
adding their nM amounts since these represent functionally
redundant antagonists of Bax and Bak. Similarly, we grouped
together Bax and Bak since they form the mitochondrial pores
leading to MOMP. The BH3-only proteins, Bid, Bim, Puma,
and Noxa, were kept as separate variables for a number
of reasons. Firstly, Bid plays an essential role in driving
the activation of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis,
specifically in response to extrinsic pathway stimulation;
therefore, functionally, Bid is largely separate from the other
BH3-only proteins. Secondly, the respective relevance and
individual importance of Bim, Puma and Noxa in regulating
the TMZ-induced intrinsic pathway of apoptosis is still a
matter of debate [51]. Furthermore, since these BH3-only
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Functional groups of apoptosis regulators
in GBM cell lines can be associated with cell
death responsiveness to TMZ and TRAIL
monotherapy
Following the parameterization of the FGs, these
data were analyzed to determine if any relationship existed
between FG values and the responsiveness of each cell line
to TMZ or TRAIL. First, we applied a principal component
analysis (PCA) to the FG data. This statistical procedure
61297

Oncotarget

allowed us to accumulate the variance observed in the 11
FGs in the 11 cell lines in a lower number of independent
dimensions, referred to as principal components (PCs)
(Figure 2A). The variance explained by the respective PCs
indicates that the first 4 PCs needed to be retained for the
subsequent analyses to capture approximately 70% of the
data variance of the original data set, and all subsequent
analyses were therefore conducted in this 4D PC space.
Each PC is defined by distinct contributions of the
different FGs, according to specific weighting coefficients
for the FGs (Figure 2B, Supplementary Table S3).
For visualization purposes, the cell-line specific
values of the FGs, multiplied with the FG-specific
coefficients in the first three 3 PCs, allowed us to position
the 11 GBM cell lines within a three dimensional PC space
(Figure 2C). The position of the individual cell lines in
the PC space is therefore associated with their respective
individual protein expression profiles. The distribution
of the cell lines within the PC space demonstrated that
the cell lines did not form spatially separated clusters,
indicating a high degree of heterogeneity between the
GBM cell lines (Figure 2C). Additional information on
this procedure is provided in the methods section and the
published literature [37].
Next, we asked whether the PC space, and
therefore the protein composition of the apoptosis
signaling network, contains information on whether the
cell lines are responsive to TMZ or TRAIL. To this end,
we first experimentally measured cell viability following
TMZ or TRAIL treatment in all cell lines (Figure 2D).
Our data showed that the responsiveness of the cell lines

to TMZ or TRAIL varied substantially across the panel
and also that individual cell lines frequently responded
differently to TMZ or TRAIL. Furthermore, we also
noted that very few cell lines responded well to these
treatments (Figure 2D). Previous work from our group
has highlighted that a reduction in cell survival in TMZ
responsive cell lines, U251 and U343, correlates with
activation of the intrinsic apoptotic cell death pathway,
as demonstrated by a significant increase in the number
of condensed nuclei and AnnexinV staining, as well as
procaspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage; we also
showed that such cell death could be suppressed by
caspase inhibition with zVAD-fmk and that no such
responses were evident in TMZ-resistant cell lines
[56]. To confirm that the TRAIL-sensitive cell lines
were undergoing apoptosis via the extrinsic pathway,
we examined the processing of procaspase-8 in the
TRAIL-sensitive cell line, A172; cleavage of caspase-8
was clearly detected 24 h post TRAIL treatment
(Supplementary Figure S1A). We also examined the
effect of TRAIL treatment on the executioner caspase,
caspase-3, and found that TRAIL treatment also led to
the cleavage of pro-caspase-3 after 24 h (Supplementary
Figure S1A). Activation of both caspase-8 and caspase-3
was prevented by the combined presence of zVAD-fmk
and TRAIL (Supplementary Figure S1A). Furthermore,
we detected a significant increase in AnnexinV positive
cells following TRAIL treatment (Supplementary Figure
S1B), which was also prevented by zVAD-fmk. None
of these events were evident in the TRAIL-resistant cell
line, MZ304 (Supplementary Figures S1A, S1B).

Figure 1: Coding and parameterizing functional groups of apoptosis signaling proteins for knowledge- and datadriven systems modeling. A. Pathway diagram for intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis pathways elicited by TMZ and TRAIL, respectively.

B. Grouping of apoptosis signaling proteins into functional groups by simple arithmetic operations. C. Relative levels of protein expression
within the GBM cell line panel. Circles summarize 627 quantifications, while circle sizes are proportional to the protein quantities
determined from n = 3 independent experiments. Green and red indicate anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins, respectively. Protein expression
amounts are provided in Supplementary Table S1. The resulting FG values are provided in Supplementary Table S2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61298

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Functional groups of cell death regulators highlight an association between protein expression profiles and
cell survival following TMZ and TRAIL treatment. A. A principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to the functional

groups of the GBM cell line panel. Results are shown as a scree plot. Bar graphs show the contribution of each principal component (PC)
toward explaining the data variance. B. Bar graphs show the coefficients for all functional groups in the first four PCs. Coefficient values
are provided in Supplementary Table S3. C. Graphical illustration of the distribution of GBM cell lines along the first three PCs. Circle
sizes decrease with distance from the observer to aid 3D visualization. D. Cell survival following TMZ and TRAIL monotherapy. Cells
were treated with TMZ (150 µM) or TRAIL (100 ng/ml) for 96 h followed by cell viability measurement. Data show cell survival relative
to control values of 100% (mean ± SEM from n = 3 independent experiments). E and F. Cell lines in the 3D PC space were color coded
according to their responsiveness to TMZ and TRAIL, respectively. G. Performance of the response group separation in the 4D PC space
by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is shown by listing the amount of correctly classified cell lines.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61299

Oncotarget

Subsequently, cell lines were defined treatmentspecifically as highly responsive (up to 30% survival), low
responsive (30-80% survival) or resistant (>80% survival).
According to the definition of response classes, the cell lines
positioned in the PC space were color coded (Figure 2E, 2F).
Interestingly, it appeared that within the 3D space, resistant
cell lines seemed to be spatially separated from cell lines with

higher responsiveness (Figure 2E, 2F). While visually this
pattern was obvious, we tested whether this separation could
likewise be achieved objectively by using linear discriminant
analysis (LDA), an algorithm that aims to separate the
responsiveness groups by hyperplanes in the 4D PC space.
The separation of the response groups by this approach
was highly accurate, with all cell lines correctly classified

Figure 3: Case-specific predictions of TMZ and TRAIL monotherapy responsiveness in GBM cell lines. A. Workflow for
determining the predictive power of the model using leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV). All predictions were performed in 4D PC
space. B,C. 2D projections of the PC spaces calculated from combinations of 10 cell lines are shown for TMZ and TRAIL treatments. Circle
sizes decrease with distance from the viewer, thereby providing information on the third PC dimension. Open circles represent the test
cell lines, which were placed into the PC spaces according to their functional group values. D. Performance scores for correctly predicting
cell line responses to TMZ and TRAIL monotherapy. E. Case-specific predictions on TMZ and TRAIL responsiveness allow the in silico
identification of optimal treatment options. Treatment recommendations were made according to the highest predicted responsiveness to
TMZ or TRAIL and validated against experimental data. Green background indicates cases where optimal treatment options could be
identified. Red background indicates cases where the better treatment option could be missed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61300

Oncotarget

into their respective response groups for TMZ treatment
responsiveness (Figure 2G). For TRAIL responsiveness,
only one highly responsive cell line was identified, which
was pooled with the next highest responsiveness group for
all subsequent analyses. LDA correctly classified 10/11 cell
lines (91%) for TRAIL responsiveness (Figure 2G). Taken
together, these findings indicate that protein data of key cell
death regulators together with information on their interplay
can be employed to separate GBM cell lines according to
their TMZ and TRAIL responsiveness.

treatment resistant cancer models, such as GBM cell lines
[29–31]. We therefore next studied the responsiveness of
the cell line panel to TMZ/TRAIL combination treatment.
First, we investigated whether the response groups could
be separated in the PC space and then we determined
whether overall responsiveness as well as response
synergies in these cell lines could be reliably predicted.
Overall, the responsiveness of the GBM cell line
panel to TMZ/TRAIL treatment was improved when
compared to the single agent treatments (Figure 4A,
Figure 2D); this reduction in cell viability (Figure 4A)
correlated with an increase in apoptotic cell death in
TMZ and TRAIL-treated U251 cells, as evidenced by
PARP cleavage and the prevention of such cleavage
upon caspase inhibition (Supplementary Figure S1C),
a significant increase in the number of Hoechst-labelled
condensed nuclei (Supplementary Figure S1D), and
caspase-3 substrate cleavage (Supplementary Figure
S1E). No such cell death-related changes were evident in
the treatment-resistant cell line, MZ294 (Supplementary
Figure S1C, S1D, S1E). As with the single agent
treatments, the response pattern to TMZ/TRAIL
treatment was heterogeneous across the cell line panel,
with both resistant and responsive cell lines identified
(Figure 4A). Color coding the cell lines according to
TMZ+TRAIL responsiveness again indicated that
regions in the PC space appear to be associated with
different levels of treatment responsiveness, and
that these spatial regions can be separated by LDA
(Supplementary Figure S2A, S1B). To test the predictive
capacity of the model for TMZ+TRAIL combination
treatment, we again conducted LOOCV (Supplementary
Figure S2C). However, the responsiveness of only 6
out of the 11 cell lines was predicted correctly (55%)
(Supplementary Figure S2D).
Since the capacity of the model to predict cell line
responsiveness to the dual treatment strategy of TMZ
and TRAIL was limited, we next considered whether
our modeling approach was better suited to study and
predict response synergies. To this end, we first calculated
the (CI) Value of each cell line using Webb’s fractional
product method [56], which provided us with a ‘synergy
score’ for the combination treatment for each cell line
(Supplementary Table S4); this was then used to place
the cell lines in the PC space. Using this approach, we
obtained regions in the PC space that allowed us to
separate the cell lines by response synergies (Figure
4B). Furthermore, once we performed LOOCV using the
CI Values, we found that we could successfully predict
response synergies to TMZ and TRAIL combination
therapy with 100% accuracy (Figure 4C, 4D). Taken
together, these results indicate that while prediction
accuracies for the overall responsiveness to TMZ and
TRAIL were limited, apoptosis protein expression patterns
together with our modeling approach, were particularly
powerful in predicting response synergies.

Case specific predictions of TMZ and TRAIL
monotherapy responsiveness allow the in silico
identification of optimal treatments
We next investigated whether the above findings can
assist in predicting the responsiveness of individual cell
lines to TMZ or TRAIL. We hypothesized that conducting
the above analyses with a reduced number of cell lines
may be sufficient to generate a PC space that can be
segmented into spatial regions that reflect different levels
of treatment responsiveness. We conducted a leave-one-out
cross validation (LOOCV) in which we used the data from
10 cell lines and subsequently positioned the 11th cell line
into the LDA segmented PC space. If the placed cell line
(test cell line) was positioned within the correct response
region, the prediction was considered to be correct
(Figure 3A). A visualization of the results limited to the
first two PCs for TMZ and TRAIL response predictions
is shown in Figure 3B, 3C. The prediction accuracies are
summarized in Figure 3D; this demonstrates that TMZ
and TRAIL responsiveness can be predicted with high
accuracy (73% and 82% correct predictions, respectively).
In situations where multiple treatment options are
available, treatment decision tools are required to assist
in pre-selecting the optimal treatment option. An optimal
treatment in our case (TMZ vs. TRAIL) was defined as
the treatment that induces higher amounts of cell death
for a given cell line. If both drugs cause similar amounts
of cell death, either treatment suggestion was considered
acceptable. Predictions were considered to have failed when
the model recommended the treatment option with a lower
effect on cell viability than the alternative treatment option.
The performance of the model as a treatment decision tool
is shown in Figure 3E. Treatment recommendations for the
11 cell lines were correct in 82% (9/11) of cases. These
proof-of-concept results demonstrate that our modeling
approach has the potential to identify best treatment options
for individual cell lines with high accuracy.

Capability to predict synergistic responses to
TMZ and TRAIL
It has previously been reported that combination
therapy with TMZ/genotoxic agents and TRAIL may
significantly enhance the responsiveness of highly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61301

Oncotarget

Accurate prediction of TRAIL sensitization by
Bcl-2/Bcl-xL antagonist ABT-737

anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 protein family,
by binding to a hydrophobic groove of these proteins,
thereby displacing bound activator BH3-only proteins and
enabling the activation of pro-apoptotic Bax and Bak [57].
To generate predictions on which cell lines could
be sensitized to TMZ or TRAIL by ABT-737, we first
determined how the position of such cell lines in the PC
space would change upon elimination of Bcl-2 and BclxL. This repositioning was determined from the PCA
results and the cell lines’ protein profiles. The vector for
the movement direction (Figure 5A) was determined by
inverting and combining the coefficients of the FG for the

The above analyses demonstrated that it is possible
to predict from baseline protein expression profiles
whether individual cell lines will respond to TMZ or
TRAIL monotherapy. Since many of the GBM cell lines
were resistant to TMZ or TRAIL or only responded poorly,
we next investigated if our systems modeling approach
could be used to predict whether poorly responsive cell
lines could be sensitized to treatment by ABT-737. ABT737 specifically antagonizes Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, the major

Figure 4: Predicting the synergy of TRAIL and TMZ combined therapy. A. Cell survival following TMZ and TRAIL combined
therapy. Cells were treated with TMZ (150 µM) and TRAIL (100 ng/ml) for 96 h and MTT assays were performed to assess cell viability.
Data show cell survival relative to control values of 100% (mean ± SEM from n = 3 independent experiments). B. Cell lines in the 3D space
were separated according to their Combination Index (CI) Value and color coded according to their response synergies to TMZ and TRAIL
combined treatment. Visual inspection indicates the response regions are spatially separated. C. 2D projections of the PC spaces calculated
from combinations of 10 cell lines are shown for TMZ/TRAIL combined treatments. Circle sizes decrease with distance from the viewer,
thereby providing information on the third PC dimension. Open circles represent the test cell lines, which were placed into the PC spaces
according to their CI Value. Note that the U251 cell line had to be grouped with the low responding cell lines in this analysis since it was
alone in its response group. D. Performance scores for correctly predicting synergistic responses to TMZ/TRAIL combination therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61302

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Prediction and experimental validation of GBM cell line sensitization to TRAIL or TMZ treatment by ABT-737.

A. A movement vector (red) was calculated by combining the weightings for the (Bcl-2+Bcl-xL+Mcl-1) functional group in the first 3 PCs. (i) and
(ii) provide different perspectives on the vectors, compatible with 3D PC spaces for TMZ or TRAIL responsiveness. B. 3D PC spaces for TMZ and
TRAIL responsiveness with movement vectors applied to test cell lines. The length of the movement vectors was calculated from the respective
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL content of the cell lines. Movement of treatment resistant cell lines towards regions populated by cell lines with higher treatment
responsiveness predicts sensitization by the Bcl-2/Bcl-xL antagonist ABT-737. C, D, E. Experimental validation of predictions. Cell viability was
measured for single and combination treatments. (C) Cells were treated with TMZ (150 µM) ± ABT-737 (1 µM) for 48 h. (D) Cells were treated
with TRAIL (100 ng/ml) ± ABT-737 (1 µM) for 48 h. Data show cell viability (mean ± SEM from n = 3 independent experiments) in relation to
untreated controls (100%). One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni comparisons was performed for statistical analysis. **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. ns = not
significant. (E) Western blot analysis to confirm the successful knockdown of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. MZ18 and MZ304 cells were transfected with
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL esiRNA. F. siRNA depletion of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL strongly sensitizes MZ18 but not MZ304 cells to TRAIL. Data show the number
of PI+ cells (mean ± S.D. from triplicate samples) following treatment with TRAIL (100 ng/ml). Experiments were repeated with similar results.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61303

Oncotarget

a predictive or prognostic biomarker for GBM [59].
Instead, due to the complexity of apoptosis signaling,
it seems rational that any potential insight gained from
this cell death pathway should require analysis of all the
key players involved. This, coupled with knowledge of
how these players interact, has the potential to provide
us with a much greater overview of a cell’s capability
to undergo apoptosis when confronted with a therapy
that ultimately aims to achieve this mode of cell death.
In this study, we applied this theory to both intrinsic
(TMZ) and extrinsic (TRAIL) apoptosis-inducing
therapies and successfully separated our panel of GBM
cell lines according to their treatment response with
100% and 91% accuracy, respectively (Figure 2G). This
indicates that the complexity of the apoptosis signaling
network as a whole needs to be taken into account for the
implementation of successful predictive and prognostic
strategies in GBM.
The functional groups defined in our study represent
low numbers of proteins logically inter-related according
to their biological interplay. This approach towards
systems modeling is notably simplistic when compared
to alternative modeling strategies, such as deterministic
mathematical models that build on the use of differential
equations [60]. The modeling strategy chosen here
has the distinct advantage of being more versatile and
easy to implement, amend and extend going forward.
For example, to build on our proof-of-concept study
with subsequent translational studies, we could include
additional independent variables that pertain, for example,
to the sub-type of GBM, thereby gaining knowledge of
the driver mutations and their effect on cell death/survival
signals. Age, Karnofsky performance score, extent of
surgical resection and other clinicopathological factors
influencing prognosis could also be included [61].
Importantly, once our cell lines were distributed
in the PC space according to their protein expression
profiles, we found little evidence of cell line overlap or
clustering, indicative of the widespread heterogeneity
found between the FGs of each cell line. This mirrors the
extensive molecular heterogeneity found between GBM
patients [15, 16] and backs the theory that a ‘one-sizefits-all’ approach to treating this disease, particularly with
an apoptosis-targeted therapy, may not be valid [62].
Instead, in line with advocates of personalized medicine,
it is conceivable that patients could be treated based on
their unique set of molecular alterations in, or expression
of, apoptosis regulators. For this, treatment decision tools
such as ours will need to be developed and clinically
validated in the future to assist in the pre-selection and
stratification of patients for optimal therapies.
The prediction accuracy of our model was 73%
and 82% for TMZ and TRAIL treatments, respectively.
The higher performance score for TRAIL was likely
attributable to the fact that we included all critical
TRAIL signaling components in our model. Furthermore,

anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins (Figure 2B); the distance
moved depended on the amount of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
that contributed to the (Bcl-2+Bcl-xL+Mcl-1) FG value
in the respective cell lines (high amounts of Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL caused a more pronounced displacement). The
resulting repositioning vectors were then applied to four
representative cell lines that poorly responded to TMZ or
TRAIL (MZ18, MZ294, MZ304, MZ327 cell lines and
MZ18, U87, MZ304, MZ294 cell lines, respectively).
For TMZ + ABT737 treatments, the movement vectors
indicated that none of the cell lines would reposition closer
to responding cell lines (Figure 5B), suggesting that ABT737 co-treatment would not sensitize these glioma cells to
TMZ. For TRAIL + ABT737 treatments, the movement
vectors indicated that MZ18 and U87, but not MZ294 and
MZ304, cell lines would reposition closer to responding
cell lines and thus be sensitized to TRAIL (Figure 5B).
These predictions were then validated experimentally.
The selected cell lines were treated with either TMZ or
TRAIL in the presence and absence of ABT-737 (1 µM)
for 48 h. Cell viability measurements demonstrated that
ABT-737 selectively sensitized MZ18 and U87 cells to
TRAIL treatment, whereas ABT-737 did not sensitize any
of the other cell lines to TMZ or TRAIL (Figure 5C, 5D).
ABT-737 did not reduce cell viability on its own. These
findings demonstrate that all predictions regarding ABT737-based sensitization could be validated (8/8), with our
approach able to identify the subset of GBM cell lines
that could be successfully sensitized to TRAIL by ABT737 co-treatment. To further validate these predictions, we
used siRNA to knockdown Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL in MZ18 and
MZ304 cells. As expected, our findings demonstrate that
successful knockdown of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL is sufficient
to strongly sensitize MZ18 cells to TRAIL monotherapy.
Our findings also demonstrate that, as predicted, Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL knockdown failed to notably raise the sensitivity of
MZ304 cells to TRAIL monotherapy (<20% cell death).
(Figure 5E, 5F). Overall, these findings demonstrate that
the sensitizing effect of pharmacologically neutralizing
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members or by siRNA-based
depletion can be accurately predicted by our approach.

DISCUSSION
Efficient induction of cell death is the aim of many
anti-cancer therapies; thus, it follows that a cellular
defect in cell death signaling pathways like apoptosis
underlies one way in which these therapies can fail
[32]. In apoptosis, death decisions are tightly controlled
through multi-factorial and non-linear interplay of
numerous regulatory proteins [58]; for this reason, indepth molecular analysis of any single protein, whether
it be death-inducing or survival-promoting, is unlikely
to yield an accurate prediction of drug responsiveness.
Indeed, it is worth noting that no individual cell
death regulating protein has so far been identified as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61304

Oncotarget

TRAIL-induced apoptosis is capable of proceeding
independently of protein neo-synthesis, which suggests
that baseline expression values for TRAIL signaling
proteins is sufficient to predict the capacity of a cell to
undergo TRAIL-induced apoptosis. The one obvious
omission to the model, which may resolve any prediction
error, is quantitative input for the TRAIL decoy receptors
(DcR1 and DcR2). However, the level of decoy receptor
expression in glioma cells is reportedly very low and
therefore unlikely to account for TRAIL resistance [63]. Of
course, we can’t exclude the possibility that other cellular
events could be influencing TRAIL susceptibility, such
as survival signaling [64] and induction of cytoprotective
autophagy [65, 66]. For example, it is now known that
in some cellular contexts TRAIL can engage NFkB, PKB/
Akt and MAPKs signaling pathways, thereby contributing
to cancer cell proliferation and migration as well as
resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis [67]. Improving
the predictive capacity for TMZ from baseline protein
expression profiles may prove to be more difficult given
that apoptosis occurs as a consequence of DNA damage
and requires transcriptional and translational responses
[4]. However, in this regard, future model extensions
could take into account additional upstream events, such
as DNA repair activity and p53 status as a main driver of
transcriptional BH3-only protein induction [68, 69].
Cell line responsiveness to TMZ and TRAIL
varied substantially, with individual cell lines frequently
responding differently to TMZ and TRAIL monotherapy.
This gave us the opportunity to assess whether our model
could be exploited as a treatment decision tool. The
prediction accuracy of our model was 82%, with treatment
recommendations correct 9 times out of 11. However, it
should be noted that few cell lines responded well to either
treatment, highlighting once again the profound resistance
of glioma cells to apoptotic stimuli and the need for more
effective and rational combination therapies. In recent
years, there has been an abundance of studies reporting
on mechanisms to overcome apoptosis resistance in
GBM for both established and novel therapies [24–32].
For the purpose of this study, we first focused on TMZ
and TRAIL combination therapy, which in theory has
the propensity to activate both the intrinsic and extrinsic
apoptotic pathways, thereby enhancing both the likelihood
of apoptosis induction as well as the strength of the
apoptotic signal. In this case, our model only predicted
the responsiveness of cell lines to TMZ+TRAIL with 55%
accuracy (Supplementary Figure S2D). This indicates
that other factors need to be taken into account to more
accurately predict TMZ+TRAIL responsiveness. Such
factors may include additional molecular information,
such as genetic alterations, resulting in the inactivation
of apoptosis proteins or that may affect death/survival
signals. Similarly, additional pathway cross-talk and/or
the potentiation of signaling processes may need to be
taken into account. For example, to address the synergistic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

manner in which TMZ and TRAIL come together to
enhance apoptosis and in an attempt to determine whether
knowledge of this synergy improves the predictive power
of the model in co-treatment scenarios, we calculated the
CI Value of each cell line [57]; this in turn allowed us
to predict with 100% accuracy the response synergies of
individual cells lines to TMZ+TRAIL (Figure 4C, 4D).
Strikingly, we were also able to predict cell line
sensitivity to TMZ and TRAIL upon their co-treatment
with ABT-737 with 100% accuracy, highlighting that the
consequences of a targeted intervention are captured by
our approach; this finding was further validated by siRNA
depletion of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. In light of the recent FDA
approval of the first Bcl-2 inhibitor, Venetoclax (ABT199), for patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
with the 17p deletion, as well as the encouraging phase
I-III clinical trials in development for Venetoclax as a
monotherapy and/or combination therapy for various
types of cancer [70], our capability to accurately predict
the treatment outcome of a targeted intervention within
the apoptosis signaling cascade is a particularly pertinent
finding. Interestingly, ABT-737 failed to sensitize any
GBM cell line to TMZ therapy, whilst in contrast MZ18
and U87 cells were sensitized to TRAIL. On the one hand,
this may suggest that the expression levels of Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL are irrelevant to TMZ resistance, at least within the
expression ranges observed in our cell line panel, but on
the other hand it also highlights the potential superiority of
TRAIL-based therapies. TRAIL has long been perceived
as a potential attractive chemotherapeutic agent, since
it can kill cancer cells without conferring significant
toxicity to normal cells [21], however, to date, no TRAILbased therapy has demonstrated both potency and lack of
systemic toxicity in any clinical trial [17, 22, 23]. Besides
the limitations of previous TRAIL-based therapeutics,
that are now being addressed in the design of superior 2nd
generation receptor ligands [71, 72], it is our conjecture
that the lack of patient pre-selection in these trials may
have contributed to their disappointing outcomes.
With the era of personalized medicine looming,
our approach, if validated translationally in subsequent
studies, could help to stratify patients for TRAIL monoor combination therapies. Such translational studies would
initially require use of large-scale quantitative protein
data from fresh or archived GBM tissue as well as the
identification of high quality antibodies for the use of high
through-put screening methods, like reverse phase protein
or tissue micro arrays. For a clinical setting, our model
could be refined to focus on cancer stem cell populations,
believed to be the tumor initiating cells that drive the
growth, progression and invasion of GBMs as well as
their post-treatment recurrence [73–75]. In this regard,
quantitative protein analysis of this highly tumorigenic
sub-population of cells could provide us with crucial
insight into whether tumor cells not surgically removed
will respond to treatment.
61305

Oncotarget

(Cat# sc-509, Santa Cruz); mouse monoclonal Bcl-xL
(Cat# sc-8392); rabbit polyclonal Bid (Cat# 2002, Cell
Signaling); rabbit monoclonal Bim (Cat# 2933, Cell
Signaling); rabbit polyclonal caspase-3 (Cat# 9662,
Cell Signaling); mouse monoclonal caspase-8 (Cat#
ALX-804-242, Enzo Life Sciences); rabbit polyclonal
caspase-9 (Cat# 9502, Cell Signaling); mouse monoclonal
cFLIP (Cat# ALX-804-428, Enzo Life Sciences); mouse
monoclonal FADD (Cat# 610399, BD Biosciences); mouse
monoclonal Mcl-1 (Cat# 559027, BD Biosciences); mouse
monoclonal Noxa (Cat# 13654, Abcam); rabbit polyclonal
PUMA (Cat# 3041, ProSci Incorporated); mouse
monoclonal SMAC/DIABLO (Cat# 2954, Cell Signaling);
and mouse monoclonal XIAP (Cat# 610763, BD
Biosciences); and mouse monoclonal β-actin (Cat# A5441,
Sigma-Aldrich). Membranes were then washed three
times with TBST for 5 min prior to being incubated with
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (anti-mouse
or anti-rabbit; Millipore) for 1 h at room temperature.
Protein bands were visualized using the Immobilin western
chemiluminescence HRP substrate (Millipore) and images
were captured using a LAS-4000 imager equipped with
a cooled 12 bit digital CCD camera (Fujifilm UK Ltd,
Bedfordshire, UK). To guarantee accurate quantifications,
special care was taken not to over-expose the protein
bands. Densitometry was carried out on 12-bit raw images
using ImageJ 1.4.10 software (National Institute of Heath,
Bethesda, MD, USA; http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij). For each
protein, the integrated density of the signal was measured,
corrected for background signals and normalized to a
β-actin loading control. Standard curves from HeLa cell
extracts (5-20 mg) were run concurrently with the GBM
cell line extracts to ensure linearity of the signal detection
range. The absolute concentration of most proteins of
interest was previously determined in HeLa cells [77–79],
so that HeLa cell signals could be used to calculate protein
concentrations in GBM cell lines. Quantifications were
carried out on at least 3 independent membranes. Cleavage
of caspase-8 and caspase-3 was also assessed in A172 and
MZ304 cells following TRAIL treatment (100 ng/ml) in
the presence of the caspase inhibitor, zVAD-fmk (150
μM; 30 min pre-treatment) for 24 and 96 h, respectively.
Cleavage of PARP was assessed in MZ294 and U251 cells
following the combined treatment of TRAIL (100 ng/ml)
+ TMZ (150 μM) in the presence or absence of zVAD-fmk
(150 μM; 30 min pre-treatment) for 96 h.

In conclusion, we have described the first preclinical proof-of-principle study that merges quantitative
protein-based analysis of apoptosis signaling networks
with data- and knowledge-driven mathematical systems
modeling to predict treatment responsiveness of GBM cell
lines to various apoptosis-inducing stimuli. Furthermore,
we have shown that a systems biology-based approach
could assist in personalizing treatment decisions in GBM
to optimize cell death induction.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
TMZ was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Ireland
Ltd (Dublin, Ireland). Human recombinant TRAIL was
purchased from Enzo Life Science (UK) Ltd (Exeter,
United Kingdom). ABT-737 was purchased from Biorbyt
(Riverside, United Kingdom), and Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
esiRNAs were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Ireland Ltd
(Dublin, Ireland).

GBM cell lines
GBM cell lines A172, U87, U251, U343 and
U373 are commercially available from the ATCC. GBM
cell lines MZ18, MZ51, MZ294, MZ304, MZ327, and
MZ256 were kindly donated by Professor Donat Kögel of
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt,
Germany and have previously been characterized [76].
The cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf
serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin
and were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C
and 5% CO2.

Western blot analysis
In order to determine the basal expression level of
apoptotic proteins, GBM cell lines were homogenized
in lysis buffer containing 0.5 mmol/l Tris-HCl (pH6.8),
2% SDS (w/v), 10% glycerine (w/v), and protease and
phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma-Aldrich). After
determining the protein concentration of samples using
a BCA protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), 20 μg
samples were boiled in gel-loading buffer and separated
on 10-15% SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes using the iBlot gel transfer
device (Life Technologies, Invitrogen, Paisley, Scotland).
The membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat milk in
TBST for 1 h at room temperature prior to being incubated
with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The following
primary antibodies were used: rabbit polyclonal Apaf-1
(Cat# 16941, Millipore); rabbit polyclonal Bak (Cat# sc832, Santa Cruz); rabbit polyclonal Bax (Cat# 06-499,
Upstate Biotechnology); mouse monoclonal Bcl-2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry
The basal surface expression of DR4 and DR5
were assessed using a BD LSR II flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences). Briefly, 1 x 105 cells were seeded into
6 well plates and allowed to adhere overnight. Cells
were then harvested with trypsin-EDTA and pelleted by
centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. Following
incubation with a blocking buffer (0.5% BSA) on ice for
61306

Oncotarget

20 min, cells were incubated with a mouse monoclonal
antibody for DR4 (Cat# ab13890, Abcam; 1:100 dilution)
or DR5 (Cat# ALX-804-914-0100, Enzo life sciences;
1:100 dilution) for 30 min, pelleted and washed x 3 with
PBS, and then incubated with a secondary anti-mouse
FITC-conjugated antibody (Life Technologies, Invitrogen,
Paisley, Scotland; 1:200 dilution) for 30 min in the dark.
Controls were stained with secondary antibody only.
FITC was excited at 488 nm and fluorescence emission
was collected in the FL1 channel through a 520 nm bandpass filter. A total of 1 x 104 gated cells were acquired
for each cell line. The relative expression of DR4 and
DR5 was determined by comparison of specific staining
intensities compared to individual cell line negative
controls. For cell death measurements, flow cytometry was
used to assess the number of AnnexinV+ cells following
treatment with TRAIL (100 ng/ml) or TRAIL+TMZ (150
μM) in the presence or absence of zVAD-fmk (150 μM;
30 min pre-treatment) for 96 h as well as the number
of PI+ cells following transfection with Bcl-2/Bcl-xL
siRNA and treatment with TRAIL (100 ng/ml) for 48 h.
Briefly, cells were seeded into 6-well plates and allowed
to adhere overnight. Following appropriate treatment
conditions, cells were pelleted and incubated in 100μl
of binding buffer (10 nM HEPES, 135 nM NaCl, 5 mM
CaCl2) containing AnnexinV- FITC conjugate (5 μl/ml)
(BioVision, Moutain View, CA, USA) for 10 min on ice
in the dark or in DMEM containing PI (1.33 μg/ml) for 15
min at 37°C. FITC was excited at 488 nm and fluorescence
emission was collected in the FL1 channel through a
520 nm band-pass filter. PI was excited at 561 nm and
fluorescence emission was collected through a 605/40 nm
band-pass filter and a 570 nm long pass filter. A total of
1 x 104 gated cells were acquired for each cell line.

“maximum effect” (Emax) conditions and accordingly
were treated with TMZ (150 µM) or TRAIL (100 ng/
ml) for 96 h. To confirm cell lines responsiveness to
TRAIL and TMZ combined therapy, cells were treated
with TRAIL (100 ng/ml) and TMZ (150 µM) for 96 h.
To substantiate the sensitization of cell lines to TRAIL or
TMZ with ABT-737, cells were either treated with TRAIL
(100 ng/ml) in the presence or absence of ABT-737 (1 µM)
for 48 h or with TMZ (150 µM) in the presence or absence
of ABT-737 (1 µM) for 48 h. Following treatment, cells
were incubated with thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide
(MTT; 5mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich Ireland Ltd) for 4 h at
37°C, after which the medium was aspirated and replaced
with DMSO (200 µl). The absorbance of each sample was
measured at 560 nm using a microplate reader (GENios,
Tecan, Mannedorf, Switzerland). MTT is a yellow
tetrazole that is converted to dark blue/purple formazan
by mitochondrial dehydrogenase of living cells. Thus,
the absorbance value for each sample was considered
proportional to the number of viable cells.

Hoechst staining
MZ294 and U251 cells were stained with Hoechst
33258 (1 μg/ml) for 20 min. Changes in nuclear
morphology were detected by epifluorescence microscopy
(Nikon Eclipse TE300). Normal bright field images were
taken to examine morphological changes, such as cell
shrinkage and membrane blebbing.

Caspase-3 substrate cleavage
DEVDase (Caspase-3-like) activity was determined
fluorometrically using carbobenzoxy-Asp-Glu-ValAsp-7-amino-4-methyl-coumarin (DEVD-AMC) as
substrate. Cleavage of DEVD-AMC to liberate free
AMC was monitored by measuring fluorescence after 1
and 2 h intervals. Protein content was determined using
Pierce Coomassie Plus Protein assay reagent (Perbio,
Northumberland, UK). Caspase activity is expressed as a
change in fluorescent units per hour and per microgram
protein.

Cell transfection
To downregulate Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL protein
expression, we used endoribonuclease-prepared small
interfering RNAs (esiRNAs), which are comprised of a
heterogeneous mixture of siRNAs that all target the same
mRNA sequence (Cat# EHU135281 and EHU087041,
Sigma-Aldrich). Briefly, MZ18 and MZ304 cells were
transfected with 1 μg of Bcl-2 esiRNA and 1 μg of BclxL esiRNA for 4 h using LipofectamineTM 2000 in
antibiotic-free Opti-MEM medium (Life Technologies,
Invitrogen, Paisley, Scotland). Following this incubation
period, the transfection mixture was replaced with fresh
DMEM and the cells were allowed to recover for 48 h,
after which they were used for experiments.

Statistical analysis
Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA with post hoc
Bonferroni test were performed to identify statistically
significant differences between treatment groups. P-values
are indicated in the figure panels and legends.

Cell viability measurements

Data processing and analysis for knowledge- and
data-driven systems modeling

GBM cell lines were seeded into 96-well plates
(2000 cells/well) and allowed to adhere overnight. To
validate cell line responsiveness to TMZ and TRAIL
monotherapy, cells were treated at clinically-informed

All data processing and analysis was performed
using a programming code developed for MATLAB
2007b (The Mathworks, UK), equipped with the statistics
toolbox; a detailed description of the procedures has

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61307

Oncotarget

previously been published [37]. In brief, following the
integration of protein expression data into functional
groups, a PCA was performed [38, 39]. PCs with
eigenvalues above 1 were retained, according to the
Kaiser criterion [80, 81]. Scatter plots were generated
from the first three PCs to visualize the data. LDA [82]
was employed to determine the accuracy of response
class separations in the PC space. LOOCV was applied
to iteratively test the prediction capacity of the model
for the entire cell line ensemble. LDA was applied after
each iteration to determine if the test cell lines positioned
in the PC space region that corresponded to its drug
responsiveness. To predict sensitization effects of ABT737 in co-treatment scenarios, the protein values for the
target proteins, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, were set to zero and the
re-positioning of cell lines of choice in the PC space was
investigated. Re-positioning towards PC space regions
of higher responsiveness were interpreted as a prediction
for successful sensitization. A detailed description for this
procedure is available in [37].

Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. The New England journal of medicine.
2005; 352:987-996.
2.	 Mrugala MM and Chamberlain MC. Mechanisms of
disease: temozolomide and glioblastoma–look to the future.
Nature clinical practice Oncology. 2008; 5:476-486.
3.	 Mirimanoff RO, Gorlia T, Mason W, Van den Bent MJ,
Kortmann RD, Fisher B, Reni M, Brandes AA, Curschmann
J, Villa S, Cairncross G, Allgeier A, Lacombe D, et al.
Radiotherapy and temozolomide for newly diagnosed
glioblastoma: recursive partitioning analysis of the EORTC
26981/22981-NCIC CE3 phase III randomized trial. Journal
of clinical oncology. 2006; 24:2563-2569.
4.	 Quiros S, Roos WP and Kaina B. Processing of
O6-methylguanine into DNA double-strand breaks requires
two rounds of replication whereas apoptosis is also induced
in subsequent cell cycles. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:168-178.
5.	 Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de Tribolet
N, Weller M, Kros JM, Hainfellner JA, Mason W, Mariani
L, Bromberg JE, Hau P, Mirimanoff RO, et al. MGMT gene
silencing and benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma.
The New England journal of medicine. 2005; 352:997-1003.

Abbreviations
temozolomide, TMZ; glioblastoma, GBM; tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, TRAIL;
death receptor 4/5, DR4/5; inhibitor of apoptosis protein,
IAP; functional groups, FG; fas-associated death domain,
FADD; death-inducing signaling complex, DISC; death
effector domain, DED; mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilisation, MOMP; second mitochondria-derived
activator of caspases, SMAC; apoptotic protease activating
factor 1, Apaf-1; principle component analysis, PCA;
linear discriminant analysis, LDA; leave-one-out cross
validation, LOOCV; epidermal growth factor receptor,
EGFR; platelet-derived growth factor receptor, PDGFR;
small interfering RNA, siRNA.

6.	 Gilbert MR, Wang M, Aldape KD, Stupp R, Hegi ME,
Jaeckle KA, Armstrong TS, Wefel JS, Won M, Blumenthal
DT, Mahajan A, Schultz CJ, Erridge S, et al. Dose-dense
temozolomide for newly diagnosed glioblastoma: a
randomized phase III clinical trial. Journal of clinical
oncology. 2013; 31:4085-4091.
7.	 Felsberg J, Thon N, Eigenbrod S, Hentschel B, Sabel MC,
Westphal M, Schackert G, Kreth FW, Pietsch T, Loffler
M, Weller M, Reifenberger G, Tonn JC, et al. Promoter
methylation and expression of MGMT and the DNA
mismatch repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 in
paired primary and recurrent glioblastomas. International
journal of cancer. 2011; 129:659-670.
8.	 Malmstrom A, Gronberg BH, Marosi C, Stupp R, Frappaz
D, Schultz H, Abacioglu U, Tavelin B, Lhermitte B, Hegi
ME, Rosell J, Henriksson R and Nordic Clinical Brain
Tumour Study G. Temozolomide versus standard 6-week
radiotherapy versus hypofractionated radiotherapy in
patients older than 60 years with glioblastoma: the Nordic
randomised, phase 3 trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2012;
13:916-926.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND Funding
The authors kindly acknowledge support for their
work by grants from the Irish Health Research Board
(HRA_POR/2012/88 and HRA_POR/2013/245), the RCSI
Research Committee (GR 08-0155) and the European
Union (FP7 IAPP SYS-MEL; FP7 APO-DECIDE;
Horizon 2020 MSC ETN MEL-PLEX, Horizon 2020
MSC ETN TRAIN-ERS).

9.	 Wick W, Platten M, Meisner C, Felsberg J, Tabatabai G,
Simon M, Nikkhah G, Papsdorf K, Steinbach JP, Sabel
M, Combs SE, Vesper J, Braun C, et al. Temozolomide
chemotherapy alone versus radiotherapy alone for malignant
astrocytoma in the elderly: the NOA-08 randomised, phase
3 trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2012; 13:707-715.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

10.	 Grossman SA, Ye X, Chamberlain M, Mikkelsen T,
Batchelor T, Desideri S, Piantadosi S, Fisher J and Fine HA.
Talampanel with standard radiation and temozolomide in
patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma: a multicenter
phase II trial. Journal of clinical oncology. 2009;
27:4155-4161.

REFERENCES
1.	 Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher
B, Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61308

Oncotarget

11.	 Peereboom DM, Shepard DR, Ahluwalia MS, Brewer CJ,
Agarwal N, Stevens GH, Suh JH, Toms SA, Vogelbaum
MA, Weil RJ, Elson P and Barnett GH. Phase II trial of
erlotinib with temozolomide and radiation in patients with
newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Journal of
neuro-oncology. 2010; 98:93-99.

24.	 Murphy AC, Weyhenmeyer B, Noonan J, Kilbride SM,
Schimansky S, Loh KP, Kogel D, Letai AG, Prehn JH and
Murphy BM. Modulation of Mcl-1 sensitizes glioblastoma
to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Apoptosis. 2014; 19:629-642.
25.	 van Roosmalen IA, Reis CR, Setroikromo R, Yuvaraj S,
Joseph JV, Tepper PG, Kruyt FA and Quax WJ. The ER
stress inducer DMC enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
glioblastoma. SpringerPlus. 2014; 3:495.

12.	 Weiler M, Hartmann C, Wiewrodt D, Herrlinger U, Gorlia
T, Bahr O, Meyermann R, Bamberg M, Tatagiba M, von
Deimling A, Weller M and Wick W. Chemoradiotherapy
of newly diagnosed glioblastoma with intensified
temozolomide. International journal of radiation oncology,
biology, physics. 2010; 77:670-676.

26.	 Bangert A, Cristofanon S, Eckhardt I, Abhari BA, Kolodziej
S, Hacker S, Vellanki SH, Lausen J, Debatin KM and Fulda
S. Histone deacetylase inhibitors sensitize glioblastoma
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by c-myc-mediated
downregulation of cFLIP. Oncogene. 2012; 31:4677-4688.

13.	 Lai A, Tran A, Nghiemphu PL, Pope WB, Solis OE, Selch
M, Filka E, Yong WH, Mischel PS, Liau LM, Phuphanich
S, Black K, Peak S, et al. Phase II study of bevacizumab
plus temozolomide during and after radiation therapy for
patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme.
Journal of clinical oncology. 2011; 29:142-148.

27.	 Cristofanon S and Fulda S. ABT-737 promotes tBid
mitochondrial accumulation to enhance TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in glioblastoma cells. Cell death & disease. 2012;
3:e432.
28.	 Fulda S, Wick W, Weller M and Debatin KM. Smac agonists
sensitize for Apo2L/TRAIL- or anticancer drug-induced
apoptosis and induce regression of malignant glioma in
vivo. Nature medicine. 2002; 8:808-815.

14.	 Wick W, Weller M, van den Bent M, Sanson M, Weiler M,
von Deimling A, Plass C, Hegi M, Platten M and Reifenberger
G. MGMT testing--the challenges for biomarker-based glioma
treatment. Nature reviews Neurology. 2014; 10:372-385.

29.	 Kim SM, Woo JS, Jeong CH, Ryu CH, Jang JD and Jeun
SS. Potential application of temozolomide in mesenchymal
stem cell-based TRAIL gene therapy against malignant
glioma. Stem cells translational medicine. 2014; 3:172-182.

15.	 Inda MM, Bonavia R and Seoane J. Glioblastoma
multiforme: a look inside its heterogeneous nature. Cancers.
2014; 6:226-239.
16.	 Eder K and Kalman B. Molecular heterogeneity of
glioblastoma and its clinical relevance. POR. 2014;
20:777-787.

30.	 Hingtgen S, Ren X, Terwilliger E, Classon M, Weissleder
R and Shah K. Targeting multiple pathways in gliomas with
stem cell and viral delivered S-TRAIL and Temozolomide.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2008; 7:3575-3585.

17.	 Lemke J, von Karstedt S, Zinngrebe J and Walczak H.
Getting TRAIL back on track for cancer therapy. Cell death
and differentiation. 2014; 21:1350-1364.

31.	 Saito R, Bringas JR, Panner A, Tamas M, Pieper RO, Berger
MS and Bankiewicz KS. Convection-enhanced delivery of
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
with systemic administration of temozolomide prolongs
survival in an intracranial glioblastoma xenograft model.
Cancer research. 2004; 64:6858-6862.

18.	 Stuckey DW and Shah K. TRAIL on trial: preclinical
advances in cancer therapy. Trends in molecular medicine.
2013; 19:685-694.
19.	 Nagpal J, Jamoona A, Gulati ND, Mohan A, Braun A,
Murali R and Jhanwar-Uniyal M. Revisiting the role of
p53 in primary and secondary glioblastomas. Anticancer
research. 2006; 26:4633-4639.

32.	 Krakstad C and Chekenya M. Survival signalling and
apoptosis resistance in glioblastomas: opportunities for
targeted therapeutics. Molecular cancer. 2010; 9:135.

20.	 Chiang MF, Chou PY, Wang WJ, Sze CI and Chang NS. Tumor
Suppressor WWOX and p53 Alterations and Drug Resistance
in Glioblastomas. Frontiers in oncology. 2013; 3:43.

33.	 Billard C. BH3 mimetics: status of the field and new
developments. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2013;
12:1691-1700.

21.	 Walczak H, Miller RE, Ariail K, Gliniak B, Griffith TS,
Kubin M, Chin W, Jones J, Woodward A, Le T, Smith C,
Smolak P, Goodwin RG, et al. Tumoricidal activity of tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand in vivo.
Nature medicine. 1999; 5:157-163.

34.	 Bai L, Smith DC and Wang S. Small-molecule SMAC
mimetics as new cancer therapeutics. Pharmacology &
therapeutics. 2014; 144:82-95.
35.	 Tagscherer KE, Fassl A, Campos B, Farhadi M, Kraemer A,
Bock BC, Macher-Goeppinger S, Radlwimmer B, Wiestler
OD, Herold-Mende C and Roth W. Apoptosis-based
treatment of glioblastomas with ABT-737, a novel small
molecule inhibitor of Bcl-2 family proteins. Oncogene.
2008; 27:6646-6656.

22.	 de Miguel D, Lemke J, Anel A, Walczak H and MartinezLostao L. Onto better TRAILs for cancer treatment. Cell
death and differentiation. 2016; 23:733-747.
23.	 Dimberg LY, Anderson CK, Camidge R, Behbakht K,
Thorburn A and Ford HL. On the TRAIL to successful
cancer therapy? Predicting and counteracting resistance
against TRAIL-based therapeutics. Oncogene. 2013;
32:1341-1350.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Yang MC, Loh JK, Li YY, Huang WS, Chou CH, Cheng JT,
Wang YT, Lieu AS, Howng SL, Hong YR and Chou AK.
Bcl2L12 with a BH3-like domain in regulating apoptosis
and TMZ-induced autophagy: a prospective combination
61309

Oncotarget

phosphorylation of the BH3-only proteins of the BCL-2
family in glioblastoma multiforme. Cell death & disease.
2012; 3:e421.

of ABT-737 and TMZ for treating glioma. International
journal of oncology. 2015; 46:1304-1316.
37.	 Passante E, Wurstle ML, Hellwig CT, Leverkus M
and Rehm M. Systems analysis of apoptosis protein
expression allows the case-specific prediction of cell
death responsiveness of melanoma cells. Cell death and
differentiation. 2013; 20:1521-1531.

52.	 Kouri FM, Jensen SA and Stegh AH. The role of Bcl-2
family proteins in therapy responses of malignant astrocytic
gliomas: Bcl2L12 and beyond. TheScientificWorldJournal.
2012; 2012:838916.

38.	 H H. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into
principal components. J Educ Psych. 1933; 24:417.

53.	 Taylor RC, Cullen SP and Martin SJ. Apoptosis: controlled
demolition at the cellular level. Nature reviews Molecular
cell biology. 2008; 9:231-241.

39.	 Pearson K. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of
points in space. Philosophical Magazine. 1901; 2:599-572.

54.	 Chen L, Willis SN, Wei A, Smith BJ, Fletcher JI, Hinds
MG, Colman PM, Day CL, Adams JM and Huang DC.
Differential targeting of prosurvival Bcl-2 proteins by
their BH3-only ligands allows complementary apoptotic
function. Molecular cell. 2005; 17:393-403.

40.	 Kischkel FC, Hellbardt S, Behrmann I, Germer M, Pawlita
M, Krammer PH and Peter ME. Cytotoxicity-dependent
APO-1 (Fas/CD95)-associated proteins form a deathinducing signaling complex (DISC) with the receptor. The
EMBO journal. 1995; 14:5579-5588.

55.	 Gelinas C and White E. BH3-only proteins in control:
specificity regulates MCL-1 and BAK-mediated apoptosis.
Genes & development. 2005; 19:1263-1268.

41.	 Parrish AB, Freel CD and Kornbluth S. Cellular
mechanisms controlling caspase activation and function.
Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology. 2013; 5.

56.	 Webb J. (1963). Effect of more than one inhibitor, in
Enzyme and Metabolic inhibitor. Academic Press. (New
York, pp. 66-77, 487-512.

42.	 Luo X, Budihardjo I, Zou H, Slaughter C and Wang X. Bid,
a Bcl2 interacting protein, mediates cytochrome c release
from mitochondria in response to activation of cell surface
death receptors. Cell. 1998; 94:481-490.

57.	 van Delft MF, Wei AH, Mason KD, Vandenberg CJ, Chen L,
Czabotar PE, Willis SN, Scott CL, Day CL, Cory S, Adams
JM, Roberts AW and Huang DC. The BH3 mimetic ABT737 targets selective Bcl-2 proteins and efficiently induces
apoptosis via Bak/Bax if Mcl-1 is neutralized. Cancer cell.
2006; 10:389-399.

43.	 Shamas-Din A, Brahmbhatt H, Leber B and Andrews DW.
BH3-only proteins: Orchestrators of apoptosis. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2011; 1813:508-520.
44.	 Lomonosova E and Chinnadurai G. BH3-only proteins in
apoptosis and beyond: an overview. Oncogene. 2008; 27
Suppl 1:S2-19.

58.	 Zamaraev AV, Kopeina GS, Zhivotovsky B and Lavrik
IN. Cell death controlling complexes and their potential
therapeutic role. CMLS. 2015; 72:505-517.

45.	 Strasser A, Cory S and Adams JM. Deciphering the rules
of programmed cell death to improve therapy of cancer and
other diseases. The EMBO journal. 2011; 30:3667-3683.

59.	 Nicolaidis S. Biomarkers of glioblastoma multiforme.
Metabolism: clinical and experimental. 2015; 64:S22-27.
60.	 Le Novere N. Quantitative and logic modelling of
molecular and gene networks. Nature reviews Genetics.
2015; 16:146-158.

46.	 Rodriguez-Nieto S and Zhivotovsky B. Role of alterations
in the apoptotic machinery in sensitivity of cancer cells
to treatment. Current pharmaceutical design. 2006;
12:4411-4425.

61.	 Fekete B, Werlenius K, Orndal C and Rydenhag B.
Prognostic factors for glioblastoma patients - a clinical
population-based study. Acta neurologica Scandinavica.
2015.

47.	 Lin CJ, Lee CC, Shih YL, Lin CH, Wang SH, Chen
TH and Shih CM. Inhibition of mitochondria- and
endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated autophagy augments
temozolomide-induced apoptosis in glioma cells. PloS one.
2012; 7:e38706.

62.	 ElBanan MG, Amer AM, Zinn PO and Colen RR. Imaging
genomics of Glioblastoma: state of the art bridge between
genomics and neuroradiology. Neuroimaging clinics of
North America. 2015; 25:141-153.

48.	 Jakubowicz-Gil J, Langner E, Badziul D, Wertel I and
Rzeski W. Apoptosis induction in human glioblastoma
multiforme T98G cells upon temozolomide and quercetin
treatment. Tumour biology. 2013; 34:2367-2378.

63.	 Knight MJ, Riffkin CD, Muscat AM, Ashley DM and
Hawkins CJ. Analysis of FasL and TRAIL induced
apoptosis pathways in glioma cells. Oncogene. 2001;
20:5789-5798.

49.	 Acehan D, Jiang X, Morgan DG, Heuser JE, Wang X and
Akey CW. Three-dimensional structure of the apoptosome:
implications for assembly, procaspase-9 binding, and
activation. Molecular cell. 2002; 9:423-432.

64.	 Opel D, Westhoff MA, Bender A, Braun V, Debatin KM and
Fulda S. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibition broadly
sensitizes glioblastoma cells to death receptor- and druginduced apoptosis. Cancer research. 2008; 68:6271-6280.

50.	 Deng Y, Lin Y and Wu X. TRAIL-induced apoptosis
requires Bax-dependent mitochondrial release of Smac/
DIABLO. Genes & development. 2002; 16:33-45.

65.	 Hou W, Han J, Lu C, Goldstein LA and Rabinowich H.
Enhancement of tumor-TRAIL susceptibility by modulation
of autophagy. Autophagy. 2008; 4:940-943.

51.	 Cartron PF, Loussouarn D, Campone M, Martin SA
and Vallette FM. Prognostic impact of the expression/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61310

Oncotarget

66.	 Han J, Hou W, Goldstein LA, Lu C, Stolz DB, Yin XM
and Rabinowich H. Involvement of protective autophagy in
TRAIL resistance of apoptosis-defective tumor cells. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2008; 283:19665-19677.

75.	 Ortensi B, Setti M, Osti D and Pelicci G. Cancer stem
cell contribution to glioblastoma invasiveness. Stem cell
research & therapy. 2013; 4:18.
76.	 Hetschko H, Voss V, Horn S, Seifert V, Prehn JH and Kogel
D. Pharmacological inhibition of Bcl-2 family members
reactivates TRAIL-induced apoptosis in malignant glioma.
Journal of neuro-oncology. 2008; 86:265-272.

67.	 Fulda S. The dark side of TRAIL signaling. Cell death and
differentiation. 2013; 20:845-846.
68.	 Zhang J, Stevens MF and Bradshaw TD. Temozolomide:
mechanisms of action, repair and resistance. Current
molecular pharmacology. 2012; 5:102-114.

77.	 Rehm M, Huber HJ, Dussmann H and Prehn JH. Systems
analysis of effector caspase activation and its control by
X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein. The EMBO journal.
2006; 25:4338-4349.

69.	 Happo L, Strasser A and Cory S. BH3-only proteins
in apoptosis at a glance. Journal of cell science. 2012;
125:1081-1087.

78.	 Laussmann MA, Passante E, Hellwig CT, Tomiczek B,
Flanagan L, Prehn JH, Huber HJ and Rehm M. Proteasome
inhibition can impair caspase-8 activation upon submaximal
stimulation of apoptotic tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) signaling. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2012; 287:14402-14411.

70.	 Deeks ED. Venetoclax: First Global Approval. Drugs. 2016;
76:979-987.
71.	 Gieffers C, Kluge M, Merz C, Sykora J, Thiemann M, Schaal
R, Fischer C, Branschadel M, Abhari BA, Hohenberger P,
Fulda S, Fricke H and Hill O. APG350 induces superior
clustering of TRAIL receptors and shows therapeutic antitumor
efficacy independent of cross-linking via Fcgamma receptors.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2013; 12:2735-2747.

79.	 Lindner AU, Concannon CG, Boukes GJ, Cannon MD,
Llambi F, Ryan D, Boland K, Kehoe J, McNamara DA,
Murray F, Kay EW, Hector S, Green DR, et al. Systems
analysis of BCL2 protein family interactions establishes
a model to predict responses to chemotherapy. Cancer
research. 2013; 73:519-528.

72.	 Seifert O, Plappert A, Fellermeier S, Siegemund M,
Pfizenmaier K and Kontermann RE. Tetravalent antibodyscTRAIL fusion proteins with improved properties.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2014; 13:101-111.

80.	 HF K. The Application of Electronic Computers to Factor
Analysis. Educational and Psychological Measurement.
1960; 20:141-151.

73.	 Wang J, Ma Y and Cooper MK. Cancer stem cells in
glioma: challenges and opportunities. Translational cancer
research. 2013; 2:429-441.

81.	 RB C. The Scree Test For The Number Of Factors.
Multivariate Behavioral Research. 1966; 1:245-276.

74.	 Lathia JD, Mack SC, Mulkearns-Hubert EE, Valentim CL
and Rich JN. Cancer stem cells in glioblastoma. Genes &
development. 2015; 29:1203-1217.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82.	 RA F. The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic
problems. Annals of human genetics 1936; 7:179-188.

61311

Oncotarget

