Correspondence

Colorectal Carcinomas, KRAS
p.G13D Mutant Allele–Specific
Imbalance, and Anti–Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor Therapy
Woo et al have comprehensively reviewed controversies
surrounding anti–epidermal growth factor receptor (antiEGFR) treatment in metastatic colon cancer, specifically
the unresolved issue of anti-EGFR therapy in patients
with colorectal carcinomas (CRC) harboring KRAS
Gly13Asp (G13D) mutation.1 Even before the report by
De Roock et al on the potential benefit of cetuximab in
CRC with KRAS p.G13D,2 there were contradicting data
on the prognostic significance of this mutation (reviewed
in Hartman et al3). The apparently discrepant clinical and
cell line data may be reconciled by taking into account the
phenomenon of mutant allele–specific imbalance
(MASI).
Introduced by Soh et al, the term “MASI” summarizes a variety of mechanisms that may lead to the predominance of the mutated allele over the wild-type
allele.4 Such an allelic imbalance favoring the mutant allele may result from the deletion of the wild-type allele,
and/or copy number gain of the mutant allele. It was
shown that KRAS MASI is associated with increased ras
guanine triphosphatase activity in cell lines and worse outcome in KRAS-mutated CRC. In a study of 394 patients
with KRAS-mutated CRC, KRAS MASI developed by
chromosome 12 hyperploidy or KRAS amplification,
most frequently in cases with KRAS codon 13 mutations.
In a multivariate analysis, KRAS codon 13 MASI represented an adverse prognostic factor independent of clinical stage and tumor site.3
We would like to suggest for future reports on antiEGFR therapy in KRAS p.G13D-mutated CRC to explicitly control for KRAS MASI. Two scenarios are likely.
First, the presence or absence of KRAS MASI may correlate with response to anti-EGFR treatment. Alternatively, anti-EGFR treatment may have no therapeutic
effect and the outcome differences attributed to antiEGFR therapy in some studies may merely reflect the
unaccounted effect of KRAS MASI. Practically, KRAS
MASI can be estimated from a semiquantitative review
of routine sequencing electropherograms or by more sophisticated methods aimed at detecting KRAS allelic
imbalances, chromosome 12 hyperploidy, or KRAS
amplification.
4366

REFERENCES
1. Woo J, Palmisiano N, Tester W, Leighton JC Jr. Controversies in
antiepidermal growth factor receptor therapy in metastatic colorectal
cancer. Cancer. 2013;119:1941-1950.
2. De Roock W, Jonker DJ, Di Nicolantonio F, et al. Association of
KRAS p.G13D mutation with outcome in patients with
chemotherapy-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer treated with
cetuximab. JAMA. 2010;304:1812-1820.
3. Hartman DJ, Davison JM, Foxwell TJ, Nikiforova MN, Chiosea SI.
Mutant allele-specific imbalance modulates prognostic impact of
KRAS mutations in colorectal adenocarcinoma and is associated with
worse overall survival. Int J Cancer. 2012;131:1810-1817.
4. Soh J, Okumura N, Lockwood WW, et al. Oncogene mutations,
copy number gains and mutant allele specific imbalance (MASI) frequently occur together in tumor cells. PloS One. 2009;4:e7464.

Douglas J. Hartman, MD
Simion I. Chiosea, MD
Department of Pathology
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28371, Published online September 24, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Colorectal Carcinomas,
KRAS p.G13D Mutant Allele–
Specific Imbalance, and
Anti–Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor Therapy
Hartman and Chiosea suggested future investigations on
anti–epidermal growth factor receptor (anti-EGFR) therapy in KRAS Gly13Asp (G13D)-mutated colorectal cancers CRCs), having previously reported that KRAS
mutant allele–specific imbalance (MASI) was more associated with KRAS codon 13–mutated tumors than ones
with codon 12 mutations,1 and was further shown to be
an independent adverse prognostic factor.
It remains unclear whether KRAS codon 13 MASI
can drive aggressive tumor phenotype. The prior study on
MASI and clinical outcomes1 was an observational study
with limited power. It is difficult to prove causality without well-designed randomized prospective studies or preclinical in vivo mouse models. Furthermore, the outcome
of CRC with KRAS G13D in the best supportive care
arm from the NCIC Clinical Trials Group CO.17 trial2
and in the European study 200204083 was not different
from the ones with other types of KRAS mutations. They
may implicate that KRAS G13D-mutated CRCs do not
Cancer

December 15, 2013

