Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Mesenchymal stem cells promote osteosarcoma cell survival and
drug resistance through activation of STAT3
Bing Tu1,2,*, Jing Zhu3,*, Shen Liu2, Lei Wang1, Qiming Fan1, Yongqiang Hao1, Cunyi
Fan2, Ting-Ting Tang1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopedic Implants, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200011, China

2

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai, 200233,
China

3

Department of Integrative Medicine and Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Ting-Ting Tang, email: ttt@sjtu.edu.cn
Keywords: osteosarcoma, mesenchymal stem cells, chemotherapy, STAT3
Received: January 06, 2016     Accepted: June 09, 2016     Published: June 22, 2016

ABSTRACT
Increasing evidence suggests that the tumor microenvironment plays a key role
in the development of drug resistant tumor cells. In this study, we tried to determine
whether the mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in the tumor microenvironment
contribute to the increased chemoresistance of osteosarcoma. We found that exposure
of Saos-2 and U2-OS cells to MSCs conditioned medium (CM) increased the viable cells
in the presence of therapeutic concentrations of doxorubicin or cisplatin. Meanwhile,
the MSC CM-associated pro-proliferative effects were accompanied by reduced
caspase 3/7 activity and Annexin V binding. We confirmed that STAT3 activation by
IL-6 regulates MSCs-induced chemoresistance. Blockade of this signal re-sensitized
drug-resistant Saos-2 cells to drug treatment. Using a osteosarcoma mouse model
with co-injection of MSCs with Saos-2cells, we found that inhibition of STAT3
prolonged the survival time of tumor bearing mice by suppressing tumor growth and
increasing the sensitivity of tumor cells to doxorubicin. Finally, we demonstrated
that increased expression of p-STAT3, multidrug resistance protein (MRP) and
P-glycoprotein (MDR-1) was associated with high chemotherapy resistance in clinical
osteosarcoma samples. Collectively, our findings suggest that MSCs within the tumor
microenvironment may represent a new target to enhance chemotherapeutic efficacy
in osteosarcoma patients.

drug resistant disease, and the question of when
chemotherapy resistance emerges in osteosarcoma is still
unknown [5]. Therefore, understanding the development
of resistance in these patients will be beneficial for a large
group of patients.
Although previous studies have identified various
tumor cell-intrinsic mechanisms of drug resistance,
it has become increasingly clear that the tumor
microenvironment plays a key role in the development
of drug resistance [6, 7]. Consequently, researchers have
demonstrated that stromal cells in the microenvironment
are important for modulating a chemotherapy response
and are often an indicator of poor prognosis [8]. For

INTRODUCTION
Osteosarcoma is the most common primary
malignant tumor in bone and accounts for approximately
5% of all newly diagnosed pediatric cancers [1]. Currently,
patients with osteosarcoma receive approximately 10
weeks of chemotherapy, followed by surgical resection
of the primary tumor [2]. The standard protocol of
care for treating primary and metastatic osteosarcoma
is a three-drug chemotherapy regimen consisting of
cisplatin, doxorubicin and methotrexate [3, 4]. Although
higher survival rates have been achieved with combined
chemotherapy, unfortunately, osteosarcoma is a relatively

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48296

Oncotarget

example, it has been reported that MSCs can support
tissue regeneration in response to therapy [9, 10]. MSCs
are found predominantly in the bone marrow, a common
origin site for osteosarcoma. In the tumor, MSCs are found
to promote the growth, angiogenesis and metastasis of
tumor cells through the release of a spectrum of cytokines
[11, 12].
Increasing evidence supports the idea that
interactions between MSCs and tumor cells plays a critical
role in the initiation and development of carcinomas [13,
14]. However, the majority of reports have focused on
proliferative, angiogenic, and immune-regulation effects
[15, 16]. Our previous studies have identified a proproliferative and metastatic effect of human MSCs on
osteosarcoma cells in the bone marrow microenvironment
[17, 18]. A later study identified mesenchymal stem cellsecreted IL-6 as a critical mediator of this interaction [19].
Based on these observations, we hypothesized that MSCs
may also induce chemotherapy resistance and promote
the failure of current chemotherapies in osteosarcoma
patients. In this study, we investigated the effect of MSCs
on chemotherapy resistance in two osteosarcoma cell
lines, Saos-2 and U2-OS, in vitro and in vivo.

doxorubicin or cisplatin (Figure 2B). Additionally, the
protective effect of MSCs CM on drug-induced tumor
cell apoptosis was confirmed by flow cytometry analysis.
Saos-2 cells cultured in MSCs CM or control medium
containing 1% FBS were exposed to doxorubicin or
cisplatin for 48 h and then stained with Annexin V–FITC
and PI. Our data indicated a significant reduction in the
percentage of apoptotic cells in drug-treated Saos-2 cells
that were exposed to MSCs CM (Figure 2C). Meanwhile,
culturing tumor cells in 1% FBS had no significant effect
on the proliferation and apoptosis (Supplementary Figure
S2A and S2B). U2-OS cells that were exposed to MSCs
CM also showed a significant reduction in apoptosis at
48 h (Figure 2D). Our data demonstrate that MSCs exert
a pro-survival effect on osteosarcoma cells by protecting
them from drug-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, previous
studies have reported that behavior of MSCs are tissue
independent. We then compared the bone marrow-derived
MSCs with umbilical cord derived MSCs. Our results
showed that both MSCs had similar effects on the druginduced apoptosis (Supplementary Figure S3).

STAT3 is essential for MSC-induced
chemoresistance in osteosarcoma cells

RESULTS

Activated STAT3 signaling has been shown to
regulate chemoresistance in various tumors. Our previous
research indicated that STAT3 is a critical mediator
for osteosarcoma proliferation [19]. To determine
whether STAT3 signaling is involved in MSC-induced
osteosarcoma survival, we assessed whether activated
STAT3 levels were increased in response to MSC-CM
treatment. Activation of STAT3 was observed in both
osteosarcoma cell lines 30 minutes after incubation with
MSCs CM (Figure 3A). Treatment of Saos-2 cells with
AG490 (JAK2 inhibitor) inhibited STAT3 activation.
However, the inhibitory effect of AG490 on STAT3 could
not be re-activated by treatment with MSC-CM (Figure
3B). Next, Saos-2 cells that were cultured in MSCs in the
presence or absence of 50 μM AG490 were treated with
20 μg/ml doxorubicin or cisplatin for 48 h. Inhibition of
STAT3 significantly enhanced the drug-induced apoptosis
of the tumor cells (Figure 3C). To obtain drug resistant
osteosarcoma cells, Saos-2 cells were cultured in a low
dose of doxorubicin or cisplatin (1 μg/ml) and passaged
every 3 days. The surviving Saos-2 cells were regarded as
chemoresistant tumor cells. The STAT3 activation levels
in the cells were tested by western blot. We observed an
increase in STAT3 activation levels in both doxorubicinand cisplatin-resistant cells (Figure 3D). Chemoresistance
was confirmed by exposing cells to 20 μg/ml doxorubicin
or cisplatin for 24 h followed by FACS analysis, which
revealed few apoptotic cells. However, the inhibition of
STAT3 via AG490 treatment in the chemoresistant cells led
to a significant increase in the apoptosis rate (Figure 3E).
Finally, the chemoresistant Saos-2 cells were treated with

MSCs protect osteosarcoma cells from druginduced apoptosis
Human MSCs harvested from the bone marrow
were characterized by both surface marker stainings and
functional studies (Supplemental Figure S1A, S1B). We
then investigated whether MSCs also protect osteosarcoma
cells from drug-induced apoptosis. Our study focused
on doxorubicin and cisplatin, which are two of the most
commonly used drugs for osteosarcoma chemotherapy
[20]. Saos-2 and U2-OS osteosarcoma cells were exposed
to different concentrations of chemotherapy drugs in the
presence or absence of MSCs CM containing 1% FBS
for 24 h. Saos-2 cells that were grown in MSCs CM
and treated with 10 or 20 μg/ml doxorubicin or cisplatin
(concentrations ranging from 0 to 100 μg/ml) showed
a significant increase in survival compared with cells
cultured in regular medium (control; Figure 1A). Similarly,
U2-OS cells treated with 10 or 20 μg/ml doxorubicin or
cisplatin displayed significantly greater survival when
cultured in the presence of MSCs CM compared to regular
medium (Figure 1B).
Consistent with the protective effect of MSCs, we
observed a significantly lower level of caspase 3/7 activity
in Saos-2 cells that were cultured in the presence of
MSCs CM, compared to control medium and exposed to
doxorubicin (2.5 to 100 μg/ml) or cisplatin (2.5 to 20 μg/
ml, Figure 2A). U2-OS cells treated with MSCs CM also
displayed significantly lower levels of caspase 3/7 activity
than cells cultured with control media in the presence of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48297

Oncotarget

drugs in the presence of AG490 for 4 days. We observed
that AG490 treatment increased the caspase 3/7 activity in
the chemoresistant tumor cells (Figure 3F). Together, these
results suggest that STAT3 modulates the protective effects
of MSCs on osteosarcoma cells. Moreover, inhibition of
STAT3 may enhance chemotherapeutic sensitivity in cases
of MSCs- or drug-induced resistance.

or Saos-2/MSCs and treated with doxorubicin (10 mg/
kg by weekly intraperitoneal injection (ip)). Only weak
bioluminescence signals were observed in the Saos-2
group, while mice co-injected with MSCs had a stronger
signal at week 4 (Figure 4F, 4G). Compared with the Saos2 OS group, co-injection with MSCs significantly reduced
the survival of the mice (Figure 4H).

MSCs promotes the proliferation and survival of
osteosarcoma in vivo

Inhibition of STAT3 enhances osteosarcoma cell
sensitivity to chemotherapy in vivo

We then asked whether exogenous MSCs promote
the proliferation and survival of tumors in vivo. Using a
osteosarcoma mouse model with co-injection of MSCs
with Saos-2, the bioluminescence imaging revealed that
MSCs significantly enhanced the signal at the tumor site
during the 4-week period (Figure 4A, 4C). Moreover,
the tumor volume of the Saos-2 group that was injected
with MSCs was larger than the control group (Saos-2,
Figure 4B, 4D). In addition, co-injection with MSCs and
Saos-2 cells significantly decreased the survival time of
mice (Figure 4E). To evaluate the effectiveness of MSCs
on chemotherapy, the mice were inoculated with Saos-2

We next asked whether STAT3 signaling
modulates chemotherapy effectiveness in vivo. The OS
and OS+MSCs mice were sacrificed, and the STAT3
activation levels were detected by IHC. We observed
that co-injection of tumor cells with MSCs dramatically
increased the p-STAT3 levels in the tumor (Figure 5A).
Then, mice were injected withSaos-2, Saos-2+MSCs
or drug resistant Saos-2 cells (Saos-2 Res group) and
treated weekly with doxorubicin and 500 μg AG490
(or DMSO in the control) via intraperitoneal injection
for 4 weeks. While a strong signal was observed at the
tumor sites in all three groups, injection with AG490

Figure 1: MSCs promote survival in drug-treated osteosarcoma cells. A. Saos-2 cells (1×104) were cultured in the presence

or absence of MSCs CM containing 1% FBS and treated with doxorubicin (top) or cisplatin (bottom) for 4 days. The number of viable
cells was tested by the CCK-8 assay. The data represent the mean±SD percentage of viable cells for indicated drug concentrations. B. Cell
viability of U2-OS cells (1×104) that were cultured and treated as Saos-2 for 4 days. The data points represent the mean cell number from
3 independent experiments, and the error bars represent SD.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48298

Oncotarget

Figure 2: MSCs protect osteosarcoma cells from drug-induced apoptosis. A. Saos-2 cells (1×104) that were cultured in the

presence or absence of 1% serum MSCs CM and treated with doxorubicin (left) or cisplatin (right) at indicated concentrations for 48 hours
were examined for caspase 3/7 activity. The data represent the mean±SD fold change from Saos-2 cells cultured in DMEM (Control)
in triplicate wells. B. U2-OS cells (1×104) were cultured and treated as Saos-2 were examined for caspase-3/7 activity. C. Saos-2 cells
that were cultured in the presence or absence of 1% serum MSCs CM and treated with doxorubicin or cisplatin (20 μg/ml) for 48 hours
were examined for Annexin V binding using FACS analysis. Top, representative analysis by FACS at 48 hours. Bottom, data represent
the mean±SD of Annexin V–FITC positive cells of three independent experiments. D. U2-OS cells (1×104) were cultured and treated as
described for Saos-2 cells, and FACs analysis was used to assess the percentage of apoptotic cells. n=3; *, p<0.01; ** p<0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48299

Oncotarget

STAT3 is critical for clinical chemotherapeutic
outcomes in osteosarcoma

significantly decreased the bioluminescence intensity
in these groups (Figure 5B). In addition, AG490
treatment in both Saos-2+MSCs and Saos-2 Res groups
lengthened the survival times of the mice (Figure 5C).
STAT3 activation increase expression of downstream
pro-chemoresistant genes. Therefore we also evaluated
the protein levels of MRP and MDR-1, which are
known to promote chemotherapy resistance in tumors.
The immunohistochemistry results showed that AG490
treatment decreased the activation of STAT3 and the
expression of MRP and MDR-1. The TUNEL assay
indicated an increase in cell apoptosis following the
injection of AG490 (Figure 5D).

To confirm a clinical role for STAT3 in
osteosarcoma chemoresistance, tumors were collected
during surgical resection from patients that were treated
with systemic chemotherapy (9 sensitive and 14 resistant
to chemotherapy, Supplementary Table S1). We observed
that p-STAT3, MRP and MDR-1 expression levels were
much higher in resistant tumors than sensitive samples
(Figure 6A, 6B). Patients were divided according to the
density of the p-STAT3 staining (more or less than 0.5)
into weak (n=10) or strong groups (n=13). One sample
from the resistant group showed a staining score less

Figure 3: STAT3 is essential for MSC- and drug-induced osteosarcoma chemoresistance. A. Saos-2 and U2-OS cells were

treated with MSCs CM for the indicated times, and p-STAT3 and STAT3 levels were examined by Western Blot. B. Saos-2 cells were cultured
in the presence or absence of MSCs CM and treated with AG490 for 30 min. Left, p-STAT3 and STAT3 levels were examined by Western Blot.
Right, the data represent the means ± SD fold change from Saos-2 cells cultured in DMEM (Control) in three independent experiments. C.
Saos-2 cells were cultured in MSCs CM in the presence or absence of AG490 for 48 hours. Left, Annexin V binding was tested by FACS. Right,
data represent the mean ± SD of apoptotic cells of three independent experiments. D. Chemoresistant Saos-2 cells were obtained from low
dose exposures to (1 μg/ml) doxorubicin or cisplatin treatment. p-STAT3 and STAT3 levels were assessed by Western blot. E. Chemoresistant
Saos-2 cells were exposed to corresponding drugs (20 μg/ml) for 48 hours. Left, Annexin V binding was tested by FACS. Right, data represent
the mean±SD of apoptosis cells of three independent experiments. F. Chemoresistant Saos-2 cells that were treated with AG490 were exposed
to corresponding drugs (20 μg/ml) for 4 days. Caspase 3/7 activity was tested at the indicated times. n=3; *, p<0.01; #, p>0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48300

Oncotarget

Figure 4: MSCs suppress drug-induced tumor regression in vivo. A. Saos-2 cells (5 *106) were injected in the left tibia of Balb/c
nude mice in the absence (OS) or presence (OS+MSCs) of 5 *106 MSCs. The mice were maintained for 4 weeks and serial bioluminescent
imaging of mice was obtained at indicated times. B. The representative gross tumor volume images of three mice at week 4. C. The weekly
quantification of luminescent signals from tumor bearing mice after Saos-2/MSCs injection. D. The quantification of tumor volumes at
the indicated times. E. The overall survival of mice bearing Saos-2 or Saos2/MSCs. (log-rank test, n = 12, p = 0.0006). F. The OS and
OS+MSCs group of mice were treated with doxorubicin (10 mg/kg) via weekly intraperitoneal injections and in vivo images of the OS and
OS+MSCs group mice are shown at week 4. G. Quantification of the luminescent signals. H. The overall survival of the two groups of mice
treated with doxorubicin. (log-rank test, n = 12, p = 0.0124). *, p<0.01; **, p<0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48301

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Inhibition of STAT3 enhances the sensitivity of osteosarcoma to chemotherapy in vivo. A. Left, immunostaining
of p-STAT3 was performed on tumors harvested from OS and OS+MSCs mice. Right, quantification of p-STAT3 positive-cells. B. Mice
were injected with Saos-2+MSCs or doxorubicin-resistant Sao-2 cells and treated with doxorubicin and AG490 via intraperitoneal injection.
Left, in vivo images of the mice at week 4. Right, quantification of the luminescent signals. C. Overall survival of the two group of mice that
were treated with AG490. (log-rank test, n = 12. Top, OS+MSCs, p=0.0091; Bottom, Saos-2 Res, p=0.0112). D. The expression profiles of
p-STAT3, MRP and MDR-1 protein levels were evaluated by immunohistochemistry assay. The level of apoptosis was examined in vivo
by the TUNEL assay. *, p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48302

Oncotarget

MSC-induced resistance is mediated by IL-6
release

than 0.5. The survival analysis indicated that the outcome
for patients in the p-STAT3 strong-staining group was
significantly worse than the p-STAT3 weak-staining
group (Figure 6C). In addition, the p-STAT3 weakstaining group showed a longer recurrence-free time after
combined chemotherapy treatment and surgical resection
(Figure 6D).

We previously demonstrated that IL-6, a major
activator of STAT3 signaling, plays an important role in
the interaction between MSCs and osteosarcoma cells.
We found that tumor cells significantly promoted the

Figure 6: STAT3 is critical for the clinical chemotherapeutic outcomes of osteosarcoma. Twenty-three patients (9 sensitive
and 14 resistant) that received systematic chemotherapy and had their tumors resected by surgery were characterized for STAT3 markers.
A. p-STAT3, MRP and MDR-1 expression levels were examined by immunohistochemistry assay. B. Quantification of the corresponding
staining densities (mean±SD, t-test, p < 0.01). C. Correlation between the expression of p-STAT3 (staining < 0.5 and staining ≥0.5)
and overall survival in osteosarcoma patients. D. Correlation between the expression of p-STAT3 (staining < 0.5 and staining ≥0.5) and
recurrence-free survival in osteosarcoma patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48303

Oncotarget

IL-6 production in MSCs (Supplementary Figure S4).
Then we examined the effects of MSC-produced IL-6
on osteosarcoma cells. The expression of IL-6 across the
clinical samples was assessed by immunohistochemistry
assay. We observed that the expression of IL-6 was higher
in the resistant osteosarcoma samples as compared to the
sensitive samples (Figure 7A). Then, Saos-2 cells that
were exposed to different concentrations of IL-6 (ranging
from 0-100 ng/ml) were treated with doxorubicin for 48
h. Our findings showed that treatment of Saos-2 cells with
IL-6 (greater than 20 ng/ml) inhibited chemotherapyinduced caspase 3/7 activity significantly (Figure 7B). To
confirm the protective effects of IL-6 on the tumor cells,
Saos-2 cells were treated with doxorubicin in the presence
or absence of 20 ng/ml IL-6 for 4 days. We showed that
IL-6 treatment led to a decrease in caspase 3/7 activity in
the tumor cells (Figure 7C). In addition, we found that
blockade of IL-6 in MSC CM via specific neutralizing
antibodies attenuated the protective effect of MSCs on
Saos-2 tumor cells (Figure 7D). Finally, STAT3 inhibition

by AG490 rescued the protective effect of IL-6 on druginduce caspase 3/7 activation (Figure 7E).

DISCUSSION
Our study identifies an important mechanism of
chemotherapy resistance that is mediated by MSCs.
We show that MSCs that reside in the osteosarcoma
microenvironment confer resistance to multiple types of
chemotherapy. We revealed that IL-6/STAT3 signaling
is responsible for the induction of resistance by MSCs
and drugs. MSC-driven chemotherapy resistance in
osteosarcoma cells was confirmed in vivo using mouse
models. Our examination of the interactions between
osteosarcoma cells and MSCs sheds new light on the
understanding of osteosarcoma chemotherapy sensitivity.
The tumor stroma, involving tumor–host cellular
interactions, plays an important role in tumor growth,
metastasis and survival [21, 22]. Activated fibroblasts in
the tumor stroma are commonly referred to as carcinoma-

Figure 7: MSC-induced resistance is mediated by the release of IL-6. A. Chemotherapy sensitive and resistant osteosarcoma
samples were collected, and the mean density of IL-6 was detected by immunohistochemistry. B. Saos-2 cells were exposed to 20 μg/
ml doxorubicin and then treated with different concentrations of IL-6 for 48 h. The relative caspase 3/7 activity in the tumor cells was
examined. C. Saos-2 cells were exposed to 20 μg/ml doxorubicin and then treated with 20 ng/ml of IL-6 for 4 days. The relative caspase 3/7
activity was examined daily. D. Saos-2 cells were cultured in the presence or absence of MSCs CM and then treated with IL-6 neutralizing
antibody. The number of viable cells was then assessed using the CCK-8 assay. E. Saos-2 cells were exposed to 20 μg/ml doxorubicin and
then treated with IL-6 and/or AG490. The caspase 3/7 activity was tested. F. Graphical depiction of the hypothetical pathway governing
MSC-induced osteosarcoma resistance. Activation by IL-6 from MSCs may regulate drug resistance by modulating the expression of
multiple drug resistant genes in osteosarcoma cells. n=3; *, p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48304

Oncotarget

tumor models decreased tumor growth and prolonged
overall survival. Our previous research suggests that IL-6
may contribute to the survival of osteosarcoma cells. In
line with this, we demonstrated in this study that MSCproduced IL-6 exerted a protective effect on the druginduced apoptosis. However, inhibition of STAT3 by
AG490 increased the sensitivity of IL-6-treated tumor
cells to doxorubicin. Although the STAT3 activation could
be induced by different pathways, our findings highlight
that STAT3 inhibition could prevent both MSCs and druginduced chemoresistance.
In osteosarcoma, overexpression of MDR-1 has
been considered a risk factor for adjuvant chemotherapy
[34]. Work by Susa et al. has shown that inhibition MDR-1
greatly improved the sensitivity of osteosarcoma to drugs
[35]. We have found that co-injection of MSCs with Saos2 cells increased the expression of MDR-1 and MRP,
suggesting that MSCs may enhance the expression of these
proteins through activation of STAT3. Furthermore, our
clinical samples showed increased expression of p-STAT3,
MRP and MDR-1 in chemoresistant tumors, suggesting
that the STAT3-associated genes may be relevant to poor
outcomes of osteosarcoma chemotherapy.
In summary, our findings reveal a systemic
mechanism of resistance via the activation of STAT3
by IL-6 from MSCs, with the subsequent up-regulation
of MRP and MDR-1 expression. It is especially notable
that osteosarcoma cells that express relatively high
levels of STAT3, either activated by drugs or induced by
MSCs in its environment, were significantly sensitized
to the apoptotic effects of drugs by STAT3 inhibition.
Considering that MSCs are indispensable for tissue
regeneration and may be difficult to completely ablate
from the organism, our findings introduce important
players to the field of chemotherapy resistance and
indicate that the STAT3 pathway may be a druggable
pathway to restore environment-induced chemoresistance.

associated fibroblasts (CAFs) or tumor associated
fibroblasts (TAFs) [23]. Accumulating evidence suggests
that CAFs/TAFs in the tumor microenvironment are
derived from MSCs [24, 25]. Interestingly, osteosarcoma
frequently occurs within the metaphy-seal area of long
bones [26], which harbors major pools of MSCs. Here, we
present novel data, which suggest that the protective effect
of MSCs on osteosarcoma cell viability was primarily due
to pro-survival versus pro-proliferative changes, which has
not been much explored so far. Several previous studies
have shown that MSCs have a pro-apoptotic effect on
tumor cells. Sun et al. found that intravenous injection
of MSC increased PARP-1 and caspase-3 cleavage in
mammary carcinoma xenografts [27]. Our observation
suggests that MSCs suppresses osteosarcoma cell death
that is associated with serum depletion and chemotherapy.
Our data clearly demonstrate that under stress conditions,
such as low serum and drug treatment, MSCs promote
survival, a role that is highly relevant to clinical
chemotherapeutic interventions.
The use of co-injection of MSCs with Saos-2
osteosarcoma tumor cells in the tibia of mice represents a
helpful model to examine the interaction between MSCs
and tumor cells in vivo. However, we recognize that this
model is limited in that MSCs were not recruited from
the bone marrow by primary tumors. It is important to
note that similar co-injection models have been used to
examine other aspects of MSCs–tumor interaction in
vivo. Karnoub et al. found that co-injection of human
breast cancer cells with MSCs increased the metastasis
of tumor cells [28]. Our current study raises the question
of whether MSCs would play a similar protective role on
apoptosis, as they are recruited from the bone marrow.
Our observations clearly demonstrate that the protective
effect of MSCs on osteosarcoma cells is specific. These
artificially enriched MSCs in tumors developed stromal
elements with functional properties that are similar to
TAFs [25, 29]. Indeed, a protective effect against druginduced apoptosis has been reported for tumor-associated
macrophages in breast cancer [30].
Constitutive activation of STAT3 has been observed
in many cancers and has been linked to increased cell
proliferation and survival [31]. Many studies have further
demonstrated that aberrant activation of STAT3 directly
confers a drug-resistance phenotype [32]. Interestingly,
the inhibition of STAT3 signaling has been shown to
downregulate the expression of survival proteins and
restores the sensitivity of cells to certain drugs [33].
Here, we showed that MSCs activate STAT3 signaling in
osteosarcoma cells both in vitro and in vivo. We further
showed that the use of a STAT3 inhibitor significantly
enhanced the chemotherapeutic efficacy and prolonged
the survival of tumor-bearing mice. Using a drug-resistant
osteosarcoma cell line, we showed that MSCs-induced
STAT3 activation was similar to drug-induced STAT3
activation and that inhibition of STAT3 in both mice
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and reagents
The human osteosarcoma cell lines Saos-2 and
U2-OS were purchased from the Chinese Academy of
Sciences (Shanghai, China). Luciferase-labeled Saos-2
cells were generated in our lab as previously described
[19]. To generate a drug-resistant cell line, Saos-2 cells
were treated with 1 μg/mL doxorubicin or cisplatin, and
the medium was refreshed to eliminate dead cells twice a
week. Cells were treated until no cell death was detected.
Human bone marrow-derived MSCs were obtained
from the proximal femur during orthopedic surgery as
previously described [36] and processed according to the
ethical guidelines of the Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital,
Shanghai, China. MSCs that were passaged 3 times were
used in our experiments. All of the cells were cultured in
48305

Oncotarget

Briefly, the cells were incubated in DMEM medium
containing 10 μl of CCK-8 solution at 37°C for 2.5 hours.
Then, the optical density (OD) at 450 nm was determined
using a microplate reader (BIOTEK, Vermont, USA), and
the ratio of viable cells was calculated.

Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and supplemented with 1%
penicillin–streptomycin.
Reagents: The doxorubicin and cisplatin used
were purchased from Sigma, MO, USA, and AG490 was
purchased from Calbiochem, CA, USA.

Western blot

Patients and specimens

The cells were washed in ice-cold PBS before lysis
with cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, MA,
USA). All samples were clarified by centrifugation and
the protein concentrations were determined using the
BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA). Equal
amounts of total protein lysates were separated through
SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane.
The membranes were blotted with antibodies against
STAT3, p-STAT3, or β-actin (Cell Signaling Technology,
MA, USA). Bound antibodies were detected with an
Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences,
Lincoln, NE, USA). Densitometric analysis of the protein
bands was performed with an image-pro plus 4.5 software
(Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD).

Twenty-three patients who underwent surgical
resection for their primary osteosarcoma lesion between
January 2006 and December 2012 were evaluated in
this study. The median age of the patients was 27 years
(range, 15–68 years). This study obtained approval
from the ethic committee of Ninth People’s Hospital
of Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
and written informed consent was obtained from the
patients or their legal guardians. Then, according to the
inhibition rate of doxorubicin in the tumor susceptibility
test results, the patient’s histological specimens were
divided into sensitive or resistant groups (Supplementary
Table S1) [37]. No significant difference was observed in
composition regarding age or sex in these two groups (p
> 0. 05).

Animals and xenograft model
Studies in mice were performed using a protocol
approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine. Fourweek-old male BALB/c nude mice were injected with
5×106 luciferase-labeled Saos-2 cells or co-injected with
5×106 MSCs into the left proximal tibia. For the drug
treatment, the mice received 10 mg/kg of doxorubicin
via intraperitoneal injection (ip) weekly. For STAT3
inhibition, the mice were treated weekly with an
intraperitoneal injection of DMSO (control) or 500 μg
AG490 (AG490 group). The luminescence activity in the
mice was monitored weekly using an In Vivo Imaging
System (IVIS, Xenogen, Alameda, CA). The tumor
volume was measured every 3 days until the animals were
sacrificed. The mice were sacrificed at week 4, and in situ
tumor samples were collected for histological analysis.
For the survival assay, 12 mice per group were maintained
until death to allow for the calculation of survival curves.

MSCs conditioned medium
MSCs were plated in 10-cm dishes and grown to a
confluent monolayer. Cells were rinsed with phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) and cultured in serum-free DMEM
for 24 h. The conditioned media was then collected,
centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 10 min, and filtered through a
0.22-μm filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA).

Apoptosis assay
For the Annexin V assay, sub-confluent cells were
cultured in 6-well plates and harvested by trypsinization.
Cells were washed twice with cold PBS and then
resuspended in binding buffer. Annexin V and propidium
iodide (PI) staining were performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA), and the Annexin V and PI signals were measured
by FACS. To detect caspase 3/7 activities, the cells were
cultured in 96-well plates at a density of 1×104 per well.
After 24 h of treatment, the caspase 3/7 activity was
determined by a Caspase-Glo kit (Promega). All of the
experiments were performed in triplicate.

Histology
Tumor samples from the nude mice or clinical
resections were fixed overnight in 10% neutral-buffered
formalin. The tissues were embedded in paraffin and cut
into 5-μm sections. The slides were incubated at 60°C for
30 min, deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through
a graded ethanol series. After antigen retrieval, intrinsic
peroxidase activity was blocked by incubation with 3%
hydrogen peroxide for 10 min. The slides were covered
with the appropriately diluted primary antibodies and
incubated at 4°C overnight. After three washes in TBS-T
for 5 min each, secondary antibodies were applied for 1 h,

Cell viability analysis
Saos-2 cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a
density of 1×104 per well and treated as follows: the
culture medium was discarded, and the cells were rinsed
3 times with PBS. Subsequently, the viable cells were
quantitated using a cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8, Dojindo,
Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48306

Oncotarget

and the staining was developed using the Dako Cytomation
Envision staining kit according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The level of apoptosis was assessed with a
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase–mediated dUTP
nick end labeling kit (TUNEL, Roche Applied Science)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

signature predicts resistance to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
in breast cancer. Nat Med. 2009; 15:68-74.
9.	 Shaked Y, Henke E, Roodhart JM, Mancuso P, Langenberg
MH, Colleoni M, Daenen LG, Man S, Xu P, Emmenegger
U, Tang T, Zhu Z, Witte L, et al. Rapid chemotherapyinduced acute endothelial progenitor cell mobilization:
implications for antiangiogenic drugs as chemosensitizing
agents. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:263-273.

Statistical analyses

10.	 Fan QM, Yue B, Bian ZY, Xu WT, Tu B, Dai KR, Li G,
Tang TT. The CREB-Smad6-Runx2 axis contributes to the
impaired osteogenesis potential of bone marrow stromal
cells in fibrous dysplasia of bone. J Pathol. 2012; 228:45-55.

The data are represented as the means ± standard
deviations (SD). Comparisons between groups were
performed using Student’s t-test, and one-way ANOVA
was used for multiple comparisons. Survival rates were
compared using Kaplan–Meier survival curves. Statistical
significance was set at p < 0.05.

11.	 Weaver VM, Lelievre S, Lakins JN, Chrenek MA, Jones JC,
Giancotti F, Werb Z, Bissell MJ. beta4 integrin-dependent
formation of polarized three-dimensional architecture
confers resistance to apoptosis in normal and malignant
mammary epithelium. Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:205-216.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

12.	 Rhodes LV, Muir SE, Elliott S, Guillot LM, Antoon
JW, Penfornis P, Tilghman SL, Salvo VA, Fonseca JP,
Lacey MR, Beckman BS, McLachlan JA, Rowan BG,
Pochampally R, Burow ME. Adult human mesenchymal
stem cells enhance breast tumorigenesis and promote
hormone independence. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010;
121:293-300.

This work was financially supported through grants
from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(81302341, 81172549) and the project was funded by the
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2015 M571570).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Li HJ, Reinhardt F, Herschman HR, Weinberg RA. Cancerstimulated mesenchymal stem cells create a carcinoma stem
cell niche via prostaglandin E2 signaling. Cancer Discov.
2012; 2:840-855.

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of
interest.

REFERENCES

14.	 Klopp AH, Gupta A, Spaeth E, Andreeff M, Marini F, 3rd.
Concise review: Dissecting a discrepancy in the literature:
do mesenchymal stem cells support or suppress tumor
growth? Stem Cells. 2011; 29:11-19.

1.	 Arndt CA, Crist WM. Common musculoskeletal tumors
of childhood and adolescence. N Engl J Med. 1999;
341:342-352.

15.	 Huang WH, Chang MC, Tsai KS, Hung MC, Chen HL,
Hung SC. Mesenchymal stem cells promote growth
and angiogenesis of tumors in mice. Oncogene. 2013;
32:4343-4354.

2.	 Luetke A, Meyers PA, Lewis I, Juergens H. Osteosarcoma
treatment - where do we stand? A state of the art review.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2014; 40:523-532.
3.	 Sakamoto A, Iwamoto Y. Current status and perspectives
regarding the treatment of osteo-sarcoma: chemotherapy.
Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2008; 3:228-231.

16.	 Barcellos-de-Souza P, Gori V, Bambi F, Chiarugi P. Tumor
microenvironment: bone marrow-mesenchymal stem cells
as key players. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1836:321-335.

4.	 Bielack SS, Marina N, Ferrari S, Helman LJ, Smeland S,
Whelan JS, Reaman GH. Osteosarcoma: the same old drugs
or more? J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:3102-3103; author reply
3104-3105.

17.	 Xu WT, Bian ZY, Fan QM, Li G, Tang TT. Human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) target osteosarcoma and
promote its growth and pulmonary metastasis. Cancer Lett.
2009; 281:32-41.

5.	 Chou AJ, Gorlick R. Chemotherapy resistance in
osteosarcoma: current challenges and future directions.
Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2006; 6:1075-1085.

18.	 Bian ZY, Fan QM, Li G, Xu WT, Tang TT. Human
mesenchymal stem cells promote growth of osteosarcoma:
involvement of interleukin-6 in the interaction between
human mesenchymal stem cells and Saos-2. Cancer Sci.
2010; 101:2554-2560.

6.	 Hazlehurst LA, Landowski TH, Dalton WS. Role of the
tumor microenvironment in mediating de novo resistance to
drugs and physiological mediators of cell death. Oncogene.
2003; 22:7396-7402.

19.	 Tu B, Du L, Fan QM, Tang Z, Tang TT. STAT3 activation
by IL-6 from mesenchymal stem cells promotes the
proliferation and metastasis of osteosarcoma. Cancer Lett.
2012; 325:80-88.

7.	 Ostman A. The tumor microenvironment controls drug
sensitivity. Nat Med. 2012; 18:1332-1334.
8.	 Farmer P, Bonnefoi H, Anderle P, Cameron D, Wirapati
P, Becette V, Andre S, Piccart M, Campone M, Brain E,
Macgrogan G, Petit T, Jassem J, et al. A stroma-related gene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20.	 Meyers PA, Schwartz CL, Krailo M, Kleinerman ES,
Betcher D, Bernstein ML, Conrad E, Ferguson W,
48307

Oncotarget

Gebhardt M, Goorin AM, Harris MB, Healey J, Huvos
A, et al. Osteosarcoma: a randomized, prospective trial of
the addition of ifosfamide and/or muramyl tripeptide to
cisplatin, doxorubicin, and high-dose methotrexate. J Clin
Oncol. 2005; 23:2004-2011.

29.	 Direkze NC, Hodivala-Dilke K, Jeffery R, Hunt T, Poulsom
R, Oukrif D, Alison MR, Wright NA. Bone marrow
contribution to tumor-associated myofibroblasts and
fibroblasts. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:8492-8495.
30.	 DeNardo DG, Brennan DJ, Rexhepaj E, Ruffell B, Shiao
SL, Madden SF, Gallagher WM, Wadhwani N, Keil SD,
Junaid SA, Rugo HS, Hwang ES, Jirstrom K, West BL,
Coussens LM. Leukocyte complexity predicts breast
cancer survival and functionally regulates response to
chemotherapy. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1:54-67.

21.	 Roodhart JM, Daenen LG, Stigter EC, Prins HJ, Gerrits J,
Houthuijzen JM, Gerritsen MG, Schipper HS, Backer MJ,
van Amersfoort M, Vermaat JS, Moerer P, Ishihara K, et al.
Mesenchymal stem cells induce resistance to chemotherapy
through the release of platinum-induced fatty acids. Cancer
Cell. 2011; 20:370-383.

31.	 Yu H, Pardoll D, Jove R. STATs in cancer inflammation
and immunity: a leading role for STAT3. Nat Rev Cancer.
2009; 9:798-809.

22.	 De Luca A, Lamura L, Gallo M, Maffia V, Normanno N.
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived interleukin-6 and vascular
endothelial growth factor promote breast cancer cell
migration. J Cell Biochem. 2012; 113:3363-3370.

32.	 Hodge DR, Hurt EM, Farrar WL. The role of IL-6 and
STAT3 in inflammation and cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2005;
41:2502-2512.

23.	 Haviv I, Polyak K, Qiu W, Hu M, Campbell I. Origin
of carcinoma associated fibroblasts. Cell Cycle. 2009;
8:589-595.

33.	 Huang S, Chen M, Shen Y, Shen W, Guo H, Gao Q, Zou
X. Inhibition of activated Stat3 reverses drug resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents in gastric cancer cells. Cancer
Lett. 2012; 315:198-205.

24.	 Mishra PJ, Humeniuk R, Medina DJ, Alexe G, Mesirov JP,
Ganesan S, Glod JW, Banerjee D. Carcinoma-associated
fibroblast-like differentiation of human mesenchymal stem
cells. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4331-4339.

34.	 Baldini N, Scotlandi K, Serra M, Picci P, Bacci G, Sottili S,
Campanacci M. P-glycoprotein expression in osteosarcoma:
a basis for risk-adapted adjuvant chemotherapy. J Orthop
Res. 1999; 17:629-632.

25.	 Spaeth EL, Dembinski JL, Sasser AK, Watson K, Klopp
A, Hall B, Andreeff M, Marini F. Mesenchymal stem cell
transition to tumor-associated fibroblasts contributes to
fibrovascular network expansion and tumor progression.
PLoS One. 2009; 4:e4992.

35.	 Susa M, Iyer AK, Ryu K, Choy E, Hornicek FJ, Mankin
H, Milane L, Amiji MM, Duan Z. Inhibition of ABCB1
(MDR1) expression by an siRNA nanoparticulate delivery
system to overcome drug resistance in osteosarcoma. PLoS
One. 2010; 5:e10764.

26.	 Savage SA, Mirabello L. Using epidemiology and genomics
to understand osteosarcoma etiology. Sarcoma. 2011;
2011:548151.

36.	 Tu B, Liu S, Liu G, Yan W, Wang Y, Li Z, Fan C.
Macrophages derived from THP-1 promote the osteogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells through the
IL-23/IL-23R/beta-catenin pathway. Exp Cell Res. 2015;
339:81-89.

27.	 Sun B, Roh KH, Park JR, Lee SR, Park SB, Jung JW,
Kang SK, Lee YS, Kang KS. Therapeutic potential of
mesenchymal stromal cells in a mouse breast cancer
metastasis model. Cytotherapy. 2009; 11:289-298, 281 p
following 298.

37.	 Wang L, Jin F, Qin A, Hao Y, Dong Y, Ge S, Dai K.
Targeting Notch1 signaling pathway positively affects the
sensitivity of osteosarcoma to cisplatin by regulating the
expression and/or activity of Caspase family. Mol Cancer.
2014; 13:139.

28.	 Karnoub AE, Dash AB, Vo AP, Sullivan A, Brooks MW,
Bell GW, Richardson AL, Polyak K, Tubo R, Weinberg
RA. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote
breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2007; 449:557-563.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48308

Oncotarget

