Original Article

The Cross-Talk Between Estrogen Receptor and Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptor Gamma in Thyroid Cancer
Ryan Chu, PhD1; Andrew van Hasselt, MBChB1; Alexander C. Vlantis, MBChB, FCS1; Enders K. W. Ng, MD2;
Shirley Y. W. Liu, MB2; Michael Dahua Fan, MPhil1; Siu Kwan Ng, MB1; Amy B. W. Chan, MB3; Zhimin Liu, PhD4;
Xin-ying Li, MD5; and George G. Chen, MB, PhD2

BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor (ER) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) are associated with thyroid
tumorigenesis and treatment. However, the interaction between them has not been studied. METHODS: The impact of ER overexpression or down-expression by DNA/small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection, ERa agonists, and the ERb agonist diarylpropiolnitrile (DPN) on PPARg expression/activity was examined in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
(ATC) cells. The effects of PPARg modulation by rosiglitazone (RTZ), a PPARg ligand, and of PPARg siRNA on ER expression were
determined. Cellular functions reflected by cell proliferation and migration were assayed. Apoptosis was analyzed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling, and apoptotic-related proteins were evaluated by Western blot analysis. RESULTS:
PPARg protein and activity were reduced by the over-expression of either ERa or ERb, whereas repression of ERa or ERb increased
PPARg expression. The administration of RTZ counteracted the effects of ER and also reduced their expression, particularly in PTC
cells. Moreover, knockdown of PPARg increased ER expression and activity. Functionally, ERa activation offset the inhibitory effect of
PPARg on cellular functions, but ERb activation aggregated it and induced apoptosis, particularly in PTC cells. Finally, the interaction
between ERb and PPARg enhanced the expression of proapoptotic molecules, such as caspase-3 and apoptosis-inducing factor.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence supporting a cross-talk between ER and PPARg. The reciprocal interaction between
PPARg and ERb significantly inhibits the proliferation and migration of thyroid cancer cells, providing a new therapeutic strategy
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
against thyroid cancer. Cancer 2014;120:142-53. V
KEYWORDS: thyroid cancer, estrogen receptors, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, apoptosis, rosiglitazone.

INTRODUCTION
Epidemiologic studies have indicate that an increase in estrogen levels or in estrogen-related molecules plays a role in the
development of thyroid cancer.1 Estrogen executes its function typically through its traditional receptors: estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and ERb.2 When estrogen binds to its receptors, it forms an estrogen-ER complex, which binds to estrogen response element (ERE) sequences in the promoter region of estrogen-responsive genes. Previous studies have
demonstrated that ERa stimulates the proliferation of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) cells,3 whereas apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells is positively associated with ERb.4 The subcellular localization of ERa and ERb may contribute to the
different pathogenesis of PTC cells and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) cells.5 Recently, low ERb expression was correlated with poor survival in patients with thyroid carcinoma.6
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor g (PPARg, a nuclear hormone receptor, binds to peroxisome proliferator
responsive element (PPRE) as a heterodimer with the retinoid X receptor (RXR).7 The activation of PPARg can lead to
the apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells,8,9 and its activity appears to be down-regulated in thyroid cancer,10,11 supporting the
concept that the promotion of PPARg is a potential therapeutic mediation in thyroid cancer treatment.
Both PPARg and ER belong to the hormone receptor superfamily. Recently, it has been reported that signal crosstalk exists bidirectionally between PPARg and ER. Either ERa or ERb is capable of inhibiting PPAR-mediated activation
in breast cancer cells.12 Therapeutically, PPARg agonists and ligands have been proposed for the treatment of estrogen-

Corresponding author: George G. Chen, MB, PhD, Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Fax: (011) 85-226450605;
gchen@cuhk.edu.hk
1
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; 2Department of Surgery, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; 3Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
4
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China; 5Department of Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China

We thank Dr. Michael Mingzhao Xing for providing K1 cells and GlaxoSmithKline for the kind gifts of rosiglitazone.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28383, Received: June 25, 2013; Revised: August 26, 2013; Accepted: August 26, 2013, Published online October 2, 2013 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

142

Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERs and PPAR Gamma in Thyroid Cancer/Chu et al

responsive malignancies, such as breast cancer,13 as well as
thyroid cancer.14-16 However, the ability of the ER to
interact with the signal-transduction pathway of PPARg
in thyroid cancer cells remains unknown. Thus, the objective of this study was to examine the interaction between
ER and PPARg and to determine how the interaction
affects the apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture and Reagents

Human PTC cells (K1 and BCPAP), ATC cells (FRO
and KAT18) and immortalized normal thyroid cells
(Nthy-ori 3-1, NTHY) were cultured in RPMI 1640
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif) as previously reported.3 The
ERa agonist propyl pyrazole triol (PPT) and the ERb
agonist diarylpropiolnitrile (DPN) were purchased from
Tocris Bioscience (Ellisville, Mo), whereas the PPARg
agonist RTZ was kindly provided by GlaxoSmithKline
(Brentford, United Kingdom). All the agonists were dissolved with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as recommended
by the manufacturers.

included in all reactions as an internal house-keeping
control.
Modulation of Estrogen Receptor-a, Estrogen
Receptor-b, and Peroxisome ProliferatorActivated Receptor-c Levels

Over-expression of ERa and ERb was evaluated using
adenovirus-carried ERa (ADERa) or ERb (ADERb)
DNAs. K1 and FRO cells were cultured in RPMI 1640
for 24 hours followed by infecting with adenovirus-lacZ
vector (ADlacZ), or ADERa, or ADERb for 24 hours.
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) was used to suppress ER
and PPARg, respectively. siRNAs for ERa and ERb were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. next, 25
nM of the designated siRNA or scramble control were
used to treat cells for 4 hours. FlexiTube siRNA premix
for PPARg was provided by Qiagen, and cells were transfected with 25 nM of the designated siRNA or scramble
control for 48 hours. After incubation, the efficacy of gene
over-expression or silencing was evaluated by Western
blot analysis as described above.
Transfection and Luciferase Reporter Assay

Western Blot Analysis

Total protein and cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions
were isolated and subjected to Western blot analysis,
which was performed according to previous publications.5,6,17 Antibodies against PPARg, ERa, ERb,
BCL2-associated X protein (Bax), caspase-3, apoptosisinducing factor (AIF), cytochrome c, actin, and prohibitin
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.
(Santa Cruz, Calif). The immunoreactive signals were
developed on Amersham Hyperfilm ECL film (Amersham plc., Little Chalfont, United Kingdom), and the relative density index was calculated.
Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction

Total RNA was isolated from human thyroid cell lines
using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany).
The levels of PPARg (forward, 50 -GCTGTGATT
ATTCTCAGTGGAGACC-30 ; reverse, 50 -CAACTGG
AAGAAGGGAAATGTTGG-30 ), ERa (forward, 50 -AT
ATGTGTCCAGCCACCAAC-30 ; reverse, 50 -CCAACA
AGGCACTGACCATC-30 ), and ERb (forward, 50 -GCA
TGGAACATCTGCTCAAC-30 ; reverse, 50 -ACGCTTC
AGCTTGTGACCTC-30 ) were measured using quantitative polymerase chain reaction, as previously described.18
All reactions were done at least twice, and the products
were analyzed using the ABI Prism 7700 sequence detector (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif). Actin was
Cancer

January 1, 2014

Cells at 90% confluence were transiently transfected with
1 lg purified PPRE-tk-Luc plasmid or 3 times ERETATA-Luc plasmid (Addgene, Cambridge, Mass) or with
pGL3-basic or pGL3-control plasmid as a positive control
for transfection efficiency and luciferase activity19 in
serum-free medium using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent
(Invitrogen). After 48 hours, promoter activity was
assessed using a luciferase reporter assay system (Promega,
Madison, Wis) to measure the intensity of chemiluminescence in a luminometer (Thermo, Waltham, Mass). All
experiments were performed in duplicate and were
repeated at least 3 times.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)22,5Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide Assay and
Wound-Healing Assay

A 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)22,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay was used to assess cell proliferation.
After the infected cells were treated with 1 lM PPT, or 10
lM DPN, or 10 lM RTZ with or without ERa/ERb
over-expression, MTT was added, and the resulting signals were measured. All experiments were performed in
triplicate and were repeated at least 3 times. A woundhealing assay was performed to determine cell migration,
which was done by measuring the movement of cells into
a scrape wound in a cellular area. The speed of wound closure was monitored after 12 hours. The wound healing
143

Original Article

Figure 1. The expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa), estrogen receptor beta (ERb), and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARg) is illustrated. (a) Messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of ERa, ERb, and PPARg were detected at (a) the
mRNA level and (b) the protein level by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses, respectively. Breast
cancer cells (MCF7) and lung cancer cells (NCI-H23) were used as positive controls for ER and PPARg, respectively. The densities
of protein bands were determined, and the ratio of target to actin was calculated. This ratio in the control MCF7 or NCI-H23 cells
was normalized to 1. NTHY indicates an immortalized normal thyroid cell line; K1, a human papillary thyroid carcinoma cell line;
BCPAP, a human papillary thyroid carcinoma cell line; FRO, an anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cell line; KAT19, an anaplastic thyroid
carcinoma cell line.

was monitored under a light microscope, and images were
taken consequently. The experiments were repeated twice.

analysis of variance followed by post-hoc Bonferroni tests
using the SPSS statistical package (SPSS Inc., Chicago,
Ill), and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Detection of Apoptosis

K1 and FRO cells were seeded onto 6-well plates and
incubated overnight to allow cells to attach to the plate.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end
labeling (TUNEL) was conducted using the APODIRECT TUNEL assay kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
Calif). Apoptosis was measured according to the protocol
provided by the kit, and the results were presented as the
folds of control conditions. All experiments were performed in duplicate and were repeated twice.
Statistical Analysis

All results are represented as mean 6 standard deviation.
Statistical comparisons were performed using a 1-way
144

RESULTS
Expression of Estrogen Receptor-a, Estrogen
Receptor-b, and Peroxisome ProliferatorActivated Receptor-c

We determined the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression
of 3 molecules using quantitative polymerase chain reaction and observed that ERb and PPARg were present in
all thyroid cell lines tested. However, ERa was absent in
the normal thyroid cell line NTHY (Fig. 1a). Western
blot analysis revealed that ERa expression was not
detected in normal thyroid cells but was present in cancer
cells. ERb and PPARg proteins did not differ significantly
among the 3 cell lines (P > .05) (Fig. 1b).
Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERs and PPAR Gamma in Thyroid Cancer/Chu et al

Figure 2. Cell proliferation is illustrated after treatment with estrogen receptor alpha (ERa), estrogen receptor beta (ERb), and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) agonists. Proliferation of the infected cells that were treated with (a)
propyl pyrazole triol (PPT), (b) diarylpropiolnitrile (DPN), or (c) and rosiglitazone (RTZ) was measured by using a 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 for a comparison between dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-treated cells versus cells that were treated with PPT, DPN, or RTZ. Total protein was isolated and
subjected to Western blot analysis for (a) ERa, (b) ERb, and (c) PPARg. The density of positive bands was determined, and the
ratio of target to actin was calculated. This ratio in the positive control MCF7 or NCI-H23 cells was normalized to 1. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 compared with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-treated cells; double asterisks, P <.01 compared with DMSOtreated cells. ADlacZ indicates adenovirus-lacZ vector; ADERa, adenovirus ERa; ADERb, adenovirus ERb.

Cancer

January 1, 2014

145

Original Article

Figure 3. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) activity and expression are illustrated in cells with estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa) and ERb over-expression. (a) Cells were transiently transfected with a peroxisome proliferator responsive
element (PPRE)-mediated luciferase reporter plasmid for 24 hours followed by infection with adenovirus ERa (ADERa)/ADERb
with or without costimulation with 1 lM propyl pyrazole triol (PPT)/10 lM diarylpropiolnitrile (DPN)/10 lM rosiglitazone (RTZ) or
with PPT/DPN either alone or with the addition of RTZ. The luciferase activity of adenovirus-lacZ vector (ADlacZ)-infected cells
was set to 1. The relative luciferase activity was defined as the fold change of each treatment over the ADlacZ control. A single
asterisk indicates P <.05 compared with the ADlacZ control; double asterisks, P <.01 compared with the ADlacZ control. (b) Total
protein was isolated from cells that received different treatments, as indicated. The expression of PPARg was determined by
Western blot analysis. Actin was used as an equal loading control. The density of protein bands was determined, and the ratio of
target to actin was calculated. This ratio in cells with ADlacZ was normalized to 1. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 in a comparison between groups, as indicated. (c,d) Total protein was isolated and subjected to Western blot analysis of (c) ERa expression
or (d) ERb expression. The density of protein bands was determined. This ratio in cells with ERa or ERb was normalized to 1. A
single asterisk indicates P <.05 in a comparison between groups, as indicated.

Effects of Propyl Pyrazole Triol,
Diarylpropiolnitrile, and Rosiglitazone on
Protein Expression and Cell Proliferation

Cells were infected with ADlacZ, or ADERa, or ADERb
followed by 12 to 72 hours of treatment with either
DMSO control (ADlacZ) or 3 agonists (ADERs). ERa
and ERb displayed significant protein over-expression after 1 lM PPT or 10 lM DPN stimulation for 48 hours,
and their levels were further elevated after ADERa and
ADERb infection, respectively (Fig. 2a,b). The expression
146

of PPARg protein also was increased after treatment with
the PPARg agonist RTZ (Fig. 2c). For cell proliferation,
the MTT assay demonstrated a significant increase in cell
counts in PPT-treated K1 cells and FRO cells, especially
when the cells were infected with ADERa (Fig. 2a);
whereas decreased cell proliferation was observed after
cells were treated with either DPN or RTZ. The inhibitory effect of DPN was more obvious in K1 cells, whereas
RTZ produced similar results in both K1 cells and FRO
cells (Fig. 2b,c).
Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERs and PPAR Gamma in Thyroid Cancer/Chu et al

with a ADlacZ control in K1 cells (Fig. 3a). The reduction
was markedly rescued by RTZ to a level much higher than
that produced in the ADlacZ control. Although PPARg
promoter activity changed little in FRO cells infected
with ADERa or ADERb, RTZ treatment also was able to
significantly increase the activity.
The effect of ERa and ERb on PPARg protein was
assessed by Western blot analysis. PPARg expression was
reduced significantly in K1 cells infected with ADERa or
ADERa in the presence of PPT (Fig. 3b). RTZ alone significantly increased the expression of PPARg in K1 cells,
but the positive effect of RTZ disappeared when it was
used in combination with other agents. PPARg expression
was reduced in FRO cells infected either with ADERa in
the presence of PPT or with ADERb in the presence of
DPN or DPN plus RTZ. Although RTZ alone increased
the expression of PPARg, the increase was not significant.
RTZ treatment demonstrably inhibited the ERa protein in both cell lines infected with ADERa (Fig. 3c), and
the decreased expression of ERa also was observed in
ADERa-infected K1 cells treated with RTZ plus PPT.
RTZ alone also was able to reduce the ERb protein in K1
cells, but not in FRO cells, infected with ADERb (Fig. 3d)
Effect of Estrogen Receptor Knockdown on
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor-c
Expression

Figure 4. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARg) expression after estrogen receptor (ER) knockdown
is illustrated. After cells were treated with ERa small interfering RNA (siRNA) (siERa), or ERb siRNA (siERb), or scramble
siRNA (control), total protein was isolated and subjected to
Western blot analysis to measure the expression of (a) ERa,
(b) ERb, and (c) PPARg. Actin was measured and used as an
equal loading control. The density of positive protein bands
was determined, and the ratio of target to actin was calculated. This ratio in cells that were treated with RNase-free
water control was normalized to 1. An asterisk indicates
P <.05 compared with the scramble siRNA control.

Effects of Estrogen Receptor-a and Estrogen
Receptor-b Over-Expression on Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptor-c Activity and
Expression

We used the luciferase reporter assay to determine PPARg
activity after ERa and ERb were up-regulated. Cells
infected with either ADERa/ADERb or ADERa/
ADERb in the presence of their agonists manifested a significant reduction in PPARg promoter activity compared
Cancer

January 1, 2014

After examining how ER over-expression affected
PPARg, we tested the effect of ER down-regulation on
PPARg. First, we confirmed that ERa siRNA and ERb
siRNA could down-regulate ERa (65% knockdown efficiency in K1 cells and 54% in FRO cells) and ERb (52%
knockdown efficiency in K1 cells and 63% in FRO cells),
respectively, compared with their respective scramble
siRNA controls (Fig. 4a,b). PPARg protein expression
was up-regulated in both cell lines treated with either
ERa siRNA or ERb siRNA (Fig. 4c).
Effect of Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated
Receptor-c Knockdown on Estrogen Receptor
Activity and Expression

To determine the reciprocal interaction of ER and
PPARg, we knocked down the PPARg gene and then
assessed ER activity and expression. With PPARg siRNA
(target sequence: GAGGGCGATCTTGACAGGAAA),
there was a distinct reduction in PPARg protein expression (Fig. 5a): 65% of PPARg protein was downregulated in K1 cells, and 72% of PPARg protein was
down-regulated in FRO cells. It is noteworthy that ER activity was markedly increased compared with controls
(Fig. 5b), as evident from the approximately 3-fold
147

Original Article

Figure 5. The effect of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) knockdown on estrogen receptor (ER) activity and expression is illustrated. (a) PPARg was transiently knocked down using PPARg small interfering RNA (siRNA) (siPPARg).
Cells that were treated with scramble siRNA were used as the control. Forty-eight hours after siRNA treatment, total protein was
isolated and subjected to Western blot analysis of PPARg. Actin was measured and used as an equal loading control. The density
of target protein bands was determined, and the ratio of target to actin was calculated. This ratio in cells that were treated with
RNase-free water control was normalized to 1. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 compared with the scramble siRNA control. (b)
Cells were transiently transfected with an estrogen response element (ERE)-mediated luciferase reporter plasmid for 24 hours
followed by treatments with water/scramble controls or siPPARg. The luciferase report activity was measured. A single asterisk
indicates P <.05 compared with the scramble siRNA control. (c,d) The expression of PPARg was knocked down by siPPARg, as
described for a above. Total protein was isolated and subjected to Western blot analysis of (c) ERa protein and (d) and ERb protein. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 compared with the scramble siRNA control.

increase in K1 cells and the approximately 2-fold increase
in FRO cells. Western blot analysis further demonstrated
the elevation of ERa and ERb proteins after the knockdown of the PPARg gene (Fig. 5c,d).
Impact of Estrogen Receptor Over-Expression
on Rosiglitazone-Induced Changes in Cell
Functions

The over-expression of ERa significantly increased cell
proliferation, as discussed above; whereas either ERb
over-expression or PPARg up-regulation induced a significant decrease in cell counts. Therefore, it would be interesting to determine how the over-expression of ERa and
ERb modulates the effect of RTZ on cell functions. We
observed that the proliferation in cells with ERa overexpression was similar between the PPT and PPT 1 RTZ
groups, but both groups had much higher proliferation
compared with that in the cells with ERb over-expression
(Fig. 6a). Cell proliferation was drastically reduced in
ERb-over-expressed K1 cells treated with RTZ versus the
148

cells without RTZ treatment, but the reduction was not
obvious in FRO cells (Fig. 6a). A wound-healing assay
was performed to determine the cell migration within 12
hours. Compared with the ADlacZ control, migration
was faster in cells with ERa over-expression, whereas
migration was slower in cells with ERb over-expression
(Fig. 6b). In the presence of PPT, RTZ treatment partially
overcame the promotional effect of ERa on cell migration
in both cell lines, although the change was statistically significant only in K1 cells. In contrast to ERa, RTZ treatment facilitated ERb-mediated inhibition of migration in
both cell lines, although the effect was significant only in
K1 cells.
Induction of Apoptosis by Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptor-c Ligand and
Estrogen Receptor-b but Not by Estrogen
Receptor-a

Previous studies have indicated that ERb agonists or
PPARg ligands induce apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells,
Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERs and PPAR Gamma in Thyroid Cancer/Chu et al

Figure 6. The effects of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and ERb over-expression are illustrated on rosiglitazone (RTZ)-induced
changes in cell functions. Cell functions were determined by assessing cell proliferation and migration. (a) Cells were infected
with ERa or ERb for 24 hours followed by treatment with propyl pyrazole triol (PPT)/diarylpropiolnitrile (DPN) either alone or
combined with RTZ. Cells that were infected with adenovirus-lacZ vector (ADlacZ) and treated only with RTZ also were included
(data not shown to simplify the linear illustration). After the treatment, a (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) (MTT) assay was used to determine cell proliferation. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 for a comparison between ERbinfected cells that were treated with RTZ and without RTZ; double pound signs, P <.01 for a comparison between cells that were
treated with adenovirus ERa (ADERa) 1 PPT plus ADERb 1 DPN/ADERb 1 DPN 1 RTZ and ADERa 1 PPT 1 RTZ and cells that were
treated with ADERb 1 DPN/ADERb 1 DPN 1 RTZ. (b) Cells were treated with various agents, as indicated. At the end of the treatment, a wound-healing assay was done by measuring the movement of cells into a scrape wound. The speed of wound closure
was monitored using a light microscope by taking sequential images. The relative cell migration rate of ADlacZ-infected cells was
set to 1. A single asterisk indicates P <.05 for a comparison between cells that were treated with RTZ and without RTZ; double
pound signs, P <.01 for a comparison between cells that were treated with ADERa 1 PPT plus ADERb 1 DPN/ADERb 1 DPN 1 RTZ
and ADERa 1 PPT 1 RTZ and cells that were treated with ADERb 1 DPN/ADERb 1 DPN 1 RTZ.

whereas ERa agonists inhibit it.2,14-16 To our knowledge,
the effect of PPARg and ERa/ERb in combination on
thyroid cancer cells has not been previously reported.
Here, we demonstrated that the application of ADERb,
DPN, or RTZ alone could significantly induce apoptosis
Cancer

January 1, 2014

in both cancer cell lines compared with an ADlacZ control (Fig. 7). Any set of 2 from these 3 agents could exert a
stronger induction of apoptosis than any single agent
alone. The strongest effect was obtained when the cells—
particularly K1 cells—were cotreated with ADERb,
149

Original Article

Figure 7. The effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) ligand, estrogen receptor beta (ERb), and
estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) on apoptosis are illustrated. Cells were treated with various agents, as listed, for 48 hours. At the
end of the treatment, apoptotic cells were measured using the APO-DIRECT terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nickend labeling (TUNEL) assay kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif). (a) Representative diagrams of the TUNEL assay of K1 cells are
shown. Controls treated with ERa/ERb/propyl pyrazole triol (PPT)/diarylpropiolnitrile (DPN) either alone or with the addition of
rosiglitazone (RTZ) also were included (data not shown). (b) The proportion of apoptotic cells was determined relative to the
cells infected with adenovirus-lacZ vector (ADlacZ). The apoptotic rate of ADlacZ was set to 1. A single asterisk indicates P <.05;
double asterisks, P <.01 compared with the ADlacZ control. ADERa indicates adenovirus ERa; ADERb, adenovirus ERb.

DPN, and RTZ, resulting in a 5.5-fold increase in apoptosis compared with the ADlacZ control (Fig. 7b). It is
noteworthy that the induction of apoptosis by DPN,
RTZ, or both agents combined was disabled in both lines
among the cells that had ERa over-expression.
Alternations of Caspase-3, Cytochrome C,
Apoptosis-Inducing Factor, and BCL2Associated X Protein Expression

Having demonstrated the increase in apoptosis by RTZ,
ERb, and DPN, we tried to explore relevant apoptotic
proteins that were previously known to be altered in thyroid cancer.3,5,17 These proteins included caspase-3, AIF,
and cytochrome c in the cytoplasm and Bax in the mitochondria. Our results indicated that the level of caspase-3
was significantly increased in K1 cells that were treated
with ADERb 1 DPN, or ADERb 1 DPN 1 RTZ, or
150

AdERb alone, or DPN alone, or DPN 1 RTZ (Fig. 8a);
but the caspase-3 level changed little in FRO cells (Fig.
8b). The level of cytochrome c was increased in a very similar fashion to that of caspase-3 in both cell lines. A change
in the AIF level also occurred that was similar to the
change in caspase-3 expression among K1 cells, but the
increase did not reach a significant point. A significant
increase in Bax was observed in both cell lines treated with
ADERb 1 DPN 1 RTZ. We noted that the decrease in
cytochrome c was observed in cells treated with ADERa
or PPT in both cell lines and that the decrease in AIF
occurred in K1 cells treated with ADERa or PPT (Fig. 8).
DISCUSSION
PPARg, ERa, and ERb are established as contributors to
the pathogenesis of thyroid cancer. The levels/activities of
Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERs and PPAR Gamma in Thyroid Cancer/Chu et al

Figure 8. The expression of apoptosis-related proteins is illustrated. Cells were treated with various agents, as listed, for 48 hours.
At the end of the treatment, cytoplasmic and mitochondrial fractions were isolated. Western blot analysis was used to detect
cytoplasmic caspase-3, cytochrome c (Cyto c), apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), and mitochondrial BCL2-associated X protein
(Bax) in (a) K1 cells and (b) FRO cells. Actin was used as an equal loading control for the cytoplasmic protein and as prohibition
for the mitochondrial protein. The density of Western blot bands was determined. In a and b, the typical Western blot bands
(Top) and a summary of protein band densities (Bottom) are indicated. A single asterisk indicates P <.05; double asterisks, P <.01
compared with the adenovirus-lacZ vector (ADlacZ) control. ADERa indicates adenovirus estrogen receptor alpha; ADERb, adenovirus estrogen receptor beta; PPT, propyl pyrazole triol; RTZ, rosiglitazone; DPN, diarylpropiolnitrile.

PPARg and ERb are decreased, whereas the level of ERa
is increased in thyroid cancer,5,6,10,11,20-22 indicating that
these molecules are potential targets for thyroid cancer
treatment. Indeed, the enhancement of ERb by its agonists or the activation of PPARg by its ligands induces apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells and inhibits tumor
growth,3,4,8,9 and the enhancement of ERa facilitates the
proliferation and growth of thyroid cancer cells.3 However, all of those studies were performed using a single
agent related to either PPARg or ER. Because both molecules belong to the nuclear receptor family and possess
very similar (PPARg and ERb) or opposite (PPARg and
Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERa) functions in term of cell proliferation and apoptosis, it is important to examine the reciprocal impact of
both molecules on thyroid cancer growth and treatment.
In this study, we determined whether the over-expression
of either ERa or ERb could modulate PPARg activity
and protein expression. The results of the PPRE-mediated
luciferase reporter assay demonstrated a significant
decrease of PPARg activity in PTC K1 cells and a slight
decrease in ATC FRO cells. In agreement with the transcription results, Western blot analysis revealed a decrease
in PPARg expression. It is noteworthy that the ERmediated reduction of PPARg activity and protein
151

Original Article

Figure 8. (Continued).

expression could be restored after treatment with the
PPARg agonist RTZ, and such a counteractive effect was
stronger in ERa-transfected cells than in ERb-transfected
cells and was more obvious in PTC cells than in ATC
cells. Moreover, RTZ treatment led to a significant inhibition of ERa protein expression in both PTC cells and
ATC cells. These findings suggest that interaction
between PPARg and ER is reciprocally inhibitory, especially for PPARg and ERa in PTC cells. Such a reciprocal
inhibition relation is further supported by 2 sets of knockdown experiments. When ERa or ERb was knocked
down by siRNA, the expression of PPARg protein was
up-regulated; whereas, when PPARg was blocked by
siRNA, the expression of ERa or/and ERb protein was
elevated. Functionally, both PTC cells and ATC cells
with ERa over-expression were more proliferative and
more capable of migration than the control cells. In contrast, cells with ERb over-expression were less proliferative
152

and less capable of migration than the control cells. The
administration of RTZ offset the promotional effect of
ERa, whereas it enhanced the inhibitory effect of ERb,
particularly in PTC cells. These data indicate that there is
a negative reciprocal relation between ER and PPARg in
terms of protein expression. However, cell functional
studies have demonstrated that the negative reciprocal
relation exists only between ERa and PPARg. Instead,
ERb and PPARg in combination offer a positive reciprocal collaboration to enhance the inhibitory effect on cell
proliferation and migration, particularly in PTC cells.
Another clear observation of our study is that the reciprocal inhibition by PPARg and ERb is much stronger
in PTC than in ATC. Furthermore, we observed that,
although ERb and PPARg were located in both nuclear
and cytoplasmic/mitochondrial fractions in PTC cells and
ATC cells, ERa was present in both nuclear and cytoplasmic/mitochondrial fractions in PTC cells only, and it was
Cancer

January 1, 2014

ERs and PPAR Gamma in Thyroid Cancer/Chu et al

mainly expressed in cytoplasmic/mitochondrial fractions
in ATC cells (data not shown). This pattern of distribution suggests that the ER genomic pathway and the ER
nongenomic pathway may function differentially between
PTC and ATC, thus possibly offering some clues regarding the different manifestations of PTC cells and ATC
cells in terms of the reciprocal inhibition offered by
PPARg and ERb. The different responses of PTC and
ATC cells to the reciprocal interaction of PPARg and
ERb are line with recent studies of both forms of thyroid
cancers at the mRNA and protein levels, in which mRNA
and proteomic signatures of ATC were associated much
more closely with a high proliferation rate, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, invasion, dedifferentiation, glycolysis, lactate generation, and chemoresistance.23-25
Although we did not observe a direct proteinprotein interaction between ER and PPARg through
coimmunoprecipitation experiments (data not shown), an
indirect contact or communication between them could
not be excluded. ERE, which drives the expression of the
vitellogenin A2 gene, can also function as a PPRE to be
bound by a PPAR/RXR heterodimer, and such a PPAR/
RXR heterodimer inhibits transactivation by the ER
through competition for ERE binding.26 Another study
demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of PPARg ligands
on collagen biosynthesis in endometrial adenocarcinoma
cells requires functional ER.27 Those studies all indicated
that a contact or communication between PPARg and ER
is necessary for some PPARg-mediated functions.
FUNDING SOURCES
This work was supported by direct grants from the Chinese University of Hong Kong (reference no. 2009.1.054 and 2009.2.026).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Rahbari R, Zhang L, Kebebew E. Thyroid cancer gender disparity.
Future Oncol. 2010;6:1771-1779.
2. Chen GG, Zeng Q, Tse GM. Estrogen and its receptors in cancer.
Med Res Rev. 2008;28:954-974.
3. Lee ML, Chen GG, Vlantis AC, et al. Induction of thyroid papillary
carcinoma cell proliferation by estrogen is associated with an altered
expression of Bcl-xL. Cancer J. 2005;11:113-121.
4. Zeng Q, Chen GG, Vlantis AC, van Hasselt CA. Oestrogen mediates the growth of human thyroid carcinoma cells via an oestrogen
receptor-ERK pathway. Cell Prolif. 2007;40:921-935.
5. Zeng Q, Chen G, Vlantis A, Tse G, van Hasselt C. The contributions of oestrogen receptor isoforms to the development of papillary
and anaplastic thyroid carcinomas. J Pathol. 2008;214:425-433.
6. Heikkila A, Hagstrom J, Maenpaa H, et al. Loss of estrogen receptor
beta expression in follicular thyroid carcinoma predicts poor outcome. Thyroid. 2013;23:456-465.

Cancer

January 1, 2014

7. Gearing KL, Gottlicher M, Teboul M, Widmark E, Gustafsson JA.
Interaction of the peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor and retinoid X receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993;90:1440-1444.
8. Chen Y, Wang SM, Wu JC, Huang SH. Effects of PPARgamma
agonists on cell survival and focal adhesions in a Chinese thyroid
carcinoma cell line. J Cell Biochem. 2006;98:1021-1035.
9. Copland JA, Marlow LA, Kurakata S, et al. Novel high-affinity
PPARgamma agonist alone and in combination with paclitaxel
inhibits human anaplastic thyroid carcinoma tumor growth via
p21WAF1/CIP1. Oncogene. 2006;25:2304-2317.
10. Aldred MA, Morrison C, Gimm O, et al. Peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma is frequently downregulated in a diversity
of sporadic nonmedullary thyroid carcinomas. Oncogene. 2003;22:
3412-3416.
11. Ying H, Suzuki H, Zhao L, Willingham MC, Meltzer P, Cheng SY.
Mutant thyroid hormone receptor beta represses the expression and
transcriptional activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma during thyroid carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 2003;63:5274-5280.
12. Wang X, Kilgore MW. Signal cross-talk between estrogen receptor
alpha and beta and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma1 in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2002;194:123-133.
13. Catalano S, Mauro L, Bonofiglio D, et al. In vivo and in vitro evidence that PPARgamma ligands are antagonists of leptin signaling in
breast cancer. Am J Pathol. 2011;179:1030-1040.
14. Kebebew E, Lindsay S, Clark OH, et al. S. Results of rosiglitazone
therapy in patients with thyroglobulin-positive and radioiodine-negative
advanced differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2009;19:953-956.
15. Smallridge RC, Copland JA, Brose MS, et al. Efatutazone, an oral
PPAR-g agonist, in combination with paclitaxel in anaplastic thyroid
cancer: results of a multicenter phase 1 trial. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2013;98:2392-2400.
16. Antonelli A, Fallahi P, Ulisse S, et al. New targeted therapies for anaplastic thyroid cancer. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012;12:87-93.
17. Chen GG, Liu ZM, Vlantis AC, et al. Heme oxygenase-1 protects against
apoptosis induced by tumor necrosis factor-alpha and cycloheximide in
papillary thyroid carcinoma cells. J Cell Biochem. 2004;92:1246-1256.
18. Liu ZM, Hasselt CA, Song FZ, et al. Expression of functional metallothionein isoforms in papillary thyroid cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009;302:92-98.
19. Li MY, Lee TW, Yim AP, Chen GG. Function of PPARgamma and
its ligands in lung cancer. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2006;43:183-202.
20. Di Vito M, De Santis E, Perrone GA, et al. Overexpression of estrogen receptor-alpha in human papillary thyroid carcinomas studied by
laser-capture microdissection and molecular biology. Cancer Sci.
2011;102:1921-1927.
21. Magri F, Capelli V, Rotondi M, et al. Expression of estrogen and
androgen receptors in differentiated thyroid cancer: an additional criterion to assess the patient’s risk. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012;19:463-471.
22. Dong W, Li J, Huang Y, Zhang H, Shan Z, Teng W. Differential
expression patterns of estrogen receptor (ER)-b splice variants
between papillary thyroid cancer and nodular thyroid goiter. Med Sci
Monit. 2012;18:BR351-BR355.
23. Hebrant A, Dom G, Dewaele M, et al. mRNA expression in papillary and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: molecular anatomy of a killing switch [serial online]. PLoS One. 2012;7:e37807.
24. Evans JJ, Crist HS, Durvesh S, Bruggeman RD, Goldenberg D. A
comparative study of cell cycle mediator protein expression patterns
in anaplastic and papillary thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Biol Ther.
2012;13:776-781.
25. Russo R, Di Cara G, Albanese NN, et al. Differential proteomic
and phenotypic behaviour of papillary and anaplastic thyroid cell
lines. J Proteomics. 2013;90:115-125.
26. Keller H, Givel F, Perroud M, Wahli W. Signaling cross-talk
between peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor/retinoid X receptor and estrogen receptor through estrogen response elements. Mol
Endocrinol. 1995;9:794-804.
27. Surazynski A, Jarzabek K, Miltyk W, Wolczynski S, Palka J. Estrogen-dependent regulation of PPAR-gamma signaling on collagen
biosynthesis in adenocarcinoma endometrial cells. Neoplasma. 2009;
56:448-454.

153

