Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Therapeutic effect of TMZ-POH on human nasopharyngeal carcinoma
depends on reactive oxygen species accumulation
Li Xie1,*, Xingguo Song1,*, Wei Guo2, Xingwu Wang1, Ling Wei1, Yang Li1, Liyan Lv1,
Weijun Wang3, Thomas C. Chen3, Xianrang Song1
1

Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Radiation Oncology, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong
Province, China

2

Ultrasound Diagnosis Department, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong Province, China

3

Department of Neurological Surgery and Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Xianrang Song, e-mail: basiclab@163.com
Keywords: nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), reactive oxygen species (ROS), temozolomide (TMZ), perillyl alcohol (POH)
Received: July 16, 2015	

Accepted: November 20, 2015	

Published: November 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common head and neck malignancy without
efficient chemotherapeutic agents for it. In our current study, we demonstrated the
cytotoxicity effects of a newly patented compound temozolomide–perillyl alcohol
(TMZ-POH) on NPC in vitro and in vivo, and the possible mechanisms involved.
Human NPC cell lines CNE1, CNE2, HNE2, and SUME-α were treated with control
(DMSO), TMZ, POH, TMZ plus POH, and TMZ-POH. Our data indicated that TMZ-POH
could inhibit NPC cell proliferation, cause G2/M arrest and DNA damage. TMZ-POH
triggered apoptosis in NPC cells via significant activation of caspase-3 and poly(ADPribose) polymerase (PARP). Importantly, TMZ-POH-induced cell death was found to
be associated with (i) the loss of inner mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm)
and release of mitochondrial Cytochrome c, (ii) the increase in ROS generation, and
(iii) the activation of stress-activated protein kinases (SAPK)/c-Jun N-terminal
kinases (JNK) signaling pathway. The generation of ROS in response to TMZ-POH
seems to play a crucial role in the cell death process since the blockage of ROS
production using the antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine or catalase reversed the TMZPOH-induced JNK activation, DNA damage, and cancer cell apoptosis. These results
provide the rationale for further research and preclinical investigation of the antitumor
effect of TMZ-POH against human NPC.

INTRODUCTION

poor with reported median survival ranging from 7.2 to 22
months [4, 5]. Thus, special emphasis is on the discovery
of effective chemotherapeutic agent.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a DNA alkylating agent
that is currently the standard care medication administered
to glioblastoma multiforme patients as its transient tumor
growth–arrest property [6, 7]. The therapeutic benefit of
TMZ depends on its ability to alkylate DNA at the N7 or O6
position of guanine residues; high expression levels
of the cellular repair enzyme O6-methylguanin-DNAmethltransferase (MGMT) can protect tumor cells from the
cytotoxic impact of TMZ, which has been demonstrated
the contribute to treatment resistance [8–10]. Perillyl
alcohol (POH) is a naturally occurring monoterpene that
is used orally for treating a variety of cancers, including

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common
head and neck malignancy with distinct ethnic and
geographic distribution. It is endemic in southern China
and Southeast Asia. A potential link exists between
Epstein–Barr virus and the development of NPC [1, 2].
Given its high radiosensitivity, the standard treatment for
NPC is radiotherapy. Along with the damage of radiation to
normal tissues, radioresistance remains a serious obstacle
to successful treatment. Radioresistance can cause local
recurrence and distant metastases in some patients [3].
Conventionally, chemotherapy is given concurrently
with radiotherapy for treating locally advanced disease.
However, the overall survival after recurrence is usually
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1651

Oncotarget

Cytotoxicity of TMZ-POH on the growth of
NPC cells in vivo

breast, pancreas, and lung carcinomas [11–13], and has
an amazing capability to enhance the cytotoxicity of TMZ
in several tumors, including the TMZ-resistant gliomas
[14]. In this study, POH was covalently conjugated
to TMZ, thereby generating a novel TMZ analog TMZPOH (honorable product from NeOnc Technologies),
which displayed a greater anticancer potency than each
of its parental molecules in several types of malignant
neoplasms such as TMZ-resistant gliomas, triple-negative
breast cancer [15], and melanoma [16].
TMZ-POH is lipid soluble, so it can be used via
inhalation or nasal drip. Direct deposition of TMZ-POH at
the nasopharyngeal site can increase nasopharyngeal local
drug concentrations; reduce the overall dose required, thereby
reducing the side effects that result from high doses; and also
lead to increased patient convenience [17]. Based on these
promising results, in this article, the anticancer activity of
TMZ-POH was evaluated against NPC in comparison with
TMZ, POH, or a mix of TMZ plus POH in vitro and in vivo.
It is well established that reactive oxygen species
(ROS) play important biological roles in cell homeostasis.
Several studies have also reported that high intracellular
ROS levels are usually associated with apoptosis in cancer
cells [18]. The well-characterized mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) family member, stress-activated
protein kinases/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK),
plays important roles in the coordination of cellular stress
responses toward different stimuli including ROS [19],
and is an important mediator of apoptosis induction in
response to different chemotherapeutic agents. The results
of this study provide a novel mechanism of TMZ-POH
that ROS accumulation is involved in TMZ-POH-induced
JNK activation, DNA damage, and cancer cell apoptosis.

To evaluate the in vivo anticancer activity of TMZPOH, the growth inhibition of HNE2 xenografts in nude
mice was investigated. All animals were imaged for
luciferase expression to confirm efficient tumor uptake.
Figure 2 presented tumor growth in these animals after
the cessation of treatment. As shown in Figure 2B, all
control animals exhibited much increased bioluminescent
radiance (indicative of vigorous tumor growth); the
administration of TMZ-POH resulted in the significant
growth suppression of HNE2 xenografts when compared
with the control groups (p < 0.05). Tumor growth showed
less bioluminescence in the TMZ-POH-treated group
than in other groups, indicating that the therapeutic
efficacy of TMZ-POH was substantially stronger than
that of TMZ, POH, or their combination. No statistically
significant differences in the body weights were observed
between the mice in TMZ-POH-treated group and mice
in control group (P > 0.05, data not shown), indicating a
low general toxicity of TMZ-POH. These data show that
TMZ-POH exhibits potent antitumor activity and high
safety in vivo.

Role of TMZ-POH treatment in G2/M arrest and
DNA damage repair pathway activation
TMZ is shown to exert its cytotoxicity by inducing
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Therefore, whether
TMZ-POH also induced cell death via DNA damage
was investigated. In previous studies, DNA damage was
reported to result in cell cycle arrest and induce a DNA
damage repair response [20–22]. To address this issue,
cell cycle and DNA damage repair pathway were studied.
As shown in Figure 3A, TMZ-POH led to an obvious
G2/M arrest compared to its individual constituents and
their combination. ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated)
and ATR (ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related) kinases
are generally activated in response to DNA damage
[23, 24]. Indeed, TMZ-POH was observed to induce the
phosphorylation of ATM and ATR at the Ser1981 and
Ser428 site, respectively (Figures 3B and 5D). Chk1 and
Chk2 are the cell cycle checkpoint kinases, downstream
of ATM and ATR [23, 25], and were shown to be
phosphorylated at the Ser345 and Thr68 site, respectively
(Figures 3B and 5D). When DNA is damaged, DSBs
trigger the recruitment of ATM to the damaged site,
which in turn phosphorylates histone H2AX (yielding
γ-H2AX) resulting in foci formation at the damage
side [26]. As shown in Figures 3B and 5D, TMZ-POH
treatment induced an increase in phosphorylated H2AX
(Ser139). Together, these results characterize TMZ-POH
as an alkylating agent with cytotoxic mechanism similar
to TMZ, but with a potency that is substantially greater
than the original compound.

RESULTS
Cytotoxicity of TMZ-POH on the growth of NPC
cells in vitro
To verify the toxic role of TMZ-POH in NPC, four
NPC cell lines CNE1, CNE2, HNE2, and SUME-α were
employed in our study, which were treated with several
concentrations of the individual constituents (TMZPOH, TMZ, or POH) alone, or with an equimolar mix of
TMZ plus POH for 48 hours, and the cell viability was
determined by MTT assay. As shown in Figure 1A, TMZPOH inhibited the proliferation of CNE1, CNE2, HNE2,
and SUME-α compared to its individual constituents
(TMZ, POH) and their combination (TMZ plus POH)
in a dose-dependent manner significantly. Furthermore,
a colony formation assay was also carried out, which
demonstrated a more potent inhibition of colony formation
capability triggered by TMZ-POH than by its constituents
and their combination (Figure 1B and Figure 1C). Taken
together, the data in this study supported the inhibitory
role in NPC cell growth and colony formation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1652

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effects of TMZ-POH on the growth of NPC cells. (A) CNE1, CNE2, HNE2, and SUME-α cells were treated with

the indicated concentrations of TMZ, POH, TMZ plus POH, and TMZ-POH for 48 hours, and then subjected to the MTT assay. The
absorbance value was calculated and standardized to the control (DMSO) group. (B) The above cells were treated with 100 μM TMZ,
POH, TMZ plus POH, and TMZ-POH for 2 hours and subjected to the cell colony formation assay. (C) Surviving fraction is presented
as mean ± SD, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (n = 3 in each group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1653

Oncotarget

TMZ-POH-induced apoptosis in human NPC cells

weaker effects. Thus, the results from the cell survival
assay (Figure 1A) correlated closely with the effects of
these compounds on DNA damage and apoptosis markers
(Figures 3B, 4C and 5D), and in all cases TMZ-POH
clearly generated the strongest anticancer impact.

Next, whether TMZ-POH can induce NPC cell
apoptosis was investigated. As shown in Figure 4A and 4B,
TMZ-POH treatment resulted in a significant increase in
the percentage of Annexin V–positive cells in all above
cells compared to other constituents. Next, whether the
superior effect of TMZ-POH would also be reflected at
the molecular level of apoptosis-related protein expression
was determined. Western blot analysis showed that TMZPOH increased significantly the expression of cleaved
PARP and cleaved (i.e., activated) caspase-7 in CNE2 and
HNE2 cells (Figure 4C). Caspase-3 is a key effector in the
process of apoptotic cell death. As shown in Figure 4D,
the elevation of activated caspase-3 was found remarkably
profound in TMZ-POH-treated group in both HNE2 and
CNE2 cells. All three indicator proteins were induced
quite prominently by TMZ-POH after 1 days of treatment,
whereas TMZ, POH, or TMZ plus POH exerted noticeably

Role of TMZ-POH in ROS accumulation and
MTP decrease
ROS plays an important role in tumorigenesis and
chemotherapy of most anticancer drugs. To assess the role
of ROS in the anticancer effect of TMZ-POH in NPC cells,
intracellular ROS levels were measured using DCFH-DA.
As shown in Figure 5A, a significant sixfold to eightfold
increase in ROS production was observed in both CNE2
and HNE2 cells upon TMZ-POH treatment, indicated by
an increased DCFH-DA fluorescence intensity, suggesting
the intracellular ROS levels were enhanced after the TMZPOH treatment.

Figure 2: Effect of TMZ-POH on subcutaneous tumor growth. (A) Mice carrying subcutaneously implanted HNE2/luc

cells were separated into five treatment groups (five animals each): (i) control (DMSO only), (ii) 50-mg/kg TMZ, (iii) 50-mg/kg POH,
(iv) 22-mg/kg POH mixed with 28-mg/kg TMZ (mimicking the dosage of the individual components contained in 50-mg/kg TMZPOH), and (v) 50-mg/kg TMZ-POH, all injected subcutaneously. Representative images of treated tumors with different treatment were
detected. (B) Tumor size was calculated in these animals after the cessation of treatment. Both graphs show folds increase in tumor size
over time. (C) Image of HNE2/luc primary tumor in mice 17 days after the cessation of treatment in different treatment groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1654

Oncotarget

ROS-mediated cytotoxicity of TMZ-POH on
NPC cells

The mitochondrion is a major site of ROS
generation in mammalian cells, the decreased
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) is also a marker
of apoptosis. So, MMP collapse was also examined. As
expected, TMZ-POH led to a decrease in mitochondrial
membrane potential (ΔΨm) significantly compared to
other constituents (Figure 5B), as indicated by increased
JC–1 fluorescence signal ratio (the fluorescent intensity of
green to red). Coincidently, the release of Cytochrome c
as the prototypic event for the induction of mitochondrial
changes during apoptosis was induced by TMZ-POH, and
the complements of antioxidant enzymes that modulate
cellular ROS flux, such as SDHA1, were significantly
suppressed by the TMZ-POH treatment.
For many drugs, the ability to induce apoptosis and
cell cycle alterations in target cells is related to the signaling
by JNKs, a family of serine/threonine kinases that mediate
intracellular signal transduction in response to different
physiological stimuli and stressing conditions. Therefore,
the role of JNKs in cell cycle regulation and apoptosis
induced by TMZ-POH in NPC cells were examined
in the current study. As shown in Figure 5C and 5D,
exposure of CNE2 and HNE2 cells to TMZ-POH induced
phosphorylation of JNK, c-Jun, activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF2), and mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase 4 (MKK4). Collectively, the data in this study
suggest TMZ-POH leads to an imbalance of the cellular
redox potential and ultimately programmed cell death.

Next, as increased ROS production is critical in
inducing cell apoptosis, whether TMZ-POH induced death
is ROS dependent was determined. Two ROS scavengers,
catalase (CAT) N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) were employed
to prevent ROS accumulation. The cell viability in TMZPOH-treated HNE2 and CNE2 cells was restored in the
presence of CAT or NAC (Figure 6A). The increase of
apoptotic cells observed upon treatment with TMZ-POH
was significantly reduced when cells were co-treated with
CAT or NAC (Figure 6B). This ability of ROS inhibitor
to abolish TMZ-POH-induced cytotoxicity suggested that
TMZ-POH-induced cell death is ROS mediated.
Accumulating evidence support the crucial role of
oxidative DNA damage. To confirm the relationship between
ROS accumulation and DNA damage, the DNA damage–
related protein expression after CAT or NAC treatments
was detected in vitro and in vivo. As shown in Figure 6C,
CAT or NAC efficiently inhibited the increase of cleaved
PARP, p-ATM, p-Chk1, p-Chk2, and γ-H2AX induced by
TMZ-POH, indicating TMZ-POH exhibits its cytotoxicity
via oxidative DNA damage. No changes in HNE2 and
CNE2 control cells were observed after the CAT or NAC
treatment alone (data not shown). Also, the increase in JNK
phosphorylation observed in TMZ-POH-treated HNE2 and
CNE2 cells was in a ROS-dependent manner (Figure 6C).

Figure 3: Effects of TMZ-POH on cell cycle checkpoint/DNA repair pathway in NPC cells. (A) The cell cycle distributions
of CNE1, CNE2, and HNE2 were analyzed by flow cytometry after 36 hours of treatment with the indicated constituents (100 μM);
representative images are shown. Three independent experiments were performed. (B) DNA repair pathway was detected by Western
blotting after 24 hours of treatment with the indicated constituents (100 μM).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1655

Oncotarget

This study demonstrates that TMZ-POH-induced
cell death is largely regulated by a ROS-mediated
DNA damage mechanism. It further demonstrates that
TMZ-POH inhibits cell cycle progression and induces
apoptosis in NPC cells by a ROS-mediated DNA damage
mechanism (Figure 6).

DNA damage under TMZ-POH treatment was detected.
TMZ-POH led to an obvious G2/M arrest and activation
of the signaling checkpoints in response to DNA damage
in NPC cell lines.
The newly designed compound TMZ-POH
displayed greater anticancer potency than each of its
parental molecules in NPC cells, as evident from a
stronger inhibition of cell/tumor proliferation and colony
formation, along with the higher level of G2/M arrest,
apoptosis, and DNA damage. Similarly, TMZ-POH
displayed a greater therapeutic efficacy than TMZ or
POH in vivo. Intriguingly, a mere mix of the constituents
of TMZ-POH, TMZ and POH, was unable to achieve the
superior efficacy of TMZ-POH, neither in vitro (Figure 1
and Figure 4) nor in vivo (Figure 2), indicating that TMZPOH is a novel chemical entity with inherently increased
potency that is greater than the sum of its parts.
To elucidate the unique mechanism underlying the
superior activity of TMZ-POH compared with TMZ or
TMZ plus POH, potentially relevant signaling pathways
were investigated. Many investigators have demonstrated
that mitochondria are key regulators of apoptosis [27].

DISCUSSION
The current study provides a novel report on the
cytotoxic effect of TMZ-POH on several different NPC
cell lines in vitro and in vivo and the possible mechanisms.
It was then observed that TMZ-POH significantly induced
cell cycle arrest and cell apoptosis in all the four NPC cell
lines (Figure 1). Besides the cellular effects, TMZ-POH
was shown to be highly effective on inhibiting tumor
growth in a tumor model using nude mice (Figure 2).
It was reported that TMZ could methylate DNA
directly and activate ATM, which in turn transmits the
DNA damage signal to downstream substrates, such as
phosphorylated Chk1 and Chk2. The latter were well
established to be key mediators for cell cycle. Therefore,

Figure 4: Effect of TMZ-POH on the apoptosis of NPC cells. (A) Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V/PI staining after 24 hours

of treatment with the indicated constituents (100 μM). (B) Representative histograms are shown. (C) The expression of apoptosis-related
proteins was detected by Western blotting after 24 hours of treatment with the indicated constituents (100 μM). (D) Activation of caspase-3
was determined by ELISA. The results shown are means ± SD; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1656

Oncotarget

Apoptosis stimuli can cause MMP loss and Cytochrome
c release from the mitochondria to the cytosol. In the
cytosol, Cytochrome c activates caspase-3, after which
specific substrates of caspase-3, such as PARP, are cleaved.
PARP is a downstream substrate of activated caspases and
protects DNA against oxidative damage. This process
eventually leads to apoptosis [27, 28]. The present study
indicates that the decrease of MMP, release of Cytochrome
c, and repression of mitochondrial enzymes SDHA as
the prototypic event for inducing mitochondrial changes
during apoptosis are induced by TMZ-POH.

As ROS are generated mainly as byproducts of
mitochondrial respiration, mitochondria are thought
to be the primary target of oxidative damage [29].
The Overproduction of intracellular ROS may attack
cellular membrane lipids, proteins, and DNA, and cause
oxidative injury, and finally result in the reduction
of cell cycle arrest or/and cell apoptosis to repair or
eliminate the damaged cells [30–32]. Then, ROS levels
in TMZ-POH-treated cells were also determined. TMZPOH could induce ROS production in both CNE2 and
HNE2 cells (Figure 5). More importantly, the ability of

Figure 5: TMZ-POH-induced ROS accumulation, MTP decrease, and activation of JNK–mitochondrial apoptotic
pathways. (A) Intracellular ROS levels were measured using the fluorescent probe DCFH-DA after cells were treated with the indicated

constituents (100 μM) for 24 hours. The raw data from each individual experiment were normalized to control cells. (B) MMP assays by
flow cytometry using the JC-1 kit. The results shown are means ± SD. (C) Western blot analysis of Cyto c, SDHA, c-Jun, p-JNK, ATF-2,
and MKK-4 in CNE2 and HNE2 cells treated with the indicated constituents (100 μM) for 24 hours. (D) The expression of proteins in tumor
specimens in mice was detected by Western blotting 3 days after the cessation of treatment in different treatment groups (Figure 2A). ACTB
was used as internal control. Data presented are representative of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1657

Oncotarget

Figure 6: TMZ-POH-induced cytotoxicity is dependent on intracellular ROS generation. CNE2 and HNE2 cells were

preincubated with or without CAT or NAC for 2 hours before exposure to TMZ-POH (100 μM) for 48 hours. (A) The cell viability was
determined by the MTT assay. (B) Percentage of cell apoptosis was determined by Annexin V/PI staining and flow cytometry. The results
shown are means ± SD. (C) Mice carrying subcutaneously implanted HNE2/luc cells were separated into four treatment groups (five
animals each): (i) control (DMSO only), (ii) 50-mg/kg TMZ-POH, (iii) DMSO and 100-mg/kg NAC, and (iv) 50-mg/kg TMZ-POH and
100-mg/kg NAC, NAC was injected intraperitoneally. Tumor specimens in mice was detected by Western blotting 3 days after the cessation
of treatment. Cell lysates from the above treated cells (CNE2, HNE2) and tumor specimens in mice (HNE2/luc) were subjected to Western
blot to analyze the expression of JNK pathway, DNA damage, and apoptosis-related factors. ACTB was used as an internal control. Data
presented are representative of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1658

Oncotarget

TMZ-POH to induce cytotoxicity was abrogated in the
presence of two ROS scavengers, CAT or NAC. After
efficiently preventing ROS accumulation, CAT and NAC
treatments significantly alleviated the cytotoxicity of
TMZ-POH, as revealed by the restoration of cell viability
(Figure 6A), along with a remarkable decrease in the
number of apoptotic cells (Figure 6B) in both HNE2 and
CNE2 cells. DNA damage pathway was partly blocked
by inhibited ROS generation in vitro and in vivo (Figure
6C). These data validate that TMZ-POH induces NPC cell
death by activating ROS production.
Previous studies have reported that high endogenous
ROS levels correlate with the activation of the JNK
pathway and DNA damage response in human cancer
cells [33, 34]; ROS-mediated JNK activation–induced
DNA damage causes mitochondrial dysfunction-related
apoptosis [35]; and ATM, which is well known for
its role in the cellular response to DNA breaks, also
regulates many diseases through JNK [36]. Besides,
ATM phosphorylates H2AX and ROS induction, which
is partly mediated by increasing H2AX. Some inducers
of cellular stress, UV irradiation and DNA-damaging
agents, can increase the transactivation capacity of ATF-2
through the SAPK/JNK. Phosphorylation of ATF-2 could
activate a large set of genes associated with tumorigenesis,
maintenance, and physiological homeostasis as well as
transcription factors and proteins engaged in stress and
DNA damage response, including tumor necrosis factor,
transforming growth factor, cyclin A, and cyclin D1 [37].
In addition, the role of JNKs was studied in cell
cycle blockade or cell death induced by TMZ-POH to
further investigate the mechanisms of these events. JNK
activation was directly related to the increased ROS by
TMZ-POH, because the blockage of ROS by CAT and
NAC blocks JNK phosphorylation in TMZ-POH-treated
CNE2 and HNE2 cells. The present report is the first
to reveal that TMZ-POH induced an increase in ROS
accumulation, and JNK is an essential signaling pathway
linking to ROS accumulation in human NPC cells. Taken
together, the results indicate that TMZ-POH-induced ROS
accumulation is responsible for the upregulation of the
JNK pathway, which in turn induces tumor cell death.
The cytotoxicity induced by TMZ-POH was
quite different from that by TMZ. TMZ methylates the
N7 and O6 positions of guanine and the N3 position of
adenine [38], and the methyl adducts, O6-methylguanine,
N7-methylguanine, and N3-methyladenine, result in a
continuous cycle of DNA base mismatch repair with
eventual strand breaks, ultimately leading to cellular
apoptosis [39, 40]. Resistance to TMZ emerges with
prolonged treatment, mainly due to MGMT, which repairs
O6-methylguanine lesion by transferring the alkyl group
from guanine to a cysteine residue, which poses a major
therapeutic challenge [41]. The present study supported
that the DNA damage induced by TMZ-POH resulted
from ROS accumulation, which was quite different from
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that by TMZ. On the basis of its limited toxicity and ease
of administration, TMZ-POH may be used as a long-term
maintenance therapy. Such a treatment would prolong
survival of patients at a reasonably high level of quality
of life.
In summary, the present study showed that TMZPOH exhibited its cytotoxicity via ROS accumulation,
which might result from MMP collapse and lead to
activated MAPKs signaling, DNA damage, and cell cycle
arrest, and thus inhibit tumor proliferation. It is, therefore,
proposed that TMZ-POH should be investigated further as
a potentially effective therapy for NPC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Pharmacological agents
TMZ was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (China),
which were dissolved in DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) to a
concentration of 100 mM. POH and TMZ-POH were
provided by NeOnc Technologies Inc. (Los Angeles, CA,
USA) and diluted with DMSO to make stock solutions of
100 mM. In all cases of cell treatment, the final DMSO
concentration in the culture medium never exceeded 0.5%.
Stock solutions of all drugs were stored at −20°C. ROS
scavengers, CAT and NAC, were purchased from SigmaAldrich.

Cell culture and treatment
Human NPC cell lines CNE1, CNE2, HNE2, and
SUME-α were purchased from the China Center for Type
Culture Collection (China) and were cultured in DMEM
(Gibco, Invitrogen, CA, USA) and supplemented with
10% FCS (Gibco, Invitrogen) and antibiotics (penicillin/
streptomycin, 100 U/mL) at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells
were plated in cell culture plates and allowed to adhere
overnight, subsequently treated with control (DMSO),
TMZ, POH, TMZ plus POH, or TMZ-POH. In some
experiments, ROS scavengers, CAT and NAC, were
employed 2 hours before the aforementioned treatments.

Cell viability assay
The effect of TMZ-POH was also evaluated by a
conventional MTT cell viability assay, and results were
presented as a percentage of the control. Briefly, NPC
cells were seeded in triplicates in 96-well plates and
treated with various concentrations (0, 40, 80, 120, 160,
and 200 μM) of TMZ, POH, TMZ plus POH, and TMZPOH for 48 hours. Thereafter, 10 μL of the MTT [5 mg/
mL in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), Sigma-Aldrich]
stock solution was added, followed by incubation at
37°C in 5% CO2 for 24 hours. Formazan crystals that
form were solubilized with 100 μL of acidified (0.01 M
HCl) 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) overnight at
1659

Oncotarget

37°C. Absorbance at 570 nm was read on a Bio-Rad 680
microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, CA, USA), and
results were reported relative to a reference wavelength
of 630 nm.

all animals via noninvasive whole-body bioluminescent
imaging. For this purpose, mice were intraperitoneally
injected with 50 mg/kg D-luciferin (Perkin Elmer, MA,
USA) and imaged using the Xenogen IVIS Spectrum
Imaging System (Caliper/Perkin Elmer). Then mice were
randomly divided into five groups, five in each group,
and treated once a day for 5 days with the following:
Control (DMSO), TMZ, POH, TMZ plus POH, and TMZPOH. Mice were imaged twice per week. Images were
analyzed by region-of-interest (ROI) analysis using the
Living Image software package (Caliper/Perkin Elmer,
MA, USA) to quantitate the tumor volume. Mice were
sacrificed and examined for the growth of tumors 17 days
after the cessation of drug treatment.

Colony formation assay
Depending on the cell line, 150–350 cells were
seeded into each well of a 6-well plate and exposed to
the aforementioned treatments. The appropriate plating
density was aimed to produce 20–100 surviving colonies
per well. These cells were incubated at 37°C for 10–14
days. After fixation with acetic acid–methanol (1:4)
and staining with diluted crystal violet (1:30), colonies
consisting of > 50 cells were considered and calculated.
Results from the triplicate plates were averaged and
divided by initial seeded cells to yield the survival rate
of clones for each concentration, and the surviving
fraction was determined. All survival curves represented a
minimum of three independent experiments.

Determination of ROS production
The production of ROS in cells following the
aforementioned treatment was evaluated using the
2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) kit
(Beyotime, China), according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, cells were washed with serum-free DMEM
twice and treated with 20 μM DCFH-DA for 30 minutes at
37°C, washed and suspended in PBS. Then the florescence
intensity was evaluated by the FACS Calibur instrument.

Cell cycle analysis
Cells were treated by above agents, collected and
washed in PBS, then re-suspended and fixed in 70%
ethanol overnight. After incubation in 1 ml of propidium
iodide staining solution (0.1% Triton X-100, 200 μg/ml
DNase-free RNase A, 20 μg/ml propidium iodide) for
1 hour at room temperature, DNA content was evaluated by
a FACS Calibur instrument (Becton Dickinson, Bedford,
MA, USA) and the distribution of cell cycle phases was
determined using ModiFit software (Topsham, ME, USA).
Two independent experiments were carried out.

Analysis of mitochondrial transmembrane
potential
After the aforementioned treatment, cells were stained
with the cationic dye 5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro1,1′,3,3′-tetraethylbenzimidazolylcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1; Beyotime) to
demonstrate the state of mitochondrial transmembrane
potential (MTP), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Briefly, cells were harvested and transferred to 1.5-mL tubes,
and then incubated with JC-1 (5 µg/mL) in a 37°C incubator
for 20 minutes after washing twice with PBS. Subsequently,
cells were collected and subjected to flow cytometry to detect
the change of JC-1 florescence.

Detection of apoptotic cells
Apoptosis was evaluated using the Annexin V–FITC
Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD Biosciences Pharmingen,
CA, USA). Cells were resuspended and incubated with
FITC–Annexin V/PI for 15 minutes in the dark, and
then evaluated by flow cytometry (FACS Calibur, BD
Biosciences) using the Cellquest software.

Western blots
Cells were lysed in cell lysis buffer (Beyotime), and
the total cellular protein concentration was determined with
a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., IL,
USA). Equal amounts of protein was separated on sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDSPAGE) and transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)
membranes (Millipore, MA, USA). These membranes
were probed overnight at 4°C with the following primary
antibodies: antibodies against human PARP, p-ATM, p-ATR,
γ-H2AX, p-Chk1/2, Cyto c, p-JNK, ATF-2, c-Jun, MKK4, SDHA, Casp 3, and cleaved Casp 7 (all 1:1000; Cell
Signaling Technology, MA, USA), antibody against ACTB
(1:2000; Zsbio, China), followed by secondary antibody
(Zsbio) with peroxidase for 1 hour at room temperature.

In vivo studies
All animal protocols were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, China. A subline
of HNE2 cells called HNE2/luc was used, which was
transfected with the firefly luciferase gene. BALB/cnu mice (4–6 weeks of age, female, from Beijing HFK
Bioscience Co., Ltd., China) were subcutaneously injected
into the flank with 3 × 106 HNE2/luc cells in 100 μL PBS.
The mice were housed in laminar flow cabinets under
specific pathogen-free conditions. Seven days after the
implantation, efficient tumor volume was confirmed in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1660

Oncotarget

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

5.	 Caponigro F, Longo F, Ionna F, Perri F. Treatment
approaches to nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a review.
Anticancer Drugs. 2010; 21:471–477.

The caspase-3 activity in tissue homogenates was
detected by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) using a Colorimetric Caspase-3 Assay Kit
(Sigma, MO, USA), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, the synthetic caspase-3 substrate
acetyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-p-nitroanilide was added to
the reaction mixture, with a control reaction prepared
in parallel to exclude any nonspecific hydrolysis of the
substrate. Both mixtures were incubated at 37°C for
1–2 hours and the absorbance was read at 405 nm; the
caspase-3 activity was expressed as an optical density
value at 405 nm.

6.	

7.	 Zhang J, Stevens MF, Bradshaw TD. Temozolomide:
mechanisms of action, repair and resistance. Curr Mol
Pharmacol. 2012; 5:102–114.
8.	 Pegg AE. Multifaceted roles of alkyltransferase and
related proteins in DNA repair, DNA damage, resistance to
chemotherapy, and research tools. Chem Res Toxicol. 2011;
24:618–639.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Kaina B, Christmann M, Naumann S, Roos WP. MGMT:
key node in the battle against genotoxicity, carcinogenicity
and apoptosis induced by alkylating agents. DNA Repair
(Amst). 2007; 6:1079–1099.

Statistical significance was evaluated with data from
at least three independent experiments. The GraphPad
Prism 6.02 software (GraphPad Software, CA, USA) was
used for data analysis. All statistical analyses between
the two groups were performed using the nonparametric
Mann–Whitney test. However, when more than two
groups were evaluated, data were assessed by analysis of
variance followed by Bonferroni-adjusted post hoc t tests
for multiple pairs of interest without a priori selection.
Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD).
All statistical tests were two sided. Differences were
considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.

10.	 Silber JR, Bobola MS, Blank A, Chamberlain MC. O(6)methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase in glioma therapy:
promise and problems. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012;
1826:71–82.
11.	 Yuri T, Danbara N, Tsujita-Kyutoku M, Kiyozuka Y,
Senzaki H, Shikata N, Kanzaki H, Tsubura A. Perillyl
alcohol inhibits human breast cancer cell growth in vitro
and in vivo. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004; 84:251–260.
12.	 Stark MJ, Burke YD, McKinzie JH, Ayoubi AS, Crowell PL.
Chemotherapy of pancreatic cancer with the monoterpene
perillyl alcohol. Cancer Lett. 1995; 96:15–21.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation of China (NO. 81372888
and NO. 81401916).

13.	 Xu M, Floyd HS, Greth SM, Chang WC, Lohman K,
Stoyanova R, Kucera GL, Kute TE, Willingham MC,
Miller MS. Perillyl alcohol-mediated inhibition of lung
cancer cell line proliferation: potential mechanisms for its
chemotherapeutic effects. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;
195:232–246.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Cho HY, Wang W, Jhaveri N, Torres S, Tseng J, Leong MN,
Lee DJ, Goldkorn A, Xu T, Petasis NA, Louie SG,
Schonthal AH, Hofman FM, et al. Perillyl alcohol for the
treatment of temozolomide-resistant gliomas. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2012; 11:2462–2472.

The authors claim that they have no conflicts of
interest.

REFERENCES

15.	 Chen TC, Cho HY, Wang W, Barath M, Sharma N, Hofman
FM, Schonthal AH. A novel temozolomide-perillyl alcohol
conjugate exhibits superior activity against breast cancer
cells in vitro and intracranial triple-negative tumor growth
in vivo. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:1181–1193.

 1.	 Wei WI, Sham JS. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Lancet.
2005; 365:2041–2054.
 2.	 Lo KW, Chung GT, To KF. Deciphering the molecular
genetic basis of NPC through molecular, cytogenetic, and
epigenetic approaches. Semin Cancer Biol. 2012; 22:79–86.

16.	 Chen TC, Cho HY, Wang W, Nguyen J, Jhaveri N,
Rosenstein-Sisson R, Hofman FM, Schonthal AH. A novel
temozolomide analog, NEO212, with enhanced activity
against MGMT-positive melanoma in vitro and in vivo.
Cancer Lett. 2015; 358:144–151.

  3.	 Rottey S, Madani I, Deron P, Van Belle S. Modern treatment
for nasopharyngeal carcinoma: current status and prospects.
Curr Opin Oncol. 2011; 23:254–258.
  4.	 Bensouda Y, Kaikani W, Ahbeddou N, Rahhali R, Jabri M,
Mrabti H, Boussen H, Errihani H. Treatment for metastatic
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head
Neck Dis. 2011; 128:79–85.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher B,
Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:987–996.

17.	 Cipolla D, Shekunov B, Blanchard J, Hickey A. Lipid-based
carriers for pulmonary products: preclinical development
1661

Oncotarget

and case studies in humans. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2014;
75:53–80.

32.	 Fan C, Zheng W, Fu X, Li X, Wong YS, Chen T.
Strategy to enhance the therapeutic effect of doxorubicin
in human hepatocellular carcinoma by selenocystine,
a synergistic agent that regulates the ROS-mediated
signaling. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2853–2863. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.1854.

18.	 Wang J, Yi J. Cancer cell killing via ROS: to increase or
decrease, that is the question. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008;
7:1875–1884.
19.	 Shen HM, Liu ZG. JNK signaling pathway is a key
modulator in cell death mediated by reactive oxygen and
nitrogen species. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006; 40:928–939.

33.	 Dolado I, Swat A, Ajenjo N, De Vita G, Cuadrado A,
Nebreda AR. p38alpha MAP kinase as a sensor of reactive
oxygen species in tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2007;
11:191–205.

20.	 Zhou BB, Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response: putting
checkpoints in perspective. Nature. 2000; 408:433–439.

34.	 Zou P, Zhang J, Xia Y, Kanchana K, Guo G, Chen W,
Huang Y, Wang Z, Yang S, Liang G. ROS generation
mediates the anti-cancer effects of WZ35 via activating
JNK and ER stress apoptotic pathways in gastric
cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:5860–5876. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.1642.

21.	Wang J, Wiltshire T, Wang Y, Mikell C, Burks J,
Cunningham C, Van Laar ES, Waters SJ, Reed E, Wang W.
ATM-dependent CHK2 activation induced by anticancer
agent, irofulven. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:39584–39592.
22.	 Tyagi A, Singh RP, Agarwal C, Siriwardana S, Sclafani RA,
Agarwal R. Resveratrol causes Cdc2-tyr15 phosphorylation
via ATM/ATR-Chk1/2-Cdc25C pathway as a central
mechanism for S phase arrest in human ovarian carcinoma
Ovcar-3 cells. Carcinogenesis. 2005; 26:1978–1987.

35.	 Chiu WH, Luo SJ, Chen CL, Cheng JH, Hsieh CY,
Wang CY, Huang WC, Su WC, Lin CF. Vinca alkaloids
cause aberrant ROS-mediated JNK activation, Mcl-1
downregulation, DNA damage, mitochondrial dysfunction,
and apoptosis in lung adenocarcinoma cells. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2012; 83:1159–1171.

23.	 Boutros R, Lobjois V, Ducommun B. CDC25 phosphatases
in cancer cells: key players? Good targets? Nat Rev Cancer.
2007; 7:495–507.

36.	 Schneider JG, Finck BN, Ren J, Standley KN, Takagi M,
Maclean KH, Bernal-Mizrachi C, Muslin AJ, Kastan MB,
Semenkovich CF. ATM-dependent suppression of stress
signaling reduces vascular disease in metabolic syndrome.
Cell Metab. 2006; 4:377–389.

24.	 Cimprich KA, Cortez D. ATR: an essential regulator of
genome integrity. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 9:616–627.
25.	 Rudolph J. Cdc25 phosphatases: structure, specificity, and
mechanism. Biochemistry. 2007; 46:3595–3604.
26.	 Bonner WM, Redon CE, Dickey JS, Nakamura AJ,
Sedelnikova OA, Solier S, Pommier Y. γH2AX and cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:957–967.

37.	 Bhoumik A, Lopez-Bergami P, Ronai Z. ATF2 on the
double–activating transcription factor and DNA damage
response protein. Pigment Cell Res. 2007; 20:498–506.

27.	 Green DR, Reed JC. Mitochondria and apoptosis. Science.
1998; 281:1309–1312.

38.	 Tentori L, Graziani G. Recent approaches to improve the
antitumor efficacy of temozolomide. Curr Med Chem.
2009; 16:245–257.

28.	 Kroemer G, Reed JC. Mitochondrial control of cell death.
Nat Med. 2000; 6:513–519.

39.	 Fu D, Calvo JA, Samson LD. Balancing repair and
tolerance of DNA damage caused by alkylating agents. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:104–120.

29.	Mandujano-Tinoco EA, Gallardo-Perez JC, MarinHernandez A, Moreno-Sanchez R, Rodriguez-Enriquez S. Antimitochondrial therapy in human breast cancer multi-cellular
spheroids. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1833:541–551.

40.	 Gratas C, Sery Q, Rabe M, Oliver L, Vallette FM. Bak and
Mcl-1 are essential for Temozolomide induced cell death
in human glioma. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2428–2435. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.1642.

30.	 Zhang H, Chen T, Jiang J, Wong YS, Yang F, Zheng W.
Selenium-containing allophycocyanin purified from seleniumenriched Spirulina platensis attenuates AAPH-induced
oxidative stress in human erythrocytes through inhibition of
ROS generation. J Agric Food Chem. 2011; 59:8683–8690.

41.	 Hiddingh L, Tannous BA, Teng J, Tops B, Jeuken J,
Hulleman E, Boots-Sprenger SH, Vandertop WP, Noske
DP, Kaspers GJ, Wesseling P, Wurdinger T. EFEMP1
induces gamma-secretase/Notch-mediated temozolomide
resistance in glioblastoma. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:363–374.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1620.

31.	 Yen CC, Hsiao CD, Chen WM, Wen YS, Lin YC,
Chang TW, Yao FY, Hung SC, Wang JY, Chiu JH,
Wang HW, Lin CH, Chen TH, et al. Cytotoxic effects of
15d-PGJ2 against osteosarcoma through ROS-mediated
AKT and cell cycle inhibition. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:716–725.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1704.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1662

Oncotarget

