Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

pHLIP-mediated targeting of truncated tissue factor to tumor
vessels causes vascular occlusion and impairs tumor growth
Suping Li1*, Yanhua Tian2*, Ying Zhao1, Yinlong Zhang1, Shishuai Su1, Jing
Wang1, Meiyu Wu1, Quanwei Shi1, Gregory J. Anderson3, Johannes Thomsen4,
Ruifang Zhao1, Tianjiao Ji1, Jie Wang5, Guangjun Nie1*
1

 AS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials & Nanosafety, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology,
C
China, Beijing 100190, China

2

eking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing
P
100871, China

3

QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia

4

Sino-Danish Center for Education and Research, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China

5

Department of Thoracic Medical Oncology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing 100142, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence to:
Guangjun Nie, e-mail: niegj@nanoctr.cn
Keywords: pH low insertion peptide (pHLIP), truncated tissue factor (tTF), tumor vessel targeting, thrombosis
Received: April 24, 2015 	Accepted: June 13, 2015	

Published: June 25, 2015

ABSTRACT
Occluding tumor blood supply by delivering the extracellular domain of
coagulation-inducing protein tissue factor (truncated tissue factor, tTF) to tumor
vasculature has enormous potential to eliminate solid tumors. Yet few of the
delivery technologies are moved into clinical practice due to their non-specific tissue
biodistribution and rapid clearance by the reticuloendothelial system. Here we
introduced a novel tTF delivery method by generating a fusion protein (tTF-pHLIP)
consisting of tTF fused with a peptide with a low pH-induced transmembrane structure
(pHLIP). This protein targets the acidic tumor vascular endothelium and effectively
induces local blood coagulation. tTF-pHLIP, wherein pHLIP is cleverly designed to
mimic the natural tissue factor transmembrane domain, triggered thrombogenic
activity of the tTF by locating it to the endothelial cell surface, as demonstrated by
coagulation assays and confocal microscopy. Systemic administration of tTF-pHLIP
into tumor-bearing mice selectively induced thrombotic occlusion of tumor vessels,
reducing tumor perfusion and impairing tumor growth without overt side effects. Our
work introduces a promising strategy for using tTF as an anti-cancer drug, which has
great potential value for clinical applications.

antibody or peptide ligands that recognize various tumor
endothelial markers [1–7]. Free tTF is soluble and inactive
[8–11]; however, its potent coagulation activity is recovered
when localized near a phospholipid membrane. Although
a number of tTF delivery strategies have been proven to
selectively induce thrombotic occlusion of tumor vessels
and subsequent tumor necrosis, most have not been moved
into clinical practice due to nonspecific delivery and rapid
clearance by the reticuloendothelial system [1, 12, 13].
The pH (low) membrane insertion peptide (pHLIP)
can insert into cell membranes by forming an inducible
transmembrane α-helix under acidic conditions [14–20],

INTRODUCTION
One major obstacle to the development of
coagulation therapy for cancer is the inability to target
vascular occluding agents specifically to tumor blood
vessels, thereby limiting their therapeutic effect and
causing adverse side effects. Over the past two decades,
approaches to targeted coagulation therapy in vivo have
largely focused on selective delivery of the extracellular
domain of the coagulation-inducing protein tissue factor
(truncated tissue factor, tTF, the initiator of the extrinsic
pathway of blood coagulation) to tumor vessels, by using
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23523

Oncotarget

and, when administered systemically, is capable of
targeting a variety of solid tumors because of acidosis of
tumor tissues [21–25], while avoiding the liver. Based on
the well-characterized tumor-targeting property of the
pHLIP, we constructed a tumor-targeted tTF delivery vector
(tTF-pHLIP) by fusing pHLIP to tTF. Unlike other current
delivery strategies wherein tTF was delivered by targeted
ligands [1–6], pHLIP-directed membrane insertion under
acidic conditions could allow tTF to adopt a state which is
close to the native extracellular domain of TF on membrane
surfaces, thus maintaining its maximum coagulation activity.
We have generated the tTF-pHLIP fusion protein
in which the N-terminus of pHLIP was fused to the
C-terminal region of tTF, and found that tTF-pHLIP can
localize to the acidic tumor endothelium of blood vessels
in tumor-bearing mice and induce local intravascular
thrombosis (Figure 1A), resulting in tumor infarction and
regression without overt side effects.

leads to the loss of the pH-dependent membrane insertion
function [26, 27]. SDS-PAGE analysis of the purified
proteins showed the expected sizes, with Mr values of
approximate 32, 000 Da for tTF-pHLIP, 28, 000  Da
for tTF and 32, 000 Da for ­tTF-K-pHLIP (Figure 1B).
Western blotting using monoclonal anti-human tissue
factor antibody further confirmed the presence of the tTF
moiety in these three proteins (Figure 1B).

Functional characterization of tTF-pHLIP fusion
proteins
We first tested whether tTF-pHLIP has the ability
to insert into the lipid bilayer by using circular dichroism
(CD) spectra. The CD spectral signal has been used to
monitor the conformational changes of pHLIP in a free
state at neutral pH to α-helix formation when inserted
into bilayers at lower pH [17]. Our data showed that
pHLIP fused with tTF was predominantly unstructured
at pH 7.4 in the absence or presence of POPC liposomes
(Figure 2A and Supplementary Figure S1 for liposome
characteristics) [28, 29], whereas α-helix formation
was observed at pH 6.5 in the presence of liposomes, as
identified by the characteristic negative peaks at 208 nm
and 222 nm. Thus, we conclude that the conjugation of
tTF to the N-terminus of pHLIP did not affect the ability
of the peptide to form a helical structure and to insert
into the membrane bilayers at low pH.
Next, we evaluated the interaction of tTF-pHLIP
with the cell membrane at neutral and acidic pH values by
confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. In the confocal

RESULTS
Generation and characterization of tTF-pHLIP
and control proteins
The chimeric protein tTF-pHLIP was generated
by fusing the N-terminus of pHLIP to the C-terminus of
the extracellular domain of tissue factor (1–218 amino
acids). We also generated free tTF and tTF-K-pHLIP
as controls. K-pHLIP is a mutant of pHLIP where the
residues Asp 13 and Asp 24 in the transmembrane
segment of pHLIP are replaced by Lys residues. This

Figure 1: Proposed mechanism of action and characterization of fusion proteins. A. Schematic showing the proposed

mechanism of action of tTF-pHLIP within tumor blood vessels. tTF-pHLIP freely circulates in the blood at physiological pH, but
inserts across the plasma membrane of tumor endothelial cells by virtue of an α-helix (green) which forms at reduced pH in tumor
blood vessels. Membrane-bound tTF then triggers the blood coagulation cascade, resulting in thrombosis and consequently tumor vessel
infarction and tumor cell necrosis. B. SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis of recombinant purified tTF-pHLIP and control proteins
tTF and tTF-K-pHLIP.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23524

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Functional characterization of expressed tTF-pHLIP proteins in vitro. A. Circular dichroism (CD) spectral

signals of tTF-pHLIP. The CD spectra of tTF-pHLIP at pH7.4 in the absence (State I) or presence of liposomes (state II) indicated an
unstructured configuration of pHLIP peptide. Decreasing the pH to 6.5 (State III) induced the membrane insertion of pHLIP via α-helix
formation. B. Confocal images of HUVECs incubated with Alexa 594-labeled tTF-pHLIP (1.24 μM, red) at pH 7.4 (top) or 6.5 (bottom)
for 30 min. Cell nuclei were labeled with Hoechst 33342 (blue). C. HUVECs were incubated in PBS at pH 7.4 or 6.5 in the presence (gray)
or absence (red) of Alexa 594-labeled tTF-pHLIP (40 μg) at 37°C for 1 hour. Cell surface binding of Alexa 594-labeled tTF-pHLIP was
assessed by flow cytometry. D. The ability of tTF-pHLIP and control proteins to facilitate the specific proteolytic activation of factor X by
factor VIIa in the presence of HUVECs at pH 7.4 or 6.5 was assessed using a Spectozyme FXa assay. pHLIP was used as negative control.
Data represent the mean ± SD of five independent experiments.

In vivo tumor vessel targeting and intravascular
thrombosis

microscopy assays, HUVEC cells were incubated with
Alexa 594-labeled tTF-pHLIP (1.24 μM) for 30 min at
37°C, at either pH 7.4 or 6.5. Our results demonstrated that
bare fluorescence was found on the tTF-pHLIP-treated
cell membrane at pH 7.4 (Figure 2B). In contrast, strong
fluorescent signals were observed on the cell surface at
pH 6.5 (Figure 2B), revealing the membrane insertion of
the pHLIP at low pH. Specific binding of tTF-pHLIP to
the cells at low pH was also determined by flow cytometry
(Figure 2C). To determine whether tTF-pHLIP bound to
cells could induce blood coagulation, we evaluated the
ability of tTF-pHLIP to enhance the specific proteolytic
activity of factor X by factor VIIa, a key step in the
extrinsic coagulation pathway [8–11]. HUVECs were
incubated with tTF-pHLIP in the presence of factor VIIa,
followed by the addition of substrate factor X. At pH 7.4,
tTF-pHLIP was unable to induce factor X activation
(Figure 2D); however, at pH 6.5, tTF-pHLIP was
found to activate factor X in a concentration-dependent
manner. Activation of factor X at lower pH was dependent
on the presence of pHLIP, as free tTF or the mutant
tTF-K-pHLIP could not induce it. Together, these data
indicate that the ligation of the pHLIP peptide to the
C-terminus of tTF could target tTF to the cell membrane
while not influencing its coagulation activity.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We next tested the tumor vascular targeting capacity
of tTF-pHLIP in nude mice bearing established ~100 mm3
orthotopic MDA-MB-231 human breast xenograft tumors.
A 20 μg/mouse (equivalent to approximately 833 μg/kg)
dose of tTF-pHLIP was injected into the mice via the tail
vein, with saline as a negative control. Note that this dose
was sufficiently safe as demonstrated in a dose escalation
study (Supplementary Figures S2-S3 and Supplementary
Videos 1–3). After 8 hours we removed the tumors
and found apparent hemorrhage in tumors treated with
tTF-pHLIP (Figure 3A, top left) compared with the vital
appearance of saline-treated tumors (Figure 3A, bottom
left), indicating blood pooling due to vascular disruption.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) accordingly revealed
extensive thrombosis in the blood vessels of tumors
treated with tTF-pHLIP but not saline (Figure 3A, middle).
We also stained the tumors with a CD41-specific antibody
to further identify thrombosis, as demonstrated by the
presence of activated platelet aggregates (Figure 3A,
right). Biodistribution data revealed that tTF-pHLIP
was specifically accumulated in the tumor 8 hours after
intravenous administration, but little or no accumulation

23525

Oncotarget

Figure 3: tTF-pHLIP treatment induces thrombosis within tumor vessels, and tumor vessel accumulation of tTFpHLIP. A. MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer-bearing nude mice were injected with tTF-pHLIP or saline via a tail vein and the tumors were
resected 8 hours post-injection. The tumors of mice treated with tTF-pHLIP were bruised and blackened (top left) in contrast to the vital
appearance of the tumors in mice treated with saline (bottom left), indicating blood pooling due to vascular disruption. Tumor sections were
subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining to detect thrombosis (middle, arrow). Immunostaining of tumor sections with anti-mouse
platelet CD41 antibody further confirmed thrombosis in the tumors of tTF-pHLIP-treated mice (top right, darker brown). Data are representative
of at least three separate experiments. B. FAM-labeled tTF-pHLIP was injected intravenously into nude mice bearing MDA-MB-231 tumors.
Tumors were harvested 8 hours later, and tumor sections were stained with anti-CD34 antibody and examined by confocal microscopy. The
tTF-pHLIP was green; blood vessels were visualized with anti-CD34 (brown); nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue).

in heart, liver, spleen, kidney or lung (Supplementary
Figure  S4), suggesting a high specificity of tTF-pHLIP
for tumor tissue. Accordingly, H&E staining showed no
thrombosis in the blood vessels of all these normal tissues
of the mice for up to 24 hours after tTF-pHLIP treatment
(Figure 4).
We further confirmed whether tTF-pHLIP
accumulated in the vessels of tumors and thus caused
clotting in them. For tumors of mice treated with FAM
(5(6)-carboxyfluorescein)-labeled tTF-pHLIP, staining of
tumor sections with antibody against vascular endothelial
cell marker CD34 showed the binding of tTF-pHLIP to
the blood vessel walls as verified by colocalization with
CD34 (Figure 3B).

using photoacoustic imaging [30]. This technique
evaluates blood perfusion of the target organ by comparing
the characteristic signals of oxyhemoglobin (HbO2) and
hemoglobin (Hb). Our results showed that in contrast to
the pre-injection state, the HbO2 signal declined sharply
while the Hb signal increased considerably 6 hours
after tTF-pHLIP treatment (Figure 5A), demonstrating a
decrease in blood supply due to thrombotic occlusion.
We further tested the therapeutic efficacy of the
tTF-pHLIP treatment. Nude mice bearing established
~100  mm3 MDA-MB-231 tumors were randomly
sorted into four groups and were treated with saline,
tTF-K-pHLIP, tTF in combination with free pHLIP
(tTF/pHLIP) or tTF-pHLIP by the tail vein 4 times
at intervals of 6 days. After the second injection, a
reduction in tumor volume was observed in mice
treated with tTF-pHLIP compared with the saline group,
and this became statistically significant from day 13
onwards. In contrast, the tumors continued to grow in all
other treatment groups, and none of these groups were
significantly different from the saline control. After the

tTF-pHLIP reduces tumor perfusion and
promotes tumor regression
To assess the impact of tTF-pHLIP-induced
thrombosis on blood supply, we analyzed tumor blood
circulation in MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing nude mice
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23526

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Thrombotic risk assessment in the normal tissue of the tTF-pHLIP-treated mice. Histological analysis of various
normal organs and tumor of MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mice 24 hours after treatment with tTF-pHLIP. Sections of heart, liver, spleen,
lung, kidney and tumor were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Thrombosis was only found in the blood vessels of the tumor, as
indicated by the arrows.

Figure 5: Photoacoustic (PA) imaging of blood supply in tumors of mice treated with tTF-pHLIP and antitumor
activity of tTF-pHLIP in model of MDA-MB-231 cancer. A. MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing nude mice were injected intravenously
with tTF-pHLIP. After 6 hours, PA signals of oxyhemoglobin (HbO2, red) and hemoglobin (Hb, blue) within the tumors were collected to
detect the change of blood supply. tTF-pHLIP treatment leads to a significant reduction in tumor perfusion. The images are representative of
3 tumors imaged. B. Nude mice bearing ~100 mm3 MDA-MB-231 tumors were injected intravenously with various vehicles at the indicated
time (arrows), and tumor sizes were recorded thereafter. Each bar represents the mean ± SD. **P < 0.01 by ANOVA for tumor volume (left)
and log-rank [Mantel-Cox] test for survival analysis (right); n = 6 – 7 mice per group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23527

Oncotarget

Safety and tolerability

fourth injection, tTF-pHLIP-treated mice had a mean
tumor volume of 552 vs 2443 mm3 for saline, 2109
mm3 for tTF-K-pHLIP and 2289 mm3 for the tTF/pHLIP
group (Figure 5B, left). The effective inhibition of tumor
growth by tTF-pHLIP correlated with a substantial
increase in median survival of animals (69.2 days vs
48.4 for saline, 49.6 for tTF-K-pHLIP and 49.0 days for
tTF/pHLIP group) (Figure 5B, right).
The antitumor activity of tTF-pHLIP was further
determined in C57BL/6 or BALB/c nude mice bearing
established ~150 mm3 B16-F10 tumors. For C57BL/6
mice, tTF-pHLIP or various controls were administered
intravenously 4 times at intervals of 48 hours. Mice
injected with saline, tTF-K-pHLIP or tTF/pHLIP formed
large tumors (Figure 6A, left). In contrast, mice injected
with tTF-pHLIP displayed rapid tumor regression. The
median survival time for saline-treated mice was 22.8 days
(Figure 6A, right), and treatment with tTF-K-pHLIP or
tTF/pHLIP did not increase this survival. However, the
tTF-pHLIP allowed survival of four of six mice for up to
43.4 days or more after tumor implantation. This curative
effect was also demonstrated in the B16-F10 nude mouse
model (Figure 6B).

During the course of the therapeutic experiments,
no morbidity or mortality was observed in both types
of tumor-bearing mice after a total of 4 intravenous
injections of tTF-pHLIP (20 μg/mouse for each injection)
at the indicated time intervals as mentioned above. This
indicates that tTF-pHLIP was not overtly toxic to the
animals. Histological analysis also showed no visible
thrombosis in the major organs (heart, liver, spleen,
lung and kidney) of the MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing
mice after single or multiple (3 times) tTF-pHLIP
administrations (Supplementary Figure S5), indicating that
the tTF-pHLIPs are well-tolerated.
To investigate whether tTF-pHLIP induces
an innate immune response, we assessed IL-6,
IP-10, TNF-α and IFN-α serum concentrations of
non-tumor-bearing C57BL/6 mice before and after
tTF-pHLIP treatment. No significant changes in
concentration of any of the cytokines were found after
single or multiple (3 times) injections of tTF-pHLIP
(Supplementary Table S1), revealing that tTF-pHLIP
may be immunologically inert.

Figure 6: Antitumor activity of tTF-pHLIP in B16-F10 melanoma model. A. C57BL/6 mice bearing ~150 mm3 melanomas

were injected with various vehicles every other day by the tail vein, and tumor sizes were recorded thereafter. Each bar represents the
mean ± SD. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 by ANOVA for tumor volume (left) and log-rank [Mantel-Cox] test for survival analysis (right);
n = 6 - 7 mice per group. B. Gross appearance of B16-F10 tumors in BALB/c nude mice after treatment with tTF-pHLIP. At the beginning
of treatment, the tumor was well-developed and growing rapidly. One day after treatment, the tumor began to scab. The scabs came off with
time, and by day 10 only fibrous scar tissue was visible in four of the six mice.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23528

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

In conclusion, we have shown that the fusion protein
tTF-pHLIP is an effective antitumor molecule by targeting
tumor vessels and inducing vascular infarction. This study,
we believe, represents the first time pHLIP technology
has been introduced into cancer therapy and this new
anticancer treatment approach is uniquely attractive for
moving into clinical practice.

A number of methods for tTF delivery have
previously been described by fusing tTF to peptide or
antibody ligands that target various overexpressed tumor
vascular markers [1–6]. However, most of these ligands
recognize markers that are also constitutively expressed
in normal endothelial cells, thereby causing off-target
effects. Another major problem is steric effects related to
ligand-receptor binding, wherein a bound receptor covers
neighboring ligand site due to its physical size, leading to
steric exclusion of ligand sites near a bound receptor and
thus reducing the average reactivity of neighboring ligand
sites [31].
In contrast, we have found in this study that
pHLIP technology can be used to selectively deliver
tTF to tumor blood vessels based on the ability of
pHLIP to undergo membrane insertion in acidic tumor
vascular compartments [32]. pHLIP can exist in three
states: in a water soluble form, bound to a membrane
surface and inserted across the lipid membrane as an
α-helix [14–17]. At physiological pH, pHLIP is largely
water-soluble, whereas at slightly acidic pH, pHLIP
forms an α-helix which is capable of inserting into a
lipid bilayer. This characteristic makes pHLIP an
attractive targeting moiety for selectively labeling and
tracing acidic tissues in vivo [14]. We generated the
fusion protein tTF-pHLIP in which the pHLIP peptide is
able to form α-helix to insert across tumor endothelium
in response to acidic tumoral pH, thereby locating tTF
on plasma membrane surface. Therefore, a distinctive
feature of pHLIP-based targeting of tTF is that pHLIP
binding does not require ligand-receptor interaction
as used in previous tTF targeting strategies [1–6],
but depends on a drop in tumor vascular pH. More
importantly, in contrast to the existing tTF delivery
methods, the pHLIP peptide in tTF-pHLIP functions
similarly to the transmembrane domain of native TF
protein, and this should confer tTF a state similar to the
native extracellular domain of TF. As a result, the blood
coagulation function of tTF can be better recovered in
tTF-pHLIP compared to ligand-mediated targeting.
We have demonstrated that systemic administration
of tTF-pHLIP can specifically induce thrombotic
occlusion of tumor vessels and impairs tumor growth in
two mouse tumor models: MDA-MB-231 human breast
orthotopic xenograft tumor and B16-F10 melanoma.
Thrombosis or other abnormalities were not observed
in normal organs of the mice. The selective binding of
tTF-pHLIP fusion protein to tumor endothelium is in
accordance with the prior findings of pHLIP targeting
of acidic tumors [21–25]. Furthermore, although
tTF-pHLIP in vivo demonstrated no overt immune
stimulation, its possible impact on the endotoxin levels
will need to be further characterized.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning, expression and purification of tTF,
tTF-K-pHLIP and tTF-pHLIP
The cDNAs coding for tTF (amino acids
1 to 218 of human TF) and tTF-pHLIP in
which the pHLIP polypeptide (cDNA sequence:
GCTGAACAGAACCCGATCTACTGGGCTCGTTACG
CTGACTGGCTGTTCACCACCCCGCTGCTGCTGCT
GGACCTGGCTCTGCTGGTTGACGCTGACGAAGG
TACC,
amino
acid
sequence:
AEQNPIYWARYADWLFTTPLLLLDLALLVDADEGT)
was linked to the C-terminus of tTF, were synthesized
de novo. The cDNAs were cloned into Nde I and
Xho I sites of the expression vector pET-30a(+).
The mutant control tTF-K-pHLIP was produced
by replacing pHLIP in the tTF-pHLIP with
K-pHILP (changes underlined) (cDNA sequence:
GCTGAACAGAACCCGATCTACTGGGCTCGTTACG
CTAAATGGCTGTTCACCACCCCGCTGCTGCTGCTG
AAACTGGCTCTGCTGGTTGACGCTGACGAAGGT
ACC; amino acid sequence: AEQNPIYWARYAKW
LFTTPLLLLKLALLVDADEGT) using the same
approach. A cDNA encoding tTF containing a
hexahistidine-tag at the 5′-end was amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the primer pair
5′- ATTATATGCTGCCACAGTATTTGTAGTGCCTGA
CATATGCC-3′ (5′-primer) and 5′- GGATTCAGAGA
AGAGCACCACCACCACCACCACTGAGAGCTCC-3′
(3′-primer), and subcloned into the expression vector
pET-30(+)a at the Nde I and Xho I sites. The vectors
were introduced into competent E. coli cells (BL21DE3)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA). After stimulating with IPTG (0.5 mM)
for 4 hours, the cells were harvested and homogenized
by sonication in washing buffer (25 mL 10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 8.0). To solubilize inclusion bodies, 5 to 10 mL of urea
buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, containing 8 M urea)
was added and the samples were incubated overnight at
room temperature (RT). The suspension was centrifuged
at 5,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was
filtered through a 0.22 μm filter and loaded onto a nickelnitrilotriacetic acid column (Ni-NTA, Novagen, Carlsbad,
CA). Purification and refolding were carried out using a
His Bind Buffer Kit (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To remove

23529

Oncotarget

the salt, the protein solution was dialyzed in a Slide-ALyzerR10 K dialysis cassette (Pierce, Bonn, Germany)
against Tris-buffered saline (TBS) (20 mM Tris, 150 mM
NaCl, pH7.4). Subsequently, tTF and tTF-pHILP were
analyzed under denaturing conditions by sodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
and western blotting using mouse monoclonal anti-human
tissue factor antibody (R&D Systems, 1:1000).

with a FV1000-IX81 confocal laser scanning biological
microscope (Olympus, Japan).

Flow cytometry
Ten thousand HUVECs were analyzed in each
sample. The cells were suspended in phosphate buffer
at pH 6.5 or 7.4 in the presence or absence of Alexa
594-labeled tTF-pHLIP (40 μg) at 37°C for 1 h. After
washing the cells to remove free tTF-pHLIP, they were
resuspended in 500 μL PBS (pH 7.4) and analyzed by flow
cytometry (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA).

Factor X activation by tTF, tTF-K-pHLIP and
tTF-pHLIP
The ability of tTF, tTF-K-pHLIP and tTF-pHLIP
to facilitate the specific proteolytic activation of factor
X by factor VIIa was assessed as described by Ruf
et al. [33]. In brief, POPC liposomes were mixed with
factor VIIa (10 nM) (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA)
in a total volume of 100 μL. Recombinant proteins
were added in a volume of 10 μL to final concentrations
ranging from 1 to 50 nM. After 5 min at 37°C, 50 μL of
factor X was added to a final concentration of 30 nM for
an additional 5 min at RT. Spectrozyme FXa (100 μL)
(BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) was then added to
reach a final concentration of 0.3 mM, and absorption at
405 nm (absorption maximum for the product generated
by proteolytic cleavage of the substrate by Xa) was
measured after 3 min. In cell-based assays, human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs, American
Type Culture Collection) were premixed with factor
VIIa (10 nM) in a total volume of 100 μL, and factor X
activation was analyzed.

Tumor animal models
All animal experiments carried out in this study
were approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal
Experiments of the Health Science Center of Peking
University (Beijing, China). Five week old BALB/c nude
mice weighing 20–23 g were purchased from Beijing
Vital River Laboratories. Human MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer and B16-F10 melanoma cells (American Type
Culture Collection) were grown as attached monolayer
cultures in DMEM, and were afterwards dissociated in
trypsin, washed and resuspended in PBS. MDA-MB-231
cells (2.0 × 106) were mixed with 50 μL of Matrigel and
injected into the mammary fat pads of the mice. For
C57BL/6 or BALB/c nude models of melanoma, B16-F10
cells (1.0 × 106) were injected subcutaneously into the
right flank. Tumors were allowed to grow to a volume
of approximately 100 to 200 mm3 (volume = [length ×
width2]/2; as measured with a vernier caliper). The
mice were then used for in vivo imaging and therapeutic
experiments.

Circular dichroism
Circular dichroism (CD) measurements were carried
out on a Bio-Logic Modular Optical System 450 (MOS450) at 25°C in phosphate buffer. Briefly, POPC liposomes
(700 μM) and tTF-pHLIP (10 μM) were mixed in 10 mM
phosphate buffer. HCl was added to lower the pH from 8.0
to 6.5, and CD spectra were recorded. tTF itself was used
as the base line.

Multispectral optoacoustic tomography
A real-time multispectral optoacoustic tomography
(MSOT) scanner (iThera Medical inVision128, Germany)
was utilized to determine tumor blood perfusion by
detecting oxyhemoglobin (HbO2) and hemoglobin
(Hb) signals. MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mice were
anesthetized with isoflurane and placed in a supine
position in an animal holder. Cross-sectional multispectral
optoacoustic image datasets of the tumors were acquired
at different wavelengths in the near-infrared window (at
10 nm intervals), where the absorbance wavelengths of
HbO2 and Hb differ widely and can thus be used to easily
distinguish these two forms.

Confocal microscopy
For confocal microscopy studies, HUVECs (5.0 × 103)
were seeded into confocal dishes (2 cm diameter) and
maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS. Twenty four hours later, the medium
was removed, cells were washed twice with PBS and
resuspended in PBS at a pH of 7.4 or 6.5 using phosphate
buffers made by mixing appropriate proportions of
Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4. Alexa 594-labeled tTF-pHLIP
(40 μg) was added to the cells. After 30 or 60 min, the
cells were washed twice with PBS and Hoechst 33342
was added to stain cell nuclei. Images were analyzed

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistics
For the study of coagulation activity in vitro, data
were compared using Student’s t test. For section analysis in
the therapeutic experiment, each treatment group consisted
of 9 to 12 mice, from which one section per mouse was

23530

Oncotarget

analyzed. For the tumor growth experiments, the differences
in mean tumor volumes between groups were compared
using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated
measures followed by Tukey’s HSD test. Cumulative survival
curves between groups were compared using Kaplan-Meier
analysis followed by the Log rank (Mantel-Cox) test.
Statistics were calculated using SPSS 18.0. P-values less
than .05 were considered statistically significant.

recombinant fusion proteins. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute. 2005; 97:733–747.
5.	 Narazaki M, Tosato G. Targeting coagulation to the tumor
microvasculature: perspectives and therapeutic implications
from preclinical studies. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute. 2005; 97:705–707.
6.	 Schwoppe C, Zerbst C, Frohlich M, Schliemann C,
Kessler T, Liersch R, Berdel WE. Anticancer therapy by
tumor vessel infarction with polyethylene glycol conjugated
retargeted tissue factor. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry.
2013; 56:2337–2347.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Dr. Jun Liu for assistance with
platelet activity detection. We also thank Prof. Sarah
Perrett from Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy
of Sciences for improving English expression and
Prof. Jingyan Han and Dr. Xiaowei Mao from School
of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University for useful
discussions and analytic tools.

7.	 Agemy L, Sugahara KN, Kotamraju VR, Gujraty K,
Girard OM, Kono Y, Ruoslahti E. Nanoparticle-induced
vascular blockade in human prostate cancer. Blood. 2010;
116:2847–2856.
8.	 Dorfleutner A, Ruf W. Regulation of tissue factor cytoplasmic domain phosphorylation by palmitoylation. Blood.
2003; 102:3998–4005.
9.	 Huang X, Ding WQ, Vaught JL, Wolf RF, Morrissey JH,
Harrison RG, Lind SE. A soluble tissue factor-annexin V
chimeric protein has both procoagulant and anticoagulant
properties. Blood. 2006; 107:980–986.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

10.	 Butenas S, Orfeo T, Mann KG. Tissue Factor in Coagulation
Which? Where? When?. Arteriosclerosis Thrombosis and
Vascular Biology. 2009; 29:1989–1996.

This work was supported by grants from the
National Basic Research Plan of China (MoST 973
Program 2012CB934000), the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (31200752, and the National
Distinguished Young Scientists program 31325010)
and the Key Research Program of Chinese Academy of
Sciences (Grant No. KGZD-EW-T06). GJA is the recipient
of a Senior Research Fellowship from the National Health
and Medical Research Council of Australia and was
supported by the CAS Visiting Professorship Program.

11.	 Butenas S, Mann KG. Active tissue factor in blood? Nature
Medicine. 2004; 10:1155–1156.
12.	 Wickström M, Larsson R, Nygren P, Gullbo J.
Aminopeptidase N (CD13) as a target for cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Science. 2011; 102:501–508.
13.	 Ding YP, Li SP, Nie GJ. Nanotechnology-based therapeutic
targeting and imaging of tumor vasculature. Nanomedicine.
2013; 8:11–14.
14.	 Andreev OA, Dupuy AD, Segala M, Sandugu S, Serra DA,
Chichester CO, Reshetnyak YK. Mechanism and uses of
a membrane peptide that targets tumors and other acidic
tissues in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 2007; 104:7893–7898.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bieker R, Kessler T, Schwöppe C, Padró T, Persigehl T,
Bremer C, Berdel WE. Infarction of tumor vessels by
NGR-peptide–directed targeting of tissue factor: experimental results and first-in-man experience. Blood. 2009;
113:5019–5027.

15.	 Andreev OA, Engelman DM, Reshetnyak YK. pH-sensitive
membrane peptides (pHLIPs) as a novel class of delivery
agents. Molecular Membrane Biology. 2010; 27:341–352.

2.	 Huang X, Molema G, King S, Watkins L, Edgington TS,
Thorpe PE. Tumor infarction in mice by antibody-directed
targeting of tissue factor to tumor vasculature. Science.
1997; 275:547–550.

16.	 Sosunov EA, Anyukhovsky EP, Sosunov AA, Moshnikova A,
Wijesinghe D, Engelman DM, Andreev OA. pH (low)
insertion peptide (pHLIP) targets ischemic myocardium.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2013;
110:82–86.

3.	 Hu P, Yan J, Sharifi J, Bai T, Khawli LA, Epstein AL.
Comparison of three different targeted tissue factor fusion
proteins for inducing tumor vessel thrombosis. Cancer
Research. 2003; 3:5046–5053.

17.	 Yao L, Daniels J, Moshnikova A, Kuznetsov S, Ahmed A,
Engelman DM, Andreev OA. pHLIP peptide targets nanogold particles to tumors. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2013; 110:465–470.

4.	 Dienst A, Grunow A, Unruh M, Rabausch B, Nör JE,
Fries  JW, Gottstein C. Specific occlusion of murine
and human tumor vasculature by VCAM-1-targeted

18.	 Thévenin D, An M, Engelman DM. pHLIP-mediated translocation of membrane-impermeable molecules into cells.
Chemical Biology. 2009; 16:754–762.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23531

Oncotarget

19.	 Cheng CJ, Bahal R, Babar IA, Pincus Z, Barrera F, Liu C,
Slack FJ. MicroRNA silencing for cancer therapy targeted
to the tumour microenvironment. Nature. 2014.

26.	 Hunt JF, Rath P, Rothschild KJ, Engelman DM.
Spontaneous, pH-dependent membrane insertion of a transbilayer alpha-helix. Biochemistry. 1997; 36:15177–15192.

20.	 Reshetnyak YK, Andreev OA, Lehnert U, Engelman DM.
Translocation of molecules into cells by pH-dependent
insertion of a transmembrane helix. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2006; 103:6460–6465.

27.	 Reshetnyak YK, Andreev OA, Lehnert U, Engelman DM.
Translocation of molecules into cells by pH-dependent
insertion of a transmembrane helix. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2006; 103:6460–6465.

21.	 Vaupel P, Kallinowski F, Okunieff P. Blood flow,
oxygen and nutrient supply, and metabolic microenvironment of human tumors: a review. Cancer Reseach. 1989;
49:6449–6465.

28.	 Dua JS, Rana AC, Bhandari AK. Liposome: methods of
preparation and applications. International Journal of
Clinical Pharmacology Research. 2012; 3:14–20.
29.	 Akbarzadeh A, Rezaei-Sadabady R, Davaran S, Joo SW,
Zarghami N, Hanifehpour Y. Liposome: classification,
preparation, and applications. Nanoscale Research Letters.
2013; 8:102.

22.	 Vāvere AL, Biddlecombe GB, Spees WM, Garbow JR,
Wijesinghe D, Andreev OA, Lewis JS. A novel technology
for the imaging of acidic prostate tumors by positron emission tomography. Cancer Research. 2009; 69:4510–4516.

30.	 Xu M, Wang LV. Photoacoustic imaging in biomedicine.
Review of Scientific Instruments. 2006; 77:041101.

23.	 Reshetnyak YK, Yao L, Zheng S, Kuznetsov S, Engelman
DM, Andreev OA. Measuring tumor aggressiveness and targeting metastatic lesions with fluorescent pHLIP. Molecular
Imaging and Biology. 2011; 13:1146–1156.

31.	 Hlavacek WS, Posner RG, Perelson AS. Steric effects on
multivalent ligand-receptor binding: exclusion of ligand
sites by bound cell surface receptors. Biophysical Journal.
1999; 76:3031–3043.

24.	 Macholl S, Morrison MS, Iveson P, Arbo BE, Andreev OA,
Reshetnyak YK, Johannesen E. In vivo pH imaging with
99mTc-pHLIP. Molecular Imaging and Biology. 2012;
14:725–734.

32.	 Sevick EM, Jain RK. Blood flow and venous pH of
tissue-isolated Walker 256 carcinoma during hyperglycemia. Cancer Reseach. 1988; 48:1201–1207.

25.	 Daumar P, Wanger-Baumann CA, Pillarsetty N, Fabrizio L,
Carlin SD, Andreev OA, Lewis JS. Efficient 18F-labeling
of large 37-amino-acid pHLIP peptide analogues and their
biological evaluation. Bioconjugate Chemistry. 2012;
23:1557–1566.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Ruf W, Rehemtulla A, Morrissey JH, Edgington TS.
Phospholipid-independent and-dependent interactions
required for tissue factor receptor and cofactor function.
Journal of Biochemistry. 1991; 266:2158–2166.

23532

Oncotarget

