Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 35

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bortezomib-mediated down-regulation of telomerase and
disruption of telomere homeostasis contributes to apoptosis of
malignant cells
Xinyu Ci1,2,3,4, Bingnan Li3, Xueping Ma1,2,4, Feng Kong1,4, Chengyun Zheng4,5,
Magnus Björkholm3,4, Jihui Jia2,4, Dawei Xu3,4
1

Central Research Laboratory, Shandong University Second Hospital, Jinan, PR China

2

Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, PR China

3

 ivision of Hematology, Department of Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska
D
University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden

4

Karolinska Institutet-Shandong University Collaborative Laboratories for Cancer and Stem Cell Research, Jinan, PR China

5

Department of Hematology, Shandong University Second Hospital, Jinan, PR China

Correspondence to:
Dawei Xu, e-mail: Dawei.Xu@ki.se
Jihui Jia, e-mail: jiajihui@sdu.edu.cn
Keywords: apoptosis, BCL2, bortezomib, hTERT, telomerase
Received: August 15, 2015 	Accepted: September 30, 2015 	Published: October 12, 2015

ABSTRACT
Bortezomib inhibits the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway to achieve its anti-cancer
effect and its well characterized activity is the NF-κB inhibition through which the antiapoptotic bcl-2 expression is down-regulated and apoptosis is subsequently induced.
However, the downstream molecular targets of bortezomib are still incompletely
defined. Because telomere stabilization via activation of telomerase, induction of
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and appropriate expression of shelterin
proteins is essential to cancer development and progression, we investigated the effect
of bortezomib on telomere homeostasis/function in malignant cells. The bortezomib
treatment of leukemic (HEL) and gastric cancer cells (BGC-823) led to significant
inhibition of hTERT and telomerase expression, widespread dysregulation of shelterin
protein expression, and telomere shortening, thereby triggering telomere dysfunction
and DNA damage. hTERT over-expression attenuated bortezomib-induced telomere
shortening, abnormal shelterin expression and telomere dysfunction. Importantly,
bortezomib-mediated apoptosis of malignant cells was partially prevented by hTERT
over-expression. Mechanistically, hTERT first robustly enhances bcl2 expression
and maintains significantly high residual levels of bcl2 even in bortezomib-treated
HEL cells. Second, hTERT protects against bortezomib-induced DNA damage. Our
findings collectively reveal a profound impact of bortezomib on telomere homeostasis/
function. Down-regulation of hTERT expression and telomere dysfunction induced by
bortezomib both contribute to its cancer cell killing actions. It is evident from the
present study that hTERT can confer resistance of malignant cells to bortezomib-based
target cancer therapy, which may have important clinical implications.

processes. Evidence has accumulated that the aberrant
proteasome-dependent proteolysis contributes to
oncogenesis, and targeting the proteasome pathway is
thus an attractive anti-cancer strategy. Indeed, bortezomib,
as the first proteasome inhibitor for cancer therapy, has

INTRODUCTION
The ubiquitin/proteasome system is the major
proteolytic site in mammalian cells and plays essential
parts in cellular homeostasis and various physiological

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38079

Oncotarget

RESULTS

proved successful in the treatment of hematological and
other malignancies [1–6]. It is well-known that bortezomib
induces cell death by inhibiting the anti-apoptotic NF-κB
signaling pathway whereas enhancing the expression of
the pro-apoptotic factor NOXA. However, given a broad
biological and physiological activity of the proteasome
system, bortezomib likely has multiple targets in
malignant cells that have not been explored in details.
Profound insights into bortezomib-mediated anti-cancer
mechanisms should be helpful for its rational application
in cancer patients.
Human telomeres are nucleoprotein complexes
consisting of up to 15 - 20 kb tandemly repetitive
TTAGGGs and associated proteins [7–10]. Six key
proteins (TRF1, TRF2, POT1, TPP1, RAP1 and TIN2)
bind to telomeric DNA and form a shelterin complex
[8, 10, 11]. This telomere structure is essential for
maintaining genomic stability and integrity and
acts as a protective cap on human chromosome ends
[7–11]. Telomere length (TL) is controlled by multiple
elements and one of the major players is telomerase
responsible for elongating telomeric DNA sequences
[7–9]. Telomerase is silent in most human differentiated
cells due to the tight repression of the hTERT gene,
which encodes the key telomerase catalytic component
[7–9]. In sharp contrast, telomerase/hTERT is widely
activated in human malignancies. Activation of
telomerase has been shown to be an essential step
during oncogenesis, thereby stabilizing telomere length
and conferring transformed cells unlimited proliferation
potential [7–9]. In addition to its canonical telomerelengthening function, hTERT or telomerase has other
multiple biological activities. For instance, hTERT has
been observed to enhance survival, chemo-resistance,
invasion and metastasis of malignant cells independently
of its telomere lengthening effect [12–17].
Because hTERT/telomerase-mediated telomere
stabilization plays a key role in cancer development
and progression, we are interested in potential effects
of bortezomib on telomere homeostasis and function.
A  previous study showed that bortezomib downregulated hTERT expression and telomerase activity
in subsets of multiple myeloma (MM) cells [18],
however, it remains to be defined whether the observed
hTERT inhibition has any functional significances. On
the other hand, as hTERT is involved in chemo- and
radio-resistance of malignant cells, it appears to be
important to elucidate whether hTERT is capable of
protecting bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. Moreover, it
is currently unclear whether bortezomib affects shelterin
protein expression and telomere structure, thereby
impairing telomere function in malignant cells. With all
these issues in mind, we sought to elucidate the effect
of bortezomib on telomere homeostasis and functional
consequences.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Bortezomib treatment leads to hTERT, hTER and
telomerase down-regulation in malignant cells
hTERT and hTER are the core of the telomerase
complex and essential to telomerase activity. hTERT
expression was previously shown to be down-regulated by
bortezomib in subsets of myeloma cell lines [18]. To see
if this is the case in other malignant cells, we co-incubated
erythroid leukemia HEL cells and gastric BGC-823 with
bortezomib. Significantly diminished hTERT  mRNA
levels were observed in both cell lines exposed to
bortezomib (Figure 1A and 1B, top panels). By 48 hours,
less than 20% of the original hTERT mRNA levels were
left in HEL cells and < 40% in BGC-823 cells. Bortezomib
also exhibited an inhibitory effect on hTER expression
to certain extent (Figure 1A and 1B, middle panels).
Consistent with these changes, significant down-regulation
of telomerase activity was observed in bortezomib-treated
HEL and BGC-823 cells (Figure 1A and 1B, bottom
panel). Of note, decreased telomerase activity developed
slowly in these bortezomib-treated cells, likely due to
its long half-life [19–21]. The inhibition of hTERT and
telomerase by bortezomib was more efficient in HEL cells
than in BGC-823 cells (Figure 1 and 1B).

Bortezomib treatment induces widespread
dysregulation of shelterin protein expression
In addition to hTERT/telomerase, shelterin proteins
binding to telomere are also essential to telomere length
maintenance and function [8]. We thus determined
potential effects of bortezomib on shelterin protein
expression. The expression of TRF1, TRF2, POT1,
TPP1, RAP1 and TIN2 mRNA was significantly lower
in HEL cells treated with bortezomib compared to that
found in untreated cells (Figure 2A). BGC-823 cells in
the presence of bortezomib exhibited different changes
in shelterin mRNA levels: significant down-regulation of
TRF1, TRF2, TPP1 and POT1 expression while enhanced
expression of TIN2 and RAP1 (Figure 2A). We further
examined TRF1, TRF2 and POT1 expression at protein
levels using immunoblotting. As shown in Figure 2B,
the abundance of TRF1, TRF2 and POT1 proteins was
significantly decreased in bortezomib-treated HEL and
BGC-823 cells, highly consistent with declines in their
mRNA expression.

Bortezomib treatment leads to telomere
shortening and telomere dysfunction
Having observed widespread effects of bortezomib
on the expression of hTERT and shelterin proteins,
we then wanted to determine whether telomere length

38080

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The inhibitory effect of bortezomib on hTERT and hTER expression and telomerase activity in leukemic and
gastric cancer cells. Cells were treated with bortezomib as indicated. hTERT and hTER transcripts were determined using qPCR and

telomerase activity assessed using a PCR-ELISA kit. The levels of each target in bortezomib-treated cells were expressed as percentages
of those in untreated cells. A. Levels of hTERT mRNA (top), hTER RNA (middle) and telomerase activity (bottom) in leukemic HEL cells
treated with bortezomib. B. Levels of hTERT mRNA (top), hTER RNA (middle) and telomerase activity (bottom) in gastric BGC-823 cells
treated with bortezomib. * and **: P < 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. BTZ, bortezomib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38081

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Widespread dysregulation of shelterin protein expression in bortezomib-treated HEL and BGC-823
cells. A. and B. mRNA levels of shelterin factors TRF1, TRF2, TPP1, POT1, RAP1 and TIN2 in bortezomib-treated cells. Cells were

treated with bortezomib for 24 hours and qPCR was used for quantitative assays. The levels of each target mRNA in bortezomib-treated
cells were expressed as percentages of those in untreated cells. (A) HEL cells and (B) BGC-823 cells. C. and D. Immunoblotting assessment
of TRF1, TRF2 and POT1 protein expression in bortezomib-treated cells. Same sets of cells above were analyzed for TRF1, TRF2 and
POT1 protein levels and shown was representative of three independent experiments. (C) HEL cells and (D) BGC-823 cells. * and **:
P < 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. BTZ, bortezomib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38082

Oncotarget

and function was affected in bortezomib-treated cells.
Flow-FISH analyses revealed that a significant telomere
shortening did occur in HEL cells (means ± SD, 1.0 ± 0.0
vs 0.80 ± 0.09 for control and treated cells, respectively,
P = 0.046) and BGC-823 cells (1.0 ± 0.0 vs 0.66 ± 0.13 for
control and treated cells, respectively, P = 0.0016) in the
presence of bortezomib (Figure 3B and 3C). Moreover, we
further assessed telomere length in BGC-823 cells using
quantitative PCR (qPCR), and telomere shortening was
similarly observed in bortezomib-treated cells (1.0 ± 0.0
vs 0.826 ± 0.166 for control and treated cells, respectively,
P = 0.08), although the difference was close to but did
not reach a statistically significant levels (Figure 3C, right
panel). To detect telomere dysfunction, we performed
immuno-FISH to examine the presence of dysfunctional
telomere-induced foci (TIF), or co-localization of 53BP1
foci with telomere signals. Telomeres, revealed as green
signals, were readily detectable in both untreated and
bortezomib-treated HEL and BGC-823 cells, whereas
red 53BP1 foci only occurred in the treated cells. The
merged image demonstrated that a fraction of 53BP1
foci were localized at telomeres in cells exposed to
bortezomib (Figure 3D and 3E) (TIF-positive HEL cells:
6.17% ± 1.61 vs 30.67% ± 5.86 for untreated and treated
cells, respectively, P = 0.002; TIF-positive BGC-823 cells:
6.33% ± 4.73 vs 42% ± 7.55 for untreated and treated
cells, respectively, P = 0.003).

expression, too. In HEL-hTERT and BGC-823-hTERT
cells treated with bortezomib, POT1 was the only
shelterin protein that was still significantly downregulated, while TRF1 and TRF2 expression was
stabilized (Figure 4A–4D), differing from that seen in
these same cells without ectopic hTERT (Figure 2A–2D).
RAP1 and TPP1 mRNA expression remained largely the
same in cells with and without bortezomib exposure,
whereas increased TIN2 transcripts occurred in treated
BGC-823-hTERT cells (Figure 4).

Bortezomib-induced cell death/apoptosis is
attenuated by over-expression of hTERT
It is well known that bortezomib treatment induces
apoptotic death of cancer cells [2]. To determine the
functional significance of hTERT down-regulation by
bortezomib, we asked whether hTERT protects malignant
cells from apoptosis induced by bortezomib. Towards this
end, we treated control- and hTERT-expressed HEL and
BGC-823 cells with bortezomib at different concentrations
(Figure 5A and 5B). As expected, all cells incubated
with bortezomib exhibited a lower viability in a dosedependent manner (Figure 5A and 5B), however, more
hTERT-over-expressed cells survived bortezomib treatment.
We further performed apoptosis analysis using Annexin
V staining, and observed that a significantly higher fraction
of control HEL and BGC-823 cells underwent apoptosis
than did hTERT-cells (Figure 5C and 5D).

hTERT over-expression inhibits bortezomibmediated telomere dysfunction

DNA damage induced by bortezomib is
diminished in hTERT-over-expressed cells

Given the above results, we wanted to determine
whether the ectopic expression of hTERT/telomerase is
capable of preventing telomere dysfunction induced by
bortezomib. HEL and BGC-823 cells were infected with
hTERT lenti-viral and retro-viral vectors, respectively,
to make hTERT-over-expressed variants, and they were
then treated with bortezomib. Cells expressing ectopic
hTERT contain approximately the double amount of
telomerase activity compared with their empty vectorinfected counterparts (Figure 3A). Upon their exposure
to bortezomib, HEL-hTERT and BGC-823-hTERT cells
exhibited significantly fewer TIF than did empty vectorinfected cells (Figure 3. TIF positivity: 30.67% ± 5.8 vs
14.33% ± 5.77 for control and HEL-hTERT cells with
bortezomib, respectively, P = 0.026; 42.00% ± 7.55 vs
18.00% ± 8.89 for control and BGC-823-hTERT cells with
bortezomib, respectively, P = 0.023).

Because DNA damage induced by bortezomib is
required for its anti-cancer activity [22–25], we wanted
to determine whether hTERT protection against apoptosis
is associated with altered DNA damage in bortezomibtreated cells. For this purpose, we compared the formation
of 53BP1 foci between control and hTERT cells in the
presence of bortezomib. Bortezomib treatment led to 50%
and 67% of 53BP1 foci-positive cells in control HEL and
BGC-823 cells, respectively, while positive ones were only
25% and 32% in their hTERT-over-expressing counterparts,
respectively, and percentages were significantly lower
(HEL vs HEL-hTERT and BGC-823 vs BGC-823-hTERT,
P = 0.005 and 0.01, respectively) (Figure 6A). Moreover,
the number of 53BP1 foci in positive cells with ectopic
hTERT was much fewer than those in positive cells
containing no ectopic hTERT (Figure 6A).

hTERT over-expression attenuates bortezomibinduced down-regulation of TRF1, TRF2, TPP1
and RAP1 expression

Bcl2 is robustly up-regulated by hTERT overexpression in HEL cells

We further sought to determine whether
hTERT over-expression was capable of antagonizing
bortezomib-induced dysregulation of shelterin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Caspase 3 activation/cleavage and bcl-2 downregulation via the NK-kB signalling inhibition is observed
in bortezomib-treated MM and other malignant cells [2].
38083

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Telomere shortening and dysfunction in HEL and BGC-823 cells treated with bortezomib, which was attenuated
by hTERT over-expression. A. Enhanced telomerase activity in HEL and BGC-823 cells expressing ectopic hTERT. Cells were infected

with lenti-viral or retro-viral hTERT-encoded vectors, and selected using puromycin. Telomerase activity was assessed using a telomerase
PCR-ELISA kit. B. and C. Telomere shortening in bortezomib-treated control cells but not in hTERT-over-expressed cells. Cells were treated
with bortezomib for 24 hours and FLOW-FISH and/or qPCR was performed to determine telomere length in these cells. B and C left panel:
FLOW-FISH results; and C right panel: qPCR results. Telomere length in bortezomib-treated cells was expressed as percentages of that in
untreated cells. D. and E. Telomere dysfunction in bortezomib-treated cells was inhibited by hTERT over-expression. Control and hTERTover-expressed cells were treated with bortezomib for 24 hours and then analyzed for co-localization of 53BP1 foci and telomere signals (TIF)
using immuno-FISH. Cells were counted for TIF and the percentage of positive cells (> 2 foci/cell) calculated (right panel). Shown in (D) and (E)
left panels is representative of three independent experiments. * and **: P < 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. BTZ, bortezomib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38084

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Attenuation of bortezomib-induced shelterin protein dysregulation by hTERT over-expression. A. and B. Cells

expressing ectopic hTERT were treated with bortezomib for 24 hours and mRNA levels of shelterin proteins then analyzed using qPCR. The
levels of each target mRNA in bortezomib-treated cells were expressed as percentages of those in untreated cells. (A) HEL-hTERT cells
and (B) BGC-823-hTERT cells. C. and D. Immunoblotting assessment of TRF1, TRF2 and POT1 protein expression in bortezomib-treated
cells. Same sets of cells above were analyzed for TRF1, TRF2 and POT1 protein levels and shown was representative of three independent
experiments. (C) HEL-hTERT cells and (D) BGC-823-hTERT cells.* and **: P < 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. BTZ, bortezomib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38085

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Attenuation of bortezomib-induced apoptosis by hTERT over-expression in HEL and BGC-823
cells. A.  Increased viability of BTZ-treated HEL cells expressing ectopic hTERT. Control and hTERT-over-expressed cells were

treated with bortezomib for 24 hours and then counted for viable cells using trypan blue exclusion test. B. Increased viability of
bortezomib-treated BGC-823 cells expressing ectopic hTERT. C. and D. Reduced apoptosis of BTZ-treated HEL and BGC-823 cells
expressing ectopic hTERT. The same sets of cells above were stained with Annexin V and then determined for apoptotic cells using
Flow cytometry. Top: Shown is representative of four independent experiments. Bottom: Apoptosis of BTZ-treated control cells
was set as 1, and differences (fold changes) in BTZ-treated hTERT-cells were calculated. * and **: P < 0.05 and 0.01, respectively.
BTZ, bortezomib.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38086

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Reduced DNA damage and/or bcl-2 up-regulation by hTERT over-expression in bortezomib-treated cells. A. and

B. Reduced 53BP1 foci by hTERT over-expression. Immuno-fluorescence analyses were performed to detect the presence of 53BP1 foci in
both control and hTERT-over-expressed cells treated with bortezomib and percentages of positive cells calculated. (A) HEL-control and HELhTERT cells. Top panels: representative of 53BP1 foci in HEL cells and their hTERT-over-expressed counterparts with and without bortezomib.
Bottom panel: 53BP1 foci-positive cells in each group based on 4 independent experiments. (B) BGC-823-control and BGC-823-hTERT cells.
* and **: P < 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. C. Bcl-2 up-regulation in HEL-hTERT cells. Left panel: Immunoblotting was performed to analyze
bcl2 protein expression. Changes in folds were based on the bcl2 signal densities. Right panel: bcl2 expression levels in HEL-control and hTERT
cells from four independent experiments. D. Bcl2 down-regulation and caspase 3 activation in bortezomib-treated HEL cells. Control and
hTERT-over-expressed HEL cells were treated with bortezomib for 24 hours and then analyzed for bcl-2 expression and caspase 3 cleavage using
Western blot. Bcl2 levels were calculated based on the scanned bcl2 signal densities in the image. Shown is representative of three independent
experiments. BTZ, bortezomib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38087

Oncotarget

To see whether this is the case in HEL and BGC-823
cells, we incubated them with bortezomib and then
analyzed caspase 3 cleavage and bcl-2 levels. Caspase
3 was undetectable in BGC-823 cells (data not shown)
and we therefore only focused on HEL and HEL-hTERT
cells. The immunoblotting results showed highly increased
bcl-2 expression (more than 4 fold increase on average) in
HEL-hTERT cells compared to their control counterparts
(Figure 6C). As expected, bortezomib treatment led to
bcl-2 down-regulation and caspase 3 cleavage in both
control HEL and HEL-hTERT cells, however, remaining
bcl2 in bortezomib-treated HEL-hTERT cells was still
80% of that in untreated control HEL cells (Figure 6D).

might significantly disrupt their expression balance and
highly organized interaction with telomeres, thereby
affecting telomere structure and function. Currently the
mechanisms underlying this bortezomib action remain
elusive. Both mRNA and protein levels of shelterin
factors were concordantly altered in bortezomib-treated
cells, which indicates an indirect effect of bortezomib.
Likely, bortezomib targets certain transcription factors
or has epigenetic effects on shelterin gene expression.
On the other hand, we unexpectedly found that hTERT
over-expression was capable of attenuating abnormal
shelterin expression mediated by bortezomib. It is
thus plausible that the diminished hTERT expression
contributes to the dysregulation of shelterin proteins in
bortezomib-treated cells.
Recent studies unveil multiple biological activities
of telomerase or hTERT in addition to its telomere
lengthening function. For instance, hTERT is capable of
facilitating the recruitment of DNA repair factors to sites
of double-stranded breaks [26], while depletion of hTERT
leads to enhanced cell radio-sensitivity, and diminished
capacity for DNA repair [27]. In accordance with these
reports, we observed that hTERT over-expression
attenuated DNA damage in bortezomib-treated malignant
cells. As DNA damage induced by bortezomib is required
for its anti-cancer activity [22–25], it is not surprising
that cell death was attenuated in hTERT over-expressed
cells when exposed to bortezomib, likely due to decreased
DNA damage mediated by hTERT. To our knowledge,
this is the first report showing that hTERT confers cancer
cells resistance to bortezomib. Thus, hTERT is capable of
mediating resistance to not only conventional anti-cancer
approaches, but also targeted cancer therapy, which might
have broad implications in cancer therapeutics.
It has been well characterized that bortezomib
inhibits the anti-apoptotic NF-κB signaling pathway by
repressing its target gene expression (such as bcl-2 and
others) [2]. Moreover, in this process, the activation of
caspase 3 occurs, which further down-regulates bcl-2
via cleavage [2, 28, 29]. We did observe these alterations
in HEL cells exposed to bortezomib. Intriguingly, a
robust up-regulation of bcl2 expression was seen in
HEL-hTERT cells, which might be one of important
mechanisms behind hTERT protection against apoptosis
by bortezomib. hTERT was recently shown to interact
with NF-κB signaling and thereby promote NF-κB target
expression [12, 15]. It will be interesting to determine
whether hTERT and NF-κB collaboratively stimulate bcl2
expression in HEL-hTERT cells. In addition, hTERT was
also observed to be involved in apoptosis by interfering
bcl2 expression and function in breast cancer cells [30],
which suggests broad interplay between bcl2 and hTERT
in regulating cancer cell survival.
In summary, we demonstrate that bortezomib
induces down-regulation of hTERT/telomerase and broad

DISCUSSION
Bortezomib exerts its anti-cancer effect by inhibiting
the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway, however, the exact
mechanisms remain incompletely understood [2]. In the
present study, we show a significant impact of bortezomib
on telomere homeostasis and function, which may be
associated with bortezomib-mediated cancer cell killing
activity.
Weise et al recently reported that bortezomib
down-regulated telomerase activity accompanied by
a decline in hTERT expression in subsets of MM cell
lines [18]. The inhibition of hTERT expression occurred
at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. We
similarly found a significant decline in hTERT mRNA and
telomerase activity in bortezomib-treated gastric cancer
and leukemic cells. These results suggest that bortezomibmediated down-regulation of hTERT expression is
not limited to MM cells. However, the question is
whether such effects of bortezomib have any functional
consequences. To address this, we first determined
telomere length and function in bortezomib-treated cells,
and shortening of telomere length coupled with telomere
dysfunction did occur in these cells. To further define
whether there is a causal relationship between hTERT
decrease and telomere shortening/dysfunction, we then
over-expressed hTERT in cells and these cells displayed
no telomere shortening and significantly fewer 53BP1 foci
at telomeres in response to bortezomib. More importantly,
hTERT over-expression protected cells from apoptosis
induced by bortezomib. Taken together, bortezomib
inhibition of hTERT expression contributes to telomere
dysfunction and cellular apoptosis.
The maintenance of telomere length and function
depends on not only hTERT/telomerase, but also
appropriate levels of shelterin protein expression [8, 11].
We observed consistent declines in expression of TRF1,
TRF2, TPP1 and POT1 mRNAs in both HEL and
BGC-823 cells, although changes in RAP1 and TIN2
expression differed between two cell lines. Conceivably,
such widespread dysregulation of shelterin proteins

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38088

Oncotarget

dysregulation of shelterin protein expression, thereby
disrupting telomere stabilization and leading to telomere
dysfunction in malignant cells. Moreover, hTERT overexpression protects from apoptotic cell death mediated by
bortezomib. Collectively, the telomerase/telomere system
is an important target of bortezomib. We thus suggest
that future clinical trials designed to evaluate the efficacy
of bortezomib include telomerase/telomere function
inhibition as one indicator of response.

Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology of Uppsala University) was used as control [19].
The lentiviral vector was packaged in 293FT cells and
supernatant collected to infect HEL cells. BGC-823 cells
were infected with pBABE retroviral control and hTERT
vectors as described [13]. The cells were selected using
puromycin.

RNA Extraction, reverse transcription and
qPCR

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The erythroid leukemia cell line HEL and the gastric
cancer cell line BGC-823 were used in the present study.
Cells were grown in 10% foetal calf serum-containing
RPMI-1640 with addition of 2 mM L-glutamine and
antibiotics (50 mg/mL penicillin, and 50 mg/mL
streptomycin) in a humid atmosphere at 37°C/5% CO2.
Bortezomib was bought from Selleck Chemicals (Houston,
TX, USA) and exponentially growing cells were incubated
with bortezomib at different concentrations for various
time periods. Cells were counted for numbers and viability
using trypan blue exclusion test.

Total cellular RNA was extracted using Trizol
kits according to the manufacture's instruction (Life
Technology, Paisley, Scotland, UK). cDNA was
synthesized using RevertAid First Strand cDNA
Synthesis kits (Thermo Scientific, Shanghai, China) and
M-MLV reverse transcriptase. qPCR was carried out in
an ABI7700 sequence detector (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA) using SYBR Green kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and the primer pairs specific
to hTERT, hTER, TRF1, TRF2, TPP1, POT1, RAP1 and
TIN2 as described [31] (Table 1). GAPDH (Table 1) was
PCR-amplified as an internal control. Levels of each
mRNA were calculated based on the threshold values and
normalization of GAPDH expression.

The hTERT lenti-viral vector and cell infection

Immunoblotting

A lenti-III-HA-GFP-hTERT vector was constructed
and a Lenti-BMN-GFP vector (a gift from Rudbeck

Total cellular proteins were extracted using
RIPA  lysis buffer, then subjected to sodium dodecyl

Cells, cell culture and treatment

Table 1: The primer sequences for reverse transcriptase qPCR and telomere length assessment
PCR primer sequences for mRNA quantification
Target

Forward

Reverse

TRF1

5′-GCTGTTTGTATGGAAAATGGC-3′

5′-CCGCTGCCTTCATTAGAAAG-3′

TRF2

5′-GACCTTCCAGCAGAAGATGCT-3′

5′-GTTGGAGGATTCCGTAGCTG-3′

TPP1

5′-CCCGCAGAGTTCTATCTCCA-3′

5′-GGACAGTGATAGGCCTGCAT-3′

TIN2

5′-GGAGTTTCTGCGATCTCTGC-3′

5′-GATCCCGCACTATAGGTCCA-3

POT1

5′-TGGGTATTGTACCCCTCCAA-3′

5′-GATGAAGCATTCCAACCACGG-3′

RAP1

5′-CGGGGAACCACAGAATAAGA-3′

5′-CTCAGGTGTGGGTGGATCAT-3′

hTERT

5′-CGGAAGAGTGTCTGGAGCAA-3′

5′-GGATGAAGCGGAGTCTGGA-3′

GAPDH

5′-AAAGGGCCCTGACAACTCTT-3′

5′-GGTGGTCCAGGGGTCTTACT-3′

hTERC

5′-TCTAACCCTAACTGAGAAGGGCGTAG-3′ (forward)
5′-GTTTGCTCTAGAATGAACGGTGGAAG-3′ (reverse)
Primer sequences for telomere length analyses

Tel1b

5′-CGGTTTGTTTGGGTTTGGGT-TTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTT-3′

Tel2b

5′-GGCTTGCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCC-TTACCCTTACCCT-3′

HBG3

5′-TGTGCTGGCCCATCACTTTG-3′

HBG4

5′-ACCAGCCA-CCACTTTCTGATAGG-3′

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38089

Oncotarget

sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred
to a PVDF membrane. The membranes were probed
with the specific antibodies against TRF1 (SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA, T1948), TFR2 (Novus,
Littleton, CO, USA, #NB110–57130), POT1 (Novus,
NB500–176), Caspase3 (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA, #9665), or Bcl-2 (ProteinTech,
Wuhan, China, #12789–1-AP) followed by anti-mouse
or rabbit horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG and
developed with the enhanced chemiluminescent method
(SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate,
Thermo Scientific). GAPDH Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Inc., Santa Cruz, CA, USA, #sc-47724) immunoblotting
was performed in parallel as a loading control.

minor modifications. Cells from calf thymus were
kindly donated from the butchery Ö-slakt AB (Värmdö,
Stockholm). All experiments were made with a Gallios
flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter) and analyzed using
the Kaluza software (Beckman Coulter, Caguas, PR,
USA). For quantification fluorescent MESF-FITC beads
(Bangs Laboratories, Fishers, IN, USA) were used and
the fluorescent signal was quantified using the QuickCal
v.2.3 data analysis program (Bangs Laboratories). For
qPCR, genomic DNA was isolated and telomere length
was assessed by real-time PCR as described [30, 36].
Two ng of DNA were used for each PCR reaction.
The primer sequences for human telomere (Tel 1b and
Tel 2b) and β-globin (HBG3 and HBG4) were listed
in Table  1: T/HBG values were determined using the
formula T/S  =  2-ΔCt, where ΔCt = average Cttelomere
− average Ctβ-globin and relative telomere length was
expressed as the percentage of that in BGC-823 cells
without bortezomib.

Telomerase activity determination
Telomerase activity was assessed using a
commercial Telomerase PCR ELISA kit (Shanghai
Roche Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Shanghai, PR China) as
recommended by the manufacturer. For each assay, one μg
of protein was used, and 23 PCR cycles were performed
after the telomerase-primer elongation reaction. The PCR
products were detected using ELISA color reaction and the
level of telomerase activity was expressed as absorbance
in arbitrary units.

Statistics
Student’s t-test or Mann-Whitney U test was used
to compare cell numbers, apoptotic cells, hTERT, hTERC
and shelterin protein mRNA levels and telomere length
between control and bortezomib-treated cells. All the
tests were two-tailed and computed using SigmaStat3.1®
software (Systat Software, Inc., Richmond, CA,
USA). P values of < 0.05 were regarded as statistically
significant.

Flow cytometry analysis of apoptosis
Cells were treated with bortezomib as decribed
above, and then harvested for apoptosis assay. The cells
were stained with a kit from BD pharmingen using a
FlowCytometer (BD). For each sample 1 × 106 cells were
measured. The control gate was set based on the negative
control.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This study was supported by grants from
the National Basic Research Program of China
(Grant No. 2012CB911202), the Adolf H. Lundin
Charitable  Foundation, Swedish Cancer Society,
the Swedish Research Council, Cancer Society in
Stockholm, Stockholm County Council, and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (81071721 and
81371781).

Immuno-FISH
Immuno-FISH was carried out as described
[32]. Briefly, cells were harvested, cytospined onto
Superfrost plus slides (Thermo Scientific), fixed with 4%
paraformadehyde and permeabilized with Triton PBS
followed by a block step with serum free Block (DAKO,
Glostrup, Denmark). The cells were first incubated with
53BP1 antibody (Bethyl Inc., Montgomery, Texas, USA)
and then with Alexa 594 secondary antibody (Jackson
Labs Technologies Inc., Los Gatos, CA, USA). The PNAtelomere probe (PANAGENE Inc., Daejeon, Korea) was
finally added onto the slides and the results were analyzed
using a confocal microscopy Leica TCS SP5 (Mannheim,
Germany). Cell carrying > 2 co-localization foci is defined
as having telomere dysfunction.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Brignole C, Marimpietri D, Pastorino F, Nico B,
Di Paolo D, Cioni M. Effect of bortezomib on human neuroblastoma cell growth, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:1142–57.

Flow-FISH and qPCR for telomere length assay

2.	 Chen D, Frezza M, Schmitt S, Kanwar J, Dou QP.
Bortezomib as the first proteasome inhibitor anticancer
drug: current status and future perspectives. Curr Cancer
Drug Targets. 2011; 11:239–53.

Flow FISH of cells was performed according to
a previous protocol by Baerlocher et al [33–35] with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38090

Oncotarget

3.	 Adams J. The proteasome: a suitable antineoplastic target.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:349–60.

18.	 Weiss C, Uziel O, Wolach O, Nordenberg J, Beery E,
Bulvick S. Differential downregulation of telomerase
activity by bortezomib in multiple myeloma cells-multiple
regulatory pathways in vitro and ex vivo. Br J Cancer. 2012;
107:1844–52.

4.	 Kane RC, Bross PF, Farrell AT, Pazdur R. Velcade: U.S.
FDA approval for the treatment of multiple myeloma progressing on prior therapy. Oncologist. 2003; 8:508–13.

19.	 Holt SE, Aisner DL, Shay JW, Wright WE. Lack of cell
cycle regulation of telomerase activity in human cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997; 94:10687–92.

5.	 Messinger YH, Gaynon PS, Sposto R, van der Giessen J,
Eckroth E, Malvar J, Bostrom BC. Bortezomib with chemotherapy is highly active in advanced B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia: Therapeutic Advances in Childhood
Leukemia & Lymphoma (TACL) Study. Blood. 2012;
120:285–90.

20.	 Hou M, Xu D, Bjorkholm M, Gruber A. Real-time quantitative telomeric repeat amplification protocol assay for
the detection of telomerase activity. Clin Chem. 2001;
47:519–24.

6.	 Michaelis M, Fichtner I, Behrens D, Haider W,
Rothweiler F, Mack A, Cinatl J, Doerr HW, Cinatl J Jr.
Anti-cancer effects of bortezomib against chemoresistant
neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Int J Oncol.
2006; 28:439–46.

21.	 Holt SE, Wright WE, Shay JW. Regulation of telomerase activity in immortal cell lines. Mol Cell Biol. 1996;
16:2932–9.
22.	 Premkumar DR, Jane EP, Agostino NR, DiDomenico JD,
Pollack IF. Bortezomib-induced sensitization of malignant
human glioma cells to vorinostat-induced apoptosis depends
on reactive oxygen species production, mitochondrial dysfunction, Noxa upregulation, Mcl-1 cleavage, and DNA
damage. Mol Carcinog. 2013; 52:118–33.

7.	 Daniel M, Peek GW, Tollefsbol TO. Regulation of the
human catalytic subunit of telomerase (hTERT). Gene.
2012; 498:135–46.
8.	 Xin H, Liu D, Songyang Z. The telosome/shelterin complex
and its functions. Genome Biol. 2008; 9:232.
9.	 Kong F, Zheng C, Xu D. Telomerase as a “stemness”
enzyme. Sci China Life Sci. 2014; 57:564–70.

23.	 Palanca A, Casafont I, Berciano MT, Lafarga M. Proteasome
inhibition induces DNA damage and reorganizes nuclear
architecture and protein synthesis machinery in sensory ganglion neurons. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014; 71:1961–75.

10.	 Martinez P, Blasco MA. Role of shelterin in cancer and
aging. Aging Cell. 2010; 9:653–66.

24.	 Ramadan K, Meerang M. Degradation-linked ubiquitin
signal and proteasome are integral components of DNA
double strand break repair: New perspectives for anticancer therapy. FEBS Lett. 2011; 585:2868–75.

11.	 Pinto AR, Li H, Nicholls C, Liu JP. Telomere protein
complexes and interactions with telomerase in telomere
maintenance. Front Biosci. 2011; 16:187–207.
12.	 Ding D, Xi P, Zhou J, Wang M, Cong YS. Human telomerase reverse transcriptase regulates MMP expression independently of telomerase activity via NF-kappaB-dependent
transcription. Faseb J. 2013; 27:4375–83.

25.	 Crawford LJ, Walker B, Irvine AE. Proteasome inhibitors
in cancer therapy. J Cell Commun Signal. 2011; 5:101–10.
26.	 Masutomi K, Possemato R, Wong JM, Currier JL,
Tothova  Z, Manola JB, Ganesan S, Lansdorp PM,
Collins K, Hahn WC. The telomerase reverse transcriptase
regulates chromatin state and DNA damage responses. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:8222–7.

13.	 Liu Z, Li Q, Li K, Chen L, Li W, Hou M, Liu T, Yang J,
Lindvall C, Bjorkholm M, Jia J, Xu D. Telomerase reverse
transcriptase promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and stem cell-like traits in cancer cells. Oncogene. 2013;
32:4203–13.

27.	 Shin KH, Kang MK, Dicterow E, Kameta A, Baluda MA,
Park NH. Introduction of human telomerase reverse transcriptase to normal human fibroblasts enhances DNA repair
capacity. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:2551–60.

14.	 Liu T, Liang X, Li B, Bjorkholm M, Jia J, Xu D.
Telomerase reverse transcriptase inhibition stimulates
cyclooxygenase 2 expression in cancer cells and synergizes with celecoxib to exert anti-cancer effects.
Br J Cancer. 2013; 108:2272–80.

28.	 Uziel O, Cohen O, Beery E, Nordenberg J, Lahav M. The
effect of Bortezomib and Rapamycin on Telomerase Activity
in Mantle Cell Lymphoma. Transl Oncol. 2014; 7:741–51.

15.	 Ghosh A, Saginc G, Leow SC, Khattar E, Shin EM,
Yan  TD, Wong M, Zhang Z, Li G, Sung WK, Zhou J,
Chng WJ, Li S, Liu E, Tergaonkar V. Telomerase directly
regulates NF-kappaB-dependent transcription. Nat Cell
Biol. 2012; 14:1270–81.
16.	 Cong Y, Shay JW. Actions of human telomerase beyond
telomeres. Cell Res. 2008; 18:725–32.

29.	 Vaziri SA, Hill J, Chikamori K, Grabowski DR,
Takigawa N, Chawla-Sarkar M, Rybicki LR, Gudkov AV,
Mekhail T. Sensitization of DNA damage-induced apoptosis by the proteasome inhibitor PS-341 is p53 dependent
and involves target proteins 14–3-3sigma and survivin. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2005; 4:1880–90.

17.	 Singhapol C, Pal D, Czapiewski R, Porika M, Nelson G,
Saretzki GC. Mitochondrial telomerase protects cancer cells
from nuclear DNA damage and apoptosis. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e52989.

30.	 Trisciuoglio D, Cardinali G, Torrisi MR, ZangemeisterWittke U, Zupi G, Biroccio A. Involvement of hTERT in
apoptosis induced by interference with Bcl-2 expression
and function. Cell Death Differ. 2005; 12:1429–38.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38091

Oncotarget

31.	 Li P, Hou M, Lou F, Bjorkholm M, Xu D. Telomere
­dysfunction induced by chemotherapeutic agents and radiation in normal human cells. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012;
44:1531–40.

34.	 Roos G, Hultdin M. Flow cytometric determination of
­telomere length. Cytometry. 2001; 45:79–80.
35.	 Dahlstrom J, Zhang X, Ghaderi M, Hultcrantz M,
Bjorkholm M, Xu D. Dysregulation of shelterin factors coupled with telomere shortening in Philadelphia chromosome
negative myeloproliferative neoplasms. Haematologica.
2015; 100: e402–e405.

32.	 Zhang X, Li B, de Jonge N, Bjorkholm M, Xu D. The DNA
methylation inhibitor induces telomere dysfunction and
apoptosis of leukemia cells that is attenuated by telomerase
over-expression. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4888–900.

36.	 Cawthon RM. Telomere measurement by quantitative PCR.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:e47.

33.	 Baerlocher GM, Mak J, Tien T, Lansdorp PM. Telomere
length measurement by fluorescence in situ hybridization
and flow cytometry: tips and pitfalls. Cytometry. 2002;
47:89–99.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38092

Oncotarget

