Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 45

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Dandelion root extract affects colorectal cancer proliferation
and survival through the activation of multiple death signalling
pathways
Pamela Ovadje1, Saleem Ammar2, Jose-Antonio Guerrero2,3, John Thor Arnason2,
Siyaram Pandey1
1

Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Windsor ON, Canada

2

Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa ON, Canada

3

Red de Estudios Moleculares Avanzados, Instituto de Ecología A.C. Xalapa, Veracruz, México

Correspondence to: Siyaram Pandey, email: spandey@uwindsor.ca
Keywords: cancer, oxidative stress, phytochemical composition, gene expression, natural health product
Received: November 30, 2015     Accepted: July 26, 2016     Published: August 22, 2016

ABSTRACT
Dandelion extracts have been studied extensively in recent years for its antidepressant and anti-inflammatory activity. Recent work from our lab, with in-vitro
systems, shows the anti-cancer potential of an aqueous dandelion root extract (DRE)
in several cancer cell models, with no toxicity to non-cancer cells. In this study, we
examined the cancer cell-killing effectiveness of an aqueous DRE in colon cancer cell
models. Aqueous DRE induced programmed cell death (PCD) selectively in > 95%
of colon cancer cells, irrespective of their p53 status, by 48 hours of treatment.
The anti-cancer efficacy of this extract was confirmed in in-vivo studies, as the oral
administration of DRE retarded the growth of human colon xenograft models by more
than 90%. We found the activation of multiple death pathways in cancer cells by DRE
treatment, as revealed by gene expression analyses showing the expression of genes
implicated in programmed cell death. Phytochemical analyses of the extract showed
complex multi-component composition of the DRE, including some known bioactive
phytochemicals such as α-amyrin, β-amyrin, lupeol and taraxasterol. This suggested
that this natural extract could engage and effectively target multiple vulnerabilities of
cancer cells. Therefore, DRE could be a non-toxic and effective anti-cancer alternative,
instrumental for reducing the occurrence of cancer cells drug-resistance.

that further research is required to reduce the incidence
of cancer rates, and the amount of cancer-related deaths,
as well as to improve the quality of life of patients already
diagnosed with the disease.
Natural health products (NHPs) and natural
products (NPs) have been essential in the development
of many drugs, with over 75% of the currently available
chemotherapies having been derived from natural sources
(plants, microbes and marine sources), with a common
example being paclitaxel [3]. These NHPs have been used
in various traditional medicines and recent studies on the
use of the NHPs for specific diseases yield some scientific
validation for their application [4, 5]. Even with all the
incoming evidence, herbal drugs and other NHPs and
NPs are usually shunned during systemic chemotherapy

INTRODUCTION
The increases in the world’s aging population, as
well as the adoption of cancer-causing behaviors, are
the major contributors to a global escalation of different
forms of cancers. There are over 12 million new cancer
cases arising annually and over 7 million cancer-related
deaths worldwide, and even with the introduction of many
chemotherapy and chemopreventive approaches, cancer is
still one of the leading causes of deaths in the world today,
with a statistic of one in four deaths being attributed to
cancer alone [1, 2].
Despite the progress made in the development
and introduction of many chemotherapy agents, the
accompanying toxicities and side effects [1], indicate

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73080

Oncotarget

because of a possible herb-drug interaction that might
enhance chemotherapy-related toxicity [6, 7].
Dandelions (Taraxacum spp) have been used for
centuries for the treatment of various ailments; surprisingly
enough, they have received little research attention. Some
scientific studies report anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative
and diuretic activities of various parts of this plant [8].
Recent studies from our lab show a strong anti-cancer
activity of an aqueous dandelion root extract (DRE) [9,
10, 11, 12]. We find that DRE is able to induce a rapid
activation of the death-receptor mediated extrinsic pathway
of apoptosis in human leukemia and pancreatic cancer
cells in a dose and time dependent manner. Furthermore,
the induction of apoptosis is dependent on caspase-8
activation. Our data shows that this action of DRE is cancer
cell selective, as the same treatment is not detrimental to
non-cancer cells. However, the detailed analyses of the
efficacy and toxicity of this extract in in-vivo and ex-vivo
models, as well as, its mechanism(s) of action still remain
unexplored. Furthermore, the pharmacologically active anticancer components of this extract are at present unknown.
We report the anti-cancer activity of the DRE
obtained with in-vitro (colon cancer cell lines) and invivo (mouse xenograft model of colon cancer) models.
We hypothesized that due to its compositional complexity
(mixture of bioactives), DRE might be able to activate
different signaling events and more efficiently induce
program cell death (PCD) processes by targeting different
metabolic vulnerabilities of cancer cells. Accordingly,
we have shown that, although DRE treatment triggered
cell death in all cell models examined and led to the
activation and localization of active caspase-8 to the
mitochondria and the peri-nuclear space, this caspase-8
activation was not essential for the induction of cell
death in colon cancer cells as an inhibition of caspase-8
activation did not alter the cytotoxicity of DRE. Therefore,
in colorectal cancer cells the DRE treatment must have
utilized caspase-8 independent cell death pathway. We
have been able to identify four pharmacologically active
components, α-amyrin, β-amyrin, lupeol and taraxasterol,
in two out of the six bioactive fractions, but the anti-cancer
activities of the individual compounds were not as strong
as that of the unfractionated DRE indicating, clearly, the
benefits of using the whole extract. Taken together our
results scientifically validate the use of NHPs, especially
dandelion root extracts, as potential anti-cancer agents,
which might represent a novel non-toxic alternative to
conventional cancer therapy available today.

its efficacy in highly aggressive colorectal cancer cells,
HT-29 (p53-/-) and HCT116 (p53 WT). For comparison,
normal colon mucosal epithelial cells (NCM460) were
also used to assess the selectivity of DRE to colorectal
cancer cells. Furthermore, we compared the efficacy of
DRE to the currently utilized colon cancer chemotherapy,
FOLFOX (5-fluorouracil, Folinic Acid and Oxaliplatin).
The results are summarized in Figure 1. We observed a
significant decrease in the viability of both HT-29 and
HCT116 colorectal cancer cells following the DRE
treatment. This effect was both time and dose dependent
and it was similar in both cell lines, irrespective of their
p53 status. Employing the WST-1 cell viability assay,
we determined the EC50 of DRE in both colon cancer
cell lines; 2.0 mg/ml in HCT116 cells and 3.5 mg/ml
in HT-29 cells. The selectivity of DRE to cancer cells
was once again confirmed, as normal NCM460 cells
were DRE refractive and did not lose metabolic activity
and cell viability when exposed to the same doses and
time points as the colon cancer cells. Furthermore, the
efficacy and selectivity of DRE to colorectal cancer cells
was compared to that of FOLFOX. It was observed that
the FOLFOX combination did not have a selective effect
to colorectal cancer cells, as the normal colon mucosal
epithelial cells were also affected at the same doses
(Figure 1A).
This reduction in metabolic viability corresponded
to an increase in apoptosis induction, as DRE treatment
triggered apoptosis selectively in colon cancer cells, but
not in normal mucosal cells, which was subsequently
confirmed by fluorescence microscopy following Hoechst
33342, propidium iodide and Annexin V staining, to
observe the nuclear morphology, cell membrane integrity
and externalization of phosphatidylserine respectively.
In the DRE-treated colon cancer cells we observed
significant increases in propidium iodide and Annexin V
positive staining, indicative of apoptosis, while NCM460
cells, again, remained unaffected (Figure 1B). Imagebased cytometry was used to quantify the apoptotic
response and the data showed an approximately 40%
increase in Annexin V positive cells and a corresponding
97% increase in propidium iodide staining in DRE
responsive cells (Figure 1C). These results confirmed
the anti-cancer potential of DRE and demonstrated its
efficacy in aggressive colorectal cancer cells regardless
of their p53 status.

Dandelion root extract selectively impairs the
migration of colon cancer cells

RESULTS

To determine if DRE can prevent invasive and
metastatic behaviours in colorectal cancer cells, the scratch
wound healing assay was employed. HT-29, HCT116 and
NCM460 cells were pre-treated with thymidine for 18 hours
to halt further proliferation, following which, the cells were
treated with DRE at the indicated concentrations. Cells

Dandelion root extract (DRE) induces apoptosis
in aggressive colorectal cancer cells
This apoptosis-inducing activity of DRE, as
previously reported [9, 11] prompted further studies into
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73081

Oncotarget

were monitored at 0 hours (at the time of treatment) and
at 3, 6, 24 and 48 hours following treatment (Figure 2). It
was observed that treatment with DRE inhibited the ability
of colorectal cancer cells, HT-29 and HCT116, to migrate
into the wound, unlike the control untreated samples that

freely migrated into the wound area. As anticipated, the
normal NCM460 cells treated with DRE were able to
migrate into the scratch wound area (Figure 2), confirming
the selectivity of DRE to cancer cells. These results clearly
indicate that dandelion root extract can inhibit the ability of

Figure 1: Dandelion root extract induces apoptosis in aggressive colorectal cancer cells. Colon Cancer cells (HT-29 [p53-/-]

and HCT116 [p53+/+]) and normal colon mucosal epithelial cells (NCM460) were treated with increasing doses of DRE and analyzed for
anticancer effects. A. Viability of colon cells treated with DRE. Results are expressed as mean ± SD from quadruplicates of 3 independent
experiments. **P<0.001, ****P<0.0001 B. Hoechst (Blue), Annexin V (Green) and Propidium Iodide (PI) (Red) staining of DRE-treated
cells, 48 hours after treatment to assess induction of apoptosis. Fluorescence images were obtained at 400X magnification; Scale bar = 25
μm. Apoptotic cells were quantified using image-based cytometry C. *P<0.05, ****P<0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73082

Oncotarget

colorectal cancer cells to migrate and invade, and therefore
metastasize to secondary locations.

in tissue slices between the control untreated and the
DRE treated group (Figure 3C). The tissue lesions
were minimal or mild and were interpreted as either
background or incidental and none was of a type or
frequency indicative of DRE toxicity to the Balb/c mice
(Table 1). Taken together, these results established that
systemic oral intake of the DRE was safe and its anticancer efficacy should be further investigated. This was
done using mouse xenografts of colon cancer.
CD-1 nu/nu immunocompromised mice were
subcutaneously injected with HT-29 p53-/- cells (left flank)
and HCT116 p53 WT cells (right flank). Following the
establishment of colon tumors, mice were separated into two
groups – an untreated control group and a DRE treatment
group (same groups as in the toxicity studies). Mice were
observed for the duration of 75 days, while the weights
and tumor volumes were measured three times a week.
The obtained results demonstrated that oral administration
of 40 mg/kg/day of DRE did not have any effects on the
weights of the mice (Figure 4A) (as observed in the toxicity
studies), but the DRE treatment efficiently suppressed the
growth of both p53 WT and p53 mutant tumors in-vivo
(Figure 4B – 4C). Additionally, H & E staining of the tumor
revealed fewer nuclei in the DRE treated group, compared
to the control group, and as expected, there were no gross
morphological differences in the livers, kidneys and hearts
of the control and DRE treated groups (Figure 4D). These
results clearly indicated that the oral administration of DRE
was not toxic in mice and was efficacious in halting the
growth of colon tumors in xenograft models.

Dandelion root extract retards the growth of
human colon tumors in mouse xenograft models
As described above, the in-vitro studies proved that
DRE induced selective apoptosis in cancer cells; thus
distinguishing between cancerous and non-cancerous
cells. The next question was whether DRE was safe to use
in-vivo and whether it could be effective against tumors
grown as xenografts.
The first step in this part of the study was to
assess the safety of systemic DRE administration to
normal Balb/c mice, at a dose of 40 mg/kg/day, for
a period of 75 days. The mice were observed for any
signs of toxicity during this time period, by weight
measurement and protein urinalysis. There were no
observable differences between the control-untreated
and the DRE-treated groups in weight gain (Figure
3A) or protein content in urine (Figure 3B), indicating
a lack of toxicity. The protein urinalysis identified
trace amounts of protein in the urine of mice from both
groups, without any significant differences between the
groups (Figure 3B).
After the completion of 75 days safety study,
histopathological analysis, by Dr. A. Brooke was
performed on tissues obtained from the mice.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the hearts, livers and
kidneys showed no gross morphological differences

Figure 2: Dandelion root extract impairs the migration of colorectal cancer cells. A. Quantification of wound closure distance
in HT-29 and NCM460 cells at different treatment times (0, 3, 6, 24 and 48 hours). Values are expressed as mean ± SD **P<0.001,
****P<0.0001. B. Representative micrographs of wound healing assay in HT-29, HCT116 and NCM460 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73083

Oncotarget

Table 1: Summary of histological lesions in normal balb/c mice on DRE regimen
No Treatment
(Plain-filtered water)
M1

M2

M3

X

X

M4

Treatment group (DRESupplemented water)
M5

M1

M2

M3 M4

Liver:
-Infiltration, leukocyte, predominantly mononuclear, minimal

X
X

-Focal mineralization, minimal
-Hepatocyte necrosis, minimal
-Focus of cellular alteration, eosinophilic, minimal

X

X

-Hepatocyte vacuolation, lipid type, minimal

X

X

X

-Hepatocyte vacuolation, lipid type, mild

X
X

X

X

X

X

Fibrin thrombus
Heart:
-Infiltration, leukocyte, predominantly mononuclear, minimal

X

Myofiber separation and vaculation, minimal (suspect artifact)

X

X
X

X

Kidney:
- Infiltration, leukocyte, predominantly mononuclear, minimal

X

X

X

X
X

Tubule vacuolation, minimal

X

X
X

Fibrin or other extracellular matrix, glomerulus
The type, frequency and grade of histological lesions are summarized in this table. The histological lesions are minimal or
mild and are interpreted as either background lesions or incidental lesions. X-indicates the mice containing different lesions.

Figure 3: Dandelion root extract is well tolerated in animal models. Balb/C mice were separated into two groups, one group on

oral administration of PBS – control and the other group on oral administration of DRE (40 mg/kg/day) for a period of 75 days. A. Weight
of mice in each group for the duration of the study. B. Urine was obtained from mice every week for the last 4 weeks of the study. Protein
urinalysis was carried out using urine dipstick and the Bradford protein assay. C. Hematoxylin and Eosin staining of tissues (hearts, kidneys
and livers). Images were obtained on a brightfield microscope at 63X Objective.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73084

Oncotarget

Figure 4: dandelion root extract halts the growth of colon tumor xenografts. Immunocompromised CD-1 nu/nu mice were

subcutaneously injected with 2 x 106 colon cancer cells (HT-29 on the left flank and HCT116 on the right flank). A. Mice weights every other
day. B. The tumor volumes were measured using a standard caliper and the tumor volumes were calculated according to the formula π/6 x
length x width. C. Images of mice tumors week 9 of the study, showing differences in the tumor sizes between the control, untreated group
and the DRE group. D. Hematoxylin and Eosin staining of tissues. Images were obtained on a brightfield microscope at 63X Objective.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73085

Oncotarget

Dandelion root extract targets the mitochondria
of colon cancer cells

Activation of caspase-8 is not essential for cell
death in human colon cancer cells

Few studies have attempted to delineate the
mechanism of action of dandelion extracts, especially
in cancer cells. Previously, we have shown that DRE
does not induce DNA damage in cancer cells. However,
as in the previous studies, we observed a disruption of
the mitochondrial membrane potential following DRE
treatment of colon cancer cells. On the other hand, the
mitochondria of NCM460 cells remained unaffected
(Figure 5). These responses were quantified and confirmed
by image-based cytometry, which clearly showed a
decrease in the intensity of red fluorescence, indicative
of a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, in HT-29
cells, with no difference between the control and DRE
treated samples of NCM460 (Figure 5B). To further
investigate the role of the mitochondria in DRE induced
apoptosis, the mitochondria were isolated from HT-29
and NCM460 cells and treated directly with 2.5 mg/ml
DRE, 250 μM Paraquat (PQ) or 3 mM N-acetylcysteine
(N-Ac). In the presence of Amplex Red and HRP, the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as H202
and superoxide can be measured. Fluorescence readings
were taken every 5 minutes for a total duration of 4 hours.
The obtained results showed a significant increase in the
levels of ROS produced in the DRE-treated mitochondria
of HT-29 cells, compared to the untreated controls and the
antioxidant controls. It was also observed that the DRE
treatment of isolated mitochondria from NCM460 cells did
not produce any significant amounts of ROS (Figure 5C).
Thus, it appears that DRE may target metabolic defect(s)
and/or mitochondrial ROS response in cancer cells, to
bring about selectivity for cancer cell killing.

Our previous studies showed that DRE treatment
rapidly and efficiently activates the extrinsic pathway of
apoptosis in leukemia, melanoma and pancreatic cancer
cells and this process is dependent on the activation of
caspase-8 as the cells with a dominant-negative FasAssociated Death Domain (Dn-FADD) are unresponsive
to the DRE treatment [12]. Here we examined whether
similar activation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway
takes place in DRE-treated colorectal cancer cells. Using
substrates specific fluorescent-labeled inhibitors of caspases
(FLICA; DEVD – Caspase-3; IETD – Caspase-8), the
activation of these caspases was monitored in HT-29 and
NCM460 cells following the DRE treatment between 15
minutes to 48 hours. The results obtained by image-based
cytometry showed a 68% increase in caspase-8 activity
with a corresponding 30% increase in propidium iodide
staining in HT-29 cells treated with 2.5 mg/ml DRE for
an hour. Furthermore, this response was specific to HT-29
cancer cells, as NCM460 normal cells remained unaffected
by the same treatment. The NCM460 cells did not activate
caspase-8 and did not uptake propidium iodide (Figure 6A).
As mitochondrial membrane destabilization was observed
in colon cancer cells treated with DRE (Figure 5A – 5B), we
wanted to confirm the link between caspase-8 activation and
the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. Following
treatment, the cells were lysed and probed for the truncated
pro-apoptotic protein, Bid. Bid is known to translocate to
the mitochondria following cleavage and activation by
activated caspase-8. This translocation to the mitochondria
has been shown to play a role in the destabilization of
the mitochondrial membrane [13]. DRE treatment led to

Figure 5: Dandelion root extract targets the mitochondria of colon cancer cells. JC-1 staining on HT-29 and NCM460. Red

fluorescence intensity was measured by fluorescence microscopy (Magnification: 400X) A. and image based cytometry B. to detect the loss
of the mitochondrial membrane potential. C. ROS production was measured in isolated mitochondria. Fluorescence readings were taken in
5-minute intervals for 5 hours at Ex. 560 nm and Em. 590 nm and expressed as relative fluorescence units (RFU) per μg protein. Statistics
– Two way ANOVA ****P<0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73086

Oncotarget

the truncation of Bid in HT-29 cells selectively, with no
increase in Bid truncation in NCM460 cells (Figure 6B).
Caspases are crucial for the initiation, propagation and
execution of apoptosis [14], and therefore their activation
and localization has been a focus of much research, with
many conflicting reports. Some reports suggest that before
their activation pro-caspases are located in the cytosol, and
remain in the cytosol even after exposure to the apoptotic
stimuli and activation [14]. Others suggest that following
activation, caspases re-localize to the mitochondria, where
they interact with other pro-apoptotic proteins during the
progression of apoptosis [15]. A third option, put forward
by Qin and colleagues, suggests that inactive caspases are
kept in the mitochondria, but following apoptotic stimuli
and activation, they are released from the mitochondria into

the cytoplasmic peri-nuclear space [16]. Here, we asked
which of these three mechanistic scenarios the activation of
Caspase-8 by the DRE treatment conformed to.
In order to do this, cells that were plated onto
coverslips, treated with DRE for 30, 60, 180 and 360
minutes and the activation and localization of caspase-8
was examined. The cells were incubated with MitoTracker
dye for 45 minutes, prior to immunocytochemical analysis
as described in the materials and methods. The results
showed a progressive destabilization of the mitochondrial
membrane following the DRE treatment, which was
observed as early as 30 minutes post treatment (Figure 6C).
Pro-caspase-8 (green) was localized in the mitochondria
(red) in control untreated cells; however, following the
DRE treatment, activated caspase-8 was released from the

Figure 6: Dandelion root extract triggers the activation of caspase-8. A. Image-based cytometry of HT-29 and NCM460 cells

stained with caspase-8 and incubated for an hour and counterstained with propidium iodide. B. Western blots and densitometry analysis
of protein levels of truncated Bid. *P<0.05 C. Immunocytochemistry of activated caspase-8 and mitochondrial localization – MitoTracker
(Red) and anti-caspase-8 antibody (Green), Hoechst 33342 (blue). Images were obtained at 400X objective. White arrows indicate the
dispersion of MitoTracker Red, indicative of a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and the magenta arrows show the presence of
active caspase-8 in the nucleus following DRE treatment. Scale bars = 25 μm. D. Prior to DRE treatment, HT-29 cells were pre-treated with
a caspase-8 specific inhibitor, IETD-fmk, for an hour at indicated concentrations and analyzed for cell viability.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73087

Oncotarget

mitochondria into cytoplasmic space, as indicated by the
dispersed green fluorescence (Figure 6C). Therefore, DRE
treatment efficiently activated the extrinsic pathway of
apoptosis in colon cancer cells and the results confirm the
localization of caspase-8 before and after activation. The
question now was whether this activation of caspase-8 was
the mandatory step in this process.
To establish this, cells were pre-incubated with a
caspase-8 specific inhibitor, IETD-fmk for an hour, before
the DRE treatment and the cells were analyzed by WST-1
viability assay. The results showed that cytotoxicity
occurred even in the presence of the caspase-8 inhibitor,
IETD-fmk, and the corresponding loss of HT-29 cells’
viability in response to the DRE treatment was dose and
time dependent (Figure 6D), suggesting that in HT-29
colorectal cancer cells the DRE-induced cell death was
caspase-8 independent.

multiple targets in cancer cells. This further confirmed the
connections between the different forms of programmed
cell death.
The next step in further assessing the differential
targeting of colorectal cancer cells was to determine if
the changes in mRNA levels corresponded to changes
in the protein levels. Not surprisingly, the protein levels,
including Bcl-2A1, Bcl-xL, Parp-2, TMEM57 and ULK1
corresponded to the mRNA levels obtained during the gene
expression analysis (Figure 8A). Furthermore, we wanted
to assess other major players in colon cancer cell survival,
including ERK1/2, Grb 2 and COX-2. We observed a
decrease in nuclear ERK1/2 and a corresponding increase
in the levels of cytoplasmic ERK1/2. This corresponds
with findings that show that nuclear localization of
ERK1/2 is essential for cell proliferation, while the
cytoplasmic localization of ERK1/2 is required for the
induction of apoptosis. Grb 2, an adaptor protein required
for the activation of ERK1/2 that later translocates to
the nucleus, was found to be decreased as well [17, 18]
(Figure 8A – 8B). Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a major
promoter of colorectal cancer and is overexpressed in
over 50% of colon cancers. This protein also has a major
impact on various signaling pathways [19]. DRE treatment
selectively decreased the expression of COX-2 in colon
cancer cells in a dose and time dependent manner, showing
its potential as an anti-inflammatory extract. These results
showcase the versatility of dandelion root extract, which is
able to target multiple programmed cell death pathways, as
well as aberrant signaling pathways, selectively in colon
cancer cells. This further shows that DRE was able to
distinguish between cancer and non-cancer cells (colon)
in order to achieve selective cytotoxicity to cancer cells,
without associated toxicity to the non-cancer cells.

Dandelion root extract promotes the expression
of programmed cell death genes
Since the DRE triggered cell death of colon cancer
cells appeared to be caspase-8 independent, we proceeded
to examine its effects on the expression cell death
related genes in order to uncover other aspects of the
DRE action. Using the RT2 Profiler Cell Death Pathway
Finder PCR system, we analyzed the expression profiles
of 84 key genes in the central mechanisms for apoptotic,
autophagic and necrotic cell death to further determine
the differences in colorectal cell response to DRE and
to further investigate the selectivity of DRE to cancer
cells, the gene expression study was carried out in HT-29
and NCM460 cells. Table 2 outlines the results obtained
from this part of the study, emphasizing the differential
expressions of genes between HT-29 colon cancer
cells and NCM460 normal colon epithelial cells. It was
observed that treatment with DRE had opposite effects in
cancer and non-cancerous cells, when it came to how they
express cell death genes, as cell death genes overexpressed
in HT-29 cells following treatment, were down-regulated
in NCM460 cells under the same conditions and vice versa
(Figure 7). In this study, we found that DRE treatment led
to the up-regulation of pro-death genes in HT-29 cells,
including caspase 1, KCNIP1, SNCA, TNF and some of
its corresponding receptors, TNFRSF1A and TNFRSF11B
(Figure 7B. In parallel, we observe a down-regulation of
pro-survival genes, especially anti-apoptotic genes, Bcl-2,
Bcl-2A1 and PARP2. At the same time, the expression of
these genes in non-cancerous NCM460 cells did not show
a drastic change from the NCM460 control untreated cells
(Figure 7A). Furthermore, where there were changes in the
gene expression of NCM460 cells, the pattern was directly
opposite to that of cancerous HT-29 cells. This increase in
gene expression was not confined to one major pathway,
as we observed increases in expressions of genes involved
in apoptosis and autophagy, indicating that DRE hit
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fractionation and phytochemical analysis of
DRE
Identification
components

of

bioactive

fractions

&

their

To commence the phytochemical analysis,
dandelion root was extracted and fractionated using
a silica gel column. The fractions obtained were then
tested for bioactivity, by WST-1 cell viability assay.
The results from the fraction studies were compared
to those obtained from the bioactivity testing of the
ethanolic extract of dandelion root. Bioactivity testing
identified 6 out of 26 fractions with significant activity,
comparable to the whole ethanolic extract. Following the
identification of bioactive fractions, these active fractions
were further fractionated to obtain secondary fractions
(28) by a preparative HPLC column. Further bioactivity
testing narrowed down the number of bioactive fractions.
The identified bioactive fractions were analyzed by
UPLC-DAD-MS, using a standard mix, to identify the
different compounds within the fractions (Figure 9A).
73088

Oncotarget

Table 2: Differential fold change in expression of cell death genes in human colorectal cancer (HT-29) versus normal
colon mucosal epithelia cells (NCM460)
Anti-Apoptotic Genes
Gene

Fold Change
(HT-29)

Fold Change
(NCM460)

Gene Function

Bcl-2 (B-Cell
Lymphoma 2)

-2.2 ± 0.23

+3.2 ± 0.44

An integral outer mitochondrial membrane protein that blocks the
apoptotic death by interacting and inhibiting pro-apoptotic proteins,
e.g BAX, APAF1 [20]

Bcl-2A1 (Bcl-2
related protein
A1)

-1.5 ± 0.21

+15.5 ± 1.1

BCL2A1 is a target of NF-kB activation, in response to inflammatory
signals. This gene exerts pro-survival functions and is generally
overexpressed in several cancers [21]

CD40LG

-1.4 ± 0.11

+11.2 ± 0.7

An integral membrane protein and a member of the TNF superfamily,
overexpressed in several carcinomas. Enhances cytokine production
and promotion of cell proliferation [22]

GALNT5
(polypeptide N-a
cetylgalactosami
nyltransferase 5)

-1.8 ± 0.23

+8.5 ± 0.75

A member of the TNF superfamily. They are responsible for the
altered O-linked glycosylation occurring during the development
of various cancers and their progression via altering O-glycan
biosynthesis [23]

PARP2 (poly
(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 2

-1.2 ± 0.15

+2.2 ± 0.25

Induced by double stranded DNA breaks, as a cellular response
to DNA damage. It is involved in DNA repair and transcriptional
regulation. PARP inhibitors are an emerging field in cancer therapy
[24, 25]

SYCP2
(Synaptonemal
Complex 2)

-1.3 ± 0.16

+2.0 ± 0.22

A major component of synaptic complexes during meiosis (prophase).
May be involved in the organization of chromatin by temporarily
binding to DNA scaffold attachment regions [26]

TMEM57
(Transmembrane
Protein 57)

-1.4 ± 0.25

+1.6 ± 0.25

A target of Jun Kinase signaling. Has been shown to interact with
several proteins, including the transcription regulators HTT and
SMAD9). Its function is still being studied

ULK1 (Unc-51
Like Autophagy
Activating
Kinase 1)/ ATG1

-1.3 ± 0.16

+3.1 ± 0.2

A serine/threonine protein kinase involved in autophagy in response
to starvation by phosphorylating Beclin-1. Transcriptional activation
of ULK1 is involved in cancer cell survival [27, 28]

Pro-Apoptotic Genes
BMF (Bcl-2
modifying factor)

+1.4 ± 0.23

+7.2 ± 0.55

A Bcl-2 family membrane that might activate apoptosis and anoikis.
Interacts with other members of the Bcl-2 family for apoptosis
induction [29, 30]

DEFB1
(Defensin, Beta
1)

+1.3 ± 0.09

-40 ± 7.54

Found to be down-regulated in several cancer types and plays a
significant role in innate and adaptive immune response to promote
cytotoxicity [31]

HSPBAP1 (Heat
shock protein
27kDa associated
protein 1)

+1.1 ± 0.11

+2.5 ± 0.3

May play a role in cellular stress response. Knockdown of this gene is
associated with an increase in caspase-3/7 activation [32]

IFNG (Interferon
Gamma)

+3.3 ± 0.25

+1.5 ± 0.5

Coordinate various cell response programs, including macrophage
activation, inhibition of cell proliferation and activation of apoptosis [33]

NFKB1 (Nuclear
factor kappa B)

+1.1 ± 0.11

-2.3 ± 0.3

Has both pro- and anti-apoptotic activities; a major transcription
factor in various cell signaling pathways [34, 35]
(Continued)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73089

Oncotarget

Anti-Apoptotic Genes
Gene

Fold Change
(HT-29)

Fold Change
(NCM460)

Gene Function

TNFRSF1A
(Tumor Necrosis
Factor Receptor
Superfamily,
Member 1A)

+1.5 ± 0.15

-2.2 ± 0.3

Member of the TNF superfamily. Recruits adapter domains such as
FADD and TRADD for activation of extrinsic apoptosis [36]

CASP1
(Caspase-1)

+12.3 ± 2.1

-2.5 ± 0.25

Cleaves a variety of substrates (121 substrates), including proinflammatory cytokine pro-interleukin (IL)-1β to induce apoptosis
(pyroptosis) [37]

SNCA (Alpha
synuclein)

+3.0 ± 0.14

-4.8 ± 0.45

A biomarker of colorectal cancer, and overexpressed in various other
cancers; might be involved in cell death activation in certain cell types
[38, 39]

TNF

+8.3 ± 0.32

-7.5 ± 0.55

A cytokine that binds to its receptors (TNFR1, TNFRSF1A) and
promotes extrinsic apoptosis under ideal conditions [40]

+9.9 ± 0.34

Active in the lysosomes for the breakdown of glycogen into glucose.
Plays a role in autophaic induction by encouraging the degradation of
p62 conjugated cargo [41]

Pro-Autophagic Genes
GAA (Acid alpha
glucosidase)

+1.2 ± 0.22

Figure 7: Differential fold change in expression of cell death genes in human colorectal cancer (HT-29) versus normal
colon mucosal epithelial cells (NCM460). Differential expression levels of cell death genes affected by DRE treatment A. Antiapoptotic genes B. Pro-apoptotic genes C. Pro-autophagic genes. The results are average of three independent experiments. *P<0.05 ****
P<0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73090

Oncotarget

Effect of DRE on the expression of cFLIP

This led to the identification of four major components
within two of the bioactive fractions (Fraction #5
and #6); α-amyrin, β-amyrin, lupeol and taraxasterol
(Figure 9B – 9C). This data confirmed the presence of
multiple bioactive components within DRE that could
potentiate its cytotoxic activity against cancer cells.

Although lupeol did not significantly affect viability
of HT-29 cells, there are studies indicating that lupeol
plays a role in TRAIL-mediated apoptosis [42]. This study
show that lupeol, at 40 μM, suppressed the expression of
cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (cFLIP), an inhibitor
of the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis, which prevents
the formation of the death inducing signaling complex
(DISC) and the subsequent activation of caspase-8 [43].
To further confirm the role of extrinsic pathway in DRE
mediated apoptosis, we compared the effect of DRE to
that of lupeol, in terms of their abilities to suppress the
expression of cFLIP. Western blotting analysis showed that
DRE, at 2.5 mg/ml, was sufficient to inhibit the expression
of cFLIP in cancer cells (Figure 10). There was slightly
additive effect when DRE was combined with the lower
dose of lupeol, at 10 μM, again confirming the beneficial
effect of multiple components within DRE, compared to
the use of individual components. These results further
confirmed the activity of DRE through the extrinsic
pathway of apoptosis.

Anti-cancer activity of identified bioactive compounds
Following the identification of 4 compounds
within 2 of the bioactive fractions, the next phase of this
study was to determine if any of these compounds had
significant cytotoxicity to cancer cells, comparable to
the DRE as a whole. Three of the four compounds are
commercially available (α-amyrin, β-amyrin and lupeol).
These compounds were tested alone in HT-29 cells, at
increasing concentrations and for increasing time periods,
and the viability of these cells was measured, using the
WST-1 viability assay. We observed a decrease in the
viability of cells treated with α-amyrin, with 10 μM as the
most effective concentration. At the concentrations ≤ 10
μM, neither β-amyrin nor lupeol significantly reduced the
viability of the cells (Figure 9D). To further test whether
these components of the DRE could act in synergy, we
tested their cytotoxicity in combination studies (α-amyrin
+ β-amyrin; α-amyrin + lupeol; β-amyrin + lupeol).
Results showed that the viability reducing effect of
α-amyrin and β-amyrin used in combination on HT29 cells was additive, but not synergistic (Figure 9E).
However, DRE is composed of multiple compounds,
some of them might act synergistically and, collectively,
are responsible for such strong and selective anti-cancer
activity

DISCUSSION
This study shows, for the first time, the anti-cancer
potential of aqueous dandelion root extract (DRE) in
aggressive colon cancer models (in-vitro and in-vivo). Our
results showed that DRE selectively reduced the metabolic
activity of aggressive colon cancer cells, irrespective of
their p53 status. DRE triggered apoptosis in colon cancer
cells, without adverse effects on the viability and survival

Figure 8: Activation of multiple signaling pathways by dandelion root extract. A. Western blots of proteins involved in
programmed cell death and cell survival and inflammation B. Densitometry quantification of western blot analysis from three independent
experiments. *P<0.05, **P< 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73091

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Identification of bioactive fractions & components within dandelion root extract. A. UPLC-DAD-MS

chromatogram of bioactive fraction #5 and #6, along with a standard mix of known compounds B, C. Identified compounds (by ChemDraw)
in bioactive fractions #5 and #6. These triterpenes are isomers (426.7g/mol). D. Viability of HT-29 cells treated with α-amyrin, β–amyrin
and lupeol ****P<0.0001 E. Compounds were analyzed alone and in combination with each other to assess combined effect in cancer cells.
α-amyrin and β-amyrin showed an additive effect at slightly lower doses than the effective concentrations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73092

Oncotarget

of non-cancerous colon mucosal epithelial cells. This effect
was clearly distinct from the cells treated with the FOLFOX
combinations. Furthermore, systemic administration of
DRE was not toxic to mice drinking DRE-supplemented
water for over a 3-month period. However, the 3 months
oral administration of DRE significantly reduced the growth
of colon tumors in xenograft models. These are novel
findings revealing that DRE, in a dose and time dependent
manner, selectively inhibits cancer cell growth. For further
assessment of the efficacy of DRE as a preventative and
therapeutic agent, transgenic mice models susceptible to
the development of colorectal cancer or chemically induced
colorectal cancer could be used. However, these results
indicate that DRE and its anti-cancer components must be
absorbed and circulated, in order to reach the site of the
tumor (in order to inhibit tumor growth).
Some studies suggest that dandelion extracts have
antioxidant, pro-oxidant and cytotoxic activity in colon
adenocarcinoma cells, Caco-2, while being able to
scavenge reactive oxygen species in mouse macrophage
cells, RAW264.7 [44]. These effects on oxidative stress
are attributed to the presence of flavonoids in the water
and ethylacetate extracts. In this study, we confirmed
the vulnerability of cancer cell mitochondria by
showing that the DRE treatment led to a decrease in the
mitochondrial membrane potential and increase in ROS
levels in the isolated mitochondria. This was consistent
with previous reports suggesting that the vulnerability of
cancer cells’ mitochondria stems from altered oxidative
phosphorylation and reduced flux through the electron
transport chain [45].
Secondly, we established that the DRE-induced
destabilization of mitochondrial membranes was associated
with a rapid activation of caspase-8. Interestingly, we

observed that following DRE treatment, activated caspase-8
was released from the mitochondria into the cytoplasmic
and peri-nuclear space, indicating that pro-caspase-8 may
reside in the mitochondria and upon activation translocate
to other locations in the cells, where they participate in the
progression of apoptosis. These results correspond to those
reported by Qin and colleagues [16].
Although caspase-8 was activated during the DRE
exposure, it was not required for the progression of
apoptosis in colon cancer cells, as the caspase-8 specific
inhibitor, IETD-fmk, did not change the DRE response
in these cells. This was in contrast to our previous study
in leukemia and pancreatic cancer cells [12]. Clearly,
the components of the DRE extract can stimulate/inhibit
other signaling pathways in colon cancer cells and induce
apoptosis, bypassing the requirement for caspase-8. Using
a pathway finder array, we observed that DRE treatment
induced the expression of several cell death genes,
involved in both the apoptotic and autophagic cell death
pathways in HT-29. These gene expression responses
indicated that DRE could engage multiple signaling
pathways to induce programed cell death (PCD) in colon
cancer cells. Furthermore, we observed differential gene
expression in HT-29 colorectal cancer cells and NCM460
normal colon mucosal epithelial cells, as genes that were
up-regulated in the cancer cells, were down-regulated or
not expressed in normal cells and vice versa.
Interestingly, in HT-29, the pro-survival genes, such as
Bcl-2, GALNT5 and PARP-2, were down-regulated, while
being up-regulated in NCM460. At the same time, the proapoptotic genes including Caspase-1, Interferon gamma and
the TNF ligands and receptors, were up-regulated in HT-29
cells, prior to the apoptosis induction, while the same genes
were down-regulated in NCM460 cells. Thus, the cancer

Figure 10: Dandelion root extract targets the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis by inhibiting the expression of cFLIP
comparing the effect of DRE and lupeol on the expression of cFLIP. Following treatment, cell lysates were obtained and
proteins were separated on a gel. The proteins were transferred onto a PVDF membrane and probed for cFLIP levels, using β-actin as a
loading control. Imaged blot of cFLIP expression levels and densitometry analysis of expression levels, compared to β-actin loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73093

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

cell-specific cytotoxicity of DRE must stem from its ability
to involve multiple elements of cell death pathways, as
evidenced by the complexity of the gene expression profiles.
We addressed the relevance of molecular complexity of
the DRE extract to its anti-cancer properties. Phytochemical
analysis and bioassays of the ethanolic dandelion root
extract led to the identification of four pharmacologically
active compounds, present in two out of the six bioactive
fractions. These were α-amyrin, β-amyrin, lupeol and
taraxasterol, 3 of which are commercially available α-amyrin, β-amyrin, lupeol. At a high dose, ≥ 10 μM,
α-amyrin reduced the viability of colon cancer cells;
however, β-amyrin and lupeol did not. Furthermore, there
were no synergistic interactions between these compounds
and neither individually nor in combination would they
display anti-cancer activity, comparable to that of the whole
unfractionated DRE. Previous findings show that taraxasterol
has anti-inflammatory and chemopreventive activity [46,
47], suggesting its importance in the anti-cancer activity of
dandelion root extract, especially on the expression levels of
COX-2. Additionally, we show that 10 µM lupeol is not very
effective on its own. There is a slight decrease in the levels of
cFLIP at this concentration but the effect was clearly noted
at 40 µM, which is the published effective concentration for
lupeol. At this concentration, lupeol can sensitize pancreatic
cancer cells to TRAIL induced apoptosis, by inhibiting the
expression of cFLIP an inhibitor of the extrinsic pathway
of apoptosis [42]. As a result, it is understandable that we
do not see a decrease in the viability of HT-29 cells with
just 10 µM lupeol. In the present study, we have found that
unfractionated DRE had a stronger effect on reducing the
expression of cFLIP in HT-29, than lupeol alone. This was
a dose and time dependent response. These results further
confirmed that the anti-cancer activity of the DRE stemmed
from its ability to activate the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis
and even though the molecular steps of the pathway might be
cell type specific, the multi-component composition of this
extract is responsible for its overall bioactivity.

Dandelion root extraction & preparation
The dandelion roots used for this study were obtained
from Premier Herbal Inc. (Lot No. 318121). The root extract
was prepared using a previously published protocol with
the following modifications [11]. Dried dandelion root was
immersed in liquid nitrogen for about 5 to 10 minutes, until
thoroughly frozen. The frozen pieces were ground up in an
impingement grinder to an average particle size of ≤ 45 μm.
Following grinding, dandelion root powder was extracted in
boiling water on low heat for 3 hours. The total extracted
material was filtered through a NITEX nylon mesh filter
(LAB PAK; Sefar BDH Inc. Chicoutini, Quebec CA) and
the filtrate was spun down at 800 x g for 5 minutes at room
temperature. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.45
μm filter, followed by lyophilization. The dried extracted
material was reconstituted in water to give a final stock
solution of 100 mg/ml and then passed through a 0.22 μm
filter, in a biological safety cabinet and stored at 4°C or
-20°C for long term storage. This material was used for all
the experiments described in this study.

Cell culture and treatment
Human colon cancer cell lines HT-29 (p53 mutant)
and HCT116 (p53 WT) (Muller et al., 2013) were
purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). These cells were
cultured in McCoy’s 5a medium (ATCC, Catalog no.
30-2007), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS) and 40 μg/ml gentamicin (Life Technologies,
Mississauga, ON). Normal human colon mucosal
epithelial cell line (NCM460, Incell Corporation, LLC,
San Antonio TX) was sub-cultured in RPMI 1640 medium
(Sigma Aldrich, Mississauga, ON), supplemented with
10% FBS and 40 μg/ml gentamicin. These cells were
grown and maintained in an incubator, set at 37°C, with
an atmosphere containing 5% CO2 and 95% humidity.
To assess the efficacy of DRE in our cell culture
models, cells were plated and grown to 50 – 70%
confluence prior to treatment with dandelion root extract
(DRE), at increasing concentration (0.5 mg/ml – 6.0
mg/ml). Subsequent to treatment, cells were analyzed
for efficacy of DRE, as described below. All cells were
cultured for ≤ 4 months, before being discarded and fresh
frozen cells were used to continue studies, lasting longer
than the 4-month period.

CONCLUSIONS
Our results showed that aqueous dandelion
root extract (DRE) efficiently and selectively triggers
programmed cell death pathways in in-vitro and in-vivo
colorectal cancer models. The results confirmed our
hypothesis that the molecular complexity of the DRE
extract is responsible for its anti-cancer activity, as it allows
the engaging of multiple signaling pathways in cancer cells,
including the mitochondria. Therefore, we can conclude that
DRE, as a complex mixture might provide a complementary
alternative to currently available chemotherapies. With
these results, DRE is approved by Health Canada for Phase
I clinical trials in hematological cancers. Their use might
prove not only efficacious, but also associated with fewer
and less severe side-effects and, thus, improve the quality
of life and possibly increase the lifespan of cancer patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Assessment of cellular metabolic activity &
viability
To examine the viability of colon cancer and normal
colon mucosal epithelial cells after treatment, cells were
incubated with cell proliferation reagent WST-1 (Catalog
No. 05 015 944 001, Roche Diagnostics) for 4 hours at
73094

Oncotarget

37°C, following treatment with DRE at indicated doses
and time points, using the manufacturers protocol.
Absorbance readings of the formazan product were
obtained 450 nm using a spectrofluorometer (SpectraMax
Gemini XS, Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) Viability
readings were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 6.0 288
software and expressed as a percentage of the control
untreated groups.

and fluorescent microscope. The area of invasion and
the distance of wound healing closure by the migrated
cells was measured.

Evaluation of mitochondrial membrane potential
JC-1 (5,5’, 6,6’-tetrachloro-1,1’, 3,3’-tetraethy
lbenzamidazolylcarbocyanine iodide) mitochondrial
membrane potential kit (Catalog No. M34152, Life
Technologies, Burlington ON) was used to monitor
membrane destabilization in cells undergoing apoptosis.
In apoptotic and necrotic cells, with defective
mitochondria, JC-1 only exists in its monomeric
form, diffused in the cytosol, with no accumulation
in the mitochondria, leading to a distinct lack of red
fluorescence. Treated cells were incubated with JC-1
dye, at a final concentration of 200 nM, for 45 minutes
at 37°C. The cells were counterstained with Hoechst
33342 and were examined by fluorescent microscopy and
fluorescent images were taken at 400X magnification.
Samples were also quantified using image-based
cytometry.

Assessment of programmed cell death induction
This distinctive externalization of phosphatidylserine
on the external membrane of apoptotic cells was exploited
to assess the induction of apoptosis, following DRE
treatment, according to a previously published protocol
[13, 48]. Following treatment with DRE, cells were
trypsinized (0.15% trypsin) to lift adherent cells from
the plates. The cells were washed twice in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) and resuspended in Annexin-V
binding buffer (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM NaOH, PH 7,5,
140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2 and 50nM sucrose) and
Annexin-V Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate (Catalog No.
A13201, Life Technologies, Burlington, ON), which binds
to the exposed phosphatidylserine, at a 1:50 ratio, with
respect to the binding buffer. This reaction was incubated
at room temperature for 15 minutes. Hoechst 33342, a
photosensitive DNA binding dye (Catalog No. H1399;
Life technologies), was used as a counterstain, at a final
concentration of 10 μM, in the last 10 minutes of the
incubation at room temperature. At the time of Hoechst
staining, cells were counterstained with propidium iodide,
a cell impermeable photosensitive DNA binding dye
(Catalog No. P4170, Sigma Aldrich, Mississauga, ON), at
a final concentration of 1 μg/ml. Following the incubation,
cells were visualized and images were obtained using a
fluorescence microscope (Leica DMI 6000 fluorescence
microscope, with a Leica DFC 360FX camera and Leica
STP6000 control board).
The images were obtained at 400X magnification
and fluorescence quantification was also carried out using
a TALI image-based cytometer (Catalog No. T10796,
Life Technologies, Burlington ON), using a previously
published protocol [49, 50].

Mitochondrial isolation and measurement of
ROS production
Mitochondria were isolated from untreated HT-29
and NCM460 cells to investigate reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production. Cells were washed twice in cold
PBS, resuspended in hypotonic buffer (1 mM EDTA,
5 mM Tris-HCl, 210 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose,
10 μM Leu-pep, 10 μM Pep-A and 100 μM PMSF)
and immediately homogenized, before centrifuging
at 600 x g for 5 minutes, at 4°C to get rid of nuclear
pellet and unbroken cell debris. The resulting cytosolic
supernatant was centrifuged again at 10,000 x g to obtain
a mitochondrial pellet, which was resuspended in cold
hypotonic buffer.
To measure the production of ROS, Amplex Red
(Catalog No. A12222, Life Technologies) was used.
Following resuspension in cold hypotonic buffer, ≥ 20 μg
of protein was added to wells of a 96-well opaque plate.
Treatment was done with 2.5 mg/ml DRE, a positive
control, 250 μM paraquat (PQ) (Catalog No. 856177,
Sigma Aldrich, Mississauga ON) and a negative control,
3 mM N-Acetylcysteine (N-AC) (Catalog No. A7250,
Sigma Aldrich, Mississauga ON). Amplex Red reagent
was added to each well at a final concentration of 50 μM;
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was added in the ratio of
6 units per 200 μL. Fluorescence readings were taken
every 5 minutes for a total time of 5 hours at Ex. 560 and
Em. 590 nm on a spectrofluorometer (SpectraMax Gemini
XS, Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). The readings
were analyzed on GraphPad Prism 6.0 288 software and
expressed as relative fluorescence units (RFU) per μg
protein.

Wound-healing migration assay
HT-29, HCT116 and NCM460 cells were grown
to 80% of confluence in 6-well tissue culture plates
(Catalog No. 83.3920.300, Sarstedt) and “wounded”
with a sterile 200 μL pipet tip to remove cells. PBS
washing was used to remove loosely attached cells
before treatment. Cells were pre-treated with thymidine
for 18 hours to halt proliferation, following which cells
were treated with DRE. The progression of migration
was photographed at different times (0 – 48 hours)
following staining with Hoechst 33342, under a light
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73095

Oncotarget

Evaluation of caspase activation

manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA quality was examined
using gel electrophoresis and measuring the A280/A260
ratio (NanoDrop 2000). The cDNA was synthesized
from 500 ng of total RNA by using the RE3 Reverse
Transcriptase Mix first-strand synthesis system. Following
a denaturation step of 5 minutes at 42°C, RNA was reverse
transcribed to a single stranded cDNA using oligo(dT)
primers (Qiagen, Inc.). The reverse transcription reaction
was performed in a total volume of 20 μL at 42°C for 15
minutes, immediately followed by 95°C for 90 minutes.

Cysteine-Aspartic Proteases (Caspases) are major
players in the initiation and execution of apoptosis [13].
Caspase activation was measured using an Image-iT Live
caspase detection kit (Catalog No. I35105, Life Technologies,
Mississauga ON). Following treatment for an hour with
DRE, cells were stained with a cell permeable FLICA dye
for the detection of active caspases, at 150X dilution and
incubated for 45 minutes at 37°C. Following incubation
with the dye, cells were washed in 1X wash buffer and
counterstained with propidium iodide. The stained cells
were visualized by TALI image-based cytometry. To
further confirm the role of caspases in apoptosis induction
by DRE, a caspase-8 specific inhibitor, IETD-fmk (Catalog
No. 218759, EMD4Biosciences, San Diego, CA) or a
pan-caspase inhibitor, ZVAD-fmk (Catalog No. 219007,
EMD4Biosciences) were incubated with HT-29 cells, an
hour before DRE treatment, as described above. Cells were
analyzed for metabolic viability by the WST-1 viability assay.

PCR array (cell death signaling pathway).
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the cell
death signaling pathway was performed, following
the reverse transcription of isolated RNA, using the
RT2Profiler PCR array system from Qiagen, Inc. The
PCR array was performed to combine the quantitative
performance of the SYBR Green based system, with
multiple profiling abilities of the pathway-focused gene
expression [51]. Gene specific primer sets for 84 relevant
genes in the major programmed cell death pathways
(Apoptosis, Autophagy and Programmed Necrosis) wee
contained in 384-well (4 x 96 wells) plates. Experimental
controls included 5 housekeeping genes, a positive control
and a negative control gene (Catalog No. PAHS-212Z,
Qiagen, Inc. Toronto, ON).
Amplification of specific gene products was detected
using the SYBR Green PCR mastermix and the real time
amplification data was gathered using the ABI 7900HT
software. The samples were amplified for 40 cycles for
15 s at 95°C and 60 s at 60°C. Each curve was completed
with a melting curve analysis, to confirm the specificity of
amplification. Gene expression was normalized to internal
controls (housekeeping genes) to establish fold change in
gene expression between the controls and treated samples
by ΔΔCT method (Qiagen RT2 Profiler PCR Array Analysis
program).

Immunocytochemical analysis of caspase
activation
To confirm the activation of caspases and their
localization upon activation, HT-29 cells were plated onto
poly-L-lysine (Catalog No. P4707, Sigma Aldrich, Canada)
coated coverslips in a 6-well plate and allowed to attach to
the coverslips for 24 hours. These cells were then treated
with DRE for different time points, ranging from 30 minutes
to 24 hours, following which the cells were incubated with
a mitochondrial specific due, MitoTracker (Invitrogen,
Canada) for 45 minutes, before the cells were obtained for
immunocytochemical analysis. Cells were fixed in 3.7%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution for 5 minutes at room
temperature, followed by a 1.4% formaldehyde/0.1% NP-40
solution for 1.5 minutes at room temperature. Subsequent
to fixation, cells were incubated with a blocking solution of
5% goat serum in PBS, followed by incubation overnight
at 4°C with anti-mouse primary antibody, specific to
active caspase-8 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA). The
following day, coverslips were incubated with a goat antimouse secondary antibody, conjugated to AlexaFluor 488
(CellSignalling Technology, MA) for an hour at room
temperature. The coverslips were washed in PBS and
incubated with Hoechst 33342 for 10 minutes, at a final
concentration of 10 μM and mounted on slides, using 80%
glycerol. The slides were stored at 4°C until ready for
visualization by fluorescent microscopy.

Western blotting analysis
SDS-PAGE was performed on the protein samples.
Treated cells were lysed in lysis buffer (0.1% NP40, 20
mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl and 5 mM EDTA), following
which, the total protein was measured by Bradford assay.
Proteins were separated on a 10% or 12% gel (depending
on the molecular weights of the proteins of interest) and
then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Following
transfer, the membranes were blocked in a milk solution
(5% w/v milk in Tris-Buffered Saline with Tween-20
(TBST)) or BSA solution (5% w/v BSA in TBST) for 90
minutes. Subsequent to the blocking step, membranes
were probed with primary antibodies, overnight at 4°C;
anti-TMEM57, raised in rabbit (1:2000), (Catalog No.
NBP1-84605), anti-ULK1, raised in rabbit (1:1000)
(Catalog No. NBP2-24738), anti-p62, raised in mouse
(1:1000), (Catalog No. H00008878M01), anti-Bcl-2A1,
raised in rabbit (1:1000), (Catalog No. NBP1-76715),

Gene expression profiling of DRE treated cells:
RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
Following treatment of HT-29 and NCM460 cells,
with DRE, total cellular RNA was extracted using the
Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Inc.), according to the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73096

Oncotarget

anti-Bcl-xL, raised in rabbit (1:2000), (Catalog No.
NB100-81814), anti-PARP-2, raised in rabbit (1:1000)
(Catalog No. NB100-185), anti-ERK1/2, raised in rabbit
(1:1000), (Catalog No. NB100-82099) and anti-Grb 2,
raised in rabbit (1:1000), (Catalog No. NB110-57013).
The aforementioned antibodies were obtained from
Novus Biologicals, Oakville ON. Anti-BID, raised in
rabbit (1:1000), (Catalog No. GTX110568), anti-COX-2,
raised in mouse (1:2000), (Catalog No. GTX61755)
and anti-cFLIP, raised in rabbit (1:1000), (Catalog No.
GTX28421) were obtained from GeneTex Inc. Irvin, CA
and anti-actin, raised in mouse (1:1000), (Catalog No.
sc-81178) was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
CA. Following incubation with the primary antibodies,
membranes were washed in TBST (1X – 15 minute wash
and 2X – 5 minute wash) and following the washes,
membranes were incubated with anti-mouse or anti-rabbit
horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody
(1:1000) – (Catalog No. ab6728 Abcam, Cambridge
MA and HAF008, Novus Biologicals, Oakville ON,
respectively) for an hour at room temperature. The
membranes were then washed for 3 X 5 minutes in TBST,
followed by band visualization with a Visiglo Select HRP
chemiluminescent substrate kit (Catalog No. CA11027138, VWR International, Mississauga ON). Densitometry
analyses were performed using Image J software.

400 spectrometer in C5D5N, at either 400 MHz (1H) or
100 (13C) MHz, using tetramethylsilane (TMS) as an
internal standard. EIMS and HREIMS were obtained on
a Kratos Concept IIH mass spectrometer.

In-vivo assessment of dandelion root extract
Toxicity assessment
Six week old Balb/C mice were obtained from
Charles River Laboratories and housed in constant
laboratory conditions of 12-hour light/dark cycle, in
accordance with the animal protocols outlined in the
University of Windsor research ethics board (AUPP
#10-17). Following acclimatization, mice were divided
into two groups (5 animals/untreated control group and 4
animals/treatment group). The control untreated group was
orally gavaged with PBS, with a volume corresponding to
the body weight of each animal, while the second group was
orally gavaged with 40 mg/kg/day of dandelion root extract
in water respectively for 75 days; animals were gavaged
3 times a week. For the duration of the study, toxicity
was measure by weighing mice twice a week and urine
was collected for protein urinalysis by urine dipstick and
Bradford assays. Following the duration of the study, mice
were sacrificed and their organs (livers, kidneys and hearts)
were obtained for immunohistochemical and toxicological
analyses, by Dr. A. Brooke at the University of Guelph.

Fractionation & phytochemical analysis of
dandelion root extract

Efficacy of DRE in tumor xenograft models of
immunocompromised mice

Bioactivity analyses of primary fractions
(supplementary materials & methods) led to the
identification of 5 bioactive fractions, which were further
fractionated to yield 24 secondary sub-fractions. Prefractionation of secondary fractions with significant
bioactivity was carried out and separated on a preparative
scale 1200 series Agilent preparative scale HPLC using
a reversed-phase Gemini Axia 250 x 21.2 mm column,
particle size 10 μm (Phenomenex Inc., Torrance CA), using
an isocratic mobile phase composition of 45% THF in 55%
water at 37.5mL.min to afford uvaol (12.0 mg, 0.0008%),
betulin, (100 mg, 0.007%), α-amyrin (6.5 mg, 0.0004%),
and betulinic acid (5.0 mg, 0.0003%) at the monitoring
wavelength of 210 nm, bandwith 4, reference off.
The final preparative scale isolation of the
phytochemicals was undertaken using a reversed-phase
Gemini Axia 250 x 21.2 mm column, particle size 10
μm (Phenomenex Inc., Torrance CA), on an Agilent
1200 Series preparative HPLC system comprising a
binary pump, an autosampler with a 2 mL loop, a diode
array detector, with a flow cell (Path length 3 mm and
maximum pressure limit, 120 bar), and a fraction collector
(40 μL collection tubes). IR spectra were recorded on a
Shimadzu 8400-S FT/IR spectrometer. Optical rotations
were registered on a Perkin Elmer 241 digital polarimeter.
NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Six week old make CD-1 nu/nu mice were obtained
from Charles River Laboratories and housed in constant
laboratory conditions of 12-hour light/dark cycle,
in accordance with the animal protocols. Following
acclimatization, mice were subcutaneously injected in
the right and left hind flanks with a colon cancer cell
suspension (in PBS) at a concentration of 2 x 106 cells/
mouse (HT-29, p53-/- in the left flank and HCT116, p53+/+
in the right flank). Tumors were allowed to develop
(approximately a week), following which, the animals
were randomized into treatment groups of 4 mice per
group, an untreated control group and a DRE treatment
group, as outlined in the toxicity studies above. The mice
were orally gavaged with either PBS or DRE in PBS at
40 mg/kg/day for 75 days. All mice were assessed for
toxicity, as well as efficacy of oral administration on the
growth of tumors. The tumors were assessed every other
day by measuring the length, width and height, using a
standard caliper and the tumor volume was calculated
according to the formula π/6 x length x width. The mice
were also assessed for any weight loss for the duration of
the study, which also lasted 75 day. Following the study,
mice were sacrificed and their organs and tissues (livers,
kidneys, hearts and tumors) were obtained and stored in
formaldehyde for immunohistochemical and toxicological
analysis.
73097

Oncotarget

Hematoxylin & eosin (H & E) staining

7.	 Nobili S, Lippi D, Witort E, Donnini M, Bausi L, Mini
E, and Capaccioli S. Natural compounds for cancer
treatment and prevention. Pharmacological Research. 2009;
59: 365–78. doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2009.01.017.

Mice organs were fixed in 10% formaldehyde in
PBS, following which the organs were cryosectioned
into 10-micron sections and placed on a superfrost/
Plus microscope slides (Fisherbrand, Fisher Scientific).
Sections of organs were stained according to a
standardized H & E protocol [52].

8.	 Yarnell E, and Abascal K. Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale and T mongolicum). Integrative Medicine. 2009:
doi:10.1016/j.jep.2011.02.027.
9.	 Chatterjee SJ, Ovadje P, Mousa M, Hamm C, and Pandey
S. The Efficacy of Dandelion Root Extract in Inducing
Apoptosis in Drug-Resistant Human Melanoma Cells.
Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
2011; 2011: doi:10.1155/2011/129045.

Statistical analyses
All experiments were repeated at least three
independent times. Statistical analysis was performed
using GraphPad Prism 6.0 288 software. Statistical tests
included the Students T-test and Two-way Anova.

10.	 Ovadje P, Chatterjee S, Griffin C, Tran C, Hamm C,
and Pandey S. Selective induction of apoptosis through
activation of caspase-8 in human leukemia cells (Jurkat)
by dandelion root extract. Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
2011; 133: 86–91. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2010.09.005.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

11.	 Ovadje P, Chochkeh M, Akbari-Asl P, Hamm C, and
Pandey S. Selective Induction of Apoptosis and Autophagy
Through Treatment With Dandelion Root Extract in Human
Pancreatic Cancer Cells. Pancreas. 2012a; 41: 1039–1046.

The authors would like to acknowledge funding/
support from the following individuals and agencies;
Donna & Dave Couvillon, The Pajama Angels, Lotte &
John Hecht Foundation, Jesse & Julie Rasch Foundation.
The authors would also like to acknowledge the
contribution of Dr. Andrew Brooke from the University
of Guelph, for the toxicological analysis of dandelion
root extract in mice models. The authors would like to
acknowledge the efforts of Drs. Tirumalai and Sikorska
in the complete editing and revamping of this manuscript.

12.	 Ovadje P, Hamm C, and Pandey S. Efficient induction of
extrinsic cell death by dandelion root extract in human
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) cells. PloS
One. 2012b; 7: e30604. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030604.
13.	 Fadeel B, and Orrenius S. Apoptosis: a basic biological
phenomenon with wide-ranging implications in human
disease. Journal of Internal Medicine. 2005; 258: 479–517.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01570.x.

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS

14.	 Loo G, Saelens X, Matthijssens F, Schotte P, Beyaert R,
Declercq W, and Vandenabeele P. Caspases are not localized
in mitochondria during life or Death. Cell Death and
Diseases. 2002; 9: 1207–1211.

The authors do not have any conflict of interests

REFERENCES

15.	 Chandra D, Choy G, Deng X, Bhatia B, Daniel P, and Tang
D. Association of Active Caspase 8 with the Mitochondrial
Membrane during Apoptosis: Potential Roles in Cleaving
BAP31 and Caspase 3 and Mediating MitochondrionEndoplasmic Reticulum cross talk in etoposide-induced cell
death. Molecular Cell Biology. 2004; 24: 6592-607.

1.	 Jemal A, Bray F, and Ferlay J. Global Cancer Statistics.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2011; 61: 69–90. doi:10.3322/
caac.20107.
2.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, and Jemal A. Cancer Statistics,
2013. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63: 11–30. doi:10.3322/
caac.21166.

16.	 Qin Z, Wang Y, Kikly K, Sapp E, Kegel K, Aronin N,
DiFiglia M. Pro-caspase-8 Is Predominantly Localized in
Mitochondria and Released into Cytoplasm upon Apoptotic
Stimulation. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2001;
276: 8079–8086.

3.	 Mann J. Natural products in cancer chemotherapy: past,
present and future. Nature Reviews, Cancer. 2002; 2: 143–8.
doi:10.1038/nrc723.
4.	 Ganesan A. The impact of natural products upon modern
drug discovery. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology.
2008; 12: 306–17.

17.	 Lu Z, and Xu S. ERK1/2 MAP Kinases in Cell Survival
and Apoptosis. IUBMB Life. 2006; 58: 621–631.
doi:10.1080/15216540600957438.

5.	 Newman DJ, and Cragg GM. Natural products as sources
of new drugs over the 30 years from 1981 to 2010. Journal
of natural products. 2012; 75: 311–35.

18.	 Mebratu Y, and Tesfaigzi Y. How ERK1/2 Activation
Controls Cell Proliferation and Cell Death Is Subcellular
Localization the Answer? Cell Cycle. 2009; 8: 1168–1175.
doi:10.1146/annurev.biophys.37.032807.

6.	 Foster BC, Arnason JT, and Briggs CJ. Natural health
products and drug disposition. Annual Review of
Pharmacology and Toxicology. 2005; 45: 203–26.
doi:10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.45.120403.095950.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19.	 Peek RM. Prevention of colorectal cancer through the
use of COX-2 selective inhibitors. Cancer Chemotherapy

73098

Oncotarget

and Pharmacology. 2004; 54: S50–6. doi:10.1007/
s00280-004-0887-x.

32.	 Hu C, and Kitts DD. Antioxidant, Prooxidant, and Cytotoxic
Activities of Solvent-Fractionated Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) Flower Extracts in vitro. Journal of Agriculture
Food Chemistry. 2003; 51: 301–310.

20.	 Tsujimoto Y, and Croce CM. Analysis of the structure,
transcripts, and protein products of bcl-2, the gene involved
in human follicular lymphoma. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 1986; 83: 5214–5218.

33.	 Smirnov DA, Brady L, Halasa K, Morley M, Solomon S,
and Cheung VG. Genetic variation in radiation-induced cell
death. Genome Research. 2012; 22 : 332–339. doi:10.1101/
gr.122044.111.

21.	 Vogler M. BCL2A1: the underdog in the BCL2 family.
Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19: 67–74. doi.org/10.1038/
cdd.2011.158.

34.	 Schroder K, Hertzog PJ, Ravasi T, and Hume DA.
Interferon-γ: an overview of signals, mechanisms and
functions. Journal of Leukocyte Biology. 2004; 75 : 163–
189. doi:10.1189/jlb.0603252.

22.	 Banchereau J, Bazan F, Blanchard D, Briè F, Galizzi JP,
van Kooten C, Liu YJ, Rousset F, and Sealand S. The CD40
Antigen and its Ligand. Annual Review of Immunology.
1994; 12: 881–926.

35.	 Kaltschmidt B, Kaltschmidt C, Hofmann TG, Hehner SP,
Dröge W, and Schmitz ML. The pro- or anti-apoptotic
function of NF-κB is determined by the nature of the
apoptotic stimulus. European Journal of Biochemistry. 2000;
267: 3828–3835. doi:10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01421.x.

23.	 He H, Shen Z, Zhang H, Wang X, Tang Z, Xu J, and Sun Y.
Clinical significance of polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl
transferase-5 (GalNAc-T5) expression in patients with
gastric cancer. Br J Cancer. 2014; 110: 2021–2029.
doi.org/10.1038/bjc.2014.93.
24.	 Liang YC, Hsu CY, Yao YL, and Yang WM. PARP-2 regulates
cell cycle-related genes through histone deacetylation and
methylation independently of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications.
2013; 431: 58–64. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.092.

36.	 Stark LA, Reid K, Sansom OJ, Din FV, Guichard S,
Mayer I, Dunlop MG. Aspirin activates the NF-kappaB
signalling pathway and induces apoptosis in intestinal
neoplasia in two in vivo models of human colorectal
cancer. Carcinogenesis. 2007; 28: 968–76. doi:10.1093/
carcin/bgl220.

25.	 Yélamos J, Schreiber V, and Dantzer F. Toward specific
functions of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-2. Trends in
Molecular Medicine. 2014; 14: 169–178. doi:10.1016/j.
molmed.2008.02.003.

37.	 Schall TJ, Lewis M, Koller KJ, Lee A, Rice GC, Wong
GHW, Goeddel DV. Molecular cloning and expression of
a receptor for human tumor necrosis factor. Cell. 2014; 61:
361–370. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(90)90816-W.

26.	 Schalk JAC, Offenberg HH, Peters E, Groot NPB, Hoovers
JMN, and Heyting C. Isolation and characterization of
the human SCP2 cDNA and chromosomal localization
of the gene. Mammalian Genome. 1999; 10: 642–644.
doi:10.1007/s003359901062.

38.	 Denes A, Lopez-Castejon G, and Brough D. Caspase-1:
is IL-1 just the tip of the ICEberg? Cell Death & Disease.
2012; 3: e338. doi:10.1038/cddis.2012.86.
39.	 Devine MJ, Plun-Favreau H, and Wood NW. Parkinson’s
disease and cancer: two wars, one front. Nat Rev Cancer.
2011; 11: 812–823. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrc3150.

27.	 Pike L, Singleton DC, Buffa F, Abramczyk O, Phadwal K,
Li J, Simon AK, Murray JT, and Harris AL. Transcriptional
up-regulation of ULK1 by ATF4 contributes to cancer cell
survival. Biochem J. 2013; 449: 389–400.

40.	 Bethge N, Lothe RA, Honne H, Andresen K, Trøen G,
Eknæs M, Lind GE. Colorectal cancer DNA methylation
marker panel validated with high performance in NonHodgkin lymphoma. Epigenetics. 2014; 9: 428–436.

28.	 Russell RC, Tian Y, Yuan H, Park HW, Chang YY, Kim J,
Guan KL. ULK1 induces autophagy by phosphorylating
Beclin-1 and activating VPS34 lipid kinase. Nat Cell Biol.
2013; 15: 741–750. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncb2757.

41.	 Hassan M, Watari H, AbuAlmaaty A, Ohba Y, and Sakuragi
N. Apoptosis and Molecular Targeting Therapy in Cancer.
BioMed Research International. 2014; 2014: 150845.
doi:10.1155/2014/150845.

29.	 Grespi F, Soratroi C, Krumschnabel G, Sohm B, Ploner
C, Geley S, Villunger A. BH3-only protein Bmf mediates
apoptosis upon inhibition of CAP-dependent protein
synthesis. Cell Death Differ. 2010; 17: 1672–1683.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2010.97.

42.	 Nascimbeni AC, Fanin M, Masiero E, Angelini C, and
Sandri M. The role of autophagy in the pathogenesis of
glycogen storage disease type II (GSDII). Cell Death
Differ. 2012; 19: 1698–1708. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
cdd.2012.52.

30.	 Hausmann M, Leucht K, Ploner C, Kiessling S, Villunger A,
Becker H, Rogler G. BCL-2 Modifying Factor (BMF) Is a
Central Regulator of Anoikis in Human Intestinal Epithelial
Cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2011; 286 : 26533–
26540. doi:10.1074/jbc.M111.265322.

43.	 Murtaza I, Saleem M, Adhami VM, Hafeez BB, and
Mukhtar H. Suppression of cFLIP by lupeol, a dietary
triterpene, is sufficient to overcome resistance to TRAILmediated apoptosis in chemoresistant human pancreatic
cancer cells. Cancer Research. 2009; 69: 1156–65.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2917.

31.	 Donald CD, Sun CQ, Lim SD, Macoska J, Cohen C, Amin MB,
Petros JA. Cancer-Specific Loss of [bgr]-Defensin 1 in Renal
and Prostatic Carcinomas. Lab Invest. 2003; 83: 501–505.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.LAB.0000063929.61760.F6.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44.	 Safa AR. c-FLIP, a master anti-apoptotic regulator.
Experimental Oncology. 2012; 34: 176–84.
73099

Oncotarget

45.	 Hu C, and Kitts DD. Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) flower
extract suppresses both reactive oxygen species and nitric
oxide and prevents lipid oxidation in vitro. Phytomedicine.
2005; 12: 588–597. doi:10.1016/j.phymed.2003.12.012.

49.	 Rieger AM, Nelson KL, Konowalchuk JD, and Barreda
DR. Modified annexin V/propidium iodide apoptosis assay
for accurate assessment of cell death. Journal of Visualized
Experiments. 2011; 37–40. doi:10.3791/2597.

46.	 Ralph SJ, and Neuzil J. Mitochondria as targets for cancer
therapy. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research. 2009; 53:
9–28. doi:10.1002/mnfr.200800044.

50.	 Remple K, and Stone L. Assessment of GFP expression and
viability using the tali image-based cytometer. Journal of
Visualized Experiments. 2011; 2–5. doi:10.3791/3659.

47.	 Ovesna Z, Vachalkova A, and Horvathova K. Taraxasterol and
b-sitosterol: New naturally compounds with chemoprotective/
chemopreventive effects. Neoplasma. 2004; 51: 407–414.

51.	 Chan L, Wilkinson A, Paradis B, and Lai N. Rapid Imagebased Cytometry for Comparison of Fluorescent Viability
Staining Methods. Journal of Fluorescence. 2012; 22:
1301–1311. doi:10.1007/s10895-012-1072-y.

48.	 Zhang X, Xiong H, and Liu L. Effects of taraxasterol on
inflammatory responses in lipopolysaccharide-induced RAW
264.7 macrophages. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2012;
141: 206–211. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2012.02.020.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52.	 Fischer AH, Jacobson KA, Rose J, and Zeller R.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining of tissue and cell sections.
Cold Spring Harbor Protocols. 2008; 2008: pdb-prot4986.

73100

Oncotarget

