Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Biomimetic Tissue–Engineered Systems for Advancing
Cancer Research: NCI Strategic Workshop Report
Teresa K. Schuessler1, Xin Yi Chan2, Huanhuan Joyce Chen3, Kyungmin Ji4, Kyung Min Park2,
Alireza Roshan-Ghias5, Pallavi Sethi6, Archana Thakur7, Xi Tian8, Aranzazu Villasante5,
Ioannis K. Zervantonakis9, Nicole M. Moore1, Larry A. Nagahara1, and Nastaran Z. Kuhn1

Abstract
Advanced technologies and biomaterials developed for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine
present tractable biomimetic systems with potential applications for cancer research. Recently, the National
Cancer Institute convened a Strategic Workshop to explore the use of tissue biomanufacturing for
development of dynamic, physiologically relevant in vitro and ex vivo biomimetic systems to study cancer
biology and drug efﬁcacy. The workshop provided a forum to identify current progress, research gaps, and
necessary steps to advance the ﬁeld. Opportunities discussed included development of tumor biomimetic
systems with an emphasis on reproducibility and validation of new biomimetic tumor models, as described in
this report. Cancer Res; 74(19); 5359–63. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
Successful use of three-dimensional (3D), heterotypic in vitro
and ex vivo models has been widespread in cancer research, and
efforts are emerging to incorporate physiologic parameters such
as perfusion, mechanics, and physicochemical gradients. To
assess the status of the ﬁeld and challenges going forward, the
National Cancer Institute Division of Cancer Biology in collaboration with the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis
and the Center for Strategic Scientiﬁc Initiatives sponsored a
workshop on February 26, 2014, entitled "Biomimetic Tissue
Engineered Systems for Advancing Cancer Research." Leaders in
the ﬁelds of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine,
biomedical engineering, cancer research, cell and molecular
biology, and pharmacology convened to discuss how biomimetic

1

Division of Cancer Biology, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, Maryland.
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Institute for
NanoBioTechnology, Physical Sciences Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland. 3Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. 4Department of Pharmacology,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan. 5Department of Biomedical Engineering, Laboratory for Stem Cells and Tissue
Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New York. 6Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cancer Nanotechnology Training Center, University of Kentucky College of Pharmacy, Lexington, Kentucky. 7Department of Oncology, Karmanos Cancer Institute at Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan. 8Department of Radiation Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 9Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
2

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Nastaran Z. Kuhn, Division of Cancer Biology,
National Cancer Institute, 9609 Medical Center Drive, Room 6W556, Rockville, Maryland 20850. Phone: 240-276-6333; Fax: 240-276-7861; E-mail:
nas.kuhn@nih.gov
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

technologies can play a pivotal role in advancing our understanding of cancer. Although not a comprehensive assessment,
this report summarizes the ﬁndings presented in the workshop
and discussions of future opportunities.

Presentation Summaries
Dr. Donald Ingber (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA)
emphasized in a keynote presentation, the importance of the
tumor microenvironment and showed that local changes in
extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and cell mechanics
actively contribute to tumor initiation and progression. He
also showed that breast cancer cell growth and spheroid
architecture are normalized when mixed with normal embryonic mesenchyme or with the critical ECM component biglycan in either 3D Matrigel or in collagen I gels (1). This insight on
the tumor microenvironment was applied in the context of
human "organs-on-chips": cell culture devices containing
micrometer-sized chambers seeded with live cells that then
recapitulate the specialized multicellular architectures, tissue–
tissue interfaces, physicochemical microenvironments, and
vascular perfusion necessary to capture complex organ-level
functions and human disease processes in vitro (2, 3). These
chips permit real-time, high-resolution imaging of cellular and
molecular processes within an organ-level context (e.g., tumoron-a-chip systems) that could complement or even bypass the
use of animal models and potentially serve as new tools for
more effective, low-cost drug screening.
Vascularized tissue–engineered systems
Dr. Sharon Gerecht (Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD) highlighted the importance of incorporating vascular
components into tissue–engineered biomimetic systems
because angiogenesis is vital for tumor growth and cancer cell
migration. She stressed that the ECM promotes tumor angiogenesis and described the use of engineering approaches such

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

5359

Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706

Schuessler et al.

as 3D ECM scaffolds, micropatterning, and microﬂuidic devices
to investigate the role of the ECM in cancer progression (4).
Dr. Steven George (University of California, Irvine; Irvine,
CA) described an in vitro microﬂuidic perfusable vasculature
network generated by combining human-derived endothelial
cells and ﬁbroblasts in ﬁbrin gels (5). Using a similar approach,
he also produced an in vitro prevascularized tumor model in
which tumor cells cocultured with endothelial cells and ﬁbroblasts in ﬁbrin gels form vascularized tumor spheroids (6).
Individual tumor cells intravasating into blood vessels can be
observed in this model. Future applications include studying
the effect of intraluminal shear stress on endothelial cell–cell
junction permeability during metastasis and the incorporation
of prevascularized tumors into the microﬂuidic vascular network. These applications would facilitate the understanding of
cancer biology in the context of perfusion or may potentially be
used for patient-speciﬁc drug development.
Dr. Shay Soker (Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC)
introduced a method of decellularizing liver tissue from various animal models while preserving the integrity of the native
ECM scaffold, tissue vasculature, and key bioactive molecules
(7). Infusion of the decellularized scaffold with hepatocyte
stem cells and human umbilical vein endothelial cells resulted
in liver-like tissue containing a bile duct, hepatocytes, and
vascular structures (8). In addition, smaller-scale, liver-derived
ECM discs mimicking native tissue can be seeded with metastatic tumor cells in a bioreactor, providing a useful highthroughput screening model for examining how environmental perturbations and physical forces affect liver metastasis or
assessing anticancer drug efﬁcacy.
Dr. Christopher Chen (Boston University, Boston, MA) presented his work on engineering capillary blood vessel networks
with precisely deﬁned geometries in vitro. Photolithographic
patterning or 3D printing technologies are used to generate
microﬂuidic channels in 3D collagen. Endothelial cells seeded
into these channels form a conﬂuent endothelium, and application of angiogenic cocktails induces sprouting of new perfusable microvessels (9, 10, 11). Dr. Chen showed that perfusing
these systems supports interstitial parenchymal cells and cell
trafﬁcking between the vascular and interstitial space. He
emphasized that constructing the simplest in vitro biomimetic
systems while faithfully capturing complex biologic processes
could contribute novel insights into how interactions between
cancers and vasculature affect cancer growth and metastasis.
Biomimetic systems for probing the tumor physical
microenvironment
Dr. Sanjay Kumar (University of California, Berkeley; Berkeley, CA) discussed how the tumor microenvironment is comparable in importance to cell-autonomous properties for
understanding tumor progression. He described how physical
features of the microenvironment regulate glioblastoma progression in terms of cell-intrinsic factors (e.g., actomyosin
contractility; ref. 12), cell-extrinsic factors (e.g., ECM rigidity,
ECM porosity, and chemical gradients; ref. 13), and the crosstalk between these factors (14).
Dr. Scott Guelcher (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN)
introduced the clinical problem of metastasis-associated bone

5360

Cancer Res; 74(19) October 1, 2014

disease and showed that, using two-dimensional (2D) polyurethane (PUR) ﬁlms with tunable mechanical properties, a
stiff microenvironment such as bone promotes osteolytic gene
expression (15). He found similar results using a 3D-perfused
bioreactor incorporating a PUR matrix with tunable pore size
and elasticity. Dr. Guelcher proposed the development of both
systemic and local anticancer drug delivery from bone grafts to
target pathways involved in osteolysis-promoting crosstalk
between tumor and bone. Proposed next-generation scaffolds
would be bone-templated to assess matrix resorption and to
compare bone morphology and pathology.
Dr. Joyce Wong (Boston University, Boston, MA) presented
the use of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stencils to pattern
cells and monitor migration of metastatic melanoma cells
cocultured with epithelium or ﬁbroblasts from different organs
(i.e., microenvironmental niches). Cell migration data showed
that in contrast with the random migration pattern of tumor
cells alone, tumor cells in coculture migrated directionally
toward the niche cells. Dr. Wong discussed future studies to
incorporate anatomical features of speciﬁc organs in vitro
using PDMS stencils and to identify factors associated with
organ tropism of metastatic melanoma.
Dr. Brendan Harley (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL) discussed the development of biomaterial
"rheostats" to study glioblastoma cell migration and invasion
by selective modiﬁcation of the extrinsic microenvironment
(e.g., microstructural/mechanical or compositional changes,
cross-linked or soluble biomolecules, and heterotypic cell–cell
interactions). He reported a methacrylated gelatin hydrogel
platform to assess malignancy of glioblastoma cells under
varying levels of epidermal growth factor receptor activity
(16). To recapitulate spatiotemporal heterogeneity in gliomas,
he developed a microﬂuidic device with optically transparent
gradient hydrogels containing overlapping patterns of cell and
matrix components with the ability to retrieve sub-regions of
the construct for downstream analysis (17). Dr. Harley presented future plans to use such chip-based platforms to study
glioma–immune cell interactions.
Correlation of molecular phenotypes and tissue function
with biomimetic systems
Dr. Michael Shuler (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY) reviewed
the concept of "body-on-a-chip" and discussed the importance
of using "physiologically based pharmacokinetic models" to
integrate multiple organ representations into a system with
common, deﬁned cell culture media. This is important for
accurately mimicking organ metabolism and function when
assessing a tissue construct's response to genetic manipulation
or exposure to cancer therapeutics (18).
Dr. Linda Grifﬁth (Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA) in a keynote presentation highlighted the
power of systems biology to integrate information across length
scales (e.g., molecular, cellular, and extracellular) by using data
from patient samples, animal models, and in vitro biomimetic
systems to computationally predict cellular response to therapy. She showed that multiplex molecular proﬁling of inﬂammatory cytokines from endometriosis patient samples predicted many inﬂammatory networks driving endometrial cell

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706

Biomimetic Tissue–Engineered Systems in Cancer Research

invasion, a process similar to cancer metastasis (19, 20).
Ultimately, this approach could be used to develop predictive
therapies targeting multiple activation pathways simultaneously. She also described systems approaches to analyze
how variations in hormonal, nutrient, and inﬂammatory status
within a human 3D liver bioreactor differentially inﬂuence
growth and chemotherapeutic responses of dormant versus
actively metastatic triple-negative breast cancer cells (21).
Dr. Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic (Columbia University, New
York, NY) described an in vitro model of Ewing sarcoma (ES)
within an engineered bone environment in which perfused,
native decellularized bone scaffolds were seeded with human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) that differentiated into osteoblasts and deposited bone matrix. Microaggregates of ES cells
were introduced into the engineered human bone. Highthroughput gene-expression analysis suggested that the engineered bone microenvironment resulted in reexpression of the
original tumor phenotype and of native ES genes that are
silenced in 2D culture (22). In another biomimetic system, she
described hMSCs cultured in a collagen hydrogel with osteosarcoma cells. The hMSCs remodel the hydrogel, facilitating
osteosarcoma cell migration and invasion.
Dr. Joseph Ludwig (University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX) showed that ES cells grown in 3D
electrospun poly(e-caprolactone) (PCL) biomimetic scaffolds
displayed growth kinetics, protein expression, and chemotherapeutic drug response more similar to in vivo xenograft tumor
models than to ES cells grown in 2D culture (23). Bioreactor
perfusion of the electrospun PCL scaffold mimicked ﬂuid
mechanical forces in bone and enhanced nutrient supply,
resulting in more uniform distribution of ES cells throughout
the scaffold and better long-term cell survival. He proposed
that this biomimetic system could be a powerful tool for
modeling metastasis and identifying drugs targeting the tumor
niche.
Dr. Calvin Kuo (Stanford University, Stanford, CA) described
an air–liquid interface for culturing long-term intestinal organoids that remain viable for up to one year (24). Combinations
of up to four genetic alterations converted primary colon
organoids to adenocarcinomas that maintained tumorigenicity when transplanted into mice (25). Dr. Kuo proposed using
such organoids for oncogene discovery by applying systems
approaches to derive prioritized lists of potentially oncogenic
alterations from The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets, genetically modifying the organoids according to the lists, and
functionally validating their tumorigenicity in vitro and in vivo.
He also proposed an organoid-based chemotherapeutic
screening assay in which results could be correlated with
patient outcome to propose recommendations for treatment.
Dr. Andrew Ewald (Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD) discussed his research on understanding the cell behavioral basis of breast cancer metastasis.
He showed that primary human breast tumor organoids
cultured in 3D reconstituted basement membrane were relatively indolent, whereas organoids derived from the same
patient and cultured in stromal collagen I were highly invasive
(26). Basal epithelial markers, including Keratin 14 (K14), were
speciﬁcally expressed in the invasive leader cells of both

www.aacrjournals.org

mouse- and human-derived tumor organoids. Although the
mechanism is unclear, the K14þ leader cell phenotype is
inducible in which bulk luminal K14 cells can become
K14þ and lead invasion. Importantly, knocking down K14 gene
expression in tumor organoids inhibits collective invasion both
in 3D culture and in vivo (27).

Future Directions
Tissue–engineered biomimetic systems hold great promise
for providing an attractive alternative or complement to the
current cancer research experimental models, namely, 2D cell
culture (which can lack important parameters of the microenvironment) and in vivo mouse model systems (which can be
costly and may not reﬂect what occurs in human cancers).
Summarized below are challenges and opportunities to
advance biomimetics for cancer research.
Improved understanding of the physical
microenvironment
With biomimetic systems there is an advantage of being able
to control one or more speciﬁc parameters of the physical
microenvironment. Because tissue architecture affects geneexpression proﬁles and cellular function, biomimetic systems
need to be developed to study the interplay between genotype,
phenotype, and cell-extrinsic factors, including stiffness, topology, pH, and oxygen tension. Biomimetic systems could also be
extremely valuable if they can accurately recapitulate the
physical and chemical properties of local microenvironments
encountered by cancer cells at distinct steps of metastasis. For
example, though not discussed at the workshop, extravasation
of circulating tumor cells (CTC) from the bloodstream into
metastatic sites can be recreated by developing endothelial
networks within microﬂuidic devices to assess how CTCs
interact with endothelial cells to surpass the endothelial
barrier and establish metastatic growth at secondary sites
under physiologic ﬂow and shear stress conditions (28). Recreating the physical and chemical parameters of a tissuespeciﬁc host microenvironment with biomimetic technologies
could also provide insight into how the ECM and heterotypic
cell–cell interactions inﬂuence CTC colonization and the
tumor dormancy switch in the metastatic niche (29, 30).
Development of biomimetic systems and predictive
computational models to understand spatiotemporal
dynamics in cancer
To better understand tumor progression and recapitulate
cancer complexity, it will be important to fabricate in vitro
systems that correlate physiologic, macroscopic tissue architecture with micro- or nanoscale molecular markers.
Such biomimetic systems representing the dynamics of
physiologic responses will increase insights into how tumor
cells integrate mechanical, electrical, chemical, and structural signals within the microenvironment over time at
multiple length scales. Multiscale computational modeling
approaches are also desired to better integrate multiple
datasets and information about tumor heterogeneity and
the microenvironment to predict tumor dynamics and treatment response.

Cancer Res; 74(19) October 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

5361

Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706

Schuessler et al.

Accelerated drug discovery
Biomimetic systems could serve as a tool for (i) screening
new drugs or combinations of drugs, (ii) optimizing dosing
strategies, and (iii) developing personalized therapy by using
organoids or patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) for
downstream analysis. Eventually, biomimetic systems could
provide a widespread platform for developing high-throughput
assays that are more cost-effective and efﬁcient than in vivo
models, yet more physiologically relevant than 2D cell culture
systems. To this end, the NIH has developed the Microphysiological Systems (MPS) Program, a partnership with the
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, and the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration to accelerate research in drug
toxicity and efﬁcacy (31). As the MPS program does not solely
address cancer therapy, more concerted efforts could be made
in this area, perhaps by coordinating efforts with other programs that support the use of conditionally reprogrammed
cells, organoids, and PDX tumors to understand the mechanisms of therapeutic response and resistance. Development of
personalized medicine could be further enhanced by using
human stem/progenitor cells or induced pluripotent stem cells
that can be programmed to recreate speciﬁc 3D organ systems
mimicking metastatic sites (32, 33). Incorporation of tumor
cells derived from PDX tumors or human organoids into these
stem cell–derived platforms could, thus, provide a patientspeciﬁc means for therapeutic screening that takes into
account the tumor microenvironment.
Creating physiologically relevant biomimetic systems
It will be important to develop biomimetic tumor models
that contain the essential components necessary for accurately
recapitulating in vivo conditions without being overly complex
and, therefore, prone to difﬁcult data interpretation. Although
in vivo models are valuable, it is not possible to control and
monitor individual parameters with the precision offered by
biomimetic systems. Development of novel biomaterials to
accurately mimic mechanical and topologic properties of the
tumor microenvironment is important, as is the development
of advanced technologies to measure subcellular and supracellular mechanical properties. Incorporation of immune system components is needed to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of how immune cells in the microenvironment
interact with tumors to affect cancer progression (e.g., assessing the effect of coculturing tumor-speciﬁc T cells with tumor
cells). Finally, it will be important to use patient-derived tumor
and stromal cells to overcome the genotypic and phenotypic
drift that occurs over time in immortalized cell lines, but
challenges remain in the collection and propagation of primary
cells and their maintenance variability in different experimental settings.
Validation of biomimetic systems
The development of embedded molecular or chemical
probes to track microenvironmental changes and individual
cell behavior in 3D scaffolds is important for validation of
biomimetic systems. An advantage would be the generation of
corresponding real-time, cell-based functional readouts and

5362

Cancer Res; 74(19) October 1, 2014

multiplex analysis, thereby allowing the comparison of tumor
formation and anticancer drug efﬁcacy in different models
such as 3D matrices, traditional cell culture assays, in vivo
xenograft models, and in vivo histologic sections. A challenge of
system validation is the appropriate selection of a "gold
standard" for comparison, which depends on the biologic
question under investigation.
Improved reproducibility
Development of different biomimetic tissue–engineered
systems to understand cancer complexity requires the establishment of guidelines for calibration and reproducibility.
Criteria could include the incorporation of essential calibrated
biosensing modalities to measure O2 and pH, development of
biomaterials and scaffolds calibrated to in vivo tumor conditions, DNA proﬁling to ensure authenticity of cell lines, the
generation of a human cancer bank for supplying human
tumor cells, and standardized cell culture methods.
Transdisciplinary teams
Investigators with diverse backgrounds should collaborate
with one another to provide novel perspectives for applying
biomimetic tissue–engineered systems to cancer research.
Required expertise may include tissue and microsystems engineering, biomaterials, cancer biology, clinical oncology, and
pharmacology. Engineers, physicists, materials scientists, and
computational experts working very closely together with
those who have a deep understanding of cancer pathophysiology will be able to deﬁne the most pertinent basic and
applied cancer biology research questions and develop applicable engineering tools to test these focused and well-deﬁned
questions.

Summary
The research presented at this workshop showcased important advances in the application of various biomimetic tissue–
engineered systems to probe questions in cancer research.
Recent work highlighted the use of 3D synthetic scaffolds,
bioreactors, decellularized tissue, and ex vivo tissue cultures to
better understand the chemical and mechanical interactions
between tumors and the microenvironment and to decipher
the dynamics of genetic and molecular changes that occur
during cancer progression. Of particular note was the potential
clinical application of biomimetic systems as more efﬁcient
and economical tools for therapeutic screening, the importance of using computational models for creating integrated
biomimetic tumor systems, and the need to fabricate reproducible, physiologically relevant biomimetic platforms that
adequately capture the essential components of a physiologic
system without being overly complex. Overall, participants
from diverse research backgrounds and expertise emphasized
the importance of transdisciplinary collaborations for best
deﬁning the pertinent clinical and biologic cancer research
questions that can be addressed with the appropriate biomimetic tissue–engineered technologies.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest are disclosed.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706

Biomimetic Tissue–Engineered Systems in Cancer Research

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the workshop speakers, poster presenters, and
participants for providing content for this meeting report. The authors thank the
NCI Workshop Planning Committee members for co-organizing the workshop,
and acknowledge Dinah Singer, Dan Gallahan, Suresh Mohla, Mariam Eljanne,

Michael Graham Espey, Jonathan Franca-Koh, Sean Hanlon, and Katrina Theisz
for insightful comments on the meeting report.
Received June 6, 2014; revised July 24, 2014; accepted July 28, 2014;
published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Bischof AG, Yuksel D, Mammoto T, Mammoto A, Krause S, Ingber DE.
Breast cancer normalization induced by embryonic mesenchyme is
mediated by extracellular matrix biglycan. Integr Biol 2013;5:1045–56.
Huh D, Matthews BD, Mammoto A, Montoya-Zavala M, Hsin HY,
Ingber DE. Reconstituting organ-level lung functions on a chip. Science 2010;328:1662–8.
Kim HJ, Ingber DE. Gut-on-a-Chip microenvironment induces human
intestinal cells to undergo villus differentiation. Integr Biol 2013;5:
1130–40.
Hielscher AC, Gerecht S. Engineering approaches for investigating
tumor angiogenesis: exploiting the role of the extracellular matrix.
Cancer Res 2012;72:6089–96.
Moya ML, Hsu YH, Lee AP, Hughes CC, George SC. In vitro perfused
human capillary networks. Tissue Eng Part C Methods 2013;19:730–7.
Ehsan SM, Welch-Reardon KM, Waterman ML, Hughes CC, George
SC. A three-dimensional in vitro model of tumor cell intravasation.
Integr Biol 2014;6:603–10.
Baptista PM, Siddiqui MM, Lozier G, Rodriguez SR, Atala A, Soker S.
The use of whole organ decellularization for the generation of a
vascularized liver organoid. Hepatology 2011;53:604–17.
Orlando G, Farney AC, Iskandar SS, Mirmalek-Sani SH, Sullivan DC,
Moran E, et al. Production and implantation of renal extracellular matrix
scaffolds from porcine kidneys as a platform for renal bioengineering
investigations. Ann Surg 2012;256:363–70.
Miller JS, Stevens KR, Yang MT, Baker BM, Nguyen DH, Cohen
DM, et al. Rapid casting of patterned vascular networks for perfusable engineered three-dimensional tissues. Nat Mater 2012;11:
768–74.
Nguyen DH, Stapleton SC, Yang MT, Cha SS, Choi CK, Galie PA, et al.
Biomimetic model to reconstitute angiogenic sprouting morphogenesis in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:6712–7.
Baker BM, Trappmann B, Stapleton SC, Toro E, Chen CS. Microﬂuidics embedded within extracellular matrix to deﬁne vascular architectures and pattern diffusive gradients. Lab Chip 2013;13:3246–52.
Ulrich TA, de Juan Pardo EM, Kumar S. The mechanical rigidity of the
extracellular matrix regulates the structure, motility, and proliferation of
glioma cells. Cancer Res 2009;69:4167–74.
Pathak A, Kumar S. Transforming potential and matrix stiffness coregulate conﬁnement sensitivity of tumor cell migration. Integr Biol
2013;5:1067–75.
Kim Y, Kumar S. CD44-mediated adhesion to hyaluronic acid contributes to mechanosensing and invasive motility. Mol Cancer Res.
2014 Jun 24. [Epub ahead of print].
Ruppender NS, Merkel AR, Martin TJ, Mundy GR, Sterling JA, Guelcher SA. Matrix rigidity induces osteolytic gene expression of metastatic breast cancer cells. PLoS ONE 2010;5:e15451.
Pedron S, Harley BA. Impact of the biophysical features of a 3D gelatin
microenvironment on glioblastoma malignancy. J Biomed Mater Res A
2013;101:3404–15.

www.aacrjournals.org

17. Mahadik BP, Wheeler TD, Skertich LJ, Kenis PJ, Harley BA. Microﬂuidic generation of gradient hydrogels to modulate hematopoietic
stem cell culture environment. Adv Healthc Mater 2014;3:449–58.
18. Smith AS, Long CJ, Berry BJ, McAleer C, Stancescu M, Molnar P, et al.
Microphysiological systems and low-cost microﬂuidic platform with
analytics. Stem Cell Res Ther 2013;4 Suppl 1:S9.
19. Beste MT, Pfafﬂe-Doyle N, Prentice EA, Morris SN, Lauffenburger DA,
Isaacson KB, et al. Molecular network analysis of endometriosis
reveals a role for c-Jun-regulated macrophage activation. Sci Transl
Med 2014;6:222ra16.
20. Chen CH, Miller MA, Sarkar A, Beste MT, Isaacson KB, Lauffenburger
DA, et al. Multiplexed protease activity assay for low-volume clinical
samples using droplet-based microﬂuidics and its application to
endometriosis. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135:1645–8.
21. Clark AM, Wheeler SE, Taylor DP, Pillai VC, Young CL, Prantil-Baun R,
et al. A microphysiological system model of therapy for liver micrometastases. Exp Biol Med. 2014 May 12. [Epub ahead of print].
22. Villasante A, Marturano-Kruik A, Vunjak-Novakovic G. Bioengineered
human tumor within a bone niche. Biomaterials 2014;35:5785–94.
23. Fong EL, Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE, Burdett E, Ramamoorthy V, Lazar
AJ, Kasper FK, et al. Modeling Ewing sarcoma tumors in vitro with 3D
scaffolds. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:6500–5.
24. Ootani A, Li X, Sangiorgi E, Ho QT, Ueno H, Toda S, et al. Sustained in
vitro intestinal epithelial culture within a Wnt-dependent stem cell
niche. Nat Med 2009;15:701–6.
25. Li X, Nadauld L, Ootani A, Corney DC, Pai RK, Gevaert O, et al.
Oncogenic transformation of diverse gastrointestinal tissues in primary organoid culture. Nat Med 2014;20:769–77.
26. Nguyen-Ngoc KV, Cheung KJ, Brenot A, Shamir ER, Gray RS, Hines
WC, et al. ECM microenvironment regulates collective migration and
local dissemination in normal and malignant mammary epithelium.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:E2595–604.
27. Cheung KJ, Gabrielson E, Werb Z, Ewald AJ. Collective invasion in
breast cancer requires a conserved basal epithelial program. Cell
2013;155:1639–51.
28. Jeon JS, Zervantonakis IK, Chung S, Kamm RD, Charest JL. In vitro
model of tumor cell extravasation. PLoS ONE 2013;8:e56910.
29. Wu M, Swartz MA. Modeling tumor microenvironments in vitro.
J Biomech Eng 2014;136:021011.
30. Alemany M, Semino CE. Bioengineering 3D environments for cancer
models. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2014; S0169-409X:00136–7.
31. Sutherland ML, Fabre KM, Tagle DA. The National Institutes of Health
Microphysiological Systems Program focuses on a critical challenge in
the drug discovery pipeline. Stem Cell Res Ther 2013;4 Suppl 1:I1.
32. Wells JM, Spence JR. How to make an intestine. Development 2014;
141:752–60.
33. Lancaster MA, Renner M, Martin CA, Wenzel D, Bicknell LS, Hurles ME,
et al. Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly. Nature 2013;501:373–9.

Cancer Res; 74(19) October 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

5363

Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706

Biomimetic Tissue−Engineered Systems for Advancing Cancer
Research: NCI Strategic Workshop Report
Teresa K. Schuessler, Xin Yi Chan, Huanhuan Joyce Chen, et al.
Cancer Res 2014;74:5359-5363. Published OnlineFirst August 5, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/08/05/0008-5472.CAN-14-1706.DC1

This article cites 29 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/19/5359.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/19/5359.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

