www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 14), pp: 22606-22615
Research Paper

Differentiation status of primary chronic myeloid leukemia cells
affects sensitivity to BCR-ABL1 inhibitors
Paavo O. Pietarinen1, Christopher A. Eide2,3, Pilar Ayuda-Durán4, Swapnil Potdar5,
Heikki Kuusanmäki5, Emma I. Andersson1, John P. Mpindi5, Tea Pemovska5,6, Mika
Kontro1, Caroline A. Heckman5, Olli Kallioniemi5, Krister Wennerberg5, Henrik
Hjorth-Hansen7,8, Brian J. Druker2,3, Jorrit M. Enserink4, Jeffrey W. Tyner2,9, Satu
Mustjoki1,10,*, Kimmo Porkka1,*
1

Hematology Research Unit Helsinki, University of Helsinki and Department of Hematology, Helsinki University Hospital
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Helsinki, Finland

2

Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
OR, USA

3

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Portland, OR, USA

4

Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

5

Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

6

Research Center for Molecular Medicine (CeMM) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

7

Department of Hematology, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway

8

Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU),
Trondheim, Norway

9

Department of Cell, Developmental and Cancer Biology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA

10

Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Kimmo Porkka, email: Kimmo.porkka@helsinki.fi
Keywords: chronic myeloid leukemia, high-throughput drug screening, ex vivo, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, CD34
Received: September 20, 2016     Accepted: January 24, 2017     Published: February 07, 2017

ABSTRACT
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) are the mainstay treatment of BCR-ABL1positive leukemia and virtually all patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic
phase (CP CML) respond to TKI therapy. However, there is limited information on the
cellular mechanisms of response and particularly on the effect of cell differentiation
state to TKI sensitivity in vivo and ex vivo/in vitro. We used multiple, independent
high-throughput drug sensitivity and resistance testing platforms that collectively
evaluated 295 oncology compounds to characterize ex vivo drug response profiles
of primary cells freshly collected from newly-diagnosed patients with BCR-ABL1positive leukemia (n = 40) and healthy controls (n = 12). In contrast to the highly
TKI-sensitive cells from blast phase CML and Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, primary CP CML cells were insensitive to TKI therapy ex vivo.
Despite maintaining potent BCR-ABL1 inhibitory activity, ex vivo viability of cells was
unaffected by TKIs. These findings were validated in two independent patient cohorts
and analysis platforms. All CP CML patients under study responded to TKI therapy
in vivo. When CP CML cells were sorted based on CD34 expression, the CD34-positive
progenitor cells showed good sensitivity to TKIs, whereas the more mature CD34negative cells were markedly less sensitive. Thus in CP CML, TKIs predominantly
target the progenitor cell population while the differentiated leukemic cells (mostly
cells from granulocytic series) are insensitive to BCR-ABL1 inhibition. These findings
have implications for drug discovery in CP CML and indicate a fundamental biological
difference between CP CML and advanced forms of BCR-ABL1-positive leukemia.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22606

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

in primary CP CML patient samples collected at the time
of diagnosis with the aim of identifying new candidate
drugs with efficacy against CP CML cells by BCR-ABL1
dependent and independent mechanisms.

All patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in
chronic phase (CP CML) and other forms of BCRABL1-positive leukemia are currently treated with
BCR-ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). CP CML
patients experience a relatively normal life span and
stay in remission for decades, some even after TKI
discontinuation [1, 2]. However, not all patients respond
optimally to TKIs and some develop intolerance or
secondary resistance. Most cases of TKI resistance are
caused by mutations in the kinase domain of the BCRABL1 gene, but some patients develop resistance due to
other mechanisms [3, 4]. Although third generation TKIs
targeting key gatekeeper mutations have been developed
(e.g. ponatinib), there still is a need for novel treatment
modalities for suboptimal responders.
BCR-ABL1-positive leukemias are classified as
CP CML, advanced phase CML, blast phase CML (BC
CML) and Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL). Several biological and
genetic factors are known to differentiate the BCR-ABL1positive leukemias but the basic mechanisms governing
the evolution from chronic to blast phase are still mostly
unknown [5]. On cell morphology level, CP CML cells
consist mostly of differentiated, mature myeloid cells
(predominantly neutrophils) with a short half-life, while
in BC CML and Ph+ ALL the predominant population
consists of undifferentiated, primitive blast cells.
We recently characterized drug responses in
BC CML patient samples and cell lines using a highthroughput drug sensitivity and resistance testing platform
[6]. In this study we set out to examine drug responses

RESULTS
Primary CP CML mononuclear cells are
insensitive to TKI therapy ex vivo
We first assessed the ex vivo drug sensitivity of fresh
primary bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood (PB)
mononuclear cells (MNCs) from 25 CP CML patients
using a panel of 295 approved and investigational drugs.
The ex vivo drug sensitivity was assessed with a sensitivity
score taking into account the area under the dose-response
curve and normalizing the value to drug responses
observed in healthy controls (selective drug sensitivity
score, sDSS). Primary CP CML MNCs (n = 10 BM and
15 PB) were markedly less sensitive to TKIs and other
drug classes ex vivo in comparison to BC CML (n = 5),
Ph+ ALL (n = 3), and acute myeloid leukemia (AML,
n = 20) patient samples (Figure 1). The sDSS values of
ex vivo responses to the tested common TKIs are depicted
in Figure 1. Most Ph+ ALL and BC CML carried the
highly TKI-resistant gatekeeper T315I BCR-ABL1 kinase
domain mutation, while all CP CML samples were BCRABL1 wild type. Representative dose response curves
for selected TKIs from individual CP CML, BC CML
patient samples and CML cells lines are shown in Figure 2,
illustrating almost complete lack of TKI sensitivity ex vivo in
CP CML samples over a large TKI concentration range. We
also tested the ex vivo drug sensitivity of CP CML samples

Figure 1: Comparison of ex vivo leukemia-specific drug sensitivity scores (sDSS) of common TKIs in CP CML, BC
CML, Ph+ ALL and AML samples. Colored symbols in BC CML and Ph+ALL graphs denote patients with TKI-resistant T315I (red)
or E255K (blue) BCR-ABL1 kinase domain mutation. Lines denote the median sDSS of TKIs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22607

Oncotarget

using different culture conditions (e.g. different media
or incubation times) and sample sources (bone marrow
or peripheral blood), with little or no effect on the TKI
sensitivities (Supplementary Figure 1). TKI sensitivities
were low also when CP CML sample was tested with a
cytotoxicity assay (CellTox Green, Promega) in parallel
with standard cell viability assay (CellTiter-Glo, Promega)
(Supplementary Figure 2). None of the CP CML patients
under study showed primary hematological resistance
to TKIs in vivo and all but one patient (CML CP 23)
achieved at least a complete cytogenetic response at
12 months of TKI therapy (Supplementary Table 1). Drug
compliance was not formally assessed.
Lack of ex vivo/in vitro TKI sensitivity was
independently confirmed from the Portland and Oslo sample
cohorts using distinct but methodologically analogous drug
sensitivity platforms. The Portland results showed that
both the Ph+ ALL and BC CML samples were sensitive to
BCR-ABL1 inhibitors ex vivo, whereas CP CML samples
showed minimal sensitivity (Figure 3A). Data from the Oslo
platform CP CML samples had very similar TKI sensitivity
to healthy controls ex vivo (Figure 3B).

library compounds showed modest activity against CP
CML MNCs ex vivo (average sDSS score > 5), while
most drugs showed sensitivity that was closer to healthy
control samples (Figure 4). The IGF-1R inhibitor BMS754807, mTOR inhibitor AZD8055, mitosis inhibitor
paclitaxel, PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PF-04691502, EZH2
inhibitor GSK343 and VEGFR inhibitor tivozanib showed
moderate selectivity to CP CML in our drug testing panel
(see Supplementary Figures 3 and 4). In contrast, MNCs
from BC CML patients showed markedly better overall
drug sensitivity compared to CP CML samples in direct
comparisons (Figure 5). Clustering of the drug response
profiles of patient samples included in this study revealed
comparable drug sensitivity profiles between CP CML
and healthy control samples with clear segregation from
BC CML samples (Supplementary Figure 5). Hence, the
observed drug insensitivies of CP CML MNCs ex vivo
were not restricted to TKIs but were more global.

TKIs inhibit BCR-ABL1 signaling in primary
CP CML MNCs
We next studied if the consistent lack of responses
to TKIs in ex vivo drug testing was due to inability of
TKIs to block cell signaling downstream of BCR-ABL1
in primary CP CML MNCs. CRKL is a central tyrosine
phosphorylated protein detected in cells of patients
with CML, suggesting that its association with BCRABL1 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
the disease. The specificity of CRKL phosphorylation to
BCR-ABL1 signaling, partnered with the stability of the

Primary CP CML MNCs are relatively
insensitive to other oncology drugs ex vivo
To gain further insight into the drug sensitivity
profiles of CP CML MNCs, we assessed the sensitivity
of CP CML MNCs to a broad range of drugs commonly
used in hematology and oncology (list of drugs provided
in Supplementary Table 2). Only 6 out of the 295 (2%)

Figure 2: Individual ex vivo TKI dose-response curves in different types of CML cell samples. Shown are responses from

TKI sensitive CML cell lines (K562, EM2), BC CML sample without TKI-resistant BCR-ABL1 mutations and typical CP CML samples
from Cohort 1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22608

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Ex vivo TKI sensitivity testing data from Portland (A) and Oslo (B) validation cohorts and platforms. (A) Drug sensitivity

score (DSS) was calculated for Portland samples and DSS of diagnose phase CP CML samples were compared with TKI-sensitive BC
CML and Ph+ ALL samples. Tested concentration ranges were 13,72–10000 nM (imatinib and nilotinib) and 1,37–1000 nM (dasatinib and
ponatinib). (B) TKI dose-response curves of CP CML (n = 3) and healthy BM (n = 3) samples were compared in Oslo platform.

Figure 4: Mean ex vivo drug testing results for BM samples from CP CML patients (red bars) and healthy controls
(blue bars). Shown are the 50 most leukemia-specific drugs ranked by the selective drug sensitivity score (sDSS). Error bars denote
standard deviation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22609

Oncotarget

We next assessed how dasatinib treatment ex vivo
affects cell populations in unfractionated MNC samples
by flow cytometric analysis. Although 72 h incubation
by itself reduced the proportion of CD34+ cells in MNC
samples, dasatinib treated wells had significantly lower
numbers of CD34+ progenitor cells in comparison to
control wells (p = 0.03, Figure 7B). CD34- cell proportion
remained similar in both groups. Together these data
indicate that the dependency of CML progenitor cells
upon BCR-ABL1 activity is lost during differentiation into
more mature cells.

phosphoprotein complex, has established this readout as
a robust method to assess BCR-ABL1 status in primary
cells and cell lines [7, 8]. We analyzed the effect of
dasatinib treatment ex vivo on CRKL phosphorylation
in three CP CML BM samples of unsorted MNCs using
western blotting. Phosphorylation of the CRKL protein
was completely inhibited by dasatinib at physiological
concentrations in the CP CML MNCs (Figure 6). Thus,
despite potent inhibition of BCR-ABL1 signaling in
CP CML MNCs by TKIs ex vivo, the cellular viability
remained unaffected, indicating that alternative pathways
govern cellular viability and survival in CP CML MNCs.

DISCUSSION

Ex vivo TKI insensitivity is linked to cellular
differentiation

BCR-ABL1-positive leukemias have been model
diseases for the successful development of targeted, safe
and efficacious cancer therapies. The advent of TKIs
has dramatically changed the outcome of these diseases,
in particular for patients with CP CML, many of whom
currently have a normal life span [2]. However, cellular
mechanisms of response and particularly the effect of cell
differentiation state to TKI sensitivity in vivo and ex vivo/
in vitro have not previously been explored.
We wanted to utilize the functional ex vivo drug
testing platforms for discovering new therapies for CP
CML patients, similar to our recent studies in BC CML in
which we found several promising drug candidates [6]. We
prospectively collected a cohort of 25 newly-diagnosed

In the primary BM and PB samples from CP CML
patients used in this study, the vast majority of the BCRABL1-positive MNCs were myelocytes, metamyelocytes
and neutrophils. To assess whether there is a difference
in ex vivo drug sensitivity between progenitor and mature
cells, we sorted CP CML MNCs into CD34+ and CD34fractions, and incubated the cells ex vivo with imatinib,
dasatinib and ponatinib in similar drug testing conditions
as performed previously. CD34+ CP CML MNCs were
significantly more sensitive to TKIs than CD34- MNCs
(Figure 7A), which was most pronounced with the more
potent TKIs dasatinib and ponatinib.

Figure 5: Comparison of overall ex vivo drug sensitivity of primary PB CP (A), BM CP (B) and BM BC CML (C) samples. Shown are
the 50 most leukemia-specific drugs ranked by the averages of selective drug sensitivity score (sDSS). A selection of effective drug classes
is highlighted with colors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22610

Oncotarget

CP CML patients and collected fresh primary PB and
BM samples for a comprehensive ex vivo drug sensitivity
assay platform testing 295 clinical oncology compounds
at a broad 4-log concentration range for each sample [9].

Overall, primary MNCs from CP CML patients exhibited
reduced sensitivity profiles to the tested drugs compared to
our experience with acute leukemias or BC CML samples.
Compounds targeting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway had

Figure 6: Ex vivo effect of dasatinib treatment on primary CP CML MNCs on BCR-ABL1 signaling as measured by
phosphorylation of CRKL protein. Western blotting was performed on cell lysates before and after 24 h 100 nM dasatinib incubation.
0.1% DMSO was used as a control treatment. CML cell line K562 and healthy BM MNC lysates were used as positive and negative
controls, respectively.

Figure 7: Effect of cellular differentiation on ex vivo TKI sensitivity. (A) Primary BM CP CML MNC samples were sorted

to CD34-positive and CD34-negative fractions and were incubated 72 h with imatinib, dasatinib and ponatinib. DSS score (see methods)
was used as the viability readout. Lines denote median. (B) Unsorted CP CML MNC samples were incubated with 100 nM dasatinib or
0.1% DMSO for 72 h. The CD34-positive and -negative cell percentages were analyzed with flow cytometry. Error bars denote standard
deviation. ns, nonsignificant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22611

Oncotarget

an effect on the viability of CP CML MNCs ex vivo, but
the leukemia-specificity was modest. The IGF-1R inhibitor
BMS-754807, PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PF-04691502 and
mTOR inhibitor AZD8055 were the most effective in CP
CML patient samples. Increased activity of the PI3K/Akt/
mTOR pathway has been proposed as an escape route for
TKI resistance in BCR-ABL1-positive leukemias and
combining nilotinib with dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor has
been shown to have a synergistic effect [10–12].
The most surprising finding in our study was the
significant lack of efficacy of all clinically available ABL
TKIs on CP CML MNCs ex vivo. We systematically
ruled out any technical cause for the insensitivity (e.g.
tested different culture media, sample sources, incubation
times and conditions, read-outs, concentrations of cells
and compounds). Importantly, identical experimental
conditions have resulted in good and clinically meaningful
drug sensitivities in primary samples from a variety of
chronic and acute hematological malignancies we have
tested. Samples from patients with BC CML and nonmutated Ph+ ALL were highly sensitive to TKIs ex vivo.
The results on CP CML MNCs were further validated
in two independent patient cohorts and analogous drug
testing platforms with the same result: TKIs had minimal
effects on the viability of primary CP CML MNCs ex vivo.
Strikingly, all CP CML patients of the current study cohort
responded well to TKI therapy in vivo, with all but one
patient achieving at least a complete cytogenetic response.
We next tested if TKIs inhibited the BCR-ABL1
signaling pathway in CP CML MNCs ex vivo. We showed
that dasatinib potently inhibited CRKL phosphorylation
in these cells ex vivo. Thus, CP CML MNC viability
remained unaffected despite efficient inhibition of the
canonical BCR-ABL1 signaling by TKIs.
As the MNC samples from diagnostic-phase CP
CML patients are composed mostly of myelocytes and
other cells from granulocytic series we tested if there was
difference in ex vivo TKI responses between immature and
mature MNCs. By cell sorting experiments, we observed
that TKIs were clearly more effective in CD34+ progenitor
cell fraction as compared to the more mature CD34population. Incubation with dasatinib also efficiently
decreased the numbers of CD34+ cells, but had little effect
on the numbers of cells in the CD34- fraction. Thus in
CP CML, the effect of TKIs is derived from targeting the
progenitor cell population while the bulk of mature cells
with little or no proliferative potential are insensitive to
BCR-ABL1 inhibition. However, due to the short halflife of mature myeloid cells, they are eliminated within
2 weeks after the TKI-driven eradication of progenitor
cells. This may explain the relatively more rapid initial
responses seen in patients with BC CML and Ph+ALL as
compared to CP CML patients.
Over the past decade, hundreds of studies have
examined the sensitivity of drugs on BCR-ABL1positive leukemic cells in vitro or ex vivo. However, the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

vast majority has been performed on immortalized cell
lines, which are derived from and reflect characteristics
of advanced BCR-ABL1-positive leukemias (e.g. the BC
CML-derived K562 cell line) or on long-term colony
assays involving significant modifications for modelling
the BM microenvironment [13–15]. In contrast, only a few
studies have been performed on primary MNCs collected
from CP CML patients. A few studies with imatinib have
shown that blocking of BCR-ABL1 signaling induce
growth inhibition more effectively in the earlier stages of
CML cell maturation [16, 17]. Our study confirms these
results and shows that this phenomenon is not limited to
only imatinib but applies to other TKIs as well.
Key question for future studies is the isolation of
molecular switches governing the differentiation-induced
changes in TKI sensitivity from highly TKI-sensitive
BCR-ABL1-positive blast-level cells to completely
insensitive mature myeloid cells, which comprise the
bulk of disease burden in CP CML. If these switches are
druggable molecules, we might have a new therapeutic
tool for transforming CML blast cells to mature
neutrophils which will have a very short life span in vivo,
similar to differentiation induced by all-trans retinoic acid
in acute promyelocytic leukemia.
To conclude, we observed low levels of ex vivo
drug sensitivity in primary CP CML samples when
compared to samples from advanced BCR-ABL1-positive
leukemia. Most importantly, CP CML MNC samples
showed minimal sensitivity to BCR-ABL1 TKIs ex vivo
reflecting a differential sensitivity among progenitor and
mature CML cells. Our findings have implications for
drug discovery in CP CML in achieving treatment-free
remission and indicate a fundamental biological difference
between CP CML and advanced forms of BCR-ABL1positive leukemia.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study cohorts and samples
Patient samples used in this study were derived from
3 independent cohorts. Cohort 1 (Helsinki) was the main
study cohort and Cohorts 2 (Portland) and 3 (Oslo) served
as validation cohorts.
Cohort 1 (Helsinki) consisted of diagnostic phase
samples collected from 25 CP CML patients (15 PB,
10 BM samples), 5 patients BC CML (4 BM, 1 PB), 3
patients Ph+ ALL (BM) and from 20 patients with AML
(18 BM, 2 PB). BM samples from 9 healthy donors were
used as controls. Cohort 1 included diagnostic phase
samples from patients participating in the Nordic CML
Study Group Clinical first-line study on the combination
of pegylated interferon-α2b and dasatinib [18] and were
diagnosed, sampled and treated at the corresponding
Nordic clinical study centers. The samples were analyzed
at the Hematology Research Unit Helsinki and the Institute
22612

Oncotarget

for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki,
Finland.
Cohort 2 (Portland) consisted of diagnostic phase
samples collected from 2 CML patients in CP and from
1 patient in BC, and from 1 patient with Ph+ ALL (all
samples from BM). Cohort 2 patients were diagnosed,
sampled, and treated and had samples analyzed at the
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Knight
Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR, USA. All samples were collected under
informed consent using a protocol approved by the Oregon
Health & Science University Institutional Review Board.
Cohort 3 (Oslo) consisted of BM samples collected
from 3 diagnostic phase CML patients and 3 BM samples
from healthy controls. Cohort 3 patients were diagnosed,
sampled and treated at the Department of Hematology,
Oslo University Hospital, Norway, and analyzed at the
Department of Microbiology at Oslo University Hospital
All samples were collected after obtaining written
informed consent (HRUHLAB2, permit numbers
239/13/03/00/2010,
303/13/03/01/2011,
Helsinki
University Hospital Ethics Committee). The study was
approved by respective local ethical review boards in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. MNCs were
separated from BM aspirates or PB samples by density
gradient centrifugation.

leukemia-specific drug sensitivity for DSRT results. Drugs
with sDSS values > 5 were considered effectively selective
and > 10 highly selective to tested cells.
Cohort 2 (Portland)
The ex vivo drug testing platform used for Cohort
2 samples platform was performed using a modification
of a protocol described previously [20]. Briefly, 10,000
cells per well were seeded into pre-drugged 384-well
plates containing 8-point dose response curves of each
drug spanning a ~1000-fold concentration range over
3-fold serial dilutions. Cells were then incubated for
72 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. After incubation, cells were
subjected to a CellTiter 96 AQueous One solution-based
cell proliferation assay (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and
read on a BioTek Synergy 2 plate reader.
Cohort 3 (Oslo)
Samples were analyzed as described for Cohort
1, except that the Selleck anticancer library was used for
ex vivo drug sensitivity screening.
In order to convert the ex vivo drug testing data from
all 3 platforms used in this study to a common metric, raw
sensitivity scores from all samples were analyzed with the
same bioinformatics pipeline developed at the Institute
for Molecular Medicine Finland [19]. The resulting
DSS scores are comparable when analyzing samples
within each cohort, but not between cohorts due to small
variations in analysis conditions (e.g. viability assays, drug
concentration ranges, cell culture media).

Ex vivo drug sensitivity testing
Cohort 1 (Helsinki)

Progenitor cell isolation

The drug sensitivity and resistance testing (DSRT)
protocol used for Cohort 1 samples has been described
previously [6, 9]. The drug collection contained 295
different compounds and covered most U.S. Food and
Drug Administration/European Medicines Agency (FDA/
EMA)-approved anticancer drugs, as well as emerging
investigational and preclinical compounds covering a wide
range of molecular targets (Supplementary Table 2). The
compounds were obtained from the National Cancer Institute
Drug Testing Program (NCI DTP) and commercial chemical
vendors. Drugs were pre-plated in 384-well plates in 5
different concentrations covering a 10,000-fold concentration
range and primary cells added at 10,000 cells per well. All
plates were incubated in a humidified environment at 37°C
and 5% CO2 for 72 h. Cell viability was measured using
the CellTiter-Glo luminescent assay (Promega, Madison,
WI, US) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with
a PHERAstar FS (BMG Labtech, Ortenberg, Germany)
plate reader. Dose response curves were generated based
on the viability readouts and a drug sensitivity score (DSS)
was calculated [19]. DSS is an integrative and robust drug
response metric based on normalized area under the curve
by taking into account all four curve fitting parameters.
DSS values were further normalized against the median
values from healthy controls (healthy BM MNCs) to obtain
a selective DSS (sDSS), which was then used to measure
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To test differences in drug sensitivities between
immature and mature CML cell populations, BM MNCs
from five Cohort 1 CP CML patient samples were sorted
into CD34+ and CD34- fractions using an AutoMACS
Separator (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).
CD34+ and CD34- cells were seeded in separate groups
into predrugged plates containing imatinib, dasatinib and
ponatinib. Identical drug sensitivity assay and analysis
conditions were used as described above for Cohort 1.

Flow cytometry analysis
We analyzed the CD34+ cell populations from
unsorted BM MNCs of four CP CML patient samples
by flow cytometry using a FACSVerse instrument (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). MNCs were stained
with a FITC labeled CD34 antibodiy (BD Biosciences). A
total of 2 × 106 cells per well were seeded in 24-well plates
at a density of 1 × 106 cells/ml. Plates were incubated
72 h in the presence of 100 nM dasatinib or 0.1% dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) (vol/vol) dissolved in Mononuclear
Cell Medium (MCM, PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany).
Sample analysis was done before and after the incubation
using the FlowJo software (FlowJo, LCC, Ashland,
OR, USA).
22613

Oncotarget

Western blot analysis

funding and honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer
and Novartis. J.W.T. receives research support from Agios
Pharmaceuticals, Array Biopharma, Aptose Biosciences,
AstraZeneca, Constellation Pharmaceuticals, Genentech,
Incyte Corporation, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Seattle
Genetics, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company and is a
consultant for Leap Oncology. B.J.D. is on the Scientific
Advisory Boards of Aptose, CTI Biosciences, and Gilead
Sciences and is PI or co-investigator on Novartis, BristolMyer Squibb and ARIAD clinical trials. OHSU and B.J.D.
have a financial interest in MolecularMD, a company that
may have a commercial interest in this research. This
potential individual and institutional conflict of interest
has been reviewed and managed by OHSU Conflict of
Interest in Research Committee and Integrity Oversight
Council. OHSU also has clinical trial contracts with
Novartis and Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) to pay for
patient costs, nurse and data manager salaries, and
institutional overhead. B.J.D. does not derive salary, nor
does his laboratory receive funds, from these contracts.
J.M.E. has received research funding and honoraria from
ARIAD Pharmaceuticals and Novartis.

Unsorted BM MNCs from 3 CP CML patient
samples were seeded in 6-well plates (3 × 106 per well)
in MCM and lysed in RIPA buffer before and after 24 h
incubation with 100 nM dasatinib or 0.1% DMSO. Protein
lysates from the CML cell line K562 and from a healthy
volunteer (BM) were used as positive and negative
controls, respectively. The protein lysates were loaded to
12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA,
USA). The proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad), after which the membrane was
blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 h.
Primary phospho-CRKL antibody (Cell Signaling
Technologies, MA, USA) was diluted 1:500 to phosphatebuffered saline + 0,05% Tween 20 (PBS-T) + 5% BSA
and incubated with the membrane for 1 hour at RT.
Secondary infrared 800CW anti-rabbit antibody (LI-COR
Biosciences, NE, USA) was diluted 1:15 000 to PBS-T +
5% BSA and incubated with the membrane for 1 h. Total
CRKL was measured from the same membrane afterwards
with primary CRKL antibody (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX,
USA, 1:1 000) and visualized with the same secondary
800CW antibody. The Odyssey imaging system (LI-COR
Biosciences) was used to visualize proteins. 100 nM
dasatinib was used for western blot and flow cytometry
experiments since this concentration is nearest the average
physiological concentration in plasma [21].

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported from grants received from
Academy of Finland, Finnish Cancer Societies, Signe and
Ane Gyllenberg Foundation, Finnish Cancer Institute,
Finnish Association of Haematology, Blood Disease
Foundation, Eutos project, Paulo Foundation, the Finnish
Pharmaceutical Society, and Ariad Pharmaceuticals.
C.A.E., J.W.T., and B.J.D. are supported by
The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society. J.W.T. is
supported by the V Foundation for Cancer Research,
the Gabrielle’s Angel Foundation for Cancer Research,
and the National Cancer Institute (5R00CA151457-04;
1R01CA183947-01). B.J.D. is an Investigator with
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and is also supported
by NIH/NCI MERIT award R37CA065823.
J.M.E. is supported by grants from the Norwegian
Research Council (221694), the Norwegian Cancer
Society (3311782 and 4487303), and from the Norwegian
Health Authority South-Eastgrants (2012012 and
2014014). P.A.-D. is supported by a fellowship from
Fundación Alfonso Martín Escudero.

Statistical analysis
The non-parametric Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient was calculated with SPSS Statistics software
(version 22, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). All correlation
analyses were performed using DSS profiles of the primary
patient cell samples. Clustering of the drug sensitivity
profiles across patient samples was performed using
unsupervised hierarchical complete-linkage clustering
using Spearman and Euclidean distance measures of the
drug and sample profiles, respectively. Clustering analyses
were performed using sDSS profiles of the patient samples
from cohort 1. Mann-Whitney U test was performed to
study the difference between two groups. P-values below
0.05 were considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

Personnel at the Hematology Research Unit Helsinki
are acknowledged for expert technical assistance.

 1.	 Huang X, Cortes J, Kantarjian H. Estimations of the
increasing prevalence and plateau prevalence of chronic
myeloid leukemia in the era of tyrosine kinase inhibitor
therapy. Cancer. 2012; 118:3123–7.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
S.M. has received honoraria and research funding
from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer and Novartis, and
research funding from Ariad. K.P. has received research
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

 2.	 Bower H, Björkholm M, Dickman PW, Höglund M,
Lambert PC, Andersson TM. Life Expectancy of Patients
With Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Approaches the Life

22614

Oncotarget

Expectancy of the General Population. J Clin Oncol. 2016;
34:2851–7.

13.	 Graham SM, Jørgensen HG, Allan E, Pearson C, Alcorn MJ,
Richmond L, Holyoake TL. Primitive, quiescent,
Philadelphia-positive stem cells from patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia are insensitive to STI571 in vitro. Blood.
2002; 99:319–25.

  3.	 Yang K, Fu LW. Mechanisms of resistance to BCR-ABL
TKIs and the therapeutic strategies: A review. Crit Rev
Oncol Hematol. 2015; 93:277–92.

14.	 Corbin AS, Agarwal A, Loriaux M, Cortes J, Deininger MW,
Druker BJ. Human chronic myeloid leukemia stem cells
are insensitive to imatinib despite inhibition of BCR-ABL
activity. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:396–409.

  4.	 Holyoake TL, Helgason GV. Do we need more drugs for
chronic myeloid leukemia? Immunol Rev. 2015; 263:106–23.
  5.	 Eide CA, O’Hare T. Chronic myeloid leukemia: advances
in understanding disease biology and mechanisms of
resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Curr Hematol Malig
Rep. 2015; 10:158–66.

15.	 Crews LA, Jamieson CH. Selective elimination of leukemia
stem cells: hitting a moving target. Cancer Lett. 2013;
338:15–22.

 6.	Pietarinen PO, Pemovska T, Kontro M, Yadav B,
Mpindi JP, Andersson EI, Majumder MM, Kuusanmäki H,
Koskenvesa P, Kallioniemi O, Wennerberg K, Heckman CA,
Mustjoki S, et al. Novel drug candidates for blast phase
chronic myeloid leukemia from high-throughput drug
sensitivity and resistance testing. Blood Cancer J. 2015;
5:e309.

16.	 Oetzel C, Jonuleit T, Götz A, van der Kuip H, Michels H,
Duyster J, Hallek M, Aulitzky WE. The tyrosine kinase
inhibitor CGP 57148 (ST1 571) induces apoptosis in
BCR-ABL-positive cells by down-regulating BCL-X. Clin
Cancer Res. 2000; 6:1958–68.
17.	 Holtz MS, Slovak ML, Zhang F, Sawyers CL, Forman SJ,
Bhatia R. Imatinib mesylate (STI571) inhibits growth of
primitive malignant progenitors in chronic myelogenous
leukemia through reversal of abnormally increased
proliferation. Blood. 2002; 99:3792–800.

  7.	 Nichols GL, Raines MA, Vera JC, Lacomis L, Tempst P,
Golde DW. Identification of CRKL as the constitutively
phosphorylated 39-kD tyrosine phosphoprotein in chronic
myelogenous leukemia cells. Blood. 1994; 84:2912–8.

18.	 Hjorth-Hansen H, Stentoft J, Richter J, Koskenvesa P,
Höglund M, Dreimane A, Porkka K, Gedde-Dahl T,
Gjertsen BT, Gruber FX, Stenke L, Eriksson KM,
Markevärn B, et al. Safety and efficacy of the combination
of pegylated interferon-α2b and dasatinib in newly
diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia
patients. Leukemia. 2016; 30:1853–60.

 8.	 Hoeve ten J, Arlinghaus RB, Guo JQ, Heisterkamp N,
Groffen J. Tyrosine phosphorylation of CRKL in
Philadelphia+ leukemia. Blood. 1994; 84:1731–6.
  9.	 Pemovska T, Kontro M, Yadav B, Edgren H, Eldfors S,
Szwajda A, Almusa H, Bespalov MM, Ellonen P,
Elonen E, Gjertsen BT, Karjalainen R, Kulesskiy E,
et al. Individualized Systems Medicine Strategy to Tailor
Treatments for Patients with Chemorefractory Acute
Myeloid Leukemia. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:1416–29.

19.	 Yadav B, Pemovska T, Szwajda A, Kulesskiy E, Kontro M,
Karjalainen R, Majumder MM, Malani D, Murumägi A,
Knowles J, Porkka K, Heckman C, Kallioniemi O, et al.
Quantitative scoring of differential drug sensitivity for
individually optimized anticancer therapies. Sci Rep. 2014;
4:5193.

10.	Quentmeier H, Eberth S, Romani J, Zaborski M,
Drexler HG. BCR-ABL1-independent PI3Kinase activation
causing imatinib-resistance. J Hematol Oncol. 2011; 4:6.
11.	 Ding J, Romani J, Zaborski M, MacLeod RA, Nagel S,
Drexler HG, Quentmeier H. Inhibition of PI3K/mTOR
overcomes nilotinib resistance in BCR-ABL1 positive
leukemia cells through translational down-regulation of
MDM2. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e83510.

20.	 Tyner JW, Yang WF, Bankhead A, Fan G, Fletcher LB,
Bryant J, Glover JM, Chang BH, Spurgeon SE, Fleming WH,
Kovacsovics T, Gotlib JR, Oh ST, et al. Kinase pathway
dependence in primary human leukemias determined by
rapid inhibitor screening. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:285–96.

12.	 Okabe S, Tauchi T, Tanaka Y, Kitahara T, Kimura S,
Maekawa T, Ohyashiki K. Efficacy of the dual PI3K
and mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 in combination with
nilotinib against BCR-ABL-positive leukemia cells involves
the ABL kinase domain mutation. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;
15:207–15.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Takahashi S, Miyazaki M, Okamoto I, Ito Y, Ueda K,
Seriu T, Nakagawa K, Hatake K. Phase I study of dasatinib
(BMS-354825) in Japanese patients with solid tumors.
Cancer Sci. 2011; 102:2058–64.

22615

Oncotarget

