CONFIDENTIAL
EMBARGO DATE 12/02/07

1019

Multidisciplinary Frontiers in Breast Cancer
Management
A Surgeon’s Perspective

S. Eva Singletary,

The current paradigm of breast cancer management may be altered significantly

MD

over the coming years by the adoption of new treatment schema and devices
Department of Surgical Oncology, The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas.

outside of the surgical arena. New advances in breast cancer imaging will
improve our ability to detect early-stage disease but also will assist in monitoring
treatment outcomes and support the development of nonsurgical ablation techniques. These advances, some already in use, include a 3-dimensional adaptation
of digital mammography, color Doppler ultrasonography that can visualize neovascularization in growing tumors, contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging with improved accuracy for the detection of occult cancers, a specialized
approach to positron emission tomography designed for use on the breast, and
the development of nanoparticle contrast agents that can be visualized with
near-infrared light. Systemic therapy, which revolutionized breast cancer management in the last half of the 20th century, is being reconceptualized, with attention turning to adjusting the timing of chemotherapy. Dose-dense regimens are
being tested, and there also is interest in so-called metronomic chemotherapy in
which very low doses are given on a very frequent schedule, resulting in reduced
toxicity and treatment outcomes that reflect an antiangiogenic mode of action.
Finally, the possibility of a breast cancer vaccine continues to intrigue and excite
physicians and patients alike, with the promise of enlisting the body’s own
immune system to seek out and destroy cancer cells and/or prevent the development of future disease. It will be important for surgeons to stay aware of
all developments that may improve the care of their patients and to be true
surgical oncologists rather than merely surgical technicians. Cancer 2007;109:
1019–29.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: breast cancer management, imaging, tomosynthesis, color Doppler
ultrasound, nanobiotechnology, dose-dense chemotherapy, metronomic chemotherapy, breast cancer vaccines.

F

Address for reprints: S. Eva Singletary, MD,
Department of Surgical Oncology, The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Box 444, Houston TX
77030-4095; Fax: (713) 792-2225; E-mail:
esinglet@mdanderson.org
Received November
December 8, 2006.

30,

2006;

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

accepted

or hundreds of years, surgery was the major weapon in the fight
against breast cancer. Now, with our growing understanding of
the biology of breast tumorigenesis and the mechanisms of metastasis, surgeons work as part of multidisciplinary teams to provide the
best care for their patients. This involves a reassessment of the most
appropriate role of surgeons. Careers are being rethought as surgeons retool their approach to be aware of all aspects of care that
may affect their patients and to be true surgical oncologists rather
than merely surgical technicians.
Based on 5 decades of research in the last half of the 20th century, the current paradigm of breast cancer management can be

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22519
Published online 12 February 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1020

CANCER

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

summarized briefly as follows: 1) Widespread use of
screening mammography means that breast tumors
usually are very small (<2 cm) when first detected.
2) For these small tumors, minimally invasive surgical techniques coupled with radiotherapy can be
used for primary treatment. 3) Systemic therapy
improves long-term outcomes for the majority of
patients, although most types of therapy are associated with significant side effects. 4) The risk of
future breast cancer (recurrence or new primary) in
high-risk patients can be reduced significantly
through long-term treatment with pharmacologic
agents such as tamoxifen, raloxifene, and aromatase
inhibitors. Some significant side effects may be associated with these treatments.
New treatment schema and devices outside of
the surgical arena may alter this paradigm significantly as we progress into the 21st century. Innovative approaches to imaging will facilitate earlier and
more accurate detection of breast cancer, support
the development of nonsurgical ablation techniques,
and assist in monitoring early response to systemic
therapy. After many years of extensive research into
optimal types and amounts of systemic therapy
agents, attention also is being focused on the timing
of treatments, with thought-provoking research in
the areas of dose-dense and metronomic chemotherapy. The development of a vaccine against breast
cancer has the potential to provide both patient-specific treatment and disease prevention without the
major side effects observed with current approaches.
These exciting frontiers of research are the subject of
this review.

New Frontiers in Breast Cancer Imaging
The widespread use of screening mammography has
had a significant impact on the breast cancer landscape. Where once it was common for tumors to be
detected only after they were relatively advanced,
most tumors are now quite small when initially discovered, with a reduced probability of axillary involvement. However, there are downsides to
mammography. Tumors still are missed with discouraging frequency, and results are especially poor
in women with dense breast tissue. Although the
concomitant use of ultrasonography has made it
easier to distinguish solid masses from cysts, it is difficult to identify malignant versus benign growths,
resulting in false-positive reports and unnecessary
biopsies. More precise estimates of size are increasingly important for new ablation techniques and for
measuring response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
New approaches that are now being used or developed

include: 1) refinements of imaging techniques already
in use, 2) functional imaging techniques, and 3) techniques using nanobiotechnology.

Refinements of imaging techniques already in use
Tomosynthesis. Nearly 25% of women who are called
back for additional imaging after a mammogram will
turn out to have false-positive results.1 At the other
extreme, as many as 20% of women who present
with breast cancer will have had a negative mammogram within the preceding year.2 One of the reasons
for these problems in mammographic interpretation
has to do with what researchers at Massachusetts
General Hospital call structured noise—anomalous
areas of structural overlap resulting when the 3dimensional breast is viewed in 2 dimensions.3,4 To
address this difficulty, those researchers developed
tomosynthesis, a 3-dimensional adaptation of standard digital mammography that compares with standard mammography in the same way that a computed
tomography (CT) scan compares with normal x-rays.
The x-ray tube, rather than producing images from 2
fixed angles, moves in a 50-degree arc about the
breast, taking 11 low-dose pictures from various
angles that are then pieced together by computer.
The procedure requires only 1 breast compression,
and the total radiation from the multiple images is
smaller than that used for standard mammography.
As with a CT scan, the radiologist can slice down
visually through the breast, so that structures that
may overlap on a standard mammogram can be
separated out. Initial trials have indicated increased
sensitivity and specificity with tomosynthesis compared with standard digital mammography—patient
call-back is reduced significantly, and the positive
predictive value is increased.5
Color Doppler ultrasonography. Color Doppler ultrasonography (CD-US) is a special US technique that
evaluates blood flow through blood vessels. US waves
bounce off of solid objects, including blood cells.
When the cells are moving, there is a change in pitch
(the Doppler effect) that can be captured and converted by a computer into an array of colors that
visualize the speed and direction of the blood flow.
New tumors cannot grow to more than 1 to 2 mm3
without the recruitment of new capillary blood vessels.6 This neovascularization may be useful for distinguishing between benign and malignant lesions and
has been the subject of intense interest as a potential
prognostic factor.7 CD-US is being studied as a lowcost, noninvasive technology for quantifying neovascularization.

Frontiers in Breast Cancer Management/Singletary

In a 1995 study, Lee and colleagues8 examined
the accuracy of blood flow detected by CD-US as an
indicator of malignancy. If blood flow was detected
within or at the margin of a lesion, then it was characterized provisionally as malignant. Comparisons
with histologic results indicated that CD-US showed
94.5% sensitivity in detecting malignant breast
tumors, but had a specificity of only 40.1%, indicating a high rate of false-positive diagnoses. Those
investigators recommended using CD-US as a supplement when solid lesions are observed by mammography or standard sonography.
Similar results were reported by Chao and colleagues,9 who measured the numbers of vessels and the
systolic peak flow velocity as indicators of vascularization. In 1124 breast lesions, they detected vascularity in 85.6% of benign lesions and in 95.3% of
malignant tumors. Although the average counts of
vessel numbers and values of flow indices in the malignant tumors were significantly larger than in the
benign lesions, those authors concluded that there
was too much overlap for this difference to be useful
clinically.
Watermann and coworkers10 conducted a retrospective study examining vascularization in early
breast cancer measured by CD-US as a prognostic
factor for overall survival. Over a 10-year period, 170
women with primary breast cancer were examined
with CD-US. The researchers divided the patients
into groups according to the number of tumor blood
vessels, as defined by direct contact with the tumor
and constant visibility over time. For patient with
from 1 to 5 vessels, from 6 to 10 vessels, and >10
vessels, the 5-year overall survival rates were 0.88,
0.92, and 0.56, respectively. Multivariate analysis
indicated that the number of tumor blood vessels
remained an independent prognostic factor when
corrected for age, tumor size, lymph node status, tumor grade, hormone receptor status, and histologic
type.
Boonjunwetwat and colleagues11 conducted a
small study to test the hypothesis that vascularity
measured by CD-US could be used to predict response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. They observed
that tumors with no/limited vascularity demonstrated by CD-US tended to show an increased response (25–33%) compared with tumors that showed
hypervascularity (13–17%), although these differences
were not significant.
CD-US is a relatively low-cost, fast, and noninvasive tool for the assessment of tumor vascularization.
Currently, it does not appear to be useful for the definitive differentiation of malignant versus benign
lesions, but it may hold promise as a prognostic indi-

1021

cator and, possibly, as a predictor of treatment
response.
Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of breast cancer
involves imaging before and after injection of a gadolinium-based contrast agent, which is taken up by
both benign and malignant lesions. The distinction
between benign and malignant is based on both
morphologic and kinetic criteria. Generally, benign
lesions are characterized by smooth edges, whereas
malignant lesions show spiculated edges. In addition,
malignant lesions tend to take up the contrast agent
more quickly than benign lesions, reflecting their
increased vascularity.
In 6 large prospective studies that have been
conducted since the mid-1990s, contrast-enhanced
MRI has shown a sensitivity of 71% to 100% for the
detection of invasive breast cancer compared with
16% to 40% for mammography and 16% to 33% for
US.12–17 Although MRI originally suffered from an
unacceptably low specificity, improved algorithms
for combining morphologic and kinetic data have
resulted in significantly improved specificity ranging
from 81% to 99%. Unlike mammography, MRI does
not expose the patient to ionizing radiation, and its
accuracy is not affected by breast density.
Despite its improved accuracy, contrast-enhanced
MRI is not recommended for general screening because
of its expense and limited availability. However, it can
be valuable for the detection of the following: cancer
that is occult on mammography or sonography, multifocal or multicentric disease in patients with a known
primary, residual disease in patients with positive
margins after breast-conserving surgery, response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, unknown primary in patients with axillary lymph node metastases, early
disease in high-risk BRCA1/2 patients, and recurrence
in patients after completion of radiation therapy.
In the future, contrast-enhanced MRI may
become an important tool in the development of
minimally invasive ablative therapies for the treatment of primary tumors, such as radiofrequency
ablation or laser ablation. Such techniques require
accurate imaging for the initial assessment of size
and location of the tumor as well as for assessment
of the success of the treatment. In a study by Burak
and colleagues,18 MRI was used for the follow-up
assessment of radiofrequency ablation treatment in
patients with breast cancer. In that study, MRI was
very effective in detecting viable cells after radiofrequency ablation treatment in tumors that were visible on MRI before treatment. If technical problems
can be resolved, contrast-enhanced MRI may also be

1022

CANCER

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

useful for monitoring the progress of tumor ablation
during treatment, something that has not been possible with US.

Functional imaging
Images obtained through positron emission tomography (PET) reflect metabolic and physiologic functions that occur in living cells. A positron-emitting
radionuclide is attached to a molecule (typically glucose or fluorodeoxyglucose [FDG]) that is ingested or
metabolized at a higher rate in tumor cells compared
with normal cells. The labeled molecule is injected
into the patient, where it accumulates in actively
growing tumors. Positron emission is tracked by
computer and used to generate a tomographic image
of the tumor.
Whole-body PET is very specific for the detection
of malignant breast tumors,19–21 but there are significant downsides to whole-body imaging, including
limited spatial resolution and considerable noise
from normal tissue, making small lesions difficult to
detect.22 Positron emission mammography (PEM)
was developed to resolve these issues by using a
much smaller device that is restricted to a single
breast.
PEM uses a parallel pair of detector heads above
and below the breast to bring it closer to the source
of emissions and provide a broad angle of coverage.
This increases the efficiency in detecting photons,
resulting in improved spatial resolution.23,24 In a
small pilot study using PEM (n ¼ 17 patients), Levine
and coworkers23 were able to detect both in situ and
invasive disease with a reported sensitivity of 86% for
the detection of malignancy and a specificity of 91%.
Rosen and coworkers24 successfully used PEM for the
examination of small breast tumors (<2.5 cm). The
PEM device was able to identify several lesions that
measured <1 cm, including a 0.4-mm noninvasive
papillary carcinoma.
A general problem with PET scans is the lack of
anatomic specificity. With the much smaller PEM detector heads, this problem can be resolved readily by
running the scan either concurrently or sequentially
with mammography without releasing the breast
compression.23,24
PEM is quite new, and it has not yet been compared directly with US, mammography, or MRI to
demonstrate that it would offer significant advantages over these older technologies. It also has some
limitations. PEM is not effective in detecting invasive
lobular carcinoma23 and may generate false-positive
results from fat necrosis at the site of old biopsies.24
Additional studies with large patient groups are

needed to address these technical issues and confirm
the preliminary results reported with PEM in pilot
studies.

Nanobiotechnology approaches
Near-infrared radiation is of interest for breast imaging, because these wavelengths lie above the
absorption level of native chromophores like hemoglobin and below the absorption level of water, so
they are able to penetrate biologic tissue up to a
depth of 15 cm. Conventional dyes that absorb in
this wavelength tend to be toxic, so workers in the
growing field of nanobiotechnology are synthesizing
light-absorbing and fluorescent nanoprobes that are
sensitive to near-infrared radiation, which can be
used to improve contrast and potentially detect the
expression of specific genes. Researchers at Rice University in Houston are experimenting with metal
nanoshells, composite spherical nanoparticles that
consist of a dielectric core covered by a thin gold
shell, as a replacement for the dyes.25 The optical
resonance of the nanoparticles can be adapted to a
wide range of wave lengths by varying the relative
dimensions of the core and the shell. These nanoshells were used for molecular imaging in a recent
study in which anti-HER2-conjugated nanoshells
were used to discriminate between living SKBR-3
breast carcinoma cells and noncancer control cells.26
Our growing knowledge of the specific genes associated with breast cancer development should allow
this approach to be fine-tuned to an even greater
degree.

Systemic Chemotherapy: Issues in Timing
Systemic therapy currently is recommended for all
but the most favorable patients (ie, lymph node negative, primary tumor size <10 mm). Guidelines for
the exact type of systemic therapy are based on
patient age/menopausal status, histologic status of
the axillary lymph nodes, size and histologic subtype
of the primary tumor, and level of estrogen receptor
expressed by the tumor.
For much of the late 20th century, attempts to
improve outcomes from systemic therapy were
largely restricted to manipulating the type and dose
of drugs used. In general, scheduling was designed
to balance the need for frequent treatments that
allowed minimal time for tumor regrowth with the
need for patient recovery from the cytotoxic effects
of the drugs, with most multidrug protocols allowing
from 21 days to 28 days of recovery between treatments. Overall duration of standard adjuvant chemotherapy is from 4 months to 6 months.

Frontiers in Breast Cancer Management/Singletary

1023

TABLE 1
Results of Large Prospective Trials Testing the Efficacy of Dose-dense Chemotherapy in Breast Cancer
No. of
patients

Median
follow-up, y

Hudis et al., 2005
(CALGB 9741 trial)28

1972

Sparano et al., 2005
(E1199 trial)29
Venturini et al., 200530

Reference

Drug regimen

Dose schedule

Outcome

Treatment toxicity

5

A?paclitaxel?C or
AC?paclitaxel

q 2 wk vs q 3 wk

DFS: 76.8%
(q 2 wk) vs 71.7%
(q 3 wk; P ¼.012);
OS: 83.0% (q 2 wk)
vs 79.5%
(q 3 wk; P ¼.049)

q 1 wk vs q 3 wk: Increased
no. of packed RBC transfusions,
decreased neutropenia
and febrile neutropenia

5052

4

AC?paclitaxel or
AC?docetaxel

q 1 wk vs q 3 wk

No significant
difference in DFS

Grade 3/4 toxicity higher in q 3 wk
vs q 1 wk for docetaxel arm only

1214

10.4

FEC

q 2 wk vs q 3 wk

No significant
difference in OS or DFS
after adjustment by
multivariate analysis

q 2 wk vs q 3 wk: Increased
asthenia, bone pain, anemia,
thrombocytopenia;
decreased leucopenia

CALGB indicates Cancer and Leukemia Group B; A, doxorubicin; C, cyclophosphamide; FEC, 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide; Q 2 wk, every 2 weeks; q 3 wk, every 3 weeks; q 1 wk, every week;
DFS, disease-free survival; OS, overall survival; RBC, red blood cells.

Beginning in the 1990s, oncologists began exploring the idea that increasing the dose density of
chemotherapy may improve outcomes while shortening the course of treatment and yielding a greater
overall cell kill. The idea of dose density is to minimize the time given for the cancer to grow between
treatments. Instead of the common intervals of from
21 days to 28 days between cycles of chemotherapy,
treatments are given at intervals of from 7 days to
14 days, frequently with growth factor supplementation. More recently, attention has turned to so-called
metronomic chemotherapy in which low doses of the
drugs are given on a very frequent schedule with the
hope of inhibiting the angiogenic activity needed for
tumor growth.

Dose-dense chemotherapy
The concept of dose-dense chemotherapy, as
adapted in the Norton-Simon hypothesis,27 stems
from the Gompertzian model of tumor growth, which
predicts that, because smaller tumors grow faster, tumor growth between cycles of chemotherapy is more
rapid when the cell kill has been greatest. Increasing
dose density limits the amount of regrowth that can
occur between cycles.
Three large prospective trials have tested this hypothesis with mixed results (Table 1).28–30 The 5-year
results from Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB)
9741 Intergroup trial, with an enrollment of 1972
patients, were presented at the 2005 San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium.28 In this protocol, lymph
node-positive breast cancer patients received doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and cyclophosphamide (CTX)

(either sequentially or with concurrent doxorubicin
and CTX followed by paclitaxel) at intervals of 2
weeks or 3 weeks. Both disease-free survival (DFS)
and overall survival (OS) were increased significantly
in the 2-week treatment arms compared with the
3-week treatment arms, and no differences were
observed as a function of sequential versus concurrent drug treatment.
The 2 other large trials listed in Table 1 showed
no difference in outcomes as a function of dose density. The North American Breast Cancer Intergroup
E1199 trial, with an enrollment of 5052 patients,
compared outcomes from 1-week treatment intervals
with 3-week treatment intervals for concurrent doxorubicin and CTX followed by either paclitaxel or
docetaxel.29 The Italian trial reported by Venturini
and colleagues30 compared treatment intervals of
3 weeks versus 2 weeks for a regimen of 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and CTX.
The differences in outcome among these three
trials may stem in part from patient sample differences: Patients in the CALGB 9741 Intergroup trial had
more advanced disease (all were lymph node-positive)
compared with the other 2 groups. Nonetheless, it is
noteworthy that the advantage in DFS seen at 5 years
in the 2-week arm versus the 3-week arm in the CALGB
9741 trial was reduced from the figure reported at 3
years (7.1% vs 9.3%, respectively).
Even if there is no significant improvement in
long-term outcomes, dose-dense chemotherapy may
have other advantages over standard dosing schedules. Citron and colleagues31 reported a lower number of hospital admissions for neutropenia and fever

1024

CANCER

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

TABLE 2
Results of Clinical Trials Testing the Efficacy of Metronomic Chemotherapy in Advanced Breast Cancer
Reference

Patient population

Median
follow-up, mo

Orlando et al., 200636

MBC (n ¼ 153)

Bottini et al., 200637

Burstein et al., 200538

Drug regimen

Outcome

23

MTX 2.5 mg 2 times daily
2 d/wk and CTX 50 mg every d

CR, 3.3%; PR, 16.3%; PCB, 15.7%

Elderly, T2-T4,
N0-N1, ERþ (n ¼ 114)

24

Letrozole 2.5 mg daily vs
letrozole and CTX 50 mg daily

OR, 87.7% for letrozole and
CTX vs 71.9% for letrozole;
DFS, 82% vs 83.5%, respectively

MBC (n ¼ 55)

12

CTX 50 mg daily and MTX
2.5 mg twice daily 2 d/wk vs
CTX/MTX and bevacizumab
10 mg/kg every 14 d

OR, 10% for CTX/MTX vs
29% for CTX/MTX and
bevacizumab; SD, 38% vs
41%, respectively; TTP, 2 mo vs
5.5 mo, respectively

MBC indicates metastatic breast cancer; MTX, methotrexate; CTX, cyclophosphamide; CR, complete response; PR, partial response; PCB, prolonged clinical benefit (no disease progression for at least 12 months);
ERþ, estrogen receptor positive; OR, overall response; DFS, disease-free survival; SD, stable disease; TTP, time to progression.

in the dose-dense group of the CALGB 9741 trial,
and patients appreciated the significant reduction in
the overall treatment time.32

Metronomic chemotherapy
Metronomic chemotherapy is a variation of dosedense scheduling in which low doses of chemotherapy drugs (each significantly below the maximum
tolerated dose [MTD]) are given at frequent, even
daily, intervals for extended periods with no prolonged drug-free intervals. The doses are low enough
that even the cumulative dose may be lower than the
MTD. These low doses result in reduced toxicity and
a reduced reliance on growth factor support to
recover from the myelosuppression.
Chemotherapy drugs interfere with cell division
and affect all dividing cells, including the endothelial
cells involved with new blood vessel formation in the
growing tumor. Usually, the damaged endothelial
cells are repaired or replaced during the 3- to 4-week
breaks normally used to recover from the side effects
of chemotherapy.33 The use of very short cycles does
not allow sufficient time for this to occur. In addition, because the endothelial cells are normal and
genetically stable, they are unlikely to acquire drug
resistance, a phenomenon that is common in genetically unstable tumor cells. They will continue to
respond to the mitosis-inhibiting effects of the chemotherapy through repeated doses in much the same
way as myeloid cells do. Myelosuppression occurs
repeatedly during multiple cycles of standard chemotherapy even if the tumor itself has mutated into a
drug-resistant form.34
Because metronomic chemotherapy is designed
primarily to be antiangiogenic instead of cytotoxic,

the principal outcomes are expected to differ from
those observed with standard chemotherapy: longterm stable disease versus the destruction of existing
disease.35 Three small clinical trials have investigated
the use of metronomic chemotherapy in patients
with advanced breast cancer (Table 2).36–38 In the
study by Orlando and colleagues,36 low-dose methotrexate (MTX) and low-dose CTX were administered
orally to 153 patients with metastatic breast cancer.
At a median follow-up of 23 months, those authors
reported that 16% of patients achieved a prolonged
clinical benefit (no disease progression for 12
months). The other 2 studies analyzed metronomic
chemotherapy alone versus in combination with
other agents. In a study that involved 114 elderly
women with advanced disease, Bottini and colleagues37 reported that letrozole in combination with
CTX (50 mg per day) significantly increased the rate
of overall response compared with letrozole alone.
Burstein and coworkers38 used the same MTX/CTX
regimen reported in the study by Orlando et al either
alone or in combination with the antiangiogenic
agent bevacizumab. The addition of bevacizumab to
the metronomic chemotherapy combination resulted
in significant increases in overall response and time
to progression compared with MTX/CTX alone.
However, the percentage of patients achieving stable
disease was similar in both groups (41% vs 38%,
respectively). All 3 studies reported very favorable
toxicity profiles for the drug regimens.
Although these results seem promising, the studies reported were very small. If larger controlled
trials provide additional evidence for the clinical usefulness of metronomic chemotherapy, then this approach would have several advantages to the patient.
In the metronomic drug regimens that have been

Frontiers in Breast Cancer Management/Singletary

1025

agents were first introduced, they were hailed as a
magic bullet that surely would usher in a new era of
effective cancer treatment.40 This has not happened
yet with these agents, and clinically important results
may prove to be equally elusive with this new approach to antiangiogenesis.

FIGURE 1. Schematic representation of humoral and cellular bases of
immunologic mobilization against foreign invaders.

TABLE 3
Potential Difficulties to Overcome in Constructing a Vaccine Against
Solid Tumors*
Most tumor antigens are self antigens and only mildly immunogenic
Tumor cells may express low levels of antigen
Antigen may be shielded from immune surveillance
Developing tumor may shed antigens
Only a fraction of tumor cells may express antigens
Tumor cells may express low levels of costimulatory proteins needed to generate a
robust immune response
Advanced-stage patients recruited for trials may have large tumors; cells on the
interior may not be accessible
Metastatic tumors may release immunosuppressive factors into the
microenvironment
Metastatic tumors associated with decreased numbers of peripheral blood
lymphocytes and dendritic cell dysfunction
* See Campoli et al., 200542; Radford et al., 200543; Molldrem, 200644; Kortylewski et al., 200545; Gillanders and Thalachallour, 200646.

tested to date, drugs have been given orally, making
administration more convenient for the patients. The
low toxicity means that there is another option for
patients who may be poor candidates for standard
chemotherapy because of advanced age or comorbidities or for patients who refuse chemotherapy
because of their fear of significant side effects.
Because patients are not expected to develop resistance to the drugs used, relatively inexpensive offpatent agents can be used, reducing the cost of treatment.39 Further cost reductions are anticipated from
the reduced need for supportive care for treatment
side effects. Metronomic chemotherapy targets a
different cell population than standard therapies, so
combining it with other low-impact modalities, such
as targeted therapies, endocrine therapy, or antitumor vaccines, should be possible.
Although all of this may seem attractive, there is
an important cautionary note. When antiangiogenic

Breast Cancer Vaccines
Both patients and physicians continue to be intrigued
and excited by the possibility of a breast cancer
vaccine that could enlist the body’s own immune
functions to seek out and destroy cancer cells and/or
prevent the development of future disease. Compared with other available therapies for breast
cancer, a vaccine would have the advantage of being
easy to administer and relatively nontoxic.
Most widely used vaccines (for influenza, hepatitis B, rubella, etc) are prophylactic in nature, that is,
they are directed against a specific etiologic agent
prior to actual disease exposure. Cancer, of course, is
a more complex situation. Although some cancers
are associated with specific infectious agents,41 the
evidence for most cancers (including breast cancer,
as discussed below) is conflicting and difficult to
interpret. Thus, most experimental cancer vaccines
to date have been designed to be therapeutic, stimulating a cellular immune response against antigens
from established tumors.
Basics of immunology
The human immune system is extraordinarily complex, and a detailed description is far beyond the
scope of this article. Figure 1 presents a very basic
outline that is intended to assist in understanding
the experimental approaches that have been used in
developing breast cancer vaccines. The figure shows
that B cells provide the basis for the humoral
response, interacting with foreign antigens in their
native form and further differentiating into plasma
cells, which secrete specific antibodies, or memory
cells, which respond quickly to future exposures.
The cellular response involves the interaction of
T cells (cytotoxic [CD8þ] or helper [CD4þ]) with
processed foreign antigens presented by the major
histocompatibility (MHC) proteins. The activated,
cytotoxic T cells release compounds that induce apoptosis in the infected cell and also undergo clonal
expansion, generating daughter cells that can recognize and kill other infected cells. The activated helper
T cells generate nonspecific responses to the invaders (eg, inflammation) and also activate B cells to
begin the production of antibodies.

Inoculation with all 5 strains stopped
tumor growth; regression in some
animals occurred >1 mo after inoculation

MHC indicates major histocompatibility; cDNA, combinational DNA; L.m., Lysteria monocytegenes.

Recombinant strains of L.m. containing
5 overlapping fragments of rat
HER2-neu used to vaccinate mice
previously injected with a HER2-positive
rat breast tumor cell line
Vaccines using L.m. as a vector
Singh et al., 200550

Although most bacteria are broken down in
phagocytic vacuoles, some L.m. can escape
into the cytoplasm, enabling them to replicate
and grow within the cell; L.m. antigens
can generate both MHC I and II responses

Vaccine alone effective as a prophylactic
agent; mice with established tumors
required pretreatment with paclitaxel
to show a survival response
Mice injected with vaccine derived from
modified LM fibroblasts transfected with
genomic DNA fragments from a highly
aggressive murine breast adenocarcinoma
DNA vaccine based on
whole cell sheared DNA
fragments transfected into
highly immunogenic fibroblasts
Chopra et al., 200649

Whole tumor cells alone are poorly immunogenic;
fibroblasts are effective at presenting antigens
and grow easily in culture

Vaccine produced an immunologic response,
and was associated with regression
of tumors derived from a
mammaglobin-A-positive cell line
Mice transgenic for human HLA-A2 and CD8
inoculated with vaccine based on human
mammoglobin-A cDNA
DNA vaccine based on
a single purified antigen
Narayanan et al., 200448

Full-length cDNA molecule transfected into
target cells where it produces antigens
that are processed by MHC I and II mechanisms

Clinical response in 3 of 16 patients (19%)
Sixteen breast cancer patients injected
with a dendritic/tumor fusion cell vaccine
Fusion of tumor cells
and dendritic cells

Targets multiple antigens; uses the ability
of dendritic cells to efficiently present
antigens with MHC class I and II pathways

Study description
Rationale

Avigan et al., 200447

Prophylactic vaccines: Are some breast cancers
attributable to an infectious agent?
Almost 20% of cancers worldwide are attributable
to infectious disease, and prophylactic vaccination
against the infecting organisms may offer significant
protection against the related cancers.41 The search
for an infectious etiology for breast cancer has been
going on for many years, with most research centering on human papillomavirus, Epstein-Barr virus,
and a human equivalent of mouse mammary tumor
virus.

Approach

Creating a therapeutic vaccine against breast cancer
For some or all of the reasons listed in Table 3,42–46
it has proven to be extraordinarily difficult to
create effective therapeutic cancer vaccines against
solid tumors. Nonetheless, a variety of approaches
can be used to increase the immune response,
largely aimed at selecting appropriate antigens
and ensuring their effective presentation to the
immune system.
Table 447–50 shows some of the approaches that
are being used currently for the development of
experimental breast cancer vaccines. Of the 4 studies
that are summarized here, 3 have produced promising results in animal studies but have not been
tested yet in patients with breast cancer. Two of
those studies used DNA vaccines, which involve the
in vivo transfection of full-length, cDNA molecules
into target cells, where they produces antigens that
are processed and presented using normal MHC Iand MHC II-based mechanisms.48,49 The third animal study used the bacterium Lysteria monocytegenes
as a vector to carry overlapping fragments of the
HER2/neu gene into the target cells.50 Avigan and
colleagues47 used a fused tumor cell/dendritic cell
vaccine in a small pilot study with 16 breast cancer
patients. Clinical response to the vaccine was apparent in 3 of the 16 patients and included near complete regression of a large chest wall mass with
stable disease for 2 years in 1 patient, 50% regression
of an adrenal mass and 44% regression of a pulmonary nodule with stable disease for 6 months in a
second patient, and stabilization of disease for 3
months in the third patient.
These experimental approaches to developing a
therapeutic breast cancer vaccine still are in very
early stages of development, and, as noted above,
most have not yet moved beyond preclinical trials. It
seems likely that, once the development moves into
clinical studies, the optimal use of these vaccines
will be in patients with early-stage disease or in
patients with minimal residual disease after the completion of other therapies.

Results

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

Reference

CANCER

TABLE 4
New Approaches for Vaccine Development in Breast Cancer

1026

Frontiers in Breast Cancer Management/Singletary

1027

TABLE 5
Current Evidence Implicating Viruses as Etiologic Agents for Breast Cancer
Virus

Evidence (Reference)

HPV

HPV identified in human breast tumors but not in normal breast tissues from women undergoing cosmetic surgery (Kan et al., 200551)
Normal human breast cells in culture are immortalized by infection with HPV (strains 16 and 18) (Band et al., 199052)

EBV

Identification of EBV genes or gene products in breast tumors (Glaser et al., 200453)
In vitro evidence of growth-stimulatory properties of EBV in breast epithelial cells in culture (Speck and Longnecker, 200054)

MMTV

Major etiologic agent of breast cancer in mice (Bittner, 193655; Moore et al., 197956)
DNA sequence with homology to the MMTV ENV gene found in 40% of human breast tumors but in <2% of normal breast
tissue samples (Etkind et al., 200057)

HPV indicates human papillomavirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; MMTV, mouse mammary tumor virus.

Table 551–57 shows that the evidence of a viral
etiology for breast cancer, while suggestive, remains
largely descriptive and indirect. It is likely that, if
such a relationship exists, then it will be much more
complex than the simple relationship observed for
such conditions as influenza. However, with such a
compelling upside—the potential to prevent thousands of new cases of breast cancer each year—the
search continues.

Conclusions
During the lifetime of most surgeons practicing today,
we have seen breast cancer management evolve dramatically from a paradigm centered on radical surgery to one that involves the synergistic combination
of multidisciplinary approaches. During this time,
our concept of curing breast cancer also as evolved.
In 1970, less than 40 years ago, there was hopeful
talk about a single magic bullet that might be found
to attack cancer. With our increased knowledge of
the molecular biology of tumors, there is now
increasing awareness that breast cancer is a complex
family of diseases rather than a single entity and is
unlikely to yield to any single approach. If recent
history has a lesson to teach us, it is that the treatment developments of the next century most likely
will lie in reducing the morbidity associated with
breast cancer, turning it into a chronic disease that
can be treated effectively, with good quality of life
achieved over extended periods.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Elmore JG, Barton MB, Moceri VM, Polk S, Arena PJ,
Fletcher SW. Ten-year risk of false positive screening
mammograms and clinical breast examinations. N Engl J
Med. 1998;338:1089–1096.
Feig SA, D’Orsi CJ, Hendrick RE, et al. American College of
Radiology guidelines for breast cancer. Am J Roentgenol.
1998;171:29–33.

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Chan HP, Wei J, Sahiner B, et al. Computer-aided detection
system for breast masses on digital tomosynthesis mammograms: preliminary experience. Radiology. 2005;237:
1075–1080.
Reiser I, Nichikawa RM, Giger ML, et al. Computerized
detection of mass lesions in digital breast tomosynthesis
images using two- and three dimensional radial gradient
index segmentation. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2004;3:437–
441.
Rafferty EA, Kopans DB, Wu T, Moore RH.Tomosynthesis: a
new tool for breast cancer detection. Proceedings from the
28th Annual San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, San
Antonio, Texas, December 8–11, 2005. Abstract from Plenary
Session 5.
Folkman J. What is the evidence that tumors are angiogenesis dependent? J Natl Cancer Inst. 1990;82:4–6.
Toi M, Band H, Kuroi K. The predictive value of angiogenesis for adjuvant therapy in breast cancer. Breast Cancer.
2000;7:311–314.
Lee SK, Lee T, Lee KR, Su YG, Liu TJ. Evaluation of breast
tumors with color Doppler imaging: a comparison with
image-directed Doppler ultrasound. J Clin Ultrasound.
1995;23:367–373.
Chao TC, Lo YF, Chen SC, Chen MF. Color Doppler ultrasound in benign and malignant breast tumors. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 1999;57:193–199.
Waterman D, Madjar H, Sauerbrei W, Hirt V, Prompeler H,
Stickeler E. Assessment of breast cancer vascularisation by
Doppler ultrasound as a prognostic factor of survival.
Oncol Rep. 2004;11:905–910.
Boonjunwetwat D, Prueksadee J, Sampatanukul P,
Chatamra K. Does color Doppler ultrasound vascularity
predict the response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in
breast cancer? J Med Assoc Thai. 2005;88:1367–1372.
Kriege M, Brekelmans CTM, Boetes C, et al. Efficacy of
MRI and mammography for breast-cancer screening in
women with a familial or genetic predisposition. N Engl J
Med. 2004;351:427–437.
Warner E, Plewes DB, Hill KA, et al. Surveillance of BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers with magnetic resonance
imaging, ultrasound, mammography and clinical breast
examination. JAMA. 2004;292:1317–1325.
MARIBS Study Group. Screening with magnetic resonance
imaging and mammography of a UK population at high
familial risk of breast cancer: a prospective multicenter
cohort study. Lancet. 2005;365:1769–1778.

1028

CANCER

March 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 6

15. Kuhl CK, Schmutzler RK, Leutner CC, et al. Breast MRI
imaging screening in 192 women proved or suspected to
be carriers of a breast cancer susceptibility gene. Preliminary results. Radiology. 2000;215:267–279.
16. Lehman CD, Blume JD, Weatherall P, et al. Screening
women at high risk for breast cancer with mammography
and MRI. Cancer. 2005;102:1898–1905.
17. Podo F, Sardanelli F, Canese R, et al. The Italian multicentre study on evaluation of MRI and other imaging modalities in early detection of breast cancer in subjects at
high genetic risk. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2002;21(suppl):
115–124.
18. Burak WE Jr, Povoski SP, Yanssens TL, et al. Radiofrequency
ablation of invasive breast cancer followed by delayed
surgical excision. Proceedings of the 25th San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, December
10–14, 2003. Abstract 451.
19. Tse NY, Hoh Ck, Hawkins RA Zinner MJ, Dahlbom M, Choi
Y. The application of positron emission tomographic imaging with fluorodeoxyglucose to the evaluation of breast
disease. Ann Surg. 1992;216–234.
20. Adler LP, Crowe JP, al-Kaisi NK, Sunshine JL. Evaluation of
breast masses and axillary lymph nodes with [F-18] 2deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose PET. Radiology. 1993;187:743–750.
21. Gorres GW, Steinert HC, von Schulthess GK. PET and functional anatomic fusion imaging in lung and breast cancers.
Cancer J. 2004;10:251–261.
22. Weisenberger D. Positron emission mammography. Available at URL: http://www.jlab.org/div_dept/detector/pem
Accessed November 27, 2006.
23. Levine EA, Freimani RI, Perrier NC, et al. Positron emission
mammography: initial clinical results. Ann Surg Oncol.
2003;10:86–91.
24. Rosen EL, Turkington TG, Soo MS, Baker JA, Coleman RE.
Detection of primary breast carcinoma with a dedicated
large-field-of-view FDG PET mammography device: initial
experience. Radiology. 2005;234:527–534.
25. Loo C, Lin A, Hirsch L, et al. Nanoshell-enabled photonicsbased imaging and therapy of cancer. Technol Cancer Res
Treat. 2004;3:33–40.
26. West J. Gold nanoshells as a new treatment strategy for
breast. Proceeding of the 28th Annual San Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, December 8–11,
2005. Abstract MSI-2.
27. Norton L. Evolving concepts in the systemic drug therapy
of breast cancer. Semin Oncol. 1997;24(suppl 10):S10-3–
S10-10.
28. Hudis C, Citron M, Berry D, et al. Five-year follow-up of
INTC9741: dose-dense chemotherapy is safe and effective.
Proceedings of the 28th Annual San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, December 8–11, 2005.
Abstract 41.
29. Sparano JA, Wang M, Martino S, et al. Phase 3 study of
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide followed by paclitaxel or
docetaxel given every 3 weeks or weekly in patients with
axillary node-positive or high-risk-node-negative breast
cancer: results of North American Breast Cancer Intergroup
Trial E1199. Proceedings of the 28th Annual San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, December
8–11, 2005. Abstract 48.
30. Venturini M, Del Mastro L, Aitini E, et al. Dose-dense adjuvant chemotherapy in early breast cancer patients: results
from a randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1712–
1714.

31. Citron ML, Berry DA, Cirrincione C, et al. Randomized trial
of dose-dense versus conventionally scheduled and sequential versus concurrent combination chemotherapy as
postoperative adjuvant treatment of node-positive primary
breast cancer: first report of Intergroup Trial C9741/Cancer
and Leukemia Group B Trial 9741. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:
1431–1439.
32. Breast Cancer Update. Interview with Daniel F. Hayes, MD.
Available from URL: http://www.breastcancerupdate.com/
bcu2006/5/hayes.asp Accessed November 25, 2006.
33. Browder T, Butterfield CE, Kraling BM, et al. Antiangiogenic
scheduling of chemotherapy improves efficacy against experimental drug-resistant cancer. Cancer Res. 2000;60:1878–1886.
34. Crawford J, Ozer H, Stoller R, et al. Reduction by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor of fever and neutropenia
induced by chemotherapy in patients with small-cell lung
cancer. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:164–170.
35. Siemann DW, Bibby MC, Dark GG. Differentiation and definition of vascular-targeted therapies. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:416–420.
36. Orlando L, Cardillo A, Rocca A, et al. Prolonged clinical benefit with metronomic chemotherapy in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Anticancer Drugs. 2006;17:961–967.
37. Bottini A, Generali D, Brizzi MP, et al. Randomized phase II
trial of letrozole and letrozole plus low-dose metronomic
oral cyclophosphamide as primary systemic treatment in
elderly breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3623–
3628.
38. Burstein HJ, Spigel D, Kindsvogel K, et al. Metronomic
chemotherapy with and without bevacizumab for advanced
breast cancer: a randomized phase II study. Proceedings of
the 28th Annual San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium,
San Antonio, Texas, December 8–11, 2005. Abstract 4.
39. Bocci G, Tuccori M, Emmenegger U, et al. cyclophosphamide-methotrexate ‘metronomic’ chemotherapy for the
palliative treatment of metastatic breast cancer. A comparative pharmacoeconomic evaluation. Ann Oncol. 2005;16:
1243–1252.
40. Kolata G.In the war on cancer, a new kind of weapon. New
York Times. May 7, 1991. Available at URL: http://query.
nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?sec¼health&res¼9D0CE1D7
1131F934A35756C0A967958260 Accessed November 28,
2006.
41. Parkin DM. The global health burden of infection-associated cancers in the year 2002. Int J Cancer. 2006;118:
3030–3044.
42. Campoli M, Ferrone S, Zea Ah, et al. Mechanisms of tumor
evasion. Cancer Treat Res. 2005;123:61–88.
43. Radford KJ, Vari F, Hart DN. Vaccine strategies to treat lymphoproliferative disorders. Pathology. 2005;37:534–550.
44. Molldrem JJ. Vaccination for leukemia. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant. 2006;12–18.
45. Kortylewski M, Kujawski M, Want T, et al. Inhibiting Stat 3
signaling in the hematopoietic system elicits multicomponent antitumor immunity. Nat Med. 2005;11:1314–
1321.
46. Gillanders WE, Thalachallour M. Progress in the development of a breast cancer vaccine: mammaglobin A as an
attractive target for vaccine therapy. Breast Dis Year Book Q.
2006;17:26–28.
47. Avigan D, Vasir B, Gong J, et al. Fusion cell vaccination of
patients with metastatic breast and renal cancer induces
immunological and clinical responses. Clin Cancer Res.
2004;10:4699–4708.

Frontiers in Breast Cancer Management/Singletary
48. Narayanan K, Jaramillo A, Benshoff ND, et al. Response of
established human breast tumors to vaccination with mammaglobin-A cDNA. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96:1388–1396.
49. Chopra A, Kim TS, O’Sullivan I, et al. Combined therapy of
an established, highly aggressive breast cancer in mice
with paclitaxel and a unique DNA-based cell vaccine. Int J
Cancer. 2006;118:2888–2898.
50. Singh R, Dominiecki ME, Jaffe EM, et al. Fusion to Listeriolysin O and delivery by Listeria monocytogenes enhances
the immunogenicity of HER-2/neu and reveals subdominant epitopes in the FBV/N mouse. J Immunol. 2005;175:
3663–3673.
51. Kan C-Y, Iacopetta BJ, Lawson JS, et al. Identification of
human papillomavirus DNA gene sequences in human
breast cancer. Br J Cancer. 2005;93:946–948.
52. Band V, Zajchowski D, Kulsea V, et al. Human papilloma
virus DNAs immortalize human mammary epithelial cells

53.

54.

55.
56.
57.

1029

and reduce their growth factor requirements. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 1990;8:463–467.
Glaser SL, Hsu JL, Gulley ML. Epstein-Barr virus and
breast cancer: state of the evidence for viral carcinogenesis. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2004;13:688–
697.
Speck P, Longnecker R. Infection of breast epithelial cells
with Epstein-Barr virus via cell-to-cell contact. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1849–1851.
Bittner J. Some possible effect of nursing on the mammary
tumor incidence. Science. 1936;84:162–169.
Moore DH, Long CA, Vaidya AB, et al. Mammary tumor
viruses. Adv Cancer Res. 1979;29:347–415.
Etkind P, Du J, Khan A, et al. Mouse mammary tumor
virus-like ENV gene sequences in human breast tumors
and in a lymphoma of a breast cancer patient. Clin Cancer
Res. 2000;6:1273–1278.

