Editorial

Pazopanib for Patients With Advanced Soft Tissue
Sarcomas in a Real-Life Setting
Stefan Sleijfer, MD, PhD

Non-gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) soft-tissue sarcomas (STSs) comprise a rare and heterogeneous group of
more than 50 different subentities that display great differences between each other in terms of molecular background,
natural behavior, and sensitivity to antitumor agents. For patients who present with advanced disease and are not amendable to curative treatment options like resection, the prognosis is dismal. Until recently, the number of different systemic
agents used against STS was quite limited. The most commonly used agent in the first-line setting, regardless of the exact
subtype, is doxorubicin.1 Because ifosfamide exhibits antitumor activity to a similar extent as doxorubicin monotherapy,2
it was hoped that the combination of these 2 agents would improve outcome. However, a recently published study from
the European Organization for Research and Treatment demonstrated that this combination indeed induces higher
response rates and prolongs progression-free survival (PFS) but also indicated that its enhanced activity was not translated
into better overall survival (OS).1 Because doxorubicin has a much more favorable toxicity profile than ifosfamide and can
be administered on an outpatient basis, doxorubicin monotherapy remains the standard for many patients.3 In addition to
doxorubicin and ifosfamide, there are several other agents with antitumor activity in STS that frequently are active against
specific STS subtypes only. Examples include dacarbazine, gemcitabine, and the combination of gemcitabine and docetaxel, which particularly exerts antitumor activity in leiomyosarcomas, as well as taxanes, which have antitumor activity
against angiosarcomas.3 However, despite the availability of these and other agents, the prognosis for patients with
advanced STS is very poor, with a median OS of 12 months, a figure that has remained unchanged in the last decades,
obviously stressing the high need for novel treatment strategies.
Pazopanib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets several factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR-1), VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor a. Because it is believed that
these factors are involved in the tumor biology of several STS subtypes, pazopanib was explored for its activity in a phase 2
study of patients with advanced STS who had failed on previous doxorubicin-based or ifosfamide-based treatment.4 Given
the known heterogeneity of STS and, consequently, the potential differences in sensitivity to pazopanib, 4 different STS
cohorts were assessed. Pazopanib met the primary endpoint for activity, justifying further study, in 3 of the 4 cohorts (leiomyosarcomas, synovial sarcomas, and other eligible STS subtypes), but not in the cohort of patients with liposarcomas.4
Pazopanib was subsequently assessed in a placebo-controlled, phase 3 study in patients with advanced, nonadipocytic STS
who had failed on previous standard chemotherapy (the pazopanib for metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma [PALETTE] study).5
Pazopanib improved the median PFS from 1.6 months in the placebo arm to 4.6 months in the pazopanib arm (hazard ratio, 0.31; 95% confidence interval. 0.24-20.40), which was similar to the median PFS achieved by doxorubicin in the
first-line setting. No OS benefit was observed, an endpoint for which the study was not powered to detect a clinically relevant difference. It is noteworthy that the gain in PFS achieved by pazopanib was not at the cost of deterioration in qualityof-life tests compared with placebo.6 On the basis of that study, pazopanib was approved.
In this issue of Cancer, Nakamura et al7 present the results from a Japanese postmarketing surveillance (PMS) program
on pazopanib in patients with advanced STS. Such reports are of great importance, although it is quite challenging to
adequately compare patient outcomes with those from prospective registration studies. For example, no criteria regarding
who can receive treatment frequently are not precisely defined in PMS projects, toxicity is less stringently evaluated and managed compared with prospective registration studies, and how and when to perform tumor evaluations are often not strictly
defined, rendering outcome parameters like response rates and PFS difficult to put into perspective.
Corresponding author: Stefan Sleijfer, MD, PhD, Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, ’s-Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE Rotterdam, the
Netherlands; Fax: (011) 31-10-703-4627; s.sleijfer@erasmusmc.nl
See referenced original article on pages 1408-16, this issue.
Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus Medical Center Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29963, Received: February 18, 2016; Accepted: February 19, 2016, Published online March 11, 2016 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1346

Cancer

May 1, 2016

Pazopanib in Real-Life Sarcomas/Sleijfer et al

Nevertheless, despite these and other limitations inherent to such programs, important information can be
derived, because these programs can provide valuable
insight into how pazopanib performs in patients who have
advanced STS as observed in daily clinical practice. It
should be realized that large proportions of the patients
we see in daily clinical practice do not meet the stringent
criteria for prospective registration studies like the PALETTE study. Accordingly, the majority of patients
accrued to the PMS study (93 of 156 patients) would not
have been eligible for the PALETTE study, mostly
because their performance scores were too poor and also
because patients received pazopanib as first-line treatment
or was administered to patients with an STS subtype that
was not included in the PALETTE study. Another important difference with the PALETTE study is that, here,
only the outcomes of patients who had advanced STS
originating in the trunk or extremities are provided,
whereas there were no restrictions with respect to the primary tumor site in the PALETTE study. Notwithstanding these and other differences, the efficacy results of
pazopanib in this real-life setting do appear to be similar
to those achieved in PALETTE; the median PFS was 15.4
weeks, and the median OS was 11.2 months. Remarkably,
there were no apparent differences in outcome between
patients who seemingly met the eligibility criteria for the
PALETTE and those who did not.7
Another intriguing aspect of this PMS program is
that patients with advanced liposarcoma were allowed to
receive treatment. Pazopanib did not meet the prespecified
criteria for further evaluation in patients with liposarcoma
in the phase 2 study, as mentioned above4; accordingly,
patients with liposarcoma were not allowed to be included
in the PALETTE study.5 In line with the results from the
previous phase 2 study, the median PFS of 8 weeks
reported in patients who had liposarcoma was worse compared with that observed in patients who had other tumor
types. Although these results suggest that pazopanib is not
a very active drug for patients with liposarcoma, at least 2
prospective phase 2 trials are currently ongoing examining
the activity of pazopanib in liposarcomas. These studies
will further inform us whether or not pazopanib should be
studied further in patients with liposarcoma and, if so,
whether it should be studied in all liposarcomas or only in
specific liposarcoma subtypes.
Also, with regard to toxicity, PMS programs provide
very valuable information. The incidence of pneumothorax was higher than that observed in PALETTE, probably because a high proportion of patients had pulmonary
metastases. Concerning other adverse events, pazopanib
Cancer

May 1, 2016

had a toxicity profile roughly consistent with that observed
in the preceding phase 2 and 3 studies.
Thus, the role of pazopanib becomes more firmly
established now that real-world data (like those in the
study presented here) have confirmed the activity of pazopanib in advanced STS. However, much remains to be
done. Despite its benefits, large proportions of patients
still are receiving treatment without experiencing clinically meaningful antitumor activity while being exposed
to the toxicity of the drug, underlining the high need for
factors to guide treatment decisions. A recent analysis
revealed that several baseline characteristics are associated
with a long-term benefit from pazopanib, such as a good
performance status, low/intermediate grade of the primary tumor, and a normal hemoglobin level at baseline.8
However, the associations of these factors with outcome
are not strong enough to use them to decide whether or
not an individual patient should receive pazopanib. Also,
the traditional histopathologic classification cannot be
used for this purpose. In the PALETTE study, the better
outcomes reported for pazopanib over placebo were
observed across all eligible STS subtypes.5 In addition, in
the PMS program discussed here,7 no clear differences
were observed between the major subtypes apart from the
patients with liposarcoma. Consequently, the search for
such factors should be continued, for example, based on
molecular characteristics of the tumor cells. In addition to
baseline characteristics, parameters that enable clinicians
to determine at an early stage during treatment whether or
not an individual patient can benefit from pazopanib also
would be very helpful in the clinic. Although the development of hypertension, a well known side effect of pazopanib, was not associated with outcome,9 changes in cytokines
in blood did have such an association.10 However, these
results need to be confirmed independently in another series
of patients; although here, too, the magnitude of effects is
unlikely to be enough to provide a basis for clinical decisions. Thus, more research also is needed, and data from
PMS studies, as discussed above, can be very helpful for
such studies.
Meanwhile, time does not stand still. The results
from 2 large phase 3 studies in patients with advanced
STS have recently been presented; 1 on trabectidin11 and
the other on eribulin.12 On the basis of preceding phase 2
studies, both studies were performed in only patients who
had advanced leiomyosarcoma or liposarcoma, and both
studies used dacarbazine as comparator. Trabectidin
improved PFS to such an extent (median PFS, 1.5 months
vs 4.2 months)11 that trabectidin recently also gained approval in the United States for patients with advanced
1347

Editorial

leiomyosarcoma or liposarcoma after failure on previous
anthracycline-based treatment. Also, the study with eribulin had a positive outcome, particularly in patients who
had advanced liposarcoma.12 In these patients, an OS
improvement—from a median of 8.4 months in
dacarbazine-treated patients to 15.6 months in patients
who were allocated to receive eribulin—formed the basis
of approval for eribulin in patients with pretreated liposarcoma in the United States. This means that, for patients
with advanced leiomyosarcoma and liposarcoma who fail
after first-line therapy, several options are available with a
high level of supporting evidence: for patients with leiomyosarcoma, pazopanib or trabectidin; and, for patients
with liposarcoma, eribulin or trabectidin. In the absence
of studies directly comparing the different options, which
option to choose in daily practice should be based on a
case-by-case basis taking into account numerous patientrelated and tumor-related factors, including the patient’s
preference, the medical history, and comorbidities of an
individual, all balanced against the expected toxicities.
Finally, the financial costs of treatment also should be
taken into account.
So, after decades when doxorubicin and ifosfamide
were the only agents in advanced STS for which their use
was supported by a high level of evidence, in recent years, 3
other compounds have entered the stage. In addition, there
is probably more to come. Several large, phase 3 studies
are ongoing, for example, on anlotinib, a VEGFR-blocker;
on aldoxorubicin; and on the combination of doxorubicin
and olaratumab (the latter is a monoclonal antibody
against platelet-derived growth factor receptor a). Also,
in earlier phases of development, various compounds
are being tested for their potential in advanced STS,
including regorafenib, cabozantinib, axitinib, anti-PD1
antibodies, and various others. Hopefully, this means
that more compounds will become available for patients
with advanced STS subtypes. After decades of relative
silence, the near future becomes a little bit brighter for
patients who have advanced STS.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

1348

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Stefan Sleijfer reports a grant from Novartis/GlaxoSmithKline for
research funding/speaker’s bureau fees during the conduct of the
study.

REFERENCES
1. Judson I, Verweij J, Gelderblom H, et al. Doxorubicin alone versus
intensified doxorubicin plus ifosfamide for first-line treatment of
advanced or metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma: a randomised controlled
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:415-423.
2. Lorigan P, Verweij J, Papai Z, et al. Phase III trial of 2 investigational schedules of ifosfamide compared with standard-dose doxorubicin in advanced or metastatic soft tissue sarcoma: a European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and
Bone Sarcoma Group study. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3144-3150.
3. Blay JY, Sleijfer S, Sch€
offski P, et al. International expert opinion on
patient-tailored management of soft tissue sarcomas. Eur J Cancer.
2014;50:679-689.
4. Sleijfer S, Ray-Coquard I, Papai Z, el al. Pazopanib, a multikinase
angiogenesis inhibitor, in patients with relapsed or refractory advanced
soft tissue sarcoma: a phase II study from the European Organisation
for Research and Treatment of Cancer-Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma
Group (EORTC study 62043). J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:3126-3132.
5. van der Graaf WT, Blay JY, Chawla SP, et al. Pazopanib for metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma (PALETTE): a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2012;379:1879-1886.
6. Coens C, van der Graaf WT, Blay JY, et al. Health-related qualityof-life results from PALETTE: a randomized, double-blind, phase 3
trial of pazopanib versus placebo in patients with soft tissue sarcoma
whose disease has progressed during or after prior chemotherapy—a
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft
Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group Global Network study (EORTC
62072). Cancer. 2015;121:2933-2941.
7. Nakamura T, Matsumine A, Kawai A, et al. The clinical outcome of
pazopanib treatment in Japanese patients with relapsed soft tissue
sarcoma: a Japanese Musculoskeletal Oncology Group (JMOG)
Study. Cancer. 2016;122:1408-1416.
8. Kasper B, Sleijfer S, Litière S, et al. Long-term responders and survivors
on pazopanib for advanced soft tissue sarcomas: subanalysis of 2 European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
clinical trials 62043 and 62072. Ann Oncol. 2014;25:719-724.
9. Duffaud F, Sleijfer S, Litière S, et al. Hypertension (HTN) as a potential biomarker of efficacy in pazopanib-treated patients with advanced
non-adipocytic soft tissue sarcoma. A retrospective study based on European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC)
62043 and 62072 trials. Eur J Cancer. 2015;51:2615-2623.
10. Sleijfer S, Gorlia T, Lamers C, et al. Cytokine and angiogenic factors
associated with efficacy and toxicity of pazopanib in advanced soft-tissue
sarcoma: an EORTC-STBSG study. Br J Cancer. 2012;107:639-645.
11. Demetri GD, von Mehren M, Jones RL, et al. Efficacy and safety of
trabectedin or dacarbazine for metastatic liposarcoma or leiomyosarcoma after failure of conventional chemotherapy: results of a phase III
randomized multicenter clinical trial [published online ahead of print
September 14, 2015]. J Clin Oncol. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.62.4734.
12. Sch€
offski P, Chawla S, Maki RG, et al. Eribulin versus dacarbazine in
previously treated patients with advanced liposarcoma or leiomyosarcoma: a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trial [published
online ahead of print February 10, 2016]. Lancet. doi: 10.1016/S0140673601283-0.

Cancer

May 1, 2016

