Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 March 12; 519(7542): 187–192. doi:10.1038/nature14259.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Notum deacylates Wnts to suppress signalling activity
Satoshi Kakugawa#1, Paul F. Langton#1, Matthias Zebisch#2,6,@, Steve Howell1, Tao-Hsin
Chang2, Yan Liu5, Ten Feizi5, Ganka Bineva4, Nicola O’Reilly4, Ambrosius P. Snijders3, E.
Yvonne Jones2,@, and Jean-Paul Vincent1,@
1MRC’s

National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK

2Division

of Structural Biology, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK.
3Cancer

Research UK, Clare Hall Laboratories, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar,
Hertfordshire. EN6 3LD, UK

4Cancer

Research UK, London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY,

UK
5Glycosciences

Laboratory, Imperial College London, Department of Medicine Du Cane Road,
London, W12 0NN UK

#

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Signalling by Wnts is finely balanced to ensure normal development and tissue homeostasis while
avoiding diseases such as cancer. This is achieved in part by Notum, a highly conserved secreted
feedback antagonist. Notum has been thought to act as a phospholipase, shedding glypicans and
associated Wnts from the cell surface. However, this view fails to explain specificity since
glypicans bind many extracellular ligands. Here we provide genetic evidence in Drosophila that
Notum requires glypicans to suppress Wnt signalling, but does not cleave their
glycophosphatidylinositol anchor. Structural analyses reveal glycosaminoglycan binding sites on
Notum, which likely help Notum colocalise with Wnts. They also identify, at the active site of
human and Drosophila Notum, a large hydrophobic pocket that accommodates palmitoleate.
Kinetic and mass spectrometric analyses of human proteins show that Notum is a carboxylesterase

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.Users may view, print, copy, and download text and
data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://
www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
@
Authors for correspondence, matthias.zebisch@evotec.com, yvonne@strubi.ox.ac.uk, jvincen@nimr.mrc.ac.uk.
6Current address: Evotec (UK) Ltd., 114 Innovation Drive, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RZ, UK
Author contributions Experimental contributions were as follows: Drosophila developmental genetics (PL, SK); Drosophila cellbased assays (SK); Human cell-based assays (MZ, THC); Mass spectrometry (SH, SK, APS); Glycan arrays (YL, SK, TF); Enzymatic
assays (MZ); Structural biology (MZ); Peptide synthesis (GB, NO’R). The project was conceived by SK, PL, MZ, EYJ, and JPV. The
first draft of the paper was written by MZ, EYJ and JPV with substantial contributions from PL, SK, and APS. All authors contributed
to the design and interpretation of experiments.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Methods are linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author information Data deposition statement: The wwPDB accession numbers for the crystal structures reported in this paper are
4wbh, 4uyu, 4uyw, 4uzl, 4uyz, 4uz1, 4uz5, 4uz6, 4uz7, 4uz9, 4uza, 4uzq, 4uzj, and 4uzk.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 2

that removes an essential palmitoleate moiety from Wnts and thus constitutes the first known
extracellular protein deacylase.

Keywords

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Notum; Wingful; Wnt; palmitoleate; glypicans; feedback inhibition; extracellular deacylase;
crystal structure
Negative feedback characterises biological signalling1 and although often cell-intrinsic, is
also mediated by secreted proteins. Cell- and non cell-autonomous feedbacks modulate
signal transduction by Wnts, a class of secreted proteins characterised by the presence of
palmitoleic acid appended on a conserved serine2,3. This palmitoleic acid moiety is essential
for signalling2,4,5, contributing to interaction with Frizzled receptors3,6,7. Canonical Wnt
signalling triggers expression of intracellular, extracellular and membrane-localised
inhibitors of the pathway. Secreted inhibitors include Dkk family members, which bind to
the extracellular domain of the Wnt coreceptor LRP5/6, as well as WIF1 and sFRPs, which
sequester Wnts8. Tiki is a membrane-bound protease that cleaves the N-terminal region of
Wnt ligands9. Notum is also thought to act enzymatically10,11 but on glypicans, a class of
heparin sulphate proteoglycans (HSPGs) implicated in the extracellular stabilisation,
movement, and/or surface retention of Wnts, as well as of other signalling ligands12-14.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Notum orthologs are found in metazoans from planarians to humans and all bear the
hallmark Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad of α/β-hydrolases10,11. Notum’s sequence similarity to
plant pectin acetylesterases prompted the early suggestion that it could hydrolyse
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains of glypicans10,11, thus affecting their ability to interact
with Wnts and somehow modulating signalling activity. It was subsequently reported that
Notum triggers glypican shedding from cultured cells, perhaps by cleaving their GPI
anchor15,16. Indeed, the currently accepted view is that Notum is a glypican-specific
phospholipase17. However, glypican-based interactions also modulate Dpp (Drosophila
TGFβ), Hedgehog, and fibroblast growth factor, as well as Wingless signalling12-14. One
would expect therefore that these pathways would also be sensitive to Notum-induced
glypican release. Yet, existing evidence suggests that Notum is primarily a feedback
inhibitor of Wnt signalling. In planarian worms, Drosophila, zebrafish and
hepatocarcinomas, notum expression is activated by Wnt signalling and, conversely, Notum
seems to preferentially suppress Wnt signalling10,11,18-21. Since more pleiotropic effects
would be expected from an enzyme that targets glypicans, we felt compelled to reassess
Notum’s specificity and mode of action.

Notum specifically inhibits Wnt signalling
To investigate systematically Notum’s specificity, we analysed its effects on Drosophila
wing imaginal discs, which require Wingless (the main Drosophila Wnt), Dpp and
Hedgehog for patterning and growth22,23. As expected, overexpression of Drosophila Notum
(dNotum) throughout the dorsal compartment prevented expression of senseless, a gene
normally activated by high level Wingless signalling. By contrast, patched (ptc), a
Hedgehog target gene24,25, was unaffected (Fig. 1a, b) and phosphoMad (pMad)

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

immunoreactivity, a marker of Dpp signalling26, was only mildly reduced (Extended Data
Fig. 1a, b). Loss-of-function assays, in homozygous notumKO tissue, confirmed dNotum’s
specificity to Wnt signalling (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1c). Although complete loss of
notum was lethal, strong hypomorphic animals (notum141 / notumKO) survived to adulthood.
The wings of such animals had supernumerary margin bristles, consistent with excess
Wingless signalling, but had no defects indicative of impaired Hedgehog or Dpp signalling
(Extended Data Fig. 1d-g). Nevertheless, extensive evidence suggests that glypicans
contribute to these two signalling pathways27-30. This is difficult to reconcile with the
apparent specificity of Notum if it acts as a glypican-specific phospholipase.

Notum does not cleave the GPI anchor of glypicans

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

One previously reported observation, namely that dNotum inhibits signalling by membranetethered (i.e. shedding-resistant) Wingless11 (Extended data Fig. 2a, b), is incompatible with
the view that Notum is a glypican-specific phospholipase. In addition, genetic removal of
the two Drosophila glypicans Dally and Dlp did not abrogate high level Wingless signalling
(Fig. 1d). These two sets of data strongly suggest that glypican shedding is unlikely to
account for the inhibitory effect of dNotum on Wingless signalling. Indeed, we could not
confirm the results of an earlier phase partition assay, which suggested that Notum increases
the water solubility of glypicans, as expected from GPI cleavage15. Extracts from cells
expressing tagged Dlp or Dally were treated with either dNotum or bacterial
phosphoinositide phospholipase C (PIPLC), an enzyme known to cleave GPI anchors.
PIPLC caused both glypicans to partition almost exclusively in the aqueous phase, but
dNotum did not (Fig. 1e for Dlp; Extended Data Fig. 2c for Dally) even though, under these
conditions, it was effective at inhibiting signalling (Extended Data Fig. 2d). Likewise, in
imaginal discs, Notum did not mimic PIPLC: while extracellular Dally and Dlp were
noticeably reduced upon addition of exogenous PIPLC, overexpression of dNotum had no
such effect (Extended Data Fig. 2e-l). Therefore, experiments with cultured cells and
imaginal discs suggest that Notum is not a glypican-specific phospholipase.

Glypicans contribute to the activity of Notum
Even though dNotum does not seem to modulate Wingless signalling by cleaving the GPI
anchor of glypicans, genetic interactions between notum and dlp suggest a functional
relationship31,32. We therefore investigated the role of Dlp or Dally in dNotum’s ability to
suppress Wingless signalling. dNotum overexpression, along the anterior-posterior (A-P)
boundary, led to complete and long range suppression of Senseless expression (Fig. 2a). In
the absence of either Dally or Dlp, this activity was very much reduced, as indicated by the
recovery of endogenous Senseless expression (Fig. 2b, c). Notably, Dally was also required
for Notum to suppress signalling by membrane-tethered Wingless (Extended Data Fig. 3a).
Since Dally is not essential for survival, this requirement could be confirmed in adult wings
(Extended Data Fig. 3b-d). To address the relevance of glypican GPI anchorage, we created
a transgene expressing Dlp-CD8 (34 C-terminal amino acids of Dlp replaced by the CD8
transmembrane domain) under control of the tubulin promoter. This transgene restored the
ability of overexpressed dNotum to repress Wingless signalling in dlp mutant homozygotes

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 4

(Fig. 2d; compare to Fig 2b), confirming the importance of glypicans but not their GPI
anchor.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Glypicans bear sulfated glycans. In Drosophila, sulfation of the sugar chains requires
Sulfateless, a GlcNAc N-Deacetylase/N-Sulfotransferase (NDST)33, which can be knocked
down in vivo with an RNAi transgene. Gal4 was used to express this transgene specifically
in the posterior compartment, leaving the anterior compartment as a control. At the same
time, a dpp-LexA driver was used to overexpress dNotum along the A-P boundary.
Overexpressed dNotum inhibited Senseless expression in the control compartment but not in
the territory deficient in sulfateless activity (Fig. 2e). Therefore sulfation of HSPGs is
needed for dNotum to act. Notably, overexpressed dNotum did not accumulate in the
compartment expressing the sulfateless RNAi transgene (compare Fig. 2e’ to Fig. 2a’).
Likewise, dNotum was depleted from the surface of dally dlp double mutant cells generated
by mitotic recombination (Fig. 2f). These findings suggest that Dally and Dlp retain dNotum
at the cell surface through interaction with their sulfated glycans. Indeed, dNotum bound
specifically to sulfated glycans on a glycan array (Extended data Fig. 4). In addition, surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) showed that recombinant hNotumcore (S81-T451, C330S) bound
to heparin and heparan sulfate with micromolar affinities. The dissociation constant of a
complex comprising hNotumcore and human glypican-3 (GPC3 P31-N538) was 104μM (Fig.
3a). Consistent with the Drosophila genetic data, this binding relies largely on the two
sulfated GAG chains in GPC3 since their removal led to a more than fivefold reduction in
affinity (Fig. 3a). We conclude that sulfated GAG chains on glypicans likely mediate their
interaction with Notum.

Structure-guided identification of GAG binding sites
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The above results suggest that glypicans contribute to Notum activity by localising it at the
cell surface, but are unlikely to be the target of Notum’s enzymatic activity. What could the
target be? We started to address this question by solving the structures of hNotumcore (in
nine crystal forms at resolutions between 1.4 and 2.8Å: see Supplementary Information) and
of dNotumΔloop (in two crystal forms at resolutions of 2.4 and 1.9Å) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data
Fig. 5, and Supplementary information). The structures exhibit a canonical α/β hydrolase
fold34, as predicted10,11. The conserved 8-stranded central β-sheet is extended on both sides
by strands 4 and 14 and is flanked by the canonical six α-helices. This single domain
topology is further extended by additional α-helices, two very short β-sheets, several long
loops and seven stabilising disulfides. The catalytic triad comprises S232, D340 and H389
(hNotum residue numbering).
Seven sulfate binding sites were identified in hNotumcore crystal form III (Fig. 3c; Extended
Data Fig. 6). Among them, one (Sulfate 1) was found by SPR to contribute substantially to
Heparin-Notum interactions (Fig. 3d). In addition, co-crystals with short heparin oligomers
or sucrose-octasulfate (SOS), a heparin mimic, were generated and analysed. These
structural studies and additional biophysical analyses (described in Supplementary
information and illustrated in Extended Data Fig. 6) delineated an extensive GAG-binding
patch centred on a basic groove between the top of the β-sheet and helix αK (Fig. 3c).
Importantly, the GAG-binding surface on Notum is distant from the catalytic triad,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 5

consistent with our earlier evidence that Notum binds to glypicans, but does not act on them
enzymatically.

Structural and enzymatic evidence for carboxylesterase activity
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The α/β hydrolase superfamily includes proteases, lipases, esterases, dehalogenases,
peroxidases and epoxide hydrolases34. To identify which of these activities relate most
closely to Notum’s, we compared the structure of hNotum to those of all known α/β
hydrolases (PDBe Fold server35). The search returned many weak homologs, including
human esterase D36 and acyl-protein thioesterase 1 (APT1)37 (Extended Data Fig. 7a). A
structure-based search for function using the ProFunc Server38 also suggested that Notum is
a carboxylesterase. Furthermore, the closest non-animal homologs of Notum, the pectin
acetyl esterases (PAEs) of angiosperms (sequence identity to hNotum 22%, Extended Data
Fig. 7b) are carboxylesterases. We assessed the functional significance of these observations
by measuring the activity of hNotumcore on p-nitrophenyl (pNP) acetate (pNP2), a
chromogenic carboxylesterase substrate39. Significant activity could be detected (Fig. 4a).
This activity was strongly inhibited by Triton X-100, and by phenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride (PMSF), a compound known to covalently modify the catalytic serine of serine
esterases and proteases (Extended Data Fig. 8a, b). In contrast, there was no measurable
hNotum activity on representative sulfatase, phosphatase, phospholipase C or amidase/
protease substrates (Fig. 4a). Addition of SOS or heparin resulted in a modest increase in
Notum carboxylesterase activity (Extended Data Fig 8a). The possibility that GAGs also
contribute to Notum function by allosteric activation requires further investigation.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

As a secreted carboxylesterase that inhibits Wnt signalling, Notum is likely to target a
carboxy-oxoester or carboxy-thioester bond present on an extracellular component of the
Wnt signal transduction machinery. The linkage between Wnt and palmitoleic acid is the
only such chemical bond described to date, suggesting that Notum could target Wnt proteins
themselves. To evaluate this possibility, we treated mWnt3A with recombinant hNotumcore
for specific durations, removed the hNotumcore and used a cell-based luciferase assay to
measure signalling activity of the remaining mWnt3A. This showed that hNotum inactivated
mWnt3A directly, irreversibly and in a time-dependent manner (Fig.4b), while no such
activity could be detected on Norrin, a non-lipidated ligand that also acts via the Wnt
receptors40 (Extended Data Fig. 8c).
Remarkably, the Notum crystal structures revealed a large (~380Å3), hydrophobic pocket
adjacent to the catalytic triad (Fig. 3b, c). Computational docking showed that this pocket
could accommodate long chain fatty acids of up to 16 carbon atoms (C16). The size
restriction imposed on saturated fatty acids was functionally assessed by measuring hNotum
enzymatic activity on commercially available saturated chromogenic pNP ester substrates of
varying chain lengths. The activity of human APT1, a cytosolic thio- and oxoesterase was
measured in parallel for comparison. hNotum had a pronounced preference for pNP8 (Fig.
4c), with a micromolar Michaelis constant (Extended Data Fig. 8d, e). The activity for pNPpalmitate (pNP16) was less than 0.2% of that for pNP8. To extend our studies of hNotum
specificity beyond commercially available substrates, we employed a competitive inhibition
assay, using pNP8 as substrate. Saturated 8-12 carbon (C8-C12) long linear carboxylic acids

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 6

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

had significant inhibitory activity (Fig. 4d) while longer saturated fatty acids had no effect.
Interestingly however, strong inhibition was observed with the Wnt-associated cisunsaturated lipids myristoleic (C14) and palmitoleic acid (C16) (Fig. 4d; Extended Data Fig.
8f), but not with palmitelaidic acid, the trans isomer of the 16:1 fatty acid (Fig. 4 d). These
results confirm that Notum can bind to C14 and C16 carboxylic acids if they contain a C9C10 cis double bond and therefore might hydrolyse the oxo-ester bond linking palmitoleate
or myristoleate to Wnts.

Notum deacylates Wnts

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To test directly Notum-mediated Wnt deacylation we turned to LC-MS analysis. mWnt3A
was purified from conditioned medium (CM), treated with recombinant hNotumcore or a
mock solution, differentially isotope labelled, and trypsinised. No significant identification
could be obtained for the predicted palmitoleoylated tryptic peptide, indicating
incompatibility with the LC-MS conditions. Importantly however, following treatment with
hNotum, this peptide could be identified and quantified in non-acylated form (Fig. 5a, b and
Extended data Fig. 9a, b). Replicate LC-MS measurements and label reversal consistently
showed an increase in signal intensity for the hNotum-treated de-acylated peptide whereas
control peptides showed no significant change (Extended Data Fig. 9c, d). This suggests that
treatment of mWnt3A with hNotum removes the palmitoleic acid moiety thus rendering the
relevant peptide more hydrophilic and detectable by LC-MS. Encouraged by these results,
we proceeded to assess the activity of hNotum on synthetic peptides. The predicted tryptic
peptide from hWnt3A was synthesised in a disulphide bonded form with a palmitoleate
group on the relevant serine (Methods). These peptides were treated with recombinant
hNotumcore, or with hNotumcoreS232A, which is predicted to be enzymatically inactive, and
the reaction products were analysed by MALDI-TOF. No significant deacylation was
detected in hNotumcoreS232A-treated samples while hNotum-treated peptides were found to
be extensively deacylated (Fig. 5c, Extended Data Fig. 9e). We conclude from these assays
that Notum catalyses the removal of palmitoleic acid, which is normally O-linked to S209 of
hWnt3A. We also assayed the effect of hNotum on a synthetic peptide from hSonic
Hedgehog, which is N-palmitoylated at the amino terminus. No change in the level of
acylation could be detected (Fig. 5d, Extended Data Fig. 9f), confirming that Notum’s
activity on Wnt is specific, in agreement with our genetic evidence.
To gain structural insight into Wnt-Notum recognition, we co-crystallized inactive
hNotumcoreS232A with a palmitoleoylated disulfide bonded peptide corresponding to
hWnt7A (C202-C209). The crystal structure revealed the palmitoleoyl group occupying the
active site pocket (Fig. 5e, Extended Data Fig. 9g). Electron density was also evident for the
ester bond. No interpretable density was found for the peptide, probably due to disorder.
This apparent lack of interaction with the peptide concurs with the general observation that
esterases/lipases of the α/β hydrolase family bind only to the acid part of the ester substrate.
The carboxylic acid carbon is 3.3Å from the Cβ of the mutated Serine nucleophile, a
distance consistent with ideal positioning of the hydroxyl for nucleophilic attack. Classically
esterasecatalysed hydrolysis proceeds through a tetrahedral transition state characterized by
a negatively charged carbonyl oxygen stabilised by two canonical backbone amides, the
oxyanion hole34. In hNotum the G127-W128 amide participates in formation of the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 7

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

oxyanion hole in addition to the canonical S232-A233 and G126-G127 amides, thereby
providing optimal stabilisation during the transition state (Extended Data Fig. 9g). The
kinked cis double bond (C9-C10) of the acyl tail is positioned at the base of the pocket
between Ile291, Phe319 and Phe320. We found a similar binding mode for a hNotum–
myristoleate crystal structure (Extended Data Fig. 9h). Thus, the binding pocket can
accommodate extended carbon tails up to C8/C10 but longer fatty acid chains must be
kinked at this point in order to fit in. Saturated fatty acids generally adopt an extended
conformation, explaining Notum’s preference for palmitoleate and myristoleate (both cisunsaturated lipids kinked at C9-C10) over palmitate and myristate. The pocket entrance
(lined by Ser232 and His389) is relatively narrow, but comparisons of all hNotum structures
suggest substantial flexibility, compatible with palmitoleate entry and release (Extended
Data Fig. 5b). Therefore crystallographic evidence strengthens our observation that Notum
is a Wnt-specific deacylase with preference for cis unsaturated long chain lipids.

Discussion

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Only a small number of secreted proteins, Wnts, Hedgehogs, and Ghrelins, are known to be
acylated41. In all cases, this post-translational modification is essential for activity and is
carried out by dedicated membrane bound O-acyl transferases (MBOATs). Porcupine, the
Wnt-MBOAT, appends palmitoleate and shorter cis unsaturated fatty acids onto Wnt42. We
have shown here that Notum specifically deacylates Wnts (Fig. 5f) and is thus the first
enzyme known to deacylate an extracellular protein. Notum’s specificity can be traced to the
shape of its hydrophobic pocket, which can accommodate cis-unsaturated fatty acids such as
myristoleate and palmitoleate, and the nature of its enzymatic activity, a carboxyl
oxoesterase. These characteristics ensure that Notum preferentially acts on Wnts, the only
secreted proteins known to be O-palmitoleoyleated on a Serine residue. Notum
enzymatically inhibits signalling activity by removing the palmitoleate moiety of Wnts,
which contributes directly to receptor binding3. Notum could also interfere non-catalytically
with formation of the Wnt–Frizzled complex by sequestering the palmitoleate moiety since
overexpressed dNotumS237A mildly suppressed Wingless signalling in vivo (data not
shown). We have found that glypicans are required for Notum function and that Notum
binds to the sulfated GAGs of HSPGs. Glypicans also bind to Wnts, and can play
stimulatory roles in Wnt signalling43,44. However, in the presence of Notum, we suggest that
glypicans are also inhibitory by acting as a scaffold that co-localises Notum and its substrate
(Wnts) at the cell surface (Fig. 5f).
Our results point to Notum’s physiological targets being exclusively Wnt family members.
Notum is the only secreted Wnt feedback inhibitor found across the metazoan kingdom,
from planarians to humans, although seemingly it is seemingly absent from C. elegans.
Notum’s Wnt-deacylation activity, along with other means of feedback inhibition such as
ligand sequestration, receptor blocking, receptor downregulation and proteolytic
degradation9,45-47 undoubtedly contributes to the fine balancing of Wnt signalling both
during development, for cell fate specification, and in adults, e.g. for stem cell maintenance.
Indeed, insufficient or excessive Wnt signalling has been associated with diseases such as
neurodegeneration and cancer respectively. Our binding data suggest that Notum could
possibly be modulated by dietary cis-unsaturated fatty acids. Moreover, since Notum is an
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 8

extracellular enzyme with a well defined and large active site pocket, it is likely amenable to
chemical inhibition to alleviate conditions associated with insufficient Wnt signalling.
Conversely, recombinant Notum could be considered as a biologic to prevent excess Wnt
signalling such as in Wnt-driven cancers.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

METHODS
Immunostaining and microscopy
The following primary antibodies were used: guinea-pig anti-Senseless (1:1000, gift from H.
Bellen), mouse anti-Patched (1:50, Hybridoma bank), rabbit anti-V5 (1:500, Abcam), mouse
anti-V5 (1:500, Invitrogen), rabbit anti-p-Smad3 (1:500, Epitomics), mouse anti-Dlp (1:50,
Hybridoma bank), rabbit anti-GFP (1:500, Abcam), mouse anti-Wingless (1:200,
Hybridoma bank). Secondary antibodies used were Alexa 488, Alexa 555 and Alexa647
(1:500, Molecular Probes). Total and extracellular immunostaining of imaginal discs was
performed as previously described 48. Imaginal discs were mounted in Vectashield with
DAPI (Vector Laboratories) and imaged using a Leica SP5 confocal microscope. Confocal
images were processed with ImageJ (N.I.H) and Photoshop CS5.1 (Adobe). All confocal
images show a single confocal section. Adult wings were mounted in Euparal (Fisher
Scientific) and imaged with a Zeiss Axiophot2 microscope with an Axiocam HRC camera.
Adult wing size and L3-L4 intervein distance was measured with ImageJ.
Drosophila husbandry and clone induction

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

All crosses were performed at 25°C except those to generate discs shown in Fig. 1a, b,
Extended Data Fig. 1a, 1b, Extended Data Fig. 2g, h, k, l and Figure 2f where larvae were
reared at 18°C, the Gal80ts permissive temperature, and then shifted to 29°C, the restrictive
temperature, 16h prior to dissection to induce UAS-notum-V5 expression. To generate
mutant clones, larvae were heat shocked for 1hr at 37°C at 60hr (±12hr) after egg laying,
except for the cross to generate the disc shown in Figure 2f, which was heat shocked for 1 hr
at 37°C at 84hr (±12hr) after egg laying. Large mutant clones were generated by including a
Minute mutation on the homologous chromosome 49
Drosophila genotypes
Figure 1a) Cyo / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / +
Figure 1b) ap-Gal4 / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / +
Figure 1c) yw hs-FLP ; notumKO FRT2A / Ubi::GFP M FRT2A
Figure 1d) yw hs-FLP ; dallyMH32 dlpMH20 FRT2A / Ubi::GFP M FRT2A
Figure 2a) UAS-notum-V5 / + ; dpp-Gal4 / +
Figure 2b) UAS-notum-V5 / + ; dpp-Gal4 dlpMH20 / dlpMH20 FRT2A
Figure 2c) UAS-notum-V5 / + ; dpp-Gal4 dallyMH32 / dallyMH32 FRT2A
Figure 2d) UAS-notum-V5 / tub::dlp-CD8 ; dpp-Gal4 dlpMH20 / dlpMH20 FRT2A
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 9

Figure 2e) lex-OP-notumV5 / en-Gal4 UAS::GFP ; dpp-lexA / UAS-sulf-RNAi
Figure 2f) yw hs-FLP / + ; UAS-notum-V5 / ptc-Gal4 UAS::GFP ; dallyMH32 dlpMH20
FRT2A / Ubi::GFP FRT2A

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Fig. 1a) Cyo / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / +
Extended Data Fig. 1b) ap-Gal4 / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / +
Extended Data Fig. 1c) yw hs-FLP ; notumKO FRT2A / Ubi::GFP M FRT2A
Extended Data Fig. 1d) notum141 Ubi::GFP FRT2A / Mkrs
Extended Data Fig. 1e) notumKO FRT2A / notum141 Ubi::GFP FRT2A
Extended Data Fig. 2a) UAS-NRT-Wg / + ; dpp-Gal4 / +
Extended Data Fig. 2b) UAS-NRT-Wg / + ; dpp-Gal4 / UAS-notum
Extended Data Fig. 2e, f, i, j) dally-GFP (protein-trap, DGRC 115-064)
Extended Data Fig. 2g) Cyo / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / +
Extended Data Fig. 2h) ap-Gal4 / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / +
Extended Data Fig. 2k) Cyo / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / dally-GFP
Extended Data Fig. 2l) ap-Gal4 / UAS-notum-V5 ; tub::Gal80ts / dally-GFP

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Fig. 3a) UAS-NRT-wg / + ; UAS-notum dallyMH32 / dpp-Gal4 dallyMH32
Extended Data Fig. 3b) UAS-notum-V5 / UAS-notum-V5
Extended Data Fig. 3c) sal-G4 / UAS-notum-V5
Extended Data Fig. 3d) sal-G4 / UAS-notum-V5 ; dallyMH32 FRT2A / dallyMH32 FRT2A
Generation of notum knockout by homologous recombination
notumKO was generated by homologous recombination using reagents and crossing schemes
described previously 50. The homology arms were amplified from w1118 genomic DNA. The
primers GATCGCTAGCCGAGAAAGACACAAACGAAGATCAAC and
GATCGGTACCCGATTCGATTACACATAGATATAGAATAG were used to amplify the
upstream 5kb homology arm, which was cloned into pTV as an Nhe1-Kpn1 fragment. The
primers GATCACTAGTGTTATCAAAAGCGAACGCCGCAATAC and
GATCAGATCTCTGGAATTGATTTGATTCGATTGCGGTG were used to amplify the
downstream 3kb homology arm, which was cloned into pTV as a SpeI-BglII fragment.
notumKO deletes 82bp sequence of the first exon which encodes the signal sequence. As
expected notumKO behaved as a null. It was recombined onto FRT2A for clonal analysis.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 10

Transgene to express Dlp-CD8

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Dlp-CD8 was made by replacing the C-terminus where the GPI anchor is normally added
with mouse CD8 transmembrane domain and GFP. The primers
GATGAATTCGGCGCGCCATGCTACATCAGCAGCAACAAC and
GCATGCGGCCGCCTCGATTGTCATTGGCCCCG were used to amplify 2193bp of the
cDNA encoding a polypeptide lacking Asp734, where GPI is normally appended. This
fragment was cloned in frame as an EcoR1-Not1 fragment in UASHRP-CD8-GFP (deleting
HRP) and the Dlp-CD8-encoding fragment was then transferred to pMTV5 as an EcoR1Xho1 fragment. From there it was transferred to pTubulin as a Kpn1-Mlu1 fragment. This
transgene rescued viability and wing patterning in dlp mutant homozygotes, which
otherwise do not survive beyond pupal stages, a strong indication that Dlp does not need to
be GPI anchored for normal development.
Expression vectors for cultured Drosophila cells

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Drosophila S2 or S2R+ (Drosophila Genomics Resource Centre, DGRC), were cultured at
25°C in Schneider’s medium + L-glutamine (Sigma) containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine
serum (FBS; Life Technologies) and 0.1 mg/mL Pen/Strep (Life Technologies). To generate
plasmids expressing V5-tagged dNotum, the dNotum cDNA (from Stephen Cohen) was
amplified, adding a V5 tag (GKPIPNPLLGLDST) at the C-terminus. This fragment was
then inserted into pActin, pUAST or pLotattB51 to generate pAct-Notum-V5, pUASTNotum-V5 or pLotattB-Notum-V5 respectively. A stable S2 line expressing V5-tagged
dNotum (S2 act-Notum-V5) was generated by transfection of S2 cells with pAct-Notum-V5
and pCoHygro (Invitrogen) followed by drug selection. Wingless was expressed from pTubWg, which was prepared by inserting the Wg cDNA from pKS-Wg 52 into pTubulin. HAtagged Dally was expressed from pAct-Dally-HA, prepared by inserting Dally-HA excised
from pMTDally-HA (from Stephen Cohen) into pActin. To conveniently manipulate Dlp’s
coding sequence, three nucleotides (GTC) were inserted at position 2100-2102 (Nucleotide
numbering with the A of first codon at position 1) to introduce a Sal I site in KS-Dlp. This
was used to insert DNA encoding an HA tag flanked by Glycine (GYPYDVPDYAG) and
thus generate pKS-Dlp-HA. The Dlp-HA was then inserted into pTubulin to make pTubDlp-HA.
PIPLC treatment of imaginal discs and cultured cells
Wing imaginal discs were treated with PIPLC as previously described in 53 with some
modifications. Briefly discs were dissected from 3rd instar larvae and incubated in
Schneider’s medium with 10% FBS containing 10 U/ml of PIPLC (Molecular Probes) at
room temperature for 30 min. After treatment, the discs were washed three times with
Schneider’s medium before extracellular staining (no detergent). S2 cells transfected with
pTub-Dlp-HA and pActin (mock), or pTub-Dlp-HA and pAct-Notum-V5 as well as the
corresponding CM were collected (total vol. 300μl) and treated with PIPLC (final
concentration 1 U/ml) for 1.5 hours at 25°C before phase separation.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 11

Phase separation assay

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The phase separation assay was performed as previously described with some
modifications 54. After PIPLC treatment, 200 μl of pre-condensed Triton X-114 (Sigma) was
added to the reaction mixtures (Triton X-114 final concentration ~2%). The extracts were
incubated for 15 min on ice and then centrifuged 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant
were transferred to new tubes and warmed at 37°C in a water bath for 10 min. After a
second centrifugation (10,000g for 10 min at room temperature), the upper phases (aqueous)
and lower phases (detergent) were collected separately and mixed with 4x sample buffer
(Life Technologies) for analysis by immunoblotting.
Immunoblotting
Samples were run on 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen) with MOPS buffer.
Proteins on gel were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane using iBlot gel transfer
System (Invitrogen). The membranes were washed with dH2O and blocked with 5%
skimmed milk in 0.1% tween-20 PBS (PBS-T) for 30 min at room temperature. Membranes
were incubated with primary antibodies (mouse monoclonal anti-V5; Life Technologies,
1:5000 and rat anti-HA; Roche, 1:2500) diluted in 5% milk PBS-T overnight at 4°C and
washed with PBS-T 3 times before incubation with HRP conjugated secondary antibodies
(anti-mouse or anti-rat; Biorad, 1:5000). Membranes were washed again in PBS-T,
developed using ECL prime western blotting detection system (GE Healthcare) and exposed
to film.
Glycan array

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

CM obtained from S2 cells expressing V5-tagged dNotum was overlaid on a focused
neoglycolipid-based glycan array containing lipid-linked GAG oligosaccharide probes (see
http://www1.imperial.ac.uk/glycosciences/ and references 55,56) and allowed to bind for 90
min. The array was then washed and stained with V5 tag mouse monoclonal antibody
(Invitrogen) followed by biotinylated anti-mouse IgG (Sigma). Binding was detected with
Alexa Fluor 647-labeled streptavidin. Fluorescence intensity was quantified and data
analysis was performed with dedicated microarray software. No binding was observed using
the control medium instead of the conditioned medium or when the anti-V5 was used in the
absence of the dNotum medium (data not shown).
Large scale expression of Notum constructs
The cDNA coding for mature hNotum (residues R38-S496) was cloned into the pHLsec
vector 57 that adds a C-terminal His6- or His10 tag. After the crystal structure was solved in
crystal forms I and II (see below) and the folded region identified, a shorter construct
hNotumcore comprising S81-T451, C330S, was found to provide higher expression levels,
thanks in part to the removal of the non-conserved C330 which provides a free, surfaceexposed sulfhydryl. Expression of wild type protein resulted in non-quantitative spontaneous
crosslinking of the protein, a problem that was not observed with the C330S variant.
For dNotum, we initially attempted to express D83-T617. However, a large unstructured and
nonconserved domain of 22kD (R416-K597) was found to interfere with crystallization.
This domain, which was not present in hNotum was deleted and replaced by GNNNG to
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 12

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

generate dNotumΔloop. Note that it could provide an additional glypican-binding surface
since it is highly basic (pI=12.4). Proteins were transiently expressed in HEK293T cells and
purified as described 47. Proteins for crystallization were expressed either in GntI-deficient
HEK293S cells or in HEK293 cells treated with kifunensine (1mg/l). Prior to crystallization
the proteins were treated with endoglycosidase F1 at a ratio of 1:100. Proteins intended for
kinetic studies were stored in 10 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 50mM NaCl, 50%
(v/v) glycerol at −20°C.
Surface plasmon resonance equilibrium binding studies

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Affinity between variants of hNotum and GPC3 or sulfated GAG was measured at 25°C in
10mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.005% Tween20 using a Biacore T200
machine (GE Healthcare). GPC3 constructs (see below) or sulfated GAGs were coupled to a
streptavidin-coated sensor chip via a biotin label and purified Notum proteins were used as
analyte. Biotinylated GAGs were produced as described 58. To produce biotinylated GPC3
we proceeded as follows. The cDNA encoding human GPC3 (full length except for the lack
of endogenous signal sequence, P31-N538) or GPC3ΔGAG (lacking C-terminal stretch that
normally contains the GAG attachment sites, P31-F493) was cloned into a variant of the
pHLsec vector, which introduces a recognition sequence for the E. coli BirA enzyme at the
C-terminus. Biotinylation at this sequence tag was performed by co-transfection of
HEK293T cells with the GPC3 construct and an E.coli BirA expression construct. The
synthetic BirA gene was codon-optimized and carried a C-terminal KDEL-tag for retention
in the endoplasmic reticulum. The BirA plasmid was used at 20% of total DNA. The
expression medium was supplemented with 100μM of sterile biotin prepared as a 2mM
stock in PBS. After three days, the CM was cleared from cell debris and repeatedly bufferexchanged to remove free biotin. The chip surface was precoupled with approximately
10000 resonance units (RU) of streptavidin. Approx. 500 RU of GPC3 was immobilized.
The amount of immobilized GAGs could not be measured. After each injection of analyte
the chip surface was regenerated with 1M NaCl, 10mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.5 to return to
baseline levels. Data were fit to a Langmuir adsorption model (B = BmaxC/(Kd + C), where
B is the amount of bound analyte and C is the concentration of analyte in the sample. Data
was then normalized to a maximum analyte binding value of 100. For the design of heparin
binding site mutants, the following considerations were taken into account. If, based on the
crystal structure, the hydrophobic part of the side chain (e.g. Arg, Lys, His) was estimated to
be of no structural importance, then the residue was mutated to serine. In all other cases it
was mutated to glutamine (Arg, Lys) or asparagine (His) to keep the overall structure as
untouched as possible.
Heparin affinity chromatography
We compared the affinity of hNotum variants for Heparin using a 1 ml HiTrap Heparin HP
column (GE Healthcare). The column was equilibrated in 10 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0. 120 μg
of sample protein, diluted into binding buffer, was injected onto the column. After washing
of the column with 5 column volumes of binding buffer the protein was eluted in a linear
gradient to 1.0 M NaCl over 20 CV. The flow rate was 2 ml/min.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 13

Chromogenic Notum activity assays

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Steady state carboxylesterase activity measurements of hNotum were performed in 50 mM
MES/NaOH, 100 mM NaCl, pH 6.5 using different chromogenic p-nitrophenyl (pNP) esters
(SIGMA; number indicates carboxylic acid chain length). Substrate stocks in DMSO were
adjusted to concentrations between 20 mM (pNP16) and 2 M (pNP2) and diluted into
reaction buffer. In tests using the short and soluble substrates pNP2 and pNP4, the final
DMSO concentration was only 0.1%. In tests using longer pNP substrates or in comparative
studies the final DMSO and Triton concentration was kept constant at 2.5% (v/v) and 0.5%
(w/v) respectively. The required amount of a 20mM substrate stock was first mixed 1:1 with
a 20% (w/v) solution of Triton X-100 in reaction buffer. The resulting emulsion was then
diluted with reaction buffer and vigorously agitated to avoid precipitation. Reactions were
started by addition of 5-10μl of protein at concentrations between 0.1 and 4 mg/ml.
Substrate was measured using a Varian Cary 50 spectrophotometer by following the
absorption change at 405nm. The extinction coefficient of p-nitrophenol in reaction buffer
was established to be 4070 M−1cm−1. Although Triton X-100 was required to maintain the
solubility of long ester substrates and fatty acids, it was itself an inhibitor of Notum
(Extended Data Fig. 8a and b). We assume that the hydrophobic region of Triton X-100 has
a propensity to bind to the active site pocket. This notion is supported by the observation
that the much larger sterol-based detergent CHAPS evokes no inhibition. Based on this
assumption of competitive inhibition by Triton X-100 we determined its inhibition constant
to be 466μM and used it to calculate a corrected Michaelis constant for pNP8 turnover.
Cell-based Notum activity assays

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To assay Wingless signalling in Drosophila cells, a modified TOPFlash vector called
WISIR, comprising a TCF-responsive promoter driving Firefly luciferase and a ubiquitous
promoter driving Renilla luciferase 59 was used. To assess the repressive activity of
dNotum, S2 R+ cells were transfected separately in 6 well plates with pTub-Wg (2 μg),
pAct-Notum-V5 (2μg) and WISIR (0.3 μg). The transfected cells were then cultured for 2
days at 25°C and then mixed in equal ratio. Firefly and Renilla luciferase levels were
measured 24 hrs later with Dual-Glo luciferase reporter assay system. As controls, cells
transfected with WISIR alone or with WISIR and pTub-Wg were mixed with mocked
treated cells. Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity and the
average of triplicate samples was calculated.
hNotum inhibition of Wnt signalling in mammalian cells was assessed in stably transfected
SuperTopFlash (STF) HEK293 cells 60. These were treated with CM from Wnt3A
producing L cells 61 with or without recombinant purified hNotum. To reveal the direct
action of hNotum on Wnt we proceeded as follows. Wnt3A CM was dialyzed for 24h
against ten volumes of tissue culture grade PBS and then sterile filtered with the aim to
remove chelators that might interfere with TALON-binding (see below). To 500 μl of such
dialyzed Wnt3a, 5μl hNotum protein or an unrelated control protein (mock) at a
concentration of 1mg/mL was added and incubated for the indicated time at room
temperature (RT, 23°C). To stop the enzymatic reaction we added 50 μl of fresh 50% slurry
of cobalt affinity beads (TALON resin) equilibrated against tissue culture grade PBS and 5μl
of 500mM imidazole in PBS. After vigorous shaking the solution was incubated for 1h at

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 14

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

RT on a vertical rotator. Beads containing the His10-tagged hNotum protein were removed
by centrifugation (3000g, 5min) and discarded. The supernatant was cleared again by
centrifugation at maximum speed (16000g, 5min). 100μl of the reaction solution was then
added to STF cells seeded the previous day at 50000 cells per 100μl and per well into 96
well plates. The Wnt-induced luciferase activity was measured after 16-20h using the Glo
kit (Promega) and an Ascent Luminoskan luminometer (Labsystems) following the
instructions of the manufacturer. Data represent average of quadruplicate measurements ±
SD. The incubation time with cells was kept constant for all compared samples.
To asses hNotum inhibition of Norrin signalling, STF cells seeded in 96 well plates were
transfected after 24h with 200ng DNA: 60 ng each of hFz4 and hLrp6 plasmids, 30 ng of
Tspan-12 plasmid, and 50 ng constitutive Renilla luciferase plasmid (pRL-TK from
Promega). Cells were stimulated 24 h post transfection with 10 μg/ml recombinant Norrin
(manuscript in preparation) which had been preincubated for 24 h with 10 ug/ml hNotum
variants or as a control, Fetal Calf Serum (FCS). Firefly and Renilla luciferase activities
were measured 48 hr later with Dual-Glo luciferase reporter assay system (Promega). Firefly
luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity and the average of triplicate
samples was calculated.
Crystallization, data collection, and structure determination

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Concentrated proteins were subjected to sitting drop vapour diffusion crystallization trials
employing a Cartesian Technologies pipetting robot and typically consisted of 100-300 nl of
protein solution and 100 nl of reservoir solution. A detailed discussion of the multiple
conditions in which crystal growth occurred is provided in supplementary information.
Standard methods were employed for x-ray diffraction data collection and structure
determination, destinctive details for the series of crystal structures are discussed in
supplementary information.
Mass spectrometric analysis of the effect of Notum on Wnt3A protein
As a general method to quantify the levels of delipidated Wnt3A protein by LC-MSMS, we
used an isotope coded alkylation reaction targeting cysteines to multiplex mass spectrometry
signal. One sample was reacted with heavy iodoacetamide (IAA, 13C2D2HINO) and the
other with the light version (C2H3INO) and consequently, peptide signal doublets appeared
at Δ4D per cysteine with peak areas used for relative quantification. Wnt3A protein (500ng,
purified from L cell CM by Kevin Dingwell (NIMR) according to4) was mixed with purified
hNotum (1μl of purified hNotumcore at 25 ng/μl) in the following buffer: 20mM Tris-HCl
buffer (pH 7.5) containing 500mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA, 0.5% CHAPS and 5% glycerol
and left together for16 hours at 25°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 4x LDS
sample buffer (Life Technologies). Coomassie blue stained bands from SDS-PAGE were
excised from the gel and cut in half and destained by incubating for 45mins with 200mM
Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) / 60% acetonitrile (ACN). To reduce cysteines, buffer was
refreshed with the inclusion of 10mM DTT for 15 minutes. After washing, half of the gel
pieces were incubated in 20 mM heavy or light IAA in 100mM ABC/ 60% ACN buffer in
the dark for 30 minutes. Proteins were digested using a 4 hour in-gel trypsin digestion step
in 100mM ABC and then quenched with 0.1% TFA. Equal aliquots of heavy and light

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 15

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

reaction were mixed to generate forward and reverse labelled samples. Duplicate LC-MS
analysis was performed using an Ultimate3000 RSLC system coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap
Velos-Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The instrument was operated in an
alternating targeted MS/MS and data dependent acquisition mode. CHGLSGSCEVK and the
control peptide AGIQECQHQFR were targeted for MS/MS. MS/MS spectra were searched
using Mascot v2.3 and identifications imported as a spectral library into Skyline software
v2.6.0.6709. Skyline was used for peaks extraction and areas determination
Mass spectrometric analysis of Wnt3A and Shh peptides
Delipidation assays were performed by reacting 3 μg of synthetic peptides (synthesis
described in supplementary information) with 1μl of enzyme (hNotumcore or
hNotumcoreS232A; 25 ng/μl) in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Total vol. 5 μl) for 16
hours at 25°C. The reaction was quenched with 0.1% TFA and samples were desalted using
c18 zip tips. Samples were prepared in α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 50:50 water/
acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. MALDI-TOF spectra were acquired using an ABSCIEX 5800
TOF/TOF systems and analysed using data explorer v4.11.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 16

Extended Data

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended data Figure 1. Notum modulates Wingless, but not Dpp or Hedgehog signalling

a-c, Overexpression of dNotum-V5 with the apterous-gal4 driver, which is expressed in the
dorsal compartment, prevents expression of Senseless (Sens) (b’), a Wingless target gene
but has no significant impact on phospho-Mad (pMad) immunoreactivity (b), an indicator of
Dpp signalling. Loss of notum activity, achieved by generating large patches of notumKO
tissue (See Methods), marked by the loss of GFP, leads to broadening of Senseless

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 17

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

expression but does not affect pMad immunoreactivity. d-g, Strong, but not complete,
reduction of notum activity led to ectopic wing margin bristles (compare inset in d and e) but
had no significant impact on wing area, which is sensitive to Dpp signalling (f) (p = 0.26,
Student’s t-Test), or on the distance between L3 and L4 veins, which is affected by changes
in Hedgehog signalling 62 (g) (p = 0.41, Student’s t-Test). 19 control (notum141 / +) and 17
mutant (notum141 / KO) wings were analysed.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended data Figure 2. dNotum does not cleave the GPI anchor of glypicans

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 18

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, b Ectopic expression of Senseless caused by NRT-Wingless, as well as endogenous
Senseless, is suppressed by co-expression of dNotum. NRT-Wingless and dNotum are
expressed in a vertical band under the control of dpp-gal4. c, Western blot analysis of phaseseparated extracts of S2 cells transfected with a plasmid expressing HA-tagged Dally. In
control extracts, Dally is found largely in the detergent (d) phase. Coexpression of dNotumV5 from a plasmid had no impact, while treatment with PIPLC shifted all detectable Dally
to the aqueous (a) phase. d, dNotum-V5 expression as in panel c was sufficient to suppress
Wingless-induced TOPFlash activity. Cells were transfected with a dual luciferase
TOPFlash reporter 59 along with a mock plasmid (−), tubulin::wingless (Wg), or
tubulin::wingless + actin::notum-V5 (Wg + Notum). e-h, Extracellular Dally-like protein
(Dlp) in control (e, g) , PIPLC-treated (f) or apterous-Gal4 UAS-notum-V5 (h) imaginal
discs. i-l, Extracellular anti-GFP staining of imaginal discs from gene trap line expressing
Dally-GFP fusion protein. Discs treated with a mock solution (i) or PIPLC (j) (same discs as
in e and f respectively but here showing Dally protein). In a separate experiment, dNotum
was overexpressed with apterous-Gal4 in the Dally-GFP background (l). No change in the
distribution of extracellular GFP could be seen compared to that in control discs (k, no
apterous-Gal4)

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended data Figure 3. dNotum requires Dally to inhibit Wingless signaling

a, Wingless and Senseless expression in a dally−/− wing imaginal disc expressing NRTwingless and notum under the control of dpp-Gal4. Some senseless expression remains,
indicating that, in the absence of Dally, dNotum is a poor inhibitor of NRTWingless-induced
(as well as endogenous) signalling. b-d, Anterior margin of wings from control, spalt (sal)Gal4 UAS-notum-V5, and sal-Gal4 UAS-notum-V5 dally−/− animals. Removal of dally
rescues the loss of margin bristles caused by dNotum overexpression.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 20

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 4. dNotum binds to sulfated glycans

Binding of dNotum-V5 to a GAG oligosaccharide array, detected by immunofluorescence.
HA = Hyaluronic acid, CSA/B/C = Chondroitin Sulfate A/B/C, HS = Heparan Sulfate, Hep
= Heparin. Details on the array are provided in Methods.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 21

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 5. Additional structural information on Notum

a, Topology plot of hNotum. β-strands are shown as numbered triangles and α-helices as
circles labelled in alphabetical order from the N to C terminus. Structural elements
conserved among most α/β-hydrolases are outlined in grey. b, Comparison of the two most
conformationally distinct hNotum structures (from crystal forms III and V). Crystal form III
is the most structurally different. All other structures superimpose with r.m.s.d.s of <0.7Å.
The circle highlights the most flexible region. c, Comparison between the structures of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 22

hNotum (Form V) and dNotum (Form I). The circle highlights the lack of a cysteine bridge
in dNotum.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 6. Structural and biophysical analysis of heparin binding

a, Heparin affinity chromatography of wild type hNotum and selected surface variants. b-e,
Close-up views of additional sulfate binding sites on hNotum, crystal form III. Each view is
accompanied with SPR heparin affinity data corresponding to each hNotum variant.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 23

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Data Figure 7. Relation of Notum to other Esterases of the α/β hydrolase family

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Comparison between hNotum and human Esterase D, showing structural relatedness.
hNotum is also related to APT1, a cytosolic esterase used in this study as a positive control
for fatty acid esterase activity. In the views shown here, the hNotum structure has been
rotated by 90° around the x-axis relative to the structure shown in Figure 3b. b, Rootless
phylogenetic tree of animal Notum proteins (red) and plant pectinacetylesterases (PAE,
green). Extent of sequence identity to hNotum is shown next to species name. Percentages
between branches indicate sequence identity between neighbours.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 24

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 8. Substrates and inhibitors of hNotum

a, Inhibition of hNotum activity on pNP-butyrate (pNP4) by PMSF (30 min preincubation
with 2 mM) as well as by Triton X-100 and CHAPS (0.5%). Presence of 20mM sucrose
octasulfate (SOS) and 50mg/l Heparin results in a minor increase of esterase activity. Values
represent each the activity relative to the mean of four control samples lacking the additives.
b, Saturable inhibition of hNotum by Triton X-100. Triton X-100 inhibits many esterases
due to binding to the acyl binding pocket through its hydrophobic group. c, Lack of
inhibition of Norrin-mediated β-catenin stabilization by Notum. Recombinant Norrin was

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 25

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

pretreated with hNotumcore at a concentration sufficient to suppress Wnt3a-mediated
signalling. d, e, Saturation kinetics of hNotum’s action on pNP-octanoate (pNP8, d) and
pNP -butyrate (pNP4, e). The activity was normalized to the Amax calculated for
hNotumcore. The activity values for the larger, full length protein were adjusted to
compensate for the increased mass. Apparent Km values in (d) were corrected for the
inhibition caused by Triton X-100. f, Saturation inhibition kinetics with myristoleic and
palmitoleic acid. pNP8 was used at a concentration of 1mM and 250μM, respectively.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 26

Extended Data Figure 9. Additional mass spectrometric analysis of hNotum’s deacylase activity

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Mass spectra of CHGLSGSCEVK from trypsinised Wnt3A protein mock-treated or
treated with hNotumcore. Left hand graph is the same as that shown in Fig. 5a, while the
right hand side shows the results of a separate experiment performed with the labels
reversed. b, Triplicate LC-MS peak areas with label reversal. Irrespective of the nature of
the label (grey indicates light label and black, heavy label), hNotumcore triggered an increase
in peak area of the delipidated Wnt3A tryptic peptide. c, d, Two control Wnt3A cysteinecontaining peptides from the same dataset were not affected by hNotumcore. e, Activity of
hNotumcore and its S232A variant on a synthetic disulphide bonded Wnt3A peptide
(CHGLSGSCEVK) palmitoleoylated on the first Serine. Both lipidated and unlipidated
peptide could be detected by MALDI-TOF. Incubation with hNotumcore, but not its S232A
variant, caused significant delipidation (peak corresponding to delipidated peptide is marked
by asterisk). Quantification of duplicate such experiments is shown in Fig. 5c. f, MALDITOF analysis shows that neither hNotumcore nor its S232A variant delipidated a synthetic
Sonic Hedgehog peptide (CGPGRGFGKRR) palmitoylated on its amino terminal Cysteine.
Quantification of duplicate such experiments is shown on Fig 5d (peak corresponding to
lipidated peptide is marked by black triangle). g, 2D active site schematic relating to Fig. 5e.
Additional hydrogen bonds and electron pair movements thought to occur during hydrolysis
by the wild type are shown in grey. h, Close-up view on the myristoleate active site complex
of hNotumcore (crystal form I). The experimental omit electron density is contoured at 2σ.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgements
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

We thank Kevin Dingwell for supplying purified mWnt3A, Hugo Bellen for anti-Senseless, Cyrille Alexandre for
plasmids and advice, Wengang Chai for glycosaminoglycan probes, Tony Holder for suggestions, T. Malinauskas
and Carmen Lorenz for advice and technical support, T. Walter for technical support with crystallization, W. Lu
and Y. Zhao for help with tissue culture, and the organisers of the Wnt EMBO meeting 2012 where our
collaboration began. We thank staff at Diamond Light Source beamlines (i02, i03, i04, i04-1, i24) for assistance
with data collection (proposal mx8423). This work was supported by the MRC (U117584268 to JPV; G0900084 to
EYJ), the UK Research Council Basic Technology Initiative (Glycoarrays Grant GRS/79268 and EPSRC
Translational Grant EP/G037604/1), the Wellcome Trust (Biomedical Resource Grants WT093378MA and
WT099197MA) to TF, the European Union (ERC grant WNTEXPORT; 294523 to JPV, a Marie Curie IEF grant to
MZ), Cancer Research UK (C375/A10976 to EYJ), and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (to SK).
THC was funded by a Nuffield Department of Medicine Prize Studentship in conjunction with Clarendon and
Somerville College Scholarships. The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics is supported by Wellcome Trust
Centre grant 090532/Z/09/Z.

References
1. Freeman M. Feedback control of intercellular signalling in development. Nature. 2000; 408:313–
319. [PubMed: 11099031]
2. Takada R, et al. Monounsaturated fatty acid modification of Wnt protein: its role in Wnt secretion.
Dev. Cell. 2006; 11:791–801. [PubMed: 17141155]
3. Janda CY, Waghray D, Levin AM, Thomas C, Garcia KC. Structural basis of Wnt recognition by
Frizzled. Science. 2012; 337:59–64. [PubMed: 22653731]
4. Willert K, et al. Wnt proteins are lipid-modified and can act as stem cell growth factors. Nature.
2003; 423:448–452. [PubMed: 12717451]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 27

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

5. Tang X, et al. Roles of N-glycosylation and lipidation in Wg secretion and signaling. Dev. Biol.
2012; 364:32–41. [PubMed: 22285813]
6. Clevers H, Nusse R. Wnt/& beta-Catenin Signaling and Disease. Cell. 2012; 149:1192–1205.
[PubMed: 22682243]
7. Kim SE, et al. Wnt Stabilization of β–Catenin Reveals Principles for Morphogen Receptor-Scaffold
Assemblies. Science. 2013; 340:867–870. [PubMed: 23579495]
8. Niehrs C. The complex world of WNT receptor signalling. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2012;
13:767–779. [PubMed: 23151663]
9. Zhang X, et al. Tiki1 is required for head formation via Wnt cleavage-oxidation and inactivation.
Cell. 2012; 149:1565–1577. [PubMed: 22726442]
10. Giraldez AJ, Copley RR, Cohen SM. HSPG modification by the secreted enzyme Notum shapes
the Wingless morphogen gradient. Dev. Cell. 2002; 2:667–676. [PubMed: 12015973]
11. Gerlitz O, Basler K. Wingful, an extracellular feedback inhibitor of Wingless. Genes & Dev. 2002;
16:1055–1059. [PubMed: 12000788]
12. Filmus J, Capurro M, Rast J. Glypicans. Genome Biol. 2008; 9:224. [PubMed: 18505598]
13. Yan D, Lin X. Shaping morphogen gradients by proteoglycans. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol.
2009; 1:a002493. [PubMed: 20066107]
14. Bornemann DJ, Duncan JE, Staatz W, Selleck S, Warrior R. Abrogation of heparan sulfate
synthesis in Drosophila disrupts the Wingless, Hedgehog and Decapentaplegic signaling pathways.
Development. 2004; 131:1927–1938. [PubMed: 15056609]
15. Kreuger J, Perez L, Giraldez AJ, Cohen SM. Opposing activities of Dally-like glypican at high and
low levels of Wingless morphogen activity. Dev. Cell. 2004; 7:503–512. [PubMed: 15469839]
16. Traister A, Shi W, Filmus J. Mammalian Notum induces the release of glypicans and other GPIanchored proteins from the cell surface. Biochem J. 2008; 410:503–511. [PubMed: 17967162]
17. Häcker U, Nybakken K, Perrimon N. Heparan sulphate proteoglycans: the sweet side of
development. Nature Rev Mol. Cell Biology. 2005; 6:530–541.
18. Petersen CP, Reddien PW. Polarized notum activation at wounds inhibits Wnt function to promote
planarian head regeneration. Science. 2011; 332:852–855. [PubMed: 21566195]
19. Chang MV, Chang JL, Gangopadhyay A, Shearer A, Cadigan KM. Activation of wingless targets
requires bipartite recognition of DNA by TCF. Current Biol. 2008; 18:1877–1881.
20. Flowers GP, Topczewska JM, Topczewski J. A zebrafish Notum homolog specifically blocks the
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. Development. 2012; 139:2416–2425. [PubMed: 22669824]
21. Torisu Y, et al. Human homolog of NOTUM, overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma, is
regulated transcriptionally by beta-catenin/TCF. Cancer Science. 2008; 99:1139–1146. [PubMed:
18429952]
22. Baena-López LA, Nojima H, Vincent J-P. Integration of morphogen signalling within the growth
regulatory network. Current Opinion in Cell Biology. 2012; 24:166–172. [PubMed: 22257639]
23. Alberts, Lewis, Johnson, Raff. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 2008
24. Basler K, Struhl G. Compartment boundaries and the control of Drosophila limb pattern by
hedgehog protein. Nature. 1994; 368:208–214. [PubMed: 8145818]
25. Alexandre C, Jacinto A, Ingham PW. Transcriptional activation of hedgehog target genes in
Drosophila is mediated directly by the cubitus interruptus protein, a member of the GLI family of
zinc finger DNA-binding proteins. Genes & Development. 1996; 10:2003–2013. [PubMed:
8769644]
26. Teleman AA, Cohen SM. Dpp gradient formation in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc. Cell.
2000; 103:971–980. [PubMed: 11136981]
27. Whalen DM, Malinauskas T, Gilbert RJC, Siebold C. Structural insights into proteoglycan-shaped
Hedgehog signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:16420–16425. [PubMed: 24062467]
28. Belenkaya TY, et al. Drosophila Dpp morphogen movement is independent of dynamin-mediated
endocytosis but regulated by the glypican members of heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Cell. 2004;
119:231–244. [PubMed: 15479640]
29. Lum L, et al. Identification of Hedgehog pathway components by RNAi in Drosophila cultured
cells. Science. 2003; 299:2039–2045. [PubMed: 12663920]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 28

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

30. Akiyama T, et al. Dally regulates Dpp morphogen gradient formation by stabilizing Dpp on the
cell surface. Developmental biology. 2008; 313:408–419. [PubMed: 18054902]
31. You J, Belenkaya T, Lin X. Sulfated is a negative feedback regulator of wingless in Drosophila.
Dev. Dynamic. 2011; 240:640–648.
32. Kirkpatrick CA, Dimitroff BD, Rawson JM, Selleck SB. Spatial regulation of Wingless morphogen
distribution and signaling by Dally-like protein. Dev. Cell. 2004; 7:513–523. [PubMed: 15469840]
33. Baeg GH, Perrimon N. Functional binding of secreted molecules to heparan sulfate proteoglycans
in Drosophila. Current Opinion in Cell Biology. 2000; 12:575–580. [PubMed: 10978892]
34. Nardini M, Dijkstra BW. Alpha/beta hydrolase fold enzymes: the family keeps growing. Current
Opinion in Structural Biology. 1999; 9:732–737. [PubMed: 10607665]
35. Krissinel E, Henrick K. Secondary-structure matching (SSM), a new tool for fast protein structure
alignment in three dimensions. Acta crystallographica. Section D, Biological crystallography.
2004; 60:2256–2268.
36. Wu D, et al. Crystal structure of human esterase D: a potential genetic marker of retinoblastoma.
The FASEB journal. 2009; 23:1441–1446. [PubMed: 19126594]
37. Duncan JA, Gilman AG. A cytoplasmic acyl-protein thioesterase that removes palmitate from G
protein alpha subunits and p21(RAS). The Journal of Biol. Chemistry. 1998; 273:15830–15837.
38. Laskowski RA, Watson JD, Thornton JM. ProFunc: a server for predicting protein function from
3D structure. Nucleic Acids Research. 2005; 33:W89–93. [PubMed: 15980588]
39. Orfila C, et al. Expression of mung bean pectin acetyl esterase in potato tubers: effect on
acetylation of cell wall polymers and tuber mechanical properties. Planta. 2012; 236:185–196.
[PubMed: 22293853]
40. Xu Q, et al. Vascular development in the retina and inner ear: control by Norrin and Frizzled-4, a
high-affinity ligand-receptor pair. Cell. 2004; 116:883–895. [PubMed: 15035989]
41. Resh MD. Covalent lipid modifications of proteins. Current Biology. 2013; 23:R431–R435.
[PubMed: 23701681]
42. Rios-Esteves J, Resh MD. Stearoyl CoA desaturase is required to produce active, lipid-modified
Wnt proteins. Cell Reports. 2013; 4:1072–1081. [PubMed: 24055053]
43. Reichsman F, Smith L, Cumberledge S. Glycosaminoglycans can modulate extracellular
localization of the wingless protein and promote signal transduction. The Journal of Cell Biology.
1996; 135:819–827. [PubMed: 8909553]
44. Fuerer C, Habib SJ, Nusse R. A Study on the Interactions Between Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans
and Wnt Proteins. Dev. Dynamics. 2010; 239:184–190.
45. Cruciat C-M, Niehrs C. Secreted and transmembrane wnt inhibitors and activators. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5:a015081. [PubMed: 23085770]
46. de Lau W, Peng WC, Gros P, Clevers H. The R-spondin/Lgr5/Rnf43 module: regulator of Wnt
signal strength. Genes & Development. 2014; 28:305–316. [PubMed: 24532711]
47. Zebisch M, et al. Structural and molecular basis of ZNRF3/RNF43 transmembrane ubiquitin ligase
inhibition by the Wnt agonist R-spondin. Nature Commun. 2013; 4:2787. [PubMed: 24225776]

Methods references
48. Beckett K, et al. Drosophila S2 Cells Secrete Wingless on Exosome-Like Vesicles but the
Wingless Gradient Forms Independently of Exosomes. Traffic. 2012; 14:82–96. [PubMed:
23035643]
49. Vincent J-P, Kolahgar G, Gagliardi M, Piddini E. Steep differences in wingless signaling trigger
myc-independent competitive cell interactions. Dev. Cell. 2011; 21:366–374. [PubMed:
21839923]
50. Baena-Lopez LA, Alexandre C, Mitchell A, Pasakarnis L, Vincent JP. Accelerated homologous
recombination and subsequent genome modification in Drosophila. Development. 2013;
140:4818–4825. [PubMed: 24154526]
51. Yagi R, Mayer F, Basler K. Refined LexA transactivators and their use in combination with the
Drosophila Gal4 system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:16166–16171. [PubMed: 20805468]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 29

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

52. Alexandre C, Baena-Lopez A, Vincent J-P. Patterning and growth control by membrane-tethered
Wingless. Nature. 2014; 505:180–185. [PubMed: 24390349]
53. Marois E, Mahmoud A, Eaton S. The endocytic pathway and formation of the Wingless
morphogen gradient. Development. 2006; 133:307–317. [PubMed: 16354714]
54. Doering TL, Englund PT, Hart GW. Detection of glycophospholipid anchors on proteins. Current
Protocols in Protein Science. 2001 Chapter 12, Unit 12.15.
55. Fukui S, Feizi T, Galustian C, Lawson AM, Chai W. Oligosaccharide microarrays for highthroughput detection and specificity assignments of carbohydrate-protein interactions. Nature
Biotech. 2002; 20:1011–1017.
56. Palma AS, Feizi T, Childs RA, Chai W, Liu Y. The neoglycolipid (NGL)-based oligosaccharide
microarray system poised to decipher the meta-glycome. Current Opinion in Chem. Biol. 2014;
18:87–94.
57. Aricescu AR, Lu W, Jones EY. A time- and cost-efficient system for high-level protein production
in mammalian cells. Acta crystallographica. Section D, Biological crystallography. 2006;
62:1243–1250.
58. Malinauskas T, Aricescu AR, Lu W, Siebold C, Jones EY. Modular mechanism of Wnt signaling
inhibition by Wnt inhibitory factor 1. Nature structural & molecular biology. 2011; 18:886–893.
59. Gagliardi M, Hernandez A, McGough IJ, Vincent J-P. Inhibitors of endocytosis prevent Wnt/
Wingless signalling by reducing the level of basal β -Catenin/Armadillo. J Cell Sci. 2014;
127:4918–4926. [PubMed: 25236598]
60. Xu H, et al. Tbx1 has a dual role in the morphogenesis of the cardiac outflow tract. Development.
2004; 131:3217–3227. [PubMed: 15175244]
61. Blitzer JT, Nusse R. A critical role for endocytosis in Wnt signaling. BMC Cell Biol. 2006; 7:28.
[PubMed: 16824228]

Extended data reference
62. Glise B, et al. Shifted, the Drosophila ortholog of Wnt inhibitory factor-1, controls the distribution
and movement of Hedgehog. Dev. Cell. 2005; 8:255–266. [PubMed: 15691766]

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 30

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 1. Notum specifically inhibits Wnt signalling

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a-c, Overexpression of V5-tagged dNotum with the apterous-gal4 driver, which is expressed
in the dorsal compartment prevents expression of Senseless (Sens) but not that of Patched
(Ptc) (b). Loss of notum activity, achieved by generating large patches of notumKO tissue
(See Methods), marked by the loss of GFP, leads to broadening of Senseless expression but
does not affect Patched expression. As in all subsequent confocal images, 3rd instar wing
imaginal discs are shown with posterior to the right and dorsal up. d, Senseless is expressed
seemingly normally in large patches of dlp dally mutant cells (GFP negative) e, Western blot
(co-stained with anti-V5 and anti-HA) of phase separated extracts of S2 cells transfected
with a plasmid expressing haemagglutinin (HA)-tagged Dlp. In control extracts, Dlp
(arrowhead) is found equally in the detergent (d) and aqueous (a) phases. Coexpression of
dNotum-V5 (asterisk) had no impact while treatment with PIPLC shifted Dlp to the aqueous
phase.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 31

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Notum requires the GAGs of glypicans to inhibit Wingless signalling

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a-c, Ectopically expressed dNotum-V5 does not suppress Senseless expression in the
absence of dlp (b) or dally (c). Although dNotum is only expressed in a vertical band along
the A-P boundary, it spreads along the whole A-P axis. d, Ectopic dNotum represses
Senseless expression in dlp mutants that express Dlp-CD8 (tubulin promoter). e, Expression
of an RNAi transgene against sulfateless in the posterior compartment prevents dNotum-V5
(expressed from dpp-lexA lex-op-notum-V5) from being retained at the cell surface and from
suppressing Senseless expression. Wingless signalling is still suppressed in the anterior
compartment. f, Accumulation of dNotum-V5 is reduced at the surface of dlp dally double
mutant tissue (GFP-negative).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 32

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 3. hNotum structure and GAG binding

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Binding of hNotumcore to immobilized heparin, heparan sulfate (HeparanSulf), hGPC3 or
hGPC3ΔGAG, assayed by SPR. b, Structure of hNotum. β-strands are numbered and αhelices are labelled alphabetically from N to C terminus. Disulfides are shown in orange,
catalytic triad residues as sticks and the active site pocket shaded grey. N96 is glycosylated
(also in dNotum). c, Heparin-mimicking ligands from three different structures are plotted
onto a surface representation coloured by electrostatic potential from red (−8kbT/ec) to blue
(-8kbT/ec). Close-up views of binding sites are shown on the right with experimental omit
electron density contoured at 2.0σ. d, SPR assay measuring hNotumcore variant binding to
immobilized heparin. Mutation of the heparin disaccharide binding site (R115S;
hNotumΔHep.unit) had little effect while mutations in the sulfate binding site 1 (R409Q
H412N R416Q; hNotumΔSulfate1) strongly reduced binding. For SPR (a, d), each data point
is the mean result of two replicates.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 33

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 4. Enzymatic activity of hNotum

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Activity of hNotumcore and its S232A variant on p-nitrophenyl (pNP) acetate (pNP2) and
activity of hNotumcore on other chromogenic substrates. pNPS = pNP-sulfate (sulfatase
substrate); pNPP=pNP-phosphate (phosphatase substrate); pNPPC=pNP-phosphorylcholine
(phospholipase C substrate); pNAA=p-Nitroacetanilide (amidase/protease substrate). b,
mWnt3A inactivation by hNotum. After the indicated time, hNotumcore or its S232A variant
was removed with cobalt affinity beads and residual Wnt3A activity measured with
TOPFlash. PC = no hNotum removal. Results are normalised to those from identically
treated mock samples. c, Activity of hNotum and hAPT1 on chromogenic p-nitrophenyl
ester substrates of different lengths. d, Inhibition of hNotum by various carboxylic acids.
pNP8 was used as substrate at a concentration of 1 mM as were the carboxylic acids. c, t: cis
or trans C9-C10 double bond. All graphs show the mean +/− s.d. (n=4).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

Kakugawa et al.

Page 34

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 5. Wnt-deacylation by Notum

a, LC-MS analysis of mWnt3A protein treated with hNotumcore or a mock solution. By
comparison to mock treatment (light label), addition of hNotum (heavy label) caused a
significant increase in the signal intensity of unlipidated CHGLSGSCEVK b, LC-MS peak
areas from panel a.; shown as mean +/− s.e.m. (n=3) c, d, Quantification from MALDI
analysis of synthetic lipid-bearing peptides treated with hNotumcore or its S232A variant;
shown as mean +/− s.e.m. (n=3). Palmitoleoylated hWnt3A peptide, but not palmitoylated
hSonic Hedgehog peptide, was specifically deacylated by the wild type enzyme. e, Close-up
view on the seryl-palmitoleate active site complex of hNotum. The experimental omit
electron density is contoured at 2σ. f, Feedback control by Notum. Notum deacylates Wnt in
a Glypican-assisted fashion.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 September 12.

