Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Repurposing the anti-malarial drug artesunate as a novel therapeutic
agent for metastatic renal cell carcinoma due to its attenuation of
tumor growth, metastasis, and angiogenesis
Da Eun Jeong1,*, Hye Jin Song2,*, Sharon Lim3, Se Jeong Lee4, Joung Eun Lim5,
Do-Hyun Nam1,4,6, Kyeung Min Joo1,2, Byong Chang Jeong5, Seong Soo Jeon5,
Han Yong Choi5, Hye Won Lee4,7
1

Department of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea

2

 epartment of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
D
Korea

3

 epartment of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
D
Medicine, Seoul, Korea

4

Institute for Refractory Cancer Research, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea

5

Department of Urology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea

6

Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea

7

 esearch Institute for Future Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
R
Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Hye Won Lee, e-mail: nsproper@naver.com
Han Yong Choi, e-mail: hanyong.choi@samsung.com
Keywords: renal cell carcinoma, metastasis, artesunate, oncosis, drug repurposing
Received: June 07, 2015      Accepted: September 16, 2015      Published: September 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Despite advances in the development of molecularly targeted therapies,
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is still incurable. Artesunate (ART), a wellknown anti-malarial drug with low toxicity, exhibits highly selective anti-tumor actions
against various tumors through generation of cytotoxic carbon-centered free radical in
the presence of free iron. However, the therapeutic efficacy of ART against metastatic
RCC has not yet been fully elucidated. In the analysis on a dataset from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) (n = 469) and a tissue microarray set from Samsung Medical
Center (n = 119) from a cohort of patients with clear cell RCC (ccRCC), up-regulation
of transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1), which is a well-known predictive marker for ART,
was correlated with the presence of distant metastasis and an unfavorable prognosis.
Moreover, ART exerted potent selective cytotoxicity against human RCC cell lines
(Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2) and sensitized these cells to sorafenib in vitro,
and the extent of ART cytotoxicity correlated with TfR1 expression. ART-mediated
growth inhibition of human RCC cell lines was shown to result from the induction of
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and oncosis-like cell death. Furthermore, ART
inhibited cell clonogenicity and invasion of human RCC cells and anti-angiogenic
effects in vitro in a dose-dependent manner. Consistent with these in vitro data,
anti-tumor, anti-metastatic and anti-angiogenic effects of ART were also validated
in human 786-O xenografts. Taken together, ART is a promising novel candidate for
treating human RCC, either alone or in combination with other therapies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33046

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

its effects, and the clinical implications of ART in metastatic
RCC. Since ART derivatives are already in clinical use, we
anticipated that our findings would potentially be readily
translatable to clinical practice. Our results promise to
provide a basis for future development of these compounds
as anti-RCC agents, either alone or in rational combination
with conventional tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).

Approximately 40% of all patients with renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) die of metastasis. Metastases are often
present at diagnosis, and relapse after nephrectomy is
common [1, 2]. Metastatic RCCs are difficult to remove
surgically, are generally resistant to most chemotherapies
and radiation, and show only limited sensitivity to cytokine
therapy [1, 2]. Although several targeted therapeutics
such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors have
been approved for the treatment of metastatic disease over
the past 10 years, metastatic RCC is still incurable [3].
There is a renewed interest in the discovery of
novel anti-cancer drugs from natural compounds and their
derivatives [4]. In addition to its established safety and
tolerability in anti-malarial treatment, artesunate (ART), a
semi-synthetic derivative of the sesquiterpene artemisinin,
has shown promise in crossover usage as an anti-cancer
agent for a variety of solid tumors [5–10]. Several
mechanisms underlying its anti-tumor activities have been
proposed, including (1) actions on cell cycle progression
[11], (2) disruptions to the intrinsic apoptotic pathway
that drive the cell toward a proapoptotic outcome [12,
13], and (3) anti-angiogenic and anti-metastatic properties
[14–16]. Recently, oncosis has regained attention since a
number of novel anticancer agents have been identified
based on their ability to induce oncotic cell death [17].
An important biochemical event leading to oncosis, as
opposed to apoptosis, is depletion in intracellular ATP
resulting in the impairment of several ionic pumps [18].
Interestingly, ART is a native compound that can induce
oncosis in pancreatic [19] and gastric [20] cancer cells.
Although the mechanisms of action of ART and its
derivatives have yet to be fully defined, these compounds
can exert direct oxidative damage to cancer cells in the
presence of free iron by converting themselves into
cytotoxic carbon-centered free radicals [21, 22]. Excess iron
also promotes oxidative stress via reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production [23]. Transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1)
has a key role in cellular iron uptake; TfR1 expression is
particularly up-regulated in rapidly growing cancer cells,
which need excess iron for their rapid proliferation [24]. A
number of recent studies have supported the hypothesis that
TfR1 is an important biomarker of susceptibility to ART.
Specifically, ART has been shown to selectively kill cancer
cells [24], and TfR1 expression is significantly correlated
with ART sensitivity in various cancer cell lines [25–27].
However, the mechanisms by which ART and its
derivatives exert specific anticancer activity against RCC
have not yet been defined. This lack of knowledge hinders
the development of these compounds in preclinical and
clinical settings. Therefore, the aims of this study were twofold: 1) to investigate the anti-tumor effects of ART on a
panel of human RCC cell lines in vitro and in vivo; and 2) to
investigate the underlying mechanisms by which ART exerts
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
TfR1 is up-regulated in clear cell RCC (ccRCC)
with distant metastases, and high TfR1
expression correlates with poor prognosis
To determine the clinical relevance and therapeutic
implication of ART for patients with metastatic RCC,
we examined whether TfR1 expression was correlated
with any of the clinico-pathological characteristics of
ccRCC. TfR1 mRNA and protein expression levels
were obtained from a dataset from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA, http://cancergenome.nih.gov) (n =
469) (Figure 1A) and a tissue microarray (TMA) from
Samsung Medical Center (Figure 1B–1D), respectively.
Using the TCGA mRNA sequencing data, we found
that elevated TfR1 expression was correlated with
advanced T stage and distant metastasis (Figure 1A).
Additionally, stage IV metastatic ccRCCs were found to
have significantly higher levels of TfR1 mRNA compared
with localized ccRCCs (Figure 1A), suggesting that
elevated transcription of TfR1 is significantly associated
with locally advanced and metastatic disease states. To
further test this hypothesis, we assayed TfR1 expression
in 119 surgically removed primary ccRCC tumors on
the TMA by immunohistochemistry (IHC) (Figure 1B).
Moderate or strong expression of TfR1 (TfR1-high)
was detected in 24 out of the 119 (20.2%) tumor tissue
samples (Figure 1C). Moreover, TfR1-high tumor tissue
was associated with the presence of distant metastasis at
diagnosis (Figure 1C). Consistent with this finding, TfR1high tumor tissue was also correlated with decreased
cancer-specific survival (CSS) and metastasis-free
survival (MFS) (Figure 1D), indicating that TfR1 could
serve as an important prognostic factor for determining
patient outcome. Taken together, TfR1 up-regulation
is significantly associated with enhanced metastatic
potential and worse clinical prognosis of RCC, implying
that TfR1 expression data could be used in advance to
select patients with RCC for whom ART could be a
beneficial therapeutic agent.

TfR1 in cell proliferation and the invasion of
human RCC cells
RCC metastases to the lungs are the most frequent
type of metastasis, with prevalence rates as high as 72%
and 76% in autopsy studies [28]. To recapitulate metastatic
33047

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Upregulation of transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) in human primary renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is correlated
with distant metastasis and worse clinical outcomes. A. Differential mRNA expression of TfR1 in different stages of clear cell

RCC (ccRCC). Pathological T stage, clinical M stage, and total stage information was obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas-Kidney
Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma (TCGA-KIRC) RNA sequencing dataset (n = 469). The box plots display medians with 95% confidence
intervals. B. Representative immunohistochemical staining (IHC) of TfR1 from the ccRCC tissue microarray (TMA) cohort. IHC staining
of TfR1 was performed and signal intensity was scored as follows: 0, negative; 1, weak; 2, moderate positive; 3, strong positive. Patients
were stratified as low (0 or 1) or high (2 or 3). Scale bar, 100 μm. C. P values for correlations of TfR1 expression with various clinicopathological characteristics of the TMA cohort. D. Kaplan-Meier analysis of cancer-specific survival (CSS) and metastasis-free survival
(MFS) according to TfR1 staining intensity in the primary ccRCC TMA cohort. The log-rank test was used to analyze statistical significance.

RCC in vitro, we established an RCC cell line, SN12CGFP-SRLu2, which is capable of efficiently colonizing
the lungs in mice. This cell line is a lung metastatic
subline that was derived from SN12C cells expressing
green fluorescent protein (SN12C-GFP) (Figure 2A).
Consistent with our clinical findings, SN12C-GFP-SRLu2
cells displayed increased TfR1 expression (Figure 2B)
and decreased overall survival relative to their parental
counterparts (Figure 2B) due to enhanced tumorigenic and
metastatic potential.
To investigate the value of TfR1 as a predictive
marker of the suitability of ART for the treatment of RCC,
we next examined TfR1 expression levels in various
human RCC cell lines [VHL wild-type RCC cell lines =
Caki-1 and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2; VHL-deficient (mutated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

or hypermethylated) RCC cell lines = A498, 769-P, and
786-O] and normal renal cortical epithelial cells (RCECs)
(Figure 2C). The mRNA and protein levels of TfR1
were higher in Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2
cells than in A498 and 769-P RCC cells, and were also
much higher than in RCECs (Figure 2C). This finding
is consistent with the observed up-regulation of TfR1 in
cancer cells.
To verify the role of TfR1 in the progression of RCC,
the effect of small interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated gene
silencing of TfR1 on tumor cell growth and invasion activity
of human RCC cells were analyzed in vitro. TfR1 silencing
with siRNA in Caki-1, 786-O and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2
cells (Figure 2D) significantly diminished cell proliferation
(Figure 2E) and the invasiveness (Figure 2F and 2G),
33048

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The cell proliferation and invasion Inhibitory effects of TfR1 silencing in human RCC cells. A. The process of
the selection of lung-specific metastatic subpopulations from SN12C-GFP human RCC cells in vivo. SN12C cells were injected into the
left subrenal capsule space (orthotopic injection), resulting in spontaneous lung metastasis. The subsequent lung-metastatic generations
were designated SN12C-GFP-SRLu1 and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2, with SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells used in these experiments. B. Comparison
of parental SN12C-GFP cells versus the subline lung metastatic SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells with respect to biological aggressiveness by
Kaplan-Meier curves. Immunoblotting was also used to compare the levels of TfR1 between the two cell lines. C. Levels of TfR1 mRNA
and protein expression in a variety of human RCC cell lines and human renal cortical epithelial cells (RCECs) as measured by qRT-PCR
and western blotting. Data are presented as means ± SDs from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05. D–G. To examine whether TfR1
is involved in cell proliferation and invasion in human RCC, Caki-1, 786-O and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were transfected with nontargeting siRNA (siCon) or TfR1 siRNA (siTfR1) for 48 h. The level of cyclin D1 was determined by western blot (D), and cell growth and
invasive activity were assessed using a Ezy-Cytox viability assay (E) and a Transwell invasion assay (F–G), respectively in vitro. Data are
presented as means ± standard deviations (SDs) from three independent experiments. ***P < 0.05.
demonstrating that increased expression of TfR1 is involved
in gain of tumorigenic and metastatic potential of RCC cells.

RCC cell lines with elevated levels of TfR1 (Caki-1, 786O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2) (Figure 3A), strengthening
the potential of TfR1 as a companion diagnostic biomarker
for ART in RCC. Since TfR1 expression and ARTmediated suppression of cell growth were most highly
correlated in Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2
cells, these cell lines were selected for further preclinical
tests of the anti-tumor activities of ART.
In the clinical trials that have been conducted thus
far, therapies that target single agents have not yielded a

In vitro selective cytotoxicity and sensitizing
effect to sorafenib of ART in human RCC cells
In subsequent in vitro studies using a human RCC
preclinical platform to determine the therapeutic potential
of ART, ART exhibited remarkably selective, dosedependent cytotoxicity in the micromolar range against
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33049

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Artesunate (ART) decreases the viability of human RCC cells in vitro and enhances the susceptibility of RCC
cells to sorafenib. A. Cytotoxic effects of ART on human RCC cells. RCC cells and normal renal epithelial cells (RCECs) were seeded

into 96-well plates and treated with the indicated concentrations of ART for 72 hours. The mean values from three independent Ezy-Cytox
viability assays were plotted and the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values for ART with respect to cell growth inhibition
were calculated. Values are expressed as means ± SDs. B–D. Effect of combination treatment with sorafenib plus ARon the viability of
human RCC cells. Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were treated for 72 hours with different concentrations of sorafenib in
combination with 10 μM, 25 μM and 50 μM ART. The mean values from three independent Ezy-Cytox viability assays were plotted and
IC50 values for sorafenib with respect to cell growth inhibition were calculated. Values are expressed as means ± SDs.

substantial clinical benefit against metastatic RCC [29].
No established consensus has yet been reached regarding
the best treatment approach for patients with RCC that has
acquired resistance to conventional therapies. Although few
studies have explored the value of ART as a combination
partner in treatment regimens, ART has been used in
combination with other agents, chosen based on target
diversity, that mutually support each other [30]. Thus, we
next explored the activity of ART alone and in combination
with clinically approved target agents for metastatic RCC
(sunitinib, sorafenib, and everolimus). To determine the
extent of synergy between ART and these agents, Caki-1,
786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were exposed for
72  hours to different concentrations of each agent, both
in the presence and absence of ART. Among these agents,
only sorafenib exerted significant synergistic inhibition with
ART against RCC cell lines (Figure 3B–3D). Although the
underlying mechanism driving the synergism between ART
and sorafenib needs to be further elucidated, these results
suggest that ART may have potential therapeutic value as a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

sensitizer of standard strategies for the treatment of patients
with advanced RCC.

ART induces G2/M cell cycle arrest, but not
apoptosis, in human RCC cells
Since treatment with ART significantly suppressed
the growth of RCC cells, we next investigated the
mechanism of this suppression by determining whether
ART inhibits cell cycle progression or induces apoptotic
cell death. Flow cytometry analysis showed that treatment
with ART changed the cell cycle stage distribution in
Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells. Speci­
fically, these cells were arrested in the G2/M phase at
48 hours after ART treatment (Figure 4A). Treatment
with ART increased the fractions of cells in G2/M, while
the proportions of cells in S phase were either slightly
increased (Caki-1, SN12C-SRLu2) or unchanged (786-O)
(Figure 4A). These findings are consistent with partial
arrest at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Consistent
33050

Oncotarget

Figure 4: ART-treated RCC cells accumulate in G2/M phase, but ART does not induce apoptosis in Caki-1, 786-O,
or SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells. A. Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were treated with 50 μM ART or vehicle control for

48 hours. Cell cycle distribution was then analyzed by flow cytometry after propidium iodide (PI) staining. The left panels summarize the
flow cytometry results for the different cell cycle stages. Data are expressed as means ± SDs from 3 independent experiments. *P < 0.05.
The right panels show representative examples of cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry. Cell subpopulations are expressed as percentages
of the total population. B. Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were treated with 50 μM ART or vehicle control for 48 hours and
then stained with Annexin V and PI. Representative FACS cytograms of stained cells are shown. Viable cells (Annexin V and PI negative)
are in the lower left quadrant. Early apoptotic cells (Annexin V positive/PI negative) are in the lower right quadrant. Terminal apoptotic/
necrotic cells (Annexin V positive/PI positive) are in the upper right quadrant. Cell subpopulations are expressed as percentages of the total
population. C. Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were cultured with DMSO and ART (50 μM) for 72 hours, after which whole
cell extracts were generated and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Western blotting was then performed using the indicated antibodies.

with the flow cytometry results, decreased protein levels
of cyclin B, cyclin D1, and E2F1 were observed (Figure
4C). Since these proteins regulate cell cycle progression,
this finding supports the idea that ART treatment leads
to G2/M cell cycle arrest. Since cyclin D1 regulates G1
phase transition, the observed decrease in cyclin D1 levels
may be secondary to the G2/M arrest caused by ART
treatment.
Interestingly, at day 2, cell cycle analysis revealed
that treatment of the three RCC cell lines with 50 μM
ART did not generate a sub-G1 fraction (Figure 4A).
This finding indicates that ART does not induce apoptosis
in human RCC cells. As a complementary technique to
study the relationship between ART and apoptosis, RCC
cells were cultivated in the presence of ART (50 μM) for
48 hours and then double-stained with Annexin V-FITC/
propidium iodide (PI). As shown in Figure 4B, apoptotic
cells were rarely found in any cell line after treatment with
50 μM ART. Moreover, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(PARP) cleavage was not significantly increased as
assessed by Western blot analysis (Figure 4C).

ART-induced cell death is accompanied by
ultrastructural features typical of oncosis, which
occurs via ROS generation and ATP depletion,
in RCC cells
Since ART did not induce apoptosis in RCC cells,
we next applied the gold standard technique for identifying
oncosis, electron microscopy, to examine ART-treated
cells on the ultra-structural level. The control 786-O
(Figure 5Aa–5Ab) and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 (Figure
5Ag–5Ah) cells exhibited normal cellular morphology
with intact nuclei and other organelles. In contrast, highmagnification electron micrographs of ART-treated 786-O
(Figure 5Ac–5Af) and SN12C-SRLu2 (Figure 5Ai–
5Al) cells revealed dilated nuclei, irregular clumping of
chromatin, cytoplasmic swelling, severely damaged and

33051

Oncotarget

Figure 5: ART mediates oncotic cell death in human RCC cells via reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and
intracellular ATP depletion. A. (a-b) Untreated control and (c-f) ART-treated 786-O cells; (g–h) untreated control and (i–l) ART-treated

SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells. High-magnification electron micrograph showing disruption of nuclear and cytoplasmic organization, cytoplasmic
swelling, dilation of ER elements, swollen mitochondria, and plasma membrane rupture following ART treatment in 786-O and SN12C-GFPSRLu2 cells. B. Effects of ART on the expression of calpain-1, calpain-2 and α-tubulin in human RCC cells. Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-SRLu2
cells were treated with ART (50 μM) for 6 hours. The levels of calpain-1, calpain-2 and α-tubulin were then analyzed by immunoblotting with
the indicated antibodies. C. Treatment with ART decreases the level of intracellular ATP and leads to oncosis. Intracellular ATP levels were
determined by measuring the activity of luciferase on its substrate, D-luciferin. Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-SRLu2 cells were treated with
DMSO or ART (50 μM) for 48 hours and lysed. The resultant luminescence of each well was measured with a luminometer. **, P < 0.01;
***P < 0.001 D. Relative ROS production in Caki-1 and 786-O cells incubated with or without 50 μM ART for 24 hours. Data are expressed
as means ± SDs from 3 independent experiments. Closed bar: DMSO control; open bar: ART (50 μM). ***P < 0.001.

swollen organelles, numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles, and
ruptures in the plasma membrane. These morphologic
characteristics are consistent with oncosis-like cell death
[31] and support our hypothesis that ART induces oncosis,
rather than apoptosis, in RCC cells.
To investigate the mechanism by which ART induces
oncosis, we analyzed the expression of oncosis-associated
proteins in RCC cells by western blotting. Calpains are
believed to be involved in oncosis-like cell death [32].
Calpains comprise a family of calcium-dependent cysteine
proteases that perform limited proteolytic cleavage on a
variety of cellular substrates, including cytoskeletal proteins
[33]. In addition, since ultra-structural examination of ARTtreated cells revealed a fuzzy morphology, we hypothesized
that the cytoskeleton might also be affected. Oncosis has
been shown to be triggered by ATP depletion and ATP
depletion can cause actin depolymerization, breakdown
of the actomyosin network, changes in the lipid order of
the plasma membrane, and membrane blebbing. As shown
in Figure 5B, ART-treated cells exhibited significantly
increased calpain-1 and calpain-2 expression and decreased
α-tubulin compared with control cells.
ATP depletion in oncosis affects ion pumps, leading
to the collapse of mitochondrial potential [32]. Specifically,
the cytomembrane is destroyed due to the inactivation of ion
pumps, which is caused by ATP depletion. In parallel with
these changes, ROS also accumulate and are commonly used
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

as markers of cellular damage. Although ROS generation
and mitochondrial membrane changes are key events in
both apoptosis and necrosis, ATP depletion is only observed
in oncosis. Interestingly, ART-treated Caki-1 and 786-O
cells exhibited decreased intracellular ATP concentrations
compared with control cells (Figure 5C). In addition, ARTtreated cells tended to accumulate ROS, which are an
indicator of mitochondrial damage (Figure 5D). These data
suggest that ART is a potent cytotoxic drug that displays an
unusual mode of action, i.e., triggering oncosis.

Inhibitory effects of ART on clonogenicity and
invasion properties of human RCC cells
We next performed focus forming assays (Figure
6A) and transwell invasion assays (Figure 6B) to examine
other properties that are required for distant metastasis of
RCC, specifically, clonogenicity and invasiveness. These
experiments revealed that ART significantly diminished
the clonogenicity (Figure 6A) and invasiveness (Figure
6B) of human RCC cells. Especially, foci formation was
completely abolished in Caki-1 and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2
cells in the presence of 5 μM ART while ART demonstrated
suppression of foci formation of 786-O cells in a dose
dependent manner (Figure 6A). Similarly, the addition
of the ART to these cells dose-dependently reduced their
capacity to invade (Figure 6B). In support of these findings,
33052

Oncotarget

Figure 6: ART inhibits the colony forming and invasion abilities of human RCC cells in a dose dependent manner. A.

Evaluation of the effect of ART treatment on clonogenicity in Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells. Representative images of
Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells stained for focus formation after 2 weeks of DMSO or ART treatment (5, 10 or 25 μM).
B–C. Invasion of Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells through Boyden transwell chambers was determined after treatment with
DMSO or ART (5, 10, 25 or 50 μM). Representative images of the bottom surface are shown. Averages of ten random microscopic fields
are presented for each condition. Data are expressed as means ± SDs from 3 independent experiments. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. D. Caki-1,
786-O, and SN12C-GFP-SRLu2 cells were treated with or without ART (50 μM) for 72 hours, and western blotting was then performed
using the indicated antibodies.

treatment with ART down-regulated the expression of
multiple molecules associated with maintaining cancer
stemness and metastatic potential, including c-MYC,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), c-MET, Src,
and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) (Figure 6C). These results
strengthen the potential therapeutic value of ART in the
treatment of metastatic RCC.

wound healing assays (Figure 7C) revealed that ART dosedependently inhibited the migration of HUVECs. Moreover,
while vehicle-treated HUVECs plated on a Matrigel surface
formed capillary-like structures within six hours, tubule
formation was significantly suppressed in ART-treated
HUVECs in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 7D).
We next examined the mechanism underlying
ART-mediated angiogenesis. Vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) regulates endothelial cell
proliferation, and tube formation [36]. VEGF binds
to specific transmembrane receptors on endothelial
cells, which results in the phosphorylation of various
downstream signal transduction molecules [35, 37]. ART
significantly suppressed VEGF-induced phosphorylation
of VEGFR2 and its downstream targets in HUVECs
(Figure 7E). These results indicate that ART exerts its
anti-angiogenic effects by directly targeting VEGFR2 on
the surface of endothelial cells and further antagonizing
the VEGFR2-mediated downstream signaling cascade,
indicating that ART may be well-tolerated and could
potentially be used as an anti-angiogenic agent in RCC.

ART inhibits the proliferation, migration, and
formation of capillary structures in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), in
addition to inhibiting vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) signaling in vitro
Tumor angiogenesis is the rate-limiting step in
tumor progression and provides both oxygen and nutrients
for tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis [34, 35]. We
next investigated the effects of ART on endothelial cell
lines in vitro and found that ART exerted a profound antiproliferation effect on HUVECs in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 7A). In addition, transwell migration (Figure 7B) and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33053

Oncotarget

Figure 7: ART inhibits cell proliferation, migration, and capillary structure formation of human umbilical vein
endothelial cell (HUVECs), in addition to inhibiting VEGFR2 signaling in vitro. A. ART inhibits the proliferation of HUVECs

as analyzed by the Ezy-Cytox assay. Results were normalized to DMSO controls. Data are expressed as means ± SDs from 3 independent
experiments. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 B. ART inhibits HUVEC migration in a transwell assay. A total of 2 × 104 HUVECs were
seeded in the top chamber and treated with either DMSO or 5, 10, 25 or 50 μM ART. After 6 hours, migrated HUVECs were stained and
quantified. Data are expressed as means ± SDs from 3 independent experiments. ***P < 0.001. C. ART inhibits HUVEC migration in the
wound healing assay. HUVECs were grown to full confluence in 12-well plates, wounded with a pipette tip, and then treated with DMSO
or 5, 10, 25 or 50 μM ART. **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. D. ART inhibits tube formation of HUVECs. After pretreatment with DMSO or 5,
10, 25 or 50 μM ART for 12 hours, HUVECs were seeded on a Matrigel layer and then further treated with DMSO or 5, 10, 25 or 50 μM
ART for 6 hours. The numbers of tubular structures in each group were counted manually; data are expressed as percent inhibition, with the
value of vehicle-treated cells set to 100%. **P < 0.01 E. ART inhibits VEGFR2 downstream signaling in HUVECs. GAPDH expression
was used as an internal control.

ART inhibits tumor growth, metastasis and
tumor angiogenesis in 786-O xenografts in vivo

meaningful reduction of microscopic lung metastatic foci
(Figure 8E). These results indicate that ART inhibits the
ability of tumor growth and pulmonary metastasis of RCC
cells significantly.
To better understand the mechanism by which ART
exerts its anti-tumor and anti-metastatic activities in vivo,
tumor tissue was isolated from 786-O xenografts at the
end of the treatment course and analyzed by IHC. We
observed that the ART-treated xenograft tumors contained
significantly decreased levels of Ki-67 (Figure 8F),
indicating that these tumors contained fewer proliferating
cells than control-treated tumors. We next investigated
whether ART induced apoptosis in 786-O xenograft tumors
by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (dUTP) nick end
labeling (TUNEL) staining. These experiments revealed
that ART did not increase the amount of apoptotic cells
in the tumors, a finding that is consistent with the in vitro
results (Figure 8F). Importantly, TUNEL-positive cells were

To investigate the effect of ART in vivo, mice bearing
subcutaneous xenografts of ccRCC cells (786-O-Luc cells,
luciferase tagged for in vivo bioluminescence imaging)
were treated daily intraperitoneally with ART (100 mg/
kg) or vehicle alone as a control. As shown in Figure 8A,
ART treatment significantly suppressed tumor growth
(n = 4) or induced tumor regression (n = 2) for the 786O xenografts compared with vehicle alone. As shown
in Figure 8B, tumor weight of ART-treated mice was
remarkably lower than that of control group, and ART
strongly inhibited tumor growth (Figure 8C) with good
in vivo tolerability (Figure 8D). Furthermore, 1 × 106 of
786-O-Luc cells were i.v. injected into lateral tail vein of
nude mice to examine the effects of ART (100 mg/kg) on
the metastatic activity of cancer cells. ART demonstrated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33054

Oncotarget

Figure 8: ART exerts anti-tumor, anti-metastasis and anti-angiogenesis effects in vivo against 786-O subcutaneous
xenografts. A–B. Images and average tumor weights of subcutaneously implanted 786-O-Luc human RCC tumors at the end of in vivo

experiment. Tumor-bearing mice were treated intraperitoneally with ART at 100 mg/kg (n = 6) or vehicle (n = 7) daily after the 786-O-Luc
cell tumors (delivered subcutaneously in the flank) reached an average volume of 100 mm3. Treatment with ART resulted in significantly
reduced tumor growth versus the vehicle control. Moreover, the implanted tumor had disappeared by the end of the experiment in 2 of the 6
mice treated with 100 mg/kg ART. ***P < 0.001. C. Bioluminescence imaging of 786-O subcutaneous tumor xenografts and body weight
changes in ART-treated and vehicle-treated mice. Tumor growth was assessed by quantifying the bioluminescence signal in each mouse;
error bars represent SEMs. Images of representative mice in the vehicle-treated (top) and ART-treated (bottom) groups are shown. *P < 0.01
D. Body weight of mice treated with vehicle or ART (100 mg/kg). Data are represented as the means ± SD. E. Comparison of numbers of
pulmonary micro-metastatic nodules between un-treated (n = 10) and ART-treated mice (n = 10). After 3 weeks of treatment, the mice were
killed, and the metastatic nodules of lungs were counted. Data are presented as the mean ± SDs. ***P < 0.001. Black arrow, micrometastatic
nodule in lung. F. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were measured immunohistochemically by performing Ki-67 and TUNEL staining. Scale
bar, 100 μm. G. Typical ultrastructural characteristics of oncotic cell death induced by ART treatment (c–f) were confirmed by electron
microscopy examination of harvested tumor tissue. (a–b) Vehicle control. H. Anti-angiogenic effects of ART in RCC xenografts were
validated by increased amount of tumor necrosis (upper panel) and reduced microvessel density (MVD) (lower panel). Frozen sections of
786-O tumor tissue were analyzed by IHC using anti-CD31 antibodies. The tumor MVD was quantified for each condition at the end of
ART treatment. *P < 0.05 I. Western blot analysis of samples from each group of mice was performed with the indicated antibodies. J. IHC
analysis of removed tumor tissue using anti-p-ERK1/2 antibodies. Scale bar, 100 μm.

counted only in regions of the intact tumor in which the
central necrosis that is typically observed in xenografts did
not interfere with the quantification of apoptotic cells.
Alternative mechanisms, such as the induction of
oncotic cell death and/or the inhibition of angiogenesis,
appear to be responsible for the antitumor effects of
ART. Electron microscopy analyses demonstrated
striking morphological features of ART-treated cells
(Figure 8G). Specifically, these cells exhibited perturbed
cytoarchitecture with numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles,
disintegrated plasma membranes, swollen nuclei, and
internally disorganized mitochondria (Figure 8G).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Additionally, quantification of the tumor mean vessel
density (MVD) at the end of ART treatment revealed
that 786-O tumor vasculature was significantly decreased
by ART treatment at 100 mg/kg (Figure 8H). Moreover,
this decrease was correlated with a significant increase
in necrosis, as evidenced by the extensive necrotic
areas in ART-treated cells (Figure 8H). This inhibition
of angiogenesis correlated with increased oncotic death
of tumor cells and increased central necrosis. Finally,
downregulation of cyclin D1, c-MYC, survivin, c-Met,
EGFR, Src, FAK, and α-tubulin expression was observed
in 786-O tumor xenografts treated with ART (Figure 8I).
33055

Oncotarget

We also observed a significant change in ERK pathway
activation in the 100 mg/kg ART-treated group at this
time (Figure 8J). Taken together, these data demonstrate
that ART exerts multiple anti-tumor and anti-metastatic
effects on cell proliferation, oncotic cell death, and tumor
angiogenesis in vivo. Additionally, ART is also known to
have a good safety profile. Thus, ART may be a promising
anticancer drug candidate for treating RCC.

The incorporation of high-quality biomarkers in the
early development of novel agents is important for guiding
later development. ART possesses a unique anti-cancer
activity via an iron-dependent mechanism. This mechanism
is particularly interesting because TfR1 has been shown to be
up-regulated in locally advanced and metastatic RCC. ART
internalization into cancer cells has been shown to depend
on TfR1 expression [25]. Moreover, the oxidative damage
caused by ROS and reactive nitrogen species is controlled
by cellular iron homeostasis [45], implying a potential link
between oxidative stress and TfR1-mediated iron uptake.
Recent studies also have reported that ROS induce the
expression of TfR1 by activating p38-MAP kinase [46],
thus facilitating iron uptake and the Fenton reaction, which
consequently results in more toxic ROS. However, oxidative
damage alone is not sufficient to explain all the anticancer
activities of ART [47, 48]. In one study, dihydroartemisinin
was shown to downregulate the level of surface TfR1 by
inducing TfR1 palmitoylation and an unexpected lipid raftmediated internalization pathway. This internalization led to
a decrease in TfR1-mediated iron uptake, which may be one
ROS-independent anticancer mechanism of ART [9].
Our results show that ART induces a form of oncosislike cell death, which may or may not be accompanied
by apoptosis consistent previous reports [19, 20]. ARTtreated RCC cells showed typical morphologic features
of oncosis rather than apoptosis. These features include
ATP depletion, ROS generation, and calpain activation.
Previous studies have indicated that calpain cleaves its
target molecules, which include spectrin, paxillin, and
vinculin, thereby inducing an oncotic phenotype [32]. ATP
depletion below a certain threshold may direct the cell
death pathway towards oncosis [49, 50]. One study found
that severe depletion of ATP in mouse renal proximal
tubule cells resulted in uniform oncosis-mediated cell
death [51]. However, under certain stress conditions
neither oncosis nor apoptosis is dominant, suggesting that
the two processes can occur simultaneously and may also
exhibit cross-talk [52]. Therefore, morphological changes
are not the most appropriate endpoint measurement of
cell death, which restricts the usefulness of monitoring
morphological changes alone in clinical studies.
Artemisinin derivatives can elicit broad-spectrum
modulatory effects on a wide panel of signaling molecules
and pathways [27]. However, the exact signaling molecules
and other targets that interact directly with artemisinin
derivatives vary in different cell lines. Thus, the precise
activities of ART are likely to be context-dependent. The
significant down-regulation of cyclin B, cyclin D1, E2F1,
survivin, and c-MYC in human RCC cells mediated by
ART may be sufficient to arrest cell cycle progression and
to suppress cancer stemness [53–59]. More importantly,
this is the first demonstration that ART can decrease the
levels of EGFR, c-MET, Src, and FAK in a human RCC
cell line. In ccRCC, EGFR overexpression has been shown
to be associated with rapid tumor growth and a high tumor

DISCUSSION
Until the past decade, the treatment options for
patients with metastatic RCC were extremely limited. As an
alternative approach, some pharmaceutical companies have
adopted a drug repurposing approach to accelerate the drug
discovery and development process. Drug repurposing, which
is the process of identifying new or different therapeutically
useful indications for existing marketed drugs by targeting
alternative disorders, has already been proven to effectively
address unmet medical needs for cancer [38–42]. For
example, several classes of Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved mitochondrially-targeted antibiotics can be
repurposed across multiple tumor types based on the ability
to eradicate cancer stem cells [40].
Since many effective drugs derived from medical
herbs possess diverse pharmacological activities, they
may serve as valuable resources for procuring novel antitumor compounds. Artemisinin and its analogues possess
anti-malarial activity in addition to a rich assortment of
anti-cancer activities [9]. The hemisuccinate group in
ART confers substantial water solubility and high oral
bioavailability, resulting in a favorable pharmacological
profile [43]. As a new class of anticancer drugs, ARTs
have many advantages including low toxicity to
normal tissue/cells [44], low cross-drug resistance
[5], and synergistic effects with many traditional
chemotherapeutic anticancer drugs [6]. However, the
therapeutic efficacy and mode of action of ART in human
RCC cells are poorly understood.
Here we characterized several key features of ART
action in human RCC cells at the cellular and molecular
levels. Our results provide a foundation for future in-depth
studies of the effects of ART on additional types of cancer
cells. In the present investigation, we reported that ART
exerts anti-tumorigenic and anti-metastatic effects in RCC
preclinical models and that ART also has anti-angiogenic
effects on HUVEC cells. ART has been shown to inhibit
tumor growth; induce growth cycle arrest; promote oncosis;
inhibit tumor angiogenesis, clonogenicity, and tissue
invasion; and inhibit cancer metastasis in human RCC
cells without significant toxicity. In addition, we found
that ART potentiates the anti-tumor effects of sorafenib in
RCC. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
demonstrating that ART has potential as an anti-tumor agent
for metastatic RCC, and also identifies TfR1 as a potential
marker for predicting the effect of ART on RCC cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33056

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

grade [60]. Another recent study demonstrated that ART
activity in cancer cells is mediated by signaling pathways
downstream of EGFR [61]. In various malignancies,
dysregulation of c-Met and Src has been shown to regulate
invasion and metastasis and correlates with poor patient
survival in metastatic RCC [62–65]. Specifically, the
primary target of ART in RCC, the precise molecular
mechanisms by which ART exerts cytoplasmic organelle
damage, and the basis for its preferential effect on RCC
cells all remain to be elucidated.
The diversity of ART targets suggests that ART is
ideal to be used in combination with other agents that
mutually support each other [30]. Indeed, other studies
have reported that combinations of ART/ART-related
compounds with newer treatment modalities such as
erlotinib and rituximab exhibit enhanced activity [66, 67].
The development of strategies for prolonging the effects
of sorafenib and other targeting agents is particularly
important in metastatic RCC, since tumors typically
develop resistance to therapy within 5–11 months. In this
study, the proliferation assays presented here revealed
that the combination of sorafenib and ART synergistically
yielded significantly greater cytotoxicity compared with
sorafenib monotherapy alone in RCC cells. Sorafenib
is an orally active, multikinase inhibitor that targets the
RAF kinases and other receptor tyrosine kinases [VEGFR
1–3, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β
(PDGFR-β)] [68]. Interestingly, sorafenib-mediated
toxicity to leukemia cells has been reported to potentially
involve ER stress and ROS generation [77], implying that
sorafenib sensitizes RCC cells to ART-mediated oxidative
stress. Similarly, in vivo anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic
efficacy of sorafenib was enhanced in a mouse model
of hepatocellular carcinoma by combination with
ART without apparent hepatotoxicity [69]. Therefore,
combination therapies consisting of anticancer agents that
exert oxidative stress together with sorafenib may prove
clinically useful for treating RCC, which depends on the
dsRNA-activated protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK)
pathway [78].
In summary, ART possesses several characteristics
that make it a promising angiogenesis inhibitor for cancer,
including its anti-tumor activity, its anti-angiogenic
efficacy, its low overall toxicity, and its highly selective
toxicity to cancer cells. Given the anti-angiogenic
activities described here, ART appears to be well-suited for
adjuvant therapy in combination with classical TKIs for
the treatment of highly angiogenic RCC. Moreover, ART
may be useful for angioprevention, which is a strategy
based on nontoxic drugs that can be taken for extended
periods or even as life-long treatments to control tumor
growth and metastasis. Further in vivo studies and clinical
trials are necessary to determine whether the promising
combination of sorafenib and ART treatment reported here
has true therapeutic value.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) gene expression and
tissue microarray (TMA) datasets
A publicly available dataset consisting of unmatched
RNA-sequencing (seq) and clinic-pathologic data from a
cohort of 469 patients with ccRCC was obtained from The
Cancer Genome Atlas-Kidney Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma
(TCGA-KIRC) research network via the TCGA data portal
(http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) [70]. In addition, a TMA
was generated from surgically removed samples from 119
patients, each of whom had pathologically proven ccRCC,
at Samsung Medical Center between August 2005 and
October 2010. The study protocol was approved by the
institutional review board (IRB) and written informed
consent was obtained from all patients prior to sample
collection. The patients consisted of 93 males (78%) and
26 females (22%); patient ages ranged from 26–82 years.
Of the 119 patients, 67 had stage I (56.3%), 4 patients
had stage II (3.4%), 20 patients had stage III (16.8%),
and 28 patients had stage IV ccRCC (23.5%). CSS and
MFS rates were calculated from the date of histological
diagnosis to death and to metastatic recurrence due to
ccRCC, respectively. The median follow-up duration was
59 months (interquartile range, 26–70 months).
TMA sections were examined by IHC for TfR1
expression as previously described [71]. Briefly, endogenous
peroxidase activity was first blocked by incubating the
sections in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide. Antigens were then
retrieved by heating the sections in 10 mM sodium citrate
(pH 6.0) at 95°C for 30 minutes. Sections were incubated
overnight at 4°C with primary rabbit polyclonal antibodies
against TfR1 (Abcam) and then for 1 hour at room
temperature (RT) with biotinylated secondary antibodies
(Vector Laboratories) and a subsequent hour at RT with
avidin–biotin complexes (Vector Laboratories). Staining
intensity was scored as follows: 0, no staining; 1, weak
staining; 2, moderate staining; and 3, strong staining. Before
analysis, each sample was classified as having low (none
to weak) or high (moderate to strong) TfR1 expression
based on the immunoreactivity of TfR1, and the KaplanMeier (KM) survival function was plotted. All scoring
was performed by a pathologist experienced in evaluating
IHC who had no knowledge of the corresponding clinicpathologic information.

Cell culture and generation of the SN12Cderived lung metastatic subline SN12C-SRLu2
To study the effect of VHL status on the response
to ART, we used Caki-1, 786-O, and SN12C-GFP-tagged
cells, all of which are human RCC cell lines. Caki1 and 786-O cells were obtained from the American

33057

Oncotarget

at 13000 rpm for 30 min, after which the supernatants
were harvested. Protein concentrations were determined
using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Thermo).
Equal amounts of protein were subjected to SDS-PAGE
and transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). After
blocking nonspecific binding sites on the membranes
with 5% skim milk or 5% BSA for 2 hours at RT, the
membranes were incubated with the indicated primary
antibodies overnight at 4°C and then with the appropriate
secondary antibodies for 1 hour at RT. Antibodies against
Cyclin B, Cyclin D1, E2F1, survivin, PARP, EGFR, FAK,
Src, α-tubulin, GAPDH (Cell Signaling Technology),
TfR1, calpain-1, calpain-2 (Abcam), c-Met (Invitrogen),
and c-MYC (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were obtained
commercially. Immunoreactive bands were visualized
with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and a
chemiluminescent substrate by exposure to X-ray film.

Type Culture Collection (ATCC), whereas SN12CGFP cells were purchased from Metabio (Korea). To
exclude the possibility of cross-contamination, all cell
lines were authenticated by short tandem repeat (STR)
profiling. To generate 786-O-Luc stable cells for in vivo
bioluminescence imaging (BLI), lentiviral expression
particles for firefly luciferase (LVP325, Amsbio) were
purchased and immediately used to transduce 786-O
cells. Transduced cells were selected by culturing for two
weeks in medium containing puromycin (2 μg/mL), and
stable clones were assayed for luciferase activity using the
Bright-Glo™ luciferase assay (Promega). All cells were
maintained in RPMI1640 medium (Gibco) supplemented
with 10% FBS (Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(PS) and propagated in a 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C.
To determine whether TfR1 expression is
upregulated in human RCC cells with enhanced lung
metastatic potential, we isolated lung metastatic cells from
the parental SN12C human RCC cell line. To generate the
subpopulation of parental SN12C cells capable of lung
metastasis in nude mice, we first injected SN12C cells
into the subrenal capsules of mice. Orthotopic spontaneous
metastatic cells (SN12C-GFP-SRLu1) were then isolated
from harvested mouse lungs and expanded, after which
they were injected into the subrenal capsules of nude mice.
After repeating this injection-isolation-expansion cycle,
we obtained the final cell line, designated SN12C-GFPSRLu2. STR profiling (AmpF/STR Identifiler Kit, Applied
Biosystems) was performed to confirm that the parental
and metastatic sublines were genetically identical, proving
that the metastatic cell line was indeed a derivative of the
parental cell line.

Cell viability assay
RCC cells were harvested upon reaching confluence,
seeded into 96-well tissue culture plates at a density of
5 × 103 cells/well, and incubated overnight. The next
day, the plating medium was replaced with 0.1 mL fresh
culture medium containing vehicle alone as a control,
ART, sorafenib, or a combination of sorafenib and ART.
Cells were treated with various concentrations of ART in
4-fold and 10-point serial dilution series (n = 3 for each
condition). After 3 days of incubation at 37°C in a 5% CO2
atmosphere, cell viability was assessed using an EZ-Cytox
Cell Viability Assay Kit (Daeil Lab). All IC50 values were
determined with the S+ Chip Analyzer (Samsung ElectroMechanics Company, Ltd) and are reported as the averages
of three independent experiments. DMSO alone was used
as the negative (vehicle) control. Each experiment was
carried out in triplicate.

Silencing of TfR1 using transfection with TR1
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
For transfection, cells were seeded at a density of
5 × 105 cells/dish and transfected with TfR1-targeting siRNAs
or appropriate control siRNA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology),
respectively, using Lipofectamine2000 (Invitrogen) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Control and TfR1-targeting
siRNAs were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.

Cell cycle analysis
Cells were seeded and pretreated with either DMSO
(control) or ART (50 μM). After incubation for 48 hours,
cells were harvested, washed twice with PBS, and fixed in
ice-cold 70% ethanol overnight at 4°C. Cells were fixed in
70% ethanol at 4°C for 30 minutes and then stained with
propidium iodide (PI, 40 μg/mL; BD Biosciences) in PBS
with RNase (100 μg/mL) at 37°C for 30 minutes. Stained
cells were quantified using a fluorescence-activated cell
sorter (FACSVerse™, BD). After gating on fluorescence
width and area to remove debris and doublet artifacts, the
percentages of cells in sub-G1, G1, S, and G2/M phase
were determined using the BD FACS software suite.

Compounds
ART was purchased from Selleckchem. A stock solution
was prepared by dissolving the drug in dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) to a final concentration of 50 mM. The solution was
divided into aliquots and stored at −20°C until use.

Preparation of protein extracts and
Western blot analysis

Detection of apoptosis by annexin V/PI staining

For western blot analysis, cells were lysed with
ice-cold RIPA buffer supplemented with a protease
inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche
Diagnostics). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cells (1 × 106) were seeded in 60 mm2 culture
dishes and incubated in a 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C
for 24 hours. Cells were then treated either with ART
33058

Oncotarget

Clonogenicity assay

(50 μM) or DMSO as a negative control. After 48 hours of
treatment, adherent and suspension cells were harvested,
washed twice with PBS, and resuspended in 1x Annexin
V binding buffer (BD). Cells were then incubated with
Annexin V-fluorescein-isothiocyanate (FITC) (BD) and PI
(Alexa Fluor 488 Annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis kit; Life
Technologies) according to the manufacturers’ protocols.
Apoptosis was subsequently assessed by flow cytometry.
Flow cytometry plots were generated with annexin-V on
the x-axis and PI on the y-axis and used to determine the
percentages of cells in each of the following quadrants:
lower left, normal cells; lower right, early apoptotic cells;
upper right, late apoptotic and necrotic cells.

Clonogenicity was assessed with a colony-forming
assay. Cells were seeded (300 cells/well) in 6-well plates
and maintained in complete medium with either DMSO
(vehicle) or various concentrations of ART (5, 10, 25 μM)
for 2 weeks. After staining with 0.2% crystal violet, the
viable colonies in each well were counted.

In vitro transwell invasion assay
Matrigel-coated transwells (BD) were used for
the invasion assay. Cells (Caki-1, 2 × 105; 786-O and
SN12C-GFP-SRLu2, 2 × 105) that had been serumstarved overnight were suspended in 300 μL serum-free
RPMI medium and added to the upper well of a
modified Boyden chamber (Corning). Cells were then
allowed to invade through the filter, which had been
precoated with 100 μg Matrigel (BD Bioscience).
Invasion was stimulated by the addition of complete
medium supplemented with 10% FBS, either with or
without ART (5, 10, 25 and 50 μM), to the bottom
compartment. Cells were allowed to invade through
the Matrigel-coated filter for 24 hours, after which
the cells that had invaded the bottom chamber were
counted. The upper side of the membrane was scraped
with a cotton swab to remove cells that had attached
but not invaded, and the invading cells attached to
the lower membrane surface were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) and stained with H&E.
The degree of invasion was assessed in each well by
counting the number of cells in 10 randomized fields
at x100 magnification. Using the cell viability assay
to correct for the proliferative effects of 10% FBS,
the degree of invasion was adjusted using the formula
(corrected invasion index = number of invaded cells/
percentage of viable cells) [72].

Detection of intracellular ATP
As a readout for Na+/K+-ATPase activity, the
intracellular ATP contents of treated cells were measured
using a commercial ATP detection kit (ENLITEN® ATP
Assay System Bioluminescence Detection Kit for ATP
Measurement, Promega) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. This kit measures the activity of luciferase
on its substrate D-luciferin, which yields a luminescent
product. Briefly, cells were washed with PBS and
resuspended in lysis buffer. The resultant lysates were
mixed with the luciferase/luciferin reagent. The emitted
light was immediately quantified using a luminometer and
the amounts of ATP were determined by comparison to a
standard curve.

Measurement of ROS
The effect of ART on intracellular ROS production
was determined using a ROS Assay Kit (Komabiotech)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In this
assay, dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA),
a cell-permeating, non-fluorescent probe, is oxidized
by ROS and converted into a fluorescent product,
2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein, which can be measured by flow
cytometry. After incubation for 1 hour with DCFH-DA in
serum-free medium, the probe was removed and the cells
were rinsed with PBS and incubated for 5 hours in fresh
medium, either with or without ART (50 μM).

Endothelial cell culture
HUVECs were obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD, USA) and
grown in the presence of endothelial cell growth medium
(EGM-2, Lonza) on plates coated with 2% gelatin.
Medium was supplemented with 1% P/S, and cells were
grown at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.

Electron microscopy
Cell pellets and harvested tumor xenografts
were fixed overnight with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 4%
paraformaldehyde at 4°C. After incubation for 1 h in
1% OsO4, the specimens were dehydrated in an ethanol
series, passed through propylene oxide, and embedded in
epoxy resin (Epok 812, 02-1001, Oken, Japan). Ultrathin
sections (60 nm) were collected on 200 mesh nickel grids
and stained for 10 min in 1% uranyl acetate and Reynolds’
lead citrate. The specimens were observed with a Hitachi
HT7700 electron microscope at 80 kV.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Endothelial cell proliferation assay
HUVECs were seeded in 96-well plates (2 × 104
cells/well). After 24 hours of incubation, cells were
incubated with various concentrations of ART for 72
hours and then with EZ-CYTOX solution for 4 hours. The
absorbance of each well at 540 nm was determined using
an ELISA reader (Bio Tek Instruments, Burlington, VT,
USA). All results are expressed as IC50 values.
33059

Oncotarget

Endothelial cell transwell migration assay and
wound healing assay

they were treated with VEGF (50 ng/mL) for 10 min.
Cells were lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer containing
a protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitors
(Roche). Protein concentrations were determined using
a modified BSA assay kit (Thermo) and normalized
before loading on 10% SDS-PAGE gels. After protein
transfer to membranes, the membranes were probed
with specific antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology)
against VEGFR2, phospho-VEGFR2 (Tyr1175), Erk1/2,
phospho-Erk1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204), FAK, phospho-FAK
(Tyr397), Src, phospho-Src (Tyr416), AKT, phosphoAKT (Ser473), NF-κB p65, and phospho-NF-κB p65
(Ser536). Membranes were then incubated with HRPconjugated secondary antibodies and immunoreactive
bands were visualized with a chemiluminescent substrate
via exposure to X-ray film.

Endothelial cell migration was analyzed using 0.1%
gelatin-coated 24-well transwell inserts with a pore size
of 8 μm (Corning Costar Corp). HUVEC cells were plated
on the upper chamber in serum-free medium with either
DMSO (control) or various concentrations of ART. The
lower chamber contained 10% FBS as a chemoattractant.
Cells were incubated at 37°C in the presence of CO2 for
4  hours, after which the cells that had migrated to the
lower membrane surface were fixed with cold 4% PFA and
stained with H&E. Images of invaded cells were captured
at ×100 magnification (three fields per well), and the
numbers of invaded cells were determined using ImageJ
software.
For the in vitro wound healing assay, HUVEC
cells (2 × 105) were seeded in 6-well plates and grown
overnight. After cells had completely adhered to the
plates, 3 vertical lines were scraped in each monolayer
(9 crosses per plate) using a yellow pipette tip. After
scraping, cells were washed with PBS and then incubated
with VEGF-containing medium, either with or without
various concentrations of ART. Images of each cross were
obtained at different time intervals (magnification 100×)
using a microscope video system. The widths of the four
sides in each cross were measured and then averaged.
Migratory ability was calculated using the following
formula: 100% − (width 24 hours/width 0 hours) × 100%.

In vivo tumorigenicity assay using
bioluminescence imaging
All animals received humane care in compliance
with the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals” prepared by the Institute of Laboratory Animal
Resources (National Institutes of Health). Additionally,
all animal procedures were performed according to the
Animal Experiment Guidelines of Samsung Biomedical
Research Institute. For the subcutaneous delivery model,
6–8-week-old female BALB/c nude mice were obtained
from Orient Bio (Korea). The effects of ART on the
tumorigenic potential of RCC cells were analyzed via
subcutaneous injection of 786-O-Luc cells [5 × 106 in
200 μL Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS)] after
administration of anesthesia. When the tumors reached an
average volume of 100 mm3, 13 nude mice were randomly
divided into two groups and treatment with ART or
vehicle (as a control) was initiated. Six of the nude mice
were treated with ART diluted in sterile saline with 5%
sodium bicarbonate, which was administered once daily
by intraperitoneal injection (100 mg/kg). The remaining
seven nude mice in the control group were administered
sterile saline according to a timing and dosing schedule
identical to that used for the treated group.
To assess the growth of the subcutaneously
implanted 786-O-Luc tumor cells, in vivo imaging
was used to quantify the bioluminescence signals. To
this end, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and
intravenously administered a D-luciferin solution (in
vivo imaging solutions, PerkinElmer, 150 mg/kg in
PBS). Images were acquired with an IVIS Spectrum
imaging system (PerkinElmer) 2–5 min after injection,
and the bioluminescence signal on each image was
quantified using the Living Image Software package
(PerkinElmer/Caliper Life Sciences). Briefly, the photon
flux (photons/s/cm2/steradian) was measured within a
region of interest (ROI) drawn around each subcutaneous
tumor. At the end of the experiment, mice were sacrificed

Endothelial cell tube formation assay
The tube formation assay, which assesses
angiogenesis, was conducted to determine whether ART
exerts an anti-angiogenic effect. Briefly, 96-well plates
were preincubated with growth factor reduced Matrigel
(Corning) at 37°C for 30 minutes. After overnight
pretreatment with ART (50 μM), cells were harvested
and resuspended in EBM medium supplemented with 50
ng/ml VEGF and either DMSO (control) or ART (5, 10,
25, 50 μM). Cells were then seeded into the Matrigelcoated wells. After incubation at 37°C in the presence of
5% CO2 for 4 hours, tube formation was observed using
a light microscope and images were captured. The total
lengths of the tubular structures in randomly chosen
microscope fields (three per well) were measured using
ImageJ. HUVECs that were plated on the Matrigel surface
successfully formed tubular structures; the lengths of these
structures in the presence or absence of ART were all
measured within 6 hours.

Western blot analysis of lysates from HUVECs
To determine the effects of ART on VEGFR2dependent signaling cascades, HUVECs were serumstarved and incubated with ART overnight, after which
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33060

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

using a standard method. Tumors were removed and fixed
in 10% buffered formalin before paraffin processing. The
tumor specimens were sectioned (4 μm), with the largest
cross sections corresponding to the ultrasound imaging
planes. The sections were stained with H&E and assessed
microscopically for changes in cell morphology.

1.	 Cohen HT, McGovern FJ. Renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2005; 353:2477–2490.
2.	 Flanigan RC, Campbell SC, Clark JI, Picken MM.
Metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol.
2003; 4:385–390.

Human RCC pulmonary metastasis assay

3.	 Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, Michaelson MD,
Bukowski RM, Oudard S, Negrier S, Szczylik C, Pili R,
Bjarnason GA, Garcia-del-Muro X, Sosman JA, Solska E,
et al. Overall survival and updated results for sunitinib compared with interferon alfa in patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:3584–3590.

For in vivo lung metastasis experiments, 1 × 106 of
786-O-Luc cells were intravenously inoculated into the
lateral tail vein of female 6- to 8-week-old BALB/c-nu
mice. One days after injection, mice were randomly
divided into two groups (10 mice per group), and ART
(100 mg/kg) or vehicle (as a control) was administered
once daily by intraperitoneal injection. The mice were
killed after 3 weeks of injection, and harvested lungs
were processed for paraffin-embedded sections, which
were stained with H&E to confirm pathologically the
presence of lung metastatic tumors.

4.	 Newman DJ, Cragg GM, Snader KM. The influence of
natural products upon drug discovery. Nat Prod Rep. 2000;
17:215–234.
5.	 Efferth T. Molecular pharmacology and pharmacogenomics
of artemisinin and its derivatives in cancer cells. Curr Drug
Targets. 2006; 7:407–421.
6.	 Li PC, Lam E, Roos WP, Zdzienicka MZ, Kaina B, Efferth T.
Artesunate derived from traditional Chinese medicine
induces DNA damage and repair. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:4347–4351.

In vivo immunohistochemistry
The proliferation index in 786-O xenografts
was determined by staining tumor sections with antiKi-67 antibodies (Zymed Laboratories) at a 1:50
dilution. The extent of apoptosis in each tumor was
measured by TUNEL using the TdT-Fragel DNA
Fragmentation Detection Kit (Calbiochem) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. All slides were also
counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin. Endothelial
cells were immunostained using rat monoclonal antiCD34 antibodies at a 1:50 dilution (Abcam). The levels
of phospho-ERK1/2 were determined using anti-pERK1/2
antibodies (phospho-p44/42; Cell Signaling Technology)
at a 1:100 dilution.

7.	 Efferth T, Benakis A, Romero MR, Tomicic M, Rauh R,
Steinbach D, Hafer R, Stamminger T, Oesch F, Kaina B,
Marschall M. Enhancement of cytotoxicity of artemisinins
toward cancer cells by ferrous iron. Free Radic Biol Med.
2004; 37:998–1009.
8.	 Wang Z, Hu W, Zhang JL, Wu XH, Zhou HJ.
Dihydroartemisinin induces autophagy and inhibits the
growth of iron-loaded human myeloid leukemia K562 cells
via ROS toxicity. FEBS Open Bio. 2012; 2:103–112.
9.	 Ba Q, Zhou N, Duan J, Chen T, Hao M, Yang X, Li J, Yin J,
Chu R, Wang H. Dihydroartemisinin exerts its ­anticancer
activity through depleting cellular iron via transferrin
­receptor-1. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e42703.
10.	 Nakase I, Lai H, Singh NP, Sasaki T. Anticancer properties of artemisinin derivatives and their targeted delivery
by transferrin conjugation. Int J Pharm. 2008; 354:28–33.

Statistical analysis
CSS and MFS values were calculated by the
Kaplan–Meier method and compared with the log-rank
test. Group comparisons were performed using Student’s
t-test (two-tailed). Differences with P values less than 0.05
were considered statistically significant.

11.	 Hou J, Wang D, Zhang R, Wang H. Experimental therapy
of hepatoma with artemisinin and its derivatives: in vitro
and in vivo activity, chemosensitization, and mechanisms of
action. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:5519–5530.
12.	 Michaelis M, Kleinschmidt MC, Barth S, Rothweiler F,
Geiler J, Breitling R, Mayer B, Deubzer H, Witt O, Kreuter J,
Doerr HW, Cinatl J, Cinatl J Jr. Anti-cancer effects of
artesunate in a panel of chemoresistant neuroblastoma cell
lines. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010; 79:130–136.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This work was supported by a grant from Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute.

13.	 Zhou HJ, Wang Z, Li A. Dihydroartemisinin induces apoptosis in human leukemia cells HL60 via downregulation of
transferrin receptor expression. Anticancer Drugs. 2008;
19:247–255.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no potential conflicts of interest
to disclose.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14.	 Anfosso L, Efferth T, Albini A, Pfeffer U. Microarray
expression profiles of angiogenesis-related genes predict
33061

Oncotarget

tumor cell response to artemisinins. Pharmacogenomics J.
2006; 6:269–278.

growth factor receptor pathway. Clin Lung Cancer. 2009;
10:281–289.

15.	 Zhou HJ, Wang WQ, Wu GD, Lee J, Li A. Artesunate
inhibits angiogenesis and downregulates vascular endothelial growth factor expression in chronic myeloid leukemia
K562 cells. Vascul Pharmacol. 2007; 47:131–138.

30.	 Liu WM. Enhancing the cytotoxic activity of novel targeted
therapies–is there a role for a combinatorial approach. Curr
Clin Pharmacol. 2008; 3:108–117.
31.	 Van Cruchten S, Van Den Broeck W. Morphological and
biochemical aspects of apoptosis, oncosis and necrosis.
Anat Histol Embryol. 2002; 31:214–223.

16.	 Rasheed SA, Efferth T, Asangani IA, Allgayer H. First evidence that the antimalarial drug artesunate inhibits invasion
and in vivo metastasis in lung cancer by targeting essential
extracellular proteases. Int J Cancer. 2010; 127:1475–1485.

32.	 Liu X, Van Vleet T, Schnellmann RG. The role of calpain
in oncotic cell death. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2004;
44:349–370.

17.	 Majno G, Joris I. Apoptosis, oncosis, and necrosis. An overview of cell death. Am J Pathol. 1995; 146:3–15.

33.	 Goll DE, Thompson VF, Li H, Wei W, Cong J. The calpain
system. Physiol Rev. 2003; 83:731–801.

18.	 Trump BF, Berezesky IK, Chang SH, Phelps PC. The pathways of cell death: oncosis, apoptosis, and necrosis. Toxicol
Pathol. 1997; 25:82–88.

34.	 Bergers G, Benjamin LE. Tumorigenesis and the angiogenic switch. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:401–410.

19.	 Du JH, Zhang HD, Ma ZJ, Ji KM. Artesunate induces
­oncosis-like cell death in vitro and has antitumor activity against pancreatic cancer xenografts in vivo. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2010; 65:895–902.

35.	 Cao Y. Tumor angiogenesis and therapy. Biomed
Pharmacother. 2005; 59:S340–343.
36.	 Hoeben A, Landuyt B, Highley MS, Wildiers H, Van
Oosterom AT, De Bruijn EA. Vascular endothelial
growth  factor and angiogenesis. Pharmacol Rev. 2004;
56:549–580.

20.	 Zhou X, Sun WJ, Wang WM, Chen K, Zheng JH, Lu MD,
Li PH, Zheng ZQ. Artesunate inhibits the growth of gastric cancer cells through the mechanism of promoting
oncosis both in vitro and in vivo. Anticancer Drugs. 2013;
24:920–927.

37.	 Gupta K, Kshirsagar S, Li W, Gui L, Ramakrishnan S,
Gupta P, Law PY, Hebbel RP. VEGF prevents apoptosis of
human microvascular endothelial cells via opposing effects
on MAPK/ERK and SAPK/JNK signaling. Exp Cell Res.
1999; 247:495–504.

21.	 Robert A, Dechy-Cabaret O, Cazelles J, Meunier B. From
mechanistic studies on artemisinin derivatives to new modular antimalarial drugs. Acc Chem Res. 2002; 35:167–174.
22.	 Golenser J, Waknine JH, Krugliak M, Hunt NH, Grau GE.
Current perspectives on the mechanism of action of artemisinins. Int J Parasitol. 2006; 36:1427–1441.

38.	 Sekhon BS. Repositioning drugs and biologics: Retargeting
old/existing drugs for potential new therapeutic applications. J Pharm Educ Res. 2013; 4.

23.	 Zecca L, Youdim MB, Riederer P, Connor JR, Crichton RR.
Iron, brain ageing and neurodegenerative disorders. Nat
Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:863–873.

39.	 Chen JJ, Cai N, Chen GZ, Jia CC, Qiu DB, Du C, Liu W,
Yang Y, Long ZJ, Zhang Q. The neuroleptic drug pimozide
inhibits stem-like cell maintenance and tumorigenicity in
hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncotarget. 2015; doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4307 [Epub ahead of print].

24.	 Daniels TR, Delgado T, Rodriguez JA, Helguera G,
Penichet ML. The transferrin receptor part I: Biology and
targeting with cytotoxic antibodies for the treatment of cancer. Clin Immunol. 2006; 121:144–158.

40.	 Lamb R, Ozsvari B, Lisanti CL, Tanowitz HB, Howell A,
Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Sotgia F, Lisanti MP. Antibiotics
that target mitochondria effectively eradicate cancer stem
cells, across multiple tumor types: treating cancer like an
infectious disease. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4569–4584.

25.	 Zhao F, Wang H, Kunda P, Chen X, Liu QL, Liu T.
Artesunate exerts specific cytotoxicity in retinoblastoma
cells via CD71. Oncol Rep. 2013; 30:1473–1482.

41.	 Sadowski MC, Pouwer RH, Gunter JH, Lubik AA, Quinn
RJ, Nelson CC. The fatty acid synthase inhibitor triclosan:
repurposing an anti-microbial agent for targeting prostate
cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9362–9381.

26.	 Nakase I, Gallis B, Takatani-Nakase T, Oh S, Lacoste E,
Singh NP, Goodlett DR, Tanaka S, Futaki S, Lai H, Sasaki T.
Transferrin receptor-dependent cytotoxicity of artemisinintransferrin conjugates on prostate cancer cells and induction
of apoptosis. Cancer Lett. 2009; 274:290–298.

42.	 Triscott J, Lee C, Hu K, Fotovati A, Berns R, Pambid M,
Luk M, Kast RE, Kong E, Toyota E, Yip S, Toyota B,
Dunn SE. Disulfiram, a drug widely used to control alcoholism, suppresses the self-renewal of glioblastoma and
over-rides resistance to temozolomide. Oncotarget. 2012;
3:1112–1123.

27.	 Das AK. Anticancer Effect of AntiMalarial Artemisinin
Compounds. Ann Med Health Sci Res. 2015; 5:93–102.
28.	 Weiss L, Harlos JP, Torhorst J, Gunthard B, Hartveit F,
Svendsen E, Huang WL, Grundmann E, Eder M, Zwicknagl M,
et al. Metastatic patterns of renal carcinoma: an analysis of
687 necropsies. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1988; 114:605–612.

43.	 Crespo-Ortiz MP, Wei MQ. Antitumor activity of artemisinin and its derivatives: from a well-known antimalarial
agent to a potential anticancer drug. J Biomed Biotechnol.
2012; 2012:247597.

29.	 Nguyen KS, Kobayashi S, Costa DB. Acquired resistance to
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
in non-small-cell lung cancers dependent on the epidermal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33062

Oncotarget

cells and budding yeast. Cancer Genomics Proteomics.
2010; 7:337–346.

44.	 Gong Y, Gallis BM, Goodlett DR, Yang Y, Lu H, Lacoste E,
Lai H, Sasaki T. Effects of transferrin conjugates of artemisinin and artemisinin dimer on breast cancer cell lines.
Anticancer Res. 2013; 33:123–132.
45.	 Pantopoulos K, Hentze MW. Rapid responses to oxidative
stress mediated by iron regulatory protein. EMBO J. 1995;
14:2917–2924.

60.	 Minner S, Rump D, Tennstedt P, Simon R, Burandt E,
Terracciano L, Moch H, Wilczak W, Bokemeyer C, Fisch M,
Sauter G, Eichelberg C. Epidermal growth factor receptor
protein expression and genomic alterations in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer. 2012; 118:1268–1275.

46.	 Ha YM, Park MK, Kim HJ, Seo HG, Lee JH, Chang KC. High
concentrations of ascorbic acid induces apoptosis of human
gastric cancer cell by p38-MAP kinase-dependent up-­regulation
of transferrin receptor. Cancer Lett. 2009; 277:48–54.

61.	 Konkimalla VB, McCubrey JA, Efferth T. The role of
downstream signaling pathways of the epidermal growth
factor receptor for Artesunate’s activity in cancer cells. Curr
Cancer Drug Targets. 2009; 9:72–80.

47.	 Firestone GL, Sundar SN. Anticancer activities of artemisinin and its bioactive derivatives. Expert Rev Mol Med.
2009; 11:e32.

62.	 Eder JP, Vande Woude GF, Boerner SA, LoRusso PM.
Novel therapeutic inhibitors of the c-Met signaling pathway
in cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2207–2214.

48.	 Lu JJ, Meng LH, Cai YJ, Chen Q, Tong LJ, Lin LP, Ding J.
Dihydroartemisinin induces apoptosis in HL-60 leukemia
cells dependent of iron and p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase activation but independent of reactive oxygen species. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008; 7:1017–1023.

63.	 Oh RR, Park JY, Lee JH, Shin MS, Kim HS, Lee SK, Kim YS,
Lee SH, Lee SN, Yang YM, Yoo NJ, Lee JY, Park WS.
Expression of HGF/SF and Met protein is associated with
genetic alterations of VHL gene in primary renal cell carcinomas. APMIS. 2002; 110:229–238.

49.	 Leist M, Single B, Castoldi AF, Kuhnle S, Nicotera P.
Intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentration:
a switch in the decision between apoptosis and necrosis. J
Exp Med. 1997; 185:1481–1486.

64.	 Rankin EB, Fuh KC, Castellini L, Viswanathan K, Finger EC,
Diep AN, LaGory EL, Kariolis MS, Chan A, Lindgren D,
Axelson H, Miao YR, Krieg AJ, et al. Direct regulation of
GAS6/AXL signaling by HIF promotes renal metastasis
through SRC and MET. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;
111:13373–13378.

50.	 Eguchi Y, Srinivasan A, Tomaselli KJ, Shimizu S,
Tsujimoto Y. ATP-dependent steps in apoptotic signal
transduction. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:2174–2181.

65.	 Suwaki N, Vanhecke E, Atkins KM, Graf M, Swabey K,
Huang P, Schraml P, Moch H, Cassidy AM, Brewer D,
Al-Lazikani B, Workman P, De-Bono J, et al. A HIF-regulated
VHL-PTP1B-Src signaling axis identifies a therapeutic target
in renal cell carcinoma. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:85ra47.

51.	 Lieberthal W, Menza SA, Levine JS. Graded ATP depletion
can cause necrosis or apoptosis of cultured mouse proximal
tubular cells. Am J Physiol. 1998; 274:F315–327.
52.	 Muller GJ, Stadelmann C, Bastholm L, Elling F, Lassmann H,
Johansen FF. Ischemia leads to apoptosis—and necrosislike neuron death in the ischemic rat hippocampus. Brain
Pathol. 2004; 14:415–424.

66.	 Efferth T, Ramirez T, Gebhart E, Halatsch ME.
Combination treatment of glioblastoma multiforme cell
lines with the anti-malarial artesunate and the epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor OSI-774.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2004; 67:1689–1700.

53.	 Shan J, Zhao W, Gu W. Suppression of cancer cell growth
by promoting cyclin D1 degradation. Mol Cell. 2009;
36:469–476.

67.	 Sieber S, Gdynia G, Roth W, Bonavida B, Efferth T.
Combination treatment of malignant B cells using the antiCD20 antibody rituximab and the anti-malarial artesunate.
Int J Oncol. 2009; 35:149–158.

54.	 Yamamoto H, Ngan CY, Monden M. Cancer cells survive
with survivin. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:1709–1714.
55.	 Li LN, Zhang HD, Yuan SJ, Tian ZY, Wang L, Sun ZX.
Artesunate attenuates the growth of human colorectal carcinoma and inhibits hyperactive Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.
Int J Cancer. 2007; 121:1360–1365.

68.	 Adnane L, Trail PA, Taylor I, Wilhelm SM. Sorafenib
(BAY 43-9006, Nexavar), a dual-action inhibitor that targets RAF/MEK/ERK pathway in tumor cells and tyrosine
kinases VEGFR/PDGFR in tumor vasculature. Methods
Enzymol. 2006; 407:597–612.

56.	 Cole MD, Cowling VH. Transcription-independent functions of MYC: regulation of translation and DNA replication. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 9:810–815.

69.	 Vandewynckel YP, Laukens D, Geerts A, Vanhove C,
Descamps B, Colle I, Devisscher L, Bogaerts E, Paridaens A,
Verhelst X, Van Steenkiste C, Libbrecht L, Lambrecht BN,
et al. Therapeutic effects of artesunate in hepatocellular carcinoma: repurposing an ancient antimalarial agent. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014; 26:861–870.

57.	 Porter LA, Donoghue DJ. Cyclin B1 and CDK1: nuclear
localization and upstream regulators. Prog Cell Cycle Res.
2003; 5:335–347.
58.	 Jiao Y, Ge CM, Meng QH, Cao JP, Tong J, Fan SJ.
Dihydroartemisinin is an inhibitor of ovarian cancer cell
growth. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2007; 28:1045–1056.

70.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Research N . Comprehensive molecular characterization of clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
Nature. 2013; 499:43–49.

59.	 Steinbruck L, Pereira G, Efferth T. Effects of artesunate on
cytokinesis and G(2)/M cell cycle progression of tumour

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33063

Oncotarget

71.	 Lee HW, Park YM, Lee SJ, Cho HJ, Kim DH, Lee JI, Kang MS,
Seol HJ, Shim YM, Nam DH, Kim HH, Joo KM.
Alpha-smooth muscle actin (ACTA2) is required for metastatic potential of human lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res. 2013; 19:5879–5889.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72.	 Lee HW, Joo KM, Lim JE, Cho HJ, Cho HJ, Park MC, Seol
HJ, Seo SI, Lee JI, Kim S, Jeong BC, Nam DH. Tpl2 kinase
impacts tumor growth and metastasis of clear cell renal cell
carcinoma. Mol Cancer Res. 2013; 11:1375–1386.

33064

Oncotarget

