Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

BRAF vs RAS oncogenes: are mutations of the same pathway
equal? differential signalling and therapeutic implications
Eftychia Oikonomou1, Evangelos Koustas1, Maria Goulielmaki1, Alexander Pintzas1
1

Laboratory of Signal Mediated Gene Expression, Institute of Biology, Medicinal Chemistry and Biotechnology, National
Hellenic Research Foundation, Athens, 11635, Greece

Correspondence to:
Alexander Pintzas, e-mail: apint@eie.gr
Keywords: BRAF vs KRAS, Cancer, differential signalling, targeted therapeutics, rational drug combinations to overcome resistance
Received: August 04, 2014	

Accepted: September 30, 2014	

Published: October 21, 2014

ABSTRACT
As the increased knowledge of tumour heterogeneity and genetic alterations
progresses, it exemplifies the need for further personalized medicine in modern
cancer management. Here, the similarities but also the differential effects of RAS
and BRAF oncogenic signalling are examined and further implications in personalized
cancer diagnosis and therapy are discussed. Redundant mechanisms mediated by
the two oncogenes as well as differential regulation of signalling pathways and
gene expression by RAS as compared to BRAF are addressed. The implications of
RAS vs BRAF differential functions, in relevant tumour types including colorectal
cancer, melanoma, lung cancer are discussed. Current therapeutic findings and future
viewpoints concerning the exploitation of RAS-BRAF-pathway alterations for the
development of novel therapeutics and efficient rational combinations, as well as
companion tests for relevant markers of response will be evaluated. The concept that
drug-resistant cells may also display drug dependency, such that altered dosing may
prevent the emergence of lethal drug resistance posed a major therapy hindrance.

and CRAF, and they can all activate MAP kinase kinase
(MEK) just upstream of ERK but they clearly perform
distinct functions in vivo as shown by the phenotypic
differences between ARAF, BRAF and CRAF null mice
[2]. When the EGFR pathway is activated, small G-protein
RAS acts through protein kinase RAF and activates the
MAPK cascade [3, 4] Figure 1.

INTRODUCTION
The MAPK signalling pathway
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways
modulate the extracellular signals to control growth,
proliferation, differentiation, migration, and apoptosis. One
of the most studied MAPK pathways is the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway. ERK is a subgroup
of MAPKs that is activated by external factors such as
growth factors and mitogens. Ligand-mediated activation
of receptor tyrosine kinases like Epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) initiate the cascade of ERK signalling
that flows through RAS GTPase, which acts as a molecular
on/ off switch [1]. Once RAS is turned on, it recruits
and activates proteins necessary for the propagation of
growth factor and other receptor signals, such as RAF
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). RAF activation
is achieved through a complex process that requires
lipid and protein binding, conformational changes, and
regulatory phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events.
There are three RAF proteins in mammals, ARAF, BRAF,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

KRAS VS BRAF ONCOGENIC
SIGNALLING
KRAS mutation
In most tumour types exhibiting mutation of a RAS
gene family member (HRAS, KRAS, or NRAS), the
mutational activation of one member predominates. In
solid tumors, including colorectal, lung and pancreatic
cancer, KRAS is mutated much more frequently than
NRAS; the reverse is true in some hematologic cancers
such as acute lymphoblastic and chronic myelomonocytic
leukemias, and Hodgkin lymphoma [5], (Table 3).

11752

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway and the Ras/PI3K/PTEN/mTOR pathway are activated by external
factors such as growth factors and mitogens. Once RAS is turned on, it recruits and activates proteins necessary for the propagation
of growth factor and other receptor signals, such as RAF and PI3K.

Approximately 90% of the activating mutations are found
in codons 12 (wild-type GGT) and 13 (wild-type GGC)
of exon 1 and ~5% in codon 61 (wild-type CAA) located
in exon 2 (8–10). The most frequently observed types of
mutations are G>A transitions (G12D: GGT → GAT) and
G>T transversions (G12V: GGT → GTT) in codon 12
and G>A transversion (G13D: GGC → GAC) in codon
13 [198]. In addition, although KRASG12D seems to
be more frequent compared with KRASG12V in colon
cancer, G12V has been associated with more aggressive
colorectal carcinomas and greater mortality than other
codon 12 or 13 mutations. KRAS activating mutations
are widely recognised as predictors of resistance to the
treatment with anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (moAbs)
in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients [6, 7].
Additional KRAS-activating mutations, involving codons
61 and 146 on exon 3 and 4 respectively were identified
at amino acid residues Q61 and A146 [8] and occur
with frequencies ranging from 1 to 4% in CRCs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

These relatively rare mutations, as well as codons 12
and 13 mutations, are responsible for the oncogenic
constitutive activation of RAS/RAF/MAPKs pathway [9].
Several studies have examined the predictive value of
KRAS mutation in codon 61 and/or 146 in metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC) treated with anti-EGFR therapy.
Lately the same value was establisehed for NRAS condon
61 mutation. Both KRAS and NRAS mutations have been
observed to be associated with primary resistance to EGFR
blockade when they occur in primary CRCs [10, 11].
Although some data suggest potentially distinct
biological consequences for mutation of the related RAS
family members, studies demonstrating a clear clinical
distinction between NRAS and KRAS are lacking. In
general, the mutual exclusivity of mutations of NRAS and
KRAS in varied tumor types suggests that they provide
similar or identical oncogenic signals. While NRAS
and KRAS may be capable of equal signaling through
the RAF/MAPK pathway, there is growing evidence

11753

Oncotarget

suggesting that NRAS mutation also provides a distinct,
prosurvival signal that mutational activation of KRAS
does not [12, 13].
What is interesting about KRAS mutations is
that in pancreatic cancer the most common mutation is
one amino-acid substitution in position 12 of the KRAS
protein, leading to a glycine (G) to aspartic acid (D)
substitution, although other variants, such as G to V are
also common [14]. The highest incidence of KRAS
mutations are found in adenocarcinomas of the pancreas
(90%), with activating point mutations in codon 12 of
KRAS to be the most common oncogene alterations [15].
From early on has been speculated that for the induction
of pancreatic tumours a single activated RAS gene is a
critical if not sufficient event [16].
Many studies have indicated that KRAS mutations
are found earlier in CRC. Mutations in KRAS and BRAF
are mutually exclusive, but KRAS and PIK3CA mutations
may coexist within the same tumor [17, 27]. Poor
prognosis and significant association with Dukes’ stage D
suggest that tumours with KRAS and PIK3CA mutations
are more likely to develop into liver metastasis [18]. The
molecular significance and therapeutic implications of
co-occurring mutations are unclear, but the fact that both
genes are acting on the same pathway, suggests a
possible synergistic effect on the signalling pathways
controlled by these genes during CRC development.

Additional mutations within the same pathway may
enhance the oncogenic transformation by strengthening
PI3K pathway signaling caused by oncogenic RAS, thus
activating other pathways.

BRAF mutation
Among the BRAF mutations observed in melanoma,
over 90% are in codon 600, and among these, over 90%
are a single nucleotide mutation resulting in substitution
of glutamic acid for valine (BRAFV600E: nucleotide
1799 T>A; codon GTG>GAG). The second most common
mutation is BRAFV600K substituting lysine for
valine, that represents 5–6% (GTG>AAG), followed by
BRAFV600R (GTG>AGG), an infrequent two-nucleotide
variation of the predominant mutation, BRAFV600′E2′
(GTG>GAA), and BRAF V600D (GTG>GAT) [Catalogue
of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC)[http://www
.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic]. The prevalence of BRAFV600K
has been reported as higher in some populations [19].

KRAS and BRAF deregulated MAPK signalling
KRAS gene mutations have been reported in
approximately 15–30% of human solid tumours, where
the MAP kinase (MAPK) pathway is found hyperactivated
[20, 180] (Figures 2–3). This mutation is the most

Figure 2: Mutant KRAS two way activation of the MAPK and PI3K pathway.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11754

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Mutant KRAS can induce either BRAF/BRAF or BRAF-CRAF dimerization of wild type proteins.

common abnormality of dominant oncogenes in human
tumours [21] and is a common event in the development
and progression of adenocarcinomas of the pancreas
(90%), colon (50%), thyroid (50%), bladder (50%), and
lung (30%). The RAS family of genes is of particular
interest in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
(HNSCC) because a mechanism for mutation (activation)
of KRAS by tobacco carcinogens has been suggested [22,
23]. Furthermore, RAS mutations have been observed
in other tobacco-related cancers, namely, pancreatic
carcinoma and non-small cell lung carcinoma [22]. The
frequency of KRAS mutations in colorectal cancer (CRC)
ranges from 24% to 50% depending on the study and the
sample source [24, 25].
Mutations in BRAF, the downstream effector of
KRAS are reported in up to 70% of melanoma cancer cell
lines [27] and they are highly prevalent in most common
cancers with poor prognosis such as malignant melanoma
[27, 28, 180] (Figures 4–5). Mutations in BRAF have been
reported in up to 60% of melanoma cases, between 40 to
70% of thyroid carcinomas, and up to 18% of CRCs [29].
Several studies have reported a range of frequencies
regarding BRAF mutations in CRC (4%–18%) [24, 27,
30, 31]. BRAF mutations have long been connected with
microsatellite instability (MSI) in sporadic colorectal
tumours, because mismatch repair-deficient tumours
have a very high incidence of BRAF mutations. mtBRAF
overexpression in a rat cell line of thyroid origin (PCCL3)
and human colon adenocarcinoma cells, induced
chromosomal instability (CIN) and MSI respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Less common is the presence of BRAF mutations in
micro-satellite stable (MSS) tumours, indicating poor
prognosis in the latter [31–34].
In cancer models: The relative significance of
BRAF and RAS mutations in human tumours have been
validated in many relevant cancer models. Mutations
in KRASG12V and subsequent overexpression in
human colon adenocarcinoma cells results in high ERK
activation. Since ERK can phosphorylate and regulate
functions of numerous cellular components, its constitutive
activation leads to cell transformation and activation
of the senescence programme at the same time. This
controversy suggests a diminished KRAS transforming
capability as compared to mutations occurring to another
downstream effector component BRAF [19]. In contrast,
the same mutation in HRAS isoform, is far more potent
in transforming human colon intermediate adenoma cells
with induction of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
(EMT) [26]. By itself, BRAFV600E mutation shows
a 138-fold transforming and oncogenic activity over
BRAFWT [27] and is a more potent oncogene than
KRASG12V [34].
Both KRAS and BRAF mutations fall into the
“driver mutation” classification, since it appears to be
one of the first events in the malignant transformation to
cancer [35]. However BRAF has also been characterised
as a “gatekeeper mutation” since the mutation that
occurs in the ATP binding site of the BRAF protein
kinases mediate resistance to small molecule inhibitors.
Gatekeeper mutations have also been detected in EGFR
11755

Oncotarget

Figure 4: MAPK pathway activation in response to BRAF mutation.

Figure 5: Mutant BRAF activation via protein dimerisation.
and PIK3CA proteins [36, 37]. Terms like “oncogene
addiction” have always characterized activating mutations
in BRAF and PIK3CA likewise inactivation of PTEN
gene. The cells become addicted to the consequences of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that mutation and grow under conditions where a normal
cell would terminate. Many malignant melanoma cells
become addicted to mutant BRAF for proliferation.
Likewise either mutation of PIK3CA or silencing of PTEN
11756

Oncotarget

and subsequent activation of AKT is a frequent form of
oncogene addiction in many tumour types [38, 39].

with other oncoproteins, as in the case of requirement
for interaction of PI3-kinase p110α with RAS in lung
tumour maintenance [64], or the study where single
copies of mutant KRAS and mutant PIK3CA cooperate
in immortalized human epithelial cells to induce tumour
formation [65].
The differential biological effect of RAS versus
BRAF oncogenes has been the topic of several studies.
In CRC, they differentially induce tumour cell properties
[34], global gene expression [66] and they differentially
regulate hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha and -2alpha [67].
On the other hand, both KRAS and BRAF oncogenes
inhibit colon epithelial polarity establishment through
up-regulation of c-myc [68], and both oncogenes promote
expression of dual-specificity phosphatase 4 (DUSP4/
MKP2) and of the stem cell marker CD133 [69, 70].
On the other hand, the role of BRAF oncogene
in tumourigenesis has been extensively described in
melanocytes. Early studies have indicated BRAFV600Eassociated senescence-like cell cycle arrest of human
naevi [71–73], which can later develop melanomas in
mice [74]. More recently, a mouse model of intestinal
carcinogenesis is driven by BRAFV600E oncogene, which
initiates an alternative pathway to colorectal cancer (CRC)
and progresses through a hyperplasia/adenoma/carcinoma
sequence [75]; or after BRAFV600E having induced
gastrointestinal crypt senescence [76].
In summary, KRAS and BRAF have key roles as
driver oncogenes in tumourigenesis in many different
types of tumours and depending on the tumour type they
can differentially regulate key pathways and genes to
provide differential biological effects. Last but not least,
they can co-operate with other genes for more profound
tumour phenotypes.

The RAS/RAF/MEK/MAPK signalling pathway
The RAS/RAF/MEK/MAPK signalling pathway
downstream of EGFR plays a significant role in
tumourigenesis.
In Cancer models: The identification of mutationally
activated KRAS and BRAF alleles in several tumour
models supports the importance of this signalling pathway
in cancer progression [27, 33]. Several reports have shown
that MAPK activation, owing to oncogenic RAS and
BRAF mutations, is likely to be involved in promoting
cellular invasiveness in different tumour models [40–43].
In sporadic CRC lesions, KRAS mutations are inversely
associated to the oncogenic BRAFV600E mutation [33,
44–46], suggesting that each mutation can induce similar
cellular effects and signal through the same pathway.
Presumably, in these tumour stages, BRAF mutations
do not occur concominantly with KRAS mutations
because their combined signalling is incompatible with
proliferation, as an excess ERK signalling could lead to
cell cycle arrest, differentiation, senescence or even cell
death, as shown in cancer models [47-50].

FUNCTIONAL ROLES OF RAS
AND BRAF ONCOGENES DURING
CANCER PROGRESSION AND
METASTASIS;STUDIES IN CANCER
MODELS
The significance of RAS oncogenes in cancer
progression has been shown in many studies involving
tumour models. HRASV12 can transform immortalized
cells, accompanied by activation of MEK and PI3K
pathways [51], whereas overexpression of the same
oncogene in normal cells causes cell cycle arrest and
senescence [52], which in other systems is associated
with a negative feedback signaling network [34, 53].
Moreover, regulated expression of RAS in cell and
animal models results in the appearance of transforming
and tumourigenic properties, which are dependent on
the tumour model context [54–57]. In pancreatic cancer,
KRAS promotes growth transformation and invasion of
immortalized human pancreatic cells by Raf and PI3K
signaling [58], while the same mutation in mice causes
early onset lung cancer [59]. Pathway activation between
EGFR family- and KRAS-dependent tumourigenesis are
comprehensively reviewed in two review papers [60,
61]. In CRC, oncogenic KRAS is required to maintain
changes in cytoskeletal organization, adhesion, and
motility of colon cancer cells [62]; however, differential
effects of oncogenic KRAS and N-RAS have been
reported on proliferation, differentiation and tumor
progression in the colon [63]. Oncogenic RAS co-operates
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DIFFERENTIAL IMPACT OF KRAS
VS BRAF ONCOGENES IN DISEASE
DIAGNOSIS, PROGNOSIS AND
OUTCOME
BRAF oncogene is a marker of poor prognosis in
Sporadic Colorectal Cancer (CRC)
Sporadic CRC development is a multi-step process
involving MSI, mutations in APC, SMAD4, KRAS, TP53
and b-catenin. KRAS and BRAF mutation frequency is
similar in stage II and III CRC.
KRAS: Oncogenic mutations affecting the RAS
GTPase molecular on/off switch, have been closely
associated with the development of sporadic CRC, in
about 35%-45% of the cases and codon 12 and 13 are two
hotspots, which account for about 95% of all mutation
types, with approximately 80% occurring in codon 12
and 15% in codon 13 [77, 78]. Location: KRAS-mutated
carcinomas are distributed in a bimodal pattern along the
proximal-distal axis of the colorectum, are frequently
11757

Oncotarget

associated with a residual polyp and show molecular
features distinct from other colorectal carcinomas, in
particular from tumours with neither BRAF nor KRAS
mutation. Compared with male subjects, female subjects
are more likely to have KRAS-mutated carcinoma in the
transverse colon and descending colon. No difference in
overall survival (OS) was observed in patients according
to their tumour KRAS mutation status in total [79].
Prognostic value: It is generally accepted that in stage
II-III CRC, the KRAS mutation status does not have a
major prognostic value [80]. Nevertheless, differences
in KRAS mutations at codons 12 and 13 may result
in different biological, biochemical and functional
consequences that could influence the prognosis of CRC.
KRAS codon 12 mutations (in particular, c.35G>T),
but not codon 13 mutations, are associated with inferior
survival in BRAF wild-type CRC. This data highlight
the importance of accurate molecular characterization
in CRC [81]. In another study, patients with p.G13Dmutated tumours have a worse OS in patients with
advanced and recurrent CRC than tumours with either
KRAS wt or bearing another KRAS mutations [82].
Likewise, KRAS splice variants: KRAS4A and KRAS4B
and their relationships with various clinico-pathological
characteristics in CRC have been investigated.
Interestingly, KRAS4A overexpression was associated
with a better OS, while overexpression of the KRAS4B
variant was significantly associated with larger tumour
size [83], Table 1.
BRAF: Mutations affecting the RAS effector, BRAF
oncogene, have been implicated only in 10% of the cases
of CRC and never in association with KRAS mutations
[33, 44, 84, 85]. So far, over 50 distinct mutations have
been identified in the BRAF gene. Of all BRAF activating
mutations, a point mutation results in a valine to glutamic
acid substitution a (T-A), also known as BRAFV600E, is
the most common change. In fact, this single mutation
dramatically increases BRAF activity and accounts for
more than 80% of all reported BRAF mutations in tumours
and implicates the constitutive activation of BRAF [89].
Location: BRAF mutated tumours are more likely to
develop on the right of the colon, and appear as poorly
differentiated adenocarcinomas or mucinous carcinomas,
as well as with peritoneal metastasis, compared with
left side CRC [78–90]. Likewise, a higher frequency of
MSI especially of the MSI-High phenotype, which is a
poor prognostic factor for CRC, has been reported to be
more prevalent in right side compared with left side in
the BRAF mutant tumours [91–93]. BRAF appears to be
a strong prognostic factor for OS, particularly in MS-L/S
stage II patients [80]. Prognostic value: BRAF mutations
emerged as an independent prognostic factor for both
progression free survival (PFS) and OS, comprising one
of the most powerful prognostic factors for advanced
and recurrent CRC [93]. BRAF mutation is likely to be
a convenient marker for the identification of a subset of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CRCs with distinctive clinical, pathological and molecular
features which may originate in hyperplastic polyps and
serrated adenomas, while increases the risk of mortality in
CRC patients by more than two-fold [95]. In addition, it
was revealed that BRAFV600E mutation also increases the
risk of mortality in melanoma patients by 1.7 times, while
its effect on papillary thyroid carcinoma still requires
further investigation [96], Table 1.
In summary, KRAS is a more frequent mutation
than BRAF in CRC mostly distributed along the proximaldistal axis of the colorectum, has little prognostic value
as compared to BRAF in overall patient survival as
compared to BRAF, the latter being a mutation more
likely to develop on the right of the colon. BRAF is highly
associated to metastasis, MSI events and appears to be a
strong prognostic factor for overall patient survival.

BRAF and not KRAS oncogenic mutations are
associated with MSI in CRC
Microsatellite instability is defined as small
deletions or expansions within short tandem repeats in
tumour DNA, which resulted from the inactivation of the
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system and characterised
by the absence of protein expression encoded by the
corresponding MMR genes (hMLH1, hMSH2, hMSH6 or
PMS2) [97–100]. Substantial progress has been made to
identify causes of chromosomal instability in colorectal
cells and to determine the effects of the different forms
of genomic instability on the biological and clinical
behaviour of colon tumours.
BRAF: In CRC tumours, BRAF mutations seem to
occur more frequently in cases with MSI characterised
by deficient DNA mismatch repair (dMMR) [32].
Approximately only 5% of microsatellite stable (MSS)
CRC cases also show mutations within BRAF gene [43,
44, 85, 100]. BRAF has been associated with dMMR
CRCs, with approximately 40% of MSI-high tumours
having a BRAF mutation compared to nearly 5% of MSS
tumours [91, 92]. Moreover, several studies suggest that
the BRAFV600E mutation occurs much more frequently
in MSI-High tumours in comparison with MSS tumours
[46, 103] and can be the cause of conversion of CIN
to MSI in colorectal tumour cells [34]. BRAF appears
to be strong prognostic factor for OS, particularly in
Microsatellite instability low (MSI-L) /stage II patients
[54], Table 1.
KRAS: Initially, KRAS mutations have been
observed in colorectal tumours independently of their
MSI status [104–106]. However, a more recent study
supports that even though KRAS tumour mutation status
has no major prognostic value for relapse-free and OS in
patients with stage II and III CRC treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy, it may actually have slightly significant
prognostic value when observed in the multivariate
analysis of the MSI-L/ and MSS subpopulation [80].
11758

Oncotarget

Table 1: Prognostic value of RAS and BRAF mutations.
Cancer type

Mutated gene

Model/Study level

Results

Reference
Dhomen et al.,
Cancer Cell,
2009 [202]

Melanoma

BRAFV600E

Mouse/preclinical

Large pigmented perianal
lesions,melanocytic lesions in
the eyelids, large pig mented
perianal epithelioid blue nevi

Colorectal stage
II/III

KRAS
BRAF

Human/ clinical
phase III

Not a major prognostic role for
overall survival
Roth et al., J Clin
Prognostic role for overall
Oncol, 2010 [203]
survival in MS-L/S tumors

mt Colorectal

BRAF

Human/clinical

Predictive biomarker for poor
prognosis in mCRC patients
Yuan et al., PLOS
undergoing anti-EGFR MoAbs One, 2013[204]
therapy

mt Colorectal

BRAFV600E

Human/clinical

Risk of mortality is increased
by 1.7 times in patients
bearing this mutation.

Safaee Arkedani
et al., Plos One
2012 [96]

Human/clinical

Poor prognosis for overall
survival compared to other
KRAS mutations or KRAS
wild type tumors

De Roock, JAMA
2010[82]

Human/clinical

BRAF mutation is a weak
prognostic factor but a strong
predictive factor
Better prognostic value
compared to the BRAF
mutation

Ekedahl et al., Br
J Dermatol.,
2013 [205]

Human/clinical

The presence of an NRAS
mutation correlates with
shorter survival from the
diagnosis of stage IV
melanoma.
The presence of either a
BRAF or NRAS mutation is
associated with an increased
risk of CNS involvement at
initial stage IV diagnosis.

Jakob et al,
Cancer, 2012 [206]

mt Colorectal

mt Melanoma

Melanoma
Stage IV

KRAS G13D

BRAFV600E
NRAS

NRAS
BRAF

Lung
adenocarcinoma
stage I

KRAS

Human/clinical

K-ras mutations were an
independent poor prognostic
Ohba et al., Surg
factor.Overall survival was
Today, 2013 [207]
significantly shorter in patients
with KRAS mutations

Papillary Thyroid
Carcinoma

BRAFV600E

Human

A high percentage of
Guerra et al.,
BRAF(V600E) alleles predicts J Clin Endocrinol
a poorer disease outcome.
Metab., 2012 [208]

At this study the different effect of a KRAS mutation in
MS-L/MSS and MSI-High tumours was consistent with
the concept that these are different forms of CRC [104,
107]. In a large study of the prognostic and predictive
value for patients deficient in MMR, KRAS and BRAF
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

provided additional useful risk stratification in rectal and
possibly CRC. Patients proficient in MMR and wildtype for KRAS have an intermediate prognosis whereas
those with KRAS mutations have the highest recurrence
rate [108], Table 1.
11759

Oncotarget

In summary, BRAF mutations appear to occur more
frequently in CRC tumours with MSI-high characterised
by dMMR, posing as strong OS prognostic factor, but
also presence of KRAS mutations in patients proficient in
MMR may suggest highest recurrence rate.

signatures can pinpoint interesting mechanistic differences
between these two frequently mutated oncogenes in CRC.
Regarding apoptosis and nucleotide excision repair,
oncogenic BRAF upregulates caspase 6 and downregulates
XPC and ERCC1, which is not the case for oncogenic
KRAS [124, 125].

Tracing origin of serrated adenomas with BRAF
and KRAS mutations

KRAS and BRAF response signatures

Emerging evidence supports the existence of an
alternative pathway of CRC development through the
serrated polyp. Molecular studies have indicated that
serrated polyps are likely to be clonal neoplasms, because
mutations in KRAS and p53, MSI and chromosome 1p
loss have been found in variable and low incidence
as compared to sporadic tubular adenomas. However,
mutations of adenomatous polyposis coli are uncommon
[109, 110]. Activation of the RAF/ RAS signal transduction
cascade by RAS mutations in serrated neoplasia is mainly
observed in hyperplastic (serrated) polyps, and their
occurrence in traditional type serrated adenoma is limited,
indicating that activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK/
MAP kinase pathway constitutes a highly significant event
in the pathogenesis of this group of lesions especially in
the early steps in the initiation of the serrated neoplasia
pathway [94, 101, 102]. Interestingly BRAF mutations
occurred only in polyps with the serrated architecture
and show a similar frequency with that in MSI CRC,
supporting that BRAF activation is pivotal in the serrated
pathway of CRC [113–116].

In a different study, independent gene expression
profile analysis of diverse oncogenic mutations in BRAF
or KRAS uncovered signatures of activated EGFR
pathway signalling [126]. While the combined oncogenic
pathway signature correctly predicted the presence of a
mutation in KRAS or BRAF known mutation carriers,
interestingly, more than two fold of the tumours that had
no oncogenic mutations in BRAF and KRAS were also
classified as oncogenic based on their gene expression
signatures indicating that many KRAS and BRAF wild
type patients share the same phenotype of an activated
EGFR pathway as the patients with at least one activating
mutation. From a biologic perspective, this finding
supports the notion that the poor outcome of tumours with
BRAF mutation is shared with some non-BRAF-mutated
tumours, suggesting that they have common biology
driving poor survival after relapse [127]. Moreover, as
shown in the original publication [128], KRAS mutation
status is an indicator of response with wild type patients
having a better outcome than patients with activating
mutations [126].

Oncogenic RAS and BRAF signatures in CRC

RAS VS BRAF ONCOGENES AND
TARGETED THERAPIES

Microarray analysis allows classification of cancers
to predict the prognosis or therapeutic responsiveness of
cancer patients [117–119, 120, 121]. In CRCs, microarray
analysis was used to divide samples into two groups based
on the existence of MSI, which is an important marker in
CRC [104]. Recently, BRAF mutant melanoma samples
were distinguished from BRAF wild-type samples [123],
suggesting that gene expression profiling according to
BRAF status might be useful for the identification of
molecular markers involved in RAS-RAS-MEK-ERKMAPK signalling. Identifying the model of activated
EGFR-signalling pathways in patients by studying gene
expression pattern can lead to the development of targeted
therapies or even may predict the response of individual
patients to EGFR pathway inhibitors.
In cancer models: BRAF and RAS oncogenes are
considered to induce cancer properties by regulating
similar signalling pathways. Microarray data derived
from these studies can validate and further interprete
data derived by analysis of clinical samples. Comparison
between BRAFV600E signature analyzed [124]
with another study where a RASV12 signature was
demonstrated [125], shows that their gene expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Prognostic Value of KRAS/ BRAF to therapies
in Sporadic CRC. KRAS and BRAF as
Pharmacological Targets
RAS and several of its downstream effectors,
including BRAF, have been shown to be commonly
mutated in a broad range of human cancers and biological
studies have confirmed that RAS pathway activation
promotes tumour initiation, progression and metastatic
spread in many contexts. Current efforts concentrate on
developing inhibitors of RAS and its key downstream
effectors, BRAF, MEK, ERK [127, 130] as well as on
the need for mutational testing of RAS/ BRAF before
proceeding to the clinical setting, Table 1.
RAS: RAS has been the obvious target for
anticancer therapy since is frequently mutated in human
cancer. Because of the high affinity between RAS–GTP
interaction, instead of a small molecule inhibitor, the nonselective farnesyl tranferase inhibitors were developed,
aiming to inhibit post-translational events. However
these proved to be unsuccessful due to redundant
regulation of KRAS by geranylgeranyl transferase
11760

Oncotarget

[131, 132]. In a recent study, a common mutant form
of KRAS, bearing a glycine- to- cysteine substitution
at codon 12 was successfully targeted. It is detected in
particularly high rates in lung cancer, occurring in 40%
of KRAS mutant lung tumours. This is the first piece
of work to report the development of small molecules
that irreversibly bind to a common oncogenic mutant,
KRASG12C and provides structure-based validation of a
new allosteric regulatory site on Ras that is targetable in a
mutant-specific manner [133].
BRAF: Alternative approaches involving inhibitors
of the key downstream effectors of RAS were therefore
pursued. RAF, MEK, and ERK, all downstream RAS
effectors, are cytosolic protein kinases that form a tiered
protein kinase cascade downstream of RAS [116]. The
limited activity-selectivity of Sorafenib (BAY 43–9006),
the first RAF kinase inhibitor, for the RAF kinases
[134–137] in tumours with BRAF mutation prompted
the development of second-generation RAF inhibitors
with greater selectivity for mutant BRAF. Sorafenib is
currently undergoing clinical evaluation for a variety
of additional cancers, including non-small cell lung
cancer [138]. The selective BRAF inhibitor Vemurafenib
(PLX4032/R7204) and its analog PLX4720, by far the
most advanced in clinical studies, have shown potent
antiproliferative effects in several preclinical models
specifically in cell lines harboring BRAFV600E mutations
[139, 140]. Phase II trials are currently enrolling patients
with metastatic papillary thyroid cancer for treatment with
vemurafenib, and with locally advanced disease using
vemurafenib as a neo adjuvant approach with which to
improve surgical resectability. GSK2118436 (Dabrafenib)
another ATP competitive BRAF inhibitor, has recently
shown a dramatic effect as single agent in patients with
metastatic melanoma and other solid tumours [143, 153],
and is currently under a phase I/II clinical trial [145].
Remarkably, Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib are currently
FDA approved drugs against BRAFV600E positive
metastatic melanomas [179].
The XL281 (BMS-908662) has shown modest
biological activity in advanced or mCRC with BRAF or
KRAS mutations, alone or in combination with cetuximab
[146, 147], Table 2.

to radioactive iodine therapy as a single agent therapy
(Hoffmann-LaR) and the GSK2118436 (Dabrafenib) in
advanced stage metastatic NSCLC with a BRAFV600E
mutation that progressed after platinum chemotherapy as
a single-agent therapy (GlaxoSmithKline), as well as in
BRAFV600E metastatic melanoma [153, 183] Figure 5/
Table 2.
In total, clinical trials using BRAF inhibitors
have indicated some encouraging results for patients
bearing BRAFV600 mutations, including an increase in
progression free and/or overall survival (clinicaltrials.
gov; NCT00941863, NCT00064350, NCT0115376,
Table 2). Similar results have been demonstrated
after treatment with MEK inhibitors, like trametinib
(GSK1120212) (NCT00687622, Table 2). The most
common side effects after those treatments include blood
components’ abnormalities, nausea, diarrhea, pyrexia,
anorexia and fatigue. In the case of vemurafenib and
dabrafenib treatment, some cases of squamous and
basal cell carcinoma were recorded. The combinatorial
treatment using a BRAF followed by a MEK inhibitor
in melanoma patients, though lacking a significant
difference in progression free or overall survival compared
to monotherapy, came with a partial or, in some cases,
even complete response of the patients (NCT01584648,
Table  2). The side effects of these treatments were
even milder than those in the monotherapy studied.
Surprisingly, a reverse treatment study, using a MEK
followed by a specific BRAF inhibitor, demonstrated some
encouraging results by reporting an increase in TTP (time
to progression) in melanoma patients [154].
However, the BRAFV600E mutation clearly differs
from wtBRAF in that V600E is independent of RAS
signalling and elevates basal kinase activity without
KRAS mutations, while wtBRAF is RAS-dependent and
are not mutually exclusive with KRAS mutations. As the
V600E mutation accounts for 80% of all BRAF mutations,
it explains the focus of search on the V600E-specific
molecular inhibitors [27, 155].

Combination of BRAF and MEK inhibitors
Because acquired resistance to BRAF inhibitors can
lead to sustained mitogen-activated protein/extracellular
signal–regulated kinase (MEK) activation in the presence
of compound, therefore the combination of BRAF
and MEK inhibitors may enhance growth inhibition.
This combination may also deter the outgrowth of
resistant melanoma cells by inhibiting the pathway
at two different levels. As such, the combination of
MEK 1/2 inhibitor GSK1120212 (GSK212) and BRAF
inhibitor GSK2118436 (GSK436) was first tested in
the phase I/II trials. The combination proved safe as no
squamous cell carcinoma and decreased frequency of
rash appeared, but only the randomized phase II section
yielded a high response rate [148]. Furthermore, two

Other RAF inhibitors
LGX818 was tested in advanced solid tumours with
BRAFV600E mutations, alone or in combination with a
MEK inhibitor [151]; PLX3603 in advanced solid tumours
with BRAF mutations (Hoffmann-La R). RAF265, an
oral highly selective inhibitor of RAF, including BRAF
and CRAF has been used in advanced solid tumours with
BRAFV600E mutations, alone or in combination with
the MEK inhibitor, MEK162 (Novartis Pharmaceuticals)
[152]; RO5185426 in unresectable or metastatic papillary
thyroid cancer harboring a BRAF mutation and resistant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11761

Oncotarget

Table 2: BRAF and downsteam MEK as therapeutic targets.
Inhibitor/
Antibody

Vemurafenib
(PLX4032)

Target

B-RAF,
BRAFV600E

Cancer type

Clinical phase

ClinicalTrials.
gov Identifier

Outcomes/ most
common side
effects

Malignant Melanoma

Phase II complete NCT01248936

No results posted

Solid tumors, multiple
myeloma

Phase II
recruiting

NCT01524978

No results posted

Colorectal cancer,
melanoma

Phase I complete NCT00405587

No results posted

Hepatocellular
carcinoma

Phase IV
recruiting

No results posted

NCT01203787

Advanced Solid tumors Phase I complete NCT00941863

Sorafenib (BAY B-RAF, C-RAF, Renal cell carcinoma
43-9006)
VEGFR,PDGFRb

NCT00478114

Phase II complete NCT00064350

1/3 of patients
showed an
increase in
overall survival/
Anemia, diarrhea,
dyspepsia,
nausea, fatigue,
leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia,
anorexia

Metastatic melanoma

Phase II active

Increase in overall
survival from
8-11 months/
Anemia, pyrexia,
arthralgea,
hyperkeratosis,
nausea, fatigue,
basal and
squamous cell
carcinoma

Solid tumors

Phase I complete NCT01262963

No results posted

Non small cell lung
carcinoma

Phase II
recruiting

NCT01336634

No results posted

Phase I recruiting NCT01436656

No results posted

Non-small cell lung
carcinoma

Dabrafenib
(GSK2118436)

Phase III
complete

Partial response
and progression
blockade in higher
doses/ Blood
components’
abnormalities

NCT01153763

B-RAF

LGX818

B-RAFV600E

Metastatic Melanoma

RAF265

B-RAF,VEGFR-2

Advanced or metastatic
Phase I active
Melanoma

XL281

B-RAF,
BRAFV600E,
C-RAF

Solid tumors

NCT00304525

No results posted

Phase I complete NCT00451880

No results posted
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11762

Oncotarget

Inhibitor/
Antibody
RO5212054
(PLX3603)

Target

Cancer type

Clinical phase

ClinicalTrials.
gov Identifier

Outcomes/ most
common side
effects

B-RAFV600

Solid tumors

Phase I active

NCT01143753

No results posted

Solid tumors,
Lymphoma

Phase I complete NCT00687622

Median
progressionfree survival
5–7 months/
dermatitis
acneiform,
diarrhoea

Oral cavity squamous
cell carcinoma

Phase II
recruiting

NCT01553851

No results posted

Pimasertib
MEK1/2
(MSC1936369B)

Solid tumors

Phase I active

NCT00982865

No results posted

Selumetinib
(AZD6244)

BRAF mutant cancers

Phase II active

NCT00888134

No results posted

NCT01584648

High percentage
of patients
showed either
complete or
partial response.
Progression
Free Survival of
approximately
9 months/ Not
serious side
effects. Most
common anaemia
and pyrexia

Trametinib
(GSK1120212)

Dabrafenib­
+Trametinib

MEK1/2

MEK1/2

BRAF+MEK1/2

Melanoma

Phase III active

randomized, phase 3 trials, have been initiated involving
patients with metastatic melanoma and Trametinib and
Dabrafenib Combination Therapy (ClinicalTrials.gov
numbers, NCT01584648 and NCT01597908). There
is also a three-part Phase 1/2 study to investigate the
safety, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and clinical
activity of trametinib (GSK1120212) and dabrafenib
(GSK2118436) when administered in combination with
the anti-EGFR antibody panitumumab in subjects with
BRAF V600E or V600K positive CRC (ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT01750918).
The combination of vemurafenib and the MEK
inhibitor cobimetinib (GDC-0973) has been tested in a
phase I trial with BRAF positive metastatic melanomas.
The combination prooved tolerable and adverse events
were manageable. Early data in eight vemurafenib-naïve
patients showed tumour reduction but safety rather than
efficacy was the purpose of this study and further research
on efficacy is warranted. Two dose levels were selected for
phase III investigation [149].
Initial results from a phase I/II trial of the
combination of LGX818 and the MEK inhibitor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MEK162 [150] in patients with BRAFV600-mutant
metastatic melanoma were recently reported. This trial
specifically allowed any BRAFV600 mutation. Initial
results are encouraging with a hight response rate, no
pyrexia, photosensitivity, or SCC have been reported
to date. A phase III trial of combined LGX818 and
MEK162 versus vemurafenib is planned.
In summary pharmacological attempts to inhibit
a mutant GTP-ase like KRAS were hardly successful
and only recently have provided new promise,
rendering inhibitors of the key downstream effectors of
RAS and targets the only alternative. Thereby, selective
BRAFV600E and MEK inhibitors were developed.

PI3K/PTEN/mTOR and RAS pathway
Apart from the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK/MNK
pathway, effective inhibitors specific for many of the key
components of the Ras/PI3K/PTEN/mTOR have also
been developed since both of these pathways are often
implicated in therapeutic resistance and interact with other
pathways [39].
11763

Oncotarget

Table 3: Most frequent codon mutations in BRAF and RAS genes and tissue localization
(COSMIC-September 2014)
Mutated gene

KRAS

HRAS

NRAS

BRAF

Most frequent codons
mutated

Most frequent mutations

12

G12D, G12V, G12C

Colorectal, pancreas,
lung, Haemato/
lymphoid

13

G13D

colorectal, prostate,
ovary, endometrium

61

Q61H

Colorectal, pancreas,
lung, haemato/
lymphoid, endometrium

12

G12V

Skin, thyroid, urinary
tract, upper

13

G13R

Skin, thyroid,
urinary tract, upper
aerodigestive tract, soft
tissue

61

Q61R

Skin, thyroid, urinary
tract, salivary gland,
aerodigestive tract

12

G12D

Haematolymphoid,
colorectal, skin

13

G13D

Haematolymphoid, skin

61

Q61R, Q61K, Q61L

Skin, thyroid,
haematolymphoid,
colorectal

600

V600E, V600K

Thyroid, Skin,
colorectal

Some colorectal tumours have both KRAS and
PI3K pathway mutations. Two major differences between
these KRAS and PI3K pathways have been observed.
First, KRAS can activate also other substrates and not
only PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, like BRAF/MEK/ERK
pathway, Rho and Ral pathways. Moreover, PI3K/AKT/
mTOR can be also regulated by other growth factor RAS
independent signals. RAS and PIK3CA, the regulatory
unit of PI3K, depending on the tissue and tumour, may or
may not be considered components of the same pathway,
although they can cross-talk in many cases. In general, if
both KRAS and PIK3CA are mutated, this can provide
an additive activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling
pathway. The presence of both mutations should be
considered for predicting therapeutic response to targeted
MEK of PI3K cancer therapeutics.
The p21-activated protein kinase 1 (PAK1) also
interacts with the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and the PI3K/
PTEN/Akt/mTOR cascades. PAK signaling molecules are
downstream effectors of Rho family GTPase and interact
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Most frequent tissues
affected

with both Raf and Akt. Interestingly, IPA3 specific PAK
inhibitor is able to inhibit the proliferation of melanoma
and CRC cells with mutations at KRAS or NRAS better,
than those containing mutations at BRAF. In contrast,
treatment of cells with IPA3 or ectopic expression of DN
PAK1 was required to sensitize RAS mutated cells to the
BRAF inhibitor GDC-0897 or the MEK inhibitor ZD6244
[156].

Target-specific cancer therapeutics: an
assessment for KRAS and BRAF mutations
KRAS and BRAF mutations lead to the constitutive
activation of EGFR signalling through the oncogenic RAS/
RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. In a previous study using MEK
(a downstream effector of KRAS and BRAF) inhibitors, it
was demonstrated that BRAF mutant cell lines responded
differently than those bearing mutant KRAS, raising
the possibility that KRAS and BRAF mutant cancer
cells might be differentially dependent on signalling
11764

Oncotarget

mechanisms that involve MEK, a scenario also supported
by the mutual exclusivity of these two mutations [157].
Treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
(mCRC) has remarkably improved the onset of targetspecific cancer therapeutics. For starters, three monoclonal
antibodies have been approved, including cetuximab
(Erbitux, ImClone) and panitumumab (Vectibix, Amgen),
which are monoclonal antibodies against EGFR and
bevacizumab (Avastin, Genentech), which is a monoclonal
antibody against vascular endothelial growth receptor
VEGFR. However, mutations in KRAS and BRAF genes
have been associated with primary resistance to antiEGFR monoclonal antibodies in CRC and targeted EGFR
therapy [158].
KRAS: Currently, KRAS is the only potential
biomarker for predicting the efficacy of anti-EGFR
therapies in CRC. Recent trials have shown that patients
with KRAS mutant tumours do not respond to anti-EGFR
agents (cetuximab/ panitumumab) because the activating
mutation occurs downstream from the target of anti-EGFR
therapy [51, 159]. It has been suggested that the resistance
mutations in KRAS and other genes were highly likely to
be present in a clonal subpopulation within the tumours
prior to the initiation of panitumumab therapy [159–162].
EGFR and KRAS: Approximately 30% to 50%
of colorectal tumours are known to have a mutated
(abnormal) KRAS, indicating that up to 50% of patients
with CRC might respond to anti-EGFR antibody therapy,
they only have a reasonable opportunity to derive clinical
benefit from the therapy. In addition, about 40% to 60%
of patients with wild-type KRAS tumours do not respond
[163]. It is highly recommended that all patients with
mCRC who are candidates for anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibody therapy have their tumours tested for KRAS
mutation [77, 88, 164–167].
Nonetheless, a recent report suggested that the use
of cetuximab or bevacizumab as a first-line therapy was
associated with survival benefit among patients with
p.G13D-mutated tumours, whereas KRAS codon 12
mutations were associated with resistance to cetuximab
among chemotherapy-refractory CRC patients [81, 82,
169]. On the other hand, even with KRAS mutational
testing, there are still many patients with KRAS wild-type
tumours that do not respond to treatment with cetuximab
or panitumumab [77, 88, 165, 169]. This suggests that
other factors such as alterations in other EGFR effectors,
including members of the RAS-mitogen activated protein
kinase (MAPK) or phosphoinositide 3-kinase (P13K)
pathways, could drive resistance to anti-EGFR therapy [30].
Moreover, previous reports have shown that RAS mutations
are not found in lung cancers from patients with acquired
resistance to EGFR TKIs [150, 173]. On the other hand,
mutations in NRAS, a RAS family member and MEK1
have been shown to mediate acquired resistance to the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mutant BRAF kinase inhibitor, vemurafenib, in melanoma
cell lines [171, 172].
BRAF: Although the presence of mutated BRAF,
which is present in 5% to 10% of colon tumours, highlights
the potential adverse prognostic factors for stage II and III
disease and patients across all disease stages [90, 174],
patients with BRAF-mutated tumours do not experience
a survival benefit from treatment with anti-EGFR mAb.
None of the responders have BRAF mutations and show
prolonged progression-free and OS compared with BRAF
mutant patients [175, 204] Table 1.
EGFR and BRAF: Mutations in BRAFV600E
predict a lack of response in wild-type KRAS mCRC
treated with anti-EGFR MoAbs as well as poor prognosis.
It is suggested that BRAF mutation may be used as an
additional biomarker for the selection of mCRC patients
who might benefit from anti-EGFR MoAbs therapy [30,
128, 175, 176]. Similarly, a retrospective pooled analysis of
the two pivotal cetuximab studies demonstrated that the best
treatment outcomes were observed in patients with both
KRAS wild-type and BRAF wild-type tumours, but there
were too few patients with BRAF mutations to determine
whether BRAF mutation status alone could predict response
to therapy [167]. Although results from these and other
retrospective studies are compelling, there are as yet no
prospective data that can help define the role of BRAF
status in response to EGFR inhibitor therapy. Combined
mutational analysis of both KRAS and BRAF could be used
to prospectively select mCRC patients eligible for EGRFtargted monoclonal antibody treatment, Table 2. Likewise,
BRAF mutations have also been found in patients with
acquired resistance to imatinib in KIT/PDGFRα-mutant
gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) [177].
In summary, the possibility that in KRAS and BRAF
mutant cancer cells differential signalling mechanisms
that involve MEK supported the mutual exclusivity of
these two mutations, lead to the target-specific cancer
therapeutics in the form of monoclonal antibodies against
EGF and VEGF receptors. So far KRAS is the only
potential biomarker for predicting the efficacy of antiEGFR therapies in CRC, since KRAS mutant tumours do
not respond to anti-EGFR agents. Presence or absence of
mutant BRAF was not correlated to any survival benefit
from treatment with anti-EGFR mAb.
Taking the above under consideration, patients
with specific BRAF and KRAS mutations who failed
initial treatment, should be further screened for other
mutations within the same pathways, both in the same
or in additional genes like PI3KCA, MEK and EGFR.
According to the test results and taking also in account
the disease stage and other clinical parameters, different
approaches could be performed, including combinatorial
drug treatments or combinations between immunotherapy
or chemotherapy and/or drug treatment.

11765

Oncotarget

Vemurafenib (PLX4032) and BRAF oncogene

such as GSK2118436 (Dabrafenib), and are closely
monitored in the melanoma field. GSK2118436 is
another ATP competitive, reversible inhibitor of mutant
BRAFV600E, as well as V600D/K and V600G kinases.
GSK2118436 is a potent BRAF inhibitor with high
selectivity for mutant BRAF compared with the wild-type
protein. This drug inhibits intratumoural phosphorylated
ERK levels, indicating MAPK pathway suppression.
Interestingly, the BRAF and MEK inhibitor combination
(GSK2118436 and GSK1120212) demonstrated a potential
reduction in drug resistance in melanoma [187], (Table 2).

PLX4032 and its analogs like PLX4720 have
demonstrated selectivity between highly homologous
wild-type BRAF and RAF1, and some selectivity for
BRAFV600E compared to non-mutated BRAF. These
compounds inhibit the inactive form of the MAP kinase
domain by firmly anchoring in the ATP-binding site of
BRAFV600E mutant activated cells Subsequent effects
on proliferation and apoptosis are also entirely restricted to
cells harboring BRAF mutations [178]. Nevertheless, BRAF
mutations select patients with advanced melanoma for
treatment with anti-BRAF agents (vemurafenib-PLX4032
and dabrafenib-GSK2118436). Addition of a phenyl ring
for pharmacokinetic reasons to PLX4720, gave rise to
vemurafenib, an FDA approved drug against BRAFV600E
melanomas [179]. The collective data strongly suggest
that PLX4720 initiates an apoptotic response only in cells
with the V600E mutation. The same inhibitor unexpectedly
activated the same MAPK pathway in KRAS mutant cells.
In these cells, PLX4720, increase pMEK and pERK levels
and therefore should be avoided in cancers caused by RAS
mutants, alternatively, MEK inhibitors may be a more
appropriate choice of therapeutic agent. Regardless of the
agent chosen, it will probably need to be used in combination
with another drug to effectively treat RAS-mutant tumours
[180]. In melanoma models, PLX4720 induces cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis exclusively in BRAFV600E-positive
cells. It should be noted that in melanoma, BRAF and NRAS
mutants can in some cases coexist in the same tumour in
contrast with colorectal cancer [44, 181, 182]. A high
proportion of patients with metastatic melanoma have shown
clinical responses when treated with an inhibitor against the
BRAFV600E [183], (Table 2).
Nevertheless, soon after the success story of
PLX4032, a new resistance mechanism against BRAF
inhibitor vemurafenib (PLX4032) was discovered. Cells
become resistant to vemurafenib (PLX4032) with different
mechanisms, most notably they express a 61-kDa variant
form of BRAFV600E, p61BRAFV600E, which lacks exons
4–8, a region that encompasses the RAS-binding domain. In
cells in which p61BRAFV600E is expressed endogenously or
ectopically, ERK signalling is resistant to the RAF inhibitor
[184, 209], (Figure 6). Other resistance mechanisms include
upregulation of RTK or NRAS [171]. It is of interest that
BRAFV600E mutant colorectal cancers are non responsive to
PLX4032 due to, among other reasons, a feedback activation
of EGFR [185]. Parallel inhibition of other oncogenic
pathways like PI3K, can sensitise resistant BRAFV600E
colorectal tumour cells to PLX4720 treatment [186].

MEK inhibitor CI-1040 and BRAF
The most frequent genetic abnormalities in ovarian
carcinoma are mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and p53.
Mutational status was correlated with growth inhibition
and apoptosis induction by the MEK inhibitor CI-1040 that
prevented activation of the downstream target, ERK1/2.
CI-1040 significantly reduced cellular proliferation and
induced apoptosis in cell lines with either KRAS or
BRAF mutations in comparison with cell lines with wildtype sequences. The RAS–RAF–MEK–ERK pathway
may play an important role in ovarian carcinogenesis but
not in endometrial carcinogenesis. Similarly, alternative
pathways for ERK activation, such as crosstalk with the
PI3K pathway, exist in endometrial cancer but are rare in
ovarian cancer [188] (Table 2).
Thus, the prognostic or predictive relevance of the
KRAS and BRAF genotype in CRC remains controversial
despite several investigations. The significance of KRAS/
BRAF mutations as predictive or prognostic biomarkers
should be taken into consideration when selecting a
KRAS/ BRAF screening assay. The availability of
companion biomarkers should improve drug efficacy,
decrease toxicity, and lead to a more individualized
approach to cancer treatment.

Oncogene induced senescence or organismal aging
It is common knowledge that cancer is an age-related
disease. Overexpression of oncogenic RAS (HRAS or
KRAS V12) or its downstream effector RAF can lead to
senescent phenotypes called oncogene-induced senescence
(OIS) [189, 190]. Cellular senescence is strongly correlated
to organismal aging with the main difference between cancer
and aging to be that the control of cell cycle is disabled in
cancer [191]. Numerous agents targeting mTOR, PI3K,
growth factor receptors, and related tyrosine kinases,
RAS, RAF, and B-RAF, S6K, MEK1/2 have been tested
to treat cancer. While RAF inhibitors are effective against
melanomas with BRAFV600E mutations, they may induce
keratoacanthomas and cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas
by selecting for RAS-mutated cells. Intriguingly, only
metformin, which affects the mTOR pathway, has been
reported to not only reduce not only the risk of cancer, but of
other age-related diseases as well [192, 193].

The impact of KRAS vs BRAF oncogenes on
their differential response to other BRAF and
MEK inhibitors
GSK2118436 inhibitor and BRAF: Other mutant
BRAF inhibitors are also gaining momentum clinically,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11766

Oncotarget

Figure 6: RAS pathway inhibitors and resistance mechanisms. [160, 161, 180]. (A) Inhibitors of the key downstream effectors

of RAS. All downstream RAS effectors are cytosolic protein kinases that form a tiered protein kinase cascade downstream of RAS. (B) The
resistance mechanism against BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib (PLX4032).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11767

Oncotarget

Previously, the mTOR was the only pathway known
to be involved in acquiring classic markers of a senescent
phenotype, including cyclin D1 accumulation. Recent
studies have revealed an additional MEK/ERK pathway
that is required for the acquisition of at least one hallmark
of senescence: hyper-accumulation of cyclin D1 [194].

tumourigenesis [199]. For these reasons, the development
of sensitive, reliable, and cost-effective methods for
mutation testing is of paramount importance. Genotyping
for ‘driver mutations’ is becoming increasingly central to
oncology care and currently in United States performed
using a multiplexed PCR-based SNaPshot assay plus
FISH for ALK translocations for NSCLC patients as part
of standard care named Competitive Amplification of
Differentially Melting Amplicons (CADMA) [200]. While
widely agreed that it is important to identify patients
with EGFR and ALK given the availability of effective
therapeutics, it is also noteworthy that in a short time
frame a large amount of patients will be diagnosed for less
common mutations like BRAF, PIK3CA and HER2, which
are also have relevant candidate targeted therapies [201].

DETECTION OF KRAS AND BRAF
MUTATIONS BY DNA SEQUENCING
Screening and identification of KRAS mutation
status is determined via polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification followed by dideoxy DNA sequencing or/
and Pyrosequencing of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
block, unstained slides, or fresh snap frozen biopsy tissue
for the presence of a mutation in codons 12, 13, 61 or
146 of the KRAS gene on chromosome 12. Likewise,
BRAFV600E mutation status is also determined via
PCR analysis of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissue. Dideoxy DNA sequencing is the most commonly
used sequencing method; however, it may not detect a
minority of mutant sequences present in a background
of abundant wild-type DNA sequence [174]. Digital
PCR described by Vogelstein and Kinzler [195], does
offer the capability of quantifying mutant allele very
accurately. However, its application to a large-scale
study is currently limited because of the cost and labor
intensive nature of this technology. Alternatively, the
array-based KRAS mutation detection system described
by Prix et al. [196], uses peptide nucleic acid-mediated
PCR clamping followed by biochip array hybridization.
Nonetheless, this method may fail to detect some rare
mutations. Moreover, the applicability of this technique
to paraffin-embedded tissue and its cost effectiveness and
limited throughput remain important issues. Compared
with dideoxy sequencing, Pyrosequencing assay offers
simplicity and cost effectiveness, particularly in the
setting of large-scale projects and clinical assays [197].
Pyrosequencing has been also reported as a very sensitive
method able to detect genetic heterogeneity in tumours
[198]. As an alternative to Pyrosequencing, laser capture
microdissection technique can collect pure population of
tumour cells to increase sensitivity for DNA sequencing.
However, performing laser capture micro dissection is
time consuming and labor intensive and yields less of
DNA than manual tissue dissection, thereby limiting the
amount of biomarkers that can be investigated.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
Frequently reported evidence from experimental
and clinical studies has demonstrated that signalling by
KRAS and BRAF oncogenes can present similarities but
also differential oncogene effects. Therefore differential
KRAS versus BRAF pathways, their components and
biological effects have attracted much attention as
promising targets and markers for targeted therapeutics.
In detail:
KRAS, a more frequent mutation than BRAF in
CRC is mostly distributed along the proximal-distal axis
of the colorectum, has little prognostic value as compared
to BRAF in overall patient survival and a mutation more
likely to develop on the right of the colon. BRAF is highly
associated to metastasis, MSI events and appears to be a
strong prognostic factor for overall patient survival.
BRAF mutations seem to occur more frequently in
CRC tumours with MSI-high characterised by dMMR, and
poses as strong OS prognostic factor, however presence
of KRAS mutations may suggest highest recurrence rate.
Pharmacological attempts to inhibit a mutant GTPase like KRAS were hardly successful and only recently
have provided new promise, rendering inhibitors of the
key downstream effectors of RAS and targets the only
alternative. Thereby, selective BRAFV600E and MEK
inhibitors were developed.
The possibility that in KRAS and BRAF mutant
cancer cells differential signalling mechanisms that
involve MEK, supported the mutual exclusivity of
these two mutations, lead to the target-specific cancer
therapeutics in the form of monoclonal antibodies against
EGFR and VEGF receptors. So far KRAS is the only
potential biomarker for predicting the efficacy of antiEGFR therapies in CRC, since KRAS mutant tumours do
not respond to anti-EGFR agents. Presence or absence of
mutant BRAF was not correlated to any survival benefit
from treatment with anti-EGFR mAb.

Clinical testing for KRAS and BRAF mutations
Other clinical applications also require highly
sensitive mutation detection, for instance, the monitoring
of minimal residual disease after treatment, monitoring
of relapse caused by the emergence of resistance
mutations, and identification of somatic mutations in early

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11768

Oncotarget

The prognostic or predictive relevance of the KRAS
and BRAF genotype in CRC remains controversial despite
several investigations. The significance of KRAS/ BRAF
mutations as predictive or prognostic biomarkers should be
taken into consideration when selecting a KRAS/ BRAF
screening assay. The availability of companion biomarkers
should improve drug efficacy, decrease toxicity, and lead
to a more individualized approach to cancer treatment.
However, many questions remain to be answered:
such as the tumour specific per oncogene effects, the role
of each oncogene in tumour heterogeneity, as well as
resistance mechanisms to drugs targeting either oncogene
or components of the so-called RAS pathway.
Furthermore cross-talk between RAS and BRAF
oncogenes with other mutated pathways like PI3K and
APC will provide new molecular mechanisms and will
assist the design of efficient rational combinatorial anticancer protocols for personalised therapy.

in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2008; 26:1626–34.
8.	 Edkins S, O’Meara S, Parker A, Stevens C, Reis M,
Jones S, Greenman C, Davies H, Dalgliesh G, Forbes S,
et al. Recurrent KRAS codon 146 mutations in human
colorectal cancer. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006; 5:928–32.
9.	 Feig LA, Cooper GM. Relationship among guanine
nucleotide exchange, GTP hydrolysis, and transforming
potential of mutated ras proteins. Mol Cell Biol. 1988;
8:2472–8.
10.	 Loupakis F, Ruzzo A, Cremolini C, Vincenzi B, Salvatore L,
Santini D, Masi G, Stasi I, Canestrari E, Rulli  E, et al.
KRAS codon 61, 146 and BRAF mutations predict
resistance to cetuximab plus irinotecan in KRAS codon 12
and 13 wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer.
2009; 101:715–21.
11.	 Janakiraman M, Vakiani E, Zeng Z, Pratilas CA, Taylor BS,
Chitale D, Halilovic E, Wilson M, Huberman K, Ricarte
Filho JC, et al. Genomic and biological characterization
of exon 4 KRAS mutations in human cancer. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:5901–11.

Conflict of interest
none

12.	 Haigis KM, Kendall KR, Wang Y, Cheung A, Haigis
MC, Glickman JN, Niwa-Kawakita M, Sweet-Cordero A,
Sebolt-Leopold J, Shannon KM, et al. Differential effects of
oncogenic K-Ras and N-Ras on proliferation, differentiation
and tumor progression in the colon. Nat Genet. 2008;
40:600–8.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by FP6 and FP7
European Union grants, as well as by grants from the
General Secretariat of Research and Technology (GSRT)
SINERGASIA “POM” 09SYN-11-675 and KRIPIS
“STHENOS” MIS 447985.

13.	 Castellano E, Santos E. Functional specificity of ras
isoforms: so similar but so different. Genes Cancer. 2011;
2:216–31.

REFERENCES

14.	 Smit VT, Boot AJ, Smits AM, Fleuren GJ, Cornelisse CJ,
Bos JL. KRAS codon 12 mutations occur very frequently
in pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988;
16:7773–82.

1.	 Prior IA, Hancock JF. Ras trafficking, ­localization and
compartmentalized signalling. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2012;
23:145–53.

15.	 Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer
Res. 1989; 49:4682–9.

2.	 Mercer KE, Pritchard CA. Raf proteins and cancer: B-Raf
is identified as a mutational target. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2003; 1653:25–40.

16.	 Almoquera C, Shibata D, Forrester K, Martin J, Arnheim N,
Perucho M. Most human carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas
contain mutant c-K-ras genes. Cell. 1988; 53:549–54.

3.	 Yarden Y, Sliwkowski MX. Untangling the ErbB signalling
network. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 2:127–37.

17.	 Velho S, Oliveira C, Ferreira A, Ferreira AC, Suriano G,
Schwartz S Jr, Duval A, Carneiro F, Machado JC,
HamelinZR, et al. The prevalence of PIK3CA mutations in
gastric and colon cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2005; 4:1649–54.

4.	 Avruch J, Khokhlatchev A, Kyriakis JM, Luo Z, Tzivion G,
Vavvas D, Zhang XF. Ras Activation of the Raf Kinase:
Tyrosine Kinase Recruitment of the MAP Kinase Cascade.
Recent Prog Horm Res. 2001; 56:127–55.

18.	 Li HT, Lu YY, An YX, Wang X, Zhao QC. KRAS, BRAF
and PIK3CA mutations in human colorectal cancer:
relationship with metastatic colorectal cancer. Oncol Rep.
2011; 25:1691–7.

5.	 Fernández-Medarde A, Santos E. Ras in cancer and
developmental diseases. Genes Cancer. 2011; 2:344–58.
6.	 Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ,
O’Callaghan CJ, Tu D, Tebbutt NC, Simes RJ, Chalchal H,
Shapiro JD, Robitaille S, et al. K-ras mutations and benefit
from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2008; 359:1757–65.

19.	 Long GV, Menzies AM, Nagrial AM, Haydu LE,
Hamilton  AL, Mann GJ, Hughes TM, Thompson JF,
Scolyer RA, Kefford RF. Prognostic and clinicopathologic
associations of oncogenic BRAF in metastatic melanoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:1239–46.

7.	 Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M, Van Cutsem E, Siena S,
Freeman DJ, Juan T, Sikorski R, Suggs S, Radinsky R,
et al. Wild-type KRAS is required for panitumumab efficacy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20.	 Hoshino R, Chatani Y, Yamori T, Tsuruo T, Oka H, Yoshida
O, Shimada Y, Ari-i S, Wada H, Fujimoto J. Constitutive
11769

Oncotarget

activation of the 41-/43-kDa mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway in human tumors. Oncogene.
1999; 18:813–22.

chromosomal instability in thyroid PCCL3 cells. Cancer
Res. 2005; 65:2465–73.
33.	 Rajagopalan H, Bardelli A, Lengauer C, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE. Tumorigenesis: RAF/RAS
oncogenes and mismatch-repair status. Nature. 2002; 418:934.

21.	 Prior IA, Lewis PD, Mattos CA. A comprehensive survey
of Ras mutations in cancer. Cancer Res. 2012; 75:2457–67.
22.	 Yarbrough WG, Shores C, Witsell DL, Weissler MC,
Fidler  ME, Gilmer TM. ras mutations and expression in
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Laryngoscope.
1994; 104:1337–47.

34.	 Oikonomou E, Makrodouli E, Evagelidou M, Joyce  T,
Probert L, Pintzas A. BRAF(V600E) efficient transformation and induction of microsatellite instability versus
KRAS(G12V) induction of senescence markers in human
colon cancer cells. Neoplasia. 2009; 11:1116–31.

23.	 Belinsky SA, Devereux TR, Maronpot RR, Stoner GD,
Anderson MW. Relationship between the formation of
promutagenic adducts and the activation of the K-ras
protooncogene in lung tumours from A/J mice treated with
nitrosamines. Cancer Res. 1989; 49:5305–11.

35.	 Long GV, Menzies AM, Nagrial AM, Haydu LE,
Hamilton  AL, Mann GJ, Hughes TM, Thompson  JF,
Scolyer RA, Kefford RF. Prognostic and clinicopathologic
associations of oncogenic BRAF in metastatic melanoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:1239–46.

24.	 Bishehsari F, Mahdavinia M, Malekzadeh R, Verginelli F,
Catalano T, Sotoudeh M, Bazan V, Agnese V, Esposito DL,
De Lellis L, et al. Patterns of K-ras mutation in colorectal
carcinomas from Iran and Italy (a Gruppo Oncologico
dell’Italia Meridionale study): influence of microsatellite
instability status and country of origin. Ann Oncol. 2006;
17:vii91–6.

36.	 Whittaker S, Kirk R, Hayward R, Zambon A, Viros A,
Cantarino N, Affolter A, Nourry A, Niculescu-Duvaz D,
Springer C, et al. Gatekeeper mutations mediate resistance
to BRAF-targeted therapies. Sci Transl Med. 2010;
2:35ra41.
37.	 Hafsi S, Pezzino FM, Candido S, Ligresti G, Spandidos DA,
Soua Z, McCubrey JA, Travali S, Libra M. Gene alterations
in the PI3K/PTEN/AKT pathway as a mechanism of
drugresistance. Int J Oncol. 2012; 40:639–44.

25.	 Calistri D, Rengucci C, Seymour I, Lattuneddu A,
Polifemo AM, Monti F, Saragoni L, Amadori D. Mutation
analysis of p53, K-ras, and BRAF genes in colorectal cancer
progression. J Cell Physiol. 2005; 204:484–8.

38.	 Weinstein IB, Joe A. Oncogene Addiction. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:3077–80.

26.	 Roberts ML, Drosopoulos KG, Vasileiou I, Stricker  M,
Taoufik E, Maercker C, et al. Microarray analysis of the
differential transformation mediated by Kirsten and Harvey
Ras oncogenes in a human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell
line. Int J Cancer. 2006; 118:616–27.

39.	 McCubrey JA, Steelman LS, Chappell WH, Abrams SL,
Montalto G, Cervello M, Nicoletti F, Fagone P,
Malaponte G, Mazzarino MC, et al. Mutations and
deregulation of Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/PTEN/Akt/
mTOR cascades which alter therapy response. Oncotarget.
2012; 3:954–87.

27.	 Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S,
Clegg S, Teague J, Woffendin H, Garnett MJ, Bottomley W,
et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature.
2002; 417:949–54.

40.	 Fujimoto K, Sheng H, Shao J, Beauchamp RD.
Transforming growth factor-beta1 promotes invasiveness
after cellular transformation with activated Ras in intestinal
epithelial cells. Exp Cell Res. 2001; 266:239–49.

28.	 Brose MS, Volpe P, Feldman M, Kumar M, Rishi I,
Gerrero R, Einhorn E, Herlyn M, Minna J, Nicholson A,
et al. BRAF and RAS mutations in human lung cancer and
melanoma. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:6997–7000.

41.	 Sumimoto H, Miyagishi M, Miyoshi H, Yamagata S,
Shimizu A, Taira K, Kawakami Y. Inhibition of growth
and invasive ability of melanoma by inactivation of
mutated BRAF with lentivirus-mediated RNA interference.
Oncogene. 2004; 23:6031–9.

29.	 Cohen Y, Xing M, Mambo E, Guo Z, Wu G, Trink B,
Beller U, Westra WH, Ladenson PW, Sidransky D. BRAF
mutation in papillary thyroid carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2003; 95:625–7.

42.	 Melillo RM, Castellone MD, Guarino V, De Falco V,
Cirafici AM, Salvatore G, Caiazzo F, Basolo F, Giannini R,
Kruhoffer M, et al. The RET/PTC-RAS-BRAF linear
signaling cascade mediates the motile and mitogenic
phenotype of thyroid cancer cells. J Clin Invest. 2005;
115:1068–81.

30.	 Barault L, Veyrie N, Jooste V, Lecorre D, Chapusot  C,
Ferraz JM, Lièvre A, Cortet M, Bouvier AM,
Rat P, et al. Mutations in the RAS-MAPK, PI(3)K
(phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase) signaling network
correlate with poor survival in a population-based series of
colon cancers. Int J Cancer. 2008; 122:2255–9.
31.	 Samowitz WS, Sweeney C, Herrick J, Albertsen H, Levin TR,
Murtaugh MA, Wolff RK, Slattery ML. Poor survival
associated with the BRAF V600E mutation in microsatellitestable colon cancers. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:6063–9.

43.	 Makrodouli E, Oikonomou E, Koc M, Andera L, Sasazuki T,
Shirasawa S, Pintzas A. BRAF and RAS oncogenes regulate
Rho GTPase pathways to mediate migration and invasion
properties in human colon cancer cells: a comparative study.
Mol Cancer. 2011; 10:118.

32.	 Mitsutake N, Knauf JA, Mitsutake S, Mesa JrC, Zhang L,
Fagin JA. Conditional BRAFV600E expression induces
DNA synthesis, apoptosis, dedifferentiation, and

44.	 Yuen ST, Davies H, Chan TL, Ho JW, Bignell GR, Cox C,
Stephens P, Edkins S, Tsui WW, Chan AS, et al. Similarity
of the phenotypic patterns associated with BRAF and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11770

Oncotarget

KRAS mutations in colorectal neoplasia. Cancer Res. 2002;
62:6451–5.

and invasion of immortalized human pancreatic cells by Raf
and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling. Cancer Res.
2007; 67:2098–106.
59.	 Johnson L, Mercer K, Greenbaum D, Bronson RT,
Crowley D, Tuveson DA, Jacks T. Somatic activation of
the K-ras oncogene causes early onset lung cancer in mice.
Nature. 2001; 410:1111–6.

45.	 Oliveira C, Pinto M, Duval A, Brennetot C, Domingo E,
Espín E, Armengol M, Yamamoto H, Hamelin R, Seruca R,
et al. BRAF mutations characterize colon but not gastric cancer
with mismatch repair deficiency. Oncogene. 2003; 22:9192–6.
46.	 Wang L, Cunningham JM, Winters JL, Guenther JC,
French AJ, Boardman LA. BRAF mutations in colon cancer
are not likely attributable to defective DNA mismatch
repair. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:5209–12.
47.	 Marshall MS. Ras target proteins in eukaryotic cells.
FASEB J. 1995; 9:1311–8.
48.	 Sewing A, Wiseman B, Lloyd AC, Land H. High-intensity
Raf signal causes cell cycle arrest mediated by p21Cip1.
Mol Cell Biol. 1997; 17:5588–97.
49.	 Woods D, Parry D, Cherwinski H, Bosch E, Lees E,
McMahon M. Raf-induced proliferation or cell cycle
arrest is determined by the level of Raf activity with arrest
mediated by p21Cip1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997; 17:5598–611.
50.	 Kerkhoff E, Rapp UR. Cell cycle targets of Ras/Raf
signalling. Oncogene. 1998; 17:1457–62.
51.	 White MA, Nicolette C, Minden A, Polverino A, Van Aelst L,
Karin M, Wigler MH. Multiple Ras functions can contribute to
mammalian cell transformation. Cell. 1995; 80:533–41.
52.	 Serrano M, Lin A, McCurrach M, Beach D, Lowe S.
Oncogenic ras Provokes Premature Cell Senescence
Associated with Accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cell.
1997; 88:593–602.
53.	 Courtois-Cox S, Genther Williams SM, Reczek EE,
Johnson  BW, McGillicuddy LT, Johannessen CM,
Hollstein PE, MacCollin M, Cichowski K. A negative
feedback signaling network underlies oncogene-induced
senescence. Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:459–72.
54.	 Tuveson DA, Shaw AT, Willis NA, Silver DP, Jackson EL,
Chang S, Mercer KL, Grochow R, Hock H, Crowley D,
et al. Endogenous oncogenic K-ras(G12D) stimulates
proliferation and widespread neoplastic and developmental
defects. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5:375–87.
55.	 Guerra C, Mijimolle N, Dhawahir A, Dubus P, Barradas M,
Serrano M, Campuzano V, Barbacid M. Tumor induction
by an endogenous K-ras oncogene is highly dependent on
cellular context. Cancer Cell. 2003; 4:111–20.
56.	 Konishi H, Karakas B, Abukhdeir AM, Lauring J, Gustin JP,
Garay JP, Konishi Y, Gallmeier E, Bachman  KE, Park
BH. Knock-in of mutant K-ras in nontumorigenic human
epithelial cells as a new model for studying K-ras mediated
transformation. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:8460–7.
57.	 Vartanian S, Bentley C, Brauer MJ, Li L, Shirasawa S,
Sasazuki T, Kim JS, Haverty P, Stawiski E, Modrusan Z,
Waldman T, et al. Identification of mutant K-Ras-dependent
phenotypes using a panel of isogenic cell lines. J Biol
Chem. 2013; 288:2403–13.
58.	 Campbell PM, Groehler AL, Lee KM, Ouellette MM,
Khazak V, Der CJ. K-Ras promotes growth transformation

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60.	 Zhou Y, Rideout WM 3rd, Zi T, Bressel A, Reddypalli S,
Rancourt R, Woo JK, Horner JW, Chin L, Chiu MI.
Chimeric mouse tumor models reveal differences in
pathway activation between ERBB family- and KRASdependent lung adenocarcinomas. Nat Biotechnol. 2010;
28:71–8.
61.	 Suda K, Tomizawa K, Mitsudomi T. Biological and
clinical significance of KRAS mutations in lung cancer:
an oncogenic driver that contrasts with EGFR mutation.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2010; 29:49–60.
62.	 Pollock CB, Shirasawa S, Sasazuki T, Kolch W, Dhillon AS.
Oncogenic K-RAS is required to maintain changes in
cytoskeletal organization, adhesion, and motility in colon
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:1244–50.
63.	 Haigis KM, Kendall KR, Wang Y, Cheung A, Haigis MC,
Glickman JN, Niwa-Kawakita M, Sweet-Cordero A, SeboltLeopold J, Shannon KM, et al. Differential effects of oncogenic
K-Ras and N-Ras on proliferation, differentiation and tumor
progression in the colon. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:600–8.
64.	 Castellano E, Sheridan C, Thin MZ, Nye E, SpencerDene  B, Diefenbacher ME, Moore C, Kumar MS,
Murillo MM, Grönroos E, et al. Requirement for interaction
of PI3-kinase p110α with RAS in lung tumor maintenance.
Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:617–30.
65.	 Wang GM, Wong HY, Konishi H, Blair BG, Abukhdeir AM,
Gustin JP, Rosen DM, Denmeade SR, Rasheed Z, Matsui W,
et al. Single copies of mutant KRAS and mutant PIK3CA
cooperate in immortalized human epithelial cells to induce
tumor formation. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:3248–61.
66.	 Kim IJ, Kang HC, Jang SG, Kim K, Ahn SA, Yoon HJ,
Yoon SN, Park JG. Oligonucleotide microarray analysis of
distinct gene expression patterns in colorectal cancer tissues
harboring BRAF and K-ras mutations. Carcinogenesis.
2006; 27:392–404.
67.	 Kikuchi H, Pino MS, Zeng M, Shirasawa S, Chung DC.
Oncogenic KRAS and BRAF differentially regulate
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha and -2alpha in colon
cancer. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:8499–506.
68.	 Magudia K, Lahoz A, Hall A. K-Ras and B-Raf oncogenes
inhibit colon epithelial polarity establishment through
up-regulation of c-myc. J Cell Biol. 2012; 198:185–94.
69.	 Cagnol S, Rivard N. Oncogenic KRAS and BRAF
activation of the MEK/ERK signaling pathway promotes
expression of dual-specificity phosphatase 4 (DUSP4/
MKP2) resulting in nuclear ERK1/2 inhibition. Oncogene.
2013; 32:564–76.

11771

Oncotarget

70.	 Kemper K Versloot M, Cameron K, Colak S, de Sousa e,
Melo F, de Jong JH, Bleackley J, Vermeulen L, Versteeg R,
Koster J, et al. Mutations in the Ras-Raf Axis underlie the
prognostic value of CD133 in colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2012; 18:3132–41.

and patient prognosis in 1075 BRAF wild-type colorectal
cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:4753–63.
82.	 De Roock W, Jonker DJ, Di Nicolantonio F, SartoreBianchi A, Tu D, Siena S, Lamba S, Arena S, Frattini M,
Piessevaux H, et al. Association of KRAS p.G13D mutation
with outcome in patients with chemotherapy-refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab. JAMA.
2010; 304:1812–20.

71.	 Michaloglou C, Vredeveld LC, Soengas MS, Denoyelle C,
Kuilman T, van der Horst CM. BRAFE600-associated
senescence-like cell cycle arrest of human naevi. Nature.
2005; 436:720–4.
72.	 Wajapeyee N, Serra RW, Zhu X, Mahalingam M,
Green  MR. Oncogenic BRAF induces senescence and
apoptosis through pathways mediated by the secreted
protein IGFBP7. Cell. 2008; 132:363–74.

83.	 Abubaker J, Bavi P, Al-Haqawi W, Sultana M, Al-Harbi S,
Al-Sanea N, Abduljabbar A, Ashari LH, Alhomoud S,
Al-Dayel F. Prognostic significance of alterations in KRAS
isoforms KRAS-4A/4B and KRAS mutations in colorectal
carcinoma. J Pathol. 2009; 219:435–45.

73.	 Scurr LL, Pupo GM, Becker TM, Lai K, Schrama D,
Haferkamp S, Irvine M, Scolyer RA, Mann GJ, Becker JC,
et al. IGFBP7 is not required for B-RAF-induced
melanocyte senescence. Cell. 2010; 141:717–27.

84.	 Brink M, de Goeij AF, Weijenberg MP, Roemen GM,
Lentjes MH, Pachen MM. K-ras oncogene mutations in
sporadic colorectal cancer in The Netherlands Cohort Study.
Carcinogenesis. 2003; 24:703–10.

74.	 Dhomen N, Reis-Filho JS, da Rocha Dias S, Hayward R,
Savage K, Delmas V, Larue L, Pritchard C, Marais R.
Oncogenic Braf induces melanocyte senescence and
melanoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:294–303.

85.	 Oliveira C, Velho S, Domingo E, Preto A, Hofstra RM,
Hamelin R, Yamamoto H, Seruca R, Schwartz S Jr.
Concomitant RASSF1A hypermethylation and KRAS/
BRAF mutations occur preferentially in MSI sporadic
colorectal cancer. Oncogene. 2005; 24:7630–4.

75.	 Rad R, Cadiñanos J, Rad L, Varela I, Strong A, Kriegl L,
Constantino-Casas F, Eser S, Hieber M, Seidler B, et al.
A genetic progression model of Braf(V600E)-induced
intestinal tumorigenesis reveals targets for therapeutic
intervention. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:15–29.

86.	 Wan PT, Garnett MJ, Roe SM, Lee S, Niculescu-Duvaz D,
Good VM, Jones CM, Marshall CJ, Springer CJ, Barford D,
Marais R. Cancer Genome Project. Mechanism of activation
of the RAF-ERK signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations
of B-RAF. Cell. 2004; 116:855–67.

76.	 Carragher LA, Snell KR, Giblett SM, Aldridge VS, Patel B,
Cook SJ, Winton DJ, Marais R, Pritchard CA. V600EBraf
induces gastrointestinal crypt senescence and promotes
tumour progression through enhanced CpG methylation of
p16INK4a. EMBO Mol Med. 2010; 2:458–71.

87.	 Garnett MJ, Marais R. Guilty as charged: B-RAF is a
human oncogene. Cancer Cell. 2004; 6:313–9.
88.	 Van Cutsem E, Vervenne WL, Bennouna J, Humblet Y,
Gill S, Van Laethem JL. Phase III trial of bevacizumab
in combination with gemcitabine and erlotinib in patients
with metastatic pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:
2231–7.

77.	 Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ,
O’Callaghan CJ, Tu D, Tebbutt NC, Simes RJ, Chalchal H,
Shapiro JD, Robitaille S, et al. K-ras mutations and benefit
from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2008; 359:1757–65.

89.	 Zlobec I, Bihl MP, Schwarb H, Terracciano L, Lugli A.
Clinicopathological and protein characterization of BRAFand K-RAS-mutated colorectal cancer and implications for
prognosis. Int J Cancer. 2010; 127:367–80.

78.	 Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M, Van Cutsem E, Siena S,
Freeman DJ, Juan T, Sikorski R, Suggs S, Radinsky R,
et al. Wild-type KRAS is required for panitumumab efficacy
in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2008; 26:1626–34.

90.	 Fariña-Sarasqueta A, van Lijnschoten G, Moerland E,
Creemers GJ, Lemmens VE, Rutten HJ, van den Brule
AJ. The BRAF V600E mutation is an independent
prognostic factor for survival in stage II and stage
III colon cancer patients. Ann Oncol. 2010; 21:
2396–402.

79.	 Rosty C, Young JP, Walsh MD, Clendenning M, Walters RJ,
Pearson S, et al. Colorectal carcinomas with KRAS mutation
are associated with distinctive morphological and molecular
features. Mod Pathol. 2013; 26:825–34.

91.	 Li WQ, Kawakami K, Ruszkiewicz A, Bennett G, Moore J,
Iacopetta B. BRAF mutations are associated with distinctive
clinical, pathological and molecular features of colorectal
cancer independently of microsatellite instability status.
Mol Cancer. 2006; 5:2.

80.	 Roth AD, Tejpar S, Delorenzi M, Yan P, Fiocca R, Klingbiel D,
Dietrich D, Biesmans B, Bodoky G, Barone  C, et al.
Prognostic role of KRAS and BRAF in stage II and III
resected colon cancer: results of the translational study on
the PETACC-3, EORTC 40993, SAKK 60-00 trial. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28:466–74.

92.	 Saridaki Z, Papadatos-Pastos D, Tzardi M, Mavroudis D,
Bairaktari E, Arvanity H. BRAF mutations, microsatellite
instability status and cyclin D1 expression predict
metastatic colorectal patients’ outcome. Br J Cancer. 2010;
102:1762–8.

81.	 Imamura Y, Morikawa T, Liao X, Lochhead P, Kuchiba A,
Yamauchi M, Qian ZR, Nishihara R, Meyerhardt JA,
Haigis KM. Specific mutations in KRAS codons 12 and 13,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11772

Oncotarget

93.	 Rampazzo E, Bertorelle R, Serra L, Terrin L, Candiotto C,
Pucciarelli S, Del Bianco P, Nitti D, De Rossi A.
Relationship between telomere shortening, genetic
instability, and site of tumour origin in colorectal cancers.
Br J Cancer. 2010; 102:1300–5.

105.	 Fujiwara T, Stolker JM, Watanabe T, Rashid A, Longo P,
Eshleman JR, Booker S, Lynch HT, Jass JR, Green JS,
et al. Accumulated clonal genetic alterations in familial and
sporadic colorectal carcinomas with widespread instability
in microsatellite sequences. Am J Pathol. 1998; 153:
1063–78.

94.	 Souglakos J, Philips J, Wang R, Marwah S, Silver M,
Tzardi M, Silver J, Ogino S, Hooshmand S, Kwak E,
et al. Prognostic and predictive value of common
mutations for treatment response and survival in patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2009;
101:465–72.

106.	 Konishi M, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, Tanaka K, Muraoka M,
Onda A, Okumura Y, Kishi N, Iwama T, Mori T, Koike M,
et al. Molecular nature of colon tumors in hereditary
nonpolyposis colon cancer, familial polyposis, and sporadic
colon cancer. Gastroenterology. 1996; 111:307–17.

95.	 Yang S, Farray FA, Mack C, Posnik O, O’Brien MJ. BRAF
and KRAS Mutations in hyperplastic polyps and serrated
adenomas of the colorectum: relationship to histology and
CpG island methylation status. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004;
28:1452–9.

107.	 Grady WM. Genomic instability and colon cancer. Cancer
Metastasis Rev. 2004; 23:11–27.
108.	 Hutchins G, Southward K, Handley K, Magill L,
Beaumont  C, Stahlschmidt J, Richman S, Chambers P,
Seymour M, Kerr D, et al. Value of mismatch repair,
KRAS, and BRAF mutations in predicting recurrence and
benefits from chemotherapy in colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2011; 29:1261–70.

96.	 Safaee Ardekani G, Jafarnejad SM, Tan L, Saeedi A, Li G.
The prognostic value of BRAF mutation in colorectal
cancer and melanoma: a systematic review and metaanalysis. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e47054.

109.	 Dong SM, Lee EJ, Jeon ES, Park CK, Kim KM.
Progressive methylation during the serrated neoplasia
pathway of the colorectum. Mod Pathol. 2005; 18:170–8.

97.	 Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. Microsatellite
instability in cancer of the proximal colon. Science. 1993;
260:816–9.

110.	 Sawyer EJ, Cerar A, Hanby AM, Gorman P, Arends M,
Talbot IC, Tomlinson IP. Molecular characteristics of
serrated adenomas of the colorectum. Gut. 2002; 51:200–6.

98.	 Thibodeau SN, French AJ, Cunningham JM, Tester  D,
Burgart LJ, Roche PC. Microsatellite instability in
colorectal cancer: different mutator phenotypes and the
principal involvement of hMLH1. Cancer Re. 1998;
58:1713–8.

111.	 Chan TL, Zhao W, Leung SY, Yuen ST. BRAF and KRAS
mutations in colorectal hyperplastic polyps and serrated
adenomas. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:4878–81.

99.	 Popat S, Hubner R, Houlston RS. Systematic review of
microsatellite instability and colorectal cancer prognosis.
J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:609–18.

112.	 Kambara T, Simms LA, Whitehall VL, Spring KJ,
Wynter  CV, Walsh MD, Barker MA, Arnold S,
McGivern  A, Matsubara N, et al. BRAF mutation is
associated with DNA methylation in serrated polyps and
cancers of the colorectum. Gut. 2004; 53:1137–44.

100.	 Koinuma K, Shitoh K, Miyakura Y, Furukawa T,
Yamashita Y, Ota J, Ohki R, Choi YL, Wada T, Konishi F,
et al. Mutations of BRAF are associated with extensive
hMLH1 promoter methylation in sporadic colorectal
carcinomas. Int J Cancer. 2004; 108:237–42.

113.	 Jass JR, O’Brien J, Riddell RH, Snover DC. Association
of Directors of Anatomic and Surgical Pathology.
Recommendations for the reporting of surgically resected
specimens of colorectal carcinoma: Association of
Directors of Anatomic and Surgical Pathology. Am J Clin
Pathol. 2008; 129:13–23.

101.	 Sanchez JA, Krumroy L, Plummer S, Aung P,
Merkulova  A, Skacel M, DeJulius KL, Manilich E,
Church JM, Casey G, Kalady MF. Genetic and epigenetic
classifications define clinical phenotypes and determine
patient outcomes in colorectal cancer. Br J Surg. 2009;
96:1196–204.

114.	 O’Brien MJ. Hyperplastic and serrated polyps of the
colorectum. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2007; 36:
947–68, viii.

102.	 Wilson PM, Labonte MJ, Lenz HJ. Molecular markers in
the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer J.
2010; 16:262–72.
103.	 Domingo E, Laiho P, Ollikainen M, Pinto M, Wang L,
French AJ, Westra J, Frebourg T, Espín E, Armengol M,
et al. BRAF screening as a low-cost effective strategy for
simplifying HNPCC genetic testing. J Med Genet. 2004;
41:664–8.

115.	 O’Brien MJ, Yang S, Mack C, Xu H, Huang CS,
Mulcahy E, Amorosino M, Farraye FA. Comparison
of microsatellite instability, CpG island methylation
phenotype, BRAF and KRAS status in serrated polyps
and traditional adenomas indicates separate pathways
to distinct colorectal carcinoma end points. Am J Surg
Pathol. 2006; 30:1491–501.

104.	 Kriegl L, Jung A, Horst D, Rizzani A, Jackstadt R,
Hermeking H, Gallmeier E, Gerbes AL, Kirchner T,
Göke  B, De Toni EN. Microsatellite instability, KRAS
mutations and cellular distribution of TRAIL-receptors in
early stage colorectal cancer. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e51654.

117.	 Schena M, Shalon D, Davis RW, Brown PO. Quantitative
monitoring of gene expression patterns with a

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

116.	 Minoo P, Moyer MP, Jass JR. Role of BRAF-V600E in the
serrated pathway of colorectal tumourigenesis. J Pathol.
2007; 212:124–33.

11773

Oncotarget

complementary DNA microarray. Science. 1995; 270:
467–70.

metastatic colorectal cancer: a retrospective consortium
analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2010; 11:753–62.

118.	 DeRisi J, Penland L, Brown PO, Bittner ML, Meltzer PS,
Ray M, Chen Y, Su YA, Trent JM. Use of a cDNA
microarray to analyse gene expression patterns in human
cancer. Nat Genet. 1996; 14:457–60.

129.	Cheng Y, Zhang G, Li G. Targeting MAPK pathway in
melanoma therapy. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2013; 32:
567–84.
130.	 Neuzillet C, Hammel P, Tijeras-Raballand A, Couvelard A,
Raymond E. Targeting the Ras-ERK pathway in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2013; 32:147–62.

119.	 Ramaswamy S, Golub TR. DNA microarrays in clinical
oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:1932–41.

131.	 Rowell CA, Kowalczyk JJ, Lewis MD, Garcia AM. Direct
demonstration of geranylgeranylation and farnesylation of
Ki-Ras in vivo. J Biol Chem. 1997; 272:14093–7.

120.	 Kitahara O, Katagiri T, Tsunoda T, Harima Y, Nakamura
Y. Classification of sensitivity or resistance of cervical
cancers to ionizing radiation according to expression
profiles of 62 genes selected by cDNA microarray
analysis. Neoplasia. 2002; 4:295–303.

132.	 Whyte DB, Kirschmeier P, Hockenberry TN, NunezOliva  I, James L, Catino JJ, Bishop WR, Pai JK. Kand N-Ras are geranylgeranylated in cells treated with
farnesyl protein transferase inhibitors. J Biol Chem. 1997;
272:14459–64.

121.	 Mariadason JM, Arango D, Shi Q, Wilson AJ, Corner GA,
Nicholas C, Aranes MJ, Lesser M, Schwartz EL,
Augenlicht  LH. Gene expression profiling-based
prediction of response of colon carcinoma cells to
5-fluorouracil and camptothecin. Cancer Res. 2003;
63:8791–8812.

133.	 Ostrem JM, Peters U, Sos ML, Wells JA, Shokat KM.
K-Ras(G12C) inhibitors allosterically control GTP affinity
and effector interactions. Nature. 2013; 503:548–51.

122.	 Dunican DS, McWilliam P, Tighe O, Parle-McDermott A,
Croke DT. Gene expression differences between the
microsatellite instability (MIN) and chromosomal
instability (CIN) phenotypes in colorectal cancer revealed
by high-density cDNA array hybridization. Oncogene.
2002; 21:3253–7.

134.	 Wellbrock C, Karasarides M, Marais R. The RAF proteins
take centre stage. Nat. Rev. Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 11:875–85.
135.	 Wilhelm SM, Carter C, Tang L, Wilkie D, McNabola A,
Rong H, Chen C, Zhang X, Vincent P, McHugh M, et al.
BAY 43–9006 exhibits broad spectrum oral antitumor
activity and targets the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway and
receptor tyrosine kinases involved in tumor progression
and angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:7099–109.

123.	 Pavey S, Johansson P, Packer L, Taylor J, Stark M,
Pollock PM, Walker GJ, Boyle GM, Harper U, Cozzi SJ,
et al. Microarray expression profiling in melanoma reveals
a BRAF mutation signature. Oncogene. 2004; 23:4060–7.

136.	 Hauschild A, Agarwala SS, Trefzer U, Hogg D, Robert C,
Hersey P, Eggermont A, Grabbe S, Gonzalez R, Gille J,
et al. Results of a phase III, randomized, placebocontrolled study of sorafenib in combination with
carboplatin and paclitaxel as second-line treatment in
patients with unresectable stage III or stage IV melanoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:2823–30.

124.	 Joyce T, Oikonomou E, Kosmidou V, Makrodouli  E,
Bantounas I, Avlonitis S, Zografos G, Pintzas A.
A molecular signature for oncogenic BRAF in human
colon cancer cells is revealed by microarray analysis. Curr
Cancer Drug Targets. 2012; 12:873–98.
125.	 Joyce T, Cantarella D, Isella C, Medico E, Pintzas A.
A molecular signature for Epithelial to Mesenchymal
transition in a human colon cancer cell system is revealed
by large-scale microarray analysis. Clin Exp Metastasis.
2009; 26:569–87.

137.	 McDermott DF, Sosman JA, Gonzalez R, Hodi FS,
Linette GP, Richards J, Jakub JW, Beeram M, Tarantolo
S, Agarwala S, et al. Double-blind randomized phase II
study of the combination of sorafenib and dacarbazine in
patients with advanced melanoma: a report from the 11715
Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:2178–85.

126.	 Tian S, Simon I, Moreno V, Roepman P, Tabernero J,
Snel M, van’t Veer L, Salazar R, Bernards R, Capella G.
A combined oncogenic pathway signature of
BRAF, KRAS and PI3KCA mutation improves colorectal
cancer classification and cetuximab treatment prediction.
Gut. 2013; 62:540–9.

138.	 Takezawa K, Okamoto I, Yonesaka K, Hatashita E,
Yamada Y, Fukuoka M, Nakagawa K. Sorafenib inhibits
non-small cell lung cancer cell growth by targeting B-RAF
in KRAS wild-type cells and C-RAF in KRAS mutant
cells. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:6515–21.

127.	 Popovici V, Budinska E, Tejpar S, Weinrich S, Estrella H,
Hodgson G, Van Cutsem E, Xie T, Bosman FT, Roth AD,
Delorenzi M. Identification of a poor-prognosis BRAFmutant-like population of patients with colon cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:1288–95.

139.	 Joseph EW, Pratilas CA, Poulikakos PI, Tadi M, Wang
W, Taylor BS, Halilovic E, Persaud Y, Xing F, Viale A, et
al. The RAF inhibitor PLX4032 inhibits ERK signaling
and tumor cell proliferation in a V600E BRAF-selective
manner. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:14903–8.

128.	 De Roock W, Claes B, Bernasconi D, De Schutter J,
Biesmans B, Fountzilas G, Kalogeras KT, Kotoula V,
Papamichael D, Laurent-Puig P, et al. Effects of KRAS,
BRAF, NRAS, and PIK3CA mutations on the efficacy of
cetuximab plus chemotherapy in chemotherapy-refractory

140.	 Yang H, Higgins B, Kolinsky K, Packman K, Go Z, Iyer
R, Kolis S, Zhao S, Lee R, Grippo JF, et al. RG7204
(PLX4032), a selective BRAFV600E inhibitor, displays
potent antitumor activity in preclinical melanoma models.
Cancer Res. 2010; 70:5518–27.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11774

Oncotarget

141.	 Tsai J, Lee JT, Wang W, Zhang J, Cho H, Mamo S, Bremer R,
Gillette S, Kong J, Haass NK, et al. Discovery of a
selective inhibitor of oncogenic B-Raf kinase with potent
antimelanoma activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;
105:3041–6.

154.	 Flaherty KT, Infante JR, Daud A, Gonzalez R, Kefford RF,
Sosman J, Hamid O, Schuchter L, Cebon J, Ibrahim N,
et al. Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition in melanoma
with BRAF V600 mutations. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367:
1694–703.

142.	 Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB, Ribas A, McArthur GA,
Sosman JA, O’Dwyer PJ, Lee RJ, Grippo JF, Nolop K,
Chapman PB. Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in
metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:809–19.

155.	 Ikenoue T, Hikiba Y, Kanai F, Tanaka Y, Imamura J,
Imamura T, Ohta M, Ijichi H, Tateishi K, Kawakami T,
et al. Functional analysis of mutations within the kinase
activation segment of B-Raf in human colorectal tumors.
Cancer Res. 2003; 63:8132–7.

143.	 Falchook GS, Long GV, Kurzrock R, Kim KB, Arkenau TH,
Brown MP, Hamid O, Infante JR, Millward  M,
Pavlick AC, et al. Dabrafenib in patients with melanoma,
untreated brain metastases, and other solid tumours: a
phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet. 2012; 379:1893–901.

156.	 Singhal R, Kandel ES. The response to PAK1 inhibitor
IPA3 distinguishes between cancer cells with mutations in
BRAF and Ras Oncotarget. 2012; 3:700–708.
157.	 Ikenoue T, Hikiba Y, Kanai F, Tanaka Y, Imamura J,
Imamura T, Ohta M, Ijichi H, Tateishi K, Kawakami T,
et al. BRAF mutation predicts sensitivity to MEK
inhibition. Nature. 2006; 439:358–62.

144.	 Arkenau HT, Kefford R, Long GV. Targeting BRAF for
patients with melanoma. Br J Cancer. 2011; 104:392–8.
145.	 http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00880321.

158.	 Pao W, Wang TY, Riely GJ, Miller VA, Pan Q, Ladanyi M,
Zakowski MF, Heelan RT, Kris MG, Varmus HE. KRAS
mutations and primary resistance of lung adenocarcinomas
to gefitinib or erlotinib. PLoS Med. 2005; 2:e17.

146.	 S. Bristol-Myers: clinicaltrials.gov: National Library of
Medicine (U.S.) 2000-11/2012.
147.	 Mordant P, Loriot Y, Leteur C, Calderaro J, Bourhis  J,
Wislez M, Soria JC, Deutsch E. Dependence on
phosphoinositide 3-kinase and RAS-RAF pathways drive
the activity of RAF265, a novel RAF/VEGFR2 inhibitor,
and RAD001 (Everolimus) in combination. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2010; 9:358–68.

159.	 Diaz LA Jr, Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR,
Berlin J, Allen B, Bozic I, Reiter JG, Nowak MA, et al.
The molecular evolution of acquired resistance to targeted
EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature. 2012;
486:537–40.

148.	 Infante J, Falchook G, Lawrence D, Weber J, Kefford R,
Bendell J, Kurzrock R, Shapiro G, Kudchadkar  RR,
Long GV, et al. Phase I/II study to assess safety,
pharmacokinetics, and efficacy of the oral MEK 1/2
inhibitor GSK1120212 (GSK212) dosed in combination
with the oral BRAF inhibitor GSK2118436 (GSK436).
J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29suppl; abstr CRA8503.

160.	 Montagut C, Dalmases A, Bellosillo B, Crespo M, Pairet S,
Iglesias M, Salido M, Gallen M, Marsters S, Tsai SP,
et al. Identification of a mutation in the extracellular
domain of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
conferring cetuximab resistance in colorectal cancer. Nat
Med. 2012; 18:221–3.
161.	 Maheswaran S, Sequist LV, Nagrath S, Ulkus L,
Brannigan B, Collura CV, Inserra E, Diederichs S, Iafrate
AJ, Bell DW, et al. Detection of mutations in EGFR
in circulating lung-cancer cells. N Engl J Med. 2008;
359:366–77.

149.	 Gonzalez R, Ribas A, Daud A, Pavlick A, Gajewski T,
Puzanov I, et al. Phase Ib study of vemurafenib in
combination with the MEK inhibitor, GDC-0973, in
patients (pts) with unresectable or metastatic BRAFV600
mutated melanoma (BRIM7). Ann Oncol. 2012; 23
doi:abstract LBA28_PR, ixe 19.10.1093/annonc/mds499.

162.	 Turke AB, Zejnullahu K, Wu YL, Song Y, DiasSantagata  D, Lifshits E, Toschi L, Rogers A, Mok T,
Sequist L, et al. Preexistence and clonal selection of MET
amplification in EGFR mutant NSCLC. Cancer Cell.
2010117:77–88.

150.	 Kefford R, Miller W, Tan D, Sullivan R, Long G,
Dienstmann R, et al. Preliminary results from a phase Ib/
II, open-label, dose-escalation study of the oral BRAF
inhibitor LGX818 in combination with the oral MEK1/2
inhibitor MEK162 in BRAF V600-dependent advanced
solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31: abstract 9029].

163.	 Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman
M, Liska D, Valtorta E, Schiavo R, Buscarino M,
Siravegna G, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and
acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal
cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:532–6.

151.	 Novartis Pharmaceuticals: clinicaltrials.gov: National
Library of Medicine 2(U.S.) 2000-11/2012.
152.	 Montagut C, Sharma SV, Shioda T, McDermott U,
Ulman  M, Ulkus LE, Dias-Santagata D, Stubbs H,
Lee  DY, Singh A, et al. Elevated CRAF as a potential
mechanism of acquired resistance to BRAF inhibition in
melanoma. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4853–61.

164.	 Raponi M, Winkler H, Dracopoli NC. KRAS mutations
predict response to EGFR inhibitors. Curr Opin
Pharmacol. 2008; 8:413–8.
165.	 Hecht JR, Mitchell E, Chidiac T, Scroggin C, Hagenstad C,
Spigel D, Marshall J, Cohn A, McCollum D, Stella P, et al.
A randomized phase IIIB trial of chemotherapy,
bevacizumab, and panitumumab compared with

153.	 Menzies AM, Long GV, Murali R. Dabrafenib and its
potential for the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Drug
Des Deve Ther. 2012; 6:391–405.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11775

Oncotarget

chemotherapy and bevacizumab alone for metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:672–80.

177.	 Agaram NP, Wong GC, Guo T, Maki RG, Singer S,
Dematteo RP, Besmer P, Antonescu CR. Novel V600E
BRAF mutations in imatinib-naive and imatinib-resistant
gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer. 2008; 47:853–9.

166.	 Benvenuti S, Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F,
Zanon  C, Moroni M, Veronese S, Siena S, Bardelli A.
Oncogenic activation of the RAS/RAF signalling pathway
impairs the response of metastatic colorectal cancers to
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody therapies.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:2643–8.

178.	 Tsai J, Lee JT, Wang W, Zhang J, Cho H, Mamo S, Bremer
R, Gillette S, Kong J, Haass NK, et al. Discovery of a
selective inhibitor of oncogenic B-Raf kinase with potent
antimelanoma activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:3041–6.

167.	 Bokemeyer C, Bondarenko I, Makhson A, Hartmann JT,
Aparicio J, de Braud F, Donea S, Ludwig H, Schuch G,
Stroh C, et al. Fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin
with and without cetuximab in the first-line treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:663–71.

179.	 Bollag G, Hirth P, Tsai J, Zhang J, Ibrahim PN, Cho H,
Spevak W, Zhang C, Zhang Y, Habets G, et al. Clinical
efficacy of a RAF inhibitor needs broad target blockade in
BRAF-mutant melanoma. Nature. 2010; 467:596–9.

168.	 Tol J, Koopman M, Cats A, Rodenburg CJ, Creemers GJ,
Schrama JG, Erdkamp FL, Vos AH, van Groeningen CJ,
Sinnige HA. Chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and cetuximab
in metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;
360:563–72.

180.	 Cichowski K, Jänne PA. Drug discovery: inhibitors that
activate. Nature. 2010; 464:358–9.
181.	 Chudnovsky Y, Adams AE, Robbins PB, Lin Q,
Khavari PA. Use of human tissue to assess the oncogenic
activity of melanoma-associated mutations. Nat Genet.
2005; 37:745–9.

169.	 Modest DP, Reinacher-Schick A, Stintzing S, Giessen C,
Tannapfel A, Laubender RP. Cetuximab-based or
bevacizumab-based first-line treatment in patients with
KRAS p.G13D-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a
pooled analysis. Anticancer Drugs. 2012; 23:666–73.

182.	 Kaplan FM, Shao Y, Mayberry MM, Aplin AE.
Hyperactivation of MEK-ERK1/2 signaling and resistance
to apoptosis induced by the oncogenic B-RAF inhibitor,
PLX4720, in mutant N-RAS melanoma cells. Oncogene.
2011; 30:366–71.

170.	 Bokemeyer C, Kuczyk MA, Sehrt J. Clinical implications
of the p53 tumor-suppressor gene. N Engl J Med. 1994;
330:865.

183.	 Vultur A, Villanueva J, Herlyn M. Targeting BRAF in
advanced melanoma: a first step toward manageable
disease. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:1658–63.

171.	 Nazarian R, Shi H, Wang Q, Kong X, Koya RC, Lee H,
Chen Z, Lee MK, Attar N, Sazegar H, et al. Melanomas
acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or
N-RAS upregulation. Nature. 2010; 468:973–7.

184.	 Poulikakos PI, Persaud Y, Janakiraman M, Kong X, Ng C,
Moriceau G, Shi H, Atefi M, Titz B, Gabay MT, et al.
RAF inhibitor resistance is mediated by dimerization of
aberrantly spliced BRAF(V600E). Nature. 2011; 480:387–
90.

172.	 Wagle N, Emery C, Berger MF, Davis MJ, Sawyer A,
Pochanard P, Kehoe SM, Johannessen CM, Macconaill LE,
Hahn WC, et al. Dissecting therapeutic resistance to RAF
inhibition in melanoma by tumor genomic profiling. J Clin
Oncol. 2011; 29:3085–96.

185.	 Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F,
Salazar  R, Zecchin D, Beijersbergen RL, Bardelli
A, Bernards R. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to
BRAF(V600E) inhibition through feedback activation of
EGFR. Nature. 2012; 483:100–3.

173.	 Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D,
Digumarthy S, Turke AB, Fidias P, Bergethon K, Shaw
AT, Gettinger S, Cosper AK. Genotypic and histological
evolution of lung cancers acquiring resistance to EGFR
inhibitors. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:75ra26.

186.	 Oikonomou E, Koc M, Sourkova V, Andera L, Pintzas
A. Selective BRAFV600E inhibitor PLX4720, requires
TRAIL assistance to overcome oncogenic PIK3CA
resistance. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e21632.

174.	 Ogino SI, Nosho K, Kirkner GJ, Kawasaki T,
Meyerhardt JA, Loda M, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS. CpG
island methylator phenotype, microsatellite instability,
BRAF mutation and clinical outcome in colon cancer. Gut.
2009; 58:90–6.

187.	 Lemech C, Infante J, Arkenau HT. The potential for
BRAF V600 inhibitors in advanced cutaneous melanoma:
rationale and latest evidence. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2012;
4:61–73.

175.	 Di Nicolantonio F, Martini M, Molinari F, SartoreBianchi A, Arena S, Saletti P, De Dosso S, Mazzucchelli L,
Frattini M, Siena S, et al. Wild-type BRAF is required
for response to panitumumab or cetuximab in metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:5705–12.

188.	 Nakayama N, Nakayama K, Yeasmin S, Ishibashi M,
Katagiri A, Iida K, Fukumoto M, Miyazaki K. KRAS or
BRAF mutation status is a useful predictor of sensitivity
to MEK inhibition in ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer. 2008;
99:2020–8.

176.	 Mao C, Liao RY, Qiu LX, Wang XW, Ding H, Chen Q.
BRAF V600E mutation and resistance to anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis. Mol Biol. Rep. 2011;
38:2219–23.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

189.	 Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW.
Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell senescence
associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cell.
1997; 88:593–602.
11776

Oncotarget

190.	 Zhu J, Woods D, McMahon M, Bishop JM. Senescence of
human fibroblasts induced by oncogenic Raf. Genes Dev.
1998; 12:2997–3007.

202.	 Dhomen N, Reis-Filho JS, da Rocha Dias S, Hayward R,
Savage K, Delmas V, Larue L, Pritchard C, Marais R.
Oncogenic Braf induces melanocyte senescence and
melanoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:294–303.

191.	 Blagosklonny MV. Prevention of cancer by inhibiting
aging. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008; 7:1520–4.

203.	 Roth AD, Tejpar S, Delorenzi M, Yan P, Fiocca R,
Klingbiel D, Dietrich D, Biesmans B, Bodoky G, Barone C,
et al. Prognostic role of KRAS and BRAF in stage
II and III resected colon cancer: results of the translational
study on the PETACC-3, EORTC 40993, SAKK 60-00
trial. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:466–74.

192.	 Blagosklonny MV. Selective anti-cancer agents as antiaging drugs. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013; 14:1092–7.
193.	 Blagosklonny MV. Common drugs and treatments for
cancer and age-related diseases: revitalizing answers to
NCI’s provocative questions. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:1711–24.

204.	 Yuan ZX, Wang XY, Qin QY, Chen DF, Zhong QH,
Wang L, Wang JP. The prognostic role of BRAF mutation
in metastatic colorectal cancer receiving anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies: a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e65995.

194.	 Leontieva OV, Demidenko ZN, Blagosklonny MV. MEK
drives cyclin D1 hyperelevation during geroconversion.
Cell Death Differ. 2013; 20:1241–9.
195.	 Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Digital PCR. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 1999; 9:9236–41.

205.	 Ekedahl H, Cirenajwis H, Harbst K, Carneiro A, Nielsen
K, Olsson H, Lundgren L, Ingvar C, Jönsson G. The
clinical significance of BRAF and NRAS mutations in a
clinic-based metastatic melanoma cohort. Br J Dermatol.
2013; 169:1049–55.

196.	 Prix L, Uciechowski P, Bockmann B, Giesing M,
Schuetz AJ. Diagnostic biochip array for fast and sensitive
detection of K-ras mutations in stool. Clin Chem. 2002;
48:428–35.
197.	 Fakhrai-Rad H, Pourmand N, Ronaghi M. Pyrosequencing:
an accurate detection platform for single nucleotide
polymorphisms. Hum Mutat. 2002; 19:479–85.

206.	 Jakob JA, Bassett RL Jr, Ng CS, Curry JL, Joseph RW,
Alvarado GC, Rohlfs ML, Richard J, Gershenwald JE,
Kim KB, et al. NRAS mutation status is an independent
prognostic factor in metastatic melanoma. Cancer. 2012;
118:4014–23.

198.	 Kosmidou V, Oikonomou E, Vlassi M, Avlonitis S, Katseli
A, Tsipras I, Mourtzoukou D, Kontogeorgos G, Zografos
G, Pintzas A. Tumor Heterogeneity Revealed by KRAS,
BRAF, and PIK3CA Pyrosequencing: KRAS and PIK3CA
Intratumor Mutation Profile Differences and Their
Therapeutic Implications. Hum Mutat. 2014; 35:329–40.

207.	 Ohba T, Toyokawa G, Kometani T, Nosaki K, Hirai F,
Yamaguchi M, Hamatake M, Seto T, Ichinose Y, Sugio K.
The mutations of the EGFR and K-ras genes in resected
stage I lung adenocarcinoma and their clinical significance.
Surg Today. 2014; 44:478–86.

199.	 Milbury CA, Li J, Makrigiorgos GM. COLD-PCRenhanced high-resolution melting enables rapid, selective
identification of low-level unknown mutations. Clin Chem.
2009; 55:2130–43.

208.	 Guerra A, Fugazzola L, Marotta V, Cirillo M, Rossi S,
Cirello V, Forno I, Moccia T, Budillon A, Vitale M. A high
percentage of BRAFV600E alleles in papillary thyroid
carcinoma predicts a poorer outcome. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2012; 97:2333–40.

200.	 Pao W, Kris MG, Iafrate AJ, Ladanyi M, Jänne PA,
Wistuba  II, Miake-Lye R, Herbst RS, Carbone DP,
Johnson BE, et al. Integration of molecular profiling into
the lung cancer clinic. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:5317–22.

209.	 Hu J, Stites EC, Yu H, Germino EA, Meharena HS,
Stork  PJ, Kornev AP, Taylor SS, Shaw AS. Allosteric
activation of functionally asymmetric RAF kinase dimers.
Cell. 2013; 154:1036–46.

201.	 Pao W, Girard N. New driver mutations in non-small-cell
lung cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:175–80.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11777

Oncotarget

