www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 5), pp: 8854-8866
Review

Improving anticancer drug development begins with cell culture:
misinformation perpetrated by the misuse of cytotoxicity assays
Alan Eastman1
1

Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, USA

Correspondence to: Alan Eastman, email: Alan.R.Eastman@Dartmouth.edu
Keywords: cytotoxicity assays, cell survival, apoptosis, target validation, synergy
Received: July 05, 2016	

Accepted: October 12, 2016	

Published: October 14, 2016

ABSTRACT
The high failure rate of anticancer drug discovery and development has
consumed billions of dollars annually. While many explanations have been provided,
I believe that misinformation arising from inappropriate cell-based screens has been
completely over-looked. Most cell culture experiments are irrelevant to how drugs
are subsequently administered to patients. Usually, drug development focuses on
growth inhibition rather than cell killing. Drugs are selected based on continuous
incubation of cells, then frequently administered to the patient as a bolus. Target
identification and validation is often performed by gene suppression that inevitably
mimics continuous target inhibition. Drug concentrations in vitro frequently far
exceed in vivo concentrations. Studies of drug synergy are performed at sub-optimal
concentrations. And the focus on a limited number of cell lines can misrepresent the
potential efficacy in a patient population. The intent of this review is to encourage
more appropriate experimental design and data interpretation, and to improve drug
development in the area of cell-based assays. Application of these principles should
greatly enhance the successful translation of novel drugs to the patient.

INTRODUCTION

treatments were tested in these PDX models. Only a single
dose/schedule was tested for each drug or combination,
which may explain why the majority of treatments still
failed to induce a significant response. Importantly, every
drug tested had previously been developed in cell-based
in vitro assays.
This review addresses a critical question: can we
improve the preclinical development of drugs at an even
earlier stage, before they reach animal and human testing?
I believe that a major problem has arisen from inadequate
and inappropriate preclinical evaluation of drugs, and a
failure to place this development in the context of how
the drugs will be administered to patients. This is an area
that the pharmaceutical industry has under-funded; it has
been estimated that only 7% of drug development costs
are expended on preclinical research [2], yet an increased
investment at this stage could reduce the exorbitant cost of
failed clinical trials later. But the concerns apply equally to
every academic laboratory involved in target identification
and drug discovery. The rate of attrition of drugs in clinical
trials could be reduced by better preclinical analysis, and
only advancing truly promising drugs into clinical trials.
The ideal strategy to cure cancer is to kill all
tumor cells while leaving enough normal cells alive that

The majority of anticancer drugs that enter clinical
trials exhibit little or no therapeutic benefit and fail to
obtain regulatory approval [1]. This high failure rate
consumes billions of dollars annually, and contributes
to the high cost of those few drugs that are eventually
approved. There has been much discussion over the past
few years about the rate of failure of novel anticancer
drugs in clinical trials, and many reasons have been
proposed including poor pharmacokinetics and drug
bioavailability, unexpected toxicity, lack of efficacy, and
regulatory hurdles [2, 3]. Others have placed the blame on
the poor predictive value of preclinical models which do
not effectively mimic human disease. Wilding and Bodmer
[4] suggested “this has become such a widespread belief
that it approaches dogma in the field of drug discovery and
optimization, and has spurred a surge in studies devoted
to the development of more sophisticated animal models.”
As an example, it has been proposed that patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) better predict clinical drug response,
but the recently proposed use of 1000 PDX models for
high-throughput drug screening is financially beyond
the scope of almost every laboratory [5]. In fact, only 62
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8854

Oncotarget

the patient survives. It is not surprising therefore that
cytotoxicity assays have become a mainstay of cancer drug
discovery. Unfortunately, there are many critical issues that
are far too commonly ignored when using these assays. As
a consequence, many inappropriate conclusions have been
made that may have little if any relevance to the treatment
of patients with cancer. Furthermore, this misleading
information likely contributes to the failure of many drugs
to effectively control cancer when tested in the clinical
setting. The intent of this review is to encourage more
appropriate experimental design and data interpretation.
While the focus of the discussion, and the examples
presented, is on traditional 2-dimensional cell culture,
many of the concerns would equally apply to alternate cell
culture models such as 3-dimensional spheroids that have
been suggested as a better approximation of solid tumors.

assaying the decrease in cell number (or any surrogate
marker of cell number) over time (Figure 2). Albeit, most
treatments do not kill cells rapidly, so it is important to
extend assays for a sufficient period of time. Using this
approach, and plotting the results as percent survivors,
the potential failure of many drugs would have been
immediately evident.
There are alternate outcomes of drug treatment
such as differentiation or senescence that can influence
the apparent results of a cytotoxicity assay. In these cases,
the results might be observed as 100% growth inhibition
with no loss of cell viability. Appropriate assays exist to
score these alternate endpoints if it is thought they might
be occurring.

INCUBATION TIMES IN VITRO OFTEN
HAVE LITTLE RELEVANCE TO THE
PATIENT

MOST “CELL VIABILITY” ASSAYS DO
NOT MEASURE CELL VIABILITY

Most in vitro cytotoxicity assays use continuous
incubation of cells with drug, yet many drugs are
then administered to a patient as a bolus. In vitro, the
continuous incubation limits recovery whereas in the
patient, the tumor is only exposed to the drug for a short
period followed by time for recovery, a scenario that is too
frequently overlooked in vitro.
The first large drug screen was performed in
the NCI60 panel of cell lines using a 2 day continuous
incubation with each compound followed by a
sulforhodamine B assessment of total protein [7]. By 1997,
more than 60,000 compounds had been analyzed in this
screen [8]. A more recent screen of 481 small molecules
in 664 cell lines has been published, but a continuous
incubation for 72 h was used, and the endpoint was total
ATP level which was again misleadingly stated as being an
assessment of viability [9]. A publically available database
of the sensitivity of ~1000 cells lines to >100 drugs also
exists (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic), but again relies
on a 72 h continuous incubation with drug.
Most small molecules have a short half-life in
patient plasma, but the consequence for target inhibition
and cell killing varies with drug. Some drugs are rapidly
inactivated or excreted while others may concentrate in
the tissues. The binding affinity for the target also varies
markedly. For example, some drugs irreversibly bind to
their target (gemcitabine to ribonucleotide reductase;
ibrutinib to Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; afatinib to EGFR),
some are pseudo-irreversible (5-fluorouracil to thymidine
synthase; methotrexate to dihydrofolate reductase),
while others have very high affinity for their target
(e.g., vinca alkaloid binding to tubulin). These drugs
can cause target inhibition long after any free drug has
been cleared from the peripheral circulation. Most DNA
damaging drugs covalently bind to DNA and require
checkpoint activation, cell cycle arrest and DNA repair

Most cell-based drug screens use growth inhibition
as an endpoint. The majority of studies use various
commercial assays that are almost ubiquitously referred
to as viability assays even though they do not measure
cell viability (Figure 1). The term “viability” implies
a measurement of both live and dead cells, and is an
expression of the proportion that remain viable. Using
these cytotoxicity assays, a reduction in signal by 50%
compared to control usually means there are fewer
cells; it does not mean that any cells have lost viability.
Furthermore, if the rate of growth of a patient’s tumor
were decreased by 50%, it would still be called progressive
disease. It is critical that preclinical development define
concentrations and schedules that result in tumor cell
killing if it is to translate to tumor shrinkage in the patient.
Tumor cell killing has alternately been measured
by the ability of the cell to divide sufficiently to form
a colony [6]. However, even colony formation assays
have limitations as they reflect the number of cells that
have proliferated to produce a colony of perhaps 50 cells
within a given time frame (perhaps 14 days). But when
counting the colonies, there are often smaller colonies
and individual cells that may remain viable but whose
proliferation was slowed or temporarily blocked by the
drug. Consequently, these assays do not truly reflect only
the surviving cells, but rather those that have been able
to grow to a defined size within a defined time period.
Cells that survive but do not form a colony within the
time frame of the assay may mimic cells in vivo that could
produce a relapse after initial response to therapy.
While colony formation assays may be closer to
reporting cell killing, such assays are not generally as
amenable to high-throughput drug screens as the modern
commercial assays. Experimentally, it is possible to
modify a growth inhibition assay so it can detect cell
killing. This requires starting with more cells, and then
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8855

Oncotarget

before recovery (or death). In contrast, many new targeted
therapeutics are ATP mimetics that reversibly inhibit a
protein kinase but rapidly dissociate from the target once
the drug concentration decreases. In this latter case, it is
usually critical to maintain chronic exposure to achieve
continuous target inhibition.

Many new drugs may fail in the clinic because
inadequate consideration has been given to how long a
target needs to be inhibited. For readily reversible drugs,
even daily administration to a patient may only inhibit its
target transiently, permitting sufficient time for recovery
each day. Hence, transient target inhibition may kill no

Figure 1: The misuse of cytotoxicity assays. Because of its ease of application to multiple samples, and its low cost, tetrazolium

dye reduction assays such as “MTT” or MTS” (available from many companies) are frequently used. This assay measures primarily
mitochondrial dehydrogenase activity that is then extrapolated to reflect the number of cells in a culture dish. However, cells can rapidly
change the activity of these enzymes such that it may not be an accurate reflection of the cell number. The CellTiter-Glo assay (Promega)
relies on changes in ATP levels that can fluctuate rapidly with many environmental stresses so may not reflect the number of viable cells.
Alternate assays measure total cell protein yet arrested cells can markedly increase their protein content without dividing, while dead cells
still have protein. In our own experiments, we routinely quantify DNA content for high throughput assays as the possible variation per cell
is generally limited to only 2 fold (i.e., whether the cells are in G1 or G2 phase of the cell cycle) [14, 21]. However, the major problem
with all these assays it that they are almost ubiquitously referred to as viability assays when none of them measure cell viability. In an ideal
situation where mitochondrial enzymes, ATP or DNA levels do not change per cell, these assays still only measure the number of viable
cells. Consider a typical cytotoxicity experiment performed in a 96 well format. If you plate 1000 cells on day 1, the control may have 2000
cells on day 2 and 4000 cells on day 3 (blue line). If drug treatment results in 2000 cells on day 3 (green line), this is often reported as 50%
viability even though it is an increase over the starting number of cells. To express the increase, it is necessary to subtract the starting cell
number, so the increase from 1000 to 2000 actually reflects 67% growth inhibition (because the control increased by 3000). If the treated
cells have completely arrested, there are still 1000 cells on day 3 (yellow line). In this case, the results will often be reported as “25%
viability” even though there may be 100% growth inhibition and no loss of viability (albeit there is likely a mixture of dying and growing
cells at this concentration). If the drug is not killing any cells, it will not cure the tumor, so a conclusion that only 25% of the cells are viable
- implying 75% have died - would provide inappropriate optimism for a potential new therapeutic agent or strategy. If there were only 250
cells on day 3, this would indeed represent loss of viable cells (red line). However, this decrease in viable cell number can not be realized
unless the starting number of cells is subtracted from the results. Unfortunately, few people measure the signal on day 1. Examples of curves
from actual experiments of cell growth and death are presented in Figure 2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8856

Oncotarget

tumor cells in the patient. Similarly, many drugs may only
work at a particular phase of the cell cycle. Inhibitors
targeting mitotic kinases are an excellent example [10].
The problem with targeting, for example, aurora kinase
or PLK1 is that these kinases are only needed for a brief
period of time during the cell cycle. Even if such a drug
could quickly kill mitotic cells, the majority of cells in
a tumor would still survive. Hence, such a drug would
need to be present for an entire cell cycle if it is to elicit
sufficient cell killing. In contrast, a drug that covalently
modifies its target may persist until a critical phase of the
cell cycle is reached.
Most of the current cytotoxicity screens camouflage
these problems by continuous exposure of cells in culture,
but as discussed, this is rarely how drugs are administered
to patients. In preclinical development, cells need to be
incubated with drug for various times (from a few hours
to days), and then the ability to recover assessed. It should
also be kept in mind that cells can arrest and survive
for long periods of time, often for much longer than a
typical cytotoxicity assay. Our experience suggests that
recovery periods of at least 7 days should be investigated
to determine whether cells die or recover (Figure 2). If
continuous drug exposure is required for cell killing, then
a continuous infusion or repetitive administration will be
required. For example, “metronomic therapy” is based on
the concept of giving low dose therapy on a repetitive,
frequent basis. While this approach is often thought to
target the tumor vasculature, it probably has significant
impact directly on the tumor as well [11, 12]. For some
drugs such as 5-fluorouracil or cytarabine, a daily or twice
daily schedule is well established as the standard-of-care.
Other approaches to provide extended drug exposure
include liposomes that slowly release drugs over many
days [13].
We recently published on the sensitivity of 65 cell
lines to the Chk1 inhibitor MK-8776 [14]. The novelty of
our screen was in using three different incubation times
(24 h, 48 h or 7 day). Following the shorter incubation,
drug was removed and cells allowed to grow until 7 days.
Hence, the results after the short drug exposure reflect the
ability of cells to recover. The three different incubation
times provided very different results: about 15% of the
cell lines were very sensitive to MK-8776 after only a 24
h incubation, 30% were sensitive after 48 h, while ~30%
were completely resistant to continuous 7-day incubation
with drug. These differences would have been completely
missed if only a single incubation time had been used.
These results suggest that a few tumors may be sensitive
to a Chk1 inhibitor when administered as a bolus or short
infusion.
A second example is the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib which has commonly been studied by
continuous incubation in cell culture, yet a recent study has
shown that a more clinically relevant 1-h incubation with
bortezomib elicits much greater differential in sensitivity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

across myeloma cell lines [15]. A short treatment may
also provide a much greater therapeutic index if it takes
longer to kill normal cells. Hence, the time of exposure
may provide an additional parameter that can enhance
therapeutic index, and could be just as important as the
administered dose. These examples highlight the need to
perform extensive preclinical investigations to develop
rationale schedules for effective drug administration to
the patient.

INCUBATION
CONCENTRATIONS
IN VITRO OFTEN HAVE LITTLE
RELEVANCE TO THE PATIENT
Many publications justify their in vitro experimental
protocol by stating that a drug is being used at a clinically
relevant concentration, but in many cases this means that
the experimental concentration approximates the peak
concentration achieved in patient plasma. Unfortunately,
this gives no consideration for the half-life of the drug in
vivo, nor the amount distributed to the tumor. “Clinically
relevant” has to mean much more than administration of
a drug at a concentration that is only achieved briefly in
patient plasma.
Consider the DNA damaging drug cisplatin as an
example: the peak plasma concentration in patients is about
10 µM and its half-life is <1 hour [16]. A relevant design
for an experiment with cisplatin would be to incubate cells
with low µM concentrations for only a few hours, then
remove the drug and follow the cells while they try, or
fail, to recover. However, some in vitro experiments use
concentrations as high as 100 µM and with incubations of
24-72 h [17]. At low drug concentrations, cisplatin works
through cross-linking DNA. At these low concentrations,
inhibition of transcription or protein function are not
observed until cells are committed to die several days later
[18]. These effects can be observed much earlier when
higher concentrations are used, yet these concentrations
and effects have no relevance to how the drug works in
patients. Experiments at these high concentrations have
simply created a clinically irrelevant science. Other
examples of inappropriate drug concentrations in vitro
have been addressed in a prior commentary [19].
There are other issues that make it difficult to
extrapolate an in vivo concentration to an in vitro assay.
For example, a drug may exhibit a long terminal half-life
in vivo suggesting prolonged exposure of the tumor to
drug. However, it is possible that the concentration during
this terminal half-life is too low to effectively inhibit its
target. In the case of the Chk1 inhibitor MK-8776, we note
that the plasma concentration in patients drops below 1
µM by 6 h [20], and the lower concentrations thereafter
are below those needed to inhibit Chk1 in cells [21].
Alternately, the concentration of drug in plasma
may be high, and have a long half-life but this does not
mean that the drug is bioavailable. Early studies with the
8857

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The impact of pulsed drug treatment on long-term cell growth and death. Examples of long-term growth curves

for cells incubated with either gemcitabine or cisplatin are shown. In both cases, asynchronously growing MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
were incubated with drug at the indicated concentrations for 6 h, then the drug was removed, and the cells allowed to repair, grow, and/or
die over the following 8 days. The experiment was performed in a 96-well format and DNA content was assessed at each time point [14]. By
starting with sufficient cells/well, and harvesting a plate on day 0, the starting DNA content can be assessed. The growth rate of untreated
cells is limited as the wells rapidly reach high cell density, and cells whose growth is partially inhibited will eventually attain the same cell
number as controls. Cells incubated with either 150 nM gemcitabine or 20 - 40 µM cisplatin exhibit curves that would be considered “stable
disease” in a patient. Higher concentrations of both drugs clearly caused a decrease in cell number, but this was not observed until 6 or 4
days following gemcitabine or cisplatin, respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8858

Oncotarget

non-selective Chk1 inhibitor UCN-01 established plasma
concentrations that exceeded 20 µM (far higher than the
100 nM needed to inhibit Chk1) with a half-life of >200
h, but it was discovered that the drug was bound avidly to
the plasma protein alpha-1-acid glycoprotein and hence
was not bioavailable to the tumor [22, 23]. This problem
was not predicted from studies with cell culture or animal
experiments (it does not bind avidly to murine or bovine
serum), but could have been discovered if human serum
has been added to cell cultures [24].
Another issue that confounds extrapolation of
in vitro concentrations to in vivo administration is
the impact of drug metabolism that can result in drug
inactivation. Even more important perhaps are the cases
where metabolism is required to activate a pro-drug;
examples include cyclophosphamide irinotecan, and
nucleoside analogs (e.g., gemcitabine, cytarabine) that
must be phosphorylated before they can impede DNA
synthesis. Many of these metabolites only occur inside
the tumor cells so their level cannot be assessed in blood.
Consequently, pharmacodynamic analysis to assess the
impact of target engagement in the tumor is required and
this should always be included in the design of early phase
clinical trials.

but whether they underwent mitotic events prior to dying
remains to be determined.
The importance of this discussion is in highlighting
that cells can arrest for a while before they die. The
expectation that apoptosis, if it is going to occur, should
be seen within 2 or 3 days has resulted in escalation of
drug concentrations so that apoptosis occurs within a short
time frame. I would recommend that one of the first assays
to perform with any new agent is a long term analysis to
assess the drug concentration and time over which cells
die, perhaps using a simple assay such as trypan blue
exclusion or measuring a decrease in the number of viable
cells as in Figure 2. Only after it is established that cells
die, and when, is it worth asking whether apoptosis was
involved. There is certainly no rationale to study apoptosis
if cells do not die.
Apoptosis provides many convenient assays, but
they are often misused or the results misrepresented.
Consider for example a caspase 3/7 enzyme assay
(available from many commercial sources) where the
results are obtained as optical density or fluorescence and
then expressed as “fold increase in apoptosis.” The extent
of apoptosis reported is primarily dependent on the base
line value. If the base line apoptosis is only 1% of the
cells, then a 5-fold increase as is typical for this assay
might reflect only 5% of the cells undergoing apoptosis,
leaving 95% of the cells alive [30-32]. Similarly,
antibodies that selectively detect a caspase-cleaved
substrate such as poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
can be very sensitive, but provide no information whether
the cleavage is occurring in a small percent of the cells
or all of them [30, 33]. When analyzing PARP cleavage
by western blotting, it is far more informative to use an
antibody that detects both the parent and the cleaved form
so as to be able to report the percent of cleavage [34, 35].
However, a further reservation is that when 50% of PARP
is cleaved, it is still unknown whether this represents
100% cleavage in 50% of the cells, or 50% cleavage
in 100% of the cells. The most informative assays for
apoptosis record the percent of cells that are apoptotic.
The most common assay uses Annexin V to measure the
relocation of phosphatidylserine to the outer surface of the
cell membrane. This assay is often called an early marker
of apoptosis, yet it occurs fairly late in the apoptotic
cascade as it is a consequence of caspase activity. We find
that both PARP cleavage and chromatin condensation can
occur many hours before the cells become positive for
Annexin V [35, 36].

CELLS CAN TAKE A LONG TIME TO DIE
Many years ago, we compared a variety of
cytotoxicity assays following treatment of cells with
cisplatin [25]. We noted a 10-fold range in GI50 values
(50% growth inhibition) depending on the assay used, but
critical to the current review is the fact that the cells took
4-6 days to die as assessed by trypan blue uptake. In a
subsequent study, we observed that cells took 3-4 days to
undergo apoptosis, consistent with the concentration and
time for trypan blue uptake [26]. It is often feasible to kill
cells much faster by using a higher concentration of drug,
but this may involve a completely different mechanism
that has no clinical relevance as discussed above.
In the case of DNA damaging agents, the delay in
cell death (or apoptosis) is easy to reconcile. Cells initially
perceive the damage, activate cell cycle checkpoints, arrest
cell cycle progression, and attempt to repair the damage.
At low levels of damage, cells may recover after a few
days, which certainly contributes to the observed growth
inhibition even though no cells may have died. When the
level of damage is too high, cells may still progress slowly
through the cell cycle and eventually reach a decision as
to whether to undergo mitosis. The damaged cells appear
to undergo a mitotic catastrophe and then apoptosis
[27]. The mitotic catastrophe can occur prematurely
in S phase-arrested cells, or after bypassing the G2
arrest [27-29]. We have performed cell cycle analysis to
complement the growth inhibition curves shown in Figure
2. Concentrations of gemcitabine that killed cells were
preceded by persistent arrest in S phase (data not shown),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TARGET IDENTIFICATION: GENE
KNOCKOUTS MAY NOT PHENOCOPY
DRUG INHIBITION
Genetic approaches are used frequently to
identify and validate a target, and thereby provide the
justification for a drug development program. Yet genetic
8859

Oncotarget

CYTOTOXICITY IN CELLS MAY BE A
CONSEQUENCE OF INHIBITION OF A
DIFFERENT TARGET THAN EXPECTED
FROM CELL-FREE ASSAYS

knockdown or knockout can provide a very different
result than transient inhibition of that protein. All proteins
participate at some point in a protein:protein interaction,
and many proteins function as a component of a multiprotein complex. If one protein is removed from this
complex, the function of the other components can be
unpredictable. One excellent example is the proteasome,
wherein knockdown of one protein can cause failure of
the other proteins to form a productive proteasome and
consequently is lethal to the cells [37].
We have shown that suppression of the DNA exo/
endonuclease Mre11 also reduces levels of Rad50 and
Nbs1 because Mre11 stabilizes this protein complex [38].
In contrast, a small molecule inhibitor of Mre11 nuclease
activity, mirin, does not change levels of these other
proteins [39, 40]. Mre11 has several functions that are
either dependent or independent of its nuclease activity
[41] such that a small molecule inhibitor may have a very
different outcome than genetic suppression.
A number of other examples have been reported
where genetic analysis may mislead drug development.
For example, it has been shown that an inhibitor of
ATM does not phenocopy loss of the ATM protein [42].
Specifically, ATM inhibition prevented damage-induced
sister chromatid exchange (SCE), whereas cells deleted
of ATM exhibited normal SCE when damaged. Similarly,
isoform selective inhibitors of the PI3K p110-beta
can suppress tumor growth while deletion of the gene
enhances tumorigenesis in mice [43]. This differential
response is rationalized as a consequence of substitution
by the p110-alpha isoform in the absence of p110-beta. It
is unknown how many other examples may exist because
such comparisons have been rarely made. It certainly
warrants a cautionary note, particularly as more high
throughput genetic approaches are being used as a starting
point for drug development.
There is a further concern for all genetic suppression
approaches used to identify novel targets as this strategy
inevitably mimics continuous target inhibition and
does not provide an opportunity for target recovery. As
discussed above, this may have little relevance to how
a drug is administered to a patient. As a consequence,
a tremendous effort may be expended on what may
eventually be deemed a poor drug target.
Finally, a limitation of knockout cells is the inability
to generate any dose-response data, a property that is
inherent with drugs. However, one valuable use of gene
knockout systems is to assess the potential for off-target
activities of a drug. If a cell lacking the target gene is
still viable, then administration of a drug should have no
impact on such a cell.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Most anticancer drugs are identified though a cellfree, in vitro assay; for example, kinase inhibition or
disruption of protein:protein interactions. These drugs are
then added to cells and, when inhibition of proliferation
or cytotoxicity is observed, it is assumed the compound
is working through the predicted target. However,
this is a leap of faith that is too often not investigated
further. In depth target validation experiments need to
be performed in cell culture to ensure that the intended
target is appropriately inhibited for the desired time. Target
validation should also be confirmed in a patient once the
drug enters clinical trials.
Our experience in this area relates to “BH3
mimetics” which target the BCL2 family of anti-apoptotic
proteins. We have reported that the majority of putative
BH3 mimetics do not inhibit BCL2 proteins directly in
cells, but rather induce an integrated stress response
that results in upregulation of the pro-apoptotic protein
NOXA [36]. The consequence is selective inhibition
of MCL1, another of the anti-apoptotic BCL2 proteins.
These putative BH3 mimetics appear to function through
a variety of different mechanisms, and often kill cells
in a BAX/BAK-independent manner [36, 44-46]. Most
recently we identified a novel pathway for the putative
BH3 mimetic gossypol, demonstrating that it is an agonist
of phospholipase A2, which as a consequence elevates
intracellular calcium, endoplasmic reticulum stress and
NOXA [47]. Several of these drugs are in clinical trials
under the erroneous expectation that they act as direct
inhibitors of BCL2 anti-apoptotic proteins (e.g., obatoclax,
gossypol). While the induction of NOXA may provide a
novel therapeutic approach, it is important to recognize
the correct mechanism as it may inform novel therapeutic
strategies and patient stratification. This problem of offtarget effects of putative BH3-mimetics is addressed in
more detail in a recent review [48].
The ability of a compound to inhibit its target in a
cell-free system is often reported as IC50 (50% inhibition
of activity) or Ki (affinity for target) and potency in
the low nM range is commonly desired. An erroneous
assumption is often made that this concentration of drug
will also inhibit its target when added to cells. However,
the intracellular concentration is usually much lower than
the applied drug concentration because of extracellular
protein binding, or because the cytoplasmic membrane
can be an effective barrier between drug and target.
The bioavailable concentration may also be limited by
intracellular metabolism or protein binding. Generally a
drug with nM inhibitory concentration in vitro will require
µM concentrations to inhibit its target in cells. Hence, if
8860

Oncotarget

a drug inhibits its target at µM concentrations in a cellfree system, as do many putative BH3 mimetics, and
inhibits cell growth at the same concentration, then its
proposed mechanism of action in cells should normally be
considered suspect. Exceptions to this concern are drugs
that are indeed concentrated in cells though usually into
specific organelles such as weak acids in mitochondria or
weak bases in lysosomes.

which measurements are made as the cell killing is more
evident at longer times.
As growth inhibition is the usual endpoint of
most cytotoxicity assays, most synergy assessments are
performed at lower, sub-optimal concentrations of each
drug, so that a combination effect can be observed. If one
uses two drugs that each inhibit cell growth by 95%, it
would not be possible to calculate a combination index.
In fact, synergy is most commonly observed at drug
concentrations eliciting low efficacy as single agents.
This is evident in a recent investigation that combined
gemcitabine and a Chk1 inhibitor [51]. The authors
compared three different calculations of synergy (Bliss,
Lowe and Highest single agent) and reported that synergy
was observed at sub-GI50 concentrations of each drug.
Another recent example is the reported synergy between
inhibitors of Her2 and CDK4/6; the problem with this
study is that incubation with a CDK4/6 inhibitor should
arrest the cells in G1, yet its failure to do so demonstrates
that it was not (or minimally) inhibiting its target [52].
Hence, I question whether a combination of drugs at suboptimal concentrations has any real relevance to treating
the patient who will hopefully be administered optimal
doses.
It has been stated that synergism is independent of
mechanism of action because the mass-action law-based
determination of synergism is mechanism independent
[53]. Unfortunately, the mechanism of action of two drugs
can have a critical impact on the experimental design and
conclusions. This is particularly evident with drugs that
perturb the cell cycle where one drug may arrest the cell
cycle and thereby elicit resistance to the second drug;
this would be deemed antagonism. There is a classic
example of the cell cycle kinetic effects associated with
the combination of vinblastine and cytarabine in a murine
leukemia model [54]. When both drugs were given
simultaneously, they were antagonistic. However, as the
time between treatments was extended an additive or even
synergistic effect was observed. These observations can be
explained if vinblastine treatment transiently synchronized
the cells in mitosis, so that 16 h later, there were many
more cells progressing through S phase to be susceptible
to cytarabine. A similar cell kinetic association was
observed with the combination of paclitaxel and cisplatin
wherein greater efficacy was observed when cisplatin was
administered after paclitaxel [55, 56]. Hence, mechanistic
understanding of each drug should lead to a rationale
schedule of administration. It should also be emphasized
that these experiments were performed in vivo in which
the drugs were cleared by the mouse such that the tumor
was only exposed to each drug for a short time period.
Experiments using continuous treatment schedules in vitro
would have been unable to observe this effect.
CPX-351, a mixture of cytarabine and daunorubicin
in a slow-release liposomal formulation, is an interesting
exception to the apparent need for appropriate drug

OVER ENTHUSIASM FOR SYNERGY
If the combination of two drugs works better
than either drug alone, we begin to get excited. If the
combination is much greater than expected, we begin to
think the interaction might be synergistic. We then apply
a mathematical calculation to demonstrate that the drug
combination is truly synergistic. But does demonstration
of synergy in vitro really lead to clinically important
advances? I believe the term synergy has been hijacked
by mathematicians without understanding the critical
biological questions. An extensive review of many
mathematical approaches can be found in reference [49].
The most commonly used assessment of synergy
is based on the median effect analysis whereby two
drugs are tested at a constant ratio across a range of
drug concentrations, starting with an equi-effective
concentration; for example drugs are combined at a
range of concentrations above and below the GI50.
A combination index is then calculated and if it is <1,
the drugs are deemed synergistic [50]. While this may
be mathematically meaningful, it may have very little
relevance to preclinical drug development. For example,
a problem with medium effect analysis is that it supposes
that drugs will be administered to patients at doses that
will have a similar (median) effect.
As discussed above, most cytotoxicity assays only
measure growth inhibition, yet as shown in Figure 2,
higher drug concentrations may (hopefully) kill cells. An
increase in cell death is the desired goal, but how does one
express synergy when the endpoint changes? For example,
if one combines two drugs that are equal in efficacy to 150
nM gemcitabine as shown in Figure 2 (i.e., 100% growth
inhibition but no apparent cell death), the additive effect
experimentally would be equivalent to that observed with
300 nM gemcitabine. In this case the number of viable
cells decreased from 100% with 150 nM gemcitabine
to about 20% with 300 nM gemcitabine after 8 days.
If these were two different drugs, each eliciting 100%
survival alone but with the combination resulting in 20%
survival, it would be considered synergistic according
to current mathematical models, yet the experimental
design clearly shows only additivity. Perhaps a better
definition of synergy might be when the effect of the drug
combination exceeds that achieved simply by increasing
the concentration of either drug alone by two fold. The
magnitude of the effect also depends on the time point at
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8861

Oncotarget

scheduling. The molar ratio of the two drugs (5:1)
was derived from in vitro synergy experiments using
continuous drug treatments [57]. The slow release
liposome circumvents the different clearance rates for
the two drugs, and maintains this molar ratio in vivo.
Improved therapeutic responses have been observed in
patients with AML [13]. As these studies did not assess
the potential role of cell cycle kinetics, it is possible that
an even greater therapeutic response might be attainable
with different drug schedules.
An understanding of the mechanism of action of
each drug in a combination is critical for another reason.
Consider a Chk1 inhibitor that inhibits its target but does
not elicit any cytotoxicity as a single agent, as we have
shown for many cell lines [14]. If the concentration of
the drug is escalated to achieve a GI50 concentration, it is
probable that the cytotoxicity is due to inhibition of some
other target. While the drug might still be inhibiting (or
killing) more cells, it is no longer relevant to the target
and hypothesis being tested. If a drug inhibits its target,
its concentration should not be increased further, and
the outcome of the drug combination should perhaps
be referred to as an enhancement ratio such as the fold
decrease in GI50 when the second drug is added. These
situations are perhaps much more exciting than situations
in which both drugs are cytotoxic.

mutations in EGFR prior to prescribing such therapy, and
a similar approach will need to become the standard for all
new targeted therapeutic strategies.
Another example from clinical observations is a
patient with metastatic bladder cancer whose remarkable
response to the mTOR inhibitor everolimus was attributed
to a loss-of-function mutation in TSC1, a suppressor of the
mTOR pathway [61]. It is suggested that mutated TSC1
may be present in 9% of bladder cancers and so may
provide a responsive patient population. Positive response
to everolimus has also been reported in patients with subependymal giant cell astrocytomas, a disease associated
with inactivation of TSC [62].
A more extreme case is the one patient who had
a complete and durable response to the topoisomerase
inhibitor irinotecan plus the Chk1/Chk2 inhibitor
AZD7762. Genomic sequencing led to identification of a
mutation in RAD50, a component of the ATM-dependent
DNA damage response pathway, and subsequent
experiments validated this mutation as being causative in
the sensitivity of the tumor [63].
Clinical trials may identify these outlier responses,
yet these trials would be far less expensive if potential
responders were identified before the trial began. We
discussed above our screen for cell lines sensitive to
Chk1 inhibitors, and discussed the availability of other
large databases that may predict sensitivity to drugs. But I
reiterate my concern that most of those screens have used
continuous drug treatments that may provide results that
are overly optimistic compared to a patient receiving bolus
drug treatment. The detection of potential responders may
require appropriate assays across large panels of cell lines,
but that will still be far cheaper than conducting a large
clinical trial in which very few responders are seen.

THE FOCUS ON ONLY A FEW CELL
LINES CAN MISREPRESENT THE
EFFICACY OF A DRUG
Despite the recent analysis of large panels of cell
lines in a few publications as discussed in Section 2, the
majority of cancer biology still tends to focus in depth
on one cell line, and then only occasionally compares
outcomes in a few other lines. Such experiments miss
the variability that exist across cell lines and that could
lead to the identification of novel therapeutic strategies in
hypersensitive subsets of patients. One relevant example
has been the extensive use of the U2OS osteosarcoma cell
line to study DNA damage-induced checkpoint regulation
[58, 59], yet this cell line turns out to be one of the few
that is hypersensitive to Chk1 inhibition [14, 21], and
consequently, the different responses to Chk1 inhibitors
has been missed. Put another way, the overt use of one
sensitive cell line may lead to the expectation that a drug
should have broad therapeutic activity in patients.
The potential variation in drug responses has been
primarily driven by clinical observations. For example,
early clinical trials with EGFR inhibitors did not
recognize that tumors with a gain-of-function mutation
in EGFR would be uniquely sensitive [60]. Additional
preclinical analysis may have identified this sensitivity and
saved millions of dollars in the cost of clinical trials by
selecting only those patients with the greatest likelihood
of responding. These days all patients are screened for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TUMOR HETEROGENEITY AND A
SOLUTION FOR IT WAS RECOGNIZED
50 YEARS AGO
Tumor heterogeneity is synonymous with drug
resistance. The realization that tumors contain multiple
genetic variants, exhibit a heterogeneous phenotype and
consequently contain clones with different responses to
drug is not a new observation [64, 65]. However, even
before this realization, drug treatments had been developed
to circumvent the problem. The earliest administration
of chemotherapeutic drugs involved single agents, but it
rapidly became evident that drug combinations were much
more effective. A series of guidelines were developed,
the most important of which for the current discussion
is that multiple drugs that do not have overlapping
mechanisms of resistance should be combined (certainly
they should avoid overlapping toxicities too) [66]. Many
standard therapies involve 3-6 different drugs while
in the case of childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia,
curative therapy has involved administration of up to 11
8862

Oncotarget

different drugs through remission induction, consolidation
and maintenance therapy [67]. The new era of targeted
molecular therapeutics has unfortunately reverted
primarily to administration of single agents. Resistance
to single drugs is inevitable, and the overt optimism that
one new molecular targeted drug will cure cancer needs
to be discarded. Most of these new drugs provide only
marginal increase in life span, and at an enormous expense
[68] (imatinib and crizotinib are possible exceptions).
Unfortunately, the goal of clinical trials has taken a
backward step to accept an “increase in life-span, ” but
the dream of a cure is still possible if we build effective
multi-drug combinations.
A palpable tumor has >109 tumor cells, though
most advanced tumors present with far more cells. Given
a spontaneous mutation frequency at any locus of 10-6,
there will already be at least 1000 cells resistant to
any drug at the time of presentation or relapse (usually
many more as the mutation frequency in a tumor with
genomic instability is thought to be much higher). Indeed,
mutations eliciting resistance to targeted therapies have
been identified in biopsies collected prior to therapy [69,
70]. One problem in clinical trials is that we wait until
the tumor has reappeared before initiating a second line
of therapy, yet resistance to that therapy will already
have developed. Chemotherapy (which includes targeted
therapies) would be much more effective if administered
when there is minimal disease. Debulking (surgery) is one
means to reduce tumor load, as is commonly used in breast
cancer patients, and is then followed by adjuvant therapy
even if there is no detectable tumor. Yet surgical options
are often limited, detection of tumor margins difficult, and
micrometastases missed. I believe we should not discard
the well-established chemotherapy agents that have been
the mainstay of therapy for many decades, and are still
the most effective drugs in use. While these drugs have
only cured some cancers, they are often effective initially
at reducing the tumor burden. Consequently, we should
be developing therapeutic strategies that combine surgery
and established chemotherapy (or radiation), and novel
targeted therapies should be administered when the tumor
burden is minimal.
I discussed the issue of whether drug combinations
should be considered synergistic. In designing drug
combinations to circumvent resistance, it will be important
to recognize that any drugs that are only effective
in combination will increase the number of possible
resistance mechanisms, and resistance to either drug
would make the combination ineffective. Consequently,
it will be far more beneficial to combine two drugs that
have completely independent actions, and independent
mechanisms of resistance. Any drugs that are only
effective in combination should be considered as a single
drug when adding up the total number of drugs in the
combination.
There is one final issue in developing drug
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

combinations that has rarely been addressed. Cell culturebased research generally operates on the concept that the
two drugs work on a single cell. In vivo, this rationale does
not have to hold, and drugs may target different cells, for
example tumor cells at different phases of the cell cycle, or
the microenvironment or vasculature. Furthermore, drugs
do not have to be administered simultaneously but could
be administered in alternating or sequential schedules.
This might reduce the potential increase in toxicity
which can result in having to decrease the dose with a
concomitant decrease in efficacy.
Today, we can dream of true precision medicine
where tumor DNA is sequenced to predict which drugs
will be most effective against a particular tumor. Tumors
have multiple mutations, and hopefully many Achilles
heels, and hopefully many drugs can be identified that
target these susceptibilities. If these drugs are selective
for the tumor, then it should be possible to combine them
without increased toxicity and thereby provide effective
combination therapy.

SUMMARY
The efficacy of a drug in a clinical trial is usually
recorded as stable disease, partial or complete remission.
These endpoints are far removed from most of the
preclinical research in which growth inhibition has been
the mainstay of cytotoxicity assays. Drugs need to induce
cell killing if they are going to shrink the tumor. Drug
concentrations and exposure times in culture should
reflect and guide future administration schedules. A simple
change in expression of data to “surviving cells” may go a
long way to emphasizing how much better our preclinical
drug development needs to be.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ongoing work of the author is supported by NIH
grant CA117874. The author also acknowledges support
from a Cancer Center Support Grant to the Norris Cotton
Cancer Center (CA23108).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The author declares no conflict of interest

REFERENCES
1.	 DiMasi JA, Feldman L, Seckler A, Wilson A. Trends in
risks associated with new drug development: success rates
for investigational drugs. Clin Pharmacol Therap. 2010;
87:272-277.
2.	 Paul SM, Mytelka DS, Dunwiddie CT, Persinger CC,
Munos BH, Lindborg SR, Schacht AL. How to improve
R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical industry’s grand
8863

Oncotarget

3.	 Scannell JW, Blanckley A, Boldenn H, Warrington B.
Diagnosing the decline in pharmaceutical R&D efficiency.
Nature Rev Drug Discovery. 2012; 11:191-200.

challenge. Nature Rev Drug Discovery. 2010; 9:203-214.

Lucas MM, Eastman A, Kisselev AF. Molecular basis
of differential sensitivity of myeloma cells to clinically
relevant bolus treatment with bortezomib. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e56132.

4.	 Wilding JL, Bodmer WF. Cancer cell lines for drug
discovery and development. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:23772384.

16.	 Himmelstein KJ, Patton TF, Belt RJ, Taylor S, Repta AJ,
Sternson LA. Clinical kinetics of intact cisplatin and some
related species. Clin Pharmacol Therap. 1981; 29:658-664.

5.	 Gao H, Korn JM, Ferretti S, Monahan JE, Wang Y, Singh
M, (and 58 other authors). High-throughput screening using
patient—derived tumor xenografts to predict clinical trial
drug response. Nature Med. 2015; 21:1318-1325.

17.	 Wang C, Youle RJ. Predominant requirement of Bax
for apoptosis in HCT116 cells is determined by Mcl-1’s
inhibitory effect on Bak. Oncogene. 2012; 31:3177-3189.
18.	 Sorenson CM, Barry MA, Eastman A. Analysis of events
associated with cell cycle arrest at G2 and cell death
induced by cisplatin. J Nat Cancer Inst. 1990; 82:749-754.

6. Brown JM, Attardi LD. The role of apoptosis in cancer
development and treatment response. Nature Rev Cancer.
2005; 5:231-237.

19.	 Smith MA, Houghton P. A proposal regarding reporting
of in vitro testing results. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:28282833.

7.	 Monks A, Scudiero D, Skehan P, Shoemaker R, Paull K,
Vistica D, Hose C, Langley J, Cronise P, Vaigro-Wolff
A, Gray-Goodrich M, Campbell H, Mayo J, Boyd M.
Feasibility of a high-flux anticancer drug screen using a
diverse panel of cultured tumor cell lines. J Nat Cancer Inst.
1991; 83:757-766.

20.	 Daud AI, Ashworth MT, Strosberg J, Goldman JW,
Mendelson D, Springett G, Venook AP, Loechner S, Rosen
L, Shanahan F, Parry D, Shumway S, Grabowsky JA, et
al. A Phase I dose-escalation trial of Checkpoint kinase 1
inhibitor MK-8776 as monotherapy and in combination
with gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumors. J
Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:1060-1066.

8.	 Weinstein JN, Myers TG, O’Connor PM, Friend SH,
Fornace AJ, Kohn KW, Fojo T, Bates SE, Rubinstein LV,
Anderson NL, Buolamwini JK, van Osdol WW, Monks AP,
et al. An information-intensive approach to the molecular
pharmacology of cancer. Science. 1997; 275:343-349.

21.	 Montano R, Chung I, Garner KM, Parry D, Eastman
A. Preclinical development of the novel Chk1 inhibitor
SCH900776 in combination with DNA damaging agents
and antimetabolites. Mol Cancer Therap. 2012; 11:427-438.

9.	 Seashore-Ludlow B, Rees MG, Cheah JH, Cokol M,
Price EV, Coletti ME, (and 20 other authors). Harnessing
connectivity in a large-scale small molecule sensitivity
dataset. Cancer Discovery. 2015; 5:1210-1223.

22.	 Fuse E, Tanii H, Kurata N, Kobayashi H, Shimada Y,
Tamura T, Sasaki Y, Tanigawara Y, Lush RD, Headlee D,
Figg WD, Arbuck SG, Senderowicz AM, et al. Unpredicted
clinical pharmacology of UCN-01 caused by specific
binding to human α1-acid glycoprotein. Cancer Res. 1998;
58:3248-3253.

10.	 Komlodi-Pasztor E, Sackett DL, Fojo AT. Inhibitors
targeting mitosis: tales of how great drugs against a
promising target were brought down by a flawed rationale.
Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:51-63.

23.	 Perez RP, Lewis LD, Beelen AP, Olszanski AJ, Johnston
N, Rhodes CH, Beaulieu B, Ernstoff MS, Eastman A.
Modulation of cell cycle progression in human tumors: a
pharmacokinetic and tumor molecular pharmacodynamic
study of cisplatin plus the Chk1 inhibitor UCN-01 (NSC
638850). Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:7079-7085.

11.	 Bocci G, Kerbel RS. Pharmacokinetics of metronomic
chemotherapy: a neglected but crucial aspect. Nature Rev
Clin Oncol. 2016; 13: in press.
12.	 Francia G, Shaked Y, Hashimoto K, Sun J, Yin M, Cesta
C, Xu P, Man S, Hacki C, Stewart J, Uhlik M, Dantzig AH,
Foster FS, Kerbel RS. Low-dose metronomic oral dosing of
a pro-drug of gemcitabine (LY2334737) causes antitumor
effects in the absence of systemic vasculogenesis. Mol
Cancer Therap. 2012; 11:680-689.

24.	 Eastman A, Kohn EA, Brown MK, Rathman J, Livingstone
M, Blank DH, Gribble GW. A novel indolocarbazole,
ICP-1, abrogates DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest
and enhances cytotoxicity. Similarities and differences to
the cell cycle checkpoint abrogator UCN-01. Mol Cancer
Therap. 2002; 1:1067-1078.

13.	 Lancet JE, Cortes JE, Hogge DE, Tallman MS, Kovacsovics
TJ, Damon LE, Komrokji R, Solomon SR, Kolitz JE,
Cooper M, Yeager AM, Louie AC, Feldman EJ. Phase
2 trial of CPX-351, a fixed 5:1 molar ratio of cytarabine/
daunorubicin, vs cytarabine/daunorubicin in older adults
with untreated AML. Blood. 2014; 123:3239-3246.

25.	Sorenson CM, Eastman A. Mechanism of cisdiamminedichloroplatinum(II)-induced cytotoxicity: role
of G2 arrest and DNA double-strand breaks. Cancer Res.
1988; 48:4484-4488.

14.	 Sakurikar N, Thompson R, Montano R, Eastman A. A
subset of cancer cell lines is acutely sensitive to the Chk1
inhibitor MK8776 as monotherapy due to CDK2 activation
in S phase. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:1380-1394. doi:10.18632/
oncotarget.6364.

26.	Barry MA, Behnke CA, Eastman A. Activation of
programmed cell death (apoptosis) by cisplatin, other
anticancer drugs, toxins and hyperthermia. Biochem
Pharmacol. 1990; 40:2353-2362.
27.	 Demarcq C, Bunch RT, Creswell D, Eastman A. The role

15.	 Shabaneh TB, Downey SL, Goddard AL, Screen M,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8864

Oncotarget

of cell cycle progression in cisplatin-induced apoptosis in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Cell Growth Different. 1994;
5:983-993.

Biol. 2008; 4:119-125.
40.	 Garner KM, Pletnev AA, Eastman A. Corrected structure of
mirin, a small-molecule inhibitor of the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1
complex. Nature Chem Biol. 2009; 5:129-130.

28.	 Schlegel R, Pardee AB. Caffeine-induced uncoupling
of mitosis from the completion of DNA replication in
mammalian cells. Science. 1986; 232:1264-1266.

41.	 Tsang E, Miyabe I, Iraqui I, Zheng J, Lambert SAE,
Carr AM. The extent of error-prone replication restart
by homologous recombination is controlled by Exo1 and
checkpoint proteins. J Cell Science. 2014; 127:2983-2994.

29.	 Aarts M, Sharpe R, Garcia-Murillas I, Gevensleben H,
Hurd MS, Shumway SD, Toniatti C, Ashworth A, Turner
NC. Forced mitotic entry of S phase cells as a therapeutic
strategy induced by inhibition of WEE1. Cancer Discovery.
2012; 2:524-539.

42.	 Choi S, Gamper AM, White JS, Bakkenist CJ. Inhibition
of ATM kinase activity does not phenocopy ATM protein
disruption. Implications for the clinical utility of ATM
kinase inhibitors. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:4052-4057.

30.	 Escobar D, Hepp MI, Farkas C, Campos T, Sodir NM,
Morales M, Alvarez CI, Swigart L, Evan GI, Gutierrez JL,
Nishinakamura R, Castro AF, Pincheira R. Sall2 is required
for proapoptotic Noxa expression and genotoxic stressinduced apoptosis by doxorubicin. Cell Death Disease.
2015; 6:e1816.

43.	 Utermark T, Rao T, Cheng H, Wang Q, Lee SH, Wang
ZC, Iglehart JD, Roberts TM, Muller WJ, Zhao JJ. The
p110α and p110β isoforms of PI3K play divergent roles in
mammary gland development and tumorigenesis. Genes
Dev. 2012; 26:1573-1586.

31.	 Sinha BK, Kumar A, Bhattacharjee S, Espey MG, Mason
RP. Effect of nitric oxide on the anticancer activity of the
topoisomerase-active drugs etoposide and adriamycin
in human melanoma cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013;
347:607-614.

44.	 Soderquist RS, Pletnev AA, Danilov AV, Eastman A. The
putative BH3 mimetic S1 sensitizes leukemia to ABT737 by increasing reactive oxygen species, inducing the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response, and up-regulating
the BH3-only protein NOXA. Apoptosis. 2014; 19:201-209.

32.	 Ham J, Costa C, Sano R, Lochmann TL, Sennott EM, Patel
NU, (and 26 other authors). Exploitation of the apoptosisprimed state of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma to develop
a potent and specific targeted therapy combination. Cancer
Cell. 2016; 29:159-172.

45.	 Vogler M, Weber K, Dinsdale D, Schmitz I, SchulzeOsthoff K, Dyer MJS, Cohen GM. Different forms of cell
death induced by putative BCL2 inhibitors. Cell Death
Differ. 2009; 16:1030-1039.
46.	 Billard C. BH3 mimetics: status of the field and new
developments. Mol Cancer Therap. 2013; 12:1691-1700.

33.	 Lee HH, Ye S, Li XJ, Lee KB, Park MH, Kim SM.
Combination treatment with paclitaxel and doxorubicin
inhibits growth of human esophageal squamous cancer cells
by inactivation of Akt. Oncol Rep. 2014; 31:183-188.

47.	Soderquist RS, Danilov AV, Eastman A. Gossypol
increases expression of the pro-apoptotic protein through a
novel mechanism involving phospholipase A2, cytoplasmic
calcium and endoplasmic reticulum stress. J Biol Chem.
2014; 289:16190-16199.

34.	 Wolf CM, Reynolds JE, Morana SJ, Eastman A. The
temporal relationship between protein phosphatase, ICE/
CED-3 proteases, intracellular acidification, and DNA
fragmentation in apoptosis. Exp Cell Res. 1997; 230:22-27.

48.	 Soderquist RS, Eastman A. BCL2 inhibitors as anticancer
drugs: a plethora of misleading BH3 mimetics. Mol Cancer
Therap. 2016; 15:2011-2017.

35.	Bates DJP, Danilov AV, Lowrey CH, Eastman A.
Vinblastine rapidly induces NOXA and acutely sensitizes
primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells to ABT-737.
Mol Cancer Therap. 2013; 12:1504-1514.

49.	 Berenbaum MC. What is synergy? Pharm Rev. 1989; 41:93141.
50.	 Chou T-C, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Regul. 1986; 22:27-55.

36.	 Albershardt TC, Salerni BL, Soderquist RS, Bates DJP,
Pletnev AA, Kisselev AF, Eastman A. Multiple BH3
mimetics antagonize anti-apoptotic MCL1 by inducing the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response and up-regulating
BH3-only protein NOXA. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:2488224895.

51.	 Koh SB, Courtin A, Boyce RJ, Boyle RG, Richards FM,
Jodrell DI. CHK1 inhibition synergizes with gemcitabine
initially by destablizing the DNA replication apparatus.
Cancer Res. 2016; 755:3583-3595.

37.	 Hilt W, Wolf DH. Proteasomes of the yeast S. cerevisiae:
genes structure and functions. Mol Biol Rep. 1995; 21:3-10.

52.	 Goel S, Wang Q, Watt AC, Tolaney SM, Dillon DA, Li
W, Ramm S, Palmer AC, Yuzugullu H, Varadan V, Tuck
D, Harris LN, Wong KK, et al. Overcoming therapeutic
resistance in HER2-positive breast cancers using CDK4/6
inhibitors. Cancer Cell. 2016; 29:255-269.

38.	 Garner KM, Eastman A. Variations in Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1
status and DNA damage-induced S-phase arrest in cell lines
of the NCI60 panel. BMC Cancer. 2011; 11:206.
39.	 Dupre A, Boyer-Chatnet L, Sattler RM, Modi AP, Lee JH,
Nicolette ML, Kopelovich L, Jasin M, Baer R, Paull TT,
Gautier J. A forward chemical genetic screen reveals an
inhibitor of the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 complex. Nature Chem
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53.	 Chou T-C. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440-446.
54.	 Goldin A, Vadlamudi S. Influence of mitotic cycle inhibitors
8865

Oncotarget

on the antileukemic activity of cytosone arabinoside (NSC63878) in mice bearing leukemia L1210. Cancer Chemother
Rep. 1971; 55:547-555.

63.	 Al-Ahmadie H, Iyer G, Hohl M, Asthana S, Inagaki A,
Schultz N, (and 18 other authors). Synthetic lethality in
ATM-deficient RAD50-mutant tumors underlies outlier
response to cancer therapy. Cancer Discovery. 2014;
4:1014-1021.

55.	 Rowinsky EK, Citardi MJ, Noe DA, Donehower RC.
Sequence-dependent cytotoxic effects due to combinations
of cisplatin and the antimicrotubule agents taxol and
vincristine. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1993; 119:727-733.

64.	 Hakansson L, Trope C. On the presence within tumors of
clones that differ in sensitivity to cytostatic drugs. Acta
Pathol Microbiol Scand A. 1974; 82:32-40.

56.	 Rowinsky EK, Gilbert MR, McGuire WP, Noe DA,
Grochow LB, Forastiere AA, Ettinge DS, Lubejko BG,
Clark B, Sartorius SE, Cornblath DR, Hendricks CB,
Donehower RC. Sequences of taxol and cisplatin: a phase I
and pharmacologic study. J Clin Oncol. 1991; 9:1692-1703.

65.	 Heppner GH. Tumor heterogeneity. Cancer Res. 1984;
44:2259-22265.
66.	Pratt, W.B., Ruddon, R.W., Ensminger, W.D., and
Maybaum, J. The Anticancer Drugs. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994.

57.	 Tardi P, Johnstone S, Harasym N, Xie S, Harasym T,
Zismann N, Harvie P, Bernudes D, Mayer L. In vivo
maintenance of synergistic cytarabine:daunorubucin ratios
greatly enhances therapeutic efficacy. Leukemia Res. 2009;
33:129-139.

67.	 Pui C-H, Boyett JM, Rivera GK, Hancock ML, Sandlund
JT, Ribeiro RC, Rubnitz JE, Behm FG, Raimondi SC,
Gajjar A, Razzouk B, Campana D, Kun LE, Relling MV,
Evans WE. Long-term results of Total Therapy studies 11,
12 and 13A for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia at
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital. Leukemia. 2000;
14:2286-2294.

58.	 Toledo LI, Altmeyer M, Rask M-B, Lukas C, Larsen DH,
Povlsen LK, Bekker-Jensen S, Mailand N, Bartek J, Lukas
J. ATR prohibits replication catastrophe by preventing
global exhaustion of RPA. Cell. 2013; 155:1088-1103.

68.	 Fojo T, Mailankody S, Lo A. Unintended consequences
of expensive cancer therapeutics - the pursuit of marginal
indications and a me-too mentality that stifles innovation
and creativity. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014;
140:1225-1236.

59.	 Buisson R, Boisvert JL, Benes CH, Zou L. Distinct but
concerted roles of ATR, DNA-PK and Chk1 in countering
replication stress during S phase. Mol Cell. 2015; 59:10111024.
60.	 Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel
S, Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon TJ, Naoki
K, Sasaki H, Fujii Y, Eck MJ, Sellers WR, Johnson BE,
Meyerson M. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation
with clinical response to gefitinib therapy. Science. 2004;
304:1497-1500.

69.	 Roche-Lestienne C, Soenen-Cornu V, Gardel-Duflos N, Lai
JL, Philippe N, Facon T, Fenaux P, Preudhomme C. Several
types of mutations of the Abl gene can be found in chronic
myeloid patients resistant to STI571, and they can pre-exist
to the onset of treatment . Blood. 2002; 100:1014-1018.
70.	 Inukai M, Toyooka S, Ito S, Asano H, Ichihara S, Soh J,
Suehisa H, Ouchida M, Aoe K, Aoe M, Kiura K, Shimizu
N, Date H. Presence of epidermal growth factor gene
T790M mutation as a minor clone in non-small cell lung
cancer. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:7854-7858.

61.	 Iyer G, Hanrahan AJ, Milowsky MI, Al-Ahmadie H,
Scott SN, Janakiraman M, Pirun M, Sander C, Socci ND,
Ostrovnaya I, Viale A, Heguy A, Peng L, et al. Genome
sequencing identifies a basis for everolimus sensitivity.
Science. 2012; 338:221.
62.	 Curran MP. Everolimus: in patients with subependymal
giant cell astrocytoma associated with tuberous sclerosis
complex. Pediatr Drugs. 2012; 14:51-60.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8866

Oncotarget

