Oncotarget, March, Vol.4, No 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Gfi1 as a regulator of p53 and a therapeutic target for ALL
Cyrus Khandanpour and Tarik Möröy
The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 can be a socalled “oncorequisite” factor that is required for the
development and maintenance of lymphoid neoplasia,
such as Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), but does
not have a direct role in the ontogeny of the disease. The
study supporting this role of Gfi1 (Khandanpour C, Phelan
J et al., Cancer Cell, 2013, 23(2):200-214) shows that
inhibition of Gfi1 cannot only cure mice from ALL but
also blocks the expansion of human primary ALL cells.
The study concludes that this feature of Gfi1 could be
exploited to improve current ALL therapies.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma is the
most common pediatric cancer and the second most
common form of acute leukemia in adults. ALL patients are
currently treated with chemotherapy and in certain cases
with additional irradiation. Moreover, both autologous or
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) are used to
treat ALL, but many patients still relapse, indicating that
new treatment regimens are urgently needed. A number of
laboratories have accumulated evidence that Gfi1 maybe
implicated in the development of T-ALL. For instance,
our laboratory has shown that high levels of Gfi1 can
accelerate T-cell lymphomagenesis in mice in the presence
of other activated oncogenes. In addition, we also found
that Gfi1 is required for an undisturbed development of
lymphocytes, but Gfi1 knockout mice still have a thymus
and at least partially functional B- and T-cells. Finally,
data from the public domain and from the laboratory of
H. Leighton Grimes, who is a collaborator and coauthor
of the study published in Cancer Cell, indicated that Gfi1
is highly expressed in subsets of human T-cell leukemia.
With these findings, the question arose, whether Gfi1 may
be required for the initiation, maintenance or progression
of ALL and if this were the case, whether Gfi1 may
represent a potential new therapeutic target.
To test this hypothesis, mouse models were used in
the Grimes and Möröy laboratories that develop diseases
similar to T-ALL and B-ALL and in which Gfi1 could be
deleted either constitutively or conditionally. In all cases,
the deletion of Gfi1 not only delayed T-ALL progression,
but also abrogated the ability of the leukemic cells to grow
in transplanted hosts. However, loss of Gfi1 did not delay
tumor initiation in case of B-ALL but also impeded the
ability of the B-ALL cells to grow upon transplantation.
The most compelling experiment was the conditional
ablation of Gfi1 in mice after a T-cell or B-cell lymphoma
was established. The deletion of the Gfi1 gene led to
tumor regression and clearance of blast cells from blood
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and to the survival of the animals, whereas the appropriate
control mice all died. The most pertinent question was
whether this effect could also be seen in human cells. To
test this, immune deficient mice (NSG) were transplanted
with cells from a T-ALL patient that had been treated but
relapsed and succumbed to the disease. The inhibition
of Gfi1 was achieved with a morpholino (an antisense
reagent) that was applied to the transplanted NSG mice
and could indeed significantly inhibit the expansion of the
human T-ALL cells. Since morpholinos have previously
been used in the clinic to treat other diseases, this
experiment showed that inhibition of Gfi1 was not only
beneficial but could also be fully applicable in a clinical
setting using these antisense reagents.
The study also offers an explanation how the
ablation of Gf1 may lead to regression of leukemia. It is
known that Gfi1 binds to a Lysine specific demethylase
(called LSD1) through a N-terminal 20 amino acid
domain, which is conserved between Gfi1 and a number
of other, similar transcription factors such as Snail and
Slug and is thus called SNAG domain. LSD1 can remove
methyl groups from histones, typically histone H3, and
thereby mediates the transcriptional repressor function
of Gfi1. But LSD1 has also other substrates, notably
the tumor suppressor p53, which it can demethylate at
carboxy-terminal Lysine residues. This demethylation
regulates several features of p53 among them its efficiency
of chromatin binding. We found that Gfi1 can bind to p53
and that both factors co-occupy common target genes
that encode pro-apoptotic proteins such as Puma, Noxa
and Bax. Evidence from chromatin-immune-precipitation
(Ch-IP) experiments suggests that Gfi1 forms a ternary
complex with p53 and LSD1 at p53 target genes such as
Puma, Noxa and Bax. Once a DNA damage signal occurs,
these target genes become transcriptionally activated and
initiate apoptosis. We could show that in leukemic cells,
a DNA damage response pathway is active, very likely
as a result of ongoing oncogenic signaling in these cells.
This was in agreement with a concept that was previously
proposed by Jiri Bartek and colleagues who stated that the
process of malignant transformation causes DNA damage.
We propose that in such a situation, Gfi1 recruits LSD1
to p53 and dampens its activity by de-methylating p53 at
C-terminal lysines to prevent immediate apoptosis. In the
absence of Gfi1, however, this demethylation cannot occur
and p53 is overactive, killing the tumor cells and in our
case eliminates the leukemia (Figure 1).
In summary, we have identified Gfi1 as a so-called
374

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 374-375

Me

p53

LSD1

Me

H3K4

DNA damage
or
oncogenic
signaling that
induces
DNA damage

Gfi1

Bax
Noxa
Puma

Gfi1 present:
Transcription
repressed

Bax
Noxa
Puma

Gfi1 absent:
Transcription
activated

Nucleosome

Me
Me

p53

H3K4

Induction of apoptosis
SNAG domain
Zinc finger domain

Figure 1: Model of Gfi1 function in T-ALL: p53 dependent transcription of target genes is activated in the absence
of Gfi1. DNA damage occurs in tumor cells in the process of malignant transformation according to the concept that oncogenic lesions

induce a DNA damage response. As a consequence p53 is activated, but is controlled by Gfi1 because it can recruit LSD1 to p53 to keep it
de-methylated at its C-terminus. If Gfi1 is lacking, LSD1 cannot de-methylate p53 with the consequence that p53 is activated and causes
the over-expression of apoptosis inducing genes, which eventually leads to the elimination of leukemic cells.

“oncorequisite” factor, which does not play a direct role
in the process of malignant transformation as such, but is
critically required by tumor cells to survive and progress,
in particular to counteract p53 mediated cell death. Thus,
targeting Gfi1 offers a new and very promising approach to
treat T-ALL and to improve therapy outcome. We conclude
from our data that absence or inhibition of Gfi1 expression
sensitizes leukemic cells to undergo accelerated cell death.
The curative effect that Gfi1 ablation has on the leukemia
outweighs the negative effects that a deletion of Gfi1 will
have, such as neutropenia, in particular since these will be
transient. This suggests that inhibition of Gfi1 expression
could be a new adjuvant therapy that renders current ALL
therapies more effective. Studies are currently under way
to test this possibility in a clinical setting.
Cyrus Khandanpour: Department of Hematology,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany
Tarik Möröy: Hematopoiesis and Cancer laboratory,
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montéal, Université de
Montréal, Canada
Correspondence: Cyrus Khandanpour, email Cyrus.Khandanpour@uk-essen.de
Correspondence: Tarik Möröy, email Tarik.Moroy@ircm.
qc.ca
Received: March 14, 2013;
Published: March 18, 2013

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

375

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 374-375

