Editorial

Introduction to the Supplement, ‘‘Cancer Therapy
With Antibodies and Immunoconjugates’’*
David M. Goldenberg, ScD, MD

This supplement includes 16 representative articles presented at the 12th Conference on Cancer Therapy With Antibodies and Immunconjugates, Parsippany, New Jersey, October 16-18, 2008, encompassing cancer treatment with unconjugated and isotope-conjugated antibodies targeting selective cancer biomarkers. Cancer 2010;116(4 suppl):1011–
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
2. V
KEYWORDS: antibodies, cancer, imaging, immunotherapy, radioimmunotherapy.

This supplement represents a selection of the 56 papers presented at the 12th Conference on Cancer Therapy With Antibod-

ies and Immunoconjugates,1 which is part of a series of biennial meetings spanning since 1980, reviewed elsewhere,2 truly
before the current era of the adoption of monoclonal antibodies as a new class of anticancer agents. At present, 9 such antibodies, including 1 drug-conjugate and 2 radionuclide-conjugates, are commercialized in the United States for cancer therapy,3
but prior thereto, murine antibodies were used as radioconjugates in diagnostic imaging.3-5 We can also consider this history as
an early example of a targeted therapy of cancer, which has become a major goal for all classes of cancer therapeutics. The majority of these conferences have focused on radiolabeled antibodies over the past 29 years, but I believe this work served as an
impetus for the identification, development, and evaluation of many different forms and uses of monoclonal antibodies targeting a growing array of cancer antigens and receptors. We started with affinity-purified polyclonal antibodies in the 1970s and
progressed to murine and then chimeric, humanized, and now fully human monoclonal antibodies, from intact IgG to F(ab’)2
and Fab’ fragments to single chain, diabody, and other multivalent constructs, as well as reengineered antibodies to affect binding, effector, signaling, or other functions, and from monospecific to multispecific monoclonal antibodies.3-5 Each of these
advances, many born in academia, spawned new technologies within established pharmaceutical companies, as well as many
new and since merged biotechnology firms. As useful as many of the commercialized monoclonal antibodies have become in
cancer therapy, it is instructive that virtually all have their most important impact when used in combination with other therapeutic modalities, particularly cytotoxic chemotherapy. This intuitively justifies further exploration of combining the modalities into single antibody constructs, such as antibody-drug, antibody-radioisotope, and antibody-cytokine conjugates.
The articles in this supplement encompass new research or timely reviews of the use of new antibodies and radioimmunoconjugates of various types for a number of different cancers, both hematologic and solid tumors. The 2 radioimmunoconjugates licensed in the United States for the therapy of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), 131I-tositumomab, and
90
Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan, are generally accepted to be more potent in treating indolent and transformed NHL in each
setting studied in comparison to rituximab, as discussed by the reviews herein by Palanca-Wessels and Press, and Sharkey
et al, and also discussed elsewhere,6 yet actual usage does not reflect this evidence. Is this a prejudice against radiolabeled
antibodies that will predict an adoption problem even with future successes in solid tumor radioimmunotherapy, or an
aberrancy in hematological oncology? Based on a review of current clinical studies, the pharmaceutical industry seems to
believe the former, while some of us who like our antibodies ‘‘hot’’ still persevere to demonstrate that targeting radiation
to cancers systemically has an important role in the therapy of disseminated disease, particularly in early disease and adjuvant settings, where the radiation dose delivered is inversely proportional to tumor size.4,5
Corresponding author: David M. Goldenberg, ScD, MD, 520 Belleville Avenue, Belleville, NJ 07109; Fax: (973) 844-7020; dmg.gscancer@att.net
Garden State Cancer Center, Center for Molecular Medicine and Immunology, Belleville, New Jersey
The articles in this supplement were presented at the ‘‘12th Conference on Cancer Therapy with Antibodies and Immunoconjugates,’’ in Parsippany, New Jersey,
October 16-18, 2008.
*Cancer Therapy With Antibodies and Immunoconjugates, Supplement to Cancer.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24786, Received: June 13, 2009; Accepted: October 21, 2009, Published online February 2, 2010 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.
wiley.com)

Cancer

February 15, 2010

1011

Editorial

The articles in this supplement cover naked, radiolabeled, and drug-conjugated antibodies. Targets such as
FLT3, platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a, vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-1, carcinoembryonic
antigen, HER2, TAG72, prostate-specific membrane
antigen, and CD20 are examples of tumor-associated
antigens studied in various laboratory and clinical settings.
Three articles, including 2 clinical studies, address the use
of the method of pretargeting, which reduces myelosuppression by separating the targeting with an unconjugated
antibody from the delivery of the therapeutic radionuclide
after blood titers of the former have been reduced.4,5
I am grateful to the program committee for reviewing abstracts and chairing various sessions of the conference. I also thank Dr. Robert M. Sharkey for helping in
relieving me of other responsibilities while organizing this
conference and preparing the supplement. The conference
and this supplement would not have been possible without the scientific contributors, attendees, and the generous support of several companies, a conference grant from
the National Cancer Institute, and the New Jersey Commission on Cancer Research that enabled students to
participate. Finally, I appreciate the cooperation and assistance of the editorial staff of Cancer.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
This conference was supported in part by USPHS grant 1 R13
CA124279 from the National Cancer Institute and the New

1012

Jersey Commission on Cancer Research. The articles in this supplement represent proceedings of the 12th Conference on Cancer
Therapy with Antibodies and Immunoconjugates, in Parsippany,
New Jersey, October 16-18, 2008. Unrestricted grant support
for the conference was provided by Actinium Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., Bayer Schering Pharma, Center for Molecular Medicine
and Immunology, ImClone Systems Corporation, MDS Nordion, National Cancer Institute, NIH, New Jersey Commission
on Cancer Research, and PerkinElmer Life & Analytical Sciences. The supplement was supported by an unrestricted educational grant from ImClone Systems Corporation, a wholly
owned subsidiary of Eli Lilly and Company, and by page
charges to the authors. David M. Goldenberg is a director and
shareholder in Immunomedics and IBC Pharmaceuticals.

REFERENCES
1. Program and abstracts of the Twelfth Conference on Cancer
Therapy with Antibodies and Immunoconjugates. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2008;23:505-528.
2. Goldenberg DM. Introduction to the Eleventh Conference on
Cancer Therapy with Antibodies and Immunoconjugates.
Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13(18 suppl);5499s.
3. Sharkey RM, Goldenberg DM. Targeted therapy of cancer:
New prospects for antibodies and immunoconjugates. CA: A
Cancer J Clin.2006;56:226-243.
4. Sharkey RM, Goldenberg DM. Advances in radioimmunotherapy in the age of molecular engineering and pretargeting.
Cancer Invest.2006;24:82-97.
5. Sharkey RM, Goldenberg DM. Novel radioimmunopharmaceuticals for cancer imaging and therapy. Curr Opin Invest
Drugs. 2008;9:1302-1316.
6. Sharkey RM, Press OW, Goldenberg DM. A re-examination
of radioimmunotherapy in the treatment of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma: prospects for dual-targeted antibody/radioantibody
therapy. Blood. 2009;113:3891-3895.

Cancer

February 15, 2010

