Research Article

Epithelial Progeny of Estrogen-Exposed Breast Progenitor Cells
Display a Cancer-like Methylome
1,6

2

1,7

3

Alfred S.L. Cheng, Aedı́n C. Culhane, Michael W.Y. Chan, Chinnambally R. Venkataramu,
4
3
1
1
1
Mathias Ehrich, Aejaz Nasir, Benjamin A.T. Rodriguez, Joseph Liu, Pearlly S. Yan,
2
5
3
1
John Quackenbush, Kenneth P. Nephew, Timothy J. Yeatman, and Tim H-M. Huang
1

Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; 2Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts; 3Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa,
Florida; 4Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, California; 5Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana;
6
Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China; and
7
Department of Life Science and Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Cheng University, Taiwan, Republic of China

Abstract
Estrogen imprinting is used to describe a phenomenon in which
early developmental exposure to endocrine disruptors
increases breast cancer risk later in adult life. We propose that
long-lived, self-regenerating stem and progenitor cells are
more susceptible to the exposure injury than terminally
differentiated epithelial cells in the breast duct. Mammospheres, containing enriched breast progenitors, were used as
an exposure system to simulate this imprinting phenomenon
in vitro. Using MeDIP-chip, a methylation microarray screening
method, we found that 0.5% (120 loci) of human CpG islands
were hypermethylated in epithelial cells derived from estrogenexposed progenitors compared with the non–estrogen-exposed
control cells. This epigenetic event may lead to progressive
silencing of tumor suppressor genes, including RUNX3, in these
epithelial cells, which also occurred in primary breast tumors.
Furthermore, normal tissue in close proximity to the tumor site
also displayed RUNX3 hypermethylation, suggesting that this
aberrant event occurs in early breast carcinogenesis. The high
prevalence of estrogen-induced epigenetic changes in primary
tumors and the surrounding histologically normal tissues
provides the first empirical link between estrogen injury of
breast stem/progenitor cells and carcinogenesis. This finding
also offers a mechanistic explanation as to why a tumor
suppressor gene, such as RUNX3, can be heritably silenced by
epigenetic mechanisms in breast cancer. [Cancer Res
2008;68(6):1786–96]

Introduction
Prolonged exposure to estrogen and related endocrine disruptors during early development increases the risk of developing
breast cancer (1, 2). These hormonally active agents have been
shown to disrupt normal development of breast epithelia and
support the growth of breast tumors (1, 2). Animal and
epidemiologic studies suggest an imprinting phenomenon in which
early exposure to estrogenic chemicals potentiates a carcinogenic

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
M. Ehrich is a shareholder and employee of Sequenom, Inc.
Requests for reprints: Tim H-M. Huang, Human Cancer Genetics Program,
Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210.
Phone: 614-688-8277; Fax: 614-292-5995; E-mail: tim.huang@osumc.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5547

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

process that is not observed until later in adult life (1, 3). Recent
studies imply that estrogen imprinting can be mediated by an
epigenetic mechanism (3, 4), a process that influences the
phenotypic outcome of a gene without genetic changes of the
underlying DNA sequence. DNA methylation, a key epigenetic
modification, occurs frequently in CpG islands located near the
promoters of silenced genes during disease development (5).
Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands is now considered to
be a common mechanism for the heritable maintenance of gene
silencing in human cancer (6).
Although developmental exposure to estrogens results in
aberrant imprinting and subsequent transformation of breast
epithelia (1), the cellular process underlying this phenomenon
remains unknown. We hypothesize that breast stem and progenitor
cells are primary targets of estrogenic exposure. These slowly
dividing cells are capable of self-renewing and, in response to
specific signaling, give rise to an amplifying population of
progenitors that subsequently differentiate into different epithelial
lineages (7). As the property of self-renewal allows for a long life
span of stem cells, we speculate that these undifferentiated cells
are highly susceptible to environmental injuries over time and
transmit their ‘‘injury memory’’ to differentiated progeny through
an epigenetic mechanism.
Using a methylation screening method, we report here that
epithelial progeny of estrogen-exposed breast progenitors exhibits
aberrant patterns of DNA methylation similar to those of known
tumor suppressor genes in primary tumors. This cancer-like DNA
methylation epigenome, or methylome (8), is associated with
abnormal clonal expansion of epithelial progeny. Furthermore, the
prevalence of estrogen-induced hypermethylation in tumors and
adjacent normal tissues suggests that these epigenetic alterations
occur early during breast carcinogenesis.

Materials and Methods
Tissue samples and cell lines. Tissues were collected in accordance
with the protocols approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the
University of South Florida and the Ohio State University. Breast tissues
from patients that underwent mastectomy were collected. Specimens were
marked for tumor and in some cases including its four surrounding zones
(1, 2, 3, and 4 cm away from the grossly visible tumor boundary; see Fig. 5A).
Samples from each zone were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. In
contralateral mastectomy cases, normal tissues were taken from the four
quadrants of the breast. Tissues were also obtained from healthy individuals
undergoing breast reduction mammoplasty. Frozen tissues mounted on
slides were marked and microdissected as described previously (9). Adipose
tissues were trimmed away; the tumor and ‘‘normal’’ tissues were separated

1786

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen-Induced DNA Methylation
and stored in liquid nitrogen. Histologic examination of tissue sections and
microdissection of samples were conducted in close collaboration with a
pathologist to ensure consistency in the clinical diagnoses. Tissues adjacent
to tumors were defined to be mostly unremarkable breast ducts or breast
with cystic changes, mild ductal hyperplasia, or other nonproliferative
changes. DNA was isolated from these samples as described previously (9).
Breast cancer cell lines Hs578t, MCF-7, MDA-MB-134, MDA-MB-231, MDAMB-435s, MDA-MB-453, T47D, and ZR75-1 were obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection.
Mammosphere culture and estrogen treatment. Normal breast tissues
were obtained from healthy individuals (age range, 15–60 y; average, 34)
undergoing reduction mammoplasties mainly due to macromastia. The
tissues were dissociated mechanically and enzymatically, and single cells
were grown into mammospheres in ultralow attachment plates (Cloning) in
serum-free mammary epithelial growth medium (Cambrex) containing
20 ng/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF), 20 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth
factor, 1 B27, and 4 Ag/mL heparin as described (10). Breast stem/
progenitor cells were dissociated from primary mammospheres and treated
with 70 nmol/L 17h-estradiol (E2; Sigma) or DMSO in phenol red–free
medium for 2 wk (medium changed twice weekly). This estrogen treatment
scheme has previously been shown to trigger neoplastic development of
normal breast epithelial cells (11). After a 2-wk exposure period, mammosphere-derived cells were cultured on a collagen substratum (BD
Biosciences) for an additional 2 to 3 wk. The cells were differentiated into
epithelia in estrogen-free conditions using phenol red–free DMEM/F12
medium supplemented with 5% charcoal-dextran–treated fetal bovine
serum (FBS; Hyclone), 5 Ag/mL insulin, 1 Ag/mL hydrocortisone, 10 ng/mL
cholera toxin, and 10 ng/mL EGF as described previously (10). Total RNA,
isolated from mammospheres and the derived epithelial cells using Trizol
(Sigma), was used for real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RTPCR) as described previously (12). Specific primers for amplification are
available on request. DNA was extracted using QIAamp DNA Mini kit
(Qiagen).
Immunofluorescence staining. Two thousand cells dissociated from
mammospheres were seeded onto collagen-coated disks (BD Biosciences),
placed on 6-cm-diameter dishes, and cultured as described above. Cells
were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and permeabilized with
0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min. After blocking with 10% normal goat serum
(Vector Laboratories) for 30 min, the cells were incubated with antibodies
against estrogen receptor a (ERa; 1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), CK14
(1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), or CK18 (1:40; Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
at room temperature overnight. Corresponding secondary FITC-conjugated
antibody was applied followed by 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining
(Molecular Probes). The disks were mounted with Vectashield medium
(Vector Laboratories) and images were captured by Zeiss fluorescence
microscopy (Zeiss).
Colony formation assay. Single-cell suspensions from mammospheres
exposed with or without estrogen were plated on collagen-coated plates at a
density of 5,000 viable cells/10-cm-diameter dish as described (10). After
21 d, the colonies were fixed with methanol/acetic acid (3:1) and stained
with 0.5% crystal violet solution for 10 min. The size of the colonies was
measured and counted. Two-tailed Student’s t test was used to assess the
significance of the observed differences in colony formation assay.
MeDIP assay and CpG island microarray hybridization. MeDIP was
performed on 2 Ag sonicated genomic DNA (300–1,000 bp) using a
modification of the method described previously (13). Methylated DNA was
immunoprecipitated at 4jC overnight with 30 AL of polyclonal antibody
against 5-methylcytosine (Abcam). After serial washings, DNA was purified
by phenol-chloroform extraction. The immunoprecipitated DNA and input
DNA (10 ng) were then ligated to linkers and amplified by linker-mediated
PCR as described previously (13). MeDIP-enriched and input DNAs (2 Ag)
were labeled with Cy5 and Cy3 dyes, respectively (12), and cohybridized to a
human CpG island microarray (Agilent Technologies). Oligonucleotide
probes (f185,000, 45-mers to 60-mers) were selected to target 27,800 CpG
islands (7–24 probes per CpG island; Agilent Technologies). The hybridized
slides were scanned by a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon) and the acquired
images were analyzed with GenePix Pro 6.0 (Axon). Dye-swap experiments

www.aacrjournals.org

were conducted, and Lowess-normalized data of duplicated microarray
experiments were used to identify significant methylated loci (P < 0.001)
using a peak detection algorithm in the ChIP Analytics 1.3 software
(Agilent). To confirm candidate methylated genes identified by MeDIP-chip,
primers targeting the enriched region were designed. PCR was performed
with immunoprecipitated or input DNA. Specific primers for amplification
are available on request.
Methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing. DNA was isolated
from breast tissues and cell lines using QIAamp DNA Mini kit and 0.5 Ag
from each sample was treated with sodium bisulfite using EZ DNA
Methylation kit (ZYMO Research). Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) primers
targeting the MeDIP-enriched regions of MXI1, RPRM, TFAP2C, and WNT5A
genes were designed using Methyl Primer Express Software v1.0 (Applied
Biosystems). Primer sequences and conditions for amplification are
available on request. The primers used for RUNX3 have been described
previously (14). Amplified products were electrophoresed on 2% agarose
gels and visualized with ethidium bromide. For sequencing, bisulfite-treated
DNA was amplified using primers for the RUNX3 promoter region ( forward
primer, YGGGGTAAATGTTAGAAATTTGT; reverse primer, ACCCCAAACTACTTAAAATCCCT). PCR products were cloned into TOPO TA cloning kit
(Invitrogen). Five to 10 randomly picked clones were sequenced using ABI
3730 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed using the BiQ
Analyzer.
Quantitative methylation analysis using MassARRAY. Bisulfitetreated DNA (1 Ag) was amplified with specific primers for the RUNX3
promoter region. MassARRAY platform was used to perform quantitative
methylation analysis (Sequenom). This system uses matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry in combination with
RNA base cleavage (MassCLEAVE). Details of quantitative analysis of
methylation status have been described elsewhere (15). Two-tailed Student’s
t test was used to assess the significance of the observed differences in
MassARRAY when the averaged methylation ratios of different breast tissue
types were compared. Statistical significance was assigned at P < 0.05.
5-Aza-2¶-deoxycytidine treatment and real-time quantitative RTPCR. MCF-7 cells were treated with 5 Amol/L 5-aza-2¶-deoxycytidine (5-azadC) for 5 d in MEM containing 10% FBS and 6 ng/AL insulin. During the
final 72 h of 5-aza-dC treatment, cells were hormone deprived by culturing
in phenol red–free MEM supplemented with 4% charcoal-dextran–treated
FBS. During the final 48 h of hormone deprivation, cells were treated with
1 Amol/L 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4-OHT) or vehicle (DMSO) followed by
treatment with vehicle (0-h time point) or 10 nmol/L E2 for the indicated
time period. RNA (2 Ag) was extracted and reverse transcribed with
SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). RUNX3 mRNA levels were
measured using SYBR Green (Applied Biosystems) on a 7500 Real-Time PCR
System apparatus. TATA-binding protein (TBP) mRNA levels were also
measured as a control. Primer sequences and conditions for amplification
are available on request.
Gene expression analyses. Total RNA was extracted from microdissected breast tissues [23 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC), 28 adjacent
normal tissues, and 10 reduction mammoplasties], and the quality of RNA
samples was assessed using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Microarray hybridizations were performed by the Core Facility at the Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute. The RNA was amplified and labeled according to Affymetrix
guidelines and applied to Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus
2.0 arrays (Affymetrix). The quality of hybridization data was assessed using
normalized unscaled SE and relative log expression statistics (16) and
MAS5.0 report quality scores. Normalized unscaled SE and relative log
expression statistics were computed using the affyPLM package in
Bioconductor. Expression values were computed from the raw (.cel)
Affymetrix files and normalized using robust multichip averaging RMA
(Bioconductor release 2.4.0). Detailed sample histology and clinical
information and raw (.cel) and RMA-normalized data for these 61 gene
expression profiles are available in ArrayExpress (accession number:
E-TABM-276). The gene expression levels of the two Affymetrix probe sets
for RUNX3 (204197_s_at, 204198_s_at) were highly correlated (r = 0.87) and
were not significantly different (P > 0.05, Student’s t test). Further analyses
of RUNX3 expression were performed on the mean gene expression level of

1787

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Preexposure of breast progenitor cells to estrogen increases proliferation of progeny epithelial cells. A, the breast progenitor cells were propagated
as floating spherical colonies, called mammospheres, and treated with 70 nmol/L E2 or DMSO solvent control for 2 wk. To induce differentiation, cells were seeded on
a collagen substratum in the absence of E2 for 2 to 3 wk. Phenotypic and epigenetic analyses were then performed on the progeny epithelial cells. B,
immunofluorescence shows that some progenitor-derived epithelial cells express ERa. After E2 stimulation (10 nmol/L, 3 h), translocation of ERa protein from the
cytoplasm and into the nucleus was seen, suggesting functional estrogen signaling. In contrast, epithelial cells preexposed to high-dose estrogen exhibited nuclear
ERa localization before E2 stimulation, reminiscent of MCF-7 cells. The percentage, subcellular localization, and staining intensity of ERa-positive cells are
shown in the bar chart. The numbers of cells listed in each category were independently scored by two researchers. C, left, cell proliferation was measured by colony
formation assay. Representative results of two independent experiments are shown. Exposure of progenitor cells to estrogen significantly increased the number of
large-sized colonies (P = 0.02; middle ) and the overall size of colonies (P = 0.038; right ) formed by epithelial progeny cells. Columns, mean of two independent
experiments; bars, SD. Asterisks, statistical significance.

these two probe sets. One IDC sample (T8703A1) was excluded as outlier in
all analyses. To evaluate RUNX3 expression in breast tissue, we performed a
general linear model ANOVA between RUNX3 gene expression and tissue
histology and patient ERa status. To test the association of RUNX3 and
ESR1 gene expression in breast tissue samples, the Pearson’s productmoment correlation coefficient was calculated. Further details, normalized
RUNX3 expression data, and the R code to perform these statistical analyses
are available online.8 RUNX3 expression levels (RMA-normalized log2
values) derived from Affymetrix microarray experiments of a panel of 51

8

http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/publications.html

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

breast cell lines were also extracted from a recent report (17). Four
noncancerous cell lines (HBL100, MCF10A, MCF12A, and SUM190PT) were
excluded for analysis. Two-tailed Student’s t test was used to test if RUNX3
expression (mean of the two probe sets as described above) was
significantly different in breast cancer cell lines according to ERa status.
Statistical significance was assigned at P < 0.05. Statistically significant
results were also obtained when all 51 cell lines were included in the
analysis.
Microarray data. The MeDIP-chip microarray data are accessible from
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE7844). The raw data for expression
profiling of human breast tumors and adjacent tissues are available at
ArrayExpress (E-TABM-276).

1788

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen-Induced DNA Methylation
Supplementary data. The supplementary data include four supplementary figures and one supplementary table.

Results
Estrogen preexposure of breast progenitors alters hormone receptor signaling and promotes clonal proliferation
of their epithelial progeny. An in vitro protocol has recently
been developed to enrich and propagate breast stem and
progenitor cells using tissue samples obtained from reduction
mammoplasties (10). These cells formed spherical colonies,
called mammospheres, in suspension culture. Although a
mammosphere may contain progenitor cells that are capable
of differentiating into different types of epithelial cells, a
subpopulation (<0.1%) of cells with self-renewal ability is
believed to be stem cells (10). We independently established
this culture method in the laboratory and showed that the
isolated mammospheres exhibited the same progenitor characteristics as previously described (see Supplementary Fig. S1).
To investigate whether the model system can be used to
simulate an estrogen imprinting event, mammospheres derived
from reduction mammoplasties were continuously exposed to E2
(70 nmol/L) or DMSO (control) for 2 weeks (Fig. 1A), a treatment
scheme known to induce transformation of the human breast
epithelial cell line MCF-10F (11). Estrogen treatment stimulated
self-renewal of breast progenitors, indicated by a significant
increase in the number of mammospheres (P < 0.01; Supplementary Fig. S1A). After the exposure, E2 was removed from culture
dishes, and progenitor cells were placed in fresh hormone-free
medium on two-dimensional collagen substratum for 2 to 3 weeks
(Fig. 1A). Under this two-dimensional culture condition, breast
progenitors differentiated into epithelial cells, which were
confirmed by immunostaining with epithelial markers (Supplementary Fig. S1B).
We then determined whether this estrogen exposure resulted in
changes of ERa signaling in progenitor-derived epithelial cells.
Immunofluorescence analysis showed that a low level of cytoplasmic ERa was present in 80% of control epithelial cells. Following E2
stimulation (10 nmol/L for 3 h), we observed ERa translocating
into the nucleus in some of the differentiated cells (Fig. 1B).
However, this nuclear localization of ERa before E2 stimulation
was already evident in epithelial cells derived from estrogenexposed progenitors. In addition, stronger nuclear staining of these
cells was observed after E2 stimulation, a condition reminiscent to
that of receptor-positive breast cancer cells (18). These affected
progeny also formed significantly larger colonies and exhibited an
increased rate of proliferation compared with the control cells (P =
0.02–0.038; Fig. 1C). The findings indicate that an imprinting
process may occur in breast progenitors preexposed to estrogen,
resulting in an alteration of nuclear receptor signaling and clonal
expansion in their epithelial progeny.
Estrogen-induced DNA hypermethylation occurs in genes
commonly associated with the maintenance of stem and
progenitor functions. To determine whether epigenetic processes
play a role in this estrogen imprinting, we compared profiles of
DNA methylation between estrogen preexposed and control
progeny using a methylation screening approach, called MeDIPchip (13). Methylated DNA, immunoprecipitated with an antibody
specific for 5-methylcytosine, and input DNA were labeled with
different fluorescent dyes and cohybridized to a microarray panel
containing nearly all the annotated human CpG islands (n =
27,800). MeDIP-chip analysis in two replicates showed that 0.5%

www.aacrjournals.org

(120 loci) of the CpG islands were hypermethylated in epithelial
cells derived from estrogen-exposed progenitors compared with
the nonexposed control cells (Supplementary Table S1; Fig. 2A).
Sequence analysis showed that 111 of these loci are located near
the transcription start site (TSS) of genes. Thirteen gene-related
loci with diverse MeDIP enrichments were randomly selected for
confirmation analyses. Primers flanking the enriched regions were
designed for gene-specific PCR assays, and estrogen-induced
hypermethylation was confirmed in 92% (12 of 13) of these loci
(Fig. 2B). Expression analysis of four such loci (RUNX3, MXI1,
RPRM, and WNT5A) further indicates that this hypermethylation
event is associated with down-regulation of the corresponding
genes (Fig. 2C). In addition, MSP was conducted to determine
whether the estrogen-induced hypermethylation could be observed
in other epithelial cells prepared from different mammoplasties
(Fig. 2D). Hypermethylation of three loci (MXI1, TFAP2C, and
WNT5A) could be confirmed in some, but not all, epithelial progeny
samples, likely attributed to individual variability.
Ontological analysis of the 111 loci revealed significant
methylation enrichment of genes related to nucleic acid and
cellular metabolism, transcriptional control, and Wnt signaling
(Supplementary Fig. S2A). Interestingly, 23% (n = 25) of these loci
are known targets of polycomb proteins that play a role in
maintaining pluripotency of stem and progenitor cells (Supplementary Fig. S2B; ref. 19). Promoter hypermethylation of
polycomb target genes is frequently observed during tumorigenesis (20). Furthermore, eight of the positive loci (EGR2, FANCF,
MXI1, PTPRG, RPRM, RUNX3, TFAP2C, and WNT5A) identified by
MeDIP-chip are known tumor suppressor genes, the downregulation of which was observed in various types of cancer
(Supplementary Fig. S2C; refs. 14, 21–24). Taken together, our
results indicate that key developmental regulators can be
epigenetically targeted by estrogen, leading to deregulation of
self-renewal of stem and progenitor cells and also tending to
promote tumorigenesis.
Estrogen-induced DNA hypermethylation can frequently be
seen in primary tumors. To determine whether estrogeninduced methylation changes observed in progenitor-derived
epithelial cells also occur in breast tumors, we examined five
loci (MXI1, RPRM, RUNX3, TFAP2C, and WNT5A) in a cohort of
breast samples. As indicated earlier, these five loci have previously
been reported to be tumor suppressors in different cancer types.
MSP analysis was performed on 31 primary tumors, 8 cancer cell
lines, and 10 control samples. Hypermethylation of these genes
was observed in 23% to 74% of these tumors, but the methylation
frequencies (25–100%) were slightly higher in cancer cell lines
(Fig. 3). The results are consistent with the previously reported
methylation frequencies (37% and 52%) for two genes, RPRM and
RUNX3, in breast tumors (14, 24). In contrast, low methylation
frequencies were detected in the reduction controls. The
prevalence of these estrogen-induced epigenetic changes in breast
tumors therefore provides evidence for a mechanistic basis
underlying how promoter CpG islands acquire DNA methylation
during cancer development (20).
Estrogen-induced hypermethylation of RUNX3 can frequently be seen in histologically normal tissue adjacent to
the tumor site. We choose RUNX3, a developmental transcription
factor regulated by polycomb repressors (19), for detailed
methylation analysis in histologically normal tissues adjacent to
primary tumors. Although inactivation of RUNX3 is known to play
a role in tumorigenesis (14, 25), the mechanism of how this

1789

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

1790

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen-Induced DNA Methylation

silencing event occurs in early breast tumorigenesis has not been
elucidated.
MassARRAY, an assay simultaneously quantifying multiple
methylated sites based on their molecular mass (15), was used to
determine the methylation status of a 2-kb RUNX3 promoter region
in nine sets of microdissected tumors and adjacent normal tissues
(n = 40; Fig. 4A). These normal tissues were obtained from four
successive zones, each 1 to 4 cm away from the tumor site of the
ipsilateral breast (Fig. 5A, left). In one case (patient 10486), normal
tissues from four quadrants of the contralateral breast were used as
controls (Fig. 5A, right). In addition, eight unrelated tissues obtained
from reduction mammoplasties were included in the analysis.
We observed hypermethylation (e.g., regions 3, 4, and 5) of
RUNX3 in at least five (4993, 9993, 9348, 10486, and 10501) of the
nine primary tumor sites (Fig. 4B). The overall methylation levels in
their corresponding normal tissues (1–4 cm away from tumor sites)
also seemed to be higher than those of the eight reduction controls.
The boundaries of this hypermethylation were clearly observed at
f0.5 and 1.7 kb upstream of the TSS (Fig. 4C). In this regard,
methylation levels through this plateau were higher in tumors
compared with adjacent normal tissues (P = 0.00038) or reduction
controls (P = 0.0027). Notably, methylation levels were higher (P =
1.88e 11) in adjacent normal tissues compared with reduction
controls. Bisulfite sequencing and MassARRAY analyses of an
overlapping fragment (region 1) yielded concordant results
(Fig. 4D). At the distal end of the sequencing region, where the
beginning of the RUNX3 methylation plateau was observed by
MassARRAY, dense methylation was detected in tumor 4993 and its
adjacent normal tissues but not in three reduction controls. In
addition, in the first exon region of RUNX3, extensive methylation
was observed in three tumor pairs and adjacent normal tissues,
whereas only a few CpG sites were methylated in reduction normal
tissue (Supplementary Fig. S3).
We then performed an in-depth individual gradient analysis
using the area with the greatest methylation difference (Fig. 5). Five
patient samples with elevated methylation levels in the primary
tumor site showed a gradual decrease in DNA methylation with
increasing distance up to 4 cm (Fig. 5B, top). However, methylation
levels in tumors from the other four patients were almost identical
to those seen in reduction normal tissues (Fig. 5B, bottom). The
four quadrant control tissues from the contralateral breast of
patient 10486 also exhibited similar basal methylation level. Taken
together, these results show that RUNX3 methylation may precede
morphologic transformation of normal breast epithelia in a subset
of patients. This observation supports the concept that estrogeninduced hypermethylation in progenitor cells is an early carcinogenic event and may create a large field of cancerization in the
human breast.

Epigenetic suppression of RUNX3 expression is mediated by
estrogen signaling in hormone receptor–positive breast
cancer. Although underexpression of RUNX3 frequently occurs in
breast cancer compared with normal epithelium (14), the
expression of RUNX3 in histologic normal tissue adjacent to the
primary tumor and the relationship between RUNX3 expression
and ERa status have not been investigated. We thus determined
mRNA levels of RUNX3 in a panel of 23 microdissected primary
IDC tissues, 28 adjacent normal tissues, and 10 reduction tissues
using expression data derived from Affymetrix microarray experiments. RUNX3 expression in IDC was significantly down-regulated
(P < 0.0005) compared with both reduction normal tissues and
adjacent normal tissues (Fig. 6A), in agreement with a recent report
(14). When the tumors were segregated by ERa status, RUNX3
expression in ERa-positive IDC was significantly lower (P = 0.028)
compared with ERa-negative IDC (Fig. 6B). Although no difference
in overall expression of RUNX3 was observed in adjacent normal
tissues versus reduction normal tissues (Fig. 6A), RUNX3 expression was significantly lower (P = 0.048) in normal breast tissues
adjacent to ERa-positive breast tumors versus ERa-negative
counterparts (Fig. 6B). Overall, a strong negative correlation (r =
0.52; P = 2.51e 5) of RUNX3 and ERa (ESR1) gene expression was
observed in this set of breast samples (Supplementary Fig. S4). In
addition, examination of RUNX3 expression from an Affymetrix
data set of 47 breast cancer cell lines (17) conclusively indicated
that RUNX3 expression was significantly lower (P = 0.0011) in ERapositive compared with ERa-negative cell lines (Fig. 6C). Collectively, the MassARRAY and gene expression analyses show that
RUNX3 expression is inversely correlated with hypermethylation of
RUNX3 and ERa status.
To determine if estrogen signaling plays a role in RUNX3
silencing, we performed a gene reactivation study using quantitative RT-PCR in ERa-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells displaying
RUNX3 hypermethylation (Fig. 3B). RUNX3 expression was first
reactivated by 5-aza-dC treatment (data not shown); subsequent
treatment with E2 resulted in transient down-regulation of RUNX3
mRNA levels (Fig. 6D ). Pretreatment with 4-OHT, an ERa
antagonist, partially inhibited the E2-induced down-regulation,
providing the direct evidence that estrogen suppression of RUNX3
is, in part, mediated by ERa.

Discussion
Developmental exposure to estrogen and related endocrine
disruptors is known to increase breast cancer risk in women (1, 2).
As indicated earlier, epidemiologic studies have suggested an
imprinting mechanism in which early exposure of environmental
estrogens potentiates a carcinogenic process observed later in life

Figure 2. Preexposure of progenitor-derived epithelial cells to estrogen causes DNA hypermethylation and transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes.
A, differentially methylated genes in estrogen-preexposed progenitor-derived epithelial cells were identified by MeDIP-chip using a microarray panel containing 27,800
CpG islands. The maximum MeDIP enrichment along 120 hypermethylated loci in control and preexposed cells are shown in the heat map (see Supplementary Table
S1 for a complete list of the hypermethylated loci). The heat map represents the averaged values of two independent experiments. B, to confirm candidate
methylated genes determined by microarray, PCR primers targeting the MeDIP-enriched region were designed and the immunoprecipitated control/preexposed
DNA samples were amplified along with input DNA. PCRs of no template (H2O) control are also shown. Twelve of 13 tested genes were validated by PCR analyses.
C, DNA methylation landscaping maps by plotting the enrichment ratio of each probe of the hypermethylated genes. The preexposed cells (red line ) displayed an
enriched methylated region of multiple probes, within the CpG island, located in proximity to the TSS (arrow ); no significant enrichment was observed in control
cells (blue line ). Genes showing DNA hypermethylation in preexposed cells were associated with transcriptional suppression [shown by real-time quantitative
RT-PCR (qRT-PCR ); upper right, inset ]. Columns, mean of three independent experiments; bars, SD. D, methylation status of tumor suppressor gene promoter
regions was confirmed by MSP in control/preexposed DNA samples derived from three individuals. MSP PCR primers targeting MeDIP-enriched regions were
designed. Preexposed cells of at least one set of samples showed DNA methylation in these tumor suppressor genes. M, PCR product with primers specific for
methylated genes; U, unmethylated genes.

www.aacrjournals.org

1791

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Estrogen-induced hypermethylation of tumor suppressor loci is also present in breast tumors. A, MSP analyses for tumor suppressor gene promoter
methylation in breast reduction normal tissues (top ) and primary tumors (bottom ). Representative gel pictures show data for 10 of a total of 31 tumor tissues examined
and 10 breast reduction normal tissues. B, summary of methylation data for all tissue samples and cancer cell lines. Aberrant methylation of these tumor suppressor
genes occurred in a high percentage of primary tumors (23–74%) and cancer cell lines (25–100%) compared with reduction normal controls (0–20%).

(1, 3). In the past, it is difficult to study how this imprinting
mechanism is operated at the molecular level. Presently, we show
that mammospheres, which contain enriched breast stem and
progenitor cells (10), can be a model system for this type of study.
Our rationale is that long-lived, slow-growing breast progenitors
are more susceptible to environmental injuries than terminally
differentiated epithelial cells, which have a high turnover rate in the
breast duct. With this prior notion, we designed the experiment by
exposing mammospheres to estrogen (i.e., E2) and later completely
removed E2 from the culture medium and allowed breast
progenitors to undergo epithelial differentiation in two-dimensional collagen stratum.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Although the mammosphere model system cannot exactly
imitate a real-life scenario, the experimental design is useful to
determine whether an imprinting phenomenon could be recreated
in vitro. The E2 dose (70 nmol/L) used in the present study is
higher than typically seen in women under normal physiologic
conditions or having prior history of estrogen exposure. In a
previous study by Russo et al. (11), they found that, at this dose of
treatment, estrogen caused cellular transformation of a breast
epithelial cell line, MCF-10F. When transformed cells with
aggressive behavior were further filtered through an invasion
chamber, these clonal cells could grow into tumors in a xenograft
model. Unlike MCF-10F, our primary epithelial cells derived from

1792

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen-Induced DNA Methylation

Figure 4. DNA hypermethylation of RUNX3 in breast tumors and adjacent histologically normal tissues. A, genomic map of the RUNX3 promoter CpG island.
Arrow, RUNX3 TSS in the genome sequence; inverted arrow, potential estrogen-responsive element (ERE ; predicted by MATCH using the TRANSFAC database).
Red bar, MeDIP-enriched region. Locations of the RUNX3 promoter fragments interrogated by MassARRAY (blue bars ) and bisulfite sequencing (gray bar).
B, quantitative methylation results from MassARRAY analysis of RUNX3 promoter region in primary breast tissues. Six amplicons covering a total of 101 CpG sites,
located approximately 0.3 to 2.3 kb upstream of the RUNX3 TSS, were designed to analyze 9 sets of breast tumor (T )/adjacent normal (N ) tissues and 8 breast
reduction normal tissues (BRN ; 48 samples total). CpG site measurements in the analyzed region of the RUNX3 promoter for all samples are depicted in the heat map.
Blue color intensity, methylation ratios (see scale bar); gray, missing data values. Each row represents methylation data from one tissue sample. Tissues from
each cancer patient are separated by black lines. Each column (spaced by white lines) represents methylation data from each amplicon. C, summation of the
overall methylation levels of each tissue type in a genomic context. Red dotted lines, methylation ratios of tumor tissues; green dotted lines, methylation ratios of
adjacent normal tissues; blue dotted lines, methylation ratios of breast reduction normal tissues; gray lines, CpG content in the amplification region calculated for a
moving 100-bp window. D, bisulfite sequencing analysis of RUNX3 promoter region in one set of breast tumor/adjacent normal tissues and three breast reduction
normal tissues. Black dots, methylated CpG sites; white dots, unmethylated sites. The underlined region is near the beginning of the methylation plateau observed
by MassARRAY. The percentages of CpG methylation of the overall and underlined regions are indicated for each tissue. Breast tumor and adjacent histologically
normal tissues showed significantly higher methylation levels compared with breast reduction normal tissues, in agreement with the MassARRAY analysis.
Additional bisulfite sequencing results are shown in Supplementary Fig. S3.

www.aacrjournals.org

1793

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

estrogen-treated progenitors did not produce tumors in female
athymic mice after 6 months of transplantation (data not shown).
Additional molecular alterations need to be acquired in these
primary epithelial cells to increase their tumorigenic potential.
Future studies can also be performed to test tumorigenicity of
different doses of estrogen and other endocrine disruptors using
this mammosphere system.
There are limitations in this mammosphere model system.
Genetic variations and other confounding factors (e.g., menopausal
status and age) may affect estrogenic susceptibility of individuals.
Therefore, we could not anticipate concordant results when
different breast progenitor samples are exposed to the same dose
of estrogen (see Fig. 2D). The experimental findings derived from

this study may be biased toward patients undergoing breast
reduction procedures. Ethically, we could not obtain breast tissue
samples from healthy individuals with a known exposure history of
endocrine disruptors. Nevertheless, the model system proposed
here represents a new paradigm, simulating a condition of early
breast carcinogenesis that is associated with exposure to
environmental estrogen. We have shown that estrogen exposure
stimulates self-renewal of breast progenitors (Supplementary
Fig. S1A) and increases proliferation of the derived epithelial
progeny (Fig. 1C), both of which are associated with alterations in
the methylome. Because such epigenetic alterations were not
observed in the differentiated epithelial cells in vitro (Fig. 2) and
in vivo (Fig. 3), we strongly contend that the methylation changes

Figure 5. Mapping geographic zones of RUNX3 DNA methylation in histologically normal tissues adjacent to breast tumor. A, microdissected breast tissues from
patients undergoing mastectomy were collected. Mastectomy specimens were marked for tumor and its surrounding zones N1 (1 cm), N2 (2 cm), N3 (3 cm), and
N4 (4 cm) from the grossly visible tumor boundary. In bilateral and prophylactic mastectomy cases, normal breast tissues were taken from the four quadrants of
the breast. UO, upper outer; UI, upper inner; LO, lower outer; LI, lower inner. B, the graphs show methylation ratios of the primary breast tumor and adjacent normal
tissues of indicated distance (cm) from tumor boundary of each patient. Data of contralateral (CL ) prophylactic mastectomy normal epithelia of patient 10486 are
also shown. Dotted lines, mean methylation ratio for breast reduction normal tissues as reference.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

1794

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen-Induced DNA Methylation

Figure 6. Inverse correlation between RUNX3 expression and ERa status. A, RUNX3 mRNA expression was significantly lower in IDC tissues compared with
breast reduction normal tissues. No difference in RUNX3 expression was observed in adjacent normal tissues with unremarkable breast ducts and fibrocystic/
nonproliferative changes versus reduction normal tissues. B, ERa-positive IDC had significantly reduced RUNX3 mRNA expression compared with ERa-negative
tumors. Notably, normal breast tissues adjacent to ERa-positive breast tumors also had significantly lower expression than ERa-negative counterparts. C, evaluation of
RUNX3 mRNA expression in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. ERa-positive cell lines had significantly lower RUNX3 expression than ERa-negative cell lines, in
agreement with the data from primary breast tissues. In A to C , expression levels are represented in log2 values. In the box plots, the upper and lower boundaries of
the box indicate 75th and 25th percentiles, respectively. Line within the box, median; bars above and below the box, 90th and 10th percentiles, respectively.
The numbers of tissues/cell lines studied are also indicated. Asterisks, statistical significance. D, real-time quantitative RT-PCR analysis of RUNX3 in MCF-7 cells
after a 5-d treatment with 5 Amol/L 5-aza-dC. Black line, 5-aza-dC–treated MCF-7 cells were hormone deprived for 72 h and treated with vehicle or 10 nmol/L
E2 for the indicated times (h); gray line, 5-aza-dC–treated and hormone-deprived cells were treated with 4-OHT (1 Amol/L for 48 h) and then treated with
vehicle or 10 nmol/L E2 for the indicated times (h). Results are presented relative to no 4-OHT treatment control (black line , 0 time point). Points, mean of
triplicates; bars, SD.

were not a consequence of cell differentiation. Alternatively, we
propose that estrogen induces epigenetic alterations in breast
progenitors leading to mammary carcinogenesis.
Our proof-of-principle study shows that critical genes controlling tumor suppression, such as RUNX3, can be down-regulated
on estrogen exposure to breast progenitors. Recent reports have
shown that breast progenitor cells express ERa (26, 27). Thus, the
down-regulation may be mediated, in part, by the canonical
pathway of estrogen signaling (see Fig. 6D). This finding is also
supported by the presence of nuclear ERa in the affected
epithelial progeny; this nuclear internalization is commonly seen
in hormone receptor–positive breast cancer with functional
estrogen signaling (18). As reported in our previous study (12),

www.aacrjournals.org

estrogen can induce H3K9 dimethylation, a repressive chromatin
modification (28), and transiently suppresses a set of ERaresponsive genes in breast cancer cells. The presence of dimethyl
H3K9 mark may promote a repressive mode that renders target
genes more vulnerable to long-term silencing during cancer
development (29). Based on existing reports and our present
study, we propose that progressive accumulation of DNA
methylation plays a final role in both maintaining permanent
silencing of tumor suppressor genes and transmitting this
heritable information from breast progenitors to their epithelial
progeny. Although our MeDIP data only provide methylation
information of the affected epithelial progeny, a sensitive
immunoprecipitation technique (30) can be implemented in the

1795

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

future to directly interrogate the methylome of mammospheres
containing only 2,000 to 10,000 cells. Comparing the methylomes
between the hormone-treated mammospheres and their derived
epithelial progeny will lead to better understanding of the
estrogen epigenetic imprinting phenomenon.
Although the present study reports estrogen-induced hypermethylation, we also observed preferential MeDIP enrichment of
f0.5% of CpG island loci analyzed in the control epithelial
progeny relative to those of the affected progeny (data not
shown). This could be a hypomethylation event, which may
require a functional demethylase yet to be characterized in the
affected progeny. Hypomethylation of non-CpG islands is known
to occur in repeat sequences of the cancer genome (6). Because
our microarray panel contains only single-copy CpG islands, the
issue of whether estrogen induces hypomethylation of repeat
sequences during epithelial differentiation remains to be
explored. One more plausible explanation is that promoter
methylation of these CpG islands occurs during normal
maturation of particular epithelial branches in the breast duct.
It is possible that, as a result of estrogen exposure, these
promoter CpG islands escape methylation-mediated silencing,
and subsequent activation of the corresponding genes may
promote clonal proliferation of the affected epithelial progeny.
Future research direction will require isolation of primary

References
1. Fenton SE. Endocrine-disrupting compounds and
mammary gland development: early exposure and later
life consequences. Endocrinology 2006;147:S18–24.
2. Yager JD, Davidson NE. Estrogen carcinogenesis in
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2006;354:270–82.
3. Ho SM, Tang WY, Belmonte de Frausto J, Prins GS.
Developmental exposure to estradiol and bisphenol A
increases susceptibility to prostate carcinogenesis and
epigenetically regulates phosphodiesterase type 4 variant 4. Cancer Res 2006;66:5624–32.
4. Newbold RR, Padilla-Banks E, Jefferson WN. Adverse
effects of the model environmental estrogen diethylstilbestrol are transmitted to subsequent generations.
Endocrinology 2006;147:S11–7.
5. Robertson KD. DNA methylation and human disease.
Nat Rev Genet 2005;6:597–610.
6. Jones PA, Baylin SB. The fundamental role of
epigenetic events in cancer. Nat Rev Genet 2002;3:
415–28.
7. Weissman IL, Anderson DJ, Gage F. Stem and
progenitor cells: origins, phenotypes, lineage commitments, and transdifferentiations. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol
2001;17:387–403.
8. Feinberg AP. Methylation meets genomics. Nat Genet
2001;27:9–10.
9. Yan PS, Venkataramu C, Ibrahim A, et al. Mapping
geographic zones of cancer risk with epigenetic
biomarkers in normal breast tissue. Clin Cancer Res
2006;12:6626–36.
10. Dontu G, Abdallah WM, Foley JM, et al. In vitro
propagation and transcriptional profiling of human
mammary stem/progenitor cells. Genes Dev 2003;17:
1253–70.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

epithelial cells from different lineages by flow cytometry using
defined surface markers and separately analyze their methylomes
by MeDIP-chip. These challenging studies will determine whether
the estrogen treatment can induce a true hypomethylation event
or prevent an epigenetically mediated maturation process in the
affected progeny.
In conclusion, the mammosphere model described in this study
may provide a new paradigm for assessing cancer risk due to
exposure to endocrine disruptors. The in vitro system may serve as
a viable alternative to animal models and other toxicologic assays
for testing new estrogenic compounds. Furthermore, the altered
methylome cataloged in this study can be used to identify
biomarkers for early breast cancer detection and biosensors for
environmental estrogens.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/20/2007; revised 12/18/2007; accepted 1/22/2008.
Grant support: NIH grants U54 CA11300, R01 CA069065, P30 CA16058, and R01
CA098522 and U01 ES015986; The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer
Center; and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Jose Russo (Fox Chase Cancer Center) for advice on estrogen
treatment scheme and Chieh-Ti Kuo, Enrica Fabbri, Sandya Liyanarachchi, Daniel
Deatherage, and Huaxia Qin (Ohio State University) for technical support.

11. Russo J, Fernandez SV, Russo PA, et al. 17-h-Estradiol
induces transformation and tumorigenesis in human
breast epithelial cells. FASEB J 2006;20:1622–34.
12. Cheng AS, Jin VX, Fan M, et al. Combinatorial
analysis of transcription factor partners reveals recruitment of c-MYC to estrogen receptor-a responsive
promoters. Mol Cell 2006;21:393–404.
13. Weber M, Davies JJ, Wittig D, et al. Chromosomewide and promoter-specific analyses identify sites of
differential DNA methylation in normal and transformed human cells. Nat Genet 2005;37:853–62.
14. Lau QC, Raja E, Salto-Tellez M, et al. RUNX3 is
frequently inactivated by dual mechanisms of protein
mislocalization and promoter hypermethylation in
breast cancer. Cancer Res 2006;66:6512–20.
15. Ehrich M, Nelson MR, Stanssens P, et al. Quantitative
high-throughput analysis of DNA methylation patterns
by base-specific cleavage and mass spectrometry. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:15785–90.
16. Bolstad BM, Collin F, Brettschneider J, et al. Quality
assessment of Affymetrix GeneChip data. In: Gentleman
R, Carey V, Huber W, Irizarry R, Dudoit S, editors.
Bioinformatics and computational biology solutions
using R and Bioconductor. New York: Springer. 2005.
p. 33–47.
17. Neve RM, Chin K, Fridlyand J, et al. A collection of
breast cancer cell lines for the study of functionally
distinct cancer subtypes. Cancer Cell 2006;10:515–27.
18. Stenoien DL, Patel K, Mancini MG, et al. FRAP
reveals that mobility of oestrogen receptor-a is
ligand- and proteasome-dependent. Nat Cell Biol
2001;3:15–23.
19. Lee TI, Jenner RG, Boyer LA, et al. Control of
developmental regulators by Polycomb in human
embryonic stem cells. Cell 2006;125:301–13.

1796

20. Widschwendter M, Fiegl H, Egle D, et al. Epigenetic
stem cell signature in cancer. Nat Genet 2007;39:157–8.
21. Kremenevskaja N, von Wasielewski R, Rao AS, Schöfl
C, Andersson T, Brabant G. Wnt-5a has tumor
suppressor activity in thyroid carcinoma. Oncogene
2005;24:2144–54.
22. McPherson LA, Loktev AV, Weigel RJ. Tumor
suppressor activity of AP2a mediated through a direct
interaction with p53. J Biol Chem 2002;277:45028–33.
23. Schreiber-Agus N, Meng Y, Hoang T, et al. Role of
Mxi1 in ageing organ systems and the regulation of
normal and neoplastic growth. Nature 1998;393:483–7.
24. Takahashi T, Suzuki M, Shigematsu H, et al. Aberrant
methylation of Reprimo in human malignancies. Int J
Cancer 2005;115:503–10.
25. Fukamachi H. Runx3 controls growth and differentiation of gastric epithelial cells in mammals. Dev
Growth Differ 2006;48:1–13.
26. Clarke RB, Spence K, Anderson E, Howell A, Okano H,
Potten CS. A putative human breast stem cell population is enriched for steroid receptor-positive cells. Dev
Biol 2005;277:443–56.
27. Woodward WA, Chen MS, Behbod F, Rosen JM. On
mammary stem cells. J Cell Sci 2005;118:3585–94.
28. Barski A, Cuddapah S, Cui K, et al. High-resolution
profiling of histone methylations in the human genome.
Cell 2007;129:823–37.
29. Ohm JE, McGarvey KM, Yu X, et al. A stem cell-like
chromatin pattern may predispose tumor suppressor
genes to DNA hypermethylation and heritable silencing.
Nat Genet 2007;39:237–42.
30. O’Neill LP, VerMilyea MD, Turner BM. Epigenetic
characterization of the early embryo with a chromatin
immunoprecipitation protocol applicable to small cell
populations. Nat Genet 2006;38:835–41.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Epithelial Progeny of Estrogen-Exposed Breast Progenitor
Cells Display a Cancer-like Methylome
Alfred S.L. Cheng, Aedín C. Culhane, Michael W.Y. Chan, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:1786-1796.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/1786
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/03/11/68.6.1786.DC1

This article cites 29 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/1786.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 16 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/1786.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

