Article

Host-Microbe Co-metabolism Dictates Cancer Drug
Efficacy in C. elegans
Graphical Abstract

Authors

HOLOBIONT
DRUG

C. elegans

dRibonucleotide
metabolism

Drug
D ug c
Dr
conversion

Microbiota

Host

E. coli

Ribonucleotide
metabolism

Unaltered

5-FU

Timothy A. Scott, Leonor M. Quintaneiro,
Povilas Norvaisas, ..., Athanasios Typas,
Nicholas D.E. Greene, Filipe Cabreiro

Correspondence
f.cabreiro@ucl.ac.uk

In Brief

NUTRITION
Vitamin B6/B9
UMP precursors

Improved
Cancer survival

Highlights
d

Drug-microbe-host high-throughput screens reveal new
mechanisms for cancer drugs

d

Microbes integrate nutritional and drug cues regulating
treatment efficacy in the host

d

Ribonucleotide co-metabolism of cancer pro-drugs exists
between host and microbe

d

Imbalanced bacterial deoxynucleotides synergize 5-FUinduced autophagic cell death

Scott et al., 2017, Cell 169, 442–456
April 20, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.040

A three-way high-throughput screen
involving host-microbe-drug interactions
reveals that the beneficial impact of some
drugs can be due to effects of drugdependent alterations by gut microbe
composition rather than direct action of
the therapeutic itself.

Article
Host-Microbe Co-metabolism Dictates
Cancer Drug Efficacy in C. elegans
Timothy A. Scott,1,6 Leonor M. Quintaneiro,1,2,6 Povilas Norvaisas,1,3,6 Prudence P. Lui,1,6 Matthew P. Wilson,2
Kit-Yi Leung,2 Lucia Herrera-Dominguez,4 Sonia Sudiwala,2 Alberto Pessia,5 Peter T. Clayton,2 Kevin Bryson,3
Vidya Velagapudi,5 Philippa B. Mills,2 Athanasios Typas,4 Nicholas D.E. Greene,2 and Filipe Cabreiro1,7,*
1Institute

of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London and Birkbeck, London WC1E 6BT, UK
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK
3Department of Computer Science, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
4European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Heidelberg, Genome Biology, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
5Metabolomics Unit, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland
6These authors contributed equally
7Lead Contact
*Correspondence: f.cabreiro@ucl.ac.uk
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.040
2UCL

SUMMARY

Fluoropyrimidines are the first-line treatment for
colorectal cancer, but their efficacy is highly variable between patients. We queried whether gut microbes, a known source of inter-individual variability,
impacted drug efficacy. Combining two tractable genetic models, the bacterium E. coli and the nematode
C. elegans, we performed three-way high-throughput
screens that unraveled the complexity underlying
host-microbe-drug interactions. We report that microbes can bolster or suppress the effects of fluoropyrimidines through metabolic drug interconversion
involving bacterial vitamin B6, B9, and ribonucleotide
metabolism. Also, disturbances in bacterial deoxynucleotide pools amplify 5-FU-induced autophagy
and cell death in host cells, an effect regulated by
the nucleoside diphosphate kinase ndk-1. Our data
suggest a two-way bacterial mediation of fluoropyrimidine effects on host metabolism, which contributes
to drug efficacy. These findings highlight the potential therapeutic power of manipulating intestinal
microbiota to ensure host metabolic health and treat
disease.
INTRODUCTION
Fluoropyrimidines are antimetabolite drugs primarily used to
treat cancer. The archetype fluoropyrimidine, 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU), is the principal therapy for colorectal cancer, the third
most common cancer worldwide (Midgley and Kerr, 1999).
5-FU and its prodrugs, such as capecitabine, are uracil analogs
that impede nucleotide biosynthesis, and hence cell division, by
inhibiting thymidylate synthase (TS). Despite the widespread use
of 5-FU-based chemotherapy, there is no universally accepted
dose, and significant pharmacokinetic variations exist between
individuals. As a result, adverse effects are frequent (diarrhea,
nausea) and response rates sub-optimal (10% as monotherapy,

50% with combination therapies) (Longley et al., 2003). The
observed inter-patient variation in 5-FU efficacy/toxicity has
been attributed to several factors, including genetic polymorphisms in TS, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, methylene
THF reductase, and cytidine deaminase (Offer and Diasio,
2016). However, genetics alone does not explain differences in
5-FU tolerance between different continents suggesting environmental factors as key determinants in 5-FU action (O’Donnell
and Dolan, 2009).
The influence of gut microbiota on 5-FU activity has not been
explored. Gut microbes play an integral role in animal physiology, contributing to metabolism, influencing immunity, and
modulating gut function. The thousands of species that make
up the human microbiome surpass the host in terms of raw cell
numbers, genomic diversity, and metabolic capability (Nicholson
et al., 2012). Together, the host and its symbiotic microbiota (holobiont) act as a single evolutionary unit against environmental
pressures (Rosenberg and Zilber-Rosenberg, 2011). Despite
great advances in understanding the microbiome’s contribution
to human health, one facet of the host-microbe relationship
that remains undefined is the influence of microbiota on hosttargeted drugs and the resulting contribution to host fitness.
The consequences of not exploring these interactions at the holobiont level can be severe, as illustrated by the patient deaths
due to the unanticipated microbial metabolism of the antiviral
sorivudine to (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)uracil, a suicide inhibitor of
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, a key host enzyme responsible for the detoxification of 5-FU (Okuda et al., 1997).
A significant barrier to exploring the host-microbiota relationship has been the complexity and diversity of the mammalian
microbiome. The nematode C. elegans offers a simplified animal model with evolutionarily conserved features important for
studying host-microbe interactions. Like humans, C. elegans
have a symbiotic relationship with microbes, requiring them for
nutrition, optimal development (Watson et al., 2014), and drug
metabolism (Cabreiro et al., 2013).
Here, we employ an innovative host-microbe-drug model and
high-throughput screening approaches to explore the role of
microbes in modulating the effect of 5-FU and other fluoropyrimidines on C. elegans. We extensively define the microbial

442 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

A

D

B

E

C

F

G

metabolic, genetic, and nutritional contributions to fluoropyrimidine activity on the host, revealing two distinct mechanisms by
which bacteria modulate the efficacy of this class of anti-cancer
drugs in vivo: (1) drug activation by bacterial ribonucleotide
metabolism; and (2) influence of bacterial deoxynucleotide pools
on the host response. We present a model that will be valuable
for further probing host-microbe-drug interactions, highlighting
how microbial metabolism can impact host fitness and survival
in the context of pharmacotherapy.
RESULTS
Microbes Have a Large Impact on Fluoropyrimidine
Action in C. elegans
We reasoned that gut microbes may contribute to the activity of
5-FU in the context of the holobiont. Fluoropyrimidines impede

Figure 1. Bacterial Activity Modulates Fluoropyrimidine Efficacy in C. elegans
(A and B) Worms cultured on laboratory (A) and
WT (B) bacterial strains show disparate responses
to 5-FU. E. coli K-12 strains: BW25113, HT115,
W3310, MG1665; E. coli B strains: E. coli B, OP50,
BL21G; K-12/B hybrid: HB101.
(C) Heat/UV treatment of E. coli impairs 5-FU
action.
(D) Fluoropyrimidine effects on worms are bacterial
strain specific.
(E and F) Bacterial growth (E) and bacterial sensitivity to 5-FU (F) do not correlate with 5-FU effects
in worms.
(G) PCA of metabolomics data for C. elegans and
E. coli treated with 5-FU.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05;
**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. See also Figure S1 and
Table S1.

cell division and interfere with nematode
fertility and development, allowing simple
and robust readouts of drug activity on
the host, such as the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) for egg hatching
(SenGupta et al., 2013).
First, we compared 5-FU activity on
worms fed five Escherichia coli laboratory
strains commonly used in worm studies
(Figure 1A) and observed up to 80-fold differences in 5-FU MICs (HB101, MIC = 8 mM
versus BL21G, MIC = 0.1 mM, p < 0.001).
The differences in host drug activity were
independent of the bacterial strain serotype, as 5-FU efficacy was similarly variable between B strains (OP50 versus
BL21G; 20-fold, p < 0.001) and within
K-12 strains (BW25113 versus HT115;
8-fold, p < 0.001). This suggested that
specific genotypic differences between
the E. coli strains could be responsible for
the observed variability in drug efficacy.
We further explored other bacterial strains including the wildtype gut gammaproteobacteria E. coli B and K-12 strains
(W3110 and MG1655), Enterobacter cloacae (LMG2783) and the
soil betaproteobacterium Comamonas aquatica (DA1877) (Figure 1B). Again, large variations of 5-FU efficacy in worms were
observed, with a 40-fold difference in egg hatching MIC between
worms fed C. aquatica (0.1 mM) and E. coli B (4 mM, p < 0.001).
Interventions modifying bacterial metabolic activity can influence the effect of host-targeted drugs in C. elegans (Cabreiro
et al., 2013). Accordingly, we cultured nematodes on bacteria
killed by heat or UV treatment. 5-FU efficacy was greatly
decreased in nematodes fed dead BW25113 (128-fold, Figure 1C) or OP50 (Figure S1A). Thus, bacterial enhancement of
5-FU activity on C. elegans requires live bacteria.
Next, we explored the microbial modulation of other clinically
used fluoropyrimidines, including floxuridine (FUdR), flucytosine

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 443

(5-FC), capecitabine (CAP), and 5-fluoroorotic acid (5-FO).
Fluoropyrimidine efficacy in C. elegans increased in the order
CAP < 5-FC < 5-FU = FUdR = 5-FO. Within each drug treatment,
the efficacy was highly dependent on the bacterial strain fed to
the worms (e.g., 5-FU OP50 = 2 mM versus C. aquatica =
0.1 mM, p < 0.001; FUdR OP50 = 2 mM versus C. aquatica =
8 mM, p < 0.001) (Figures 1D and S1B–S1E). Therefore, as for
5-FU, the pharmacodynamics of these drugs in the host are bacteria dependent and drug specific.
A possible confounding factor for the differential effects of
bacteria on worm MIC could be the absolute number of bacterial
cells available and their digestion. To test whether there was
a link between bacterial growth phenotype and modulation
of drug efficacy in C. elegans, we quantified bacterial growth
in the absence (Figure 1E) and presence (Figures 1F, S1F,
and S1G) of 5-FU, and found no link with drug efficacy in
C. elegans. Experiments with other fluoropyrimidines confirmed
these observations (Figures S1H and S1I). Similarly, rates of bacterial consumption by worms do not explain 5-FU efficacy
(Figure S1J).
The type of bacteria fed to C. elegans has a significant impact
on host biology, including gene expression and metabolism
(Watson et al., 2014). Expression of worm genes associated
with pyrimidine metabolism, required for potential 5-FU conversion, was largely unaffected by the bacterial strain (Figure S1K).
Therefore, bacterial modulation of 5-FU efficacy in C. elegans
occurs by means other than bacterial regulation of nematode
gene expression. Given that 5-FU disrupts pyrimidine metabolism homeostasis (Ser et al., 2016), we also investigated
whether drug treatment induces metabolic changes in E. coli,
which could contribute to the observed effects in the worm.
Targeted metabolomics in worms or E. coli exposed to 1 mM
5-FU (the full inhibitory concentration for worm hatching) revealed that 5-FU did not affect bacterial metabolism as shown
by principal component analysis (PCA), while inducing a significant metabolic shift in the worms (Figures 1G and S1L–S1M).
These data imply distinct sensitivities to 5-FU action between
host and microbe and support a regulatory effect of bacteria
on drug efficacy in the host that is independent of altered bacterial metabolism caused by drug treatment.
Overall, we found that bacteria are key determinants of fluoropyrimidine efficacy on host metabolism and embryonic survival.
Host-Microbe-Drug Screens Reveal Bacterial
Regulators of Fluoropyrimidine Action
We hypothesized that the bacterial uracil phosphoribosyltransferase upp mutant (Dupp), a gene previously used for cancer
therapy (Koyama et al., 2000) and capable of metabolizing
5-FU in vitro, could influence the response of the host to treatment. As predicted, worms fed Dupp bacteria developed fully
at concentrations of 5-FU that completely inhibited worms fed
the control strain (Figure 2A), further suggesting an interspecies
mediation of drug effects. Therefore, to investigate how E. coli
impacts 5-FU action in C. elegans, we developed a three-way
high-throughput host-microbe-drug screen using the E. coli
non-essential gene knockout Keio library (Baba et al., 2006) (Figure 2B). The developmental response of C. elegans to 5-FU is
dose dependent when fed control BW25113 (Figures S2A and

444 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

S2B). Therefore, the worm response to the drug in the presence
of each E. coli mutant was estimated as the MIC that arrests
development at L1 larvae stage, allowing us to determine the
relative contribution of each E. coli gene in mediating 5-FU effects in the host. 96 mutants were excluded from further investigation due to poor growth on nematode growth medium (NGM),
undisrupted target gene, or impaired worm development in the
absence of drug (Figure 2C; Table S2). A primary screen within
a narrow range of drug concentrations (1–5 mM) revealed that
80% of the total 3,813 E. coli mutants screened did not alter
5-FU effects in C. elegans (Figures 2C and S2C). 574 (15%)
of the mutant strains allowed full development at 5 mM and
were investigated further at a higher range of concentrations
(5–100 mM). This secondary screen (Figures S2C) revealed that
the top 5% (124 mutants) increased C. elegans resistance
to drug to MICs >30 mM and the top 1% (35 mutants) to
MICs >43 mM. Thus, we identified the subset of bacterial genes
most significantly affecting 5-FU efficacy in the host.
Chemical perturbations in bacteria have been used to associate genes with phenotypes and function (Nichols et al.,
2011). We therefore asked whether we could infer drug action
on the host by evaluating the effect of 5-FU on bacteria alone.
First, we investigated how gene deletions affect E. coli response
to 5-FU, using changes in growth, measured by optical density
(OD), as a readout of drug effects on the bacteria (Figures S2D
and S2E). As expected, most deletions did not affect response
to 5-FU treatment (r2 = 0.33, p < 2 3 1016; Figure S2D). One
of the most significant resistant hits was Dupp (p < 0.001, false
discovery rate [FDR] = 0, Figures 2D, S2E, and S2G). These
findings validate our bacterial screening approach (see STAR
Methods for details). Next, we asked whether the effects
observed for bacterial growth matched the effects of 5-FU in
the worms. Worm MIC values (colored circles) were plotted
relative to the bacterial growth OD values with (y axis) and
without (x axis) 5-FU treatment for each E. coli knockout strain
(Figures 2D, S2F, and S2G). Strikingly, bacterial growth in control
(r2 = 0.02, p = 0.0007; Figure S2F) or 5-FU treatment alone
(r2 = 0.007, p = 0.05; Figure S2G) cannot predict 5-FU effects
on host physiology. Moreover, when the three datasets are combined together (Figure 2D), this can be further inferred visually by
the lack of a gradient in color top to bottom (correlation with 5-FU
effects on bacterial growth) or left to right (correlation with bacterial growth alone). Indeed, the 5% of bacterial knockouts that
conferred the greatest MIC values in worms contained equal
proportions of mutants with sensitive (e.g., DgcvA) and resistant
(e.g., Dupp) growth interactions with 5-FU (Figure 2E). Altogether, bacterial growth or 5-FU effects on E. coli growth are
not key determinants or predictors of 5-FU effects on host
physiology.
To determine which bacterial processes contribute to the effects of 5-FU on host physiology, we performed enrichment
analysis of KEGG and EcoCyc pathways on the genes with
strong 5-FU effects on C. elegans development (MIC >5 mM)
(Figure 2F, see STAR Methods for details). Out of the significantly
enriched pathways, 3 (pyridoxal-5-phosphate [PLP], chorismate, and folate biosynthesis) were involved in the production
of 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate (CH2-THF), a cofactor for
TS (thyA/TS; Figure 2G), the canonical target of 5-FU (Longley

A

D

B

C

E

F
G

Figure 2. Chemical-Genomic Bacterial-Host Screens Identify Pathways for 5-FU Action Not Revealed by Bacterial-Drug Screens
(A) 5-FU inhibits worm development on control (BW25113) but not mutant E. coli (Dupp).
(B) Diagram of the three-way host-microbe-drug interaction screen.
(C) Screen design and Venn diagram of biologically relevant hits.
(D) 3D graph correlating effects of gene knockout on bacterial growth (x axis), effects of 5-FU on bacterial growth (y axis), and effects of knockout on worm growth
inhibition by 5-FU (colored circles). Gray dashed fit line (correlation between 5-FU and knockout effects in bacteria) determines bacterial sensitivity to 5-FU (blue/
green color gradient box). Error bars represent SD.
(E) Venn diagram of E. coli sensitive/resistant hits (FDR <0.05) with C. elegans 5% top hits for 5-FU treatment.
(F) KEGG (K) and EcoCyc (E) pathway enrichment for gene deletions, and their effects on C. elegans ranked by coverage. Knockouts with MIC >5 mM are hits.
Violin plots display distribution of MIC values; Contour color, number of hits; interior color, pathway coverage. *FDR <0.05; **FDR <0.01.
(G) Metabolic network between chorismate, one-carbon, and vitamin B6 metabolism based on screen results.
See also Figure S2 and Table S2.

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 445

D-glyceraldehyde 3-P + pyruvate
dxs
D-xylulose 5-P

salvage pathway
E. coli
worm

Pyridoxine 5-P (PNP)
pdxH

F57C9.1
pdxK
Pyridoxal (PL)

pdxH
Pyridoxal 5-P (PLP)

Pyridoxamine 5-P
(PMP)

pdxY

de novo pathway

B

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

2

0.5

0.0

4

E
1.0

Ctrl. PL
BW
∆pdxJ

0.5

0.0

0 0.01

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

2

BW
∆pdxH
∆pdxY
∆pdxK
∆pdxK∆pdxJ

Fraction hatching

Fraction hatching

0 0.01

D
Fraction hatching

1.0

BW
∆pdxA
∆pdxB
∆serC
∆epd
∆pdxJ

0.5

F57C9.1
pdxK
Pyridoxamine (PM)

salvage pathway

C

1.0

0.0

de novo pathway
E. coli

pdxJ

F57C9.1
pdxK
Pyridoxine (PN)

D-erythrose 4-P
epd
serC
pdxA
pdxB
3-amino-1-hydroxyacetone 1-P

0 0.01

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

1.5
Vitamer B6 levels (pmol/μg)

A

4

n.s.
1.0

2

4

BW
BW + PL
∆pdxJ
∆pdxJ + PL

*
***
n.s.
*

0.5

n.s.
n.s.

0.0

***

PLP

*
*** *

PNP

n.s.
n.s.
**
**

PMP

n.s.
n.s.
**
***
n.s.
n.s.
*
n.s.
n.s.
**

PL

PN

n.s.
**

**
*** ***

PM

B6 Vitamers

Figure 3. Pyridoxal-5-Phosphate Is a Key Cofactor for the Mediation of 5-FU Effects
(A) The de novo (blue, E. coli) and salvage pathway genes (green, E. coli; red, C. elegans) of B6 metabolism.
(B) Knockout of B6 de novo pathway enzymes in E. coli reduces 5-FU efficacy in worms.
(C) E. coli B6 salvage pathway modulates the de novo pathway to regulate 5-FU effects on worms.
(D and E) Supplementation of pyridoxal (PL) improves 5-FU efficacy in worms (D) and rescues bacterial B6 deficiency as measured by LC-MS/MS (E).
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. See also Figure S3. For statistics, see Table S3.

et al., 2003). Enrichment for pathways involved in energy production (e.g., TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation) is consistent
with the observation that disruption of metabolic activity by
UV/heat treatment decreases 5-FU efficacy (Figures 1C and
S1A). Surprisingly, pyrimidine metabolism was not significantly
over-represented, suggesting that only key genes (e.g., Dupp)
belonging to this pathway contribute to the observed effects.
Overall, our three-way screen reveals that host-microbe-drug interactions are inherently complex, and that drug efficacy at the
holobiont level can only be fully understood if evaluating biological readouts in the host.
E. coli Vitamin B6 Is Essential for 5-FU Efficacy in
C. elegans
Given the link between vitamin B6, chorismate-folate, and pyrimidine metabolism, we next investigated how these bacterial
pathways regulate 5-FU action in the host. Vitamin B6 is a key
cofactor involved in numerous enzyme-catalyzed reactions in
all living systems. Unlike eukaryotes, E. coli is capable of synthesizing PLP, the active form of B6, via both de novo and salvage
biosynthetic pathways (Fitzpatrick et al., 2007) (Figure 3A). We

446 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

therefore tested the impact of these two B6 pathways in regulating 5-FU efficacy in the host. We found that impairing de
novo PLP synthesis decreased 5-FU efficacy in the worm by
8- to 16-fold (p < 0.001; Figure 3B). By contrast, deletion of
pdxY from the salvage pathway had no effect (Figure 3C).
Knockout of pdxH, a gene at the intersection of both pathways,
decreased 5-FU efficacy by 8-fold (p < 0.001; Figure 3C). Using
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/
MS), we found that DpdxH mutants were also deficient in
PLP (–96%, p = 0.0001) while accumulating pyridoxine 5-P
(PNP; +315%, p = 0.0001) (Figure S3A). Interestingly, knockout
of pdxK, a key kinase in the salvage pathway, improved 5-FU efficacy (DpdxK = 0.1 mM versus BW25113 = 0.25 mM, p < 0.001;
Figure 3C), possibly due to positive feedback into de novo synthesis of PLP. Indeed, when we blocked de novo PLP synthesis
in the DpdxK by knocking out pdxJ, 5-FU efficacy dropped to
that conferred by DpdxJ and DpdxH mutants alone (Figure 3C).
Altogether, our data imply a key role of bacterial PLP in the
mediation of 5-FU effects on host physiology.
Vitamins are important regulators of microbial metabolism
but can also influence host metabolism. Therefore, we tested

30

*

*

***
***
Glu2

Glu3

*

Glu4

Glu5

Glu6

Glu7

4

***

***

***

F

F

O
-T
H

-T
H
3

H

H
C

F

*
-T
H

F

F

******

C

***

2

20

H

40

OP50 OP50-MR
Control
50 mM
metformin

1.0

∆gcvP
∆fau

Glu

60

2

Folates

C

Fraction hatching

***

20

0

BW
∆gcvP
∆fau

80

0

4

BW

10

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

H+
-T
H
F

2

0 0.01

D 100

TH

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

0.0

C

0 0.01

50
40

% CH2-THF

BW
∆metF
∆metE
∆metH
∆metE∆metH
∆folM
∆purU
∆fau

0.5

0.0

E

Folate metabolism

4

F

1.0

2

H

Fraction hatching

C

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

0.5

D

0 0.01

BW
∆pdxJ
∆gcvP
∆gcvP∆pdxJ

1.0

Fraction hatching

Fraction hatching

0.5

0.0

B

BW
∆gcvP
∆gcvT
∆gcvH
∆gcvA
∆gcvR
∆glyA

1.0

% total Folates

A Glycine/serine metabolism

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1

2
4
8
[5-FU] (μM)

whether PLP affects bacterial or host metabolism to regulate
5-FU efficacy. Supplementation with 1 mM pyridoxal (PL), a precursor of PLP through conversion by pyridoxal kinase (bacterial =
pdxK or worm = F57C9.1; Figure 3A), fully rescued the effect of
the DpdxJ mutant and improved 5-FU efficacy (BW + PL =
0.1 mM versus BW = 0.25 mM, p = 0.006, Figure 3D). Similar effects were observed at 10 mM PL (Figure S3B). Also, supplementation with PL fully rescued PLP and pyridoxine (PN) levels in
DpdxJ vitamin B6-deficient bacteria (Figure 3E). In contrast,
worms fed DpdxKDpdxJ double mutants were not rescued by
supplementation with various B6 precursors at 1 mM, consistent
with the role of pdxK in the utilization of B6 vitamers (Figure S3C).
In addition, the hatching inhibition caused by 5-FU in C. elegans
treated with RNAi for pyridoxal kinase (F57C9.1) (Figures 3A and
S3D), with reduced capacity to utilize B6 vitamers, was similar to
wild-type (WT) worms when fed DpdxJ and supplemented with
PL (Figures S3E and S3D), suggesting that PL rescue is not
mediated by worm metabolism. Consistent with this idea, worms
grown on the PLP-deficient mutant DpdxJ failed to show significant gene expression changes for enzymes involved in vitamin
B6, folate metabolism, the glycine cleavage system, and nucleotide metabolism, which mediate the effects of 5-FU in eukaryotic
cells (Ser et al., 2016) (Figure S3F). Taken together, these results
support a role for bacterial PLP in the modulation of drug efficacy
in the host via effects on microbial metabolism rather than direct
effects on the host.
Vitamin B6 Regulates One-Carbon Metabolism in
Bacteria to Mediate 5-FU Effects on the Host
One-carbon metabolism (OCM) plays an essential role in a
myriad of biochemical processes. Out of the 43 enzymes in
E. coli that require PLP as a cofactor, ten were found in our

16

Figure 4. Vitamin B6 Acts in Concert with
Glycine and Folate Metabolism to Mediate
5-FU Effects
(A) Disruption of bacterial glycine and serine
metabolism impairs 5-FU action.
(B) B6 effects are mediated by the glycine cleavage
system.
(C and D) Disruption of bacterial folate metabolism
(C) impairs 5-FU action in worms and alters folate
homeostasis (D). DHF, dihydrofolate; THF, tetrahydrofolate; CH+-THF, 5,10-methenyl-THF; CH2THF, 5,10-methylene-THF; CH3-THF, 5-methylTHF; CHO-THF, 10-formyl-THF. Each metabolite
is the ratio between the sum of the values for the
different glutamate side chains (1–7) and the sum of
all metabolites measured.
(E) Disruption of glycine (DgcvP) or folate (Dfau)
metabolism alters CH2-THF polyglutamylation.
(F) Metformin impairs 5-FU action in worms fed
OP50 but to a lesser degree on metformin-resistant
strain OP50-MR.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05;
**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. See also Figure S4. For
statistics, see Table S4.

32

screen as regulating the effects of 5-FU on host physiology,
with five belonging to OCM (Figures 2G). In particular, PLP is
essential for reactions involved in the production of CH2-THF
(Longley et al., 2003), an important cofactor in pyrimidine synthesis by TS.
Glycine and serine metabolism are at the center of OCM, as
major one-carbon donors in the production of CH2-THF (Locasale, 2013). We found that knockout of bacterial genes involved
in the glycine cleavage system (GCS) (gcvTHP, or their transcriptional regulators gcvA and gcvR) reduced 5-FU effects up to
8-fold (Figure 4A). PLP is a key cofactor in the two parallel reactions mediated by glyA and gcvP to produce CH2-THF, and
therefore we queried whether PLP regulates 5-FU effects via
the GCS. Accordingly, host 5-FU MICs were similar for worms
fed the single mutants, DgcvP and DpdxJ, and the respective
double mutant (Figure 4B). These results support GCS as the
main pathway regulated by PLP to mediate the efficacy of 5-FU.
Next, we probed the role of CH2-THF in mediating 5-FU effects. First, we tested whether the inhibition of bacterial folate
metabolism alters 5-FU efficacy on the host. Inhibition of the shikimate pathway that produces the folate precursor para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA; Figure S4A) decreased 5-FU efficacy up to
16-fold (Figure S4B). Also, impairing synthesis of the main precursors of CH2-THF, including tetrahydrofolate (THF) by DfolM
or DpurU and 5,10-methenyl-THF (CH+-THF) by Dfau, reduced
5-FU efficacy by 8- to 16-fold (Figure 4C). In contrast, deletion
of metF resulted in increased drug efficacy (MIC = 0.1 mM,
p < 0.001; Figure 4C), possibly due to retention of CH2-THF
within the folate cycle. Next, we performed LC-MS/MS analysis
of bacterial folate metabolism in Dfau and DgcvP mutants to
investigate the impact of these genes on folate metabolism.
Our data show a shift in folate metabolite pools with an increase

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 447

in formyl-THF (CHO-THF; +33%, p < 0.0001) in Dfau, and THF
(+25%, p < 0.0001) in DgcvP, with a decrease in the remaining
folate forms (Figure 4D), confirming their role in the regulation
of folate metabolism and consistent with our observations in
Gldc-deficient mouse embryos (Pai et al., 2015). These findings
suggest a redistribution of folates to maintain essential CH2-THF
pools required for cellular division. Altogether, the data indicate
that bacterial folate metabolic status regulates the efficacy of
5-FU on the host.
In order to probe the activity of folate-dependent enzymes, we
analyzed folate polyglutamylation profiles. Folates are defined
by a pteridine ring, PABA, and a variable number of glutamate
moieties, which determine retention and bioavailability for enzymatic reactions (Kwon et al., 2008). Major differences in polyglutamylation profiles were observed only for CH2-THF (Figure 4E)
but not other folate forms (Figure S4C). The decrease in the
abundance of shorter polyglutamate chains of CH2-THF in
Dfau (nglu = 3) and DgcvP (nglu = 3, nglu = 4) (Figure 4E) is consistent with the role of these genes in the mediation of 5-FU efficacy
in the host (Figures 4A–4C), possibly by regulating the availability
of CH2-THF as a cofactor for TS. To confirm this, we used
chemical interference by metformin, which dramatically alters
polyglutamylation of CH2-THF in E. coli (Cabreiro et al., 2013).
Our data show that metformin treatment impairs 5-FU treatment
by 16-fold, and this effect is partially rescued in a strain resistant
to metformin but not 5-FU (OP50-MR) (Figure 4F). Indeed, bacterial growth data show that metformin is antagonistic to the
effects of 5-FU (Figures S4D–S4F). Given that genetic polymorphisms in human methylene THF reductase (Offer and Diasio,
2016) are associated with 5-FU efficacy in cancer treatment,
we investigated the effect of DgcvP and DpdxJ mutants on
host folate metabolism by LC-MS/MS. Our data show that these
bacterial mutants do not regulate folate pools in the host (Figure S4G). Overall, our results indicate that disrupted folate metabolism in bacteria have a direct impact on 5-FU efficacy, without
directly modulating host OCM.
Fluoropyrimidines Hijack Bacterial Ribonucleotide
Metabolism to Regulate Drug Efficacy on the Host
Fluoropyrimidines are pro-drugs that require intracellular metabolic conversion to downstream active metabolites to induce
RNA and DNA damage (Longley et al., 2003). Since TS links
OCM and pyrimidine metabolism, we hypothesized that bacteria
could influence drug cytotoxicity through metabolic interconversion, an effect possibly regulated by vitamin B6. Cytosine deaminase (CodA), which converts cytosine to uracil, exists only in
prokaryotes and has been used for suicide gene therapy against
cancer for the delivery and conversion of 5-FC to 5-FU to cancer
cells expressing bacterial codA (Koyama et al., 2000). We utilized
this peculiarity to determine whether E. coli regulates drug efficacy independently of the host metabolic machinery by conducting a bioconversion assay (see STAR Methods for details,
Figure 5A). 5-FC was effective at inhibiting worm hatching only
if fed on WT bacteria but not DcodA or Dupp mutants (Figures
5A and 5B). Pre-incubation of 5-FC with control bacteria complemented the metabolic deficiency of DcodA and Dupp. Interestingly, the intermediate response observed for pre-incubation
with DcodA suggests an alternative but less efficient pathway
448 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

for conversion of this pro-drug (Figure 5B). LC-MS/MS analysis
of fluoronucleotides supports these findings (Figure 5C). The
amount of 5-FC was higher in DcodA relative to control (4.61fold, p = 0.004; 1.7-fold, p = 0.044) with a concomitant decrease
of 5-FU (4.4-fold, p = 0.018; 5.4-fold, p = 0.006) in pellets (intracellular) and supernatants (secreted), respectively. 5-fluorouridine 50 -monophosphate (5-FUMP) was also decreased in DcodA
pellets (4.5-fold, p = 0.0008). Thus, bacteria can convert and
secrete metabolized fluoronucleotides from 5-FC, which then
target worm metabolism (Figure 1G).
Therefore, which bacterial genes are involved in the full
bioconversion of fluoropyrimidines? To explore this, we first
investigated the contribution of the salvage pathways of pyrimidine ribonucleotides (e.g., UMP) and deoxyribonucleotides (e.g.,
thymidine) (Figure 5D). Impeding bacterial uptake of nucleobases and nucleosides reduced 5-FU action (Figure S5A). Inhibition of ribonucleotide metabolism through knockout of udp and/
or udk had no role alone (DudpDudk = 0.25 mM, p = 0.916) but
acted synergistically with Dupp to inhibit bacterial contribution
of 5-FU effects on the host (Dupp = 2 mM; DudpDupp = 32 mM;
DudkDupp = 32 mM, Figure 5E). As expected, knockout of the
pyrimidine nucleotidase yjjG improved drug efficacy (DyjjG =
0.1 mM, p = 0.014). We further investigated the link between pyrimidine supplementation, bacteria, and 5-FU effects on the host
by feeding worms bacterial mutants of pyrimidine metabolism
(Figure 5D). Supplementation of uridine (Figure S5B) and orotate
(Figure S5C) dramatically reduced 5-FU efficacy (by 160- and
16-fold, respectively), an effect mediated by the ribonucleotide
salvage pathway genes upp,udk,udp and the de novo pyrimidine
pathway gene pyrE, but not pyrD, respectively (Figures S5B
and S5C). Instead, interfering with the deoxyribonucleotide
salvage pathway increased 5-FU efficacy by rewiring nucleotide
metabolism though the ribonucleotide salvage pathway (Dtdk =
0.1 mM, versus BW = 0.25 mM, p = 0.004; DtdkDudpDupp =
32 mM versus DudkDupp = 32 mM, p = 1), a finding consistent
with the observation that supplementation with thymidine slightly
increases 5-FU efficacy in worms fed Dtdk bacteria (Figure S5D).
Next, we addressed the role of the de novo pathway. We
observed that knockout of genes downstream (pyrE and pyrF)
but not upstream (pyrD) of orotate strongly impaired 5-FO efficacy (DpyrE and DpyrF = 32 mM; DpyrD = 0.25 mM) (Figure 5F).
In addition, bioconversion of 5-FO and excretion of metabolized
fluoronucleotides can be performed by WT E. coli but not DpyrE
(Figure S5E). We also found pathway specificity in the conversion of fluoronucleotides, as worms fed DpyrE did not modulate
5-FU effects (Figure S5C) or downstream metabolites of converted 5-FO (Figure S5E). Thus, bacterially mediated bioconversion and secretion of fluoropyrimidines is pathway specific
(de novo for 5-FO and salvage ribonucleotide for 5-FU and
5-FC) and determines drug efficacy in the host. Furthermore,
our data suggest that E. coli also acts as an integrator of nutritional metabolites to regulate the effects of fluoropyrimidines
on host metabolism.
Therefore, we tested whether B6 and B9 act in concert with
ribonucleotide metabolism to mediate drug transformation. Our
data indicate that pdxJ and gcvP are negatively epistatic to
upp,udk (Figure 5G). Also, supplementation of PL required intact
ribonucleotide salvage to improve 5-FU efficacy (Figure 5H) and

A

B

C

E

F

G

H

I

J

D

Figure 5. Bacteria Complement C. elegans Metabolically to Mediate 5-FU Effects
(A) Diagram of the bioconversion experiment.
(B) Pre-conversion of 5-FC by bacteria enhances drug effects on the host.
(C) Control but not codA metabolize 5-FC and excrete 5-FU. BD-below detection in codA but not BW.
(D) Diagram of bacterial (fluoro)pyrimidine metabolism. Dashed arrows, more than one reaction.
(E) Opposite effects of salvage deoxyribonucleotide (Dtdk) and ribonucleotide (DuppDudkDudp) metabolism in 5-FU efficacy.
(F) Bacterial de novo pyrimidine metabolism regulates the effects of 5-FO.
(G and H) B6 deficiency (G) and PL supplementation (H) regulate 5-FU effects through bacterial ribonucleotide metabolism.
(I) Bacterial conversion of 5-FU alters fluoropyrimidine profiles and availability in C. elegans.
(J) Knockout of host umps-1 mediates drug effects on worm development only in the absence of bacterial conversion of 5-FO.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. See also Figure S5. For statistics, see Table S5.

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 449

B

A

C

E

D

F
H

I

G

J
K

(legend on next page)

450 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

increased the transcription of pyrimidine metabolism genes (Figure S5F), and pdxJ regulates drug bioconversion (Figure S5G).
Altogether our findings implicate this metabolic axis as central
for fluoropyrimidine metabolism, and the regulation of nucleotide
flux is mediated by vitamin B6 and B9.
Gut microbes are key players involved in the regulation of host
physiology through metabolism of nutrients and xenobiotics
(Spanogiannopoulos et al., 2016). Does co-metabolism of fluoropyrimidines occur in the worm-E. coli holobiont? We performed
fluoronucleotide LC-MS/MS analysis of worms and E. coli
treated with 5-FU. Our data highlight distinct profiles both in
worms and bacteria, an effect dependent on E. coli genotype
(Figure 5I). In particular, 5-FUMP and 5-fluorouridine 50 -triphosphate (5-FUTP) were significantly decreased in DudpDudkDupp
triple mutants and worms fed this strain (Figures S5H and S5I).
Similar trends were observed for worms fed heat-killed bacteria,
DpdxJDgcvP double mutants and control bacteria supplemented with uridine (Figures S5J and S5K), further supporting
the role of bacterial ribonucleotide salvage metabolism in the
conversion of fluoronucleotides to increase drug efficacy in the
host. In order to probe this further, we utilized umps-1(zu456)
loss-of-function worm mutants, which are incapable of converting orotate to UMP (Merry et al., 2014). Since umps-1(zu456)
impairs fertility, we assayed worm larval development (which
was not affected by the mutation; data not shown) as a proxy
for drug efficacy. Indeed, umps-1(zu456) worms were only resistant to the effects of 5-FO when fed DpyrE bacteria (Figure 5J),
but not to 5-FU (Figure S5L). Overall, our data suggest that
host de novo pyrimidine metabolism does not contribute to fluoropyrimidine efficacy beyond its minor role in converting 5-FO at
high drug concentrations and supports the notion that the holobiont functions as a single unit in the mediation of drug effects.
Bacterial Deoxynucleotide Imbalance Increases
5-FU-Induced Autophagy and Cellular Death
We found that knockout of bacterial ndk, the nucleoside diphosphate kinase from the deoxyribonucleotide salvage pathway,
and yjjG from the ribonucleotide salvage pathway, improved
efficacy of fluoropyrimidine treatment in worms (0.1 mM,
p < 0.0001; Figures 5E, 5F, 6A, and 6G). Therefore, we probed
whether ndk was acting in concert with the bacterial conversion
of 5-FU to downstream fluoronucleotides to mediate the host
response to drug. Surprisingly, knockout of ndk was not epistatic
to pyrE in the mediation of 5-FO effects (Figure 6A), did not
confer resistance to bacterial inhibition by 5-FU (Figures 6B
and S6A), and did not alter 5-FUTP or 5-FdUMP abundance in

E. coli or C. elegans (Figures 6C and 6D), the two metabolites
responsible for impeding cellular division by causing RNA and
DNA damage, respectively (Longley et al., 2003). In contrast,
knockout of yjjG (1) dramatically increased fluoronucleotide
abundance in both organisms (Figures 6C and 6D), possibly by
impeding diversion of 5-FU metabolism to the less toxic prodrug 5-fluorouridine (5-FUrd) (Figure 5D); (2) enhanced bacterial
sensitivity to 5-FU (Figure 6B); and (3) required higher concentrations of uridine for rescuing 5-FU toxicity (Figure S6B). Altogether, these data suggest a distinct mode of action conferred
by these two genes. To gain insight into the mechanism underlying such effects, we performed analysis of nucleotide metabolism by LC-MS/MS. This approach revealed discrete deoxynucleotide changes in Dndk, but not DyjjG or DpyrE (Figures
6E, S6C, and S6D). To investigate the role of microbial deoxynucleotides in modulating drug potency, we tested the function of
the dCTP deaminase dcd, which, like ndk, alters dNTP pools
(Figure 6F) (Maslowska et al., 2015). Knockout of dcd, like ndk,
improved 5-FU efficacy on the host (Figure 6G) but did not alter
the bacterial sensitivity to 5-FU (Figures 6B and S6A). Thus,
bacterial deoxynucleotide imbalance mediated by ndk and dcd
promotes cellular death by a distinct mechanism to increased
fluoronucleotide pools in host cells (e.g., yjjG) (Figure 6D).
In C. elegans, overexpression of TS in the germline increases
resistance to 5-FU effects (Kim et al., 2008). As a consequence
of TS inhibition, DNA damage (Longley et al., 2003) and disruption of OCM have previously been reported for mammalian cells
treated with 5-FU (Ser et al., 2016). Similarly, we observed that
folate metabolism was dysregulated in embryos, but not intact
worms treated with 5-FU (Figures 6H and S6E), suggesting
that TS in the germline is one of the likely targets of 5-FU in
C. elegans. DNA damage caused by cancer drugs induces autophagy-mediated cell death in human cells (Zeng and Kinsella,
2011). Similarly, DNA damage checkpoint activation by 5-FU in
C. elegans induces autophagy, measured by changes in lgg-1::
GFP fluorescence, the worm ortholog of atg8/LC3 (SenGupta
et al., 2013). Therefore, we investigated the role of bacteria in
the activation of autophagy by 5-FU and found that autophagy
was activated by 5-FU in a dose- and bacterial-dependent
manner (Figure S6F). Also, Dndk and Ddcd but not DyjjG
synergized the effects of 5-FU to induce autophagy (Figure 6I)
despite similar effects on embryonic lethality (Figure 6G),
further supporting a distinct mechanism to induce cell death
in host cells. To probe the involvement of the DNA damage
mismatch repair (MMR) pathway in the activation of autophagy
(SenGupta et al., 2013), we tested the MMR-deficient mutant

Figure 6. Bacteria Regulate 5-FU Effects in C. elegans by Two Distinct Mechanisms
(A) Bacterial ndk effects on the efficacy of 5-FU are independent of 5-FO bioconversion mediated by pyrE.
(B) IC50 values for bacterial growth with 5-FU.
(C and D) LC-MS/MS quantification of fluoropyrimidines in E. coli (C) and C. elegans (D) supplemented with 50 mM 5-FU.
(E) Volcano plot of nucleotide metabolism of bacterial mutants.
(F) Diagram of deoxynucleotide metabolism in E. coli. X = G or A.
(G) Bacterial deoxyribonucleotide imbalance caused by Dndk and Ddcd improves 5-FU effects.
(H) 5-FU alters folate metabolism homeostasis in embryos. Inset: effects of 5-FU on egg hatching of the analyzed samples.
(I) Activation of autophagy (Lgg-1::GFP reporter) in embryos by 5-FU is dependent on bacteria.
(J) Host ndk-1 is required for 5-FU-induced autophagy activation by bacterial deoxynucleotide imbalance.
(K) Bacterial ndk effects on 5-FU efficacy are mediated by the host ndk-1 gene.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. See also Figure S6. For statistics, see Table S6.

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 451

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

(legend on next page)

452 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

msh-6(pk2504). We found that msh-6 improved resistance to
5-FU, as previously reported (SenGupta et al., 2013), but this
effect was dependent on bacterial metabolism, in particular, deoxynucleotide metabolism. msh-6 mutants were only resistant to
5-FU when fed HT115 (Figure S6G), but not BW25113 (Figure S6H) or Dndk (Figures S6G and S6H). Thus, imbalanced bacterial deoxynucleotide pools improve 5-FU efficacy in the host
independently of the MMR. So, how is autophagy activated by
bacterial deoxynucleotide pools in the context of 5-FU treatment? Given the role of ndk in regulating deoxynucleotide metabolism, we tested whether the worm ortholog ndk-1 plays a
role in mediating these effects. Efficient knockdown of ndk-1
by RNAi (Figure S6I) reduced fertility (data not shown) but did
not contribute to 5-FU effects on the host (Figures 6J and 6K).
ndk-1 RNAi solely decreased the activation of autophagy
(Figure 6J) and abolished the improvement in 5-FU efficacy
conferred by knockout of bacterial ndk (Figure 6K). Thus, host
ndk-1 regulates effects of microbial deoxynucleotides to modulate drug potency. This implies an alternative role for NDK rather
than its direct involvement in the metabolism of fluoropyrimidines. Overall, we show that bacteria mediate two modes of
cellular death in the host either by an increase of RNA-damaging
FUTP (e.g., DyjjG) or by sensitizing the DNA-damaging effects of
5-FU (e.g., Dndk, Ddcd).
Anti-hyperproliferation and Pro-survival Effects of 5-FU
Are Dependent on Bacteria
Does ribonucleotide metabolism of fluoronucleotides account
for differences observed between bacterial strain serotype (Figures 1A and 1B)? We find that DuppDudk double knockouts,
which fully abolish salvage ribonucleotide metabolism, confer
similar worm MICs for 5-FU regardless of bacterial genetic
background (Figure 7A), and the supplementation with uridine
or orotate rescues 5-FU effects in all strains tested (Figure S7A).
Also, measurements of metabolized fluoronucleotides both in
bacteria and C. elegans correlate with drug efficacy on the
host (Figures 7B and 7C). This implies that bacterial ribonucleotide metabolism is the bottleneck of 5-FU action and other
pathways modulate its flux. Interestingly, and contrarily to the
knockout of bacterial ndk that always increases 5-FU efficacy
on the host, we found that single mutations of yjjG, udk, and
upp have strain-dependent effects on 5-FU toxicity (Figures
S7B and S7C). For example, knockout of upp on OP50 or an
OP50-uracil prototroph, with restored de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis, has opposite effects on 5-FU efficacy in the host
suggesting a complex interplay between bacterial salvage and
de novo ribonucleotide metabolism in regulating host toxicity
(Figure S7C).

Next, we tested the anti-proliferative effects of 5-FU on tumorlike germlines in the worm. Knockdown of gld-1 or gain of function of glp-1 in C. elegans impairs oocyte development, resulting
in a hyperproliferative germline and ultimately death (Pinkston
et al., 2006). Consistent with our previous findings, 5-FU or
5-FO effects on tumor size were dependent on bacterial genotype (Figures 7D, 7E, and S7D). 5-FU and 5-FO also extended
gld-1 worm lifespan when fed on BW25113 bacteria (+34.4%,
p < 0.001; Figure 7F, Table S7) but importantly not with
DudpDudkDupp or DpyrE mutants, respectively (–2.27%,
p = 0.2830; 0.79%, p = 0.9341). Also, 5-FU did not extend
survival of worms fed HT115 and HB101 (Figure S7E). Similar
effects were obtained for gld-1 and the gain-of-function glp-1
worms fed Dupp E. coli (Figures S7F and S7G). These results
highlight that the pro-survival and anti-proliferative properties
of fluoropyrimidines depend on bacterial metabolism, a finding
of potential clinical relevance to humans.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we have demonstrated how microbes and
dietary cues modulate the efficacy of fluoropyrimidines on the
C. elegans host.
Chemical-Holobiont Screens for Drug Effects on Host
Physiology
Historically, pharmacology has solely considered host biology
when developing new therapeutics, which may contribute
to the high degree of failure observed for drugs undergoing clinical trial. While it is accepted that gut microbiota are capable
of altering drug pharmacodynamics (Spanogiannopoulos
et al., 2016), probing the complex relationships between host,
microbe, and drug has proved difficult. Here, we used a nematode-microbe model to unravel the contribution of bacterial
genes in host responses to anti-cancer drugs by testing a combination of bacterial genetics, dietary sources, and chemical
compounds. The advantages of the metabolically and evolutionarily conserved C. elegans model are clear: the convenience of
sustaining animals on defined bacterial populations, together
with the ease of genetic manipulations and biochemical analysis
in both organisms, allows rigorous investigation of host-microbe
interactions by rapid screening that is not possible in higher
models. This system may be of particular use for pre-clinical
screening of drug interactions in the context of host and microbe,
a task usually studied in vitro or by analyzing candidate compounds using in vitro fecal models (Spanogiannopoulos et al.,
2016), or for designing bacteria for drug delivery, a prospect
for future personalized medicine. While our screening approach

Figure 7. 5-FU Improves Survival and Reduces Germline Hyper-Proliferation of gld-1 RNAi Worms
(A) upp and udk mediate the effects of 5-FU regardless of bacterial genetic background.
(B and C) LC-MS/MS quantification of fluoropyrimidines in E. coli (B) and C. elegans (C) supplemented with 50 mM 5-FU.
(D) Representative images of DAPI-stained hyperproliferative gonads of gld-1 RNAi worms. Images were rotated and aligned for ease of comparison.
(E) 5-FU and 5-FO reduce tumor size in a bacterial-dependent manner. Tumor retraction, distance between gonad arms at midsection/distance between
gonad loops.
(F) 5-FU and 5-FO extends the lifespan of gld-1 RNAi worms when fed on control bacteria but not ribonucleotide mutants.
(G) Diagram summarizing the effects of 5-FU on the C. elegans/E. coli holobiont.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. See also Figure S7. For statistics, see Table S7.

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 453

of incorporating the host as a biological readout validated findings obtained by more traditional microbial high-throughput
genetic and chemical genetic approaches, we provide striking
insights into host-microbe interactions that could not be uncovered by studying microbes in isolation.
Another advantage of our approach is the evolutionarily
conserved effects of 5-FU on host metabolism, at similar physiological drug concentrations to that observed in human plasma after treatment or at concentrations capable of inhibiting TS in colon
cancer cells (Ser et al., 2016). In fact, similar metabolic changes
were observed in the serum of tumorous mice treated with 5-FU
(Ser et al., 2016) and worms treated with 5-FU. Changes in metabolites from pyrimidine (e.g., uracil, orotate), one-carbon (e.g.,
methionine, homocysteine, L-serine), and carnitine metabolism
(e.g., L-acetylcarnitine, isovalerylcarnitine) were observed (Figures S1K and S1L). Most importantly, the model proved valuable
in identifying key biological processes at the host-microbe
interface (bioconversion and host-microbe metabolic complementation for drugs), bacterial pathways responsible for drug efficacy (e.g., ribonucleotide (Garcia-Gonzalez et al., 2017 [this
issue of Cell]), vitamin B6, and OCM), and dietary cues affecting
drug metabolism (e.g., pyrimidines) (Figure 7E).
Role of the Microbiota in Modulating Fluoropyrimidine
Efficacy
We report that bacterial activation of fluoropyrimidines by direct
metabolic conversion is critical for optimal drug efficacy in
worms. Given that the microbiota is a key determinant of host
health and a source of inter-individual variability (Nicholson
et al., 2012), and given the highly conserved nature of nucleotide
metabolism across bacterial taxa (Peregrı́n-Alvarez et al., 2009),
our results raise the possibility that microbes might similarly influence the action of 5-FU and predict cancer therapy outcomes
in patients. In recent years, there have been several reports of
microbial influence on drug efficacy (reviewed by Spanogiannopoulos et al., 2016), some in the context of cancer therapy. For
example, gut microbes have been reported to reactivate the cancer drug irinotecan, causing toxicity. Also, gut microbes isolated
from human feces are capable of converting 5-FC to 5-FU, but
whether this phenomenon contributes to drug efficacy in the
host has never been tested until now. Similarly, we demonstrate
that E. coli can convert not only 5-FC, but also other clinically
relevant fluoropyrimidine prodrugs such as 5-FU and capecitabine. Importantly, worm responses to fluoropyrimidines were
strongly contingent on their microbes, with pharmacodynamics
varying by as much as 40-fold on different bacterial strains and
disruption of bacterial metabolism leading to changes as great
as 256-fold. We have revealed that inhibition of bacterial ribonucleotide metabolism drastically antagonizes drug efficacy, while
inhibition of deoxyribonucleotide metabolism improves it, an effect also regulated by dietary pyrimidines. Similar mechanisms
have been observed in mammals, where dietary arginine regulates the inactivation of the cardiac drug digoxin by the gut
microbe E. lenta (Haiser et al., 2013).
Here, we have discovered that the C. elegans-E. coli holobiont
acts together as a single unit in the context of drug metabolism,
showing biochemical complementation for the mediation of fluoropyrimidine effects on host physiology (Figure 7G).

454 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

Role of Diet and Drugs in Fluoropyrimidine Efficacy
Interventions that disrupt the microbiota, such as antibiotics,
impair the response of tumors to CpG-oligonucleotide immunotherapy and platinum chemotherapy (Iida et al., 2013). Additionally, unforeseen interactions between the antiviral drug sorivudine and 5-FU prodrugs have led to patient deaths due to
microbiome-drug interactions (Okuda et al., 1997). Consistent
with these findings, our data show that the anti-diabetic drug
metformin, which possesses anti-cancer properties, inhibits
bacterial OCM, thereby reducing 5-FU efficacy in C. elegans.
Given the interaction of metformin with the human microbiota
(Cabreiro, 2016), these results raise the possibility that co-therapies for cancer might yield undesired outcomes if host-microbedrug interactions are not taken into account.
In addition to drugs, we observed that dietary nutrients (e.g.,
pyrimidines, vitamin B6) can alter the efficacy of 5-FU. Vitamins
produced by gut microbes (e.g., vitamin B12) are a determining
factor in shaping microbial communities (Degnan et al., 2014).
Likewise, our data show that in bacteria, B6 regulates ribonucleotide flux via modulation of OCM.
Bacteria as Regulators of 5-FU-Induced Cell Death:
A Double-Edged Sword
The magnitude and balance of deoxynucleotide pools are important for replication fidelity (Maslowska et al., 2015). Here, we
show that alterations in deoxynucleotide pools caused by mutations in dcd and ndk do not sensitize bacterial mutants to the
DNA damage agent 5-FU but increase efficacy of treatment
in the host. Our results illustrate that the holobiont metabolic
complementation occurs at two levels in the context of drugs:
(1) in their bioconversion and by regulating the availability of
RNA-damaging fluoronucleotides such as FUTP to the host,
and (2) in the supply of regulatory metabolites that synergize
with 5-FU-induced DNA damage. Consistent with our observations, it was previously reported that bacterial nucleotide
metabolism regulates C. elegans germline proliferation (Chi
et al., 2016).
Cancer treatments can activate either pro-survival or prodeath autophagy activity in tumor cells, an effect dependent
on the cellular context (Zeng and Kinsella, 2011), but this mechanism is not fully understood. Our data suggest a divergent role
for dNTP pool imbalance between prokaryotes and eukaryotes
and a mechanism where deoxynucleotide pools from nonself to self can amplify autophagy-mediated cell death inflicted
by fluoropyrimidines on eukaryotic cells. In contrast, increased
dNTP pools desensitize human cancer cells to rapamycininduced autophagy (Chen et al., 2014). Altogether, these findings implicate dNTP pools in the regulation of autophagy by
drugs, a mechanism of relevance to cancer biology and human
health.
Our chemical-genomic-holobiont screening approaches highlight that bacteria play key roles in the efficacy of a drug in an
animal model and illustrate a critical missing component in our
understanding of the mechanistic basis of drugs in the treatment
of disease. In humans, the identification of gut microbiota members responsible for these mechanisms and their regulation by
dietary supplements could have a dramatic impact on treatment
outcome.

STAR+METHODS

REFERENCES

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:

Baba, T., Ara, T., Hasegawa, M., Takai, Y., Okumura, Y., Baba, M., Datsenko,
K.A., Tomita, M., Wanner, B.L., and Mori, H. (2006). Construction of Escherichia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene knockout mutants: The Keio collection.
Mol. Syst. Biol. 2, 2006.0008.

d
d
d

d

d

KEY RESOURCES TABLE
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Nematode and Bacterial Strains
B Nematode Culture Conditions
B Bacterial Strain Construction
METHOD DETAILS
B Lifespan Analysis
B Hatching Assays
B Developmental assay
B C. elegans bacterial-consumption assays
B C. elegans Fluorescence Microscopy
B Quantitative RT-PCR
B 1-Carbon Metabolism Analysis
B Vitamin B6 Analysis
B 100 Metabolite Method
B Nucleotide and Fluoronucleotide Analysis
B Bacterial Fluorescence Quantification
B Bacterial MIC Assays
B Bioconversion Assays
B Host-Microbe-Drug Screen
B Microbe-Drug Screen
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B General
B High-Throughput Screens

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven figures and seven tables and can be
found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.040.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, T.A.S., P.N., and F.C.; Methodology, T.A.S., L.M.Q., P.N.,
P.P.L., M.P.W., K.-Y.L., L.H.-D., S.S., and F.C.; Software, P.N., A.P., K.B., and
V.V.; Formal Analysis, T.A.S., L.M.Q., P.N., P.P.L., M.P.W., L.H.-D., K.B., A.P.,
V.V., P.B.M., A.T., and F.C.; Investigation, T.A.S., L.M.Q., P.N., P.P.L., M.P.W.,
K.-Y.L., L.H-D., S.S., and F.C.; Resources, P.C., P.B.M., A.T., N.D.E.G., and
F.C.; Writing, T.A.S., L.M.Q., P.N., P.P.L., P.B.M., A.T., N.D.E.G., and F.C.;
Visualization, P.N. and F.C.; Supervision, K.B., P.B.M., A.T., N.D.E.G., and
F.C.; Project Administration, F.C.; Funding Acquisition, P.C., P.M., A.T.,
N.D.E.G., and F.C.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Worm strains were provided by the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center. F.C. acknowledges funding from the Wellcome Trust/Royal Society (Sir Henry Dale
Fellowship-102532/Z/12/Z) and N.D.E.G. from the MRC (MR/N003713/1).
N.D.E.G. is supported by Great Ormond Street Hospital Children’s Charity.
We thank Helena Cochemé, Andrew Osborne, and Jürg Bähler for critical
reading of the manuscript.
Received: November 9, 2016
Revised: February 9, 2017
Accepted: March 28, 2017
Published: April 20, 2017

Cabreiro, F. (2016). Metformin joins forces with microbes. Cell Host Microbe
19, 1–3.
Cabreiro, F., Au, C., Leung, K.Y., Vergara-Irigaray, N., Cochemé, H.M., Noori,
T., Weinkove, D., Schuster, E., Greene, N.D., and Gems, D. (2013). Metformin
retards aging in C. elegans by altering microbial folate and methionine metabolism. Cell 153, 228–239.
Chen, W., Zhang, L., Zhang, K., Zhou, B., Kuo, M.L., Hu, S., Chen, L., Tang, M.,
Chen, Y.R., Yang, L., et al. (2014). Reciprocal regulation of autophagy and
dNTP pools in human cancer cells. Autophagy 10, 1272–1284.
Chi, C., Ronai, D., Than, M.T., Walker, C.J., Sewell, A.K., and Han, M. (2016).
Nucleotide levels regulate germline proliferation through modulating GLP-1/
Notch signaling in C. elegans. Genes Dev. 30, 307–320.
Degnan, P.H., Taga, M.E., and Goodman, A.L. (2014). Vitamin B12 as a modulator of gut microbial ecology. Cell Metab. 20, 769–778.
Fitzpatrick, T.B., Amrhein, N., Kappes, B., Macheroux, P., Tews, I., and
Raschle, T. (2007). Two independent routes of de novo vitamin B6 biosynthesis: Not that different after all. Biochem. J. 407, 1–13.
Footitt, E.J., Clayton, P.T., Mills, K., Heales, S.J., Neergheen, V., Oppenheim,
M., and Mills, P.B. (2013). Measurement of plasma B6 vitamer profiles in children with inborn errors of vitamin B6 metabolism using an LC-MS/MS method.
J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 36, 139–145.
Garcia-Gonzalez, A.P., Ritter, A.D., Shrestha, S., Andersen, E.C., Yilmaz, L.S.,
and Walhout, A.J.M. (2017). Bacterial metabolism affects the C. elegans
response to cancer chemotherapeutics. Cell 169, this issue, 431–441.
Haiser, H.J., Gootenberg, D.B., Chatman, K., Sirasani, G., Balskus, E.P., and
Turnbaugh, P.J. (2013). Predicting and manipulating cardiac drug inactivation
by the human gut bacterium Eggerthella lenta. Science 341, 295–298.
Iida, N., Dzutsev, A., Stewart, C.A., Smith, L., Bouladoux, N., Weingarten, R.A.,
Molina, D.A., Salcedo, R., Back, T., Cramer, S., et al. (2013). Commensal bacteria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the tumor microenvironment. Science 342, 967–970.
Kim, S., Park, D.H., and Shim, J. (2008). Thymidylate synthase and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase levels are associated with response to 5-fluorouracil in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol. Cells 26, 344–349.
Koyama, F., Sawada, H., Hirao, T., Fujii, H., Hamada, H., and Nakano, H.
(2000). Combined suicide gene therapy for human colon cancer cells using
adenovirus-mediated transfer of escherichia coli cytosine deaminase gene
and Escherichia coli uracil phosphoribosyltransferase gene with 5-fluorocytosine. Cancer Gene Ther. 7, 1015–1022.
Kwon, Y.K., Lu, W., Melamud, E., Khanam, N., Bognar, A., and Rabinowitz,
J.D. (2008). A domino effect in antifolate drug action in Escherichia coli. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 4, 602–608.
Laourdakis, C.D., Merino, E.F., Neilson, A.P., and Cassera, M.B. (2014).
Comprehensive quantitative analysis of purines and pyrimidines in the human
malaria parasite using ion-pairing ultra-performance liquid chromatographymass spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci.
967, 127–133.
Locasale, J.W. (2013). Serine, glycine and one-carbon units: Cancer metabolism in full circle. Nat. Rev. Cancer 13, 572–583.
Longley, D.B., Harkin, D.P., and Johnston, P.G. (2003). 5-fluorouracil: Mechanisms of action and clinical strategies. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 330–338.
Maslowska, K.H., Makiela-Dzbenska, K., Fijalkowska, I.J., and Schaaper,
R.M. (2015). Suppression of the E. coli SOS response by dNTP pool changes.
Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 4109–4120.
Merry, A., Qiao, M., Hasler, M., and Kuwabara, P.E. (2014). RAD-6: Pyrimidine
synthesis and radiation sensitivity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Biochem. J. 458,
343–353.

Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017 455

Midgley, R., and Kerr, D. (1999). Colorectal cancer. Lancet 353, 391–399.
Nichols, R.J., Sen, S., Choo, Y.J., Beltrao, P., Zietek, M., Chaba, R., Lee, S.,
Kazmierczak, K.M., Lee, K.J., Wong, A., et al. (2011). Phenotypic landscape
of a bacterial cell. Cell 144, 143–156.
Nicholson, J.K., Holmes, E., Kinross, J., Burcelin, R., Gibson, G., Jia, W., and
Pettersson, S. (2012). Host-gut microbiota metabolic interactions. Science
336, 1262–1267.
Nikkanen, J., Forsström, S., Euro, L., Paetau, I., Kohnz, R.A., Wang, L., Chilov,
D., Viinamäki, J., Roivainen, A., Marjamäki, P., et al. (2016). Mitochondrial DNA
replication defects disturb cellular dNTP pools and remodel one-carbon metabolism. Cell Metab. 23, 635–648.
O’Donnell, P.H., and Dolan, M.E. (2009). Cancer pharmacoethnicity: Ethnic
differences in susceptibility to the effects of chemotherapy. Clin. Cancer
Res. 15, 4806–4814.
Offer, S.M., and Diasio, R.B. (2016). Is It Finally Time for a Personalized Medicine Approach for Fluorouracil-Based Therapies? J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 205–207.
Okuda, H., Nishiyama, T., Ogura, K., Nagayama, S., Ikeda, K., Yamaguchi, S.,
Nakamura, Y., Kawaguchi, Y., and Watabe, T. (1997). Lethal drug interactions
of sorivudine, a new antiviral drug, with oral 5-fluorouracil prodrugs. Drug
Metab. Dispos. 25, 270–273.
Pai, Y.J., Leung, K.Y., Savery, D., Hutchin, T., Prunty, H., Heales, S., Brosnan,
M.E., Brosnan, J.T., Copp, A.J., and Greene, N.D. (2015). Glycine decarboxylase deficiency causes neural tube defects and features of non-ketotic hyperglycinemia in mice. Nat. Commun. 6, 6388.

456 Cell 169, 442–456, April 20, 2017

Peregrı́n-Alvarez, J.M., Sanford, C., and Parkinson, J. (2009). The conservation and evolutionary modularity of metabolism. Genome Biol. 10, R63.
Pinkston, J.M., Garigan, D., Hansen, M., and Kenyon, C. (2006). Mutations
that increase the life span of C. elegans inhibit tumor growth. Science 313,
971–975.
Rosenberg, E., and Zilber-Rosenberg, I. (2011). Symbiosis and development:
The hologenome concept. Birth Defects Res. C Embryo Today 93, 56–66.
SenGupta, T., Torgersen, M.L., Kassahun, H., Vellai, T., Simonsen, A., and
Nilsen, H. (2013). Base excision repair AP endonucleases and mismatch
repair act together to induce checkpoint-mediated autophagy. Nat. Commun.
4, 2674.
Ser, Z., Gao, X., Johnson, C., Mehrmohamadi, M., Liu, X., Li, S., and Locasale,
J.W. (2016). Targeting one carbon metabolism with an antimetabolite
disrupts pyrimidine homeostasis and induces nucleotide overflow. Cell Rep.
15, 2367–2376.
Spanogiannopoulos, P., Bess, E.N., Carmody, R.N., and Turnbaugh, P.J.
(2016). The microbial pharmacists within us: A metagenomic view of xenobiotic metabolism. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 273–287.
Watson, E., MacNeil, L.T., Ritter, A.D., Yilmaz, L.S., Rosebrock, A.P., Caudy,
A.A., and Walhout, A.J. (2014). Interspecies systems biology uncovers metabolites affecting C. elegans gene expression and life history traits. Cell 156,
759–770.
Zeng, X., and Kinsella, T.J. (2011). Impact of autophagy on chemotherapy and
radiotherapy mediated tumor cytotoxicity: ‘‘To live or not to live’’. Front. Oncol.
1, 30.

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

E. coli: W3110: F-, l-, rph-1, IN(rrnD, rrnE)

CGSC

CGSC: 4474

W3110 DyjjG::kan

This Study

N/A

W3110 Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

W3110 Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

W3110 Dndk::kan

This Study

N/A

W3110 Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: MG1655: F-, l-, rph-1, ilvG-, rfb-50

CGSC

CGSC: 6300

MG1655 DyjjG::kan

This Study

N/A

MG1655 Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

MG1655 Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

MG1655 Dndk::kan

This Study

N/A

MG1655 Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: HT115: mcrA, mcrB, IN(rrnD, rrnE)1,
rnc14::Tn10 l(DE3)

CGC

CGC: 8854; RRID:WB-STRAIN:HT115(DE3)

HT115 Dndk::kan

This Study

N/A

HT115 DyjjG::kan

This Study

N/A

HT115 Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

HT115 Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

HT115 Dupp Dudk:kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: HB101: supE44 hsdS20(rB-mB-) recA13 ara-14
proA2 lacY1 galK2 rpsL20 xyl-5 mtl-1

CGSC

CGSC: 12554

E. coli: BW25113: F-, D(araD-araB)567, DlacZ4787(::rrnB-3),
l-, rph-1, D(rhaD-rhaB)568, hsdR514

CGSC

CGSC: 7636

Keio collection: Single-gene knockout mutants
in E. coli BW25113 background

NBRP

https://shigen.nig.ac.jp/ecoli/strain/resource/
keioCollection/list/

BW25113 DmetE DmetH::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 DpdxJ DgcvP::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 DpdxJ Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dudk Dudp::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 DpdxK DpdxJ::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dupp Dudp::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dupp Dtdk::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dndk DpyrE::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 DnupG DnupC::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dudk Dupp DgcvP::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dudk Dupp DpdxJ::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dudp Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

BW25113 Dudk Dupp Dtdk::kan

This Study

N/A

Bacterial and Virus Strains

E. coli: OP50: Uracil auxotroph

CGC

CGC: 11077; RRID:WB-STRAIN:OP50

OP50 DyjjG::kan

This Study

N/A

OP50 Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

OP50 Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

OP50 Dndk::kan

This Study

N/A
(Continued on next page)

Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017 e1

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

OP50p (uracil prototroph)

This Study

N/A

OP50p (uracil prototroph) Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

OP50p (uracil prototroph) Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

OP50-MR (metformin resistant)

(Cabreiro et al., 2013)

N/A

E. coli: B Wildtype

CGSC

CGSC: 2507

E. coli: B DyjjG::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: B Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: B Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: B Dndk::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: B Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

E. coli: BL21G: F ompT hsdS(rB mB)
dcm+ Tetr gal l(DE3) endA Hte

Fisher Scientific

Cat# 50-125-348

BL21G Dupp Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

BL21G Dupp Dudk Dudp::kan

This Study

N/A

BL21G DyjjG::kan

This Study

N/A

BL21G Dupp::kan

This Study

N/A

BL21G Dndk::kan

This Study

N/A

BL21G Dudk::kan

This Study

N/A

Comamonas aquatica: DA1877

CGC

CGC: 7905; RRID:WB-STRAIN:DA1877

Enterobacter cloacae: LMG 2783

BCCM

ATCC 13047

Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
5-Fluorouracil R 99%

Sigma-Aldrich

Cat# F6627

5-Fluoro-20 -deoxyuridine

Alfa Aesar

Cat# L1497

5-Fluorocytosine R 99%

Acros Organics

Cat# 258340010

5-Fluoroorotic acid 98%

ThermoFisher Scientific

Cat# R0811

Capecitabine R 99%

Santa Cruz Biotechnology

Cat# SC-205618

Metformin (1,1 Dimethylbiguanide hydrochloride)

Sigma-Aldrich

Cat# D150959

D3 pyridoxal phosphate

Buchem BV

N/A

D3 pyridoxal R 98%

Sigma-Aldrich

Cat# 705187

D2 pyridoxine > 98%

CDN Isotopes

Cat# D-6819

D3 Pyridoxamine > 98%

Sigma-Aldrich

Cat# 705322

Cytidine-13C9,15N3 50 triphosphate

Sigma-Aldrich

Cat# 645699

Uridine-13C9,15N2 50 -triphosphate

Santa Cruz Biotechnology

Cat# SC-301963A

Critical Commercial Assays
PierceTM BCA Portein Assay Kit

ThermoFisher Scientific

Cat# 23250

Qubit RNA HS Assay Kit

ThermoFisher Scientific

Cat# Q32852

Qubit Protein Assay Kit

ThermoFisher Scientific

Cat# Q33211

GenElute Plasmid Miniprep Kit

Sigma-Aldrich

Cat# PLN70

Direct-zol RNA MiniPrep

Zymo Research

Cat# R2052

iScript Reverse Transcription Supermix for RT-qPCR

Bio-Rad

Cat# 1708841

PrecisionPLUS 2X qPCR Mastermix

PrimerDesign

Cat# PrecisionPLUS-R-SY

Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase

ThermoFisher Scientific

Cat# F530S

Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
C. elegans: N2 Bristol

CGC

CGC: 10570

C. elegans: GH636: umps-1(zu456)III

CGC

CGC: 19419; RRID:WB-STRAIN:GH636

C. elegans: GC833: glp-1(ar202)III

CGC

CGC: 15458; RRID:WB-STRAIN:GC833

C. elegans: NL2099: rrf-3(pk1426)II

CGC

CGC: 10766; RRID:WB-STRAIN:NL2099

C. elegans: NL2511: msh-6(pk2504)

CGC

CGC: 10771; RRID:WB-STRAIN:NL2511
(Continued on next page)

e2 Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

C. elegans: DA2123: adIS2122[lgg-1p::GFP::lgg-1 +
rol-6 (su1006)]

CGC

CGC: 15849; RRID:WB-STRAIN:DA2123

This Study

Table S1; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2017.03.040

FLP recombinase, temp-sensitive replication: pCP20

CGSC

CGSC: 7629

Cloning expression vector, medium copy no.: pACYC184

CGSC

CGSC: 12139

BW25113 upp cloned into pACYC184: pUpp

This Study

N/A

Ahringer C. elegans RNAi library: RNAi control
plasmid: pL4440

Source BioScience

http://www.sourcebioscience.com/products/
life-science-research/clones/rnai-resources/
c-elegans-rnai-collection-ahringer/

Ahringer C. elegans RNAi library: RNAi ndk-1 (F25H2.5)
knockdown: pL4440-ndk-1

Source BioScience

http://www.sourcebioscience.com/products/
life-science-research/clones/rnai-resources/
c-elegans-rnai-collection-ahringer/

Vidal C. elegans RNAi library: RNAi gld-1 (T23G11.3)
knockdown: pL4440-gld-1

Source BioScience

http://www.sourcebioscience.com/products/
life-science-research/clones/rnai-resources/
c-elegans-orf-rnai-resource-vidal/

Alon GFP transcriptional reporter library: ndk promoter
GFP reporter: pNdk::GFP

Dharmacon

Cat# PEC3876

Alon E. coli GFP transcriptional reporter library: udk
promoter GFP reporter: pUdk::GFP

Dharmacon

Cat# PEC3876

Alon E. coli GFP transcriptional reporter library: upp
promoter GFP reporter: pUpp::GFP

Dharmacon

Cat# PEC3876

R (v3.2.3)

R consortium

https://www.r-project.org

GraphPad Prism 6

GraphPad Software, Inc.

https://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/
prism/

JMP 11

SAS Institute Inc.

http://www.jmp.com/en_be/software/dataanalysis-software.html

Oligonucleotides
For information regarding oligonucleotide sequences
used in this study, please refer to Table S1.
Recombinant DNA

Software and Algorithms

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact Filipe Cabreiro (f.cabreiro@
ucl.ac.uk).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Nematode and Bacterial Strains
C. elegans strains N2 Bristol, GH636 umps-1(zu456)III, GC833 glp-1(ar202)III, NL2099 rrf-3(pk1426)II, NL2511 msh-6(pk2504) and
DA2123 adIS2122[lgg-1p::GFP::lgg-1 + rol-6 (su1006)] were obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC). The E. coli
Keio Knockout Collection (Baba et al., 2006) (odd numbered strains) was obtained from the National BioResource Project. Other
bacterial strains obtained from the Coli Genetic Stock Center, and bacterial strains created for this study are listed in Table S1.
Both bacterial and nematode mutants were re-confirmed by PCR or snPCR using primers listed in Table S1.
Nematode Culture Conditions
Worms were maintained and raised at 20 C, unless otherwise stated, on nematode growth medium (NGM). Where indicated molten
agar was supplemented with fluoropyrimidines (0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 mM), nucleotides (200 mM, 2 mM) and B6
vitamers (10 mM, 1 mM). Maintenance of the GH636 strain was achieved on NGM plates supplemented with 100 mM uridine. For UV
and heat treatment of bacteria, an overnight culture of the indicated bacterial strain grown at 37 C was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for
30 min at 4 C, then resuspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at a final OD600nm = 24. For UV treatment, bacteria were irradiated for 30 min on a CL-1000 Ultraviolet Crosslinker (UVP) containing bulbs irradiating at 254 nm; for heat treatment, bacteria
were incubated for 30 min at 70 C in a water bath. For RNAi experiments, worms were kept for two generations on NGM plates

Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017 e3

containing 1 mM IPTG (isopropyl b-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside) seeded with E. coli HT115(DE3) or HT115(DE3) Dndk expressing
RNAi constructs in the pL4440 feeding vector. RNAi clones were verified by sequencing and efficacy of knockdown was determined
by qRT-PCR (Figures S3D and S6I).
Bacterial Strain Construction
Bacterial strains used and generated in this study are shown in the Key Resources Table. E. coli single deletion mutants were obtained from the Keio collection (Baba et al., 2006). Strains with multiple mutations were constructed by removing the kanamycin resistant marker from single Keio clones by transformation with pCP20 and subsequent transfer of kanamycin resistant-tagged mutations
via P1vir phage-mediated transduction. All bacterial mutants were confirmed by colony PCR using the primers detailed in Table S1. In
general, binding sites of the -cseq-F and -R primers are located up- and down-stream of the mutation site, respectively, and were
used to confirm kanamycin-sensitive mutants, while the K1, which binds to the kanamycin resistance gene, was used in conjunction
with the appropriate -cseq-F primer to confirm kanamycin-resistant mutants.
For the generation of BW25113-GFP strains we used bacterial clones containing promoter-fused plasmids from the library of transcriptional fusions of gfp from the Uri Alon lab. The MG1655 strains containing promoter-fused plasmids for udk, ndk, and upp genes
(see Key Resources Table plasmid list) were selected from the library and each plasmid was extracted using a GenElute Plasmid
Miniprep Kit (Sigma Aldrich). The resulting plasmid DNA was confirmed by PCR, using the -cseq-F primer and the Primer 1 from
pUA66 as a reverse primer (Table S1). Following confirmation, each plasmid was transformed into the BW25113 strain.
For the generation of pUpp complementation plasmid, the DNA sequence of the upp gene, including its promoter and terminator,
was amplified from the BW25113 chromosome using Phusion High Fidelity DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the
primers listed in Table S1. The DNA fragment was cloned into pACYC184 at the HindIII and BamHI sites, the inserted sequence
confirmed by PCR using primers pACYC -Hind-F and -Bam-R.
METHOD DETAILS
Lifespan Analysis
Axenic worm eggs were obtained by treating healthy gravid WT adults with alkaline hypochlorite. Bleached eggs were allowed to
develop until the L4 larval stage on HT115(DE3) L4440 or gld-1 RNAi E. coli at 25 C. Efficacy of gld-1 knockdown was confirmed
by tumorigenicity of the gonads and by the absence of embryos/oocytes. Animals (gld-1 RNAi or glp-1(gof)) were transferred to control and 5-FU treated plates seeded with BW25113 or BW25113 Dupp and maintained at 25 C for the whole duration of the lifespan.
Worms were transferred to fresh plates every 4 days. Animals that did not display tumorous gonads were removed from the trial at
day 1 of adulthood and the ones that showed protruded vulvas were censored. Survival was monitored every 1-2 days and worms
were scored as dead if they did not respond to prodding with a platinum wire. Statistical analysis was performed by the log-rank test
using JMP 11 software (SAS Institute).
Hatching Assays
Assays were performed in 12-well plates. C. elegans were raised from L1 stage on control (BW25113), other WT or mutant E. coli
strains for 2 days at 20 C. Two L4-stage worms were transferred to each well containing seeded NGM agar supplemented with
varying concentrations of 5-FU or other drugs. Adult worms were removed after a 24 hr incubation at 25 C. After another 24 hr
incubation period, the hatching ratio was scored as the fraction (%) of developed larvae from the initially laid eggs, and presented
as the mean ± SD from at least 3 independent biological replicates with at least 100 animals per data point. Statistical analysis
was performed by group analysis one per row multiple t tests using Graphpad Prism 6 software.
Developmental assay
NGM agar plates containing the appropriate drug concentration were prepared, seeded, and incubated as described for the HostMicrobe-Drug Screen. Visual scoring of nematode development was based on a 5 level system, as follows:
0 = Complete ablation of development (i.e., arrested at L1 stage),
1 = L2/L3-sized
2 = L4/young adult-sized
3 = Fertile adults, no progeny
4 = Complete development, fertile adults with progeny (comparable to no drug control)
C. elegans bacterial-consumption assays
Bacteria grown overnight in LB-Miller broth were washed twice in NGM broth, normalized to OD595nm = 3.1 and added to
96-well microtiter plates (100 mL/well, OD595nm0.6). Antibiotics (Carbenicillin, 100 mg/mL; Streptomycin, 100 mg/mL; Penicillin,
100 mg/mL) were included to inhibit bacterial growth. Synchronized L1 nematodes were added at 800-1000 animals per well. Plates
were incubated at 25 C, 400 rpm and the absorbance at OD595nm was measured at 16, 20, 24 and 28 hr using a Tecan Infinite Pro

e4 Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017

M200 microplate reader and Magellan v7.2 software. Rates of consumption were expressed as the decrease in OD595nm units
per hour.
C. elegans Fluorescence Microscopy
Quantitation of 5-FU growth inhibition was achieved by using the constitutive and robust expression of the GFP::LGG-1 throughout
all worm developmental stages and after freezing as a readout of worm size. L1 larvae were placed in 96-well plates containing 5-FU
supplemented NGM and seeded with BW25113, BW25113 Dupp, and the respective complemented strains. After 48 hr incubation at
20 C, worms from each well were resuspended in PBS, transferred to a 96-well plate and frozen before imaging. GFP intensity as a
measure of area was quantified as the pixel density in the entire cross sectional area of each worm from which the background pixel
density was subtracted. 30 worms per condition in 3 biological replicates were imaged.
Alternatively, L1s were raised to the L4-stage on the appropriate bacterial strains, then transferred to 12-well plates containing
5-FU and respective controls to lay eggs for 24 hr at 25 C (similarly to the hatching assays). The levels of autophagy (GFP::LGG-1)
in embryos were measured based on whole egg GFP intensity. At least 40 embryos per condition in 3 biological replicates were
imaged.
For the effects of 5-FU on tumorous gonad size, day-4 adult gld-1 RNAi animals for each experimental drug and bacterial condition
were fixed in 100% methanol for 5 min on ice. Samples were stained with 500 mg/mL DAPI for 30 min in the dark, followed by 3x M9
buffer washes, and placed on 2% agarose pads before imaging. Images were taken of the entire animal using the 10x objective.
Tumor retraction was measured as the distance between the two arms of the gonad at the midpoint of the cross sectional area
normalized to the distance between the loops of the gonads. At least 45 worms per condition in 3 biological replicates were imaged.
All images were taken using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 Plus microscope with a DAPI filter cube (excitation: 358 nm; emission: 463 nm) or a
GFP filter cube (excitation: 470 nm; emission: 525 nm), an Hamamatsu ORCA-ER digital camera, and further analyzed using Volocity
6.3 software (PerkinElmer). Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA using GraphPad Prism 6 software.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Transcriptional measurements of C. elegans were performed in synchronized L4 hermaphrodites fed on diverse bacterial strains and
conditions. For total RNA extraction, worms were disrupted in TRI Reagent (Zymo Research) with lysing matrix D (MP Biomedicals),
and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, then stored at –80 C overnight. After a thaw-freeze-thaw procedure, samples were homogenized
using ThermoMixer C (Eppendorf) at 2000 rpm for 10 min at 4 C. Total RNA were extracted using Direct-zol MiniPrep (Zymo
Research) and purified of DNA by in-column DNase I treatment. RNA quantification was achieved using Qubit RNA HS Assay
Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). cDNA synthesis was performed using iScript Reverse Transcription Supermix (Bio-Rad). Quantitative
PCR was performed with PrecisionPLUS 2x qPCR MasterMix (PrimerDesign) using a LightCycler 480 Real-Time PCR system
(Roche). Primer sequences for each gene (Table S1) were previously optimized over a linear range of cDNA concentrations. Relative
transcriptional abundance of target genes was calculated using the DCt method and was normalized to averaged mRNA levels of
the housekeeping gene cdc-42. At least 3 independent biological replicates for each condition were measured per gene. Statistical
significance was obtained using one-way ANOVA tests (for comparison between 4 groups) or unpaired t tests (comparison between
two groups) performed in GraphPad Prism 6 software.
1-Carbon Metabolism Analysis
For bacterial sample collection and metabolite extraction, 3-day old bacterial lawns of BW25113 or mutants grown at 20 C on
standard NGM plates were scraped using a 24 cm cell scraper and transferred to an eppendorf tube and snap frozen in liquid
nitrogen. The bacterial pellet was kept at 80 C until required.
For worm samples, approximately 1000 synchronized L1 stage larvae were grown at 20 C on standard NGM plates seeded with
3-day old BW25113 or mutant bacteria. L4 larvae were collected for analysis or transferred to fresh NGM plates containing 5-FU and
incubated at 25 C for an additional 24 hr before collection. Worms were washed thoroughly using dH2O to remove bacteria and snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen. The worm pellet was kept at 80 C until required.
For egg samples, approximately 5000 synchronized 1-day adult worms per condition (control and 1 mM 5-FU) were axenized using
alkaline hypochlorite. Bleached eggs were placed in M9 buffer for 3 hr to recover from bleaching. An aliquot was kept for determining
egg viability, and the remaining eggs were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept 80 C until required.
At least 4 biological replicates from each type of bacteria/worm/egg sample were collected for each measurement. Samples were
resuspended in MS sample buffer at pH 7.0 containing 20 mM ammonium acetate, 0.1% ascorbic acid, 0.1% citric acid, 100 mM
dithiothreitol (all from Sigma Aldrich). Bacterial suspensions were sonicated for 10 s at 40% amplitude using a hand-held sonicator
(Q700 sonicator, Qsonica). Worm and egg pellets were sonicated at 4 C for a total of 1 min 15 s at 100% amplitude. Protein was
removed by acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich) precipitation and centrifugation for 15 min at 12,000 g, 4 C. Supernatants were transferred
to fresh tubes, lyophilized, and stored at 80 C until required. Prior to analysis, lyophilized samples were resuspended in 60 mL of MS
sample buffer and centrifuged for 15 min at 12,000 g, 4 C. The resulting supernatants were transferred to glass sample vials.
Folate measurements by LC-MS/MS were performed as previously described (Cabreiro et al., 2013). Mass spectrometric data
were analyzed as in (Pai et al., 2015) using MassLynx Software (Waters). Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA using
the Graphpad Prism 6 software.

Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017 e5

Vitamin B6 Analysis
For bacterial sample collection and metabolite extraction, 3-day old bacterial lawns grown on standard NGM or supplemented with
1.0 mM pyridoxal at 20 C were washed from plates using 1x PBS. The bacteria were washed three times in 1x PBS to remove
potential contaminating pyridoxal from the NGM medium and centrifuged at for 30 min at 4,000 rpm, 4 C. The bacterial pellet
was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at 80 C until required. At least 4 biological replicates were collected for each condition.
The bacterial pellets were resuspended in 50 mL dH2O and lysed by subjecting the sample to 5 freeze-thaw cycles using a methanol-dry ice bath and a 37 C waterbath. The resulting lysates were pelleted for 5 min at 5,000 rpm, 4 C, and the supernatants
collected. Proteins were precipitated by mixing 10 mL of bacterial lysate supernatant with 0.15 N (final concentration) trichloroacetic
acid (TCA, Sigma Aldrich) and spiked with deuterated internal standards (PMP, PNP, PLP: d3-PLP, PM: d3-PM, PN: d2-PN and PL:
d3-PL; all at a final concentration of 25 nM, Table S1) up to a total volume of 120 mL. Samples were vortexed for 30 s, left on ice in the
dark for 60 min and centrifuged to pellet the precipitated protein. The resulting supernatant was transferred to a glass vial and kept
at –20 C in the dark until sample analysis.
B6 vitamers LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an adapted version of the protocol detailed in (Footitt et al., 2013). Stock
solutions of all B6 vitamers and deuterated internal standards were reconstituted using dH2O, stored at –80 C to prevent degradation,
and kept on ice protected from light during laboratory handling. A Waters Acquity H-Class UPLC system was connected to a Waters
Xevo TQ-S triple quadrupole mass spectrometer in multiple reaction monitoring and positive ionisation mode. A Waters Acquity
UPLC HSS T3 column (1.8 mm, 2.1 3 50 mm) with a 1.8 mm Acquity UPLC HSS T3 guard column was used for reversed-phase chromatographic separation along with a mobile phase consisting of A: 3.7% acetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) in H2O with 0.02% heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA, Sigma Aldrich) and B: 100% methanol (Fisher Scientific). A gradient elution over 6.5 min was used. Gradient and
retention times of each compound are listed in Table S3. Mass spectrometry settings were as follows: capillary 2.50 kV, source temperature 150 C, desolvation temperature 600 C, cone gas flow rate 150 L/hr, and desolvation gas flow rate 1200 L/hr. The optimized
cone voltages and collision energies for each compound are as detailed in Table S3.
Analyte concentrations were determined by taking the peak area ratio of each vitamer and comparing it to a deuterated internal standard (PMP, PNP, PLP compared to d3-PLP, PM to d3-PM, PN to d2-PN and PL to d3-PL). All vitamers were well differentiated according
to retention time, except for PLP and PNP which elute at a similar time however, these can be differentiated from each other by mass
without cross-talk between ion pairs occurring. Calibration curves were constructed between 1.25 and 200 nM and shown to have linearity (r2 > 0.99). All results were normalized to protein concentration determined by the Pierce BCA Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA using GraphPad Prism 6 software.
100 Metabolite Method
For bacterial samples, 3-day old bacterial lawns of BW25113 growing on NGM plates supplemented with 1 mM 5-FU at 20 C plates
were washed with dH2O, spun down at 15,000 rpm at 4 C and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. The bacterial pellet was kept at 80 C
until required. For worm samples, approximately 4000 synchronized L1 stage larvae were grown at 20 C on NGM plates supplemented 1 mM 5-FU and seeded with 3-day old BW25113. At the L4 larval stage, worms were collected using dH2O, washed thoroughly using dH2O to remove bacteria, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. The worm pellet was kept at 80 C until required. 3-4 biological replicates for bacteria/worm sample were collected for each condition, and an aliquot of each was retained to quantify protein
content using the Pierce BCA Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) for data normalization.
The 100 metabolite analysis was performed as described previously (Nikkanen et al., 2016). Frozen samples were homogenized in
two steps protocol for maximum recovery by Precellys-24 bead homogenizer (1.4 mm beads) with 20 mL of labeled internal standard
mix (Cambridge Isotope Laboratory). In the first step, 500mL of precooled 100% acetonitrile + 1% formic acid was added to the sample and homogenized for 3 cycles, 20 s each, at 5,500 rpm with 30 s pause between each homogenization interval. Then the samples
were centrifuged for 15 min, 14,000 rpm, 4 C and the supernatants were collected. In second step, 500mL of 90/10% acetonitrile/
H2O + 1% formic acid was added to the remaining pellet, the steps as detailed above were repeated, and supernatants were pooled
with the first extract, and the whole extract was centrifuged again for 15 min, 14,000 rpm, 4 C. The collected extracts in both bacterial
and worms protocols were dispensed in to OstroTM 96-well plate (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) and filtered by applying vacuum
at a delta pressure of 300-400 mbar for 2.5 min on robot’s (Hamilton’s StarLine) vacuum station. The clean extract was collected to a
96-well collection plate, placed under OstroTM plate. The collection plate was sealed and centrifuged for 15 min, 4000 rpm, 4 C and
placed in auto-sampler of the liquid chromatography system for the injection.
100 metabolites were separated by Waters Acquity UPLC, and analyzed by triple quadrupole mass spectrometry. Data analysis
was performed using MetaboAnalyst 3.0. Principal component analysis (PCA) using unsupervised multivariate analysis was applied.
For each metabolite, differences between experimental groups were determined using linear modeling. Log2 transformed metabolite
concentrations with 5-FU were compared against control. Significance of differences was evaluated within the linear models using
pooled standard errors with the subsequent Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction for multiple testing.
Nucleotide and Fluoronucleotide Analysis
For bacteria grown on solid media, bacteria were cultured and collected as explained in methods for 1-Carbon metabolism analysis.
For bacteria and supernatant analysis, samples were collected as explained in the Bioconversion Assay section and kept at –80 C
until further analysis.

e6 Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017

For worm samples, approximately 5000 synchronized L1 stage larvae were grown at 20 C on standard NGM plates seeded with
3-day old BW25113 or mutant bacteria. L4 larvae were collected for analysis or transferred to fresh NGM plates containing 5-FU and
incubated at 25 C for an additional 8 hr before collection. Worms were washed thoroughly using dH2O, frozen in liquid nitrogen and
kept at 80 C until further analysis.
3-4 biological replicates from each type of bacteria/worm/supernatant sample were collected for each condition. Each sample was
spiked with an optimum concentration of the internal standards (200 mM of Cytidine-13C9,15N3 50 triphosphate and Uridine-13C9,15N2
50 -triphosphate, 10 mM of caffeine, 250 mM of 5-Fluorouridine, Table S1). Bacteria and worm samples were resuspended in 100 mL
100% methanol and sonicated using 30 s intervals at 4 C for a total of 2 min (bacterial samples) or 6 min (worm samples), at 100%
amplitude using a high intensity ultrasonic water bath sonicator coupled to a cup horn (Q700 Qsonica). Subsequently, protein was
removed by centrifuging lysed samples for 30 min at 13,000 rpm, 4 C and collecting the resulting supernatant to fresh tubes. Samples
were lyophilized and the resulting pellet was resuspended in 50 mL of ice-cold dH2O prior to sample injection and analysis. Supernatants were filtered through an Amicon Ultra (0.5 mL) centrifugal filter Ultracel 3K (Merck Millipore) for 20 min at 13,000 rpm, 4 C. The
resulting filtrate was collected and kept on ice prior to sample injection and analysis.
Nucleotide and fluoronucleotide analysis by LC-MS/MS was performed essentially as described in (Laourdakis et al., 2014) using
the ion transitions, cone voltages, and collision energies described in Table S6. Analyte concentrations were determined by correlation of the MS signal of a given metabolite with the appropriate internal standard signal. The results obtained were normalized
against protein concentration determined using a Qubit Fluorometer, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each
metabolite differences between strains were determined using linear modeling. Log2 transformed metabolite concentrations in
Dndk, DyjjG and DpyrE mutants were compared against the BW control. Significance of differences was evaluated within the linear
models using pooled standard errors.
Bacterial Fluorescence Quantification
NGM plates ± pyridoxal (1 mM) were prepared and seeded with 150 mL overnight LB culture of BW25113 strain containing either a
promoterless plasmid or the GFP promoter plasmid for ndk, udk, and upp genes (Key Resources Table). The plates were incubated
for 3 days at 20 C, then the bacteria were scraped off the plates and washed with 2 mL of 1x PBS into 2 mL eppendorf tubes. The
resulting bacterial cultures were thoroughly mixed by vortexing and diluted 4-fold. 75 mL of each sample was added to a 96-well plate
containing 75 mL 1x PBS. Bacterial OD was measured at 600 nm and GFP intensity was measured at excitation 470 nm, emission
525 nm using a Tecan Infinite Pro M200 plate reader with Magellan v7.2 software. 4 biological replicates were used for each
measurement. Differences between strains were calculated between values determined as: [(GFP gene of interest/OD600nm)/GFP
promoterless/OD600nm]. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA using GraphPad Prism 6 software.
Bacterial MIC Assays
Bacteria grown overnight in LB-Miller broth were washed twice in NGM broth, normalized to OD600nm = 2 and added to 96-well
microtiter plates at a final dilution of 1,000-fold in 200 mL NGM broth containing 2-fold serially diluted drug. Plates were incubated
for 16 hr at 37 C, 180 rpm and the absorbance at OD600nm was measured using a Tecan Infinite Pro M200 microplate reader and
Magellan v7.2 software. GraphPad Prism 6 was used to create drug response curves and calculate the concentration of drug
required for 50% growth inhibition (IC50) using a log(inhibitor) versus response - variable slope (four parameter) model, and perform
statistical analysis of IC50 values by one-way ANOVA.
Bioconversion Assays
BW25113 or Keio mutant bacteria were cultured in LB-Miller broth overnight at 37 C. Cultures were spun down at 4000 rpm for
30 min, washed twice with PBS, then resuspended in 1 mL of PBS and the OD600nm determined using a standard spectrophotometer.
Each sample was normalized to 12 OD units and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. Bacterial pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL of
5 mM 5-FO or 5-FC in 1X PBS and incubated overnight at 37 C, 650 rpm in the dark. Bacteria were spun down at 10,000 rpm for
5 min, and the resulting supernatants were filter sterilized (0.22 mm) and used for downstream experiments including hatching assays
or mass spectrometry.
Host-Microbe-Drug Screen
Keio collection bacteria were grown for two generations in LB-Miller broth in 96-well, flat-bottomed microtiter plates incubated for
16 hr at 37 C, 180 rpm, the first passage with 50 mg/mL kanamycin and the second without antibiotics. Screen assay 96-well plates
were prepared by mixing 5-FU with NGM agar at the indicated concentrations. Plates were spotted with 5 mL of bacterial culture per
well and incubated at 20 C over 3 days to allow bacterial growth. Nematodes were prepared by bleaching gravid adults to release
eggs, washing thrice, and synchronizing to L1 in M9 media at 20 C overnight. Approximately 10 L1 nematodes were added per well
and incubated at 25 C for 72 hr. Worm development was visually scored to determine minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC, [5-FU]
mM) at which worm development was ablated (i.e., to the same degree as worms grown on wild-type BW25113 bacteria at 1 mM
5-FU). Bacterial mutants which displayed no growth on NGM, for which nematode development was delayed in the absence of
added drug, or which had undisrupted target gene were excluded from the screen (Table S2). For the primary screen, L1 nematodes
on each one of the 3813 knockouts were exposed to 5-FU concentrations (0, 1, 2.5, 5 mM). Mutants with inconsistent results were
Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017 e7

rescreened. Bacterial clones on which nematodes developed at 5 mM 5-FU (574, 15% of total screened) were further tested in a secondary screen at a wider range of drug concentrations (0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 75, 100 mM) with 3 biological replicates (Figure S2C,
right panel). For each mutant, final MIC value was established as the minimum 5-FU concentration that hinders worm growth.
Microbe-Drug Screen
Bacterial clones from the worm secondary screen were screened in 5-FU bacterial growth-inhibition assays in 96-well microtiter
plates. Mutants were grown in LB for one generation followed by growth in NGM broth for a second generation, before being inoculated in fresh NGM broth for the assay. Plates were incubated at 37 C, 180 rpm, and bacterial growth was measured at 24 hr by
OD600nm using a Tecan Infinite Pro M200 plate reader and Magellan v7.2 software. Bacterial OD values were corrected for media
only blanks and averaged from 3 independent biological repeats ± SD.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
General
Data were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05 by unpaired t tests, multiple t tests, one-way ANOVA or BenjaminiHochberg FDR < 0.05 as indicated in the Figure, Figure labels or experimental methods. Asterisks denote corresponding statistical
significance *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from at least 3 independent biological replicates,
unless stated otherwise in Figures, Figure labels or experimental methods. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism
6 software, log-rank test in JMP 11 software (SAS Institute) or linear modeling in R, as indicated.
High-Throughput Screens
Data analysis was performed using the R statistical analysis software package v3.2.3 (https://www.r-project.org), unless stated
otherwise. Linear modeling/regression was accomplished using R base function ‘‘lm,’’ and function ‘‘glm’’ from ‘‘multvar’’ package.
Outliers in linear regression analysis were identified using Bonferonni-adjusted outlier test from ‘‘car’’ package. Plots were generated
using ‘‘ggplot’’ and ‘‘gplots’’ packages.
Information on E. coli knockouts from the Keio library and their annotations was acquired from (Baba et al., 2006). Additional gene
annotations for E. coli K-12 were collected using R packages from Bioconductor v3.2: ‘‘org.EcK12.eg.db,’’ ‘‘KEGGREST’’ and
‘‘GO.db.’’ Information on genes with unknown function, enzymes using pyridoxal-5-phosphate (PLP) and metabolic pathways
was acquired using PathwayTools and ‘‘pythoncyc’’ Python API software from EcoCyc. All software and databases were used at their
most recent versions, as of 2016-08.
The relationship between E. coli growth ± 5-FU treatment (OD values) and C. elegans (MIC averages) was established using linear
regression (Figures S2F and S2G). Outliers DatpH, DpurA, DpriA, DyfgA, DhyfF and DaceE, with respective Bonferonni-adjusted significance: p = 1.8 3 105, p = 2.1 3 104, p = 2.1 3 103, p = 6.8 3 103, p = 0.01, p = 0.02 were excluded from the correlation
estimation in both datasets. The bacterial growth in control and 5-FU treatment was correlated (Figure S2D). Analysis of knockout
and 5-FU interaction in bacteria was performed using linear modeling on log2 transformed growth OD values (Figure S2E). Here,
BW25113 (WT) growth without 5-FU was used as reference contrast in corresponding knockout and drug treatment factors. The
interaction term shows the difference of combined KO and 5-FU effect from the sum of separate effects. Bacterial strains containing
gene deletions that counteract 5-FU effect are considered resistant (antagonistic interaction), whereas strains with gene deletions
that strengthen drug effect are considered sensitive (synergistic interaction). The interaction between 5-FU and knockout effect
was found to be significantly correlated with the knockout effect itself (y = 0.06-0.35*x, r2 = 0.12, p = 2 3 1016, data not shown).
This indicates that in general the strains with more impaired growth are more resistant to 5-FU treatment. For example, 5-FU treatment causes 36% growth reduction in WT (ODControl = 0.28, ODTreatment = 0.18) and only 5% in DldcA, which grows to 31% of WT
growth in control (ODControl = 0.08, ODTreatment = 0.07) and has no significant interaction with 5-FU treatment (p = 0.82, FDR = 0.88)
(Table S2). The interaction estimates in the linear model were adjusted against this trend to avoid confounding of these effects. The
significance of effects in the linear model was estimated using pooled standard errors and Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction for
multiple testing (Table S2).
KEGG and EcoCyc pathway enrichment was estimated in terms of knockout effects on C. elegans. Knockouts with MIC
values > 5 mM were considered hits and only pathways containing 5 or more corresponding genes were included in the analysis.
The pyrimidine pathway was added for illustrative purposes. The significance of the pathway enrichment was calculated using
the hypergeometric test, where the p value indicates the likelihood to encounter no less than the observed number of hits in the
pathway (right-tail probability), given that the total number of hits is 574 out of 3813 screened knockouts. Coverage was defined
as the ratio of hits over the total number of screened knockouts in a specific pathway.
Enrichment of KEGG pathways for compounds from the 100 metabolites study was evaluated using metabolite concentrations and
the ‘‘Pathway analysis’’ tool on MetaboAnalyst 3.0.

e8 Cell 169, 442–456.e1–e8, April 20, 2017

Supplemental Figures

Figure S1. Effects of Fluoropyrimidines on Bacterial Growth and C. elegans Egg Hatching, Related to Figure 1
(A) C. elegans fed heat or UV-killed OP50 show increased resistance to 5-FU. MICControl = 2 mM; MICUV = 16 mM; MICHeat = 32 mM.
(B–E) Fluoropyrimidines show varying efficacy on worms fed E. coli K-12/B hybrid HB101, K-12 BW25113, B OP50 and Comamonas aquatica DA1877. Response
to 5-FO (B), FUdR (C), capecitabine (D) and 5-FC (E).

(legend continued on next page)

(F and G) Effects of 5-FU on (F) laboratory and (G) wild-type bacterial growth in NGM broth. No significant changes in IC50 values were observed within bacterial
strain serotype despite 8-fold changes in worm MICs (e.g., BW25113 versus HT115, Figures 1A, 2B, and 2F). Drug response curves were calculated using a
log(inhibitor) versus response - variable slope (four parameter) model. C. aquatica grew poorly in NGM and was readily killed by 5-FU while E. cloacae grew the
best on NGM with or without 5-FU (G), but both conferred low worm MICs (Figure 1B).
(H and I) Effects of fluoropyrimidines on (H) BW25113 and (I) OP50 bacterial growth in NGM broth. Note that E. coli is remarkably resistant to growth inhibition by
5-FC but capable of modulating the pharmacodynamics of 5-FC in the worm hatching assays (E).
(J) Rates of consumption of diverse bacterial strains by C. elegans over a period of 8 hr. Differences in bacterial consumption do not correlate with 5-FU efficacy.
(K) Expression of worm genes involved in fluoropyrimidine metabolism does not correlate with bacterial-induced changes in drug efficacy. For example, increases
in uridine monophosphate kinase (C29F7.3) and uridine phosphorylase (upp-1) expression for HB101-fed nematodes does not correlate with the reduced drug
efficacy observed for this strain (Figures S1B–S1E) compared to OP50, BW25113 and C. aquatica.
(L) Metabolite profiling in worms and E. coli, treated with 5-FU. BLOD = below level of detection. Only statistically significant changes in metabolite levels are
displayed.
(M) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis for metabolomics in E. coli and C. elegans. Metabolite concentration comparisons were made against control conditions
in appropriate species. Grey indicates that enrichment is non-significant (p > 0.05), white – enrichment could not be estimated.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. For statistics see Table S1.

Figure S2. Chemical Genomic Bacterial Screens and Chemical Genomic Bacterial Host Screens, Related to Figure 2
(A) 5-FU inhibits development of worms fed control E. coli BW25113 but not Dupp mutants. This effect was reversed by gene complementation (pUpp). Worm size
was obtained from fluorescence intensity measurements of the DA2123 worm strain.
(B) Representative GFP fluorescence images of DA2123 worms from (A) illustrating the effects of 5-FU on worm size.
(C) Cumulative distribution of C. elegans MIC values and variability (from 3 independent biological replicates) for 5-FU effects for each knockout with MIC > 5 mM.
(D) Bacterial growth (OD600nm) of Keio knockouts in liquid NGM. Correlation between control and 50 mM 5-FU treatment. Linear fit (red) indicates general growth
reduction by drug treatment (slope 0.44 < 1; p < 2 3 10 16).
(E) Linear modeling applied for bacterial growth to determine antagonistic and synergistic hits in bacterial screen. Examples for WT, Dupp, DpaaF and DgcvA.
Black arrows mark knockout effects in comparison to WT, purple arrows mark 5-FU treatment effect, gray bars indicate expected combined effect of knockout
and 5-FU treatment. Significant interaction between knockout and 5-FU treatment is shown by green (antagonistic) and blue (synergistic) arrows.
(F and G) Correlation between C. elegans MIC values and E. coli growth OD600nm in NGM (F) or NGM + 50 mM 5-FU (G). Linear regression fit and covariation ellipse
are marked in red. Knockouts that exhibit significant interaction with 5-FU (FDR < 0.05) are color-coded green (resistant) and blue (sensitive).
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. For statistics, see Table S2.

B
Fraction hatching

1.0
0.8

0.2

***
PLP

***

***

PNP PMP PL
PN
B6 Vitamers

PM

0.0
0.0

PA

C
Fraction hatching

1.0

ctrl.
PN
PM
PL

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.25

0.5

1

BW ∆pdxK∆pdxJ

2

4

[5-FU] (μM)

Fraction hatching

E

1.0

Ctrl. PL
BW
∆pdxJ

0.5

0.0

F57C9.1 RNAi
0 0.01

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5FU] (μM)

2

4

Ctrl. PL
BW
∆pdxJ

0.5

F

0.1

0.25 0.5
1
[5-FU] (μM)

2

4

D
Relative expression
F57C9.1

***

0.4

0.0

BW
∆pdxH

1.0

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

***
L4440 F57C9.1
RNAi

2.5
2.0
1.5

*

1.0
0.5
0.0

C
29
F7
ct .3
p
dh s-1
od
nd -1
k
py -1
rth 1
k
ty -1
m
um s-1
ps
up -1
p
g R cs 1
12 hC 1
12
gc .1
s
m t-1
F5 el-3
7C 2
9
m .1
th
f-1

0.6

Relative expression of Gene of interest
in ∆pdxJ/BW25113

Vitamer B6 levels (pmol/μg)

A

Pyrimidine

Glycine

B6 Folate

Figure S3. Effects of Bacterial Vitamin B6 Metabolism on 5-FU Efficacy, Related to Figure 3
(A) Vitamin B6 pools are altered in DpdxH mutant E. coli measured by LC-MS/MS. PLP = Pyridoxal-5-Phosphate; PNP = Pyridoxine-5-Phosphate; PMP =
Pyridoxamine-5-Phosphate; PL = Pyridoxal; PN = Pyridoxine; PM = Pyridoxamine; PA = Pyridoxic acid.
(B) Media supplementation with 10 mM PL rescues 5-FU efficacy on worms fed DpdxJ bacteria to control levels (BW + PL = 0.25 mM versus BW = 0.25 mM,
p = 0.779; DpdxJ + PL = 0.25 mM versus DpdxJ = 2 mM, p < 0.001; DpdxJ + PL = 0.25 mM versus BW = 0.25 mM, p = 1; DpdxJ + PL = 0.1 mM versus BW + PL =
0.1 mM, p = 1).
(C) Inhibition of both B6 de novo and salvage pathways using a DpdxJDpdxK double mutant decreases 5-FU efficacy which cannot be rescued by supplementation with 1 mM PN, PM or PL.
(D) Efficient RNAi knockdown of the worm F57C9.1 gene, an ortholog of human PDXK.
(E) Knockdown of F57C9.1 by RNAi does not alter worm responses to 5-FU upon supplementation with PL.
(F) Gene expression levels by qRT-PCR of enzymes involved in the glycine cleavage system, folate and vitamin B6 metabolism in worms grown on DpdxJ bacteria.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. For statistics, see Table S3.

A

aroL

Shikimate

Shikimate-3-P
aroA

B

Aromatic AA biosynthesis
aroC
Tryptophan
Chorismate
Tyrosine
pabB
Phenylalanine
pabA
4-amino-4-deoxychorismate

Fraction hatching

Quinone biosynthesis
ubiquinol
menaquinol

pabC
4-aminobenzoate (PABA)

∆aroA
∆aroC
∆pabC

0.5

0.0

0 0.01

0.05 0.1 0.25 0.5 1
[5-FU] (μM)

2

4

80

∆gcvP
∆fau

40

*

20
0

60

% CHO-THF

BW

60

% DHF

BW

Tetrahydrofolate biosynthesis

% CH+-THF

C

Chorismate and PABA

1.0

40
20
0

Glu Glu2 Glu3 Glu4 Glu5 Glu6 Glu7

60

*

40
20
0

Glu Glu2 Glu3 Glu4 Glu5 Glu6 Glu7

Glu Glu2 Glu3 Glu4 Glu5 Glu6 Glu7

60

*

40

20

20

**

Glu Glu2 Glu3 Glu4 Glu5 Glu6 Glu7

0

40
20
0

Glu Glu2 Glu3 Glu4 Glu5 Glu6 Glu7

D

Glu2 Glu3 Glu4 Glu5 Glu6 Glu7

E

OP50

OP50-MR
0.2

OP50

OP50-MR
control 50 μM 5-FU

H
-T

F
H

F

F
3

100

0

H

MR

20

H

50

C

40

C

MR

∆gcvP

C

C

60

-T

0

MR
OP50 strain C
Metformin (mM)
0

∆pdxJ

2

1

BW

80

H

ns.
***

25

H
F

2

ns.

10
15
20
Time (hours)

C

0

***.

***

100

50 μM 5-FU

ns.

***

G

5

H+
-T

log2 OD600nm dt

24

***

0 μM 5-FU

***.

0

F

ns.
***

3

0.0

25

TH

10
15
20
Time (hours)

F

F 4

5

0.1

H

0

control
50 mM metformin
100 mM metformin

D

0.0

OD 600nm

50 mM metformin
100 mM metformin

0.1

% of total Folates

OD600nm

control 50 μM 5-FU
control

-T

0.2

O

0

60

C
H

% THF

40

% CH3-THF

**

60

% Folic Acid

80

Figure S4. Bacterial Folate Metabolism Regulates 5-FU Action, Related to Figure 4
(A) Diagram of the chorismate and PABA biosynthetic pathways.
(B) Disruption of chorismate and PABA biosynthesis impairs 5-FU action in worms.
(C) Polyglutamylation profiles of detectable folate metabolites in control, DgcvP and Dfau mutants. No striking changes are observed for the majority of folates.
(D) 5-FU treatment (50 mM) impairs OP50 growth, but not in the presence of metformin (50 or 100 mM).
(E) 5-FU treatment (50 mM) impairs OP50 metformin-resistant strain (OP50-MR) growth regardless of metformin effects (50 or 100 mM).
(F) Metformin effects on bacterial growth are antagonistic to 5-FU effects in OP50 but not OP50-MR.
(G) Impairment of the folate cycle (Dfau) and the glycine cleavage system (DgcvP) in E. coli does not modulate folate metabolism in C. elegans. Each metabolite is
the ratio between the sum of the values for the different glutamate side chains (1-7) and the sum of all metabolites measured.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. For statistics, see Table S4.

Figure S5. Bacterial Bioconversion of Fluoropyrimidines, Related to Figure 5
(A) Disruption of nucleobases (DuraA) and nucleosides import (DnupCDnupG) reduces 5-FU efficacy.
(B) Supplementation with 200 mM uridine impairs 5-FU effects in worms fed BW25113 by 320-fold but not the triple mutant DudpDudkDupp.
(C) Supplementation with 200 mM orotate impairs 5-FU effects in worms fed BW25113. The effect is partially rescued when worms are fed DpyrE but not DpyrD
mutant bacteria.
(D) Supplementation with 200 mM thymidine improves 5-FU effects in worms fed Dtdk mutant bacteria but not control BW25113 or Dupp mutants.
(E) Pre-conversion of 5-FO by WT bacteria enhances drug effects on the host. Note that incubation of 5-FO with DpyrE mutant bacteria fully abolishes bacterialmediated effects on host metabolism. Thus, de novo nucleotide metabolism is the unique pathway for the conversion of 5-FO.
(F) Vitamin B6 supplementation increases GFP expression in ndk, udk, and upp promoter reporter strains.
(G) Disruption of bacterial vitamin B6 production impairs 5-FC bioconversion.

(legend continued on next page)

(H) LC-MS/MS quantification of fluoropyrimidines in E. coli supplemented with 50 mM 5-FU.
(I) LC-MS/MS quantification of fluoropyrimidines in C. elegans supplemented with 50 mM 5-FU.
(J) LC-MS/MS quantification of fluoropyrimidines in E. coli supplemented with 50 mM 5-FU.
(K) LC-MS/MS quantification of fluoropyrimidines in C. elegans supplemented with 50 mM 5-FU.
(L) Developmental response to 5-FU is uniquely mediated by bacterial genotype (BW control or triple mutant DudpDudkDupp) but not host genotype (N2 Wildtype or umps-1(zu456)).
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. For statistics, see Table S5.

Figure S6. Bacterial Deoxynucleotide Metabolism Effects on 5-FU Efficacy, Related to Figure 6
(A) Effects of 5-FU on bacterial growth of sensitive DyjjG, resistant Dupp and neutral Dndk or Ddcd. Drug response curves were calculated using a log(inhibitor)
versus response - variable slope (four parameter) model.
(B) Supplementation with 200 mM and 2 mM uridine impairs 5-FU effects in worms fed DyjjG and Dndk mutants in a distinctive manner.

(legend continued on next page)

(C) Heatmap of metabolite profiles for bacterial nucleotide metabolism mutants. Absolute metabolite levels shown by color scale, clustering done by Euclidean
distance.
(D) Difference in metabolite levels between Dndk (y axis) and DpyrE (x axis) mutants in comparison to BW. Color gradient shows Dndk/DpyrE logFC, indicating
opposing/concordant effects of mutants on metabolite levels. Metabolites with significant changes in Dndk/BW and Dndk/DpyrE are labeled (See Table S6).
(E) 5-FU does not alter folate metabolism homeostasis in whole worms at 5 and 20 mM.
(F) LGG-1::GFP expression in embryos from DA2123 worms fed BW25113, UV-irradiated BW25113 and triple mutant DudpDudkDupp treated with 5-FU at
various concentrations and supplemented with 200 mM uridine or thymidine. Uridine supplementation rescues 5-FU induction of autophagy while thymidine
supplementation improves it in a bacterial dependent manner.
(G) Increased resistance to 5-FU in the mismatch repair worm mutant msh-6(pk2504) is mediated by bacteria. Resistance to 5-FU by msh-6 mutant worms is only
observed when fed on HT115 but not HT115(Dndk) mutant bacteria.
(H) msh-6(pk2504) does not confer resistance to 5-FU compared to WT worms when fed BW25113 or Dndk bacteria.
(I) Efficient knockdown of ndk-1 in worms by RNAi.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. For statistics, see Table S6.

Figure S7. 5-FU Effects on Tumor Size and Survival of the Host Are Dependent on Bacterial Genotype, Related to Figure 7
(A) Supplementation with uridine and orotate (200 mM or 2 mM) impairs 5-FU effects in worms fed diverse bacterial strains.
(B) Role of bacterial yjjG, udk, upp, and ndk in E. coli K-12 strains in the regulation of 5-FU effects on the host.
(C) Role of bacterial yjjG, udk, upp, and ndk in E. coli B strains in the regulation of 5-FU effects on the host. OP50p refers to OP50 prototroph for uracil/uridine.
(D) Representative 10x images of DAPI stained gld-1 RNAi whole worms treated for 4 days with 5-FU and fed control or Dupp mutant bacteria. Tumor retraction as
measured by distance (A’ to B’)/(A to B).
(E) 5-FU extends the lifespan of gld-1 worms when fed on BW25113 bacteria but not HB101 or HT115.
(F and G) 5-FU extends the lifespan of gld-1 (F) and glp-1 (G) gain-of-function worms when fed on control bacteria, but not Dupp mutants.
Data are represented as mean ± SD. For statistics, see Table S7.

