Published OnlineFirst November 28, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230

Meeting Report

Nineteenth Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Hypothesis-Driven
Clinical Investigation in Cancer
1

2

3

William G. Kaelin, Charles L. Sawyers, and Enrico Mihich
1

Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 2Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York;
and 3Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York

Abstract
This symposium was held in Trento, Italy, from June 14 to
16, 2007, and was cochaired by William G. Kaelin, Enrico
Mihich, and Charles L. Sawyers. A session was deveted to the
proof of concept derived from successes in target-oriented
therapeutics. Molecular targets must be identified in each
patients because they are equally present in all patients with
the same tumor type. A session was devoted to the identification of markers of drug effectiveness. Two sessions were
focused on opportunities for developing new specific molecular target-oriented therapies. [Cancer Res 2007;67(23):11102–5]

Introduction
Progress in target cancer chemotherapy unveiled the advantages
and limitations of the approach. Ways to optimize this chemotherapy, the identification of new sites of intervention, the development of markers and of new technologies for activity monitoring,
and the rational design of combination treatments are all discussed
herein.

Report
Charles L. Sawyers stated that 85% of patients with relapsed
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) have mutations in the ABL
kinase domain altering imatinib sensitivity; the majority of them
occur at residues altering the conformational flexibility of ABL
such that it cannot achieve the closed conformation required for
optimal imatinib binding. Dasatinib binds ABL in either conformation and is effective in imatinib-resistant patients. Resistance
to dasatinib occurs almost exclusively through mutations at drug
contact residues; some confer resistance to dasatinib but not to
imatinib. The data favors combinations with these two compounds
for CML and for other cancers. Preliminary data suggests that
resistance to both of these inhibitors could be overcome by VX680.
In general, the magnitude of kinase inhibition and size of the
inhibitor’s area under the curve correspond to clinical responses.
The responses could also be affected by mutations in ‘‘modifier’’
genes reducing kinase dependence. Thus, patients with glioblastoma fail to respond to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
inhibitors if the tumor also contains a PTEN mutation. Negative
feedback loop blockade could lead to hyperactivated signaling
pathways: mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors
could cause increased activity of Akt in some tumors, and this may
counteract therapeutic effects. These difficulties may be solved
through appropriate combination therapies. Obviously, patient-

Requests for reprints: Enrico Mihich, Experimental Therapeutics, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Elm & Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263. Phone: 716-845-3314;
Fax: 716-845-3351; E-mail: enrico.mihich@roswellpark.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

tailored kinase inhibitor therapy requires the evaluation of diverse
molecular mechanisms for optimal response.
George D. Demetri emphasized that imatinib provided remarkable progress in the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GIST). Mutations in the PDGFRA proto-oncogene of a KITnegative GIST subset justified the development of new agents
targeting related signaling molecules. Imatinib inhibits most
mutated variants of KIT and a small subset of mutated PDGFRA
kinases and induces a 3-fold increase in patient survival. Resistance
follows secondary mutations in the tumor genome. The multitargeted kinase inhibitor, Sunitinib, improved responses in patients
with imatinib-resistant GIST. Other multikinase inhibitors and
combinations of agents are being tested to inhibit other pathways, including phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) and mTOR.
Imaging techniques and response biomarkers are being developed.
Inhibition of heat shock protein-90 (Hsp90) selectively destroys
numerous structural mutants of KIT or PDGFRA. Early clinical data
of the Hsp90 inhibitor IPI-504 suggests that destruction of KIT
is possible by this mechanism. Based on the GIST example, translational research could be implemented to control other common
cancers.
William Pao stated that gefitinib and erlotinib induce major
responses in certain patients with non–small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC). EGFR tyrosine kinase somatic mutations are more
commonly associated with sensitivity to gefitinib and erlotinib in
patients who never smoked cigarettes, whereas mutations in KRAS
associated with primary resistance were more frequent in patients
with significant tobacco exposure. Second site EGFR mutations
occur in about half of the patients with acquired resistance to these
drugs. Substitution of methionine for threonine at position 790
(T790M) is linked to genetic susceptibility to lung cancer.
Transgenic mice with EGFRT790M alone or with drug-sensitive
L858R mutation were developed and both developed lung adenocarcinomas requiring mutant EGFR for tumor maintenance and
were resistant to an EGFR kinase inhibitor. The models should be
useful for developing improved therapies for NSCLL harboring the
EGFRT790M mutation.
William Kaelin indicated that clear cell renal carcinoma is
usually linked to loss of the VHL tumor suppressor gene and that
restoration of VHL function suppresses tumor formation. pVHL
regulates hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) polyubiquitylation. When
pVHL is defective, or oxygen levels are low, HIF accumulates and
activates 100 to 200 genes involved in adaptation to hypoxia, such
as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). HIF down-regulation
is necessary and sufficient for pVHL to suppress VHL / renal
carcinoma in vivo. Expression of HIFa and inactivation of VHL
phenocopy similar pathologic changes. The risk of renal carcinoma
linked to VHL alleles correlates with induced HIF deregulation.
Thus, HIF and HIF-responsive gene products are validated
therapeutic targets in kidney cancer. Drugs inhibiting VEGF,
or KDR, have activity against renal carcinoma and several

11102

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 28, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230
Nineteenth Annual Pezcoller Symposium

down-regulate HIF, including mTOR, Hsp90, and HDAC inhibitors.
The HIF regulation by PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway opens new sites
for intervention. Combinations of agents inhibiting different HIFresponsive gene products or that indirectly target HIF are being
tested such as mTOR inhibitors combined with VEGF inhibitors.
Paul Waring stressed the importance of decreasing the attrition
which occurs during the development of new drugs. One should
develop targeted therapies and diagnostic tests and meet the
critical need to obtain tumor samples in order to identify which
patients are most likely to benefit from a given treatment. New
technologies such as microarray expression profiling, serum tumor
proteome profiling, and genomewide genetic associations identify
biomarkers or biomarker signatures. The difficulties are that many
biomarker techniques do not work on formalin-fixed tissues, primary tumors may not represent metastatic tumors, obtaining
multiple tumor biopsies for exploratory biomarker studies is often
unjustifiable, surrogate biomarker measurements in blood samples
may not be representative.
David Carbone stressed that many solid tumors do not seem to
be driven by single targetable pathways. NSCLC is complex and
heterogeneous, and demands detailed analysis of each subset to
define optimal therapeutic approaches. A small subset with mutant
EGFR tumors will achieve substantial benefit from targeted
therapy. Some patients without EGFR mutations experience significant benefit. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization timeof-flight mass spectrometry was used to study pretreatment
unfractionated sera and identify NSCLC patients with improved
survival following gefitinib and erlotinib treatment. Independently
acquired mass spectra gave concordant results, and an algorithm
predictive of time to progression and survival was generated and
might be useful in selecting therapies for patients with advanced
NSCLC. Assessment of eicosanoid expression in individual lung
cancer patients seemed to identify those who would benefit from
cyclooxygenase inhibition. However, this pathway is complex in
lung cancer as some eicosanoids have antitumor activities.
Gordon Mills discussed the possibility that ‘‘oncogenic addiction’’ may provide targets for specific tumor growth inhibition.
Despite the validation of the PI3K pathway, no drugs targeting PI3K
or the downstream regulator Akt have thus far been approved.
Drugs developed for other purposes target PI3K, such as rapamycin
analogues, ether lipids, and inhibitors of EGFR, HER2, c-kit,
platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and Bcr-abl. The main
challenge is identifying PI3K inhibitors with a usable therapeutic
index. Tumors with PI3K pathway aberrations may undergo
‘‘oncogene addiction’’ rendering them sensitive to PI3K inhibition.
Intervention sites in the PI3K pathway include PI3K itself, the
downstream regulator Akt, and other downstream components
such as mTOR, integrin-linked kinase, phosphoinositide-dependent
kinase-1, p70S6 kinase, and Forkhead/FOXO1.
Steven Larson stressed that better-targeted therapies are likely to
be guided by molecular imaging through the use of radiolabeled
biomarkers. Positron emission tomography (PET) is well-suited for
this purpose. Tumor responses have been studied with biomarkers
such as [18F] 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose, which measures glycolysis
and [18F]fluorothymidine (FLT), which measures proliferation.
Selective anticancer drug effects on key molecules may also be
imaged with [18F]fluordihydrotestosterone, an androgen receptor–
binding agent and [68Ga]gallium-Fab¶2 herceptin, binding to HER2
receptor. The pharmacology and pharmacodynamics of agents
such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors, tumoricidal antibodies, and
adoptive immunotherapy are being studied with PET imaging.

www.aacrjournals.org

Todd Golub discussed the development of target-specific therapies based on the molecular characterization of a tumor at the
level of DNA, RNA, protein, or other biomolecules. Gene expression
profiling could be used to classify acute leukemias, childhood brain
tumors, prostate cancer, lymphoma, and lung cancer. Gene expression profiling indicates which components of the signature might
be worthy of conventional biochemically based high-throughput
screens. In some cases, no single gene/protein, but a group of
signature genes are required to explain the phenotype under study.
In other cases, the target is found to be ‘‘undruggable.’’ A small
library could be screened to identify compounds modulating a
defined gene expression signature of biological interest. This gene
expression–based high-throughput screening was applied to discover compounds inducing the differentiation of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) cells and compounds inhibiting the activity of
the Ewing sarcoma oncogene (EWS/FLI), or abrogating androgen
receptor signaling in prostate cancer. The feasibility of using gene
expression profile databases to systematically connect signatures
of diseases to the signatures of gene product function or of drug
action was established. Relevant connections were discovered in
dexamethasone-resistant childhood leukemia, androgen response
in prostate, and HDAC inhibition in various cell types.
Neal Rosen outlined the rational design of combination therapies
based on biomarkers indicating their combined molecular action
and emphasized that the efficient clinical development of these
therapies requires a knowledge of the kinetics of target inhibition
by the agents employed. Immunohistochemical assays are not
quantitative and it is impossible to obtain multiple biopsies over
short time periods to ascertain the kinetics of inhibition. Target
inhibition is determined in surrogate normal tissue, and only
occasionally in tumor biopsies obtained before and after drug
administration. These problems could be overcome with functional
imaging. Hsp90 inhibitors cause the degradation of client proteins,
HER2 being among the most sensitive. 17-AAG has significant antitumor activity in patients with advanced breast cancers overexpressing HER2. Herceptin Fab fragment with a 2 h half-life was
chelated to positron emitting isotopes, including 68Ga. The reagent
imaged the 17-AAG effects on surface HER2 expression in tumor
xenografts as a function of dose and time after drug administration
and is now being used in phase 2 clinical trials of 17-AAG and
Herceptin. Tumors with mutant BRAF were quite sensitive to MEK
inhibitors. Treatment of melanoma with MEK inhibitor PD0325901
resulted in objective responses and disease stabilization. In BRAF
tumors, MEK inhibition was associated with D-cyclin loss, p27
induction, RB-phosphorylation loss and concomitant G1 arrest.
As 18-FLT transport into tumor cells is S phase–dependent, 18-FLT
PET could constitute a marker of early response to MEK inhibitors.
The FLT PET image declined after MEK inhibitor dosing and after
drug discontinuation, the image stayed low until the tumor began
to increase in size. The PET method is useful for assessing agents
that cause stable disease and the heterogeneous responses of
tumor metastases.
Kevin Shannon discussed the use of genetically engineered mice
to investigate treatment responses and provided evidence that
hyperactive Ras is a promising therapeutic target. However, the
critical target(s) of hyperactive Ras are largely unknown. Mice
carrying conditional mutant alleles of the NF1 tumor suppressor
gene encoding neurofibromin (Nf1) or oncogenic Kras help in
understanding how cells remodel signaling in response to
hyperactive Ras. The Mx1-Cre transgene ablating Nf1 or activating
KrasG12D expression in hematopoietic cells results in a fatal

11103

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 28, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230
Cancer Research

myeloproliferative disorder (MPD) reminiscent of juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and CML. Retroviral insertional mutagenesis
identifies mutations cooperating with hyperactive Ras to induce
progression from MPD to AML. CI-1040, a potent MEK inhibitor,
had no effects in Nf1 mice with MPD. However, MEK inhibition
induced the regression of Nf1-deficient AMLs which uniformly
developed resistance to CI-1040 in vivo, despite equivalent target
inhibition in sensitive and resistant clones. Retroviral insertions in
resistant AMLs were consistent with the outgrowth of preexisting
clones during CI-1040 administration.
Barbara Weber emphasized that oncology drug development
should be increasingly focused on molecularly targeted small
molecules and should involve testing only in patients mostly likely
to respond. Response prediction biomarkers are identified based
on the hypothesis that all cancer abnormalities are fixed in the
genome by genetic or epigenetic alterations, which are the targets
and response determinants of targeted cancer therapeutics. At her
institution, the IC50 for every compound in development was determined in 300 human cancer cell lines representing the spectrum of
adult cancer patients. All cell lines were also profiled for DNA copy
number, RNA transcript profiles and targeted genomic sequencing.
The incidence and prevalence of cell line sensitivity predictors in
primary human tumors were assessed. The overall data determined
the clinical studies design. As targeted agents may also be more
effective in combination, short hairpin RNA technology was used
to identify lethal phenotypes that predict both effective targeted
combinations and new targets. Combinations of targeted agents
with standard cytotoxics were also evaluated.
David Livingston indicated that short hairpin RNA library
screening was initiated for proteins that, when depleted from
human ovarian cancer cell lines, lead to inhibition of cell proliferation and may serve as ovarian cancer drug targets. With a
hairpin library encompassing all 92 human tyrosine kinases in three
different ovarian cancer cell lines, erbB3 was detected as a protein
that, when depleted, was associated with a proliferative defect. The
erbB3 protein was activated through phosphorylation and coimmunoprecipitated with PI3K. Analogous results were obtained with
fresh tumor cells from patients with late stage ovarian cancer. ErbB3
engaged PI3K pathways, leading to AKT and mTOR modulations.
David Tuveson outlined a model of pancreatic cancer and its
potential use in experimental therapeutics. Mutant mice were
generated that developed preinvasive intraepithelial neoplasia
(PanIN). Mice with pancreatic ductal carcinoma (PDA) slowly
progressing to invasive and metastatic tumors had 16 months
median survival. PanIN and PDA closely resembled their human
counterparts, with cachexia and analogous metastasic pattern.
Activation/expression of the Notch, Cox-2, erbB1/B2, and hedgehog
pathways were seen and represent potential therapeutic targets. By
incorporating additional conditional mutations in tumor suppressor genes including p53 and Ink4a/ARF, advanced and metastatic
PDA models were generated. The pancreatic-specific concomitant
expression of endogenous KrasG12D and Trp53R172H allele resulted in
metastatic PDA, and tumor cells showed widespread numerical and
structural chromosomal instability. Mice with PDA were refractory
to gemcitabine, whereas mice harboring transplanted human or
murine PDA were sensitive to it, consistent with the striking
difference in gemcitabine triphosphate levels seen within the
tumors. The exploration of additional therapeutics in this new
model is warranted.
Arul Chinnaiyan discovered oncogenic chromosomal aberrations
based on outlier genes ERG and ETV1 which were overexpressed in

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

the majority of prostate cancers, being mutually exclusive across
several gene expression data sets. By RNA ligase-mediated rapid
amplification of cDNA ends, a recurring fusion of prostate-specific,
androgen-regulated genes TMPRSS2 to ERG or ETV1 occurred in
cases which overexpressed the respective ETS family member. Using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, 23 of 29 prostate cancer samples
were found to harbor rearrangements in ERG or ETV1. Androgen-responsive promoter elements of TMPRSS2 identified three
prostate cancer subtypes, the androgen-regulated TMPRSS2:ERG,
TMPRSS2:ETV1, and TMPRSS2:ETV4. Dysregulation of ETS family
member expression through fusions with TMPRSS2 may be a
generalized mechanism for prostate cancer progression. Novel 5¶
fusion partners with outlier expression of ETS family members were
identified. The role of ETS gene rearrangements in prostate cancer
progression was confirmed. The identification of androgeninsensitive 5¶ fusion partners has implications for the antiandrogen
treatment of advanced prostate cancer.
Anna Bagnato outlined the endothelin axis role in cancer and
the possibility of affecting it by target chemotherapy. In ovarian
cancer, ligand-mediated ETAR engagement activated different
tumor-promoting pathways including protein kinase C, PI3K, and
mitogen-activated protein kinase and transactivates EGFR. ETAR
was identified as a metastasis-associated gene correlating with
resistance to chemotherapy, and as a relevant therapeutic target.
The lack of clinical responses to EGFR inhibition by ZD4054
suggests that through signaling via alternative receptors, such as
ETAR, the tumor can override the EGFR inhibition. The cross-talk
between the EGFR and ETAR pathways, and the improved
therapeutic efficacy of targeting ETAR by ZD4054, plus EGFR by
gefitinib in preclinical models, encourages clinical evaluations of
this combination. ET-1 and ET-3 trigger pathways affecting normal
host-tumor interactions and tumor progression.
Nathaneal Gray emphasized that most kinase inhibitors developed to date target the ATP binding site in its ‘‘active’’
conformation, in which the activation loop is phosphorylated
(type I). The crystal structures of inhibitors such as imatinib,
BIRB796, and sorafenib revealed new binding modes at additional
sites immediately adjacent to the ATP region (type II). New cellular
Bcr-abl inhibitors like GNF-2 target the myristate-binding site
of abl, and allosterically inhibit kinase activity. GNF-2 exhibits
antiproliferative activity in Bcr-abl–transformed cells and acted
synergistically with ATP-competitive inhibitors in cell culture and
in a murine CML model. Combinations with Gleevec reduced the
development of resistance.
Massimo Santoro indicated that the RET receptor is rearranged
in f30% of papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC). RET germ line
point mutations cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
(MEN 2) syndromes and RET somatic mutations were found
in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). RET/PTC and
RET/MEN 2 are constitutively active tyrosine kinases inducing
anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenicity in nude mice
when introduced in NIH 3T3 cells, and carcinogenesis when
introduced in transgenic mice. In vitro, some pyrazolo-pyrimidines
inhibited RET/PTC and RET/MEN 2 autophosphorylation in a
dose-dependent manner. Zactima and Sorafenib also inhibited
RET. Zactima binds RET kinase, had cytostatic effects in RETpositive human thyroid carcinoma cells, and had significant
activity against xenografted RET mutation–positive MTC TT. Both
Zactima and Sorafenib are being tested in patients with thyroid
cancer. Clinical evaluation coupled with measurements of RET
phosphorylation levels or RET pathway activity will be crucial

11104

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 28, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230
Nineteenth Annual Pezcoller Symposium

to assess target inhibition and clinical value of RET inhibition in
MTC and PTC.

Prospects
As discussed at this symposium, the success achieved in targeted
chemotherapy provides ample proof of principle and firmly establishes this approach in cancer chemotherapy. Difficulties in optimizing treatments may be overcome through pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic studies rendered possible by the increasing availability of imaging technologies. Tumor molecular characterization

www.aacrjournals.org

in individual patients is necessary to obviate heterogeneity and to
proceed further towards individualized therapies. Future emphasis
will no doubt be given to the identification of novel sites of intervention and related markers and to target determined combination
treatments.

Acknowledgments
Received 8/22/2007; accepted 10/10/2007.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

11105

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 28, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230

Nineteenth Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Hypothesis-Driven
Clinical Investigation in Cancer
William G. Kaelin, Charles L. Sawyers and Enrico Mihich
Cancer Res 2007;67:11102-11105. Published OnlineFirst November 28, 2007.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3230

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

