Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The pan-HER family tyrosine kinase inhibitor afatinib overcomes
HER3 ligand heregulin-mediated resistance to EGFR inhibitors in
non-small cell lung cancer
Kimio Yonesaka1, Keita Kudo1, Satomi Nishida1, Takayuki Takahama1, Tsutomu
Iwasa1, Takeshi Yoshida1, Kaoru Tanaka1, Masayuki Takeda1, Hiroyasu Kaneda1,
Isamu Okamoto2, Kazuto Nishio3, Kazuhiko Nakagawa1
1

Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan

2

Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Kyushu, Japan

3

Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan

Correspondence to:
Kimio Yonesaka, e-mail: yonesaka@sakai.med.kindai.ac.jp
Keywords: afatinib, erlotinib, heregulin, non-small cell lung cancer, human epidermal growth factor receptor
Received: June 18, 2015      Accepted: September 04, 2015      Published: September 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Afatinib is a second generation epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) characterized as an irreversible pan-human EGFR (HER) family
inhibitor. Afatinib remains effective for a subpopulation of patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with acquired resistance to first generation EGFF-TKIs such
as erlotinib. Heregulin activates HER3 in an autocrine fashion and causes erlotinib
resistance in NSCLC. Here we examine whether afatinib is effective against heregulinoverexpressing NSCLCs harboring EGFR activating mutations. Afatinib but not erlotinib
decreased EGFR mutant NSCLC PC9HRG cell proliferation in vitro and in mouse
xenografts. Afatinib inhibited phosphorylation of the cell signaling pathway proteins
HER3, EGFR, HER2, and HER4, likely by prevention of trans-phosphorylation as HER3
kinase activity is inadequate for auto-phosphorylation. Afatinib, unlike erlotinib,
inhibited AKT activation, resulting in elevated apoptosis in PC9HRG cells. Clinically,
a subpopulation of 33 patients with EGFR mutations and NSCLC who had received
first generation EGFR-TKIs exhibited elevated plasma heregulin levels compared to
healthy volunteers; one of these achieved a response with afatinib therapy despite
having previously developed erlotinib resistance. Afatinib can overcome heregulinmediated resistance to erlotinib in EGFR mutant NSCLC. Further studies are necessary
to determine whether heregulin can predict afatinib efficacy after development offirst
generation EGFR-TKI resistance.

always respond to EGFR-TKI therapy despite the presence
of EGFR activating mutations. Furthermore, all patients
ultimately become refractory to EGFR-TKI treatment after
their initial response. Previous research has elucidated
several underlying mechanisms in the resistance to EGFR
inhibitors [5]. For example, approximately 50% of patients
with NSCLC harboring EGFR activating mutations were
shown to have developed a T790M substitution EGFR
secondary mutation upon their acquisition of resistance to
EGFR-TKIs [6]. In addition, MET amplification, human
EGFR 2 (HER2) amplification, or hepatocyte growth
factor overexpression have also been observed to cause
EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC [7–9]. Therefore, current

INTRODUCTION
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a
molecular target of oncotherapy in certain kinds of cancer
including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [1]. EGFR
inhibitors are classified into tyrosine kinase inhibitors or
monoclonal anti-EGFR antibodies [2]. EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) such as gefitinib or erlotinib
show drastic efficacy in patients with NSCLC harboring
EGFR activating mutations [3, 4]. The constructive
alteration of EGFR resulting from genomic mutation
causes preferential ATP binding with its kinase domain and
spontaneous EGFR activation. However, tumors do not
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33602

Oncotarget

clinical investigations seek to identify a novel treatment
strategy for conquering EGFR-TKI resistance.
Afatinib is a second generation EGFR-TKI, which
can irreversibly bind to EGFR tyrosine kinase and more
potently inhibit its activation than can first generation
EGFR-TKIs [10]. In phase III clinical trials or combined
analyses, afatinib was shown to significantly prolong
progression-free survival as well as overall survival
compared to standardized cytotoxic chemotherapy in
patients with advanced NSCLC harboring EGFR-activating
mutations, especially exon 19 deletions [11–13]. Preclinical studies have suggested that second generation
EGFR-TKIs are effective in NSCLC cells harboring EGFR
exon 20 T790M mutations, which causes resistance to first
generation EGFR-TKIs [10, 14]. Dacomitinib represents
one such second generation EGFR-TKI. However,
dacomitinib resistant cell line models were shown to have
developed focal amplification of EGFR that preferentially
involved the T790M-containing allele [15]. Furthermore, in
clinical studies, afatinib exhibited only a limited efficacy
in patients with EGFR mutant NSCLC who acquired a
resistance to first generation EGFR-TKIs. Asapproximately
half of these are likely to possess an EGFR T790M
mutation [16, 17], these results suggest that afatinib was
not sufficient to overcome T790M-induced resistance to
EGFR-TKIs. Additionally, afatinib has more and greater
toxicities including diarrhea or rash compared to those
associated with first generation EGFR-TKIs because of
its irreversible inhibition of wild-type EGFRs in normal
cells [17]. In contrast, third generation EGFR-TKIs such as
AZD9291 and CO-1686 were shown to exhibit enhanced
efficacy against NSCLCs with EGFR T790M mutations and
less overall toxicity as a result of wild-type EGFR inhibition
being unaffected by these compounds [18, 19].
However, a unique characteristic of afatinib is its
ability to inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of members of
the pan-HER family including HER1 (also known as EGFR),
HER2, and HER4. In this regard, afatinib is potentially more
effective compared to first or third generation EGFR-TKIs,
which inhibit only the EGFR tyrosine kinase.
Heregulin is a ligand for HER3 and is aberrantly
overexpressed in certain cancer cells including those
from NSCLC, in which HER3 is activated in an autocrine
fashion [20–22]. Previously, both preclinical and clinical
studies have suggested that heregulin could cause
resistance to EGFR inhibitors in NSCLC and colorectal
cancer (CRC) [20, 22–26]. Heregulin expression levels
varies among those cancers, and patients with higher
heregulin-expressing cancer cells were shown to exhibit
more refractory and shorter progression free-survival with
EGFR-TKIs such as erlotinib in NSCLC and with antiEGFR antibodies such as cetuximab in CRC compared to
patients with lower heregulin expression [23, 25, 26].
In contrast to first generation EGFR-TKIs, the
efficacy of afatinib against NSCLCs with EGFR-TKI
resistance because of heregulin-overexpression has
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

never been evaluated. In this study, we aimed to examine
whether afatinib could efficiently prevent cell proliferation
in heregulin-overexpressing NSCLC cells harboring
EGFR-activating mutations. In addition, we analyzed
cell-signaling pathway activation in order to elucidate the
mechanism by which afatinib might overcome EGFR-TKI
resistance in heregulin-overexpressing NSCLCs. Finally,
we examined the clinical efficacy of afatinib in patients
with NSCLC and EGFR mutations in correlation with
their level of heregulin expression.

RESULTS
Heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells were
resistant to erlotinib, but maintained afatinib
sensitivity
First, we evaluated the efficacy of erlotinib in
PC9Mock and heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells
using an in vitro cell-proliferation inhibition assay. Both
cell lines were treated with erlotinib in doses ranging from
0.0033 to 10 μM for 72 h. Similar to our previous study,
PC9Mock cells showed decreased numbers of viable cells
after erlotinib treatment in a dose-dependent manner,
whereas PC9HRG cells maintained cell-proliferation
at higher concentration of erlotinib (Figure 1A) [22].
Next, we evaluated the susceptibility to afatinib in these
cell lines. Whereas the PC9HRG cells were refractory to
erlotinib, they remained sensitive to afatinib (Figure 1B).
Thus, the IC50 (the concentration required to effect 50% cell
growth inhibition) value of erlotinib in PC9HRG cells was
approximately 5 μM, whereas the IC50 value of afatinib was
approximately 20 nM. According to the pharmacokinetic
data for afatinib, the mean steady-state maximum plasma
concentration (Cmax) of afatinib at the FDA-approved
dosing (40 mg/day) is 78 nM [27]. Thus, the IC50 value of
afatinib in PC9HRG cells was much less than the clinically
achievable plasma concentration of afatinib in patients
with NSCLC. We also evaluated another second generation
EGFR-TKI, dacomitinib, for inhibitory ability against
PC9HRG cell proliferation. PC9HRG cells were sensitive to
dacomitinib as well, with an the IC50 value of approximately
10 nM (Supplementary Figure S1).
Here, we hypothesized that the differential
sensitivity between erlotinib and afatinib in heregulin
overexpressing PC9HRG cells was the result of differing
signaling transduction, especially in the HER3-AKT
signaling pathway, as our previous study had shown that
refractoriness to erlotinib is caused by HER3 re-activation
in PC9HRG cells [22]. We therefore evaluated this cell
signaling pathway in PC9Mock and PC9HRG cells, which
were treated with erlotinib or afatinib for 24 h, using
immunoblotting (Figure 1C). This analysis demonstrated
that the phosphorylation of EGFR as well as HER3 was
decreased in PC9Mock cells following either erlotinib
or afatinib exposure. Furthermore, both drugs decreased
33603

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Heregulin-overexpressing NSCLC cell line PC9HRG cells are resistant to erlotinib, but sensitive to afatinib.

A. Mock-transfected EGFR mutant NSCLC PC9Mock cells or stably heregulin-transfected PC9HRG cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of erlotinib; cell viability was measured 3 days later and values are plotted relative to untreated control cells (means ± SD).
B. PC9Mock cells or PC9HRG cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of afatinib; cell viability was measured 3 days later.
C. PC9Mock and PC9HRG cells were treated with 1 μM erlotinib or 0.1 μM afatinib for the indicated times, then probed for the indicated proteins.

the phosphorylation of AKT, a downstream effector
of HER3, in PC9Mock cells. The phosphorylation of
EGFR was also decreased in heregulin-overexpressing
PC9HRG cells following erlotinib exposure. However,
the phosphorylation of HER3 was decreased in PC9HRG
cells following 3 h erlotinib exposure, but HER3 was
re-activated after 6 h erlotinib exposure, which was
accompanied by increased total HER3 expression. In
these cells, AKT was also reactivated after 6 h erlotinib
exposure. These observations were identical to those from
our previous study. However, in contrast to the results
following erlotinib treatment, afatinib maintained the
inhibition of both EGFR and HER3 phosphorylation in
heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells during 24 h
despite increased total HER3 levels. Finally, afatinib
exposure maintained the inhibition of phosphorylation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of AKT in these cells over 24 h. These results suggested
that the different susceptibilities to erlotinib and afatinib
are caused by different capabilities of those drugs to
inhibit the HER3-AKT signaling pathway in heregulin
overexpressing PC9HRG cells.

Afatinib can inhibit HER3 activation
accompanied with pan-HER family inhibition
in heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells
The susceptibility to afatinib seems to be correlated
with the inhibition of HER3-AKT signaling in PC9HRG
cells, although HER3 has weak kinase activity that is not
sufficient for auto-phosphorylation. Others have reported
that HER3 can be trans-phosphorylated by other HER
family receptors in cancer tissues [28, 29]. In addition,
33604

Oncotarget

our previous study observed that HER3 associated with
HER2 in PC9HRG cells treated with erlotinib [22].
Therefore, we expected that afatinib inhibited the tyrosine
kinase activities of other HER family receptors and
thus prevented the trans-phosphorylation of HER3 in
PC9HRG cells. To test this hypothesis, we assessed the
total and phosphorylated levels of HER family proteins
including EGFR, HER2, HER3, and HER4 in heregulinoverexpressing PC9HRG cells treated with erlotinib or
afatinib. PC9HRG cells were treated with erlotinib or
afatinib at doses ranging from 0.001 to 1 μM for 12 h.
Phosphorylation of EGFR was found to be decreased in
PC9HRG cells treated with erlotinib as well as afatinib in
a dose-dependent manner (Figure 2A, 2B).
We also noted that phosphorylation of HER2 was
not inhibited by exposure to erlotinib at concentrations of
0.1 μM or less. Furthermore, the results from immunoblots
with long exposures showed that HER2 phosphorylation
still remained even following 1 μM erlotinib exposure.
In contrast, phosphorylation of HER2 was drastically
inhibited with afatinib at 0.01 μM. In addition, total HER2
levels were also decreased in cells treated with afatinib
in a dose-dependent manner, although total HER2 levels
were maintained in cells treated with erlotinib.
Third, we observed that phosphorylation of HER3
was increased in cells treated with 0.01 μM or higher
concentrations of erlotinib accompanied with elevated
total HER3 expression levels. Phosphorylation of HER3
was also increased in cells treated with 0.001 μM afatinib;
however, this was decreased in cells treated with 0.01 μM
or higher concentrations of afatinib, even though total
HER3 expression levels were increased.
Finally, phosphorylation of HER4 was not shown
to be decreased in cells treated with erlotinib at even
1 μM concentration. In contrast to erlotinib exposure,
phosphorylation of HER4 was inhibited in cells treated
with afatinib in a dose-dependent manner.
Therefore, these results showed that afatinib could
inhibit phosphorylation of all HER family proteins in a
dose-dependent manner; the phosphorylation of HER3
was especially well paralleled with that of other HER
family members including EGFR, HER2, and HER4 in
PC9HRG cells. These results suggest that afatinib prevents
trans-phosphorylation of HER3 by inactivating other HER
family kinases. In addition, phosphorylation of AKT, the
downstream effector of HER3, was potently inhibited by
afatinib but not by erlotinib in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 2C). This suggests that the HER3-AKT signaling
pathway was inhibited by afatinib, but not by erlotinib.

plays a key role in anti-apoptosi; therefore, we examined
whether afatinib could induce apoptosis in heregulinoverexpressing PC9HRG cells. PC9HRG cells were
treated with 1 μM erlotinib or 0.1 μM afatinib for 24 h, and
then poly (ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage was
evaluated using immunoblotting. Afatinib caused more
PARP cleavage compared to erlotinib in PC9HRG cells
(Figure 3A). We also evaluated apoptosis using an annexin
V binding assay. Consistent with PARP cleavage results,
afatinib exposure significantly increased the proportion of
apoptosis in PC9HRG cells compared with that obtained
following erlotinib exposure (Control vs erlotinib vs
afatinib; 5.5 vs 7.4 vs 11.6%, respectively; P < 0.05,
Figure 3B, 3C). These results suggest that PC9HRG cells
are more sensitive to afatinib than to erlotinib because
HER3-AKT signaling inhibition by afatinib causes a
predisposition to apoptosis in these cells.

Heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG xenografts
showed sensitivity to afatinib but not erlotinib
To verify whether these in vitro findings were
relevant in vivo, heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells
were implanted subcutaneously in mice, which were then
treated with erlotinib, afatinib, or vehicle for four weeks.
Xenograft tumors arising from PC9HRG cells continued
to grow with erlotinib treatment, while tumors shrank
with afatinib treatment (Figure 4A). We also evaluated
the HER3-AKT signaling pathway in tumors using
immunoblotting. Consistent with the results from the in
vitro study, erlotinib treatment increased phosphorylation
of HER3 accompanied with increased total HER3 levels
(Figure 4B). In addition, we also noted that erlotinib could
not inhibit AKT phosphorylation in the tumors. In contrast,
afatinib treatment evinced decreased phosphorylation
of HER3 even though the total HER3 levels increased
(Figure 4B). Finally, afatinib was able to inhibit the
phosphorylation of AKT in tumors. Together, these results
suggested that afatinib treatment in vivo was also able
to overcome heregulin-induced EGFR-TKI resistance
through alteration of HER3-AKT signal transduction.

A subpopulation of patients with EGFR mutation
and NSCLC has high plasma concentrations of
heregulin and might be sensitive to afatinib even
after acquisition of erlotinib-resistance
To verify whether these preclinical findings were
relevant in a clinical situation, we evaluated plasma
heregulin expression levels among healthy individuals and
patients with EGFR mutations and NSCLC, and assessed
their responsiveness to afatinib. Among healthy volunteers
(n = 35) plasma heregulin levels were minimal (median 0
pg/mL; 0–1750 pg/mL, Figure 5A). However, patients with
EGFR mutations and NSCLC (n = 33) had variable and
significantly higher levels of plasma heregulin than did

Afatinib, but not erlotinib, can induce apoptosis
in heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells
We observed that afatinib, but not erlotinib, could
inhibit HER3-AKT signal transduction in heregulinoverexpressing PC9HRG cells. This pathway generally
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33605

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Afatinib inhibits phosphorylation of HER3 dose-dependently, in parallel with inhibition of phosphorylation
of other HER family members in heregulin-overexpressing NSCLCs. A, B. PC9HRG cells were treated with the various

indicated concentrations of erlotinib or afatinib for 12 h, then probed for the indicated proteins (A) Phosphor-HER family protein expression
levels were measured and quantified using the Multi Gauge system (Fujifilm, Japan) (B) X axis; concentration of drugs, Y axis; fold
changes compared with untreated control. *; with long exposure. C. PC9HRG cells were treated with the various indicated concentration
of erlotinib or afatinib for 12 h, then probed for the indicated proteins.

the healthy volunteers (median 981 pg/mL; 0–16,181 pg/
mL). Among the patients, seven were treated with afatinib
after failure to respond to gefitinib or erlotinib treatment
owing to tumor progression. Those patients were found
to be also refractory to afatinib except for one, LC6, who
achieved partial response with afatinib therapy (Figure 5B,
5C, Supplementary Table S1). Plasma heregulin levels were
measured prior to afatinib treatment; among these, LC6
exhibited a relatively high level of plasma heregulin.

with heregulin-overexpressing NSCLCs. Mechanistically,
in contrast to erlotinib, afatinib could inhibit the
phosphorylation of pan-HER family member proteins
at clinically achievable concentrations in heregulinoverexpressing PC9HRG cells. Afatinib has previously
been shown to directly inhibit the kinase activity of
EGFR, HER2, and HER4 [10]. HER3, in contrast, has
only weak kinase activity, but is a potent activator of its
binding partner, HER2 [28, 29]. Our previous study had
shown that HER3 preferentially heterodimerized with
HER2, which caused an increase in the phosphorylation
of HER3 in PC9HRG cells after erlotinib treatment [22].
In addition, we demonstrated that the anti-HER2 antibody
pertuzumab in combination with erlotinib decreased the
phosphorylation of HER3 and its downstream effector
AKT in those cells [22]. Together, these results suggested
that afatinib inhibited members of the pan-HER family,
especially EGFR, as well as inhibiting HER2 kinase
activity, which reduced the trans-phosphorylation of
HER3 in PC9HRG cells.

DISCUSSION
A novel treatment strategy for overwhelming
EGFR-TKI resistance is required for improving the
prognosis for patients with NSCLC harboring EGFR
activating mutations. Our previous study showed that
heregulin overexpression caused erlotinib resistance in
EGFR mutant NSCLC cells [22]. Here we showed that in
pre-clinical studies, afatinib can overcome the resistance
to first generation EGFR-TKIs such as erlotinib in patients
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33606

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Afatinib induces higher levels of apoptosis in heregulin-overexpressing NSCLCs than does erlotinib. A.

PC9HRG cells were treated with 1 μM erlotinib or 0.1 μM afatinib for 24 h, then were probed for the indicated protein. B, C. PC9HRG cells
were treated with 1 μM erlotinib or 0.1 μM afatinib for 6 h, then the number of apoptotic cells was determined by staining with propidium
iodide (PI) and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled annexin V followed by flow cytometry. Representative flow cytometric profiles
are shown in (B), and quantitative data (means ± SE of three independent experiments) are shown in (C).

Figure 4: Heregulin-overexpressing NSCLC cell xenografts are resistant to erlotinib, but sensitive to afatinib. A. In a

xenograft NSCLC model, heregulin-overexpressing PC9HRG cells were injected subcutaneously into nude mice, and tumors were allowed
to grow to at least 150 mm3 before animals were treated with erlotinib, afatinib, or the vehicle. Each treatment group consisted of n = 10
mice. Data represent means ± SEM. *P < 0.05. B. PC9HRG cell xenografted mice were treated with erlotinib, afatinib, or vehicle for 12 h;
cell lysates from tumors were probed for the indicated proteins.

In a clinical study, we observed here that a patient
with NSCLC carrying an EGFR mutation and exhibiting
high plasma heregulin expression achieved a response with
afatinib treatment, despite having previously developed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

erlotinib resistance. Comparatively, our previous analysis
using archival tissue samples showed that a subpopulation
of NSCLC tumors expressed elevated levels of heregulin
following development of gefitinib resistance, versus those
33607

Oncotarget

Figure 5: A patient with an EGFR mutation and NSCLC, with high plasma heregulin shows resistance to erlotinib, but
is sensitive to afatinib. A. Plasma heregulin expression levels were measured using ELISA in healthy volunteers (n = 35) and in patients
with EGFR mutations and NSCLC (n = 33). The red bar indicates the plasma heregulin expression level of a patient, LC6, who acquired
resistance to erlotinib and then achieved a response with afatinib therapy. B. Seven patients were treated with afatinib after acquiring
resistance to first generation EGFR-TKIs including gefitinib or erlotinib. Plasma heregulin expression levels were measured in those
patients post-acquisition of resistance to first generation EGFR-TKIs. The responsiveness to afatinib therapy is shown for each patient. C.
Chest CT scan of a patient, LC6, is shown prior to and post afatinib therapy.

observed prior to EGFR-TKI therapy [22]. Here, we were
not able to evaluate whether plasma and tumor heregulin
expression levels were correlated. However, the higher
plasma heregulin levels observed in patients with NSCLC
compared to healthy volunteers suggested that plasma
heregulin might be derived from the tumors themselves.
Furthermore, previous clinical trials have shown that
a subpopulation of patients with EGFR mutations and
NSCLC remained sensitive to subsequent afatinib therapy,
although they had previously acquired resistance to
gefitinib or erlotinib treatment [16, 17]. Thus, these results
suggested that a subpopulation of patients with EGFR
mutations and NSCLC developed first generation EGFRTKI resistance because of increased heregulin expression,
but that such patients might retain afatinibsensitivity.
In addition, afatinib might be the optimum treatment
choice for EGFR-TKI naïve patients with NSCLC and high
heregulin expression. Previously, heregulin-overexpression
was correlated with the shortness of progression-free
survival in patients with NSCLC treated with erlotinib [25,
26]. However, our previous preclinical study showed that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

use of the anti-HER3 antibody patritumab in combination
with erlotinib was able to overcome the heregulin-induced
EGFR-TKI resistance in PC9HRG cells [22]. Furthermore,
patritumab in combination with erlotinib also significantly
prolonged progression-free survival compared with placebo
in combination with erlotinib in a subpopulation of patients
with NSCLC and high expression levels of heregulin in a
randomized clinical trial [25]. Similarly, our current study
suggests that afatinib might be more optimized than first
generation EGFR-TKIs for use in EGFR-TKI naïve patients
with NSCLC and high heregulin expression. Additionally,
it has recently been shown that the survival benefits of
afatinib treatment are greater than those obtained with
erlotinib in patients with EGFR “wild-type” NSCLC [30].
However, no predictive biomarker was identified for the
outcome of afatinib therapy among these patients, although
some patients with EGFR wild-type NSCLC were shown
to exhibit high levels of heregulin expression in other
studies [25, 26]. Thus, heregulin expression analysis might
be helpful to enhance the benefit of afatinib use in patients
with EGFR wild-type NSCLC as well.
33608

Oncotarget

In summary, this study is the first demonstration of
the efficacy of a second generation EGFR-TKI, afatinib,
against NSCLC refractory to first generation EGFR-TKIs
because of overexpression of a kinase ligand, heregulin.
Our results, combined with those from the published
literature, suggest that the unique property of afatinib as a
HER-family TKI underlies its efficacy therein. Therefore,
we recommend that afatinib should be examined in a
clinical setting on a cohort of patients with NSCLC
with first generation EGFR-TKI refractoriness and high
heregulin expression.

dilutions recommended by the respective manufacturers, and
signals were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence
system (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA, USA).

Cell-proliferation inhibition assays
The sensitivity to afatinib and erlotinib was
evaluated using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell
Viability Assay (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Briefly,
cells were resuspended in medium containing 0.5% FBS
in a Prime Surface 96U 96-well plate (Sumitomo Bakelite
Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 5 × 103 cells/well. After
overnight incubation, agents were added to the medium
at 0.0033–10 μM for afatinib and erlotinib. Cell viability
was quantified based on luminescence after the addition
of the CellTiter-Glo reagent. All experimental points were
set up in 6 wells.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
PC9Mock and PC9HRG cell lines have been
previously characterized; these possess EGFR exon 19
deletions [22]. PC9HRGs were stably transfected with a
full-length cDNA fragment encoding human heregulin
(NRG1, NM_13956) as previously described [22].
Cells were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute
(RPMI)-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)
and penicillin-streptomycin-amphotericin B (Wako Pure
Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan). We used cell
lines within 6 months from resuscitation. Afatinib and
erlotinib were obtained from commercial sources. Stock
solutions of 10 mM afatinib and erlotinib were prepared
in dimethylsulfoxide and stored at −20°C.

Annexin V binding assay
The binding of annexin V to cells was measured
with the use of an Annexin-V-FLUOS Staining Kit
(Roche diagnostics DmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Cells
were harvested by exposure to trypsin-EDTA, washed
with PBS, and centrifuged at 200 × g for 5 min. The
cell pellets were resuspended in 100 μL Annexin-VFLUOS labeling solution, incubated for 10 to 15 min at
15°C to 25°C, and then analyzed for fluorescence with a
flow cytometer (FACSCalibur) and Cell Quest software
(Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).

Antibodies and western blotting

Xenograft studies

Cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 106 cells/plate in
Prime Surface 60-mm plates (Sumitomo Bakelite Co. Ltd.,
Tokyo, Japan) and allowed to grow overnight in medium
containing 0.5% FBS before the addition of the drug to the
medium. Cells were incubated for various times with various
concentrations of drugs, then washed with phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) and lysed in buffer containing 25 mM
Tris (pH 8.3), 192 mM glycine, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate,
and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride as previously
described [2]. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 × g
for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected for
subsequent procedures. Western blotting was performed
following a standard protocol; samples were resolved by
sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, which were
probed with antibodies against phospho-AKT (Ser-473),
AKT, phospho-EGFR (Tyr-1068), EGFR, phospho-HER3
(Tyr-1289), phospho-HER4, HER4, ERK, PARP, and
heregulin (all from Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers,
MA, USA); phospho-ERK1/2 (Thr-202/204) (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); β-actin (SigmaAldrich); and phospho-HER2 (Tyr-1248) and HER2 (Merck/
Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Antibodies were used at

Xenograft studies were performed using PC9HRG
cells as previously described [22]. Briefly, cells were
implanted into female athymic nude mice (BALB/cAJclnu/nu) and tumors were allowed to grow to at least 150
mm3 before mice were treated with afatinib (10 mg/kg) or
erlotinib (25 mg/kg) administered daily by oral gavage.
Each treatment group consisted of eight mice. Studies
were performed in accordance with the standards of the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee under a
protocol approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee
at Kinki University.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Patients and treatment
The study included 33 patients who were treated
for EGFR mutant NSCLC at Kinki University School
of Medicine between September 2013 and March 2015.
Most patients had received first generation EGFR-TKIs
such as gefitinib or erlotinib. Serum of healthy volunteers
was obtained from commercial sources. The study was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Kinki
University School of Medicine. Written informed consent
was obtained from all patients.
33609

Oncotarget

Measurement of heregulin plasma
concentrations

to both gefitinib and cetuximab in EGFR wild-type cancers.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:6963–6973.
3.	 Paez JG, Jänne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel S,
Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon TJ, Naoki K,
Sasaki H, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation
with clinical response to gefitinib therapy. Science. 2004;
304:1497–1500.

Plasma samples were obtained from 35 healthy
volunteers and 33 patients with EGFR mutations and
NSCLC. Plasma concentrations of heregulin were measured
using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) kits (NRG1 beta 1 human ELISA Kit, Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, samples and standards were added
into a 96-well microplate coated with the capture antibody.
The plates were washed, and the detection antibody was
added. After addition of the chromogen, the color intensity
was measured at 450 nm using a spectrophotometric plate
reader. Heregulin protein concentrations were determined by
comparison to the standard curve.

4.	 Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S,
Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, Harris PL, Haserlat SM,
Supko JG, Haluska FG, Louis DN, Christiani DC, et al.
Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer
to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:2129–2139.
5.	 Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D, Digumarthy S,
Turke AB, Fidias P, Bergethon K, Shaw AT, Gettinger S,
Cosper AK, Akhavanfard S, Heist RS, et al. Genotypic and
histological evolution of lung cancers acquiring resistance
to EGFR inhibitors. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:75ra26.

Statistical analyses

6.	 Kobayashi S, Boggon T, Dayaram T, Jänne PA, Kocher O,
Meyerson M, Johnson BE, Eck MJ, Tenen DG, Halmos B.
EGFR mutation and resistance of non-small cell lung cancer
to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:786–792.

Statistical analyses were performed using StatView
v.5.01 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). All
statistical tests were two-sided, and a P value < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant. Data were graphically
displayed using GraphPad Prism v.5.0 for Windows
(GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA).

7.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y, Hyland C,
Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X, Christensen J,
Kosaka T, Holmes AJ, et al. MET amplification leads to
gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007; 316:1039–1043.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Takezawa K, Pirazzoli V, Arcila ME, Nebhan CA, Song X,
de Stanchina E, Ohashi K, Janjigian YY, Spitzler PJ, Melnick MA,
Riely GJ, Kris MG, et al. HER2 amplification: a potential
mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR inhibition in EGFRmutant lung cancers that lack the second-site EGFRT790M
mutation. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2:922–933.

We thank Haruka Yamaguchi, Yume Shinkai,
Michiko Kitano, and Mami Kitano for technical support.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no potential conflicts of interest.

9.	 Yano S, Wang W, Li Q, Matsumoto K, Sakurama H,
Nakamura T, Ogino H, Kakiuchi S, Hanibuchi M, Nishioka Y,
Uehara H, Mitsudomi T, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor
induces gefitinib resistance of lung adenocarcinoma with epidermal growth factor receptor-activating mutations. Cancer
Res. 2008; 68:9479–9487.

GRANT SUPPORT
Research funds were provided by Kinki University,
Japan.

10.	 Li D, Ambrogio L, Shimamura T, Kubo S, Takahashi M,
Chirieac LR, Padera RF, Shapiro GI, Baum A, Himmelsbach F,
Rettig WJ, Meyerson M, et al. BIBW2992, an irreversible
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor highly effective in preclinical lung
cancer models. Oncogene. 2008; 27:4702–4711.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

11.	 Sequist LV, Yang JCH, Yamamoto N, O’Byrne K, Hirsh V,
Mok T, Geater SL, Orlov S, Tsai CM, Boyer M, Su WC,
Bennouna J, et al. Phase III study of afatinib or cisplatin plus
pemetrexed in patients with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma
with EGFR mutations. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3327–3334.

REFERENCES
1.	 Hynes NE, Lane HA. ERBB receptors and cancer: the
complexity of targeted inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005;
5:341–354.

12.	 Wu YL, Zhou C, Hu CP, Feng J, Lu S, Huang Y, Li W,
Hou M, Shi JH, Lee KY, Xu CR, Massey D, et al. Afatinib
versus cisplatin plus gemcitabine for first-line treatment of
Asian patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
harbouring EGFR mutations (LUX-Lung 6): an open-label,
randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:213–222.

2.	 Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Lindeman N, Homes AJ,
Jackman DM, Zhao F, Rogers AM, Johnson BE, Jänne PA.
Autocrine production of amphiregulin predicts sensitivity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33610

Oncotarget

13.	 Yang JC, Wu YL, Schuler M, Sebastian M, Popat S,
Yamamoto N, Zhou C, Hu CP, O’Byrne K, Feng J, Lu S,
Huang Y, et al. Afatinib versus cisplatin-based chemotherapy for EGFR mutation-positive lung adenocarcinoma
(LUX-Lung 3 and LUX-Lung 6): analysis of overall survival data from two randomised, phase 3 trials. Lancet
Oncol. 2015; 16:141–151.

factor on normal and malignant human breast and ovarian
epithelial cells. Oncogene. 1999; 18:6050–6062.
22.	 Yonesaka K, Hirotani K, Kawakami H, Takeda M, Kaneda H,
Sakai K, Okamoto I, Nishio K, Jänne PA, Nakagawa K.
Anti-HER3 monoclonal antibody patritumab sensitizes
refractory non-small cell lung cancer to the epidermal
growth factor receptor inhibitor erlotinib. Oncogene. 2015;
May 11; doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.142.

14.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Gale CM, Lifshits E, Gonzales AJ,
Shimamura T, Zhao F, Vincent PW, Naumov GN, Bradner
JE, Althaus IW, Gandhi L, et al. PF00299804, an irreversible
pan-ERBB inhibitor, is effective in lung cancer models with
EGFR and ERBB2 mutations that are resistant to gefitinib.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:11924–11932.

23.	 Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Okamoto I, Satoh T, Cappuzzo F,
Souglakos J, Ercan D, Rogers A, Roncalli M, Takeda M,
Fujisaka Y, Philips J, et al. Activation of ERBB2 signaling
causes resistance to the EGFR-directed therapeutic antibody
cetuximab. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:99ra86.

15.	 Ercan D, Zejnullahu K, Yonesaka K, Xiao Y, Capelletti M,
Rogers A, Lifshits E, Brown A, Lee C, Christensen JG,
Kwiatkowski DJ, Engelman JA, et al. Amplification of
EGFR T790M causes resistance to an irreversible EGFR
inhibitor. Oncogene. 2010; 29:2346–2356.

24.	 Schoeberl B, Faber AC, Li D, Liang MC, Crosby K, Onsum M,
Burenkova O, Pace E, Walton Z, Nie L, Fulgham A, Song Y,
et al. An ErbB3 antibody, MM-121, is active in cancers
with ligand-dependent activation. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:2485–2494.

16.	 Katakami N, Atagi S, Goto K, Hida T, Horai T, Inoue A,
Ichinose Y, Koboyashi K, Takeda K, Kiura K, Nishio K,
Seki Y, et al. LUX-Lung 4: A Phase II trial of afatinib in
patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer who progressed during prior treatment with erlotinib, geﬁtinib, or
both. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3335–3341.

25.	 Mendella J, Freemana DJ, Fenga W, Hettmannb T,
Schneiderb M, Blumb S, Ruhe J, Bange J, Nakamaru K,
Chen S, Tsuchihashi Z, von Pawel J, et al. Clinical translation and validation of a predictive biomarker for patritumab,
an anti-human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3)
monoclonal antibody, in patients with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer. EBioMedicine. 2015; 2:264–271.

17.	 Miller VA, Hirsh V, Cadranel J, Chen YM, Park K, Kim SW,
Zhou C, Su WC, Wang M, Sun Y, Heo DS, Crino L, et al.
Afatinib versus placebo for patients with advanced, metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer after failure of erlotinib,
gefitinib, or both, and one or two lines of chemotherapy
(LUX-Lung 1): a phase 2b/3 randomised trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2012; 13:528–538.

26.	 Sequist LV, Lopez-Chavez A, Doebele RC, Gray JE, Harb
WA, Modiano MR, Jackman DM, Baggstrom MQ, Atmaca
A, Felip E, Provencio M, Cobo M, et al. A randomized phase
2 trial of MM-121, a fully human monoclonal antibody targeting ErbB3, in combination with erlotinib in EGFR wildtype NSCLC patients. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:5s.

18.	 Jänne PA, Yang JC, Kim DW, Planchard D, Ohe Y,
Ramalingam SS, Ahn MJ, Kim SW, Su WC, Horn L,
Haggstrom D, Felip E, et al. AZD9291 in EGFR inhibitorresistant non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;
372:1689–1699.

27.	 Wind S, Schmid M, Erhardt J, Goeldner RG, Stopfer P.
Pharmacokinetics of afatinib, a selective irreversible ErbB
family blocker, in patients with advanced solid tumours.
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2013; 52:1101–1109.
28.	 Zhang Q, Park E, Kani K, Landgraf R. Functional isolation
of activated and unilaterally phosphorylated heterodimers of
ERBB2 and ERBB3 as scaffolds in ligand-dependent signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:13237–13242.

19.	 Sequist LV, Soria JC, Goldman JW, Wakelee HA, Gadgeel SM,
Varga A, Papadimitrakopoulou V, Solomon BJ, Oxnard GR,
Dziadziuszko R, Aisner DL, Doebele RC, et al. Rociletinib
in EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2015; 372:1700–1709.

29.	 Jura N, Shan Y, Cao X, Shaw DE, Kuriyan J. Structural
analysis of the catalytically inactive kinase domain of the
human EGF receptor 3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;
106:21608–21613.

20.	 Zhou BB, Peyton M, He B, Liu C, Girard L, Caudler E, Lo Y,
Baribaud F, Mikami I, Reguart N, Yang G, Li Y, et al.
Targeting ADAM-mediated ligand cleavage to inhibit
HER3 and EGFR pathways in non-small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:39–50.

30.	 Soria JC, Felip E, Cobo M, Lu S, Syrigos K, Lee KH, Göker E,
Georgoulias V, Li W, Isla D, Guclu SZ, Morabito A,
et al. Afatinib versus erlotinib as second-line treatment of
patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the lung
(LUX-Lung 8): an open-label randomised controlled phase
3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015; 16:897–907.

21.	 Aguilar Z, Akita RW, Finn RS, Ramos BL, Pegram MD,
Kabbinavar FF, Pietras RJ, Pisacane P, Sliwkowski MX,
Slamon DJ. Biologic effects of heregulin/neu differentiation

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33611

Oncotarget

