Commentary

Hypogonadism Related to Crizotinib Therapy
Implications for Patient Care
Suresh S. Ramalingam, MD1 and Alice T. Shaw, MD, PhD2

Crizotinib, a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was recently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
for the treatment of patients with advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that harbor a rearrangement in the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene. First described in NSCLC in 2007, this molecular abnormality is present in approximately 4% to 7% of all cases of lung adenocarcinoma.1,2 Clinicopathologic characteristics associated with ALK
rearrangement include never-smoker status, younger age at diagnosis, and adenocarcinoma with a solid growth pattern
and signet ring cells.1 A number of different ALK fusion partners have been reported in NSCLC, all of which ultimately
lead to constitutive activation of ALK and its downstream signaling pathways. Aberrant ALK activation results in unrestrained cellular proliferation, evasion of apoptosis, and other phenotypes unique to cancer cells. Although data on the natural history of ALK-positive NSCLC are limited due to the widespread availability of crizotinib, it appears that the disease
has a relatively poor outcome in the absence of crizotinib therapy.3
Crizotinib was originally developed to target the c-MET pathway in advanced solid tumors, although it was also
known to inhibit ALK. Based on the marked activity of crizotinib in 2 patients with ALK-positive NSCLC, an early-phase
study of crizotinib was modified to include an expansion cohort for patients with advanced ALK-positive NSCLC. In this
expansion cohort, the objective response rate among 119 patients was 61% and the median progression-free survival was
10 months.4 Similar results were observed in a follow-up phase 2 study of crizotinib involving 136 ALK-positive
patients5,6; in this study, objective response rate was 50% and median response duration was 41.9 weeks. On the basis of
its documented response rate, crizotinib received accelerated approval in the United States in August 2011, just 4 years after the initial discovery of ALK rearrangement in NSCLC.
In both phase 1 and 2 testing, crizotinib was tolerated very well. The most common adverse events associated with
crizotinib include visual disturbances, gastrointestinal symptoms, peripheral edema, fatigue, decreased appetite, and elevated aminotransferases.4 The majority of the toxicities are grade 1 or 2 in severity, and some improve with continuation
of therapy. Based on preliminary patient-reported outcomes from the ongoing phase 2 study of crizotinib, quality of life is
maintained during the course of therapy, despite the presence of gastrointestinal and other side effects. In addition,
patients have reported a clinically meaningful improvement in disease-related symptoms, including fatigue, insomnia,
and appetite loss.
In this issue of Cancer, Weickhardt and colleagues7 report on hypogonadism in male patients treated with crizotinib,
a hitherto unreported finding. The investigators measured serum testosterone levels in 19 patients treated with crizotinib.
For comparison, they determined testosterone levels in an equal number of patients with NSCLC who were not exposed
to crizotinib. The researchers found that testosterone levels were significantly lower in crizotinib-treated patients compared with controls (mean total testosterone: 131 vs 311 ng/dL, respectively). Two patients for whom baseline testosterone levels were measured experienced a significant reduction in testosterone levels within 2 to 3 weeks of initiation of
crizotinib therapy. In 4 patients, the authors also tracked testosterone levels in real time as a function of crizotinib exposure; testosterone levels increased rapidly with cessation of crizotinib and decreased rapidly when the drug was restarted.
Evaluation of the serum follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels showed no compensatory increase
despite the fall in testosterone, suggesting a potential effect of crizotinib both at a central level in the pituitary and in the

Corresponding author: Suresh S. Ramalingam, MD, Associate Professor, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, 1365 Clifton Road, C-3090, Atlanta, GA
30322; Fax: (404) 778-5520; Suresh.Ramalingam@emory.edu
1
Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia; 2Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts

See original referenced article on pages 5302-9, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27561, Received: March 7, 2012; Accepted: March 8, 2012, Published online April 4, 2012 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

November 1, 2012

E1

Commentary

testes. The mechanism is not known, but it is interesting
to note that c-MET and ALK are both expressed in the
central nervous system (CNS) and testes.
The observation of hypogonadism in patients receiving crizotinib therapy is intriguing and raises a number of
additional questions. First, the prevalence of hypogonadism appears to be very high in male patients treated with
crizotinib. Common symptoms of low testosterone
include fatigue, depression, and sometimes insomnia, in
addition to sexual dysfunction. Among the 255 patients
treated with crizotinib on the phase 1 and 2 studies, treatment-related fatigue was seen in only 20% of patients and
was primarily grade 1 or 2. Only 3% of patients had
insomnia attributed to study drug, and depression and
sexual dysfunction were not among the common adverse
reactions (present in 10% of patients). It is possible that
some of the hypogonadism-related symptoms were underreported or deemed related to the underlying disease.
However, it is also possible that patients may not all manifest symptoms of hypogonadism despite a decrease in testosterone level. Second, the authors postulate that
crizotinib must exert its effects both in the CNS and in
the testes. However, penetration of crizotinib into the
CNS is believed to be poor, and in fact, the CNS is the
most common site of relapse in crizotinib-resistant
patients.8 Understanding the precise mechanism by which
crizotinib may suppress testosterone levels is not only of
academic interest, but may have implications for the development of second-generation ALK inhibitors, some of
which may penetrate into the CNS more efficiently than
crizotinib. Finally, the observation of testosterone deficiency in crizotinib-treated males raises the possibility that
a similar phenomenon could occur in crizotinib-treated
females. Low testosterone levels in females can be associated with similar symptoms as in males, and this question
should be addressed.
Hypogonadism occurs quite commonly in patients
with advanced cancer, is often underdiagnosed, and is
rarely subjected to therapy.9 This study highlights the
potential importance of therapy-induced hypogonadism
in a subset of patients with lung cancer, and has several
immediate clinical implications. First, treating physicians
need to be aware of this potential side effect and should
look for manifestations of hypogonadism in patients on
crizotinib therapy. Importantly, physicians need to
inquire specifically about symptoms of testosterone deficiency, including sexual dysfunction, keeping in mind
that symptoms of low testosterone can be easily confounded by cancer-related symptoms. As noted by the
authors, it is possible that no obvious signal related to tesE2

tosterone deficiency was detected in crizotinib trials
because investigators were unaware of this clinical observation. Second, in those patients who have low testosterone and are symptomatic, it would be reasonable to
consider testosterone replacement. Bone density should
also be monitored in these patients. Clearly, prospective
studies are required to determine whether hormone
replacement therapy can alleviate symptoms and improve
quality of life in patients with crizotinib-induced testosterone deficiency.
As our knowledge regarding ALK-positive NSCLC
grows, it is becoming increasingly clear that crizotinib represents a highly effective and safe treatment option for this
group of patients with lung cancer. The improvement in
disease-related symptoms and the extended duration of
disease control with crizotinib are robust and meaningful
to patients. Optimal management of treatable or preventable adverse events can only improve upon the therapeutic
index of this agent and help to ensure the best quality of
life for our patients.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE
Dr. Ramalingam has received honorarium from Pfizer Pharmaceuticals for serving as a consultant at an advisory board meeting. Dr. Shaw has served as a consultant for Pfizer, Ariad,
Chugai, and Novartis Pharmaceuticals.

REFERENCES
1. Shaw AT, Yeap BY, Mino-Kenudson M, et al. Clinical features and
outcome of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer who harbor
EML4-ALK. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:4247-4253.
2. Soda M, Choi YL, Enomoto M, et al. Identification of the transforming EML4-ALK fusion gene in non-small-cell lung cancer. Nature.
2007;448:561-566.
3. Shaw AT, Yeap BY, Solomon BJ, et al. Effect of crizotinib on overall
survival in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring ALK gene rearrangement: a retrospective analysis. Lancet Oncol.
2011;12:1004-1012.
4. Kwak EL, Bang YJ, Camidge DR, et al. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:
1693-1703.
5. Crino L, Kim DW, Riely GJ, et al. Initial phase II results with crizotinib in advanced ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
PROFILE 1005. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:Abstract 7514.
6. Camidge DR, Bang YJ, Kwak EL, et al. Progression-free survival
(PFS) from a phase I study of crizotinib (PF-02341066) in patients
with ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:Abstract 2501.
7. Weickhardt et al. Rapid-onset hypogonadism secondary to crizotinib
use in men with metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer.
2012;118:5302-5309.
8. Costa DB, Kobayashi S, Pandya SS, et al. CSF concentration of the
anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitor crizotinib. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29:e443-e445.
9. Vigano A, Piccioni M, Trutschnigg B, et al. Male hypogonadism
associated with advanced cancer: a systematic review. Lancet Oncol.
2010;11:679-684.

Cancer

November 1, 2012

