Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Cancer
Research

Integrated Systems and Technologies

Endothelial Thermotolerance Impairs
Nanoparticle Transport in Tumors
Alexander F. Bagley1,2, Ruth Scherz-Shouval3, Peter A. Galie4, Angela Q. Zhang1,
Jeffrey Wyckoff1, Luke Whitesell3, Christopher S. Chen4, Susan Lindquist3,5,6, and
Sangeeta N. Bhatia1,6,7,8,9,10

Abstract
The delivery of diagnostic and therapeutic agents to solid
tumors is limited by physical transport barriers within tumors,
and such restrictions directly contribute to decreased therapeutic
efﬁcacy and the emergence of drug resistance. Nanomaterials
designed to perturb the local tumor environment with precise
spatiotemporal control have demonstrated potential to enhance
drug delivery in preclinical models. Here, we investigated the
ability of one class of heat-generating nanomaterials called plasmonic nanoantennae to enhance tumor transport in a xenograft
model of ovarian cancer. We observed a temperature-dependent
increase in the transport of diagnostic nanoparticles into tumors.
However, a transient, reversible reduction in this enhanced trans-

port was seen upon reexposure to heating, consistent with the
development of vascular thermotolerance. Harnessing these observations, we designed an improved treatment protocol combining
plasmonic nanoantennae with diffusion-limited chemotherapies.
Using a microﬂuidic endothelial model and genetic tools to inhibit
the heat-shock response, we found that the ability of thermal
preconditioning to limit heat-induced cytoskeletal disruption is
an important component of vascular thermotolerance. This work,
therefore, highlights the clinical relevance of cellular adaptations to
nanomaterials and identiﬁes molecular pathways whose modulation could improve the exposure of tumors to therapeutic agents.

Introduction

rendered less effective in patients due to a narrow "therapeutic
index," a constraint well appreciated in clinical oncology (1). To
achieve the local concentrations required for optimal anticancer
activity, the delivered cargo must overcome transport bottlenecks
arising from physical features of tumors (e.g., high interstitial
pressure and dense stroma; refs. 2, 3).
Perturbing the tumor vasculature represents an attractive
approach for enhancing transport for at least two reasons. First,
by regulating physical barriers, including blood ﬂow and
extravasation, the tumor vasculature limits the delivery of
therapeutic agents spanning several orders of magnitude in
size, including antibodies, nanoparticle carriers, and conventional chemotherapies (3–7). Second, many solid tumors are
dependent on the host vasculature for supplying nutrients and
oxygen during neoangiogenesis. These features make the vasculature a generalized and genetically stable target for solid
tumors (8). Multifaceted efforts have been made to modify the
tumor vasculature to enhance transport. The antiangiogenesis
antibodies trastuzumab, bevacizumab, and cediranib normalize tumor vasculature, and thereby improve tumor blood ﬂow
(9–12). Transvascular transport is enhanced by VEGF, TNFa,
IL1, histamine, and tumor-penetrating peptides (13–16). Physical approaches harnessing electromagnetic or acoustical energy
(e.g., radiofrequency ablation or focused ultrasound) are also
being actively explored (17–20). Nanomaterials (e.g., plasmonic nanoantennae) offer greater control of heating in tumor
environments and have generated interest in nanomaterialbased methods for improving drug transport in tumors via
localized heating (21–27). Plasmonic nanomaterials efﬁciently
convert near-infrared light into localized heat due to rapid
oscillations in the nanoparticle's electron cloud, an effect
known as surface plasmon resonance (SPR; refs. 28, 29).

With the ongoing development of molecularly targeted therapies and nanoparticle carrier formulations, the delivery of such
therapeutic cargos to solid tumors remains a central challenge in
oncology. Locally enhancing the concentration of these agents
within tumors will provide opportunities to achieve greater
therapeutic efﬁcacy, minimize off-target toxicities, and limit the
development of drug resistance. Current chemotherapeutic regimens must carefully balance the conﬂicting goals of achieving
cure and limiting systemic toxicity to normal organs. Many
compounds, which are highly lethal to cancer cells in vitro, are

1
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 2MD-PhD Program,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. 3Whitehead Institute
for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 4Departments
of Bioengineering and Physiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 5Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 6Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 7Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 8Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 9Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
10
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Sangeeta N. Bhatia, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, E19-502d, Cambridge, MA 02139. Phone:
617-253-0893; Fax: 617-324-0740; E-mail: sbhatia@mit.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Res; 75(16); 3255–67. 2015 AACR.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3255

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Bagley et al.

Although many efforts have revealed how mass transport is
altered in tumors as they develop, less is known about how the
transport is altered in response to nanotherapeutic interventions,
including hyperthermia (30, 31). Vascular thermotolerance represents a potentially important adaptation of tumors to heat and
limits transport in tumors, yet the cellular and molecular components responsible for its effects are not well understood (5).
Insight into how nanomaterial-mediated heating induces vascular thermotolerance and how vascular thermotolerance limits
transport would deepen our understanding of tumor transport
barriers and guide the development of oncologic approaches that
use thermal energy.
The acquisition of thermotolerance has been primarily attributed to the heat-shock response (HSR), an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional program driven by heat-shock factor 1
(HSF1) to protect cells from damage to the proteome induced by
high temperature (32). Upon heat shock, HSF1 binds to regulatory
elements on the DNA and induces the transcription of HSPs, which
act as molecular chaperones to restore protein homeostasis
(33–35). Many aspects of this prosurvival response are conserved
from yeast to human, in various stressful conditions. In cancer,
HSF1 is activated in tumors to promote their survival. Recent
studies have revealed two distinct transcriptional programs activated by HSF1 in cancer cells and in cancer-associated stromal cells.
Not only are these transcriptional programs different from each
other, they are also distinct from the classic transcriptional
response induced by heat shock (35). Together, these two cancer-associated programs promote malignancy in ways that reach far
beyond the activation of classical HSPs. In fact, when exposed to
heat, cancer cells, and presumably other cell types in the tumor, are
capable of mounting an additional HSR. However, it remains to be
determined whether the HSR plays a role in mediating tumor
transport through its effects on vascular thermotolerance.
Here, we explore the effects of local heating induced by plasmonic nanoantennae called gold nanorods (PEG-NRs) on tumor
vasculature. PEG-NRs enhance the accumulation of therapeutic
and diagnostic cargos in solid tumors, but at the same time they
induce vascular thermotolerance. Therefore, although an initial
heat exposure enhanced tumor transport, this effect was lost upon
reexposure to PEG-NR–mediated heating (as would occur in
clinical protocols requiring repeated administration of chemotherapeutics over periods of days to weeks). We demonstrate
in ovarian tumor xenograft models that delivery of diffusionlimited therapeutic agents is impaired due to thermotolerance,
contributing to diminished treatment responses. Using microﬂuidic endothelial permeability assays, in vitro analysis of the
endothelial cytoskeleton, and intravital microscopy of the tumor
vasculature, we identify the HSR as playing a primary role in
limiting heat-induced disruption of the actin cytoskeleton, and
thereby contributing to vascular thermotolerance. Finally, we
preliminarily explore inhibition of the HSR as a remedy for
thermotolerance using genetic approaches that diminish HSF1
activity. Collectively, we ﬁnd rapid thermal adaptation of solid
tumors to nanomaterial-generated heat stress, an effect with
functional consequences for chemotherapeutic delivery and relevance to the design of more effective treatment schedules.

Materials and Methods
Animal models and cell lines
All studies involving mice were approved by the MIT Committee on Animal Care. Epithelial ovarian cancer models were

3256 Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

established by unilateral or bilateral subcutaneous injection of
approximately 1 to 2  106 CP70 human ovarian cancer cells into
the rear ﬂanks of 4- to 5-week-old athymic nude mice (Charles
River Laboratories). The NOD-SCID Hsf1-null mouse model was
generated in the Lindquist Laboratory, as follows: Hsf1þ/ mice
(BALB/c  129SvEV), a gift from Ivor J. Benjamin (University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Salt Lake City,
UT), were crossed with NOD-SCID mice, and intercrossed for four
generations. Mice carrying a SCID/SCID genotype, in combination with either an Hsf1þ/þ, Hsf1þ/ or Hsf1/ genotype were
used for this study. The HGL heat-shock reporter mouse strain was
generated in the Lindquist laboratory as follows: standard C57BL/
6 ES cells were targeted with a plasmid encoding a GFP–Luciferase
fusion protein, under regulation of the HSPA6 promoter, and
used to generate a mouse, which was then crossed into the albino
variant and bred to homozygosity. Rag1tm1MomTg(Tie2GFP)
287Sato/J mice expressing GFP in endothelial cells were used for
vessel permeability studies (The Jackson Laboratory). Tumor
growth was monitored for approximately 10 to 20 days before
injection of PEG-NRs. Human CP70 and OVCAR-8 cells were
cultured in RPMI-1640 with L-glutamine (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin. Mouse B16 melanoma cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
and penicillin/streptomycin. Primary human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVEC) were cultured in media prepared from
the EGM-2 BulletKit (Lonza).
PEG-NR synthesis
Concentrated cetyltrimethylammonium (CTAB)–coated gold
nanorods (Nanopartz, Inc.) with dimensions of 41  10 nm were
incubated with 5 kDa methyl-PEG-thiol (Laysan Bio, Inc.) to a
ﬁnal concentration of 100 mmol/L as described previously (36).
After gentle mixing for 60 minutes, solutions were dialyzed for at
least 24 hours in 3,500 MWCO Slide-A-Lyzer cassettes (Thermo
Scientiﬁc) in deionized, distilled water. Solutions were transferred
to 100 kDa ﬁlter tubes (Millipore) and washed with ultrapure
water through ﬁve cycles of centrifugation (3,000 g, 10 minutes).
PEG-NR solutions were resuspended in sterile PBS to an optical
density of approximately 100 OD and stored at 4 C before use in
animal models.
Tumor accumulation studies
Mice bearing bilateral CP70 ovarian tumors were administered
i.v. injections of PEG-NRs (100 mL; 100–150 OD). After 48 to 72
hours to allow PEG-NR clearance from the systemic circulation,
animals received an i.v. injection of AngioSpark750 (AS750;
PerkinElmer; 50 mL in PBS; stock solution) and one ﬂank tumor
received 808 nm near-infrared irradiation for up to 30 minutes
using a continuous 808 nm diode laser source (Visotek). Tumor
temperature was monitored continuously with an infrared thermal camera (FLIR T650sc) and tumor temperature was maintained at 40 C to 43 C during the laser irradiation period. At
multiple time points between 10 minutes and 48 hours after
PEG-NR heating, tumor near-infrared ﬂuorescence imaging was
acquired using a whole-animal IVIS Spectrum-bioluminescent
and ﬂuorescent imaging system (Xenogen). Quantiﬁcation of
relative AS750 accumulation in PEG-NR–heated tumors compared with contralateral unheated tumors was performed using
Living Image analysis software (v4.3.1). Tumors harvested from
animals were rinsed in PBS and whole-tumor AS750 ﬂuorescence
was detected using a near-infrared imaging system (LICOR

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Limits Tumor Transport

Odyssey). Tumor homogenates were prepared by incubating
tumor samples in tissue extraction buffer (70% EtOH, 0.3N HCl)
and lysing samples on an automated homogenizer (gentleMACS
Octo Dissociator, Miltenyi Biotec). Samples were centrifuged
(1,000 rpm, 5 minutes), extracted overnight at 4 C, and supernatant ﬂuorescence was measured in microplates on the LICOR
imaging system.
For tumor accumulation studies in immunocompromised
Hsf1-null, heterozygous, and wild-type animals, subcutaneous
CP70 xenografts were established on the hind ﬂank, PEG-NRs
were administered i.v., and AS750 was administered immediately
before heating. AS750 ﬂuorescence was serially monitored by
whole animal ﬂuorescence imaging (IVIS) for up to 48 hours after
injection. Area under the curve quantiﬁcation was performed
using GraphPad Prism software (v6.02).
Intravital imaging
Intravital tumor imaging was performed on an Olympus
FV1000 multiphoton laser scanning confocal microscope with a
25, N.A. 1.05 objective lens. For vessel permeability experiments,
animals were anesthetized by isoﬂurane and administered an
intravenous bolus of ﬂuorescein dextran (70,000 MW; Invitrogen),
tetramethylrhodamine dextran (2,000,000 MW; Invitrogen), or
Texas Red dextran (70,000 MW; Invitrogen; 2–2.5 mg/mL). Immediately following injection of vascular dyes, tumors were positioned and immobilized on the stage for the duration of the
experiment. For heat-shock induction experiments, dorsal window
chambers were surgically implanted or skin-ﬂap models were
prepared in HGL reporter mice. Induction of the HSR as measured
by GFP expression in vessels and surrounding tissue was monitored up to 24 hours after heating. For intratumoral cellular uptake
studies, Rag1-Tie2GFP mice bearing unilateral subcutaneous CP70
xenograft tumors were i.v. administered TR-dextran to visualize the
vessel lumen and interstitial cells and imaged with a 25, N.A. 1.05
objective lens and 4 digital zoom (100 total magniﬁcation)
within 1 to 2 hours following PEG-NR heating.
Microﬂuidic in vitro permeability studies
Microﬂuidic devices were fabricated as described previously
(37, 38). Brieﬂy, 400-mm stainless steel needles were withdrawn
from collagen hydrogels polymerized within the device to create
cylindrical voids that were then seeded with HUVECs. The
endothelialized channels were exposed to continuously applied
shear stress at magnitudes between 0.1 and 0.2 Pa for 12 to 18
hours to facilitate formation of tight junctions. Channels were
placed in a temperature-controlled chamber (Air-Therm ATX,
World Precision Instruments) on an epiﬂuorescence microscope
(Nikon Eclipse TI, Nikon Instruments). Saline solutions containing 70 kDa FITC-Dextran and Rhodamine-Dextran (Sigma) were
continuously perfused through channels at ﬂow rates of 5 mL/min.
Temperature within the heated chamber was continuously monitored for the duration of each experiment. Fluorescence and
brightﬁeld images were acquired with a 10 objective lens at the
start and conclusion of each heating period. MetaMorph software
(v7.7.3.0) was used for image acquisition. Channels receiving
repeated heating cycles were returned to a 37 C incubator
between the initial and subsequent imaging sessions, and again
exposed to ﬂuid shear stress. Dextran diffusion was quantiﬁed by
tracking the movement of the dye front as a function of time.
Image analysis, quantiﬁcation of dye front displacement, and

www.aacrjournals.org

statistical analysis were performed with ImageJ software and
GraphPad Prism software (v6.02).
Cytoskeletal stability studies
HUVECs were seeded into m-Slide 8 Well standard bottom
dishes (ibidi) at 4.5  103 cells per well and allowed to adhere for
24 hours. The culture medium was then exchanged for fresh
medium containing rAVCMV-LifeAct-TagGFP2 adenovirus (multiplicity of infection: 100; ibidi). After overnight incubation at
37 C, HUVECs either received a heat pretreatment (45 C, 30
minutes) or were maintained at 37 C. Following a 24-hour
recovery period at 37 C, all cells received a heat shock (45 C, 1
hour). Images were acquired using a 20 objective lens on a
ﬂuorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti) before and 0, 1, 2, 4,
and 6 hours after the ﬁnal heat treatment. Images were obtained
from 6 to 8 different wells per condition and time point. An
investigator blinded to the experimental conditions scored cells
contained visible actin ﬁlaments connecting nonadjacent points
on the cell membrane, as well as the total number of cells per ﬁeld.
A total of 13,583 cells were scored (1,072–1,213 cells/condition)
and statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism
software.
Cell viability studies
HUVECs were seeded at 5  103 cells per well in 96-well black
glass-bottom plates (Grenier) and allowed to adhere for 24 hours.
Cells were pretreated by incubation at 45 C for 30 minutes,
allowed to recover for 24 hours at 37 C, then incubated at 45 C
for an additional 1 hour. Cells were allowed to recover at 37 C for
30 hours. Relative viable cell number was assayed using Alamar
Blue (Invitrogen) before and 0, 6, and 30 hours after the ﬁnal heat
treatment.
Tumor volume and survival studies
For tumor progression studies, nude mice were implanted with
approximately 1  106 to 2  106 CP70 human ovarian cancer
cells in the hind ﬂanks. Tumor treatments consisted of administration of PEG-NRs, doxorubicin-loaded liposomes (5 mg/kg;
Encapsula), and NIR irradiation with appropriate controls. Brieﬂy,
48 to 72 hours after PEG-NR administration, tumors were exposed
to NIR laser irradiation to achieve a temperature of approximately
41 C to 43 C for 30 minutes as monitored using an infrared
camera (FLIR T650sc). Twenty-four hours later, animals underwent a second cycle of NIR laser irradiation in combination with
intravenously administered doxorubicin-loaded liposomes. Longitudinal tumor progression studies lasted approximately 4 to 5
weeks from initial treatment with tumor volumes measured
approximately every 3 to 4 days using digital calipers by investigators who were blinded to the experimental groups. Animals
were euthanized when the tumor burden exceeded 500 mm3.
Plots and statistical analysis of tumor volume growth and Kaplan–
Meier survival analysis were performed using GraphPad Prism.
Immunohistochemistry
Tumors were harvested and ﬁxed in PBS containing 4%
paraformaldehyde overnight at 4 C. Tissues were transferred to
cassettes and placed in 70% ethanol solution at room temperature
until parafﬁn embedding. Antibodies used included a rabbit polyclonal CD31 antibody (1:75, Abcam), rabbit monoclonal HSP70
(1:50, Cell Signaling Technology), and a cocktail of rat monoclonal
antibodies to HSF1 (AB4; 1:500, Thermo Scientiﬁc). Slides were

Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3257

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Bagley et al.

counterstained with standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). LabVision Autostainer 360 Immunohistochemical Stainer (Thermo
Scientiﬁc) was used to perform IHC with antigen retrieval.
Nanoparticle circulation time
AS750 and FITC-Dextran were i.v. administered to animals, and
blood was collected by retro-orbital sampling at several times
following injection using heparin-coated microcapillary tubes
(VWR International). Samples were rapidly transferred to a 5
mmol/L EDTA solution to prevent coagulation. Blood samples
were spun on a tabletop centrifuge for 30 to 60 seconds to separate
plasma and erythrocyte fractions. Plasma fractions were transferred
to 96-well plates and read on a ﬂuorescence microplate reader
(Molecular Devices) and near-infrared imaging system (LICOR).
Nanoparticle in vitro stability
AS750 nanoparticles were serially diluted in solutions of distilled water, PBS, 10% (v/v) FBS in PBS, and 50% (v/v) FBS in PBS
to a lowest concentration of 1:100,000 of the stock concentration.
Nanoparticle ﬂuorescence was measured on an IVIS Spectrumbioluminescent and ﬂuorescent imaging system (Xenogen) and
an Odyssey near-infrared scanner (LICOR). Image analysis and
quantiﬁcation was performed using ImageJ software.

Results
PEG-NR heating enhances tumor transport followed by
development of thermotolerance
Mild heating of tumors with PEG-NRs or other methods has
previously been shown to enhance the accumulation of diagnostic and therapeutic agents in tumors (5, 24, 39). To study the
impact of nanomaterial-driven heating on tumor transport, mice
with ovarian xenograft ﬂank tumors were administered PEG-NRs
several days before heating. At various times, tumor transport was
assessed by quantifying delivery of pegylated ﬂuorescent nanoparticles (AS750) as a model of diffusion-limited cargo. AS750 is
composed of an iron oxide core coated with polyethylene glycol
(PEG) and near-infrared ﬂuorophores; its circulation time (t1/2:
283 minutes), particle size (35 nm), and spectral characteristics

(Ex/Em: 750/775 nm) make it a good model for clinical nanoparticle formulations and for in vivo monitoring. Consistent with
previous studies, tumors receiving a single exposure to PEG-NR
heating accumulated AS750 in 2.1-fold excess compared with
unheated tumors on the contralateral ﬂanks (Fig. 1). Because most
therapeutic agents are administered clinically in multiple cycles
spanning periods of days to weeks, we explored the consequences
of repeated PEG-NR heating on tumor transport. Ovarian tumor
xenografts received repeated exposure to PEG-NR heating with
intervals between heating episodes deﬁned as Dt ranging from 8
hours to 1 week. Tumor transport was characterized at the time of
the second heat exposure by administration of AS750. A Dt of 8
hours still resulted in a 1.4-fold increase in tumor transport
relative to untreated tumors; however, the enhancement was
reduced as compared with that seen after a single heat exposure.
At longer Dt of 24 and 48 hours, tumor transport was no longer
enhanced over untreated controls (0.9- and 1.0-fold, respectively), consistent with the development of vascular thermotolerance.
At longer Dt, we noted a recovery of heat enhancement, beginning
at 96 hours and increasing back to >2-fold by a Dt of 1 week.
Fluorescence of explanted tumors displayed a similar trend, with
shorter Dt between PEG-NR heat exposures correlating with
reduced tumor transport (Supplementary Fig. S1). These data
demonstrate that PEG-NR heating increases tumor transport but
also induces a state of vascular thermotolerance that peaks at 24 to
48 hours and reverts after 1 week. In subsequent experiments, we
used a Dt of 8 or 24 hours to further investigate the acquisition of
thermotolerance within the tumor vasculature.
To explore the dynamics of heat-enhanced tumor transport,
mice received either a single or double exposure to PEG-NR
heating and tumor transport was assessed by offsetting the
administration of AS750 by 0, 1, or 6 hours after heating
(Supplementary Fig. S2A). Tumors receiving a single exposure
of PEG-NR heating displayed a 2- to 2.7-fold increase in
accumulation when AS750 was administered within 1 hour of
PEG-NR heating and no relative enhancement in accumulation
when AS750 was administered 6 hours after PEG-NR heating
(Supplementary Fig. S2B and S2C). These data indicate that a

Figure 1.
Heat-induced transport enhancement is followed by a period of thermotolerance, wherein transport enhancement is resistant to subsequent heating. A,
experimental time course included administration of gold nanorods (PEG-NR), an initial exposure of laser heating (heat), and an interval Dt varying from
0 to 7 days before reexposure (heat). Tumor transport was probed at the end of Dt via administration of AS750 imaging nanoparticles and tumor accumulation
was quantiﬁed via in vivo ﬂuorescence imaging. B, tumor transport as visualized by AS750 nanoparticle ﬂuorescence in heated versus unheated tumors for
increasing Dt. Note the increase in tumor transport after heat exposure was absent upon repeat exposure after 24 to 48 hours but began to recover at 96 hours.
C, tumor transport (ratio of AS750 for heated vs. unheated tumors; n ¼ 8–12/group from two independent experiments;   , P < 0.01;    , P < 0.001, one-way
ANOVA and Tukey post-tests); error bars, SE.

3258 Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Limits Tumor Transport

Figure 2.
Rational design of PEG-NR treatment
regimens to enhance drug delivery and
efﬁcacy. A, accumulation of
doxorubicin liposomes in unheated,
single heat exposure (1 heat) and
reexposure with Dt of 24 hours
(2 heat) groups. Bars normalized to
unheated controls. (n ¼ 5 mice/group;

, P < 0.05, Mann–Whitney test); error
bars, SE. B, time courses for each
experimental group. Animals received
0, 1, or 2 exposures to PEG-NR heating
with doxorubicin liposomes
administered with the ﬁnal heat
exposure. Regimens were repeated
weekly for the duration of the
therapeutic trial period. C and D, tumor
volume and Kaplan–Meier survival
analysis [n ¼ 8–9 mice/group;

, P < 0.05, unpaired t test, two-tailed,
Holm-Sidak method for multiple
comparisons (C) and log-rank
Mantel–Cox test (D)]; error bars, SE.

single exposure of PEG-NR heating establishes a 6 hour "window" where nanoparticles can accumulate to a greater extent
within heated tumors. Interestingly, in tumors receiving a
repeated PEG-NR exposure after Dt of 8 hours, we no longer
observed an enhancement in accumulation when AS750 was
administered 1 hour following the second heat exposure (Supplementary Fig. S2B and S2C). These results suggest that both
the magnitude of the thermal response and its dynamics may be
altered after repeated exposure to heat. Taken together, these
data demonstrate an initial increase in tumor transport in
response to heat that is followed by a transient, reversible loss
in heat enhancement.
Rational design of PEG-NR therapeutic regimens for enhanced
tumor transport and efﬁcacy
We next examined the relationship between PEG-NR–heating
schedules, chemotherapeutic drug accumulation in tumors, and
resulting anticancer activity. Our results in tumor models point to
speciﬁc design criteria that could maximize the efﬁcacy of combination approaches involving PEG-NR heating and chemotherapy. In particular, we reasoned that the temporal relationship
between heating and administration of therapy may be important, as reexposure to PEG-NR heating with Dt of less than 96
hours dampened tumor accumulation. Doxorubicin-loaded liposomes are a clinically approved nanoparticle therapy for ovarian
cancer, yet their relatively large particle diameter (100 nm)
limits their intratumoral accumulation. Consistently, a single
exposure to PEG-NR heating led to a 2.7-fold higher concentration of doxorubicin liposomes in xenograft tumor homogenates
relative to double heated tumors with Dt of 24 hours (Fig. 2A).
Given the enhancement in intratumoral doxorubicin concentrations, we then investigated the degree to which improved delivery
inﬂuenced antitumor efﬁcacy, and animal survival. Cohorts of
tumor-bearing mice were randomized to receive doxorubicin
liposomes with either single or double exposures to PEG-NR
heating (1 heat þ Dox and 2 heat þ Dox, respectively),

www.aacrjournals.org

doxorubicin liposomes alone (Dox), or no treatment (NT; Fig.
2B). We observed the greatest antitumor effect in the 1 heat þ
Dox cohorts. Although tumor growth was delayed in the 2 heat
þ Dox cohort relative to untreated controls, these tumors grew
signiﬁcantly faster than those in the 1 heat þ Dox cohort (Fig.
2C). A similar trend was observed in a Kaplan–Meier survival
analysis; untreated and Dox only cohorts survived between 16
and 20 days after initiation of treatment. Although 2 heat þ Dox
cohorts survived longer than either of these groups, the 1 heat þ
Dox cohorts survived for the longest duration overall and significantly longer than the 2 heat þ Dox cohort with no evidence of
systemic toxicity among any of the cohorts (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. S3).
Endothelial response to PEG-NR heat exposure in the tumor
environment
Because the endothelium is a dynamic, heat-responsive interface between the systemic circulation and the tumor interstitium,
we next assessed the role of the endothelium in mediating
vascular thermotolerance. Having observed the effect of thermotolerance on tumor transport and growth in vivo, we sought to
visualize endothelial barrier function in vivo. In particular, we
sought to understand the size dependence of the permeability
effects on potential cargos, as well as observe endothelial
responses to single and double PEG-NR heating in the tumor
environment. Mouse xenograft models received either a single
PEG-NR heat exposure or double PEG-NR heat exposure with a Dt
of 24 hours. Transvascular transport in tumors was probed by an
intravenous bolus of 70 kDa FITC-Dextran. Unheated tumors
displayed minimal extravasation of 70 kDa FITC-Dextran tracer
dye, whereas tumors receiving a single PEG-NR heat exposure
exhibited vascular leakage into the interstitial space within an
hour after heating (Supplementary Fig. S4). Consistent with bulk
measurements in Fig. 1, tumors receiving a second exposure to
PEG-NR heating displayed less extravasation of tracer dye into the
interstitial space.

Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3259

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Bagley et al.

Increased vascular permeability via endothelial cell retraction
would not necessarily lead to enhanced tumor accumulation of
tracer due to bidirectional diffusive transport of cargo across the
vessel wall (3). Therefore, we sought to understand what could be
driving tracer accumulation and retention in our model using
intravital microscopy. To visualize extravasation in proximity to
tumor vessels at higher resolution, we established tumors in a
transgenic mouse model using the Tie2 promoter to drive tissuespeciﬁc expression of GFP in endothelial cells. Intravenous 70 kDa
Texas Red dextran (TR-Dex) was administered and the intra- and
extravascular distribution of TR-Dex was examined in response to
PEG-NR–heating regimens (Fig. 3). Most notably, we observed a
signiﬁcant number of perivascular TR-Dex–positive puncta, likely
representing macrophage or dendritic cell populations, consistent
with phagocytic uptake of TR-Dex (Fig. 3A and B). For each PEGNR heating regimen, we quantiﬁed the frequency of TR-Dex–
positive cells per volumetric image stack as a proxy for the degree
of local extravasation (Fig. 3C). Unheated tumors displayed
relatively few TR-Dex–positive cells, whereas tumors receiving a
single exposure to PEG-NR heating displayed a signiﬁcant 3.9fold greater frequency of TR-Dex–positive cells. In contrast,
tumors reexposed to PEG-NR heating with Dt of 24 hours displayed a reduced frequency of TR-Dex–positive cells, which was
only 1.6-fold higher than the unheated state. For each condition,

tumor blood ﬂow was maintained during each imaging period,
suggesting that vaso-occlusion or thrombosis was not a major
contributor to the diminished extravasation observed with repeated PEG-NR heating (data not shown). Elevated levels of VEGF in
the tumor microenvironment could also enhance vascular permeability, with both increased interendothelial gap formation
and increased transcytosis. Nevertheless, we did not observe
signiﬁcant differences in VEGF expression following either heating regimen in this study (Supplementary Fig. S5).
To corroborate these observations with bulk tumor accumulation, tumor homogenates were prepared from mice injected i.v.
with 70 kDa FITC-Dextran. Homogenates from tumors receiving a
single exposure to PEG-NR heating accumulated 1.7-fold greater
FITC-Dextran than unheated controls, whereas homogenates
from tumors receiving a double heat exposure accumulated
FITC-Dextran to a similar degree as unheated tumors (Fig. 3D).
Activation of endothelial HSR is sufﬁcient to limit
heat-enhanced transvascular transport
Having demonstrated a role for the endothelium in mediating
vascular thermotolerance, we next focused on the relevant cellular
and molecular pathways involved. To study the speciﬁc contribution of the endothelium to vascular thermotolerance, we used a
microﬂuidic device consisting of a cylindrical channel lined by a

Figure 3.
Macromolecule accumulation in vivo after single or double PEG-NR–heating exposures. A, intravital imaging of intra- and extravascular distribution of 70 kDa Texas
þ
Red dextran (TR-Dex) in ovarian xenografts with Tie2-GFP endothelium. Collagen ﬁbers (purple) highlight the tumor interstitial space, GFP (green) highlights
tumor endothelium, and TR-Dex (red) is distributed between vessel lumen, interstitial space, and perivascular cells. PEG-NRs appear as punctate spots most
strongly in GFP channel; scale bar, 20 mm. B, perivascular phagocytic cell residing in tumor interstitium (T) outside of tumor blood vessel (V). Yellow
asterisk highlights uptake of TR-Dex cargo in putative endosome. C, quantiﬁcation of TR-Dex–positive cells per tumor tissue volume measured by intravital
imaging. (n ¼ 15–23 ﬁelds of view from three mice per condition;     , P < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-tests); error bars, SE. D, accumulation of
FITC-labeled 70 kDa Dextran in tumor homogenates from tumors receiving no heating, a single exposure, or double PEG-NR heat exposure. (n ¼ 3–7
tumors/condition;  , P < 0.05, unpaired t test, two-tailed); error bars, SE.

3260 Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Limits Tumor Transport

monolayer of endothelial cells encapsulated in type I collagen
(37). In Fig. 4A, the cylindrical monolayers represent a ﬁrst
approximation of the vasculature of solid tumors, which consist
of an endothelial monolayer surrounded by a network of collagen
ﬁbers, proteoglycans, and cancer cells as well as reduced pericyte
coverage (8). A saline solution containing 70 kDa FITC-Dextran
was perfused through the endothelial channel and permeability
associated with various temperatures and heating regimens was
measured over time using the migration of the FITC-Dextran dye
front (Fig. 4B). We applied a temperature ramp spanning physiologic body temperature of 37 C to 45 C to encompass the full
range of temperatures achieved during in vivo PEG-NR–heating
experiments. For vessels subjected to a single heat treatment, FITCDextran dye was retained within the vessel lumen between 38 C
and 42 C (Fig. 4D and E). At 43 C, we observed signiﬁcant
migration of the dye front into the surrounding collagen matrix,
indicating disruption of the endothelial monolayer and increased
transvascular permeability (Fig. 4C). Structural changes to the
endothelium were observed, as the cells transitioned from a
conﬂuent, ﬂow-aligned "cobblestone" appearance before heating
to a contracted state with increased frequency of interendothelial
gaps (Fig. 4B).
Interestingly, when the same vessels were subjected to a second
heat treatment with a Dt of 8 to 24 hours, the dye front displacement of FITC-Dextran was diminished. When heated channels
were returned to physiologic body temperature after an initial

heating, the endothelial cells resealed to form a functional barrier
to FITC-Dextran diffusion (data not shown). Compared with their
initial heating exposure, reheated vessels displayed 26.3- and
11.6-fold less dye front displacement at 42 C and 43 C, respectively (Fig. 4C and D). To integrate the effect across temperature,
we calculated the cumulative dye front displacement during single
heating and reheating regimens. The cumulative displacement of
FITC-Dextran from the lumen into the surrounding collagen
matrix between 40 C and 43 C was reduced by 2.6-fold in
reheated channels relative to single heated channels (Fig. 4E).
The ability to recapitulate vascular thermotolerance in a model
containing minimal elements (i.e., endothelial cells and collagen)
suggests that the endothelium is a key factor in adaptation to
repeated thermal challenges.
Cytoskeletal recovery of endothelial cells is enhanced after
repeated exposures to heat
The morphologic changes in endothelial cells suggested that
cytoskeletal disruption can contribute to functional changes in
permeability. To explore the response of the endothelial cytoskeleton to single versus double heat exposures, HUVECs were
infected with adenovirus expressing an F-actin–binding GFP
fusion protein, which enables dynamic monitoring of F-actin
destabilization and structural recovery in living endothelial cells.
HUVECs received either a single heat exposure ("1 heat") or
second heat exposure with Dt of 24 hours ("2 heat"), and

Figure 4.
Endothelial HSR is sufﬁcient for transvascular transport and vascular thermotolerance. A, photograph and cross-section schematic of microﬂuidic endothelial
channel. A cylindrical channel lined by an endothelial monolayer is established within a type 1 collagen gel. Saline solutions containing 70 kDa FITC-Dextran
are ﬂowed through the channel during controlled heating regimens to monitor temperature-dependent transport across endothelium. B, representative ﬂuorescence
and bright ﬁeld images for pre- and post-heating. Dye front displacement (d) measured for each temperature; scale bars, FITC-Dex, 200 mm; BF, 150 mm;
BF zoomed, 75 mm. C, FITC-Dextran accumulation outside of lumen during 43 C heating period in microﬂuidic channels subjected to a single (1 heat)
or repeated (2 heat) heat exposure; scale bar, 150 mm. D, dye front displacement versus temperature across physiologic temperature range (n ¼ 3–6 channels/
group). E, cumulative front displacement over time between 40 C and 43 C. Channels were exposed to each temperature level for 10 minutes, excluding
ramping intervals.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3261

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Bagley et al.

cytoskeletal structure was serially monitored by time-lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy (Fig. 5A). To quantify cytoskeletal structure,
we scored cells with at least one visible F-actin ﬁlament connecting
nonadjacent points along the cell membrane (F-Actinþ). Heating
conditions were chosen to mimic the single and double PEG-NR–
heating regimens explored in vivo, and the heat exposures in the
minimal microﬂuidic vasculature in vitro. At physiologic temperatures, the majority of cells in the 1 and 2 heat groups displayed
numerous membrane-spanning F-actin ﬁlament networks (Fig.
5B and D and Supplementary Fig. S6). Immediately following
heating, both 1 and 2 heated cells displayed a collapsed F-actin
appearance as observed in prior studies (40, 41). Time-lapse
microscopy revealed the kinetics of cytoskeletal recovery of 1
and 2 heated cells following heat exposure. The 2-heated
endothelial cells exhibited efﬁcient structural recovery 1 to 2
hours after heat exposure and remained stable at these levels for
4 to 6 hours after heat exposure. In contrast, 1 heated cells failed
to exhibit recovery of the cytoskeleton 1 to 2 hours after heat
exposure, and 6 hours later exhibited only partial recovery.
Endothelial cell viability was not signiﬁcantly different between
1 heated and 2 heated cells before heat exposure, immediately
following heat exposure, or 30 hours following heat exposure. A
small decrease in viability in 1 heated cells was observed 6 hours
after heat exposure (Fig. 5C). Collectively, these data demonstrate
that a preconditioning heat treatment of endothelial cells
accelerates recovery upon subsequent heat exposure, which is

manifested by more efﬁcient F-actin cytoskeleton recovery.
Importantly, the time scales for cytoskeletal recovery observed
in 1 heated and 2 heated endothelial cell populations were
similar to the windows of altered cargo accumulation observed in
tumors exposed to single and double PEG-NR–heating regimens,
respectively.
PEG-NR heat exposure induces a HSR
Because we found that vascular thermotolerance affects tumor
transport, an understanding of the molecular pathways mediating
this effect could suggest approaches to improve transport. The
mammalian HSR is an ancient, evolutionarily conserved cellular
signaling network that is activated in response to a variety of
proteotoxic stresses, including heat, oxidative stress, low pH, and
heavy metals (32). Previous studies have identiﬁed a role for the
HSR in mediating thermotolerance in a variety of cells and
organisms (42–44). Thermotolerance is classically deﬁned as a
cell-intrinsic adaptation to heat stress that promotes increased
viability upon subsequent heat stress. Of interest to this study,
thermotolerance has been shown to confer enhanced cytoskeletal
stability to cells upon subsequent heat exposure (40, 41). To
investigate whether nanomaterial-induced heat activates an
HSF1-dependent HSR in our model, we performed intravital
microscopy of tumor xenografts growing in transgenic mice
expressing HSF1-dependent GFP fused to Luciferase (HGL
model; Fig. 6A). HGL mice bearing B16 melanoma xenografts

Figure 5.
Cytoskeletal recovery in endothelial cells is enhanced by preconditioning heat exposure. A, experimental time courses for single heat exposure (1 heat) and
reexposure to heat (2 heat). B, representative ﬂuorescence images of endothelial cell F-Actin ﬁlaments during recovery after ﬁnal heating. Images
depict cytoskeletal collapse and subsequent recovery. For each regimen, the same cell is shown across multiple time points to demonstrate the kinetics
of endothelial cell recovery. C, relative endothelial cell (EC) viability for cells in 1 heat and 2 heat groups before and at different time points after heating.
n ¼ 5/group;  , P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Tukey post-tests. ns, nonsigniﬁcant. D, the percentage of cells with visible membrane-spanning F-Actin
ﬁlaments per ﬁeld during the post-heating recovery period. n ¼ 1,072–1,213 cells from 6 to 8 ﬁelds of view per condition per time point;     , P < 0.0001, two-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni post-tests; error bars, SE.

3262 Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Limits Tumor Transport

received single PEG-NR heat treatments. Unheated tumors displayed minimal GFP expression in vascular territories (Fig. 6B).
Because of their strong optical scattering properties, PEG-NRs
were readily visualized in both heated and unheated tumors as
punctate, perivascular signals in all emission channels (Fig. 6B
and Supplementary Fig. S7). Tumors receiving a single PEG-NR
heat exposure displayed a marked and diffuse increase in GFP
expression in the host-derived tumor stroma, indicating robust
induction of the HSR in response to PEG-NR heating. A cellular
inﬁltrate appearing to concentrate the PEG-NRs in perivascular
regions was also observed in PEG-NR–heated tumors (Fig. 6B).
Using a dorsal skinfold model to investigate normal endothelium,
several regions revealed strong vascular GFP expression, indicating that the normal vascular endothelium mounts a prominent
HSR within hours following heating (Fig. 6C and D). Our results
suggest that the thermotolerance we observed in tumors with Dt
between 8 and 24 hours could be explained by induction of the
HSR in the endothelium after an initial heat exposure. These
experiments establish that tumor-localized heating by PEG-NRs
and other means is sufﬁcient to induce a robust HSR in both
normal and tumor endothelium.
Inhibition of the HSR maintains heat-enhanced tumor
transport upon repeated heating
We next investigated whether sustained inhibition of the HSR
might restore transport in the setting of thermotolerance. To this
end, we established tumor xenografts in immunocompromised
mice harboring deletions in one or both alleles of Hsf1. Tumors
received two PEG-NR heat exposures with a Dt of 24 hours. As
in Fig. 1, AS750 tumor accumulation was serially measured by in
vivo ﬂuorescence imaging (Fig. 7A). Because we observed the
greatest thermotolerance with Dt of 24 hours in earlier experiments, we selected this as the interval between PEG-NR heat
exposures. Among the groups, animals with two functional alleles
of Hsf1 displayed the least enhancement in AS750 accumulation
following 2 heating, consistent with the development of thermotolerance observed earlier (Fig. 7A and B). Interestingly, com-

pared with Hsf1þ/þ mice, mice with one or two deleted Hsf1 alleles
accumulated 2.6- and 6.0-fold greater concentrations of AS750,
respectively, during the 24 hours period following AS750 administration (Fig. 7C and D). To rule out the possibility that tumors
growing in Hsf1/ mice were more prone to accumulate AS750
than those growing in Hsf1þ/þ mice due to intrinsic, nonvascular
structural differences, single exposures of PEG-NR heating were
explored in Hsf1þ/þ and Hsf1/ models. With single exposure to
PEG-NR heating, we observed no signiﬁcant difference in the net
accumulation of AS750 in xenografts implanted in Hsf1þ/þ versus
Hsf1/ mice after 24 hours (Supplementary Fig. S8). Variations
in accumulation based on genotype were observed at earlier time
points (3–4 hours), but these differences were not statistically
signiﬁcant. Immunohistochemical staining of tumor sections
revealed strong nuclear HSF1 expression in the tumor cells independent of the host's genetic background, but no expression in
CD31þ vascular cells in Hsf1/ animals, even those that received
PEG-NR heating (Supplementary Fig. S9). Collectively, these data
suggest a model in which PEG-NR heating modulates the tumor
endothelium in a transient, reversible manner, with consequences
both for cargo delivery and overall therapeutic efﬁcacy (Fig. 7E).

Discussion
This study deepens our understanding of vascular thermotolerance, both in terms of its functional effects on tumor growth and
the underlying mechanisms involved. We ﬁnd that nanomaterialgenerated heat stress can induce vascular thermotolerance in
tumors, contributing to reduced delivery of therapeutics and
diminished treatment responses. In addition, we identify stabilization of the actin cytoskeleton associated with the endothelial
HSR as a major feature of acquired vascular thermotolerance.
Because dosing regimens in the clinic require multiple cycles of
administration, we explored the effect of reexposure to PEG-NR
heating on tumor transport. Previous studies have elucidated a
role for vascular thermotolerance in regulating tumor blood ﬂow
in a site- and tumor model–dependent manner (45). For instance,
local vascular damage after heating in regions containing higher

Figure 6.
Induction of HSR upon heating in tumor
and normal vasculature. A, a schematic
of HGL transgenic model. Heatresponsive promoter elements from
the HSPA6 gene regulate expression of
GFP–ﬁreﬂy luciferase fusion protein,
permitting visualization of the HSR in
the host-derived tumor stroma,
including the neovascular endothelium.
B, elevated GFP expression following
PEG-NR heating in tumors indicates
robust induction of the HSR. Tumor
vasculature highlighted by intravenous
TR-Dextran (TR-Dex). Intrinsic
luminescence of PEG-NRs allows for
direct detection of nanoparticles by
multiphoton microscopy. C and D,
intravital imaging reveals induction of
normal endothelial HSR. Line histogram
proﬁles of normalized GFP and TR-Dex
ﬂuorescence intensities at regularly
spaced intervals along vessel after heat
exposure (n ¼ 6 equidistant positions
along vessel); scale bar, 50 mm

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3263

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Bagley et al.

Figure 7.
Genetic ablation of HSR prevents
vascular thermotolerance in response
to repeated PEG-NR heating. A, ovarian
tumor xenografts established in either
homozygous-null (/), heterozygous
(þ/), or wild type (þ/þ) Hsf1 animals
received an initial PEG-NR heat
exposure (heat), an interval dt of
24 hours, and a reexposure to
PEG-NR heating (heat). Tumor
transport was assayed by i.v. injection
of AS750 post-heating, followed by
serial measurements of AS750
ﬂuorescence for 24 hours by in vivo
ﬂuorescence imaging. B, tumor
accumulation of transported AS750 for
each genetic background up to 24 hour
after treatment. n ¼ 3–6/group; error
bars, SE. C, representative in vivo
ﬂuorescence images in animals with
/
þ/
þ/þ
Hsf1 , Hsf1 , and Hsf1
backgrounds receiving double PEG-NR
heat exposures. D, area under the curve
from panel B for each genetic
background, demonstrating enhanced
/
accumulation in Hsf1
animals.
n ¼ 3–6/group;   , P < 0.01, one-way
ANOVA and Tukey post-tests; error
bars, SE. E, the proposed model for
the effects of PEG-NR heating on
tumor transport and acquired
thermotolerance. An initial exposure
to PEG-NR heating alters the
endothelial architecture via
cytoskeletal collapse, leading to
enhanced tumor transport of
nanoparticle cargos. Over the next 24 to
48 hours, acquired thermotolerance,
mediated by the HSR and Hsf1, upon
reexposure to PEG-NR heating, results
in enhanced cytoskeletal recovery and
diminished tumor transport.
Restoration of heat sensitivity occurs
after approximately 1 week from the
initial heat exposure.

concentrations of PEG-NRs may play a role in the initial development of vascular thermotolerance (30). In our model, however,
the tumor vasculature remained functionally perfused with
blood. Our studies extend the effects of vascular thermotolerance
to transvascular transport, a major barrier to cargo delivery (46).
Our data revealed a transient period of impaired transport in
tumors reexposed to PEG-NR heating within 24 to 48 hours of an
initial heat exposure. Heat responsiveness was restored approximately 1 week after the initial exposure. It is feasible that blood
ﬂow and transvascular transport in tumors are functionally coupled in the context of therapeutic delivery, and this hypothesis
requires further study.
Our transport data enabled us to rationally design therapeutic
dosing schedules involving PEG-NRs and chemotherapeutic
agents. In particular, we observed that delivery of doxorubicin
liposomes was impaired by vascular thermotolerance for a period

3264 Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

of up to 48 hours. It is interesting that despite comparable
therapeutic concentrations in the unheated and 2 PEG-NR–
heating groups, animals receiving doxorubicin liposomes in
combination with PEG-NR heating demonstrated slower tumor
progression, which could reﬂect a synergistic interaction between
heating and chemotherapy occurring in the tumor parenchyma.
Nevertheless, the superior response to weekly doxorubicin liposomes and single PEG-NR heat exposure suggests that vascular
thermotolerance has direct clinical consequences on tumor
progression.
The well-deﬁned role of the tumor endothelium in regulating
cargo transport (3) led us to focus on its role in thermotolerance.
Using a minimal microﬂuidic model of the endothelium, we
recapitulated the transport behavior observed in vivo, providing
evidence that the endothelium was sufﬁcient for the development
of thermotolerance. In addition, for both single and double heat

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Limits Tumor Transport

exposures, we linked the stability and recovery kinetics of the
endothelium to F-actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Importantly, normal endothelial cells exhibited thermotolerance in our microﬂuidic and ﬂuorescent actin studies, suggesting that this effect is
not limited to tumor-associated endothelial cells. The in vivo
selectivity for tumor vessels we observe is, therefore, likely a
consequence of local PEG-NR accumulation and focused deposition of energy in the tumor environment, rather than intrinsic
differences between normal and tumor endothelium; however,
the similarity and differences in thermal responses of different
endothelial subtypes remain an open area of inquiry. By observing similar heat-responsive kinetics at multiple biologic scales—
from individual cells to three-dimensional endothelial models to
the tumor environment—we suggest that subcellular processes in
endothelial cells related to cytoskeletal stability contribute to the
macroscopic effects on tumor transport.
Although the development of thermotolerance is associated
with induction of the HSR, less is known about the role of the HSR
in the context of therapeutic delivery. In this study, we demonstrate a role for the HSR in vascular transport by observing that
induction of the HSR in the endothelium temporally correlates
with the development of thermotolerance. Furthermore, genetic
deletion of Hsf1, the master regulator of the mammalian HSR, in
the vasculature was associated with enhanced accumulation following reexposure to PEG-NR heating. Loss of Hsf1 in ﬁbroblasts
coinjected with breast cancer cells into mice has recently been
shown to attenuate the growth of breast cancer tumor xenografts
(47). CP70 cells used in this study, however, are a cisplatinresistant, highly aggressive subclone of A2780 ovarian cancer
cells. Xenografts formed by these cells are largely devoid of
cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts, and any other stroma, and still form
in Hsf1 null mice. A role for the HSR in endothelial stability has
been suggested by previous reports identifying HSR proteins,
including HSP27 as stabilizers of F-actin stress ﬁbers during
thermal stress (40, 41). Cell lines with elevated HSP27 expression
had increased stability of stress ﬁbers during multiple heat exposures. This behavior persisted for several days and contributed to
maintenance of both normal morphology and viability. Future
studies may illuminate roles of HSP27 and other HSR-regulated
proteins in modulating transport across the vascular endothelium
into the tumor.
Our focus in this study on the endothelial cell–intrinsic
adaptations to heat exposure does not preclude other mechanisms of vascular permeability. In addition to thermally induced
cytoskeleton collapse, endothelial contraction in venules is
induced by vasoactive agents such as histamine and bradykinin,
as well as cytokines, including TNF and IFNg (48). Mast cell
activation in tumors may induce local release of histamine,
which in turn may contribute to the early phases (<1 hour) of
enhanced nanoparticle delivery observed. In addition, direct
endothelial injury in regions with high concentrations of PEGNRs may induce an immediate sustained response lasting for
several hours following PEG-NR heat exposure. VEGF inﬂuences vascular permeability in tumors (8), but we did not
observe variations in VEGF between different heating regimens
in this study. Finally, modiﬁcations to the extracellular matrix
(ECM), particularly collagen, can independently modify drug
transport (49–53). In our model, we observed retention of
macromolecules in regions with higher collagen density (Supplementary Fig. S10), further supporting a role for the ECM in
modulating drug transport. PEG-NR–mediated therapy alters

www.aacrjournals.org

collagen structure at ablative temperatures (54), but the effect
at milder heating regimes remains an active area of investigation. The kinetics of nanoparticle accumulation suggest that
vascular-modifying effects of PEG-NR heating are likely to be
multifactorial, including both chemical mediators and the
cell-intrinsic adaptations we describe.
Delivery of therapeutics to solid tumors in an efﬁcient and
speciﬁc manner remains a major challenge. In addition to
molecular-targeting approaches with monoclonal antibodies
or peptides, physical stimuli such as acoustic and electromagnetic energy have garnered interest because they target a genetically stable component of solid tumors. In addition, the
technologies to generate intratumoral heating have signiﬁcantly matured during the past decades, with nanomaterials such as
gold nanorods offering the promise of more targeted, homogeneous, controlled, and efﬁcient deposition of thermal energy
within tumor tissue (55). Pharmacologic strategies to render
endothelial cells more heat responsive or block the induction of
thermotolerance would create new opportunities to enhance
chemotherapy efﬁcacy. As nanomaterial-inspired approaches
are developed to improve tumor transport, this work anticipates a potential clinical challenge and suggests methods for
achieving a maximal therapeutic response through rationally
designed dosing schedules. Future studies investigating cellular
adaptations to nanomaterial-mediated perturbations in solid
tumors will provide additional avenues for incorporating nanomaterials into clinical practice.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: A.F. Bagley, A.Q. Zhang, C.S. Chen, S. Lindquist,
S.N. Bhatia
Development of methodology: A.F. Bagley, R. Scherz-Shouval, A.Q. Zhang,
J. Wyckoff
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): A.F. Bagley, R. Scherz-Shouval, P.A. Galie, A.Q. Zhang,
J. Wyckoff
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): A.F. Bagley, A.Q. Zhang, L. Whitesell, S. Lindquist
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: A.F. Bagley, R. ScherzShouval, P.A. Galie, A.Q. Zhang, L. Whitesell, C.S. Chen, S. Lindquist,
S.N. Bhatia
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): A.F. Bagley
Study supervision: C.S. Chen, S.N. Bhatia

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Heather Fleming for her helpful suggestions on
this article; the Koch Institute Core Facilities, in particular Michael Brown,
Denise Crowley, and Kathleen Cormier from the Koch Institute Histology
Core.

Grant Support
This study was supported in part by a Koch Institute Support Grant
P30-CA14051 from the National Cancer Institute (Swanson Biotechnology
Center) and a Core Center Grant P30-ES002109 from the National Institute
of Environmental Health Sciences. This study was additionally supported by
the Marie-D. & Pierre Casimir-Lambert Fund, US National Institutes of
Health (UH3 EB017103, R01 EB000262, and U54CA151884, and MITHarvard Center of Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence. A.F. Bagley acknowledges support from the Harvard-MIT MD-PhD Program at Harvard Medical
School and MSTP grant T32GM007753 from the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences. R. Scherz-Shouval was supported by the Human

Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3265

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Bagley et al.

Frontiers Science Program, the Fulbright Program, and the Israel National
Postdoctoral Award Program for Women in Science. S.N. Bhatia and S.
Lindquist are HHMI Investigators.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked

advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate
this fact.
Received February 3, 2015; revised April 26, 2015; accepted May 15, 2015;
published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015.

References
1. Minchinton AI, Tannock IF. Drug penetration in solid tumours. Nat Rev
Cancer 2006;6:583–92.
2. Chauhan VP, Jain RK. Strategies for advancing cancer nanomedicine. Nat
Mater 2013;12:958–62.
3. Jain RK, Stylianopoulos T. Delivering nanomedicine to solid tumors. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol 2010;7:653–64.
4. Thurber GM, Weissleder R. A systems approach for tumor pharmacokinetics. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e24696.
5. Kong G, Braun RD, Dewhirst MW. Characterization of the effect of
hyperthermia on nanoparticle extravasation from tumor vasculature.
Cancer Res 2001;61:3027–32.
6. Alvarez Secord A, Jones EL, Hahn CA, Petros WP, Yu D, Havrilesky LJ,
et al. Phase I/II trial of intravenous Doxil and whole abdomen hyperthermia in patients with refractory ovarian cancer. Int J Hyperthermia
2005;21:333–47.
7. Kong G, Dewhirst MW. Hyperthermia and liposomes. Int J Hyperthermia
1999;15:345–70.
8. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell
2011;144:646–74.
9. Goel S, Wong AH, Jain RK. Vascular normalization as a therapeutic strategy
for malignant and nonmalignant disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
2012;2:a006486.
10. Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in
antiangiogenic therapy. Science 2005;307:58–62.
11. Kamoun WS, Ley CD, Farrar CT, Duyverman AM, Lahdenranta J, Lacorre
DA, et al. Edema control by cediranib, a vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-targeted kinase inhibitor, prolongs survival despite persistent
brain tumor growth in mice. J Clin Oncol 2009;27:2542–52.
12. Tong RT, Boucher Y, Kozin SV, Winkler F, Hicklin DJ, Jain RK. Vascular
normalization by vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 blockade
induces a pressure gradient across the vasculature and improves drug
penetration in tumors. Cancer Res 2004;64:3731–6.
13. Sugahara KN, Teesalu T, Karmali PP, Kotamraju VR, Agemy L, Greenwald
DR, et al. Coadministration of a tumor-penetrating peptide enhances the
efﬁcacy of cancer drugs. Science 2010;328:1031–5.
14. Brouckaert P, Takahashi N, van Tiel ST, Hostens J, Eggermont AM, Seynhaeve AL, et al. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha augmented tumor response in
B16BL6 melanoma-bearing mice treated with stealth liposomal doxorubicin (DOXIL (R)) correlates with altered DOXIL (R) pharmacokinetics. Int
J Cancer 2004;109:442–8.
15. Ten Hagen TLM, Van Der Veen AH, Nooijen PT, Van Tiel ST, Seynhaeve AL,
Eggermont AM. Low-dose tumor necrosis factor-alpha augments antitumor activity of stealth liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil (R)) in soft tissue
sarcoma-bearing rats. Int J Cancer 2000;87:829–37.
16. Ruegg C, Yilmaz A, Bieler G, Bamat J, Chaubert P, Lejeune FJ. Evidence for
the involvement of endothelial cell integrin alpha V beta 3 in the disruption
of the tumor vasculature induced by TNF and IFN-gamma. Nat Med
1998;4:408–14.
17. Liapi E, Geschwind JF. Transcatheter and ablative therapeutic approaches
for solid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:978–86.
18. Frenkel V. Ultrasound mediated delivery of drugs and genes to solid
tumors. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2008;60:1193–208.
19. O'Neill BE, Li KCP. Augmentation of targeted delivery with pulsed high
intensity focused ultrasound. Int J Hyperthermia 2008;24:506–20.
20. ter Haar G. Therapeutic applications of ultrasound. Prog Biophys Mol Biol
2007;93:111–29.
21. Sershen SR, Westcott SL, Halas NJ, West JL. Temperature-sensitive polymernanoshell composites for photothermally modulated drug delivery.
J Biomed Mater Res 2000;51:293–8.
22. Bartczak D, Muskens OL, Millar TM, Sanchez-Elsner T, Kanaras AG. Laserinduced damage and recovery of plasmonically targeted human endothelial cells. Nano Lett 2011;11:1358–63.

3266 Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

23. von Maltzahn G, Park JH, Agrawal A, Bandaru NK, Das SK, Sailor MJ, et al.
Computationally guided photothermal tumor therapy using long-circulating gold nanorod antennas. Cancer Res 2009;69:3892–900.
24. Park J-H, von Maltzahn G, Xu MJ, Fogal V, Kotamraju VR, Ruoslahti E, et al.
Cooperative nanomaterial system to sensitize, target, and treat tumors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:981–6.
25. Park JH, von Maltzahn G, Ong LL, Centrone A, Hatton TA, Ruoslahti E, et al.
Cooperative nanoparticles for tumor detection and photothermally triggered drug delivery. Adv Mater 2010;22:880–5.
26. von Maltzahn G, Park JH, Lin KY, Singh N, Schw€
oppe C, Mesters R, et al.
Nanoparticles that communicate in vivo to amplify tumour targeting. Nat
Mater 2011;10:545–52.
27. Bagley AF, Hill S, Rogers GS, Bhatia SN. Plasmonic photothermal heating
of intraperitoneal tumors through the use of an implanted near-infrared
source. ACS Nano 2013;7:8089–97.
28. DasGupta D, von Maltzahn G, Ghosh S, Bhatia SN, Das SK, Chakraborty S.
Probing nanoantenna-directed photothermal destruction of tumors using
noninvasive laser irradiation. Appl Phys Lett 2009;95:233701.
29. Jain PK, Huang X, El-Sayed IH, El-Sayed MA. Noble metals on the
nanoscale: optical and photothermal properties and some applications
in imaging, sensing, biology, and medicine. Acc Chem Res 2008;41:
1578–86.
30. Dewhirst MW, Vujaskovic Z, Jones E, Thrall D. Re-setting the biologic
rationale for thermal therapy. Int J Hyperthermia 2005;21:779–90.
31. Thrall DE, Maccarini P, Stauffer P, Macfall J, Hauck M, Snyder S, et al.
Thermal dose fractionation affects tumour physiological response. Int J
Hyperthermia 2012;28:431–40.
32. Akerfelt M, Morimoto RI, Sistonen L. Heat shock factors: integrators of cell
stress, development and lifespan. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010;11:545–55.
33. Sakurai H, Enoki Y. Novel aspects of heat shock factors: DNA recognition,
chromatin modulation, and gene expression. FEBS J 2010;277:4140–9.
34. Pelham HR. A regulatory upstream promoter element in the Drosophila
hsp 70 heat-shock gene. Cell 1982;30:517–28.
35. Mendillo ML, Santagata S, Koeva M, Bell GW, Hu R, Tamimi RM, et al. HSF1
drives a transcriptional program distinct from heat shock to support highly
malignant human cancers. Cell 2012;150:549–62.
36. Lin KY, Bagley AF, Zhang AY, Karl DL, Yoon SS, Bhatia SN. Gold nanorod
photothermal therapy in a genetically engineered mouse model of soft
tissue sarcoma. Nano LIFE 2010;1:277–87.
37. Nguyen DH, Stapleton SC, Yang MT, Cha SS, Choi CK, Galie PA, et al.
Biomimetic model to reconstitute angiogenic sprouting morphogenesis in
vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:6712–7.
38. Galie PA, Nguyen DH, Choi CK, Cohen DM, Janmey PA, Chen CS. Fluid
shear stress threshold regulates angiogenic sprouting. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2014;111:7968–73.
39. Hauck ML, Dewhirst MW, Bigner DD, Zalutsky MR. Local hyperthermia
improves uptake of a chimeric monoclonal antibody in a subcutaneous
xenograft model. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:63–70.
40. Lavoie JN, Gingras-Breton G, Tanguay RM, Landry J. Induction of Chinese
hamster HSP27 gene expression in mouse cells confers resistance to heat
shock. HSP27 stabilization of the microﬁlament organization. J Biol Chem
1993;268:3420–9.
41. Lavoie JN, Hickey E, Weber LA, Landry J. Modulation of actin microﬁlament dynamics and ﬂuid phase pinocytosis by phosphorylation of heat
shock protein 27. J Biol Chem 1993;268:24210–4.
42. Sanchez Y, Lindquist SL. Hsp104 required for induced thermotolerance.
Science 1990;248:1112–5.
43. Lindquist S, Kim G. Heat-shock protein 104 expression is sufﬁcient for
thermotolerance in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:5301–6.
44. Queitsch C, Hong SW, Vierling E, Lindquist S. Heat shock protein 101 plays
a crucial role in thermotolerance in arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2000;12:
479–92.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Limits Tumor Transport

45. Gautherie M, et al. Biological basis of oncologic thermotherapy. Clinical
thermology. Subseries thermotherapy. 1990, Berlin; New York: SpringerVerlag. p. 169.
46. Lin JC, Song CW. Inﬂuence of vascular thermotolerance on the heatinduced changes in blood-ﬂow, Po2, and cell-survival in tumors. Cancer
Res 1993;53:2076–80.
47. Scherz-Shouval R, Santagata S, Mendillo ML, Sholl LM, Ben-Aharon I, Beck
AH, et al. The reprogramming of tumor stroma by HSF1 is a potent enabler
of malignancy. Cell 2014;158:564–78.
48. Robbins SL, Kumar V, Cotran RS. Robbins and Cotran pathologic basis of
disease. 8th ed. 2010, Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier. p. 1450.
49. Chauhan VP, Martin JD, Liu H, Lacorre DA, Jain SR, Kozin SV, et al.
Angiotensin inhibition enhances drug delivery and potentiates chemotherapy by decompressing tumour blood vessels. Nat Commun
2013;4:2516.
50. Diop-Frimpong B, Chauhan VP, Krane S, Boucher Y, Jain RK. Losartan
inhibits collagen I synthesis and improves the distribution and efﬁcacy

www.aacrjournals.org

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

of nanotherapeutics in tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:
2909–14.
Mok W, Boucher Y, Jain RK. Matrix metalloproteinases-1 and -8 improve
the distribution and efﬁcacy of an oncolytic virus. Cancer Res 2007;67:
10664–8.
Alexandrakis G, Brown EB, Tong RT, McKee TD, Campbell RB, Boucher Y,
et al. Two-photon ﬂuorescence correlation microscopy reveals the twophase nature of transport in tumors. Nat Med 2004;10:203–7.
Brown E, McKee T, diTomaso E, Pluen A, Seed B, Boucher Y, et al. Dynamic
imaging of collagen and its modulation in tumors in vivo using secondharmonic generation. Nat Med 2003;9:796–800.
Lo JH, von Maltzahn G, Douglass J, Park JH, Sailor MJ, Ruoslahti E, et al.
Nanoparticle ampliﬁcation photothermal unveiling of cryptic collagen
binding sites. J Mater Chem B Mater Biol Med 2013;1:5235–40.
Wust P, Hildebrandt B, Sreenivasa G, Rau B, Gellermann J, Riess H, et al.
Hyperthermia in combined treatment of cancer. Lancet Oncol 2002;3:
487–97.

Cancer Res; 75(16) August 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3267

Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

Endothelial Thermotolerance Impairs Nanoparticle Transport in
Tumors
Alexander F. Bagley, Ruth Scherz-Shouval, Peter A. Galie, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:3255-3267. Published OnlineFirst June 29, 2015.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0325

This article cites 53 articles, 20 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/16/3255.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/16/3255.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

