2221

Guidelines for International Breast Health and Cancer
Control–Implementation
Supplement to Cancer

Guideline Implementation for Breast Healthcare in
Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries
Overview of the Breast Health Global Initiative Global Summit 2007

Benjamin O. Anderson,
Cheng-Har Yip, MD3
Robert A. Smith, PhD4
Roman Shyyan, MD5
Stephen F. Sener, MD6,7
Alexandru Eniu, MD8
Robert W. Carlson, MD9
Edward Azavedo, MD10
Joe Harford, PhD11

MD

1,2

Breast cancer outcomes in low- and middle-income countries (LMCs) correlate
with the degree to which 1) cancers are detected at early stages, 2) newly
detected cancers can be diagnosed correctly, and 3) appropriately selected multimodality treatment can be provided properly in a timely fashion. The Breast
Health Global Initiative (BHGI) invited international experts to review and revise
previously developed BHGI resource-stratified guideline tables for early detection,
diagnosis, treatment, and healthcare systems. Focus groups addressed specific
issues in breast pathology, radiation therapy, and management of locally
advanced disease. Process metrics were developed based on the priorities established in the guideline stratification. The groups indicated that cancer prevention

1

Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

through health behavior modification could influence breast cancer incidence in

2

tality. Programs to promote breast self-awareness and clinical breast examination

3

and resource-adapted mammographic screening are important early detection
steps. Breast imaging, initially with ultrasound and, at higher resource levels with

Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.
University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
4

American Cancer Society, Atlanta, Georgia.

5

Lviv Cancer Center, Lviv, Ukraine.

6

Evanston Northwestern Healthcare, Evanston,
Illinois.
7

Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
8
Cancer Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania.
9

Stanford University, Stanford, California.

10

Department of Radiology, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

11

National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

The Breast Health Global Initiative (BHGI) gratefully acknowledges grants and conference support from the following organizations and
agencies: Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Susan G. Komen For The Cure; American Society of Clinical Oncology; US National Cancer

LMCs. Diagnosing breast cancer at earlier stages will reduce breast cancer mor-

diagnostic mammography, improves preoperative diagnostic assessment and permits image-guided needle sampling. Multimodality therapy includes surgery,
radiation, and systemic therapies. Government intervention is needed to address
drug-delivery problems relating to high cost and poor access. Guideline dissemination and implementation research plays a crucial role in improving care. Adaptation of technology is needed in LMCs, especially for breast imaging, pathology,
radiation therapy, and systemic treatment. Curricula for education and training

Institute, Office of International Affairs; American
Cancer Society; Lance Armstrong Foundation; US
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(*Grant 1 R13 HS017218-01); US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Cancer
Prevention and Control, National Center for
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion; American Society of Breast Disease; Oncology Nursing Society; US National Cancer
Institute, Office of Women’s Health; US National
Institutes of Health, Office of Research on
Women’s Health. In addition, the BHGI received
unrestricted educational grants from AstraZeneca,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ethicon Endo-Surgery,
F. Hoffmann-La Roche, GE Healthcare, Novartis
Oncology, and Pfizer Oncology.

Published 2008 by the American Cancer Society*
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23844
Published online 24 September 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Complete financial disclosures are presented at
the end of this article.
Address for reprints: Benjamin O. Anderson, MD,
Department of Surgery, Box 356410, University
of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; Fax: (206)
543-8136; E-mail: banderso@u.washington.edu
*This article is a US Government work and, as
such, is in the public domain in the United States
of America.
Received June 10, 2008; accepted June 24,
2008.

2222

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8
in LMCs should be developed, applied, and studied in LMC-based learning laboratories to aid information transfer of evidence-based BHGI guidelines. Cancer
2008;113(8 suppl):2221–43. Published 2008 by the American Cancer Society.*

KEYWORDS: breast cancer, low-income countries, early detection, screening,
diagnosis, treatment, healthcare systems, guideline, implementation, resource
allocation, process metrics.

C

ancer is the second most common cause of
death in low-income and middle-income countries (LMCs), more than respiratory infections and
diseases, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, diarrheal diseases, and
tuberculosis.1 Issued during the 58th World Health
Assembly in 2005, the World Health Organization
(WHO) Resolution on Cancer Prevention and Control
(WHA58.22) urges member states to collaborate with
WHO in the development of cancer control programs
aimed at reducing cancer mortality and improving
quality of life for cancer patients and their families.2
This landmark WHO resolution calls on LMCs to
integrate cancer control programs within existing
health systems, to identify evidence-based, sustainable actions across the continuum of cancer care, and
to make the best use of resources to benefit their
populations afflicted with cancer. LMCs are urged to
support research translating knowledge into effective
public health measures for cancer prevention and
treatment, to improve access to appropriate technologies for the early diagnosis and treatment of cancer,
and to promote research evaluating low-cost interventions that are affordable and sustainable. In alignment
with the WHO, the Institute of Medicine has called for
the development and implementation of resource
level-appropriate guidelines for the overall management of major cancers for which highly effective
treatments are available, to provide a framework for
systematic improvement in cancer control in LMCs.3
Among women, breast cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide, and
case fatality rates are highest in low-resource countries. Over 411,000 deaths result from breast cancer
annually, accounting for >1.6% of female deaths
from all causes. Projecting to 2010, the annual global
burden of new breast cancer cases will be 1.5 million, and an ever-increasing majority will be from
LMCs.4 Globally, breast cancer is the most common
cancer among women, comprising 23% of the 1.1
million female cancers that are newly diagnosed
each year.5,6 Approximately 4.4 million women who
were diagnosed with breast cancer in the last 5 year
currently are alive, making breast cancer the single
most prevalent cancer in the world.5 Despite the

common misconception that breast cancer is predominantly a problem of wealthy countries, the majority of breast cancer deaths in fact occur each year in
developing rather than developed countries.4
Breast cancer is an urgent public health problem
in high-resource regions and is becoming an increasingly urgent problem in low-resource regions, in
which incidence rates have been increasing by up to
5% per year.7,8 Although global breast cancer incidence rates have increased by approximately 0.5%
annually since 1990, breast cancer rates in Japan,
Singapore, and Korea have doubled or tripled in the
past 40 years, and China’s urban registries document
20% to 30% increases in the past decade alone.9 In
the urban areas of India, cervical cancer had the
highest incidence among female cancers 15 years
ago but now has been overtaken by breast cancer as
the most commonly diagnosed cancer among
women.10 Despite the younger age structure of most
developing countries, breast cancer already accounts
for approximately 45% of the incident cases and 54%
of the annual deaths.4
The breast cancer burden in LMCs predictably
will continue to increase in coming years on the basis of 1) increasing life expectancy and 2) shifting
reproductive and behavioral patterns associated with
heightened breast cancer risk. Even assuming conservatively that there will be no change in underlying
age-specific rates, there could be a nearly 50%
increase in global incidence and mortality between
2002 and 2020 due to demographic changes alone.
These increases will be disproportionately high in
the developing world, with projected respective
increases of 55% and 58% in incidence and mortality
by the year 2020 in comparison to the known statistics from only 18 years prior.4 These statistics most
likely underestimate the actual rising breast cancer
rates, because the few data available from LMCs
reveal increases in breast cancer age-specific incidence and mortality rates, especially in recent birth
cohorts. This is especially true among urban women
and most likely is caused at least in part by the adoption of Western lifestyles, which tend to promote
decreased parity, delayed childbirth, decreased physical exercise, and dietary habits associated with earlier

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

menarche, all of which have been associated with
increasing rates of postmenopausal breast cancer.6,9,11
Despite significant scientific advances in breast
cancer management, most of the world faces
resource constraints that limit the capacity to
improve early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of
the disease. In LMCs, worsened cancer survival is
largely because of late disease stage at presentation,
which leads to particularly poor outcomes when
coupled with limited diagnosis and treatment capacity.12 It was reported in 2001 that, in India, between
50% and 70% of new patients present with locally
advanced breast cancer (LABC) (stage III) or metastatic breast cancer (MBC) (stage IV) breast cancer at
diagnosis.13 By comparison, approximately 44% of
European (EUROCARE) and 36% of American (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) breast
cancer cases reportedly were locally advanced or
metastatic at diagnosis between 1990 and 1992.14
Compounding the problem of late diagnosis, breast
cancer fatality rates are high, because LMCs typically
lack the major components of healthcare infrastructure and resources necessary to implement improved
methods for the early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of breast cancer.15,16 Although most LMCs have
not yet identified cancer as a priority healthcare
issue, it will become an important health problem as
the control of communicable diseases improves.6
In high-resource countries, evidence-based
guidelines outlining optimal approaches to the early
detection, diagnosis, and treatment of breast cancer
have been defined and disseminated.17-20 These
guidelines are resource neutral, they fail to consider
variable resource distributions where overall standards
of living are high, and they fail to recognize ubiquitous
deficits in infrastructure and resources in LMCs. Moreover, they do not consider implementation costs or
provide guidance on how a suboptimal system can be
improved incrementally toward an optimal system.
Such guidelines defining optimal breast care and services, as pointed out by the WHO, have limited use in
resource-constrained countries,21 and there is a need
for resource-based guidance related to strategies for
reducing the burden of breast cancer for settings in
which optimal care is not feasible.
The development and implementation of international, evidence-based breast healthcare guidelines
oriented to countries or regions of the world with
limited financial resources is a crucial step toward
improving breast healthcare and breast cancer care
in these regions. Current evidence regarding the
value of earlier detection and cost-effective diagnosis
and treatment can be applied to define ‘best practices with limited resources’ for breast healthcare.

2223

Although healthcare strategies may differ measurably,
improvement in breast cancer outcomes can be
achieved using the best standard of care that is practical in a given setting.
Cosponsored by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center and by Susan G. Komen for the
Cure, the Breast Health Global Initiative (BHGI)
strives to develop evidence-based, economically feasible, and culturally appropriate guidelines that can
be used in nations with limited healthcare resources
to improve breast cancer outcomes. The BHGI held
its first 2 Global Summits in Seattle, Washington in
2002 and Bethesda, Maryland in 2005 to address
healthcare disparities22 and evidence-based resource
allocation23 as they relate to breast cancer in LMCs.
Modeled after the approach of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network,24 the BHGI developed and
applied an evidence-based consensus panel process
(now formally endorsed by the Institute of Medicine3) to create resource-sensitive guidelines for
breast cancer early detection,25,26 diagnosis,27,28
treatment,29,30 and healthcare systems31 as they
relate to breast healthcare in LMCs. The BHGI guidelines are intended to assist ministers of health,
policymakers, administrators, and institutions in
prioritizing resource allocation as breast cancer treatment programs are implemented and developed in
their resource-constrained countries.
The goal of the third BHGI Global Summit held
in 2007 was to address the implementation of breast
healthcare guidelines in LMCs. The BHGI resourcestratified guidelines that were formulated at the second Global Summit were broadened to identify effective implementation strategies and to measure the
success of that implementation through the identification of key process metrics. The purpose of this article
is to summarize the outcome of the 2007 BHGI Global
Summit and to provide an outline for the next steps
in systematic and comprehensive guideline implementation in LMCs with the goals of advancing breast
healthcare delivery, improving quality of life for breast
cancer patients and their families, alleviating or preventing breast cancer morbidity, and ultimately
decreasing breast cancer mortality in these countries.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The BHGI guidelines published in 200626,28,30,31 were
reexamined, revised, and extended at the third
Global Summit, which was held October 1 through 4,
2007 and was hosted by the American Society of
Clinical Oncology (ASCO) in Budapest, Hungary.
Nineteen national and international groups and
agencies joined the BHGI as scientific organizational

2224

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

partners, collaborating organizations, and participating
organizations. The BHGI consensus conference methodology, which was used to organize both of the prior
BHGI Global Summits, has been described previously.23
The 2007 BHGI Scientific Advisory Committee nominated, reviewed, and ratified the selection of the 8
BHGI panel co-chairs for the 4 2007 Consensus Panels:
Early Detection, Diagnosis, Treatment, and Health Care
Systems. The 2007 panel co-chairs, in turn, worked
with BHGI leadership to select panelists for each of the
4 consensus panels and to set assigned topics and
speakers for plenary presentations.
Each panel held 1 full-day meeting that included a
morning session of plenary presentations and an afternoon session of discussion and debate among panelists
regarding the content of their consensus article. Each
morning began with a presentation by a breast cancer
advocate from a limited-resource country that summarized the personal experience of women facing
breast cancer in that country. Each afternoon began
with a summary of a current or future BHGI pilot project for implementation in a selected LMC.
Healthcare resources, as defined previously in
the 2005 BHGI Global Summit, were stratified
according to a 4-tiered system based on available
resources relevant to program implementation:
 Basic level—Core resources or fundamental services that are absolutely necessary for any breast
healthcare system to function; basic-level services
typically are applied in a single clinical interaction.
 Limited level—Second-tier resources or services
that are intended to produce major improvements
in outcome such as increased survival, and are
attainable with limited financial means and modest infrastructure; limited-level services may
involve single or multiple clinical interactions.
 Enhanced level—Third-tier resources or services
that are optional but important; enhanced-level
resources should produce further improvements in
outcome and increase the number and quality of
therapeutic options and patient choice.
 Maximal level—High-level resources or services
that may be used in some high-resource countries
and/or may be recommended by breast care
guidelines that do not adapt to resource constraints but that nonetheless should be considered
a lower priority than those resources or services
listed in the basic, limited, or enhanced categories
on the basis of extreme cost and/or impracticality
for broad use in a resource-limited environment;
to be useful, maximal-level resources typically
depend on the existence and functionality of all
lower level resources.

On the basis of this stratification scheme, each
of the 4 panels debated key issues related to guideline implementation for early detection,32 diagnosis,33 treatment34 and healthcare systems.35 Each
panel’s discussion was recorded and transcribed, and
the transcripts were used as a starting point for writing the 4 consensus articles. Panel co-chairs coordinated the writing of those articles, sections of which
were coauthored and/or edited by participating
panelists. Consensus article drafts were reviewed and
edited by all coauthors. Final drafting, including the
resolution of disagreements among coauthors, as was
overseen by the panel co-chairs as organized by
BHGI staff.
In parallel with the afternoon Consensus Panel
meetings, selected focus groups met to address discipline-specific topics related to LMC program implementation. Of these, 3 groups chose to prepare
articles that would summarize their discussion and
findings: the Radiation Therapy Focus Group,36 the
Systemic Therapy Focus Group,37 and the Breast Pathology Focus Group.38 Also, morning plenary speakers were invited to submit individual articles on their
topics for publication together with the consensus
articles. In lieu of the standard, external peer-review
process, submitted articles underwent an internal,
blinded peer-review process. All individual article
submissions underwent blinded peer-review by panel
co-chairs and selected internal BHGI nonauthor
reviewers. Individual articles that did not address
issues specific to LMCs or that did not directly complement issues related to guideline implementation
were referred for journal submission outside of the
BHGI guidelines. After final acceptance, all focus
group and individual articles were coordinated with
the consensus guideline articles for internal cross
referencing. Thus, the combination of consensus,
focus group, and individual articles represents a complete BHGI guideline compendium, which is the final
work product of the 2007 Global Summit as published
as a complete unit in this Cancer supplement.

RESULTS
Prevention Through Risk Factor Modification
A complete discussion of breast cancer prevention
through risk factor modification in LMCs is provided
by McTiernan et al separately in this BHGI supplement to Cancer.39 In summary, health behaviors that
may reduce the risk of breast cancer include prolonged lactation, regular physical activity, weight
control, avoiding excess alcohol intake, avoiding prolonged use of exogenous hormone therapy, and
avoiding excessive radiation exposure. These beha-

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

viors, although they have not been proven in clinical
trials to reduce risk, are likely to be beneficial. Information on them can be provided as a prevention
strategy in LMCs, although the methods of information delivery and follow-up will depend on financial
and personnel resources. The magnitude of absolute
risk reduction based on risk factor management is
somewhat unclear. However, any of these health
behaviors can reduce risk for other chronic diseases,
so they may be of high interest for general public
health in both LMCs and high-income countries.
Several strategies are available for reducing
breast cancer risk in countries with lower resources,
but few of them have completed rigorous testing in
clinical trials.39 Strategies to increase the prevalence
and length of lactation may reduce risk for breast
cancer in mothers in addition to providing nutritional benefits for infants and small children.
Increased adiposity, a sedentary lifestyle, and moderate to high levels of alcohol use are associated with
increased risk of breast cancer. The evidence of a
role for specific dietary components is less clear. For
individual women, counseling should include
increasing physical activity and balancing energy
such that weight remains stable over a lifetime and,
preferably, with the body mass index remaining
<25 kg/m2. The provision of public transport and
community-level and workplace facilities to enable
these activities should be encouraged. Counseling
should include limiting alcohol intake to no more than
1 drink per day on average. The use of combined
estrogen/progesterone menopause hormone therapy
should be limited to women with refractory menopausal symptoms and for as short a period as possible.

Early Detection
Strategies to reduce breast cancer risk cannot eliminate the majority of breast cancers that develop in
LMCs, and breast cancer remains the most prominent cancer among women even in countries that
lack the most common ‘Westernized’ breast cancer
risk factors.9 Early disease stage at detection, as discussed fully in the early detection consensus article
provided separately in this BHGI supplement,32 is a
key determinant of breast cancer outcome, because
earlier staged disease has lower breast cancer mortality and requires fewer resources to provide effective
treatment (Fig. 1).
Public education is a key first step in implementing breast health programs (Fig. 1, column 1). The
approach and scope of the public education program
determine the success of early detection, as measured by stage at diagnosis, and also will drive the
breadth of resource allocation needed for program

2225

implementation. Public education programs, as discussed fully by Kreps and Sivaram,40 must include
health education messages that convey the idea that
breast cancer is curable in the majority of women
when it is detected early, diagnosed accurately, and
treated appropriately. To optimize success, communication methods need to be adapted to the cultural
boundaries and taboos that invariably surround
breast cancer diagnosis but that may differ among
and within countries, depending on the social context and common healthcare belief systems.
Breast cancer screening modalities include breast
self-examination, clinical breast examination (CBE),
and screening mammography (Fig. 1, column 2). The
effectiveness and efficiency of each of these strategies must be considered in the context of resource
availability and population-based need, which also
determines the primary goal of a screening program
(Fig. 1, column 3). Screening mammography is the
only single modality with which prospective randomized trials have demonstrated an improvement
breast cancer mortality, but its cost is prohibitive in
many settings.41 A survey of oncology experts
reported by Cazap et al indicated that >90% of Latin
American countries had no national law or guideline
for mammography screening.42 When screening
mammography is used in LMCs, target populations
and screening intervals need to consider what is
optimal for the overall population and within the
scope of available resources.32
In most developing countries, a larger proportion
of women are younger. Breast cancer incidence rates
are lower in younger women. This means that
screening programs will have a lower yield in terms
of cases detected per 1000 women screened. The
resource implications of screening this type of population should be considered carefully on the basis of
age distribution and likely incidence rates of the
population in question. When introducing mammography screening, a strong case can be made for initiating screening in a limited age group of women in
which age-specific incidence rates indicate that it is
likely to be most productive; then, as the program
gains experience, it may be expanded to additional
age groups.32 Those responsible for screening programs should consider the age-specific incidence
rates of breast cancer in their country, the available
resources, and the most recent information regarding
the effectiveness of screening in various age groups
to determine the appropriate targets for mammography screening.
Unlike screening mammography, it has not been
demonstrated in randomized trials that CBE
improves breast cancer mortality. Studies of CBE in

2226

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 1. Resource allocation for early detection for breast cancer. CBE indicates clinical breast examination; US, ultrasound; 1/2, with or without. *Target
group selection for mammographic screening should consider breast cancer demographics and resource constraints within the population. Please see text for
complete discussion. yIt has been demonstrated that breast magnetic resonance imaging is more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in asymptomatic women who have an inherited susceptibility to breast cancer. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in
some higher income settings.

LMCs have been undertaken but have been problematic and inconclusive.43 Inferential studies suggest
that clinical down-sizing of palpable disease should
improve outcome.44 However, the establishment of
clinical evaluation, which includes patient history as
well as CBE, is a practical and necessary prerequisite
for the operation of any early detection program,
especially in an LMC in which patients typically
present with advanced disease stage, and, at a minimum, provides a practical linkage between breast
cancer early detection and diagnosis.

Diagnosis
Breast diagnosis consists of clinical evaluation, imaging and laboratory studies, and surgical pathology,
each aspect of which is reviewed comprehensively
separately in this BHGI supplement.33 Obtaining a
patient’s history, specific both to her breasts and to her
general health, provides important information for the

clinical assessment of breast disease and comorbid disease that may influence breast cancer therapy choices
(Fig. 2, column 1). Focused CBE and a complete physical examination provide guidance on the extent of
disease, presence of metastatic disease, and ability to
tolerate more aggressive therapeutic regimens.
Breast imaging, initially with ultrasound and, at
higher resource levels, with diagnostic mammography improves preoperative diagnostic assessment,
and also permits image-guided needle sampling of
suspicious lesions (Fig. 2, column 2). Diagnostic
mammography, although it is helpful for breast-conservation therapy, is not mandatory in LMCs when
these resources are lacking.45 Additional imaging studies facilitate metastatic workup and, thus, patient
treatment selection. Selected laboratory studies are
required for the safe administration of cytotoxic
chemotherapy, which is a limited-level resource for
treatment of stage I breast cancer (Fig. 3) and a

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

2227

FIGURE 2. Diagnosis resource table for breast cancer. CBE indicates clinical breast examination; TNM, classification of malignant tumor system; US, ultrasound; FNAB, fine-needle aspiration biopsy; SLN, sentinel lymph node; CBC, complete blood count; ER, estrogen receptor; IHC, immunohistochemistry; DCIS,
ductal carcinoma in situ; LVI, lymphovascular invasion; mammo, mammography; CT, computed tomography; HER-2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2;
PR, progesterone receptor; PET, positron emission tomography; MIBI, methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile; BRCA1/2, breast cancer genes 1 and 2. *Systemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and CBC testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be provided. yER
testing by IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic
level, IHC testing of ER status also should be provided. {The use of SLN biopsy requires clinical and laboratory validation of the SLN technique. §If the costs
associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab would be used as a limited-level. In this case, measurement of HER-2/neu overexpression
and/or gene amplification would also need to be available at the limited level in order to properly select patients for this highly effective but expensive HER-2/
neu targeted biological therapy. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced
levels. Maximal resources level should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in some higher income settings.

basic-level resource for the treatment of lymph
node-positive, estrogen receptor (ER)-negative, and
locally advanced disease (Figs. 4 and 5).
Although surgical excision for diagnosis can be
used when alternatives are unavailable, needle sampling is highly preferable for reasons fully delineated
in prior BHGI publications.27,28 Under no circumstances should mastectomy be considered an acceptable method for tissue ‘sampling.’27 Fine-needle
aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is recognized as the most
cost-effective procedure with the shortest turnaround
time.46 The choice of sampling procedures (FNAB,
core-needle biopsy, or excisional biopsy) should be

based on the availability and access to cytopathologists/pathologists in each medical community and on
the training and experience of the available pathology specialists, as fully discussed by the BHGI Breast
Pathology Focus Group.38 Sentinel lymph node biopsy, although it is developed in the context of highincome countries, actually can be used by breast surgery teams in lower income settings at low cost
when the technique is restricted to the use of blue
dye without radiotracer.47
Quality surgical pathology is critical to breast
program function (Fig. 2, column 3).33,38 The availability of predictive tumor markers, especially ER

2228

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 3. Treatment resource allocation table for stage I breast cancer. SLN indicates sentinel lymph node; CMF, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil; AC, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide; EC, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide; FAC, 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide; LH-RH, luteinizing hormonereleasing hormone; HER-2/neu, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. *ER testing by IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective
when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic level, then IHC testing of ER status also should be provided. yBreast-conserving surgery can be
provided as a limited-level resource but requires breast-conserving radiation therapy. If breast-conserving radiation is unavailable, then patients should be transferred to
a higher level facility for postlumpectomy radiation. {The use of SLN biopsy requires clinical and laboratory validation of the SLN technique. §Systemic chemotherapy
requires blood chemistry profile and complete blood count testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be provided.
kIf the costs associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab would be used as a limited-level. In this case, measurement of HER-2/neu overexpression and/or gene amplification would also need to be available at the limited level in order to properly select patients for this highly effective but expensive HER-2/neu
targeted biological therapy. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. An
empty matrix box indicates that additional resource allocation is not mandated beyond those resources required at lower levels. Maximal level resources should not be
targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in some higher income settings.

testing, is critical to the proper selection of cancer
therapy when endocrine therapies are available,
recognizing that quality assessment of immunohistochemical testing is important to avoid false-negative
results. Interdisciplinary communication underlies
the basis of success for breast diagnostic programs at
all economic levels. Furthermore, the interaction of
the pathologist with the radiologist and the surgeon
(interdisciplinary team collaboration) is critical in the
examination and reporting of the pathology specimen, because the clinical situation in which the

specimen was obtained can have a marked influence
on the significance of certain pathologic findings
and, in the case of cancer, can be critical in determining accurate tumor staging.

Treatment
Breast cancer treatment consists of surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic therapy, each aspect of
which is reviewed comprehensively separately in
this BHGI supplement34 and is summarized below
(Figs. 3-6).

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

2229

FIGURE 4. Treatment resource allocation table for stage II breast cancer. CMF indicates cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil; AC, doxorubicin
and cyclophosphamide; EC, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide; FAC, 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide; SLN, sentinel lymph node; LH-RH, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone; HER-2/neu, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. *Chest wall and regional lymph node irradiation substantially
decreases the risk of postmastectomy local recurrence. If available, it should be used as a basic-level resource. ySystemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and complete blood count testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be provided. {ER testing by
IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic level, then
IHC testing of ER status also should be provided. §Breast-conserving surgery can be provided as a limited-level resource but requires breast-conserving radiation therapy. If breast-conserving radiation is unavailable, then patients should be transferred to a higher level facility for postlumpectomy radiation. kThe use
of SLN biopsy requires clinical and laboratory validation of the SLN technique. }If the costs associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab
would be used at a limited level. In this case, measurement of HER-2/neu overexpression and/or gene amplification would also need to be available at the limited level in order to properly select patients for this highly effective but expensive HER-2/neu targeted biological therapy. Note that the table stratification
scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. An empty matrix box indicates that additional resource
allocation is not mandated beyond those resources required at lower levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even
though they may be used in some higher income settings.

Surgical therapy
The ability to perform modified radical mastectomy
(MRM) is the mainstay of locoregional treatment at
the basic level of breast healthcare (Figs. 3-5, column
1). Although MRM (total mastectomy plus level I/II
axillary lymph node dissection) is considered fundamental surgical training in high-income countries,
surgeons from LMCs may have had less exposure to
the procedure and may not be knowledgeable
regarding the operation’s proper technical execution.

A retrospective review of patients referred from
outside institutions to Tata Memorial Hospital in
Mumbai, India indicated that, of 424 women who
underwent ‘therapeutic’ surgical interventions, 191
women (45%) were judged to have had incomplete
surgery. Of these, 153 patients underwent completion
revision surgery, and 123 had residual axillary
lymph nodes, including 64 patients (52%) with metastatic lymph nodes that had been left behind in the
axillary bed.48

2230

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 5. Treatment resource allocation table for locally advanced breast cancer. AC indicates doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide; EC, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide; FAC, 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide; CMF, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil; LH-RH, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone;
HER-2/neu, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. *Chest wall and regional lymph node irradiation substantially decreases the risk of postmastectomy local recurrence. If available, it should be used as a basic-level resource. ySystemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and complete blood count testing for safety.
When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be provided. {ER testing by IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is
cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic level, then IHC testing of ER status also should be provided. §If the costs associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab would be used at a limited level. In this case, measurement of HER-2/neu overexpression and/or gene
amplification would also need to be available at the limited level in order to properly select patients for this highly effective but expensive HER-2/neu targeted biological
therapy. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. An empty matrix box
indicates that additional resource allocation is not mandated beyond those resources required at lower levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in some higher income settings.

Radiation therapy
The availability of radiation therapy allows for consideration of breast-conserving therapy, postmastectomy chest wall radiation, and palliation of painful
or symptomatic metastases (Figs. 3-6, column 2).
Radiation therapy, as detailed by the BHGI Radiation
Treatment Focus Group,36 has a major impact on
local tumor control for early and locally advanced
disease, and effective and safe radiation therapy also
can improve overall survival rates.49,50
The use of evidence-based doses and techniques
is crucial for achieving the best possible clinical outcomes and reduced complications. The cost of devel-

oping and maintaining a radiation therapy program
should be balanced against the cost of managing
complications of treatment, both of which contribute
to the overall management costs of breast cancer
patients.36 For patients with distant metastases,
radiation therapy is an effective tool for palliation,
especially for bone, brain, and soft tissue metastases
(Fig. 6, column 2).
There is a huge insufficiency of radiation therapy
resources in LMCs. Thus, there is a need to provide
the necessary equipment and also to improve the
quality, technique, and utilization of resources in an
optimal and sustainable fashion. Radiation therapy

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

2231

FIGURE 6. Treatment resource allocation table for metastatic (stage IV) and recurrent breast cancer. CMF indicates cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5fluorouracil. *ER testing by IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic level, then IHC testing of ER status also should be provided. ySystemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and complete blood
count testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be provided. Note that the table stratification scheme implies
incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. An empty matrix box indicates that additional resource allocation is not
mandated beyond those resources required at lower levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may
be used in some higher income settings.

can be delivered with a cobalt-60 unit or a linear accelerator (LINAC) along with other quality-assurance tools.36 Although LINAC is considered the
preferred therapy in most settings, telecobalt
machines are a reasonable alternative in LMCs. It is
noteworthy that LINAC requires consistent electricity for powering and water for cooling the equipment. Thus, in some low-income settings, it may be
more practical to provide telecobalt technology. In
either circumstance, applying safe and effective
treatment requires well trained staff, support systems, geographic accessibility, and the initiation and
completion of treatment without undue delay.51 To
specifically address these issues in LMCs, in 2004,
the International Atomic Energy Agency established
the ‘Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy’ to
seek and direct funds from individuals, charitable

trusts, foundations, and the public and private sectors to help patients in poor countries receive
appropriate cancer treatment, an initiative that has
been welcomed by the WHO.
In early-stage breast cancer, radiation therapy is
an essential part of breast-conservation treatment
(Figs. 3 and 4; column 2). Standard treatment
includes the irradiation of the entire breast with an
additional boost to the tumor site and should be
delivered after treatment planning with at least 2dimensional imaging. Among patients with lymph
node-positive disease, postmastectomy radiation
therapy has demonstrated local control and overall
survival advantages. However, if access to radiation
could be limited more specifically, then preference
for postmastectomy radiation might be given to
patients with 4 positive lymph nodes. Chest wall

2232

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

and supraclavicular lymphatic irradiation is considered standard treatment for locally advanced disease.
However, routine axilla irradiation is not recommended because of the heightened risk of lymphedema. When indicated, internal mammary chain
irradiation may be considered when used with
cardiac-safe radiation techniques and appropriate
planning. The long-term risks of cardiac morbidity
and mortality require special attention to the volume
of heart and lungs exposed, and attempts should be
made to reduce exposure to these tissues. Alternative
treatment schedules such as hypofractionated radiation and partial breast irradiation currently are investigational and should not be considered as standard
care in LMCs.

Systemic therapy
The use of systemic cytotoxic chemotherapy is effective
in the treatment of all biologic subtypes of breast cancer but is more resource intensive to provide (Figs. 3-6,
column 3).34 The provision of endocrine therapy
requires relatively few specialized resources but, optimally, requires knowledge of hormone receptor status
to assure the treatment of those patients who are most
likely to benefit (Figs. 3-6, column 4). HER-2-targeted
therapy is very effective in tumors that overexpress the
HER-2/neu oncogene, but cost largely prevents the use
of this treatment in LMCs (Figs. 3-5, column 5).
Tamoxifen remains useful and is recommended
for patients with ER-positive tumors in LMCs (Figs.
3-5, column 4). Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) produce
better results than tamoxifen and are recommended
for countries with enhanced and maximal resources,
but cost constraints make tamoxifen a very reasonable alternative to AIs. No overall survival benefit has
been attributed to AIs over tamoxifen. Hormone therapy should be used after surgery for at least 5 years.
Trastuzumab combined with taxanes yields high
pathologic response rates in patients with HER-2/neuoverexpressing tumors, is recommended in countries
with enhanced and maximal resources, and should be
made available in countries with lower levels of
resources at lower costs because of its high efficacy. In
patients who are candidates for trastuzumab, it should
be continued for a total of 1 year. Clinical trials to evaluate the role of shorter durations of trastuzumab are
appropriate for LMCs and should be encouraged.
Management of locally advanced disease
Recent data indicate that LABC and MBC are the
most common stages at presentation and include 60%
to 80% of cases in most LMCs.6,52,53 Although the incidence of LABC has decreased significantly in developed countries with enhanced and maximal resources

because of widespread education and increasing use
of screening mammography, as fully discussed in a
separate article of this BHGI supplement,37 LABC
remains a daily challenge for oncologists in LMCs in
which limitations to proper management also include
a lack of local data, cultural circumstances, and weak,
inefficient healthcare systems.
Preoperative chemotherapy is the preferred primary therapy for LABC, because it allows an early
assessment of sensitivity to treatment as well as breast
conservation (Fig. 5).37 Clinical assessment of chemosensitivity may be particularly helpful, because emerging data suggest that there could be differences in
host metabolism of systemic treatment agents—tamoxifen, alkylating agents, taxanes—on genetic bases, with
associated differences in efficacy and toxicity among
genetically different populations.54,55 Research specifically directed at differences among groups in response
to systemic therapy may be warranted.56 Although the
preferred initial treatment of LABC is systemic therapy,
if optimal chemotherapy and evaluation are not available, then primary MRM is acceptable. However, it
should be recognized that, without systemic therapy,
surgery alone for LABC is unlikely to improve outcome
given the high likelihood of systemic recurrence; thus,
the role of MRM without adjuvant treatment for LABC
should be viewed primarily as palliative therapy.
After responding to systemic therapy, most
patients with LABC will require a MRM followed by
radiation therapy.36 Locoregional therapy decisions
should be based on both the pretreatment clinical
extent of disease and the pathologic extent of the disease after chemotherapy (Fig. 5, columns 1 and 2).
Accordingly, physical examination and imaging studies that accurately define the initial extent of disease
are required before treatment.57 The success of breast
conservation
after
preoperative
chemotherapy
depends on careful patient selection and achieving
negative surgical margins. Adjuvant breast radiation is
indicated for all patients who are treated with breast
conservation. For patients who undergo mastectomy,
chest-wall and regional lymph node radiation should
be considered for those who present with clinical
stage III disease or who have histologically positive
lymph nodes after preoperative chemotherapy.57
Metastatic and inflammatory breast cancer should
be managed initially with preoperative therapy irrespective of resource level. Standard preoperative therapy includes anthracycline-based chemotherapy (Figs.
5 and 6; column 3). The addition of sequential taxane
after anthracycline-based chemotherapy improves
pathologic responses and breast-conservation rates,
although it may not improve survival. The combination is considered appropriate treatment at the

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

2233

FIGURE 7. Breast care programs: human resource allocation table. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in
some higher income settings.

enhanced and maximal levels; however, costs and lack
of a clear survival benefit do not justify its use at limited-resource levels. Combined cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) chemotherapy
is less potent than anthracycline and taxanes, but it
may be used in its classic schedule in LMCs because of
the lower costs and fewer complications. It remains to
define the role for preoperative endocrine therapy better, but such therapy appears to be feasible and acceptable in elderly women.37

Healthcare Systems
Poorer outcomes in LMCs may relate to their healthcare systems, which have limited capability for successful early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of
breast cancer (Figs. 7 and 8). Impediments to better
outcomes include deficits in public education and
awareness, insufficient numbers of appropriately
trained healthcare workers, limited access to screening/treatment facilities, inadequate supplies of

necessary drugs, and timeliness of treatment after diagnosis. These points are reviewed comprehensively
in the Health Care Systems Consensus Panel article35
and are summarized here.

Public education
Obstacles to improving cancer care arise from multiple sources, including deficits in public knowledge
and awareness, social and cultural barriers, challenges in organizing healthcare, and insufficient
resources (Fig. 7, column 1). Early breast cancer
detection improves outcome in a cost-effective fashion, assuming treatment is available, but requires
public education to foster active patient participation
in diagnosis and treatment.
Professional education and training
Education of healthcare professionals, trusted traditional
healers, governmental agencies, women, and the public
regarding breast health and about breast cancer detec-

2234

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 8. Breast care programs: support systems resource allocation table. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing
resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they
may be used in same higher income settings.

tion, diagnosis, and treatment is central to the provision
of high-quality breast cancer care (Fig. 7, column 2).

Cancer center organization
The use of multidisciplinary teams for the management of breast cancer in general, and LABC in particular, is strongly recommended and should be
available wherever patients with breast cancer are
treated (Fig. 8, columns 3 and 4).35,37,58 Even if
some members of a full team (oncologist, radiologist, radiotherapist, pathologist, gynecologist, nurse,
psychoanalyst, and physiotherapist) are unavailable,
whoever is available should meet and discuss
patient management together. In LMCs, in which
some specialists are unavailable, the team approach
should be adapted to include only 2 to 4 members
(eg, surgeon, radiologist, pathologist, and medical
and/or radiation oncologist). Every effort should be
made to have local pathologists available. Patient
advocates may play an important role in encoura-

ging the setup of multidisciplinary teams and can
serve a special role in strengthening patient navigation through a given healthcare system (Fig. 7, column 3).

Radiation facilities
The delivery of radiation therapy requires a healthcare system that can provide the basic equipment,
the human resources, and the patient access to
scheduled care to ensure safe and effective radiation
therapy (Fig. 8, column 1). The current supply of
megavoltage radiotherapy machines (cobalt-60 or
LINAC) is only 18% of the estimated need in some
parts of the developing world.59 Cobalt machines are
less expensive and have lower quality assurance,
maintenance, and staffing needs.60 Because treatment interruptions from machine breakdown or
machine servicing adversely affect patients’ outcomes,61 the ability to provide preventive maintenance is an important consideration. The colbalt-60

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

units have greater simplicity with regard to mechanical and electrical components and operations and,
hence, are an attractive option for a low-resource
setting. LINACs have a higher technical sophistication and, hence, higher maintenance requirements.
Cobalt-60 units have a constancy of beam output
and predictability of decay; however, compared with
LINACs, cobalt-60 units have poor field flatness,
lower percentage depth dose, greater penumbra,
lower dose rate, and less favorable beam profile.
Colbalt-60 is limited in its ability to deliver more
complex treatments. Compared with LINAC, it may
result in an increased dose to the contralateral
breast, a higher skin dose, or some dose inhomogeneities in the treated breast, especially during breast-conservation irradiation. However, these disadvantages
can be mitigated by a proper treatment plan and the
use of simple accessories, such as wedges.36

Drug delivery
The implementation of scientific evidence-driven
recommendations is limited by resources and by the
availability of manpower, modern equipment, and
costs of drugs. The prices are notably affordable for
CMF; doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide; and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil combinations, and those drugs are on the WHO list of
essential chemotherapeutic drugs.62 Nonetheless,
patients in many LMCs do not have access to the
standard drugs used to treat breast cancer in the
higher income settings (Fig. 8, column 1). Remedying
drug distribution problems and reducing the cost of
prohibitively expensive drugs is difficult to do at the
facility level, but it may be possible to create partnerships with drug companies to receive medicines for
free or at reduced cost.
Options for reducing drug use could include
decreasing treatment time or using intermittent
rather than continuous therapy.63 Another approach
could be to use strategies that increase bioavailability
of the drug, such as taking food in conjunction with
medicines that increase drug absorption.64 Older
drugs that previously were discarded or were considered minimally active in breast cancer are being reevaluated from a targeted therapy perspective. The
platinum drugs, such as cisplatin, have resurfaced as
active treatment for breast cancer after preclinical
models suggested their synergism with trastuzumab
as HER-2-targeted treatment.65
It is more likely, however, that government intervention is needed to address the drug delivery problem in LMCs. Government officials can and should
work to improve drug donation programs, get better
prices from pharmaceutical companies, and obtain

2235

licenses to produce generic medicines. In particular,
opiates for pain control, which are the mainstay of
palliative care, often are unavailable. Preliminary estimates indicate that 4.8 million individuals per year do
not receive treatment for moderate to severe pain
caused by cancer.66 Developing countries consume
only approximately 6% of the world’s morphine, despite housing >80% of the world’s population.67
Increasing the availability of opioids for pain control
will require reducing attitudinal, access, and legal barriers as well as realistic pricing of generic agents.
There also is broader concern that research and
development of cancer drugs is driven mainly by
commercial considerations rather than public health
priorities, leading to the creation of drugs that are
unlikely to reach populations in less developed countries. Although many breast cancer drugs are relatively standardized at this point, in the future, more
targeted, genetically based drugs will be developed
that may exclude large portions of populations in
LMCs because of cost.

Process Metrics
Appropriate quality-assurance and quality-control
measures should be integrated into cancer care programs at all levels of early detection, diagnosis, and
treatment. Focusing efforts on improving performance in problem areas can assure the efficient use of
resources and the maximization of their positive
impact. Nonpunitive reporting of errors is a critical
step in improving patient safety and processes.
Proper methodology for defining quality-improvement initiatives must be considered and adapted to
existing resources.68
Process metrics are useful tools that health ministers and facility managers can use to track progress
and inform future decisions. Carefully selected process metrics can be collected without excessive effort
or cost and can be used to measure the effectiveness
of a facility’s or country’s ability to detect, diagnose,
and treat cancer. Without metrics, it is difficult to
determine the success of a breast cancer program.
The suggested metrics in this article are very basic
and are intended only to provide a general orientation
to metrics and models (Fig. 9). Specific measurements
will need to be designed at the local level, in which
an intricate understanding of the available resources
and program goals can inform their creation and use.
Generally, the sophistication of metrics will
increase with the level of resources. However, it is
possible that certain metrics can be used at many
levels of resources and that the outcome expectations
change as resources levels increase. In many LMCs, the
collection of even rudimentary measurements will be

2236

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 9. Table of process metrics for breast healthcare programs in low-and middle-income countries. Pts indicates patients; H&P, history and physical; dx, diagnosis; suspic., suspicious; CBE, clinical breast examination; ca, cancer; tx, treatment; TNM, tumor classification system; HER-2/neu, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; d, day; XRT, external beam radiotherapy. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited,
and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in same higher income settings.

difficult. Despite these difficulties, LMCs should
actively engage in creating and using metrics that can
be integrated easily into existing practices.

DISCUSSION
The improvements in survival in the industrial world
observed in recent decades have been attributed to
early detection by screening and to timely and effective treatment guided by extensive and rigorous
clinical trials in screening and treatment.69,70 Consequently, breast cancer mortality, which had been relatively unchanged from the 1930s through the 1980s,
has dropped by 1.4% to 3.1% per year between 1990
and 2003 in the US.71 Notably, minority women in the
US are more likely to present with advanced-stage
disease and have higher mortality rates than white
women, although white women and black women
who present with similar stage disease and receive

similar treatment have similar outcomes. These findings suggest that differences in stage at presentation
and treatment should represent primary targets of
research and interventions designed to reduce disparities in cancer outcomes among women.72
An approach for evidence-based breast health
improvement in LMCs is defined in the BHGI guidelines. Breast health interventions for early detection,
diagnosis, and treatment in LMCs are delineated and
explained in the published BHGI Guidelines for International Breast Health and Cancer Control. The
guidelines outline programmatic approaches to support key breast health interventions that can be replicated in communities in which resources are limited
to support comprehensive and functional breast
healthcare programs using sustainable applications
for breast healthcare implementation. The BHGI
guidelines provide a resource-sensitive, stratified framework for guidance on how to overcome obstacles

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

to implementation of breast health interventions
when resources are limited, including underserved
communities in high-income countries.
Organizational collaboration among regional,
national, and international groups to improve healthcare delivery in LMCs can facilitate effective guideline implementation. The adoption of evidencebased breast healthcare guidelines for implementation oriented to LMCs is a crucial step toward
improving breast healthcare and breast cancer care
in these regions. Improving a healthcare system so
that it can deliver better breast healthcare can be
accomplished best if multiple sectors act in collaboration. Improvements are most likely to be
achieved when healthcare ministries and governmental agencies, nongovernmental organizations,
national cancer institutes, and public and patient
groups work together.
To successfully implement the BHGI guidelines
in LMCs, 3 goals must be addressed. First, dissemination and implementation (D&I) strategies need to
be developed so that guideline adoption takes place.
Rather than assuming that we know the optimal
approaches to information transfer in LMCs, varied
strategies need to be explored and studied in different
LMC environments. Second, education of the public,
of healthcare providers, and of health system administrators is necessary for guideline adoption to be successful and sustained. Third, effective and affordable
technology for detection, diagnosis, and treatment
must be achieved in target LMCs so that cancer diagnosis and treatment is performed correctly.

Guideline Dissemination and Implementation Research
The dominant paradigm even now in the medical
community is that good research and publication
should be sufficient to ensure the translation of scientific findings into general practice.73 Unfortunately, a
landmark Institute of Medicine (IOM) report from
2001 clearly identified the failure to translate much
scientific innovation into practice.74,75 More recently,
Rubenstein and Pugh separated the IOM’s second
translational block—clinical research to practice—into
2 parts: 1) clinical research to guidelines and 2) guidelines to practice.76 D&I researchers maintain that the
process is complex, and they have begun to identify
factors and processes that are critical to the adoption
of new technologies and practices.77 Although there
already has been some D&I work on assessing readiness for change, it usually has focused on just 1 component, such as providers or health units, or it has
focused on intention without considering self-efficacy
or environment. In the conclusion of their extensive
review of the implementation literature, Greenhalgh

2237

et al note the need for more research on system readiness for innovation and for more studies evaluating
the implementation of specific interventions.78
A review of available information strongly suggests that there is a crucial role for research in applying the experience and knowledge of high-income
societies to the challenges of women and breast cancer throughout the world.56 A recent survey of oncology experts from Latin American countries indicated
that 94% of the surveyed experts considered clinicalepidemiologic research development on breast cancer insufficient in their country.42 The main reasons
identified were insufficient economic retribution and
lack of available time. To our knowledge, very little
research on guideline implementation has been done
in LMCs. It is necessary to determine whether the
basic frameworks and instruments that have been
described in high-income countries apply in these
very different environments and what adaptation is
needed to make them both valid and feasible. A systematic program of research to develop appropriate
readiness assessment instruments and to identify
effective implementation strategies is needed now in
a variety of LMCs. Thus, as we move forward to support the adoption, implementation, and maintenance
of the new evidence-based principles embodied in
the BHGI guidelines, it will be critical to incorporate
careful evaluation into the efforts to ensure that lessons concerning effectiveness and efficiency are captured. It is precisely because resources are scarce in
these countries that it is even more imperative for
LMCs to adopt effective practices as quickly as possible and to design implementation approaches with
limited resources in mind.73

Education and training programs
Public education is mandatory to improve breast
health outcome in LMCs. The mediating effects of
psychosocial and cultural variables on the impact of
breast cancer interventions in LMCs are understudied. The personal representations of illness that
guide health behavior vary across cultures. These
representations underlie and influence women’s
response to prevention and screening campaigns as
well as the likelihood of initiating and complying
with treatment and follow-up.56 Regardless of
resource availability, breast health outcomes cannot
improve unless women understand the benefits of
early detection and are willing to undergo timely diagnosis and treatment. Practical evidence-based strategies are needed for effective communication to the
public to promote early detection of breast cancer,
enhance breast cancer diagnosis, improve the quality
of breast cancer treatment, support the information

2238

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

needs of breast cancer survivors, improve palliative
care, and increase the sensitivity of end-of-life care
for breast cancer.40
Professional education and training programs for
breast healthcare exist in many international settings.
However, these efforts primarily target the education
of healthcare providers in high-income countries
about novel (and usually expensive) technologies and
drugs used in the delivery of cutting-edge care. These
professional educational efforts typically do not
address the specific needs of healthcare providers in
LMCs in which infrastructure is lacking or dysfunctional. Healthcare organizations and agencies need
to collaborate on improving breast healthcare to develop curricula that are selected appropriately for
healthcare providers in target LMCs. These educational curricula need to be tailored to the specific
resource constraints that drive medical decisionmaking and therapy.
One example of targeted education and training
is in breast pathology. The development of optimal
breast pathology services has been recognized as a
fundamental requirement for the delivery of quality
breast healthcare with emphasis on patient’s safety.
The financial burden of establishing and maintain
breast pathology services is counterbalanced by the
cost savings from decreased adverse effects and excessive use of treatment resources resulting from
incomplete or incorrect pathologic diagnoses. Proper
training in breast pathology, for both pathologists
and laboratory technicians, is critical to programmatic success and provides the underpinnings of
programmatic success for any country at any level of
economic wealth.38
BHGI collaborators have now established a
model breast pathology laboratory at the Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital (KATH) in Kumasi, Ghana.79
This program, which is supported by BHGI collaborator Helge Stalsberg from Norway, has created a
training program and laboratory infrastructure that
has proven to be sustainable with existing resources
at KATH. At the University Hospital of North Norway
(UNN), a plan to re-establish surgical pathology at
KATH was developed through discussions with the
Ghanaian hospital. This program development is a
model for pathology infrastructure development in a
low-income environment. Two KATH technicians
came to UNN and trained in the histopathology laboratory for 3 months. On their return, they started
producing slides at KATH. Since April 2006, weekly
shipments of hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides
have been sent to UNN by courier service. When
needed, paraffin blocks are sent on request. From
March 2006, 2 young Ghanaian physicians have been

received as trainees at the UNN, doing full resident
work and training with the aim of being approved as
specialists in pathology in Ghana by 2010. This type
of training approach could be mirrored in other
countries and also serves as an educational model
for specialties outside of pathology.

Technology application and development
Even in low-income settings, some basic-level technology is necessary to provide cancer care. Existing
technologies in imaging (ultrasound, mammography,
x-ray), tissue sampling (minimally invasive needle biopsy), and pathology (histopathology and/or cytology, immunohistochemistry) are necessary resources
for effective cancer care. BHGI guidelines can be
used in LMC settings to identify needed standard
technology infrastructure.
Introduction of breast imaging in LMCs. In highresource countries, diagnostic mammography is a
core resource for workup for lesions of all clinical
presentations, Women aged 30 years with a palpable lump generally undergo diagnostic mammography as the initial diagnostic study of choice.80 In
high-resource countries, breast ultrasound is used to
augment diagnostic mammography and specifically
to examine localized findings from the diagnostic
mammogram and/or CBE. Screening breast ultrasound (a survey of the whole breast in clinically
asymptomatic women) generally is discouraged
because of insufficient evidence to determine
whether ultrasound is efficacious and cost-effective
as a screening tool.81 Currently, a multicenter trial is
underway in the US to evaluate the efficacy of
screening whole-breast ultrasound.82
By contrast, diagnostic breast ultrasound generally becomes available in low-resource countries
before diagnostic mammography becomes common.
Mammography is a highly specialized imaging tool
that is considerably more expensive than ultrasound.
Until the recent application of digital technology
(which, itself, is quite expensive), mammographic
imaging required the use of x-ray film, for which the
costs and quality-control requirements can be an
insurmountable barriers to widespread use in a lowresource a country.16 Many health facilities will not
purchase mammographic equipment, because it is
dedicated to the single use of breast imaging without
any other radiographic applications. By comparison,
ultrasound commonly is available in all resource settings, because it can be used for imaging many parts
of the body, and it requires no film other than that
for record keeping. Ultrasound equipment can use
multiple different transducers, making it useful for
many different diagnostic applications other than

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

evaluation of the breast. Thus, there is a strong impetus for the use of breast ultrasound in settings in
which mammography is unavailable.
Although a comparative study has not been performed in a resource-constrained setting, diagnostic
breast ultrasound may have more utility than diagnostic mammography as an initial diagnostic test in
LMCs. Breast ultrasound is particularly useful for
imaging masses in the breast, it can be used to distinguish solid masses from fluid-filled cysts, and it
can characterize the shape and morphology of solid
masses, all of which are very useful in determining
which palpable masses are more likely to be disease
requiring a tissue biopsy.80 Because patients in lowresource settings most commonly present with
locally advanced, palpable, invasive cancers, ultrasound can provide considerable supplemental information after a positive CBE for the evaluation of the
extent of breast disease.83 Furthermore, premenopausal breast cancer appears to be relatively more
common in low-income countries based on the
younger average age at diagnosis. Younger, premenopausal women more commonly have dense breasts
that are less amenable to mammographic imaging
and more amenable to ultrasound.84
Breast pathology in LMCs. The quality of breast
healthcare and the ultimate clinical outcome of
patients with breast cancer are related directly to the
quality of breast pathology practice. In regions of the
world with few or no on-site pathologists, attempts
should be made to find another pathology laboratory
to assist them with processing of the specimen and
interpretation of the pathology samples. Adequate
tissue sampling and processing and the appropriate
use of ancillary studies, such as biomarker studies
for prognostic/predictive factors, require sufficient
healthcare and financial resources. False-positive and
false-negative diagnoses result in under and over
treatment. False-positive diagnoses of cancer commonly are attributable to interpretation errors. Falsenegative diagnoses of cancer are attributed most often to a nonrepresentative specimen or to severe
artifactual changes in the tissue material. However,
specimen quality also plays an important role in
false-positive diagnostic errors, because over interpretation is more likely to occur in a poor-quality
specimen because of either limited material on
which to base the diagnosis or because of significant
artifactual changes from poor fixation or slide preparation, making interpretation more difficult. These
shortcomings can be minimized if steps are taken to
ensure adequate specimen quality and if pathologists
acquire and maintain high-level diagnostic skills in
breast pathology.38

2239

Hormone therapy is among the simplest methods of providing systemic therapy for ER-positive
breast cancers. Tamoxifen, as an oral medication,
can be provided with minimal infrastructure other
than an outpatient pharmacy. If tamoxifen is too expensive, then surgical or radiation-induced oophorectomy has proven efficacy and can be performed in
premenopausal women. Thus, the use of hormone
receptor testing is of significant value, because tamoxifen and/or oophorectomy are unlikely to be efficacious when the cancer fails to express ER and PR.
Patients can be given these hormone therapies even
if ER and PR testing is unavailable. However, if this
algorithm is followed, then a large proportion of
patients will receive therapy that, if testing had been
available, would have been predicted to have no
therapeutic utility. In regions that have no accessibility to performance on-site ancillary testing such as
ER immunohistochemistry, locating a laboratory in
the region that has the capacity to perform the
needed test is strongly recommended.38
The rate of ER-positive cancers may vary among
different racial groups. In 1 study, the incidence of
ER- and PR-positive cancers was similar in Japanese
women and American women.85 By contrast, another
study analyzing >1000 tumors in Chinese women
indicated that the ER-positive rate was 54%, which is
significantly lower than the rate for Caucasian
women, even when considering the potential confounding variable of menopausal status.86 Thus, ER
and PR testing, although it is considered a limitedlevel resource rather than a basic-level resource, has
obvious importance for guiding the use of therapy.
Indeed, savings from the selective use of hormone
treatments should offset (if not completely pay for)
the cost of the hormone receptor testing.
Informatics in breast healthcare delivery. International partnership addressing health issues in LMCs
requires the development and application of lowcost communication tools to facilitate information
transfer between partner organizations and to make
key information generally available to the public.38
For example, telepathology has the potential to
enhance training in some settings and can be used
for consultation on challenging cases on an ongoing
basis using expertise at a distance. The availability of
broad-band connections capable of handling the
large amount of information that needs to be transferred remains an issue in many low- and mediumresource settings, as has demonstrated at Tata Memorial in Mumbai, India.87
In 2005, the BHGI developed an Internet website
on the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
server (www.bhgi.info) to facilitate outside communi-

2240

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

cation regarding BHGI activities. The BHGI website
serves as an information portal, providing access for
downloading BHGI publications and materials.
Because the website is written in HTML, modifying
information on the website is cumbersome and expensive. It also lacks flexibility and does not permit
interactive dialogue. In 2007, BHGI developed a customized Internet portal using the Microsoft program
Sharepoint 2003 to facilitate dialogue, information
exchange, and article preparation for the 2007 Global
Summit participants. This BHGI Sharepoint portal has
become a hub of the international communication for
the Global Summit, facilitating organization of the
meeting and ensuing collaborative writing this BHGI
supplement. This application, although it is a significant improvement on the BHGI website for communication and dialogue, still has limitations. Future
applications for open access informatics could prove
to be invaluable tools for improving information dissemination and for providing linkages among healthcare organizations and facilities in LMCs.
Use of novel technology. Although some tools that
are used commonly in high-income countries are
unaffordable in LMCs, other simpler tools are available and can be applied. Special collaborations with
technology companies can be formed for the development of modular diagnostic clinics that integrate
clinical evaluation, basic imaging, tissue sampling,
and histopathologic assessment to make accurate
cancer diagnoses and to prepare for treatment. Innovative technology development could improve
healthcare delivery when that technology is targeted
toward low-cost applications in LMCs.

Development of learning laboratories
The implementation of D&I research, education, and
training and technology application could be vetted
through the development of international learning
laboratories to create unique environments for information transfer, collaborative learning, study, and
analysis. Through collaboration between the BHGI
and in-country sponsoring organizations, specialized
curricula and methodology could be developed based
on the BHGI guidelines. BHGI learning laboratories
established in collaboration with sponsoring institutions in LMCs could become a venue for education
and training. A key principle in the success of these
learning centers would be the recognition that
experts from high-, middle-, and low-income countries all have information, experience, and skills to
share. Although experts from high-income countries
may have expertise in the application of cutting-edge
diagnostic tools or therapies, experts from LMCs
have expertise in the reality of healthcare delivery in

limited-resource settings. Real-world problem solving
will require a collaborative approach using mutual
knowledge transfer from all participants.
By applying D&I research methodology, the outcome of training opportunities and educational
exchanges in Learning Laboratories could be
assessed and measured. Participants from LMCs who
come for breast health education could be tracked
after their training to determine which aspects of the
Learning Laboratory curriculum proved useful and
which aspects warrant more improvement and study.
By obtaining organized feedback from Learning Laboratory participants, the effectiveness of the BHGI
guidelines could be tested and improved. Thus, the
BHGI Learning Laboratory could become the operational model for BHGI guidelines application and
testing in a practical, real-world LMC environment
as a key step toward improving breast healthcare
delivery in LMCs around the globe.

FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
Funding for the BHGI, 2007 Global Summit on International
Breast Health-Implementation and Guidelines for International
Breast Health and Cancer Control-Implementation publication
came from partnering organizations who share a commitment
to medically underserved women. We thank and gratefully
acknowledge these organizations and agencies for grants and
conference support: Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center;
Susan G. Komen for the Cure; American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO); US National Cancer Institute, Office of International Affairs (OIA); American Cancer Society; Lance Armstrong
Foundation; US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(*Grant 1 R13 HS017218-01); US Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Division of Cancer Prevention and Control,
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion; American Society of Breast Disease; Oncology Nursing Society; US National Cancer Institute, Office of Women’s
Health (OWH); and US National Institutes of Health, Office of
Research on Women’s Health (ORWH).
*Funding for the 2007 Global Summit on International
Breast Health—Implementation was made possible (in part) by
Grant No. 1 R13 HS017218-01 from the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ). The views expressed in written
conference materials or publications and by speakers and moderators do not necessarily reflect the official policies of the
Department of Health and Human Services; nor does mention
of trade names, commercial practices, or organizations imply
endorsement by the US Government.
We thank and gratefully acknowledge the generous support of our corporate partners through unrestricted educational
grants: Pfizer Inc.; AstraZeneca; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; Ethicon Endo Surgery, Inc.; GE Healthcare; F. HoffmannLa Roche AG; and Novartis Oncology.
BHGI is a global health alliance of organizations and individuals. We are grateful to our collaborators throughout the
world who share the BHGI mission and vision. Thank you for
your important contributions to this endeavor for medically
underserved women.

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

Anderson GF, Chu E. Expanding priorities-confronting
chronic disease in countries with low income. N Engl J
Med. 2007;356:209-211.
World Health Organization. 58th World Health Assembly
Approved Resolution on Cancer Prevention and Control
WHA58.22. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2005.
Sloan FA, Gelband H, eds. Cancer Control Opportunities in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries [summary]. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2007:1-16.
Ferlay J, Bray F, Pisani P, Parkin DM. GLOBOCAN 2002:
Cancer Incidence, Mortality and Prevalence Worldwide.
IARC CancerBase No. 5. version 2.0. Lyon, France: IARC
Press; 2004. Available at:http://www-dep.iarc.fr/. Accessed
on August 26, 2008.
Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:74-108.
Parkin DM, Fernandez LM. Use of statistics to assess the
global burden of breast cancer. Breast J. 2006;12(1 suppl):
S70-S80.
Stewart B, Kleihues PE. World Cancer Report. Lyon, France:
IARC Press; 2003.
IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Cancer-Preventive Strategies. IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention. Vol.
7: Breast Cancer Screening. Lyon, France: Oxford University
Press; 2002.
Porter P. ‘‘Westernizing’’ women’s risks? Breast cancer in
lower-income countries. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:213-216.
Pal SK, Mittal B. Improving cancer care in India: prospects
and challenges. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2004;5:226-228.
Bray F, McCarron P, Parkin DM. The changing global patterns of female breast cancer incidence and mortality.
Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6:229-239.
Hisham AN, Yip CH. Spectrum of breast cancer in Malaysian women: overview. World J Surg. 2003;27:921-923.
Chopra R. The Indian scene. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19(18
suppl):106S-111S.
Sant M, Allemani C, Berrino F, et al. Breast carcinoma survival in Europe and the United States. Cancer. 2004;100:
715-722.
Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA. Cancer statistics, 2000. CA Cancer J Clin. 2000;50:7-33.
Zotov V, Shyyan R. Introduction of breast cancer screening
in Chernihiv Oblast in the Ukraine: report of a PATH Breast
Cancer Assistance Program experience. Breast J. 2003;9 (2
suppl):S75-S80.
Carlson RW, Anderson BO, Burstein HJ, et al. Breast cancer.
J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2005;3:238-289.
Morrow M, Strom EA, Bassett LW, et al. Standard for breast
conservation therapy in the management of invasive breast
carcinoma. CA Cancer J Clin. 2002;52:277-300.
Smith RA. Breast cancer screening among women younger
than age 50: a current assessment of the issues. CA Cancer
J Clin. 2000;50:312-336.
Abrams JS. Adjuvant therapy for breast cancer—results from
the USA consensus conference. Breast Cancer. 2001;8:298-304.
World Health Organization. Executive Summary of the
National Cancer Control Programmes: Policies and Managerial Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2002.
Anderson BO, Braun S, Carlson RW, et al. Overview of
breast health care guidelines for countries with limited
resources. Breast J. 2003;9(2 suppl):S42-S50.

2241

23. Anderson BO, Shyyan R, Eniu A, et al. Breast cancer in limited-resource countries: an overview of the Breast Health
Global Initiative 2005 guidelines. Breast J. 2006;12(1 suppl):
S3-S15.
24. Winn RJ, Botnick WZ. The NCCN Guideline Program: a conceptual framework. Oncology (Williston Park). 1997;11:25-32.
25. Anderson BO, Braun S, Lim S, Smith RA, Taplin S, Thomas
DB. Early detection of breast cancer in countries with limited resources. Breast J. 2003;9(2 suppl):S51-S59.
26. Smith RA, Caleffi M, Albert US, et al. Breast cancer in limited-resource countries: early detection and access to care.
Breast J. 2006;12(1 suppl):S16-S26.
27. Vargas HI, Anderson BO, Chopra R, et al. Diagnosis of
breast cancer in countries with limited resources. Breast J.
2003;9(2 suppl):S60-S66.
28. Shyyan R, Masood S, Badwe RA, et al. Breast cancer in limited-resource countries: diagnosis and pathology. Breast J.
2006;12(1 suppl):S27-S37.
29. Carlson RW, Anderson BO, Chopra R, et al. Treatment of
breast cancer in countries with limited resources. Breast J.
2003;9(2 suppl):S67-S74.
30. Eniu A, Carlson RW, Aziz Z, et al. Breast cancer in limitedresource countries: treatment and allocation of resources.
Breast J. 2006;12(1 suppl):S38-S53.
31. Anderson BO, Yip CH, Ramsey SD, et al. Breast cancer in
limited-resource countries: health care systems and public
policy. Breast J. 2006;12(1 suppl):S54-S69.
32. Yip CH, Smith RA, Anderson BO, et al. Guideline
implementation for breast healthcare in low- and middleincome countries: early detection resource allocation.
Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2244-2256.
33. Shyyan R, Sener SF, Anderson BO, et al. Guideline implementation for breast healthcare in low- and middleincome countries: diagnosis resource allocation. Cancer.
2008;113(8 suppl):2257-2268.
34. Eniu A, Carlson RW, El Saghir NS, et al. Guideline implementation for breast healthcare in low- and middleincome countries: treatment resource allocation. Cancer.
2008;113(8 suppl):2269-2281.
35. Harford J, Azavedo E, Fischietto M. Guideline implementation for breast healthcare in low- and middle income
countries: breast healthcare program resource allocation.
Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2282-2296.
36. Bese NS, Munshi A, Budrukkar A, et al. Breast radiation
therapy guideline implementation in low- and middleincome countries. Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2305-2314.
37. El Saghir NS, Eniu A, Carlson RW, et al. Locally advanced
breast cancer: treatment guidelines and resource-driven
implementation. Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2315-2324.
38. Masood S, Vass L, Ibarra JA, et al. Breast pathology guidelines implementation for countries of limited resources.
Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2297-2304.
39. McTiernan A, Porter P, Potter JD. Breast cancer prevention
in countries with diverse resources. Cancer. 2008;113(8
suppl):2325-2330.
40. Kreps GL, Sivaram R. The central role of strategic health
communication in enhancing breast cancer outcomes
across the continuum of care in limited-resource countries.
Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2331-2337.
41. Weiss NS. Breast cancer mortality in relation to clinical
breast examination and breast self-examination. Breast J.
2003;9(2 suppl):S86-S89.
42. Cazap E, Buzaid A, Garbino C, et al. Breast cancer in Latin
America: results of the SLACOM/BCRF Expert Survey. Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2359-2365.

2242

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

43. Pisani P, Parkin DM, Ngelangel C, et al. Outcome of screening by clinical examination of the breast in a trial in the
Philippines. Int J Cancer. 2006;118:149-154.
44. Duffy SW, Tabar L, Vitak B, Warwick J. Tumor size and
breast cancer detection: what might be the effect of a less
sensitive screening tool than mammography? Breast J.
2006;12(1 suppl):S91-S95.
45. Nadkarni MS, Gupta PB, Parmar VV, Badwe RA. Breast conservation surgery without pre-operative mammography—a
definite feasibility. Breast. 2006;15:595-600.
46. Abati A, Simsir A. Breast fine needle aspiration biopsy: prevailing recommendations and contemporary practices. Clin
Lab Med. 2005;25:631-654.
47. Giuliano AE, Kirgan DM, Guenther JM, Morton DL. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for breast
cancer [see comments]. Ann Surg. 1994;220:391-398; discussion 398-401.
48. Thorat MA, Rangole A, Nadkarni MS, Parmar V, Badwe RA.
Revision surgery for breast cancer: single institution experience. Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2247-2252.
49. Nielsen HM, Overgaard M, Grau C, Jensen AR, Overgaard J.
Study of failure pattern among high-risk breast cancer
patients with or without postmastectomy radiation therapy
in addition to adjuvant systemic therapy: long-term results
from the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group DBCG
82 B and C randomized studies. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:22682275.
50. Ragaz J, Olivotto IA, Spinelli JJ, et al. Locoregional radiation
therapy in patients with high-risk breast cancer receiving
adjuvant chemotherapy: 20-year results of the British Columbia randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:116-126.
51. Bese NS, Kiel K, El-Gueddari Bel K, Campbell OB, Awuah
B, Vikram B. Radiotherapy for breast cancer in countries
with limited resources: program implementation and evidence-based recommendations. Breast J. 2006;12(1 suppl):
S96-S102.
52. Hortobagyi GN, de la Garza Salazar J, Pritchard K, et al.
The global breast cancer burden: variations in epidemiology and survival. Clin Breast Cancer. 2005;6:391-401.
53. El Saghir NS, Khalil MK, Eid T, et al. Trends in epidemiology and management of breast cancer in developing Arab
countries: a literature and registry analysis. Int J Surg.
2007;5:225-233.
54. Goetz MP, Rae JM, Suman VJ, et al. Pharmacogenetics of
tamoxifen biotransformation is associated with clinical
outcomes of efficacy and hot flashes. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:9312-9318.
55. DeMichele A, Aplenc R, Botbyl J, et al. Drug-metabolizing
enzyme polymorphisms predict clinical outcome in a
node-positive breast cancer cohort. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:
5552-5559.
56. Love RR. Defining a global research agenda for breast cancer. Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2366-2371.
57. Buchholz TA, Lehman CD, Harris JR, et al. Statement of the
science concerning locoregional treatments after preoperative chemotherapy for breast cancer: a National Cancer
Institute conference. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:791-797.
58. Cataliotti L, De Wolf C, Holland R, et al. Guidelines on the
standards for the training of specialised health professionals dealing with breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:
660-675.
59. Barton MB, Frommer M, Shafiq J. Role of radiotherapy in
cancer control in low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:584-595.

60. Van Der Giessen PH, Alert J, Badri C, et al. Multinational
assessment of some operational costs of teletherapy.
Radiother Oncol. 2004;71:347-355.
61. Bese NS, Sut PA, Ober A. The effect of treatment interruptions in the postoperative irradiation of breast cancer.
Oncology. 2005;69:214-223.
62. World Health Organization. Essential Medicines. WHO
Model List, 2005. Available at: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
hq/2005/a87017_eng.pdf. Accessed on August 26, 2008.
63. Bines J, Eniu A. Effective but cost prohibitive drugs in
breast cancer treatment: a clinical review. Cancer. 2008;113
(8 suppl):2353-2358.
64. Ratain MJ, Cohen EE. The value meal: how to save $1700 per
month or more on lapatinib. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3397-3398.
65. Pegram M, Hsu S, Lewis G, et al. Inhibitory effects of combinations of HER-2/neu antibody and chemotherapeutic
agents used for treatment of human breast cancers. Oncogene. 1999;18:2241-2251.
66. World Health Organization. Access to Controlled Medications Programme: Briefing Note, 2007. Available at: http://
www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/access_to_
controlled_medications_brnote_english.pdf. Accessed January
22, 2008.
67. Webster R, Lacey J, Quine S. Palliative care: a public health
priority in developing countries. J Public Health Policy.
2007;28:28-39.
68. Auerbach AD, Landefeld CS, Shojania KG. The tension
between needing to improve care and knowing how to do
it. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:608-613.
69. Weir HK, Thun MJ, Hankey BF, et al. Annual report to the
nation on the status of cancer, 1975-2000, featuring the
uses of surveillance data for cancer prevention and control.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:1276-1299.
70. Clarke M. Meta-analyses of adjuvant therapies for women
with early breast cancer: the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’
Collaborative Group overview. Ann Oncol. 2006;17(10
suppl):x59-x62.
71. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun MJ. Cancer
statistics, 2007. CA Cancer J Clin. 2007;57:43-66.
72. Bach PB, Schrag D, Brawley OW, Galaznik A, Yakren S,
Begg CB. Survival of blacks and whites after a cancer diagnosis. JAMA. 2002;287:2106-2113.
73. McCannon CJ, Berwick DM, Massoud MR. The science of
large-scale change in global health. JAMA. 2007;298:19371939.
74. Committee on Quality of Health Cre in America, Institute
of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health
System for the 21st Century. Bethesda, MD: Institute of
Medicine; 2001.
75. [No authors listed] IOM committee calls for complete
revamping of health care system to achieve better quality.
Qual Lett Healthc Lead. 2001;13:14-15.
76. Rubenstein LV, Pugh J. Strategies for promoting organizational and practice change by advancing implementation research. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21(2 suppl):S58-S64.
77. Grimshaw J, Eccles M, Thomas R, et al. Toward evidencebased quality improvement. Evidence (and its limitations)
of the effectiveness of guideline dissemination and implementation strategies 1966-1998. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21
(2 suppl):S14-S20.
78. Greenhalgh T, Robert G, Macfarlane F, Bate P, Kyriakidou O.
Diffusion of innovations in service organizations: systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Q. 2004;82:581629.

BHGI Guideline Implementation for LMCs/Anderson et al
79. Stalsberg H, Awuah B, Ibarra JA, Nsiah-Asare A. Re-establishing a surgical pathology service in Kumasi, Ghana: case
report and discussion of barriers and key elements of a
successful collaboration between low- and high-resource
countries. Cancer. 2008;113(8 suppl):2338-2346.
80. The NCCN Breast Cancer Screening and Diagnosis Guidelines. The Complete Library of NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology [CD-ROM]. Version 1. Jenkintown,
Pa: National Comprehensive Cancer Network; 2005.
81. Stavros AT, Thickman D, Rapp CL, Dennis MA, Parker SH,
Sisney GA. Solid breast nodules: use of sonography to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions. Radiology.
1995;196:123-134.
82. Berg WA. Rationale for a trial of screening breast ultrasound: American College of Radiology Imaging Network
(ACRIN) 6666. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2003;180:1225-1228.

2243

83. Fornage BD, Toubas O, Morel M. Clinical, mammographic,
and sonographic determination of preoperative breast cancer size. Cancer. 1987;60:765-771.
84. Kaplan SS. Clinical utility of bilateral whole-breast US in
the evaluation of women with dense breast tissue. Radiology. 2001;221:641-649.
85. Nomura Y, Kobayashi S, Takatani O, Sugano H, Matsumoto
K, McGuire WL. Estrogen receptor and endocrine responsiveness in Japanese versus American breast cancer
patients. Cancer Res. 1977;37:106-110.
86. Chow LW, Ho P. Hormonal receptor determination of 1052
Chinese breast cancers. J Surg Oncol. 2000;75:172-175.
87. Desai S, Ghosh TK, Chinoy R, Mohan A, Dinshaw KA. Telepathology at Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai and Barshi,
a rural centre in Maharashtra. Natl Med J India. 2002;
15:363-364.

