Review Article

Current Applications and Future
Prospects of Fine-Needle Aspiration
Biopsy of Locoregional Lymph Nodes
in the Management of Breast Cancer
Savitri Krishnamurthy, MD

Staging of disease is routine in the evaluation of patients newly diagnosed with breast cancer. Assessment
of palpable and/or nonpalpable locoregional lymph nodes is an important component of the initial staging.
Ultrasound (US) is the favored imaging modality for the initial investigation of lymph nodes and results in a
significant increase in the specificity of the overall evaluation when used in conjunction with fine-needle
aspiration (FNA). This review provides a concise summary, based on published literature, of the current
applications and future prospects of FNA biopsy of locoregional lymph nodes in the initial staging and subsequent surgical management of patients with breast cancer. Patients undergo either sentinel lymph node
(SLN) biopsy or complete axillary lymph node dissection, based on whether the axillary lymph node status
is determined to be negative or positive in the initial staging process. The status of lymph nodes in the supraclavicular, infraclavicular, and internal mammary regions provides more accurate staging information
and also impacts subsequent surgical management. The identification and evaluation of intramammary
lymph nodes can add value in the overall assessment of patients with breast cancer. The feasibility of noninvasive imaging modalities for SLN mapping in animal models has indicated a good potential for FNA biopsy in the subsequent investigation of SLNs identified noninvasively in humans. Cancer (Cancer
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
Cytopathol) 2009;117:451–62. V
KEY WORDS: breast cancer, lymph nodes, fine-needle aspiration biopsy, sentinel lymph node biopsy,
neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Staging of the malignant tumor is a routine component in the assessment of patients who are newly
diagnosed with breast cancer. Breast cancer staging aids in the appropriate management of patients at each
stage of disease and is useful in estimating the prognosis for a patient at a particular stage. The routine staging process includes taking a thorough history of the patient, physical examination, mammography, ultrasonography (US) of the breast and lymph node basins, computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen,
bone scanning, and chest radiography. Cancer is assigned a clinical stage at the time of the initial diagnosis
based on the findings of the physical examination, radiologic studies, and core needle biopsy (CNB) of the
Corresponding author: Savitri Krishnamurthy, MD, Department of Pathology, Unit 53, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 794-5664; skrishna@mdanderson.org
Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
I thank Dr. Gary Whitman and Dr. Huong LePetross of the Department of Diagnostic Radiology for the ultrasound images used in this report.
Received: July 14, 2009; Revised: August 24, 2009; Accepted: August 26, 2009
Published online October 7, 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/cncy.20055, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

451

Review Article

primary breast tumor, with or without fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy or CNB of locoregional lymph nodes
(ie, those in the axillary basins, supraclavicular and infraclavicular regions, and internal mammary chain). The definitive breast cancer stage is based on pathologic
information obtained at the time of surgical removal of
the primary tumor and regional lymph nodes.
Traditionally, breast cancer has been staged using
the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification system,
which classifies cancer based on the size of the primary tumor, the presence and extent of regional lymph node
involvement, and the presence of distant metastasis.
Breast cancer staging using TNM classification has been
adopted by the American Joint Commission on Cancer
(AJCC); last revised in 2003, it provides guidelines for the
accurate staging of any breast tumor.1,2
Determining whether cancer has spread to locoregional lymph nodes is a critical step in the initial staging
of patients with breast cancer and dictates the selection of
treatment options. Physical examination alone is neither
sensitive nor reliable in evaluating lymph nodes because
lymph nodes with metastatic disease are often not palpable and reactive lymph nodes may be enlarged, mimicking
metastasis. The false-negative rate of clinical examination
of axilla for detecting metastatic lymph nodes is reported
to be as high as 30% to 45% in different series.3-5 Imaging
modalities can improve the sensitivity of clinical examination in assessing locoregional lymph node status in the
preliminary staging process. The different types of imaging techniques available for this purpose include US, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), CT, positron emission
tomography-CT, technetium 99m sestamibi imaging,
and immunoscintigraphy.6-10 In the detection of lymph
node metastasis, the accuracy of high-resolution US is
equal to or greater than that of other techniques. In addition, the relative ease of obtaining a tissue biopsy is a distinct advantage of US imaging of lymph nodes.
Therefore, US is the favored primary imaging technique
and is widely used for determining the status of locoregional lymph nodes in the initial staging of breast cancer.
Breast imaging with US has undergone a dramatic
evolution in both technical advances and clinical applicability. The accuracy of preoperative US diagnosis of
lymph node status has improved with the development
of high-resolution and Doppler US and better definition
of criteria that may indicate the presence of metastasis in
452

the lymph nodes. US aids in the visualization of not only
alterations in the size, shape, and contours of the lymph
node but also changes in the cortical morphology and texture, which can reflect the presence of an underlying
metastasis.
Several sonographic features have been suggested to
categorize a lymph node as possibly benign or metastatic.
Sonographic features that suggest a benign lymph node
include a predominantly hyperechoic signal due to fat
replacement, the presence of a thin homogeneous symmetrical cortical rim around the hyperechoic hilar fat, and
symmetrical cortical lobulations. The lymph node is categorized sonographically as suspicious or positive for metastatic disease when there is thickening or eccentric
lobulation of the hyperechoic cortical rim, compression
or displacement of the fatty hyperechoic hilum, or
complete replacement of the hilar fat by hypoechoic tissue.11-21 Bonnema et al11 found that classifying lymph
nodes with a hyperechoic pattern at the center as benign
and those with a hypoechoic center or inhomogeneous
architecture as malignant yielded a sensitivity of 36% and
specificity of 95%. Although De Kanter et al13 also found
these criteria to be helpful in detecting metastasis, they
also found that 30% of lymph nodes believed to be benign
using these criteria were malignant at the time of cytologic
or histologic analysis. When size >5 mm was used as a criterion, Bonnema et al11 found that the sensitivity
increased to 87%, with a significant reduction in specificity to 56%. Studies using in vitro sonography of isolated
lymph nodes have further refined the criteria for categorizing a lymph node as possibly benign or malignant.22,23
These studies indicate that changes in cortical morphology may precede any changes in the overall size or echogenicity of the hilum; thus, changes in cortical morphology
may be at least as important as the other features alluded
to by in vivo studies. Focusing on changes in cortical morphology, Bedi et al23 used in vitro sonography of 171 axillary lymph nodes, dividing the lymph nodes into 6
subgroups with a progressive increase in the probability of
metastasis. Using the final correlation of sonographic features with histopathologic examination of the dissected
lymph nodes that were scanned before processing, they
reported that predominantly hyperechoic lymph nodes
can be considered benign, whereas those with asymmetric
focal hypoechoic cortical lobulation or a completely hypoechoic signal are most likely malignant. Bedi et al also
Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

FNA of Lymph Nodes in Breast Cancer/Krishnamurthy

pointed out that generalized cortical lobulation may produce false-negative results, and therefore should be
regarded as indeterminate for metastasis.23
The criteria for the preoperative stratification of
lymph nodes based on US features are not standardized,
making strict comparisons between studies impossible.
Alvarez et al24 performed a meta-analysis of all reported
studies of sonography of axillary lymph nodes using size
>5 mm or alterations in cortical morphology as criteria
for labeling a lymph node as abnormal. These researchers
found that sensitivity varied between 54.7% and 92.3%
and specificity between 44.1% and 97.1% in studies that
included palpable and nonpalpable lymph nodes. In studies of nonpalpable lymph nodes alone, sensitivity ranged
from 26.4% to 87.1% and specificity from 55.6% to
98.1%. The use of different criteria and study design has
resulted in mixed findings, with a wide range of results
from different studies reported in the literature.
Tissue biopsy of locoregional lymph nodes that
appear to harbor metastatic disease increases the specificity of physical examination during the initial staging process. FNA biopsy is widely used for this purpose.
Similarly, tissue biopsy of sonographically indeterminate,
suspicious, and metastatic-appearing lymph nodes provides a more definite diagnosis than sonography alone. To
the best of our knowledge, there are no strict guidelines
for selecting the lymph nodes for performing tissue
biopsy. The majority of investigators performed FNA
biopsy of lymph nodes suspected of harboring metastatic
disease on sonography. Kuenen-Boumeester et al20 performed FNA biopsy of lymph nodes nearest to the breast,
postulating that these lymph nodes most likely represent
sentinel lymph nodes (SLNs). Some investigators have
biopsied the lymph node that appeared to be the largest
on US. Jain et al25 performed FNA biopsy of all lymph
nodes, including benign-appearing lymph nodes.
Although both FNA biopsy and CNB have been used by
different investigators, FNA biopsy has most often been
used for this purpose. In the very few studies that used
CNB, the sensitivity and specificity were comparable to
those of FNA biopsy.26-28
US-guided FNA of the lymph nodes is generally
performed by the radiologist using a 22-gauge or 23gauge hypodermic needle with a 10-mL syringe attached
to the needle, with or without the instillation of local anesthetic in and around the lymph node of interest. There are
Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

no recommendations for optimal processing of the aspirate. Direct smears fixed in alcohol for Papanicolaou
staining or air-dried for Diff-Quik staining have been
used by most investigators. Conventional cytomorphologic evaluation alone was performed by all investigators
for rendering a definite diagnosis of the aspirated material
without the use of ancillary cytokeratin immunostaining.
It is plausible that, in centers in which immediate assessment of the aspirate is not performed, the aspirated material can be used to make a cell block, cytospin, or
monolayer preparation rather than many direct smears,
thereby facilitating evaluation. Koelliker et al29 used Thin
Prep (Hologic Inc, Bedford, Mass) and reported the utility of this technique for processing the specimen. Immediate assessment of the specimen allows for the evaluation of
the quality of the aspirate proportionate to the size of the
aspirated lymph node, and in cases with paucicellular
aspirate, the radiologist could perform additional passes
to improve the specimen quality and procure a sufficient
amount of lymphoid tissue for evaluation. In addition, at
the immediate diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma in 1 of
many abnormal lymph nodes in a particular region, the
radiologist can terminate further evaluation of the remaining sonographically abnormal lymph nodes. Inadequate
sampling rates, ranging from 5% to 10%, have been
reported in a few studies.18,19,30 These studies emphasized
the value of immediate assessment to improve the
adequacy of the specimen for cytologic evaluation.
The overall sensitivity of US-guided FNA biopsy for
the evaluation of axillary lymph nodes in the initial staging of breast cancer ranged from 25% to 95% and specificity from 97% to 100%.24,25,29-41 False-positive results,
ranging from 1.4% to 1.6%, have been reported only
rarely.20,30,31 These results have been reported to occur
occasionally because of interpretive errors and mistaking
reactive lymphoid cells or mesothelial cells for metastatic
carcinoma. The majority of cases believed to be false-positive may indeed be true-positive cases because of complete
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy or, occasionally,
failure to detect minimal volume disease on final pathologic examination. The common causes of false-negative
results from US-guided FNA biopsy of locoregional
lymph nodes include failure to observe all lymph nodes
on US, small metastases (measuring <5 mm), involvement of few (usually 1-3) lymph nodes by metastatic disease, and interpretive errors, including failure to recognize
453

Review Article

tumor cells.12,20 The usual pitfalls in making a diagnosis
of metastatic carcinoma include mistaking reactive
lymphoid cells, immunoblasts, histiocytes, dendritic reticulum cells, endothelial cells, or megakaryocytes as metastatic carcinoma. The difficulty of distinguishing
histiocytes from metastatic lobular carcinoma is well
known. To the best of my knowledge, the sensitivities of
US-guided FNA biopsy of lymph nodes in the detection
of metastatic ductal and lobular carcinomas have not been
compared in any of the studies.
Current applications and future prospects of FNA
biopsy of locoregional lymph nodes in the initial staging
and subsequent surgical management of patients with
early and advanced breast cancer are summarized below.

Early Stage Breast Cancer
Initial staging of axillary lymph nodes in patients with
early stage (T1 or T2) breast cancer helps the surgeon
select the appropriate surgical management of axilla.
Patients who have no evidence of metastatic disease in the
preliminary staging process are selected for SLN biopsy,
whereas those with evidence of metastatic disease undergo
complete dissection of the axillary lymph nodes.42,43 Axillary SLNs receive drainage from the breast parenchyma
first and, therefore, have the highest probability of containing metastatic cells. The overall accuracy and falsenegative rate of SLN biopsy performed in patients with
early stage breast cancer have been validated by several
large studies and range from 95% to 99% and from 8% to
12%, respectively.44-46 The pathologic status of SLNs is a
sensitive and specific predictor of non-SLN status in
breast cancer patients. When SLNs are found to be negative for metastasis by thorough pathologic evaluation,
complete dissection of axillary lymph nodes and its associated morbidities, including lymphedema and neuropathy,
can be obviated. SLNs are identified by performing a lymphoscintigram, in which radioactive technetium sulfur
colloid is injected in and around the primary tumor before
surgery and isosulfan blue is injected at the time of surgery
to aid in the final dissection of the SLN. Detection of metastatic disease in the axillary lymph nodes during the initial staging process allows for the complete dissection of
these lymph nodes at the time of primary breast surgery,
thereby avoiding a staged procedure with the incurred
additional operative time, cost, and effort. In addition,
454

patients who are recognized upfront as not suitable for
SLN biopsy are protected from possible anaphylactic reaction to the blue dye used for lymphatic mapping.47,48
Cosmetic side effects, including discoloration of skin after
intradermal injection of the blue dye, can also be avoided.
The identification of lymph nodes harboring metastatic
disease during the initial staging process can also avoid
false-negative results of SLN biopsy, which may result
from diversion of the lymphatic channels after blockage of
the true SLN by metastatic tumor. Several studies have
reported the utility of US-guided FNA biopsy for guiding
surgeons in the selection of either SLN biopsy or complete
axillary lymph node dissection in patients with early stage
breast cancer. US-guided FNA biopsy of axillary lymph
nodes with features suggesting metastasis is reported to
have avoided SLN biopsy in 8% to 33% of patients with
early stage breast cancer.30-40 Figure 1 is an illustration of
the utility of US-guided FNA biopsy of axillary lymph
nodes in a patient with early stage breast cancer. The
reported false-negative rate ranges from 5% to 48%.
Although the majority of studies published to date indicate that small-sized metastases accounted for the majority
of the false-negative results, the mean size of the metastatic
tumor missed by US-guided FNA biopsy of the lymph
nodes has, to the best of my knowledge, been reported
only rarely. Krishnamurthy et al40 found the mean size of
metastasis to be 3.5 mm in false-negative cases of USguided FNA biopsy of lymph nodes in patients with early
stage breast cancer. US-guided FNA biopsy has high specificity and positive predictive value, thus reducing the
number of unnecessary SLN procedures. Figure 2 illustrates a false-negative result of a US-guided FNA biopsy
of an axillary lymph node in a patient with early stage
breast cancer. The utility of FNA biopsy of axillary lymph
nodes in patients with early stage breast cancer is depicted
in Figure 3.

Patients Selected for Neoadjuvant
Chemotherapy
Neoadjuvant therapy (chemotherapy preceding therapeutic surgery) is the standard treatment plan for patients
with more advanced or inoperable breast cancer.49,50
Recently, indications for neoadjuvant therapy have
expanded to include selected patients with operable and
early stage disease. The neoadjuvant approach is based on
Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

FNA of Lymph Nodes in Breast Cancer/Krishnamurthy

FIGURE 1. (A) Ultrasound of the axilla in a patient with early
stage breast cancer demonstrated an oval, hypoechoic lymph
node that was categorized as indeterminate on sonographic
evaluation. (B) Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the same
lymph node demonstrated a polymorphous population of
lymphoid cells without any evidence of metastasis. (C) The
patient underwent sentinel lymph node biopsy that was also
negative for metastatic disease.

Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

FIGURE 2. (A) Ultrasound of the axilla in a patient with early
stage breast cancer demonstrated an indeterminate axillary
lymph node with a focal area of cortical thickening. (B) Direct
smears of a fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the same lymph
node demonstrated benign lymphoid tissue without any evidence of metastatic tumor. (C) The patient underwent sentinel lymph node biopsy, which demonstrated a metastatic
tumor measuring 4.0 mm in greatest dimension.

455

Review Article

FIGURE 3. The utility of fine-needle aspiration biopsy of axillary lymph nodes in patients with early stage breast cancer is
shown.

the results of studies indicating that most breast tumors
will decrease in size when exposed to 3 or 4 cycles of cytotoxic chemotherapy. The benefits of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for patients with locally advanced breast cancer
are widely reported and include in vivo assessment of the
response of the tumor to cytotoxic chemotherapy, conversion from inoperable to operable disease, and potential
downsizing of large tumors, allowing breast-conserving
therapy in patients who were initially believed to be unfit
for such treatment.49,50
Determining the status of locoregional lymph nodes
contributes to the accurate staging of the cancer before the
initiation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and provides a
baseline for evaluating response in lymph nodes proven to
contain metastases. In addition, the status of locoregional
lymph node involvement at presentation is prognostic of
treatment failure. Patients with documented lymph node
disease before systemic therapy are reported to have the
highest recurrence rates, and lack of a response to chemotherapy is a statistically significant predictor of distant failure.54 Many reports have described the role of US-guided
FNA biopsy of axillary lymph nodes in directing the surgical treatment of patients with early stage breast cancer;
however, only a few reports have illustrated its utility in
patients selected to receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Khan et al51 reported the value of a comprehensive
approach to staging, including the evaluation of axillary
and nonaxillary lymph nodes (including supraclavicular,
456

infraclavicular, and internal mammary chain lymph
nodes), before neoadjuvant chemotherapy.51 Although
preneoadjuvant lymph node staging cannot determine the
full extent of axillary lymph node disease, it provides useful information for medical oncologists in planning chemotherapy regimens.
To the best of our knowledge, only a few other
reports to date have indicated the value of the initial staging of the axillary lymph nodes and its impact on subsequent axillary intervention after the completion of
chemotherapy.52-56 Patients who are negative for lymph
node metastasis in the initial staging process may be candidates for SLN biopsy, and patients with documented
metastasis may be candidates for complete dissection of
axillary lymph nodes after the completion of chemotherapy. Figure 4 illustrates the utility of US-guided FNA of
axillary lymph nodes in the initial staging of a patient with
advanced breast cancer. Whereas the majority of published data regarding SLN biopsy and neoadjuvant chemotherapy have reported on the accuracy of lymphatic
mapping performed after the completion of systemic therapy, few groups have reported the utility of SLN biopsy
before the initiation of chemotherapy in patients who are
determined to be free of lymph node disease by US, with
or without FNA biopsy of suspicious and indeterminate
lymph nodes.54,55 The rationale for performing SLN biopsy before chemotherapy is to determine axillary lymph
node status more accurately than would be possible from
US-guided biopsy alone, which can aid in the subsequent
management of axilla after the completion of chemotherapy. The utility of FNA biopsy of axillary lymph nodes in
patients selected for neoadjuvant chemotherapy is
depicted in Figure 3.
Evaluation of other lymph node regions, such as the
supraclavicular, infraclavicular, and internal mammary
chains, in addition to the axillary basins, allows for a more
thorough evaluation of lymph node status in the initial
staging process of patients who are selected for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In the sixth edition of the AJCC staging system, metastasis in ipsilateral infraclavicular lymph
nodes and axillary lymph nodes is staged as N3a, that in
internal mammary lymph nodes and axillary lymph nodes
is staged as N3b, and metastasis in supraclavicular lymph
nodes is staged as N3c. Rare reports have indicated the
utility of determining the status of these lymph nodes in
the initial staging process. The relatively low fat content
Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

FNA of Lymph Nodes in Breast Cancer/Krishnamurthy

in lymph nodes at these sites makes US evaluation of their
status, with or without FNA biopsy, very suitable for evaluation. Newman et al56 evaluated the significance of the
involvement of infraclavicular (level III axillary contents)
adenopathy identified by US, with or without FNA biopsy, in a series of patients with locally advanced breast
cancer who were receiving preoperative chemotherapy.
These authors reported that infraclavicular lymph node
involvement as detected by US indicated a significantly
worse survival rate. They found that the disease-free and
overall 5-year survival rates for patients with suspected
infraclavicular adenopathy was significantly worse than
for patients without this feature (50% vs 68% and 58% vs
83%, respectively). Nearly one-third of patients with
locally advanced breast cancer will have involved infraclavicular lymph nodes, which indicates a significantly
adverse prognosis. In addition, preoperative identification
of infraclavicular lymph node involvement necessitates a
level III axillary lymph node dissection during definitive
surgery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Figure 5 illustrates the results of an investigation of the infraclavicular
region in a patient with advanced breast cancer. With
rapid advancements in the development of novel systemic
therapy regimens, it will become increasingly important
to identify patients who face the highest risk of disease
recurrence and risk of failure to respond to systemic therapy. The utility of the assessment of lymph node involvement in regions other than axillary lymph node basins is
evolving and is routinely evaluated in some if not all centers involved in the comprehensive care of patients with
breast cancer.

Preoperative Identification and Detection
of Metastatic Tumors in Intramammary
Lymph Nodes

FIGURE 4. (A) Ultrasound of the axilla in a patient with locally
advanced cancer demonstrated a large, hypoechoic lymph
node that was categorized as malignant on sonographic evaluation. (B) Direct smears demonstrated metastatic disease.
(C) The patient received neoadjuvant chemotherapy and subsequently underwent axillary lymph node dissection. Note the
presence of residual tumor amid areas of sclerosis, indicating
a partial response to chemotherapy.

Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

Intramammary lymph nodes (IMLNs) are defined as
lymph nodes surrounded by breast tissue and are encountered in 1% to 28% of patients.57-59 Low-lying axillary
lymph nodes or deep pectoral lymph nodes can be mistaken for IMLNs. IMLNs are a potential site for the
regional spread of breast cancer. Although IMLNs can
occur anywhere in the breast parenchyma, they are usually
identified in the upper outer quadrant of the breast.59 The
clinical importance of IMLN metastasis has not received
adequate attention. Current breast cancer staging
457

Review Article

considers an IMLN with metastatic disease as an axillary
lymph node, leading to a lymph node stage of N1 (provided the size of metastasis is >0.2 mm), even if the axillary lymph nodes are proven to be negative for metastatic
disease. US is more sensitive than mammography in the
detection of metastasis in IMLNs. Evaluation of IMLNs
not only provides staging information in both early and
advanced stage breast cancer but also localizes these lymph
nodes for subsequent final histopathologic examination of
the mastectomy/segmental mastectomy specimen. A preoperative diagnosis of metastatic IMLN by US-guided
FNA biopsy warrants inclusion of the lymph node in the
surgically excised tissue for patients undergoing breastconserving surgery. Rarely, the identification of metastasis
in an IMLN may lead to detection of occult or recurrent
breast cancer. Edeiken-Monroe et al60 have reported the
usefulness of sonography and US-guided FNA biopsy for
the preoperative assessment of IMLNs in patients with
breast cancer. The most consistent sonographic features
associated with IMLN metastases were a reduction in the
volume of central echogenic hilum and marked hypoechogenicity of the IMLN cortex.
The management of axillary lymph nodes in patients
with IMLN metastasis is controversial. The controversy
lies in whether an IMLN testing positive for metastasis
warrants a complete dissection of axillary lymph nodes,
similar to a positive axillary lymph node, or whether the
axillary lymph nodes can be spared.59,61-65 Irrespective of
the controversy regarding the management of axillary
lymph nodes in patients with an IMLN metastasis, the
preoperative identification of IMLNs by US imaging and
the investigation of these lymph nodes by US-guided
FNA biopsy may be meaningful for the subsequent care of
patients with breast cancer.

Prospects for Use of FNA Biopsy in Staging
Axillary Lymph Nodes
FIGURE 5. (A) Ultrasound of the infraclavicular region in a
patient with locally advanced breast cancer illustrated a
hypoechoic lymph node that was categorized as suspicious
on sonographic evaluation. (B) Direct smears of a fine-needle
aspiration of the lymph node demonstrated metastatic carcinoma. The patient received neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
underwent complete axillary lymph node dissection, including removal of infraclavicular lymph nodes. (C) An illustration
of 1 of the infraclavicular lymph nodes with large areas of
sclerosis without any evidence of metastatic tumor is shown,
indicating a complete response to chemotherapy.

458

There is currently a great deal of interest in exploring noninvasive methods for the accurate identification and investigation of metastatic disease in SLNs for axillary lymph
node staging in breast cancer. A combination of the radioactive colloid and blue dye methods that is currently used
to identify SLNs in patients with breast cancer suffers
from some limitations. The radioactive colloid method
requires special facilities for handling radioactive isotopes
Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

FNA of Lymph Nodes in Breast Cancer/Krishnamurthy

and suffers from the low spatial resolution of the Geiger
counters used for noninvasive SLN identification. In
addition, this method takes approximately 24 hours for
lymph node uptake because of the large size of the tracers
(typically 100-200 nanometers) and may cause radiation
damage to the connective tissues of the skin. The method
using blue dye, such as isosulfan blue or methylene blue,
requires surgery for visual identification of lymph nodes
with uptake of the blue dye. Noninvasive, nonionizing,
and high-resolution mapping of SLNs in conjunction
with minimally invasive methods, such as FNA biopsy,
for the detection of metastatic tumors is currently being
actively investigated in a few preclinical studies. One such
technique, photoacoustic tomography, is an emerging
hybrid technology that is proving to be excellent for noninvasive imaging of biologic tissues, offering not only a
good spatial resolution but also high soft-tissue contrast.66-69 This technique is highly sensitive to endogenous and exogenous optical contrast and provides good
ultrasonic spatial resolution. In addition, because this
imaging system uses diffusive photons, it can achieve up
to a 50-mm imaging depth in biologic tissues with satisfactory spatial resolution, which is very suitable for the
noninvasive identification of axillary SLNs. Photoacoustic
imaging (PI) systems are nonionizing and relatively inexpensive, have a higher sensitivity than MRI, and have the
potential to be readily and easily adapted to clinical practice. PI has been used successfully for the in vivo identification of SLNs in animal models using different types of
contrast agents with high contrast-to-noise ratios and
good resolution. These contrast agents are used as nanoparticles because of their widely tunable properties, such
as sizes, shapes, and composition that enhance the contrast
for optical imaging in the noninvasive identification of
SLNs. Pramanik et al67 have demonstrated the utility of
single-walled carbon nanotubes as a contrast agent for the
noninvasive identification of SLNs using PI in a rat
model.67 The advantage of this agent is reported to be the
broad absorption spectrum, which provides a wide range
of light wavelengths for imaging. Near-infrared gold
nanocages were used by Song et al68 for SLN mapping
using the PI modality.68 These authors point out that
both of these contrast agents can be further functionalized
by bioconjugation with specific targeting molecules,
thereby allowing molecular imaging for the detection of
metastatic tumor in SLNs. The PI techniques hold promCancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

ise for translation to humans for the noninvasive identification of SLNs; in conjunction with FNA biopsy, PI can
potentially avoid the currently practiced invasive technique of SLN biopsy. Currently, this imaging system is
limited by its slow scanning speed. However, using a
higher pulse repetition frequency laser and a US array system could accelerate acquisition of signals, improving the
feasibility of real-time PI for clinical use.
Conclusions
In summary, FNA biopsy of locoregional lymph nodes
plays an important role in the initial staging of breast cancer. Sonographic evaluation of lymph nodes, with or without associated FNA biopsy of indeterminate, suspicious,
or metastatic lymph nodes, increases the sensitivity and
specificity of the evaluation in patients with early and
advanced stage breast cancer. In both groups, the evaluation of axillary lymph nodes can influence surgical management of the axilla. In addition, in patients with
advanced stage disease, the detection of metastatic disease
in lymph nodes not only provides staging information but
also provides an opportunity to evaluate the tumor’s
response to treatment during the course of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Currently, comprehensive evaluation of
locoregional lymph nodes in patients newly diagnosed
with breast cancer is routinely practiced in several comprehensive cancer centers.
Advances in imaging modalities, such as PI, hold
promise for the noninvasive identification of SLNs in
patients with breast cancer. FNA biopsy is well suited as a
minimally invasive technique for the investigation of SLNs
identified noninvasively by such newly emerging technology. In addition, if molecular imaging of SLNs becomes
feasible after successful bioconjugation of contrast agents
with specific targeting molecules for imaging of metastatic
tumor, FNA biopsy can be useful for confirming the presence of metastatic tumor in the targeted areas.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The author made no disclosures.

References
1.

Singletary SE, Allred C, Ashley P, et al. Revision of the
American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:3628-3636.
459

Review Article
2.

Singletary SE, Connolly JL.Breast cancer staging: working
with the sixth edition of The AJCC Cancer staging manual.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2006;56:37-47.

16. Mustonen P, Farin P, Kosunen O, et al. Ultrasonographic
detection of metastatic axillary lymph nodes in breast cancer. Ann Chir Gynaecol. 1990;79:15-18.

3.

Sacre RA.Clinical evaluation of axillary lymph nodes compared to surgical and pathological findings. Eur J Surg
Oncol. 1986;12:169-173.

4.

Pamilo M, Soiva M, Lavast EM.Real-time ultrasound, axillary mammography, and clinical examination in the diagnosis of axillary lymph node metastases in breast cancer.
J Ultrasound Med. 1989;8:115-120.

17. Verbanck J, Vandewiele I, De Winter H, Tytgat J, Van
Aelst F, Thanghe W.Value of axillary ultrasonography and
sonographically guided puncture of axillary nodes: a prospective study in 144 consecutive patients. J Clin Ultrasound. 1997;25:53-56.

5.

De Freitas R, Costa MV, Schneider SV, Nicolau MA, Marussi E.Accuracy of ultrasound and clinical examination in
the diagnosis of axillary lymph node metastases in breast
cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 1991;17:240-244.

6.

Bombardieri E, Crippa F, Baio SM, Peeters BAM, Pauwels
EK.Nuclear medicine advances in imaging of breast cancer.
Tumor. 2001;87:277-289.

7.

Schillaci O, Scopinaro F, Spanu A, et al. Detection of
axillary lymph node metastases in breast cancer with
99mTc-tetrotosniua scintigraphy. Int J Oncol. 2002;20:483487.

8.

Ohta M, Tokuda Y, Saitoh Y, et al. Comparative efficacy
of position emission tomography and ultrasonography in
preoperative evaluation of axillary lymph node metastases in
breast cancer. Breast Cancer. 2000;7:99-103.

9.

Murray AD, Staff RT, Redpath TW, et al. Dynamic contrast enhanced MRI of the axilla in women with breast cancer: comparison with pathology of nodes. Br J Radiol.
2002;75:220-228.

10. Chae BJ, Bae JS, Kang BJ, Kim SH, Jung SS, Song BJ.Positron emission tomography. Computed tomography in the
detection of axillary lymph node metastasis in patients with
early stage breast cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2009;39:284289.
11. Bonnema J, van Geel AN, van Ooijen B, et al. Ultrasound
guided aspiration biopsy for detection of axillary node metastases in breast cancer patients: new diagnostic method.
World J Surg. 1997;21:270-274.
12. Krishnamurthy S, Sneige N, Bedi DG, et al. Role of ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of indeterminate and
suspicious axillary lymph nodes in the initial staging of
breast carcinoma, Cancer. 2002;95:982-988.
13. De Kanter AY, van Eijck CH, van Geel AN, et al. Multicentre study of ultrasonographically guided axillary node biopsy in patients with breast cancer. Br J Surg. 1999;86:
1459-1462.
14. Yang WT, Ahuja A, Tang A, Suen M, King W, Metreweli
C.High resolution sonographic detection of axillary node
metastases in breast cancer. J Ultrasound Med. 1996;16:
241-246.
15. Vaidya JS, Vyas JJ, Khandelwal KC, Mittra I, Thakur
MH.Role of ultrasonography to detect axillary node
involvement in operable breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol.
1996;22:140-143.

460

18. Deurloo EE, Tanis PJ, Gilhuijs KG, et al. Reduction in
number of sentinel lymph node procedures by preoperative
ultrasonography of the axilla in breast cancer. Eur J Cancer.
2003;39:1068-1073.
19. Sapino A, Cassoni P, Zanon E, et al. Ultrasonographicallyguided fine-needle aspiration of axillary lymph nodes: role
in breast cancer management. Br J Cancer. 2003;88:702706.
20. Kuenen-Boumeester V, Menke-Pluymers M, de Kanter AY,
Obdeijn IM, Urich D, Van Der Kwast TH.Ultrasoundguided fine needle aspiration cytology of axillary lymph
nodes in breast cancer patients. A preoperative staging procedure. Eur J Cancer. 2003;39:170-174.
21. Tate JJT, Lewis V, Archer T, Guyer PG, Royle GT, Taylor
I.Ultrasound detection of axillary lymph node metastases in
breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 1989;15:139-141.
22. Feu J, Tresserra F, Fábregas R, et al. Metastatic breast carcinoma in axillary lymph nodes: in vitro US detection. Radiology. 1997;205:831-835.
23. Bedi DG, Krishnamurthy R, Krishnamurthy S, et al.
Cortical morphological features of axillary lymph nodes
as a predictor of metastasis in breast cancer: in vitro
sonographic study. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;191:646652.
24. Alvarez S, Añorbe E, Alcorta P, López F, Alonso I, Cortés
J.Role of sonography in the diagnosis of ancillary lymph
node metastases in breast cancer: a systematic review. AJR
Am J Roentgenol. 2006;186:1342-1348.
25. Jain A, Haisfield-Wolfe ME, Lange J, et al. The role of
ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of axillary lymph
nodes in the staging of breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol.
2007;15:462-471.
26. Nori J, Varzi E, Bazzocchi M, et al. Role of axillary lymph
node ultrasound and large core biopsy in the preoperative
assessment of patients selected for sentinel node biopsy.
Radiol Med. 2005;109:330-344.
27. Abe H, Schmidt RA, Sennett CA, et al. US-guided core
needle biopsy of axillary lymph nodes in patients with
breast cancer: why and how to do it. Radiographics.
2007;27(suppl 1):S91-S99.
28. Rao R, Lilley L, Andrews V, Radford L, Ulisscy M.Axillary
staging by percutaneous biopsy: sensitivity of fine-needle
aspiration versus needle biopsy. Surg Oncol. 2009;16:11701175.
29. Koelliker SL, Chung MA, Mainiero MB, Steinhoff MM,
Cady B.Axillary lymph nodes: US-guided fine-needle

Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

FNA of Lymph Nodes in Breast Cancer/Krishnamurthy

aspiration for initial staging of breast cancer- correlation
with primary tumor size. Radiology. 2008;246:81-89.
30. Ciatto S, Brancato B, Risso G, et al. Accuracy of fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of axillary lymph nodes as
a triage test in breast cancer staging. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2007;103:85-91.
31. Van Rijk MC, Duerloo EE, Nieweg OE, et al. Ultrasonography and fine-needle aspiration cytology can spare breast
cancer patients unnecessary sentinel lymph node biopsy.
Ann Surg Oncol. 2005;13:31-35.
32. Popli MB, Sahoo M, Mehrotra N, et al. Preoperative ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology for axillary
staging in breast carcinoma. Australas Radiol. 2006;50:122126.
33. Gilissen F, Oostenbroek R, Storm R, Westenend P, Plaisier
P.Prevention of futile sentinel node procedures in breast
cancer: ultrasonography of the axilla and fine-needle aspiration cytology are obligatory. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2006;34:
497-500.
34. Hinson JL, McGrath P, Moore A, et al. The critical role of
axillary ultrasound and aspiration biopsy in the management of breast cancer patients with clinically negative axilla.
Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;15:250-255.
35. Sahoo S, Sanders MA, Roland L, et al. A strategic approach
to the evaluation of axillary lymph nodes in breast cancer
patients: analysis of 168 patients at a single institution. Am
J Surg. 2007;194:524-526.
36. Holwitt DM, Swatske ME, Gillanders WE, et al. The combination of axillary ultrasound and ultrasound-guided
biopsy is an accurate predictor of axillary lymph nodes as a
triage test in breast cancer staging. Breast Cancer Res Treat.
2007;103:85-91.
37. Altomare V, Guerrero G, Carino R, et al. Axillary lymph
node echo-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology enables
breast cancer patients to avoid a sentinel lymph node biopsy. Preliminary experience and a review of the literature.
Surg Today. 2007;37:735-739.
38. Tahir M, Osman KA, Shabbir J, et al. Preoperative axillary
staging in breast cancer-saving time and resources. Breast J.
2008;14:369-371.
39. Alkuwari E, Auger M.Accuracy of fine-needle aspiration cytology of axillary lymph nodes in breast cancer patients: a
study of 115 cases with cytologic-histologic correlation.
Cancer. 2008;114:89-93.
40. Krishnamurthy S, Hynek I, Vasquez S, Hunt KK, Yang
W.Utility of ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of
indeterminate and suspicious axillary lymph nodes in
the management of patients with early breast cancer: a
study of 278 patients. Cancer (Cancer Cyopathol). 2008;
114(S5):350.
41. Swinson C, Ravichandran D, Nayagam M, Allen S.Ultrasound and fine needle aspiration cytology of the axilla in
the pre-operative identification of axillary nodal involvement in breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2009 May 14.
[Epub ahead of print].

Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

42. Giuliano AE, Kirgan DM, Guenther JM, Morton DL.Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for breast
cancer. Ann Surg. 1994;220:391-401.
43. Veronesi V, Paganelli G, Galimberti V, et al. Sentinel-node
biopsy to avoid axillary dissection in breast cancer with
clinically negative lymph-nodes. Lancet. 1997;349:18641867.
44. Krag D, Weaver D, Ashikaga T, et al. The sentinel lymph
node in breast cancer-a multi center validation study. N
Engl J Med. 1998;339:941-946.
45. Krag DN, Anderson SJ, Julian TB, et al. Technical outcome of sentinel lymph node resection and conventional
axillary lymph node dissection in patients with clinically
node negative breast cancer: results from the NSABP B-32
randomized phase III trial. Lancet. 2007;8:881-888.
46. McMasters KM, Tuttle TM, Carlson DJ, et al. Sentinel
lymph node biopsy for breast cancer: a suitable alternative
to routine axillary dissection in multi-institutional practice
when optimal technique is used. J Clin Oncol. 2008;18:
2560-2566.
47. Albo D, Wayne JD, Hunt KK, et al. Anaphylactic reactions
to isosulfan blue dye during sentinel lymph node biopsy for
breast cancer. Am J Surg. 2001;182:393-398.
48. Montgomery LL, Thorne AC, Van Zee KJ, et al. Isosulfan
blue dye reactions during sentinel lymph node mapping for
breast cancer. Anesth Analg. 2002;95:385-388.
49. Fisher B, Brown A, Mamounas et al. Effect of preoperative
chemotherapy on local-regional disease in women with operable breast cancer: findings from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-18. J Clin Oncol.
1997;15:2483-2493.
50. Buchholz TA, Hunt KK, Whitman GJ, et al. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast carcinoma: multidisciplinary considerations of benefits and risks. Cancer. 2003;98:1150-1160.
51. Khan A, Sabel MS, Nees A, et al. Comprehensive axillary
evaluation in neoadjuvant chemotherapy patients with ultrasonography and sentinel lymph node biopsy. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2005;12:697-704.
52. Oruwari JU, Chung MA, Koelliker S, Steinhoff MM, Cady
B.Axillary staging using ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy on locally advanced breast cancer. Am J Surg.
2002;184:307-309.
53. Somasundar P, Grass J, Steinhoff M, et al. Role of ultrasound-guided axillary fine-needle aspiration in the management of invasive breast cancer. Am J Surg. 2006;192:458461.
54. Kilbride KE, Lee MC, Nees AV, et al. Axillary staging
prior to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer: predictors of recurrence. Am Surg Oncol. 2008;15:3252-3258.
55. Straver ME, Rutgers EJ, Russell NS, et al. Towards rational
axillary treatment in relation to neoadjuvant therapy in
breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2009;45:2284-2292.
56. Newman LA, Kuerer HM, Fornage B, et al. Adverse prognostic significance of infraclavicular lymph nodes detected
461

Review Article
by ultrasonography in patients with locally advanced breast
cancer. Am J Surg. 2001;81:313-318.
57. Egan RL, McSweeney MB.Intramammary lymph nodes.
Cancer. 1983;51:1838-1842.
58. Jadusingh IH.Intramammary lymph nodes. J Clin Pathol.
1992;45:1023-1026.
59. Hogan BV, Peter MB, Shenoy H, Horgan K, Shaaban
A.Intramammary lymph node metastasis predicts poorer
survival in breast cancer patients. Surg Oncol. 2009 Jan 24.
[Epub ahead of print].
60. Edeiken-Monroe BS, Monroe DP, Monroe BJ, et al. Metastases to intramammary lymph nodes in patients with
breast cancer: sonographic findings. J Clin Ultrasound.
2008;36:279-285.
61. Shen J, Hunt KK, Mirza NQ, et al. Intramammary lymph
node metastases are an independent predictor of poor outcome in patients with breast carcinoma. Cancer.
2004;101:1330-1337.
62. Nassar A, Cohen C, Cotsonis G, Carlson G.Significance of
intramammary lymph nodes in the staging of breast cancer:
correlation with tumor characteristics and outcome. Breast
J. 2008;14:147-152.

462

63. Guth AA, Mercado C, Roses DF, et al. Intramammary
lymph nodes and breast cancer a marker for disease severity,
or just another lymph node? Am J Surg. 2006;92:502-505.
64. Intra M, Garcia-Etienne CA, Renne G, et al. When sentinel lymph node is intramammary. Ann Surg Oncol.
2008;15:1304-1308.
65. Cox CE, Cox JM, Ramos D, Meade TL.Intramammary
sentinel lymph nodes: what is the clinical significance. Ann
Surg Oncol. 2008;15:1273-1274.
66. Skrabalak SE, Au L, Lu X, Li X, Xia Y.Gold nanocages for
cancer detection and treatment. Nanomed. 2007;2:657-668.
67. Pramanik M, Song KM, Swierczewska M, Greer D,
Sitharaman B, Wang LV.In vivo carbon nanotube-enhanced
non-invasive photoacoustic mapping of the sentinel lymph
node. Phys Med Biol. 2009;54:3291-3301.
68. Song KH, Kim C, Cobley CM, Xia Y, Wang LV.Nearinfrared gold nanocages as a new class of tracers for photoacoustic sentinel lymph node mapping on a rat model. Nano
Lett. 2009;9:183-188.
69. Song KH, Kim C, Maslov K, Wang LV.Noninvasive in
vivo spectroscope nanorod-contrast photoacoustic mapping
of sentinel lymph nodes. Eur J Radiol. 2009;70:227-231.

Cancer Cytopathology

December 25, 2009

