HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2010 April 2; 141(1): 39–51. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.014.

Macrophage Diversity Enhances Tumor Progression and
Metastasis
Binzhi Qian1 and Jeffrey W. Pollard1,2,3
1Department

of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461

Author Manuscript

2Department

of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Women’s Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461
3Cooperative

Center for the Study of Reproduction and Infertility Research, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461

Abstract

Author Manuscript

There is persuasive clinical and experimental evidence that macrophages promote cancer initiation
and malignant progression. During tumor initiation they create an inflammatory environment that
is mutagenic and which promotes growth. As tumors progress to malignancy, macrophages
stimulate angiogenesis, enhance tumor cell migration, invasion, and suppress anti-tumor immunity.
At metastatic sites macrophages prepare the target tissue for arrival of tumor cells and then a
different subpopulation of macrophages promotes tumor cell extravasation, survival, and
subsequent growth. Specialized subpopulations of macrophages may represent important new
therapeutic targets.

Introduction

Author Manuscript

Tumors have a complex cellular ecology that establishes the malignant potential of the
tumor. In these ecosystems innate immune cells are highly represented and among the most
abundant of these are macrophages. Although the original hypotheses proposed that
macrophages are involved in antitumor immunity, there is substantial clinical and
experimental evidence that in the majority of cases these tumor-associated macrophages
(TAM) enhance tumor progression to malignancy. The tumor promoting functions of
macrophages at the primary site include supporting tumor-associated angiogenesis,
promotion of tumor cell invasion, migration and intravasation as well as suppression of
antitumor immune responses (Condeelis and Pollard, 2006; Pollard, 2004). Macrophages
also potentiate the seeding and establishment of metastatic cells and play a role in tumor

Corresponding Author: Jeffrey W. Pollard, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Developmental and Molecular
Biology, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA, Phone: 718-430-2090, Fax: 718-430-8663,
jeffrey.pollard@einstein.yu.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errorsmaybe
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Qian and Pollard

Page 2

Author Manuscript

initiation when inflammation is a causal factor. This review focuses on the diverse roles and
functions of macrophages in the primary tumor and at metastatic sites. Accumulating
evidence suggests that tumor initiation, progression, and metastasis are affected by dynamic
changes in the phenotypes of macrophages and that defined subpopulations of macrophages
are responsible for these tumor-promoting activities.
Macrophage Phenotypes

Author Manuscript

Macrophages are differentiated cells of the mononuclear phagocytic lineage (Pollard,
2009)and references therein) that are characterized by specific phenotypic characteristics
and by the expression of particular markers, none of which are entirely restricted to the
lineage (Gordon and Taylor, 2005). In mice, macrophages are phagocytic and express
CD11b, F4/80, colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R; CD115) and do not express
Gr1 (more specifically Ly6G that is detected by anti-Gr1 antibodies). In humans,
phagocytosis, CD68, CD163, CD16, CD312 and CD115 are the major markers of the
lineage. When combined these characteristics discriminate macrophages from other
members of the myeloid lineage such as the polymorphonuclear neutrophils and eosinophils
(Joyce and Pollard, 2009).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Macrophage origins, lineage, and regulation by growth factors have been recently reviewed
and attempts have been made to define macrophage subsets (Pollard, 2009) and references
therein). The most successful classifications have been applied to subtypes participating in
particular immunological responses. These include the “activated” macrophage involved in
the responses of type I helper T cells (Th1) to pathogens. This population is activated by
interferon gamma and engagement of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and is characterized by
elevated expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II, expression of
interleukin (IL-12) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α) generation of reactive oxygen
species and nitric oxide (NO) and the ability to kill pathogens and cells. In contrast, the
“alternatively-activated” macrophages that differentiate in response to IL-4 and IL-13, are
involved in Th2-type responses including humoral immunity and wound healing (Gordon,
2003). Another population is the antigen-presenting, migratory dendritic cells that are a
branch of the mononuclear phagocytic lineage. There are also other macrophage populations
involved in tissue development and homeostasis that are largely regulated by CSF-1 and that
do not fall easily into these immunological categories (Pollard, 2009). This argues that there
are many populations of macrophages ranging from trophic macrophages involved in
developmental processes (often with specialized functions such as the bone remodeling
osteoclast), those active in tissue repair, and the immunological subsets described above
(Pollard, 2009). Mantovani and collaborators have suggested that macrophages in tumors are
biased away from the activated (M1) to the alternatively activated type named “M2”
(Mantovani and Sica, 2010). Recent gene profiling experiments on TAMs support this shift
to an immunoregulatory type (Biswas et al., 2006; Ojalvo et al., 2009; Pucci et al., 2009).
However, in contrast to this binary MI/M2 definition, TAMs are comprised of several
distinct populations that often share features of both types, but with greater overall similarity
to macrophages involved in developmental processes (Ojalvo et al., 2009; Ojalvo et al.,
2010). The functions of these subpopulations in promoting malignancy will be discussed
below.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 3

Macrophages and Cancer

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Clinical studies make a strong case that macrophages promote tumorigenesis. In one metaanalysis it has been reported that over 80% of studies show a correlation between
macrophage density and poor patient prognosis (Bingle et al., 2002) and recent studies have
further supported this conclusion. For example, there is a strong association between poor
survival and increased macrophage density in thyroid, lung, and hepatocellular cancers
(Chen et al., 2005; Ryder et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008). However, as before there are some
exceptions with high macrophage densities correlating with increased survival in pancreatic
cancer (Kim et al., 2008). An unbiased transcriptome analysis of follicular lymphoma shows
that a macrophage transcriptional signature is a predictor of a poor prognosis, as is increased
macrophage density (Farinha et al., 2005). Analysis of the transcriptome of TAMs derived
from studies in mouse models of breast cancer has also provided evidence that an
enrichment in macrophage transcripts is predictive of poor prognosis and reduced survival in
human breast cancer (Ojalvo et al., 2009; Zabuawala et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Macrophage differentiation, growth and chemotaxis are regulated by several growth factors
including CSF-1, granulocyte-macrophage (GM)-CSF, IL-3, and chemokines such as CCL-2
(Pollard, 2009). Over-expression of CSF-1, the major lineage regulator for macrophages
(Pollard, 2009), is, associated with poor prognosis in breast, ovarian, endometrial, prostate,
hepatocellular and colorectal cancer among others (Groblewska et al., 2007; Lin et al., 2002;
Mantovani and Sica, 2010; Mroczko et al., 2007; Ojalvo et al., 2010; Sapi and Kacinski,
1999; Smith et al., 1995; Zhu et al., 2008). CCL-2 is also over-expressed in a wide-range of
cancers (Mantovani and Sica, 2010) and is associated with poor prognosis in breast,
colorectal and thyroid cancers (Bailey et al., 2007; Saji et al., 2001; Tanaka et al., 2009;
Yoshidome et al., 2009) whereas its absence is associated with increased survival in cervical
cancer patients (Zijlmans et al., 2006). In melanoma there appears to be an inverse
relationship between CSF-1 and CCL2 expression although in this case, TAM density still
correlates with invasiveness and poor prognosis (Varney et al., 2005). A CSF-1 response
transcriptional signature has been found in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast
(Sharma et al., 2009) and in a subset of breast cancers where it correlates with higher tumor
grade (Beck et al., 2009). In leiomyosarcomas the CSF-1 expression signature has been
reported as the only independent prognosticator in multivariate analysis (Espinosa et al.,
2009). These association studies are highly suggestive of the involvement of these growth
factors and chemokines in tumor macrophage biology. However, a note of caution should be
added for this interpretation, given that in some cases tumor cells express the receptors for
these growth factors and chemokines and this expression can result in an increased
malignant phenotype (Mantovani et al., 2008; Patsialou et al., 2009; Scholl et al., 1994;
Smith et al., 1995).
Experimental evidence for the tumor promoting activation of macrophages has been derived
from several different types of experiments. Genetic ablation of the macrophage growth
factor CSF-1 in the polyoma middle T (PyMT) oncoprotein mouse model of breast cancer
greatly reduces macrophage density in tumors, slows the rate of tumor progression to
malignancy and severely inhibits metastasis (Lin et al., 2001). In these studies macrophages
are the only cells expressing the CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R). Over-expression of CSF-1 in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 4

Author Manuscript

wild type tumors results in earlier macrophage recruitment and an accelerated rate of tumor
progression and increased metastasis. Genetic ablation of CSF-1 also affects tumor
development and reduces malignancy in a genetic model of colon cancer (Oguma et al.,
2008) and in an osteosarcoma xenotransplant model (Kubota et al., 2009). Furthermore
genetic ablation in myeloid cells of the Est-2 transcription factor, a direct effecter of the
CSF-1 pathway, results in an inhibition of metastasis in both PyMT and orthotopic
transplant breast cancer models (Zabuawala et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript

Similar results have been obtained with therapeutic approaches. Treatment with antisense or
antibodies that inhibit CSF-1 or its receptor reduces macrophage recruitment or function in
mice bearing xenotransplants of human tumor cells, thereby inhibiting tumor growth and
metastasis (Abraham et al., 2010; Aharinejad et al., 2009). Further, specific depletion of
macrophages using clodronate-encapsulated liposomes reduces tumor growth in melanoma,
ovarian, Lewis lung, teratocarcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and prostate graft models
(Gazzaniga et al., 2007; Halin et al., 2009; Kimura et al., 2007; Robinson-Smith et al., 2007;
Zeisberger et al., 2006).

Author Manuscript

It should be recognized however, that although the experimental and clinical data largely
support the hypothesis that macrophages promote malignancy there are exceptions. For
example, in the bone marrow macrophages play a gatekeeper role by phagocytosing cells
that do not express the anti-death receptor CD47. Leukemic cells up-regulate this receptor to
escape destruction (Jaiswal et al., 2009). Older data also show that liver macrophages
(known as Kupffer cells) engulf and kill circulating tumor cells, such that the depletion of
Kupffer cells in rats enhances metastasis (Heuff et al., 1993). Further, in peritoneal xenograft
experiments in which cancer cells ‘metastasize’ to the liver, depletion of Kupffer cells
worsens the prognosis. In addition these tumors exhibit greater differentiation and less
malignancy but grow faster in the absence of macrophages, the mice dying of an increased
tumor load (Oosterling et al., 2005). Thus although these experiments provide further
support for a role for macrophages in malignant progression, ironically the outcome of their
depletion was earlier death. These data contrast with the observations that Kupffer cells
provide essential mitogens to hepatocellular carcinoma. The mitogen synthesis is due to
NFκB signaling in these cells and ablation of their NFκB signaling results in a reduction in
tumor burden (Karin and Greten, 2005).
Although the dynamics within tumors is undoubtedly complex, with macrophages playing
both positive and negative roles, the data from animal models as well as from the clinical
correlates indicates that in the vast majority of cases macrophages promote tumor
progression and metastasis.

Author Manuscript

MACROPHAGES IN CANCER INITIATION AND PROMOTION
There is a growing appreciation that inflammation is the root cause of many cancers.
Mantovani and colleagues have called this the 7th hallmark of cancer and reviewed its
characteristics as well as the epidemiological and infectious disease literature that supports
this hypothesis (Mantovani and Sica, 2010). A causal basis for the role of inflammation in
cancer initiation has direct experimental support. In humans chronic obstructive pulmonary

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

disease is associated with persistent colonization with the bacterium Haemophilus
influenzae and leads to increased lung cancer risk. In a mouse model of lung cancer
bronchial exposure with H.influenzae lysate results in inflammation in the lung and an
increase in tumorigenesis (Moghaddam et al., 2009). Myeloid-specific ablation of intergrin
αV also results in an ulcerative colitis that induces colonic tumors (Lacy-Hulbert et al.,
2007). Ablation in myeloid cells of Stat3, a transcription factor whose function suppresses
inflammatory responses because it is a major target of immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10
(Yu et al., 2007), causes inflammation in the colon. This is associated with abundant
expression of TNFα and IL-6 by macrophages, and results in a chronic colitis and invasive
colonic adenocarcinomas (Deng et al., 2010). Similarly global ablation of IL-10 also results
in chronic colitis and intestinal tumors (Yu et al., 2007). Mice that have a genetic ablation of
GM-CSF (Csf3) and interferon γ (Ifnγ) whose loss would compromise acquired immune
responses to pathogens, are found to develop a wide range of cancers (Enzler et al., 2003).
The causality of the inflammation in carcinogenesis in these studies comes from
experiments in which suppression of the bacterial flora by antibiotic treatment reduces the
inflammation and inhibits tumorigenesis (Berg et al., 1996; Deng et al., 2010; Enzler et al.,
2003). These data argue that the immune system is normally in balance but once the negative
controls of immune responses are compromised, a persistent inflammatory response to
normally commensal organisms results. This inflammation in turn creates a tumor promoting
microenvironment.

Author Manuscript

The inflammatory state in myeloid cells is controlled by the transcriptional factors NFκB
and Stat3 that work in opposition to one another (Karin and Greten, 2005; Yu et al., 2007).
NFκB is a central transducer of signals that cause inflammation downstream of TLR
activation. Its activity results in expression of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-12 and
TNFα as well as inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) (Karin and Greten, 2005). In the
inflammatory responses associated with cancer initiation, NFκB signaling is essential for the
inflammatory phenotype (Karin and Greten, 2005). Inhibition of this activity through
ablation of IκB kinase α (IKKα) in myeloid cells in mouse models of intestinal cancer
reduces inflammation and inhibits tumor progression (Greten et al., 2004).

Author Manuscript

The type of inflammation associated with increased cancer risk due to chronic infection or
persistent irritation is often called “smoldering inflammation” (Mantovani and Sica, 2010).
This nomenclature is used because the inflammation is low grade without overt clinical
consequences. Activated macrophages are central to this type of immune response and work
in concert with other immune cells (Balkwill et al., 2005). It has been hypothesized that
these immune cells produce a mutagenic environment (Pang et al., 2007) by generating both
reactive nitrogen and oxygen species. NO in particular reacts with peroxidates to give
nitrosoperoxycarbonate and this reaction is a major driver of the chemistry of inflammation.
This highly reactive compound and other products cause mutations in the adjacent epithelial
cells (Meira et al., 2008; Pang et al., 2007). In addition, there is evidence that the
inflammatory microenvironment also promotes genetic instability within the developing
tumor epithelial cells (Colotta et al., 2009). In either case, the mutations are fixed after
replication of the epithelial cells, a process that is stimulated by growth factors synthesized
by the infiltrating or resident immune cells that include macrophages. These growthpromoting effects on tumors are caused by the production of IL-6 in hepatocellular
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 6

Author Manuscript

carcinoma (HCC) (Lin and Karin, 2007; Naugler et al., 2007) and TNFα (Karin et al., 2006)
and IL-6 in colitis associated cancers (Grivennikov et al., 2009). Interestingly, IL-6 synthesis
in Kupffer cells in response to inflammation-induced liver damage is gender dependent with
males who have increased risk of HCC having elevated levels. IL-6 is also required for the
increased risk of HCC in female mouse models (Naugler et al., 2007).

Author Manuscript

Classical models of skin carcinogenesis show that oncogenic mutations caused by low but
not initiating doses of carcinogens (such as dimethybenzanthracene) need to be “fixed” by
application of a tumor promoter. The promoter application causes an acute inflammatory
response that is dominated by macrophages. TNFα action through NFkB is a causal agent in
this promotion through mechanisms that act directly on epithelial cells and on the
inflammatory cells in the surrounding stroma, particularly the macrophages (Balkwill,
2009). Similar mechanisms operate in colon cancer (Luo et al., 2004). Together these data
strongly support causal roles for inflammation in cancer initiation and promotion. Although
not definitive, given that macrophages have not been uniquely targeted in any system, the
data suggest that macrophages are key cells in cancer induced by inflammation.
Macrophage functions in the Primary Tumor

Author Manuscript

The macrophage phenotype associated with cancer initiation and promotion is comparable to
the “activated” one (Gordon, 2003). However, once initiated and the tumors progress
towards malignancy, the macrophage phenotype changes from the “inflammatory” type to
one that resembles macrophages that promote tissue formation during development (Figure
1) (Pollard, 2004, 2009). In established tumors, NFκB signaling is inhibited by the
constitutive expression of p50 homodimers that negatively regulate NFκB and the
macrophages display the M2/trophic phenotype with reduced iNOS and TNFα expression
(Saccani et al., 2006). Indeed, blocking NFkB function by inhibition of IKKα in cultured
macrophages reduces the inflammatory gene expression signature and pushes cells to the
trophic/M2 type (Porta et al., 2009). This transition from stimulated to inhibited NFκB
function between the initiation and the established tumor stages are poorly understood but
appears central to macrophage function in the tumor microenvironment. This alternatively
activated/trophic type of macrophage is also found in cancers that arise in the apparent
absence of obvious inflammation, such as breast cancer, in which macrophages are recruited
to benign tumors in large numbers just as the tumors transition to malignancy (Figure 1).

Author Manuscript

Macrophage recruitment to tumors has been well-documented in the PyMT mouse model of
breast cancer (Lin et al., 2003; Pollard, 2009) where a sizeable populations of macrophages
are recruited at the adenoma/mammary intraepithelial stage once the tumors have progressed
to early malignancy (Lin et al., 2003; Lin et al., 2006; Lin et al., 2001; Wyckoff et al., 2007).
Similar patterns also occur in human endometrial and breast cancers (Lewis and Pollard,
2006; Smith et al., 1995). These macrophages are recruited in the presence of CSF-1, which
promotes a trophic phenotype, and IL-4 and IL-10, which makes them immunomodulatory
(DeNardo et al., 2009; Hamilton, 2008; Lin et al., 2001). Thus it is a misnomer to consider
the leukocytic infiltrate in established tumors to be “inflammatory” as there are few of the
hallmarks of inflammation, such as edema, swelling and fever.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 7

Author Manuscript

Macrophages have the most complex transcriptome known (Suzuki et al., 2009). Because of
their potential diversity of gene products, blood origin, and motile nature they are ideally
suited to perform specific tasks in a timely and spatially appropriate manner. Thus
macrophages, despite sharing many features in common, distinct tasks appear to require
subtypes of macrophages. This is the case in the tumor microenvironment where
macrophages are put into service to support the tumor. These pro-tumoral functions of
macrophage subpopulations are discussed below and are indicated in Figure 2.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tumor cell invasion, migration, and intravasation—Using a combination of
intravital imaging and an in vivo assay for invasive tumor cells in the PyMT mouse model
and in breast cancer cell xenografts, macrophages have been shown to be required for tumor
cell migration and invasion (Condeelis and Pollard, 2006). They are the key that unlocks the
gate to allow tumor cells to escape. Mechanistically, tumor cells synthesize CSF-1 that
stimulates macrophages to move and produce epidermal growth factor (EGF) that in turn
activates migration in the tumor cells (Wyckoff et al., 2004) (Figure 1). The macrophages
and tumor cells move in lock-step, and inhibition of either the EGF or CSF-1 signaling
pathways results in inhibition of migration and chemotaxis of both cell types. This is despite
the fact that the CSF-1 receptor and the EGF receptor (ErbB1) are restricted to macrophages
and tumor cells, respectively (Wyckoff et al., 2004; Wyckoff et al., 2007). A number of
experimental systems provide evidence that macrophages and tumor cells are sufficient for
this EGF-CSF-1 paracrine interaction: macrophage-induced migration can be re-capitulated
with these two cell types in an in vitro collagen overlay assay (Condeelis and Pollard, 2006),
in mammary epithelial organoid culture system (DeNardo et al., 2009) or in co-culture
(Green et al., 2009). However, in this latter case EGF is not involved whereas CSF-1 is
essential. In human breast cancer EGF expression is restricted to macrophages whereas
CSF-1 is in the tumor cells (Leek et al., 2000; Scholl et al., 1994). In PyMT tumor cells
CSF-1 is regulated by steroid hormone receptor co-activator (SRC)-1 and in SRC-1’s
absence, although tumor growth is not affected, macrophage recruitment is impaired and
tumor cell intravasation and metastasis are inhibited (Wang et al., 2009). Macrophage
polarization to the invasion-promoting phenotype is in turn regulated by Il-4 synthesized by
CD4+ T cells or tumor cells. In the absence of IL-4 macrophages are unable to promote
invasion and migration of tumor cells and metastasis is dramatically reduced in the PyMT
model (DeNardo et al., 2009; Gocheva et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript

The co-migration of macrophages and tumor cells can be initiated by other growth factors
such as heregulin and CXCL12 (stromal derived factor-1;SDF-1) dependent on the breast
cancer model. However once initiated, the migration of both cell types still requires
paracrine CSF-1-EGF signaling (Hernandez et al., 2009). Given that heregulin and CXCL12
can be synthesized by tumor cells, fibroblasts, or pericytes, this data suggests that a
specialized microenvironment is formed that can initiate tumor cell-macrophage invasion
(Figure 1). This is consistent with intravital imaging of mammary tumors that shows tumor
cell invasion is not uniform but occurs sporadically in particular locations and the
observations that tumor cell movement in vivo occurs adjacent to macrophages in the PyMT
mammary tumor model (Wyckoff et al., 2007) and in xenotransplants on the chick allantoic
membrane (Green et al., 2009). Pertinently, CSF-1 expression in human tumors is highest at

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 8

Author Manuscript

the invasive edge, a site abundantly populated by macrophages (Lin et al., 2001; Scholl et
al., 1994; Smith et al., 1995; Zhu et al., 2008).
Other molecules that may be involved in the macrophage stimulation of invasiveness in vivo
have also been suggested by tissue culture experiments. For example Wnt5a acting through
the non-canonical pathway (Pukrop et al., 2006) in organoids and TNFα via NFκB in coculture (Hagemann et al., 2005) can promote tumor cell invasion. Further, macrophages have
been shown to compensate for the loss of motility in tumor cells following a knockdown of
osteopontin (SPP1) (Cheng et al., 2007).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The extracellular matrix plays a major role in modifying tumor cell invasiveness.
Macrophage synthesize SPARC/osteonectin (secreted protein, acidic rich in cysteine), which
is important for deposition of collagen IV, enhanced tumor cell invasion, and adhesion to
other ECM components (such as fibronectin). SPARC/osteonectin has been shown to be
required for spontaneous metastasis from the primary tumor (Sangaletti et al., 2008).
Fibrillar Collagen 1 also enhances the invasion process as tumor cells and macrophages
move ~10 times faster on these structures than through the stroma itself. This has the
unfortunate consequence of recruiting cells towards blood vessels given that these
collagenous fibrils also anchor these structures (Condeelis and Segall, 2003). At least during
development of the mammary gland, macrophages have been shown to promote collagen
fibrillogenesis (Ingman et al., 2006). Intravital imaging has shown that intravasation occurs
through clusters of macrophages located on the abluminal side of the vessels (Wyckoff et al.,
2007). Thus macrophages on vessels give come-hither signals that result in tumor cell
migration down collagen fibrils toward vessels where the tumor cells escape into the
vasculature aided by macrophages. This localized movement near to vessels has been
confirmed by intravital imaging of xenografted tumors (Gligorijevic et al., 2009). Reduction
in the number of tumor associated macrophages using genetic means (Wyckoff et al., 2007),
or inhibition of EGF (DeNardo et al., 2009; Wyckoff et al., 2007) or CSF-1 (Wyckoff et al.,
2007) signaling in wild type mice bearing mammary tumors reduces the numbers of
circulating tumor cells. This data suggests that the paracrine loop between the two cell types
is required for egress into the circulation in vivo (Wyckoff et al., 2007). Importantly, analysis
of clinical material indicates that a structure named the “tumor microenvironment of
metastasis (TMEM)” defined by co-localization of macrophages, tumor cells, and
endothelial cells is a prognostic marker for poor survival in breast cancer (Robinson et al.,
2009). These data may also tie together the clinical observations described above as CSF-1,
EGF, CXCR4 are prognostic markers in many cancers.

Author Manuscript

The macrophages that stimulate tumor cell invasion in vivo have been isolated and their
transcriptome interrogated on DNA microarrays. Unsupervised clustering shows this
population uniquely separated from a general TAM or a reference population of splenic
macrophages. Comparisons with other datasets show that the “invasive macrophages” are
most similar to those found during embryogenesis. They are enriched in developmental
pathways, in particular the Wnt signaling pathway (Ojalvo et al., 2010). Given that
macrophage-produced Wnts promote vascular remodeling in developmental contexts (Lobov
et al., 2005) this array data led to the hypothesis that these invasive macrophages link
angiogenesis and tumor invasion.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 9

Author Manuscript

The studies cited above have focused upon invasion and intravasation of single tumor cells
typically found in breast cancers. However there are other types of invasion, including the
collective invasion of sheets of cells such as that found in colon cancer. In a mouse model of
this disease caused by a mutation in the APC gene and hemizygosity of Smad4, a unique
population of immature myeloid cells (which express CD34, CD45, CD11b, and CCR1, but
not F4/80) surrounds the invasive front. Depletion of CCL9, the ligand for CCR1, blocks the
accumulation of these cells with a consequent inhibition of tumor cell invasion (Kitamura et
al., 2007). These myeloid cells display an unusual phenotype and, as yet, no complete
lineage relationship has been established.

Author Manuscript

Tumor cell migration also requires proteolytic destruction of the matrix to allow the escape
of tumor cells from the confines of the basement membrane. Subsequently, proteolysis is
required for tumor cells to migrate through the dense stroma. Macrophages are potent
producers of many proteases, including cathepsins, matrix metalloproteases, and serine
proteases (Egeblad and Werb, 2002). In many tumors proteases play a role in tumor
progression and metastasis (Egeblad and Werb, 2002; Gocheva et al., 2006; Joyce and
Pollard, 2009). Depletion of cathesin B (Gocheva et al., 2010; Vasiljeva et al., 2006) and S
(Gocheva et al., 2010) from macrophages results in reduced tumor cell invasion and
inhibition of metastasis in the PyMT model. Urokinase/Plasminogen activator (uPA) is
mostly produced by macrophages and in the PyMT model its loss also inhibits metastasis
(Almholt et al., 2005). In the colon model of collective cell migration described above, the
immature myeloid cells produce both MMP9 and MMP2 that are required for the tumor cell
invasion (Kitamura et al., 2007).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Angiogenesis—In most tumors there is a dramatic enhancement of vascular density from
the benign to malignant transition, a process referred to as the angiogenic switch (Hanahan
et al., 1996). The formation of a complete vasculature is a complex process with many cell
types, often with overlapping functions influencing its outcome in tumors. Cells of the
mononuclear phagocytic lineage cells, and macrophages in particular, are major contributors
to this process (Zumsteg and Christofori, 2009). Studies in which macrophages are reduced
in mammary tumors using the null mutation in the Csf1 gene show that these cells are
required for the angiogenic switch. This effect is reversed by the re-expression of CSF-1 in
the mammary epithelium (Lin et al., 2006). Over-expression of CSF-1 in wild type mice
results in the premature accumulation of macrophages into hyperplastic lesions and a
dramatic early angiogenic switch that in turn accelerates the transition to malignancy. These
data strongly argue for the role of the angiogenic switch in regulating the malignant
transition and for macrophages to be important players in this regulation (Lin and Pollard,
2007). These studies also show that macrophages play a significant role in vascular
remodeling as tumors progress to late carcinoma stages (Lin et al., 2006). A similar
macrophage depletion strategy also reduces angiogenesis in an osteosarcoma model (Kubota
et al., 2009). Further, most TAM depletion strategies using liposome-encapsulated
clodronate described above, inhibit angiogenesis in transplanted tumor models (Gazzaniga et
al., 2007; Halin et al., 2009; Kimura et al., 2007; Zeisberger et al., 2006). This effect seems
to be the most likely cause of reduced tumor growth following macrophage depletion seen in
these transplants models, as their growth is very dependent upon rapid angiogenesis.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A subpopulation of CD11b-positive myeloid cells characterized by expression of Tie2, a
marker of mature endothelial cells, has been described in tumors. These myeloid cells
appear to be derived from Tie2-expressing monocytes (TEM) that are found in human cancer
patients and in mice (Murdoch et al., 2008). Co-injection of tumor cells with these cells
enhances angiogenesis. In contrast ablation of these cells impairs angiogenesis in several
mouse models of cancer (De Palma et al., 2005). Transcriptional profiling of Tie2-positive
and negative monocytes show that they are distinct classes although highly related (Pucci et
al., 2009). We have also identified two subpopulations of macrophages in the PyMT model
that express differing levels of Tie2 (Data not shown). They are probably equivalent to the
two populations described by (Pucci et al., 2009) who defined their populations by a reporter
gene assay rather than the more sensitive analysis of cell surface markers by fluorescenceactivated cell sorting. Indeed, Tie2 mRNA is expressed in the Tie2-negative population
albeit at a 2-fold lower level than the expression in the Tie2-positive population (Pucci et al.,
2009).

Author Manuscript

Transcriptional profiling on high-density oligonucleotide arrays of these TAMs shows that
they are highly enriched in transcripts that encode angiogenic molecules (Ojalvo et al.,
2009). Reinforcing this result, in the PyMT mammary cancer model, gene ablation of the
Ets2 transcription factor in the myeloid lineage inhibits angiogenesis. Transcriptional
profiling of the Ets2-deficient TAMs shows that ETS2 controls the expression of transcripts
encoding proteins that regulate angiogenesis (Zabuawala et al., 2010). In both cases
comparisons of TAM transcriptomes with available clinical databases shows that these
transcriptional signatures are predictive of survival (Ojalvo et al., 2009; Zabuawala et al.,
2010). These data make a strong case that this population of TAMs plays important roles in
tumor progression through their effects on angiogenesis. Moreover, the pro-angiogenic role
of TAMs in mouse models is consistent with clinical observations in breast cancer that
correlate macrophage density with microvessel density and poor prognosis (Leek and Harris,
2002).

Author Manuscript

Hypoxia is a major driver of angiogenesis. Macrophages accumulate in hypoxic areas of the
tumor and are particularly associated with necrotic tissue (Murdoch et al., 2008). HIF1α
whose expression is constitutive in macrophages, modulates the recruitment of macrophages
to hypoxic regions of the tumor. This recruitment is through chemokines especially CCL-2
and endothelins (Grimshaw et al., 2002; Murdoch et al., 2008). At the hypoxic site, HIF1α
regulates the transcription of a large panel of genes associated with angiogenesis including
VEGF (Lewis and Hughes, 2007; Murdoch et al., 2008). These genes then mediate the
revascularization of the necrotic zones (Murdoch et al., 2008). This process can be modeled
in in vivo angiogenesis models such as in T47D tumor cell spheroids (Murdoch et al., 2008)
or in transplant tumor models (Zumsteg and Christofori, 2009).
Macrophages produce VEGF in both human and mouse mammary tumors (Leek and Harris,
2002; Lin et al., 2006). VEGF over-expression in macrophage depleted mice increases
vascularization and also accelerates the transition to malignancy (Lin et al., 2007). This
rescue is also associated with the recruitment of macrophages even in the absence of CSF-1
and these cells and their angiogenesis regulating gene products may be partially responsible
for the angiogenic response. Targeted ablation of the Vegfa gene in myeloid cells results in
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 11

Author Manuscript

the inhibition of the angiogenic switch (Stockmann et al., 2008). However, despite the
failure of the angiogenic switch, the tumors that grow out are more aggressive and are
characterized by a less dense but more coherent vasculature. This aggressive growth
suggests strong selection in response to hypoxic stress for tumor cells that are able to use
glycolysis as a source for energy (Stockmann et al., 2008).

Author Manuscript

Macrophages can produce VEGF but in other cases they also make it bioavailable through
the production of MMP9, which releases VEGF from extracellular depots. Targeting of
macrophages with bisphosphonate in a model of cervical carcinogenesis inhibits of
angiogenesis because macrophages are the major producers of MMP9 in this model and are
recruited by CCL2 (Giraudo et al., 2004). Lack of CCL2 signaling reduces macrophage
infiltration but has only a modest effect on tumor progression because of a compensatory
recruitment of MMP9-producing neutrophils (Pahler et al., 2008). However, in other reports
CCL2 recruitment of macrophages is required for angiogenesis (Fujimoto et al., 2009;
Gazzaniga et al., 2007). In a glioblastoma mouse model, stromal-synthesized SDF-1
(CXCL12) recruits a myeloid cell population that expresses MMP9 and releases matrixbound VEGF. This VEGF not only stimulates angiogenesis but also tumor cell invasion (Du
et al., 2008).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Immunoregulation—Macrophages are central to many immune responses and are clearly
immunoregulatory cells within the tumor. In some cases this can result in rejection as both
macrophages and dendritic cells are able to present antigens to cytotoxic T cells and
macrophages are adept at tumor killing. Pioneering work from Fidler and colleagues
indicated that activated macrophages can kill tumor cells and eliminate metastases (Fidler
and Schroit, 1988). Similarly inhibition of tumor growth in xenograft models have recently
been obtained by activating macrophages by either over-expressing GM-CSF (Eubank et al.,
2009) or treating tumors with CpG together with anti-IL10 (Guiducci et al., 2005). These
latter treatments activate Toll-like receptors and block immunosupression, respectively.
However, in the vast majority of tumors there does not appear to be substantial
immunological limitation of tumor growth. This suggests that the tumor microenvironment
suppresses any immune response and alters the phenotype to one that promotes the tumor
(Swann et al., 2008). The exact role of macrophages or their cousins in this process has not
been fully delineated. Phenotyping of the transcriptome of TAMs has suggested that they
represent an immunological regulatory type. This is characterized by downregulation of
transcripts involved with immunological activation such as IL-12, IL-18 and the TLR
signaling pathway and upregulation of transcripts found in alternatively activated
macrophages such as arginase (Biswas et al., 2006; Ojalvo et al., 2009). Importantly in the
PyMT model this polarization of macrophages is caused by IL-4 synthesized by CD4positive T cells (DeNardo et al., 2009). Furthermore, macrophages in tumors develop in high
concentrations of CSF-1 that support their differentiation to trophic macrophages and away
from immunologically-activated ones, which are controlled by GM-CSF (Hamilton, 2008;
Mantovani and Sica, 2010).
Macrophages can inhibit cytotoxic T-cell responses through several mechanisms. For
example, macrophages produce IL-10 that in turn induces monocytes to express the
costimulatory molecule programmed death ligand (PD)-L1 and suppresses cytotoxic T cell
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 12

Author Manuscript

responses (Kuang et al., 2009). Macrophages in human ovarian cancers produce CCL22, a
chemokine that regulates the influx of regulatory T cells (Treg) that suppress cytotoxic T cell
responses. The abundance of these Tregs in ovarian cancer predicts poor survival (Curiel et
al., 2004). In mammary tumor xenografts a newly recruited macrophage population
suppressed immune responses through synthesis of PGE2 and TGF-β (Torroella-Kouri et
al., 2009).

Author Manuscript

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are another immunosuppressive immune cell
population related to macrophages that has come to the forefront in recent years. MDSCs are
a mixed population of myeloid cells that accumulate in pathological conditions including
cancer. Morphologically, these populations consist of monocytes and granulocytes and
immature myeloid cells and are identified by their capacity to suppress cytotoxic T cell
responses (Gabrilovich and Nagaraj, 2009). In mice, MDSCs express both the myeloid cell
marker CD11b and the granulocyte marker Gr1. The presence of these markers satisfy the
classical definition of neutrophils and therefore MDSCs are not mononuclear phagocytes
(Gabrilovich and Nagaraj, 2009). This cell surface marker analysis has also been reinforced
by gene expression analysis that shows that MDSCs are markedly different from TAMs
(Pucci et al., 2009). However, a key question remains whether these cells can differentiate
solely into mature granulocytes or whether they can become macrophages in vivo.
Macrophages at the Metastatic Site

Author Manuscript

Most studies have focused upon events occurring in the primary tumor often with metastasis
as an end point. However, metastasis not only requires the release of cells from the primary
site but also their transit through the circulation or lymphatics to arrive at a distant site where
the cells need to extravasate, survive, and prosper. This process of metastasis is very
inefficient. In humans there are many thousands of circulating cells released by tumors every
day but only a few successfully make metastases. In fact the most likely fate for these cells is
death, with extravasation and establishment of micro-metastases being major rate-limiting
events (Joyce and Pollard, 2009). Although it has long been known that macrophages
populate metastatic lesions (Joyce and Pollard, 2009) only recently has their role in
metastasis been appreciated.

Author Manuscript

Cancer is a systemic disease and primary tumors secrete factors that influence metastatic
outcome at distant sites. For example the tumor-derived extracellular matrix protein,
versican, stimulates metastasis in the Lewis lung carcinoma model through TLR2 signaling
in myeloid cells (Kim et al., 2009). Aggressive tumors systemically influence less aggressive
indolent ones to grow faster and to stimulate the growth of micro-metastases through the
acquisition of bone marrow derived cells. In these studies osteopontin expressed from the
aggressive tumor has been shown to be necessary but not sufficient for the mobilization of
bone marrow cells (McAllister et al., 2008). In neither study were the phenotype of the bone
marrow cells that influence the metastatic site fully characterized, however it is likely that
macrophages are major payers in these responses.
Primary tumors have also been shown to cause the accumulation myeloid derived cells at
distant sites and this process enhances metastatic efficiency (Kaplan et al., 2005). These
primed sites are termed the pre-metastatic niche. Their location can be altered, for example
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

from lung to bone, by serum conditioned by the primary tumor giving organ specificity to
the metastases (Kaplan et al., 2005). Among the tumor-produced factors required for the premetastatic niche are the myeloid chemoattractants S100A8 and A9 whose synthesis is
induced by the primary tumor. S100 proteins induce the synthesis of amyloid protein A that
signals through TLR4 in myeloid and endothelial cells (Hiratsuka et al., 2006; Hiratsuka et
al., 2008). In addition, lysyl oxidase crosslinks the collagen at the pre-metastatic site and is
essential for the myeloid recruitment (Erler et al., 2009). These myeloid cells secrete MMP9
that releases matrix-bound VEGF whose function is in turn required for the increase in
metastatic efficiency (Hiratsuka et al., 2002). Although the myeloid cells that accumulate in
these niches have not been fully characterized, they are CD11b, Mac1 and VEGFR1positive, characteristics of mononuclear phagocytic cells (Hiratsuka et al., 2006; Kaplan et
al., 2005). Inhibition of VEGFR1 signaling by antibody inhibition or receptor mutation also
inhibits the formation of the pre-metastatic niche (Hiratsuka et al., 2002; Kaplan et al.,
2005). However, there is a contradictory report challenging these findings, albeit in a
different model of metastasis (Dawson et al., 2009). It has been proposed that these niches
provide sites for tumor cells to adhere and prosper (Psaila and Lyden, 2009). Alternatively,
these niches might simply prepare the tissue for successful colonization by being a reservoir
of monocytes that can be rapidly mobilized to differentiate into macrophages in response to
incoming tumor cells, a process that enhances metastatic seeding and growth (Qian et al.,
2009).

Author Manuscript

Metastatic cells can colonize and grow in particular tissues even in the absence of a primary
tumor(Joyce and Pollard, 2009). Recent ex-vivo imaging studies of lungs indicate that
macrophages are recruited to these extravasating tumor cells and ablation of these
macrophages dramatically reduce the extravasation efficiency and the subsequent tumor cell
survival such that metastatic cell seeding efficiency is markedly reduced (Qian et al., 2009).
Furthermore, ablation of these recruited macrophages limits subsequent metastatic growth,
even after metastatic lesions had been established. These effects were accompanied by
physical interactions between macrophages and metastatic tumor cells suggesting shortrange transmission of growth and survival signals (Qian et al., 2009). Phenotyping revealed
that the metastasis-associated macrophages differ from the CD11c-positive lung interstitial
resident macrophages. Instead they are by CSF-1 and characterized by cell surface
expression of CD11b, F4/80, VEGFR1, and CXCR2 and the absence of Gr1 and CD11c
(Qian et al., 2009). Thus this pro-metastatic macrophage is another population with a
distinct phenotype (Figure 2) that is found not only in these experimental models but also in
metastases derived from autochthonous (spontaneous and native) models (Qian et al., 2009).

Author Manuscript

In summary mononuclear phagocytes appear to not only set up preferred sites for metastatic
cell seeding but also enhance tumor cell extravasation, establishment, and subsequent growth
of metastatic lesions (Figure 3).
Perspectives
Malignant cells can be reverted to a quiescent differentiated state by incorporation into an
embryonic microenvironment (Joyce and Pollard, 2009). This indicates the
microenvironment is dominant over malignancy. Thus for tumors to progress and become

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

malignant they must manipulate their microenvironment to one that is at least permissive if
not promoting. This is probably due to selection of oncogenic mutations that lead to
secretion of molecules that alter the cellular composition and function of the
microenvironment. Among these changes is the recruitment of bone marrow derived cells of
which, macrophages are particularly abundant. Macrophages in primary and secondary
tumors confer several properties that enhance progression and metastasis. Each function is
effected by a particular macrophage subpopulation (Figure 2). Elsewhere we have reviewed
data that macrophages play important trophic roles during development and have argued that
these roles are recapitulated in tumors (Pollard, 2009). This conjecture is supported by
transcriptome analysis on high-density arrays that show the TAMs are most similar to
macrophages involved in developmental processes (Ojalvo et al., 2009). These trophic
macrophages are also characterized as immunomodulatory as would be expected for cells
involved in normal processes. However, in contrast to developing systems tumors have lost
their “off” switches because of oncogenic mutations, thus losing control of positional
identity. Consequently tumors continue to inappropriately call for trophic support from
macrophages. This leads to macrophage enhancement of malignancy at every step of the
way.

Author Manuscript

Undoubtedly, as we dig deeper many other macrophage subpopulations will be revealed. For
example, macrophages in prostate cancer cause the tumor cells to become resistant to the
inhibitory effects of therapeutic androgen receptor antagonists and instead these drugs
become agonists for growth. This resistance is mediated by a transcriptional cofactor TAB2
that acts as a sensor of inflammation in the form of IL-1β and whose phosphorylation causes
release of gene transcription that is normally repressed by the anti-androgen. Similar
mechanisms operate with anti-estrogens in MCF-7 breast cancer cells (Zhu et al., 2006).
Macrophages might therefore have a further pro-tumor function in the progression of sex
steroid hormone-dependent cancers to steroid independence.

Author Manuscript

Many experimental challenges remain. For example, caution needs to be exercised in the
interpretation of experiments involving tumor transplantation, often into immunocompetent
animals. These experiments are confounded by anti-graft reactions even in syngeneic
contexts as well as the skewed immune reactions in immuno-compromised mice. They
cannot represent the subtlety of immune cell interactions that occurs during the progression
of autochthonous tumors. Thus for macrophage biology, immune competent animals need to
be used and although valuable results can be obtained from transplant experiments, the
conclusions need to be validated in models of spontaneously arising tumors. Another
challenge is to confirm that the macrophage subtypes and functions found in rodents are
present in human tumors. It is likely that comparable macrophage populations exist given
that the individual TAM expression signatures derived from mice are represented in human
tumor datasets and can even be predictive (Ojalvo et al., 2009; Zabuawala et al., 2010). Yet,
this validation of the rodent data in humans is essential before anti-macrophage therapeutics
are designed.
The evidence that macrophages provide tropic support to tumors and the genetic
experiments that show if you remove this support that malignancy is suppressed, strongly
argue that these cells or their unique signaling pathways are therapeutic targets. Unlike

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 15

Author Manuscript

tumor cells, the genomes of macrophages are stable suggesting that they may not as readily
become drug resistant. Significant progress has been made in identifying the molecular basis
for both macrophage phenotypes and their actions in promoting specific aspects of tumor
behavior. Some important signaling pathways have been defined as described above,
including those in response to VEGFa, TNFα, EGF and CSF-1. In addition, some
transcriptional regulators (NFκB, Stat3) that bias macrophage phenotypes from pro- to antitumoral and molecules that recruit these cells to tumors such as CCL-2 have been identified.
Pan-macrophage inhibitors such as drugs that inhibit CSF-1 signaling are in early clinical
trials. However, in the future there may also be targeted therapies that uniquely strike
macrophages in the tumor microenvironment and macrophage therapeutics that enhance the
activities of conventional treatments.

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript

This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health to JWP (NIH PO1 CA100324,
U01CA143233 and RO1 CA131270) and to the Albert Einstein Cancer Center Core grant P30 CA 13330. JWP is
the Louis Swan Goldstein Swan Chair in Women’s Cancer Research.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Abraham D, Zins K, Sioud M, Lucas T, Schafer R, Stanley ER, Aharinejad S. Stromal cell-derived
CSF-1 blockade prolongs xenograft survival of CSF-1-negative neuroblastoma. Int J Cancer. 2010;
126:1339–1352. [PubMed: 19711348]
Aharinejad S, Sioud M, Lucas T, Abraham D. Targeting stromal-cancer cell interactions with siRNAs.
Methods Mol Biol. 2009; 487:243–266. [PubMed: 19301651]
Almholt K, Lund LR, Rygaard J, Nielsen BS, Dano K, Romer J, Johnsen M. Reduced metastasis of
transgenic mammary cancer in urokinase-deficient mice. Int J Cancer. 2005; 113:525–532.
[PubMed: 15472905]
Bailey C, Negus R, Morris A, Ziprin P, Goldin R, Allavena P, Peck D, Darzi A. Chemokine expression
is associated with the accumulation of tumour associated macrophages (TAMs) and progression in
human colorectal cancer. Clinical & experimental metastasis. 2007; 24:121–130. [PubMed:
17390111]
Balkwill F. Tumour necrosis factor and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:361–371. [PubMed:
19343034]
Balkwill F, Charles KA, Mantovani A. Smoldering and polarized inflammation in the initiation and
promotion of malignant disease. Cancer cell. 2005; 7:211–217. [PubMed: 15766659]
Beck AH, Espinosa I, Edris B, Li R, Montgomery K, Zhu S, Varma S, Marinelli RJ, van de Rijn M,
West RB. The macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 response signature in breast carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15:778–787. [PubMed: 19188147]
Berg DJ, Davidson N, Kuhn R, Muller W, Menon S, Holland G, Thompson-Snipes L, Leach MW,
Rennick D. Enterocolitis and colon cancer in interleukin-10-deficient mice are associated with
aberrant cytokine production and CD4(+) TH1-like responses. The Journal of clinical investigation.
1996; 98:1010–1020. [PubMed: 8770874]
Bingle L, Brown NJ, Lewis CE. The role of tumour-associated macrophages in tumour progression:
implications for new anticancer therapies. The Journal of pathology. 2002; 196:254–265. [PubMed:
11857487]
Biswas SK, Gangi L, Paul S, Schioppa T, Saccani A, Sironi M, Bottazzi B, Doni A, Vincenzo B,
Pasqualini F, et al. A distinct and unique transcriptional program expressed by tumor-associated
macrophages (defective NF-kappaB and enhanced IRF-3/STAT1 activation). Blood. 2006;
107:2112–2122. [PubMed: 16269622]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chen JJ, Lin YC, Yao PL, Yuan A, Chen HY, Shun CT, Tsai MF, Chen CH, Yang PC. Tumorassociated macrophages: the double-edged sword in cancer progression. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:953–964. [PubMed: 15598976]
Cheng J, Huo DH, Kuang DM, Yang J, Zheng L, Zhuang SM. Human macrophages promote the
motility and invasiveness of osteopontin-knockdown tumor cells. Cancer research. 2007; 67:5141–
5147. [PubMed: 17545592]
Colotta F, Allavena P, Sica A, Garlanda C, Mantovani A. Cancer-related inflammation, the seventh
hallmark of cancer: links to genetic instability. Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:1073–1081. [PubMed:
19468060]
Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages: obligate partners for tumor cell migration, invasion, and
metastasis. Cell. 2006; 124:263–266. [PubMed: 16439202]
Condeelis J, Segall JE. Intravital imaging of cell movement in tumours. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:921–
930. [PubMed: 14737122]
Curiel TJ, Coukos G, Zou L, Alvarez X, Cheng P, Mottram P, Evdemon-Hogan M, Conejo-Garcia JR,
Zhang L, Burow M, et al. Specific recruitment of regulatory T cells in ovarian carcinoma fosters
immune privilege and predicts reduced survival. Nat Med. 2004; 10:942–949. [PubMed:
15322536]
Dawson MR, Duda DG, Chae SS, Fukumura D, Jain RK. VEGFR1 activity modulates myeloid cell
infiltration in growing lung metastases but is not required for spontaneous metastasis formation.
PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e6525. [PubMed: 19763275]
De Palma M, Venneri MA, Galli R, Sergi LS, Politi LS, Sampaolesi M, Naldini L. Tie2 identifies a
hematopoietic lineage of proangiogenic monocytes required for tumor vessel formation and a
mesenchymal population of pericyte progenitors. Cancer cell. 2005; 8:211–226. [PubMed:
16169466]
DeNardo DG, Barreto JB, Andreu P, Vasquez L, Tawfik D, Kolhatkar N, Coussens LM. CD4(+) T cells
regulate pulmonary metastasis of mammary carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of
macrophages. Cancer cell. 2009; 16:91–102. [PubMed: 19647220]
Deng L, Zhou JF, Sellers RS, Li JF, Nguyen AV, Wang Y, Orlofsky A, Liu Q, Hume DA, Pollard JW, et
al. A novel mouse model of inflammatory bowel disease links mammalian target of rapamycindependent hyperproliferation of colonic epithelium to inflammation-associated tumorigenesis. The
American journal of pathology. 2010; 176:952–967. [PubMed: 20042677]
Du R, Lu KV, Petritsch C, Liu P, Ganss R, Passegue E, Song H, Vandenberg S, Johnson RS, Werb Z, et
al. HIF1alpha induces the recruitment of bone marrow-derived vascular modulatory cells to
regulate tumor angiogenesis and invasion. Cancer cell. 2008; 13:206–220. [PubMed: 18328425]
Egeblad M, Werb Z. New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2002; 2:161–174. [PubMed: 11990853]
Enzler T, Gillessen S, Manis JP, Ferguson D, Fleming J, Alt FW, Mihm M, Dranoff G. Deficiencies of
GM-CSF and interferon gamma link inflammation and cancer. The Journal of experimental
medicine. 2003; 197:1213–1219. [PubMed: 12732663]
Erler JT, Bennewith KL, Cox TR, Lang G, Bird D, Koong A, Le QT, Giaccia AJ. Hypoxia-induced
lysyl oxidase is a critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment to form the premetastatic
niche. Cancer cell. 2009; 15:35–44. [PubMed: 19111879]
Espinosa I, Beck AH, Lee CH, Zhu S, Montgomery KD, Marinelli RJ, Ganjoo KN, Nielsen TO, Gilks
CB, West RB, et al. Coordinate expression of colony-stimulating factor-1 and colony-stimulating
factor-1-related proteins is associated with poor prognosis in gynecological and nongynecological
leiomyosarcoma. The American journal of pathology. 2009; 174:2347–2356. [PubMed: 19443701]
Eubank TD, Roberts RD, Khan M, Curry JM, Nuovo GJ, Kuppusamy P, Marsh CB. Granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor inhibits breast cancer growth and metastasis by invoking an
anti-angiogenic program in tumor-educated macrophages. Cancer research. 2009; 69:2133–2140.
[PubMed: 19223554]
Farinha P, Masoudi H, Skinnider BF, Shumansky K, Spinelli JJ, Gill K, Klasa R, Voss N, Connors JM,
Gascoyne RD. Analysis of multiple biomarkers shows that lymphoma-associated macrophage
(LAM) content is an independent predictor of survival in follicular lymphoma (FL). Blood. 2005;
106:2169–2174. [PubMed: 15933054]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fidler IJ, Schroit AJ. Recognition and destruction of neoplastic cells by activated macrophages:
discrimination of altered self. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 1988; 948:151–173. [PubMed:
3052591]
Fujimoto H, Sangai T, Ishii G, Ikehara A, Nagashima T, Miyazaki M, Ochiai A. Stromal MCP-1 in
mammary tumors induces tumor-associated macrophage infiltration and contributes to tumor
progression. Int J Cancer. 2009; 125:1276–1284. [PubMed: 19479998]
Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as regulators of the immune system.
Nature reviews immunology. 2009; 9:162–174.
Gazzaniga S, Bravo AI, Guglielmotti A, van Rooijen N, Maschi F, Vecchi A, Mantovani A, Mordoh J,
Wainstok R. Targeting tumor-associated macrophages and inhibition of MCP-1 reduce
angiogenesis and tumor growth in a human melanoma xenograft. The Journal of investigative
dermatology. 2007; 127:2031–2041. [PubMed: 17460736]
Giraudo E, Inoue M, Hanahan D. An amino-bisphosphonate targets MMP-9-expressing macrophages
and angiogenesis to impair cervical carcinogenesis. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2004;
114:623–633. [PubMed: 15343380]
Gligorijevic B, Kedrin D, Segall JE, Condeelis J, van Rheenen J. Dendra2 photoswitching through the
Mammary Imaging Window. J Vis Exp. 2009; :2876.doi: 10.3791/1278
Gocheva V, Wang HW, Gadea BB, Shree T, Hunter KE, Garfall AL, Berman T, Joyce JA. IL-4 induces
cathepsin protease activity in tumor-associated macrophages to promote cancer growth and
invasion. Genes Dev. 2010; 24:241–255. [PubMed: 20080943]
Gocheva V, Zeng W, Ke D, Klimstra D, Reinheckel T, Peters C, Hanahan D, Joyce JA. Distinct roles
for cysteine cathepsin genes in multistage tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 2006; 20:543–556.
[PubMed: 16481467]
Gordon S. Alternative activation of macrophages. Nature reviews. 2003; 3:23–35.
Gordon S, Taylor PR. Monocyte and macrophage heterogeneity. Nature reviews immunology. 2005;
5:953–964.
Green CE, Liu T, Montel V, Hsiao G, Lester RD, Subramaniam S, Gonias SL, Klemke RL.
Chemoattractant signaling between tumor cells and macrophages regulates cancer cell migration,
metastasis and neovascularization. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e6713. [PubMed: 19696929]
Greten FR, Eckmann L, Greten TF, Park JM, Li ZW, Egan LJ, Kagnoff MF, Karin M. IKKbeta links
inflammation and tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colitis-associated cancer. Cell. 2004;
118:285–296. [PubMed: 15294155]
Grimshaw MJ, Wilson JL, Balkwill FR. Endothelin-2 is a macrophage chemoattractant: implications
for macrophage distribution in tumors. European journal of immunology. 2002; 32:2393–2400.
[PubMed: 12207323]
Grivennikov S, Karin E, Terzic J, Mucida D, Yu GY, Vallabhapurapu S, Scheller J, Rose-John S,
Cheroutre H, Eckmann L, et al. IL-6 and Stat3 are required for survival of intestinal epithelial cells
and development of colitis-associated cancer. Cancer cell. 2009; 15:103–113. [PubMed:
19185845]
Groblewska M, Mroczko B, Wereszczynska-Siemiatkowska U, Mysliwiec P, Kedra B, Szmitkowski M.
Serum levels of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and macrophage colonystimulating factor (M-CSF) in pancreatic cancer patients. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2007; 45:30–34.
[PubMed: 17243911]
Guiducci C, Vicari AP, Sangaletti S, Trinchieri G, Colombo MP. Redirecting in vivo elicited tumor
infiltrating macrophages and dendritic cells towards tumor rejection. Cancer research. 2005;
65:3437–3446. [PubMed: 15833879]
Hagemann T, Wilson J, Kulbe H, Li NF, Leinster DA, Charles K, Klemm F, Pukrop T, Binder C,
Balkwill FR. Macrophages induce invasiveness of epithelial cancer cells via NF-kappaB and JNK.
J Immunol. 2005; 175:1197–1205. [PubMed: 16002723]
Halin, S.; Rudolfsson, SH.; Van Rooijen, N.; Bergh, A. Neoplasia. Vol. 11. New York, NY: 2009.
Extratumoral macrophages promote tumor and vascular growth in an orthotopic rat prostate tumor
model; p. 177-186.
Hamilton JA. Colony-stimulating factors in inflammation and autoimmunity. Nature reviews. 2008;
8:533–544.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hanahan D, Christofori G, Naik P, Arbeit J. Transgenic mouse models of tumour angiogenesis: the
angiogenic switch, its molecular controls, and prospects for preclinical therapeutic models. Eur J
Cancer. 1996; 32A:2386–2393. [PubMed: 9059326]
Hernandez L, Smirnova T, Kedrin D, Wyckoff J, Zhu L, Stanley ER, Cox D, Muller WJ, Pollard JW,
Van Rooijen N, et al. The EGF/CSF-1 paracrine invasion loop can be triggered by heregulin beta1
and CXCL12. Cancer research. 2009; 69:3221–3227. [PubMed: 19293185]
Heuff G, Oldenburg HS, Boutkan H, Visser JJ, Beelen RH, Van Rooijen N, Dijkstra CD, Meyer S.
Enhanced tumour growth in the rat liver after selective elimination of Kupffer cells. Cancer
Immunol Immunother. 1993; 37:125–130. [PubMed: 8319242]
Hiratsuka S, Nakamura K, Iwai S, Murakami M, Itoh T, Kijima H, Shipley JM, Senior RM, Shibuya
M. MMP9 induction by vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 is involved in lung-specific
metastasis. Cancer cell. 2002; 2:289–300. [PubMed: 12398893]
Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Maru Y. Tumour-mediated upregulation of chemoattractants
and recruitment of myeloid cells predetermines lung metastasis. Nature cell biology. 2006;
8:1369–1375. [PubMed: 17128264]
Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Sakurai Y, Akashi-Takamura S, Ishibashi S, Miyake K, Shibuya M, Akira S,
Aburatani H, Maru Y. The S100A8-serum amyloid A3-TLR4 paracrine cascade establishes a premetastatic phase. Nature cell biology. 2008; 10:1349–1355. [PubMed: 18820689]
Ingman WV, Wyckoff J, Gouon-Evans V, Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages promote collagen
fibrillogenesis around terminal end buds of the developing mammary gland. Dev Dyn. 2006;
235:3222–3229. [PubMed: 17029292]
Jaiswal S, Jamieson CH, Pang WW, Park CY, Chao MP, Majeti R, Traver D, van Rooijen N, Weissman
IL. CD47 is upregulated on circulating hematopoietic stem cells and leukemia cells to avoid
phagocytosis. Cell. 2009; 138:271–285. [PubMed: 19632178]
Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:239–252.
[PubMed: 19279573]
Kaplan RN, Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH, Vincent L, Costa C, MacDonald DD, Jin DK,
Shido K, Kerns SA, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the
pre-metastatic niche. Nature. 2005; 438:820–827. [PubMed: 16341007]
Karin M, Greten FR. NF-kappaB: linking inflammation and immunity to cancer development and
progression. Nature reviews immunology. 2005; 5:749–759.
Karin M, Lawrence T, Nizet V. Innate immunity gone awry: linking microbial infections to chronic
inflammation and cancer. Cell. 2006; 124:823–835. [PubMed: 16497591]
Kim DW, Min HS, Lee KH, Kim YJ, Oh DY, Jeon YK, Lee SH, Im SA, Chung DH, Kim YT, et al.
High tumour islet macrophage infiltration correlates with improved patient survival but not with
EGFR mutations, gene copy number or protein expression in resected nonsmall cell lung cancer.
British journal of cancer. 2008; 98:1118–1124. [PubMed: 18283317]
Kim S, Takahashi H, Lin WW, Descargues P, Grivennikov S, Kim Y, Luo JL, Karin M. Carcinomaproduced factors activate myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate metastasis. Nature. 2009;
457:102–106. [PubMed: 19122641]
Kimura YN, Watari K, Fotovati A, Hosoi F, Yasumoto K, Izumi H, Kohno K, Umezawa K, Iguchi H,
Shirouzu K, et al. Inflammatory stimuli from macrophages and cancer cells synergistically
promote tumor growth and angiogenesis. Cancer Sci. 2007; 98:2009–2018. [PubMed: 17924976]
Kitamura T, Kometani K, Hashida H, Matsunaga A, Miyoshi H, Hosogi H, Aoki M, Oshima M,
Hattori M, Takabayashi A, et al. SMAD4-deficient intestinal tumors recruit CCR1+ myeloid cells
that promote invasion. Nat Genet. 2007; 39:467–475. [PubMed: 17369830]
Kuang DM, Zhao Q, Peng C, Xu J, Zhang JP, Wu C, Zheng L. Activated monocytes in peritumoral
stroma of hepatocellular carcinoma foster immune privilege and disease progression through PDL1. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2009; 206:1327–1337. [PubMed: 19451266]
Kubota Y, Takubo K, Shimizu T, Ohno H, Kishi K, Shibuya M, Saya H, Suda T. M-CSF inhibition
selectively targets pathological angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. The Journal of experimental
medicine. 2009; 206:1089–1102. [PubMed: 19398755]
Lacy-Hulbert A, Smith AM, Tissire H, Barry M, Crowley D, Bronson RT, Roes JT, Savill JS, Hynes
RO. Ulcerative colitis and autoimmunity induced by loss of myeloid alphav integrins. Proceedings

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2007; 104:15823–15828.
[PubMed: 17895374]
Leek RD, Harris AL. Tumor-associated macrophages in breast cancer. Journal of Mammary Gland
Biology & Neoplasia. 2002; 7:177–189. [PubMed: 12463738]
Leek RD, Hunt NC, Landers RJ, Lewis CE, Royds JA, Harris AL. Macrophage infiltration is
associated with VEGF and EGFR expression in breast cancer. The Journal of pathology. 2000;
190:430–436. [PubMed: 10699991]
Lewis CE, Hughes R. Inflammation and breast cancer. Microenvironmental factors regulating
macrophage function in breast tumours: hypoxia and angiopoietin-2. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;
9:209. [PubMed: 17601353]
Lewis CE, Pollard JW. Distinct role of macrophages in different tumor microenvironments. Cancer
research. 2006; 66:605–612. [PubMed: 16423985]
Lin EY, Gouon-Evans V, Nguyen AV, Pollard JW. The macrophage growth factor, CSF-1, in mammary
gland development and tumor progression. Journal of mammary gland biology and neoplasia.
2002; 7:147–162. [PubMed: 12465600]
Lin EY, Jones JG, Li P, Zhu L, Whitney KD, Muller WJ, Pollard JW. Progression to malignancy in the
polyoma middle T oncoprotein mouse breast cancer model provides a reliable model for human
diseases. The American journal of pathology. 2003; 163:2113–2126. [PubMed: 14578209]
Lin EY, Li J, Bricard G, Wang W, Deng Y, Sellers R, Porcelli SA, Pollard JW. Vascular endothelial
growth factor restores delayed tumor progression in tumors depleted of macrophages. Molecular
Oncology. 2007; 1:288–302. [PubMed: 18509509]
Lin EY, Li JF, Gnatovskiy L, Deng Y, Zhu L, Grzesik DA, Qian B, Xue XN, Pollard JW. Macrophages
regulate the angiogenic switch in a mouse model of breast cancer. Cancer research. 2006;
66:11238–11246. [PubMed: 17114237]
Lin EY, Nguyen AV, Russell RG, Pollard JW. Colony-stimulating factor 1 promotes progression of
mammary tumors to malignancy. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2001; 193:727–740.
[PubMed: 11257139]
Lin EY, Pollard JW. Tumor-associated macrophages press the angiogenic switch in breast cancer.
Cancer research. 2007; 67:5064–5066. [PubMed: 17545580]
Lin WW, Karin M. A cytokine-mediated link between innate immunity, inflammation, and cancer. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2007; 117:1175–1183. [PubMed: 17476347]
Lobov IB, Rao S, Carroll TJ, Vallance JE, Ito M, Ondr JK, Kurup S, Glass DA, Patel MS, Shu W, et al.
WNT7b mediates macrophage-induced programmed cell death in patterning of the vasculature.
Nature. 2005; 437:417–421. [PubMed: 16163358]
Luo JL, Maeda S, Hsu LC, Yagita H, Karin M. Inhibition of NF-kappaB in cancer cells converts
inflammation- induced tumor growth mediated by TNFalpha to TRAIL-mediated tumor
regression. Cancer cell. 2004; 6:297–305. [PubMed: 15380520]
Mantovani A, Allavena P, Sica A, Balkwill F. Cancer-related inflammation. Nature. 2008; 454:436–
444. [PubMed: 18650914]
Mantovani A, Sica A. Macrophages, innate immunity and cancer: balance, tolerance, and diversity.
Current opinion in immunology. 2010 In press.
McAllister SS, Gifford AM, Greiner AL, Kelleher SP, Saelzler MP, Ince TA, Reinhardt F, Harris LN,
Hylander BL, Repasky EA, et al. Systemic endocrine instigation of indolent tumor growth requires
osteopontin. Cell. 2008; 133:994–1005. [PubMed: 18555776]
Meira LB, Bugni JM, Green SL, Lee CW, Pang B, Borenshtein D, Rickman BH, Rogers AB, MoroskiErkul CA, McFaline JL, et al. DNA damage induced by chronic inflammation contributes to colon
carcinogenesis in mice. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2008; 118:2516–2525. [PubMed:
18521188]
Moghaddam SJ, Li H, Cho SN, Dishop MK, Wistuba II, Ji L, Kurie JM, Dickey BF, Demayo FJ.
Promotion of lung carcinogenesis by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease-like airway
inflammation in a K-ras-induced mouse model. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009; 40:443–453.
[PubMed: 18927348]
Mroczko B, Groblewska M, Wereszczynska-Siemiatkowska U, Okulczyk B, Kedra B, Laszewicz W,
Dabrowski A, Szmitkowski M. Serum macrophage-colony stimulating factor levels in colorectal

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

cancer patients correlate with lymph node metastasis and poor prognosis. Clin Chim Acta. 2007;
380:208–212. [PubMed: 17368603]
Murdoch C, Muthana M, Coffelt SB, Lewis CE. The role of myeloid cells in the promotion of tumour
angiogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:618–631. [PubMed: 18633355]
Naugler, WE.; Sakurai, T.; Kim, S.; Maeda, S.; Kim, K.; Elsharkawy, AM.; Karin, M. Science. Vol.
317. New York, NY: 2007. Gender disparity in liver cancer due to sex differences in MyD88dependent IL-6 production; p. 121-124.
Oguma K, Oshima H, Aoki M, Uchio R, Naka K, Nakamura S, Hirao A, Saya H, Taketo MM, Oshima
M. Activated macrophages promote Wnt signalling through tumour necrosis factor-alpha in gastric
tumour cells. Embo J. 2008; 27:1671–1681. [PubMed: 18511911]
Ojalvo LS, King W, Cox D, Pollard JW. High-density gene expression analysis of tumor-associated
macrophages from mouse mammary tumors. The American journal of pathology. 2009; 174:1048–
1064. [PubMed: 19218341]
Ojalvo LS, Whittaker CA, Condeelis JS, Pollard JW. Gene expression analysis of macrophages that
facilitate tumor invasion supports a role for Wnt-signaling in mediating their activity in primary
mammary tumors. J Immunol. 2010; 184:702–712. [PubMed: 20018620]
Oosterling SJ, van der Bij GJ, Meijer GA, Tuk CW, van Garderen E, van Rooijen N, Meijer S, van der
Sijp JR, Beelen RH, van Egmond M. Macrophages direct tumour histology and clinical outcome
in a colon cancer model. The Journal of pathology. 2005; 207:147–155. [PubMed: 16104052]
Pahler JC, Tazzyman S, Erez N, Chen YY, Murdoch C, Nozawa H, Lewis CE, Hanahan D. Plasticity in
tumor-promoting inflammation: impairment of macrophage recruitment evokes a compensatory
neutrophil response. Neoplasia. 2008; 10:329–340. [PubMed: 18392134]
Pang B, Zhou X, Yu H, Dong M, Taghizadeh K, Wishnok JS, Tannenbaum SR, Dedon PC. Lipid
peroxidation dominates the chemistry of DNA adduct formation in a mouse model of
inflammation. Carcinogenesis. 2007; 28:1807–1813. [PubMed: 17347141]
Patsialou A, Wyckoff J, Wang Y, Goswami S, Stanley ER, Condeelis JS. Invasion of human breast
cancer cells in vivo requires both paracrine and autocrine loops involving the colony-stimulating
factor-1 receptor. Cancer research. 2009; 69:9498–9506. [PubMed: 19934330]
Pollard JW. Tumor educated macrophages promote tumor progression and metastasis. Nature Reviews
Cancer. 2004; 4:71–78. [PubMed: 14708027]
Pollard JW. Trophic macrophages in development and disease. Nature reviews immunology. 2009;
9:259–270.
Porta C, Rimoldi M, Raes G, Brys L, Ghezzi P, Di Liberto D, Dieli F, Ghisletti S, Natoli G, De
Baetselier P, et al. Tolerance and M2 (alternative) macrophage polarization are related processes
orchestrated by p50 nuclear factor kappaB. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 2009; 106:14978–14983. [PubMed: 19706447]
Psaila B, Lyden D. The metastatic niche: adapting the foreign soil. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:285–293.
[PubMed: 19308068]
Pucci F, Venneri MA, Biziato D, Nonis A, Moi D, Sica A, Di Serio C, Naldini L, De Palma M. A
distinguishing gene signature shared by tumor-infiltrating Tie2-expressing monocytes, blood
“resident” monocytes, and embryonic macrophages suggests common functions and
developmental relationships. Blood. 2009; 114:901–914. [PubMed: 19383967]
Pukrop T, Klemm F, Hagemann T, Gradl D, Schulz M, Siemes S, Trumper L, Binder C. Wnt 5a
signaling is critical for macrophage-induced invasion of breast cancer cell lines. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2006; 103:5454–5459. [PubMed:
16569699]
Qian B, Deng Y, Im JH, Muschel RJ, Zou Y, Li J, Lang RA, Pollard JW. A distinct macrophage
population mediates metastatic breast cancer cell extravasation, establishment and growth. PLoS
ONE. 2009; 4:e6562. [PubMed: 19668347]
Robinson BD, Sica GL, Liu YF, Rohan TE, Gertler FB, Condeelis JS, Jones JG. Tumor
microenvironment of metastasis in human breast carcinoma: a potential prognostic marker linked
to hematogenous dissemination. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2433–2441. [PubMed: 19318480]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Robinson-Smith TM, Isaacsohn I, Mercer CA, Zhou M, Van Rooijen N, Husseinzadeh N, McFarlandMancini MM, Drew AF. Macrophages mediate inflammation-enhanced metastasis of ovarian
tumors in mice. Cancer research. 2007; 67:5708–5716. [PubMed: 17575137]
Ryder M, Ghossein RA, Ricarte-Filho JC, Knauf JA, Fagin JA. Increased density of tumor-associated
macrophages is associated with decreased survival in advanced thyroid cancer. Endocr Relat
Cancer. 2008; 15:1069–1074. [PubMed: 18719091]
Saccani A, Schioppa T, Porta C, Biswas SK, Nebuloni M, Vago L, Bottazzi B, Colombo MP,
Mantovani A, Sica A. p50 nuclear factor-kappaB overexpression in tumor-associated
macrophages inhibits M1 inflammatory responses and antitumor resistance. Cancer research.
2006; 66:11432–11440. [PubMed: 17145890]
Saji H, Koike M, Yamori T, Saji S, Seiki M, Matsushima K, Toi M. Significant correlation of
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 expression with neovascularization and progression of breast
carcinoma. Cancer. 2001; 92:1085–1091. [PubMed: 11571719]
Sangaletti S, Di Carlo E, Gariboldi S, Miotti S, Cappetti B, Parenza M, Rumio C, Brekken RA,
Chiodoni C, Colombo MP. Macrophage-derived SPARC bridges tumor cell-extracellular matrix
interactions toward metastasis. Cancer research. 2008; 68:9050–9059. [PubMed: 18974151]
Sapi E, Kacinski BM. The role of CSF-1 in normal and neoplastic breast physiology. Proc Soc Exp
Biol Med. 1999; 220:1–8. [PubMed: 9893162]
Scholl SM, Pallud C, Beuvon F, Hacene K, Stanley ER, Rohrschneider LR, Tang R, Pouillart P,
Lidereau R. Anti-colony-stimulating factor-1 antibody staining in primary breast
adenocarcinomas correlates with marked inflammatory cell infiltrates and prognosis. Journal of
the National Cancer Institute. 1994; 86:120–126. [PubMed: 8271294]
Sharma M, Beck AH, Webster JA, Espinosa I, Montgomery K, Varma S, van de Rijn M, Jensen KC,
West RB. Analysis of stromal signatures in the tumor microenvironment of ductal carcinoma in
situ. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009; :2905.doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0654Smith HO, Anderson PS, Kuo DY, Goldberg GL, DeVictoria CL, Boocock CA, Jones JG, Runowicz
CD, Stanley ER, Pollard JW. The role of colony-stimulating factor 1 and its receptor in the
etiopathogenesis of endometrial adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 1995; 1:313–325. [PubMed:
9815987]
Stockmann C, Doedens A, Weidemann A, Zhang N, Takeda N, Greenberg JI, Cheresh DA, Johnson
RS. Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates tumorigenesis.
Nature. 2008; 456:814–818. [PubMed: 18997773]
Suzuki H, Forrest AR, van Nimwegen E, Daub CO, Balwierz PJ, Irvine KM, Lassmann T, Ravasi T,
Hasegawa Y, de Hoon MJ, et al. The transcriptional network that controls growth arrest and
differentiation in a human myeloid leukemia cell line. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:553–562. [PubMed:
19377474]
Swann JB, Vesely MD, Silva A, Sharkey J, Akira S, Schreiber RD, Smyth MJ. Demonstration of
inflammation-induced cancer and cancer immunoediting during primary tumorigenesis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008;
105:652–656. [PubMed: 18178624]
Tanaka K, Kurebayashi J, Sohda M, Nomura T, Prabhakar U, Yan L, Sonoo H. The expression of
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in papillary thyroid carcinoma is correlated with lymph node
metastasis and tumor recurrence. Thyroid. 2009; 19:21–25. [PubMed: 19072670]
Torroella-Kouri M, Silvera R, Rodriguez D, Caso R, Shatry A, Opiela S, Ilkovitch D, Schwendener
RA, Iragavarapu-Charyulu V, Cardentey Y, et al. Identification of a subpopulation of
macrophages in mammary tumor-bearing mice that are neither M1 nor M2 and are less
differentiated. Cancer research. 2009; 69:4800–4809. [PubMed: 19458073]
Varney ML, Johansson SL, Singh RK. Tumour-associated macrophage infiltration, neovascularization
and aggressiveness in malignant melanoma: role of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 and vascular
endothelial growth factor-A. Melanoma Res. 2005; 15:417–425. [PubMed: 16179869]
Vasiljeva O, Papazoglou A, Kruger A, Brodoefel H, Korovin M, Deussing J, Augustin N, Nielsen BS,
Almholt K, Bogyo M, et al. Tumor cell-derived and macrophage-derived cathepsin B promotes
progression and lung metastasis of mammary cancer. Cancer research. 2006; 66:5242–5250.
[PubMed: 16707449]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Wang S, Yuan Y, Liao L, Kuang SQ, Tien JC, O’Malley BW, Xu J. Disruption of the SRC-1 gene in
mice suppresses breast cancer metastasis without affecting primary tumor formation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2009; 106:151–156.
[PubMed: 19109434]
Wyckoff J, Wang W, Lin EY, Wang Y, Pixley F, Stanley ER, Graf T, Pollard JW, Segall J, Condeelis J.
A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is required for tumor cell migration in
mammary tumors. Cancer research. 2004; 64:7022–7029. [PubMed: 15466195]
Wyckoff JB, Wang Y, Lin EY, Li JF, Goswami S, Stanley ER, Segall JE, Pollard JW, Condeelis J.
Direct visualization of macrophage-assisted tumor cell intravasation in mammary tumors. Cancer
research. 2007; 67:2649–2656. [PubMed: 17363585]
Yoshidome H, Kohno H, Shida T, Kimura F, Shimizu H, Ohtsuka M, Nakatani Y, Miyazaki M.
Significance of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in angiogenesis and survival in colorectal
liver metastases. Int J Oncol. 2009; 34:923–930. [PubMed: 19287949]
Yu H, Kortylewski M, Pardoll D. Crosstalk between cancer and immune cells: role of STAT3 in the
tumour microenvironment. Nature reviews immunology. 2007; 7:41–51.
Zabuawala T, Taffany DA, Sharma SM, Merchant A, Adair B, Srinivasan R, Rosol TJ, Fernandez S,
Huang K, Leone G, et al. An ets2-driven transcriptional program in tumor-associated
macrophages promotes tumor metastasis. Cancer research. 2010; 70:1323–1333. [PubMed:
20145133]
Zeisberger SM, Odermatt B, Marty C, Zehnder-Fjallman AH, Ballmer-Hofer K, Schwendener RA.
Clodronate-liposome-mediated depletion of tumour-associated macrophages: a new and highly
effective antiangiogenic therapy approach. British journal of cancer. 2006; 95:272–281.
[PubMed: 16832418]
Zhu P, Baek SH, Bourk EM, Ohgi KA, Garcia-Bassets I, Sanjo H, Akira S, Kotol PF, Glass CK,
Rosenfeld MG, et al. Macrophage/cancer cell interactions mediate hormone resistance by a
nuclear receptor derepression pathway. Cell. 2006; 124:615–629. [PubMed: 16469706]
Zhu XD, Zhang JB, Zhuang PY, Zhu HG, Zhang W, Xiong YQ, Wu WZ, Wang L, Tang ZY, Sun HC.
High expression of macrophage colony-stimulating factor in peritumoral liver tissue is associated
with poor survival after curative resection of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2008;
26:2707–2716. [PubMed: 18509183]
Zijlmans HJ, Fleuren GJ, Baelde HJ, Eilers PH, Kenter GG, Gorter A. The absence of CCL2
expression in cervical carcinoma is associated with increased survival and loss of heterozygosity
at 17q11.2. The Journal of pathology. 2006; 208:507–517. [PubMed: 16435282]
Zumsteg A, Christofori G. Corrupt policemen: inflammatory cells promote tumor angiogenesis.
Current opinion in oncology. 2009; 21:60–70. [PubMed: 19125020]

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Macrophages Promote Tumor Initiation, Progression, and Malignancy

Author Manuscript

A) Chronic smoldering inflammation in response to pathogens or chronic irritants creates a
mutagenic and growth-promoting environment in the subepithelial stroma. This environment
potentiates the acquisition of oncogenic mutations in the overlying epithelial cells. Central to
the inflammatory process are activated macrophages, which are the major producers of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species as well as a wide range of growth factors. B)
Spontaneous or hereditary mutations cause tumor initiation and progression in cancers not
associated with inflammation. C) The hyperplastic lesions progress to an intraepithelial
neoplasia. This process results in the recruitment of monocytes by chemoattractants from the
blood, such as colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) and the chemokine CCL-2. These
monocytes differentiate into macrophages in the tumor. These macrophages, unlike those in
the initiating inflammatory environment, are not classically activated but instead resemble
trophic, immunomodulatory macrophages found during development. D) The transition
from an intraepithelial neoplasia/adenoma to an early carcinoma is promoted by
macrophages in part through their stimulation of the angiogenic switch. Macrophages
deliver vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and other angiogenic molecules in a
temporal and spatial fashion to avascular areas resulting in angiogenesis. In addition,
macrophages produce growth factors and proteases that facilitate the escape of tumor cells
from their constraining basement membranes. Furthermore, macrophages suppress cytotoxic
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

T cell responses to the invading tumor cells. E) After progression to malignancy, and as
tumors because late carcinomas, macrophages are continuously recruited through similar
mechanisms as before. In the tumor they differentiate into different subpopulations that have
functions in: (1) angiogenesis, (2) tumor cell invasion and intravasation, and (3)
immunosuppression. The dotted box designates an invasive microenvironment as defined in
mouse models of breast cancer. In this model tumor cell motility and invasion is sparked by
the production of growth factors/chemokines, such as CXCL12 that binds to its receptor
(CXCR4) expressed on both macrophages and tumor cells. Once motility is initiated it is
driven by an obligate epidermal growth factor (EGF)-CSF-1 paracrine loop with
macrophages and tumor cells moving in lock step. Invasion also requires matrix formation
and destruction through cathepsins and SPARC. Macrophages promote vasculogeneisis
through angiogenic factors such as VEGF. Tumor cells egress through macrophage clusters
on the blood vessels thus the macrophages increase both the invasion/intravasation of tumor
cells and the number of vascular targets. This allows increased numbers of tumor cells to
enter the circulation and thereby enhance tumor metastasis.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Macrophage Phenotypes and Tumorigenesis

Shown are six macrophage functions that provide extrinsic support to a tumor. Each of these
extrinsic activities can be ascribed to a unique macrophage subpopulation. All of these
macrophage subtypes are defined by the expression of the canonical markers Cd11b, F4/80
CSF-1R, and the absence of Gr1 but they are educated by microenvironmental cues to adopt
a particular phenotype and perform the tasks as shown. The population listed as
“perivascular” are probably the same as the invasive macrophage population as they have
similar activities but they are localized to the abluminal surface of vessels often in cluster. *
Populations whose transcriptomes have been analyzed

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

Qian and Pollard

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Macrophages Promote Seeding and Growth of Metastatic Cells

Author Manuscript

Myeloid cells, most likely macrophages, are recruited to the pre-metastatic niche in response
to secreted products from the primary tumor. The metastatic target organs contain fibroblasts
and elaborate extracellular matrix consisting of fibronectin and collagen. These niches direct
and enhance tumor cell seeding in sites distant from the primary tumor. Once the tumor cells
arrive at the metastatic site and begin to extravasate they recruit macrophages that are
differentiated from blood borne monocytes. These macrophages enhance the ability of
tumors cells to extravasate and promote their subsequent survival and growth. They continue
to accumulate in metastatic lesions where they stimulate the growth and survival of the
metastatic cells. Several growth factors and signaling pathways are important for these
macrophage functions including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the premetastatic site and colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) for growth of the tumor cells.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 23.

