Cancer
Research

Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

Expression of the p53 Target CDIP Correlates with Sensitivity
to TNFa-Induced Apoptosis in Cancer Cells
Lauren Brown-Endres1, David Schoenfeld1, Fang Tian1, Hyung-Gu Kim1, Takushi Namba1,
sar Mun
~oz-Fontela3, Anna Mandinova1,2, Stuart A. Aaronson3, and Sam W. Lee1,2
Ce

Abstract
TNFa is a pleiotropic cytokine that signals for both survival and apoptotic cell fates. It is still unclear that the
dual role of TNFa can be regulated in cancer cells. We previously described an apoptotic pathway involving
p53!CDIP!TNFa that was activated in response to genotoxic stress. This pathway operated in the presence of
JNK activation; therefore, we postulated that CDIP itself could sensitize cells to a TNFa apoptotic cell fate,
survival, or death. We show that CDIP mediates sensitivity to TNFa-induced apoptosis and that cancer cells with
endogenous CDIP expression are inherently sensitive to the growth-suppressive effects of TNFa in vitro and in
vivo. Thus, CDIP expression correlates with sensitivity of cancer cells with TNFa, and CDIP seems to be a regulator
of the p53-mediated death versus survival response of cells to TNFa. This CDIP-mediated sensitivity to TNFainduced apoptosis favors pro- over antiapoptotic program in cancer cells, and CDIP may serve as a predictive
biomarker for such sensitivity. Cancer Res; 72(9); 2373–82. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
Two pathways of apoptosis have been described for mammalian cells: the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway, activated in
response to cellular stress, and the extrinsic death receptor
pathway, activated at the cell surface by the binding of TNFa
family cytokines to their cognate receptors (1–7). TNFa,
however, can exert pleiotropic cellular effects, controlling cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, as well as regulating the host immune response (4–7).
TNFa does not generally induce apoptosis unless the NF-kB
survival arm of the signal is inhibited (e.g., by blocking de novo
protein synthesis with cycloheximide). However, any perturbation of the TNFa!NF-kB signal would be expected to
produce a cellular outcome equivalent to that of blocking
protein synthesis, resulting in apoptosis rather than survival
in response to TNFa. Among transcription factors, the contribution of NF-kB and p53 to cancer development and
progression as well as resistance to chemotherapy is well
established (8–10). Considering the deregulation of these 2
important factors in cancers, deﬁning the cross-talk between
NF-kB and p53 has been studied intensively for the molecular
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown; 2Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and 3Department
of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Sam W. Lee, Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129. Phone: 617-726-6691; Fax: 617-643-2334; E-mail:
swlee@partners.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3369
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

details and biologic outcome of their interaction (8–11). There
are many places for intersection and cross-talk between the
p53 and NF-kB pathways, which represent ways that NF-kB
can regulate p53 and vice versa (12).
Recently, we identiﬁed a novel p53 target, CDIP, and showed
that CDIP acts in a hitherto unknown apoptotic pathway
involving p53!CDIP!TNFa, acting in certain cells in
response to DNA damage (13). These ﬁndings were particularly
intriguing given that in our cell systems NF-kB was not
blocked, but cells nevertheless underwent apoptosis in a
TNFa- and caspase 8–dependent manner. This raised the
question of what was directing these cells to undergo
TNFa-induced apoptosis. We hypothesized that CDIP itself
could act as a sensitizing factor for a TNFa apoptotic cell fate.
Here we show that TNFa-induced apoptosis is dependent
upon CDIP and that endogenous CDIP expression in cancer
cells correlates with sensitivity to the death effects of TNFa.
Importantly, the proapoptotic effect of CDIP!TNFa, which
has previously been shown to be blocked by knockdown of
endogenous TNFa, is rescued by the addition of human
recombinant TNFa only in CDIP expressing cells. CDIP-dependent sensitivity to TNFa-induced apoptosis is further shown to
be dependent upon JNK and occurs through a mechanism that
involves an alteration in the NF-kB transcriptional program
that favors proapoptotic over prosurvival gene expression.
Overall, the identiﬁcation of CDIP as an important sensitizing
factor to TNFa-induced apoptosis has implications for TNFabased cancer therapeutics, as well as autoimmune diseases
resulting from excessive TNFa signaling.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines and culture conditions
U2OS, U2OS-CDIP (tet-on), IMR90-E1A, EJ, EJ-p53 (tet-off),
A549, HT-1080, ME-180, A172, BT474, Calu3, LS174T, SW480,

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

2373

Brown-Endres et al.

HCT116, MDAMB468, SKBR3, HCT1937, MDAMB435, H1975,
AU565, SUM149, WiDr, SNU1040, T24, and RD cells were
cultured in standard Dulbecco's modiﬁed Eagle's medium
(Lonza) containing 10% FBS (Invitrogen), 100 U/mL penicillin,
and 100 mg/mL streptomycin at 37 C. All these cell lines were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. The cells
were periodically authenticated by morphologic inspection
and tested Mycoplasma contamination by PCR test (MycoSensor QPCR kit; Agilent Technologies Inc.,) every 6 months.
In addition, cell line authentication was done before the
initiation of the study by evaluating the presence of gene
mutations (i.e., p53, Ras, and others) and speciﬁc gene expression via Q-PCR. EJ-p53 cells were additionally maintained in
the presence of tetracycline (1 mg/mL), except for conditions
of p53 induction. CDIP expression was induced in U2OS-CDIP
cells by the addition of doxycycline to a ﬁnal concentration
of 1 mg/mL. Camptothecin (25 mmol/L) and etoposide
(100 mmol/L) were solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
and maintained at stock concentrations at 20 C and used at
the concentrations indicated (Sigma-Aldrich). SP600125 (SP)
JNK inhibitor (Calbiochem) was solubilized in DMSO, maintained at a stock concentration (50 mmol/L, 20 C), and used
at a ﬁnal concentration of 5 mmol/L. N-Acetyl-L-Cysteine
(NAC) was solubilized in PBS, maintained at a stock concentration (1 mol/L, 20 C), and used at ﬁnal concentrations of 1
to 40 mmol/L.
Cell death assays
Cell viability was determined by crystal violet staining (0.2%
w/v in 2% ethanol) and Trypan blue exclusion (GIBCOInvitrogen). Apoptotic cell populations were determined by
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick
end labeling (TUNEL) assay (Roche). Brieﬂy, cells were trypsinized, recovered by centrifugation at 300  g, and ﬁxed in
2% paraformaldehyde-PBS for 16 hours. Cells were then
washed twice with PBS and resuspended in fresh permeabilization solution (0.1% Triton-X 100 and 0.1% Sodium citrate)
for 30 minutes at room temperature. Enzymatic labeling of
free 30 -OH DNA ends with dUTP-conjugated to TMR red was
carried out according to the manufacturer's protocol. The
percentage of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells was determined
by ﬂow cytometry enumeration of ﬂuorescent cells (FL2-H:
570–620 nm).
Plasmids and siRNAs
The CDIP coding sequence based on DQ167023 was tagged
with hemagglutinin and expressed in pcDNA3.1. We used
validated CDIP siRNA oligonucleotides (Origene Trilencer-27
Human siRNA pool SR309314) to knock down the expression of
endogenous CDIP as compared with cells transfected scrambled negative control siRNA duplex (Origene Trilencer-27
Universal Scrambled Negative Control siRNA Duplex SR30004).
To exclude off-target effects of the siRNA, we used the 3 unique
27mer CDIP siRNA duplexes separately and in pool, all of which
reduced CDIP expression (data not shown). Transfection
conditions and vectors expressing control luciferase shRNA
and shRNAs directed against CDIP and TNFa were previously
described (13).

2374

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

Mouse tumor xenografts
Athymic NCr-Foxn1nu female mice (Taconic Farms) were
given subcutaneous injections of 1  106 A549 and 2  106 RD
cells in a 50% Matrigel (BD Biosciences) solution. Once a tumor
weight of 25 to 50 mg was reached, mice were given intraperitoneal injections of 5 mg rhTNFa (Invitrogen), reconstituted in
endotoxin-free 0.9% saline, every 5 days. Tumors weights [mg
¼ (Length (mm)  Width (mm)2/2] were measured every 2
days for up to 3 weeks.

Results
CDIP expression sensitizes cells to recombinant TNFainduced cell death
Previous studies showed that in response to genotoxic
stress, TNFa plays an essential role in CDIP-induced apoptosis
(13). If CDIP acts as a sensitizing factor for recombinant/
exogenous TNFa-induced cell death, then we would expect
that the treatment of these cells with exogenous recombinant
human TNFa (rhTNFa), without concomitant CDIP induction, would produce a cell survival rather than cell death
effect. Indeed, in cells grown under normal conditions, in the
absence of any p53!CDIP stress signal, rhTNFa has no
effect on cell viability (Fig. 1A). To directly test whether CDIP
plays a role as a TNFa sensitizing factor, we disabled the
endogenous CDIP!TNFa pathway by siRNA-directed
knockdown of TNFa. As expected, this lead to increased
long-term viability of CDIP-expressing U2OS-CDIP "tet-on"
cells in response to doxycycline treatment and of IMR90-E1A
cells exposed to camptothecin, which activates the
p53!CDIP!TNFa pathway. However, the addition of
rhTNFa to the culture was able to rescue the cell death
effects of CDIP, with no apparent effect on cells lacking CDIP
induction (Fig. 1B and C). We then used TUNEL assay
to evaluate whether these effects on cell viability were due
to apoptosis and found that the addition of rhTNFa is able
to promote apoptosis, only in CDIP expressing cells (Fig. 1B
and C).
To further substantiate these ﬁndings, we titrated down the
endogenous CDIP!TNFa signal and then tested whether
exogenous rhTNFa could still rescue CDIP-dependent apoptosis in TNFa–shRNA expressing cells. The expression of
TNFa transcript and TNFa-induced signaling, observed as
I-kB phosphorylation, correlates with CDIP protein expression
in a dose-dependent manner in both U2OS-CDIP "tet-on" and
IMR90-E1A cells (Supplementary Fig. S1A and B). CDIPdependent apoptosis also showed a dose-dependent
decrease as we decreased the concentration of doxycycline,
indicating that we could control this cellular response by
varying the amount of CDIP expressed (Supplementary Fig.
S1C). Again, the addition of rhTNFa to the culture rescued
the attenuated apoptotic response of cells lacking endogenous TNFa (i.e., TNFa–siRNA transfected). Importantly, the
rescue effect of rhTNFa was diminished as CDIP expression
was decreased, showing that CDIP is required for TNFainduced apoptosis. If CDIP was not involved in this response,
we would expect the levels of apoptosis in rhTNFa-rescued
cells to remain the same regardless of any decrease in CDIP

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

CDIP Expression Correlates with Sensitivity to TNFa

Figure 1. Sensitivity to exogenous/recombinant TNFa-induced apoptosis is dependent upon CDIP. A, IMR90-E1A and U2OS cells were treated with
recombinant human TNFa (rhTNFa) for up to 3 days, and viability was assessed by crystal violet staining at the time points indicated. Apoptosis following 2
days of treatment with rhTNFa was determined by TUNEL assay, followed by enumeration of dUTP-ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-positive cells by
ﬂow cytometry (FL1-H: dUTP-FITC). B, U2OS-CDIP cells were transfected with control luciferase- (Cont.-) and TNFa-targeting (TNFa-) siRNA for
24 hours, treated with doxycyline (1 mg/mL), and supplemented with either 5 ng/mL recombinant human TNFa (rhTNFa) or an equivalent amount of bovine
serum albumin. Long-term viability was assessed by crystal violet staining 72 hours after drug treatments. TUNEL assay was used to determine
apoptosis 2 days following treatments and is shown as the percentage of dUTP–FITC–positive cells  SEM (n ¼ 3). C, IMR90-E1A cells were transfected
as in B and treated with camptothecin (0.5 mmol/L) for 24 hours, and supplemented with either 5 ng/mL recombinant human TNFa (rhTNFa) or an
equivalent amount of bovine serum albumin. BSA, bovine serum albumin; dox, doxycycline.

expression (Supplementary Fig. S1C, dashed line). We next
conﬁrmed these ﬁndings in IMR90-E1A cells, in which the
CDIP!TNFa pathway acts to induce apoptosis in response
to genotoxic stress. The ability of exogenously added
rhTNFa to induce apoptosis in TNFa–siRNA cells decreased
in a similar fashion with decreasing amounts of camptothecin (Supplementary Fig. S1D and E). These results supported
the hypothesis that CDIP expression is required for TNFainduced apoptosis.

www.aacrjournals.org

Endogenous CDIP expression correlates with sensitivity
to TNFa-induced apoptosis
If CDIP were acting to sensitize cells to TNFa-mediated
apoptosis, we would expect to see some level of endogenous
CDIP expression in cancer cells that are inherently sensitive to
the antiproliferative effects of TNFa. We obtained a panel of
cancer cell lines: a total of 22 human cancer cell lines, including
9 lines with wt-p53 and 13 lines with mutant p53, and investigated whether there was any relationship between

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

2375

Brown-Endres et al.

endogenous CDIP expression and sensitivity to TNFa-induced
death. First, CDIP protein expression levels were evaluated by
Western blot analysis (Fig. 2A). CDIP was abundantly
expressed in most of wt-p53 containing cell lines, including
U2OS, HT1080, ME-180, and A172, and lesser amounts in A549,
H1975, LS175T, but very little in HCT116 and BT474 (Fig. 2A).
However, CDIP levels were relatively lower in most of mutant

p53 containing cell lines but RD cell line. We then divided
several lines from this panel of cells into CDIP little-expressing
(Fig. 2B) and CDIP-expressing cells (Fig. 2C), and tested their
growth response to rhTNFa after 2 days of treatment. The
viability of these cells after treatment with rhTNFa did, in fact,
reﬂect their CDIP status, as rhTNFa exerted a more pronounced antiproliferative effect on cell lines expressing

Figure 2. CDIP expression in various cancer cells correlates with sensitivity to exogenous recombinant TNFa-induced apoptosis. A, endogenous CDIP protein
expression was examined in a total of 22 human cancer cell lines grown under normal conditions, by Western blot analysis. b-Actin was used as a loading
control. Cell lines were grouped based on p53 status (wt-p53 and mutant p53) as indicated. B and C, cells were treated with recombinant rhTNFa as indicated
and long-term viability was assessed by crystal violet staining 48 hours posttreatment. Cell lines are grouped based on CDIP expression (B, low and C, high).
The plates were scanned by densitometer and quantitated. Cell viability of each plate was shown by a percentage after the normalization to the control (no
TNFa treated). D, the effect of CDIP knockdown in cells sensitive to TNFa death (ME-180 and RD) was assessed by transfection with either control luciferase(Cont.-) or CDIP- targeting siRNA for 24 hours, followed by treatment with rhTNFa (10 ng/mL). Cell viability up to 3 days post-rhTNFa treatment was
determined by trypan blue exclusion and is shown as the mean percent increase in dead cells relative to similarly transfected bovine serum albumin-treated
control cells  SEM (n ¼ 3). E, two TNFa-insensitive cell lines, A549 and SW480, were transfected with either control pcDNA3 empty vector (pcDNA3-EV) or
CDIP expressing pcDNA3 constructs, respectively, followed by treatment with rhTNFa (10 ng/mL). Cell viability was determined by trypan blue exclusion and
is shown relative to transfected control bovine serum albumin-treated cells. BSA, bovine serum albumin.

2376

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

CDIP Expression Correlates with Sensitivity to TNFa

endogenous levels of CDIP protein, although there are few
exceptions (Fig. 2B and C). The contribution of CDIP to this
effect was directly assessed by knockdown of CDIP in these
rhTNFa-sensitive lines, followed by trypan blue staining to
measure cell death up to 3 days after treatment. The once
sensitive ME-180 and RD cells were rendered insensitive to
TNFa killing upon knockdown of endogenous CDIP (Fig. 2D).
Conversely, we introduced CDIP into the TNFa-insensitive
A549 and SW480 cell lines by transfection with a CDIP expression vector and measured viability after rhTNFa treatment.
CDIP expression lead to an increase in the cell death response
of both A549 and SW480 cells to rhTNFa, in comparison with
empty vector control–treated cells (Fig. 2E). These ﬁndings
lend further support to our hypothesis that CDIP expression
correlates with sensitivity to acts to TNFa.
CDIP activates the JNK-dependent TNFa apoptotic
pathway
We next investigated the effect of CDIP expression on
pathways known to act as conduits of TNFa survival and
apoptotic signaling. During the TNFa-mediated survival
response, JNK is activated in a transient manner, and activation is terminated within 1 hour of TNFa stimulation (4, 14).
Conversely, during the TNFa-mediated apoptotic response,
JNK is activated in a sustained manner, and this sustained JNK
activity is known to be required for an apoptotic cell fate (14,
15). After activation of the CDIP!TNFa pathway, U2OS-CDIP
cells showed late JNK phosphorylation (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Fig. S2). Moreover, induction of CDIP!TNFa downstream of p53 activation (i.e., in response to DNA damage or
induced p53 expression) resulted in a similar pattern of late
JNK phosphorylation (Fig. 3B). Treatment with recombinant
human TNFa (rhTNFa) alone (i.e., in the absence of CDIP
activation) produced no such late JNK phosphorylation (Supplementary Fig. S2). This absence of sustained JNK phosphorylation was observed despite an increase in phosphorylated IkB, indicating that the cells were responsive to rhTNFa.
CDIP!TNFa signaling also produced an increase in I-kB
phosphorylation, conﬁrming that the TNFa pathway was
in fact activated in response to doxycycline-induced
CDIP!TNFa signal. Interestingly, when compared with cells
treated with rhTNFa alone, cells with CDIP!TNFa had lower
FLIP expression (Supplementary Fig. S2). Because FLIP is a
known NF-kB survival target, we supposed that CDIP might be
inﬂuencing TNFa survival signaling at the level of NF-kB target
gene expression (Supplementary Fig. S2).
The effect of CDIP on late JNK phosphorylation was next
assessed directly by siRNA-directed knockdown of CDIP. In
comparison with control siRNA-treated cells with DNA damage-induced p53!CDIP!TNFa activation, knockdown of
CDIP resulted in a block of JNK phosphorylation (Fig. 3C).
The contribution of JNK to the CDIP!TNFa apoptotic signal
was determined using a well-established chemical inhibitor of
JNK (16–18). Pretreatment of U2OS-CDIP cells and IMR90-E1A
cells with a JNK-selective inhibitor resulted in a complete block
of CDIP-dependent apoptosis (Fig. 3D and E). U2OS parental
cells were not affected by doxycycline or JNK inhibitor treatments, supporting the conclusion that these effects were

www.aacrjournals.org

speciﬁc to CDIP activation and JNK inhibition. In addition,
CDIP-induced apoptosis was completely unaffected by pretreatment of cells with other mitogen-activated protein kinase
inhibitors (Supplementary Fig. S4). Together, these results
showed that activation of CDIP!TNFa induces a TNFa
apoptotic signal that is dependent upon JNK, which is consistent with previous reports showing that JNK is required for the
TNFa apoptotic cell fate decision (13–19).
NF-kB target gene expression is inﬂuenced by CDIP
To test whether CDIP could inﬂuence the NF-kB transcriptional program in response to TNFa treatment, we used the
expression PCR arrays to analyze NF-kB target–gene expression under 2 conditions: (i) activation of CDIP!TNFa, which
leads to an apoptotic cell fate, and (ii) treatment with rhTNFa
alone, which is a condition of cell survival (Supplementary Fig.
S4A). There were 2 NF-kB targets that displayed differential
expression under these conditions. Interleukin-8 (IL-8) was
speciﬁcally upregulated in response to CDIP!TNFa, whereas
TNF receptor associated factor 1 (TRAF1) was speciﬁcally
upregulated in response to TNFa treatment alone (Supplementary Fig. S4B). To conﬁrm and expand these results, realtime PCR was carried out for additional NF-kB targets. When
CDIP was not expressed, we observed a speciﬁc upregulation of
some NF-kB targets known to play a role in cell survival, such
as SOD2 (Supplementary Fig. S4B). A sandwich ELISA assay
conﬁrmed that the CDIP!TNFa-induced increase in IL-8
transcript also resulted in an increase in secreted IL-8 (Supplementary Fig. S4C).
Inhibition of ROS and IL-8 impairs TNFa apoptosis
downstream of CDIP
In view of the evidence that CDIP!TNFa-induced apoptosis requires JNK, the identiﬁcation of superoxide dismutase 2
(SOD2) as a survival target was noteworthy. SOD2 is an
antioxidant enzyme and known NF-kB target (20, 21) that
functions to counteract the deleterious effects of intracellular
ROS. Because ROS accumulation leads to sustained JNK activity in cells undergoing TNFa-induced apoptosis (22), it is likely
that ROS contributes to the late JNK phosphorylation we
observed in cells undergoing CDIP!TNFa-dependent apoptosis. To investigate the role of SOD2 and IL-8 modulation in
CDIP!TNFa-dependent apoptosis, we pretreated U2OSCDIP cells with NAC, a chemical antioxidant and an IL-8
blocking antibody, both alone and in combination. The cells
were then assessed for ROS production and apoptosis after
inducing CDIP expression. ROS levels were induced under
conditions of CDIP expression, an effect that was abrogated
by pretreatment with NAC (Fig. 4A–C). Although blocking of
IL-8 had some ability to attenuate the apoptotic response
(Supplementary Fig. S5), blocking ROS completely abrogated
apoptosis (Fig. 4D). As expected for a JNK-dependent apoptotic
process, the treatment of cells with NAC produced a pronounced decrease in phosphorylated JNK, despite the presence
of a TNFa apoptotic signal (Fig. 4E). Notably, cells that are
refractory to TNFa-induced apoptosis showed no detectable
levels of phosphorylated JNK (Fig. 4E). Together, these results
showed a primary role for ROS in CDIP!TNFa-dependent

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

2377

Brown-Endres et al.

Figure 3. CDIP-induced apoptosis requires prolonged JNK activity. A, U2OS-CDIP cells were either left untreated or treated with doxycycline (1 mg/mL) to
induce CDIP expression for the time indicated. Active JNK was detected by Western blot analysis of p46 and p54 JNK dually phosphorylated at Thr183 and
Tyr185. Western blot analysis was also carried out with antibodies speciﬁc for CDIP and cleaved PARP (clv-PARP), to conﬁrm CDIP expression and induction
of apoptosis, respectively. B, IMR90-E1A and EJ-p53 tet-off cells were cultured with camptothecin and in the absence to tetracycline to induce p53
expression, respectively. Phospho-JNK, phospho-p53, CDIP, and cleaved PARP were detected by Western blot analysis. C, CDIP-dependent JNK
phosphorylation was assessed in cell lines transfected with control siRNA (Cont.-shRNA) or siRNA directed against CDIP. CDIP!TNFa was induced in
IMR90-E1A cells by treatment with camptothecin (24 hours) and in U2OS cells by treatment with etoposide (ETO, 36 hours). Knockdown of CDIP was
conﬁrmed by Western blot analysis of CDIP expression, and the effect of this on phospho and total JNK expression was determined by Western blot analysis.
D, U2OS-CDIP and U2OS parental cells were pretreated with either SP600125 (JNK inhibitor) or DMSO (carrier) for 1 hour, and cell viability was assessed 40
hours after the addition of doxycycline. Under the same conditions, the percent of apoptotic U2OS-CDIP cells was determined by TUNEL assay, followed by
enumeration of dUTP–TMR–positive cells by ﬂow cytometry (FL2-H: dUTP-TMR). E, the percentage of TUNEL-positive U2OS-CDIP cells (in repeat
experiments) and IMR90E1A cells after pretreatment with SP600125, followed by treatment with camptothecin, is shown as the mean  SEM (n ¼ 3). CPT,
camptothecin; dox, doxycycline.

apoptosis, accounting for the sustained JNK activation and JNK
dependency of this apoptotic response. To further determine
whether ROS production was linked to SOD2, we ﬁrst asked

2378

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

whether SOD2 protein expression changed with CDIP expression and found that SOD2 protein levels were inversely correlated with CDIP expression (Fig. 5A). Moreover, SOD2 activity

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

CDIP Expression Correlates with Sensitivity to TNFa

Figure 4. CDIP-induced apoptosis
is linked to ROS and activated JNK.
A, intracellular ROS was measured
by DCFDA ﬂuorescence staining 24
hours after treatment of RD (CDIP
positive) or A549 (CDIP negative) with
rhTNFa alone and in combination
with NAC and is shown as the mean
fold increase or decrease relative to
untreated cells  STDV (n ¼ 3).
B, CDIP expression was induced in
U2OS-CDIP cells (þ doxycycline),
and ROS levels were determined as
in A. C, U2OS cells were transfected
with control siRNA (siCont) or siRNA
directed against CDIP (siCDIP), and
ROS levels were determined as in A in
the presence and absence of
rhTNFa. D, apoptosis was assessed
in U2OS-CDIP cells (þ doxycycline,
72 hours) cultured in the presence
and absence of NAC  SEM (n ¼ 3).
E, the expression levels of
phosphorylated (phos-) and total
(tot-) JNK were assessed by Western
blot analysis in different cell lines as
follows: U2OS-CDIP cells treated
with either rhTNFa (5 ng/mL) or
doxycycline (1 mg/mL) for 20 hours,
RD (CDIP positive) and A549 cells
(CDIP negative) treated with either
rhTNFa or an equivalent amount of
bovine serum albumin (-TNFa) for
24 hours. b-Actin protein expression
served as a loading control.
BSA, bovine serum albumin;
dox, doxycycline.

was protective against CDIP-induced apoptosis (Fig. 5B and C).
Overall, this suggests a CDIP!TNFa-dependent apoptotic
pathway that involves ROS generation via suppression of the
antioxidant SOD2.

to TNFa-mediated apoptosis and suggests that TNFa may
be effective in limiting the growth of CDIP-positive tumors
in vivo.

Discussion
TNFa limits the growth of CDIP-positive tumors in vivo
In our previous screen, we identiﬁed various tumor cell lines
that either displayed high levels of endogenous CDIP expression or no detectable levels of CDIP expression (Fig. 2B and C).
Using 2 such cell lines, we examined the ability of TNFa to limit
tumor growth using an in vivo mouse tumor xenograft model.
Athymic mice were given subcutaneous injections of RD
(positive for CDIP expression) and A549 (negative for CDIP
expression) cells. Once the tumors had reached a signiﬁcant
size, rhTNFa was administered by intraperitoneal injection
every 5 days, and tumor growth was monitored for up to 3
weeks. After 16 days, the growth of RD tumors in mice given
rhTNFa injections was signiﬁcantly lower compared with
control-treated mice. Conversely, the growth of A549 tumors
was not signiﬁcantly different between mice treated with
and without rhTNFa (Fig. 6A and B). These data lend further
support to our hypothesis that CDIP sensitizes cancer cells

www.aacrjournals.org

The TNFa cell fate decision making process is not
completely understood. Although the survival arm of this
pathway is well characterized and known to require NF-kB
upregulation of prosurvival target genes, and the termination
of a JNK-dependent proapoptotic signal, less is known about
the apoptotic arm. In this study, we identiﬁed CDIP as a key
sensitizing factor to TNFa-mediated apoptosis in various
cancer cells. We provided evidence that cells with endogenous
CDIP expression were inherently sensitive to TNFa-induced
death; conversely, cells that have no or little detectable basal
CDIP expression were refractory to TNFa killing in vitro and
in vivo.
Our analysis of NF-kB target gene expression showed that a
program of survival gene expression (i.e., SOD2, TRAF1, A1, and
c-IAP1 and 2) is activated when TNFa has no apoptotic effect
and that an alternate proapoptotic program, involving the
upregulation of IL-8 (23) and the attenuated induction of

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

2379

Brown-Endres et al.

Figure 5. CDIP expression correlates with a decrease in SOD2 expression, and SOD2 expression inhibits CDIP-dependent cell death. A, SOD2 protein levels
were assessed by Western blot analysis in U2OS-CDIP cells ( doxycycline, transfected with siCont or siCDIP RNA or with/without rhTNFa treatment).
B, U2OS-CDIP cells were cultured with/without doxycycline in the presence of rhTNFa. SOD2/Mn SOD activity assay was carried out as suggested by vendor
(Millipore Inc: HCS232). C, the SOD2 open reading frame with an amino-terminus HA tag was cloned into pcDNA4 and then introduced into U2OS cells along
with empty vector (EV) pcDNA4, which served as a control. Sequential Western blot analysis was carried out with anti-HA and anti-SOD2 antibodies (Santa
Cruz) to detect exogenous SOD2 protein expression. U2OS-CDIP cells were transfected with a pcDNA4-SOD2 (SOD2) expression vector or empty pcDNA4
vector as a control (EV), and 24 hours posttransfection, the cells were treated with doxycycline to activate CDIP expression. Viability was assessed with crystal
violet staining and apoptosis was determined using TUNEL assay followed by FACS enumeration of TUNEL-positive cells and is shown as an increase in the
TUNEL-positive population relative to cells that were left untreated (doxycycline). dox, doxycycline.

survival targets is activated when TNFa induces apoptosis.
This is consistent with a previous report showing that NF-kB–
dependent TRAF and c-IAP expression virtually disappears in
cells rendered susceptible to TNFa-induced apoptosis by the
expression of an I-kB super repressor (24). In addition, we
found that CDIP!TNFa-induced apoptosis is associated with
late JNK phosphorylation and that JNK activity is required for
this proapoptotic TNFa signal. Given these results, the identiﬁcation of SOD2 as an NF-kB survival target was particularly
interesting. SOD2 is an antioxidant enzyme responsible for
the conversion of superoxide radicals (O2-) to H2O2 leading to
their eventual elimination through peroxidases, which convert H2O2 to H2O. ROS is known to inhibit JNK phosphatases
leading to the sustained JNK activation required for TNFainduced death (22). Our observed upregulation of SOD2 would
be expected to lower intracellular ROS, or maintain it at levels
below a threshold required for JNK apoptotic activity, and is
therefore consistent with a TNFa-mediated survival response.

2380

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

In addition, a recent study showed a deeper understanding of
the cross-talk between NF-kB and p53 showing that p53
signiﬁcantly contributes to nuclear NF-kB activity induced
during S-phase arrest and remarkably also in response to
TNFa (11).
The importance of ROS to the CDIP!TNFa-mediated
apoptotic response is supported by the observation that
treating cells with NAC, a chemical antioxidant, resulted in
an almost complete block of CDIP-dependent apoptosis, and
an attenuation of JNK phosphorylation. Furthermore, if ROS
is critical for tipping the balance in favor of TNFa-mediated
apoptosis in CDIP expressing cells over survival in CDIP
lesser expressing cells treated with rhTNFa, we would
expect to see some difference in intracellular ROS levels
between these conditions. Indeed, cells undergoing
CDIP!TNFa-mediated apoptosis showed elevated ROS
levels compared with CDIP nonexpressing cells that survived
in response to TNFa.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

CDIP Expression Correlates with Sensitivity to TNFa

Figure 6. Response of mouse tumor xenografts to rhTNFa and current model of CDIP-mediated cell fate decision making in response to rhTNFa. A, growth of
A549 tumor xenografts (little endogenous CDIP expression) and B, RD (endogenous CDIP expression) and stable control (shLuc) or CDIP knockdown (shCDIP)
tumor xenografts in athymic mice treated with and without 5 mg of rhTNFa, every 5 days over the time course indicated. Bottom panels indicated tumor sizes
for A549 (left, n ¼ 4) and RD (right, n ¼ 4) at day 18 following treatment with rhTNFa. Lines indicate the median weights,  , P < 0.5 (nonsigniﬁcant) and   , P < 0.02
(signiﬁcant). C, in cells with endogenous or induced CDIP expression (i.e., by p53 in response to DNA damage), NF-kB survival gene expression downstream
of TNFa is suppressed in favor of proapoptotic gene expression (e.g., IL-8). Cancer cells then respond to elevated ROS, which facilitates a prolonged JNK
activation and an apoptotic cell fate. Conversely, under conditions of TNFa stimulation alone, a program of NF-kB survival target gene expression is activated.
For example, SOD2 acts to maintain intracellular ROS levels below the threshold required for JNK activation and apoptosis. Other NF-kB survival targets act to
reinforce this effect, allowing the survival cell fate to prevail.

Together, these results extend our previous work that identiﬁed a novel CDIP!TNFa proapoptotic pathway acting
downstream of p53 (13) and provide an explanation for why
cells with an activated CDIP!TNFa signal follow an apoptotic
cell fate. In our current model (Fig. 6C), NF-kB survival gene
expression downstream of TNFa is suppressed in CDIP
expressing cells in favor of IL-8 expression, which allows
the apoptotic cell fate to prevail. Conversely, cells that do not
express CDIP respond to TNFa by activating a program of
NF-kB survival target gene expression. In particular, SOD2
acts to maintain intracellular ROS levels below a threshold
required for JNK activation and apoptosis, although other
NF-kB survival targets also likely contribute to this survival
cell fate. Deregulated TNFa signaling contributes to a number of disease pathologies (i.e., cancer, sepsis, diabetes, and
autoimmune disease); therefore, identifying factors that

www.aacrjournals.org

modulate TNFa cell fate decision making is of great therapeutic value. To this end, we are currently employing a
chemical genetic approach to identify CDIP activators and
suppressors.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
This work was supported by NIH grants CA085681, CA142805, and CA80058. L.
Brown-Endres is supported by an MGH ECOR Fund for Medical Research
Fellowship.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received October 10, 2011; revised February 15, 2012; accepted February 28,
2012; published OnlineFirst May 1, 2012.

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

2381

Brown-Endres et al.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

14.

2382

Baud V, Karin M. Signal transduction by tumor necrosis factor and its
relatives. Trends Cell Biol 2001;11:372–7.
Grivennikov SI, Karin M. Inﬂammatory cytokines in cancer: tumour
necrosis factor and interleukin 6 take the stage. Ann Rheum Dis
2011;70 Suppl 1:i104–8.
Peter ME, Krammer PH. The CD95 (APO-1/Fas) DISC and beyond. Cell
Death Differ 2003;10:26–35.
Wajant H, Pﬁzenmaier K, Scheurich P. Tumor necrosis factor signaling.
Cell Death Differ 2003;10:45–65.
Thorburn A. Death receptor-induced cell killing. Cell Signal 2004;16:
39–44.
Micheau O, Tschopp J. Induction of TNF receptor I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling complexes. Cell 2003;114:181–90.
Muppidi JR, Tschopp J, Siegel RM. Life and death decisions: secondary complexes and lipid rafts in TNF receptor family signal transduction. Immunity 2004;21:461–5.
Wu H, Lozano G. NF-kappa B activation of p53. A potential mechanism
for suppressing cell growth in response to stress. J Biol Chem
1994;269:20067–74.
Ryan KM, Ernst MK, Rice NR, Vousden KH. Role of NF-kappaB in p53mediated programmed cell death. Nature 2000;404:892–7.
Oren M, Cooks T. NFkB and p53: A life and death affair. Cell Cycle
2010;9:1027.
Schneider G, Henrich A, Greiner G, Wolf V, Lovas A, Wieczorek M, et al.
Cross talk between stimulated NF-kappaB and the tumor suppressor
p53. Oncogene 2010;29:2795–806.
Ak P, Levine AJ. p53 and NF-kB: different strategies for responding to
stress lead to a functional antagonism. FASEB J 2010;24:3643–52.
Brown L, Ongusaha PP, Kim HG, Nuti S, Mandinova A, Lee JW, et al.
CDIP, a novel proapoptotic gene, regulates TNFalpha-mediated apoptosis in a p53-dependent manner. EMBO J 2007;26:3410–22.
Deng Y. A JNK-dependent pathway is required for TNFalpha-induced
apoptosis. Cell 2003;115:61–70.

Cancer Res; 72(9) May 1, 2012

15. Papa S, Bubici C, Zazzeroni F, Pham CG, Kuntzen C, Knabb JR, et al.
The NF- kappaB-mediated control of the JNK cascade in the antagonism of programmed cell death in health and disease. Cell Death
Differ 2006;13:712–29.
16. Bennett BL, Sasaki DT, Murray BW, O'Leary EC, Sakata ST, Xu W, et al.
SP600125, an anthrapyrazolone inhibitor of Jun N-terminal kinase.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:13681–6.
17. Huang C, Rajfur Z, Borchers C, Schaller MD, Jacobson K. JNK
phosphorylates paxillin and regulates cell migration. Nature
2003;424:219–23.
18. Kawauchi T, Chihama K, Nabeshima Y, Hoshino M. The in vivo roles of
STEF/Tiam1, Rac1 and JNK in cortical neuronal migration. EMBO J
2003;22:4190–201.
19. Liu ZG, Hsu H, Goeddel DV, Karin M. Dissection of TNF receptor 1
effector functions: JNK activation is not linked to apoptosis while
NFkappaB activation prevents cell death. Cell 1996;87:565–76.
20. Xu Y, Kiningham KK, Devalaraja MN, Yeh CC, Majima H, Kasarskis
EJ, et al. An intronic NF-kappaB element is essential for induction of
the human manganese superoxide dismutase gene by tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1beta. DNA Cell Biol 1999;18:
709–22.
21. Guo G, Yan-Sanders Y, Lyn-Cook BD, Wang T, Tamae D, Ogi J, et al.
Manganese superoxide dismutatase-mediated gene expression in
radiation-induced adaptive responses. Mol Cell Biol 2003;23:2362–78.
22. Kamata H, Honda S, Maeda S, Chang L, Hirata H, Karin M. Reactive
oxygen species promote TNFalpha-induced death and sustained JNK
activation by inhibiting MAP kinase phosphatases. Cell 2005;120:
649–61.
23. Kunsch C, Rosen CA. NF-kappa B subunit-speciﬁc regulation of the
interleukin-8 promoter. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:6137–46.
24. Wang CY, Mayo MW, Korneluk RG, Goeddel DV, Baldwin AS Jr. NFkappaB antiapoptosis: induction of TRAF1 and TRAF2 and c-IAP1 and
c-IAP2 to suppress caspase-8 activation. Science 1998;281:1680–3.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Expression of the p53 Target CDIP Correlates with Sensitivity to
TNF α-Induced Apoptosis in Cancer Cells
Lauren Brown-Endres, David Schoenfeld, Fang Tian, et al.
Cancer Res 2012;72:2373-2382.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/9/2373
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2012/04/24/72.9.2373.DC1

This article cites 24 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/9/2373.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/9/2373.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

