www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 2), pp: 2617-2627
Research Paper

Disruption of the association between drug transporter and actin
cytoskeleton abolishes drug resistance in hypertrophic scar
Linlin Su1,*, Lanqing Fu2,*, Yan Li1,*, Fangfang Yang1, Min Zhang1, Dahai Hu1
1

Department of Burns and Cutaneous Surgery, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710032,
China

2

Department of Orthopedics, Jingzhou Central Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Jingzhou, Hubei 434020, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Linlin Su, email: linlinsu@fmmu.edu.cn
Dahai Hu, email: hudhai@fmmu.edu.cn
Keywords: hypertrophic scar, fibroblasts, P-glycoprotein
Received: September 01, 2016     Accepted: November 22, 2016     Published: December 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Hypertrophic scar is characterized by the overgrowth of fibroblasts and often
considered as a kind of benign skin tumor, thus chemotherapeutic drugs have been
used to treat scars. In view of the similarity, this study aims to investigate whether
drug resistance in cancer that contributes to the failure of chemotherapy also exists
in hypertrophic scar, and what is the possible mechanism. Fibroblasts derived from
hypertrophic scar and normal skin tissues were first compared for their resistance to
verapamil and etoposide phosphate. Scar fibroblasts showed stronger resistance to
both verapamil and etoposide than normal fibroblasts, also scar fibroblasts expressed
more P-glycoprotein and MRP1 than normal fibroblasts. When scar fibroblasts
were pre-treated with PSC833 or probenecid, a P-glycoprotein or MRP1 inhibitor
respectively, the resistance to verapamil or etoposide was strongly attenuated.
Moreover, co-immunoprecipitation revealed more association of P-glycoprotein/MRP1
with actin filaments in scar fibroblasts than normal fibroblasts. The resistance in scar
fibroblasts to verapamil and etoposide was almost abolished when pre-treated with
latrunculin-A or a specific anti-actin antibody. Taken together, this study suggests that
the enhanced expression of drug resistance-related transporters and their increased
association with actin cytoskeleton contribute to the resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs in hypertrophic scar. Thus, down-regulating the expession of drug transporters
or disrupting drug transporter-actin filament interaction might be novel and effective
ways for hypertrophic scar treatment.

INTRODUCTION

Given that HS shares certain similarity with tumor, this
study aims to determine whether drug resistance also exists
in HS and whether this is mediated by P-glycoprotein and/
or MRP1.
Recent studies have revealed that the interaction
between drug transporter proteins and cytoskeleton system
plays essential roles in various cellular processes, such as
cross-membrane substance trafficking, intracellular protein
transportation, as well as cell signaling [5–7]. Of interest,
emerging evidences have suggested an important role of
the actin-based cytoskeleton in P-glycoprotein-mediated
drug resistance in cancer cells [8]. In fact, the organization

Hypertrophic scar (HS) is often considered as a kind
of benign skin tumor because of its excessive fibroblast
proliferation. A major challenge in cancer treatment is
the resistance of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents,
which is mediated by several drug resistance-related
drug transporters [1–2], particularly P-glycoprotein
and multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1).
P-glycoprotein and MRP1 are overexpressed in various
tumors [3–4], they exclude therapeutic drugs out of cells
and thus decrease the intracellular drug accumulation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2617

Oncotarget

of actin filaments was involved in the expression and
function of P-glycoprotein in osteosarcoma cells that
exhibit drug resistance [9]. Cytoskeleton alteration was
also found in a human breast cancer cell line that shows
drug resistance [10]. Therefore, it is worthy to elucidate
whether the interaction between drug transporters, such as
P-glycoprotein or MRP1, and actin cytoskeleton would be
one of the mechanisms that confer HS resistance.
In this study we have investigated the association
between P-glycoprotein/MRP1 and actin, as well as the
role of this interaction in P-glycoprotein/MRP1-mediated
drug resistance in HS. Our results revealed HS-derived
fibroblasts were more resistant to both verapamil and
etoposide phosphate than normal fibroblasts. HS overexpressed both P-glycoprotein and MRP1, and the use
of P-glycoprotein or MRP1 inhibitor could abolish the
drug resistance in HS. Stronger association between
P-glycoprotein/MRP1 and actin was found in HS, when
latrunculin-A, an actin depolymerization agent, was used
to disrupt this association, drug resistance in HS was
greatly attenuated. Thus the enhanced P-glycoprotein/
MRP1 expression and their association with actin
cytoskeleton might be a potential mechanism conferring
HS resistance to chemotherapy, while disrupting this
association by well-designed chemicals would be a novel
approach for HS treatment.

NF, while exhibited strong cytoplasm distribution in HF
(Figure 2A). The protein level of P-glycoprotein or MRP1 in
HF was ~2.5- or ~7-fold higher than that in NF, respectively
(Figure 2B). PepT1, an oligopeptide transporter that does
not confer cell drug resistance, showed no difference on the
staining pattern or expession level between NF and HF and
served as an internal control in this study (Figure 2A–2B).

RESULTS

Pre-treating cells with P-glycoprotein or MRP1
inhibitor abolished HS drug resistance in vitro

The protein levels of P-glycoprotein and MRP1
were up-regulated in hypertrophic scar dermis
in vivo
In vivo experiments were performed to validate
above in vitro data. Dermis from normal skin (ND)
and hypertrophic scar (HD) were sectioned and stained
with anti-P-glycoprotein, anti-MRP1 or anti-PepT1
antibody for immunohistochemistry (Figure 3A–3B).
Results showed only ~10% P-glycoprotein or ~35%
MRP1-positively stained cells in ND, while ~60%
P-glycoprotein or ~80% MRP1-positively stained cells
in HD (Figure 3A–3B). Immunoblotting analysis further
confirmed above observation, the protein levels of
P-glycoprotein and MRP1 were up-regulated by ~3- or
~7-fold respectively in HD compared to ND (Figure 3C).
In vivo PepT1 distribution or protein expression showed
no difference between the two groups (Figure 3A–3C).

Hypertrophic scar-derived fibroblasts were
more resistant to both verapamil and etoposide
phosphate

Next we tried to elucidate whether drug resistance
in HS was related to the overexpression of P-glycoprotein
or MRP1. PSC833, an inhibitor for P-glycoprotein, and
probenecid (Prob), an inhibitor for MRP1, were selected
and used in this study. Cells were pre-treated with PSC833
or DMSO (vehicle control) in Figure 4, or pre-treated
with Prob or DMSO (vehicle control) in Figure 5 for
12 h, and then subjected to Ver or Etop treatment for 12
h. Light microscopy and flow cytometry analysis revealed
that PSC833 (Figure 4) or Prob (Figure 5) pre-treatment
significantly attenuated drug resistance in HF, causing
rapid decrease on living cell number (Figure 4A–4B
and 5A–5B) and increase on dead cell rate (Figures 4C
and 5C). The cytotoxicity of PSC833 and Prob at different
concentrations was measured by MTT assay. PSC833 at
5 µM (Figure 4D) and Prob at 1 mM (Figure 5D), the
concentrations that did not cause cellular toxicity, were
used in this study.

We first investigated the difference on drug
resistance between nomal skin and HS. Fibroblasts from
normal skin (NF) and hypertrophic scar (HF) were treated
with ethanol (vehicle control, VeCtrl), verapamil (Ver,
200 µM), or etoposide phosphate (Etop, 100 µM) for
12 h, cell survival and death were then analyzed by light
microscope (Figure 1A) or flow cytometry (Figure 1C).
More living cells were observed in HF than in NF after
drug treatment (Figure 1A). Prior to Ver or Etop treatment,
there were ~400 living cells in each group, after drug
treatment ~300–340 living cells left in HF while only ~100
in NF (Figure 1B). Flow cytometry analysis showed Ver
or Etop caused an ~75% cell death rate in NF while only
~23% in HF (Figure 1C), consistent with the observation
and counting in Figure 1A–1B.

The protein levels of P-glycoprotein and MRP1
were up-regulated in hypertrophic scar fibroblasts

The association between P-glycoprotein/MRP1
and actin was up-regulated in hypertrophic scar
fibroblasts

Then we studied the expression and localization of
two drug resistance-related transporter proteins, namely
P-glycoprotein and MRP1, in normal skin and HS.
P-glycoprotein and MRP1 showed very few stainings in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The ultimate question was to reveal the underlying
mechanisms that confer HS drug resistance. Recent
studies have indicated the involvement of P-glycoprotein2618

Oncotarget

remarkably more co-localization of P-glycoprotein/MRP1
with actin in HF than that in NF (Figure 6B–6C).

cytoskeletal protein (e.g. actin) association in drug
transporting protein functions [11]. Therefore, we
moved to examine whether the interaction between
P-glycoprotein/MRP1 and actin existed in skin fibroblasts,
and whether this interaction was different between
NF and HF. Co-IP analysis showed NF exhibited weak
interaction beetween P-glycoprotein/MRP1 and actin,
which was significantly up-regulated in HF (Figure 6A).
Dual-labelled immunofluorescent analysis further showed

The disruption of P-glycoprotein/MRP1-actin
association by latrunculin-A abrogated drug
resistance in hypertrophic scar fibroblasts
We explored whether disrupting P-glycoprotein/
MRP1-actin association would affect drug resistance

Figure 1: Evaluation of drug resistance in fibroblasts from normal skin and hypertrophic scar. (A) Normal skin fibroblast

(NF) and hypertrophic scar fibroblast (HF) were treated with ethanol (vehicle control, VeCtrl), verapamil (Ver, 200 µM) or etoposide
phosphate (Etop, 50 µM) for 12 h, then the cell density in each group was visualized under light microscope. (B) The living cell number
under each treatment in (A) was counted and compared between NF and HF. (C) The dead cell rate in each treatment group was analyzed
by flow cytometry and compared. Error bars represent means ± SD (n = 4), **p < 0.01.

Figure 2: The comparison on the localization and expression of drug transporting proteins in NF and HF. (A) Study by

immunocytofluorescence to assess the cellular localization of P-glycoprotein (red), MRP1 (red), and PepT1 (red) in NF and HF. Nuclei
were visualized with DAPI (blue). White arrowheads point to the positive immunostainings. Scale bar: 25 µm. (B) Immunoblotting of
P-glycoprotein, MRP1 and PepT1 in the lysates of NF and HF. β-actin served as an equal protein loading control. Histogram compared the
difference on the relative protein expression between NF and HF. Each data point was normalized against corresponding β-actin with the
average value after normalization in NF arbitrarily set as 1. Error bars represent means ± SD (n = 6), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2619

Oncotarget

Figure 3: The comparison on the distribution and expression of drug transporting proteins between normal dermis
and scar dermis in vivo. (A) Study by immunohistochemistry to assess the distribution of P-glycoprotein (brownish), MRP1 (brownish),

and PepT1 (brownish) in normal dermis (ND) and hypertrophic scar dermis (HD). Nuclei were conterstained with hematoxylin (blue).
Black arrowheads point to the positive immunostainings. Scale bar: 50 µm. (B) Histogram comparing the P-glycoprotein-, MRP1-, or
PepT1-positively stained cell rate between ND and HD. (C) Immunoblotting of P-glycoprotein, MRP1 and PepT1 in the lysates from ND
and HD. β-actin served as an equal protein loading control. Histogram compared the difference on the relative protein expression between
ND and HD. Each data point was normalized against corresponding β-actin with the average value after normalization in NF arbitrarily set
as 1. Error bars represent means ± SD (n = 6), **p < 0.01.

Figure 4: Evaluation of the resistance to verapamil after pre-treating cells with P-glycoprotein inhibitor in NF and HF.

(A) Cell density in NF and HF after Ver alone or with PSC833 pre-treatment was visualized under light microscope. (B) The living cell
number in each treatment in (A) was counted and compared. (C) The dead cell rate in each treatment group was analyzed by flow cytometry
and compared. Error bars represent means ± SD (n = 4), **p < 0.01. (D) The cytotoxicity of PSC833 in NF and HF was determined by
MTT assay with the absorbance measured at 540 nm. PSC833 at 5 µM was the concentration used in this study as indicated by black arrow.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2620

Oncotarget

in HS. HF were treated with latrunculin-A, an actin
depolymerization agent, or DMSO for 12 h and lysed for
immunoblotting. Results showed that latrunculin-A did not

affect the protein level of P-glycoprotein or MRP1, while it
significantly decreased β-actin level by 70% (Figure 7A).
Notably, Co-IP analysis showed that latrunculin-A disrupted

Figure 5: Evaluation of the resistance to etoposide phosphate after pre-treating cells with MRP1 inhibitor in NF and
HF. (A) Cell density in NF and HF after Etop alone or with probenecid (Prob) pre-treatment was visualized under light microscope.

(B) The living cell number under each treatment in (A) was counted and compared. (C) The dead cell rate in each treatment group was
analyzed by flow cytometry and compared. Error bars represent means ± SD (n = 4), **p < 0.01. (D) The cytotoxicity of Prob in NF and HF
was determined by MTT assay with the absorbance measured at 540 nm. Prob at 5 µM was the concentration used in this study as indicated
by black arrow.

Figure 6: Study to assess the association and co-localization between P-glycoprotein/MRP1 with actin in NF and HF.

(A) Co-IP was performed to assess the association between P-glycoprotein/MRP1 with actin in NF and HF. Mouse (Ms) or rabbit (Rb) IgG
was used as negtive control for its corresponding primary antibody. Lysate from NF without Co-IP was used as positive control. The relative
association of P-glycoprotein/MRP1 with actin in NF and HF was summarized and compared in histogram. Error bars represent means ±
SD (n = 4), **p < 0.01. (B–C) Dual-labeled immunofluorescent staining was used to assess the co-localization between P-glycoprotein (b,
red) or MRP1(c, red) with actin (green). Nuclei were visualized with DAPI (blue). The co-localization was indicated in orange in merged
images. Scale bar: 20 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2621

Oncotarget

the strong interaction of P-glycoprotein/actin by ~90% and
MRP1/actin by ~70% in HF (Figure 7B). When HF were
pre-treated with latrunculin-A for 12 h and then subjected
to Ver or Etop for another 12 h, the living cell number was
reduced from ~300 to ~50 when compared to Ver or Etop
treatment alone (Figure 7C–7D), suggesting latrunculinA-induced disruption of P-glycoprotein/MRP1-actin
association abolished the drug resistance in HF.

Drug resistance is one of the major clinical challenges
in cancer chemotherapy and often leads to the failure
of chemotherapy and cancer recurrence [1–2]. Given
the similarity between HS and tumor, it is reasonable to
expect the existence of drug resistance phenomenon in
HS or HS-derived fibroblasts. In this study, verapamil and
etoposide phosphate, two agents with potential anti-cancer
effect, were selected to investigate drug resistance in HS.
As shown in Figure 1, normal skin fibroblasts were more
sensitive to verapamil and etoposide, and exhibited less
living cell number (Figure 1A–1B) and higher dead cell
rate (Figure 1C–1D) than hypertrophic scar fibroblasts,
suggesting the presence of drug resistance in HS.
Drug transporters play important roles in
mediating the chemosensitivity and drug resistance in
cancer cells [13]. P-glycoprotein and MRP1 are the two
best characterized drug resistance-related transporters
responsible for the failure of cancer chemotherapy [14].
They are often over-expressed in cancer cells and actively
reduce intracellular drug accumulation below toxic
concentration via pumping drugs out of cells [15–16].
Importantly, the resistance to verapamil or etoposide has
been reported to be mediated by P-glycoprotein or MRP1,
respectively [17]. Our study revealed significantly elevated
expression of P-glycoprotein and MRP1 in scar fibroblasts,

The use of specific anti-actin antibody abrogated
drug resistance in hypertrophic scar fibroblasts
An anti-actin antibody was used to specifically inhibit
actin function. Briefly, HF were pre-treated with the antiactin or normal rabbit IgG (vehicle control) for 24 h and
then subjected to Ver or Etop treatment for 12 h, the living
cell number was significantly reduced compared to Ver or
Etop treatment alone (Figure 8A–8B), suggesting that the
inhibition of actin function abolished drug resistance in HF.

DISCUSSION
HS is featured by the overgrowth of dermal
fibroblasts [12] and considered as a benign skin tumor.
Thus, chemotherapy has been used for HS treatment.

Figure 7: Effects of latrunculin-A on P-glycoprotein/MRP1-actin association and on drug resistance in HF.
(A) Immunoblotting to assess the effect of latrunculin-A (Lat-A) on protein level of P-glycoprotein, MRP1 or β-actin in HF. GAPDH served
as an equal protein loading control. (B) Co-IP to assess the effect of Lat-A on P-glycoprotein/MRP1-actin association in HF. Normal mouse
or rabbit IgG served as negtive control. (C) Cell density in HF after Ver or Etop treatment with/without Lat-A pre-treatment was visualized
under light microscope. (D) The living cell number in each treatment group was counted and compared. Error bars represent means ± SD
(n = 6), **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2622

Oncotarget

while only slight expression in normal fibroblasts
(Figure 2B). Interestingly, although P-glycoprotein and
MRP1 were reported to primarily locate at the plasma
membrane in many epithelial and endothelial cells [18],
our study showed that P-glycoprotein and MRP1 were
predominantly distributed in the cytoplasm in cultured
scar fibroblasts, with tiny staining in normal fibroblast
cytoplasm (Figure 2A). In vivo studies further confirmed
above observation, results showed that although normal
skin dermis expressed little P-glycoprotein and MRP1,
their protein levels were notably enhanced in hypertrophic
scar dermis (Figure 3C). IHC on normal dermis and scar
dermis revealed the tissue distribution of P-glycoprotein
and MRP1. Due to the diversity on fibroblast density in
normal dermis and scar dermis, the positivley-stained
fibroblast rate was compared between two groups instead
of the positively-stained cell number, results indicated
significantly higher stained cell rate in scar dermis than
that in normal dermis (Figure 3A–3B). Above data, on the
other hand, demonstrate the existence of drug resistance
in HS. Besides, PepT1, an oligopeptide transporter that
does not confer drug resistance, showed no difference in
its expression and distribution between normal skin and
HS and served here as an internal control (Figures 2–3).
Inhibiting the function of drug transporter is a way
to study drug resistance [19–20]. In order to elucidate
whether the resistance to verapamil and etoposide in HS
was confered by P-glycoprotein and MRP1, PSC833 and
probenecid were used to specifically inhibit the function of
P-glycoprotein and MRP1 in cultured fibroblasts. Results
showed that the resistance to verapamil or etoposide in scar
fibroblasts was remarkably abolished when cells was pretreated with PSC833 or probenecid. (Figures 4–5). Also,
pre-treating cells with PSC-833 or probenecid significantly
decreased the living cell number (Figures 4A–4B and
5A–5B) and increased the dead cell rate (Figures 4C–4D
and 5C–5D) in scar fibroblasts, while did not affect normal
fibroblasts. These data demonstrate that drug resistance in
HS is mediated by P-glycoprotein and MRP1.

There are emerging evidences linking the function
of drug transporters, such as P-glycoprotein, with actin
microfilament system. A few reports have suggested
the involvement of P-glycoprotein-actin association
in drug resistance [21–22]. A recent study showed
that cytochalasin, an actin-perturbing agent, enhanced
intracellular drug accumulation in leukemia cells,
indicating the attenuation of drug resistance in these
cells [23]. Another similar study reported the disruption
of actin stress-fiber network increased the intracellular
drug accumulation and cytotoxic effect in osteosarcoma
cells, suggesting the abrogation of drug resistance [9]. Our
present study confirmed the structural interaction between
P-glycoprotein and actin filament in skin fibroblasts by
co-immunoprecipitation and immuno-colocalization, and
for the first time revealed the association between MRP1
and actin (Figure 6). More importantly, the association
and co-localization between P-glycoprotein/MRP-1
and actin were significantly elevated in scar fibroblasts
than those in normal fibroblasts (Figure 6), suggesting a
potential linkage between actin cytoskeletal network and
the resistance in scar fibroblasts. When scar fibroblasts
were treated with latrunculin-A, an actin cytoskeleton
disrupting compound, only the steady-state level of
β-actin was affected, but not P-glycoprotein and MRP1,
suggesting the specificity of this inhibitor (Figure 7A).
Also, latrunculin-A significantly abolished the association
between P-glycoprotein/MRP1 and actin in scar
fibroblasts (Figure 7B). When cells were pre-treated with
latrunculin-A, the resistance to verapamil or etoposide
in scar fibroblasts was remarkably attenuated (Figure
7C–7D). Moreover, the use of specific anti-actin antibody
abrogated drug resistance in hypertrophic scar fibroblasts
(Figure 8A–8B). These data make it conceivable that
the linkage of drug transporter with actin cytoskeleton
functions as a potential mechanism in the development of
drug resistance in HS.
Taken together, this study reveals the presence of
drug resistance in HS that is closely related to the enhanced

Figure 8: Effect of the specific anti-actin antibody on drug resistance in HF. (A) Cell density in HF after Ver or Etop treatment

with/without the anti-actin antibody pre-treatment was visualized under light microscope. (B) The living cell number in each treatment
group was counted and compared. Error bars represent means ± SD (n = 6), **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2623

Oncotarget

expression of drug resistance-related transporters,
such as P-glycoprotein and MRP1, defines for the first
time an enhanced association between P-glycoprotein/
MRP1 and actin cytoskeleton in HS, and also discloses
a dramatic reduction of P-glycoprotein/MRP1-mediated
drug resistance when actin function was specifically
inhibited. Research on new molecules or gene therapy
strategies aiming at selectively disrupting drug transportercytoskeleton interaction or P-glycoprotein/MRP1mediated drug resistance, may stem from the results of
this study to improve the efficacy of HS chemotherapy.

fibroblasts were subject to SDS-PAGE and transferred
onto PVDF membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA).
After blocking with 5% non-fat milk, membranes were
incubated with specific primary antibodies (Table 3)
at 4°C overnight. On the following day, membranes
were washed and incubated with corresponding HRPconjugated secondary antibodies at 37°C for 1 h. Proteins
were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence system
using Fluor Chem FC (Alpha Innotech).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Lysates from normal skin fibroblasts and
hypertrophic scar fibroblasts were prepared in IP lysis
buffer (10 mM Tris, 0.15 M NaCl, 1% NP-40, and
10% glycerol, pH 7.4 at 22°C) supplemented with
protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails according
to manufacturer’s instruction. Co-IP was performed
to identify if actin was structurally associated with
P-glycoprotein or MRP1. In brief, 2 µg mouse or rabbit
IgG was added to 400 µg lysates of fibroblasts and
incubated for 1 h before precipitated with 10 µl protein
A/G agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA) for 1 h, supernatant was then obtained after
centrifuging at 1000 g for 5 min. This pre-cleaning step
removed non-specific interacting proteins from cell
lysates. Thereafter, lysates were incubated with 2 µg
normal mouse/rabbit IgG as negative control or specific
anti-P-glycoprotein or anti-MRP1 antibody for Co-IP
on a Labnet MiniLabRoller overnight, to be followed
by incubation with 20 µl protein A/G agarose beads to
extract the immunocomplexes. Thereafter, beads were
washed with IP lysis buffer and immunocomplexes
(P-glycoprotein/MRP1 and its interacting protein partners)
were extracted in SDS sample buffer at 100°C for SDSPAGE and immunoblot analysis. 50 µg normal fibroblast
lysates without IP served as the positive control.

Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)

Ethics statement
The protocol for studies using human samples
was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Ethics
Committee of the Fourth Military Medical University.
Patients who offered skin samples including normal
skin and hypertrophic scar provided their written,
informed consent. Patient samples were deidentified and
anonymized prior to analysis.

Primary skin fibroblast isolation and culture
Normal skin and hypertrophic scar tissues were
obtained from sixteen patients (Table 1) who had been
undergoing plastic surgery in Department of Burns and
Cutaneous Surgery, Xijing Hospital (Xi’an, China).
All specimens were collected with the permission from
the Human Subjects Committee of the local institution.
Dermal portions were minced and incubated in a solution
of collagenase type I (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) at
0.1 mg/ml at 37°C for 3 h to separate fibroblasts. Isolated
fibroblasts were then pelleted and grown in DMEM
(Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% fetal
calf serum (Gibco), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml
streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with
5% (v/v) CO2. Cells were seeded into six-well plates at
2 × 105 cells/well in normal growth medium and cells
at the third and fourth sub-passages were used for
experiments. Prior to drug treatment, cells were cultured in
serum-free DMEM for 12 h and then treated with various
drugs (detailed chemical information in Table 2). Cells in
control group were added with an equal volume of serumfree medium with corresponding vehicle control. Cells
were harvested and analyzed at time points indicated in
each experiment.

Immunocytofluorescence
Fibroblasts were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for
10 min. After washing with PBS, cells were permeabilized
with 0.1% Triton-X 100 for 10 min and blocked with
1% bovine serum albumin at room temperature for 1 h.
Samples were then incubated with 1:50 diluted primary
antibody at 4°C overnight at appropriate dilutions
(Table 3). After being washed with PBS, samples were
incubated with 1:100 diluted FITC-488 or Cy3-555
conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA)
at 37°C for 1 h. After being washed with PBS three times,
samples were stained with DAPI for 30 min. Coverslips
were then mounted onto glass slides and viewed with
Olympus Box-Type Photofluorography Unit Model
FSX100 (Olympus, Japan).

Immunoblotting
Briefly, 50 µg lysates from normal skin dermis,
hypertrophic scar dermis, and their corresponding

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2624

Oncotarget

Table 1: The proﬁle of each sample for primary culture
Sample

Gender

Age (years)

Biopsy site

Duration of lesion (months)

NF/HF 1
Male
17
Cheek
10
NF/HF 2
Male
20
Arm
16
NF/HF 3
Male
20
Shoulder
6
NF/HF 4
Male
21
Shoulder
5
NF/HF 5
Male
24
Shoulder
24
NF/HF 6
Male
36
Buttock
7
NF/HF 7
Male
38
Chest
17
NF/HF 8
Male
42
Chest
15
NF/HF 9
Female
16
Chest
8
NF/HF 10
Female
18
Chest
14
NF/HF 11
Female
24
Shoulder
9
NF/HF 12
Female
25
Arm
10
NF/HF 13
Female
27
Cheek
12
NF/HF 14
Female
43
Shoulder
11
NF/HF 15
Female
45
Back
10
NF/HF 16
Female
46
Back
18
Abbreviations: NF, normal skin ﬁbroblast; HF, hypertrophic scar-derived ﬁbroblast.

Etiology
Post-operation
Electric injury
Burn
Scald
Scald
Burn
Post-operation
Post-operation
Trauma
Scald
Burn
Scald
Burn
Burn
Trauma
Scald

Table 2: Detailed information on the chemicals used in this study
Chemicalnames

Function

Vendor

Cat no.

Lot no.

Working
concentration

Solution

152-11-4

verapamil

P-glycoprotein substrate Santa cruz biotechnology

sc-3590

200 µM

ethanol

PSC833

P-glycoprotein inhibitor

Santa cruz biotechnology

sc-361298 121584-18-7

5 µM

DMSO

etoposide phosphate

MRP1 substrate

Santa cruz biotechnology

sc-357357 117091-64-2

50 µM

cold water

probenecid

MRP1 inhibitor

Santa cruz biotechnology

sc-202773

57-66-9

1 mM

DMSO

latrunculin-A

actin depolymerization
reagent

Santa cruz biotechnology

sc-202691

76343-93-6

0.2 µM

DMSO

Table 3: Summary of primary antibodies used in this study
Antigen

Cat no.

Host

Vendor

Dilution
IHC IF
IP
1:50 1:50
1:40
1:50
1:50
1:40
1:50

IB
Inhibitor
P-glycoprotein
sc-55510
Mouse
Santa cruz biotechnology
1:200
MRP1
ab24102
Mouse
Abcam
1:200
MRP1
sc-13960
Rabbit
Santa cruz biotechnology
PepT1
sc-20653
Rabbit
Santa cruz biotechnology
1:200
Actin
sc-1616
Goat
Santa cruz biotechnology
1:500
Actin
4967
Rabbit
Cell signaling technology
1:100
1:500
Abbreviations: IB, immunoblotting; IHC, immunohistochemistry; IF, immunofluorescence; IP, immunoprecipitation.

Immunohistochemistry

The 4-µm thickness paraffin-embedded sections were
dewaxed, the endogenous peroxidase activity was
quenched with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 min, and then
blocked for non-specific bindings by normal goat serum

Hypertrophic scar and normal skin tissues were
fixed in 10% buffered formalin solution overnight.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2625

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

for 30 min. Sections were then incubated overnight at 4°C
with appropriate primary antibody dilutions (Table 3) and
then followed by the application of PV-6000 Histostain
TM Kit (ZSJQ, China). Briefly, sections were incubated
with biotinylated secondary antibody, streptavidin–biotin–
horseradish peroxidase was used for signal amplification
and diaminobenzidine (DAB) for staining, sections were
then counterstained with hematoxylin. Negative control
was achieved by an isotypematched IgG in each of the
immunostaining. Images were captured using an Olympus
fluorescence microscope with an Olympus FSX100 digital
camera. All images were subsequently compiled and
analyzed using IPP (Image-Pro Plus) software package.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

FUNDING
This work was supported by Xijing Hospital Natural
Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scientists (No:
XJZT14J06 to L.S.).

Authors’ contributions
L.S. designed the research and wrote the manuscript;
L.S., L.F. and Y.L. performed experiments, analyzed data
and revised the manuscript; F.Y. and M.Z. contributed
reagents, materials and analysis tools; D.H. and L.S.
approved the final submission. All authors discussed the
results and reviewed the manuscript.

Flow cytometry
Cell death was evaluated by flow cytometry. Cells
were treated with various drugs for specific period and
washed with PBS. After washing, cells were resuspended
in 100 μl Annexin-V (diluted at 1:100 in 1% BSA in PBS)
added with 5 μl FITC plus 5 μl PI, and incubated for
15 min at room temperature in dark. 400 ul Annexin-V
was added to above mixture, cell death was then measured
by BD FACSAria III flow cytometry (BD Bioscience, San
Jose, CA).

REFERENCES
  1.	 Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance
in cancer: role of ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2002; 2:48–58.
  2.	 Donnenberg VS, Donnenberg AD. Multiple drug resistance
in cancer revisited: the cancer stem cell hypothesis. J Clin
Pharmacol. 2005; 45:872–877.

Cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxicity of PSC833 and probenecid was
evaluated by MTT assay. In brief, fibroblasts were seeded
in 96-well plates at 3 × 104 cells/well and kept overnight
allowing full attachment. On the next day culture medium
was replaced with fresh one supplemented with various
concentrations of probenecid at 10−2, 10−1, 1, 2, 10 and
102 mM or PSC833 at 0.05, 0.5, 5, 10, 50 and 500 μM,
cells were allowed to grow for 48 h. Then 100 µl MTT
(10 mg/ml) was added to each well 4 h before completion
of this incubation. Thereafter, 100 µl DMSO was added
to each well. The optical density (OD) was measured at
540 nm with a Bio-Rad Model 680 Plate Reader (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Hercules, CA).

  3.	 Choi YH, Yu AM. ABC Transporters in Multidrug
Resistance and Pharmacokinetics, and Strategies for Drug
Development. Curr Pharm Des. 2014; 20:793–807.
  4.	 Chang XB. A molecular understanding of ATP-dependent
solute transport by multidrug resistance-associated protein
MRP1. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2007; 26:15–37.
  5.	 Luna EJ, Hitt AL. Cytoskeleton—plasma membrane
interactions. Science. 1992; 258:955–964.
  6.	 Kusumi A, Sako Y. Cell surface organization by the
membrane skeleton. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1996; 8:566–574.
  7.	 Wang Z, Chen J, Wang J, Ahn S, Li CM, Lu Y, Loveless VS,
Dalton JT, Miller DD, Li W. Novel tubulin polymerization
inhibitors overcome multidrug resistance and reduce
melanoma lung metastasis. Pharm Res. 2012; 29:3040–3052.

Statistical analysis

  8.	 Jorfi S, Inal JM. The role of microvesicles in cancer
progression and drug resistance. Biochem Soc Trans. 2013;
41:293–298.

Each experiment reported herein was repeated at
least three to four times, excluding pilot experiments.
Statistical analysis was performed using the GB-STAT
software package (version 7.0; Dynamic Microsystems,
Silver Spring, MD). One-way ANOVA was performed and
followed by Dunnett’s test for multiple comparisons. In
selected experiments, Student’s t test was used for paired
comparisons.

  9.	 Takeshita H, Kusuzaki K, Ashihara T, Gebhardt MC,
Mankin HJ, Hirasawa Y. Actin organization associated
with the expression of multidrug resistant phenotype in
osteosarcoma cells and the effect of actin depolymerization
on drug resistance. Cancer Lett. 1998; 126:75–81.
10.	 Bichat F, Mouawad R, Solis-Recendez G, Khayat D,
Bastian  G. Cytoskeleton alteration in MCF7R cells, a
multidrug resistant human breast cancer cell line. Anticancer
Res. 1997; 17:3393–3401.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
None.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2626

Oncotarget

11.	 Luciani F, Molinari A, Lozupone F, Calcabrini, Lugini L,
Stringer A, Puddu P, Arancia G, Cianfriglia M, Fais S.
P-glycoprotein-actin association through ERM family
proteins: a role in P-glycoprotein function in human cells
of lymphoid origin. Blood. 2002; 99:641–648.

barrier, and not by MRP1 and BCRP. Nucl Med Biol.
2013; 40:873–878.
18.	 Porcelli L, Lemos C, Peters GJ, Paradiso A, Azzariti A.
Intracellular trafficking of MDR transporters and relevance
of SNPs. Curr Top Med Chem. 2009; 9:197–208.

12.	 Singer AJ, Clark RA. Cutaneous wound healing. N Engl J
Med. 1999; 341:738–746.

19.	 Binkhathlan Z, Lavasanifar A. P-glycoprotein inhibition as
a therapeutic approach for overcoming multidrug resistance
in cancer: current status and future perspectives. Curr
Cancer Drug Targets. 2013; 13:326–346.

13.	 Huang Y, Sadée W. Membrane transporters and channels
in chemoresistance and -sensitivity of tumor cells. Cancer
Lett. 2006; 239:168–182.
14.	 Childs S, Ling V. The MDR superfamily of genes and its
biological implications. Important Adv Oncol. 1994: 21–36.

20.	 Callaghan R, Luk F, Bebawy M. Inhibition of the multidrug
resistance P-glycoprotein: time for a change of strategy?
Drug Metab Dispos. 2014; 42:623–631.

15.	 Huang Y. Pharmacogenetics/genomics of membrane
transporters in cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Metastasis
Rev. 2007; 26:183–201.

21.	 Capella LS, Alcantara JS, Moura-Neto V, Lopes AG,
Capella MA. Vanadate is toxic to adherent- growing
multidrug-resistant cells. Tumour Biol. 2000; 21:54–62.

16.	 Vander Borght S, Komuta M, Libbrecht L, Katoonizadeh A,
Aerts R, Dymarkowski S, Verslype C, Nevens F, Roskams T.
Expression of multidrug resistance-associated protein
1 in hepatocellular carcinoma is associated with a more
aggressive tumour phenotype and may reflect a progenitor
cell origin. Liver International. 2008; 28: 1370–1380.

22.	 Erokhina MV, Shtil AA, Shushanov SS, Sidorova  TA,
Stavrovskaya AA. Partial restoration of the actin
cytoskeleton in transformed Syrian hamster fibroblasts
selected for low levels of ‘typical’ multidrug resistance.
FEBS Lett. 1994; 341:295–298.
23.	 Tsuruo T, Iida H. Effects of cytochalasins and colchicine on
the accumulation and retention of daunomycin and vincristine
in drug resistant tumor cells. Biochem Pharmacol. 1986;
35:1087–1090.

17.	 Römermann K, Wanek T, Bankstahl M, Bankstahl  JP,
Fedrowitz M, Müller M, Löscher W, Kuntner C,
Langer O. (R)-[(11)C]verapamil is selectively transported
by murine and human P-glycoprotein at the blood-brain

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2627

Oncotarget

