2309

Changes in Causes of Death Over Time After
Treatment for Invasive Aspergillosis
John R. Wingard, MD1
Patricia Ribaud, MD2
Haran T. Schlamm, MD3
Raoul Herbrecht, MD4

BACKGROUND. Assessment of response to invasive aspergillosis (IA) therapy has
been challenging in treatment trials.

METHODS. The causes of death over 12 weeks were categorized prospectively by a
blinded data review committee using a priori defined criteria in participants in a
randomized comparative trial of voriconazole versus amphotericin B as first-line

1

Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.

therapy of proven or probable IA.
RESULTS. Death occurred in 98 of 277 patients during the 12-week course of

2
Hematology-Greffe de Moelle, Hospital SaintLouis, University Paris VII, Paris, France.

study. Seventy-three of the 98 deaths (74%) occurred in the first 6 weeks; 25

3

Pfizer, Inc., New York, New York.

4

Department of Oncology and Hematology, Clinical Biology, Hautepierre Hospital, Hospitals of the
University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

deaths occurred during the second 6 weeks. Of the 73 deaths during the first 6
weeks, 50 (68%) were judged to be attributable to IA. Of the 25 deaths during the
second 6 weeks, only 6 (24%) were judged to be attributable to IA. Fifty of the 56
deaths (89%) attributable to IA occurred during the first 6 weeks.

CONCLUSIONS. These data suggest that most deaths due to IA occur during the
first 6 weeks after the start of therapy and 6 weeks may be a better interval to
judge the effectiveness of antifungal therapy because most deaths after 6 weeks
are due to causes related to the underlying disease and its treatment rather than
due to IA. Attributable mortality when assessed using a priori definitions and
conducted in a blinded manner by a central data review committee can be useful
in the assessment of IA therapy. Cancer 2008;112:2309–12.  2008 American
Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: invasive aspergillosis, attributable mortality after antifungal therapy,
voriconazole, antifungal treatment trials.

Supported by funding from Pfizer. The KaplanMeier curves were prepared by Pfizer.
Dr. Wingard has received honoraria and grant
support from Pfizer, Merck, and Schering. He is a
consultant to Pfizer, Merck, Gilead, MSD, and
Novartis, and he is on the Speakers Bureaus of
Pfizer, Merck, Shering, MGI, Astellas, and
Zeneus. Dr. Schlamm is an employee of Pfizer,
Inc. Dr Herbrecht has received honoraria or grant
support from Gilead, Merck, Pfizer, ScheringPlough, and Zeneus. Dr. Ribaud has received
honoraria from Pfizer, Merck, and Schering.
Address for reprints: John R. Wingard, MD, 1376
Mowry Rd., Ste. 145, PO Box 103633, Gainesville,
FL 32610-3633; Fax: (352) 273-8109; E-mail:
wingajr@medicine.ufl.edu
Received October 10, 2007; revision received
January 2, 2008; accepted January 14, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

P

ublished clinical studies of treatment for invasive aspergillosis
(IA) have used various approaches for the assessment of efficacy
of investigational treatments. Several studies have assessed response
using defined clinical, radiologic, and microbiologic criteria at the
end of treatment or at a fixed timepoint1–3; other studies have incorporated survival as the primary indicator of efficacy.4 Certainly, both
approaches are important and offer complementary information
about the clinical benefit of a particular investigational treatment.
The use of surrogate markers5 has also been suggested to gauge
treatment response, but to date this approach has not been evaluated in the conduct of a clinical trial.
In the largest published study of IA, the primary endpoint was
the global response (a composite of clinical, radiographic, and
microbiologic response assessments) to treatment, as assessed by a
data review committee (DRC) blinded to study treatment, measured
at 12 weeks after study entry.1 Survival at 12 weeks was examined as
a secondary endpoint. A marked difference between successful
global response (partial plus complete response) and survival at 12
weeks was noted (53% and 71%, for voriconazole and 32% and 58%

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23441
Published online 13 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

2310

CANCER

May 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 10

for amphotericin B, respectively). The higher rate of
survival compared with the rate of response suggests
that the criteria used to determine successful global response (resolution or major improvement of
attributable symptoms, signs, radiographic and/or
bronchoscopic abnormalities present at diagnosis)
may have actually underestimated the clinical benefit
of treatment. In part, this may be attributable to
‘stable’ responses (less than 50% response) being attributable not only to lack of response but also in
some instances to patients who may be responding
but have lingering or persistent imaging abnormalities or symptoms. Conversely, the relatively high survival rates observed in that trial may mean that
survival, as an assessment of response, may overestimate benefit.
Would an assessment of attributable mortality be
preferable to all-cause mortality? Moreover, would
assessment of efficacy at an earlier timepoint provide
more relevant data? To investigate these questions,
we examined deaths over time and whether death
was attributed to IA in the previous study.1

conazole group and 58% in the amphotericin B
group.

Definitions
Death causality was defined a priori as follows.
Death without aspergillosis
The death had to be clearly attributed to a cause
other than IA. The subject must have had no evidence of IA on autopsy (where available) or must
have had a global response of ‘complete’ at the last
assessment before death. Otherwise the case was
assessed as death with aspergillosis.
Death with aspergillosis
The death had to be clearly attributed to a cause
other than IA, but there was evidence of IA at the
time of death. Otherwise the case was assessed as
death due to IA.
Death due to aspergillosis
The death was not clearly attributed to another cause
and there had been no improvement before death;
also, if there was a sudden, unexplained cerebral
event before death.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Clinical Trial
Patients with proven or probable IA using modified
Mycoses Study Group/European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer (MSG/EORTC)
criteria were randomly assigned to receive either voriconazole or amphotericin B.1 Other licensed antifungal therapy was allowed if the initial therapy failed to
respond or if the patient was intolerant of therapy.
Responses were assessed at 12 weeks. Complete
response was defined as resolution of all clinical
signs and symptoms and greater than 90% reduction
in radiologic lesions attributable to IA. Partial
response was defined as clinical improvement plus
greater than 50% in radiologic lesions attributable to
IA. Stable response was defined as no or minimal
improvement. Failure was defined as worsening of IA
disease. Success was defined as complete or partial
response. Unsuccessful outcomes were defined as
stable or indeterminate responses or failure. The primary analysis was performed in the modified intentto-treat population (all patients with DRC-confirmed
baseline diagnosis and received at least 1 dose of
study drug).
There were 144 patients in the voriconazole
group and 133 patients in the amphotericin B group.
Success was observed in 53% of patients in the voriconazole group and in 32% of the amphotericin B
group. The survival at 12 weeks was 71% in the vori-

Indeterminate
In some cases insufficient data were available for the
committee to categorize the cause of death.
Data Review Methods
All case data were reviewed by the DRC before analysis of the results of the trial. Although the treatment
assignment was unblinded to the treating clinicians,
the DRC was blinded to treatment assignment, to
adverse events, and to laboratory abnormalities that
might suggest which study drug had been used in
case reviews. The DRC consisted of 4 teams of 2
experienced clinicians and a radiologist. Two teams
consisted of American investigators and 2 teams
consisted of European teams. To facilitate uniformity
of review, initial training was conducted by teams
reviewing the same cases, exchanging them, and
cross-checking the teams’ decisions, discussing sources
of disagreement and establishing guidelines for interpreting areas of potential disagreement.
All of the available data present at the time of a
subject’s death were reviewed by the DRC blinded to
treatment. The DRC examined the survival data in
the modified intent-to-treat (MITT) group of the
study,1 looking specifically at attributable mortality
during the first and second 6-week time intervals.
Each death was categorized as 1) caused by
aspergillosis; 2) unrelated, no evidence of aspergillo-

Aspergillosis Death Causality/Wingard et al.

2311

TABLE 1
Causes of Death After Initial Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis (IA) by Either Voriconazole or Amphotericin B
Causes of death

Anytime during 12 weeks after
start of therapy (% of total deaths)

During first 6 weeks
(% of death causality)

During second 6 weeks
(% of death causality)

Any cause
Caused by aspergillosis
Unrelated to aspergillosis
No evidence of IA
Some evidence of IA
Indeterminate

98
56 (57%)
28 (29%)
10
18
14 (14%)

73
50 (68%)
16 (22%)
5
11
7 (10%)

25
6 (24%)
12 (48%)
5
7
7 (28%)

sis; 3) unrelated, with some evidence of aspergillosis;
or 4) indeterminate, as defined above. Groups 2, 3,
and 4 were combined. Kaplan-Meier estimates of time
to death and time to death attributable to IA (Group
1) or other causes (Groups 2–4) were developed.

RESULTS
There were 98 deaths reported at any time during
the period up to 12 weeks after study entry (Table 1).
Most deaths (74%) occurred during the first 6 weeks.
Slightly more than half (56 of 98, 57%) of the deaths
during the 12-week period of study were considered
by the DRC to be caused by IA. During the first 6
weeks, 68% of the 50 deaths were due to IA, but only
24% of the 25 deaths during the second 6 weeks
were due to IA. In some deaths attributed primarily
due to causes other than IA (such as progressive cancer or graft vs host disease), there remained some
evidence of residual IA at the time of death (Table 1).
Figure 1 shows the Kaplan-Meier curves of time to
death due to aspergillosis (Fig. 1a), and time to death
due to all causes other than due primarily to IA (Fig.
1b). There were no differences noted between voriconazole and amphotericin B in deaths due to all
causes other than due to IA (P 5 .87). In contrast,
there were substantial differences between voriconazole and amphotericin B in deaths due to IA
(P 5 .00082). In 14 cases, insufficient data were available to the DRC to categorize the cause of death.
After a review of the limited data available for these
‘indeterminate’ cases, the pattern of death causality
seems to be similar to that in the DRC-categorized
cases: the deaths within the first 6 weeks were likely
to be caused by IA, whereas the deaths within the
second 6 weeks were not.

DISCUSSION
These data suggest that survival to 12 weeks may
actually underestimate the effectiveness of treatment
for IA because a substantial proportion of deaths
occurring during this relatively long observation

FIGURE 1. Time to death from start of therapy due to (a) invasive aspergillosis (IA), and (b) all causes other than IA. (a) All subjects censored at Day
84. Subjects who died of any causality other than aspergillosis were considered censored (P 5 .00082 by log-rank test). (b) All subjects censored at
Day 84. Subjects who died due to aspergillosis were considered censored
(P 5 .87 by log-rank test).

period (43%) may be due to other causes. Moreover,
most of the deaths caused by IA (50 of 56, 89%)
occurred during the first 6 weeks of the therapy.
These observations suggest that an assessment of
survival at 6 weeks may be preferable to survival at

2312

CANCER

May 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 10

12 weeks because there would be fewer deaths unrelated to IA. Moreover, an assessment of attributable
mortality at 6 weeks may be an even better assessment of response to treatment for IA. These observations can be useful in the design of future trials of
investigational therapies for IA.
One potential weakness in this study is the difficulty in setting precise definitions for attribution and
the use of subjective, ‘expert-derived’ criteria. This
concern was addressed in this study by establishment of standardized definitions a priori, use of a
centralized DRC consisting of experienced clinicians
rather than individual site investigators, the use of
training of the DRC at the outset to ensure that the
definitions were applied in a uniform manner, keeping the DRC blind to the treatment assignment, and
grading the cases before the results of the trial were
analyzed. Although these measures reduce subjectivity, we acknowledge that this concern is not eliminated altogether. Another issue is that validation of
attribution (to autopsy findings) has not been performed in any trial and is probably not possible to
do in view of low autopsy rates universally.
Of note is the observation that the deaths due to
causes other than IA were similar in the 2 treatment
arms (Fig. 1b). If there were some misclassifications
it was in the same direction in both arms and suggests that although there may be inherent shortcomings in any attribution schema, actually it is likely
that the classification was most often adequate in
the context of a real clinical trial testing antifungal
therapies. As patients had similar baseline characteristics with respect to the underlying condition, one
would expect similar death rates from nonaspergillus
causes (at least up to the first 3 months). This might

not be true on a longer term because patients receiving the more effective antifungal drug (in this case
voriconazole) would likely go on to receive more
subsequent courses of chemotherapy than the
patients receiving less effective therapy.
We conclude that attributable mortality as
assessed in a standardized manner by a central data
review committee can be a useful outcome measure
in the evaluation of antifungal treatment response
and adds important complementary information in
addition to clinical response and crude mortality.
Further, a shorter time of assessment for IA treatment, such as 6 weeks, provides more relevant data
than longer intervals, where deaths due to competing
causes not related to fungal infection increasingly
occur with the passage of time.

REFERENCES
1. Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, et al. Voriconazole
versus amphotericin B for primary therapy of invasive
aspergillosis. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:408–415.
2. Bowden R, Chandrasekar P, White MH, et al. A double-blind,
randomized, controlled trial of amphotericin B colloidal dispersion versus amphotericin B for treatment of invasive
aspergillosis in immunocompromised patients. Clin Infect
Dis. 2002;35:359–366.
3. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Bresnik M, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B as initial therapy for invasive mold infection: a randomized trial comparing a high-loading dose regimen with
standard dosing (AMBiLoad trial). Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44:
1289–1297.
4. Marr KA, Boeckh M, Carter RA, Kim HW, Corey L. Combination antifungal therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect
Dis. 2004;39:797–802.
5. Anaissie EJ. Trial design for mold-active agents: time to
break the mold—aspergillosis in neutropenic adults. Clin Infect
Dis. 2007;44:1298–1306.

