Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Curcumin combined with FAPαc vaccine elicits effective
antitumor response by targeting indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase
and inhibiting EMT induced by TNF-α in melanoma
Guan-Min Jiang1,*, Wan-Ying Xie2,*, Hong-Sheng Wang3,*, Jun Du3, Bai-Ping Wu1,
Wei Xu2, Hui-Fang Liu2, Ping Xiao1, Zhi-Gang Liu4, Hong-Yan Li1, Shuang-Quan
Liu2, Wen-Jun Yin2, Qiu-Gui Zhang2, Jian-Ping Liang5, Hong-Jun Huang1
1

 epartment of Clinical Laboratory, Hunan Cancer Hospital & The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
D
Central South University, Changsha, 410013, PR China

2

Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of South China, Hengyang, 421001, PR China

3

Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
510006, PR China

4

Department of Radiation Oncology, Hunan Cancer Hospital & The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013, PR China

5

Department of Thoracic Surgery 2, Hunan Cancer Hospital & The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, 410013, PR China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Hong-Jun Huang, e-mail: hongjunhuanghjh@163.com
Jian-Ping Liang, e-mail: liangsugd@vip.sina
Qiu-Gui Zhang, e-mail: zhangqg789@163.com
Keywords: curcumin, indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase, immunotherapy, melanoma, fibroblast activation protein α
Received: April 07, 2015      Accepted: July 08, 2015      Published: July 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Fibroblast activation protein α (FAPα) is a potential target for cancer therapy.
However, elimination of FAPα+ fibroblasts activates secretion of IFN-γ and TNF-α.
IFN-γ can in turn induce expression indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), thereby
contributing to immunosuppression, while TNF-α can induce EMT. These two reactive
effects would limit the efficacy of a tumor vaccine. We found that curcumin can
inhibit IDO expression and TNF-α-induced EMT. Moreover, FAPαc vaccine and CpG
combined with curcumin lavage inhibited tumor growth and prolonged the survival
of mice implanted with melanoma cells. The combination of FAPαc vaccine, CpG and
curcumin stimulated FAPα antibody production and CD8+ T cell-mediated killing
of FAPα-expressing stromal cells without adverse reactive effects. We suggest a
combination of curcumin and FAPαc vaccine for melanoma therapy.

tryptophan locally and producing toxic tryptophan
catabolites that induce proliferation arrest, inactivation
and apoptosis among T lymphocytes and natural killer
(NK) cells [4, 5]. Thus, inhibition of IDO expression
and/or activity is considered to be a potentially effective
therapeutic strategy [6, 7].
Given the close interaction between tumor cells
and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the tumor
microenvironment, CAF-targeted strategies could also
make an important contribution to an integrated cancer
immunotherapy [8]. Fibroblast activation protein α
(FAPα) is a serine protease involved in extracellular
matrix remodeling and is strongly expressed by CAFs,

INTRODUCTION
Melanoma is the most serious form of skin cancer.
Historically, metastatic melanoma has carried a poor
prognosis, but recently new and potentially more effective
anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-1 therapies, as well as other
immunotherapies, have shown promise [1, 2]. However,
a major impediment to cancer immunotherapy is the
induction of indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), which
is a key mediator of tumor immune tolerance [3]. IDO
is the first and rate-limiting enzyme in the metabolism of
the essential amino acid tryptophan along the kynurenine
pathway. It induces immune tolerance by depleting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25932

Oncotarget

but is not detectable in normal adult human tissues [9,
10]. Furthermore, because of the multiple roles played
by FAPα in neoangiogenesis, invasion and metastasis,
it is frequently explored as a target for cancer therapy. In
the context of immunotherapy involving T cells targeting
cancer cells, an agent targeting FAPα-expressing cells might
increase therapeutic efficacy against both solid tumors and
metastatic cells [11, 12]. Removing FAPα+ fibroblasts
does not alter the number or subtypes of tumor infiltrating
T cells, but does result in their activation and secretion of
interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α),
two antitumor cytokines secreted by activated Th1 and NK
cells [13]. On the other hand, IFN-γ also strongly induces
expression of IDO, which reportedly contributes to tumorinduced immunosuppression [14], while TNF-α can induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), an important
contributor to cancer invasion and metastasis [15–18].
Together, the induction of IDO expression and EMT limit
the therapeutic efficacy of antitumor vaccines.
Curcumin is a natural polyphenolic compound
derived from the root of curcuma longa, which is widely
used for medical purposes in India. A large body of
evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies in both animals
and human indicate that curcumin exerts antioxidant, antiinflammatory, antitumor, antifibrotic and wound healing
properties [19, 20]. Moreover, we previously showed
that curcumin can inhibit the IDO expression induced
by IFN-γ and the EMT induced by TNF-α, suggesting
curcumin could be a useful agent for antitumor therapy
when combined with tumor vaccines.
In our present work, we assessed the therapeutic
efficacy and molecular mechanism of a combination of
curcumin with FAPαc vaccine, which contains the main
catalytic domain of the dipeptidyl peptidase of FAPα with
abundant T-cell and B-cell epitopes. In addition, we also
administered the Th1-polarized immunoregulator CpG

oligonucleotide 1826, which was previously shown to
enhance specific cellular and humoral immune responses
in C57 mice [21]. It was anticipated that this new approach
would eliminate the immune tolerance and tumor cell
metastasis induced by IFN-γ and TNF-α. Our results show
that FAPαc vaccine in combination with curcumin inhibits
tumor growth and significantly prolongs the survival of
mice implanted with B16 melanoma cells. These findings
suggest combination therapy using FAPαc vaccine in
combination with curcumin may be an effective approach
to preventing and treating melanoma.

RESULTS
Curcumin dose-dependently down-regulates
IDO expression in B16 melanoma cells
To investigate the effect of curcumin on IDO
expression, B16 melanoma cells were first pretreated
for 4 h with selected concentrations of curcumin before
treating the cells with IFN-γ (100 U/ml) for 24 h. IDO
expression was then assessed in total cell lysates using
western blotting. As shown in Figure 2, treatment with
curcumin significantly and dose-dependently reduced
IDO expression, which was almost completely inhibited
at a concentration of 25 μM (Figure 2). More importantly,
curcumin not only inhibited IDO expression induced
by IFN-γ, it also suppressed basal expression of IDO in
B16 cells. But because the majority of B16 exposed to
25 μM curcumin died, in subsequent experiments we
applied curcumin at a concentration of 15 μM, which
downregulated IDO expression significantly but did
not affect the survival rate of the cells (Figure 2A–2B).
Overall, this result demonstrates that curcumin downregulates IFN-γ-induced and basal expression of IDO in a
dose-dependent manner.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the treatment schedule and dosages in mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25933

Oncotarget

Curcumin suppresses TNF-α-induced EMT
in B16 melanoma cells

increase in vimentin levels and a corresponding decrease
in E-cadherin levels. By contrast, the morphological
changes induced by TNF-α were not observed in
cells pretreated with curcumin, and the vimentin and
E-cadherin levels were similar to those in the control
group (Figure 3B–3C). This suggests that curcumin
suppresses TNF-α-induced EMT in B16 melanoma cells.

As mentioned, TNF-α has been shown to induce
EMT in several cell lines. To verify that effect in B16
cells, we treated the cells with TNF-α (20 ng/ml) and
recorded the phenotypic changes using a phase contrast
microscope. After treatment with TNF-α for 72 h, B16
cells became scattered and adopted the typical fibroblastlike morphology of mesenchymal cells (Figure 3A). In
addition, up-regulation of vimentin and down-regulation
of E-cadherin are important molecular markers of EMT.
TNF-α-treated cells in the present study exhibited
significantly up-regulated vimentin expression and downregulated E-cadherin expression (Figure 3B–3C). Taken
together, these results indicate that TNF-α induces EMT
in B16 cells.
To then evaluate the effect of curcumin on TNFα-induced EMT, the cells were pretreated for 4 h with
or without curcumin (15 μM) before treatment for 72 h
with or without TNF-α (20 ng/ml). Phenotypic changes
were then recorded using a phase contrast microscope,
and vimentin and E-cadherin expression was assessed
using western blotting. We found that in the absence of
curcumin TNF-α-treated cells exhibited morphological
changes characteristic of EMT as well as a significant

IDO and FAPα were detectable in B16
tumor-bearing mice
Because IDO is believed to be an important
mediator of tumor immune tolerance that creates an
immunosuppressive microenvironment within the
tumor site, while the tumor-associated antigen FAPα
plays multiple roles in neoangiogenesis, invasion and
metastasis, we established an IDO- and FAPα-expressing
tumor model by implanting B16 cells into female C57
mice. We then performed immunohistochemical studies to
determine whether IDO and FAPα were, in fact, expressed
by the tumor tissues. As shown in Figure 4, we detected
IDO expression in regions of B16 tumor tissue and FAPα
expression in fibroblasts within the tumor stroma. These
findings suggest that IDO-mediated immune tolerance
occurs in B16 tumor-bearing mice, and FAPα is a useful
target for tumor immunotherapy.

Figure 2: A, B. Cytotoxicity of curcumin in B16 cells. Experiments were performed by means of an MTT enzyme assay. B16 cells

were incubated in the presence of different concentrations of curcumin at 37°C for 24 h (A) or 48 h (B) Each column represents the mean
± SD with respect to 100% control. At least three independent assays were performed. C. Curcumin down-regulated the IFN-γ-induced
expression of IDO in a dose-dependent manner. B16 cells were pretreated with the indicated concentrations of curcumin for 2 h and then
treated with 100 U/ml IFN-γ for 24 h. IDO expression was detected by western blotting, GAPDH served as the loading control. Similar
results were obtained in three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25934

Oncotarget

FAPαc vaccine and CpG combined with
curcumin lavage elicits a protective antitumor
response in a FAPα-positive mice model

curcumin lavage elicits a protective antitumor response
in FAPα-positive B16 tumor-bearing mice. Consistent
with that idea, the B16 tumor volume in mice treated
with FAPαc vaccine and CpG combined with curcumin
lavage was significantly smaller than in the other three
groups 21 days after tumor implantation. During the
period from 21 days to 31 days after tumor implantation,
tumor volumes decreased sharply in all four groups, due
to the development of ulcers (Figure 5C). In addition, the
body weights of the mice in all four groups continued to
increase, but there were no significant differences among
the four groups (Figure 5B). Overall, these results suggest
that the antitumor activity of the combination of FAPαc
vaccine and CpG with curcumin lavage was significantly
greater than CpG alone, curcumin plus CpG or even
FAPαc vaccine plus CpG.

We demonstrated in vitro that curcumin downregulates IDO expression and suppresses TNF-α-induced
EMT (Figures 2 and 3). To assess the preventive efficacy
of FAPαc vaccine combined with curcumin in vivo,
experiments were performed using a FAPα-positive
B16 tumor model. We found that 31 days after tumor
implantation, the survival rate among mice immunized
with FAPαc vaccine and CpG combined with curcumin
lavage was 60%, whereas the survival rates among mice
immunized with CpG alone, with FAPαc plus CpG or
with curcumin plus CpG were all 20% (Figure 5A). This
suggests FAPαc vaccine and CpG in combination with

Figure 3: Curcumin inhibits TNF-α-induced EMT in B16 cells. A. Cells were pre-treated with or without 15 μM curcumin for

4 h and then treated with 20 ng/ml TNF-α for 72 h. Phenotypic changes of EMT in B16 cells were detected using a phase contrast
microscope. B, C. B16 cells were treated as indicated in (A) after which expression of vimentin (B) and E-cadherin (C) was detected by
western blotting. GAPDH served as the loading control. Similar results were obtained in three independent experiments, *p < 0.05.

Figure 4: Identification of FAP α and IDO expression in B16 tumor cells of mice. Distributions of IDO and FAP α in B16
tumor tissue was examined immunohistochemically (400×). IDO was observed in regions of B16 tumor cells, while FAP α was mainly
detected in tumor stroma cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25935

Oncotarget

Antitumor mechanism of the FAPαc vaccine
combined with curcumin

resulted in the development of several immunotherapeutic
agents for its treatment, including ipilimumab and
pembrolizumab, antibodies respectively blocking CTLA4 and PD-1 [22]. However, antigen selection remains a
crucial step in tumor immunotherapy. It was recently
suggested that tumor stromal cells could be a useful target
for tumor immunotherapy because these cells, unlike the
tumor cells, are diploid, genetically stable and susceptible
to immunological attack [23].
Stromal cells and cancer cells depend on one
another for mutual paracrine stimulation, and stromal
CAFs are likely required for the survival and growth of
cancer cells [24]. The transmembrane serine protease
FAPα is highly expressed on the CAFs present in >90%
of human epithelial tumors, and plays a significant role
in tumor progression and metastasis [25]. Targeting FAPα
genetically or with vaccines or pharmacological agents
has been shown to impair tumor progression in several
preclinical cancer models [26, 27]. Consequently, FAPα is
thought to be an adaptive tumor-associated antigen useful
for tumor immunotherapy. In our research, we found that
FAPα is stably expressed by the tumor stromal cells in
B16 melanoma-bearing mice (Figure 4). The FAPαc
peptide used in the present study is the main catalytic
domain of the dipeptidyl peptidase of murine FAPα and
contains abundant T cell and B cell epitopes, and is 96%
homologous to the human FAPα homolog [28]. This
suggests a FAPαc vaccine could prove to be a valuable
reference for clinical trials.
Although strategies targeting the immune system
to achieve an antitumor response have shown promise in
terms of survival benefit, the most common challenges
encountered during immune-based antitumor therapy
are lack of an antitumor immune response and frequent
adverse events [29, 30]. For example, as mentioned above,
the secretion of the antitumor cytokines IFN-γ and TNF-α
by activated Th1 and NK cells is a feature of effective
tumor vaccines. Unfortunately, however, IFN-γ can also
induce IDO expression and TNF-α can induce EMT,
limiting the development of a beneficial effect of therapy
[13–15]. Here we found that these two adverse events also
occur in B16 melanoma cells, and that these cells express
IDO under basal conditions (Figures 2 and 3) and in the
tumor tissue of B16 melanoma-bearing mice (Figure 4).
This implies that IDO mediates immune tolerance in B16
tumor-bearing mice and suggests, therefore, that inhibiting
induction of IDO expression and EMT could improve
the efficacy of tumor vaccines. Notably, we found that
curcumin inhibits both basal and IFN-γ-induced IDO
expression and simultaneously represses TNF-α-induced
EMT in B16 melanoma cells (Figures2 and 3). Curcumin
reportedly suppresses IFN-γ-induced IDO expression by
blocking the Janus-activated kinase/protein kinase Cδ/
STAT1 signaling pathway [31]. In addition, it also inhibits
lipopolysaccharide-induced EMT in breast cancer cells

To investigate the antitumor mechanism of FAPαc
vaccine combined with curcumin, we first performed
immunohistochemical studies to verify the expression
of IDO and FAPα within the tumor tissues. As shown in
Figure 6, we found that in mice immunized with FAPαc
vaccine and CpG combined with curcumin lavage, the
numbers of tumor cells expressing IDO and FAPα were
significantly reduced and the tumor stroma was obviously
destroyed (Figure 6C, red arrow). This indicates that
curcumin abrogated the immune tolerance, most likely by
suppressing IDO expression, enabling the FAPαc vaccine
to stimulate an important antitumor immune response in
vivo. As shown in Figure 7A, mice immunized with FAPαc
vaccine and CpG in combination with curcumin lavage
exhibited a more significant humoral immune response
than mice immunized with FAPαc vaccine and CpG
without curcumin (each group, n = 10; P < 0.01), though
both groups elicited greater humoral immune responses
than mice immunized with CpG alone or with curcumin
plus CpG (each group, n = 10; P < 0.01).
This specific immune response was examined
further using western blotting, which showed that the
anti-FAPα antibody from individual immunized mice
recognized FAPα protein in lysates of tumor tissue from
B16 tumor-bearing mice. By contrast, no bands appeared
when using the serum from mice immunized with PBS
and CpG (Figure 7B). These data indicate that the FAPαc
vaccine induces an antibody specific to the FAPα antigen.
To further explore the antitumor mechanism of
FAPαc vaccine combined with curcumin, splenic CD8+
T cell function was examined. Splenocytes isolated from
immunized mice were restimulated with FAPαc for 3 days,
after which IFN-γ production by the CD8+ T cells was
assessed using flow cytometry. As shown in Figure 7,
we found that nearly 4.4% of the CD8+ T cells produced
IFN-γ in mice immunized with the FAPαc vaccine and
CpG combined with curcumin lavage. By contrast, only
0.9% of CD8+ T cells in mice immunized with CpG
alone, 0.9% in mice immunized with CpG and curcumin
lavage, and 1.5% in mice immunized with FAPαc and
CpG produced IFN-γ. These results suggest that the
FAPαc vaccine and CpG combined with curcumin lavage
elicited a protective antitumor response that was partially
dependent on a curcumin-induced increase in FAPα
antibody and CD8+ T cell-mediated killing of FAPαexpressing tumor stromal cells.

DISCUSSION
Immunotherapy is poised to assume a more
central role in the treatment of a variety of cancer types.
Recognition of the immunogenic nature of melanoma has

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25936

Oncotarget

Figure 5: FAPαc vaccine plus curcumin and CpG elicited a protective antitumor response in B16 tumor-bearing
mice. B16 tumor cells were implanted (s.c.) in the backs of B57 mice after the second immunization, after which tumor volumes and
body weights were measured at regular intervals. A. Survival rate among mice treated during the experiment. Thirty-one days after tumor
implantation, the survival rate among mice immunized with FAPαc+curcumin+CpG is significantly higher than among mice immunized
with PBS+CpG, FAPαc+CpG or curcumin+CpG (**p < 0.01). B. Average body weights of the mice in the different groups did not differ
during the experiment (#p > 0.05). C. Tumor growth (n = 10). Following vaccination, tumors were measured every 3 days (mean ± SE) as
described in the Materials and Methods. Tumor volume in mice immunized with FAPαc+curcumin+CpG were significantly smaller than in
the other three groups (**p < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25937

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of curcumin and FAPαc vaccine on expression of FAPα and IDO in B16 tumor-bearing mice. Mice

were assigned to four groups as follows, PBS+CpG A. FAPαc+CpG B. FAPαc+curcumin+CpG C. Curcumin+CpG D. after which the
distributions of IDO and FAPα in tumor tissue were examined immunohistochemically.

through down-regulation of NF-κB/Snail signaling [32].
Given that TNF-α induces EMT and promotes metastasis
via NF-κB-mediated Twist expression [33], we speculate
that curcumin may inhibit TNF-α-induced EMT in B16
cells by inhibiting NF-kB-dependent signaling, though
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that idea remains to be tested. The properties of curcumin
appear to make it an ideal agent for combination with tumor
vaccines for antitumor therapy. In addition, we previously
observed that adding CpG to the vaccine dramatically
enhances the vaccine’s antitumor efficacy  [21]. Taken
25938

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Detection of immune responses in B16 tumor-bearing mice. A. Results of ELISAs using an anti-FAPα antibody.
Mice were vaccinated as described in Materials and Methods. One week after the second booster, the serum samples were collected for
detection of anti-FAPα antibody using the ELISA. B. Western blotting analysis of the serum anti-FAPα antibody specificity. The antigen
was the lysate from tumor tissue from B16 tumor-bearing mice. C. Detection of CD8+ T cell function. On day 47, when the experiment
was terminated, splenocytes were isolated and re-stimulated with FAPαc ex vivo. IFN-γ production in CD8+ T cells was then assessed using
flow cytometry, **p < 0.01.

together, these results suggest combining FAPαc, curcumin
and CpG could be a potentially effective approach to
treating melanoma (Figure 5).
In sum, our findings suggest a FAPαc vaccine in
combination with curcumin is a promising therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of melanoma. This approach
is associated with three beneficial effects: First, it breaks
tumor tolerance and activates tumor-responsive T cells
through inhibition of IDO expression. Second, because
cancer cells depend on stromal cells for support through
paracrine stimulation, targeting stromal cells may increase
the susceptibility of melanoma cells to both immunological
and pharmacological antitumor therapy (Figure 6). Finally,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

curcumin inhibits TNF-α-induced EMT, thereby suppressing
the invasiveness and metastatic potential of melanoma cells.
We therefore conclude that combined administration of
FAPαc vaccine with curcumin may be a new and effective
method for preventing and/or treating melanoma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals and reagents
Curcumin, hematoxylin, Freund’s incomplete
adjuvant, mouse TNF-α and IFN-γ were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (Deisenhofen, Germany). The monoclonal
25939

Oncotarget

FAPα antibody was from Abcam, and the monoclonal
IDO antibody was from Chemicon. The monoclonal antivimentin antibody, polyclonal anti-β-actin and secondary
HRP-conjugated anti-mouse antibody were from Cell
Signaling Technology (MA, USA). The anti-CD8-PE and
anti-IFN-γ-FITC were from Beckman Coulter, and IL-2
and Brefeldin A were from BioLegend.

(SDS)-polyacrylamide gels and electrophoretically
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. After blocking
with 5% non-fat milk at room temperature for 2 h, the
membranes were incubated first with the primary antibody
at 1:1000 dilution overnight at 4°C, and then with a HRPconjugated secondary antibody at 1:5000 dilution for 1 h
at room temperature. Specific immune complexes were
detected using western blotting plus chemiluminescence
reagent (Life Science, Inc., Boston, MA).

Cell line and mouse
B16 (ATCC® CRL-6475™) cells were cultured in
RPMI 1640 (Gibco, Germany) containing 10% fetal calf
serum (Gibco, Germany). C57 mice were purchased from
the Sun Yat-sen University (Guangzhou, China) animal
center and raised under pathogen-free conditions. All animal
studies were conducted in accordance with institutional
guidelines for the care and use of experimental animals.

Adjuvant and vaccine preparation
The phosphorothioate-modified CpG oligonucleotide
1,826
(5′-TCCATGACGTTCCTGACGTT-3′)
was
synthesized by the Shanghai Sangon Biological Engineering
Technology and Service. The antigens FAPαc and CpG
were separately dissolved in PBS. The two solutions were
mixed to obtain a suspension including 200 μg (first vaccine
per mouse) or 100 μg antigens FAPαc and 30 μg CpG. Then
the suspension was emulsified by equivalent volume of
Freund’s incomplete adjuvant.

Preparation of FAPac
We chose the main catalytic domain of the
dipeptidyl peptidase of murine FAPα (AA599-AA696)
(NP_032012.1), which contains abundant T-cell and B-cell
epitopes. The target gene (mRNA 1967–2258, GenBank:
BC019190.1) was obtained by RT-PCR and ligated with
a prokaryotic expression vector, pET28a(+) (Novagen,
Germany), which was then amplified in E. Coli DH5α and
expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3). The purified peptide
(FAPαc) was employed as the FAPα vaccine.

Immunization and measurement
of tumor growth
Five-week-old female C57 mice were randomly
assigned into four groups, and immunized (s.c.) on the
back in multiple locations on days 0, 14 and 21 (Figure 1).
The groupings were as follows: 1 (n = 10), 30 μg CpG
(per mouse); 2 (n = 10), 200 μg FAPαc and 30 μg CpG;
3 (n = 10), 200 μg FAPαc, 30 μg CpG and curcumin
(administration was initiated with the first immunization
and ended 10 days after the last immunization; dissolved
in 1% Tween80/0.5% methylcellulose at a concentration
of 50 mg/ml, 5 mg once/day) with additional lavage
using intragastric administration needles (0.9 × L50 mm);
4 (n = 10), curcumin and 30 μg CpG. On day 17, tumors
were implanted through injection of B16 cells (105 cells)
into the backs of the mice. Tumor growth and body
weights were measured every three days, and the tumor
volumes were determined using the formula (a × b2)/2,
where a is the larger and b the smaller diameter. The
experiment was terminated on day 47.

Cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxicity of curcumin toward the cultured
cells was assessed using MTT [3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol2yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assays (Sigma
Chemical Co., USA). B16 cells were seeded onto 96-well
microplates (NunC, Denmark) at a density of 1 × 104
cells per well and incubated for 24 h. The Cells were
then treated with selected concentrations of curcumin for
24 h or 48 h. Cells in culture medium alone served as the
untreated control. The MTT reagent (5 mg/ml in distilled
water) was prepared immediately prior to use. After
removing the incubation medium from the wells, the cells
were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and
10 ml of MTT reagent was added. After incubation for 4 h
at 37°C, MTT reagent in 100 ml of dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO) was added to each well. Surviving cells were
then detected by measuring absorbance at 570 nm using
a plate reader. The cell viability was expressed as a
percentage of the values obtained for the controls.

Immunohistochemical detection of FAPα
and IDO expression
Tumors were harvested and then fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde, after which 5-μm paraffin-embedded
sections were cut. This was followed by deparaffinization,
antigen retrieval, serum blocking and incubation with antiFAPα antibody (1:100 dilution) or anti-IDO antibody (1:50
dilution) overnight at 4°C. An isotype-matched irrelevant
antibody was used as the negative control. After washing,
slides were incubated with HRP IgG (EnVision+; DAKO),
and DAB (DAKO) was applied as a substrate. Lastly, the
slides were counterstained with hematoxylin.

Western blotting analysis
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer, after which the
lysates were cleared by centrifugation and denatured by
boiling in Laemmli buffer. Aliquots of protein samples
were then separated on 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25940

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Measurement of serum FAPα antibody
using ELISA

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Blood samples were obtained via the tail vein from
each mouse, and serum was collected. After precoating
96-well plates with FAPαc antigen (100 ng/well) and
blocking with 3% bovine serum albumin for 1 h at room
temperature, the serum samples were added in serial
dilutions from 1:1000 to 1:128,000. The plates were
then washed, and HRP-conjugated IgG (1:5000 dilution;
Boster) was added for 1 h at room temperature. The plates
were then washed, and the signals were developed using
tetramethylbenzidine and hydrogen peroxide and were
read at A405 using an Elx800 universal microplate reader
(Bio-Tek).

REFERENCES
1.	 Tsai KK, Zarzoso I, Daud AI. PD-1 and PD-L1 antibodies for melanoma. Human vaccines & immunotherapeutics.
2014; 10:3111–3116.
2.	 Hodi FS, O'Day SJ, McDermott DF, Weber RW,
Sosman  JA, Haanen JB, Gonzalez R, Robert C,
Schadendorf D, Hassel JC, Akerley W, van den
Eertwegh AJ, Lutzky J, Lorigan P, Vaubel JM, Linette GP,
et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with
metastatic melanoma. The New England journal of medicine. 2010; 363:711–723.

Detection of CD8+ T-cell function in the spleens
of tumor bearing mice

3.	 Mellor AL, Munn DH. IDO expression by dendritic cells:
tolerance and tryptophan catabolism. Nature reviews
Immunology. 2004; 4:762–774.

Spleens were collected 31 days after tumor
implantation. Freshly isolated splenocytes were incubated
in ammonium chloride buffer to lyse the erythrocytes and
then stimulated with 10 μg/ml FAPαc. IL-2 and Brefeldin
A were added at concentrations of 300 U/ml and 1 μg/
ml, respectively. After stimulation for 3 days, the cells
were collected, stained with PE-CD8 and FITC-IFN-γ
antibodies, and detected using flow cytometry.

4.	 Takikawa O. Biochemical and medical aspects of the
indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase-initiated L-tryptophan
metabolism. Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2005; 338:12–19.
5.	 Jiang GM, He YW, Fang R, Zhang G, Zeng J, Yi  YM,
Zhang S, Bu XZ, Cai SH, Du J. Sodium butyrate downregulation of indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase at the
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. The
­international ­journal of biochemistry & cell biology. 2010;
42:1840–1846.

Statistical analyses
All values are reported as the mean ± SEM of three
independent experiments unless otherwise specified.
Comparisons between two groups were analyzed using
two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test, and one-way ANOVA
followed by Bonferroni’s test was used for multiple
comparisons. These analyses were performed using Prism
Software Version 5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla,
CA). Values of p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

6.	 Uyttenhove C, Pilotte L, Theate I, Stroobant V, Colau D,
Parmentier N, Boon T, Van den Eynde BJ. Evidence for
a tumoral immune resistance mechanism based on tryptophan degradation by indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase. Nature
­medicine. 2003; 9:1269–1274.
7.	 Hou DY, Muller AJ, Sharma MD, DuHadaway J, Banerjee T,
Johnson M, Mellor AL, Prendergast GC, Munn DH.
Inhibition of indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase in dendritic cells
by stereoisomers of 1-methyl-tryptophan ­correlates with antitumor responses. Cancer research. 2007; 67:792–801.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

8.	 Ohshio Y, Teramoto K, Hanaoka J, Tezuka N, Itoh  Y,
Asai T, Daigo Y, Ogasawara K. Cancer-associated
fibroblast-targeted strategy enhances antitumor immune
responses in dendritic cell-based vaccine. Cancer science.
2015; 106:134–142.

Grant support: This work was funded by the
Hunan Natural Science Foundation (No. 13JJ4078), the
Bureau of Hunan Provincial Science and Technology
(No. 2013sk5010, No. 2012sk2007, No. 2012sk3252),
the National Program on Key Basic Research Project
(973 Program) (NO. 2011CB935800), the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81472470, No.
81302317, and No. 31101071), the Guangdong Natural
Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar (No.
2014A030306025), the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities (Sun Yat-sen University)
(No. 12ykpy09) and the Science and Technology
Planning Project of Guangdong Province, China (No.
2012B031500005).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9.	 Kelly T, Huang Y, Simms AE, Mazur A. Fibroblast activation protein-alpha: a key modulator of the microenvironment in multiple pathologies. International review of cell
and molecular biology. 2012; 297:83–116.
10.	 Rettig WJ, Garin-Chesa P, Beresford HR, Oettgen HF,
Melamed MR, Old LJ. Cell-surface glycoproteins of human
sarcomas: differential expression in normal and malignant
tissues and cultured cells. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
1988; 85:3110–3114.
25941

Oncotarget

11.	 Scott AM, Wiseman G, Welt S, Adjei A, Lee FT,
Hopkins W, Divgi CR, Hanson LH, Mitchell P, Gansen DN,
Larson SM, Ingle JN, Hoffman EW, Tanswell P, Ritter G,
Cohen LS, et al. A Phase I dose-escalation study of sibrotuzumab in patients with advanced or metastatic fibroblast
activation protein-positive cancer. Clinical cancer research
2003; 9:1639–1647.

22.	 Callahan MK, Postow MA, Wolchok JD. CTLA-4 and
PD-1 Pathway Blockade: Combinations in the Clinic.
Frontiers in oncology. 2014; 4:385.
23.	 Gilboa E. The promise of cancer vaccines. Nature reviews
Cancer. 2004; 4:401–411.

12.	 Jackson RC. Contributions of protein structure-based drug
design to cancer chemotherapy. Seminars in oncology.
1997; 24:164–172.

24.	 Erez N, Truitt M, Olson P, Arron ST, Hanahan D.
Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts Are Activated in Incipient
Neoplasia to Orchestrate Tumor-Promoting Inflammation
in an NF-kappaB-Dependent Manner. Cancer cell. 2010;
17:135–147.

13.	 Kraman M, Bambrough PJ, Arnold JN, Roberts EW,
Magiera L, Jones JO, Gopinathan A, Tuveson DA,
Fearon DT. Suppression of antitumor immunity by stromal
cells expressing fibroblast activation protein-alpha. Science.
2010; 330:827–830.

25.	 Garin-Chesa P, Old LJ, Rettig WJ. Cell surface glycoprotein of reactive stromal fibroblasts as a potential antibody target in human epithelial cancers. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1990; 87:7235–7239.

14.	 Munn DH, Mellor AL. Indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase and
tumor-induced tolerance. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2007; 117:1147–1154.

26.	 Lee J, Fassnacht M, Nair S, Boczkowski D, Gilboa E.
Tumor immunotherapy targeting fibroblast activation protein, a product expressed in tumor-associated fibroblasts.
Cancer research. 2005; 65:11156–11163.

15.	 Yu L, Mu Y, Sa N, Wang H, Xu W. Tumor necrosis factor alpha induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
promotes metastasis via NF-kappaB signaling pathwaymediated TWIST expression in hypopharyngeal cancer.
Oncology reports. 2014; 31:321–327.

27.	 Loeffler M, Kruger JA, Niethammer AG, Reisfeld RA.
Targeting tumor-associated fibroblasts improves cancer
chemotherapy by increasing intratumoral drug uptake. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2006; 116:1955–1962.

16.	 Wang H, Fang R, Wang XF, Zhang F, Chen DY, Zhou B,
Wang HS, Cai SH, Du J. Stabilization of Snail through
AKT/GSK-3beta signaling pathway is required for TNFalpha-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in prostate
cancer PC3 cells. European journal of pharmacology. 2013;
714:48–55.

28.	 Niedermeyer J, Scanlan MJ, Garin-Chesa P, Daiber C,
Fiebig HH, Old LJ, Rettig WJ, Schnapp A. Mouse fibroblast
activation protein: molecular cloning, alternative splicing
and expression in the reactive stroma of epithelial cancers.
International journal of cancer 1997; 71:383–389.
29.	 Kelderman S, Schumacher TN, Haanen JB. Acquired and
intrinsic resistance in cancer immunotherapy. Molecular
oncology. 2014; 8:1132–1139.

17.	 Xue C, Plieth D, Venkov C, Xu C, Neilson EG. The gatekeeper effect of epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulates
the frequency of breast cancer metastasis. Cancer research.
2003; 63:3386–3394.

30.	 Ma C, Armstrong AW. Severe adverse events from the
treatment of advanced melanoma: a systematic review
of severe side effects associated with ipilimumab, vemurafenib, interferon alfa-2b, dacarbazine and interleukin-2.
The Journal of dermatological treatment. 2014; 25:401–408.

18.	 Jiang GM, Wang HS, Zhang F, Zhang KS, Liu ZC, Fang R,
Wang H, Cai SH, Du J. Histone deacetylase inhibitor induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions via up-regulation
of Snail facilitates cancer progression. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2013; 1833:663–671.

31.	 Jeong YI, Kim SW, Jung ID, Lee JS, Chang JH, Lee CM,
Chun SH, Yoon MS, Kim GT, Ryu SW, Kim JS, Shin YK,
Lee WS, Shin HK, Lee JD, Park YM. Curcumin suppresses
the induction of indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase by blocking the
Janus-activated kinase-protein kinase Cdelta-STAT1 signaling
pathway in interferon-gamma-stimulated murine dendritic cells.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 2009; 284:3700–3708.

19.	 Maheshwari RK, Singh AK, Gaddipati J, Srimal RC.
Multiple biological activities of curcumin: a short review.
Life sciences. 2006; 78:2081–2087.
20.	 Yao QY, Xu BL, Wang JY, Liu HC, Zhang SC, Tu CT.
Inhibition by curcumin of multiple sites of the transforming
growth factor-beta1 signalling pathway ameliorates the progression of liver fibrosis induced by carbon tetrachloride in
rats. BMC complementary and alternative medicine. 2012;
12:156.

32.	 Huang T, Chen Z, Fang L. Curcumin inhibits LPS-induced
EMT through downregulation of NF-kappaB-Snail signaling in breast cancer cells. Oncology reports. 2013;
29:117–124.

21.	 Zeng J, Cai S, Yi Y, He Y, Wang Z, Jiang G, Li X, Du J.
Prevention of spontaneous tumor development in a ret
transgenic mouse model by ret peptide vaccination with
indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase inhibitor 1-methyl tryptophan. Cancer research. 2009; 69:3963–3970.

33.	 Yu L, Mu Y, Sa N, Wang H, Xu W. Tumor necrosis factor alpha induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
promotes metastasis via NF-kappaB signaling pathwaymediated TWIST expression in hypopharyngeal cancer.
Oncology reports. 2014; 31:321–327.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25942

Oncotarget

