1995

E D I T O R I A L

Clofarabine
In Search of Combinations for the Treatment of
Patients With High-Risk Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Pellegrino Musto, MD1
Felicetto Ferrara, MD2
1
Unit of Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, IRCCS-CROB, Reference Cancer Center
of Basilicata, Rionero in Vulture, Italy.
2

Division of Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation Unit, Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.

T

See referenced original article on pages 2090–6,
this issue.
Address of reprints: Pellegrino Musto, MD, IRCCS CROB, Reference Cancer Center of Basilicata, Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Strada Provinciale, 8, Rionero in Vulture, Pz 85028, Italy; Fax:
(011) 0039-0972726217. E-mail: p.musto@tin.it
Received February 14, 2008; revision received
April 14, 2008; accepted May 15, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

he clinical outcome of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is extremely variable, ranging from survival of a few days to cure,
depending on different patient clinical characteristics, disease biology, and treatment intensity.1 Causes of therapeutic failure include
death in induction and, more frequently, resistant or relapsed disease. Over the past few years, the application of novel cytogenetic
and molecular techniques has markedly improved our knowledge
on the pathophysiology of the disease, resulting in new potential
therapies.2 Despite this, current therapeutic results are still unsatisfactory, particularly in older patients and/or in those with primary
refractory or relapsed disease, because of difﬁculties in translating
new pathogenetic insights from the bench to the bedside. Accordingly, salvage chemotherapy still represents the best option, at least
for young adult patients who relapse after achieving ﬁrst complete
remission (CR1).3 In contrast, the actual advantage of salvage chemotherapy is more controversial where older AML patients are concerned, especially in those with a CR1 duration of less than 12
months. In this subset, the second complete remission (CR2) rate is
usually lower than 30%, with substantial toxicity and mortality and
few possibilities of receiving stem cell transplantation (SCT),
although more patients in the last few years are being considered
for reduced intensity allogeneic SCT.4 Gemtuzumab ozogamycin
(GO), an immunoconjugate composed of a humanized anti-CD33
antibody linked to the potent antitumor antibiotic calicheamicin,
results in a 20% to 25% CR2 rate in elderly patients with relapsed
AML, when used as a single agent; however, the majority of patients
will ultimately relapse.5
Overall, most therapeutic results for relapsed AML derive from
retrospective studies based on salvage regimens including intermediate- or high-dose cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C), with percentages
of CR2 ranging from 30% to 60%, and possibility of long-term survival strictly related to eligibility for SCT. At the moment, there is no
gold standard salvage chemotherapy, and the therapeutic choice
mostly depends on personal experience concerning efﬁcacy and
toxicity. The addition to chemotherapy of GO has been reported as

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23804
Published online 8 September 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1996

CANCER October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

potentially useful in increasing CR rate and duration;
however, toxicity of the combination is not negligible
and can be substantial at the hepatic level.5 Whatever
the salvage therapy, best results are achievable when
SCT is feasible. On this basis, characteristics of an ideal
salvage regimen should include both antileukemic efﬁcacy and acceptable extrahematologic toxicity. In clinical practice, it is indeed not rare that toxicity from
previous therapy may preclude the feasibility of SCT.
The wide differences in CR2 rates and durations
in various phase 2 single-arm trials have clearly
shown that biological and clinical characteristics of
the patients rather than different treatment modalities account for discordant results. Relevant prognostic factors at relapse are age, cytogenetics at
presentation, previous SCT, and duration of CR1.3 In
particular, the prognosis of AML patients who
relapse less than 12 months from CR1 achievement
is particularly poor after conventional salvage chemotherapy; therefore, new strategies should be
designed in this patient subset.
Although induction chemotherapy regimens
have not substantially changed in over 20 years,
exciting results have emerged from several phase 2
studies, based on the adoption of new agents either
in relapsed/refractory AML patients or in newly diagnosed older ones with unfavorable characteristics at
diagnosis and/or who are not eligible for intensive
treatment. Among the new different cytotoxic agents
that have been investigated recently in high-risk
AML, clofarabine, a second generation purine
nucleoside analogue designed to overcome the limitations and to incorporate the best qualities of both
cladribine and ﬂudarabine, is particularly notable. In
2004, the drug was approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of
pediatric relapsed/refractory acute lymphoblastic
leukemia after at least 2 prior regimens.6 However,
clofarabine has also shown signiﬁcant efﬁcacy in
high-risk AML and myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS), either alone or in combination in adult
patients. In particular, exciting results have been
reported by using clofarabine as a ﬁrst-line single
agent in elderly unﬁt patients, with a response rate
approximating 50%, including patients with unfavorable cytogenetics at diagnosis.7 In refractory/
relapsed disease, the drug has been mainly used in
combination with Ara-C, given that there is a strong
biological rationale for adopting such an association.6 Preclinical studies, in fact, have clearly shown
that pretreatment with clofarabine leads to increases
in intracellular Ara-C triphosphate levels via indirect
up-regulation of deoxycytidine kinase (dCK) because
of decreased 20 deoxynucleoside-S0 triphosphate pools

caused by clofarabine’s inhibition of ribonucleotide
reductase. In addition, because clofarabine inhibits
both ribonucleotide reductase and DNA polymerases, logical combination regimens would include
clofarabine and agents that damage DNA and inhibit
DNA repair, such as anthracyclines. Clofarabine
could also be combined with agents inducing apoptosis, because it has been shown to activate caspases, with potential therapeutic efﬁcacy in the
treatment of indolent lymphoproliferative disorders.
In this issue of Cancer, Faderl and coworkers
designed a phase 1 study of clofarabine 6 Ara-C,
plus idarubicin.8 Patients with primary refractory or
ﬁrst-relapse AML were assigned to either clofarabine
plus idarubicin (CI) if previously exposed to Ara-C
with a response lasting <12 months, or clofarabine
and idarubicin plus Ara-C (CIA) for responses 12
months or if never exposed to Ara-C. Interestingly, in
both subgroups there was a considerable percentage
of patients (38% and 39%, respectively) with primary
refractory disease, and patients relapsing after allogeneic SCT were also included. In addition, 20% of
patients in the entire cohort had experienced prior
malignancies, and all but 1 of these patients had
received prior chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy.
Finally, the median age for both subgroups was older
than 55 years.
A standard ‘‘3+3’’ phase 1 design was followed to
deﬁne maximum tolerated dose. Response rate was
higher for patients receiving CIA, characterized, however, by more favorable prognostic features, mainly
more prolonged duration of CR1. In addition, in this
subgroup duration of response was signiﬁcantly longer compared with CI. In either group, responses
occurred after 1 course of therapy, and were
observed at all dose levels; of note, 30% of patients
could be referred for a SCT. Dose-limiting toxicity
(DLT) included hyperbilirubinemia and elevated liver
enzymes for CI-treated patients, whereas in those
receiving CIA, mucositis and diarrhea were major
factors accounting for DLT. Myelosuppression was
ubiquitous, as expected; however, it was prolonged
in only 13% of patients treated with CI and 5% of
those given CIA. Nonhematologic toxicities, in particular hand-foot syndrome, did occur frequently,
although it was generally reversible. Other drugrelated side effects included skin rash (mainly in the
CIA subgroup) and facial ﬂushing. In general, toxicity
was no different compared with that recorded in previous studies based on combination of clofarabine
with Ara-C, and it is worthy of note that 30% of
patients resulted as eligible for allogeneic SCT. In
this setting, it would be of interest to have more information on the toxicity of allogeneic SCT in this

Editorial/Musto and Ferrara

group, especially at the hepatic level, given that clofarabine was associated in both arms with signiﬁcant
liver toxicity.
Data from this trial clearly account for the activity of clofarabine in high-risk AML. Obviously, no
deﬁnite conclusions can be drawn regarding the different response rates observed by using the 2
schemes, as the aim of the study was not to make a
comparison. However, the 48% response rate
reported for the CIA combination is considerable as
compared with results achieved with single-agent
clofarabine (30%-35% CR2), and, as the authors
report, the combination is currently under investigation in randomized studies versus clofarabine + AraC in relapsed or refractory acute leukemia.
The study has 2 main points of interest: ﬁrst,
patients were stratiﬁed according to CR1 duration
and previous exposure to Ara-C; second, 2 different
combinations of clofarabine with Ara-C and/or idarubicin were explored. On the contrary, the possibility
of exploring the CI combination in patients never
exposed to Ara-C seems to us of more limited clinical interest, because in the daily practice virtually all
AML patients judged as eligible for conventional
chemotherapy are given Ara-C. Nonetheless, data
can be useful for the minority of patients who are
initially recruited into experimental therapies based
on new drugs such as hypomethylating agents or
other biological response modiﬁers that are in turn
able to induce CR. In the study by Faderl and coworkers, pretreatment with these agents was allowed, as
well as with monoclonal antibodies such as GO.
However, the percentage of patients receiving these
agents was not reported, nor was the percentage of
patients older than 70 years indicated; in theory,
these 2 factors could have affected the different
response rate observed in the 2 arms.
Although clofarabine acts as a myelosuppressive
agent, its toxicity proﬁle makes the drug potentially
useful for patients excluded from intensive chemotherapy at diagnosis who have relapsed after CR was
achieved with investigational therapy. A major hope is
that it can replace Ara-C in induction treatment in
newly diagnosed patients with the aim of increasing
CR rate and duration. With this in view, a study from
Medical Research Council is now comparing clofarabine versus Ara-C 6 GO 6 anthracylines in the elderly ﬁt AML patient population. If results will be
more favorable with clofarabine, a new standard therapeutic approach could be deﬁned after more than 20
years. Additional trials are currently exploring the
potential utility of the drug in young-adult AML
patients in combination with anthracyclines and AraC. Data from unﬁt patients, including those with poor

1997

cytogenetics, are particularly exciting and need to be
conﬁrmed in larger studies in which the deﬁnition of
‘‘unﬁt’’ should be well established and reproducible
among the different studies. In this regard, different
comorbidity scores based on clinical and biological
characteristics at diagnosis have been proposed and
could be adopted. Experimental trials combining clofarabine with biologic response modiﬁers represent a
further ﬁeld of investigation, either in frail patients or
in older ﬁt patients with poor cytogenetics.
A recent analysis by Sekeres and coworkers has
clearly shown that in an AML elderly patient population, a delay of a few days to acquire karyotypic information before starting induction chemotherapy
had no impact on CR achievement and survival.9
Therefore, in the near future it would be desirable to
stratify patients not only by comorbidity, performance status, or other clinical features, but also by
well-deﬁned cytogenetic and molecular ﬁndings. In
high-risk MDS, phase 2 studies with clofarabine as a
single agent have provided interesting results6; therefore, in this setting, either in newly diagnosed
patients or in those progressing after hypomethylating agents, the only drugs currently registered for
high-risk MDS, further exploration with clofarabine
singly or in combination is warranted.
Finally, in contrast to other purine analogues,
clofarabine demonstrates enhanced oral bioavailability. Data on the efﬁcacy and tolerability of the oral
formulation are currently limited, but different studies are ongoing in hematologic malignancies and
solid tumors. The possibility of using oral clofarabine
as maintenance therapy to suppress the minimal residual disease could also be taken into account.
In conclusion, although relapse still represents the
most relevant obstacle to achieving a cure in AML, it
offers an opportunity to investigate new therapeutic
strategies, mainly in patients who are expected to gain
negligible advantage from conventional salvage chemotherapy. Elderly patients with unfavorable prognostic
features at presentation represent another ideal target
for new agents. The development of well-designed
randomized phase 2 trials, based on multiple outcomes, would allow several therapies to be evaluated,
providing new and exciting knowledge.

REFERENCES
1. Ferrara F. Unanswered questions in acute myeloid leukaemia. Lancet Oncol. 2004;5:443-450.
2. Ravandi F, Burnett AK, Agura ED, Kantarjian HM. Progress
in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer. 2007;
110:1900-1910.
3. Ferrara F, Palmieri S, Mele G. Prognostic factors and therapeutic options for relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia. Haematologica. 2004;89:998-1008.

1998

CANCER October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

4. Huisman C, Meijer E, Petersen EJ, Lokhorst HM, Verdonck
LF. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation after reduced
intensity conditioning in acute myelogenous leukemia
patients older than 40 years. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2008;14:181-186.
5. Tsimberidou AM, Giles FJ, Estey E, O’Brien S, Keating MJ,
Kantarjian HM. The role of gemtuzumab ozogamicin in
acute leukaemia therapy. Br J Haematol. 2006;132:398-409.
6. Kantarjian HM, Jeha S, Gandhi V, Wess M, Faderl S. Clofarabine: past, present, and future. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007;48:
1922-1930.

7. Burnett AK, Baccarani M, Johnson P, et al. A phase II study
(Biov-121) of clofarabine monotherapy ﬁrst line in patients
aged 65 years or older with acute myeloid leukemia for
whom standard intensive chemotherapy is not considered
suitable [abstract]. Blood. 2006;108:130a.
8. Faderl S, Ferrajoli A, Wierda W, et al. Clofarabine combinations as acute myeloid leukemia salvage therapy. Cancer.
2008;113:2090-2096.
9. Sekeres M, Elson, P, Wang X, et al. Time from diagnosis to
treatment initiation predicts survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) [abstract]. Blood. 2007;110:184a.

