Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Antibiotics for cancer therapy
Richard G. Pestell and Albert A. Rizvanov

Elegant studies by Lisanti, Sotgia and co-workers
demonstrate that when breast cancer cells are grown under
conditions that promote 3D-sphere formation, which
selects for cancer stem cells, that mitochondrial proteins
are dramatically induced. Importantly, these studies also
show that antibiotic agents that function as mammalian
inhibitors of mitochondrial biogenesis, are selectively
toxic to cancer stem cells, when grown as mammospheres
[1, 2]. The effects of antibiotics on mitochondrial
biogenesis can be explained by the ‘endosymbiotic
theory of mitochondrial evolution’, according to which
mitochondria directly evolved from bacteria. This is why
drugs that target prokaryotic protein synthesis interfere
with eukaryotic mitochondrial biogenesis.

This increase in mitochondrial membrane potential upon
oncogenic transformation was the basis of screening
for mitochondrio-toxic drugs that selectively inhibit
tumor growth [3]. Oncogenes and tumor suppressors
govern mitochondrial biogenesis as either cyclin D1
overexpression, or pRB deletion have similar affects
to inhibit mitochondrial biogenesis, via inactivation of
NRF1, and thereby MtTFA, to thereby enhance cytosolic
glycolysis [4, 5], as observed in the Warburg effect.
In the studies by Sotgia, Lisanti and co-workers,
the proteomic analysis conducted on mammary stem
cells, identified an increased abundance of mitochondrial
proteins in two distinct breast cancer cell lines. The notion
that such a change may confer increased sensitivity to
antibiotics was examined by treating 3D tumor-spheres
and indeed the number of colonies was reduced in 12
cell lines representing 8 different types of cancer, without
affecting normal fibroblasts or cells in monolayer.
Importantly this is in contrast to the effect of antibiotics,
which enhance the renewal of non-malignant stem cells
[6]. Further pre-clinical in vivo studies are warranted as
the local tissue microenvironment creates a metabolic
asymmetry and distinct cell types may have different
response to these agents. The bioequivalent dose required
to block cancer stem cells should be assessed carefully,
and the mechanism examined further, given that prior
studies suggest that antibiotics can also affect kinase
signaling pathways and the secretion of cytokines,
including IL-8 [7], which is known to promote cancer
stems cell expansion.

The role of mitochondrial metabolism in stem cells
and cancer is complex. Stem cells and cancer stem cells
have distinct characteristics and the techniques used to
analyze these types of cells have often given different
results. For example, there is an apparent disparity
between transplantation and lineage tracing experiments
analyzing mammary gland stem cells.
The metabolism of stem cells differs from normal
cells. Undifferentiated embryonic stem cells as well as
adult stem cells differ from fully differentiated cells.
Stem cells rely mostly on anaerobic metabolism, rather
than oxidative phosphorylation. In undifferentiated stems
cells, the number of mitochondria are reduced with
a low content of mtDNA and a reduced rate of oxygen
consumption, as well as a low level of intracellular
ATP and reactive oxygen species, consistent with a
quiescent state. However, intact mitochondrial function is
crucial for the maintenance of stem cells, as evidenced
by compromised hematopoietic stem cell function,
profound anemia and lymphopenia in mice expressing a
mutant form of mitochondrial DNA polymerase-γ that is
associated with increased mitochondrial DNA mutations.

The evidence that antibiotics may reduce the
viability and clonal expansion of cancer stem cells is of
broad importance, as cancer stem cells are increasingly
accepted as a distinct cell type that gives rise to therapy
resistance, tumor recurrence and distant metastasis.
Richard G. Pestell: Department of Cancer Biology
and Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA and Kazan Federal
University, Republic of Tatarstan, Russian Federation

In contrast with the reduction in mitochondrial mass
in normal stem cells, Lisanti and colleagues demonstrated
an increase in mitochondrial protein abundance in breast
cancer stem cells, defined by growth as mammospheres.
In studies conducted in the early 1980s, tumor carcinoma
cells, induced by chemical carcinogens or v-fos correlated
with an increase in mitochondrial membrane potential.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Correspondence: Richard G. Pestell, email Richard.Pestell@
jefferson.edu
Received: February 16, 2015
Published: February 17, 2015

2587

Oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	

Lamb R, et al. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11029-37.

2.	

Lamb R, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; PMID 25625193.

3.	

Fantin VR, et al. Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:29-42.

4.	 Wang C, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:1156772.
5.	

Sankaran VG, et al. Genes Dev. 2008; 22(4) p 463

6.	

Chang M-Y, et al. Stem Cell Reports. 2014; 3:353-64.

7.	

Kanoh S, et al. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2010; 23:590-615.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2588

Oncotarget

