Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A versatile ex vivo technique for assaying tumor angiogenesis
and microglia in the brain
Ali Ghoochani1, Eduard Yakubov1, Tina Sehm1, Zheng Fan1, Stefan Hock1,
Michael Buchfelder1, Ilker Y. Eyüpoglu1,*, Nicolai Savaskan1,*
1

aboratory for Translational Neurooncology, Department of Neurosurgery, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich
L
Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Nicolai Savaskan, e-mail: savaskan@gmx.net
Keywords: glioblastoma, angiogenesis, neuronal cell death, slice culture, ex vivo
Received: August 23, 2015 	Accepted: November 20, 2015 	Published: December 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Primary brain tumors are hallmarked for their destructive activity on the
microenvironment and vasculature. However, solely few experimental techniques
exist to access the tumor microenvironment under anatomical intact conditions
with remaining cellular and extracellular composition. Here, we detail an ex vivo
vascular glioma impact method (VOGIM) to investigate the influence of gliomas and
chemotherapeutics on the tumor microenvironment and angiogenesis under conditions
that closely resemble the in vivo situation. We generated organotypic brain slice cultures
from rats and transgenic mice and implanted glioma cells expressing fluorescent reporter
proteins. In the VOGIM, tumor-induced vessels presented the whole range of vascular
pathologies and tumor zones as found in human primary brain tumor specimens. In
contrast, non-transformed cells such as primary astrocytes do not alter the vessel
architecture. Vascular characteristics with vessel branching, junctions and vessel length
are quantitatively assessable as well as the peritumoral zone. In particular, the VOGIM
resembles the brain tumor microenvironment with alterations of neurons, microglia and
cell survival. Hence, this method allows live cell monitoring of virtually any fluorescencereporter expressing cell. We further analyzed the vasculature and microglia under the
influence of tumor cells and chemotherapeutics such as Temozolamide (Temodal/
Temcad®). Noteworthy, temozolomide normalized vasculare junctions and branches
as well as microglial distribution in tumor-implanted brains. Moreover, VOGIM can
be facilitated for implementing the 3Rs in experimentations. In summary, the VOGIM
represents a versatile and robust technique which allows the assessment of the brain
tumor microenvironment with parameters such as angiogenesis, neuronal cell death
and microglial activity at the morphological and quantitative level.

to study angiogenesis in an organotypic environment
with remaining cellular complexity, organotypic
microenvironment [11, 12] and intact neurovascular units
[13–19]. There are intrinsic advantages in evaluating
the angiogenic process and the vascular morphology in
organotypic 3D culture compared to 2D cell cultures.
Cell culture assays such as the tube formation, retina,
aortic ring and endothelial spheroid assays which use
dissociated endothelial cells (mainly human umbilical
vein endothelial cells [HUVEC], brain endothelial cells or
aortic endothelial cells) or tissue pieces (retina or arterial
tissues) are to a certain extent redundant or reflect ectopic

INTRODUCTION
Brain vasculature and the angiogenic process play
both key roles during development and function of the
brain [1] [2]. Apart from physiological processes, aberrant
vasculature is involved in certain cerebral pathologies
such as stroke, inflammation, multiple sclerosis [3],
epilepsy [4], Alzheimer’s disease [5] and brain tumors [6,
7]. Angiogenesis is mainly studied in in vivo-experiments
[8–10]. In vitro bioassays are characterized by their
reduced or deprived environmental impact and their
versatile assessability [2]. Only a few ex vivo assays exist
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1838

Oncotarget

angiogenesis independent of the particular conditions
present in the brain microenvironment [20, 21]. Such cell
culture-based models lost their tissue integrity and are
deprived from their physiologic micromilieu, connectivitydependent signals and their organotypic environment
which are important determinants in in vivo processes.
Here, we describe the establishment of the Vascular
Organotypic Glioma Impact Model (VOGIM) presenting
a robust and reliable tool to investigate physiological
and pathological angiogenesis. In principle, any brain
tissue from wild type or transgenic mice or rodents can
be facilitated for the organotypic brain slice assay. We
provide evidence that the ex vivo cerebral vasculature
and the intact cell structure resemble closely the in vivo
environment. Various genetic backgrounds can be used for
donor tissues including transgenic animals with respective
controls. Genetically identical slices can be produced and
brought into the culture. Furthermore, slice cultures can
be prepared virtually from any region of the brain [22]
or even from peripheral organs like liver, kidneys and
many others [23]. Moreover, monitoring of defined cells
in brain slices can be achieved by acquiring tissue from
transgenic animals expressing fluorescent reporter genes
under the control of cell-type specific promoters such as
CX3CR1 (for microglia), GFAP (for astrocyte-specificity)
or tie1 (for endothelial cells) and by ectopic gene
expression through ectopic transfection or viral infection
[24]. Furthermore, the impact of tumors on neurons and
bystanders is assessable in the VOGIM [11, 25]. Thus, we
provide here a reliable and versatile method to investigate
tumor angiogenesis and the tumor microenvironment in
the VOGIM ex vivo culture system.

sections with intact tissue integrity which showed solely
basal cell death were processed further. A critical part of
the VOGIM procedure is the tumor implantation. After
one day in culture, we started to implant tumor cells into
brain sections. For the implantation process we used
a micro-syringe which prevents brain tissue damage
compared to other application methods (Figure 1B).
Approximately 100,000 tumor cells in a volume of
100 nl were implanted into the brain tissue under sterile
conditions (Figure 1B, lower column). After tumor
implantation, documentation of the developing tumor
bulk was performed every second day. One day after the
tumor implantation fluorescence microscopy generally
shows an undefined, cloud-like tumor. However, several
days after implantation the tumor bulk becomes more
defined and a clear border is detectable (Figure 1B, lower
column).
We next tested the general cell viability and survival
in brain slices during the VOGIM process after two and
eight days in culture. The propidium iodide (PI) staining
were utilized as a cell death marker and revealed a low
background staining which slightly increased with culture
time (Figure 2A). Thus, these results demonstrate that
brain tissue is viable and histological intact with the given
culture period.
To assess and display tumor growth and tumorinduced cell death in the VOGIM process, we implanted
constitutively GFP expressing tumor cells into slices
one day after culture (Figure 1B). Tumors size and cell
death increased over time and reached highest levels at
day 8 in culture. (Figure 2B). PI intensity measurement
showed higher intensity levels in brain slices implanted
with tumor cells on day 8 in comparison to day 4
(Figure 2B). The PI intensity signal increased three fold
on day 8 compared to the levels at day 4 (Figure 2C). This
is well in line with previous reports on tumor-induced
neurodegeneration in vivo [25]. Moreover, tumor size
measurements displayed about 150 μm increase in growth
on day 8 in comparison to tumor size at day 4 (Figure
2D). In conclusion, the results propose that the VOGIM
technique display differences in both tumor cells growth
and cell death in the brain slices.

RESULTS
The VOGIM procedure and tumor-induced
brain damage
For investigations of the brain tumor angiogenesis
we first facilitated organotypic brain slice cultures. This
ex vivo assay has been previously tested in proof-ofprinciple assays showing its suitability for remaining
an organotypic environment with preserved cellular and
extracellular complexity and neurovascular units [14, 15].
Here, we analyzed the Vascular Organotypic
Glioma Impact Model (VOGIM) to study different
parameters such as tumor growth, tumor cell death,
physiological
vasculature
and
tumor-induced
angiogenesis. The tissue for the organotypic brain slice
assay was derived from 4 days old wild type or transgenic
rodents and mice. Brains were cut into 350 μm thick
organotypic slices and transferred onto transmembrane
inserts for further culturing (Figure 1A). During a
resting and stabilization period of one day in culture
we analyzed the quality of each section and overall cell
survival was determined (Figure 1B). Only those brain
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The VOGIM resembles the vascular architecture
of the brain
To establish a reliable quantification technique
for the evaluation and measurement of vessel length,
branching and diameter, we compared two widely
used and established methods. First, we assessed the
grid-overlay technique to the VOGIM method. The
principle of the grid-overlay technique is based on a
virtual grid placed onto the image thereby allowing
to measure the number crossing vessels per area. As
a matter of fact, the number of vessels correlates with
the number of grid crossing points. The crossing points
1839

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Flowchart and procedure of the VOGIM protocol. A. Day 1: Isolation of brain tissue and brain dissection (‘slicing’).

Green box gives hand-on details of this experimental step. A.1. Transfer of trimmed brain tissue to fit onto the specimen disc. A.2-3.
Fixation of the trimmed brain on the specimen disc, afterwards it is placed into buffer chamber filled with cold preparation medium. A.4-5.
Sectioning horizontal brain slices in 350 μm thickness. A.6. Collection of brain slices with large blunted Pasteur pipette in petri dish filled
with cold preparation medium. A.7. Transfer of brain slices onto a 0.4 μm pore-size transwell membrane insert which is placed into a six
well plate filled with 1400 μl culture medium. B. Day 2: tumor implantation step, green and red boxes indicate details and give quality
control checkpoints of experimental steps. B.1. PI staining and intensity measurement in the brain slices before tumor implantation to
evaluate quality. B.2. Tumor implantation method is presented. Implantation of 100,000 cells per 0.1μl into the cortex area with a Hamilton
syringe (one μl capacity). B.3. Fluorescence microscopic images for the evaluation of invaded tumor cells into brain slice. Scale bar
represents 500 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1840

Oncotarget

can be counted in two ways: observer-dependent in a
manual manner or automatized with software-based
applications such as Photoshop or freely available NIH
Image J. Moreover, the overall number of vessels can be
calculated as well as any area of interest or tumor zones
(Supplementry  Figure  1A). To analyze vessel-density
in cortex or randomized areas, samples were blinded
for the counting procedure by coding all images of the
different experimental groups (Supplementry Figure 1A).
In addition, we considered a second evaluation method
based on the free-software NIH Image J (see material
and methods for details). The Image J application
mainly calculates identified vessel trees generated
from immune-positive signals (Supplementry Figure

1B). This approach gives a higher level of data quality
and controls for artefacts or certain spots which can be
easily identified and excluded for further quantification
procedure. The application offers a great number of
possibilities and parameters to measure and detect. We
applied the following parameters for vessel analysis:
total length, number of junctions and number of branches
(Supplementry Figure 1B). The quantity of vessel
diameter is a standard approach in vascular investigation.
Changes in vessel diameter can also be measured by
Image J or the ZEN software (Zeiss, Germany) manually.
The vessel diameter measurements were performed at
higher magnification over the entire length of single
blood vessels (Supplementry Figure 1C).

Figure 2: Visualization of tumor growth and cell death in the VOGIM protocol. A. Representative fluorescence images for

PI staining of brain slices to detect cell death after 8 days in culture. Scale bar represents 500 μm. B. Representative fluorescence images
monitoring tumor growth (green) and cell death (PI) at day 4 and day 8. Scale bar represents 500 μm. C. Quantification of cell death
(PI intensity quantification) at day 4 and 8 (n = 9). D. Quantification of tumor size measurements on day 4 and 8 (n = 9). Scale bar represents
500 μm. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test (*P < 0.05, mean is given ± s.e.m.).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1841

Oncotarget

Quantitative vessel assessment in different
brain areas

demonstrated that increased number of microglia is
present in peritumoral area with contact or close proximity
to vessels compared to controls (Figure 4C, 4D).
Interestingly, when monitoring microglial cells in tumorbearing brains we found increased numbers of microglia
in peritumoral areas area (Figure 4C).
Further we facilitated the VOGIM to assess tumorinduced vascularization in the peritumoral area (TZ  II)
(Figure 4C, 4E). Staining brain slices with laminin
illustrated a high density of vessels in peritumoral area
(Figure 4C, 4E).
We also quantified total length, vascular junctions
and branches in the peritumoral area. All three vascular
parameters were increased in the peritumoral area
(Figure 4E). Analysis of blood vessels diameter and
distribution showed significant differences between
peritumoral and control areas. In the peritumoral area we
found a mean diameter range between 4 to 6 μm whereas
in sham controls diameter range were between 2 to 4 μm
(Figure 4F).
Analysis of tumor angiogenesis revealed different
types of vessel pathologies. Tumor vessels appeared
abnormal with tortuous, saccular and disorganized
structures and were often found in proximity of a
network of micro-vessels (Figure 4G). Noteworthy, these
pathological tumor-induced vessels found in the VOGIM
resembled the spectrum of pathological vessels also found
in in vivo studies [27].
To validate the VOGIM assay we continued with
a comparison of the impact of malignant cells and nontransformed cells in the brain environment. For this
we implanted gliomas into brain slices and compared
the results with that of implanted primary astrocytes
(Figure 5). In the case of glioma cells tumor volume and
peritumoral cell death increased over time and reached
highest levels at day 8 in culture (Figure 5A). In contrast,
cell death analysis of astrocytes-implanted brain slices
revealed almost no alteration (Figure 5A). Furthermore,
tumor size measurements displayed a significant increase
in the case of gliomas (Figure 5B). In contrast, implanted
astrocytes showed almost no bulk growth over time
(Figure 5B).
Hence, we investigated the impact of implanted
astrocytes in brains in comparison to gliomas
(Figure  5C,  5D). Noteworthy, primary astrocytes did
neither affect vessel length, junctions nor branches which
remained at the level of control brain slices (Figure 5C,
5D). Thus, despite the implantation procedure and
volume load non-transformed cells did neither alter
cell damage nor the vasculature in the VOGIM
(Figure 5C, 5D).
We continued to monitor microglial cells in the
VOGIM assay. Therefore, we implanted red fluorescent
protein-expressing glioma cells into brain slices from
CX3CR1-GFP transgenic mice to track the movement
and interaction of microglia with tumor cells during

In the next step we investigated blood vessel
parameters in different brain areas of the VOGIM
(Figure 3A). For this we immunostained brain slices for
laminin. First we evaluated blood vessel diameters in the
cortex, hippocampus and in white matter. Interestingly,
these analyses revealed region-specific blood vessel
diameter distributions (Figure 3A). In the hippocampus,
blood vessels diameter ranged between 5 to 7 μm while
vessel diameters in the cortex had a range of 2 to 4 μm as
well as in the white matter (Figure 3B). Analysis of total
blood vessels length displayed significantly higher in the
hippocampal area compared to cortex and white matter
(Figure 3C). Moreover, the analysis showed significant
higher number of junctions in the hippocampus while
number of branches displayed slight differences between
hippocampus and other areas of the brain slice (Figure 3C).
Altogether, our results show that the VOGIM is sensitive
enough to display differences of vascular parameters in the
various areas of the brain slice as has been found in vivo
(Heinzer et al., 2008).

Quantitative assessment of vessels and microglia
in peritumoral zones
Hence, we investigated the tumor microenvironment
in glioma-infiltrated brain tissue. For this we implanted red
fluorescent protein-expressing tumor cells in brain slices
from CX3CR1-GFP mice (Figure 4A). CX3CR1-GFP mice
express GFP under the macrophage/microglia-specific
promoter CX3CR1 thus enabling time lapse microglia
movement tracking in vivo as well as visualization of
perivascular microglia and their relation to newly formed
vessels. After fixing and immunostaining in free-floating,
VOGIMs were mounted onto microscopic slides. Brain
tumors form a specific tumor microenvironment which
consists of different heterogeneous areas with at least
three different tumor zones termed TZ I-III [26]. Within
this concept TZ I represents the tumor bulk whereas TZ
II displays the peritumoral or perifocal area characterized
by microglial activation and neuronal cell damage
surrounding the tumor bulk. TZ III is revealed as the
area following the perifocal area containing only few
single tumor cells regarded as cancer stem cells or cancer
initiating cells (Figure 4B, Supplementry Figure 2).
Therefore, we examined blood vessels in the peritumoral
area (TZ II) in comparison to similar areas which were
sham treated (i.e. implanted with same volume of cell free
medium) (Figure 4A). Interestingly, when we analyzed the
neuronal distribution we found a clear pattern of tumor
zones with a rim of cell damage surrounding the tumor
bulk (Figure 4B, Supplementry Figure 2).
Next, we quantified microglia in peritumoral
area versus sham treated controls. These experiments
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1842

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Visualization and quantification of the vasculature in different brain slice areas. A. Cortex, hippocampus and
white matter were candidate to monitor vascularization in different bran slice areas. Laminin antibody was utilized to stain vessels. Scale
bar represents 20 μm. B. Distribution of vessels diameter (μm) in cortex, hippocampus and white matter (n = 6). C. Quantification of
different vascular parameters total vessels length, number of junctions and branches with Image J Angiogenesis tools plugin. Images with
314 μm x 314 μm size were used for quantification. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test (*P < 0.05, error bars represent
mean ± s.e.m.).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1843

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Visualization and quantification of tumor angiogenesis and microglia. A. CX3CR1-GFP mouse brain slices were

utilized to implant RFP expressing murine glioma cells (GL261). For control samples, we implanted only medium at the same position
and in the same manner as tumor was implanted. White squares display peritumoral positions or peri-injection area in sham operated slices
which were quantified. Scale bar represents 500 μm. B. Representative image displaying cell death and tumor zones in the VOGIM. Cell
nuclei staining is shown in blue (stained with Hoechst 33258), tumor (green) and neurons (red) are given. Arrow indicates the typical
breaking-up of neuronal cell structures in the peritumoral zone (TZ II). The tumor bulk is also termed as Tumor Zone I (TZ I). Scale bar
represents 100 μm. C. Vascularization in peritumoral area (TZ II). Vessels are stained for Laminin (blue). GFP positive (CX3CR1-GFP
mice) cells represent perivascular microglia. Scale bar represents 20 μm. D. Number of perivascular microglial cells in TZ II in comparison
to sham. Images with 288 μm x 288 μm size were used for quantification. E. Quantification of vessel parameters: total length, number of
junctions and branches in peritumoral area (TZ II) versus sham operated brain slices. Images with 570 μm x 570 μm size were used for
quantification (n = 6). F. Distribution of vessels diameter (μm) in TZ II and sham (n = 6). G. Images represent tan assembly of pathological
tumor vessels found in the VOGIM. Scale bars is given as 40 μm. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test (*P < 0.05, error
bars represent mean ± s.e.m.).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1844

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Vascular and cellular response after non-transformed cell implantation in VOGIM. A. PI staining (red) and

GFP positive area to monitor cell death and tumor growth respectively in brain slices (top) in comparison to astrocytes cell implantation
(bottom). Given are cell growth at day 4 and 8. Arrows indicate tumor bulk. Scale bar represents 500 μm. B. Quantification of bulk cell
growth area of gliomas (F98) and primary astrocytes in brain slices. C. Vascularization in peritumoral area (TZ II). Vessels are stained for
Laminin (blue). Glioma cells (F98, left) or astrocytes (right) are displayed in green and cell growth is indicated by the white dotted line.
Arrows indicate intra-tumoral vessels in glioma-implanted brains. Scale bar represents 50 μm. D. Quantification of vessel length, junctions
and branches in glioma implanted slices (green) and astrocytes-implanted brain slices (green). Images with 288 μm x 288 μm size were used
for quantification. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test (*P < 0.05, error bars represent mean ± s.e.m, n = 6).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1845

Oncotarget

Drug sensitivity and adverse reaction analysis in
the VOGIM assay

the culture phase (Figure 6). We monitored microglia
cells in different tumor zones from TZ I to TZ III
(Figure 6A). Tracking microglia displayed the highest
number of microglia in the peritumoral area (TZ II)
(Figure 6A, middle picture) while conspicuous alteration
in number of microglia was detected in TZ I (Figure 6A,
left picture). In comparison to TZ II, less microglia cells
accumulated in TZ I (Figure 6B). Likewise, the number
of microglia cells in TZ III was lower compared to TZ
II (Figure 6B). In fact, microglial density in TZ III
revealed comparable numbers to that found control brain
slices (without tumor implantation) (data not shown).
Furthermore, we monitored microglia cells engulfing
glioma cells in peritumoral area (Figure 6C). These data
indicate that the VOGIM technique is also suitable to
study tumor-immune interactions with resident immunecompetent cells ex vivo.

Various protocols have been developed to evaluate
the applicability of drugs or small molecule inhibitors on
glioma cells and their microenvironment. In particular,
vascularization and the tumor-immune interaction have
become center of interest in recent years. Therefore, we went
on to test whether the VOGIM is capable to display changes
in tumor cell viability and microenvironmental alterations
under specific drug treatment. One of the anti-cancer drugs
which have been widely used and established as standard
for the treatment of glioblastoma is Temozolomide (TMZ,
Temodal/Temcad®). TMZ is a chemotherapeutical drug
belonging to the alkylating agents transferring a methyl
group to purine bases of DNA (O6-guanine; N7-guanine
and N3-adenine). In contrast to many other chemotherapy

Figure 6: Microglia distribution and interaction in different tumor zones. A. Distribution of microglial cells (green) located

in tumor zone I, II and III. RFP stable expressing GL261 (red) were implanted into CX3CR1-GFP positive brain slices. TZ I represents
the tumor bulk, TZ II indicates the peritumoral zone and TZ III is the area distant to TZ I. Scale bar represents 100 μm (for left), 20 μm
for middle and right images. B. Quantification of the number of microglial cells in different tumor zones. Images with 710 μm x 710 μm
size were utilized for quantification. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test (*P < 0.05, error bars represent mean ± s.e.m,
n = 4). C. Representative image displaying interaction of microglia with glioma cells. Scale bar represents 20 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1846

Oncotarget

drugs, TMZ can reach the brain via a systemic route and
is nowadays standard in glioblastoma therapy. Therefore,
we used this drug and examined the effects on peritumoral
vascularization. One day after tumor implantation, we started
with TMZ treatment in the VOGIM with 100 μM TMZ
every second day. The experiment was determined on day
8 and slices were further processed for analysis. Treatment
of tumor-implanted brain slices with TMZ led to reduced
cell death compared to untreated controls (Figure 7A, 7B).
Moreover, tumor size measurements revealed reduced
tumor growth under TMZ treatment (Figure 7C). We further
examined peritumoral vascularization and microglial
distribution in TZ II under TMZ treatment (Figure 7D).
Interestingly, the number of microglial cells decreased
in TZ II after TMZ application (Figure 7E). Furthermore,
determination of vessel diameters of peritumoral vessels
showed that TMZ treatment slightly led to smaller vessels
(Figure 7F). Moreover, TMZ treatment reduced significantly
overall vascularization parameters towards normalization
(Figure 7G).
We went on and investigated the TMZ effects on
native brain tissue. We found that TMZ did not increase
neuronal damage compared to untreated controls
(Figure 8A, 8B). We continued to monitor also the effects
of TMZ on microglial cells and the vasculature. Although
TMZ was highly efficient on alleviating glioma-induced
alteration, TMZ did neither affect microglial distribution,
morphology nor vasculature in normal brain tissue
(Figure 8C–8E).
Taken together, our data propose the VOGIM
technique is appropriate to investigate the impact of
chemotherapeutics on tumor growth, cell survival,
angiogenesis and microglial cells.

architecture similar to that seen in the living. Tumor
growth, optical and biochemical assessment of the
microenvironment can be conducted by implanting
reporter gene expressing glioma cells (i.e. fluorescent
protein expression such as GFP, RFP, CFP and others).
Tumor cells adhere and invade into the brain slice,
form a tumor bulk and attract and induce vessels by
secreting angiogenic factors. Due to the organotypic and
anatomical preservation tumor zone II (TZ II according
to the brain tumor zone model [26]) is highly affected by
tumor-induced angiogenesis showing an aberrant vessel
architecture and a high-dense micro-vascular network
of newly formed vessels [33–35]. Induced angiogenesis
can be analyzed by quantitative means such as vessel
density in defined areas, vessel diameters, number of
branches ranging from a parent vessel and vessel length.
Moreover, monitoring of defined cells in brain slices can
be achieved by acquiring transgenic animals expressing
live-cell reporter genes in a cell-type specific manner
such as CX3CR1 (for microglia), GFAP (for astrocytespecificity) or tie1 (for endothelial cells) and by ectopic
gene expression through ectopic transfection or viral
infection [24]. Furthermore, the impact of tumors on
neurons and bystanders is assessable in the VOGIM
[11, 25, 36].
In physiological processes such as during
development or reorganizational processes angiogenesis
is active in a transient mode as a self-limiting process
[37, 38]. Conversely, in pathologies such as stroke,
inflammation, epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease and
glioblastomas vessels are dynamic and as a result the
vascular architecture is altered and shows aberrant
structures and pathological vessels are formed [39–41].
In particular, primary brain tumors are highly angiogenic
active with constant secretion of growth-promoting and
pro-angiogenic factors. Interestingly, pathological tumorinduced vessels found in the VOGIM resembled those
pathological vessels found in vivo [27]. These similarities
with human conditions are noteworthy since perfusion,
intravasal pressure dynamics and functional blood
flow are absent in the VOGIM. There are advantages
in evaluating the angiogenic process and the vascular
morphology in organotypic 3D-cultures compared to
2D cell culture. Assays like the tube formation assay
[20, 21] which facilitates endothelial cells (HUVECs
or brain endothelial cells) are to a certain extent
redundant since these cell models are firstly dissociated
from their natural environment and secondly deprived
from connectivity-dependent signals and their overall
organotypic environment. In contrast, the VOGIM allows
the analysis of neurons, microglial cells and the tumormicroenvironment in an in vivo-like, complex system with
preserved tissue architecture, connectivity and signals
similar to that seen in vivo.
Tumor growth and micro-environmental studies
can be performed by implanting reporter gene expressing

DISCUSSION
Here, we describe the establishment of the
Vascular Organotypic Glioma Impact Model (VOGIM)
as a robust and reliable tool to investigate physiological
and pathological angiogenesis. In principle, any brain
tissue from wild type or transgenic mice or rodents can
be facilitated for the organotypic brain slice assay. We
provide evidence that the ex vivo cerebral vasculature
and the intact cell structure resemble closely the in vivo
environment. The VOGIM is based on the trans-well
interface method [28–32]. The VOGIM requires solely
standard equipment and is a straight and easy-to-perform
method. Different genetic strains and transgenes can be
used for donor tissues with respective littermate controls.
For controls genetically identical slices with different
treatment regiments can be compared. Also, the VOGIM
can be prepared virtually from any region of the brain
[22] or even from peripheral organs like liver, kidneys
and many others [23]. The VOGIM allows analysis of
neurons, glial cells and the tumor-microenvironment in
an in vivo-like, complex system with preserved tissue
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1847

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Analysis the drug sensitivity of VOGIM method. A. PI staining (red) and GFP positive area (green) monitors cell death

and tumor growth respectively in brain slices treated with temozolamide (TMZ, 100 μM). Untreated brain slices served as control samples
and analysis was performed on day 4 and 8. Scale bar displays 500 μm. B. Quantification of cell death after temozolamide (TMZ) treatment
in comparison to untreated control samples on day 4 and 8. C. Quantification of tumor growth after temozolamide (TMZ) treatment in
comparison to untreated controls at day 8. D. Peritumoral (TZ II) vascularization of TMZ treated brain slices (CX3CR1-GFP positive)
and untreated controls. Laminin staining (blue) was utilized for vessel visualization. Microglial cells are displayed in green. Scale bar in
top images represents 200 μm, scale bar in bottom images shows 20 μm. E. Quantification of the numbers of perivascular microglial cells
in peritumoral area (TZ II) of temozolomide (TMZ) treated and untreated tumor-implanted brain slices. Images with 288 μm x 288 μm
size were used for quantification. F. Distribution of vessel diameters (μm) in peritumoral areas after temozolomide (TMZ) treatment and
in untreated controls. G. Quantification of vessel length, junctions and branches in glioma implanted untreated slices and temozolomide
treated brain slices. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test (*P < 0.05, error bars represent mean ± s.e.m, n = 6).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1848

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Vascular and cellular response after temozolomide treatment in VOGIM. A. Cell death monitoring (PI staining,

white signal) in native slices under untreated control conditions (top) and after temozolomide (TMZ, 100 μM) treatment (bottom). Given is
cell death at day 4 and day 8. Scale bar represents 500 μm. B. Quantification of cell death in brain slices after temozolomide (TMZ, 100 μM)
treatment. Untreated controls are displayed in blue, TMZ treated group is given in red. C. Vascularization and microglial distribution
of brain areas after temozolomide (TMZ) treatment. Vessels are stained for Laminin (blue) and microglial cells are displayed in green.
Scale bar represents 20 μm. D. Quantification of the numbers of perivascular microglial cells after temozolomide (TMZ) treatment and in
untreated (control) brain slices. E. Quantification of vessel length, junctions and branches in brain slices treated with temozolomide (TMZ)
or untreated (control). Images with 288 μm x 288 μm size were used for quantification. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s
t-test (*P < 0.05, error bars represent mean ± s.e.m, n = 6).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1849

Oncotarget

malignant glioma cells (i.e. various fluorescent protein
expressions such as GFP, RFP, YFP, CFP and others).
Tumor cells adhere and invade into the brain slice, form
a tumor bulk and attract vessels by secreting angiogenic
factors.
Another advantage of this ex vivo model is that
the VOGIM enables pharmacological testing of virtually
any drug compound in real time mode. These drugs
could target the tumor angiogenesis as well as the tumor
growth. The VOGIM allows the simultaneous analysis of
drug impact on vessels and tumor microenvironment [25,
42–44]. In particular questions of unintended side effects
and bystander effects can be investigated simultaneously
by this method [43]. This extents the investigations of
novel drugs beyond expected target analysis.
Angiogenesis can be assessed quantitatively in
defined areas in various tumor zones and peritumoral
regions. Here, we compared two established and widely
used methods for the analysis of the vasculature. Both
the grid-overlay method as well as software-based
applications assessed tumor vessels in a quantitatively
reliable manner and reflected the angiogenic complexity
in different tumor zones. As revealed by the VOGIM the
tumor bulk and its secreted factors have an enormous
influence on the viability of brain tissue and neuronal
function [25, 36]. Secreted factors attract vessels and the
vessels grow around the tumor bulk in an accumulating
fashion. Despite the fact, that no bloodstream is flowing
and perfusion is absent in the cell culture, the vital brain
tissue and its angiogenic reactions and adaptations include
all required components in its organotypic organization.
Also, endothelial cells and pericytes remain viable (data
not shown) for the whole culture time in the VOGIM.
The VOGIM procedure, which we described here,
can be used to generate slice cultures from virtually
any part of the brain. It is crucial that the normal brain
morphology and connectivity is retained upon slicing.
Also, the VOGIM can be facilitated to monitor glioma
invasion and migration [45, 46]. The VOGIM in particular
strives to combine the versatility of tumor proliferation,
microenvironment and angiogenesis assays with
complexity of the organ-specific situation. Furthermore,
the VOGIM can well be considered as a new technique in
the angiogenesis field implementing the 3Rs for the sake
of reducing animal experiments. Altogether, we suggest
the ex vivo brain slice model, the VOGIM, as a reliable
alternative to many in vitro assays and in vivo trials.

Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Biochrom, Berlin,
Germany) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin
(Biochrom, Berlin, Germany) and 1% Glutamax (Gibco/
Invitrogen, California, USA). Cells were passaged at
approx. 80% confluence. For dissociation, glioma cells
were washed with PBS for 3 min and then treated with
trypsin 0.05% at 37°C for 3 min and collected by gentle
pipetting.

Vascular organotypic brain slice cultures
(VOGIM) and cell death monitoring
Four-day-old Wistar rats (Charles River, Boston,
MA, USA) or CX3CR1-GFP transgenic mice were
decapitated. Brains were cautiously removed and
maintained under ice-cold conditions. Frontal lobes
and cerebellum were dissected off. The remaining parts
of the brain were glued to specimen discs. A vibratome
(Leica VT 1000S, Bensheim, Germany) was used to cut
horizontally the brain into 350 μm thick slices. Thereafter,
brain slices were collected and trimmed. The midbrains
were cut off and discarded and the hippocampus slices
were transferred onto culture plate insert membrane
dishes (Greiner BioOne, Frickenhausen, Germany; pore
size 0.4 μm) and subsequently transferred into six-well
culture dishes (GreinerBioOne, Frickenhausen, Germany)
(Figure  1A). Brain slices were cultured at humidified
conditions (35°C, 5% CO2) with 1.4 ml culture medium per
well included MEM–HBSS (Gibco/Invitrogen, California,
USA) , 2:1, 25% normal horse serum (Biochrom, Berlin,
Germany), 2% L-glutamine (Gibco/Invitrogen, California,
USA) , 2.64 mg/ml glucose (Merk, Germany), 100 U/
ml penicillin (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin
Sigma-Aldrich), 10 μg/ml insulin–transferrin–sodium
selenite supplement (Invitrogen, California, USA) and
0.8 μg/ml vitamin C (Merk, Germany). On the first day
and before tumor implantation in culture, a cell death
staining was performed with propidium iodide (SigmaAldrich) (0.1 mg/ml) and the quality of the acquired
brain slices determined (Figure 1B). After PI-staining,
the slices were washed once with 1 M phosphate buffered
saline and a complete medium exchange was performed
thereafter. After cell death measurement, tumor cells,
astrocytes or buffer volume were implanted into the slices
(100,000 cells / 0.1 μl medium per slice) with a microsyringe (Figure 1B). Astrocytes were prelabelled with
DiI (Molecular Probes, USA) for at least 8 hours prior
implantation. Crucial for the tumor implantation procedure
is a sensible handling of the brain slices and the tumor
cells. The brain slice must not be damaged during the
tumor implantation. The procedure of cell death staining,
washing and complete medium exchange was performed
consecutively every other day over a course of 8 days.
A time-lapse cell death analysis can be performed after
the culture period.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Rodent glioma cell line F98 and mice glioma
cell line GL261 were obtained from ATCC/LGC-2397
(Germany). All cell lines were cultured under standard
humidified conditions (37°C, 5% CO2) with Dulbecco’s
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1850

Oncotarget

Immunofluorescence staining

skeletonized. Through further processing, characteristic
information of the vessel network is extracted and branching
points and meshes are identified. We obtained the following
parameters: total length, number of junctions and number of
branches. Locating branching points or nodes in the skeleton
is performed by locating pixels with more than 2 pixelneighbors. The meshes or the number of meshes correlates
with the number of branches and the interconnection of the
vessels. The total length is performed by splitting off all lines
between branching points or between branching points and
image border, then the length of each line are summed up.
Mainly, this software application is used in anti-angiogenic
drug trials in combination with human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs). We adapted the application and
its macros for analyzing the vessel network in the VOGIM.

After the slices were cultured for 8 days, the slices
are fixated with para-formaldehyde (Merk, Germany)
for 45 to 60 minutes, followed by permeabilization for
30 minutes with 0.5% Triton-X (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS.
Primary antibodies laminin (Sigma-Aldrich) were diluted
in a concentration of 1:1000 in 3% horse serum (HS)
or fetal calf serum (FCS) and 0,2% Triton X-100 as the
blocking solution and subsequently incubated for overnight
at 4°C. Alexa Fluor 405, 448 and 568 (Invitrogen/ Life
Technologies) were used as secondary antibodies with
1:1000 concentration. Slices were then washed twice in
PBS, stained with Hoechst (Invitrogen/ Life Technologies)
and again washed in PBS. Then, stained tissue slices were
flat-mounted with ImmuMount (Thermo Scientific).

Temozolomide treatment

Vascular quantification methods

One day after tumor implantation, temozolomide
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the culture medium at a
final concentration of 100 μM and was renewed every
second day with changing culture medium within 6 days.
Temozolomide was dissolved in dimethyl- sulfoxide
(DMSO) which we used the same amount of DMSO as
vehicle control.

The overlaying grid method was used to analyze
the density of the vessels. After culturing, fixation and
immunohistochemical vessel-staining, the peritumoral zone
and control zones in each brain slice are defined. Images
are acquired with a fluorescent or confocal microscope.
Since the peritumoral zone is a narrow zone directly
around the tumor bulk, a higher magnification of x40 or
higher is recommended. The acquired images are analyzed
with the grid method. With Image J or Adobe Photoshop
a stereological grid consisting of 12 squares with the side
lengths of 80 μm is superimposed onto the experiment
images of the brain slices stained for laminin. The density
of blood vessels in the tissue is calculated by counting the
intersections of blood vessels and virtual grid. The number
of intersections of vessels crossing the outlines of a defined
grid was counted as well as the number of intersections of
vessels and inner grid lines. If two different vessels seem
to cross the grid in one intersection point, the intersections
of the both vessels are counted. The total number of vessels
crossing the grid correlates with the level of vessel density
and angiogenesis. All intersections of vessels and grid area
are counted.
The Angiogenesis Analyzer is an Image J based
tool to quantify experimental images and allows analysis of cellular networks (http://image.bio.methods.free.
fr/ImageJ/?Angiogenesis-Analyzer-for-ImageJ.
html,
documents downloadable at: http://image.bio.methods.
free.fr/ImageJ/?Angiogenesis-Analyzer-for-ImageJ. html).
After fixation and vessel staining, control zones and
peritumoral zone are defined. Images are acquired with the
help of a fluorescent or confocal microscope. As far as the
magnification is concerned, the analysis should be performed
at higher magnification, since the peritumoral zone is a very
narrow and close to the tumor bulk area. Images acquired
in the closest distance at these magnifications, exactly show
the vessels of the peritumoral zone. After collecting, the
experimental images are handled with the Angiogenesis
Analyzer. Using binary thinning procedures, the image is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Quantitative data from experiments were obtained
as stated in the figure legends. Analysis was performed
using unpaired Student’s t test (MS Excel). Data from
all experiments were obtained from at least three
independent experiments. The level of significance was
set at * indicates p < 0.05. Error bars represent ± s.e.m. if
not otherwise stated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all members of the Translational
Neurooncology lab for continuous evaluation for
and innovations of the VOGIM procedure. We thank
all department members for continuous financial
and administrative support. M. Beckmann and
F.  Flaschingbauer (Erlangen) are kindly acknowledged
for proving fresh umbilical cords. This study was in
part supported by the Förderverein Tumor Center of
the University Erlangen-Nürnberg and the German
Research Council DFG (DFG Ey94/2-1). A.G. performed
the present work in fulfillment of the requirements for
obtaining the degree Dr. rer. biol. hum. at the FriedrichAlexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial conflict
of interests.
1851

Oncotarget

Author contributions

BRAF in cancer cells inhibits angiogenesis and abrogates
hypoxia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012. 109: E353-9.

N.E.S. and I.Y.E. conceived and designed the study.
A.G. performed all experiments with help from E.Y:, Z.F.,
S.H. and T.S. A.G. analyzed the data and A.G., E.Y., M.B.,
I.Y.E. and N.E.S. interpreted and discussed the data with
all authors. N.E.S. wrote the manuscript in conjunction
with A.G. All authors contributed to the preparation of the
final manuscript.

10.	 Maolood N, Meister B. Protein components of the bloodbrain barrier (BBB) in the brainstem area postrema-nucleus
tractus solitarius region. J Chem Neuroanat. 2009. 37: 182-95.
11.	 Savaskan NE, Seufert S, Hauke J, Tränkle C, Eyüpoglu
IY, Hahnen E. Dissection of mitogenic and neurodegenerative actions of cystine and glutamate in malignant gliomas.
Oncogene. 2011. 30: 43-53.
12.	 Moser KV, Schmidt-Kastner R, Hinterhuber H, Humpel
C. Brain capillaries and cholinergic neurons persist in
organotypic brain slices in the absence of blood flow. Eur J
Neurosci. 2003. 18: 85-94.

Abbreviations
3Rs, Three Rs (Replacement, Reduction, Refinement);
GFP, green fluorescen protein; HUVEC, human umbilical
vein endothelial cells; MG, microglia; PI, propidium iodide;
TMZ, temozolamide (trade names are Temcad/Temodal);
TZ, tumor zone; VOGiM, Vascular organotypic glioma
impact and invasion model.

13.	 Kremer C, Breier G, Risau W, Platt KH. Up-regulation of
flk-1/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 by its
ligand in a cerebral slice culture system. Cancer Res. 1997.
57: 3852-9.
14.	 Bendfeldt K, Radojevic V, Kapfhammer J, Nitsch C. Basic
fibroblast growth factor modulates density of blood vessels
and preserves tight junctions in organotypic cortical cultures of mice: a new in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier. J Neurosci. 2007. 27: 3260-7.

REFERENCES
1.	 Carmeliet P, Tessier-Lavigne M. Common mechanisms of
nerve and blood vessel wiring. Nature. 2005. 436: 193-200.
2.	 Hick S, Fan Z, Buchfelder M, Eyupoglu IY, Savaskan
N. Brain Tumor-Induced Angiogenesis: Approaches and
Bioassays. Evolution of the Molecular Biology of Brain
Tumors and the Therapeutic Implications. 2013. Dr Terry
Lichtor (Ed), ISBN: 978-953-51-0989-1, InTech, doi:
105772/53182. Available from: http://wwwintechopencom/books/evolution-of-the-molecular-biology-of-braintumors-and-the-therapeutic-implications/brain-tumorinduced-angiogenesis-approaches-and-bioassays.

15.	 Morin-Brureau M, Lebrun A, Rousset MC, Fagni L,
Bockaert J, de Bock F, Lerner-Natoli M. Epileptiform
activity induces vascular remodeling and zonula occludens
1 downregulation in organotypic hippocampal cultures:
role of VEGF signaling pathways. J Neurosci. 2011. 31:
10677-88.
16.	 Mani N, Khaibullina A, Krum JM, Rosenstein JM.
Activation of receptor-mediated angiogenesis and signaling pathways after VEGF administration in fetal rat CNS
explants. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2003. 23: 1420-9.

3.	 Bennett J, Basivireddy J, Kollar A, Biron KE, Reickmann
P, Jefferies WA, McQuaid S. Blood-brain barrier disruption
and enhanced vascular permeability in the multiple sclerosis
model EAE. J Neuroimmunol. 2010. 229: 180-91.

17.	 Chip S, Nitsch C, Wellmann S, Kapfhammer JP. Subfieldspecific neurovascular remodeling in the entorhino-hippocampal-organotypic slice culture as a response to oxygenglucose deprivation and excitotoxic cell death. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 2013. 33: 508-18.

4.	 Croll SD, Goodman JH, Scharfman HE. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in seizures: a double-edged
sword. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2004. 548: 57-68.

18.	 Guillamo JS, de Boüard S, Valable S, Marteau L, Leuraud
P, Marie Y, Poupon MF, Parienti JJ, Raymond E,
Peschanski M. Molecular mechanisms underlying effects
of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition on invasion,
proliferation, and angiogenesis in experimental glioma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009. 15: 3697-704.

5.	 Ujiie M, Dickstein DL, Carlow DA, Jefferies WA. Bloodbrain barrier permeability precedes senile plaque formation
in an Alzheimer disease model. Microcirculation. 2003. 10:
463-70.
6.	 Li B, Sharpe EE, Maupin AB, Teleron AA, Pyle AL,
Carmeliet P, Young PP. VEGF and PlGF promote adult vasculogenesis by enhancing EPC recruitment and vessel formation at the site of tumor neovascularization. FASEB J. 2006.
20: 1495-7.

19.	 Androutsellis-Theotokis A, Rueger MA, Park DM, Boyd
JD, Padmanabhan R, Campanati L, Stewart CV, LeFranc Y,
Plenz D, Walbridge S, Lonser RR,McKay RD. Angiogenic
factors stimulate growth of adult neural stem cells. PloS
one. 2010. 5: e9414.

7.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011. 144: 646-74.
8.	 Okuno Y, Nakamura-Ishizu A, Otsu K, Suda T, Kubota Y.
Pathological neoangiogenesis depends on oxidative stress
regulation by ATM. Nat Med. 2012. 18: 1208-16.

20.	 Jaffe EA, Nachman RL, Becker CG, Minick CR. Culture
of human endothelial cells derived from umbilical veins.
Identification by morphologic and immunologic criteria. J
Clin Invest. 1973. 52: 2745-56.

9.	 Bottos A, Martini M, Di Nicolantonio F, Comunanza V,
Maione F, Minassi A, Appendino G, Bussolino F, Bardelli
A. Targeting oncogenic serine/threonine-protein kinase

21.	 Arnaoutova I, Kleinman HK. In vitro angiogenesis: endothelial cell tube formation on gelled basement membrane
extract. Nat Protoc. 2010. 5: 628-35.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1852

Oncotarget

22.	 Falsig J, Aguzzi A. The prion organotypic slice culture
assay—POSCA. Nat Protoc. 2008. 3: 555-62.

36.	 Kohling R, Senner V, Paulus W, Speckmann EJ.
Epileptiform activity preferentially arises outside tumor
invasion zone in glioma xenotransplants. Neurobiology of
disease. 2006. 22: 64-75.

23.	 van de Bovenkamp M, Groothuis GM, Draaisma AL,
Merema MT, Bezuijen JI, van Gils MJ, Meijer DK,
Friedman SL, Olinga P. Precision-cut liver slices as a new
model to study toxicity-induced hepatic stellate cell activation in a physiologic milieu. Toxicol Sci. 2005. 85: 632-8.

37.	 Folkman J, Shing Y. Angiogenesis. J Biol Chem. 1992.
267: 10931-4.
38.	 Folkman J, Shing Y. Control of angiogenesis by heparin
and other sulfated polysaccharides. Adv Exp Med Biol.
1992. 313: 355-64.

24.	 Chiarugi A, Moskowitz MA. Cell biology. PARP-1—a perpetrator of apoptotic cell death? Science. 2002. 297: 200-1.
25.	 Savaskan NE, Heckel A, Hahnen E, Engelhorn T, Doerfler
A, Ganslandt O, Nimsky C, Buchfelder M, Eyüpoglu IY.
Small interfering RNA-mediated xCT silencing in gliomas
inhibits neurodegeneration and alleviates brain edema. Nat
Med. 2008. 14: 629-32.

39.	 Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nat Med.
2003. 9: 653-60.
40.	 Esiri MM, Joachim C, Sloan C, Christie S, Agacinski G,
Bridges LR, Wilcock GK, Smith AD. Cerebral Subcortical
Small Vessel Disease in Subjects With Pathologically
Confirmed Alzheimer Disease: A Clinicopathologic Study
in the Oxford Project to Investigate Memory and Ageing
(OPTIMA). Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2014; 28: 30-5.

26.	 Eyupoglu IY, Bauchfelder M, Savaskan NE. Surgical resection of malignant gliomas-role in optimizing patient outcome. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013. 9: 141-51.
27.	 Dimberg A. The glioblastoma vasculature as a target for
cancer therapy. Biochemical Society transactions 2014. 42:
1647-52.

41.	 Hashizume K, Tsuda H, Hodozuka A, Tanaka T. Clinical
and experimental studies of epilepsy associated with focal
cortical dysplasia. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2004. 58:
S26-9.

28.	 Yamamoto N, Kurotani T, Toyama K. Neural connections
between the lateral geniculate nucleus and visual cortex in
vitro. Science. 1989. 245: 192-4.
29.	 Molnar Z, Blakemore C. Lack of regional specificity for
connections formed between thalamus and cortex in coculture. Nature. 1991. 351: 475-7.

42.	 Hatipoglu G1, Hock SW, Weiss R, Fan Z, Sehm T,
Ghoochani A, Buchfelder M, Savaskan NE, Eyüpoglu IY.
Sunitinib impedes brain tumor progression and reduces
tumor-induced neurodegeneration in the microenvironment.
Cancer science. 2015. 106: 160-70.

30.	 Stoppini L, Buchs PA, Muller D. A simple method for
organotypic cultures of nervous tissue. J Neurosci Methods.
1991. 37: 173-82.

43.	 Fan Z, Sehm T, Rauh M, Buchfelder M, Eyupoglu IY,
Savaskan NE. Dexamethasone alleviates tumor-associated
brain damage and angiogenesis. PloS one. 2014. 9: e93264.

31.	 Falsig J, Julius C, Margalith I, Schwarz P, Heppner FL,
Aguzzi A. A versatile prion replication assay in organotypic
brain slices. Nat Neurosci. 2008. 11: 109-17.

44.	 Eyüpoglu IY, Hahnen E, Tränkle C, Savaskan NE,
Siebzehnrübl FA, Buslei R, Lemke D, Wick W, Fahlbusch
R, Blümcke I. Experimental therapy of malignant gliomas
using the inhibitor of histone deacetylase MS-275. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2006. 5: 1248-55.

32.	 Back A, Tupper KY, Bai T, Chiranand P, Goldenberg FD,
Frank JI, Brorson JR. Ammonia-induced brain swelling and
neurotoxicity in an organotypic slice model. Neurol Res.
2011. 33: 1100-8.

45.	 Eyüpoglu IY, Hahnen E, Heckel A, Siebzehnrübl FA,
Buslei R, Fahlbusch R, Blümcke I. Malignant gliomainduced neuronal cell death in an organotypic glioma
invasion model. Technical note. J Neurosurg. 2005. 102:
738-44.

33.	 Hardee ME, Zagzag D. Mechanisms of glioma-associated
neovascularization. Am J Pathol. 2012. 181: 1126-41.
34.	 Kroh H, Stoltenburg-Didinger G. Vascular response in
experimental spinal cord gliomas of the rat. Zentralbl Allg
Pathol. 1988. 134: 523-30.

46.	 Valster A, Tran NL, Nakada M, Berens ME, Chan AY,
Symons M. Cell migration and invasion assays. Methods.
2005. 37: 208-15.

35.	 Storring FK, Duguid JB. The vascular formations in glioblastoma. J Pathol Bacteriol. 1954. 68: 231-3.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1853

Oncotarget

