NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2014 November 10; 26(5): 605–622. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.006.

ANTIANGIOGENESIS STRATEGIES REVISITED: FROM
STARVING TUMORS TO ALLEVIATING HYPOXIA
Rakesh K. Jain, Ph.D.
Edwin L. Steele Laboratory for Tumor Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, Harvard
Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, 100 Blossom Street, Cox 7, Boston, MA
02114, jain@steele.mgh.harvard.edu

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ten antiangiogenic drugs targeting VEGF or its receptors are approved for cancer treatment.
However, these agents, intended to block tumors’ blood supply, may cause hypoxia, which may
fuel tumor progression and treatment resistance. Emerging clinical data suggest that patients
whose tumor perfusion or oxygenation increases in response to these agents may actually survive
longer. Hence, strategies aimed at alleviating tumor hypoxia while improving perfusion may
enhance the outcome of radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy. Here, I summarize
lessons learned from pre-clinical and clinical studies over the past decade and propose strategies
for improving antiangiogenic therapy outcomes for malignant and nonmalignant diseases.

Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumors acquire blood supply via multiple mechanisms: angiogenesis (sprouting new vessels
from existing vessels), co-option, intussusception, vasculogenesis, vascular mimicry and
trans-differentiation of cancer cells into endothelial cells (Carmeliet and Jain, 2011). More
than 40 molecules have been identified to play a critical role in blood vessel recruitment, but
most studies to date have focused on VEGF and its receptors. In fact, since 2004, 10 drugs
that target VEGF or its receptors have been approved for the treatment of various malignant
diseases (Table 1), with many more in clinical trials. Unfortunately, these agents – used as
monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy – have only provided survival benefits
on the order of weeks to months in some tumor types, and have not been efficacious at all in
others. Multiple mechanisms underlie these incremental benefits. In this Perspective, I will
discuss these mechanisms and speculate on how we can better utilize current antiangiogenic
(AA) agents and develop new ones to improve benefit to patients with cancer or other
diseases with abnormal vasculature. Instead of reviewing the entire literature, I will focus on
the underlying principles – inspired by the works of many in this field, but relying heavily
on insights gained from our own pre-clinical and clinical studies.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Jain

Page 2

Solid tumors develop resistance to targeted therapies including AA
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

therapies

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Millions of advanced cancer patients worldwide have benefited from molecularly targeted
therapeutics – whether these agents target oncogenic pathways in cancer cells, angiogenic
pathways in blood vessels, or both. However, some tumors are intrinsically resistant to these
agents while others develop resistance after an initial response, thus limiting overall survival
benefits to months (Table 1). An important feature that distinguishes the AA drugs from
other targeted therapies is that AA agents are typically given to unselected patients for the
approved indications, whereas cancer cell targeted therapeutics are given to only subsets of
patients selected on the basis of biomarkers. Thus, informed selection of patients likely to
benefit from AA drugs could significantly improve benefits from these agents. For example,
recent studies show that recurrent and newly diagnosed glioblastoma (GBM) patients whose
tumor blood perfusion or oxygenation increases after the initiation of AA therapy survive
6-9 months longer than those whose tumor perfusion does not change or instead decreases
(Batchelor et al., 2013; Emblem et al., 2013; Sorensen et al., 2012). These emerging data
suggest that we should be able to improve overall survival with a more personalized use of
existing AA agents and by developing novel hypoxia-alleviating agents.

Why alleviating hypoxia is critical for improving cancer treatment
The imbalance between pro- and anti-angiogenic signaling as well as physical compression
leads to abnormal vessels and impaired blood perfusion in tumors (Jain 2005; Jain 2013).
The degree of blood flow impairment varies with tumor growth stage and location, and can
differ among tumor regions (Movie S1, embedded in Figure 1) or between a primary tumor
and its metastases. This progressively worsening heterogeneity in blood perfusion as tumors
grow raises an interesting conundrum: if a tumor needs blood vessels to grow and to
metastasize, how does it keep growing when growth impairs the very blood supply that
brings the required nutrients and removes waste products? This apparent paradox can be
understood by thinking about how reduced blood supply can impart a survival advantage to
these renegade cells by creating an abnormal microenvironment, characterized by hypoxia
and acidosis (Figure 1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our hypothesis is that impaired blood supply and the resulting abnormal tumor
microenvironment help cancer cells evade the immune system, increase their invasive and
metastatic potential, and apply selective survival pressures to which a cancer cell
populations adapt (Figure 1). Under physiological conditions, immune cells constantly
patrol tissues to identify and destroy pathogens, foreign antigens, and abnormal cells. In
contrast, a hypoxic and acidic microenvironment reprograms the resident macrophages
(phagocytes) – whose job is to recognize, engulf and remove dying cells – into a
protumorigenic and immunosuppressive phenotype (Casazza et al., 2013; Colegio et al.,
2014; Finger and Giaccia, 2010; Hanahan and Coussens, 2011; Keith et al., 2012; Motz and
Coukos, 2013; Noy and Pollard, 2014; Palazón et al., 2012; Semenza, 2014; Wilson and
Hay, 2011). Hypoxia and acidosis can also attenuate the killing potential of immune effector
cells within the tumor microenvironment. Specifically, growth factors and chemokines (e.g.,
TGFβ, VEGF) induced by hypoxia or acidosis suppress the activity of T lymphocytes, and
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

inhibit the ability of dendritic cells to process tumor antigens and present them to
lymphocytes (Barsoum et al., 2014; Calcinotto et al., 2012; Gabrilovich et al., 2012; Palazón
et al., 2012). In addition, hypoxia can directly up-regulate – via HIF1α activation – the
expression of the immune check-point protein PD-L1 by myeloid-derived suppressor cells,
dendritic cells and cancer cells to aid immune-suppression and evasion (Noman et al., 2014).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to protection from the immune system, hypoxia may select for more malignant
cells – as cells that respond to physiological cues normally undergo apoptosis under hypoxic
conditions (Wilson and Hay, 2011). Hypoxia can increase the invasive potential of cancer
cells by inducing the production of pro-migratory proteins (e.g., SDF1α, HGF) and proinvasive extracellular matrix molecules (Finger and Giaccia, 2010; Semenza, 2014).
Hypoxia also provides a niche for so-called cancer stem cells and facilitates inflammation,
while also conferring resistance to radiation and many widely used therapeutic agents
(Wilson and Hay, 2011). Collectively, these observations may explain why intratumoral
hypoxia correlates with poor prognosis in many human cancers (Wilson and Hay, 2011).
Elevated interstitial fluid pressure (IFP) resulting from compression of lymphatic vessels
also fuels tumor progression and resistance to treatment, but via distinct mechanisms (Jain,
2013). Tumor vessel leakiness worsens interstitial hypertension, causes edema and leads to
sluggish blood flow due to clogging of red blood cells concentrated by the leakage of plasma
(Jain, 1988; Netti et al., 1996; Sevick and Jain, 1989). Tumor vessel leakiness and
compression thereby collaborate in creating a vicious cycle responsible for both acute and
chronic hypoxia as well as acidosis. Thus, normalizing the tumor microenvironment by
repairing the function of tumor vessels may be a promising strategy to slow tumor
progression and enhance cancer treatment.

Antiangiogenic agents can normalize the tumor vasculature and alleviate
hypoxia

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The role of blood vessels in tumor progression has been investigated for more than a century
[for a review, see (Carmeliet and Jain, 2000)]. However, the development of AA agents was
catapulted by the groundbreaking hypothesis – put forward in 1971 by the late Dr. Judah
Folkman – that starving tumors by blocking angiogenesis would slow tumor progression and
improve patient survival (Folkman, 1971). The cloning of VEGF by Napoleone Ferrara and
his team was a turning point for the field (Ferrara, 2002). Initially discovered as Vascular
Permeability Factor (VPF) by Harold Dvorak and colleagues (Dvorak, 2002), VEGF turned
out to be a key survival factor for endothelial cells. This discovery propelled the
development of both small [e.g., tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), peptides] and large
molecular weight (e.g., antibodies, receptor-bodies) inhibitors of VEGF or its downstream
signaling (Ferrara, 2002). As anticipated, these inhibitors alone decreased both blood vessel
density and growth of tumors.
In contrast to most preclinical studies, monotherapy with bevacizumab – an anti-VEGF
monoclonal antibody – failed to show overall survival benefit in patients (Jain, 2005). In
multiple randomized phase III trials, bevacizumab conferred a survival benefit only when
given in combination with chemotherapy (Table 1). These clinical findings seemed
paradoxical: why do drugs designed to destroy tumor blood vessels benefit patients only by
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 4

improving the efficacy of therapeutics that rely on those very blood vessels to reach their
target?

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We tried to resolve this paradox by proposing that judicious use of AA agents could
transiently “normalize” the abnormal tumor vasculature, resulting in improved blood
perfusion (Figure 2A). The latter would decrease hypoxia (known to confer resistance to
radio-, chemo- and immune therapies) and increase drug accessibility. Thus, therapies given
during the window of normalization might achieve greater efficacy (Jain, 2001). The
normalized vessels would also resist shedding of cancer cells from the primary tumor,
potentially decreasing metastases (Jain, 2005). This hypothesis, while controversial, offered
a potential explanation for why bevacizumab can improve the outcome of
chemotherapeutics, and more importantly, offered guidelines to improve such combination
therapies (Jain et al., 2006). Other hypotheses, though not mutually exclusive, also offered
potential reasons for combining AA agents with chemotherapies (Carmeliet and Jain, 2011).
For example, some antiangiogenic agents may directly kill cancer cells and sensitize
endothelial cells to cytotoxic drugs. Additionally, anti-cancer agents may also directly kill
endothelial cells. Finally, killing of tumor cells by cytotoxic and/or antiangiogenic agents
may transiently decompress blood vessels resulting in improved perfusion.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A variety of pre-clinical studies using direct and indirect AA agents supported the
normalization hypothesis (Izumi et al., 2002; Jain et al., 1998; Tong et al., 2004; Winkler et
al., 2004; Yuan et al., 1996). These studies also revealed that blockade of VEGF signaling or
up-regulation of thrombospondin transiently pruned the immature and leaky vessels of
tumors in mice and actively remodeled the remaining vasculature so that it more closely
resembled the normal vasculature. The morphological changes were accompanied by
functional improvements: decreased IFP, decreased tumor hypoxia, and improved
penetration of macromolecules from these vessels in these tumors. Radiation therapy had a
better outcome when given during the normalization window compared to prior to or after
the normalization window (Winkler et al., 2004). We also discovered that Tie-2 activation
contributed to the increased pericyte coverage and an increase in matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) activity that, in turn, repaired the basement membrane (Winkler et al., 2004).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While focus of this Perspective is primarily on VEGF-inhibition because of its clinical
relevance, a number of other molecular targets – present in cancer and a variety of host cells
– that facilitate or hinder vascular normalization have also been investigated (Goel et al,
2011) (Figure 3 and Table 2). Several agents that target these pathways are now in clinical
trials (e.g., Ang-2/Tie-2, FGFR) (Vasudev and Reynolds, 2014). Most recently, chloroquine,
an anti-malarial drug being tested in cancer patients, has been shown to induce vascular
normalization – leading to improved blood perfusion in tumors and reduced metastasis – by
enhancing Notch signaling in endothelial cells (Figure 3) (Maes et al., 2014).

Increased tumor perfusion/oxygenation appears to confer survival benefit
A phase I/II trial in rectal carcinoma patients revealed that a single dose of bevacizumab
decreased vessel density, increased pericyte coverage and lowered the interstitial fluid
pressure in tumors (Willett et al., 2004). A subsequent trial in recurrent GBM (rGBM)

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

patients demonstrated that cediranib, an oral pan-VEGFR TKI, normalized tumor vessels,
and alleviated edema (Batchelor et al., 2007). However, the improvement in PFS and OS
correlated with the extent of normalization (Sorensen et al., 2009). Notably, cediranib
transiently increased perfusion and oxygenation in a subset of recurrent and newly
diagnosed GBM patients, and only these patients survived longer (Batchelor et al., 2013;
Emblem et al., 2013; Sorensen et al., 2012). Similar findings on increased oxygenation and
pathological response have been reported with bevacizumab in patients with locally
advanced breast cancera.
These clinical trials suggest that for a given dose/schedule of AA agents, some patients
whose tumor perfusion/oxygenation increases benefit while others do not. However, these
findings need to be tested in prospective randomized trials. If validated, increased perfusion/
oxygenation early in treatment could serve as a potential predictive biomarker for AA
therapy. The next important challenge is to determine why for the same dose of AA agents,
tumor perfusion goes up only in some patients and not in others.

Benefits of vascular normalization are AA-dose and drug-size dependent
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As originally hypothesized, the extent of vascular normalization in a primary or metastatic
lesion is likely dependent on the dose of anti-VEGF/R drugs relative to the level of VEGF in
that lesion (Figure 2B). Very high doses of anti-VEGF/R agents could cause a rapid
reduction in blood perfusion for a tumor with a certain level of VEGF by excessive vessel
pruning and might not improve the outcome of concurrent therapies. High doses may
increase hypoxia resulting in increased metastasis and enrichment of cancer stem cells as
reported in pre-clinical studies (Chung et al., 2012). In contrast, lower doses might improve
perfusion and outcome. Indeed, low doses of an anti-VEGFR2 antibody (10 or 20 mg/kg)
increased perfusion compared to a high dose (40 mg/kg) or control IgG in a breast cancer
model (Huang et al., 2012).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There are no clinical data directly comparing the dose effect of anti-VEGF agents on
perfusion or oxygen levels. However, a study showed decreased perfusion and uptake of
docetaxel in the non-small cell lung cancer in patients after administration of 15 mg/kg dose
of bevacizumab (Van der Veldt et al., 2012). Unfortunately, unlike the GBM trials
(Batchelor et al., 2013; Sorensen et al., 2012), this study did not look at the time course of
perfusion or drug uptake. Nor did it examine whether these two parameters correlated with
the treatment outcome. So, although this clinical study does show a decrease in perfusion
with 15 mg/kg dose, it does not reveal if this reduction in perfusion translated into survival
benefit for these patients. If starving tumors were the key mechanism of benefit from
bevacizumab, as generally hypothesized, one would expect lower PFS and OS with lower
dose of bevacizumab, assuming the lower dose will not saturate the VEGF target. However,
there was no statistically significant difference in PFS or OS in non-small cell lung cancer
patients treated with 15 mg or 7.5 mg/kg bevacizumab with chemotherapy (Reck et al.,
2010). Whether lowering the dose below 7.5 would have increased PFS or OS in these
aGarcia-Foncillas, J., Martinez, P., Lahuerta, A., Llombart Cussac, A., Gonzalez, M. G., Sanchez-Gomez, R. M., Alvarez, I., Anton,
A., Illarramendi, J. J., De Juan, A., et al. (2012). Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI versus 18F-misonidazole-PET/CT to predict
pathologic response in bevacizumab-based neoadjuvant therapy in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 30, (suppl; abstr 10512).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

patients is not known. These results collectively argue for tailoring the dose and schedule of
anti-VEGF agents for individual patients using imaging or other biomarkers, including the
levels of VEGF and its receptors in the primary tumor and metastatic lesions.
The size of concurrently administered drugs is also important, as anti-VEGF therapy is
likely to lower size of pores in tumor vessels, thus lowering extravasation of drugs (Hobbs et
al., 1998). For example, in a number of preclinical studies and a clinical study, bevacizumab
has been shown to decrease the uptake of antibodies (e.g., trastuzumab, cetuximab)b
(Arjaans et al., 2013; Heskamp et al., 2013; Pastuskovas et al., 2012). In contrast, in a breast
cancer model in mice, low dose anti-VEGFR2 antibody (5 or 10 mg/kg, compared to the
standard dose of 40 mg/kg) improved the delivery of antibody-sized nanoparticles (~12nm)
but not larger nanoparticles (60 or 120 nm), while higher doses did not improve delivery of
either (Chauhan et al., 2012). Furthermore, combination therapy with a low dose of antiVEGFR2 antibody (5 mg/kg) improved the efficacy of 10 nm nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane®)
but not 100 nm liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil®) (Chauhan et al., 2012). Thus, the dose of
anti-VEGF agents may need to be tailored for the size of concurrently administered
therapeutics and may compromise the delivery of therapeutics beyond a certain size for a
given tumor. All this, of course, makes the optimal use of AA agents more complex.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While a number of preclinical studies have shown increased perfusion and drug uptake in
tumors with a variety of AA agents (Goel et al., 2011; Maes et al., 2014), there are no
clinical studies to date that have measured both time-course of perfusion and drug uptake
along with survival benefit. The closest to drug uptake kinetics has been the measurement of
oxygen supply – which similar to perfusion kinetics seems to support the benefit of vascular
normalization (Emblem et al., 2013). It is possible that the benefit of vascular normalization
may come primarily from improved tumor oxygenation resulting from improved perfusion –
rather than improved drug uptake – for various reasons discussed earlier (Figure 1).

Overcoming resistance to AA therapy using biomarkers

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because tumors use multiple pathways for recruiting vessels, it is not surprising that
blocking VEGF/R alone has inconsistent or incomplete effects on tumor vasculature. For
example, non-sprouting mechanisms may be predominant in some treatment naïve-tumors
(e.g., vessel cooption in the metastatic legions in the lungs, liver, lymph nodes) or may
become operative as a means of escape from anti-VEGF therapy in other tumors (e.g., vessel
cooption in GBM) (Movie S2). Some of these mechanisms may be triggered by molecules
produced in response to increased hypoxia (e.g., HGF, SDF1α, Ang2), resulting from
excessive pruning by longer treatment-duration and/or higher doses of anti-VEGF agents.
Some treatment-naïve tumors may have a majority of blood vessels invested in pericytes and
thus remain resistant to VEGF blockade (Sitohy et al. 2013). Other tumors may have
excessive amount of endogenous anti-VEGF molecules (e.g., sVEGFR1, NRP1,
thrombospondin), and thus not respond to exogenous VEGF blockade (Duda et al., 2010).
Finally, cellular mechanisms involving various immune cell populations (Gr-1+ myeloid

bOosting, S., Nagengast, W., Oude Munnink, T., Lub-de Hooge, M., Brouwers, A., and Glaudemans, A. (2012). 89 Zr-bevacizumab
PET imaging in metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients before and during antiangiogenic treatment. J Clin Oncol. 30, abstr 10581.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cells, T helper 17 cells) and fibroblasts have been implicated in resistance to AA therapy
(Chung et al., 2013; Hanahan and Coussens, 2012; Noy and Pollard, 2014; Ohlund et al,
2014).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To gain insight into the molecular players involved in intrinsic and evasive resistance to
anti-VEGF agents, we and other investigators have measured a panel of molecules in the
tumor-tissue or circulation of patients undergoing AA therapies. Correlating the levels of
these tissue/circulating biomarker candidates with treatment outcome has revealed candidate
pathways potentially involved in treatment resistance to anti-VEGF therapies. For example,
elevated levels of sVEGFR1 prior to treatment were associated with poor outcome from
bevacizumab in rectal carcinoma, triple-negative breast cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), and metastatic colorectal carcinoma patients (Duda et al., 2010; Meyerhardt et al.,
2012; Raut et al., 2012; Willett et al., 2009; Zhu et al., 2013)c. Additionally, high levels of
sVEGFR1 were also associated with fewer side effects in rectal, breast and liver cancer
patients (Duda et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2013)c. Finally, a retrospective analysis has shown
that a genetic polymorphism in the VEGFR1 gene correlates with increased VEGFR1
expression and poor outcome of bevacizumab treatment in metastatic renal cell carcinoma
and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients (Lambrechts et al., 2012). Similarly, elevated
levels of NRP1 were associated with poor outcome in some trials (Lambrechts et al., 2013).
It is possible that VEGFR1 and NRP1 function as endogenous VEGF-traps. Thus, adding an
external anti-VEGF agent may not have significant biologic effects in patients with high
sVEGFR1/NRP1 levels (Jain, 2013). Additionally, increased VEGFR1 levels may induce
increased pro-angiogenic signaling by PlGF when VEGF is blocked (Lambrechts et al.,
2012). These hypothesis-generating findings need to be tested prospectively, and if
validated, alternate pathways need to be targeted in patients with elevated sVEGFR1/NRP1
levels. Along these lines, baseline level of the short form of VEGF (VEGF-A121) is a
predictive biomarker in some studies, but not in others (Lambrechts et al., 2013), and is
being tested prospectively in a breast cancer trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT01663727).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As an example of evasive resistance, circulating levels of the chemokine SDF1α rise in
patients who evade various anti-VEGF therapies, including rectal carcinoma with
bevacizumab, GBM with cediranib, HCC with sunitinib and soft-tissue sarcoma with
sorafenib (Duda et al., 2011). The SDF1α/CXCR4 pathway is involved in vessel co-option,
vasculogenesis, fibrosis, lymphocyte trafficking and cancer cell invasion – depending on the
tumor and treatment. For example, in HCC this pathway appears to increase fibrosis while in
GBM it appears to facilitate invasion of cancer cells and co-option of host vessels by
invading cancer cells (Chen et al., 2014)d (Movie S2). The latter finding has led to a clinical
trial with AMD3100 (an anti-CXCR4 drug) plus bevacizumab in recurrent GBM patients
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01339039).
cBoucher, Y., Martin, J. D., Tolaney, S. M., Seano, G., Goel, S., Ancukiewicz, M., Isakoff, S. J., Winer, E. P., Krop, I. E., and Jain, R.
K. (2013). Tissue biomarkers and interstitial fluid pressure in a phase II study of preoperative (preop) bevacizumab (bev) followed by
dose-dense doxorubicin (A)/cyclophosphamide (C)/paclitaxel (T) in combination with bev in HER2-negative operable breast cancer
(BC). Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 73, Abstract nr LB-76.
dKirkpatrick, N. D., and Jain, R. K. (2010). In vivo vessel co-option by glioma cells following chronic anti-angiogenic treatment.
2010 AACR Annual Meeting Proceedings, (abstr 368)
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other evasive pathways include Ang2/Tie2/VE-PTP and HGF/cMET, which play important
roles in vascular structure and function (pericyte coverage, permeability) and cell invasion
(Figure 3) (Sennino et al., 2012; Vasudev and Reynolds, 2014)e. In addition, cellular
mechanisms of resistance involve the participation of local or bone marrow-derived
populations of immune cells (e.g., Gr-1+ myeloid cells, Th17 cells) or pericyte coverage,
which promote resistance through direct support of paracrine interactions with the
endothelial cells (Carmeliet and Jain, 2011; Chung et al., 2013). A number of agents that
target these evasive pathways are now in clinical trials (Vasudev and Reynolds, 2014).

Targeting VEGF versus VEGFR2 may have a different outcome

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Since VEGFR2 is thought to be the main receptor conveying the pro-angiogenic signals
downstream of VEGF, it is generally assumed that targeting VEGFR2 would have similar
biological effects as targeting the ligand. However, this is not the case in some malignancies.
For example, whereas bevacizumab monotherapy has not improved overall survival in any
phase III trial, the anti-VEGFR2 antibody ramucirumab led to an OS advantage of 1.4
months in advanced gastric or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) adenocarcinomas (Table 1).
Interestingly, when added to paclitaxel, ramucirumab also increased OS by 2.3 months in
patients with GEJ tumors (Table 1). When combined with chemotherapy, both bevacizumab
and ramucirumab failed to improve OS in metastatic breast cancer, yet both improved
survival in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (Table 1). It is tempting to assume that
blood vessels of GEJ tumors are highly or even exclusively dependent on VEGFR2signaling for their survival, and hence ramucirumab’s benefits result from starving these
tumors – in support of the original anti-angiogenesis hypothesis. However, the starvation
hypothesis does not explain the failure of bevacizumab in the same tumor type.

Blood vessels are not the only target of antiangiogenic agents

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As pointed out above, the targets of AA agents include not only blood vessels, but also
subsets of cancer and stromal cells. For example, VEGF can serve as a survival factor,
promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and support stem-cell phenotype in
cancer cells. VEGF can also block the maturation of dendritic cells (Goel and Mercurio,
2013). Similarly, PlGF – a member of the VEGF family – functions as a survival factor for
medulloblastoma cells and facilitates their spread through the cerebrospinal fluid via
neuropilin 1 (NRP1) signaling (Snuderl et al., 2013). Other angiogenic molecules, including
angiocrines, such as PDGF, angiopoietins, SDF1α, TGFβ, also support the survival,
proliferation and migration of various types of cancer and stromal cells (Butler et al., 2010).
Similarly, sunitinib targets both VEGFR and c-KIT – which is commonly mutated in GIST
(gastrointestinal stromal tumor) cells. Thus, AA agents and especially multi-receptor TKIs
may affect tumor growth and metastasis by multiple mechanisms, making the task of
deciphering their primary mechanism of action or identifying predictive biomarkers more

eHidalgo, M., Le Tourneau, C., Massard, C., Boni, V., Calvo, E., Albanell, J., Taus, A., Sablin, M.-P., Varga, A., Bahleda, R., et al.
(2014). Results from the first-in-human (FIH) phase I study of RO5520985 (RG7221), a novel bispecific human anti-ANG-2/antiVEGF-A antibody, administered as an intravenous infusion to patients with advanced solid tumors. 2014 ASCO Annual Meeting
Proceedings, (abst 2525).
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 9

complex. Future studies that incorporate tissue, circulating and imaging biomarkers are
needed to resolve these outstanding issues.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Agents targeting oncogenic pathways can also normalize tumor vessels
Although agents targeting endothelial or perivascular cells can directly induce vascular
normalization, inhibition of oncogenic signaling can have the same effect indirectly. In
1998, we showed that the initial effects of castration upon androgen-dependent carcinoma
are primarily vascular (preceding tumor cell death), due to an indirect mechanism of
hormone-depletion that suppresses tumor cell production of angiogenic factors (Jain et al.,
1998). We subsequently showed that inhibition of Human Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor-2 (HER2) signaling in breast cancer cells using trastuzumab normalizes breast
tumor vessels by modulating the expression of at least four pro- and AA molecules (Izumi et
al., 2002). Moreover, several other reports describe similar effects from inhibiting oncogenic
pathways (e.g., Ras, PI3K, AKT, EGFR, BRAF), which can lower the expression of VEGF
and other pro-angiogenic molecules (Goel et al., 2012). Hence, such agents have the
potential to improve tumor oxygenation via dual mechanisms: improved perfusion through
normalization of vessels and reduced oxygen consumption by dying cancer cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Combining antiangiogenic agents with drugs that target oncogenic
pathways

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Combining AA agents with agents targeting oncogenic pathways – similar to
chemotherapeutic agents – has led to some unexpected results. For example, despite
promising pre-clinical results from combining VEGF and EGFR targeted agents in
colorectal and NSCLC models, all phase III trials combining these targeted agents failed
(Tol et al., 2009). Similarly, phase III trials combining VEGF and HER2-targted therapies in
HER2+ breast cancer patients also failed (Gianni et al., 2013). A potential mechanism for
these failures, as suggested above, is that the dose of bevacizumab used may have decreased
the size of pores in the tumor vessel walls and compromised the delivery of antibodies
(Chauhan et al., 2012). This hypothesis is consistent with elevated baseline plasma VEGF
concentrations being associated with greater bevacizumab benefit. It is also consistent with
the recent randomized phase II trial showing benefit of combining bevacizumab with a
smaller drug – erlotinib – in EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients (Seto et al., 2014).
Unfortunately, in all of these trials, patients with central nervous system (CNS) metastases
were excluded. We discovered that treatment of HER2+ breast tumors in the mouse brain
with trastuzumab leads to increased VEGF production by host cells in the brain (Izumi et al.,
2002). To this end, we combined HER2-targeted drugs (trastuzumab and lapatinib) with an
anti-VEGFR2 antibody and demonstrated a significant improvement in survival of mice
bearing HER2+ tumors in their brain (Kodack et al., 2012). Moreover, a phase II clinical
trial with dual HER2-blockade and bevacizumab showed encouraging results in heavily
pretreated HER2+ breast cancer patients with brain metastases (Falchook et al., 2013).
Whether this will translate into increased OS in brain metastasis patients in a phase III trial
remains to be seen.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 10

Combining antiangiogenic agents with vessel decompressing agents
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Diminished blood perfusion and hypoxia in tumors results not only from the abnormal
structure and leakiness of tumor vessels, but also from compression of vessels by
extravascular components in tumors (Chauhan et al., 2014; Chauhan et al., 2013; Jain, 1988;
Jain, 2014; Padera et al., 2004; Stylianopoulos et al., 2012). This is evident in highly
desmoplastic tumors where a large fraction of vessels are compressed and may contribute to
the failure of AA therapies in these patients (e.g., pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, a
subset of breast cancers) (Kindler et al., 2010). Moreover, some tumors begin to produce
more extracellular matrix in response to VEGF-blockade – partly from increased hypoxia –
and become treatment-resistant (Aguilera et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2014). Thus, strategies
that can alleviate compressive forces exerted by stromal cells and/or extracellular matrix in
desmoplastic tumors should decompress tumor vessels and sensitize these tumors to AA
agents. In fact, when Shh-blockade improves perfusion in desmoplastic pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas in mice, these tumors become responsive to an anti-VEGFR2 antibody
(Rhim et al, 2014). Additionally, agents that can normalize both desmoplastic stroma and
abnormal blood vessels may be effective in these treatment-resistant tumors (Stylianopoulos
and Jain, 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our laboratory has recently discovered that widely prescribed anti-hypertensive drugs –
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and ACE-inhibitors collectively known as reninangiotensin system (RAS) inhibitors – can inhibit cancer-associated fibroblast activity to
decrease the production of collagen I and hyaluronan, reduce compressive forces in tumors,
open up blood vessels in desmoplastic breast and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas in
mice, and improve the delivery and efficacy of chemotherapeutics (Chauhan et al., 2013).
Other anti-fibrotic agents (e.g., pirfenidone) may also benefit the treatment of desmoplastic
tumors (Kozono et al., 2013). However, given the heterogeneity of stromal cells, the choice
of molecular target for depleting stroma is critical. For example, a recent study utilized
genetic ablation of SMA+ cells to deplete stroma in desmoplastic pancreatic tumors
(Ozdemir et al., 2014). Since pericytes – required to maintain vessel integrity – are also
SMA+, this strategy destroyed many blood vessels and increased hypoxia. As expected
(Figure 1), this genetic SMA+ cell depletion approach induced EMT, stem-cell phenotype,
invasion, metastasis, inflammation, and immunosuppression by increasing hypoxia in these
tumors.
Although there are no prospective clinical data on the combination of RAS-inhibitors with
standard therapies, retrospective studies show that metastatic renal cell carcinoma patients
survive 7 months longer when they receive RAS inhibitors in combination with sunitinib
compared to sunitinib alone (30 vs 23 months) (Keizman et al., 2011). Similarly, another
retrospective study of 2,277 advanced lung cancer patients showed better overall survival
when RAS inhibitors were given concurrently with chemotherapy alone or chemotherapy
and bevacizumabf. Since a significant fraction of cancer patients develop hypertension

fMenter, A. R., Carroll, N., Delate, T., Hornbrook, M. C., Kushi, L. H., Sakoda, L., Lee, V. S., Quinn, V. P., Adams, J. L., and
Ritzwoller, D. P. Effect of angiotensin system inhibitors on survival in patients receiving chemotherapy for advanced non-small cell
lung cancer. 2014 ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings, (abstr 8069)
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

during the course of AA therapy, and because RAS inhibitors are fairly safe and relatively
inexpensive, it would be worthwhile to test this hypothesis prospectively. Besides RAS
inhibitors, it would also be of interest to test if alleviation of desmoplasia by nintedanib, an
AA agent that targets VEGFR, FGFR and PDGFR and proven to be effective in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis – contributed to the survival benefit in combination with docetaxel in the
lung adenocarcinoma patients (Reck et al., 2014; Richeldi et al., 2014).

Vascular normalization can improve immunotherapy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recently approved immune checkpoint inhibitors have led to unprecedented improvements
in overall survival in melanoma patients (Wolchok et al., 2013). However, a subset of
patients even in this highly responsive disease does not benefit. Additionally, the first FDA
approved therapeutic vaccine sipuleucel-T (Sip-T) – where autologous dendritic cells are
exposed to a fusion protein consisting of GM-CSF and prostatic acidic phosphatase and then
infused back into the body – demonstrated a modest survival benefit of a few months.
Finally, various vaccine and adoptive T cell therapies – including with chimeric antibody
receptors (CAR) – have shown promise in various malignancies (Ogino et al., 2011). We
hypothesize that the normalizing the tumor microenvironment will improve the outcome of
all these different immunotherapies and potentially allow lowering the dose of
immunotherapeutic agents that, in turn, may decrease their toxicity (Huang et al., 2013). As
stated earlier, the abnormal microenvironment of tumors helps tumors evade immune
response through multiple mechanisms, including impairment of lymphocyte infiltration, upregulation of immune check-point protein expression via hypoxia, recruitment of Tregs, and
establishment of an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment that impairs the function
of the resident and transiting immune effector cells (Figure 4) (Huang et al., 2013; Motz et
al., 2014). Our laboratory has demonstrated that normalizing doses of anti-VEGFR2
antibody (DC101) can alleviate hypoxia, improve the delivery of immune effector cells into
the tumor, convert the immunosuppressive microenvironment of tumors into an
immunostimulatory one and improve survival from a vaccine therapy (Huang et al, 2012).
There are also a number of pre-clinical studies that show the benefit of combining AA
agents with various immunotherapies (Table 3). Whether vascular normalization played any
role in these results remains unknown. Regardless, clinical trials combining immune
checkpoint blockers and other immunotherapies with AA agents have begun (Table 3).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Targeting endothelial cell metabolism can inhibit tumor angiogenesis
Until recently, only molecular signals such as VEGF and others have been demonstrated to
regulate angiogenesis. However, endothelial cells require energy and new biomass to
proliferate and migrate during new vessel formation. Carmeliet and colleagues have recently
discovered increased glycolysis via the glycolytic activator PFKFB3 in the leading
endothelial cells – known as the tip cells – during sprouting angiogenesis (De Bock et al.,
2013; Schoors et al., 2014). PFKFB3-driven glycolysis is also required for proliferating stalk
endothelial cells that elongate the vascular sprout. These studies show that endothelial cell
metabolism plays a pivotal role in vessel sprouting. Furthermore, pharmacological blockade
of PFKFB3 inhibited pathological angiogenesis with modest side effects. These studies
provide a paradigm shift in previous anti-glycolytic strategies, which aimed to block

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

glycolysis maximally and permanently, however at the cost of causing severe toxicity. Thus,
targeting tumor endothelial cell metabolism opens up new possibilities for AA therapy.
Whether targeting PFKFB3 also blocks non-sprouting modes of vessel recruitment is not
known.

Antiangiogenic agents cause toxicities

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Similarly to most cancer therapeutics, AA agents may lead to cardiovascular and noncardiovascular adverse effects, some of which may be fatal (~1.5-2.5% of patients). These
toxicities are dependent not only on the class of AA agents (targeting VEGF versus VEGFR
versus VEGFR-TKI), but also on specific AA agent. Cardiovascular toxicities include
hypertension, thromboembolic disease, left ventricular dysfunction, myocardial ischemia,
and prolongation of the QTc interval. Non-cardiovascular toxicities include proteinuria,
bleeding, delayed wound healing, gastrointestinal perforation, fatigue, thyroid dysfunction,
stomatitis, myelosuppression, cutaneous effects (including hand-foot syndrome) and
dysphonia. Other rare and AA agent-specific adverse effects include reversible posterior
leukoencephalopathy, osteonecrosis of the jaw, microangiopathic hemolysis, pancreatic
enzyme elevations, hypoglycemia. Some of these adverse effects are dose-dependent and are
even reversible, while others are not. Retrospective studies have shown association between
some of these (e.g., hypertension) and the survival benefit, but none have been proven
prospectively. Some of the adverse effects appear contradictory – such as hemorrhage and
thrombosis – which makes their management challenging and deciphering the underlying
mechanisms complex. (For a comprehensive recent review on these adverse effects and their
management, please see http://www.uptodate.com/contents/toxicity-of-molecularlytargeted-antiangiogenic-agents-cardiovascular-effects and http://www.uptodate.com/
contents/toxicity-of-molecularly-targeted-antiangiogenic-agents-non-cardiovascular-effects).
It is tempting to postulate that reducing the dose of AA agents would not only reduce
toxicity, but may also increase the window of normalization and delay the onset of hypoxia
with all its negative consequences. However, there are no phase III randomized trials to date
that compare the effect of high versus low dose of the same AA agent on the efficacy or
toxicity.

Animal models of cancer and experimental design need to be improved
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A major challenge in AA therapy of cancer has been the discordance between the preclinical and clinical results. There are many potential reasons for this, including limitations
of available animal models as well as the experimental design. First, the pre-clinical tumor
models used generally grow rapidly and are more sensitive to anti-VEGF agents than their
human counterparts (with the notable exception of renal cell carcinomas). Genetically
engineered mouse models (GEMMs) are less genetically complex than human tumors and
rarely metastasize similarly to the human disease. Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models
are improving with the development of mice with “more” humanized immune system.
Second, almost all AA agents have been approved for metastatic disease, while most preclinical studies examine the effect on primary tumors (corresponding to the neoadjuvant
setting in the clinic). Although better murine models of advanced disease are now being
developed, pre-clinical studies are rarely carried out in the adjuvant or metastatic settings

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(Francia et al., 2011). It is worth noting that the US FDA will provide accelerated approval
upon demonstration of a substantial increase in the pathological complete response rate for
patients with aggressive breast cancers (e.g., triple-negative), with full approval conditional
on eventual demonstration of improvements in disease-free and OS rates, as well as
acceptable toxicity (Prowell and Pazdur, 2012). Third, while both bevacizumab and
aflibercept have shown improved OS only when combined with chemo- or immunetherapeutics, most pre-clinical studies tested these agents as monotherapies. Fourth, although
bevacizumab does not recognize mouse VEGF, many investigators use bevacizumab in their
murine studies, thus not addressing the contribution of host VEGF in the outcome. Fifth, in
many pre-clinical studies, the dose of AA agents has been unusually high, potentially
leading to misleading results (Chung et al., 2012). Sixth, many studies using GEMMs in
which the relevant gene is knocked-out in the embryo represent prevention rather than
intervention studies. Hence, the findings may not translate to the treatment setting, and can
even derail treatment strategies. Seventh, murine models tend to underestimate toxicity. We
need to take these limitations into account in both experimental design and data
interpretation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The normalization strategy can benefit patients with nonmalignant
diseases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abnormal vessels are a hallmark of not only cancer, but also a number of nonmalignant
diseases that afflict more than half a billion people worldwide. These include wet agerelated macular degeneration (AMD) and diabetic macular edema. Vascular normalization
seems to be a major mechanism of benefit from the approved anti-VEGF agents (Jain,
2005). Neurofibromatosis-2 (NF2)-associated schwannomas also harbor abnormal vessels
causing edema, which may contribute to hearing loss by disrupting auditory nerve function.
Additionally, inflammatory molecules produced as a result of hypoxia may also trigger
hearing loss (Roosli et al., 2012). Indeed, low dose bevacizumab improved hearing in 60%
of NF2 patients in a phase I trial (Plotkin et al., 2009). A follow-up phase II study showed
hearing benefit in approximately 40% patients (Plotkin S., personal communication).
Bevacizumab is now approved for NF2-related schwannomas in UK. Other potential
applications of vascular normalization include controlling plaque-rupture, neurovascular
complications stemming from radiation therapy and tuberculosis (Jain et al., 2007; Solano et
al., 2007). Unfortunately, similar to cancer, the nonmalignant diseases also become resistant
to anti-VEGF therapies. Fortunately, the benefit may last years in the latter compared to
only a couple of months in the former (Table 1). One cause of failure may be fibrosis –
presumably instigated by hypoxia resulting from prolonged VEGF-blockade. Additionally,
some vessels may be refractory to VEGF-blockade due to pericyte coverage. A phase II data
suggests that prevention of fibrosis and pruning of resistant vessels with a PDGF inhibitor
may prolong the benefit of ranibizumab in patients with wet AMD and has led to a phase III
trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01940900). A number of trials that target PDGF or
Ang2 along with VEGF to prolong the benefit to patients are planned or ongoing (Ratner,
2014).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 14

Summary and Perspective
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In conclusion, AA therapy, despite being given to unselected patients, has benefited
numerous patients worldwide who had no other alternative treatment options. Similar to
various therapeutic approaches that looked straightforward in the beginning,
antiangiogenesis has turned out to be more complex and nuanced than originally envisaged
for multiple reasons: First, a major part of the complexity in AA therapy stems from
multiple mechanisms employed by tumors to recruit blood vessels. These mechanisms seem
to vary not only spatially and temporally within a tumor, but also between a primary tumor
and its metastases, and among tumor types. Moreover tumors may switch from one
mechanism to another during growth and in response to treatment. While VEGF seems to be
a central player in sprouting angiogenesis, our knowledge of the molecular players in other
mechanisms is still in its infancy. Understanding these mechanisms in more detail will allow
development of novel agents to target all types of tumor vessels and augment responses to
currently available AA agents.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Second, the initial focus of antiangiogenic therapy was to target endothelial cells, pericytes
and/or the basement membrane they are invested in. Now we know that these cells interact
not only with each other and cancer cells, but also with the extracellular matrix and other
stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment, including the resident and transiting immune
cells, cancer stem cells as well as fibroblasts/myofibroblasts. This interaction is not only
chemical in nature, but also physical. While our understanding of the biochemical
microenvironment has grown exponentially, our understanding of the physical
microenvironment is in its early stages (Jain et al., 2014). The physical forces exerted by the
tumor stroma can directly induce cancer cell invasion (Tse et al, 2011), and compress blood
and lymphatic vessels. As discussed earlier, the resulting hypoxia, acidosis and interstitial
hypertension can fuel tumor heterogeneity, progression and treatment resistance.
Furthermore, forces exerted by plasma and interstitial fluid can also affect vessel formation
and function (Song and Munn, 2011). Thus, strategies to control these forces are likely to
yield new ways of alleviating hypoxia, slowing tumor progression and reducing treatment
resistance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Third, not only blood vessels, but also other components of the tumor microenvironment are
abnormal and all these abnormalities in concert seem to fuel tumor progression and
treatment resistance. Thus, we need to develop therapeutic agents that normalize the entire
tumor microenvironment, including immune and other stromal cells, and not just the tumor
blood vessels. Limited preclinical as well as retrospective clinical studies suggest targeting
the rennin-angiotensin system as a promising approach for normalizing CAFs in
desmoplastic tumors – which account for about 25% of human tumors. Similarly, a number
of agents that aim to normalize the immune microenvironment have been approved and
others are being tested. In the long run, a judicious combination of these agents is likely to
yield significant benefit to patients while reducing their toxicity.
Finally, unlike cancer cell targeted therapies, many AA agents are not directly cytotoxic, but
directly affect the vascular permeability. This makes interpreting contrast-enhanced images
complicated. Hence, the search for biomarkers has been challenging. Most biomarker

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

studies have focused on circulating biomarkers that are unable separate the response of host
from that of neoplastic lesions. Tissue biomarkers – based generally on a limited sample(s)
of tumors – do not account for the heterogeneity inherent in all malignancies. Advanced
imaging techniques can provide both spatial and temporal information, but are expensive
and use protocols that may not be standardized across multiple institutions. A limited
number of correlative trials have used all three approaches and have provided powerful
insights into the mechanisms of response and resistance. However, these trials have been
small. Hence, these findings need to be validated in prospective, randomized trials.
Importantly, future trials with novel agents need to integrate all three types of biomarkers.
Addressing these challenges and judiciously using existing and newly developed AA agents,
alone or with other emerging therapeutic approaches, is likely to increase survival benefits
in selected patients, while sparing other patients from unnecessary and expensive treatments.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my colleagues and collaborators for their contributions to the area of tumor microenvironment
and antiangiogenesis therapy for more than three decades. In addition, I would like to thank Dan G. Duda and
Giorgio Seano for their help in manuscript preparation, Dan G. Duda for preparing Figure 1 and Table 1, Trupti
Vardam for Table 3, Giorgio Seano for Table 2, Figures 2, 3 and 4, and James Baish, Tracy T. Batchelor, Ana
Batista, Peter Carmeliet, Vikash Chauhan, Helen Chen, Elisabeth de Vries, Dai Fukumura, Steven Isakoff, Robert
S. Kerbel, Lance L. Munn, Kamila Naxerova, Mei Rosa Ng, Timothy P. Padera, Sara Tolaney and Lei Xu for many
helpful comments. I apologize to authors whose original work I could not cite due to limitations on the number of
references.
I received consultant fees from Enlight, Ophthotech and SynDevRx; own equity in Enlight, Ophthotech,
SynDevRx, and XTuit; and serve on the Board of Directors of XTuit and Boards of Trustees of H&Q Healthcare
Investors, H&Q Life Sciences Investors, and Tekla Healthcare Opportunities Fund.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abramsson A, Lindblom P, Betsholtz C. Endothelial and nonendothelial sources of PDGF-B regulate
pericyte recruitment and influence vascular pattern formation in tumors. J. Clin. Invest. 2003;
112:1142–1151. [PubMed: 14561699]
Ager EI, Kozin S, Kirkpatrick ND, Seano G, Kodack DP, Askoxylakis V, Huang Y, Goel S, Snuderl
M, Muzikansky A, et al. Blockade of MMP14 activity in murine breast carcinomas: implications for
macrophages, vessels, and radiotherapy. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2014 in press.
Aguilera KY, Rivera LB, Hur H, Carbon JG, Toombs JE, Goldstein CD, Dellinger MT, Castrillon DH,
Brekken RA. Collagen Signaling Enhances Tumor Progression after Anti-VEGF Therapy in a
Murine Model of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:1032–1044. [PubMed:
24346431]
Arjaans M, Oude Munnink TH, Oosting SF, Terwisscha van Scheltinga AG, Gietema JA, Garbacik
ET, Timmer-Bosscha H, Lub-de Hooge MN, Schroder CP, de Vries EG. Bevacizumab-induced
normalization of blood vessels in tumors hampers antibody uptake. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:3347–
3355. [PubMed: 23580572]
Barsoum IB, Smallwood CA, Siemens DR, Graham CH. A Mechanism of Hypoxia-Mediated Escape
from Adaptive Immunity in Cancer Cells. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:665–674. [PubMed: 24336068]
Batchelor TT, Gerstner ER, Emblem KE, Duda DG, Kalpathy-Cramer J, Snuderl M, Ancukiewicz M,
Polaskova P, Pinho MC, Jennings D, et al. Improved tumor oxygenation and survival in

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

glioblastoma patients who show increased blood perfusion after cediranib and chemoradiation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2013; 110:19059–19064. [PubMed: 24190997]
Batchelor TT, Sorensen AG, di Tomaso E, Zhang WT, Duda DG, Cohen KS, Kozak KR, Cahill DP,
Chen PJ, Zhu M, et al. AZD2171, a pan-VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, normalizes tumor
vasculature and alleviates edema in glioblastoma patients. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:83–95. [PubMed:
17222792]
Bindra RS, Crosby ME, Glazer PM. Regulation of DNA repair in hypoxic cancer cells. Cancer Metast.
Rev. 2007; 26:249–260.
Bottos A, Martini M, Di Nicolantonio F, Comunanza V, Maione F, Minassi A, Appendino G,
Bussolino F, Bardelli A. Targeting oncogenic serine/threonine-protein kinase BRAF in cancer cells
inhibits angiogenesis and abrogates hypoxia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:E353–359.
[PubMed: 22203991]
Bristow RG, Hill RP. Hypoxia and metabolism. Hypoxia, DNA repair and genetic instability. Nature
Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:180–192. [PubMed: 18273037]
Brufsky AM, Hurvitz S, Perez E, Swamy R, Valero V, O’Neill V, Rugo HS. RIBBON-2: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of
bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy for second-line treatment of human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2-negative metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2011; 29:4286–4293.
[PubMed: 21990397]
Butler JM, Kobayashi H, Rafii S. Instructive role of the vascular niche in promoting tumour growth
and tissue repair by angiocrine factors. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2010; 10:138–146. [PubMed:
20094048]
Calcinotto A, Filipazzi P, Grioni M, Iero M, De Milito A, Ricupito A, Cova A, Canese R, Jachetti E,
Rossetti M. Modulation of microenvironment acidity reverses anergy in human and murine tumorinfiltrating T lymphocytes. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:2746–2756. [PubMed: 22593198]
Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Angiogenesis in cancer and other diseases. Nature. 2000; 407:249–257.
[PubMed: 11001068]
Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Molecular mechanisms and clinical applications of angiogenesis. Nature. 2011;
473:298–307. [PubMed: 21593862]
Casazza A, Di Conza G, Wenes M, Finisguerra V, Deschoemaeker S, Mazzone M. Tumor stroma: a
complexity dictated by the hypoxic tumor microenvironment. Oncogene. 2013; 33:1743–1754.
[PubMed: 23604130]
Castets M, Mehlen P. Netrin-1 role in angiogenesis: to be or not to be a proangiogenic factor? Cell
Cycle. 2010; 9:1466–1471. [PubMed: 20372055]
Chauhan VP, Boucher Y, Ferrone CR, Roberge S, Martin JD, Stylianopoulos T, Bardeesy N, DePinho
RA, Padera TP, Munn LL, Jain RK. Compression of pancreatic tumor blood vessels by hyaluronan
is caused by solid stress and not interstitial fluid pressure. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:14–15. [PubMed:
25026209]
Chauhan VP, Martin JD, Liu H, Lacorre DA, Jain SR, Kozin SV, Stylianopoulos T, Mousa AS, Han
X, Adstamongkonkul P, et al. Angiotensin inhibition enhances drug delivery and potentiates
chemotherapy by decompressing tumour blood vessels. Nat. Commun. 2013; 4:2516. [PubMed:
24084631]
Chauhan VP, Stylianopoulos T, Martin JD, Popovic Z, Chen O, Kamoun WS, Bawendi MG,
Fukumura D, Jain RK. Normalization of tumour blood vessels improves the delivery of
nanomedicines in a size-dependent manner. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012; 7:383–388. [PubMed:
22484912]
Chen Y, Huang Y, Reiberger T, Duyverman AM, Huang P, Samuel R, Hiddingh L, Roberge S, Koppel
C, Lauwers GY, et al. Differential effects of sorafenib on liver versus tumor fibrosis mediated by
SDF1α/CXCR4 axis and Gr-1+ myeloid cell infiltration in mice. Hepatol. 2014; 59:1435–1447.
Cheng AL, Kang YK, Chen Z, Tsao CJ, Qin S, Kim JS, Luo R, Feng J, Ye S, Yang TS, et al. Efficacy
and safety of sorafenib in patients in the Asia-Pacific region with advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma: a phase III randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009;
10:25–34. [PubMed: 19095497]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chi J-T, Wang Z, Nuyten DSA, Rodriguez EH, Schaner ME, Salim A, Wang Y, Kristensen GB,
Helland Å, Børresen-Dale A-L, et al. Gene Expression Programs in Response to Hypoxia: Cell
Type Specificity and Prognostic Significance in Human Cancers. PLoS Med. 2006; 3:e47.
[PubMed: 16417408]
Chiang HY, Korshunov VA, Serour A, Shi F, Sottile J. Fibronectin is an important regulator of flowinduced vascular remodeling. Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology. 2009; 29:1074–
1079.
Chung AS, Kowanetz M, Wu X, Zhuang G, Ngu H, Finkle D, Komuves L, Peale F, Ferrara N.
Differential drug class-specific metastatic effects following treatment with a panel of angiogenesis
inhibitors. J. Pathol. 2012; 227:404–416. [PubMed: 22611017]
Chung AS, Wu X, Zhuang G, Ngu H, Kasman I, Zhang J, Vernes J-M, Jiang Z, Meng YG, Peale FV,
et al. An interleukin-17-mediated paracrine network promotes tumor resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy. Nat. Med. 2013; 19:1114–1123. [PubMed: 23913124]
Colegio OR, Chu NQ, Szabo AL, Chu T, Rhebergen AM, Jairam V, Cyrus N, Brokowski CE,
Eisenbarth SC, Phillips GM, et al. Functional polarization of tumour-associated macrophages by
tumour-derived lactic acid. Nature. 2014; 513:559–563. [PubMed: 25043024]
De Bock K, Georgiadou M, Carmeliet P. Role of endothelial cell metabolism in vessel sprouting. Cell
Metab. 2013; 18:634–647. [PubMed: 23973331]
Demetri GD, van Oosterom AT, Garrett CR, Blackstein ME, Shah MH, Verweij J, McArthur G,
Judson IR, Heinrich MC, Morgan JA, et al. Efficacy and safety of sunitinib in patients with
advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumour after failure of imatinib: a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2006; 368:1329–1338. [PubMed: 17046465]
Devy L, Huang L, Naa L, Yanamandra N, Pieters H, Frans N, Chang E, Tao Q, Vanhove M, Lejeune
A, et al. Selective inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase-14 blocks tumor growth, invasion, and
angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:1517–1526. [PubMed: 19208838]
di Tomaso E, London N, Fuja D, Logie J, Tyrrell JA, Kamoun W, Munn LL, Jain RK. PDGF-C
induces maturation of blood vessels in a model of glioblastoma and attenuates the response to antiVEGF treatment. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e5123. [PubMed: 19352490]
Duda DG, Kozin SV, Kirkpatrick ND, Xu L, Fukumura D, Jain RK. CXCL12 (SDF1alpha)-CXCR4/
CXCR7 pathway inhibition: an emerging sensitizer for anticancer therapies? Clin. Cancer Res.
2011; 17:2074–2080. [PubMed: 21349998]
Duda DG, Willett CG, Ancukiewicz M, di Tomaso E, Shah M, Czito BG, Bentley R, Poleski M,
Lauwers GY, Carroll M, et al. Plasma soluble VEGFR-1 is a potential dual biomarker of response
and toxicity for bevacizumab with chemoradiation in locally advanced rectal cancer. Oncologist.
2010; 15:577–583. [PubMed: 20484123]
Dvorak HF. Vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth factor: a critical cytokine in
tumor angiogenesis and a potential target for diagnosis and therapy. J. Clin. Oncol. 2002;
20:4368–4380. [PubMed: 12409337]
Elisei R, Schlumberger MJ, Muller SP, Schoffski P, Brose MS, Shah MH, Licitra L, Jarzab B,
Medvedev V, Kreissl MC, et al. Cabozantinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer. J. Clin.
Oncol. 2013; 31:3639–3646. [PubMed: 24002501]
Emblem KE, Mouridsen K, Bjornerud A, Farrar CT, Jennings D, Borra RJ, Wen PY, Ivy P, Batchelor
TT, Rosen BR, et al. Vessel architectural imaging identifies cancer patient responders to antiangiogenic therapy. Nat. Med. 2013; 19:1178–1183. [PubMed: 23955713]
Escudier B, Bellmunt J, Negrier S, Bajetta E, Melichar B, Bracarda S, Ravaud A, Golding S, Jethwa S,
Sneller V. Phase III trial of bevacizumab plus interferon alfa-2a in patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma (AVOREN): final analysis of overall survival. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:2144, 2150.
[PubMed: 20368553]
Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, Szczylik C, Oudard S, Siebels M, Negrier S, Chevreau C, Solska E,
Desai AA, et al. Sorafenib in advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 2007;
356:125–134. [PubMed: 17215530]
Falchook GS, Moulder SL, Wheler JJ, Jiang Y, Bastida CC, Kurzrock R. Dual HER2 inhibition in
combination with anti-VEGF treatment is active in heavily pretreated HER2-positive breast
cancer. Ann. Oncol. 2013; 24:3004–3011. [PubMed: 24158411]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fang J, Shing Y, Wiederschain D, Yan L, Butterfield C, Jackson G, Harper J, Tamvakopoulos G,
Moses MA. Matrix metalloproteinase-2 is required for the switch to the angiogenic phenotype in a
tumor model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2000; 97:3884–3889. [PubMed: 10760260]
Farsaci B, Higgins JP, Hodge JW. Consequence of dose scheduling of sunitinib on host immune
response elements and vaccine combination therapy. Intl. J. Cancer. 2012; 130:1948–1959.
Ferrara N. VEGF and the quest for tumour angiogenesis factors. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2002; 2:795–803.
[PubMed: 12360282]
Finger E, Giaccia A. Hypoxia, inflammation, and the tumor microenvironment in metastatic disease.
Cancer Metast. Rev. 2010; 29:285–293.
Fischer C, Mazzone M, Jonckx B, Carmeliet P. FLT1 and its ligands VEGFB and PlGF: drug targets
for anti-angiogenic therapy? Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:942–956. [PubMed: 19029957]
Folkman J. Tumor Angiogenesis: Therapeutic Implications. N. Engl. J. Med. 1971; 285:1182–1186.
[PubMed: 4938153]
Foy KC, Miller MJ, Moldovan N, Carson WE, Kaumaya PTP. Combined vaccination with HER-2
peptide followed by therapy with VEGF peptide mimics exerts effective anti-tumor and antiangiogenic effects in vitro and in vivo. OncoImmunol. 2012; 1:1048–1060.
Francia G, Cruz-Munoz W, Man S, Xu P, Kerbel RS. Mouse models of advanced spontaneous
metastasis for experimental therapeutics. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2011; 11:135–141. [PubMed:
21258397]
Fuchs CS, Tomasek J, Yong CJ, Dumitru F, Passalacqua R, Goswami C, Safran H, dos Santos LV,
Aprile G, Ferry DR, et al. Ramucirumab monotherapy for previously treated advanced gastric or
gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (REGARD): an international, randomised,
multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2014; 383:31–39. [PubMed: 24094768]
Fukumura D, Kashiwagi S, Jain RK. The role of nitric oxide in tumour progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer.
2006; 6:521–534. [PubMed: 16794635]
Gabrilovich DI, Ishida T, Nadaf S, Ohm JE, Carbone DP. Antibodies to Vascular Endothelial Growth
Factor Enhance the Efficacy of Cancer Immunotherapy by Improving Endogenous Dendritic Cell
Function. Clin. Cancer Res. 1999; 5:2963–2970. [PubMed: 10537366]
Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V. Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by tumours.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2012; 12:253–268. [PubMed: 22437938]
Gianni L, Romieu GH, Lichinitser M, Serrano SV, Mansutti M, Pivot X, Mariani P, Andre F, Chan A,
Lipatov O, et al. AVEREL: a randomized phase III Trial evaluating bevacizumab in combination
with docetaxel and trastuzumab as first-line therapy for HER2-positive locally recurrent/metastatic
breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2013; 31:1719–1725. [PubMed: 23569311]
Giantonio BJ, Catalano PJ, Meropol NJ, O’Dwyer PJ, Mitchell EP, Alberts SR, Schwartz MA, Benson
AB 3rd. Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX4)
for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group Study E3200. J. Clin. Oncol. 2007; 25:1539–1544. [PubMed: 17442997]
Goel HL, Mercurio AM. VEGF targets the tumour cell. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2013; 13:871–882.
[PubMed: 24263190]
Goel S, Duda DG, Xu L, Munn LL, Boucher Y, Fukumura D, Jain RK. Normalization of the
vasculature for treatment of cancer and other diseases. Physiol. Rev. 2011; 91:1071–1121.
[PubMed: 21742796]
Goel S, Fukumura D, Jain RK. Normalization of the tumor vasculature through oncogenic inhibition:
an emerging paradigm in tumor biology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:E1214. [PubMed:
22550180]
Goel S, Gupta N, Walcott BP, Snuderl M, Kesler CT, Kirkpatrick ND, Heishi T, Huang Y, Martin JD,
Ager E, et al. Effects of vascular-endothelial protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibition on breast
cancer vasculature and metastatic progression. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2013; 105:1188–1201.
[PubMed: 23899555]
Goveia J, Stapor P, Carmeliet P. Principles of targeting endothelial cell metabolism to treat
angiogenesis and endothelial cell dysfunction in disease. EMBO Mol. Med. 2014; 6:1105–1120.
[PubMed: 25063693]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Greenberg JI, Shields DJ, Barillas SG, Acevedo LM, Murphy E, Huang J, Scheppke L, Stockmann C,
Johnson RS, Angle N, Cheresh DA. A role for VEGF as a negative regulator of pericyte function
and vessel maturation. Nature. 2008; 456:809–813. [PubMed: 18997771]
Grothey A, Van Cutsem E, Sobrero A, Siena S, Falcone A, Ychou M, Humblet Y, Bouche O, Mineur
L, Barone C, et al. Regorafenib monotherapy for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer
(CORRECT): an international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2013; 381:303–312. [PubMed: 23177514]
Hamzah J, Jugold M, Kiessling F, Rigby P, Manzur M, Marti HH, Rabie T, Kaden S, Grone HJ,
Hammerling GJ, et al. Vascular normalization in Rgs5-deficient tumours promotes immune
destruction. Nature. 2008; 453:410–414. [PubMed: 18418378]
Hanahan D, Coussens LM. Accessories to the crime: functions of cells recruited to the tumor
microenvironment. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:309–322. [PubMed: 22439926]
Hayashi H, Kurata T, Fujisaka Y, Kawakami H, Tanaka K, Okabe T, Takeda M, Satoh T, Yoshida K,
Tsunoda T, et al. Phase I trial of OTS11101, an anti-angiogenic vaccine targeting vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 1 in solid tumor. Cancer Sci. 2013; 104:98–104. [PubMed:
23020774]
Hellstrom M, Phng LK, Hofmann JJ, Wallgard E, Coultas L, Lindblom P, Alva J, Nilsson AK,
Karlsson L, Gaiano N, et al. Dll4 signalling through Notch1 regulates formation of tip cells during
angiogenesis. Nature. 2007; 445:776–780. [PubMed: 17259973]
Heskamp S, Boerman OC, Molkenboer-Kuenen JDM, Oyen WJG, van der Graaf WTA, van
Laarhoven HWM. Bevacizumab reduces tumor targeting of antiepidermal growth factor and antiinsulin-like growth factor 1 receptor antibodies. Intl. J. Cancer. 2013; 133:307–314.
Hobbs SK, Monsky WL, Yuan F, Roberts WG, Griffith L, Torchilin VP, Jain RK. Regulation of
transport pathways in tumor vessels: role of tumor type and microenvironment. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 1998; 95:4607–4612. [PubMed: 9539785]
Hodi FS, Lawrence D, Lezcano C, Wu X, Zhou J, Sasada T, Zeng W, Giobbie-Hurder A, Atkins MB,
Ibrahim N, et al. Bevacizumab plus ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer
Immunol Res. 2014; 2:632–642. [PubMed: 24838938]
Huang H, Bhat A, Woodnutt G, Lappe R. Targeting the ANGPT-TIE2 pathway in malignancy. Nat.
Rev. Cancer. 2010; 10:575–585. [PubMed: 20651738]
Huang X, Wong MK, Yi H, Watkins S, Laird AD, Wolf SF, Gorelik E. Combined Therapy of Local
and Metastatic 4T1 Breast Tumor in Mice Using SU6668, an Inhibitor of Angiogenic Receptor
Tyrosine Kinases, and the Immunostimulator B7.2-IgG Fusion Protein. Cancer Res. 2002;
62:5727–5735. [PubMed: 12384531]
Huang Y, Goel S, Duda DG, Fukumura D, Jain RK. Vascular normalization as an emerging strategy to
enhance cancer immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2943–2948. [PubMed: 23440426]
Huang Y, Yuan J, Righi E, Kamoun WS, Ancukiewicz M, Nezivar J, Santosuosso M, Martin JD,
Martin MR, Vianello F, et al. Vascular normalizing doses of antiangiogenic treatment reprogram
the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and enhance immunotherapy. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 2012; 109:17561–17566. [PubMed: 23045683]
Izumi Y, Xu L, di Tomaso E, Fukumura D, Jain RK. Tumour biology: herceptin acts as an antiangiogenic cocktail. Nature. 2002; 416:279–280. [PubMed: 11907566]
Jain RK. Determinants of tumor blood flow: a review. Cancer Res. 1988; 48:2641–2658. [PubMed:
3282647]
Jain RK. Normalizing tumor vasculature with anti-angiogenic therapy: a new paradigm for
combination therapy. Nat. Med. 2001; 7:987–989. [PubMed: 11533692]
Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science.
2005; 307:58–62. [PubMed: 15637262]
Jain RK. Normalizing tumor microenvironment to treat cancer: bench to bedside to biomarkers. J.
Clin. Oncol. 2013; 31:2205–2218. [PubMed: 23669226]
Jain RK. An Indirect Way to Tame Cancer. Sci. Am. 2014; 310:46–53. [PubMed: 24640331]
Jain RK, Duda DG, Clark JW, Loeffler JS. Lessons from phase III clinical trials on anti-VEGF therapy
for cancer. Nat. Clin. Pract. Oncol. 2006; 3:24–40. [PubMed: 16407877]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Jain RK, Finn AV, Kolodgie FD, Gold HK, Virmani R. Antiangiogenic therapy for normalization of
atherosclerotic plaque vasculature: a potential strategy for plaque stabilization. Nat. Clin. Pract.
Cardivasc. Med. 2007; 4:491–502.
Jain RK, Martin JD, Stylianopoulos T. The role of mechanical forces in tumor growth and therapy.
Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2014; 16:321–346. [PubMed: 25014786]
Jain RK, Safabakhsh N, Sckell A, Chen Y, Jiang P, Benjamin L, Yuan F, Keshet E. Endothelial cell
death, angiogenesis, and microvascular function after castration in an androgen-dependent tumor:
role of vascular endothelial growth factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 1998; 95:10820–10825.
[PubMed: 9724788]
Jodele S, Chantrain CF, Blavier L, Lutzko C, Crooks GM, Shimada H, Coussens LM, Declerck YA.
The contribution of bone marrow-derived cells to the tumor vasculature in neuroblastoma is matrix
metalloproteinase-9 dependent. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:3200–3208. [PubMed: 15833851]
Johansson A, Hamzah J, Payne CJ, Ganss R. Tumor-targeted TNFalpha stabilizes tumor vessels and
enhances active immunotherapy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:7841–7846. [PubMed:
22547817]
Karar J, Maity A. PI3K/AKT/mTOR Pathway in Angiogenesis. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2011; 4:51.
[PubMed: 22144946]
Kashiwagi S, Tsukada K, Xu L, Miyazaki J, Kozin SV, Tyrrell JA, Sessa WC, Gerweck LE, Jain RK,
Fukumura D. Perivascular nitric oxide gradients normalize tumor vasculature. Nat. Med. 2008;
14:255–257. [PubMed: 18278052]
Keith B, Johnson RS, Simon MC. HIF1α and HIF2α: sibling rivalry in hypoxic tumour growth and
progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2012; 12:9–22. [PubMed: 22169972]
Keizman D, Huang P, Eisenberger MA, Pili R, Kim JJ, Antonarakis ES, Hammers H, Carducci MA.
Angiotensin system inhibitors and outcome of sunitinib treatment in patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma: a retrospective examination. Eur. J. Cancer. 2011; 47:1955–1961. [PubMed:
21600760]
Kindler HL, Niedzwiecki D, Hollis D, Sutherland S, Schrag D, Hurwitz H, Innocenti F, Mulcahy MF,
O’Reilly E, Wozniak TF, et al. Gemcitabine Plus Bevacizumab Compared With Gemcitabine Plus
Placebo in Patients With Advanced Pancreatic Cancer: Phase III Trial of the Cancer and Leukemia
Group B (CALGB 80303). J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:3617–3622. [PubMed: 20606091]
Ko JS, Zea AH, Rini BI, Ireland JL, Elson P, Cohen P, Golshayan A, Rayman PA, Wood L, Garcia J,
et al. Sunitinib mediates reversal of myeloid-derived suppressor cell accumulation in renal cell
carcinoma patients. Clin. Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2148–2157. [PubMed: 19276286]
Kodack DP, Chung E, Yamashita H, Incio J, Duyverman AM, Song Y, Farrar CT, Huang Y, Ager E,
Kamoun W, et al. Combined targeting of HER2 and VEGFR2 for effective treatment of HER2amplified breast cancer brain metastases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:E3119–3127.
[PubMed: 23071298]
Kozono S, Ohuchida K, Eguchi D, Ikenaga N, Fujiwara K, Cui L, Mizumoto K, Tanaka M.
Pirfenidone inhibits pancreatic cancer desmoplasia by regulating stellate cells. Cancer Res. 2013;
73:2345–2356. [PubMed: 23348422]
Lambrechts D, Claes B, Delmar P, Reumers J, Mazzone M, Yesilyurt BT, Devlieger R, Verslype C,
Tejpar S, Wildiers H, et al. VEGF pathway genetic variants as biomarkers of treatment outcome
with bevacizumab: an analysis of data from the AViTA and AVOREN randomised trials. Lancet
Oncol. 2012; 13:724–733. [PubMed: 22608783]
Lambrechts D, Lenz HJ, de Haas S, Carmeliet P, Scherer SJ. Markers of response for the
antiangiogenic agent bevacizumab. J. Clin. Oncol. 2013; 31:1219–1230. [PubMed: 23401453]
Lawler PR, Lawler J. Molecular basis for the regulation of angiogenesis by thrombospondin-1 and -2.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect. Med. 2012; 2:a006627. [PubMed: 22553494]
Lee KE, Simon MC. From stem cells to cancer stem cells: HIF takes the stage. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
2012; 24:232–235. [PubMed: 22296771]
Li B, Lalani AS, Harding TC, Luan B, Koprivnikar K, Huan Tu G, Prell R, VanRoey MJ, Simmons
AD, Jooss K. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Blockade Reduces Intratumoral Regulatory T
Cells and Enhances the Efficacy of a GM-CSF-Secreting Cancer Immunotherapy. Clin. Cancer
Res. 2006; 12:6808–6816. [PubMed: 17121902]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Liu J, Liao S, Diop-Frimpong B, Chen W, Goel S, Naxerova K, Ancukiewicz M, Boucher Y, Jain RK,
Xu L. TGF-beta blockade improves the distribution and efficacy of therapeutics in breast
carcinoma by normalizing the tumor stroma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:16618–16623.
[PubMed: 22996328]
Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E, Blanc JF, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul JL,
Forner A, et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 359:378–
390. [PubMed: 18650514]
Maes H, Kuchnio A, Peric A, Moens S, Nys K, De Bock K, Quaegebeur A, Schoors S, Georgiadou M,
Wouters J, et al. Tumor vessel normalization by chloroquine independent of autophagy. Cancer
Cell. 2014; 26:190–206. [PubMed: 25117709]
Magnussen A, Kasman IM, Norberg S, Baluk P, Murray R, McDonald DM. Rapid access of antibodies
to alpha5beta1 integrin overexpressed on the luminal surface of tumor blood vessels. Cancer Res.
2005; 65:2712–2721. [PubMed: 15805270]
Maione F, Molla F, Meda C, Latini R, Zentilin L, Giacca M, Seano G, Serini G, Bussolino F, Giraudo
E. Semaphorin 3A is an endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor that blocks tumor growth and
normalizes tumor vasculature in transgenic mouse models. J. Clin. Invest. 2009; 119:3356–3372.
[PubMed: 19809158]
Manning EA, Ullman JGM, Leatherman JM, Asquith JM, Hansen TR, Armstrong TD, Hicklin DJ,
Jaffee EM, Emens LA. A Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-2 Inhibitor Enhances
Antitumor Immunity through an Immune-Based Mechanism. Clin. Cancer Res. 2007; 13:3951–
3959. [PubMed: 17606729]
Mazzone M, Dettori D, Leite de Oliveira R, Loges S, Schmidt T, Jonckx B, Tian YM, Lanahan AA,
Pollard P, Ruiz de Almodovar C, et al. Heterozygous deficiency of PHD2 restores tumor
oxygenation and inhibits metastasis via endothelial normalization. Cell. 2009; 136:839–851.
[PubMed: 19217150]
Meyerhardt JA, Ancukiewicz M, Abrams TA, Schrag D, Enzinger PC, Chan JA, Kulke MH, Wolpin
BM, Goldstein M, Blaszkowsky L, et al. Phase I study of cetuximab, irinotecan, and vandetanib
(ZD6474) as therapy for patients with previously treated metastastic colorectal cancer. PLoS
One. 2012; 7:e38231. [PubMed: 22701615]
Miles DW, Chan A, Dirix LY, Cortes J, Pivot X, Tomczak P, Delozier T, Sohn JH, Provencher L,
Puglisi F, et al. Phase III study of bevacizumab plus docetaxel compared with placebo plus
docetaxel for the first-line treatment of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative
metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:3239, 3247. [PubMed: 20498403]
Miller K, Wang M, Gralow J, Dickler M, Cobleigh M, Perez EA, Shenkier T, Cella D, Davidson NE.
Paclitaxel plus bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med.
2007; 357:2666–2676. [PubMed: 18160686]
Motz GT, Coukos G. Deciphering and reversing tumor immune suppression. Immunity. 2013; 39:61–
73. [PubMed: 23890064]
Motz GT, Santoro SP, Wang LP, Garrabrant T, Lastra RR, Hagemann IS, Lal P, Feldman MD,
Benencia F, Coukos G. Tumor endothelium FasL establishes a selective immune barrier
promoting tolerance in tumors. Nat. Med. 2014; 20:607–615. [PubMed: 24793239]
Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Tomczak P, Hutson TE, Michaelson MD, Negrier S, Oudard S, Gore ME,
Tarazi J, Hariharan S, et al. Axitinib versus sorafenib as second-line treatment for advanced renal
cell carcinoma: overall survival analysis and updated results from a randomised phase 3 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:552–562. [PubMed: 23598172]
Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, Michaelson MD, Bukowski RM, Rixe O, Oudard S, Negrier S,
Szczylik C, Kim ST, et al. Sunitinib versus interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N.
Engl. J. Med. 2007; 356:115–124. [PubMed: 17215529]
Nasarre P, Thomas M, Kruse K, Helfrich I, Wolter V, Deppermann C, Schadendorf D, Thurston G,
Fiedler U, Augustin HG. Host-derived angiopoietin-2 affects early stages of tumor development
and vessel maturation but is dispensable for later stages of tumor growth. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:1324–1333. [PubMed: 19208839]
Neri D, Supuran CT. Interfering with pH regulation in tumours as a therapeutic strategy. Nature Rev.
Drug Discov. 2011; 10:767–777. [PubMed: 21921921]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Netti PA, Roberge S, Boucher Y, Baxter LT, Jain RK. Effect of transvascular fluid exchange on
pressure-flow relationship in tumors: a proposed mechanism for tumor blood flow heterogeneity.
Microvasc. Res. 1996; 52:27–46. [PubMed: 8812751]
Noman MZ, Desantis G, Janji B, Hasmim M, Karray S, Dessen P, Bronte V, Chouaib S. PD-L1 is a
novel direct target of HIF-1α, and its blockade under hypoxia enhanced MDSC-mediated T cell
activation. J. Exp. Med. 2014; 211:781–790. [PubMed: 24778419]
Noy R, Pollard JW. Tumor-associated macrophages: from mechanisms to therapy. Immunity. 2014;
41:49–61. [PubMed: 25035953]
Ogino S, Galon J, Fuchs CS, Dranoff G. Cancer immunology--analysis of host and tumor factors for
personalized medicine. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2011; 8:711–719. [PubMed: 21826083]
Öhlund D, Elyada E, Tuveson D. Fibroblast heterogeneity in the cancer wound. J Exp Med. 2014;
211:1503–1523. [PubMed: 25071162]
Orsenigo F, Giampietro C, Ferrari A, Corada M, Galaup A, Sigismund S, Ristagno G, Maddaluno L,
Koh GY, Franco D, et al. Phosphorylation of VE-cadherin is modulated by haemodynamic forces
and contributes to the regulation of vascular permeability in vivo. Nat. Commun. 2012; 3:1208.
[PubMed: 23169049]
Ozdemir BC, Pentcheva-Hoang T, Carstens JL, Zheng X, Wu CC, Simpson TR, Laklai H, Sugimoto
H, Kahlert C, Novitskiy SV, et al. Depletion of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts and fibrosis
induces immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival. Cancer Cell.
2014; 25:719–734. [PubMed: 24856586]
Padera TP, Stoll BR, Tooredman JB, Capen D, di Tomaso E, Jain RK. Pathology: cancer cells
compress intratumour vessels. Nature. 2004; 427:695. [PubMed: 14973470]
Palazón A, Aragonés J, Morales-Kastresana A, de Landázuri MO, Melero I. Molecular pathways:
hypoxia response in immune cells fighting or promoting cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 2012;
18:1207–1213. [PubMed: 22205687]
Pastuskovas CV, Mundo EE, Williams SP, Nayak TK, Ho J, Ulufatu S, Clark S, Ross S, Cheng E,
Parsons-Reponte K, et al. Effects of Anti-VEGF on Pharmacokinetics, Biodistribution, and
Tumor Penetration of Trastuzumab in a Preclinical Breast Cancer Model. Mol. Cancer Ther.
2012; 11:752–762. [PubMed: 22222630]
Phng LK, Gerhardt H. Angiogenesis: a team effort coordinated by notch. Dev. Cell. 2009; 16:196–208.
[PubMed: 19217422]
Plotkin SR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Barker FG 2nd, Halpin C, Padera TP, Tyrrell A, Sorensen
AG, Jain RK, di Tomaso E. Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in patients with
neurofibromatosis type 2. New Engl. J. Med. 2009; 361:358–367. [PubMed: 19587327]
Prowell TM, Pazdur R. Pathological Complete Response and Accelerated Drug Approval in Early
Breast Cancer. New Engl. J. Med. 2012; 366:2438–2441. [PubMed: 22646508]
Ratner M. Next-generation AMD drugs to wed blockbusters. Nat. Biotechnol. 2014; 32:701–702.
[PubMed: 25101720]
Raut CP, Boucher Y, Duda DG, Morgan JA, Quek R, Ancukiewicz M, Lahdenranta J, Eder JP,
Demetri GD, Jain RK. Effects of sorafenib on intra-tumoral interstitial fluid pressure and
circulating biomarkers in patients with refractory sarcomas (NCI protocol 6948). PLoS One.
2012; 7:e26331. [PubMed: 22347360]
Raymond E, Dahan L, Raoul JL, Bang YJ, Borbath I, Lombard-Bohas C, Valle J, Metrakos P, Smith
D, Vinik A, et al. Sunitinib malate for the treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. New
Engl. J. Med. 2011; 364:501–513. [PubMed: 21306237]
Reck M, Kaiser R, Mellemgaard A, Douillard JY, Orlov S, Krzakowski M, von Pawel J, Gottfried M,
Bondarenko I, Liao M, et al. Docetaxel plus nintedanib versus docetaxel plus placebo in patients
with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer (LUME-Lung 1): a phase 3, double-blind,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:143–155. [PubMed: 24411639]
Reck M, von Pawel J, Zatloukal P, Ramlau R, Gorbounova V, Hirsh V, Leighl N, Mezger J, Archer V,
Moore N, Manegold C. Overall survival with cisplatin-gemcitabine and bevacizumab or placebo
as first-line therapy for nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer: results from a randomised
phase III trial (AVAiL). Ann. Oncol. 2010; 21:1804–1809. [PubMed: 20150572]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reis M, Czupalla CJ, Ziegler N, Devraj K, Zinke J, Seidel S, Heck R, Thom S, Macas J, Bockamp E,
et al. Endothelial Wnt/beta-catenin signaling inhibits glioma angiogenesis and normalizes tumor
blood vessels by inducing PDGF-B expression. J. Exp. Med. 2012; 209:1611–1627. [PubMed:
22908324]
Richeldi L, du Bois RM, Raghu G, Azuma A, Brown KK, Costabel U, Cottin V, Flaherty KR, Hansell
DM, Inoue Y, et al. Efficacy and safety of nintedanib in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. New
Engl. J. Med. 2014; 370:2071–2082. [PubMed: 24836310]
Rhim AD, Oberstein PE, Thomas DH, Mirek ET, Palermo CF, Sastra SA, Dekleva EN, Saunders T,
Becerra CP, Tattersall IW, et al. Stromal elements act to restrain, rather than support, pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:735–747. [PubMed: 24856585]
Rini BI, Halabi S, Rosenberg JE, Stadler WM, Vaena DA, Archer L, Atkins JN, Picus J, Czaykowski
P, Dutcher J, Small EJ. Phase III trial of bevacizumab plus interferon alfa versus interferon alfa
monotherapy in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: final results of CALGB 90206. J.
Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:2137–2143. [PubMed: 20368558]
Robert NJ, Dieras V, Glaspy J, Brufsky AM, Bondarenko I, Lipatov ON, Perez EA, Yardley DA, Chan
SY, Zhou X, et al. RIBBON-1: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial of
chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab for first-line treatment of human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2-negative, locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2011;
29:1252–1260. [PubMed: 21383283]
Roosli C, Linthicum FH Jr. Cureoglu S, Merchant SN. Dysfunction of the cochlea contributing to
hearing loss in acoustic neuromas: an underappreciated entity. Otol. Neurotol. 2012; 33:473–480.
[PubMed: 22377650]
Saltz LB, Clarke S, Diaz-Rubio E, Scheithauer W, Figer A, Wong R, Koski S, Lichinitser M, Yang
TS, Rivera F, et al. Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as firstline therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomized phase III study. J. Clin. Oncol. 2008;
26:2013–2019. [PubMed: 18421054]
Sandler A, Gray R, Perry MC, Brahmer J, Schiller JH, Dowlati A, Lilenbaum R, Johnson DH.
Paclitaxel-carboplatin alone or with bevacizumab for non-small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J.
Med. 2006; 355:2542–2550. [PubMed: 17167137]
Schoors S, De Bock K, Cantelmo AR, Georgiadou M, Ghesquiere B, Cauwenberghs S, Kuchnio A,
Wong BW, Quaegebeur A, Goveia J, et al. Partial and transient reduction of glycolysis by
PFKFB3 blockade reduces pathological angiogenesis. Cell Metab. 2014; 19:37–48. [PubMed:
24332967]
Seano G, Chiaverina G, Gagliardi PA, di Blasio L, Puliafito A, Bouvard C, Sessa R, Tarone G,
Sorokin L, Helley D, et al. Endothelial podosome rosettes regulate vascular branching in tumour
angiogenesis. Nat. Cell Biol. 2014a ePub on Sep 14, 2014 as doi: 10.1038/ncb3036.
Seano G, Daubon T, Genot E, Primo L. Podosomes as novel players in endothelial biology. Eur. J. Cell
Biol. 2014b ePub on Aug 7, 2014 as doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2014.07.009.
Semenza GL. Oxygen Sensing, Hypoxia-Inducible Factors, and Disease Pathophysiology. Annu. Rev.
Pathol. 2014; 9:47–71. [PubMed: 23937437]
Sennino B, Ishiguro-Oonuma T, Wei Y, Naylor RM, Williamson CW, Bhagwandin V, Tabruyn SP,
You WK, Chapman HA, Christensen JG, et al. Suppression of tumor invasion and metastasis by
concurrent inhibition of c-Met and VEGF signaling in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Cancer
Discov. 2012; 2:270–287. [PubMed: 22585997]
Seto T, Kato T, Nishio M, Goto K, Atagi S, Hosomi Y, Yamamoto N, Hida T, Maemondo M,
Nakagawa K, et al. Erlotinib alone or with bevacizumab as first-line therapy in patients with
advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring EGFR mutations (JO25567): an
open-label, randomised, multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:1236–1244.
[PubMed: 25175099]
Sevick EM, Jain RK. Viscous resistance to blood flow in solid tumors: effect of hematocrit on
intratumor blood viscosity. Cancer Res. 1989; 49:3513–3519. [PubMed: 2731173]
Shrimali RK, Yu Z, Theoret MR, Chinnasamy D, Restifo NP, Rosenberg SA. Antiangiogenic agents
can increase lymphocyte infiltration into tumor and enhance the effectiveness of adoptive
immunotherapy of cancer. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:6171–6180. [PubMed: 20631075]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sitohy B, Nagy JA, Dvorak HF. Anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy for cancer: reassessing the target. Cancer
Res. 2012; 72:1909–1914. [PubMed: 22508695]
Skuli N, Monferran S, Delmas C, Favre G, Bonnet J, Toulas C, Cohen-Jonathan Moyal E.
Alphavbeta3/alphavbeta5 integrins-FAK-RhoB: a novel pathway for hypoxia regulation in
glioblastoma. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:3308–3316. [PubMed: 19351861]
Snuderl M, Batista A, Kirkpatrick ND, Ruiz de Almodovar C, Riedemann L, Walsh EC, Anolik R,
Huang Y, Martin JD, Kamoun W, et al. Targeting placental growth factor/neuropilin 1 pathway
inhibits growth and spread of medulloblastoma. Cell. 2013; 152:1065–1076. [PubMed:
23452854]
Solano JM, Bakri SJ, Pulido JS. Regression of radiation-induced macular edema after systemic
bevacizumab. Can. J. Ophthalmol. 2007; 42:748–749. [PubMed: 17823640]
Song JW, Munn LL. Fluid forces control endothelial sprouting. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:15342–15347. [PubMed: 21876168]
Sorensen AG, Batchelor TT, Zhang WT, Chen PJ, Yeo P, Wang M, Jennings D, Wen PY, Lahdenranta
J, Ancukiewicz M, et al. A “vascular normalization index” as potential mechanistic biomarker to
predict survival after a single dose of cediranib in recurrent glioblastoma patients. Cancer Res.
2009; 69:5296–5300. [PubMed: 19549889]
Sorensen AG, Emblem KE, Polaskova P, Jennings D, Kim H, Ancukiewicz M, Wang M, Wen PY, Ivy
P, Batchelor TT, Jain RK. Increased survival of glioblastoma patients who respond to
antiangiogenic therapy with elevated blood perfusion. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:402–407. [PubMed:
22127927]
Sternberg CN, Davis ID, Mardiak J, Szczylik C, Lee E, Wagstaff J, Barrios CH, Salman P, Gladkov
OA, Kavina A, et al. Pazopanib in locally advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results of
a randomized phase III trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:1061–1068. [PubMed: 20100962]
Stylianopoulos T, Martin JD, Chauhan VP, Jain SR, Diop-Frimpong B, Bardeesy N, Smith BL,
Ferrone CR, Hornicek FJ, Boucher Y, et al. Causes, consequences, and remedies for growthinduced solid stress in murine and human tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:15101–
15108. [PubMed: 22932871]
Stylianopoulos T, Jain RK, et al. Combining two strategies to improve perfusion and drug delivery in
solid tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:18632–18637. [PubMed: 24167277]
Suzuki H, Fukuhara M, Yamaura T, Mutoh S, Okabe N, Yaginuma H, Hasegawa T, Yonechi A, Osugi
J, Hoshino M, et al. Multiple therapeutic peptide vaccines consisting of combined novel cancer
testis antigens and anti-angiogenic peptides for patients with non-small cell lung cancer. J.
Transl. Med. 2013; 11:97. [PubMed: 23578144]
Tewari KS, Sill MW, Long HJ 3rd, Penson RT, Huang H, Ramondetta LM, Landrum LM, Oaknin A,
Reid TJ, Leitao MM, et al. Improved survival with bevacizumab in advanced cervical cancer.
New Engl. J. Med. 2014; 370:734–743. [PubMed: 24552320]
Tol J, Koopman M, Cats A, Rodenburg CJ, Creemers GJ, Schrama JG, Erdkamp FL, Vos AH, van
Groeningen CJ, Sinnige HA, et al. Chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and cetuximab in metastatic
colorectal cancer. New Engl. J. Med. 2009; 360:563–572. [PubMed: 19196673]
Tong RT, Boucher Y, Kozin SV, Winkler F, Hicklin DJ, Jain RK. Vascular normalization by vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2 blockade induces a pressure gradient across the vasculature
and improves drug penetration in tumors. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:3731–3736. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1118910109. Epub 2011 Dec 27. [PubMed: 15172975]
Tse JM, Cheng G, Tyrrell JA, Wilcox-Adelman SA, Boucher Y, Jain RK, Munn LL. Mechanical
compression drives cancer cells toward invasive phenotype. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;
109:911–916. [PubMed: 22203958]
Vakoc BJ, Lanning RM, Tyrrell JA, Padera TP, Bartlett LA, Stylianopoulos T, Munn LL, Tearney GJ,
Fukumura D, Jain RK, et al. Three-dimensional microscopy of the tumor microenvironment in
vivo using optical frequency domain imaging. Nat. Med. 2009; 15:1219–1223. [PubMed:
19749772]
van Beijnum JR, Dings RP, van der Linden E, Zwaans BM, Ramaekers FC, Mayo KH, Griffioen AW.
Gene expression of tumor angiogenesis dissected: specific targeting of colon cancer angiogenic
vasculature. Blood. 2006; 108:2339–2348. [PubMed: 16794251]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Van Cutsem E, Tabernero J, Lakomy R, Prenen H, Prausova J, Macarulla T, Ruff P, van Hazel GA,
Moiseyenko V, Ferry D, et al. Addition of aflibercept to fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan
improves survival in a phase III randomized trial in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
previously treated with an oxaliplatin-based regimen. J. Clin. Oncol. 2012; 30:3499–3506.
[PubMed: 22949147]
van der Graaf WT, Blay JY, Chawla SP, Kim DW, Bui-Nguyen B, Casali PG, Schoffski P, Aglietta M,
Staddon AP, Beppu Y, et al. Pazopanib for metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma (PALETTE): a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2012; 379:1879–1886.
[PubMed: 22595799]
Van der Veldt AA, Lubberink M, Bahce I, Walraven M, de Boer MP, Greuter HN, Hendrikse NH,
Eriksson J, Windhorst AD, Postmus PE, et al. Rapid decrease in delivery of chemotherapy to
tumors after anti-VEGF therapy: implications for scheduling of anti-angiogenic drugs. Cancer
Cell. 2012; 21:82–91. [PubMed: 22264790]
Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033. [PubMed: 19460998]
Vasudev NS, Reynolds AR. Anti-angiogenic therapy for cancer: current progress, unresolved
questions and future directions. Angiogenesis. 2014; 17:471–494. [PubMed: 24482243]
Vegran F, Boidot R, Michiels C, Sonveaux P, Feron O. Lactate influx through the endothelial cell
monocarboxylate transporter MCT1 supports an NF-kappaB/IL-8 pathway that drives tumor
angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:2550–2560. [PubMed: 21300765]
Wang W, Ma Y, Li J, Shi HS, Wang LQ, Guo FC, Zhang J, Li D, Mo BH, Wen F, et al. Specificity
redirection by CAR with human VEGFR-1 affinity endows T lymphocytes with tumor-killing
ability and anti-angiogenic potency. Gene Ther. 2013; 20:970–978. [PubMed: 23636245]
Wells SA Jr. Robinson BG, Gagel RF, Dralle H, Fagin JA, Santoro M, Baudin E, Elisei R, Jarzab B,
Vasselli JR, et al. Vandetanib in patients with locally advanced or metastatic medullary thyroid
cancer: a randomized, double-blind phase III trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 2012; 30:134–141. [PubMed:
22025146]
Willett CG, Boucher Y, di Tomaso E, Duda DG, Munn LL, Tong RT, Chung DC, Sahani DV, Kalva
SP, Kozin SV, et al. Direct evidence that the VEGF-specific antibody bevacizumab has
antivascular effects in human rectal cancer. Nat. Med. 2004; 10:145–147. [PubMed: 14745444]
Willett CG, Duda DG, di Tomaso E, Boucher Y, Ancukiewicz M, Sahani DV, Lahdenranta J, Chung
DC, Fischman AJ, Lauwers GY, et al. Efficacy, Safety, and Biomarkers of Neoadjuvant
Bevacizumab, Radiation Therapy, and Fluorouracil in Rectal Cancer: A Multidisciplinary Phase
II Study. J. Clin. Oncol. 2009; 27:3020–3026. [PubMed: 19470921]
Wilke H, Muro K, Van Cutsem E, Oh SC, Bodoky G, Shimada Y, Hironaka S, Sugimoto N, Lipatov
ON, Kim T-Y, et al. Ramucirumab plus paclitaxel versus placebo plus paclitaxel in patients with
previously treated advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma
(RAINBOW): a double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:1224–35.
[PubMed: 25240821]
Wilson WR, Hay MP. Targeting hypoxia in cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2011; 11:393–410.
[PubMed: 21606941]
Winkler F, Kozin SV, Tong RT, Chae SS, Booth MF, Garkavtsev I, Xu L, Hicklin DJ, Fukumura D, di
Tomaso E, et al. Kinetics of vascular normalization by VEGFR2 blockade governs brain tumor
response to radiation: role of oxygenation, angiopoietin-1, and matrix metalloproteinases. Cancer
Cell. 2004; 6:553–563. [PubMed: 15607960]
Wolchok JD, Kluger H, Callahan MK, Postow MA, Rizvi NA, Lesokhin AM, Segal NH, Ariyan CE,
Gordon RA, Reed K, et al. Nivolumab plus ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. New Engl. J.
Med. 2013; 369:122–133. [PubMed: 23724867]
Yasuda S, Sho M, Yamato I, Yoshiji H, Wakatsuki K, Nishiwada S, Yagita H, Nakajima Y.
Simultaneous blockade of programmed death 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
(VEGFR2) induces synergistic anti-tumour effect in vivo. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2013; 172:500–
506. [PubMed: 23600839]
You WK, Sennino B, Williamson CW, Falcon B, Hashizume H, Yao LC, Aftab DT, McDonald DM.
VEGF and c-Met blockade amplify angiogenesis inhibition in pancreatic islet cancer. Cancer
Res. 2011; 71:4758–4768. [PubMed: 21613405]
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Yuan F, Chen Y, Dellian M, Safabakhsh N, Ferrara N, Jain RK. Time-dependent vascular regression
and permeability changes in established human tumor xenografts induced by an anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor/vascular permeability factor antibody. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
1996; 93:14765–14770. [PubMed: 8962129]
Zhang J, O’Carroll SJ, Henare K, Ching LM, Ormonde S, Nicholson LF, Danesh-Meyer HV, Green
CR. Connexin hemichannel induced vascular leak suggests a new paradigm for cancer therapy.
FEBS Letters. 2014; 588:1365–1371. [PubMed: 24548560]
Zhang X, Gaspard JP, Chung DC. Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor by the Wnt and Kras pathways in colonic neoplasia. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:6050–6054. [PubMed: 11507052]
Zhou Z, Doi M, Wang J, Cao R, Liu B, Chan KM, Kortesmaa J, Sorokin L, Cao Y, Tryggvason K.
Deletion of laminin-8 results in increased tumor neovascularization and metastasis in mice.
Cancer Res. 2004; 64:4059–4063. [PubMed: 15205311]
Zhu AX, Ancukiewicz M, Supko JG, Sahani DV, Blaszkowsky LS, Meyerhardt JA, Abrams TA,
McCleary NJ, Bhargava P, Muzikansky A, et al. Efficacy, safety, pharmacokinetics, and
biomarkers of cediranib monotherapy in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a phase II study.
Clin. Cancer Res. 2013; 19:1557–1566. [PubMed: 23362324]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Hypoxia and acidosis resulting from impaired perfusion fuel tumor progression and
treatment resistance

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Adverse consequences of hypoxia and acidosis and some of the molecular players
contributing to these: 1) Induction of cancer “stem cell” phenotype (e.g., Akt/β-catenin,
OCT4) (Lee and Simon, 2012); 2) Resistance to radiotherapy, chemotherapy and
immunotherapy (e.g., fewer oxygen radicals, cell cycle arrest) (Huang et al., 2013; Neri and
Supuran, 2011; Wilson and Hay, 2011); 3) Tumor growth and genomic instability:
Expression of growth factors (e.g., IGF1, TGF-α), oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes
(Bindra et al., 2007; Bristow and Hill, 2008; Wilson and Hay, 2011); 4) Epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion and metastasis (e.g., CXCR4, Snail, Lox, cMET)
(Finger and Giaccia, 2010; Semenza, 2014); 5) Inflammation, immunosuppression and
fibrosis (e.g., IL-6, TGF-β, SDF1α, TAM polarization, Tregs, MDSCs) (Casazza et al.,
2013; Chen et al., 2014; Colegio et al., 2014; Motz and Coukos, 2013; Palazón et al., 2012;
Semenza, 2014); 6) Abnormal angiogenesis (e.g., HIFs/VEGF, Ang2) (Carmeliet and Jain,
2011); 7) Resistance to apoptosis/autophagy (e.g., BNIP3) (Semenza, 2014); and 8) Switch
to anaerobic metabolism (e.g., Glut1, LDHA, PGK1) (Semenza, 2014; Vander Heiden et al.,
2009). Many of these consequences are dependent on HIF1α while others are not.
Therefore, improving tumor perfusion may alleviate these adverse consequences. Inset
shows heterogeneous perfusion in a tumor leading to hypoxic and acidic regions. [Inset
reproduced from (Vakoc et al., 2009)]. See also Movie S1.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Effect of vascular normalization on tumor perfusion/oxygenation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A, In a normal tissue, the blood vessels have normal structure and function due to balance of
the signals downstream of the pro-angiogenic molecules (e.g., VEGF, Ang2) and
antiangiogenic molecules (e.g., sVEGFR1, thrombospondins, semaphorins). In contrast,
tumor vessels are structurally and functionally abnormal due to imbalance between pro- and
antiangiogenic signals. This creates an abnormal microenvironment in tumors –
characterized by hypoxia, acidosis and elevated fluid pressure – which fuels tumor
progression and treatment resistance via multiple mechanisms shown in Figure 1. Inhibiting
pro-angiogenic signaling or enhancing antiangiogenic signaling can prune some abnormal
vessels and remodel the rest resulting in a “normalized vasculature”. Depending upon the
extent of normalization versus pruning, tumor perfusion/oxygenation may increase, remain
unchanged or decrease. Some tumors might be intrinsically resistant to a given AA agent
and others may switch to non-sprouting mechanisms of vessels recruitment (e.g., vessel
cooption) that are refractory to the given AA agent and continue to make abnormal vessels
again. [Adapted and updated from Jain, 2001 and Sorensen et al, 2012]. See also Movie S2.
B, The window of increased perfusion from vascular normalization depends on the dose and
potency of antiangiogenic therapy. High doses may cause excessive pruning of tumor
vessels resulting in a shorter window, and may starve a tumor of oxygen and other nutrients.
High doses may also increase toxicity – including some fatal. [Adapted and updated from
Jain, 2013].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Pathways that facilitate or hinder vascular normalization

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although most studies on vascular normalization have focused on VEGF, a number of
molecular players can facilitate (green) or hinder normalization (red). Please note that the
outcome may be dose and context-dependent. Table 2 provides further details about each of
these molecular players. (Tumor cell is depicted near endothelial cells to save space.)
[Adapted and updated from Goel et al, 2011].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Vascular normalization can reprogram the tumor microenvironment from
immunosuppressive to immunosupportive

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The abnormal tumor vasculature can impede T-effector cell infiltration into tumors, and
create a hypoxic and acidic tumor microenvironment, which up-regulates PD-L1 on
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), dendritic cells and cancer cells, impairs Teffector cell and polarizes tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) to the immune inhibitory
M2-like phenotype to suppress T-effector cell function. Hypoxia can also up-regulate
multiple immune-suppressive growth factors and cytokines (e.g., VEGF, TGFβ). Vascularnormalization with appropriate dose and schedule of antiangiogenic treatment can normalize
the tumor vasculature and generate a more homogeneous distribution of perfused tumor
vessels, facilitating the infiltration of T-effector cells while reducing MDSC accumulation.
In addition, alleviation of hypoxia and acidity by improved vascular perfusion polarizes
TAMs to an immunostimulatory M1-like phenotype. [Adapted and updated from Huang et
al, 2013].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Pazopanib

Sorafenib

Sunitinib

12

35
6.8
9.3
8
1
2
27
6

Metastatic RCC

GIST

PNET

Metastatic RCC

Unresectable HCC

Unresectable HCC

Metastatic RCC

Advanced soft tissue
sarcoma

3

5

1.4

NS

2.7

4.8

4.5

6

2.3

3.3

2.1

9.9

12.4

1.2 and 2.9

11.8 and 13.4

4.8

0.8 and 1.9

9 and 18

18

5.9

15.7

0.4 and 0.6

16.2 and 13

Advanced cervical
cancer (with
chemotherapy)

Metastatic RCC (with
IFNα)

Metastatic breast
cancer (with
chemotherapy)*

1.7

2.6

14.1
20

1.4

0

Metastatic nonsquamous NSCLC
(with chemotherapy)

4.4

10

Metastatic colorectal
cancer (with
chemotherapy)

Bevacizumab

Improvement
in PFS
(months)

Improvement
in RR (%)

Approved Indication

Drug

NS

N/A

2.3

2.8

NS

?

NS

4.6

3.7

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

2

2.1

1.4

4.7

Improvement
in OS (months)

(van der Graaf et al., 2012)

(Sternberg et al., 2010)

(Cheng et al., 2009)

(Llovet et al., 2008)

(Escudier et al., 2007)

(Raymond et al., 2011)

(Demetri et al., 2006)

(Motzer et al., 2007)

(Tewari et al., 2014)

(Escudier et al., 2010)

(Rini et al., 2010)

(Brufsky et al., 2011)

(Robert et al., 2011)

(Miles et al., 2010)

(Miller et al., 2007)

(Reck et al., 2010)

(Sandler et al., 2006)

(Giantonio et al., 2007)

(Saltz et al., 2008)

(Kindler et al., 2010)

Ref.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Survival Benefits from Anti-VEGF/VEGFR Drugs

Jain
Page 31

10

0.6

8.7

25

0.8

12

N/A

Advanced RCC

Chemo-refractory
metastatic colorectal
cancer

Chemo-refractory
metastatic colorectal
cancer

Advanced medullary
thyroid cancer

Metastatic gastric and
gastroesophageal
junction (GEJ) cancers

Metastatic GEJ
cancers (with
chemotherapy)

Metastatic NSCLC
(with chemotherapy)

Axitinib

Regorafenib

Aflibercept

Cabozantinib

Ramucirumab

N/A

1.5

0.8

7.2

2.2

0.2

2

6.2

Improvement
in PFS
(months)

N/A

2.3

1.4

NS

1.4

1.4

N/A

N/A

Improvement
in OS (months)

g

(Wilke et al., 2014)

(Fuchs et al., 2014)

(Elisei et al., 2013)

(Van Cutsem et al., 2012)

(Grothey et al., 2013)

(Motzer et al., 2013)

(Wells et al., 2012)

Ref.

Perol, M. (2014). REVEL: A randomized, double-blind, phase III study of docetaxel (DOC) and ramucirumab (RAM; IMC-1121B) versus DOC and placebo (PL) in the second-line treatment of stage IV
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) following disease progression after one prior platinum-based therapy. 2014 AACR Annual Meeting Proceedings, (abstr LBA8006)

g

No longer approved in the USA.

*

43

Advanced medullary
thyroid cancer

Vandetanib

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Improvement
in RR (%)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Approved Indication

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drug

Jain
Page 32

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 33

Table 2

Molecules linked with tumor angiogenesis and vascular normalization*

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Molecule

Complete name

Cell type

Localization

References

Ang1

Angiopoietin 1

Pericyte

Soluble factor

(Huang et al., 2010;
Winkler et al., 2004)

Ang2

Angiopoietin 2

Endothelial

Soluble factor

(Huang et al., 2010;
Nasarre et al., 2009)

BRAF

Proto-oncogene B-Raf

Tumor

Intracellular

(Bottos et al., 2012;
Goel et al., 2012)

c-Met

Hepatocyte growth
factor receptor (HGFR)

Tumor

Transmembrane

(Goel et al., 2012;
You et al., 2011)

Connexin-43

Connexin 43

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Zhang et al., 2014)

Dll4

Delta-like ligand 4

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Hellstrom et al., 2007)

EGFR

Epidermal growth factor
receptor

Tumor

Transmembrane

(Izumi et al., 2002)

eNOS

Endothelial NOS

Endothelial

Intracellular

(Fukumura et al., 2006)

FAK

Focal adhesion kinase

Tumor,
endothelial

Intracellular

(Skuli et al., 2009)

FN

Fibronectin

ECM

Extracellular

(Chiang et al., 2009)

Frizzled

Frizzled

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Elisei et al., 2013)

HIF

Hypoxia-inducible factor

Tumor,
endothelial

Intracellular

(Semenza, 2014)

iNOS

Inducible nitric oxide
synthases

Tumor cells

Intracellular

(Fukumura et al., 2006; Kashiwagi et al., 2008)

Lactate

Lactate

Endothelial

Intracellular

(Goveia et al., 2014;
Vegran et al., 2011)

LAMA4

Laminin α4

ECM

Extracellular

(Seano et al., 2014a;
Zhou et al., 2004)

LDH

Lactate dehydrogenase

Endothelial

Intracellular

(Goveia et al., 2014;
van Beijnum et al., 2006)

MCP-1

Monocarboxylate
transporter 1

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Goveia et al., 2014)

MMP14

Matrix
metallopotreinases 14

Tumor,
endothelial

Transmembrane

(Ager et al., 2014;
Seano et al., 2014b)

MMP2

Matrix
metallopotreinases 2

Tumor,
endothelial

Soluble factor

(Fang et al., 2000;
Winkler et al., 2004)

MMP9

Matrix
metallopotreinases 9

Tumor,
endothelial

Soluble factor

(Jodele et al., 2005;
Winkler et al., 2004)

Netrin-1

Netrin 1

ECM

Extracellular

(Castets and Mehlen, 2010)

Notchl

Notch homolog 1

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Hellstrom et al., 2007; Phng and Gerhardt, 2009)

NRP-1

Neuropilin 1

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Maes et al., 2014;
Maione et al., 2009)

PDGF-B,C

Platelet-derived growth
factor B, C

Endothelial

Soluble factor

(Abramsson et al., 2003; di Tomaso et al., 2009)

PDGFR

PDGF receptor

Pericyte

Transmembrane

(Abramsson et al., 2003; di Tomaso et al., 2009)

PFKFB3

6-phosphofructo-2kinase/fructose-2,6biphosphatase 3

Endothelial

Intracellular

(De Bock et al., 2013; Goveia et al., 2014)

PHD2

HIF-prolyl hydroxylase 2

Tumor,
endothelial

Intracellular

(Mazzone et al., 2009)

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 34

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Molecule

Complete name

Cell type

Localization

References

PI3K

Phosphatidylinositol
bisphosphate 3-kinase

Tumor

Intracellular

(Karar and Maity, 2011)

PIGF

Placental growth factor

Endothelial

Soluble factor

(Fischer et al., 2008)

Ras

Ras family

Tumor

Intracellular

(Karar and Maity, 2011; Zhang et al., 2001)

Rgs5

Regulator of G-protein
signaling 5

Pericyte

Intracellular

(Hamzah et al., 2008)

RhoB

Ras homolog gene
family, member B

Tumor cells

Intracellular

(Skuli et al., 2009)

SEMA3A

Semaphorin 3A

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Maione et al., 2009)

TGFR

TFG receptors

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Liu et al., 2012)

TGFβ

Transforming growth
factor β

Tumor

Soluble factor

(Liu et al., 2012)

Tie2

TIE 2

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Huang et al., 2010;
Winkler et al., 2004)

TNFR

TNF receptors

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Johansson et al., 2012)

TNFα

Tumor necrosis factor α

Tumor

Soluble factor

(Calcinotto et al., 2012;Johansson et al., 2012)

TSP-1

Thrombospondin 1

ECM

Extracellular

(Lawler and Lawler, 2012)

VE-cadherin

Vascular endothelial
cadherin

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Maes et al., 2014;
Orsenigo et al., 2012)

VEGF-A

Vascular endothelial
growth factor A

Tumor,
endothelial

Soluble factor

(Batchelor et al., 2007; Ferrara, 2002;
Winkler et al., 2004)

VEGFR2

VEGF receptors

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Ferrara, 2002;
Sitohy et al., 2012;
Winkler et al., 2004)

VE-PTP

VE-protein tyrosine
phosphatase

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Goel et al., 2013)

WNT

WNT family

Endothelial

Soluble factor

(Reis et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2001)

α5β1 integrin

α5β1 integrin

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Magnussen et al., 2005)

α6β1 integrin

α6β1 integrin

Endothelial

Transmembrane

(Seano et al., 2014a;
Seano et al., 2014b)

αvβ3 integrin

αvβ3 integrin

Tumor,
endothelial

Transmembrane

(Seano et al., 2014b;
Skuli et al., 2009)

αvβ5 integrin

αvβ5 integrin

Tumor,
endothelial

Transmembrane

(Skuli et al., 2009)

β-catenin

β-catenin

Endothelial

Intracellular

(Reis et al., 2012)

*

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For additional references, see Goel et al., 2011.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 35

Table 3

Combination of immunotherapies with antiangiogenic agents

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Antiangiogenic

Immunotherapy

Tumor models

Results

Preclinical studies

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Anti-VEGFR2 mAb

Whole tumor cell vaccine
(secreting GM-CSF)

Breast carcinoma
(Neu-expressing)

↑ trafficking of CD8+ T cells
↑ regression of tumor in FVB
mice (Manning et al., 2007)

Anti-VEGFR2 mAb

Whole tumor cell vaccine
(Mitomycin treated)

Breast carcinoma

↑ recruitment of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells
↓ MDSCs and Tregs
↑ survival (Huang et al., 2012)

Adenoviral delivery
of sVEGFR1/R2

Whole tumor cell vaccine
(secreting GM-CSF)

Colon carcinoma
Melanoma

↑ infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+
T cells.
↓ MDSCs and Tregs.
↑ survival (Li et al., 2006)

VEGF peptide mimic

HER-2 B cell epitope
vaccine

Breast carcinoma

↑ High affinity HER-2 native
antibodies.
↑anti-tumor and
antiangiogenic effects.
↓ tumor growth (Foy et al., 2012)

SU 6668

Whole tumor cell vaccine
(irradiated) and
recombinant B7.2-IgG
fusion protein

Breast carcinoma

↑ recruitment of CD8+ T cells
(Huang et al., 2002)

Sunitinib

Pox-virus based vaccine
expressing carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) and costimulatory
molecules

Colon carcinoma

↑ intratumoral T cells
↓ MDSCs and Tregs
↓ tumor volume and ↑ survival
(Farsaci et al., 2012)

Sorafenib

Anti-PD-1 antibody with a
CXCR4 inhibitor
(AMD3100)

Hepatocellular
carcinoma

↑ intratumoral T cells
↓ MDSCs and Tregs
↓ primary and metastatic tumor
h
volume and ↑ apoptosis

Anti-mouse VEGF
mAb

Peptide-pulsed DCs

Sarcoma

↑ DC number and function.
↑ tumor growth delay
(Gabrilovich et al., 1999)

Anti-mouse VEGF
mAb

Anti-gp100 pmel-1 T
cells, gp100 vaccine, IL-2
after lymphodepletion

Melanoma

↑ immune cell infiltration
↑ tumor growth delay
↑ survival (Shrimali et al., 2010)

VEGFR-1 CAR-Modified
T cells

Lung carcinoma

↓ endothelial tube formation in
vitro
↑ tumor growth delay and ↓
metastasis (Wang et al., 2013)

Anti-VEGFR2

Anti-PD-1 antibody

Colon carcinoma

↑ inhibition of tumor
neovascularization.
↑ T cell infiltration.
↑ expression of cytokines
(Yasuda et al., 2013)

N/A

Peptide vaccine
(VEGFR1, VEGFR2,
URLC10, TTK or CDCA1)

NSCLC

↑ T cell response
↑ Stable disease for 2 months
(Suzuki et al., 2013)

N/A

Antiangiogenic peptide
vaccine

Different solid tumors

↑ activation of T cells.
Anti-tumor activity being
evaluated (Hayashi et al., 2013)

Sunitinib

Adoptive T cell transfer

RCC

↓ number and function of
MDSCs and Tregs (Ko et al., 2009)

Bevacizumab

IFN-aplha2A

Metastatic RCC

↑ progression free survival

Clinical Studies

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

Jain

Page 36

Antiangiogenic

Immunotherapy

Tumor models

Results
(Escudier et al., 2010)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bevacizumab

Ipilimumab

Advanced melanoma

↑ T cell infiltration
(Hodi et al., 2014)

Bevacizumab

Nivolumab

NSCLC

(clinicaltrials.gov identifier:
NCT01454102)

Bevacizumab

Nivolumab

GBM

(clinicaltrials.gov identifier:
NCT02017717)

h
Reiberger, T., Ramjiawan, R. R., Chen, Y., Ng, R., Hato, T., Unan, E. C., Reddy, T. P., Huang, Y., Ochiai, H., Huang, P., Zhu, A. X., Jain, R. K.,
Duda, D. G. (2014). CXCR4 inhibition in combination with anti-PD1 immunotherapy results in an effective immune response during treatment
with sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 60(S1): 644A (abstract 920).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 10.

