Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Antitumor efficacy of the heparan sulfate mimic roneparstat
(SST0001) against sarcoma models involves multi-target inhibition
of receptor tyrosine kinases
Giuliana Cassinelli1, Enrica Favini1, Laura Dal Bo1, Monica Tortoreto1, Marcella De
Maglie2,3, Gianpaolo Dagrada4, Silvana Pilotti4, Franco Zunino1, Nadia Zaffaroni1,
Cinzia Lanzi1
1

Molecular Pharmacology Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

2

Department of Veterinary Sciences and Public Health, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy

3

Mouse and Animal Pathology Laboratory, Fondazione Filarete, Milan, Italy

4

Laboratory of Experimental Molecular Pathology, Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

Correspondence to: Giuliana Cassinelli, email: giuliana.cassinelli@istitutotumori.mi.it
Cinzia Lanzi, email: cinzia.lanzi@istitutotumori.mi.it
Keywords: roneparstat, sarcoma, receptor tyrosine kinase, heparan sulfate, heparanase
Received: February 02, 2016     Accepted: May 08, 2016     Published: June 25, 2016

ABSTRACT
The heparan sulfate (HS) mimic/heparanase inhibitor roneparstat (SST0001)
shows antitumor activity in preclinical sarcoma models. We hypothesized that this
100% N-acetylated and glycol-split heparin could interfere with the functions of
several receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) coexpressed in sarcomas and activated
by heparin-binding growth factors. Using a phospho-proteomic approach, we
investigated the drug effects on RTK activation in human cell lines representative
of different sarcoma subtypes. Inhibition of FGF, IGF, ERBB and PDGF receptors by
the drug was biochemically and functionally validated. Roneparstat counteracted
the autocrine loop induced by the COL1A1/PDGFB fusion oncogene, expressed in a
human dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans primary culture and in NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB
transfectants, inhibiting cell anchorage-independent growth and invasion. In addition,
roneparstat inhibited the activation of cell surface PDGFR and PDGFR-associated
FAK, likely contributing to the reversion of NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cell transformed and
pro-invasive phenotype. Biochemical and histological/immunohistochemical ex vivo
analyses confirmed a reduced activation of ERBB4, EGFR, INSR, IGF1R, associated with
apoptosis induction and angiogenesis inhibition in a drug-treated Ewing’s sarcoma
family tumor xenograft. The combination of roneparstat with irinotecan significantly
improved the antitumor effect against A204 rhabdoid xenografts resulting in a high
rate of complete responses and cures. These findings reveal that roneparstat exerts
a multi-target inhibition of RTKs relevant in the pathobiology of different sarcoma
subtypes. These effects, likely cooperating with heparanase inhibition, contribute to
the antitumor efficacy of the drug. The study supports heparanase/HS axis targeting
as a valuable approach in combination therapies of different sarcoma subtypes
providing a preclinical rationale for clinical investigation.

INTRODUCTION

osteosarcoma (OS) and synovial sarcoma (SS) are the most
common forms in children and young adults [1, 2].
Although survival of sarcoma patients has improved
in the last few decades, advanced and recurrent disease
remains a challenge to clinical management and is

Sarcomas are a highly heterogeneous group of rare
aggressive tumors arising either in bones or soft tissues.
Ewing’s sarcoma (ES), rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47848

Oncotarget

associated with poor prognosis [1, 2]. In fact, current
aggressive therapies with cytotoxic agents give low
response rates in most histological subtypes and are
associated with several side effects. The development
of novel treatment approaches is needed to improve
patients’ outcomes [1]. Recent advances in elucidation of
mechanisms of sarcoma molecular pathology have provided
the ground to develop new molecularly targeted treatments
based on abnormalities in growth factor signaling identified
in the different sarcoma subgroups. Angiogenesis-related
pathways are recognized as potential therapeutic targets and
various agents targeting receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
are under clinical evaluation [3]. Imatinib, a TK inhibitor
targeting ABL, KIT and PDGFR, has shown impressive
efficacy in gastrointestinal stromal tumors carrying
gain-of-function KIT or PDGFRA mutations, and in
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) characterized by
overactivation of PDGFR due to a collagen 1A1 (COL1A1)/
PDGFB rearrangement [4, 5]. Such therapeutic success,
relying on a condition of ‘oncogene addiction’ [6], has not
been reproduced in other sarcoma types. In fact, most of
these tumors might not be dependent on a single targetable
signaling pathway due to the high biomolecular complexity.
Growing preclinical and clinical evidence suggests
that the heparanase/heparan sulfate (HS) system, a crucial
regulator of biological processes in the tumor and its
microenvironment, might represent a valuable therapeutic
target [7–11]. HS, structurally similar to heparin, forms
the side chains of HS proteoglycans (HSPGs) which are
key components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and
the cell surface [10, 11]. HSPGs can exert structural and
regulatory functions by contributing to the ECM integrity
and by binding, through the docking-sites provided by
the HS chains, a multitude of bioactive “heparin-binding”
molecules including growth factors, cytokines and
chemokines. This binding capability allows HSPGs to
regulate the bioavailability and function of growth factors by
creating a protected reservoir and by acting as co-receptors
for ligands of RTKs [11]. HSs, are substrates for heparanase
which is the only known mammalian endoglycosidase
able to specifically cleave HS chains producing discrete
fragments that facilitate the biological activity of
bound (e.g. pro-angiogenic factors VEGF and bFGF).
Moreover, heparanase enzymatic activity participates
in ECM degradation and remodeling associated with
processes involving cell dissemination, such as metastasis,
inflammation, and angiogenesis. In fact, heparanase, which
is rarely expressed in normal tissues, has been found highly
expressed in several tumor types including RMSs and ESs,
often associated with poor prognosis, and recently involved
in chemoresistance [9, 12–15].
HS mimics, synthesized and selected as heparanase
inhibitors, have shown anti-tumor efficacy as well as
antiangiogenic and antimetastatic properties, in preclinical
studies leading a few of them to clinical evaluation [9,
16]. We previously demonstrated the antitumor effect of
the glycol-split heparin derivative heparanase inhibitor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

roneparstat (SST0001) in a panel of pediatric sarcoma
models including an ES, RMSs, and OSs [13, 17]. Moreover,
combination studies showed an improved treatment efficacy
in association with clinically available antiangiogenic agents
such as bevacizumab and sunitinib [17]. The nature of HS
mimics suggests a complex mechanism of action affecting
the plethora of functions of cellular and ECM-bound HS.
Beyond heparanase, HS mimics are supposed to inhibit the
function of heparin-binding molecules, including several
growth factors of RTKs, and are likely to have an effect
on cell signaling. Since, in most cases, such effects have
only been assumed and not directly addressed, a better
understanding of the multi-target actions of HS mimics on
deregulated signaling pathways in specific tumor contexts is
essential to optimize their use as antitumor drugs.
In the present study, we hypothesized that the
activity of RTKs variably expressed and often over-active
in sarcomas (e.g. FGF, ERBB, PDGF receptors) might
be influenced by HS mimics. To test this hypothesis, we
investigated the effects of roneparstat on critical signaling
pathways and features of the malignant phenotype in
sarcoma models.

RESULTS
Multi-target effects of roneparstat on RTK
activation in pediatric sarcoma cell lines
We applied an explorative approach based on the
phospho-proteomic profiling of RTKs to simultaneously
detect the activation of multiple receptors in lysates from
control and roneparstat-treated sarcoma cell lines including
ES family tumors (ESFT), RMS, OS and SS. Whereas
the inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation of PDGFR and
ERBB family members was a common event in roneparstattreated cells from the different sarcoma histotypes, the
drug interference on the activation of other receptors (i.e.
IGF1R, FGFR4) was found to occur in a cell line-specific
way (Figure 1). RTKs inhibited by roneparstat included
receptors constitutively active in serum-free cultured
cells, e.g. ERBB4 in ESFT and SS or FGFR4 in ARMS
cells (Supplementary Figure S1), and receptors active in
the presence of serum (Figure 1). Based on these findings,
we sought to validate the HS mimic effects on receptor
signaling pathways at biochemical and functional levels in
selected sarcoma models.

FGF/FGFR
The inhibitory effect of drug treatment on FGFR4,
constitutively active in RH30 cells (Supplementary Figure S1
and Figure 1), was confirmed by western blotting
(Figure 2A). The activation of FGF receptors was not
evidenced by the phospho-RTK array in the ESFT cell lines.
However, since high levels of FGFR3 expression, associated
with a cancer-related mutation, were described in SK-NMC cells [18, 19], we analyzed tyrosine phosphorylation
47849

Oncotarget

of this receptor by western blotting which confirmed the
roneparstat-induced inhibition (Figure 2B). Moreover,
bFGF-induced, as well as spontaneous, Matrigel invasion
by SK-N-MC cells was abrogated by treatment with the HS
mimic (Figure 2B).

was significantly antagonized by roneparstat. Treatment of
the OS cell line U2OS, also producing the growth factor
[22], inhibited in a dose-dependent way both spontaneous
and exogenous IGF2-induced invasion (Figure 2D).
Similarly, U2OS cell ability to form colonies in soft agar
was significantly reduced by roneparstat and completely
abrogated at 1 mg/ml (Figure 2D). Although this drug
concentration modestly affected the overall clonogenic
efficiency of TC71 cells (about 36% of inhibition), an
almost complete disappearance of large-size colonies was
observed (Figure 2C).

IGF/IGF-1R system
The phospho-RTK array analysis showed a reduced
phosphorylation of IGF1R in roneparstat-treated TC71
and U2OS cells (Figure 1). Figure 2C shows that, in the
ES cell line TC71, drug treatment was able to markedly
reduce IGF1R phosphorylation at Y1135/Y1136, two
major autophosphorylation sites in the receptor activation
loop [20]. TC71 cells carry the prototypical EWS-FLI1
fusion and, consistently with a common pattern of IGF/
IGF1R axis deregulation, express high levels of IGF1R and
of both IGF1 and IGF2 likely involved in autocrine loops
[21]. Nonetheless, IGF1R remains highly responsive to
exogenous IGF2 in TC71 cells. In fact, as shown in Figure
2C, cell invasion in Matrigel was increased by 4-fold in the
presence of the growth factor and such stimulatory effect

ERBB family
Consistently with the phospho-proteomic findings
(Figure 1), western blot analysis showed that roneparstat
reduced the ERBB4 activating phosphorylation at tyrosine
984 in TC71 and SK-N-MC cell lines (Figure 3A and 3B)
both deriving from post-chemotherapy ESFT and
overexpressing a constitutively active receptor [19, 23–25
and Supplementary Figure S1]. Of note, a cancer-associated
mutation of ERBB4 has been described in TC71 cells [19].

Figure 1: Proteomic profiling of tyrosine phosphorylated kinase receptors (RTKs) in control and roneparstat-treated
sarcoma cell lines. The day after seeding, cells were treated with solvent or roneparstat (1 mg/ml) for 48 h in complete medium. Then,
control (C) and drug-treated (Rone) cells were lysed and processed for analysis with human phospho-RTK array. Rectangles evidence
RTKs investigated in this study. (+), reference spots. ESFT, Ewing’s sarcoma family tumor; ARMS, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma; ERMS,
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma; OS, osteosarcoma; SS, synovial sarcoma.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47850

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Inhibition of activation and biological activities of FGFRs and IGF1R. (A), (B), (C) Western blot analyses were

performed on whole cell lysates (WCL) from control (−) and roneparstat-treated (Rone) cells (1 mg/ml, for 48 h) to assess the receptor
activation status using antibodies specifically recognizing activating tyrosine phosphorylated residues. The overall levels of receptors,
actin or tubulin are shown as controls. (B), (C), (D) For the Matrigel invasion assay, cells were pretreated with roneparstat at 1 mg/ml or
at the indicated concentrations for 24 h. Then, cells were transferred to Transwell chambers in serum-free medium with or without the
indicated growth factors (50 ng/ml). The number of invading cells per field ± SD is reported. Data from one experiment representative
of at least two independent experiments or the average data from two experiments, performed in independent duplicates, are shown.
(C), (D) For the anchorage-independent cell growth assay, cells were seeded in soft agar in the presence or absence of roneparstat at 1 mg/ml
(Rone) or at the indicated concentrations. U2OS cell colonies were counted after 24 days using a magnifying projector, whereas TC71 cell
colony number and size were determined after 10 days by computer image analysis. The colony size distribution is scored as percentage of
small (S, < 400 pixels), medium (M, 400–600 pixels), or large (L, > 600 pixels). Data from one experiment representative of at least two
independent experiments, performed in duplicate (mean ± SD), are shown. *P < 0.05, ***P ≤ 0.001 drug-treated versus untreated control
cells; ###P ≤ 0.001 growth factor stimulated versus unstimulated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47851

Oncotarget

ERBB4 can be activated by several members of the EGFrelated growth factor family including heparin-bindingEGF (HB-EGF) characterized by a strong propensity to
bind cell surface proteoglycans [26–28]. Accordingly,
we observed that pretreatment of SK-N-MC cells with
roneparstat clearly antagonized the HB-EGF stimulus in the
Matrigel invasion assay. Moreover, under these conditions,
drug treatment strongly inhibited also EGF-induced cell
invasion (Figure 3B).
Since ERBB4 and EGFR, as homodimers or
heterodimers, may share different ligands including HBEGF and EGF [26], we further investigated the effects
of roneparstat on EGFR activation. Despite EGFR was
barely detectable in the phospho-RTK array (Figure 1)
and in whole cell lysates (Figure 3B) of SK-N-MC cells,
immunoprecipitation of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins
from control and treated cells allowed demonstrating
the ability of the HS mimic to inhibit the receptor
phosphorylation (Figure 3B). Of note, roneparstat inhibited
ERBB4 activation as well as HB-EGF-induced Matrigel
invasion (Figure 3C) also in the CME-1 synovial sarcoma

cell line, which harbors a constitutively active receptor
(Supplementary Figure S1).
In line with the phospho-proteomic findings
(Figure1), the activation of other ERBB family members,
i.e ERBB2 and ERBB3, was found inhibited by roneparstat
treatment in the ERMS cell line RD (Figure 3D) which
expresses both receptors and a constitutively active ERBB3
[29, 30 and Supplementary Figure S1].

PDGF/PDGFR
We previously reported the abrogation of PDGFR
tyrosine phosphorylation in TC71 cells exposed to
roneparstat [17]. Here, we deepened investigation of the
drug effects on the PDGF/PDGFR axis in an additional
ESFT (SK-N-MC) and in an OS (U2OS) cellular model.
Differently from TC71 cells, displaying a barely detectable
phosphorylation of PDGFRβ in the phospho-RTK array,
SK-N-MC cells showed a marked activation of PDGFRα
in the presence of serum which was completely inhibited in
drug-treated cells (Figure 1). Western blotting of SK-N-MC

Figure 3: Inhibition of activation and biological activities of ERBB family receptors. (A), (B), (C), (D) Western blot analyses

were performed on whole cell lysates (WCL) from control (−) and roneparstat-treated cells (Rone, 1 mg/ml, for 48 h) to assess the receptor
activation status using antibodies specifically recognizing kinase-activating phosphorylations. (B), (C) Activation of EGFR and ERBB4
was alternatively assessed by immunoprecipitation with anti-phospho-tyrosine antibody (IP: PY) followed by receptor detection by western
blotting. The overall levels of receptors, actin or tubulin in the corresponding WCL are shown. Matrigel invasion assay was performed with
cells previously exposed to 1 mg/ml roneparstat for 24 h in serum and then transferred in Transwell chambers in serum-free medium with or
without the indicated growth factors (50 ng/ml). Data from one experiment representative of at least two independent ones (CME-1, mean
± SD) or the average data ± SE from two experiments (SK-N-MC), performed in independent duplicates, are shown. In (C), representative
images show CME-1 cells passed through Matrigel and stained with SRB in the invasion assay, original magnification 100X. ***P ≤ 0.001
drug-treated versus untreated control cells; ##P ≤ 0.005 ###P ≤ 0.001 growth factor stimulated versus unstimulated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47852

Oncotarget

cell lysates confirmed the abrogation of phosphorylation at
tyrosine residue 849, the major autophosphorylation site in
the receptor activation loop, which was evident in both the
precursor and the mature forms [31] (Figure 4A). Moreover,
a remarkable dose-dependent inhibition on PDGF-induced
Matrigel invasion was observed in roneparstat-treated cells.
The phospho-RTK array confirmed a constitutive activation
of PDGFRα in U2OS cells (Supplementary Figure S1)
accordingly to the described PDGF-mediated autocrine
loop [31]. The reduced receptor phosphorylation observed
following roneparstat-treatment (Figure 1) was further
validated by immunoprecipitation (Figure 4B). Moreover,
the drug strongly inhibited U2OS cell spontaneous
invasiveness and abrogated the 3-fold increase in cell
invasion induced by exogenous PDGF (Figure 4B).

cells, was also efficiently inhibited in a dose-dependent
way (Figure 5B). Furthermore, the drug strongly reduced
the invasive ability of NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells under serum
free-condition (Figure 5C). Western blot analysis of PDGFR
immunoprecipitates from control and roneparstat-treated
NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells showed that the drug was able to
reduce PDGFRβ phosphorylation at Y857 (Figure 5D), a
residue located in the receptor activation loop and critical
for TK activity [32]. Immunofluorescence microscopy
showed that in NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB control cells, the
activated receptor was present either in a cytoplasmic pool,
surrounding the nuclei, or at the cell periphery where it
was concentrated in the filipodial rod-like extensions at the
leading edge of polarized motile cells (Figure 5E). Such a
subcellular localization of the activated PDGFR resembled
the transient effect described for exogenous PDGFBB on
the receptor distribution in fibroblasts [33]. In roneparstattreated NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells, the receptor activation was
no more detected in the filopodial extensions, suggesting
a specific effect on the PDGFR pool localized at the cell
membrane. Indeed, western blot showed increased levels
of PDGFRβ in drug-treated whole cell lysates (Figure 5D)
consistent with interference on ligand-induced receptor
downregulation [34]. Because of the well-known ability
of the PDGFBB/PDGFRβ axis to induce cytoskeleton
remodeling in mesenchymal cells [31], we examined the
F-actin organization in our model. Consistent with the
reduced cell motility of drug-treated NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB
cells (Figure 5C), F-actin staining by phalloidin evidenced
the prevalent organization of actin filaments in not
contractile cortical fibers. Conversely, in control cells the
complex network of ventral stress fibers and transverse arcs
reflected highly functional contractile machinery [33, 35].
In accordance with downregulation of PDGFR
kinase activity in drug-treated NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells, the
tyrosine phosphorylation of co-immunoprecipitated proteins
appeared reduced (Figure 5D). Since focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) is known to link the growth factor/RTK
systems with the ECM/integrins axes and to be associated
with PDGFBB-activated PDGFRβ [36], we assessed
the presence of FAK in PDGFRβ immunoprecipitates
from NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells. Although FAK was found
associated with the RTK in both control and drug-treated
cells (Figure 5D), its phosphorylation at tyrosine 397,
located in the kinase domain, was markedly reduced
in cells exposed to roneparstat. Overall, these findings
demonstrated the ability of the HS mimic to inhibit
PDGFRβ and its signaling activated through the pathogenic
autocrine loop active in DFSP.

COL1A1/PDGFB/PDGFR oncogenic loop
The striking effects of roneparstat in sarcoma cells
endowed with PDGFR activating autocrine loops [31 and
our data not shown] prompted us to investigate the ability
of the HS mimic to inhibit the transforming potential of
the COL1A1/PDGFB chimeric protein generated by
the chromosomal translocation t(17;22) in DFSP [4, 5].
In this tumor, the fusion protein is processed into a
functional PDGFBB leading to an autocrine activation of
PDGFRβ which is recognized as driver of the oncogenic
transformation. We took advantage of the availability of an
early passage human DFSP primary cell culture (DFSP-C)
to investigate the effects of roneparstat on malignant
phenotype features such as anchorage–independent growth
and invasiveness. Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH)
analysis confirmed the presence of the COL1A1/PDGFB
fusion gene in about 85% of cells. The FISH pattern
of a representative DFSP-C cell shown in Figure 4C,
characterized by a single copy of the COL1A1/PDGFB
fusion, is superimposable with that observed in the
patient DFSP specimen (not shown). DFSP-C cell colony
formation in soft agar was significantly inhibited in the
presence of the HS mimic (Figure 4D). In the Matrigel
invasion assay, DFSP-C cells showed a low spontaneous
invasive potential, however, when incubated in the presence
of their own conditioned medium, the invasive capacity was
enhanced. Under this condition, a significant reduction of
cell invasion could be observed upon roneparstat treatment
(Figure 4E).
Further investigations were performed using NIH3T3
mouse fibroblasts transformed by human DNA containing
the COL1A1/PDGFB rearrangement (NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB)
[5] as a DFSP model system. Roneparstat selectively
inhibited the proliferation of NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB with
respect to parental NIH3T3 cells (Figure 5A). In addition,
the drug completely reverted the transformed phenotype
of transfected cells to a flattened, less refractile, normal
fibroblast-like morphology characterized by contact
inhibition, resembling that of parental NIH3T3 cells.
Anchorage–independent growth, a hallmark of malignant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Multi-RTK inhibitory effects of roneparstat
in vivo
Using the previously reported treatment schedule
(s.c., 2qdx6/w x4w) [13, 17], here we extended the analysis
of roneparstat activity on an additional human ESFT model,
SK-N-MC. Moreover, we investigated the drug potential
47853

Oncotarget

to affect RTK activation in the in vivo setting. SK-N-MC
xenografts were responsive to roneparstat treatment which
induced a maximum TVI of 67% (P < 0.003) (day 17 after
the beginning of treatment) and 1/7 cured mice at the end of
the experiment (day 117). Pharmacodynamic confirmation
of roneparstat multitarget effect was obtained on SK-N-MC
tumors excised after 12 days of treatment. Analysis of tumor
tissue lysates by phospho-RTK array showed a prominent
tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR, ERBB4, INSR and
IGF1R in control which was remarkably decreased
in tumor from treated mice (Figure 6A). In addition,
immunohistochemical detection of CD31 and histological
analyses showed that roneparstat induced a reduction
of microvessel density (P < 0.05) and an increase of the
apoptotic nuclei number (P < 0.05) (Figure 6B), whereas

the number of mitoses in tumor cells was not significantly
affected (not shown). Increased apoptosis and decreased
angiogenesis were also observed in archived tissue samples
of RD tumors from mice which received prolonged
(3–4 weeks) roneparstat treatments [17] (Supplementary
Figure S2). Interestingly, in this model, a significant
reduction of mitoses in tumor cells could be also observed.

Enhanced antitumor effect by combination of
roneparstat with irinotecan
We previously showed that angiogenesis inhibition
contributes to the antitumor efficacy of camptothecins
and found that roneparstat cooperates with antiangiogenic

Figure 4: Inhibition of activation and biological activity of PDGFR receptors. (A), (B) Western blot analysis was performed

on whole cell lysates (WCL) or PDGFR immunoprecipitates (IP: PDGFR) from control (−) and roneparstat-treated cells (Rone, 1 mg/ml,
for 48 h) with an antibody recognizing PDGFR activating tyrosines in SK-N-MC cells. Black arrows indicate the precursor form and red
arrows the mature hyperglycosylated receptor. Tubulin shows correct loading. For the invasion assay, cells, pretreated with roneparstat at
1 mg/ml or at the indicated concentrations for 24 h, were transferred to Matrigel-coated transwells in serum-free medium in the presence of
the indicated PDGFR ligands (50 ng/ml). In (A) and in (B), data from one experiment representative of at least two independent experiments,
performed in duplicate, are shown. (C) The presence of the COL1A1/PDGFB fusion gene in DFSP-C short term cell culture was assayed
by FISH analysis using green-labeled COL1A1 and spectrum orange-labeled PDGFB BAC probes. A single fusion signal (arrow) is present
in the tumor cell harboring the DFSP specific translocation alongside with two green signals (COL1A1) and one red signal. On the left, a
cell showing normal FISH pattern. (D) Inhibition of DFSP-C cell anchorage-independent growth by roneparstat. Cells were seeded in soft
agar in the presence or absence of increasing drug concentrations. Colonies were counted after 26 days using a magnifying projector and
data reported as mean percentage of controls ± SD. (E) Inhibition of Matrigel invasion. DFSP-C cells were subjected to invasion assay in
serum-free medium, or in the presence of their own conditioned medium (CM), after 24 h of treatment with roneparstat (1 mg/ml). In (D)
and (E) average data from two experiments, performed in independent duplicates, are shown. *P < 0.05, ***P ≤ 0.001 drug-treated versus
untreated control cells, ###P < 0.001 growth factor stimulated versus unstimulated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47854

Oncotarget

agents to counteract sarcoma xenograft growth [17, 37].
Thereby, we tested the potential of the HS mimic to
promote responsiveness to irinotecan of the rhabdoid A204
tumor that displayed the lowest sensitivity to treatment
with camptothecins, among a panel of sarcoma models, in
terms of cures [37]. As reported in Figure 6C, roneparstat
was able to decrease the constitutive activation of PDGFRα
in A204 cells [38, 39]. Confirming previous findings [17,
37], roneparstat and irinotecan as single agents achieved a
high TVI (80% and 95%, respectively) with one complete

regression (CR) in the group of animals receiving the
camptothecin (Table1 and Figure 6D). Nonetheless, single
drug administration produced mostly a tumor growth delay
(Figure 6D). In mice receiving the drug combination, TVI
reached 100%, with 8/8 animals experiencing CR. In this
group of mice, only 3 tumors regrew around 50 days after
the last treatment, whereas the remaining 5 out of 8 mice
showed no evidence of disease at the end of the experiment
(day 115) (Table 1). Noteworthy, the combination treatment
was well tolerated in all animals.

Figure 5: Inhibition of COL1A1/PDGFB fusion oncogene-mediated PDGFR activation and NIH3T3 cell
transformation. (A) Parental NIH3T3 and NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of roneparstat (Rone)

and the drug antiproliferative activity was assessed 72 h later by cell counting. The right panel shows the effect of 24 h drug treatment
on the transformed morphologic phenotype of NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB cells in comparison with parental cells. Representative images were
taken under a phase-contrast microscope (original magnification, 100X). (B) Inhibition of anchorage-independent growth of NIH3T3COL1A1/
PDGFB
cells. Cells were seeded in soft agar in the presence or absence of increasing roneparstat concentrations. Colonies were counted
after 11 days using a magnifying projector and data reported as mean colony number/field ± SD. (C) Inhibition of NIH3T3COL1A1/
PDGFB
cell invasive ability. After 24 h of exposure to roneparstat (1 mg/ml), transfected fibroblasts were transferred to Matrigel-coated
transwell chambers in serum-free medium and invasion assessed 24 h later. Data are reported as the average cell number per field ± SD.
Representative images of SRB-stained invaded cells are shown beside (original magnification 100X). (D) Effect of roneparstat (1 mg/ml,
24 h) on PDGFR activation and signaling. The receptor was immunoprecipitated from NIH3T3COL1A/PDGFB cell lysates with an anti-PDGFRβ
antibody and its activation assessed by western blotting using an antibody recognizing tyrosine phosphorylated PDGFR. In the same filter,
anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (pY) revealed phosphopeptides co-immunoprecipitated with PDGFRβ, among which FAK, which was then
identified by blotting with anti-phospho-FAK and anti-FAK antibodies. Blots performed on cell lysates (CL) show the protein overall levels
and loading control. (E) Indirect immunofluorescence showing, on the left, localization of tyrosine phosphorylated PDGFR in control and
roneparstat-treated (1 mg/ml for 24 h) NIH3T3COL1A/PDGFB cells. On the right, cellular distribution of F-actin stained with green fluorescent
phalloidin. Nuclei are evidenced with Hoechst 3341 counterstaining (blue). Two images for each sample are shown. Original magnification,
1000X. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 drug-treated versus untreated control cells. Data from representative experiments, performed in duplicate,
are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47855

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

sarcoma cell subtypes. The inhibition of specific RTKs
was confirmed ex vivo in drug-treated ESFT xenografts.
In addition, we showed that the combination of roneparstat
with irinotecan, a clinically available cytotoxic agent,
resulted in strong potentiation of the anti-tumor effect.
Roneparstat was selected in extensive synthetic
chemistry studies as a modified heparin devoid of any
significant anticoagulant effect and endowed with a strong
heparanase inhibitory activity [40]. For its relevance in
critical aspects of cancer progression, heparanase represents
an attractive therapeutic target [7, 9, 16]. Indeed, inhibition
of secreted heparanase, implicated in ECM remodeling
processes, is consistent with the anti-angiogenic and antimetastatic effects described for roneparstat and other HS

Consistent with the pleiotropic nature and the broad
regulatory functions of HS, the mechanism of the antitumor
action of HS mimics appears complex and dependent on
the biological context. We previously reported a significant
activity of the HS mimic roneparstat against a panel of soft
tissue and bone sarcoma models [13, 17]. In the present
study, we extended investigation to the effects exerted by
the drug on molecular signaling systems implicated in the
pathobiology of sarcomas. Our data showed that, by acting
as a multi-target agent, roneparstat was able to counteract
activation and functions of several growth factor/RTK axes
supporting or driving the malignant phenotype in different

Figure 6: In vivo activity of roneparstat, alone and in combination, against sarcoma xenografts in mice. (A), (B)

Pharmacodynamic effect on RTKs in SK-N-MC xenografts associated with angiogenesis inhibition and apoptosis induction. Tumor
xenografts-bearing mice were administered with vehicle (CTR) or roneparstat at 60 mg/kg (2qdx5/w)(Rone). After 16 days, tumors were
removed and processed for proteomic profiling with phospho-RTK array (A) or immunohistochemical and histological analysis (B). For
immunohistochemical detection of microvessel density, formalin fixed and paraffin embedded tumor sections were probed with an antibody
recognizing CD31-positive cells. In parallel, tumor sections were stained with Hematoxylin-Eosin (H & E) for morphological detection
of apoptotic cells. Columns, mean percentage of controls ± SE. On the right, representative images of CD31 and H&E staining. Arrows
indicate apoptotic cells with typical morphological features: shrinkage and fragmentation into membrane-bound apoptotic bodies. Original
magnification 400X; insert, 1000X. (C) Reduced constitutive phosphorylation of PDGFRα in roneparstat-treated A204 rhabdoid cells. After
48 h of incubation in the presence of solvent or 1 mg/ml roneparstat in serum-free medium, cells were lysed and processed for proteomic
profiling with phospho-RTK array. (+), reference spots. (D) Enhancement of antitumor efficacy against A204 rhabdoid xenografts by
combined treatment with irinotecan. Irinotecan (50 mg/kg) was administered i.v. with an intermittent treatment schedule q4dx4; roneparstat
(60 mg/kg) was administered s.c., 2qdx6/w, for 4 weeks. Brackets under abscissa indicate the treatments’ timeframe. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
drug-treated versus control tumors, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01 versus drug combination at day 24 after tumor implantation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47856

Oncotarget

Table 1: Antitumor effects of roneparstat and irinotecan against human A204 rhabdoid sarcoma
xenografts
Drug

Na

Doseb
(mg/kg/day)

Schedule

TVI%c
(day)

CRd

irinotecan

8

50

q4dx4

95 (24)**,##

1/8

roneparstat

7

60x2

2qdx6/wx4w

80 (24)**,#

0/7

roneparstat plus
irinotecan

8

60x2

2qdx6/wx4w

50

q4dx4

100 (24)**

8/8

NEDe
0/8
0/7
5/8

N, number of treated mice
Tumor fragments were implanted s.c. in the right flank of nude mice at day 0 and treatments started the day after. Roneparstat,
dissolved in sterile saline, was administered s.c. at 10 ml/kg; irinotecan, dissolved in sterile distilled water, was delivered i.v.
at 15 ml/kg. Drugs were administered, as indicated, alone or in combination.
c
TVI%, tumor volume inhibition percent = 100 − (mean tumor volume of treated mice / mean tumor volume of control mice
× 100) determined on day 24 after tumor implantation.
d
CR, complete regressions, i.e. disappearance of the tumors lasting at least ten days after the end of treatments
e
NED, mice with no evidence of disease at the end of the experiment (day 115).
**P < 0.001 vs control tumors, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01 vs combination-treated tumors, by Student’s t test.
a

b

mimics [7, 41–43]. Furthermore, the ability of roneparstat to
inhibit multiple myeloma growth and angiogenesis has been
correlated with disruption of the heparanase/syndecan-1
axis and downregulation of HGF, VEGF and MMP-9
gene expression controlled by endogenous heparanase
in myeloma cells [44, 45]. In line with these findings,
roneparstat treatment induced a remarkable reduction of
angiogenesis-related molecules released in the conditioned
media of ES and RMS cells [17].
Nonetheless, in vitro studies suggest that an additional
mechanism through which HS mimics exert their antitumor
activity relies on direct effects on tumor and stromal
cells through interference on HSPGs interactions with
chemokines, growth factors and receptors. Inhibition of
endothelial cell functions stimulated by VEGF and FGF2,
such as migration, morphogenesis or proliferation, has
been commonly reported as a feature of several HS mimics
[46–48]. Among compounds currently undergoing clinical
evaluation, the glycol-split heparin M402 (necuparanib)
inhibits migration of Jurkat cells induced by the heparinbinding chemokine SDF-1α [49]. The fully sulfated HS
mimic PG545 inhibits proliferation of pancreatic tumor
cells and migration/invasion of ovarian cancer cells by
interacting with Wnts ligands and other heparin binding
factors [50, 51]. The recent report showing that roneparstat
inhibits chondrogenesis and chondrogenic marker gene
expression in mesenchymal cells from mouse embryo [52]
suggests a potential therapeutic interest for the drug in
treatments of hereditary multiple exostoses, benign pediatric
cartilaginous tumors overexpressing heparanase. Of note,
interference on signaling mediated by bone morphogenetic
proteins, which are well known heparin-binding factors [11,
53] could contribute to the strong anti-chondrogenic effect
of roneparstat.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Our present findings support the view of a
competition with HSPGs regulatory functions as a relevant
mechanism contributing to roneparstat antitumor effects.
The formation of a functional ternary complex with FGF
family members and FGF receptors has long been known
as a characteristic of heparin resembling the co-receptor
function of HSPGs [10]. Glycol-split heparin derivatives
were shown to maintain the ability to bind bFGF [40].
However, as opposed to heparin, roneparstat induced only a
little release of bFGF from the ECM and failed to stimulate
its mitogenic activity in early evaluation tests. Present data
confirmed that the HS mimic is able to counteract the proinvasive effect of bFGF and the constitutive activation of
FGFR4 and FGFR3. The implication of FGFR4 signaling
in RMS tumorigenesis is well documented [54]. The
receptor is, in fact, frequently overexpressed through gene
amplification or direct transcription by the PAX3-FOXO1
fusion oncoprotein, the hallmark of alveolar RMS. High
FGFR4 expression correlates with advanced stage and poor
survival, whereas oncogenic mutations of FGFR4 are found
in a subset of tumors [55]. bFGF, which is abundant in the
bone microenvironment, is a main motility factor for ESFT
cells [18]. Indeed, expression and activation of FGFRs
were observed in clinical samples of ESFT [18] and, in a
recent meta-analysis of mutational data, FGFR3 was found
mutated in 50% of ESFT cell lines, being one of the most
frequently mutated cancer-associated genes [19].
The IGF/IGF1R/IGFBPs axis represents a nodal
signaling system and a potential therapeutic target in both
ESFT and OS [20, 56]. In ESFT cells, upregulation of
IGF1 and downregulation of the inhibitory IGFBP3 have
been described as a direct consequence of the aberrant
transcription induced by EWS-FLI1, the fusion oncoprotein
pathognomonic of the disease [1, 21, 57]. Moreover, several
47857

Oncotarget

studies have reported IGF1R expression in ESFT and OS
tumor samples and IGF1R signaling dependency in cell
cultures [56, 58]. Our data showed inhibition of IGF1R
activation in TC71 and U2OS cells exposed to roneparstat
and, in agreement, inhibition of colony formation and IGF2stimulated invasion. Notably, heparin-binding domains
are present in four out of six IGFBPs which regulate halflife and bioavailability of IGFs [59, 60]. Specifically, it
has been proposed that, by favoring the binding of IGF/
IGFBP complexes to “heparin-like glycosaminoglycans”
at the cell surface and ECM, certain IGFBPs can increase
local IGF activity stimulating nearby IGF1R [59, 60]. In
addition, although IGF ligands are not considered canonical
heparin-binding proteins, a previously uncharacterized
putative heparin-binding domain in IGF2 has been recently
demonstrated to play a pivotal role in the IGF2/IGFBP2
complex affinity for heparin [61]. Overall, these studies
and our present findings are consistent with interference
on the formation of a functional IGF/IGFBP/HS ternary
complex as mechanism of inhibition of IGF1R activation
by roneparstat.
ERBB4 is an additional target of roneparstat
treatment revealed in this study. ERBB4 activation was in
fact inhibited by drug treatment in TC71 and SK-N-MC
cells which overexpress the receptor [23–25]. ERBB4
expression in ESFT cells has been recently reported to
correlate with an aggressive phenotype in vitro and in vivo.
Moreover, in the clinical setting, overexpression of the
receptor has been observed in metastatic lesions compared
to primary tumors, pointing to a potential role as metastasis
biomarker [23]. Our evidence that roneparstat could
completely abrogate HB-EGF-induced Matrigel invasion by
SK-N-MC cells, support a possible interference of the HS
mimic with the interaction between HB-EGF and HSPGs,
essential for the ligand function [62, 63]. Indeed, HB-EGF
expression and secretion by ESFT and ERMS cells [23 and
our data not shown] may sustain activation of both ERBB4
and EGFR. Thereby, the inhibition of ERBB receptors may
conceivably rely on roneparstat hampering activation of
homo and heterodimers of the ERBB family [28]. Similarly
to what observed in ESFT cells, ERBB4 activation was
inhibited by roneparstat treatment in the SS cell line
CME-1. Notably, also in these cells ERBB4 activation
was associated with the cell invasive ability. This finding
warrants further investigation since a missense mutation
in ERBB4 has been recently detected, in addition to the
t(X;18) main oncogenic driver, in a SS [64]. In SK-N-MC
tumor xenografts, ERBB4 and EGFR were the prominent
RTKs detected by the phospho-proteome array together
with INSR and IGF1R. Their tyrosine phosphorylation was
remarkably reduced in roneparstat-treated tumors providing
pharmacodynamic evidence of in vivo targeting. Notably,
decreased angiogenesis was associated with increased
apoptosis in tumor cells. These effects are conceivably the
result of the multi-targeting heparanase/HS activity of the
drug affecting tumor and stromal cells, as well as the ECM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

It is also conceivable that cell-type dependent factors,
such as types and HS composition of HSPGs, as well as
mechanisms of receptor activation, influence eventual
effects of roneparstat on specific signaling pathways. With
respect to PDGFRs, consistently with a competition with
HSPGs for binding PDGFs, our data support that both
autocrine and paracrine modalities of activation can be
antagonized by roneparstat. Notably, we demonstrated for
the first time the potential of a HS mimic to counteract an
oncogenic autocrine loop driving cell transformation in
two DFSP model systems, a human primary culture and
NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB transfectants. Our data clearly indicated
that inhibition of the cell membrane pool of constitutively
activated PDGFR is associated with inhibition of cell
anchorage-independent growth and invading ability by
roneparstat. On the other hand, PDGF contributes to the
paracrine growth stimulation of different types of stromal
cells playing a key role in the cross-talk with malignant
cells in the tumor microenvironment. Interference with
these PDGF functions may, at least in part, contribute to
roneparstat inhibitory effect on angiogenesis observed
here, as well as in other studies [15, 43]. It remains to be
elucidated whether the PDGF/PDGFR axis inhibition by
roneparstat is associated with a reduction of the intratumor
fluid pressure, as described for other PDGFR antagonists
[31, 65]. The latter effect would be of particular relevance
in relation to combination treatments, since a reduced
intratumor fluid pressure has been shown to favor drug
uptake and therapeutic efficacy [65]. The preclinical profile
of roneparstat appears, in fact, especially promising in
combination therapies. Previous reports showed good
tolerability and potentiation of antitumor efficacy by
treatments combining the HS mimic with dexamethasone
or other antimyeloma agents, antiangiogenic agents, and
lapatinib, in various models [15, 17, 43, 44]. In line with
these studies, the combination of roneparstat with the
camptothecin irinotecan, was highly effective and welltolerated in the rhabdoid model A204 being able, in contrast
to the singly administered drugs, to block the tumor growth
in all treated mice and until the end of the experiment in
the majority of animals. These findings implicate a potential
clinical interest, since roneparstat is currently under phase
1 evaluation and irinotecan has emerged in pediatric trials
as promising for treating RMS and ES in combination
therapies [66].
In summary, this study confirms interference with the
heparanase/HS functions as a valuable antitumor approach
in preclinical sarcoma models and a promising strategy to
enhance efficacy in combination therapies. The reported data,
demonstrating a multi-target inhibitory effect on activation of
coexpressed and often interconnected RTKs crucial in the
pathobiology of different sarcoma subtypes, reveals a new
aspect, likely cooperating with heparanase inhibition, of
the antitumor activity of the HS mimic roneparstat. These
findings contribute to provide a preclinical rationale for
further investigation in the clinical setting.
47858

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

anti-phospho-HER2/ERBB2 (Tyr877), anti-phosphoHER4/ERBB4 (Tyr984) and anti-FAK from Cell Signaling
(Beverly, MA); anti-PDGFR β and anti-PDGFRα from
Upstate Biotechnology; anti-FGFR3 and anti-FGFR4
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Rabbit monoclonal
antibodies: anti-phospho-PDGFRα (Tyr849)/PDGFRβ
(Tyr857), anti-phospho-IGF-IRβ (Tyr1135/1136)/InsulinRβ
(Tyr1150/1151), anti-phospho-HER3/ErbB3 (Tyr1289),
anti-PDGFRβ and anti-HER2/ERBB2 from Cell Signaling.

Cell lines, culture conditions and drugs
The human rhabdoid A204 and osteosarcoma U2OS
cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture
Collection, the alveolar RH30 cell line was from Leibniz
Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms
and Cell Cultures. The Askin’s tumor cell line SK-N-MC
was kindly provided by R. Maggi (University of Milan,
Italy), the embryonal RMS cell line RD by A. Rosolen
(University of Padua, Italy) and the ES cell line TC71
by M.C. Manara (Rizzoli Institute, Bologna, Italy). The
murine NIH3T3 cell line and its derivative NIH3T3COL1A1/
PDGFB
cell line, obtained by transfection with DNA from a
human dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans containing the
COL1A1/PDGFB rearrangement [5] were kindly provided
by A. Greco (Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Tumori, Milan,
Italy). The SS cell line CME-1 was previously described
[67]. The short term culture of DFSP was obtained by
enzymatic disaggregation of a fresh specimen. Patient
provided written consent for the use of specimen for
research.
RD, RH30, A204 and CME-1 cells were cultured
in RPMI medium, TC71 cells in Iscove’s modified
Dulbecco’s medium, U2OS cells in McCoys medium,
and SK-N-MC cells in EMEM medium (Lonza, Verviers,
Belgium). The DSFP-C primary culture was maintained in
DMEM:Ham’s F12 (1:1) medium (Lonza). Culture media
were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. The
above listed cell lines were maintained at 37°C in a 5% CO2
atmosphere. NIH3T3 and NIH3T3COL1A1/PDGFB fibroblasts
were cultivated in DMEM supplemented with 10% or
5% calf serum, respectively (Colorado Serum Company,
Denver, CO) in a 10% CO2 atmosphere. All tumor cell
lines were authenticated by the AmpFISTR Identifiler PCR
amplification kit (Applied Biosystems, PN4322288) and
only frozen pools of tested cells were used.
Roneparstat (SST0001) was provided by sigma-tau
Research Switzerland S.A. (Mendrisio, CH). Preparation
and characterization of roneparstat, characterized by
N-acetylation and glycol-splitting (previously known
as 100NA-ROH), have been previously reported [40].
Roneparstat was dissolved in physiological saline and
irinotecan in distilled water.

Cellular studies
For the cell growth inhibition assay, cells were
plated at 2500 cells/cm2, treated the day after with the
indicated drug concentrations and counted 72 h later using
a Coulter Counter (Coulter Electronics, Luton, UK). For
the anchorage-independent growth assay in soft agar, the
previously described procedure was applied [68]. Briefly,
cells, seeded at 500–1000 cells/cm2, were incubated in the
presence of solvent or drug for 11–26 days then, colonies
were counted under a magnifying projector. Alternatively,
the number of colonies in six fields was counted for each
plate. The size and the number of colonies were determined
by ImageMaster TotalLab, version 1.10, analyzing digital
images captured by Image Master VDS (Amersham
Biosciences Little Chalfont, UK). For the Matrigel invasion
assay, cells were seeded in complete medium and pretreated
at the indicated drug concentrations for 24 h. Then, cells
were harvested, resuspended in serum-free or in the cells’
own conditioned medium as indicated, and transferred to
the upper chamber of 24-well Transwell plates (Costar,
Corning Inc., Corning, NY) previously coated with
Growth Factor Reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San
Jose, CA) (6 × 104 – 2,4 × 105 cells/filter, according to the
spontaneous invasive ability). The same drug concentration
used for cell pretreatment was added in both the upper and
lower chambers. Where indicated, human recombinant
growth factors were added in the lower chamber at 50 ng/
ml. After 24 h (or 48 h for experiments with the SK-NMC cell line), cells that invaded Matrigel were stained
with sulforodhamine B (SRB) (Sigma) and counted under
an inverted microscope as described [17]. The number
of invading cells in four microscopic fields was counted
for each filter. The following human recombinant growth
factors were used: HGF, HB-EGF, PDGFAA and PDGFBB
from Sigma, basic FGF and EGF from Peprotech (London,
UK), IGF2 from R&D system (Minneapolis, MN).

Antibodies

Western blot analysis and RTK proteome
profiler

Mouse monoclonal antibodies: anti-phosphoFAK(Tyr397) from BD Transduction (Lexington, KY);
anti-EGFR and anti-phosphotyrosine clone 4G10, from
Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY); anti-β tubulin
and anti-ERBB3 from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis MO);
anti IGF-IRβ from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz,
CA). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies: anti-actin and antiERBB4 from Sigma; anti-phospho-FGFR (Tyr653/654),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

For biochemical analyses, exponentially growing
cells were seeded in complete medium and treated the
day after with the drug at the indicated concentrations.
After 48h, cells were processed for RTK analysis using
the Proteome Profiler Array Kit (ARY001/ARY001B,
47859

Oncotarget

R&D systems) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, or for total protein extraction, or
immunoprecipitation as previously described in details
[68, 69]. Otherwise, proteomic analysis was performed on
lysates from serum starved cells, or on lysates from frozen
tumors analogously processed after pulverization by the
Mikro-Dismembrator II (B. Brown Biotech International,
Melsungen, Germany). For validation experiments,
immunoprecipitates or cell lysates were prepared,
separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred on nitrocellulose and
analyzed by western blotting as described [68], using the
indicated antibodies.

serial s.c. passages of tumor fragments. For antitumor
activity studies, fragments from growing tumors were
s.c. implanted in the right flank of mice. Groups of
7–8 mice bearing one tumor s.c. were employed.
Treatments started 1–3 days after the engraftment.
Roneparstat was administered s.c., twice daily (60
mg/kg/injection), for 6 consecutive days per week
(2qdx6/w), with the treatment repeated for 4–6 weeks.
Irinotecan was administered i.v. (q4dx4) at 50 mg/Kg.
The efficacy of drug treatments was assessed as: tumor
volume inhibition percentage (TVI %) in treated versus
control mice, calculated according to the formula: TVI%
= 100 − (mean TV treated/mean TV control × 100);
complete regression (CR), i.e. disappearance of the tumor
lasting at least ten days after the end of treatments; no
evidence of disease (NED), i.e. absence of tumors at the
end of the experiment. Drug tolerability was assessed
as body weight loss percent which never exceeded 10%
during treatments.
For histological and immunohistochemical analyses,
mice carrying s.c. SK-N-MC xenografts (three to five
mice per group) were treated with roneparstat at the dose
60 mg/kg (2qdx5/w). After 16 days from the beginning
of treatment, tumors were excised, formalin fixed and
paraffin embedded. Four μm sections from each tumor
xenograft were stained with Hematoxylin-Eosin and the
number of mitoses and apoptosis was morphologically
assessed in 3 randomly selected high power fields within
the tumor section. Microvessel density was evaluated by
immunohistochemical detection of CD31 using a primary
rat monoclonal antibody (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany).
The number of CD31-positive vascular outlines was counted
in 3 200x microscopic fields randomly selected throughout
the neoplastic tissue by using the ImageJ analysis program.
Histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses were
performed in a blind fashion.
For in vivo pharmacodynamic evaluation, two
hours after the last drug administration, the animals were
sacrificed and the tumors were resected and snap frozen
in liquid nitrogen before processing for RTK proteomic
profiling.

Immunofluorescence analyses
Cells, grown on coverslips, were exposed to the
drug for 48 h, then fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde for
15 min and permeabilized in cold 100% methanol for 1
min. After blocking in 1% BSA in PBS for 1 h and washing
in PBS, cells were incubated with primary anti-phosphoPDGFR antibody (1:500) followed by secondary Alexa
Fluor 488 anti-rabbit antibody (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
Alternatively, cells were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for
20 min and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in
PBS for 5 min at room temperature. After blocking with
2% BSA in PBS, slides were incubated with Fluorescein
Isothiocyanate Labeled Phalloidin (1:500) (Sigma). Nuclei
were counterstained with Hoechst 33341 (Sigma). Slides,
mounted with Mowiol, were examined by a fluorescence
microscope equipped with a digital camera.

Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization
COL1A1 and PDGFB gene status were studied by
FISH on cells from primary culture by using Bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) probes (Children Hospital
Research Institute, Oakland, CA) covering the PDGFB
(RP11-630N12 RP11-506F7) and COL1A1 (RP11-93L18,
RP11- 131M15) genes [70]. BACs were labelled with
Spectrum Green or Spectrum Orange (Abbott Molecular,
Abbott Park, IL) by nick translation (Nick translation KIT;
Abbott Molecular). Probe labelling and cells treatments
for FISH were carried out according to manufacturer’s
instruction.

Statistical analyses
The Student’s 2-tailed t test was applied to assess
statistical significance in in vitro and in vivo experiments.
P values < 0.05 were considered significant.

In vivo studies
All experiments were carried out using 8 weeks-old
female athymic Swiss nude mice (Charles River, Calco,
Italy). Mice were maintained in laminar flow rooms
keeping temperature and constant humidity with free
access to food and water. Experiments were approved by
the Ethics Committee for Animal Experimentation of the
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori of Milan
according to reported guidelines [71].
Cells exponentially growing in cell culture were
injected s.c. in mice and tumor lines were achieved by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Dr. Giovanna Petrangolini
for in vivo experimental support, Prof. Eugenio Scanziani
for assistance in immunohistochemical analyses, Dr.
Angela Greco for the generous gift of the NIH3T3COL1A1/
PDGFB
cell line, and Dr. Alessandro Noseda for critical
review of the manuscript.
47860

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Chiodelli P, Bugatti A, Urbinati C, Rusnati M. Heparin/
Heparan sulfate proteoglycans glycomic interactome in
angiogenesis: biological implications and therapeutical use.
Molecules. 2015; 20:6342–88.

Roneparstat is a proprietary drug of sigma-tau
Research Switzerland S.A. F. Zunino and N. Zaffaroni
received grant support from sigma-tau Research Switzerland
S.A. The other authors disclosed no potential conflict of
interest.

12.	 Masola V, Maran C, Tassone E, Zin A, Rosolen A,
Onisto M. Heparanase activity in alveolar and embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma: implications for tumor invasion. BMC
Cancer. 2009; 9:304.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

13.	 Shafat I, Ben-Arush MW, Issakov J, Meller I, Naroditsky I,
Tortoreto M, Cassinelli G, Lanzi C, Pisano C, Ilan N,
Vlodavsky I, Zunino F. Pre-clinical and clinical significance
of heparanase in Ewing’s sarcoma. J Cell Mol Med. 2011;
15:1857–64.
14.	 Kazarin O, Ilan N, Naroditzky I, Ben-Itzhak O, Vlodavsky I,
Bar-Sela G. Expression of heparanase in soft tissue
sarcomas of adults. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 33:39.
15.	 Ramani VC, Zhan F, He J, Barbieri P, Noseda A, Tricot G,
Sanderson RD. Targeting heparanase overcomes
chemoresistance and diminishes relapse in myeloma.
Oncotarget. 2016;7:1598–607. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6408.
16.	 Pisano C, Vlodavsky I, Ilan N, Zunino F. The potential
of heparanase as a therapeutic target in cancer. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2014; 89:12–9.
17.	 Cassinelli G, Lanzi C, Tortoreto M, Cominetti D, Petrangolini G,
Favini E, Zaffaroni N, Pisano C, Penco S, Vlodavsky I,
Zunino F. Antitumor efficacy of the heparanase inhibitor
SST0001 alone and in combination with antiangiogenic
agents in the treatment of human pediatric sarcoma models.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2013; 85:1424–32.
18.	 Kamura S, Matsumoto Y, Fukushi JI, Fujiwara T, Iida K,
Okada Y, Iwamoto Y. Basic fibroblast growth factor in the
bone microenvironment enhances cell motility and invasion
of Ewing’s sarcoma family of tumours by activating the
FGFR1-PI3K-Rac1 pathway. Br J Cancer. 2010; 103:370–81.
19.	 Ward KA, Archer M, Bryan BA, Mitchell DC. The genomic
landscape of pediatric bone sarcomas. J Pediatr Oncol.
2013; 1:88–97.
20.	 Li R, Pourpak A, Morris SW. Inhibition of the insulin-like
growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R) tyrosine kinase as a novel
cancer therapy approach. J Med Chem. 2009; 52:4981–5004.
21.	 Huang HJ, Angelo LS, Rodon J, Sun M, Kuenkele KP,
Parsons HA, Trent JC, Kurzrock R. R1507, an anti-insulinlike growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) antibody, and EWS/
FLI-1 siRNA in Ewing’s sarcoma: convergence at the IGF/
IGFR/Akt axis. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e26060.

The study was supported by Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro (IG 8956 to C. Lanzi) and by
research grants from sigma-tau Research Switzerland S.A.
(to F. Zunino and N. Zaffaroni).

REFERENCES
  1.	 Taylor BS, Barretina J, Maki RG, Antonescu CR, Singer S,
Ladanyi M. Advances in sarcoma genomics and new
therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:541–57.
  2.	 HaDuong JH, Martin AA, Skapek SX, Mascarenhas L.
Sarcomas. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2015; 62:179–200.
  3.	 Versleijen-Jonkers YM, Vlenterie M, van de Luijtgaarden AC,
van der Graaf WT. Anti-angiogenic therapy, a new player in
the field of sarcoma treatment. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2014;
91:172–85.
  4.	 Simon MP, Pedeutour F, Sirvent N, Grosgeorge J, Minoletti F,
Coindre JM, Terrier-Lacombe MJ, Mandahl N, Craver RD,
Blin N, Sozzi G, Turc-Carel C, O’Brien KP, et al. Deregulation
of the platelet-derived growth factor B-chain gene via fusion
with collagen gene COL1A1 in dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans and giant-cell fibroblastoma. Nat Genet. 1997;
15:95–8.
  5.	 Greco A, Fusetti L, Villa R, Sozzi G, Minoletti F, Mauri P,
Pierotti MA. Transforming activity of the chimeric
sequence formed by the fusion of collagen gene COL1A1
and the platelet derived growth factor b-chain gene in
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Oncogene. 1998; 17:
1313–9.
  6.	 Weinstein IB, Joe AK. Mechanisms of disease: Oncogene
addiction—a rationale for molecular targeting in cancer
therapy. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2006; 3:448–57.
  7.	 McKenzie EA. Heparanase: a target for drug discovery in
cancer and inflammation. Br J Pharmacol. 2007; 151:1–14.
 8.	 Vlodavsky I, Elkin M, Ilan N. Impact of heparanase and
the tumor microenvironment on cancer metastasis and
angiogenesis: basic aspects and clinical applications. Rambam
Maimonides Med J. 2011; 2:e0019.
  9.	 Masola V, Secchi MF, Gambaro G, Onisto M. Heparanase as
a target in cancer therapy. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2014;
14:286–93.

22.	 Raile K, Höflich A, Kessler U, Yang Y, Pfuender M, Blum WF,
Kolb H, Schwarz HP, Kiess W. Human osteosarcoma (U-2
OS) cells express both insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)
receptors and insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6phosphate (IGF-II/M6P) receptors and synthesize IGFII: autocrine growth stimulation by IGF-II via the IGF-I
receptor. J Cell Physiol. 1994; 159:531–41.

10.	 Knelson EH, Nee JC, Blobe GC. Heparan sulfate signaling
in cancer. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014; 39:277–88.

23.	 Mendoza-Naranjo A, El-Naggar A, Wai DH, Mistry P, Lazic N,
Ayala FR, da Cunha IW, Rodriguez-Viciana P, Cheng H,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47861

Oncotarget

Tavares Guerreiro Fregnani JH, Reynolds P, Arceci RJ,
Nicholson A, et al. ERBB4 confers metastatic capacity in
Ewing sarcoma. EMBO Mol Med. 2013; 5:1019–34.
24.	 Kang HG, Jenabi JM, Zhang J, Keshelava N, Shimada H,
May WA, Ng T, Reynolds CP, Triche TJ, Sorensen PH.
E-cadherin cell-cell adhesion in Ewing tumor cells mediates
suppression of anoikis through activation of the ErbB4
tyrosine kinase. Cancer Res.2007; 67:3094–105.

Meco D, Di Francesco AM, Riccardi R, et al. The curative
efficacy of namitecan (ST1968) in preclinical models of
pediatric sarcoma is associated with antiangiogenic effects.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2012; 84:163–71.
38.	 Bai Y, Li J, Fang B, Edwards A, Zhang G, Bui M, Eschrich S,
Altiok S, Koomen J, Haura EB. Phosphoproteomics identifies
driver tyrosine kinases in sarcoma cell lines and tumors.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:2501–11.

25.	 Sundvall M, Veikkolainen V, Kurppa K, Salah Z, Tvorogov D,
van Zoelen EJ, Aqeilan R, Elenius K. Cell death or survival
promoted by alternative isoforms of ErbB4. Mol Biol Cell.
2010; 21:4275–86.

39.	 McDermott U, Ames RY, Iafrate AJ, Maheswaran S, Stubbs H,
Greninger P, McCutcheon K, Milano R, Tam A, Lee DY,
Lucien L, Brannigan BW, Ulkus LE, et al. Ligand-dependent
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)-alpha
activation sensitizes rare lung cancer and sarcoma cells to
PDGFR kinase inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:3937–46.

26.	 Roskoski R Jr. The ErbB/HER family of protein-tyrosine
kinases and cancer. Pharmacol Res. 2014; 79:34–74.

40.	 Naggi A, Casu B, Perez M, Torri G, Cassinelli G, Penco S,
Pisano C, Giannini G, Ishai-Michaeli R, Vlodavsky I.
Modulation of the heparanase-inhibiting activity of heparin
through selective desulfation, graded N-acetylation, and
glycol splitting. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:12103–13.

27.	 Dreyfuss JL, Regatieri CV, Jarrouge TR, Cavalheiro RP,
Sampaio LO, Nader HB. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans:
structure, protein interactions and cell signaling. An Acad
Bras Cienc. 2009; 81:409–29.
28.	 Linggi B, Carpenter G. ErbB receptors: new insights on
mechanisms and biology. Trends Cell Biol. 2006; 16:649–56.

41.	 Hostettler N, Naggi A, Torri G, Ishai-Michaeli R, Casu B,
Vlodavsky I, Borsig L. P-selectin- and heparanase-dependent
antimetastatic activity of non-anticoagulant heparins.
FASEB J. 2007; 21:3562–72.

29.	 Ricci C, Landuzzi L, Rossi I, De Giovanni C, Nicoletti G,
Astolfi A, Pupa S, Menard S, Scotlandi K, Nanni P, Lollini PL.
Expression of HER/erbBfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases
and induction of differentiation by glial growth factor 2 in
human rhabdomyosarcoma cells. Int J Cancer.2000; 87:
29–36.

42.	 Ostapoff KT, Awasthi N, Cenik BK, Hinz S, Dredge K,
Schwarz RE, Brekken RA. PG545, an angiogenesis and
heparanase inhibitor, reduces primary tumor growth and
metastasis in experimental pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2013; 12:1190–201.
43.	 Zhang L, Ngo JA, Wetzel MD, Marchetti D. Heparanase
mediates a novel mechanism in lapatinib-resistant brain
metastatic breast cancer. Neoplasia. 2015; 17:101–13.

30.	 Nordberg J, Mpindi JP, Iljin K, Pulliainen AT, Kallajoki M,
Kallioniemi O, Elenius K, Elenius V. Systemic analysis of
gene expression profiles identifies ErbB3 as a potential drug
target in pediatric alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e50819.

44.	 Ritchie JP, Ramani VC, Ren Y, Naggi A, Torri G, Casu B,
Penco S, Pisano C, Carminati P, Tortoreto M, Zunino F,
Vlodavsky I, Sanderson RD, et al. SST0001, a chemically
modified heparin, inhibits myeloma growth and angiogenesis
via disruption of the heparanase/syndecan-1 axis. Clin Cancer
Res. 2011; 17:1382–93.
45.	 Purushothaman A, Hurst DR, Pisano C, Mizumoto S,
Sugahara K, Sanderson RD. Heparanase-mediated loss
of nuclear syndecan-1 enhances histone acetyltransferase
(HAT) activity to promote expression of genes that drive
an aggressive tumor phenotype. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:
30377–83.
46.	 Casu B, Guerrini M, Guglieri S, Naggi A, Perez M, Torri G,
Cassinelli G, Ribatti D, Carminati P, Giannini G, Penco S,
Pisano C, Belleri M, et al. Undersulfated and glycol-split
heparins endowed with antiangiogenic activity. J Med
Chem.2004; 47:838–48.

31.	 Heldin CH. Autocrine PDGF stimulation in malignancies.
Ups J Med Sci. 2012; 117:83–91.
32.	Wardega P, Heldin CH, Lennartsson J. Mutation of
tyrosine residue 857 in the PDGF beta-receptor affects cell
proliferation but not migration. Cell Signal. 2010; 22:1363–8.
33.	 Moes MJA, Zhou Y, Boonstra J. Co-localization of the
PDGF β-receptor and actin during PDGF stimulation in
mouse fibroblasts. ISRN Cell Biology. 2012, volume 2012,
article ID 568104.
34.	 De Donatis A, Comito G, Buricchi F, Vinci MC, Parenti A,
Caselli A, Camici G, Manao G, Ramponi G, Cirri P.
Proliferation versus migration in platelet-derived growth
factor signaling: the key role of endocytosis. J Biol Chem.
2008; 283:19948–56.
35.	 Tojkander S, Gateva G, Lappalainen P. Actin stress fibers—
assembly, dynamics and biological roles. J Cell Sci. 2012;
125:1855–64.
36.	 Sieg DJ, Hauck CR, Ilic D, Klingbeil CK, Schaefer E,
Damsky CH, Schlaepfer DD. FAK integrates growth-factor
and integrin signals to promote cell migration. Nat Cell
Biol. 2000; 2:249–56.

47.	 Dredge K, Hammond E, Davis K, Li CP, Liu L, Johnstone K,
Handley P, Wimmer N, Gonda TJ, Gautam A, Ferro V,
Bytheway I. The PG500 series: novel heparan sulfate
mimetics as potent angiogenesis and heparanase inhibitors
for cancer therapy. Invest New Drugs. 2010; 28:276–83.

37.	 Cassinelli G, Zuco V, Petrangolini G, De Cesare M, Tortoreto M,
Lanzi C, Cominetti D, Zaffaroni N, Orlandi A, Passeri D,

48.	 Cole CL, Hansen SU, Baráth M, Rushton G, Gardiner JM,
Avizienyte E, Jayson GC. Synthetic heparan sulfate

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47862

Oncotarget

oligosaccharides inhibit endothelial cell functions essential
for angiogenesis. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e11644.

61.	 Lund J, Søndergaard MT, Conover CA, Overgaard MT.
Heparin-binding mechanism of the IGF2/IGF-binding protein
2 complex. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014;52:345–55.

49.	 Zhou H, Roy S, Cochran E, Zouaoui R, Chu CL, Duffner J,
Zhao G, Smith S, Galcheva-Gargova Z, Karlgren J, Dussault N,
Kwan RY, Moy E, et al. M402, a novel heparan sulfate
mimetic, targets multiple pathways implicated in tumor
progression and metastasis. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e21106.
50.	 Jung DB, Yun M, Kim EO, Kim J, Kim B, Jung JH, Wang E,
Mukhopadhyay D, Hammond E, Dredge K, Shridhar V,
Kim SH. The heparan sulfate mimetic PG545 interferes
with Wnt/β-catenin signaling and significantly suppresses
pancreatic tumorigenesis alone and in combination
with gemcitabine. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4992–5004. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.3214.
51.	 Winterhoff B, Freyer L, Hammond E, Giri S, Mondal S, Roy D,
Teoman A, Mullany SA, Hoffmann R, von Bismarck A,
Chien J, Block MS, Millward M, et al. PG545 enhances
anti-cancer activity of chemotherapy in ovarian models and
increases surrogate biomarkers such as VEGF in preclinical
and clinical plasma samples. Eur J Cancer. 2015; 51:879–92.
52.	 Huegel J, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Sgariglia F, Koyama E,
Pacifici M. Heparanase stimulates chondrogenesis and
is up-regulated in human ectopic cartilage: a mechanism
possibly involved in hereditary multiple exostoses. Am J
Pathol. 2015; 185:1676–85.
53.	 Kronenberg HM. Developmental regulation of the growth
plate. Nature. 2003; 423:332–336.
54.	 Zhu B, Davie JK. New insights into signalling-pathway
alterations in rhabdomyosarcoma. Br J Cancer. 2015;
112:227–31.
55.	 Taylor JG 6th, Cheuk AT, Tsang PS, Chung JY, Song YK,
Desai K, Yu Y, Chen QR, Shah K, Youngblood V, Fang J,
Kim SY, Yeung C, et al. Identification of FGFR4-activating
mutations in human rhabdomyosarcomas that promote
metastasis in xenotransplanted models. J Clin Invest. 2009;
119:3395–407.
56.	 Fleuren ED, Versleijen-Jonkers YM, Boerman OC, van
der Graaf WT. Targeting receptor tyrosine kinases in
osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma: current hurdles and future
perspectives. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1845:266–76.
57.	 Prieur A, Tirode F, Cohen P, Delattre O. EWS/FLI-1 silencing
and gene profiling of Ewing cells reveal downstream
oncogenic pathways and a crucial role for repression of
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3. Mol Cell Biol.
2004; 24:7275–83.
58.	 Olmos D, Martins AS, Jones RL, Alam S, Scurr M, Judson IR.
Targeting the Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 Receptor in
Ewing’s Sarcoma: Reality and Expectations. Sarcoma.
2011; 2011:402508.
59.	 Forbes BE, McCarthy P, Norton RS. Insulin-like growth factor
binding proteins: a structural perspective. Front Endocrinol
(Lausanne). 2012; 3:38.
60.	 Firth SM, Baxter RC. Cellular actions of the insulin-like
growth factor binding proteins. Endocr Rev. 2002; 23:824–54.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62.	 Aviezer D, Yayon A. Heparin-dependent binding and
autophosphorylation of epidermal growth factor (EGF)
receptor by heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor but not
by EGF. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994; 91:12173–7.
63.	 Iwamoto R, Mine N, Kawaguchi T, Minami S, Saeki K,
Mekada E. HB-EGF function in cardiac valve development
requires interaction with heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
Development. 2010; 137:2205–14.
64.	 Vlenterie M, Hillebrandt-Roeffen MH, Flucke UE, Groenen PJ,
Tops BB, Kamping EJ, Pfundt R, de Bruijn DR, Geurts van
Kessel AH, van Krieken HJ, van der Graaf WT, VersleijenJonkers YM. Next generation sequencing in synovial sarcoma
reveals novel gene mutations. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:34680–90.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5786.
65.	 Pietras K, Rubin K, Sjöblom T, Buchdunger E, Sjöquist M,
Heldin CH, Ostman A. Inhibition of PDGF receptor signaling
in tumor stroma enhances antitumor effect of chemotherapy.
Cancer Res.2002; 62:5476–84.
66.	 Wagner LM. Fifteen years of irinotecan therapy for pediatric
sarcoma: where to next? Clin Sarcoma Res. 2015; 5:20.
67.	 Mancuso T, Mezzelani A, Riva C, Fabbri A, Dal Bo L,
Sampietro G, Perego P, Casali P, Zunino F, Sozzi G, Pierotti MA,
Pilotti S. Analysis of SYT-SSX fusion transcripts and bcl-2
expression and phosphorylation status in synovial sarcoma.
Lab Invest. 2000; 80:805–13.
68.	 Cuccuru G, Lanzi C, Cassinelli G, Pratesi G, Tortoreto M,
Petrangolini G, Seregni E, Martinetti A, Laccabue D,
Zanchi C, Zunino F. Cellular effects and antitumor activity
of RET inhibitor RPI-1 on MEN2A-associated medullary
thyroid carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004; 96:1006–14.
69.	 Lanzi C, Cassinelli G, Cuccuru G, Zaffaroni N, Supino R,
Vignati S, Zanchi C, Yamamoto M, Zunino F. Inactivation
of Ret/Ptc1 oncoprotein and inhibition of papillary thyroid
carcinoma cell proliferation by indolinone RPI-1. Cell Mol
Life Sci. 2003; 60:1449–59.
70.	 Salgado R, Llombart B, M Pujol R, Fernández-Serra A,
Sanmartín O, Toll A, Rubio L, Segura S, Barranco C, SerraGuillén C, Yébenes M, Salido M, Traves V, et al. Molecular
diagnosis of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a comparison
between reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and
fluorescence in situ hybridization methodologies. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer. 2011; 50:510–7.
71.	 Workman P, Aboagye EO, Balkwill F, Balmain A, Bruder G,
Chaplin DJ, Double JA, Everitt J, Farningham DA, Glennie MJ,
Kelland LR, Robinson V, Stratford IJ, et al. Guidelines for the
welfare and use of animals in cancer research. Br J Cancer
2010; 102:1555–77.
47863

Oncotarget

