Research Article

Osteopontin Promotes Vascular Endothelial Growth
Factor–Dependent Breast Tumor Growth and Angiogenesis
via Autocrine and Paracrine Mechanisms
Goutam Chakraborty, Shalini Jain, and Gopal C. Kundu
National Center for Cell Science, Pune, India

binding ligand N-linked glycoprotein family plays important role in
determining the oncogenic potential of various cancers (11, 12).
OPN exerts its prometastatic effects by regulating various cell
signaling events through interaction with integrins and CD44
receptors that ultimately lead to tumor progression (13). Recent
evidences indicated that OPN regulates tumor growth through
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 and urokinase-type plasminogen
activator expressions and activation of matrix metalloproteinases
in various cancer cells (14–17). The role of OPN in various
pathophysiologic conditions, particularly in cancer, suggested that
the variation in glycosylation, phosphorylation, and sulfation
generates the different functional forms that might alter its normal
physiologic functions (12, 18). Previous studies have shown that
tumor-derived OPN is soluble, and it exhibits close similarity with
human milk OPN (19, 20). Earlier reports also suggested that OPN
produced either from tumor or stromal cells has been shown to
enhance the metastatic ability (21).
Breast tumor kinase (Brk/PTK6/Sik) is a nonreceptor tyrosine
kinase and expressed in metastatic breast tumors but not in normal
mammary tissue or benign lesions (22). It has been postulated that
Brk promotes cell migration, and silencing of Brk resulted in
inhibition of migration and proliferation in various cancer cells,
including MDA-MB-231 (23, 24). Recent data revealed that activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF-4/cAMP-responsive element binding
protein-2) regulates VEGF expression (25, 26). Neuropilin-1 (NRP-1)
was initially characterized to mediate the chemorepulsive activity
of collapsin/semaphorins in neuronal cells (27, 28). NRP-1 is also
expressed in endothelial cells and in various tumors, and it functions
as isoform-specific receptor for VEGF165 and plays an important role
in tumor progression (29–32). Previous studies have shown that
blocking or silencing of NRP-1 resulted in significant reduction of
tumor progression (10). However, the role of Brk in regulation of
ATF-4–dependent VEGF expression and interaction of VEGF with
NRP-1 in response to OPN and how all of these ultimately control
breast tumor angiogenesis is not well defined.
In this study, we provide both in vitro and in vivo experimental
evidences that show the molecular mechanism by which OPN
regulates Brk/nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB)/ATF-4 signaling cascades
that ultimately augment the VEGF expression and tumor
angiogenesis through autocrine and paracrine mechanisms. We
have further substantiated the crucial roles of tumor-derived,
endogenous OPN in tumor angiogenesis using short interfering
RNA (siRNA) based approach in in vitro and in vivo models.
Moreover, our clinical data revealed that the enhanced expressions
of OPN and VEGF correlate with NRP-1, Brk, NF-nB and ATF-4
levels in breast carcinoma of higher grades. These data provide new
insights into the mechanism underlying the regulation of VEGF
expression by OPN in breast tumor angiogenesis and understanding these mechanisms may form the basis of new therapeutic
regimens for the management of breast cancer.

Abstract
Angiogenesis is the hallmark of cancer, and development
of aggressiveness of primary tumor depends on de novo
angiogenesis. Here, using multiple in vitro and in vivo models,
we report that osteopontin (OPN) triggers vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)–dependent tumor progression and
angiogenesis by activating breast tumor kinase (Brk)/nuclear
factor–inducing kinase/nuclear factor-KB (NF-KB)/activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF-4) signaling cascades through
autocrine and paracrine mechanisms in breast cancer system.
Our results revealed that both exogenous and tumor-derived
OPN play significant roles in VEGF-dependent tumor angiogenesis. Clinical specimen analysis showed that OPN and
VEGF expressions correlate with levels of neuropilin-1, Brk,
NF-KB, and ATF-4 in different grades of breast cancer.
Consequently, OPN plays essential role in two key aspects of
tumor progression: VEGF expression by tumor cells and VEGFstimulated neovascularization. Thus, targeting OPN and its
regulated signaling network could be a novel strategy to block
tumor angiogenesis and may develop an effective therapeutic
approach for the management of breast cancer. [Cancer Res
2008;68(1):152–61]

Introduction
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from the
existing one is a key step for tumor growth, survival, progression,
and metastasis (1). A large number of proangiogenic factors and
their cognate receptors have been identified (2–4). To date, the best
characterized proangiogenic cytokine to turn on the ‘‘angiogenic
switch’’ is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; ref. 5). For
over a decade, the role of VEGF in regulation of tumor angiogenesis
has been under intense investigation (6). Previous results indicated
that VEGF signaling represents a critical rate-limiting step in
angiogenesis (7). Alternative exon splicing results in four isoforms
of VEGF (VEGF121, VEGF165, VEGF189, and VEGF206), and among
them, VEGF165 is the predominant one that plays a major role in
tumor angiogenesis (7, 8). Recent data show that the functions of
VEGF may not be limited to endothelial cells but also play
important roles in survival, proliferation, and migration in tumor
cells (9, 10).
Osteopontin (OPN), a secreted noncollagenous, sialic acid–rich,
chemokine-like protein and also a member of small integrin-

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Gopal C. Kundu, National Center for Cell Science, Pune 411
007, India. Phone: 91-20-25708103; Fax: 91-20-25692259; E-mail: kundu@nccs.res.in.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2126

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

152

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

OPN Regulates VEGF-Dependent Tumor Angiogenesis
Cell comigration assay. The endothelial-breast tumor cell interaction
was shown by comigration assays. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with
either OPN alone or along with anti-VEGF or anti–NRP-1 blocking antibody
and used in lower chamber. EA.hy-926 cells were seeded on the upper
chamber. In separate experiments, MDA-MD-231 cells were transfected
with OPNi or NRP-1i and used for comigration assay. The migrated cells
were stained with Giemsa and were counted in three high-power fields
under an inverted microscope.
In vivo Matrigel-based angiogenesis assay. The in vivo Matrigel
angiogenesis assay was preformed as described (33). Briefly, Matrigel
(0.5 mL) was injected s.c. in the ventral groin region of female athymic
NMRI (nu/nu) mice. In separate experiments, the conditioned medium
(CM) of untreated or OPN-treated MDA-MB-231 cells were mixed with
Matrigel and injected to the mice. In other experiments, OPN-treated CM
was mixed with anti-VEGF blocking antibody (400 Ag/kg of body weight per
mice) and Matrigel or CM collected from OPNi-transfected cells were mixed
with Matrigel and then injected to the mice. After 3 weeks, Matrigel plugs
were excised and processed for histopathology and immunohistochemistry.
The paraffin sections were immunostained with antihuman vWF and
anti–phosphorylated KDR antibodies.
In vivo tumorigenicity, histopathology, and immunohistochemistry.
The tumorigenicity and immunohistochemistry experiments were performed as described earlier (34, 35). Briefly, MDA-MB-231 (5  105) cells
were injected orthotopically in the mammary fat pad of female athymic
nude mice. OPN (0.5 Amol/L) or anti-VEGF (400 Ag/kg of body weight per
mice) blocking antibody was injected to the site of tumor twice a week up to
6 weeks. In other experiments, OPN cDNA transfected cells alone or along
with anti-VEGF antibody were injected into the nude mice. In separate
experiments, OPNi or NRP-1i (250 Ag/kg of body weight per mice) mixed
with transfection reagent were given to the site of tumor twice a week until
termination of the experiments. Mice were sacrificed and photographed, the
tumors were dissected out and weighed, and tumor tissues were used for
histopathologic and immumohistochemical studies with their specific
antibodies. Tumor samples were lysed in lysis buffer. Mice blood was
collected from retro-orbital plexus, and serum was isolated. The levels of
OPN, VEGF, and CA 15-3 were detected by Western blot using their specific
antibodies. The OPN-induced VEGF–NRP-1 interaction in tumor samples
was analyzed by immunoprecipitating tumor lysates with anti-VEGF
antibody and immunoblotted with anti–NRP-1 antibody. The nuclear
extracts of tumor tissues were prepared as described earlier and used for
EMSA for detection of NF-nB–DNA and ATF-4–DNA binding (35).
Human breast clinical specimen analysis. Human breast tumor
specimens of different grades and normal breast tissues were collected from
local hospital with informed consent and flash frozen. The levels of OPN
and VEGF were examined by Western blot. The tumor sections were stained
with H&E. The vWF expression and microvessel density were detected by
immunofluorescence using anti-vWF antibody. To examine the status of NFnB localization and NRP-1, Brk, and ATF-4 expressions, tumor tissue
sections were analyzed by immunohistochemistry using their specific
antibodies and were visualized under confocal microscopy (Zeiss).
Statistical analysis. The results of the experimental studies are
expressed as mean F SE. Statistical differences were analyzed by Student’s
t test. P < 0.05 was regarded as significant. All these bands were analyzed
densitometrically (Kodak Digital Science), and the fold changes were
calculated. The in vivo angiogenesis and all other in vivo experimental data
were quantified using the Image Pro Plus 6.0 Software (Nikon).

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and transfection. Human breast adenocarcinoma (MDAMB-231) cell line was obtained from American Type Culture Collection.
Human umbilical vein endothelial cell line EA.hy-926 was a generous gift
from Dr. Christopher Newton. The super repressor form of InBa in pCMV4
(Dr. Dean Ballard, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine), wild-type (wt)
and kinase negative (mut) nuclear factor–inducing kinase (NIK; K249A/
K430A) in pcDNA3 vector (Prof. David Wallach, Weizmann Institute of
Science), VEGF-Luc construct (Dr. Debabrata Mukhopadhyay, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine), VEGF-GFP cDNA construct (Dr. Rakesh K. Jain,
Massachusetts General Hospital), wt (pEF/mATF-4) and dominant-negative
(dn; pEF/mATF-4M) ATF-4 (Dr. Javed Alam, Yale University School of
Medicine), wt and kinase mutant (KM) Brk in pRC CMV vector (Prof. Mark
Crompton, Royal Holloway University of London), and human OPN cDNA in
pcDNA 3.1 (Dr. Ann Chambers, University of Western Ontario) were
transfected in MDA-MB-231 cells using Lipofectamine 2000.
siRNA. Cells were transfected with OPN siRNA (OPNi) or NRP-1 siRNA
(NRP-1i; Dharmacon) using liposome according to manufacturer’s instructions. The sequence targeted for OPN is 5¶ GUU UCA CAG CCA CAA GGA
CdTdT/dTdT CAA AGU GUC GGU GUU CCU G 5¶ and its nonsilencing
control is 5¶ CAG UAC AAC GCA UCU GGC AdTdT/dTdT GUC AUG UUG
CGU AGA CCG U 5¶. The NRP-1 siRNA sequence is 5¶ GAG AGG UCC UGA
AUG UUC CdTdT/dTdT CUC UCC AGG ACU UAC AAG G 5¶ and its nonsilencing control is 5¶ AGA GAU GUA GUC GCU CGC UdTdT/dTdT UCU
CUA CAU CAG CGA GCG A 5¶. The Brk siRNA sequence is 5¶AAG GUG GCC
AUU AAG GUG AdTdT/dTdT UUC CAC CGG UAA UUC CAC U 5¶ and its
nonsilencing control is 5¶CAC ACU AGG UUG CCA CAG GdTdT/dTdT GUG
UGA UCC AAC GGU GUC C 5¶.
Purification of human OPN. The human OPN was purified from human
breast milk as described previously with minor modifications and used
throughout this study (15).
Coculture assay. The tumor-endothelial cell interaction was studied by
coculture experiments using MDA-MB-231 and EA.hy-926 cells. EA.hy-926
cells were transfected with NRP-1i and cocultured with nontransfected or
OPNi or NRP-1i transfected MDA-MB-231 cells. In separate experiments,
cocultured cells were either treated with OPN alone or along with antiVEGF antibody. The level of pKDR in cell lysates was detected by
immunoprecipitation followed by Western blot.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot. The immunoprecipitation
and immunoblot experiments were performed using their specific antibodies as described (14).
RNA extraction and reverse transcription–PCR. The RNA was
isolated from MDA-MB-231 cells and used for reverse transcription–PCR
(RT-PCR). The VEGF primers were used: sense, 5¶-CCC TCC GAA ACC ATG
AAC TTT-3¶ and antisense, 5¶-AGA GAT CTG GTT CCC GAA AC-3¶. The
amplified cDNA fragments were resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis.
Reporter gene expression. MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with
VEGF-luciferase reporter construct, either alone or along with OPN cDNA
or OPNi. Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot using antiluciferase
antibody. The VEGF promoter activity was measured either by transfecting
MDA-MB-231 cells with VEGF-GFP or cotransfected with wt and KM Brk or
wt and dn ATF-4 or InBa super repressor (sup. rep.) or Brk siRNA and then
treated with OPN. The GFP expression was measured by using fluorescence
microscopy (Nikon) and quantified by Image Pro Plus 6.0 Software (Nikon)
and represented in the form of bar graph.
Brk kinase assay. Brk kinase assay was performed as described earlier (22).
EMSA. MDA-MB-231 cells were either transfected with wt and KM Brk
or wt and mut NIK, InBa sup. rep. or wt and dn ATF-4 and then treated
with 0.5 Amol/L OPN. Nuclear extracts were used for NF-nB and ATF-4–
DNA binding.
Immunofluorescence. To examine whether OPN regulates ATF-4
expression and nuclear translocation, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with
0.5 Amol/L OPN, and immunofluorescence was performed using anti–ATF-4
antibody.
Wound migration. The wound assay was performed using MDA-MB-231
and endothelial (EA.hy-926) cells with typical cobblestone morphology as
described (14).

www.aacrjournals.org

Results
OPN augments the expression of VEGF. To examine whether
OPN regulates VEGF expression and control breast tumor
angiogenesis, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with exogenous
OPN, and VEGF expression were analyzed by Western blot (Fig. 1A)
and by RT-PCR (Fig. 1B). The results indicated that OPN induces
VEGF expression both at protein and RNA levels. To examine the
specificity of OPN on VEGF expression, cells were individually

153

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

signaling pathway. Earlier, we have shown that NIK plays a crucial
role in OPN-induced signaling, which in turn regulates tumor
growth (18). To examine whether Brk plays any role on OPNinduced NIK phosphorylation, cells were individually transfected
with wt or KM Brk and then treated with OPN. The data revealed
that wt Brk enhanced, whereas KM Brk inhibited, OPN-induced
NIK phosphorylation, indicating that Brk plays a crucial role in this
process (Fig. 2B). EMSA results revealed that wt Brk enhanced,
whereas KM Brk suppressed, OPN-induced NF-nB–DNA binding
(Supplementary Fig. S1B). Moreover, Brk siRNA inhibited OPNinduced NF-nB–DNA binding (data not shown). These results
define a novel-signaling pathway by which OPN regulates Brkdependent NIK-mediated NF-nB activation.
OPN regulates crosstalk between NF-KB and ATF-4 leading
to VEGF expression. Previous reports have indicated that ATF-4
regulates VEGF expression in response to various stimuli (26). To
examine whether OPN regulates ATF-4 cellular localization, cells
were treated with OPN or transfected with OPNi, and localization
of ATF-4 was detected by immunofluorescence (Supplementary
Fig. S1C). The results showed that OPN enhanced ATF-4 nuclear
localization. To check whether OPN regulates ATF-4–DNA binding
and involvement of Brk in this process, EMSA was performed. The
data revealed that wt Brk enhanced, whereas KM Brk drastically
suppressed, OPN-induced ATF-4–DNA binding (Fig. 2C, lanes 1–4).
Brk siRNA also suppressed OPN-induced ATF-4–DNA binding
(data not shown). InBa sup. rep. or mut NIK inhibited, whereas wt
NIK significantly enhanced, OPN-induced ATF-4–DNA binding
(Fig. 2C, lanes 5–9). Cotransfection of cells with wt Brk along with
InBa sup. rep. or mut NIK unaffected OPN-induced ATF-4–DNA
binding (Fig. 2C, lanes 10 and 12). Similar results were obtained

transfected with OPN cDNA or OPNi or treated with anti-OPN
blocking antibody (R&D Systems). The data revealed that cells
transfected with OPN cDNA enhanced, whereas transfected with
OPNi or treated with anti-OPN antibody suppressed, the VEGF
expression (Fig. 1C). To examine whether OPN regulates VEGF
promoter activity, cells were individually transfected with OPN
cDNA or OPNi along with VEGF-luciferase reporter construct.
Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot using antiluciferase
antibody. The data showed that silencing of OPN drastically
suppressed, whereas overexpression significantly enhanced, VEGF
promoter activity (Fig. 1D). These results suggested that exogenous,
as well as tumor-derived, OPN augments VEGF expression both at
transcriptional and protein levels.
OPN stimulates Brk/NIK-dependent NF-KB activation. Brk is
considered as one of the key regulator during breast cancer
progression and is expressed moderately in MDA-MB-231 cells
(22–24). We sought to determine whether OPN regulates Brk
phosphorylation in MDA-MB-231 cells. Accordingly, cells were
treated with OPN for 0 to 24 min, and level of pBrk was detected by
immunoprecipitation followed by Western blot. The results showed
that OPN enhances Brk phosphorylation (Supplementary Fig. S1A).
Pretreatment of cells with avh3 blocking antibody significantly
suppressed, whereas inhibitor of c-Src (pp2) or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K; wortmannin) had no effect on OPN-induced
Brk phosphorylation and Brk kinase activation (Fig. 2A). The data
are analyzed densitometrically and represented in the form of bar
graph (Fig. 2A). Cells treated with RGD but not with RGE peptide
also suppressed OPN-induced Brk phosphorylation (data not
shown). These data suggested that OPN regulates avh3-integrin–
dependent Brk activation, which is independent of c-Src/PI3K

Figure 1. Exogenous and tumor-derived OPN augments VEGF expression in MDA-MD-231 cells. A, serum-starved cells were incubated with 0 to 1 Amol/L OPN
for 6 h at 37jC, and conditioned media and cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot using anti-VEGF antibody. Actin was used as loading control. B, cells were
treated with 0 to 1 Amol/L OPN for 3 h, total RNA was isolated, and the level of VEGF mRNA was detected by semiquantitative RT-PCR. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH ) was used as internal control. C, cells were transfected with OPN cDNA, OPNi, or Coni or treated with OPN blocking antibody. The
expressions of VEGF and OPN in cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot using their specific antibodies. Human recombinant VEGF and purified OPN were used as
controls. D, cells were transfected with VEGF-luciferase reporter construct alone or cotransfected with OPNi, Coni, or OPN cDNA, and luciferase expression was
detected by Western blot using antiluciferase antibody. The data represent three experiments exhibiting similar results. Fold changes were calculated.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

154

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

OPN Regulates VEGF-Dependent Tumor Angiogenesis

Figure 2. OPN regulates VEGF expression via Brk/NF-nB/ATF-4 signaling pathways in MDA-MB-231 cells. A, OPN induces Brk phosphorylation and kinase
activity through avh3 integrin–dependent but c-Src and PI3K-independent pathway. Cells were treated with 0.5 Amol/L OPN for 8 min or pretreated with anti-avh3
antibody or wortmannin or pp2 for 2 h and then treated with OPN. The cell lysate was immunoprecipitated with anti-Brk antibody. Half of the immunoprecipitated
samples were analyzed by Western blot using antiphosphotyrosine antibody. Remaining half of the samples was used for detecting Brk kinase activity by
autophosphorylation study. Total Brk expression in the cells was used as loading control. The levels of p-Tyr-Brk were quantified by densitometric analysis and
represented in the form of bar graph (*, P < 0.03). B, OPN-induced Brk-mediated NIK phosphorylation was determined by transfecting the cells with wt or KM Brk
and then treated with 0.5 Amol/L OPN for 15 min. Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot using anti–phosphorylated NIK antibody. C, Brk regulates OPN-dependent
ATF-4–DNA binding and crosstalk between NF-nB and ATF-4. Cells were transfected with wt or KM Brk and treated with OPN. In separate experiments, cells were
transfected with wt NIK or mut NIK or sup. rep. InBa or wt Brk and mut NIK or KM Brk and wt NIK or wt Brk and InBa sup. rep followed by treatment with OPN.
ATF-4–DNA binding activity was analyzed by EMSA. Note that Brk up-regulates ATF-4 activity through NF-nB–dependent/independent pathway. D, roles of Brk
and ATF-4 in OPN-induced VEGF expression. Cells were individually transfected with wt and KM Brk or wt and dn ATF-4 or Brk siRNA or InBa sup. rep. and then treated
with OPN. VEGF expressions (secreted and total) were analyzed by Western blot. All figures are representation of three experiments. Fold changes were calculated.

when cells were cotransfected with KM Brk along with wt NIK
(Fig. 2C, lane 11). These data indicated that OPN up-regulates Brkdependent ATF-4 activation. However, OPN also enhances Brkdependent NIK/NF-nB–mediated ATF-4 activation. Transfection of
cells with wt or dn ATF-4 had no effect on OPN-induced NF-nB–
DNA binding, indicating that OPN-regulated crosstalk between
NF-nB and ATF-4 is unidirectional toward ATF-4 (Supplementary
Fig. S1D). To determine the role of Brk and ATF-4 on OPN-induced
VEGF expression, cells were individually transfected with wt/KM
Brk, Brk siRNA, or wt/dn ATF-4 and then treated with OPN.
The results showed that cells transfected with wt Brk or wt
ATF-4 increased VEGF expression upon OPN treatment, whereas
transfection with KM Brk, Brk siRNA or dn ATF-4 showed drastic
suppression of VEGF expression (Fig. 2D). Moreover, InBa sup. rep.
significantly reduced OPN-induced VEGF expression (Fig. 2D). The
effect of OPN on VEGF promoter activity was examined either by
transfecting the cells with VEGF-GFP reporter construct alone or
cotransfecting with wt and KM Brk, wt and dn ATF-4, InBa sup.
rep., or Brk siRNA and then treated with OPN. The OPN-induced
GFP expression was analyzed by fluorescence microscopy (Nikon),
quantified by Image Pro Plus 6.0 Software (Nikon), and represented
in the form of bar graph (Supplementary Fig. S2). These data clearly
suggested that Brk, ATF-4, and NF-nB play important role in OPNinduced VEGF expression both at transcriptional and protein level.

www.aacrjournals.org

VEGF and its receptor NRP-1 play crucial roles in OPNregulated breast tumor cell motility through autocrine
mechanism. Recent data revealed that VEGF acts as survival,
migratory and proliferative factor in breast carcinoma cells (10, 36).
NRP-1 is the only VEGF-specific receptor that is expressed in MDAMB-231 cells (29, 30). We therefore speculated that OPN might
regulate the interaction between VEGF and NRP-1, which may
control the motility of MDA-MB-231 cells. Accordingly, cells were
treated with OPN alone or along with anti-VEGF or anti-NRP-1
blocking antibody, and lysates were immunoprecipitated with antiVEGF antibody and immunoblotted with anti–NRP-1 antibody. The
data suggested that OPN-induced VEGF interacts with NRP-1 in
MDA-MB-231 cells through autocrine manner (Fig. 3A, I). To
examine whether OPN has any effect on breast tumor cell motility
and whether VEGF and NRP-1 are involved in this process, wound
assay was performed using MDA-MB-231 cells with typical
cobblestone morphology. Wounds with a constant diameter were
made, and cells were treated with OPN alone or along with antiVEGF or anti–NRP-1 blocking antibody. In separate experiments,
cells were transfected with NRP-1i and then treated with OPN, and
wound assay was performed. The wound photographs were taken
under phase contrast microscope (Fig. 3A, II). Moreover, cells
transfected with wt Brk or wt ATF-4 enhanced, whereas KM Brk or
dn ATF-4 drastically suppressed, OPN-induced wound migration

155

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

VEGF, which is expressed in MDA-MB-231 cells, can regulate KDR
phosphorylation in endothelial (EA.hy-926) cell line through
paracrine loop. Accordingly, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with
OPN and CM either alone or mixed with anti-VEGF blocking
antibody incubated with endothelial cells. In separate experiments,
CM of OPNi transfected MDA-MB-231 cells were incubated with
endothelial cells. Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blot for
KDR phosphorylation. The data revealed that OPN-induced VEGF
enhanced KDR phosphorylation in endothelial cells through
paracrine mechanism (Supplementary Fig. S3A). To investigate
whether OPN-induced MDA-MB-231 cell-derived VEGF regulates
endothelial cell wound motility, MDA-MB-231 cells were either

(Fig. 3A, II). Interestingly, the enhanced wound migration caused by
overexpression of wt Brk or wt ATF-4 was suppressed upon treatment of cells with anti-VEGF and anti–NRP-1 blocking antibodies
(Fig. 3A, II). These results clearly indicated that OPN regulates
VEGF-dependent wound migration through NRP-1–mediated
autocrine mechanism.
OPN-induced VEGF controls KDR-dependent endothelial
cell motility and in vivo angiogenesis through paracrine and
juxtacrine mechanisms. Tumor-derived VEGF interacts with
endothelial cell surface VEGF receptor-2 (also called KDR) and
induces KDR phosphorylation that leads to tumor angiogenesis
(37). Therefore, we sought to determine whether OPN-induced

Figure 3. A, OPN enhances the VEGF–NRP-1 interaction in MDA-MB-231 cells. I, OPN-induced VEGF–NRP-1 interactions were examined by treating the
cells with OPN for 6 h or pretreated with anti-VEGF or anti–NRP-1 blocking antibody and then treated with OPN. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-VEGF
antibody and analyzed by Western blot with anti–NRP-1 antibody. II, VEGF and NRP-1 play crucial roles in OPN-induced tumor cell motility. Wounds with a
constant diameter were made, and cells were treated with OPN. In separate experiments, cells were transfected with wt and KM Brk or wt and dn ATF-4 and then
treated with OPN in absence or presence of anti-VEGF or anti–NRP-1 blocking antibody, and wound assay was performed. In separate experiments, cells were
individually transfected with OPNi, and wound assay was conducted. Cells were also transfected with NRP-1i and then treated with OPN. Wound photographs
were taken after termination of the experiments (t = 12 h). B, OPN controls VEGF-dependent endothelial cell (EC ) wound migration in a paracrine mechanism.
Endothelial (EA-hy.926) cells were incubated with conditioned media obtained from OPN-treated or OPNi transfected MDA-MB-231 cells, and wound assay was
performed and represented in the form of bar graph (*, P < 0.007; **, P < 0.01). In separate experiments, endothelial cells were also incubated with OPN-treated
conditioned media mixed with anti-VEGF blocking antibody and used for wound assay. C, OPN enhances VEGF-dependent NRP-1/pKDR mediated tumor-endothelial
cell interaction through juxtacrine mechanism. Endothelial cells were transfected with NRP-1i (EA NRP-1i) and cocultured with normal or OPNi or NRP-1i
transfected MDA-MB-231 cells. OPN alone or along with anti-VEGF blocking antibody were added to the cocultured cells. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with
anti–NRP-1 antibody and analyzed by Western blot with anti–phosphorylated KDR antibody. D, OPN enhances VEGF/NRP-1–mediated endothelial cell migration
through juxtacrine manner. Endothelial cells were added on the upper portion of modified Boyden chamber. MDA-MB-231 cells seeded in lower chamber were either
treated with OPN alone or along with anti-VEGF or anti–NRP-1 blocking antibody and used for direct comigration assays. In separate experiments, MDA-MB-231 cells
were transfected with OPNi or NRP-1i and seeded in the lower chamber, and comigration assays were performed. Endothelial cells were migrated from upper
chamber to the lower chamber and counted under inverted microscope (Nikon). Columns, means of three determinations; bars, SE (*, P < 0.001; **, P < 0.004).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

156

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

OPN Regulates VEGF-Dependent Tumor Angiogenesis

Figure 4. OPN induces VEGF/NRP-1–dependent tumor growth and angiogenesis in nude mice model. A, OPN regulates VEGF-dependent angiogenesis in
Matrigel plug assay. The OPNi-transfected or OPN-treated CM of MDA-MB-231 cells either alone or along with anti-VEGF antibody were mixed with Matrigel and then
injected s.c. to ventral groin region of nude mice (NMRI, nu/nu). Matrigel plugs were excised, and the sections were subjected to histopathologic analysis. Note
that endothelial cell nuclei stained blue were observed inside the bed of pink stained Matrigel. The endothelial cells were further characterized by immunofluorescence
using anti-vWF antibody (stained with Cy3; red) as marker and visualized under confocal microscopy. The phosphorylation of KDR was also detected by
immunofluoresence by using anti–phosphorylated KDR antibody followed by staining with FITC (green ). Nuclei were stained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI; blue ). B, typical photographs of orthotopic breast tumors in athymic nude mice model. Bottom, excised tumors of respective mice. Six mice were used
in each set of experiments. C, the levels of VEGF, OPN, and CA 15-3 from xenograft tumor lysates and sera were analyzed by Western blot. NF-nB and
ATF-4–DNA-binding in these orthotopic tumors were analyzed by EMSA. Actin was used as control. D, mice breast tumors were analyzed by histopathology (top )
and immunohistochemistry using anti-vWF antibody (bottom ). vWF was stained with Cy3 (red) and nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue ). Normal mammary fat
pad (MFP ) is used as control.

OPN. The level of pKDR was analyzed by Western blot. The results
showed that pKDR/KDR is detectable only in endothelial but not in
MDA-MB-231 cells (Supplementary Fig. S3B). The endothelialbreast tumor cell interaction was further examined by direct
comigration assay. The MDA-MB-231 cells either treated with
exogenous OPN or transfected with OPNi or NRP-1i or treated with
anti-VEGF or anti–NRP-1 antibody followed by treatment with OPN
and used in the lower chamber whereas endothelial cells were used
in the upper portion of modified Boyden chamber. The results
showed that OPN stimulates VEGF/NRP-1–mediated endothelial
cell migration through juxtacrine pathway (Fig. 3D). Taken together, these data showed that OPN-induced VEGF interacts with
endothelial cell surface receptor, KDR, and regulates endothelial
cell motility through paracrine and juxtacrine mechanisms.
OPN promotes VEGF-dependent in vivo angiogenesis. To
assess whether OPN regulates VEGF-dependent in vivo angiogenesis, Matrigel plug assay was performed. The CM obtained from
OPN-treated or OPNi-transfected MDA-MB-231 cells was mixed
with Matrigel either alone or along with anti-VEGF blocking
antibody and injected s.c. (ventral groin region) to the nude mice.
Matrigel plugs were excised, and the sections were analyzed by

treated or transfected under similar conditions as described above
and endothelial cell wound migration was performed. The data are
analyzed and represented in the form of bar graph (Fig. 3B). These
results showed that OPN enhances VEGF-dependent endothelial
cell motility in paracrine mechanism.
The interaction of OPN-induced VEGF with NRP-1 and KDR
through juxtacrine mechanism is shown by coculture experiments
using MDA-MB-231 and endothelial cells. Accordingly, endothelial
cells were transfected with NRP-1i and cocultured with MDA-MB231 cells in the presence of OPN alone or along with anti-VEGF
antibody. In separate experiments, MDA-MB-231 cells were also
transfected with OPNi or NRP-1i and used for coculture experiments. The cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti–NRP-1
antibody, followed by immunoblotting with anti–pKDR antibody.
Our data revealed that OPN-induced VEGF acts as bridge between
NRP-1, expressed in tumor cells, and KDR, expressed in endothelial
cells, and regulates NRP-1–mediated KDR phosphorylation through
juxtacrine mechanism (Fig. 3C). To verify whether pKDR is indeed
expressed in endothelial but not in MDA-MB-231 cells, endothelial
cells were incubated with CM of OPN-treated MDA-MB-231 cells.
In separate experiments, MDA-MB-231 cells were also treated with

www.aacrjournals.org

157

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

(% to control) were analyzed and represented as bar graph
(Supplementary Fig. S4B). Blocking of VEGF with its antibody or
NRP-1i significantly suppressed OPN-induced breast tumor growth
in nude mice suggesting that VEGF and its receptor NRP-1 play
crucial role in this process.
Tumor sections were also analyzed by histopathology. The
results showed that tumors generated by OPN exhibit enhanced
tumor cell infiltration, poor differentiation, higher nuclear
polymorphism, mitotic count (12–16/hpf) and increased vessel
formation in mammary fat pad of mice compared with control
(Fig. 4D, top). Moreover, well-differentiated tumor structure, little
infiltration and nuclear polymorphism, lesser mitotic features
(2-5/hpf), and decreased vessel formation were observed in the
tumors of the mice injected with anti-VEGF blocking antibody or
NRP-1i along with OPN. To examine whether OPN regulates tumor
angiogenesis, mice tumors were analyzed by immunohistochemistry using anti-vWF antibody (Fig. 4D, bottom; Supplementary
Fig. S4C). The results indicated that OPN enhanced microvessel
density, whereas blocking of VEGF or silencing NRP-1 suppressed
OPN-induced tumor angiogenesis. Silencing tumor-derived OPN
drastically suppressed vWF expression, suggesting the potential
role of tumor-derived OPN in tumor angiogenesis. To examine

histopathologic and immunohistochemical studies using anti-vWF
and anti-pKDR antibodies. The data revealed that OPN enhances
VEGF-dependent in vivo angiogenesis through KDR phosphorylation (Fig. 4A). The neovascularization and KDR phosphorylation
were quantified and represented graphically (Supplementary
Fig. S4A). The data showed that OPN regulates VEGF-dependent
in vivo angiogenesis through paracrine loop, whereas silencing
tumor-derived OPN resulted in drastic reduction of tumor
angiogenesis.
VEGF plays a crucial role in OPN-induced tumor growth and
angiogenesis in orthotopic mice model. Our in vitro and in vivo
data prompted us to examine whether OPN regulates tumor
growth in orthotopic nude mice model and whether VEGF is
involved in this process. Accordingly, MDA-MB-231 cells were
transfected with OPN cDNA or treated with OPN and injected
orthotopically into the mammary fat pad of female nude mice. In
separate experiments, OPNi or NRP-1i were mixed with transfection reagent and injected to the site of the tumor. Purified OPN and
anti-VEGF blocking antibody were injected intratumorally twice a
week up to completion of the experiments. After 6 weeks, mice
were sacrificed and tumors were collected. The typical photographs
of tumors are shown in Fig. 4B. The changes of tumor weight

Figure 5. A and B, analysis of human breast tumor clinical specimens with different pathologic grades. Human breast tumor specimens (1–14) were collected
from local hospital with informed consent. The tumor grading was performed by histopathologic analysis using a modified Scarff-Bloom-Richardson system. Tumor
samples were analyzed by Western blot using anti-VEGF or anti-OPN antibody (A). The levels of OPN and VEGF were also detected in normal breast epithelial
tissues. The expressions of OPN and VEGF were quantified and represented in the form of bar graph (B ). C and D, histopathologic micrographs of normal and
breast tumor tissues of different grades (specimen 5, grade II; specimens 8 and 9, grade III). The sections of normal and tumor tissues (specimens 5, 8, and 9)
of different grades were analyzed by immunohistochemistry using anti-vWF antibody. Note that the enhanced microvessel density was observed in higher grades
of tumor (specimens 8 and 9) and correlates with increased OPN and VEGF expressions. The vWF-positive areas indicate the microvessel density (pink arrows ).
Cellular localization of NF-nB and expression profiles of NRP-1, ATF-4, and Brk were analyzed by immunohistochemical studies using their specific antibodies.
Note that NF-nB, ATF-4, and Brk are stained with FITC (green ), whereas NRP-1 is stained with TRITC (red).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

158

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

OPN Regulates VEGF-Dependent Tumor Angiogenesis

Figure 6. A schematic representation of OPN-induced NF-nB/ATF-4–mediated VEGF expression through activation of Brk/NIK leading to tumor growth and
angiogenesis through autocrine, paracrine, and juxtacrine mechanisms.

expert oncopathologist using modified Scarff-Bloom-Richardson
system, and regional lymph node metastasis was analyzed by
histopathology (Supplementary Table S1). The expressions of OPN
and VEGF (Fig. 5A) and the interaction between VEGF and NRP-1
(data not shown) were studied in tumor specimens of different
grades. The levels of OPN and VEGF were quantified and represented as bar graph (Fig. 5B). The data revealed that there were
significantly higher levels of OPN and VEGF expressions (Fig. 5A;
8 of 14 tumor specimens and one normal sample), and these data
correlated with tumors of higher grades. The data also indicated
that the interaction between VEGF and NRP-1 was also enhanced
significantly with tumors of higher grades (data not shown). The
immunohistochemical staining with anti-vWF antibody showed the
enhanced angiogenic vessel formation in breast tumor specimens
of higher grades (Fig. 5C).
Localization and expression of NF-KB, ATF-4, Brk, and NRP-1
in breast tumors specimens. To examine the activation status
of NF-nB in different grades of tumor specimens, tissue sections
were analyzed by immunohistochemistry using anti–NF-nB, p65
antibody. The results indicated that the NF-nB nuclear localization
was significantly enhanced in higher grades (grades II and III) of
tumors compared with the tumor of lower grades or normal breast
tissues (Fig. 5C). The status of expressions of NRP-1, ATF-4, and
Brk in different grades of tumors was also analyzed by immunohistochemistry using their specific antibodies. These results
indicated that the higher expressions of NRP-1, ATF-4, and Brk
correlate with higher grades of tumors (Fig. 5D). The ATF-4 nuclear

whether OPN enhances the interaction between VEGF and NRP-1
in vivo system, the tumor lysates were immunoprecipitated with
anti-VEGF antibody and analyzed by Western blot using anti–NRP1 antibody. Treatment with anti-VEGF blocking antibody or
silencing NRP-1 significantly suppressed OPN-induced interaction
between VEGF and NRP-1 (data not shown) and further suggested
that OPN augments the interaction between VEGF and NRP-1 that
ultimately control the tumor growth and angiogenesis.
Tumor tissues were lysed, and the levels of OPN and VEGF were
detected by Western blot (Fig. 4C). The level of CA15-3 from mice
serum was analyzed as breast cancer marker. The levels of VEGF
and OPN were also detected from mice serum (Fig. 4C). Significant
induction of VEGF was observed in tumor generated by OPN.
Tumor samples were also analyzed by EMSA (Fig. 4C) and immunofluorescence (Supplementary Fig. S4D), and the data suggested
that OPN augments NF-nB and ATF-4–DNA binding and nuclear
localization in these tumors. Moreover, silencing tumor-derived
OPN significantly suppressed NF-nB and ATF-4–DNA binding and
nuclear localization. These data suggested that both tumor-derived
and exogeneous OPN regulates NF-nB and ATF-4–dependent VEGF/
NRP-1–mediated breast tumor progression and angiogenesis.
Expressions of OPN and VEGF and their implications in
human breast tumor angiogenesis. The in vitro and in vivo data
further prompted us to extend these studies in human clinical
breast tumor specimens. Human solid breast tumor specimens and
regional lymph nodes were collected with informed consent from a
local hospital. Tumor grading was performed with the help of

www.aacrjournals.org

159

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

The role of OPN in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis is under
intense investigation (12, 40). Earlier Senger et al. reported that
VEGF induces OPN expression in endothelial cells, which in turn
regulates angiogenesis (41). However we have shown that OPN
regulates VEGF expression, which controls tumor angiogenesis
through autocrine, paracrine, and juxtacrine pathways. These data
suggested that there could be a positive feedback loop between
OPN and VEGF which might play an important role in tumor
progression and angiogenesis. It has also been reported that
coexpression of VEGF and OPN correlates with angiogenesis in
patients with stage I lung adenocarcinoma (42). Earlier reports
have shown that cooperation of OPN and VEGF may facilitate
tumor progression and angiogenesis in carcinomas derived from
other organs (43). Recently, we have showed that OPN regulates
cyclooxygenase-2–dependent prostaglandin E2 production, which
in turn regulates prostate cancer angiogenesis (14). Although
earlier reports indicated that OPN acts as an angiogenic factor but
the molecular mechanism by which OPN regulates VEGFdependent tumor angiogenesis in breast cancer is not well defined.
Our study for the first time showed the in-depth signaling pathways
by which OPN induces cell migration and angiogenesis through
induction of VEGF expression in breast cancer. Moreover, these
studies correlate with the data obtained from human breast tumor
specimens in Indian scenario.
Suppression of tumor progression by targeting the angiogenic
switch is one of the greatest challenges for cancer biologists and
medical oncologists. Recent reports on anticancer therapy
indicated that suppression of tumor angiogenesis by administration of antiangiogenic molecules is one of the most potent
therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cancer (44). However,
it is also known that some side effect of these antiangiogenic drugs
are considered as the main problem of this therapy (45). Faced with
the barrier to the traditional antiangiogenic strategies, we tested an
in vivo RNA interference–based approach by targeting OPN and
NRP-1. In recent time, in vivo siRNA-based approach has been
proposed for treatment of several diseases including cancer (46).
Therefore, appropriately designed OPN siRNA, injected intratumorally, exhibit significant suppression of tumor angiogenesis
and may help in the surgical excision of tumor and provide
considerable therapeutic value for the treatment of cancer.
Finally, we have shown for the first time that OPN induced the
potent angiogenic molecule, VEGF expression. OPN regulates
tumor growth and angiogenesis by induction of VEGF expression
through activation of Brk/NF-nB/ATF-4 pathways. These data
showed that OPN-induced VEGF regulates tumor angiogenesis
through autocrine, paracrine, and juxtacrine mechanisms (Fig. 6).
Our results further warrant that the mechanism shown in the
mouse model underlies the human pathology, and a clear understanding of such mechanism(s) may facilitate the development of
novel therapeutic approaches to suppress OPN-regulated NF-nB/
ATF-4–dependent VEGF expression, thereby controlling tumor
growth and angiogenesis.

localization was also significantly enhanced in higher grades
(grades II and III) of tumors and correlated with NF-nB (Fig. 5C
and D). The status of OPN and VEGF expressions and its correlation with NF-nB and ATF-4 activation and metastatic potential
in various grades of tumors are summarized in Supplementary
Table S1. These results showed that tumors with higher grades
exhibit significantly higher levels of ATF-4 and NF-nB nuclear
localization, and these data correlated with enhanced OPN, Brk,
and VEGF expression both in in vitro and in vivo systems, which
further corroborated with tumor growth and angiogenesis in breast
carcinoma.

Discussion
We have for the first time shown the molecular mechanism of
OPN-induced VEGF expression and its potential role in regulating
in vitro cell motility which ultimately modulates in vivo tumor
growth and angiogenesis in breast cancer model. Our data also
revealed that OPN might be necessary for maximal induction of
neovascularization by inducing VEGF expression through activation of Brk/NF-nB/ATF-4 pathways. Several lines of evidences
support this conclusion. First, OPN regulates VEGF promoter
activity and expression in human breast carcinoma cell lines.
Second, OPN stimulates Brk phosphorylation and Brk/NIKmediated NF-nB–dependent/independent ATF-4 activation and
crosstalk between NF-nB and ATF-4 that leads to VEGF expression.
Third, in autocrine pathway, OPN-induced VEGF interacts with
tumor cell surface receptor NRP-1 and stimulates VEGF–NRP-1–
mediated tumor cell motility. Fourth, in paracrine loop, OPNinduced VEGF up-regulates KDR phosphorylation, resulting in
enhanced endothelial cell motility and in vivo angiogenesis in nude
mice. Fifth, in juxtacrine manner, OPN-induced VEGF regulates
tumor-endothelial cell interaction through binding with NRP-1 in
breast cancer and KDR in endothelial cells. Sixth, OPN-induced
VEGF leads to increased breast tumor growth and angiogenesis in
nude mice model and blocking of tumor-derived VEGF or silencing
of tumor-derived OPN and NRP-1 significantly suppressed breast
tumor progression and angiogenesis. Seventh, analysis of human
solid breast tumor specimens showed the significant correlation
between the OPN, Brk, NRP-1, and VEGF expressions NF-nB and
ATF-4 activations with different pathologic grades of tumors. All
these data supported by the fact that OPN and its downstream
signaling molecules might be used as therapeutic target for the
treatment of breast cancer.
Previous reports indicated that Brk plays important role during
breast tumor progression (22, 23). We provide evidence, at least in
part, that Brk plays crucial role in OPN-induced NIK-mediated
NF-nB activation. Our data also showed that OPN regulates Brkdependent ATF-4 activation and a crosstalk between NF-nB and
ATF-4 that controls VEGF-dependent tumor angiogenesis. NRP-1
acts as key receptor for VEGF-mediated signaling in MDA-MB-231
cells (36, 38). Recent evidence indicated that NRP-1 could independently regulate VEGF-induced cell signaling (39). We sought to
determine whether OPN plays any role in regulating the interaction
between VEGF and NRP-1 in breast cancer cells. Our results
showed that enhanced interaction of VEGF and NRP-1 in response
to OPN control the breast cancer cell migration and tumor growth
through autocrine mechanism. We have also shown that OPNinduced tumor-derived VEGF regulates KDR/NRP-1–mediated
endothelial cell motility and tumor angiogenesis through paracrine
and juxtracrine mechanisms.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Acknowledgments
Received 6/12/2007; revised 10/5/2007; accepted 10/29/2007.
Grant support: Department of Biotechnology, Government of India (G.C. Kundu)
and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Government of India (G.
Chakraborty and S. Jain).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

160

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

OPN Regulates VEGF-Dependent Tumor Angiogenesis

References
1. Folkman J, Shing Y. Angiogenesis. J Biol Chem 1992;
267:10931–4.
2. Rifkin DB, Moscatelli D. Recent developments in the
cell biology of basic fibroblast growth factor. J Cell Biol
1989;109:1–6.
3. Nicosia RF, Nicosia SV, Smith M. Vascular endothelial
growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and
insulin-like growth factor-1 promote rat aortic angiogenesis in vitro . Am J Pathol 1994;145:1023–9.
4. Gleave ME, Hsieh JT, Wu HC, et al. Epidermal growth
factor receptor-mediated autocrine and paracrine stimulation of human transitional cell carcinoma. Cancer
Res 1993;53:5300–7.
5. McMahon G. VEGF receptor signaling in tumor
angiogenesis. Oncologist 2000;5:3–10.
6. Ferrara N. VEGF and the quest for tumor angiogenesis
factors. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:795–803.
7. Ferrara N, Gerber HP, LeCouter J. The biology of VEGF
and its receptors. Nat Med 2003;9:669–76.
8. Cross MJ, Dixelius J, Matsumoto T, Claesson-Welsh L.
VEGF-receptor signal transduction. Trends Biochem Sci
2003;28:488–94.
9. Banerjee SN, Sengupta K, Banerjee S, Saxena NK,
Banerjee SK. 2-Methoxyestradiol exhibits a biphasic
effect on VEGF-A in tumor cells and upregulation is
mediated through ER-a, a possible signaling pathway
associated with the impact of 2-ME2 on proliferative
cells. Neoplasia 2003;5:417–26.
10. Mercurio AM, Bachelder RE, Bates RC, Chung J.
Autocrine signaling in carcinoma: VEGF and the a 6 h 4
integrin. Semin Cancer Biol 2004;14:115–22.
11. Sodek J, Ganss B, McKee MD. Osteopontin. Crit Rev
Oral Biol Med 2000;11:279–303.
12. Chakraborty G, Jain S, Behera R, et al. The
multifaceted roles of osteopontin in cell signaling,
tumor progression and angiogenesis. Curr Mol Med
2006;6:819–30.
13. Wai PY, Kuo PC. The role of osteopontin in tumor
metastasis. J Surg Res 2004;121:228–41.
14. Jain S, Chakraborty G, Kundu GC. The crucial role of
cyclooxygenase-2 in osteopontin-induced protein kinase
C a/c-Src/InB kinase a/h-dependent prostate tumor
progression and angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2006;66:
6638–48.
15. Philip S, Bulbule A, Kundu GC. Osteopontin stimulates tumor growth and activation of promatrix
metalloproteinase-2 through nuclear factor-n B-mediated induction of membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase in murine melanoma cells. J Biol Chem 2001;276:
44926–35.
16. Das R, Mahabeleshwar GH, Kundu GC. Osteopontin
stimulates cell motility and nuclear factor nB-mediated
secretion of urokinase type plasminogen activator
through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling
pathways in breast cancer cells. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
28593–606.
17. Rangaswami H, Bulbule A, Kundu GC. Nuclear

www.aacrjournals.org

factor-inducing kinase plays a crucial role in osteopontin-induced MAPK/I n B a kinase-dependent nuclear
factor n B-mediated promatrix metalloproteinase-9
activation. J Biol Chem 2004;279:38921–35.
18. Rangaswami H, Bulbule A, Kundu GC. Osteopontin:
role in cell signaling and cancer progression. Trends Cell
Biol 2006;16:79–87.
19. Rittling SR, Chen Y, Feng F, Wu Y. Tumor-derived
osteopontin is soluble, not matrix associated. J Biol
Chem 2002;277:9175–82.
20. Senger DR, Perruzzi CA, Papadopoulos A, Tenen DG.
Purification of a human milk protein closely similar to
tumor-secreted phosphoproteins and osteopontin. Biochim Biophys Acta 1989;996:43–8.
21. Denhardt DT, Mistretta D, Chambers AF, et al.
Transcriptional regulation of osteopontin and the
metastatic phenotype: evidence for a Ras-activated
enhancer in the human OPN promoter. Clin Exp
Metastasis 2003;20:77–84.
22. Zhang P, Ostrander JH, Faivre EJ, Olsen A, Fitzsimmons D, Lange CA. Regulated association of protein
kinase B/Akt with breast tumor kinase. J Biol Chem
2005;280:1982–91.
23. Chen HY, Shen CH, Tsai YT, Lin FC, Huang YP, Chen
RH. Brk activates rac1 and promotes cell migration and
invasion by phosphorylating paxillin. Mol Cell Biol 2004;
24:10558–72.
24. Harvey AJ, Crompton MR. Use of RNA interference to
validate Brk as a novel therapeutic target in breast
cancer: Brk promotes breast carcinoma cell proliferation. Oncogene 2003;22:5006–10.
25. Roybal CN, Yang S, Sun CW, et al. Homocysteine
increases the expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor by a mechanism involving endoplasmic reticulum
stress and transcription factor ATF4. J Biol Chem 2004;
279:14844–52.
26. Roybal CN, Hunsaker LA, Barbash O, Vander Jagt DL,
Abcouwer SF. The oxidative stressor arsenite activates
vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA transcription
by an ATF4-dependent mechanism. J Biol Chem 2005;
280:20331–9.
27. He Z, Tessier-Lavigne M. Neuropilin is a receptor for
the axonal chemorepellent semaphorin III. Cell 1997;90:
739–51.
28. Kolodkin AL, Levengood DV, Rowe EG, Tai YT, Giger
RJ, Ginty DD. Neuropilin is a semaphorin III receptor.
Cell 1997;90:753–62.
29. Soker S, Fidder H, Neufeld G, Klagsbrun M.
Characterization of novel vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) receptors on tumor cells that bind
VEGF165 via its exon 7-encoded domain. J Biol Chem
1996;271:5761–7.
30. Soker S, Takashima S, Miao HQ, Neufeld G, Klagsbrun
M. Neuropilin-1 is expressed by endothelial and tumor
cells as an isoform-specific receptor for vascular
endothelial growth factor. Cell 1998;92:735–45.
31. Miao HQ, Lee P, Lin H, Soker S, Klagsbrun M.
Neuropilin-1 expression by tumor cells promotes tumor
angiogenesis and progression. FASEB J 2000;14:2532–9.

161

32. Barr MP, Byrne AM, Duffy AM, et al. A peptide
corresponding to the neuropilin-1-binding site on VEGF
(165) induces apoptosis of neuropilin-1-expressing
breast tumour cells. Br J Cancer 2005;92:328–33.
33. Leopold JA, Walker J, Scribner AW, et al. Glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase modulates vascular endothelial growth factor-mediated angiogenesis. J Biol Chem
2003;278:32100–6.
34. Sweeney CJ, Mehrotra S, Sadaria MR, et al. The
sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide in combination with
docetaxel reduces metastasis and improves survival in a
xenograft model of breast cancer. Mol Cancer Ther
2005;4:1004–12.
35. Chakraborty G, Rangaswami H, Jain S, Kundu GC.
Hypoxia regulates cross-talk between Syk and Lck
leading to breast cancer progression and angiogenesis.
J Biol Chem 2006;281:11322–31.
36. Bachelder RE, Crago A, Chung J, et al. Vascular
endothelial growth factor is an autocrine survival factor
for neuropilin-expressing breast carcinoma cells. Cancer
Res 2001;61:5736–40.
37. Matsumoto T, Claesson-Welsh L. VEGF receptor
signal transduction. Sci STKE 2001;RE 21:1–17.
38. Bachelder RE, Lipscomb EA, Lin X, et al. Competing
autocrine pathways involving alternative neuropilin-1
ligands regulate chemotaxis of carcinoma cells. Cancer
Res 2003;63:5230–3.
39. Wang L, Zeng H, Wang P, Soker S, Mukhopadhyay D.
Neuropilin-1-mediated vascular permeability factor/
vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent endothelial cell migration. J Biol Chem 2003;278:48848–60.
40. Takahashi F, Akutagawa S, Fukumoto H, et al.
Osteopontin induces angiogenesis of murine neuroblastoma cells in mice. Int J Cancer 2002;98:707–12.
41. Senger DR, Ledbetter SR, Claffey KP, PapadopoulosSergiou A, Peruzzi CA, Detmar M. Stimulation of
endothelial cell migration by vascular permeability
factor/vascular endothelial growth factor through cooperative mechanisms involving the avh3 integrin,
osteopontin, and thrombin. Am J Pathol 1996;149:
293–305.
42. Shijubo N, Uede T, Kon S, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor and osteopontin in stage I lung
adenocarcinoma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:
1269–73.
43. Shijubo N, Uede T, Kon S, Nagata M, Abe S. Vascular
endothelial growth factor and osteopontin in tumor
biology. Crit Rev Oncog 2000;11:135–46.
44. Giavazzi R, Nicoletti MI. Small molecules in antiangiogenic therapy. Curr Opin Invest Drugs 2002;3:
482–91.
45. Kerbel RS, Viloria-Petit A, Klement G, Rak J.
‘Accidental’ anti-angiogenic drugs. anti-oncogene directed signal transduction inhibitors and conventional
chemotherapeutic agents as examples. Eur J Cancer
2000;36:1248–57.
46. Jain S, Chakraborty G, Bulbule A, Kaur R, Kundu GC.
Osteopontin: an emerging therapeutic target for anticancer therapy. Expert Opin Ther Targets 2007;11:81–90.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Osteopontin Promotes Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor−
Dependent Breast Tumor Growth and Angiogenesis via
Autocrine and Paracrine Mechanisms
Goutam Chakraborty, Shalini Jain and Gopal C. Kundu
Cancer Res 2008;68:152-161.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/152
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/01/04/68.1.152.DC1

This article cites 46 articles, 21 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/152.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/152.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

