NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2010 March 19; 140(6): 935–950. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.02.043.

Anti-inflammatory Agents: Present and Future
Charles A. Dinarello1,2,*
1Department

of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA 2Department of
Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 6500 HC Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inflammation involving the innate and adaptive immune systems is a normal response to infection.
However, when allowed to continue unchecked, inflammation may result in autoimmune or
autoinflammatory disorders, neurodegenerative disease, or cancer. A variety of safe and effective
anti-inflammatory agents are available, including aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatories, with many more drugs under development. In particular, the new era of antiinflammatory agents includes “biologicals” such as anticytokine therapies and small molecules
that block the activity of kinases. Other anti-inflammatories currently in use or under development
include statins, histone deacetylase inhibitors, PPAR agonists, and small RNAs. This Review
discusses the current status of anti-inflammatory drug research and the development of new antiinflammatory therapeutics.

Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reducing pain, inflammation, and fever with salicylate-containing plant extracts can be
traced throughout written human history. One hundred and fifty years ago, Felix Hoffman
acetylated salicylic acid and created aspirin. Aspirin inhibits the cyclooxygenase (COX)
enzymes COX-1 and COX-2, which synthesize inflammatory mediators called
prostaglandins and thromboxanes. The ability to block production of prostaglandins and
thromboxanes accounts for aspirin being the world’s most used therapeutic agent. Second to
aspirin are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), which target COX-2 and hence
the synthesis of prostaglandins, particularly PGE2. Synthetic forms of natural cortisol
(termed glucocorticoids) are also widely used to treat many inflammatory diseases, and
despite their side effects, glucocorticoids remain a mainstay for reducing inflammation. Yet,
it is still the challenge of the pharmaceutical chemist to develop more effective and less
toxic agents to treat the signs and symptoms of acute inflammation as well as the long-term
consequences of chronic inflammatory diseases.
Inflammation is a dynamic process with proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) playing
central roles. A number of “biologicals” have been developed to treat inflammation (Table
1), including agents that reduce the activity of specific cytokines or their receptors
(anticytokine therapies), block lymphocyte trafficking into tissues, prevent the binding of
monocyte-lymphocyte costimulatory molecules, or deplete B lymphocytes (Figure 1).
Current anticytokine therapies have found a place in the treatment of autoimmune diseases,

©2010 Elsevier Inc.
*
Correspondence: cdinarello@mac.com.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes two tables and can be found with this article online at doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2010.02.043.

Dinarello

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, multiple sclerosis, and
others. Without question, neutralization of specific proinflammatory cytokines has
“canonized” their causative role in inflammation and has changed the lives of millions of
patients with these diseases. One drawback of anticytokine therapies is decreased host
immune defense against infection and possibly cancer. Nevertheless, the benefits of
anticytokine therapies outweigh the risks, and the risks can be reduced. Compared to the
consequences of long-term glucocorticoid treatment to stem inflammation, anticytokine
therapies are a major improvement. Indeed, organ toxicities are rarely, if ever, observed with
anticytokine therapies as they operate almost exclusively in extracellular rather than
intracellular compartments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kinases that act downstream of cytokine receptors have become new targets to tame
inflammation, and orally active small-molecule inhibitors of intracellular signaling kinases
will likely be the new frontier of anti-inflammatory drug development. However, because
many intracellular signaling molecules are involved in normal cellular functions, the
effective concentration that does not elicit organ toxicity will need to be carefully
determined. Statins, a safe class of drugs used for lowering serum cholesterol, also have
anti-inflammatory properties. Orally active inhibitors of histone deacetylases, which are also
safe and used clinically, are effective drugs with anti-inflammatory properties that also block
cell proliferation. Naturally occurring resolvins are also being developed as antiinflammatory agents. This Review discusses current anti-inflammatory drugs as well as the
development of new orally active, safe, and effective drugs for treating acute or chronic
inflammation.

Inhibiting Prostaglandins: Targeting COX-2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The inflammatory molecule PGE2 lowers pain thresholds, and the primary goal of oral
inhibitors of PGE2 is to reduce pain. There are two pathways for synthesizing the
inflammatory molecule PGE2: the constitutive COX-1 pathway and the inducible COX-2
pathway. Whereas COX-1 accounts for low levels of PGE2 and regulates homeostatic
mechanisms in health, COX-2 induces at least two orders of magnitude more PGE2
compared to COX-1 and is primarily associated with inflammatory disease. Synthesis of
COX-2 is absent or low in healthy individuals but is upregulated by proinflammatory
cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF-α in response to infection or in inflammatory disease.
Specific inhibitors of COX-2 have provided a major advance in the treatment of pain,
particularly in patients with osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. For the most part, COX-2
inhibitors have significantly reduced gastrointestinal side effects compared to COX-1
inhibitors. However, the chronic use of some COX-2-specific inhibitors has been associated
with an increase in cardiovascular as well as cerebrovascular events particularly in patients
with an elevated risk of thrombosis. This increased risk may be due to the COX-2-mediated
reduction in synthesis of prostacyclin, which is a natural inhibitor of platelet activation. In
addition to their widespread benefit in arthritis, COX-2-specific inhibitors are used to reduce
the development of colon cancer in high-risk patients as adenocarcinoma cells in the colon
overexpress COX-2. There is still a need to develop safer, more effective COX-2 inhibitors.

Resolvins
There are several steps in the initial inflammatory cascade triggered by cytokines, including
recruitment of myeloid cells (monocytes and neutrophils) into affected tissues (Figure 1).
Inflammatory products of arachidonic acid oxidation (omega-6) including inflammatory
prostaglandins (PGE2) and lipoxins (LTB4) are released from infiltrating myeloid cells. In
contrast, products of eicosapentanoic acid (omega-3) oxidation, PGE3, and LTB5, have antiinflammatory activities. Products of omega-3 fatty acid oxidation include resolvins of the E

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

series (RvE1 and RvE2) (Serhan and Chiang, 2008), which are found naturally in nearly all
inflammatory sites in mammals. The D series of resolvins are derived from docosahexaenoic
acid. Specific receptors for resolvins have been identified and when activated are functional
in reducing inflammation (Krishnamoorthy et al., 2010). In general, resolvins are part of the
anti-inflammatory portfolio that coexists with inflammation. Synthetic forms of RvE1 are
currently in clinical trials for treating ocular diseases and other local inflammatory
conditions. In animal models of sterile inflammation, RvE1 suppresses the number of
infiltrating neutrophils and macrophages as well as decreasing expression of the genes
encoding TNF-α, IL-1β, and VEGF (Jin et al., 2009). The anti-inflammatory properties of
omega-3 fatty acids include suppression of IL-1β and TNF-α production (Endres et al.,
1989), and the mechanism of action of omega-3 fatty acids may include boosting production
of resolvins of the D and E series.

Glucocorticoids: Suppressing Cytokine-Driven Inflammation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Glucocorticoids are used widely on a chronic basis to treat most autoimmune diseases.
Short-term glucocorticoid treatment is used in gout, and intra-articular injections of
glucocorticoids are commonly used to treat painful osteoarthritic joints and tendonitis.
Although there are several mechanisms by which glucocorticoids reduce inflammation, a
major one may be to reduce expression of cytokine-induced genes. Glucocorticoids enter all
cells and bind to the cytoplasmic steroid receptor, and then this complex translocates to the
nucleus where it is recognized by specific DNA sequences. The major effect of binding to
DNA is the suppression of transcription by opposing the activation of the transcription
factors AP-1 and NF-κB. AP-1 and NF-κB induce expression of genes encoding nearly all
proinflammatory cytokines. Glucocorticoids also suppress expression of inflammatory genes
encoding T cell growth factors such as IL-2, IL-4, IL-15, and IL-17 as well as interferon-γ
(IFN-γ). In addition, glucocorticoids reduce expression of genes encoding COX-2, inducible
nitric oxide synthase, and intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), which are normally
induced by the cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α. Glucocorticoids increase expression of genes
encoding anti-inflammatory molecules, such as the cytokine IL-10 and the IL-1 type 2 decoy
receptor.

Biologicals as Anti-inflammatory Agents
Anticytokine Therapies

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although cytokines are studied in nearly every biological discipline, cytokine-mediated
effects often dominate the fields of inflammation, immunology, atherosclerosis, and
degenerative processes of aging. In addition, cytokine-driven chronic inflammation has been
implicated in cancer formation as well as metastasis (see Review by S.I. Grivennikov et al.
on page 883 of this issue). Cytokines are secreted by one cell and act on another cell in order
to bring about a change in the function of the target cell. In a way, one can consider
cytokines as the “hormones” of inflammatory responses, but whereas a hormone is the
primary product of a specialized cell, cytokines can be produced by many different cell
types including those of the immune system and epithelia. On a molar basis, cytokines are
far more potent than hormones. For example, the concentration of IL-1 that induces COX-2
is 10 pM and the concentration of IL-12 that induces IFN-γ is 20 pM. In terms of
anticytokine therapies, the amount of a neutralizing antibody or soluble receptor that blocks
the activity of a cytokine can be relatively low compared to the amount of antibody needed
to kill a microbe.
Blocking the activity of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1, TNF, IL-6, IL-12, IL-17,
IL-18, or IL-23 reduces inflammation and suppresses specific pathways that activate T cells.
Blocking IL-32 and IL-33 may also be useful for treating inflammation as well as allergy.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chemokines are also cytokines, and small-molecule chemokine receptor antagonists have
been used to treat Crohn’s disease, an autoimmune inflammatory bowel disease (Proudfoot
et al., 2010). Chemokines drive the migration of immune cells but they also affect
angiogenesis and the activity of myeloid cells.
Anticytokine Therapies and Host Defense

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The conundrum in considering anticytokine therapies for treating chronic diseases is that
cytokines evolved many millions of years ago and provided a survival benefit for the host
through what is now termed the “innate immune response.” The innate immune response is
less specific than the adaptive immune response and is the first line of defense against
infection or injury. It is characterized by an inflammatory response involving infiltration of
neutrophils in response to cytokines resulting in phagocytosis and intracellular killing of the
pathogens and the control of infection. In most cases, even without antibiotics, the
inflammation subsides once the infection is eliminated, and there is little or no damage to
the host. In fact, cytokines produced during inflammation also assist in the repair process
after injury. However, the same cytokines that orchestrate the infiltration of neutrophils
acutely in order to fight infection are responsible for tissue remodeling and organ damage
when produced chronically. Chronic inflammation destroys the joints, the ability of lung
tissue to exchange gases, the patency of blood vessels, the intestinal barrier, and the myelin
sheath that insulates nerve fibers in the brain and spinal cord. Hence, even though their
primary function is to protect the host when challenged and to repair tissue when injured,
these cytokines are mediators of disease and thus are targets for anticytokine therapy.
Another paradox is provided by IFN-γ, which is essential for defense against intracellular
microorganisms such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which causes tuberculosis. IFN-γ is
also a major cytokine in the pathogenesis of several autoimmune diseases including multiple
sclerosis, psoriasis, and lupus.
Blocking cytokines may reduce inflammation but also renders the host susceptible to
infection and maybe even cancer. Anti-TNF-α treatment increases opportunistic infections
(reviewed in Dinarello, 2005). On the other hand, anticytokine therapy has little or no organ
toxicity or gastrointestinal disturbances and so is well tolerated.

Biologicals for Treating Autoimmune Diseases
Autoimmune versus Autoinflammatory Diseases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Some chronic inflammatory diseases are autoimmune, whereas others are
“autoinflammatory.” In autoimmune diseases, the T cell dominates as the primary
dysfunctional cell or initiator of the disease process. A cluster of cytokines such as TNF-α,
IFN-g, IL-2, IL-12, IL-23, and IL-17 participate in maintaining autoreactive T cells.
Rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, type 1 diabetes, psoriasis, lupus, and
multiple sclerosis are examples of autoimmune diseases in which the inflammation is
secondary to a disease process that is driven by autoreactive T cells (See Essay by L.A.
Zenewicz et al., in this issue). In contrast, autoinflammatory diseases are not mediated by
the adaptive immune system and do not involve T cells but rather are caused by
dysfunctional macrophages (see Essay by D.L. Kastner et al. in this issue). The mechanism
of autoinflammatory disease appears to be due to increased secretion of IL-1β, and treatment
is uniquely based on reducing the activity of IL-1β.
Most autoimmune diseases can be treated with any one of a number of “biologicals” (Table
1). The best example is rheumatoid arthritis where neutralizing TNF-α, blocking IL-6
receptors, depleting B lymphocytes, or preventing T cell costimulation are all effective
therapeutic approaches. Even blocking IL-1 receptors or neutralizing IL-1β is effective for
treating rheumatoid arthritis, but this effect is due to protection of bone and cartilage rather
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

than reduction of T cell activation. Thus, preventing the activity of only one cytokine or
reducing the effect of one pathway can be effective in treating autoimmune diseases. Other
examples include psoriasis and Crohn’s disease, which can be effectively treated by
blocking IL-12, IL-23, or TNF-α or by using a humanized monoclonal antibody to block a4
integrins. For example, a monoclonal antibody directed against α4 integrins (natalizumab)
prevents the migration of immune cells into tissues. One goal in treating autoimmune
disease is to reduce the infiltration of autoreactive T cells into the affected tissue. Another is
the depletion of B cells using anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies such as rituximab,
ocrelizumab, or ofatumumab. Biologicals offer several options for treating autoimmune
diseases. Although the field of biologicals began with the use of anti-TNF-α monoclonal
antibodies to treat Crohn’s Disease, it has expanded considerably. Antibodies to IL-12,
IL-17, IL-23, IL-1β, and the IL-6 receptor have been approved, and antibodies to IL-23 and
IL-17 are in clinical trials. Each “biological” can be effective in the treatment of more than
one autoimmune disease, suggesting that there is considerable overlap in cytokine functions
in inflammation. The success of a “biological” is best observed in patients with poorly
controlled disease who are receiving the standard of therapy for that disease, for example
rheumatoid arthritis. Adding a biological to standard therapy often decreases disease
severity. The physician has an increasing list of biologicals from which to choose: anti-TNFα antibodies or soluble TNF receptors to neutralize TNF-α, anti-IL-6 receptor antibodies to
block IL-6, CTLA-4-Ig to block the binding of costimulatory molecules, rituximab (an antiCD20 monoclonal antibody) to deplete B cells, neutralizing antibodies to block IL-12 and
IL-23 activity, or natalizumab to reduce lymphocyte trafficking. Although the degree of
benefit will differ depending on the patient, most experience improved control of their
disease.
Why Just One?
Despite the multiple cellular and cytokine-mediated mechanisms for sustaining autoimmune
diseases, blocking just one cytokine can be sufficient to bring the disease under control.
Why is this? There is evidence that cytokines exist in “cascades” and that interrupting one
cytokine interrupts the cascade. For example, blocking TNF-α reduces the activity of IL-6
and IL-1β (Dinarello et al., 1986; Fong et al., 1989), blocking IL-1β reduces IL-6
(Fitzgerald et al., 2005; Goldbach-Mansky et al., 2006; Hoffman et al., 2004; Pascual et al.,
2005), and blocking IL-12 and IL-23 reduces IFN-γ. B lymphocytes make TNF-α and
IL-1β, and this may account for the beneficial effects of depleting B cells with monoclonal
antibodies. IL-12 and IL-23 sustain production of IL-17, which may explain the success of
using IL-12 and IL-23 inhibitors to treat autoimmune diseases.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There is also ample evidence that cytokines act in a synergistic rather than additive fashion.
For example, synergistic cytokine pairs include IL-1 and TNF-α, TNF-α and IFN-γ, and
IL-1β and IL-6 (reviewed in Dinarello, 1996, 2009a). Thus, blocking one cytokine interrupts
this synergy and reduces disease severity. Part of the success of TNF-α inhibitors for
treating rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, and psoriasis is the loss of TNF-α-bearing T
cells. TNF-α is located on the T cell surface and anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibodies of the
IgG1 class crosslink membrane TNF-α and induce death of T cells (reviewed in Dinarello,
2005).
Autoimmune Disease and B Cell Depletion
Rituximab and other monoclonal antibodies that target and deplete CD20-positive B cells
have an unexpected benefit in treating rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, Crohn’s disease,
multiple sclerosis, and type 1 diabetes (Table 1). Although depletion of B cells reduces
immunoglobulin levels, this is unlikely to explain the efficacy of B cell depletion for treating
these autoimmune diseases. B cells contribute to antigen presentation and thus help in T cell

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

activation. Also, increasing evidence links the pathogenesis of most autoimmune diseases
with T cells producing IL-17. IL-17 is a proinflammatory cytokine that induces chemokine
production and promotes infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages. There was a marked
reduction in IL-17 produced by synovial cells from the joints of rheumatoid arthritis patients
treated with rituximab (van de Veerdonk et al., 2009b). In peripheral blood mononuclear
cells, the presence of rituximab reduced the levels of IL-17 as well as the number of T cells
producing the cytokine.
Side Effects of Biologicals

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The major side effect of biologicals is a reduction in host defense against infections. When
detected early, these infections can be effectively treated with antibiotics. However, three
biologicals used to treat autoimmune diseases have resulted in cases of progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). PML is a rapidly demyelinating and potentially
fatal disease that is caused by a virus and is often observed in patients treated with
immunosuppressive drugs or in patients with AIDS. PML has been associated with patients
with multiple sclerosis or Crohn’s disease treated with the monoclonal antibody natalizumab
(Major, 2009). PML also develops in patients treated with the B cell-depleting antibody
rituximab and in psoriasis patients treated with the monoclonal antibody efalizumab.
Natalizumab and efalizumab prevent the migration of T cells into tissues, whereas rituximab
lyses CD20-bearing B cells and does not affect T cell migration. It is not clear why
natalizumab, rituximab, or efalizumab cause PML.

Biologicals for Treating Autoinflammatory Diseases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Autoinflammatory diseases are chronic inflammatory conditions characterized by
macrophage dysfunction and local as well as systemic inflammation (see Essay by D.L.
Kastner et al. in this issue; Table S1 available online). Autoinflammatory diseases are
noninfectious but can be exacerbated by infection. Recurrent fevers are common, with
painful joints and muscles and elevated blood neutrophil counts. By inhibiting only IL-1β,
these diseases rapidly are brought under control; neutralization of TNF-α has little or no
effect. Some of these debilitating diseases are due to gain-of-function mutations that affect
the activation of caspase-1, which leads to increased processing of the inactive IL-1β
precursor and release of active IL-1β (reviewed in Masters et al., 2009). Caspase-1
activation is initiated by the “inflammasome,” a multiprotein intracellular complex (see
Review by K. Schroder and J. Tschopp on page 821 of this issue). The first mutation
affecting the processing of IL-1β was discovered in the nucleotide-binding domain and
leucine-rich repeat containing protein 3 (NLRP3), a component of the inflammasome
(Hoffman et al., 2001). Mutations associated with the classic autoinflammatory disease
familial Mediterranean fever also increase the secretion of IL-1β (Masters et al., 2009).
Another classic autoinflammatory disease is hyper-IgD (Drenth et al., 1999). Mutations in
the gene encoding mevalonate kinase cause hyper-IgD and also periodic fever syndrome
(International Hyper-IgD Study Group). In each of these diseases, IL-1β can stimulate its
own production, which plays a pivotal role in autoinflammatory disease pathogenesis
(Dinarello et al., 1987; Gattorno et al., 2007).
Is Type 2 Diabetes an Autoinflammatory Disease?
Type 1 diabetes is a classic autoimmune disease in which autoreactive T cells attack the
insulin-producing β cells of the pancreas. On the other hand, in type 2 diabetes, there is no T
cell involvement but rather a chronic state of inflammation in which IL-1β is produced and
kills the β cells. Thus, type 2 diabetes falls into the autoinflammatory class of diseases, and
the beneficial effects of IL-1β blockade in patients with type 2 diabetes supports that
concept. IL-1β is also cytotoxic for β islet cells in autoimmune type 1 diabetes (Mandrup-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Poulsen et al., 1986), but in type 2 diabetes high levels of glucose can stimulate IL-1β
production by the β islet cell itself (Maedler et al., 2002). IL-1β is also produced by fat cells,
an additional source of IL-1β in type 2 diabetes. In general, the loss of β cell mass in the
pancreas progresses over several years during which time patients are in a “pre-diabetic”
state. It is therefore possible to “salvage” β islet cells by reducing IL-1β-mediated
inflammation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Proof of a specific role for IL-1β in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes was demonstrated in
patients in a 13 week randomized, placebo-controlled study using the IL-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1Ra), also called anakinra, to block IL-1β. There was a statistically and
clinically significant improvement in insulin production and glycemic control (Larsen et al.,
2007a). The clinical response to anakinra was linked to variants in the gene encoding IL-1Ra
that result in low circulating levels of IL-1Ra (Larsen et al., 2009), raising the possibility
that insufficient IL-1Ra contributes to inflammation in type 2 diabetes. In the 39 weeks after
anakinra treatment, patients who responded to anakinra used 66% less insulin to obtain the
same level of glycemic control. This observation suggests that blocking IL-1β even for a
short period restores the function of pancreatic β cells or possibly allows for some
regeneration of β cells. Several trials blocking TNF-α in type 2 diabetes have succeeded in
reducing C-reactive protein but did not improve glycemic control. The anakinra trial
observations have been confirmed using a specific neutralizing monoclonal antibody to
IL-1β (Donath et al., 2009). These studies provide clinical evidence that type 2 diabetes is a
chronic auto-inflammatory disease in which IL-1β-mediated inflammation progressively
destroys the insulin-producing pancreatic β cells.
In diabetic mice, administration of a caspase-1 inhibitor reduces insulin resistance; in mice
deficient in caspase-1, there is improved sensitivity to insulin (Stienstra et al., 2009). In
addition, the thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) binds to NLRP3, which activates
caspase-1 and the subsequent processing and secretion of active IL-1β (Zhou et al., 2010).
TXNIP-deficient mice exhibit improved glucose tolerance and reduced insulin resistance
(Zhou et al., 2010). There are several studies linking TXNIP expression to type 2 diabetes
and glucose regulation. Thus, it appears that in insulin-secreting pancreatic β cells, glucosestimulated IL-1β activity is caspase-1 dependent; production of IL-1β by adipocytes is also
caspase-1 dependent (Stienstra et al., 2009).
IL-1 Blockade in Stroke and Heart Disease

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

IL-1 receptor blockade in stroke patients results in a decrease in circulating neutrophils and
IL-6 levels, which is often associated with a reduction in IL-1β activity. Moreover, the
severity of neurological impairment appears to decrease in stroke patients treated with IL-1
receptor blockade compared to placebo-treated controls (Emsley et al., 2005). Does IL-1
contribute to heart failure after myocardial infarction? Animal studies show that reducing
IL-1 activity prevents post-infarction myocardial remodeling (Abbate et al., 2008). In a
placebo-controlled trial of anakinra in patients with myocardial infarction, daily anakinra
treatment was added to standard therapy the day after angioplasty and continued for 14 days.
Three months later, there was a statistically significant difference in the left ventricular endsystolic volume index (a surrogate marker of damage severity in myocardial infarction) in
patients treated with anakinra compared to patients given a placebo (Abbate et al., 2010).
The mechanism for the beneficial effect of the 14 day course of therapy is likely to be due to
a reduction in the myocardial remodeling that takes place after loss of viable heart muscle,
and that results in heart failure. The heart seems to be exquisitely sensitive to IL-1 blockade
as the amount of anakinra used to treat the myocardial infarction patients was the same as
that used in rheumatoid arthritis, that is, 100 mg subcutaneously each day. This dose results
in a brief (4 hr) rise in blood levels not more than 1.0 μg/ml.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 8

Agents for Blocking IL-1 Activity

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Specific monoclonal antibodies, such as canakinumab and Xoma 052, are the best agents for
blocking IL-1β activity. Canakinumab is approved for the treatment of a group of
autoinflammatory diseases now termed cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS)
that includes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome, Mucle-Wells syndrome, and
Neonatal Onset Multi-inflammatory Disease (see Essay by D.L. Kastner et al. in this issue;
Lachmann et al., 2009). Both canakinumab and Xoma 052 are in clinical trials for treating
type 2 (and type 1) diabetes, gout, Behcet’s disease, and other autoinflammatory diseases.
Rilonacept is a construct of the two extracellular domains of the IL-1 receptor complex and
binds to both IL-1α and IL-1β. Rilonacept has been approved for the treatment of familial
cold autoinflammatory syndrome (Hoffman et al., 2008) and has been used to treat gout. The
extracellular domains of IL-1 receptor type II preferentially bind to IL-1β. However, for
optimal neutralization, the extracellular domain of IL-1 receptor accessory protein is
required and, in clinical testing, the type II receptor was not effective. The extracellular
domains of IL-1 receptor type I, which preferentially bind to IL-1Ra and IL-1α, were not
effective in patients.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Is it possible to specifically inhibit IL-1 activity with orally active agents? Currently, there
are no orally active agents that prevent the binding of IL-1 to its receptor. Nevertheless,
orally active agents that target the processing and secretion of IL-1β have been developed.
For IL-1β to be released from the cell as an active cytokine, several steps are necessary
(Figure 2). The purinergic receptor P2X7 is activated by extracellular ATP and appears to be
a critical early step in the release of active IL-1β (Netea et al., 2009; Perregaux et al., 2000).
Once the purinergic receptor P2X7 is activated, there is a rapid efflux of potassium ions
from the cell, subsequent oligomerization of the inflammasome, activation of caspase-1,
cleavage of the IL-1β precursor, and release of active IL-1β via secretory lysosomes. Orally
active, specific inhibitors of the P2X7 receptor reduce disease in several models of
inflammation and are being tested in humans with rheumatoid arthritis. However, the P2X7
receptor serves other cellular functions, and it is unclear to what extent inhibition of this
receptor contributes to the amelioration of inflammation. Moreover, sites for caspase-1
activity are present in four members of the IL-1 family: IL-1β, IL-18, IL-33, and IL-1F7. In
the case of IL-33, inhibition of caspase-1 decreases the intracellular destruction of the IL-33
precursor. Orally active caspase-1 inhibitors also reduce inflammation in several animal
models of disease and are effective in humans with autoinflammatory diseases (Stack et al.,
2005). However, similar to inhibition of the P2X7 receptor, specific inhibition of caspase-1
will also impact processing of other IL-1 family members. Moreover, there are animal
models of IL-1β-mediated disease that are independent of caspase-1 processing of the IL-1β
precursor.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although the oligomerization of inflammasome components initiates the conversion of procaspase-1 into the active enzyme for processing the IL-1β precursor, there are ample
examples of caspase-1-independent activities of IL-1β. For example, the inflammation
induced by muscle injury results in a large influx of neutrophils, tissue damage, and high
IL-6 levels. This response is absent in mice deficient in IL-1β but fully present in mice
deficient in caspase-1 (Fantuzzi et al., 1997). Intra-articular injection of cell wall fragments
derived from Streptococcus pyogenes into mice resulted in joint inflammation, cartilage
destruction, and a robust infiltration of neutrophils. However, caspase-1-deficient mice
exhibited the same response (Joosten et al., 2009). Similarly, injection of urate crystals
intraperitoneally into mice induced a brisk peritonitis in mice with or without caspase-1
(Guma et al., 2009). These findings are important for the pathogenesis of autoinflammatory
diseases as non-caspase-1 processing of IL-1β in the extracellular compartment accounts for
IL-1β-mediated inflammation under conditions involving elevated neutrophil activation.
Neutrophil enzymes that can process the IL-1β precursor include elastase, proteinase-3,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

chymases, granzyme A, and cathepsin G (Fantuzzi et al., 1997; Guma et al., 2009; Joosten et
al., 2009). Proteinase-3 cleaves the IL-1β precursor into an active molecule (Coeshott et al.,
1999; Joosten et al., 2009) (see Figure 1). Alpha-1 antitrypsin is an endogenous inhibitor of
elastase and proteinase-3 and exhibits a broad range of anti-inflammatory properties (Lewis
et al., 2008).
Natural Inhibition of Cytokines
Some cytokines function as natural inhibitors of inflammation, but are they useful
therapeutically? Rabbits passively immunized against their own endogenous IL-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1Ra) experience severe colitis (Ferretti et al., 1994), and mice deficient in
IL-1Ra develop diseases such as destructive arthritis (Horai et al., 2000), arteritis (Nicklin et
al., 2000), and a psoriasis-like skin disorder. Furthermore, mice deficient in endogenous
IL-1Ra develop aggressive tumors after exposure to carcinogens (Krelin et al., 2007). These
data support the concept that relative amounts of IL-1 versus IL-1Ra affect the severity of
some diseases. A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is associated with lower circulating
levels of IL-1Ra (Larsen et al., 2009; Rafiq et al., 2007) and a concomitant increase in type 2
diabetes (Larsen et al., 2009). The same polymorphism is associated with reduced survival
in patients with colon carcinoma compared to those with the wild-type allele (Graziano et
al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The notion of an imbalance between IL-1β and IL-1Ra has gained considerable legitimacy
with reports of infants born with a genetic abnormality that results in nonfunctional IL-1Ra
(Aksentijevevich et al., 2009; Reddy et al., 2009). Soon after birth, the affected infants
exhibit impressive local and systemic inflammation. Unless treated with exogenous IL-1Ra,
the infants die. The infants suffer from multiple neutrophil-laden skin eruptions, vasculitis,
bone abnormalities with large numbers of osteoclasts, osteolytic lesions, and sterile
osteomyelitis. The inflammation resembles an infection with sepsis-like multiorgan failure,
but all cultures were sterile for microbes. When treated with daily IL-1Ra (anakinra), the
inflammation abated and the bone lesions were reversed. The infants are an extreme
example of what happens without functional IL-1Ra: the activity of endogenous IL-1 is
“unopposed” and IL-1-driven inflammation runs rampant. From these studies, one can
propose that the outcome of inflammation is the balance of proinflammatory versus antiinflammatory cytokines (Dinarello, 2009b).
Systemic Inflammation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sepsis is an example of severe systemic inflammation and falls into the autoinflammatory
class of diseases as macrophages but not T cells play a dominant role. The first studies that
blocked cytokine activity in humans were in patients with sepsis. The clinical trials of IL-1
or TNF-α blockade were based on animal models of systemic inflammation caused by lethal
endotoxin or live infection. The data from the animal studies were impressive: blocking
either IL-1 or TNF-α reduced mortality. Hence, it seemed plausible that patients with sepsis
could be treated by reducing IL-1 or TNF-α activity. Despite sophisticated intensive care,
there are more than 500,000 deaths from sepsis annually in the US. Consequently, millions
of dollars have been invested in the development of IL-1 and TNF-α blocking agents, and
these have been tested in placebo-controlled clinical trials in over 12,000 patients. Only
marginal reductions in 28 day mortality were achieved, insufficient to gain regulatory
approval. A meta-analysis of the clinical trial data concluded that a survival benefit of
blocking IL-1 or TNF-α was only observed in those patients most likely to die (Eichacker et
al., 2002).
Other anticytokine therapies such as blocking IL-4 or IL-5 in the treatment of asthma were
based on well-established animal models of airway antigen challenge, yet the data in several

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

placebo-controlled trials did not show sufficient efficacy to warrant moving forward with
these cytokine blockers. However, in autoimmune diseases and autoinflammatory diseases,
blocking cytokines has proven consistently beneficial. The same IL-1 receptor antagonist
and the same monoclonal antibodies to TNF-α or soluble TNF receptors that failed in
clinical trials for sepsis have been approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis,
Crohn’s disease, plaque psoriasis, and a spectrum of autoinflammatory diseases.

Protease Inhibitors
Proteases play an important role in initiating as well as sustaining inflammation. Many
studies have focused on blocking matrix metalloproteases in order to stabilize fragile
plaques in arteries or reduce the loss of cartilage in arthritic conditions. Posttranslational
cleavage of the N-terminal amino acids of certain chemokines (CCL3, CCL5, and CCL23,
for example) by proteases increases their potency (some by over 100-fold). Inhibition of
proteinase-activated receptor 2 (PAR-2) reduces inflammation in mouse models of
rheumatoid arthritis. Inhibition of PAR-2 also reduces the destruction of chondrocytes in
cartilage by IL-1β. Antibodies to complement factor 5 (C5) prevent its protease-mediated
conversion to C5a, the terminal component in complement-mediated inflammation. Thus,
inhibition of proteases is a valid approach to controlling inflammation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There are several serum protease inhibitors to combat protease-mediated inflammation. The
serum protein α-1 antitrypsin inhibits serine proteases including neutrophil elastase and also
proteinase-3. Activation of complement is also inhibited by α-1 antitrypsin. Humans born
with a genetic deficiency in α-1 antitrypsin develop pulmonary emphysema early in life,
possibly due to progressive destruction of lung alveoli due to insufficient inhibition of
neutrophil-derived elastase by α-1 antitrypsin. Although α-1 antitrypsin inhibits neutrophilderived elastase in vitro, it also blocks endotoxin-stimulated IL-1β and TNF-α production
by human blood monocytes and reduces translocation of the transcription factor NF-κB to
the nucleus in response to cytokine stimulation. Whole-blood cytokine production in
patients lacking α-1 antitrypsin is elevated but decreases following an infusion of exogenous
α-1 antitrypsin (Pott et al., 2009). Administration of exogenous α-1 antitrypsin to mice
protects against allograft rejection (Lewis et al., 2008) and blocks IL-1β-induced death of
insulin-producing pancreatic α cells (Lewis et al., 2008); α-1 antitrypsin also prevents
HIV-1 entry into host cells in vitro (Shapiro et al., 2001; Munch et al., 2007).

Orally Active Anti-inflammatories

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several orally active, disease-modifying drugs used to treat autoimmune diseases—
methotrexate, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and rapamycin—also possess anti-inflammatory
properties. The most widely used of these is methotrexate, which is primarily an
antiproliferative agent due to its ability to inhibit dihydrofolate reductase. However,
methotrexate also decreases production of TNF-α and chemokines in vivo. The
antiangiogenic properties of methotrexate may also contribute to its anti-inflammatory
profile. Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and rapamycin are immunosuppressive agents, which are
used broadly in many clinical situations from preventing allograft rejection to treating
psoriasis and controlling vasculitis. Their primary mechanism of action is as inhibitors of
IL-2 and IFN-γ production, which results in lymphocytes producing less TNF-α. Reducing
inflammation is part of their effectiveness but is likely to be an indirect effect.
Colchicine, which binds to tubulin and blocks microtubule formation, remains the standard
of therapy for preventing attacks of urate crystal arthritis (gout) and for treating the
autoinflammatory disease familial Mediterranean fever (see Essay by D.L. Kastner et al. in
this issue). Colchicine is also used to treat a variety of chronic inflammatory diseases
including autoimmune biliary cirrhosis. The mechanism of action of colchicine is to prevent
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the infiltration of neutrophils into inflamed tissues. Colchicine also inhibits the mobility of
monocytes and macrophages, and colchicine therapy in patients with familial Mediterranean
fever has dramatically reduced the development of life-threatening amyloidosis. Both
familial Mediterranean fever and gouty arthritis are IL-1β-mediated diseases. For example,
the IL-1 receptor antagonist (anakinra) as well as monoclonal antibodies to IL-1β
(canakinumab) will reduce the pain and inflammation of gouty arthritis. Similarly, in
familial Mediterranean fever and Behcet’s disease, blocking IL-1β results in a rapid and
sustained remission of inflammation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In 1991, Gilla Kaplan reported that clinically achievable levels of thalidomide inhibited
endotoxin-induced TNF-α in human blood monocytes (Sampaio et al., 1991). Thalidomide,
orally active and structurally related to glutamic acid, had caused limb malformations in
children born of mothers who used the drug to combat nausea during pregnancy.
Thalidomide was approved to treat patients with leprosy and later, due to its antiangiogenic
properties, was used widely to treat patients with multiple myeloma. Its use in treating
various autoimmune diseases is based on its immunosuppressive effects and ability to affect
the production as well as the activities of several cytokines including IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, IL-12,
IL-23, TNF-α, and IFN-γ. For example, a beneficial effect of thalidomide in Crohn’s
disease patients is thought to be due to reduced TNF-α and IL-23 production. However,
peripheral neuropathy and other adverse effects are a major problem with thalidomide. New
analogs of this drug such as γ-fluoro-4-aminothalidomide exhibit increased potency in
blocking cytokine production. Analogs increase cAMP levels in macrophages by inhibiting
phosphodiesterase-4, which results in reduced TNF-α production. The anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 is elevated in response to thalidomide analogs (Thiele et al., 2002). The
thalidomide analog lenalidomide has been approved in the US and Europe in combination
with dexamethasone as maintenance therapy for multiple myeloma (Falco et al., 2008).
Although lenalidomide has reduced neurotoxicity, a hypercoagulation state has been
observed in clinical trials. In controlled studies, lenalidomide failed to induce remission or
be effective for treating Crohn’s disease. Nevertheless, lenalidomide’s clinical benefit in
multiple myeloma is due, in part, to its anticytokine and antiangiogenic properties, and it
continues to be evaluated in the treatment of several chronic autoimmune and
autoinflammatory diseases.

Small-Molecule Inhibitors of Signal Transduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It has been estimated that there are over 300 kinases that phosphorylate intracellular
proteins, including autophosphorylation of kinases themselves. A key kinase of interest is
the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which regulates several fundamental
mediators of inflammation including cytokines, chemokines, COX-2, and nitric oxide
synthase. The discovery of p38 MAPK began with a screen for small molecules that
inhibited endotoxin-induced IL-1β production as part of a program to develop orally active
drugs for treating rheumatoid arthritis. Scientists at SmithKlineBeecham found that one of
the compounds (SB20358) reduced IL-1β production and also reduced arthritis in mice. In
order to ascertain the mechanism of action of SB20358, they radiolabeled the compound,
added it to cell lysates, and isolated an intracellular protein that was closely related to
HOG-1 (high osmotic glucose-1), which is found in yeast and enables growth in high sugar
concentrations (Kumar et al., 1995). The induction of cytokines and chemokines by immune
cells treated with hyperosmotic concentrations of sodium chloride is dependent on p38
MAPK (Shapiro and Dinarello, 1995).
After the discovery of p38 MAPK in the drug screen, the next step was to develop smallmolecule inhibitors against the several isoforms of p38 MAPK. In general, specific
inhibitors of p38 MAPK do not affect the downstream signaling component c-Jun NH2-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

terminal kinase (JNK). Inhibitors of the p38 MAPK α isoform reduce the production of
IL-1β and TNF-α in endotoxin-stimulated human monocytes, whereas the β, γ, and δ
isoform inhibitors are less effective. Most animal models for sepsis, type 1 diabetes,
rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, multiple sclerosis, and inflammatory bowel disease exhibit
marked improvement when treated with pan-p38 MAPK inhibitors. The most studied
inhibitor of p38 MAPK is SB20358, which inhibits phosphorylation of its substrate ATF-2.
Orally active p38 MAPK inhibitors are well tolerated in phase I clinical trials in healthy
subjects, but hepatic toxicity is observed with increasing doses. Clinical targets for orally
active inhibitors of p38 MAPK have focused on rheumatoid arthritis with limited success.
Although there is improvement in clinical scores in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with
most p38 MAPK inhibitors, the window of efficacy and unwanted toxicity appears to be
narrow and some clinical trials have been halted. The development of new p38 MAPK
inhibitors for clinical testing continues because the kinase plays such a central role in many
inflammatory processes (Marin et al., 2001).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tyrosine kinases such as the Janus kinases (Jak) play a key role in many proliferative
diseases including leukemias and are part of the angiogenic process in solid tumors. In
rheumatoid arthritis, the synovial membrane, usually a single-cell layer in healthy subjects,
proliferates and becomes vascularized. Like a tumor, the proliferating synovium (pannus)
invades and destroys the surrounding joint. Jak3 is a tyrosine kinase that drives the
proliferation and differentiation of lymphocytes. From in vitro studies, inhibition of the Jak
signaling pathway appears to be a strategy in treating rheumatoid arthritis and possibly other
chronic inflammatory conditions. Clinical trials of the orally active Jak inhibitor CP-690550
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, renal allografts, or psoriasis showed a reduction in
inflammation markers and improved quality of life for these patients. Mechanisms of action
include a reduction in dendritic cell activation and proinflammatory cytokine production as
well as increased production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. A related Jak inhibitor
reduced IL-17 and IFN-g production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells. At higher
doses, Jak inhibitors are associated with increased serum creatinine levels, indicating
possible renal toxicity. An increase in infections, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and
dyspepsia have been reported as the dose increases.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) participates in intracellular signaling in B cells as well as in
cells expressing Fc-γ receptors. Fc-γ receptors are activated by IgG1 and are expressed by
monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and mast cells. A specific inhibitor of Syk reduced
production of IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-18. There are controversial data on whether Syk
inhibits IL-1β via the inflammasome (Gross et al., 2009; van de Veerdonk et al., 2009a). In a
mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (collagen-induced arthritis), Syk inhibition reduced
bone erosion, pannus formation, and synovitis. In a blinded, placebo-controlled clinical
study in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, who were unresponsive to methotrexate, there
was a rapid and significant improvement in all parameters of disease severity. Matrix
metalloproteinase 3 and serum IL-6 levels decreased within the first week. However, side
effects included gastrointestinal disturbances and neutropenia (Weinblatt et al., 2008).
Inhibition of Syk may be a valid strategy for reducing inflammation in autoimmune
diseases.
Imatinib (Gleevec) is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that is used clinically to block the kinase
activity of the BCR-ABL oncoprotein in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Imatinib is
also effective in ameliorating disease in a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis and in
reducing TNF-α production by synovial fluid mononuclear cells from patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (Paniagua et al., 2006). This kinase inhibitor reduced TNF-α production
by human blood monocytes in response to lipopolysaccharide but did not suppress

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. In murine models of acute hepatitis,
imatinib prevented TNF-α-dependent inflammatory damage to the liver induced by injecting
concanavalin A (Wolf et al., 2005). These findings suggest that imatinib is able to act as an
anti-inflammatory because it reduces TNF-α production. It remains unclear whether these
observations will be of therapeutic value for treating TNF-α-mediated diseases.

Statins as Anti-inflammatory Agents

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mevalonate is the substrate for the synthesis of cholesterol as well as several biologically
active sterols. The generation of mevalonate requires the reduction of the enzyme
hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) by HMG-CoA reductase. Synthetic smallmolecule inhibitors of the reductase are called “statins.” Statins were developed to lower the
endogenous synthesis of cholesterol in patients at high risk for myocardial infarction in
whom elevated levels of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) were difficult to control. Initial
epidemiological studies showed a highly significant reduction in cardiovascular events with
statin treatment, and the number of high-risk patients being treated with statins increased
rapidly. Several analogs of statins that also inhibit HMG-CoA reductase entered clinical
trials; it became clear that all statins reduced LDL levels to the same extent but that the
decrease in cardiovascular events was greater for some statins than for others. An analysis of
the Framingham cohort (a long-term prospective study of the health of residents of
Framingham, MA, USA) for serum levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) provided a value for
predicting cardiovascular risk, although the association of elevated CRP with inflammation
in coronary artery disease was not new (Liuzzo et al., 1994).
A large, placebo-controlled trial of nearly 18,000 patients evaluated the effect of
rosuvastatin for cardiovascular events in patients with normal LDL-cholesterol levels (less
that 130 mg/dL). After 1.9 years, CRP decreased by 37% in the treatment group and there
were significantly fewer (range of 48%–55%) cardiovascular events including stroke. Death
from any cause was 20% lower compared to the placebo group (Ridker et al., 2008). The
study known as the JUPITER trial raised the epidemiological issue of the benefit of statins
in apparently healthy subjects. CRP levels above 2.0 mg/l, a biomarker for occult
inflammation including coronary artery inflammation, were used as an entry criterion for the
JUPITER trial (~4% of the US population have CRP levels above 2.0 mg/l). The overall
conclusion of the study was that statins had anti-inflammatory properties independent of
their ability to lower cholesterol and that reducing occult inflammation with statins could
reduce degenerative processes of aging.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The statin-mediated reduction in mevalonate also reduces the synthesis of cholesterol via the
isoprenoid pathway. The function of several intracellular signaling molecules is also
affected by statins through a reduction in products of the isoprenoid pathway that are
important for the formation of signaling complexes. There is no dearth of studies on the antiinflammatory properties of statins in vitro and in animal models of autoimmune and
inflammatory diseases. In vitro, statins reduce cytokine production and expression of
endothelial adhesion molecules. Statins decrease expression of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II molecules but do not affect MHC class I. They also downregulate
the maturation of dendritic cells. Statins bind to a unique allosteric site in β2 integrin known
as lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1), which participates in many
inflammatory processes. However, the anti-inflammatory effect of binding to LFA-1 is
independent of the inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase. Fluvastatin induced apoptosis of
synovial cells from patients with rheumatoid arthritis through a caspase-3 mechanism. Both
atorvastatin and simvastatin suppressed expression of the RANK ligand by fibroblast-like
synovial cells, and atorvastatin inhibited osteoclast formation in a coculture of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, suggesting that statins may inhibit osteoclast formation and bone

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

destruction. However, studies on the anti-inflammatory effects of statins in vitro have also
yielded inconsistent data: some studies report a reduction in cytokine production by human
blood monocytes, whereas others report an increase in cytokine production (Kuijk et al.,
2008). It seems that animal models reveal consistent findings for the anti-inflammatory
effects of statins. It is important to note that although the anti-inflammatory properties of
statins are highly consistent in animal models, statins do not lower cholesterol in mice.
Many studies demonstrate reduced disease severity in animals treated with clinically
achievable levels of statins and suffering from a variety of inflammatory conditions
including colitis, uveitis, myocarditis experimental allergic encephalitis, lethal sepsis,
allograft rejection, and asthma (Abeles and Pillinger, 2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Statins have been used to reduce inflammation, tame immune cell activation, or arrest
degenerative processes. Because of their widespread use and long-term safety record, some
physicians prescribe statin therapy for nonapproved indications. A number of case reports
describe the dramatic effects of statins added to standard therapies, but beneficial effects
need to be confirmed in controlled studies. For example, in three patients with lupus
glomerulonephritis who were not responding to the standard of therapy (cyclophosphamide
and prednisone), adding high doses of simvastatin brought about a dramatic reduction in
disease activity. There are randomized, placebo-controlled studies, but two issues cloud the
results: the particular statin used and the dose. Clearly the anti-inflammatory properties of
statins vary, whereas the cholesterol-lowering properties are similar. Six clinically used
statins were examined in vitro for their ability to affect NF-κB, phosphorylation of IκB, and
activation of tissue factor, the first step in coagulation. There was a distinct difference
between the statins: cerivastatin, atorvastatin, and simvastatin were more effective in
reducing these parameters than fluvastatin, lovastatin, or pravastatin (Hilgendorff et al.,
2003).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Nevertheless, there seems to be no dearth of case reports and small uncontrolled trials that
show the benefits of statins for reducing inflammation. In the case of rheumatoid arthritis
where the anti-inflammatory effects of blocking cytokines have been shown repeatedly,
there have been more than ten trials of statins resulting in a moderate reduction in joint
inflammation associated with a fall in CRP and red cell sedimentation rate and decreased
cytokine production by circulating monocytes. As many patients with long-standing
rheumatoid arthritis are also at high risk for cardiovascular disease, adding statin therapy to
the standard of care (methotrexate) is highly cost effective. Adding statins to the regimen of
cyclosporine and sirolimus for kidney transplant patients lowered the rate of organ rejection.
In patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, statin therapy for 6 months
significantly lowered the number of brain lesions detected by gadolinium, an established
marker of disease activity. Examination of peripheral blood cells revealed no suppression in
T cell responses but did reveal an increase in production of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory
cytokine (Paul et al., 2008).

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
In order to compact chromatin, DNA is tightly wrapped around nuclear histones, which are
maintained in a state of deacetylation by histone deacetylases (HDACs). Histone acetylases,
on the other hand, hyperacetylate histones, unraveling DNA and thus permitting
transcription factors to bind to gene promoters and initiate gene expression. In humans, there
are 18 HDACs divided into classes based on their dependence on zinc for enzymatic activity
(Khan et al., 2008). In addition to their ability to deacetylate the highly conserved Nterminal lysines of nuclear histones, HDACs also target many non-histone-containing
cytoplasmic proteins affecting ribosomal function, cytoskeletal polymerization, and
signaling pathways.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Synthetic inhibitors of HDACs are orally active and used widely in medicine. For example,
valproic acid, the drug of choice for treating epilepsy as well as obsessive disorders
(Gerstner et al., 2008), is an HDAC inhibitor (Ren et al., 2004). Valproic acid has also been
used in patients with HIV-1 to purge the latently infected pool of memory T cells (Archin et
al., 2008). The HDAC inhibitor sodium butyrate is used to treat patients with sickle cell
anemia and β-thalassemia (Atweh and Schechter, 2001). The development of newer, smallmolecule synthetic inhibitors of HDACs began with the work of Paul Marks, a cancer
researcher (Marks et al., 2001). The goal was to inhibit HDACs in order to increase the
expression of several proapoptotic genes that are often silenced in malignant cells. The first
of this class was the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). At
micromolar plasma concentrations, (O’Connor et al., 2006) SAHA has been approved for
treating patients with cutaneous T cell leukemia (Santini et al., 2007) and has shown benefit
in the treatment of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (Garcia-Manero et al., 2008). Many
hematopoietic malignancies appear to be responsive to HDAC inhibitors, possibly related to
the ability of these compounds to reduce the production of cytokines, many of which are
growth factors for leukemias and myeloproliferative neoplasms (Guerini et al., 2008).
Indeed, HDAC inhibitors such as SAHA exhibit immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory
properties by reducing cytokine production (Leoni et al., 2002, 2005). Importantly, the antiinflammatory properties of HDAC inhibitors are observed in the low nanomolar range
compared to the micromolar range needed to treat cancer where the mechanism of action is
to increase apoptosis by upregulating expression of proapoptotic genes. The recent
expanding interest in HDAC inhibitors as orally active, safe, anti-inflammatory agents has
been fueled by the ability of these inhibitors to reduce disease severity in several animal
models of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases (Table S2).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ITF2357 is a hydroxamic acid-containing, orally active inhibitor targeting class I and II
HDACs. In a phase II clinical trial in children with active systemic onset juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, a daily oral dose of ITF2357 at 1.5 mg/kg for 12 weeks resulted in no organ
toxicity and a significant (p < 0.01) reduction in parameters of systemic disease and the
number of painful joints in over 75% of patients (Vojinovic et al., 2008). At a dose of 1.5
mg/kg, the peak blood levels of ITF2357 were 125–200 nM, which are the levels that inhibit
cytokine production in vitro and by cultured blood cells from subjects receiving the drug in
vivo (Oldoni et al., 2009). Given that targeting of IL-1-mediated inflammation to protect
pancreatic islets has been tested in human trials (Donath et al., 2009; Larsen et al., 2007a),
HDAC inhibitors may be useful for preventing inflammation of pancreatic islet tissue.
Indeed, the HDAC inhibitors SAHA and ITF2357 reduced cytokine-mediated nitric oxide
formation and reversed the decline in insulin secretion by isolated islets (Larsen et al.,
2007b; Susick et al., 2007). In animal models of Alzheimer’s disease, the most common
neurodegenerative disease, HDAC inhibitors (Larsen et al., 2007a) decreased β-amyloid
production, and effective neuroprotection was associated with increased acetylation of
histones (Kozikowski et al., 2009) (see Review by C.K. Glass et al. in this issue). In a model
of head trauma, the anti-inflammatory properties of HDAC inhibitors helped to prevent
neurological impairment even when administered 24 hr after the injury (Shein et al., 2009).
Although the role of inflammation in Huntington’s disease is presently unclear, inhibition of
caspase-1 delays the onset of motor abnormalities in a mouse model of this
neurodegenerative disease (Charles et al., 1999) and treatment with oral SAHA reduces
disease severity (Hockly et al., 2003) (Table S2).

Anticoagulants and Thrombolytics as Anti-inflammatory Agents
Despite several randomized, placebo-controlled trials of antiinflammatory agents and
anticytokine therapies, sepsis remains a leading cause of death. The only approved agent for
reducing death in sepsis is activated protein C (aPC). Protein C is a natural component of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

human serum and upon activation inhibits the formation of thrombin and breaks down
thrombi in blood vessels. aPC drives fibrinolysis through inhibition of plasminogenactivator inhibitor-1. As a therapeutic in septic patients, aPC is administered intravenously
and restores circulation to hypoxic organs. Perhaps more importantly, however, aPC exerts a
number of anti-inflammatory effects. For example, aPC blocks the production of the
proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α by blocking the transcription factor NF-κB
(Esmon, 2006) and p38 MAPK (Nold et al., 2007), decreasing apoptosis of endothelial cells
and inhibiting leukocyte adhesion and chemotaxis.
Similarly, other anticoagulants, which prevent the formation of microthrombi on the
endothelium thereby maintaining a blood supply to organs, may also be useful as antiinflammatory agents (Figure 1). Low molecular weight heparins and antithrombin exhibit
anti-inflammatory effects in vivo, mostly by reducing cytokine production and endothelial
activation by thrombin. However, in a controlled trial in septic patients, anti-thrombin did
not reach statistical significance for reducing all cause 28 day mortality. Small-molecule
antiplatelet agents used in patients at risk for myocardial infarction also act as antiinflammatory agents. Although these small-molecule anticoagulants are used primarily to
prevent clot formation, it is likely that many patients benefit from the anti-inflammatory
properties of this drug class.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inhibition of Activated Complement

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Activation of complement results in the generation of the terminal component, complement
5a (C5a). C5a binds to its receptor C5aR and triggers the synthesis of cytokines,
chemokines, and adhesion molecules with the subsequent infiltration of myeloid cells,
mostly neutrophils, into the area of injury (Figure 1). As such, C5a is a major cause of acute
inflammation, and activated complement appears to contribute to nearly all inflammatory
processes. Not unexpectedly, there are natural inhibitors of complement activation such as
C1 inhibitor and soluble Crry, which inhibit all complement activation pathways and target
activation of C3 (Huang et al., 2008). Rheumatoid arthritis, immune complex diseases,
psoriasis, lupus nephritis, acute lung injury, myocardial and cerebral infarction, and renal
ischemia are considered diseases in which the activity of C5a could be targeted.
Complement activation takes place in acute allograft rejection. Eculizumab, a monoclonal
antibody directed against C5, has been approved for the treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. A single chain of this antibody, pexelizumab, has been extensively studied
in clinical trials in models of ischemia. Pexelizumab, which is directed against C5 and
blocks the generation of C5a, has been used in acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI) and the coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) procedure. Meta-analysis of over
15,000 patients from seven clinical trials showed no overall benefit of the antibody when
added to the standard of care (Testa et al., 2008), but the antibody did reduce the risk of
death by 26% in patients undergoing CABG.
Another approach to preventing the inflammatory sequelae of complement activation is
direct inhibition of serine proteases. Nafamostat mesilate is a small-molecule serine protease
inhibitor that targets the formation of the C3/C5 convertases. Several studies indicate that
the interaction of macrophages or dendritic cells with T cells results in activation of
complement. In mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (a model of multiple
sclerosis), nafamostat attenuated central nervous system inflammation, reduced
demyelination, and decreased the numbers of immune cells producing IFN-γ and IL-17 (Li
et al., 2009). Orally active convertase inhibitors or small-molecule antagonists of C5aR may
become broadly useful for treating chronic inflammatory conditions. Although there was no
benefit in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis after 28 days of treatment with an orally

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 17

active antagonist of C5aR, targeting inflammation by preventing the generation of C5a or
blocking C5aR with orally active small molecules holds considerable promise.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The Anti-inflammatory Effects of PPARs
Endogenous, intracellular mechanisms exist to tame inflammation by targeting gene
expression of proinflammatory cytokines, cell adhesion molecules, and genes such as
COX-2 or inducible nitric oxide synthase. The peroxisome proliferator-activator receptors
(PPARs) are members of the nuclear receptor superfamily. There are three separate gene
products with highly conserved DNA-binding domains: PPARα, PPARβ/δ, and PPARγ.
Functionally, PPARs form heterodimers with retinoic acid receptors. Although this
interaction has downstream effects in the regulation of glucose metabolism, PPAR agonists
are antiinflammatory agents because they reduce expression of several proinflammatory
cytokines, most chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules. There are several endogenous
agonists of PPARs such as prostacyclin. However, there are orally active synthetic ligands
for PPARγ—rosiglitazone, pioglitazone, troglitazone, and fenofibrate—that are used to treat
insulin resistance in patients with type 2 diabetes. These drugs belong to the chemical class
called thiazolidinediones (or glitazones).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In vitro, the PPARγ agonist pioglitazone reduces synthesis and gene expression of TLR2,
TLR4, IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in human blood
monocytes (Dasu et al., 2009). In vivo, pioglitazone reduces lipopolysaccharide-induced
TLR2 and TLR4 expression on peritoneal macrophages (Dasu et al., 2009). In humans with
type 2 diabetes, pioglitazone reduces serum CRP and TNF-α but increases VEGF levels.
Rosiglitazone improves insulin resistance by increasing the production of the antiinflammatory molecule adiponectin. In a mouse model of lupus nephritis, oral treatment
with pioglitazone decreases immune complex deposition, renal inflammation, and intrarenal
synthesis of TNF-α, IL-1β, and VCAM-1 (Zhao et al., 2009).
Despite the anti-inflammatory portfolio of PPAR agonists, some clinical studies indicate that
treatment of type 2 diabetic patients with thiazolidinediones, particularly rosiglitazone,
increases cardiovascular events and death (Stafylas et al., 2009). A meta-analysis of data on
the cardiovascular safety of glitazones concluded that clinical trials consistently indicate an
increased risk of heart failure. Some studies have shown that pioglitazone may be beneficial
for reducing major cardiovascular outcomes. Whether using PPARg agonists as antiinflammatory agents will entail the same risks remains unknown. Nevertheless, PPARγ
agonists as a class of orally active drugs with anti-inflammatory properties will certainly be
developed.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Prostaglandin Agonists and Phosphodiesterase-4 Inhibitors
Although PGE2 is inflammatory and lowers pain thresholds, it is also one of the most
immunosuppressive natural products of inflammation. One of the four receptors for PGE2 is
EP4, and selective EP4 agonists are anti-inflammatory. For example, EP4 agonists reduced
levels of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion molecules. PGE2 is a potent
inhibitor of IFN-γ and IL-2 production but increases IL-17 production. In general, the
immunosuppressive properties of PGE2 are due to an increase in the intracellular levels of
cyclic AMP (cAMP), which suppresses production of TNF-α, IL-2, and IFN-γ. In fact,
inhibitors of PGE2 synthesis result in lower levels of cAMP and higher levels of TNF-α.
Analogs of prostaglandin-I2 (iloprost, cicaprost, treprostinil) inhibit the proinflammatory
cytokines IL-12, TNF-α, IL-1α, and IL-6 as well as the chemokines MIP-1α and MCP-1 by
boosting cAMP levels (Zhou et al., 2007).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE-4) are anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive
because they prevent the breakdown of cAMP. Rolipram, roflumilast, piclamilast, and
pentoxifylline are selective PDE-4 inhibitors that are in clinical use. A general property of
PDE-4 inhibitors is the suppression of cytokine production as well as degranulation by
neutrophils and TNF-α-induced neutrophil adherence to endothelial cells, which is a
fundamental step in inflammation. Some studies indicate that rolipram and newer PDE-4
inhibitors are comparable or superior to methylprednisolone in suppressing inflammation in
models of inflammatory bowel disease, atopic dermatitis, spinal cord injury, septic shock,
cerebral ischemia, and hyperoxia-induced lung inflammation. PDE-4 inhibitors also
decrease the binding of NF-κB to DNA and the production of VEGF.

Conclusions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this Review, I have made a case that the future of anti-inflammatory agents lies in the
development of orally active drugs that reduce production or activities of proinflammatory
cytokines. In addition, particularly with respect to treating the inflammatory component of
degenerative diseases of aging, newer drugs need to have minimal risks of organ toxicity
while ensuring that host immune defense against infection and cancer is not impaired. Some
drugs currently used to treat a variety of diseases exhibit distinct anticytokine effects, for
example, statins, histone deacetylase inhibitors, and PPAR agonists. Based on their longterm safety, increasing the anti-inflammatory and anticytokine properties of these classes of
drugs is warranted. New agents are in a rapid stage of development, for example, orally
active chemokine receptor antagonists. Based on animal studies, using small RNAs to
downregulate gene expression and targeting microRNAs that regulate gene expression holds
therapeutic promise. In addition, agents that increase the expression and activities of
endogenous anticytokines such as the IL-1 receptor antagonist or IL-10 should be
considered. The understanding of the pivotal role of inflammation in seemingly unrelated
diseases has resulted in the use and development of new anti-inflammatory agents such as
the biologicals. These have improved the quality as well as the duration of life for millions
of patients. In addition, it appears that combating inflammation will slow the degenerative
consequences of aging such as atherosclerosis, joint disease, and neurodegeneration.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The author is supported by Grants AI 15614 (NIH), CA 6934 (NIH), and 26-2008-893 (JDRF) and the Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. The author thanks A. Abbate, M. Donath, M. Nold, L. Joosten, S.-H.
Kim, T. Mandrup-Poulsen, P. Mascagni, M. Netea, A. Solinger, F. van de Veerdonk, and J. van der Meer for
helpful comments.

REFERENCES
Abbate A, Kontos MC, Grizzard JD, Biondi-Zoccai GL, Van Tassell BW, Robati R, Roach LM, Arena
RA, Roberts CF, Varma A, et al. Interleukin-1 blockade with anakinra to prevent adverse cardiac
remodeling following acute myocardial infarction. Am. J. Cardiol. 2010 10.1016/j.amjcard.
2009.12.059.
Abbate A, Salloum FN, Vecile E, Das A, Hoke NN, Straino S, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Houser JE, Qureshi
IZ, Ownby ED, et al. Anakinra, a recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, inhibits
apoptosis in experimental acute myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2008; 117:2670–2683.
[PubMed: 18474815]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abeles AM, Pillinger MH. Statins as antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory agents: a future in
rheumatologic therapy? Arthritis Rheum. 2006; 54:393–407. [PubMed: 16447216]
Aksentijevevich I, Master SL, Ferguson PJ, Dancey P, Frenkel J, van Royen-Kerkhoff A, Laxer R,
Tedgard U, Cowen EW, Pham TH, et al. An autoinflammatory disease with deficiency of the
interleukin-1-receptor antagonist. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009; 360:2426–2437. [PubMed: 19494218]
Andrei C, Margiocco P, Poggi A, Lotti LV, Torrisi MR, Rubartelli A. Phospholipases C and A2
control lysosome-mediated IL-1 beta secretion: Implications for inflammatory processes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 2004; 101:9745–9750. [PubMed: 15192144]
Archin NM, Eron JJ, Palmer S, Hartmann-Duff A, Martinson JA, Wiegand A, Bandarenko N, Schmitz
JL, Bosch RJ, Landay AL, et al. Valproic acid without intensified antiviral therapy has limited
impact on persistent HIV infection of resting CD4+ T cells. AIDS. 2008; 22:1131–1135. [PubMed:
18525258]
Atweh GF, Schechter AN. Pharmacologic induction of fetal hemoglobin: raising the therapeutic bar in
sickle cell disease. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 2001; 8:123–130. [PubMed: 11224687]
Becker CE, Creagh EM, O’Neill LA. Rab39a binds caspase-1 and Is required for caspase-1-dependent
interleukin-1b secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 2009; 284:3431–3437.
Bocker U, Sirenko OI, Morris JS, Sartor RB, Singer MV, Haskill JS, Watson JM. Expression and
localization of IL-1beta mRNA is interrelated with cytoskeletal rearrangement in monocytes
stimulated by adherence: a light microscopy in situ hybridization study. Immunol. Cell Biol. 2001;
79:444–453. [PubMed: 11564152]
Brough D, Rothwell NJ. Caspase-1-dependent processing of pro-interleukin-1beta is cytosolic and
precedes cell death. J. Cell Sci. 2007; 120:772–781. [PubMed: 17284521]
Charles P, Elliott MJ, Davis D, Potter A, Kalden JR, Antoni C, Breedveld FC, Smolen JS, Eberl G,
deWoody K, et al. Regulation of cytokines, cytokine inhibitors, and acute-phase proteins following
anti-TNF-alpha therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. J. Immunol. 1999; 163:1521–1528. [PubMed:
10415055]
Coeshott C, Ohnemus C, Pilyavskaya A, Ross S, Wieczorek M, Kroona H, Leimer AH, Cheronis J.
Converting enzyme-independent release of TNFα and IL-1β from a stimulated human monocytic
cell line in the presence of activated neutrophils or purified proteinase-3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 1999; 96:6261–6266. [PubMed: 10339575]
Dasu MR, Park S, Devaraj S, Jialal I. Pioglitazone inhibits Toll-like receptor expression and activity in
human monocytes and db/db mice. Endocrinology. 2009; 150:3457–3464. [PubMed: 19389833]
Dinarello CA. Biological basis for interleukin-1 in disease. Blood. 1996; 87:2095–2147. [PubMed:
8630372]
Dinarello CA. Differences between anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha monoclonal antibodies and
soluble TNF receptors in host defense impairment. J. Rheumatol. Suppl. 2005; 74:40–47.
[PubMed: 15742464]
Dinarello CA. Immunological and inflammatory functions of the interleukin-1 family. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 2009a; 27:519–550. [PubMed: 19302047]
Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1beta and the autoinflammatory diseases. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009b;
360:2467–2470. [PubMed: 19494224]
Dinarello CA, Cannon JG, Wolff SM, Bernheim HA, Beutler B, Cerami A, Figari IS, Palladino MA Jr.
O’Connor JV. Tumor necrosis factor (cachectin) is an endogenous pyrogen and induces
production of interleukin 1. J. Exp. Med. 1986; 163:1433–1450. [PubMed: 3486936]
Dinarello CA, Ikejima T, Warner SJ, Orencole SF, Lonnemann G, Cannon JG, Libby P. Interleukin 1
induces interleukin 1. I. Induction of circulating interleukin 1 in rabbits in vivo and in human
mononuclear cells in vitro. J. Immunol. 1987; 139:1902–1910. [PubMed: 3497982]
Donath MY, Weder C, Brunner A, Keller C, Whitemore J, Der K, Zayed H, Scannon PJ, Feldstein JD,
Dinarello CA, Solinger AM. XOMA 052, a potential disease modifying anti-1L-1beta antibody,
shows sustained HbA1c reductions 3 months after a single injection with no increases in safety
parameters in subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2009; 58:A30.
Drenth JP, Cuisset L, Grateau G, Vasseur C, van de Velde-Visser SD, de Jong JG, Beckmann JS, van
der Meer JW, Delpech M. Mutations in the gene encoding mevalonate kinase cause hyper-IgD and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

periodic fever syndrome. International Hyper-IgD Study Group. Nat. Genet. 1999; 22:178–181.
[PubMed: 10369262]
Eichacker PQ, Parent C, Kalil A, Esposito C, Cui X, Banks SM, Gerstenberger EP, Fitz Y, Danner RL,
Natanson C. Risk and the efficacy of antiinflammatory agents: retrospective and confirmatory
studies of sepsis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2002; 166:1197–1205. [PubMed: 12403688]
Emsley HC, Smith CJ, Georgiou RF, Vail A, Hopkins SJ, Rothwell NJ, Tyrrell PJ. A randomised
phase II study of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in acute stroke patients. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry. 2005; 76:1366–1372. [PubMed: 16170078]
Endres S, Ghorbani R, Kelley VE, Georgilis K, Lonnemann G, van der Meer JW, Cannon JG, Rogers
TS, Klempner MS, Weber PC, et al. The effect of dietary supplementation with n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids on the synthesis of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor by
mononuclear cells. N. Engl. J. Med. 1989; 320:265–271. [PubMed: 2783477]
Esmon CT. Inflammation and the activated protein C anticoagulant pathway. Semin. Thromb. Hemost.
2006; 32:49–60. [PubMed: 16673266]
Falco P, Cavallo F, Larocca A, Liberati AM, Musto P, Boccadoro M, Palumbo A. Lenalidomide and
its role in the management of multiple myeloma. Expert Rev. Anticancer Ther. 2008; 8:865–874.
[PubMed: 18533796]
Fantuzzi G, Ku G, Harding MW, Livingston DL, Sipe JD, Kuida K, Flavell RA, Dinarello CA.
Response to local inflammation of IL-1β converting enzyme-deficient mice. J. Immunol. 1997;
158:1818–1824. [PubMed: 9029121]
Ferretti M, Casini-Raggi V, Pizarro TT, Eisenberg SP, Nast CC, Cominelli F. Neutralization of
endogenous IL-1 receptor antagonist exacerbates and prolongs inflammation in rabbit immune
colitis. J. Clin. Invest. 1994; 94:449–453. [PubMed: 8040288]
Fitzgerald AA, Leclercq SA, Yan A, Homik JE, Dinarello CA. Rapid responses to anakinra in patients
with refractory adult-onset Still’s disease. Arthritis Rheum. 2005; 52:1794–1803. [PubMed:
15934079]
Fong Y, Tracey KJ, Moldawer LL, Hesse DG, Manogue KB, Kenney JS, Lee AT, Kuo GC, Allison
AC, Lowry SF, Cerami A. Antibodies to cachectin/tumor necrosis factor reduce interleukin 1β and
interleukin 6 appearance during lethal bacteremia. J. Exp. Med. 1989; 170:1627–1633. [PubMed:
2809510]
Garcia-Manero G, Yang H, Bueso-Ramos C, Ferrajoli A, Cortes J, Wierda WG, Faderl S, Koller C,
Morris G, Rosner G, et al. Phase 1 study of the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat
(suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid [SAHA]) in patients with advanced leukemias and
myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 2008; 111:1060–1066. [PubMed: 17962510]
Gattorno M, Tassi S, Carta S, Delfino L, Ferlito F, Pelagatti MA, D’Osualdo A, Buoncompagni A,
Alpigiani MG, Alessio M, et al. Pattern of interleukin-1beta secretion in response to
lipopolysaccharide and ATP before and after interleukin-1 blockade in patients with CIAS1
mutations. Arthritis Rheum. 2007; 56:3138–3148. [PubMed: 17763411]
Gerstner T, Bell N, Konig S. Oral valproic acid for epilepsy–longterm experience in therapy and side
effects. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2008; 9:285–292. [PubMed: 18201150]
Goldbach-Mansky R, Dailey NJ, Canna SW, Gelabert A, Jones J, Rubin BI, Kim HJ, Brewer C,
Zalewski C, Wiggs E, et al. Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease responsive to
interleukin-1beta inhibition. N. Engl. J. Med. 2006; 355:581–592. [PubMed: 16899778]
Graziano F, Ruzzo A, Canestrari E, Loupakis F, Santini D, Rulli E, Humar B, Galluccio N, Bisonni R,
Floriani I, et al. Variations in the interleukin-1 receptor antagonist gene impact on survival of
patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Pharmacogenomics J. 2009; 9:78–84. [PubMed:
19104506]
Gross O, Poeck H, Bscheider M, Dostert C, Hannesschlager N, Endres S, Hartmann G, Tardivel A,
Schweighoffer E, Tybulewicz V, et al. Syk kinase signalling couples to the Nlrp3 inflammasome
for anti-fungal host defence. Nature. 2009; 459:433–436. [PubMed: 19339971]
Guerini V, Barbui V, Spinelli O, Salvi A, Dellacasa C, Carobbio A, Introna M, Barbui T, Golay J,
Rambaldi A. The histone deacetylase inhibitor ITF2357 selectively targets cells bearing mutated
JAK2(V617F). Leukemia. 2008; 22:740–747. [PubMed: 18079739]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Guma M, Ronacher L, Liu-Bryan R, Takai S, Karin M, Corr M. Caspase 1-independent activation of
interleukin-1beta in neutrophil-predominant inflammation. Arthritis Rheum. 2009; 60:3642–3650.
[PubMed: 19950258]
Hilgendorff A, Muth H, Parviz B, Staubitz A, Haberbosch W, Tillmanns H, Holschermann H. Statins
differ in their ability to block NF-kappaB activation in human blood monocytes. Int. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. 2003; 41:397–401. [PubMed: 14518599]
Hockly E, Richon VM, Woodman B, Smith DL, Zhou X, Rosa E, Sathasivam K, Ghazi-Noori S,
Mahal A, Lowden PA, et al. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
ameliorates motor deficits in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
2003; 100:2041–2046. [PubMed: 12576549]
Hoffman HM, Mueller JL, Broide DH, Wanderer AA, Kolodner RD. Mutation of a new gene encoding
a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells
syndrome. Nat. Genet. 2001; 29:301–305. [PubMed: 11687797]
Hoffman HM, Rosengren S, Boyle DL, Cho JY, Nayar J, Mueller JL, Anderson JP, Wanderer AA,
Firestein GS. Prevention of cold-associated acute inflammation in familail cold autoinflammatory
syndrome by interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Lancet. 2004; 364:1779–1785. [PubMed:
15541451]
Hoffman HM, Throne ML, Amar NJ, Sebai M, Kivitz AJ, Kavanaugh A, Weinstein SP, Belomestnov
P, Yancopoulos GD, Stahl N, Mellis SJ. Efficacy and safety of rilonacept (interleukin-1 trap) in
patients with cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes: Results from two sequential placebocontrolled studies. Arthritis Rheum. 2008; 58:2443–2452. [PubMed: 18668535]
Horai R, Saijo S, Tanioka H, Nakae S, Sudo K, Okahara A, Ikuse T, Asano M, Iwakura Y.
Development of chronic inflammatory arthropathy resembling rheumatoid arthritis in interleukin 1
receptor antagonist-deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. 2000; 191:313–320. [PubMed: 10637275]
Huang Y, Qiao F, Atkinson C, Holers VM, Tomlinson S. A novel targeted inhibitor of the alternative
pathway of complement and its therapeutic application in ischemia/reperfusion injury. J. Immunol.
2008; 181:8068–8076. [PubMed: 19017999]
Jin Y, Arita M, Zhang Q, Saban DR, Chauhan SK, Chiang N, Serhan CN, Dana R. Anti-angiogenesis
effect of the novel anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving lipid mediators. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci. 2009; 50:4743–4752. [PubMed: 19407006]
Joosten LA, Netea MG, Fantuzzi G, Koenders MI, Helsen MM, Sparrer H, Pham CT, van der Meer
JW, Dinarello CA, van den Berg WB. Inflammatory arthritis in caspase 1 gene-deficient mice:
Contribution of proteinase 3 to caspase 1-independent production of bioactive interleukin-1beta.
Arthritis Rheum. 2009; 60:3651–3662. [PubMed: 19950280]
Kahlenberg JM, Dubyak GR. Mechanisms of caspase-1 activation by P2X7 receptor-mediated K+
release. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 2004; 286:C1100–C1108. [PubMed: 15075209]
Khan N, Jeffers M, Kumar S, Hackett C, Boldog F, Khramtsov N, Qian X, Mills E, Berghs SC, Carey
N, et al. Determination of the class and isoform selectivity of small-molecule histone deacetylase
inhibitors. Biochem. J. 2008; 409:581–589. [PubMed: 17868033]
Kozikowski AP, Chen Y, Subhasish T, Lewin NE, Blumberg PM, Zhong Z, D’Annibale MA, Wang
WL, Shen Y, Langley B. Searching for disease modifiers-PKC activation and HDAC inhibition - a
dual drug approach to Alzheimer’s disease that decreases Abeta production while blocking
oxidative stress. ChemMedChem. 2009; 4:1095–1105. [PubMed: 19396896]
Krelin Y, Voronov E, Dotan S, Elkabets M, Reich E, Fogel M, Huszar M, Iwakura Y, Segal S,
Dinarello CA, Apte RN. Interleukin-1beta-driven inflammation promotes the development and
invasiveness of chemical carcinogen-induced tumors. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:1062–1071. [PubMed:
17283139]
Krishnamoorthy S, Recchiuti A, Chiang N, Yacoubian S, Lee CH, Yang R, Petasis NA, Serhan CN.
Resolvin D1 binds human phagocytes with evidence for proresolving receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 2010; 107:1660–1665. [PubMed: 20080636]
Kuijk LM, Beekman JM, Koster J, Waterham HR, Frenkel J, Coffer PJ. HMG-CoA reductase
inhibition induces IL-1beta release through Rac1/PI3K/PKB-dependent caspase-1 activation.
Blood. 2008; 112:3563–3573. [PubMed: 18684863]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kumar S, McLaughlin MM, McDonnell PC, Lee JC, Livi GP, Young PR. Human mitogen-activated
protein kinase CSBP1, but not CSBP2, complements a hog1 deletion in yeast. J. Biol. Chem.
1995; 270:29043–29046. [PubMed: 7493921]
Lachmann HJ, Kone-Paut I, Kuemmerle-Deschner JB, Leslie KS, Hachulla E, Quartier P, Gitton X,
Widmer A, Patel N, Hawkins PN. Use of canakinumab in the cryopyrin-associated periodic
syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009; 360:2416–2425. [PubMed: 19494217]
Laliberte RE, Eggler J, Gabel CA. ATP treatment of human monocytes promotes caspase-1 maturation
and externalization. J. Biol. Chem. 1999; 274:36944–36951. [PubMed: 10601248]
Larsen CM, Faulenbach M, Vaag A, Volund A, Ehses JA, Seifert B, Mandrup-Poulsen T, Donath MY.
Interleukin-1-receptor antagonist in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 2007a; 356:1517–
1526. [PubMed: 17429083]
Larsen L, Tonnesen M, Ronn SG, Storling J, Jorgensen S, Mascagni P, Dinarello CA, Billestrup N,
Mandrup-Poulsen T. Inhibition of histone deacetylases prevents cytokine-induced toxicity in beta
cells. Diabetologia. 2007b; 50:779–789. [PubMed: 17265033]
Larsen CM, Faulenbach M, Vaag A, Ehses JA, Donath MY, Mandrup-Poulsen T. Sustained effects of
interleukin-1 receptor antagonist treatment in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009; 32:1663–1668.
[PubMed: 19542207]
Leoni F, Fossati G, Lewis EC, Lee JK, Porro G, Pagani P, Modena D, Moras ML, Pozzi P, Reznikov
LL, et al. The histone deacetylase inhibitor ITF2357 reduces production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines in vitro and systemic inflammation in vivo. Mol. Med. 2005; 11:1–15. [PubMed:
16557334]
Leoni F, Zaliani A, Bertolini G, Porro G, Pagani P, Pozzi P, Dona G, Fossati G, Sozzani S, Azam T, et
al. The antitumor histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid exhibits
antiinflammatory properties via suppression of cytokines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2002;
99:2995–3000. [PubMed: 11867742]
Lewis EC, Mizrahi M, Toledano M, Defelice N, Wright JL, Churg A, Shapiro L, Dinarello CA.
alpha1-Antitrypsin monotherapy induces immune tolerance during islet allograft transplantation in
mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2008; 105:16236–16241. [PubMed: 18852465]
Li Q, Nacion K, Bu H, Lin F. The complement inhibitor FUT-175 suppresses T cell autoreactivity in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Am. J. Pathol. 2009; 175:661–667. [PubMed:
19608865]
Liuzzo G, Biasucci LM, Gallimore JR, Grillo RL, Rebuzzi AG, Pepys MB, Maseri A. The prognostic
value of C-reactive protein and serum amyloid a protein in severe unstable angina. N. Engl. J.
Med. 1994; 331:417–424. [PubMed: 7880233]
MacKenzie A, Wilson HL, Kiss-Toth E, Dower SK, North RA, Surprenant A. Rapid secretion of
interleukin-1beta by microvesicle shedding. Immunity. 2001; 15:825–835. [PubMed: 11728343]
Maedler K, Sergeev P, Ris F, Oberholzer J, Joller-Jemelka HI, Spinas GA, Kaiser N, Halban PA,
Donath MY. Glucose-induced beta cell production of IL-1beta contributes to glucotoxicity in
human pancreatic islets. J. Clin. Invest. 2002; 110:851–860. [PubMed: 12235117]
Major EO. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in patients on immunomodulatory therapies.
Annu. Rev. Med. 2009; 61:35–47. [PubMed: 19719397]
Mandrup-Poulsen T, Bendtzen K, Nerup J, Dinarello CA, Svenson M, Nielsen JH. Affinity-purified
human interleukin I is cytotoxic to isolated islets of Langerhans. Diabetologia. 1986; 29:63–67.
[PubMed: 3514344]
Marin V, Farnarier C, Gres S, Kaplanski S, Su MS, Dinarello CA, Kaplanski G. The p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase pathway plays a critical role in thrombin-induced endothelial chemokine
production and leukocyte recruitment. Blood. 2001; 98:667–673. [PubMed: 11468165]
Marks PA, Rifkind RA, Richon VM, Breslow R, Miller T, Kelly WK. Histone deacetylases and
cancer: causes and therapies. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2001; 1:194–202. [PubMed: 11902574]
Masters SL, Simon A, Aksentijevich I, Kastner DL. Horror autoinflammaticus: the molecular
pathophysiology of autoinflammatory disease (*). Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2009; 27:621–668.
[PubMed: 19302049]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Munch J, Standker L, Adermann K, Schulz A, Schindler M, Chinnadurai R, Pohlmann S, Chaipan C,
Biet T, Peters T, et al. Discovery and optimization of a natural HIV-1 entry inhibitor targeting the
gp41 fusion peptide. Cell. 2007; 129:263–275. [PubMed: 17448989]
Netea MG, Nold-Petry CA, Nold MF, Joosten LA, Opitz B, van der Meer JH, van de Veerdonk FL,
Ferwerda G, Heinhuis B, Devesa I, et al. Differential requirement for the activation of the
inflammasome for processing and release of IL-1beta in monocytes and macrophages. Blood.
2009; 113:2324–2335. [PubMed: 19104081]
Nicklin MJ, Hughes DE, Barton JL, Ure JM, Duff GW. Arterial inflammation in mice lacking the
interleukin 1 receptor antagonist gene. J. Exp. Med. 2000; 191:303–312. [PubMed: 10637274]
Nold MF, Nold-Petry CA, Fischer D, Richter B, Blaheta R, Pfeilschifter J, Muhl H, Schranz D,
Veldman A. Activated protein C down-regulates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and
improves clinical parameters in an in-vivo model of septic shock. Thromb. Haemost. 2007;
98:1118–1126. [PubMed: 18000619]
O’Connor OA, Heaney ML, Schwartz L, Richardson S, Willim R, MacGregor-Cortelli B, Curly T,
Moskowitz C, Portlock C, Horwitz S, et al. Clinical experience with intravenous and oral
formulations of the novel histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in patients
with advanced hematologic malignancies. J. Clin. Oncol. 2006; 24:166–173. [PubMed: 16330674]
Oldoni T, Furlan A, Monznani V, Dinarello CA. Decreased whole blood cytokine production during a
phase I trial of the histone deacetylase inhibitor ITF2357. Cytokine. 2009; 48:120.
Paniagua RT, Sharpe O, Ho PP, Chan SM, Chang A, Higgins JP, Tomooka BH, Thomas FM, Song JJ,
Goodman SB, et al. Selective tyrosine kinase inhibition by imatinib mesylate for the treatment of
autoimmune arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 2006; 116:2633–2642. [PubMed: 16981009]
Pascual V, Allantaz F, Arce E, Punaro M, Banchereau J. Role of interleukin-1 (IL-1) in the
pathogenesis of systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis and clinical response to IL-1 blockade.
J. Exp. Med. 2005; 201:1479–1486. [PubMed: 15851489]
Paul F, Waiczies S, Wuerfel J, Bellmann-Strobl J, Dorr J, Waiczies H, Haertle M, Wernecke KD, Volk
HD, Aktas O, Zipp F. Oral high-dose atorvastatin treatment in relapsing-remitting multiple
sclerosis. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e1928. [PubMed: 18398457]
Perregaux DG, McNiff P, Laliberte R, Conklyn M, Gabel CA. ATP acts as an agonist to promote
stimulus-induced secretion of IL-1 beta and IL-18 in human blood. J. Immunol. 2000; 165:4615–
4623. [PubMed: 11035104]
Pott GB, Chan ED, Dinarello CA, Shapiro L. Alpha-1-antitrypsin is an endogenous inhibitor of
proinflammatory cytokine production in whole blood. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2009; 85:886–895.
[PubMed: 19197072]
Proudfoot AE, Power CA, Schwarz MK. Anti-chemokine small molecule drugs: a promising future?
Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs. 2010; 19:345–355.
Qu Y, Franchi L, Nunez G, Dubyak GR. Nonclassical IL-1 beta secretion stimulated by P2X7
receptors is dependent on inflammasome activation and correlated with exosome release in murine
macrophages. J. Immunol. 2007; 179:1913–1925. [PubMed: 17641058]
Rafiq S, Stevens K, Hurst AJ, Murray A, Henley W, Weedon MN, Bandinelli S, Corsi AM, Guralnik
JM, Ferruci L, et al. Common genetic variation in the gene encoding interleukin-1-receptor
antagonist (IL-1RA) is associated with altered circulating IL-1RA levels. Genes Immun. 2007;
8:344–351. [PubMed: 17443229]
Reddy S, Jia S, Geoffrey R, Lorier R, Suchi M, Broeckel U, Hessner MJ, Verbsky J. An
autoinflammatory disease due to homozygous deletion of the IL1RN locus. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009;
360:2438–2444. [PubMed: 19494219]
Ren M, Leng Y, Jeong M, Leeds PR, Chuang DM. Valproic acid reduces brain damage induced by
transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats: potential roles of histone deacetylase inhibition and heat
shock protein induction. J. Neurochem. 2004; 89:1358–1367. [PubMed: 15189338]
Ridker PM, Danielson E, Fonseca FA, Genest J, Gotto AM Jr. Kastelein JJ, Koenig W, Libby P,
Lorenzatti AJ, MacFadyen JG, et al. Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular events in men and women
with elevated C-reactive protein. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 359:2195–2207. [PubMed: 18997196]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sampaio EP, Sarno EN, Galilly R, Cohn ZA, Kaplan G. Thalidomide selectively inhibits tumor
necrosis factor alpha production by stimulated human monocytes. J. Exp. Med. 1991; 173:699–
703. [PubMed: 1997652]
Santini V, Gozzini A, Ferrari G. Histone deacetylase inhibitors: molecular and biological activity as a
premise to clinical application. Curr. Drug Metab. 2007; 8:383–393. [PubMed: 17504226]
Serhan CN, Chiang N. Endogenous pro-resolving and antiinflammatory lipid mediators: a new
pharmacologic genus. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2008; 153(Suppl 1):S200–S215. [PubMed: 17965751]
Shapiro L, Dinarello CA. Osmotic regulation of cytokine synthesis in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 1995; 92:12230–12234. [PubMed: 8618875]
Shapiro L, Pott GB, Ralston AH. Alpha-1-antitrypsin inhibits human immunodeficiency virus type 1.
FASEB J. 2001; 15:115–122. [PubMed: 11149899]
Shein NA, Grigoriadis N, Alexandrovich AG, Simeonidou C, Lourbopoulos A, Polyzoidou E,
Trembovler V, Mascagni P, Dinarello CA, Shohami E. Histone deacetylase inhibitor ITF2357 is
neuroprotective, improves functional recovery and induces glial apoptosis following experimental
traumatic brain injury. FASEB J. 2009; 23:4266–4275. [PubMed: 19723705]
Stack JH, Beaumont K, Larsen PD, Straley KS, Henkel GW, Randle JC, Hoffman HM. IL-converting
enzyme/caspase-1 inhibitor VX-765 blocks the hypersensitive response to an inflammatory
stimulus in monocytes from familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome patients. J. Immunol. 2005;
175:2630–2634. [PubMed: 16081838]
Stafylas PC, Sarafidis PA, Lasaridis AN. The controversial effects of thiazolidinediones on
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Int. J. Cardiol. 2009; 131:298–304. [PubMed: 18684530]
Stienstra R, Joosten LA, Koenen T, van der Meer JWM, Tack CJ, Kanneganti T, Netea MG. The
inflammasome-mediated caspase-1 activation controls apipocyte differentiation and insulin
sensitivity. Cytokine. 2009; 48:134.
Susick L, Veluthakal R, Suresh MV, Hadden T, Kowluru A. Regulatory roles for histone deacetylation
in IL-1beta-induced nitric oxide release in pancreatic beta-cells. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 2007; 5:5.
Testa L, Van Gaal WJ, Bhindi R, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Abbate A, Agostoni P, Porto I, Andreotti F, Crea
F, Banning AP. Pexelizumab in ischemic heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis on
15,196 patients. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg. 2008; 136:884–893. [PubMed: 18954626]
Thiele A, Bang R, Gutschow M, Rossol M, Loos S, Eger K, Tiegs G, Hauschildt S. Cytokine
modulation and suppression of liver injury by a novel analogue of thalidomide. Eur. J.
Pharmacol. 2002; 453:325–334. [PubMed: 12398921]
van de Veerdonk FL, Joosten LA, Devesa I, Mora-Montes HM, Kanneganti TD, Dinarello CA, van der
Meer JW, Gow NA, Kullberg BJ, Netea MG. Bypassing pathogen-induced inflammasome
activation for the regulation of interleukin-1beta production by the fungal pathogen Candida
albicans. J. Infect. Dis. 2009a; 199:1087–1096. [PubMed: 19222370]
van de Veerdonk FL, Lauweys B, DiPadova F, Marijnissen RJ, Koenders MI, Gutierrez-Roelens I,
Durez P, Netea MG, van der Meer JWM, van den Berg WB, Joosten LA. The anti-CD20
antibody rituximab reduces the Th17 response. Cytokine. 2009b; 48:98.
Vojinovic J, Dinarello CA, Damjanov N, Oldoni T. Safety and efficacy of oral ITF 2357 in patients
with active systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SOJIA) Results of a phase II, open label,
international, multicentre clinical trial. Arthritis Rheum. (Munch). 2008; 58:S943.
Weinblatt ME, Kavanaugh A, Burgos-Vargas R, Dikranian AH, Medrano-Ramirez G, Morales-Torres
JL, Murphy FT, Musser TK, Straniero N, Vicente-Gonzales AV, Grossbard E. Treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis with a Syk kinase inhibitor: a twelve-week, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2008; 58:3309–3318. [PubMed: 18975322]
Wolf AM, Wolf D, Rumpold H, Ludwiczek S, Enrich B, Gastl G, Weiss G, Tilg H. The kinase
inhibitor imatinib mesylate inhibits TNF-{alpha} production in vitro and prevents TNFdependent acute hepatic inflammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2005; 102:13622–13627.
[PubMed: 16174751]
Zhao W, Thacker SG, Hodgin JB, Zhang H, Wang JH, Park JL, Randolph A, Somers EC, Pennathur S,
Kretzler M, et al. The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonist pioglitazone
improves cardiometabolic risk and renal inflammation in murine lupus. J. Immunol. 2009;
183:2729–2740. [PubMed: 19620300]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Zhou R, Tardivel A, Thorens B, Choi I, Tschopp J. Thioredoxin-interacting protein links oxidative
stress to inflammasome activation. Nat. Immunol. 2010; 11:136–140. [PubMed: 20023662]
Zhou W, Hashimoto K, Goleniewska K, O’Neal JF, Ji S, Blackwell TS, Fitzgerald GA, Egan KM,
Geraci MW, Peebles RS Jr. Prostaglandin I2 analogs inhibit proinflammatory cytokine
production and T cell stimulatory function of dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 2007; 178:702–710.
[PubMed: 17202330]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Inflammation and Points of Inhibition by Anti-inflammatory Agents

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Shown is the inflammatory pathway associated with ischemia-induced tissue damage and
the anti-inflammatory drugs that can be used to block inflammation at various points in the
pathway. During ischemia, mesenchymal-derived cells undergo hypoxic damage, lose
membrane integrity, and release their cytoplasmic contents. This is followed by the release
of biologically active proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and VEGF. These cytokines
bind to and activate their cognate receptors on nearby macrophages. The activation of the
cytokine receptors triggers tissue-resident macrophages to express an extensive portfolio of
proinflammatory genes. Some gene products such as the IL-1β and IL-18 precursor proteins
require processing by caspase-1 and secretion as active cytokines. There is also chemokine
production by activated tissue macrophages. A concentration gradient of secreted cytokines
and chemokines forms between the macrophage and the endothelium of the
microvasculature. Activation of cytokine and chemokine receptors on the endothelium takes
place resulting in the opening of endothelial junctions. This leads to a capillary leak and the
passage of plasma proteins into the ischemic area. During the ischemic event, there is
activation of complement with induction of cytokines and chemokines, as well as a direct
effect of C5a on chemoattraction. As part of the cytokine activation of the endothelium,
there is expression of the adhesion molecule VCAM-1, which facilitates the rolling of innate
immune cells such as monocytes and neutrophils (myeloid cells) and their adherence to the
endothelium. These inflammatory cells then leave the circulation and enter the tissue space
by diapedesis. With increasing numbers of infiltrating myeloid cells, the healthy tissue
surrounding the ischemic area (called the penumbra) is subjected to damage from the
cellular infiltrate due to the release of cytokines and chemokines into the penumbral tissue.
Release of damaging proteases from neutrophils contributes to the loss of tissue in the
penumbra. Adherence of platelets to the endothelium causes further endothelial activation
by increasing expression of receptors for platelets. During the development of an
inflammatory infiltrate in the ischemic tissue, a cascade of clotting factors is initiated by
cytokine-induced endothelial tissue factor. In addition, the cytokine-activated endothelium

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 27

releases inhibitors of fibrinolysis. With increased coagulation in the microvasculature and
decreased fibrinolysis, tissue perfusion slows and hypoxia and tissue damage worsen.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Production and Release of IL-1β

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(Top left) Primary blood monocytes, tissue macrophages, or dendritic cells are activated by
the cytokine IL-1β (blue oval) resulting in the formation of the IL-1 receptor complex
(composed of IL-1RI and IL-1RAcP). The intracellular TIR domains of the IL-1 receptor
complex recruit MyD88 and other signaling components leading to translocation of the
transcription factor NF-κB into the nucleus. This results in transcription of the gene
encoding the precursor of IL-1β and its translation into protein (blue dumb-bell) (Bocker et
al., 2001). ATP released from activated monocytes (or from dying cells) accumulates
outside the cell. As the extracellular levels of ATP increase, the P2X7 receptor is activated,
triggering the efflux of potassium ions from the cell. Low intracellular potassium ion levels
enable the components of the caspase-1 inflammasome to assemble. Assembly results in the
conversion of procaspase-1 to active caspase-1. There is evidence that the components of the
inflammasome localize to secretory lysosomes together with the IL-1β precursor protein and
lysosomal enzymes (Andrei et al., 2004). In the secretory lysosome, active caspase-1 cleaves
the IL-1β precursor, generating active mature IL-1β. Mature IL-1β is released along with the
IL-1β precursor and the contents of the secretory lysosomes (Andrei et al., 2004). There is
evidence that secretion of active IL-1β requires an increase in intracellular calcium ion
levels (Kahlenberg and Dubyak, 2004). Processing of the IL-1β precursor can also take
place in the cytosol independently of caspase-1 and the inflammasome (Brough and
Rothwell, 2007). Studies have also shown that Rab39a, a member of the GTPase family,
contributes to the secretion of mature IL-1β by helping IL-1β traffic from the cytosol into
the vesicular compartment (Becker et al., 2009) from where it is secreted by exocytosis (Qu
et al., 2007) (not shown). Mature IL-1β can also exit the cell through a loss in membrane
integrity (Laliberte et al., 1999) or exocytosis via small vesicles (MacKenzie et al., 2001).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

Dinarello

Page 29

Table 1

Biologicals in the Treatment of Chronic Autoimmune and Inflammatory Diseases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drugs

Function

Diseases Treated

Anti-CD3 (eplizumab); anti-IL-2 receptor MoAb (daclizumab)

Targeting T cells

Transplant rejection;
Type 1 diabetes

Anti-CD20 (rituximab, crelizumab, ofatumumab); anti-CD22 (epratuzumab);
anti-Blys MoAb IgG1 (belimumab)

Targeting B cells

Type 1 diabetes; rheumatoid
arthritis; multiple sclerosis

Anti-TNF-α MoA (infliximab, adulimumab, golimumab); anti-TNF-α pegylated
Fab’ (certolizumab); soluble TNF p75 receptor Fc fusion (etanercept)

Reducing TNF-α
activities

Rheumatoid arthritis;
Crohn’s disease; psoriasis

Anti-IL-6 MoAb (MEDI5117); Anti-IL-6 receptor (toculizumab)

Reducing IL-6
activities

Rheumatoid arthritis;
juvenile arthritis

Anti-IL-12/23 (ustekinumab); Anti-IL-17 MoAb (AIN457/LY24398)

Neutralization of IL-12,
IL-23, and IL-17

Rheumatoid arthritis;
Crohn’s Disease; psoriasis

IL-1 receptor antagonist (anakinra); soluble IL-1 receptor (rilonacept); anti-IL-1β
(IgG1) (canakinumab); anti-IL-1β (IgG2) (Xoma 052); anti-IL-1R MoAb IgG1
(AMG 108)

Reducing IL-1β
activities

Autoinflammatory
diseases (see Table S1)

Anti-a4 integrins MoAb (natalizumab); anti-LFA-1 MoAb (efalizumab)

Blocking cell adhesion
and migration

Multiple sclerosis; Crohn’s
Disease; psoriasis

CTLA-4 Ig fusion protein (abatacept)

Blocking T cell
coreceptors

Type 1 diabetes;
rheumatoid arthritis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 25.

