Oncotarget, September, Vol.4, No 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial Material

Druggable Drivers of Lung Cancer
Shameem Fawdar, Zoe C. Edwards, John Brognard
cell lines, our approach can be broadly applied to elucidate novel
pharmacologically targetable mutationally activated enzymes.
Alternatively, our strategy could be used as an approach to
stratify patients for treatment with already existing therapies,
such as MEK inhibitors. Our screen is broadly applicable and
provides a potential clinical strategy to go from cancer genomic
data, to genetic dependency identification, to administration
of targeted therapies tailored to the patient’s tumor. As n-of1 clinical trials become a real possibility one could envisage
isolating tumor cells from a biopsy, performing next-generation
sequencing, establishing a cell line and screening all somatic
mutants to identify individual Achilles’ heels that can be
targeted therapeutically. While cost prohibitive at this stage,
the continual drop in prices of siRNA screening libraries,
robotics, and next-generation sequencing means that bringing
such screening efforts to the clinic could become a realistic
prospect. In addition, the same strategy may be applied to
circulating tumor cells, from which cell lines can be derived,
presenting an opportunity to circumvent the more costly and
invasive acquisition of cancer cells through biopsies. Targeted
genetic dependency screens are an effective way to uncover low
frequency oncogenes that can serve as targets for therapeutic
intervention for tumors of any origin. The mutation frequency
for the genes we identified ranged from 2-10% of lung cancers;
given the frequency of lung cancer in the population, these

Cancer genomic sequencing is ushering in an era of
targeted and personalized therapeutic approaches for the
treatment of cancer. Targeted therapies are yielding impressive
response rates in patients, leading to longer progression-free
survival and less severe side effects than those associated with
traditional chemotherapeutic regimens. Treatment of EGFR
mutation-positive lung cancer patients with EGFR inhibitors,
or BRAFV600E-positive melanoma patients with a combination
of RAF and MEK inhibitors, serve as impressive validators of
this approach [1, 2]. However, the number of patients that can be
treated with targeted therapies is limited by our understanding
of the genetic drivers that are required to maintain cancer
cell survival and proliferation [3]. To tackle this enormous
challenge presented to the research community we applied a
targeted genetic dependency approach to discover functionally
relevant somatically mutated proteins required to maintain lung
cancer cell survival and growth [4]. Utilizing cancer genomic
sequencing data from the Sanger Institute we depleted six lung
cancer cell lines of all somatically mutated proteins to discover
novel genetic dependencies and identify low frequency driver
mutations [5]. Given the impressive effort of The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome
Consortium (ICGC), among others, to catalogue all somatically
altered genes in over 50 different cancers and over 500 cancer

Figure 1: Targeted genetic dependency screen to identify novel actionable mutations; mutated FGFR4, MAP3K9 and
PAK5 are illustrated examples. Patient tumors are exome sequenced and treatment is stratified based upon the mutational profile of
each individual. Treatment options include novel pharmacological compounds to specifically inhibit driver oncogenes, and/or targeting the
main downstream hyper-activated pro-proliferative signaling pathway, for example inhibition of MEK.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1334

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 1334-1335

targets could be exploited by pharmaceutical companies for
drug development. Indeed PAK5 mutations have been identified
in 9% of lung adenocarcinomas and if approximately half of
these were gain-of-function mutations (we observed 4 out of
7 PAK5 mutants had increased activity compared to wildtype PAK5), this would represent a sizable patient population
(approximately 65,000 patients/year globally) that could benefit
from targeted inhibition of the PAK5 kinase [6]. Therefore
the mutational activation frequency for PAK5 would mirror
that observed in the EML4-ALK kinase rearrangement, where
patients showed unprecedented response from treatment with
the ALK inhibitor crizotinib [7]. An important finding from our
study was the identification of mutations that act in concert to
hyper-activate a specific pathway. For example, in one cancer
cell line we observed an accumulation of activating mutations
that converge towards the same central pathway to confer a
proliferative advantage to the cell; specifically, we observed
that the intermediately activating mutation BRAFL597V can
cooperate with PAK5T538N and NRASQ61K to drive and maintain
tumor growth via the RAF/MEK/ERK signaling axis. Thus a
patient presenting to the clinic with a similar mutational profile
would preferentially benefit from a pan-RAF or MEK inhibitor
rather than a single BRAF-specific inhibitor. Furthermore, by
identifying the individual hyper-activated components of the
pathway, a combination therapy of targeted pharmacological
inhibitors may prove to be more successful and better tolerated
by the patient. In summary, targeted genetic dependency
screens represent a valuable strategy to identify low frequency
oncogenic mutations and can complement more traditional
bioinformatic approaches; these tend to be selective for lossof-function mutations as alterations in key residues required to
maintain enzymatic activity are those most likely to be predicted
as damaging [8]. As such platforms become increasingly used,
we can foresee a future where a majority of cancer patients will
be diagnosed on the basis of their tumor mutation profile and
consequently receive the appropriately tailored treatment.

4.	

Editorial
Fawdar S et al. Proc National Academy of
Sciences.Material
2013.

5.	

Greenman C et al. Nature. 2007; 446(7132):153-158.

6.	

Imielinski M et al. Cell . 2012; 150(6):1107-1120.

7.	

Gerber DE, Minna JD. Cancer Cel. 2010; l 18(6):548-551.

8.	

Brognard J. Cancer research 71(8):3152-3161.

Shameem Fawdar: Signalling Networks in Cancer Group,
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute and The
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
Zoe C. Edwards: Signalling Networks in Cancer Group,
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute and The
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
John Brognard: Signalling Networks in Cancer Group,
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute and The
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
Correspondence: John Brognard, email jbrognard@picr.
man.ac.uk
Received: July 30, 2013;
Published: August 14, 2013;

REFERENCES
1.	

Gazdar AF. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2010; 29(1):37-48.

2.	 Chapman PB et al. N Engl J Med. 2010; 364(26):25072516.
3.	

Kim E et al. Cancer Discovery. 2011.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1335

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 1334-1335

