Original Article

Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy Associated With
Brentuximab Vedotin Therapy
A Report of 5 Cases from the Southern Network on Adverse Reactions (SONAR) Project
Kenneth R. Carson, MD1; Scott D. Newsome, DO2; Ellen J. Kim, MD3,4; Nina D. Wagner-Johnston, MD1;
Gloria von Geldern, MD5; Craig H. Moskowitz, MD6; Alison J. Moskowitz, MD6; Alain H. Rook, MD3,4; Pankaj Jalan, MD7;
Alison W. Loren, MD8; Daniel Landsburg, MD8; Thomas Coyne, MD9; Donald Tsai, MD8; Dennis W. Raisch, PhD10;
LeAnn B. Norris, PharmD11; P. Brandon Bookstaver, PharmD11; Oliver Sartor, MD1,12; and Charles L. Bennett, MD11,13,14

BACKGROUND: Brentuximab vedotin (BV) is an anti-CD30 monoclonal antibody-drug conjugate that was approved in 2011 for the
treatment of patients with anaplastic large cell and Hodgkin lymphomas. The product label indicates that 3 patients who were treated
with BV developed progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a frequently fatal JC virus-induced central nervous system
infection. Prior immunosuppressive therapy and compromised immune systems were postulated risk factors. In the current study, the
authors reported 5 patients who developed BV-associated PML, including 2 immunocompetent patients. METHODS: Case information
was obtained from clinicians (4 patients) or a US Food and Drug Administration database (1 patient). RESULTS: All 5 patients had
lymphoid malignancies. Two patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphomas had not previously received chemotherapy. PML developed after a median of 3 BV doses (range, 2 doses-6 doses) and within a median of 7 weeks after BV initiation (range, 3 weeks-34 weeks).
Presenting findings included aphasia, dysarthria, confusion, hemiparesis, and gait dysfunction; JC virus in the cerebrospinal fluid (2
patients) or central nervous system biopsy (3 patients); and brain magnetic resonance imaging scans with white matter abnormalities
(5 patients). Four patients died at a median of 8 weeks (range, 6 weeks-16 weeks) after PML diagnosis. The sole survivor developed
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. CONCLUSIONS: PML can develop after a few BV doses and within weeks of BV initiation. Clinicians should be aware of this syndrome, particularly when neurologic changes develop after the initiation of BV treatment.
The decision to administer BV to patients with indolent cutaneous lymphomas should be based on consideration of risk-benefit proC 2014 American Cancer Society.
files and of alternative options. Cancer 2014;120:2464-71. V
KEYWORDS: lymphoma, immunocompromised, autoimmune, fungoides, brentuximab, vedotin.

INTRODUCTION
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare and often fatal infection of the central nervous system (CNS)
that results from reactivation of latent JC polyoma virus (JCV), which typically occurs in immunocompromised patients.1
In the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy, approximately 80% of new PML diagnoses develop among individuals
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).2 However, before the HIV epidemic, the majority of PML cases
occurred in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders.3 Among HIV-negative individuals, PML has been most

Corresponding author: Kenneth R. Carson, MD, Division of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Ave, Campus Box 8056, St. Louis,
MO 63110; Fax: (314) 747-5123; kcarson@dom.wustl.edu
1
Division of Medical Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri; 2Division of Neuroimmunology and Neuroinfectious Diseases, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 3Division of Dermatology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 4Division of Medical Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 5Department of Neurology,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 6Division of Hematologic Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York; 7Division of Neurology, Southern Illinois College of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois; 8Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
9
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson School of Medicine, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey; 10University of New
Mexico College of Pharmacy, VA Cooperative Studies Program Clinical Research Pharmacy Coordinating Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico; 11Southern Network
on Adverse Reactions (SONAR) Program, South Carolina College of Pharmacy, Columbia, South Carolina; 12Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; 13Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina; 14Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina

The first 2 authors contributed equally to this article.
Critical review was provided by Eugene O. Major, PhD, chief of Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience at the National Institute of Neurologic Diseases of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. Zaina Qureshi, PhD, MS; Brian Chen, PhD, JD; and Richard M. Schulz, PhD provided helpful critical review of the policy implications of the study.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28712, Received: October 28, 2013; Revised: February 17, 2014; Accepted: February 27, 2014, Published online April 25, 2014 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2464

Cancer

August 15, 2014

Brentuximab-Associated PML/Carson et al

commonly associated with cytotoxic chemotherapy,
immune-suppressing medications, and solid organ and
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.4-6 PML incidence estimates range from 0.07% in a population-based
study of individuals with hematologic malignancies to
0.5% among patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
treated with fludarabine to 3% to 5% among persons
diagnosed with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
in the post-highly active antiretroviral therapy era.6 Currently, there is a lack of universally accepted treatments
for PML outside of reconstitution of the immune system.
Immune reconstitution is often achieved through
removal of the offending agent associated with PML, by
stimulating an altered immune system, or by initiating
antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV=acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Some patients with PML survive after the development of an immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), which is characterized by
rapid infiltration of cytotoxic T cells.7 Although the development of IRIS among patients with PML can be lifesaving, CNS inflammation due to IRIS can result in death
or permanent neurologic disability.8
Most recently, PML has been reported in patients
receiving several different immune-modulating monoclonal antibodies.6 These monoclonal antibodies appear
to alter normal immune function and=or immune surveillance.9 Natalizumab, a monoclonal antibody targeted against the integrin alpha-4, was initially approved
for the treatment of multiple sclerosis and Crohn disease, but was withdrawn from the market in 2005 after 3
patients developed PML. After implementation of a
global risk management program, natalizumab was reintroduced in 2006.10 In certain high-risk individuals,
natalizumab has been associated with a PML incidence
of up to 1 in 85 exposures.11 Efalizumab, a monoclonal
antibody targeting CD11a, was approved in 2003 for
the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis.
Marketing of the drug was voluntarily discontinued by
the manufacturer in 2009 after 3 confirmed cases of
PML developed in patients who had received several
years of treatment with efalizumab.12 Rituximab, an
anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, was approved for the
treatment of indolent B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas
in 1997. Over the next 9 years, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) received reports of 10 patients
who developed PML after treatment with rituximab. In
2009, we reported 57 rituximab-associated PML cases
occurring among patients with autoimmune diseases (5
patients) and lymphoproliferative disorders (52
patients).13 Subsequently, by mid-2012, the FDA had
Cancer

August 15, 2014

received reports of 511 patients with rituximabassociated PML.
In 2011, the FDA granted accelerated approval for
brentuximab vedotin (BV), a monoclonal antibody targeting CD30-positive cells, which is conjugated to the cytotoxic agent monomethyl auristatin E.14 The approval
was for the treatment of recurrent or refractory systemic
anaplastic large cell lymphoma and classic Hodgkin lymphoma. The initial product label included a warning that
1 patient treated with BV had developed and subsequently
died of PML.15 In 2012, the manufacturer added a “Black
Box” warning to the label indicating that 2 subsequently
reported patients had also developed PML after BV treatment. Long-term clinical follow-up on the 3 patients was
not reported.16 The warning identified potential contributory risk factors as underlying lymphoproliferative disorders, compromised immune systems, and multiagent
chemotherapy. Clinicians were advised that among
patients treated with BV, signs and symptoms of PML,
primarily neurologic changes, may develop over the
course of several weeks or months.16
For all monoclonal antibodies targeting the immune
system, vigilant postmarketing surveillance is essential to
detect rare disorders such as PML.17 When cases of PML
arise, assessment of the risks and benefits of the associated
agent for the approved indications is warranted.11 The
FDA noted in January 2012 that 3 cases of PML were
diagnosed among the first 2000 patients who had received
BV, although comprehensive information on presenting
findings, prior treatments, PML treatments, and outcome
was not provided. In the current study, we summarized
the clinical characteristics, interval between BV therapy
and onset of disease, response to treatment, pathology=laboratory findings, and long-term outcomes in 5
patients in whom PML developed after the initiation of
BV treatment. The identification of these 5 BV-associated
PML cases occurred within the first year of marketing
of BV.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The Southern Network on Adverse Reactions (SONAR)
project conducts safety initiatives focusing on monoclonal
antibody-associated PML. Case information was obtained
directly from treating clinicians for 4 patients. We also
obtained 6 reports from the FDA’s Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) of all BV-associated PML cases
(search period between August 1, 2011 and December 31,
2012); 1 of these cases was excluded because information
confirming the diagnosis of PML was not included in the
report and 4 cases were excluded because they represented
2465

Original Article

duplicate reports of cases identified directly by SONAR.
Duplicate reports in the FAERS and SONAR databases
were confirmed based on cross-referencing patient age,
sex, and dates of BV treatment. Information obtained
from clinicians was considered preferentially in instances
in which duplicate clinical information was available in
FAERS and from clinicians, based on previous experience.17 Inclusion criteria were receipt of BV therapy
before PML diagnosis or symptom onset, PML confirmation based on histologic examination of tissue from the
CNS or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrating lesions consistent with PML, and documentation of
JCV DNA in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by polymerase
chain reaction. Abstracted data included sociodemographic information, neurological signs and symptoms at
the time of presentation, prior therapies, MRI findings,
CSF findings, biopsy findings, and clinical outcomes.
Two cases have been previously described as case reports
(in 3 publications).18-20
RESULTS
The 5 patients with PML associated with BV treatment
ranged in age from 38 years to 72 years (median, 50
years). (Table 1) Three patients were men. Indications for
BV treatment included classic Hodgkin lymphoma (3
patients) that was initially diagnosed 7, 8, and 12 years
previously, respectively; primary cutaneous anaplastic
large cell lymphoma diagnosed 4 years previously; and
transformed mycosis fungoides.
The 3 patients with classic Hodgkin lymphoma
were negative for HIV and had received standard frontline
and salvage combination chemotherapy regimens. Initial
therapy was the combination of doxorubicin, bleomycin,
vinblastine, and dacarbazine for all 3 patients with Hodgkin lymphoma. The patients also received autologous
stem cell transplantation (3 years and 5 years previously,
respectively, for 2 patients and immediately after BV for 1
patient) after standard salvage regimens using combination chemotherapy with ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide (2 patients) and etoposide, methylprednisolone,
cytarabine, and cisplatin (1 patient). Two patients with
Hodgkin lymphoma also received radiotherapy to the abdomen and pelvis. The 3 patients had participated in clinical trials of BV and had responded to BV therapy. In
evaluating neurologic dysfunction, initial brain MRI
scans revealed multifocal white matter lesions in these 3
patients. JCV DNA was not detected on at least 1 occasion in CSF samples obtained from 2 of these patients,
one of whom had an immunostain of a spinal cord lesion
biopsy (at the level of the first thoracic vertebra) that was
2466

positive for JCV and the second for whom a repeat CSF
evaluation was positive.
The 2 patients with cutaneous lymphomas had not
participated in clinical trials of BV. They received BV as
an off-label treatment for their lymphoma. The patient
with transformed mycosis fungoides was negative for HIV
and was initially diagnosed with stage IB mycosis fungoides (using TNMB staging system) 4 years before transformation. This patient had received topical
corticosteroids, topical nitrogen mustard, phototherapy,
interferon-a, bexarotene, localized radiotherapy, and the
histone deacetylase inhibitor romidepsin before BV therapy. The patient responded to BV therapy. In evaluating
neurologic dysfunction, this patient underwent a brain
MRI scan that revealed multifocal white matter lesions. A
brain autopsy revealed JCV-positive cells detected by in
situ hybridization. JCV had not been detected in CSF
samples obtained before the death of this patient. The
patient with primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma was also negative for HIV. The patient had
received topical corticosteroids, methotrexate, bexarotene,
denileukin diftitox, interferon-a and interferon-gamma,
pralatrexate, and the histone deactylase inhibitor vorinostat previously. The patient also responded to BV treatment. A brain biopsy revealed scattered demyelination
and immunohistochemistry demonstrated oligodendrocytes that were positive for JCV.
The most common clinical presentations of PML in
the current series were speech dysfunction=aphasia (4
patients), hemiparesis (2 patients), hemianopsia (1
patient), memory loss (2 patients), gait dysfunction (3
patients), and confusion (2 patients) (Table 1). The onset
of neurological symptoms occurred days to weeks after
the administration of 2 to 6 doses of BV (1.2 mg=kg to
1.8 mg=kg administered intravenously). One patient
(with classic Hodgkin lymphoma) underwent an autologous stem cell transplantation 7 weeks after the last of 6
BV treatments and neurologic symptoms developed over
the next 4 months. In 4 patients, neurological dysfunction
worsened rapidly and progressively over a period of 3 to 8
weeks until death occurred in hospice settings. The 38year-old patient with primary cutaneous anaplastic large
cell lymphoma demonstrated clinical and MRI findings
that were suggestive of PML-associated IRIS (PMLIRIS).18 The diagnosis of PML-IRIS was further supported by infiltrating T cells identified on brain biopsy.
The patient improved clinically and radiographically with
treatment with daily oral prednisone. When corticosteroids were tapered off several months later, a new
contrast-enhancing lesion developed on brain MRI,
Cancer

August 15, 2014

Cancer

August 15, 2014

Difficulty with word finding,
confusion, forgetfulness
over several wk
Normal

Normal
PML or viral encephalitis,
based on clinical and
MRI findings
CSF: JCV DNA detected by
PCR

Multifocal areas of nonenhancing T2 white matter,
which were greatest in
the anterior/inferior right
frontal lobe; additional
areas of subcortical T2
hyperintensity in bilateral
temporal lobes
Thyroid cancer, thyroidectomy, chronic
lymphopenia

Vision
Differential diagnosis at
time of PML presentation

MRI

Between 3 and 4 y prior to PML

Prior medications
(between 9-12 y prior to PML)
Prior medications
(between 5-8 y prior to PML)

Other illnesses

Detection of JCV

Normal

Gait

ESHAP (for recurrence),
BEAM, autoSCT,

Broad-field radiotherapy
and ABVD

Diet-controlled diabetes
mellitus, depression

T2 hyperintense lesion in
right cerebral hemisphere
with well-circumscribed
enhancing lesions in right
parietal lobe

CSF: JCV DNA detected by
PCR in second LP; no
JCV detected in initial LP

Impaired due to
hemiparesis
Left-sided hemianopsia
Ischemic stroke

Left hemiparesis, impaired
coordination

Dysarthria, encephalopathy

51/man

Age at time of PML
diagnosis, y/sex
Speech/mental status

Motor

Yes (1st PML case submitted to the manufacturer
and to the FDA [7/04/
2011])
47/man

Yes (5th PML case submitted to the FDA and the
manufacturer [11/2012])

Hodgkin Lymphoma

Clinical trial participant

Hodgkin Lymphoma

ABVD; radiation to abdomen and pelvis
ICE (for recurrence) with
partial response; BEAM;
autologous stem cell
transplant
Localized radiotherapy to
right neck (for second recurrence of nodular sclerosing Hodgkin disease)

Epilepsy, migraine
headaches

Spinal cord lesion biopsy,
initially negative for JC
virus; later evaluation of
the sample detected JC
virus; JC virus not
detected in CSF from 2
LPs
Ill-defined abnormal T2
hyperintensity involving
left superior cerebellar
peduncle

Right leg weakness and difficulty writing with right
arm weakness
Impaired due to right leg
weakness
Normal
Subacute CNS ischemia or
progression of lymphoma

Dysarthria

50/man

Yes (3rd PML case submitted to manufacturer and
FDA [11-15-2011])

Hodgkin Lymphoma

TABLE 1. Clinical Findings For 5 Patients With Brentuximab Vedotin-Associated PML

Topical steroid creams

Topical steroid creams

Topical steroid creams

Severe eczema

Multifocal white matter
lesions noted in left more
than right hemisphere

Brain biopsy- JCV detected
by
immunohistochemistry.

Ataxia requiring 1-person
assist
Normal
Metastatic brain lesions

Mildly decreased strength in
all extremities

Mixed nonfluent aphasia,
apraxia

38/woman

No (2nd PML case submitted to the FDA [10/2011])

Cutaneous Anaplastic
T-Cell Lymphoma

Topical corticosteroids,
nitrogen mustard, phototherapy, interferon-a-2b

None

Asymmetric T1 hypointense
and T2 hyperintense
lesions of the frontal
white matter

Brain autopsy with JCV
detected by in situ
hybridization; JCV not
detected in CSF

Normal
PML, based on clinical findings and MRI findings

Not tested

Generalized weakness

Poor short-term memory,
confusion

No (4th PML case submitted to the manufacturer
and to the FDA [3/29/
2012])
72/woman

Stage IB Mycosis
Fungoides

Brentuximab-Associated PML/Carson et al

2467

2468
3 wk; impaired coordination,
left >right dysiadokinesis,
slurred speech, left-sided
hemianopsia and visual
neglect, left hemiparesis,
and left central facial
paresis

Progressive neurological
deterioration and worsening MRI; died in hospice
8 wk after PML diagnosis

3 doses (1.8 mg/kg) 21 d
apart (PET showed favorable response to therapy)

gemcitabine, vinorelbine,
and liposomal
doxorubicin

Hodgkin Lymphoma

24 wk; speech changes,
incoordination of right
hand (poor penmanship),
and right lower extremity
weakness

5 doses (1.8 mg/kg); clinical
trial participant was withdrawn due to peripheral
neuropathy; 2 additional
doses (1.2 mg/kg)
Progressive neurological
deterioration and worsening MRI findings; T1-T2
and T8-T9 intramedullary
lesions; radiotherapy
(3000 Gy) to T1-T2 lesion
and corticosteroids; paraplegia developed and
died in hospice 6 wk after PML diagnosis and 20
wk after first brentuximab
vedotin treatment

Augmented ICE (2 cycles)

None

Hodgkin Lymphoma

Neurological and radiological improvement; maintained on prednisone at a
dose of 50 mg orally/d
for 1 y; upon discontinuing corticosteroids, a
new enhancing brain
lesion developed and the
patient restarted prednisone at a dose of 20 mg
orally/d with resolution of
this lesion and no evidence of new lesions
3 wk; mixed aphasia, inability to read, and unsteady
gait

2 doses (1.8 mg/kg every 3
wk) (1 cycle); disappearance of skin tumors

Methotrexate, bexarotene,
denileukin diftitox,
interferon-gamma-1b;
interferon-a-2b
Bexarotene, denileukin diftitox, interferon-gamma1b, interferon-a-2b, vorinostat, pralatrexate
Prednisone

Cutaneous Anaplastic
T-Cell Lymphoma

7 wk; disorientation, poor
short-term memory, and
weakness

Progressive neurological
deterioration; died in hospice 15 wk after first
brentuximab vedotin
treatment

3 doses (1.8mg/kg)
(significant response
of skin lesions)

Bexarotene, radiotherapy,
romidepsin

Topical corticosteroids,
nitrogen mustard, phototherapy, interferon-a-2b

Stage IB Mycosis
Fungoides

Abbreviations: ABVD, doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine; autoSCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; BEAM, carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine and melphalan; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ESHAP, etoposide, methylprednisolone, cytarabine, and cisplatin; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; Gy grays; ICE, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide; JCV, JC polyoma
virus; LP, lumbar puncture; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PET, positron emission tomography; PML, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

Time from first brentuximab
vedotin to main PML symptoms

Subsequent course

36 wk; 6 mo after the
patient treated with
autoSCT demonstrated
confusion, forgetfulness,
and difficulty finding
words

Autologous stem cell transplantation; ICE
6 doses (1.2 mg/kg every
wk); total of 2 cycles of 3
doses; PET scan became
negative after last brentuximab vedotin dose.
Progressive neurological
deterioration; died 8 wk
after PML diagnosis

After brentuximab vedotin

No. of doses of brentuximab
vedotin and clinical response

ABVD

Hodgkin Lymphoma

<1 y prior to brentuximab vedotin

Between 1 and 2 y prior to PML

TABLE 1. Continued

Original Article

Cancer

August 15, 2014

Brentuximab-Associated PML/Carson et al

reflecting reactivation of PML-IRIS. At the time of reinitiation of prednisone, this brain lesion regressed and the
patient had no further lesion formation and achieved partial neurologic recovery after several months of follow-up
while continuing to receive prednisone therapy.
DISCUSSION
To the best of our knowledge, the current study is the first
comprehensive case series reporting 5 cases of PML
among patients treated with BV, 4 of whom died within
weeks of the PML diagnosis. In interpreting these findings, several factors should be considered.
First, there are important differences in the clinical
features noted in patients who developed PML after BV
treatment when compared with PML that developed after
exposure to the monoclonal antibodies rituximab, efalizumab, and natalizumab.6 Time to the onset of symptoms
and duration of therapy before PML was much shorter in
the patients treated with BV. Three of the patients with
PML were symptomatic after only 2 or 3 doses of BV
(administered every 3 weeks) and the fourth was symptomatic after the fifth dose. In contrast, PML was diagnosed
at a median of 63 weeks after initial exposure to rituximab. For natalizumab, PML symptom onset occurred after a median of 26 months of treatment.21 For
efalizumab, all 3 confirmed cases developed  3 years after treatment initiation.22 It is also important to note that
the case fatality rate was low for natalizumab at 22% when
compared with 80% for BV, 90% for rituximab, and
100% for efalizumab.7,13,22
Second, in the HIV-negative population, lymphoid
malignancies, hematopoietic transplantation, and multiagent chemotherapy are all risk factors associated with the
development of PML. Thus, they are potential confounders in the assessment of the association between PML and
BV. Three patients in the current series had a history of
recurrent classic Hodgkin lymphoma and had received
multiple lines of combination chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation. PML onset was 3 years and
5 years after transplantation, respectively, in 2 of these
patients, whereas PML occurred 6 months after autologous stem cell transplantation in the third patient. Previous case series have suggested that most hematopoietic
transplantation-associated PML cases among individuals
with lymphoid malignancies occur within 24 months of
the transplant procedure.5 The remote nature of the transplant procedures in 2 of the 3 patients with classic Hodgkin lymphoma in the current study argue against this as a
major contributing risk factor. Similarly, 2 of the 5
patients in the current series had cutaneous lymphomas
Cancer

August 15, 2014

and had not previously received multiagent chemotherapeutic regimens.
Third, consideration of possible mechanisms of
PML causation by BV is warranted. Depletion of CD30expressing activated T cells could reduce JCV immune
surveillance in the CNS, resulting in PML. Related to
this, CD30 has been proposed as a therapeutic target on
alloreactive activated T cells, causing acute graft-versushost disease.23 Just as depletion of CD30-positive T cells
might be beneficial in patients with graft-versus-host disease, it may also reduce immune surveillance in patients
predisposed to JCV reactivation and PML.
Fourth, to the best of our knowledge, there is an
incomplete understanding of what factors may influence
the development of and outcomes associated with PMLIRIS among the small number of individuals who develop
this syndrome after receiving immune-modulating monoclonal antibody therapies. Among 52 previously reported
patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma with PML who
received rituximab, PML-IRIS was not noted.13 This suggests that patients with lymphoma, perhaps due to
immune suppression related to previous treatments or the
malignancy itself, may be less able to develop the immune
response necessary for PML-IRIS. In contrast, all of the
40 recently reported patients with multiple sclerosis with
natalizumab-associated PML developed PML-IRIS (a
syndrome that is commonly noted among HIV-infected
individuals with PML) after withdrawal of natalizumab
and after undergoing plasmapheresis.7 The development
of PML-IRIS shortly after the last dose of BV in the sole
survivor of BV-associated PML to the best of our knowledge represents the first case of PML-IRIS in a person
with lymphoma who developed PML after therapy with
rituximab or BV.6,13 As highlighted in a recent report of
PML in association with compounded dimethyl fumarate, the development of PML-IRIS after drug discontinuation supports a causal relationship.24 A prolonged course
of corticosteroids may also be required to facilitate neurologic recovery in patients with PML-IRIS, as observed in
the survivor in the current case series and suggested in previous literature.9
Fifth, the results of the current study have clinical
implications. The findings reinforce the importance of
maintaining a high index of suspicion for PML when evaluating patients treated with BV who present with speech
disturbances, neurocognitive changes, and=or other persistent neurological symptoms. The presence of multifocal
white matter lesions on brain MRI scans performed
among patients with classic Hodgkin lymphoma should
further raise suspicion for PML, given the extreme rarity
2469

Original Article

of multifocal CNS spread of classic Hodgkin lymphoma.25 Health care providers should also be aware that
even when JCV DNA is not detected during CSF sampling, PML remains a possibility due to the low sensitivity
of tests used to detect JCV DNA in the CSF.26 JCV DNA
was not detected in CSF specimens obtained from 2
patients, although it was later identified on CNS biopsy
specimens from these same patients. JCV DNA was
detected in only 1 of 2 CSF samples obtained from a third
patient. Thus, in the setting of a high index of suspicion,
brain biopsy may be required to confirm or exclude a diagnosis of PML. More sensitive polymerase chain reaction
assays currently are being developed to help overcome
these challenges.27
There are some limitations to the current study.
Detailed clinical histories and medical records were available for the PML episode for 4 patients and an FDA safety
report was available for the fifth patient. These data sources did not include information regarding prior infectious
complications or leukopenia episodes that may have
occurred with prior treatments. In addition, data concerning the total number of individuals who have received BV
were not available, thereby limiting our ability to estimate
the incidence of BV-associated PML.
The findings of the current study have policy implications. One consideration would be to develop a BVrelated FDA-approved Risk Evaluation and Mitigation
Strategy (REMS) program modeled after that established
for natalizumab (Tysabri Outreach: Unified Commitment to Health [TOUCH]). A REMS program is
grounded in the concept of risk=benefit tradeoffs, primarily for beneficial drugs associated with important risks in
which the REMS ensures that patients and providers
understand the risks and benefits before initiating treatment with the pharmaceutical agent.
We conclude that PML is a possible adverse drug
reaction that may occur shortly after initiating BV treatment and after a few doses of BV have been administered.
For patients with recurrent classic Hodgkin lymphoma,
systemic anaplastic large cell lymphoma, or transformed
cutaneous lymphoma, the high response rates from BV
among those with these diagnoses who otherwise have few
treatment options support favorable risk-benefit profiles in
these settings.28,29 In contrast, the decision to administer
BV to patients with indolent cutaneous CD30-positive
lymphomas, such as cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma and lymphomatoid papulosis, should be made with
careful consideration of alternative options that, such as
BV, have high response rates and produce cosmetic benefits, but may have more favorable risk profiles.
2470

FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported in part by the National Cancer Institute
(1R01CA165609-01A1), the American Cancer Society (IRG-13043-01, MSRG-13-077-01-CPHPS and MRSG 3071-81082), the
South Carolina SmartState Program, and the Doris Levkoff Meddin Medication Safety Education Program.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Carson has acted as a consultant, received research funding, and
participated on an advisory board for Millennium Pharmaceuticals.
Dr. Newsome has acted as a member of the scientific advisory
boards for Biogen Idec and Genzyme. Dr. Craig H. Moskowitz has
acted as a member of the Scientific Advisory Board and received
research support from Seattle Genetics. Dr. Alison J. Moskowitz
has received research funding from Seattle Genetics. Dr. Bookstaver
has acted as a member of the advisory boards of Gilead Pharmaceuticals and Durata Pharmaceuticals.

REFERENCES
1. Cinque P, Casari S, Bertelli D. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, HIV, and highly active antiretroviral therapy. N Engl J Med.
1998;339:848-849.
2. Sacktor N. The epidemiology of human immunodeficiency virusassociated neurological disease in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Neurovirol. 2002;8(suppl 2):115-121.
3. Brooks BR, Walker DL. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Neurol Clin. 1984;2:299-313.
4. Garcia-Suarez J, de Miguel D, Krsnik I, Banas H, Arribas I,
Burgaleta C. Changes in the natural history of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy in HIV-negative lymphoproliferative disorders:
impact of novel therapies. Am J Hematol. 2005;80:271-281.
5. Shitrit D, Lev N, Bar-Gil-Shitrit A, Kramer MR. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in transplant recipients. Transpl Int.
2005;17:658-665.
6. Carson KR, Focosi D, Major EO, et al. Monoclonal antibodyassociated progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy in patients
treated with rituximab, natalizumab, and efalizumab: a review from
the Research on Adverse Drug Events and Reports (RADAR) Project. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:816-824.
7. Tan IL, McArthur JC, Clifford DB, Major EO, Nath A. Immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome in natalizumab-associated
PML. Neurology. 2011;77:1061-1067.
8. Harrison DM, Newsome SD, Skolasky RL, McArthur JC, Nath A.
Immune reconstitution is not a prognostic factor in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. J Neuroimmunol. 2011;238:81-86.
9. Major EO. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in patients
on immunomodulatory therapies. Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:35-47.
10. Ransohoff RM. Natalizumab for multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:2622-2629.
11. Fox RJ, Rudick RA. Risk stratification and patient counseling for
natalizumab in multiple sclerosis. Neurology. 2012;78:436-437.
12. US Food and Drug Administration. FDA Public Health Advisory
Updated Safety Information about Raptiva (efalizumab). fda.gov/
Drugs/DrugSafety/PostmarketDrugSafetyInformationforPatientsandProviders/DrugSafetyInformationforHeathcareProfessionals/PublicHealthAdvisories/ucm110605.htm. Access date.
13. Carson KR, Evens AM, Richey EA, et al. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy after rituximab therapy in HIV-negative patients:
a report of 57 cases from the Research on Adverse Drug Events and
Reports project. Blood. 2009;113:4834-4840.
14. National Cancer Institute. FDA Approval for Brentuximab Vedotin.
cancer.gov/cancertopics/druginfo/fda-brentuximabvedotin. Accessed
on March 17, 2013.
15. Adcetris (Brentuximab Vedotin) Package Insert. accessdata.fda.gov/
drugsatfda_docs/label/2011/125388s000,125399s000lbl.pdf. Accessed
on May 14, 2013.

Cancer

August 15, 2014

Brentuximab-Associated PML/Carson et al

16. Adcetris (Brentuximab Vedotin) Package Insert. accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/125388s0005lbl.pdf. Accessed on May 14, 2013.
17. Bennett CL, Nebeker JR, Yarnold PR, et al. Evaluation of serious
adverse drug reactions: a proactive pharmacovigilance program (RADAR) vs safety activities conducted by the Food and Drug Administration and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Arch Intern Med. 2007;
167:1041-1049.
18. Jalan P, Mahajan A, Pandav V, Bekker S, Koirala J. Brentuximab
associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Clin Neurol
Neurosurg. 2012;114:1335-1337.
19. Wagner-Johnston ND, Bartlett NL, Cashen A, Berger JR. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in a patient with Hodgkin lymphoma treated with brentuximab vedotin. Leuk Lymphoma. 2012;53:
2283-2286.
20. von Geldern G, Pardo CA, Calabresi PA, Newsome SD. PML-IRIS
in a patient treated with brentuximab. Neurology. 2012;79:2075-2077.
21. Bloomgren G, Richman S, Hotermans C, et al. Risk of natalizumabassociated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. N Engl J
Med. 2012;366:1870-1880.
22. Molloy ES, Calabrese LH. Therapy: targeted but not trouble-free:
efalizumab and PML. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2009;5:418-419.
23. Zeiser R, Nguyen VH, Hou JZ, et al. Early CD30 signaling is critical for adoptively transferred CD41CD251 regulatory T cells in

Cancer

August 15, 2014

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.
29.

prevention of acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood. 2007;109:22252233.
van Oosten BW, Killestein J, Barkhof F, Polman CH, Wattjes MP.
PML in a patient treated with dimethyl fumarate from a compounding pharmacy. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1658-1659.
Gerstner ER, Abrey LE, Schiff D, et al. CNS Hodgkin lymphoma.
Blood. 2008;112:1658-1661.
Marzocchetti A, Di Giambenedetto S, Cingolani A, Ammassari A,
Cauda R, De Luca A. Reduced rate of diagnostic positive detection
of JC virus DNA in cerebrospinal fluid in cases of suspected progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in the era of potent antiretroviral therapy. J Clin Microbiol. 2005;43:4175-4177.
Ryschkewitsch CF, Jensen PN, Major EO. Multiplex qPCR assay
for ultra sensitive detection of JCV DNA with simultaneous identification of genotypes that discriminates non-virulent from virulent
variants. J Clin Virol. 2013;57:243-248.
Younes A, Gopal AK, Smith SE, et al. Results of a pivotal phase II
study of brentuximab vedotin for patients with relapsed or refractory
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2183-2189.
Pro B, Advani R, Brice P, et al. Brentuximab vedotin (SGN-35) in
patients with relapsed or refractory systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma: results of a phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:21902196.

2471

