Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Cancer
Research

Review

Intratumor Heterogeneity: Evolution through Space and Time
Charles Swanton

Abstract
Recent technologic advances have permitted higher resolution and more rapid analysis of individual
cancer genomes at the single-nucleotide level. Such advances have shown bewildering intertumor heterogeneity with limited somatic alterations shared between tumors of the same histopathologic subtype.
Exacerbating such complexity, increasing evidence of intratumor genetic heterogeneity (ITH) is emerging,
both within individual tumor biopsies and spatially separated between biopsies of the same tumor.
Sequential analysis of tumors has also revealed evidence that ITH temporally evolves during the disease
course. ITH has implications for predictive or prognostic biomarker strategies, where the tumor subclone
that may ultimately inﬂuence therapeutic outcome may evade detection because of its absence or presence at
low frequency at diagnosis or because of its regional separation from the tumor biopsy site. In this review, the
implications of "trunk and branch" tumor evolution for drug discovery approaches and emerging evidence
that low-frequency somatic events may drive tumor growth through paracrine signaling fostering a tumor
ecologic niche are discussed. The concept of an "actionable mutation" is considered within a model of clonal
dominance and heterogeneous tumor cell dependencies. Evidence that cancer therapeutics may augment
ITH and the need to track the tumor subclonal architecture through treatment are deﬁned as key research
areas. Finally, if combination therapeutic approaches to limit the consequences of ITH prove challenging,
identiﬁcation of drivers or suppressors of ITH may provide attractive therapeutic targets to limit tumor
evolutionary rates and adaptation. Cancer Res; 72(19); 4875–82. 2012 AACR.

Intratumor Heterogeneity: A New Vision for an
Old Problem
Tumor morphologic heterogeneity has long been recognized by pathologists and forms the basis of many tumor
grading prognostic classiﬁcation systems. For example, one
component of the breast cancer Scarff–Bloom–Richardson
grading system comprises an assessment of nuclear pleomorphism, a characteristic associated with tumor aneuploidy (1). Indeed the term anaplasia, ﬁrst coined by David Von
Hansemann in 1890, refers to nuclear and mitotic atypia and
reﬂects observations of tumor morphologic heterogeneity.
Tumor morphologic heterogeneity is often regionally distinct with diversity in tumor cell proliferation, immune
inﬁltration, differentiation status, and necrosis that differ
between microscopy ﬁelds.
As a result of these common pathologic observations,
intratumor genetic heterogeneity (ITH) is considered in
tumor immunohistochemical quantitative analyses that
often take into account both the intensity of cellular staining

Author's Afﬁliations: Cancer Research UK London Research Institute,
Translational Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory; and UCL Cancer Institute,
London, United Kingdom
Corresponding Author: Charles Swanton, Cancer Research UK, London
Research Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, United
Kingdom. Phone: 44-207-269-3463; Fax: 44-20-7269-3094; E-mail:
Charles.swanton@cancer.org.uk
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

as well as the percentage of tumor cells scoring positive for
the immunohistochemical marker. Despite common histopathologic observations of ITH in the clinical setting, our
knowledge of the extent of ITH at the genetic or epigenetic
level, as well as its underlying causes, has remained relatively
rudimentary. Conceptually, the prevalence of ITH and its
underlying causes have not been advanced by the routine
use of cancer genomics platforms because of the inability of
expression microarray or DNA copy number platforms to
resolve differences in mRNA expression or DNA copy number between cells of the same tumor.
The advent of tumor deep-sequencing technologies, discussed in this review, has begun to resolve the extent of ITH
at the single-nucleotide level. Deep-sequencing technologies
are beginning to shed light on the consequences of such
heterogeneity for drug discovery and biomarker validation
approaches.

An Evolutionary Perspective on Cancer
Heterogeneity
The impact of heterogeneity on tumor growth control
from an evolutionary perspective has been considered in
detail (reviewed in ref. 2). In 1976, Peter Nowell proposed the
clonal evolution model of cancer and applied evolutionary
models to understand tumor growth and treatment failure
and the phenomenon of increased tumor aggressiveness that
occurs during the natural history of advanced solid tumors
(3). Nowell noted a decade later in a reﬂection on his work
"Tumors arise from a single 'mutated' cell and that biological

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

4875

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Swanton

and clinical progression results from subsequent additional
alterations, giving rise to more aggressive subpopulations
within the original neoplastic clone." He also noted that
genetic instability, occurring in tumor cells during disease
progression, might enhance this process.
Indeed, subsequent work in the early 1980s from Harris and
colleagues, investigating the generation of metastatic subclones from a mouse sarcoma cell line, concluded that the
generation of such metastatic clones arose at a higher rate than
the generation of stable mutations conferring drug resistance
(10–1,000-fold higher rate) and that acquisition of metastatic
potential by subclones was in some cases reversible (4), coining
the term "dynamic heterogeneity." The parallels with Nowell's
concepts of genetic instability and disease progression are
intriguing; Harris and colleagues concluded that metastatic
variants generated from heterogeneous cell populations might
arise through unknown epigenetic mechanisms or other
mechanisms generating diversity at a higher rate. Subsequently, the same group found that a highly metastatic melanoma
cell line, B16F10, acquired resistance to methotrexate at a
higher rate than the B16F1 line with low metastatic potential
suggesting a common mechanism responsible for metastatic
outgrowth and drug resistance, 2 common phenomena that
cooccur in epithelial malignancies (5). The authors concluded
that these phenotypes may be uniﬁed through one mechanism,
mediated by the generation of heterogeneous structural chromosomal gene ampliﬁcation events from cell to cell that are
selected for during drug exposure or metastatic outgrowth.
Developments in the ﬁelds of mathematics and evolutionary
biology are beginning to shed light on the impact of tumor
diversity on evolutionary selection, raising important questions as to how advanced tumors might be more optimally
controlled. Gatenby's parallels of tumor metastatic growth
with population growth control are prescient: "Two centuries
of experience have shown that the vast majority of introduced
species are simply too heterogeneous, too dispersed and too
adaptive to be eliminated." He proposes that an "adaptive
therapy" approach, in which drug-sensitive clones are controlled, but not eliminated, to out-compete drug-resistant but
less ﬁt subclones, may prove more tractable in the near term to
limit progression of advanced metastatic solid tumors (6, 7).

Intratumor Heterogeneity in Space and Time
In contrast to linear models of tumor evolution with sequentially ordered somatic mutations in driver genes resulting in
clonal sweeps of homogeneous tumor cell expansion, more
recent evidence suggests that branched evolutionary tumor
growth may contribute to ITH both within a primary tumor
and between primary and metastatic tumor sites (Fig. 1).
Shah and colleagues investigated a case of advanced invasive
lobular carcinoma of the breast and through whole-genome
sequencing showed the existence of 19 nonsynonymous mutations present in the metastasis that were not present in the
primary tumor diagnosed 9 years before, illustrating the spatial
and temporal dynamics of ITH (8). Through elegant FISHbased analyses of acute lymphoblastic leukemia single cells,
Anderson and colleagues deﬁned branched evolutionary
growth and convergent evolution of recurrent copy number

4876

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

events occurring in different subclones of the same patient (9).
In an extensive analysis of ITH in pancreatic cancer, Yachida
and colleagues showed that clonal tumor populations present
in the primary, but genetically distinct from the nonmetastatic
clones, give rise to metastatic disease in a branched evolutionary pattern, with "progressor mutations" common to metastatic sites and within regionally separated subclones of the
primary lesion (10). Campbell and colleagues showed that
genome instability occurs early in pancreatic cancer and
contributes to ongoing tumor evolution at metastatic sites,
distinct from the primary, that may in turn seed tertiary
metastases with evidence of convergent evolutionary paths
and organ-speciﬁc relationships between metastases (11).
Navin and colleagues have provided elegant insight into the
depth and challenges of ITH in breast cancer within single
tumor biopsies. Using a technique to separate tumor cells
based on their DNA content, termed sector ploidy proﬁling,
followed by DNA copy number analysis by comparative genomic hybridization or single-cell sequencing, they showed that a
single breast cancer biopsy may contain multiple intermixed
karyotypic tumor populations that differ by major structural
chromosomal gene ampliﬁcations. Such diversity may occur
within 1 tumor biopsy or may be regionally separated, related
through branched evolutionary growth (12, 13).
Our group analyzed multiple regions of 2 primary clear-cell
renal carcinomas and associated metastatic sites (14).
Sixty-three percent to 69% of all nonsynonymous somatic
mutations identiﬁed across multiple biopsies of 2 primary
tumors and their associated metastatic sites were not detectable in a single biopsy, suggesting that a single biopsy may
underestimate the somatic mutational landscape of a tumor.
We found evidence for ITH that was present at genetic,
transcriptomic, and functional levels with spatial separation
of tumor subclones. Furthermore, between 25% and 50% of
nonsynonymous variants identiﬁed in 19 single biopsies across
2 tumors were private mutations and evaded detection elsewhere in the tumor despite sequencing to more than 250-fold
coverage. Branched evolutionary growth was detected in this
analysis with evidence of convergent evolution, with multiple
recurrent, yet distinct, inactivating mutations occurring in the
same tumor suppressor genes including SETD2, PTEN, and
KDM5C in different branches (and regions) of the tumor
phylogenetic tree. Therefore, evidence now suggests that
despite considerable ITH, it appears there are recurrent targets
that are subject to loss of function mutations and convergent
evolution, suggesting deterministic tumor dependencies that
may be exploitable (9, 14).
Substantiating conclusions of branched tumor growth,
Nik-Zainal and colleagues (15, 16) have provided an in-depth
whole-genome sequencing analysis of 21 breast cancers. The
authors conﬁrm subclonal variation and show that the majority of tumor somatic mutations occur following tumor diversiﬁcation and branching. Strikingly, all tumors harbored a
dominant clone (>50% of cancer cells) that differed by thousands of mutations from other subclones. For example, 1
tumor harbored a dominant clone with 15,600 mutations
distinct from subclones within other branches of the phylogenetic tree. By inference, the authors conclude that the

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Clinical Perspectives on Intratumor Heterogeneity

1

Tracking heterogeneity and bottlenecks:

Development of noninvasive techniques to monitor
and track the subclonal dynamics of tumor architecture
through treatment may enhance understanding of
resistance mechanisms as branches are “pruned” at
the expense of outgrowth of other branches harboring
heterogeneous resistance mutations (e.g., T790M
gatekeeper mutation; ref. 33).

2

Tumor sampling bias: Biopsies in 1 region
of a heterogeneous primary or metastatic tumor will
identify trunk events but may also identify as many or 
more heterogeneous events not shared by all regions
of the tumor or by all tumor subclones. Comparison
of paired primary/metastatic samples may enhance the
identification of trunk events for therapeutic targeting.
Regional genetic ITH may have an impact on ex vivo
assays of cell phenotypic function.

3

Drivers of heterogeneity: Identification of the
driver events for genomic instability that may occur at
the nexus of the trunk and branch may provide new
approaches to limit tumor diversity and adaptation.

4

Actionable mutations: Early drivers of disease
biology lead to ubiquitous somatic events present in
every tumor subclone and tumor region. Such
ubiquitous tumor mutations may present more robust
therapeutic targets and optimal synthetic lethal targets.

1

1

1

1
1
2
2

2
3

4

Develop methods to quantify ITH in tumors:

Impact of therapy on intratumor heterogeneity:

Emerging evidence in breast and renal cancer suggests
that heterogeneous branched mutations may
outnumber common trunk mutations.

Longitudinal analyses of cytotoxic therapy on ITH will address
whether therapy exacerbates branched evolution. Can thresholds
of ITH be exploited to improve outcomes?

Figure 1. Trunk and branch model representing intratumor heterogeneity. Common or ubiquitous events in the tumor found in every subclone and every tumor
region are represented in the trunk of the tree. Diverse, heterogeneous somatic events are represented by the branches and the leaves. Tumor somatic events
occurring in the trunk or branches may be driver or passenger events that may be dynamic during tumor evolution and adaptation to therapy. The ﬁgure
illustrates key research areas and the need to identify how cancer therapeutics might inﬂuence intratumor heterogeneity. Adapted from Yap et al. (21).

proliferation and eventual outgrowth of the subclone, precipitating mammographic detection, must have been a ratelimiting event because of the vast number of mutations present
in that subclone that differ from the common somatic events
present in all tumor cells.
Intratumor heterogeneity and evolutionary
bottlenecking
Through the analysis of structural variations and allelic
frequencies in a primary basal breast cancer, a xenograft,
and a brain metastasis from the same patient, Ding and
colleagues showed that the metastasis may derive from a
low-frequency subclone within the primary (17). The team
noted a wide range of allelic variant frequencies in the
primary tumor, indicative of substantial ITH, with less
divergent mutational frequencies at the metastatic site,

www.aacrjournals.org

suggesting a process analogous to evolutionary bottlenecking through subclonal selection during the metastatic process (18). Substantiating the capacity for such heterogeneity
to foster metastatic growth, medulloblastoma metastases
from the same patient are relatively homogeneous and
derive from a low-frequency subclone of the primary tumor
(19).
Through our multiregion sequencing analysis of clear-cell
renal-cell carcinomas (ccRCC), metastases could be traced
back to a distinct region of the primary tumor (14). Consistent
with observations from Ding and colleagues, there appeared to
be a relative restriction of diversity at metastatic sites (17).
Sector ploidy and allelic imbalance analysis of the tumor and
metastatic sites suggested that the primary region that
spawned the metastasis had become tetraploid with the metastatic sites harboring a chromosomally unstable pattern by

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

4877

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Swanton

A

Diploid

Tetraploid

B

CIN

R2

R4

Cancer cell population

Tetraploid

M2b

R9

DI=1.43

Bottleneck
Genetic heterogeneity

DI=1.81
Time

C

D
R1 R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
R7
R8

R4
M2b
M2a
M1

R9

1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15 17 19 21

Chest wall metastasis Perinephric metastasis
M2a,b

MI

Figure 2. Evolutionary bottlenecking and restriction of diversity between primary and metastases. A, transient restriction of diversity through an evolutionary
bottlenecking process, for example, during clonal selection through therapy or during metastatic progression may lead to the requirement for
alternative mechanisms to generate ITH. One such mechanism can be generated through structural and whole CIN. Tetraploidy is thought to be a precursor of
CIN. B and C, multiregion analysis of a primary renal-cell carcinoma and its metastatic sites revealed that the metastatic lesions were most similar to region 4
of the primary. Ploidy analysis revealed that the primary regions were all diploid with the exception of region 4, which was tetraploid. Metastatic
sites were subtetraploid. D, allelic imbalance analysis revealed substantial heterogeneity in chromosome structure between 2 biopsies of the same metastatic
site (M2a and M2b). Taken together with ploidy analysis, these data indicate the possible emergence of CIN at metastatic sites. Longitudinal studies will reveal
to what extent metastatic sites represent outgrowth of multiple heterogeneous subclones from the primary tumor and genetic events that may be permissive
for metastatic outgrowth during the bottlenecking process. Adapted from Gerlinger et al. (14, 18).

allelic imbalance analysis with structural chromosomal complexities that differed between regions of the same metastatic
site (Fig. 2). Conceivably, following subclonal selection and the
restriction of diversity and bottlenecking, generation of tumor
chromosomal instability (CIN) provides a route to rapidly
initiate a further expansion in tumor heterogeneity. It is
tempting to speculate that this may explain observations of
increased CIN at metastatic sites to compensate for the
transient restriction of diversity during the selection of a
minority tumor subclone (20). The parallels with the work of
Harris and colleagues on dynamic heterogeneity are notable as
genomic instability driven by heterogeneous structural and
numerical chromosomal changes, promoting extensive alterations in gene dosage, may be one such way of creating nonmutational routes to tumor metastases (4, 5). Conceivably,
such mechanisms may also be reversible, as postulated in the

4878

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

dynamic heterogeneity model, as distinct alterations in gene
dosage permissive for metastatic outgrowth may be lost in
subsequent cell divisions because of spontaneous chromosome reassortments.

The Trunk–Branch Model of Tumor Growth:
Delineating Heterogeneous from Ubiquitous
Events
Modeling tumor diversity within a tree structure of tumor
growth provides a conceptual framework to consider
the capacity of tumors to evade cancer therapeutics and the
limitations to current biomarker validation strategies (Fig. 1).
Early somatic events that drive tumor growth or maintenance,
present in early clonal progenitors, are represented within the
"trunk" of the tumor (21). For example, somatic events in VHL

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Clinical Perspectives on Intratumor Heterogeneity

(ccRCC) or p53 (triple-negative breast cancer) are often clonally dominant, mapping to the trunk of the tumor evolutionary
tree (14, 22). Such trunk somatic aberrations, present at the
early stages of tumor development, are likely to be ubiquitous
events occurring at all sites of disease. In contrast, later
somatic events that occur following branched separation of
subclones represent heterogeneous events. Such subclonal
heterogeneity may occur within a single biopsy or may be
spatially separated between regions of the same tumor or its
metastatic sites (14, 21). Intriguingly, evidence is emerging that
indicates commonly accepted early drivers of disease biology
such as VHL loss (23) and p53, PTEN, or PIK3CA somatic
mutations in triple-negative breast cancer (22) may not always
be clonally dominant in the tumor population or present in all
the tumor cells (p53, PTEN, and PIK3CA in TNBC) or primary
and metastatic regions sampled (VHL in renal cancer).

Clinical Implications of Intratumor Heterogeneity
Tumor sampling bias
Tumor sampling bias may arise because of differences in
somatic events within the primary tumor, between the primary
and metastatic sites, between metastatic sites, or even within
single biopsies (Fig. 1). Heterogeneity is also dynamic and
evolves over time, as has been observed in elegant FISH studies
in cytogenetically high-risk multiple myeloma (24). Dynamic
changes in the subclonal architecture of the tumor, where
tumor subclones may change and compete with each other
for dominance during the disease course and through treatment, create challenges for predictive or prognostic biomarker
efforts in which the tumor subclone that deﬁnes clinical
outcome (e.g., secondary plasma cell leukemia) may not be
readily detectable at diagnosis (24).
Therapeutic decision making in oncologic practice is often
made with reference to the primary tumor lesion, diagnosed
months or years previously, or in cases in which patients
present with advanced disease, from one metastatic site. Such
approaches are likely to be therapeutically tractable if these
tumor somatic events occur in the tumor trunk and are present
ubiquitously throughout all tumor subclones and continue to
maintain tumor growth and survival at all sites of disease.
However, the changing dynamics of tumor subclonal architecture over space and time may result in previously subdominant clones, perhaps either not present or barely detectable in
the primary, gaining preeminence. Conceivably, differences in
tumor environmental selection pressures at metastatic sites
may result in regional variation of tumor subclone evolution as
distinct environments select for certain subclones over others,
further contributing to ITH (11). Therefore, alterations in the
subclonal architecture of the tumor may result in changes in
tumor molecular proﬁle that may differ between sites of
metastatic disease, distinct from the proﬁle of the primary
tumor.
Qualiﬁcation of clinical biomarkers has been a notoriously
difﬁcult process with only 100 of the estimated 150,000
biomarkers qualiﬁed and implemented into clinical practice
(25). Biomarker discovery approaches combining laboratory
analyses of gene function with genetic or transcriptomic
analyses of tumor tissue often rely on single tumor biopsies

www.aacrjournals.org

of the primary or metastatic lesions to prioritize the
identiﬁcation of candidate biomarkers for validation (26).
Conceivably, a highly variable genetic and transcriptomic
landscape across a primary and metastatic tumor might lead
to tumor sampling bias confounding the validation of biomarkers because of spurious associations of heterogeneous
tumor genetic events with clinical outcome in the discovery
phase of these studies.
Capacity for therapy to augment intratumor
heterogeneity
In contrast to mutator phenotypes and microenvironmental factors such as tissue hypoxia and acidosis that may
enhance ITH (27), the capacity for cytotoxic therapies to
augment ITH remains relatively underexplored. In the study
by Keats and colleagues, the enhanced complexity of the
relapsed subclone suggested that treatment with DNA damaging agents through myeloma therapy may potentially
exacerbate genomic complexity (24). The potential for therapy to augment genome instability and ITH has been
observed in relapsed methyl-guanine-DNA methyltransferase-deﬁcient glioblastoma multiforme following alkylator
therapy that provides a selection pressure to lose DNA
mismatch repair function (28). Similarly, cytotoxic therapy
was thought to be responsible for the increase in transversions witnessed in relapsed acute myeloid leukemia following exposure to DNA damaging agents (29). Given the
association of ITH with poorer clinical outcome (30), such
observations suggest the controversial concept that therapeutics may in some cases contribute to enhanced tumor
diversity and adaptation.
Therefore, cancer cytotoxics may contribute to an enhanced
tumor evolutionary rate through fostering genetic diversity
and, as proposed by Gillies and colleagues, by initiating an
adverse tumor microenvironment that enables small phenotypic changes to result in large variations in ﬁtness (27).
Deﬁning actionable mutations within a model of clonal
dominance
Tumor deep-sequencing analyses have led to attempts to
stratify therapeutics based on the occurrence of "actionable
mutations" where a clinician matches a tumor mutation to a
cancer drug. Somatic mutational heterogeneity, where distinct
mutations may be present in some biopsies but not detectable
in others, suggests a more cautionary approach to the
clinical implementation of deep sequencing in circumstances
where previously undescribed "actionable mutations" might be
considered as suitable for clinical trial stratiﬁcation. Given
observations of the spatial separation of somatic mutations, it
is conceivable that some actionable mutations, particularly
ones with limited prior evidence of relevance in a disease
subtype, may not be present within all tumor cells (present at
submodal frequencies) or may be regionally separated, and
thus represent relatively poor therapeutic targets (Fig. 1).
Similarly, synthetic lethal approaches to drug discovery are
likely to have optimal efﬁcacy if the genetic dependency of the
drug discovery approach occurs early in tumor evolution,
present in all tumor subclones, as witnessed by the potent

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

4879

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Swanton

efﬁcacy of PARP inhibition in tumors of BRCA germline
carriers (31).
Perhaps, within the context of early-phase clinical trial
development, consideration could be given to the clonal dominance of such "actionable mutations," as sampling multiple
sites of disease, to establish the ubiquitous nature of such
mutations, is not only traumatic for the patient but also
impractical clinically. For example, recent evidence, in glioblastoma and triple-negative breast cancer, indicates that
commonly accepted "actionable mutations" in signal transduction pathway regulators such as PTEN or PIK3CA may
represent somatic events occurring in the branches of the
tumor rather than clonally dominant ubiquitous, trunk mutations (22, 32).
Such considerations should not imply that genetic
approaches to treatment stratiﬁcation from single biopsies
are futile. Many of the established biomarkers in oncology
derive from, and have been clinically qualiﬁed in, single tumor
biopsies. Examples include HER2 ampliﬁcation or overexpression to guide trastuzumab therapy in breast cancer,
BRAFV600E mutation to guide BRAF inhibitor treatment in
melanoma, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
activating mutations to guide geﬁtinib or erlotinib treatment
in adenocarcinoma of the lung.
It is likely that many established drivers of disease biology
occur early in tumor development and represent ubiquitous
events in the "trunk" of the tumor, present at all sites of disease,
less subject to tumor sampling bias (21). In the case of renal
cancer, such trunk events would be represented by VHL or
PBRM1 somatic mutations (14). However, low-frequency
somatic events present in some subclones but not others
(analogous to the branches of the tumor tree), generating ITH,
are likely to contribute to the acquisition of drug resistance
driven by Darwinian selection through treatment. Low-frequency gatekeeper mutations in the EGFR tyrosine kinase are
associated with inferior progression-free survival on EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy (33). Similarly, non–small
cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) exposure to EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors can result in the selection of resistant subclones
harboring low-frequency mesenchymal epithelial transition
factor ampliﬁcation, present in the tumor before treatment
(34).
Such examples suggest that biomarker efforts may have
to adapt to the challenge of detecting heterogeneous somatic events present in the tumor at low frequency to predict
therapeutic outcome or deﬁne combination approaches to
limit the acquisition of drug resistance as well as understand the complex phenotypic interplay between heterogeneous cancer subclones. ITH supports a more cautious
approach when deﬁning the presence of an actionable
mutation for clinical trial stratiﬁcation to encompass a
deﬁnition that incorporates clonal or interregional tumor
dominance.
Cancer as a complex ecologic system dependent on
population level heterogeneity
The clonal dominance model to deﬁne an actionable event
does not necessarily preclude the possibility that tumor growth

4880

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

can be limited through the targeting of heterogeneous, lowfrequency subpopulations. Evidence suggests that minority
cancer cell populations may maintain ITH and by inference,
targeting such low-frequency cells might have an impact on the
bulk tumor population; Low-frequency glioblastoma subclones harboring mutated EGFR maintain ITH through paracrine activation of proliferation of the EGFR–wild-type cancer
cell population (35). Considering tumors as ecologic niches
with complex functional interdependencies may be necessary
to further reﬁne deﬁnitions of actionable mutations to attenuate tumor growth. Taking advantage of ITH through enforced
competition between tumor subclones forms the basis of
elegant models of tumor adaptive therapy (7).
Cancer cell phenotypic heterogeneity and drug
sensitivity
ITH is likely to have direct phenotypic consequences on
tumor behavior and the acquisition of drug resistance. For
example, low-frequency subclones, detectable in the tumor
before treatment, harboring resistance mutations in EGFR in
NSCLC (33) as well as multiple distinct secondary mutations in
c-KIT in different metastases that occur in gastrointestinal
stromal tumor following KIT/platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy (36) confer
resistance to targeted approaches.
Our group has shown that a heterogeneous mutation near
the kinase domain of mTOR promotes resistance to serum
deprivation and hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway following everolimus therapy in regions of the primary tumor that
harbor the mutation, but not in primary tumor regions with
wild-type mTOR. Similarly, extensive ITH in DNA copy number
events of "drivers" such as MET, PDGFRA, and EGFR have been
shown to occur in a mutually exclusive manner in glioblastoma
(37). Adjacent glioblastoma tumor cells display distinct copy
number abnormalities in these "targetable" or actionable
receptor tyrosine kinase ampliﬁcation events. Heterogeneous
copy number events present in the tumor branches, rather
than trunk, suggest that targeting individual branched genetic
lesions may prove relatively futile if ITH results in phenotypic
heterogeneity in drug sensitivity. Szerlip and colleagues have
conﬁrmed this by demonstrating that cell lines grown from the
same glioblastoma with heterogeneous PDGFR or EGFR ampliﬁcation states require both PDGFR and EGFR inhibition for
maximal phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway attenuation and
growth inhibition (38). Intriguingly, such heterogeneity is likely
to be maintained and selected for by the presence of doubleminute chromosomes harboring RTK ampliﬁcation. Such
double-minute chromosomes lack centromeres and are, therefore, unequally segregated during mitosis, resulting in the
propagation of ITH. Phenotypic heterogeneity in drug sensitivity proﬁles that may be spatially separated or present at low
frequency in minor subclones of the tumor suggests that
proﬁling cancer cell phenotypes from single biopsies to guide
therapeutic decision making from heterogeneous tumors may
prove challenging.
In summary, although a proportion of tumors of the same
histopathologic subtype may share common drivers, branched
events initiating heterogeneity in potential resistance

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Clinical Perspectives on Intratumor Heterogeneity

Relationships between intratumor heterogeneity and
clinical and pathologic parameters
The presence of extensive ITH within primary renal cell
carcinomas suggests a rational basis for the improvements in
survival outcome associated with palliative surgery to the
primary site in patients with oligometastatic disease, through
the removal of an evolutionary sink of primary tumor diversity
with the capacity to seed further metastases. Longitudinal
studies are primed to reveal further insight about the extent to
which metastatic sites represent outgrowth of multiple heterogeneous subclones from the primary tumor and genetic
events that may be permissive for metastatic outgrowth during
the bottlenecking process.
Despite the emerging consequences of ITH on tumor adaptation, little is known about the relationship of ITH with
standard tumor histopathologic prognostic parameters, nor
how mechanisms generating ITH vary between primary
tumors and metastatic recurrences. Developing robust methods to deﬁne ITH will be a critical step in this process (Fig. 1).
Extensive evidence supports the association of clonal diversity
with progression from preinvasive to invasive adenocarcinoma
and CIN with poorer disease outcome (30, 39, 40). Prospective
analyses of the association of ITH in the primary tumor with
risk of early metastatic relapse following adjuvant cytotoxic or
radiotherapy seem justiﬁed. Such approaches will address
whether the degree of ITH might shed light on our ability to
cure some primary tumors but not others.

shown to occur during these processes provide both a tool to
decipher potential permissive genetic events required during
this process and a therapeutic opportunity, if these steps are
governed by a restricted set of actionable mutations. Developing minimally invasive approaches to track and monitor
tumor subclonal dynamics through the disease course will be
an essential step in this process that will also allow the extent to
which cytotoxic therapies may exacerbate genomic instability
and ITH to be monitored.
Multiregion and ultradeep-sequencing analyses have the
potential to shed light on further convergent evolutionary
events that tumors must overcome to maintain or continue
growth, as evidenced by recurrent distinct SETD2 mutations
in ccRCC. Such "predictable" and deterministic tumor
dependencies may represent new therapeutic opportunities
to mitigate the risk of ITH. Drawing parallels in cancer with
examples of convergent evolution in ecology emphasizes the
continued need to consider tumor growth within evolutionary and population genetics models (41). Such convergent
evolutionary events highlight the requirement to prioritize
research on the ecologic tumor niche as the selection force
(and in some cases the driver itself of genomic instability) for
genetic adaptation, as proposed by Gatenby and colleagues
(41).
Continued distinction between trunk and branch events
may expand the repertoire of actionable mutations in the
tumor trunk, albeit in smaller and smaller patient cohorts. By
illuminating common branched events that may predispose to
therapeutic failure through subclonal outgrowth, novel combinatorial therapeutic strategies may be envisaged to shortcircuit future tumor evolutionary networks and drug resistance mechanisms. ITH may present profound regulatory and
practical clinical challenges when considering such drug combinatorial approaches, faced with a restricted number of drugs
active against deﬁned actionable mutations compared with
the bewildering potential for diversity within individual
tumors.
Finally, if such approaches prove intractable, hope may
derive from functional studies that illuminate new classes of
suppressors and initiators of tumor diversity and immunotherapeutic approaches targeting tumor neoantigenic diversity, which may ultimately lead to therapeutic opportunities to
limit tumor adaptation and Darwinian selection.

Future Directions

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

ITH provides a necessary substrate for Darwinian selection
during metastatic outgrowth and therapeutic resistance. Subclonal selection and transient bottlenecking that have been

Received June 3, 2012; revised July 13, 2012; accepted August 14, 2012;
published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012.

pathways to targeted therapeutics will likely result in the need
to consider individual tumor-speciﬁc strategies to extend
progression-free intervals. A future in which personalized
medicine moves from the current status of patient cohorts
deﬁned by single trunk tumor driver events, to the single
patient, in which both trunk and branch tumor events are
characterized in advance of treatment, and in which no 2
tumors share the same characteristics, may be envisaged. This
may have important regulatory, ethical, and health economic
implications and raises the need to incorporate an understanding of tumor heterogeneity into clinical trial design. For
these reasons, some rightly argue that focusing on the consequences of genetic diversity in terms of common tumor
phenotypes, rather than the speciﬁc genetic aberrations themselves, may prove more beneﬁcial (27).

No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

References
1.
2.
3.

Frierson HF Jr. Grade and ﬂow cytometric analysis of ploidy for
inﬁltrating ductal carcinomas. Hum Pathol 1993;24:24–9.
Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature 2012;481:
306–13.
Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science
1976;194:23–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

4.

5.

Harris JF, Chambers AF, Hill RP, Ling V. Metastatic variants are
generated spontaneously at a high rate in mouse KHT tumor. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982;79:5547–51.
Cillo C, Dick JE, Ling V, Hill RP. Generation of drug-resistant variants in
metastatic B16 mouse melanoma cell lines. Cancer Res 1987;47:
2604–8.

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

4881

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Swanton

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

4882

Gatenby RA. A change of strategy in the war on cancer. Nature
2009;459:508–9.
Gatenby RA, Silva AS, Gillies RJ, Frieden BR. Adaptive therapy. Cancer
Res 2009;69:4894–903.
Shah SP, Morin RD, Khattra J, Prentice L, Pugh T, Burleigh A, et al.
Mutational evolution in a lobular breast tumour proﬁled at single
nucleotide resolution. Nature 2009;461:809–13.
Anderson K, Lutz C, van Delft FW, Bateman CM, Guo Y, Colman SM,
et al. Genetic variegation of clonal architecture and propagating cells in
leukaemia. Nature 2011;469:356–61.
Yachida S, Jones S, Bozic I, Antal T, Leary R, Fu B, et al. Distant
metastasis occurs late during the genetic evolution of pancreatic
cancer. Nature 2010;467:1114–7.
Campbell PJ, Yachida S, Mudie LJ, Stephens PJ, Pleasance ED,
Stebbings LA, et al. The patterns and dynamics of genomic instability
in metastatic pancreatic cancer. Nature 2010;467:1109–13.
Navin N, Krasnitz A, Rodgers L, Cook K, Meth J, Kendall J, et al.
Inferring tumor progression from genomic heterogeneity. Genome Res
2010;20:68–80.
Navin N, Kendall J, Troge J, Andrews P, Rodgers L, McIndoo J, et al.
Tumour evolution inferred by single-cell sequencing. Nature 2011;
472:90–4.
Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D, Gronroos
E, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by
multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med 2012;366:883–92.
Nik-Zainal S, Alexandrov LB, Wedge DC, Van Loo P, Greenman CD,
Raine K, et al. Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast
cancers. Cell 2012;149:979–93.
Nik-Zainal S, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Alexandrov LB, Greenman CD, Lau
KW, et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell 2012;149:994–1007.
Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW, et al. Genome
remodelling in a basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft.
Nature 2010;464:999–1005.
Gerlinger M, Swanton C. How Darwinian models inform therapeutic
failure initiated by clonal heterogeneity in cancer medicine. Br J Cancer
2010;103:1139–43.
Wu X, Northcott PA, Dubuc A, Dupuy AJ, Shih DJ, Witt H, et al. Clonal
selection drives genetic divergence of metastatic medulloblastoma.
Nature 2012;482:529–33.
Carter SL, Eklund AC, Kohane IS, Harris LN, Szallasi Z. A signature of
chromosomal instability inferred from gene expression proﬁles predicts
clinical outcome in multiple human cancers. Nat Genet 2006;38:1043–8.
Yap T, Gerlinger M, Futreal A, Pustzai L, Swanton C. Intratumour
heterogeneity: seeing the wood for the trees. Sci Transl Med 2012;
4:127ps10.
Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y, et al. The clonal and
mutational evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast cancers. Nature 2012;486:395–9.
Vaziri SA, Tavares EJ, Golshayan AR, Rini BI, Aydin H, Zhou M, et al.
Differing von Hippel Lindau genotype in paired primary and metastatic
tumors in patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Front Genitourin
Oncol 2012;2:51.
Keats JJ, Chesi M, Egan JB, Garbitt VM, Palmer SE, Braggio E, et al.
Clonal competition with alternating dominance in multiple myeloma.
Blood 2012;120:1067–76.

Cancer Res; 72(19) October 1, 2012

25. Poste G. Bring on the biomarkers. Nature 2011;469:156–7.
26. Swanton C, Larkin JM, Gerlinger M, Eklund AC, Howell M, Stamp G,
et al. Predictive biomarker discovery through the parallel integration of
clinical trial and functional genomics datasets. Genome Med
2010;2:53.
27. Gillies RJ, Verduzco D, Gatenby RA. Evolutionary dynamics of carcinogenesis and why targeted therapy does not work. Nat Rev Cancer
2012;12:487–93.
28. Comprehensive genomic characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature 2008;455:1061–8.
29. Ding L, Ley TJ, Larson DE, Miller CA, Koboldt DC, Welch JS, et al.
Clonal evolution in relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia revealed by
whole-genome sequencing. Nature 2012;481:506–10.
30. McGranahan N, Burrell RA, Endesfelder D, Novelli MR, Swanton C.
Cancer chromosomal instability: therapeutic and diagnostic challenges. 'Exploring aneuploidy: the signiﬁcance of chromosomal imbalance' review series. EMBO Rep 2012;13:528–38.
31. Fong PC, Boss DS, Yap TA, Tutt A, Wu P, Mergui-Roelvink M, et al.
Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in tumors from BRCA mutation carriers. N Engl J Med 2009;361:123–34.
32. Nickel GC, Barnholtz-Sloan J, Gould MP, McMahon S, Cohen A,
Adams MD, et al. Characterizing mutational heterogeneity in a
glioblastoma patient with double recurrence. PLoS ONE 2012;7:
e35262.
33. Su KY, Chen HY, Li KC, Kuo ML, Yang JC, Chan WK, et al.
Pretreatment epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M
mutation predicts shorter EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor response
duration in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol
2012;30:433–40.
34. Turke AB, Zejnullahu K, Wu YL, Song Y, Dias-Santagata D, Lifshits E,
et al. Preexistence and clonal selection of MET ampliﬁcation in EGFR
mutant NSCLC. Cancer Cell 2010;17:77–88.
35. Inda MM, Bonavia R, Mukasa A, Narita Y, Sah DW, Vandenberg S, et al.
Tumor heterogeneity is an active process maintained by a mutant
EGFR-induced cytokine circuit in glioblastoma. Genes Dev 2010;24:
1731–45.
36. Liegl B, Kepten I, Le C, Zhu M, Demetri GD, Heinrich MC, et al.
Heterogeneity of kinase inhibitor resistance mechanisms in GIST.
J Pathol 2008;216:64–74.
37. Snuderl M, Fazlollahi L, Le LP, Nitta M, Zhelyazkova BH, Davidson CJ,
et al. Mosaic ampliﬁcation of multiple receptor tyrosine kinase genes in
glioblastoma. Cancer Cell 2011;20:810–7.
38. Szerlip NJ, Pedraza A, Chakravarty D, Azim M, McGuire J, Fang Y, et al.
Intratumoral heterogeneity of receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR and
PDGFRA ampliﬁcation in glioblastoma deﬁnes subpopulations with
distinct growth factor response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:
3041–6.
39. Maley CC, Galipeau PC, Finley JC, Wongsurawat VJ, Li X, Sanchez CA,
et al. Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to esophageal
adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet 2006;38:468–73.
40. Birkbak NJ, Eklund AC, Li Q, McClelland SE, Endesfelder D, Tan P,
et al. Paradoxical relationship between chromosomal instability
and survival outcome in cancer. Cancer Res 2011;71:3447–52.
41. Gatenby RA, Gillies RJ, Brown JS. Of cancer and cave ﬁsh. Nat Rev
Cancer 2011;11:237–8.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

Intratumor Heterogeneity: Evolution through Space and Time
Charles Swanton
Cancer Res 2012;72:4875-4882. Published OnlineFirst September 20, 2012.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2217

This article cites 40 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/19/4875.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 34 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/19/4875.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

