Original Article

Automated Pain Intervention for Underserved Minority Women
With Breast Cancer
Karen O. Anderson, PhD, MPH1; Guadalupe R. Palos, DrPH, LMSW, RN2; Tito R. Mendoza, PhD1; Charles S. Cleeland, PhD1;
Kai-Ping Liao, PhD, MHA3; Michael J. Fisch, MD, MPH4; Araceli Garcia-Gonzalez, MD, DSc1; Alyssa G. Rieber, MD4;
L. Arlene Nazario, MD4; Vicente Valero, MD5; Karin M. Hahn, MD, MPH6; Cheryl L. Person, MD7; and Richard Payne, MD8

BACKGROUND: Minority patients with breast cancer are at risk for undertreatment of cancer-related pain. The authors evaluated the
feasibility and efficacy of an automated pain intervention for improving pain and symptom management of underserved African
American and Latina women with breast cancer. METHODS: Sixty low-income African American and Latina women with breast cancer
and cancer-related pain were enrolled in a pilot study of an automated, telephone-based, interactive voice response (IVR) intervention. Women in the intervention group were called twice weekly by the IVR system and asked to rate the intensity of their pain and
other symptoms. The patients’ oncologists received e-mail alerts if the reported symptoms were moderate to severe. The patients
also reported barriers to pain management and received education regarding any reported obstacles. RESULTS: The proportion of
women in both groups reporting moderate to severe pain decreased during the study, but the decrease was significantly greater for
the intervention group. The IVR intervention also was associated with improvements in other cancer-related symptoms, including
sleep disturbance and drowsiness. Although patient adherence to the IVR call schedule was good, the oncologists who were treating
the patients rated the intervention as only somewhat useful for improving symptom management. CONCLUSIONS: The IVR intervention reduced pain and symptom severity for underserved minority women with breast cancer. Additional research on technological
C 2015 American Cancer Society.
approaches to symptom management is needed. Cancer 2015;121:1882-90. V
KEYWORDS: breast cancer, minority groups, pain, symptoms, assessment.

INTRODUCTION
Inadequate treatment of pain among minority patients with cancer has been documented in multiple studies.1,2 When minority patients are underserved because of limited financial resources, they are particularly at risk. Although most minority
populations have a lower incidence of breast cancer than non-Hispanic white populations, minority patients are more
likely to be diagnosed with advanced disease and may be at particular risk for pain and related symptoms.3 Although the
results of descriptive studies suggest that underserved minority patients might benefit from education about cancer pain,
the results of a randomized clinical trial indicated that education alone did not improve pain management.4 We concluded
that an intervention targeting multiple patient, provider, and health care system barriers is needed to optimize pain
management.
However, multicomponent interventions are difficult to implement in understaffed public hospitals. Although traditional telephone communication is not feasible for repeated assessment, combining telephones with computerized assessment may be an effective way to follow patients’ pain. Interactive voice response (IVR) and Web-based systems have been
used effectively to monitor symptoms associated with chemotherapy5-14 and stem cell transplantation.15,16 To our knowledge, however, no previous studies have evaluated an IVR system that was specifically designed for underserved minority
women with breast cancer. In the current study, we evaluated an automated, telephone-based IVR system that measures

Corresponding author: Tito R. Mendoza, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd., Unit 1450, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 745-3475; tmendoza@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.; 2Office of Cancer Survivorship, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.; 3Department of Health Services Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.;
4
Department of General Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.; 5Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.; 6London Regional Cancer Program, London Health Sciences Center, London, Ontario, Canada; 7Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The University of Texas Health Sciences Center, Houston, Texas.; 8Duke Institute on Care at the End of Life, Duke University Divinity School, Durham, North Carolina.

We acknowledge Katherine Gilmore, MPH, and Lucy Balderas, BA, for recruitment and retention efforts and Jeanie Woodruff, BS, ELS, for editorial support.
The authors evaluate the feasibility and efficacy of an automated pain intervention for improving pain and symptom management in underserved African American and Latina women with breast cancer. The intervention reduces pain and symptom severity for the women, indicating that further research on technological
approaches to symptom management is warranted.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29204, Received: November 26, 2013; Revised: August 15, 2014; Accepted: September 2, 2014, Published online February 24, 2015 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1882

Cancer

June 1, 2015

Breast Cancer Pain Intervention/Anderson et al

patients’ pain and symptom levels, alerts providers when a
symptom is moderate to severe, and assesses barriers to
pain control. Our specific objectives were: 1) to pilot test
the efficacy of the IVR intervention for improving pain
and pain-related symptoms in minority patients with
breast cancer compared with the current standard of care,
and 2) to evaluate the feasibility of the IVR intervention.
We hypothesized that minority patients in the intervention group would demonstrate reduced severity of pain
and related symptoms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Setting and Patients

The patients were recruited in the outpatient medical oncology clinic of a large public hospital in Houston, Texas,
that treats underserved patients. Patients who receive
treatment at this hospital are required to meet incomebased eligibility criteria based on federal poverty-level
guidelines. The patients were approached by bilingual
female research staff in private clinic rooms. Eligibility criteria included: 1) outpatient in the oncology clinic, 2)
breast cancer diagnosis confirmed by pathology, 3) selfreport of being black/African American or Latina/Hispanic, 4) English-speaking or Spanish-speaking, 5) aged
18 years, 6) chronic cancer-related pain, and 7) a “pain
worst” score 4 on a scale from 0 to 10. The patient’s
oncologist confirmed that the pain was related to cancer
or cancer treatment17 but did not participate in the
recruitment process. If an eligible patient agreed to participate, then the staff obtained written informed consent
and scheduled the baseline assessment, which was to be
conducted in English or Spanish, depending on patient
preference. The patients were stratified by minority group
and randomly assigned to the intervention group or the
control group by an electronic protocol management system. The Institutional Review Boards of The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and the Harris
Health System approved the study.
IVR Intervention

The IVR system was demonstrated at baseline to patients
in the intervention group, who then practiced using the
system. The research staff explained that the system would
call 2 times per week for 8 weeks at preferred times. The
system asked patients to identify themselves using a study
number, and then the IVR symptom script began.
Patients reported their responses using the touch-tone telephone keypad. If a patient did not have telephone access
during the study, then a cell telephone was provided. If a
patient did not answer an IVR call, then the system
Cancer

June 1, 2015

repeated the call up to 3 times on the same day, spaced 45
minutes apart. If the calls were not answered, then the system notified the research staff, who contacted the patient
by telephone and verbally administered the symptom
items.18
The IVR intervention consisted of: 1) assessment of
patients’ pain and related symptoms, 2) determination of
pain or other symptoms that exceeded a severity threshold, 3) feedback of information about suprathreshold
symptoms to the physician, and 4) assessment of patientrelated barriers. The barriers assessed included: 1) nonadherence to analgesic medications; 2) difficulty obtaining
analgesic medications; 3) side effects from medications; 4)
concerns about opioids, such as fear of addiction; 5) reliance on alternative strategies (eg, herbs) for pain management; and 6) lack of family support for pain management.
When a patient reported a barrier, a member of the
research staff contacted the patient by telephone and provided educational information regarding the barrier and
how to overcome it.4 A standardized English/Spanish
script was used and was followed by an opportunity for
questions.
Pain

When the patient’s reported pain level was 5 on the scale
from 0 to 10, the IVR system immediately forwarded this
information by e-mail to the patient’s physician. The
patients in the clinic are treated by oncology fellows who
are supervised by attending oncologists. The e-mail alerts
were sent to the patient’s oncology fellow, and a copy was
sent to the attending oncologist. The research staff monitored the IVR alerts on a Web-based intranet site and sent
an e-mail to the physician who received the alert that contained a form for documentation of response.
Other symptoms

The IVR assessed 12 additional symptoms contained in
the MD Anderson Symptom Inventory (MDASI).19 In
addition to pain, 6 symptoms (nausea, vomiting, emotional distress, sadness, drowsiness, and shortness of
breath) were identified by the oncologists as symptoms
that should generate e-mail alerts. The symptoms nausea,
vomiting, distress, sadness, and drowsiness triggered an
alert when the level was 5. For shortness of breath, the
alert threshold was designated as 3. No specific thresholds were set for fatigue, sleep disturbance, lack of appetite, dry mouth, difficulty remembering, or numbness/
tingling. The physicians were provided with the intervention group’s most recent IVR symptom ratings before the
patients’ clinic visits.
1883

Original Article
Control Group

Patients in the control group received the usual pain and
symptom management interventions given by the clinic
physicians. The patients completed the paper-and-pencil
assessments at baseline and at 2 follow-up assessments.
They were informed that their symptom data would be
used for research purposes only and would not be provided to their clinicians. All patients were instructed to
report any symptoms to their physicians.
Outcomes Assessment

The outcome measures were administered to all patients
in the study during clinic visits at time point 1 (4-6 weeks
after enrollment in the study) and at time point 2 (8-10
weeks after enrollment).
Instruments
MDASI. The MDASI contains 13 symptom items that are
rated from 0 to 10 on numeric scales. The reliability and
validity of the MDASI have been demonstrated.19,20 The
Spanish language version of the MDASI has been
validated.21

The Barriers Questionnaire II
(BQ-II) was developed to measure patient beliefs that are
barriers to optimal pain treatment. The BQ-II has demonstrated excellent reliability and validity.22-24 The Spanish language version of the questionnaire has been
validated.25
Barriers Questionnaire-II.

Other measures

The Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group performance status scale was used to assess the
physician’s estimate of the patient’s functional status at
baseline.26 This scale is an observational measure of functional ability that has demonstrated excellent reliability
and validity.27,28
Performance status.

Biomedical variables. Biomedical information was
recorded from the patients’ electronic medical records.
Pain management index. The analgesic data were used to
compute a pain management index (PMI) score at each
assessment.29 Pain management is considered adequate when
there is congruence between the patient’s pain severity and
the appropriateness of the prescribed analgesic. Negative
PMI scores indicate under-medication, and scores 0 are
considered a conservative indicator of acceptable treatment.
Patient demographic form. Patients completed a demographic questionnaire, which included questions about
age, race, and ethnicity.

1884

The feasibility of the intervention
was evaluated by determining rates of recruitment and
retention, patient adherence to the call schedule, rates of
physician receipt and response to the alerts, and physician
evaluation of the IVR system.

Feasibility measures.

Statistical Analysis

For this pilot study, we planned to enroll a total of 60
patients. Our objectives were to pilot the intervention,
obtain an estimate of its effect, and collect feasibility
measures. Our power analysis indicated that we could
detect a standardized difference of 0.74 in mean pain severity ratings between the the control and intervention
groups using a 2-tailed test at an a level of. 05 and. 80
power.
We used descriptive statistics to describe how
patients rated pain and symptom severity. Proportions
of patients who rated their symptoms as moderate to
severe (5 on a 0-10 scale) were reported.30 Potential
differences between patient groups based on demographic variables were explored using chi-square tests
or t tests. If the normality assumption was not met for
the t test, then the Wilcoxon test was used. Nominal
P values were reported.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the IVR intervention, linear mixed models were used to evaluate changes
in mean pain and symptom severity across time. A groupby-time interaction term was included in each model. In
addition, a random intercept was included to account for
baseline variations in pain and symptom severity. Performance status and PMI scores were entered as covariates
to control for possible effects of function and pain management. The PMI score was not included in the model
for pain severity. Generalized estimating equation analysis
was used to determine the likelihood of observing a higher
number of symptom threshold events in the intervention
group. To address our hypothesis that the severity of pain
would be reduced in the intervention group, we used the
McNemar test to compare the proportions of patients
with moderate to severe pain across time. In addition, we
calculated the PMI score for each patient and performed a
chi-square test to compare the proportions of patients
whose pain was inadequately managed in the IVR and
control groups. To address our hypothesis that the severity
of pain-related symptoms, such as sleep disturbance and
emotional distress, would be reduced in the intervention
group, we used linear mixed models to compare painrelated symptoms between the IVR and control groups.
The McNemar test was used to compare the proportions
of patients with moderate to severe symptoms across time.
Cancer

June 1, 2015

Breast Cancer Pain Intervention/Anderson et al

Figure 1. This Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) flow diagram illustrates patient flow throughout the study.

Secondary Analyses

We used the t test or its nonparametric counterpart to
compare BQ-II scores between the groups at baseline and
at time point 1, and between the groups at baseline and at
time point 2. The primary endpoints for the evaluation of
feasibility were the recruitment and retention rates; and
secondary variables were patient adherence to the symptom assessment, frequency of alerts and responses to
alerts, and physician evaluation of the intervention.
RESULTS
Patient Characteristics

Of the 449 patients with breast cancer who were screened
for eligibility, 73 patients were eligible and were
approached regarding participation in the study (Fig. 1),
and 60 patients agreed to be enrolled. Reasons for refusal
included lack of time (n = 2), reluctance to complete questionnaires (n = 2), financial concerns (n = 1), lack of interest (n = 1), and unknown (n = 7). Eighty-four percent of
the intervention group and 72% of the control group
completed the first follow-up assessment, and 68% of the
Cancer

June 1, 2015

intervention group and 86% of the control group completed the second follow-up assessment.
Demographic and clinical characteristics of the 60
participants are listed by group assignment in Table 1.
The mean 6 standard deviation time since cancer diagnosis was 2.0 6 3.3 years, with no significant differences
between groups. No significant baseline differences were
observed between the intervention and control groups or
between African American and Latina women, between
younger women versus older women, or by disease stage.
Most patients were receiving active treatments, but 16
patients (27%) had recently finished treatment or were
waiting for treatment to begin. Among the Latina
patients, 74% described Spanish as their primary
language.
Symptom Alerts

During the study, 71% of the IVR assessments were completed successfully. In total, 221 symptom alerts were generated for patients in the intervention group for pain (n =
164), drowsiness (n = 140), emotional distress (n = 109),
1885

Original Article
TABLE 1. Baseline Demographic and Disease Variables Among African American and Latina Women
With Breast Cancer
No. of Patients (%)

Characteristic
Age: Mean 6 SD, y
Education: Mean 6 SD, y
Ethnic group
African American
Latina
Marital status
Married
Unmarried
Employment status
Unemployed
Employed
Homemaker
Retired
Other
Disease stage
IIA-IIB
IIIA-IIIB
IV
Unknown
Disease status
No evidence of disease
Local/regional
Metastatic
Unknown
Treatment status
Chemotherapy
Radiotherapy
Hormone therapy
Immunotherapy
Noneb
Patients with severe painc
Good performance statusd

Intervention
Group,
n = 31

Control
Group,
n = 29

49.6 6 9.9
10.6 6 4.1

50.5 6 11.0
10.0 6 2.9

13 (42)
18 (58)

12 (41)
17 (59)

15 (48)
16 (52)

13 (45)
16 (55)

16 (52)
2 (6)
7 (23)
4 (13)
2 (6)

15 (52)
4 (14)
8 (28)
2 (7)
0 (0)

7 (23)
11 (35)
11 (35)
2 (6)

7 (24)
12 (41)
10 (34)
0 (0)

4 (13)
14 (45)
11 (35)
2 (6)

4 (14)
12 (41)
12 (41)
1 (3)

14 (45)
1 (3)
5 (16)
2 (6)
9 (29)
21 (68)
14 (45)

17 (59)
0 (0)
3 (10)
2 (7)
7 (24)
23 (79)
15 (45)

Pa
.76
.51
.97

.78

.31

.91

.91

.44

Differences in pain severity

Linear mixed models for mean pain scores on the
MDASI revealed a significant time effect (P <. 001) and
a significant group-by-time interaction (P <. 05), with
both groups reporting decreased pain severity from baseline to the time point 2 assessment (Fig. 2). There were
significant differences between groups in their pain
change scores from baseline to time point 1 (0.6 vs 2.3;
P =. 034; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.13-3.3). A
similar significant difference was observed between the
groups from baseline to time point 2 (1.2 vs 3.5; P =.
015; 95% CI, 0.47-4.2). For both comparisons, larger
pain reductions were observed in the intervention group.
For patients in the intervention group, the proportion of
women reporting moderate to severe pain (5) decreased
significantly from baseline (86%) to the time point 2
assessment (43%; P =. 004). Although there was a
decrease in the proportion of patients reporting moderate
to severe pain in the control condition from baseline
(80%) to the time point 2 assessment (56%), this change
was not statistically significant (P =. 07). The 43% difference (from 86% to 43%) in the proportion reporting
moderate to severe pain in the intervention group was
significantly greater than the 24% difference (from 80%
to 56%) reported in the control group (P =. 04).
Differences in mean symptom severity

.83
.82

Abbreviation: SD, standard deviation.
a
P values are for comparisons between the intervention group and the control group.
b
None indicates no chemotherapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy, or hormone therapy.
c
Severe pain intensity is defined as an MD Anderson Symptom Inventory
“pain worst” score in the severe range (range, 7-10).
d
Good performance status is defined as a score of zero or 1 on the 5-point
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group scale.

shortness of breath (n = 106), sadness (n = 92), nausea
(n = 64), and vomiting (n = 28). During the study, 28 of
the 31 patients in the intervention group reported symptoms severe enough to generate an alert, and 100% of the
symptom threshold events were detected. E-mail alerts
were sent to the physicians, who acknowledged the receipt
of 161 alerts (73%) by e-mail response to the research
staff. The physicians’ most frequent responses to the alerts
were to use current symptom treatments (46%), see the
patient at the next scheduled appointment (33%), or prescribe a new symptom treatment (8%).
1886

Primary Analyses

Controlling for baseline sleep scores, the mean scores for
sleep disturbance decreased significantly across time for
the intervention group but not for the control group (P
<. 01), and they were significantly lower for the intervention group compared with the control group (P <.
01) at the time point 1 and time point 2 assessments.
Figure 3 indicates that mean scores across time for fatigue were not significantly lower for the intervention
group than for the control group (P =. 07), and there
was no significant group-by-time interaction (P =. 06).
Mixed models for sadness identified no significant differences between the 2 groups. An analysis of the patients’
distress scores revealed a significant time effect (P <. 03)
but no significant differences between groups (P =. 06).
Probability of symptom threshold events by group
across time

Generalized estimating equation analysis indicated that
there were no significant differences in the odds ratios
(ORs) of observing fewer symptom threshold events for
the intervention group compared with the control group
at baseline (95% CI, 0.52-2.8), at the time point 1
Cancer

June 1, 2015

Breast Cancer Pain Intervention/Anderson et al

ness decreased significantly from baseline (65%) to the
time point 2 assessment (30%; P =. 04). Although the
proportion of women in the control group reporting
moderate or severe drowsiness decreased from baseline
(52%) to the time point 2 assessment (36%), this change
was not statistically significant (P =. 29).
Differences between groups. Although there were significant differences in individual symptoms within groups
over time, there were no significant differences between
groups over time in the proportion of moderate to severe
symptoms. For the symptoms nausea, vomiting, and
shortness of breath, there were no significant changes
across time in symptom severity within or between groups
or in the proportions of patients in either group that
reported moderate to severe symptoms.

PMI
Figure 2. Mean pain severity over time is illustrated for the
intervention and control groups. MDASI indicates MD Anderson Symptom Inventory.

assessment (95% CI, 0.32-2.5), and at the time point 2
assessment (95% CI, 0.14-1.2). Compared with the baseline assessment, the odds of observing fewer threshold
events for the intervention group was twice as likely at the
time point 1 assessment (OR, 2.1; P <. 009) and about 6
times as likely at the time point 2 assessment (OR, 5.8; P
<. 001). The ORs comparing baseline assessments against
the time point 1 and time point 2 assessments for the control group were not significant.
Proportion of moderate to severe symptoms
across time

The proportion of women in
the intervention group reporting moderate to severe distress decreased significantly from baseline (57%) to the
time point 2 assessment (19%; P =. 008). In contrast, the
proportion of women in the control condition reporting
moderate to severe distress did not change significantly
from baseline (40%) to the time point 2 assessment
(40%). For patients in the intervention group, the proportion reporting moderate to severe sadness also decreased
significantly from baseline (52%) to the time point 2
assessment (19%; P =. 04). In the control group, the proportion of women reporting moderate to severe sadness
decreased from baseline (56%) to the time point 2 assessment (36%), but the change was not statistically significant (P =. 27). The proportion of women in the
intervention group reporting moderate to severe drowsi-

Differences within groups.

Cancer

June 1, 2015

The data in Table 2 indicate that 33% of the intervention
group and 28% of the control group received adequate
analgesics at baseline. At the time point 1 and time point
2 assessments, some improvement in the PMI score was
noted, but there were no significant differences between
the 2 groups.
Secondary Analyses
IVR evaluation

Only 33% of physicians reported that the symptom feedback influenced their clinical decisions. The symptom information was rated as somewhat useful, with a
mean 6 standard deviation rating of 5.0 6 2.5 on a scale
from 0 (“not at all useful”) to 10 (“extremely useful”).
The physicians also were asked whether they thought the
alerts should be incorporated into patient care. The mean6 standard deviation response on a scale from 0
(“definitely should not be incorporated”) to 10
(“definitely should be incorporated”) was 5.2 6 3.2.
Barriers

BQ-II scores did not change significantly during the study,
and there were no significant differences between the
groups. The total BQ-II score for the intervention group
decreased from baseline (10.45) to the time point 2 assessment (8.41), but this decrease was not significant (P =. 11).
DISCUSSION
In this study, we evaluated the efficacy of an IVR intervention for improving pain and other cancer-related symptoms in underserved African American and Latina
patients with breast cancer. The number of women in
both groups reporting moderate to severe pain decreased
1887

Original Article

Figure 3. Mean severity for disturbed sleep, fatigue, sadness, and emotional distress over time is illustrated for the intervention
and control groups. MDASI indicates MD Anderson Symptom Inventory.

during the study, but the decrease was statistically significant only in the intervention group. Although both
groups reported decreases in pain severity over time, the
decreases in the intervention group from baseline to the
follow-up assessments were significantly greater than the
decreases in the control group. The decrease in reported
pain severity for the control group may have been associated with the generalized effects of conducting a pain
1888

study in the clinic. The observed improvements in the
PMI score during the study support this possibility.
In addition to improving pain intensity, the IVR
intervention was associated with improvements in other
cancer-related symptoms. The patients in the intervention
group demonstrated a significant decrease in the number
of symptom threshold events during the study. When
examining individual symptoms, the women in the
Cancer

June 1, 2015

Breast Cancer Pain Intervention/Anderson et al

TABLE 2. Percentages of Patients in the Interactive
Voice Response System Group and the Control
Group With Negative Scores on the Pain
Management Index
Negative PMI, %a

Group

Baseline

Time Point 1:
4-6 Weeks

Time Point 2:
8-10 Weeks

IVR
Control

67
72

56
54

37
44

Abbreviations: IVR, interactive voice response system (intervention); PMI,
pain management index.
a
The PMI is calculated by subtracting the intensity of the patient’s pain
from the strength of the analgesic medication. A negative PMI indicates
that the patient’s pain is undermanaged.

intervention group demonstrated significant decreases
across time in moderate to severe distress, sadness, and
drowsiness, whereas the women in the control group did
not. The feedback to the physicians may have increased
their awareness of symptoms not previously reported by
patients and, thus, may have improved symptom management. It is also possible that the improvement in pain severity in the intervention group may have contributed to
reduced sadness and distress.
The IVR intervention was also associated with
improvements in sleep disturbance, a symptom that did
not trigger alerts. At the end of the study, the patients in
the intervention group, but not in the control group,
reported significantly less sleep disturbance than at baseline. It should be noted that the physicians received a summary of the intervention group patients’ most recent IVR
assessments before clinic visits. In addition, the decreases
in patients’ pain severity may have contributed to the
improvements in sleep disturbance.
Although scores on the BQ-II decreased among
patients in the intervention group during the study, this
improvement was not statistically significant. A more intensive educational intervention may be needed to change
patient beliefs and attitudes that are barriers to pain
management.
In addition, although patients previously have rated
the IVR system highly,7,18 the physicians in the current
study did not, and only 8% of alerts led to changes in
symptom treatment. Feedback from the physicians indicated that they typically received the alerts when they were
away from the hospital and that contacting the patient
was often a challenge. They expressed a preference for
receiving symptom feedback when meeting with patients
in the clinic. Further adaptations of the IVR intervention
are needed to examine strategies for improving providerCancer

June 1, 2015

patient communication. In addition, other forms of technology, such as Web-based or smart phone applications,
may prove more acceptable to providers.
Our study had several limitations. It was designed as
a pilot study with a small sample size and short duration.
Another issue was that multiple components were
included in the intervention. The efficacy of the intervention may have been related to regular symptom assessments, alerts, and/or other variables, such as improved
communication with providers. For example, the act of
reporting symptoms may have been reassuring to patients
and may have encouraged a discussion of symptoms with
their oncologists. Because underserved minority women
with cancer are at risk for inadequate pain and symptom
management, further research is required to evaluate
which components are most effective for improving pain
and symptom outcomes.
In conclusion, the IVR intervention was successful
in reducing pain and symptom severity for underserved
minority women with breast cancer. The feasibility of the
automated system also was supported, and additional
research on this technological approach to symptom management is warranted.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported by American Cancer Society Grant RSGT-05-219-01CPPB and in part by the National Institutes of Health/National
Cancer Institute through The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center’s Support Grant P30 CA016672.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Cleeland has a patent for the MD Anderson Symptom Inventory (MDASI), which is licensed to The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center and Charles Cleeland; he is a consultant
to Astra Zeneca, Abbott, Genentech, Amgen, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Pfizer, Estellas, Bayer, Acetylon, Johnson & Johnson, and
Novartis.

REFERENCES
1. Anderson KO, Green CR, Payne R. Racial and ethnic disparities in
pain: causes and consequences of unequal care. J Pain. 2009;10:
1187-1204.
2. Fisch MJ, Lee JW, Weiss M, et al. Prospective, observational study
of pain and analgesic prescribing in medical oncology outpatients
with breast, colorectal, lung, or prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;
30:1980-1988.
3. Payne R, Medina E, Hampton JW. Quality of life concerns in
patients with breast cancer: evidence for disparity of outcomes and
experiences in pain management and palliative care among AfricanAmerican women. Cancer. 2003;97(1 suppl):311-317.
4. Anderson KO, Mendoza TR, Payne R, et al. Pain education for
underserved minority cancer patients: a randomized controlled trial.
J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:4918-4925.
5. Basch E, Artz D, Dulko D, et al. Patient online self-reporting of
toxicity symptoms during chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:
3552-3561.

1889

Original Article
6. Carpenter JS, Rawl S, Porter J, et al. Oncology outpatient and provider responses to a computerized symptom assessment system. Oncol
Nurs Forum. 2008;35:661-669.
7. Cleeland CS, Wang XS, Shi Q, et al. Automated symptom alerts
reduce postoperative symptom severity after cancer surgery: a randomized controlled clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:994-1000.
8. Given CW, Sikorskii A, Tamkus D, et al. Managing symptoms
among patients with breast cancer during chemotherapy: results of a
2-arm behavioral trial. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:5855-5862.
9. Mooney KH, Beck SL, Friedman RH, Farzanfar R. Telephonelinked care for cancer symptom monitoring: a pilot study. Cancer
Pract. 2002;10:147-154.
10. Ruland CM, Andersen T, Jeneson A, et al. Effects of an internet
support system to assist cancer patients in reducing symptom distress: a randomized controlled trial. Cancer Nurs. 2013;36:6-17.
11. Sikorskii A, Given CW, Given B, et al. Symptom management for
cancer patients: a trial comparing 2 multimodal interventions. J Pain
Symptom Manage. 2007;34:253-264.
12. Velikova G, Booth L, Smith AB, et al. Measuring quality of life in
routine oncology practice improves communication and patient wellbeing: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:714-724.
13. Weaver A, Young AM, Rowntree J, et al. Application of mobile
phone technology for managing chemotherapy-associated side-effects.
Ann Oncol. 2007;18:1887-1892.
14. Yun YH, Lee KS, Kim YW, et al. Web-based tailored education program for disease-free cancer survivors with cancer-related fatigue: a
randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1296-1303.
15. Anderson KO, Giralt SA, Mendoza TR, et al. Symptom burden in
patients undergoing autologous stem-cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007;39:759-766.
16. Bush N, Donaldson G, Moinpour C, et al. Development, feasibility
and compliance of a web-based system for very frequent QOL and
symptom home self-assessment after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Qual Life Res. 2005;14:77-93.
17. Barbera L, Molloy S, Earle CC. Frequency of non-cancer-related
pain in patients with cancer [letter]. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:2837.
18. Anderson KO, Palos GR, Garcia-Gonzalez A, et al. Automated pain
intervention for underserved African American and Latina women with

1890

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.
30.

breast cancer. In: Elk R, Landrine H, eds. Cancer Disparities: Causes
and Evidence-Based Solutions. New York: Springer; 2012:415-431.
Cleeland CS, Mendoza TR, Wang XS, et al. Assessing symptom distress in cancer patients: the MD Anderson Symptom Inventory.
Cancer. 2000;89:1634-1646.
Cleeland CS. Symptom burden: multiple symptoms and their
impact as patient-reported outcomes. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr.
2007;37:16-21.
Wang XS, Cleeland CS, Mendoza TR, et al. Impact of cultural and
linguistic factors on symptom reporting by patients with cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;102:732-738.
Gunnarsdottir S, Donovan HS, Serlin RC, Voge C, Ward S.
Patient-related barriers to pain management: the Barriers Questionnaire II (BQ-II). Pain. 2002;99:385-396.
Ward S, Donovan HS, Owen B, Grosen E, Serlin R. An individualized intervention to overcome patient-related barriers to pain management in women with gynecologic cancers. Res Nurs Health. 2000;
23:393-405.
Ward SE, Goldberg N, Miller-McCauley V, et al. Patient-related
barriers to management of cancer pain. Pain. 1993;52:319-324.
Ward SE, Hernandez L. Patient-related barriers to management of
cancer pain in Puerto Rico. Pain. 1994;58:233-238.
Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response
criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin
Oncol. 1982;5:649-655.
Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Baez L, Loehrer P, Pandya KJ. Pain and
treatment of pain in minority patients with cancer. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Minority Outpatient Pain Study. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127:813-816.
Cleeland CS, Portenoy RK, Rue M, et al. Does an oral analgesic
protocol improve pain control for patients with cancer? An intergroup study coordinated by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group. Ann Oncol. 2005;16:972-980.
Cleeland CS, Gonin R, Hatfield AK, et al. Pain and its treatment in
outpatients with metastatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:592-596.
Serlin RC, Mendoza TR, Nakamura Y, Edwards KR, Cleeland CS.
When is cancer pain mild, moderate or severe? Grading pain severity
by its interference with function. Pain. 1995;61:277-284.

Cancer

June 1, 2015

