www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 14576-14592
Research Paper

Transdifferentiation of human male germline stem cells to
hepatocytes in vivo via the transplantation under renal capsules
Zheng Chen1,6,*, Minghui Niu1,*, Min Sun1,*, Qingqing Yuan1,*, Chencheng Yao1, Jingmei
Hou1, Hong Wang1, Liping Wen1, Hongyong Fu1, Fan Zhou1, Zheng Li2, Zuping He1,3,4,5
1

State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji- Med X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China

2

Department of Andrology, Urologic Medical Center, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200080, China

3

Shanghai Institute of Andrology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200001,
China

4

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai 200127, China

5

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China

6

Department of General Surgery, Suqian people's Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical University, Jiangsu
223800, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Zuping He, email: zupinghe@sjtu.edu.cn
Keywords: human, spermatogonial stem cells, transplantation, in vivo, transdifferentiation
Received: November 25, 2016     Accepted: January 11, 2017     Published: January 18, 2017

ABSTRACT
Here we proposed a new concept that human spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs)
can transdifferentiate into hepatocytes in vivo. We first established liver injury
model of mice by carbon tetrachloride to provide proper environment for human
SSC transplantation. Liver mesenchymal cells were isolated from mice and identified
phenotypically. Human SSC line was recombined with liver mesenchymal cells, and
they were transplanted under renal capsules of nude mice with liver injury. The grafts
expressed hepatocyte hallmarks, including ALB, AAT, CK18, and CYP1A2, whereas germ
cell and SSC markers VASA and GPR125 were undetected in these cells, implicating
that human SSCs were converted to hepatocytes. Furthermore, Western blots revealed
high levels of PCNA, AFP, and ALB, indicating that human SSCs-derived hepatocytes
had strong proliferation potential and features of hepatocytes. In addition, ALB–,
CK8–, and CYP1A2– positive cells were detected in liver tissues of recipient mice.
Significantly, no obvious lesion or teratomas was observed in several important organs
and tissues of recipient mice, reflecting that transplantation of human SSCs was safe
and feasible. Collectively, we have for the first time demonstrated that human SSCs
can be transdifferentiated to hepatocyte in vivo. This study provides a novel approach
for curing liver diseases using human SSC transplantation.

INTRODUCTION

transplanted hepatocytes are able to restore the liver
parenchyma of patients directly or promote the native liver
regeneration by secreting appropriate factors indirectly;
and iv) transplantation of human hepatocytes is technically
simple and reversible since the native liver doesn’t need
to be removed. However, severe shortage of primary
human hepatocytes, including the limited number and
proliferation of these cells, restricts their applications in
treating liver disorders [9, 10]. Human embryonic stem
(ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have

Human hepatocyte transplantation has been
regarded as an alternative and effective treatment for
acute- and end-stage liver failure and metabolic liver
diseases [1–3]. Notably, hepatocyte transplantation has
several advantages over orthotopic liver transplantation
[4–9]: i) hepatocytes from one donor can be used for
more patients; ii) hepatocytes could be transplanted
into patients with liver diseases multiple times; iii) the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14576

Oncotarget

been shown to generate hepatocytes [11–14]. Moreover,
transplantation of hepatocytes derived from ES cells and
iPS cells could repair liver damage in animal models
[15, 16]. Nevertheless, several key issues, e.g., ethic and
safety issues associated with human ES cells and virus
transduction and tumorigenesis related to human iPS cells
[17], have not yet been solved for clinical applications
of hepatocytes generated from human pluripotent cells.
Meanwhile, adult stem cells derived from bone marrow
can be converted into hepatocytes and improve liver injury
[18, 19]. However, the identity of these cells converting
into hepatocytes remains unclear and controversial [20].
In bone marrow, there are several stem cell populations,
including hematopoietic stem cells, mesenchymal stem
cells, endothelial progenitor cells, multipotent adult
progenitor cells, and side population cells, and it is
essential to define which type of stem cells to be the actual
cells for liver regeneration [21]. Adversely, subsets of stem
cells from bone marrow lead to fibrogenesis within the
liver in response to injury [20]. Therefore, it is crucial to
seek a readily available cell source from another stem cells
and/or extra-hepatic tissues to provide human hepatocytes
for cell therapy of liver diseases.
Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs), a subpopulation
of type A spermatogonia in mammalian testis, have great
plasticity because of their remarkable pluripotency and
transdifferentiation potentials [22]. Numerous studies
have reported that SSCs from both mice and human
can be dedifferentiated in vitro to become ES-like cells
which can subsequently differentiate to various cell
lineages of all three germ layers [23, 24] , suggesting that
SSCs have great applications in regenerative medicine.
Furthermore, we and the peers have shown that mouse
SSCs could be directly transdifferentiated into prostatic,
uterine, skin epithelium, mature hepatocytes, and
dopaminergic neurons [25–27]. The transdifferentiation
process circumvents the adverse intermediate stage of
pluripotency, which is much safer to avoid the formation
of teratomas and has advantages in future clinical
applications. The transdifferentiation doesn’t change host
genotype, and human SSCs are not involved in ethical
issues. Significantly, we have recently demonstrated
that human SSCs can directly transdifferentiate into
mature and functional hepatocytes in vitro [28], which
is one step closer to clinical application. However, it
remains unknown whether human SSCs are able to
transdifferentiate to hepatocytes in vivo.
Stem cells are resided in the niche which is the
local microenvironment or niche to regulate their selfrenewal and differentiation [29, 30]. It has been suggested
that the connective tissues and mesenchymal cells are
major regulators of epithelial differentiation [25]. For
example, SSCs are unipotent since they can only give
rise to sperm within seminiferous tubules of mammalian
testis. However, once out of the testicular niche, SSCs can
acquire pluripotency to become ES-like cells in vitro [22].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Moreover, mesenchymal cells from fetal/neonatal organs
can induce mouse SSCs directly to transdifferentiate to
prostatic, uterine, and skin epithelium in vivo [25]. During
liver embryonic development, the adjacent septum
transversum mesenchyme and hepatic mesenchyme cells
(e.g., stellate cells) secrete a series of growth factors
and other factors, including FGF, BMP, HGF, Wnt,
TGFβ, and retinoic acid (RA), which are essential for
hepatogenesis [31, 32]. Given the importance of the niche
for stem cell regulation, we selected hepatic mesenchymal
cells to coax SSC transdifferentiation in vivo. In this
study, we established liver injury model of mice using
carbon tetrachloride. Moreover, liver mesenchymal
cells and renal capsule provided an appropriate niche
for transdifferentiation of human SSCs to hepatocytes
in vivo. Significantly, neither cellular lesion nor tumor
formation was seen in numerous pivotal organs and tissues
of recipient mice. This study offers a novel approach to
generate human hepatocytes directly from human SSCs
in vivo, which could have significant applications in
treating various kinds of liver diseases.

RESULTS
Isolation and identification of liver mesenchymal
cells
We first isolated liver mesenchymal cells from mice
using retrograde perfusion technique. After anesthetization
of mice and a midline abdominal incision, the liver, inferior
vena cava, and portal vain were well exposed (Figure 1A).
The suprahepatic inferior vena cava was sutured (Figure
1B), which was beneficial for insertion and perfusion.
After the perfusion with HBSS buffer, liver tissues were
instantly changed from reddish to white (Figure 1C). The
liver tissues were sequentially perfused with pre-warmed
0.05% pronase E and 0.05% collagenase IV to delete
mature hepatocytes, and they appeared softened after
adequate digestion in situ (Figure 1D). Liver tissues were
carefully removed and minced thoroughly on a Petri dish
(Figure 1E), and they were further digested with 0.025%
pronase E and 0.025% collagenase IV and followed by
60%-30% percoll gradient centrifugation (Figure 1F) to
separate liver mesenchymal cells (interface between 60%
percoll and 30% percoll) (Figure 1G) and remove mature
hepatocytes (Figure 2A). Liver mesenchymal cells are
collected, cultured, and identified by morphology and the
expression of genes and proteins. After 6 hours of culture,
Kupffer cells were adhered to the culture dishes and they
were oval in shape (Figure 2B).
We next analyzed phenotypic characteristics of liver
mesenchymal cells at transcriptional and translational levels
in order to clarify their identities. As shown in Figure 2C,
the freshly isolated cells expressed the transcripts of Des
(Desmin) and Emr1 (Emerin homolog 1), markers for
hepatic stellate cells, as well as Vwf (Von Willebrand factor)
14577

Oncotarget

and Acta2 (Actin, alpha 2), hallmarks for endothelial
cells and Kupffer cells, respectively. Freshly isolated
hepatic stellate cells were identified by highly refractive
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm and retinoid fluorescence
excited under ultraviolet light (Figure 2D). In addition,
immunocytochemistry revealed that more than 90% of the
isolated cells were positive for VIMENTIN (Figure 2E)
and VWF (Figure 2F), markers for hepatic stellate cells
and endothelial cells, respectively, reflecting that the purity
of these cells was over 90%. Taken together, these results
suggest that the isolated cells were liver mesenchymal cells
morphologically and phenotypically.

To further evaluate the levels of hepatic damage
caused by carbon tetrachloride, histological examination
was performed using hematoxylin and eosin staining. As
shown in Figure 4, carbon tetrachloride led to massive
hepatocyte necrosis in liver tissues under microscope.
Moreover, the necrosis areas were gradually enhanced with
the doses of carbon tetrachloride. Moderate concentrations
(1.5%–2.0%) of carbon tetrachloride resulted in 50%-80%
of areas with liver lobular damage, while higher doses
(e.g., 5%–10%) of carbon tetrachloride caused the death
of mice. Therefore, 1.5% of carbon tetrachloride was
employed as optimal concentration to establish liver injury
model of mice.

Establishment of liver injury model

Cell recombination and transplantation of
human SSC line under renal capsule of nude
mice with liver injury

To determine the optimal concentrations, a series of
concentrations of carbon tetrachloride were utilized, and
the levels of liver injury were examined under macroscope
and microscope. As shown in Figure 3A–3C, the activities
and mental conditions of mice were gradually deteriorated
with the concentration increases of carbon tetrachloride
. Liver necrosis was visualized and aggravated by the
increasing doses of carbon tetrachloride under the
macroscope (Figure 3D, i–x).

The cells we utilized in this study were a human
SSC line that we established [33]. This human SSC line
possesses an unlimited proliferation capacity, and notably
it assumes the similar behaviors of primary human SSCs
since it is able to colonize, survive and proliferate in the
recipient mice after xenotransplantation [33]. We next

Figure 1: Separation of liver mesenchymal cells from mice. (A) Exposure of the liver tissues, inferior vena cava (green arrow)

and portal vein (yellow arrow) was performed. (B) The suprahepatic inferior vena cava (arrow) was sutured. (C) Retrograde perfusion was
conducted with HBSS buffer via inferior vena cava. (D) Sequential perfusion was carried out with pre-warmed pronase E and collagenase
IV in situ. (E) Liver tissues were dissected and minced thoroughly and followed by further digestion with pronase E and collagenase IV in
vitro. (F, G) Liver mesenchymal cells (violet arrow) were separated by percoll gradient centrifugation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14578

Oncotarget

verified the identity of the human SSC line using various
markers for primary human SSCs. RT-PCR revealed that the
transcripts of PLZF, UCHL1, GPR125, GFRA1, RET and
MAGEA4 were detected in human SSC line (Figure 5A).
Moreover, immunocytochemistry further showed that
UCHL1 (Figure 5B), GFRA1 (Figure 5C), GPR125 (Figure
5D) and PLZF (Figure 5G) were stained positively for this
cell line. Double immunostaining demonstrated that human
SSC line was co-expressing GFRA1 and UCHL1 (Figure
5E), and GPR125 and UCHL1 (Figure 5F). Replacement
of primary antibodies with isotype IgG or phosphate buffer
saline (PBS) was used as negative controls, and no specific
staining was observed in this cell line (Figure 5H). To
rule out the non-specific binding of these antibodies, we

performed immunocytochemistry showing that no staining
of UCHL1, GFRA1, GPR125 and PLZF was seen in
primary human Sertoli cells (Figure 5I). Together, these data
implicate that human SSC line we used in the current study
was human SSCs phenotypically.
The eGFP expression of human SSC line in culture
could be observed under a fluorescence microscope (Figure
6A), which was used to track cell origin. Human SSC line
was recombined mouse liver mesenchymal cells (Figure 6B),
and eGFP expression of human SSC line was clearly seen
in cell recombinants (Figure 6B–6C). All cell recombinants
were transplanted to the nude mice under the renal capsule
(Figure 7A–7D), and the mice with human SSC transplantation
were grown well with normal activities (Figure 7E).

Figure 2: Characterization and identification of mouse liver mesenchymal cells. (A) Mature hepatocytes were removed
by percoll density gradient centrifugation. Scale bar = 10 µm. (B) Kupffer cells (white arrow) were isolated by percoll density gradient
centrifugation. Scale bar = 10 µm. (C) RT-PCR revealed the expression of Des, Emr1, Acta2, and Vwf in the isolated cells. Gapdh served
as a loading control of total RNA. (D) Lipid droplets and retinoid fluorescence were observed in the freshly isolated hepatic stellate cells.
Scale bar = 20 µm. (E, F) Immunocytochemistry showed the expression of VIMENTIN in hepatic stellate cells (E) and VWF in liver
endothelial cells (F) Scale bar in E = 20 µm; scale bar in F = 10 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14579

Oncotarget

Transdifferentiation of human SSCs into
hepatocytes

to hepatic lineage fate. It remains to be clarified if mouse
liver mesenchymal cells could be transdifferentiated
to hepatocytes in vitro or in vivo. To further determine
the origin of hepatocytes, we used the combination of
hepatocyte markers and eGFP to track cell lineages. As
shown in Figure 8E–8F, immunohistochemistry revealed
that the grafts expressed hepatocyte specific markers,
including CK18 and CYP1A2, and eGFP simultaneously,
implicating that these hepatocytes were originated from
human SSC line rather than liver mesenchymal cells.
Notably, a majority of cells in these grafts were positive
for human nuclear antigen (HumNuc) (Figure 8G), and
replacement with primary antibody with PBS resulted in
no staining (Figure 8H), which further reflects that these
cells were indeed originated from human SSC line but not
mouse liver mesenchymal cells. Few cells in the grafts were
negative for HumNuc (Figure 8G, asterisks), reflecting
these cells might be derived from mouse liver mesenchymal
cells. Moreover, GPR125 and VASA, hallmarks for human
SSCs and germ cells, respectively, were undetected in the
grafts from human SSC line with liver mesenchymal cells
(Figure 9A–9B), implicating that human SSCs completely
converted to hepatocytes.
Western blots further demonstrated that CYP1A2,
AAT, AFP, ALB, and PCNA were expressed in the grafts
derived from human SSC line with liver mesenchymal cells,
whereas GPR125 was undetectable in these grafts (Figure 9C),
which was completely consistent with our data using

Four weeks after transplantation, grafts were observed
in recipient mice (Figure 7F, left panel). Notably, the grafts
derived from human SSC line with liver mesenchymal cells
could grow (Figure 7F, top kidney, left panel), whereas there
was no graft from human SSCs without liver mesenchymal
cells (Figure 7F, low kidney, left panel), which reflects
that liver mesenchymal cells plays an important role in
regulating the fate determinations of human SSCs. In
addition, a number of eGFP-positive cells were detected in
these grafts (Figure 7F, right panel), reflecting that the cells
were originated from human SSC line.
To further determine whether human SSCs
transdifferentiate to hepatocytes, we analyzed phenotypic
characteristics of the cells derived from the grafts. As shown
in Figure 8A–8B, the grafts generated from human SSC
line with liver mesenchymal cells were strongly positive
for AAT and ALB, specific markers for mature hepatocytes.
Notably, a small number of cells formed cell cords with
tight cell-cell interactions (Figure 8A), which was similar
to liver plate and bile canaliculi structures in mouse liver
tissues. In contrast, AAT (Figure 8C) and ALB (Figure 8D)
were undetectable in the grafts derived from transplantation
of human SSC line without liver mesenchymal cells,
suggesting that liver mesenchymal cells established an
inductive microenvironment for human SSC commitment

Figure 3: The establishment of mouse liver injury model by carbon tetrachloride. (A) Nude mice without carbon tetrachloride
served as controls. (B, C) Nude mice were injected with different concentrations (0.2%–10%) of carbon tetrachloride. (D) Different levels
of liver damage and necrosis by various concentrations (0.2%–10%) of carbon tetrachloride were visible under the macroscope.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14580

Oncotarget

immunohistochemistry. Moreover, immunohistochemistry
revealed that a number of cells were positive for ALB
(Figure 10A), CK8 (Figure 10B), and CYP1A2 (Figure 10C)
in liver tissues of recipient mice. Significantly, numerous
cells in liver tissues of recipient mice were stained positively
for HumNuc (Figure 10D), and replacement with primary
antibody with PBS resulted in no staining (Figure 10E),
suggesting that these cells were derived from human SSC line.
Considered together, our results implicate that human SSCs
could be transdifferentiated to hepatocytes phenotypically
in vivo.

human SSC line (Figure 11A), which implicates that human
SSC line transplantation could ameliorate the liver injury.

DISCUSSION
We have demonstrated that human SSC line
could be directly transdifferentiated to hepatocytes after
transplantation with liver mesenchymal cells under
renal capsule of mice with liver injury. Notably, this
was the first report showing that human SSCs can be
transdifferentiated to hepatocytes in vivo when placed in a
proper microenvironment. The grafts derived from human
SSCs expressed specific markers of hepatocytes, including
ALB, AAT, CK18, and CYP1A2, reflecting potential
functional activity of these cells. In addition, high level
of PCNA expression was found in the cells derived from
human SSCs, which indicates that these cells had a strong
proliferation capacity and offers an invaluable source of
human hepatocytes for curing liver diseases. Recently, we
have revealed that human primary SSCs can efficiently
be transdifferentiated to mature hepatocytes in vitro by
the conditioned-medium [28]. Significantly, the protocol
using human SSC transplantation in this study was more
simplified without the intermediate stages in vitro, which
has advantages to cure patients more timely because

Safety evaluation of human SSC transplantation
To evaluate the safety of human SSC transplantation,
we examined the lesion of several pivotal organs and tissues,
including brain, lung, kidney, spleen, cardiac muscle, and
liver of recipient mice. As shown in Figure 11B, no obvious
lesion or teratomas was observed in the organs and tissues
of recipient mice transplanted with human SSC line, which
was similar to findings in control nude mice (Figure 11C).
The results suggest that the transplantation of human SSCs
was safe and feasible. Moreover, significant improvement
was seen in the liver tissues of mice with human SSC line
compared to liver injury mice without transplantation of

Figure 4: Histological changes in liver tissues of mice induced by different doses of carbon tetrachloride. Hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) staining showed the lesion of livers of mice with different concentrations (0.2%–10%) of carbon tetrachloride. Mice
treated without carbon tetrachloride were used as a negative control (NC). Scale bars = 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14581

Oncotarget

of human SSCs to hepatocytes in vivo was relatively
simple, which circumvents the lengthy process associated
with the differentiation of ES cells and iPS cells in vitro.
Liver mesenchymal cells might provide a crucial induction
microenvironment or niche for the transdifferentiation
of human SSCs to hepatocytes in vivo, as evidenced by
our immunohistochemistry and Western blotting results
showing that hepatocytes markers (e.g., ALB, AAT, CK18,
and CYP1A2) and HumNuc were strongly expressed in
the grafts derived from transplantation of human SSC
line and liver mesenchymal cells whereas germ cell
and SSC hallmarks (e.g., VASA and GPR125) were
undetectable in these grafts. Additionally, the expression
of AAT, ALB and CYP1A2 was undetectable in the grafts
without recombination of liver mesenchymal cells, further
implicating that liver mesenchymal cells (i.e., hepatic
stellate cells, endothelial cells, and Kupffer cells) were
required for the transdifferentiation of human SSCs to
hepatocytes in vivo. Notably, we found that numerous
cells were stained positively for ALB, CK8, CYP1A2, and
HumNuc in hepatic tissues of recipient mice, reflecting

liver failure is a severe and rapidly progressive disease.
Meanwhile, no obvious lesion or teratomas was observed
in a number of important organs and tissues, reflecting
that cell-based therapy using the transplantation of human
SSCs for liver disorders could be harmless to patients and
practicable.
Hepatocytes transplantation has emerged as a
promising treatment for a variety of liver diseases [1–3].
However, there is severe shortage of primary human
hepatocytes, which precludes their wider clinical
applications [9, 10]. Therefore, it is imperative to generate
functional hepatocytes from stem cells and/or extrahepatic tissues for treating patients with liver disorders.
A number of studies have shown that hepatocytes can
be derived from the ES cells and the iPS cells [11–14].
Nevertheless, a series of obstacles, e.g., ethical issues,
tumorigenesis and safety, restrict their clinical use [17].
Here we revealed a novel cell source of human
hepatocytes derived from human SSCs, which offers a
new therapeutic methodology with distinct advantages
over ES and iPS cells. In addition, the transdifferentiation

Figure 5: Characterization and identification of human SSC line at transcription and translation levels. (A) RT-PCR

revealed the expression of PLZF, UCHL1, GPR125, GFRA1, RET, and MAGEA4 in human SSC line. ACTB served as a loading control of
total RNA, while PCR without cDNA but with water served as a negative control. (B–D, G) Immunocytochemistry showed the expression
of phenotypic markers of human SSCs, including UCHL1 (B), GFRA1(C), GPR125 (D), and PLZF (G) in human SSC line. Scale bars in
B–D = 10 µm. (E,F,H) Double immunostaining displayed the coexpression of GFRA1 and UCHL1 (E), GPR125 and UCHL1 (F), as well
as isotype IgG and PBS (H) in human SSC line. (I) Immunocytochemistry illustrated the expression of UCHL1, GFRA1, GPR125 and
PLZF in primary human Sertoli cells. Scale bars in E–I = 20 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14582

Oncotarget

that human SSCs could be converted to hepatocytes that
might be transferred to liver tissues via blood circulation
to repair the damaged liver.
Liver mesenchyme cells can produce a number of
factors, including FGF, BMP, HGF, Wnt, TGFβ and RA,
which are critical for liver development [31]. These factors
can form a complex network helpful for fate decisions
of human SSCs, which can’t be completely reproduced
in vitro. Liver mesenchymal cells are able to mimick
the environment for liver development, and they might
provide an appropriate niche, which generated necessary
signals and cell-cell interactions for the transdifferentiation
of human SSCs to hepatocytes. This could be verified by
previous findings showing that mesenchymal cells are
essential for inducing the differentiation of mouse SSCs
to cell lineages of skin and prostate [25].
We set up liver damage model of mice by carbon
tetrachloride to offer the conversion environment for
human SSCs. Carbon tetrachloride can cause injury
of specific liver lobular zones and it has been used to
establish liver damage model [34]. Although hepatic oval
cells have been shown to respond to carbon tetrachloride
[34], the internal environment using carbon tetrachloride
as a reprogramming approach has not been reported. We
have revealed that 1.5% of carbon tetrachloride effectively
led to massive injury of liver tissues and induced the
transdifferentiation of human SSCs to hepatocytes.
A cascade of factors might be released and activated
by carbon tetrachloride, which provides an internal
environment for liver repair and regeneration by human
SSCs. It remains to be determined whether human SSCs

could be transdifferentiated into hepatocytes in normal
recipient mice.
Human SSCs have significant applications in both
reproductive and regenerative medicine because of their
unique and great potentials [24, 28]. However, basic studies
and clinical usage were seriously hampered due to a limited
number of human SSCs and difficulty to obtain human
testicular tissues [33]. To solve the urgent problems, we have
for the first time established a stable human SSC line with
an unlimited proliferation potential by overexpressing SV40
large T antigen [33]. This human SSC line has the similar
behaviors of primary human SSCs because it can colonize
and proliferate in the recipient mice after xenotransplantation
[33]. In the current study, we verified the identity of human
SSC line as human SSCs at both transcription and translation
levels since it expressed a number of markers for human
SSCs. Another advantage of this human SSC line was its
eGFP reporter gene as confirmed in this study, which was
convenient for tracking cell lineage origin. Therefore, human
SSC line was selected to obtain sufficient number of human
SSCs for transplantation. Hepatocyte specific markers and
eGFP were simultaneously detected and completely coexpressed in the grafts. Furthermore, a number of cells in
liver tissues of recipient mice were positive for HumNuc,
thus excluding the possibility of regeneration of liver
derived from mouse liver mesenchymal cells. These results
clearly demonstrated that hepatocytes were originated from
human SSCs but not conversion from liver mesenchymal
cells. Together, these data illustrate that human SSC line
has great potentials and applications, since they have the
abilities of transdifferentiation although these cell lines

Figure 6: The recombination of human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells. (A) The eGFP expression was seen

in human SSC line. Scale bar = 20 µm. (B, C) Cell recombinants including human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells were
incubated in collagen gel. The eGFP fluorescence (B, left panel, and C) was seen in the recombinants showing substantial numbers of
human SSC line and a homogeneous distribution. Scale bar in C = 50 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14583

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

might be unable to differentiate to spermatids and its safety
needs to be evaluated because of the overexpression of
SV40 large T antigen. It seems to be interesting to determine
whether human SSCs could be transdifferentiated to liver
mesenchymal cells.
In summary, we have for the first time demonstrated
that human SSCs were able to transdifferentiate to
hepatocytes in vivo. Liver mesenchymal cells were effective
for inducing the generation of hepatocytes from human
SSCs, and transplantation of human SSCs can significantly
improve liver injury with high safety. Therefore, this study
offers a novel approach for treating liver diseases based on
human SSC transplantation.

Human SSC line and cell culture
Human SSC line was established by transfecting
human SSCs with a plasmid (Lenti-EF1α -SV40LargeTIRES-eGFP) expressing the SV40 large T antigen under
the control of the EF1α promoter, and eGFP was utilized
as a reporter gene [33]. The identity of human SSC line
was evaluated by the expression of genes and proteins for
human SSCs using RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry,
respectively. Human SSC line was cultured with
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium/Nutrient Mixture

Figure 7: Transplantation of human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells under the renal capsules of mice.

(A)  Skin incision was performed in mouse ventral spine. (B) The kidneys of mice were externalized to make tiny incision in the capsules.
(C) Transplantation of human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells under renal capsules of mice. (D) Kidneys were returned and
skin was sutured to prevent backflow of cell recombinants. (E) The activities of transplanted mice were checked daily. (F) Grafts (red arrow,
top kidney) were visible in recipient mice (left panel). The eGFP fluorescence was observed in these grafts (right panel). Scale bar = 20 µm.
No graft (low kidney, left panel) was detected in the recipient mice transplanted with human SSC line without liver mesenchymal cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14584

Oncotarget

Figure 8: The expression of hepatic markers in the grafts derived from human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal
cells. (A–D) Immunohistochemistry with DAB staining revealed the expression of AAT and ALB in the grafts derived from human
SSC line plus mouse liver mesenchymal cells (A, B) and from human SSC line without liver mesenchymal cells (C, D). Notes: Black
arrow in figure A indicated cell cords with tight cell-cell interactions, while green arrow denoted liver plate-like structure. Scale bars in
A–D = 10 µm. (E, F) Immunohistochemistry showed the coexpression CK18 and eGFP (E) as well as CYP1A2 and eGFP (F), and the
expression of HumNuc (G) in the grafts derived from human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells. Notes: asterisks denoted
HumNuc-negative cells. Replacement with primary antibody with PBS (H) was used as a negative control. Scale bars in E and F = 20 µm;
and scale bars in G and H = 40 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14585

Oncotarget

F12 (DMEM/F12, Gibco Laboratories, Grand Island, NY)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco)
and 100 unit/ml penicillin and streptomycin (Invitrogen).
The cells were passed every 3-4 days using 0.05% trypsin
and 0.53 mM EDTA (Invitrogen) and maintained at 34°C
in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator.

streptomycin for 20 min, ii) 0.05% pronase E (Sigma)
solution containing 100 ml HBSS, 357 mg HEPES and
50 mg pronase E for 7 min, and iii) 0.05% collagenase
IV (Gibco) solution containing 100 ml HBSS, 357 mg
HEPES, and 50 mg collagenase IV for 5 min. After the
in situ digestion, liver tissues were carefully excised and
minced thoroughly, and they were further digested with
pre-warmed 0.025% pronase E and 0.025% collagenase
IV in vitro for 15 min. Cell suspension was collected and
purified by 60% and 30% percoll (Sigma-Aldrich) density
gradient centrifugation [35]. The freshly isolated liver
mesenchymal cells were identified by morphology and
biochemical phenotypes.

Ethics statement
All methods were carried out in accordance with
relevant guidelines and regulations of the Institutional
Ethical Review Committee of Ren Ji Hospital. All
experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional
Ethical Review Committee of Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (license number
of ethics statement: 2012–01). An informed consent of
testis tissues used for research only was obtained from
each obstructive azoospermia patient.
This study on nude mice was approved by The
Institutional Ethical Review Committee of Ren Ji Hospital,
and the experiments were carried out strictly in accordance
with the care and use of laboratory animals and the related
ethical regulation of Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

RNA extraction and reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from human SSC line and
the freshly isolated liver mesenchymal cells using Trizol
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). DNase I was used to
remove potential contamination of genomic DNA. Reverse
transcription (RT) was performed using First Strand cDNA
Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific) and PCR was performed
according to the protocol described previously [36]. The
primer pairs of selected genes, including PLZF, UCHL1,
GPR125, GFRA1, RET, MAGEA4, ACTB, Des, Emr, Acta2,
Vwf, and Gapdh were designed and listed in Table 1. The
PCR reaction started at 94°C for 5 min and was performed as
follows: denaturation at 94°C for 30 sec, annealing at specific
temperature (Tm) as indicated in Table 1 for 45 sec, and
elongation at 72°C for 45 sec. After 35 cycles, the samples
were extended at 72°C for additional 10 min. The PCR
products were separated by electrophoresis on 1.5% agarose
gels, and images were captured by chemiluminescence
(Chemi-Doc XRS, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). PCR samples
without cDNA but with water served as a negative control.

Isolation and characterization of mouse liver
mesenchymal cells
Liver mesenchymal cells were isolated from
BALB/c mice (Shanghai Laboratory Animal Center,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China) of 12
weeks old using retrograde perfusion via the inferior vena
cava (IVC) [35]. Briefly, mice were anesthetized and
perfused with pre-warmed solutions, including: i) 100 ml
HBSS buffer containing 19 mg EGTA (Sigma-Aldrich),
357 mg HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.5% penicillin and

Figure 9: The expression of germ cell and hepatic markers in the grafts derived from human SSC line and mouse
liver mesenchymal cells. (A, B) Immunohistochemistry showed the expression of GPR125 (A) and VASA (B) in the grafts derived
from human SSC line plus mouse liver mesenchymal cells. Scale bars in A and B = 20 µm. (C) Western blots displayed the expression of
CYP1A2, AAT, AFP, ALB, PCNA, and GPR125 in the grafts generated from human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells. Notes:
S1, S2 and S3 represented three different samples. ACTB served as a loading control of proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14586

Oncotarget

Table 1: The primer sequences of genes used for RT-PCR
Genes
Des
Acta2
Vwf
Emr1
ACTB
UCHL1
GPR125
GFRA1
PLZF
MAGEA4
RET
Gapdh

Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Forward
Reverse

Primer sequence
CAACCTTCCTATCCAGACCTTC
GTAGCCTCGCTGACAACCTC
AATGGCTCTGGGCTCTGTAA
CTCTTGCTCTGGGCTTCATC
TGCCTCAGTGGGAGAAAGAT
CAGGTTTGTGCTCTGCTTGA
CTGCACCTGTAAACGAGGCTT
GCAGACTGAGTTAGGACCACAA
CGCACCACTGGCATTGTCAT
TTCTCCTTGATGTCACGCAC
CCAATGTCGGGTAGATGA
CCAATGTCGGGTAGATGA
TACCCTTTGGACTTGGTT
TACCCTTTGGACTTGGTT
CCAAAGGGAACAACTGCCTG
CGGTTGCAGACATCGTTGGA
CGGTTCCTGGATAGTTTGC
GGGTGGTCGCCTGTATGT
CCGAGTCCCTGAAGATG
CAGGACGATTATCAGAAGG
CCAATGTCGGGTAGATGA
CCAATGTCGGGTAGATGA
GCCCTCCCTACTCTCTTGAATA
AGGAGGGCTGGGTACAATTA

Product size (bp)

Tm (°C)

141

60

152

58

108

58

127

60

200

55

244

55

246

49

410

58

317

54

155

50

126

52

383

58

Immunocytochemistry

Establishment of mouse liver injury model

Human Sertoli cells were isolated from obstructive
azoospermia patients with normal spermatogenesis using a
two-step enzymatic digestion and followed by differential
plating. Immunocytochemistry was performed to determine
the identity of human SSC line, primary human Sertoli
cells, and mouse liver mesenchymal cells pursuant to the
procedure described previously [37]. Briefly, cells were fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 30 min and followed by
permeabilization with 0.4% Triton X-100 for 15 min and
blocking in 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich)
for 1 h. The primary antibodies were as follows: UCHL1
(AbD Serotec), GFRA1 (Santa Cruz), GPR125 (Abcam),
PLZF (Santa Cruz), VIMENTIN (Abcam), and VWF
(Santa Cruz). After incubation overnight at 4°C, rhodamineconjugated or FITC-conjugated IgG was used as secondary
antibodies. The dilutions, resources, and companies of
primary and secondary antibodies for immunocytochemistry
were shown in Table 2. Double immunostaining was
also performed to verify the identity of human SSC line
antibodies against GFRA1 and UCHL1 as well as GPR125
and UCHL1. Replacement of primary antibodies with isotype
IgG or PBS served as a negative control. The nuclei of cells
were stained with DAPI (4′-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole)
and the epifluorescence were examined under fluorescence
microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti-S, Nikon Corporation, Tokyo,
Japan).

Carbon tetrachloride was utilized to established liver
injury model of nude mice [34]. In order to provide a proper
internal environment, different concentrations of carbon
tetrachloride (Sinopharm  Chemical  Reagent  Co., Ltd,
Shanghai, China), ranging from 0.2% to 10% diluted in olive
oil, were administered to the abdominal cavity of nude mice
(Shanghai Laboratory Animal Center, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China) of 6 weeks old by intraperitoneal
injection for 15 sec. Twenty hours after carbon tetrachloride
administration, liver tissues from nude mice were fixed in 4%
PFA, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 5 μm thickness.
The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E), and the degrees of liver necrosis were determined
under the macroscope and microscope.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Transplantation of human SSC line and mouse
liver mesenchymal cells under renal capsules of
nude mice
Transplantation of human SSC line and mouse liver
mesenchymal cells under renal capsule of nude mice was
performed pursuant to the method described previously
[38]. Briefly, 2 × 106 cells were recombined at a ratio with
85% of human SSC line and 15% of liver mesenchymal
cells (hepatic stellate cells, endothelial cells, and Kupffer
cells) in 15 ml tube. Human SSC line without liver
14587

Oncotarget

Table 2: The antibodies used for immunostaining and Western blots
Antibodies
UCHL1
GFRA1
GPR125
VASA
CK18
CK8
AFP
ALB
AAT
CYP1A2
PCNA
VWF
VIMENTIN
ACTB
AlexFlour488
AlexFlour594
AlexFlour647
AlexFlour594
HRP-conjugated IgG
HRP-conjugated IgG

Dilutions
ICC: 1:200
ICC: 1:200
ICC: 1:200
WB:1:100
IHC:1:100
IHC:1:100
IHC:1:100
IHC:1:100
WB:1:100
IHC:1:100
WB:1:100
IHC:1:100
WB:1:100
IHC:1:100
WB:1:100
WB:1:500
ICC: 1:200
ICC: 1:200
WB: 1:5000
1:500
1:500
1:500
1:500
1:1000
1:1000

mesenchymal cells served as a control. The resultant cell
recombinants were placed in 200 μl of PBS with 3 mg/ml
collagen type I (10 μl with 105 cells per graft), incubated at
37°C for 1 h–1.5 h to allow collagen gelation, and cultured
with DMEM/F12 medium. After incubation with DMEM/
F12 overnight at 37°C and 5% CO2 incubator, the cells
in collagen gel were grafted under the renal capsule of
6-week-old nude mice according to the method described
previously [39]. Mice with liver injury caused by carbon
tetrachloride were anaesthetized by 0.01 ml/g boy weight
of Avertin. The skin of the mice was sterilized by 75%
of alcohol and 10 mm of inclusions were made in mouse
abdomen to expose the kidneys. The capsules of kidneys
were open and transplanted with 10 μl graft with 105 of
human SSC line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells. The
capsules were sutured, and each kidney was transplanted
with two cell grafts. Four weeks after implantation, grafts
were harvested and analyzed for eGFP expression and
hallmarks of hepatocytes by immunohistochemistry as
described below. The experiments were performed three
times. This study was approved by The Institutional
Ethical Review Committee of Ren Ji Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine.

Companies
AbD Serotec
Santa Cruz

Rabbit

Abcam

Goat
Mouse
Goat
Mouse

Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz

Mouse

Santa Cruz

Goat

Bethyl

Rabbit

Santa Cruz

Rabbit
Mouse
Mouse
Mouse
Goat-anti-Rabbit
Donkey-anti-Goat
Goat-anti-Mouse
Goat-anti-Mouse
Goat anti-Mouse
Goat anti-Rabbit

Abcam
Santa Cruz
Abcam
Proteintech
Invitrogen
Invitrogen
Invitrogen
Invitrogen
Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz

in 4% PFA, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 5 μm
thickness. The sections were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin, and they were observed under a microscope.

Immunohistochemistry
To assess whether human SSC line could convert to
hepatocytes in vivo, immunohistochemistry was conducted
in term of the method as described previously [33]. Briefly,
grafts and liver tissues form recipient mice were fixed in
4% PFA, dehydrated through graded alcohols, embedded
in paraffin, and sectioned at 5 μm thickness. The sections
were deparaffinized and rehydrated, and antigen retrieval
was performed in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer solution
for 20 min at 96°C. Endogenous peroxidase activity was
quenched by incubation with 3% hydrogen peroxide.
After permeabilization with 0.4% Triton X-100 and
blocking with 5% donkey serum (Maibio), the sections
were incubated with primary antibodies, including ALB
(albumin) (Santa Cruz) and AAT (alpha-1antiproteinase)
(Bethyl), in a humidified chamber overnight at 4°C.
After washes three times with PBS, the sections were
incubated with horse radish peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibody for 1 hour at room temperature and
followed by 3, 3-diaminobenzidine (DAB) as a substrate.
The dilutions, resources, and companies of primary and
secondary antibodies for immunohistochemistry were
shown in Table 2. After immunostaining, sections were
counterstained with hematoxylin and examined under a

Histological examination
Various kinds of organs and tissues, including liver,
spleen, heart, lung, brain, and kidney, from recipient
mice, normal nude mice, and liver injury mice were fixed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Resources
Rabbit
Goat

14588

Oncotarget

Figure 10: The expression of ALB, CK8, and CYP1A2 in graft hepatic tissues of recipient mice. Immunohistochemistry
showed that the expression of ALB (A), CK8 (B), CYP1A2 (C), HumNuc (D), and PBS (E) in graft liver tissues of recipient mice. Scale
bars in A–E = 20 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14589

Oncotarget

Western blots

light microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti-S, Nikon Corporation,
Tokyo, Japan).
For immunofluorescence, similar procedures were
performed except for peroxidase quenching. The primary
antibodies were CK18 (Santa Cruz), CYP1A2 (Santa Cruz),
human nuclear antigen (HumNuc) (Millipore), GPR125
(Abcam), and VASA (Abcam), and incubated in a humidified
chamber overnight at 4°C. The secondary antibodies were
rhodamine-conjugated IgG and FITC-conjugated IgG and
incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. The dilutions,
resources, and companies of primary and secondary
antibodies for immunohistochemistry were shown in
Table 2. Replacement of primary antibody with PBS was
utilized as a negative control. DAPI was used to stain cell
nuclei and the sections were observed the epifluorescence
using fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti-S, Nikon
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).

The grafts were minced thoroughly and lysed
with RIPA buffer (Santa Cruz) on ice. Western blots
were performed according to the protocol as described
previously [33]. Briefly, the concentration of total proteins
was measured first by BCA kit (Dingguo Company, China).
Twenty micrograms of cell lysates were resolved by SDSPAGE (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA). The chosen
antibody included CYP1A2 (Santa Cruz), AAT (Bethyl),
AFP (alpha-fetoprotein) (Santa Cruz), ALB (Santa Cruz),
PCNA (Santa Cruz), GPR125 (Abcam), and ACTB
(Proteintech). The dilutions, resources, and companies of
primary and secondary antibodies for Western blots were
shown in Table 2. After extensive washes in PBS, the blots
were detected by chemiluminescence (Chemi-Doc XRS,
Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).

Figure 11: The histological observations of the organs and tissues in mice transplanted with human SSC line and
mouse liver mesenchymal cells, mice with liver injury, and the normal nude mice. Notes: organs and tissues from mice with

liver injury by carbon tetrachloride induction (A), as well as organs and tissues from mice at 4 weeks after transplantation of human SSC
line and mouse liver mesenchymal cells (B), and organs and tissues from normal nude mice (C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14590

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

10.	 Fausto N. Liver regeneration and repair: hepatocytes, progenitor
cells, and stem cells. Hepatology. 2004; 39:1477–1487.

All data were obtained from at least three independent
experiments. Statistical analyses were determined using
analysis of variance (ANOVA) and a 2-tailed t-test, and
P values of less than 0.05 (p < 0.05) were considered
statistically significant.

11.	 Cai J, Zhao Y, Liu Y, Ye F, Song Z, Qin H, Meng S, Chen Y,
Zhou R, Song X, Guo Y, Ding M, Deng H. Directed
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into functional
hepatic cells. Hepatology. 2007; 45:1229–1239.
12.	 Chen YF, Tseng CY, Wang HW, Kuo HC, Yang VW,
Lee OK. Rapid generation of mature hepatocyte-like cells
from human induced pluripotent stem cells by an efficient
three-step protocol. Hepatology. 2012; 55:1193–1203.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest with the
submitted paper.

13.	 Si-Tayeb K, Noto FK, Nagaoka M, Li J, Battle MA,
Duris C, North PE, Dalton S, Duncan SA. Highly efficient
generation of human hepatocyte-like cells from induced
pluripotent stem cells. Hepatology. 2010; 51:297–305.

FUNDING

14.	 Huang P, Zhang L, Gao Y, He Z, Yao D, Wu Z, Cen J, Chen X,
Liu C, Hu Y, Lai D, Hu Z, Chen L, et al. Direct reprogramming
of human fibroblasts to functional and expandable hepatocytes.
Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 14:370–384.

This work was supported by grants from National
Nature Science Foundation of China (31230048, 31171422,
31671550, 31401250) and Chinese Ministry of Science
and Technology (2014CB943101, 2016YFC1000606), The
Program for Professor of Special Appointment (Eastern
Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning
(2012.53), Shanghai Municipal Education CommissionGaofeng Clinical Medicine Grant Support (20152511),
Shanghai Hospital Development Center (SHDC12015122),
and a key grant from the Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality (12JC1405900).

15.	 Heo J, Factor VM, Uren T, Takahama Y, Lee JS, Major M,
Feinstone SM, Thorgeirsson SS. Hepatic precursors derived
from murine embryonic stem cells contribute to regeneration
of injured liver. Hepatology. 2006; 44:1478–1486.
16.	 Chiang CH, Chang CC, Huang HC, Chen YJ, Tsai PH,
Jeng SY, Hung SI, Hsieh JH, Huang HS, Chiou SH, Lee FY,
Lee SD. Investigation of hepatoprotective activity of induced
pluripotent stem cells in the mouse model of liver injury. J
Biomed Biotechnol. 2011; 2011:219060.

REFERENCES
1.	

17.	 Duncan AW, Dorrell C, Grompe M. Stem cells and liver
regeneration. Gastroenterology. 2009; 137:466–481.

Cantz T, Sharma AD, Ott M. Concise review: cell therapies for
hereditary metabolic liver diseases-concepts, clinical results,
and future developments. Stem Cells. 2015; 33:1055–1062.

2.	

Miyajima A, Tanaka M, Itoh T. Stem/progenitor cells in liver
development, homeostasis, regeneration, and reprogramming.
Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 14:561–574.

3.	

Liu J, Zhang Z, Liu Y, Guo C, Gong Y, Yang S, Ma M, Li Z,
Gao W-Q, He Z. Generation, Characterization, and Potential
Therapeutic Applications of Cardiomyocytes from Various
Stem Cells. Stem Cells Dev. 2012; 21:2095–2110.

18.	 Herrera MB, Fonsato V, Bruno S, Grange C, Gilbo N,
Romagnoli R, Tetta C, Camussi G. Human liver stem cells
improve liver injury in a model of fulminant liver failure.
Hepatology. 2013; 57:311–319.
19.	 Li J, Zhang L, Xin J, Jiang L, Li J, Zhang T, Jin L, Li J, Zhou P,
Hao S, Cao H, Li L. Immediate intraportal transplantation of
human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells prevents death
from fulminant hepatic failure in pigs. Hepatology. 2012;
56:1044–1052.

4.	 Viswanathan P, Gupta S. New directions for cell-based
therapies in acute liver failure. J Hepatol. 2012; 57:913–915.
5.	 Habibullah CM, Syed IH, Qamar A, Taher-Uz Z. Human
fetal hepatocyte transplantation in patients with fulminant
hepatic failure. Transplantation. 1994; 58:951–952.
6.	 Fox IJ, Chowdhury JR, Kaufman SS, Goertzen TC,
Chowdhury NR, Warkentin PI, Dorko K, Sauter BV, Strom SC.
Treatment of the Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I with hepatocyte
transplantation. New Engl J Med. 1998; 338:1422–1426.

20.	 Kallis YN, Alison MR, Forbes SJ. Bone marrow stem cells
and liver disease. Gut. 2007; 56:716–724.
21.	 Sousa BR, Parreira RC, Fonseca EA, Amaya MJ, Tonelli FM,
Lacerda SM, Lalwani P, Santos AK, Gomes KN, Ulrich H,
Kihara AH, Resende RR. Human adult stem cells from diverse
origins: an overview from multiparametric immunophenotyping
to clinical applications. Cytometry Part A. 2014; 85:43–77.

  7.	 Goss JA, Stribling R, Martin P. Adult liver transplantation for
metabolic liver disease. Clin Liver Dis. 1998; 2:187–210.

22.	 Chen Z, Li Z, He Z. Plasticity of male germline stem cells
and their applications in reproductive and regenerative
medicine. Asian J Androl. 2015; 17:367–372.

  8.	 Fisher RA, Strom SC. Human hepatocyte transplantation:
worldwide results. Transplantation. 2006; 82:441–449.
  9.	 Forbes SJ, Gupta S, Dhawan A. Cell therapy for liver
disease: From liver transplantation to cell factory. J Hepatol.
2015; 62:S157–169.

23.	 Kanatsu-Shinohara M, Inoue K, Lee J, Yoshimoto M,
Ogonuki N, Miki H, Baba S, Kato T, Kazuki Y, Toyokuni S,
Toyoshima M, Niwa O, Oshimura M, et al. Generation of
pluripotent stem cells from neonatal mouse testis. Cell.
2004; 119:1001–1012.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14591

Oncotarget

24.	 Kossack N, Meneses J, Shefi S, Nguyen HN, Chavez S,
Nicholas C, Gromoll J, Turek PJ, Reijo-Pera RA. Isolation
and characterization of pluripotent human spermatogonial
stem cell-derived cells. Stem Cells. 2009; 27:138–149.

32.	 Vasconcellos R, Alvarenga EC, Parreira RC, Lima SS,
Resende RR. Exploring the cell signalling in hepatocyte
differentiation. Cellular Signal. 2016; 28:1773–1788.
33.	 Hou J, Niu M, Liu L, Zhu Z, Wang X, Sun M, Yuan Q, Yang S,
Zeng W, Liu Y, Li Z, He Z. Establishment and Characterization
of Human SSC Line with Unlimited Proliferation Potentials
and no Tumor Formation. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:16922.

25.	 Simon L, Ekman GC, Kostereva N, Zhang Z, Hess RA,
Hofmann MC, Cooke PS. Direct transdifferentiation of stem/
progenitor spermatogonia into reproductive and nonreproductive
tissues of all germ layers. Stem Cells. 2009; 27:1666–1675.

34.	 Petersen BE, Zajac VF, Michalopoulos GK. Hepatic oval
cell activation in response to injury following chemically
induced periportal or pericentral damage in rats. Hepatology.
1998; 27:1030–1038.

26.	 Zhang Z, Gong Y, Guo Y, Hai Y, Yang H, Yang S, Liu Y,
Ma M, Liu L, Li Z, Gao WQ, He Z. Direct transdifferentiation
of spermatogonial stem cells to morphological, phenotypic and
functional hepatocyte-like cells via the ERK1/2 and Smad2/3
signaling pathways and the inactivation of cyclin A, cyclin B
and cyclin E. Cell Commun Signal. 2013; 11:67.

35.	 Mederacke I, Dapito DH, Affo S, Uchinami H, Schwabe RF.
High-yield and high-purity isolation of hepatic stellate cells
from normal and fibrotic mouse livers. Nat Protoc. 2015;
10:305–315.

27.	 Yang H, Liu Y, Hai Y, Guo Y, Yang S, Li Z, Gao WQ, He Z.
Efficient Conversion of Spermatogonial Stem Cells to
Phenotypic and Functional Dopaminergic Neurons via the
PI3K/Akt and P21/Smurf2/Nolz1 Pathway. Mol Neurobiol.
2015; 52:1654–1669.

36.	 Guo Y, Liu L, Sun M, Hai Y, Li Z, He Z. Expansion and
long-term culture of human spermatogonial stem cells via
the activation of SMAD3 and AKT pathways. Exp Biol
Med. 2015; 240:1112–1122.

28.	 Chen Z, Sun M, Yuan Q, Niu M, Yao C, Hou J, Wang  H,
Wen L, Liu Y, Li Z, He Z. Generation of functional hepatocytes
from human spermatogonial stem cells. Oncotarget. 2016;
7:8879–8895. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7092.

37.	 Yang S, Ping P, Ma M, Li P, Tian R, Yang H, Liu Y, Gong Y,
Zhang Z, Li Z, He Z. Generation of Haploid Spermatids
with Fertilization and Development Capacity from Human
Spermatogonial Stem Cells of Cryptorchid Patients. Stem
Cell Rep. 2014; 3:663–675.

29.	 Scadden DT. The stem-cell niche as an entity of action.
Nature. 2006; 441:1075–1079.

38.	 Leong KG, Wang BE, Johnson L, Gao WQ. Generation
of a prostate from a single adult stem cell. Nature. 2008;
456:804–808.

30.	 Chen C, Ouyang W, Grigura V, Zhou Q, Carnes K, Lim H,
Zhao GQ, Arber S, Kurpios N, Murphy TL, Cheng AM,
Hassell JA, Chandrashekar V, Hofmann MC, Hess RA,
Murphy KM. ERM is required for transcriptional control of the
spermatogonial stem cell niche. Nature. 2005; 436:1030–1034.

39.	 Cunha GR, Baskin L. Use of sub-renal capsule
transplantation in developmental biology. Differentiation.
2016; 91:4–9.

31.	 Zhao R, Duncan SA. Embryonic development of the liver.
Hepatology. 2005; 41:956–967.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14592

Oncotarget

