Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 35

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

The photosensitizer verteporfin has light-independent antileukemic activity for Ph-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia
and synergistically works with dasatinib
Takanobu Morishita1, Fumihiko Hayakawa1, Keiki Sugimoto2, Mizuho Iwase3,
Hideyuki Yamamoto1, Daiki Hirano1, Yuki Kojima1, Naoto Imoto1, Tomoki Naoe4
and Hitoshi Kiyoi1
1

Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan

2

Fujii Memorial Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Otsu, Japan

3

Department of Analytical Neurobiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, Nagoya, Japan

4

National Hospital Organization Nagoya Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan

Correspondence to: Fumihiko Hayakawa, email: bun-hy@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Keywords: drug screening, patient-derived xenograft, Ph+ ALL, verteporfin, drug repositioning
Received: July 10, 2016	

Accepted: July 23, 2016	

Published: August 02, 2016

Abstract
Cell lines have been used for drug discovery as useful models of cancers; however,
they do not recapitulate cancers faithfully, particularly from the viewpoints of
microenvironmental independence. Patient-derived xenografts (PDX) are established
by the transfer of primary tumor cells directly from patients into immunodeficient
mice and can provide primary-like tumor cells of the amount needed at the desired
time. We developed a high-throughput drug screening system using PDX cells and
performed drug screening using the PDX cells of Philadelphia chromosome-positive
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL). We established four Ph+ ALL PDX mice and
performed high-throughput screening of 3440 compounds using leukemia cells
from the PDX mice (PDX-cell screening). The profiles of drugs selected by PDX-cell
screening were markedly different from those by screening using the Ph+ ALL cell line.
We found that verteporfin, an FDA-approved drug, exhibited strong PDX cell-specific
cytotoxicity. In the validation assay, its GI50 was 228 nM, 395 nM, and 538 nM in three
PDX cells and 3.93 µM, 2.11 µM, and 5.61 µM in three cell lines. Although verteporfin
is a photosensitizer activated by photoirradiation, its cytotoxic effects were mediated
by the light-independent production of reactive oxygen species; therefore, its antileukemic effects were also exerted in vivo without photoirradiation. Furthermore, it
exhibited synergistic effects with dasatinib, an ABL kinase inhibitor. These results
indicated the potential of verteporfin as a new anti-leukemic reagent.

Introduction

rate of allo-SCT is high, and Ph+ ALL is common among
the elderly, who cannot receive allo-SCT. Therefore, there
are still unmet medical needs for Ph+ ALL.
Target-based screening and phenotype-based
screening represent the two major ways to develop
drugs. In target-based screening, the target molecule of
a certain disease, such as a particular kinase, is initially
selected based on its knowledge of molecular pathology.
Compounds are screened by evaluating their inhibitory
effects on the enzymatic activity of the target molecule in
vitro. Their effects on cell lines and mouse models are then
investigated. This is a powerful method that is currently

ABL kinase inhibitors are highly effective for
BCR-ABL-positive leukemias such as chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) and Philadelphia chromosome-positive
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL). ABL kinase
inhibitors keep CML in the chronic phase for a long period
of time and markedly increase the complete remission rate
of Ph+ ALL; however, the relapse of Ph+ ALL is almost
inevitable. [1] The only way to currently achieve a cure is
to undergo allogeneic-stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT)
during remission [2, 3]; however, the therapy-related death
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56241

Oncotarget

Results

being used to develop many tyrosine kinase inhibitors
including ABL kinase inhibitors; however, difficulties have
been associated with identifying the true molecular targets
of diseases in many cases, and inhibition of the target
molecule does not always lead to anti-tumor effects. Even
when the target molecule is successfully inhibited, antitumor effects may not be obtained due to the activation of
an escape signal or evolution of resistant clones with drugresistant mutations. [4-6] Clonal evolution by the T315I
mutation in BCR-ABL represents a severe obstacle for Ph+
ALL therapy. [7]
Phenotype-based screening using cell lines as cancer
models have widely been used in the development of antitumor drugs. In this method, library compounds are added
to the culture media of cell lines and selected based on
their growth inhibitory effects on the cell lines. Most anticancer agents used in standard therapy for leukemia were
developed by the 1970s. The development of innovative
agents to replace previous standard therapies for leukemia
using phenotype-based screening has not advanced
for more than 30 years, suggesting the limitations of
cell line-based screening and existing libraries for drug
development. [8] Completely new libraries and novel
cancer models to replace cell lines are now required for
the serial development of innovative anti-cancer agents.
In order to overcome these limitations, we
previously developed a new high-throughput drugscreening system using lymphoma cells obtained from
patient-derived xenografts (PDX). PDX are established
by the transfer of primary cancer cells directly from
patients into immunodeficient mice. PDX faithfully
maintain the characteristics of the parental tumors such as
gene expression profiles, the mutational status including
genome copy number variants, and metastatic potential
even after several passages [9, 10]. PDX also maintain
hierarchy of the cancer cell differentiation status [11, 12]
and drug responsiveness. [13] Furthermore, PDX may
provide the required amount of primary-like cancer cells at
the desired time. In the present study, we performed highthroughput screening of 3440 compounds using leukemia
cells from Ph+ ALL PDX (PDX-cell screening), and found
that the photosensitizer, verteporfin, exhibited strong antileukemic effects both ex vivo and in vivo. These effects
were mediated by oxidative stress and had synergism with
dasatinib, an ABL kinase inhibitor clinically used for Ph+
ALL. These results indicated the potential of verteporfin
as a new anti-leukemic reagent and PDX-cell screening as
a novel strategy for the development of anti-cancer drugs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Establishment of ex vivo culturing of PDX cells
Primary Ph+ ALL cells obtained from the bone
marrow of four patients were intravenously transplanted
into NOD/SCID/ IL-2Rγnull (NOG) mice. Patients’
backgrounds and disease characteristics are summarized in
Supplemental Table 1. All leukemia cells were successfully
engrafted into mice. A total of 1.3 X 108 to 5.8 X 108 cells
were obtained from one PDX mouse and the ratios of
leukemia cells were 86.0 to 95.7 % (Supplemental Table
2). PhLO cells were the most efficiently obtained cells.
PDX cells did not survive well without stromal cells
ex vivo, and S17 cells, murine bone marrow stromal cells,
were found to support the survival of Ph+ ALL PDX cells
in our previous study. [14] Therefore, we examined the
survival of the PDX cells obtained in a co-culture with
S17 cells. PhLO cells showed the highest survival rate
(Figure 1A) and a slow growth rate with a doubling time
of more than 14 days (Figure 1B).

Verteporfin was specifically selected by PDX-cell
screening
We performed drug screening using PhLO cells
co-cultured with S17 cells as described previously [15]
(PDX-cell screening), and compared the profiles of the
selected drugs to those of screening using ALL-1 cells, a
Ph+ ALL cell line (Cell-line screening). The library of 3440
compounds containing off-patent drugs was screened.
Screening was performed using PhLO cells co-cultured
with S17 cells, mono-cultured ALL-1 cells, and monocultured S17 cells, as shown in Figure 2A. All screenings
were performed well with Z’-factors of 0.88, 0.56, and
0.93 and coefficient of variation values of 7.33%, 4.48%,
and 2.26%, respectively.
All compounds were plotted on scattergrams,
on which MTT values in ALL-1 cells (Figure 2B) or
viabilities in PDX cells (Figure 2C) were set on the
Y-axis and MTT values in S17 cells were set on the
X-axis. Compounds with MTT values in ALL-1 cells
(Figure 2B) or viabilities in PDX cells less than 0.5 were
discriminated as effective compounds in each screening.
Effective compounds in one screening were plotted with
red dots in another screening (Figure 2B and 2C). The
profiles of the selected drugs were markedly different
between PDX-cell screening and Cell-line screening.
Cell-line screening was generally more sensitive than
PDX-cell screening. The number of effective compounds
in PDX-cell screening was 60 (Figure 2C), whereas 597
compounds were effective in Cell-line screening (Figure
2B). Only 37 compounds out of 597 effective compounds
(6%) in Cell-line screening were also effective in PDX56242

Oncotarget

Table 1: Top 10 drugs selected by PDX screening.

cell screening (Figure 2C), suggesting the difficulty
associated with identifying effective compounds for PDX
cells by Cell-line screening. On the other hand, 37 out
of 60 effective compounds (62%) in PDX-cell screening
were also effective in Cell-line screening.
The top 10 compounds in PDX-cell screening were
shown in Table 1. We selected verteporfin for further
analysis. Verteporfin exhibited strong cytotoxicity in
PDX-cell screening, but did not show significant growth
inhibition in Cell-line screening (Figure 2B and 2C).

Verteporfin is an FDA-approved drug for the treatment of
age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) and is suitable
for being injected into humans.
Furthermore, we made a new library by selecting the
top 200 compounds in PDX-cell screening using PhLO
cells and subjected them to other PDX-cell screenings
using PhLH and PhLK cells and Cell-line screening
using NPhA1, ALL-1, and TCC-Y/sr cells. All cells were
PDX cells or cell lines of Ph+ ALL. PhLH and TCC-Y/
sr both had the T315I mutation of BCR-ABL, which

Figure 1: Establishment of an ex vivo culture of PDX cells. A. Survival improvements in PDX cells by a co-culture with stromal
cells. PDX cells were cultured with or without S17 cells, as indicated. Viabilities were measured by DAPI staining and a flow cytometric
analysis on day 7. B. The slow growth rate of PhLO cells ex vivo. PhLO cells were cultured with S17 cells as in A.. Live cell counts relative
to that on day 1 were plotted on a line graph. Assays were performed in triplicate. Mean values were plotted with standard deviations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56243

Oncotarget

caused strong resistance to ABL kinase inhibitors. [7] The
clinical and genetical backgrounds of the cell lines are
summarized in Supplemental Table 3. We compared the
drug sensitivity profiles of these cells. We evaluated drug
effects in these Cell-line screenings with the same method
as in PDX screenings, that is, with the image analyzer
to make the assay conditions equal. The relationships

between drug sensitivity profiles among PDX cells were
weak, whereas those among cell lines were strong. The
correlation coefficients between PhLO and PhLH, PhLO
and PhLK, and PhLH and PhLK were 0.215, 0.375, and
0.554, respectively, while those between NPhA1 and
ALL-1, NPhA1 and TCC-Y/sr, and ALL-1 and TCC-Y/sr
were 0.817, 0.909, and 0.706, respectively (Supplemental

Figure 2: Comparison between PDX-cell screening and Cell-line screening. A. Flow chart of screenings. PhLO were sacrificed
to obtain PDX cells on day 1. PDX cells (1.0 x 104 / well) and S17 cells (1.0 x 103 / well), ALL-1 cells (1.0 x 104 / well) alone, and S17
cells (1.0 x 103 / well) alone were seeded on 96-well plates as indicated on day 1. Drug-library compounds were added on day 2. After 48
h, PDX cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 and PI. The viability of PDX cells was analyzed with an image analyzer. The growth of
ALL-1 cells and S17 cells was measured by an MTT assay. B. Results of Cell-line screening. All compounds were plotted on a scattergram
on which the relative MTT values of ALL-1 cells and S17 cells were set on the Y-axis and X-axis, respectively. The relative MTT values
are relative values to the MTT value of the control cells treated with vehicle (DMSO). Effective compounds in PDX screening are plotted
in red. Verteporfin is represented in green. The gray line indicates that the MTT value of ALL-1 is 0.5. Many of the red dots were plotted
under the gray line, indicating that the effective compounds in PDX-cell screening were also frequently effective in Cell-line screening.
C. Results of PDX-cell screening. All compounds were plotted on a scattergram on which the relative viabilities of PDX cells and relative
MTT values of S17 cells were set on the Y-axis and X-axis, respectively. Effective compounds in Cell-line screening are plotted in red.
Verteporfin is represented in green. The gray line indicates that the viability of PDX cells was 0.5. Few of the red dots were plotted under
the gray line indicating that effective compounds in Cell-line screening were rarely effective in PDX-cell screening.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56244

Oncotarget

Figure 1). These results suggested that PDX cells had
more diverse drug sensitivity profiles than those of cell
lines.

Verteporfin co-operatively worked with dasatinib
ex vivo and in vivo

Verteporfin had strong anti-leukemic effects
through light-independent ROS production

ABL kinase inhibitors are the main components
of combined chemotherapies for Ph+ ALL, and dasatinib
has been proposed as the most effective for Ph+ ALL.
[17] Therefore, we determined whether verteporfin
had synergistic effects with dasatinib. A normalized
isobologram and fraction affected-combination index
plot were made in order to estimate drug interactions.
Most combination data points fell on the lower left area
of the isobologram (Figure 4A) and most combination
index values were less than 1.0 (mean, 0.73; range, 0.281.34, Figure 4B and Supplemental Table 4). These results
indicated the existence of synergistic anti-leukemic effects
between verteporfin and dasatinib.
We next examined the anti-leukemic effect of
verteporfin in vivo. In clinical use for ARMD, verteporfin
is administered at a maximum of once a week. Therefore,
in the first trial, we administered verteporfin (10 mg/kg) on
alternate days from days 14 to 28 after the transplantation
of leukemia cells; however, it did not lead to significant
reductions in the number of leukemia cells (data not
shown). Since its blood concentrations were very low,
3.7 nM to 21.8 nM, 24 h after its administration at 12.5
mg/kg (Supplemental Figure 2A), continuous infusion
appeared to be required in order for it to exert its antileukemia effects. We used osmotic pumps that delivered
drugs by an osmotic process at a controlled rate for
continuous infusion. The mean blood concentration of
verteporfin after the implantation of osmotic pumps
was 654 nM, approximately 3 folds higher than its GI50
in the ex vivo experiments (Supplemental Figure 2B).
We assessed the in vivo effects of verteporfin using this
system. Twelve NOG mice transplanted with PhLO
cells were treated with vehicle, verteporfin, dasatinib, or
a combination of both from days 22 to 28, as shown in
Figure 5A. The body weights of mice were similar among
each group on day 28, suggesting that drug toxicity was
not severe in any group (Supplemental Figure 2C). Single
therapies with verteporfin and dasatinib significantly
reduced the leukemia cell ratio, and combined therapy
further reduced the number of leukemia cells in the spleen
(Figure 5B). Both of the single therapies had weaker
anti-leukemic effects in bone marrow than in the spleen,
however the combination therapy showed significantly
enhanced effects (Figure 5C). These results indicated that
verteporfin exhibited anti-leukemic activity in Ph+ ALL
when administered by itself and also in combination with
dasatinib in vivo. We further investigated the effect of
verteporfin on other 3 PDX models. Significant reduction
of leukemia cells in spleen was observed in PhLI mice,
whereas the effect was not significant in PhLK and PhLH
mice (Figure 5D), suggesting sensitivity of verteporfin
were various in vivo. We finally examined the effect of
verteporfin on normal hematopoiesis and found that

The structural formula of verteporfin is shown in
Figure 3A. Verteporfin is an example of a photosensitizer,
which absorbs photons at specific wavelengths, induces
the production of ROS, and then exerts cytotoxic effects.
Verteporfin is currently used in photodynamic therapy for
ARMD in which laser irradiation to the retina is performed
15 min after its intravenous administration in order to
prevent angiogenesis. We compared the dose-dependency
of its anti-leukemic effects among 3 PDX cells and 3 cell
lines ex vivo. In addition to PhLO and ALL-1, PhLH,
another Ph+ ALL PDX cell, and TCC-Y/sr, another Ph+
ALL cell line, were examined. PhLH and TCC-Y/sr
both have the T315I mutation in BCR-ABL. PDX cells
were more sensitive to verteporfin than cell lines. The
concentrations to cause 50% growth inhibition (GI50)
for PhLO, PhLH, and PhLK were 228 nM, 395 nM, and
538 nM, respectively, whereas GI50 for ALL-1, TCC-Y/
sr, and NPhA1 were 3.93 µM, 2.11 µM, and 5.61 µM,
respectively (Figure 3B). These results were consistent
with the results of the screenings. Although the T315I
mutation in BCR-ABL leads to strong resistance to ABL
kinase inhibitors [7], it did not cause significant resistance
to verteporfin.
Since we performed all these experiments under
minimum white fluorescent light, the cytotoxicity observed
was considered to be independent of light. In order to
clarify the mechanisms underlying light-independent
cytotoxicity, we examined the type of cell death induced
by verteporfin, and found that it induced apoptosis in all
4 PDX cells (Figure 3C). We speculated that verteporfin
produced ROS to some extent without light activation,
which lead to apoptosis in PDX cells because of their high
sensitivity to oxidative stress. We found that verteporfin
produced ROS in a light-independent manner in all 4 PDX
cells to the same extent as menadione, a well-known ROS
producer among various cells [16] (Figure 3D). In order
to further confirm the involvement of oxidative stress
in verteporfin-induced cytotoxicity, we investigated the
effects of glutathione (GSH), a major reducing agent in
cells, on its cytotoxicity. GSH significantly reduced the
sensitivity of 2 out of 3 PDX cells to verteporfin (Figure
3E), indicating the involvement of ROS production in the
light-independent cytotoxicity of verteporfin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56245

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Verteporfin showed strong anti-leukemic effects through light-independent ROS production. A. Chemical

structure of verteporfin. B. Dose-dependent anti-leukemic effects of verteporfin on PDX cells and Ph+ ALL cell lines. PDX cells cocultured with S17 cells and mono-cultured cell lines were treated with the indicated concentrations of verteporfin for 48 h. Viabilities
were detected using a flow cytometer and presented as relative values to the viabilities of untreated cells. Each point represents the mean
value for at least 3 independent experiments. Error bars show standard deviations. PDX cells were more sensitive to verteporfin than cell
lines. C. Verteporfin reduced the mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨM) in PDX cells. The indicated PDX cells were treated with 1 µM
verteporfin, labeled with JC-1 reagents, and analyzed with a flow cytometer. The ratio of low ΔΨM PDX cells was plotted on a bar graph.
D. Verteporfin induced ROS production in PDX cells. The indicated PDX cells were incubated with verteporfin (2 µM) or menadione (50
µM) for 3 h. Menadione was used as the positive control of a ROS inducer. ROS production was measured by CellROX Green Oxidative
Stress Reagents and plotted on a bar chart. E. GSH prevented the verteporfin-induced apoptosis in PDX cells. The indicated PDX cells
co-cultured with S17 cells with or without 2 mM GSH in the culture medium were treated with the indicated dose of verteporfin as in B..
GI50 of verteporfin of the indicated PDX cells with or without GSH were determined and plotted on a bar chart. **: p < 0.001. GI50 were
determined as results of at least 3 independent experiments. Error bars indicate standard deviations. GSH partly abolished the cytotoxicity
of verteporfin in two of three PDX cells, suggesting that oxidative stress played a role in its cytotoxic effects.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56246

Oncotarget

verteporfin did not significantly reduce the number of
peripheral blood cells and bone marrow mononuclear cells
(Supplemental Figure 3A and 3B), supporting the safety
of verteporfin.

23 compounds including verteporfin were effective in
PDX cell screening, but were not in Cell-line screening.
Although some of these differences in drug sensitivity
may have been due to differences between the primary
leukemia cells of ALL-1 cells and PhLO, based on the
molecular pathological homogeneity of Ph+ ALL, many
of these differences may be attributed to differences
between PDX cells and cell lines. These results showed
the difficulty in selecting the effective compounds for
primary tumor cells by Cell-line screening and the
superiority of PDX-cell screening in the development of
anti-tumor drugs. Of note, the result that PDX cells had
more diverse drug sensitivity profiles than those of cell
lines (Supplemental Figure 1) was important. Since cell
lines are tumor cells that are strongly selected based on
growth rates under ex vivo culture, cell lines may lose the
diversity of drug sensitivity during the establishment of
cell lines from primary tumor cells. These results indicated
the difficulty of choosing effective compounds for primary
tumor cells by Cell-line screening and the superiority of
PDX-cell screening in the development of anti-tumor
drugs. The best method to search for compounds that
commonly show strong anti-tumor effects in multiple
PDX cells may be by multiple PDX-cell screenings.
We cannot currently conclude that PDX-cell
screening is superior, because we need to determine
whether this screening has the ability to select drugs

Discussion
Using PDX-cell screening, we herein demonstrated
that verteporfin exerted strong anti-tumor effects on Ph+
ALL. It produced ROS in leukemia cells and induced
apoptosis, which was a different mechanism of action from
conventional anti-tumor drugs. This drug had weak antileukemic effects on cell lines in spite of its strong antileukemic effects on PDX cells. Thus, Cell-line screening
did not select this drug as a candidate anti-leukemic drug.
This is an exceptional case. Cell-line screening was more
sensitive than PDX-cell screening and discriminated many
(597) compounds as effective; however, 94% of these
compounds were not effective for PDX cells (Figure 2C).
This was markedly different from 62% of the effective
compounds in PDX-cell screening also being effective
in Cell-line screening (Figure 2B). Even when effective
compounds were strictly selected, that is, only compounds
that inhibited growth by more than 80% being selected
as effective compounds in Cell-line screening, only 11
(12%) out of 93 effective compounds were also effective
in PDX-cell screening (data not shown). In addition,

Figure 4: Verteporfin co-operated with dasatinib. A. A normalized isobologram between verteporfin and dasatinib. PhLO cells

co-cultured with S17 cells were treated with 16 combinations of verteporfin (60nM, 120nM, 180nM, and 240nM) and dasatinib (12nM,
24nM, 36nM, and 48nM). The viabilities of cells treated with each combination were measured using a flow cytometer after 48 h. Sixteen
experimental data points are plotted. The list of markers of data points are shown in Supplemental Table 4. The normalized doses of
dasatinib ((D)Dasatinib / (Dx)Dasatinib) and verteporfin ((D)Verteporfin / (Dx)Verteporfin) are shown on the Y-axis and X-axis, respectively. The diagonal
line represents CI = 1.0, the line of additive effects. The plot below the diagonal line represents synergistic effect, and above represents
antagonistic effects. B. Fraction affected-CI plot. CI values and dead cell ratios in A. were plotted on the Y-axis and X-axis of a scatter gram,
respectively. CI values were less than 1.0 in most of the plots (CI mean, 0.73; CI range, 0.28-1.34), indicating synergistic anti-leukemic
effects between verteporfin and dasatinib. Experiments performed in duplicate and mean values were plotted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56247

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Verteporfin and dasatinib co-operated to reduce the number of leukemia cells in vivo. A. Schematic presentation

of the treatment schedule. NOG mice transplanted with PhLO cells were treated with vehicle, verteporfin, dasatinib, or both from days 22
to 28, as indicated. B. Leukemia cell number reductions in the spleen after the treatment with verteporfin and dasatinib. The leukemia cell
ratio in spleen cells was analyzed using a flow cytometer with anti-human CD19 antibodies. Leukemia cell ratios in all mice were plotted.
Single therapies with verteporfin and dasatinib significantly reduced the leukemia cell ratio. C. Leukemia cell number reductions in the
bone marrow after the treatment with verteporfin and dasatinib. The leukemia cell ratio in bone marrow cells was analyzed as in B.. The
combination therapy showed significantly enhanced effects, indicating synergistic effects between verteporfin and dasatinib in vivo. D.
Comparison of in vivo effect of verteporfin among 4 PDX models. NOG mice were transplanted with the indicated PDX cells were treated
with vehicle or verteporfin as in A.. Leukemia cell ratio in spleen was analyzed as in B.. **: p < 0.001, *: p < 0.05. The horizontal line is the
mean of measurements. Abbreviations, i.v.: intravenous injection; c.s.c.: continuous subcutaneous injection; i.p.: intraperitoneal injection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56248

Oncotarget

The anti-leukemic effects of this drug in vivo were
not as strong as those of dasatinib, and this drug was not
effective in 2 out of 4 PDX models, PhLK and PhLH
(Figure 5D). These will be because the blood concentration
of verteporfin was not very high, only approximately
3-fold higher than its GI50 for PhLO cells. GI50 for PhLK
and PhLH were about 2.4 and 1.7 times higher than PhLO
(Figure 3B), which would lead to verteporfin-resistance of
these mice model. Due to the poor solubility of verteporfin
and the limited volume of the osmotic pump (200 µl),
we were unable to administer more in this system. The
development of a better method for dissolving verteporfin
will enable higher blood concentrations and stronger antileukemic effects in vivo.
Verteporfin had synergistic anti-leukemic effects
with dasatinib. Previous studies reported the involvement
of ABL kinase in resistance to oxidative stress. The
nuclear translocation of c-ABL and activation of early
growth response protein 1 by c-ABL have been shown
to contribute resistance to oxidative stress. [22, 23] A
previous study demonstrated that adaphostin-induced
oxidative stress overcame resistance to imatinib, another
clinically used ABL kinase inhibitor, in Ph+ ALL. [24]
The inhibition of ABL kinase by dasatinib may attenuate
the tolerance of leukemia cells to oxidative stress, which
may function co-operatively with verteporfin-induced
oxidative stress. The uptake of verteporfin by the primary
cells of CML, another leukemia developed by BCR-ABL,
is greater than that by the normal mononuclear cells of
peripheral blood and bone marrow, which further explains
their co-operation in vivo.
In summary, we herein performed PDX-cell
screening using the PDX cells of Ph+ ALL, identified
oxidative stress as an important anti-leukemic mechanism
that co-operatively functions with ABL kinase inhibition,
and discovered verteporfin as an anti-leukemic ROS
inducer. By introducing the phenotype of primary cancer
cells at the earlier in vitro stages of drug development,
PDX-cell screening sheds new light on anti-cancer drug
development.

more efficiently that have strong anti-tumor effects on
actual cancer cells in patients. PDX-cell screening selects
anti-cancer reagents that cannot be identified by Cellline screening, and provides new candidates for anticancer drug development. PDX-cell screening may detect
anti-cancer drugs among existing drugs that have been
overlooked for their anti-tumor activities.
We revealed that the light-independent antileukemic effects of verteporfin were attributed to ROS
production without light. Pyruvinium pamoate, a ROS
inducer, was also selected by PDX-cell screening using
lymphoma PDX cells and exhibited strong anti-lymphoma
activity in PDX mice in our previous study. Pyruvinium
pamoate, similar to verteporfin, had strong anti-leukemic
effects on PDX cells, but only had moderate effects on
ALL-1 in this screening (Table 1). These results indicated
that PDX cells were more sensitive to oxidative stress than
cell lines. Reducing agents such as 2-mercaptoethanol are
often added to culture media during the early stage of the
establishment of cell lines including ALL-1. [18] The
addition of reducing agents becomes unnecessary after
the establishment of cell lines in many cases, suggesting
that cell lines obtain resistance to oxidative stress during
their establishment. PDX-cell screening may be a useful
tool for discovering oxidative-stress-inducing drugs that
are hard to select using Cell-line screening.
Verteporfin is activated by light, most efficiently
at a wavelength of 690 nm, and produces ROS in cells.
Its cytotoxicity for some cancer cells such as pancreatic
cancer, breast cancer, and leukemia has been reported;
however, its cytotoxicity had been activated by light in all
these cases. [19-21] Therefore, pioneering cancer therapy
using verteporfin has been localized therapy combined
with photoirradiation. [19] This is the first study on the
light-independent cytotoxicity of verteporfin. This effect
has been overlooked for a long period of time despite
intensive investigations being conducted on this drug,
possibly because it had weak cytotoxicity for cell lines
and its cytotoxicity for primary tumor cells was hard
to estimate. This result will promote the application of
this drug to systemic chemotherapy for cancer and may
markedly expand its potential uses.
Verteporfin was originally designed to be excreted
rapidly after photoirradiation in order to prevent side
effects such as photodermatosis. Therefore, the half-life of
this drug is short at 5.6 h. Verteporfin is an FDA-approved
drug for ARDM; however, its approved usage is for single
intravenous administration. Repetitive administration
is only permitted one time with an interval at least one
week. Since verteporfin did not exert its anti-leukemic
effects in vivo with an alternate day administration
protocol (data not shown), non-approved usage such as
continuous infusion is needed when verteporfin is applied
to the treatment of leukemia. No safety information for
such usage is currently available, and therefore, a phase I
study is needed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Materials and Methods
Cells
S17 cells, a murine bone marrow stromal cell lines,
were previously described. [14] S17 cells were cultured
in Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) for
maintenance. ALL-1 cells, TCC-Y/sr cells, and NPhA1
were maintained in 10% FBS-containing Iscove’s modified
Dulbecco’s medium (ISCOVE) and 10% FBS-containing
RPMI medium, respectively. [25, 26] All cell lines have
not been tested for authentication in our laboratory.
56249

Oncotarget

Reagents and antibodies

Cell-line screening

Verteporfin and reduced-form GSH were purchased
from Wako Pure Chemical Industries (Osaka, Japan).
Dasatinib and menadione was obtained from Chemscene
(Princeton, NJ, USA) and Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO,
USA), respectively. An anti-human CD19 antibody and
anti-mouse CD45 antibody were purchased from BD
Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA).

ALL-1 cells (1.0 x 104 /well) and S17 cells (1.0 x
103 /well) were seeded on 96-well plates on day 1. Library
compounds were added to each well on day 2. MTT
assays were performed using Cell Counting Kit-8 reagent
(Dojindo Laboratories, Kumamoto, Japan) on day 4.

Detection of apoptosis and ROS generation

Compound library

These assays were performed as described
previously. [15]

A library of 3440 compounds mainly consisting of
off-patent drugs and pharmacologically active reagents
was kindly provided by The Drug Discovery Initiative
(The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan) and described
previously. [15]

Estimation of drug interactions
PDX cells co-cultured with S17 cells were treated
with 16 combinations of verteporfin (60 nM, 120 nM,
180 nM, and 240 nM) and dasatinib (12 nM, 24 nM, 36
nM, and 48 nM). The viabilities of cells treated with each
combination were measured after 48 h using FACS Aria
flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). In
order to estimate drug interaction between verteporfin and
dasatinib, a normalized isobologram and fraction affectedcombination index (CI) plot were made using CompuSyn
software (ComboSyn, Paramus, NJ, USA). [27] CI values
greater than 1.0 indicated antagonistic effects, equal to 1.0
additive effects, and below 1.0 synergistic effects.

Establishment of PDX cells
PhLO and PhLK cells were established in a previous
study. [12] PhLH and PhLI were established as described
previously. [12, 14, 15] Briefly, primary Ph+ ALL cells
(6.8-20 X 106 cells) were injected into the tail vein of
non-irradiated 8-week-old male NOG mice. To prevent
human T cell expansion, 0.1 mg anti-CD3 antibody
(Janssen Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan) was injected on
the same day. For the in vivo passage of PDX cells, BM
cells or spleen cells (5 X 106 cells) from a PDX mouse
were injected into another NOG mouse with an 8-week
interval. Primary cells were collected from patients after
obtaining written informed consent, and the Institutional
Review Board of Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine approved this study.

Estimation of in vivo drug effects
PhLO cells (1.0 x 107 /mouse) were injected
intravenously into 6-week-old male NOG mice, which
were then treated with vehicle, verteporfin (140 milligram
(mg)/kilogram (kg)/day), dasatinib (20 mg/kg/day), and a
combination of these drugs from days 22 to 28. Verteporfin
was administered by continuous subcutaneous infusion
(c.s.c.) using Alzet osmotic pumps (Alzet, Cupertino, CA,
USA). An intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) was performed
for dasatinib. All mice were sacrificed on day 28 and the
chimerism of leukemia cells was investigated by flow
cytometer using an anti-human CD19 antibody and antimouse CD45 antibody. Blood concentrations of verteporfin
were calculated by LCMS-2020 (Shimadzu Corporation,
Kyoto, Japan). All animal experiments were approved by
the Nagoya University Animal Ethics Committee.

PDX-cell screening
S17 cells (1.0 x 103 /well) and PhLO cells (1.0 x
10 /well) were seeded on 96-well plates in 10% FBScontaining RPMI medium on day 1. On day 2, the library
compounds (2 µM each) were added to each well. After
48 hours (h) on day 4, total and dead PDX cells were
stained with Hoechst 33342 and Propidium Iodide (PI),
respectively. Total and dead PDX cells were counted
separately from S17 cells using an Array Scan VTI HCS
image analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA) as described previously. [15] Since the
library contained some photosensitive compounds, all
experiments were performed under conditions that avoided
sunlight and laser light.
4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analyses
Differences between two groups were analyzed
with the Student’s t-test. Differences between more than
three groups were examined with the Tukey-Kramer test.
Statistical analyses were performed by R software (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria)
56250

Oncotarget

and p < 0.05 was considered significant.

International ALL Trial MRC UKALLXII/ECOG2993.
Blood. 2009; 113:4489-4496.

Acknowledgments

3.	 Wang L, Wang Y, Tang W, Dou H-B, Shan J-H and Hu
J. The superiority of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation from unrelated donor over chemotherapy for
adult patients with high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in first remission. International Journal of Hematology.
2013; 98:569-577.

We thank the Drug Discovery Initiative (The Tokyo
University, Tokyo, Japan) for providing the Prestwick and
Lopack Chemical Library. We are very grateful to Yoko
Matsuyama and Chika Wakamatsu for their technical
assistance.

4.	 Koppikar P, Bhagwat N, Kilpivaara O, Manshouri T, Adli
M, Hricik T, Liu F, Saunders LM, Mullally A, AbdelWahab O, Leung L, Weinstein A, Marubayashi S, Goel
A, Gonen M, Estrov Z, et al. Heterodimeric JAK-STAT
activation as a mechanism of persistence to JAK2 inhibitor
therapy. Nature. 2012; 489:155-159.

Conflicts of Interest
K.S. is an employee of Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Co. Ltd., T.N. received research funding from Fujifilm
Corporation. H.K. received research funding from Chugai
Pharmaceutical Co. LTD., Bristol-Myers Squibb, KyowaHakko Kirin Co. LTD., Zenyaku Kogyo Company LTD.,
and Fujifilm Corporation. The other authors have no
potential conflicts of interest.

5.	

6.	 Bewry NN, Nair RR, Emmons MF, Boulware D,
Pinilla-Ibarz J and Hazlehurst LA. Stat3 contributes to
resistance toward BCR-ABL inhibitors in a bone marrow
microenvironment model of drug resistance. Molecular
cancer therapeutics. 2008; 7:3169-3175.

Grant support
This work was supported by MHLW KAKENHI
Grant Number H22-3jigan-Ippan-010 and H26Kakushintekigan-Ippan-133, and JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Numbers 23591381, 25118711, 25293218, 25670449, and
15K09472. This work was also supported by the Program
to Disseminate Tenure Tracking System, MEXT, Japan
and the Platform for Drug Discovery, Informatics, and
Structural Life Science from the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.

7.	 von Bubnoff N, Schneller F, Peschel C and Duyster J.
BCR-ABL gene mutations in relation to clinical resistance
of Philadelphia-chromosome-positive leukaemia to STI571:
a prospective study. The Lancet. 2002; 359:487-491.
8.	 Wilding JL and Bodmer WF. Cancer cell lines for drug
discovery and development. Cancer research. 2014;
74:2377-2384.
9.	 Zhao X, Liu Z, Yu L, Zhang Y, Baxter P, Voicu H,
Gurusiddappa S, Luan J, Su JM, Leung HC and Li XN.
Global gene expression profiling confirms the molecular
fidelity of primary tumor-based orthotopic xenograft
mouse models of medulloblastoma. Neuro-oncology. 2012;
14:574-583.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

10.	 DeRose YS, Wang G, Lin YC, Bernard PS, Buys SS, Ebbert
MT, Factor R, Matsen C, Milash BA, Nelson E, Neumayer
L, Randall RL, Stijleman IJ, Welm BE and Welm AL.
Tumor grafts derived from women with breast cancer
authentically reflect tumor pathology, growth, metastasis
and disease outcomes. Nature medicine. 2011; 17:15141520.

References
1.	

Bauer RC, Sanger J, Peschel C, Duyster J and von Bubnoff
N. Sequential inhibitor therapy in CML: in vitro simulation
elucidates the pattern of resistance mutations after secondand third-line treatment. Clinical cancer research. 2013;
19:2962-2972.

11.	 Bonnet D and Dick JE. Human acute myeloid leukemia is
organized as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive
hematopoietic cell. Nature medicine. 1997; 3:730-737.

2.	 Fielding AK, Rowe JM, Richards SM, Buck G, Moorman
AV, Durrant IJ, Marks DI, McMillan AK, Litzow MR,
Lazarus HM, Foroni L, Dewald G, Franklin IM, Luger
SM, Paietta E, Wiernik PH, et al. Prospective outcome
data on 267 unselected adult patients with Philadelphia
chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia
confirms superiority of allogeneic transplantation over
chemotherapy in the pre-imatinib era: results from the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Donato NJ, Wu JY, Stapley J, Gallick G, Lin H, Arlinghaus
R and Talpaz M. BCR-ABL independence and LYN kinase
overexpression in chronic myelogenous leukemia cells
selected for resistance to STI571. Blood. 2003; 101:690698.

12.	 Tanizaki R, Nomura Y, Miyata Y, Minami Y, Abe A,
Hanamura A, Sawa M, Murata M, Kiyoi H, Matsushita
T and Naoe T. Irrespective of CD34 expression, lineagecommitted cell fraction reconstitutes and re-establishes
transformed Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemia in
NOD/SCID/IL-2Rgammac-/- mice. Cancer science. 2010;
101:631-638.

56251

Oncotarget

13.	 Hidalgo M, Bruckheimer E, Rajeshkumar NV, GarridoLaguna I, De Oliveira E, Rubio-Viqueira B, Strawn S, Wick
MJ, Martell J and Sidransky D. A pilot clinical study of
treatment guided by personalized tumorgrafts in patients
with advanced cancer. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2011;
10:1311-1316.

20.	 Lo VC, Akens MK, Moore S, Yee AJ, Wilson BC and
Whyne CM. Beyond radiation therapy: photodynamic
therapy maintains structural integrity of irradiated healthy
and metastatically involved vertebrae in a pre-clinical in
vivo model. Breast cancer research and treatment. 2012;
135:391-401.

14.	 Kuwatsuka Y, Minami M, Minami Y, Sugimoto K,
Hayakawa F, Miyata Y, Abe A, Goff DJ, Kiyoi H and
Naoe T. The mTOR inhibitor, everolimus (RAD001),
overcomes resistance to imatinib in quiescent Ph-positive
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. Blood cancer journal.
2011; 1:e17.

21.	 Jamieson CH, McDonald WN and Levy JG. Preferential
uptake of benzoporphyrin derivative by leukemic versus
normal cells. Leukemia research. 1990; 14:209-219.
22.	 Nihira K, Taira N, Miki Y and Yoshida K. TTK/Mps1
controls nuclear targeting of c-Abl by 14-3-3-coupled
phosphorylation in response to oxidative stress. Oncogene.
2008; 27:7285-7295.

15.	 Sugimoto K, Hayakawa F, Shimada S, Morishita T,
Shimada K, Katakai T, Tomita A, Kiyoi H and Naoe T.
Discovery of a drug targeting microenvironmental support
for lymphoma cells by screening using patient-derived
xenograft cells. Scientific reports. 2015; 5:13054.

23.	 Stuart JR, Kawai H, Tsai KK, Chuang EY and Yuan ZM.
c-Abl regulates early growth response protein (EGR1) in
response to oxidative stress. Oncogene. 2005; 24:80858092.

16.	 Beck R, Pedrosa RC, Dejeans N, Glorieux C, Leveque
P, Gallez B, Taper H, Eeckhoudt S, Knoops L, Calderon
PB and Verrax J. Ascorbate/menadione-induced oxidative
stress kills cancer cells that express normal or mutated
forms of the oncogenic protein Bcr-Abl. An in vitro and in
vivo mechanistic study. Invest New Drugs. 2011; 29:891900.

24.	 Chandra J, Tracy J, Loegering D, Flatten K, Verstovsek S,
Beran M, Gorre M, Estrov Z, Donato N, Talpaz M, Sawyers
C, Bhalla K, Karp J, Sausville E and Kaufmann SH.
Adaphostin-induced oxidative stress overcomes BCR/ABL
mutation-dependent and -independent imatinib resistance.
Blood. 2006; 107:2501-2506.
25.	 Cesano A, O’Connor R, Lange B, Finan J, Rovera G and
Santoli D. Homing and progression patterns of childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemias in severe combined
immunodeficiency mice. Blood. 1991; 77:2463-2474.

17.	 Talpaz M, Shah NP, Kantarjian H, Donato N, Nicoll J,
Paquette R, Cortes J, O’Brien S, Nicaise C, Bleickardt
E, Blackwood-Chirchir MA, Iyer V, Chen TT, Huang F,
Decillis AP and Sawyers CL. Dasatinib in imatinib-resistant
Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemias. N Engl J
Med. 2006; 354:2531-2541.

26.	 Kano Y, Akutsu M, Tsunoda S, Mano H, Sato Y, Honma
Y and Furukawa Y. In vitro cytotoxic effects of a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor STI571 in combination with commonly
used antileukemic agents. Blood. 2001; 97:1999-2007.

18.	 Epstein AL and Kaplan HS. Feeder layer and nutritional
requirements for the establishment and cloning of human
malignant lymphoma cell lines. Cancer research. 1979;
39:1748-1759.

27.	 Chou TC. Theoretical basis, experimental design, and
computerized simulation of synergism and antagonism in
drug combination studies. Pharmacol Rev. 2006; 58:621681.

19.	 Huggett MT, Jermyn M, Gillams A, Illing R, Mosse S,
Novelli M, Kent E, Bown SG, Hasan T, Pogue BW and
Pereira SP. Phase I/II study of verteporfin photodynamic
therapy in locally advanced pancreatic cancer. British
journal of cancer. 2014; 110:1698-1704.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56252

Oncotarget

