Research Article

A Chemical Screen Identifies Anisomycin as an Anoikis Sensitizer
That Functions by Decreasing FLIP Protein Synthesis
1

1

1

1

1

Imtiaz A. Mawji, Craig D. Simpson, Marcela Gronda, Moyo A. Williams, Rose Hurren,
1
2
2
1
Clare J. Henderson, Alessandro Datti, Jeffrey L. Wrana, and Aaron D. Schimmer
1

Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Hospital and 2Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mt. Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Abstract
Malignant epithelial cells with metastatic potential resist
apoptosis that normally occurs upon loss of anchorage from
the extracellular matrix, a process termed ‘‘anoikis.’’ Resistance to anoikis enables malignant cells to survive in an
anchorage-independent manner, which leads to the formation
of distant metastases. To understand the regulation of anoikis,
we designed, automated, and conducted a high-throughput
chemical screen for anoikis sensitizers. PPC-1 anoikis–
resistant prostate cancer cells were seeded in hydrogel-coated
ultralow binding plates for suspension conditions and
standard tissue culture plates to promote adhesion. After
seeding, cells were treated with aliquots from a library of
previously characterized small molecules, and viability was
assessed using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt,
assay. From this chemical screen, we identified anisomycin
that induced apoptosis in suspension conditions, but was not
toxic to these cells grown under adherent conditions.
Anisomycin sensitized cells to anoikis by decreasing levels
of the caspase-8 inhibitor FLIP and subsequently activating
the death receptor pathway of caspase activation. Although
anisomycin activated c-Jun-NH2-kinase and p38, these kinases
were not functionally important for the effect of anisomycin
on anoikis and FLIP. Rather, anisomycin decreased FLIP and
sensitized cells to anoikis by inhibiting its protein synthesis.
Finally, we showed that anisomycin decreased distal tumor
formation in a mouse model of prostate cancer metastases.
Thus, a novel chemical screen identified anisomycin as an
anoikis sensitizer that acts by decreasing FLIP protein synthesis. Our results suggest that FLIP is a suppressor of anoikis
and inhibiting FLIP protein synthesis may be a useful antimetastatic strategy. [Cancer Res 2007;67(17):8307–15]

Introduction
In advanced tumors, malignant cells with metastatic potential
can gain independence from the extracellular matrix (ECM) and
can therefore survive in an anchorage-independent manner (1–6).
This anchorage-independent survival enables metastatic cells to
survive after detachment from their resident tumor and migrate to
the lymphatic and circulatory systems. Once within the circulation,
cells with high metastatic potential can evade immune surveillance, invade distal organs, and initiate de novo tumor growth.

Requests for reprints: Aaron D. Schimmer, Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess
Margaret Hospital, 610 University Avenue Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2M9. Phone: 416946-2838; E-mail: aaron.schimmer@utoronto.ca.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1687

www.aacrjournals.org

Although metastasis is a multistep process, anchorage-independent
survival represents a critical step in the early development of
metastatic disease (2, 7). Therefore, the identification of pathways
that regulate anchorage-independent survival is important to
understanding the process of metastases and may provide novel
targets for antimetastatic strategies.
Nonmalignant cells undergo apoptosis upon detachment from
the ECM, a self-initiated process termed ‘‘anoikis’’ (8, 9). Studies in
endothelial cells, nonmalignant epithelial cells, and, more recently,
malignant epithelial cells, suggest that anoikis can occur through
self-initiated activation of the death receptor signaling pathway
(6, 9–11). Apoptosis that proceeds through the death receptor
pathway is generally mediated by the upstream caspase, caspase-8,
that induces apoptosis by activating downstream effector caspases
such as caspase-3.
One mechanism of resistance to death receptor pathway
activation is overexpression of the endogenous dominant negative
homologue of caspase-8, FLIP [c-Fas–associated death domain-like
interleukin-1 (IL-1)–converting enzyme-like inhibitory protein];
(12–15). In contrast to nonmalignant cells, cancerous epithelial
cells with metastatic potential have increased levels of FLIP and fail
to down-regulate this protein after detachment from the ECM
(6, 16).
To better understand the regulation of anoikis, we developed a
novel high-throughput screen to identify small molecules that can
sensitize resistant malignant cells to this process. By screening a
library of well-characterized compounds, we identified anisomycin
as a potent and specific anoikis sensitizer. Anisomycin initiated
anoikis in a caspase-8–dependent manner, due to its inhibition
of FLIP protein synthesis and independent of its ability to activate
c-Jun-NH2-kinase (JNK) and p38. Consistent with its activity as
an anoikis sensitizer, anisomycin also reduced the metastatic
potential of human prostate cancer cells seeded in the mouse circulation. Together, these studies define anisomycin as a potent and
specific anoikis sensitizer and suggest that suppression of FLIP
synthesis may be a useful strategy to reduce metastases.

Materials and Methods
Reagents. The LOPAC chemical library (1,280 compounds) was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and the Prestwick chemical library (1,120
compounds) was purchased from Prestwick Chemical. Anisomycin,
homoharringtonine, cycloheximide, and emetine were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. z-VAD-fmk, SP6000125, and SB203580 were purchased from
Calbiochem.
Cell culture. E1A transformed wild-type, and caspase-8 / mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEF; gifts from S. Benchimol, York University,
Toronto, Canada) were maintained in DMEM medium. PPC-1, PC-3, DU145, LNCaP, and OVCAR-3 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640. MBMDA468 cells were maintained in DMEM medium. All culture media was
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone) and antibiotics.

8307

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
dsRED-PPC-1 cells were engineered by transfecting PPC-1 cells with
pdsRed2-C1 (Clontech Laboratories). Cells stably expressing dsRed2 protein
were selected with 1 mg/mL G418 for 5 days, and G418-resistant colonies
were pooled and enriched for dsRed2 expression using a MoFlo fluorescent
activated cell sorter (DAKO). All cells were grown on tissue culture–treated
polystyrene for adherent conditions or on hydrogel-coated ultralow binding
plates for suspension conditions (Corning). Cells in suspension were gently
pipetted at least once during the suspension culture to prevent the
formation of stable cell spheroids. All cells were cultured at 37jC in a humid
atmosphere with 5% CO2.
High-throughput anoikis assay. Liquid handling was done by a Biomek
FX Laboratory Automation Workstation (Beckman Coulter). PPC-1 cells
were seeded into 96-well polystyrene and 96-well ultralow binding hydrogelcoated tissue culture plates to represent anchorage-dependent (adherent)
and anchorage-independent (suspension) conditions, respectively. Compounds were transferred from the chemical libraries to cells in adherent and
suspension conditions in parallel to a final compound concentration of
5 Amol/L and a final DMSO concentration (compound solvent) of 0.2%.
Cells were incubated in standard tissue culture conditions for 20 h. Cell
viability was assessed using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt (MTS) reduction assay (Promega) on a SpectraMax384 spectrophotometer (Molecular
Devices) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Cell viability was calculated relative to vehicle-treated (0.2% DMSO) control wells on each plate.
Hits were defined empirically as compounds that preferentially reduced
viability under suspension conditions but not adherent conditions and
defined mathematically as (relative viability under suspension conditions) /
(relative viability under adherent conditions) z3 SDs below the mean of the
population of compounds tested.
Cell viability, apoptosis, colony formation, and caspase activation
assays. Cell viability was assessed using the MTS reduction assay according
to the manufacturer’s protocols and as previous described (17). Apoptosis
was measured by flow cytometry to detect cell surface Annexin V expression
and propidium iodide uptake (Biovision) as previously described (18).
Clonogenic growth after suspension culture was measured using colony
formation assays as previously described (6). Briefly, equal volumes of
suspension-cultured cells were seeded into six-well plates and grown in
adherent conditions for 1 week. Colonies were fixed, stained with methylene
blue, and counted. Caspase activation in intact cells was measured by flow
cytometry using FITC-labeled, cell-permeable peptides that bind preferentially and reversibly to caspase-3, caspase-8, or caspase-9 (Cell Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s directions and as previously
described (18).
Small interfering RNA transfections. Cells (3.0  106) were seeded in
100-mm dishes and transfected the next day using LipofectAMINE 2000
(Invitrogen) and double-stranded small interfering RNAs (siRNA) targeting
either FLIP (siFLIP) or luciferase (siCtrl; Smartpool, Dharmacon). Cells were
reseeded 6 h posttransfection into 24-well plates at 7.5  104 per well, in
either adherent or suspension conditions for 16 to 20 h, and then assayed
for viability by Annexin V and propidium iodide staining.
Reverse-transcriptase real-time PCR. First-strand cDNA was synthesized from 1 Ag of DNase-treated total cellular RNA using random primers
and SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s protocols. Real-time PCR assays were done in triplicate with
100 ng of RNA equivalent cDNA, SYBR Green PCR Master mix (Applied
Biosystems), and 400 nmol/L of gene-specific primers. Reactions were
processed and analyzed on an ABI 7700 Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems). Forward/reverse PCR primer pairs for human cDNAs
were as follows: Flip L forward 5¶-CCTAGGAATCTGCCTGATAATCGA-3¶,
reverse 5¶-TGGGATATACCATGCATACTGAGATG-3¶; Flip S forward 5¶-GCAGCAATCCAAAAGAGTCTCA-3¶, reverse 5¶-TTTTCCAAGAATTTTCAGATCAGGA-3¶; and 18S forward 5¶-AGGAATTGACGGAAGGGCAC-3¶, reverse
5¶-GGACATCTAAGGGCATCACA-3¶. Relative mRNA expression was determined using the DDC T method as described (17).
Immunoblot analysis. Cells were lysed with radioimmunoprecipitation
assay buffer [10 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100,
0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 5 mmol/L EDTA] containing Complete

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

protease inhibitors (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (0.4 mmol/L
sodium orthovanadate, 10 mmol/L sodium fluoride, and 10 mmol/L
tetrasodium PPi), all from Sigma. Immunoblot assays were done as
described previously (18). Briefly, protein lysates were quantified (Protein
Assay Dye Reagent or Dc Protein Assay, Bio-Rad), resolved by electrophoresis through 10% SDS-PAGE, and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride
membranes. Membranes were incubated with mouse monoclonal antihuman FLIP (clone NF6, 1:500 v/v dilution, Alexis), mouse monoclonal antihuman caspase-8 (clone 3-1-9, 1:1,000 v/v dilution, BD Biosciences), mouse
monoclonal anti-human JNK-1 (1:200, v/v dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), mouse monoclonal anti-human phosphorylated JNK (1:1,000 v/v
dilution, Cell Signalling), mouse monoclonal anti-human p38 (1:1,000 v/v
dilution, Cell Signalling), mouse monoclonal anti-human phosphorylated
p38 (1:1,000 v/v dilution, Cell Signalling), mouse monoclonal anti-human
phosphorylated c-Jun (1:1,000 v/v dilution, Cell Signalling), mouse
monoclonal anti-human actin (clone AC-15, 1:30,000 v/v dilution, SigmaAldrich), or monoclonal anti-human tubulin (1:30,000 v/v dilution, Sigma).
Primary antibodies were detected with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–
conjugated secondary antibodies [goat anti-mouse IgG (Bio-Rad), protein A
HRP (GE), and goat anti-mouse IgG (GE)] and enhanced chemiluminescence (West Pico Reagent, Pierce).
Protein synthesis assay. PPC-1 cells (1.0  105) were seeded in 24-well
plates. The next day, cells were treated with increasing concentrations of
anisomycin. One hour after treatment, 10 ACi [3H]leucine (Perkin-Elmer)
was added to each well and the cells were incubated for an additional hour.
After incubation, cells were harvested, washed once with PBS, and protein
synthesis was terminated by exposing cells to 15% ice-cold trichloroacetic
acid for 20 min. Cells were washed with water to remove trichloroacetic
acid and unbound [3H]leucine and then lysed with 0.1 mol/L NaOH-0.1%
SDS. [3H]leucine incorporation was measured with a scintillation counter.
In vivo studies. The effects of anisomycin on distant tumor formation
in vivo were evaluated essentially as previously described (6). Briefly, dsREDPPC-1 cells that stably express dsRed2 fluorescent protein were treated in
culture with anisomycin (5 Amol/L) or buffer control for 16 h. After
treatment, 3.5  106 viable cells (as measured by trypan blue exclusion
assay) were either injected via the tail vein or s.c. into the hind limbs into
sublethally irradiated (3.5 Gy) male severe combined immunodeficient
(SCID) mice between ages 5 and 7 weeks. The number of cells injected was
at least 3-fold above the minimum threshold required for distal tumor
formation (data not shown). Mice injected with tumor cells s.c. were
maintained for 3 weeks and then sacrificed via carbon dioxide inhalation.
Tumors were excised and weighed. Mice injected with tumor cells i.v. were
maintained for 5 weeks after injection or until moribund, at which time the
animals were sacrificed via carbon dioxide inhalation and were dissected.
Red fluorescent tumors were detected via whole-body imaging and wholeorgan imaging using a Leica MZ FLIII fluorescent stereomicroscope with
a 100 W mercury lamp, a 560/40 excitation filter, and a 610 long-pass
emission filter. Images were acquired using a Leica DC350 digital camera at
0.8 magnification and analyzed using Image Pro Plus 6.0 (MediaCybernetics). A single common threshold was applied to identify and measure
fluorescence in each organ (19). The number of fluorescent spots and the
corresponding pixel area were recorded for each lung lobe. All quantification was done on unmanipulated images.
Mice were obtained from an in-house breeding program and housed in
laminar-flow cage racks under standardized environmental conditions with
ad libitum access to food and water. All experiments were done according
to the regulations of the Canadian Council on Animal Care.
Statistics. For the in vivo studies, nonparametric methods were used to
test for differences in the number of metastases. For comparisons of two
groups, the Mann-Whitney rank-sum test was used. In studies of distant
tumor formation in mice, survival times were compared with a log-rank
statistic, where the day of sacrifice was considered a censored event.

Results
Identification of small molecules that sensitize resistant
cells to anoikis. Resistance to anoikis permits malignant cells to

8308

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anisomycin Sensitizes Resistant Cells to Anoikis

survive after loss of attachment to their ECM and facilitates
metastases. Small molecules that restore sensitivity to anoikis
could serve as useful molecular probes to better understand the
regulation of this pathway. To identify such molecules, we
developed, automated, and conducted a high-throughput chemical
screen for anoikis sensitizers. In the optimized and automated
assay, PPC-1 cells were seeded in parallel in 96-well hydrogelcoated plates to prevent adhesion and 96-well standard tissue
culture plates to promote adhesion. Cells under suspension or
adherent conditions were treated with aliquots from the Prestwick
(n = 1,120) and LoPAC (n = 1,200) library of off-patent drugs and
chemicals ( final concentration 5 Amol/L and <0.2% DMSO).
Twenty hours after incubation, cell viability was measured by
MTS assay. The Z factor of the combined suspension and adherent
assay was 0.8, where the Z factor is defined as 1 [(3SD sample +
3SD of negative control) / (mean of sample
mean of negative
control)]. The Z factor is a measure of the variability of the data
and a Z factor of 1 is ideal and a Z factor of 0.5 denotes a very
robust screening assay (20). The results of the screen are shown in
Fig. 1A. The top hit from this screen was anisomycin that was
8.1 SDs below the mean of the population of compounds tested
(Fig. 1B). Anisomycin is an inhibitor the 28S rRNA that is known
to inhibit protein synthesis and activate the kinases JNK and p38
(21–25).

Anisomycin sensitizes resistant cells to anoikis. To validate
anisomycin as an anoikis sensitizer, PPC-1 cells were treated with
increasing concentrations of anisomycin under suspension and
adherent conditions, after which viability was measured by the
MTS assay. Anisomycin sensitized PPC-1 cells to anoikis with an
LD50 of 0.54 F 0.05 Amol/L (Fig. 1C). In contrast, its LD50 under
adherent conditions was >50 Amol/L. Sensitization to anoikis was
confirmed using a colony formation assay (Fig. 1D). To assess the
spectrum of activity of anisomycin as an anoikis sensitizer, we
tested the effects of this compound on five additional malignant
cell lines (Fig. 1D). Anisomycin sensitized PC-3 and DU-145
prostate cancer and OVCAR-3 ovarian cancer cell lines to anoikis.
Conversely, anisomycin was less active in LNCaP prostate cancer
and MB-MDA-468 breast cancer cells.
Anisomycin sensitizes to anoikis by activating the death
receptor pathway of caspase activation. We next explored the
mechanism by which anisomycin sensitized cells to anoikis. To
determine whether anisomycin sensitized cells to anoikis through
a caspase-dependent mechanism, PPC-1 cells were treated under
suspension conditions with increasing concentrations of anisomycin in the presence or absence of the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VADfmk (100 Amol/L). z-VAD-fmk inhibited the ability of anisomycin to
promote anoikis, demonstrating a caspase-dependent mechanism
of anoikis (Fig. 2A).

Figure 1. High-throughput screening identifies anisomycin as an anoikis sensitizer. A, PPC-1 cells were seeded in 96-well polystyrene or hydrogel-coated plates to
represent anchorage-dependent (adherent) and anchorage-independent (suspension) conditions, respectively. Compounds from chemical libraries were added to
adherent and suspension cells in parallel for a final concentration of 5 Amol/L. Twenty hours later, cell viability was assessed using an MTS assay. Data were expressed
as the relative viability of suspension-cultured cells divided by the relative viability of adherent-cultured cells for each compound tested. Hits were defined empirically
as compounds that preferentially reduced viability under suspension conditions but not adherent conditions and defined mathematically as (relative viability under
suspension conditions) / (relative viability under adherent conditions) z3 SDs below the mean of the population of compounds tested. B, chemical structure of
anisomycin. C, PPC-1 cells (1.5  104) were seeded overnight in 96-well plates in adherent (Adh) or suspension (Sus) conditions. Cells were then cultured with
increasing concentrations of anisomycin for 20 h. After incubation, cell viability was measured by the MTS assay. Points, mean percent viable cells relative to untreated
controls; bars, SE. D, PC-3, DU-145, and LNCaP prostate; MB-MDA-468 breast; and OVCAR-3 ovarian cancer cells were cultured under suspension conditions with
increasing concentrations of anisomycin. Twenty-hours after incubation, equal volumes of suspension-cultured cells were replated in a colony formation assay.
Points, mean percentage of colonies compared with untreated controls; bars, SE.

www.aacrjournals.org

8309

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Anisomycin initiates anoikis via a caspase-8–dependent mechanism. A, PPC-1 cells (7.5  104) were seeded in 24-well plates under suspension conditions
and treated with increasing concentrations of anisomycin in the presence (.) or absence (o) the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk (100 Amol/L). Twenty hours after
incubation, anoikis was determined by flow cytometry to detect cell surface Annexin V expression and propidium iodide uptake. Points, mean percent of viable cells
compared with untreated controls; bars, SE. B, PPC-1 cells (7.5  104) were seeded in 24-well plates under suspension and treated with anisomycin (5 Amol/L).
At increasing times after treatment, caspase activation was detected with FITC-labeled peptides that bind preferentially and irreversibly to caspase-3/7 (C3), caspase-8
(C8), or caspase-9 (C9). Caspase activation was monitored by flow cytometry to quantify the percentage of fluorescently labeled cells. Points, mean percentage of cells
with active caspases relative to untreated cells; bars, SE. C, PPC-1 cells (3.0  106) were seeded in 100-mm dishes in either adherent or suspension conditions
overnight. Cells were then treated with increasing concentrations of anisomycin. Twenty hours after incubation, total cellular protein was isolated and analyzed by
SDS-PAGE immunoblotting using anti–caspase-8 and anti-tubulin antibodies. ProC8, uncleaved (inactive) procaspase-8; *C8, cleaved (active) caspase-8.
D, E1A-transformed wild-type (WT) and caspase-8 / (C8 / ) MEFs (1.0  104) were cultured in suspension conditions with increasing concentrations of anisomycin.
Ten hours after incubation, cell viability was measured using the MTS assay. Points, mean percentage viable cells compared with untreated controls; bars, SE.

To determine the sequence of caspase activation in anisomycinmediated anoikis, PPC-1 cells were treated with anisomycin
(5 Amol/L) or buffer under suspension conditions. At increasing
times after treatment, caspase activation was detected using cellpermeable, FITC-labeled peptides that bind preferentially and
irreversibly to active caspases. Active caspase-8 was detected
before activation of caspase-3/7 and caspase-9 (Fig. 2B). These data
suggest that anisomycin can sensitize cells to anoikis by activating the death receptor pathway of caspase activation. Consistent
with this observation, immunoblot analysis revealed that anisomycin activated caspase-8 in cells cultured under suspension but
not adherent conditions (Fig. 2C).
To further evaluate the dependence on caspase-8 for anisomycinmediated sensitization to anoikis, E1A-transformed wild-type and
caspase-8–deficient MEFs were treated with increasing concentrations of anisomycin under suspension conditions and cell
viability was determined by the MTS assay. Caspase-8 / MEFs
were resistant to anisomycin-mediated anoikis compared with
wild-type cells. (Fig. 2D). Thus, anisomycin sensitizes resistant cells
to anoikis by activating the death receptor pathway of caspase
activation.
Anisomycin sensitizes cells to anoikis by decreasing levels of
FLIP protein. FLIP is an endogenous inhibitor of caspase-8 (26).
We have previously shown that increased levels of FLIP contribute

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

to anoikis resistance in malignant cells (6). Therefore, we measured
the effects of anisomycin on FLIP protein expression. PPC-1 cells
were treated with increasing concentration of anisomycin under
adherent and suspension conditions. After incubation, FLIP protein
and mRNA levels were measured by immunoblotting and reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), respectively. Under both adherent and
suspension conditions, anisomycin decreased levels of FLIP protein
but did not change FLIP mRNA (Fig. 3A and B, and data not
shown). To determine whether a reduction in FLIP protein was
functionally important for anoikis sensitization, we tested whether
FLIP knockdown using siRNA recapitulated the effects of
anisomycin (Fig. 3C). We found that FLIP knockdown, anisomycin,
or a combination of these treatments did not influence viability
under adherent conditions, whereas each treatment alone sensitized cells to anoikis. Furthermore, combining the two treatments
did not further sensitize cells to anoikis. Thus, we concluded that
anisomycin sensitizes resistant cells to anoikis by decreasing levels
of FLIP protein.
Activation of JNK and p38 by anisomycin is not necessary or
sufficient to sensitize cells to anoikis. Through its ability to
inhibit the 28S rRNA, anisomycin can activate JNK and p38, and
these effects can be dissociated from its ability to inhibit protein
synthesis (21–25). Through the E3 ligase ITCH, JNK promotes the
degradation of FLIP (27–29). Therefore, we tested the effects of

8310

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anisomycin Sensitizes Resistant Cells to Anoikis

anisomycin on JNK activation and its functional significance in
decreasing FLIP and sensitizing cells to anoikis. PPC-1 cells were
treated with anisomycin (5 Amol/L) and levels of JNK, phosphorylated JNK, p38, phosphorylated p38, FLIP, and caspase-8 were
measured by immunoblotting at increasing times of incubation
(Fig. 4A). Rapid increases in phosphorylated JNK and phosphorylated p38 were detected at times that preceded the decrease in
FLIP and activation of caspase-8.
We then determined whether anisomycin-mediated activation
of JNK and p38 were functionally important for the effects of
anisomycin on FLIP and anoikis. PPC-1 cells under suspension
conditions were treated with increasing concentrations of anisomycin along with the chemical JNK inhibitor SP600125. After
incubation, cell viability was measured by Annexin V staining and
levels of FLIP were measured by immunoblotting (Fig. 4B). Despite
pretreatment with SP600125, anisomycin continued to sensitize
cells to anoikis and decrease FLIP. However, pretreatment with
SP600125 inhibited anisomycin-mediated phosphorylation of the
JNK target c-Jun (Fig. 4C). Similar to the effects of JNK inhibition,
pretreatment with the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) inhibitor SB203580 did not block the effects of anisomycin
on anoikis and FLIP (data not shown). Thus, these results show

that anisomycin activates JNK and p38 MAPK, but activation of
these kinases is not necessary for the effects of anisomycin on
anoikis or FLIP.
Anisomycin inhibits FLIP synthesis. FLIP protein has a short
half-life, so decreased FLIP protein and sensitization to anoikis
could be an early sign of protein synthesis inhibition. As
anisomycin induces cell stress through a ribotoxic mechanism
(24), we tested whether anisomycin sensitized cells to anoikis by
inhibiting protein synthesis. PPC-1 cells were treated with the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, anisomycin, or both
cycloheximide and anisomycin, and changes in levels of FLIP
protein were measured by immunoblotting over time. Inhibition
of protein synthesis by cycloheximide caused a rapid decrease in
FLIP protein within 1.5 h of treatment. The rate of reduction of
FLIP was the same after anisomycin treatment and no further
decrease in FLIP levels were observed when anisomycin was added
to cycloheximide (Fig. 5A). We also measured protein synthesis
after treatment of cells with increasing concentrations of anisomycin. Anisomycin reduced protein synthesis at concentrations
associated with reductions in FLIP and sensitization to anoikis
(Fig. 5B). Finally, we tested the effects of other known inhibitors
of protein synthesis on anoikis sensitization. PPC-1 cells were

Figure 3. Anisomycin induces anoikis by decreasing FLIP protein through a posttranslational mechanism. A, PPC-1 cells (3.0  106) were seeded overnight in
adherent or suspension conditions and then treated with increasing concentrations of anisomycin. Twenty hours after incubation, total cellular protein was isolated and
analyzed by SDS-PAGE immunoblotting using anti-FLIP and anti-tubulin antibodies. B, PPC-1 cells were cultured in the presence of increasing concentrations of
anisomycin. Twenty hours after incubation, total cellular RNA was isolated. FLIP long (FLIP-L ) and FLIP short (FLIP-S ) mRNA expressions were measured relative to
18S RNA by real-time RT-PCR. Columns, mean percentage of FLIP-L/18S or FLIP-S/18S expression relative to untreated controls (DDC T normalization); bars, SE.
C, PPC-1 cells (3.0  106) were seeded in 100-mm dishes under adherent conditions overnight and then transfected with anti-luciferase siRNA (siCtrl , 50 nmol/L)
or anti-FLIP siRNA (siFLIP , 50 nmol/L). Forty-eight hours after transfection, total cellular protein was isolated and analyzed by SDS-PAGE immunoblotting using
anti-FLIP and anti-tubulin antibodies. D, PPC-1 cells were transfected with siRNAs as in (C ). Eight hours after transfection, cells were subcultured into 24-well plates
(7.5  104 per well) under adherent or suspension conditions and incubated overnight. Cells were then treated with anisomycin (5 Amol/L) for 20 h. After incubation,
apoptosis/anoikis was determined by flow cytometry to detect cell surface Annexin V expression and propidium iodide uptake. Columns, mean percentage of
viable cells compared with untreated controls; bars, SE.

www.aacrjournals.org

8311

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Anisomycin activates JNK and p38, but this activation is not functionally important for the effects of anisomycin on anoikis and FLIP. A, PPC-1 cells
(3.0  106) were seeded in 100-mm dishes for 8 h under suspension conditions and then treated with anisomycin (5 Amol/L). Total cellular protein was isolated at
increasing times after treatment and analyzed by SDS-PAGE immunoblotting using antibodies against JNK, phosphorylated JNK, FLIP, p38, phosphorylated p38,
caspase-8, and actin. B, PPC-1 cells (7.5  104) were cultured in 24-well plates in suspension conditions for 8 h. Cells were then pretreated with a JNK inhibitor
(SP610025 , 25 Amol/L) for 1 h followed by treatment with anisomycin (5 Amol/L). Twenty hours after incubation, anoikis was determined by flow cytometry to detect cell
surface Annexin V expression and propidium iodide uptake. Columns, mean percentage of viable cells compared with untreated controls; bars, SE. C, PPC-1 cells
were cultured as in (B ). Twenty hours after incubation, total cellular protein was isolated and analyzed by SDS-PAGE immunoblotting using anti-FLIP, anti–c-Jun,
and anti-actin antibodies.

treated under adherent or suspension conditions with increasing
concentrations of the known protein synthesis inhibitors emetine
(30), homoharringtonine (31), and cycloheximide (30), and cell
viability was measured by the MTS assay. All three protein
synthesis inhibitors induced cell death under suspension but not
adherent conditions similar to anisomycin (Fig. 5C). Interestingly,
emetine and cycloheximide were both weak hits in the initial
screen for anoikis sensitizers. Taken together, these results suggest
that inhibiting protein synthesis sensitizes resistant cells to anoikis
by decreasing FLIP synthesis.
Anisomycin decreases the in vivo survival of circulating
prostate cancer cells. The presence of circulating cancer cells
after adjuvant chemotherapy is prognostic for an increased risk of
relapse and the development of metastatic disease (32–34). Anoikis
blocks metastasis by preventing normally adherent cells from
surviving after detachment from their primary site, and FLIP
contributes to anoikis resistance. Therefore, we tested whether
reducing FLIP levels with anisomycin could decrease distal tumor
formation in vivo. PPC-1 cells labeled with a red fluorescent protein
(dsRed2) were treated with anisomycin (5 Amol/L) or buffer control
in culture under adherent conditions. After treatment, cells were
injected i.v. into sublethally irradiated SCID mice. Five weeks after
i.v. injection or when moribund, mice were sacrificed and tumor
formation in the organs was imaged with fluorescent microscopy.
Invasion of prostate cancer cells was detected in the lung, bone,
and liver, which are clinically relevant sites of metastases in

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

prostate cancer. Treatment with anisomycin decreased tumor
formation in these organs compared with controls (Fig. 6A). It is
important to note that both treated and control cells were >85%
viable at the time of injection and remained viable for at least
72 h under adherent conditions.
Metastasis of dsRed–PPC-1 cells to the lung was readily quantifiable using image-based analysis (19, 35). Compared with control,
mice injected with anisomycin-treated cells had a decreased
median total tumor count and median total tumor area within the
lung (Fig. 6B). Median survival of mice injected with anisomycintreated cells was significantly longer than mice injected with control
treated cells (35 versus 25 days, respectively, P = 0.0001 by logrank statistic, n = 27). Similar reductions in tumor growth were
observed in the bones and liver.
In contrast to the decrease in tumor formation after i.v. injection,
no significant difference in tumor weight was detected after s.c.
injection of dsRed–PPC-1 cells treated with anisomycin or buffer
alone (128 F 57 versus 193 F 85 mg; P = 0.25, by t test; Fig. 6C).
These results further validate that the PPC-1 cells were viable at the
time of injection.
Taken together, these results indicate that inhibiting FLIP
synthesis with anisomycin decreases the survival of circulating
tumor cells and thereby decreases tumor formation in distant
organs. Thus, the inhibition of FLIP and protein synthesis inhibitors
may be an effective antimetastatic strategy and a useful adjunct to
chemotherapy.

8312

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anisomycin Sensitizes Resistant Cells to Anoikis

Discussion
Anoikis serves as a barrier to metastasis. Resistance to anoikis
permits cancer cells to survive in the systemic circulation and
facilitates their metastasis to distant organs. In fact, patients with
circulating tumor cells in the peripheral blood after conventional
chemotherapy have a worse prognosis compared with patients without these circulating cells (32, 34). Therefore, therapeutic strategies
that specifically target anoikis resistance pathways have the potential
to decrease metastasis and thereby improve patient survival.
To better understand the mechanisms that regulate the process
of anoikis, we developed, automated, and conducted a chemical
screen that identified anisomycin as a small molecule that
sensitizes resistant tumor cells to anoikis. Anisomycin binds and
inhibits 28S rRNA, leading to activation JNK and p38 MAPK
(21–25). By binding the 28S subunit, anisomycin also inhibits the
peptidyl-transferase activity of ribosomes and thereby blocks
protein synthesis (36, 37). The effects on protein synthesis can be
dissociated from its activation of kinases such as JNK (25).
We then used anisomycin as a chemical probe to understand
control points within the anoikis pathway and showed that anisomycin sensitizes resistant cells to anoikis by decreasing FLIP protein
synthesis and activating the death receptor pathway of caspase
activation. FLIP is a short half-life protein as it is rapidly ubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasomal system (38). Thus, decreased
levels of FLIP would be an early sign of inhibition of protein synthesis
as degradation proceeds without continued synthesis. In our study,
we observed that anisomycin activated both JNK and p38; however,
activation was not necessary for decreases in FLIP protein or

sensitization to anoikis. This finding is consistent with earlier studies
in nonmalignant cells showing that JNK activation is not requisite
for activation of anoikis upon detachment from the ECM (39).
As a protein synthesis inhibitor, anisomycin would be expected to
decrease the synthesis of many proteins and is not a specific inhibitor of FLIP expression. Although the studies with FLIP siRNA
support a critical role for FLIP in anoikis resistance, we cannot
exclude the possibility that protein synthesis inhibitors sensitize
cells to anoikis by decreasing additional proteins. Rather, these
results suggest that continued protein synthesis within suspended
tumor cells permits them to escape anoikis and highlights protein
synthesis inhibition as a potential strategy to inhibit metastases.
Whereas anisomycin has not been used clinically, the protein
synthesis inhibitor homoharringtonine is under development as a
new therapeutic agent. Although this drug has activity as a single
agent in hematologic malignancies (40, 41), it did not reduce the
size of established solid tumors in clinical studies (42, 43). Our
report might provide an explanation for the lack of benefit of
homoharringtonine in solid tumors. We showed that inhibiting
protein synthesis did not reduce the viability of malignant cells
adherent to their ECM, but induced apoptosis after the cells
detached. Thus, our study suggests that protein synthesis inhibitors
could be of clinical benefit for the treatment of solid tumors when
used to induce apoptosis of circulating tumor cells.
Studies in animals and patients with malignancies have shown
that the presence and phenotype of malignant cells in the
circulation can predict metastasis and survival (33, 34). To study
the effect of inhibition of FLIP synthesis on the survival and distant

Figure 5. Anisomycin sensitizes cells to anoikis by decreasing FLIP synthesis. A, PPC-1 cells (3.0  106) were seeded overnight in adherent conditions and then
treated with anisomycin (5 Amol/L), cycloheximide (5 Ag/mL), or a combination of both. At increasing times after incubation, total cellular protein was isolated and
analyzed by SDS-PAGE immunoblotting using anti-FLIP and anti-actin antibodies. B, PPC-1 cells (1.0  105) were seeded in 24-well plates. The next day, cells were
treated with increasing concentrations of anisomycin. One hour after treatment, [3H]leucine (10 ACi) was added to each well and the cells were incubated for an
additional hour. After incubation, cells were harvested, washed, lysed, and [3H]leucine incorporation was measured with a scintillation counter. Columns, mean
radioactive counts normalized to the number of cells per well; bars, SD. C, PPC-1 cells (1.5  104) were seeded in 96-well plates in adherent (Adh ) or suspension (Sus )
conditions and incubated overnight. Cells were then cultured with increasing concentrations of homoharringtonine, emetine, or cycloheximide for 20 h. After incubation,
cell viability was measured by the MTS assay. Points, mean percentage viable cells relative to untreated controls; bars, SE.

www.aacrjournals.org

8313

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Anisomycin diminishes the
in vivo survival and growth of circulating
prostate cancer cells. A, fluorescent
dsRed–PPC-1 cells were treated under
adherent conditions with anisomycin
(5 Amol/L) or buffer control. Sixteen hours
after treatment, cells were harvested and
3.5  106 viable cells were injected into the
tail veins of sublethally irradiated SCID
mice. Five weeks after injection, or when
mice became moribund, mice were
sacrificed and their organs were imaged
using a fluorescent microscope (n = 27).
Representative images of tumor formation
in the lung, bone, and liver. B, the number
and area of distant tumors from mice
described above were quantified using
image analysis software. Tumors were
quantified from all five lobes of the lungs.
Points, measurements from each
mouse; bars, median of the population.
C, fluorescent dsRed–PPC-1 cells were
treated under adherent conditions with
anisomycin (5 Amol/L) or buffer control.
Sixteen hours after treatment, cells were
harvested and 3.5  106 viable cells were
injected s.c. into sublethally irradiated
SCID mice. Three weeks after injection,
mice were sacrificed, and the tumors were
excised and weighed. Columns, mean
tumor weight; bars, SD.

tumor formation of malignant cells in vivo, we used our previously
described mouse model that measures the ability of circulating
human prostate cancer cells to form distant tumors (6). We showed
that inhibition of FLIP with anisomycin reduced the number and
area of distant tumors. In this model, FLIP protein levels were
decreased in adherent dsRed–PPC-1 cells in culture before mice
were injected, but the cells were viable at the time of injection and
remained viable when cultured under adherent conditions for
extended periods of time. Furthermore, we note that no difference
was detected in tumor growth after s.c. injection of adherent cells
treated with anisomycin or control.
It would have been interesting to determine the mechanism by
which anisomycin prevents distant tumor formation in vivo.
Unfortunately, anisomycin suppresses FLIP protein expression for
a maximum of 24 h (data not shown), so anisomycin was no longer
active by the time the metastatic tumors were detected. Therefore,
it was not possible to compare levels of FLIP in the metastatic
tumors from mice injected with treated and untreated cells to
determine whether there had been target knock down. We
attempted to collect dsRed-labeled PPC-1 cells 20 h after injection
into the tail veins of SCID mice as described, but even at this time
point we could not detect enough dsRed-labeled cells in the

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

circulation to permit analysis of viability by flow cytometry.
Nonetheless, we feel that our xenograft model provides a proofof-concept that inhibition of protein synthesis within circulating
tumor cells may decrease their ability to form distant tumors.
In summary, we used a chemical biology approach to identify
mechanisms that influence anoikis. Our study shows that inhibition
of protein synthesis can sensitize cells to anoikis by decreasing FLIP
protein levels. Thus, protein synthesis inhibition may be a useful
strategy to decrease metastases and could have clinical benefit when
combined with chemotherapy. In the adjuvant setting, the chemotherapy would induce apoptosis of any micrometastases that have
already seeded distant sites, whereas protein synthesis inhibitors
would induce apoptosis in chemoresistant circulating tumor cells.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/8/2007; revised 6/4/2007; accepted 6/26/2007.
Grant support: Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Canadian
Cancer Society, and the Ontario Cancer Research Network through funding provided
by the Province of Ontario; Edward Christie Stevens Fellowship in Medical Research
(I.A. Mawji); and a CIHR Clinician Scientist Award (A.D. Schimmer).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

8314

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Anisomycin Sensitizes Resistant Cells to Anoikis

References
1. Kimura K, Markowski M, Bowen C, Gelmann EP.
Androgen blocks apoptosis of hormone-dependent
prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res 2001;61:5611–8.
2. Mehlen P, Puisieux A. Metastasis: a question of life or
death. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:449–58.
3. Zhou J, Scholes J, Hsieh JT. Signal transduction targets
in androgen-independent prostate cancer. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2001;20:351–62.
4. Rennebeck G, Martelli M, Kyprianou N. Anoikis and
survival connections in the tumor microenvironment: is
there a role in prostate cancer metastasis? Cancer Res
2005;65:11230–5.
5. DeMarzo AM, Nelson WG, Isaacs WB, Epstein JI.
Pathological and molecular aspects of prostate cancer.
Lancet 2003;361:955–64.
6. Mawji IA, Simpson CD, Hurren R, et al. Critical role
for Fas-associated death domain-like interleukin-1converting enzyme-like inhibitory protein in anoikis
resistance and distant tumor formation. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2007;99:811–22.
7. Glinsky GV, Glinsky VV, Ivanova AB, Hueser CJ.
Apoptosis and metastasis: increased apoptosis resistance of metastatic cancer cells is associated with the
profound deficiency of apoptosis execution mechanisms. Cancer Lett 1997;115:185–93.
8. Frisch SM, Francis H. Disruption of epithelial cellmatrix interactions induces apoptosis. J Cell Biol 1994;
124:619–26.
9. Frisch SM, Screaton RA. Anoikis mechanisms. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 2001;13:555–62.
10. Frisch S. Evidence for a function of death-receptorrelated, death-domain-containing proteins in anoikis.
Cur Biol 1999;9:1047–9.
11. Rosen K, Shi W, Calabretta B, Filmus J. Cell
detachment triggers p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent overexpression of Fas ligand. A novel
mechanism of Anoikis of intestinal epithelial cells. J Biol
Chem 2002;277:46123–30.
12. Schimmer AD. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins:
translating basic knowledge into clinical practice.
Cancer Res 2004;64:7183–90.
13. Krueger A, Baumann S, Krammer PH, Kirchhoff S.
FLICE-inhibitory proteins: regulators of death receptormediated apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:8247–54.
14. Thome M, Tschopp J. Regulation of lymphocyte proliferation and death by FLIP. Nat Rev Immunol 2001;1:50–8.
15. Reed JC. Drug Insight: cancer therapy strategies
based on restoration of endogenous cell death mechanisms. Nat Clin Pract Oncol 2006;3:388–98.
16. Aoudjit F, Vuori K. Matrix attachment regulates Fasinduced apoptosis in endothelial cells: a role for c-flip
and implications for anoikis. J Cell Biol 2001;152:633–43.

www.aacrjournals.org

17. Schimmer AD, Thomas MP, Hurren R, et al.
Identification of small molecules that sensitize resistant
tumor cells to tumor necrosis factor-family death
receptors. Cancer Res 2006;66:2367–75.
18. Carter BZ, Gronda M, Wang Z, et al. Small-molecule
XIAP inhibitors derepress downstream effector caspases
and induce apoptosis of acute myeloid leukemia cells.
Blood 2005;105:4043–50.
19. Cairns RA, Hill RP. Acute hypoxia enhances spontaneous lymph node metastasis in an orthotopic murine
model of human cervical carcinoma. Cancer Res 2004;
64:2054–61.
20. Zhang JH, Chung TD, Oldenburg KR. A simple
statistical parameter for use in evaluation and validation of high throughput screening assays. J Biomol
Screen 1999;4:67–73.
21. Bogoyevitch MA, Ketterman AJ, Sugden PH. Cellular
stresses differentially activate c-Jun N-terminal protein
kinases and extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinases in cultured ventricular myocytes. J Biol Chem
1995;270:29710–7.
22. Shu J, Hitomi M, Stacey D. Activation of JNK/SAPK
pathway is not directly inhibitory for cell cycle
progression in NIH3T3 cells. Oncogene 1996;13:2421–30.
23. Kuroki DW, Minden A, Sanchez I, Wattenberg EV.
Regulation of a c-Jun amino-terminal kinase/stressactivated protein kinase cascade by a sodium-dependent
signal transduction pathway. J Biol Chem 1997;272:
23905–11.
24. Iordanov MS, Pribnow D, Magun JL, Dinh TH,
Pearson JA, Magun BE. Ultraviolet radiation triggers
the ribotoxic stress response in mammalian cells. J Biol
Chem 1998;273:15794–803.
25. Iordanov MS, Pribnow D, Magun JL, et al. Ribotoxic
stress response: activation of the stress-activated
protein kinase JNK1 by inhibitors of the peptidyl
transferase reaction and by sequence-specific RNA
damage to the a-sarcin/ricin loop in the 28S rRNA.
Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:3373–81.
26. Irmler M, Thome M, Hahne M, et al. Inhibition of
death receptor signals by cellular FLIP. Nature 1997;388:
190–5.
27. Chang L, Kamata H, Solinas G, et al. The E3 ubiquitin
ligase itch couples JNK activation to TNFa-induced cell
death by inducing c-FLIP(L) turnover. Cell 2006;124:
601–13.
28. Gao M, Labuda T, Xia Y, et al. Jun turnover is
controlled through JNK-dependent phosphorylation of
the E3 ligase Itch. Science 2004;306:271–5.
29. Gallagher E, Gao M, Liu YC, Karin M. Activation of
the E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch through a phosphorylationinduced conformational change. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2006;103:1717–22.
30. Grollman AP. Structural basis for inhibition of

8315

protein synthesis by emetine and cycloheximide based
on an analogy between ipecac alkaloids and glutarimide
antibiotics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1966;56:1867–74.
31. Tujebajeva RM, Graifer DM, Karpova GG, Ajtkhozhina
NA. Alkaloid homoharringtonine inhibits polypeptide
chain elongation on human ribosomes on the step of
peptide bond formation. FEBS Lett 1989;257:254–6.
32. Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ, et al. Circulating
tumor cells, disease progression, and survival in
metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;351:
781–91.
33. Berezovskaya O, Schimmer AD, Glinskii AB, et al.
Increased expression of apoptosis inhibitor protein
XIAP contributes to anoikis resistance of circulating
human prostate cancer metastasis precursor cells.
Cancer Res 2005;65:2378–86.
34. Moreno JG, Miller MC, Gross S, Allard WJ, Gomella
LG, Terstappen LW. Circulating tumor cells predict
survival in patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
Urology 2005;65:713–8.
35. Hoffman RM. The multiple uses of fluorescent
proteins to visualize cancer in vivo . Nat Rev Cancer
2005;5:796–806.
36. Barbacid M, Vazquez D. (3H)anisomycin binding to
eukaryotic ribosomes. J Mol Biol 1974;84:603–23.
37. Janzen DM, Geballe AP. Modulation of translation
termination mechanisms by cis - and trans -acting
factors. Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 2001;66:
459–67.
38. Poukkula M, Kaunisto A, Hietakangas V, et al. Rapid
turnover of c-FLIPshort is determined by its unique Cterminal tail. J Biol Chem 2005;280:27345–55.
39. Krestow JK, Rak J, Filmus J, Kerbel RS. Functional
dissociation of anoikis-like cell death and activity of
stress activated protein kinase. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1999;260:48–53.
40. Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Garcia-Manero G,
et al. Phase I/II study of subcutaneous homoharringtonine in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia who
have failed prior therapy. Cancer 2007;109:248–55.
41. Levy V, Zohar S, Bardin C, et al. A phase I dosefinding and pharmacokinetic study of subcutaneous
semisynthetic homoharringtonine (ssHHT) in patients
with advanced acute myeloid leukaemia. Br J Cancer
2006;95:253–9.
42. Witte RS, Lipsitz S, Goodman TL, et al. A phase II
trial of homoharringtonine and caracemide in the
treatment of patients with advanced large bowel cancer.
Invest New Drugs 1999;17:173–7.
43. Witte RS, Hsieh P, Elson P, Oken MM, Trump DL.
A phase II trial of amonafide, caracemide, and
homoharringtonine in the treatment of patients with
advanced renal cell cancer. Invest New Drugs 1996;14:
409–13.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Chemical Screen Identifies Anisomycin as an Anoikis
Sensitizer That Functions by Decreasing FLIP Protein
Synthesis
Imtiaz A. Mawji, Craig D. Simpson, Marcela Gronda, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:8307-8315.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8307

This article cites 43 articles, 19 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8307.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8307.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

