NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2011 May 19; 473(7347): 298–307. doi:10.1038/nature10144.

Molecular mechanisms and clinical applications of angiogenesis
Peter Carmeliet1,2 and Rakesh K. Jain3
1Laboratory

of Angiogenesis and Neurovascular Link, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven
B-3000, Belgium
2Laboratory

of Angiogenesis and Neurovascular Link, Vesalius Research Center, K. U. Leuven,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium

3Edwin

L. Steele Laboratory for Tumor Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
USA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abstract
Blood vessels deliver oxygen and nutrients to every part of the body, but also nourish diseases
such as cancer. Over the past decade, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
angiogenesis (blood vessel growth) has increased at an explosive rate and has led to the approval
of anti-angiogenic drugs for cancer and eye diseases. So far, hundreds of thousands of patients
have benefited from blockers of the angiogenic protein vascular endothelial growth factor, but
limited efficacy and resistance remain outstanding problems. Recent preclinical and clinical
studies have shown new molecular targets and principles, which may provide avenues for
improving the therapeutic benefit from anti-angiogenic strategies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Blood vessels arose in evolution to allow haematopoietic cells to patrol the organism for
immune surveillance, to supply oxygen and nutrients and to dispose of waste. Vessels also
produce instructive signals for organogenesis in a perfusion-independent manner (Box 1).
Although beneficial for tissue growth and regeneration, vessels can fuel inflammatory and
malignant diseases, and are exploited by tumour cells to metastasize and kill patients with
cancer. Because vessels nourish nearly every organ of the body, deviations from normal
vessel growth contribute to numerous diseases. To name just a few, insufficient vessel
growth or maintenance can lead to stroke, myocardial infarction, ulcerative disorders and
neurodegeneration, and abnormal vessel growth or remodelling fuels cancer, inflammatory
disorders, pulmonary hypertension and blinding eye diseases1,2.
Several modes of vessel formation have been identified (Fig. 1). In the developing
mammalian embryo, angioblasts differentiate into endothelial cells, which assemble into a
vascular labyrinth — a process known as vasculogenesis (Fig. 1b). Distinct signals specify

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Correspondence should be addressed to P.C. (peter.carmeliet@vib-kuleuven.be) or R.K.J. (jain@steele.mgh.harvard.edu)..
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare competing
financial interests: details accompany the full-text HTML version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature. Readers are welcome to
comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

arterial or venous differentiation3. Subsequent sprouting ensures expansion of the vascular
network, known as angiogenesis (Fig. 1a). Arteriogenesis then occurs, in which endothelial
cell channels become covered by pericytes or vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), which
provide stability and control perfusion. Tissues can also become vascularized by other
mechanisms, but the relevance of these processes is not well understood. For example, preexisting vessels can split by a process known as intussusception, giving rise to daughter
vessels (Fig. 1c). In other cases, vessel co-option occurs, in which tumour cells hijack the
existing vasculature (Fig. 1d), or tumour cells can line vessels — a phenomenon known as
vascular mimicry (Fig. 1e). Putative cancer stem-like cells can even generate tumour
endothelium4 (Fig. 1f). Although debated, the repair of healthy adult vessels or the
expansion of pathological vessels can be aided by the recruitment of bone-marrow-derived
cells (BMDCs) and/or endothelial progenitor cells to the vascular wall. The progenitor cells
then become incorporated into the endothelial lining in a process known as postnatal
vasculogenesis. Collateral vessels, which bring bulk flow to ischaemic tissues during
revascularization, enlarge in size by distinct mechanisms, such as the attraction and
activation of myeloid cells5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The revascularization of ischaemic tissues would benefit millions, but therapeutic
angiogenesis remains an unmet medical need. Instead, more success has been achieved by
targeting the vascular supply in cancer and eye diseases6. In this Review, we describe key
molecular targets in angiogenesis and discuss the clinical experience with the most widely
used class of anti-angiogenic agent — blockers of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF, also known as vascular permeability factor or VPF). Rather than providing an
encyclopaedic survey, we focus on some of the recently discovered mechanisms and
principles, and on targets with translational potential.

Vessel branching, maturation and quiescence

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We first provide the current view of the sequential steps of vessel branching (quiescence,
activation and resolution), before discussing the molecular players involved in more depth
(Fig. 2). In a healthy adult, quiescent endothelial cells have long half-lives and are protected
against insults by the autocrine action of maintenance signals such as VEGF, NOTCH,
angiopoietin-1 (ANG-1) and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). Because vessels supply
oxygen, endothelial cells are equipped with oxygen sensors and hypoxia-inducible factors
— such as prolyl hydroxylase domain 2 (PHD2) and hypoxia-inducible factor-2α (HIF-2α),
respectively — which allow the vessels to re-adjust their shape to optimize blood flow.
Quiescent endothelial cells form a monolayer of phalanx cells with a streamlined surface,
interconnected by junctional molecules such as VE-cadherin and claudins. These endothelial
cells are ensheathed by pericytes, which suppress endothelial cell proliferation and release
cell-survival signals such as VEGF and ANG-1. Endothelial cells and pericytes at rest
produce a common basement membrane.
When a quiescent vessel senses an angiogenic signal, such as VEGF, VEGF-C, ANG-2,
FGFs or chemokines, released by a hypoxic, inflammatory or tumour cell, pericytes first
detach from the vessel wall (in response to ANG-2) and liberate themselves from the
basement membrane by proteolytic degradation, which is mediated by matrix

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

metalloproteinases (MMPs) (Fig. 2a). Endothelial cells loosen their junctions, and the
nascent vessel dilates. VEGF increases the permeability of the endothelial cell layer, causing
plasma proteins to extravasate and lay down a provisional extracellular matrix (ECM)
scaffold. In response to integrin signalling, endothelial cells migrate onto this ECM surface.
Proteases liberate angiogenic molecules stored in the ECM such as VEGF and FGF, and
remodel the ECM into an angio-competent milieu. To build a perfused tube and prevent
endothelial cells from moving en masse towards the angiogenic signal, one endothelial cell,
known as the tip cell, becomes selected to lead the tip in the presence of factors such as
VEGF receptors, neuropilins (NRPs) and the NOTCH ligands DLL4 and JAGGED1 (Fig.
2a). The neighbours of the tip cell assume subsidiary positions as stalk cells, which divide to
elongate the stalk (stimulated by NOTCH, NOTCH-regulated ankyrin repeat protein
(NRARP), WNTs, placental growth factor (PlGF) and FGFs) and establish the lumen
(mediated by VE-cadherin, CD34, sialomucins, VEGF and hedgehog) (Fig. 2b). Tip cells
are equipped with filopodia to sense environmental guidance cues such as ephrins and
semaphorins, whereas stalk cells release molecules such as EGFL7 into the ECM to convey
spatial information about the position of their neighbours, so that the stalk elongates. A
hypoxia-inducible program, driven by HIF-1α, renders endothelial cells responsive to
angiogenic signals. Myeloid bridge cells aid fusion with another vessel branch, allowing the
initiation of blood flow. For a vessel to become functional, it must become mature and
stable. Endothelial cells resume their quiescent phalanx state (Fig. 2c), and signals such as
platelet-derived growth factor B (PDGF-B), ANG-1, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β),
ephrin-B2 and NOTCH cause the cells to become covered by pericytes. Protease inhibitors
known as tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) and plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) cause the deposition of a basement membrane, and junctions are reestablished to ensure optimal flow distribution. Vessels regress if they are unable to become
perfused.

The VEGF family

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Given the complexity of a process such as angiogenesis, it is remarkable that a single growth
factor, VEGF, regulates this process so predominantly. The VEGF family consists of only a
few members and distinguishes itself from other angiogenic superfamilies by the largely
non-redundant roles of its members. VEGF (also known as VEGF-A) is the main
component, and it stimulates angiogenesis in health and disease by signalling through VEGF
receptor-2 (VEGFR-2, also known as FLK1)7,8. Neuropilins such as NRP1 and NRP2 are
VEGF co-receptors, which enhance the activity of VEGFR-2, but also signal
independently9. Similar to VEGFR-2 deficiency, the loss of VEGF aborts vascular
development2. In response to a VEGF gradient, established by soluble and matrix-bound
isoforms, tip cells upregulate DLL4 expression, which activates NOTCH in stalk cells; this
downregulates VEGFR-2 expression, rendering stalk cells less responsive to VEGF, thereby
ensuring that the tip cell takes the lead10. Soluble VEGF isoforms promote vessel
enlargement, whereas matrix-bound isoforms stimulate branching. Paracrine VEGF,
released by tumour, myeloid or other stromal cells, increases vessel branching and renders
tumour vessels abnormal11, whereas autocrine VEGF, released by endothelial cells,
maintains vascular homeostasis12. Emerging evidence indicates that the biological effect of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

VEGFR-2 signalling depends on its subcellular localization — for example, for VEGF to
induce arterial morphogenesis, VEGFR-2 must signal from intracellular compartments13.
Activating VEGFR2 mutations cause vascular tumours, and genetic polymorphisms in
VEGF and/or its receptors co-determine pathological angiogenesis14,15, whereas the
blockade of VEGF signalling can target angiogenic vessels in malignant and ocular disease
in humans. VEGF protein or gene transfer stimulates vessel growth in ischaemic tissues, but
often in association with undesired leakage and vessel abnormalities.
VEGF-C, a ligand of the VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3 receptors, activates blood-vessel tip
cells16. VEGFR-3 is necessary for the formation of the blood vasculature during early
embryogenesis, but later becomes a key regulator of lymphangiogenesis — the formation of
new lymphatic vessels from pre-existing ones17. In zebrafish, in which the first embryonic
vein arises by segregation of venous-fated endothelial cells from a common precursor
vessel, the sprouting of venous endothelial cells is restricted by VEGFR-2 but promoted by
VEGFR-3 (ref. 18). Venous-derived angiogenesis in the arterial trunk also relies on
VEGFR-3 signalling. Anti-VEGFR-3 antibodies that inhibit receptor dimerization or ligand
binding slow down tumour growth synergistically, and enhance the inhibition of tumour
growth by VEGFR-2 blockade, making VEGFR-3 another anti-angiogenic candidate16.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Originally discovered as a VEGF homologue, PlGF was also expected to be an angiogenic
factor. However, unlike VEGF, PlGF is dispensable for development and is relevant only in
disease19,20. PlGF is a multitasking cytokine that stimulates angiogenesis by direct or
indirect mechanisms, and also activates bone-marrow-derived endothelial progenitor and
myeloid cells, as well as stromal cells, to create a nurturing ‘soil’ for tumour cells, in
addition to activating tumour cells19. By skewing the polarization of tumour-associated
macrophages (TAMs), the loss of PlGF improves vessel perfusion and maturation, and
enhances responses to chemotherapy21. PlGF blockade by neutralizing anti-PlGF antibodies
phenocopies the anti-angiogenic effects of genetic Plgf (also known as Pgf) deficiency in
spontaneous mouse tumour models and diseases such as ocular neovascularization22. Yet
other PlGF-blocking strategies fail to inhibit the growth of tumours in transplantable tumour
models23. The therapeutic potential of PlGF blockade in patients with cancer thus remains to
be established. In preclinical models, PlGF protein or gene delivery increases the
revascularization of ischaemic tissues.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Deficiency of the VEGF family member VEGF-B in mice does not impair angiogenesis in
normal development, and cannot compensate for VEGF blockade after birth19. VEGF-B has
only restricted angiogenic activity in certain tissues such as the heart, yet it promotes
neuronal survival and induces metabolic effects19,24. Divergent effects of VEGF-B on
pathological angiogenesis have been reported, and it has been shown to promote the growth
of cardiac vessels, without inducing adverse effects such as increased permeability or
leakage25.
The precise role of the VEGFR-1 receptor (also known as FLT-1) in angiogenesis remains
elusive19,26. VEGFR-1 exists both as a membrane-anchored signalling-competent form and
as a soluble secreted form (also known as sFLT-1). By trapping its ligands, sFLT-1 can
assist the guidance of the emerging branch or inhibit sprouting altogether. Because of its

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

weak tyrosine kinase activity, VEGFR-1 may act as a decoy for VEGF, moderating the
amount of free VEGF available to activate VEGFR-2 and explaining why VEGFR-1 loss
results in vessel overgrowth19. However, intracellular VEGFR-1 signalling in angiogenic
endothelial, stromal and myeloid cells stimulates pathological angiogenesis26. VEGFR-1
signalling also promotes the growth of VEGFR-1+ tumour cells in response to autocrine
VEGF production in an angiogenesis-independent manner27, and upregulates MMP9 in
endothelial cells at the premetastatic site. There is evidence to suggest that VEGFR-1+
haematopoietic progenitors form a premetastatic niche in distant organs, but this finding is
debated28,29. Neutralizing anti-PlGF, anti-VEGFR-1 and anti-VEGFR-2 antibodies are in
early clinical development.

The PDGF family

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For vessels to function properly, they must be mature and covered by mural cells. Several
growth-factor families, such as PDGFs, angiopoietins and TGF-β, contribute to this
process30. To stabilize endothelial cell channels, angiogenic endothelial cells release PDGFB to chemoattract PDGF receptor-β (PDGFR-β)+ pericytes31,32. Hence, pericyte deficiency
after PDGF-B ablation causes vessel leakage, tortuosity, microaneurysm formation and
bleeding. Knockout of the genes encoding the PDGF-B protein retention motif (necessary
for pericyte adhesion) in mice results in tumour vessel fragility and hyperdilation, whereas
PDGFR-β-hypomorph mice have insufficient pericytes around brain vessels, leading to
blood–brain barrier (BBB) defects and neurodegenerative damage owing to the leakage of
toxic substances33. Tumour-derived PDGF-B also recruits pericytes indirectly by
upregulating stromal-cell-derived factor-1α (SDF-1α; encoded by CXCL12). Besides a local
origin, pericytes can also arise from perivascular PDGFR-β+ pericyte progenitors, recruited
from the bone marrow34. By inhibiting PDGFR-β signalling in mural cells, VEGF reduces
pericyte coverage and renders tumour vessels abnormal.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

PDGFR inhibition diminishes tumour growth by causing pericyte detachment, leading to
immature vessels that are prone to regression35. Other pericyte-deficient mouse strains that
lack the proteoglycan NG2 (also known as CSPG4) also form abnormal tumour vessels and
smaller tumours. Paradoxically, the overexpression of PDGF-B in mice inhibits tumour
growth by promoting pericyte recruitment and inducing endothelial cell growth arrest36.
Because the survival of endothelial cells depends on pericyte VEGF production, pericytes
protect endothelial cells from VEGF withdrawal and confer resistance to VEGF blockade.
This protection requires a close endothelial-cell–pericyte interaction, as PDGF-B blockade
reduces pericyte coverage and vessel number only when VEGF is produced by pericytes and
not by more distant tumour cells37. Initial studies using multi-target receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) showed that blocking PDGF-B renders mature vessels more sensitive to
VEGF blockade by depleting the vessels of pericytes31. Recent studies with more specific
inhibitors have shown that combination therapy is no more efficient than anti-VEGF
monotherapy38.
PDGFR-β+ pericytes have a dual role in metastasis. In primary tumours, pericytes limit
tumour cell intravasation, because the more loosely assembled vessel wall is no longer a
barrier for disseminating tumour cells after depletion of pericytes39. The absence of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

pericytes around vessels also correlates with metastasis in patients, and a trial evaluating
PDGF-B blockade was aborted because of excessive leakage. These studies indicate that
blocking vessel maturation can promote malignancy. However, other reports have shown
that pericytes, co-opted by tumour cells at micrometastatic sites, allow tumour colonization
by releasing angiogenic factors. Overall, future studies are needed to explore the benefits
and risks of PDGF blockade for the treatment of cancer.
PDGF-B blockade may be used therapeutically for non-malignant vascular diseases such as
pulmonary hypertension, whereas PDGF-B activation may offer therapeutic opportunities
for stabilizing vascular malformations40. PDGF-CC, another family member released by
cancer-associated fibroblasts in VEGF-inhibitor-resistant tumours, stimulates vessel growth
and maturation, and attenuates the response to anti-VEGF treatment41,42. By preventing the
activation of perivascular PDGFR-α+ astrocytes, which together with pericytes constitute
the BBB, the blockade of PDGF-CC preserves the integrity of the BBB during stroke.
Inhibition of PDGF-DD suppresses ocular neovascularization, whereas PDGF-DD
overexpression normalizes tumour vessels and improves drug delivery.

TGF-β signalling
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Human hereditary haemorrhagic teleangiectasia is characterized by vascular malformations.
Human genetic studies have shown that this disorder is due to mutations in the genes that
encode endoglin (ENG) or activin receptor-like kinase (ALK1, also known as ACVRL1) —
receptors of the TGF-β family. Mouse studies have confirmed that the loss of the TGF-β
receptors ALK-1, TGFR-1 (also known as ALK-5), TGFR-2 or ENG results in
arteriovenous malformations, reminiscent of those seen in patients with hereditary
haemorrhagic teleangiectasia43. However, understanding the molecular basis of this pathway
has been challenging owing to inconsistent results. This is partly due to the contextdependent pro- and anti-angiogenic effects of TGF-β family members. Furthermore,
although TGF-β promotes VSMC differentiation, and deficiency of ENG or ALK-1 impairs
mural cell development, it remains unclear whether other TGF-β components mediate their
vascular effects in vivo by means of endothelial cells or VSMCs43. Preclinical studies have
shown that antibodies against ENG or ALK-1 can inhibit tumour angiogenesis and growth.
Several TGF-β blockers are now in early-phase clinical trials.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The FGF superfamily
The superfamily of FGFs and their receptors controls a wide range of biological functions44.
bFGF was among the first discovered angiogenic factors and, like FGF1, has angiogenic and
arteriogenic properties; FGF9 stimulates angiogenesis in bone repair. FGFs activate
receptors (FGFRs) on endothelial cells or indirectly stimulate angiogenesis by inducing the
release of angiogenic factors from other cell types44. For instance, in the heart, FGFmediated signalling fuels vessel growth by stimulating the release of hedgehog, ANG-2 and
VEGF-B. Low levels of FGF are required for the maintenance of vascular integrity, as
inhibition of FGFR signalling in quiescent endothelial cells causes vessel disintegration45.
Aberrant FGF signalling promotes tumour angiogenesis and mediates the escape of tumour
vascularization from VEGF- or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-inhibitor

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

treatment46. Development of specific FGF or FGFR inhibitors for blocking angiogenesis is
lagging behind, partly because Fgf1 or Fgf2 deficiency in mice did not produce vascular
defects and the FGF superfamily shows substantial redundancy44. FGF protein or gene
transfer has been tested for therapeutic angiogenesis, but without sustained success in the
clinic.

The ANG and TIE signalling system

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Healthy vessels must be equipped with mechanisms to maintain quiescence, while
remaining able to respond to angiogenic stimuli. The ANG and TIE family is a binary
system to offer such a switch. The human ANG family consists of two receptors, TIE-1 and
TIE-2, and three ligands, ANG-1, ANG-2 and ANG-4. ANG-1 functions as a TIE-2 agonist,
and ANG-2 functions as a competitive ANG-1 antagonist in a context-dependent manner
(ANG-4 has not been as well studied, but is thought to act like ANG-1). Because no ligand
for TIE-1 has been identified, this orphan receptor may act as a negative regulator of TIE-2,
but its precise role remains elusive47. ANG-1 is expressed by mural and tumour cells,
whereas ANG-2 is released from angiogenic tip cells. In confluent endothelium, ANG-1
induces TIE-2 clustering in trans at cell–cell junctions to maintain endothelial cell
quiescence48. ANG-1 also stimulates mural coverage and basement membrane deposition,
thereby promoting vessel tightness. In the presence of angiogenic stimulators, sprouting
endothelial cells release ANG-2, which antagonizes ANG-1 and TIE-2 signalling to enhance
mural cell detachment, vascular perm eability and endothelial cell sprouting47. In
accordance, Tie2 (also known as Tek) deficiency in mice causes vascular defects, and
activating germline and somatic TIE2 (TEK) mutations in humans result in venous
malformations. Tumour-derived ANG-2 also promotes angiogenesis by recruiting proangiogenic TIE-2-expressing monocytes (TEMs)49.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The overall effects of the ANG–TIE system on tumours are context dependent47. ANG-1
stimulates tumour growth by promoting endothelial cell survival and vessel maturation, but
it also inhibits tumour cell extravasation and maintains the integrity of healthy vessels
outside tumours. These conflicting biological activities warrant caution when considering
ANG-1 as an anticancer target. Instead, ANG-2 may be a more appealing therapeutic target
because it stimulates tumour angiogenesis and recruits pro-angiogenic TEMs, and ANG-2
inhibition promotes vessel regression and normalization50. Given that ANG-2 and VEGF
cooperatively increase angiogenesis, co-blockade of VEGF and ANGs is superior in
inhibiting tumour angiogenesis, metastasis and leakage51. Various agents that block either
TIE-2 or ANG-2 are being evaluated in early-phase clinical trials.

The NOTCH and WNT signalling pathway
The vessel-branching model postulates that, in general, tip cells migrate and stalk cells
proliferate. Recent studies have implicated NOTCH signalling in this model10. In response
to VEGF, activation of VEGFR-2 upregulates DLL4 expression in tip cells. In neighbouring
stalk cells, DLL4 then activates NOTCH, which downregulates VEGFR-2 but upregulates
VEGFR-1; thus, the stalk cells become less responsive to the sprouting activity of VEGF but
more sensitive to molecules such as PlGF. Overall, DLL4 and NOTCH signalling restricts

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

branching but generates perfused vessels10. By upregulating PDGFR-β in NOTCH+ mural
cells, DLL4 in endothelial cells also stimulates vessel maturation. JAGGED1, another
NOTCH ligand expressed by stalk cells, promotes tip-cell selection by interfering with the
reciprocal DLL4 and NOTCH signalling from the stalk cell to the tip cell52. NOTCH
signalling in stalk cells is dynamic over time, because it upregulates its own inhibitor,
NRARP53.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An unanticipated complexity is that endothelial cells continuously compete for the tip-cell
position by fine-tuning their expression of VEGFR-2 versus VEGFR-1, indicating that this
signalling circuit is constantly re-evaluated as cells meet new neighbours54. In accordance,
the inhibition of DLL4 and NOTCH signalling induces the formation of more numerous but
hypoperfused vessels, resulting in tumour hypoxia and growth inhibition55. However,
chronic DLL4 blockage in healthy animals results in vascular neoplasms56, and endothelial
cell inactivation of RBP-J, a transcription factor downstream of NOTCH, also leads to
uncontrolled angiogenesis. Although these data indicate that quiescent phalanx cells need
low-level NOTCH signalling, they also warrant caution against the indiscriminate use of
DLL4 and NOTCH inhibitors for the treatment of cancer. Signalling by the hedgehog family
members also participates in embryonic vasculogenesis, vascular morphogenesis and tube
formation, as well as in arterial specification, by regulating NOTCH expression3.
Endothelial cells express various types of WNT ligand and their frizzled (FZD) receptors, of
which several stimulate endothelial cell proliferation. NOTCH activates WNT signalling in
proliferating stalk cells during vessel branching53, explaining why NOTCH, which usually
suppresses proliferation and promotes quiescence, stimulates proliferation of stalk cells in
vivo. WNT also activates NOTCH in a reciprocal-feedback system, because WNT signals in
endothelial cells induce a NOTCH-like phenotype, characterized by branching defects, loss
of venous identity and aberrant vascular remodelling57. Gene-inactivation of some of the
WNT and FZD members in mice (Wnt2, Wnt5a, Fzd4 and Fzd5) causes vascular defects,
whereas the combined loss of Wnt7a and Wnt7b impairs brain angiogenesis and BBB
formation58. Because some WNT members inhibit angiogenesis, specific blockers of these
proteins will be required.

Integrins and proteases
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The ECM provides a physical link between vascular cells and their surrounding tissues.
Endothelial cells possess mechanisms to interact with and alter the matrix. Integrins are
heterodimeric receptors that mediate adhesion to ECM and immunoglobulin superfamily
molecules59,60. Upregulation of the integrins αvβ3 and αvβ5 permits growing endothelial
cells to bind to provisional matrix proteins in the tumour milieu; these proteins include
vitronectin, fibrinogen and fibronectin, both in native and degraded forms. These adhesive
interactions provide survival cues and traction for invading endothelial cells. Other integrins
involved in angiogenesis include α1β1, α2β1, α4β1, α5β1, α6β1, α9β1 and α6β4 (refs 59, 60).
In addition to signalling induced by ligating ECM components, integrins regulate
angiogenesis by other mechanisms. Given their ability to interact with several extracellular
molecules and transmit signals in a bidirectional manner, integrins function as ‘hubs’,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

orchestrating endothelial cell and VSMC behaviour during angiogenesis59,61. Hence, the
binding of integrins to growth factors (such as VEGF, FGFs and ANG-1) or their receptors
(VEGFR-2 and FGFRs) stimulates vessel growth. Integrins also upregulate and activate
zymogen proteases in invading tip cells, and promote vessel maturation by regulating
interactions between endothelial cells, pericytes and the basement membrane. Other
integrins promote the adhesion of angiogenic BMDCs to tumour endothelial cells. Recent
studies have highlighted the complexities in understanding the role of αvβ3 in pathological
angiogenesis, as tumour angiogenesis was stimulated by gene deficiency in mice but
inhibited by pharmacological blockade59,60. Nonetheless, integrin blockers are now being
evaluated in the clinic.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Quiescent endothelial cells and pericytes share a common basement membrane, which not
only physically restrains these cells but also keeps them quiescent owing to the
antiproliferative properties of the ECM components. During branching, proteolytic
remodelling of the ECM liberates these cells for unrestricted movement and converts the
characteristics of the basement membrane into a pro-angiogenic environment. Distinct
proteases such as MMPs modulate angiogenesis by several mechanisms62. They promote
endothelial cell migration and tube formation by proteolytically remodelling the basement
membrane, by executing directional matrix proteolysis (membrane type 1-MMP) or by
exposing chemotactic cryptic motifs sites in the ECM. MMPs and plasmin also liberate
angiogenic factors such as VEGF and FGF from immobilized matrix stores63. VEGF
isoforms that are cleaved by MMPs (and therefore soluble) preferentially enlarge vessels,
whereas MMP-resistant matrix-bound VEGF supports vessel branching64. Macrophages,
neutrophils and mast cells initiate angiogenesis by MMP9-mediated activation of
VEGF65,66. Proteases such as MMP9 also participate in the mobilization of progenitors from
the bone marrow by shedding soluble forms of membrane-bound cytokines (such as KIT
ligand; also known as stem-cell factor or SCF)67. MMPs establish a premetastatic niche by
allowing the recruitment of marrow progenitors29. Given their destructive potential, the
activity of proteases must be tightly controlled. For instance, loss of the inhibitor PAI-1
prevents vessel branching because excessive ECM breakdown leaves no matrix support for
the sprout68. In addition, basement membrane deposition during vessel maturation requires
the activity of MMP inhibitors such as TIMPs. Because degradation of ECM components
can also generate anti-angiogenic fragments such as tumstatin and angiostatin1, protease
inhibitors must be judiciously evaluated for biological effects.

Junctional molecules
Cell–cell communication is fundamental for vessels to act as a synchronized unit along their
longitudinal axis. Such coordination is accomplished by cell–cell communication through
gap junctions, established by connexins, which inform upstream feeding vessels about the
perfusion status of downstream tissues to prevent shunting, a well-known defect in tumour
vessels69. Apart from these long-range communication junctions, endothelial cells and
pericytes have junctions for short-range communication.
Quiescent endothelial cells form a monolayer of interconnected cells, whereas angiogenic
endothelial cells dissociate their junctions to migrate. The tight junctional molecules

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

claudins, occludins and junctional adhesion molecules maintain barriers, such as the BBB,
whereas adherens junctions establish cell–cell adhesion, cytoskeleton remodelling and
intracellular signalling70. Loss of VE-cadherin does not prevent vessel development, but
induces defects in vascular remodelling and integrity2. VE-cadherin is also required for
localizing CD34 and its sialomucin receptor to cell–cell contacts for lumen formation71. In
quiescent phalanx endothelial cells, VE-cadherin promotes vessel stabilization by inhibiting
VEGFR-2 signalling while activating TGFR pathways. Notably, oxygen sensors control VEcadherin expression in a feedback loop, so vessel perfusion can be optimized when the
oxygen supply is insufficient72. N-cadherin stabilizes contacts between endo thelial cells and
pericytes. During sprouting, the adhesive function of VE-cadherin between adjacent cells is
reduced by endocytosis in response to VEGF and angiogenic factors70. At the same time, the
localization of VE-cadherin at filopodia allows tip cells to establish new contacts with cells
on outreaching sprouts. Antibodies, recognizing neoepitopes of VE-cadherin that are
exposed after dissociation of adherens junctions during sprouting, offer opportunities for
selective blockage of endothelial cell growth without affecting endothelial cell maintenance.

Chemokines and G-protein-coupled receptors
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chemokines regulate angiogenesis by recruiting pro-angiogenic immune cells and
endothelial progenitor cells, or through the direct activation of endothelial G-proteincoupled chemokine receptors (GPCRs). A well-known chemokine is SDF-1α, which binds
to its receptor CXCR4 on tip cells73. SDF-1α is upregulated by HIF-1α in hypoxia, and
supports mobilization and retention of pro-angiogenic CXCR4+ BMDCs to promote
revascularization of ischaemic organs. Cancer-associated fibroblasts also release SDF-1α.
Another chemokine is the biologically active lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), which
binds to the S1P family of G-protein-coupled receptors (S1PRs) and regulates endothelial
cell barrier function, vessel stability and angiogenesis, in part by crosstalking to PDGF and
VEGF receptors — a process known as GPCR-jacking74. Inhibitors of SDF-1α, CXCR4 and
S1P are being developed for cancer treatment73. Another recently identified GPCR is
GPR124, which regulates BBB differentiation75.

Other pathways and challenges in translation
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other pathways also regulate angiogenesis, some of which provide guidance signals to
navigating tip cells (Box 2). Given the ancestral function of vessels to supply oxygen, vessel
formation is under the control of oxygen sensors (Box 3). As already mentioned, various
anti-angiogenic avenues in addition to VEGF blockade are under development14. A
challenge for the future will be to identify optimal treatment regimens for these agents,
either as monotherapy or in combination with VEGF blockade.
A major hurdle in translating the above-mentioned insights into clinically successful
treatments stems from the fact that various anti-angiogenic approaches have different effects
or are more effective in preclinical than clinical settings. This divergence may be due to
several factors. First, most preclinical studies examine the effect of anti-angiogenic agents
on transplantable, rapidly growing primary tumours, whereas most anti-angiogenic drugs
have been approved for spontaneously arising, slowly evolving cancers in metastatic settings

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

or for advanced disease in patients. The spontaneous tumour models in genetically
engineered mice also do not recapitulate various aspects of the human disease. Differences
in malignancy, vascularization and the stromal microenvironment between humans and mice
lead to different responses. Second, only a few preclinical studies have analysed the effects
of anti-angiogenic agents in residual disease after cytoablative therapy or in the adjuvant
setting, and often without chemotherapy. Third, the doses used in preclinical mouse studies
are often higher than those given to patients, resulting in more pronounced antivascular and
antitumour effects in mice. Fourth, most genetic studies use mice in which the relevant
angiogenic gene has been deleted before tumours become established, which is different
from pharmacological intervention in patients after the cancer has become detectable.
Finally, the dose and schedule of anti-angiogenic and chemotherapeutic drugs in the clinic
have not been optimized, owing to cost and other considerations14.

Clinical anti-angiogenesis with VEGF blockers

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several VEGF blockers have been approved for clinical use in cancer and eye diseases6,7.
So far, the US Food and Drug Administration has approved the use of the VEGFneutralizing antibody bevacizumab (Avastin) for metastatic colorectal cancer, metastatic
non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, metastatic breast cancer, recurrent glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) and metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) (Table 1). In addition, several
multi-targeted TKIs, which block the signalling of pathways such as VEGF, have been
approved, including sorafenib (Nexavar) for metastatic RCC and unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma, and sunitinib (Sutent) and pazopanib (Votrient) for metastatic RCC (Table 1).
Recently, vandetanib (Zactima) has been approved for unresectable or metastatic medullary
thyroid cancer and sunitinib has been recommended for approval for advanced pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumours, but the clinical data have not yet been published. Treatment with
VEGF inhibitors generally prolongs the survival of responsive patients with cancer of the
order of months (Table 1). Two anti-VEGF compounds — intravitreous injection of the
VEGF aptamer pegaptanib (Macugen) and the anti-VEGF Fab antibody ranibizumab
(Lucentis) — have been approved for treatment of the wet (neovascular) form of age-related
macular degeneration, which causes blindness owing to the formation of leaky neovessels.
Bevacizumab is also used off-label for this condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Notwithstanding these successes, the clinical use of VEGF blockers in patients with cancer
has shown that anti-angiogenic therapy is more challenging than anticipated. For example,
VEGF receptor TKIs are effective as monotherapy in certain cancers, but fail in others or are
toxic when combined with chemotherapy6,14. The use of bevacizumab is approved only
when combined with cytotoxic or cytokine therapy (with the exception of patients with
GBM). Many patients with metastatic disease are refractory or acquire resistance to VEGF
inhibitors46, and biomarkers to identify responders are missing14. In a recent trial,
bevacizumab prolonged disease-free progression but not overall survival in patients with
metastatic RCC76, and failed to show benefit in the adjuvant setting77. Moreover, questions
have begun to arise about whether anti-angiogenic therapy causes cancer cells to become
more malignant78,79. What are the reasons for these problems, and what can be done to
move forward? The discussion in the next sections does not offer an answer to the daily

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 12

challenges in oncological practice, but provides some avenues for developing future
strategies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Refractoriness to VEGF blockade in advanced cancer
A fraction of patients with cancer are refractory to VEGF-inhibitor treatment46. The extent
of refractoriness varies from one cancer to another, differs between micro- and
macrometastatic disease, and differs for various types of VEGF blocker. Patients can be
intrinsically refractory and never show any response to treatment, or develop evasive
resistance during the course of treatment. Several mechanisms have been proposed to
explain these phenomena, which are related to changes in the tumour cells, endothelial cells
or other stromal cells6,14,46,80 (Fig. 3). It is important to note that these mechanisms have
been identified for advanced, late-stage, macrometastatic disease only.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumour angiogenesis can become VEGF independent at a more advanced stage because of
the production of other pro-angiogenic molecules, and thus respond poorly to VEGF
blockade. Hypoxia induced by vessel regression after VEGF blockade can also switch on a
more invasive and metastatic program, whereas in other cases, cancer (stem) cells can
become hypoxia-tolerant when acquiring extra mutations and survive in poorly oxygenated
niches. VEGF blockade inhibits sprouting angiogenesis, but may not be as efficient in
suppressing other modes of tumour vascularization, relying on the recruitment of BMDCs,
vessel co-option, vasculogenic mimicry or vessel splitting. Certain tumours, such as
pancreatic carcinoma, contain a hypovascular stroma and are therefore less sensitive to antiangiogenic agents. Vessel pruning by VEGF blockade can aggravate hypoxia, resulting in
the upregulation of angiogenic factors such as PlGF, FGFs, chemokines and ephrins, and
this may rescue tumour vascularization46. Some tumour endothelial cells show signs of
cytogenetic abnormalities and transforming stem-cell potential81, which could alter
sensitivity to VEGF inhibition. Furthermore, GBM-like stem cells can differentiate into
tumour endothelial cells, and VEGF blockers can only partially inhibit this process4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other stromal cells contribute to the resistance to VEGF blockade. Hypoxia promotes the
recruitment of angiocompetent BMDCs, including TEMs, TAMs, neutrophils, mast cells
and CD11b+GR-1+ (also known as ITGAM+Ly6G+) myeloid-derived suppressor cells,
which release angiogenic signals such as VEGF, BV8 (also known as PROK2) and
MMPs82. VEGF blockade is often combined with chemotherapeutics — by sensitizing
endothelial cells to cytotoxic damage, VEGF inhibitors impair endothelial cell survival and
regrowth, but recruitment of BMDCs after chemotherapy can revascularize tumours
(‘vasculogenic rebound’)6,83. The release of angiogenic factors such as PDGF-CC by
cancer-associated fibroblasts also contributes to resistance. Furthermore, vessels in most
tumours are covered with few pericytes, but microvessels in some cancers acquire a dense
pericyte coat with a thick basement membrane; such mature vessels are usually less sensitive
to VEGF blockers31,32. Understanding the molecular basis of these cancer-type-dependent
resistance mechanisms against VEGF blockade offers opportunities to improve antiangiogenic treatment.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 13

VEGF blockers in the adjuvant setting
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

On the basis of the clinical experience with VEGF inhibitors in macrometastatic cancer,
VEGF blockers were anticipated to be beneficial for micrometastatic disease in the adjuvant
setting (that is, after surgical resection of the primary tumour). However, compared with
chemotherapy alone, adjuvant treatment of patients with micrometastatic disease in
combination with bevacizumab and chemotherapy failed to prolong disease-free survival
after three years77. The administration of an anti-VEGF antibody initially prolonged diseasefree survival in patients, but this benefit was lost after three years. The precise reasons for
this remain unclear. It is possible that the micrometastatic tumour cells were less responsive
to anti-VEGF treatment because they were in a state of angiogenic dormancy84. The
recruitment of proangiogenic BMDCs may convert micrometastasis to macrometastasis, but
it unclear whether VEGF blockade eliminates this rescue pathway. Another hypothesis is
that an angiogenesis rebound occurs after the arrest of anti-VEGF treatment, as documented
in animal models85. However, such vascular rebound did not occur after long-term treatment
with a pan-VEGFR TKI in patients with GBM86.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another question is whether the transient disease-free survival benefit of anti-VEGF
treatment was attributable to a change in the nature of the disease, and whether VEGF
blockade caused the cancer to become more malignant after an initial delay. Some
preclinical models show that VEGF blockade aggravates hypoxia and induces a protumorigenic inflammatory state, which promotes invasiveness and metastasis, despite
inhibition of primary tumour growth and prolongation of survival78,79. However, another
preclinical study reported no effect of VEGF blockade on metastasis in the adjuvant
setting87, and clinical trials have not shown an increase in malignancy or tumour-growth
rebound after VEGF blockade, at least not in the metastatic setting. Moreover, a recent
randomized phase II trial showed that continuous dosing and discontinuous dosing (four
weeks on and two weeks off) of sunitinib have the same outcome in RCC patients. Finally, a
meta-analysis of advanced cancers shows that VEGF blockade does not aggravate metastatic
disease88. Recurrent GBM is an exception, in which VEGF blockade increased tumour
invasion, but even in these studies, tumours might have become more malignant because the
treatment prolonged survival and allowed the cancer to progress further. Overall, there is an
urgent need for an improved mechanistic understanding of vessel growth and resistance to
anti-angiogenic therapy, particularly in micrometastatic lesions.

Tumour vessel abnormalities as a future target
Another parameter that could determine the overall efficiency of anti-VEGF therapy is the
abnormal nature of tumour vessels. Tumour vessels become abnormal in almost all aspects
of their structure and function89. They are heterogeneous, tortuous, branch chaotically and
have an uneven vessel lumen. In addition to abnormal endothelial cells, pericytes and the
basement membrane are also abnormal. Owing to the leakiness of tumour vessels, escaping
fluid raises the interstitial fluid pressure. As a result, blood flow is heterogeneous, and
oxygen, nutrients, immune cells and drugs are distributed unevenly. Because radiation
therapy and many chemotherapeutics rely on the formation of oxygen radicals to kill cancer
cells, tumour hypoxia reduces their efficacy. These vessel abnormalities create a hostile

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 14

milieu, characterized by hypoxia, low pH and high fluid pressure, which can select for more
malignant cancer cells and lower barriers to their escape through leaky vessels.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

These findings raise questions for the future. Excessive vessel pruning and growth arrest by
anti-angiogenic agents could aggravate tumour invasiveness and metastasis by increasing
hypoxia and creating a protumorigenic inflammatory state. Vessel normalization could
provide new therapeutic opportunities to slow down tumour invasiveness and dissemination,
and increase tumour responses to chemotherapeutics and radiotherapy89. Another
consideration is how vessel normalization should be combined with an anti-angiogenic
treatment. Vessel normalization was first recognized in mice xenografted with colon cancer
and treated with an anti-VEGF antibody, but it is transient in mice and patients14,89,90.
Recent genetic studies in mice have shown that sustained vessel normalization can provide
benefits. Indeed, haplodeficiency of the oxygen-sensor PHD2 in endothelial cells induces
sustained normalization of tumour vessels, without altering vessel density or size72. In these
vessels, leakage, tortuosity and remodelling are reduced, whereas endothelial cell
quiescence, barrier tightening and vessel maturation are increased — changes that boost
perfusion and decrease hypoxia72. A streamlined monolayer of phalanx endothelial cells is
also formed, providing a more impenetrable barrier for intravasating tumour cells72. These
changes do not affect tumour growth, but reduce tumour cell invasiveness, intravasation and
metastasis72. Although these genetic studies offer an elegant example, the challenge will be
to develop therapeutic strategies that translate these insights into daily practice in the clinic.

Future directions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An important question is how anti-angiogenic medicine can be improved. In the short term,
the use of current anti-VEGF agents should be optimized. Given the low response rates, a
step forward would be the discovery of predictive biomarkers to identify responders among
the large patient group of non-responders. So far, only a few candidates for predictive
biomarkers have been identified, but they emerged from small studies and require
prospective validation in independent randomized trials14. Another consideration is the
optimization of the dose and duration of anti-angiogenic drug delivery. Little is understood
about the mechanisms of vascularization of micrometastatic lesions, and agents that can
block other modes of tumour vascularization (such as co-option, intussusception,
vasculogenesis and vasculogenic mimicry) are needed. Furthermore, understanding the
mechanistic differences between VEGFR TKIs and anti-VEGF antibodies (for instance,
whether the former are effective as monotherapy because they inhibit several targets,
whereas the latter require combination chemotherapy in most instances) will help to
optimize the design of anticancer treatments.
In the intermediate term, anti-VEGF agents could be combined with agents that target the
escape pathways detected in clinical studies (not in mice). Examples are ANG-2, PlGF,
SDF-1α and CXCR4 (ref. 14). The challenge will be when to add these second agents —
before, during or after anti-VEGF therapy. In the long term, the therapeutic potential of
vascular normalization agents based on recently identified targets should be evaluated in
preclinical models, but their clinical development will require years. By using combinatorial
therapeutic approaches, it will be important to explore the eradication of most tumour

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

vessels and normalization of residual vessels for longer durations than are now achievable
with VEGF blockers alone. The potential of tumour vessel normalization to improve
anticancer immune therapy should be explored further. Finally, it is important to test
whether the approved anti-VEGF agents and those under development could be used to treat
various non-malignant diseases characterized by abnormal vasculature, which afflict
millions of people worldwide and in many cases have no effective treatment — such as agerelated macular degeneration causing blindness, schwannomas causing loss of hearing, and
atherosclerotic plaques causing stroke and myocardial infarction after rupture14,91. A tight
integration between preclinical and clinical research is crucial to achieve these goals.

Acknowledgments

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We would like to acknowledge the late J. Folkman for inspiring us and others to work in the area of tumour
angiogenesis. We would like to thank L. Claeson-Welch, H. Augustin, E. Dejana, S. Kozin, D. G. Duda, S. Goel, L.
L. Munn, G. Sledge, R. Stupp and H. D. Suit for their comments, and L. Notebaert for help with the illustrations.
We apologize to the authors whose work we could not cite because of the limit on the number of references. The
work of P.C. is supported by a Federal Government Belgium grant (IUAP06/30), long-term structural Methusalem
funding by the Flemish Government, a Concerted Research Activities Belgium grant (GOA2006/11), Leducq
Transatlantic Network ARTEMIS and a grant from Flanders Research Foundation (FWO G.0673.08). The research
of R.K.J. is supported by US National Institutes of Health grants P01-CA80124, R01-CA85140, R01-CA115767
and R01-CA126642, Federal Share/NCI Proton Beam Program Income, the National Foundation for Cancer
Research and a Department of Defense Breast Cancer Research Innovator Award (W81XWH-10-1-0016).

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Folkman J. Angiogenesis: an organizing principle for drug discovery? Nature Rev. Drug Discov.
2007; 6:273–286. [PubMed: 17396134]
2. Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nature Med. 2003; 9:653–660. [PubMed:
12778163]
3. Swift MR, Weinstein BM. Arterial–venous specification during development. Circ. Res. 2009;
104:576–588.
4. Wang R, et al. Glioblastoma stem-like cells give rise to tumour endothelium. Nature. 2010;
468:829–833. [PubMed: 21102433]
5. Schaper W. Collateral circulation: past and present. Basic Res. Cardiol. 2009; 104:5–21. [PubMed:
19101749]
6. Jain RK, Duda DG, Clark JW, Loeffler JS. Lessons from phase III clinical trials on anti-VEGF
therapy for cancer. Nature Clin. Pract. Oncol. 2006; 3:24–40. [PubMed: 16407877]
7. Ferrara N. VEGF-A: a critical regulator of blood vessel growth. Eur. Cytokine Netw. 2009; 20:158–
163. [PubMed: 20167554]
8. Nagy JA, Dvorak AM, Dvorak HF. VEGF-A and the induction of pathological angiogenesis. Annu.
Rev. Pathol. 2007; 2:251–275. [PubMed: 18039100]
9. Neufeld G, Kessler O. The semaphorins: versatile regulators of tumour progression and tumour
angiogenesis. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:632–645. [PubMed: 18580951]
10. Phng LK, Gerhardt H. Angiogenesis: a team effort coordinated by Notch. Dev. Cell. 2009; 16:196–
208. [PubMed: 19217422]
11. Stockmann C, et al. Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates
tumorigenesis. Nature. 2008; 456:814–818. [PubMed: 18997773]
12. Lee S, et al. Autocrine VEGF signaling is required for vascular homeostasis. Cell. 2007; 130:691–
703. [PubMed: 17719546]
13. Lanahan AA, et al. VEGF receptor 2 endocytic trafficking regulates arterial morphogenesis. Dev.
Cell. 2010; 18:713–724. [PubMed: 20434959]
14. Jain RK, et al. Biomarkers of response and resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. Nature Rev. Clin.
Oncol. 2009; 6:327–338. [PubMed: 19483739] This review highlights the importance of various

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

types of biomarker to personalize anti-angiogenic medicine, distinguish responders from nonresponders and monitor treatment efficacy and adverse effects.
15. Buysschaert I, Schmidt T, Roncal C, Carmeliet P, Lambrechts D. Genetics, epigenetics and
pharmaco-(epi)genomics in angiogenesis. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 2008; 12:2533–2551. [PubMed:
19210754]
16. Tvorogov D, et al. Effective suppression of vascular network formation by combination of
antibodies blocking VEGFR ligand binding and receptor dimerization. Cancer Cell. 2010; 18:630–
640. [PubMed: 21130043]
17. Tammela T, Alitalo K. Lymphangiogenesis: molecular mechanisms and future promise. Cell.
2010; 140:460–476. [PubMed: 20178740]
18. Herbert SP, et al. Arterial–venous segregation by selective cell sprouting: an alternative mode of
blood vessel formation. Science. 2009; 326:294–298. [PubMed: 19815777]
19. Fischer C, Mazzone M, Jonckx B, Carmeliet P. FLT1 and its ligands VEGFB and PlGF: drug
targets for anti-angiogenic therapy? Nature Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:942–956. [PubMed: 19029957]
20. Carmeliet P, et al. Synergism between vascular endothelial growth factor and placental growth
factor contributes to angiogenesis and plasma extravasation in pathological conditions. Nature
Med. 2001; 7:575–583. [PubMed: 11329059]
21. Rolny C, et al. HRG inhibits tumor growth and metastasis by inducing macrophage polarization
and vessel normalization through downregulation of PlGF. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:31–44.
[PubMed: 21215706]
22. Van de Veire S, et al. Further pharmacological and genetic evidence for the efficacy of PlGF
inhibition in cancer and eye disease. Cell. 2010; 141:178–190. [PubMed: 20371353]
23. Bais C, et al. PlGF blockade does not inhibit angiogenesis during primary tumor growth. Cell.
2010; 141:166–177. [PubMed: 20371352]
24. Hagberg CE, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor B controls endothelial fatty acid uptake.
Nature. 2010; 464:917–921. [PubMed: 20228789]
25. Bry M, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor-B acts as a coronary growth factor in transgenic
rats without inducing angiogenesis, vascular leak, or inflammation. Circulation. 2010; 122:1725–
1733. [PubMed: 20937974]
26. Schwartz JD, Rowinsky EK, Youssoufian H, Pytowski B, Wu Y. Vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-1 in human cancer. Cancer. 2010; 116:1027–1032. [PubMed: 20127948]
27. Lichtenberger BM, et al. Autocrine VEGF signaling synergizes with EGFR in tumor cells to
promote epithelial cancer development. Cell. 2010; 140:268–279. [PubMed: 20141840]
28. Duda DG, Jain RK. Premetastatic lung ‘niche’: is vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1
activation required? Cancer Res. 2010; 70:5670–5673. [PubMed: 20587530]
29. Kaplan RN, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the premetastatic niche. Nature. 2005; 438:820–827. [PubMed: 16341007]
30. Jain RK. Molecular regulation of vessel maturation. Nature Med. 2003; 9:685–693. [PubMed:
12778167]
31. Hellberg C, Ostman A, Heldin CH. PDGF and vessel maturation. Recent Results Cancer Res.
2010; 180:103–114. [PubMed: 20033380]
32. Gaengel K, Genove G, Armulik A, Betsholtz C. Endothelial-mural cell signaling in vascular
development and angiogenesis. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 2009; 29:630–638. [PubMed:
19164813] This article discusses the role of pericytes in tumour angiogenesis, and highlights the
possible pro-metastatic effects of blocking pericyte coverage.
33. Quaegebeur A, Segura I, Carmeliet P. Pericytes: blood–brain barrier safeguards against
neurodegeneration? Neuron. 2010; 68:321–323. [PubMed: 21040834]
34. Song S, Ewald AJ, Stallcup W, Werb Z, Bergers G. PDGFRβ+ perivascular progenitor cells in
tumours regulate pericyte differentiation and vascular survival. Nature Cell Biol. 2005; 7:870–879.
[PubMed: 16113679]
35. Bergers G, Song S, Meyer-Morse N, Bergsland E, Hanahan D. Benefits of targeting both pericytes
and endothelial cells in the tumor vasculature with kinase inhibitors. J. Clin. Invest. 2003;
111:1287–1295. [PubMed: 12727920]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

36. McCarty MF, et al. Overexpression of PDGF-BB decreases colorectal and pancreatic cancer
growth by increasing tumor pericyte content. J. Clin. Invest. 2007; 117:2114–2122. [PubMed:
17641778]
37. Sennino B, et al. Cellular source and amount of vascular endothelial growth factor and plateletderived growth factor in tumors determine response to angiogenesis inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:4527–4536. [PubMed: 19401451]
38. Nisancioglu MH, Betsholtz C, Genove G. The absence of pericytes does not increase the
sensitivity of tumor vasculature to vascular endothelial growth factor-A blockade. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:5109–5115. [PubMed: 20501841]
39. Gerhardt H, Semb H. Pericytes: gatekeepers in tumour cell metastasis? J. Mol. Med. 2008; 86:135–
144. [PubMed: 17891366]
40. Lebrin F, et al. Thalidomide stimulates vessel maturation and reduces epistaxis in individuals with
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Nature Med. 2010; 16:420–428. [PubMed: 20364125]
41. Crawford Y, et al. PDGF-C mediates the angiogenic and tumorigenic properties of fibroblasts
associated with tumors refractory to anti-VEGF treatment. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:21–34. [PubMed:
19111878]
42. di Tomaso E, et al. PDGF-C induces maturation of blood vessels in a model of glioblastoma and
attenuates the response to anti-VEGF treatment. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e5123. [PubMed: 19352490]
43. Pardali E, Goumans MJ, ten Dijke P. Signaling by members of the TGF-β family in vascular
morphogenesis and disease. Trends Cell Biol. 2010; 20:556–567. [PubMed: 20656490]
44. Beenken A, Mohammadi M. The FGF family: biology, pathophysiology and therapy. Nature Rev.
Drug Discov. 2009; 8:235–253. [PubMed: 19247306]
45. Murakami M, et al. The FGF system has a key role in regulating vascular integrity. J. Clin. Invest.
2008; 118:3355–3366. [PubMed: 18776942]
46. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2008;
8:592–603. [PubMed: 18650835]
47. Augustin HG, Koh GY, Thurston G, Alitalo K. Control of vascular morphogenesis and
homeostasis through the angiopoietin–Tie system. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2009; 10:165–177.
[PubMed: 19234476]
48. Saharinen P, et al. Angiopoietins assemble distinct Tie2 signalling complexes in endothelial cell–
cell and cell–matrix contacts. Nature Cell Biol. 2008; 10:527–537. [PubMed: 18425119]
49. De Palma M, et al. Tie2 identifies a hematopoietic lineage of proangiogenic monocytes required
for tumor vessel formation and a mesenchymal population of pericyte progenitors. Cancer Cell.
2005; 8:211–226. [PubMed: 16169466]
50. Falcon BL, et al. Contrasting actions of selective inhibitors of angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2 on
the normalization of tumor blood vessels. Am. J. Pathol. 2009; 175:2159–2170. [PubMed:
19815705]
51. Koh YJ, et al. Double antiangiogenic protein, DAAP, targeting VEGF-A and angiopoietins in
tumor angiogenesis, metastasis, and vascular leakage. Cancer Cell. 2010; 18:171–184. [PubMed:
20708158]
52. Benedito R, et al. The Notch ligands Dll4 and Jagged1 have opposing effects on angiogenesis.
Cell. 2009; 137:1124–1135. [PubMed: 19524514]
53. Phng LK, et al. Nrarp coordinates endothelial Notch and Wnt signaling to control vessel density in
angiogenesis. Dev. Cell. 2009; 16:70–82. [PubMed: 19154719]
54. Jakobsson L, et al. Endothelial cells dynamically compete for the tip cell position during
angiogenic sprouting. Nature Cell Biol. 2010; 12:943–953. [PubMed: 20871601]
55. Thurston G, Noguera-Troise I, Yancopoulos GD. The Delta paradox: DLL4 blockade leads to
more tumour vessels but less tumour growth. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2007; 7:327–331. [PubMed:
17457300] References 10 and 55 discuss the molecular model of vessel branching, and the role of
DLL4 and NOTCH signalling in tip- and stalk-cell formation.
56. Yan M, et al. Chronic DLL4 blockade induces vascular neoplasms. Nature. 2010; 463:E6–E7.
[PubMed: 20147986]
57. Corada M, et al. The Wnt/β-catenin pathway modulates vascular remodeling and specification by
upregulating Dll4/Notch signaling. Dev. Cell. 2010; 18:938–949. [PubMed: 20627076]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

58. Dejana E. The role of Wnt signaling in physiological and pathological angiogenesis. Circ. Res.
2010; 107:943–952. [PubMed: 20947863]
59. Desgrosellier JS, Cheresh DA. Integrins in cancer: biological implications and therapeutic
opportunities. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2010; 10:9–22. [PubMed: 20029421]
60. Hodivala-Dilke K. αvβ3 integrin and angiogenesis: a moody integrin in a changing environment.
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2008; 20:514–519. [PubMed: 18638550]
61. Contois L, Akalu A, Brooks PC. Integrins as ‘functional hubs’ in the regulation of pathological
angiogenesis. Semin. Cancer Biol. 2009; 19:318–328. [PubMed: 19482089]
62. Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Pleiotropic roles of matrix metalloproteinases in tumor angiogenesis:
contrasting, overlapping and compensatory functions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 2010; 1803:103–
120. [PubMed: 19800930]
63. Bergers G, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 triggers the angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis.
Nature Cell Biol. 2000; 2:737–744. [PubMed: 11025665]
64. Iruela-Arispe ML, Davis GE. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of vascular lumen formation.
Dev. Cell. 2009; 16:222–231. [PubMed: 19217424]
65. Du R, et al. HIF1α induces the recruitment of bone marrow-derived vascular modulatory cells to
regulate tumor angiogenesis and invasion. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:206–220. [PubMed: 18328425]
66. Heissig B, et al. Role of neutrophil-derived matrix metalloproteinase-9 in tissue regeneration.
Histol. Histopathol. 2010; 25:765–770. [PubMed: 20376783]
67. Heissig B, et al. Recruitment of stem and progenitor cells from the bone marrow niche requires
MMP-9 mediated release of kit-ligand. Cell. 2002; 109:625–637. [PubMed: 12062105]
68. Blasi F, Carmeliet P. uPAR: a versatile signalling orchestrator. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2002;
3:932–943. [PubMed: 12461559]
69. Pries AR, Hopfner M, le Noble F, Dewhirst MW, Secomb TW. The shunt problem: control of
functional shunting in normal and tumour vasculature. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2010; 10:587–593.
[PubMed: 20631803]
70. Dejana E, Tournier-Lasserve E, Weinstein BM. The control of vascular integrity by endothelial
cell junctions: molecular basis and pathological implications. Dev. Cell. 2009; 16:209–221.
[PubMed: 19217423]
71. Strilic B, et al. The molecular basis of vascular lumen formation in the developing mouse aorta.
Dev. Cell. 2009; 17:505–515. [PubMed: 19853564]
72. Mazzone M, et al. Heterozygous deficiency of PHD2 restores tumor oxygenation and inhibits
metastasis via endothelial normalization. Cell. 2009; 136:839–851. [PubMed: 19217150] This
article provides genetic evidence of a role for the oxygen-sensor PHD2 in tumour vessel
normalization through its regulation of endothelial cell phalanx formation.
73. Duda DG, et al. CXCL12 (SDF1α) — CXCR4/CXCR7 pathway inhibition: an emerging sensitizer
for anti-cancer therapies? Clin. Cancer Res. 2011; 17:2074–2080. [PubMed: 21349998]
74. Visentin B, et al. Validation of an anti-sphingosine-1-phosphate antibody as a potential therapeutic
in reducing growth, invasion, and angiogenesis in multiple tumor lineages. Cancer Cell. 2006;
9:225–238. [PubMed: 16530706]
75. Kuhnert F, et al. Essential regulation of CNS angiogenesis by the orphan G protein-coupled
receptor GPR124. Science. 2010; 330:985–989. [PubMed: 21071672]
76. Escudier B, et al. Phase III trial of bevacizumab plus interferon alfa-2a in patients with metastatic
renal cell carcinoma (AVOREN): final analysis of overall survival. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:2144–
2150. [PubMed: 20368553]
77. Allegra CJ, et al. Phase III trial assessing bevacizumab in stages II and III carcinoma of the colon:
results of NSABP protocol C-08. J. Clin. Oncol. 2011; 29:11–16. [PubMed: 20940184]
78. Ebos JM, et al. Accelerated metastasis after short-term treatment with a potent inhibitor of tumor
angiogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:232–239. [PubMed: 19249681]
79. Paez-Ribes M, et al. Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to increased
local invasion and distant metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:220–231. [PubMed: 19249680]
References 78 and 79 provide preclinical evidence that VEGF or VEGFR blockade can enhance
metastasis, whereas references 87 and 88 provide preclinical and clinical evidence that VEGF or
VEGFR blockade has no effect on metastasis.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

80. Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in life, disease and medicine. Nature. 2005; 438:932–936. [PubMed:
16355210]
81. Hida K, et al. Tumor-associated endothelial cells with cytogenetic abnormalities. Cancer Res.
2004; 64:8249–8255. [PubMed: 15548691]
82. Ferrara N. Pathways mediating VEGF-independent tumor angiogenesis. Cytokine Growth Factor
Rev. 2010; 21:21–26. [PubMed: 20005148] References 46 and 82 discuss the mechanisms of
resistance to VEGF or VEGFR blockade.
83. Nagengast WB, et al. VEGF-PET imaging is a noninvasive biomarker showing differential
changes in the tumor during sunitinib treatment. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:143–153. [PubMed:
21084271]
84. Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2009;
9:239–252. [PubMed: 19279573]
85. Mancuso MR, et al. Rapid vascular regrowth in tumors after reversal of VEGF inhibition. J. Clin.
Invest. 2006; 116:2610–2621. [PubMed: 17016557]
86. di Tomaso E, et al. Glioblastoma recurrence after cediranib therapy in patients: lack of “rebound”
revascularization as mode of escape. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:19–28. [PubMed: 21199795]
87. Padera TP, et al. Differential response of primary tumor versus lymphatic metastasis to VEGFR-2
and VEGFR-3 kinase inhibitors cediranib and vandetanib. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:2272–2279.
[PubMed: 18687659]
88. Miles D, et al. Disease course patterns after discontinuation of bevacizumab: pooled analysis of
randomized phase III trials. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 29:83–88. [PubMed: 21098326]
89. Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy.
Science. 2005; 307:58–62. [PubMed: 15637262] This review presents evidence for vascular
abnormalities in tumours, and the therapeutic potential to normalize these vessels for treatment of
cancer and other diseases characterized by abnormal vessels.
90. Jain RK. Normalizing tumor vasculature with anti-angiogenic therapy: a new paradigm for
combination therapy. Nature Med. 2001; 7:987–989. [PubMed: 11533692]
91. Plotkin SR, et al. Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in patients with neurofibromatosis type
2. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009; 361:358–367. [PubMed: 19587327]
92. Butler JM, Kobayashi H, Rafii S. Instructive role of the vascular niche in promoting tumour
growth and tissue repair by angiocrine factors. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2010; 10:138–146. [PubMed:
20094048] This review discusses the emerging concept that endothelial cells produce instructive
signals for organ development, repair and even cancer. It also highlights the importance of
hypoxia-mediated signalling in angiogenesis.
93. Adams RH, Eichmann A. Axon guidance molecules in vascular patterning. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 2010; 2:a001875. [PubMed: 20452960]
94. Mosch B, Reissenweber B, Neuber C, Pietzsch J. Eph receptors and ephrin ligands: important
players in angiogenesis and tumor angiogenesis. J. Oncol. 2010; 2010:135285. [PubMed:
20224755]
95. Sawamiphak S, et al. Ephrin-B2 regulates VEGFR2 function in developmental and tumour
angiogenesis. Nature. 2010; 465:487–491. [PubMed: 20445540]
96. Majmundar AJ, Wong WJ, Simon MC. Hypoxia-inducible factors and the response to hypoxic
stress. Mol. Cell. 2010; 40:294–309. [PubMed: 20965423]
97. Fraisl P, Mazzone M, Schmidt T, Carmeliet P. Regulation of angiogenesis by oxygen and
metabolism. Dev. Cell. 2009; 16:167–179. [PubMed: 19217420]
98. Arany Z, et al. HIF-independent regulation of VEGF and angiogenesis by the transcriptional
coactivator PGC-1α. Nature. 2008; 451:1008–1112. [PubMed: 18288196] References 24, 97 and
98 discuss the link between metabolism and angiogenesis, and show that metabolic regulators
control angiogenesis.
99. Ohtani K, Dimmeler S. Control of cardiovascular differentiation by microRNAs. Basic Res.
Cardiol. 2010; 106:5–11. [PubMed: 21184089] This review discusses the emerging evidence for
regulation of angiogenesis by epigenetic mechanisms.
100. Nicoli S, et al. MicroRNA-mediated integration of haemodynamics and Vegf signalling during
angiogenesis. Nature. 2010; 464:1196–1200. [PubMed: 20364122]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 20

BOX 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Perfusion–independent role of endothelial cells
During embryogenesis, the invasion of endothelial cells into nascent organs confers
inductive signals to promote organogenesis, even in the absence of blood flow. This
suggests that endothelial cells not only form passive conduits for delivering oxygen but
also establish organ-specific vascular niches, which stimulate organogenesis by the
production of paracrine-tropic ‘angiocrine’ factors92. Endothelial cells show remarkable
heterogeneity in different organs. These organ-specific endothelial cells release signals
for pancreatic differentiation, reconstitution of haematopoietic stem cells and expansion
of neuronal precursors, and give rise to haematopoietic progenitors by endothelial-tohaematopoietic transition. The vascular adventitia — the outer layer of vessels — also
hosts vessel-resident stem and progenitor cells. Emerging evidence indicates that such
perfusion-independent activities of endothelial cells also promote tumorigenesis92. In
addition to constituting the building blocks of vessels and delivering nutrients and
oxygen, tumour endothelial cells allow the recruitment of pro-angiogenic bone-marrowderived cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 21

BOX 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Guidance signals in angiogenesis
Tip cells sense guidance cues, similar to how axonal growth cones explore their
surroundings. It is therefore not surprising that molecules used by navigating axons are
evolutionarily conserved, and molecules such as VEGF also guide neuronal cells.
Navigating endothelial cells express receptors for axon-guidance cues, including ephrin
receptors (EPH); neuropilins (NRPs) and PLEXIN-D1, which bind semaphorins;
ROBO4, which binds slit proteins; and UNC5B, which binds netrin proteins. Given the
size and complexity of these families (and the existing controversies93), we illustrate this
concept with a few examples that have therapeutic potential.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

EPH receptors and their ligands, the ephrins, regulate cell-contact-dependent patterning
and can generate bidirectional signals. The signalling cascade in ephrin-expressing cells
is known as reverse signalling, whereas signalling in EPH-receptor-expressing cells is
termed forward signalling. Ephrin-B2 and its receptor EPHB4 regulate vessel
morphogenesis by several mechanisms93,94. During vasculogenesis, the vascular plexus
is marked by ephrin-B2+ arterial and EPHB4+ venous territories. By avoiding repulsive
actions, ephrin-B2+ and EPHB4+ cells prevent intermingling and segregate from each
other. In zebrafish, the emigration of venous-fated cells from a precursor vessel leads to
segregation of ephrin-B2+ arterial endothelial cells in the dorsal aorta and EPHB4+
venous endothelial cells in the cardinal vein18. Moreover, reverse signalling by ephrin-B2
in tip cells induces VEGFR-2 internalization, which is necessary for downstream
signalling of VEGFR-2 to elicit VEGF-induced tip-cell filopodial extension95. Ephrin-B2
also promotes the recruitment of mural cells and bone-marrow-derived endothelial
progenitor cells. In tumours, the overall effect of EPHB4 is pro-angiogenic, making it a
target for anti-angiogenic therapy. Indeed, upregulation of EPHB4 stimulates tumour
angiogenesis, whereas EPHB4 blockade has the opposite effect. Other EPH receptors and
ephrin ligands, such as EPHA2 and ephrin-A1, have a role in vessel growth and
maturation94. Notably, ephrin-A1 levels are upregulated in tumours treated with VEGF
blockers, suggesting that it contributes to resistance against VEGF blockade46. Various
therapeutics that target EPH receptors and ephrin ligands are being developed, but the
complexity of this signalling system should be kept in mind.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Semaphorins are secreted or membrane-anchored, and bind to plexin proteins or their
NRP co-receptors. The loss of Plxnd1 in mice induces erroneous navigation of vessels,
because endothelial cells cannot recognize the repulsive semaphorin-3E (SEMA3E)
signals in their environment. Many semaphorins inhibit tumour angiogenesis, including
SEMA3A, SEMA3B, SEMA3D, SEMA3F and SEMA4A, whereas SEMA3C and
SEMA4D promote tumour angiogenesis. NRPs bind ligands such as semaphorins and
VEGF, but the vascular defects observed in Nrp1-deficient embryos are attributable to
defective VEGF signalling, rather than defective semaphorin signalling. An antibody that
blocks the binding of VEGF, but not of SEMA3A, to NRPs also inhibits tumour
angiogenesis. Dual targeting with antibodies that block both VEGF and NRP1 is more
effective than single-agent therapy, presumably because the antivascular remodelling
effects of anti-NRP1 antibodies keep vessels in a VEGF-dependent state. In addition, a
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

soluble NRP2B variant with increased VEGF affinity enhances the tumour-growthinhibitory activity of an antibody that blocks the interactions of VEGF with VEGFR-2
but not with NRPs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 23

BOX 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hypoxia and epigenetic regulation of angiogenesis
The prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD) proteins PHD1–3 are oxygen-sensing enzymes
that hydroxylate the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) proteins HIF-1α and HIF-2α when
sufficient oxygen is available. Once hydroxylated, HIFs are targeted for proteasomal
degradation96. Under hypoxia, PHDs become inactive, and HIFs initiate broad
transcriptional responses to increase the oxygen supply by angiogenesis, through the
upregulation of angiogenic factors such as VEGF97. HIFs are also activated in nonhypoxic conditions by oncogenes and growth factors, allowing tumour cells to stimulate
angiogenesis before they become deprived of oxygen. In general, HIF-1α promotes
vessel sprouting, whereas HIF-2α mediates vascular maintenance97. Reduced HIF-1α
levels in mice impair embryonic vascular development, revascularization of ischaemic
tissues, and angiogenesis in injured tissues and tumours97. The use of HIF-1α inhibitors
to block tumour or ocular angiogenesis has therefore received attention. Conversely,
Hif1a gene transfer in mice or activation of HIF-1α by pharmacological blockade of
PHDs promotes ischaemic tissue revascularization.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HIF-1α also regulates tumour angiogenesis indirectly, by releasing chemoattractants such
as SDF-1α to recruit pro-angiogenic BMDCs65. Gene silencing of Phd2 in mouse tumour
cells enhances vessel growth by similar mechanisms. Hypoxia also regulates the
polarization and pro-angiogenic activity of tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) by
means of HIF-1α and HIF-2α with different effects96. That hypoxia and inflammation
are closely intertwined is illustrated by the finding that signalling by HIF-1α and nuclear
factor-κB cross-activate each other. In certain cases, hypoxic upregulation of VEGF
occurs independently of HIF-1α, and is mediated by the metabolic regulator PGC-1α in
preparation for oxidative metabolism once the ischaemic tissue is revascularized98.
Because HIF signalling contributes to acquired resistance against anti-VEGF therapy, the
combined blockade of VEGF and HIF-1α is being explored as a cancer treatment
strategy.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There is increasing evidence for epigenetic control of angiogenesis, particularly by noncoding microRNAs (miRNAs)15, which induce messenger RNA degradation or block
translation. Because miRNAs target multiple genes, they are well positioned to regulate
complex processes such as angiogenesis. Endothelial cells express several miRNAs that
are induced by hypoxia or VEGF. Most of those stimulate angiogenesis by hijacking proangiogenic cascades, while suppressing angiostatic pathways99. The expression of
miR-126 is induced by the mechanosensitive transcription factor KLF2A and integrates
the mechanosensory stimulus of blood flow to shape the vascular system100. Endothelialcell-specific loss of DICER, an exonuclease involved in miRNA biogenesis, impairs
pathological angiogenesis. Angiogenic miRNAs seem to offer significant pro- or antiangiogenic potential.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Modes of vessel formation

There are several known methods of blood vessel formation in normal tissues and tumours.
a–c, Vessel formation can occur by sprouting angiogenesis (a), by the recruitment of bonemarrow-derived and/or vascular-wall-resident endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) that
differentiate into endothelial cells (ECs; b), or by a process of vessel splitting known as
intussusception (c). d–f, Tumour cells can co-opt pre-existing vessels (d), or tumour vessels
can be lined by tumour cells (vascular mimicry; e) or by endothelial cells, with cytogenetic
abnormalities in their chromosomes, derived from putative cancer stem cells (f). Unlike
normal tissues, which use sprouting angiogenesis, vasculogenesis and intussusception (a–c),
tumours can use all six modes of vessel formation (a–f).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Molecular basis of vessel branching

The consecutive steps of blood vessel branching are shown, with the key molecular players
involved denoted in parentheses. a, After stimulation with angiogenic factors, the quiescent
vessel dilates and an endothelial cell tip cell is selected (DLL4 and JAGGED1) to ensure
branch formation. Tip-cell formation requires degradation of the basement membrane,
pericyte detachment and loosening of endothelial cell junctions. Increased permeability
permits extravasation of plasma proteins (such as fibrinogen and fibronectin) to deposit a
provisional matrix layer, and proteases remodel pre-existing interstitial matrix, all enabling
cell migration. For simplicity, only the basement membrane between endothelial cells and
pericytes is depicted, but in reality, both pericytes and endothelial cells are embedded in this
basement membrane. b, Tip cells navigate in response to guidance signals (such as

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

semaphorins and ephrins) and adhere to the extracellular matrix (mediated by integrins) to
migrate. Stalk cells behind the tip cell proliferate, elongate and form a lumen, and sprouts
fuse to establish a perfused neovessel. Proliferating stalk cells attract pericytes and deposit
basement membranes to become stabilized. Recruited myeloid cells such as tumourassociated macrophages (TAMs) and TIE-2-expressing monocytes (TEMs) can produce proangiogenic factors or proteolytically liberate angiogenic growth factors from the ECM. c,
After fusion of neighbouring branches, lumen formation allows perfusion of the neovessel,
which resumes quiescence by promoting a phalanx phenotype, re-establishment of junctions,
deposition of basement membrane, maturation of pericytes and production of vascular
maintenance signals. Other factors promote transendothelial lipid transport.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Potential mechanisms of resistance to targeted VEGF therapy in cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Different mechanisms underlie the resistance to VEGF blockade seen in some patients with
cancer. These mechanisms are not exclusive, and it is likely that several occur
simultaneously in a single tumour. a, In established tumours, VEGF blockade aggravates
hypoxia, which upregulates the production of other angiogenic factors or increases tumour
cell invasiveness. Tumour cells that have acquired other mutations can also become hypoxia
tolerant. The more malignant tumour cells are shown as dark green, blue and purple cells. b,
Other modes of tumour vascularization, including intussusception, vasculogenic mimicry,
differentiation of putative cancer stem cells (CSCs) into endothelial cells (ECs),
vasculogenic vessel growth and vessel co-option (all denoted by the mosaic red–purple
vessels), may be less sensitive to VEGF blockade. c, Tumour vessels covered by pericytes
(green) are less sensitive to VEGF blockade. d, Recruited pro-angiogenic BMDCs (yellow),
macrophages (blue and purple) or activated cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs; orange)
can rescue tumour vascularization by the production of pro-angiogenic factors.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

Carmeliet and Jain

Page 28

Table 1

Overview of anti-angiogenic drugs in cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drug

Approved indication

Improvement
in RR (%)

Improvement in
PFS (months)

Improvement in
OS (months)

Bevacizumab

Metastatic
colorectal
cancer (with
chemotherapy)

10

4.4

4.7*

0

1.4

1.4*

7.8

2.8

2.5*

14.1

2.6

2.1†

Metastatic
non-squamous
NSCLC (with
chemotherapy)

20

1.7

2.0*

10.3–14.0

0.4–0.6

NR*

Metastatic breast
cancer (with
chemotherapy)‡

15.7

5.9

NS*

9–18

0.8–1.9

NS*

11.8–13.4

1.2–2.9

NS*

9.9

2.1

NS†

Recurrent GBM
(monotherapy)

Currently only phase II data reported

Metastatic RCC
(with IFN-α)

18

4.8

NS*

12.4

3.3

NS*

Sunitinib

Metastatic RCC

35

6.0

4.6*

Sorafenib

Metastatic RCC

8

2.7

NS†

Unresectable HCC

1

NS

2.8*

2

1.4

2.3*

27

5.0

NR*†

Pazopanib

Metastatic RCC

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Anti-angiogenic therapies currently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of malignancies. Per indication, the
results of various trials are shown. The data show the improvement observed after the addition of the anti-VEGF therapy. GBM, glioblastoma
multiforme; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; IFN, interferon; NR, not reported; NS, not significant; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung carcinoma; OS,
overall survival; PFS, progression-free survival; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; RR, response rate. For reference, see http://clinicaltrials.gov.
*

First-line therapy.

†

Second-line therapy.

‡

The FDA recommended the withdrawal of bevacizumab for breast cancer in December 2010; this is under appeal, with a hearing expected in June
2011. However, bevacizumab is approved for metastatic breast cancer in Europe, except in the United Kingdom.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 June 09.

