718

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Proceedings of the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Supplement to Cancer

Combining Endocrine Agents With Chemotherapy:
Which Patients and What Sequence?
Kathleen I. Pritchard,

MD

Clinical Trials and Epidemiology, University of Toronto at Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer
Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

In metastatic breast cancer, attempts to improve response to therapy by combining hormones and chemotherapy began in the 1970s. Since then, several randomized trials comparing single-agent hormone therapy or chemotherapy versus
sequential combinations of these agents have been performed. In the majority of
those studies, an increased response rate or an increased time to progression was
observed when chemotherapy was added to hormone therapy or when hormone
therapy was added to chemotherapy. However, in few of those trials was the
increased response rate statistically significant or the response duration significantly prolonged, and no studies reported an improvement in overall survival.
Furthermore, the studies did not make the correct comparisons of 1) hormone
therapy alone followed by chemotherapy alone versus hormone therapy and
chemotherapy given concurrently or 2) chemotherapy alone followed by hormone therapy versus concurrent chemotherapy and hormone therapy. To truly be
advantageous, concurrent treatment should provide an increased response rate
and response duration compared with the added or overall response rate and

Dr. Pritchard has received honoraria and served
as a member of the advisory board for Aegera,
AstraZeneca, Hoffmann-LaRoche, Novartis, OrthoBiotech (advisory board only), Pfizer, SanofiAventis, and YM Biosciences. She has also
served as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Biomira,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, Novartis, Ortho-Biotech, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, and YM Biosciences and has
received research funding from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, the National Cancer
Institute of Canada, Novartis, Ortho-Biotech, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, and YM Biosciences. Dr.
Pritchard also has provided expert testimony for
AstraZeneca and Sanofi-Aventis.
Presented at Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer: Proceedings of the Sixth
Cambridge Conference, Cambridge, Massachusetts, April 30–May 1, 2007.
Address for reprints: Kathleen Pritchard, MD, Clinical Trials and Epidemiology, Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, 2075 Bayview Avenue,
Toronto, ON M4N 3M5 Canada; Fax: (416) 4806002; E-mail: kathy.pritchard@sunnybrook.ca
Received July 30, 2007; revision received
October 4, 2007; accepted October 11, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

response duration of the same agents used sequentially. In the adjuvant setting,
the timing and sequencing of hormone therapy and chemotherapy also has not
been studied well. However, it has been accepted widely that adjuvant chemotherapy should be completed before beginning tamoxifen. No trials examining
concurrent versus sequential treatment have been performed with hormone therapy and chemotherapy in the premenopausal setting or with aromatase inhibitors and chemotherapy in postmenopausal women. Considering the demonstrated
importance of the timing of chemotherapy and tamoxifen in the postmenopausal
setting, these questions should be explored further. Cancer 2008;112(3 suppl):
718–22.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: breast cancer, chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, hormone therapy,
metastatic, adjuvant, tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors.

I

t is believed that endocrine therapy acts by a cytostatic mechanism, which prevents cells from dividing. Other cells in the tumor
die in the normal process of events; this, together with the cytostatic
effect of endocrine agents, can produce shrinkage in tumor volume.
Conversely, many chemotherapeutic agents work better in patients
who have cells that are cycling at a more rapid rate or in whom
higher proportions of cells are cycling actively. Thus, theoretically,
it is quite likely that chemotherapy and hormones used together
may act in an antagonistic fashion. Unfortunately, this hypothesis

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23189
Published online 10 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Combined Endocrine and Chemotherapy/Pritchard

has not been explored well in either the metastatic
or adjuvant setting.

Metastatic Setting
Cytotoxics and hormones used concurrently may
have effects that are additive, synergistic, or antagonistic. It is known that cytotoxics have certain endocrine effects, particularly in premenopausal women,
in whom decreased estrogen levels and a subsequent
increase in gonadotropin levels are observed. In vitro,
tamoxifen acts synergistically with the antimetabolites methotrexate1 and 5-fluorouracil2 and with cyclophosphamide,3 but it acts antagonistically with
melphalan.4 Progestins, androgens, and corticosteroids may cause leukocytosis and, thereby, may
enable the administration of higher doses of cytotoxics,5 but there are now more specific methods to
achieve this objective.
In assessing the combination of hormones with
chemotherapy, as in assessing hormone combinations, it is important to recognize that an increased
response rate is not necessarily the most important
endpoint. To be truly advantageous, the combination
should provide an increased response rate and
response duration compared with the additive or
overall response rate and response duration provided
by the same agents used sequentially. Better yet, an
overall survival advantage favoring the combination
over the sequential use of the same agents would establish a real benefit. In addition, it must be recognized
that the combination of 2 therapies, in particular,
the addition of chemotherapy to hormone therapy,
almost certainly will increase toxicity. Thus, careful
assessments of quality of life should be performed
before recommending a combination, particularly in
situations in which no overall survival benefit has
been demonstrated.
Attempts to improve response to therapy by
combining hormones and chemotherapy began in
the 1970s.6 Since that time, several randomized trials
comparing hormone therapy alone with the same
hormone agent plus chemotherapy7–15 have been
performed. In the majority of those studies, an
increased response rate was observed when chemotherapy was added to hormone therapy, but in only 2
studies was this increase statistically significant.8,11
In another of those trials, response duration was prolonged significantly.15 In that study, patients were
randomized after they had an initial response to
oophorectomy to either receive or not to receive
additional therapy with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF). Response duration
was prolonged from 6 months to 17.5 months in the
patients who received additional CMF (P 5 .05). In

719

yet another study, overall survival was prolonged significantly. In that trial of diethylstilbestrol (DES)
alone versus DES plus cyclophosphamide and 5fluorouracil, the median survival of patients who
received the combination was increased from 29
months to 72 months (P 5 .05).13
In addition, a large number of randomized trials
in which chemotherapy alone was compared with
the same chemotherapy plus hormone therapy have
been reported.16–25 In 4 of those trials, the combination produced a significantly higher response rate
than chemotherapy alone.16,17,22,24 Careful examinations of additive sequential overall response rates to
chemotherapy followed by the same hormone were
not made in most of those trials. Consequently,
appropriate comparisons between the reported
response rates cannot be made. There was no trial
noted in which the combination produced a statistically significant improvement in overall survival,
although 1 trial produced a prolonged median survival that came close to significance (19 months vs
24 months; P 5 .07) when tamoxifen was added to
CMF.22
One large Australian trial randomized women with
metastatic breast cancer to receive either 1) tamoxifen,
or 2) cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin (adriamycin)
(CA), or 3) tamoxifen and CA concurrently. The initial
response rate to tamoxifen alone (22%) was significantly lower than either CA (45%; P > .001) or tamoxifen plus CA (51%; P > .001). Patients receiving
tamoxifen were treated with combined CA and 5-fluorouracil (CAF) at the time of disease progression, however, and additive response rates and overall survival
on all study regimens were similar.8
Until chemotherapy and hormones used concurrently produce clear prolongation of survival or
increased response rates and prolonged response
durations accompanied by improved quality of life
compared with the additive response rates and duration observed with the 2 modalities used sequentially, it appears prudent to use hormone therapy
first, in appropriate patients, followed by chemotherapy when the tumor becomes resistant to sequential
endocrine therapy.

Adjuvant Therapy
For many years tamoxifen, in the adjuvant setting,
was given concurrently with chemotherapy by many
investigators and in the study protocols of several
large breast cancer research groups.26 In addition,
however, it was given sequentially with chemotherapy given first in other trial groups.27 Theoretical
considerations took investigators and clinicians in 2

720

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

directions. It was believed that, if patients had
tumors that were highly responsive to endocrine
therapy, such as tumors with very high levels of
estrogen receptors (ERs) and/or progesterone receptors (PgRs), that starting endocrine therapy sooner
after surgery would be more efficacious. Conversely,
because endocrine therapy is cytostatic and many
chemotherapeutic agents work better in the cells that
are dividing, giving hormones and chemotherapy
simultaneously could be disadvantageous. Early data
by Sertoli et al.28 suggested that, in postmenopausal
women with positive ER status, giving tamoxifen
concurrently was better; whereas, in women with low
or no ER, giving chemotherapy first followed by tamoxifen was better. However, because of the small
sample size of that trial, the results were not significant, only suggestive; and long-term follow-up did
not confirm this finding.29 An additional study by
Pico et al.30,31 also suggested additional benefit for
the sequential use of epirubicin and tamoxifen, but
the benefit was not significant. On the basis of these
theoretical considerations and tantalizing clinical
hints, Albain et al. from the North American Intergroup designed a study in the late 1980s in the adjuvant setting that randomized 1477 postmenopausal
women with ER-positive and/or PgR-positive breast
cancer to receive 1) tamoxifen alone, 2) tamoxifen
plus concurrent CAF, or 3) CAF followed by tamoxifen. Data from that trial indicated not only that CAF
added to tamoxifen overall32,33 but that giving CAF
first followed by tamoxifen resulted in a nearly 50%
fewer recurrences and deaths from breast cancer and
concurrent therapy.34
Subsequent to that study, although there are few
additional data, most clinicians have adopted the
approach of giving chemotherapy followed by tamoxifen. A few studies that were included in a metaanalysis in the Oxford Overview, however, suggested
that there is no difference between the use of tamoxifen given concurrently with chemotherapy and given
sequentially after chemotherapy, but the data are
few; and, to date, detailed, formal comparisons between the trial designs have not been made? No
such trials examining concurrent versus sequential
treatment have been performed with the aromatase
inhibitors (AIs) and chemotherapy in postmenopausal women, with tamoxifen and chemotherapy, or
with ovarian ablation or chemotherapy in the premenopausal setting.
In conclusion, considering the demonstrated importance of the timing of adjuvant chemotherapy
and tamoxifen in the postmenopausal setting, it is
clear that these questions should be explored further
in the near future. It also may be possible that trials

in which patients are treated simultaneously or
sequentially with hormones and chemotherapy in
the neoadjuvant setting may be helpful, particularly
if surrogate endpoints could be used, such as measures of proliferation like Ki-67 or other surrogate
markers.

OPEN DISCUSSION
The questions and discussion below follow from the
oral presentation given at the Sixth Cambridge Conference on Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of
Breast Cancer and do not correspond directly to the
written article, which is a more general review.
Dr. Paul Goss. Am I right to say that all of the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project
(NSABP) trials gave endocrine and chemotherapy
concurrently?
Dr. Kathleen Pritchard. Until recently, all of the
NASBP trials gave it concurrently, but they now give
it sequentially. So, this is really an unexplored area.
There is a proposal with the Intergroup to study this,
and there is a big assumption that all the AIs are the
same in relation to chemotherapy as tamoxifen, but
there is no big randomized study looking at that.
From what I have seen in looking at combining
chemotherapy with endocrine therapy, there are no
trials in premenopausal women and no studies with
the AIs in adjuvant therapy. We also haven’t
addressed it in the metastatic or neoadjuvant setting
in a long, long time. There isn’t much that is recent
on this whole subject. I think that, in metastatic disease, most of us would sequentially use chemotherapy drugs but first use endocrine therapy as long as
we can, because it gives a better quality of life. In the
adjuvant setting, I think we have accepted that
chemotherapy followed by tamoxifen is the drill, but
with very limited data, and we don’t know about the
AIs. I think this would be an area to look at.
Dr. Goss. In the premenopausal setting with the
Tamoxifen and Exemestane Trial clinical trial design,
one blockades the ovaries and gives the chemotherapy along with it. It’s hard to imagine that the ovarian blockade is important though, because the
chemotherapy is predominantly shutting down ovulation in any case. It’s probably hard to argue that
leaving women to ovulate normally at the outset of
chemotherapy is likely a helpful strategy, because
most if not all women have a substantial hit to their
ovarian function while receiving chemotherapy.
Dr. Pritchard. They probably get a hit, but they
may not get it until part way through the chemotherapy. And whether that’s important or not important,
we don’t really know.

Combined Endocrine and Chemotherapy/Pritchard

Dr. Goss. These 2 issues are not irrelevant. The
concurrent endocrine therapy with radiation and
chemotherapy is a really a very important discussion.
You’re giving therapy with significant toxicity and
with long-term toxicity with long-term hope that,
over 10 years, there will be a beneficial effect.
Dr. Pritchard. I think the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program was very interested in this question
of the timing of systemic endocrine therapy in combination with chemotherapy and with radiation. I
personally think that the AI timing concurrent with
chemotherapy and also concurrent with radiation are
very important.
Dr. Jo Anne Zujewski. I do agree, and the only
way this will get done is by an international collaboration. It would be a huge and challenging study.
And no drug company would pay for it. I don’t think
we can do both concurrently; so, ideally, we would
prioritize the questions and consider adding them,
perhaps in a factorial design to other large studies.
Dr. Goss. Of the 2 questions, I think the concurrent chemotherapy with AI is more important versus
the radiation. With extended endocrine therapy, local
recurrence is going down. To power a study over 12
years, to really make this question clinically relevant,
would be incredibly difficult.
Dr. Zujewski. It’s true that we don’t know the answer to it. But how would you design this? Would
you hypothesize that sequential would be some percent better? Why don’t you just give it sequentially?
Dr. Goss: There isn’t a lot of rationale for giving
it concurrently. There’s no modeling, no data
Dr. Pritchard. There were logical reasons both
for giving endocrine and chemotherapy concurrently:
Those who are receptor positive would get their endocrine therapies 6 months or so sooner, which
might be more helpful. And arguments for giving it
sequentially are that the drugs may interfere with
each other. I think there’s no logical way to interpret
this without doing a trial.

5.

REFERENCES

17.

1.

2.

3.

4.

Levine R, Lippman ME, Longo D, Cowan K. Effects of
estrogen and tamoxifen on dihydrofolate reductase in
gene-amplified methotrexate resistant human breast cancer cells. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res. 1983;24:173.
Benz C, Moellekin B, Cadman E. RNA and estrogen receptor effects associated with tamoxifen-fluorouracil synergy
in breast cancer. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res. 1983;24:173.
Jordan VC, Tormey DC, Clifton K, et al. Treatment of rat
mammary cancer by combinations of tamoxifen and cyclophosphamide. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res. 1980;21:293.
Goldenberg GJ. The effect of diethylstilbestrol and tamoxifen on the cytocidal activity and uptake of melphalan (M)
in human breast cancer cells in vitro [abstract]. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol. 1983;2:22.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

18.

19.

20.

721

Bibby MC, Double JA, Mughal MA. Effects of nandrolone
decanoate on the toxicity and antitumor action of CCNU
and FU in murine tumors. Br J Cancer. 1981;44:572–
577.
Oberfield RA, Cady B, Pazianos AG, et al. Adrenalectomyoophorectomy and combined chemotherapy for carcinoma
of the breast with metastases. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1979;
148:881–886.
Ahmann DL, O’Connell MJ, Hahn RG, Bisel HF, Lee RA,
Edmonson JH. An evaluation of early or delayed adjuvant
chemotherapy in premenopausal patients with advanced
breast cancer undergoing oophorectomy. N Engl J Med.
1977;297:356–360.
Australian and New Zealand Breast Cancer Trials Group. A
randomized trial in postmenopausal patients with
advanced breast cancer comparing endocrine and cytotoxic therapy given sequentially or in combination. J Clin
Oncol. 1986;4:186–193.
Bezwoda WR, Derman D, De Moor NG, Lange M, Levin J.
Treatment of metastatic breast cancer in estrogen receptor
positive patients. A randomized trial comparing tamoxifen
alone versus tamoxifen plus CMF. Cancer. 1982;50:2747–2750.
Cavalli F, Beer M, Martz G, et al. Concurrent or sequential
use of cytotoxic chemotherapy and hormone treatment in
advanced breast cancer: report of the Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Res. BMJ (Clin Res Ed). 1983;286:5–8.
Falkson G, Falkson HC, Glidewell O. Improved remission
rates and remission duration in young women with metastatic breast cancer following combined oophorectomy
and chemotherapy: a study by Cancer and Leukemia
Group B. Cancer. 1979;43:2215–2222.
Glick JH, Creech RH, Torri S, et al. Tamoxifen plus sequential CMF chemotherapy versus tamoxifen alone in postmenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer.
1980;45:735–741.
Kiang DT, Gay J, Goldman A, Kennedy BJ. A randomized
trial of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy in advanced
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1985;313:1241–1246.
Kumar KS, Vogel CL, Moore MR, et al. Sequential versus
concomitant chemo-hormonal therapy in breast cancer.
Breast. 1982;8:2–7.
Rossof A, Gelman R, Creech RH. Randomized evaluation of
combination chemotherapy vs observation alone following
response or stabilization after oophorectomy for metastatic
breast cancer in premenopausal women. Am J Clin Oncol.
1982;5:253–259.
Brunner KW, Sonntag RW, Alberto P, et al. Combined
chemo and hormonal therapy in advanced breast cancer.
Cancer. 1977;39:2923–2933.
Cocconi G, DeLisi V, Boni C, et al. Chemotherapy versus combination of chemotherapy and endocrine therapy in advanced
breast cancer. Cancer. 1983;51:581–588.
Gercovich FG, Morgenfeld EL, Rivarola EG, et al. Chemotherapy (CT) vs chemohormonal therapy (CT1HT) for
postmenopausal patients (PT) with advanced breast cancer. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res. 1988;29:197.
Kardinal CG, Perry MC, Weinberg V, et al. Chemoendocrine
therapy vs chemotherapy alone for advanced breast cancer
in postmenopausal women: preliminary report of a randomized study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1983;3:365–372.
Kardinal CG, Perry MC, Korzun AH, et al. Response to
chemotherapy or chemoendocrine therapy in patients with
advanced breast cancer previously treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1985;6:185.

722

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

21. Krook JE, Ingle JN, Green SJ, et al. Randomized clinical
trial of cyclophosphamide, 5-FU, and prednisone with or
without tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with
advanced breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rep. 1985;69:355–361.
22. Mouridsen HT, Rose C, Engelsman E, et al. Combined cytotoxic and endocrine therapy in postmenopausal patients with
advanced breast cancer. A randomized study of CMF vs CMF
plus tamoxifen. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol. 1985;21:291–299.
23. Rubens RD, Begent R, Knight RK. Combined cytotoxic and
progestogen therapy for advanced breast cancer. Cancer.
1978;42:1680–1686.
24. Tormey DC, Falkson G, Crowley J, et al. Dibromodulcitol
and Adriamycin plus or minus tamoxifen in advanced
breast cancer. Am J Clin Oncol. 1982;5:33–39.
25. Viladiu P, Alonso M, Avella A. Chemotherapy versus chemotherapy plus hormonotherapy in postmenopausal advanced breast cancer patients a randomized trial. Cancer.
1985;56:2745–2750.
26. Fisher B, Redmond C, Brown A, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with and without tamoxifen in the treatment of primary breast cancer: 5 year results from the National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Trial. J Clin
Oncol. 1986;4:459–471.
27. Pritchard KI, Paterson AH, Fine S, et al. Randomized trial of
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil chemotherapy added to tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy in postmenopausal women with node-positive estrogen and/or
progesterone receptor-positive breast cancer: a report of the
National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group.
Breast Cancer Site Group. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:2302–2301.
28. Sertoli MR, Pronzato P, Amoroso D, et al. A randomized
study of concurrent versus sequential chemotherapy and
tamoxifen in stage II breast cancer [abstract]. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol. 1991;10:14a.

29. Sertoli MR, Pronzato P, Ventorini M, et al. A randomized
study of concurrent versus sequential adjuvant chemotherapy and tamoxifen in stage II breast cancer [abstract]. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2002;21:46a.
30. Pico C, Martin M, Jara C. Epirubicin-cyclophosphamide
chemotherapy plus tamoxifen administered concurrent
versus sequential: randomized phase III trial in postmenopausal node-positive breast cancer patients. GEICAM 9401 study [abstract]. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2002:
21:37a.
31. Pico C, Martin M, Jara C, et al. Epirubicin-cyclophosphamide adjuvant chemotherapy plus tamoxifen administered concurrently versus sequentially: randomized phase
III trial in postmenopausal node-positive breast cancer
patients. A GEICAM 9401 study. Ann Oncol. 2004;15:79–
87.
32. Albain K, Green S, Ravdin P, et al. Overall survival after
cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, 5-FU, and tamoxifen
(CAFT) is superior to T alone in postmenopausal receptor (1), node (1) breast cancer: new findings from phase
III Southwest Oncology Group Intergroup Trial S8814
(INT-0100) [abstract]. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2001;
20:94a.
33. Albain K, Green S, Osborne K, et al. Tamoxifen (T) versus
cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin and 5-FU plus either concurrent or sequential T in postmenopausal receptor (1), or
node (1) breast cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group phase
III Intergroup trial (SWOG-8814, INT-0100) [abstract]. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol. 1997;16:128a.
34. Albain K, Green SJ, Ravdin PM, et al. Adjuvant chemohormonal therapy for primary breast cancer should be sequential instead of concurrent: initial results from
Intergroup trial 0100 (SWOG-8814) [abstract]. Proc Am Soc
Clin Oncol. 2002;21:37a.

