Correspondence

Effectiveness of Population-Based
Service Screening With
Mammography for Women Ages
40 to 49 Years
Evaluation of the Swedish
Mammography Screening in Young
Women (SCRY) Cohort
The Hellquist et al1 article in Cancer stated that there was
a 26% reduction in breast cancer deaths in women aged
40-49 years in Swedish counties that invited women to
have routine screening every 2 years compared with counties that did not routinely invite women to be screened.
The authors concluded that the high percentage reduction
in deaths is, in and of itself, proof that screening at age 40
years is a rational choice for society. This is an overreach.
Because their article uses nonrandomized controls and
has many more controls than treated patients, there is a
strong possibility of a study bias that did not reveal itself in
the prestudy period but became significant during the 16
years of the study. The higher mortality of the controls could
be, at least in part, the result of factors other than screening.
Even if we accept that mortality fell, the low incidence of breast cancer in this age group must be considered along with the magnitude of the percentage
reduction in deaths. A 26% reduction (down to 803
deaths in the study group) means 282 lives were saved. A
26% reduction should save 322 of the 1238 control
deaths. One million women followed during 16 years
required 8 million biannual mammograms at 100% participation. Using a conservative assumption of $100 for
each mammogram and the resultant visits, false positives,
and biopsies, the total cost at a participation rate of 80%
would be 640 million dollars, and the cost for each of the
604 lives saved would be $1,058,225. This high figure
does not justify unquestioning support for routine mammography at ages 40-49 years.
Healthcare dollars are not unlimited. Resources
should be allocated on a rational basis so that diseases that
are less publicized than breast cancer are not shortchanged.

REFERENCE
1. Hellquist BN, Duffy SW, Abdsaleh S, et al. Effectiveness of
population-based service screening with mammography for
women ages 40 to 49 years: evaluation of the Swedish

4100

Mammography Screening in Young Women (SCRY) cohort
[Published online ahead of print September 29, 2010].
Cancer. DOI:10.1002/cncr.25650
Roger A. Forsyth, MD
Permanente Group, Retired
Pasadena, California
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26002, Published online: March 8, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Effectiveness of
Population-Based Service
Screening With Mammography
for Women Ages 40-49 Years
Evaluation of the Swedish
Mammography Screening in Young
Women (SCRY) Cohort
We thank Dr. Forsyth for his interest in our article1 and
for addressing the important issue of cost versus benefit of
mammography screening. There are a few points in Dr.
Forsyth’s letter that need to be addressed.
Dr. Forsyth claims, ‘‘The authors conclude that the
high percentage reduction in deaths is, in and of itself,
proof that screening at age 40 years is a rational choice for
society.’’ No such statement was made in the article. The
conclusion in our article is that screening for women aged
40 to 49 years is efficient in reducing breast cancer mortality in this age group.
The miscalculation of cost per life saved
(640,000,000/604 is 1,059,603 not 1,058,225) makes
little difference, but more importantly, the misunderstanding of the number of years the women are screened
seems to have been mixed up with the average follow-up
for death measured from screening start. Women aged
40 to 49 years are screened for 10 years, not 16 years.
Neither was the number of women in the study presented as
1 million, which was used by Dr Forsyth for his calculations.
In our article, the number needed to invite to screening
during a 10-year period to save 1 life was estimated at 1252
women. If we multiply 1252 women by 5 mammography
examinations and assume a participation rate at 80%, then
the number of mammography examinations per life saved is
1252  5  0.8 ¼ 5008. For a cost of $100 per examination, the cost per life saved will be $500,800.

Cancer

September 1, 2011

Correspondence

Cost per life saved is not a perfect measure when
comparing screening of young women with older
women. Cost per life year gained would be a better alternative. In a complete cost analysis, it is also important to take into consideration that breast cancers are
found at an earlier stage with screening, which reduces
the cost of treatment.
Unfortunately we had some difficulty understanding what Dr. Forsyth means by the ‘‘many more controls
than treated patients’’ causing a ‘‘strong possibility of a
study bias,’’ but we assume he refers to the possibility of a
difference in baseline mortality between the study group
and the control group. In the study, the difference in baseline mortality was estimated to be 6% and nonsignificant.
This potential difference most likely decreased over the
study period, which is further discussed in our article.

REFERENCE
1. Hellquist BN, Duffy SW, Abdsaleh S, et al. Effectiveness of
population-based service screening with mammography for
women ages 40 to 49 years: evaluation of the Swedish
Mammography Screening in Young Women (SCRY) cohort
[Published online ahead of print September 29, 2010].
Cancer. DOI:10.1002/cncr.25650
Barbro Numan Hellquist, MSc
Håkan Jonsson, PhD
Department of Radiation Sciences
Umea University
Umea, Sweden

Lennarth Nyström, PhD
Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine
Umea University
Umea, Sweden
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25999, Published online: March 8, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Treatment of Pituitary Neoplasms
With Temozolomide
A Review
I have read with great interest the paper entitled, ‘‘Treatment
of Pituitary Neoplasms With Temozolomide: A Review’’
by Syro et al.1 The authors considered a series of aggressive
pituitary tumors in order to evaluate the efficaciousness of
temozolomide and to correlate low-level MGMT immunoexpression with a favorable response. Their study
represents an accurate review of this topic. However, in my
opinion, an aspect of their article is challenging.

Cancer

September 1, 2011

The role of temozolomide in the treatment of
aggressive pituitary adenomas and carcinomas continues
to assume a more prominent significance in literature concerning this therapeutic approach. However, the significance of MGMT immunoexpression in predicting the
response to therapy appears more ambiguous. The
authors1 stated a finding that low-level MGMT immunoexpression is correlated with a favorable response.
However, this statement doesn’t seem reliable. In the
same article,1 the authors also stated that all 6 carcinomas
responded to therapy, but in a contemporaneous study,2
the same authors observed that only 57% of carcinomas
demonstrated low MGMT immunoexpression. I wonder
about the usefulness of an antibody that doesn’t recognize
nearly 1 out of 2 cases! This is a crucial feature because the
DNA repair enzyme, MGMT, antagonizes the genotoxic
effects of temozolomide, and MGMT promoter methylation is the key mechanism of MGMT gene silencing, predictive of a favorable response.
Already several articles3 have revealed some reservations about the association of MGMT immunoexpression
with treatment response. In addition, it is well-known that
in malignant gliomas, immunohistochemical determination of MGMT protein expression has not proven reliable
for diagnostic purposes4 and that the assessment of the
MGMT promoter methylation status is usually assessed by
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Given the
behavioral unpredictability of pituitary tumors, the identification, to date, of so-called atypical adenomas and even
more so of pituitary carcinomas (recognizable only after
that tumor metastasized) remains controversial.5 Patients,
surgeons, and clinicians are still waiting for tools that permit an early detection of aggressive pituitary tumors.
Nevertheless, a semiquantitative immunohistochemical
assay of MGMT subject to interobserver variability and
performed in tumors that, although aggressive, are frequently morphologically indistinguishable from a typical
pituitary adenoma could add further doubt. Probably a
more correct identification of MGMT status may be
achieved with methylation-specific polymerase-chain reaction. In conclusion, further investigations should be performed in pituitary tumors to correlate response to
temozolomide with MGMT promoter methylation status.

REFERENCES
1. Syro LV, Ortiz LD, Scheithauer BW, et al. Treatment of
pituitary neoplasms with temozolomide: a review. Cancer.
2011;117:454-462.

4101

Correspondence
2. Lau Q, Scheithauer B, Kovacs K, Horvath E, Syro LV, Lloyd
R. MGMT immunoexpression in aggressive pituitary adenoma and carcinoma. Pituitary. 2010;13:367-379.
3. Raverot G, Sturm N, de Fraipont F, et al. Temozolomide
treatment in aggressive pituitary tumors and pituitary carcinomas: a French multicenter experience. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2010;95:4592-4599.
4. Riemenschneider MJ, Hegi ME, Reifenberger G. MGMT
promoter methylation in malignant gliomas. Target Oncol.
2010;5:161-165.
5. Scheithauer BW, Gaffey TA, Lloyd RV, et al. Pathobiology
of pituitary adenomas and carcinomas. Neurosurgery. 2006;
59:341-353.
Gianluca Marucci, MD
Section of Pathology ‘‘M. Malpighi’’, Department of Haematology and Oncological
Sciences, L. and A. Seragnoli, Bellaria Hospital, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26000, Published online: March 8, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Treatment of Pituitary
Neoplasms With Temozolomide
A Review
We appreciate the comments of Dr. Marucci regarding
our paper entitled, ‘‘Treatment of Pituitary Neoplasms
With Temozolomide: A Review’’.1 The 6 patients with
carcinomas who responded to treatment were the reported
patients in the literature. MGMT immunoexpression was
only available in 3 of them, and it was negative.1 The 57%
of carcinomas that demonstrated low MGMT immunoexpression were from a retrospective study of paraffinembedded tissues.2
Dr. Marucci raises an important question, can
MGMT immunostaining predict response to temozolomide therapy? At present, this is controversial. Several,
but not all, publications conclude that MGMT immunoreactivity is a reliable indicator of therapeutic response to
temozolomide in patients with pituitary adenomas.
With respect to the use of immunohistochemistry, 2
important problems must be addressed, the method and
its interpretation.
If tissue fixation, processing, and immunostaining
are properly performed, then the immunohistochemical
findings are reliable. This has been proven by several
authors. Obviously, when methods are suboptimally
applied, the results are not acceptable. The dispute is not
with the method but with its interpretation.
4102

In some tumors, every neoplastic cell is MGMTimmunonegative, whereas in others every cell is immunopositive. The former tumors appear to respond to temozolomide, whereas the latter tumors do not. The challenge is
that many pituitary tumors consist of a mixture of
MGMT-immunonegative and -immunopositive cells.
How should such results be interpreted? Maybe the
MGMT-immunonegative cell would respond, whereas
the immunopositive cells would be resistant? Can immunonegative cells transform to immunopositive cells or vice
versa? Is it possible that temozolomide administration
depletes MGMT causing transformation of immunopositive cells to immunonegative cells resulting in a beneficial
response to temozolomide? Other genetic and/or epigenetic factors may also exist that could affect temozolomide
responsiveness.
Lastly, Dr. Marucci alludes to the demonstration
of promoter methylation and its greater accuracy in
predicting a therapeutic response. In published studies
and in our experience, perfect correlation between
MGMT staining and methylation status has not been
achieved. Clearly, all available methods of assessing
likelihood of temozolomide response should be used.
We feel strongly that MGMT immunoreactivity is
valuable and should be pursued.
Obviously, more work is needed to address these
issues.

REFERENCES
1. Syro LV, Ortiz LD, Scheithauer BW, et al. Treatment of
pituitary neoplasms with temozolomide: a review. Cancer.
2011;117:454-462.
2. Lau Q, Scheithauer B, Kovacs K, Horvath E, Syro LV, Lloyd
R. MGMT immunoexpression in aggressive pituitary adenoma and carcinoma. Pituitary. 2010;13:367-379.
Luis V. Syro, MD
Department of Neurosurgery
Hospital Pablo Tobon Uribe and Clinica Medellin
Medellin, Colombia

Kalman Kovacs, MD, PhD
Department of Laboratory Medicine
St. Michael’s Hospital Toronto
Ontario, Canada

Bernd W. Scheithauer, MD
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
Mayo Clinic
Rochester, Minnesota
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25998, Published online: March 8, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

September 1, 2011

