Research Article

Rb Depletion Results in Deregulation of E-Cadherin and Induction
of Cellular Phenotypic Changes that Are Characteristic
of the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition
1,4,6

1,4

2,3

Yoshimi Arima, Yasumichi Inoue, Tatsuhiro Shibata, Hidemi Hayashi,
6
6
1,4
Osamu Nagano, Hideyuki Saya, and Yoichi Taya

5

1

Radiobiology Division, 2Cancer Genomics Project, and 3Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute; 4Solution-Oriented
Research for Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency; 5Department of Biomedical Research and Development, Link
Genomics, Inc.; 6Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) is mutated
or expressed at very low levels in several tumor types, including retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma, as well as small cell
lung, colon, prostate, bladder, and breast carcinomas. Loss or
reduction of Rb expression is seen most commonly in highgrade breast adenocarcinomas, suggesting that a relationship
may exist between loss of Rb function and a less-differentiated
state, increased proliferation, and high metastatic potential.
In this study, we found that knockdown of Rb by small interfering RNA in MCF7 breast cancer cells disrupts cell-cell
adhesion and induces a mesenchymal-like phenotype. The
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a key event in
embryonic morphogenesis, is implicated in the metastasis of
primary tumors. Additionally, Rb is decreased during growth
factor– and cytokine-induced EMT and overexpression of
Rb inhibits the EMT in MCF10A human mammary epithelial
cells. Ectopic expression and knockdown of Rb resulted in
increased or reduced expression of E-cadherin, which is specifically involved in epithelial cell-cell adhesion. Other EMTrelated transcriptional factors, including Slug and Zeb-1, are
also induced by Rb depletion. Furthermore, we confirmed that
Rb binds to an E-cadherin promoter sequence in association
with the transcription factor activator protein-2A. Finally, in
breast cancer specimens, we observed a concurrent downregulation of Rb and E-cadherin expression in mesenchymallike invasive cancers. These findings suggest that Rb inactivation contributes to tumor progression due to not only loss of
cell proliferation control but also conversion to an invasive
phenotype and that the inhibition of EMT is a novel tumor
suppressor function of Rb. [Cancer Res 2008;68(13):5104–12]

Introduction
The breakdown of epithelial cell homeostasis leading to
aggressive cancer progression is correlated with a loss of epithelial
characteristics and the acquisition of a migratory phenotype. This
phenomenon, called the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), is considered to be a crucial event in malignancy. The

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Yoichi Taya, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Radiobiology Division, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. Phone: 81-33542-2511, ext. 4800; Fax: 81-3-5565-0727; E-mail: ytaya@gan2.res.ncc.go.jp.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5680

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

EMT is also an essential component of embryonic development,
tissue remodeling, and wound repair (reviewed in refs. 1, 2). During
this transition, the epithelial phenotype, characterized by strong
cell-cell junctions and polarity, is replaced by a mesenchymal
phenotype, with reduced cell-cell interactions, a fibroblastic
morphology, and increased motility. Given the importance of
EMT in carcinoma progression, there is considerable interest in
understanding the mechanisms that contribute to this complex
process.
A hallmark of EMT is the loss of E-cadherin expression.
E-cadherin is a key component of adherens junctions, structures
that play crucial roles in the maintenance of epithelial integrity (3).
E-cadherin is a calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecule that
mediates homophilic interactions and controls the formation of
catenin-containing complexes that link E-cadherin to the actin and
microtubule cytoskeleton (3, 4). In cancer, loss of E-cadherin
function through genetic or epigenetic mechanisms has been
implicated in the progression and metastasis of numerous
malignancies (5, 6). Therefore, deregulation of E-cadherin expression may contribute to tumorigenesis. Several proteins that downregulate E-cadherin expression, including Snail (7, 8), Twist (9),
SIP1 (10), Slug (11), and ZEB1/yEF1 (12), have been identified. In
contrast, activator protein-2a (AP-2a) is a transcription factor that
positively regulates expression of E-cadherin (13–15). Gain of
negative regulators and loss of positive regulators of E-cadherin
transcription have been reported for some cancers (15, 16).
The retinoblastoma (Rb) gene product is a tumor suppressor
that regulates multiple cellular processes, such as growth,
differentiation, and apoptosis, and is inactivated by mutations in
many types of human cancers (17–19). The tumor suppressor
activity of Rb derives from its ability to inhibit cell cycle transition
by repressing the transcription of genes required for the G1-S phase
transition, such as E2F/DP1-dependent transcription (reviewed in
ref. 20). The loss of Rb is critical for tumorigenesis. Somatic
inactivation of both Rb gene alleles has been found in a number of
common mesenchymal and epithelial malignancies (21). Furthermore, functional loss of the Rb gene has been implicated in
advanced stages of various cancers, including carcinoma of the
breast, bladder, liver, esophagus, and colon (22–26). Rb expression
levels have been inversely correlated with tumor invasiveness in
gastric carcinoma (27). A recent report indicates that the basal
cluster subtype of invasive breast tumors tends to express relatively
low levels of Rb and high levels of p16 (28). Given that low levels of
Rb expression correlate with clinical outcome, Rb inactivation may
contribute to tumor initiation, progression, and metastasis.
However, the molecular mechanisms of this contribution have
not been elucidated.

5104

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rb Controls EMT by Promoting E-Cadherin Expression

In this study, we show that depletion of Rb in breast cancer cells
results in the specific down-regulation of E-cadherin expression
and induction of an EMT-like phenotype with high production
of extracellular matrix and increased cell motility. In addition, we
found that Rb is degraded during the EMT. Furthermore,
reexpression of Rb inhibited EMT and induced E-cadherin
expression in Rb-negative cells. Rb binds to AP-2a and promotes
E-cadherin expression (13), and, indeed, we confirmed that Rb
binds to the E-cadherin promoter sequence with AP-2a. Our
observations support the hypothesis that Rb plays a crucial role in
maintenance of the epithelial phenotype by up-regulating the
expression of E-cadherin. Thus, these results indicate that Rb is a
key player in EMT inhibition and that Rb inactivation is associated
with invasion and metastasis of cancer cells.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines and cell cultures. MCF10A cells were cultured in mammary
epithelial growth medium containing BPE, hydrocortisone, human epidermal growth factor, insulin, and GA-1000 (MEGM BulletKit, Takara) at 37jC
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. MCF-7, MDA-MB-468, and DLD-1
cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.
MCF10A cells were incubated with transforming growth factor-h1 (TGFh1;
Sigma), tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa; Calbiochem), MG132 (Calbiochem),
Z-Val-Ala-Asp(OMe)-fmk (Enzyme Systems Products), or TGFh type I
receptor (ThRI) kinase inhibitor II (Calbiochem), as indicated.
Small interfering RNA transfection and adenoviral infections. Rb
small interfering RNA (siRNA; #1, 5¶-GAAAGGACATGTGAACTTATT-3¶ and
#2, 5¶-CGAAATCAGTGTCCATAAATT-3¶) and negative control siRNA were
purchased from Dharmacon. Stealth p53 siRNA (5¶-CCAGTGGTAATCTACTGGGACGGAA-3¶) and negative control siRNA were purchased from
Invitrogen. Cells were transfected using the Lipofectamine 2000 reagent
(Invitrogen). Ad-CMV-Rb was purchased from Vector Biolabs. Ad5CMV-Luc
encoding the Luciferase gene was used as a control. Cells were cultured with
adenovirus at a multiplicity of infection of 100.
Reverse transcription–PCR assays. Total RNA was isolated using an
RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN). The cDNA was synthesized from 1 Ag of total
RNA with the Advantage RT-for-PCR kit (BD Biosciences). Semiquantitative
PCR was performed using Taq DNA polymerase (Roche) on a Peletier
Thermal Cycler (MJ Research) for 25 cycles of 95jC for 1 min, 60jC for
1 min, and 72jC for 1 min. The PCR products were separated by
electrophoresis on 1.5% agarose gels. Real-time PCR was performed using
SYBR Premix ExTaq (TaKaRa) on a Thermal Cycler Dice RealTime System
(TB800, TaKaRa) for 40 cycles of 95jC for 30 s and 60jC for 30 s. Product
specificity was verified by agarose gel electrophoresis and melting curve
analysis. Primer sequences are listed in the supplementary information.
Immunoblot analysis. Cells were rinsed in PBS and lysed with NuPAGE
LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Whole-cell extracts were heated at 70jC for
10 min after the addition of DTT. Samples were subjected to 5% to 20%
(REAL GEL PLATE, Bio Craft) or 3% to 8% (NuPAGE Tris-Acetate Gel,
Invitrogen) gradient SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred onto polyvinylidene
difluoride membranes (Millipore). Immunodetection was performed using
the enhanced chemiluminescence system (Amersham).
Immunofluorescence analysis. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde-PBS for 15 min at room temperature, washed with PBS, and then
permeabilized with 0.2% TritonX-3% bovine serum albumin–PBS for 5 min
at room temperature. Cells were stained with primary antibodies for 1 h at
room temperature. After being washed with PBS, the cells were incubated
with AlexFluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (Molecular Probe, Inc.),
counterstained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), and observed
with a fluorescence microscope (ECLIPSE E1000, Nikon).
Antibodies. The following antibodies were used: mouse monoclonal
antibodies for Rb (4H1, Cell Signaling), E-cadherin (BD Transduction
Laboratories), p53 (DO-1, Oncogene Science), cytokeratin 18 (Abcam), and
fibronectin (P1H11, Santa Cruz); rabbit polyclonal antibodies for phosphorylated Smad3(Ser423/425)/Smad1(Ser463/465; Cell Signaling), h-catenin (H-102,

www.aacrjournals.org

Santa Cruz), AP-2a (Santa Cruz); goat polyclonal antibodies for h-actin and
Samd2/3 (Santa Cruz). Horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary
antibodies were obtained from Amersham Biosciences. AlexaFluorconjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Molecular Probes,
Inc. For immunohistochemistry, anti–E-cadherin, anti-vimentin (Dako), and
anti-Rb (BD PharMingen) mouse monoclonal antibodies were used.
Cdc42 activation assay. Cell lysates were incubated with GST-Pak1-p21
binding domain agarose beads (EZ-Detect Cdc42 activation kit, Pierce).
GTP-bound Cdc42 that precipitated with the beads was detected by SDSPAGE and immunoblotting with an anti-Cdc42 antibody.
Matrigel assay. For the bottom layer, 300 AL of Matrigel (BD
Biosciences) was added to 24-well tissue culture plates and incubated at
37jC for 30 min to allow the Matrigel to solidify. Cells were transfected with
siRNAs 24 h before the assay, and 2  104 cells (0.5 mL) were then mixed
with Matrigel (4%; 0.5 mL) at 4jC and added over the solidified bottom
layer. After incubation at 37jC for 3 d, cell growth was analyzed.
Invasion assays. Cell motility was measured using a Boyden Chamber
(Falcon BD). Cells were transfected with siRNAs 24 h before the assay, and
5  104 cells (0.5 mL) were then seeded in serum-free medium in the upper
chamber with serum-containing medium in the lower chamber. After 24 h at
37jC, cells were scraped from the upper chamber with a cotton swab, and
the undersides of the membranes were fixed in 100% methanol, stained with
Giemza, and counted.
Biotinylated dsDNA pull-down assay. Cells were lysed in TNTE buffer
[20 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 120 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, and 0.5%
Triton-X 100] containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Cell extracts
were incubated with biotinylated double-stranded E-cadherin nucleotides
comprising the core promoter region ( 308/+21) and poly(deoxyinosinicdeoxycytidylic acid) for 18 h. DNA-bound proteins were collected with
streptavidin-agarose beads for 4 h, washed with TNTE buffer, separated by
SDS-PAGE, and identified by immunoblotting.

Results
Inactivation of Rb leads to EMT-like changes. To characterize
the effect of the inactivation of Rb on epithelial morphology, we
transfected siRNAs targeting two different regions of Rb into
human breast cancer MCF7 cells. Depletion of Rb induced a
morphologic change of MCF7 cells from a paving stone sheetlike structure to fibroblastic-spindle shape, which represents one
characteristic of EMT (Fig. 1A). When epithelial cells are
undergoing EMT, their morphology changes from well-organized
cell-cell adhesion to loss of cell-cell contacts and cell scattering,
which is often associated with loss of epithelial markers and gain
of mesenchymal markers. Thus, we examined the localization
and expression of several critical molecules, such as E-cadherin,
h-catenin, and fibronectin, which are altered during the conversion
of epithelial-like cells into mesenchymal-like cells. Whereas both
E-cadherin and h-catenin were mainly localized along cell-cell
contact sites in control MCF7 cells, they were detected mainly in
the cytoplasm in Rb-depleted cells (Fig. 1B). Furthermore,
fibronectin expression, which is a mesenchymal marker, was
significantly increased in Rb-depleted cells (Fig. 1C). Moreover,
expression of other EMT markers, including vimentin and
N-cadherin, was also detected, as described below. The induction
of an EMT-like phenotype by the depletion of Rb was also observed
in human colon cancer DLD-1 cells (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Expression of adenoviral Rb restored the morphologic changes and
E-cadherin localization in Rb-depleted cells (Supplementary
Fig. S2). These results indicate that inactivation of Rb in these cells
is associated with morphological and molecular changes of EMT.
Another important change induced by depletion of Rb was the
suppression of cell growth (Supplementary Fig. S3). The trypan
blue exclusion test revealed that >40% of cells had died within

5105

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Depletion of Rb induces EMT-like changes in MCF7 cells. A , cells were transfected with two separate siRNAs targeting the human Rb sequence or with
a control siRNA. After 48 h of incubation, cells were examined by phase-contrast microscopy. B , immunolabeling localization of E-cadherin and h-catenin. MCF7
cells were transfected with siRNAs for 48 h and then stained with antibodies to E-cadherin (green ) and h-catenin (red ) and with DAPI (blue ). C , whole-cell lysates
were subjected to an immunoblot analysis with antibodies to Rb, fibronectin, or h-actin. D , cells were transfected with the indicated siRNAs for 48 h. Cell viability
was measured by the trypan blue exclusion method.

48 h after transfection (Fig. 1D), suggesting that the suppression of
cell growth in Rb-depleted cells is due to cell death. Given that the
cell death induced by the depletion of Rb was completely rescued
by p53 siRNA (Fig. 1D), the Rb depletion activates p53-dependent
apoptotic pathways.
Depletion of Rb induces Rho family GTPase-mediated actin
reorganization and cell invasion. To further show that the
depletion of Rb induces EMT, we examined whether the depletion
was able to mediate migratory and invasive phenotypes, which are
characteristics of the EMT. Local polymerization of actin, making
lamellipodia-like and filopodia-like structures an important
signature of cell migration, was observed in Rb-depleted cells
(Fig. 2A). The Rho family GTPases mediate modulation of the actin
cytoskeleton: filopodia are induced to form by Cdc42, lamellipodia
by Rac1, and stress fibers by RhoA. To test the involvement of
Rac1/Cdc42 activation in the Rb depletion–induced EMT, we used
GST pull-down assays to analyze the active forms of Cdc42. As
expected, Cdc42 was activated in Rb-depleted cells (Fig. 2B).
Therefore, depletion of Rb induces the activation of Cdc42, leading
to reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton at the cell membrane,
which may explain the motility of the cells. Notably, the depletion
of p53 also induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton,
formation of filopodia (Fig. 2A), and activation of Cdc42 (Fig. 2B),
as previously reported (29). However, in contrast to the depletion of
Rb, the down-regulation of E-cadherin expression (Supplementary

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Fig. S4) and the expression of fibronectin were not observed in
p53-depleted cells, suggesting that the EMT is not induced by the
inactivation of p53 alone. One of the hallmarks of the invasive
mesenchymal phenotype is the formation of branching colonies in
three-dimensional Matrigel cultures. Control MCF7 cells form
alveolar spherical colonies in Matrigel. In contrast, Rb depletion
impairs the formation of the spherical structures (Fig. 2C),
although depletion was insufficient to form the branching colonies.
Furthermore, Boyden chamber transwell assays revealed that
siRNA-mediated depletion of Rb in T47D or MCF7 cells led to an
increase in cell invasiveness (Fig. 2D). However, this increase in
invasiveness was significantly inhibited when MCF7 cells were
treated with Toxin B, a Rho family small GTPase inhibitor. In
addition, we investigated the effect of expression of a Cdc42
dominant-negative form on the EMT phenotype induced by Rb
depletion. The expression of Cdc42 dominant-negative restored
stress fiber formation in Rb-depleted cells (Supplementary Fig. S5).
This result indicates that activation of Cdc42 by Rb depletion is an
important mechanism in induction of filopodia and reduction of
stress fibers, which are related to increased motility of Rb-depleted
cells. All these findings suggest that depletion of Rb induces
invasiveness and that Rho family GTPases play a role in the Rb
siRNA-mediated proinvasive phenotype.
Down-regulation of Rb expression during EMT in mammary
epithelial cells. In the course of the siRNA analysis, we found that

5106

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rb Controls EMT by Promoting E-Cadherin Expression

Rb expression is required for the maintenance of an epithelial
phenotype in MCF7 breast cancer cells. We next attempted to
determine whether Rb expression is down-regulated during the
induction of EMT. Previously, treatment with a combination of
TGFh and TNFa was shown to induce EMT in some cell types
(30, 31). When MCF10A normal mammary epithelial cells were
treated with TGFh/TNFa, morphologic change from an epitheliallike to mesenchymal-like appearance was induced (Fig. 3A).
In TGFh/TNFa-treated MCF10A cells, the localization of both
E-cadherin and h-catenin was altered from cell-cell contacts to the
cytoplasm, and the expression of another epithelial marker,
cytokeratin 18, was reduced (Fig. 3A and C). Moreover, expression
of a mesenchymal marker, fibronectin, increased (Fig. 3B). The
effect of TGFh/TNFa treatment on Rb levels in MCF10A cells was
determined by immunoblot analysis. Both Rb and p53 levels were
significantly reduced during EMT (Fig. 3B). TGFh stimulates Smadmediated signaling by binding to and activating the type I and type
II TGFh receptors. Smad2 and Smad3 are activated by phosphor-

ylation of the COOH terminal SXS motif by the ThRI kinase, and
Smad3 is an essential mediator of the TGFh-mediated EMT
(reviewed in ref. 32). The TGFh/TNFa-induced reduction in Rb and
p53 expression, as well as fibronectin expression, was totally
blocked by treatment with a ThRI kinase inhibitor, suggesting that
the reduction was dependent on the ThRI-Smad3 signaling
pathway (Fig. 3C). We also found that transfection with a
combination of Rb siRNA and p53 siRNA induced down-regulation
of E-cadherin expression and reorganization of actin in MCF10A
cells (Supplementary Fig. S6).
We next attempted to determine whether Rb and p53 are
affected at the transcriptional or protein levels in cells undergoing
EMT. Semiquantitative reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR)
analysis revealed that mRNA levels of p53 were markedly
suppressed in TGFh/TNFa-treated MCF10A cells compared with
untreated cells, whereas those of Rb were unchanged (Fig. 3D,
left). The decline of both Rb and p53 levels in TGFh/TNFatreated cells was effectively prevented by the presence of MG132,

Figure 2. Depletion of Rb alters reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and invasive potential in MCF7 cells. A , cells were transfected with the indicated siRNAs.
After 48 h, cells were stained for filamentous actin (F-actin ) using rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin and observed with confocal laser scanning microscopy. B ,
cells were transfected with siRNAs for 48 h and then serum starved for 4 h, after which cell lysates were subjected to immunoblotting with antibodies to Rb, p53,
cdc42, and the mesenchymal marker fibronectin. A pull-down assay was performed to capture the active form of cdc42. C , MCF7 cells were subjected to a
Matrigel analysis. After 3 d, the colonies were photographed. D , Boyden chamber transwell assay. Depletion of Rb significantly promoted the invasiveness of T47D
and MCF7 cells. Cells were treated with Toxin B (10 ng/mL) to inhibit Rho family small GTPases.

www.aacrjournals.org

5107

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Rb down-regulation occurs during EMT in MCF10A normal human mammary epithelial cells. A, cells were treated with a combination of TGFh (10 ng/mL)
and TNFa (10 ng/mL) for 48 h. Cells were examined by phase-contrast microscopy and then stained with antibodies to E-cadherin (green ) and h-catenin (red )
and with DAPI (blue ). B , MCF10A cells were treated with TGFh and TNFa for the indicated times, after which whole-cell lysates were subjected to an immunoblot
analysis with the indicated antibodies. C , cells were treated with TGFh/TNFa for 48 h in the presence or absence of 1 Amol/L TGFh receptor I kinase inhibitor.
Samples were subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies. D, MCF10A cells were incubated for 48 h with or without TGFh/TNFa, after which the
abundance of mRNAs for Rb, p53, E-cadherin, MMP9, and GAPDH was determined by semiquantitative RT-PCR (left). Cells were incubated with TGFh/TNFa
for 24 h and then in the additional absence or presence of 10 Amol/L MG132 for 12 h. For caspase inhibitor treatment, cells were treated with TGFh/TNFa in the
presence of 20 Amol/L Z-Val-Ala-Asp(OMe)-fmk for 48 h. Whole-cell lysates were subjected to an immunoblot analysis with antibodies to Rb, p53, or a-tubulin (right ).

an inhibitor of various intracellular proteases, as well as
proteasomes (Fig. 3D, right). These results indicate that the
down-regulation of Rb expression is caused by ubiquitin/
proteasome-mediated protein degradation via the EMT signaling
pathway. Because Rb also regulates apoptosis and is cleaved by
caspases in apoptotic cells (33), we determined the amount of Rb
in the presence of the caspase inhibitor Z-Val-Ala-Asp(OMe)-fmk.
The TGFh/TNFa-induced reduction of Rb was not blocked by the
caspase inhibitor, suggesting that the reduction is not a
consequence of apoptosis.
Inhibition of EMT in TGFB/TNFA-treated MCF10A cells by
overexpression of Rb. We tested the possibility that constitutive
Rb expression is able to block the TGFh/TNFa-induced EMT in
MCF10A cells. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Rb, but not
p53, restored E-cadherin expression and localization to cell-cell
junctions and prevented the morphologic transition from an
epithelial-like to mesenchymal-like appearance caused by TGFh/
TNFa treatment (Fig. 4). These results suggest that Rb is required
for maintenance of the epithelial phenotype and that a loss of Rb is
involved in the induction of EMT.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Rb regulates E-cadherin expression. The process of EMT is
associated with the functional loss of E-cadherin due largely to the
repression of its transcription (34). E-cadherin plays a central role
in maintaining epithelial cell-cell adhesion and polarity. Downregulation of E-cadherin transcription is thought to be a primary
contributor to the onset of EMT (34, 35). Accordingly, to investigate
the involvement of Rb in E-cadherin transcription, we assessed
changes in E-cadherin mRNA levels using Rb-specific siRNA in
Rb-positive MCF7, MCF10A, and DLD-1 cells. RT-PCR analyses
showed that depletion of Rb in these epithelial cells resulted in a
decrease in E-cadherin expression (Fig. 5A). This result shows that
constitutive Rb expression is at least partly responsible for
maintaining high levels of E-cadherin in epithelial cells. To further
assess the contribution of Rb to the expression of E-cadherin, we
reexpressed Rb in Rb-negative MDA-MB-468 cells. RT-PCR analysis
revealed a significant enhancement of E-cadherin mRNA expression in Ad-Rb–infected cells compared with Ad-Luc–infected
control cells (Fig. 5A). To determine whether Rb directly or
indirectly regulates the level of E-cadherin, we first investigated the
effects of Rb depletion on the expression of various molecules that

5108

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rb Controls EMT by Promoting E-Cadherin Expression

are known to regulate E-cadherin expression and to play a key
role in EMT induction by real-time PCR analysis. Rb depletion
significantly induced the expression of EMT-related transcription
factors, including Slug and Zeb-1, both of which suppress the
expression of E-cadherin (Fig. 5B). In addition, SIM2, a repressor
of Slug (36), was reduced in Rb-depleted cells. Given that the
transcription factor AP-2a is associated with a GC-rich region of
the E-cadherin promoter and positively regulates the expression
of E-cadherin (13–15), we next examined whether Rb binds to the
E-cadherin promoter sequence together with AP-2a by conducting a biotinylated double-stranded DNA pull-down assay. In
MCF7 cells, we confirmed that both Rb and AP-2a associate with
the promoter region (Fig. 5C), indicating that Rb can assist AP-2a
in up-regulating transcriptional activity at the E-cadherin
promoter. To elucidate the relationship between the up-regulation
of E-cadherin expression and the cell cycle, we examined the
phosphorylation status of Rb bound to the E-cadherin promoter.
Cells were treated with actinomycin D or aphidicolin to induce G1
arrest or early S-phase arrest, respectively. The actinomycin
D–treated cell extract contained mainly hypophosphorylated Rb,
whereas the aphidicolin-treated cell extract contained hyperphosphorylated Rb. Hypophosphorylated Rb exhibited a greater
association with the E-cadherin promoter than did hyperphosphorylated Rb (Fig. 5D). Interestingly, the amount of
precipitated AP-2a increased in the presence of hypophosphorylated Rb, suggesting that the hypophosphorylated Rb is an
activator of AP-2a. Collectively, our data indicate that E-cadherin
expression in epithelial-derived cancer cells may be regulated not
only indirectly by Slug and Zeb-1 expression as a result of Rb
depletion, but also directly by Rb binding to the promoter region
together with AP-2a.

Correlation between Rb and E-cadherin expression in
primary breast tumor samples. Because the reduction in Rb
expression correlated with the down-regulation of E-cadherin
expression in the cell line–derived EMT model, we examined
whether such a correlation exists in tumor specimens from breast
cancer patients. The expression levels of Rb, E-cadherin, and
vimentin were determined in formalin-fixed breast cancer samples
by immunohistochemical analysis. Representative immunohistochemical staining is illustrated in Fig. 6 and Supplementary
Fig. S7. Rb was highly expressed in intraductal carcinoma cells that
expressed membrane-associated E-cadherin (Fig. 6A). In contrast,
concurrent down-regulation of Rb and E-cadherin expression was
observed in invasive ductal carcinoma cells expressing vimentin,
which is the major intermediate filament protein expressed in
mesenchymal cells (Fig. 6B). Of the 14 breast cancer samples
examined, three invasive ductal carcinomas showed downregulation of E-cadherin expression, cancer cells in those samples
acquired the mesenchymal phenotype, and all the samples
expressed very low levels of Rb. In the other 11 samples, which
exhibited higher expression of both Rb and E-cadherin, cancer cells
maintained the epithelial phenotype. Similar findings were made in
tumor specimens obtained from colorectal cancer patients
(Supplementary Fig. S8). Indeed, the down-regulation of Rb
expression was associated with down-regulation of E-cadherin
and the mesenchymal conversion of cancer cells.

Discussion
We have investigated the effect of Rb depletion in human
epithelial cells. Our data reveal that Rb is responsible for
maintenance of the epithelial phenotype by preventing EMT and

Figure 4. Inhibition of EMT in TGFh/TNFa-treated MCF10A cells by overexpression of Rb. MCF10A cells were infected with recombinant adenoviruses encoding
luciferase (Ad-Luc ), Rb (Ad-Rb ), or p53 (Ad-p53 ) and incubated in the presence of TGFh (10 ng/mL) and TNFa (10 ng/mL) for 24 h. Treated cells were examined by
phase-contrast microscopy and then stained with antibodies to E-cadherin (green ) and with propidium iodide (red) and observed with confocal laser scanning
microscopy.

www.aacrjournals.org

5109

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Rb regulates E-cadherin expression and endogenous Rb binds to the E-cadherin promoter sequence with the transcription factor AP-2a. A, MCF7,
MCF10A, or DLD-1 cells were transfected siRNAs and MDA-MB-468 cells were infected Ad-Luc or Ad-Rb. The mRNA levels of Rb and E-cadherin were then
determined by semiquantitative RT-PCR. B, real-time PCR analysis of the abundance of mRNAs for Vimentin, Fibronectin, N-cadherin, Snail, Twist, Slug, Zeb-1,
SIM2, and E-cadherin in control siRNA–transfected or Rb-siRNA–transfected MCF7 cells. C , association of endogenous Rb with AP-2a on the human E-cadherin
promoter sequence determined by DNA-mediated pull-down assays. MCF7 cell extracts were incubated with streptavidin-agarose beads and biotinylated dsDNA.
Whole extracts (Input) and precipitated complexes were subjected to immunoblotting with antibodies to Rb or AP-2a. D , HCT116 cells were treated with actinomycin D
or aphidicolin, and the extracts included mainly hypophosphorylated or hyperphosphorylated Rb, respectively. The cell extracts were mixed with AP-2a derived
from MDA-MB-468 cells and then incubated with streptavidin-agarose beads and biotinylated E-cadherin promoter sequence dsDNA.

suppression of tumor progression and metastasis. Here, we propose
that inactivation of Rb contributes not only to tumorigenesis but
also to tumor progression to an invasive phenotype and that the
inhibition of EMT is a novel tumor suppressor function of Rb.
Rb acts not only as a negative, but also as a positive regulator of
transcription (37). The negative regulatory activity of Rb is largely
viewed as an effect on cell cycle progression that influences
tumorigenesis; hypophosphorylated Rb binds E2F and inhibits E2F
transcriptional activity at the promoters of many genes involved
in DNA replication (20, 38). In addition to its role in regulating
cell proliferation through the E2F pathway, Rb plays a role in
differentiation (e.g., myogenesis, adipogenesis, and osteogenesis) by
positively affecting the activity of several differentiation-promoting
transcription factors, such as MyoD, CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein h, Runx2, and the glucocorticoid receptor (39–42).
Although Rb acts as a positive regulator of transcription, whether
this activity contributes to the tumor suppressor function of Rb is
unknown. Here, we showed that Rb controls cell-cell adhesion in
epithelial cells through positive regulation of E-cadherin transcription by interacting with AP-2a. It is particularly important to
understand whether this regulation of transcription is related to
cell cycle progression. We found that hypophosphorylated Rb
preferentially associates with the E-cadherin promoter compared

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

with hyperphosphorylated Rb. Furthermore, a previous study has
shown the importance of E-cadherin in contact-dependent growth
inhibition of normal epithelial cells, and E-cadherin expression also
leads to dephosphorylation of Rb, resulting in an increase in the
level of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27kip1 and a
decrease in the level of cyclin D1 (43). We hypothesize that a
positive feedback loop involving E-cadherin and Rb acts to
maintain epithelial cell characteristics. However, the precise
molecular mechanisms by which Rb regulates the activity of
AP-2a are still unknown. Recently, it has been reported that the
association of Rb with p204, which has two LXCXE Rb-binding
motifs, is required for stimulation of Runx2-dependent transcription and osteogenesis (44). It is therefore possible that certain
LXCXE-containing proteins cooperate with the Rb/AP-2a complex
to regulate the transcription of E-cadherin.
A striking finding here is that interference with Rb function
contributed to the induction of EMT in cancer cell lines. The Rb
pathway is inactivated in the majority of human cancers. Downregulation of Rb expression has been implicated in high-grade
human breast cancers (28, 45), and Rb expression is inversely
correlated with tumor invasion in gastric carcinoma (27).
Additionally, loss of E-cadherin has been strongly implicated in
the progression and metastasis of human cancers: aberrant

5110

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rb Controls EMT by Promoting E-Cadherin Expression

Figure 6. Correlation between Rb and E-cadherin expression in primary breast tumor samples. The expression of Rb, E-cadherin, and vimentin were
immunohistochemically examined in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues. Rb and E-cadherin are expressed in intraductal carcinoma cells
(A), whereas down-regulation of Rb and E-cadherin expression was observed in invasive ductal carcinoma cells (B). Arrows indicate cancer cells having the
mesenchymal phenotype defined by both morphologic changes and vimentin expression. Arrowheads indicate vascular endothelial cells expressing Rb as a
positive control. Bars, 100 Am.

expression of E-cadherin has been correlated with metastasis
of breast cancer (46, 47). Moreover, abnormal expression of
E-cadherin and h-catenin is reported to be a useful prognostic
factor in patients with gastric carcinoma (48). In addition to
analyses using cell lines, our immunohistochemical analysis of
human breast cancer samples revealed a down-regulation of
E-cadherin and Rb in the invasive front where vimentin-positive
cancer cells are located, but not in normal mammary gland
tissues (Fig. 6 and Supplementary Fig. S7). These in vivo
observations further suggest a role for Rb in the regulation of
E-cadherin expression in primary human cancers and strengthen
the biochemical and functional links between inactivation of Rb
and cancer progression.
Expression of adenoviral E-cadherin partially restored the
morphologic changes and cell-cell dissociation observed in Rbdepleted cells (Supplementary Fig. S9). This result suggests that
inactivation of Rb induces EMT partly due to loss of E-cadherin
expression. We also examined whether the depletion of E-cadherin
can induce EMT in MCF7 cells (Supplementary Fig. S10).
E-cadherin expression was significantly reduced in cells transfected
with E-cadherin siRNA, and the E-cadherin/h-catenin adhesion
complex disappeared from cell membrane. However, the fibroblastic morphologic change characteristic of the EMT was not
observed in E-cadherin–depleted cells, indicating that loss of
E-cadherin alone is not sufficient for EMT induction. Several
known EMT-related genes, including vimentin, N-cadherin,
fibronectin, and Slug, were induced by depletion of Rb (Fig.
5B). Zeb-1 can be regulated by Rb (49), and, indeed, we
confirmed that depletion of Rb induces Zeb-1 expression.
Additionally, SIM2, which binds and represses the Slug promoter
(36), was reduced in Rb-depleted cells. Given that Slug and Zeb-1
are known to suppress E-cadherin expression, E-cadherin
expression may be regulated not only by the direct effects of
Rb-binding to the promoter but also by the indirect effects of

www.aacrjournals.org

SIM2, Slug and Zeb-1 expressions, as a result of Rb depletion. All
these findings suggest that Rb is an upstream regulator of Ecadherin and other EMT-related molecules, playing a key role in
the EMT/MET switch.
Loss of p53 function is also assumed to be a crucial event in the
development of many types of cancers, leading to deregulation of
cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. Our data show that combined
inactivation of Rb and p53 raised the cell survival rate, although
there was disruption of cell-cell interactions. These findings imply
that loss of p53 enables cells to counteract p53-dependent apoptosis
induced upon loss of cell-cell interactions. In addition, recent
studies suggest a potential role for p53 in cell motility (29). The
effects of p53 on cell motility are largely mediated through the
regulation of Rho signaling, thereby controlling organization of the
actin cytoskeleton. In the present study, both Rb and p53 expression
levels were significantly reduced during EMT, and the combined
inactivation of Rb and p53 activated Cdc42, leading to a much
greater reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton than the inactivation of Rb alone. Moreover, the loss of both E-cadherin and p53
resulted in the accelerated development of invasive and metastatic
mammary carcinomas in mice (50). Thus, it is very probable that
the loss of p53 raises cell survival in cells with disrupted cell-cell
interactions and facilitates cell motility, whereas the loss of Rb
down-regulates the transcription of E-cadherin leading to EMT.
Together, the results of this study show that Rb acts as a
regulator of E-cadherin and that its inactivation plays a role not
only in loss of control of cell proliferation but also in induction of
EMT, contributing to tumor progression, including invasion and
metastasis. Further studies are necessary to understand whether
the role of Rb in the EMT influences metastatic development in
human cancers. Research addressing this aspect will also ascertain
the relative contributions of each of the functional properties of Rb,
i.e., control of the cell cycle, apoptosis, and cell-cell adhesion, in
tumor aggressiveness.

5111

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/28/2007; revised 3/6/2008; accepted 4/24/2008.
Grant support: Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (Y. Taya and H. Saya)

References
1. Arias AM. Epithelial mesenchymal interactions in
cancer and development. Cell 2001;105:425–31.
2. Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in
tumour progression. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:442–54.
3. Perez-Moreno M, Jamora C, Fuchs E. Sticky business:
orchestrating cellular signals at adherens junctions. Cell
2003;112:535–48.
4. Takeichi M. Morphogenetic roles of classic cadherins.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 1995;7:619–27.
5. Berx G, Becker KF, Hofler H, van Roy F. Mutations of
the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. Hum Mutat 1998;
12:226–37.
6. Graff JR, Herman JG, Lapidus RG, et al. E-cadherin
expression is silenced by DNA hypermethylation in
human breast and prostate carcinomas. Cancer Res
1995;55:5195–9.
7. Batlle E, Sancho E, Franci C, et al. The transcription
factor snail is a repressor of E-cadherin gene expression
in epithelial tumour cells. Nat Cell Biol 2000;2:84–9.
8. Cano A, Perez-Moreno MA, Rodrigo I, et al. The
transcription factor snail controls epithelial-mesenchymal transitions by repressing E-cadherin expression. Nat
Cell Biol 2000;2:76–83.
9. Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, et al. Twist, a master
regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role in
tumor metastasis. Cell 2004;117:927–39.
10. Comijn J, Berx G, Vermassen P, et al. The two-handed
E box binding zinc finger protein SIP1 downregulates Ecadherin and induces invasion. Mol Cell 2001;7:1267–78.
11. Hajra KM, Chen DY, Fearon ER. The SLUG zinc-finger
protein represses E-cadherin in breast cancer. Cancer
Res 2002;62:1613–8.
12. Eger A, Aigner K, Sonderegger S, et al. DEF1 is a
transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin and regulates
epithelial plasticity in breast cancer cells. Oncogene
2005;24:2375–85.
13. Batsche E, Muchardt C, Behrens J, Hurst HC, Cremisi
C. RB and c-Myc activate expression of the E-cadherin
gene in epithelial cells through interaction with
transcription factor AP-2. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:3647–58.
14. Sumigama S, Ito T, Kajiyama H, et al. Suppression of
invasion and peritoneal carcinomatosis of ovarian
cancer cells by overexpression of AP-2a. Oncogene
2004;23:5496–504.
15. Schwartz B, Melnikova VO, Tellez C, et al. Loss of AP2a results in deregulation of E-cadherin and MMP-9 and
an increase in tumorigenicity of colon cancer cells
in vivo . Oncogene 2007;26:4049–58.
16. Kwok WK, Ling MT, Lee TW, et al. Up-regulation of
TWIST in prostate cancer and its implication as a
therapeutic target. Cancer Res 2005;65:5153–62.
17. Weinberg RA. The retinoblastoma protein and cell
cycle control. Cell 1995;81:323–30.
18. Sherr CJ. Cancer cell cycles. Science 1996;274:1672–7.
19. Taya Y. RB kinases and RB-binding proteins: new
points of view. Trends Biochem Sci 1997;22:14–7.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

and Grant-in-Aid for Third Term Comprehensive Control Research for Cancer from
the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan (Y. Taya and T. Saya).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. T. Fujiwara for the gift of the p53 expression adenovirus, Dr. M.
Herlyn for the gift of the E-cadherin expression adenovirus, and members of the
Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, for helpful
discussions.

20. Classon M, Harlow E. The retinoblastoma tumour
suppressor in development and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2002;2:910–7.
21. Sellers WR, Kaelin WG, Jr. Role of the retinoblastoma
protein in the pathogenesis of human cancer. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:3301–12.
22. Hui AM, Li X, Makuuchi M, Takayama T, Kubota K.
Over-expression and lack of retinoblastoma protein are
associated with tumor progression and metastasis in
hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer 1999;84:604–8.
23. zur Hausen A, Sarbia M, Heep H, Willers R, Gabbert
HE. Retinoblastoma-protein (prb) expression and prognosis in squamous-cell carcinomas of the esophagus. Int
J Cancer 1999;84:618–22.
24. Varley JM, Armour J, Swallow JE, et al. The
retinoblastoma gene is frequently altered leading to
loss of expression in primary breast tumours. Oncogene
1989;4:725–9.
25. Cairns P, Proctor AJ, Knowles MA. Loss of heterozygosity at the RB locus is frequent and correlates with
muscle invasion in bladder carcinoma. Oncogene 1991;6:
2305–9.
26. Poller DN, Baxter KJ, Shepherd NA. p53 and Rb1
protein expression: are they prognostically useful in
colorectal cancer? Br J Cancer 1997;75:87–93.
27. Chou NH, Chen HC, Chou NS, Hsu PI, Tseng HH.
Expression of altered retinoblastoma protein inversely
correlates with tumor invasion in gastric carcinoma.
World J Gastroenterol 2006;12:7188–91.
28. Gauthier ML, Berman HK, Miller C, et al. Abrogated
response to cellular stress identifies DCIS associated
with subsequent tumor events and defines basal-like
breast tumors. Cancer Cell 2007;12:479–91.
29. Gadea G, Lapasset L, Gauthier-Rouviere C, Roux P.
Regulation of Cdc42-mediated morphological effects: a
novel function for p53. EMBO J 2002;21:2373–82.
30. Bates RC, Mercurio AM. Tumor necrosis factor-a
stimulates the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of
human colonic organoids. Mol Biol Cell 2003;14:
1790–800.
31. Willis BC, Liebler JM, Luby-Phelps K, et al. Induction
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in alveolar epithelial cells by transforming growth factor-h1: potential
role in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Pathol 2005;
166:1321–32.
32. Roberts AB, Tian F, Byfield SD, et al. Smad3 is key to
TGF-h-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition,
fibrosis, tumor suppression and metastasis. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev 2006;17:19–27.
33. Tan X, Wang JY. The caspase-RB connection in cell
death. Trends Cell Biol 1998;8:116–20.
34. Peinado H, Portillo F, Cano A. Transcriptional
regulation of cadherins during development and carcinogenesis. Int J Dev Biol 2004;48:365–75.
35. Thiery JP, Sleeman JP. Complex networks orchestrate
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2006;7:131–42.
36. Laffin B, Wellberg E, Kwak HI, et al. Loss of

5112

Singleminded-2s in the mouse mammary gland induces
an epithelial mesenchymal transition associated with
up-regulation of Slug and MMP2. Mol Cell Biol 2008;28:
1936–46.
37. Morris EJ, Dyson NJ. Retinoblastoma protein partners. Adv Cancer Res 2001;82:1–54.
38. Inoue Y, Kitagawa M, Taya Y. Phosphorylation of
pRB at Ser612 by Chk1/2 leads to a complex between
pRB and E2F-1 after DNA damage. EMBO J 2007;26:
2083–93.
39. Novitch BG, Spicer DB, Kim PS, Cheung WL, Lassar
AB. pRb is required for MEF2-dependent gene expression as well as cell-cycle arrest during skeletal muscle
differentiation. Curr Biol 1999;9:449–59.
40. Singh P, Coe J, Hong W. A role for retinoblastoma
protein in potentiating transcriptional activation by the
glucocorticoid receptor. Nature 1995;374:562–5.
41. Thomas DM, Carty SA, Piscopo DM, et al. The
retinoblastoma protein acts as a transcriptional coactivator required for osteogenic differentiation. Mol Cell
2001;8:303–16.
42. Chen PL, Riley DJ, Chen Y, Lee WH. Retinoblastoma
protein positively regulates terminal adipocyte differentiation through direct interaction with C/EBPs. Genes
Dev 1996;10:2794–804.
43. St Croix B, Sheehan C, Rak JW, Florenes VA,
Slingerland JM, Kerbel RS. E-Cadherin-dependent
growth suppression is mediated by the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27(KIP1). J Cell Biol 1998;142:557–71.
44. Luan Y, Yu XP, Xu K, et al. The retinoblastoma
protein is an essential mediator of osteogenesis that
links the p204 protein to the Cbfa1 transcription factor
thereby increasing its activity. J Biol Chem 2007;282:
16860–70.
45. Bieche I, Lidereau R. Loss of heterozygosity at 13q14
correlates with RB1 gene underexpression in human
breast cancer. Mol Carcinog 2000;29:151–8.
46. Shibata T, Kokubu A, Sekine S, Kanai Y, Hirohashi S.
Cytoplasmic p120ctn regulates the invasive phenotypes
of E-cadherin-deficient breast cancer. Am J Pathol 2004;
164:2269–78.
47. Kowalski PJ, Rubin MA, Kleer CG. E-cadherin
expression in primary carcinomas of the breast and
its distant metastases. Breast Cancer Res 2003;5:
R217–22.
48. Zhou YN, Xu CP, Han B, et al. Expression of
E-cadherin and h-catenin in gastric carcinoma and its
correlation with the clinicopathological features and
patient survival. World J Gastroenterol 2002;8:987–93.
49. Liu Y, Costantino ME, Montoya-Durango D, Higashi
Y, Darling DS, Dean DC. The zinc finger transcription
factor ZFHX1A is linked to cell proliferation by Rb-E2F1.
Biochem J 2007;408:79–85.
50. Derksen PW, Liu X, Saridin F, et al. Somatic
inactivation of E-cadherin and p53 in mice leads to
metastatic lobular mammary carcinoma through induction of anoikis resistance and angiogenesis. Cancer Cell
2006;10:437–49.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rb Depletion Results in Deregulation of E-Cadherin and
Induction of Cellular Phenotypic Changes that Are
Characteristic of the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition
Yoshimi Arima, Yasumichi Inoue, Tatsuhiro Shibata, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:5104-5112.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5104
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/06/19/68.13.5104.DC1

This article cites 50 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5104.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5104.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

