Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 43

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Different growth and metastatic phenotypes associated with a
cell-intrinsic change of Met in metastatic melanoma
Eri Adachi1, Katsuya Sakai1, Takumi Nishiuchi2, Ryu Imamura1, Hiroki Sato1, Kunio
Matsumoto1
1

Division of Tumor Dynamics and Regulation, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 9201192, Japan

2

Division of Functional Genomics, Advanced Science Research Center, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-0934,
Japan

Correspondence to: Kunio Matsumoto, email: kmatsu@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp
Keywords: drug resistance, HGF, malignant melanoma, met, metastasis
Received: April 05, 2016     Accepted: September 13, 2016     Published: September 23, 2016

ABSTRACT
A dynamic phenotypic change contributes to the metastatic progression and drug
resistance in malignant melanoma. Nevertheless, mechanisms for a phenotypic change
have remained to be addressed. Here, we show that Met receptor expression changes
in a cell-autonomous manner and can distinguish phenotypical differences in growth,
as well as in metastatic and drug-resistant characteristics. In metastatic melanoma,
the cells are composed of Met-low and Met-high populations. Met-low populations
have stem-like gene expression profiles, are resistant to chemotherapeutic agents,
and have shown abundant angiogenesis and rapid tumor growth in subcutaneous
inoculation. Met-high populations have a differentiated phenotype, are relatively
resistant to B-RAF inhibitor, and are highly metastatic to the lungs. Met plays a
definitive role in lung metastasis because the lung metastasis of Met-high cells
requires Met, and treatment of mice with the Met-containing exosomes from Methigh cells facilitates lung metastasis by Met-low cells. Clonal cell fate analysis showed
the hierarchical phenotypical changes from Met-low to Met-high populations. Met-low
cells either showed self-renewal or changed into Met-high cells, whereas Met-high
cells remained Met-high. Clonal transition from Met-low to Met-high cells accompanied
changes in the gene expression profile, in tumor growth, and in metastasis that were
similar to those in Met-high cells. These findings indicate that malignant melanoma has
the ability to undergo phenotypic change by a cell-intrinsic/autonomous mechanism
that can be characterized by Met expression.

characteristics are regulated by the heterogeneity of
tumor cells. Cancer stem-cell models have provided
one explanation for the phenotypic and functional
heterogeneity in several types of tumors. In malignant
melanoma, however, phenotypic heterogeneity among
tumorigenic melanoma cells from patients was reversible
and not hierarchically organized [5, 6]. Melanoma cells
characterized by the histone demethylase JARID1B
are more competent in sustaining tumor growth
compared with JARID1B-negative populations, whereas
JARID1B expression is reversibly turned on and off [7].
Melanoma cells gain resistance to molecular-targeted
agents in response to hypoxia [8]. Thus, adaptive
phenotypic plasticity and cell-intrinsic heterogeneity are
characteristics of malignant melanoma.

INTRODUCTION
The incidence of malignant melanoma is increasing
faster than that of other solid tumors [1]. The 5-year
survival rate is less than 20% for distant-stage metastatic
malignant melanoma [2], indicating that metastasis is the
main factor in a poor outcome. In addition, the aggressive
characteristics of malignant melanoma results in an
innate and acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic and
molecular-targeted drugs.
Autocrine and paracrine growth factors secreted
within a tumor microenvironment participate in
metastasis and drug resistance in malignant melanoma
[3, 4]. In addition to extrinsic factors in the tumor
microenvironment, tumorigenicity and malignant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70779

Oncotarget

Met/hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor
mediates tumor cell proliferation, survival, invasion, and
metastasis [9–11]. Previous studies have indicated that
Met promotes proliferation, survival, and metastasis in
malignant melanoma [12–15]. Comprehensive analysis
for drug resistance conferred by the interaction between
tumor cells and stromal cells has shown that HGF secreted
from stromal cells confers resistance/survival in tumor
cells against molecular-targeted agents [3, 4]. Recent
study has indicated that Met plays a role in premetastatic
niche formation in B16-F10 highly metastatic melanoma
[16], suggesting an involvement of Met in the phenotypic
plasticity and heterogeneity of melanoma. Understanding
of the mechanisms by which the malignant characteristics
of melanoma cells are regulated by Met could promote
an understanding of stage progression and plasticity, and,
hence, the design of better therapeutic interventions.
In the present study, we found that there are different
populations in metastatic melanoma cells, and these are
characterized by different cell-surface Met expressions.
Cells with Met-low and Met-high expressions have
different profiles in gene expression, tumorigenicity,
growth, and metastasis. Cell-surface Met expression was
found to be in dynamic equilibrium and regulated by
hierarchical and cell-autonomous changes between Metlow and Met-high populations.

Met-low and Met-high populations were selected: 886
genes were higher in Met-low than in Met-high cells, while
353 genes were higher in Met-high than in Met-low cells
(Supplementary Tables S1, S2). Gene ontology enrichment
analysis revealed different expressions of gene clusters
between these populations. The gene expressions clustered
as “negative regulation of cell differentiation,” “stem cell
maintenance,” and “response to UV” were higher in Metlow than in Met-high populations. In contrast, the gene
expressions clustered as “pigmentation,” and “melanocyte
differentiation” were higher in Met-high than in Met-low
populations (Figure 2A, Supplementary Tables S3, S4). In
agreement with this, Met-high cells were highly pigmented,
whereas Met-low cells were scarcely pigmented (Figure 2B).
Likewise, mRNA for Syntaxin-3, a key gene for pigmentation
of melanosome [17], was expressed at a much higher level in
Met-high cells than in Met-low cells (Figure 2B).
Among the gene clusters shown in Figure 2A, Kit,
Snai2, and Sox9 are expressed in the progenitor cells of
melanocytes [18, 19], and are expressed at a higher level
in Met-low cells. Oca2 and Hps1 promotes melanogenesis
via melanosome transport [20, 21], and these are expressed
at a higher level in Met-high cells. Xpa and Brca2 play a
role in nucleotide excision repair [22, 23], which suggests
a DNA repair function in UV-sensitive unpigmented
cells in Met-low populations. Collectively, these gene
expression profiles indicate that Met-low are more
melanoblastic, while Met-high are more differentiated to
a certain extent.
We confirmed the expressions of several genes by
quantitative RT-PCR (Figure 2C). The Kit genes play a
critical role in the migration and survival of melanoblasts.
Sox10, Pax3 and Mitf genes are key regulators of
melanocyte development [19, 24], and regulate Met
expression in melanocytes and melanoma cells [15, 25].
The expressions of Kit and Sox9 genes were higher in
Met-low than in Met-high cells, whereas no significant
difference was seen in the expressions of Mitf (Figure 2C),
Sox10 and Pax3 genes (not shown). Consistently, the dual
analysis of the cell surface Met and Kit indicated the cells
were composed of two major populations characterized
by Kit-high/Met-low and Kit-low/Met-high (Figure 2D).
Next, we addressed the sensitivity of Met-low and
Met-high cells to the cytotoxic anticancer drugs cisplatin
(DNA cross-linking drug) and dacarbazine (DNA
alkylating drug), because xenobiotic transporters Abcb1
and Abcg2 genes known to cause multi-drug resistance
[26, 27] were higher in the Met-low population than in
the Met-high population (Figure 2E). Unfractionated
cells were cultured for either 3 or 7 days in the absence
or presence of 10 μM cisplatin or 1 mM dacarbazine,
and surviving cells were analyzed for cell-surface Met
expression (Supplementary Figure S1A). In the presence
of cisplatin, the Met-high population was clearly decreased
and had largely disappeared after 7 days. The same
result was obtained for cells cultured in the presence of

RESULTS
Stem cell- and differentiation-related gene
expressions in Met-low and Met-high
populations
The cell-surface Met expression in B16-F10
melanoma cells analyzed by flow cytometer was
heterogeneous, and the cells were composed of Met-low
and Met-high populations (Figure 1A). We purified Metlow and Met-high cells by cell sorting with > 95% purity
(Figure 1A). Met mRNA levels were much higher in the
Met-high cells than those in the Met-low cells (Figure
1B), suggesting that the difference in cell-surface Met
expression was mainly due to a difference in Met gene
expression. Met protein levels were higher and Met was
phosphorylated in the Met-high cells compared with those
in Met-low cells (Figure 1C). Because both Met-low and
Met-high cells did not produce detectable levels of HGF,
the phosphorylation of Met in Met-high cells seemed to be
HGF-independent. HGF stimulated Met phosphorylation
in Met-low cells, but this stimulation was not clear in
Met-high cells (Figure 1C), while HGF stimulated cell
migration of both Met-low and Met-high cells (not shown),
suggesting some portions of Met could be activated in a
HGF-dependent manner in Met-high cells.
To characterize Met-low and Met-high populations, we
analyzed gene expression profiles via microarray analysis.
Genes differently expressed by more than 2-fold between
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70780

Oncotarget

dacarbazine. The populations of dead cells and apoptotic
cells increased following treatment with either cisplatin
or dacarbazine, and the numbers were higher in Met-high
cells than in Met-low cells (Supplementary Figure S1B).
Thus, compared with Met-high cells, Met-low cells were
more resistant to chemotherapeutic agents, and the higher
expressions of Abcb1 and Abcg2 in Met-low cells could
have participated in this resistance.

(100% (11/11) in Met-low cells and 72.7% (8/11) in Methigh cells). Tumors from Met-high cells were highly
pigmented, while the tumors from Met-low cells were
mostly non-pigmented with the exception of partially
pigmented regions (Figure 3A). Immunohistochemical
analysis of Met expression showed that Met expression
levels were maintained in tumor tissues after 28 days postinoculation (Figure 3B). Tumor cells derived from Metlow populations showed a low level of Met expression,
while tumor cells derived from Met-high populations
showed a high level of Met expression.
The tumor volume in the Met-low cells became
much larger than in the Met-high cells 28 days postinoculation (Figure 3C), indicating a more rapid growth
potential in Met-low than in Met-high cells. We noticed
a higher expression of genes characterized as “blood
vessel morphogenesis” and “regulation of angiogenesis”
in Met-low cells than in Met-high cells (Figure 3D,
Supplementary Table S3), and, therefore, we analyzed
tumor-associated angiogenesis by immunohistochemical
staining of CD31-positive endothelial cells and α-smooth

Higher angiogenic and growth properties in Metlow populations
To examine the tumor characteristics of Met-low
and Met-high cells in vivo, Met-low and Met-high cells
obtained after cell sorting were inoculated in the left and
right subcutaneous regions, respectively, per each of the
C57BL/6 syngenic mice. Both Met-low and Met-high cells
formed tumors at a rate of 100%, when subcutaneously
inoculated at 100 cells/site (n = 4). However, Met-low
cells formed tumors more efficiently than Met-high
cells when subcutaneously inoculated at 10 cells/site

Figure 1: Heterogeneous cell-surface Met receptor expression in B16-F10 melanoma. A. B16-F10 melanoma cells were

stained with anti-Met-PE antibody and analyzed by flow cytometry. Left panel indicates cell-surface Met receptor expression of the
unfractionated B16-F10 melanoma cells (parental). Boxes in the panel indicate gates used for cell sorting into Met-low or Met-high. Cellsurface Met expressions of Met-low (middle) and Met-high (right) cells were re-analyzed after sorting. B. Expression of Met analyzed by
quantitative RT-PCR. Following cell sorting, the cells were cultured for 3 days and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Each value
represents the mean ± SD. The assay was done in triplicate and substantially same results were obtained. C. Expression of Met and Met
tyrosine phosphorylation. Following cell sorting, the cells were cultured for 2 weeks and subjected to immunoprecipitation and Western blot
analysis. In independently performed experiment using another lot Met-low and Met-high cells, substantially the same results was obtained.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70781

Oncotarget

muscle actin-positive pericytes. The vascular structures of
the endothelial cells surrounded by pericytes are abundant
in Met-low tumors, whereas the vascular structures of
endothelial cells were poorly surrounded by pericytes in
Met-high tumors (Figure 3E). The blood vessel density

was higher in Met-low than in Met-high tumors (Figure
3F), and the vascular areas surrounded by endothelial cells
were much larger in Met-low than in Met-high tumors
(Figure 3G) (P < 0.05, Mann-Whitney’s test). These
results suggest that the formation of functional blood

Figure 2: Different characteristics of Met-low and Met-high populations. A. Expression profiles of genes that functionally

belong to “negative regulation of cell differentiation,” “stem cell maintenance,” “pigmentation,” and “response to UV.” The analysis was
performed using RNA samples prepared from two independently prepared Met-low and Met-high cells. B. Appearance of parental, Met-low
and Met-high cells (left), and expressions of Syntaxin-3 mRNA (right). C. Expression of Kit, Sox9, and Mitf mRNA. D. Dual analysis of
Kit and Met by flow cytometry. Parental, Met-low, and Met-high cells were stained with anti-Met and anti-Kit antibodies and analyzed by
flow cytometry. E. Expression of Abcb1 and Abcg2 mRNA. Gene expression profiles were analyzed by microarray analysis, and the data
obtained by microarray analysis were deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus and can be accessed by No. GSE69741. Expressions of
Syntaxin-3, Kit, Sox9, Mitf, Abcb1, and Abcg2 mRNA were analyzed by RT-PCR. Each RT-PCR analysis were done in triplicate and each
value represents the mean ± SD. The same RT-PCR analysis was independently performed twice and substantially the same results were
obtained.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70782

Oncotarget

vessels may be attributable to the higher growth potential
of tumors from Met-low cells.
To know whether selective suppression of Met
might influence tumor growth properties, Met-high cells
were subjected to the stable expression of shRNA targeting
Met (sh-Met) or non-targeting shRNA (Non-target). The
knockdown of cell-surface Met expression was confirmed
by flow cytometry (Supplementary Figure S2A). When

Met-low and Met-high cells (Met-high, sh-Met or Nontarget) were inoculated in the left and right subcutaneous
regions, respectively, Non-target, sh-Met, and Met-high
cells all showed lower tumor growth than that in Met-low
cells (Supplementary Figure S2B). These results indicate
that a change in Met expression alone does not regulate
the difference in the tumor growth properties between
Met-low and Met-high cells.

Figure 3: Tumorigenicity and tumor growth of Met-low and Met-high cells subcutaneously implanted in syngenic mice.

A. Appearances of tumors. Tumors developed from Met-low (left side) (n = 11/11) and Met-high (right side) (n = 8/11) cells in the same
mouse are indicated in pairs. NT, no tumor. A scale bar, 10 mm. B. Histological appearance and Met expression in subcutaneous tumors.
Arrowheads indicate pigmented cells. Scale bars, 50 μm in left and right panels; 200 μm in middle panels. C. Growth of tumors derived
from Met-low (n = 11) and Met-high (n = 11) cells. In independently performed same experiment, substantially the same results were
obtained. Each value represents the mean ± SD. **p < 0.01 by Student’s t-test. D. Expression profile of genes characteristic to “blood vessel
morphogenesis” in Met-low and Met-high cells. E. Blood vessels in subcutaneous tumors, as evaluated by immunohistochemistry for CD31
(green) and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) (red). Arrowheads indicate vascular structures. Scale bars, 50 μm. F, G. Blood vessel density
(F) and area of blood vessels (G). The blood vessel density and area were determined using immunohisotochemical data of individual
tumors from Met-low (n = 5) or Met-high (n = 5) cells. The area for luminal structures closed by CD31-positive endothelial was measured
by image analysis. *p < 0.05 by Student’s t-test. In independently performed same experiment, substantially the same results were obtained.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70783

Oncotarget

Highly metastatic properties of Met-high
populations to the lung

metastasis or only a small number of metastases in the
liver and subcutaneous tissues (0.7 ± 1.3 per mouse).
The metastases derived from Met-low cells were not
pigmented, while metastases from Met-high cells were
(Figure 5A). The number of metastases of Met-low cells
was not significantly changed by shRNA expression
targeting Met (Figure 5B, Supplementary Table S5).
Thus, Met-low populations include a small number of
subfractions, which have metastatic potential for organs
other than the lungs. Taken together, these results indicate
a clear difference between Met-low and Met-high cells
with respect to organ tropism in metastasis and Met is
functionally involved in highly metastatic potential to the
lungs in Met-high cells.

We next addressed whether Met-low and Met-high
populations might show different metastatic potentials.
Met-low and Met-high cells isolated after cell sorting
were cultured for 3 weeks (or 6 weeks in the case of cells
expressing shRNA, see below), then 105 cells per mouse
were injected into the tail veins (n = 13–15 for each
experimental group), and the incidences of metastasis to
the lungs were analyzed 21 days later. The number of lung
metastasis was much higher in Met-high cells (39.1 ± 31.4
per mouse) than in Met-low cells (8.3 ± 10.2 per mouse)
(Figures 4A, 4B) (P < 0.01, Tukey’s test). Histological
analysis indicated that tumors from Met-low cells were
not pigmented, whereas tumors from Met-high cells
were highly pigmented (Figure 4C). The number of lung
metastases was significantly suppressed in Met-high cells
expressing sh-Met but not in Met-high cells expressing
Non-target (Figure 4B). Thus, Met contributes to the lung
metastasis of melanoma cells.
A previous study indicated that Met in exosomes
released from B16-F10 melanoma cells induces a
premetastatic niche formation in lungs, thereby facilitating
lung metastasis of melanoma cells [16]. Therefore, we
prepared exosomes and analyzed Met protein levels in
exosomes derived from Met-low and Met-high cells.
Exosomes obtained from Met-low and Met-high cells
showed an average size of 110.3 and 112.9 nm in diameter,
respectively (Supplementary Figure S3A). The zeta potential
values for exosomes from Met-low and Met-high cells
were −35.1 and −31.1 mV, respectively, suggesting slightly
different electrostatic characteristics (Supplementary Figure
S3B). In Western blot analysis, similar Rab5 protein levels
indicated that similar amounts of exosomes were released
from Met-low and Met-high cells (Figure 4D). In addition
to the Met level, the levels of TRP2, HSP70, HSP90, and
VLA4 were analyzed, because exosomes from subjects with
advanced-stage malignant melanoma contained higher levels
of these proteins [16]. The exosomes prepared from Methigh cells contained much higher Met protein than those
prepared from Met-low cells. TRP2 and HSP90 were found
in larger amounts in the exosomes in Met-high cells than in
Met-low cells. Furthermore, the number of lung metastases
of Met-low cells was increased to 2.2-fold higher levels by
the pretreatment of mice with exosomes derived from Methigh cells (Figure 4D). These data strongly suggest that the
Met in exosomes contributes to the lung metastatic potential
of Met-high cells.
In addition to lung metastasis, we found that Metlow and Met-high cells showed different metastatic
potentials to organs other than the lungs (Figures 5A, 5B,
Supplementary Table S5), though the overall absolute
number of metastases was much smaller compared with
lung metastasis. Met-low cells formed several metastases
in the liver, kidney, and subcutaneous tissues (3.9 ± 2.2
per mouse), whereas Met-high cells showed either no
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Hierarchical phenotypical changes from Met-low
into Met-high populations
Next, we addressed whether each population is in
a static state or in dynamic equilibrium. Met-low and
Met-high cells were sorted by flow cytometry, subjected
to clonal growth from a single cell, and the cell-surface
Met expressions were analyzed in each population 21
days later (Figure 6, Supplementary Figure S4). The Met
expression was divided into 3 groups according to the
following categories (Figure 6A): “Met-low,” more than
85% of the total cells show a fluorescent intensity of less
than 300; “Met-high,” more than 85% of the total cells
show a fluorescent intensity of more than 300; and, “Metdim,” intermediate cells between Met-low and Met-high.
Of the 11 clonal populations derived from Met-low
single cells, 3 populations stayed in Met-low, 5 populations
were changed to transitional, and 3 populations were
changed to Met-high (Figure 6B, Supplementary Figure
S4). In contrast, of the 11 clonal populations derived from
Met-high cells, one population was changed to Met-dim,
and 10 populations stayed in Met-high. Thus, the Met-low
populations were composed of both self-renewing clones
and clones changeable from Met-low to Met-high cells.
In contrast, most of the Met-high populations were stable,
and no clonal population was changed from Met-high to
Met-low. These results indicate the hierarchical phenotypic
changes from Met-low into Met-high populations.
We next addressed whether the hierarchical
change in Met expression could be observed in human
malignant melanoma cells. Met expression in A2058
melanoma cells was relatively heterogeneous, and a reanalysis of Met-low and Met-high cells after cell sorting
indicated that Met-low and Met-high cells existed as
different populations (Supplementary Figure S5A). These
populations were subjected to clonal growth, and the
cell-surface Met expression was analyzed 28 days later
(Figure 6A, Supplementary Figure S5B). Among the
12 clonal populations derived from Met-low cells, one
clonal population stayed in Met-low, whereas 11 clonal
populations changed to Met-dim or Met-high. In contrast,
all 12 clonal populations derived from Met-high stayed
70784

Oncotarget

in Met-high. Thus, the hierarchical phenotypical changes
from Met-low into Met-high populations were observed
not only in B16-F10 mouse melanoma cells but also in
A2058 human malignant melanoma cells.
A previous study indicated that HGF facilitates
resistance to BRAF inhibitor in malignant melanoma cells
with an oncogenic BRAF mutation [3, 4]. HGF enhanced

the survival of A2058 cells harboring a mutant BRAF in
the presence of BRAF inhibitor (vemurafenib) in both Metlow and Met-high cells (Supplementary Figure S6A), and
higher survival/resistance was seen in Met-high cells than
in Met-low cells at varying concentrations of vemurafenib
(Supplementary Figure S6B). The increases in dead and
apoptotic cells by vemurafenib were larger in Met-low cells

Figure 4: Lung metastasis of Met-low and Met-high cells injected into tail vein. A. Appearance of metastases in lungs. Scale

bars, 5 mm. B. The number of metastases in lungs. Met-low (n = 15), Met-high (n = 15), and Met-high cells expressing non-target shRNA
(Non-target) (n = 13) or Met-targeting shRNA (sh-Met) (n = 14) were used. **p < 0.01 and *p < 0.05 by Tukey’s test. In independently
performed three sets of same experiments using a smaller number of animals (n = 2 - 6 for each experimental group), substantially the
same results were obtained, and values were combined. C. Different pigmentation in metastatic tumors in the lung. Scale bars, 200 μm. D,
Protein levels in exosomes derived from Met-low and Met-high cells. Protein levels were analyzed by Western blot and Rab5 was used as
markers to indicate the amount of exosomes. Substantially same results were obtained in an independently performed experiment using
independently prepared exosomes. E. The effect of Met-high cell-derived exosomes on metastasis of Met-low cells to the lung. Mice were
injected with saline or Met-high cell-derived exosomes for three weeks. Met-low cells were injected two weeks after the treatment with
exosomes and lung metastasis was analyzed three weeks post-inoculation. n = 6 in each experimental group. **p < 0.01 and *p < 0.05 by
Tukey’s test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70785

Oncotarget

than those in Met-high cells (Supplementary Figure S6C).
Thus, the higher Met activation status in Met-high cells than
in Met-low cells facilitates resistance to BRAF inhibitor.
Finally, we examined whether clonal transition
from Met-low to Met-high cells might be accompanied
by a change in tumor characteristics. The Met-high cells
that had clonally transitted and expanded from Metlow cells (low→high) were subjected to analyses for a
gene expression profile, tumor growth and metastasis.
Microarray analysis indicated that the expression of
the characteristic genes in the transitted cells showed a
transitional profile or closer profile to that of Met-high
cells than to Met-low cells (Figure 6C). In subcutaneous
tumor growth assays, tumor growth in the transitted cells
was much less than that in the Met-low cells (Figure 6D),
which is consistent with tumor growth characteristics
in Met-low and Met-high cells (Figure 3C). Following
intravenous injection, the transitted cells and Met-high
cells formed much larger numbers of lung metastases,
compared with the Met-low cells (Figure 6E). Met-low
cells formed several metastases in organs other than the
lungs, whereas the transitted and Met-high cells formed
no, or only a few, metastases in organs other than the lungs
(Figure 6F, Supplementary Table S6). Thus, the clonal
transition from Met-low to Met-high was accompanied
with the changes in gene expression profiles, tumor
growth, and metastasis.

heterogeneity characterized by Met expression level is
dynamically changed in a cell-intrinsic manner. However,
this phenotype change is hierarchical from Met-low to
Met high populations. Considering the stem-like gene
expression profiles in Met-low populations and the
pigmented phenotype in Met-high populations, the cellintrinsic and hierarchical change from Met-low cells to
Met-high cells could be driven by a program reflecting
melanocyte development, and this might explain the
phenotypic diversity of some cases of melanomas.
Previous studies have indicated that Met functions in
cancer stem cells in several cancer cell types, such as colon
cancer, prostate cancer, and glioblastoma [29–31]. HGF
enhances the epithelial-mesenchymal transition [9–11].
SOX9 participates in the cancer stem cell state and maintains
mesenchymal features in some cancers [32]. In the present
study, we found that Met is rather expressed in melanoma
cells characterized by more differentiated phenotypes such
as pigmentation, lower Kit and Sox9 expression. This
discrepancy may relate to the particular developmental
characteristic of melanocytes, i.e., Met is not expressed in
melanoblasts, while the Met expression is induced during
melanocyte development by Mitf genes [15, 25].
The metastatic characteristics of Met-low and Methigh melanomas differed in organotropism. Met-high
cells metastasize mostly to the lungs, whereas Met-low
cells metastasize to the liver, kidney, and other tissues.
The low frequency of multi-organ metastasis of Met-low
cells suggests that only a small population of Met-low
cells can metastasize to multiple organs. Identification
and characterization of theses cells could lend a better
understanding of the multi-organ metastatic potential of
melanomas. On the other hand, our results indicate that the
highly metastatic potential of Met-high cells functionally
required Met expression. Consistent with the previous report
describing that exosome-packaged Met from B16-F10

DISCUSSION
Melanomas are highly heterogeneous tumors, but
the mechanisms for a phenotypic change remained mostly
unknown [28]. Analysis of patient-derived xenograft
models have shown that phenotypical heterogeneity
is reversible within advanced malignant melanoma
cells [5, 6]. Consistently, we found that phenotypical

Figure 5: Metastasis of Met-low and Met-high cells to organs other than lungs. A. Appearance of metastases in the liver,

kidney, and subcutaneous (Sc) tissue. Arrowheads indicate tumors. Scale bars, 5 mm. B. The number of metastases in various tissues except
lungs. Met-low (n = 14), Met-high (n = 15), and Met-high cells expressing non-target shRNA (Non-target) (n = 12) or Met-targeting shRNA
(sh-Met) (n = 12) were used.**p < 0.01 and *p < 0.05 by Tukey’s test. In independently performed three sets of same experiments using a
smaller number of animals (n = 2 - 6 for each experimental group), substantially the same results were obtained, and values were combined.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70786

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Clonal change in Met expression, gene expression profile, and tumor characteristics of Met-low and Methigh populations. A. Representative histographical profiles defined as “Met-low,” “Met-dim,” or “Met-high.” The threshold value for

fluorescence intensity for Met expression was set at 300, and the cells were divided into 3 groups: “Met-low,” more than 85% of the total
cells show a fluorescent intensity of less than 300; “Met-high,” more than 85% of the total cells show a fluorescent intensity of more than
300; and, “Met-dim,” intermediate cells between Met-low and Met-high. B. Change in Met expression during clonal expansion of B16-F10
and A2058 cells. Met-low and Met-high cells were sorted by flow cytometry, individually subjected to the clonal growth from a single cell,
and cell-surface Met expression was analyzed in each population 21 days (B16-F10) or 28 days (A2058) later. Eleven (B16-F10) or twelve
(A2058) clonal cell populations derived from Met-low and Met-high cells were analyzed. Met-low or Met-high clonal cells were obtained
by independently performed cell sorting in twice.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70787

Oncotarget

Figure 6 (Continued ): C. Comparison of gene expression profiles between Met-low, Met-high, and the Met-high cells transitted from

Met-low (low→high). Among three samples in Met-low or Met-high, the data for two samples (lane 1 and 2) were taken from the same data
sets used in Figure 2A and 3D. D. Tumor growth. Tumor growth by Met-low cells (n = 6) and the transitted Met-high cells (Met-low→Methigh) (n = 6). Met-low and transitted Met-high cells were inoculated in the same mouse in pairs. *p < 0.01 by Mann-Whitney’s test. E, F.
Metastasis to the lungs (E) and organs other than the lungs (F). Met-low (n = 10), Met-high (n = 12), and the transitted Met-high (Metlow→Met-high) (n = 12) cells were used. ***p < 0.0001 and **p < 0.01 by Tukey’s test. The experiment was independently performed for
three times (n = 2 - 4 for each experimental groups), substantially similar results were obtained, and values were combined.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70788

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

melanoma forms a pre-metastatic niche in lungs [16], we
found that exosomes derived from Met-high cells contained
much higher levels of Met than those from Met-low cells
(Figure 4D), and the number of lung metastases of Metlow cells was increased by the pretreatment of mice with
exosomes derived from Met-high cells (Figure 4E). These
data strongly suggested that the Met in exosomes functionally
contributed to the lung metastatic potential of Met-high cells.
Tumor-associated angiogenesis differs between
Met-low and Met-high melanomas. Tumors from Methigh cells developed vascular structures without pericytes.
This might be explained by the low expression of plateletderived growth factor (PDGF) and angiopoietin-2
(Angpt2), because the former facilitates the recruitment
of pericytes and the latter induces sprouting angiogenesis
[34, 35]. On the other hand, Met-low cells expressed
proangiogenic factors at a higher level and tumors
from Met-low cells developed more vascular networks
surrounded by pericytes. This vascularization in Met-low
tumors may function more normally and can support a
larger growth potential of Met-low tumors. Instead, the
vascular structures lacking pericytes in Met-high tumors
may allow transendothelial movement of tumor cells,
thereby facilitating intravasation/extravasation of tumor
cells during metastatic colonization.
Malignant melanoma is one of the most
chemoresistant tumors, and why melanomas are particularly
insensitive to chemotherapeutic agents remains poorly
understood [36, 37]. Xenobiotic transporters ABCB1
(also known as MDR1 or P-glycoprotein) and ABCG2
(also known as breast cancer resistance protein) plays a
major role in drug resistance against chemotherapeutic
agents [26, 27, 38, 39]. The higher expression levels of
ABCB1 and ABCG2 in Met-low cells may explain, at
least in part, why Met-low cell populations are more
resistant to chemotherapeutic agents than Met-high cell
populations. On the other hand, malignant melanoma
harboring a mutant BRAF responds to RAF inhibitors, but
the tumors often recur within a certain period of treatment
[3, 39]. Expression of HGF and activation of Met confers
resistance to BRAF inhibitors in patients [3, 4]. Met-high
cell populations show a higher survival rate compared with
Met-low cell populations in the presence of BRAF inhibitor
(Supplementary Figure S6). Thus, Met-low and Met-high
populations have shown resistance to chemotherapeutic
and molecular-targeted agents in different ways, in
which progenitor cell characteristics and Met activation
participates in drug-resistance.
Finally, cell-intrinsic and hierarchical change in Met
expression and the associated gene expression profiles could
be a mechanism that might help explain the intrinsic diversity
and plasticity in tumor growth, metastasis, and drug resistance
in malignant melanomas. Elucidation of the mechanism by
which Met expression in individual cells is regulated overall
in a certain equilibrium between Met-low and Met-high
cell populations may facilitate further understanding of the
intrinsic nature of malignant melanomas.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell culture, exosome preparation, shRNA
expression, and reagents
Cells were obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection. B16-F10 cells were cultured in
RPMI1640 medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal
bovine serum. A2058 cells were cultured in DME medium
supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum and 2
mM glutamine. For analysis of Met expression in clonal
cell populations, cells sorted by flow cytometry were first
cultured on a 96-well plate at a density of one cell/well,
and were then cultured for 3–4 weeks. Mouse Met shRNA
sense sequences were obtained from the Broad Institute
TRC shRNA library (Table 1). For exosome preparation,
the culture supernatant was centrifuged at 500 × g for
10 min, and filtered through a 0.22-μm filter membrane.
The filtrate was centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 20 min, and
exosomes were collected by centrifugation at 100,000 ×
g for 70 min. The particle size and the zeta potential of
exosomes were analyzed using a ZETASIZER NANO
(Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). Lentiviral
vector encoding shRNA were prepared using HEK-293
cells, and cells transfected with the lentiviral vector were
cultured in the presence of 0.5–1.0 μg/ml puromycin for
more than 7 days. Cisplatin and dacarbazine were obtained
from WAKO Pure Chemicals. Vemurafenib and a BCA
Protein Assay Kit were obtained from Selleckchem and
Pierce Biotechnology, respectively.

Flow cytometry and antibodies
Cells were stained using either a rat anti-mouse MetPE antibody, a rat anti-human Met antibody (eBiosciences,
code: 12-8854-82, clone eBioclone 7, or code: 148858-80, clone eBioclone 97), or an anti-mouse Kit
antibody (eBiosciences, code: 14-1172-81, clone ACK2).
Secondary antibodies conjugated with phycoerythrin
(PE) or allophycocyanin (APC) were used (Santa Cruz).
Isotype controls were used to set the background. Livecell selection was accomplished using 7-AAD (BD
biosciences). Cells were analyzed and/or sorted on a
FACS canto II, a FACS Aria II (Becton Dickinson) or
with a JSAN cell sorter (Bay Bioscience, Kobe, JAPAN).
Cell cycles were determined using a Cell-Cycle Phase
Determination Kit (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI).
Apoptotic cells were stained using an Annexin V-FITC
Apoptosis Kit (BioVision, Milpitas, CA).

Microarray analysis
Microarray analyses were performed using the Whole
Mouse Genome (4 × 44k, G4846A) Oligo Microarray,
according to the Agilent 60-mer Oligo Microarray
Processing Protocol (Agilent Technologies). Total RNA
samples (200 ng) were used to prepare Cy3-labeled cRNA
70789

Oncotarget

Table 1: Sense and antisense sequences for shRNA
Purpose

Sense

Anti sense

Non-target

GCGCGATAGCGCTAATAATTT

AAATTATTAGCGCTATCGCGC

sh-Met

CGGGATTCTTTCCAAACACTT

AAGTGTTTGGAAAGAATCCCG

Table 2: Primer sequences for RT-PCR
Genes
abcg2
actb
kit
met
mitf
sox9
stx3

Forward
TCGCAGAAGGAGATGTGTTG
AGCCATGTACGTAGCCATCC
ATCCCGACTTTGTCAGATGG
CTACACCCCAGCCCAAACTA
AGCCAGCAGGTCAGATCCTA
ATAAGTTCCCCGTGTGCATC
TCAGTCACCCAGCATTCAAG

Histological analysis

using a Low RNA Input Fluorescent Linear Amplification
Kit (Agilent Technologies). Fluorescence-labeled cRNAs
were purified using an RNeasy RNA Purification Kit
(Qiagen Inc., Hilden, Germany). Two independent RNA
samples were used to confirm the reproducibility of the
microarray analyses. The images were analyzed using
Feature Extraction Software (Ver. 10.7.3.1) and GeneSpring
GX 11.5 software (Agilent Technologies). Normalization
was performed as follows: (i) intensity-dependent Lowess
normalization; (ii) data transformation, with measurements
set to ≤0.01; (iii) per-chip 75th-percentile normalization of
each array; and, (iv) per-gene: normalized to the median
of each gene. Genes differently expressed more than twice
between Met-low and Met-high populations were selected
and used for the gene ontology enrichment analysis. Gene
ontology (GO) enrichment analyses were performed
using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7. The raw and
processed data were deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database (access ID: GSE69741).

For immunostaining of Met, frozen sections were
fixed with methanol, tissue sections were incubated with
PBS containing 3% bovine serum albumin for 30 min,
washed with PBS, and incubated overnight with rabbit
anti-Met antibody (Santa Cruz, code: sc-162, clone SP260) in PBS containing 0.5% bovine serum albumin
and 0.1% Tween-20 at 4 ˚C. After washing, sections
were incubated with EnVision+ System-HRP Labeled
Polymer (DAKO, code: K4002, Glostrup, Denmark).
Immunocomplexes were visualized using an IMMPACT
DAB kit (VECTOR, code: SK-4105, PE2 6XS, UK) and
nuclei were stained with hematoxylin. For blood vessel
staining, frozen sections were fixed with methanol,
then treated with rat anti-CD31 (BD, code: 557355,
clone MEC13.3) and mouse anti-α-smooth muscle actin
(DAKO, code: M0851, clone 1A4, Glostrup, Denmark)
antibodies were diluted via a Vector® M.O.M.™
Immunodetection Kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA). Sections were analyzed using a Biozero BZ-9000
(KEYENCE, Osaka, Japan).

Tumor growth and metastasis assay
Five week-old female C57BL/6 mice (SLC,
Shizuoka, Japan) were used. Met-low and Met-high
cells were prepared via 2 successive cell sortings. For
subcutaneous growth, 10, 50, or 100 cells in 50 μl culture
medium were mixed with 50 μl of growth factor-reduced
matrigel, and subcutaneously injected bilaterally. Tumor
volume was analyzed on day 35 or within 35 days after
the inoculation unless otherwise specified. For metastasis
assay, 105 cells in 100 μl of PBS were injected into the
tail veins, and the degrees of metastases were analyzed
21 days later. All animal experiments were performed in
accordance with the animal experiments guidelines of
Kanazawa University.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Reverse
TTGGATCTTTCCTTGCTGCT
CTCTCAGCTGTGGTGGTGAA
AAGGCCAACCAGGAAAAGTT
TGAATTTGAGCGATGCTGAC
GGTGGGAAAGACATCCAAGA
TACTGGTCTGCCAGCTTCCT
GCCCTTCATATGTGGCATTT

Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was prepared using Sepasol RNA
(Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan), and RNA were reverse
transcribed using Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase
and Oligo(dT) primer (Invitrogen). Quantitative PCR
reactions were performed in triplicate using SYBRgreen dye (Roche Diagnostics) with the 7500 Sequence
Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Streetsville,
ON, Canada). The transcription level of β-actin was
used for normalization. The primer sequences are listed
in Table 2.
70790

Oncotarget

Western blotting

K. M.), and a grant from the Project for Development
of Innovative Research on Cancer Therapeutics
(P-DIRECT) from the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan. We are grateful
for assistance from Scientific Editorial Services
(Harrison, AR, US).

Western blotting was performed as described
elsewhere [40]. Briefly, a PVDF membrane was
incubated with 5% bovine serum albumin for 2 h, and
then incubated overnight at 4 ˚C with primary antibodies.
After washing 3 times, the membrane was incubated
for 1 h with species-specific horseradish peroxidaseconjugated antibodies, and developed with ECL
detection reagent (ImmunoStar, Wako Pure Chemical).
For detection of Met tyrosine phosphorylation, cell
lysate was subjected to immunoprecipitation with
mouse anti-Met (code:#3127, clone 25H2) antibody
(Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA) and
phospho-Met was detected using rabbit anti-phosphoMet (Y1234/Y1235) (code:#3077, clone D26) antibody
(1:1000 dilution, Cell Signaling Technology). Immune
complexes were recovered with Protein G-Sepharose
beads (Zymed Laboratories, South San Francisco, CA).
For exosome analysis, antibodies against Met (25H2),
Rab5 (rabbit, code:#5347, clone C8B1) (1:1000 dilution,
Cell Signaling Technology), TRP2 (rabbit, code:
BS3320, clone K89, 1:1000 dilution, Bioworld, Louis
Park, MN), HSP70 and HSP90 (mouse, code: SPA810-D and ADI-SPA-830, clone C92F3A-5 and AC88,
1:1000 dilution, Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY),
and VLA4 (rat, code: ab25247, clone PS/2, 1:1000
dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) were used. Can
Get Signal® (TOYOBO, Osaka, Japan) was used for the
dilution of antibodies.

Author contributions
K.S. and K.M. designed the study and wrote
the paper. N.T. performed microarray analysis. E.A.
performed the experiments, with the noted exception of
the microarray analysis, and helped writing the paper.
R.I. and H.S. performed the animal experiments that
used clonally expanded Met-high cells. All authors
analyzed the results and approved the final version of
the manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Holmes D. The cancer that rises with sun. Nature. 2014;
515: S110-S111.
2.	 Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong SJ, Thompson JF,
Atkins MB, Byrd DR, Buzaid AC, Cochran AJ, Coit DG,
Ding S, Eggermont AM, Flaherty KT, Gimotty PA, et
al. Final version of 2009 AJCC melanoma staging and
classification. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27: 6199-6206.
3.	 Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni
M, Qian ZR, Du J, Davis A, Mongare MM, Gould J,
Frederick DT, Cooper ZA, Chapman PB, Solit DB, Ribas
A, Lo RS, Flaherty KT, Ogino S, Wargo JA, Golub TR.
Tumour micro-environment elicits innate resistance to
RAF inhibitors through HGF secretion. Nature. 2012;
487: 500-504.

Statistical analysis
Error bars represent the means ± standard
deviation. Mouse experiments were performed in
duplicate using at least 4 mice per treatment group.
Multiple-group comparisons were analyzed using either
a Tukey’s test or ANOVA. Two group comparisons
were analyzed using either a Student’s t-test or a MannWhitney’s U test using Prism 6 software. A P < 0.05 was
considered significant.

4.	 Wilson TR, Fridlyand J, Yan Y, Penuel E, Burton L, Chan
E, Peng J, Lin E, Wang Y, Sosman J, Ribas A, Li J, Moffat
J, et al. Widespread potential for growth-factor-driven
resistance to anticancer kinase inhibitors. Nature. 2012;
487: 505-509.
5.	 Quintana E, Shackleton M, Sabel MS, Fullen DR, Johnson
TM, Morrison SJ. Efficient tumour formation by single
human melanoma cells. Nature. 2008; 456: 593-598.

Abbreviations
HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; PE, phycoerythrin;
GO, gene ontology; GEO, gene expression omnibus;
ANOVA, analysis of variance; ABC, ATP-binding
cassette.

6.	 Quintana E, Shackleton M, Foster HR, Fullen DR, Sabel
MS, Johnson TM, Morrison SJ. Phenotypic heterogeneity
among tumorigenic melanoma cells from patients that is
reversible and not hierarchically organized. Cancer Cell.
2010; 18: 510-523.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

7.	 Roesch A, Fukunaga-Kalabis M, Schmidt EC, Zabierowski
SE, Brafford PA, Vultur A, Basu D, Gimotty P, Vogt T,
Herlyn M. A temporarily distinct subpopulation of slowcycling melanoma cells is required for continuous tumor
growth. Cell. 2010; 141: 583-594.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

8.	 O'Connell MP, Marchbank K, Webster MR, Valiga AA,
Kaur A, Vultur A, Li L, Herlyn M, Villanueva J, Liu Q,
Yin X, Widura S, Nelson J, Ruiz N, et al. Hypoxia induces

This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (No. 24300329 and 15K14473 to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70791

Oncotarget

phenotypic plasticity and therapy resistance in melanoma
via the tyrosine kinase receptors ROR1 and ROR2. Cancer
Discov. 2013; 3: 1378-1393.

is a Rab32/38 guanine nucleotide exchange factor. Curr
Biol. 2012; 22: 2135-2139.
22.	 Nakane N, Takeuchi S, Yuba S, Saijyo M, Nakatsu Y, Murai
H, Nakatsuru Y, Ishikawa T, Hirota S, Kitamura Y, Kato Y,
Tsunoda Y, Miyauchi H, et al. High incidence of ultravioletB-or chemical-carcinogen-induced skin tumours in mice
lacking the xeroderma pigmentosum group A gene. Nature.
1995; 377: 165-168.

9.	 Cecchi F, Rabe DC, Bottaro DP. Targeting the HGF/Met
signaling pathway in cancer therapy. Expert Opin Ther
Targets. 2012; 16: 553-572.
10.	 Furlan A, Kherrouche Z, Montagne R, Copin MC, Tulasne
D. Thirty years of research on met receptor to move a
biomarker from bench to bedside. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:
6737-6744.

23.	 Patel KJ, Yu PPCV, Lee H, Corcoran A, Thistlethwaite
FC, Evans MJ, Colledge WH, Friedman LS, Ponder BAJ,
Venkitaraman AR. Involvement of Brca2 in DNA Repair.
Mol Cell. 1998; 1: 347-357.

11.	 Sakai K, Aoki S, Matsumoto K. Hepatocyte growth
factor and Met in drug discovery. J Biochem. 2015; 157:
271-284.

24.	 Cichorek M, Wachulska M, Stasiewicz A, Tymińska A. Skin
melanocytes: biology and development. Postepy Dermatol
Alergol. 2013; 30: 30-41.

12.	 Otsuka T, Takayama H, Sharp R, Celli G, LaRochelle WJ,
Bottaro DP, Ellmore N, Vieira W, Owens JW, Anver M,
Merlino G. c-Met autocrine activation induces development
of malignant melanoma and acquisition of the metastatic
phenotype. Cancer Res. 1998; 58: 5157-5167.

25.	 McGill GG, Haq R, Nishimura EK, Fisher DE. c-Met
expression is regulated by Mitf in the melanocyte lineage. J
Biol Chem. 2006; 281: 10365-10373.

13.	 Recio JA, Merlino G. Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter
factor activates proliferation in melanoma cells through
p38 MAPK, ATF-2 and cyclin D1. Oncogene. 2002; 21:
1000-1008.

26.	 Chen KG, Sikic BI. Molecular pathways: regulation and
therapeutic implications of multidrug resistance. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18: 1863-1869.
27.	 Stacy AE, Jansson PJ, Richardson DR. Molecular
pharmacology of ABCG2 and its role in chemoresistance.
Mol Pharmacol. 2013; 84: 655-669.

14.	 Ferraro D, Corso S, Fasano E, Panieri E, Santangelo R,
Borrello S, Giordano S, Pani G, Galeotti T. Pro-metastatic
signaling by c-Met through RAC-1 and reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Oncogene. 2006; 25: 3689-3698.

28.	 Meacham CE, Norrison SJ. Tumour heterogeneity and
cancer plasticity. Nature. 2013; 501: 328-337.

15.	 Beuret L, Flori E, Denoyelle C, Bille K, Busca R, Picardo
M, Bertolotto C, Ballotti R. Up-regulation of MET
expression by α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and MITF
allows hepatocyte growth factor to protect melanocytes and
melanoma cells from apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:
14140-14147.

29.	 Tamase A, Muraguchi T, Naka K, Tanaka S, Kinoshita
M, Hoshii T, Ohmura M, Shugo H, Ooshio T, Nakada
M, Sawamoto K, Onodera M, Matsumoto K, et al.
Identification of tumor-initiating cells in a highly aggressive
brain tumor using promoter activity of nucleostemin. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106: 17163-17168.

16.	 Peinado H, Alečković M, Lavotshkin S, Matei I,
Costa-Silva B, Moreno-Bueno G, Hergueta-Redondo
M, Williams C, García-Santos G, Ghajar C, NitadoriHoshino A, Hoffman C, Badal K, et al. Melanoma
exosomes educate bone marrow progenitor cells toward a
pro-metastatic phenotype through MET. Nat Med. 2012;
18: 883-891.

30.	 De Bacco F, Casanova E, Medico E, Pellegatta S, Orzan F,
Albano R, Luraghi P, Reato G, D'Ambrosio A, Porrati P,
Patanè M, Maderna E, Pollo B, et al. The MET oncogene
is a functional marker of a glioblastoma stem cell subtype.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72: 4537-4550.
31.	 Vermeulen L, De Sousa E, Melo F, van der Heijden M,
Cameron K, de Jong JH, Borovski T, Tuynman JB, Todaro
M, Merz C, Rodermond H, Sprick MR, Kemper K, Richel
DJ, Stassi G, Medema JP. Wnt activity defines colon cancer
stem cells and is regulated by the microenvironment. Nat
Cell Biol. 2010; 12: 468-476.

17.	 Yatsu A, Ohbayashi N, Tamura K, Fukuda M. Syntaxin-3
is required for melanosomal localization of Tyrp1 in
melanocytes. J Invest Dermatol. 2013; 133: 2237-2246.
18.	 Nitzan E, Krispin S, Pfaltzgraff ER, Klar A, Labosky
PA, Kalcheim C. Developmental pathways activated in
melanocytes and melanoma. Development. 2013; 140:
2269-2279.

32.	 Guo W, Keckesova Z, Donaher JL, Shibue T, Tischler V,
Reinhardt F, Itzkovitz S, Noske A, Zürrer-Härdi U, Bell G,
Tam WL, Mani SA, van Oudenaarden A, Weinberg RA.
Slug and Sox9 cooperatively determine the mammary stem
cell state. Cell. 2012; 148: 1015-1028.

19.	 Mort RL, Jackson IJ, Patton, E. E. The melanocyte lineage
in development and disease. Development. 2015; 142:
620-632.

33.	 Jain RK. Normalizing tumor vasculature with antiangiogenic therapy: a new paradigm for combination
therapy. Nat Med. 2001; 7: 987-989.

20.	 Puri N, Gardner JM, Brilliant MH. Aberrant pH of
melanosomes in pink-eyed dilution (p) mutant melanocytes.
J Invest Dermatol. 2000; 115: 607-613.

34.	 Ribatti D, Nico B, Crivellato E. The role of pericytes in
angiogenesis. Int J Dev Biol. 2011; 55: 261-268.

21.	 Gerondopoulos A, Langemeyer L, Liang JR, Linford A,
Barr FA. BLOC-3 mutated in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70792

Oncotarget

35.	 Tsao H, Atkins MB, Sober AJ. Management of cutaneous
melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2004; 351: 998-1012.

39.	 Sosman JA, Kim KB, Schuchter L, Gonzalez R, Pavlick
AC, Weber JS, McArthur GA, Hutson TE, Moschos SJ,
Flaherty KT, Hersey P, Kefford R, Lawrence D, et al.
Survival in BRAF V600-mutant advanced melanoma
treated with vemurafenib. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:
707-714.

36.	 Gogas HJ, Kirkwood JM, Sondak VK. (2007)
Chemotherapy for metastatic melanoma: time for a change?
Cancer. 2007; 109: 455-464.
37.	 Joyce H, McCann A, Clynes M, Larkin A. Influence
of multidrug resistance and drug transport proteins on
chemotherapy drug metabolism. Expert Opin Drug Metab
Toxicol. 2015; 11: 1-15.

40.	 Ito K, Sakai K, Suzuki Y, Ozawa N, Hatta T, Natsume T,
Matsumoto K, Suga H. Artificial human Met agonists based
on macrocycle scaffolds. Nat Commun. 2015; 6: 6373.

38.	 Di C, Zhao Y. Multiple drug resistance due to resistance to
stem cells and stem cell treatment progress in cancer. Exp
Ther Med. 2015; 9: 289-293.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70793

Oncotarget

