Published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Twenty-fourth Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Molecular Basis
for Resistance to Targeted Agents
Richard Marais1, William Sellers2, David Livingston3, and Enrico Mihich3

Abstract
The mechanisms of genetically determined mechanisms of resistance to several target drugs were discussed in
breast cancer, melanoma, colorectal and prostate cancers, chronic myelogenous leukemia, small cell lung cancer,
and medulloblastoma. In each case, heterogeneity of mechanisms was emphasized. In melanoma, therapeutic
interference with the effects of BRAF mutations was repeatedly discussed. It was also reported that anti-CTLA4
antibodies provided the ﬁrst treatment improving survival of patients with stage IV melanoma. Epithelial–
mesenchymal transition (EMT) was introduced as a mechanism of resistance, particularly in lung and pancreatic
cancer, where the role of microenvironment factors was also indicated. In colorectal and prostate cancers, the use
of liquid biopsies, namely, measurements of tumor nucleic acid in blood, were indicated as a way to obtain wholetumor assessment instead of the partial assessment obtainable with traditional biopsies. Knowledge of the
mechanisms of drug action and resistance was stressed to be essential for the design of new agents and
combination of agents aimed at increasing antitumor effectiveness and overcoming resistance. Cancer Res; 73(3);
1046–9. 2012 AACR.

Findings Presented
Jeffrey Engelman (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA) discussed natural resistance to kinase inhibitors, the
mechanisms of resistance, and strategies to overcome it. He
focused on resistance to RAF inhibitors in BRAF-mutant
colorectal tumors. Gene alteration and bypass mechanisms
of resistance were discussed with examples of ALK and EGFR
genes. Heterogenicity of mechanisms of resistance was emphasized as challenges to overcoming resistance in the clinic.
Epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) yielding a new type
of cells after inhibition of target in the original cell was also
indicated as a mechanism of resistance.

Resistance in Breast Cancer
Jos Jonkers (Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands) studied genetically engineered mouse models
(GEMM) and patient-derived tumor graft models for BRCAdeﬁcient breast cancer. These mice develop mammary tumors
with genomic instability and hypersensitivity to DNA damaging agents, including platinum drugs and PARP inhibitors.
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1The Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester, United Kingdom; 2Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research,
Cambridge; and 3Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
Prior presentation: The ﬁndings of this article were presented in the 24th
Annual Pezcoller Symposium titled "Molecular Basis for Resistance to
Targeted Agents," which was held in Trento, Italy on June 14–16, 2012.
Corresponding Author: Enrico Mihich, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 450
Brookline Ave, Boston, MA 02115. Phone: 716-316-7782; Fax: 617-5828550; E-mail: enrico_mihich@dfci.harvard.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

1046

Response and resistance to platinum drugs and the clinical
PARP inhibitor olaparib were found to be affected by drug
efﬂux transporter activity, type of BRCA1 founder mutation,
and 53BP1 status. BRCA1 re-expression contributes to therapy
of resistance in patient-derived tumor graft models of BRCA1deﬁcient triple-negative breast cancer.
Elaine Mardis (The Genome Institute at Washington University, St. Louis, MO) studied breast cancer samples from a
clinical trial of aromatase inhibitors. She used whole-genome
sequencing of paired tumor and normal DNA to correlate
genomic alterations with clinical response. Sequencing of
known variant regions identiﬁed impacts of heterogeneity of
tumor cells on response and resistance. The remaining tumor
cells often display known driver mutations not detected in the
pretreatment cell populations.
Jose Baselga (Massachusetts General Hospital) discussed
the reversal of endocrine resistance in breast cancer by targeting the mTOR pathway. A mechanism of endocrine resistance
in hormone receptor–positive (HRþ) breast cancer is aberrant
signaling via the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (Pl3K)/Akt/mTOR
pathway. A phase III study was concluded comparing the
mTOR inhibitor everolimus and exemestane to exemestane
and placebo in 724 patients with HRþ breast cancer refractory
to nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitors. Everolimus plus exemestane resulted in synergistic improvement in progression-free
survival. Going forward, new studies are being designed with
PI3K inhibitors in combination with estrogen receptor (ER)
degraders that in preclinical models have shown synergism.

Resistance in BRAF-Mutant Melanoma
Levi Garraway (Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA)
discussed the development of selective RAF and MEK

Cancer Res; 73(3) February 1, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236

Twenty-fourth Annual Pezcoller Report

inhibitors, which has resulted in prolonged survival of patients
with melanoma whose tumors harbor BRAF(V600E/K) mutations. Resistance to kinase inhibitors may be grouped into 3
categories: (i) "target-oriented" resistance mechanisms (e.g.,
secondary mutation, ampliﬁcation, or dysregulation of the
target oncoprotein); (ii) "bypass" mechanisms (engagement of
a signaling module that circumvents the target oncoprotein);
or (iii) alterations in downstream effectors (e.g., key signaling
proteins that are activated by the target oncoprotein). Mechanisms of resistance in BRAF-mutant melanoma are pertinent to
each of these categories. Examples include discovery of several
mechanisms that re-establish RAF signaling, bypass mechanisms such as the COT kinase or various receptor tyrosine
kinases, and activating mutations of MEK1, which signals
downstream of mutated BRAF. In most cases, the resistance
mechanisms result in sustained extracellular signal–regulated
kinase (ERK) signaling—hence restoring activation of the
oncogenic mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway
that is dysregulated by mutant BRAF in melanoma. Multiple
mechanisms of MAPK activation, dysregulation of the oncogenic MAPK transcriptional output, and possible ERKindependent mechanisms of resistance were identiﬁed by
functional screens; although 150 to 200 individual resistance
effectors have been nominated by these screens, many of these
seem to converge upon a narrower set of key cellular effectors.
Thus, parsimonious therapeutic combinations (e.g., 3–4 drugs)
could be developed that impede many individual "upstream"
resistance mechanisms. This knowledge and a detailed understanding of "steady state" tumor dependencies and clinical
genomic characterization of relapsing tumors may lead to
novel therapeutic combinations worthy of clinical evaluation.
Richard Marais (The Peterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Manchester, UK) indicated that BRAF regulates cell growth and
survival through the MEK/ERK signaling pathway. BRAF is
mutated in about half of melanoma cases. Drugs targeting
BRAF achieve responses in about 60% of patients with melanoma, validating this approach to treatment of these patients.
However, these drugs induce non-melanoma skin lesions
(keratoacanthomas and cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas)
in about 30% of patients because they drive paradoxical
activation of the MAPK pathways in cells with RAS mutations,
the upstream activator of BRAF. This activation is driven by
BRAF dimerization with a related protein called CRAF. These
side effects can be blocked by MEK inhibitors. Other drugs can
drive this paradox. Nilotinib induced RAF dimerization and
pathway activation in drug-resistant chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) cells, but the combination of nilotinib with
a MEK inhibitor induces the death of these cells.
Jeffrey Sosman (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) outlined BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) effects on resistance in melanoma. Most patients with melanoma with BRAFV600 mutations
treated with BRAFi, including vemurafenib or dabrafenib, have
rapid clinical responses with median progression-free survival
of 6.8 months and survival improved to 13 to 16 months. MEKdependent mechanisms include activating mutations in
upstream NRAS or downstream MEK1; overexpression of COT,
which activates MEK, and either alternate splicing, or ampliﬁcation of the mutant BRAFV600 gene. MEK-independent resis-

www.aacrjournals.org

tance includes activation of receptor tyrosine kinases [RTK;
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) and insulinlike growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR)] or their ligands
[hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) for met]. Many of these cases
may also require re-activation of the MAPK pathway. Once
resistance occurs MEKi alone are ineffective, whereas the
addition of a MEKi to BRAFi appears to re-induce responses
in about 20% of patients. Other approaches include the combination of an MEKi with AKTi; BRAFi with PI3K inhibitor,
BRAFi þ HGF/met inhibitor, and an ERK inhibitor. A different
approach is the combination of an immune activating agent
such as anti-CTLA4, anti-PD1, or interleukin (IL)-2 with a
BRAFi.
Charlotte Ariyan (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY) discussed the potential value of immune
checkpoint blockade. Anti-CTLA4 antibody blockade was the
ﬁrst treatment shown to improve survival in a randomized
control trial in patients with stage IV melanoma. While the
response rates were low, the durability of response was years.
To improve the effects of immunotherapy, combinations with
other drugs are being studied. It was found that BRAFi are not
immunosuppressive and may have stimulatory effects on
vaccine responses in vivo. Characterization of targeted therapies will be needed to optimize combination treatments.

The Use of Liquid Biopsies in Colorectal and
Prostate Cancer
Alberto Bardelli (Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment, Candiolo, Torino, Italy) outlined the mechanisms of
resistance to EGFR-targeted agents in colorectal cancer. To
monitor resistance measurements of tumor DNA in blood,
"liquid biopsies" are used, thus capturing a whole-tumor
marker. Clinical ﬁndings are correlated with results obtained
in mouse colon carcinoma xenografts: K-ras mutations correspond to anti-EGFR resistance. Metastatic colorectal cancers
respond differently to EGFR-targeted agents, and monotherapy with cetuximab and panitumumab is effective only in 10%
to 20% of cases. Oncogenic activation of EGFR downstream
effectors such as KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN has a role on
response to therapy. Predictive biomarkers are translated to
couple EGFR-targeted antibodies to patients.
Johann de Bono (Institute of Cancer Research and Royal
Marsden Hospital, London, UK) discussed prostate cancer
therapy. New agents have improved overall survival, including
2 novel endocrine agents with different mechanisms of action
(abiraterone and enzalutamide), a cytotoxic (cabazitaxel) and
a systemic a-particle emitting radionuclide (Radium 223).
Studies with the CYP17 inhibitor abiraterone and the novel
androgen receptor antagonist enzalutamide have conﬁrmed
that advanced prostate cancer is not hormone refractory; in
patients with castrate cancer, the prostate contains high
hormone concentrations. The personalized prostate cancer
treatment is likely complicated by the intra- and interpatient
heterogeneity of this disease, with more than 20 clonal subtypes of prostate cancer being identiﬁed. Circulating tumor
cells and plasma nucleic acids are being evaluated as multipurpose biomarkers.

Cancer Res; 73(3) February 1, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

1047

Published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236

Marais et al.

BCR-ABL Inhibitors in CML
Giulio Superti-Furga (CeMM Research Center for Molecular
Medicine, Vienna, Austria) discussed the complexity of factors
conditioning drug–target interactions and the activity of a
given drug. Occurrence of the BCR-ABLT315l gatekeeper mutation is one challenge in CML therapy. BCR-ABL inhibitors
have multiple targets and pleiotropic effects with synergistic
potential. A strong synergy between danusertib and bosutinib
exclusively affected CML cells harboring BCR-ABLT315l. Both
compounds targeted MAPK pathways downstream of BCRABL, resulting in impaired activity of c-Myc and downregulation of c-Myc target genes. The contribution of danusertib and
bosutinib could be mimicked individually by speciﬁc MAPK
inhibitors and collectively by downregulation of c-Myc through
Brd4 inhibition.
William Sellers (Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research,
Cambridge, MA) discussed understanding resistance and related applications to drug discovery. Therapeutics against cancer
genetic underpinnings have had clinical impact as shown by
imatinib in BCR-ABL–driven CMLs, erlotinib and geﬁtinib in
EGFR-mutated lung cancer, crizotinib in ALK-translocated
lung cancer, and vemurafenib in BRAF-mutant melanoma. The
efﬁcacy of small-molecule inhibitors of KIT, PDGFR, HER2,
EGFR, BRAF, and ALK in a diversity of malignances including
gastrointestinal stromal tumor, lung cancer, and melanoma
indicates that a new generation of efﬁcacious drugs is emerging. Understanding of resistance has led to second-generation
inhibitors, including nilotinib in imatinib-resistant CML and
then in the ﬁrst-line CML therapy. Targeting BCR-ABL, the
Smoothened receptor, the MET receptor, and the ALK kinase
with novel combinations was discussed.
Thomas O'Hare (University of Utah School of Medicine/
Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT) discussed
resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in CMLs. Imatinib
resistance due to point mutations in the BCR-ABL kinase
domain is largely controlled by nilotinib and dasatinib. The
most problematic point mutation is the frequent BCRABLT315l "gatekeeper" mutation, which is insensitive to all 3
approved therapies. Ponatinib is a high-afﬁnity BCR-ABL TKI
with activity against all known single kinase domain mutants.
However, ponatinib binding is adversely affected by 2 or more
mutations in the same BCR-ABL molecule. BCR-ABL compound mutation resistance proﬁles were established for imatinib, nilotinib, dasatinib, bosutinib, ponatinib, and DCC-2036.
Evidence supporting the hypothesis that ponatinib resistance
will fall into 2 main categories was presented: (i) BCR-ABL
compound mutation–mediated resistance in which BCR-ABL
remains an appropriate sole target and (ii) resistance despite
inhibition of BCR-ABL, requiring concurrent inhibition of
newly identiﬁed co-critical targets.

Correlations of Genomic Changes to Resistance
Roman Thomas (University Hospital Cologne, Cologne,
Germany) indicated that lung cancer therapeutics targeting
speciﬁc signaling pathways activated by genetic lesions have
shown clinical success, as exempliﬁed by EGFR mutations as
well fusions affecting ALK and ROS1. Genetic alterations have

1048

Cancer Res; 73(3) February 1, 2013

also been identiﬁed in squamous cell carcinomas and small cell
lung cancer, which may bear therapeutic potential. Annotating
lung tumor samples with cancer genomics data may enhance
diagnostic resolution by establishing a more biologically oriented, cancer genomics–based taxonomy of lung cancer.
Silvia Buonamici (Novartis) discussed resistance to
smoothened inhibitors. The 12-pass transmembrane protein
Patched (Ptch) inhibits Smoothened (Smo), a G-protein–
coupled receptor (GPCR)-like molecule. When Ptch inhibition is attenuated, Smo signals via a cytosolic complex of
proteins leading to activation of the Gli family of transcription factors. Somatic mutations in Ptch and Smo lead to
constitutive pathway activation and are found in sporadic
medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma (BCC). NVPLDE225 inhibits Smo-dependent signaling in vitro and in
vivo and shows dose-related antitumor activity in genetically
deﬁned medulloblastoma models. Following long-term dosing of NVP-LDE225 in medulloblastoma allograft models,
resistance was observed. Three different mechanisms of
resistance were identiﬁed: chromosomal ampliﬁcation of
Gli2, mutations in Smo, and increased PI3K signaling. Combination of NVP-LDE225 with PI3K/mTOR inhibitors
markedly delayed the development of resistance.

EMT and Microenvironment as Determinants of
Resistance
Rafaella Sordella (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY) discussed lung cancer resistance–targeted
therapy. In lung cancer cell lines resistant to erlotinib EGFR
(EGFR T790M), secondary mutations and MET oncogene
ampliﬁcation were 2 principal mechanisms of acquired resistance. Cells intrinsically resistant to erlotinib displayed features suggesting an EMT. TGF-b–mediated signaling was
sufﬁcient to induce these phenotypes. Increased TGFb–dependent IL-6 secretion unleashed previously addicted
lung tumor cells from their EGFR dependency. Inﬂammation
stimulated IL-6 secretion and decreased tumor response to
erlotinib. Thus, both tumor cell–autonomous mechanisms
and/or activation of tumor microenvironment contributed to
erlotinib resistance; treatments based only on EGFR inhibition
may not be effective in patients with lung cancer harboring
mutant EGFR.
Ben Stanger (University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA)
discussed the dynamics of tumor spread in pancreatic cancer
realizing that metastasis formation is relatively rare. During
stochastic tumor evolution, cells undergo EMT—associated
with the acquisition of stem cell–like features well before frank
malignancy, suggesting that EMT enables early spread of
pancreatic tumor cells. Circulating pancreatic cancer cells
that pass the basement membrane are E-cadherin–negative
and at a premalignant stage. EMT and invasive behavior are
associated with areas of inﬂammation; an inhibitor of inﬂammation (dexamethasone) blocks cell entry into the bloodstream. The importance of soil for the establishment of metastasis was clearly indicated.
David Tuveson (Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge,
UK) discussed how tumor stroma inﬂuences the therapeutic

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236

Twenty-fourth Annual Pezcoller Report

response of pancreatic tumors. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) frequently harbors somatic mutations in 4 genes
(KRAS, p16, tp53, and SMAD4). Transplanted tumor models
have superior tissue perfusion and delivery of gemcitabine
than primary murine PDACs, this inversely correlating with
stromal content. Human PDAC is hypovascular and contains a
compressed residual vasculature. Smoothened inhibitors such
as IPI-926 depleted the PDAC stroma and transiently increased
vascular density and prolonged survival. Systemic administration of polymerized hyaluronidase (PEGPH20) caused dilatation of intratumoral vasculature and delivery of chemotherapy
prolonging survival of mice with PDACs. Alternative targeting the tumor stroma may also be beneﬁcial in PDACs,
including the use of an albumin–paclitaxel formulation, which
elevated the gemcitabine levels in the mouse PDAC tumors.
Paclitaxel elicits the liberation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), which induces the destruction of cytidine deaminase,
the major pathway of gemcitabine inactivation in cells. PDAC
is resistant to VEGF-targeted therapeutics. The Notch pathway
implicated in vessel morphogenesis is inhibited with g-secretase inhibitors, which induced the rapid destabilization of the
PDAC vasculature, promoting the death of intratumoral endothelial cells. These effects were exacerbated by concomitant
exposure to gemcitabine.
Todd Golub (Broad Institute at MIT, Cambridge, MA)
discussed approaches to discovering microenvironmentmediated drug resistance. A coculture system was developed
to systematically assay the ability of 23 stromal cell types
to inﬂuence the innate resistance of 45 cancer cell lines to 35
anticancer drugs. The stroma-mediated resistance of BRAFmutant melanoma to RAF inhibition was characterized.
Stromal secretion of HGF resulted in activation of the HGF
receptor MET, reactivation of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT
pathways, and immediate resistance to RAF inhibition. In
patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma, there was a statistically signiﬁcant correlation between stromal HGF expression and innate resistance to treatment. Dual inhibition of
RAF and MET caused reversal of drug resistance. Thus, the
systematic dissection of tumor–microenvironment interactions may reveal important mechanisms underlying drug
resistance.

oping resistance to the drugs. An inhibitor of mutated
BRAFV600E inhibited serine phosphorylation of IRS1/2
and led to an increase in IRS1/2 levels in BRAFV600E-mutated
451-LU-BR melanoma cells. Melanoma cells that became
resistant to PLX4032 have signiﬁcantly higher levels of IRS1
and/or IRS2 than PLX4032-sensitive melanoma cells. Inhibitors, developed by NovoTyr and the Hebrew University,
induce IRS1/2 phosphorylation on serine residues and degradation of IRS1/2, with long-lasting antitumor effects. The
lead compound inhibited various drug-resistant cancer cell
types and possessed antitumor and anti-metastatic effects
on human melanoma in nude mice.

Best Poster Presentation

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

Hadas Reuveni (NovoTyr Therapeutics Ltd, Tel Hai/Jerusalem Hebrew University, Israel) gave an oral presentation
of an outstanding poster on targeting insulin receptor substrates (IRS) as a therapeutic target for drug-resistant cancers. The phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrates
IRS1/2 on serine residues leads to IRS1/2 degradation.
mTOR and EGFR inhibitors inhibited the phosphorylation
of IRS1. This resulted in the stimulation of the IGF1R-IRS1 to
PKB/Akt pathway, enhancing cancer cell survival and devel-

W. Sellers has employment (other than primary afﬁliation; e.g., consulting) in
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research as VP/Global Head of Oncology; has
ownership interest (including patents) in Novartis Pharmaceuticals; and is a
consultant/advisory board member of MSKCC and St. Jude's Hospital. D.M.
Livingston has employment (other than primary afﬁliation; e.g., consulting) in
Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research as consultant; has a commercial
research grant from Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research; and is a
consultant/advisory board member for Nextech. No potential conﬂicts of
interest were disclosed by the other authors.

www.aacrjournals.org

Summary
A signiﬁcant beneﬁt derived from this meeting was the
unequivocal conﬁrmation that the use of molecular target–
oriented anticancer drugs and combination of drugs can lead
to clinical beneﬁts.
A common theme throughout the symposium was that
resistance to target-oriented agents has heterogeneous molecular mechanisms that are correlated with genetic changes and
that this clearly determines important clinical challenges.
The possibility was emphasized of developing new agents
and combination of agents that would overcome the resistance, determining effects of primary and sequential mutations
and thus restore responses. It was recognized that knowledge
of the mechanisms of drug action and resistance is essential for
a successful development of these treatments.
The use of tumor cells circulating in blood as markers of
response was discussed and compared with the advantages of
the so-called "liquid biopsies," namely, the measurements of
circulating tumor nucleic acid reﬂecting the status of a whole
tumor instead of the partial visualization provided by traditional biopsies. Two other important emerging themes were
that EMT could be the basis of resistance and that the
microenvironment of tumor cells can play an important role
in the development of resistance.
The information discussed supported the possibility of
ultimately developing individualized treatments of cancer
based on knowledge of determinants of drug action and
resistance in individual tumors.

Received August 16, 2012; revised November 10, 2012; accepted November 20,
2012; published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012.

Cancer Res; 73(3) February 1, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

1049

Published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236

Twenty-fourth Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Molecular Basis for
Resistance to Targeted Agents
Richard Marais, William Sellers, David Livingston, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:1046-1049. Published OnlineFirst December 7, 2012.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3236

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

