Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

Review

Cancer
Research

The Microculture-Kinetic (MiCK) Assay: The Role of a Drug-Induced
Apoptosis Assay in Drug Development and Clinical Care
Linda Bosserman1, Franklyn Prendergast2, Roy Herbst3, Martin Fleisher4, Emery Salom5, Steven Strickland6,
Anastasios Raptis10, Allan Hallquist7, Mathieu Perree7, Swapnil Rajurkar1, Misagh Karimi1, Karl Rogers8,
Dirk Davidson9, Carl Willis8, Manuel Penalver5, Howard Homesley12, Matthew Burrell13, Audrey Garrett14,
James Rutledge15, Michael Chernick11, and Cary A. Presant1,7

Abstract
A drug-induced apoptosis assay, termed the microculture-kinetic (MiCK) assay, has been developed. Blinded
clinical trials have shown higher response rates and longer survival in groups of patients with acute myelocytic
leukemia and epithelial ovarian cancer who have been treated with drugs that show high apoptosis in the MiCK
assay. Unblinded clinical trials in multiple tumor types have shown that the assay will be used frequently by
clinicians to determine treatment, and when used, results in higher response rates, longer times to relapse, and
longer survivals. Model economic analyses suggest possible cost savings in clinical use based on increased generic
drug use and single-agent substitution for combination therapies. Two initial studies with drugs in development
are promising. The assay may help reduce costs and speed time to drug approval. Correlative studies with
molecular biomarkers are planned. This assay may have a role both in personalized clinical therapy and in more
efﬁcient drug development. Cancer Res; 72(16); 3901–5. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
Biomarkers that can reliably predict response to chemotherapy and other clinical outcomes, such as time to relapse
and overall survival, have been sought. Such assays would have
uses in both clinical oncology and drug development.
Because most chemotherapy drugs induce cytotoxicity via
apoptosis, researchers have attempted to develop a robust
method that can correlate in vitro drug-induced apoptosis with
clinical outcomes. In this work, we summarize our research to
develop a chemotherapy-induced apoptosis assay [the microculture-kinetic (MiCK) assay; this assay has also been given the
commercial name Correct Chemo].

Assay Methods
For tumor cell preparation, sterile tumor specimens (surgical biopsy, 5 core needle biopsies, effusions, bone marrow, or

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Wilshire Oncology Medical Group-US Oncology, La
Verne, California; 2Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 3Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, Connecticut; 4Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York; 5South Florida Gynecologic Oncology, Coral Gables,
Florida; 6Vanderbilt Cancer Center, 7DiaTech Oncology, and 8NashvilleOncology Associates, Nashville; and 9Tennessee Plateau Oncology, Crossville, Tennessee; 10University of Pittsburgh Medical School, Pittsburgh; and
11
Lankenau Institute of Medicine, Wynnewood, Pennsylvania; 12Wake
Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina;
13
Northside Hospital of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia; 14Sacred Heart Medical
Center, Eugene, Oregon; and 15Data Vision, Dayton, Ohio
Corresponding Author: Linda Bosserman, Wilshire Oncology Medical
Group-US Oncology, 1502 Arrow Highway, La Verne, CA 91750. Phone:
214-448-4250; Fax: 972-378-0378; E-mail: bestchemo@gmail.com
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

blood) are sent via overnight delivery to the DiaTech Oncology
Laboratory in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Neoplastic cells are
puriﬁed from the solid tumors, effusions, or marrow by a series
of steps (proprietary process; DiaTech Oncology).
After puriﬁcation, each tumor cell preparation is analyzed by
a pathologist using cytospin preparations and immunocytochemical stains. To be evaluable, each specimen must achieve
at least 90% pure tumor cell content and 90% viability by trypan
blue exclusion.
Human JURL-MK2 chronic leukemia in blast crisis cell line
(DSMZ) is used as a positive control for MiCK assays performed with patient tumor cells. RPMI-1640 medium without
phenol red is used, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
100 U/mL of penicillin, and 100 mg/mL of streptomycin. Cell
counts and viability are evaluated by trypan blue dye exclusion.
The procedure used for the MiCK assay for apoptosis was
adapted from a previously described method (1, 2). After
overnight incubation, chemotherapy drugs are added to 96well or 384-well plates in 2.5 mL (384-well) or 5 mL (96-well)
aliquots. The number of drugs or drug combinations and the
number of concentrations tested depend on the number of
viable malignant cells that are isolated from the tumor specimen. The drug concentrations (determined by molarity) are
those indicated by the manufacturer as the desired blood level
concentration  1 serial dilution if enough cells are available.
Following drug addition, the plate is incubated for 30 minutes
at 37 C in a 5% carbon dioxide humidiﬁed atmosphere incubator. Each well is then overlaid with sterile mineral oil, and the
plate is placed into the incubator chamber of a microplate
spectrophotometric reader (BioTek Instruments). The apparent optical density (OD) at 600 nm is read and recorded every 5
minutes over a period of 48 hours. Apparent OD increases,

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3901

Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

Bosserman et al.

which correlate with apoptosis, are converted to kinetic units
(KU) of apoptosis by means of proprietary software (ProApo)
according to a previously described formula (3–6).
A typical apoptotic curve generated by the MiCK assay has
an initial steep component followed by a plateau and/or
decreasing portion of the curve when measuring OD versus
time. The initial steep rise in the curve, where apoptosis is
measured, is associated with the increased OD. This is primarily associated with the blebbing of the cell membrane, and
in part to cytoplasmic and nuclear condensation. The resulting
decline and/or plateau of the OD curve indicate various stages
of cell disintegration. During apoptosis, intercellular bridges
may be apparent on phase-contrast light microscopies, which
can also contribute to the apparent OD. The apoptotic curve is
illustrated in Fig. 1A.

Figure 1. MiCK assay on breast cancer cells isolated from a lymph node of
a 73-year-old patient. A, OD variation versus time of untreated cells
(control) and cells cultured with 2 different concentrations of 4HC and
doxorubicin. The control curve shows a slight decrease of OD over time.
Apoptosis in the drug-treated cells is shown by the increase of OD over 16
hours with low doses and over 4 hours with the higher concentrations.
Higher drug concentrations induce more apoptosis, as seen in the
steeper slope. B, overall response in KU of apoptosis in breast cancer
cells cultured with various drugs and combinations. For ease of
interpretation, only the highest response is shown for the drug
combinations (B, combo column, far right). The highest drug-induced
apoptosis is observed with 4HC plus doxorubicin (5.0 KU), as shown in B.
4HC, 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide.

3902

Cancer Res; 72(16) August 15, 2012

In the assay, active apoptosis is indicated as >1.0 KU. A drug
that produces 1 KU is deﬁned as inactive, and the tumor cells
are considered to be resistant to that drug (based on previous
laboratory correlations of KU with other markers of druginduced cytotoxicity, such as growth in culture and thymidine
uptake).
The MiCK assay results obtained in blinded clinical trials
were not sent to the submitting clinical investigators and
treating physicians. Results from unblinded clinical trials or
specimens used for routine clinical care were sent to the
submitting physician within 72 hours of specimen submission.
An example of a clinical report is shown in Fig. 1B.

Correlation of the MiCK Assay with Clinical
Outcomes
Initial clinical trials in acute leukemia showed the feasibility of
the MiCK assay (4, 5). These early trials were the basis for
conducting prospective trials of the assay. A blinded, prospective, multicenter clinical trial was conducted in patients with
acute myelocytic leukemia (AML). Bone marrow and/or blood
samples from patients with AML who were to undergo induction
chemotherapy were submitted for the assay. Because this was a
blinded trial, the clinicians never knew the results of the in vitro
assay. The outcomes were correlated with the results of induction chemotherapy with the standard regimen of anthracyclines
for 3 days and cytarabine for 7 days. The results (Strickland S,
unpublished data) indicate a good correlation between
idarubicin-induced apoptosis in vitro and clinical outcomes of
complete response and overall survival. In patients with an
intermediate or favorable AML karyotype, there was a trend
toward improved relapse-free survival, although this was not
statistically signiﬁcant. Multivariant analyses indicated that the
only signiﬁcant variable that correlated with the improvement in
overall survival was the level of idarubicin-induced apoptosis.
The assay was then studied in solid tumors. A blinded,
prospective, multi-institutional trial was conducted in ovarian
carcinoma. Specimens from patients who had undergone a
resection or tumor biopsy were submitted to the laboratory for
MiCK assay. Because this was a blinded study, the physicians
never knew the results of the in vitro assay. The physicians used
whatever adjuvant therapy they believed was indicated (standard therapy, nonstandard chemotherapy, or even no therapy).
The patients' clinical outcomes were correlated with the in
vitro response to the chemotherapy that was used (7; unpublished data). The group of patients who received a chemotherapy that produced the highest chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in the MiCK assay experienced signiﬁcantly longer overall
survival rates and time to relapse. If the patients received a
chemotherapy that showed substantial drug-induced apoptosis in the assay, signiﬁcantly higher rates of complete or partial
response to chemotherapy were observed.
The assay was then tested in a nonblinded clinical trial to
determine the pattern of physician usage with the MiCK assay
(8). A wide variety of tumor specimens from 44 patients were
submitted for MiCK assay. The assay results were sent to the
treating physician, who then had the option to use the results of
the MiCK assay or to disregard them in developing a treatment

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

A Novel Apoptosis Assay with Improved Patient Outcomes

plan and administering the treatment to the patient. The use
of the MiCK assay to determine chemotherapy was correlated
with clinical outcomes in the patients. The results indicated
that 64% of the physicians used the MiCK assay to determine
the treatment plan. If the physicians used the assay to determine the chemotherapy treatment plan, a plan for proprietary
drug therapy was changed to generic therapy 57% of the time,
and generic drugs were changed to proprietary drugs in 11%
of cases. In 36% of those patients, the assay was used with other
information (e.g., hormonal therapy based on estrogen receptor status or trastuzumab therapy based on Her2 testing).
In 50% of the patients, the treatment plan was changed by
physicians as a result of the MiCK assay.
Outcomes of treatment were improved when the physicians
used the assay results (Table 1). The response rate (complete
and partial responses) was higher when the assay was used by
the physician (44% compared with a response rate of 6.7% if the
assay was not used; P < 0.02). Furthermore, the relapse-free
interval was signiﬁcantly longer when the assay was used by
the oncologist (8.6 months compared with 4.0 months if the
assay was not used; P < 0.01). Most importantly, overall survival
was signiﬁcantly longer (10.1 months if the assay was used to
develop the treatment plan compared with 4.1 months if the
assay was not used; P ¼ 0.02).
These results suggest that the MiCK assay may be useful for
improving physician decision-making. The clinical settings
may include selection of adjuvant chemotherapy [e.g., deciding among breast cancer adjuvant chemotherapy regimens
such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-ﬂuorouracil
(5-FU; CMF) vs. cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and paclitaxel (AC-T) vs. doxetaxel plus cyclophosphamide (TC) vs.
cyclophosphamide, epirubicin, and 5-FU (FEC)], selection of
therapy for initial tumor recurrence or metastasis (e.g., deciding among colorectal cancer regimens such as FOLFOX vs.
FOLFIRI vs. XELOX vs. 5-FU þ leucovorin), and selection of
therapy for heavily pretreated patients (e.g., deciding among
non–small cell cancer regimens such as docetaxel vs. vinorelbine vs. gemcitabine vs. 2 drug combinations vs. phase I
studies vs. supportive care only).

Table 1. Comparison of clinical outcomes
according to physician use of the drug-induced
apoptosis assay in patients with measurable
disease
MiCK assay used MiCK assay
by oncologist
not used
Patients, n
Response rate
(complete response þ
partial response)
Relapse-free
interval (median)
Overall
survival (median)

www.aacrjournals.org

25
11/25 (44%)
P < 0.02

15
1/15 (6.7%)

8.6 months
P < 0.01

4.0 months

10.1 months
P ¼ 0.02

4.1 months

Impact of the MiCK Assay on Drug Development
Two laboratory trials were conducted to determine the
potential use of the MiCK drug-induced apoptosis assay in drug
development. In one trial, leukemia cell lines were used to test
a new drug (drug A) for a pharmaceutical company (unpublished proprietary information). In the HL60 leukemia line,
drug A produced signiﬁcantly more apoptosis (5.9 KU compared
with 2.7 KU for idarubicin and 2.8 KU for daunorubicin). In
contrast, in the Ramos Burkitt cell line, apoptosis induced by
drug A (6.5 KU) was similar to that induced by daunorubicin
(5.9 KU) but inferior to that produced by idarubicin (8.5 KU).
In a second study, 2 colon cancer cell lines were used to test
pemetrexed activity (9). In both HT29 and LOVO cell lines,
pemetrexed and gemcitabine were inactive, but oxaliplatin
showed good drug-induced apoptosis. However, the combination of pemetrexed plus gemcitabine produced more apoptosis
compared with oxaliplatin, indicating drug synergy.
Although the validation of in vitro results in cell lines by
correlating those results with clinical outcomes in patients
awaits further study, early results indicate a potential for the
assay to be used at several points in drug development. The
assay could be used to screen drugs preclinically with different
cell lines, to screen human tumor specimens for activity of a new
drug alone or combined with standard drugs compared with
standard drugs alone, to select tumor types for clinical trials
based on in vitro activity of the new drug in human tumor
specimens or tumor cell lines, and to select appropriate patients
for phase I, II, or III clinical trials. The ability to more carefully
focus clinical trials on patients who have a greater chance of
responding to a new drug should shorten the time from drug
discovery to U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval based
on pivotal randomized prospective clinical trials.

Cost Reduction
The results of the assay were used to model possible
chemotherapy cost reductions in 2 settings. The ﬁrst model
was based on different patterns of physician drug use if the
MiCK assay was used to select chemotherapy (10). The claims
records of chemotherapy expenditures by a large, self-insured
employer were used as a baseline control. It was predicted that
if physicians had used the best chemotherapeutic drug based
on the MiCK assay together with appropriate biotherapy, a 49%
reduction in chemotherapy costs (drug plus supportive care
plus administration) compared with the cost of the chemotherapy that was actually used would have been achieved.
In a second modeling study (currently in progress), investigators are evaluating the possible drug savings that can be
realized when clinicians use the MiCK assay to develop treatment plans incorporating the best chemotherapy (with either
generic multisource drugs or proprietary single-source drugs)
in recurrent cancers. These model studies justify prospective
clinical trials to speciﬁcally compare outcomes and drug costs
between groups of patients receiving therapy based on the
MiCK assay and patients whose therapy has been determined
without the use of a MiCK assay (unpublished data, clinical
trials in progress at United Healthcare and Walter Reed
National Military Medical Center; NCT00286845).

Cancer Res; 72(16) August 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3903

Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

Bosserman et al.

Correlation with Molecular Biomarkers
There is overwhelming interest in the development of molecular biomarkers associated with the choice of chemotherapy.
Frequently, this involves testing of archival specimens for the
presence of molecular abnormalities. Because such molecular
changes may evolve over time, the correlation between molecular biomarkers and drug response and clinical outcomes may
also change over time. The MiCK assay is currently being
compared with molecular biomarker analyses to determine
the correlations between in vitro molecular biomarker patterns
and patterns of chemotherapy-induced apoptosis.
However, recent observations in renal cell carcinomas indicate substantial tumor cell heterogeneity in molecular genetic
changes between the primary tumor site and metastatic sites
(11). Because of this mutational intratumor heterogeneity, the
phenotypic chemotherapy-induced apoptosis MiCK assay may
provide more theranostic information relevant to treatment
decisions.

Comparison of the MiCK Assay with
Chemotherapy Sensitivity and Resistance
Assays
Clinicians and investigators frequently compare the MiCK
assay with previously published chemotherapy sensitivity and
resistance assays (12–14). However, the MiCK assay is a novel
analysis that differs from such previous technologies in substantial ways. Tumor cell puriﬁcation is more rigorous in the
MiCK assay, reducing confounding chemical or membrane
changes from nonneoplastic cells. The cellular and intercellular phenomena associated with apoptosis and cell death are
more comprehensively measured by the MiCK assay, reducing
the possibility of misinterpreting reversible chemical or membrane changes as irreversible cell death. Because the MiCK
assay measures phenotypic changes of apoptosis continuously
every 5 minutes for 24 to 48 hours, compared with only one
analytic time point in chemoresistance assays, it can more
accurately determine irreversible cell death associated with
chemotherapy. Despite studies suggesting some correlation
between drug sensitivity and clinical outcomes (12), the lack of
a consistent correlation between previous chemotherapy sensitivity/resistance assays and clinical outcomes is reﬂected in
clinical reviews in the literature (13) and the conclusion by in
the American Society of Clinical Oncology assessment conclusions (14) that prior assays are not sufﬁciently robust to
warrant general use. Because the MiCK assay was not evaluated in prior reviews, and because it is signiﬁcantly different

from chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance assays, it must
be evaluated separately from other tests.

Conclusions
The MiCK chemotherapy-induced apoptosis assay is promising. Future studies are warranted and will be focused on
prospectively testing different types of tumors as well as larger
numbers of patients. Prospective, randomized, multicenter
clinical trials are currently in development to compare patients
whose therapy has been selected based on the MiCK assay with
patients receiving standard therapy. Such prospective, blinded,
multicenter studies will probably be focused on patients with
breast, colorectal, or non–small cell lung cancer who will
receive chemotherapy for ﬁrst tumor recurrence or for ﬁrst
presentation with metastatic cancer. Patients will randomly
receive standard chemotherapy versus the best chemotherapy
based on the MiCK assay.
The MiCK assay may have value in reducing the time and
costs required for drug development, improving clinical outcomes, and possibly reducing the costs of oncologic care.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
A. Hallquist and M. Perree are employed by DiaTech Oncology. F. Prendergast,
R. Herbst, M. Fleisher, J. Rutledge, M. Chernick, and C.A. Presant are paid
consultants of DiaTech Oncology. C.A. Presant serves as Director of Medical
Oncology for DiaTech Oncology. F. Prendergast, R. Herbst, M. Perree, A. Hallquist, M. Perree, and C.A. Presant have stock options in DiaTech Oncology. The
Wilshire Oncology Medical Group receives direct research grant funding from
DiaTech Oncology (L. Bosserman, S. Rajurkar, and C.A. Presant are employed by
Wilshire Oncology Medical Group but do not receive direct research grant
funding from DiaTech Oncology). E. Salom, S. Strickland, A. Raptis, K. Rogers, D.
Davidson, C. Willis, M. Perree, H. Homesley, M. Burrell, and A. Garrett receive
research grant funding from DiaTech Oncology.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: L. Bosserman, R. Herbst, S. Rajurkar, C.A. Presant
Development of methodology: L. Bosserman, A. Raptis, A. Hallquist, M. Perree,
S. Rajurkar, M. Chernick, C.A. Presant
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): L. Bosserman, R. Herbst, A. Raptis, M. Perree, M.
Karimi, K. Rogers, C. Willis, M. Penalver, M. Burrell, A. Garrett, C.A. Presant
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): L. Bosserman, A. Raptis, A. Hallquist, K. Rogers, M.
Penalver, J. Rutledge, C.A. Presant
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: L. Bosserman, F.
Prendergast, R. Herbst, M. Fleisher, E. Salom, S. Strickland, A. Raptis, A. Hallquist,
M. Perree, S. Rajurkar, M. Karimi, K. Rogers, M. Penalver, H. Homesley, A. Garrett,
J. Rutledge, M. Chernick, C.A. Presant
Administrative, technical, or material support: L. Bosserman, A. Hallquist,
C.A. Presant
Study supervision: L. Bosserman, M. Perree, S. Rajurkar, D. Davidson, C.A.
Presant
Received February 22, 2012; revised April 2, 2012; accepted April 13, 2012;
published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012.

References
1.
2.

3.

3904

Kravtsov VD, Fabian I. Automated monitoring of apoptosis in suspension cell cultures. Lab Invest 1996;74:557–70.
Kravtsov VD. A novel microculture kinetic assay (MiCK assay) for
malignant cell growth and chemosensitivity. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:
1564–70.
Kravtsov VD, Daniel TO, Koury MJ. Comparative analysis of different
methodological approaches to the in vitro study of drug-induced
apoptosis. Am J Pathol 1999;155:1327–39.

Cancer Res; 72(16) August 15, 2012

4.

5.

6.

Kravtsov VD, Greer J, Shyr Y, Haselton J, Whitlock JA, Goodman S,
et al. Prediction of survival in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Blood
2001;98:214b.
Kravtsov VD, Greer JP, Whitlock JA, Koury MJ. Use of the microculture
kinetic assay of apoptosis to determine chemosensitivities of leukemias. Blood 1998;92:968–80.
Ballard KS, Homesley HD, Hodson C, Presant CA, Rutledge J, Hallquist A, et al. Endometrial carcinoma in vitro chemosensitivity testing

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

A Novel Apoptosis Assay with Improved Patient Outcomes

of single and combination chemotherapy regimens using the novel
microculture kinetic apoptosis assay: implications for endometrial
cancer treatment. J Gynecol Oncol 2010;21:45–9.
7. Salom EM, Penalver M, Homesley HD, Presant CA, Rutledge J, Burrell
MO, et al. Can we increase response rate (RR) and overall survival (OS)
by individualizing chemotherapy in ovarian cancer (OC): the role of new
chemotherapy (CT) induced apoptosis assay. J Clin Oncol 28:15s,
2010 (suppl; abstr 5112).
8. Bosserman LD, Rajurkar SP, Rogers K, Davidson DC, Chernick M,
Hallquist A, et al. Correlation of drug-induced apoptosis assay results
with oncologist treatment decisions and patient response and survival.
Cancer 2012 Feb 21. [Epub ahead of print].
9. Schultz R, Rothenberg M, Koury M, Hankins W, Kravtsov V. Sequence
dependence using combinations of Alimta (pemetrexed sodium
LY231514, MTA), gemcitabine and oxaliplatin in human colorectal
carcinoma cell lines [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 11th NCIEORTC-AACR Symposium on New Drugs in Cancer; 2000 Nov 7–
10; Amsterdam, Netherlands.
10. Latimer G, Presant CA, Hallquist A, Perree M, Agapitos D. The
value of personalized treatment planning: cost savings by the

www.aacrjournals.org

11.

12.

13.

14.

microculture kinetic chemosensitivity assay, evidence from a large
American self-insured company. J Clin Oncol 2009;27 (suppl;
abstr e17).
Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D,
Gronroos E, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution
revealed by multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med 2012;366:
883–92.
€ hler C, Neuber K, Thoelke A, Ulrich J,
Ugurel S, Schadendorf D, Pfo
et al.Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group. In vitro drug sensitivity predicts response and survival after individualized sensitivitydirected chemotherapy in metastatic melanoma: a multicenter phase II
trial of the Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group. Clin Cancer
Res 2006;12:5454–63.
Samson DJ, Seidenfeld J, Ziegler K, Aronson N. Chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance assays: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol
2004;22:3618–30.
Burstein HJ, Mangu PB, Somerﬁeld MR, Schrag D, Samson D, Holt L,
et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline
update on the use of chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance assays.
J Clin Oncol 2011;29:3328–30.

Cancer Res; 72(16) August 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

3905

Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

The Microculture-Kinetic (MiCK) Assay: The Role of a Drug-Induced
Apoptosis Assay in Drug Development and Clinical Care
Linda Bosserman, Franklyn Prendergast, Roy Herbst, et al.
Cancer Res 2012;72:3901-3905. Published OnlineFirst August 3, 2012.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0681

Cited articles

This article cites 11 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/16/3901.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

