Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Melatonin antiproliferative effects require active mitochondrial
function in embryonal carcinoma cells
Rute Loureiro1, Silvia Magalhães-Novais1,2, Katia A. Mesquita1,2, Ines Baldeiras1,3,
Isabel S. Sousa1,2, Ludgero C. Tavares1,2, Ines A. Barbosa1, Paulo J. Oliveira1,
Ignacio Vega-Naredo1,4
1

CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal

2

Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal

3

School of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal

4

Department of Morphology and Cell Biology, University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain

Correspondence to:
Ignacio Vega-Naredo, e-mail: naredo@gmail.com
Keywords: melatonin, mitochondria, metabolism, dichloroacetate, cancer stem cells
Received: January 19, 2015      Accepted: May 08, 2015      Published: May 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Although melatonin oncostatic and cytotoxic effects have been described in
different types of cancer cells, the specific mechanisms leading to its antitumoral effects
and their metabolic context specificity are still not completely understood. Here, we
evaluated the effects of melatonin in P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells (CSCs) and
in their differentiated counterparts, cultured in either high glucose medium or in a
galactose (glucose-free) medium which leads to glycolytic suppression and increased
mitochondrial metabolism. We found that highly glycolytic P19 CSCs were less
susceptible to melatonin antitumoral effects while cell populations relying on oxidative
metabolism for ATP production were more affected. The observed antiproliferative
action of melatonin was associated with an arrest at S-phase, decreased oxygen
consumption, down-regulation of BCL-2 expression and an increase in oxidative
stress culminating with caspase-3-independent cell death. Interestingly, the combined
treatment of melatonin and dichloroacetate had a synergistic effect in cells grown in
the galactose medium and resulted in an inhibitory effect in the highly resistant P19
CSCs. Melatonin appears to exert its antiproliferative activity in P19 carcinoma cells
through a mitochondrially-mediated action which in turn allows the amplification of
the effects of dichloroacetate, even in cells with a more glycolytic phenotype.

well as regulation of cell death [9] and autophagy [10], and
an intrinsic antitumoral activity [11]. Due to the multitude
of its actions, a role in maintaining healthy aging has been
ascribed to melatonin [12].
Two models have been proposed to explain tumor
heterogeneity: the stochastic model that assumes that
all cancerous cells have the ability to proliferate and
regenerate a tumor [13] and the cancer stem cell model that
hypothesizes that similarly to normal tissues, tumors are
composed of a mixed population of cells at varying states
of differentiation. These differentiated cancer cells (dCCs)
are typically unable to initiate a tumor and normally derive
from stem-like counterparts with the ability to proliferate
indefinitely. Recently, a new cancer stem cell hypothesis

INTRODUCTION
Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine), the main
pineal hormone that relays light/ dark cycle information to
the circadian system, can also be produced in other tissues
[1]. Melatonin amphiphilic characteristics allow it to
reach any cell, compartment or body fluid [2]. Besides its
well-known functions in circadian and seasonal rhythms,
melatonin and its metabolites also decrease oxidative
stress by acting both as direct free radical scavenger and
by stimulating the activity and expression of antioxidant
enzymes [3–6]. Additionally, several other activities have
been attributed to melatonin: the regulation of the immune
system [7], the modulation of mitochondrial activity [8], as

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17081

Oncotarget

suggests that cancer stem cells could be mostly originated
from stochastic effects during DNA replication in normal
adult stem cells [14]. Regardless of the true mechanism,
cancer stem cells are considered the driving force
behind cancer development and progression. It is believed
that cancer stem cell differentiation leads to the production
of multiple lineages ultimately forming the tumor bulk
[15]. In this regard, cancer stem cells have emerged as
an important chemotherapeutic target, as their ability to
evade treatments provides a likely explanation for tumor
re-growth. Although cancer stem cells were only initially
described in 1997 for acute myeloid leukemia [16], they
have been further identified and isolated from bone marrow,
brain, breast, pancreas, skin, neck, nervous system, colon
and prostate cancers [17, 18]. Approaches to eliminate
cancer stem cells and avoid tumor re-growth include the
depletion of tumor blood supply, differentiation therapies,
developmental signaling pathways, DNA checkpoint
proteins, and modulation of the cellular redox state [18–20].
P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells (CSCs)
constitute an appropriate model for the study of cancer
stem cell maintenance and differentiation. In fact, upon its
loss of pluripotency through differentiation with retinoic
acid these cells retain their immortalized phenotype [21,
22]. We had previously observed that P19 CSCs possess
specific mitochondrial and metabolic properties that are
altered during cell differentiation. These properties are
inter-connected with pluripotency and resistance to the
mitochondrial agent dichloroacetate. Thus, the stimulation
of mitochondrial activity by culturing P19 stem cells in
galactose (glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvate- containing
medium reduced their glycolytic phenotype and
stemness, triggered cell differentiation, and increased the
susceptibility of P19 cells to dichloroacetate [23].
Although sufficient evidence supports the antitumoral
function of melatonin in some tumor types [24], little is
known about the functional effects of this indolamine in
cancer cells expressing a stem cell-like phenotype and,
particularly, how that effect depends on mitochondrial
activity. In general, factors which allow melatonin to
recognize context specificity and induce apoptosis in some
types of cancer cells only are not completely known [24].
In the present study, we analyze the effect of melatonin
in the P19 CSCs model which allows testing the effect
of different molecules in distinct metabolic contexts and
stemness stages. Interestingly, we found that only cells
relying on a more oxidative metabolism for ATP production
were susceptible to melatonin. Thus, this work aims the
understanding of the mechanisms that make these cells
vulnerable to melatonin in comparison with their glycolytic
counterparts.

degrees of pluripotency, differentiation and mitochondrial
activity [23].

Melatonin decreased P19 cell mass only when
oxidative metabolism was used for
ATP production
To assess the effect of different concentrations of
melatonin (0.001, 0.01, 0.1 and 1 mM) on P19 four stages
of differentiation (Glu-CSCs, Glu-dCCs, Gal-CSCs and
Gal-dCCs), cell mass was evaluated after 24, 48, 72 and
96 hours of treatment. The decreasing effect of melatonin
on cell mass was dependent on the medium used for
cell growth. At 72 hours of incubation, 1 mM melatonin
significantly decreased Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs cell mass,
which was more evident in Gal-dCCs (Figure 1A). In fact,
the concentration required for half maximal inhibitory
effect was considerably lower in Gal-dCCs than in GalCSCs (Table 1).
The trypan blue dye exclusion assay was carried out
to determine the effects on cell viability after 72 hours
of treatment with 0.1 and 1 mM melatonin (Figure 1B).
Hence, only cells cultured in galactose (glucose-free),
glutamine/pyruvate- containing media which relied
more in oxidative metabolism for ATP production were
susceptible to 1 mM melatonin (p < 0.01). Considering
these observations, one can ask what makes these cells
more susceptible to melatonin in comparison to their high
glucose medium counterparts.

Melatonin reduced intracellular calcium
concentration and induced S-phase arrest
in P19 cells grown in the modified
galactose-containing media
In order to verify whether the effect of melatonin was
mediated by any alteration on cell cycle progression, flow
cytometry analysis with propidium iodide was performed
in the four groups of P19 cells treated with melatonin (0.1
and 1 mM) during 72 hours. As expected, all differentiated
P19 cell groups generated by either the addition of retinoic
acid (Glu-dCCs, Gal-dCCs) or by culture in the modified
galactose-containing medium (Gal-CSCs), presented
differences regarding cell cycle progression when
compared to the undifferentiated group. Thereby, Gal-CSCs
significantly increased the percentage of cells in G1/G0
phase at expenses of reducing cells at S-phase (p < 0.001
vs. Glu-CSCs). Moreover, P19 Glu-dCCs presented an arrest
on G2/M phase (p < 0.001) when compared to their stem
counterpart (Glu-CSCs). Similarly, P19 Gal-dCCs prolonged
its G2/M phase at the expense of a reduction on G1/G0 phase
(p < 0.05) when compared to Gal-CSCs. Therefore, when
compared to the groups previously shown to be more resistant
to melatonin (P19 cells grown on high glucose medium), all
other groups of P19 cells showed a significant decrease in
S-phase after treatment with melatonin.

RESULTS
The P19 cell model allows testing the effects of
melatonin on the same cancer cell line within different
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17082

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Melatonin showed antiproliferative effects only in P19 cells which were reliable in oxidative metabolism
for ATP production. Melatonin effects on cell viability were measured in the four types of P19 cells: stem (CSCs) and differentiated

(dCCs) lines, growing in glucose (Glu) and in modified galactose (Gal)-containing media. A. The sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay shows a
cytotoxic effect of 1mM melatonin in Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs. Data represent the average percentage of SRB absorbance with respective
time 0 ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 vs. control. B. Cell viability determined
by trypan blue dye exclusion assay after 72 hours of treatment with melatonin confirms the resistance of P19 cells cultured in high glucose
medium. Data are expressed as percentage of live cells ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. * vs. control; a vs. Glu-CSCs.
C. Cell cycle was analyzed by flow cytometry using propidium iodide in the four types of P19 cancer cells, untreated (Ctr) and treated with
melatonin (0.1 and 1 mM) during 72 hours. Data are expressed as percentage of cells in G1/G0, S and G2/M ± SEM from three independent
experiments. D. Intracellular levels of free calcium were detected by Fluo-4 fluorescence. Data are means ± SEM from at least three
separate experiments. Statistical comparisons: * vs. Ctr; a vs. Glu-CSCs; b vs. Gal-CSCs; c vs. Glu-dCCs. The number of symbols marks
the level of statistical significance: one for p < 0.05, two for p < 0.01, and three for p < 0.001.

Melatonin altered mitochondrial membrane
potential, oxygen consumption and ATP
content in P19 cells

The effect of melatonin on cell cycle progression
was dependent on the metabolic and differentiation status
of the cells. In this regard, 1 mM melatonin 72 hours
treatment induced an arrest at G2/M and G1/G0 phases
respectively for the resistant Glu-CSCs and Glu-dCCs
groups (p < 0.05). On the other hand, 1 mM melatonin
induced an arrest at S-phase in both P19 cell groups
cultured in galactose (glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvatecontaining medium (p < 0.001) at expenses of reducing the
number of cells on G2/M phase for Gal-CSCs, and on G1/
G0 phase for Gal-dCCs (Figure 1C).
Melatonin modulates calcium homeostasis [25], a
critical step to maintain a regular cell cycle progression.
The four groups of P19 cells showed different basal
levels of intracellular free calcium, being the highest
concentration observed in P19 cells grown in galactose
(glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvate- containing medium.
In these groups of P19 cells cultured in the modified
galactose media, 1 mM melatonin along 72 hours
treatment resulted in decreased amount of free calcium
(p < 0.05) in clear contrast to the results in the resistant
Glu-CSCs (Figure 1D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Considering that the antiproliferative action of
melatonin was only observed in P19 cells with active
mitochondrial metabolism, we propose that this effect may
be mediated through a direct interaction with the referred
organelle.
In all P19 cell groups, melatonin increased
mitochondrial membrane potential, reaching significant
values with 1 mM melatonin for both groups of CSCs
(Glu-CSCs and Gal-CSCs) and with 0.1 mM melatonin for
both dCCs groups (Figure 2A). Since the mitochondrion
couples the maintenance of mitochondrial membrane
potential with electron transport in the respiratory chain
and with ATP synthesis, we next measured mitochondrial
respiration. Figure 2B shows no effects on basal
oxygen consumption in glycolytic Glu-CSCs treated
with melatonin. In contrast, melatonin decreased basal
respiration of more oxidative cells (Glu-dCCs, Gal-CSCs,
Gal-dCCs), which was especially relevant for cells grown
17083

Oncotarget

Table 1: Computing simulation for obtaining the half maximal inhibitory concentration and the
combination index in P19 cells treated with dichloroacetate (DCA) and melatonin (MEL)
IC50(mM)

CI

MEL

DCA

10 mM DCA + 0.1 mM MEL

10 mM DCA + 1 mM MEL

Glu-CSCs

n/a

52.915

n/a

n/a

Glu-dCCs

n/a

9.955

n/a

n/a

Gal-CSCs

1.930

19.988

0.954

0.273

Gal-dCCa

0.024

14.360

2.052

0.496

Dose-response values IC50 (dose required for median effect) and the combination index (CI) were obtained with CompuSyn
software for drug combinations and for general dose effect analysis, using data from cell mass studies in P19 embryonal
carcinoma stem cells (CSCs) and differentiated cancer cells (dCCs) grown in glucose media (Glu) and in glucose-free
galactose-containing media (Gal). The CI value reflects the extent of synergy or antagonism: CI < 0.9, synergy; 0.9 < CI
< 1.1, additive effect; CI > 1.1, antagonism. n/a: not applicable.
in galactose medium (p < 0.01). Interestingly, 10 μM
FCCP increased oxygen consumption only in Glu-CSCs
(p < 0.001) and did not increase oxygen consumption up
to a similar maximal capacity in melatonin-treated groups
which were shown to have decreased basal respiration
levels. Furthermore, although basal oxygen consumption
was not affected by melatonin in Glu-CSCs, the addition of
FCCP to cells treated with 1 mM melatonin did not result
in increased respiration, suggesting that melatonin impairs
respiration even in the high glycolytic and resistant GluCSCs. Overall, these results point out for a direct action
of melatonin on the mitochondrial electron transport
chain in all groups of P19 cells, especially in those with
an active oxidative metabolism. Conversely, its effects on
the mitochondrial transmembrane electric potential suggest
another target. Intriguingly, 1 mM melatonin significantly
increased ATP content in Glu-CSCs, Gal-CSCs and GaldCCs (Figure 2C). Despite this, both ADP and AMP levels,
as well as energy charge and the percentage of ATP in the
total adenine nucleotide pool remained unchanged after
treatment with melatonin in the four groups of P19 cells.

groups compared to their corresponding controls (p < 0.001),
especially in cells cultured in galactose medium (Figure
2D). This effect may be related with the ability of melatonin
to decrease the proliferation rate of highly oxidative cells.
Intriguingly, although 0.1 mM melatonin also impacted
oxygen consumption of cells cultured in galactose media,
this concentration also exhibited an antioxidant effect.
Since excessive ROS production by mitochondria
plays a preponderant role in mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabilization, we investigated alterations
in BCL-2 and BAX protein content. We found no
changes in BAX content in whole-cell extracts in any
of the analyzed cell groups. However, melatonin-treated
cells cultured in galactose media showed a decreased
content of the antiapoptotic protein BCL-2, while this
effect was not found when cells were grown in high
glucose media (Figure 3A). The observed decrease of
BCL-2 content in melatonin-treated and galactosecultured cells suggests that the intrinsic apoptotic
pathway may have been activated. However, our data
did not show the expected increase in caspase-3-like
activity (Figure 3B). Interestingly, untreated Gal-CSCs
show the highest activity of caspase-3 when compared
to Glu-CSCs (p < 0.001). This observation may occur
as consequence of the forced metabolic remodeling and
its associated differentiation process induced by the
galactose (glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvate- containing
medium. Nonetheless, the calcein-AM and propidium
iodide Live/Dead assay confirmed that 1 mM melatonin
increases the percentage of dead cells (calcein-/
propidium iodide+) in cell populations with higher
mitochondrial metabolism (Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs;
p < 0.001). Moreover, this effect was also detected in
Glu-dCCs (p <0.001) where a tendency for decreased
viability was measured by the trypan blue assay. Finally,
0.1 mM melatonin also increased the percentage of dead
cells but only in cells grown in galactose (glucose-free),
glutamine/pyruvate- containing medium (Figure 3C).

Melatonin showed a pro-oxidant effect,
reduced BCL-2 expression and induced a
caspase-3-independent cell death in P19 cells
with oxidative metabolism
The disruption of the mitochondrial electron transport
chain results in a higher reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production [26]. Differentiated P19 cells (Glu-dCCs and
Gal-dCCs) presented higher malondialdehyde (MDA)
content, a classical marker of oxidative stress, when
compared to their stem counterparts (p < 0.001). Similarly,
cells cultured in galactose (glucose-free), glutamine/
pyruvate- containing media (Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs) also
presented higher MDA content than their high glucosecultured counterparts. Despite these basal differences, 1 mM
melatonin significantly increased MDA levels in all P19 cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17084

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Melatonin altered mitochondrial membrane potential, oxygen consumption and ATP production in P19
cells. A. Accumulation of the potentiometric dye tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) was measured by flow cytometry in all

experimental groups: stem (CSCs) and differentiated (dCCs) P19 cells, growing in glucose (Glu) and in modified galactose (Gal)-containing
media, and treated with 0.1 and 1 mM melatonin during 72 hours. Data are shown as relative fluorescence units (RFU) that represent
the mean average of geometric mean values ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)
phenylhydrazone (FCCP) (2 μM) was used as negative control. Statistical comparisons: * vs. control; # vs. 0.1 mM melatonin. B. Oxygen
consumption displayed as nmol of O2 per minute and per 106 cells was decreased after the treatment with melatonin in Glu-dCCs, GalCSCs and Gal-dCCs. Ten μM FCCP was added to test maximal respiration. Data are means ± SEM from at least three independent
experiments. Statistical comparisons: * vs. control; # vs. 0.1 mM melatonin; † vs. basal. C. ATP, ADP and AMP measurements obtained
by high-performance liquid cromatography and expressed as pmol per mg of protein indicated an increased ATP production after 72 hours
of treatment with 1 mM melatonin, particularly in cells cultured in galactose medium. Data are means ± SEM from n = 6 experiments.
D. Measurement of malondialdehyde (MDA) by high-performance liquid cromatography in the four groups of P19 cells revealed an increased
lipid peroxidation after 72 hours of treatment with 1 mM melatonin, especially in cells cultured in modified galactose medium. Data are
means ± SEM for n = 6 experiments. Statistical comparisons: * vs. control; # vs. 0.1 mM melatonin; a vs. Glu-CSCs; b vs. Gal-CSCs; c vs.
Glu-dCCs. The number of symbols marks the level of statistical significance: one for p < 0.05, two for p < 0.01, and three for p < 0.001.

Dichloroacetate enhanced the antiproliferative
effect of melatonin

additive and antagonistic effects in Gal-CSCs and
Gal-dCCs respectively, the combination of 10 mM
dichloroacetate with 1 mM melatonin clearly exerted
a synergistic effect in both groups of galactose mediagrown cells (Table 1). As dichloroacetate activates
pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) by inhibiting pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDHK), we evaluated phos­
pho(Ser293)-PDH after 72 hours treatment with 1
mM melatonin and 10 mM dichloroacetate. However,
treatment with dichloroacetate alone was able to
significantly reduce phospho(Ser293)-PDH in Glu-CSCs,
Glu-dCCs and Gal-dCCs. Furthermore, treatment with
melatonin, alone or in combination with dichloroacetate,
did not alter the phosphorylation status of PHD in all
types of P19 cells with the exception of Gal-dCCs where
a significant decrease of phospho(Ser293)-PDH (p <
0.05) was observed (Figure 4B). Although our results

The above results suggest that melatonin antitumor
effects are dependent on cellular oxidative metabolism
and are caspase-3 activity-independent. Therefore,
Glu-CSCs presented a resistant profile which might be
related to their predominantly glycolytic metabolism.
As melatonin appears to affect only cells relying on
mitochondrial metabolism, we next questioned whether
a combined treatment with dichloroacetate could affect
Glu-CSCs. As shown in Figure 4A, co-treatment with
10 mM dichloroacetate and 1 mM melatonin resulted
in decreased Glu-CSCs cell mass (p < 0.01 and p <
0.001 for 48 and 72 hours of treatment, respectively).
Although the calculated combination index with 10 mM
dichloroacetate and 0.1 mM melatonin suggested
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17085

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Melatonin induced caspase-3-independent cell death in P19 cells presenting oxidative metabolism. A. Protein

levels of BCL-2 and BAX revealed no changes in BAX content but evident alterations in BCL-2 especially after treating P19 cells cultured
in galactose with melatonin. Treatments: control (C), melatonin 0.1 mM (0.1), and melatonin 1 mM (1). Bar charts show means of optical
density (O.D.) ± SEM expressed as percentage of Glu-CSCs, from at least three separate immunoblots. B. Caspase-3-like activity determined
in the four types of P19 cells: P19 stem (CSCs) and differentiated (dCCs) cells, grown in glucose (Glu) and modified galactose media (Gal),
using DEVD linked to p-nitroaniline (pNA) was not induced by the treatment with melatonin during 72 hours. Data are expressed as means
(nmol pNA per minute and mg protein) ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. C. However, live/dead assay with calceinAM and propidium iodide (PI) showed a higher percentage of dead cells (calcein-/PI+) in melatonin-treated cells which present a higher
oxidative metabolism (Glu-dCCs, Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs). Data are expressed as percentage of viable cells (calcein+/PI-), dead cells
(calcein-/PI+), and cell debris (calcein-/PI-) ± SEM from at least three independent experiments. Statistical comparisons: * vs. control; #
vs. 0.1 mM melatonin; a vs. Glu-CSCs; b vs. Gal-CSCs. The number of symbols marks the level of statistical significance: one for p < 0.05,
two for p < 0.01, and three for p < 0.001.

suggest that this pathway might not be directly involved
in melatonin effects, the result from the co-treatment
in Glu-CSCs and the decrease in phospho(Ser293)PDH observed in melatonin-treated Gal-dCCs revealed
significant information about the possible contribution
of this pathway.
To determine whether apoptosis-inducing
factor (AIF) release from mitochondria is involved
in the antiproliferative effects elicited by melatonin,
and possibly confirm caspase-independent cell
death, we measured AIF content in mitochondrial
and cytosolic fractions. The results showed a higher
cytosolic 67-kDa AIF content in Glu-CSCs and in
both types of galactose media-grown P19 cells either
treated with melatonin alone or in combination with
dichloroacetate (p < 0.05). Besides the observed
increase in cytosolic 67-kDa AIF content, an
additional cytosolic band of ~57 kDa was identified
in melatonin-treated cells grown in galactose medium
(Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs) and in Glu-dCCs treated
with both melatonin and dichloroacetate. This additional
band is likely to correspond to a form of AIF which
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

translocates to the nucleus where it triggers caspase-3independent type of cell death [27] (Figure 5).

DISCUSSION
Several metabolic properties distinguish cancer
cells from normal healthy cells [28], including a
decreased mitochondrial ATP production under
normoxia, a phenomenon termed Warburg effect [29–31].
Similarly, normal stem cells rely on glycolysis for ATP
production. In fact, a recent report suggests that cancer
initiating cells may be mostly derived from normal
adult stem cells [14]. However, the exact mechanisms
by which cancer cells maintain an anaerobic metabolism
in the presence of oxygen and the relationship between
carcinogenesis and stem cell metabolism are not
completely understood [32]. We have previously
documented the different metabolic signatures of P19
CSCs and dCCs. P19 CSCs are highly glycolytic and
their differentiation is characterized by a more oxidative
metabolism marked by a noticeable mitochondrial
remodeling. Although P19 CSCs and dCCs have similar
17086

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of the combined treatment with melatonin and dichloroacetate (DCA) in P19 embryonal carcinoma
stem (CSCs) and differentiated (dCCs) cells, grown in glucose (Glu) and galactose (Gal) media. A. The sulforhodamine

B (SRB) assay shows a decrease in cell mass after 72 hours of the combined treatment of the Glu-CSC group with 1 mM melatonin
and 10 mM dichloroacetate. Data represent the average percentage of SRB absorbance with respective time 0 ± SEM from at least four
independent experiments. B. Content of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and PDH-subunit E1α phosphorylated at Ser293 site in the four
types of P19 cells studied reveals that melatonin was only able to contribute to dichloroacetate effect by reducing PDH phosphorylation in
Gal-dCCs. Treatments: control (C), melatonin 1 mM (M), dichloroacetate 10 mM (D), and melatonin 1 mM + dichloroacetate 10 mM
(M+D). Ponceau  S was used to normalize sample loading. Bar charts show means of normalized optical density (O.D.) expressed as
percentage of control ± SEM from three separate immunoblots. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 vs. control.

amounts of mitochondria, these organelles undergo
profound changes in their morphology, biogenesis and
physiology along the differentiation process, culmi­
nating with the establishment of a long filamentous,
polarized and active network [23]. These alterations are
accompanied by reduction in stemness and cell growth
suggesting a link between pluripotency, proliferation
and mitochondrial metabolism. In fact, when forcing
mitochondrial metabolism by growing P19 cells in
galactose (glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvate- containing
medium (Gal-CSCs), cells increase their mitochondrial
activity, reduce proliferation and pluripotency and,
spontaneously, differentiate. In addition, when P19 GalCSCs are treated with retinoic acid, the resultant cells
(Gal-dCCs) show the highest degree of mitochondrial
development and function [23].
The glycolytic metabolism observed in P19 CSCs
is also linked with a drug-resistant phenotype. Thus, P19
CSCs were shown to be resistant to dichloroacetate, a
mitochondrial drug that reverses the abnormal metabolism
of cancer cells by shifting it from glycolysis to glucose
oxidation [23]. This mitochondria-mediated cell death
suppression seems to be a common feature among
different types of CSCs [33].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As the mechanism by which melatonin is cytotoxic
towards some cancer cells is still uncertain, the present work
investigates the impact of cell differentiation and metabolism
on melatonin action. This was achieved by using P19 cells
at four different differentiation stages: Glu-CSCs, GludCCs, Gal-CSCs, and Gal-dCCs. The results obtained here
revealed that melatonin did not affect high glucose-grown
CSCs. In fact, only cells which rely more in oxidative
phosphorylation for ATP synthesis, particularly those cells
grown in galactose medium were susceptible to the highest
concentration of melatonin (1 mM). In addition, inhibition
of proliferation by melatonin was also observed in Gal-dCCs
at lower concentrations. As stated above, Gal-dCCs are the
cell group with the largest degree of cell differentiation,
morphological heterogeneity (Supplementary Figure S1)
and up-regulated mitochondrial function, which make
these cells more susceptible to antiproliferative agents. In
agreement, we have previously demonstrated that Gal-dCCs
present a more open conformation of the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore that is not able to respond to
cyclosporin A [23]. Resistance to drug therapy constitutes
an important hallmark of CSCs, which seems to be strongly
related with an altered cell metabolic profile. Accordingly,
some tumor cells are unable to produce ATP in a
17087

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Representative immunoblot images for apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) in cytosolic and mitochondrial
extracts from P19 stem (CSCs) and differentiated (dCCs) cells, grown in glucose (Glu) and galactose (Gal) media,
show a higher cytosolic localization of ~57 kDa form of AIF in cells grown in galactose media, treated with melatonin,
alone or in combination with dichloroacetate. Treatments: control (C), melatonin 1 mM (M), dichloroacetate 10 mM (D), and
melatonin 1 mM + dichloroacetate 10 mM (M+D). Ponceau S and TOM20 were used to normalize sample loading in cytosolic and
mitochondrial extracts, respectively. Bar charts show means of normalized optical density (O.D.) ± SEM, from at least three separate
immunoblots. Statistical comparisons: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 vs. control. n/a: no band detected (O.D. = 0).

mitochondria-dependent manner resulting in a mitochondrialapoptosis resistant phenotype [28, 33] that is also
characteristic of many stem cells [34]. Our present results
suggest that melatonin-dependent antiproliferative effect
requires an active mitochondrial metabolism. Therefore, if
melatonin acts throughout a mitochondria-mediated manner,
lower concentrations of melatonin would be expected to be
more efficient in revealing its antiproliferative effects in
Gal-dCCs than in other types of P19 cells expressing a more
resistant and undifferentiated phenotype. It is known that the
cytostatic or cytotoxic effects of melatonin in tumor cells
vary depending on the cell type and its concentration, being
the antiapoptotic actions of melatonin typically described
at millimolar concentrations only in specific cancer types
[11]. Consequently, our findings highlight the importance of
mitochondrial and cell differentiation therapies when using
melatonin against cancer cells with more undifferentiated
stem cell-like signatures.
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) exhibit a special cell
cycle structure that plays a role in stem cell maintenance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[35], being characterized by short G1 and G2 phases
and by a high proportion of cells in S-phase. In fact, the
stem cell cycle plays a role in the regulation of cell fate
decisions [36]. We found that cell cycle is remodeled to
the canonical cycle with prolonged G1 phase when P19
cells are forced to rely on mitochondrial metabolism for
ATP production. Under these conditions, melatonin had a
higher effect and induced an arrest at S-phase. However,
this arrest at S-phase induced by high doses of melatonin
was not equivalent in Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs since it
was produced at the expenses of reducing the number of
Gal-CSCs cells on G2/M phase and Gal-dCCs cells on G1/
G0 phase. These differences may come as consequence
of the heterogeneity within cell populations. Both types
of cells, Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs, are composed of a
range of different cell populations with different cell
cycle regulation, morphology, growth rate, differentiation
patterns and metabolism [23] that may lead to divergent
responses upon melatonin treatment. In glycolytic and
resistant cells, melatonin induced alternative types of cell
17088

Oncotarget

cycle arrest, namely at phases G2/M and G1/G0 in GluCSCs and Glu-dCCs respectively. Recent studies reported
different results regarding cell cycle progression in cancer
cells treated with melatonin. In human colorectal cancer
cells, melatonin decreased the S-phase population and
induced cell death [37], whereas in osteosarcoma and
leukemia cells, melatonin reduced the proportion of cells
in the S- and G2/M-phases while increasing cells in G1/G0
phase [38, 39], an effect also observed by us in Glu-dCCs.
However, in this work, melatonin-induced cell cycle
arrests seem to be incomplete in several cases, probably
as a consequence of the observed heterogeneity within
cell populations. On the other hand, high concentrations
of melatonin increased the number of hepatoma cells in
S-phase, showing an antiproliferative effect [40] which
was also observed by us in P19 cells cultured in galactose
(glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvate- containing medium.
Therefore, although melatonin induced alterations in cell
cycle progression, those effects depend on the overall
metabolic and differentiation state of the cancer cells.
Even so, in the more resistant P19 Glu-CSCs, melatonin
was able to induce an arrest at G2/M albeit without
exerting significant cytostatic effects. Thus, in the P19
CSCs model, melatonin was only able to reduce cell
proliferation when the cells lost pluripotency and cell
cycle was modified to the canonical structure.
Spontaneous Ca2+ oscillations are restricted to the
G1/S phase transition in P19 CSCs, suggesting a role
for Ca2+ in stem cell cycle progression [41]. In fact, we
have recently reported that P19 stem cells present low
cytosolic calcium levels, which are increased during cell
differentiation [23]. The higher concentrations of free
calcium found in P19 cells grown in galactose medium
are correlated with the changes found on cell cycle
progression. Accordingly, the effect of melatonin on free
Ca2+ was also dissimilar. Glu-CSCs showed increased Ca2+
levels upon melatonin treatment while having no effect
on cell viability. Conversely, melatonin-treated cells
grown in galactose (glucose-free), glutamine/pyruvatecontaining medium showed cell cycle arrest at S-phase,
decreased cell viability and low intracellular free Ca2+
concentrations which, according with our previous results
[23], seem to be required at high levels during the process
of cell differentiation and mitochondrial maturation. These
different results, which depend on the cellular metabolic
state, are probably influenced by the lower calcium
retention ability of mitochondria from differentiated
cells than those from Glu-CSCs [23]. Thus, the effects of
melatonin on calcium signaling [25, 42] may play a role
in mediating its growth-inhibitory action in cells with an
active mitochondrial metabolism.
Melatonin mitigates mitochondrial dysfunction
in healthy cells, maintaining membrane potential and
optimizing electron transport within the respiratory chain
[8, 43, 44]. However, in some melatonin-sensitive cancer
cells, mitochondrial depolarization is observed [45, 46].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Although this effect is not observed in other tumor
cells [39], it suggests, according to our results, that the
disruption of mitochondrial membrane potential is not
essential for melatonin-induced antiproliferative actions.
Despite this, P19 cells relying on oxidative metabolism
showed a decrease in cell respiration after treatment with
melatonin, an effect also identified in Glu-CSCs when
maximal respiration is induced with FCCP. Although GluCSCs present depolarized mitochondria and decreased
oxygen consumption, mitochondrial respiration is not
completely impaired as cells possess functional OXPHOS
machinery but probably decouple respiration from ATP
production [23]. Then, when cells undergo differentiation,
mitochondria became polarized suggesting a different
modulation of mitochondrial potential between stem
and differentiated cells. While mitochondrial membrane
potential in differentiated cells is maintained by the electron
transport chain, in undifferentiated cells this process
depends mostly on glycolysis and on ATP hydrolase activity
of the F1Fo-ATPase [23]. Our results suggest a direct effect
of melatonin in the electron transport chain, although the
observed increase of mitochondrial membrane potential
may not result from an inhibition of the respiratory chain
alone but instead from effects on ATP synthase.
Previous works showed an effect of melatonin
in inhibiting the increased respiration resulting from
stimulation of Krebs’ cycle, protecting mitochondria from
oxidative damage [47]. In another study, it was reported
that melatonin decreased OXPHOS through complex IV
inhibition while increasing the glycolytic efficiency [48],
an effect that might explain the resistance of Glu-CSCs to
melatonin, as well as the observed decrease in respiration
and increased ATP levels. In our previous report, we
demonstrated, by blocking OXPHOS with oligomycin,
that glycolysis is the primary pathway for ATP production
in P19 cells [23]. Although we have found here that 1mM
melatonin also produced an increase in the ATP content in
Gal-CSCs and Gal-dCCs, we have not found differences
regarding the percentage of ATP on the total adenine
nucleotide pool between controls and melatonin-treated
cells. Thus, the energetic balance was not affected by the
treatment with melatonin. It was described that melatonin
maintains mitochondrial homeostasis in normal cells since
it is able to reduce oxygen consumption while maintaining
OXPHOS activity and ATP synthesis [49]. Despite this,
the higher amount of adenine nucleotides observed after
the treatment with melatonin could also be related with
an action of melatonin in triggering and/or directing cell
differentiation as previously described [50, 51]. This action
would be mediated by its interaction with the retinoicrelated orphan receptor alpha (RORA) whose expression
is temporally regulated during differentiation of P19 cells
into neural lineages [52, 53], as probably occurs in P19
cells grown in galactose that express higher amounts of
the neuron-specific marker betaIII-tubulin [23]. In general,
our data indicate that the predictable outcome of melatonin
17089

Oncotarget

treatment depends on the involvement of mitochondrial
bioenergetics to cell metabolism.
It is known that melatonin-induced apoptosis in cancer
cells is associated with ROS production [45, 54, 55], and
that oxidative stress determines cancer cells fate in response
to melatonin [11]. Here, we found a link between impaired
oxygen consumption, mitochondrial hyperpolarization and
oxidative stress generation in cells grown in the modified
galactose media and treated with melatonin. Although the
precise mechanism by which melatonin induces ROS in
cancer cells remains unknown, our results together with
data from other authors suggest that ROS produced by the
mitochondrial electron transport chain constitutes a key
factor in melatonin-induced cell death [39, 55–57] and
differentiation [50].
Excessive ROS contributes to mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabilization (MOMP), which is mainly
controlled by proteins from the BCL-2 family and is
an important factor in mediating the intrinsic apoptosis
[56]. Previous studies have noted that melatonin alters
the balance between BAX and BCL-2 in some cancer
cells by up-regulating BAX expression, resulting in
MOMP and cytochrome c release [39, 58, 59]. However,
in other cancer cells, melatonin induces a decrease in
BCL-2 [45, 46, 60]. Here, BAX remained unaltered
whereas BCL-2 was down-regulated in the cells grown in
galactose media and treated with melatonin, altering the
BAX/BCL-2 balance but without causing cytochrome
c release (data not shown), probably due to increased
mitochondrial membrane potential. Accordingly, we
have not detected an increase in caspase-3-like activity.
Nonetheless, the Live/Dead assay suggests that the
observed decrease in cell proliferation is due to a
cytotoxic rather than a cytostatic action of melatonin.
Melatonin increased cytosolic AIF levels in GalCSCs and Gal-dCCs, as well as in Glu-CSCs. However,
the observed band corresponds to a 67-kDa form of AIF,
which is the precursor form containing a mitochondriallocalizing sequence, and which is unable to cause cell death
[61]. On the contrary, melatonin seems to exert another
undescribed mitochondrial effect by inducing de novo
synthesis of the AIF precursor protein. After being imported
into mitochondria, the mitochondrial localizing sequence
contained in 67-kDa AIF is cleaved, resulting in the
accumulation of the mature 57-kDa form of the AIF protein.
This is described to translocate to the nucleus where it
triggers a caspase-3-independent type of cell death [27]. We
found a higher cytosolic localization of this ~57 kDa form
of AIF in cells cultured in galactose media and treated with
melatonin, alone or in combination with dichloroacetate, and
in Glu-dCCs treated with melatonin and dichloroacetate.
Nonetheless, the increased percentage of dead
cells (calcein -/ PI +) after 72 hours of treatment with
melatonin, although moderated, was statistically significant
(p < 0.001) in cells with a more oxidative metabolism. In
these cells, cultured in the galactose medium, more than 50%
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of the cellular mass was lost after 72 hours of treatment with
melatonin. Due to this, the measurement of the percentage
of live/dead cells in the remaining population probably
represents early (or other) events of cell death as well as
processes of selection of the more resistant subpopulations.
In fact, we cannot exclude divergent effects of melatonin
in the different cell subpopulations. In accordance to
this hypothesis, we observed a different pattern of AIF
expression in some cells which may indicate the presence of
different cell subpopulations with dissimilar susceptibility to
activate this pathway (Supplementary Figure S2).
Taking all our results into account, we can infer
that melatonin induces a toxic effect in P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells via the inhibition of mitochondrial
metabolism as described in other types of tumor cells
[62]. Thus, P19 Glu-CSCs present a strong resistant
phenotype, which seems to be linked to their glycolytic
metabolism. In fact, we previously observed that only
the P19 cells with an active mitochondrial metabolism
are susceptible to the anticancer agent dichloroacetate
[23]. Surprisingly, when we combined 1 mM melatonin
and 10 mM dichloroacetate, cytotoxicity in the highly
resistant Glu-CSCs was observed. These results are of
great importance considering that to our knowledge,
this is the only treatment showing an efficient and
viable effect against P19 Glu-CSCs. Furthermore, the
synergistic capability of this treatment combination was
observed in P19 cells with the most active mitochondrial
metabolism. The mechanism of action of dichloroacetate
ultimately concerns the activity of PDH that, according
to our previous results, seems to be deregulated and
overexpressed in P19 CSCs [23]. However, upon
melatonin treatment, no significant changes in the content
of PDH on its active (dephosphorylated) form were
found, which would allow us to explain its synergistic
effect with dichloroacetate. The absence of correlation
between the phosphorylation status of PDH and the
observed synergistic effect reinforce the hypothesis about
a deregulation in the PDK-PDH axis, at least in the more
undifferentiated P19 cells. Thus, this deregulation might
be related with the preference of primitive cells for a
more glycolytic metabolism. In agreement, the group
composed of more differentiated and oxidative cells (GaldCCs) showed significant changes in phospho(Ser293)PDH when treated with melatonin and dichloroacetate.
Since other mechanisms of PDH regulation may involve
other phosphorylation sites [63], our results suggest the
contribution of alternative mechanisms which might
also be independent of the phosphorylation status of
PDH, thus explaining part of the synergistic effect of
the combination. For example, it was recently described
that dichloroacetate is able to suppress mTOR activity
specifically through pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4
(PDK4) and independently of PDH [64]. Curiously, it was
also described that Pdk4 gene expression can be increased
by melatonin in mice [65].
17090

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Schematic representation summarizing the proposed role of melatonin in cancer stem cells. Our hypothesis

ascribes an anti-tumor effect for melatonin only in differentiated cancer cells with an active oxidative metabolism, triggering a type of
mitochondrial-mediated cell death which is likely to be characterized by an arrest at S-phase, reduction of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain (ETC), generation of reactive oxygen species, BCL-2 down-regulation and AIF release. Thus, the treatment with melatonin
and the stimulation of mitochondrial metabolism constitute promising strategies against resistant cancer stem cells.

Nonetheless, the decrease of phospho(Ser293)-PDH
observed in Gal-dCCs after treatment with melatonin,
reinforces the idea that the anti-tumor actions of melatonin
occur at a mitochondrial level. Accordingly, our results
suggest that melatonin exerts its anticancer effects in P19
cells with an active oxidative metabolism, triggering a type
of mitochondrial cell death which is caspase-3-independent
and is probably AIF-mediated (Figure 6). These results are
in accordance with previous works developed in other types
of cancer cells such as MCF-7 [66].
Mitochondrial activity, function and differentiation
strongly impact the antitumoral ability of melatonin
which involves, among others, the activation of intrinsic
apoptotic pathways, in P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells as well as in other types of cancer cells [24]. It is
known that AIF controls programmed cells death during
early morphogenesis and that its genetic inactivation
renders embryonic stem cells resistant to cell death [67].
Consequently, the mechanism of caspase-3-independent
cell death, stimulation of mitochondrial differentiation and
metabolism, with consequent disruption of the Warburg
effect constitute promissory strategies when targeting
resistant cancer cells with an embryonic signature.

37ºC in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. High glucose Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, D5648; Sigma, St.
Quentin Fallavier, France) was supplemented with 10%
FBS (10270–106, Gibco; Paisley, UK), 1.8 g/l sodium
bicarbonate (S5761, Sigma), 110 mg/l sodium pyruvate
(P5280, Sigma) and antibiotic/antimycotic solution (A5955,
Sigma). Galactose (glucose-free)-containing medium was
prepared using DMEM without glucose (D5030, Sigma)
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1.8 g/l sodium bicarbonate,
110 mg/l sodium pyruvate, 1.8 g/l galactose (G5388,
Sigma), 0.584 g/l L-glutamine (G3126, Sigma) and
antibiotic/antimycotic solution. P19 cancer cells, growing
in high glucose DMEM or in galactose (glucose free)containing DMEM, were maintained in monolayer and
passaged every 2–3 days at a 1:20 to 1:30 dilution.
In order to induce cell differentiation, P19 CSCs
were seeded at a density of 5.2 × 103 cells/cm2 and 1 μM
of retinoic acid (R2625, Sigma) was added for 96 hours.
Melatonin (M5250, Sigma) was always freshly
dissolved in ethanol and dichloroacetate (347795, Sigma)
in water. If not indicated otherwise, twenty-four hours
after seeding, P19 CSCs and dCCs grown in both culture
media were exposed to 0.1 mM and 1 mM melatonin alone
or in combination with 10 mM dichloroacetate (347795,
Sigma) during 72 hours. Controls were always treated
with an equal amount of vehicle (less than 0.95% ethanol).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture, differentiation and treatment

Cell viability/mass

P19 embryonal carcinoma cells (CRL-1825, ATCC;
Manassas, VA, USA) were obtained and cultured in
glucose- or galactose (glucose-free)-containing media at
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell mass was measured by the Sulforhodamine
B (SRB) assay as described previously [68]. P19 cells
17091

Oncotarget

were seeded in in 48-well plates at a concentration of
0.5 × 104 cells/ml for P19 CSCs and 2 × 104 cells/ml for
P19 dCCs. Twenty-four hours after seeding, cells were
treated with different melatonin concentrations (1 μM,
10 μM, 0.1 mM and 1 mM) alone, or in combination with
10 mM dichloroacetate. Treatments were performed from
24 to 96 hours and samples were collected every 24 hours.
After each period of treatment (24, 48, 72 and 96 hours), the
medium was removed and wells rinsed with 1% PBS. Cells
were then fixed by adding 1% acetic acid in 100% methanol
for at least 2 hours at –20ºC. Later, the fixation solution
was discarded and the plates dried in an oven at 37ºC.
Next, 250 μl of 0.5% SRB in 1% acetic acid solution were
added and incubated at 37°C for 1 hours. The wells were
then washed with 1% acetic acid in water and dried. Then,
500 μl of 10 mM Tris, pH 10 were added and the plates
shaken for 30 minutes. Finally, 200 μl of each supernatant
were transferred in 96-well plates and optical density was
measured at 540 nm. The dose-response values IC50 (dose
required for median effect) and the combination index were
calculated using Compusyn software [69, 70].
After selecting the optimal time and concentration
of melatonin treatments (0.1 mM, 1 mM melatonin for
72 hours), we performed the trypan blue dye exclusion
assay to measure cell viability. Treated and control P19
cells were trypsinized and washed with PBS. 100 μl of cell
suspension was aseptically transferred to a 1.5 ml tube and
an equal volume of trypan blue (T8154, Sigma) was added
for 3 minutes at room temperature. The resuspension
was then placed in a dual-use counting slide (145–0011,
Bio-Rad; Hercules, CA, USA) and read in a TC20
automated cell counter (145–0102SP, Bio-Rad). Results
are shown as percentage of live cells.

final concentration of 2.5 mM to the plate wells containing
HBSS. The plates were incubated for 30 minutes at 37ºC
and fluorescence (excitation at 494 nm and emission at 516
nm) was measured in a Gemini EM fluorescence multi-plate
reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

Mitochondrial transmembrane electric potential
The mitochondrial membrane potential in P19 cells
was investigated by measuring tetramethylrodamine
methyl ester (TMRM; T668, Invitrogen) fluorescence
by flow cytometry (FACScalibur, Becton Dickinson).
P19 cells were seeded, differentiated and treated with
melatonin at the concentrations described above. After,
cells were trypsinized and loaded with 150 nM TMRM for
30 minutes and then evaluated for mean cell fluorescence
by flow cytometry. The uncoupler carbonyl cyanide
4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone (FCCP; 2 μM) was
used as a control and was added 15 minutes after TMRM
loading to cause mitochondrial depolarization.

Oxygen consumption
Oxygen consumption was measured polarographically
with a Clark-type Oxygen electrode (YSI 5331, Yellow
Springs Instruments; Yellow Springs, OH, USA) connected
to a recorder (BD 121, Kipp&Zonen; Delft, The Netherlands)
in a thermostated water-jacketed closed chamber with
magnetic stirring. The reactions were performed at 37°C in
1 ml of glucose- or galacose-containing DMEM with 5 × 106
cells. Respiration was sustained with endogenous substrates
followed by uncoupling by FCCP (10 μM). Respiration
rates were obtained assuming an oxygen concentration of
237 nmol O2/ml in the experimental medium at 37°C [71].
In order to confirm the measurement of mitochondrial basal
respiration, 1.5 μM rotenone was added to completely inhibit
oxygen consumption by inhibiting mitochondrial complex I
(NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase).

Cell cycle analysis
One million P19 cells were harvested, washed
with PBS and fixed by adding 70% cold (–20ºC) ethanol.
Subsequently, cells were centrifuged at 850 g to remove the
ethanol, washed twice with PBS and finally resuspended
in 400 μl PBS. 10 μg/ml RNAse (R5000, Sigma) and
20  μg/ml propidium iodide (P4864, Sigma) were added
for 30 minutes at 37ºC. 20 × 103 events per sample were
analyzed by using a FACScalibur flow cytometer (Becton
Dickenson, San Jose, CA, USA) with 488 nm excitation
and 605 nm emission wavelengths. The percentage of cells
in G1/G0, S and G2/M was determined using Modfit LT
software (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME, USA).

Adenine nucleotide measurement (ATP/ADP/AMP)
ATP, ADP and AMP levels were measured by
HPLC. For adenine nucleotide extraction, after one rinse
in cold PBS, 0.5 ml PBS and 0.5 ml perchloric acid/
EDTA were added to each dish. Cells were scraped from
the dishes, placed in 1 ml micro-centrifuge tubes and
centrifuged for 2 minutes at 14,000 × g. Pellets were then
re-suspended in 50 μl of 1 M NaOH and later used for
protein quantification by the BCA protein assay (23227,
Thermo Scientific; Rockford, IL, USA). The supernatant
was neutralized with 3 M KOH in 1.5 M Tris and
centrifuged again. The supernatant was again collected
and stored at –80°C until analyzed by reverse-phase high
performance liquid chromatography. The chromatographic
apparatus was a Beckman-System Gold, consisting of a
126 Binary Pump Model and a 166 Variable UV detector,
controlled by computer. The detection wavelength was

Intracellular calcium measurement
Intracellular calcium levels were measured as described
in the Fluo-4 Direct Calcium Assay kit (F10472, Invitrogen;
Paisley, UK). After seeding 5 × 105 P19 cells in 96 well
plates, the medium was removed and 50 μl of pre-warmed
HBSS were added. The Fluo-4 Direct calcium reagent was
prepared as suggested by the manufacturer and added in a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17092

Oncotarget

254 nm, and the column was a Lichrospher 100RP-18
from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). An isocratic elution
with 100 mM phosphate buffer (KH2PO4), pH 6.5 and 1%
methanol was performed with a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The
time required for each analysis was 5 minutes.

system (RPN5785; GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ)
and imaged with Versa Doc imaging system (Bio-Rad)
according to the manufacturers’ protocols. Densities of
each band were calculated with Quantity One Software
(Bio-Rad) or ImageJ software. All data presented are
representative from at least three separate experiments.

Lipid peroxidation

Isolation of mitochondrial and cytosolic extracts

The content in malondialdehyde (MDA) was
measured by high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) separation. P19 cells were harvested, washed
and resuspended in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4)
and stored at –80ºC until used. Lipid peroxidation was
assessed by the fluorimetric determination (excitation at
515 nm and emission at 553 nm; FP-2020/2025, Jasco,
Tokyo, Japan) of MDA adducts separated by HPLC
(Gilson; Middleton, WI, USA) using the ClinRep complete
kit (RECIPE; Munich, Germany).

Mitochondrial extracts were isolated harvesting
P19 cells by trypsinization and by spinning them down
at 1,000 g. Pellets were washed once in cold PBS and
centrifuged again (1,000 g) at 4ºC. The cell suspension
was then resuspended in 0.5 ml of ice cold sucrose buffer
(250 mM sucrose, 20 mM K+ Hepes pH 7.5, 10 mM
KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA)
supplemented right before use with 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM
PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail containing 1 μg/
ml of leupeptin, antipain, chymostatin and pepstatin.
The cell suspension was then incubated on ice for 20 to
30 minutes. After incubation, cells were transferred to a
pre-cooled tissue homogenizer and homogenized 30 times
using a tight pestle, while keeping the homogenizer on
ice. Progress was monitored every 20 to 30 strokes under
a phase contrast microscope and was stopped when more
than 90% of cells were burst.
Homogenized cells were centrifuged at 3,500 g
for 5 minutes at 4ºC. The supernatant, containing the
mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions was collected. Then,
the collected supernatant was centrifuged again at 10,000
g during 15 minutes at 4ºC. The pellet, corresponding to
the mitochondrial fraction was resuspended in 50 μl of
sucrose buffer cited above. The supernatant was again
centrifuged at 100,000 g during 30 minutes at 4ºC. The
resulting supernatant contained the cytosolic fraction and
was lyophilized in order to concentrate the protein and
resuspended in 50 μl of the same sucrose buffer.
Specific proteins in both fractions were semiquantified by western blotting as described above using
antibodies against AIF (sc-13116) from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology and cytochrome c (556433) from Becton
Dickenson. Densitometry values were normalized to the
levels of Ponceau S for cytosolic extracts, and to the
content in translocase of the outer membrane 20 (TOM20)
(sc-11415; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for mitochondrial
extracts.

Western blot analysis
In order to obtain total cellular extracts, P19
cells were harvested by trypsinization, washed with
PBS and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1,000 g. The
cellular pellet was resuspended in RIPA buffer (R0278;
Sigma) supplemented with 2 mM ditiothreitol (DTT),
100 μM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and
a protease inhibitor cocktail (containing 1 μg/ml of
leupeptin, antipain, chymostatin, and pepstatin A),
physically ruptured by sonication and kept at –80ºC
until used. Protein contents were determined by using
the BCA protein assay (23227; Thermo Scientific).
After denaturation at 95ºC for 5 minutes in a Laemmli
buffer (161–0737; BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA),
equivalent amounts of protein (30 μg) were separated
by electrophoresis in 12% sodium dodecyl sulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and
electrophoretically transferred to a polyvinylidene
difluoride (PVDF) membrane. Ponceau S staining
was used to ensure equal loading [23]. After blocking
membranes with 5% skim milk in TBS-T (50 mM TrisHCl, pH 8; 154 mM NaCl and 0.1% Tween-20) for
1 hour at room temperature, membranes were incubated
overnight at 4ºC with the antibodies directed against
B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2; 2870), BCL-2-associated X
protein (BAX, 2772) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH;
3205) from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA); and
pSer293-PDH-E1α (ab92696) from Abcam (Cambridge,
UK), each previously diluted 1:1,000 in blocking buffer
(1% skim milk in TBS-T). After three 5 minutes-washes
in PBS-T, the membranes were incubated with a dilution
(1:10, 000 in blocking buffer) of a corresponding alkaline
phosphatase-conjugated secondary antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) for 2 hours at room
temperature. After three washes in PBS-T for 15 minutes
each, membranes were developed with the ECF detection
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Caspase 3-like activity
P19 cells were trypsinized and washed in PBS.
After washing, cells were concentrated by centrifuging at
300 g for 3 minutes and the supernatant was discarded.
The pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer containing
100 mM NaCl, 0.1% CHAPS, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM EDTA,
50 mM HEPES pH 7.4. The samples were kept on ice for
20 minutes following by protein quantification through the
BCA kit assay (23227; Thermo Scientific). Then, 25 μg of
17093

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

cell protein extracts were aliquoted in an assay buffer (100
mM NaCl, 0.1% CHAPS, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM EDTA,
10% glycerol, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) supplemented with
100 μM caspase-3 substrate Ac-DEVD-pNA (235400;
Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and incubated
for 2 hours at 37ºC. Caspase 3-like activity was accessed
following the detection of the chromophore p-nitroaniline
(pNA) after cleavage from the labeled substrate
Ac-DEVD-pNA. Method calibration was achieved using
known concentrations of p-NA.

1.	 Reiter RJ, Tan DX, Rosales-Corral S, Manchester LC.
The universal nature, unequal distribution and antioxidant
­functions of melatonin and its derivatives. Mini Rev Med
Chem. 2013; 13:373–384.
2.	 Hardeland R, Pandi-Perumal SR, Cardinali DP. Melatonin.
Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006; 38:313–316.
3.	 Galano A, Tan DX, Reiter RJ. On the free radical scavenging activities of melatonin’s metabolites, AFMK and AMK.
J Pineal Res. 2013; 54:245–257.

Live/dead assay

4.	 Reiter RJ, Acuna-Castroviejo D, Tan DX, Burkhardt S.
Free radical-mediated molecular damage. Mechanisms for
the protective actions of melatonin in the central nervous
system. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001; 939:200–215.

Calcein-AM (C1430; Invitrogen) and propidium
iodide (P4864; Sigma Aldrich) were used to determine the
percentages of viable and dead cells. After the treatments
with melatonin, 106 P19 cells were harvested, washed,
resuspended in HBSS/Ca and loaded with 0.1 μM calceinAM and 8 μM propidium iodide for 20 minutes at room
temperature. Fluorescence was measured by FACS
(Becton Dickinson FACScalibur) with 488 nm excitation
wavelength. The simultaneous measurement of Calcein/
propidium iodide fluorescence was performed using
530/30 nm bandpass filter for Calcein and a 610/20 nm
bandpass filter for propidium iodide red fluorescence.

5.	 Tan DX, Hardeland R, Manchester LC, Galano A, Reiter RJ.
Cyclic-3-hydroxymelatonin (C3HOM), a potent antioxidant,
scavenges free radicals and suppresses o
­ xidative reactions.
Curr Med Chem. 2014; 21:1557–1565.
6.	 Vega-Naredo I, Poeggeler B, Sierra-Sanchez V,
Caballero  B, Tomas-Zapico C, Alvarez-Garcia O,
Tolivia  D, Rodriguez-Colunga MJ, Coto-Montes A.
Melatonin neutralizes neurotoxicity induced by quinolinic
acid in brain tissue culture. J Pineal Res. 2005; 39:266–275.
7.	 Calvo JR, Gonzalez-Yanes C, Maldonado MD. The role
of melatonin in the cells of the innate immunity: a review.
J Pineal Res. 2013; 55:103–120.

Statistical analyses
Data are mean values ± SEM and multiple comparisons
were carried out using ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni
post hoc test. Significance was accepted with p < 0.05.

8.	 Acuna-Castroviejo D, Escames G, Rodriguez MI,
Lopez LC. Melatonin role in the mitochondrial function.
Front Biosci. 2007; 12:947–963.
9.	 Sainz RM, Mayo JC, Rodriguez C, Tan DX, LopezBurillo S, Reiter RJ. Melatonin and cell death: differential
actions on apoptosis in normal and cancer cells. Cell Mol
Life Sci. 2003; 60:1407–1426.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Maria Sancha Santos for
her help and technical assistance with the HPLC apparatus.
This work was performed with funding from Fundação
Montepio Geral, FCT - Portuguese Foundation for Science
and Technology (Pest-C/SAU/LA0001/2013–2014, PTDC/
QUI-BIQ/101052/2008, PTDC-SAU-TOX-117912–2010,
and PTDC/DTP-FTO/1180/2012) co-funded by FEDER
(QREN), through Programa Mais Centro under projects
CENTRO-07-ST24-FEDER-002002, CENTRO-07-ST24FEDER-002006 and CENTRO-07-ST24-FEDER-002008,
and through Programa Operacional Factores de
Competitividade - COMPETE and National funds. The
FCT also supported Mesquita KA (SFRH/BD/66138/2009).
Vega-Naredo I acknowledges the program “Clarín”
de Ayudas Postdoctorales del Principado de Asturias
(ACB14–20) co-funded by a Marie Curie COFUND action
(7th Framework Programme of the European Commission).

10.	 Vega-Naredo I, Caballero B, Sierra V, Garcia-Macia M,
de Gonzalo-Calvo D, Oliveira PJ, Rodriguez-Colunga MJ,
Coto-Montes A. Melatonin modulates autophagy through a
redox-mediated action in female Syrian hamster Harderian
gland controlling cell types and gland activity. J Pineal Res.
2012; 52:80–92.
11.	 Rodriguez C, Martin V, Herrera F, Garcia-Santos  G,
Rodriguez-Blanco J, Casado-Zapico S, SanchezSanchez AM, Suarez S, Puente-Moncada N, Anitua MJ,
Antolin I. Mechanisms involved in the pro-apoptotic effect of
melatonin in cancer cells. Int J Mol Sci. 2013; 14:6597–6613.
12.	 Hardeland R. Melatonin and the theories of aging: a ­critical
appraisal of melatonin’s role in antiaging mechanisms.
J Pineal Res. 2013; 55:325–356.
13.	 Campbell LL, Polyak K. Breast tumor heterogeneity: cancer
stem cells or clonal evolution? Cell Cycle. 2007; 6:2332–2338.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Tomasetti C, Vogelstein B. Cancer etiology. Variation in
cancer risk among tissues can be explained by the number
of stem cell divisions. Science. 2015; 347:78–81.

The authors declare they have no conflicts of interests.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17094

Oncotarget

15.	 Reya T, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF, Weissman IL. Stem
cells, cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature. 2001;
414:105–111.

30.	 Ertel A, Verghese A, Byers SW, Ochs M, Tozeren A.
Pathway-specific differences between tumor cell lines and
normal and tumor tissue cells. Mol Cancer. 2006; 5:55.

16.	 Bonnet D, Dick JE. Human acute myeloid leukemia is
­organized as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive
hematopoietic cell. Nat Med. 1997; 3:730–737.

31.	 Pedersen PL. Warburg, me and Hexokinase 2: Multiple
­discoveries of key molecular events underlying one of ­cancers’
most common phenotypes, the “Warburg Effect”, i.e., elevated
glycolysis in the presence of oxygen. J Bioenerg Biomembr.
2007; 39:211–222.

17.	 Tai MH, Chang CC, Kiupel M, Webster JD, Olson LK,
Trosko JE. Oct4 expression in adult human stem cells:
­evidence in support of the stem cell theory of carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 2005; 26:495–502.

32.	 Folmes CD, Dzeja PP, Nelson TJ, Terzic A. Metabolic
­plasticity in stem cell homeostasis and differentiation. Cell
Stem Cell. 2012; 11:596–606.

18.	 Tang C, Ang BT, Pervaiz S. Cancer stem cell: target for
anti-cancer therapy. FASEB J. 2007; 21:3777–3785.

33.	 Loureiro R, Mesquita KA, Oliveira PJ, Vega-Naredo I.
Mitochondria in cancer stem cells: a target for therapy. Recent
Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov. 2013; 7:102–114.

19.	 Jung JW, Park SB, Lee SJ, Seo MS, Trosko JE, Kang KS.
Metformin represses self-renewal of the human breast
­carcinoma stem cells via inhibition of estrogen receptormediated OCT4 expression. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e28068.

34.	 Shyh-Chang N, Daley GQ, Cantley LC. Stem cell
­metabolism in tissue development and aging. Development.
2013; 140:2535–2547.

20.	 Trosko JE. Induction of iPS cells and of cancer stem cells:
the stem cell or reprogramming hypothesis of cancer? Anat
Rec (Hoboken). 2014; 297:161–173.

35.	 White J, Dalton S. Cell cycle control of embryonic stem
cells. Stem Cell Rev. 2005; 1:131–138.

21.	 McBurney MW. P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. Int J Dev
Biol. 1993; 37:135–140.

36.	 Pauklin S, Vallier L. The cell-cycle state of stem cells
­determines cell fate propensity. Cell. 2013; 155:135–147.

22.	 Mummery CL, Feijen A, Moolenaar WH, van den Brink CE,
de Laat SW. Establishment of a differentiated mesodermal
line from P19 EC cells expressing functional PDGF and
EGF receptors. Exp Cell Res. 1986; 165:229–242.

37.	 Hong Y, Won J, Lee Y, Lee S, Park K, Chang KT.
Melatonin treatment induces interplay of apoptosis,
­autophagy, and senescence in human colorectal cancer
cells. J Pineal Res. 2014; 56:264–274.

23.	 Vega-Naredo I, Loureiro R, Mesquita KA, Barbosa
IA, Tavares LC, Branco AF, Erickson JR, Holy J,
Perkins  EL, Carvalho RA, Oliveira PJ. Mitochondrial
metabolism directs stemness and differentiation in P19
embryonal carcinoma stem cells. Cell Death Differ. 2014;
21:1560–1574.

38.	 Liu L, Xu Y, Reiter RJ. Melatonin inhibits the proliferation of human osteosarcoma cell line MG-63. Bone. 2013;
55:432–438.
39.	 Perdomo J, Cabrera J, Estevez F, Loro J, Reiter RJ, Quintana J.
Melatonin induces apoptosis through a caspase-dependent but
reactive oxygen species-independent mechanism in human
leukemia Molt-3 cells. J Pineal Res. 2013; 55:195–206.

24.	 Bizzarri M, Proietti S, Cucina A, Reiter RJ. Molecular
mechanisms of the pro-apoptotic actions of melatonin
in cancer: a review. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2013;
17:1483–1496.

40.	 Ozdemir F, Deniz O, Kaynar K, Arslan M, Kavgaci H, Yildiz
B, Aydin F. The effects of melatonin on human hepatoma
(Hep G2) cell line. Bratisl Lek Listy. 2009; 110:276–279.

25.	 Dai J, Inscho EW, Yuan L, Hill SM. Modulation of
intracellular calcium and calmodulin by melatonin in
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. J Pineal Res. 2002;
32:112–119.

41.	 Resende RR, Adhikari A, da Costa JL, Lorencon E,
Ladeira  MS, Guatimosim S, Kihara AH, Ladeira LO.
Influence of spontaneous calcium events on cell-cycle
progression in embryonal carcinoma and adult stem cells.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010; 1803:246–260.

26.	 St-Pierre J, Buckingham JA, Roebuck SJ, Brand MD.
Topology of superoxide production from different sites in
the mitochondrial electron transport chain. J Biol Chem.
2002; 277:44784–44790.

42.	 Benitez-King G, Huerto-Delgadillo L, Anton-Tay F.
Melatonin modifies calmodulin cell levels in MDCK and
N1E-115 cell lines and inhibits phosphodiesterase activity
in vitro. Brain Res. 1991; 557:289–292.

27.	 Otera H, Ohsakaya S, Nagaura Z, Ishihara N, Mihara K.
Export of mitochondrial AIF in response to proapoptotic
stimuli depends on processing at the intermembrane space.
EMBO J. 2005; 24:1375–1386.

43.	 Fischer TW, Zmijewski MA, Wortsman J, Slominski A.
Melatonin maintains mitochondrial membrane potential
and attenuates activation of initiator (casp-9) and effector ­caspases (casp-3/casp-7) and PARP in UVR-exposed
HaCaT keratinocytes. J Pineal Res. 2008; 44:397–407.

28.	 Barbosa IA, Machado NG, Skildum AJ, Scott PM,
Oliveira PJ. Mitochondrial remodeling in cancer metabolism and survival: potential for new therapies. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2012; 1826:238–254.

44.	 Leon J, Acuna-Castroviejo D, Escames G, Tan DX,
Reiter RJ. Melatonin mitigates mitochondrial malfunction.
J Pineal Res. 2005; 38:1–9.

29.	 Chen Z, Lu W, Garcia-Prieto C, Huang P. The Warburg
effect and its cancer therapeutic implications. J Bioenerg
Biomembr. 2007; 39:267–274.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Bejarano I, Redondo PC, Espino J, Rosado JA, Paredes SD,
Barriga C, Reiter RJ, Pariente JA, Rodriguez AB. Melatonin
17095

Oncotarget

induces mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis in human
myeloid HL-60 cells. J Pineal Res. 2009; 46:392–400.

cycle arrest and apoptosis in hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cell
line. J Pineal Res. 2008; 45:532–540.

46.	 Rubio S, Estevez F, Cabrera J, Reiter RJ, Loro J, Quintana J.
Inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis by
melatonin in human myeloid HL-60 cells. J  Pineal Res.
2007; 42:131–138.

60.	 Trubiani O, Recchioni R, Moroni F, Pizzicannella J,
Caputi  S, Di Primio R. Melatonin provokes cell death in
human B-lymphoma cells by mitochondrial-­dependent apoptotic pathway activation. J Pineal Res. 2005; 39:425–431.

47.	 Reyes-Toso CF, Rebagliati IR, Ricci CR, Linares LM,
Albornoz LE, Cardinali DP, Zaninovich A. Effect of
­melatonin treatment on oxygen consumption by rat liver
mitochondria. Amino Acids. 2006; 31:299–302.

61.	 Daugas E, Nochy D, Ravagnan L, Loeffler M, Susin SA,
Zamzami N, Kroemer G. Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF):
a ubiquitous mitochondrial oxidoreductase involved in
apoptosis. FEBS Lett. 2000; 476:118–123.

48.	 Sarti P, Magnifico MC, Altieri F, Mastronicola D, Arese M.
New Evidence for Cross Talk between Melatonin and
Mitochondria Mediated by a Circadian-Compatible Interaction
with Nitric Oxide. Int J Mol Sci. 2013; 14:11259–11276.

62.	 Wang BQ, Yang QH, Xu RK, Xu JN. Elevated levels of
mitochonrial respiratory complexes activities and ATP
production in 17-beta-estradiol-induced prolactin-secretory
tumor cells in male rats are inhibited by melatonin in vivo
and in vitro. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013; 126:4724–4730.

49.	 Lopez A, Garcia JA, Escames G, Venegas C, Ortiz F,
Lopez  LC, Acuna-Castroviejo D. Melatonin protects the
mitochondria from oxidative damage reducing oxygen
­consumption, membrane potential, and superoxide anion
production. J Pineal Res. 2009; 46:188–198.

63.	 Fan J, Kang HB, Shan C, Elf S, Lin R, Xie J, Gu TL,
Aguiar M, Lonning S, Chung TW, Arellano M, Khoury HJ,
Shin DM, Khuri FR, Boggon TJ, Kang S, et al. Tyr-301
phosphorylation inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase by blocking substrate binding and promotes the Warburg effect.
J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:26533–26541.

50.	 Luchetti F, Canonico B, Bartolini D, Arcangeletti M,
Ciffolilli S, Murdolo G, Piroddi M, Papa S, Reiter RJ,
Galli F. Melatonin regulates mesenchymal stem cell
­differentiation: a review. J Pineal Res. 2014; 56:382–397.

64.	 Liu Z, Chen X, Wang Y, Peng H, Jing Y, Zhang H. PDK4
protein promotes tumorigenesis through activation of
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB)-Ras
homolog enriched in brain (RHEB)-mTORC1 signaling
cascade. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:29739–29749.

51.	 Soliman A, Lacasse AA, Lanoix D, Sagrillo-Fagundes L,
Boulard V, Vaillancourt C. Placental melatonin system is
present throughout pregnancy and regulates villous trophoblast differentiation. J Pineal Res. 2015.

65.	 Sharman EH, Bondy SC, Sharman KG, Lahiri D, Cotman
CW, Perreau VM. Effects of melatonin and age on gene
expression in mouse CNS using microarray analysis.
Neurochem Int. 2007; 50:336–344.

52.	 Kuklina EM. Melatonin as potential inducer of Th17 cell
differentiation. Med Hypotheses. 2014; 83:404–406.
53.	 Matsui T, Sashihara S, Oh Y, Waxman SG. An orphan nuclear
receptor, mROR alpha, and its spatial expression in adult
mouse brain. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1995; 33:217–226.

66.	 Cucina A, Proietti S, D’Anselmi F, Coluccia P, Dinicola S,
Frati L, Bizzarri M. Evidence for a biphasic apoptotic
­pathway induced by melatonin in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. J Pineal Res. 2009; 46:172–180.

54.	 Casado-Zapico S, Martin V, Garcia-Santos G, RodriguezBlanco J, Sanchez-Sanchez AM, Luno E, Suarez C, GarciaPedrero JM, Menendez ST, Antolin I, Rodriguez C. Regulation
of the expression of death receptors and their ligands by melatonin in haematological cancer cell lines and in leukaemia cells
from patients. J Pineal Res. 2011; 50:345–355.

67.	 Joza N, Susin SA, Daugas E, Stanford WL, Cho SK,
Li  CY, Sasaki T, Elia AJ, Cheng HY, Ravagnan L,
Ferri KF, Zamzami N, Wakeham A, Hakem R, Yoshida H,
Kong YY, et al. Essential role of the mitochondrial
­apoptosis-inducing factor in programmed cell death. Nature.
2001; 410:549–554.

55.	 Osseni RA, Rat P, Bogdan A, Warnet JM, Touitou  Y.
Evidence of prooxidant and antioxidant action of m
­ elatonin
on human liver cell line HepG2. Life Sci. 2000; 68:387–399.

68.	 Skehan P, Storeng R, Scudiero D, Monks A, McMahon J,
Vistica D, Warren JT, Bokesch H, Kenney S, Boyd MR.
New colorimetric cytotoxicity assay for anticancer-drug
screening. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1990; 82:1107–1112.

56.	 Tsujimoto Y, Shimizu S. Role of the mitochondrial
­membrane permeability transition in cell death. Apoptosis.
2007; 12:835–840.

69.	 Chou TC. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440–446.

57.	 Zhang HM, Zhang Y, Zhang BX. The role of mitochondrial complex III in melatonin-induced ROS production in
­cultured mesangial cells. J Pineal Res. 2011; 50:78–82.

70.	 Chou TC, Martin N. (2007). CompuSyn Software for Drug
Combinations and for General Dose-Effect Analysis, and
User’s Guide. (Paramus, NJ: ComboSyn, Inc.).

58.	 Leja-Szpak A, Jaworek J, Pierzchalski P, Reiter RJ.
Melatonin induces pro-apoptotic signaling pathway in
human pancreatic carcinoma cells (PANC-1). J Pineal Res.
2010; 49:248–255.

71.	 Rasmussen HN, Rasmussen UF. Oxygen solubilities of
media used in electrochemical respiration measurements.
Anal Biochem. 2003; 319:105–113.

59.	 Martin-Renedo J, Mauriz JL, Jorquera F, Ruiz-Andres O,
Gonzalez P, Gonzalez-Gallego J. Melatonin induces cell

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17096

Oncotarget

