Meeting Report

Cancer
Research

Thirteenth AACR Special Conference on Cancer Epigenetics
Jason P. Ross and Peter L. Molloy

Abstract
The 13th American Association of Cancer Research (AACR) Special Conference on Cancer Epigenetics was
held in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on January 20–23, 2010. This event heralded insights arising from the large
sequencing efforts within the NIH Epigenetics Roadmap Project and the Cancer Genome Atlas Project, as well
as important new discoveries in the basic biology of epigenetics and results of epigenetic drug clinical trials.
A summary of the recent findings is presented here, with particular emphasis on the major themes of
the conference. Cancer Res; 70(19); 7372–8. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction
Returning to the home of the first AACR Special Conference in Cancer Epigenetics, San Juan, Puerto Rico, this meeting provided a powerful reminder of how epigenetics has
moved from the periphery to center stage of cancer research
over the intervening 13 years. The conference was organized
by Jean-Pierre Issa, Peter Laird, and Kornelia Polyak, and the
28 invited and 26 proffered presentations were grouped thematically around the following topic areas: stem cells and
differentiation; cancer epigenomes; clinical implications
and epigenetic therapies; the establishment, reading, and
writing of epigenetic marks; environmental interactions;
and technology development and bioinformatics. (A list of
conference presenters and their affiliations is provided as
Supplementary Information). More than 300 attendees were
at the conference. Demonstrative of the growth in data currently being generated in cancer epigenetics, two poster sessions
over consecutive days were arranged to display all the 145 posters. In the following sections, we discuss findings and concepts
emerging in the major thematic areas of the conference.

The Epigenome of Normal and Stem Cells
Underpinning studies of epigenetic changes that occur in
cancer cells is an understanding of the epigenetic landscape
of normal cells and the processes that drive the orderly
development and differentiation of the body's multiple tissues
and cell types. In the opening plenary lecture, Rudolf Jaenisch
discussed the nature of stem cells and their epigenetic states
from the perspective of reprogramming somatic cells to

Authors' Affiliation: CSIRO Food and Nutritional Sciences, Preventative
Health Flagship, North Ryde, Sydney, Australia
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer
Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Peter L. Molloy, P.O. Box 52, North Ryde, 1670
NSW, Australia. Phone: 61-2-9490-5168; Fax: 61-2-9490-5020; E-mail:
peter.molloy@csiro.au.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2102
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

7372

generate induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Elegant experiments using differentiated pro-B cells demonstrated the
stochastic nature of the epigenetic reprogramming driven by
combinations of transcription factors, with the vast majority
of cells able to be reprogrammed into iPS cells. A clear message, whether for application of stem cells in tissue therapy or
in understanding the aberrant epigenetic state of cancer cells,
was the importance of understanding the epigenetic ground
state of pluripotency. In the case of hematopoietic stem cells,
this theme was further reinforced by Margaret Goodell, who
challenged the notion of narrow linear pathways of successive
commitment to progenitor cells of more restricted differentiation potential. Rather than containing different classes of
stem cells capable of giving rise exclusively to myeloid or Bor T-lymphoid lineage cells, her findings suggest that there
is a “consortium” of stem cells of different flavors. Each is able
to give rise to cells of different lineages, but with different propensities for production of cells of each lineage (i.e., myeloidbiased compared with lymphoid-biased stem cells).
Bing Ren presented an exposition of the first comprehensive epigenome maps, including complete genome bisulfite
methylation sequencing of human embryonic stem (ES) cells
in comparison with fetal lung fibroblasts (1). At the chromatin level, the major differences observed were in the expansion of gene silencing–related methylation of histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9me3) from a coverage of <10% of the genome
in ES cells to >30% in fibroblasts. Fibroblast chromatin was
also distinguished by expansion of the histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) mark that was promoter localized and enriched in genes involved in developmental
programming (contrasting with H3K9me3, which was largely
located in intergenic regions). The distribution of canonical
CpG methylation was ∼90% equivalent when comparing
fibroblasts and ES cells, with elevated methylation observed
in the gene body of highly transcribed genes. The most unexpected finding was that of significant levels of non-CpG
methylation in ES cells. Non-CpG methylation was depleted
from functional sequences, such as binding sites for NANOG,
SOX2, and OCT4 transcription factors, and was enriched
in transcribed regions—exons, introns, and 3′ untranslated
regions. The possible role of non-CpG methylation in ES

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Epigenetics

cell–specific gene regulation was discussed, but the possibility was also raised (Jaenisch) that the non-CpG methylation
was “noise” generated by the high activity of de novo DNA
methyltransferases that would be subsequently diluted out
by cell replication.
The role of H3K27 methylation in marking genes that are
developmentally regulated was further reinforced in the case
of primary breast epithelial cells where about 30% of the
genes differentially expressed between progenitor-like CD44+
cells and CD24+ differentiated luminal epithelial cells were
marked by H3K27 methylation (Reo Maruyama and Kornelia
Polyak). In comparing CD44+ and CD24+ cell types, there was
a shift in differential marking from H3K27me3 in CD44+ cells
to more common DNA methylation marking in differentiated
luminal epithelial cells, including some genes where the
H3K27me3 mark was replaced by DNA methylation on differentiation. Pregnancy induced a shift in the epigenetic profile of CD44+ cells toward that of differentiated CD24+ cells,
a reprogramming that may have significance for the higher
rate of ER+ cancers in nulliparous women.
Tom Gingeras described our evolving understanding of the
complexity of the transcriptome and “RNA space” with a particular focus on chimeric RNAs, which are RNAs containing
sequences from different genome regions and, often, different chromosomes (2). Interestingly, the observed clusters
of connections between genes within chimera RNA often
include functionally related genes, and for about 70% of
chimeric RNAs, chromatin analysis indicates that they are
physically colocated in the nucleus. He postulated that chimeric RNAs may have a functional role in bringing genes
back together in transcription factories, providing a form
of spatial memory.
Using the muscle-specific MYOD gene as a model, Peter
Jones described the interplay between the epigenetic states
of the promoter and enhancer regions and nucleosome positioning in MYOD-expressing and nonexpressing cells. He
described essentially three states: (a) actively expressing
genes in which the promoter and enhancer are unmethylated
and contain local nucleosome free regions; the histone 2
variant H2A.Z is positioned at both the promoter and
enhancer; (b) a repressed state, such as in nonexpressing
fibroblasts where the promoter is blocked by nucleosomes
bearing the H3K27me3 repressive mark and the enhancer
region is blocked in about 50% of copies, but still is associated with H2A.Z; and (c) a silenced state, as seen in some
colon cancer cell lines in which both the enhancer and promoter are methylated and H3K27me3 methylation is replaced by H3K9me3 methylation. He stressed the critically
important role of nucleosome positioning and remodeling
in epigenetic regulation and pointed to acetylation at histone
3 lysine 56 (H3K56ac) as a potentially important modification
for loosening histone-DNA interactions and allowing transcriptional activation. Jessica Tyler expanded on this theme,
exploring the role of H3K56ac in yeast. H3K56ac localizes to
sites of DNA replication and repair, and absence of H3K56
acetylation leads to accelerated aging. Lower histone H3
levels are associated with aging, with extension of life span
observed by elevating histone expression. She noted that

www.aacrjournals.org

levels of H3K56ac are elevated in many cancers, with most
of the acetylated form being free protein.
James Sherley described an additional role for H2A.Z (also
known as H2.AFZ), which is concentrated at the kinetochore
and involved in chromosome segregation. This study showed
by immunofluorescence that in asymmetrically dividing tissue stem cells, the chromosomes containing “parent” strands
selectively contain H2A.Z and remain in the parent stemlike cell after division. The investigators postulate that
retaining the parental noncopied DNA strand in the stem
cell minimizes the accumulation of replication errors and
protects against cancer development.

Cancer Epigenomes
One of the major developments in the field of cancer epigenetics has been the emerging application of genome-wide
technologies, initially using microarrays, but increasingly
high-throughput sequencing (see following discussion). The
effect of this approach was evident in most of the presentations discussed in the following paragraphs, and the meeting
provided an excellent opportunity to compare and consolidate concepts of epigenome dysregulation in cancer.
Two presentations pointed to the importance of epigenetic
control over extended chromatin regions and aberrant gene
silencing in cancer. Susan Clark, using ChIP-on-chip and
ChiP-seq, described the identification of 35 chromosomal
regions that showed concurrent repression of multiple genes
in a high proportion (up to 70%) of prostate cancers and
met their criteria for long-range epigenetic silencing (LRES;
ref. 3). Within these regions, diverse modes of silencing were
apparent and an LRES region on chromosome 7q35 was chosen as an example. Suppression of gene expression across the
region was consistently associated with loss of the active
H3K9 acetylation mark. The nature of suppressive marks differed according to the preexisting normal epigenetic state of
subregions within the LRES region. Three common modes of
epigenetic silencing were found and included (a) reinforcement, (b) gain, and (c) exchange of repressive histone and
DNA methylation marks. Marcos Estecio described the
genome-wide analysis by ChIP-seq of lamina-associated
domains (LAD) in the PC3 prostate cancer cell line. Lamina
domains are much more frequent in cancer cell lines than in
normal lung fibroblasts, but shorter in length, averaging
about 30 to 70 kb and accounting for about 2.7% of the
genome or 1.9% of Refseq genes. Genes with LADs are consistently repressed, but there is only a low coincidence of promoter DNA methylation within LADs. A significant fraction
overlap with regions enriched in H3K27me3, but a substantial
proportion of LAD repression domains are not associated
with H3K9me2, H3K27me3, or DNA methylation, raising the
possibility that lamina association may be of itself repressive.
Given their size and features of repressive marks, it will be
interesting to see whether there is an overlap of LADs in
cancer cells with subregions within LRES domains.
Benjamin Berman described the initial analysis of the first
full genome-wide bisulfite methylome sequencing of a
matched primary cancer and normal genome. He reported

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7373

Ross and Molloy

observations on cancer-specific DNA methylation changes in
annotated promoters, gene bodies, and predicted protein
binding sites. Difference plots showed a consistent pattern
of increased methylation within CpG islands in cancer, with
decreased methylation in flanking and transcribed sequences.
Consistent with LRES, he presented an example of a long chromatin domain that showed overall hypomethylation, but with
peaks of DNA hypermethylation, which tended to correspond
to CpG islands.
The presence of the “polycomb mark,” methylation of
H3K27 by the EZH2 enzyme of the PRC2 complex, in ES cells
has emerged over the past couple of years as an important
indicator of genes frequently subject to epigenetic silencing
and DNA methylation in cancer. EZH2 is commonly overexpressed in solid tumors, and Arul Chinnaiyan described
how the overexpression of EZH2 in aggressive and metastatic
prostate cancer, driven by and in conjunction with the expression of the TMPRS-ERG fusion gene, led to repression
of a set of stem cell PRC2 target genes. He proposed EZH2
as a promising therapeutic target for treatment of prostate
and other solid tumors. Karen Cichowski provided further insights into the role of EZH2 in driving aggressive prostate
cancer, demonstrating that, through repression of DAB2IP,
it drove primary growth through activation of the Ras pathway and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and metastasis through NF-κB activation. Charles Roberts discussed the
critical role of EZH2 overexpression in rhabdoid sarcomas,
where deletion of the chromatin remodeling gene SNF5 leads
to increased EZH2 expression and activation of stem cell
gene expression programs that drive tumorigenesis. Sara
Sukumar provided additional insight into the potential of
long noncoding RNAs, acting through the PRC2 complex,
to control epigenetic status. HOTAIR is a long noncoding
RNA transcribed from the HOX gene cluster, and its expression is often highly elevated in metastatic breast cancer.
HOTAIR specifically binds to the PRC2 complex, and its overexpression leads to recruitment of PRC2 complexes to >800
genes, leading to H3K27 trimethylation and repression of
gene expression.
Whereas EZH2 is the epigenetic regulator most strongly
implicated in cancer development, the importance of other
“readers and writers” of the genome is emerging, as is the
understanding of the molecular pathways through which
they act. These include the Jumonji family of histone
demethylases; one enzymatically inactive family member,
JARID2, copurifies with the PRC2 complex and, through its
DNA binding domain, targets a specific set of promoters in
ES cells (Kristian Helin). Mark Bedford described identification of the Tudor domain protein TRD3 as a reader of arginine methylation marks deposited by the transcriptional
coactivators CARM1 and PRMT1—H3R17me2a and
H4R3me2a, respectively. TRD3 is localized to transcription
start sites and acts as a coactivator of androgen- and
estrogen-responsive genes. Priya Kapoor provided insight
into another epigenetically regulated step in gene transcription, elucidating the role of histone 4 lysine 20 trimethylation
(H4K20me3) in blocking transition from an RNA PolII initiation to an elongation complex. Removal of H4K20me3 and

7374

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

acetylation at histone 4 lysine 16 (H4K16ac) allowed productive elongation and was required in combination with promoter demethylation for maximal reactivation of the TMS1
tumor suppressor gene.
Jean-Pierre Issa discussed the features that make genes
targets for methylation in cancer. Pointing out that methylation seemed to be largely independent of gene function,
he proposed a deterministic model of DNA hypermethylation
in contrast to a model of stochastic methylation followed
by selection. Issa and colleagues analyzed the CpG island
methylation profiles of the cell lines in the National Cancer
Institute 60-cancer panel and identified a pattern of a lower
level of long interspersed nuclear element (LINE), long terminal repeat (LTR), and short interspersed nuclear element
(SINE) retrotransposons in a 20-kb window around methylation
susceptible promoters. A predictive model based on these
observations was validated in an independent set of primary
bladder cancers and cell lines. Issa noted that Polycombtargeted genes fell within their susceptible target genes.
Andrew Feinberg challenged us to view aberrant promoter
methylation in cancer through the lens of the evolutionary
development of epigenetic regulatory systems (4). He observed that the most epigenetically variable regions in the
genome occur outside or at the edge of CpG islands, and proposed that variable methylation regions (VMR) provide increased epigenetic plasticity and allow cells to respond to
different environments. Mouse VMRs are enriched in developmental genes, and there is significant overlap with tissue
and cancer differentially methylated regions in humans. He
proposed that such regions that have been selected through
evolution may be a Trojan horse for cancer susceptibility.
Two intersecting themes of epigenetic gene silencing in
cancer are emerging and were features of presentations at
the conference. One develops from the role of gene-targeted
regulatory proteins including specific transcription factors
and chromatin-modifying proteins, such as polycomb group
proteins, which target networks of genes distributed across
the genome. The other draws our attention to the role of
chromosomal domains and coordinated geographic control
of localized gene clusters.

Environmental Effects on the Epigenome
Both epidemiologic data and animal experiments support
the hypothesis that environmental agents may exert their
oncogenic effects through epigenetic as well as genetic
mechanisms. Rob Waterland and Nellie Ulrich reviewed both
their own work and that of others in discussing the challenging area of the epigenetic effects of diet and environment.
The effect of diet, specifically components affecting methyl
donor/one-carbon metabolism, has been most clearly shown
in the Agouti mouse model where elevated methyl donor
supply can cause methylation-induced silencing of the intracisternal A particle LTR element controlling agouti expression (Waterland).
Although a number of studies of the effects of polymorphisms in one-carbon metabolism genes have led to inconclusive results, Nellie Ulrich concluded that the MHTFR

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Epigenetics

TT homozygosity combined with low dietary folate can lead
to global hypomethylation. Similarly, folate metabolism
polymorphisms are associated with CIMP+ colon cancers.
She pointed to other areas, particularly cigarette smoke and inflammation, where effects on cancer development may have a
significant epigenetic component. This theme was taken up in
the following two talks, which described the use of human
bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) to study the effect of cigarette
smoke. Fang Liu demonstrated substantial effects of long-term
cigarette smoke condensate on histone modifications: decreased H4K16ac and H4K20me3, increased H3K27me3 levels,
as well as 40% to 50% hypomethylation of repeat sequences
and hypermethylation of specific tumor suppressor genes.
Using the purified tobacco smoke carcinogen benzopyrenediol epoxide, Carmen Tellez showed increased levels of
DNMT1 and silencing of nearly 500 genes, both with and
without CpG island promoters. siRNA knockdown of DNMT1
blocked carcinogen-induced transformation of HBECs and
associated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
Another significant exogenous factor affecting specific cancers is bacterial or viral infection. Toshikazu Ushijima discussed the DNA methylation changes seen in noncancerous
mucosae of individuals with Helicobacter pylori–associated
gastric cancer. Use of a mongolian gerbil animal model has
allowed researchers to demonstrate that the altered methylation following H. pylori infection was dependent on an infection-specific inflammatory response that could be blocked by
cyclosporin. Using a humanized mouse liver model, Yasuyuki
Okamoto showed that hepatitis B and C viruses (HBV and
HCV) induced a common set of DNA methylation changes,
with additional changes that were HCV specific. These
changes included hypermethylation of multiple genes (e.g.,
HOXA1) and LINE-1 hypomethylation. The establishment
of such animal models offers the opportunity to understand
the molecular mechanisms involved in infection-induced
epigenetic changes.

Technologies for Epigenome Analysis
Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis
It is an exciting time in the development of epigenetic
methods, particularly in relation to whole genome methods
for microarrays and deep sequencing. Eventually, cancer epigenomic methods will have to sufficiently address issues of tissue heterogeneity and the often limiting amounts of DNA
present in clinical cancer samples. A suite of new methods
were unveiled at this conference. Of particular interest was
the claim by Pacific Biosciences (Benjamin Flusberg) of DNA
methylation sequencing without bisulfite treating DNA (5).
Benjamin described a new extension of single-molecule realtime (SMRT) technology where DNA methylation could be determined by examining the kinetics of base addition. It was
possible to detect 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, N6-methyladenosine, 8-oxoguanosine, as well as 5-methylcytosine. Although
not yet reaching the specificity of bisulfite sequencing, the
technology has the potential for much longer reads and of
allowing inspection of longer-range allelic methylation.

www.aacrjournals.org

Bisulfite sequencing of the first whole methylomes of
normal (ES and fibroblast cells) and cancer DNA has shown
technical feasibility. However, costs are still prohibitive for
sequencing larger numbers of clinical samples, and several
strategies are being used to gain good genome coverage
at reduced cost. Alex Meissner described his group's work
of optimizing and benchmarking their reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) method for clinical
samples. He reported that after optimization, input DNA
requirements could be reduced to 30 ng of fresh tissue or
1 μg of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue. The Broad
Institute has also addressed the need for downstream analysis tools by releasing the “Epigenome Pipeline Package,” an
RRBS software toolkit developed for the analysis of clinical
samples (6). RRBS performed favorably in comparison with
the sequencing-based methylation enrichment by capture
methods, MeDIP-seq and MethylCap-Seq, as well as the
array-based Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation27 platform. At a broad resolution, there was a good visual correlation between all methods. In terms of power to detect
differentially methylated regions, RRBS and MethylCap-Seq
both performed well, with MeDIP-Seq being significantly less
sensitive. MeDIP-Seq also exhibited bias, particularly at lower
CpG densities.
The first human ES cell epigenome shows that non-CpG
methylation is widespread, accounting for 24.5% of total
methylation in H1 cells (1). An enrichment method with
the potential to select efficiently for CpG-methylated
and non–CpG-methylated DNA was described by Jason
Ross. Streptavidin bisulfite ligand methylation enrichment
(SuBLIME) enriches for methylated DNA before bisulfite treatment and deep sequencing by labeling bisulfitetreated DNA with biotin at sites of cytosine nonconversion.
SuBLIME was applied to the study of three reduced complexity colorectal cancer cell line genomes and a normal
blood control.
Two other complexity reduction methods using restriction enzymes were presented as posters. Jaroslav Jelinek
presented deep sequencing data using digital restriction
enzyme analysis of methylation (DREAM). This approach
uses the different end sequences created by sequential cutting with the methylation sensitive enzyme SmaI (blunt end)
and its methylation insensitive neoschizomer XmaI (filled in
5′ overhang) before ligation of sequencing adaptors. Analysis
of the terminal sequences in deep sequencing data allows
determination of methylation status at individual SmaI sites
across the genome. A poster by Horace Drew introduced
bisulfite tagging, a method relying on cutting the genome
with the methylation-insensitive enzymes MspI and TaqI,
which yields a cytosine-containing single-stranded overhang. The cytosine(s) in these overhangs are converted
through bisulfite treatment without denaturation. Selective
adaptor ligation fractionates the genome at these cut sites
into methylated and unmethylated compartments, with
the method amenable to both microarrays and deep sequencing. Although DREAM and bisulfite tagging are limited
to inspecting cytosine methylation within singular sites, they
have advantages in mapping back to an unmodified genome,

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7375

Ross and Molloy

7376

allowing more deep sequencing reads to be placed uniquely
within the genome.

laboratory normalizes to preserve the distribution and has a
feature to access the quality of exon-junction reads.

Bioinformatics, biostatistics, and data mining
Epigenomics is a relative new area, and analysis of
genome-wide data poses particular challenges. High-density
array normalization has some difficulties; without proper
consideration of the data, it is easy to “normalize” away
actual biological differences between highly variant experimental groups, such as some cancers to normal tissues, or
“epigenome-mark” enriched portions of the genome compared with total DNA. Floor Duijkers, in analyzing neuroblastoma cell Differential Methylation Hybridization data from
244K CpG island arrays (Agilent), found that traditional loess
and/or VSN normalization removed the treatment effect
between the paired samples. Somewhat fortuitously, the
restriction enzyme digestion in the Differential Methylation
Hybridization method means that some probes should only
exhibit background hybridization in both enriched and total
fraction samples within a pair. Duijkers developed an adjusted, weighted loess inter-array normalization based on baseline correction to this set of probes on the array, which led to
significantly better methylation discrimination and detection
of differential methylation. This experience suggests that in
designing custom methylation arrays, strong consideration
should be given in the design phase to normalization strategies, perhaps with the incorporation of probes explicitly for
normalization purposes.
The application of deep sequencing to epigenomics poses
new biostatistical and bioinformatic challenges. In a wideranging talk, Wei Li examined some of these issues with aligning and analyzing transcriptome-derived deep sequencing
reads (RNA-Seq) and short bisulfite reads (bis-Seq) data before
introducing his groups' software (7). Bisulfite treatment of
DNA converts most cytosines to uracil and the genome is
decomposed to a pseudo-three base code. This significantly
reduces the uniqueness and information density of the DNA,
creating some difficulties with aligning bis-Seq reads. In silico
crafted “hypermethylated” reference genomes with all cytosines removed except those in a CpG context creates an alignment bias toward mapping reads with methylated cytosines.
Conversely, the opposite is true for “hypomethylated” reference genomes. One bias-free approach is to remove all cytosines from reads of the genome and then map the cytosines
back, postalignment. However, this approach ignores potential
mapping information contained within the cytosines present
in the read. Li demonstrated BSMAP, a software system that
maps asymmetrically, only allowing thymines in bisulfite reads
to align with cytosines in the reference, but not the reverse.
This maximizes the information content of the cytosines within the read without introducing false-positive alignments. Also
of particular note, Li warned against the use of the commonly
used reads per kilobase measure (RPKM) for RNA-Seq. RNASeq count data follow a negative binomial distribution, an
overdispersed Poisson distribution arising from correlation
within the data. RPKM adjustment reduces variance in a gene
length–dependent manner such that normalized data cease to
follow a Poisson-like distribution. Software developed in the Li

Clinical Impact

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Diagnosis and prognosis
There has been a rapid expansion of knowledge in cancer
epigenetics and maturation of DNA methylation detection
techniques with numerous reports on promising DNA methylation diagnostic biomarkers. However, there are few validation studies and only a few markers progressing to clinical
use. This led Paul Cairns to make a plea for large, consistently designed studies designed by a consortium using
standardized and optimized methods, animal models, and
controls with methods robust for transfer to outside laboratories with lesser expertise. For validation studies, Cairns
stipulated the need for a reference set of specimens and
called for standardization of specimen collection, DNA isolation, bisulfite modification, assay, and methylation scoring. For development of blood-based DNA methylation
biomarkers, he further speculated that the discovery of biomarkers unique to a cancer arising from a particular tissue or
histologic cell type will be unlikely, but that this could be
aided by the use of multigene diagnostic panels and algorithms to determine the likelihood of the cancer tissue of
origin. He also made the point that age-related alterations
in the epigenome create additional difficulties for detection
of neoplastic biomarkers.
Tumor classification and prognostic and
predictive biomarkers
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project, jointly funded
by the National Cancer Institute and the National Human
Genome Research Institute, is unique in scope, size, and
depth, with profiling of gene expression, miRNAs, copy number variation, and genome-wide methylation, as well as
SNP genotyping and exon sequencing. The pilot project,
announced in 2006, focused on the characterization of the
most common forms of malignant brain cancer in adults
(glioblastoma multiforme), ovarian cancer (serous cystadenocarcinoma), and lung cancer (squamous carcinoma). In
September 2009, the NIH announced an expanded program
to examine genomic changes in more than 20 types of cancer,
including cancer DNA methylomes in many common cancers. At this AACR conference, Benjamin Berman from
the USC Epigenome Center as part of a collaborative effort
with Johns Hopkins University, discussed the sequencing
and ongoing bioinformatics of the first cancer methylome,
derived from a stage III colorectal cancer selected for optimal
purity and its adjacent normal colon tissue (see previous
discussion).
Analysis of data from the TCGA pilot study by Houtan
Noushmehr identified a specific subgroup of tumors characterized by coordinated methylation of a large number of loci
(8). It was suggested that such coordinated silencing might
arise through a defect in a trans-acting factor. The “G-CIMP”
tumors were characterized by a proneural phenotype, IDH1
mutation, and specific chromosomal alterations. Typically,

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Epigenetics

patients had a favorable prognosis. A CIMP cancer phenotype has now been identified as a clinical subtype in colon,
gastric, ovarian, head and neck, and oral cancers. It remains
to be seen whether tumors arising from other tissues have a
defined CIMP subtype. Regardless, better definition of cancer
subtypes by the TCGA and other consortia will allow the
appropriate design of clinical trials using epigenetic drugs
and hopefully improve patient outcomes.
One area where epigenetic profiling is having increasing
effect is in the prediction of disease progression or response
to therapy. James Herman spoke of the use of methylation
of specific genes as prognostic or predictive biomarkers.
Methylation of the MGMT gene has become well established
as predictive of response to treatment with alkylating agents
in glioblastomas. Similarly, he reported that silencing of the
CHFR gene by DNA methylation in esophageal cancer is
predictive of response to taxane therapy. He also described
studies of stage I lung adenocarcinomas, showing that methylation of a greater number of specific marker genes was
associated with a substantially higher rate of recurrence,
independent of treatment. In a bladder cancer genome scan,
Carmen Marsit identified the methylation of two genes,
KRT13 and HOXB2, as being significantly associated with
poorer survival.
Epigenetic therapies
Epigenetic therapies have emerged as a major target for
pharmaceutical companies. Although drugs targeting DNA
methylation and histone deacetylases, in particular, have either gained clinical approval or are being extensively tested
in clinical trials, there is still much to be learned about their
mechanisms of action and clinical application. Progress on
both fronts was reported at the meeting. An important
emerging concept in treatment is the ability of epigenetically
targeted drugs to resensitize tumors to other forms of treatment. The importance of aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in the development of platinum resistance in ovarian
cancer provides a rationale for combination chemotherapy.
In a 10-patient phase I/II trial of low-dose decitabine [5aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC)] combined with carboplatin,
Kenneth Nephew and Fang Fang observed one complete
patient response and three additional patients with stable
disease for more than 6 months. Complete response required
six to eight cycles of treatment. They reported that this therapy was tolerated and determined to be safe; demethylation
of LINE-1 repeat sequences and some single-copy genes
could be monitored in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
The theme of reversal of drug tolerance was elaborated by
Marie Classon in the final talk of the meeting (9). Treatment
of PC9 non–small cell lung cancer cells with the epidermal
growth factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib led to the
emergence of resistant or drug-tolerant colonies. This drugtolerant state is dependent on insulin-like growth factor-I
receptor signaling and the histone demethylase KDMA5/
RBP2/JARID1a and involves widespread epigenetic change.
The drug-tolerant state is semi-stable, and after extended
culturing, cells return to a drug-sensitive state. Importantly,
drug-tolerant cells are highly sensitive to histone deacetylase

www.aacrjournals.org

inhibitors. Similar properties of drug tolerance to a variety of
agents were observed in cell lines from other cancer types.
The data provide a clear rationale for combined treatment
with epigenetic drugs to prevent or minimize the emergence
of drug resistance.
With the emergence of epigenetically targeted therapies,
Steve Baylin stressed the importance of distinguishing the
epigenetic and cytotoxic effects of drugs such as 5-aza-dC.
Unlike most cancer therapeutics, a significant feature of this
successful application has been the de-escalation of doses.
Longer-term low-dose treatments show greater efficacy. As
an example, he discussed treatment of the Kasumi-1 leukemia cell line with different doses of 5-aza-dC. Concentrations
as low as 10 nmol/L were shown to be as effective in promoter demethylation as the much higher standard dose of
500 nmol/L. Low doses of 10 or 100 nmol/L 5-aza-dC also
effectively prevented long-term self-renewal. Similarly, in a
model of breast cancer engraftment, treatment of MCF7 cells
for 3 days with 500 nmol/L 5-aza-dC (a low level for this
cell line) resulted in minimal DNA damage and no acute cell
cycle arrest, but effectively inhibited engraftment.

Summary
The 13th AACR Special Conference on Cancer Epigenetics
was one of breadth and depth. References to some key papers
described at and published shortly before or since the conference are provided. It is worth commenting on the quality
of the posters and the quality of discussions held around
those posters. In particular, this AACR Cancer Epigenetics
conference was highlighted by the discussion of data from
the first complete human methylomes and the introduction
of the first cancer methylome. No doubt these are the first of
many cancer epigenomes to be published in the next few
years, signaling the start of a great discovery phase in cancer
epigenetics. This meeting also heralded a deeper understanding of the histone code both on a genome-wide scale and
within the fine regulation of single genes. One got the sense
that cancer epigenetics has now reached a certain maturity
in terms of our understanding of aberrant epigenetic signatures in neoplastic cells and our development of epigenetics
research tools. Now is the time for grand plans. In the spirit
of adventure, the meeting was dovetailed with the International Human Epigenome Consortium (IHEC) launch conference in Paris, France, on January 25–26, for which a number
of investigators flew directly from Puerto Rico. IHEC intends
to decipher at least 1,000 reference epigenomes at a cost of
US$100 million within the next 7 to 10 years. The findings of
these large projects will challenge our assumptions about
cancer epigenetics and epigenetics in general. Increasingly,
we expect to see systems biology approaches applied to epigenomics. The generation of epigenomic, genomic, and transcriptomic data for individual samples in large projects such
as the IHEC and TCGA projects will give us an unparalleled
view of the epigenomic landscape but will create significant
bioinformatics, biostatistics, and systems biology integration
challenges. Heavy investment in building bioinformatics
tools and the development of biostatistical methods seem

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7377

Ross and Molloy

warranted, lest the capacity for data generation starts to
exceed our capacity to interpret it. The ongoing challenge
will be to understand the molecular mechanisms responsible
for laying down the normal epigenome and how they become
disrupted in cancers.
The translation of cancer epigenetics basic research into
therapeutic outcomes for patients has already begun. A number of talks were presented at the conference of nascent clinical trials of epigenetic drugs. It is notable that a consensus
was formed suggesting that low doses and multitreatment
regimens of epigenetic drugs were most effective.
The development of deep sequencing technologies has
brought nucleotide-level resolution to the study of epigenetics. However, clinical epigenetic biomarker discovery
and validation requires the inspection of large patient
cohorts, a costly endeavor. In the medium term, to keep costs
manageable, we expect the analysis of complexity-reduced or
enriched methylomes to be still of critical importance.
This conference highlighted that as we unravel the complexities of epigenetics, we must increasingly appreciate the

three-dimensional structure of the chromatin. Ultimately,
we must understand the epigenome not just at the level of
single nucleosomes but as chromatin neighborhoods and
domains interacting in three dimensions. It will be an exciting time ahead as we see the study of cancer epigenetics
become increasingly epigenomic in scope. We look forward
to the next AACR Special Conference on Cancer Epigenetics
to hear in detail some of these outcomes.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
We thank the conference chairpersons Jean-Pierre Issa, Peter Laird, and
Kornelia Polyak for their much appreciated time and effort in organizing
this conference. We also wish to thank all the presenters, supporters, and
attendees who contributed to make this an excellent meeting.
Received 06/16/2010; accepted 07/26/2010; published OnlineFirst 09/21/2010.

References
1. Lister R, Pelizzola M, Dowen RH, et al. Human DNA methylomes at
base resolution show widespread epigenomic differences. Nature
2009;462:315–22.
2. Gingeras TR. Implications of chimaeric non-co-linear transcripts.
Nature 2009;461:206–11.
3. Coolen MW, Stirzaker C, Song JZ, et al. Consolidation of the cancer
genome into domains of repressive chromatin by long-range epigenetic silencing (LRES) reduces transcriptional plasticity. Nat Cell Biol
2010;12:235–46.
4. Feinberg AP, Irizarry RA. Evolution in health and medicine Sackler
colloquium: stochastic epigenetic variation as a driving force of development, evolutionary adaptation, and disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2010;107 Suppl 1:1757–64.
5. Flusberg BA, Webster DR, Lee JH, et al. Direct detection of DNA

7378

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

6.

7.
8.

9.

methylation during single-molecule, real-time sequencing. Nat Methods 2010;7:461–5.
Gu H, Bock C, Mikkelsen TS, et al. Genome-scale DNA methylation
mapping of clinical samples at single-nucleotide resolution. Nat Methods 2010;7:133–6.
Li W, Miao L. Li Lab website [Internet]. Available from: http://
openwetware.org/wiki/Li_Lab.
Noushmehr H, Weisenberger DJ, Diefes K, et al. Cancer Genome
Atlas Research Network. Identification of a CpG island methylator
phenotype that defines a distinct subgroup of glioma. Cancer Cell
2010;17:510–22.
Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, et al. A chromatin-mediated reversible
drug-tolerant state in cancer cell subpopulations. Cell 2010;141:
69–80.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Thirteenth AACR Special Conference on Cancer Epigenetics
Jason P. Ross and Peter L. Molloy
Cancer Res 2010;70:7372-7378.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/19/7372

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

