Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619

Meeting Report

Chemistry in Cancer Research: A Vital Partnership
1

2

3

4

5

Shana J. Sturla, John J. Irwin, Richard N. Loeppky, Mark J. Mulvihill, and Mark Searcey
1
Department of Medicinal Chemistry and The Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; 2Department of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California; 3Department of Chemistry,
University of Missouri, Columbia, Columbia, Missouri; 4OSI Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Farmingdale, New York; and
5
School of Chemical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of East Anglia, Norwich, Norfolk, England

The first Chemistry in Cancer Research Conference jointly
presented by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and American
Association for Cancer Research (AACR) was hosted by the
Chemistry in Cancer Research Working Group (CICR) of the
AACR, February 4 to 7, 2007, in San Diego, CA. The purpose of
the meeting was to provide an interactive and cross-disciplinary
forum for scientists engaged in cancer research with a unifying
focus on chemical structure and reactivity. Research areas spanned
fields, such as biomarker analysis, carcinogenesis, chemical biology,
drug discovery and development, molecular modeling, proteomics,
and structural biology. An outstanding group of 26 invited
talks, including two keynote talks, plus 22 proffered talks from
selected abstracts, including early career scientists and students,
and 109 poster presentations comprised this stimulating meeting.
There were over 240 registrants, including 122 ACS members, 31
AACR members, and 42 members of both organizations. Travel
awards were provided for 13 scholars-in-training and one minorityserving institution faculty. This meeting report presents highlights
from each oral presentation, organized by session. A complete
listing of oral and poster session presentations can be found in
appendices. Further details, including reaction schemes with
chemical structures available for some presentations, are available
as supplementary data.
A tribute was shared in memory of Christopher J. Michejda, who
directed the chemistry and structural biology faculty of National
Cancer Institute (NCI)’s Center for Cancer Research and who died
suddenly 1 month before the meeting. Chris was a founding CICR
member and a strong proponent of the power of chemistry in
cancer research. He is remembered for his diverse scientific
contributions in areas including cancer therapy and nitrosamine
carcinogenesis, his infectious personality, and a belief in the
potential of science to serve humanity.
The meeting was opened by Stephen Fesik (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL), who stressed that the biggest premium for
mistakes in drug development are involved in clinical trials and
that any preclinical information with the potential to influence
clinical trials is extremely important and valuable. The research
centered on the Bcl 2 family of proteins and ABT 737, a candidate
that potentiates chemotherapy and radiotherapy and displays
single-agent activity in cell lines. Understanding the mechanistic
basis of unresponsiveness to ABT 737 in certain cell lines can

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
A joint conference presented by the American Association for Cancer Research and
the American Chemical Society.
Requests for reprints: Shana Sturla, University of Minnesota, Division of
Medicinal Chemistry, WDH 9-151, 308 Harvard Street, SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
Phone: 612-626-5143; Fax: 612-624-0139; E-mail: sturl002@umn.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619

www.aacrjournals.org

guide patient population selection and the design of improved
therapies. For example, high Mcl 1 is associated with resistance to
ABT 737 and current work is under way to design a drug to
reduce Mcl 1 that may synergize with ABT 737. An orally active
ABT 737 analogue is currently in phase I trials; and Abbott plans
to move forward with single-agent trials, expecting that an
understanding of mechanism will influence the success of trials.
Paul Wender (Stanford University, Stanford, CA) discussed that
new therapies from new chemistries, diagnostic methods, and
prevention strategies are anticipated to revolutionize cancer
research. Chemistry in cancer research has evolved from using
available material to a rational approach to designed molecules
that achieve a desired function and can be obtained in a practical
way: function-oriented synthesis. Illustrative examples included
the apoptolidins and bryostatins. Simpler natural product
analogues drastically reduce the number of synthetic steps to
active molecules. A final concept centered on breaching biological
barriers, with examples of drug/probe-transporter conjugates to
enhance bioavailability and change efficacy of existing agents.
Wender shared thoughts regarding the value of people involved in
research, training programs, methods to bridge academia and
industry, and the problems of limited resources available to
support the richness of researcher ideas. After the lecture, it was
discussed that ‘‘rules’’ in medicinal chemistry are good guidelines
but that it is important to be open to eclectic agents, ultimately
seeking the ‘‘biggest bang’’ from the smallest amount of chemical
information.

Drug Discovery
The drug discovery session began with Dale Boger (Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA) and the message that problems
dictate the choice of chemistry and approaches used. For example,
with scarce structural information and without known leads,
combinatorial chemistry is a powerful tool. Natural products
studies allow the definition of the biological target, the nature of
the interaction with the target, and the origin (if any) of tumor
selectivity. Finally, structure-based drug design can generate novel
design concepts. Dr. Boger enlarged on studies in each area,
beginning with the structure-based design of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase inhibitors. Dr. Boger described solutionphase combinatorial chemistry producing a library of 80,000
compounds, at about the limit to which one could expect an
academic laboratory to screen. Finally, DNA-binding duocarmycins
illustrated that compounds need to be sufficiently stable to reach
their target but sufficiently reactive to alkylate the target when they
arrive. The next presentation reiterated the importance of targetstructure driving chemisty. Gustavé Bergnes (Cytokinetics, San
Francisco, CA) presented the development of motor kinesin spindle
protein (KSP) inhibitors with a philosophy of ‘‘design, synthesis,
assay, and learn.’’ Ispinesib is >70,000-fold selective for KSP versus

6539

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (14). July 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619
Cancer Research

other kinesin proteins, and its progression into clinical trials is
a significant development for a small to medium company.
Dr. Bergnes described further goals to anticipate potential risks
and pitfalls that can block progress to the clinic. Thomas Penning
(Abbott Laboratories) described an inhibitor of the DNA repair
enzyme poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase that crosses the blood-brain
barrier, potentiates temozolamide, and is currently in the first ever
phase 0 clinical trial. Mark Mulvihill (OSI Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Farmingdale, NY) described the development of inhibitors of
insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR), a transmembrane
tyrosine kinase. Using a cocrystal structure of an imidazopyrimidine bound to the protein, ‘‘northern’’ and ‘‘southern’’ domains that
had potential for variation were identified. The northern domain
contained a hydrophobic pocket that was amenable to locking the
structure into a rigid quinoline ring system, whereas the southern
domain was altered to a cyclobutane structure. The resulting
compound has an excellent pharmacokinetic profile in mice and
90% inhibition of IGF-IR phosphorylation with significant tumor
growth delay and no effect on blood glucose; OSI-906 is currently in
clinical development. Louis Lombardo (Bristol-Myers Squibb,
Princeton, NJ) described the Bristol-Myers Squibb approach to
the development of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
inhibitors, followed by dasatinib, a marketed kinase inhibitor
(Sprycel) for the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML). Since the advent of imatinib mesylate (Gleevec or Glivec),
research on kinase inhibitors has exploded and is a major part of
the new drug pipeline. Compounds that bind the ATP pocket,
however, have potential selectivity problems. A key to the success
of dasatinib lies in the lack of cross-resistance with imatinib.
Patrick Harran (UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX)
described how serendipity and a prepared mind could lead to
unexpected discoveries of new antitumor agents. Serendipitous
dimers of a second mitochondria-derived inhibitor of caspases
(Smac) analogue, with nonpeptidic replacements for proline and
phenylalanine, exhibited enhanced efficacy in cell-based functional
assays. Work of this nature is reestablishing the balance between
replication and death, the ultimate aim of all anticancer programs.
Eileen Kennedy (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA) described
hydrocarbon-stapled peptides to target inhibition of the androgenreceptor ligand binding domain. Frank Gu (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA) described nanoparticles for
targeting prostate cancer. This series of presentations showed
the range of approaches that chemists in industry and academia
are applying to the discovery and potentiation of new molecules
with therapeutic potential.

Proteomics
Proteomics, the study of the whole of the protein content of
the cell, has the potential to revolutionize the way cancer diagnosis
and treatment is approached. This session showed the potential of
proteomics to make a significant contribution to the identification
of new targets and the effects of new drugs in both tumor cells
and tissues. However, it also clearly highlighted the ingenuity of the
various groups working in the area in solving problems associated
with the analysis of information derived from studies of the global
expression of proteins. Catherine Fenselau (University of Maryland,
College Park, MD) began the session with the statement that
‘‘chemistry enables proteomics’’ and described protein changes in
MCF-7 tumor cells that are resistant to various antitumor agents.
The strategy focuses on specific subcellular organelles and

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (14). July 15, 2007

incorporation of 18O, using labeled water for quantitation. Thus,
protein-labeling in normal cells ( forward labeling) is followed by
protein-labeling in resistant tumor cell lines (reverse labeling).
Ben Cravett (Scripps Institute, San Diego, CA) described activitybased protein profiling, which, when combined with mass
spectrometry (MS), can aid in the identification of proteins with
varying activities between cell types, such as metastatic versus
nonmetastatic. Probes that carry a reporter group bind and
label enzymes in the proteome with a dependence on activity.
The laboratory aims to develop an integrated enzyme and
metabolite profile for tumor cells. James Veal (Serenex, Durham,
NC) gave insight into an approach that uses chemoproteomics and
proteome mining and showed an application to drug discovery
involving an HSP90 inhibitor that was refined and optimized to
generate ultimately a clinical candidate. Colin Barry (University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA) discussed proteomic analysis of the
folate-homocysteine pathway using a modified stable isotope
labeling of amino acids by cell culture approach. William Griffiths
(University of London, London, England) described cytochrome
P450 (CYP) expression in tumor cells and potential implications for
individualized drug and prodrug administration as the basis of
personalized medicine in cancer, a pervasive concept addressed
throughout the conference. A comparison of the CYP expression
profile of the microsomal fraction of primary colorectal cancer
tissue, liver metastases, and surrounding liver tissue shows
differences in individual CYPs. Forest White (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA) addressed the general
question of how phosphorylation regulates biological response. He
discussed phosphoproteomics or global analysis of protein
phosphorylation by looking at the epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling pathway. Virginia Espina (George Mason
University, Manassas, VA) discussed the importance of preserving
tissue samples in clinical settings, for example, in the development
of personalized cancer therapy. Finally, Yuebiao Yao (Morehouse
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA) discussed the use of twodimensional gels in colorectal cancer to analyze primary versus
metastatic tumors.

Chemical Biology of Carcinogenesis
Chemists have played and continue to play an important role in
cancer prevention through research on carcinogenesis. Traditionally, this has involved various fields of chemistry: development
of sensitive instrumentation and methods to gauge exposure,
organic and inorganic chemical model studies on mechanisms of
carcinogen formation and bioactivation studies, the determination
of putative carcinogen metabolic paths, the elucidation of
endogenous pathways which may have carcinogenic potential,
and the generation and utilization of relevant synthetic procedures.
Whereas accidental exposures and subsequent clear-cut epidemiology resulted in the positive identification of a small number of
human carcinogens, many more substances are animal carcinogens. How can the true human carcinogenic potential of a
substance or an endogenous chemical or biochemical process be
assessed? The presentations given at the Chemical Biology of
Carcinogenesis, as well as several in the Biomarkers sessions of this
conference, show current research in this field. All emphasized the
elucidation of DNA/protein modification and the consequences
and significance of this chemistry. Tamoxifen, a selective estrogen
receptor modulator (SERM), is used in treatment and prevention of
breast cancer and osteoporosis but has been associated with an

6540

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619
Chemistry in Cancer Research: A Vital Partnership

increased risk of uterine cancer. Dr. Judy Bolton discussed
microsomal bioactivation of benzothiophene SERMs being examined as safe replacements for tamoxifen. Cellular protein targets
were found by the invention and utilization of COATAG
methodology: the SERM is covalently linked to a biotin tag,
permitting immunoisolation and identification. Dr. Bolton emphasized that covalent SERM-protein binding may not be strictly
deleterious but could contribute to chemoprevention through
Keap1 alkylation and induction of detoxification enzymes. Guanine
bases in DNA are readily oxidized to their 8-oxo derivatives by
biologically relevant reactive oxygen species (ROS) but the
carcinogenic consequences of this chemistry are not clear. Cynthia
Burrows (University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT) reported on her
group’s work directed at understanding how the products and
mechanisms of guanine oxidation may provide a basis for
mutagenesis and the possible role of DNA-protein cross-linking
therein. Yelena Margolin (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
presented another aspect of base oxidation in DNA: the chemical
basis of site selectivity for oxidation by ROS and other oxidants.
Sensitive assays developed by Lawrence Marnett’s group have
shown surprisingly low levels of an endogenous oxidative damage–
associated nucleoside adduct in human urine. Charles Knutson
(Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) presented data from 13Clabeling studies showing the metabolism and excretion of the
M1dG adduct, which is expected to affect biomarker studies
of oxidative DNA damage by this pathway. John Essigmann
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) began the second session
with a discussion of the value of chemically based mutagenesis
studies. By site-specifically modifying DNA oligomers with
modified bases and incorporating them into viral genomes,
Dr. Essigmann and his group have developed a method producing
a ‘‘fingerprint’’ for each type of adduct which evaluates its
replication efficiency, whether it induces the error prone SOS
response, types of mutations, and relative frequencies. Essigmann
discussed chemical mechanisms of repair by the AlkB protein,
which may protect bacteria against macrophage action (humans
have homologues of AlkB). Fred Guengerich (Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine) used his group’s research to illustrate
complex connections between the chemistry and biochemistry
of reactive intermediates and mutagenesis. For example, aflotoxin,
a potent human carcinogen, is activated by CYP-mediated
conversion to two stereoisomeric epoxides. Although the more
reactive isomer has a t 1/2 of only f1 s, it is vastly more genotoxic
and binds DNA efficiently. Dr. Guengerich presented his group’s
extensive research concerning interactions of DNA polymerases
with adducted bases, examining the effects on insertion and
extension of the strand being copied by a translesional DNA
polymerase. The process of establishing a suspected carcinogen to
be a human carcinogen is an arduous task involving varied
approaches. IARC has declared the tobacco-specific carcinogens,
NNN and NNK, to be human carcinogens due in significant
measure to the extensive research of Stephen Hecht and his
collaborators. However, given the complex and numerous
protective mammalian defenses against carcinogenesis, biomarkers and the nature of DNA adducts need to be established.
An illustration was provided by the presentation of Pramod
Upadhyaya (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN), concerning CYP-mediated metabolism. Recent concerns have been raised
about the possible genotoxicity of acrylamide, which is found in
some fried foods, because it is activated through the corresponding epoxide. Further, it is structurally akin to carcinogens

www.aacrjournals.org

described by Dr. Guengerich. Matthias Baum (University of
Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany) described comparisons
of the genotoxicity of glycidamide in several different assays and
with N-nitroso compounds known to be potent alkylating agents.

Biomarkers and Analytic Chemistry
The session on Biomarkers and Analytic Chemistry involved a
range of experimental approaches for the identification and
analysis of chemical biomarkers important in cancer. Ian Blair
(University of Pennsylvania) described reaction pathways related to
the overproduction of ROS with a focus on understanding the
effects of this process when various enzymes involved are upregulated, such as in cells under oxidative stress mediated by the
overproduction of the cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme. Reactions of
specific lipid peroxidation products with DNA and reduced
glutathione (GSH) produce adducts. Moving from DNA and GSH
to proteins, Daniel Liebler (Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine) continued the discussion of lipid peroxidation and
addressed problems and solutions in identifying targets. Using
conjugated lipid-biotin probes, adducts were surveyed using
streptavidin binding and proteins were identified by MS, an
approach analogous to the COATAG method discussed earlier in
Dr. Bolton’s talk. Helpful analytic strategies were suggested, such as
the construction of model peptides to determine MS behavior,
mild ammonia hydrolysis methods, and wide-band activation.
Elizabeth Grimm (University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX) introduced iNOS, an enzyme that catalyses
intracellular NO production from L-arginine, and has carried out
studies to establish iNOS expression as a predictive marker that
correlates inversely with survival in stage-3 melanoma patients.
The presentation of Chenguo Xing (University of Minnesota)
directly related to Dr. Fesik’s talk, i.e., apoptotic regulation by the
Bcl2 family of proteins. Dr. Xing has established that HA 14-1 can
synergize various standard chemotherapies; and data indicate that
HA14-1 induces cell death by two distinct pathways, possibly
converting antiapoptotic Bcl2 to a proapoptotic form. Natalia
Tretyakova (University of Minnesota) transitioned the focus to
exogenous carcinogens. Dr. Tretyakova explained that the isomers
of diepoxybutane influence resulting patterns of DNA alkylation. In
the questions-and-answers portion of Dr. Tretyakova’s talk, links
between findings for diepoxybutane and nitrogen mustards and
the CML drug sulfam were discussed. Following on the theme of
DNA-small molecule adduct formation, Peter Farmer (University of
Leicester, Leicester, England) presented an overview of current
analytic methodologies. The focus was on MS as an approach for
obtaining an accurate indication of dose that takes into account
individual biological differences. Dr. Farmer established a detection limit benchmark of one damaged base in 108 nucleotides or
less. Comparing adduct levels between MS methods and 32P
postlabeling indicated that the methods correlate, but in some
cases 32P assay may underestimate adduct levels. Finally,
Dr. Farmer presented a new site selective mutation assay as a
variant on the SupF assay for human cells. It was concluded that
future studies should address the biological influences of low levels
(one or two adducts per cell) of DNA damage. Roberto Diaz
(Vanderbilt University) addressed the identification of peptides
recovered from in vivo biopanning of enzyme libraries from animal
tumors, and Surojit Sur (Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions,
Baltimore, MD) presented an example of drug discovery in a
multidisciplinary academic setting.

6541

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (14). July 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619
Cancer Research

Modeling and Bioinformatics

Structural Biology

Throughout the conference, computational strategies aided in
the design and evaluation of cancer therapies and a session was
focused on emerging methods and applications in this area. In the
first talk, David Covell (NIH, Frederick, MD) presented bioinformatic and chemical informatics strategies for mining the screening
data from the ‘‘NCI60’’ panel of 60 immortalized human-derived
cell lines that have been accumulated at NCI over the past 19 years.
Recently, cell screening has been augmented with high content
DNA, protein microarray, and xenograft data resulting in a
database with over two million datapoints. Interpretation of
data linking small molecules, molecular targets, and mechanism
of action remains an area of active research. John Irwin (University
of California, San Francisco, CA) talked about the ZINC database,
a collection of commercially available compounds in biologically
relevant representations for virtual screening and chemical
informatics applications. Dr. Irwin discussed the importance of
the representation of molecules in their bioactive forms, particularly of protonation and tautomeric variants, as well as forms
appropriate for metalloenzymes. He presented the Directory of
Useful Decoys database for benchmarking docking programs,
challenging them to expose weaknesses and as a basis for
improving docking methods. James Wright (Carleton University,
Ottawa, ON, Canada) talked about the problem of quinone
formation via P450 metabolism of estradiol used in hormone
replacement therapy. A goal is to develop new estrogen mimics
with good relative bioavailability and that cannot form dangerous
quinones. Lei Jiam (New York University, New York, NY) discussed
molecular modeling and dynamics studies of oxidative lesions in
hNeil1, part of the base excision repair pathway. William Jorgensen
(Yale University, New Haven, CT) discussed computer-aided lead
generation and optimization focusing on nonnucleoside inhibitors
of HIV reverse transcriptase as a therapeutic context. Jorgensen
described the Biochemical and Organic Model Building program,
which generates conformers of a dynamically created combinatorial in silico library. His approach trains a scoring function against
experimental data, and ligands are filtered for properties (i.e.,
solubility, cell permeablity) using Qikprop and Monte Carlo/free
energy perturbation to refine predictions including water molecules and flexible ligand and receptor. Brian Shoichet (University of
California) presented virtual screening for structure-based inhibitor
discovery, describing simple, artificial protein binding sites to study
the performance of docking programs. Docking works well for
simple binding sites but poorly against real drug targets. Experiments to address why involved docking against AmpC h lactamase
in a head-to-head comparison of docking and HTS in collaboration
with the National Chemical Genomics Center. Of 70,500 compounds screened, 1,274 were primary hits; but after follow-up, none
were single, noncovalent, reversible, competitive inhibitors. Docking the same library resulted in 16 compounds picked to test, of
which two were found to be active, the best with a K i of 37 AM.
Lihua Wang (New York University) has used QM/MM calculations
to investigate catalytic mechanisms of a DNA polymerase. Mark
Klein (University of Minnesota) discussed the use of a nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) and alanine scanning-derived threedimensional pharmacophore to search the NCI database for
compatible small molecules, filtered for ‘‘drug likeness.’’ The
resultant collection was docked to the NMR model using Glide,
from which top scoring ligands were selected as putative CDK4/6
inhibitors and experimental testing of the docking predictions is
under way.

The structural biology talks involved NMR and X-ray crystallography studies of diverse proteins with a focus on novel
techniques, gaining an understanding of mechanism and the
design of small-molecule inhibitors. These are highlighted here,
and details from the studies presented are described in the
supplementary data. Andrew Byrd (NCI, Frederick, MD) presented
high-field (900 MHz) NMR work centered on the STAT proteins, a
family of cytoplasmic proteins that mediate cellular responses to
cytokines via membrane receptors coupled to Janus-activated
kinase. Their large size (f100 kDa) has limited solution NMR
studies, and structures have been solved primarily by X-ray
crystallography. On the basis of Dr. Byrd’s recent solution structure
of STAT4-NT, he concluded that both X-ray and NMR dimer
arrangements can exist in solution with both being relevant.
Stephen Burley (Structural GenomiX, San Diego, CA) provided an
overview of the company and its capabilities, highlighting its
fragment-based drug discovery approach, noting that many of the
fragment hits are more selective than one would predict based
upon their low molecular weight and lack of complexity. Wei Yang
(NIH-National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, Bethesda, MD) presented the application of X-ray
crystallography, molecular biology, and various biochemical and
biophysical approaches to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
behind the Y-family of DNA polymerases. These catalyze templatedependent DNA synthesis with low fidelity and low processivity for
normal DNA but synthesize past-damaged template bases. The
structures reveal a conventional right hand–like catalytic core,
with unusually small finger and thumb domains resulting in an
open and capacious active site. This information is central to
understanding biological effects of DNA-damaging agents as
discussed in the earlier chemical biology of carcinogenesis session.
Ann McDermott (Columbia University, New York, NY) presented
solid state NMR studies of binding and function of membraneassociated proteins. NMR spectra of uniformly labeled (15N, 13C)
solid state proteins can be well resolved and may provide a basis for
structural and functional studies. Her group uses a magic-angle
spinning technique (40 AL of solvent with a few milligrams of
protein) and has studied many small proteins. Ian Hardcastle
(Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, England) presented on his work regarding
small molecule inhibitors of MDM2-p53 protein interactions.
Inhibition is expected to reactivate normal p53 pathways in cells
overexpressing MDM2, causing proapototic effects. HSQC NMR
structural studies indicated a plausible binding mode for a
compound in complex with MDM2. Ann Alcaraz (Emory University,
Atlanta, GA) presented on the structure of colchicine and a model
that indicates a new ligand binding site.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (14). July 15, 2007

Professional Advancement Seminar for Early Career
Scientists: Careers in Academia and Industry
A lunchtime session was held to discuss chemistry careers in
cancer research. Information was presented by Dr. John Hunt
(Bristol Meyers Squibb) and Dr. Lawrence Marnett (Vanderbilt
University). Dr. Hunt discussed recent trends in the industry,
including an increasing integration of science throughout the
drug pipeline. Dr. Marnett overviewed traditional tenure track
positions involving some combination of teaching and research, as
well as research professorships and opportunities in core academic
research facilities. He gave useful hints and advice for developing

6542

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619
Chemistry in Cancer Research: A Vital Partnership

research ideas and seeking funding. Representatives from academia and industry participated in roundtable discussions with
participants.

Conclusions
A number of session- and discipline-spanning concepts emerged
during the meeting, including predictive strategies for responsiveness of individual cancers to specific therapies, a focus on
correlating chemical structure and target selectivity, and chemical
pathways in drug toxicity and carcinogenesis. The meeting was
considered highly successful by participants and a consensus called
for developing a regularly scheduled event. At the AACR Annual

www.aacrjournals.org

Meeting in April 2007, plans for the meeting to become
a biennial event were announced, with the next to be held in
Spring 2009. Participants indicated that the ACS-AACR union
represented by this conference marked a beginning of alliances
that will greatly benefit cancer research.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/2/2007; accepted 5/31/2007.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We acknowledge the conference chair, Stephen S. Hecht, and the program
committee (see supporting information). We thank the AACR staff for preparation of
the appendices.

6543

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (14). July 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619

Chemistry in Cancer Research: A Vital Partnership
Shana J. Sturla, John J. Irwin, Richard N. Loeppky, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:6539-6543. Published OnlineFirst July 9, 2007.

Updated version

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1619

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

