OPEN

Oncogene (2013) 32, 5614–5624
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/13
www.nature.com/onc

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

MiR-155-mediated loss of C/EBPb shifts the TGF-b response
from growth inhibition to epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
invasion and metastasis in breast cancer
J Johansson1,6, T Berg1,6, E Kurzejamska2,3, M-F Pang1, V Tabor1, M Jansson4, P Roswall1, K Pietras1,5, M Sund4, P Religa2 and J Fuxe1
During breast cancer progression, transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-b) switches from acting as a growth inhibitor to become a
major promoter of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion and metastasis. However, the mechanisms involved in this
switch are not clear. We found that loss of CCAAT-enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPb), a differentiation factor for the mammary
epithelium, was associated with signs of EMT in triple-negative human breast cancer, and in invasive areas of mammary tumors in
MMTV-PyMT mice. Using an established model of TGF-b-induced EMT in mouse mammary gland epithelial cells, we discovered that
C/EBPb was repressed during EMT by miR-155, an oncomiR in breast cancer. Depletion of C/EBPb potentiated the TGF-b response
towards EMT, and contributed to evasion of the growth inhibitory response to TGF-b. Furthermore, loss of C/EBPb enhanced
invasion and metastatic dissemination of the mouse mammary tumor cells to the lungs after subcutaneous injection into mice. The
mechanism by which loss of C/EBPb promoted the TGF-b response towards EMT, invasion and metastasis, was traced to a
previously uncharacterized role of C/EBPb as a transcriptional activator of genes encoding the epithelial junction proteins
E-cadherin and coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor. The results identify miR-155-mediated loss of C/EBPb as a mechanism,
which promotes breast cancer progression by shifting the TGF-b response from growth inhibition to EMT, invasion and metastasis.
Oncogene (2013) 32, 5614–5624; doi:10.1038/onc.2013.322; published online 19 August 2013
Keywords: CCAAT-enhancer binding protein beta; epithelial-mesenchymal transition; transforming growth factor-beta; Breast
cancer; metastasis

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer progression is associated with several hallmarks of
cancer, such as loss of epithelial differentiation, and evasion of
growth inhibitory and apoptotic cell responses.1 Transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-b) is at the center of these hallmarks, as it
is a prominent growth inhibitor of normal and pre-malignant
epithelial cells, but switches to become a major promoter of
invasion and metastasis during breast cancer progression.2–4 Thus,
TGF-b has dual roles in breast cancer by acting as a tumor
suppressor in early stages, and a promoter of invasion and
metastasis in advanced disease. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms of this switch in the TGF-b response has remained an
elusive goal in cancer research.
TGF-b promotes tumor cell invasion and metastasis by inducing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a latent developmental
process, which is reactivated in cancer tissues.5,6 During EMT,
genes encoding epithelial proteins, such as the junction proteins
E-cadherin and coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) are
inactivated. In parallel, genes encoding mesenchymal proteins,
such as vimentin and N-cadherin are induced. As a result, tumor
cells undergoing EMT gain the capacity to detach and migrate into
the surrounding tissue. Thus, EMT converts benign tumor cells into
malignant counterparts by inducing a de-differentiation program.
EMT is speciﬁcally linked to triple-negative breast cancers, which

have lost expression of the estrogen receptor, the progesterone
receptor and the human epidermal growth factor receptor
(HER2).7,8 Furthermore, EMT promotes the acquisition of stem
cell characteristics suggesting that cancer stem cells may originate
from more differentiated tumor cells undergoing EMT.9
TGF-b signaling towards EMT involves activation of Smad3/4
transcription factors, which form EMT-promoting complexes with
cofactors, such as Snail, Zeb, AP-1 and NF-KB.3,10–12 TGF-b
signaling towards growth inhibition is mediated by Smad
complexes with FoxO factors, which activate the cell cycle
inhibitors p15INK4b and p21CIP1,13,14 and with E2F4/5 and ATF3
factors, which inactivate c-Myc and ID1, respectively.15–17 In
addition, the transcription factor CCAAT-enhancer binding protein
beta (C/EBPb) was identiﬁed as a component of these complexes,
which is essential both for the induction of p15INK4b and the
repression of c-Myc, and therefore central to the cytostatic
program initiated by TGF-b.18 Further studies have shown that
C/EBPb-mediated growth inhibition is averted in human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2)-overexpressing
breast cancer cells via an increased ratio of liver inhibitory
protein (LIP) versus liver activating protein (LAP) and thereby
inhibition of the transcriptional activity of LAP.19
C/EBPb is a differentiation factor for the mammary epithelium
and is produced, through alternative initiation of translation, in

1
Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; 2Department of Medicine, Centre for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; 4Department of Surgical and Perioperative
Sciences, Surgery, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden and 5Department of Laboratory Medicine Malmö, Lund University Cancer Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
Correspondence: Professor J Fuxe, Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Scheeles v. 2, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
E-mail: jonas.fuxe@ki.se
6
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 25 January 2013; revised 1 June 2013; accepted 24 June 2013; published online 19 August 2013

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5615
three isoforms: the transcriptional activators liver activating
protein 1 and 2 (LAP1 and LAP2), and the LIP, which can inhibit
C/EBPb-mediated gene activation.20–22 C/EBPb has been reported
to be deregulated in breast cancer but its role in cancer
progression is not fully elucidated (reviewed in Zahnow22). Loss
of the transcriptional activation function of LAP due to an
increased LIP/LAP ratio was identiﬁed as a mechanism of evasion
of the cytostatic response to TGF-b in metastatic breast cancer
cells isolated from pleural effusions.18,23,24 The mechanism was
traced to a role of C/EBPb as a transcriptional activator of INK4b, a
gene encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p15INK4b,
which is an important mediator of growth inhibition in response
to TGF-b.18 These data show that loss of C/EBPb-mediated gene
activation promotes breast cancer progression. Interestingly,
overexpression of LAP2 was shown to induce EMT-like features
in cultured breast cancer cells, suggesting that C/EBPb might be
involved in the TGF-b response towards both growth inhibition
and EMT.25
We hypothesized that de-regulation of C/EBPb might be
associated with TGF-b-induced EMT during breast cancer progression. To determine this, we combined studies of human breast
cancer, mouse models of TGF-b-driven mammary cancer progression driven a model of TGF-b-induced EMT in mammary epithelial
cells. The results indicate that the loss of C/EBPb in breast cancer
promotes malignant progression by shifting the TGF-b response
from growth inhibition to EMT, invasion and metastasis.

RESULTS
Loss of C/EBPb marks signs of EMT in invasive breast cancer
Immunoﬂuorescence staining and subsequent confocal microscopy analysis of samples of human breast carcinoma was
performed to determine whether signs of EMT and loss of cell
differentiation is associated with alterations in expression of
C/EBPb. As loss of E-cadherin is a hallmark of EMT in breast cancer,
we co-stained for E-cadherin and C/EBPb. Prominent staining of
E-cadherin at cell–cell junctions and nuclear staining of C/EBPb
was detected in breast cancer cells in samples of welldifferentiated ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) (Figure 1a). Furthermore, we analyzed the expression of E-cadherin and C/EBPb in a
series of eight invasive ductal breast carcinomas, which had been
classiﬁed according to their status of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and HER2 (Supplementary Figure 1). We found
decreased expression of E-cadherin in areas of triple-negative
tumors (Figure 1a) and that these tumors (number 6, 7, 8)
expressed decreased levels of E-cadherin compared with tumors
that were positive for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor
and HER2, or only HER2 (Figure 1b). Nuclear staining for C/EBPb
was decreased in triple-negative tumors and linear regression
analysis showed signiﬁcant correlation (P ¼ 0.0011) between the
expression of E-cadherin and C/EBPb in the eight tumors analyzed
(Figures 1a and b). Further analysis demonstrated signiﬁcantly
decreased expression of C/EBPb in E-cadherin-negative areas
compared with E-cadherin-positive areas of the triple-negative
breast tumors (Figure 1c).
To study the expression of C/EBPb during mammary cancer
progression, we stained sections from transgenic mice overexpressing the polyoma virus middle T antigen under the mouse
mammary tumor virus promoter (MMTV-PyMT mice). Female
heterozygous MMTV-PyMT mice develop palpable hyperplastic
lesions at around 4 weeks of age. These lesions develop into
adenomas that become macroscopically visible and grow in size
and at 10 weeks of age, they are classiﬁed as adenomas. However,
at 12–14 weeks of age, the tumors switch on a more invasive
phenotype and progress into adenocarcinomas that disseminate
and form lung metastases. Metastatic spread of tumor cells in the
MMTV-PyMT model is driven by TGF-b.26 Co-staining for
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

E-cadherin and C/EBPb in tumor sections from 10- and 14-weekold MMTV-PyMT mice revealed signiﬁcant loss of C/EBPb
expression in E-cadherin-negative areas compared with
E-cadherin-positive tumor areas of adenocarcinomas (Figures 1d
and e).
Loss of C/EBPb during TGF-b1-induced EMT
Our results indicated that loss of C/EBPb in breast cancer was
linked to loss of E-cadherin, a hallmark of EMT, which prompted us
to study whether C/EBPb is regulated during EMT. We used an
established model of TGF-b1-induced EMT in mouse mammary
gland epithelial cells (NMuMG). As expected, treatment of NMuMG
cells with TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml) for 48 h resulted in cellular elongation
(Figure 2a), as well as loss of E-cadherin and induction of vimentin
(Supplementary Figure 2a). Distinct nuclear staining of C/EBPb was
detected in untreated NMuMG cells, but was decreased in cells
treated with TGF-b1 (Figure 2a). Immunoblotting analyses
conﬁrmed the EMT phenotype of TGF-b1-treated NMuMG cells
that expressed decreased levels of the junction proteins
E-cadherin, CAR, occludin and claudin-3, and increased levels of
N-cadherin and vimentin, compared with untreated cells
(Figure 2b). Immunoblotting analysis of C/EBPb showed that all
three C/EBPb isoforms (LAP1, LAP2 and LIP) were decreased in
TGF-b1-treated NMuMG cells (Figure 2b). No obvious changes in
the ratio between LIP and LAP isoforms were detected.
To study whether loss of C/EBPb was speciﬁcally coupled to an
EMT response downstream of TGF-b1, we analyzed expression of
C/EBPb in mouse mammary EpH4 epithelial cells, which are known
to be resistant to TGF-b1-induced EMT.27,28 Treatment of EpH4
cells with TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml) for 48 h did not result in any
morphological signs of EMT, nor any changes in the expression of
junction proteins, or the mesenchymal proteins vimentin and
N-cadherin (Figures 2c and d and Supplementary Figure 2b).
However, activation of Smad3 was induced in EpH4 cells after TGFb1 treatment (Figure 2e). C/EBPb was prominently expressed in
EpH4 cells and the relative level of LIP versus LAP2 was higher in
EpH4 cells compared with NMuMG cells (Figure 2d). No changes in
C/EBPb levels were detected in EpH4 cells after TGF-b1 treatment.
To study whether the repression of C/EBPb was mediated
through the canonical TGF-b/Smad3 pathway, we performed
studies in which we inhibited the action of Smad3. Loss of C/EBPb
during TGF-b1-induced EMT (5 ng/ml, 24 h) was inhibited by both
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Smad3 (Figure 2f), and in the
presence of a commercially available speciﬁc inhibitor of Smad3
(Supplementary Figure 2c).
The data indicated that loss of C/EBPb is a result of a signaling
event occurring downstream of receptor-Smad signaling and
speciﬁcally associated with an EMT response to TGF-b1 in
mammary epithelial cells. In further support of this, we found
that all three isoforms of C/EBPb were signiﬁcantly less expressed
in MDA-MB-231 cells, which are invasive human breast cancer
cells that display EMT features, compared with MCF7 cells, which
are non-invasive, non-EMT-like human breast cancer cells
(Supplementary Figure 2d). Moreover, we found that all three
C/EBPb isoforms were decreased in another frequently used
model of TGF-b1-induced EMT in human lung carcinoma A549
cells (Supplementary Figure 2e). This further linked loss of C/EBPb
to an EMT response and showed that this effect is not restricted to
mammary epithelial cells.
MiR-155-mediated depletion of C/EBPb during TGF-b1-induced
EMT
Next, we wanted to determine the mechanism of C/EBPb
repression during TGF-b1-induced EMT. Compared with messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of E-cadherin (Cdh1) and CAR (Cxadr),
which were reduced by 60 and 40%, respectively, in NMUMG cells
after TGF-b1 treatment (10 ng/ml, 24 h), mRNA levels of C/EBPb
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5616

Figure 1. Loss of C/EBPb is associated with EMT in invasive breast cancer. (a) Representative confocal microscopy images of samples of human
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and invasive breast carcinoma stained by immunofluorescence with antibodies against E-cadherin and C/EBPb.
The outlined region of the invasive breast carcinoma marks an E-cadherin þ area of the tumor. Cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI. Scale bar,
50 mm. (b) Graph showing results from linear regression analysis of quantitative measurements of the fluorescence intensity of C/EBPb (y axis)
and E-cadherin (x axis) staining in eight different invasive breast tumors. The best-fit line is indicated as well as two confidence bands (dotted)
that defined the confidence interval (95%). Tumors 6, 7 and 8 had been classified as triple-negative breast tumors (See Supplementary
Figure 1 for characterization of the different tumors). (c) Bar graph showing results from measurements of mean fluorescent intensity of
C/EBPb staining in E-cadherin þ versus E-cadherin  tumor areas of the three triple-negative tumors (#6, 7, 8). Mean fluorescent intensity
values of C/EBPb in E-cadherin þ areas were normalized to 100%. (d) Representative images showing immunofluorescence staining for
E-cadherin and C/EBPb in adenomas and adenocarcinomas of 10- and 14-week-old MMTV-PyMT mice, respectively. The outlined region marks
an E-cadherin þ area of the tumor. Cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI. Scale bar, 50 mm. (e) Bar graph showing results from measurements of
mean fluorescent intensity of C/EBPb staining in E-cadherin þ versus E-cadherin  tumor areas of adenocarcinomas from 14-week-old MMTVmice. Mean fluorescent intensity values of C/EBPb in E-cadherin þ areas were normalized to 100%. ***Po0.001.

(Cebpb) were less reduced (20%) (Figure 3a). This suggested that
posttranscriptional mechanisms could be involved in repressing
C/EBPb during TGF-b1-induced EMT. Based on recent data
showing that Cebpb is targeted by microRNA-155 (miR-155) in B
cells and macrophages,29,30 and the fact that miR-155 is a wellknown oncomiR in breast cancer, we hypothesized that miR-155
could have a role in repressing C/EBPb during TGF-b-induced EMT.
We treated NMuMG cells with a commercially available synthetic
miR-155 inhibitor (50 nM), which is speciﬁcally designed to target
and irreversibly bind and inactivate miR-155, 2 h prior to TGF-b1
treatment (5 ng/ml, 24 h) to study whether the presence of the
miR-155 inhibitor would affect the expression of C/EBPb. We
found that in the presence of the miR-155 inhibitor (50 nM), the
expression of C/EBPb was increased at baseline, and less repressed
during EMT (Figure 3b). Immunoﬂuorescence analysis further
indicated that inhibition of miR-155 resulted in increased nuclear
expression of C/EBPb at baseline, and less repression during
TGF-b1-induced EMT (Supplementary Figure S3a). No obvious
rescue of the repression of E-cadherin or the induction of vimentin
was observed neither in immunoﬂuorescence (Supplementary
Figure S3a), nor immunoblot analysis (data not shown). However,
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis showed a 20% rescue of the
repression of Cdh1 mRNA during TGF-b-induced EMT
(Supplementary Figure S3b). On the contrary, treatment of
NMuMG cells with a synthetic miR-155 mimic (50 nM) resulted in
decreased levels of C/EBPb at baseline, and further repression
after TGF-b1 treatment (5 ng/ml, 24 h) (Figure 3c). Loss- or gain-offunction of miR-155 did not signiﬁcantly alter the LIP/LAP ratio
(Supplementary Figure S3c). Further analysis by qPCR showed that
the expression levels of miR-155 were around 4.5-fold higher in
NMuMG cells compared with EpH4 cells at baseline, and further
increased in NMuMG cells upon TGF-b1 exposure (Figure 3d), as
previously reported.31 In comparison, the expression level of
C/EBPb (all isoforms) was considerably higher in EpH4 cells
compared with NMuMG cells (Figure 3e).
Loss of C/EBPb shifts the TGF-b response from growth inhibition to
EMT
The data suggested that miR-155-mediated repression C/EBPb could
sensitize cells to TGF-b1-induced EMT. To study this, we performed
loss- and gain-of-function studies for C/EBPb. Knockdown of C/EBPb
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5617

Figure 2. Loss of C/EBPb is linked to the induction of EMT in response to TGF-b1. (a, c) Representative brightfield and immunofluorescence
images showing induction of morphological characteristics of EMT and loss of nuclear staining of C/EBPb in NMuMG cells (a) but not in EpH4
cells (c) after TGF-b1 treatment (10 ng/ml, 48 h). Scale bars, 50 mm. (b, d) Results from immunoblotting analysis showing changes in the
expression of established EMT markers, and decreased expression of all three isoforms of C/EBPb (LAP1, LAP2 and LIP) in NMuMG cells (b) but
not in EpH4 cells (d) after TGF-b1 treatment (10 ng/ml, 48 h). (e) Immunoblotting analysis of the effect of TGF-b1 treatment (10 ng/ml, 1 h) on
phosphorylation of Smad3 (p-Smad3) in NMuMG and EpH4 cells. (f ) Immunoblotting analysis of the effect of siRNA-mediated knockdown of
Smad3 (100 nM, 72 h) on the repression of C/EBPb during TGF-b1-induced EMT (5 ng/ml, 24 h) in NMuMG cells. Calnexin was used as a loading
control for all immunoblotting experiments.

in NMuMG cells through lentivirus-mediated overexpression of Cebpb
small hairpin RNA (shRNA) resulted in decreased expression of
E-cadherin and CAR, at baseline (Figure 4a). Furthermore, Cebpb
knockdown potentiated induction of EMT in response to TGF-b1
(5 ng/ml, 24 h), as evident by further decreased expression of
E-cadherin and CAR, and further increased expression of vimentin
compared with cells expressing control shRNA (Figure 4a). On the
contrary, transient overexpression of LAP2 in NMuMG cells resulted in
increased mRNA levels of Cdh1 and Cxadr at baseline, and less
repression of both genes in response to TGF-b1 (2 ng/ml, 24 h)
(Figure 4b). However, no rescue of E-cadherin, or CAR repression was
detected at the protein level (data not shown), under these conditions.
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Together, these results suggested that loss of C/EBPb had an
impact on the induction phase allowing NMuMG cells to more
easily undergo EMT in response to TGF-b1. Next, we wanted to
determine whether re-expression of C/EBPb would be sufﬁcient to
revert cells from a more established EMT phenotype. To test this,
we used a strategy of long-term induction of EMT in NMuMG cells,
which previously was reported to result in profound EMT and also,
evasion of the cytostatic effects of TGF-b1.32 We found that
NMuMG cells treated for long term (14 days) with TGF-b1 (2 ng/ml)
displayed a prominent EMT phenotype with low expression of
E-cadherin, CAR and C/EBPb (Figure 4c). Overexpression of LAP2
in such long-term treated NMuMG cells resulted in increased
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5618

Figure 3. Depletion of C/EBPb during TGF-b1-induced EMT by miR-155. (a) Results from qPCR analysis of the effect of TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml, 24 h)
on mRNA levels of Cebpb, Cdh1, Cxadr and Vim relative to control, which was normalized to 100%. Data are mean ±s.e.m. of three
independent experiments. (b, c) Immunoblotting analysis of the effect of a miR-155 inhibitor (b) and a miR-155 mimic (c) on the repression of
C/EBPb during TGF-b1-induced EMT (5 ng/ml, 24 h). (d) Results from qPCR analysis of the expression of miR-155 in EpH4 and NMuMG cells at
baseline and after treatment with TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml, 24 h). (e) Immunoblotting analysis of the relative expression levels of C/EBPb in EpH4 and
NMuMG cells at baseline and after treatment with TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml, 48 h). Calnexin was used as a loading control for all immunoblotting
experiments. *Po0.05; **Po0.01, ***Po0.001.

expression of E-cadherin and CAR, and decreased expression of
vimentin. However, no morphological evidence of reversion of the
EMT phenotype was observed (data not shown). Overexpression of
LAP2 did not affect the expression of the EMT factors Zeb1, Slug,
Snail or Twist, suggesting that the induction of E-cadherin and CAR
was independent of the expression of these factors (Figure 4d).
Similar to a previous report,32 we found that long-term treated
NMuMG cells had evaded most of the growth inhibitory effect of
TGF-b1 and proliferated at a rate more similar to untreated cells
(Figure 4e). Overexpression of LAP2 was sufﬁcient to restore the
growth inhibitory effect of TGF-b1 in these cells (Figure 4e).
Together, these data indicated that miR-155-mediated depletion of
C/EBPb allows mammary tumor cells to both evade the cytostatic
effect of TGF-b1, and become sensitive to TGF-b-induced EMT. Based
on this, we hypothesized that C/EBPb levels might also affect the
invasive properties of NMuMG cells in response to TGF-b1. To test this,
we performed two-chamber chemoinvasion assays, in which NMuMG
cells expressing control shRNA, or Cebpb shRNA, were seeded in
Matrigel in the upper chamber and TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml) added to the
lower chamber. Analysis was performed at 8 h after seeding cells and
showed that NMuMG cells expressing Cebpb shRNA were 60% more
invasive than cells expressing control shRNA (Figure 4f). On the
contrary, NMuMG cells overexpressing LAP2 were 40% less invasive
compared with control cells (Figure 4g).
Loss of C/EBPb promotes invasion and metastatic spread of mouse
mammary 4T1 tumor cells
The results showing that C/EBPb levels modiﬁed the invasive
capacity of NMuMG cells towards TGF-b1 in vitro prompted us to
study whether loss of C/EBPb would affect the metastatic capacity
of mammary tumor cells, in vivo. We performed loss-of-function
studies in the 4T1 mammary tumor model, which is driven by
TGF-b.33 Knockdown of C/EBPb in 4T1 cells through overexpression of Cebpb shRNA resulted in decreased expression of
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

E-cadherin, and increased expression of vimentin (Figure 5a). Similar
to the results from the experiments with NMuMG cells, we also
found that 4T1 cells expressing Cebpb shRNA were more invasive
than control cells towards TGF-b1 (Figure 5b). Upon subcutaneous
injection of 4T1 cells into the ﬂank of syngeneic BALB/c mice, we
found that 4T1 cells expressing Cebpb shRNA initially grew at a
similar rate to control tumors but during the second week, their
growth rate decreased (Figures 5c and d). Analysis of metastatic
spread to the lungs showed that the average number of metastasis
per lung was signiﬁcantly higher in mice carrying C/EBPb knockdown tumors (N ¼ 7) compared with mice carrying control tumors
(N ¼ 5) (Figures 5e and f). Metastatic foci in the lungs were found in
100% of mice with C/EBPb knockdown tumors and 20% of mice
with control tumors (Figure 5g). Further analysis showed that
knockdown of C/EBPb did not affect phosphorylation of Smad3
after exposure to TGF-b1, or endogenous production of TGF-b1 in
4T1 cells (Supplementary Figures 4a and b). These results indicated
that the effect of C/EBPb knockdown was not due to altered TGF-b
signaling in these cells. Furthermore, we were interested to study
whether it would be possible to revert to EMT and inhibit the
invasive capacity of 4T1 cells by stable overexpression of C/EBPb.
qPCR analysis revealed that 4T1 cells, similar to NMuMG cells,
expressed high levels of miR-155 compared with EpH4 cells
(Supplementary Figure 4c). Lentivirus-mediated overexpression of
C/EBPb did not affect the expression of EMT markers in 4T1 cells
and also, did not affect the capacity of these cells to migrate
in invasion assays (Supplementary Figures 4d and e). These results
indicate that overexpression of C/EBPb is not sufﬁcient to revert
tumor cells from a more stable EMT phenotype.
Identiﬁcation of C/EBPb as a transcriptional activator of junction
proteins
Based on our results, we wanted to elucidate the mechanisms by
which loss of C/EBPb promotes TGF-b1-induced EMT, invasion and
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5619

Figure 4. Loss of C/EBPb shifts the TGF-b response from growth inhibition to EMT. (a) Immunoblotting results showing the effect of
knockdown of C/EBPb via overexpression of Cebpb shRNA (Cebpb shRNA) on the expression of EMT markers at baseline and after treatment
with TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml, 48 h). Non-targeting shRNA was used as a control (Control shRNA). (b) qPCR results showing the effect of transient
overexpression of LAP2 on Cdh1 and Cxadr expression in NMuMG cells at baseline, and after TGF-b1 treatment (2 ng/ml, 24 h). Data from qPCR
experiments (f, g) represent mean±s.e.m. of three independent experiments. *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001. (c, d) Immunoblotting results
showing the effect of overexpression of FLAG-tagged LAP2 (FLAG-LAP2) on the expression of EMT markers in NMuMG cells treated for long
term (14 days) with TGF-b1 (2 ng/ml). (e) Bar graph showing the effect of TGF-b1 treatment for 72 h (10 ng/ml) or 14 days (2 ng/ml) on the
proliferation of NMuMG cells in the presence, or absence of overexpressed LAP2. Data represent mean±s.e.m. of three independent
experiments. *Po0.05, ***Po0.001. (f, g) Bar graphs showing the effect of C/EBPb knockdown through expression of Cebpb shRNA (f ) or
overexpression of LAP2 (g) on the capacity of NMuMG cells to migrate through Matrigel during 8 h using TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml) as a
chemoattractant. Data are presented as percentage values compared with controls that were set to 100. *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001.

metastasis. As our studies had shown that knockdown of C/EBPb,
per se, was sufﬁcient to cause reduced expression of E-cadherin
and CAR, we hypothesized that C/EBPb could modulate the EMT
response downstream of TGF-b by acting as a transcriptional
activator of junction proteins.
By using a computer-based software used to identify binding
sites for transcription factors in genomic DNA sequences, we
found putative binding sites for C/EBP transcription factors were
identiﬁed in promoter regions of several genes encoding junction
proteins including Cdh1 (Figure 6a), Cxadr (Figure 6b), Cldn3
(Supplementary Figure 3a) and Ocln (Supplementary Figure 3b).
Chromatin immunoprecipitationChIP assays demonstrated that C/
EBPb speciﬁcally interacted with regions of Cdh1 and Cxadr
promoters containing C/EBP binding sites in NMuMG cells
(Figure 6c). To determine the capacity of C/EBPb to regulate
Cdh1 and Cxadr promoters, we performed promoter reporter
assays. Overexpression of C/EBPb activated the Cdh1 promoter by
twofold and the Cxadr promoter by 2.5-fold (Figure 6d). Similarly,
C/EBPb activated Ocln and Cldn3 promoters by ﬁvefold and
twofold, respectively (Supplementary Figure 3c). LAP2 was more
potent than C/EBPb and activated the Cdh1 and Cxadr promoters
by ﬁve- and fourfold, respectively. LIP had modest effects on Cdh1
and Cxadr promoters.
In line with a role for C/EBPb as a factor, which is important to
maintain cellular levels of E-cadherin and CAR, we found that
knockdown of C/EBPb resulted in decreased Cdh1 and Cxadr
mRNA levels (Figure 6e). Knockdown of C/EBPb resulted in loss of
E-cadherin and CAR also in human lung A549 carcinoma cells
suggesting a role for C/EBPb as a transcriptional activator of
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

junction proteins also in other types of epithelial cells
(Supplementary Figure 3d). Furthermore, we found that C/EBPb
dissociated from Cdh1 and Cxadr promoters during TGF-b1induced EMT (Figure 6f).

DISCUSSION
Based on our results, we propose a model that miR-155-mediated
depletion of C/EBPb in breast cancer cells promotes loss of
differentiation, invasion and metastasis by shifting the TGF-b
response from growth inhibition to EMT (Figure 7). A mechanism
explaining why loss of C/EBPb promotes EMT, invasion and
metastasis was traced to a previously uncharacterized role of
C/EBPb as a transcriptional activator of junction proteins in
mammary epithelial cells. Thus, loss of C/EBPb-mediated gene
activation of Cdkn2b, as well as Cdh1 and Cxadr, shifts the TGF-b
response in breast cancer cells from growth inhibition to EMT.
Loss of C/EBPb was detected in samples of triple-negative
human breast cancers, which are characterized by their dedifferentiated and invasive nature, and by displaying EMT
characteristics, such as loss of E-cadherin.8 This raises the
possibility to use staining for C/EBPb as an additional diagnostic
tool to determine invasiveness in human breast cancer. In support
of this, reduced staining of C/EBPb is seen in various samples of
ductal breast carcinomas presented in the Human Protein Atlas
database.34 Future studies using a more large-scale approach will
determine whether immunohistochemical staining of C/EBPb
could be used as prognostic tool in breast cancer.
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5620

Figure 5. Loss of C/EBPb promotes invasion and metastatic spread of mammary tumor cells. (a) Immunoblotting results showing the effect of
overexpression of Cebpb shRNA on the expression of E-cadherin, vimentin and C/EBPb in 4T1 cells. Calnexin was used as a loading control.
(b) Bar graph showing the effect of C/EBPb knockdown through expression of Cebpb shRNA on the capacity of 4T1 cells to migrate through
Matrigel using TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml) as a chemoattractant. Data are presented as percentage values compared with controls that were set to 100.
**Po0.01. (c) Representative H&E images of 4T1 tumors expressing control or Cebpb shRNA and grown subcutaneously (sc) for 2 weeks. (d) Bar
graph showing growth rates of 4T1 tumors expressing control or Cebpb shRNA and grown sc for 2 weeks. (e) Representative H&E images of
lung metastasis (arrows) from mice carrying 4T1 tumor cells expressing control or Cebpb shRNA. Scale bar, 200 mm (c, e). (f ) Circle diagram
showing percentage of mice with detectable lung metastases. (g) Bar graph showing the average number of lung metastasis. **Po0.01.

The identiﬁcation of C/EBPb as a transcriptional activator of
junction proteins, not only in mammary epithelial cells but also in
human lung carcinoma cells, provides a mechanism for how loss of
C/EBPb promotes EMT, tumor cell invasion and metastasis. The
results should be put into perspective of published data showing
that epithelial genes including Cdh1 and Cxadr, are inactivated
during EMT by repressors, such as Snail, Zeb and Twist (reviewed in
Peinado et al.35). Our results suggest that inactivation of epithelial
genes during EMT is not solely a result from activation of
transcriptional repressors, but also from inactivation of transcriptional activators, such as C/EBPb, which normally promote
epithelial differentiation. In our studies, it was not sufﬁcient to
revert EMT in 4T1 tumor cells by stable expression of C/EBPb alone.
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

It is possible that C/EBPb needs to be overexpressed together with
other cofactors to fully induce mesenchymal-epithelial transition in
invasive cancer cells. It might also be due by incapacity of C/EBPb
to overcome the repressive action of Snail, Zeb and Twist factors
on epithelial genes. It will be of interest for the future to elucidate
whether activators and repressors compete to regulate epithelial
genes and whether such competition would be important for
mammary epithelial cell differentiation, and for the induction of
EMT during breast cancer progression. Identiﬁcation of such
mechanisms may open up possibilities to block or even revert
EMT to inhibit tumor progression. Interestingly, vimentin was more
potently induced by TGF-b after knockdown of C/EBPb, and further
repressed after overexpression of LAP2. This indicates that C/EBPb
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5621

Figure 6. Identification of C/EBPb is a transcriptional activator of genes encoding junction proteins in mammary epithelial cells. (a, b) Putative
C/EBP binding sites in the promoter regions of the mouse Cdh1 (E-cadherin) and Cxadr (CAR) genes were identified via the Consite software
(http://asp.ii.uib.no:8090/cgi-bin/CONSITE/consite/). Regions containing (region II), or not containing (region I) C/EBP binding sites are shown.
(c) Results from ChIP analysis of C/EBPb binding to regions I/II in Cdh1 and Cxadr promoters in NMuMG cells. (d) Results from promoter
reporter assays showing the effect of overexpression of C/EBPb, LAP2 or LIP on the activity of Cdh1 and Cxadr promoters in EpH4 cells. Data
represent mean ±s.d. *Po0.05, compared with control. (e) qPCR results showing the effect of Cebpb shRNA and control shRNA on Cdh1 and
Cxadr expression. (f ) Results from ChIP analysis showing the effect of TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml, 48 h) on C/EBPb binding to Cdh1 and Cxadr promoters.
Data from qPCR experiments represent mean±s.e.m. of three independent experiments. *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001.

may promote epithelial differentiation both by activating epithelial
genes and by repressing mesenchymal genes. Future studies will
reveal whether C/EBPb is a direct repressor of vimentin, or if it acts
through one or more intermediate steps of regulation.
We identiﬁed C/EBPb as a target of miR-155 during TGF-binduced EMT in NMuMG cells. MiR-155 is an oncomiR linked to
breast cancer invasion and metastasis and was recently shown to
be an important mediator of TGF-b-induced EMT in NMuMG
cells.31,36 However, few miR-155 targets have been linked to TGFb-induced EMT. It was recently shown that miR-155 targets
RhoA,31 which regulates formation of cell–cell junctions and cell
polarity during epithelialization by controlling actomyosin polymerization and protein complex formation.37,38 Together with our
results, this suggests that miR-155 promotes degradation of
junction complexes during TGF-b-induced EMT by targeting dual
mechanisms: (i) RhoA-mediated actomyosin polymerization and
junction formation, and (ii) C/EBPb-mediated transcriptional
activation of genes encoding junction proteins.
Re-activation of C/EBPb and other factors promoting epithelial
differentiation might represent a fruitful approach to preserve or
strengthen a more differentiated, benign tumor phenotype in
breast cancer. In support of this, it has been shown that steroid
hormones like glucocorticoids, which are potent inducers of
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

C/EBPb and that promote epithelial differentiation, can inhibit
TGF-b-induced EMT in breast cancer cells, and block EMT and
tumor cell dissemination in pancreatic cancer models.39–41 In
addition, C/EBPb is a critical mediator of progesterone-regulated
epithelial differentiation, and it was recently shown that
progesterone reverses the EMT phenotype in breast cancer cells,
and inhibits EMT in endometrial cancer.42 Moreover, BMP7, which
was recently shown to antagonize TGF-b-induced EMT and inhibit
metastatic spread of breast cancer cells, is a potent inducer of
C/EBPb, at least in adipocytes.43–45 Based on our data, we believe
it would be of interest for the future to study the role of C/EBPb in
mediating the anti-EMT effects of these agents and also, to
elucidate further target genes of C/EBPb in breast cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human breast cancer
Clinical samples of human ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal
breast cancer were obtained after breast cancer surgery and were freshly
frozen and sectioned according to standard procedures. A pathologist at
Umeå University Hospital, Sweden independently classiﬁed all tumors
according to the status of estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptor. The
Research Ethics Review Board of Northern Sweden (EPN) approved all
studies using human material.
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5622
immunoblotting. The Smad3 siRNA (Dharmacon, Thermo Scientiﬁc, Rockford, IL, USA), the miR-155 inhibitor (miRIDIAN Hairpin Inhibitor mmu-miR155, Dharmacon, Thermo Scientiﬁc) and the miR-155 mimic (Syn-mmumiR-155 miScript miRNA Mimic, Qiagen, Stockholm, Sweden), or the
negative control (miRIDIAN microRNA hairpin inhibitor negative control no
1 (Dharmacon)) were transfected into NMuMG cells in 12-well plates using
Dharmafect according to standard protocol 24 h prior to addition of TGFb1 (5 ng/ml). Cells were lysed after 24 h and analyzed by immunoblotting.
For qPCR analysis, cells were transfected in 24-wells.

Immunoﬂuorescence staining and image analysis

Figure 7. Schematic model proposing how miR-155-mediated
depletion of C/EBPb promotes breast cancer progression by shifting
the TGF-b response from growth inhibition to EMT. C/EBPb acts as a
mediator of TGF-b-induced growth inhibition by acting as a
transcriptional activator of Cdkn2b, which encodes p15INK4b, as
shown by others.18 In addition, C/EBPb promotes epithelial
differentiation by acting as a transcriptional activator of genes
encoding junction proteins including Cdh1, Cxadr, Ocln and Cldn3.
Activation of miR-155, an oncomiR frequently overexpressed in
breast cancer, results in depletion C/EBPb. As a result, the growth
inhibitory effect of TGF-b is lost, and as a consequence of
inactivation of genes encoding junction proteins, cells acquire an
increased capacity to undergo EMT, invade and metastasize.

Immunoﬂuorescence staining of cultured cells was performed on cells
grown on cover slips, which ﬁxed in absolute ethanol, and stained as
previously described.11 Staining of frozen sections of human and mouse
tumors was performed after ﬁxation in 4% paraformaldehyde, blocking in
3% BSA in PBS followed by staining with primary and secondary antibodies
according to Supplementary Methods.
For image analysis and quantiﬁcation of the intensity of immunoﬂuorescence staining in the eight different human invasive breast carcinomas,
three to ﬁve images per tumor were captured (  200 magniﬁcation),
depending on tumor size. Images were imported into the ImageJ software
(http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/). Four randomly selected tumor areas in each
image were analyzed separately for mean ﬂuorescence intensity staining
of C/EBPb and E-Cadherin, respectively. To more speciﬁcally study whether
loss of C/EBPb correlated with loss of E-cadherin, we compared mean
ﬂuorescence intensity values in E-cadherin þ versus E-cadherin  areas in
the three tumors that were classiﬁed as triple-negative breast cancers. Four
E-cadherin þ and four E-cadherin  areas were selected per tumor. For
quantiﬁcation of mean ﬂuorescence intensity of C/EBPb and E-Cadherin
staining in tumor sections from 14-week-old MMTV-PyMT mice (N ¼ 3) ﬁve
images of each tumor were captured. Images were imported into ImageJ
and four E-cadherin þ and four E-cadherin  areas were selected per tumor
and compared for C/EBPb intensity.

Antibodies
See Supplementary section.

Mouse mammary tumor models
All animal studies were approved by the Northern Stockholm Animal
Welfare Committee, and by the Karolinska Institute. Mammary tumors and
lungs were isolated from 10- or 14-week-old female heterozygous MMTVPyMT mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, USA), freshly frozen and
sectioned according to standard procedures. Mammary tumors were
harvested at 10 weeks of age to 14 weeks of age. For frozen sections,
samples were ﬁxed 1 h at 4 1C in 4% paraformaldehyde, incubated in 30%
sucrose over night, embedded in OTC, sectioned and stained as indicated.
Green ﬂuorescent protein-labeled 4T1 cells (2  106) expressing Cebpb
shRNA or control shRNA were subcutaneously implanted in the dorsal back
of 6- to 8-week-old female BALB/c mice (n ¼ 8 per group) and tumor sizes
were measured with a caliper every 2 days, starting from day 5 after
implantation. To study metastasis, primary tumors were surgically removed
under analgesia and anesthesia 2 weeks after implantation. Animals were
killed after 2 months and their lungs isolated, ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in parafﬁn. Central parts of lungs from each mouse
implanted with 4T1 cells either expressing Cebpb shRNA (N ¼ 7) or control
shRNA (N ¼ 5) were sectioned (5 mm), stained for hematoxylin and eosin
and analyzed with a Leica DMLB100 bright ﬁeld microscope at  10 and
 40 magniﬁcation to morphologically identify metastases. Pictures were
captured at  20 magniﬁcation.

Cell culture and treatments
NMuMG cells (ATCC) were cultured as described previously.11 EMT was
induced in by the addition of TGF-b1 (R&D Systems, Abingdon, UK) at doses
of 2–10 ng/ml. EpH4 cells (kindly provided by H. Beug, Vienna Medical
University) were cultivated as described.46 Human lung A549 carcinoma
cells (ATCC) were cultivated in Dulbecco’s modiﬁcation of Eagle’s medium
with 10% fetal calf serum at 37 1C. Mouse mammary 4T1 tumor cells (ATCC)
were cultured in RPMI-1640 with 10% fetal calf serum at 37 1C.
The speciﬁc inhibitor of Smad3 (Calbiochem, EMD Chemicals, Gibbstown, NJ, USA) was added to NMuMG cells (10 nM) 2 h prior to the
addition of TGF-b1. After 24 h, cells were harvested and analyzed by
Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

Lentivirus-mediated knockdown and overexpression of C/EBPb
Lentivirus vectors expressing shCebpb or control shRNA (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa cruz, CA, UA) were used to infect NMuMG, 4T1 and
A549 cells. Vectors overexpressing human C/EBPb or control (Gentarget,
San Diego, Ca, USA) were used to infect 4T1 cells. Brieﬂy, 1  10^5 cells
were seeded in a 96-well plate and infected with 20 ml of lentivirus particles
in medium containing 8 mg/ml polybrene (Calbiochem, EMD). After 24 h,
medium was replaced with selection medium containing 10 mg/ul
Puromycin (Calbiochem, EMD).

Immunoblotting
Immunoblotting analysis of cell lysates from cells prepared at indicated
times was performed according to standard procedures as previously
described.11

Quantitative real-time PCR
Was performed according to standard protocols as previously described.11
Primers used are listed in Supplementary Table 1.

Reporter assays and overexpression studies
The expression vector for rat Cebpb was provided by Magnus Nord (Lung
Research Laboratory, Karolinska Hospital, Sweden). Expression plasmids for
human LIP and LAP2 isoforms were obtained from Addgene, Cambridge,
MA, USA. A promoter reporter construct for human CDH1 was generated
by subcloning a 2-kb sequence upstream region of CDH1 from a fosmid
containing a 10-kb genomic DNA sequence upstream from CDH1 (BACPAC
Resources Center, Oakland, CA, USA) into a pGL-3 basic vector (Promega,
Fitchburg, WI, USA) by introducing the restriction sites Nhe1 and HindIII
using PCR (for primers, see Table S1). Plasmids encoding human Ocln and
mouse Cldn3 promoters were provided by J. Mankertz (Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany) and M. Furuse (Kobe University,
Japan), respectively. The mouse Cxadr promoter construct was described
previously.11 A plasmid encoding b-Galactosidase (b-gal) under the
& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5623
CMV promoter was used as an internal control of transfection efﬁciency in
all reporter assays.
Reporter constructs and expression plasmids were transfected into EpH4
or NMuMG cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA, USA)
according to standard procedures. Effects on mRNA expression were
analyzed by qPCR as described. Luciferase and b-GAL activities were
analyzed using a Polar Star Omega (BMG LABTECH, Cary, NC, USA) plate
reader. Luciferase values were normalized to b-GAL values to account for
variations in transfection efﬁciency.

Invasion assays
Cells were trypsinized, resuspended in growth factor-reduced Matrigel
(2 mg/ml, BD Biosciences, Stockholm, Sweden) diluted 1:5 in Dulbecco’s
modiﬁcation of Eagle’s medium with 1% FBS. Fifty-thousand cells were
seeded into the cell culture inserts (8 mm pore (Millipore, Billerica, MA,
USA). Medium with TGF-b1 (10 ng/ml) was added in the lower chamber.
After 8-h incubation in 37 1C/ 5% CO2 incubator, non-migrated cells were
removed with cotton swabs and inserts ﬁxed in methanol. The membrane
was removed and mounted with Vectashield containing 4’,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA). Images were captured by
using a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope and the number of invaded cells
was counted.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were performed using a chromatin
immunoprecipitation Assay Kit (Millipore), according to instructions
from the manufacturer. DNA-protein complexes were ampliﬁed by PCR
for 25–30 cycles in the presence of 1.5 mM MgCl2, 200 mM dNTPs
and 10 pmol of primers (see Table S1). Ten percent of the precipitated
DNA was used for each PCR. Samples were analyzed on a 2% agarose gel.
All chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments were repeated three times.

Statistical analysis
All values are presented as means±s.e.m. Signiﬁcance between two
groups was determined by t-test (reporter assays, qPCR) and signiﬁcance
as assessed by analysis of variance, followed by the Bonferroni’s test for
multiple comparisons. Linear regression analysis of mean ﬂuorescence
intensity values for C/EBPb and E-Cadherin expression in human tumors
was analyzed using PrismGraphPad. Po0.05 was considered signiﬁcant for
all statistical analysis.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Mina Bissell (Berkeley University), Carl-Henrik Heldin (Uppsala University)
and Marene Landström (Umeå University) for valuable input on the manuscript. We
also thank Mathilda Sjöberg (Karolinska Institutet) for assistance with lentivirus
infections and Anette Berglund (Umeå University) for handling of human tissue
samples. This work was supported by research grants from the Swedish Research
Council, the Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation, the Swedish Cancer Society and
the Strategic Cancer Foundation (StratCan) at Karolinska Institute to JF, by a fellowship
from the Swedish Society of Medical Research to TB, as well as research grants from
Vasterbotten County Council (VLL) and Cancerforskningsfonden Norrland to MS. VT
was supported by a grant from the Swedish Cancer Society, PR was supported by the
Swedish Cancer Society an European Union RD Found, Ewa Kurzejamska was
supported by Foundation for Polish Science and the Karolinska Institutet.

REFERENCES
1 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 2000; 100: 57–70.
2 Bierie B, Moses HL. Tumour microenvironment: TGFbeta: the molecular Jekyll and
Hyde of cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2006; 6: 506–520.
3 Heldin CH, Landstrom M, Moustakas A. Mechanism of TGF-beta signaling to
growth arrest, apoptosis, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Curr Opin Cell
Biol 2009; 21: 166–176.
4 Massague J. TGFbeta in cancer. Cell 2008; 134: 215–230.
5 Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Clin
Invest 2009; 119: 1420–1428.

& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

6 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in
development and disease. Cell 2009; 139: 871–890.
7 Blick T, Widodo E, Hugo H, Waltham M, Lenburg ME, Neve RM et al. Epithelial
mesenchymal transition traits in human breast cancer cell lines. Clin Exp Metastasis 2008; 25: 629–642.
8 Jeong H, Ryu YJ, An J, Lee Y, Kim A. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast
cancer correlates with high histological grade and triple-negative phenotype.
Histopathology 2012; 60: E87–E95.
9 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou AY et al. The epithelialmesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell 2008;
133: 704–715.
10 Fuxe J, Vincent T, De Herreros AG. Transcriptional crosstalk between TGFbeta and
stem cell pathways in tumor cell invasion: role of EMT promoting Smad complexes. Cell Cycle 2010; 9: 2363–2374.
11 Vincent T, Neve EP, Johnson JR, Kukalev A, Rojo F, Albanell J et al. A SNAIL1SMAD3/4 transcriptional repressor complex promotes TGF-beta mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat Cell Biol 2009; 11: 943–950.
12 Xu J, Lamouille S, Derynck R. TGF-beta-induced epithelial to mesenchymal
transition. Cell Res 2009; 19: 156–172.
13 Gomis RR, Alarcon C, He W, Wang Q, Seoane J, Lash A et al. A FoxO-Smad
synexpression group in human keratinocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:
12747–12752.
14 Seoane J, Le HV, Shen L, Anderson SA, Massague J. Integration of Smad and
forkhead pathways in the control of neuroepithelial and glioblastoma cell
proliferation. Cell 2004; 117: 211–223.
15 Chen CR, Kang Y, Siegel PM, Massague J. E2F4/5 and p107 as Smad cofactors
linking the TGFbeta receptor to c-myc repression. Cell 2002; 110: 19–32.
16 Frederick JP, Liberati NT, Waddell DS, Shi Y, Wang XF. Transforming growth factor
beta-mediated transcriptional repression of c-myc is dependent on direct binding
of Smad3 to a novel repressive Smad binding element. Mol Cell Biol 2004; 24:
2546–2559.
17 Kang Y, Chen CR, Massague J. A self-enabling TGFbeta response coupled to
stress signaling: Smad engages stress response factor ATF3 for Id1 repression in
epithelial cells. Mol Cell 2003; 11: 915–926.
18 Gomis RR, Alarcon C, Nadal C, Van Poznak C, Massague J. C/EBPbeta at the core of
the TGFbeta cytostatic response and its evasion in metastatic breast cancer cells.
Cancer Cell 2006; 10: 203–214.
19 Arnal-Estape A, Tarragona M, Morales M, Guiu M, Nadal C, Massague J et al. HER2
silences tumor suppression in breast cancer cells by switching expression of
C/EBPss isoforms. Cancer Res 2010; 70: 9927–9936.
20 Robinson GW, Johnson PF, Hennighausen L, Sterneck E. The C/EBPbeta transcription factor regulates epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation in the
mammary gland. Genes Dev 1998; 12: 1907–1916.
21 Seagroves TN, Krnacik S, Raught B, Gay J, Burgess-Beusse B, Darlington GJ et al.
C/EBPbeta, but not C/EBPalpha, is essential for ductal morphogenesis, lobuloalveolar proliferation, and functional differentiation in the mouse mammary
gland. Genes Dev 1998; 12: 1917–1928.
22 Zahnow CA. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta: its role in breast cancer and
associations with receptor tyrosine kinases. Expert Rev Mol Med 2009; 11: e12.
23 Sebastian T, Malik R, Thomas S, Sage J, Johnson PF. C/EBPbeta cooperates with
RB:E2F to implement Ras(V12)-induced cellular senescence. EMBO J 2005; 24:
3301–3312.
24 Zahnow CA, Cardiff RD, Laucirica R, Medina D, Rosen JM. A role for CCAAT/
enhancer binding protein beta-liver-enriched inhibitory protein in mammary
epithelial cell proliferation. Cancer Res 2001; 61: 261–269.
25 Bundy LM, Sealy L. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)-2 transforms normal mammary epithelial cells and induces epithelial to mesenchymal
transition in culture. Oncogene 2003; 22: 869–883.
26 Muraoka RS, Dumont N, Ritter CA, Dugger TC, Brantley DM, Chen J et al. Blockade
of TGF-beta inhibits mammary tumor cell viability, migration, and metastases.
J Clin Invest 2002; 109: 1551–1559.
27 Brown KA, Aakre ME, Gorska AE, Price JO, Eltom SE, Pietenpol JA et al. Induction
by transforming growth factor-beta1 of epithelial to mesenchymal transition is a
rare event in vitro. Breast Cancer Res 2004; 6: R215–R231.
28 Oft M, Peli J, Rudaz C, Schwarz H, Beug H, Reichmann E. TGF-beta1 and Ha-Ras
collaborate in modulating the phenotypic plasticity and invasiveness of epithelial
tumor cells. Genes Dev 1996; 10: 2462–2477.
29 He M, Xu Z, Ding T, Kuang DM, Zheng L. MicroRNA-155 regulates inﬂammatory
cytokine production in tumor-associated macrophages via targeting C/EBPbeta.
Cell Mol Immunol 2009; 6: 343–352.
30 Costinean S, Sandhu SK, Pedersen IM, Tili E, Trotta R, Perrotti D et al. Src homology
2 domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta are targeted by miR-155 in B cells of Emicro-MiR-155 transgenic mice.
Blood 2009; 114: 1374–1382.

Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

Loss of C/EBPb is linked to EMT in breast cancer
J Johansson et al

5624
31 Kong W, Yang H, He L, Zhao JJ, Coppola D, Dalton WS et al. MicroRNA-155 is
regulated by the transforming growth factor beta/Smad pathway and contributes
to epithelial cell plasticity by targeting RhoA. Mol Cell Biol 2008; 28: 6773–6784.
32 Gal A, Sjoblom T, Fedorova L, Imreh S, Beug H, Moustakas A. Sustained TGF beta
exposure suppresses Smad and non-Smad signalling in mammary epithelial cells,
leading to EMT and inhibition of growth arrest and apoptosis. Oncogene 2008; 27:
1218–1230.
33 McEarchern JA, Kobie JJ, Mack V, Wu RS, Meade-Tollin L, Arteaga CL et al. Invasion
and metastasis of a mammary tumor involves TGF-beta signaling. Int J Cancer
2001; 91: 76–82.
34 Uhlen M, Bjorling E, Agaton C, Szigyarto CA, Amini B, Andersen E et al. A human
protein atlas for normal and cancer tissues based on antibody proteomics. Mol
Cell Proteomics 2005; 4: 1920–1932.
35 Peinado H, Olmeda D, Snail Cano A. Zeb and bHLH factors in tumour progression:
an alliance against the epithelial phenotype? Nat Rev Cancer 2007; 7: 415–428.
36 Mattiske S, Suetani RJ, Neilsen PM, Callen DF. The oncogenic role of miR-155 in
breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2012; 21: 1236–1243.
37 Wang HR, Zhang Y, Ozdamar B, Ogunjimi AA, Alexandrova E, Thomsen GH et al.
Regulation of cell polarity and protrusion formation by targeting RhoA for
degradation. Science 2003; 302: 1775–1779.
38 Terry S, Nie M, Matter K, Balda MS. Rho signaling and tight junction functions.
Physiology (Bethesda) 2010; 25: 16–26.
39 Gotoh T, Chowdhury S, Takiguchi M, Mori M. The glucocorticoid-responsive gene
cascade. Activation of the rat arginase gene through induction of C/EBPbeta.
J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 3694–3698.

40 Rhim AD, Mirek ET, Aiello NM, Maitra A, Bailey JM, McAllister F et al. EMT and
dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell 2012; 148: 349–361.
41 Zhang L, Lei W, Wang X, Tang Y, Song J. Glucocorticoid induces mesenchymal-toepithelial transition and inhibits TGF-beta1-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and cell migration. FEBS Lett 2010; 584: 4646–4654.
42 Zuo L, Li W, You S. Progesterone reverses the mesenchymal phenotypes of basal
phenotype breast cancer cells via a membrane progesterone receptor mediated
pathway. Breast Cancer Res 2012; 12: R34.
43 Tseng YH, Kokkotou E, Schulz TJ, Huang TL, Winnay JN, Taniguchi CM et al. New
role of bone morphogenetic protein 7 in brown adipogenesis and energy
expenditure. Nature 2008; 454: 1000–1004.
44 Zeisberg M, Hanai J, Sugimoto H, Mammoto T, Charytan D, Strutz F et al. BMP-7
counteracts TGF-beta1-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and reverses chronic renal injury. Nat Med 2003; 9: 964–968.
45 Buijs JT, Henriquez NV, van Overveld PG, van der Horst G, Que I, Schwaninger R
et al. Bone morphogenetic protein 7 in the development and treatment of bone
metastases from breast cancer. Cancer Res 2007; 67: 8742–8751.
46 Janda E, Lehmann K, Killisch I, Jechlinger M, Herzig M, Downward J et al. Ras and
TGF[beta] cooperatively regulate epithelial cell plasticity and metastasis: dissection of Ras signaling pathways. J Cell Biol 2002; 156: 299–313.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Oncogene (2013) 5614 – 5624

& 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited

