Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Metabolic flux-driven sialylation alters internalization, recycling,
and drug sensitivity of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) in SW1990 pancreatic cancer cells

Mohit P. Mathew1, Elaine Tan1, Christopher T. Saeui1, Patawut Bovonratwet2,
Samuel Sklar1, Rahul Bhattacharya1 and Kevin J. Yarema1
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Translational Tissue Engineering Center, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
2

Current address: Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA

Correspondence to: Kevin J. Yarema, email: kyarema1@jhu.edu
Keywords: pancreatic cancer, sialic acid, galectin, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), glycobiology
Received: June 22, 2016	

Accepted: August 01, 2016	

Published: August 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
In prior work we reported that advanced stage, drug-resistant pancreatic cancer
cells (the SW1990 line) can be sensitized to the EGFR-targeting tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib by treatment with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc (Bioorg.
Med. Chem. Lett. (2015) 25(6):1223-7). Here we provide mechanistic insights into
how this compound inhibits EGFR activity and provides synergy with TKI drugs. First,
we showed that the sialylation of the EGFR receptor was at most only modestly
enhanced (by ~20 to 30%) compared to overall ~2-fold increase in cell surface
levels of this sugar. Second, flux-driven sialylation did not alter EGFR dimerization
as has been reported for cancer cell lines that experience increased sialylation due
to spontaneous mutations. Instead, we present evidence that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
treatment weakens the galectin lattice, increases the internalization of EGFR, and
shifts endosomal trafficking towards non-clathrin mediated (NCM) endocytosis.
Finally, by evaluating downstream targets of EGFR signaling, we linked synergy
between 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and existing TKI drugs to a shift from clathrin-coated
endocytosis (which allows EGFR signaling to continue after internalization) towards
NCM endocytosis, which targets internalized moieties for degradation and thereby
rapidly diminishes signaling.

INTRODUCTION

carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) such as the sialylated Tn
antigen (sTn), sialyl Lewis X (sLeX) and ganglioside GM3
[6, 7] and its bulk chemical properties – for example when
it is assembled into polysialic acid – can be anti-adhesive
and provide a mechanism for cancer cells to detach from a
primary tumor to initiate metastasis.
Links between sialic acid and oncogenesis suggests
that increased sialylation would be counter-productive
in cancer therapy thereby posing a conundrum for
exploiting otherwise promising metabolic oligosaccharide
engineering strategies to treat cancer. Metabolic
oligosaccharide engineering (MOE [8, 9], also known as
metabolic glycoengineering, MG or MGE [10]) refers to a
method where non-natural monosaccharides are supplied
to living cells or animals to modulate glycosylation
(detailed background information is provided elsewhere

In mammals, glycosylation is a ubiquitous co/
post-translational modification of proteins and lipids
that modulates the activities of these molecules in
many ways that – despite decades of study – often
remain poorly understood. An illustration of a recent,
unexpected glycosylation-based result is the ability of
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc to sensitize drug-resistant pancreatic
cancer cells to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) [1].
To elaborate briefly, this compound is a “high flux”
N-acetylmannosamine (ManNAc) analog that increases
sialylation [2-5]; consequently it is counterintuitive
that such a compound could have anti-cancer potential
because sialic acid has generally been regarded as cancerpromoting. This sugar occurs in many tumor-associated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66491

Oncotarget

[11-14]). To illustrate this conundrum, MOE can be used
to install non-natural sialic acids in TACAs for delivery
of diagnostic [15, 16] and therapeutic [17] agents or even
for fluorinated sugars intended to have anti-metastatic
properties [9,18,19]. At the same time, however, these
approaches could promote cancer progression by
increasing overall sialylation and, for this reason (and
others beyond the scope of this discussion), MOE has
made only halting progress towards clinical adoption.
Intriguingly, several reports provide a counterpoint
to the widely held assumption that sialylation is
synonymous with increased carcinogenicity. For
example, our group found that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc – a
“pro-drug” that is activated by intracellular esterases to
generate ManNAc [20] – promotes high levels of flux
through the sialic acid biosynthetic pathway [3] and can
double cell surface sialylation in human cancer cells [4].
Surprisingly however, this compound had only a modest
(in fact almost negligible) impact on endpoints related to
metastasis such as cell motility [4]. One explanation for
this muted response to increased sialylation is that once
cancer cells have attained a disease-promoting level of
this sugar, any additional increase may not be capable
of further exacerbating cancer progression. Indeed,
although sialylation is associated with many aspects of
oncogenesis [21, 22], too large of an increase may actually
be detrimental. This idea is consistent with descriptions of
only “slightly increased” levels of sialic acid in some types
of cancer [23] and feedback mechanisms that carefully
titer metabolic flux (i.e., generation of ManNAc from
UDP-GlcNAc) into the sialic acid biosynthetic pathway
[24,25].
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
is an oncogenic protein linked to poor prognosis in
pancreatic (and other) cancers [26-28] that illustrates how
hypersialylation can deter cancer progression. For context,
the overall glycosylation status of EGFR has been linked
to changes in receptor activity as well as to overall cell
behavior [29, 30]. For example, genetic deletion of the
Asn-420 glycosylation site enables ligand-free activation
of EGFR [31] and inhibition of N-glycosylation with
tunicamycin sensitizes human non-small cell lung cancer
cells to erlotinib [32]. Focusing on sialic acid, increased
levels of this sugar observed in certain cancer cell lines
were found several years ago to inhibit EGFR activity in
lung cancer cells [29]. In subsequent work, the impact
of sialylation on EGFR activity was through the overexpression of sialyltransferases [33], which diminished
EGFR activity and through sialidase treatment, which
removed sialic acid and promoted EGFR signaling [34].
Building on these findings, our group recently
showed that a “small molecule” approach using
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc could reproduce drug sensitization
achieved by genetic manipulation of sialylation. Looking
forward to clinical translation, our approach is important
because we rely on conventional drug strategies rather
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

than gene therapy approaches that have yet to be
validated for use in human patients and furthermore,
our approach is transient and reversible and thus can
avoid long-term harm to healthy tissues (e.g., increased
sialylation that can promote tumorogenesis over a period
of months or years can be avoided by our strategy). In
particular, 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc sensitized drug-resistant
pancreatic cancer cells to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) erlotinib and gefitinib [1] that are currently used
as cancer therapeutics but are only modestly effective
because of rapid onset drug resistance in patients [35].
Based on the clinical promise of counteracting drug
resistance, especially in difficult-to-treat malignancies
such as pancreatic cancer, we investigated the impact
of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc on EGFR signaling to gain
insight into the underlying molecular mechanisms by
which this compound attenuated oncogenic signaling
and to understand the unusual synergy between TKIs and
increased cellular sialylation supported by this compound.

RESULTS
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment has a minor
impact on EGFR sialylation
In previous studies we characterized the
glycosylation of SW1990 cells by using “glycosite”
glycoproteomic analysis (4) as well as through N-glycan
profiling [5]. As outlined in detail in the Supplemental
Material, 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment increased the
sialylation of one N-glycan site on EGFR (overall, EGFR
has 11 sequons for N-glycan attachment with eight of these
sites typically occupied [36]). To quickly summarize this
prior work here in the main document, it suggested that
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc had only a minor impact on EGFR
compared to its much higher enhancement of overall cell
surface sialylation. To confirm this premise in the current
study, we used two additional methods to measure EGFR
sialylation. In both cases we began by immunopurifying
EGFR from control and 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated
cells. In the first set of experiments, the purified EGFR
was quantified by using western blots (Figure 1A)
and in parallel stained for α2,6 sialic acid using HRPlinked SNA-1 lectin. Examination of the lectin blots
indicated a slight trend towards increased sialylation
upon 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment but rigorous
quantification was not possible due to artifacts in the
blots. In an independent method, the immunopurified
EGFR was incubated with sialidase and the released
sialic acid was quantified using FACE analysis (Figure
1B). These experiments showed an increase of ~20 to
30% in EGFR sialylation in SW1990 cells, which was
consistent with the previously-reported minimal increase
in this endpoint [4] and markedly lower than the ~2-fold
66492

Oncotarget

increase in global surface sialylation in cells treated with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc under identical conditions.
Our finding that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc had a only a
minor impact on EGFR sialylation differed from reports
where five of EGFR’s N-glycan sites experienced a twofold or higher increase in sialic acid [29]. A comparison
of these studies suggested that genetic manipulation
compared to our flux-based method resulted in clearcut
differences to EGFR sialylation; in particular, our
approach had a disproportionately minor effect on EGFR
compared to overall changes to cell surface sialylation.
Despite this disparity, a critical endpoint of increased
sialylation achieved through 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc – i.e.,
diminution of EGFR signaling and sensitization to TKI
drugs – was remarkably similar to genetically modified
cells [34]. However, as described in this report, although
the ultimate outcome of each approach converged on

the same endpoint of diminishing EGFR signaling and
sensitizing cells to TKI drugs, metabolic flux-based
changes to EGFR function through a different mechanism
that affects receptor activity and trafficking in ways that
supersede (but potentially complement) the previouslyreported mechanism where increased sialylation inhibits
EGFR signaling by decreasing receptor dimerization [29,
33, 34].

FRAP assays show minimal changes in receptorligand binding affinity, thereby discounting the
role of dimerization
We tested whether changes to sialylation achieved
through 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment had a similar
effect on EGFR dimerization as discussed above; based

Figure 1: Sialylation of immunopurified (IP’d) EGFR from SW1990 cells. Cells were treated with 100 μM (or 0 µM for

controls) 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and EGFR was IP’d from each condition. (A) One aliquot of the IP’d EGFR was separated using PAGE
and the resulting blots were probed with an EGFR-recognizing antibody or HRP-linked SNA-1 lectin; the SNA-1 staining was ablated
by the binding competitor lactose. The data from the western blot was quantified and normalized to EGFR levels as shown in the the bar
graph, which verifies that there was a small increase in α2,6 sialylation of EGFR in the 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated cells. (B) A second
aliquot of IP’d EGFR was digested with sialidase, which was analyzed by Fluorescent Assisted Carbohydrate Electrophoresis (FACE).
Quantification of the FACE bands (normalized to EGFR levels determined from the western blots) provided independent verification that
overall sialylation of EGFR increased with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment Each experiment includes at least three biological replicates
and the bands were quantified using Image J with data expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). * indicates a p value of < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66493

Oncotarget

of receptor-ligand binding.
Because ligand binding is linked to the dimerization
status of EGFR [37-39], EGF binding kinetics would
be expected to differ between 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNActreated and control cells if EGFR dimerization is
perturbed by analog treatment. The t0.5 values determined
for 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated and control cells,
however, were statistically identical (7.497s and 8.368s,
respectively, Figure 2). This experiment provided
added evidence that a flux-based increase in sialylation
modulates EGFR activity through a mechanism different
than previously reported changes to receptor dimerization.

on the minimal impact of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc on EGFR
sialylation (Figure 1), we did not anticipate that this
would be the case but wanted to experimental confirm
this premise. This expectation was supported by western
blot assays conducted following the procedures described
by Liu et al., [29] that were not able to reproduce the
published results where increased sialylation inhibited
EGFR dimerization. Instead, although we did observe a
slight trend towards reduced dimerization, we were not
able to achieve a statistically significant result despite
repeating the experiment multiple times.
To confirm that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc had minimal
(if any) impact on EGFR dimerization, we explored
additional methods to assess this endpoint. In the first
of these experiments, we used fluorescent recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP) assays to evaluate receptor
(EGFR)-ligand (EGF) binding kinetics, which are
influenced by receptor dimerization [37-39]. A portion of
the cell membrane was photobleached while the cells were
in a bath containing Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated EGF.
The rate at which bleached EGF molecules were released
and unbleached Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated EGF from
solution bound to the vacated receptors was measured by
monitoring the recovery of fluorescence. The t0.5 value
is inversely proportional to the rate at which bleached
EGF molecules are released and unbleached Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated EGF from solution bind to the vacated
receptors, thereby providing a quantitative measurement

Surface localization of EGFR was decreased by
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment, supporting a
galectin lattice mechanism
Based on the evidence that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
had minimal impact on EGFR dimerization, we reasoned
that this compound’s ability to reduce EGFR signaling
involved a different (or additional) mechanism. One
hint from the saturation binding assays we previously
reported [1] was that the binding of EGF to the cell surface
was lower in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated compared
to control cells. The earlier study, however, did not
distinguish between two explanations for this finding: first,
changes to ligand affinity due to factors such as EGFR

Figure 2: EGFR Ligand affinity measured using a FRAP assay. A representative fluorescent recovery after photobleaching

(FRAP) assay is shown, in which recovery rates are inversely proportional to t0.5 when Alexafluor 488-conjugated EGF is present in the bath.
This experiment indicated that receptor ligand affinities were not measurably different in the presence or absence of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66494

Oncotarget

dimerization or second, reduced surface localization of
the receptor. In the current study having cast doubt on a
major role for changes to ligand affinity by not gaining
evidence for the dimerization hypothesis we pursued the
second possibility`, which was reduced surface display of
EGFR. To monitor this parameter`, we directly labeled
surface EGFR using an Alexa Fluor-488-conjugated mAb
followed by analysis using confocal microscopy (Figure
3). In this experiment surface EGFR was measured using
the selective permeabilization method previously reported
for EGFR (40,41) and other surface receptors [41,42].
In particular, we followed the procedure described by
Mardones and coworkers who showed that ectodomain
targeting EGFR antibodies of the type we used only stain
cell surface-localized EGFR when the cells are fixed

without permeabilization [41]. Quantification of the
resulting fluorescence at two magnifications (20x, panel A
and 43x, panel B) confirmed that analog treatment resulted
in decreased display of cell surface localized EGFR. The
images presented in Figure 3 show some heterogeneity in
EGFR expression, consistent with the existence of “side
populations” in pancreatic cancer cell lines (as described
by Yao et al., [43]); in the current publication – which
aims to describe a new mechanism for modulating EGFR
activity via an MOE approach – this nuance in cell to cell
variability is less important than our goal of describing the
overall effects of increased flux-based sialylation on the
trafficking of EGFR in cells that express this oncogenic
protein.

Figure 3: Confocal imaging of EGFR in SW1990 cells treated with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc. The treated cells, in comparison

with untreated controls, were imaged at (A) 20X and (B) 43X magnifications after being fixed and stained with Alexa Fluor-488 conjugated
EGFR mAb (green) and DAPI (blue). Quantification of mAb staining, normalized to DAPI, showed a decrease in surface localized EGFR
when SW1990 cells were treated with 100 mM 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc as shown in the bar graphs. Each experiment includes at least three
biological replicates and the fluorescence intensity of Alexa Fluor-488 and DAPI were quantified using Image J with the resulting data
expressed as the mean value +/- standard error of the mean (SEM). Asterisks (*) indicate a p value of < 0.05. Scale bars represent 100 µm
and 50 µm, respectively for Panels A and B.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66495

Oncotarget

Mathematical modeling and experimental
evidence suggests that the galectin lattice
modulates EGFR activity in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNActreated cells

(e.g., in Figure 3) were analyzed by using a macroscopic
cell-level model of EGFR trafficking [44]. This model,
which contains five basic components (ligand binding,
synthesis, internalization, degradation, and recycling)
that are in most cases subdivided into additional steps,
is described in detail in the Supplemental Material (e.g.,
in Figure S2). This model was implemented to explore
the impact of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc on EGFR trafficking
by analyzing each parameter on its own; none of these
model simulations were consistent with our experimental
data. We then simulated the parameters in pairwise

To generate hypotheses to describe how
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc could modulate EGFR activity
through a non-dimerization based mechanism, western
blot and saturation binding results from our previous work
[1] and the surface localization assays reported herein

Figure 4: Proposed galectin lattice-mediated mechanism for modulation of EGFR signaling through 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
treatment. The combined modeling and early experimental results were consistent with the depicted biochemical mechanism where

destabilization of the galectin lattice occurs due to the masking of galectin-binding epitopes by analog-driven increased sialylation of
N-linked glycans. (A) Cancer cells often have highly organized, less-mobile surface receptors (e.g., the green structure represents EGFR
while the black structures represent any other cell surface glycoprotein) in part because of a highly formed galectin lattice. (B) One result of
a strong galectin lattice is lengthened residence times for EGFR on the cell surface [45], resulting in enhanced phosphorylation that lead to
increased downstream EGFR signaling, which contributes to cancer progression. (C) 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment leads to an increase
in sialylation of N-linked glycans bound to EGFR, based on lectin-staining data (specifically SNA binding as shown in the representative
FACS plot depicts globally increased expression of α2,6-linked sialic upon 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment, which is consistent with both
the data shown in Figure 1 and our previous results [4]); glycans terminated with α2,6-linked sialic acids mask galactose residues and
negatively regulate galectin binding [48]. (D) In turn, reduced galectin binding decreases lattice strength, thereby increasing the surface
mobility of EGFR and enhancing its removal from the cell surface [45]. (E) Ultimately – over time periods longer (e.g., 30 to 90 min) than
the 2 min time frame investigated in our previous work (1) – this increased rate of internalization predicts faster inactivation of EGFR,
which is computationally and experimentally demonstrated subsequently in this report.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66496

Oncotarget

combinations, which resulted in a single “hit” where the
modeled result was consistent with experimental data.
Specifically, the results shown in Figure S5, Panel (A)
– which were obtained by simultaneously varying the
simulated internalization and recycling rates – provided a
match between modeled and experimental results. These
simulations predicted (as shown in the upper graph) that
an increase in the internalization rate (ke) along with
a decrease in the recycling rate (1/kx) would result in
decreased EGFR phosphorylation accompanied by a slight
increase in overall EGFR levels. Significantly, this set of
variables also predicted (lower graph) the lower initial
EGFR levels observed on the cell surface after treatment
with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc (Figure 3) observed before
the simulated addition of EGF. A survey of the literature
provided a biochemical mechanism consistent with the
modeled simulations insofar as sialylation can disrupt the
galectin lattice, which in turn can influence EGFR activity
in cancer [45] as depicted in Figure 4 and described in
more detail in the Discussion, below. To gain support for
this mechanism, we next conducted experiments to verify
that a 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-driven increase in sialylation
could disrupt the galectin lattice, modulate EGFR
trafficking, and ultimately attenuate downstream signaling.

in analog-treated cells (Figure 5C). This result showed
that the inhibitory effects of increased sialylation, which
attenuates lattice strength by blocking galectin binding to
surface receptors, can be mimicked by lactose competition
that also disrupts the binding of these lectins.
Finally, a binding assay using Ricinus communus
agglutinin (RCA), a lectin that recognizes terminal
galactose residues (which are the critical binding
epitopes for galectins when they are presented on
highly-branched N-glycans) showed decreased signal
in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated cells (Figure 5D). The
affinity of RCA and galectins for terminal galactose
residues is regulated in a yin-yang manner by sialylation
because sialic acids mask binding sites for these lectins
[47]. The RCA results (both from this study (Figure
5D) and from our previous investigation of the SW1990
pancreatic cancer cell line, [4]) therefore indicated
that potential galectin binding sites were masked by
increased levels of sialylation in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNActreated cells. In particular, α2,6-linked sialic acids that
block galectin binding (48) approximately double in
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated SW1990 cells based on
Sambucus nigra agglutinin (SNA) staining [4, 5].

1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc increases membrane fluidity

1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
towards NCM

To evaluate whether increased membrane fluidity
predicted from the hypothesized attenuation of the galectin
lattice contributed to observed increased internalization
of EGFR, FRAP assays were conducted in the absence
of unbound Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated EGF. In this
experiment, which differs from the results shown in Figure
2 where the bath contained an excess of fluorescentlylabeled EGF, membrane fluidity was monitored by
measuring the rate that fluorescently-labeled EGF already
bound to receptors adjacent to the bleached region
diffuses into the bleached areas. The t0.5 values determined
in this experiment, which are inversely proportional
to the rate of diffusion were noticeably different in the
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treated cells that had faster diffusion
rates compared to non-treated controls (control t0.5= 17.77,
treated t0.5= 7.112, Figure 5A). The observed trends were
repeatable across multiple experiments and supported the
premise that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc modulated cell surface
trafficking dynamics. To further confirm this result, an
independent flow cytometry assay showed a similar
increase in membrane fluidity and subsequent changes
in EGFR internalization as were observed in the FRAP
assays (Figure 5B). Next, lactose (a galectin binding
inhibitor [46]) was used to competitively inhibit galectin
binding to 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated cells to further
confirm the role of the galectin lattice mechanism in
EGFR internalization. The presence of lactose increased
the internalization rate of EGFR in untreated control
cells to levels statistically identical to those observed

Beyond providing clues that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
treatment increased the rate of EGFR internalization
consistent with the galectin lattice mechanism outlined
in Figure 4, which we experimentally confirmed as just
described, the mathematical modeling presented in the
Supplemental Material predicted a decreased recycling
rate (1/kx). A biochemical mechanism consistent with
this prediction was a shift towards non-clathrin mediated
(NCM) endocytosis and away from clathrin mediated
internalization because – unlike clathrin mediated
internalization where signaling can continue and indeed
be amplified – NCM-internalized moieties are directed for
rapid degradation rather than recycling [49].This insight
led us to investigate NCM endocytosis in more detail by
treating cells with filipin, which is an inhibitor of nonchathrin mediated (NCM) endocytosis. As shown in
Figure 5E, filipin ablated the 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-driven
increase in EGFR internalization, indicating that this
mode of internalization played an important role in EGFR
trafficking in analog-treated cells compared to untreated
controls where clathrin-coated internalization played a
dominant role in receptor trafficking.
To further confirm that NCM endocytosis
played an important role in EGFR internalization in
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treated cells, we monitored time
points longer than the two minute intervals used in our
initial experiments (and modeling simulations) because
NCM endocytosis requires 30 to 90 min to fully route cell
surface elements towards degradation [49]. We reasoned

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66497

shifts

internalization

Oncotarget

that there should be evidence of a shift from clathrincoated internalization to NCM endocytosis before full
degradation takes place, therefore we assessed these two
modes of internalisation at 10 and 30 min time points that
precede the onset of degradation by measuring endosome

size by visualizing endocytosis; this parameter was chosen
for analysis because clathrin-coated endosomes are larger
(~100-150 nm) [50-52] than NCM endosomes (~50-80
nm) [53, 54]. In these experiments, 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNActreated and control cells were incubated with Alexa

Figure 5: EGFR internalization assays. (A) FRAP assays, conducted in the absence of excess fluorescently-labeled EGF, indicated

that the recovery rate (t0.5) was over twice as fast in cells treated with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc indicated greater membrane fluidity consistent
with decreased galectin lattice strength (as outlined in Figure 3). (B) Internalization assays conducted in the presence of fluorescentlylabeled EGF for 30 min at 37 C showed that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment led to a significant increase in EGF, and by extension EGFR,
internalization. (C) Lactose pretreatment, a competitive inhibitor of galectin binding, led to an increase in internalization in control
cells comparable to the increase caused by 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc. (D) RCA lectin binding decreased significantly on treatment with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc. (E) Internalization measured after filipin pretreatment was not significantly different between the control and treated
samples. At least three biological replicates were carried out for each experiment with data expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM)
and * indicates p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66498

Oncotarget

Fluor 488-conjugated EGF for 10 min (Figure 6A)
or 30 min (Figure 6B) at 37oC, fixed, and then imaged
using confocal microscopy. Endosome sizing by Image
J showed a significant shift in endosome population
from larger endosomes toward smaller endosomes in
the analog-treated cells compared to untreated controls.
This shift toward smaller endosomes was consistent with
increased NCM endocytosis at the expense of clathrincoated endocytosis and provided additional support for
the hypothesis that EGFR internalization became biased
towards NCM endocytosis upon 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
treatment.
Finally, because NCM endosomes are primarily
fated for degradation [49], we reasoned that EGFR would
experience increased degradation at longer EGF exposure
times in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated cells compared to
untreated controls. Therefore the time-dependent increase
in the degradation of EGFR we observed (e.g., at 30
min (Figure 7A) or 60 min (Figure 7B)) further support

the hypothesis that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc increases
internalization via a shift to NCM endocytosis.

ERK1/2- and AKT-driven signaling do not
respond to 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment
We next sought to gain insight into the impact of
NCM-shifted internalization on the signaling activity of
EGFR in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treated SW1990 cells.
This receptor must be phosphorylated to initiate signaling
and we previously showed that changes in p-EGFR
levels in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treated SW1990 cells,
while modest, were amplified downstream in stronger
inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation (p-STAT3) [1].
Notably, the previously-reported decrease in p-STAT3
levels (which were reproduced in the current experiments,
Figure 8A) was confirmed to not be due to a change in
overall STAT3 levels (Figure 8B), providing additional

Figure 6: Confocal images of SW1990 cells after (A) 10 min and (B) 30 min of exposure to 2 µg/ml Alexafluor 488-conjugated EGF at
37oC showed a significantly greater density of larger endosomes in non-treated controls compared to cells treated with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc.
The endosomes were sized using ImageJ and * indicates a p value of < 0.05. Scale bars represent 20 µm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66499

Oncotarget

evidence that decreased p-STAT3 legitimately reflected
attenuation of EGFR signaling pathway activation upon
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment and not changes in the
overall levels of this protein.
In addition to STAT3, p-ERK1/2 and p-AKT can
also be activated by EGFR; accordingly, we investigated
whether these additional downstream effectors of p-EGFR
signaling were reduced in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated
cells. In these experiments, EGFR-driven signaling
via the ERK1/2 and AKT pathways was monitored
by measuring phosphorylated ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2)
and phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT) using western blot
analysis. These experiments showed that no statistically
significant change occurred for p-ERK1/2 (Figure 8C) or
p-AKT (Figure 8D). The minimal response of p-ERK1/2
and p-AKT in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated cells can be
explained by activation of ERK1/2 and AKT via RAS
[35, 55]; mutations that constitutively activate RAS
signaling have long been associated with non-small cell
lung cancer and metastatic colorectal cancer [56] and
now have been linked to pancreatic cancer. Consistent
with this information, the RAS pathway is constitutively

activated in the SW1990 cell line used in this study [57],
which represents the clinical situation for a large majority
(e.g., ≥ 81% [58, 59]) of pancreatic cancer patients.
Activation by these alternate pathways negates the
impact of reduced p-EGFR levels on ERK1/2 and AKT in
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated SW1990 cells. By contrast,
because STAT3 activity is not primarily driven by RAS
signaling [60, 61] (although linked to RAS in a parallel
and complementary manner [62]), we reasoned that
inhibition of STAT3 by 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc nevertheless
could provide therapeutic benefit even in cells with
constitutively active RAS. To test this premise, we next
evaluated the expression of selected p-STAT3-driven
oncogenes in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc-treated cells.

Downstream STAT3-driven genes respond to
analog-mediated p-EGFR inhibition
Although not all downstream effectors driven by
p-EGFR are inhibited by 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment
in SW1990 cells (e.g., ERK1/2 and AKT signaling do

Figure 7: EGFR degradation is enhanced by 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc. Western blot analysis of SW1990 cells exposed to 10 ng/mL
of EGF for (A) 30 min or (B) 60 min after incubation with (or without) 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc revealed that longer exposures to EGF led
to decreased EGFR levels for the treated cells. At least 3 biological replicates were carried out for each experiment with data expressed as
mean ± standard error mean (SEM). * indicates a p value of < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66500

Oncotarget

EGFR-responsive genes including MYC and VEGFA [63]
(Figure 9B) to attenuated p-EGFR levels in SW1990 cells
– suggest that a compound such as 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
is unlikely to comprise a “stand alone” drug for advanced
stage pancreatic cancers. Indeed, several “glycosylationonly” EGFR-targeting therapies have recently been
judged to be ineffective as cancer therapies (34). Instead,
as we recently reported [1], synergy between otherwise
ineffective TKIs (e.g,. gefitinib and erlotinib) and
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc holds promise for combination
therapy in drug resistant cancers. The mechanism behind
the observed synergy was unclear, however, especially

not respond as described above), we found that several
important oncogenes activated by p-STAT3 were
successfully inhibited by treatment with this sugar analog.
In particular, the reduction in p-STAT3 (Figure 8A) was
correlated with decreased expression of BCL3, MMP2,
and MMP7 (Figure 9A). This downstream modulation of
several p-STAT3-driven genes that contribute to cancer
progression demonstrates that even modest changes in the
activity of surface receptors due to altered glycosylation
have potential therapeutic benefit.
Conversely, offsetting factors – including the
negligible response of ERK1/2 and AKT and other

Figure 8: Impact of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc on downstream signaling of STAT and ERK1/2. Western blots of lysates from
SW1990 cells treated with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc. The treated (and control) cells were subsequently exposed to 10 ng/mL of EGF for 2.0
min and (A) the amount of phosphorylated STAT3 significantly decreased (B) without a corresponding decrease in STAT3 levels (B). At
the same time, phosphorylation of ERK1/2 (C) and AKT (D) were not affected. Each experiment includes at least three biological replicates
and the blots were quantified using Image J with data expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). * indicates a p value of < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66501

Oncotarget

considering that there are very few strategies where drug
synergy is achieved by directing multiple drugs against the
same biomolecular target (in this case, EGFR). To address
this issue, we investigated how two marginally effective
EGFR-targeting strategies achieve synergy when used in
combination in SW1990 cells [1].

Synergy between
erlotinib

1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc

when used by itself – experienced an amplified decrease
upon exposure to 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc compared to
treatment with the sugar analog by itself (Figure 10E).
Of the many conditions tested, the ability of co-treatment
to amplify p-STAT3 inhibition provides an explanation
for the synergy observed between 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
and TKI drugs; we emphasize that other factors such as
control of STAT3 by cytokine, GPC, or toll-like receptors,
which is beyond the scope of the current study, may also
contribute to the synergy.

and

To gain insight into synergy between
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and erlotinib [1], various
downstream components of EGFR signaling were
analyzed via western blots in SW1990 cells treated with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc, erlotinib, or both. First, as expected
from previous experiments, 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
alone did not significantly affect EGFR levels (Figure
10A). In this experiment, erlotinib treatment decreased
EGFR levels but cotreatment with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
did not enhance this effect, indicating a lack of
synergy. Next, EGFR phosphorylation was tested
and 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc (as expected from previous
results) as well as erlotinib decreased p-EGFR but again
cotreatment did not have a synergistic effect (Figure 10B).
Moreover, none of the treatment conditions significantly
altered either p-AKT or p-ERK1/2 levels (Figure 10C and
Figure 10D respectively), again leaving synergy between
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and erlotinib unexplained.
Instead, synergy between 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and
erlotinib depended on modulation of STAT3. Specifically,
levels of p-STAT3 – although not affected by erlotinib

DISCUSSION
This report builds on previous studies where we
characterized glycosylation in advanced stage pancreatic
cancer SW1990 cells treated with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc to
understand how metabolic flux-driven increases in sialic
acid contribute to cancer progression [4, 5]. Our focus on
pancreatic cancer was motivated by poor prognoses for
this disease, which has a five year survival rate of only
~4% [64]; we reasoned that gaining a better understanding
of glycosylation could be valuable for devising new
treatment strategies. This premise was supported by our
discovery that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc sensitized SW1990
cells to the EGFR-targeting TKI drugs erlotinib and
gefitinib [1].
We first sought a mechanistic understanding of
how 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and the resultant increase in
sialylation (Figure 1 and [4]), dampened EGFR signaling.
Based on recent reports by others that sialyltransferase
over-expression diminishes EGFR signaling by inhibiting

Figure 9: RT-PCR analysis of SW1990 cells treated with and without 100 μM of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc showed (A) a significant decrease

in expression of STAT3 associated genes BCL3, MMP2 and MMP7 whereas (B) VEGFA and MYC, which can also be regulated by STAT3,
showed increased expression (VEGFA) or was not affected (MYC). At least 3 biological replicates were carried out for each experiment
with data expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). * indicates a p value of < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66502

Oncotarget

dimerization of this glycoprotein in several cell lines
[29, 33, 34], we first tested whether increased sialylation
achieved through 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treatment of
SW1990 cells had a similar effect. Experiments following
the protocols described by Yen and coauthors [34]
showed a slight trend towards reduced dimerization but
the results were not statistically significant; together with
data shown in Figure 2 where there was no difference
in the on/off rate of EGF binding in treated or untreated
cells, we concluded that the previously-reported
dimerization mechanism offered, at most, only a partial
explanation for the impact of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc on
EGFR activity in SW1990 cells. This disparity – along
with indications that cell surface trafficking of EGFR
was involved in cellular responses to this sugar analog
(Figure 3) – led us to explore additional mechanisms by
which sialylation modulates EGFR signaling. One such
plausible mechanism could be the increased expression
of polysialic acid, which has been associated with both
increased metabolic flux through the sialic acid pathway
[65] and metastatic pancreatic cancer [66]. However, in

the case of SW1990 cells which metastasize to the kidney
(as compared to metastasis to neural tissue where PSA is
required [66]), there is no evidence that PSA is involved
in SW1990 cell metastasis, consistent with our extensive
previously-reported evaluation of N-linked glycans in
this cell line [5]. Based on this evidence that PSA is not
involved in the changed biological activity of SW1990
cells upon treatment with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc, we sought
(and verified) alternative mechanisms as described next.
Based on our previous demonstration that
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc approximately doubles overall
levels of α2,6-sialic acid in SW1990 cells [4, 5] and
the current evidence that α2,6-sialylation of EGFR also
increases, albeit moderately (Figure 1), the galectin
lattice provides an attractive complementary mechanism
to the dimerization hypothesis. The basis for evoking the
galectin lattice – as outlined in Figure 4 – to explain the
impact of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc in SW1990 cells is that
α2,6-sialic acid inhibits galectin affinity for underlying
galactose/GalNAc epitopes [48]; the resulting negative
regulation of the lattice reduces surface display of EGFR

Figure 10: Western blot analysis of SW1990 cells treated with 50 µM 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc, 30 nM of erlotinib, or both compounds in
combination showed (A) EGFR levels that are not affected by the analog alone are decreased by erlotinib. (B) EGFR phosphorylation

is inhibited by both compounds individually as well as in combination. (C) and (D) p-AKT and p-ERK1/2 levels, respectively, are not
significantly affected by any of the treatment conditions. (E) p-STAT3 levels are inhibited by the analog but are not affected by erlotinib;
however the combination of the two compounds leads to significantly lower p-STAT3 levels when compared to the analog alone. At least 3
biological replicates were carried out for each experiment with data expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). * indicates a p value
of < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66503

Oncotarget

by promoting internalization, which reduces signaling
potency [45]. Building on data from earlier experiments,
(e.g., our prior publications [1, 4]), Figures 1 and 2 of this
paper, and support from modeling simulations (see the
Supplemental Material), we showed (e.g., in Figure 5) that
increased internalization consistent with attenuation of the
galectin lattice occurs.
Mechanistically, the galectin lattice directly interacts
with cell surface glycoproteins and affects their trafficking,
activity, and signaling potency [67]. This mechanism
provides a plausible explanation for the changes to EGFR
activity and trafficking observed in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNActreated cells because, by increasing global cell surface
sialylation by ~2-fold [4], this analog is expected to
reduce galectin binding to cell surface glycans thereby
increasing the surface mobility of cell surface receptors
such as EGFR. This idea is consistent with evidence that
micron-scale membrane domain organization structure
influences EGFR mobility on the cell surface through a
glycosylation-based mechanism [45] and the growing
understanding of how the galectin lattice represents an
important layer of membrane organization. Indeed, the
lattice has been described as a “gel-like polymer that
regulates glycoprotein distribution” that controls diffusion,
complex formation and domain interactions in the plasma
membrane [68].
Another significant aspect of the current study is that
we outline downstream consequences of attenuation of the
galectin lattice with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc, which not only
increases the rate of EGFR internalization but shifts it to a
new mode of endocytosis. Specifically, internalization of
this receptor shifted from a clathrin-mediated mechanism
towards NCM endocytosis (Figure 6) upon increased
sialylation and this shift led to enhanced degradation
of EGFR (Figure 7). Together, these results provide
an alternative and complementary mechanism to the
dimerization hypothesis associated with sialyltransferasemediated increases in sialylation and helps explain how
increased flux-based sialylation attenuates EGFR signaling
and holds anti-cancer potential for treating drug resistant
pancreatic cancer despite resistance to TKIs or constitutive
Ras activation (Figure 8 and references [69, 70]). To
elaborate briefly, a shift towards NCM endocytosis rapidly
ablates EGFR activity compared to “normal” clathrincoated internalization where signaling is maintained or
even enhanced upon endocytosis; for example clathrinmediated endocytosis is essential for MAPK activation
[71]. Similarly, EGFR activity can continue from within
endosomes [72, 73] and signaling emanating from clathrincoated endosomal vesicles can be adequate to promote cell
survival even in the absence of surface signaling cues [74].
Therefore the ability of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc to redirect
EGFR trafficking away from this activating mode of
internalization provides important insights into how this
compound attenuates signaling of this oncogene.
Altered vesicular trafficking has particularly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

important ramifications for STAT3-driven gene expression
because clathrin-mediated endocytosis supports
cytoplasmic transport of STAT3 to the nucleus [75].
This observation helps explain the strong diminution of
expression of STAT3-associated genes BCL3, MMP2 and
MMP7 in 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc treated cells (Figure 9A)
despite maintenance of other aspects of EGFR signaling.
Furthermore, synergy between 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc and
erlotinib was linked to pSTAT3 (Figure 10E) insofar as
cells treated with erlotinib alone sustain STAT3 activity
despite lower overall levels of EGFR and p-EGFR.
Instead, for the reduced levels of EGFR caused by
erlotinib to be manifest in downstream activity, cotreatment with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc was needed to
shift clathrin-mediated internalization towards NCM
endocytosis and rapid inactivation rather than prolonged
signaling. From a practical perspective, this synergy holds
intriguing potential to combat drug-resistant pancreatic
cancer, which remains virtually untreatable to date.
In conclusion, this report provides evidence that
flux-driven sialylation reduces EGFR signaling by
masking galectin binding epitopes [76]; this strategy
offers an alternative, and potentially more facile, method
to attenuate lattice effects compared to intervening in
the production of highly-branched N-glycan structures
that function as galectin binding epitopes [77-79]. Our
results further show that attenuation of the galectin lattice
directs EGFR trafficking away from clathrin-mediated
internalization (which relies on galectin binding [80])
towards NCM endocytosis, which explains the inhibitory
effects of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc on downstream pSTATactivated genes and synergy with TKIs. However,
due to the complexities of both glycosylation and cell
signaling, we mention several caveats. First, while we did
not obtain evidence to support the previously-reported
dimerization hypothesis to explain the effect of altered
sialylation on EGFR in SW1990 cells, our experiments
did not rule out this mechanism for other cell types or for
genetic manipulation of sialylation. Second, yet another
mechanism by which increased sialylation could in theory
suppress EGFR signaling is by increasing cellular levels
of ganglioside GM3 [81]. Of course altering the galectin
lattice, and by extension the bulk fluidic properties of the
plasma membrane, almost certainly affects additional
pathways beyond EGFR signaling [78, 79, 82]. Therefore,
although we present evidence that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc
acts via EGFR through galectin lattice effects, cell-level
behavior (e.g., synergy with TKI drugs) most likely
has additional inputs beyond the scope of this study.
Nevertheless we emphasize that this report describes the
important and novel finding that a pharmacologically
relevant small molecular (1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc) provides
the same functional benefits of less translatable genetic
approaches in sensitizing drug-resistant cancer cells to
TKI inhibitors and provides mechanistic insight into
this phenomenon. We believe that this new information
66504

Oncotarget

provides an important scientific foundation for both
continued basic science investigations into the underlying
mechanisms but also provides impetus for clinical
translational of this strategy that holds promise for
prolonging the effectiveness of existing cancer drugs (e.g.,
erlotinib and gefitinib).

phospho-AKT (p-Akt, Ser473 (D9E) Cell Signaling
#4060), anti-phospho-ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2 Try202/204,
Cell Signaling, #9101), anti-β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich)
and HRP-linked anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling).
Protein bands were quantified using the ImageJ software.
Where necessary, blots were stripped with Gentle ReView
Stripping Buffer (Amresco), reblocked and analyzed. In
cases where blots were re-analyzed, the control samples
for the data presented (e.g., for p-EGFR and p-AKT in
Figure 7B) are in some cases the same because, out of
the multiple samples available for presentation, the ones
that were the most visually representative of the “Image J”
quantification were shown.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell
culture
and
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc

incubation

with

SW1990 (ATCC® CRL-2172) cells were grown
in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)
supplemented 10% with heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and 1.0% of a 100x pen/strep antibiotic
solution (Invitrogen). Cells were maintained at 37°C
in a humidified, 5% CO2-containing atmosphere.
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc was synthesized and characterized
as previously described [2, 3] and stored lyophilized at
-80°C. Stock solutions (100 mM) were made in ethanol
(EtOH). For analog treatment, cells typically were plated
in 6-well tissue culture plates in 2.0 mL of culture media
at a density of 300,000 cells/well and the appropriate
volume of 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc was added to each well
to achieve the desired analog concentrations; the identical
volume of ETOH (always less than 10 µL/mL) was added
to each well in each experiment to ensure that all cells
were exposed to the same amount of solvent as those
treated with the highest concentration of analog. Cells
were typically incubated for 48 h with the sugar analogs;
in certain experiments (as indicated below) the first 24 h
of incubation was carried out in complete media and the
cells were serum starved for the final 24 h before analysis
following published protocols for monitoring EGFR
phosphorylation and activation [29].

EGFR immunopurification and characterization
of sialylation
Cells were incubated for 48 h with 100 µM
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc, rinsed in ice cold PBS, collected
using cell scrapers, and resuspended in 0.5 mL of ice
cold cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling). Samples were
sonicated on ice three times for 5 s each and then samples
were centrifuged for 10 min at 4 oCat 14,000g. Protein
from control and treated cells were collected from the
supernatant, quantified using the Pierce 660 nm protein
assay (Thermo Scientific); protein levels were then
normalized to 1.0 mg/mL. EGFR from control and treated
samples was then immunopurified using Sepharose bead
conjugated EGFR mAb (Cell Signaling) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. After purification, the samples
were divided in two with half of the samples boiled in
loading buffer for 10 min and then analyzed for total
EGFR protein levels by western blotting as described
above. HRP-linked SNA-1 Lectin (EY Laboratories) was
also used to stain western blots of immunopurified EGFR
to determine the levels of α2-6 linked sialic acid. Band
intensities were quantified using ImageJ software and
normalized to EGFR levels.

Western blot analysis

Fluorescent assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis
(FACE)

Proteins obtained from SW1990 cells were
analyzed by western blots after the cells were incubated
with 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc, erlotinib or both for 48 h
including, as described above, serum starvation for the
last 24 h and exposure to 10 ng/mL recombinant human
EGF (Peprotech AF-100-15) in PBS for 2.0 min, 30
min or 60 min. Proteins were collected and quantified
using the BCA assay (ThermoFisher) after which time
normalized aliquots were separated using polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis and then were immunodetected using
the following commercial antibodies: anti-phosphoEGFR (p-EGFR, Tyr1068 Cell Signaling #4267), antiEGFR (D33B1, Cell Signaling, #4267), anti-STAT3
(STAT3, 79D7, Cell Signaling #4904), anti-phosphoSTAT3 (p-STAT3, Tyr705, Cell Signaling #9131), antiwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The other half of the immunopurified EGFR
samples were digested with sialidase (P0722L, New
England BioLabs), wherein 10 µL of immunopurified
EGFR on sepaharose beads was incubated with 200 units
of sialidase in a 100 µL reaction volume for 48 h at 37oC.
After sialidase digestion, the samples were centrifuged
at 14,000g and the amount of sialic acid released into
the supernatants was determined by FACE following an
established protocol (83,84). Briefly, 50 mg graphitized
carbon columns were prepared and activated with 80%
acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) using three
1.0 mL washes and were then equilibrated with five 1.0
mL milli Q water washes under vacuum. The supernatants
66505

Oncotarget

were then loaded onto the columns and the columns were
washed five times with 1.0 mL of milliQ water under
vacuum after which the released sialic acids were eluted
under gravity using 1.0 mL of 25% acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v
TFA. The samples were then lyophilized, resuspended
in 150 µL of milli Q water, transferred into fresh 1.5 mL
eppendorf tubes, and lyophilized again. These samples,
along with sialic acid standards, were then labeled with 40
µL of a 6.25 mM 2-aminoacridone (Carbosynth) solution
in DMSO overnight at 37 oC.
A gel solution was prepared with 500 mL of 40%
acrylamide (BioRad), 100 mL tris-acetate (400 mM, pH
7.0), 370 mL milliQ water and 25 mL of glycerol. An
aliquot of the gel solution (5 mL) was then mixed with
25 µL of 10% ammonium persulfate and 5 µL of TEMED
(BioRad) and poured into preassembled casting plates
with a 0.75 mm well comb. After 7.5 min the combs
were removed and the gels were transferred into the gel
apparatus (BioRad) and the apparatus was filled with 1X
tris-borate EDTA (BioRad). The gel apparatus was then
placed on ice for 2.0 h. An aliquot of each sample (2.0 µL)
was then loaded onto the gel and the gel was run at 500 V
for 40 min on ice. The gel was then transferred onto a visiblue benchtop variable UV transilluminator and imaged.
Band intensities were then quantified using ImageJ
software and normalized to the EGFR levels measured in
the western blots described above.

Solution (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1.0%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 20 mM glucose and
then incubated at 37°C with 2.0 µg/mL of Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated EGF (Life Technologies). Cells were then
analyzed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
technique (FRAP) [85, 86] under two conditions. In the
first approach, which was adapted from Sprague et al.
who describe the use of FRAP for analysis of binding
interactions [87]; unbound Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated
EGF was maintained in the bath, which allowed us to
measure EGF on/off rate (as shown in Figure 2C). In the
second set of experiments, unbound EGF was removed
by washing before imaging, in which case membrane
fluidity was measured (Figure 5A). Cells were incubated
at 37 ˚C for the duration of the FRAP experiments. Then,
using a Zeiss 780 FCS Confocal Microscope together with
a 488 nm Argon ion laser for excitation of Alexa Fluor
488 we monitored emissions at 525 nm. The laser intensity
was adjusted to obtain a 75 % loss in fluorescence in a
rectangular 3.0 by 1.0 µm photobleached region on
the apical focal plane of the cell membrane; for rapid
bleaching high laser intensities were used for a single
bleaching scan (0.278s). Multiple regions were imaged
pre- and post- photobleaching using low laser intensities
and recovery fluorescence in the selected regions was
tracked over time.
The fluorescent intensity measured at each time
point (I(t)) was then converted to a normalized fluorescent
intensity (NFI(t)) normalized using the following equation:
Normalized Fluorescent Intensity= [{I(t)-I(post bleach)}/
I(prebleach)]/I(post recovery) The NFI was then plotted
against time and fit to a one phase exponential association
curve using the GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad
Software, Inc.; La Jolla, CA). From the fit of the curves,
time constants for half recovery were derived (t0.5).

Confocal microscopy for cell surface EGFR
measurement
Cells were incubated for 48 h with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc with serum starvation over the
last 24 h. Cells were washed in 1.0 mL of PBS and then
fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 10 min. Cells were
blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS
for 1.0 h and then incubated overnight at 4oC with Alexa
Fluor 488-conjugated EGFR mAb (Cell Signaling).
Nuclei were stained with DAPI. After three washes in
PBS, the cells were imaged on Zeiss AxioObserver with
780-Quasar confocal module & FCS. Gross fluorescence
was determined for Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated EGFR
mAb and DAPI for each image using ImageJ software.
The relative fluorescence of each 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNActreated sample was determined by normalizing Alexa
Fluor 488-conjugated EGFR mAb fluorescence to DAPI
fluorescence and then normalizing to control samples not
treated with analog.

Fluorescent recovery
(FRAP) assays

after

Mathematical modeling of EGFR trafficking
Based on evidence that 1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAcmediated changes to sialylation in SW1990 cells impact
EGFR by a different mechanism than previously observed
for sialyltransferases, we proposed that this compound
affected EGFR trafficking via changes to the galectin
lattice [45]. Before undertaking additional experiments
to support this hypothesis, we implemented a MATLAB
model of the surface dynamics and recycling kinetics of
this receptor [44] to gain support for the galectin lattice
mechanism (or to rule it out) and to evaluate whether any
competing, and perhaps more compelling, hypotheses
existed. As described in detail in the Supplemental
Material, the computational model was consistent with
the galectin lattice hypothesis; it did not support any
alternative mechanisms; and it helped guide investigation
of different modes of internalization as presented below.

photobleaching

Cells were incubated for 48 h with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc with serum starvation over the
last 24 h. The cells were washed in Live Cell Imaging
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66506

Oncotarget

Internalization assays

procedures (88,89).

Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR)

Cells were incubated for 48 h with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc with serum starvation over the last
24 h. The cells then were washed with PBS, treated with
enzyme free cell dissociation buffer (Life Technologies)
until they detached from the culture plate, collected, and
counted and cell numbers were normalized using the
Beckman Z2 cell coulter counter. Cells were then washed
twice in Live Cell Imaging Solution (Life Technologies)
supplemented with 1.0% bovine serum albumin (BSA)
and 20 mM glucose and treated with 0.5 µg/mL of filipin
(Sigma Aldrich) or 100 mM of lactose (Carbosynth) for
60 min. Cells were then incubated at 37°C for 30 min
with 2.0 µg/mL of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated EGF (Life
Technologies). Cells were washed three times, followed
by acid washing for 5.0 min with 0.2 M glycine (pH 2.5),
washed thrice and finally analyzed using flowcytometry
with an Accuri C6 Flowcytometer. The cell population
of interest was gated appropriately and 104 cells falling
within the gated area were measured and used to
determine the mean fluorescence of the cell population;
the histograms for these experiments are shown in Figure
S6 in the Supplemental Material.

Total RNA was isolated using Trisol® reagents
(Gibco BRL) and reversed transcribed using the high
capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Applied Biosystems). PCR
amplifications were performed using the following
TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays from Applied
Biosystems: BCL3 (Assay ID: Hs00180403_m1), MYC
(Assay ID: Hs00153408_m1), VEGFA (Assay ID:
Hs00900055_m1), MMP2 (Assay ID: Hs01548727_m1),
MMP7 (Assay ID: Hs01042796_m1) and GAPDH (Assay
ID: Hs03929097_g1). qRT-PCR was performed using
the Step-One Plus Real-Time PCR system (Applied
Biosystems) with the thermocycling conditions of 50 ˚C
for 2.0 min, 95 ˚C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95
˚C for 15 s and 60 ˚C for 1.0 min.

Statistical analysis
Data was expressed as means ± standard error
(SEM). Statistical significance was determined using one
way ANOVA with a Dunnett’s post-test to compare means
of different samples with the control or a Bonferroni
post test to compare specific pairs of columns. The null
hypothesis was rejected in cases where p-values were <
0.05.

Lectin binding assays
Cells were incubated for 48 h with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc. The cells were washed with PBS,
treated with enzyme free cell dissociation buffer (Life
Technologies) until they detached from the culture plate,
collected, and counted and cell numbers were normalized
using the Beckman Z2 cell coulter counter. Cells were
then washed twice in PBS. Cells were then incubated
at room temperature for 120 min with 5.0 µg/mL of
Flourescein-labeled RCA lectin (Vector Laboratories).
Cells were washed three times in PBS and analyzed using
flowcytometry with an Accuri C6 Flow cytometer. The
cell population of interest was gated appropriately and 104
cells were used to determine mean fluorescence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND GRANT
SUPPORT
Funding for this study was obtained from NIH
grants R01CA112314, S10OD016374, and P01HL107147
and the Willowcroft Foundation.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest with the contents of this article.

Confocal microscopy for endosome sizing

REFERENCES

Cells were incubated for 48 h with
1,3,4-O-Bu3ManNAc with serum starvation over the
last 24 h. Cells were then washed in Live Cell Imaging
Solution (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1.0%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 20 mM glucose. Cells
were then incubated at 37°C for 10 min or 30 min with
2.0 µg/mL of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated EGF (Life
Technologies). Cells were then fixed, nuclei were stained
with DAPI and then imaged on Zeiss AxioObserver with
780-Quasar confocal module & FCS. Endosome size
was estimated using ImageJ software based on published
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1.	 Mathew MP, Tan E, Saeui CT, Bovonratwet P,
Liu L, Bhattacharya R and Yarema KJ. Metabolic
glycoengineering sensitizes drug-resistant pancreatic cancer
cells to tyrosine kinase inhibitors erlotinib and gefitinib.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015; 25:1223-1227.
2.	 Aich U, Campbell CT, Elmouelhi N, Weier CA,
Sampathkumar SG, Choi SS and Yarema KJ. Regioisomeric
SCFA attachment to hexosamines separates metabolic flux
from cytotoxicity and MUC1 suppression. ACS Chem Biol.
2008; 3:230-240.
66507

Oncotarget

3.	 Almaraz RT, Aich U, Khanna HS, Tan E, Bhattacharya
R, Shah S and Yarema KJ. Metabolic oligosaccharide
engineering with N-acyl functionalized ManNAc
analogues: cytotoxicity, metabolic flux, and glycan-display
considerations. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2012; 109:992-1006.

targeting of MRI contrast reagents. J Am Chem Soc. 1999;
121:4278-4279.
18.	 Dafik L, d’Alarcao M and Kumar K. Fluorination of
mammalian cell surfaces via the sialic acid biosynthetic
pathway. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008; 18:5945-5947.

4.	 Almaraz RT, Tian Y, Bhattarcharya R, Tan E, Chen S-H,
Dallas MR, Chen L, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Konstantopoulos
K and Yarema KJ. Metabolic flux increases glycoprotein
sialylation: implications for cell adhesion and cancer
metastasis. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012; 11:M112.017558.

19.	 Dafik L, d’Alarcao M and Kumar K. Modulation of
cellular adhesion by glycoengineering. J Med Chem. 2010;
53:4277-4284.
20.	 Mathew MP, Tan E, Shah S, Bhattacharya R, Meledeo
MA, Huang J, Espinoza FA and Yarema KJ. Extracellular
and intracellular esterase processing of SCFA-hexosamine
analogs: implications for metabolic glycoengineering and
drug delivery. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012; 22:6929-6933.

5.	 Shah P, Yang S, Sun S, Aiyetan P, Yarema KJ and Zhang
H. Mass spectrometric analysis of sialylated glycans with
use of solid-phase labeling of sialic acids. Anal Chem.
2013; 85:3606-3613.

21.	 Varki NM and Varki A. Diversity in cell surface sialic acid
presentations: implications for biology and disease. Lab
Invest. 2007; 87:851-857.

6.	 Sell S. Cancer-associated carbohydrates identified by
monoclonal antibodies. Hum Pathol. 1990; 21:1003-1019.
7.	

Fukuda M. Possible roles of tumor-associated carbohydrate
antigens. Cancer Res. 1996; 56:2237-2244.

22.	 Häuselmann I and Borsig L. Altered tumor-cell
glycosylation promotes metastasis. Front Oncol. 2014; 4:28.
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00028.

8.	 Campbell CT, Sampathkumar S-G, Weier C and Yarema
KJ. Metabolic oligosaccharide engineering: perspectives,
applications, and future directions. Mol Biosys. 2007;
3:187-194.

23.	 Sillanaukee P, Pönniö M and Jääskeläinen IP. Occurrence
of sialic acids in healthy humans and different disorders.
Eur J Clin Invest. 1999; 29:413-425.

9.	 Almaraz RT, Mathew MP, Tan E and Yarema KJ.
Metabolic oligosaccharide engineering: Implications for
selectin-mediated adhesion and leukocyte extravasation.
Ann Biomed Eng. 2012; 40:806-815.

24.	 Kornfeld S, Kornfeld R, Neufeld EF and O’Brien PJ. The
feedback control of sugar nucleotide biosynthesis in liver.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1964; 52:371-379.
25.	 Keppler OT, Hinderlich S, Langner J, Schwartz-Albiez
R, Reutter W and Pawlita M. UDP-GlcNAc 2-epimerase:
A regulator of cell surface sialylation. Science. 1999;
284:1372-1376.

10.	 Du J, Meledeo MA, Wang Z, Khanna HS, Paruchuri VDP
and Yarema KJ. Metabolic glycoengineering: sialic acid
and beyond. Glycobiology. 2009; 19:1382-1401.
11.	 Kayser H, Zeitler R, Kannicht C, Grunow D, Nuck R and
Reutter W. Biosynthesis of a nonphysiological sialic acid in
different rat organs, using N-propanoyl-D-hexosamines as
precursors. J Biol Chem. 1992; 267:16934-16938.

26.	 Yamanaka Y, Friess H, Kobrin MS, Buchler M, Beger
HG and Korc M. Coexpression of epidermal growth
factor receptor and ligands in human pancreatic cancer is
associated with enhanced tumor aggressiveness. Anticancer
Res. 1993; 13:565-569.

12.	 Keppler OT, Horstkorte R, Pawlita M, Schmidt C and
Reutter W. Biochemical engineering of the N-acyl side
chain of sialic acid: biological implications. Glycobiology.
2001; 11:11R-18R.

27.	 Tobita K, Kijima H, Dowaki S, Kashiwagi H, Ohtani Y,
Oida Y, Yamazaki H, Nakamura M, Ueyama Y and Tanaka
M. Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in human
pancreatic cancer: Significance for liver metastasis. Int J
Mol Med. 2003; 11:305-309.

13.	 Goon S and Bertozzi CR. Metabolic substrate engineering
as a tool for glycobiology. J Carbohydr Chem. 2002;
21:943-977.

28.	 Korc M. Role of growth factors in pancreatic cancer. Surg
Oncol Clin N Am. 1998; 7:25-41.

14.	 Prescher JA, Dube DH and Bertozzi CR. Chemical
remodelling of cell surfaces in living animals. Nature. 2004;
430:873-877.

29.	 Liu YC, Yen HY, Chen CY, Chen CH, Cheng PF, Juan YH,
Chen CH, Khoo KH, Yu CJ, Yang PC, Hsu TL and Wong
CH. Sialylation and fucosylation of epidermal growth factor
receptor suppress its dimerization and activation in lung
cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:1133211337.

15.	 Mahal LK, Yarema KJ and Bertozzi CR. Engineering
chemical reactivity on cell surfaces through oligosaccharide
biosynthesis. Science. 1997; 276:1125-1128.
16.	 Mahal LK, Yarema KJ, Lemieux GA and Bertozzi CR.
(1999). Chemical approaches to glycobiology: Engineering
cell surface sialic acids for tumor targeting. In: Inoue Y,
Lee YC and Troy II FA, eds. Sialobiology and Other
Novel Forms of Glycosylation. (Osaka, Japan: Gakushin
Publishing Company), pp. 273-280.

30.	 Wu SL, Kim J, Bandle RW, Liotta L, Petricoin E and
Karger BL. Dynamic profiling of the post-translational
modifications and interaction partners of epidermal growth
factor receptor signaling after stimulation by epidermal
growth factor using Extended Range Proteomic Analysis
(ERPA). Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006; 5:1610-1627.

17.	 Lemieux GA, Yarema KJ, Jacobs CL and Bertozzi CR.
Exploiting differences in sialoside expression for selective
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31.	 Tsuda T, Ikeda Y and Taniguchi N. The Asn-42066508

Oncotarget

linked sugar chain in human epidermal growth factor
receptor suppresses ligand-independent spontaneous
oligomerization. Possible role of a specific sugar chain
in controllable receptor activation. J Biol Chem. 2000;
275:21988-21994.

induced survival while internalized receptors regulate NGFinduced differentiation. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:5671-5678.
43.	 Yao J, Cai HH, Wei JS, An Y, Ji ZL, Lu ZP, Wu JL, Chen
P, Jiang KR, Dai CC, Qian ZY, Xu ZK and Miao Y. Side
population in the pancreatic cancer cell lines SW1990 and
CFPAC-1 is enriched with cancer stem-like cells. Oncol
Rep. 2010; 23:1375-1382.

32.	 Ling Y, Li T, Perez-Soler R and Haigentz Jr M. Activation
of ER stress and inhibition of EGFR N-glycosylation by
tunicamycin enhances susceptibility of human non-small
cell lung cancer cells to erlotinib. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol. 2009; 64:539-548.

44.	 Hendriks BS, Opresko LK, Wiley HS and Lauffenburger
D. Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) levels and
locations. Quantitative analysis of HER2 overexpression
effects. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:1130-1137.

33.	 Park J-J, Yi JY, Jin YB, Lee Y-J, Lee J-S, Lee Y-S, Ko Y-G
and Lee M. Sialylation of epidermal growth factor receptor
regulates receptor activity and chemosensitivity to gefitinib
in colon cancer cells. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012; 83:849857.

45.	 Lajoie P, Partridge EA, Guay G, Goetz JG, Pawling J,
Lagana A, Joshi B, Dennis JW and Nabi IR. Plasma
membrane domain organization regulates EGFR signaling
in tumor cells. J Cell Biol. 2007; 179:341-356.

34.	 Yen HY, Liu YC, Chen NY, Tsai CF, Wang YT, Chen YJ,
Hsu TL, Yang PC and Wong CH. Effect of sialylation on
EGFR phosphorylation and resistance to tyrosine kinase
inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:69556960.

46.	 Lakshminarayan R, Wunder C, Becken U, Howes MT,
Benzing C, Arumugam S, Sales S, Ariotti N, Chambon V,
Lamaze C, Loew D, Shevchenko A, Gaus K, Parton RG and
Johannes L. Galectin-3 drives glycosphingolipid-dependent
biogenesis of clathrin-independent carriers. Nat Cell Biol.
2014; 16:595-606.

35.	 Yun C-H, Mengwasser KE, Toms AV, Woo MS, Greulich
H, Wong K-K, Meyerson M and Eck MJ. The T790M
mutation in EGFR kinase causes drug resistance by
increasing the affinity for ATP. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2008; 105:2070–2075.

47.	 Yarema KJ, Goon S and Bertozzi CR. Metabolic selection
of glycosylation defects in human cells. Nat Biotechnol.
2001; 19:553-558.
48.	 Zhuo Y and L BS. Emerging role of α2,6-sialic acid as a
negative regulator of galectin binding and function. J Biol
Chem. 2011; 286:5935-5941.

36.	 Zhen Y, Caprioli RM and Staros JV. Characterization of
glycosylation sites of the epidermal growth factor receptor.
Biochemistry. 2003; 42:5478–5492.

49.	 Sigismund S, Argenzio E, Tosoni D, Cavallaro E, Polo
S and Di Fiore PP. Clathrin-mediated internalization is
essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for
degradation. Dev Cell. 2008; 15:209-219.

37.	 Zhou M, Felder S, Rubinstein M, Hurwitz DR, Ullrich
A, Lax I and Schlessinger J. Real-time measurements of
kinetics of EGF binding to soluble EGF receptor monomers
and dimers support the dimerization model for receptor
activation. Biochemistry. 1993; 32:8193-8198.

50.	 Heuser J. Three-dimensional visualization of coated vesicle
formation in fibroblasts. J Cell Biol. 1980; 84:560-583.

38.	 Dawson JP, Berger MB, Lin C-C, Schlessinger J, Lemmon
MA and Ferguson KM. Epidermal growth factor receptor
dimerization and activation require ligand-induced
conformational changes in the dimer interface. Mol Cell
Biol. 2005; 25:7734-7742.

51.	 Liu S-H, Mallet WG and Brodsky FM. (2001). Chapter 1.
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis. In: Marsh M, ed. Frontiers
in Molecular Biology: Endocytosis. (New York: Oxford
University Press).
52.	 Dautry-Varsat A. (2001). Chapter 2. Cathrin-independent
endocytosis. In: Marsh M, ed. Frontiers in Molecular
Biology: Endocytosis. (New York: Oxford University
Press).

39.	 Macdonald-Obermann JL and Pike LJ. Different epidermal
growth factor (EGF) receptor ligands show distinct
kinetics and biased or partial agonism for homodimer and
heterodimer formation. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:2617826188.

53.	 Rothberg KG, Heuser JE, Donzell WC, Ying Y, Glenney
JR and Anderson RG. Caveolin, a protein component of
caveolae membrane coats. Cell. 1992; 68:673-682

40.	 Wikstrand CJ, McLendon RE, Friedman AH and Bigner
DD. Cell surface localization and density of the tumorassociated variant of the epidermal growth factor receptor,
EGFRvIII. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:4130-4140.

54.	 van Deurs B, Holm PK, Sandvig K and Hansen SH. Are
caveolae involved in clathrin-independent endocytosis?
Trends Cell Biol. 1993; 3:249-251.

41.	 Mardones G and González A. Selective plasma
membrane permeabilization by freeze-thawing and
immunofluorescence epitope access to determine the
topology of intracellular membrane proteins. J Immunol
Meth. 2003; 275:169-177.

55.	 Castellano E and Downward J. RAS interaction with PI3K
more than just another effector pathway. Genes Cancer.
2011; 2:261-274. doi: 10.1177/1947601911408079.
56.	 Linardou H, Dahabreh IJ, Kanaloupiti D, Siannis F,
Bafaloukos D, Kosmidis P, Papadimitriou CA and Murray
S. Assessment of somatic k-RAS mutations as a mechanism
associated with resistance to EGFR-targeted agents: a

42.	 Zhang YZ, Moheban DB, Conway BR, Bhattacharyya A
and Segal RA. Cell surface Trk receptors mediate NGFwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66509

Oncotarget

systematic review and meta-analysis of studies in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer and metastatic colorectal cancer.
Lancet Oncol. 2008; 9:962-972.

factor receptor inhibitor erlotinib is mediated by HER-3 in
pancreatic and colorectal tumor cell lines and contributes to
erlotinib sensitivity. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006; 5:2051-2059.

57.	 Halilovic E, She QB, Ye Q, Pagliarini R, Sellers WR, Solit
DB and Rosen N. PIK3CA mutation uncouples tumor
growth and cyclin D1 regulation from MEK/ERK and
mutant KRAS signaling. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:6804-6814.

71.	 Kranenburg O, Verlaan I and Moolenaar WH. Dynamin
is required for the activation of mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinase by MAP kinase kinase. J Biol Chem. 1999;
274:35301-35304.

58.	 Mulcahy HE, Lyautey J, Lederrey C, qi Chen X, Anker
P, Alstead EM, Ballinger A, Farthing MJ and Stroun M.
A prospective study of K-ras mutations in the plasma of
pancreatic cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 1998; 4(2):271275.

72.	 Oksvold MP, Skarpen E, Wierød L, Paulsen RE and
Huitfeldt HS. Re-localization of activated EGF receptor
and its signal transducers to multivesicular compartments
downstream of early endosomes in response to EGF. Eur J
Cell Biol. 2001; 80:285-294.

59.	 Benvenuti S, Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F,
Zanon C, Moroni M, Veronese S, Siena S and Bardelli A.
Oncogenic activation of the RAS/RAF signaling pathway
impairs the response of metastatic colorectal cancers to antiepidermal growth factor receptor antibody therapies. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67:2643-2648.

73.	 Le Roy C and Wrana JL. Clathrin-and non-clathrinmediated endocytic regulation of cell signalling. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2005; 6:112-116.
74.	 Wang Y, Pennock S, Chen X and Wang Z. Endosomal
signaling of epidermal growth factor receptor stimulates
signal transduction pathways leading to cell survival. Mol
Cell Biol. 2002; 22:7279-7290.

60.	 Siveen KS, Sikka S, Surana R, Dai X, Zhang J, Kumar AP,
Tan BKH, Sethi G and Bishayee A. Targeting the STAT3
signaling pathway in cancer: Role of synthetic and natural
inhibitors. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1845:136-154.

75.	 Bild AH, Turkson J and Jove R. Cytoplasmic transport of
Stat3 by receptor-mediated endocytosis. EMBO J. 2002;
21:3255-3263.

61.	 Yu H, Lee H, Herrmann A, Buettner R and Jove R.
Revisiting STAT3 signalling in cancer: new and unexpected
biological functions. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:736-746.

76.	 de Oliveira JT, de Matos AJ, Santos AL, Pinto R, Gomes
J, Hespanhol V, Chammas R, Manninen A, Bernardes ES,
Albuquerque Reis C, Rutteman G and Gärtner F. Sialylation
regulates galectin-3/ligand interplay during mammary
tumour progression--a case of targeted uncloaking. Int J
Dev Biol. 2011; 55:823-834.

62.	 Fang B. Genetic interactions of STAT3 and anticancer drug
development. Cancers (Basel). 2014; 6:494-525.
63.	 Pagès G and Pouysségur J. Transcriptional regulation of
the Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor gene–a concert of
activating factors. Cardiovasc Res. 2005; 65:564-573.

77.	 Lagana A, Goetz JG, Cheung P, Raz A, Dennis JW and
Nabi IR. Galectin binding to Mgat5-modified N-glycans
regulates fibronectin matrix remodeling in tumor cells. Mol
Cell Biol. 2006; 26:3181-3193.

64.	 Brenner H. Long-term survival rates of cancer patients
achieved by the end of the 20th century: a period analysis.
Lancet. 2002; 360:1131-1135.

78.	 Lau KS, Partridge EA, Grigorian A, Silvescu CI, Reinhold
VN, Demetriou M and Dennis JW. Complex N-glycan
number and degree of branching cooperate to regulate cell
proliferation and differentiation. Cell. 2007; 129:123-134.

65.	 Bork K, Reutter W, Gerardy-Schahn R and Horstkorte R.
The intracellular concentration of sialic acid regulates the
polysialylation of the neural cell adhesion molecule. FEBS
Lett. 2005; 579:5079-5083.

79.	 Dennis JW, Nabi IR and Demetriou M. Metabolism, cell
surface organization, and disease. Cell. 2009; 139:12291241.

66.	 Kameda K, Shimada H, Ishikawa T, Takimotoa A,
Momiyama N, Hasegawa S, Misuta K, Nakano A,
Nagashima Y and Ichikawa Y. Expression of highly
polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule in pancreatic
cancer neural invasive lesion. Cancer Lett. 1999; 137:201–
207.

80.	 Torreno-Pina JA, Castro BM, Manzo C, Buschow SI,
Cambi A and Garcia-Parajo MF. Enhanced receptor–
clathrin interactions induced by N-glycan-mediated
membrane micropatterning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2014; 111:11037-11042.

67.	 Garner OB and Baum LG. Galectin–glycan lattices regulate
cell-surface glycoprotein organization and signalling.
Biochem Soc Trans. 2008; 36:1472-1477.

81.	 Huang X, Li Y, Zhang J, Xu Y, Tian Y and Ma K.
Ganglioside GM3 inhibits hepatoma cell motility via
down-regulating activity of EGFR and PI3K/AKT signaling
pathway. J Cell Biol. 2013; 114:1616-1624.

68.	 Nabi IR, Shankar J and Dennis JW. The galectin lattice at a
glance. J Cell Sci. 2015; 128:2213-2219.

82.	 Boscher C, Dennis JW and Nabi IR. Glycosylation,
galectins and cellular signaling. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2011;
23:383-392.

69.	 Ioannou N, Dalgleish AG, Seddon AM, Mackintosh D,
Guertler U, Solca F and Modjtahedi H. Anti-tumour activity
of afatinib, an irreversible ErbB family blocker, in human
pancreatic tumour cells. Br J Cancer. 2011; 105:1554-1562.

83.	 Jackson P. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of reducing
saccharides labeled with the fluorophore 2-aminoacridone:
subpicomolar detection using an imaging system based

70.	 Buck E, Eyzaguirre A, Haley JD, Gibson NW, Cagnoni P
and Iwata KK. Inactivation of Akt by the epidermal growth
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66510

Oncotarget

on a cooled charge-coupled device. Anal Biochem. 1991;
196:238-244.

87.	 Sprague BL, Pego RL, Stavreva DA and McNally JG.
Analysis of binding reactions by fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching. Biophys J. 2004; 86:3473-3496.

84.	 Jackson P. High-resolution polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis of fluorophore-labeled reducing saccharides.
Meth Enzymol. 1994; 230:250-265.

88.	 Thompson DB, Villaseñor R, Dorr BM, Zerial M and Liu
DR. Cellular uptake mechanisms and endosomal trafficking
of supercharged proteins. Chem Biol. 2012; 19:831-845.

85.	 Axelrod C, Koppel DE, Schlessinger J, Elson E and Webb
WW. Mobility measurement by analysis of fluorescence
photobleaching recovery kinetics. Biophys J. 1976;
16:1055-1069.

89.	 Zlobina MV, Kharchenko MV and Kornilova ES.
Analysis of EGF receptor endocytosis dynamics based on
semiquantitative processing of confocal immunofluorescent
images of fixed cells. Cell Tiss Biol. 2013; 7:382-391.

86.	 Day CA, Kraft LJ, Kang M and Kenworthy AK. Analysis
of protein and lipid dynamics using confocal fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). Curr Protoc Cytom.
2012; Chapter 2:Unit 2.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66511

Oncotarget

