Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A plant alkaloid, veratridine, potentiates cancer chemosensitivity
by UBXN2A-dependent inhibition of an oncoprotein, mortalin-2
Ammara Abdullah1, Sanam Sane1, Kate A. Branick1, Jessica L. Freeling1,
Hongmin Wang1, Dong Zhang2, Khosrow Rezvani1
1

 ivision of Basic Biomedical Sciences, Sanford School of Medicine, The University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD
D
57069, USA

2

Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Osteopathic Medicine, New York Institute of Technology, Old Westbury, NY
11568, USA

Correspondence to:
Khosrow Rezvani, e-mail: khosrow.rezvani@usd.edu
Keywords: veratridine, UBXN2A, p53, mortalin-2, chemotherapy
Received: March 10, 2015      Accepted: June 30, 2015      Published: July 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Veratridine (VTD), an alkaloid derived from the Liliaceae plant shows anti-tumor
effects; however, its molecular targets have not been thoroughly studied. Using a
high-throughput drug screen, we found that VTD enhances transactivation of UBXN2A,
resulting in upregulation of UBXN2A in the cytoplasm, where UBXN2A binds and
inhibits the oncoprotein mortalin-2 (mot-2). VTD-treated cancer cells undergo cell
death in UBXN2A- and mot-2-dependent manners. The cytotoxic function of VTD is
grade-dependent, and the combined treatment with a sub-optimal dose of the standard
chemotherapy, 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) and etoposide, demonstrated a synergistic
effect, resulting in higher therapeutic efficacy. VTD influences the CD44+ stem
cells, possibly through UBXN2A-dependent inhibition of mot-2. The VTD-dependent
expression of UBXN2A is a potential candidate for designing novel strategies for colon
cancer treatment because: 1) In 50% of colon cancer patients, UBXN2A protein levels
in tumor tissues are significantly lower than those in the adjacent normal tissues.
2) Cytoplasmic expression of the mot-2 protein is very low in non-cancerous cells;
thus, VTD can produce tumor-specific toxicity while normal cells remain intact.
3)  Finally, VTD or its modified analogs offer a valuable adjuvant chemotherapy
strategy to improve the efficacy of 5-FU-based chemotherapy for colon cancer patients
harboring WT-p53.

the UBXN2A-mot-2 complex will not affect normal cells.
Previously, MKT-077 and withanone were reported as
mot-2 small molecule inhibitors [6, 7]. However, several
unacceptable side effects were observed when MKT-077
was used in a clinical trial [8].
In this study, we performed a high-throughput drug
screen in order to look for a drug that targets UBXN2A.
Veratridine (VTD), a plant alkaloid, was revealed
to enhance transactivation of a UBXN2A promoterluciferase reporter construct. Cell-based assays coupled
with gene-specific shRNA silencing confirmed that
VTD was sufficient to induce UBXN2A protein levels,
resulting in colon cancer cell death in UBXN2A- and
mot-2-dependent manners. Unlike cancer cells with a high
level of mot-2 in the cytoplasm [2], non-cancerous cells
remain intact when exposed to VTD. This study shows

INTRODUCTION
The heat shock protein mortalin-2 (mot-2) excludes
wild-type (WT)-p53 from the nucleus and eventually
targets p53 protein for proteasomal degradation [1]. The
anti-p53 functions of mot-2 in patients with colon cancer
make mot-2 a potentially targetable oncoprotein for such
patients [2, 3]. We have previously shown that a Ubiquitinlike (UBX)-domain-containing protein, UBXN2A, binds
to and inactivates the mot-2 oncoprotein. UBXN2A
expression is sufficient to re-activate WT-p53 through
a mechanism of competitive interaction with mot-2 [4].
This novel protein complex (UBXN2A-mot-2) exists
only in the cytoplasm of cancer cells and not in normal
cells due to the dominant mitochondrial localization of
mot-2 in normal cells [5]. Therefore, therapy that targets
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23561

Oncotarget

that VTD exhibits synergistic effects when combined with
chemotherapeutic drugs. VTD potentiates the antitumor
effect of 5-FU in long-term exposure and may affect
CD44+ stem cells through the UBXN2A/mot-2-dependent
pathway. The ability of VTD to induce UBXN2A
expression, causing significant cancer cell death alongside
standard chemotherapy, suggests VTD could be a potential
complementary strategy in the treatment of solid tumors
with high levels of mot-2 [9–12].

is grade- and stage-dependent indicating its prognostic
value. These in vivo results indicate mot-2 as a significantly
expressed oncoprotein in colon cancer with a potential to
serve as a therapeutic target.

Induction of the anti-mot-2 protein UBXN2A
suppresses tumor growth in xenografts
Several of the UBX-domain-containing proteins
play positive or negative regulatory roles in diverse types
of cancers [4, 18–20]. We generated two Tet-on inducible
HCT-116 colon cell lines expressing GFP-empty or GFPUBXN2A. Fluorescent microscopy and western blot (WB)
analysis showed that incubation with Doxycycline (DOX) for
48 hours induces expression of GFP-empty or GFP-UBXN2A
in HCT-116 cells (Figure 2A–2B). Quantitation of protein
bands in Figure 2B showed there is no significant difference
between GFP-empty and GFP-UBXN2A signals after
doxycycline induction, which eliminates GFP involvement
in the phenotypes presented in Figure 2. To measure the total
level of p53 proteins in Tet-on inducible cells, we decided to
use a flow cytometry approach as described by Brotherick
et al [21]. This approach allowed us to measure p53 signals
in cells gated for GFP expression; therefore, we obtained an
accurate level of increased p53 expression in cells expressing
GFP-UBXN2A versus GFP-empty. Supplementary Figure
S1C shows significant upregulation of p53 expression by
GFP-UBXN2A after induction with DOX.
Incubation of cells with DOX for 48 and 72 hours
significantly increased early apoptosis in GFP-UBXN2Aexpressing cells using Annexin V marker (Figure 2C and
Supplementary Figure S2A–S2C). Flow-cytometry results
further confirmed that expression of an apoptotic marker,
caspase-3, significantly increased following DOX-induced
UBXN2A expression (Figure 2D and Supple­
mentary
Figure S3A). Because our previous data [4] and others’
[22] indicate reactivation of p53 upon mot-2 inhibition
targets both cell proliferation and apoptosis, we further
investigated whether DOX-induced UBXN2A expression
affects cell cycle arrest in addition to the activation of the
apoptosis pathway. Staining of the p21 cell cycle arrest
marker showed that induction of UBXN2A expression
increased expression of the p21 protein, which can lead to
arresting cell growth (Figure 2E). Because the anti-cancer
function of UBXN2A is mediated through mot-2-p53, we
hypothesized that UBXN2A induction would potentiate
the cytotoxic effects of standard chemotherapy which
cause DNA damage and activate pathways that signal to
p53 [2]. To answer this question, we examined apoptosis
and cell death markers in UBXN2A-induced cells treated
with 5-FU, a thymidylate synthase inhibitor commonly
used in patients with colon cancer. Our flow cytometry
data indicated that expression of capase-3 and PARP
(apoptosis markers) and Sytox red (cell death marker)
were significantly higher when UBXN2A-induced cells
incubated with 5-FU (Figure 2F–2H).

RESULTS
Elevated levels of mot-2 in clinical samples of
colon and breast cancer are associated with
cancer progression
We conducted a series of protein arrays (Supple­
mentary Figure S1, Panels A–B) to compare the level
of mot-2 in tumor tissue versus adjacent normal tissues.
The results indicated that 75% (36 out of 48) of colon
tumors show 1.5 fold or greater overexpression of mot-2
as compared to their normal adjacent tissues, with
a maximum of 7.6 fold (P < 0.001, Figure 1A and
Supplementary Table S1). We observed similar upregulation
of mot-2 protein in breast cancer patients (P < 0.05, Figure
1B, and Supplementary Table S2). The increase in mot2 levels was found to be higher among the tumor tissues
of male patients with colon cancer as compared to female
patients (Figure 1C). As described previously [13], the
incidence and subsites of colon cancer are gender dependent
due to several factors, including oral contraceptive use
and hormone replacement therapy in females. The higher
numbers of tumors with high levels of mot-2 proteins in male
patients can be considered as an addition factor contributing
to the reported differences between male and female [14].
Consequently, this can justify alternative treatment strategies
based on the gender of colon cancer patients, as previously
highlighted [15]. Further studies need to be done to explain
whether the mot-2 level has any correlation with other
observed differences such as the lower number of tumors in
distal subsites observed in females versus males.
Moreover, upregulation of mot-2 only in breast cancer
patients was age-dependent. The level of mot-2 was found
to be significantly higher in comparatively younger females
with an average age of 48.71 ± 1.54 years (P < 0.05, Figure
1D). The increased number of breast tumors with high mot2 proteins in younger female patients that can be associated
with poorer output might be related to a risk of specific
tumor subtypes [16]. Breast tumors with upregulated mot-2
in younger patients can be a decent criteria for choosing
different target therapies based on the age of patients, as
some common markers are not age dependent in patients
with breast cancer [17]. Further study needs to be conducted
to explain the key mechanism underlying mot-2 alteration
in younger patients with breast cancer. The upregulation of
mot-2 in both colon and breast cancers (Figure 1E–1H),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23562

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The heat shock protein mot-2 plays a critical role in tumorigenesis. Equal amounts of tumor tissue lysates from 48

patients with colon cancer (A) and 55 patients with breast cancer (B) along with matched adjacent normal tissue lysates were probed with
anti-mot-2 and anti-actin antibodies followed by quantitation and normalization of signals. A–B. These two diagrams show densitometryquantified signals of mot-2 expression in tumor tissue versus normal adjacent tissue. The expression of mot-2 in the tumor tissues of
patients diagnosed with colon cancer (A) and breast cancer (B) was significantly higher as compared to normal tissues (Colon tumor:
R2 = 0.46 and P < 0.001, Breast tumor: R2 = 0.07 and P < 0.05, correlation coefficient test for each pair of variables). C. Overexpression of
mot-2 in colon cancer is gender-dependent. Higher numbers of male patients show overexpression of mot-2 as compared to female patients.
D. Overexpression of mot-2 in breast cancer is age-dependent. The statistical analysis shows that a relatively higher number of young female
patients showed over-expression of mot-2 levels. E–H. Profiling of grade- and stage-dependent of tumors with colon (E and G) and breast
(F and H) cancer showed that patients with mot-2 overexpression have been diagnosed with a higher grade and stage of tumors, indicating
poorer survival. These clinical results confirm mot-2 as a potential target for the treatment of cancers and a promising prognostic factor.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23563

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Induction of UBXN2A slows the growth of a colon cancer tumor ex vivo and in a mouse xenograft model by
50%. A. A Tet-on regulated inducible HCT-116 colon cancer cell line was established successfully. 48 hours incubation with Doxycycline

(DOX, 10 mg/ml) induces an equal expression of GFP-empty (EMP) or GFP-UBXN2A in HCT-116 cells. Images were taken using an
inverted fluorescent microscope. B. WB showing the expression of GFP-empty and GFP-UBXN2A proteins in HCT-116 cells when treated
with DOX for 48 hours. An anti-GFP antibody was used to detect the levels of GFP alone or of GFP-UBXN2A fusion proteins, while
GAPDH was used as a loading control. Optical density of bands were measured by Image Studio software C. Inducible cells (GFP-EMP
or GFP-UBXN2A) were treated with DOX for the indicated times. Cells were then stained with PerCP-Cy5.5 Annexin V antibody, and a
total of 10, 000 gated events were analyzed by flow cytometry. DOX-induced UBXN2A expression in 48 and 72 hours showed a significant
increase in annexin binding in those cells. The data is shown as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments in trplicate (n = 3) where
*p < 0.001 using Tukey’s modified student’s t-test. D. Inducible cells (GFP-EMP or GFP-UBXN2A) were treated with DOX for 48 hours,
followed by staining with Alexa Fluor 546 anti-caspase-3 antibody. Cells were analyzed using flow cytometry and collected data was
normalized with GFP-EMP (+DOX). The DOX-induced UBXN2A expression significantly increased caspase-3 levels (n = 3, *p < 0.05).
E. Inducible cells (GFP-EMP or GFP-UBXN2A) were treated with DOX for the indicated times. Immunofluoresence of p21 was performed.
Intensity of fluorochrome signals from a confocal microscope were analyzed by the Image J (NIH, Bethesda, MD) program and plotted.
The data was normalized with GFP-EMP (+DOX). The expression of UBXN2A significantly increased levels of p21 (n = 100, *p < 0.001).
F–G. HCT-116 cells expressing GFP-EMP and GFP-UBXN2A under DOX were treated with 5-FU (100 μM) for 48 hours. Cells were then
stained with Alexa Fluor 546 anti-caspase-3 (F) or anti-cleaved PARP (G) antibodies, followed by flow cytometry analysis. The induced
UBXN2A significantly enhanced 5-FU-induced increase in caspase-3 and cleaved PARP levels (n = 3, *p < 0.05). H. Inducible HCT-116
cells were incubated with DOX and 5-FU for 48 hours, stained with Sytox Red, and then the population of dead cells was analyzed using
flow cytometry. UBXN2A significantly enhanced 5-FU-induced cell death (n = 3, *p < 0.05). I–J. 1 × 107 Tet-on inducible cells were
injected subcutaneously into the lower flanks of nude mice. The animals with palpable tumors (< 5 mm3) for early-stage tumor response
were divided into two groups after injection to be fed with a standard diet (controls) or a DOX-containing diet (625 mg/kg). Tumor volumes
in mm3 were determined with digital calipers by the formula Volume = (width) 2 × length/2 every second day for 40 days. (Continued )

We next examined how induction of UBXN2A
contributes to tumor suppression in xenograft mouse
models. After injection of inducible cells subcutaneously
into the lower flanks of nude mice, mice with a palpable
tumor volume (~5 mm, early-staged tumor experiments
[23]) were fed either normal or DOX diets for 40 days. The
data confirmed that induction of UBXN2A can slow the
growth of tumors (Figure 2I–2J). WB of dissected tumors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

confirmed successful induction of GFP-empty and GFPUBXN2A (Figure 2K). Measurement of the growth rate of
tumors showed that induction of UBXN2A led to a 50%
reduction of tumor size and mass as well as the central
necrosis in some mice 40 days after implantation (Figure
2L). In an advanced-staged tumor response approach
[23], we confirmed that induction of UBXN2A can lead to
more apoptotic/necrotic events during the development of
23564

Oncotarget

Figure 2: (Continued ) Induction of UBXN2A slows the growth of a colon cancer tumor ex vivo and in a mouse xenograft
model by 50%. K. Expression of GFP-empty or GFP-UBXN2A proteins in dissected xenografts confirmed successful tumor responses

to DOX after 40 days. L. Growth of tumors with and without DOX on day 40. Treatment with DOX significantly decreases tumor size
and weight by more than 50%. The data is shown as mean ± SEM of 9 mice (n = 4 for control and n = 5 for DOX) where *p < 0.05 using
Tukey’s modified student’s t-test.

stablished tumors using PSVue 794, a distinct marker of
apoptosis/necrosis [24] used in live mice (Supplementary
Figure S3B–S3F).
While the above results indicate that p53 has a
role during UBXN2A activation, several evidence in the
literature indicate inhibition of mot-2 can also lead to
apoptotic events in the presence of mutant p53 protein
[25]. To better understand the observed phenotype
following expression of GFP-UBXN2A, we overexpressed
UBXN2A by transient transfection of HCT-116 p53 −/−
and p53 +/+ with GFP-Empty and GFP-UBXN2A cloned
in pAcGFP1-C1 vector (Clontech). Forty-eight hours after
transfection, cells were subjected to flow-cytometry analysis
using Annexin V early apoptotic marker. Panels G and H
in Supplementary Figure S3 showed expression of GFPUBXN2A can induce early apoptosis in both p53 −/− and
p53 +/+ HCT-116 cells. Induction of UBXN2A led to a twofold increase in Annexin V positive cells in p53 (−/−) cells
while UBXN2A showed a three-fold increase in Annexin V
positive cells in p53 (+/+) cells. This later set of experiments
(n = 3 in triplicate) confirmed the trend highlighted in our
previous publication [4] and more importantly illustrates
p53 is an important positive modulator in the UBXN2Awww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mot-2 pathway but that it is not an essential core component
of UBXN2A’s anti-cancer pathway.

Discovery of UBXN2A enhancers using a
luciferase-based assay
Our in vivo results encouraged us to screen for
compounds that can enhance expression of UBXN2A.
Using the UBXN2A promoter upstream of a luciferase
construct that was transiently transfected to HCT-116
cells, we performed a high-throughput drug screen with
1800 FDA approved drugs, synthetic compounds, and
natural products. Forty-eight hours after transfection,
cells were treated with compounds for 24 hours in
triplicate (Figure 3A). The results showed that a 40 μM
Veratrine sulfate (VH) resulted in a ~two fold increase in
luciferase activity (Figure 3B–3C). We looked at protein
expression of UBXN2A as well as P47 (another member
of the UBXD family) to confirm the selectivity of VH as a
selective enhancer of UBXN2A protein in cells. The WB
results showed that VH selectively upregulates UBXN2A
(Figure 3D). Because Veratrine has a typical alkaloid
structure and induces apoptosis, we looked for a similar
23565

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Veratrine and its purified form VTD increase UBXN2A level in vitro and in vivo. A. A cell-based screen was conducted

in search of compounds that induce the expression of the UBXN2A gene. The 3.9 K base of DNA upstream from the UBXN2A gene on human
chromosome 2, including endogenous promoters and necessary enhancers as well as untranslated exon 1, was cloned into MCS-mGL.1, a Gaussia
luciferase vector, and transiently transfected into HCT-116 colon cancer cells. We used empty MCS-mGL.1 for background expression. This cell
line was used to screen over 1800 FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved drugs, synthetic compounds, and natural products. A glow
luciferase activity assay was conducted in triplicate. We found 12 potential candidates in the initial screen, which were confirmed again by the
luciferase assay. B–C. 40 μM Veratrine sulfate (an unpurified form of VTD) resulted in a ~twofold increase in luciferase activity when compared
to control. D. WB experiments showed incubation of HCT-116 with Veratrine for 24 hours leads to up-regulation of UBXN2A, while Veratrine
has no effect on p47 (UBXN2C), another member of UBXD family. GAPDH was used as a loading control. Staurosporine, as an alkaloid, was
used as a negative control. E. IP injection of Veratrine (0.125 mg/kg) to C57Bl/6N mice for 28 days showed a selective upregulation of UBXN2A
in small intestine and colon tissues, but no changes were observed in the liver of the same animals. F. VTD, a naturally occurring plant alkaloid of
steroidal structure, is a component of Veratrine mixture. G. HCT-116 cells were treated with VTD (20 and 40 μM) and cell lysates were subjected
to WB. GAPDH was used as a loading control. VTD increases UBXN2A protein levels in a dose-dependent manner.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23566

Oncotarget

structure with similar apoptotic outputs to use as a control
alkaloid compound next to Veratrine in colon cancer cells.
We chose staurosporine, since it is a microbial alkaloid
compound and it induces apoptosis in colon cancer cells
[26]. Staurosporine decreased UBXN2A level compared
to cells incubated with Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS,
Figure 3D). While these two compounds have a similar
alkaloid base, they function differently in cells even in
terms of genes involved in apoptosis [27]. It has been
shown that staurosporine upregulates and downregulates
several chaperone and endoplasmic reticulum proteins
[28] during staurosporine-induced apoptosis. UBXN2A,
as a co-chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum associated
degradation (ERAD) pathway [29], can be another target
downregulated by staurosporine. Overall, these results
indicate plant alkaloid Veratrine can selectively increase
protein level of UBXN2A in HCT-116 colon cancer cells.
More importantly, intraperitoneal injection (IP) of
0.125 mg/kg VH [30] every day for 28 days leads to the
selective upregulation of UBXN2A in small intestine and
colon tissues of mice, while, due to a high pool of UBXN2A
in the liver, these was no significant changes in the liver
tissue (Figure 3E). We observed a different level of VHdependent UBXN2A induction in different segments of
the gastrointestinal system (esophagus to rectum; data not
shown). These data suggest that VH can increase UBXN2A
levels in vivo to a functionally meaningful degree, as we
observed following UBXN2A induction in xenograft
tissues (Figure 2). Of course, there are differences in terms
of UBXN2A expression under the Tet-on inducible system,
which uses human EF1 alpha promoter (lentiviral vector
pLVi(3G), Clontech) versus the expression of endogenous
UBXN2A by Veratrine, which activates UBXN2A’s promoter.
The alkaloid fraction of Veratrine is known to contain
a mixture of two major alkaloid esters: Veratridine (VTD)
and Cevadine [31, 32]. VTD, with a veratroyl group at the
3-O-R1 position and a free hydroxyl group at the 15-O-R2
position can function as an antihypertensive plant-derived
substance (Figure 3F) [33]. Besides antihypertensive
functions, there is evidence for anti-proliferative and
apoptotic roles of VTD in cancer cells [34–37]. The antiproliferative and apoptotic functions of VTD are mediated
by wild-type p53 [38]. Based on the above evidence, we
hypothesized that the purified form of VH, VTD, is a major
UBXN2A inducer. To answer this question, we treated HCT116 cells with 20 and 40 μM of VTD for 24 hours. WB of
the total cell lysate showed that VTD induces UBXN2A
expression in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 3G).
Measurement of UBXN2A in cells and tissues (Figure
3) confirmed UBXN2A expression increases at least 1.84fold in colon tissues (1.32-fold in small intestine and no
changes in liver) in the presence of Veratrine (Figure 3E) and
is increased 2–4 fold by its purified form, VTD, in HCT-116
colon cancer cells (Figure 3G). However, we observed lower
UBXN2A expression with Veratrine (unpurified form of
VTD) in HCT-116 cells (Figure 3D). This set of quantitation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

analysis (Figure 3D versus Figure 3G) further confirmed
that VTD is the main UBXN2A enhancer in the Veratrine
mixture, since VTD was more effective than Veratrine.

VTD induces cell death of human colon
cancer cells
Based on the above results, we then hypothesized that
VTD-induced UBXN2A leads to apoptosis and cell death
mimicking the Tet-on induced-UBXN2A model (Figure 2).
As cell detachment and cell shrinking are ubiquitous aspects
of apoptosis [39], we examined these features in four cancer
cell lines: HCT116 (WT-p53), LoVo (WT-p53), SW-480
(mutant-p53), and U2OS (WT-p53), all in the presence
of vehicle (DMSO, Supplementary Figure S1D), and
different concentrations of VTD (Figure 4, Supplementary
Figure  S4). The results showed that VTD significantly
increases cell detachment of HCT-116 (poorly-differentiated
colon cancer cell line, Figure 4A), LoVo (well-differentiated
colon cancer cell line, Figure 4B) and U2OS (osteosarcoma
with perinuclear mot-2 expression [40, 41], Figure 4C) in
a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner. In SW-480,
VTD had no effect on cell detachment, indicating WT-p53
is one of the requirements for VTD’s cytotoxic functions
(Figure 4D). In addition, live cell imaging of cells incubated
72 hours with VTD revealed VTD induces cell shrinking
and rounding resembling apoptosis changes in HCT-116
(Supplementary Figure S4A), LoVo (Supplementary
Figure S4B), and U2OS (Supplementary Figure S4C) in
a dose- and time-dependent manner, while SW-480 cells
remain unchanged (Supplementary Figure S4D).
We next performed a clonogenic survival assay to
determine colony formation in cancer cells in the presence
and absence of VTD. Staurosporine-treated cells were used
as a positive control (Supplementary Figure S4F). The
results showed that VTD reduces colony formation in HCT116 in higher doses. Using HCT-116 p53 +/− or p53 −/−,
we showed that the anti-colony formation role of VTD is
still partially p53 dependent in effective doses (Figure 4E–
4G). Expectedly, VTD significantly decreases the number
of colonies of LoVo (Figure 4H and Supplementary Figure
S4E), HepG2 (liver cancer cell line, Figure 4I), and U2OS
(Figure 4J) with as low as 30 μM VTD concentration, while
SW480 cells with mutant p53 had no response to VTD, even
at higher doses (Figure 4K). To further understand the level
of p53’s contribution in cell viability following Veratridine
treatment, we treated two additional cell lines with different
statuses of p53 (Supplementary Figure S5, panels A–B). As
illustrated in the Supplementary Figure S5, the cytotoxic
effect of VTD is cell dependent, since VTD successfully
decreased colon formation in HT-29 colon cancer cells
(Supplementary Figure S5, Panels A and C) carrying mutant
p53. In opposite results, VTD had no significant cytotoxic
effect on human pancreatic cancer cells (MIA PaCa-2,
Supplementary Figure S5B) similar to SW-480 colon cancer
cells (Figure 4K), both possessing a mutant p53 gene.
23567

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Induction of apoptosis and in vitro cytotoxicity by VTD in human cancer cell lines with different statuses
of p53 and mot-2. A–D. Cells were treated with VTD for 24, 48, and 72 hours. After incubation, dead cells were washed off, and the

remaining attached cells were calculated by counting in five random fields using the Axiovert 200 M inverted microscope and AxioVision
software (cell detachment assay). The % of cells attached was calculated as % of control cells. VTD significantly decreases the % of cells
attached in a dose-dependent manner in cancer cells with WT-p53 (A: HCT-116, B: LoVo and C: U2OS) but not with mutant p53 (D:
SW480). The data in Panel D suggest Veratridine might promote cell proliferation. However, a strict statistical analysis rejects any significant
changes in SW-480 cells. The data is shown as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments (n = 3, *p < 0.05). E–K. Cells were plated
for 5 days, and the colonies of cells were treated with different concentration of VTD. The colonies of viable cells were stained with crystal
violet dye and absorbance, as an index of measurement of colony forming units, was read at 562 nm (clonogenic survival assay). (Continued )

Despite a reasonable induction of UBXN2A by VTD in
HCT-116 (Figure 3G), we did obtain a modest effect in HCT116 poorly differentiated colon cancer cells (Figure 4A and
4E). In contrast, we observed a more distinct effect of VTD
in LoVo well-differentiated colon cancer cells (Figure 4B and
4H). These results indicate that there are other conditions,
such as the level of mot-2 in HCT-116 versus LoVo cells
(Figure 4L) or the level of mot-2-p53 interaction [2], that can
additionally modulate VTD cytotoxicity. In another word, the
effect of VTD is cell-type dependent.
At the same time, we measured the mot-2, p53, and
UBXN2A protein levels in all these cell lines. The WB
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

analysis showed mot-2 levels vary based on the cancer
cell type, while HSC70 is fairly equal in all examined cell
lines (Figure 4L). To verify whether VTD-induced cell
death is mediated through the UBXN2A-mot-2-p53 axis
[4], we looked at the expression of p53 in the cytoplasm
and nucleus of HCT-116 cells following VTD treatment.
WB showed that VTD increases WT-p53 levels both
in the cytoplasm and nucleus (Figure 4M) where p53
can activate its downstream cascades in dependent- or
independent-transcriptional manners [42]. Due to a high
cell death in higher doses of VTD, we could not use WB
analysis for reliable p53 and UBXN2A detection and
23568

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (Continued) Induction of apoptosis and in vitro cytotoxicity by VTD in human cancer cell lines with different
statuses of p53 and mot-2. VTD induced a significant decrease in cell viability in a p53- and differentiation grade manner in HCT-116

poorly differentiated cells (E), HCT-116 p53+/− (F), HCT-116 p53−/− (G), LoVo well-differentiated cells (H), SW-480 (K), and two non-colon
cancer cells: HepG2 (I) and U2OS (J) The data is shown as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments (n = 3, *p < 0.05). L. Determination
of endogenous levels of mot-2, UBXN2A, HSC70, and p53 proteins in various cancer cell lines using WB. M. HCT-116 cells were treated with
VTD (10 and 30 μM) and cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were subjected to WB. HSC70 and Orc-2 antibodies were used as cytoplasmic and
nuclear markers, respectively. VTD increases p53 in both cytoplasm and nucleus compartments in a dose-dependent manner.

quantification. In addition, we looked at the p53 level
in the absence of UBXN2A. LoVo colon cancer cells
stably expressing shRNA against UBXN2A (clones 5
and 6) were treated with VTD (30 and 100 μM) followed
by WB. Results presented in Supplementary Figure S4I
indicate the expression of p53 is reduced in the absence of
UBXN2A despite the presence of VTD.
Despite a reasonable upregulation of p53 in HCT116 cells with 30 μM of VTD (Figure 4M) we observed
VTD only induces cell death at higher does in HCT-116
cells (Figure 4E). It has been reported that VTD can
induce cell death superoxide anions via induction of
cytochrome c release in bovine chromaffin cells [37].
Therefore, it is possible that VTD uses a dual mechanism
(mot-2-UBXN2A axis as well as superoxide anions)
to promote cell death at higher doses in resistant cells
such as HCT-116. Similar to a small-molecule Bcl-2
antagonist with duel pro-apoptotic functions in resistant
cancer cells [43], the current study indicates that VTD can
exhibit subcellular targeting effects that encompass two
independent apoptotic pathways. As previously described,
the level of mot-2-p53 binding under exogenous or
endogenous stresses can also influence the p53-dependent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

apoptosis [2]. Therefore, despite increased levels of p53
in HCT-16 at lower doses following low doses of VTD
(Figure 4M), it is possible that the status of the mot-2-p53
complex [2] or even the balances of other anti-apoptotic
proteins [44] such as bcl-2 in resistant cells [45] sustain
high p53 expression and its downstream functions.
Furthermore, Supplementary Figure S6C–S6E shows
a genotoxic agent, etoposide, is also more cytotoxic in
well-differentiated cells (LoVo) and starts to kill LoVo
cells at low concentrations (3 µM), while the same dose
of etoposide was not effective in HCT-116 cells, similar to
the effects observed with VTD alone.

VTD is less cytotoxic towards non-cancerous
cells and overexpression of mot-2 alleviates
the cytotoxic effect of VTD
Because heat shock protein mot-2 is dominantly
located in mitochondria in normal cells [5], we hypothesized
that VTD-dependent upregulation of UBXN2A has no
apparent sign of cytotoxicity in normal cells. To answer
this question, we checked the effect of VTD on two noncancerous cell lines. We incubated human umbilical vein
23569

Oncotarget

Figure 5: VTD functions via the UBXN2A-mot-2-p53 axis. A. WB confirmed the presence and the absence of p53 protein in HCT-

116 p53(+/+) and HCT-116 p53(−/−) cancer cell lines, respectively. B–D. The effect of VTD on the viability of poorly-differentiated (HCT-116
p53(+/+) and HCT-116 p53 (−/−)) and well-differentiated (LoVo) colon cancer cell lines was determined using an MTT assay. VTD’s cytotoxic
effect on all three cell lines was dose dependent in (B) 24 hours, (C) 48 hours, and (D) 72 hours. As compared to the HCT-116 p53(+/+) cells,
HCT-116 p53(−/−) cells showed more resistance to VTD’s effects, whereas well-differentiated (LoVo) colon cancer cells showed the highest
sensitivity to VTD. E. LoVo cells were stably silenced for UBXN2A using a UBXN2A-shRNA along with a scrambled shRNA. Viability
of UBXN2A-silenced cells was found to be significantly higher as compared to control cells upon treatment with VTD. F. In another set
of experiments, UBXN2A-silenced cells were treated with VTD (100, 200, and 300 μM) for 24 hours. Cells were then labelled with Sytox
Red followed by flow cytometry analysis. Results showed silencing of UBXN2A significantly decreases cell death in response to VTD.
G. SW48 well-differentiated colon cancer cells with WT-p53 were treated with MKT-077 (5 μg/ml), a mot-2 inhibitor, along with VTD
for 72 hours. A clonogenic survival assay showed VTD signifcantly decreases the colony number of SW-48. However, preincubation with
MKT-077 neutralizes the cytotoxic effect of VTD. The data is shown as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments (n = 3) in triplicate
where *p < 0.05 using Bonferroni’s modified student’s t-test. H. This flowchart recapped the sequence of proteins which activate and
function upon VTD exposure to decrease cell viability.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23570

Oncotarget

endothelial cells (HUVECs), which mimic non-cancerous
endothelial cells next to tumor cells, with VTD (S4G).
The HUVEC cells did not respond to VTD in the first 24
hours, followed by a moderate response at the highest
dose of VTD (300 μM) in 48 hours. We repeated the
VTD experiments (0–300 μM) in non-cancerous kidney
(HEK293) cells [46] (Supplementary Figure S4H), and we
obtained similar results as those obtained in non-cancerous
HUVEC cells (Supplementary Figure S4G). Both HUVEC
and HEK-293 cells have been used extensively as control
non-cancerous cells next to various cancer cell lines
[47, 48]. Together, these results suggest VTD needs higher
doses to trigger cell death in normal cells with low levels of
cytoplasmic mot-2 and stresses as previously described [2].
In addition, these different levels of the stress condition [49]
can justify increased sensitivity to VTD observed in LoVo
and U2OS cells versus HCT-116 cells.
To further confirm mot-2 inhibition is a key
event during VTD-induced cytotoxicity, in another set
of experiments, we decided to conduct a gain of mot2 functions in VTD treated cells. We first transiently
transfected SW-48 well differentiated colon cancer cells with
HA-empty or HA-mot-2 plasmids using Neon transfection
system. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were
treated with DMSO or VTD for another 48 hours. Cells were
stained with Sytox red, followed by flow-cytometer analysis.
Panel J in Supplementary Figure S4 shows that while VTD
induces cell death in cells expressing HA-empty vector, the
cytotoxic effect of VTD was significantly neutralized in
cells expressing HA-mot-2 proteins. Expectedly, there were
not significant differences in DMSO-treated cells expressing
HA-empty or HA-mot-2 proteins.

which indicates VTD can partly trigger cell cytotoxicity
independent of the p53 mechanism (Figure 5D) probably
due to UBXN2A-dependent inhibition of mot-2 unrelated
to p53 sequestration (Figure 5H). In addition, these results
indicate that the conditions of the well-differentiated
colon cancer cells (LoVo) increases the effectiveness of
VTD as described for other anti-cancer compounds [51].
In the second set of experiments, we treated two stable
UBXN2A silenced clones of LoVo along with controls
with VTD. We observed that UBXN2A-silenced cells
showed greater cell viability than control cells, confirming
that VTD requires UBXN2A to decrease the cell viability
(Figure 5E). Besides the MTT assay, a set of Sytox red
flow cytometry experiments further confirmed that in the
absence of the UBXN2A there is a significant decrease
in the cell death (Figure 5F; Supplementary Figure S5D–
S5F). We observed that silencing of UBXN2A could
not completely eliminate the cytotoxic effect of VTD in
LoVo cells, particularly in higher doses. We believe that
one reason for this issue is that our stable shRNA clones
are not 100% silent for UBXN2A protein and therefore
the remaining UBXN2A can still mediate the cytotoxic
effect of VTD in a compensatory mechanism manner. It
is noteworthy to indicate that we generated 10 UBXN2A
silent cell lines with different levels of silenced UBXN2A.
We examined the cytotoxic effect of VTD on all 10 cell
lines that had different levels of UBXN2A. Interestingly,
we found those silent cells with only 50% silenced
UBXN2A or less were able to response to VTD, similar to
the cells carrying scrambled shRNA.
To eliminate the possibility that VTD can inhibit
mot-2 independently of UBXN2A, we decided to
overexpress HA-empty or HA-mot-2 in LoVo stably
expressing scrambled shRNA or shRNA against UBXN2A
(Figure S6A). Among the available silent clones, we found
Clone #6 (Figure 5E) is the ideal clone because UBXN2A
shows maximum silencing. We transiently transfected
cells with HA-empty and HA-mot-2 using the Neon
transfection system (Life Technologies). Following initial
optimization, we achieved high transfection efficiency
(> 80%) and high cell viability (> 85%) simultaneously.
After 24 hours cells were treated with DMSO or VTD
for another 24 hours followed by flow-cytometry
analysis using an Annexin V apoptosis marker. Panel
A in Supplementary Figure S6 shows VTD (100 μM)
successfully induced apoptosis in scrambled cell lines
regardless of HA-empty or HA-mot-2 expression.
However, in the absence of UBXN2A, VTD did not induce
apoptosis, neither in cells expressing HA-empty nor in
cells expressing HA-mot-2 proteins. Expectedly, there
were also significant differences between cells expressing
scrambled shRNA versus cells expressing UBXN2A
shRNA regardless of the presence or the absence of
exogenous mot-2. Together, this set of experiments further
confirmed UBXN2A can play a critical role in anti-cancer
mechanism of VTD in cancer cells.

VTD induces apoptosis and cell death via the
UBXN2A-mot-2-p53 axis
We decided to confirm whether VTD-induced tumor
suppression is indeed mediated via the UBXN2A-mot2-p53 axis. After initial verification with WB (Figure 5A),
HCT-116 (p53+/+ and p53 −/−) and LoVo were treated
with VTD for 24, 48, and 72 hours (Figure 5B–5D). The
MTT cell proliferation assay showed 24 hour treatment
with VTD was not sufficient to produce any cytotoxic or
anti-proliferative effect on HCT-116 cell lines; however,
VTD at higher doses significantly decreases the viability
of well-differentiated LoVo cells (Figure 5B–5D). All
three cell lines started to respond to VTD at 48 hours, and
reduction of cell viability reached a maximum at 72 hours,
particularly in LoVo cells. We defined this phenomenon
as a delayed cytotoxic response, since it occurs through
UBXN2A transcription, as previously described for other
anti-cancer agents [50]. The viability of HCT-116 p53+/+
was found to be significantly lower than HCT-116 p53−/−
in the presence of VTD, indicating that VTD partially
acts via p53 in the cells. However, HCT-116 p53−/− cells
started to respond to VTD at higher doses after 48 hours,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23571

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Synergistic inhibitory effects of VTD and etoposide or 5-FU chemotherapeutic drugs on the growth of human
colon cancer cells. A–C. HCT-116 and D–F. LoVo cells were treated with VTD (10- 300 μM) for 24, 48, and 72 hours. A suboptimal dose

of Etoposide (ETO) (5 μM) was added to cells for the last 24 hours only. The viability of cells was determined as % of control (untreated
cells) using an MTT assay. The chemotherapeutic drug ETO significantly enhanced the VTD-induced decrease in cell viability of both poorly
differentiated (HCT-116) and well-differentiated (LoVo) colon cancer cell lines in a time-dependent manner. G–H. HCT-116 (G) and LoVo
(H) cells were treated with VTD (10–200 μM) and a suboptimal dose of ETO (5 μM) for 24 hours. Cells were then stained with Annexin V
apoptotic marker. ETO significantly sensitizes both poorly and well-differentiated colon cancer cells to VTD even at 30 μM. (Continued )

Finally, to understand the contribution of mot-2
to the anti-cancer mechanism of VTD, we used a mot-2
inhibitor known as MKT-077 [7] along with VTD in welldifferentiated SW-48 (WT-p53) colon cancer cells for 72
hours. Due to the critical role of mot-2 in the mitochondria,
we could not use a silencing strategy for mot-2 in this set
of experiments. The shRNA silencing of mot-2 interfered
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

with normal mitochondrial functions and turned cells
into an unhealthy and non-physiological status. VTD
alone significantly decreased cell viability in a dosedependent manner; however, upon mot-2 inhibition in the
cytoplasm by MKT-077, VTD had no significant effect on
cell viability (Figure 5G). It is noteworthy to specify that
inhibition of mot-2 by MKT-077 indeed induced cell death
23572

Oncotarget

Figure 6: (Continued) Synergistic inhibitory effects of VTD and etoposide or 5-FU chemotherapeutic drugs on the
growth of human colon cancer cells. I–L. HCT-116 and LoVo cells were treated with different doses of 5-FU (5–100 μM, I-J)
and ETO (1–50 μM, K-L) along with VTD (30 μM and 100 μM respectively) for 24 hours. MTT assays showed the treatment with 5-FU
and ETO with VTD decreased cell viability at much lower drug doses particularly in LoVo cells. Results were analyzed using CalcuSyn
software to calculate the combination index (CI) to confirm and quantify the synergism observed with combination therapies (S6 and S7
and Supplementary Tables 4 and 5). The data is shown as mean ± SEM of three different experiments (n = 3) where *p < 0.001 using
Bonferroni’s modified student’s t-test.

in SW-48 cells by binding to mot-2 protein. However,
adding VTD to MKT-077 did not increase any additional
cell death. We concluded that pre-inhibition of mot-2 by
MKT-077 hinders the effect of VTD, which needs mot-2
for its cytotoxic pathway. Together, these data show that
VTD requires UBXN2A and mot-2 for its action while the
presence of p53 can further enhance VTD’s functions in a
cell type-dependent manner (Figure 5H).

by an MTT assay in HCT-116 versus LoVo cells in a timedependent manner (Supplementary Figure S6C–S6E).
Combination of VTD with a suboptimal dose of etoposide
significantly potentiates the cytotoxic effect of VTD in
HCT-116 (Figure 6A–6C) and LoVo (Figure 6D–6F).
We analyzed our results with CalcuSyn software in order
to understand the mode of interaction of the tested drugs
(Supplementary Figure S6F–S6G). The median-effect plots
for HCT-116 revealed that it was synergistic effect only when
we mixed higher concentrations of VTD with sub-optimal
concentrations of etoposide (5 μM) as the combination
indexes (CI) were found to be ≤ 0.4 (Supplementary
Figure S6F and Supplementary Table 4). However, in
LoVo cells, lower concentration of VTD (100 μM) still
showed synergistic effects (CI< 1) with 5 μM etoposide
(Supplementary Figure S6G and Supplementary Table
4). The low doses of VTD produce an antagonistic effect
(CI > 1) with etoposide (Supplementary Figure S6F–
S6G), as previously described for other combination
therapies [53]. Besides the cell viability assay, we decided
to measure the apoptotic activity in the above combination
therapy. The flow cytometry data revealed that combined

Combination treatment with VTD and
chemotherapeutic agents results in synergistic
cytotoxicity in colon cancer cells
Targeting carcinogenic-specific mechanisms by novel
natural products, alone or in combination with standard
chemotherapies, may provide synergy with existing
treatments, lessen side effects, and ultimately improve both
life expectancy and quality of life for cancer patients [52].
To examine whether VTD has synergism or additive effects
with standard chemotherapeutic drugs commonly used in
colon cancer patients, we first combined different doses of
VTD with suboptimal doses of etoposide as determined
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23573

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Sensitization of colon cancer cells to a long-term suboptimal dose of 5-fluorouracil exposure when combined
with VTD. A–D. (A) HCT-116, (B) LoVo, (C) SW-480, and (D) U2OS were treated with VTD (10–300 μM) for 10 days. Colony

formation assays showed VTD effectively reduces cell viability in a cell type-dependent manner. E–G. (E) HCT-116, (F) LoVo, and
(G) U-2OS were treated with suboptimal doses of 5-FU and VTD (50 and 100 μM) for 10 days. Clonogenic survival assays revealed an
intermediate-dose of VTD significantly potentiates the standard chemotherapy used at very low dose (1–5 μM 5-FU). H–I. A series of flow
cytometry assays using an antibody against the CD44 cancer stem cell marker illustrated that VTD can target CD44+ cancer stem cells and
eventually eliminate them in a dose-dependent manner, implicating VTD as a potential cancer stem cell-targeting therapy. (Continued )

treatment with VTD and a suboptimal dose of Etoposide
(5 μM) for 24 hours significantly increased early
apoptosis in HCT-116 (Figure 6G) cells as well as LoVo
(Figure 6H).
While we observed a promising synergism effect
with a combination of VTD and a suboptimal dose
of etoposide, we decided to repeat the combination
therapy in the presence of a low dose of VTD and
clinical doses of 5-FU and etoposide. We hypothesized
that the suboptimal dose of VTD, capable of increasing
UBXN2A (Figure 3), would potentiate the cytotoxic
effect of the chemotherapeutic drugs. Cells were
treated with 5-FU (5–100 μM) and etoposide (1–50 μM)
along with VTD (30 and 100 μM respectively) in two
different sets of experiments for 24 hours. We found
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

both the intermediate-dose of VTD (100 μM) and low
dose (30 μM) of VTD significantly enhanced the 5-FU
and etoposide effects on cell viability in both HCT116 and LoVo cells (Figure 6I–6L and Supplementary
Figure S6B).
We purposely showed the mild effect of VTD+5FU/etoposide observed in HCT-116 poorly differentiated
colon cancer cells (Figure 6I and 6K) next to LoVo
well-differentiated colon cancer cells, which effectively
responded to VTD+5-FU/etoposide (Figure 6J and 6L).
The different sensitivity levels observed in HCT-116 and
LoVo cells following VTD ± genotoxic agents further
support our initial hypothesis that the effect of VTD can
be cell dependent and determined by mot-2 [2] and other
mot-2-related cellular pathways.
23574

Oncotarget

Figure 7: (Continued) Sensitization of colon cancer cells to a long-term suboptimal dose of 5-fluorouracil exposure
when combined with VTD. J. Tumor tissue lysates from 48 patients with colon cancer alongside the matched adjacent normal colon

tissue lysates were probed with anti-UBXN2A and anti-Actin antibodies, followed by quantitation and normalization of signals. UBXN2A
expression shows a marked downregulation in ≥ 50% of patients with colon cancer. UBXN2A expression levels may have a correlation with
the stages of colon cancer as several patients at stage III had low level of UBXN2A (inset). (I) The proposed mechanism action of VTD.
VTD increases the expression of UBXN2A, which releases the p53 from mot-2′s sequestration and, together with standard chemotherapy,
can cause an effective tumor suppression.

VTD potentiates the cytotoxic effect of
sub-optimal chemotherapy against cancer
cells receiving long-term therapy

The analysis of our results with CalcuSyn software
revealed that most of the combinations of 5-FU or
etoposide with VTD have a synergistic effect on colon
cancer cell viability (S7). In the case of HCT-116 cells,
the strongest synergistic effect (CI = 0.165 and 0.109)
was found when the highest concentrations of 5-FU
(75 and 100 μM) were combined with 100 μM of VTD,
while the synergistic effect started at lower combinations
(Supplementary Figure S7A and Supplementary Table 5).
When VTD (30 μM) was used along with etoposide, the
combined effect was synergistic (CI = 0.516) at as low
as 5 μM of etoposide (Supplementary Figure S7C and
Supplementary Table 5). The same analysis for LoVo cells
demonstrated that the combinations of even the smallest
concentrations of 5-FU (5 μM) with 100 μM VTD (CI
= 0.32) and etoposide (1 μM) with 30 μM VTD (CI =
0.275) had a synergistic effect on the viability of welldifferentiated colon cancer cells (Supplementary Figures
S7B, S7D and Supplementary Table 5).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Because colon cancer cells develop resistance
to chemotherapy after an initial response [45, 54], we
decided to investigate whether VTD can potentiate the
cytotoxic effect of 5-FU when cells receiving long-term
therapy mimicking the in vivo therapy. Cells were treated
with VTD for 10 days. The cell viability assay showed
that HCT-116 cells only responded to a high concentration
of VTD, and they were able to recover at lower doses of
VTD (Figure 7A). On the other hand, well-differentiated
LoVo cells (Figure 7B) and an osteosarcoma U2OS cell
line (with high perinuclear mot-2, Figure 7D) showed a
significant decrease in cell viability in a dose-dependent
manner with long-term exposure to VTD. Expectedly, the
SW480 (mutant p53) showed no response to long-term
exposure of VTD (Figure 7C).

23575

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

Based on the significant effect of long-term
exposure in LoVo and U2OS, we hypothesized that VTD
could be a potential complementary strategy alongside
5-FU, an effective drug [55] with a high rate of resistant
events [45] in colon tumors. To answer this question,
we first determined the minimum concentration of 5-FU
that has no effect or a very mild effect on cell viability
after 10 days’ exposure in three cell lines HCT-116,
LoVo, and U2OS (data not shown). We performed 10 day
treatments using a combination of a low dose of VTD (50
μM or 100 μM) plus a suboptimal dose of 5-FU (1 μM or
5 μM). The presence of VTD significantly potentiated the
cytotoxic effect of the suboptimal dose of 5-FU (Figure
7E–7G). These results indicate that the novel anti-cancer
mechanism of VTD can lower the dose of 5-FU in patients
and thereby decrease side effects while postponing drug
resistance. Because CD44+ stem cells are one of the major
stem cells in cancers involved in self-renewal capacity,
enhanced tumor initiation, and drug resistance [56], we
decided to examine whether VTD can target these specific
populations. Figure 7H shows that a high dose of VTD
(100 μM) significantly reduces the abundance of the
CD44+ cancer stem cells in LoVo cells. On the other hand,
Figure 7I demonstrates that an intermediate-dose of VTD
significantly reduces the abundance of the CD44+ cancer
stem cells in the U2OS cancer cell line.
Analysis of the Oncomine database revealed that
UBXN2A expression is downregulated in some human
cancers, including in patients with colon adenocarcinoma
[57]. Furthermore, WB of 48 human tumor and adjacent
normal tissue lysates verified a marked downregulation
of UBXN2A in ~50% of patients with colon cancer
(Figure 7J). We also showed that UBXN2A expression
levels change based on stage of colon cancer (Figure 7Jinset). Interestingly, these data suggested that UBXN2A
changes may have a correlation with the stages of colon
cancer, as several patients at stage III had a low level of
UBXN2A (inset). As it has been reported for other anticancer proteins such as SP1 [58], UBXN2A’s up- and
down-regulation can coordinate with the stage of cancers.
Patients with high UBXN2A proteins may delay tumor
progression and prolong overall survival, and patients
with a low level of UBXN2A are more often found in
the late stage of tumors (progressive tumor). Similar
subpopulations have been described for the protein level
of Chloride channel accessory 1 (CLCA1) [59] and
topoisomerase-1 (Topo1) [60] in colon cancer patients,
leading to different prognostic Outcomes. Further analysis
employing a higher number of patients with colon cancer
is needed to determine the relation of UBXN2A protein
levels and patient survival in different stages.
This clinical data highlights the beneficiary effect of
VTD as a UBXN2A enhancer in patients with low levels
of UBXN2A, and it could be used to overcome resistance
to chemotherapies in patients, particularly those with overexpressed mot-2 (Figure 7K).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Here, we identify and establish UBXN2A as a colon
tumor suppressor in both in vitro and in vivo models. We
showed that UBXN2A enhancement leads to apoptosis at
the cellular level and in live animals, resulting in tumor
growth suppression. More importantly, we found induction
of UBXN2A enhances the cytotoxic effects of 5-FU.
Despite its anti-cancer role, we observed that 50% of
patients with colon cancer have underexpressed UBXN2A
in their tumors, while at the same time 75% of these patients
have an overexpression of mot-2. This clinical evidence plus
the anti-growth function of UBXN2A in xenograft tumors
encouraged us to look for UBXN2A enhancers. Using a
high-throughput drug screen, we found VTD as a potential
UBXN2A enhancer. VTD is a natural plant alkaloid found in
Liliaceae plants, and it has prospective anticancer properties
[34–37]. Natural alkaloids, as anticancer agents, have already
served as a rich reservoir for drug discovery [61, 62]. As
described for other anti-cancer alkaloids [52, 63], our results
indicate that VTD can mediate transcriptional activity of the
UBXN2A promoter, increasing the UBXN2A protein level in
vitro and in vivo and resulting in upregulation of p53 protein
in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus compartment, where
p53 induces apoptosis and cell death [4]. The anti-cancer
function of VTD is mediated through the UBXNA-mot-2
axis. In addition, the heterozygous p53+/− and homozygous
p53 − /− HCT-116 cell lines show an intermediate cytotoxic
effect in the presence of VTD. These latter results indicate:
1) VTD function is partially dependent on p53 since it
can mediate apoptosis in the absence of p53 as well as the
presence of mutant p53 proteins which may still be functional
[25]. 2) VTD-dependent expression of UBXN2A and
consequent binding of UBXN2A to mot-2 interferes with the
other tumorigenic functions of mot-2 beyond p53 reactivation
as described previously [2, 22, 64–68].
Quantitation of UBXN2A level showed there
are differences among cell lines expressing exogenous
or endogenous UBXN2A (Figure 2K), mouse tissues
(Figure 3E), and human tumors (Figure 7J) which could
be due to the different regulatory pathways unique in
each system. Certainly, UBXN2A expression under the
Tet-on inducible system, which uses human EF1 alpha
promoter (lentiviral vector pLVi(3G), Clontech) versus
the expression of endogenous UBXN2A by VTD, which
activates UBXN2A’s promoter generate different levels of
protein expression. However, the comparison of Annexin
V early apoptosis events induced by exogenous GFPUBXN2A (Figure 2C) versus endogenous UBXN2A
activated through VTD (Figure 6G) indicates a similar
percent change in apoptosis, which verifies UBXN2A’s
contributions to the apoptosis process in both systems.
In this study, we found that VTD-dependent
inactivation of mot-2 has a synergetic effect with etoposide
and 5-FU, two chemotherapeutic drugs with different anticancer mechanisms. Combination therapy of VTD and
23576

Oncotarget

Cell culture, chemicals, and drug treatments

5-FU or etoposide at clinical dosages as well as suboptimal
doses confirmed VTD enhances the cytotoxicity of
these two genotoxic agents. Significant reduction of cell
viability with long-term exposure of suboptimal doses of
5-FU in the presence of low doses of VTD verified the
clear synergistic effects of the two treatments combined.
As previously rationalized [2], the UBXN2A-mot-2
dependent anti-cancer mechanism of VTD combined
with DNA damage mechanisms triggered by conventional
chemotherapy can be considered a novel treatment strategy
wherein two different but interconnected pathways can
selectively choose cancer cells with high levels of mot-2
and high pools of inactivated p53 versus normal cells with
low mot-2 in the cytoplasm.
Recent chemotherapeutic studies confirmed
traditional chemotherapies are not capable of eradicating
cancer stem cells (CSCs) and fail to prevent disease
relapse and metastatic dissemination, indicating that new
therapies need to focus on the ability to target CSCs [69].
Mot-2 protein plays a protective role in cancer stem cells
[70]. Depletion of CD44 positive stem cancer cells in the
presence of VTD suggests this alkaloid may target a subpopulation of cancer stem cells through the UBXN2Amot-2 pathway as described for other natural products
[71]. Further studies of both molecular and self-renewal
[72] assays are needed to understand the specific inhibitory
role of VTD in the progression of cancer stem cells.
In summary, successful tumor growth suppression
of xenografts in the presence of induced UBXN2A led
to a drug screen to identify a natural compound capable
of upregulating UBXN2A protein in both in vitro and
in vivo models. We found that VTD induces apoptosis
and reduces cell viability in cancer cells and CSCs in a
UBXN2A-, mot-2, and partially p53-dependent manner,
while normal cells dominantly remain intact. Combination
therapy of VTD and standard chemotherapy showed VTD
or its modified analogs can be a complementary strategy
alongside suboptimal dose of chemotherapy, particularly
in well-differentiated colon tumors. This study establishes
the concept that the anti-cancer protein UBXN2A plays
a crucial opposite role in colon tumorigenesis, and it
justifies the transition of a novel plant alkaloid compound
to clinical development.

Cells were purchased from American Type Culture
Collection (VA, USA) and they were grown in the
recommended medium. Veratridine, Veratrine, etoposide,
5-Fluorouracil and staurosporine were purchased from
Sigma (MO, USA). Because we used DMSO as a solvent
for VTD at different concentration (10–300 μM), we
examined different concentrations of DMSO (0.02%–
0.3%) corresponding to VTD used (10–300 μM) in HCT116 cells. As the results show in Panel D of Supplementary
Figure S1, concentrations of DMSO as a vehicle had no
cytotoxic effect on HCT-116 colon cancer measured
by MTT assay at 24, 48, and 72 hours. This set of data
further confirmed the cytotoxic effect observed with VTD
is purely related to the anti-cancer function of VTD and
not DMSO.

Antibodies and immunoblotting analysis
Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were prepared
from the cells using NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic
Extraction Reagents (Pierce, IL, USA) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein concentrations
were determined by BCA assay followed by SDSPAGE and WB analysis with the appropriate antibodies
(Supplementary Table 3). Signals were acquired using
Odyssey infrared imaging (LI-COR) and Image Studio
software (version 3.1).

High-throughput drug screening
A cell-based screen was conducted in search of
compounds that induce the expression of the UBXN2A
gene. The 3.9K base of DNA upstream from the UBXN2A
gene on human chromosome 2, including endogenous
promoters and necessary enhancers as well as untranslated
exon 1 (Figure 3A), was cloned into MCS-mGL.1,
a Gaussia luciferase vector, and transiently transfected
into HCT-116 colon cancer cells, with empty MCS-mGL.1
for background expression. This cell line was used to
screen over 1800 FDA (Food and Drug Administration)
approved drugs, synthetic compounds, and natural
products (Xactagen). A glow luciferase activity assay
was conducted in triplicate followed by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR and WB analysis for UBXN2A, P47 (negative
control), or GAPDH± Veratrine or its purified form VTD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mot-2 and UBXN2A detection by protein
microarray

MTT cell viability assay

The expression of mot-2, UBXN2A, and actin
(for normalization) in normal and tumor tissues were
determined according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Protein Biotechnologies, CA, USA). The complete list of
patients and their tumors are provided in Supplementary
Table S1 and S2.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

An MTT (3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2- yl]-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay was performed to
measure the viability of cells. Briefly, cells were seeded
at a density of 10 × 103 cells per well in phenol-red free
growth media. After 24 hours, cells were treated with
various concentrations of VTD ± 5-FU or etoposide.

23577

Oncotarget

After incubation, an MTT dye was added to the cells for
2–4 hours. The absorbance of samples was measured at
630 nm using an EXL808 absorption spectrophotometer
(Biotek, Winooski). The viability of cells was calculated
as % of control. Cell detachment and clonogenic survival
assays were conducted as previously described [4]. Early
apoptosis, caspase-3, cleaved PARP and Sytox Red (Life
Technology, NY, USA) were measured by the Accuri C6
flow cytometer system (BD Pharmingen, MD, USA) [73].

2.	 Lu WJ, Lee NP, Kaul SC, Lan F, Poon RT, Wadhwa R,
Luk JM. Mortalin-p53 interaction in cancer cells is stress
dependent and constitutes a selective target for cancer therapy. Cell Death Differ. 2011; 6:1046–1056.
3.	 Wadhwa R, Takano S, Robert M, Yoshida A, Nomura H,
Reddel RR, Mitsui Y, Kaul SC. Inactivation of tumor
suppressor p53 by mot-2, a hsp70 family member. J Biol
Chem. 1998; 273:29586–29591.
4.	 Sane S, Abdullah A, Boudreau DA, Autenried RK, Gupta
BK, Wang X, Wang H, Schlenker EH, Zhang D, Telleria C,
Huang L, Chauhan SC, Rezvani K. Ubiquitin-like (UBX)domain-containing protein, UBXN2A, promotes cell death
by interfering with the p53-Mortalin interactions in colon
cancer cells. Cell Death Dis. 2014; 5:e1118.

Xenograft models in nude mice
1 × 107 Tet-on HCT-116 cells expressing GFP-empty
or GFP-UBXN2A were injected into 6 to 8 week old nude
female mice [athymic nude-Foxn1nu, Harlan (IN, USA)]
by subcutaneous injection. The animals with palpable
tumors (~5 mm3) were then divided into two groups
and fed with a standard diet (controls, n = 5) or a Doxcontaining diet (625 mg/kg, n = 5). Of the control, one
mouse was removed from the experiment due to a tumor
size of > 200 mm3 at 25 days, and we had a total of 9 mice
at day 40 with 18 tumors (one GFP-empty and one GFP
UBXN2A per mouse). Tumor volumes were determined as
previously described [4].

5.	 Burbulla LF, Schelling C, Kato H, Rapaport D, Woitalla D,
Schiesling C, Schulte C, Sharma M, Illig T, Bauer P, Jung S,
Nordheim A, Schols L, Riess O, Kruger R. Dissecting the
role of the mitochondrial chaperone mortalin in Parkinson’s
disease: functional impact of disease-related variants on mitochondrial homeostasis. Hum Mol Genet. 2010; 19:4437–4452.
6.	 Grover A, Priyandoko D, Gao R, Shandilya A, Widodo N,
Bisaria VS, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R, Sundar D. Withanone
binds to mortalin and abrogates mortalin-p53 complex:
computational and experimental evidence. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2012; 44:496–504.

Statistics

7.	 Wadhwa R, Sugihara T, Yoshida A, Nomura H, Reddel
RR, Simpson R, Maruta H, Kaul SC. Selective toxicity of
MKT-077 to cancer cells is mediated by its binding to the
hsp70 family protein mot-2 and reactivation of p53 function. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:6818–6821.

Statistical analysis was perfomed using GraphPad
Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Prism Software, Inc.) where
appropriate. Results are shown as mean ± SEM and are
representative of at least three independent experiments
with a P value less than 0.05. Calculated r2 is a measure
of goodness-of-fit of linear regression.

8.	 Koya K, Li Y, Wang H, Ukai T, Tatsuta N, Kawakami M,
Shishido , Chen LB. MKT-077, a novel rhodacyanine dye
in clinical trials, exhibits anticarcinoma activity in preclinical studies based on selective mitochondrial accumulation.
Cancer Res. 1996; 56:538–543.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

9.	 Dundas SR, Lawrie LC, Rooney PH, Murray GI. Mortalin
is over-expressed by colorectal adenocarcinomas and
­correlates with poor survival. J Pathol. 2005; 205:74–81.

This project has been funded in whole or in part by
the startup package (Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences,
University of South Dakota) and the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of
Health under award number 5P20GM103548 (Miskimins).
We thank Dr. Carlos Telleria (Division of Basic Biomedical
Sciences, University of South Dakota) for critical input.

10.	 Ando K, Oki E, Zhao Y, Ikawa-Yoshida A, Kitao H, Saeki H,
Kimura Y, Ida S, Morita M, Kusumoto T, Maehara Y.
Mortalin is a prognostic factor of gastric cancer with normal
p53 function. Gastric Cancer. 2014; 17:255–262.
11.	 Chen J, Liu WB, Jia WD, Xu GL, Ma JL, Huang M,
Deng  YR, Li JS. Overexpression of Mortalin in hepatocellular carcinoma and its relationship with angiogenesis
and epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Int J Oncol. 2014;
44:247–255.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

12.	 Takano S, Wadhwa R, Yoshii Y, Nose T, Kaul SC,
Mitsui Y. Elevated levels of mortalin expression in human
brain tumors. Exp Cell Res. 1997; 237:38–45.

REFERENCES
1.	 Kaul SC, Aida S, Yaguchi T, Kaur K, Wadhwa R.
Activation of wild type p53 function by its mortalin-­
binding, cytoplasmically localizing carboxyl terminus
­peptides. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:39373–39379.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23578

13.	 Gao RN, Neutel CI, Wai E. Gender differences in ­colorectal
cancer incidence, mortality, hospitalizations and s­ urgical
procedures in Canada. J Public Health (Oxf). 2008;
30:194–201.
Oncotarget

14.	 Boyle P, Leon ME. Epidemiology of colorectal cancer.
Br Med Bull. 2002; 64:1–25.

activation regulates anoikis in human colon tumor cell lines.
Oncogene. 2002; 21:7797–7807.

15.	 Warren RS, Atreya CE, Niedzwiecki D, Weinberg VK,
Donner DB, Mayer RJ, Goldberg RM, Compton CC,
Zuraek MB, Ye C, Saltz LB, Bertagnolli MM. Association
of TP53 mutational status and gender with survival after
adjuvant treatment for stage III colon cancer: results of
CALGB 89803. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:5777–5787.

27.	 Zhang H, Hoang T, Saeed B, Ng SC. Induction of apoptosis in prostatic tumor cell line DU145 by staurosporine, a potent inhibitor of protein kinases. Prostate. 1996;
29:69–76.
28.	 Short DM, Heron ID, Birse-Archbold JL, Kerr LE,
Sharkey J, McCulloch J. Apoptosis induced by staurosporine alters chaperone and endoplasmic reticulum proteins:
Identification by quantitative proteomics. Proteomics. 2007;
7:3085–3096.

16.	 Vaziri SA, Krumroy LM, Elson P, Budd GT, Darlington G,
Myles J, Tubbs RR, Casey G. Breast tumor immunophenotype of BRCA1-mutation carriers is influenced by age at
diagnosis. Clin Cancer Res. 2001; 7:1937–1945.

29.	 Rezvani K, Teng Y, Pan Y, Dani JA, Lindstrom J, Garcia
Gras EA, McIntosh JM, De Biasi M. UBXD4, a UBXcontaining protein, regulates the cell surface number and
stability of alpha3-containing nicotinic acetylcholine
­receptors. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:6883–6896.

17.	 Sutandyo N, Suzanna E, Haryono SJ, Reksodiputro AH.
Signaling pathways in early onset sporadic breast cancer of patients in Indonesia. Acta Med Indones. 2008;
40:139–145.
18.	 Lee JJ, Kim YM, Jeong J, Bae DS, Lee KJ. UbiquitinAssociated (UBA) Domain in Human Fas Associated
Factor 1 Inhibits Tumor Formation by Promoting Hsp70
Degradation. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e40361.

30.	 Bourin M, Chenu F, Hascoet M. Topiramate and phenytoin
anti-immobility effect in the mice forced swimming test is
reversed by veratrine: Implication for bipolar depression
treatment. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 205:421–425.

19.	 Phan VT, Ding VW, Li F, Chalkley RJ, Burlingame A,
McCormick F. The RasGAP proteins Ira2 and neurofibromin are negatively regulated by Gpb1 in yeast and ETEA in
humans. Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 30:2264–2279.

31.	 Benforado JM. The veratrum alkaloids. Physiological
­pharmacology. 1967.
32.	 Hare JD. Purification and Quantitative Analysis of
Veratridine and Cevadine by HPLC. Journal of Agricultural
and Food Chemistry. 1996; 44:149–152.

20.	 Wu-Baer F, Ludwig T, Baer R. The UBXN1 protein associates with autoubiquitinated forms of the BRCA1 tumor suppressor and inhibits its enzymatic function. Mol Cell Biol.
2010; 11:2787–2798.

33.	 Loizzo MR, Tundis R, Menichini F, Statti GA. Hypotensive
natural products: current status. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2008;
8:828–855.

21.	 Brotherick I, Shenton BK, Cowan WK, Angus B,
Horne CH, Higgs MJ, Lennard TW. p53 expression measured by flow cytometry. A comparison of three monoclonal
antibodies and the relationship with grade and DNA ploidy
in breast cancer. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1995;
41:146–150.

34.	 Fraser SP, Grimes JA, Djamgoz MB. Effects of voltagegated ion channel modulators on rat prostatic cancer cell
proliferation: comparison of strongly and weakly metastatic
cell lines. Prostate. 2000; 44:61–76.
35.	 Fraser SP, Salvador V, Manning EA, Mizal J, Altun S,
Raza M, Berridge RJ, Djamgoz MB. Contribution of functional voltage-gated Na+ channel expression to cell behaviors involved in the metastatic cascade in rat prostate ­cancer:
I. Lateral motility. J Cell Physiol. 2003; 195:479–487.

22.	 Wu PK, Hong SK, Veeranki S, Karkhanis M, Starenki D,
Plaza JA, Park JI. A mortalin/HSPA9-mediated switch in
tumor-suppressive signaling of Raf/MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase. Mol Cell Biol. 2013; 33:4051–4067.

36.	 Jordan J, Galindo MF, Calvo S, Gonzalez-Garcia C,
Cena V. Veratridine induces apoptotic death in bovine chromaffin cells through superoxide production. Br J Pharmacol.
2000; 130:1496–1504.

23.	 Zhang J, Wang C, Ke N, Bliesath J, Chionis J, He QS,
Li QX, Chatterton JE, Wong-Staal F, Zhou D. A more efficient RNAi inducible system for tight regulation of gene
expression in mammalian cells and xenograft animals.
RNA. 2007; 13:1375–1383.
24.	 Hensley H, Devarajan K, Johnson JR, Piwnica-Worms D,
Godwin AK, von Mehren M, Rink L. Evaluating new therapies in gastrointestinal stromal tumor using in vivo molecular optical imaging. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014; 15:911–918.

37.	 Jordan J, Galindo MF, Tornero D, Benavides A,
Gonzalez C, Agapito MT, Gonzalez-Garcia C, Cena V.
Superoxide anions mediate veratridine-induced cytochrome
c release and caspase activity in bovine chromaffin cells.
Br J Pharmacol. 2002; 137:993–1000.

25.	 Lu WJ, Lee NP, Kaul SC, Lan F, Poon RT, Wadhwa R,
Luk JM. Induction of mutant p53-dependent apoptosis in
human hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting stress protein
mortalin. Int J Cancer. 2011; 129:1806–1814.

38.	 Gomez-Lazaro M, Galindo MF, Fernandez-Gomez FJ,
Prehn JH, Jordan J. Activation of p53 and the pro-apoptotic
p53 target gene PUMA during depolarization-induced apoptosis of chromaffin cells. Exp Neurol. 2005; 196:96–103.

26.	 Windham TC, Parikh NU, Siwak DR, Summy
JM, McConkey DJ, Kraker AJ, Gallick GE. Src

39.	 Sui X, Kong N, Wang X, Fang Y, Hu X, Xu Y, Chen W,
Wang K, Li D, Jin W, Lou F, Zheng Y, Hu H, Gong L,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23579

Oncotarget

Zhou X, Pan H, et al. JNK confers 5-fluorouracil resistance in
p53-deficient and mutant p53-expressing colon cancer cells
by inducing survival autophagy. Sci Rep. 2014; 4:4694.

(NAG-1) modulators from natural products as anti-cancer
agents. Life Sci. 2014; 100:75–84.
53.	 Chan JY, Phoo MS, Clement MV, Pervaiz S, Lee SC.
Resveratrol displays converse dose-related effects on
5-­fluorouracil-evoked colon cancer cell apoptosis: the
roles of caspase-6 and p53. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008;
7:1305–1312.

40.	 Kaul Z, Yaguchi T, Kaul SC, Hirano T, Wadhwa R,
Taira K. Mortalin imaging in normal and cancer cells
with quantum dot immuno-conjugates. Cell Res. 2003;
13:503–507.
41.	 Widodo N, Deocaris CC, Kaur K, Hasan K, Yaguchi T,
Yamasaki K, Sugihara T, Ishii T, Wadhwa R, Kaul SC.
Stress chaperones, mortalin, and pex19p mediate 5-aza-2′
deoxycytidine-induced senescence of cancer cells by DNA
methylation-independent pathway. J Gerontol A Biol Sci
Med Sci. 2007; 62:246–255.

54.	 Kozovska Z, Gabrisova V, Kucerova L. Colon cancer:
cancer stem cells markers, drug resistance and treatment.
Biomed Pharmacother. 2014; 68:911–916.

42.	 Green DR, Kroemer G. Cytoplasmic functions of the
tumour suppressor p53. Nature. 2009; 458:1127–1130.

56.	 Rao GH, Liu HM, Li BW, Hao JJ, Yang YL, Wang MR,
Wang XH, Wang J, Jin HJ, Du L, Chen Q. Establishment
of a human colorectal cancer cell line P6C with stem cell
properties and resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. Acta
Pharmacol Sin. 2013; 34:793–804.

55.	 Schmoll HJ, Buchele T, Grothey A, Dempke W. Where
do we stand with 5-fluorouracil?. Semin Oncol. 1999;
26:589–605.

43.	 Hermanson D, Addo SN, Bajer AA, Marchant JS, Das SG,
Srinivasan B, Al-Mousa F, Michelangeli F, Thomas DD,
Lebien TW, Xing C. Dual mechanisms of sHA 14–1 in
inducing cell death through endoplasmic reticulum and
mitochondria. Mol Pharmacol. 2009; 76:667–678.

57.	 Kurashina K, Yamashita Y, Ueno T, Koinuma K, Ohashi J,
Horie H, Miyakura Y, Hamada T, Haruta H, Hatanaka H,
Soda M, Choi YL, Takada S, Yasuda Y, Nagai H, Mano H.
Chromosome copy number analysis in screening for prognosis-related genomic regions in colorectal carcinoma.
Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:1835–1840.

44.	 Harwood FG, Frazier MW, Krajewski S, Reed JC,
Houghton JA. Acute and delayed apoptosis induced by thymidine deprivation correlates with expression of p53 and
p53-regulated genes in colon carcinoma cells. Oncogene.
1996; 12:2057–2067.

58.	 Hsu TI, Wang MC, Chen SY, Yeh YM, Su WC, Chang WC,
Hung JJ. Sp1 expression regulates lung tumor progression.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:3973–3988.

45.	 Violette S, Poulain L, Dussaulx E, Pepin D, Faussat AM,
Chambaz J, Lacorte JM, Staedel C, Lesuffleur T. Resistance
of colon cancer cells to long-term 5-fluorouracil exposure is
correlated to the relative level of Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L) in addition to Bax and p53 status. Int J Cancer. 2002; 98:498–504.

59.	 Yang B, Cao L, Liu J, Xu Y, Milne G, Chan W, Heys SD,
McCaig CD, Pu J. Low expression of chloride channel
accessory 1 predicts a poor prognosis in colorectal cancer.
Cancer. 2015; 121:1570–1580.

46.	 Parmar N, Nichole Wetton, Shelley Alvarado, Shane
Kennedy. Profiling of human normal and cancer cell lines
using phenotype microarray analysis. The FASEB Journal.
2014; 28:613–615.

60.	 Braun MS, Richman SD, Quirke P, Daly C, Adlard JW,
Elliott F, Barrett JH, Selby P, Meade AM, Stephens RJ,
Parmar MK, Seymour MT. Predictive biomarkers of chemotherapy efficacy in colorectal cancer: results from the
UK MRC FOCUS trial. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:2690–2698.

47.	 Hondroulis E, Zhang R, Zhang C, Chen C, Ino K, Matsue T,
Li CZ. Immuno nanoparticles integrated electrical control
of targeted cancer cell development using whole cell bioelectronic device. Theranostics. 2014; 4:919–930.

61.	 Shao RG, Cao CX, Nieves-Neira W, Dimanche-Boitrel MT,
Solary E, Pommier Y. Activation of the Fas pathway
independently of Fas ligand during apoptosis induced by
camptothecin in p53 mutant human colon carcinoma cells.
Oncogene. 2001; 20:1852–1859.

48.	 Taherian A, Li X, Liu Y, Haas TA. Differences in integrin
expression and signaling within human breast cancer cells.
BMC Cancer. 2011; 11:293.
49.	 Lowe SW, Cepero E, Evan G. Intrinsic tumour suppression.
Nature. 2004; 432:307–315.

62.	 Upreti M, Lyle CS, Skaug B, Du L, Chambers TC.
Vinblastine-induced apoptosis is mediated by discrete
alterations in subcellular location, oligomeric structure, and
activation status of specific Bcl-2 family members. J Biol
Chem. 2006; 281:15941–15950.

50.	 Gajate C, An F, Mollinedo F. Differential cytostatic and
apoptotic effects of ecteinascidin-743 in cancer cells.
Transcription-dependent cell cycle arrest and transcriptionindependent JNK and mitochondrial mediated apoptosis.
J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:41580–41589.

63.	 Urra FA, Cordova-Delgado M, Pessoa-Mahana H,
Ramirez-Rodriguez O, Weiss-Lopez B, Ferreira J, ArayaMaturana R. Mitochondria: a promising target for anticancer alkaloids. Curr Top Med Chem. 2013; 13:2171–2183.

51.	 Deeb KK, Trump DL, Johnson CS. Vitamin D signalling
pathways in cancer: potential for anticancer therapeutics.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:684–700.

64.	 Yang L, Guo W, Zhang Q, Li H, Liu X, Yang Y, Zuo J,
Liu W. Crosstalk between Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT
in suppression of Bax conformational change by Grp75

52.	 Yang MH, Kim J, Khan IA, Walker LA, Khan SI.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug activated gene-1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23580

Oncotarget

under glucose deprivation conditions. J Mol Biol. 2011;
414:654–666.

suppress acquired chemotherapy resistance. Oncogene.
2014; 33:4451–4463.

65.	 Guo W, Yan L, Yang L, Liu X, E Q, Gao P, Ye X, Liu W,
Zuo J. Targeting GRP75 improves HSP90 inhibitor efficacy
by enhancing p53-mediated apoptosis in hepatocellular
­carcinoma. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e85766.

70.	 Tai-Nagara I, Matsuoka S, Ariga H, Suda T. Mortalin and
DJ-1 coordinately regulate hematopoietic stem cell function through the control of oxidative stress. Blood. 2014;
123:41–50.

66.	 Saar Ray M, Moskovich O, Iosefson O, Fishelson Z.
Mortalin/Grp75 Binds to Complement C9 and Plays a Role
in Resistance to Complement-Dependent Cytotoxicity.
J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:15014–15022.

71.	 Kanwar SS, Yu Y, Nautiyal J, Patel BB, Padhye S,
Sarkar  FH, Majumdar AP. Difluorinated-curcumin
(CDF): a novel curcumin analog is a potent inhibitor of colon cancer stem-like cells. Pharm Res. 2011;
28:827–838.

67.	 Ryu J, Kaul Z, Yoon AR, Liu Y, Yaguchi T, Na Y,
Ahn HM, Gao R, Choi IK, Yun CO, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R.
Identification and functional characterization of nuclear
mortalin in human carcinogenesis. J Biol Chem. 2014;
289:24832–24844.
68.	 Yoo JY, Ryu J, Gao R, Yaguchi T, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R,
Yun CO. Tumor suppression by apoptotic and anti-­
angiogenic effects of mortalin-targeting adeno-oncolytic
virus. J Gene Med. 2010; 12:586–595.
69.	 Vidal SJ, Rodriguez-Bravo V, Galsky M, Cordon-Cardo
C, Domingo-Domenech J. Targeting cancer stem cells to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23581

72.	 Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW,
Guba M, Bruns CJ, Heeschen C. Distinct populations of
cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic
activity in human pancreatic cancer. Cell Stem Cell. 2007;
1:313–323.
73.	 Witney TH, Kettunen MI, Hu DE, Gallagher FA,
Bohndiek SE, Napolitano R, Brindle KM. Detecting treatment response in a model of human breast adenocarcinoma
using hyperpolarised [1-13C]pyruvate and [1,4-13C2]fumarate. Br J Cancer. 2010; 103:1400–1406.

Oncotarget

