Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The E1B19K-deleted oncolytic adenovirus mutant Ad∆19K
sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to drug-induced DNA-damage
by down-regulating Claspin and Mre11
Constantia Pantelidou1, Gioia Cherubini1, Nick R. Lemoine1, Gunnel Halldén1
1

Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK

Correspondence to: Gunnel Halldén, e-mail: g.hallden@qmul.ac.uk
Keywords: checkpoint-inactivation, apoptosis, mitotic aberrations, pancreatic cancer, cytotoxic drugs
Received: October 28, 2015     Accepted: January 27, 2016     Published: February 10, 2016

ABSTRACT
Adenovirus-mediated sensitization of cancer cells to cytotoxic drugs depends on
simultaneous interactions of early viral genes with cell death and survival pathways.
It is unclear what cellular factors mediate these interactions in the presence of DNAdamaging drugs. We found that adenovirus prevents Chk1-mediated checkpoint
activation through inactivation of Mre11 and downregulation of the pChk1 adaptorprotein, Claspin, in cells with high levels of DNA-damage induced by the cytotoxic
drugs gemcitabine and irinotecan. The mechanisms for Claspin downregulation involve
decreased transcription and increased degradation, further attenuating pChk1mediated signalling. Live cell imaging demonstrated that low doses of gemcitabine
caused multiple mitotic aberrations including multipolar spindles, micro- and multinucleation and cytokinesis failure. A mutant virus with the anti-apoptotic E1B19Kgene deleted (Ad∆19K) further enhanced cell killing, Claspin downregulation, and
potentiated drug-induced DNA damage and mitotic aberrations. Decreased Claspin
expression and inactivation of Mre11 contributed to the enhanced cell killing in
combination with DNA-damaging drugs. These results reveal novel mechanisms that
are utilised by adenovirus to ensure completion of its life cycle in the presence of
cellular DNA damage. Taken together, our findings reveal novel cellular targets that
may be exploited when developing improved anti-cancer therapeutics.

cells by cellular defence mechanisms, the early viral E1B,
E3 and E4 gene-products act to inhibit apoptosis, immune
response activation and DNA-damage repair. These viral
functions have been exploited to engineer oncolytic
mutants that are unable to propagate in normal cells but
efficiently replicate in cancer cells with deregulated cell
survival and apoptosis pathways [1, 2]. Currently, the
clinically most efficacious replication-selective mutants
harbour a small deletion of the E1ACR2-domain (e.g.
dl922-947 and Ad∆24) to ablate pRb-binding that results
in potent anti-tumour efficacy in various solid tumours
with deregulated cell cycle and limited toxicity to normal
tissue (e.g. [5, 6]). To date, significant clinical responses
have only been reported in combination with cytotoxic
drugs and/or radiation therapy [1, 5, 7-9].
In preclinical models, efficacy of viruses has been
clearly demonstrated both when administered alone and in
combination with conventional therapeutics. For example,
potent synergistic cancer cell killing was demonstrated

INTRODUCTION
Replication-selective oncolytic adenoviral mutants
are promising as future cancer therapeutics because of
their efficient lysis of a broad range of adenocarcinoma
types, including drug-resistant cancers, with demonstrated
clinical safety [1, 2]. Most studies have employed mutants
based on adenovirus serotype 5 of species C (Ad5), which
has a small 36kb linear dsDNA genome enclosed by a
protein capsid [3]. Cellular entry occurs via attachment to
Coxsackie virus and adenovirus receptor (CAR), and αvβ3
and αvβ5 integrins for endosome-mediated internalisation
and capsid degradation, followed by transport of viral
DNA to the nucleus for expression of early viral genes. To
support viral DNA and protein synthesis, the early viral
E1A gene-products inactivate the G1/S checkpoint, mainly
through inhibition of pRb, leading to E2F-mediated
transcription of S-phase genes, which is essential for the
viral life cycle [4]. To avoid elimination of the infected
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15703

Oncotarget

with several oncolytic adenoviruses in combination
with DNA-damaging agents, including gemcitabine and
irinotecan [10-13]. However, the cellular mechanisms
for the increased tumour cell killing in combination with
drugs are mostly unknown, both in preclinical models and
in patients. Virus-induced cell lysis occurs through nonapoptotic, necrotic-like cell death mechanisms while in
combination with cytotoxic drugs, drug-induced apoptosis
is often enhanced [11, 14-16]. It has been established
that viral E1A expression is necessary for synergistic
enhancement of cytotoxic drug-induced cell death and that
E1A-binding to p300 and p400 is required, but not to pRb
[14, 17-19]. Furthermore, the E4orf3 and E4orf6 genes
are rapidly expressed after infection to prevent the cellular
DNA-damage response (DDR) mainly by inactivating the
Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) complex [20, 21]. E4orf3
sequesters the Mre11 subunit to nuclear tracks and
E4orf6 together with E1B55K targets Mre11, Nbs1 and
p53 for proteasomal degradation, resulting in checkpoint
abrogation [20, 22, 23]. These functions are likely to
contribute to the enhanced cell killing in combination with
DNA-damaging drugs.
To take advantage of the virus-mediated
enhancement of cancer cell killing in combination with
DNA-damaging drugs we developed mutants with the
anti-apoptotic E1B19K gene deleted in addition to
tumour-selective deletions including the E1ACR2-domain
(e.g. Ad∆∆) [11, 24, 25]. E1B19K is a functional Bcl-2
homologue that binds Bax and Bak, therefore inhibiting
mitochondrial pore formation and apoptosis in response
to both death receptor–induced signaling and intrinsically
induced apoptosis (p53-dependent and -independent)
[26-29]. Our approach to eliminate E1B19K rather than
the anti-apoptotic p53-binding E1B55K (e.g. Onyx-015,
H101), which greatly attenuates viral production, resulted
in mutants with retained high potency in models of
pancreatic and prostate cancers [11, 24]. Both Ad∆19K
and Ad∆∆ greatly enhanced cell killing induced by the
DNA-damaging agents gemcitabine and irinotecan [10,
11], which are currently being used for the treatment of
pancreatic cancers.
In the current study, we employed Ad∆19K (deleted
only in E1B19K) to identify virus-dependent mechanisms
that converge on drug-induced signalling pathways
to confer cell death of pancreatic cancer cells. We
demonstrate that AdΔ19K cooperates with gemcitabine
or irinotecan to deregulate cell-cycle mechanisms.
For the first time, we report that adenovirus attenuates
Chk1 activation even in the presence of cytotoxic drugs
and high levels of DNA damage. We demonstrate that
Ad∆19K inactivates the DNA repair factor Mre11 and
prevents drug-induced accumulation of Claspin, a protein
required for Chk1 activation. These findings identify
novel mechanisms for virus-mediated weakening of the
DDR, followed by increased mitotic aberrations and cell
death, as causes of the virus-mediated drug-sensitization.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We conclude that Claspin and associated regulatory factors
including Mre11 and Chk1 could be therapeutically
targeted by E1B19K-deleted oncolytic viruses and/or
novel inhibitors to better manage treatment-insensitive
pancreatic cancers in particular.

RESULTS
The adenoviral mutant Ad∆19K synergises
with gemcitabine and irinotecan by enhancing
apoptotic death in pancreatic cancer cells
We previously demonstrated that E1B19K-deleted
mutants cause potent synergistic cell death in combination
with several cytotoxic drugs including gemcitabine [10,
11]. To investigate the mechanisms of action in the current
study we first assessed cell death over time in response
to low doses of Ad5 and AdΔ19K in combination with
gemcitabine or irinotecan in the pancreatic cancer cells
PT45 and MIAPaCa2. In PT45, the combination of
AdΔ19K with gemcitabine induced significantly more
cell death than each agent alone at 72 through 96h posttreatment (Figure 1a). Similar results were obtained with
irinotecan. Cell death with gemcitabine and Ad∆19K
was synergistic and higher than the combination with
Ad5 at 48 - 96h (Figure 1a and Table S1). In MIAPaCa-2
cells, cell killing was also increased with Ad∆19K in
combination with either drug (Figure 1b and Table S1).
In accordance, significantly higher sensitization ratios
were observed when suboptimal doses of AdΔ19K were
combined with gemcitabine or irinotecan compared to Ad5
in cell viability assays, in both PT45 and MIAPaCa2 cells
(Figure 1c). We confirmed that the enhanced cell killing
occurred through caspase-3-dependent apoptosis that was
significantly greater in Ad∆19K-infected gemcitabinetreated cells compared to all other treatments (Figure 1d).
Ad5 in combination with gemcitabine also induced
caspase-3–dependent apoptosis that was significantly
higher than the corresponding single agent-treatments.
Interestingly, the majority of apoptosis occurred in cells
with a DNA content of 4N and >4N, which mainly
represent cells in G2/M phases (Figure 1d). There were
significantly more apoptotic cells with 4N DNA content
when AdΔ19K was combined with gemcitabine compared
to the drug treatment alone. In contrast to AdΔ19K,
which caused apoptosis mostly in cells with >4N DNA
content, gemcitabine caused apoptosis equally in cells
occupying G1, S and G2/M phases and the presence of
AdΔ19K promoted the apoptosis of cells in G2/M phases
(Figure 1d). Similar trends were observed in Ad5-infected
cells.
These findings demonstrate that the synergistic
cell killing in Ad∆19K-infected drug-treated cells occurs
through more potent caspase-3-dependent apoptosis
than in Ad5-infected cells. Furthermore, the enhanced
cell killing is independent of viral DNA replication,
15704

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The adenoviral mutant Ad∆19K synergises more potently than Ad5 with gemcitabine and irinotecan by
enhancing apoptotic death in pancreatic cancer cells. a and b. Cell death assays using Trypan blue dye incorporation in PT45
(a) and MIAPaCa-2 (b) cells. Error bars represent S.E.M. of A. 3-7 and B. 3-4 independent experiments. c. Sensitization ratios (EC50 of
virus / EC50 of virus and drug) derived from cell viability assays in PT45 (left panel) and MIAPaCa-2 (right panel) cells. Red dotted lines
indicate a ratio of 1 (= no sensitization). Drug cytotoxicity (%) ± S.E.M. was: 40.3±5.8% and 30.7±10.7% with 2nM (PT45) and 10nM
(MIAPaCa-2) gemcitabine (Gem), respectively, and 28.0±2.1% and 34.3±8.6% with 3μM (MIAPaCa-2) and 5μM (PT45) irinotecan (Iri),
respectively. Error bars represent S.E.M. of 4 independent experiments. d. Percentage of apoptotic cells (total apoptosis, left panel) as
determined by cleaved caspase-3 flow-cytometric assays in PT45 cells. Apoptosis in each cell-cycle phase/DNA content (right panel) is
expressed as % of total apoptosis in each condition. Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments. a-d. *.p<0.05, **.p<0.01,
***.p<0.001 (one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's multiple comparison test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15705

Oncotarget

demonstrated by prevention of both viral DNA
amplification and assembly of viral replication centres
(Figure S1a-b). In contrast, more adenovirus-infected
E1A-positive cells were detected in gemcitabine-treated
PT45 and MIAPaCa-2 cells, an increase that occurred
earlier in Ad∆19K-infected cells and was paralleled by
higher E1A mRNA levels (Figure S1c-d).

and S2e). Spindle multipolarity was evident following
gemcitabine treatment and resulted in multipolar
divisions (42.9±10.6%), with more multipolar anaphases
in the presence of AdΔ19K (63.4±6.8%) (Figure 2e).
Moreover, gemcitabine treatment induced cytokinesis
failure (15.3±8.8%), which was promoted by AdΔ19K
(31.1±11.4%) (Figure 2f). As a consequence of the
aberrant mitotic progression, a high degree of micro- and
multi-nucleated daughter cells was observed (Figure 2g)
that was likely a result of chromosome alignment and
segregation errors. Addition of AdΔ19K significantly
decreased the frequency of mononucleated cells and
consequently increased occurrence of multinucleation in
combination-treated cells compared to gemcitabine alone
(Figure 2g).
We conclude that following the S-phase arrest,
gemcitabine-treated cells went through a prolonged
aberrant mitosis and that AdΔ19K infection did not
affect the initial drug-induced S-phase arrest nor mitotic
duration but promoted mitotic entry, spindle multipolarity,
cytokinesis failure and multinucleation. Moreover,
Ad∆19K prevented gemcitabine-treated PT45 cells from
accumulating in G1 with more cells remaining in the S and
G2/M phases, suggesting that combination-treated cells
were non-viable and died before entering G1.

Adenovirus increases the mitotic index and
aberrant mitosis in gemcitabine-treated cells
Based on our findings that more apoptotic cells
accumulated in G2/M phases we hypothesised that
cell cycle progression was required after gemcitabineinduced S-phase arrest for virus to enhance cell killing.
To monitor cell cycle progression following treatment,
we synchronised cells using thymidine block and
performed cell cycle and mitotic index analysis over
time, with E1A as a marker of infected cells. As expected,
gemcitabine induced S-phase arrest that peaked at 36h;
this was followed by cell progression to G2 and a gradual
G1 arrest (Figure 2a, statistics in Table S2). AdΔ19K
infection did not affect drug-induced S-phase arrest,
however, the gradual gemcitabine-dependent G1 arrest
(48-72h) was prevented by virus and cells accumulated
in S and G2 phases (Figure 2a). In non-synchronised
PT45 and MIAPaCa-2 cells gemcitabine-induced S-phase
arrest was also unaffected by adenovirus infection and
cells accumulated in S and G2/M phases (Figure S2a-b).
Similarly, AdΔ19K did not interfere with irinotecaninduced S/G2 arrest (Figure S2c). Interestingly, mitotic
index analysis in synchronised PT45 cells revealed that
adenovirus infection significantly increased the mitotic
index of gemcitabine-treated cells following the druginduced S-phase block (Figure 2b).
The observation that virus-infection of gemcitabinetreated cells resulted in a higher proportion of cells
accumulating in the G2/M phase, prompted us to
investigate whether these cells displayed normal or
aberrant mitosis. We found that gemcitabine-treated cells
exhibited significantly increased spindle multipolarity
in mitosis, as determined by immunofluorescence
microscopy of the spindle pole marker Aurora A (Figure
2c). Further increases were seen in the presence of either
Ad5 or AdΔ19K (Figure 2c), which can be attributed to
E1A-induced centrosome amplification [30]. Multipolar
spindles were also abundant in irinotecan treated cells
(Figure S2d). Since there were no major differences
in effect on mitosis and multipolarity between Ad5 or
Ad∆19K in combination with gemcitabine we pursued
further in depth studies using the Ad∆19K mutant.
Analysis of mitotic progression was performed using longterm time-lapse microscopy of synchronised histone H2B
mCherry-expressing PT45 cells. Gemcitabine treatment
resulted in prolonged mitosis (2.9±1.5h), which was
unaffected by AdΔ19K infection (3.2±1.1h) (Figure 2d
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AdΔ19K and DNA-damaging drugs cooperate to
increase cellular DNA damage
Despite the accumulation of mitotic aberrations as
a consequence of viral infection of gemcitabine-treated
cells, the total number of cells in mitosis (<12%) could
not account for the significantly increased synergistic
cell killing. Both gemcitabine and irinotecan cause
DNA damage [31-33] and adenovirus has been reported
to induce host cell DNA strand breaks [34, 35]. To
investigate whether DNA-damage and repair mechanisms
also contributed to the synergistic cell killing, we explored
whether Ad∆19K and/or Ad5 enhanced drug-induced
DNA-damage. The degree of DNA strand breaks was
determined by terminal dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL)
assays and signals were quantified only in cells with a
DNA content of 2N-4N, in order to exclude cells with
fragmented DNA (apoptotic DNA fragmentation). The
frequency of TUNEL-positive cells was significantly
elevated in cells treated simultaneously with AdΔ19K
and gemcitabine, compared to either agent alone or the
combination of Ad5 with gemcitabine (Figure 3a).
To verify the presence of DNA damage, we
assessed the expression levels of the DNA damage marker
H2AX phosphorylation over time by immunoblotting
followed by densitometric quantification. In PT45 cells
the combination of AdΔ19K with either gemcitabine or
irinotecan caused significantly higher levels of H2AX
phosphorylation at 48 and 72h post-treatment, compared
to the corresponding single agent treatments (Figure 3c).
15706

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Adenovirus increases the mitotic index in gemcitabine-treated cells and enhances aberrant passage through
mitosis. a and b. Cell cycle and mitotic index analysis in synchronised PT45 cells, stained with propidium iodide (for DNA-content

analysis), a phospho-histone H3 antibody (for mitotic index analysis) and an E1A antibody (for identification of infected cells) and analysed
by flow-cytometry. Dead cells, as identified from their incorporation of FVD, and cells in subG1 phase were excluded from the analysis.
a. Cell-cycle distribution of non-infected or infected cells, shown as % cells in G1-phase, S-phase, G2-phase and mitosis (M). Only
S-phase statistical significance is shown. b. Mitotic Index (% cells in mitosis). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 4 independent experiments.
c. Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis of Aurora-A (green) and α-Tubulin (red) with nuclear DAPI staining (DNA, blue) in PT45
cells fixed at 48hpi using methanol. Left panel: Example images of bipolar and multipolar spindles in cells treated with gemcitabine. Scale
bar: 5μm. Right panel: Quantification of spindle multipolarity, expressed as frequency (%), ≥ 150 mitotic cells/condition were counted.
Error bars represent S.E.M of two independent experiments. d-g. Time-lapse microscopy 24-96hpi in PT45 cells stably expressing histone
H2B-mCherry. Error bars represent S.E.M of 3 independent experiments. Numbers on images indicate time (in minutes). Scale bar: 20μm.
d. Scatter plot showing the duration of mitosis, defined from the time of nuclear envelope breakdown until the time of sister chromatid
separation. At least 100 mitotic cells were analysed/condition/study in 3 independent studies.

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15707

Oncotarget

Figure 2 (Continued  ): e. Frequency (%) (top panel) and example images (bottom panels) of bipolar and multipolar anaphases. At

least 100 mitotic cells were analysed/condition/study in 3 independent studies. f. Frequency (%) (top panel) and example images (bottom
panels) of cytokinesis failure. At least 100 mitotic cells were analysed/condition/study in 3 independent studies. g. Frequency (%) (top
panel) and example images (bottom panels) of mononucleated, micronucleated and multinucleated daughter cells. At least 150 daughter
cells were analysed/condition/study in 3 independent studies. a-g. *.p<0.05 **.p<0.01, ***.p<0.001 (one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s
multiple comparison test)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15708

Oncotarget

Figure 3: AdΔ19K and DNA-damaging drugs cooperate to induce DNA damage. a. TUNEL flow-cytometric assay for DNA
strand breaks 72hpi in PT45 cells. Error bars represent S.E.M. of 2-4 independent experiments. Only cells with a DNA content of 2-4N
were analysed. b. Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis of E1A (green) and γH2AX (red) with nuclear DAPI staining (DNA, blue)
in PT45 cells fixed at 48hpi using paraformaldehyde. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. Scale bar: 20μm
c. Immunoblot analysis of phospho-histone H2AX (Ser139) (pH2AX) in PT45 cells, treated with 300ppc viruses ± 5nM gemcitabine
(Gem) (left panel) and 5μM irinotecan (Iri) (right panel). Upper panels: Representative immunoblots of pH2AX (15kDa) with α-Tubulin
(55kDa) or Actin (42kDa) as loading controls. Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Vertical lines on the immunoblot indicate points
of cropping. Bottom panels: pH2AX protein levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to the loading control and
expressed as fold-change relative to mock 24h (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments. a-c.*.p<0.05 **.p<0.01,
***.p<0.001 (one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's multiple comparison test).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15709

Oncotarget

At 72h, the combination of Ad5 with irinotecan, but
not gemcitabine, also induced more phospho-H2AX
expression than the single agent treatments (Figure 3c).
The increased levels of phospho-H2AX in PT45 cells
treated with either gemcitabine or AdΔ19K were observed
as distinct foci in cells expressing the viral E1A protein
determined by immunofluorescence microscopy (48h;
Figure 3b). Similar results were obtained in MIAPaCa-2
cells 48h post-treatment (Figure S3). Therefore, the
E1B19K deletion confers earlier and more potent
induction of DNA damage in combination with DNAdamaging drugs compared to the intact Ad5 virus.

were also noted after 48-72h with Ad5 in combination
with gemcitabine. In MIAPaCa-2 cells, significant
reductions in Mre11 expression compared to drug alone
were detected 24-48h post-treatment with AdΔ19K and
either gemcitabine or irinotecan, and 24h post-treatment
with Ad5 in combination with irinotecan (Figure S4b).
To conclude, AdΔ19K mislocalised and degraded Mre11
even in the presence of DNA-damaging drugs, inactivating
the MRN complex and consequently attenuating Chk1
activation and the DNA damage and repair signalling.

AdΔ19K inhibits drug-induced accumulation
of Claspin through increased degradation and
decreased synthesis

AdΔ19K attenuates the DNA damage response
induced by gemcitabine and irinotecan

The findings that AdΔ19K promoted drug-induced
DNA-damage and attenuated DDR signalling, suggested
that the diminished activation of Chk1 played a role in
the enhanced cell killing. In response to replication
stress or DNA damage, Chk1 is activated by ATRmediated phosphorylation through recruitment of the
adaptor protein Claspin [36, 37]. We found that both
gemcitabine and irinotecan induced the accumulation
of Claspin at 24-48h post-treatment in PT45 (Figure 5a)
and MIAPaCa2 cells (Figure S5a). Interestingly, in PT45
cells both gemcitabine- and irinotecan-induced Claspin
accumulation was significantly reduced in the presence of
AdΔ19K, but not with Ad5 (Figure 5a). In MIAPaCa-2
cells similar effects were observed in the presence of
AdΔ19K (Figure S5a).
For cells to efficiently recover from the ATR/Chk1
checkpoint response and enter mitosis, Claspin needs to be
degraded by a mechanism involving the ubiquitin ligase
complex β-TrCP-SCF, Aurora-A and Plk-1 [38, 39]. Since
we had observed that Ad∆19K-infection of gemcitabinetreated cells decreased pChk1 levels, increased the mitotic
index and reduced drug-induced Claspin accumulation,
we asked whether virus promoted Claspin degradation. To
address this question we examined Plk1 phosphorylation,
a major protein responsible for phosphorylating and
targeting Claspin for ubiquitination and subsequent
proteasomal degradation [39]. In PT45 cells, AdΔ19K,
but not Ad5, significantly induced Plk1 phosphorylation
48h post-infection (Figure 5b). No significant changes
in pPlk1 were observed in cells treated with gemcitabine
alone. In Ad∆19K-infected cells Plk1 phosphorylation was
still maintained, albeit to a lesser extent, in the presence
of gemcitabine and was significantly higher compared to
gemcitabine alone or in combination with Ad5 (Figure
5b). Similar results were obtained with irinotecan (Figure
5b). Analogous to PT45 cells, the presence of AdΔ19K
in gemcitabine-treated MIAPaCa-2 cells significantly
induced the levels of pPlk1 (Figure S5b). Hence AdΔ19Kinduced phosphorylation of Plk1 persisted, albeit to a lesser
extent, in the presence of chemotherapeutic drugs. To
further investigate whether increased pPlk1 led to Claspin

The presence of high levels of DNA damage and
the abnormal mitosis led us to investigate drug- and
virus-mediated effects on the DNA damage response by
determining changes in activation of the checkpoint kinase
Chk1. In PT45 cells, gemcitabine and irinotecan induced
Chk1 phosphorylation that subsided from 24 to 72h posttreatment (Figure 4a), while in MIAPaCa-2 cells druginduced Chk1 phosphorylation peaked at 48h (Figure S4a).
As expected, no phosphorylation of Chk1 was observed
upon infection with either Ad5 or Ad∆19K. Drug-induced
Chk1 phosphorylation was overall attenuated in the
presence of virus in both cell lines (Figure 4a and S4a).
Significantly decreased Chk1 phosphorylation in PT45
cells was observed with AdΔ19K 24h after treatment
with either drug, while Ad5 significantly attenuated only
gemcitabine-induced Chk1 phosphorylation at 24h (Figure
4a). In MIAPaCa-2 cells, AdΔ19K-mediated attenuation
of drug-induced Chk1 phosphorylation was noted 48h
after treatment (Figure S4a).
Immediately after adenovirus infection, the
DDR is prevented by viral early proteins that act by
mislocalising and degrading the MRN complex [23]. To
determine whether Ad∆19K also reduced drug-induced
Chk1 phosphorylation through the same mechanisms,
we examined Mre11 localisation and expression in
combination-treated cells. In untreated and gemcitabinetreated cells, diffuse pan-nuclear localisation of Mre11
was observed (Figure 4b). In striking contrast, AdΔ19Kinfected cells mislocalised Mre11 in track-like structures
and reduced Mre11 expression, regardless of the presence
of gemcitabine (right panels, E1A+/Mre11+ cells; Figure
4b). Immunoblotting verified that Mre11 expression
was significantly reduced (Figure 4c), consistent with
adenovirus-dependent degradation of Mre11. Importantly,
the downregulation of Mre11 was still evident in the
presence of either gemcitabine or irinotecan (Figure
4c). In PT45 cells infected with AdΔ19K, Mre11 protein
levels were significantly lower 24-72h after gemcitabinetreatment and 48-72h after irinotecan-treatment, compared
to drug alone (Figure 4c). Significantly lower Mre11 levels
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15710

Oncotarget

Figure 4: AdΔ19K attenuates the DNA damage response induced by gemcitabine and irinotecan. a. Immunoblot analysis of

phospho-Chk1 (Ser296) (pChk1) and total Chk1 in PT45 cells, treated with 300ppc viruses ± 5nM gemcitabine (Gem) (left panel) and 5μM
irinotecan (Iri) (right panel). Upper panels: Representative immunoblots of phospho- and total Chk1 (56kDa) with Vinculin (130kDa)
as loading control. Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Vertical lines on the immunoblot indicate points of cropping. Bottom
panels: pChk1 protein levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to total Chk1 and the loading control and expressed
as fold-change relative to mock 24h (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments. b. Immunofluorescence microscopy
analysis of E1A (green) and Mre11 (red) with nuclear DAPI staining (DNA, blue) in PT45 cells, fixed at 24hpi using paraformaldehyde.
Representative images of 2 independent experiments are shown. Scale bar: 20μm.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15711

Oncotarget

Figure 4 (Continued  ): c. Immunoblot analysis of Mre11 in PT45 cells, treated with 300ppc viruses ± 5nM gemcitabine (Gem) (left

panel) and 5μM irinotecan (Iri) (right panel). Upper panels: Representative immunoblots of Mre11 (81kDa) with α-Tubulin (55kDa) as
loading control. Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Vertical lines on the immunoblot indicate points of cropping. Bottom panels:
Mre11 protein levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to the loading control and expressed as fold-change relative to
mock 24h (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of at least 3 independent experiments. a-c. *.p<0.05 **.p<0.01, ***.p<0.001 (one-way ANOVA
with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).

degradation in the presence of Ad∆19K we determined
Claspin half-life by cycloheximide-chase assays. The halflife of Claspin was significantly reduced in gemcitabinetreated cells in the presence of AdΔ19K compared to
untreated cells (Figure 5c). However, the shorter half-life
was unlikely to cause the significant downregulation of
Claspin levels observed in combination-treated cells and
we explored whether Claspin synthesis was also decreased.
Claspin mRNA levels were increased in the presence of
gemcitabine (Figure 5d), likely a consequence of druginduced S-phase arrest. Remarkably, AdΔ19K- but not
Ad5-infection of gemcitabine-treated cells significantly
decreased Claspin mRNA levels to almost basal after
48h (Figure 5d). In addition, when protein degradation
was prevented by the proteasomal inhibitor MG-132
newly-synthesised Claspin accumulated in cells treated
with gemcitabine alone but not in cells treated with a
combination of gemcitabine and AdΔ19K (Figure 5e).
This confirmed that gemcitabine-induced upregulation of
Claspin synthesis was inhibited in the presence of AdΔ19K.

presence of chemotherapeutic drugs was essential for
the enhanced cell killing in response to the combination
treatment, we silenced both Claspin and Mre11.
Knockdown efficiency in PT45 cells transfected with
Claspin or Mre11 siRNA ranged from 46-58% for Claspin
and from 72-78% for Mre11, at 72-120h post-transfection
(Figure 6a-6b). Silencing of either Claspin or Mre11
increased the sensitization ratios in cells treated with
gemcitabine or irinotecan and AdΔ19K, as compared to
non-targeting siRNA (Figure 6a-6b; lower panels). We
verified that cell death was significantly increased in cells
with knockdown of either Claspin or Mre11 in response
to the AdΔ19K and gemcitabine combination at 48 and
72h post-treatment, compared to non-targeted knockdown
(Figure 6c). In addition, AdΔ19K infection alone but not
gemcitabine treatment alone resulted in greater cell death
72h after infection in the knockdown cells (Figure 6c).
Interestingly, AdΔ19K DNA replication was increased
in cells transfected with Mre11 but not Claspin siRNA
(Figure 6d). However, in the presence of gemcitabine,
viral replication was greatly attenuated in cells treated
with any of the siRNAs (Figure 6d). These data are in
agreement with our sensitization studies demonstrating
that the increased cell death was not due to enhanced viral
replication (Figure 1a-1b, Figure S1a-b).
Next we investigated whether Claspin and Mre11
silencing in combination-treated cells was accompanied

Mre11 and Claspin knockdown enhance cell
death and DNA damage induced by AdΔ19K and
DNA-damaging drugs
In order to determine whether the AdΔ19Kdependent downregulation of Claspin and Mre11 in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15712

Oncotarget

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15713

Oncotarget

Figure 5: AdΔ19K inhibits drug-induced accumulation of Claspin through increased degradation and decreased
synthesis. a. Immunoblot analysis of Claspin in PT45 cells, treated with 300ppc viruses ± 5nM gemcitabine (Gem) (left panel) or 5μM
irinotecan (Iri) (right panel). Upper panels: Representative immunoblots of Claspin (250kDa) with Vinculin (130kDa) as loading control.
Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Bottom panels: Claspin protein levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised
to the loading control and expressed as fold-change relative to mock 24h (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of at least 3 independent
experiments. b. Immunoblot analysis of phospho-Plk1 (T210) (pPlk1) and total Plk1 in PT45 cells, treated with 300ppc viruses ± 5nM
gemcitabine (Gem) (left panel) or 5μM irinotecan (Iri) (right panel). Upper panels: Representative immunoblots of phospho- and total
Plk1 (68kDa) with Vinculin (130kDa) as loading control. Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Bottom panels: pPlk1 protein levels
were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to total Plk1 and the loading control and expressed as fold-change relative to mock
24h (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 2 independent experiments. c. PT45 cells were treated with 300ppc of Ad5 or AdΔ19K ± 10nM
gemcitabine (Gem). At 48hpi, 3μM of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide was added to study protein degradation. Cells were
harvested at 0, 2, 4 and 6 hours post-cycloheximide treatment and prepared for immunoblot analysis of Claspin expression. Claspin protein
levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to the loading control and expressed relative to the 0h time-point of each
treatment (set to 1). The half-life was derived from plotting claspin protein levels against time post-cycloheximide treatment (min) and
determining the time at which protein level was at 0.5. Error bars represent S.E.M. of 5 independent experiments. d. Claspin mRNA levels
measured by qPCR in PT45 cells 24 and 48hpi, normalised to GAPDH internal control and expressed as fold-change relative to mock 24h
(=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments. a-d. *.p<0.05, **.p<0.01, ***.p<0.001 (one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's
multiple comparison test). e. PT45 cells were treated with 300ppc of AdΔ19K ± addition of 10nM gemcitabine (Gem). At 48hpi, 10μM of
the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 was added to study protein synthesis. Cells were harvested at 0, 2 and 6 hours post-MG-132 treatment
and prepared for immunoblot analysis of Claspin expression. Left panel: Representative immunoblot of Claspin (250kDa) with Vinculin
(130kDa) as a loading control. Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Right panel: Mean values of newly synthesised Claspin protein
levels at 0, 2 and 6h post-MG-132 treatment. Claspin protein levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to the loading
control and expressed relative to the 0h time-point of each treatment (set to 1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments.
**.p<0.01 (two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's multiple comparison test).

by increased DNA damage and/or effects on cell-cycle
distribution. Cell cycle and mitotic index analysis
demonstrated that knocking-down Mre11 had no
effect on mitotic index (Figure 6e), while silencing of
Claspin significantly increased the mitotic index at 48h,
specifically in cells treated with gemcitabine and AdΔ19K
(Figure 6e). Importantly, Claspin and Mre11 knockdown
resulted in significantly higher phospho-H2AX levels
compared to non-targeted knockdown at both 48h and
72h post-treatment with the gemcitabine and AdΔ19K
combination (Figure 6f and S6). These results show that
downregulation of either Mre11 or Claspin promote both
DNA damage and cell death in the presence of concurrent
treatment with gemcitabine and Ad∆19K. Taken together,
these findings present a mechanism whereby adenovirus
cooperates with DNA-damaging drugs to enhance cell
killing while still promoting passage through the cell
cycle, to complete the viral life cycle despite the high
levels of unrepaired cellular DNA damage (Figure 7).

been evaluated in conjunction with several cytotoxic drugs
acting through different mechanisms, including irinotecan
that inhibits topoisomerase I [42, 43]. However, only
limited improvements in survival, similar to gemcitabine
alone, were reported for all combinations and the expected
synergistic effects on tumour regression were not observed
[40, 42]. Novel therapies with different mechanisms of
action to overcome treatment-resistance are therefore
urgently needed. Accumulating evidence has shown that
oncolytic viruses may fulfil this role by acting on drugdependent cellular mechanisms to re-sensitize resistant
cancers. For example, oncolytic adenoviral mutants
enhanced overall responses to gemcitabine in clinical
trials for pancreatic cancer [7] and caused regression
of pancreatic tumours in xenograft models [10, 44, 45].
We previously reported that our engineered replicationselective mutants, Ad∆∆ and Ad∆19K potently and
specifically lysed cancer cells with deregulated G1/S cell
cycle control and also increased cell killing in combination
with DNA-damaging drugs in preclinical models of
drug-insensitive pancreatic and prostate cancers [10, 11,
24]. Ad∆∆- or Ad∆19K-infection in conjunction with
gemcitabine, irinotecan, cisplatin, or docetaxel resulted in
synergistic cell killing in cancer cell lines and prolonged
time to tumour progression in vivo. The findings supported
our hypothesis that deletion of the viral anti-apoptotic
gene E1B19K was the cause of the significantly enhanced
cell killing, suggesting that Ad∆19K could serve as a tool
to identify cellular factors involved in drug-resistance or
-sensitization for future therapeutic targeting.
In the current study, we demonstrate that Ad∆19K
increases drug-induced DNA-damage and apoptotic death
to a greater extent than Ad5, and that virus-mediated

DISCUSSION
Pancreatic adenocarcinomas are always aggressive
with high mortality rates and no effective treatments
available for late stage disease. This malignancy has the
lowest 5-year survival-rates globally (<5%). To date, no
therapy has been reported to significantly prolong survival,
including administration of nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane),
cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), or gemcitabine [40].
Until now, the cytidine analogue gemcitabine has been
the treatment of choice although drug-resistance develops
rapidly. Gemcitabine is incorporated into DNA, blocking
synthesis and causing DNA-strand breaks [31, 41] and has
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15714

Oncotarget

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15715

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Mre11 and Claspin knockdown enhance cell death and DNA damage in response to AdΔ19K and DNAdamaging drugs. PT45 cells were transfected with siRNA against Claspin (siClas), Mre11 (siMre) or non-targeting siRNA (siNT),

re-seeded and treated for use in cell viability assays, immunoblotting, Trypan Blue cell death assays, mitotic index analysis and viral
genome amplification assays. Untreated cells were harvested at 48, 72, 96 and 120h post-transfection for immunoblot analysis to monitor
Claspin and Mre11 knockdown. a and b. Upper panels: Representative immunoblots of a. Claspin (250kDa) and b. Mre11 (81kDa)
with Vinculin (130kDa) as loading control. Numbers indicate MW size marker (kDa). Protein levels were quantified by densitometric
analysis, normalised to the loading control and expressed as % protein knockdown relative to siNT. Error bars represent S.E.M. of at least
4 independent experiments. Bottom panels: Sensitization ratios (EC50 of virus / EC50 of virus and drug) derived from cell viability assays
72hpi (corresponding to 120h post-transfection). Error bars represent S.E.M. of at least 4 independent experiments. Drug cytotoxicity
(%) ± S.E.M. was: 12.9±4.4% and 27.2±9% with 2nM and 5nM gemcitabine (Gem), respectively, and 18.3±8% with 5μM irinotecan (Iri)
in siNT-transfected cells, 8.6±4.5% and 25.2±5.7% with 2nM and 5nM gemcitabine, respectively, and 25±6.5% with 5μM irinotecan in
siClas-transfected cells, 29±6.5% and 47.9±1.1% with 2nM and 5nM gemcitabine, respectively, and 42.1±6.1% with 5μM irinotecan in
siMre-transfected cells. c. Cell death assays using Trypan blue dye incorporation at 48 and 72hpi (corresponding to 96 and 120h posttransfection, respectively). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments. d. Viral genome amplification (Ad-E2A levels) at
48hpi measured by qPCR. Viral DNA was normalized to input DNA (4h) and cellular GAPDH and expressed as fold-change relative to
AdΔ19K siNT (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 4 independent experiments. e. Mitotic index analysis at 48hpi in unsynchronised PT45
cells stained with propidium iodide, a phospho-histone H3 antibody and an E1A antibody (for identification of infected cells). Dead cells,
as identified from their incorporation of FVD, were excluded from the analysis. Error bars represent S.E.M. of 2 independent experiments.
f. Immunoblot analysis of phospho-histone H2AX (Ser139) (pH2AX) 48hpi in siRNA-transfected PT45 cells treated with 300ppc viruses
± 5nM gemcitabine (Gem). Upper panel: Representative immunoblot of pH2AX (15kDa) with Actin (42kDa) as loading control. Numbers
indicate MW size marker (kDa). Bottom panel: pH2AX protein levels were quantified by densitometric analysis, normalised to the loading
control and expressed as fold-change relative to mock 24h (=1). Error bars represent S.E.M. of 3 independent experiments. a-f. *.p<0.05,
**.p<0.01, ***.p<0.001 (one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's multiple comparison test).

checkpoint abrogation plays a key role. We previously
demonstrated that suboptimal doses of gemcitabine
stimulates viral uptake in pancreatic cancer cell lines [44],
which was observed as increased number of E1A-positive
cells in the presence of drug in this study. The increased
number of virus-infected cells and the early E1A-gene
expression in Ad∆19K-infected cells contributes to
the enhanced cell killing while viral replication is not
required. Increased E1A expression has previously been
observed in the absence of the E1B19K gene, resulting in
earlier lysis and enhanced viral spread in addition to E1Ainduced apoptosis [26, 46-48]. Taken together, our results
suggest that E1A also augments drug-induced apoptosis
in response to gemcitabine and irinotecan even when the
drugs initially attenuate viral replication.
PT45 and MIAPaCa-2 cells have the genetic
alterations that characterise pancreatic cancer including
activating KRAS mutations, CDKN2A/p16 deletion, and
inactivating TP53 mutations that result in deregulated cell
cycle control [49]. Therefore, only limited increases in
the S-phase population were noted after virus-infection
and no enhancement of drug-induced S-phase arrest
was observed, which has been proposed as a potential
mechanism of synergy between gemcitabine and
oncolytic adenoviruses [50-52]. In contrast, we found
that simultaneous infection of gemcitabine-treated cells
with either AdΔ19K or Ad5 increased the number of
cells in mitosis through G2/M checkpoint abrogation.
The combination-treated mitotic cells displayed a high
degree of aberrations as a consequence of the extensive
unrepaired DNA-damage caused by the drug-induced
interruption of DNA synthesis and subsequent strand
breaks. Ad5 is a potent inhibitor of the MRN-complex
that activates the DNA damage repair response [22,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23, 53, 54]. The inhibition is the result of E1A-induced
expression of E4orf3, E4orf6 and E1B55K genes early
during infection, targeting Mre11, Nbs1, Rad50 and
p53 for sequestration and degradation. In this study, we
found that the higher levels of unrepaired DNA damage
was caused by adenovirus inactivation of the MRNmediated repair functions through mislocalization and
degradation of Mre11, also in the presence of drugs that
induce significant DNA-damage. In agreement with viral
hindrance of the Mre11/MRN function, both Ad∆19K- and
Ad5-infection decreased the potent activation of pChk1
in drug-treated cells suggesting checkpoint abrogation.
Carson et al. demonstrated that mislocalisation of Mre11
by the viral E4orf3 protein was sufficient to prevent ATR
signalling, but not concatemirization of viral DNA, which
was prevented by E4orf6/E1B55K-mediated targeting of
Mre11 for degradation [54]. Furthermore, the E4orf3dependent mislocalisation of Mre11 reduced ATR/Chk1
signalling in response to the DNA-replication inhibitor
hydroxyurea [54]. We conclude that the AdΔ19K-mediated
mislocalisation and degradation of Mre11 in the presence
of gemcitabine or irinotecan contribute to the attenuation
of Chk1 phosphorylation, which subsequently would
impair phosphorylation and recruitment of the homologous
recombination factor Rad51 to DNA repair foci at stalled
replication forks [55] (Figure 7). In addition, Mre11 is
also critical for homologous recombination at stalled or
collapsed replication forks [56], and its downregulation by
Ad∆19K would further attenuate DNA repair resulting in
increased accumulation of DNA damage.
Further evidence that the checkpoint was abrogated
and cells with significant levels of unrepaired DNAdamage progressed through the cell cycle in combinationtreated cells, is provided by our discovery that Ad∆19K
15716

Oncotarget

prevents drug-induced accumulation of the pChk1/ATR
adaptor protein Claspin. Ad∆19K-mediated inhibition
of Claspin synthesis and, to a lesser extent, increased
degradation, enables checkpoint recovery and mitotic
entry even in the presence of high levels of DNA
damage. Interestingly, neither Ad5 nor Ad∆19K affected
basal Claspin levels while both viruses induced pPlk1.
However, only Ad∆19K caused significant inhibition of
Claspin expression and increased pPlk1 activation in the
presence of gemcitabine or irinotecan. It is possible that
the higher levels of early viral genes in Ad∆19K-infected

cells result in potent direct E1A- or E1B-binding to
transcription-factors that regulate Claspin expression, or
that viral E3- or E4-genes interfere with other regulatory
elements of Claspin turnover. Both NF-κB and E2F1 were
previously reported to regulate Claspin synthesis [57, 58]
and interestingly, viral E1A can repress NF-κB-dependent
transcription through suppression of IKK activity [59, 60].
We propose that the elevated E1A expression in Ad∆19Kinfected cells, followed by increased expression of
additional early viral proteins including the E4 products,
more potently prevented the accumulation of Claspin

Figure 7: Schematic illustration of cellular mechanisms identified to play major roles in the enhanced cell killing
in response to adenovirus and DNA-damaging drugs. The cytidine analogue gemcitabine is incorporated into DNA, blocks
synthesis and directly causes DNA-strand breaks. Irinotecan, represented by its most potent metabolite SN38, inhibits topoisomerase
I preventing completion of DNA-synthesis and causing DNA damage. E1A-expression in Ad∆19K-infected or Ad5-infected cells induces
potent expression of E4orf3 and E4orf6 that prevent, together with E1B55K, the cellular DNA-damage response mainly by inactivating
Mre11 and rendering the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) repair complex non-functional (individual viral proteins not shown for simplicity).
Degradation and mislocalisation of Mre11 results in direct attenuation of ATR/Chk1 phosphorylation and checkpoint abrogation preventing
homologous recombination (HR). In addition, the high expression-levels of E1A/early viral genes in Ad∆19K-infected cells target Claspin
for transcriptional downregulation and degradation that prevents full activation of Chk1 and reinforces checkpoint abrogation resulting in
significant increases in deregulated entry into mitosis of cells with unrepaired damaged DNA. The end result is high levels of unrepaired
DNA damage with synergistic and apoptotic death throughout the cell cycle.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15717

Oncotarget

and the function of the DNA damage response compared
to Ad5. Claspin has previously been reported to be a
target of the E7 oncoprotein of human papilloma virus
(HPV)-16 that increased the proteasomal degradation by
deregulating components of the Aurora-A/Plk1/SCFβ-TrCP
degradation machinery, thereby attenuating DNA damage
responses and promoting mitotic entry [61]. Also, hepatitis
B virus (HBV) X protein was shown to mediate Plk1
activation, inducing Claspin degradation and attenuating
both DNA repair and the checkpoint responses, thereby
resulting in cell cycle progression and eventual death
[62]. However, to our knowledge, adenovirus-mediated
inhibition of Claspin activity had not been previously
reported. Our findings reveal a potential novel mechanism
whereby adenovirus destabilises Claspin, relaxes S-G2/M
checkpoint activation, forces progression through the
cell cycle in the presence of DNA damage and ultimately
augments cell killing. It will be of great interest to
determine whether adenovirus-mediated destabilisation
of Claspin recruits similar mechanisms to those reported
for HPV or HBV. Another possibility is that adenovirusmediated disruption of PP2A phosphatase activity by the
viral E4orf4 protein [63, 64] could stabilize pPlk1 thereby
inducing Claspin degradation, as PP2A was shown to dephosphorylate Plk1 in response to DNA damage [65].
Importantly, knockdown of Claspin or Mre11
enhanced the cell death in combination-treated cells,
strongly supporting our evidence for AdΔ19K-mediated
downregulation of Claspin and Mre11 as major causes
for the enhanced cell death (Figure 7). Mre11 knockdown
potentiated DNA damage in combination-treated cells
but had no effect on cell cycle distribution or viral DNA
replication. We conclude that downregulation of Mre11
contributes to the observed apoptotic cell death that
occurred throughout the cell cycle. Knockdown of Claspin
also increased DNA damage in combination-treated
cells, with no effects on viral DNA replication, however
the number of cells entering mitosis increased. These
results suggest that the enhanced cell death observed
when Claspin is downregulated might be a result of both
increased DNA damage and mitotic entry in combinationtreated cells, with subsequent mitotic aberrations.
In conclusion, our data strongly point toward a role
for the potent earlier E1A expression in the absence of
the E1B19K-gene, in promoting the expression of the
viral E1B and E4 genes that attenuate the DNA damage
response, as essential for the synergistic cell killing.
Although less pronounced, mitotic aberrations and DNA
damage were also observed with Ad5 infection. However,
Ad∆19K greatly attenuated drug-induced Claspin
expression, which was not significantly reduced in the
presence of Ad5. We suggest that both aberrant mitosis
and enhanced apoptotic death throughout the cell cycle
due to high levels of DNA damage is required for the
synergistic cell killing. Our findings have revealed novel
cellular targets that are deregulated by adenovirus to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

subvert the cellular defence against both viruses and other
cytotoxic agents. We propose that exploiting these factors
in combination with DNA-damaging drugs, improved anticancer therapeutics could be developed resulting in greatly
enhanced tumour cell killing. Oncolytic adenoviruses
could be designed to synergise with DNA-damaging drugs
by incorporating the E1B19K-deletion in combination
with inhibitors or si/shRNA that target pChk1/Claspin and
Mre11/Rad51.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and culture conditions
The human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines
PT45 (Prof H. Kalthoff, Kiel, Germany) and MIAPaCa-2
(ATCC, VA) are derived from primary PDAC tumours.
The cell lines were STR-profiled (LGC Standards, UK
and Cancer Research UK) and verified to be identical to
the profiles reported by the suppliers and to the original
vial. Cells were grown at 37°C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with
10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin and
streptomycin (Penicillin 10000 units/ml, Streptomycin
10mg/ml; P/S) (all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, MO).
DMEM contained 4.5g/L glucose, L-glutamine, sodium
pyruvate and sodium bicarbonate. In all experiments cells
were seeded in 10% FBS/1% P/S DMEM.

Viruses and infections
Both wild-type virus Ad5 and the mutant Ad∆19K
were generated from the species C wild-type adenovirus
type 5 plasmid pTG3602 (a gift from Dr Majid Mehtali,
Transgéne, Strasbourg, France), produced, purified and
characterised as previously described [11, 24]. Ad∆19K
is deleted in the anti-apoptotic E1B19K gene (Ad∆19K).
The viral particle (vp) to infectious units (plaque-forming
units; pfu) was 28 and 12 vp/pfu for Ad5 and Ad∆19K,
respectively. All infections were performed in serum-free
DMEM -/+ the indicated doses of viruses and 2h later the
medium was replaced with 10% FBS/1% P/S DMEM -/+
the indicated dose of drug(s).

Trypan blue inclusion cell death assay
PT45 and MIAPaCa-2 cells were infected with
300ppc of Ad5 or AdΔ19K -/+ addition of 5nM (PT45)
or 20nM (MIAPaCa-2) gemcitabine (Gemzar; Eli
Lilly, Indianapolis, IN) or 5μM irinotecan (Campto,
Hospira UK Limited, Leamington Spa, UK). At
the indicated times cells were trypsinised and cell
suspension was mixed with 0.4% Trypan Blue dye
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc, CA) at 1:1 ratio and 10μl
in duplicates were loaded onto a dual-chambered
counting slide (Bio-Rad). Cell count and viability were
15718

Oncotarget

assessed using a TC20™ automated cell counter (BioRad). Percentage cell viability was recorded and used to
calculate cell death.

analysis was performed using the FlowJo v7.6.5 software
(Tree star, Inc, OR).

Cell synchronisation

Cell viability assays

PT45 cells were treated with 2.5mM thymidine
(100mM in water; Alfa Aesar, MA) for synchronisation
in early S-phase. 24h after treatment, cells were released
from the thymidine block by washing twice with PBS.
Cells were immediately infected with 300ppc of viruses
-/+ 5nM gemcitabine.

Cell viability assays were performed as described
previously [11]. Cells were infected with Ad5 or Ad∆19K
-/+ addition of gemcitabine or irinotecan in 2% FBS/1%
P/S DMEM. Drug concentration was fixed at doses
previously determined to kill 20-40% of cells. Cells
were assayed 72h later using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)2H-tetrazolium assay (Promega, Southampton, UK)
to quantify live cells as an indirect measurement of
cell death. Dose–response curves were generated to
determine the concentration of each agent killing 50%
of cells (EC50) using untreated cells or cells treated with
one agent only as controls. Each data point was generated
from triplicate samples and experiments repeated at least
three times.

Cell cycle and mitotic index analysis
PT45 cells were infected with 300ppc of viruses -/+
5nM gemcitabine. At the indicated times post-infection,
supernatant and cells were harvested, washed with PBS
and incubated with 250μl of the fixable viability dye
(FVD) eFluor® 506 (eBioscience, CA) diluted 1:1000 in
PBS. Following a 30min incubation at 4ºC, cells were
washed in PBS and fixed with cold 70% ethanol (30min,
4ºC). All centrifugations henceforth were performed at
2000rpm for 3min. Cells were washed with 1ml of 1%
FBS/PBS and permeabilised using cold 0.25% Triton
X-100 diluted in 1% FBS/PBS. Following a 10min
incubation at 4ºC, cells were centrifuged and incubated in
100μl of rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-histone H3 (S10)
(Abcam, UK) and mouse monoclonal anti-E1A antibodies
diluted in 1% FBS/PBS (30min, 22°C). Following two
washes in 2ml of 1% FBS/PBS, cells were incubated
in 100μl of goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor® 488 and antimouse Alexa Fluor® 647 IgG (H+L) antibodies (Life
Technologies, Thermo Fischer Scientific, UK) diluted in
1% FBS/PBS (30min, 22°C). Cells were then washed with
3ml of 1% FBS/PBS and incubated in 200μl of PI (50μg/
ml)/RNAse A (100μg/ml) solution (30min, 22°C). Cells
were immediately acquired using the BD FACSDiva™
software operated on the BD LSRFortessa™ cell analyzer
(both from Becton Dickinson). PI and Alexa Fluor® 488
signals were detected in the B695/40 and B5300/30
filters, respectively, of the 488nm blue laser. FVD eFluor®
506 and Alexa Fluor® 647 signals were detected in the
V525/50 filter of the 405nm violet laser and R670/14
filter of the 640nm red laser, respectively. Cell debris and
doublets were excluded, followed by gating of live cells
and acquisition of 20000 events. Data were analyzed using
the FlowJo v7.6.5 software.
For cell cycle analysis with PI only, PT45 and
MIAPaCa-2 cells were infected, treated and harvested
as specified and fixed with cold 70% ethanol (30min,
4°C). Cells were pelleted, washed with 1ml of PBS and
incubated in 300μl of PI (50μg/ml)/RNAse A (100μg/
ml) solution (30min, 22°C). Immediately after staining,
cells were analysed using a BD FACSCalibur instrument.
Cell debris and doublets were excluded and 20000 events
were acquired. PI fluorescence was detected using the FL3

Cleaved caspase-3 apoptotic assay
PT45 cells were infected with 300ppc of Ad5tg
or AdΔ19K -/+ addition of 5nM gemcitabine. Where
indicated, 25μM of the pan-caspase inhibitor Calbiochem®
Z-VAD(OMe)-FMK (5mM in dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO); Millipore, MA) was added simultaneously
with gemcitabine or staurosporine. Mock-infection and
16h treatment at 1μM with the apoptosis-inducing agent
staurosporine (1mM in DMSO; Sigma-Aldrich), were
used as negative and positive controls, respectively. At
72hpi cells were harvested, fixed and stained using the
FITC Active Caspase-3 Apoptosis Kit (BD Biosciences
Pharmingen, CA) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. Additionally, cell pellets were re-suspended
in 250μl of PBS containing 50μg/ml of propidium iodide
(PI) (1mg/ml in water; Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA) and
100μg/ml of ribonuclease A (RNAse A) (33mg/ml in TrisHCl/glycerol; Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for 30min at
22°C. Flow-cytometric data acquisition was performed
using BD CellQuest™ software operated on a BD
FACSCalibur instrument (both from Becton Dickinson,
NJ). PI and FITC signals were detected in the FL-3 and
FL-1 channel, respectively, of the 488nm argon laser.
Dot plots of Side Scatter (SSC-H) vs Forward Scatter
(FSC-H) were used to exclude debris, followed by doublet
exclusion using the area and width of the FL2 channel.
Acquisition stopped when 20000 events were acquired in
the doublet-exclusion gate. Cell-cycle specific apoptosis
was measured by plotting the FL1-H channel, where FITC
was detected, against the FL3-H channel, where PI was
detected, and gates for apoptotic cells with DNA content
of 2N (G1-phase), 2-4N (S-phase), 4N (G2/M-phase) and
>4N (polyploid), where applied. Post-acquisition data
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15719

Oncotarget

channel of the 488nm argon laser. Data were analyzed
using the FlowJo v7.6.5 software.

Cells were fixed in 100% ice-cold methanol (20min,
4°C), followed by 20min blocking in 5% FBS/PBS and
incubation (overnight, 4°C) in mouse monoclonal antiAurora-A (IAK-1) (BD Biosciences) and rabbit polyclonal
anti-α-Tubulin (Abcam) antibodies diluted in 5% FBS/
PBS. Cells were washed three times in PBS and incubated
(1h, 22°C) in goat anti-mouse AlexaFluor® 488 and antirabbit AlexaFluor® 594 IgG (H+L) antibodies (both from
Life Technologies) diluted in 5% FBS/PBS.

Linardopoulos, The Institute of Cancer Research, London,
UK) using 16μl Lipofectamine™ 2000 (Life Technologies
Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturerʼs
instructions. 24h later cells were harvested, washed in PBS
and fluorescently sorted using the BD FACSAria™ cell
sorter (Becton Dickinson) based on mCherry expression
(detected in the YG610/20-A filter of the yellow-green
561nm laser). The PT45 histoneH2B-mCherry cells were
fluorescently sorted several times until more than 90%
of cells expressed mCherry. For time-lapse microscopy
PT45 histoneH2B-mCherry cells were synchronised
and infected as detailed above. 2hpi the medium was
replaced with 10% FBS/Leibovitz’s L15 medium (Life
Technologies) -/+ 5nM gemcitabine. 24hpi cells were
subjected to a 72h time-lapse imaging by phase-contrast
and fluorescence microscopy using a Zeiss Axiovert
200M fluorescence microscope. Images from 3 different
fields per condition were acquired every 15min from 24
to 96hpi. Data were analysed using AxioVision Rel. 4.9.1
(Carl Zeiss, Germany) and NIH ImageJ software.

Paraformaldehyde fixation method

TUNEL assay

Cells were fixed (10min, 22°C) in 4%
paraformaldehyde/PBS (made from 16%(w/v) formaldehyde;
TAAB, UK), followed by permeabilization (10min, 22°C)
in Triton buffer (0.5% Triton X-100, 20mM Hepes KOH
pH7.9, 50mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 300mM Sucrose).
Cells were blocked in 0.05% Tween-20/3% BSA/PBS
(15min, 22°C) and incubated (overnight, 4°C) in primary
antibodies diluted in blocking buffer. Antibodies used:
mouse monoclonal anti-Ad-DBP (37.3) (a gift from K.
Benihoud, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France),
rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-histoneH2A.X (Ser139)
(Cell Signalling Technology, MA), mouse monoclonal antiE1A and/or rabbit polyclonal anti-Mre11 (Genetex Inc.,
CA). Coverslips were washed twice in blocking buffer and
incubated (1h, 22°C) in secondary antibodies (goat antimouse or anti-rabbit AlexaFluor® 594 and/or goat antimouse AlexaFluor® 488) diluted in blocking buffer.

PT45 cells were infected with 300ppc of viruses
-/+ 10nM gemcitabine. 72hpi cells were harvested, fixed
and stained using the APO-BrdU kit (BD Biosciences
Pharmingen) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.
Flow-cytometric data acquisition was performed using
BD CellQuest™ software operated on a BD FACSCalibur
instrument (both from Becton Dickinson). FITC
fluorescence was detected in the FL-1 of the 488nm argon
laser. Cell debris and doublets were excluded and 20000
events were acquired. Post-acquisition data analysis was
performed using the FlowJo v7.6.5 software.

Immunofluorescence microscopy analysis
PT45 cells were seeded on coverslips (MenzelGläser, Germany), treated as specified and at the indicated
times post-infection processed as follows:

Methanol fixation method

Immunoblotting
PT45 and MIAPaCa-2 cells were infected and
treated as specified, and harvested at the indicated
times. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris
pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium
deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with protease
inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor
(Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Cell lysates were
incubated on ice (15min), centrifuged (15min, 16100xg,
4°C) and quantitated for protein using the Bio-Rad
Protein assay (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. Cell lysates were mixed with 2X sample
Laemmli buffer (0.125M Tris-HCl pH6.8, 20% glycerol,
4% SDS, 0.01% bromophenol blue and freshly-added 10%
β-mercaptoethanol) and incubated for 5min at 95ºC. Equal
amounts (typically 30-60μg) of protein were resolved by
SDS Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
using the Mini-PROTEAN® Tetra cell system (Bio-Rad).
Proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes
(Hybond-ECL, GE Healthcare, UK) using the TransBlot® SD semi-dry electrophoretic transfer cell (Bio-Rad)

Mounting and analysis
Coverslips were washed in PBS and distilled
water and were allowed to dry (30min, 22°C) before
mounting on slides (ESCO Optics, NJ) using the ProLong
Gold antifade reagent with DAPI (Life Technologies,
Thermo Fisher Scientific). Slides were analysed using a
Zeiss Axioplan epifluorescent microscope. Images were
acquired using the confocal laser scanning microscope
Zeiss LSM510 META.

PT45 histone H2B-mCherry stable cell line
generation and time-lapse microscopy
PT45 cells were transfected with 5μg of
histoneH2B-mCherry construct (a gift from Dr Spiros
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15720

Oncotarget

siRNA transfections

or the Mini Trans-Blot® electrophoretic transfer cell system
(Bio-Rad). Membranes were incubated (overnight, 4°C) in
the following primary antibodies: rabbit polyclonal antiphospho-histone H2A.X Ser139, rabbit polyclonal antiα-Tubulin, goat polyclonal anti-Actin (C-11) (SantaCruz
Biotechnology, Inc; TX), rabbit polyclonal anti-phosphoChk1 Ser296 (133D3) (Cell Signalling Technology), rabbit
polyclonal anti-Chk1 (Cell Signalling Technology), mouse
monoclonal anti-Vinculin (SPM227) (Abcam), rabbit
polyclonal anti-Mre11, rabbit polyclonal anti-Claspin
(Cell Signalling Technology), rabbit polyclonal antiphospho-Plk1 Thr210 (Enzo Life Sciences, UK), mouse
monoclonal anti-Plk1 (Abcam) and mouse monoclonal
anti-β-Tubulin (SAP.4G5) (Abcam). Membranes were
washed in 0.1% Tween-20/TBS, and incubated (1h at
22°C or 2h at 4°C) in polyclonal anti-goat, mouse or rabbit
immunoglobulins/HRP (Dako). Immunodetection was
performed using enhanced chemiluminescence substrate
ECL and ECL-Plus (PerkinElmer). Protein bands were
visualised on X-ray films (FujiFilm) or using the G:Box
iChemi-XT imaging system (Syngene, UK) and quantified
by densitometric analysis using the NIH ImageJ software.

PT45 cells were left untransfected or transfected
with 25nM of siGENOME non-targeting (NT) siRNA
#1 control (D-001210-01-05), siGENOME SMARTpool
Claspin (CLSPN) siRNA or siGENOME SMARTpool
MRE11A siRNA, using DharmaFECT1 transfection
reagent (all purchased from Dharmacon, GE Healthcare)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. siRNA
sequences: siGENOME SMARTpool CLSPN (D-00528801/02/03/04) ‘5-GGAAAUACCUGGAGGAUGA-3’,
‘5-GCAGAUGGGUUCUUAAAUG-3’,
‘5-GGACG
UAAUUGAUGAAGUA-3’, ‘5-GAAUUUAUAUGCUG
GGAAA-3’ and siGENOME SMARTpool MRE11A
(D-009271-01/02/03/04)
‘5-GAUGAGAACUC
UUGGUUUA-3’, ‘5-GAAAGGCUCUAUCGAAUGU-3’,
‘5-GCUAAUGACUCUGAUGAUA-3’, ‘5-GAGUAUA
GAUUUAGCAGAA-3’. After 6h medium was replaced
with 10% FBS/1% P/S DMEM. 24-32h later nontransfected, siNT-, siCLSPN- and siMRE11-transfected
cells were harvested, counted and re-seeded in 96-well
plates for use in cell viability assays or 6-well plates for
use in immunoblotting, trypan blue cell death assays,
mitotic index analysis and/or viral genome amplification
assays.

mRNA analysis by reverse transcriptase qPCR
PT45 cells were infected with 300ppc of viruses,
treated with 5nM gemcitabine and harvested (excluding
supernatant) at the indicated times. RNA was extracted
using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Netherlands)
according to the manufacturer's instructions and purified
from contaminating DNA using the DNA-free™ kit
(Ambion®, Life Technologies, CA) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. 1μg of RNA was reversed
transcribed in a 50μl reaction containing 1x TaqMan®
Reverse Transcription Buffer, 5.5mM MgCl2, 500μM
deoxyNTPs mixture, 2.5μM random hexamers, 0.4units/
μl RNase inhibitor and 1.25units/μl MultiScribe® Reverse
Transcriptase (all from Applied Biosystems, Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Reverse transcription was performed using a
DNA Engine Dyad® Peltier thermal cycler (MJ Research)
by incubating at 25°C for 10min, followed by 30min
incubation at 48°C and a 5min incubation at 95°C. 20ng of
complementary DNA (cDNA) were used in qPCR analysis
of viral E1A and Penton genes and the cellular Claspin
with GAPDH as internal control. qPCR using the standard
curve method (Applied Biosystems 7500 Instrument) was
performed with SYBR® Green PCR master mix (Applied
Biosystems) and 200nM of the following primers: E1A
5'-TGCCAAACCTTGTACCGGA-3' (forward) and
5'-CGTCGTCACTGGGTGGAAA-3' (reverse), Penton
5'-GATCGGAAAACCTCTCGAGAAA-3'
(forward)
and 5'-CGTAGGAGGGAGGAGGACCTT-3' (reverse),
Claspin 5'-ACAGTGATTCCGAAACAGA-3' (forward)
and 5'-TGCTCCTCGGCACTGTCATA-3' (reverse).
Melting (dissociation) curves for each primer set were
generated for primer quality control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Viral genome amplification
PT45 cells were infected with 300ppc of viruses,
treated with 5nM gemcitabine and harvested (excluding
supernatant) at 4, 24, 36, 48 and 72hpi. Cell suspension
was pelleted, snap-frozen and stored at -80ºC. DNA
was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit,
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen) and
used for quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis as previously
described [10].

Quantification of E1A protein expression
by flow cytometry
PT45 and MIAPaCa-2 cells were infected with
300ppc (PT45) or 100ppc (MIAPaCa-2) of viruses -/+
5nM (PT45) or 10nM (MIAPaCa-2) gemcitabine. At
the indicated times cells were harvested (excluding
supernatant) and 0.5-1x106 cells/ml were resuspended
in ice-cold 3% BSA/1% sodium azide/PBS, pelleted and
fixed in 0.5ml 100% methanol (10min, -20°C). Cells
were washed twice in 1% BSA/PBS and permeabilised in
0.5ml of 0.5% Triton-X100/PBS (15min, 22°C), followed
by wash in 0.1% Triton/PBS and incubation with mouse
monoclonal anti-E1A (M58) antibody (Labvision, Thermo
Fisher Scientific) diluted in 3% BSA/PBS (30min, 22°C).
Cells were washed once with PBS and incubated with
anti-mouse monoclonal FITC-conjugated antibody (Dako,
Denmark) diluted in 3% BSA/PBS (30min, 22°C). Cells
were washed twice in PBS, resuspended in 3% BSA/1%

15721

Oncotarget

sodium azide/PBS and analysed by flow cytometry using
a BD FACSCalibur instrument. Cell debris was excluded
and 20000 events were acquired. FITC was detected using
the FL1 channel of the 488nm argon laser. Data were
analyzed using the FlowJo v7.6.5 software.

patients with a serotype 5/3 chimeric oncolytic adenovirus
expressing GMCSF. Mol Ther. 2010; 18:1874-1884.
6.	 Kimball KJ, Preuss MA, Barnes MN, Wang M, Siegal GP,
Wan W, Kuo H, Saddekni S, Stockard CR, Grizzle WE,
Harris RD, Aurigemma R, Curiel DT, Alvarez RD. A phase
I study of a tropism-modified conditionally replicative adenovirus for recurrent malignant gynecologic diseases. Clin
Cancer Res. 2010; 16:5277-5287.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by a generous grant from
the UK charity Pancreatic Cancer Research Fund (PCRF)
and by the BCI CRUK Centre Grant [grant number
C16420/A18066]. We want to thank our colleagues
at the Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), Dr Spiros
Linardopoulos, Dr Konstantinos Drosopoulos and Dr
Mark Gurden, for insightful and stimulating discussions
and for the kind gifts of reagents for live cell imaging
and cell synchronisation. We thank our colleagues at
the Centre of Molecular Oncology at BCI for helpful
discussions and critical proofreading of the manuscript,
especially Dr Susana Godinho and Dr Stella Man.

7.	 Hecht JR, Bedford R, Abbruzzese JL, Lahoti S, Reid TR,
Soetikno RM, Kirn DH, Freeman SM. A phase I/II trial of
intratumoral endoscopic ultrasound injection of ONYX-015
with intravenous gemcitabine in unresectable pancreatic
carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:555-561.
8.	 Kasuya H, Takeda S, Nomoto S, Nakao A. The potential of
oncolytic virus therapy for pancreatic cancer. Cancer Gene
Ther. 2005; 12:725-736.
9.	 Freytag SO, Stricker H, Movsas B, Kim JH. Prostate cancer
gene therapy clinical trials. Mol Ther. 2007; 15:1042-1052.
10.	 Cherubini G, Kallin C, Mozetic A, Hammaren-Busch K,
Muller H, Lemoine NR, Hallden G. The oncolytic adenovirus AdDeltaDelta enhances selective cancer cell killing
in combination with DNA-damaging drugs in pancreatic
cancer models. Gene Ther. 2011; 18:1157-1165.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

11.	 Leitner S, Sweeney K, Oberg D, Davies D, Miranda E,
Lemoine NR, Hallden G. Oncolytic adenoviral mutants
with E1B19K gene deletions enhance gemcitabine-induced
apoptosis in pancreatic carcinoma cells and anti-tumor efficacy in vivo. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:1730-1740.

Author contributions
CP, GC and GH conceived of the study. CP and GC
conducted all experiments. GC initiated the project and
generated the preliminary data. CP designed and performed
most of the experiments including viability, knockdown,
immunoblotting, cell cycle progression studies, and confocal
and live cell imaging analysis. All data were analysed by CP
and GH, and CP constructed all figures. GH and CP wrote
the manuscript in consultation with NL.

12.	 Lee WP, Tai DI, Tsai SL, Yeh CT, Chao Y, Lee SD,
Hung MC. Adenovirus type 5 E1A sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma cells to gemcitabine. Cancer Res. 2003;
63:6229-6236.
13.	 Raki M, Sarkioja M, Desmond RA, Chen DT, Butzow R,
Hemminki A, Kanerva A. Oncolytic adenovirus Ad5/3delta24 and chemotherapy for treatment of orthotopic ovarian cancer. Gynecologic oncology. 2008; 108:166-172.

REFERENCES

14.	 Miranda E, Maya Pineda H, Oberg D, Cherubini G, Garate
Z, Lemoine NR, Hallden G. Adenovirus-mediated sensitization to the cytotoxic drugs docetaxel and mitoxantrone
is dependent on regulatory domains in the E1ACR1 generegion. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e46617.

1.	 Aghi M, Martuza RL. Oncolytic viral therapies - the clinical
experience. Oncogene. 2005; 24:7802-7816.
2.	 Patel MR, Kratzke RA. Oncolytic virus therapy for cancer:
the first wave of translational clinical trials. Translational
research. 2013; 161:355-364.

15.	 Abou El Hassan MA, van der Meulen-Muileman I, Abbas
S, Kruyt FA. Conditionally replicating adenoviruses kill
tumor cells via a basic apoptotic machinery-independent
mechanism that resembles necrosis-like programmed cell
death. J Virol. 2004; 78:12243-12251.

3.	 Russell WC. Adenoviruses: update on structure and function. J Gen Virol. 2009; 90:1-20.
4.	 Ferrari R, Gou D, Jawdekar G, Johnson SA, Nava M, Su T,
Yousef AF, Zemke NR, Pellegrini M, Kurdistani SK, Berk
AJ. Adenovirus small E1A employs the lysine acetylases
p300/CBP and tumor suppressor Rb to repress select host
genes and promote productive virus infection. Cell host &
microbe. 2014; 16:663-676.

16.	 Baird SK, Aerts JL, Eddaoudi A, Lockley M, Lemoine
NR, McNeish IA. Oncolytic adenoviral mutants induce a
novel mode of programmed cell death in ovarian cancer.
Oncogene. 2008; 27:3081-3090.
17.	 Liao Y, Yu D, Hung MC. Novel approaches for chemosensitization of breast cancer cells: the E1A story.
Advances in experimental medicine and biology. 2007;
608:144-169.

5.	 Koski A, Kangasniemi L, Escutenaire S, Pesonen S, Cerullo
V, Diaconu I, Nokisalmi P, Raki M, Rajecki M, Guse K,
Ranki T, Oksanen M, Holm SL, et al. Treatment of cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15722

Oncotarget

18.	 Samuelson AV, Narita M, Chan HM, Jin J, de Stanchina E,
McCurrach ME, Narita M, Fuchs M, Livingston DM, Lowe
SW. p400 is required for E1A to promote apoptosis. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2005; 280:21915-21923.

32.	 Jones RM, Kotsantis P, Stewart GS, Groth P, Petermann E.
BRCA2 and RAD51 promote double-strand break formation and cell death in response to gemcitabine. Molecular
cancer therapeutics. 2014; 13:2412-2421.

19.	 Tworkowski KA, Chakraborty AA, Samuelson AV,
Seger YR, Narita M, Hannon GJ, Lowe SW, Tansey
WP. Adenovirus E1A targets p400 to induce the cellular
oncoprotein Myc. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008;
105:6103-6108.

33.	 Petitprez A, Poindessous V, Ouaret D, Regairaz M,
Bastian G, Guerin E, Escargueil AE, Larsen AK. Acquired
­irinotecan resistance is accompanied by stable modifications of cell cycle dynamics independent of MSI status.
International journal of oncology. 2013; 42:1644-1653.
34.	 Caporossi D, Bacchetti S. Definition of adenovirus type 5
functions involved in the induction of chromosomal aberrations in human cells. J Gen Virol. 1990; 71:801-808.

20.	 Liu Y, Shevchenko A, Shevchenko A, Berk AJ. Adenovirus
exploits the cellular aggresome response to accelerate inactivation of the MRN complex. J Virol. 2005;
79:14004-14016.
21.	 Woo JL, Berk AJ. Adenovirus ubiquitin-protein ligase
stimulates viral late mRNA nuclear export. J Virol. 2007;
81:575-587.

35.	 Connell CM, Shibata A, Tookman LA, Archibald KM,
Flak MB, Pirlo KJ, Lockley M, Wheatley SP, McNeish IA.
Genomic DNA damage and ATR-Chk1 signaling determine
oncolytic adenoviral efficacy in human ovarian cancer cells.
The Journal of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:1283-1297.

22.	 Evans JD, Hearing P. Relocalization of the Mre11-Rad50Nbs1 complex by the adenovirus E4 ORF3 protein is
required for viral replication. J Virol. 2005; 79:6207-6215.

36.	 Chini CC, Chen J. Human claspin is required for replication
checkpoint control. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2003; 278:30057-30062.

23.	 Turnell AS, Grand RJ. DNA viruses and the cellular DNAdamage response. J Gen Virol. 2012; 93:2076-2097.

37.	 Chini CC, Chen J. Claspin, a regulator of Chk1 in DNA
replication stress pathway. DNA repair. 2004; 3:1033-1037.

24.	 Öberg D, Yanover E, Sweeney K, Adam V, Costas C,
Lemoine NR, Halldén G. Improved potency and selectivity
of an oncolytic E1ACR2 and E1B19K deleted adenoviral
mutant (Ad∆∆) in prostate and pancreatic cancers. Clin
Canc Res. 2010; 541-553.

38.	 Macurek L, Lindqvist A, Lim D, Lampson MA,
Klompmaker R, Freire R, Clouin C, Taylor SS, Yaffe MB,
Medema RH. Polo-like kinase-1 is activated by aurora A to
promote checkpoint recovery. Nature. 2008; 455:119-123.
39.	 Mamely I, van Vugt MA, Smits VA, Semple JI, Lemmens
B, Perrakis A, Medema RH, Freire R. Polo-like kinase-1
controls proteasome-dependent degradation of Claspin during checkpoint recovery. Curr Biol. 2006; 16:1950-1955.

25.	 Liu TC, Wang Y, Hallden G, Brooks G, Francis J,
Lemoine NR, Kirn D. Functional interactions of antiapoptotic proteins and tumor necrosis factor in the context of
a replication-competent adenovirus. Gene Ther. 2005;
12:1333-1346.

40.	 Oettle H. Progress in the knowledge and treatment of
advanced pancreatic cancer: from benchside to bedside.
Cancer treatment reviews. 2014; 40:1039-1047.

26.	 White E. Mechanisms of apoptosis regulation by viral oncogenes in infection and tumorigenesis. Cell Death Differ.
2006; 13:1371-1377.

41.	 Candelaria M, de la Cruz-Hernandez E, Perez-Cardenas
E, Trejo-Becerril C, Gutierrez-Hernandez O, DuenasGonzalez A. Pharmacogenetics and pharmacoepigenetics
of gemcitabine. Medical oncology. 2010; 27:1133-1143.

27.	 Subramanian T, Vijayalingam S, Chinnadurai G. Genetic
identification of adenovirus type 5 genes that influence viral
spread. J Virol. 2006; 80:2000-2012.

42.	 Kulke MH, Tempero MA, Niedzwiecki D, Hollis DR,
Kindler HL, Cusnir M, Enzinger PC, Gorsch SM, Goldberg
RM, Mayer RJ. Randomized phase II study of gemcitabine
administered at a fixed dose rate or in combination with
cisplatin, docetaxel, or irinotecan in patients with metastatic
pancreatic cancer: CALGB 89904. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:5506-5512.

28.	 Yoon AR, Kim JH, Lee YS, Kim H, Yoo JY, Sohn JH, Park
BW, Yun CO. Markedly enhanced cytolysis by E1B-19kDdeleted oncolytic adenovirus in combination with cisplatin.
Hum Gene Ther. 2006; 17:379-390.
29.	 Cross JR, Postigo A, Blight K, Downward J. Viral prosurvival proteins block separate stages in Bax activation
but changes in mitochondrial ultrastructure still occur. Cell
Death Differ. 2008; 15:997-1008. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2008.

43.	 Lipton A, Harvey H, Witters L, Kerr S, Legore K, Campbell
C. Gemcitabine/Irinotecan/celecoxib in pancreatic cancer.
Oncology (Williston Park). 2004; 18:43-45.

30.	 De Luca A, Mangiacasale R, Severino A, Malquori L, Baldi
A, Palena A, Mileo AM, Lavia P, Paggi MG. E1A deregulates the centrosome cycle in a Ran GTPase-dependent
manner. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:1430-1437.

44.	 Bhattacharyya M, Francis J, Eddouadi A, Lemoine NR,
Hallden G. An oncolytic adenovirus defective in pRb-binding (dl922-947) can efficiently eliminate pancreatic cancer
cells and tumors in vivo in combination with 5-FU or gemcitabine. Cancer Gene Ther. 2011; 18:734-743.

31.	 Ewald B, Sampath D, Plunkett W. H2AX phosphorylation marks gemcitabine-induced stalled replication forks
and their collapse upon S-phase checkpoint abrogation.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2007; 6:1239-1248.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Onimaru M, Ohuchida K, Nagai E, Mizumoto K, Egami
T, Cui L, Sato N, Uchino J, Takayama K, Hashizume M,
15723

Oncotarget

Tanaka M. Combination with low-dose gemcitabine and
hTERT-promoter-dependent conditionally replicative
adenovirus enhances cytotoxicity through their crosstalk mechanisms in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Lett. 2010;
294:178-186.

kinase Chk1 is required for mammalian homologous
­recombination repair. Nat Cell Biol. 2005; 7:195-201.
56.	 Costanzo V. Brca2, Rad51 and Mre11: performing balancing acts on replication forks. DNA repair. 2011;
10:1060-1065.

46.	 Boulakia CA, Chen G, Ng FW, Teodoro JG, Branton PE,
Nicholson DW, Poirier GG, Shore GC. Bcl-2 and adenovirus E1B 19 kDA protein prevent E1A-induced processing
of CPP32 and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.
Oncogene. 1996; 12:529-535.

57.	 Iwanaga R, Komori H, Ishida S, Okamura N, Nakayama K,
Nakayama KI, Ohtani K. Identification of novel E2F1 target genes regulated in cell cycle-dependent and independent
manners. Oncogene. 2006; 25:1786-1798.
58.	 Kenneth NS, Mudie S, Rocha S. IKK and NF-kappaBmediated regulation of Claspin impacts on ATR checkpoint
function. The EMBO journal. 2010; 29:2966-2978.

47.	 Rao XM, Tseng MT, Zheng X, Dong Y, Jamshidi-Parsian
A, Thompson TC, Brenner MK, McMasters KM, Zhou
HS. E1A-induced apoptosis does not prevent replication of
adenoviruses with deletion of E1b in majority of infected
cancer cells. Cancer Gene Ther. 2004; 11:585-593.

59.	 Cook JL, Walker TA, Worthen GS, Radke JR. Role of the
E1A Rb-binding domain in repression of the NF-kappa
B-dependent defense against tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2002; 99:9966-9971.

48.	 Cuconati A, Degenhardt K, Sundararajan R, Anschel
A, White E. Bak and Bax function to limit adenovirus
replication through apoptosis induction. J Virol. 2002;
76:4547-4558.

60.	 Shao R, Karunagaran D, Zhou BP, Li K, Lo SS, Deng J,
Chiao P, Hung MC. Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB
activity is involved in E1A-mediated sensitization of radiation-induced apoptosis. The Journal of biological chemistry.
1997; 272:32739-32742.

49.	 Moore PS, Sipos B, Orlandini S, Sorio C, Real FX, Lemoine
NR, Gress T, Bassi C, Kloppel G, Kalthoff H, Ungefroren
H, Lohr M, Scarpa A. Genetic profile of 22 pancreatic carcinoma cell lines. Analysis of K-ras, p53, p16 and DPC4/
Smad4. Virchows Arch. 2001; 439:798-802.

61.	 Spardy N, Covella K, Cha E, Hoskins EE, Wells SI,
Duensing A, Duensing S. Human papillomavirus 16 E7
oncoprotein attenuates DNA damage checkpoint control by
increasing the proteolytic turnover of claspin. Cancer Res.
2009; 69:7022-7029.

50.	 Wang H, Liu Z, Wang ZP, Li FY, Zhao Y, Chen GP, Li
DC. [Double-mutated oncolytic adenovirus combined with
gemcitabine for treating an orthotopic nude mouse model of
bladder cancer]. Zhonghua zhong liu za zhi [Chinese journal of oncology]. 2013; 35:412-417.

62.	 Studach L, Wang WH, Weber G, Tang J, Hullinger RL,
Malbrue R, Liu X, Andrisani O. Polo-like kinase 1 activated by the hepatitis B virus X protein attenuates both the
DNA damage checkpoint and DNA repair resulting in partial polyploidy. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2010;
285:30282-30293.

51.	 Wang H, Satoh M, Chen GP, Li DC, Hamada H, Arai
Y. E1A, E1B double-restricted adenovirus enhances
the cytotoxicity and antitumor activity of gemcitabine
to renal cell carcinoma. Chinese medical journal. 2011;
124:1082-1087.

63.	 Li S, Brignole C, Marcellus R, Thirlwell S, Binda O,
McQuoid MJ, Ashby D, Chan H, Zhang Z, Miron MJ,
Pallas DC, Branton PE. The adenovirus E4orf4 protein
induces G2/M arrest and cell death by blocking protein
phosphatase 2A activity regulated by the B55 subunit. J
Virol. 2009; 83:8340-8352.

52.	 Liu D, Kojima T, Ouchi M, Kuroda S, Watanabe Y,
Hashimoto Y, Onimatsu H, Urata Y, Fujiwara T. Preclinical
evaluation of synergistic effect of telomerase-specific oncolytic virotherapy and gemcitabine for human lung cancer.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2009; 8:980-987.
53.	 Chaurushiya MS, Weitzman MD. Viral manipulation of
DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoints. DNA repair. 2009;
8:1166-1176.

64.	 Mui MZ, Kucharski M, Miron MJ, Hur WS, Berghuis AM,
Blanchette P, Branton PE. Identification of the adenovirus
E4orf4 protein binding site on the B55alpha and Cdc55
regulatory subunits of PP2A: Implications for PP2A function, tumor cell killing and viral replication. PLoS Pathog.
2013; 9:e1003742.

54.	 Carson CT, Orazio NI, Lee DV, Suh J, Bekker-Jensen S,
Araujo FD, Lakdawala SS, Lilley CE, Bartek J, Lukas J,
Weitzman MD. Mislocalization of the MRN complex
prevents ATR signaling during adenovirus infection. The
EMBO journal. 2009; 28:652-662.

65.	 Jang YJ, Ji JH, Choi YC, Ryu CJ, Ko SY. Regulation of
Polo-like kinase 1 by DNA damage in mitosis. Inhibition of
mitotic PLK-1 by protein phosphatase 2A. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2007; 282:2473-2482.

55.	 Sorensen CS, Hansen LT, Dziegielewski J, Syljuasen RG,
Lundin C, Bartek J, Helleday T. The cell-cycle checkpoint

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15724

Oncotarget

