Research Article

In vitro and In vivo Molecular Evidence for Better Therapeutic
Efficacy of ABT-627 and Taxotere Combination
in Prostate Cancer
1

3

1

2

1

Sanjeev Banerjee, Maha Hussain, Zhiwei Wang, Allen Saliganan, Mingxin Che,
2
2
1
Daniel Bonfil, Michael Cher, and Fazlul H. Sarkar
1

Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute; 2Department of Urology, Wayne State University, School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan; and 3Departments of Medicine and Urology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

Abstract
Bone is the key metastatic site for prostate cancer. Endothelin
1 (ET-1) produced abundantly by prostate cancer cells binds to
its receptor present on bone marrow stromal cells and favors
osteoblastic response during bone metastases of prostate
cancer. This suggests that interrupting ET-1 interaction with
its endothelin A (ETA) receptor could be useful for inhibiting
prostate cancer bone metastasis and, as such, may enhance
the therapeutic activity of docetaxel (Taxotere), the most
commonly used drug for the treatment of metastatic prostate
cancer. Therefore, the goal of our study was to obtain
preclinical data supporting our hypothesis that the combined
use of ETA receptor antagonist (ABT-627; Atrasentan) with
Taxotere will be superior in inducing apoptosis in vitro and
inhibiting tumor growth in vivo in a SCID-hu model of
experimental bone metastasis induced by C4-2b prostate
cancer cells. In vitro studies were done on a panel of prostate
cancer cell lines to understand the molecular basis of
combination therapy, and we found that the combination
was more effective in the inhibition of cell viability and
induction of apoptosis in LNCaP and C4-2b cells (androgen
receptor positive) but not in PC-3 cells. These results were
correlated with inactivation of Akt/nuclear factor-KB and its
target genes. For in vivo studies, the therapeutic regimen was
initiated when the tumor began showing signs of growth and
treatment was continued for 5 weeks. Tumor volume and
serum prostate-specific antigen were used as terminal index
to evaluate the therapeutic advantage of combination therapy
relative to a single regimen and untreated control. At
termination, we found a 90% reduction in tumor volume by
combination treatment relative to the untreated control
group. Most importantly, the antitumor activity was associated with the down-regulation of molecular markers in tumor
tissues that were similar to those observed in vitro. [Cancer Res
2007;67(8):3818–26]

Introduction
Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in men in the United States (1). Death is the result of
metastatic hormone refractory disease in virtually the majority of
patients. Prostate cancer metastasizes preferentially to bone,

Requests for reprints: Fazlul H. Sarkar, Department of Pathology, Karmanos
Cancer Institute, Room 740 HWCRC Building, 4160 John R Street, Detroit, MI 48201.
Phone: 313-576-8327; Fax: 313-576-8389; E-mail: fsarkar@med.wayne.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3879

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

causing osteoblastic lesions with a progressive morbid course (2).
Hence, the development of a novel and effective therapeutic
strategy by which one could effectively inhibit hormone and/or
chemotherapy refractory prostate cancer is urgently needed.
Normal healthy bone constantly undergoes remodeling through
synchronized activities of osteoblasts, which synthesizes new bone,
and osteoclasts, which resorbs old bone (3). Recent findings
highlight the acquisition of osteoblastic phenotype with progression of prostate cancer, which is mediated by the interactions
between prostate cancer cells and osteoblasts within the bone
microenvironment. Some active bone factors, which are produced
and secreted by prostate cancer cells and stimulate new bone
formation and osteoblast proliferation, include fibroblast growth
factor, bone morphogenetic proteins, platelet-derived growth
factor, transforming growth factor h, insulin-like growth factor,
pleiotrophin-osteoblast stimulating factor, and interleukins (interleukin-1 and interleukin-6; ref. 4). In addition, strong and emerging
evidences suggest a critical role of the potent vasoconstrictor
endothelin 1 (ET-1) in the pathogenesis and progression of prostate
cancer–induced osteoblastic lesions (5, 6). Nelson et al. reported
that ET-1 levels in plasma samples from men with hormone
refractory prostate cancer are significantly higher compared with
those from men with clinically localized disease and those without
prostate cancer (7). Furthermore, the enzyme that degrades ET-1,
neutral endopeptidase 24.11, is less prominent in prostate cancer,
leading to the overproduction of ET-1 in men with prostate cancer
(8). The action of ET-1 is mediated by G protein–coupled
receptors–endothelin A (ETA) and endothelin B (ETB) receptor
interaction (9, 10). ETB is the predominant endothelin receptor in
healthy prostatic epithelium and responsible for the clearance of
circulating ET-1, thereby regulating ET-1 production (11). In
prostate cancer, a significant reduction in the expression of ETB
has been reported (12). Thus, tumor cells producing ET-1
stimulates new bone formation in vitro and osteoblastic metastasis
in vivo via the ETA receptor (ref. 6). Based on this preexisting
knowledge, we hypothesized that targeting ETA receptor in
combination with a conventionally used cytotoxic drug could
influence the prostate cancer cell behavior within the bone
microenvironment, resulting in a greater antitumor activity.
Several low molecular weight compounds antagonizing the ETA
receptor, thus interrupting cellular signaling affecting cell proliferation, have been evaluated in laboratory studies, as well as in
clinical setting. The ETA receptor antagonist ABT-627 (Atrasentan),
which is p.o. bioavailable with selectivity (1800-fold), potentially
binds to the ETA receptor (K i = 0.034 nmol/L), blocking the
biological effects of ET-1, has been reported (13). In phase III of
clinical trials, Atrasentan significantly delayed disease progression
in men with prostate cancer bone metastases compared with

3818

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Combination Therapy of Taxotere and ABT-627

placebo-treated patients with same characteristics (14). Laboratory
studies using a combination treatment of ABT-627 with paclitaxel
revealed additive antitumor, proapoptotic, and antiangiogenic
effects in ovarian cancer cells (15). Another investigation
conducted in nude mice showed that Atrasentan inhibited growth
and neoangiogenesis in cervical cancer cell xenograft (16).
Furthermore, novel molecular mechanistic pathways involved in
metastasis-suppressing activity of Atrasentan during ovarian
carcinoma progression have been recently published (17). However,
to test this hypothesis in vivo, animal model of prostate cancer
within the bone microenvironment having osteoblastic reactions
are limited. We have previously found that C4-2b prostate cancer
cells grown in a SCID-hu model of experimental bone metastases
produced osteoblastic as well as osteolytic lesions. Therefore, we
have used this model for the current in vivo study.
In this study, we have tested our hypothesis in vitro and
especially in vivo using the SCID-hu model. Our data showed, for
the first time, that ABT-627 treatment in combination with
Taxotere caused greater antiproliferative and proapoptotic activity
in vitro and antitumor activity in vivo. Our results were also
correlated with mechanism-based evidence obtained from both
in vitro and in vivo studies.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents. The human prostate carcinoma cell lines
LNCaP [androgen receptor (AR) positive], C4-2b (AR positive), and PC-3
(AR negative) were maintained in exponential growth by twice weekly passage
in RPMI 1640 (DMEM, Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithesburg, MD) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 units/mL penicillin, and
10 mg/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2 in air at
37jC. Antibodies were purchased from the following commercial sources:
total Akt, Akt kinase assay kit, and Ser473-phosphorylated Akt from Cell
Signaling (Beverly, MA); anti-Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL antibodies from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA); anti-Bax antibody from Trevigen, Inc.
(Gaithersburg, MD); anti–poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) antibody from
Biomol Research (Plymouth, PA); antisurvivin antibody from R&D Systems
(Minneapolis, MN); anti–h-actin antibody from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis,
MO). Taxotere (Aventis Pharmaceuticals, Bridgewater, NJ) was dissolved in
DMSO to make 4 Amol/L stock solution. ABT-627, a generous gift from Abbott
Laboratories (Chicago, IL), was dissolved in 0.1 mol/L Na2CO3 to make a 10mmol/L stock solution.
Cell growth inhibition by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. All three prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP,
C4-2b, and PC-3 cells) were seeded at a density of 3  103 cells per well in
96-well microtiter culture plates. After overnight incubation, the medium
was removed and replaced with a fresh medium containing different
concentrations of ABT-627 (0–50 Amol/L) diluted from a 10-mmol/L stock.
After 72 h of incubation with drug, 20 AL of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) solution (5 mg/mL in PBS) were added
to each well and incubated further for 2 h. Upon termination, the
supernatant was aspirated and the MTT formazan formed by metabolically
viable cells was dissolved in isopropanol (100 AL). The plates were mixed
for 30 min on a gyratory shaker, and the absorbance was measured at
595 nm on a plate reader (TECAN, Durham, NC).
Cell growth inhibition by cytotoxic agents. Cells were plated as
described above and allowed to attach overnight. The culture medium was
replaced with a fresh medium containing 25 Amol/L of ABT-627 and
1 nmol/L of the chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel (Taxotere) for an
additional 72 h. For single agents, ABT-627 and Taxotere, cells were also
exposed for 72 h. The effect of ABT-627 cotreatment on cell viability was
examined by the MTT assay method as described above.
Quantification of apoptosis by ELISA. The cell apoptosis ELISA
detection kit (Roche, Palo Alto, CA) was used to detect apoptosis after
treatments with drugs individually and in combination according to

www.aacrjournals.org

manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, LNCaP and C4-2b cells were treated with
ABT-627 and/or Taxotere alone or in combination for 72 h. After treatment,
the cytoplasmic histone/DNA fragments from these cells were extracted and
bound to immobilized antihistone antibody. Subsequently, the peroxidaseconjugated anti-DNA antibody was used for the detection of immobilized
histone/DNA fragments. After addition of substrate for peroxidase, the
spectrophotometric absorbance of the samples was determined by using an
ULTRA multifunctional microplate reader (TECAN) at 405 nm.
Flow cytometric analyses for assessing the percentage of apoptotic
cells. C4-2b cells were incubated in the presence or absence of 25 Amol/L of
ABT-627, Taxotere (1.0 nmol/L), and combination with Taxotere and ABT-627
for 48 h. Free-floating cells were collected, and adherent cells were harvested
with 0.25% trypsin and resuspended in RPMI 1640 media. Cells
(1  106) were centrifuged at 300  g for 5 min and then washed once with
PBS, fixed in 75% ethanol overnight at 4jC, and stained with 0.02 mg/mL of
propidium iodide (PI) together with 0.1 mg/mL of RNase A. The DNA
histogram from at least 10,000 PI-stained cells at an emission wavelength of
690 nm was measured using a Becton Dickinson fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) caliber flow cytometer and analyzed with ModFit LT software
(San Jose, CA). The percentage of apoptotic cells in the sub–G0-G1 was
calculated.
Protein extraction and Western blot analysis. The prostate cancer cells
C4-2b were plated and allowed to attach for 36 h. ABT-627 and/or Taxotere
alone or in combination was directly added to the cell cultures at indicated
concentrations and incubated for 72 h. Control cells were incubated in the
medium with an equivalent concentration of solvent. After the incubation
period, the cells were harvested in PBS by scrapping them from culture dishes
and collecting them by centrifugation. Cellular lysates were prepared by
suspending the cells in 200 AL of lysis buffer (150 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L
EGTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1 mmol/L sodium orthovanadate, 1 mmol/L
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 2 Ag/mL leupeptin, and 2 Ag/mL
aprotinin). The cells were disrupted by sonication and extracted at 4jC for
30 min at maximal microfuge speed to remove debris. For Western blot
analysis, each extract prepared as described equivalent to 50 Ag total protein
was separated on SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed with specific antibodies. Detection of specific proteins
was carried out with an enhanced chemiluminescence Western blotting kit
according to manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce, Rockford, IL).
Assay of Akt kinase activity. Cells were incubated and treated as
mentioned above. They were then washed twice with PBS and lysed in icecold lysis buffer [20 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% Triton
X-100, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L EGTA, 2.5 mmol/L sodium PPi, 1 mmol/L
h-glycerophosphate, 1 mmol/L sodium orthovanadate, 1 Ag/mL leupeptin,
and 1 mmol/L PMSF]. The extracts were centrifuged to remove cellular
debris, and the protein content of the supernatants was determined using
the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay reagent (Pierce). Proteins
(150 Ag) were incubated with gentle rocking at 4jC overnight with
immobilized Akt antibody cross-linked to agarose hydrazide beads. After
the Akt was selectively immunoprecipitated from the cell lysates, the
immunoprecipitated products were washed twice with lysis buffer and
twice with kinase assay buffer [25 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.5), 10 mmol/L MgCl2,
5 mmol/L h-glycerol phosphate, 0.1 mmol/L sodium orthovanadate,
2 mmol/L DTT] and then resuspended in 40 AL of kinase assay buffer
containing 200 Amol/L ATP and 1 Ag GSK-3a/h fusion protein. The kinase
assay reaction was allowed to proceed at 30jC for 30 min and stopped by
the addition of Lamelli SDS sample buffer. Reaction products were resolved
by 10% SDS-PAGE, followed by Western blotting with antiphosphorylated
GSK-3a/h antibody. For analysis of the total amount of Akt, 40 Ag of protein
from the lysate samples were resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE, followed by
Western blotting with anti-Akt antibody.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Nuclear protein extracts were
prepared according to the method described by Chaturvedi et al. (18).
Briefly, the cells were washed with cold PBS and suspended in 0.15 mL of
lysis buffer [10 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 10 mmol/L KCl, 0.1 mmol/L EDTA,
0.1 mmol/L EGTA, 1 mmol/L DTT, 1 mmol/L PMSF, 2 Ag/mL leupeptin,
2 Ag/mL aprotinin, and 0.5 mg/mL benzamidine]. The cells were allowed to
swell on ice for 20 min, and then 4.8 AL of 10% Nonidet P-40 was added. The

3819

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
tubes were vigorously mixed on a vortex mixer for a few seconds and
centrifuged for 120 s in a microfuge. The nuclear pellet was resuspended in
30 AL of ice-cold nuclear extraction buffer [20 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9),
0.4 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L EGTA, 1 mmol/L DTT,
0.5 mmol/L PMSF, 2 Ag/mL leupeptin, 2 Ag/mL aprotinin, and 0.5 mg/mL
benzamidine] and incubated on ice with intermittent mixing. The tubes
were then centrifuged for 5 min in a microfuge at 4jC, and the supernatant
(nuclear protein extract) was collected in a cold Eppendorf tube and stored
at 70jC for later use. The protein content was measured by BCA method.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was done by incubating 8 Ag
of nuclear protein extract with IRDye-700–labeled nuclear factor-nB
(NF-nB) oligonucleotide. The incubation mixture included 2 Ag of poly(dIdC) in a binding buffer. The DNA-protein complex formed was separated
from free oligonucleotide on 8.0% native polyacralyamide gel using buffer
containing 50 mmol/L Tris, 200 mmol/L glycine (pH 8.5), and 1 mmol/L
EDTA and then visualized by Odyssey Infrared Imaging System using
Odyssey Software Release 1.1 (Li-COR, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska).
Experimental animals. Male homozygous CB-17 SCID/SCID mice
(4 weeks old) were purchased from Taconic Farms (Germantown, NY). The
mice were housed and maintained under sterile conditions in facilities
accredited by the American Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory
Animal Care and in accordance with current regulations and standards of
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, and NIH. The mice were used in accordance with Animal Care and
Use Guidelines of Wayne State University under a protocol approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice received Lab Diet 5021
(Purina Mills, Inc., Richmond, IN).
Human bone and implantation of tumor cells. Human male fetal
bone tissue was obtained by a third party nonprofit organization (Advanced
Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA), and written informed consent was
obtained from the donor family, consistent with regulations issued by each
state involved and the federal government. After 1 week of acclimatization,
the mice were implanted with a single human fetal bone fragment as
described previously (19). C4-2b cells were harvested from subconfluent
cultures after a brief exposure to 0.25% trypsin and 0.2% EDTA.
Trypsinization was stopped by adding a medium containing 10% FBS.
The cells were washed once in serum-free medium and resuspended. Only
suspensions consisting of a single cell with >90% viability was used for the
injections. Cells (1  106) in 20-AL serum-free RPMI medium were injected
intraosseously by insertion of a 27-gauge needle and Hamilton syringe
through the mouse skin directly into the marrow surface of the previously
implanted bone. In our previous experience with this model, we found a
tumor take rate of >90%.
Experimental protocol. As soon as the majority of the bone implants
began to enlarge (now called a ‘‘bone tumor’’) as determined by caliper
measurements (30th day after cancer cell injection), mice were randomized
into the following treatment groups (n = 7): (a) untreated control; (b) only

ABT-627, 10 mg/kg body weight given i.p. everyday for 5 weeks since
initiation of therapy; (c) Taxotere–one cycle, 5 mg/kg body weight given i.v.
every 3rd day (total of four doses); and (d) ABT-627 plus Taxotere, following
exactly the similar schedule as described for individual drugs. The volume
of the bone tumor in each group was determined by twice weekly caliper
measurements. The body weight of mice in each group was also measured.
All mice were euthanized 1 day after the last dose of ABT-627 treatment
(5 weeks) because large tumors were formed in the control mice, which
required termination, and their final body weight and tumor volume were
recorded. On autopsy, the tumor was neatly excised, freed of any extraneous
adhering tissue, and subjected to ex vivo imaging on a Lo-Rad M-IV
mammography unit using a magnified specimen technique. For routine
H&E staining, one part of the tissue was fixed in formalin and embedded in
paraffin; another part was rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at
70jC, and subsequently used for preparation of nuclear protein extracts.
H&E staining confirmed the presence of tumor.
Serum prostate-specific antigen determination. Commercially
available ELISA kit (Anogen, Inc., Ontario, Canada) was used to determine
serum concentration of prostate-specific antigen following manufacturer’s
instruction.
Tumor tissue nuclear protein extraction and EMSA. Tissues were
minced and incubated on ice for 30 min in 0.5 mL of ice-cold buffer A,
composed of 10 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.9), 1.5 mmol/L KCl, 10 mmol/L
MgCI2, 0.5 mmol/L DTT, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630, and 0.5 mmol/L PMSF. The
minced tissue was homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer (Kontes Co.,
Vineland, NJ) followed by centrifuging at 5000  g at 4jC for 10 min. The
crude nuclear pellet was suspended in 200 AL of buffer B [20 mmol/L
HEPES (pH 7.9), 25% glycerol, 1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 420 mmol/L NaCI,
0.5 mmol/L DTT, 0.2 mmol/L EDTA, 0.5 mmol/L PMSF, and 4 Amol/L
leupeptidin] and incubated on ice for 30 min. The suspension was
centrifuged at 16,000  g at 4jC for 30 min. The supernatant (nuclear
proteins) was collected and kept at 70jC until use. The protein
concentration was determined using the BCA assay kit with bovine serum
albumin as the standard (Pierce).
Statistical analysis. Data are represented as mean F SD for the absolute
values or percent of controls, as indicated in the vertical axis legend of
Figs. 1–3, 5, and 6. The statistical significance of differential findings between
experimental groups and control was determined by Student’s t test as
implemented by Excel 2000 (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA). P values
smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Results
Effect of ABT-627 treatment on cell growth. To test the effect
of ABT-627 treatment on androgen-dependent and androgenindependent prostate cancer cell proliferation, cells were treated

Figure 1. Effect of ABT-627 on growth of prostate cancer
cell lines LNCaP, C4-2b, and PC-3 by MTT assay. Cells
were either untreated or treated with increasing
concentration of ABT-627 (0–50 Amol/L) for 72 h and
then analyzed by MTT assay as described under
Materials and Methods.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

3820

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Combination Therapy of Taxotere and ABT-627

the prostate cancer cells were more sensitive to the cytotoxic effect
of a combined regimen of ABT-627 and Taxotere as determined by
cell viability assay. For these studies, cells were treated with ABT627 (25 Amol/L) alone or in combination with single dose of
Taxotere (1 nmol/L) and viable cells were evaluated after 72 h by
MTT assay (Fig. 2). We found that the combination treatment of
cells with both ABT-627 and Taxotere for 72 h caused a significant
60% to 70% growth inhibition in LNCaP and C4-2b cells compared

Figure 2. Effect of ABT-627 and Taxotere treatment on viability of prostate
cancer cell lines LNCaP, C4-2b, and PC-3. Cells were either untreated or
treated with either ABT-627 (25 Amol/L) alone, Taxotere (1 nmol/L) alone at
designated concentration or treated simultaneously with ABT-627 and
Taxotere for 72 h and then analyzed by MTT assay as described under
Materials and Methods.

with increasing concentrations of ABT-627 (0–50 Amol/L) for 72 h.
As shown in Fig. 1, cell viability was reduced in a dose-dependent
manner only in LNCaP and C4-2b cells; PC-3 cells were relatively
insensitive at equivalent concentration of the drug. As noted in
LNCaP cells, the viability was reduced by 18%, 30%, and 60% with
10 Amol/L, 25 Amol/L, and 50 Amol/L of ABT-627 treatment for
72 h, respectively. Likewise, the treatment of C4-2b cells resulted in
15%, 32%, and 56% reduction in cell viability when exposed to
identical concentrations of ABT-627 for a similar period. In
contrast, PC-3 cells were comparatively resistant to the effect of
ABT-627 and thus revealed only a marginal nonsignificant decrease
in cell viability up to a concentration of 50 Amol/L of ABT-627
treatment. These results indicate that overall ABT-627 is an
effective inhibitor of LNCaP and C4-2b prostate cancer cell growth.
ABT-627 sensitizes prostate cancer cells to Taxotere-induced
growth inhibition. The effect of ABT-627 alone on the viability of
three different prostate cancer cells was determined. Our data
show a significant concentration-dependent inhibition of cell
viability by ABT-627 only in two of the three investigated cell lines
(Fig. 1). Subsequent studies were undertaken to examine whether

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 3. A, sensitization of prostate tumor cells LNCaP and C4-2b to
ABT-627–induced and Taxotere-induced apoptosis as determined by
histone-DNA ELISA after 72 h treatment with ABT-627 (25 Amol/L) alone,
Taxotere (1 nmol/L) alone, or the combination of ABT-627 and Taxotere
incubated for 72 h. Increased apoptotic response was evident in combination
treatment group relative to untreated control or single-agent treated group.
B, cell cycle analysis using FACS. Exponentially growing C4-2b cells were
either untreated or treated with Taxotere/ABT-627 for 72 h followed by FACS
analysis for assessing apoptotic cells as measured by accumulation of cells in
the sub–G0-G1 fraction.

3821

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. A and B, dose and time-course
representation of NF-nB down-regulation
by ABT-627 in C4-2b cells. Cells were
incubated with the indicated concentration
of ABT-627, and the nuclear proteins were
subjected to Gel Shift Assay for the
evaluation of NF-nB DNA binding activity.
Untreated C4-2b cells express basal level
of NF-nB but upon ABT-627 treatment,
NF-nB was down-regulated as early as
48 h after the treatment. C, NF-nB DNA
binding activity in the nuclear extract of
C4-2b prostate cancer cells in the
presence and/or absence of ABT-627 and
Taxotere as detailed under Materials and
Methods. Lane 1 , untreated control; lane 2,
treated with Taxotere (1 nmol/L; 72 h);
lane 3, treated with ABT-627
(25 Amol/L; 72 h); lane 4, ABT-627
and Taxotere treatment together (72 h).
ABT-627 and ABT-627 and Taxotere
treatment down-regulated the basal
constitutive NF-nB in C4-2b cells.
D, Western blot analysis of PARP,
antiapoptotic proteins, such as Bcl-xL,
Bcl-2, and survivin, and phosphorylated
Akt in whole-cell lysates of C4-2b cells after
treatment with only ABT-627 (25 Amol/L,
72 h) alone, Taxotere (1 nmol/L, 72 h)
alone, or ABT-627 and Taxotere together
(72 h).

with f40% growth inhibition by single treatments (Fig. 2).
However, once again PC-3 cells were found to be insensitive to
this combined regimen, unlike LNCaP and C4-2b cells. These
results suggest that the combination of ABT-627 and Taxotere
elicits a significantly greater loss of viable prostate cancer cells
relative to either agent alone. The inhibition of cell growth and
viability as assessed by MTT could also be due to the induction of
apoptosis induced by ABT-627 or chemotherapeutic agents. We
therefore investigated whether ABT-627 could potentiate the effect
of Taxotere by inducing apoptotic cell death compared with either
agent alone.
ABT-627 sensitizes C4-2b and LNCaP cells to apoptosis by
Taxotere. Two different approaches including histone-DNA ELISA
and sub–G0-G1 fraction of PI-stained nuclei were used to
investigate the degree of apoptosis. We observed apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells treated with either ABT-627 (25 Amol/L)
or Taxotere (1 nmol/L) alone. However, relative to single agent,
combination treatment induced more apoptosis in LNCaP and
C4-2b cell lines (Fig. 3A). These results are consistent with the
inhibition of cell viability by MTT, suggesting that the loss of viable
cells by ABT-627 and Taxotere is partly due to the induction of
apoptotic cell death. These findings were complimented by FACS
scan results wherein sub–G0-G1 fraction of PI-stained nuclei were
increased by 2.88-fold relative to only Taxotere treatment (Fig. 3B).
ABT-627 inhibits activation of NF-KB. As documented
previously, constitutive NF-nB found in nuclear extracts from
prostate cancer cells enables survival by inhibiting apoptosis. To
investigate whether the drug ABT-627 could abrogate constitutively

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

expressed NF-nB, cells were treated with increasing concentrations
of the drug (5, 10, and 25 Amol/L for 72 h) and subjected to gel shift
assay (EMSA). As shown in Fig. 4A and B, ABT-627 resulted in a
decreased NF-nB DNA binding activity in C4-2b cells in a dosedependent and time-dependent manner. Interestingly, the combination of ABT-627 and Taxotere showed greater degree of
down-regulation of the NF-nB DNA binding activity (Fig. 4C). These
results show that ABT-627 not only down-regulates the NF-nB DNA
binding activity but inhibits NF-nB even more in the presence of
low concentration of Taxotere, which could be responsible for
better cell killing by combination treatment.
Cellular basis for ABT-627 and Taxotere augmenting signal
for apoptosis. To identify the mechanism of enhanced apoptotic
response by ABT-627 and Taxotere combination treatment, we next
assessed by Western immunoblotting PARP cleavage and modulation of the status of antiapoptotic proteins using C4-2b cells as
representative cell type. Preliminary experiments were done to
determine the optimal treatment schedule and dose of individual
agents. Cells were treated with ABT-627 (25 Amol/L) and Taxotere
for 72 h, and their whole-cell extract were subjected to Western
immunoblotting. Our data showed that combination treatment
substantially inhibited the levels of all markers tested that favors
cell survival (Fig. 4D). Because PARP is a substrate for caspase
activity and a reliable marker of apoptosis, we assessed the level
of cleaved PARP. Individually, these agents showed low levels of
PARP cleavage; however, the combination of ABT-627 and Taxotere
resulted in the appearance of a stronger cleaved PARP band
(Fig. 4D). Our results on the inactivation of NF-nB DNA binding

3822

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Combination Therapy of Taxotere and ABT-627

activity and subsequent decrease in the levels of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and
survivin are consistent with transcriptional inactivation of Bcl-2,
Bcl-xL, and survivin due to inactivation of NF-nB in combination
treatment. Moreover, because inactivation of Akt phosphorylation
also reportedly sensitizes cells to chemotherapeutic drugs, we
examined the Akt activity by monitoring the phosphorylation of
GSK-3a/h which is a substrate of Akt. We found that, although
Taxotere and ABT-627 had an effect on down-regulation of
phosphorylated Akt, the effect was much more pronounced in
the combination group favoring apoptosis (Fig. 4D). These results
confirms previous notion that ET-1 activates Akt activity through a
PI-3 kinase–dependent mechanism and inhibition of ET-1 by ABT627 results in the attenuation of PI-3 kinase–Akt survival pathway,
causing inactivation of NF-nB and its target genes, leading to cell
growth inhibition and induction of apoptotic cell death.
ABT-627 augments in vivo therapeutic effect of Taxotere on
tumor growth. The above in vitro mechanistic results strongly
support more efficient killing of prostate cancer cells by the novel
combinatorial regimen comprising Taxotere and ABT-627. However,
no in vivo preclinical studies has been done to date emulating the
human situation commonly seen in patients presented with prostate
cancer bone metastases accompanying osteoblastic lesions. Thus,
we evaluated in vivo the efficacy of combinatorial regimen using
SCID-hu model of experimental prostate cancer bone metastasis of
C4-2b cells. The experimental scheme is summarized in Fig. 5A. We
found that ABT-627 as well as Taxotere alone inhibited the C4-2b
tumor growth within the bone environment to some extent (Fig. 5B).
Interestingly, the combination of ABT-627 and Taxotere showed 90%

inhibition in tumor growth relative to control, demonstrating
enhanced inhibitory effect of ABT-627 and Taxotere combination in
our model (Fig. 6B). To explore therapeutic benefit and unravel the
molecular mechanism by which ABT-627 potentiated the antitumor
and antimetastatic effect of Taxotere, we quantitated serum prostatespecific antigen and evaluated the antiapoptotic gene expression
profiles by performing Western immunoblot and EMSA analysis
using harvested tumor tissue extracts. We found a significant
decrease in serum prostate-specific antigen (Fig. 6A) in all treatment
groups, and these results are consistent with decreased tumor
volume as shown in Fig. 5B. Moreover, our treatment conditions did
not cause any significant weight loss of animals (Fig. 6B), suggesting
that ABT-627 alone, Taxotere alone, or their combinations did not
induce any deleterious effects under present experimental conditions. These results clearly support the efficacy of combination of
ABT-627 and Taxotere in inhibiting prostate tumor growth in a
s.c. implanted fetal bone model of experimental metastases.
In vivo NF-nB DNA binding activity and its downstream
effector, survivin and Bcl-2. We subsequently evaluated within
two randomly selected tumor specimens per group to test whether
ABT-627 and/or Taxotere drug combinations alter molecules that
were observed during our in vitro studies. We measured the DNA
binding activity of NF-nB and two of its downstream target genes,
such as Bcl-2 and survivin, within tumor tissues. Our results clearly
show that NF-nB and the expression of its downstream effector
genes, Bcl-2 and survivin, was significantly down-regulated in
specimens obtained from the combination group (Fig. 6C). These
in vivo results were similar to our in vitro findings, suggesting that

Figure 5. A, schematic representation of experimental design and treatment schedule for in vivo studies. B, top , tumor growth curve showing drug efficacy in
inhibiting tumor growth in SCID-hu mice: control, n = 7; ABT-627, n = 7; Taxotere, n = 7; ABT-627 and Taxotere, n = 6. Bottom , comparison of the tumor volumes
in each group on the day when all mice were sacrificed (*P < 0.01, ABT-627 and Taxotere versus control). C, representation of primary tumor size in SCID-hu
mice at time of sacrifice.

www.aacrjournals.org

3823

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Serum prostate-specific antigen values in serum collected from animals from our in vivo studies as determined by ELISA showing superior therapeutic
efficacy of combination treatment (A), but most importantly there was no treatment related toxicity on animals as shown by no significant change in the average
terminal body weight at time of sacrifice (B). C, NF-nB in harvested tumor samples collected from each group (top ); Western blot for survivin and Bcl-2 (bottom ).
D, H&E stained sections of tumors from control, ABT-627, Taxotere, or ABT-627 plus Taxotere combination group. Top, tumor cells (solid arrow ) and new bone
formation (osteoblastic reaction; open arrow ). Top right, active osteoblasts (arrow ) lining that are piling up on the surface of bone matrix surface; middle and
bottom, pathologic findings from each treated group as discussed under Results.

the inactivation of NF-nB is, at least, one of the molecular events by
which the drug combination potentiates antitumor activity in our
experimental model. The down-regulation of the survivin and Bcl-2
protein expression also provides further evidence of loss of
survival/proliferative signals within tumors treated with the drugs
which corroborates our in vitro findings (Fig. 4D).
Tumor histology. All tumors harvested from the control and
treated group of mice were subjected to histopathologic evaluation
(Fig. 6D). In the control group of mice, the bone is seen severely
destroyed by infiltrating tumor cells by osteolytic processes.
Residual bone also showed active new bone formation (osteoblastic
reaction) as shown by prominent osteoblasts lining and piling up
on the surface of bone matrix. Osteoclasts are also focally seen.
Significant histologic changes are seen in two of seven tumors in
combination group. The neoplastic cells in these two tumors show
marked cytoplasmic clearing and vacuolization. Tumor cells form
smaller nests and associated with dense fibrosis. The bone
fragments show much less prominent osteblastic rim. The tumors
in remaining animals are mainly composed of large irregular sheets
or small nests of high-grade neoplastic cells with eosinophilic

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

cytoplasm. The tumor cells are associated with variable hemorrhage, necrosis, cystic degeneration, and fibrosis. The bone
fragments have a prominent osteoblastic rim. None of these
changes showed obvious differences among these groups.

Discussion
Hormone-insensitive human prostate cancer with predilection to
bone metastases exhibits chemoresistance toward commonly used
conventional chemotherapeutic agents, suggesting that novel agents
must be developed and tested for achieving better outcome in the
treatment of hormone refractory and metastatic prostate cancer.
Previous studies have shown that ET-1 produced abundantly by
prostate cancer cells binds to its receptor present on bone marrow
stromal cells and favors osteoblastic response during bone
metastases of prostate cancer. These results suggest that the
interruptions of ET-1 interaction with its receptor could be a useful
strategy for inhibiting prostate cancer bone metastasis and, as such,
may enhance the therapeutic activity of docetaxel (Taxotere), the
most commonly used drug for the treatment of metastatic prostate

3824

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Combination Therapy of Taxotere and ABT-627

cancer. Docetaxel (Taxotere), a member of the taxane family, showed
clinical activity in a wide spectrum of solid tumors, including breast,
lung, ovarian, prostate cancers, etc. It binds to tubulin and deranges
the equilibrium between microtubule assembly and disassembly
during mitosis and, in turn, impairs mitosis and cell proliferation in
tumors. Therefore, the goal of our study was to obtain preclinical
data supporting our hypothesis that the combined use of ET-1
receptor antagonist, ABT-627 (Atrasentan), with Taxotere will be
superior in inducing apoptosis in vitro and inhibiting tumor growth
in vivo in a SCID-hu model of experimental bone metastasis induced
by C4-2b prostate cancer cells.
In this report, we have presented evidence showing better
therapeutic activity of Taxotere when combined with ABT-627
(Atrasentan) both in vitro and in vivo. Our results showed
inhibition of tumor cell survival/proliferation and induction of
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo, resulting in better antitumor activity
of combination therapy in vivo. These results validate the potential
advantage of combination therapy for advanced prostate cancer as
shown in our experimental model. Our results are in concordance
with recently published work by Akhavan et al. (20), demonstrating
that endothelin receptor blockade enhances taxane effect in
prostate cancer and that ABT-627 exhibited additive tumor effects
when used in combination with taxane drugs both in vitro and
in vivo using ETA overexpressing PPC-1 xenograft tumors and
assessing the tumor growth rate.
Recent studies have shown that tumor cells produce ET-1, which
has dual effect in stimulating osteoblast and tumor cell
proliferation via ETA receptors. Thus, intervening ET-1 ligand–
receptor interaction by the drug ABT-627 impedes ETA receptor
signaling, suggesting that this drug is an effective therapeutic
arsenal in preventing osteoblastic bone lesions and tumor growth
arrest, invasion, and angiogenesis in vivo (6). Interestingly, the drug
ABT-627 alone showed limited effect on tumor growth in our
model system; however, antitumor activity was significantly
increased by using one cycle of cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agent,
Taxotere, commonly used for the treatment of advanced prostate
cancer. Furthermore, our mouse model of experimental bone
metastasis carrying human bone xenograft creates the bone
marrow microenvironment that is closely similar to those seen in
bone metastatic disease of prostate cancer. One remarkable finding
was that the tumor cells induced new bone formation (osteblastic
lesions) within the implanted bone, and this feature is commonly
seen in patients with advanced prostate cancer. In addition, we
also found osteolytic processes in this model, which are also seen
in bone metastatic disease in humans. Thus, we believe that this
model of experimental bone metastases is a useful model for
further understanding of the biological role and pathophysiologic
role of tumor-bone interaction of prostate cancer metastasis, which
is likely to assist in designing better therapies for bone metastatic
disease of prostate cancer.
Our in vitro studies revealed that the drug ABT-627 has
differential sensitivity toward human prostate cancer cells, as
concluded from its ability to inhibit the growth of LNCaP and
C4-2b cells (AR positive) but not the growth of PC3 cells that are AR
negative. However, what role AR plays in determining the sensitivity
of prostate cancer cells toward ABT-627 is not known and, as such,
could be an interesting topic on its own right for future
investigation. Consistent with these observations, we further
evaluated, under in vitro conditions, the response of prostate
cancer cells to combination treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agent, Taxotere; and again we found enhanced killing of

www.aacrjournals.org

LNCaP and C4-2b cells but not of PC-3 cells. Additional studies
conducted using C4-2b cells complimented the cell viability results
and revealed pronounced apoptosis using a sensitive DNA-histone
ELISA and FACS-PI staining for analysis of sub–G0-G1 cells after
72 h coincubation with ABT-627 and Taxotere. Further, mechanistic
studies using C4-2b cells correlated with cell growth inhibition and
induction of apoptosis with pronounced effect observed in
combination group compared with single agents. FACS scan
analysis results revealed that the drug combination increased cell
numbers in the sub–G0-G1 phase, suggesting apoptotic cell death.
A recent report published by Nelson et al. documented that ET-1
induced phosphorylation of Akt in prostate cancer cells (21).
Studies published by our laboratory and others have shown that
Akt directly activates NF-nB signaling (22). In other cell types, ET-1
reportedly signals through Erk1/2 to induce Akt phosphorylations
(23). This clearly reveals that ET-1 has diverse cellular responses
and, as such, multiple pathways converging to promote tumor cell
proliferation and survival signaling. Thus, blocking endothelin axis
with novel drugs, such as ABT-627, knocks down cell survival
response to ETA signaling by inactivation of Akt/NF-nB signaling
pathway. Our results using C4-2b cells showed more pronounced
down-regulation of phosphorylated Akt in combination treatment
compared with single agents.
To further test whether there is any possible link between
endothelin axis and induction of apoptotic cell death using the
proposed combinatorial regimen, we focused our attention on
modulation of an important transcription factor, NF-nB, which is
regulated by Akt. Consistent with existing reports in the literature
documenting that ET-1 induces NF-nB activation, we evaluated
NF-nB DNA binding activity using nuclear protein extracts of
prostate cancer cells (C4-2b) treated with ETA receptor antagonist
(ABT-627). Increasing concentration of ABT-627 reduced the basal
constitutive level of NF-nB DNA binding activity, and these results
are consistent with previously published reports establishing the
link between NF-nB activation and endothelin axis (ETA receptor
blockade). Several lines of evidence supports that the NF-nB
pathway is an important target to prevent prostate cancer bone
metastases, and published literatures suggest that NF-nB reciprocally regulates genes involved in metastases and apoptosis. We
propose a hypothesis wherein ET-1 activates NF-nB through
autocrine loop and that ET-1 antagonists abrogate NF-nB
activation favoring proapoptotic environment, leading to greater
killing when combined with chemotherapeutic agents. The C4-2b
prostate cancer cells with high-basal level of constitutive NF-nB is
likely to favor active transcription of prosurvival genes whose
expression results in increased proliferation. In addition, numerous studies have shown that the production of angiogenic factors
in inducing angiogenesis are regulated through NF-nB binding to
promoter sequence of vascular endothelial growth factor, resulting
in increased neovascularization in tumors. Thus, ABT-627–
mediated down-regulation of NF-nB could result in a cascade of
molecular events including up-regulation of effectors of apoptosis
and reduction in the number of blood vessels within the tumor,
ultimately resulting in the inhibition of cell survival, proliferation,
and induction of cell death and collectively causing antitumor
activity. As previously suggested by Nelson et al. (21) and others, we
also believe that up-regulation of Akt activity and NF-nB accounts
for the majority of the effects elicited by ET-1 signaling. Previous
studies reported in the literature revealed elevated circulating
plasma ET-1 in men with hormone refractory prostate cancer
(13.2 ng/mL) compared with normal controls (5.1 pg/mL). It is

3825

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

likely that ET-1 concentrations in circulation would be even lower
than the local tissue concentrations, wherein prostate cancer cells
are eliciting an autocrine mechanism of ET-1 signaling through the
ETA receptor, augmenting uncontrolled proliferation and, as such,
supports our results.
Other studies targeting combination of ETA receptor antagonist
and chemotherapeutic drugs are beginning to emerge. Del Bufalo
et al. (24) and Rosano et al. (15) have shown that the drug ABT-627
attenuated the action of ET-1 and sensitized the ovarian tumor
cells to paclitaxel. Furthermore, in a nude mouse model carrying
CaSki xenograft, the combined treatment of ABT-627 along with
paclitaxel was very effective in inhibiting tumor growth (16).
Consistent with these results, our findings reinforce the hypothesis
that prolonged treatment with ETA receptor antagonists along with
antitumor chemotherapeutic agents should be more effective for
the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer in the future.
In conclusion, the combination treatment significantly
inhibited tumor cell growth, induced apoptosis, and inhibited

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2006.
CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:106–30.
2. Logothetis CJ, Lin SH. Osteoblasts in prostate cancer
metastasis to bone. Nat Rev 2005;5:21–8.
3. Keller ET, Brown J. Prostate cancer bone metastases
promote both osteolytic and osteoblastic activity. J Cell
Biochem 2004;91:718–29.
4. Yonou H, Ogawa Y, Ochiai A. [Mechanism of
osteoblastic bone metastasis of prostate cancer]. Clin
Calcium 2006;16:25–32.
5. Mundy GR. Endothelin-1 and osteoblastic metastasis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:10588–9.
6. Yin JJ, Mohammad KS, Kakonen SM, et al. A causal
role for endothelin-1 in the pathogenesis of osteoblastic
bone metastases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:
10954–9.
7. Nelson JB, Hedican SP, George DJ, et al. Identification
of endothelin-1 in the pathophysiology of metastatic
adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Nat Med 1995;1:944–9.
8. Papandreou CN, Usmani B, Geng Y, et al. Neutral
endopeptidase 24.11 loss in metastatic human prostate
cancer contributes to androgen-independent progression. Nat Med 1998;4:50–7.
9. Arai H, Hori S, Aramori I, Ohkubo H, Nakanishi S.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

the growth of C4-2b cells in the bone microenvironment in our
SCID-hu model of human prostate cancer bone metastasis. These
results suggest that the combination of ABT-627 and Taxotere
could be a promising regimen for the treatment of prostate
cancer and its metastases. Further testing of combinations of
various drugs with ABT-627 and attenuation of survival signaling
is likely to assist in designing mechanism-based anticancer
therapies, particularly for metastatic prostate cancer for which
there is currently no curative treatment.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/19/2006; revised 12/11/2006; accepted 1/29/2007.
Grant support: Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Sanofi-Aventis for providing Taxotere for this study and Carrie Koerner
for the critical reading of this manuscript.

Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding an
endothelin receptor. Nature 1990;348:730–2.
10. Sakurai T, Yanagisawa M, Takuwa Y, et al. Cloning of
a cDNA encoding a non-isopeptide-selective subtype of
the endothelin receptor. Nature 1990;348:732–5.
11. Kobayashi S, Tang R, Wang B, et al. Localization of
endothelin receptors in the human prostate. J Urol 1994;
151:763–6.
12. Nelson JB, Chan-Tack K, Hedican SP, et al. Endothelin-1 production and decreased endothelin B receptor
expression in advanced prostate cancer. Cancer Res
1996;56:663–8.
13. Verhaar MC, Grahn AY, Van Weerdt AW, et al.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic effects of
ABT-627, an oral ETA selective endothelin antagonist,
in humans. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2000;49:562–73.
14. Carducci M, Nelson JB, Saad F, et al. Effect of
atrasentan on disease progression and biological markers
in men with metastatic hormone refractory prostate
cancer: phase 3 study. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:384s.
15. Rosano L, Spinella F, Salani D, et al. Therapeutic
targeting of the endothelin a receptor in human ovarian
carcinoma. Cancer Res 2003;63:2447–53.
16. Bagnato A, Cirilli A, Salani D, et al. Growth inhibition
of cervix carcinoma cells in vivo by endothelin A receptor blockade. Cancer Res 2002;62:6381–4.

3826

17. Rosano L, Spinella F, Di Castro V, et al. Endothelin-1 promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
in human ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res 2005;65:
11649–57.
18. Chaturvedi MM, Mukhopadhyay A, Aggarwal BB.
Assay for redox-sensitive transcription factor. Methods
Enzymol 2000;319:585–602.
19. Nemeth JA, Yousif R, Herzog M, et al. Matrix
metalloproteinase activity, bone matrix turnover, and
tumor cell proliferation in prostate cancer bone
metastasis. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002;94:17–25.
20. Akhavan A, McHugh KH, Guruli G, et al. Endothelin
receptor a blockade enhances taxane effects in prostate
cancer. Neoplasia 2006;8:725–32.
21. Nelson JB, Udan MS, Guruli G, Pflug BR. Endothelin-1
inhibits apoptosis in prostate cancer. Neoplasia 2005;7:
631–7.
22. Evan G, Littlewood T. A matter of life and cell death.
Science 1998;281:1317–22.
23. Wu-Wong JR, Chiou WJ, Wang J. Extracellular signalregulated kinases are involved in the antiapoptotic
effect of endothelin-1. 2000;293:514–21.
24. Del Bufalo D, Di Castro V, Biroccio A, et al.
Endothelin-1 acts as a survival factor in ovarian
carcinoma cells. Clin Sci (Lond) 2002;103 Suppl 48:
302–5S.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

In vitro and In vivo Molecular Evidence for Better
Therapeutic Efficacy of ABT-627 and Taxotere Combination
in Prostate Cancer
Sanjeev Banerjee, Maha Hussain, Zhiwei Wang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:3818-3826.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3818

This article cites 23 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3818.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3818.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

