Review

Is B-Raf a Good Therapeutic Target for Melanoma and
Other Malignancies?
1

1,2,3,4,5

SubbaRao V. Madhunapantula and Gavin P. Robertson

Departments of 1Pharmacology, 2Pathology, and 3Dermatology, The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine; 4The Foreman
Foundation for Melanoma Research; and 5Penn State Melanoma Therapeutics Program, Hershey, Pennsylvania

normal cells and causes hyperactivity of the MAP kinase pathway
promoting tumor development (2, 3). Activation occurs as a result
of a conformational change in protein structure due to glutamic
acid acting as a phosphomimetic between the Thr598 and Ser601
phosphorylation sites (2, 4). Activating B-Raf mutations are
acquired, somatic, post-zygotic events and are not inherited in
families (5). Cell culture and/or animal based studies have shown
the oncogenic potential conferred by V600EB-Raf to developing
cancer cells (1, 2).
Abnormally high activation of the MAP kinase pathway can
inhibit cellular growth in a wide variety of normal and cancer cells
by promoting cellular senescence (6). This senescence is suggested
to be caused by induction of a variety of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors, such as p21Cip1, p16Ink4a, and p27Kip1, which are
proposed to act as a putative defense mechanism of normal cells
to overcome oncogene activation (6). In contrast, moderate levels
of MAP kinase pathway activation have been shown to promote
transformation and immortalization of mouse melanocytes,
increased in vitro colony formation, and elevated Erk1/2 activities
(1, 2). Recent evidence suggests that V600EB-Raf initially promotes
nevi development but the resulting high, intense activation of
the MAP kinase pathway inhibits further tumor progression.
Furthermore, additional genetic changes such as loss of p16INK4a or
elevation in Akt3 activity are needed for the senescent melanocytic
cells to reenter the cell cycle.6 Recently, Akt3 activity in early
melanocytic lesions has been shown to phosphorylate V600EB-Raf
to reduce its activity and the MAP kinase pathway activity to
levels promoting, rather than inhibiting, proliferation to overcome
the senescence block.6

Abstract
The RAF family members, A-Raf, B-Raf, and C-Raf (or Raf-1),
are intermediate molecules in the mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinase [Ras/Raf/MAP kinase/extracellular signal–
regulated kinase (Erk) kinase (MEK)/Erk] pathway, which
relays extracellular signals from the cell membrane to the
nucleus via a cascade of phosphorylation events ultimately
promoting cancer development. This pathway is activated by
mutation in f7% of all human cancers. B-Raf is one of the
proteins frequently mutated to an active form during tumor
development. Therefore, B-Raf is an attractive cancer target
but lack of clinical efficacy using agents targeting this protein
has raised serious doubts about its therapeutic utility. Design
of more effective B-Raf inhibitory agents, targeting other
members of the signaling cascade for greater clinical efficacy
or inhibiting B-Raf in combination with other targets, is being
evaluated to resolve these perplexing issues. Here, we discuss
recent progress, using preclinical models and clinical studies,
to resolve the controversy of whether B-Raf would be a good
therapeutic target for melanoma and other malignancies.
[Cancer Res 2008;68(1):5–8]

Background
B-Raf is central to mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling and frequently activated by mutation in cancer.
B-Raf is one of three serine/threonine kinases in the Raf family,
which includes A-Raf, B-Raf, and C-Raf (or Raf-1; refs. 1, 2). Raf
family members are intermediate molecules in the mitogenactivated protein (MAP) kinase [Ras/Raf/MAP kinase/extracellular
signal–regulated kinase (Erk) kinase (Mek)/Erk] pathway, a signal
transduction cascade relaying extracellular signals from cell
membrane to nucleus via an ordered series of consecutive
phosphorylation events, which are detailed in Fig. 1A (1).
Alterations activating members of the pathway are implicated in
development of carcinomas of the skin (27–70%), ovary (f30%),
thyroid (36–53%), colon (5–22%), and pancreas (f33%; refs. 1, 2).
B-Raf in this cascade is the most mutated gene in melanomas, with
>60% of advanced tumors containing constitutively active mutant
protein.
Among different B-Raf mutations, a single-base missense
substitution (T to A at nucleotide 1,799) that changes valine to
glutamic acid at codon 600 (V600E) in exon 15 is prevalent in
f90% of melanoma tumors with mutation of B-Raf (3). V600EB-Raf
protein leads to kinase activity 10.7 times higher than occurs in

Key Finding
Lessons learned from preclinical studies about the therapeutic potential of targeting B-Raf. MAP kinase pathway
activation is central to cancer development by enhancing multiple
oncogenic processes (4). Therefore, therapies targeting mutant
V600E
B-Raf activity or other components of the MAP kinase cascade
could halt progression of malignant tumors by slowing tumor
growth, preventing angiogenesis, inhibiting invasion and metastasis, inducing tumor cell death, or promoting tumor differentiation
(2, 7–9). Targeted therapies of this type can be effective; for
example, inhibiting Abl and KIT tyrosine kinases with the smallmolecule inhibitor imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, ST1571) was shown
as an effective monotherapy for treating chronic myelogenous
leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (10).
The potential to inhibit tumor development by targeting B-Raf
signaling has been clearly shown in multiple preclinical animal
models but remains controversial in the clinical setting (2, 8).

Requests for reprints: Gavin P. Robertson, Department of Pharmacology, H078,
The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey,
PA 17033. Phone: 717-531-8098; Fax: 717-531-5013; E-mail: gprobertson@psu.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2038

www.aacrjournals.org

6
M. Cheung, A. Sharma, and G.P. Robertson. Mutant B-Raf (V600E) and Akt3
cooperate to promote melanoma development, submitted for publication.

5

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. A, diagrammatic representation of the MAP kinase signaling pathway. Shown are selected proteins in the signaling cascade affected by constitutively
activated B-Raf mutation and effect on cell survival, invasion, growth, and angiogenesis. Pharmacologic agents inhibiting the pathway at various locations in the
pathway are also shown. Typically the cascade is activated when extracellular stimuli such as mitogens, hormones, or neurotransmitters induce receptor tyrosine kinase
dimerization leading to Ras-activation by increasing cellular Ras-GTP levels. Activated Ras recruits dimerized Raf kinase to the plasma membrane where it is activated
by autophosphorylation or by other kinases and assembled into a MAP kinase signaling complex consisting of Mek, Erk, and scaffolding proteins. Phosphorylation and
activation of Mek1 and Mek2 by activated Raf kinase initiates MAP kinase signaling, which subsequently phosphorylates (activates) downstream Erk1 and Erk2.
Activated Erk1 and Erk2 dissociate from the MAP kinase complex and phosphorylate several cytoplasmic proteins, kinases, and nuclear transcription factors that
ultimately lead to expression of proteins playing important roles in cell growth, differentiation, and survival. B, melanoma tumor development was inhibited with siRNA to
B-RAF but not with siRNA to C-RAF or scrambled siRNA (see ref. 8). SiRNA-mediated reduction of B-Raf led to decreased tumorigenic potential of melanoma
cells. SiRNAs against B-Raf, C-Raf, and scrambled siRNA were introduced into UACC 903 melanoma cells (white arrow ) and, 36 h later, cells were injected into nude
mice (black arrow ). Size of tumors was measured at 2-d intervals; bars, SE. SiRNA-mediated down-regulation of B-Raf lasted for up to 8 d in culture and reduced
the tumorigenic potential of melanoma cells. Control cells were nucleofected with buffer only, a scrambled siRNA, or siRNA against C-Raf. C, inhibition of B-Raf
signaling using sorafenib retards melanoma tumor development (see ref. 8). The effects of sorafenib (BAY 43-9006) treatment are shown on melanoma tumor
development. UACC 903 melanoma cells were injected into nude mice and tumor development was allowed to occur to day 6, at which point mice were injected i.p.
every 2 d with sorafenib dissolved in DMSO (indicated by arrowheads ). Control animals were given DMSO only. The Raf kinase inhibitor sorafenib reduced the
tumorigenic potential of melanoma cells containing mutant V600EB-Raf protein at concentrations z50 mg/kg by decreasing vascular development followed by a decrease
in proliferation and an increase in the tumor cell apoptosis. D, inhibition of V600EB-Raf and downstream proteins reduces formation of metastatic tumors in the lungs
of mice (see ref. 9). SiRNA-mediated reduction of mutant V600EB-Raf, Mek, Erk, and cyclin D1 proteins decreased formation of melanoma metastases in the lungs
of mice. SiRNA against each respective protein or a scrambled siRNA control was introduced into green fluorescent protein–tagged 1205 Lu melanoma cells; 36 h later
cells were i.v. injected into nude mice, and 17 d later lung metastases were scored.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

6

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

B-Raf as a Therapeutic Target

B-Raf mutations in metastatic melanoma show varied results with
respect to the clinical characteristics or outcomes between
melanomas with or without B-Raf mutation (9). This has raised
significant concern about B-Raf as a therapeutic target (2).
Especially, if preclinical animal studies are correct, therapeutically
targeting the MAP kinase signaling cascade may only be effective
for the f60% of melanoma patients whose tumors contain mutant
V600E
B-Raf protein and maximal inhibition may require inhibition
of Mek1/2 and not B-Raf (9, 13). Thus, it may be critical to ascertain
the mutational status of B-Raf in patients and use Mek1/2
inhibitors for greatest therapeutic efficacy. Discrepancies between
preclinical animal models and clinical studies still need to be
reconciled.
Pharmacologic agent selection could be the key to effectively target B-Raf pathway signaling. Whereas failure of
sorafenib in clinical trials could be due to its inability to reach a
concentration sufficient to inhibit B-Raf or to decreased potency
against highly active mutant B-Raf compared with wild-type B-Raf,
it is most likely due to off-target secondary effects. Pharmacologic
agents are generally not specific but rather inhibit activity of
multiple proteins. Sorafenib is one such example where, in addition
to inhibiting Raf, it also decreases activity of VEGF receptor
(VEGFR)-1, VEGFR2, VEGFR3, platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-h, Flt-3, p38, c-Kit, and fibroblast growth factor receptor
1 (15). Therefore, inhibitory effects may be due to sorafenib or
metabolized products targeting any single or combination of
proteins. To address this issue, preclinical studies are evaluating
the efficacy of more specific B-Raf inhibitors such as SB-590885.
SB-590885 is a potent B-Raf kinase inhibitor that is f100-fold
more specific than sorafenib and acts by stabilizing the active
conformation. However, use in preclinical models led to only a
modest decrease in melanoma tumor volume, suggesting B-Raf
might not be an ideal target (16).
Perhaps drugs need to be selected that target particular
processes mediated by B-Raf signaling to be effective. Preclinical
studies in animals have evaluated this possibility by identifying
agents that inhibit the same tumorigenic phenotype as occurs
following siRNA-mediated inhibition of B-Raf. In these studies,
siRNA-mediated inhibition of V600EB-Raf showed that it was
necessary for the pathway inhibitor to decrease the proliferative
capacity of tumor cells for efficacy (8, 9). However, comparison of
siRNA-mediated versus sorafenib-mediated inhibition showed that
sorafenib significantly retarded vascular development, mediated
through reduced VEGF secretion or VEGFR inhibition, whereas
siRNA decreased the proliferative capacity of tumor cells (8).
Studies examining the mechanism reducing metastasis development following B-Raf inhibition came to a similar conclusion
showing that decreased proliferative capacity was necessary for
metastasis inhibition (9). Because lung metastases in this model
did not require angiogenesis, sorafenib and its antiangiogenic
properties had no effect. In contrast, Mek inhibition using UO126
decreased tumor cell proliferation thereby significantly reducing
lung metastases (8, 9, 17). Other reports also found sorafenib
ineffective at blocking lung adenoma formation compared with the
Mek inhibitor CI-1040 (14). It is confounding that sorafenib and
UO126 inhibit V600EB-Raf signaling in cultured melanoma cells to
similar levels but are not equally effective at inhibiting metastasis
development in animals. Efficacy of an agent such as sorafenib in
cultured cells does not necessarily translate into tumor inhibitory
effectiveness. Thus, targeting Mek using pharmacologic agents and
not mutant B-Raf might have greatest clinical efficacy.

Targeting B-Raf using siRNA or pharmacologic Raf kinase inhibitor
sorafenib (BAY 43-9006) reduced MAP kinase signaling, thereby
decreasing tumor and/or metastasis development in animals (Fig.
1B and C; refs. 8, 9). Treating mice containing melanomas, colon,
breast, or lung tumors significantly reduced cell growth and/or
vascular development thereby delaying tumorigenesis (8). Specifically, siRNA- and sorafenib-mediated inhibition of B-Raf in
melanoma decreased cellular proliferation and/or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion, which retarded vascular
development by acting as an angiogenesis inhibitor (2, 8). More
recently, V600EB-Raf has also been shown to regulate melanoma
metastasis through overexpression of fibronectin and by promoting
interaction of melanoma cells with neutrophils to facilitate
extravasation across the endothelial lining as well as enhance
proliferation in the lung microenvironment (7, 11). Inhibiting these
processes decreased lung metastases by 4- to 5-fold of cells
containing but not those lacking the V600EB-Raf mutation (9). Thus,
active B-Raf can be targeted to reduce the tumorigenic and
metastatic potential of cancer cells by reducing cellular proliferation or vascular development in animal models, making it a likely
clinical therapeutic target.
Unfortunately, clinical trials using sorafenib to target B-Raf
signaling have not been effective except for kidney cancer, which
has raised serious doubt about the utility of therapeutically targeting
B-Raf signaling (12). Sorafenib has now been approved for use in
humans with renal cell carcinoma with relatively few minor side
effects (rashes, hand-foot syndrome, diarrhea, hypertension, and
stomatitis) and extending average life span by almost 12 weeks
(2, 12). Discrepancies between preclinical and clinical trial results
in terms of effectiveness of shrinking tumors following B-Raf inhibition are serious and controversial issues that need resolution.
Searching for the solution to whether B-Raf is a suitable
therapeutic target. Controversy remains about an explanation
for the lack of therapeutic success when targeting mutant V600EBRaf. One possibility is that it is not the most efficient strategy
to inhibit the MAP kinase signaling cascade or whether it is due
to the mechanism of action of sorafenib (2, 9). In response to
this controversy, preclinical studies have evaluated whether
targeting V600EB-Raf or another member of the MAP kinase
pathway would be the most effective approach to inhibit this
pathway. SiRNA-mediated inhibition of V600EB-Raf and proteins
downstream in the MAP kinase signaling cascade (Mek1/2,
Erk1/2, and cyclin D1) all significantly decreased lung metastases
compared with controls (9). However, targeting Mek1/2 was the
most effective strategy to reduce lung metastases, which is
illustrated in Fig. 1D (9). Furthermore, melanomas containing
mutated B-Raf are more responsive to agents targeting Mek in the
MAP kinase pathway than tumors with wild-type B-Raf or
harboring a Ras mutation (13). These were not the first studies
to identify Mek as a potentially important therapeutic target in
the pathway. Pharmacologic inhibition of Mek using CI-1040 had
previously been shown to be effective for reducing melanoma
metastasis (14). A separate study has also shown that inhibition
of V600EB-Raf and Mek using sorafenib and UO126 was more
effective in retarding tumor development compared with sorafenib monotherapy or siRNA-mediated down-regulation of B-Raf
expression (2).
Additional controversy exists about whether the presence of
B-Raf mutation affects therapeutic agent efficacy. Preclinical
models suggest that it may alter responsiveness to therapeutic
agents (13). However, studies assessing the clinical significance of

www.aacrjournals.org

7

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

inhibition of cell proliferation and apoptosis in glioma cells (20). In
a similar manner, systemic liposomal ceramide has been shown to
enhance efficacy of sorafenib. This combination led to inhibition
acting in a cooperative synergistic manner, which has therapeutic
potential for more effectively treating melanoma and breast cancer
through enhanced cellular apoptosis.7 Thus, targeting B-Raf
signaling using sorafenib may be more effective in combination
with other therapeutic agents than alone. It remains to be
determined whether these combinations would be more effective
in the clinic. Thus, uncertainty remains whether sorafenib could
be combined with another agent to improve its clinical efficacy;
however, before clinical evaluation, the agent combination would
need to have a solid and novel mechanistic underpinning before
proceeding to the clinic.
Conclusion. B-Raf is central to MAP kinase signaling and is
frequently activated in cancer. It remains uncertain whether
targeting B-Raf could be an effective therapeutic approach for
patients whose tumors have an active form of this protein.
Currently, targeting Mek, rather than B-Raf, in the MAP kinase
pathway seems to be the most promising therapeutic strategy.

Targeting B-Raf signaling in combination with other
pathway inhibitors. Lack of clinical efficacy using sorafenib as a
monotherapy and no mechanistic-based explanation for failure
have led to exploration of other therapeutic regimens in which
sorafenib is combined with other agents to identify combinations
resulting in more effective, synergistically acting tumor inhibition.
Preliminary results combining sorafenib with carboplatin and
paclitaxel in 2004 looked promising with responses in melanoma
patients, possibly as high as 50%, when compared with sorafenib
alone (18). However, recent results of phase III trials in patients
with advanced melanoma announced in 2006 that this combination failed to improve progression-free survival of patients (19).
Thus, this combination might not be effective as first thought,
driving the search for alternative strategies to improve the efficacy
of sorafenib (18).
Recent preclinical studies combining sorafenib with other agents
to increase its efficacy are providing a mechanistic basis for
selection of novel agent combinations that might be clinically
effective. For example, sorafenib has been combined with Rotterlin,
a protein kinase C inhibitor, leading to increased synergistic

Acknowledgments
7

Received 5/31/2007; revised 9/30/2007; accepted 10/8/2007.
Grant support: The American Cancer Society (RSG-04-053-01-GMC) and The
Foreman Foundation for Melanoma Research.

M.A. Tran, M. Kester, and G.P. Robertson. Sorafenib and liposomal ceramide
cooperate to synergistically inhibit malignant melanoma and breast cancer, submitted
for publication.

References
1. Garnett MJ, Marais R. Guilty as charged: B-RAF is a
human oncogene. Cancer Cell 2004;6:313–9.
2. Tuveson DA, Weber BL, Herlyn M. BRAF as a potential
therapeutic target in melanoma and other malignancies.
Cancer Cell 2003;4:95–8.
3. Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, et al. Mutations of
the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature 2002;417:
949–54.
4. Wan PT, Garnett MJ, Roe SM, et al. Mechanism of
activation of the RAF-ERK signaling pathway by
oncogenic mutations of B-RAF. Cell 2004;116:855–67.
5. Lang J, Boxer M, MacKie R. Absence of exon 15 BRAF
germline mutations in familial melanoma. Hum Mutat
2003;21:327–30.
6. Michaloglou C, Vredeveld LC, Soengas MS, et al.
BRAFE600-associated senescence-like cell cycle arrest of
human naevi. Nature 2005;436:720–4.
7. Gaggioli C, Robert G, Bertolotto C, et al. Tumorderived fibronectin is involved in melanoma cell
invasion and regulated by V600E B-Raf signaling
pathway. J Invest Dermatol 2007;127:400–10.
8. Sharma A, Trivedi NR, Zimmerman MA, Tuveson DA,

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Smith CD, Robertson GP. Mutant V599EB-Raf regulates
growth and vascular development of malignant melanoma tumors. Cancer Res 2005;65:2412–21.
9. Sharma A, Tran MA, Liang S, et al. Targeting mitogenactivated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase kinase in the mutant (V600E) B-Raf signaling
cascade effectively inhibits melanoma lung metastases.
Cancer Res 2006;66:8200–9.
10. Demetri GD, von Mehren M, Blanke CD, et al.
Efficacy and safety of imatinib mesylate in advanced
gastrointestinal stromal tumors. N Engl J Med 2002;347:
472–80.
11. Liang S, Sharma A, Peng HH, Robertson G, Dong C.
Targeting mutant (V600E) B-Raf in melanoma interrupts
immunoediting of leukocyte functions and melanoma
extravasation. Cancer Res 2007;67:5814–20.
12. Kane RC, Farrell AT, Saber H, et al. Sorafenib for the
treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res 2006;12:7271–8.
13. Solit DB, Garraway LA, Pratilas CA, et al. BRAF
mutation predicts sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Nature
2006;439:358–62.
14. Collisson EA, De A, Suzuki H, Gambhir SS, Kolodney
MS. Treatment of metastatic melanoma with an orally

8

available inhibitor of the Ras-Raf-MAPK cascade. Cancer
Res 2003;63:5669–73.
15. Wilhelm S, Carter C, Lynch M, et al. Discovery and
development of sorafenib: a multikinase inhibitor for
treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:835–44.
16. King AJ, Patrick DR, Batorsky RS, et al. Demonstration of a genetic therapeutic index for tumors expressing oncogenic BRAF by the kinase inhibitor SB-590885.
Cancer Res 2006;66:11100–5.
17. Adnane L, Trail PA, Taylor I, Wilhelm SM. Sorafenib
(BAY 43-9006, Nexavar((R))), a dual-action inhibitor that
targets RAF/MEK/ERK pathway in tumor cells and
tyrosine kinases VEGFR/PDGFR in tumor vasculature.
Methods Enzymol 2005;407:597–612.
18. Flaherty KT. Sorafenib: delivering a targeted drug to
the right targets. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2007;7:
617–26.
19. Lejeune FJ, Rimoldi D, Speiser D. New approaches in
metastatic melanoma: biological and molecular targeted
therapies. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2007;7:701–13.
20. Jane EP, Premkumar DR, Pollack IF. Coadministration of sorafenib with rottlerin potently inhibits cell
proliferation and migration in human malignant glioma
cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;319:1070–80.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Is B-Raf a Good Therapeutic Target for Melanoma and Other
Malignancies?
SubbaRao V. Madhunapantula and Gavin P. Robertson
Cancer Res 2008;68:5-8.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/5

This article cites 20 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/5.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 16 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/5.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

