Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985

Research Article

Src-Induced Cisplatin Resistance Mediated by Cell-to-Cell
Communication
Elizabeth Peterson-Roth, Cathleen M. Brdlik, and Peter M. Glazer
Departments of Therapeutic Radiology and Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut

Abstract
Cisplatin-induced cell death can be triggered by cell-to-cell
communication through gap junctions. Here, we show that
activated src produces tyrosine phosphorylation of the gap
junction protein connexin 43, decreases gap junction communication, and increases cell survival in response to
cisplatin. Experiments with mixed cell populations show that
src activity in one cell can confer increased cisplatin survival
on neighboring cells, even when the neighboring cells lack
such src activity. This work is the first demonstration that
expression of an oncogene in one cell can affect the survival of
a neighboring cell not expressing the oncogene in response to
a chemotherapeutic drug. The trans-acting effect of activated
src on neighboring cells can be blocked by inhibitors of src
kinase or by siRNA-mediated knockdown of src expression,
and it can be counteracted by forced up-regulation of
connexin 43, via either gene transfer or proteasome inhibition. These results identify a novel pathway of cisplatin
resistance that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention.
[Cancer Res 2009;69(8):3619–24]

Introduction
Once activated in a cell, oncogenes generally promote increased
growth and survival. In addition, oncogene expression in cancer
cells commonly confers resistance to chemotherapy and radiation.
The increased resistance is thought to occur through cell
autonomous mechanisms in which an activated oncogene in a
cell confers resistance to that particular cell (1, 2). In this work, we
report a novel pathway by which expression of an oncogene, src, in
one cell can increase survival of neighboring cells that are not,
themselves, expressing the oncogene, to the chemotherapeutic
drug, cisplatin.
Prior work by our group identified a pathway of cisplatin toxicity
involving cell-to-cell signaling that is dependent on the DNAdependent protein kinase complex and on gap junction intercellular communication (GJIC; ref. 3). In this pathway, cisplatin
damage in one cell triggers a signal that is dependent on DNAdependent protein kinase and is transmitted via GJIC to a
neighboring cell to cause cell death. We therefore hypothesized
that factors that modulate GJIC might influence the response of
cell populations to cisplatin treatment specifically by affecting the
cell-to-cell response pathway. Based on a report that connexin 43
(cx43) is a phosphorylation target of src (4), we asked whether
activated src can modulate the intercellular transmission of the
death signal in response to cisplatin.

Requests for reprints: Peter M. Glazer, Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, PO Box 208040, New Haven, CT 06520. Phone:
203-737-2788; Fax: 203-737-1467; E-mail: Peter.Glazer@yale.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985

www.aacrjournals.org

To test this, we developed a series of genetically defined cell lines
derived from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), including
wild-type (wt) MEFs, MEFs expressing activated v-Src, and MEFs
deficient in Ku80, a key component of the DNA-dependent protein
kinase complex. Because prior work established that Ku80 /
MEFs cannot initiate the cisplatin cell-to-cell death signal but can
still receive it, they served as receiver cells to examine the transacting effects of activated src expression. We report here that
expression of activated src in one group of cells attenuates their
ability to send a death signal to neighboring cells, thereby
conferring resistance to cells in the overall population even if they
do not express activated src. In addition, forced overexpression of
cx43 by gene transfer or by proteasome inhibition reversed the
effect of v-Src, whereas the use of a src kinase inhibitor or the use
of siRNAs to knock down src expression blocked it, leading in all
four cases to increased sensitivity of neighboring cells to cisplatin.
Hence, the work identifies novel pharmacologic strategies to
sensitize tumor cells to cisplatin.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines. Wt and Ku80 / immortalized MEFs were grown in DMEM
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). A pcDNA3 vector containing cDNA
for v-Src (generous gift from G. Steven Martin, University of California,
Berkeley) was stably transfected into wt MEFs. Positive clones (Src1 and
Src2) were selected with 800 Ag/mL of geneticin. To create the Src1+cx43
cell line, overexpressing human cx43, Src1 cells were stably transfected with
human cx43 cDNA cloned into pcDNA 3.1 and a positive clone was selected
using 0.1 mg/mL zeocin.
Drug treatment and survival assays. Cells were treated with indicated
concentrations of cisplatin (Sigma) for 1 h. In addition, as indicated, cells
were treated with 1Amol/L PP2 (Calbiochem) for 2 h before and concurrent
with cisplatin treatment or treated with 50 mg/mL of lindane simultaneously with cisplatin treatment.
High- and low-density clonogenic survival experiments and monolayer
growth assay with mixed populations of cells were performed as previously
described (3) with the following alterations. To measure survival exclusively
in Ku80 / cells, we created a puromycin (puro)-resistant cell line by
stably transfecting them with the pCMV-puro-bam vector, and resistant
cells were selected and maintained using 2Ag/mL of puro (Sigma). For
experiments with the proteasome inhibitor, MG132 (A.G. Scientific), Src1
cells were pretreated with MG132 (100 nmol/L) for 24 h, MG132 was
removed, and cells were trypsinized and seeded 1:1 with Ku80 / puro+
cells. Cells were allowed to attach for 3 h, treated with cisplatin, and
followed by the monolayer growth assay.
siRNA treatment. Src1 cells were transfected simultaneously with two
siRNA oligonucleotides targeting v-Src (UCAACAACACGGAAGGUAAUU,
CGGGAGAGCGAGACGACAAUU) or control siRNA molecule designed to
target glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA using
DharmaFECT 1 transfection reagent (Thermo Scientific). Twenty-four hours
posttransfection, the Src1 cells were reseeded 1:1 with Ku80 / puro+ cells
at high density. The next day, mixed cell populations were treated with
5 Ag/mL cisplatin for 1 h, washed twice with PBS, trypsinized, and seeded at
low density in media containing puro to assay clonogenic survival of the
Ku80 / puro+ cells.

3619

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (8). April 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985
Cancer Research
Western blotting and immunoprecipitation. Cell lysates were
collected and processed for Western blot as previously described (7).
Immunoprecipitation was performed as previously described (8). Primary
antibodies were as follows: anti–v-Src (Ab-1; Calbiochem), anti–p-Src
(Tyr416; Cell Signaling), anti-phosphotyrosine (Cell Signaling), anti-cx43
(BD Transduction Laboratories), anti–p-cx43 (Tyr-265; Santa Cruz), and
anti–g-tubulin clone GTU-88 (Sigma). Gel images analyzed with NIH image
software.

Results

Figure 1. v-Src expression mediates connexin phosphorylation. Wt MEFs were
transfected with a v-Src expression vector and analyzed for v-Src levels and
cx43 phosphorylation. A, Western blot (WB ) for src expression in wt MEFs in two
subclones, Src1 and Src2. Band intensities for src expression were quantified
and normalized to tubulin. The values given below the respective lanes indicate
fold level of expression of src in relation to wt cells. B, Western blot for
tyrosine phosphorylated src in the presence (+PP2) or absence of the src
inhibitor PP2. C, Western blot for tyrosine phosphorylated cx43 using a cx43
phospho-specific antibody (pYcx43). B and C, values below each lane indicate
levels of phospho-protein in relation to wt cells (normalized to tubulin). D,
immunoblot analysis with antiphosphotyrosine antibody (top ) and anti-cx43
antibody (bottom ) of samples from the indicated cells first immunoprecipitated
with anti-cx43 antibody. IP, immunoprecipitaion.

Assays for cell communication. The Lucifer yellow dye transfer assay
was performed as previously described (5). Briefly, cell monolayers were
overlayed with 0.05% Lucifer yellow in 2 mL of DMEM + 10% FBS, then
two linear scrapes were made through the monolayer using a scalpel
blade. Treated monolayers were incubated at 37jC for 5 min to allow for
dye uptake, and then dye containing media was removed and monolayers
were washed thoroughly with PBS and returned to normal media. Dye
transfer from cells at the edge of the scrape to neighboring cells (as a
measure of gap junction communication) was visualized using Zeiss
Axiovert 200 fluorescent microscope. The flow cytometry assay was
adapted from Czyz and colleagues (6). Briefly, donor cells were
trypsinized, resuspended in 0.3 mol/L glucose, and preloaded for
30 min with 50 nmol/L calcein AM and 90 nmol/L DiI (Inivitrogen).
Preloaded donor cells were washed thrice with PBS, and added to a
monolayer of unstained recipient cells of the same type at a ratio of 1:25
(donor/recipient). Donor and recipient cells were cocultured for 3 h then
collected by trypsinization, resuspended in PBS, and analyzed immediately on Becton Dickinson FACSCalibur. Data were analyzed by FlowJo
software. In the indicated experiments, cells were pretreated with MG132
for 24 h.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (8). April 15, 2009

v-Src expression alters connexin phosphorylation and
function. To examine the role of activated src in cisplatin
response, we transfected wt MEFs with v-Src cDNA. Stable clones
were selected and tested for v-Src expression. Western blotting
confirmed that two clones (Src1 and Src2) had increased
expression of v-Src above baseline levels of c-Src detected in the
parental wt cells (Fig. 1A). The antibody recognizes both c-Src and
v-Src. Although the overall increase in src levels was found to be
only 1.6- and 1.8-fold, levels of activated src (Fig. 1B) were
substantially elevated in both src clones (8.1- and 2.9-fold).
Treatment with the src kinase inhibitor PP2 decreased the levels
of activated src in both Src1 and Src2 cells to levels below those in
wt MEFs (Fig. 1B).
To examine the effect of activated src expression on GJIC, we
tested for phosphorylation of cx43, which has two potential src
phosphorylation targets at tyrosine 247 and 265. Using an antibody
specific for tyrosine-phosphorylated cx43, we detected 2- to 3-fold
higher phosphorylation of cx43 in the 2 subclones expressing v-Src
(Fig. 1C). We also immunoprecipitated cx43 from wt, Src1, and Src2
cells using anti-cx43 antibody and performed immunoblot analysis
of the samples using phospho-tyrosine (Fig. 1D, top) or cx43
antibodies (Fig. 1D, bottom). The novel bands detected by the anti–
phospho-tyrosine antibody in cx43 immunoprecipitation samples
from Src1 and Src2 cells provide further evidence of increased cx43
phosphorylation in the presence of v-Src.
Impact of v-Src on GJIC. Lucifer yellow is a fluorescent dye that
is able to pass from cell to cell through gap junction channels. By
creating a scrape in a cell monolayer, the Lucifer yellow dye can
enter cells along the scrape line. If GJIC is present, the dye will
spread through cells outward, away from the scrape line.
Visualization of GJIC using Lucifer yellow dye transfer in cell
monolayers showed a decrease in GJIC in v-Src–expressing clones
compared with wt cells because in wt cells, there is a greater
amount of dye transfer away from the scrape line (Fig. 2A shows
data for Src1 compared with wt). To confirm and quantify changes
in GJIC caused by v-Src expression, we used a flow cytometry–
based assay to assess transfer of calcein dye from cells preloaded
with calcein to a population of unloaded cells. As a control, DiI, a
fluorescent dye that cannot pass through gap junctions, was also
preloaded into the initial cells along with calcein. The preloaded
cells were then washed and mixed with unloaded cells for 3 hours,
followed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis of
calcein and DiI content in the mixed population. In the FACS plot
(Fig. 2B, bottom), cells that are positive for both dyes (circled cell
population) represent preloaded cells, and cells that are positive for
only calcein are those that received the calcein dye through GJIC.
As a control, unstained cells were analyzed by FACS (Fig. 2B, top).
The apparently higher calcein staining in Src1 cells is due to the
decreased GJIC; less neighboring cells take up the dye so it is more
highly concentrated in the few cells it enters. In the wt population,
more cells take up the dye so it is diluted as it moves through the

3620

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985
Src-Induced Cisplatin Resistance

cell monolayer. The expression of v-Src in preloaded cells led to a
40% decrease in calcein dye transfer, consistent with decreased
GJIC (Fig. 2C).
v-Src expression abrogates the cell density dependence of
the survival response to cisplatin. As expected, we found that wt
MEFs show decreased cisplatin survival at increasing cell densities
(Fig. 2D), demonstrating the ability of high-density cells to engage
in cytotoxic cell-to-cell signaling after cisplatin damage (3). The
addition of a GJIC inhibitor, lindane, abrogated the density
dependence of wt cells, illustrating the role of GJIC in the density
effect. With expression of v-Src in MEFs (Src1 and Src2 cells), the
density dependence of cisplatin response was also eliminated,
correlating with the effect of v-Src on GJIC in these cells (Fig. 2A–
C). Interestingly, the baseline resistance of Src1 and Src2 cells at
low density (where there is minimal cell-to-cell communication)
was seen to be elevated compared with that of the parental wt
MEFs at low density (Fig. 2D). This increased survival represents
cell autonomous resistance and can be attributed to the effect of
activated src on regulatory pathways acting within individual cells
to influence cell growth and damage responses.
v-Src increases cisplatin survival of neighboring cells not
expressing the oncoprotein. To further dissect the trans-acting
effect of v-Src expression on neighboring cells in high-density
populations, we took advantage of a previously established cell
mixing assay. We had found that although Ku80 / cells cannot
initiate or send the cell death signal to neighboring cells after
treatment with cisplatin, they are able to receive it (3). This finding
allowed us to create a system where we can use Ku80 / cells as a
recipient cell population to test the ability of selected MEFs and

other defined cell types to send a cytotoxic signal to neighboring
cells after cisplatin damage. To specifically measure survival of
Ku80 / cells in mixed populations, a line of Ku80 / cells was
made puro resistant by gene transfer, creating Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells.
To test the influence of activated src on cell-to-cell signaling in
mixed populations, Ku80 / , wt, Src1, or Src2 cells as ‘‘sender
cells’’ were mixed at high or low density with Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells, and the mixed populations were treated with
cisplatin. After cisplatin treatment, puro was added to kill all the
sender cells and allow for growth of the receiver cell population
only. Visualization of monolayer growth of Ku80 / puro+ receiver
cells showed that in the high density cultures, the presence of wt
sender cells caused greater cisplatin-mediated killing of Ku80 /
puro+ receiver cells compared with the result in the mixture of
Ku80 / sender cells and Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells (Fig. 3A).
In comparison, the expression of v-Src in wt sender cells (Src1 cells)
reduced the cisplatin killing of (and so conferred better survival on)
the neighboring Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells (Fig. 3A). Control
experiments established that all sender cells were killed by puro
selection and that the visualized monolayer represents only the
growth of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells (data not shown).
To confirm that the cells need to be in close contact for v-Src
expression in the sender cell population to have an effect on the
survival of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells, we repeated the
monolayer growth assay with mixed populations of cells seeded
at low density (<500 cell/cm2) at the time of cisplatin treatment. At
this low density, cells are so spread out on the dish that there is
little or no direct contact between neighboring cells and thus gap

Figure 2. Decreased GJIC and increased survival in
v-Src–expressing cells. A, visualization of Lucifer yellow
dye transfer after scrape loading in wt and Src1 cells. B,
FACS assay for GJIC. Cells were preloaded with two
fluorescent dyes: calcein, which passes through gap
junctions, and DiI, which cannot. The preloaded cells were
then overlayed on a monolayer of unstained cells and
incubated to allow time for calcein dye transfer via gap
junctions. After 3 h, the mixed population was analyzed for
calcein and DiI content by FACS. Cells containing both
calcein and DiI represent the preloaded population (gated
population in top right quadrant, circled ). Cells containing
only calcein (bottom right quadrant ) were deemed to have
received the dye by GJIC. Top, wt and Src1 cells alone.
Bottom, wt and Src1 cells mixed with cells preloaded with
calcein and DiI. C, quantification of the percentage of
unloaded cells that acquired calcein, indicative of gap
junction transmission. Percentages of calcein-positive cells
were normalized to the percent of DiI and calcein
double-positive cells that were preloaded with dye.
D, clonogenic survival measured by colony formation of wt
and v-src–expressing cells in response to cisplatin.
wt, Src1, or Src2 cells were treated at either high
(30,000 cell/cm2) or low (500 cells/cm2) density, as
indicated, with 2.5 Ag/mL of cisplatin, and clonogenic
survival was quantified. One set of wt cells was also treated
with lindane at 50mg/mL as indicated. For clonogenic
survival of cells treated at high density, cells were treated
for 1 h at high density, trypsinized, and then serially
diluted for colony formation analysis.

www.aacrjournals.org

3621

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (8). April 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985
Cancer Research

Figure 3. v-Src expression in one cell can influence
survival of a neighboring cell not expressing the
oncoprotein. A and B, the indicated sender cell line was
mixed in a 1:1 ratio with puro-resistant Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells. The mixed populations of cells were treated
with cisplatin for 1 h at (A ) high density or (B) low
density. After cisplatin exposure, the medium was replaced
with fresh medium containing puro to kill off the sender
cells and allow only for growth of Ku80 / puro+ receiver
cells. Seven days after cisplatin treatment, cells were
stained with crystal violet and monolayer growth was
visualized. C and D, colony formation by Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells was assayed in mixed population of cells
containing Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells and indicated
sender cells: Ku80 / MEFs (not puro resistant), wt
MEFs, MEF subclones expressing v-Src (Src1 or Src2).
The cisplatin treatments were performed with the indicated
concentrations of drug at high (C) and low (D ) overall
cell density. After cisplatin treatment, cell cultures were
detached and replated in the presence of puro to allow
detection and quantification of colony formation specifically
by the Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells.

junction channels are not formed (3). We found that, at low density,
there were no differences in survival of Ku80 / puro+ receiver
cells regardless of the nature of the comixed ‘‘sender’’ cell line
(Fig. 3B), consistent with a lack of cell-to-cell signaling in these
sparse cell populations.
To better quantify the above observations, we treated mixed
populations at high or low density and then assayed for colony
formation of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells after serial dilution.
When cells were treated with cisplatin in high-density cultures,
expression of v-Src in the sender cells (Src1 and Src2) resulted in
increased survival of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells over a range of
doses compared with when wt cells were mixed with receiver cells
(Fig. 3C). In contrast, at low density, there was no effect of Src1 or
Src2 cells on the survival of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells (Fig. 3D).
These data show quantitatively that v-Src expression in wt cells can
increase survival of neighboring cells to cisplatin even if the
neighboring cells do not express the oncoprotein.
The effect of activated src on survival of neighboring cells is
reversed by forced overexpression of cx43 or by src kinase
inhibition or RNAi-mediated knockdown. To determine if forced
overexpression of cx43 could overcome the effect of v-Src on GJIC
and on cell-to-cell cisplatin killing, we used two methods to upregulate cx43 in cells. First, a vector expressing human cx43 cDNA
was transfected into Src1 cells, and a clone stably overexpressing
cx43 was selected for further study (Src1+cx cells; Fig. 4A). Second,
it has been reported that blocking cx43 degradation via proteasome
inhibition can increase cx43 levels and gap junction formation
(9). In our hands, we found that treatment of the Src1 cells for
24 hours with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 led to elevated cx43
expression (Fig. 4A), and we determined that cx43 levels remained
high for at least 6 hours after MG132 removal (data not shown).
The increased levels of cx43 protein expression conferred by either
stable cx43 expression or by proteasome inhibition correlated with
detectable increases in GJIC, as measured by FACS (Fig. 4B). Using
the monolayer growth assay with Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells in

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (8). April 15, 2009

mixed populations, we found that there was increased killing of the
receiver cells when they were mixed with Src1+cx sender cells or
with Src1 sender cells pretreated with MG132 compared with
unmodified or untreated Src1 cells (Fig. 4C). It is important to note
that in the Src1+MG132 sample, only Src1 cells were treated with
MG132; Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells were not exposed to MG132
and were mixed with Src1 cells only after MG132 had been
removed. This protocol was designed to ensure that survival of the
receiver cells was not affected by direct treatment with MG132 and
that the effect observed could be attributed specifically to the
influence of MG132 on Src1 cells. Hence, the results show that both
stable overexpression of cx43 and transient overexpression of cx43,
by pharmacologic manipulation, are able to overcome the effects
of v-Src on GJIC and thereby influence cisplatin response in
neighboring cells.
To further link src kinase activity in Src1 cells with the altered
cisplatin survival of comixed Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells, we
compared cisplatin survival of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells in
high-density mixed populations of Src1 and Ku80 / puro+ with
or without pretreatment with the src kinase inhibitor PP2 or with
siRNA knockdown of v-Src in the Src1 cells. Western blot analysis
for activated src revealed that PP2 treatment reduced src kinase
activity to below wt levels (Fig. 1B). Survival of Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells in this experiment was quantified by colony
formation (Fig. 4D), revealing that PP2 completely blocks the
trans-acting prosurvival effect of v-Src on Ku80 / puro+ receiver
cells. Note that PP2 has no effect on the survival of Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells when they are mixed with wt cells that do not contain
activated src, suggesting that cancers containing cells with
activated src would be sensitized to cisplatin by src kinase
inhibition but healthy tissue would be unaffected.
To confirm and extend the results with the src kinase inhibitor,
siRNA oligonucleotides specific for v-Src were used to knockdown
v-Src expression in Src1 cells. Knockdown of v-Src led to a
significant decrease of activated src (indicated by the decrease in

3622

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985
Src-Induced Cisplatin Resistance

phosphorylated src by Western blot analysis) in Src1 cells (Fig. 4E,
right) and resulted in decreased survival of comixed Ku80 /
puro+ receiver cells to cisplatin treatment in the mixed cell
population [compare survival of Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells
mixed with v-Src siRNA–treated cells versus cells treated with
GAPDH siRNA (Fig. 4E, left)]. We chose to compare v-Src siRNA
knockdown in Src1 cells to GAPDH siRNA knockdown to account
for nonspecific effects of siRNA transfection. These results further
support our model in which v-Src kinase mediates connexin
phosphorylation and reduces GJIC, thereby attenuating transmission of the cisplatin-stimulated cell-to-cell death signal.

Discussion
We have shown here that expression of v-Src in one cell
population can alter the survival of neighboring cells (even those
not expressing it) to the chemotherapeutic drug, cisplatin. Stable
expression of v-Src in two independent clones produced increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of cx43, yielded decreased GJIC, and
abrogated the density dependence of cisplatin killing in cell
populations. In mixed populations in which non–v-Src expressing
cells were tagged by puro resistance for detection, we found that
v-Src expression in one set of cells can block cell-to-cell
transmission to neighboring cells of a cytotoxic signal triggered
by cisplatin exposure. Inhibition of src kinase with PP2 or by

siRNA knockdown of v-Src was found to restore transmission of
the cell death signal and to increase the cisplatin killing of
neighboring cells. In addition, forced overexpression of cx43 by
either stable transfection or by pretreatment of v-Src–expressing
cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 was also found to
restore transmission of the cisplatin-induced death signal to
neighboring cells. It should be noted that our work does not
imply that there are no cell autonomous effects of src that can
cause resistance to cytotoxic agents. Indeed, we observed this
ourselves in Fig. 2D, where v-Src was seen to elevate the cisplatin
survival of cells treated at low density compared with low density
survival of wt cells. At the low density tested in these
experiments, there is minimal cell-to-cell contact, and so, cell
survival is determined on a cell autonomous basis.
However, by comparing cisplatin responses at high versus low
cell density and in mixed cell populations, our work reveals the
novel finding that src expression in one cell can elevate survival
of neighboring cells to cisplatin by disrupting cell-to-cell
transmission of a death signal. This linkage of src expression to
cell-to-cell communication is most clearly shown in the cell
mixing experiments in which the Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells
showed better cisplatin survival when mixed with the Src1 or Src2
cells than when mixed with wt MEFs. This increased survival in
the non–src-expressing Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells was only
observed when the cell populations were treated at high density,

Figure 4. Inhibition of v-Src kinase activity or
overexpression of connexin overcomes the increased
survival conferred on neighboring cells by v-Src. A,
Western blot analysis of cx43 expression in Src1 cells,
Src1 cells transfected with a vector expressing human
cx43 cDNA, or Src1 cells treated with the proteasome
inhibitor MG132 (100 nmol/L for 24 h). B, table of relative
cx43 expression levels and extent of dye transfer in the
indicated Src1 cell lines. The level of cx43 expression in
each sample is relative to untreated Src1 cells (normalized
to tubulin), calculated from the Western blot in A. FACS
assay for dye transfer was performed as described in
Materials and Methods and quantified as in Fig. 2C . C,
visualization of monolayer growth (in the presence of puro)
by Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells comixed with the indicated
MEF-derived cell lines: wt MEFs, MEFs expressing v-Src
(Src1), Src1 cells overexpressing cx43 by gene transfer
(Src1 +cx), and Src1 cells pretreated with the proteasome
inhibitor MG132. Puro selection restricted growth only to
the Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells. D, clonogenic survival of
Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells comixed with the indicated
sender cell line and treated with cisplatin in the presence or
absence of the Src tyrosine kinase inhibitor PP2, as
indicated. Mixed cell populations were seeded at high
density, treated with PP2, then exposed to cisplatin. After
treatment, cisplatin and PP2 were removed, cells were
washed with PBS, trypsinized, and reseeded at low density
in the presence of puro to specifically detect growth of
Ku80 / puro+ receiver cell colonies. E, siRNA-mediated
knockdown of v-Src. Src1 cells were treated with siRNA
oligonucleotides targeted against either v-Src or GAPDH,
as indicated. Twenty-four hours later, Src1 cells were
reseeded in a mixed population with Ku80 / puro+
receiver cells, and the mixed population of cells was
treated with cisplatin the following day. Clonogenic survival
of the Ku80 / puro+ receiver cells as measured by colony
formation is graphed at left. Right, the Western blot shows
the levels of phosphorylated src (p-src ) and of GAPDH in
the Src1 cells 48 h after transfection with the indicated
siRNAs (the time at which the cisplatin exposure was done
in the left).

www.aacrjournals.org

3623

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (8). April 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985
Cancer Research

where gap junctions can be formed, and not at low density,
indicating that cell-to-cell contact and intercellular communication are required.
Clinically, overexpression and activation of src is seen in many
cancer types that are currently treated with cisplatin, including
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, non–small cell lung
cancers, and ovarian carcinomas (10–12). In this regard, our
finding that the src kinase inhibitor PP2 can reverse the effect of
activated src in one cell and thereby increase the cytotoxicity of
cisplatin on neighboring cells suggests a novel application for
src kinase inhibitors in combination with cisplatin, i.e., that src
inhibitors have the potential to sensitize tumor cells expressing
activated src as well as to sensitize tumor cells without activated
src that are in direct contact with src-activated cells to cisplatin.
One src inhibitor, Dasatinib (sprycel), is already in clinical use to
treat chronic myelogenous leukemia, and our work indicates that
it could have a new therapeutic application in a strategy to
enhance the effectiveness of cisplatin in many solid tumors.
The regulation of connexins in cancer is also an area of active
interest because it has been shown that increased connexin
expression and consequent elevated GJIC in certain cancer cell
lines can reverse aspects of the malignant phenotype (13, 14). Here,
we have shown that the level of the gap junction protein cx43
modulates cell-to-cell cisplatin killing and that elevated expression
of cx43 by gene transfer or by up-regulation via proteasome
inhibition can overcome the effects of v-Src. In this regard, because
proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib are available for clinical
use, our observation that MG132 can sufficiently up-regulate cx43
expression to sensitize cell populations to cisplatin may also
provide the basis for a new therapeutic strategy to combine
proteasome inhibitors with cisplatin treatment.

References
1. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al. MET
Amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung
cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science 2007;
316:1039–43.
2. Gorre ME, Mohammed M, Ellwood K, et al. Clinical
resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCRABL gene mutation or amplification. Science 2001;293:
876–80.
3. Jensen R, Glazer PM. Cell-interdependent cisplatin
killing by Ku/DNA-dependent protein kinase signaling
transduced through gap junctions. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2004;101:6134–9.
4. Lin R, Warn-Cramer BJ, Kurata WE, Lau AF. v-Src
phosphorylation of connexin 43 on Tyr247 and Tyr265
disrupts gap junctional communication. J Cell Biol 2001;
154:815–27.
5. Oh SY, Dupont E, Madhukar BV, et al. Characterization of gap junctional communication-deficient
mutants of a rat liver epithelial cell line. Eur J Cell
Biol 1993;60:250–5.
6. Czyz J, Irmer U, Schulz G, Mindermann A, Hulser DF.
Gap-junctional coupling measured by flow cytometry.
Exp Cell Res 2000;255:40–6.
7. Peterson-Roth E, Reynolds M, Quievryn G, Zhitkovich
A. Mismatch repair proteins are activators of toxic
responses to chromium-DNA damage. Mol Cell Biol
2005;25:3596–607.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (8). April 15, 2009

Finally, the ability of src, as well as of other oncoproteins, to
promote cell growth and survival in the face of cytotoxic agents is
well-established (15–17). However, no prior studies considered or
even suspected that src might act in trans to alter the response of
non–src-expressing neighboring cells. In our prior work, in which
we surveyed a series of cytotoxic agents for their ability to induce
cell death via gap junction transmission, we found that only
cisplatin triggers this pathway (3). Hence, it is likely that the
effect of activated src identified here is specific for cisplatin
exposure. Nonetheless, in addition to src, there is evidence that
signaling by Ha-Ras (18, 19) and by the epidermal growth factor
receptor (20) may also modulate GJIC, and so it is possible that
these factors may therefore also influence the survival of cells to
cisplatin without having to be expressed/activated in all cells in a
tumor population. If so, pharmacologic targeting of these factors
may provide yet another means to sensitize malignant cell
populations to cisplatin.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 3/14/08; revised 2/5/09; accepted 2/6/09; published OnlineFirst 4/7/09.
Grant support: American Cancer Society, New England Division (Jo and Gus
Berkes Postdoctoral Fellowship to E.P. Roth), Anna Fuller Fund (Postdoctoral
Fellowship in Molecular Oncology to E.P. Roth), and NIH (RO1CA113344 to P.M.
Glazer).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

8. Gibson SL, Bindra RS, Glazer PM. CHK2-dependent
phosphorylation of BRCA1 in hypoxia. Radiat Res 2006;
166:646–51.
9. Musil LS, Le AC, VanSlyke JK, Roberts LM. Regulation
of connexin degradation as a mechanism to increase
gap junction assembly and function. J Biol Chem 2000;
275:25207–15.
10. Wiener JR, Windham TC, Estrella VC, et al. Activated
SRC protein tyrosine kinase is overexpressed in latestage human ovarian cancers. Gynecol Oncol 2003;88:
73–9.
11. Bu R, Purushotham K, Kerr M, et al. Alterations in
the level of phosphotyrosine signal transduction constituents in human parotid tumors. Proc Soc Exp Biol
Med 1996;211:257–64.
12. Mazurenko NN, Kogan EA, Zborovskaya IB, Kisseljov
FL. Expression of pp60c-src in human small cell and
non-small cell lung carcinomas. Eur J Cancer 1992;28:
372–7.
13. Huang RP, Fan Y, Hossain MZ, Peng A, Zeng ZL,
Boynton AL. Reversion of the neoplastic phenotype of
human glioblastoma cells by connexin 43 (cx43). Cancer
Res 1998;58:5089–96.
14. King TJ, Fukushima LH, Hieber AD, Shimabukuro KA,
Sakr WA, Bertram JS. Reduced levels of connexin43 in
cervical dysplasia: inducible expression in a cervical
carcinoma cell line decreases neoplastic potential with
implications for tumor progression. Carcinogenesis
2000;21:1097–109.

3624

15. Masumoto N, Nakano S, Fujishima H, Kohno K, Niho
Y. v-src induces cisplatin resistance by increasing the
repair of cisplatin-DNA interstrand cross-links in
human gallbladder adenocarcinoma cells. Int J Cancer
1999;80:731–7.
16. Pengetnze Y, Steed M, Roby KF, Terranova PF,
Taylor CC. Src tyrosine kinase promotes survival and
resistance to chemotherapeutics in a mouse ovarian
cancer cell line. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003;
309:377–83.
17. Qin B, Ariyama H, Baba E, et al. Activated Src and
Ras induce gefitinib resistance by activation of signaling
pathways downstream of epidermal growth factor
receptor in human gallbladder adenocarcinoma cells.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2006;58:577–84.
18. Lee KW, Jung JW, Kang KS, Lee HJ. p38 is a key
signaling molecule for H-ras-induced inhibition of gap
junction intercellular communication in rat liver
epithelial cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1030:258–63.
19. de Feijter AW, Trosko JE, Krizman DB, Lebovitz RM,
Lieberman MW. Correlation of increased levels of Haras T24 protein with extent of loss of gap junction
function in rat liver epithelial cells. Mol Carcinog 1992;5:
205–12.
20. Lau AF, Kanemitsu MY, Kurata WE, Danesh S,
Boynton AL. Epidermal growth factor disrupts gapjunctional communication and induces phosphorylation of connexin43 on serine. Mol Biol Cell 1992;3:
865–74.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985

Src-Induced Cisplatin Resistance Mediated by Cell-to-Cell
Communication
Elizabeth Peterson-Roth, Cathleen M. Brdlik and Peter M. Glazer
Cancer Res 2009;69:3619-3624. Published OnlineFirst April 7, 2009.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0985

This article cites 20 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/8/3619.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/8/3619.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

