Research Article

Effects of Sustained Antiangiogenic Therapy in Multistage Prostate
Cancer in TRAMP Model
Tatyana Isayeva, Diptiman Chanda, Lisa Kallman, Isam-Eldin A. Eltoum,
and Selvarangan Ponnazhagan
Department of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama

Abstract
Antiangiogenic therapy is a promising alternative for prostate
cancer growth and metastasis and holds great promise as an
adjuvant therapy. The present study evaluated the potential of
stable expression of angiostatin and endostatin before the
onset of neoplasia and during the early and late stages of
prostate cancer progression in transgenic adenocarcinoma of
mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice. Groups of 5-, 10-, and 18-weekold male TRAMP mice received recombinant adeno-associated
virus-6 encoding mouse endostatin plus angiostatin (E+A) by
i.m. injection. The effects of therapy were determined by
sacrificing groups of treated mice at defined stages of tumor
progression and following cohorts of similarly treated mice
for long-term survival. Results indicated remarkable survival
after recombinant adeno-associated virus–(E+A) therapy only
when the treatment was given at an earlier time, before the
onset of high-grade neoplasia, compared with treatment given
for invasive cancer. Interestingly, early-stage antiangiogenic
therapy arrested the progression of moderately differentiated
carcinoma to poorly differentiated state and distant metastasis. Immunohistochemical analysis of the prostate from
treated mice indicated significantly lower endothelial cell
proliferation and increased tumor cell apoptosis. Vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-2 expression
was significantly down-regulated in tumor endothelium
after treatment but not VEGFR-1. Analysis of the neuroendocrine marker synaptophysin expression indicated that antiangiogenic therapy given at an early-stage disease reduced
neuroendocrine transition of the epithelial tumors. These
studies indicate that stable endostatin and angiostatin
gene therapy may be more effective for minimally invasive
tumors rather than advanced-stage disease. [Cancer Res
2007;67(12):5789–97]

Introduction
Prostate cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
men (1). Current treatment for localized prostate cancer includes
radical prostatectomy, cryoablation therapy, external beam radiation therapy, and brachytherapy (2–4). Androgen ablation therapy
and chemotherapy are given for patients with locally advanced and
metastatic disease (2). Despite recent advances in early detection,
occurrence of metastatic disease due to androgen independence
and resistance to conventional therapies is common. Thus,

Requests for reprints: Selvarangan Ponnazhagan, Department of Pathology, The
University of Alabama at Birmingham, LHRB 513, 701, 19th Street South, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0007. Phone: 205-934-6731; Fax: 205-975-9927; E-mail: sponnazh@
path.uab.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3637

www.aacrjournals.org

evaluation of newer therapies that can limit local advancement
of primary tumors necessary to develop distant metastasis would
be effective treatments of prostate cancer.
Antiangiogenic therapy is highly promising as an adjuvant
therapy to overcome some of the limitations of conventional
therapies for antitumor effects. Clinical trials with compounds
having antiangiogenic effects, including carboxyamido-triazole,
thalidomide, TNP-470, and interleukin-12, have shown promise
(5). Most of these studies were done in patients with advancedstage disease with well-established tumor vasculature and
activation of several angiogenic and growth factor signals (6).
Thus, it is important to determine the potential of antiangiogenic
therapy at progressive stages of prostate cancer growth to identify
the most effective stage for treatment and to delineate mechanistic
implications. The present study describes the effects of sustained
endostatin and angiostatin therapy at different grades of tumor
pathology in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate
(TRAMP) model. TRAMP mice develop progressive forms of
prostate cancer during their lifetime with lesions ranging from
mild prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) to large multinodular malignant neoplasia (7). Histopathology of the prostate and
molecular changes associated with the progression of the disease
have been well characterized in the TRAMP model, which allows
a careful examination of the effects of new interventional
therapies. Influenced by the transactivation of probasin promoter
expressing the SV40 large-T antigen during puberty, tumorigenesis
occurs in 100% these, and different stages of the cancer proceed
as in humans (7).
Because antiangiogenic therapy mandates sustained amounts of
the angiosuppressive factor(s) for therapeutic effect, we chose a
gene transfer approach to deliver them from a recombinant adenoassociated virus (rAAV). Our earlier studies established that stable
expression of angiostatin and endostatin as secreted proteins from
rAAV-transduced muscle tissue provides significant protection
against the growth of human cancer cell lines as xenografts in
athymic mice (8, 9). We have also recently established that
transduction of rAAV, encapsidated in serotype 6 capsid, provides
significant enhancement of transgene expression over rAAV2 (10).
Thus, in the present study, we used rAAV6 vector to produce
systemically stable levels of angiostatin and endostatin beginning
at the preneoplastic lesion, hyperplasia, or adenocarcinoma stages
of prostate cancer growth in TRAMP model.
Results of these studies indicated that stable expression of
angiostatin and endostatin in early-stage disease not only delayed
progression of the disease but also significantly increased survival.
Histopathology of prostate tissue from mice with long-term
survival revealed arrest of cancer progression. This blockade
greatly inhibited organ metastasis. Sustained expression of
angiostatin and endostatin significantly reduced vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor (VEGFR)-2 expression as well as

5789

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

neuroendocrine transition of the prostate epithelium. However, the
same therapy was ineffective in increasing overall survival when
given after formation of an established tumor. These data indicate
that stable antiangiogenic therapy may greatly improve the
outcome of prostate cancer when administered during an early
stage of the disease rather than during a late stage of the disease,
and may be effectively combined with conventional therapies for a
synergistic benefit.

Materials and Methods
Cells and reagents. Human embryonic kidney cell line 293 was
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection and maintained in
Iscove’s modified essential medium supplemented with 10% newborn calf
serum. The cells were cultured at 37jC with 5% CO2. Restriction
endonucleases and other modifying enzymes were purchased from either
New England Biolabs or Promega Co. TRAMP-C2 and TRAMP-C3 cells were
a kind gift of Dr. Norman Greenberg and maintained as described (11).
Primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells were maintained as
published (8). Mouse monoclonal antibody for Ki67 (clone SP6) and rabbit
polyclonal antibody for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) p85 fragment
were obtained from Research Diagnostics, Inc., and Promega, respectively.
Rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (clone MEC 13.3) was purchased from BD
PharMingen. Antibodies for mouse hypoxia inducible factor (Hif)-1a,
VEGFR1, and VEGFR2 were purchased from R&D Systems, Inc. Antibody for
mouse synaptophysin was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. A
monoclonal rabbit anti-mouse cytokeratin-8 antibody (clone E432) was
purchased from Abcam, Inc. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated and
Alexa Fluor–conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from
Amersham and Molecular Probes, respectively. Color reagents were
purchased from Amersham. The mouse VEGF ELISA kit was purchased
from R&D, and mouse endostatin ELISA kit was from Neogen Corporation.
Antibodies for angiostatin ELISA were purchased from Alpha Diagnostics
Intl., Inc.
Transgenic mice. The TRAMP mice, developed on a pure C57BL/6
background, heterozygous for the probasin-Tag transgene, were bred and
maintained in the Animal Care Facility of the University of Alabama at
Birmingham. Transgenic males and the nontransgenic littermates were
obtained as (TRAMP C57BL/6  FVB Breeder) F1. After weaning at 3 to
4 weeks of age, genotyping for the probasin-Tag transgene was done by PCR
using DNA isolated from tail biopsy (12). Animal care and treatments were
conducted in accordance with established guidelines and protocols
approved by the University of Alabama at Birmingham Institutional Animal
Care Committee.
Recombinant plasmids, production, and purification of rAAV. cDNA
containing murine endostatin and angiostatin sequences were isolated from
the plasmid pBlast murine Endo::Angio (Invivogen) and subcloned in the
AAV plasmid pSub201 (13) between the inverted terminal repeats under the
control of the cytomegalovirus enhancer/chicken h-actin promoter.
Secretory signal sequences of mouse interleukin 2 and mouse plasminogen
were included upstream of the endostatin and angiostatin cDNA,
respectively, for systemic secretion. Construction of recombinant plasmids
containing green fluorescent protein (GFP) was recently published (8).
Production of rAAV was done by transient transfection in 293 cells using the
helper plasmid containing adenovirus and AAV (Rep2-Cap6) functions (14).
Recombinant virus was purified from cell lysates by iodixanol gradient
centrifugation and heparin affinity column chromatography (15). The
particle titer of purified virions was determined by quantitative slot blot
analysis.
Vector injection, preparation, and analysis of tissues. Before
initiating treatment studies, 25 male TRAMP mice and 10 age-matched
male nontransgenic littermates were sacrificed at 12, 18, 24, 28, and
32 weeks of age to determine the pathology of the prostate, tumor grade,
and index of metastasis. The accuracy of tumor grade at these time points
was determined to be >80%. For treatment studies, 22 mice were included
for sacrifice at each time point (12, 18, 24, 28, and 32 weeks; 110 mice in

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

total) for pathologic evaluation, and 14 mice were included for end point
survival. There were three time points for treatment with rAAV-GFP and
rAAV-(E+A) namely 5, 10, and 18 weeks of age. Vector injections were given
only once with 1  1011 genomic particles of rAAV-(E+A) or GFP i.m. in the
quadriceps of the hind limb at 5, 10, or 18 weeks of age.
Mouse genitourinary tract, consisting of the bladder, urethra, seminal
vesicles, ampullary gland, and prostate were excised and weighed. At
necropsy, all animals were examined for gross organ abnormalities. The
tissues were formalin-fixed and embedded in paraffin. Five-micrometer
sections were stained with H&E. For the analysis of prostate, based on
anatomic location and histologic features as described (12, 16), all prostate
lobes, including anterior, ventral, and dorsolateral lobes, were reviewed by
an experienced pathologist (Dr. Eltoum) in a blinded fashion and graded.
Prostate lesions were scored using a 1 to 6 scale that has been established
for TRAMP mice (16). Grade 1, normal prostate epithelium; grade 2, low
PIN; grade 3, high PIN; grade 4, well-differentiated tumor; grade 5,
moderately differentiated tumor; and grade 6, poorly differentiated tumor.
The extent of PIN was quantified by recording the number of separate foci
of PIN per section. Characteristics of PIN lesions were epithelial tufting,
hyperchromatic nuclei, elongated nuclei, nuclear stratification, microcapillary projections, cribiform structures, and increased mitosis and
apoptosis. Progression of PIN lesions to a higher grade was characterized by
increased invasiveness of the tumor cells. Well-differentiated tumor was
characterized by increased quantity of small glands, often associated with
desmoplastic response or stromal thickening. Cells in well-differentiated
tumors often exhibited round nuclei with fewer hyperchromatic nuclei than
in PIN lesions. Increased apoptosis and mitosis were also apparent.
Moderately differentiated tumors were characterized by nearly anaplastic
sheets of cells with remnants of glandular architecture. Poorly differentiated
tumors were characterized by anaplastic sheets of cells with irregular nuclei
and a decrease in the cytoplasmic region. This tumor grade is often highly
vascularized and hemorrhagic, and the cancer lesions are also necrotic. End
point in survival studies was based on death or when the animals became
totally ill and moribund. At that time, mice were humanely euthanized by
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee–approved protocol and the
date of euthanasia was recorded as the end day of survival. Following
euthanasia, autopsy was done and end-stage (grade 6) tumor was confirmed
by histopathology.
Blood vessel diameter was measured in 10 random fields per tissue
sample of highest vascular density at 20 magnification in an Olympus
microscope. Tissues from a minimum of 10 mice were analyzed for each
group. The images were analyzed using Bioquant Nova Software (Bioquant
Image Analysis Corporation).
Immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemical studies were done in
5-Am sections of paraffin-embedded tumor tissues using antibodies for
Ki67, anti-PARP p85, CD31, Hif-1a, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, synaptophysin, and
cytokeratin-8. For each group, tissues from at least 10 mice were analyzed.
Antigen retrieval was achieved by incubating the slides in 0.05% trypsin for
20 min at 37jC and endogenous peroxidase was blocked by incubation with
3% H2O2 for 10 min at room temperature. The working dilutions of the
antibodies were as follows: Ki67 and anti-PARP p85, 1:50; CD31/PECAM1,
Hif-1a, VEGFR-1, and VEGFR-2, 1:10; cytokeratin-8, 1:200. Secondary
antibodies were respective, isotype-matched, anti-rabbit, anti-rat, or antigoat antibodies conjugated to HRP or Alexa Fluor, and were used at a
dilution of 1:500. To determine the proliferation and apoptotic indices,
stained slides were examined under high power (40). A minimum of 10
randomly chosen fields were counted for slides from each mouse to
determine the total number of cells and cells that stained positive in each
field. The percentage proliferation and apoptosis was calculated using the
following formula: (number of positively stained cells / total number of cells
in a field)  100. The antigen-antibody complex was visualized with
diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride or fluorescent secondary antibody,
and tissues were counterstained minimally with hematoxylin. To determine
microvessel density, the number of vessels was determined by counting 10
fields of the highest vascular density in high-power (40).
To determine whether tumor cells (cytokeratin-8 staining) or tumorassociated endothelial cells [CD31/platelet/endothelial cell adhesion

5790

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Prostate Cancer
molecule 1 (PECAM-1) staining] expressed VEGR1, VEGFR2, and Hif-1a, we
used a double-immunofluorescence staining technique. Cytokeratin-8– and
CD31-positive cells were identified by red fluorescence (Alexa 594) and
VEGR1- and VEGFR2-positive cells were identified by green fluorescence
(Alexa 488). The presence of growth factor receptors on the cells were
detected by colocalization of red and green fluorescence, which appeared
yellow. The percentage of double-stained cells was determined from tumor
cells or endothelial cell in 10 randomly selected microscopic fields at 200
magnification (22 mice per group). Data from immunohistochemistry were
further confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR described below.
ELISA. Blood samples from mice were allowed to clot for 2 h at room
temperature at 4jC. The samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 2,000  g
and the serum was removed and stored at 80jC until assayed. For each
time point, serum samples from at least 12 mice per group were analyzed.
For ELISA, serum samples were diluted 10-fold. Endostatin and VEGF levels
were measured as per instructions of the ELISA kit manufacturers. The
sensitivity of the assays was 9.1 and 3 pg/mL for endostatin and VEGF,
respectively. An ELISA was developed in our laboratory to determine serum
angiostatin levels similar to that previously described (8). Briefly, 96-well
ELISA plates were coated overnight at 4jC with a monoclonal angiostatin
antibody (ANST12-M, Alpha Diagnostics Intl.) at a concentration of
10 Ag/mL in borate buffer (BS; pH 8.6). The next day, the antibody was
discarded and the wells were blocked with 150 AL of bovine serum albumin
in BS (BS-BSA) for 45 min at room temperature. Serum samples, diluted 1:3
in BS-BSA, were added to the wells and incubated overnight at 4jC. All of
the samples were analyzed in triplicate. After washing five times with PBS
containing 0.5% Tween 20, a polyclonal angiostatin antibody (ANST11-S,
Alpha Diagnostic Intl.), biotinylated using the EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin
reagent (Pierce), was added at a concentration of 1 Ag/mL and incubated
overnight at 4jC. The contents were then discarded and plates were washed
five times with PBS containing 0.5% Tween 20 after which streptavidinconjugated alkaline phosphatase was added and incubated for 30 min at
room temperature. Color development was done with the addition of pNPP
chromogenic substrate (Sigma) and incubated at room temperature for
20 min. Absorbance at 405 nm was measured in an ELISA plate reader. As a
reference standard, known concentrations of recombinant angiostatin from
0 to 1,000 ng/mL were included in triplicate. The sensitivity of the assay was
15 ng/mL.
Real-time PCR. Total RNA was isolated from the prostate tissue of naı̈ve
and rAAV-(E+A)–treated TRAMP mice (n = 22 mice per group) with TRIzol
reagent (Invitrogen) and RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). A two-step quantitative
real-time, reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) was done on cDNA generated
with isolated RNA using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit and iQ SYBR Green
Supermix (Bio-Rad). Primers used were as follows: mouse VEGFR1 forward,
5¶-TCACCGAACTCCACCTCCATGTTT-3¶ and reverse, 5-TATCTTCATGGAGGCCTTGGGCTT-3; VEGFR2 forward, 5¶-ACGTCGACATAGCCTCCACTGTTT-3¶ and reverse, 5¶-TTCTCGGTGATGTACACGATGCCA-3¶.
Mouse glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) forward, 5¶TCAACAGCAACTCCCACTCTTCCA-3¶ and reverse, 5¶-ACCCTGTTGCTGTAGCCGTATTCA-3¶. Quantitative real-time PCR was carried out in a
Bio-Rad icycler (Optical Module). Reactions were done using the LightCycler-FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green system (Roche Molecular
Biochemicals) in a final volume of 25 AL, consisting of 0.5 AL of each
primer (0.5 pmol/L), 12.5 AL of 2 supermix containing reaction buffer,
Fast-start Taq DNA double strand–specified SYBR Green I dye, 10.5 AL H2O,
and 1 AL (0.5 Ag) of template DNA. PCR was done with a 3-min
preincubation at 95jC followed by 45 cycles of 15-s denaturation at 95jC,
and 1 min each for annealing and extension at 67jC. PCR products were
subjected to melting curve analysis using the Light Cycler system to exclude
amplification of nonspecific products. The values were normalized with
GAPDH values from each sample.
Effects of endostatin and angiostatin in prostate cancer cells
derived from the TRAMP mice. TRAMP-C2 and TRAMP-C3 cells, derived
from TRAMP model (11), and human umbilical vascular endothelial cells
(HUVEC) were mock-transfected or transfected with rAAV-(E+A) or rAAVGFP in 96-well tissue culture plates. Seventy-two hours later, cell
proliferation was determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenylte-

www.aacrjournals.org

trazolium bromide assay as described (8). Total RNA was isolated in
similarly transfected cells and RT-PCR was done for the expression of
VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2. The values were normalized with RT-PCR data for
GAPDH from same samples. All in vitro studies were done in triplicates.
Statistical analysis. Results were analyzed using a two-tailed Student’s
t test to assess statistical significance. Values of P < 0.05 were considered
statistically significant.

Results
Disease progression in TRAMP mice. For an experimental
model of prostate cancer, we independently bred and maintained a
colony of TRAMP mice in C57BL/6  FVB background at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham animal facility. When these
mice were 10 to 12 weeks old, they began to show PIN lesions in
the prostate glands characterized by epithelial tufting, nuclear
stratification, and micropapillary projection. The earliest adenocarcinoma was detected around 18 weeks. Tumor differentiation
was characterized by increased mitoses and apoptosis. As the
tumors became poorly differentiated, increased vascularization and
hemorrhage was apparent and the tumor cells appeared pleomorphic with irregular nuclei. Prostate tumors continued to grow
beyond age 28 weeks when some mice began to die of the illness.
Major cause of death was due to organ metastasis of the prostate
cancer, in particular to lung and lymph nodes. The mean age of
survival of untreated mice was found to be 31.2 F 5.6 weeks.
Systemically stable levels of antiangiogenic factors after
rAAV transduction and its influences on VEGF. Cohorts of
TRAMP mice were given a one-time i.m. injection of 1011 genomic
particles of rAAV6 encoding endostatin and angiostatin rAAV(E+A) as bicistronically expressed proteins from a single vector or
rAAV encoding GFP to determine vector-related nonspecific
effects. Three different time points were chosen for treatment:
week 5 when the animals did not develop any abnormality in the
prostate, week 10 when low to moderate PIN lesion was observed
in untreated mice, and week 18 when mice showed significant
adenocarcinoma characterized by well-differentiated tumor. Serum
samples obtained before vector injection and regularly after
therapy were subjected to ELISA for endostatin and VEGF levels.
The mean serum endostatin level after rAAV-(E+A) treatment was
912 ng/mL. In untreated naı̈ve mice, the mean endostatin level was
189 ng/mL (Fig. 1A). The mean serum angiostatin level after rAAV(E+A) treatment was 651 ng/mL. In untreated naı̈ve mice, the mean
angiostatin level was 34 ng/mL (Fig. 1B). The systemic levels of
endostatin angiostatin were comparable between rAAV-(E+A)
groups after vector administration irrespective of the stage of
disease and time of vector administration (Fig. 1A and B).
However, there was a marked difference in serum VEGF levels
between different groups based on time of vector injection, as
shown in Fig. 1C. In naı̈ve mice, VEGF levels started to show
significant elevation at 10 weeks of age and there was a steady
increase until 32 weeks. When rAAV-(E+A) therapy was given at
either 5 or at 10 weeks of age, VEGF levels showed marked
decrease at 12 weeks compared with naı̈ve mice and remained
around this amount until 60 weeks (P < 0.04). However, in mice
administered with rAAV-(E+A) at 18 weeks, when the cancer
has already progressed to differentiated stage, there was no significant decrease in serum VEGF level compared with naı̈ve animals
(P > 0.05).
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry. To analyze the
effect of sustained antiangiogenic therapy on multistage progression of prostate cancer, 22 mice from each group were sacrificed at

5791

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

12, 18, 20, 24, and 32 weeks of age. Prostate tissue sections were
H&E stained and graded. In rAAV-GFP–treated mice, progression
of the disease was identical to that of naı̈ve mice displaying highgrade PIN lesion by week 12, well-differentiated tumor by week 18,
and poorly differentiated tumor by 24 to 28 weeks. Metastasis,
especially to lung and lymph nodes, was apparent by 28 weeks in
these mice as in naı̈ve mice. However, when mice received rAAV(E+A) treatment either at week 5 or at week 10 of age, progression
of the disease was significantly slow. As shown in Fig. 2A and B,
there was a significant delay in the progression of the disease. Until
18 weeks, histology of the prostate seemed normal as seen in
nontransgenic littermates. However, during this time, untreated
TRAMP mice exhibited high-grade PIN lesion. Around 24 weeks of
age, when untreated mice already displayed poorly differentiated
tumor with metastasis to liver, lung, and lymph nodes, rAAV(E+A)–treated mice showed only well-differentiated tumor. Interestingly, prostate cancer in most of the mice in rAAV-(E+A)–treated
group did not progress to poorly differentiated tumor even at
60 weeks.
Our scoring system was based on assigning the occurrence of the
highest-grade tumor in the prostate irrespective of quantity of
accompanying low-grade tumor cells. Hence, to discern whether
differences exist in the percentage of phenotypically distinct cell
populations within the same prostate tissue sample between naı̈ve
and rAAV-(E+A)–treated animals, well-differentiated prostate
tumors were analyzed for percentage of cells with early-stage
morphology. Results, shown in Table 1, indicated that only 10% of
tissue section area was of well-differentiated type in rAAV-(E+A)
treatment, whereas 90% of them were of normal to PIN lesion type.
However, in naı̈ve animals with well-differentiated tumor, none of
the cells contained normal epithelial phenotype or early PIN lesion,
and 40% of the scored tumors were of a well-differentiated tumor
type. The occurrence of well-differentiated tumor ranged between
18 and 24 weeks in untreated animals, whereas in mice treated
with rAAV-(E+A) at early stages, well-differentiated tumor was

evident only after 24 weeks of age, and remained until 50 weeks
(Table 1).
To determine the effects of endostatin and angiostatin from
rAAV on proliferation, apoptosis, and microvessel density of the
prostate, immunohistochemistry was done with anti-Ki67, antiPARP p85 fragment, and anti–CD31/PECAM-1 antibodies, respectively. Representative results of these analyses are shown in Fig. 2C.
There was a marked decrease in tumor cell proliferation in rAAV(E+A)–treated mice compared with control or rAAV-GFP–treated
mice. When tumor cell proliferation was compared within same
grade tumors between naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A) groups, prominent
Ki67 staining was seen in 14% of stromal cells, 62% of basal
epithelial cells, and 65% of luminal epithelial cells in untreated
animals. However, in the group of mice that were treated with
rAAV-(E+A), the number of proliferating cells in the basal and
luminal region of the prostate was 25% and 40%, respectively.
There was no significant difference in the frequency of Ki67positive stromal cells between naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A) groups.
Microvessel density was analyzed in the prostate tissue from 10
control and 10 rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice with the same tumor
grade; there was a significant decrease in E+A–treated animals
compared with the naı̈ve group (Fig. 2C). The difference was more
pronounced in well-differentiated and moderately differentiated
tumors (P < 0.005), correlating to an earlier and rapid metastatic
event in naı̈ve animals. During early stages of tumor development
in transgenic mice, foci of hyperplasia in the prostatic glands were
observed with few newly formed vessels inside the hyperplastic
lesions. With tumor progression, new blood vessel formation was
seen inside the acini associated with papillary and cribiform
proliferation of epithelium into the lumen. During the progression
of tumor, there was an increase in the number and diameter of
blood vessels both in the tumor area and in the stroma. When we
measured the vessel diameter of 24-week-old naı̈ve mice with
tumors between well-differentiated to moderately differentiated
grade, the diameter of blood vessels in the tumor was 17.8 F 1.3 Am.

Figure 1. Serum endostatin, angiostatin,
and VEGF levels. Serum samples were
obtained at different time points from naı̈ve
and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice. ELISA for
human endostatin (A) was done using a
commercial kit and that for angiostatin (B)
by a method developed in our laboratory,
described in Materials and Methods.
Points, average of assays done in triplicate
from different groups. C, serum VEGF
levels in naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated
mice were measured by ELISA. Points,
average from at least 10 animals for each
time point (P < 0.003 between n and w ).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

5792

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Prostate Cancer

Figure 2. Histologic and immunochemical analysis of prostate tissue from TRAMP mice with or without rAAV-(E+A) treatment. A, cohorts of TRAMP mice were
sacrificed at indicated weeks after no treatment or treatment with rAAV-(E+A), and prostate tissues were sectioned and stained for histopathology. The slides were
evaluated by a pathologist and graded as follows: G1, grade1, normal prostate; G2, grade 2, low-grade PIN; G3, grade, high-grade PIN; G4, grade 4, well-differentiated
tumor; G5, grade 5, moderately differentiated tumor; and G6, grade 6, poorly differentiated tumor. B, tumor progression in naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated
mice over time (n = 22 mice per group). C, for immunochemistry analysis of tumor cell proliferation, apoptosis, and microvessel density in naı̈ve (24 wks) and
rAAV-(E+A)–treated (48 wks) TRAMP mice, prostate tissues obtained from mice with the same histologic grade (well-differentiated tumor) were paraffin embedded
and sectioned. Staining was done with anti-Ki67 antibody for proliferation, anti-PARP p85 fragment polyclonal antibody for apoptosis, and CD31/PECAM-1
antibody for endothelial cells. The slides were minimally counterstained with hematoxylin. D, proliferation and apoptotic indices were calculated by counting
positive cells in 10 random fields at 40 magnification from naı̈ve (open columns ) and rAAV-(E+A)–treated (filled columns ) mice having well-differentiated tumor
(P < 0.004 for proliferation and P < 0.003 for apoptosis). Blood vessel counts were determined by counting the number of vessels in 10 randomly chosen areas
of CD31/PECAM-1–stained sections in high power (*, P < 0.02 and **, P < 0.005). All of the analyses were done at least in 10 mice per group. WDA, well-differentiated
tumor; MDA, moderately differentiated tumor; PDA, poorly differentiated tumor.

However, in mice treated with rAAV-(E+A), this grade tumor was
evident only around 48 weeks of age. Interestingly, the diameter of
vessels in the prostate tumor of rAAV-(E+A)–treated group was
11.5 F 0.6 Am (P < 0.001). In the stromal compartment, the treated
group showed a mean blood vessel diameter of 49.3 F 12.1 Am,
whereas in untreated mice the vessel diameter was found to be
124.3 F 27.7 Am (P < 0.0001). Apoptotic index in the rAAV-(E+A)–
treated group was eight times higher than in naı̈ve mice and the
rAAV-GFP–treated mice in all tumor grades (P < 0.003; Fig. 2D).
Long-term survival and organ metastasis. Results of longterm survival are given in Fig. 3A. Following rAAV-(E+A)
administration at 5 and 10 weeks of age, significant increase in
survival was recorded and >60% of mice were alive even after

60 weeks (P < 0.003). However, i.m. administration of the vector at
week 18, when mice had high-grade PIN lesion to welldifferentiated tumor of the prostate, did not improve survival
significantly (P > 0.05). Mean weight of the genitourinary system,
consisting of the bladder, urethra, seminal vesicles, and ampullary
glands from control and rAAV-(E+A) treatment at 5 or 10 weeks of
age, indicated a significant reduction after treatment both during
well differentiated (P < 0.05) and moderately differentiated
(P = 0.001) stages (Fig. 3B). The increase in survival after
endostatin and angiostatin therapy also correlated with an absence
of organ metastasis. Mice that were untreated or given rAAV-GFP
had visible metastasis of the cancer to organs including lung,
spleen, lymph nodes, and liver around 20 weeks, whereas no distant

Table 1. Percentage of prostate cancer cells based on phenotype in grade 4 tumors of naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice
Age range (wk)

Normal (%)

Low PIN (%)

High PIN (%)

Well-differentiated tumor (%)

Total (%)

18-24
24-60

0
16 F 8

0
7F4

60 F 14
67 F 25

40 F 16
10 F 7

100
100

Naı̈ve
rAAV-(E+A)

www.aacrjournals.org

5793

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Survival index, urinogenital system, and metastasis in
TRAMP mice after rAAV-(E+A) treatment. A, survival was recorded
from 14 mice in each group. rAAV-(E+A) early stage indicates
treatment given at 5 or 10 wks; rAAV-(E+A) late stage indicates
treatment given at 18 wks. *, P < 0.003 compared with naı̈ve and
rAAV-GFP. B, mouse genitourinary tracts consisting of bladder,
urethra, seminal vesicles, ampullary gland, and the prostate were
excised and weighed at different stages of tumor progression from
naı̈ve (open columns ) and rAAV-(E+A)–treated (filled columns )
mice. The stages included PIN, well-differentiated tumor,
moderately differentiated tumor, and poorly differentiated tumor.
The tissues were weighed and the mean weight was determined
(*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.001). C, metastasis to liver, lung, and lymph
nodes was analyzed by H&E staining from naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–
treated mice 32 wks of age. Arrows, metastatic foci.

metastasis was found in rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice until 48 weeks
(Fig. 3C).
Expression of VEGF receptors, Hif-1A, and synaptophysin.
Previous studies have characterized that during early events of
cancer development in TRAMP mice, expression of Hif-1a and
VEGFR-1 (Flt-1) is up-regulated but as the disease progresses,
expression of VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk-1) is increased (17). Because we
observed significant decrease in serum VEGF levels after rAAV(E+A) gene therapy, given either before the onset or during early
stages of the disease, we sought to determine if stable expression of
these factors resulted in modulating the expression of Hif-1a and
VEGF receptors. Prostate tissues obtained at different time points
from naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice were immunohistochemically stained for the expression of Hif-1a, VEGFR1, and
VEGFR2. To identify whether cells positive for the expression of
these factors were of tumor origin or of proliferating endothelial
cell origin, the same slides were also stained with antibodies for
cytokeratin-8 and CD31, respectively. In untreated mice, expression
of Hif-1a and VEGFR1 were predominant during early stages of
tumor growth (until week 12). There was no significant difference
in the expression of Hif-1a and VEGFR1 in the endothelial cells of
naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice; however, there was a
moderate reduction in VEGFR1 expression in tumor cells of
rAAV-(E+A)–treated animals (data not shown). In contrast, staining
for VEGFR2 indicated a significant decrease in expression after
rAAV-(E+A) therapy given at either 5 or 10 weeks of age. In

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

untreated mice, highly intense staining for VEGFR2 was observed
from week 12 and continued throughout their life span. However,
when rAAV-(E+A) therapy was given either at 5 or 10 weeks of
age, VEGFR2 expression was significantly reduced (Fig. 4A). This
difference was seen both in tumor cells and in tumor endothelium
by colocalization studies. Real-time PCR analysis of RNA samples
isolated from the tumor tissues also corroborated the results of
immunohistochemistry (Fig. 4B).
To determine if antiangiogenic therapy impairs the onset of
neuroendocrine transition of prostate epithelial tumors, areas of
well/poorly differentiated tumors from naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–
treated mice were stained with synaptophysin, a marker for
neuroendocrine differentiation. Although high-level expression of
synaptophysin is not observed in well-differentiated tumors in the
prostate of TRAMP, compared with rAAV-(E+A)–treated animals
that showed no staining, regions of well-differentiated tumor in
naı̈ve mice showed sporadic, positively stained cells adjacent to
regions of poor differentiation with intense staining for synaptophysin. Quantitation of synaptophysin-positive cells in the prostate
of moderately-differentiated tumor indicated 38% in untreated
mice and 14% after rAAV-(E+A) treatment (P < 0.05; Fig. 5).
Endostatin and angiostatin treatment significantly decreases
proliferation of endothelial cells and nonmetastatic prostate
cancer cells. Data from in vivo studies corroborated with in vitro
analysis of cell proliferation and VEGFR-2 expression. Treatment of
nonmetastatic TRAMP-C3 and metastatic TRAMP-C2 and HUVEC

5794

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Prostate Cancer

with endostatin and angiostatin by gene transfer indicated a
significant difference in cell proliferation only in TRAMP-C3 and
HUVEC (Fig. 6A). Interestingly, RT-PCR analysis for VEGFR-2
indicated significant down-regulation after treatment with endostatin and angiostatin in TRAMP-C2, TRAMP-3, and HUVEC (Fig. 6B),
suggesting a possible involvement of additional proangiogenic
factors that mediate aggressive growth pattern through different
signal pathways, which may limit the antiangiogenic effects of
endostatin and angiostatin therapy in vivo.

Discussion
Antiangiogenesis is a promising new therapy for prostate cancer.
Although early clinical trials targeting tumor angiogenesis with
purified proteins or pharmacologic drugs have shown promise, the
effects have only been transient (18, 19). Most of these trials have
enrolled patients having end-stage cancer with an aggressive
phenotype and highly established vascular network (20–22).
Although antiangiogenic therapy targets tumor vasculature rather
than tumor cells directly, the onset of metastasis triggers a cascade
of signaling events in cancer cells, tumor endothelium, and cells of
the matrix. Thus, targeting the event of angiogenesis by specific
antiangiogenic compounds for antitumor effects requires identification of an optimal stage of tumor growth for therapeutic
intervention. Many of the preclinical animal studies validating
antiangiogenic drugs, recombinant factors, and gene transfer

approaches have been done in immunodeficient animals (23–26).
Despite promising results, in these models, the kinetics of
implanted tumor growth and the relevance of cell lines studied
to the pattern of primary growth and spontaneous progression of
human tumor are highly limited.
The present study sought to determine the effects of sustained
antiangiogenic therapy, initiated at different stages of tumor
progression and characterized by distinct histologic grade, in an
autochthonous TRAMP model. A combination of endostatin and
angiostatin was used as antiangiogenic factors by a stable gene
therapy approach based on its proven efficacy in our previous
studies (8, 9). Recent studies have identified cellular targets that
bind angiostatin, including, avh3 integrin (27), ATP synthase (28),
and CD26 (29). Endostatin has been reported to mediate its
antiangiogenic effects by binding to integrin a5h1 (30) and VEGFR2 present on endothelial cells and cancer cells (31, 32), inhibition of
matrix metalloproteinases (32), and down-regulation of c-myc and
cyclin-D1 (33). On the other hand, there is a clear correlation on
VEGF level and expression of VEGF receptors during the
progression of prostate cancer both in human patients and in
mice prone to developing spontaneous prostatic neoplasia (7, 17,
34). During the initial stages of prostate disease, characterized by
PIN lesion, increased levels of VEGFR1 and Hif-1a have been
reported (17). As the disease progresses to the onset of metastasis,
VEGFR2 level becomes pronounced with a decrease in VEGFR1
and Hif-1a. Results of the present study indicate that despite

Figure 4. Expression of VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 in proliferating tumor endothelium in naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice. A, paraffin sections of prostate tissue from
naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice with the same grade tumor were stained with antibodies for VEGFR1 (top) or VEGFR2 (bottom ) and CD31. Images obtained
from individual staining were also merged to show relative expression of the receptors on endothelial cells after treatment. B, quantitative real-time PCR analysis of
VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 from RNA isolated from naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated TRAMP mice (treated at 5 wks of age) at different stages. Columns, copy number of
VEGFR mRNA, normalized to copy number of GAPDH amplification from the same sample (n = 22 per group; *, P < 0.025 and **, P < 0.05 compared with naı̈ve mice).

www.aacrjournals.org

5795

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

maintenance of elevated levels of antiangiogenic factors systemically, the effects were highly significant only when the therapy was
initiated at early stages of cancer. Interestingly, similar antitumor
effects of endostatin and angiostatin were seen whether therapy
was initiated before the onset of cancer around 5 weeks or when
PIN lesions already became apparent at 10 weeks. Thus, it is
suggestive that antiangiogenic therapy may be more effective when
started before or during early angiogenic switch of tumor
progression, and before the acquisition of a more aggressive,
metastatic phenotype. The same therapy when given at later stages
of tumor may be ineffective because preexisting vessels may no
longer be viable targets. Although, in our studies, the VEGFR-2
levels were higher during this time compared with other time
points, interestingly, a similar increase in VEGFR-2 levels was also
observed in untreated mice during the same time. Previous
experimental therapeutic studies using TRAMP mice have also
reported that the highest levels of VEGFR-2 expression occurred
during this time, beginning at 16 weeks (17). Based on this
observation, we speculate that systemically sustained levels of
endostatin and angiostatin during VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2 signaling
axis that is sufficient to impair tumor angiogenesis and acquisition
of metastatic phenotype may extend long-term survival.
VEGF signaling through VEGFR2 has been known to initiate a
cascade of downstream activation involving p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and
Src leading to endothelial and tumor cell proliferation and

Figure 5. Synaptophysin expression in prostate tissue of naı̈ve and rAAV(E+A)–treated mice. Prostate from naı̈ve and rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice having
differentiated tumor were stained with synaptophysin antibody. Compared with
rAAV-(E+A)–treated animals, which showed no staining, well-differentiated
tumor cells of naı̈ve mice showed sporadic, positively stained cells. Columns,
percentage of synaptophysin-positive cells between the two groups (*, P < 0.05).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Figure 6. Effects of endostatin and angiostatin on proliferation and VEGFR
expression in TRAMP-C2, TRAMP-C3, and HUVEC in vitro. A, cell proliferation
was determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide assay in nontransfected or rAAV-GFP or rAAV-(E+A) cells (*, P < 0.005
compared with mock). B, RT-PCR analysis for the expression of VEGFR-2 was
done with total RNA isolated from mock-transfected (open columns ) and
AAV-(E+A)–transfected (filled columns ) TRAMP-C2 and TRAM-C3 cells
48 h after gene transfer. Relative copy number of the RNA transcripts was
determined by normalizing with values obtained from amplification of GAPDH
RNA (*, P < 0.05 and **, P < 0.01 compared with mock).

migration, leading to metastasis. Signaling through MAPK, PI3K,
and Src pathways results in the up-regulation of other angiogenic
factors such as platelet-derived growth factor, insulin-like growth
factor, and epidermal growth factor (35–37). Hence, antiangiogenic
therapy targeting VEGF would be more effective during early
transitional stages of prostate cancer progression by not only
impairing the metastatic switch but also indirectly affecting the
activation of other factors that trigger metastatic events. Direct
binding of endostatin to VEGFR2 has been shown to block VEGFmediated signaling (32). Recent studies have also indicated that
endostatin possibly exerts a sequestering effect on VEGF in tumor
cells that precludes its release and subsequent recruitment of new
vasculature (38).
The antiangiogenic effect of angiostatin has been attributed to
its binding to avh3 integrin, ATP synthase, and CD26 (27–29). The
integrin receptor avh3 has been shown to play a critical role in
tumor metastasis (39). Its expression is up-regulated in newly
synthesized blood vessels. Results of immunohistochemistry with
CD31/PECAM antibody in the present study also concur with
previous findings in TRAMP model that there is a direct correlation
between increased microvessel density and progressive stages of
cancer, beginning with low-grade PIN lesion. However, no increase
in microvessel density was observed in prostate tissue of
nontransgenic mice of the same age (7, 17, 40). Thus, the effects
of angiostatin and endostatin therapy when initiated during early
phases of tumor growth seem to be more significant than when
given for advanced-stage disease.

5796

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Prostate Cancer

The acquisition of a neuroendocrine phenotype is a salient
feature of late-stage prostate cancer (41). Our studies examining
synaptophysin expression in differentiated areas of tumors of naı̈ve
mice indicated few synaptophysin-positive cells in well-differentiated epithelium, adjoining highly synaptophysin-positive, and
poorly differentiated regions. However, there were hardly any
synaptophysin-expressing cells among well-differentiated tumors
of rAAV-(E+A)–treated mice prostate, suggesting that targeting
angiogenesis may also delay or prevent the phenotypic switch of
prostate cancer to the neuroendocrine type possibly by deprivation
of oxygen and nutrients.
Further studies on the effects of antiangiogenic therapy in
hormone refractory tumors characterized by neuroendocrine

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2006.
CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:106–30.
2. Konety BR, Eastham JA, Reuter VE, et al. Feasibility of
radical prostatectomy after neoadjuvant chemohormonal therapy for patients with high risk or locally
advanced prostate cancer: results of a phase I/II study.
J Urol 2004;171:709–13.
3. Koukourakis MI, Touloupidis S. External beam radiotherapy for prostate cancer: current position and trends.
Anticancer Res 2006;26:485–94.
4. Acher PL, Morris SL, Popert RJ, Perry MJ, Potters L,
Beaney RP. Permanent prostate brachytherapy: a
century of technical evolution. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis 2006;9:215–20.
5. Masiero L, Figg WD, Kohn EC. New anti-angiogenesis
agents: review of the clinical experience with carboxyamido-triazole (CAI), thalidomide, TNP-470 and interleukin-12. Angiogenesis 1997;1:23–35.
6. Figg WD, Kruger EA, Price DK, Kim S, Dahut WD.
Inhibition of angiogenesis: treatment options for
patients with metastatic prostate cancer. Invest New
Drugs 2002;20:183–94.
7. Gingrich JR, Barrios RJ, Foster BA, Greenberg NM.
Pathologic progression of autochthonous prostate
cancer in the TRAMP model. Prostate Cancer Prostatic
Dis 1999;2:70–5.
8. Ponnazhagan S, Mahendra G, Kumar S, et al. Adenoassociated virus 2-mediated antiangiogenic cancer gene
therapy: long-term efficacy of a vector encoding
angiostatin and endostatin over vectors encoding a
single factor. Cancer Res 2004;64:1781–7.
9. Isayeva T, Ren C, Ponnazhagan S. Recombinant adenoassociated virus 2-mediated antiangiogenic prevention
in a mouse model of intraperitoneal ovarian cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 2005;11:1342–7.
10. Aldrich WA, Ren C, White AF, et al. Enhanced
transduction of mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic
cells by repetitive infection with self-complementary
adeno-associated virus 6 combined with immunostimulatory ligands. Gene Ther 2006;13:29–39.
11. Foster BA, Gingrich JR, Kwon ED, et al. Characterization of prostatic epithelial cell lines derived from
transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate
(TRAMP) model. Cancer Res 1997;57:3325–30.
12. Greenberg NM, DeMayo F, Finegold MJ, et al.
Prostate cancer in a transgenic mouse. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1995;92:3439–43.
13. Samulski RJ, Chang LS, Shenk TA. Recombinant
plasmid from which an infectious adeno-associated
virus genome can be excised in vitro and its use to study
viral replication. J Virol 1987;61:3096–101.
14. Grimm D, Kay MA, Kleinschmidt JA. Helper virusfree, optically controllable, and two-plasmid-based

www.aacrjournals.org

transition and identification of other targets modulated by
angiostatin and endostatin therapy at different stages of tumor
progression could provide new clues to precisely understanding the
molecular interactions involved and may lead to the development
of more effective targeted therapies.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/2/2006; revised 3/15/2007; accepted 4/11/2007.
Grant support: NIH grant R01CA98817 and the U.S. Army Department of Defense
grants PC020372 and PC050949.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Robert Hardy and April White for critical reading of the manuscript.

production of adeno-associated virus vectors of serotypes 1 to 6. Mol Ther 2003;7:839–50.
15. Zolotukhin S, Byrne BJ, Mason E, et al. Recombinant
adeno-associated virus purification using novel methods
improves infectious titer and yield. Gene Ther 1999;6:
973–85.
16. Suttie A, Nyska A, Haseman JK, Moser GJ, Hackett
TR, Goldsworthy TL. A grading scheme for the
assessment of proliferative lesions of the mouse prostate
in the TRAMP model. Toxicol Pathol 2003;31:31–8.
17. Huss WJ, Hanrahan CF, Barrios RJ, Simons JW,
Greenberg NM. Angiogenesis and prostate cancer:
identification of a molecular progression switch. Cancer
Res 2001;61:2736–43.
18. DeMoraes ED, Fogler WE, Grant D. Recombinant
human angiostatin (rhA): a phase I clinical trial
assessing safety, pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD). Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2001;20:3a.
19. Eder JP, Supko JG, Clark JW, et al. Phase I clinical trial
of recombinant human endostatin administered as a
short intravenous infusion repeated daily. J Clin Oncol
2002;20:3772–84.
20. Herbst RS, Hess KR, Tran HT, et al. Phase I study of
recombinant human Endostatin in patients with
advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2002;20:3792–803.
21. Thomas JP, Arzoomanian RZ, Alberti D, et al. A phase
I pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of
recombinant human endostatin in patients with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:223–31.
22. Kulke MH, Bergsland EK, Ryan DP, et al. Phase II
study of recombinant human endostatin in patients
with advanced neuroendocrine tumors. J Clin Oncol
2006;24:3555–61.
23. Muramaki M, Miyake H, Hara I, Kamidono S.
Synergistic inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis
by combined treatment with TNP-470 and docetaxel in
a human prostate cancer PC-3 model. Int J Oncol 2005;
26:623–8.
24. Nicholson B, Gulding K, Conaway M, Wedge SR,
Theodorescu D. Combination antiangiogenic and androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: a promising
therapeutic approach. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:8728–34.
25. Inoue K, Slaton JW, Eve BY, et al. Interleukin
8 expression regulates tumorigenicity and metastases
in androgen-independent prostate cancer. Clin Cancer
Res 2000;6:2104–19.
26. Raikwar SP, Temm CJ, Raikwar NS, Kao C, Molitoris
BA, Gardner TA. Adenoviral vectors expressing human
endostatin-angiostatin and soluble Tie2: enhanced
suppression of tumor growth and antiangiogenic effects
in a prostate tumor model. Mol Ther 2005;12:1091–100.
27. Tarui T, Miles LA, Takada Y. Specific interaction of
angiostatin with integrin a(v)h(3) in endothelial cells.
J Biol Chem 2001;276:39562–8.
28. Moser TL, Stack MS, Asplin I, et al. Angiostatin binds

5797

ATP synthase on the surface of human endothelial cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:2811–6.
29. Gonzalez-Gronow M, Grenett HE, Gawdi G, Pizzo SV.
Angiostatin directly inhibits human prostate tumor cell
invasion by blocking plasminogen binding to its cellular
receptor, CD26. Exp Cell Res 2005;303:22–31.
30. Sudhakar A, Sugimoto H, Yang C, Lively J, Zeisberg M,
Kalluri R. Human tumstatin and human endostatin
exhibit distinct antiangiogenic activities mediated by
avh3 and a5h1 integrins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;
100:4766–71.
31. Hajitou A, Grignet C, Devy L, et al. The antitumoral
effect of endostatin and angiostatin is associated with a
down-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor
expression in tumor cells. FASEB J 2002;16:1802–4.
32. Kim YM, Hwang S, Kim YM, et al. Endostatin blocks
vascular endothelial growth factor-mediated signaling
via direct interaction with KDR/Flk-1. J Biol Chem 2002;
277:27872–9.
33. Hanai J, Dhanabal M, Karumanchi SA, et al. Endostatin causes G1 arrest of endothelial cells through
inhibition of cyclin D1. J Biol Chem 2002;277:16464–9.
34. Pallares J, Rojo F, Iriarte J, Morote J, Armadans LI, de
Torres I. Study of microvessel density and the expression
of the angiogenic factors VEGF, bFGF and the receptors
Flt-1 and FLK-1 in benign, premalignant and malignant
prostate tissues. Histol Histopathol 2006;21:857–65.
35. Qiao M, Shapiro P, Kumar R, Passaniti A. Insulin-like
growth factor-1 regulates endogenous RUNX2 activity in
endothelial cells through a phosphatidylinositol 3kinase/ERK-dependent and Akt-independent signaling
pathway. J Biol Chem 2004;279:42709–18.
36. Rak J, Yu JL, Klement G, Kerbel RS. Oncogenes and
angiogenesis: signaling three-dimensional tumor
growth. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 2000;5:24–33.
37. Weis S, Cui J, Barnes L, Cheresh D. Endothelial
barrier disruption by VEGF-mediated Src activity
potentiates tumor cell extravasation and metastasis.
J Cell Biol 2004;167:223–9.
38. Macpherson GR, Ng SS, Forbes SL, et al. Antiangiogenic activity of human endostatin is HIF-1independent in vitro and sensitive to timing of treatment
in a human saphenous vein assay. Mol Cancer Ther 2003;
2:845–54.
39. Pecheur I, Peyruchaud O, Serre CM, et al. Integrin
a(v)h3 expression confers on tumor cells a greater propensity to metastasize to bone. FASEB J 2002;16:1266–8.
40. Kaplan-Lefko PJ, Chen TM, Ittmann MM, et al.
Pathobiology of autochthonous prostate cancer in a preclinical transgenic mouse model. Prostate 2003;55:219–37.
41. Shah RB, Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM, et al. Androgenindependent prostate cancer is a heterogeneous group
of diseases: lessons from a rapid autopsy program.
Cancer Res 2004;64:9209–16.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Effects of Sustained Antiangiogenic Therapy in Multistage
Prostate Cancer in TRAMP Model
Tatyana Isayeva, Diptiman Chanda, Lisa Kallman, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:5789-5797.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5789

This article cites 41 articles, 24 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5789.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 8 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5789.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

