www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 8), pp: 13496-13508
Research Paper

Radioprotective effects of Keratinocyte Growth Factor-1 against
irradiation-induced salivary gland hypofunction
Jeong-Seok Choi1,2,*, Hyun-Soo Shin1,2,*, Hye-Young An1,2, Young-Mo Kim1,2, Jae-Yol Lim1,2
1

Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Incheon, Republic of Korea

2

Translational Research Center, Incheon, Republic of Korea

*

These authors are contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Jae-Yol Lim, email: jylim@inha.ac.kr
Keywords: salivary glands, irradiation, xerostomia, KGF-1, apoptosis
Received: November 02, 2016     Accepted: December 28, 2016     Published: January 10, 2017

ABSTRACT
Irradiation can cause salivary gland hypofunction, with hyposalivation producing
discomfort, health risks, and reducing function in daily life. Despite increasing translational
research interest in radioprotection, there are no satisfactory treatments available.
Keratinocyte growth factor-1 stimulates proliferation of salivary epithelial cells or salivary
stem/progenitor cells. However, the exact mechanism of its radioprotection against
radiation-induced salivary hypofunction is not fully elucidated. Our results reveal that
the radioprotective effects of keratinocyte growth factor-1 involved alleviation of growth
inhibition and anti-apoptotic cell death of human parotid epithelial cells. Furthermore,
keratinocyte growth factor-1 protected human parotid epithelial cells through the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase – protein kinase B (Akt) pathway and inhibition of p53-mediated
apoptosis through activation of mouse double minute 2. Local delivery of keratinocyte
growth factor-1 into the irradiated salivary glands could protect radiation-induced salivary
cell damages, suppress p53-mediated apoptosis and prevent salivary hypofunction in vivo.
This suggests that keratinocyte growth factor-1 is a promising candidate to prevent
radiation-induced salivary hypofunction and raise rational development keratinocyte growth
factor-1 local delivery system.

INTRODUCTION

as a cytoprotective drug to reduce the symptoms of oral
mucositis [7, 8]. KGF-1 also has potential for amelioration
of irradiation-induced salivary hypofunction [5, 6].
KGF-1 is a member of FGF7/10/22 subfamilies
and acts exclusively through a subset of FGF receptors,
FGFR2IIIb [9]. KGF-1 is related to epithelial cell growth,
differentiation, survival, and DNA repair [10]. Although
KGF-1 effectively protects and regenerates damaged
epithelial cells in the gastrointestinal mucosa, lung
and oral mucosa [9–14], the exact mechanisms are not
understood, particularly in terms of radioprotection on
epithelial cells of SGs.
In this study, we investigated the KGF-1 mechanism
related to anti-apoptotic effect in vitro and determined
whether the KGF-1 could prevent salivary hypofunction
in vivo. Our results indicate for the first time that KGF-1
can provide radioprotection to SG epithelial cells by
reducing DNA damage and p53-mediated apoptosis
following irradiation, in which phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)- protein kinase B (Akt)-p53 pathway mediates the
radioprotective effect of KGF-1.

Radiotherapy is the main treatment in patients with
head and neck cancer. Due to the structural proximity and
complexity in head and neck area, irradiation-induced
salivary gland (SG) damage is common. Hyposalivationrelated complications such as xerostomia, halitosis,
burning sensation, bizarre taste, swallowing difficulty and
dental caries decrease the quality of life [1]. In spite of
advances in SG-sparing radiation techniques, it remains
challenging to prevent irradiation-induced salivary
hypofunction.
Our previous study found that mesenchymal stem
cell-secreted bioactive factors provide radioprotection and
tissue remodeling [2]. An increasing number of studies
using bioactive factors for prevention or amelioration of
irradiation-induced SG damage have been conducted [3–6].
Keratinocyte growth factor-1 (KGF-1, also known as FGF-7)
stimulates the growth of epithelial cells and protects those
cells from chemotherapy or radiotherapy-induced oral
mucositis. Recombinant KGF (Palifermin) has been approved
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13496

Oncotarget

RESULTS

cells (Figure 3A). We investigated whether cell death
was related to irradiation-induced DNA damage, and
our results showed that DNA damage marker, γH2AX
significantly decreased after KGF-1 treatment (Figure 3A).
In addition, the radioprotective effect of KGF-1 against
DNA damage and cell death was inhibited in the presence
of FGFR2 inhibitor or PI3k inhibitor in the medium
(Figure 3B–3C).
To analyze whether the radioprotective effect
of KGF-1 is attributed to an anti-apoptotic effect, we
examined the changes in apoptosis-associated proteins
including p53, PUMA, Bax, cytochrome c, cleaved
caspase-9 and -3, and Bcl-2. Irradiation increased the
expression of pro-apoptotic proteins; p53, PUMA, Bax,
cytochrome c, and cleaved caspase-9 and -3, whereas it
decreased the expression of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2
(Figure 3D). Importantly, KGF-1 treatment significantly
inhibited the irradiation-induced induction in expression
of pro-apoptotic proteins and increased the expression of
anti-apoptotic protein. In the presence of FGFR2 inhibitor
to block endogenous KGF signaling, irradiation-induced
apoptosis in hPECs was still observed, suggesting an
anti-apoptotic effect of exogenous KGF-1. In sum,
the protective effect of KGF-1 on irradiation-induced
apoptosis in hPECs is associated with regulation of
p53-mediated apoptosis pathway (Figure 3D).
To determine the signaling pathway, we next
explored the expression of FGFR2 and its downstream
signal transduction pathway. Given the role of PI3K-Akt
pathway of growth factor signaling, we examined
activation of PI3K, its downstream target, Akt, and
an important p53 suppressor, murine double minute 2
(MDM2). Irradiation reduced the expression of PI3KAkt-MDM2 axis (Figure 3E). Phosphorylations of
PI3K, Akt, and MDM2 were enhanced in response
with KGF-1 pretreatment. These results suggest that
KGF-1 induces PI3K and Akt activation and subsequent
phosphorylation of MDM2 inhibits irradiation-induced
p53 activation. In the presence of PI3K inhibitor, the
loss of Akt phosphorylation confirmed the efficacy of the
inhibitor, and inhibition of MDM2 phosphorylation by
PI3K inhibitor suggested that down-regulation of the antiapoptotic pathway antagonized p53 and its downstream
pro-apoptotic proteins (Figure 3F–3G). Furthermore, both
inhibitors blocked the promotion of proliferative capacity
and inhibition of apoptosis by KGF-1 (Figure 3H). These
results provide support for the protection of KGF-1 by
blocking apoptotic signaling pathway that is induced by
known PI3K-Akt-MDM2 axis (Figure 3I).

Irradiation response of human parotid epithelial
cells in vitro
We initially investigated irradiation response of
human parotid epithelial cells (hPECs) in vitro to examine
the mechanisms of KGF-1 on radioprotection of salivary
epithelial cells. KGF-1 was administered immediately
after irradiation. We assessed morphological changes,
proliferation, and cytotoxicity of the monolayer cultured
hPECs at one, two, and three days after irradiation at a
dosage of 0, 15, and 20 Gy. Irradiation at a dosage of
15 and 20 Gy induced morphological changes of hPECs
from a cuboidal, cobblestone appearance to destroyed,
fibroblastoid morphology (Figure 1A). Irradiation
significantly decreased proliferation and increased
cytotoxicity by LDH release in the hPECs in a time
dependent manner (Figure 1B and 1C). HPECs with 20 Gy
of irradiation lost significant proliferative capacity while
increasing LDH release from one day post-irradiation,
suggesting an irradiation dose-response relationship.
KGF-1 at concentrations of 50, 100, and 200 ng/ml
alleviated irradiation-induced growth inhibition and
cytotoxic damage by irradiation at two days after
irradiation (Figure 1D–1F). There was a more significant
effect of 100 or 200 ng/ml of KGF-1 on irradiationinduced changes in cell proliferation and viability in
hPECs than 50 ng/ml of KGF-1 (Figure 1E and 1F). In
addition, 100 ng/ml of KGF-1 successfully reduced
irradiation-induced growth inhibition and cell death by
live/dead staining (Figure 1G–1I). KGF-1 itself did not
affect cell proliferation or cell death. Based on these
observations, 100 ng/ml of KGF-1 was chosen for further
experiments.
To investigate the phenotypic markers expression,
mRNA and protein expression of acinar markers;
α-amylase (AMY1A) and AQP5 (AQP5), ductal markers;
CK7 (KRT7) and CK18 (KRT18), intercellular adherence
protein; E-cadherin (CDH1), and TJ protein; ZO-1
(TJP1) were compared among the groups at two days
after irradiation (Figure 2A and 2B). Irradiation reduced
the salivary epithelial markers (α-amylase, AQP5, CK7,
and CK18), ZO-1, and E-cadherin expression. KGF-1
treatment enhanced all the salivary epithelial markers and
increased the ZO-1 and E-cadherin expression.

Radioprotective mechanisms of KGF-1
To understand the mechanism of irradiation-induced
cell death, we performed an in vitro TUNEL assay, which
revealed the presence of fragmented hPEC DNA. These
findings are direct evidence of apoptotic cell death.
Irradiation significantly increased DNA fragments and
TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells and KGF-1 successfully
reduced DNA fragments and TUNEL-positive apoptotic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Morphological improvement, cytoprotection and
anti-apoptosis following irradiation by KGF-1
treatment
We determined that rat salivary epithelial cells
in vivo demonstrated immunoreactivity to FGFR2 (data not
13497

Oncotarget

shown). Next, we performed an in vivo experiment testing
whether local administration of KGF-1 could ameliorate
irradiation-induced salivary hypofunction. External
appearance and dissected SGs in each group were observed
at 16 weeks after irradiation. Neck irradiation resulted in
loss of hair around the neck and decreased glandular size,
but KGF-1-treated rats showed less hair loss and larger
glandular size than the irradiation group. Body weight
and dissected glandular weight were measured at two
and 16 weeks after irradiation (Figure 4A and 4B). Body
weight and glandular weight were significantly lower in
the irradiation group than the control group at two and
16 weeks after irradiation. However, KGF-1 treatment

led to significantly increased body and glandular weight
compared to the irradiation group at 16 weeks after
treatment.
Histological evaluations of the micro-morphological
changes were performed and the densities of mucin were
measured by PAS staining followed by examination
by a blinded researcher using a software program to
calculate the pixels of purple stained areas at 16 weeks
after irradiation. The salivary acinoductal structure was
destroyed and reduced after irradiation, but maintained
in the KGF-1 group (Figure 4C). Morphometric analysis
of PAS staining showed that mucin production decreased
significantly after irradiation, but increased significantly

Figure 1: Morphological changes, cell proliferation and viability of hPECs after irradiation. (A) Irradiation induced

morphological changes of hPEC in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Scale bars represent 100 μm. (B) Proliferation of hPEC after
irradiation was examined. (C) Cytotoxicity of hPEC after irradiation was examined. Data are presented as the means ± SEM (n = 5).
Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni›s post hoc test. *, compared to 0Gy in each group; #, compared to 15 Gy in each group, $, compared to
15 and 20 Gy in 2 days. ***P <0.001, ###P < 0.001, $$$P < 0.001. (D) Effect of dose dependent-KGF-1 on irradiation-induced changes
in cell proliferation and viability in hPEC. Scale bars represent 100 μm. (E) Proliferation of hPEC after IR+KGF-1 was examined.
(F) Cytotoxicity of hPEC after IR+KGF-1 was examined (n = 5). One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared to IR; #, compared
to IR+KGF-1 (50 ng/ml). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001. (G) Effect of KGF-1 on irradiationinduced changes in cell proliferation and viability in hPEC. Scale bars represent 100 and 200 μm. (H) Proliferation of hPEC after IR+KGF-1
was examined. (I) Cytotoxicity of hPEC after IR+KGF-1 was examined (n = 5). One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s pot hoc test. *, compared to
CON; #, compared to IR; $, compared to IR+KGF-1. ***P < 0.001, ###P < 0.001, $$P < 0.01, $$$P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13498

Oncotarget

in the KGF-1 group relative to the irradiation group
(Figure 4C and 4D). MTC staining showed irradiationinduced fibrotic changes in peri-acinoductal area but less
in the KGF-1 group (Figure 4C and 4D).
We next investigated the cellular effects of KGF-1
on salivary epithelial, endothelial, myoepithelial, and

ductal cells (Figure 4E). Immunohistochemical staining
revealed that expression of AQP5 (a marker of salivary
epithelial cells), CK18 (ductal cells) CD31 (endothelial
cells), and α-SMA (myoepithelial cells) was significantly
lower in the irradiation group than the control group
(Figure 4E and 4F). Treatment of the KGF-1 increased the

Figure 2: Effect of KGF-1 on salivary mRNA and protein expression. (A) Irradiation significantly decreases the salivary acinar

markers (α-amylase; AMY1A and AQP5; AQP5), TJ protein (ZO-1; TJP1), adherence protein (E-cadherin; CDH1), and ductal markers
(CK7; KRT7 and CK18; KRT18) in hPEC that is increased by treatment with KGF-1 (100 ng/ml) (n = 9). One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post
hoc test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR. ***P < 0.001, ###P < 0.001. (B) The protein translation of the same markers in Figure 2A
was examined by Western blot, and the expression levels relative to β-actin were calculated (n = 3). One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc
test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13499

Oncotarget

staining density of these cells relative to the irradiation
group, suggesting KGF-1 could preserve myoepithelial
and endothelial cells as well as salivary epithelial cells
against irradiation-induced cell depletion.
Next, we performed an in vivo experiment testing
whether local delivery of KGF-1 could prevent irradiationinduced salivary hypofunction. Local irradiation at 15 Gy
to the neck induced apoptosis in SGs, whereupon TUNEL
positive apoptotic cells were markedly increased at
24 hours after irradiation (Figure 4G). Apoptotic cell

death, however, was reduced by treatment with KGF-1
before and immediately after irradiation. Quantification
of TUNEL positive cells revealed that a significant
increase in apoptosis was observed after irradiation, but
this decreased significantly following KGF-1 treatment
relative to the irradiation (vehicle PBS treated) group
(Figure 4H). KGF-1 alone without irradiation did
not increase cell death. We examined the changes in
apoptosis-associated proteins in vivo (Figure 4I and 4J).
Similar to in vitro findings, irradiation increased the

Figure 3: Effect of KGF-1 on apoptosis and apoptosis-related protein expression. (A) KGF-1 effect of TUNEL positive
cells and DNA damages in hPECs. (B) Comparison of the percentages of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells among groups. (C) Comparison
of the percentages of DNA damages among groups. Data are presented as the mean number of apoptotic cells per field ± SEM (n = 3).
One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR; $, compared to IR+KGF-1. ***P < 0.001, ###P < 0.001,
###
P < 0.001. (D–G) Effect of FGFR2 and PI3k inhibitor on irradiation-induced FGFR2-PI3k pathway and apoptosis. FGFR2 and PI3k
inhibitor induces an increase of FGFR2-PI3k-related protein and pro-apoptotic protein in hPECs. (H) Comparison of the proliferation
capacities among groups. (n = 5). One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR, $, compared to
IR+ KGF-1. ***P < 0.001, ###P < 0.001, $$$P < 0.001. (I) Proved signaling pathway of KGF-1 to block the apoptosis and DNA damage of
hPECs after irradiation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13500

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Macro- or micro-morphological evaluation, cytoprotective effect and anti-apoptosis of KGF-1 treatment.

(A and B) Body weight and dissected glandular weight were measured at two and 16 weeks after irradiation. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s
post hoc test. *, compared to CON in each group; #, compared to IR+PBS in each group. . *P <0.05, **P <0.01, ***P <0.001, #P < 0.05,
##
P < 0.01. (C) Representative histological pictures of H-E, PAS and MTC staining from three groups at 16 weeks post-irradiation are
presented. Scale bars represent 50 μm. (D) Densities upon PAS (upper) staining were measured using a software program to calculate pixels
of purple stained mucin-containing areas. MTC (lower) staining showed the IR+KGF-1 group exhibited less periductal and perivascular
fibrosis than the IR group. One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR. ***P < 0.001, ###P < 0.001.
(E) Representative images of salivary epithelial (AQP5), endothelial (CD31), myoepithelial (α-SMA), and ductal cells (CK18) in the SG in
the three experimental groups. Scale bars represent 50 μm. (F) Each staining area was measured in pixels using a software program. Data
are presented as the mean area (%) ± SEM. One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR. *P < 0.05
**P < 0.01 ***P < 0.001, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01. two weeks (n = 3 in all groups), 16 weeks CON group (n = 3), IR+PBS group (n = 3),
IR+KGF-1 group (n = 2). Five random sections from each rat were evaluated by a blinded researcher. The number of slides examined from
each experimental group ranged from 18 to 21. (G) Representative images of an in vivo TUNEL assay from three experimental groups at
two weeks post-irradiation. Scale bars represent 50 μm. (H) The number of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells was determined by a blinded
researcher. Data are presented as the mean number of apoptotic cells per field ± SEM. One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared
to CON; #, compared to IR. ***P < 0.001, ###P < 0.001. (n = 2 mice in all groups. Five random sections in each experimental group were
examined.) (I) Representative images of apoptotic cascades as determined by Western blotting. (J) Comparison of p53, PUMA, BAX,
cytochrome C, cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-9 and Bcl-2 expression (results are presented as the mean ± SEM). One-way ANOVA,
Tukey’s post hoc multiple comparisons test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR; $, compared to IR+KGF-1. ***P < 0.001, ##P < 0.01,
###
P < 0.001, $P < 0.05, $$P < 0.01. (n = 2 mice in all groups).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13501

Oncotarget

expression of pro-apoptotic proteins; p53, PUMA, Bax,
cytochrome c, and cleaved caspase-9 and -3, whereas it
decreased the expression of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2.
KGF-1 treatment significantly inhibited the irradiationinduced induction in expression of pro-apoptotic proteins
and increased the expression of anti-apoptotic protein.
These findings suggest that the radioprotective effect of
KGF-1 is associated with regulation of p53-mediated
apoptosis pathway in vivo.

and EGF were higher after KGF-1 treatment relative to
the irradiation group. The average activity of salivary
amylase was significantly reduced in the irradiation group
(Figure 5D), and it was significantly improved in the KGF-1
group. EGF contents in saliva at each time point were also
confirmed by ELISA. The average concentration was
significantly lower in the irradiation group than the control
group (Figure 5E), and significantly increased in the KGF-1
group relative to the irradiation group at 16 weeks after
treatment.

Recovery of irradiation-induced salivary
hypofunction

DISCUSSION

The amount of salivation and lag time were measured
pre-radiation and two and 16 weeks post-radiation.
The changes in SFR and lag time after irradiation were
calculated by the post- radiation to pre-radiation ratio.
Irradiation significantly decreased the ratio of SFR at
16 weeks and increased the ratio of the lag time at two
and 16 weeks after irradiation (Figure 5A and 5B). KGF-1
treatment significantly improved the ratio of SFR and the
lag time at 16 weeks after irradiation. We performed western
blotting of saliva collected at 16 weeks post-radiation to
examine the salivary amylase and EGF protein expression
level (Figure 5C). The expression levels of salivary amylase

In this study, we investigated the KGF-1 mechanism
related to the anti-apoptotic effect in vitro and protective
effects of local administration of KGF-1 on SG function
following irradiation in vivo. With KGF-1 treatment,
we verified the radioprotective mechanism of KGF-1
by protection against DNA damage and p53-mediated
apoptosis through PI3K-Akt pathway after irradiation
using human SG epithelial cell culture in vitro. Salivary
function recovered within 16 weeks after irradiation
and these findings are supported by an earlier study that
delivered KGF-1 gene to submaxillary glands transductally
in mice [5].

Figure 5: Effect of salivary function by KGF-1 treatment. (A) Salivary flow rate (SFR) was calculated at pre-irradiation and 2

and 16 weeks post-irradiation. The changes in SFR after irradiation were expressed by the ratio of post-irradiation SFR to pre-irradiation
SFR (Mean ± SEM). (B) Time to salivation (lag time, LT) was measured and the ratios of post-irradiation LT to pre-irradiation LT were
presented. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. (A, B and E) Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s post hoc test. *, compared to CON in
each group; #, compared to IR+PBS in each group. . *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, #P < 0.05. (C) Western blotting of amylase and EGF in saliva at
16 weeks post-irradiation. (D) The salivary amylase activity was examined by the Assay Kit and fold changes in activity level are presented.
(E) EGF contents were measured at each time point and the average contents are presented. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM.
One-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test. *, compared to CON; #, compared to IR. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, ##P < 0.01. 2 weeks (n = 3 in
all groups), 16 weeks CON group (n = 3), IR+PBS group (n = 3), IR+KGF-1 group (n = 2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13502

Oncotarget

The exact mechanism of SG dysfunction induced
by irradiation remains unclear. Irradiation causes DNA
damage and generates reactive oxygen species, an
important cause of apoptotic cell death in target tissues.
Reactive oxygen species lead to apoptosis and to the
up-regulation of inflammatory cytokines. The latter can
produce further tissue damage, amplifying signaling
cascades and the entire injury process [15]. One of the
most consistent phenomena in SG response to irradiation is
the loss of cellular components in our study. These findings
imply that a continued apoptotic response contributes
to these observations. Avila et al. suggested that the
apoptotic response after irradiation is mediated by p53
and is directly associated with salivary dysfunction [16].
p53 induces apoptosis by transcriptional regulation of
target genes, and involves mitochondrial cytochrome c
release and caspase9 and -3 cascades [17]. A number of
p53-regulated genes have been identified, and some of
these represent potential downstream mediators of p53dependent apoptosis including Bax and PUMA [18, 19].
The Bax protein accumulates in mitochondria in response
to death signals [18]. PUMA localizes to the mitochondria
and interacts with Bax. PUMA interaction with Bax
rapidly induces apoptosis through cytochrome c release
and activation of caspase-3 and -9 [19]. Irradiation
increases expression of pro-apoptotic proteins and
decreases expression of anti-apoptotic protein. KGF-1
treatment significantly decreases the irradiation-induced
expression of pro-apoptotic proteins and increases the
expression of anti-apoptotic protein.
PI3K/Akt pathway is important in cell survival and
proliferation in cells [20, 21]. To addressing the role of
KGF-1 to block the apoptosis in the model of hPECs, we
focused on the PI3K/Akt signaling axis, a pathway with
protective effects that inhibit cell apoptosis. We postulated
that KGF-1 could induce PI3K, Akt, and MDM2
phosphorylation in hPECs. Phosphorylations of PI3KAkt-MDM2 axis were enhanced in response with KGF-1
pretreatment. These results support our hypothesis that
KGF-1 preserves hPECs viability by inhibiting apoptosis,
probably by mediating the PI3K-Akt-MDM2 pathway.
As a critical regulator of PI3K-mediated cell survival,
activation of Akt signaling is sufficient to block cell death
induced by apoptotic stimuli. The mechanisms underlying
the cytoprotective effects of KGF-1 in epithelial cells
are mediated via PI3K–Akt signaling [22, 23]. These
findings are reproduced in our study that KGF-1 treatment
reduced the extent of irradiation-induced DNA damage
and apoptotic cell death in salivary epithelial cells
via activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK),
FGFR2IIIb and PI3K-Akt signaling transduction pathway.
PI3K is a vital regulatory protein responsible for cell
growth, proliferation, differentiation, motility, and survival
and these functions are related to the ability to activate
protein kinase B (Akt). Akt mediates anti-apoptotic
action through phosphorylation of multiple downstream
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

targets including MDM2, a p53 interacting protein that
downregulates p53 transcriptional activity [24].
Salivary parenchymal cells have FGFR2 receptors
that are required for KGF-1 signaling [6]. We first
examined sections of SGs to determine whether they
expressed FGFR2 and rat salivary parenchymal cells
showed FGFR2, and it was distributed to ductal area.
KGF-1 has the potential to protect many types of cells
against irradiation [6, 10, 14, 25, 26]. Our results showed
that the KGF-1 administered to SGs can prevent irradiation
damage in acinar, ductal, endothelial and salivary stem/
progenitor cells. Lombaert IM et al. demonstrated that
expansion of salivary stem/progenitor cells was achieved
by subcutaneous administration of KGF-1, resulting in the
preservation of saliva secretion after irradiation in mice [5].
Transductal KGF-1 gene delivery to submaxillary glands
successfully prevents salivary hypofunction by increasing
proliferation of salivary parenchymal and endothelial
cells [6]. Salivary microvascular endothelial cells might
be early and sensitive targets of irradiation in both murine
and porcine SGs [27, 28].
In this study, KGF-1 was delivered to SGs through
local injection because of concern that systemic delivery
of KGF-1 could produce a malignancy [29, 30]. Intraductal
delivery of adenoviral vectors to rodent SGs has been
shown to be safe [31–34]. However, intravenous delivery
does not alter tumor response or patient survival [7]. Using
murine xenograft models for head and neck and colorectal
carcinoma, KGF-1 given subcutaneously had no effect
on either tumor growth or antitumor chemotherapeutic
activity [8]. To begin to address these concerns, this study
examined the protective efficacy of KGF-1 when locally
administered to irradiate SGs in vivo. We injected KGF-1
twice (1 hour before and immediately after irradiation)
so that KGF-1 locally injected into SG could act as a
mitigator of early radiation damage.
In summary, the present study shows that locally
administrated KGF-1 into the irradiated SGs effectively
protects SG subtype cells, preventing hypofunction of
salivation in vivo. The PI3K-Akt- pathway mediates the
anti-apoptotic effect of KGF-1 in salivary epithelial cells,
and leads to activation of Mdm2 and blockade of the
p53-mediated apoptotic pathway. Our results here clearly
show that new strategies for development and design of
novel effective therapeutic drugs based on the activation
of KGF-1 signaling pathways are needed for treatment of
patients with irradiated SG damage. Thus, KGF-1 may be
beneficial to prevent irradiation-induced SG hypofunction
in patients being treated for head and neck cancers.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human salivary gland epithelial cells culture
We obtained hPECs from a patient who underwent
parotidectomy due to benign parotid tumor, as described
13503

Oncotarget

in our previous study [35]. The specimen was collected
with informed consent and institutional review board
approval. A small portion of a non-tumor bearing
gland was resected and washed thrice with cold 1×PBS
containing 1% antibiotics. The tissue was finely chopped
and enzymatically digested with 0.25% collagenase type
B (2.5 mg/mL) and DNase I (1 mg/mL) with gentle
shaking at 37°C for 30 minutes. The cell suspension
was subsequently filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer,
then centrifuged at 1500 rpm for five minutes, after
which it was plated on a culture dish and cultured with
Keratinocyte-Serum Free Medium (KSFM; Gibco, Grand
Island, NY, USA) containing epidermal growth factor
(EGF, 5 ng/ml), calcium chloride (CaCl2, 0.09 mM) and
1% antibiotics.

For assessment of proliferation and cytotoxicity following
irradiation, at least three independent experiments were
performed.
To assess the cell viability, a LIVE/DEAD assay
kit (Invitrogen, CA, USA) was utilized according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. HPECs were seeded in 6-well
plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well and cultured for up
to three days. Cells were washed with 1×PBS, detached using
0.5% Trypsin-EDTA, neutralized with cell culture media,
and collected in 50 ml tubes. Next, cells were centrifuged
at 1500 rpm for five minutes, the supernatant was discarded,
and pellets were resuspended in trypan blue dye in media for
one minute before counting using a hemocytometer.

In vitro irradiation and cell morphology

The cultured cells were randomly divided into five
groups: 1) Normal control group without irradiation and
KGF-1 treatment (CON), 2) Irradiation without KGF-1treatment (IR), 3) Irradiation with KGF-1-treatment (IR+
KGF-1), 4) FGFR2 inhibitor added before irradiation and
KGF-1 treatment after irradiation (IR+FGFR2 inhibitor),
5) PI3k inhibitor added before irradiation and KGF-1
treatment after irradiation (IR+PI3k inhibitor). For
immunofluorescence staining, cells were washed and
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at room
temperature, then permeabilized with 0.4% Triton X-100
in 1×PBS for 10 minutes at room temperature. After
washing with 1×PBS, cells were treated with 1% BSA
in 1×PBS for one hour before incubation with primary
antibodies specific for anti-γ-H2AX (Abcam, Cambridge,
UK) in 1% BSA overnight at 4°C. The cells were washed
in PBS before incubation with a goat anti-rabbit IgGAlexa-488-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen,
Camarillo, CA, USA) for six hours at room temperature
in the dark. The nucleus was counterstained with
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, dihydrochloride (DAPI;
Vector Labs), after which the cells were viewed using a
confocal laser scanning microscope (Olympus FV1000,
Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Effects of the FGFR2 inhibitor, LY2874455 (2 nΜ,
Sellekchem, Boston, MA, USA), PI3k inhibitor, BKM120
(100 nΜ, Sellekchem, Boston, MA, USA) on the action
of KGF-1 in irradiation-induced changes of hPECs were
investigated. The hPECs at passage 2–3 were seeded at
2 × 104 cells/well, cultured at 37°C for three days on 6-well
plates, and irradiated with 0, 10, and 20 Gy using a 4 MV
X-ray from a linear accelerator (Mevatron MD, Siemens
Medical Laboratories Inc., Germany) before treatment with
FGFR2 inhibitor (2 nM) and PI3k inhibitor (100 nM).

Evaluation of apoptosis, DNA damage

For irradiation experiments, the hPECs at passage
2–3 were seeded at 2 × 104 cells/well, cultured at 37°C
for three days on 6-well plates, and irradiated with
0, 10, and 20 Gy using a 4 MV X-ray from a linear
accelerator (Mevatron MD, Siemens Medical Laboratories
Inc., Germany). 100 ng/ml KGF-1 (R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN, USA) was administered immediately
after irradiation, cell morphology was analyzed under an
inverted phase-contrast microscope (Olympus FV1000,
Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), and images were obtained
using a digital camera at one, two, and three days after
irradiation.

Cell proliferation, cytotoxicity, and viability
To investigate the cell proliferation of hPECs, an MTS
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium) uptake assay was used.
HPECs were seeded at 1 × 104 cells/well, cultured at 37°C
for three days. The cultured cells were randomly divided into
three groups: 1) Normal control group without irradiation
and KGF1 treatment (CON), 2) irradiation without KGF1-treatment (IR), 3) Irradiation with KGF-1-treatment
(IR+KGF-1). The IR and IR+KGF-1 groups were irradiated
with 15 or 20 Gy using 4 MV X-ray from a linear accelerator
(Mevatron MD, Siemens Medical Laboratories Inc.,
Germany). KGF-1 (50 ng/ml or 100 ng/ml or 200 ng/ml,
R&D Systems, Minneapolis, USA) was applied in KGF-1
added groups after irradiation. After addition of 20 μl MTS
reagent and incubation at 37°C for four hours, proliferation of
hPECs was investigated by reading the absorbance at 490 nm
using a 96-well plate reader (Dynex Revelation, Dynex Ltd.,
Billingshurst, UK). At 1, 2, 3 days after irradiation, 100 μl
of supernatant per well was harvested and transferred into a
new 96-well, flat-bottom plate. LDH substrate (100 μl) was
added to each well and incubated for 30 minutes at room
temperature protected from light. The absorbance of the
samples was measured at 490 nm with an ELISA reader.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Evaluation of salivary phenotypic gene
expression
The levels of transcripts were determined by
real-time PCR (RT-PCR) on the ABI PRISM sequence
13504

Oncotarget

detection system using SYBR Green I as a double-stranded
DNA-specific dye according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
The PCR reaction was carried out using 1 μM cDNA,
10 μM SYBR Green PCR master mix (Roche Diagnostics,
Laval, Quebec, Canada), 10 pM sense and antisense
primers specific for α-amylase (AMY1A), AQP5 (AQP5),
E-cadherin (CDH1), ZO-1 (TJP1), CK7 (KRT7) and
CK18 (KRT18) in a reaction mixture with a final volume
of 20 µL (Table 1). The amount of real-time PCR products
was normalized with the house-keeping gene, β-actin.

the left neck of the rats was made to expose ipsilateral
submaxillary gland. KGF-1 (20 µl) or PBS solution
(20 µl) was injected twice; 1 hour before irradiation and
immediately after irradiation directly to the submaxillary
glands using a syringe with a 21-gauge needle. After
injections, the neck wound was sutured and sterilized.
Vehicle (PBS)-treated rats were served as an irradiation
control group. KGF-1-injected without irradiation group
was included to determine its mitogenic effect.

Western blotting

Apoptotic cells dissected glands at 24 hours
after treatment were visualized using the Apoptag Plus
Fluorescein In Situ Apoptosis Detection kit (Millipore,
Bedford, MA, USA), and two blind examiners
independently counted the absolute number of apoptotic
cells in three random fields per tissue section under 400 ×
magnification. At least three random tissue sections per
gland were chosen for each slide.
For in vitro TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) staining, cells were washed and fixed in 4%
phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde for 25 minutes at
20°C. After washing thrice with PBS, cells were stained
using the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche
Diagnostics, Laval, Quebec, Canada) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The nucleus was counterstained
with DAPI, and the cells were visualized under the
Axiovert 200 fluorescence microscope with 10 × 10 and
20 × 10 NA objectives equipped with AxioCam HRC
digital camera.

TUNEL assay

For western blot analysis, samples were isolated
from the lysate (30 μg), mixed in reducing buffer, boiled,
resolved on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, and transferred to a polyvinylidene
difluoride membrane by blotting. The blot was incubated
overnight at 4°C in a blocking solution with primary
antibodies to the following antigens: α-amylase, AQP5,
ZO-1, CK7, CK18, FGF7, FGFR2, p53 upregulated
modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) and β-actin (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); E-cadherin (BD
Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA); p53, Bax (Abcam,
England); Bcl-2, Cytochrome C, Cleaved caspase-9 and
Cleaved caspase-3, protein kinase B (PI3K), p-PI3K,
Akt, p-Akt and murine double minute 2 (MDM2),
p-MDM2 (Cell signaling, Danvers, MA, USA). After
washing the blots with 0.1% Tween 20 in 1×PBS, they
were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies corresponding to each primary
antibody, after which they were subjected to enhanced
chemiluminescence detection (GE Healthcare Life
Science, USA).

Morphological, histological, and
immunohistochemical evaluation
Body weights were measured at two and 16 weeks
after irradiation followed by saliva collection and humane
euthanasia. The submaxillary glands of the mice were
harvested and the surrounding fat and connective tissues
were removed. The glandular weights were measured
and submaxillary glands were immediately placed in 4%
paraformaldehyde at room temperature.
To evaluate the functionality of SG components,
tissues were processed, embedded in paraffin, sectioned
at 4 µm, and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E),
Masson›s Trichrome (MT) and Periodic Acid Schiff
(PAS). The sections were washed in phosphate buffered
saline (PBS) and pre-incubated for one hour in a blocking
solution containing 5% normal goat serum in PBS. After
a brief PBS wash, primary antibodies for aquaporin
(AQP)-5 (Alomone labs, Jerusalem, Israel), cytokeratin
(CK)-18 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Texas, USA),
α-SMA and CD31 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) diluted in
blocking solution were applied. Sections were incubated
overnight at 4°C, in secondary antisera (Invitrogen,
Camarillo, CA, USA) for 90 minutes at room temperature,

Animal experiments
This study was approved by the Animal Ethics
Committee of Inha University Hospital. Animals were
cared for in accordance with established institutional
guidelines. Female SD rat (n = 24) weighing 280–350 g
were used for the experiments. (Orient Bio, Gyeonggi-Do,
Korea) The animals were kept under clean, conventional
conditions. They were given access to standard laboratory
food and sterilized water ad libitum. Rats were anesthetized
with xylazine (10 mg/kg, i.p) and ketamine (100 mg/kg i.p)
and fixed in a plane board. To cause irradiation-induced SG
hypofunction, irradiation was carried out with 4 MV X-ray
emitted from a linear accelerator (Mevatron MD, Siemens
Medical Laboratories Inc., Germany) with a single dose
of 15 Gy at a focus-to-skin distance of 100 cm. Rats were
irradiated in the head and neck field with the body shielded
from irradiation.
KGF-1 was dissolved in PBS containing 0.1%
BSA (100 µg KGF-1/ 1 ml PBS). A 5-mm incision to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13505

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primers used for RT-PCR
Gene and symbol
α-Amylase (AMY1A)
Aquaporin 5 (AQP5)
E-Cadherin (CDH1)
ZO-1 (TJP1)
CK7 (KRT7)
CK18 (KRT18)

Primer sequences (5′–3′)
F

AAT TGA TCT GGG TGG TGA GC

R
F
R
F
R
F
R
F
R
F
R

CTT ATT TGG CGC CAT CGA TG
ACT GGG TTT TCT GGG TAG GG
GTG GTC AGC TCC ATG GTC TT
CGC ATT GCC ACA TAC ACT CT
TTG GCT GAG GAT GGT GTA AG
TTT GGC CGA GGG ATA GAA GT
TAT TGC CAT CTC TTG CTG CC
CAG GAT GTG GTG GAG GAC
AAC TTG GCA CGC TGG TTC T
GGA GGC TGG AGA GCA AAA TC
AGT CAT CAG CAG CAA GAC GG

and treated with avidin–biotin–peroxidase solution. The
peroxidase label was visualized using diaminobenzidine
as the chromogen (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA,
USA). Sections were washed, allowed to air dry, cover
slipped, and processed for observation under a confocal
microscope (IX81, Olympus, Center Valley, PA, USA).
Three sections were made for each gland, three random
fields per section of gland were checked by two blind
examiners, and positive cell numbers or stained areas were
measured using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices
Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

IL, USA), after which 1 µg of total saliva protein was
separated on SDS-PAGE and transferred to an Immobilon
nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).
Next, the membrane was blocked with 5% skim milk/TBS
for one hour at room temperature, then rinsed with wash
buffer and incubated with mouse anti-amylase antibody
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) at a
1:5000 dilution. Following overnight incubation with
shaking at 4°C, the membranes were rinsed with wash
buffer thrice for five minutes each. This was followed
by incubation with a 1:5000 dilution of anti-mouse
IgG horseradish peroxidase conjugate (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) for one hour
at 37°C. Finally, samples were rinsed with wash buffer
as above, after which detection was conducted using
enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) western detection
reagents (Elpisbio, Daejeon, Korea). The bands of interest
were detected using a luminescent image analyzer (4000 r,
Kodak, Rochester, NY, USA), and the results were
quantified using a software program (Kodak).
In addition, amylase activity of secreted saliva
was determined using a salivary α-amylase assay kit
(Salimetrics LLC, State College, PA, USA) with 2-chlorop-nitrophenol linked with maltotriose as the chromogenic
substrate according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The amount of α -amylase activity present in the sample
is directly proportional to the increase in absorbance at
405 nm observed using a standard laboratory plate reader.
Saliva EGF was measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using a commercial kit
(Quantikine; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The kit uses
a sandwich ELISA that recognizes mouse EGF and has
no detectable cross reactivity with other cytokines. Each
sample from each group collected at different time points

Salivary function evaluation
Salivary secretory function was determined by
measuring salivary flow rate (SFR) and lag time of
salivation at two and 16 weeks after irradiation. Saliva
was collected using a micropipette for 10 minutes after
stimulation by intraperitoneal injection of pilocarpine
(2  mg/kg) when rat salivated in the floor of mouth.
Collected saliva was placed in pre-weighed 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes, and SFR (µl/ml) was calculated as the
total saliva weight (mg) divided by the collection time
(minutes) (saliva has a specific gravity of 1 mg/ml). The
lag time of salivation was determined as the time from
stimulation to the beginning of saliva secretion. To reduce
the effects of diurnal variation, saliva was collected
consistently at 2:00 p.m.

Amylase and EGF contents in saliva
Saliva samples obtained at 16 weeks after irradiation
were centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 15 minutes. Total
supernatant protein concentrations were determined
by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce, Rockford,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13506

Oncotarget

was assayed in duplicate and the plate was read at 450 nm.
The EGF concentration of the samples was determined by
reading the optical density of the sample against the values
of the standard curve.

  4.	 Limesand KH, Avila JL, Victory K, Chang HH, Shin YJ,
Grundmann O, Klein RR. Insulin-like growth factor-1
preserves salivary gland function after fractionated radiation.
International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics.
2010; 78:579–586.

Statistical analysis

  5.	 Lombaert IM, Brunsting JF, Wierenga PK, Kampinga HH,
de Haan G, Coppes RP. Keratinocyte growth factor prevents
radiation damage to salivary glands by expansion of the
stem/progenitor pool. Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio). 2008;
26:2595–2601.

Statistical analysis was conducted using the Graph
Pad Prism 5 package (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla,
CA, USA). The Mann-Whitney test was used to assess
differences between groups. One way ANOVA followed
by Tukey’s post hoc test and two-way ANOVA followed
by the Bonferroni post hoc test were used to compare
values among groups. Linear regression was applied
to evaluate the association between parameters. Null
hypotheses of no difference were rejected if p-values were
less than .05.

 6.	 Zheng C, Cotrim AP, Rowzee A, Swaim W, Sowers A,
Mitchell JB, Baum BJ. Prevention of radiation-induced
salivary hypofunction following hKGF gene delivery to
murine submandibular glands. Clinical cancer research.
2011; 17:2842–2851.
 7.	Brizel DM, Murphy BA, Rosenthal DI, Pandya KJ,
Gluck S, Brizel HE, Meredith RF, Berger D, Chen MG,
Mendenhall W. Phase II study of palifermin and concurrent
chemoradiation in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Journal of clinical oncology. 2008; 26:2489–2496.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by grants of the Basic
Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Science, ICT and Future Planning (2016R1C1B2014177),
the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the
Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI)
funded by the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Republic
of Korea (HI16C1894), and an Inha Research Grant.

  8.	 Brake R, Starnes C, Lu J, Chen D, Yang S, Radinsky R,
Borges L. Effects of palifermin on antitumor activity of
chemotherapeutic and biological agents in human head and
neck and colorectal carcinoma xenograft models. Molecular
cancer research. 2008; 6:1337–1346.
  9.	 Rotolo S, Ceccarelli S, Romano F, Frati L, Marchese C,
Angeloni A. Silencing of keratinocyte growth factor
receptor restores 5-fluorouracil and tamoxifen efficacy on
responsive cancer cells. PloS one. 2008; 3:e2528.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Finch PW, Rubin JS. Keratinocyte growth factor/fibroblast
growth factor 7, a homeostatic factor with therapeutic
potential for epithelial protection and repair. Advances in
cancer research. 2004; 91:69–136.

None declared.

FUNDING

11.	 Chen L, Brizel DM, Rabbani ZN, Samulski TV, Farrell CL,
Larrier N, Anscher MS, Vujaskovic Z. The protective
effect of recombinant human keratinocyte growth factor on
radiation-induced pulmonary toxicity in rats. International
journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics. 2004;
60:1520–1529.
12.	 Baba Y, Yazawa T, Kanegae Y, Sakamoto S, Saito I,
Morimura N, Goto T, Yamada Y, Kurahashi K. Keratinocyte
growth factor gene transduction ameliorates acute lung
injury and mortality in mice. Human gene therapy. 2007;
18:130–141.
13.	 Farrell CL, Bready JV, Rex KL, Chen JN, DiPalma CR,
Whitcomb KL, Yin S, Hill DC, Wiemann B, Starnes CO,
Havill AM, Lu ZN, Aukerman SL, et al. Keratinocyte
growth factor protects mice from chemotherapy and
radiation-induced gastrointestinal injury and mortality.
Cancer research. 1998; 58:933–939.
14.	 Zheng C, Cotrim AP, Sunshine AN, Sugito T, Liu L, Sowers A,
Mitchell JB, Baum BJ. Prevention of radiation-induced oral
mucositis after adenoviral vector-mediated transfer of the
keratinocyte growth factor cDNA to mouse submandibular
glands. Clinical cancer research. 2009; 15:4641–4648.

No financial or material support has been received
for this work; moreover, the authors declare no financial
interests in companies or other entities that could have an
interest in the information within this contribution.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Coppes RP, Zeilstra LJ, Kampinga HH, Konings AW. Early
to late sparing of radiation damage to the parotid gland by
adrenergic and muscarinic receptor agonists. British journal
of cancer. 2001; 85:1055–1063.
  2.	 An HY, Shin HS, Choi JS, Kim HJ, Lim JY, Kim YM.
Adipose Mesenchymal Stem Cell Secretome Modulated
in Hypoxia for Remodeling of Radiation-Induced Salivary
Gland Damage. PloS one. 2015; 10:e0141862.
 3.	 Kojima T, Kanemaru S, Hirano S, Tateya I, Suehiro A,
Kitani Y, Kishimoto Y, Ohno S, Nakamura T, Ito J. The
protective efficacy of basic fibroblast growth factor in
radiation-induced salivary gland dysfunction in mice. The
Laryngoscope. 2011; 121:1870–1875.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13507

Oncotarget

15.	 Sonis ST, Elting LS, Keefe D, Peterson DE, Schubert M,
Hauer-Jensen M, Bekele BN, Raber-Durlacher J, Donnelly JP,
Rubenstein EB. Perspectives on cancer therapy-induced
mucosal injury: pathogenesis, measurement, epidemiology,
and consequences for patients. Cancer. 2004; 100:1995–2025.

27.	 Cotrim AP, Sowers A, Mitchell JB, Baum BJ. Prevention
of irradiation-induced salivary hypofunction by microvessel
protection in mouse salivary glands. Molecular therapy.
2007; 15:2101–2106.

16.	 Avila JL, Grundmann O, Burd R, Limesand KH. Radiationinduced salivary gland dysfunction results from p53dependent apoptosis. International journal of radiation
oncology, biology, physics. 2009; 73:523–529.

28.	 Xu J, Yan X, Gao R, Mao L, Cotrim AP, Zheng C, Zhang C,
Baum BJ, Wang S. Effect of irradiation on microvascular
endothelial cells of parotid glands in the miniature pig.
International journal of radiation oncology, biology,
physics. 2010; 78:897–903.

17.	 Schuler M, Bossy-Wetzel E, Goldstein JC, Fitzgerald P,
Green DR. p53 induces apoptosis by caspase activation
through mitochondrial cytochrome c release. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2000; 275:7337–7342.

29.	 Finch PW, Rubin JS. Keratinocyte growth factor expression
and activity in cancer: implications for use in patients with
solid tumors. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2006;
98:812–824.

18.	 Miyashita T, Reed JC. Tumor suppressor p53 is a direct
transcriptional activator of the human bax gene. Cell. 1995;
80:293–299.

30.	 Housley RM, Morris CF, Boyle W, Ring B, Biltz R,
Tarpley JE, Aukerman SL, Devine PL, Whitehead RH,
Pierce GF. Keratinocyte growth factor induces proliferation
of hepatocytes and epithelial cells throughout the rat
gastrointestinal tract. The Journal of clinical investigation.
1994; 94:1764–1777.

19.	 Yu J, Zhang L, Hwang PM, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B.
PUMA induces the rapid apoptosis of colorectal cancer
cells. Molecular cell. 2001; 7:673–682.

31.	 O’Connell BC, Zheng C, Jacobson-Kram D, Baum BJ.
Distribution and toxicity resulting from adenoviral vector
administration to a single salivary gland in adult rats.
Journal of oral pathology & medicine. 2003; 32:414–421.

20.	 Scotti ML, Langenheim JF, Tomblyn S, Springs AE,
Chen WY. Additive effects of a prolactin receptor
antagonist, G129R, and herceptin on inhibition of HER2overexpressing breast cancer cells. Breast cancer research
and treatment. 2008; 111:241–250.

32.	Zheng C, Voutetakis A, Kok MR, Goldsmith CM,
Smith GB, Elmore S, Nyska A, Vallant M, Irwin RD,
Baum BJ. Toxicity and biodistribution of a first-generation
recombinant adenoviral vector, in the presence of
hydroxychloroquine, following retroductal delivery to
a single rat submandibular gland. Oral diseases. 2006;
12:137–144.

21.	 Maiello MR, D’Alessio A, De Luca A, Carotenuto A,
Rachiglio AM, Napolitano M, Cito L, Guzzo A, Normanno N.
AZD3409 inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells with
intrinsic resistance to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
gefitinib. Breast cancer research and treatment. 2007;
102:275–282.

33.	 Zheng C, Goldsmith CM, Mineshiba F, Chiorini JA, Kerr A,
Wenk ML, Vallant M, Irwin RD, Baum BJ. Toxicity and
biodistribution of a first-generation recombinant adenoviral
vector, encoding aquaporin-1, after retroductal delivery to a
single rat submandibular gland. Human gene therapy. 2006;
17:1122–1133.

22.	 Li J, Huang S, Zhang J, Feng C, Gao D, Yao B, Wu X, Fu X.
Mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate inflammatory cytokineinduced impairment of AT-II cells through a keratinocyte
growth factor-dependent PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathway. Molecular medicine reports. 2016; 13:3755–3762.
23.	 Bao S, Wang Y, Sweeney P, Chaudhuri A, Doseff AI,
Marsh CB, Knoell DL. Keratinocyte growth factor induces
Akt kinase activity and inhibits Fas-mediated apoptosis in
A549 lung epithelial cells. American journal of physiology
Lung cellular and molecular physiology. 2005; 288:L36–42.

34.	 Baum BJ, Zheng C, Alevizos I, Cotrim AP, Liu S,
McCullagh L, Goldsmith CM, McDermott N, Chiorini JA,
Nikolov NP, Illei GG. Development of a gene transfer-based
treatment for radiation-induced salivary hypofunction. Oral
oncology. 2010; 46:4–8.

24.	 Qiu W, Leibowitz B, Zhang L, Yu J. Growth factors protect
intestinal stem cells from radiation-induced apoptosis
by suppressing PUMA through the PI3K/AKT/p53 axis.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:1622–1632.

35.	 Shin HS, Kook YM, Hong HJ, Kim YM, Koh WG, Lim JY.
Functional spheroid organization of human salivary gland
cells cultured on hydrogel-micropatterned nanofibrous
microwells. Acta biomaterialia. 2016.

25.	 Takeoka M, Ward WF, Pollack H, Kamp DW, Panos RJ.
KGF facilitates repair of radiation-induced DNA damage
in alveolar epithelial cells. The American journal of
physiology. 1997; 272:L1174–1180.
26.	 Braun S, Krampert M, Bodo E, Kumin A, Born-Berclaz C,
Paus R, Werner S. Keratinocyte growth factor protects
epidermis and hair follicles from cell death induced by UV
irradiation, chemotherapeutic or cytotoxic agents. Journal
of cell science. 2006; 119:4841–4849.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13508

Oncotarget

