Research Article

Serine-Arginine Protein Kinase 1 Overexpression Is Associated
with Tumorigenic Imbalance in Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase
Pathways in Breast, Colonic, and Pancreatic Carcinomas
Gregory M. Hayes, Patricia E. Carrigan, and Laurence J. Miller
Mayo Clinic Cancer Center and Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona

Abstract
Aberrant patterns of pre-mRNA processing are typical of
human malignancies, yet the mechanisms responsible for
these changes remain undefined. We have recently shown
overexpression of a core splice regulatory protein, serinearginine protein kinase 1 (SRPK1), in dysplastic and neoplastic
pancreatic ductular cells. In the present study, we have
established that SRPK1 levels are similarly up-regulated in
breast and colonic tumors where its expression increases
coordinately with tumor grade. Targeting SRPK1 for inhibition
using small interfering RNA in breast and colonic tumor cell
lines in vitro resulted in both increased apoptotic potential
and enhanced cell killing after treatment with gemcitabine and
cisplatin. Recent reports have described multifaceted interactions between the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and AKT signaling networks and the splice regulatory
machinery. Consequently, we have shown that targeted inhibition of SRPK1 in tumor cells results in reduced phosphorylation of MAPK3, MAPK1, and AKT. Alterations in the splice
pattern and resulting expression of MAPK kinase are implicated in mediating the antitumoral effects resulting from
SRPK1 down-regulation. The up-regulation of SRPK1 in multiple cancers and its ability to regulate multiple relevant signaling pathways provide support for developing agents to
inhibit this kinase for possible broad application to treat
epithelial cancers. [Cancer Res 2007;67(5):2072–80]

Introduction
Aberrant patterns of pre-mRNA splicing are typical of human
malignancies, yet the mechanisms responsible for these alterations
remain poorly understood. We recently reported the elevation of
a kinase [serine-arginine protein kinase (SRPK) 1] in pancreatic
carcinoma cells that is critical for the regulation of various mRNA
splicing factors (1). In the current report, we have explored whether
a similar abnormality in SRPK1 expression exists in other common
epithelial malignancies (breast and colonic carcinomas) and
have evaluated possible relevant signaling events. We have also
examined the effect of selective inhibition of this kinase on cancerrelevant processes.
Proteins encoded by splice variants have been shown to affect a
variety of tumor-associated processes. For example, BCL2L1
transcripts may undergo alternative splicing to produce either

Note: G.M. Hayes and P.E. Carrigan are coprimary authors.
Requests for reprints: Laurence J. Miller, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center and
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic,
13400 East Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ 85259. Phone: 480-301-6650; Fax: 480-3016969; E-mail: miller@mayo.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2969

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

the antiapoptotic long form or the proapoptotic short form.
Therefore, a shift in the splicing pattern of these transcripts can
have profound effects on the proliferative activity of cancer cells
and on their response to proapoptotic therapies (2). The inappropriate retention of intron 4 during processing of cyclin D1
transcripts results in production of a variant protein termed cyclin
D1b that serves as a nuclear oncogene (3), whereas expression of
CD44 isoforms containing variable exon 6 increases metastatic
propensity of pancreatic carcinoma cells (4, 5). These examples
clearly show the potential functional effect of aberrant splicing on
tumorigenesis.
Several specific alternative splicing events have been implicated
in the progression of breast and colonic cancers. Alternatively
spliced versions of androgen (6) and estrogen (7) receptors have
been found in mammary carcinomas, and expression of the
ESR1Dexon3 isoform has proven more potent in activating vascular
endothelial growth factor than wild-type receptor (8), linking
this variant to angiogenesis of breast tumors. A splice variant of
the Rac1 small GTPase (Rac1b) has been shown in colonic tumors,
where it has been shown to be active and to lead to anchorageindependent growth (9). Whereas the expression of the antiapoptotic protein survivin is grossly elevated in many cancers, the
survivin2B splice variant has a growth-inhibitory effect and is lost
in late-stage breast (10) and colonic cancers (11). Here, too, these
examples show that changes in the splicing behavior of tumor cells
can influence tumor progression.
The molecular alterations responsible for these tumor-related
changes in pre-mRNA splicing remain poorly defined. In a murine
breast tumor model, it has been shown that increases in splice
factor levels correlate with the presence of alternatively spliced
products common to many forms of malignancy (12). Serinearginine proteins comprise a family of splice factors that are
activated after phosphorylation by SRPKs in the cytoplasm.
Phosphorylated serine-arginine proteins can be shuttled into the
nucleus where they can exert influence over splice site usage
by interacting with both cis-acting regulatory sequences present
within a given pre-mRNA molecule and other splice regulatory
proteins (13). We have recently reported the overexpression of a
core splice regulatory protein, SRPK1, in dysplastic and neoplastic
pancreatic epithelial cells (1). Targeting this protein for inhibition
in vitro using small interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in reduced
proliferation of pancreatic tumor cells and altered expression of
key apoptotic proteins, BAX and BCL2, to enhance apoptosis and
responsiveness to cytotoxic agents.
In the present study, expression of SRPK1 was examined in
breast and colon using immunohistochemistry, and SRPK1 was
shown to be expressed predominantly in ductular epithelial cells of
normal breast and colon. SRPK1 was found to be overexpressed in
breast and colonic tumors when compared with adjacent normal
epithelium, and levels of the kinase increased along with tumor

2072

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

SRPK1 Overexpression in Epithelial Cancers

grade. Strong expression of SRPK1 protein was also evident in the
majority of breast and colonic tumor cell lines. Down-regulation of
SRPK1 in breast and colonic tumor cell lines using siRNA increased
the proportion of these cells undergoing apoptosis and sensitized
these cells to chemotherapeutic intervention. Due to the emerging
evidence of interactions between the splice regulatory machinery
and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
AKT signaling pathways (14, 15), investigation was extended to
examine expression and activation of proteins in these pathways in
tumor cells expressing reduced levels of SRPK1 protein. Whereas
total protein levels of MAPK3 [also known as extracellular signalregulated kinase (ERK) 1], MAPK2 (ERK2), and AKT did not change
in cells following reduction in SRPK1, decreases in phosphorylation
of these three proteins were apparent in all the tumor lines studied.
Decreasing expression of SRPK1 in these cells led to a reduction
in phosphorylation of multiple serine-arginine proteins as well
as alterations in the splice pattern of MAPK kinase (MAP2K)
2 [MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) 2] transcripts. Together, these results
suggest an important regulatory role for SRPK1 in MAPK and AKT
pathways and support the development of drugs inhibiting SRPK1
for possible antitumor effects.

Materials and Methods
Immunohistochemistry. Human breast and colonic cancer specimens
were acquired for immunohistochemistry after approval by the Mayo Clinic
Institutional Review Board. Tissue sections (6 Am) were stained with a
monoclonal antibody (mAb) against SRPK1 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA)
as described previously (1). Sections were counterstained with Hematoxylin
QS (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and photomicrographs were
captured using the Zeiss AxioPlan2 imaging system (Zeiss, Thornwood, NY).
Staining intensity was determined using a semiquantitative scale of 0 to 4,
where 0 represents no detectable staining and 4 indicates strong staining of
SRPK1 protein. Sections from multiple patients for each grade of breast and
colonic carcinomas (n = 3 for each grade of tumor) and normal controls
were stained (total case number: n = 12 for breast and n = 15 for colon).
Cell culture. Breast (MCF10A, MCF7, MDA231, and MDA468), colonic
(CaCO2, HT29, and LS174T), and pancreatic (MiaPaCa2 and Panc1) tumor
cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC;
Manassas, VA) and cultured according to specifications. The nontransformed human pancreatic ductal cell line HPDE6 was supplied by Dr. M.S.
Tsao (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada) and cultured as
described previously (16, 17). Pancreatic and breast cells were grown in
10-cm dishes to 70% to 80% confluency before transfection with 15 Ag
of plasmid DNA using LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
The colonic cell lines were harvested at 80% confluency and resuspended at
107/mL in PBS from which 400 AL aliquots were added to 2-mm cuvettes,
incubated on ice with 15 Ag DNA, and electroporated at 300 V for 10 ms
using a square wave electroporator (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA).
Electroporated cells were immediately added to prewarmed medium and
incubated under normal culture conditions. Efficiency of LipofectAMINE
transfection using a green fluorescent protein–encoding reporter construct
was determined to be at least 80% for the breast and pancreatic cells,
whereas efficiency of electroporation was determined to be f75% for the
colonic cells used in this study.
Western blot analysis. Cell lysates were prepared as described
previously (1), and protein concentrations were determined using the
Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay kit and SmartSpec spectrophotometer
(both from Bio-Rad Laboratories). Lysates were diluted with an equal
volume of 2 NuPAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen) containing 0.1 mol/L
DTT. Protein (15 Ag) was loaded per well of 4% to 12% gradient NuPAGE
gels, and resolved proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride
membrane (Bio-Rad Laboratories) before being blocked in PBS containing
3% bovine serum albumin. Blots were incubated with primary antibody
overnight at 4jC, washed in PBS-Tween 20, and then incubated with

www.aacrjournals.org

peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature.
Antibodies at a concentration of 0.5 to 1 Ag/mL were incubated with blots.
Following incubation, membranes were washed repeatedly and proteins
were visualized using the SuperSignal enhanced chemiluminescence kit
(Pierce, Rockford, IL) before digital photography of blots. Subsequent
densitometry of digital images was done using ImageJ software ( from NIH,
Bethesda, MD). Antibodies for SRPK1 and SRPK2 were obtained from BD
Biosciences, the anti-phosphorylated serine-arginine antibody (mAb 104;
ref. 18) was obtained from ATCC, and all others were obtained from Cell
Signaling (Danvers, MA; claimed specificity: phosphorylated MAPK family
sampler, phosphorylated MAPK clone 28B10, phosphorylated AKT pathway
sampler, and MAP2K2).
siRNA-encoding short hairpin constructs. Plasmids encoding siRNAs
were generated as described previously (1). Briefly, sh1-SRPK1 encodes a
siRNA targeting nucleotides 1,171 to 1,189 of the SRPK1 mRNA (GI:47419935).
A plasmid encoding a scrambled version of this coding sequence was used
as control. All sequences were aligned against the Genbank database to
ensure specificity, and DNA constructs were purified using Qiagen MaxiPrep
method (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA).
Cytotoxicity assays. Transfected cells were harvested 24 h after
transfection and replated at a concentration of 2  105 viable cells per well
into six-well plates. Cells were allowed to adhere overnight before addition of
100 nmol/L gemcitabine-HCl to selected wells (Gemzar; Eli Lilly and Co.,
Indianapolis, IN). Cisplatin (10 Amol/L) was added the following day (Bedford
Laboratories, Bedford, OH). This resulted in total incubation times of 48
h with gemcitabine and 24 h with cisplatin. After treatment, cells were
harvested and stained with Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (BD
Biosciences) per manufacturer’s protocol and analyzed using flow cytometry
on a Becton Dickinson (Franklin Lakes, NJ) FACScan instrument (19, 20).
Reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Transfected cells were harvested
with cell dissociation solution and lysed in Trizol at a concentration of
1  107/mL (Invitrogen). RNA was purified from each extract using Qiagen
RNeasy kit. Integrity of RNA samples was confirmed using electrophoresis
and UV absorbance ratios. Approximately 0.5 Ag RNA was used to produce
cDNA with Promega (Madison, WI) First-Strand Synthesis kit. Reverse
transcription-PCRs (RT-PCR) were run using 25 ng of cDNA and amplifying
product over 30 to 35 cycles. Oligonucleotide primers were designed against
the 5¶-end and 3¶-end regions of MAP2K1 (MEK1; forward primer,
5¶-CCAAAATGCCCAAGAAGAAGCCG-3¶; reverse primer, 5¶-CCAAACACTTAGACGCCAGCAGC-3¶), MAP2K2 (MEK2; forward primer, 5¶-CACCATCAACCCTACCATCGCC-3¶; reverse primer, 5¶-CCACTTCTTCCACCTCGGACC-3¶), and actin ( forward primer, 5¶-CCAGCTCACCATGGATGATGATATCG-3¶; reverse primer, 5¶-GGAGTTGAAGGTAGTTTCGTGGATGC-3¶).
PCR bands were subcloned and sequenced to confirm their identities.

Results
SRPK1 expression is elevated in tumors of the breast and
colon. We have previously reported that SRPK1 protein levels are
increased in dysplastic and neoplastic human pancreatic ductular
epithelial cells when compared with normal pancreatic ductular
cells. To ascertain the precise localization of SRPK1 in normal
breast and colon and to determine whether this protein might be
overexpressed in breast and colonic tumors, SRPK1 immunohistochemistry was done (Fig. 1). Low levels of SRPK1 were detected in
epithelial cells lining normal colonic ducts and crypts (Fig. 1A),
whereas elevated expression of the kinase was found in colonic
tumors of all grades (Fig. 1B–E). This relative increase in SRPK1
protein expression was clearly shown in sections that contained
both normal and neoplastic ductular cells, where the level of
staining was visibly increased in tumor cells compared with the
adjacent normal epithelial cells (Fig. 1D, arrow). Expression of
SRPK1 in the normal breast was similarly restricted primarily to
epithelial cells lining the mammary ducts (Fig. 1F). Levels of SRPK1
were visibly greater in breast tumors of all grades than in normal

2073

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. In situ expression of SRPK1 in normal and neoplastic human colon and breast. Immunohistochemistry was done on colon (A–E ) and breast (F–I )
tissue sections using an antibody against SRPK1. Tumors were graded on a scale of 1 to 4 for colonic tumors and on the Bloom-Richardson scale of 1 to 3 for breast
tumors. Western blot analysis was done on a panel of four breast and three colonic cell lines (J ) using mAbs against SRPK1 and actin. K, densitometry was done
on multiple immunoblots. SRPK1 levels and expression were quantified relative to nontransformed MCF10A cells for breast or to CaCO2 cells for colon. *, P < 0.05;
**, P < 0.01; n = 3. Bars, SD.

epithelial cells (Fig. 1G–I). SRPK1 expression also seemed to
increase coordinately with tumor grade, suggesting an association
between SRPK1 levels and differentiation status of these epithelial
tumors.
Expression of SRPK1 was examined by Western blot analysis
using lysates derived from a panel of commonly studied breast and
colonic tumor cell lines (Fig. 1J). In the breast cell lines, the lowest
levels of SRPK1 protein were detected in the near-normal MCF10A
cells compared with MCF7, MDA231, and MDA468. Densitometry
was done on immunoblots, and the quantity of SRPK1 protein was
found to be modestly, but significantly, increased in two of the
three breast tumor cell lines relative to MCF10A cells (graphed in
Fig. 1K). In the colonic cell lines examined, the best differentiated
and closest to normal epithelial cells, the CaCO2 cells, expressed a
lower amount of SRPK1 than either the HT29 or the LS174T cell
lines (Fig. 1J), with this observation confirmed by quantitative
densitometry (Fig. 1K). The detection of elevated levels of SRPK1 in
breast and colonic tumors and in the majority of tumor cell lines,
combined with data from our previous report (1), indicates that
increased expression of SRPK1 is characteristic of diverse epithelial
malignancies.
Reducing the expression of SRPK1 in breast and colonic
tumor cells increases apoptosis. To determine whether drugs
targeting and inhibiting SRPK1 may serve as a potential therapeutic option for breast and colonic malignancies, we did SRPK1

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

knockdown experiments using the previously described siRNAencoding construct, sh1-SRPK1 (1). Transfection of this plasmid
into MCF10A and MCF7 cells reduced expression of the SRPK1
protein, whereas transfection of a control plasmid encoding a
scrambled version of the siRNA sequence did not affect SRPK1
expression (Fig. 2A). Levels of the related kinase, SRPK2, remained
constant following transfection of either plasmid, supporting the
specificity of this approach. SRPK1 protein levels were determined
using densitometry and normalized to actin, and quantities were
plotted relative to control-transfected cells. This showed a
significant decrease in expression of SRPK1 after this treatment
(Fig. 2A). Seventy-two hours after transfection, cells were harvested,
stained with Annexin V, and analyzed using flow cytometry to
determine the proportion of cells undergoing apoptosis, as we have
described previously (Fig. 2B; ref. 1). Following transfection with
the siRNA-encoding construct, there was reduced expression of
SRPK1 in MCF7 tumor cells and a dramatic increase in the
percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis, whereas there was no
significant change in the proportion of nontransformed MCF10A
cells undergoing apoptosis. Transfected MCF10A and MCF7 cells
were also treated with gemcitabine and cisplatin to assess the
potential of using SRPK1 knockdown in combination with
conventional chemotherapeutic strategies (Fig. 2B). Addition of
either gemcitabine, cisplatin, or a combination of the two drugs
to MCF7 cells expressing reduced amounts of SRPK1 resulted in

2074

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

SRPK1 Overexpression in Epithelial Cancers

significantly higher levels of apoptosis when compared with MCF7
cells transfected with the control plasmid. Sensitivity of the nontransformed MCF10A cells to these agents remained unaffected by
SRPK1 knockdown.
Parallel experiments were done on CaCO2 and HT29 cells to
determine whether SRPK1 knockdown would also mediate an
increase in apoptosis in colonic tumor cells. Electroporation of the
sh1-SRPK1 construct decreased levels of SRPK1 protein in both cell
lines, as determined by immunoblotting and densitometry, but had
no effect on SRPK2 expression (Fig. 2C). Cells were subsequently
incubated with Annexin V to determine the apoptotic proportion,
and although the effect of reduced SRPK1 expression in these two
cell lines was less dramatic than that observed in breast tumor
cells, a significant increase in the proportion of HT29 cells
undergoing apoptosis following this treatment was shown.
Treatment of colonic tumor cells with gemcitabine or the
combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin resulted in significant
increases in apoptosis in both CaCO2 and HT29 tumor cell lines
following SRPK1 reduction. These results show that targeting

SRPK1 in both breast and colonic tumor cells can increase
apoptosis and enhance cell death in response to chemotherapy.
SRPK1 regulates the AKT and MAPK networks. Excessive
activation of MAPK and AKT signaling cascades has been well
described for a broad range of malignancies (21, 22), including
tumors of the breast and colon (23, 24). These pathways have also
been shown to be relevant to the effect of chemotherapy (25).
Recent advances have shown the capacity of these signaling
cascades to regulate the activation and localization of splice factors
resulting in changes in pre-mRNA processing (15, 26, 27). These
studies have implicated critical interactions between the splice
regulatory machinery and MAPK and AKT signaling networks.
Thus, we postulated that a decrease in SRPK1 expression may
affect apoptotic potential by altering signals transmitted by these
networks. Both total protein expression and phosphorylation status
of several well-characterized MAPK proteins and AKT were
compared using Western blot analysis in the breast and colonic
cell lines treated with either the siRNA-encoding sh1-SRPK1
construct or the control plasmid (Fig. 3). Each lysate (15 Ag) was

Figure 2. Reduced expression of SRPK1
in breast and colonic tumor cell lines
increases apoptosis and response to
gemcitabine and/or cisplatin. Breast and
colonic cells were transfected with 10 Ag
of either the siRNA-encoding sh1-SRPK1
plasmid or a plasmid encoding a scrambled
version of the sequence as control, and
Western blot analysis (A and C ) was done to
determine protein levels. Densitometry was
done on blots from multiple experiments,
and quantities of SRPK1 relative to control
transfectants were graphed. B and D, the
effect of SRPK1 expression on apoptosis
after chemotherapy was assayed by treating
transfected cells with 0.1 Amol/L gemcitabine
(Gem ) and/or 10 Amol/L cisplatin (Cis )
before staining with Annexin V and
propidium iodide and analysis by flow
cytometry. *, P < 0.01; n = 3. Bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

2075

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. SRPK1 expression regulates
signaling through the MAPK and AKT
pathways in breast, colonic, and pancreatic
tumor cells. Western blot analysis was
done on lysates derived from the indicated
panel of cell lines transfected with 10 Ag of
either the siRNA-encoding sh1-SRPK1
plasmid or a plasmid encoding a scrambled
version of the sequence as control.
MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 are pancreatic
tumor cell lines and HPDE6 is a welldifferentiated nontransformed pancreatic
ductal epithelial cell line. Antibodies were
used to detect total protein levels or
phosphorylated versions of the indicated
proteins (ph- ).

loaded in each lane, and levels of each relevant protein were
determined by Western blotting and densitometry. Expected
changes in the levels of SRPK1 protein were confirmed using an
antibody specific for this protein. Quantities of total MAPK3 and
MAPK1 proteins remained stable following SRPK1 knockdown in
each of the breast and colonic cell lines studied; however, the
phosphorylated active forms of these proteins were reduced in the
tumor cells in response to SRPK1 reduction. Phosphorylation of
MAPK3 and MAPK1 in the nontransformed control MCF10A cells
was barely detectable and remained unchanged after SRPK1
knockdown. Expression of MAPK14 (p38) decreased slightly or
remained unaltered in the breast and colonic cell lines, respectively,
after SRPK1 knockdown, whereas levels of phosphorylated
MAPK14 were clearly reduced in all cells in response to reduced
SRPK1. The quantity of total AKT protein (AKT isoforms 1, 2,
and 3) also remained unaffected by knockdown of SRPK1 in these
lines, whereas phosphorylated AKT was slightly reduced in the
breast and colonic tumor lines in response to reduced levels of
SRPK1. Similar to what was observed for phosphorylated MAPK3
and MAPK1, the levels of phosphorylated AKT protein in the
nontransformed MCF10A breast cells were virtually undetectable
compared with MCF7 breast tumor cells. This was consistent with
earlier reports of increased activation of these proteins in tumors.
Expression and phosphorylation status of MAPK8 (c-Jun NH2terminal kinase) remained constant in each of the cell lines studied
under these conditions, providing support that decreases in
MAPK3, MAPK1, and AKT activation following SRPK1 knockdown
were specific and were not due solely to an increase in the number
of cells undergoing apoptosis.
Analogous experiments were done using lysates derived from
control-transfected and sh1-SRPK1–transfected pancreatic cell
lines that we have previously reported to respond similarly to the
targeted disruption of SRPK1 expression (Fig. 3). The non-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

transformed HPDE6 cell line represents a near-normal control
(16, 17), whereas MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 cells are two commonly
studied pancreatic tumor cell lines. Diminished levels of phosphorylated MAPK3, MAPK1, and MAPK14 were exhibited by
pancreatic tumor cell lines following siRNA targeting of SRPK1,
whereas levels of total and phosphorylated MAPK8 remained
unchanged. Reduced amounts of phosphorylated AKT were also
reproducibly observed in pancreatic tumor cell lines following
SRPK1 reduction, although this reduction was quantitatively small.
Relatively modest phosphorylated MAPK3, MAPK2, or AKT was
detected in nontransformed HPDE6 cells regardless of level of
SRPK1 expression, supporting the inappropriate activation of these
proteins during pancreatic tumorigenesis. The observed reduction
in total p38 levels in all of the pancreatic cell lines following SRPK1
knockdown may be responsible for the observed reduction in
phosphorylated MAPK14. Collectively, these results implicate
SRPK1 in regulating the expression or activation of multiple
proteins in the MAPK and AKT networks, and because signaling
through these cascades has been shown to enhance proliferation
and survival of many types of tumors, targeting SRPK1 to inhibit
these signals is believed to contribute to the proapoptotic effects of
this treatment strategy.
SRPK1 reduction alters splicing of MAP2K2. Due to its role as
a central regulator of the splicing process, down-regulation of
SRPK1 is expected to have a widespread effect on the splicing and
expression of a diverse set of genes. To elucidate the effect of
decreased SRPK1 levels on splicing in breast and colonic cell lines,
Western blots were done using an antibody specific to a phosphorylated epitope found in multiple serine-arginine protein splice
factors (Fig. 4A; ref. 18). Disruption of SRPK1 expression in each of
the cell lines resulted in the anticipated reduction in the phosphorylation status of multiple serine-arginine proteins, the conventional targets of this protein kinase. Reduced phosphorylation

2076

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

SRPK1 Overexpression in Epithelial Cancers

of the splice factors SRp20, 30a-c, 40, 55, and 75 following treatment
was clearly shown by this method. This outcome is consistent with
what we reported earlier in pancreatic tumor cell lines and
suggests that, although multiple kinases have been described that
are able to phosphorylate the serine-arginine family of proteins, the
targeted reduction in SRPK1 activity is not fully compensated for
by those other kinases.
Based on our observation that reduced SRPK1 expression in
breast, colonic, and pancreatic tumor cells led to diminished
activation of MAPK3 and MAPK1, we used RT-PCR to evaluate the
effect of SRPK1 inhibition on the processing of the transcripts
encoding two kinases responsible for their phosphorylation:
MAP2K1 and MAP2K2 (Fig. 4B). SRPK1 knockdown in each of
the tumor cell lines resulted in a dramatic shift in the mRNA
processing of MAP2K2 transcripts that was less overt in the
nontransformed and near-normal HPDE6 cell line. Sequencing of
MAP2K2 PCR products revealed transcripts exhibiting deletions of
exon 7, exons 7 and 8, or exons 7 to 10 (Fig. 4D) occurring in cells
following inhibition of SRPK1. These previously unidentified
MAP2K2 mRNAs are predicted both to result in either an in-frame
coding deletion (D exons 7–8) or loss-of-frame mutations (D exon 7
and D exons 7–10) during translation of the transcripts and to
produce novel MAP2K2 isoforms whose functions remain to be
determined. No significant alterations in MAP2K1 splice patterns

or expression levels were observed. Western blot analysis
confirmed the reduction in MAP2K1/2 proteins following inhibition of SRPK1 (Fig. 4C). It is postulated that the change in splicing
fidelity elicited by SRPK1 down-regulation in tumor cells leads to
production of aberrant transcripts or protein products that may
inhibit the expression or availability of these proteins to
phosphorylate their intended targets, MAPK3 and MAPK1. Future
experiments are planned to investigate further the specific roles
these splicing alterations have on the activation and expression of
MAP2K1/2 proteins.

Discussion
SRPK1-encoding transcripts are ubiquitously expressed in many
human tissues (28, 29); however, the precise cellular localization of
this protein within breast and colon has not been described.
Immunohistochemical analysis using a SRPK1-specific antibody
showed that this protein is expressed almost exclusively within
epithelial cells lining the ducts of normal breast and within
epithelial cells along the colon. Importantly, elevated levels of
SRPK1 were detected in breast and colonic tumors, where the
quantity of SRPK1 seems to increase coordinately with increasing
grade of malignancy. Substantial expression of this protein was also
found across a panel of breast and colonic tumor cell lines. In vitro

Figure 4. Decreased SRPK1 expression in breast and colonic tumor cells affects splice factor activation, resulting in altered splicing of MAP2K2 transcripts.
Western blot analysis (A) was done on lysates derived from breast and colonic cell lines transfected with 15 Ag of either the siRNA-encoding sh1-SRPK1 plasmid or
a plasmid encoding a scrambled version of the sequence as control. Serine-arginine protein phosphorylation was detected using the mAb 104 that recognizes a
phosphorylated serine-arginine epitope common to multiple activated splice factors (18). RT-PCR was done (B) using primers specific for MAP2K1 or MAP2K2,
and cDNAs were derived from the control-transfected and sh1-SRPK1–transfected cell lines and resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis. C, total quantities of
MAP2K1/2 and actin proteins were confirmed by Western blot analysis. D, genomic organization of MAP2K2 and the novel splice events identified using RT-PCR
analysis are diagrammed.

www.aacrjournals.org

2077

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

down-regulation of SRPK1 using siRNA increased the proportion of
breast and colonic tumor cells, but not nontransformed cells,
undergoing apoptosis in addition to increasing their sensitivity to
killing by two commonly used chemotherapeutic agents: gemcitabine and cisplatin. These results suggest that drugs inhibiting
SRPK1 activity may be effective as stand-alone agents or in
combination with conventional chemotherapeutic regimens.
We have further shown that decreased expression of SRPK1
inhibited signaling through MAPK3 and MAPK1 and that this may
be due to the observed alterations in splicing of MAP2K2 transcripts that encode one of the two major kinases responsible for
phosphorylation of MAPK3 and MAPK1 proteins. Reduction in
SRPK1 protein levels was also found to slightly reduce signaling
through AKT phosphorylation in the tumor cells, which could
result in a loss of proliferation and survival signals normally
induced by this cascade. The ability of SRPK1 to regulate multiple
signaling pathways that are often exploited by tumor cells to
enhance proliferation and survival points toward an opportunity to
develop novel anticancer therapeutics targeting this protein.
The preponderance of missplicing mRNA in cancer cells has
been well documented for a large number of malignancies; however, the changes in the splicing machinery that are responsible
for this remain poorly defined. Although elevated levels of specific
serine-arginine proteins have been correlated with the presence of
alternatively spliced transcripts in breast (12) and lung tumors (30),
the overlapping activity of splice factors and their restricted tissue
distribution suggests that there may be a more central splicing
protein that is responsible for the prevalence of altered splicing
in tumors. Recently, overexpression of SRPK1 has been shown in
both acute T cell (31) and chronic myelogenous leukemia (32),
supporting an important role for SRPK1 in altered mRNA processing in leukemia. Our demonstration that SRPK1 is overexpressed in breast, colonic, and pancreatic tumors supports a
contributory role for this protein in generating aberrant splice
patterns across a broad and diverse group of malignancies.
Therapies targeting SRPK1 for inhibition would be anticipated to
have a broad effect on the splicing and subsequent expression of a
multitude of genes owing to the role of this kinase as a central
splicing regulator. We have focused attention on the MAPK and
AKT signaling pathways because activation of both has been
implicated in the progression of a broad spectrum of human
cancers (21, 22) as well as in mediating changes in the splice
regulatory network (15, 26, 27). The MAPK cascade responds to
mitogenic signals mediated by cell surface growth factor receptors,
resulting in activation of the proto-oncogenes Ras and Raf. Signals
through this hierarchical kinase pathway culminate in the
phosphorylation of MAPK3 and MAPK1 that in turn activate a
variety of transcription factors important to the expression of
proteins necessary for cell proliferation and survival. It is
remarkable that the MAPK3 and MAPK1 signaling cascade has
been proven to be activated in most human tumors, where it has
been shown not only to drive proliferation of tumor cells but also
to mediate resistance to a variety of chemotherapeutic agents both
in vitro and in vivo. Based on these epidemiologic and molecular
findings, the MAPK network represents an area of intense interest
in the development of anticancer drugs. Our results show that
reduced SRPK1 expression in tumor cells modifies the splicing of
transcripts encoding MAP2K2 to favor production of alternative
mRNAs that do not produce wild-type proteins. The effect of
decreased SRPK1 expression on MAP2K2 is likely responsible, at
least in part, for the observed decrease in phosphorylation of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

MAPK3 and MAPK1 and the antitumor effects observed. Prior
reports have already established that inhibition of phosphorylation
of MAPK3 and MAPK1 can reduce proliferation as well as increase
apoptosis of tumor cells (33, 34). These studies lend support to our
observations that the decrease in activation of these kinases may
play a role in the antitumor effect of targeting SRPK1.
Two additional signaling pathways in the global MAPK network
are the stress-activated protein kinase (MAPK8) and the MAPK14
(p38) kinase pathways that respond to a variety of cellular stress
signals, including proinflammatory cytokines and environmental
stress, leading to growth inhibition and apoptosis. Activation of the
MAPK14 signaling cascade has been frequently reported to be an
important regulator of apoptosis and may affect the sensitivity of
tumor cells to various cytotoxic agents, including cisplatin and
5-fluorouracil (35). In the present study, a reduction in total
MAPK14 expression and phosphorylation was observed in tumor
cells with diminished SRPK1 levels, yet the percentage of cells able
to undergo apoptosis was enhanced. This suggests that, although
the quantity of phosphorylated MAPK14 is reduced, there may be
sufficient activity remaining to induce apoptosis either alone or in
combination with another proapoptotic signaling component. It is
further inferred that the ability of the MAPK8 cascade to remain
unaffected and provide stress-induced proapoptotic signals may be
sufficient to increase the apoptotic potential caused by SRPK1
down-regulation in tumor cells.
The AKT cascade, another serine/threonine kinase signaling
pathway, has also garnered much interest by cancer researchers, as
signals transduced through this pathway may promote proliferation, growth, and survival (22). The siRNA-mediated reduction in
SRPK1 protein levels resulted in a modest reduction in AKT
phosphorylation that is believed to result in loss of prosurvival
signals that, when coupled with loss of growth and survival
signaling by MAPK3 and MAPK1, may act coordinately to facilitate
tumor cell death. It is postulated that the increase in apoptotic
potential of tumor cells with diminished SRPK1 expression may be
due to an overall shift in these and possibly other yet unidentified
signaling pathways to favor cell cycle arrest and apoptosis over
growth. Although the antibodies used in this study detect all three
AKT isoforms (1, 2, and 3), future investigation will need to discern
whether SRPK1 reduction preferentially reduces phosphorylation
of specific AKT isoforms because each has been shown to have
unique effect on various tumor pathways (36–38). Together, the
MAPK and AKT pathways offer great potential for cancer
therapeutics to amend the altered signaling pathways exploited
by tumor cells for growth and for resistance to current chemotherapeutic regimens. A variety of inhibitors targeting signaling
through the MAPK pathway are currently being evaluated in
clinical trials. Specific farnesyltransferase inhibitors designed to
inhibit Ras have unfortunately been disappointing in early clinical
trials, owing to the observation that higher concentrations of these
inhibitors are required to inhibit oncogenic kRAS compared with
wild-type protein (39). Inhibitors targeting MAP2K1 and MAP2K2
and those inhibiting Raf may offer more promise. We postulate that
the development of inhibitors targeting SRPK1 will offer a means to
inhibit the expression and/or activation of multiple signaling
proteins that are overexpressed during tumorigenesis. It is also
promising that targeting SRPK1 expression may prove therapeutically effective for a diverse range of malignancies exhibiting
elevated expression of this protein.
The effect of SRPK1 on chemotherapeutic potential remains an
area of controversy because expression of SRPK1 has been coupled

2078

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

SRPK1 Overexpression in Epithelial Cancers

to both resistance and susceptibility of tumor cells to platinumcontaining agents. Schenk et al. have shown an association
between the resistance of testicular germ cell tumors and A2780
ovarian tumor cells to cisplatin and diminished SRPK1 expression
(40, 41). In contrast, Plasencia et al. have shown that SRPK1
overexpression is associated with resistance of HT29 cells to
oxaliplatin, and we have previously described the targeting of this
kinase as a means of sensitizing pancreatic tumor cell lines to both
gemcitabine and cisplatin (1, 42). These disparate effects of SRPK1
expression on tumor cell sensitivity to cytotoxic agents may be due
to differential gene expression patterns exhibited by such cells. For
example, it has already been shown that the primary substrate for
SRPK1 in testicular germ cells is protamine 1, a protein required
for chromatin condensation during spermatogenesis (28), whereas
serine-arginine proteins are generally considered the predominant
substrates for SRPK1 phosphorylation outside of the testicular
compartment (29). Examination of the influence that SRPK1
expression may have on the splicing of specific genes or the
activation of specific protein substrates differentially expressed in
divergent tumor cell lines is ongoing and is expected to provide
insights into the mechanisms responsible for chemotherapeutic
sensitivity and resistance.
Whether alternative splicing is causative or a result of tumor
formation remains an area of intense debate; however, the ability of
aberrant splice products to affect the balance between cell

References
1. Hayes GM, Carrigan PE, Beck AM, Miller LJ. Targeting
the RNA splicing machinery as a novel treatment
strategy for pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer Res 2006;66:
3819–27.
2. Mercatante DR, Bortner CD, Cidlowski JA, Kole R.
Modification of alternative splicing of Bcl-x pre-mRNA
in prostate and breast cancer cells. Analysis of apoptosis
and cell death. J Biol Chem 2001;276:16411–7.
3. Lu F, Gladden AB, Diehl JA. An alternatively spliced
cyclin D1 isoform, cyclin D1b, is a nuclear oncogene.
Cancer Res 2003;63:7056–61.
4. Gunthert U, Hofmann M, Rudy W, et al. A new variant
of glycoprotein CD44 confers metastatic potential to rat
carcinoma cells. Cell 1991;65:13–24.
5. Rudy W, Hofmann M, Schwartz-Albiez R, et al. The
two major CD44 proteins expressed on a metastatic rat
tumor cell line are derived from different splice variants:
each one individually suffices to confer metastatic
behavior. Cancer Res 1993;53:1262–8.
6. Zhu X, Daffada AA, Chan CM, Dowsett M. Identification of an exon 3 deletion splice variant androgen
receptor mRNA in human breast cancer. Int J Cancer
1997;72:574–80.
7. Gallacchi P, Schoumacher F, Eppenberger-Castori S,
et al. Increased expression of estrogen-receptor exon5-deletion variant in relapse tissues of human breast
cancer. Int J Cancer 1998;79:44–8.
8. Koduri S, Goldhar AS, Vonderhaar BK. Activation of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by the ER-a
variant, ERD3. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2006;95:37–43.
9. Jordan P, Brazao R, Boavida MG, Gespach C, Chastre E.
Cloning of a novel human Rac1b splice variant with
increased expression in colorectal tumors. Oncogene
1999;18:6835–9.
10. Ryan B, O’Donovan N, Browne B, et al. Expression of
survivin and its splice variants survivin-2B and survivinDEx3 in breast cancer. Br J Cancer 2005;92:120–4.
11. Suga K, Yamamoto T, Yamada Y, et al. Correlation
between transcriptional expression of survivin isoforms
and clinicopathological findings in human colorectal
carcinomas. Oncol Rep 2005;13:891–7.
12. Stickeler E, Kittrell F, Medina D, Berget SM. Stage-

www.aacrjournals.org

proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis has emerged as a
major facet in the tumorigenic process. It is intriguing that
extensive alternative splicing is prevalent to both testicular germ
cells and tumors that express a collection of proteins referred to as
cancer/testes antigens (43–45). Previous reports have shown that
SRPK1 transcripts are found ubiquitously across human tissues,
but levels are highest in testicular germ cells (28, 29). The presence
of high levels of SRPK1 in testes and its overexpression in tumors
suggest that this protein follows a pattern of inappropriate
regulation during tumorigenesis that could be similar to other
cancer/testes antigens. It is further postulated that the high
quantity of SRPK1 protein present in both germ cells and tumors is
responsible for the extensive alternative splicing patterns prevalent
to both types of cells, thus implicating this protein as a critical
regulator of aberrant splicing in human cancers.

Acknowledgments
Received 8/10/2006; revised 12/5/2006; accepted 12/27/2006.
Grant support: Mayo Clinic and the Fiterman Foundation (L.J. Miller) and Canary
Foundation/American Cancer Society (P.E. Carrigan).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Tom Lidner for the histologic grading of tissues; Dr. M.S. Tsao for
provision of the HPDE6 cell line; and A.M. Beck, L-A. Bruins, and Dr. Maoqing Dong
for excellent assistance.

specific changes in SR splicing factors and alternative
splicing in mammary tumorigenesis. Oncogene 1999;18:
3574–82.
13. Bourgeois CF, Lejeune F, Stevenin J. Broad specificity
of SR (serine-arginine) proteins in the regulation of
alternative splicing of pre-messenger RNA. Prog Nucleic
Acid Res Mol Biol 2004;78:37–88.
14. Matter N, Herrlich P, Konig H. Signal-dependent
regulation of splicing via phosphorylation of Sam68.
Nature 2002;420:691–5.
15. Blaustein M, Pelisch F, Tanos T, et al. Concerted
regulation of nuclear and cytoplasmic activities of SR
proteins by AKT. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2005;12:1037–44.
16. Furukawa T, Duguid WP, Rosenberg L, Viallet J,
Galloway DA, Tsao MS. Long-term culture and immortalization of epithelial cells from normal adult human
pancreatic ducts transfected by the E6E7 gene of human
papilloma virus 16. Am J Pathol 1996;148:1763–70.
17. Ouyang H, Mou L, Luk C, et al. Immortal human
pancreatic duct epithelial cell lines with near normal
genotype and phenotype. Am J Pathol 2000;157:1623–31.
18. Zahler AM, Lane WS, Stolk JA, Roth MB. SR proteins:
a conserved family of pre-mRNA splicing factors. Genes
Dev 1992;6:837–47.
19. Moore A, Donahue CJ, Bauer KD, Mather JP.
Simultaneous measurement of cell cycle and apoptotic
cell death. Methods Cell Biol 1998;57:265–78.
20. van England M, Nieland LJW, Ramaekers FCS,
Schutte B, Reutelingsperger CPM. Annexin V-affinity
assay: a review on an apoptosis detection system based
on phosphatidylserine exposure. Cytometry 1998;31:1–9.
21. Hoshino R, Chatani Y, Yamori T, et al. Constitutive
activation of the 41-/43-kDa mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway in human tumors. Oncogene
1999;18:813–22.
22. Yoeli-Lerner M, Toker A. Akt/PKB signaling in
cancer: a function in cell motility and invasion. Cell
Cycle 2006;5:603–5.
23. Sivaraman VS, Wang H, Nuovo GJ, Malbon CC.
Hyperexpression of mitogen-activated protein kinase in
human breast cancer. J Clin Invest 1997;99:1478–83.
24. Fang JY, Richardson BC. The MAPK signalling
pathways and colorectal cancer. Lancet Oncol 2005;6:
322–7.

2079

25. Sebolt-Leopold JS, Herrera R. Targeting the mitogenactivated protein kinase cascade to treat cancer. Nat
Rev Cancer 2004;4:937–47.
26. Pelisch F, Blaustein M, Kornblihtt AR, Srebrow A.
Cross-talk between signaling pathways regulates alternative splicing: a novel role for JNK. J Biol Chem 2005;
280:25461–9.
27. van der Houven van Oordt W, Diaz-Meco MT, Lozano
J, Krainer AR, Moscat J, Caceres JF. The MKK(3/6)-p38signaling cascade alters the subcellular distribution of
hnRNP A1 and modulates alternative splicing regulation. J Cell Biol 2000;149:307–16.
28. Papoutsopoulou S, Nikolakaki E, Chalepakis G, Kruft
V, Chevaillier P, Giannakouros T. SR protein-specific
kinase 1 is highly expressed in testis and phosphorylates
protamine 1. Nucleic Acids Res 1999;27:2972–80.
29. Wang HY, Lin W, Dyck JA, et al. SRPK2: a differentially expressed SR protein-specific kinase involved
in mediating the interaction and localization of premRNA splicing factors in mammalian cells. J Cell Biol
1998;140:737–50.
30. Zerbe LK, Pino I, Pio R, et al. Relative amounts of
antagonistic splicing factors, hnRNP A1 and ASF/SF2,
change during neoplastic lung growth: implications for
pre-mRNA processing. Mol Carcinog 2004;41:187–96.
31. Hishizawa M, Imada K, Sakai T, Ueda M, Hori T,
Uchiyama T. Serological identification of adult T-cell
leukaemia-associated antigens. Br J Haematol 2005;130:
382–90.
32. Salesse S, Dylla SJ, Verfaillie CM. p210BCR/ABLinduced alteration of pre-mRNA splicing in primary
human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells. Leukemia
2004;18:727–33.
33. Ozaki K, Minoda A, Kishikawa F, Kohno M. Blockade
of the ERK pathway markedly sensitizes tumor cells to
HDAC inhibitor-induced cell death. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2006;339:1171–7.
34. Rice PL, Beard KS, Driggers LJ, Ahnen DJ. Inhibition
of extracellular-signal regulated kinases 1/2 is required
for apoptosis of human colon cancer cells in vitro by
sulindac metabolites. Cancer Res 2004;64:8148–51.
35. Olson JM, Hallahan AR. p38 MAP kinase: a convergence point in cancer therapy. Trends Mol Med 2004;10:
125–9.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

36. Zhou GL, Tucker DF, Bae SS, Bhatheja K, Birnbaum MJ,
Field J. Opposing roles for Akt1and Akt2 in Rac/Pak signaling and cell migration. J Biol Chem 2006;281:36443–53.
37. Meng Q, Xia C, Fang J, Rojanasakul Y, Jiang BH. Role
of PI3K and AKT specific isoforms in ovarian cancer cell
migration, invasion, and proliferation through the
p70S6KI pathway. Cell Signal 2006;18:2262–71.
38. Heron-Milhavet L, Franckhauser C, Rana V, et al. Only
Akt1 is required for proliferation, while Akt2 Promotes
cell cycle exit through p21 binding. Mol Cell Biol 2006;
22:8267–80.
39. End DW, Smets G, Todd AV, et al. Characterization of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

the antitumor effects of the selective farnesyl protein
transferase inhibitor R115777 in vivo and in vitro .
Cancer Res 2001;61:131–7.
40. Schenk PW, Boersma AW, Brandsma JA, et al. SKY1 is
involved in cisplatin-induced cell kill in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae , and inactivation of its human homologue,
SRPK1, induces cisplatin resistance in a human ovarian
carcinoma cell line. Cancer Res 2001;61:6982–6.
41. Schenk PW, Stoop H, Bokemeyer C, et al. Resistance
to platinum-containing chemotherapy in testicular
germ cell tumors is associated with downregulation of
the protein kinase SRPK1. Neoplasia 2004;6:297–301.

2080

42. Plasencia C, Martinez-Balibrea E, Martinez-Cardus A,
Quinn DI, Abad A, Neamati N. Expression analysis of
genes involved in oxaliplatin response and development
of oxaliplatin-resistant HT29 colon cancer cells. Int J
Oncol 2006;29:225–35.
43. Venables JP. Alternative splicing in the testes. Curr
Opin Genet Dev 2002;12:615–9.
44. Venables JP. Aberrant and alternative splicing in
cancer. Cancer Res 2004;64:7647–54.
45. Simpson AJ, Caballero OL, Jungbluth A, Chen YT, Old
LJ. Cancer/testis antigens, gametogenesis, and cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:615–25.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Serine-Arginine Protein Kinase 1 Overexpression Is
Associated with Tumorigenic Imbalance in
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Pathways in Breast,
Colonic, and Pancreatic Carcinomas
Gregory M. Hayes, Patricia E. Carrigan and Laurence J. Miller
Cancer Res 2007;67:2072-2080.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2072

This article cites 44 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2072.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 16 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2072.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

