Editorial

Bevacizumab Beyond Disease Progression for Advanced
Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer: Does Persistence Have
Its Rewards?
~oz, PhD1; Emily B. Roarty, PhD1; and John V. Heymach, MD, PhD1,2
Irene Guijarro-Mun

In selecting cancer treatments, as in life, sometimes it pays to be persistent. However, not knowing when to quit carries its
own hazards as well, particularly in the face of potentially diminishing benefits, increasing toxicities, and significant costs.
These issues become even more relevant as new treatment options emerge with more favorable toxicity profiles and enable
long-term treatment without the cumulative toxicities of chemotherapy. Whether or not there is a benefit to continuing a
targeted drug past progression depends on a host of factors and likely varies by drug and tumor type. For example, does
the tumor retain at least some dependence on a target blocked by the drug, or does the resistance mechanism completely
bypass the target? Does stopping the drug induce a rebound effect that could accelerate tumor progression when the drug
is stopped?
For vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors such as bevacizumab, preclinical and clinical studies of
other tumor types suggest that there may be benefit to continuing treatment beyond progression, but it was previously
unknown whether non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients would benefit from such an approach. In this issue of
Cancer, Takeda et al1 address this issue. They conducted a randomized phase II study of 100 patients with nonsquamous
NSCLC who had progressed after first-line platinum-based chemotherapy with bevacizumab. Patients were randomized
to either docetaxel alone or docetaxel with bevacizumab with a primary endpoint of progression-free survival (PFS). The
bevacizumab arm demonstrated modestly prolonged PFS at 4.4 months versus 3.4 months for the control arm (hazard ratio [HR], 0.71; P 5 .058), and this achieved the predefined statistical endpoint with a 1-sided P value < 0.2. There was
also a trend toward improved overall survival (OS) in the bevacizumab arm (13.1 vs 11.0 months in the control arm; HR,
0.74; P 5 0.11). Toxicities were generally consistent with those seen in early studies of bevacizumab for NSCLC and
included higher rates of hypertension and hemorrhagic events, although the rates of grade 3 or life-threatening adverse
events was relatively low in both arms. There was a higher rate of discontinuing therapy because of toxicity (34% in the
bevacizumab arm vs 24% in the control arm).
This trial, as with all randomized phase II designs, was not intended to be a definitive study, and the results must be
interpreted cautiously. Nevertheless, it does at least begin to address some important issues that can help guide future trials. One such issue is whether patients who have previously progressed after treatment with bevacizumab would achieve
less benefit from bevacizumab (or other VEGF inhibitors) in the refractory setting than patients who are bevacizumabnaive. In other words, does prior bevacizumab in the first-line setting promote relative resistance to bevacizumab, or does
the tumor retain at least some dependence on the pathway?
In a prior phase II study, Herbst et al2 tested the combination of bevacizumab with either docetaxel or pemetrexed
for platinum-refractory NSCLC. Similarly to the results of Takeda et al,1 improved PFS (4.8 vs 3.0 months; adjusted HR,
0.67) was observed in the bevacizumab plus chemotherapy arm versus the chemotherapy arm. Although there were differences in the study designs and populations, taken as a whole, the studies suggest that the benefit from bevacizumab in the
second-line setting appears to be roughly comparable whether or not patients have received first-line bevacizumab.
The findings of Takeda et al1 are reminiscent of the findings for colorectal cancer, for which the continuation of
VEGF inhibition beyond progression was explored in 2 randomized studies. The ML18147 study3 evaluated second-line

Corresponding author: John V. Heymach, MD, PhD, Departments of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology and Cancer Biology, Unit 432, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 792-1220; jheymach@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

See referenced original article on pages 1050-9, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29894, Received: December 15, 2015; Accepted: December 16, 2015, Published online February 1, 2016 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

April 1, 2016

1047

Editorial

therapy with either irinotecan, fluorouracil, and folinic
acid (FOLFIRI) or folinic acid, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) with or without bevacizumab for patients
who had previously progressed on a first-line bevacizumab-containing regimen. The study demonstrated a
modest but statistically significant survival advantage of
1.4 months, and this resulted in the addition of bevacizumab continuation to treatment guidelines. A similar study
was conducted with ziv-aflibercept, a fusion protein using
the extracellular domains of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1) and VEGFR2.4 Patients who
had been previously treated with an oxaliplatin regimen
(which may have included bevacizumab) were randomized to FOLFIRI with bevacizumab or a placebo. In that
study, the primary endpoint of OS was met with a 1.4month improvement (13.5 vs 12.1 months) along with
improvements in the PFS and response rate. A benefit was
also seen in the subgroup that received prior bevacizumab.
The result of these 2 studies is the addition of new treatment options for second-line antiangiogenic therapy in
combination with chemotherapy for colorectal cancer
patients who have previously progressed on bevacizumabbased first-line regimens.
These results suggest that tumors retain at least partial
dependence on the VEGF pathway even after progression
on bevacizumab. This is consistent with preclinical cancer
xenograft models in which VEGF blockade not only prevented regrowth of a subset of residual tumors after cytoablative therapy but also slowed the regrowth of some
tumors that occurred after the discontinuation of chemotherapy.5 It raises an interesting question, however: would
switching to a different agent targeting the VEGF pathway
(eg, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor with a broader spectrum of
activity) provide even greater benefits after bevacizumab
progression? One rationale for switching is that both preclinical and clinical data suggest that resistance to VEGF
inhibition may be accompanied by an upregulation of alternative angiogenic pathways. For example, we previously
observed in preclinical models that bevacizumab resistance
was accompanied by an upregulation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor and fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) pathways in stromal cell populations,6 and
bevacizumab resistance in colorectal patients treated with
bevacizumab was associated with an upregulation of circulating basic fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, and several myeloid recruitment factors.7 In preclinical
models, VEGF resistance has also been associated with
enhanced infiltration of granulocyte differentiation antigen
11 (Gr11) myeloid cells into the tumor.8 These findings
support a potential benefit in targeting not only VEGF but
1048

also potential escape pathways such as the FGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor, MET, and myeloid recruitment pathways after progression on bevacizumab.
Although such strategies have not been definitively
tested, it is noteworthy that in the avastin tarceva lung adenocarcinoma study (ATLAS) study, the addition of erlotinib to maintenance therapy with bevacizumab after firstline chemotherapy plus bevacizumab prolonged PFS in
comparison with maintenance therapy with bevacizumab
alone.9 There are also intriguing hints from the testing of
nintedanib, a multitargeted angiokinase inhibitor targeting the VEGFR, PDGFR, and FGFR pathways. In the
LUME-Lung 1 randomized phase III trial comparing
docetaxel with either nintedanib (BIBF1120) or a placebo, the nintedanib arm was found to achieve the primary endpoint of prolonged PFS in comparison with the
placebo arm, regardless of histology (overall PFS HR,
0.79; 0.0019; squamous HR, 0.77; P 5 .02; adenocarcinoma HR, 0.77; P 5 0.0019).10 Furthermore, significantly prolonged OS was observed in patients with
adenocarcinoma (HR, 0.83; P 5 0.0359; median, 12.6 vs
10.3 months) but not in the squamous subgroup. On the
basis of these results, nintedanib has recently received
approval in the European Union for NSCLC. In an exploratory subset analysis, patients treated with prior bevacizumab in the first-line setting showed a trend toward
greater relative PFS and OS benefits from nintedanib in
comparison with patients who did not receive first-line
bevacizumab (eg, the OS HR was 0.61 for patients who
received prior bevacizumab and 0.85 for those who did
not receive first-line bevacizumab). Although the numbers
in this subset analysis are too small for definitive conclusions to be drawn, it is consistent with the possibility that
patients treated with first-line bevacizumab may receive
benefit from a broad angiokinase inhibitor.
Another potential switch strategy for VEGF pathway
blockade after first-line therapy with bevacizumab would
be to specifically target the VEGF2 receptor itself, which
theoretically may be more effective if alternative VEGFR2
ligands (eg, VEGF-C) were upregulated. Ramucirumab is
a recombinant monoclonal antibody that blocks VEGFR2
signaling. It was tested in the Phase III REVEL trial, an
international study that involved nonsquamous and
squamous NSCLC patients who had experienced disease
progression after treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy for locally advanced or metastatic disease.11
Patients were randomized to treatment with ramucirumab
and docetaxel or with a placebo and docetaxel. In this
trial, the median OS was significantly improved in the
ramucirumab group versus the placebo group (10.5 vs 9.1
Cancer

April 1, 2016

Bevacizumab Beyond Progression in NSCLC/Guijarro-Munoz et al

months; HR, 0.857; P 5 0.0235), as was the median PFS
(4.5 vs 3.0 months; HR, 0.762; P < 0.0001). On the basis
of these results, ramucirumab was recently approved for
the treatment of relapsed NSCLC patients in combination
with second-line docetaxel. Subset analyses for the patients
who were previously treated with first-line bevacizumab
were not reported, however, so it is not possible to determine at this time whether ramucirumab with docetaxel
would be more effective than bevacizumab with docetaxel
after progression with first-line bevacizumab.
In conclusion, the study by Takeda et al1 extends the
earlier finding from preclinical tumor models and 2
randomized studies in colorectal cancer that continued
VEGF blockade after progression on first-line therapy may
provide at least a modest benefit when it is continued with
second-line chemotherapy. Further testing in larger
randomized studies would be needed to validate the observations here. It is unclear whether such additional studies
would be worthwhile, however, because of the availability
of other VEGF pathway inhibitors such as ramucirumab
(in the United States) and nintedanib (in the European
Union) for use with docetaxel in platinum-refractory
NSCLC. There are, in fact, theoretical reasons to believe
that switching to a broader tyrosine kinase inhibitor or
mechanistically distinct VEGF inhibitor may be preferable
to continuing bevacizumab. Nevertheless, this study by
Takeda et al makes an important contribution and adds to
the building evidence that when it comes to VEGF blockade for NSCLC, persistence may truly be a virtue.
FUNDING SUPPORT
J.V. Heymach is supported in part by the UT Lung Spore
(P50CA070907); an NIH Cancer Center Support Grant
(P30CA16672); an NCI R01 award (R01CA168484);
the V Foundation for Cancer Research; the LUNGevity
Foundation; Uniting Against Lung Cancer; the Lung
Cancer Research Foundation; and generous philanthropic
contributions to The University of Texas MD Anderson
Lung Moon Shot Program, the Dell Fund honoring Lorraine Dell, Rexanna’s Foundation for Fighting Lung Cancer, and the Bruton Endowment for Tumor Biology.

Cancer

April 1, 2016

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
John V. Heymach reports grants from AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Bayer; he also reports working on advisory boards for Genentech, AstraZeneca, Novartis,
GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly, Boehringer Ingelheim, Synta,
and Exelixis outside the submitted work.
REFERENCES
1. Takeda M, Yamanaka T, Seto T, et al. Bevacizumab beyond disease
progression after first-line treatment with bevacizumab plus chemotherapy in advanced nonsquamous non–small cell lung cancer (West
Japan Oncology Group 5910L): an open-label, randomized, phase 2
trial. Cancer. 2016;122:1050-1059.
2. Herbst RS, O’Neill VJ, Fehrenbacher L, et al. Phase II study of efficacy and safety of bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy
or erlotinib compared with chemotherapy alone for treatment of
recurrent or refractory non small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:4743-4750.
3. Bennouna J, Sastre J, Arnold D, et al. Continuation of bevacizumab
after first progression in metastatic colorectal cancer (ML18147): a
randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:29-37.
4. Van Cutsem E, Tabernero J, Lakomy R, et al. Addition of aflibercept to fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan improves survival in
a phase III randomized trial in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer previously treated with an oxaliplatin-based regimen. J Clin
Oncol. 2012;30:3499-3506.
5. Bagri A, Berry L, Gunter B, et al. Effects of anti-VEGF treatment
duration on tumor growth, tumor regrowth, and treatment efficacy.
Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16:3887-3900.
6. Cascone T, Herynk MH, Xu L, et al. Upregulated stromal EGFR
and vascular remodeling in mouse xenograft models of angiogenesis
inhibitor–resistant human lung adenocarcinoma. J Clin Invest. 2011;
121:1313-1328.
7. Kopetz S, Hoff PM, Eng C, et al. Levels of angiogenic cytokines
prior to disease progression in metastatic colorectal cancer patients
treated with bevacizumab. Gastointestinal Cancers Symposium. 2009;
292.
8. Shojaei F, Wu X, Malik AK, et al. Tumor refractoriness to antiVEGF treatment is mediated by CD11b1Gr11 myeloid cells. Nat
Biotechnol. 2007;25:911-920.
9. Johnson BE, Kabbinavar F, Fehrenbacher L, et al. ATLAS: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase IIIB trial comparing
bevacizumab therapy with or without erlotinib, after completion of
chemotherapy, with bevacizumab for first-line treatment of advanced
non–small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:3926-3934.
10. Reck M, Kaiser R, Mellemgaard A, et al. Docetaxel plus nintedanib
versus docetaxel plus placebo in patients with previously treated
non–small-cell lung cancer (LUME-Lung 1): a phase 3, doubleblind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:143-155.
11. Garon EB, Ciuleanu TE, Arrieta O, et al. Ramucirumab plus docetaxel versus placebo plus docetaxel for second-line treatment of stage
IV non–small-cell lung cancer after disease progression on platinumbased therapy (REVEL): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised
phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2014;384:665-673.

1049

