Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Artesunate suppresses tumor growth and induces apoptosis
through the modulation of multiple oncogenic cascades in a
chronic myeloid leukemia xenograft mouse model
Chulwon Kim1, Jong Hyun Lee1, Sung-Hoon Kim1, Gautam Sethi2, Kwang Seok Ahn1
1

College of Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea

2

Department of Pharmacology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 117597, Singapore

Correspondence to:
Gautam Sethi, e-mail: phcgs@nus.edu.sg
Kwang Seok Ahn, e-mail: ksahn@khu.ac.kr
Keywords: Artesunate, STAT5, CREB, MAPK, CML
Received: November 16, 2014	

Accepted: December 21, 2014	

Published: February 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Artesunate (ART), a semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin, is one of the
most commonly used anti-malarial drugs. Also, ART possesses anticancer potential
albeit through incompletely understood molecular mechanism(s). Here, the effect
of ART on various protein kinases, associated gene products, cellular response, and
apoptosis was investigated. The in vivo effect of ART on the growth of human CML
xenograft tumors in athymic nu/nu mice was also examined. In our preliminary
experiments, we first observed that phosphorylation of p38, ERK, CREB, Chk-2, STAT5,
and RSK proteins were suppressed upon ART exposure. Interestingly, ART induced
the expression of SOCS-1 protein and depletion of SOCS-1 using siRNA abrogated the
STAT5 inhibitory effect of the drug. Also various dephosphorylations caused by ART led
to the suppression of various survival gene products and induced apoptosis through
caspase-3 activation. Moreover, ART also substantially potentiated the apoptosis
induced by chemotherapeutic agents. Finally, when administered intraperitoneally,
ART inhibited p38, ERK, STAT5, and CREB activation in tumor tissues and the growth
of human CML xenograft tumors in mice without exhibiting any significant adverse
effects. Overall, our results suggest that ART exerts its anti-proliferative and proapoptotic effects through suppression of multiple signaling cascades in CML both
in vitro and in vivo.

pathways in tumor cells can form the basis of novel
therapy for cancer patients.
Artesunate (ART), extracted from Artemisiaannua L.
(Sweet Wormwood, qinghao), has been used in traditional
Chinese medicine to treat fever and chills [4]. Although
the active constituent of the plant, artemisinin, has been
identified as an anti-malarial sesquiterpene, its derivative
ART is deemed more suitable for drug development due to
its aqueous solubility. ART is not only cytotoxic towards
cancer cell lines in vitro, but also exerts significant
antitumor activities against human xenograft tumors in
nude mice [5–8]. ART has also shown significant antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects against leukemia
[9–11], liver cancer [12, 13], oral cancer [14], breast
cancer [15], cervical cancer [16], and gastric cancer
[17]. Additionally, ART has also been reported to induce

INTRODUCTION
Abundant evidence has demonstrated that
several phytochemicals found in medicinal herbs exert
anti-tumorigenic activities by inducing apoptosis in
cancer cells. Plant-derived natural products as well
as semisynthetic and synthetic analogs contribute
significantly to cancer chemotherapy because they can
induce apoptosis in malignant tumor cells while exerting
low toxicity towards normal cells and thus producing
lower adverse effects [1, 2]. Many recent preclinical and
clinical studies have indicated that targeting multiple
signaling pathways against neoplastic cells could increase
patient survival and might reduce the emergence of cells
that are resistant to monotherapy [3]. Thus identification of
pharmacological agents that can target diverse oncogenic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4020

Oncotarget

RESULTS

apoptosis through inhibition of hyperactive Wnt/betacatenin [6], NF-kappaB [18], and PI3K/Akt [16] signaling
pathways, by targeting iron-catalyzed lysosomal reactive
oxygen species [15] activating Bak-mediated caspaseindependent intrinsic pathway [19], and promoting cell
oncosis [17]. Although several molecular mechanisms as
discussed above have been described to account for the
potent antitumor activities exerted by ART, its potential
effect on p38/ERK/STAT5/CREB signal transduction
pathways in human CML cells has never been investigated
before.
Several studies have indicated that mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) such as ERK, p38 kinase, and
JNK pathways regulate cellular proliferation, apoptosis,
and differentiation [20]. Especially, the p38 kinase and
ERK activation are known to contribute to anti-apoptosis
by mediating cell proliferation and survival [21]. Besides,
the signal transducers and activators of transcription
5 (STAT5) plays a critical role in Breakpoint Cluster
Region-Abelson 1 (BCR-ABL1)-driven neoplasias.
STAT5 is an essential component in the signaling network
that maintains the survival and growth of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) cells [22]. STAT5 belongs to the STAT
gene family [23]. The two highly homologous (98%)
isoforms of STAT5, STAT5a and STAT5b [23], act as both
cytoplasmic signaling proteins and nuclear transcription
factors. STAT5 becomes active by phosphorylation of a
specific tyrosine residue in the carboxy-terminal domain
[23], homo- or heterodimerizes, and translocates to the
nucleus where it binds to the target gene promoters [23].
Previous data has demonstrated that the MAPK pathway
is required for the full activation of one of the STAT5
isoforms (STAT5a) [24] and ERK can directly interact with
STAT5a [25]. Besides, the dysregulation of the STAT5
signaling pathway is closely associated with oncogenesis
and leukemogenesis [26]. STAT5 has been shown to be
constitutively activated in several forms of lymphoid,
myeloid, and erythroid leukemias [27–29]. Indeed, the
introduction of constitutively active STAT5 mutants into
hematopoietic cells is sufficient to induce multilineage
leukemia in mice [30]. Also, cAMP-regulatory elementbinding protein (CREB) is a 43 kDa basic/leucine zipper
(bZIP) transcription factor that is overexpressed and
constitutively phosphorylated in a number of different
human cancers [31]. The downregulation of CREB can
inhibit proliferation due to decreasing cells in S phase in
the TF-1 and K562 cells showing that CREB indeed can
act as a proto-oncogene that potentially contributes to
leukemogenesis [32].
The purpose of this study was to investigate the
role of ART in inducing human CML cells apoptosis
and elucidate its underlying molecular mechanisms. We
particularly aimed to determine whether the modulation of
p38/ERK/STAT5/CREB signaling pathways by ART can
play a critical role in mediating its antitumor effects in
human CML cells and xenograft mouse model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ART decreases phosphorylation levels of various
kinases in KBM-5 cells
The structure of ART is shown in Figure 1A. To
examine the effects of ART on intracellular signaling, we
screened the phosphorylation status of multiple cellular
kinases in human CML KBM-5, using the human phosphokinase antibody array (Figure 1B and 1C). Activated p38,
ERK, CREB, and STAT5 was strongly expressed in nontreated cells. ART treated cells resulted in a decrease in
phosphorylated p38, ERK, CREB, and STAT5 levels.
Other kinases or phospho-proteins modulated upon ART
treatment included: Chk-2, p53, and RSK. The kinases
known to phosphorylate CREB, which are linked closely
to tumor progression and metastasis [33], include mitogenactivated protein kinases (MAPK) [34]. In addition,
STAT5 activation pathways have been closely linked with
the proliferation, anti-apoptosis, and chemoresistance of
tumors [35]. Therefore, in the next set of experiments, we
focused on investigating the potential effect of ART on the
CREB and STAT5 signaling pathways in KBM-5 cells.

ART inhibits phosphorylation of p38, ERK,
and STAT5 in KBM-5 cells
Data obtained from our phospho-kinase antibody
array studies was further confirmed by Western blot
analysis. Cells were treated with indicated concentrations
of ART for 4 h. ART suppressed the phosphorylation of
p38, ERK, and STAT5 in a concentration-dependent
manner in KBM-5 cells and had no effect on the expression
of total p38, ERK, STAT5 proteins (Figure 1D).

ART inhibits binding of STAT5 and CREB
to the DNA
Because tyrosine phosphorylation causes the
dimerization of STATs and their translocation to the
nucleus, where they bind to DNA and regulate gene
transcription [36], and also of CREB related transcription
factor which binds CRE and heterodimerizes with CREB
in nucleus [32], we determined whether ART suppresses
the DNA binding activities of both STAT5 and CREB in
tumor cells. EMSA analysis of nuclear extracts prepared
from KBM-5 cells showed that ART inhibited STAT5- and
CREB-DNA binding activities in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 1E). These results show that ART abrogates the
DNA binding ability of both STAT5 and CREB proteins.

ART suppresses phosphorylation of STAT5 and
CREB in nuclei
Because STAT5 have shown to play a role in
tumor development and progression [30] and the
4021

Oncotarget

phosphorylation of CREB is linked closely with tumor
progression and metastasis [33], we next tested the effect
of ART on phosphorylation of STAT5 and CREB in
nuclei. As shown by Western blot analysis in Figure 1F,
left panels, ART inhibited phosphorylation of STAT5 and
STAT5 expression in nuclei (  first and second panels).
Likewise, ART suppressed phosphorylation of CREB in a
dose-dependent manner, and ART had no effect on CREB
protein (Figure 1F, right,  first and second panels).

cells and the treatment with ART clearly suppressed this
phosphorylation in a concentration-dependent manner.
The levels of total JAK2 remained unchanged under the
similar conditions (Figure 1G, second panel ).

ART induces the expression of SOCS-1
in KBM-5 cells
Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) are
transcriptional targets of activated STAT proteins that
negatively control STAT signaling. Thus, we examined
whether ART modulates the expression of SOCS-1, which
can act as a negative regulator of the JAK/STAT signaling
pathway [38]. As shown in Figure 1H, left panels, ART
led to an increased expression of SOCS-1 at the protein
level. ART also enhanced mRNA level of SOCS-1 in a
dose dependent manner in KBM-5 cells (Figure 1H, right
panels).

ART suppresses constitutive activation of JAK2
Signal transducer and activator of transcription
has been reported to be activated by the soluble tyrosine
kinases of the Janus family (JAK) [37]. Because JAK2
is the main kinase involved, we examined the effect of
ART on JAK2 activation in CML cells. As shown in
Figure 1G, JAK2 was constitutively active in KBM-5

Figure 1: The Human Phospho-Kinase Array detection kit reveals that ART suppresses phosphorylation of p38, ERK,
STAT5, and CREB in KBM-5 cells. (A) The chemical structure of Artesunate (ART). (B) KBM-5 human myeloid leukemia cells

(1 × 107 cells/well) were either untreated or treated with 50 μM of ART for 4 h. Parts A and B of the array were each incubated with 300 μg of
cell lysate. Arrays were done according to the manufacturer’s protocols using Human Phospho-Kinase Array Kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis,
MN), and array images are shown. (C) Array profiles created by quantifying the mean spot pixel densities are shown. Graphs represent spot
intensities of indicated proteins. (D) After KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were seeded onto 6-well plates, they were treated with various
indicated concentrations of ART for 4 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot analysis using antibodies against
p-p38, p38, p-ERK, ERK, p-STAT5 and STAT5. (E) ART suppresses STAT5 and CREB-DNA binding activity. KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/
well) were treated with various indicated concentrations of ART for 4 h, analyzed for nuclear STAT5 and CREB levels by EMSA.
(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4022

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (Continued ) (F) KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated with various indicated concentrations of ART for 4 h. After

that, nuclear proteins were extract, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot analysis using antibodies against p-STAT5,
STAT5, p-CREB, and CREB. (G) After KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were seeded onto 6-well plates, they were treated with various
indicated concentrations of ART for 4 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot analysis using antibodies
against p-JAK2, and JAK2. (H) KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated with various indicated concentrations of ART for 4 h,
after which whole-cell extracts were prepared and 10 μg portions of those extracts were resolved on 8% SDS-PAGE, electrotransferred
onto nitrocellulose membranes, and probed for SOCS-1 antibody. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with β-actin antibody to
verify equal protein loading (H, left panels). KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated with various indicated concentrations of ART
for 4 h, and total RNA was extracted and examined for expression of SOCS-1 by RT-PCR. GAPDH was used as an internal control to
show equal RNA loading (H, right panels). (I) Effect of SOCS-1 knockdown on ART induced expression of SOCS-1. KBM-5 cells were
transfected with either SOCS-1 siRNA or scrambled siRNA (50 nM). After 48 h, cells were treated with 100 μM ART for 4 h and wholecell extracts were subjected to Western blot analysis. (J) ART causes the inhibition of translocation of STAT5 to the nucleus. After 4 h of
ART treatment, the cells were fixed and permeabilized. STAT5 (green) was immunostained with mouse anti-STAT5 followed by FITCconjugated secondary antibodies and the nuclei (blue) were stained with DAPI. The third panels show the merged images of the first and
second panels. The results shown are representative of two independent experiments.

SOCS-1 siRNA down-regulate the expression of
SOCS-1 and reverses the inhibition of STAT5
activation by ART

showed that ART-induced SOCS-1 expression was
effectively abolished in the cells treated with SOCS-1
siRNA; whereas treatment with scrambled siRNA had
no effect (Figure 1I,  first panel). We also found that
ART failed to suppress STAT5 activation in cells treated
with SOCS-1 siRNA (Figure 1I, third panel). These
siRNA results corroborate with our earlier evidence on

We determined whether the suppression of SOCS1 expression by siRNA would abrogate the inhibitory
effect of ART on STAT5 activation. Western blotting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4023

Oncotarget

the critical role of SOCS-1 in the suppression of STAT5
phosphorylation by ART.

ART induces the expression of both bax and p21
in KBM-5 cells

ART reduces nuclear pool of STAT5 in
tumor cells

The Bcl-2 family proteins have emerged as critical
regulators of the mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by
functioning as either promoters (e.g., bax and bak)
or inhibitors (e.g., bcl-2 and bcl-xL) of the cell death
process [40]. Once activated, bax permeabilizes the
mitochondrial outer membrane, resulting in the release
of cytochrome c and other pro-apoptotic factors that
induce caspase activation and cell death [41]. Besides,
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 is prototypical
member of the Cip/Kip family of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors. It negatively modulates cell cycle progression
by inhibiting the activities of cyclin E/CDK2 and cyclin D/
CDK4 complexes and blocks DNA replication by binding
to proliferating cell nuclear antigen [42]. We found that
ART induced the expression of both bax and p21 at mRNA
and protein levels in CML cells (Figure 3C and 3D).

Because the active dimer of STAT5 is capable of
translocating to the nucleus and inducing transcription
of specific target genes [39], we determined whether
ART suppresses the nuclear translocation of STAT5.
Immunocytochemistry (Figure 1J) clearly demonstrated
that ART reduced the translocation of STAT5 into the
nucleus in KBM-5 cells.

ART causes the accumulation of the cells in the
sub-G1 phase of the cell cycle in a variety of
human tumor cells
We set out to determine the effect of ART on cell
cycle distribution in KBM-5, U266, MM1.S, AsPC-1,
H1299, DU145, and MCF-7 cells. After treatment each
cell lines for 24 h, ART-induced an increased accumulation
of cell population on sub-G1 phase in KBM-5, U266,
MM1.S cell lines, which is indicative of apoptosis
(Figure 2A). Distinctively, ART had no effect on AsPC-1,
H1299, DU145, and MCF-7 cell lines, which may be
indicative of its cell-type specificity (Figure 2B).

ART induces early and late apoptosis
To further demonstrate the anti-tumor effects of
ART, we examined early apoptosis using the Annexin V
antibody. The Annexin V positive cells (regarded as early
apoptotic cells) were increased as compared with the
non-treated cells as observed by flow cytometric analysis
(Figure 3E). When we further examined for late apoptosis
by analyzing DNA strand breaks using the TUNEL
assay, percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis was also
considerably increased upon ART treatment as observed
by flow cytometric analysis (Figure 3F).

ART activates caspase-3 and causes PARP
cleavage in KBM-5, U266, and MM1.S cells
Cells were treated with indicated concentrations
of ART for the 24 h, and then examined for caspase
activation by Western blot analysis using specific
antibodies. We found a dose-dependent activation of
caspase-3 by ART in suspension cell lines (Figure 2C,
first panels). Activation of downstream caspase-3 led
to the cleavage of a 116 kDa PARP protein into 87 kDa
fragments (Figure 2C, Second panels). In adherent cell
lines, on the other hand, ART had no effect on activation
of caspase-3 and cleavage of PARP protein (Figure 2D).
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that ART
induces caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in KBM-5, U266,
and MM1.S cell, but not AsPC-1, H1299, DU145, and
MCF-7 cells.

ART potentiates the apoptotic effects of
chemotherapeutic drugs
Paclitaxel and docetaxel (mitotic inhibitor) and
doxorubicin (an anthracycline antibiotic) are major
anticancer drugs used in the treatment of variety of cancers.
To determine whether ART can also potentiate the apoptotic
effect of these drugs, we treated KBM-5 cells with ART in
combination with doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and docetaxel,
and then examined the cell viability using a MTT assay.
We found that ART indeed enhanced the cytotoxic effects
of doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and docetaxel (Figure 3G).
And then, to further confirm the potentiation effect of
ART on chemotherapeutic drugs-induced apoptosis, we
next determined whether the ART also down-regulates
the expression of survivin, and induces PARP cleavage
in KBM-5 cells by Western blot analysis when used in
combination with these agents. As shown in Figure 3H, we
found that combination treatment substantially enhanced
the suppression of survivin expression and induced
PARP cleavage as compared to the treatment with with
individual drugs, indicating that ART can indeed potentiate
chemotherapeutic drugs-induced apoptosis (Figure 3H).

ART down-regulates expression of various
proteins involved in apoptosis
Because bcl-2, bcl-xL, survivin, and IAP-1/2 have
been implicated in tumor cell survival and mitochondrial
dysfunction, we next examined the effects of ART on the
constitutive expression of these mRNA and proteins. We
found that ART substantially suppressed the expression of
anti-apoptotic molecules both at protein and mRNA level
in CML cells (Figure 3A and 3B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4024

Oncotarget

Figure 2: ART induces apoptosis by PARP cleavage through activation of caspase-3. (A) and (B) After KBM-5, U266,

MM1.S, AsPC-1, H1299, DU145, and MCF-7 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were seeded onto 6-well plates, they were either untreated or treated
with 50 μM of ART for 24 h. Then, the cells were fixed and analyzed using a flow cytometry. (C) and (D) Various tumor cells (1 × 106
cells/well) were treated with indicated concentrations of ART for 24 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot
analysis using antibodies against caspase-3 and PARP. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with β-actin antibody to verify equal
protein loading.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4025

Oncotarget

Figure 3: ART and chemotherapeutic agents induce apoptosis. (A) Inhibition of bcl-2, bcl-xL, and survivin mRNA expressions by

ART in KBM-5 cells. Cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated with indicated concentrations of ART for 24 h. Total RNA was isolated, bcl-2,
bcl-xL, and survivin mRNA expressions were examined by RT-PCR analysis. GAPDH was performed to control for a similar initial cDNA
content of the sample. The results shown are representative of the three independent experiments. (B) KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were
treated with indicated concentrations of ART for 24 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot analysis using
antibodies against bcl-2, bcl-xL, survivin, and IAP-1/2. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with β-actin antibody to verify equal
protein loading. (C) Cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated with indicated concentrations of ART for 24 h. Total RNA was isolated, bax and
p21 mRNA expressions were examined by RT-PCR analysis. GAPDH was performed to control for a similar initial cDNA content of the
sample. The results shown are representative of the three independent experiments. (D) Cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated with indicated
concentrations of ART for 24 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot analysis using antibodies against bax
and p21. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with β-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading. (E) KBM-5 cells were treated
with ART at 50 μM and 100 μM concentrations for 24 h and the cells were incubated with an FITC-conjugated Annexin V antibody and then
analyzed by a flow cytometry. (F) After treatment of ART for 24 h, the cells were fixed and incubated using TUNEL reaction solution and then
analyzed by a flow cytometry. (G) KBM-5 cells (1 × 104 cells/well) were incubated at 37°C with 30 μM doxorubicin, 1.5 nM paclitaxel, and
1.5 nM docetaxel in the presence and absence of 10 μM ART as indicated for 24 h, and the viable cells were assayed using the MTT reagent.
(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4026

Oncotarget

Figure 3: (Continued ) (H) KBM-5 cells (1 × 106 cells/well) were treated 30 μM doxorubicin, 1.5 nM paclitaxel, and 1.5 nM docetaxel in
the presence and absence of 10 μM ART as indicated for 24 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of lysates were analyzed by Western blot analysis
using antibodies against survivin and PARP. The same blots were stripped and reprobed with β-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading.

ART exhibits antitumor effects in a xenograft
CML model

ART activates caspase-3 in CML tumor tissues
To determine whether ART activates caspase-3, we
examined the expression of cleaved caspase-3 in CML
tumors from mice. Our results showed that ART increased
the expression of caspase-3 and caused cleavage of
caspase-3 in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 5B, bottom
panel ).

We examined the therapeutic potential of ART on the
growth of subcutaneously implanted human CML KBM-5
cells in nude mice. The experimental protocol is depicted
in Figure 4A. KBM-5 cells were implanted subcutaneously
in the right flank of nude mice. When tumors have reached
0.25 cm in diameter after a week, the mice were randomized
into 4 groups and started the treatment as per the
experimental protocol. The tumor diameters were measured
at 5-day intervals. The treatment was continued for 4 weeks
and animals were sacrificed after 5 weeks. The tumors were
excised and the tumor diameters were measured. We found
that the tumor volume increased rapidly in the control group
as compared to the other treatment groups (Figure 4B).
Interestingly, we also noted that ART when given at 200
mg/kg body weight considerably inhibited the growth of the
tumor at Day 25 after treatment (P < 0.01 when compared
to control) (Figure 4C and 4D).

ART inhibits phosphorylation of p38, ERK,
CREB, STAT5, and JAK2 in tumor tissues
We also evaluated the effect of ART on
phosphorylation level of p38, ERK, CREB, STAT5, and
JAK2 in CML tumor tissues. Figure 5C and 5D showed
that ART was quite effective in suppressing the expression
of p-p38, p-ERK, p-CREB, p-STAT5, and p-JAK2 in a
concentration-dependent manner. ART had no effect on
the expression of total p38, ERK, CREB, STAT5, and
JAK2 proteins in tumor tissues (Figure 5C and 5D).

ART downregulates the expression of the cell
proliferation marker Ki-67

ART induces the expression of SOCS-1 in tumor
tissues

To determine whether ART decreases myeloid
leukemia tumor growth by inhibiting proliferation, we
examined the expression of Ki-67+ cells in myeloid
leukemia tumors from mice. Ki-67-positive index was
used as a biomarker for cell proliferation. Our results
showed that ART significantly decreased the expression of
Ki-67 in tumor tissues in a dose-dependent manner (Figure
5A). (P < 0.001 vs. vehicle).

To determine whether ART induces the expression
of SOCS-1, we examined the expression of this protein in
myeloid leukemia tumors obtained from mice by Western
blot analysis. Figure 5E shows that ART indeed induced
the expression of SOCS-1 protein in a dose-dependent
manner.

ART down-regulates expression of various
proteins involved in apoptosis in tumor tissues

ART downregulates the expression of VEGF

We next examined using western blot analysis
whether ART can modulate the constitutive expression
of anti-apoptotic proteins in tumor tissues. We found that
ART indeed suppressed the expression of bcl-2, bcl-xL,
survivin, and IAP-1/2 in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 5F).

Because VEGF plays an important role in
angiogenesis, we also examined its expression in CML
tumors. We found that ART effectively suppressed the
expression of VEGF in tumor tissues in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure 5B, upper panel).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4027

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effects of ART in human myeloid leukemia cells growth in nude mice induced by KBM-5. (A) Schematic

representation of experimental protocol described in “Materials and Methods.” KBM-5 cells (4 × 106 cells/mice) were injected subcutaneously
into the right flank of the mice. The animals were randomized after 1 week of tumor cell injection into four groups based on tumor volume.
Group I was given PBS (200 μL, i.p. thrice/week), group II was given ART (50 mg/kg body weight, i.p. thrice/week), group III was given ART
(100 mg/kg body weight, i.p. thrice/week), and group IV was given ART (200 mg/kg body weight, i.p. thrice/week). (B) Necropsy photographs
of mice bearing subcutaneously implanted myeloid leukemia tumors. (C) Tumor volumes in mice measured during the course of experiment
and calculated using the formula V = 4 / 3 πr3, ** indicates p < 0.01. (D) Tumor volumes in mice measured on the last day of the experiment at
autopsy using Vernier calipers and calculated using the formula V = 4 / 3 πr3 (n = 5). Columns, mean; bars, SE. ** indicates p < 0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4028

Oncotarget

Figure 5: ART exerts the effect against tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis in myeloid leukemia. (A) 
Immunohistochemical analysis of proliferation marker Ki-67+ cell indicates the inhibition of human myeloid leukemia cells proliferation by
ART dose-dependent treated groups of animals. Samples from 3 animals in each treatment group were analyzed, and representative data are
shown (A, left panel). Quantification of Ki-67 proliferation index as described in “Materials and Methods.” Values are represented as mean ±
SE of triplicate (A, right panel). Columns, mean of triplicate; bars, SE. (B) Immunohistochemical analysis of VEGF and cleaved caspase-3 in
myeloid leukemia tumors. Samples from 3 animals in each treatment group were analyzed. (C–E) Western blot analysis showed the inhibition
of p-p38, p-ERK, p-CREB, p-STAT5, p-JAK2, and SOCS-1 by ART in whole cell extracts from animal tissue. The same blots were stripped
and reprobed with p38, ERK, CREB, STAT5, JAK2, and β-actin antibody to verify equal protein loading. (F) and (G) Equal amounts of lysates
were analyzed by Western blot analysis using antibodies against bcl-2, bcl-xL, survivin, IAP-1, IAP-2, bax, and p21. β-actin was used as a
loading control. Western blotting samples from three mice in each group were analyzed and representative data are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4029

Oncotarget

ART induces the expression of both bax and p21
in tumor tissues

to be constitutively activated in lymphoid, myeloid,
and erythroid leukemias [27–29], suggesting that ART
may block oncogenesis through suppression of tyrosyl
phosphorylation of STAT5.
How ART inhibits activation of STAT5 was
investigated in detail. Recently, cross talk between the
MAP kinase pathways and the activation of the different
STAT transcription factors has been described. MAPK
kinase (MEK) inhibitor has been shown to suppress
growth hormone-induced transcription mediated by
STAT5, which can also directly interact with ERK1/2 [24,
25]. We observed that ART inhibited the phosphorylation
of p38 and ERK using both human phospho-antibody
array system and Western blot analysis. Our data suggests
that ART could possibly affect the interaction between
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and STAT5
pathways. Additionally, we found for the first time that
ART could suppress phosphorylation of CREB and also
its DNA binding activity. Recent studies have shown
that CREB is involved tumor initiation, progression and
metastasis, thereby supporting its role as a proto-oncogene
[49]. Shankar et al have previously demonstrated that
CREB overexpression is also linked with increased risk of
relapse and decreased event-free survival in acute myeloid
leukemia [32]. Overall, it was found that ART could
suppress phosphorylation of multiple proteins (p38/ERK/
STAT5/CREB) as confirmed through the corroboration
between the phospho array system and Western blot
analysis.
We further found that the expression of several antiapoptotic gene products (e.g. bcl-2, bcl-xl, survivin) was
suppressed by ART. Constitutively active STAT5/CREB
is closely associated with oncogenesis by preventing
cancer cells from apoptosis [27, 29, 49]; this implies
that suppression of the transcriptional factors by ART
could facilitate apoptosis. ART has been shown to induce
apoptosis, activate caspase-3 and increase the Bax/Bcl-2
ratio and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase in both human
hepatoma cells [13] multiple myeloma and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) [50]. The survivin
expression is reported to be increased by STAT5 in T cell
leukemia [51]. Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL can also block cell death
induced by a variety of chemotherapeutic drugs, and thus
contribute to chemoresistance [52]. It has been previously
reported that ART selectively down-regulates survivin that
contributes to a radio-sensitization of glioma cells by an
increased induction of apoptosis [53]. We also observed
that ART substantially potentiated the apoptotic effect of
doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and docetaxel in KBM-5 cells and
hence could also be used in conjunction with existing antiCML therapies.
We further noted that ART significantly suppressed
CML growth in a xenograft mouse model down-regulated
the expression of phospho-p38/ERK/STAT5/CREB and
increased the levels of caspase-3 in treated group as
compared with control. The down-modulation of VEGF

To determine whether ART induces the expression
of bax and p21, we examined the expression of these
proteins in myeloid leukemia tumors from mice by
Western blot analysis. Figure 5G shows that ART induced
the expression of both bax and p21 gene products in tumor
tissues in a dose-dependent manner.

DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to determine whether
ART can exert its anti-cancer effects in CML cells
through targeted abrogation of diverse signal transduction
cascades. This hypothesis was tested by using both a
human phospho-antibody array system and xenograft
mice model. We first found that this agent suppressed the
phosphorylation of p38, ERK, CREB, Chk-2, STAT5,
and RSK in human CML KBM-5 cells, also p53 protein
became phosphorylated at Ser392 and Ser46, but not
Ser15 in response to ART treatment. We further noted
that ART can indeed suppress constitutive STAT5 and
CREB activation, inhibit binding of STAT5 and CREB to
the DNA, and reduce nuclear pool of STAT5 in KBM-5
cell with minimal effect on p38 and ERK activation. ART
further down-regulated the expression of various gene
products, including bcl-2, bcl-xl, survivin, IAP-1/2, while
up-regulated bax and p21 gene expression in CML cells.
Intraperitoneal injection of ART in a xenograft model
of human CML KMB-5 cells resulted in a significant
suppression of tumor progression and suppression of
phosphorylation of p38/ERK/STAT5/CREB in ARTtreated tumor tissues. These experimental results clearly
indicate that ART acts upon multiple signal transduction
cascades in CML.
We found for the first time that ART could suppress
constitutive STAT5 activation in CML and that these
effects were specific to STAT5 activation at Tyr694/699,
as ART had no effect on the expression of total STAT5
protein. We also observed that ART suppressed nuclear
translocation and DNA binding activity of STAT5. There
is an abundant evidence to suggest that STAT5a and
STAT5b are major player for lymphoid, myeloid, and
erythroid cell development and function [43, 44]. Indeed,
STAT5 proteins are activated by diverse cytokines, such
as IL-2, IL-3, IL-5, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and erythropoietin
[45–47]. Following cytokine stimulation, human STAT5a
and STAT5b are phosphorylated on the conserved tyrosine
residues Tyr-694 and Tyr-699, respectively, which allows
for their dissociation from the receptor complex, formation
of hetero or homodimers, and nuclear translocation to
bind specific elements in the promoter of target genes
and activate transcription [48]. Constitutive activation
of STAT5 has been exhibited to be directly involved in
oncogenic transformation [36]. STAT5 has been shown
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4030

Oncotarget

expression in tumor tissues by ART also emphasized
its anti-angiogenic potential in CML, an aspect which
requires further investigations. Overall, our experimental
observations clearly indicate that the anti-cancer effects
of ART in human CML cells are mediated through the
suppression of diverse signal transduction cascades and
provide a strong rationale for pursuing the use of ART to
enhance treatment efficacy in CML patients.

Phospho-Kinase Array Kit (Proteome Profiler™; R&D
Systems, Minneapolis, MN) following manufacturer’s
instructions. Densitometry values for Western blot and
antibody array experiments were estimated by the Image
J software (National Institutes of Health, Maryland, U.S.)
and were expressed as arbitrary units (a.u.). Multiple film
exposures were used to verify the linearity of the samples
analyzed and to avoid saturation of the film. In antibody
arrays, the average signal of the pair of duplicate spots,
representing each phosphorylated kinase protein, was
calculated after subtraction of background values (pixel
density) from negative control spots and normalization to
average values from positive control spots.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Artesunate (ART), 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), propidium iodide (PI),
Tris base, glycine, NaCl, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),
RNase A, DPX mountant for histology, and bovine serum
albumin (BSA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, MO). Iscove Modified Dulbecco Medium (IMDM),
RPMI 1640, and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were obtained
from Lonza Group Ltd. (Basel, Switzerland). 0.4% Trypan
Blue solution, and antibiotic-antimycotic mixture was
obtained from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY).
Anti-phospho-p38, anti-p38, anti-phospho-ERK, antiERK, anti-phospho-CREB, anti-CREB, anti-phosphoJAK2, anti-JAK2, anti-procaspase-3, and anti-cleaved
caspase-3 antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology (Beverly, MA). Anti-phospho-STAT5,
anti-STAT5, anti-SOCS-1, SOCS-1 siRNA, anti-bcl-2,
anti-bcl-xL, anti-survivin, anti-cyclin D1, anti-IAP-1, antiIAP-2, anti-PARP, anti-Ki-67, anti-VEGF, anti-β-actin,
and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary
antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA). TUNEL (terminal transferase mediated
dUTP-fluorescein nick end labeling) assay kit was from
Roche Diagnostics GmbH (Mannheim, Germany). Wholecell lysates of tumor tissues were obtained with T-PER
Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (Pierce, Rockford, USA).

Western blotting
After the cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of ART, the cells were lysed and the total
protein concentrations were determined by Bradford reagent
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Equal amounts of lysates resolved
on sodium dodecyl-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) were transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane, and the membrane was blocked with 1× TBS
containing 0.1% Tween 20 and 5% skimmed milk or 2%
BSA for 1 h at room temperature. After the blocking, the
membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with the
respective primary antibodies. The membranes were washed
twice and incubated with diluted horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:10000) for 1 h
at room temperature. After three washes, the membranes
were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL)
kit (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, USA).

Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
STAT5 and CREB-DNA binding was analyzed
by EMSA using a 32P-labeled high-affinity cis-inducible
element (hSIE) probe. The sequences of STAT5 DNAbinding elements was 5′-AGA TTT CTA GGA ATT
CAA TCC-3′ and CREB DNA-binding elements was
5′-AGA GAT TGC CTG ACG TCA GAG AGC TAG-3′
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). Briefly,
nuclear extracts were prepared and incubated with the
labeled hSIE probe. The DNA-protein complex formed
was separated from free oligonucleotide on 5% native
polyacrylamide gels. The dried gels were visualized with
an Universial hood II (Bio-rad, Hercules, CA).

Cell lines
Human myeloid leukemia KBM-5, human multiple
myeloma cell lines such as U266 and MM1.S (melphalansensitive), human pancreas adenocarcinoma AsPC-1,
human lung carcinoma H1299, human prostate carcinoma
DU145, and human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA). KBM-5 cells were cultured in IMDM
medium supplemented with 15% FBS. All other cells were
cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS. All
media were also supplemented with 100 U/ml of penicillin
and 100 μg/ml of streptomycin.

Transfection with SOCS-1 siRNA
We investigated the ability of commercially available
electroporation systems, the Neon™ Transfection System
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Transfection efficiency was
measured by Western blot analysis. KBM-5 cells were
prepared for transfection, after cells were resuspended
with 120 μl of Neon Resuspension Buffer R for every
one million cells. For each electroporation, KBM-5 cells

Human phospho-kinase array
For antibody arrays three hundred micrograms
of cellular extracts were incubated with the Human
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4031

Oncotarget

with 50 nM of SOCS-1 siRNA (Santa Cruz, CA) were
aliquoted into a sterile microcentrifuge tube. A Neon Tip
was inserted into the Neon Pipette and the cell-siRNA
mixture was aspirated into the tip avoiding air bubbles.
The Neon Pipette was then inserted into the Neon Tube
containing 3 ml of Neon Electrolytic Buffer E in the Neon
Pipette Station. Cells were pulsed once with a voltage of
1,300 and a width of 20 ms. After 48 h of transfection,
cells were treated with 100 μM of ART for 4 h, and wholecell extracts were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, lysed
with lysis solution, and cell lysates were prepared for
Western blot analysis.

metabolize to formazan. Absorbance was measured
with an automated spectrophotometric plate reader at a
wavelength of 570 nm. Cell viability was normalized as
relative percentages in comparison with untreated controls.

RNA analysis and reverse transcription-PCR
KBM-5 cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of ART, washed, and suspended in
Trizol reagent. Total RNA was extracted according
to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Life
Technologies). Total RNA was reverse transcribed
into cDNA using an oligo (dT)15 premix (Intron,
Korea). The relative expression of socs-1, bcl-2,
bcl-xL, survivin, bax, and p21 was analyzed using
quantitative RT-PCR with glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as an internal control. The
following pairs of forward and reverse primer sets were
used: socs-1, 5′-ACGCAGCATTAACTGGGATG-3′
and 5′-CCCTGGTTTGTGCAAAGATACT-3′. bcl-2,
5′-TTGTGGCCTTCTTTGAGTTCGGTG-3′ and 5′-TAC
AGTTCCACAAAGGCATCCCAG-3′. bcl-xL, 5′-TACCA
GCCTGACCAATATGGCGAA-3′ and 5′-TGGGTTC
AAGTGATTCTCCTGCCT-3′. survivin, 5′-ATGGGTGCC
CCGACGTT-3′ and 5′-TCAATCCATGGCAGCCAG-3′.
bax, 5′-GAGAGGTCTTTTTCCGAGTGG-3′ and 5′CCTTGAGCACCAGTTTGCTG-3′. p21, 5′-AGGTCT
TGGATTGAGGAACAG-3′ and 5′-TTTGCAGCAGACA
ACAATGGCT-3′. PCR products were run on 1% agarose
gel and then stained with Loading Star (Dynebio, Korea).
Stained bands were visualized under UV light and
photographed.

Immunocytochemistry for STAT5 localization
After the KBM-5 cells were treated with the 100 μM
of ART, the cells suspension was put into the cytospin and
the assembly was placed into the rotor. Thereafter it was
centrifuged for 5 min at 750 rpm. The cells were attached
the slide and analyze under the microscope whether
monolayer spread of cells obtained. The cells were fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 20 min at room
temperature and then washed three times in PBS. The
cells were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS
for 20 min, washed three times in PBS, and then blocked
with 5% normal goat serum in PBS for 1 h at room
temperature. The cells were then incubated overnight at
4°C with anti-STAT5 (1:100 dilution), washed three times,
and incubated with FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies
(1:200; Jackson Immuno Research, West Grove, PA) for
1 h at room temperature. Next, the cells were stained with
a 1 μg/ml DAPI solution and mounted on glass slides
using CRYSTAL/MOUNT™ (Biomeda Corp., Foster
City, CA). Using an Olympus FluoView FV1000 confocal
microscope (Tokyo, Japan), DAPI and FITC fluorescence
were excited (Ex: 405 nm and 488 nm) and detected (Em:
461 nm and 519 nm) with 2.1% laser transmissivity and
5.0% laser transmissivity respectively.

Annexin V assay
One of the early indicators of apoptosis is the
rapid translocation and accumulation of the membrane
phospholipid phosphatidylserine from the cell’s
cytoplasmic interface to the extracellular surface. This
loss of membrane asymmetry can be detected using the
binding properties of annexin V. To detect apoptosis, we
used annexin V antibody conjugated with the fluorescent
dye fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). KBM-5 (1 × 106
cells/well) cells were treated with ART for 24 h, and then
stained by Annexin V conjugated to FITC. The cells were
washed and observed accordingly with a flow cytometry
(Becton–Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany).

Cell cycle analysis
Cell cycle analysis was performed using PI. After
treatment with ART, the cells were collected, washed
with cold PBS, fixed with 70% ethanol, and incubated for
30 min at 37°C with 0.1% RNaseA in PBS. Cells were
then washed, resuspended, and stained in PBS containing
25 μg/ml of PI for 30 min at room temperature. Cell
distribution across the cell cycle was analyzed with a flow
cytometry (Becton–Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany).

TUNEL assay
After treatment with ART for 24 h, cells were fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 1 h,
washed with PBS and permeabilized in 0.1% sodium
citrate, containing 0.1% Triton X-100, at 4°C for 20 min.
Cells were then resuspended in a final volume of 25 μl of
TUNEL reaction mixture (2.5 μl TUNEL-Enzyme in 22.5
μl TUNEL Label, Roche), with the addition of 20 mM

MTT assay
Cell viability was measured by an MTT assay to
detect NADH-dependent dehydrogenase activity. Fifty
microliters of MTT solution (5 mg/ml) in 1× phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) was directly added to the cells,
which were then incubated for 4 h to allow MTT to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4032

Oncotarget

EDTA and then counterstained with 5 μg/ml propidium
iodide in PBS containing 0.5 μg/ml DNase-free RNaseA,
for 1 h at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere in the dark.
After being washed with PBS, cells were analyzed
by a flow cytometer (Becton–Dickinson, Heidelberg,
Germany). Acquisition and analysis of the data was
performed using Cell Quest 3.0 software.

ice for 30 minutes in 0.5 ml of ice-cold T-PER Tissue Protein
Extraction Reagent (Pierce, Rockford, USA). The minced
tissue was centrifuged at 16,000 × g at 4°C for 20 minutes.
The proteins were then fractionated by SDS-PAGE,
electrotransferred to nitrocellulose membranes, blotted with
each antibody, and detected by enhanced chemiluminescence
(ECL) kit (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, USA).

Animals

Immunohistochemical analysis of myeloid
leukemia tumor samples

All procedures involving animals were reviewed
and approved by KHU Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee [KHUASP(SE)-12–038]. Six week-old athymic
nu/nu female mice (NARA Biotech, Korea) were implanted
subcutaneously in the right flank with KBM-5 cells.
The animals were housed (6 mice/cage) in the standard
mice plexi glass cages in a room maintained at constant
temperature and humidity under 12 h light and dark cycle
and fed with regular autoclaved mouse chow with water
ad libitum. None of the mice exhibited any lesions and all
were tested pathogen-free. Before initiating the experiment,
we acclimatized all mice to a pulverized diet for 3 days.

Solid tumors from control and various treatment
groups were fixed with 10% phosphate buffered formalin,
processed and embedded in paraffin. Sections were cut
and deparaffinized in xylene, and dehydrated in graded
alcohol and finally hydrated in water. Antigen retrieval
was performed by boiling the slide in 10 mM sodium
citrate (pH 6.0) for 30 min. Immunohistochemistry was
performed following manufacturer instructions (Vector
Laboratories ImmPRESSTM REAGENT KIT). Briefly,
endogenous peroxidases were quenched with 3% hydrogen
peroxide. Non-specific binding was blocked by incubation
in the blocking reagent in the ImmPRESSTM REAGENT
KIT (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Sections were incubated
overnight with primary antibodies as follows: anti-Ki-67,
anti-cleaved caspase-3, and anti-VEGF (each at 1:100
dilutions). Slides were subsequently washed several
times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and were
incubated with ImmPRESSTM reagent according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Immunoreactive species were
detected using 3, 3-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride
(DAB) as a substrate. Sections were counterstained with
Gill’s hematoxylin and mounted under glass coverslips.
Images were taken using an Olympus BX51 microscope
(magnification, 20×). Positive cells (brown) were
quantitated using the Image-Pro plus 6.0 software package
(Media Cybernetics, Inc.).

Subcutaneous implantation of KBM-5 cells
KBM-5 cells were harvested from subconfluent
cultures, washed once in serum-free medium, and
resuspended in PBS. Only suspensions consisting of single
cells, with > 90% viability, were used for the injections.
KBM-5 cells [4 × 106/100 μL PBS:Matrigel (1:1)] were
injected subcutaneously into the left flank of the mice. To
prevent leakage, a cotton swab was held cautiously for
1 minute over the site of injection.

Experimental protocol
When tumors have reached 0.25 cm in diameter,
the mice were randomized into the following treatment
groups (n = 6/group). Group I was given PBS (200 μL,
i.p. thrice/week), group II was given ART (50 mg/kg
body weight, i.p. thrice/week), group III was given ART
(100 mg/kg body weight, i.p. thrice/week), and group
IV was given ART (200 mg/kg body weight, i.p. thrice/
week). Therapy was continued for 4 weeks, and the
animals were euthanized 1 week later. Primary tumors
were excised and the final tumor volume was measured
as V = 4 / 3 πr3, where r is the mean radius of the three
dimensions (length, width, and depth). Half of the tumor
tissue was fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin for
immunohistochemistry and routine hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) staining. The other half was snap frozen in liquid
nitrogen and stored at –80°C.

Statistical analysis
All numeric values are represented as the mean ±
SD. Statistical significance of the data compared with
the untreated control was determined using the Student
unpaired t-test. Significance was set at P < 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the
Korean Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
(MoEST) (No. 2011–0006220).

Western blot analysis for tumor tissues

Conflict of interest

Myeloid leukemia tumor tissues (75–100 mg) from
control and experimental mice were minced and incubated on

The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclosure.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4033

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

15.	 Hamacher-Brady A, Stein HA, Turschner S, Toegel I,
Mora R, Jennewein N, Efferth T, Eils R, Brady NR.
Artesunate activates mitochondrial apoptosis in
breast cancer cells via iron-catalyzed lysosomal reactive oxygen species production. J Biol Chem. 2011;
286:6587–6601.

1.	 Gullett NP, Ruhul Amin AR, Bayraktar S, Pezzuto JM,
Shin DM, Khuri FR, Aggarwal BB, Surh YJ, Kucuk O.
Cancer prevention with natural compounds. Semin Oncol.
2010; 37:258–281.

16.	 Thanaketpaisarn O, Waiwut P, Sakurai H, Saiki I.
Artesunate enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
human cervical carcinoma cells through inhibition of the
NF-kappaB and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways. Int J Oncol.
2011; 39:279–285.

2.	 Ichikawa H, Nakamura Y, Kashiwada Y, Aggarwal BB.
Anticancer drugs designed by mother nature: ancient drugs
but modern targets. Curr Pharm Des. 2007; 13:3400–3416.
3.	 Faivre S, Djelloul S, Raymond E. New paradigms in anticancer therapy: targeting multiple signaling pathways with
kinase inhibitors. Semin Oncol. 2006; 33:407–420.

17.	 Zhou X, Sun WJ, Wang WM, Chen K, Zheng JH, Lu MD,
Li PH, Zheng ZQ. Artesunate inhibits the growth of gastric cancer cells through the mechanism of promoting
oncosis both in vitro and in vivo. Anticancer Drugs. 2013;
24:920–927.

4.	 Klayman DL. Qinghaosu (artemisinin): an antimalarial drug
from China. Science. 1985; 228:1049–1055.
5.	 Dell’Eva R, Pfeffer U, Vene R, Anfosso L, Forlani A,
Albini A, Efferth T. Inhibition of angiogenesis in vivo
and growth of Kaposi’s sarcoma xenograft tumors by
the anti-malarial artesunate. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004;
68:2359–2366.

18.	 Li S, Xue F, Cheng Z, Yang X, Wang S, Geng F, Pan L.
Effect of artesunate on inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis of SP2/0 myeloma cells through affecting
NFkappaB p65. Int J Hematol. 2009; 90:513–521.

6.	 Li LN, Zhang HD, Yuan SJ, Tian ZY, Wang L, Sun ZX.
Artesunate attenuates the growth of human colorectal carcinoma and inhibits hyperactive Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.
Int J Cancer. 2007; 121:1360–1365.

19.	 Zhou C, Pan W, Wang XP, Chen TS. Artesunate induces
apoptosis via a Bak-mediated caspase-independent intrinsic pathway in human lung adenocarcinoma cells. J Cell
Physiol. 2012; 227:3778–3786.

7.	 Du JH, Zhang HD, Ma ZJ, Ji KM. Artesunate induces oncosislike cell death in vitro and has antitumor activity against
pancreatic cancer xenografts in vivo. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol. 2010; 65:895–902.

20.	 Reddy KB, Nabha SM, Atanaskova N. Role of MAP kinase
in tumor progression and invasion. Cancer Metastasis Rev.
2003; 22:395–403.
21.	 Xia Z, Dickens M, Raingeaud J, Davis RJ, Greenberg ME.
Opposing effects of ERK and JNK-p38 MAP kinases on
apoptosis. Science. 1995; 270:1326–1331.

8.	 Jiang W, Huang Y, Wang JP, Yu XY, Zhang LY. The
synergistic anticancer effect of artesunate combined with
allicin in osteosarcoma cell line in vitro and in vivo. Asian
Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013; 14:4615–4619.

22.	 Warsch W, Walz C, Sexl V. JAK of all trades: JAK2STAT5 as novel therapeutic targets in BCR-ABL1+ chronic
myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2013; 122:2167–2175.

9.	 Efferth T, Rucker G, Falkenberg M, Manns D, Olbrich A,
Fabry U, Osieka R. Detection of apoptosis in KG-1a
leukemic cells treated with investigational drugs.
Arzneimittelforschung. 1996; 46:196–200.

23.	 Ihle JN. The Stat family in cytokine signaling. Curr Opin
Cell Biol. 2001; 13:211–217.
24.	 Pircher TJ, Flores-Morales A, Mui AL, Saltiel AR,
Norstedt G, Gustafsson JA, Haldosen LA. Mitogenactivated protein kinase kinase inhibition decreases growth
hormone stimulated transcription mediated by STAT5. Mol
Cell Endocrinol. 1997; 133:169–176.

10.	 Reungpatthanaphong P, Mankhetkorn S. Modulation of
multidrug resistance by artemisinin, artesunate and dihydroartemisinin in K562/adr and GLC4/adr resistant cell lines.
Biol Pharm Bull. 2002; 25:1555–1561.
11.	 Efferth T, Giaisi M, Merling A, Krammer PH, Li-Weber M.
Artesunate induces ROS-mediated apoptosis in doxorubicin-resistant T leukemia cells. PLoS One. 2007; 2:e693.

25.	 Pircher TJ, Petersen H, Gustafsson JA, Haldosen LA.
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) interacts with
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5a.
Mol Endocrinol. 1999; 13:555–565.

12.	 Wang Q, Wu LM, Li AY, Zhao Y, Wang NP. Experimental
studies of antitumor effect of artesunate on liver cancer.
Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2001; 26:707–708, 720.

26.	 Hennighausen L, Robinson GW. Interpretation of cytokine
signaling through the transcription factors STAT5A and
STAT5B. Genes Dev. 2008; 22:711–721.

13.	 Hou J, Wang D, Zhang R, Wang H. Experimental therapy
of hepatoma with artemisinin and its derivatives: in vitro
and in vivo activity, chemosensitization, and mechanisms of
action. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:5519–5530.

27.	 Chai SK, Nichols GL, Rothman P. Constitutive activation
of JAKs and STATs in BCR-Abl-expressing cell lines and
peripheral blood cells derived from leukemic patients.
J Immunol. 1997; 159:4720–4728.

14.	 Nam W, Tak J, Ryu JK, Jung M, Yook JI, Kim HJ, Cha IH.
Effects of artemisinin and its derivatives on growth inhibition and apoptosis of oral cancer cells. Head Neck. 2007;
29:335–340.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28.	 Ilaria RL Jr, Van Etten RA. P210 and P190(BCR/ABL)
induce the tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA binding

4034

Oncotarget

activity of multiple specific STAT family members. J Biol
Chem. 1996; 271:31704–31710.

42.	 Luo Y, Hurwitz J, Massague J. Cell-cycle inhibition by
independent CDK and PCNA binding domains in p21Cip1.
Nature. 1995; 375:159–161.

29.	 Shuai K, Halpern J, ten Hoeve J, Rao X, Sawyers CL.
Constitutive activation of STAT5 by the BCR-ABL oncogene in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Oncogene. 1996;
13:247–254.

43.	 Teglund S, McKay C, Schuetz E, van Deursen JM,
Stravopodis D, Wang D, Brown M, Bodner S, Grosveld G,
Ihle JN. Stat5a and Stat5b proteins have essential and nonessential, or redundant, roles in cytokine responses. Cell.
1998; 93:841–850.

30.	 Moriggl R, Sexl V, Kenner L, Duntsch C, Stangl K,
Gingras S, Hoffmeyer A, Bauer A, Piekorz R, Wang D,
Bunting KD, Wagner EF, Sonneck K, Valent P, Ihle JN,
Beug H. Stat5 tetramer formation is associated with leukemogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:87–99.

44.	 Cui Y, Riedlinger G, Miyoshi K, Tang W, Li C, Deng CX,
Robinson GW, Hennighausen L. Inactivation of Stat5 in
mouse mammary epithelium during pregnancy reveals distinct functions in cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 24:8037–8047.

31.	 Sakamoto KM, Frank DA. CREB in the pathophysiology
of cancer: implications for targeting transcription factors
for cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2583–2587.

45.	 Kirken RA, Rui H, Malabarba MG, Howard OM,
Kawamura M, O’Shea JJ, Farrar WL. Activation of JAK3,
but not JAK1, is critical for IL-2-induced proliferation and
STAT5 recruitment by a COOH-terminal region of the IL-2
receptor beta-chain. Cytokine. 1995; 7:689–700.

32.	 Shankar DB, Cheng JC, Kinjo K, Federman N, Moore TB,
Gill A, Rao NP, Landaw EM, Sakamoto KM. The role of
CREB as a proto-oncogene in hematopoiesis and in acute
myeloid leukemia. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:351–362.

46.	 Snow JW, Abraham N, Ma MC, Abbey NW, Herndier B,
Goldsmith MA. STAT5 promotes multilineage hematolymphoid development in vivo through effects on early hematopoietic progenitor cells. Blood. 2002; 99:95–101.

33.	 Wu D, Zhau HE, Huang WC, Iqbal S, Habib FK, Sartor O,
Cvitanovic L, Marshall FF, Xu Z, Chung LW. cAMPresponsive element-binding protein regulates vascular endothelial growth factor expression: implication in
human prostate cancer bone metastasis. Oncogene. 2007;
26:5070–5077.

47.	 Smithgall TE, Briggs SD, Schreiner S, Lerner EC, Cheng H,
Wilson MB. Control of myeloid differentiation and survival
by Stats. Oncogene. 2000; 19:2612–2618.

34.	 Tan Y, Rouse J, Zhang A, Cariati S, Cohen P, Comb MJ.
FGF and stress regulate CREB and ATF-1 via a pathway involving p38 MAP kinase and MAPKAP kinase-2.
EMBO J. 1996; 15:4629–4642.

48.	 Leonard WJ. Role of Jak kinases and STATs in cytokine
signal transduction. Int J Hematol. 2001; 73:271–277.
49.	 Xiao X, Li BX, Mitton B, Ikeda A, Sakamoto KM.
Targeting CREB for cancer therapy: friend or foe. Curr
Cancer Drug Targets. 2010; 10:384–391.

35.	 Aggarwal BB, Sethi G, Ahn KS, Sandur SK, Pandey MK,
Kunnumakkara AB, Sung B, Ichikawa H. Targeting signaltransducer-and-activator-of-transcription-3 for prevention
and therapy of cancer: modern target but ancient solution.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006; 1091:151–169.

50.	 Holien T, Olsen OE, Misund K, Hella H, Waage A, Ro TB,
Sundan A. Lymphoma and myeloma cells are highly sensitive to growth arrest and apoptosis induced by artesunate.
Eur J Haematol. 2013; 91:339–346.

36.	 Bunting KD. STAT5 signaling in normal and pathologic
hematopoiesis. Front Biosci. 2007; 12:2807–2820.

51.	 Tomita M, Kawakami H, Uchihara JN, Okudaira T,
Masuda M, Matsuda T, Tanaka Y, Ohshiro K, Mori N.
Inhibition of constitutively active Jak-Stat pathway suppresses cell growth of human T-cell leukemia virus type
1-infected T-cell lines and primary adult T-cell leukemia
cells. Retrovirology. 2006; 3:22.

37.	 Ihle JN. STATs: signal transducers and activators of transcription. Cell. 1996; 84:331–334.
38.	 Mallette FA, Calabrese V, Ilangumaran S, Ferbeyre G.
SOCS1, a novel interaction partner of p53 controlling
oncogene-induced senescence. Aging (Albany NY). 2010;
2:445–452.

52.	 Kitada S, Andersen J, Akar S, Zapata JM, Takayama S,
Krajewski S, Wang HG, Zhang X, Bullrich F, Croce CM,
Rai K, Hines J, Reed JC. Expression of apoptosis-regulating
proteins in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: correlations
with In vitro and In vivo chemoresponses. Blood. 1998;
91:3379–3389.

39.	 Desrivieres S, Kunz C, Barash I, Vafaizadeh V,
Borghouts C, Groner B. The biological functions of the
versatile transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5 and new
strategies for their targeted inhibition. J Mammary Gland
Biol Neoplasia. 2006; 11:75–87.

53.	 Reichert S, Reinboldt V, Hehlgans S, Efferth T, Rodel C,
Rodel F. A radiosensitizing effect of artesunate in glioblastoma cells is associated with a diminished expression of the
inhibitor of apoptosis protein survivin. Radiother Oncol.
2012; 103:394–401.

40.	 Adams JM, Cory S. The Bcl-2 protein family: arbiters of
cell survival. Science. 1998; 281:1322–1326.
41.	 Martinou JC, Green DR. Breaking the mitochondrial barrier. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 2:63–67.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4035

Oncotarget

