HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2010 October 28; 467(7319): 1114–1117. doi:10.1038/nature09515.

Distant Metastasis Occurs Late during the Genetic Evolution of
Pancreatic Cancer
Shinichi Yachida1,†, Siân Jones4,†, Ivana Bozic5, Tibor Antal5,6, Rebecca Leary4, Baojin
Fu1, Mihoko Kamiyama1, Ralph H. Hruban1,2, James R. Eshleman1, Martin A. Nowak5,
Victor E. Velculescu4, Kenneth W. Kinzler4, Bert Vogelstein4, and Christine A. IacobuzioDonahue1,2,3,*

Author Manuscript

1Department

of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore Maryland 21231 USA

2Department

of Oncology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions, Baltimore Maryland 21231 USA

3Department

of Surgery, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions, Baltimore Maryland 21231 USA

4The

Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics and The Howard Hughes Medical
Institute at The Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231 USA

5Program

for Evolutionary Dynamics, Department of Mathematics, Department of Organismic and
Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 USA

Author Manuscript

6School

of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9-3JZ, UK

Summary

Author Manuscript

Metastasis, the dissemination and growth of neoplastic cells in an organ distinct from that in
which they originated 12, is the most common cause of death in cancer patients. This is
particularly true for pancreatic cancers, where most patients are diagnosed with metastatic disease
and few show a sustained response to chemo- or radiation therapy 3. Whether the dismal prognosis
of patients with pancreatic cancer compared to patients with other types of cancer is a result of late
diagnosis or early dissemination of disease to distant organs is not known. Here we rely on data
generated by sequencing the genomes of seven pancreatic cancer metastases to evaluate the clonal
relationships among primary and metastatic cancers. We find that clonal populations that give rise
to distant metastases are represented within the primary carcinoma, but these clones are
genetically evolved from the original parental, non-metastatic clone. Thus, genetic heterogeneity

Users may view, print, copy, download and text and data- mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to ciacobu@jhmi.edu..
†Joint first authors
Author Contributions Sample collection and processing was performed by CID, SY, YZ, BF, and MK. Microdissection, DNA
extractions and whole genome amplification reactions were performed by SY. Sequencing was performed by SJ. Copy number
analyses were performed by RL. Computational models and estimates of clonal evolution were performed by IB, TA and MAN. CID,
SY, SJ, RHH, JRE, VEV, KWK and BV directed the research. CID, BV, and SY wrote the manuscript, which all authors have
approved.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.

Yachida et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

of metastases reflects that within the primary carcinoma. A quantitative analysis of the timing of
the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer was performed, indicating at least a decade between the
occurrence of the initiating mutation and the birth of the parental, non-metastatic founder cell. At
least five more years are required for the acquisition of metastatic ability and patients die an
average of two years thereafter. These data provide novel insights into the genetic features
underlying pancreatic cancer progression and define a broad time window of opportunity for early
detection to prevent deaths from metastatic disease.
We performed rapid autopsies of seven individuals with end stage pancreatic cancer
(Supplementary Table 1). In all patients, metastatic deposits were present within two or
more anatomic sites in each patient, most often the liver, lung and peritoneum, as is typical
for this form of neoplasia 4.

Author Manuscript

Low passage cell lines (six patients) or first passage xenografts (one patient) were created
from one of the metastases present at each patient’s autopsy. These samples comprised
seven of the 24 pancreatic cancers which previously underwent whole exome sequencing
and copy number analysis, as described in a mutational survey of the pancreatic cancer
genome 5. In this previous study, a total of 426 somatic mutations in 388 different genes
were identified among 220,884,033 bp sequenced in the seven index metastatic lesions,
corresponding to an average of 61 mutations per index metastatic lesion (range 41-77). In all
samples, the vast majority of mutations were represented by missense or silent single base
substitutions (Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 2).

Author Manuscript

For each of the somatic mutations identified in the seven index metastasis lesions, we
determined whether the same somatic mutation was present in anatomically distinct
metastases harvested at autopsy from the same patients. We also determined whether these
mutations were present in the primary pancreatic tumors from which the metastases arose. A
small number of these samples of interest were cell lines or xenografts, similar to the index
lesions, whereas the majority were fresh-frozen tissues that contained admixed neoplastic,
stromal, inflammatory, endothelial and normal epithelial cells (Fig. 1a). Each tissue sample
was therefore microdissected to minimize contaminating non-neoplastic elements before
purifying DNA.

Author Manuscript

Two categories of mutations were identified (Fig. 1b). The first and largest category
corresponded to those mutations present in all samples from a given patient (“founder”
mutations, mean of 64%, range 48-83% of all mutations per patient; Fig. 1b, example in
Supplementary Fig. 2a). These data indicate that the majority of somatically acquired
mutations present in pancreatic cancers occur before the development of metastatic lesions.
All other mutations were characterized as “progressor” mutations (mean of 36%, range 17 52% of all mutations per patient; Fig. 1b, example in Supplementary Fig. 2b). These
mutations were present in one or more of the metastases examined, including the index
metastasis, but not the parental clone.
These mutation types were used to classify the lesions that contained them into parental
clones (containing only founder mutations) and subclones (containing both founder and
progressor mutations). By definition, there could be only one parental clone in a patient,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

though there could be many different subclones. Parental clones tended to contain more
deleterious mutations (nonsense, splice site or frameshift mutations) than subclones (12.6%
of the mutations in the parental clones versus 8.1% of the mutations in subclones,
Supplementary Table 2). The parental clones had already accumulated mutations in all
driver genes (KRAS, TP53 and SMAD4) previously shown to drive pancreatic
tumorigenesis 6. Through combined analysis of high density SNP chip data on the index
lesion (Supplementary Table 3) plus the sequencing data on all lesions (Supplementary
Table 2) we found that the vast majority of homozygous mutations (51 mutations,
representing 89% of all homozygous mutations) in the index lesion were already present in
the parental clones. Homozygous mutations are characteristic of tumor suppressor genes
such as SMAD4 and CDKN2A and often occur in association with chromosomal instability 7.
In sum, the parental clones harbored the majority of deleterious genetic alterations and
chromosomal instability, upon which were superimposed an accumulation of progressor
mutations associated with clonal evolution and metastasis.

Author Manuscript

Evolutionary maps were constructed for each patient’s carcinoma based on the patterns of
somatic mutation and allelic losses and the locations of individual metastatic deposits (Fig.
2, Supplementary Figs. 3 to 8). These maps revealed that, despite the presence of numerous
founder mutations within the parental clones, the cells giving rise to the metastatic lesions
had a large number of progressor mutations. For example, in Pa01 the parental clone
contained 49 founder mutations, yet a clonal expansion marked by the presence of mutations
in six additional genes was present in the lung and peritoneal metastases (Supplementary
Fig. 3). Moreover, 22 more mutations were found in the liver metastasis. Note that all
mutations in the metastatic lesions were clonal, i.e., present in the great majority if not all
neoplastic cells of the metastasis, as assessed by Sanger sequencing. Thus, these mutations
were present in the cell that clonally expanded to become the metastasis. Similarly, large
numbers of progressor mutations were generally observed in the metastases from each of the
seven cases examined (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Figs. 3 to 8).

Author Manuscript

To distinguish between the possibilities that clonal evolution occurred inside the primary
cancer versus within secondary sites, we sectioned the primary tumors from two patients
into numerous, three-dimensionally organized pieces (Fig. 2a,b) and examined the DNA
from each piece for each of the founder and progressor mutations. In Patient Pa08, there
were three progressor mutations present in two independent peritoneal metastases (defining
one subclone) and 23, 25, or 27 additional progressor mutations present in liver and lung
metastases (defining three additional subclones; Fig. 2c). Through the analysis of distinct
regions of the primary tumor, it was clear that subclones giving rise to each of these
metastases were present in the primary tumor. Moreover, these subclones were not small;
from the size of the pieces (Fig. 2a) and the amounts of DNA recovered, each subclone must
have contained in excess of 100 million cells. In addition, more than four different
subclones, each containing a similarly large numbers of cells, could be identified through the
analysis of other pieces of the same tumor. These subclones could be put into an ordered
hierarchy establishing an evolutionary path for tumor progression (Fig. 2c). Analysis of
multiple primary tumor pieces and metastatic lesions from patient Pa04 revealed a similar

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

clonal evolution, with distinct, large subclones within the primary tumors giving rise to the
various metastases (Supplementary Fig. 8).
To further clarify clonal evolution within the primary site, we attempted to correlate the
mutation signatures representing the subclones of Pa08 (Fig. 2c) with the geographic
location of the pieces of the primary tumor used to define them (Fig. 2a, 2b). Samples
representative of the parental clone were located throughout the primary carcinoma. By
contrast, samples representing subclones were nonrandomly located in proximity to each
other, within which the subclones specifically giving rise to peritoneal versus distant
metastases were seen. Thus, we conclude that the genetic heterogeneity of metastases
reflects heterogeneity already existing within the primary carcinoma, and that the primary
carcinoma is a mixture of numerous subclones, each of which has independently expanded
to constitute a large number of cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

This dataset could also be used to infer the timing of the development of the various stages
of pancreatic tumor progression 8. We assume that the tumor is initiated by a genetic event
that confers a selective growth advantage to the cell that goes on to become the founder cell
of the tumor. To estimate the timing, we first used Ki67 labeling to determine the
proliferation rate of seven samples of normal duct epithelium from surgically resected
pancreata of individuals without pancreatic cancer as well as of each index metastasis. Ki67positive nuclei constituted an average of 0.4% of normal ductal cells, while an average of
16.3% of cancer cells within the index metastasis lesions were Ki67-positive, consistent
with prior estimates 9-10 (Supplementary Table 4). Based on these data plus that from
sequencing of the index lesions, we derived estimates for three critical times in tumor
evolution: T1 - the time between tumor initiation and the birth of the cell giving rise to the
parental clone; T2 - the subsequent time required for the birth of the cell that gave rise to the
index metastasis; and T3 – the time between the dissemination of this cell and the patients’
death (Fig. 3). In other words, there is a time point, t0, when the tumor was initiated, and a
time point t1 when a cell is born that has all mutations that exist in the parental clone.
Similarly, there is a time point in tumor evolution, t2, when a cell is born that has all the
mutations that exist in the index metastasis. T1 is given by t1- t0 and T2 is given by t2- t1. If
we denote t3 as the time of patient’s death, then T3 = t3- t2.
Using the mathematical model described in the Methods, we were able to conservatively
estimate an average of 11.7 years from the initiation of tumorigenesis until the birth of the
cell giving rise to the parental clone, an average of 6.8 years from then until the birth of the
cell giving rise to the index lesion, and an average of 2.7 years from then until the patients’
death (see Supplemental Discussion and Supplementary Table 5).

Author Manuscript

We show, for the first time, that primary pancreatic cancers contain a mix of geographically
distinct subclones, each containing large numbers (hundreds of millions) of cells that are
present within the primary tumor years before the metastases become clinically evident. The
features of these metastatic subclones that promote metastasis formation have yet to be
discerned, as no consistent genetic signature of metastatic subclones could be identified. We
did identify several genes that were mutated in one or more of the index metastatic lesions
from these seven patients with Stage IV disease, but not in the primary pancreatic index

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

lesions from 17 patients with Stage II disease (Supplementary Table 2). These genes include
those that may play a role in invasive or metastatic ability through heterotypic cell adhesion
(CNTN5), motility (DOCK2), proteolysis (MEP1A) and tyrosine phosphorylation (LMTK2).
However, these mutations were not metastasis-specific per se as all but one were present in
the matched primary carcinoma of those same seven patients, and there is no evidence that
the mutations we observed endowed these genes with metastagenic activity. These data also
do not reveal the selective pressures within the primary carcinoma that led to the formation
of progressor mutations. In light of recent findings indicating that pancreatic cancers are
poorly vascularized 11, one possibility is that intratumoral hypoxia creates a fertile
microenvironment for the formation of additional mutations beyond that of the parental
clone.

Author Manuscript

One of the major implications of these data is their implication for screening to prevent
pancreatic cancer deaths. Quantitative analysis indicated a large window of opportunity for
diagnosis while the disease was still in the curative stage –at least a decade. Our model also
predicts an average of 6.8 years between the birth of the cell giving rise to the parental clone
and the seeding of the index metastasis. Unfortunately, the great majority of patients are not
diagnosed until the last 2 years of the entire tumorigenic process. The challenge is to detect
these tumors during time T1, or even after T1 but before seeding of metastases. Advanced
imaging methods, as well as blood tests to detect cancer-specific proteins, transcripts, or
genes 12, offer hope for such non-invasive early detection.

Methods Summary

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Rapid autopsies were performed on seven individuals with Stage IV pancreatic cancer 13.
Genomic DNA was extracted from cell lines or xenografts established from one metastasis
of each patient and used for exomic sequencing as previously described 5. The Illumina
Infinium II Whole Genome Genotyping Assay employing the BeadChip platform was also
used to analyze each sample at 1,072,820 (1M) SNP loci as previously described 5. Samples
of snap frozen pancreatic cancer tissue were microdissected using a PALM MicroLaser
System (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Oberkochen, Germany) and DNA extracted using
QIAmp DNA Micro Kits (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Genomic DNA was quantified by
calculating long interspersed nuclear elements (LINE) by real-time PCR. Whole genome
amplification (WGA) was performed using 10 ng total template DNA and an illustra
GenomiPhi V2 DNA Amplification Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Ki67
immunolabeling (Clone MIB-1, Dako Cytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) was performed on
formalin fixed, paraffin embedded sections of normal pancreatic ducts and metastatic
pancreatic cancer tissues for each patient using the Ventana Discovery staining system
(Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ, USA), and this information used to inform
computational models of the timing of clonal evolution of each patient’s pancreatic cancer
(full details of these models are available in Online Methods).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

Methods
Patients and Tissue Samples

Author Manuscript

Tissue samples from 7 patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma were collected in
association with the Gastrointestinal Cancer Rapid Medical Donation Program (GICRMDP).
This program was approved by the Johns Hopkins institutional review board and deemed in
accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. Details of the
program have been described in detail previously 13. The tissue harvesting protocol consists
of the following; after opening of the body cavity using standard techniques, the whole
pancreas including the pancreatic cancer and each grossly identified metastasis were
sampled using a sterile blade and forceps. The whole pancreas was sliced into 1 × 1 × 0.4
cm sections for overnight fixation in 10% buffered-formalin, for freezing in Tissue-Tek
OCT compound (Sakura Finetechnical, Tokyo, Japan) in liquid nitrogen and for snapfreezing in liquid nitrogen in 1.7 mL cryovials and storage at −80°C. Xenograft enriched or
low passage cell lines were generated from the post mortem cancer tissues of these seven
patients as previously described 13,14.
Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM)

Author Manuscript

Frozen tissue sections of autopsy tissues were cut into 7 μm sections using a cryostat and
embedded onto UV-treated PALM membrane slides (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging,
Oberkochen, Germany) and the slides were stored immediately at −80 °C until subsequent
fixation. Tissue sections that underwent LCM were defrosted, fixed in 100% methanol for 3
minutes, stained with toluidine blue before microdissection to remove contaminating stromal
elements. Sections were dissected using a PALM MicroLaser System (Carl Zeiss
MicroImaging). Dissected tissues were catapulted into adhesive caps. Generally, >20,000
cells were obtained from 5-10 serial sections by LCM in order to have obtain sufficient
quantity and quality of genomic DNA for subsequent amplification and sequencing.
Genomic DNA Extraction and Whole Genome Amplification

Author Manuscript

Genomic DNA from microdissected tissues was extracted using QIAmp DNA Micro Kit
(Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Genomic DNA was
quantified by calculating long interspersed nuclear elements (LINE) by real-time PCR. The
LINE primer set 5′-AAAGCCGCTCAACTACATGG-3′ (forward) and 5′TGCTTTGAATGCGTCCCAGAG-3′ (reverse) was designed. The real-time PCR condition
was 95°C for 10 minutes; 40 cycles of 94°C for 10 seconds, 58°C for 15 seconds and 70°C
for 30 seconds. PCR was carried out using Platinum SYBR Green qPCR SuperMix-UDG
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). To minimize sequencing bias from using low starting
templates, only samples for which the measured concentration by LINE assay was ≥3.3
ng/ul (1000 genome equivalents) were used as a starting template for whole genome
amplification (WGA). WGA was performed using 10 ng total template DNA and an illustra
GenomiPhi V2 DNA Amplification Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA), following
the manufacturer’s protocol. WGA products were purified using a Microspin G-50 system
(GE Healthcare). The purified WGA products were quantified by NanoDrop
spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and diluted to 20 ng/μL
for sequencing analysis. Using these methods and quality controls, there was complete
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

concordance in the mutational signatures obtained of cultured cell lines/xenografts versus
WGA materials prepared from their matched frozen tissues.
Sanger Sequencing
PCR amplification and sequencing was performed using the conditions and primers
described by Jones et al. 5. A small number of sequencing reactions failed (<2% of the total
reactions) and these corresponding genes were not included in progression models or
quantitative time estimates of clonal evolution.
Genotyping

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The Illumina Infinium II Whole Genome Genotyping Assay employing the BeadChip
platform was used to analyze tumor samples at 1,072,820 (1M) SNP loci as previously
described 5. Briefly, all SNP positions were based on the hg18 (NCBI Build 36, March
2006) version of the human genome reference sequence. The genotyping assay begins with
hybridization to a 50 nucleotide oligonucleotide, followed by a two-color fluorescent single
base extension. Fluorescence intensity image files were processed using Illumina
BeadStation software to provide normalized intensity values and allelic frequency for each
SNP position. For each SNP, the normalized experimental intensity value (R) was compared
to the intensity values for that SNP from a training set of normal samples and represented as
a ratio (called the “Log R Ratio”) of log2 (Rexperimental/Rtraining set). For each SNP, the
normalized allele intensity ratio (theta) was used to estimate a quantitative allelic frequency
value (called the “B Allele Frequency”) for that SNP 15. Using Illumina BeadStudio
software, LogR Ratio and B Allele Frequency values were plotted along chromosomal
coordinates and examined visually. Regions of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) were identified
as genomic regions >2Mb with consecutive homozygous genotype calls (B Allele Frequency
near 0 or 1). Smaller (<2Mb) regions of LOH were identified by requiring co-occurrence of
decreased Log R Ratio scores in regions of consecutive homozygous genotype calls (B
Allele Frequency near 0 or 1). Visual analysis of these data plotted along chromosomal
coordinates was followed by manual analysis of the data for selected genes of interest.
Estimations of Proliferation Rates

Author Manuscript

To estimate the cell division rate, the Ki-67 labeling index (LI) in the proband lesion for
each case was calculated. The Ki-67 LI on the pancreatic ducts in the histologically normal
pancreas parenchyma was also calculated. Normal pancreas was collected from 2 autopsied
patients who died of causes other than pancreatic cancer and 5 patients who underwent distal
pancreatectomy for a serous cystadenoma or a islet cell tumor at The Johns Hopkins
Hospital. Paraffin blocks were cut into sections 4 μm thick for Ki-67 immunostaining with
all staining processes from deparaffinization to counterstaining with hematoxylin being
performed automatically with the Ventana Discovery staining system (Ventana Medical
Systems, Tucson, AZ). An anti-human Ki-67 mouse monoclonal antibody (Clone MIB-1,
Dako Cytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) was used. At least 12 randomly selected high-power
fields containing a minimum of 2000 cells were evaluated for each case, and the labeling
index (LI) was calculated as the percentage of positive cell nuclei. Reactive small
lymphocytes in each case were regarded as internal positive controls for Ki-67. Equal or

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

more intense nuclear staining in comparison with the internal positive controls was
considered to indicate positivity.
Modeling Tumor Evolution
Passenger mutations were defined as those unlikely to drive tumorigenesis. To be
conservative, we considered passenger mutations as those not included as candidate cancer
genes in a recent study based on whole exome sequencing of 24 pancreatic cancers 5. As the
great majority of mutations identified in cancers are believed to be passengers, the results of
the model are not highly dependent on the model used to estimate the relatively small
number of drivers 16.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Because passenger mutations are neutral and do not affect the evolution in any way, they are
accumulated independently in each cell lineage. Following the lineage of the founder cell of
the parental clone back in time, we can assume that it acquired a new neutral mutation with
rate r at each cell division, with r being the product of the mutation rate per base pair per
cell division and the number of base pairs sequenced. The accumulation of neutral mutations
in a cell lineage can be well-described by a Poisson process with rate r per cell division. We
are interested in the number of cell divisions in the single lineage between tumor initiation
and birth of the founder cell of the parental clone during which N1 passenger mutations
accumulate. On the other hand, N1 is also the number of mutations that are found in all
tumor samples from one patient. Since we sequenced at least one sample from the primary
tumor and at least three samples from different metastases from each patient, these specific
N1 mutations had to be present in the founder cells of all three metastases and in cells in the
primary tumor. Thus there was a cell in the tumor that had these N1 specific mutations for
the first time, and that is, by definition, the founder cell of the parental clone. Since we can
neglect the accumulation of mutations before the onset of the tumor, these N1 mutations are
accumulated along the single lineage from the tumor initiator cell to the founder cell of the
parental clone. As the number of cell divisions between two subsequent mutations is
distributed according to an exponential distribution with mean 1/r, the required number of
cell divisions is the sum of N1 independent exponentially distributed random variables with
mean 1/r, and is distributed according to a Gamma distribution with shape parameter N1 and
scale parameter 1/r. The mean of this distribution is N1/r and the standard deviation is
(see Supplementary Table 6). Since the number of base pairs sequenced in the study
is 31.7·106, and the mutation rate per base pair per generation is estimated at 5·10−10, r =
31.7·106·5·10−10 ≈ 0.016 per generation 8.

Author Manuscript

Using our measurements of Ki-67 labeling index of the 7 index lesions (average 16.3%), we
were able to estimate the S-phase fraction of cells in the 7 index lesions (average
LI=9.5%) 17. Assuming a median value for the S-phase duration in human tissues and
tumors, Ts, of 10 hours 18, and using the formula for the potential cell doubling time
Tpot=λTs/LI, we get an estimate for Tpot of 3.5 days. Here λ is a correction factor for the
non-linear age distribution of cells through the cell cycle, which was assumed to be 0.8 19.
This estimate is consistent with the average cell doubling time in pancreatic cancer from
Amikura et al. 20 of 2.3 days. We use this latter estimate in our analysis, as we believe it is
more accurate for pancreatic cancer.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

Amikura et al 20 also reported the median doubling time of pancreatic cancer metastases as
56 days. To estimate the age of the index metastasis, we used a two stage model. We
estimated the tumor doubling time was equal to the cell doubling time (Tgen) until the tumor
size reached 100 microns in diameter at which time angiogenesis is required 21. Thereafter,
we used the median doubling time described above.
Our model works very well for estimating the number of cell divisions between discrete
events in tumor evolution. In order to go from number of cell divisions to actual time we
need to have an estimate for the average rate of cell division. The accuracy of our
predictions regarding actual time therefore depends on the accuracy of that estimate. If we
let Tgen denote the average time between subsequent cell divisions in a cell lineage, we
arrive at the expression for time T1:

Author Manuscript

We therefore estimate the number of cell divisions, and hence the time T1 between tumor
initiation and birth of the founder cell of the parental clone to be proportional to the number
of passenger mutations, N1, that the tumor acquired during that time. In our calculations, we
use the estimate for cell doubling time in pancreatic cancer from the literature 20 as the value
of Tgen.

Author Manuscript

T2 is determined analogously, with N2 defined as the number of passenger mutations present
in the index lesion but not in the parental clone. T3 is determined from literature-based
estimates of the tumor and cell doubling times, and the size of the index lesions at
autopsy 20.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgements

Author Manuscript

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants CA106610 (CID), CA62924 (CID, MAN),
CA43460 (BV), CA57345 (KWK and VEV), CA121113 (VEV and KWK), GM078986 (MAN), the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation Grand Challenges Grant 37874, the Uehara Memorial Foundation (SY), the AACRBarletta Foundation (CID), the John Templeton Foundation, Pilot Funding from the Sol Goldman Pancreatic
Cancer Research Center, the Michael Rolfe Pancreatic Cancer Foundation, the George Rubis Endowment for
Pancreatic Cancer Research, the Joseph C. Monastra Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research, the Alfredo
Scatena Memorial Fund, the Virginia and the D.K. Ludwig Fund for Cancer Research, The Joint Program in
Mathematical Biology and J. Epstein. We would like to acknowledge Drs. Toby C. Cornish, Clark Henderson,
Noriyuki Omura and Seung-Mo Hong for their technical assistance in selected aspects of this work.

REFERENCES
1. Fidler IJ. Critical Determinants of Metastasis. Seminars in Cancer Biology. 2002; 12(2):89.
[PubMed: 12027580]
2. Nguyen DX, Bos PD, Massague J. Metastasis: From Dissemination to Organ-Specific Colonization.
Nature reviews. 2009; 9(4):274.
3. Stathis A, Moore MJ. Advanced Pancreatic Carcinoma: Current Treatment and Future Challenges.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 7(3):163. [PubMed: 20101258]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

4. Yachida S, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA. The Pathology and Genetics of Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer.
Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine. 2009; 133(3):413. [PubMed: 19260747]
5. Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, et al. Core Signaling Pathways in Human Pancreatic Cancers
Revealed by Global Genomic Analyses. Science (New York, N.Y. 2008; 321(5897):1801.
6. Maitra A, Hruban RH. Pancreatic Cancer. Annual Review of Pathology. 2008; 3:157.
7. Lengauer C, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Genetic Instabilities in Human Cancers. Nature. 1998;
396(6712):643. [PubMed: 9872311]
8. Jones S, Chen WD, Parmigiani G, et al. Comparative Lesion Sequencing Provides Insights into
Tumor Evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2008; 105(11):4283. [PubMed: 18337506]
9. Terada T, Ohta T, Kitamura Y, et al. Cell Proliferative Activity in Intraductal Papillary-Mucinous
Neoplasms and Invasive Ductal Adenocarcinomas of the Pancreas: An Immunohistochemical
Study. Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine. 1998; 122(1):42. [PubMed: 9448015]
10. Hisa T, Ohkubo H, Shiozawa S, et al. Growth Process of Small Pancreatic Carcinoma: A Case
Report with Imaging Observation for 22 Months. World J Gastroenterol. 2008; 14(12):1958.
[PubMed: 18350642]
11. Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, et al. Inhibition of Hedgehog Signaling Enhances Delivery
of Chemotherapy in a Mouse Model of Pancreatic Cancer. Science (New York, N.Y. 2009;
324(5933):1457.
12. Leary RJ, Kinde I, Diehl F, et al. Development of Personalized Tumor Biomarkers Using
Massively Parallel Sequencing. Science Translational Medicine. 2(20):20ra14.
13. Embuscado EE, Laheru D, Ricci F, et al. Immortalizing the Complexity of Cancer Metastasis:
Genetic Features of Lethal Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer Obtained from Rapid Autopsy. Cancer
Biology & Therapy. 2005; 4(5):548. [PubMed: 15846069]
14. Fu B, Guo M, Wang S, et al. Evaluation of Gata-4 and Gata-5 Methylation Profiles in Human
Pancreatic Cancers Indicate Promoter Methylation Patterns Distinct from Other Human Tumor
Types. Cancer Biology & Therapy. 2007; 6(10):1546. [PubMed: 17912029]
15. Peiffer DA, Le JM, Steemers FJ, et al. High-Resolution Genomic Profiling of Chromosomal
Aberrations Using Infinium Whole-Genome Genotyping. Genome Research. 2006; 16(9):1136.
[PubMed: 16899659]
16. Bignell GR, Greenman CD, Davies H, et al. Signatures of Mutation and Selection in the Cancer
Genome. Nature. 463(7283):893. [PubMed: 20164919]
17. Sasaki K, Matsumura K, Tsuji T, et al. Relationship between Labeling Indices of Ki-67 and Brdurd
in Human Malignant Tumors. Cancer. 1988; 62(5):989. [PubMed: 3409179]
18. Rew DA, Wilson GD. Cell Production Rates in Human Tissues and Tumours and Their
Significance. Part Ii: Clinical Data. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2000; 26(4):405. [PubMed: 10873364]
19. Steel, GG. The Growth Kinetics of Tumours. Clarendon Press; Oxford: 1977.
20. Amikura K, Kobari M, Matsuno S. The Time of Occurrence of Liver Metastasis in Carcinoma of
the Pancreas. Int J Pancreatol. 1995; 17(2):139. [PubMed: 7622937]
21. Naumov GN, Bender E, Zurakowski D, et al. A Model of Human Tumor Dormancy: An
Angiogenic Switch from the Nonangiogenic Phenotype. Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
2006; 98(5):316. [PubMed: 16507828]

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1. Summary of somatic mutations in metastatic pancreatic cancers

Author Manuscript

a. Histopathology of primary infiltrating pancreatic cancer and metastatic pancreatic cancer
to the peritoneum, liver and lung. In addition to infiltrating cancer cells in each lesion
(arrows), non-neoplastic cell types are abundant. b. Total mutations representing parental
clones (founder mutations), and clonal evolution (progressor mutations) within the primary
carcinoma based on comparative lesion sequencing. Mutations common to all samples
analyzed were the most common category identified.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 2. Geographic mapping of metastatic clones within the primary carcinoma and proposed
clonal evolution of Pa08

Author Manuscript

a. Illustration of the pancreatic specimen removed from Pa08 at rapid autopsy, and the
planes of sectioning of the specimen. b. Mapping of the parental clone and subclones
identified in a by comparative lesion sequencing within serial sections of the infiltrating
pancreatic carcinoma. Metastatic subclones giving rise to liver and lung metastases are
nonrandomly located within slice 3, indicated by blue circles. These clones are both
geographically and genetically distinct from clones giving rise to peritoneal metastases in
this same patient, indicated by green. c. Proposed clonal evolution based on the sequencing
data. In this model, after development of the parental clone, ongoing clonal evolution
continues within the primary carcinoma (yellow rectangle), and these subclones seed
metastases in distant sites. * indicates two mutations were found in the TTN gene.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

Yachida et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 3. Schema of the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer

Author Manuscript

Tumorigenesis begins with an initiating mutation in a normal cell that confers a selective
growth advantage. Successive waves of clonal expansion occur in association with the
acquisition of additional mutations, corresponding to the progression model of pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) and time T1. One founder cell within a PanIN lesion will
seed the parental clone and hence initiate an infiltrating carcinoma (end of T1 and beginning
of T2). Eventually, the cell that will give rise to the index lesion will appear (end of T2 and
beginning of T3). Unfortunately, most patients are not diagnosed until well into time interval
T3 when cells of these metastatic subclones have already escaped the pancreas and started to
grow within distant organs. The average time for intervals T1, T2 and T3 for all seven
patients is indicated in the parentheses at left (see also Supplementary Table 6).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 02.

