Priority Report

Single-Cell Transcription Site Activation Predicts Chemotherapy
Response in Human Colorectal Tumors
1

1

3

4

Rossanna C. Pezo, Saumil J. Gandhi, L. Andrew Shirley, Richard G. Pestell,
2
1
Leonard H. Augenlicht, and Robert H. Singer
1

Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and 2Departments of Medicine and Cell Biology,
Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Bronx, New York; 3Department of Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University; and 4Department of
Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Abstract
Candidate gene and pathway approaches, and unbiased gene
expression profiling, have identified marker signatures predictive of tumor phenotypes, such as drug sensitivity and
invasive or metastatic potential. However, application of such
information to evaluation of tumors in the clinic is limited by
cell heterogeneity in the tumor. We have developed a novel
method of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) that can
detect transcriptional activation of individual genes at their
site in single cells in the interphase nucleus. A major obstacle
in the treatment of colorectal cancer is relative insensitivity
to the chemotherapeutic agent 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU). Here,
we have developed a sensitive approach to predict relative
sensitivity of colorectal cancer cells to 5-FU, using FISH with
probes targeted to nascent mRNAs to measure the number of
individual cells with active transcription sites for a panel of
candidate genes. These results reveal that the transcriptional
status of four key genes, thymidylate synthase (TYMS), MORFrelated gene X (MRGX), Bcl2-antagonist/killer (BAK), and
ATPase, Cu2+ transporting b polypeptide (ATP7B), can accurately predict response to 5-FU. As proof of principle, we show
that this transcriptional profile is predictive of response to
5-FU in a small number of patient colon tumor tissues.
This approach provides a novel ability to identify and
characterize unique minor cell populations in the tumor that
may exhibit relative resistance to chemotherapy. [Cancer Res
2008;68(13):4977–82]

Introduction
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is the most commonly used agent in
combination therapy for colorectal cancer in either an adjuvant or
advanced stage setting (1). Although stage is a significant predictor
of likely outcome, cellular and molecular markers of sensitivity to
5-FU, or disease-free or overall survival, have been identified for
each stage. Among these are levels of thymidylate synthase and
thymidine phosphorylase, two enzymes intimately related to 5-FU
metabolism (2–4). The presence of microsatellite instability has
also been linked to 5-FU response (5, 6). Finally, the presence of a
wild-type p53 gene (7–9), especially when coupled with amplification and/or elevated expression of the c-myc gene (10, 11),
correlates with a favorable response to 5-FU.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Robert H. Singer, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Golding Building Room 601BA, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461. Phone: 718430-8646; Fax: 718-430-8697; E-mail: rhsinger@aecom.yu.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6770

www.aacrjournals.org

More recently, unbiased approaches that use gene expression
profiling have characterized response to drugs and prognosis. With
regard to colorectal cancer, heterogeneous responses to 5-FU (12),
camptothecin (12), and oxaliplatin (13) were identified in a panel of
30 cell lines, and microarray analysis was used to identify gene
expression profiles predictive of relative sensitivity to these drugs.
The predictive value of this approach was better than other
molecular markers that have been reported (12).
Regardless of the method used to identify clinically useful
markers of drug response, all approaches must eventually deal with
the fact that tumors are highly heterogeneous. Only a minor
proportion of the cells may be relatively drug resistant or have
other important clinical phenotypes, such as propensity to invade
or metastasize. Because these cells cannot be identified histologically, alternate means are necessary for their detection. This is not
only of major clinical importance, but the distribution of such cells
in relation to important features of the tumor, such as the invasive
front or the proximity to blood supply, provide significant insight
into the cell biology of tumor formation and progression. Although
immunohistochemistry can provide such information, it is limited
by the availability of appropriate antibodies, as well as in the
number of distinct gene products that can be identified
simultaneously. An alternate approach is to examine gene
expression patterns of individual cells using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). This could also prove to be crucial in assaying
biopsy samples that contain very small deposits of cancer cells,
below the detection threshold of assays such as microarrays and
Northern blots, which measure total RNA for a population of cells
(14). Earlier work in our laboratory has shown that FISH can detect
individual nascent mRNAs in the nucleus as well as single mRNA
molecules in the cytoplasm with high spatial resolution (15).
We have reported a method of FISH that can identify whether
a particular gene is transcriptionally active in cultured cells (16),
or in formalin-fixed tissue (17). Moreover, using multiple probes of
distinct fluorescence emissions, and combinatorial multiplexing of
such probes, we have shown that activation of 10 genes in single
cells can be assayed simultaneously (16). In this report, we used
this methodology in both tissue culture and fixed tissue to define a
subset of genes that differentiates between colorectal tumor cells
that are relatively sensitive or resistant to 5-FU.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. DLD, HCT15, SW837, SW620, HCT116, RW2982, and SW403
cell lines with documented responses to 5-FU were provided by JM
Mariadason (Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY), grown in MEM
(Cellgro), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), 1%
penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen), 100 Amol/L nonessential amino acids
(Sigma), and 10 mmol/L HEPES buffer (Invitrogen) in a humidified
incubator at 37jC with 5% CO2.

4977

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Oligonucleotide probe design and synthesis. Probes for FISH were
designed using OLIGO-6.0 software (Molecular Biology Insights), and
specificity was verified through the National Cancer Institute GeneBank
nucleotide-nucleotide BLAST program. For each target nascent transcript,
4 50-mer DNA probes were synthesized containing 4 to 5 modified
thymidine bases (Supplementary Fig. S1) conjugated to either Cy3 or Cy5
succinimidyl ester fluorescent dyes (GE Healthcare).
Patient tissue samples. Tissue microarrays (TMA) containing core
biopsies of paraffin-embedded tissues from 15 anonymous colon cancer
patients in triplicate were purchased (US Biomax). Paraffin-embedded
tissue samples with known outcomes were obtained from seven patients
who had undergone treatment for colon cancer at the Kimmel Cancer

Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA (approved by the
Thomas Jefferson University Institutional Review Board).
RNA FISH in cultured cells and paraffin-embedded tissues. Cells
were grown on glass coverslips, extracted with Triton X-100, fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde, and hybridized with 20 ng of labeled probe as
described (16). Paraffin-embedded tissue FISH was performed as
described (17).
Detection of transcription sites. Fluorescent signals were detected
with an epifluorescence Olympus AX70 microscope, UApo 40X, 1.35NA and
PlanApo 60X, 1.4NA objectives, and a CoolSNAP-HQ CCD camera (Photometrics) using filters for 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), FITC, Cy3,
and Cy5 (Chroma Technology). Stacks of images were acquired with a

Figure 1. Defining markers of 5-FU response in human colorectal tumor cell lines using single-cell profiling of transcription site activation. A, flowchart of the
strategy used to define a predictive model for response to 5-FU–based chemotherapy. Candidate genes were selected from gene expression profiles of each human
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line. The training set of cell lines selected represents the extremes of sensitivity or resistance to 5-FU. A transcription site activation
profile of candidate genes was determined for each cell line. Using leave-one-out analysis, a predictive model that classified the training set of cell lines as
resistant or sensitive to 5-FU with the highest accuracy was derived. The predictive marker genes were evaluated for their ability to accurately classify a panel of
independent test cell lines as 5-FU–resistant or–sensitive in a blinded study. B, detection of an active transcription site for the gene MRGX in an individual human
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell (DLD-1). Nuclei are stained with DAPI and sites of transcription are detected with fluorescent probes labeled in Cy3 (red) and Cy5
(green ). Inset, close-up of area of nucleus with both Cy3 and Cy5 probes bound to nascent transcripts. Scale bar, 6 Am. C, transcription site activation profile of
5-FU–resistant and 5-FU–sensitive colorectal tumor cell lines as measured by FISH for nascent mRNAs. Analysis of active transcription sites for each candidate
gene in individual cells provides a transcriptional profile for each cell line. Red bars, candidate genes correlated with 5-FU resistance; blue bars, candidate genes
correlated with 5-FU sensitivity. Columns, mean for three experiments; bars, SE.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

4978

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Single-Cell Transcription Site Profiles of Tumors
200-nm Z step size and analyzed using IPLab software version 3.61 (BD
Biosciences). Random fields of cells were imaged to ensure that differences
in numbers of active transcription sites between samples were due to
differences in transcription and not due to heterogeneity in proliferation
among cells within a culture or tissue sample. Transcription sites were
assayed in untreated cell cultures and tissues except for samples from
patients 1F, 4F, and 6F, who received 5-FU therapy before surgical resection
of their tumors. Only nuclei located entirely within the imaged field were
scored for presence or absence of transcription sites. Each image within a
stack was analyzed separately to accurately count nuclei in close proximity.
Fluorescent spots in the nucleus were identified as transcription sites
based on fluorescence intensity, volume, and shape. Spots also present in
the FITC channel represented autofluorescence and were not counted.
Transcripts were first detected individually, using Cy3 and Cy5 probes. After
identifying a four-gene signature predictive of 5-FU response, the genes
were analyzed simultaneously in the same sample. Two genes correlating
with resistance (TYMS and MRGX) were detected with probes labeled with
one fluorophore, and two genes correlating with sensitivity (ATP7B and
BAK) were detected with probes labeled with a different fluorophore.
Percentage of transcription sites for each gene was calculated from the total
number of transcription sites detected and the total number of nuclei
detected.
Statistical analysis. Statistical tests were performed using MATLAB
v7.0.1 (MathWorks). To perform logistic regression, we let P be the
probability that a cell line is sensitive to 5-FU, given its gene expression
profile x = [x1,. . .,xn ], where x n is the percentage of cells containing
transcription sites for gene n in cell line x. The odds of sensitivity to 5-FU
are P/(1-P). We parameterized the odds such that
P
ðeq: 1Þ
Þ ¼ w0 þ X T w1
lnð
1P
;P ¼

ew0 þ XT w1
1 þ ew0 þXT w1

ðeq: 2Þ

where xT denotes the transpose of X. We used a maximum likelihood
estimator that uses as an input the measured quantities xn and outcomes
for each of the training samples. The estimator then iteratively solved for
P by varying the variables w 0 and w 1. The linear decision boundary could
then be written as
P
ðeq: 3Þ
Þ ¼ w0 þ X T w1 ¼ 0:
lnð
1P

Results
To develop markers predictive of 5-FU response, we selected four
colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines representing extremes of
sensitivity or resistance to 5-FU and chose a set of candidate genes
including thymidylate synthase and genes that correlated highly
with 5-FU response in a microarray study (12). Figure 1A provides
an overview of the strategy. For each of the 12 candidate genes,
we examined active transcription sites in individual cells using
FISH (Fig. 1B). Our results showed differential transcription of
several genes in 5-FU–sensitive or 5-FU–resistant colorectal tumor
cell lines (Fig. 1C). We examined various combinations of these
genes to identify expression signatures that correlated with either
resistance or sensitivity to 5-FU.
To evaluate the predictive value of each combination of genes,
we used logistic regression to build a model that predicted
response of a cell line to 5-FU based on the active transcription site
profile of those genes. Exhaustive combinations of the 12 potential
markers for 5-FU response were used to build various models, each
of which was evaluated for predictive accuracy using a training set
of 4 cell lines with documented responses to 5-FU (12).

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 2. Chemotherapy indicator plot. A, two genes that are poor predictive
markers of response to 5-FU treatment. Filled squares, cell lines known to be
sensitive. Filled cirlces, cell lines known to be resistant. The decision line is
an average of 12 decision boundaries generated from leaving out each of
the 12 samples from the training set once. The large error in the decision
boundary signifies the dependency of the model on a single sample in the
training set. B, the four genes, MRGX, TYMS, BAK , and ATP7B are identified as
good predictive markers of response to 5-FU treatment. C, performance of
biomarkers in an independent set of blinded test cell lines. Test cell lines A
and D, corresponding to RKO and HCT116, respectively, were classified
as 5-FU–sensitive (P = 0.05 and P = 0.0005, respectively). Test cell line B,
corresponding to SW620 was classified as 5-FU–resistant (P = 0.023). C, the
fourth cell line, HCT15, was also classified as 5-FU–resistant (P = 0.099).

4979

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Due to the small sample size of the training set, we used leaveone-out crossvalidation to assess the accuracy of the predictive
models. The transcriptional profile and the outcome of k-1 of the
k training samples was used to produce a linear decision boundary
as outlined in the statistical methods section. The model was then
used to predict the outcome of the kth training sample. The process
was repeated k times, excluding a different training sample for
validation each time.
If a set of genes was not a good predictor of response to 5-FU,
then the decision boundary was sensitive to each of the k training
samples that were excluded. The result was a large variation
between calculated decision boundaries, leading to poor sensitivity
and specificity of the predictive model (Fig. 2A). Alternatively,
Fig. 2B shows a set of genes whose expression levels yielded a
model with high predictive accuracy and robustness. The variance
between k decision boundaries calculated for each of the k
subsets was small. A gene expression signature consisting of four
genes, TYMS, MRGX, BAK and ATP7B, correctly classified the
training set of cell lines as either sensitive or resistant to 5-FU
(Fig. 2B).

This model was then used to predict the response of
independent test cell lines to 5-FU. Four additional colorectal
adenocarcinoma cell lines, HCT15, SW620, RKO, and HCT116,
were used to test the predictive model. Analysis of these test cell
lines was blinded to eliminate bias in scoring of transcription
sites. Cells were scored for number of transcription sites for
MRGX, TYMS, BAK, and ATP7B. Our model, consisting of these
four genes, correctly predicted the response of all four test cell
lines to 5-FU (Fig. 2C): SW620 (P = 0.023) was classified as 5-FU
resistant, whereas RKO (P = 0.051) and HCT116 (P = 0.0005) were
classified as 5-FU sensitive. The fourth cell line, HCT15, was
classified as 5-FU resistant with somewhat lower significance
(P = 0.099).
To investigate the potential of using transcription site profiling
in tumors, we examined active transcription sites in tissue samples
from 15 anonymous colon cancer patients on a TMA hybridized
with probes for either TYMS and MRGX (Fig. 3A) or BAK and ATP7B
(Fig. 3B). Although colon tumor tissues were all from patients
with grade 2 colon adenocarcinomas, single-cell transcription site
profiles of individual tumors revealed a large variability in the

Figure 3. Detection of active transcription sites for 5-FU marker genes in paraffin-embedded human colon tumor TMA. A, merge of DAPI, Cy3, and Cy5 channels.
Image shows DAPI-stained nuclei containing transcription sites (arrows) for MRGX and TYMS. Scale bar, 5 Am. B, merge of DAPI, Cy3, and Cy5 channels.
Image shows DAPI-stained nuclei containing transcription sites (arrows ) for ATP7B and BAK. Scale bar, 5 Am. C, active transcription site profile for 5-FU marker genes
in colon tumor biopsies from individual patients as measured by RNA FISH. Red bars, genes correlated with 5-FU resistance. Blue bars, genes correlated with
5-FU sensitivity. Columns, mean for three sections from each individual tumor; bars, SE. D, chemotherapy indicator plot for tumors from 15 anonymous patients.
Filled diamonds, tumor samples with unknown clinical outcomes. Our predictive model classified 11 samples as sensitive and 2 samples as resistant. The model
was unable to classify the remaining two samples with significant confidence.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

4980

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Single-Cell Transcription Site Profiles of Tumors

expression of marker genes (Fig. 3C). A majority of these tumor
samples had high expression of the proapoptotic gene BAK,
suggesting that these early-grade tumors would be sensitive to
apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs such as 5-FU. Our
predictive model classified 11 of the 15 samples as relatively sensitive
(Fig. 3D). Two of the 15 tumors were classified as more resistant,
whereas the remaining two tumors showed mixed characteristics.
To provide proof of principle that these transcription site profiles
are associated with outcomes to therapy, we tested colon tumor
samples from a small number of patients with known outcomes.
Tissue samples were obtained from surgically resected tumors of
patients undergoing treatment for colon cancer. Three patients,
designated 1F, 4F, and 6F, received 5-FU–based chemotherapy
before and after surgery, whereas four patients, designated 1N, 4N,
5N, and 6N, received 5-FU–based therapy only after surgery. Tissues
were hybridized with probes for TYMS, MRGX, BAK, and ATP7B
(Fig. 4A). Analysis was blinded to eliminate bias in the scoring of
transcription sites. Tumors from patients 1F, 4F, and 6F had
relatively higher expression of TYMS and MRGX and lower
expression of ATP7B and BAK, classifying these patients as
relatively less sensitive to 5-FU–based chemotherapy (Fig. 4B).
Among these three patients, 1F had tumor recurrence after
previous surgery and 5-FU–based chemotherapy, although presently has no evidence of another reccurence, whereas patients 4F
and 6F both later developed metastatic disease after 5-FU–based
chemotherapy. In contrast, patients 1N, 4N, 5N, and 6N had tumors
with higher expression of ATP7B and BAK than TYMS and MRGX,
classifying them as more sensitive to 5-FU–based chemotherapy
(Fig. 4B). These four patients have not had a recurrence of their
tumors or evidence of metastasis after surgery and 5-FU therapy,
consistent with their classification as more sensitive to the drug
treatment they received. On the basis of our predictive model,
tumors from patients 1F, 4F, and 6F were classified as relatively
resistant and tumors from patients 1N, 4N, 5N, and 6N as relatively
sensitive (Fig. 4C).

Discussion
Assay of transcription site activation differs from gene
expression profiling in two key ways. First, expression analysis by
Northern blots, qRT-PCR, or microarrays measures steady-state
transcript levels, whereas transcription site analysis provides data
on whether the gene is on or off, essentially measuring the function
of the gene as a rheostat that monitors and provides input into
determining steady-state levels. As such, transcription site analysis
can provide insight into the presence or absence of signals and
pathways that directly activate transcription. Second, by nature
of the assay, transcription site analysis provides information
on individual cells, rather than the mean level of expression of a
gene in a population. Thus, this method is better suited for analysis of
limited amounts of tissue and for dissection of heterogeneity that
likely exists in tumors. Further, this FISH-based methodology can be
combined with histopathology to provide a more accurate molecular
picture of the cell biology of individual tumors, such as spatial
distribution and orientation of tumor cells with particular phenotypes in the context of stromal-epithelial cell interactions (17), as well
as the histopathologic features of cells with particular transcription
site profiles.
In this report, we have shown that transcription site profiles of
key genes for which steady-state levels correlate with response to
5-FU in vitro (12) could be used to develop a novel approach that

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 4. Prediction of response to 5-FU–based chemotherapy in colon
cancer patients. A, active transcription sites for 5-FU marker genes in
paraffin-embedded human colon tumor tissues. Image shows DAPI-stained
nuclei containing transcription sites for ATP7B and BAK (both shown in
green). Scale bar, 5 Am. B, active transcription site profile for 5-FU marker
genes in colon tumor samples from seven patients as measured by RNA
FISH. The seven patients are designated as follows: patient #1F, female,
age 60 y, tumor stage T3N2Mx (poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma); patient
#4F, male, age 56 y, tumor stage T3N1Mx (poorly differentiated mucinous
adenocarcinoma); patient #6F, male, age 33 y, unknown tumor stage
(metastastic adenocarcinoma); patient #1N, male, age 62 y, tumor stage
T3N1Mx (well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma); patient #4N, female,
age 67 y, tumor stage T3N2Mx (moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma);
patient #5N, female, age 56 y, tumor stage T3N2Mx (moderately to poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma); patient #6N, female, age 42 y, tumor stage
T3N1Mx (moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma). Red bars, genes
correlated with 5-FU resistance. Blue bars, genes correlated with 5-FU
sensitivity. Columns, mean for six fields from each individual tumor; bars, SE.
C, chemotherapy indicator plot for tumors from seven anonymous patients.
Filled squares, patients known to be sensitive. Filled circles, patients known
to be resistant. Our predictive model classified three samples as resistant
and four samples as sensitive.

4981

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

predicts response of tumor cells to chemotherapy. Using cell lines
representing the extremes of sensitivity and resistance, we derived
a four-gene signature that independently predicted 5-FU response
in test cell lines. Furthermore, by extending the analysis to human
colon tumor tissue, we provided proof of principle that the
transcription site profile of cells varies among individual tumors
and may be used to predict patient response to 5-FU. This study
will be followed up by a more extensive clinical test of the approach
to determine the predictive value of such data.
We suggest transcription site analysis of cells in situ will be more
incisive than expression analysis or profiling in subclassifying
tumors with regard to important clinical phenotypes, such as
chemotherapeutic response, as reported here, or invasive or
metastatic potential. Such information is essential for maximizing
the efficacy of therapeutic treatment, and for personalizing care for
patients.

References
1. Longley DB, Harkin DP, Johnston PG. 5-fluorouracil:
mechanisms of action and clinical strategies. Nat Rev
Cancer 2003;3:330–8.
2. Leichman CG, Lenz HJ, Leichman L, et al. Quantitation
of intratumoral thymidylate synthase expression predicts for disseminated colorectal cancer response and
resistance to protracted-infusion fluorouracil and weekly leucovorin. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:3223–9.
3. Salonga D, Danenberg KD, Johnson M, et al. Colorectal
tumors responding to 5-fluorouracil have low gene
expression levels of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase,
thymidylate synthase, and thymidine phosphorylase.
Clin Cancer Res 2000;6:1322–7.
4. Metzger R, Danenberg K, Leichman CG, et al. High
basal level gene expression of thymidine phosphorylase
(platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor) in
colorectal tumors is associated with nonresponse to
5-fluorouracil. Clin Cancer Res 1998;4:2371–6.
5. Elsaleh H, Iacopetta B. Microsatellite instability is a
predictive marker for survival benefit from adjuvant

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
L.H. Augenlicht: consultant/advisory board, Pittsburgh Cancer Center, Arizona
Cancer Center, and Valley Hospital, New Jersey. R.H. Singer: consultant/advisory
board, Aureon Laboratories. The other authors disclosed no potential conflicts
of interest.

Acknowledgments
Received 12/27/2007; revised 3/18/2008; accepted 5/8/2008.
Grant support: NIH grant R33CA83208 (R.H. Singer), the NIH Medical Scientist
Training Program T32GM07288 (R.C. Pezo), U54CA100926 (L.H. Augenlicht), and the
Albert Einstein Cancer Center Core Grant P30CA13330. This work was supported in
part by R01CA70896, R01CA75503, R01CA86072, R01CA107382 (R.G. Pestell). The
Kimmel Cancer Center was supported by NIH Cancer Center Core grant P30CA56036
(R.G. Pestell).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank S.M. Shenoy for assistance with microscopy and image analysis and
J.M. Mariadason for providing cell lines and data on cell response and expression.

chemotherapy in a population-based series of stage III
colorectal carcinoma. Clin Colorectal Cancer 2001;1:
104–9.
6. Elsaleh H, Powell B, McCaul K, et al. P53 alteration
and microsatellite instability have predictive value for
survival benefit from chemotherapy in stage III
colorectal carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:1343–9.
7. Goh HS, Yao J, Smith DR. p53 point mutation and
survival in colorectal cancer patients. Cancer Res 1995;
55:5217–21.
8. Benhattar J, Cerottini JP, Saraga E, Metthez G, Givel JC.
p53 mutations as a possible predictor of response to
chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal carcinomas. Int J
Cancer 1996;69:190–2.
9. Ahnen DJ, Feigl P, Quan G, et al. Ki-ras mutation and
p53 overexpression predict the clinical behavior of
colorectal cancer: a Southwest Oncology Group study.
Cancer Res 1998;58:1149–58.
10. Arango D, Corner GA, Wadler S, Catalano PJ,
Augenlicht LH. c-myc/p53 interaction determines sensitivity of human colon carcinoma cells to 5-fluorouracil
in vitro and in vivo . Cancer Res 2001;61:4910–5.

4982

11. Augenlicht LH, Wadler S, Corner G, et al. Low-level
c-myc amplification in human colonic carcinoma cell
lines and tumors: a frequent, p53-independent mutation
associated with improved outcome in a randomized
multi-institutional trial. Cancer Res 1997;57:1769–75.
12. Mariadason JM, Arango D, Shi Q, et al. Gene
expression profiling-based prediction of response of
colon carcinoma cells to 5-fluorouracil and camptothecin. Cancer Res 2003;63:8791–812.
13. Arango D, Wilson AJ, Shi Q, et al. Molecular
mechanisms of action and prediction of response to
oxaliplatin in colorectal cancer cells. Br J Cancer 2004;
91:1931–46.
14. Levsky JM, Singer RH. Gene expression and the myth
of the average cell. Trends Cell Biol 2003;13:4–6.
15. Femino AM, Fay FS, Fogarty K, Singer RH. Visualization
of single RNA transcripts in situ. Science 1998;280:585–90.
16. Levsky JM, Shenoy SM, Pezo RC, Singer RH. Singlecell gene expression profiling. Science 2002;297:836–40.
17. Capodieci P, Donovan M, Buchinsky H, et al. Gene
expression profiling in single cells within tissue. Nat
Methods 2005;2:663–5.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Single-Cell Transcription Site Activation Predicts
Chemotherapy Response in Human Colorectal Tumors
Rossanna C. Pezo, Saumil J. Gandhi, L. Andrew Shirley, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:4977-4982.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4977
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/06/24/68.13.4977.DC1

This article cites 17 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4977.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4977.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

