Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Caffeine affects the biological responses of human hematopoietic
cells of myeloid lineage via downregulation of the mTOR pathway
and xanthine oxidase activity
Bernhard F. Gibbs1,*, Isabel Gonçalves Silva1,*, Alexandr Prokhorov1,*, Maryam
Abooali1, Inna M. Yasinska1, Maxwell A. Casely-Hayford1, Steffen M. Berger2, Elizaveta
Fasler-Kan2,3, Vadim V. Sumbayev1
1

School of Pharmacy, University of Kent, Chatham Maritime, ME4 4TB Kent, United Kingdom

2

 epartment of Pediatric Surgery and Department of Clinical Research, Inselspital, University Hospital, University of Bern,
D
CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland

3

Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel and University Hospital Basel, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Vadim Sumbayev, e-mail: V.Sumbayev@kent.ac.uk
Elizaveta Fasler-Kan, e-mail: elizaveta.fasler@insel.ch
Keywords: myeloid cells, caffeine, Inflammation, allergy
Received: July 06, 2015      Accepted: August 31, 2015      Published: September 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Correction of human myeloid cell function is crucial for the prevention of inflammatory
and allergic reactions as well as leukaemia progression. Caffeine, a naturally occurring
food component, is known to display anti-inflammatory effects which have previously
been ascribed largely to its inhibitory actions on phosphodiesterase. However, more
recent studies suggest an additional role in affecting the activity of the mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR), a master regulator of myeloid cell translational pathways, although
detailed molecular events underlying its mode of action have not been elucidated.
Here, we report the cellular uptake of caffeine, without metabolisation, by healthy and
malignant hematopoietic myeloid cells including monocytes, basophils and primary
acute myeloid leukaemia mononuclear blasts. Unmodified caffeine downregulated mTOR
signalling, which affected glycolysis and the release of pro-inflammatory/pro-angiogenic
cytokines as well as other inflammatory mediators. In monocytes, the effects of caffeine
were potentiated by its ability to inhibit xanthine oxidase, an enzyme which plays a
central role in human purine catabolism by generating uric acid. In basophils, caffeine
also increased intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels which further
enhanced its inhibitory action on mTOR. These results demonstrate an important mode
of pharmacological action of caffeine with potentially wide-ranging therapeutic impact
for treating non-infectious disorders of the human immune system, where it could be
applied directly to inflammatory cells.

an isosteric inhibitor of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
phosphodiesterase (cAMP-PDE) which upregulates intra­
cellular cAMP levels [2]. Caffeine was also found to
reduce the role of glycolysis in cell energy metabolism
via upregulation of lipid degradation (lipolysis) [3, 4].
Recent evidence demonstrated that human
hematopoietic cells do not express the cytochrome P450
1A2 isoform and thus should not be able to metabolise
caffeine, resulting in the effects of unmodified caffeine
[5]. In this case, caffeine could competitively inhibit

INTRODUCTION
Caffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) is a purine alka­
loid present in the leaves, seeds or nuts of a number of
plants and is consumed by many people worldwide on a
daily basis due to its presence in tea or coffee. In humans,
caffeine is rapidly demethylated by cytochrome P450
isoform 1A2 and then converted mostly into methylated
derivatives of uric acid by the enzyme xanthine oxidase
(XOD) [1]. For a long time caffeine was recognised as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28678

Oncotarget

XOD [6] rather than act as its substrate (most of the other
methylxanthines can be converted by XOD). Moreover,
several stable purines including caffeine were recently
found to inhibit the activity of the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) in somatic cells [7, 8]. It was also
demonstrated that at high concentrations (5 mM), caffeine
is capable of inhibiting the mTOR pathway in HOS
osteosarcoma cells [7]. In addition, 10 mM caffeine was
able to inhibit the PI3K/Akt/mTOR/p70S6K pathway in
various cell lines including SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells
and HeLa cells [9]. 10 mM caffeine was even capable of
inhibiting the phosphorylation (Ser473) of Akt in SH-SY5Y
cells [9]. In myeloid cells mTOR, a highly conserved serine/
threonine kinase, acts as a central regulator of cell growth
and metabolism and plays crucial pathophysiological roles
in host immune defence, allergic reactions and leukaemia
[10]. Importantly, the mTOR pathway plays a pivotal role
in non-hypoxic activation of the hypoxia-inducible factor
1 (HIF-1) transcription complex in human myeloid cells.
HIF-1 controls the expression of over 40 target genes
responsible for glycolysis, angiogenesis and cell adhe­
sion – physiological processes which form a critical part
of myeloid cell function in the human immune system.
This transcription complex, containing an inducible α and a
constitutive β subunit, is a major component of the myeloid
cell stress adaptation machinery [11, 12]. Therefore,
inhibiting the mTOR/HIF-1 metabolic/signalling axis could
be an excellent therapeutic strategy for treating human
disorders associated with myeloid cell function – leukaemia,
autoimmune disease, and allergy. However, existing mTOR
inhibitors are toxic and can cause major side effects and
adverse drug reactions. Thus, if the inhibitory activity of
caffeine on mTOR has indeed been overlooked for decades,
this agent may be an excellent non-toxic drug candidate for
the correction of pathophysiological responses of human
hematopoietic cells of myeloid lineage.
Here we report for the first time that caffeine
inhibits the activation of mTOR in THP-1 human myeloid
leukaemia cells, primary human acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML) cells and primary human basophils. In THP-1
and primary AML cells caffeine was also found to inhibit
XOD. In all cases, the caffeine-mediated attenuation of
the mTOR pathway led to the downregulation of ligandinduced glycolysis and cytokine/growth factor/mediator
production. Caffeine is known to upregulate lipolysis
through activation of hormone sensitive lipase (HSL).
This upregulates the Krebs’ cycle leading to decreased
intracellular levels of 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG), thus
preventing degradation of HIF-1α protein (the inducible
HIF-1 subunit) by a classical mechanism controlled by
HIF-1α prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs). This effect was
observed in all of the myeloid cell types studied except
for basophils, where HIF-1α accumulation was less
PHD-dependent and caffeine completely blocked IgEinduced HIF-1α accumulation. High performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) experiments demonstrated that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

caffeine entered all of the above cell types and was not
metabolised. Taken together, our results reveal novel
mechanisms for the downregulatory effects of caffeine on
the biological responses of human myeloid cells.

RESULTS
Caffeine inhibits ligand-induced activation of the
mTOR pathway and its downstream effects in
THP-1 human AML cells
We first investigated the effects of caffeine on ligandinduced mTOR activation through phosphorylation of its
S2448 residue in THP-1 cells. Cells were exposed for 4 h
to ligands (see below) with or without 1 h pre-treatment
with 1 mM caffeine (this concentration corresponds
to a therapeutic dose of caffeine and is well below the
toxic dose [13]). In line with our previous observations
[10], we found that pro-inflammatory ligands of Tolllike receptors (TLRs) 2 (plasma membrane-associated
TLR – 1 μg/ml peptidoglycan (PGN) was used as a ligand),
7/8 (endosomal TLRs recognising viral single-stranded
RNA – 0.1 μg/ml resiquimod (R848) was employed as a
ligand) induce activating S2448 phosphorylation of mTOR.
The same effect was observed for stem cell factor (SCF),
a major hematopoietic factor which is also known to
promote growth of leukaemia cells, where caffeine (1 mM)
attenuated its effect in all cases (Figure 1). Intriguingly,
caffeine alone did not significantly reduce phospho-S2448
mTOR in non-stimulated cells but significantly reduced
background levels of phospho-T389 p70 S6K1 and
phospho-S65 eIF4E-BP1 (see Figure 1 for details). This
suggests that caffeine is likely to act directly on mTOR
as well, which would prevent further phosphorylation but
not impact on existing activity. The presence of caffeine
close to the catalytic site (in the active site of mTOR)
would almost certainly affect its kinase activity. However,
it is important to stress that phosphorylation of mTOR at
the inhibitory T2446 site was not increased by caffeine.
This observation clearly suggests that caffeine is unlikely
to enhance the activity of this mTOR downregulatory
pathway and is likely to be a potential direct mTOR
inhibitor, as some other purine containing compounds (such
as cAMP) do [8]. Phosphorylation levels of its substrates
(indicators of mTOR kinase activity) – p70 S6 kinase 1 (p70
S6K1 – at position T389) and eukaryotic initiation factor
4E-binding protein 1 (eIF4E-BP1 at position S65) were
also significantly upregulated by all the employed ligands
as well as phosphorylation of S2448 mTOR. All these
processes were attenuated by caffeine (Figure 1).
We next investigated the effects of caffeine on
mTOR downstream and associated biochemical pathways
induced by PGN, R848 and SCF. We found that caffeine
did not downregulate PGN-induced accumulation of
HIF-1α protein. This was in line with a significant
decrease in HIF-1α PHD activity in cells treated with PGN
28679

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Caffeine inhibits the ligand-induced mTOR signalling pathway in THP-1 human acute myeloid leukaemia
cells. Cells were exposed for 4 h to the indicated concentrations of PGN, R848 or SCF with or without 1 h pre-treatment with 1 mM

caffeine. Levels of pS2448 and pT2446 phospho-mTOR as well as phosphorylation of its downstream enzymes were analysed as outlined
in the Materials and Methods. Western blot data show one representative experiment of four that gave similar results and were quantitatively
analysed. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D; * – p < 0.01 vs. control (n = 4), a – p < 0.01 vs. PGN alone, b – p < 0.01 vs. R848
alone and c – p < 0.01 vs. SCF alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28680

Oncotarget

in the presence of caffeine (Figure 2A). ATP levels, which
are often controlled in a HIF-1-dependent manner, were
decreased in cells co-stimulated with PGN and caffeine.
Levels of cAMP did not undergo significant changes,
probably owing to the fact that receptors involved in
these events are not G-protein-coupled [14]. They do not
provoke adenylate cyclase activation/cAMP production
and thus cAMP-PDE-inhibiting activity of caffeine has
no effect in this case. AMP levels were also not increased
by PGN stimulation, which conforms with our previous
observations (Figure 2B). The presence of caffeine did
not increase AMP levels despite a significant decrease in
PGN-induced XOD activity (Figure 2C). This is likely
to be caused by the inhibition of hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT), an enzyme which
converts hypoxanthine (accumulated when XOD was
inhibited) into inosine monophosphate (IMP), which
is then converted into AMP [15, 16]. However, we
could not rule out the possibility of caffeine-dependent
effects on other enzymes involved in the conversion of
hypoxanthine into AMP. Intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels upregulated by PGN were also
unaffected by caffeine, possibly because XOD is not the
main contributor to the intracellular ROS pool (NADPH
oxidase plays this role [17]) in this case (Figure 2C).
Glycolysis, which was significantly upregulated by
PGN, was reduced to its basic level (Figure 2D). This is
not surprising, since translation of glycolytic enzymes
is likely to be an mTOR-dependent process in human
hematopoietic cells [18]. However, intracellular 2-OG
levels were almost completely abolished by caffeine
(Figure 2D). This may be due to the caffeine-dependent
upregulation of lipolysis and, therefore, the Krebs’ cycle
(which would lead to a reduction of intracellular 2-OG
levels and a subsequent decrease in 2-OG-dependent
HIF-1α PHD activity, where 2-OG is used as a cofactor
[19]; which we observed (Figure 2A)). Furthermore, the
pro-inflammatory responses of THP-1 cells induced by
PGN (release of TNF-α and IL-6) were attenuated by
caffeine (Figure 2E).
The situation with endosomal TLRs 7 and 8 was
slightly different, where THP-1 cells were exposed to
0.1 μg/ml R848 with or without 1 h pre-treatment with
1 mM caffeine. We found that, unlike with PGN, R848induced HIF-1α accumulation was significantly reduced
by caffeine. HIF-1α PHD activity was significantly
decreased by R848 (as we have reported before [20]),
but in the presence of caffeine, PHD activity did not
reduce further and was even slightly elevated compared
to exposure to R848 alone (Figure 3A). ATP, AMP and
cAMP levels in the cells were not affected by caffeine
as in the experiments with PGN (Figure 3B). Caffeine
inhibited R848-induced XOD activity but also (unlike
following the exposure of THP-1 cells to PGN) it reduced
intracellular ROS levels upregulated by R848. In the case
of endosomal TLRs, XOD contributes to the intracellular
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ROS pool [17] together with NADPH oxidase (Figure 3C).
This result explains the caffeine-dependent decrease in
HIF-1α accumulation in THP-1 cells induced by R848,
since ROS may play a primary role in the process.
Glycolysis was also significantly upregulated in the
presence of R848 and this effect was slightly reduced by
caffeine. 2-OG levels were significantly reduced (by ca.
50%) by caffeine (Figure 3D). R848-induced production
of IL-6 and TNF-α were significantly lower in the presence
of caffeine (Figure 3E).
SCF-induced biological responses of THP-1 cells
were also affected in a way similar to that observed
for PGN (see above). THP-1 cells were exposed for 4
h to 0.1 μg/ml SCF with or without 1 h pre-treatment
with 1 mM caffeine. We found that SCF-induced HIF1α accumulation was not decreased in the presence of
caffeine which corresponded to a striking decrease in
HIF-1α PHD activity in the cells (Figure 4A). ATP, cAMP
and AMP levels were not affected at all (Figure 4B). As
with TLRs, the Kit receptor, which recognises SCF as a
ligand, is not a G-protein coupled receptor (it is a typical
receptor tyrosine kinase), and therefore no changes in
cAMP levels were observed. SCF-induced XOD activity
was reduced by caffeine, however intracellular ROS
levels were slightly upregulated by SCF and remained
unchanged in the presence of caffeine (Figure 4C). SCF
also upregulated glycolysis and caffeine attenuated this
process as well as significantly reduced intracellular
2-OG levels (Figure 4D). Finally, SCF-induced vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production was
significantly increased upon exposure of the cells to SCF,
but this process was attenuated by caffeine (Figure 4D).
In order to confirm that caffeine is able to directly
inhibit XOD and, if so, to characterise this process,
we studied the kinetics of caffeine effects on purified
bovine liver XOD activity using the Lineweaver-Burk
approach [21]. We found that caffeine isosterically (in a
competitive manner) inhibited XOD (Figure 5). However,
the Ki was only 4.022 mM suggesting that caffeine is
a weak inhibitor compared to classic XOD inhibitors
(for example, allopurinol and sodium tungstate). This
confirmed our previous studies showing the ability of
caffeine to inhibit XOD in vitro but not in vivo due to
demethylation of the drug.

Caffeine affects SCF-induced responses of
primary human AML cells in an mTORdependent manner
We sought confirmation of our results using primary
human leukocytes. For this purpose we used primary acute
myeloid leukaemia cells AML-PB001F purchased from
AllCells (Alameda, CA, USA). Cells were exposed to
0.1 μg/ml SCF (these cells express high levels of the Kit
receptor) for 4 h with or without 1 h pre-treatment with
1 mM caffeine. We found that SCF induced a significant
28681

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effects of caffeine on TLR2-mediated biological responses of THP-1 cells. Cells were exposed for 4 h to PGN with

or without 1 h pre-treatment with 1 mM caffeine before assessing the indicated biological responses: A. HIF-1α accumulation, B. ATP/
cAMP/AMP levels, C. XOD activity and intracellular ROS pool, D. glycolysis and 2-OG level as well as E. TNF-α/IL-6 release. Western
blot data show one representative experiment of three that gave similar results. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D; * – p < 0.01
vs. control (n = 3), a – p < 0.01 vs. PGN alone.

Figure 3: Effects of caffeine on TLR7/8-mediated biological responses of THP-1 cells. Cells were exposed for 4 h to R848 with

or without 1 h pre-treatment with 1 mM caffeine before analysing A. HIF-1α accumulation, B. ATP/cAMP/AMP levels, C. XOD activity
and intracellular ROS pool, D. glycolysis and 2-OG level as well as E. TNF-α/IL-6 release. Western blot data show one representative
experiment of three that gave similar results. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D; * – p < 0.01 vs. control (n = 3), b – p < 0.01 vs.
R848 alone.

Figure 4: Effects of caffeine on SCF-induced Kit receptor activation in- THP-1 cells. Cells were exposed for 4 h to SCF with

or without 1 h pre-treatment with 1 mM caffeine before analysing A. HIF-1α accumulation, B. ATP/cAMP/AMP levels, C. XOD activity
and intracellular ROS pool, D. glycolysis and 2-OG level as well as VEGF release. Western blot data show one representative experiment
of three that gave similar results. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D; * – p < 0.01 vs. control (n = 3), c – p < 0.01 vs. SCF alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28682

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Caffeine is a weak competitive inhibitor of XOD. Kinetics of the effects of caffeine on the activity of purified bovine
liver XOD were analysed as described in the Materials and methods. Each point was analysed in quadruplicate.

increase in mTOR phosphorylation at position S2448 and
respectively phosphorylation of its substrates – p70 S6K1
and eIF4E-BP1 (Figure 6A). These levels were compared
with those in resting primary human leukocytes (PL)
obtained from healthy donors (Figure 6A). As in THP-1
cells, SCF induced significant upregulation of HIF-1α
accumulation, glycolysis, VEGF release and XOD activity.
All these effects were attenuated by caffeine (in the case of
HIF-1α – downregulated; the level was still significantly
higher than the control) (Figure 6B). Interestingly,
background levels of HIF-1α, pS2448 mTOR and XOD
activity were significantly higher in primary AML
cells compared to primary “healthy” leukocytes (PL)
suggesting that these factors/pathways are crucial for
AML cell function. Importantly, resting primary human
leukocytes obtained from the blood of healthy donors did
not accumulate detectable amounts of HIF-1α protein.
Given the effects of caffeine on AML cell
function, we next determined the concentrationdependent actions of caffeine on these cells following
exposure to 0.1 μg/ml SCF for 4 h with or without 1 h
pre-treatment with 0.01, 0.1 and 1 mM caffeine. Levels
of pS2448 mTOR were monitored as a biochemical
response. We found that SCF-dependent mTOR
phosphorylation was significantly affected by 1 and 0.1
but not 0.01 mM caffeine (Figure 7).

readily respond to IgE-dependent triggering, although
compared to leukaemic myeloid cells they are relatively
unresponsive to SCF [22] and TLR2/4 ligands [23].
Stimulation of primary human basophils with 1 μg/ml
anti-IgE led to the activation of mTOR phosphorylation
at S2448, which was attenuated by caffeine (Figure 8).
Similar effects were observed regarding the phos­
phorylation of mTOR substrates (Figure 8).
As shown previously [24], HIF-1α accumulation
was upregulated by anti-IgE. This process was completely
blocked by caffeine and the process appeared to be
independent of PHD activity, since no significant
changes were observed in enzyme activity (Figure 9A).
Importantly, we could not detect any XOD activity
in basophils, which is supported by our previous
observations [21]. Western blot analysis (Figure 9A)
demonstrated the absence of XOD protein in basophils.
ATP and AMP levels were not affected by any of the
treatments; however, cAMP levels were significantly
upregulated by anti-IgE and were further increased in the
presence of 1 mM caffeine (Figure 9B). This suggests that
IgE-induced responses in basophils are indirectly linked
to G-protein-coupled receptor signalling, possibly due
to the actions of histamine acting through H2 receptors,
which may serve as a negative feedback loop limiting
further basophil degranulation and histamine release.
Intracellular ROS levels were not affected which confirms
our previous findings suggesting that IgE-induced
basophil responses are orchestrated in a redox-independent
manner (Figure 9C). IgE-dependent histamine release
was significantly affected by caffeine which is in line
with the observed caffeine-dependent downregulation
of IgE-induced glycolysis and 2-OG levels (Figure 9D).
However, the effect associated with 2-OG levels did not
impact HIF-1α accumulation or PHD activity, further
confirming our hypothesis that this process is most likely
to be PHD-independent in basophils.

Caffeine downregulates anti-IgE-induced
activation of human basophils by affecting
mTOR signalling
We were next interested in investigating the effects
of caffeine on primary human basophils. These terminally
differentiated granulocytes display biochemically similar
but pathophysiologically different responses compared to
THP-1 and primary AML cells. Furthermore, basophils
play a crucial role in human allergic reactions since they
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28683

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effects of caffeine on SCF-induced Kit receptor activation in primary human AML cells. AML-PB001F cells

were exposed for 4 h to SCF with or without 1 h pre-treatment with 1 mM caffeine before analysis of A. mTOR phosphorylation and its
biological activity and B. HIF-1α accumulation, glycolysis, VEGF release and XOD activity. Western blot data (50,000 cells per well were
loaded in each case for AML cells and 90,000 for healthy primary leucocytes) show one representative experiment of three-four (using cells
derived from different donors) that gave similar results. In both panels A and B we also show the results obtained from non-treated healthy
primary human leukocytes (PL) handled as described in Materials and Methods. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D; * – p < 0.01
vs. control (n = 4 for panel A and n = 3 for panel B), d – p < 0.01 vs. SCF alone.

Figure 7: Dose-dependent effects of caffeine on SCF-induced Kit receptor-mediated intracellular pS2448 mTOR
levels. AML-PB001F cells were exposed for 4 h to 0.1 μg/ml of SCF with or without 1 h pre-treatment with 0.01, 0.1 or 1 mM caffeine.
pS2448 mTOR levels were analysed. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D of three individual experiments; * – p < 0.01 vs. control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28684

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Caffeine inhibits ligand-induced mTOR signalling pathway in primary human basophils. Cells were exposed for 2 h to

0.1 μg/ml anti-IgE with or without 30 min pre-treatment with 1 mM caffeine. pS2448 and pT2446 phospho-mTOR levels as well as phosphorylation
of its downstream enzymes were analysed as described in Materials and Methods. Western blot data show one representative experiment of four
that gave similar results. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D; * – p < 0.01 vs. control (n = 4), e – p < 0.01 vs. anti-IgE alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28685

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Effects of caffeine on the anti-IgE-induced biological responses of primary human basophils. Cells were

exposed for 2 h to 0.1 μg/ml anti-IgE with or without 30 min pre-treatment with 1 mM caffeine before analysis of A. HIF-1α accumulation
and XOD protein levels, B. ATP/cAMP/AMP levels, C. intracellular ROS pool and histamine release, D. glycolysis and 2-OG level.
Western blot data show one representative experiment of three that gave similar results. Quantitative data are shown as means ± S.D ; * – p
< 0.01 vs. control (n = 3), e – p < 0.01 vs. anti-IgE alone.

We next further verified the differential involvement
of XOD in the biological responses of myeloid cells
by assessing whether basophil function could be
affected by XOD inhibitors/substrate. We studied the
effects of the XOD inhibitor allopurinol, the XOD sub­
strate hypoxanthine (hypoxanthine – chemically is an
allopurinol isomer) and the highly specific XOD inhibitor
sodium tungstate. Neither of these compounds, however,
was able to significantly affect anti-IgE-stimulated
basophil histamine release and HIF-1α accumulation
(Supplementary Figure S1). We also noticed that, while
0.01 mM caffeine did not significantly inhibit IgEinduced histamine release, HIF-1α accumulation was
still markedly reduced at this low caffeine concentra­
tion (Supplementary Figure S1). This provides further
confirmation of our previous observations [24] suggesting
that histamine release and HIF-1 activation are controlled
by biochemically independent pathways.

control we used urine of healthy volunteers following
consumption of caffeine by them. In the urine we detected
six caffeine metabolites as well as unmodified caffeine,
suggesting that all the metabolites are detectable by our
method and that caffeine is mostly metabolised in vivo
in humans (Figure 10). In both THP-1 cells and primary
human basophils we detected caffeine but none of its
metabolites, suggesting that caffeine is endocytosed into
these myeloid cells but is not further metabolised. This
finding was confirmed by the fact that none of the caffeine
metabolites was detected in the culture medium; only
unmodified caffeine was detected (Figure 10). These data
suggest that the effects of caffeine observed in the study
were solely caused by unmodified caffeine.
Taken together, our results demonstrate for the first
time that caffeine affects the biological responses of human
myeloid cells, including leukaemia cell lines, primary AML
cells and primary human basophils by downregulating the
mTOR pathway and differentially inhibiting XOD.

Caffeine is taken up but not metabolised by
human myeloid cells

DISCUSSION

In order to ascertain whether the observed effects
described above were due to caffeine or a metabolite
we investigated whether the different myeloid cell
types employed in the study could metabolised caffeine
following cellular uptake. We found that neither
THP-1 cells nor primary human leukocytes nor basophils
contained the cytochrome P450 1A2 isoform which is
primarily responsible for caffeine demethylation (data
not shown since they are at zero levels). We then assessed
whether caffeine (a) enters the studied cells and (b) is
metabolised through other pathways. For this purpose we
used high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in
order to detect caffeine and its metabolites. As a positive

Caffeine, a plant-derived purine alkaloid, was
chemically identified over 100 years ago and its effects
were observed even before Biochemistry developed
into an independent field of science [1]. However, due
to its metabolism and labile properties, the effects of
caffeine in human hematopoietic cells (where it remains
unmetabolised) were completely overlooked. Given the fact
that some purine compounds were found to directly inhibit
mTOR, we were interested to see whether caffeine displays
such an activity too. Alternatively, unmodified caffeine was
found to inhibit XOD, which we recently showed to play
a major role in myeloid cell responses. We were therefore
interested in discovering whether caffeine plays a major role

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28686

Oncotarget

Figure 10: Determination of caffeine and its metabolites in human urine and myeloid cells. Caffeine and its metabolites

in human urine (coffee drinkers) and medium/lysates of THP-1 cells (exposed for 4 h to 1 mM caffeine) and human basophils (exposed
for 2 h to 1 mM caffeine) were detected by HPLC. The caffeine metabolic pathway in humans is also presented indicating how each
metabolite is obtained biochemically. CYP4501A – cytochrome P450 A2; XOD – xanthine oxidase; NAT2 – N-acetyltransferase 2;
AAMU – 5 Acetylamino-6-amino-3-methyluracil; AFMU – 5 Acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil.

in the biological responses of human hematopoietic cells of
myeloid lineage based on its potential actions on XOD and
mTOR. These leukocytes determine human innate immune
responses and are affected during severe human disorders
such as AML and allergy. Thus, elucidating a potentially
overlooked mechanism of caffeine may result in additional
therapeutic uses for this methylxanthine which was rapidly
taken up by these myeloid cells but not metabolised.
We analysed the effects of caffeine on the proinflammatory and pro-leukaemic responses of human
AML cells using THP-1 cell line and primary AML cells
as well as on the pro-allergic reactions of primary human
basophils. Caffeine was found to downregulate activating
phosphorylation (S2448 position) of the mTOR protein thus
affecting its kinase activity. This occurred in both THP-1
cells (upon exposure to PGN, R848 and SCF) as well as in
primary AML cells stimulated with SCF (TLR expression
levels are quite low in these cells). Importantly, caffeine did
not increase phosphorylation of the T2446 residue of mTOR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

This shows that caffeine does not activate specific mTOR
downregulatory cascades, for example the AMPK pathway
[10]. Intracellular AMP (specific AMP kinase activator)
levels were also not affected by caffeine. However, caffeine
inhibited XOD activity in both THP-1 and primary AML
cells. Our previous studies showed that inhibition of XOD by
allopurinol or sodium tungstate led to a significant increase
in intracellular AMP levels and therefore induced AMPKdependent downregulatory phosphorylation of mTOR
at position T2446 [21]. Here, we also observed inhibition
of XOD but without increases in intracellular AMP
levels. Recently, it was reported that caffeine is capable
of inhibiting Akt phosphorylation thus preventing mTOR
activation (presumably through phosphorylation of its
S2448 residue). However, other studies demonstrated that,
in tissues expressing high levels of XOD (for example
skeletal muscles), high concentrations of caffeine (10 mM)
activate AMPK [7]. These tissues, however, can metabolise
caffeine. XOD expression in leukocytes (even in AML cells)
28687

Oncotarget

is relatively low compared to other tissues and in basophils
where the presence of XOD was even undetectable [21].
Although caffeine is a weak inhibitor of XOD
compared to allopurinol and especially sodium tungstate, it
might affect the re-use of purines in myeloid cells (this system
is quite robust in leukocytes and is not affected by allopurinol
or tungastates, which are specific XOD inhibitors only –
especially tungstates, where tungsten replaces molybdenum
in the catalytic site of the enzyme causing its irreversible
inhibition). Caffeine is known to inhibit HGPRT, however, in
myeloid cells its inhibitory effects are more striking since it
is not metabolised in these cells [25]. This means that, upon
inhibition of XOD by caffeine, levels of hypoxanthine are
increased. However, hypoxanthine can’t be converted into
IMP and further down to AMP [21] (for more details, see
Supplementary Figure S2). This lack of increase in AMP
levels prevents the activation of AMP kinase and subsequent
phosphorylation of mTOR at T2446.
Inhibition of mTOR and XOD by caffeine did
not lead to the attenuation of HIF-1α accumulation in
THP-1 and primary AML cells. This was due to a significant
decrease in HIF-1α PHD activity (resulting from the
decrease in intracellular 2-OG levels required for this
reaction in form of a co-factor). Caffeine activates lipolysis
by upregulating the activity of hormone-sensitive lipase
(HSL), which is well expressed in myeloid cells [4, 25].
This leads to a decrease in glycolysis, which is further
supported by a decrease in mTOR kinase activity which
is required for translation of glycolytic enzymes [18, 26].
Such an effect results in the upregulation of the Krebs’
cycle and thus in a decrease in intracellular 2-OG levels that
affect HIF-1α PHD activity, thus preventing physiological
degradation of HIF-1α protein. The effects described above
are summarised in the scheme presented in the Figure 11.
Caffeine was revealed to inhibit mTOR, thus
downregulating glycolysis. Previous reports suggested
a possible influence of caffeine on NF-kB activity and
calcium-dependent signalling [7, 27]. All these effects
are likely to be responsible for the decreases in cytokine
production observed in the present study (e.g. TNF-α and
IL-6 in the case of TLR ligand stimulation and VEGF
when the cells were exposed to SCF). These effects took
place in both THP-1 and primary AML cells.
Despite the well-known fact that caffeine is an
effective inhibitor of cAMP-PDE [2], no significant changes
in intracellular cAMP levels were observed in THP-1 or
AML cells. This could be explained by the fact that neither
TLRs nor the SCF receptor (Kit) are G-protein coupled
receptors. Therefore, they do not activate adenylate cyclase,
the enzyme, which converts ATP into cAMP.
A different picture was observed in primary human
basophils which did not express detectable amounts of
XOD. Here, we also observed inhibition of IgE-induced
mTOR kinase activity and abrogation of the mediator
(histamine) release. However, HIF-1α accumulation
did not seem to be PHD dependent in these cells and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

therefore, upon inhibition of mTOR kinase activity,
IgE-induced HIF-1α accumulation was attenuated by
caffeine. However, in contrast to AML and THP-1 cells,
we observed a significant increase in intracellular cAMP
levels in basophils which were further upregulated by
caffeine. Basophils release histamine and also express
H2-type histamine receptors which are G-protein-coupled
and thus activate adenylate cyclase [15]. The cAMP levels
induced by the autocrine actions of histamine are therefore
preserved by caffeine as an inhibitor of cAMP-PDE. In
this case, it is likely that we observed additional inhibition
of mTOR activation due to the indirect actions of caffeine
by increasing cAMP. All the effects reported were studied
at 1 mM caffeine. However, dose-response investigations
demonstrated that it displays its activities in primary AML
cells and basophils at 0.1 mM though not at 0.01 mM.
Taken together, our results demonstrate, for the first
time, that unmodified caffeine inhibits mTOR function by
targeting its kinase activity during the biological responses
of various human myeloid cells. These findings support
observations made by other groups regarding caffeine effects
on the mTOR pathway in non-blood cells [7, 8]. Furthermore,
caffeine inhibits XOD activity but, unlike XOD-specific
inhibitors, it does not upregulate the re-use of purines in
AML cells. In contrast, basophils do not express detectable
amounts of XOD. Since caffeine is a non-toxic drug with
relatively few side effects at therapeutic concentrations, and
easily metabolised in non-blood cells, our findings may lead
to new avenues for therapy of human disorders affecting
myeloid hematopoietic cells. However, it is obvious that
high concentrations of caffeine would need to be maintained
in order to achieve either its anti-inflammatory/anti-allergic
effects or to affect SCF-induced biological responses.
Because of this, the therapeutic actions of caffeine would
more likely be achieved following external applications of
this drug. For example, caffeine could be applied as a cream
supplement or through other forms of direct application
of unmodified caffeine on target myeloid cells with the
purpose of their inactivation or elimination (previous studies
have shown the ability of caffeine to induce programmed
cell death [7, 8]). Alternatively, for internal applications,
one might consider the recently discovered advantages of
Nanobiotechnology or other highly specific forms of drug
delivery in order to supply caffeine directly to myeloid cells.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
RPMI-1640 medium, foetal calf serum and
supplements, caffeine, bovine liver XOD, PGN, goat antihuman-IgE, caffeine metabolites and an ATP luminometric
detection kit were purchased from Sigma (Suffolk, UK).
AMP/cAMP detection kits were purchased from Promega
(Southampton, UK). Maxisorp™ microtitre plates were
obtained from Nunc (Roskilde, Denmark) as well as from
28688

Oncotarget

Figure 11: Possible biochemical mechanisms of the effects of caffeine on the mTOR pathway, HIF-1 activity and
energy metabolism in human myeloid cells (SCF-induced responses are used as the example). Additional abbreviations
used: HK – hexokinase, PGI – phosphoglucose isomerase, PFK – phosphofructokinase, AL – Aldolase, TPI – Triose-phosphate isomerase,
GPDH – glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, PGK – phosphoglycerate kinase, PGM – phosphoglycerate mutase, EL – enolase,
PK – pyruvate kinase, LDH – lactate dehydrogenase, DHAP – dihydroxyacetone phosphate, GA3-P – glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, 3-PG –
3-phosphoglycerate, 2-PG – 2-phosphoglycerate, PEP – phosphoenolpyruvate, GLT1/3 – glucose transporters 1/3, TSC1/TSC2 – Tuberous
sclerosis proteins 1 and 2, PDK – P-3-PI-dependent kinase, ADK – adenylate kinase, TK – tyrosine kinase.

Oxley Hughes Ltd (London, UK). Mouse monoclonal
antibodies to HIF-1α, mTOR and β-actin as well as rabbit
polyclonal antibodies against phospho-S2448 mTOR and
phospho-T2446 mTOR were from Abcam (Cambridge,
UK). Antibodies against phospho-T389 p70 S6 kinase 1
(p70 S6K1), total and phospho-S65 eukaryotic initiation
factor 4E binding protein 1 (eIF4E-BP1) antibodies were
obtained from Cell Signalling Technology (Danvers, MA
USA). Goat anti-mouse and goat anti-rabbit fluorescence
dye-labelled antibodies were obtained from Li-Cor
(Lincoln, Nebraska USA). ELISA-based assay kits for
the detection of IL-6, TNF-α and VEGF were purchased
from R&D Systems (Abingdon, UK). All other chemicals
were of the highest grade of purity that were commercially
available (from either Sigma or Fisher Scientific).

supplemented with 10% foetal calf serum, penicillin (50 IU/
ml) and streptomycin sulfate (50 μg/ml). Cells used in the
experiments were from the 5–35th passage.

Primary human AML cells
Primary human AML mononuclear cells (AMLPB001F, newly diagnosed/untreated) were purchased from
AllCells (Alameda, CA, USA) and handled in accordance
with manufacturer’s instructions. Cells derived from two
different patients were used in the experiments.

Primary human leukocytes obtained from
healthy donors
Primary human leukocytes were obtained from buffy
coat blood (prepared from healthy donors) purchased from
the National Health Blood and Transfusion Service (NHSBT,
UK) following ethical approval (REC reference: 12/
WM/0319). Mononuclear-rich leukocytes were obtained by
Ficoll-density centrifugation according to the manufacturer’s

THP-1 human myeloid cells
THP-1 human leukaemia monocytic macrophages
were obtained from the European collection of Cell Cultures
(Salisbury, UK). Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 media
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28689

Oncotarget

protocol. Cell numbers were determined using a haemocy­
tometer and diluted accordingly with HEPES-buffered
Tyrode’s solution before treatment as indicated.

hydroxylation. Lysates of non-treated and treated THP1 cells were incubated for one hour in 96-well ELISA
plates which were coated with HIF-1α capture antibodies
and blocked with BSA as described previously. Lysates
were then subjected PHD assay following this incubation
period.

Primary human basophils
Primary human basophils were obtained from buffy
coats and isolated from the leukocyte-rich fraction obtained
by Ficoll density centrifugation as described above. Basophils
were then purified by a negative selection procedure to
90–100% purity (as judged by alcian blue staining) using
a commercially available kit, as previously described [28].
Basophils were pre-incubated for 15 min at 37°C in HEPESbuffered Tyrode’s solution and then treated as indicated.

Detection of intracellular ATP, cAMP, AMP,
ROS and 2-OG levels, xanthine oxidase activity
as well as glycolysis intensity
ATP was detected using a commercial luminometric
kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
AMP and cAMP levels were detected using luminometric
assay kits in accordance with manufacturer’s protocols.
Intracellular ROS levels were also monitored by
luminometric assay as previously described [32]. 2-OG
levels were analysed using a glutamate dehydrogenase
spectrophotometric assay [33]. Xanthine oxidase activity
was measured as described before [21]. The intensity of
glycolysis was determined based on the ability cell lysate
enzymes, used as a multienzyme preparation, to convert
glucose into lactate under anaerobic conditions, which was
achieved by employing an anaerobic chamber [10].

Stem cell factor
Human SCF protein was produced in E.Coli and
purified in accordance with published protocols [29].

Western blot analysis
Expressions of HIF-1α, total and phospho-T389
p70 S6K1, total and phospho-S65 eIF4E-BP1 as well as
XOD protein levels were determined by Western blot
analysis and compared to β-actin in order to determine
equal protein loading, as previously described [10]. Li-Cor
goat secondary antibodies, conjugated with fluorescent
dyes, were used according to the manufacturer’s protocol
in order to visualise the proteins of interest using a Li-Cor
Odyssey imaging system. Western blot data were subjected
to quantitative analysis using Odyssey software and values
were normalised against respective β-actin bands.

Detection of IL-6, TNF-α and VEGF release
Concentrations of these cytokines released into the
cell culture media were analysed by ELISA (R&D Systems
assay kit) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Measurement of histamine release
Histamine releases were assessed using spectro­
fluorometic autoanalysis as previously described [34].
Histamine releases were calculated from the histamine
contents released into the supernatants as a percentage of
total histamine content present in lysed cell pellets.

Detection of phospho-S2448 and phospho-T2446
mTOR in cell lysates by ELISA
Phosphorylation of mTOR was monitored using
ELISA assays as recently described [10, 21, 30]. Briefly,
the ELISA plates were coated with mouse anti-mTOR
antibodies and blocked with 2% BSA. Cell lysates were
then added to the wells and kept at room temperature for
at least 2 h (under constant agitation). After extensive
washing with TBST buffer, anti-phospho-S2448 (or antiphospho-T2446) mTOR antibody was added and plates
were incubated for at least 2 h at room temperature with
constant agitation. Plates were then washed with TBST
buffer and incubated with 1:1000 HRP-labelled goat antirabbit IgG in TBST buffer. After extensive washing with
TBST, bound secondary antibodies were then detected by
the peroxidase reaction (ortho-phenylenediamine/H2O2).

High performance liquid chromatography
Caffeine and its metabolites were analysed in urine
according to a previously described protocol [35, 36]
with minor modifications. Healthy subjects were asked
to refrain from all caffeine containing beverages and
chocolate for 1 day. At 8 a.m. on the test day subjects
were asked to consume 2 cups of very strong espresso
(approximately 200 mg of caffeine) and 6 hours later urine
was collected for analysis.
10 ml of urine were mixed with 200 mg of ascorbic
acid. The pH was adjusted to 3.5 with 30% acetic acid.
200 μl of urine were mixed with 140 mg of ammonium
sulfate, 25 μl of internal standard (137 MU) and vortexed
at full speed for 1 min. The metabolites were extracted
with chloroform:isopropanol (95:5) and centrifuged. The
organic phase was evaporated to dryness using nitrogen or
Speedvac and the pellet was dissolved in 750 μl of diluent

HIF-1α PHD assay
To detect HIF-1α PHD activity we employed
a peptide-based assay [31]. HIF-1α-free cell lysates
were used to avoid the impact of intracellular HIF-1α
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28690

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

containing MeOH : acetic acid : water (20:0.5:979.5
vol:vol:vol) and 5 μl of the sample was analysed by
Agilent HPLC system (the flow rate was 0.5 ml/min)
with a UV detector using a gradient elution profile.
Caffeine, caffeine metabolites and the internal standard
were separated on an Agilent XBD C18 reverse phase
column (1.8 μm, 4.6 × 50 mm). The solvents used for the
elution were mobile phase A containing MeOH : acetic
acid : water (20:0.5:979.5 vol:vol:vol) and mobile phase
B (MeOH : acetic acid : water 700:0.5:229.5 vol:vol:vol).
The gradient program was 0% B (0 min), 100% (0.1 to 15
min) and 0% (15.1 to 18 min). The analytes were detected
by UV absorbance at 280 nm. Calibration curves were
developed using known amounts of metabolites.

1.	 Miners JO, Birkett DJ. The use of caffeine as a metabolic probe for human drug metabolizing enzymes. Gen
Pharmacol. 1996; 27:245–249.
2.	 Stefanovich V. Cyclic 3′,5′-adenosine monophosphate
phosphodiesterase (cAMP PDE) and cyclic 3′,5′-guanosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase (cGMP PDE) in
microvessels isolated from bovine cortex. Neurochem Res.
1997; 4:681–687.
3.	 Spriet LL, MacLean DA, Dyck DJ, Hultman E, Cederblad G,
Graham TE. Caffeine ingestion and muscle metabolism
during prolonged exercise in humans. Am J Physiol. 1992;
262:E891–898.
4.	 Donsmark M, Langfort J, Holm C, Ploug T, Galbo H.
Contractions activate hormone-sensitive lipase in rat muscle
by protein kinase C and mitogen-activated protein kinase. J
Physiol. 2003; 550:845–854.

Analysis of total cytochrome P450 and activity of
CYP450 1A2
Total CYP450 was analysed by a classic
spectrophotometric method initially proposed by Omura
and Sato [37]. CYP450 1A2 activity was analysed based
on its ability to oxidise caffeine using NADPH as a donor.
Mouse liver homogenates obtained from commercial
sources were used as positive control.

5.	 Krovat BC, Tracy JH, Omiecinski CJ. Fingerprinting
of cytochrome P450 and microsomal epoxide hydrolase
gene expression in human blood cells. Toxicol Sci. 2000;
55:352–360.
6.	 Sumbaev VV, Rozanov AY. Effect of caffeine on xanthine
oxidase activity. Ukr Biokhim Zh. 1997; 69:196–200.
7.	 Miwa S, Sugimoto N, Yamamoto N, Shirai T, Nishida H,
Hayashi K, Kimura H, Takeuchi A, Igarashi K, Yachie A,
Tsuchiya H. Caffeine induces apoptosis of osteosarcoma
cells by inhibiting AKT/mTOR/S6K, NF-kappaB and
MAPK pathways. Anticancer Res. 2012; 32:3643–3649.

Statistical analysis
Each experiment was performed at least three times
and statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed
Student’s t test. Statistical probabilities (p) were expressed
as *, where p < 0.01.

8.	 Saiki S, Sasazawa Y, Imamichi Y, Kawajiri S, Fujimaki T,
Tanida I, Kobayashi H, Sato F, Sato S, Ishikawa K-I, Imoto
M, Hattori N. Caffeine induces apoptosis by enhancement
of autophagy via PI3K/Akt/mTOR/p70S6K inhibition.
Autophagy. 2011; 7:176–187.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Alexandr Prokhorov was a fellow of the European
Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI).
Regretfully, he has tragically died in an accident in recent
past. The work was partially supported by the University
of Kent Faculty of Sciences Research Fund. We are
also grateful to Dr. Simon Stafford (Oxley Hughes Ltd,
London, UK) for the gift of ELISA plates and to Ms Irene
Wegner (University of Applied Sciences Northwestern
Switzerland, Institute of Chemistry and Bioanalytics)
for her assistance with HPLC experiments. We are most
grateful to Dr. Luca Varani from Institute for Research in
Biomedicine, Universita’ della Svizzera Italiana (USI) via
Vela 6, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland for his generous help
with SCF purification.

9.	 Xie J, Ponuwei GA, Moore CE, Willars GB, Tee AR,
Herbert TP. cAMP inhibits mammalian target of rapamycin complex-1 and -2 (mTORC1 and 2) by promoting complex dissociation and inhibiting mTOR kinase activity. Cell
Signal. 2011; 23:1927–1935.
10.	 Yasinska IM, Gibbs BF, Lall GS, Sumbayev VV. The
HIF-1 transcription complex is essential for translational
control of myeloid hematopoietic cell function by maintaining mTOR phosphorylation. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014;
71:699–710.
11.	 Semenza GL. HIF-1 and tumor progression: pathophysiology and therapeutics. Trends Mol Med. 2002; 8:S62–67.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12.	 Walmsley SR, Cadwallader KA, Chilvers ER. The role of
HIF-1alpha in myeloid cell inflammation. Trends Immunol.
2005; 26:434–439.

There is no conflict of interest that the authors
should disclose.

13.	 Natarajan G, Lulic-Botica M, Aranda JV. Clinical pharmacology of caffeine in the newborn. NeoReviews. 2007;
8:e214–e221.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28691

Oncotarget

14.	 Akira S, Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2004; 4:499–511.

Wijmenga C, Stunnenberg HG, Xavier RJ, Netea MG.
mTOR- and HIF-1alpha-mediated aerobic glycolysis as
metabolic basis for trained immunity. Science. 2014;
345:1250684.

15.	 Nolan LL, Kidder GW. Caffeine: its action on purine
metabolizing enzymes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
1979; 91:253–262.

27.	 Ren H, Teng Y, Tan B, Zhang X, Jiang W, Liu M, Du B,
Qian M. Toll-like receptor-triggered calcium mobilization
protects mice against bacterial infection through extracellular ATP release. Infect Immun. 2014; 82:5076–5085.

16.	 Ferrer I, Costell M, Grisolia S. Lesch-Nyhan syndromelike behavior in rats from caffeine ingestion: changes in
HGPRTase activity, urea and some nitrogen metabolism
enzymes. FEBS Lett. 1982; 141:275–278.

28.	 Gibbs BF, Papenfuss K, Falcone FH. A rapid two-step
procedure for the purification of human peripheral blood
basophils to near homogeneity. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008;
38:480–485.

17.	 Nicholas SA, Bubnov VV, Yasinska IM, Sumbayev VV.
Involvement of xanthine oxidase and hypoxia-inducible factor
1 in Toll-like receptor 7/8-mediated activation of caspase 1 and
interleukin-1beta. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011; 68:151–158.

29.	 Wang C, Liu J, Wang L, Geng X. Solubilization and
refolding with simultaneous purification of recombinant
human stem cell factor. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2008;
144:181–189.

18.	 Pollizzi KN, Powell JD. Integrating canonical and metabolic signalling programmes in the regulation of T cell
responses. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014; 14:435–446.
19.	 Sumbayev VV, Nicholas SA. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1
as one of the “signaling drivers” of Toll-like receptor-­
dependent and allergic inflammation. Arch Immunol Ther
Exp (Warsz). 2010; 58:287–294.
20.	 Nicholas SA, Sumbayev VV. The role of redox-dependent
mechanisms in the downregulation of ligand-induced
Toll-like receptors 7, 8 and 4-mediated HIF-1 alpha prolyl
hydroxylation. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010; 88:180–186.

31.	 Gibbs BF, Yasinska IM, Oniku AE, Sumbayev VV. Effects
of stem cell factor on hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha accumulation in human acute myeloid leukaemia and LAD2
mast cells. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e22502.

21.	 Abooali M, Lall GS, Coughlan K, Lall HS, Gibbs BF,
Sumbayev VV. Crucial involvement of xanthine oxidase in
the intracellular signalling networks associated with human
myeloid cell function. Sci Rep. 2014; 4:6307.

32.	 Kapiszewska M, Cierniak A, Elas M, Lankoff A. Lifespan
of etoposide-treated human neutrophils is affected by
antioxidant ability of quercetin. Toxicol In Vitro. 2007;
21:1020–1030.

22.	 Frenz AM, Gibbs BF, Pearce FL. The effect of recombinant stem cell factor on human skin and lung mast cells and
basophil leukocytes. Inflamm Res. 1997; 46:35–39.

33.	 Kozhukhar AV, Yasinska IM, Sumbayev VV. Nitric
oxide inhibits HIF-1alpha protein accumulation under
hypoxic conditions: implication of 2-oxoglutarate and iron.
Biochimie. 2006; 88:411–418.

23.	 Sumbayev VV, Yasinska IM, Oniku AE, Streatfield CL,
Gibbs BF. Involvement of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 in
the inflammatory responses of human LAD2 mast cells and
basophils. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e34259.

34.	 Shore PA, Burkhalter A, Cohn VH Jr. A method for the
fluorometric assay of histamine in tissues. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 1959; 127:182–186.

24.	 Sumbayev VV, Nicholas SA, Streatfield CL, Gibbs BF.
Involvement of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 HIF(1alpha)
in IgE-mediated primary human basophil responses. Eur J
Immunol. 2009; 39:3511–3519.

35.	 Butler MA, Lang NP, Young JF, Caporaso NE, Vineis P, Hayes
RB, Teitel CH, Massengill JP, Lawsen MF, Kadlubar FF.
Determination of CYP1A2 and NAT2 phenotypes in human
populations by analysis of caffeine urinary metabolites.
Pharmacogenetics. 1992; 2:116–127.

25.	 Degang Y, Akama T, Hara T, Tanigawa K, Ishido Y,
Gidoh M, Makino M, Ishii N, Suzuki K. Clofazimine
modulates the expression of lipid metabolism proteins in
Mycobacterium leprae-infected macrophages. PLoS Negl
Trop Dis. 2012; 6:e1936.

36.	 Sarkar M, Stabbert R, Kinser RD, Oey J, Rustemeier K,
von Holt K, Schepers G, Walk RA, Roethig HJ. CYP1A2
and NAT2 phenotyping and 3-aminobiphenyl and
4-­aminobiphenyl hemoglobin adduct levels in smokers and
non-smokers. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006; 213:198–206.

26.	 Cheng SC, Quintin J, Cramer RA, Shepardson KM, Saeed S,
Kumar V, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Martens JH, Rao NA,
Aghajanirefah A, Manjeri GR, Li Y, Ifrim DC, Arts RJ, van
der Veer BM, Deen PM, Logie C, O’Neill LA, Willems P,
van de Veerdonk FL, van der Meer JW, Ng A, Joosten LA,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30.	 Prokhorov A, Gibbs BF, Bardelli M, Ruegg L, Fasler-Kan E,
Varani L, Sumbayev VV. The immune receptor Tim-3
mediates activation of PI3 kinase/mTOR and HIF-1 pathways in human myeloid leukaemia cells. Int J Biochem Cell
Biol. 2015; 59:11–20.

37.	 Omura T, Sato R. The Carbon Monoxide-Binding Pigment
of Liver Microsomes. I. Evidence for Its Hemoprotein
Nature. J Biol Chem. 1964; 239:2370–2378.

28692

Oncotarget

