Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Flcn-deficient renal cells are tumorigenic and sensitive to mTOR
suppression
Mingsong Wu1,* Shuhui Si2,*, Yan Li3, Susan Schoen2, Guang-Qian Xiao4, Xueying Li1,
Bin Tean Teh5, Guan Wu1,4, Jindong Chen1,2
1

Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi 563099, China

2

 idney Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Urology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642,
K
USA

3

State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Functions of Nature Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China

4

Department of Pathology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA

5

NCCS-VARI Translational Cancer Research Laboratory, National Cancer Centre, 169610, Singapore

*

Theses authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jindong Chen, e-mail: Jindong_chen@URMC.rochester.edu
Guan Wu, e-mail: guan_wu@URMC.rochester.edu
Keywords: BHD, RCC, kidney cancer, mTOR, sirolimus
Received: July 17, 2015      Accepted: September 09, 2015      Published: September 21, 2015

ABSTRACT
Deficiency of tumor suppressor FLCN leads to the activation of the mTOR signaling
pathway in human BHD-associated renal cell carcinomas (RCC). We have previously
developed a renal distal tubule-collecting duct-Henle’s loop-specific Flcn knockout
(KO) mouse model (Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre). This mouse model can only survive for three
weeks after birth due to the development of polycystic kidney and uremia. Whether
these cystic solid hyperplasia changes seen in those KO mice are tumorigenic or
malignant is unknown. In this study, we demonstrated that genetic disruption of Flcn
in mouse kidney distal tubule cells could lead to tumorigenic transformation of these
cells to develop allograft tumors with an aggressive histologic phenotype. Consistent
with previous reports, we showed that the mTOR pathway plays an important role
in the growth of these Flcn-deficient allograft and human UOK 257-1 xenograft
tumors. We further demonstrated that the mTOR inhibitor, sirolimus, suppresses
the tumor’s growth, suggesting that mTOR inhibitors might be effective in control of
FLCN-deficient RCC, especially in BHD renal tumorigenesis.

provides its therapeutic effects by inhibiting both protein
kinase complex mTORC1 and mTORC2. Sirolimus
inhibits the growth of many tumor cell lines in vitro and
exhibits antitumor activity in murine tumor models [4].
Sirolimus also affects angiogenesis in tumors. Guba et al.
demonstrated in a mouse model that sirolimus inhibited
tumor progression through antiangiogenic activity related
to impaired production of VEGF and limiting proliferative
response of endothelial cells to stimulation by VEGF [5].
Luan et al. reported similar findings in a mouse model of
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) [6]. Additionally,
sirolimus has also been shown to inhibit the progression
of dermal Kaposi’s sarcoma [7].

INTRODUCTION
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
is a protein kinase that integrates a variety of signaling
pathways that regulate cellular growth, proliferation
and metabolism [1]. The mTOR molecule involves two
functionally distinct, but cross-talk complexes, mTOR
complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2)
[2]. Targeting mTOR is one of the therapeutic strategies
for many mTOR-related tumorigenesis including kidney
cancer [3]. A few mTOR inhibitors have been identified
in the past decades [4]. Sirolimus, also known as
rapamycin, is one of the inhibitors of mTOR [4]. Sirolimus

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32761

Oncotarget

FLCN (folliculin), a tumor suppressor, was
originally identified from patients with Birt–Hogg–
Dubé (BHD) disease [8]. BHD disease is an inherited
kidney cancer syndrome that predisposes patients to
develop hair follicle tumors, kidney cancers, lung cysts,
and spontaneous pneumothorax [8, 9]. Generally, most
of kidney cancers (>90%) are renal cell carcinomas
(RCC) that are subtyped histologically as clear cell RCC
(70–80%), papillary RCC (10–15%), chromophobe
RCC (5–10%), and collecting duct carcinoma (<1%).
However, of the BHD-related kidney tumors, the
majority are chromophobe RCC and chromophobe RCC/
oncocytoma hybrid [10]. In addition, besides BHD, there
are a few other kidney cancer-related syndromes such
as von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome [11], hereditary
papillary renal carcinoma type 1 (HPRC) hereditary
leiomyomatosis [12] renal cell cancer (HLRCC), and
tuberous sclerosis (TS) [13]. All of the syndromes are
genotype-specific, namely, VHL, HPRC, HLRCC, TS,
and BHD are caused by mutated VHL, c-Met, FH, TSC/
TSC2, and FLCN, respectively. Interestingly, while each of
the above syndromes is subtype-specific, BHD syndrome
predisposes to developing all subtypes of RCCs 10, which
indicates that these syndromes have diverse genetic
and pathogenic backgrounds in renal tumorigenesis 14,
and only FLCN plays a role of universal renal tumor
suppressor. In addition, FLCN mutations and loss of its
mRNA expression have been observed in various types of
sporadic tumors including colorectal cancer, endometrial
carcinoma, gastric cancer, and other types of tumors
developed in BHD patients [8, 15–27], which further
suggests that FLCN is a universal cancer suppressor. In
vitro cell experiments and in vivo Flcn knockout mouse
model studies indicated that loss of FLCN led to the
activation of the mTOR pathway [28–34]. These findings
suggest that up-regulation of mTOR pathway is involved
in BHD tumorigenesis and mTOR could be an effective
drug target for FLCN-deficient tumorigenesis.
In our previous study, we have developed a renal
distal tubule-collecting duct-Henle’s loop-specific Flcn
knockout (KO) mouse model (Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre) [31].
This mouse model can only survive three weeks after
birth due to the development of polycystic kidneys and
uremia. Whether the cystic solid hyperplasia seen in these
KO mice is tumorigenic or malignant is unknown. In
this study, we demonstrated that cells isolated from the
mouse Flcn-deficient renal cysts containing cystic solid
hyperplasia could evolve into malignant tumorigenic
cells in vitro, and could develop allograft tumors after
being injected into nude mice. Moreover, we further
developed a xenograft tumor mouse model by inoculating
human FLCN-deficient UOK 257-1 cells [35]. Since no
therapeutic approaches for BHD kidney tumorigenesis
have been described, targeting the mTOR pathway could
be an effective therapeutic strategy for BHD-specific
or FLCN-deficient kidney tumorigenesis. Herein, we
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

treated these allograft and xenograft mouse models with
the mTOR inhibitor, sirolimus, and demonstrated that
sirolimus could efficiently suppress FLCN-deficient tumor
growth.

RESULTS
Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule cells evolved
into aggressive tumor cells and allograft tumors
To determine whether genetic disruption of Flcn in
mouse kidney distal tubule cells can lead to development
of kidney neoplasm, we have previously generated
distal tubule-collecting duct-specific knockout mice by
breeding Flcnflox/flox mice to Ksp-Cre transgenic mice with
expression of Cre-recombinase under the control of the
kidney-specific cadherin promoter [31]. No substantial
solid tumors other than cysts and solid hyperplasia were
observed in all the affected mice (Figure 1A–1C), which
is likely due to the short lifespan of the Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre
mice due to polycystic changes of the kidneys and uremia.
Thus, in this study, we isolated and cultivated cells from
the cystic hyperplasia and micro-tumors of kidney-specific
homozygous knockout mice Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre, and
inoculated them into athymic nude mice to see whether
tumors would develop in these hosts.
The cystic renal cells were isolated from the
polycystic kidneys and cultivated in vitro for 35 passages
or more (Figure 1D). Six Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre kidneys
were used for isolating cystic renal cells. While most
of the cells died out, the pre-malignant or malignant
cells survived (Figure 1E–1F). Four cell lines were
successfully obtained. To determine whether the survived
cells are Flcn-disrupted, we performed genotyping on
the four selected cell lines. All the four cell lines are
Flcn-deleted (Figure 1G). Western blot analysis further
validated the result (Figure 1H). The surviving cells were
collected and maintained to establish cell lines. Inoculated
subcutaneously in the athymic nude mice, these cells
grew into allograft renal tumors after one month (Figure
2A–2B). The control HEK-293 normal kidney cells
did not develop any tumors. The Flcn-deficient tumors
were histologically composed of mixed spindle cells
and epithelial cells with high malignant morphology
(Figure 2C–2D). Immunohistochemical analysis with
a panel of kidney-specific markers (AQP1, PAX2, and
CK7) demonstrated that these tumors were renal cell
carcinomas. (Figure 2E–2H) The histological features
are consistent with sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma
(SRCC) (Figure 2F–2H). Human SRCC accounts for 1%
to 5% of all renal malignant neoplasms [36]. Patients with
sarcomatoid tumors usually present with poor prognosis
for all stages of the disease. While SRCC may evolve from
any type of renal cell carcinoma, many reports have noted
that chromophobe cell carcinoma is the most common
histologic variant associated with SRCC transformation
32762

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Generation of tumorigenic Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule cell lines. A. phenotype of the KO (Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre

knockout) mice. KO kidneys were enlarged due to polycystic changes compared to WT ones. B. H&E staining of the polycystic kidneys
of Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre mice at age of 10 days. C. hyperplasia/micro-tumors identified in a Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre mouse kidney (indicated by
arrows). D. No Flcn expression observed in the hyperplasia/micro-tumors (indicated by arrows). Note that the hyperplasia/micro-tumors
were Flcn negative compared to the proximal tubules stained positively (indicated by arrow heads). E, F. representative cells lines isolated
from two Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre polycystic/micro-tumor kidneys and cultured in DMEM medium. G. PCR genotyping demonstrated that
cell lines derived from four KO kidneys (C1-C4) displayed KO band (152 bp), indicated that Flcn had been disrupted. Wild-type kidney
(Flcnflox/flox) showed only a wild-type band (1001 bp). Cystic kidney (Cys) had both wild-type band and KO band due to the mixture of
Flcn disrupted and undisrupted renal cells. H. Western blot analysis demonstrated that the cells (C1–C4) have no Flcn expression. Cystic
kidney tissue showed weak Flcn expression. WT, wild type; KO, knockout. Cys, cystic kidney. Bar scale, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32763

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule cells are tumorigenic. A. inoculation of Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule cells

developed into allograft tumors in nude mice. B. allograft tumors obtained in the nude mice. C, D. H&E staining of these tumor tissue
sections revealed that all tumors were high-grade renal cell carcinomas (sarcomatoid RCC). E. IHC analysis with FLCN antibody
showed no Flcn expression in the allograft tumors. F, G. and H. IHC analysis by renal cell carcinoma makers (AQP1, PAX2, and CK7)
revealed that the allograft tumors were positive for these markers, indicating that the allograft tumors were renal cell carcinomas.
Bar scale, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32764

Oncotarget

[37–43]. Correspondingly, 84% of the human kidney
tumors from BHD patients were chromophobe or
chromophobe/oncocytoma hybrid [10]. Thus, it is not
surprising to see that Flcn-deficient renal cystic cells
ultimately develop into SRCCs.

the allograft reached ~450 mm3. We found that sirolimus
showed a strong suppressive effect on allograft tumor
growth even when the treatment started later (~450 mm3
instead of ~200 mm3) (p < 0.05) (Figure 4D–4F). At the
end of treatment, while the average tumor size in the
control group grew to ~2700 mm3, the average size of
sirolimus-treated tumors was ~570 mm3, a slight increase
from ~450 mm3.
To determine whether early-treatment of sirolimus
could be more effective, we further performed another
experiment by starting the sirolimus treatment when the
allograft tumors only reached ~150 mm3 at a dose of 7.5
mg/kg. While the vehicle-treated control tumors grew fast,
the sirolimus-treated tumors stopped growing and shrank
(Figure 5A–5B). At the end of the treatment, sirolimus
reduced the average tumor size to ~117 mm3 from average
size of ~150 mm3, whereas the control tumors reached
up to a size of ~2000 mm3. Clearly, both high-dose of
sirolimus and early-treatment delivered better efficacy
(p < 0.05, Figure 5C). Based on the above experiments, a
high dosage (15 mg/kg) of sirolimus and early-treatment
(tumor size ~150 mm3) could lead to more efficient tumor
growth suppression in the allograft mouse model. The
differences are statistically significant (Figure 6A–6B).

The mTOR pathway was up-regulated in
Flcn-deficient allograft tumors
To elucidate the biochemical mechanism of the
cystogenesis and carcinogenesis related to inactivation of
Flcn in these allograft tumors, we investigated the possible
relevance of Flcn to the mTOR signaling pathway. Since
we have demonstrated that Flcn deficiency leads to the
activation of the mTOR pathway in those kidney cysts
[31], we expected that mTOR was also activated in these
high-grade allograft RCCs originated from the cystic
hyperplasia/micro-tumor cells. First, we observed that
the allograft tumors (Figure 3A–3B) were Flcn negative
(Figure 3C–3D), indicating the tumors derived from Flcnnull cystic renal tubule cells. We then further examined
whether the inactivation of Flcn was associated with
the up-regulation of mTOR in the allograft tumors as
it does in Flcn-deficient cysts. Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed that mTOR was also activated through
phosphorylation in allograft sarcomatoid tumors
(Figure  3E–3F), which were Flcn-staining negative
(Figure 3C–3D). In contrast, the Flcn-positive cells
showed negative p-mTOR signals. To gain further insight
into the relevance of Flcn to the mTOR pathway, we next
examined the phosphorylated status of the downstream
targets S6. Phosphorylated S6 has been observed in some
of the tumors (Figure 3G–3H), which is consistent with
our observation in kidney cysts of Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre mice.
Therefore, these results suggest that Flcn is connected to
the mTOR signaling network.

Sirolimus suppressed xenograft tumor growth
of human FLCN-deficient UOK 257-1 cells
After the above results were obtained, we became
interested in comparing the mouse allograft model with
a human xenograft tumor model. The UOK 257 cell line
is the only well-characterized RCC cell line that was
derived from a BHD patient. To further test the efficacy of
sirolimus on human FLCN-deficient RCC growth in vivo,
we developed a xenograft mouse model by inoculating
human FLCN-deficient RCC line, UOK 257-1, a cell line
derived from a human BHD renal tumor [35]. It has been
demonstrated that loss of the FLCN leads to the activation
of the mTOR pathway in this cell line. Targeting mTOR by
its inhibitor sirolimus is expected to suppress the growth
of xenograft tumors developed from this cell line. When
the tumor size reached 200 mm3, sirolimus was given to
these mice at a dose of 15 mg/kg every other day. The
results demonstrated that sirolimus caused tumor growth
inhibition (Figure 7), which is consistent with the results
obtained in the allograft tumors though the efficacy was
slightly lower compared to the results obtained from the
mouse allograft tumors.

Sirolimus inhibited mouse allograft
Flcn-deficient tumor growth
To examine whether mTOR inhibitor sirolimus
could suppress mouse Flcn-deficient tumor growth,
we treated the above allograft-bearing nude mice with
sirolimus at a dose of 7.5 mg/kg every other day. The
treatment started when the allograft tumor reached
~200 mm3, and ended at the 21st day. The average size
of sirolimus-treated tumors increased to ~700 mm3 while
the vehicle-treated control increased to ~2200 mm3
(Figure 4A–4B). The results indicated that allograft tumor
growth was much slower in the sirolimus-treated group
compared to the vehicle treated controls, suggesting that
sirolimus could significantly inhibit the growth of these
allograft tumors (Figure 4C).
To further determine whether a higher dosage of
sirolimus would exhibit a dose dependent drug effect,
we repeated the experiment by increasing the sirolimus
dose to 15 mg/kg. Sirolimus was given to the mice when
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
In this study, we first isolated the mouse Flcndeficient cells from our previously developed knockout
mouse Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre that can only survive three
weeks after birth due to the development of polycystic
kidneys and blood urea nitrogen (BUN). We further
32765

Oncotarget

Figure 3: The mTOR pathway is activated in allograft tumors developed from Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule cell
lines. A, B. H&E staining of tumors. C, D. Flcn was not expressed in allograft tumor. E, F. mTOR was activated by phosphorylation in
Flcn-deficient tumor. G, H. phosphorylated activation of S6 was also observed in tumors. Bar scale, 50 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32766

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Sirolimus inhibits mouse allograft Flcn-deficient tumor growth. A. representative tumors photographed from both

sirolimus-treated mice (upper panel) and vehicle-treated control mice (lower panel). Sirolimus (7.5 mg/kg) was given every other day when
allograft tumor size reached 200 mm3. B. growth curve of sirolimus-treated mice and vehicle-treated control mice. C. tumor growth was
inhibited significantly by sirolimus compared to vehicle-treated controls (p < 0.01, t-test, showed in C). At the end of the treatment, tumors
continued to grow slowly. D. representative tumors photographed from both sirolimus-treated mice (upper panel) and vehicle-treated
control mice (lower panel). Sirolimus at a high dose (15 mg/kg) was given to treat the allograft tumors when the tumor size reached 450
mm3. E. growth curves of sirolimus-treated mice with high dosage of sirolimus treatment (15 mg/kg) and vehicle-treated control mice. F.
tumor growth was inhibited significantly by sirolimus compared to vehicle-treated controls (p < 0.01, showed in F). Note that tumor growth
had essentially stopped when treated with a higher dose of sirolimus.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32767

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Sirolimus inhibits tumor growth. A. representative tumors photographed from both sirolimus-treated mice (upper panel)
and vehicle-treated control mice (lower panel). B, C. sirolimus (7.5 mg/kg) was given to the treatment group when allograft tumor size
reached 150 mm3. Tumor growth was inhibited significantly by sirolimus compared to vehicle-treated controls (C). At the end of the
treatment, allograft tumors shrank slightly.

Figure 6: High dosages of sirolimus and early treatment lead to better treatment effects on tumor. A. high dosage of

sirolimus (15 mg/kg) exerted stronger inhibition on allograft tumor growth compared with low dose (7.5 mg/kg) (p < 0.05). B. sirolimus
exerted more efficient suppression on smaller tumors at an early-stage (tumor size, <150 mm3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32768

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Sirolimus inhibits human UOK 257-1 xenograft tumor growth. A. representative tumors photographed from both

sirolimus-treated mice (upper panel) and vehicle-treated control mice (lower panel) at the end of the experiments (day 22). Sirolimus
(15 mg/kg) was given every other day for 21 days when allograft tumor size reached 200 mm3. B. growth curves of sirolimus-treated mice
and vehicle-treated control mice. C. at the end of treatment, tumors were significantly smaller in sirolimus-treated group compared to
vehicle-treated controls (p < 0.05).

demonstrated that these Flcn-deficient cells could evolve
into tumorigenic cells and develop allograft tumors in
athymic nude mice. The ability of the cells to develop
into allograft tumors implies that deficiency of Flcn in
kidney distal tubule-collecting duct-Henle’s loop would
lead to kidney cancer if the Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre mice could
survive longer. Our in vitro culture process might have
played a significant role in “natural” selection of these
premalignant or malignant cells. To our knowledge, this is
the first time that by harvesting potential tumorigenic cells
from an organ-specific tumor suppressor knockout mouse
model and culturing these cells in vitro to overcome the
shorter life expectancy of the knockout mouse model, the
tumorigenic capability of cells with a tumor suppressor
gene disruption was able to be tested. Otherwise, these
cells would not have lived long enough in vivo to generate
tumors.
The mouse allograft tumors also displayed the
features of sarcomatoid RCC, indicating that loss of Flcn
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in renal distal tubule cells could result in highly aggressive
tumors from these cells. Similar to renal cysts developed
from our Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre mice, these allograft tumors
also exhibited the activation of the mTOR pathway,
which is consistent with the previous findings in FLCNdeficient cell lines and animal models. To test whether
mTOR inhibitors, such as sirolimus, could suppress tumor
growth in allograft mice as well, we treated the allograft
mice with various concentrations of sirolimus. Our results
demonstrated that sirolimus could effectively inhibit Flcndeficient allograft tumor growth, suggesting that mTOR
inhibitors may be effective in treating FLCN-deficient
RCC. Additionally, we demonstrated that a higher dose
of sirolimus and earlier treatment delivered a better
suppressive effect on tumor growth, showing a dosedependent manner in tumor suppression.
To determine whether sirolimus can also exert
suppression on human FLCN-deficient tumor growth,
we developed a xenograft tumor mouse model for testing
32769

Oncotarget

by inoculating human FLCN-deficient UOK 257-1
cells that were isolated from the original UOK 257 line
[35]. Similarly, treatment of the UOK 257-1 xenograft
with sirolimus led to suppression of tumor growth.
Interestingly, it appeared that sirolimus was somewhat
less effective against human UOK 257-1 xenograft
tumor growth at a dose of 15 mg/kg compared to mouse
allograft tumors. After 12 days treatment, the sirolimustreated tumors started to grow, though much slower than
the control group, suggesting that the tumors might have
gradually developed resistance to sirolimus. In addition,
the genetic background of the human UOK 257-1 cell line
is probably different from the mouse allograft tumors,
potentially carrying more DNA mutations, which may
lead to the activation of other signaling pathways besides
mTOR. Nonetheless, significant tumor suppression was
observed in sirolimus-treated UOK 257-1 xenograft
tumors. Thus, we provided first evidence that the mTOR
inhibitor, sirolimus, can efficiently suppress both allograft
and xenograft FLCN-dificient tumor growth.
Since the role of mTOR in cell proliferation and
survival has been a major focus of research in human
oncogenesis [44], and many genes associated with
tumor-prone syndromes (e.g. hamartoma syndromes)
are involved in the mTOR pathway [45], there has been
considerable effort in developing mTOR-targeting
drugs for use in oncology. In the case of kidney cancer,
a sirolimus analog, temsirolimus, was approved for
treating advanced stage RCC in 2007 based on a Phase III
study and has been proven to be effective against RCCs
that were primarily clear cell subtype [46]. The clinical
benefit of temsirolimus for patients was demonstrated in
the study comparing temsirolimus with interferon alpha
(IFN-alpha) or combined temsirolimus plus IFN-alpha as
first-line treatment of advanced RCC, showing treatment
with temsirolimus alone significantly increased median
overall survival in poor-risk, advanced RCC patients (10.9
vs 7.3 vs 8.4 months) [46]. To test whether temsirolimus is
effective on other RCC subtypes, in another clinical study,
temsirolimus was used for treating patients with non clearcell and sarcomatoid variant ccRCC subtypes. The results
indicated that the benefit from mTOR inhibitor was limited
[47]. For the BHD-specific kidney tumorigenesis, the
therapeutic approach could be different due to its specific
genetic background and histological characteristics [14].
For example, while most of the kidney cancer-related
genes are subtype-specific, FLCN mutations lead to
all subtypes of RCCs that have been observed in BHD
syndrome patients and knockout mouse models [10, 34,
48]. Thus, FLCN-deficient renal tumorigenesis might be
associated with more than one pathway. In this study, we
demonstrated that mTOR inhibitor, sirolimus, is able to
suppress FLCN-deficient allograft and xenograft tumor
growth. Currently, therapeutic approaches for BHD renal
tumorigenesis and other mTOR-related FLCN-deficient
neoplasia have not yet been described. Our findings could
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

provide insights into the therapeutic strategy for BHD
renal tumorigenesis and other FLCN-mTOR related tumor
growth.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Distal tubule-collecting duct-Henle’s
loop-specific knockout mice
The generation of distal tubule-collecting ductHenle’s loop-specific mice has been described in our
previous study [31]. Briefly, Flcnflox/flox mice were first
bred to Ksp-Cre transgenic mice to generate kidneyspecific Flcn heterozygous knockout mice, Flcnflox/+/KspCre. These Flcnflox/+/Ksp-Cre heterozygotes were then
backcrossed to Flcnflox/flox mice to generate kidneyspecific homozygous knockout mice Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre.
The knockout mice developed polycystic kidneys with
hyperplasia and early stage tumors (micro-tumors) [24].
However, the affected mice die from uremia within three
weeks after birth and are not amenable to drug testing.
To establish a Flcn-deficient mouse renal tumor model
for drug study, cells from renal cysts and micro tumors of
the affected Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre kidneys were isolated and
cultured in DMEM medium as described below.

Isolation and culture of Flcn-deficient renal
distal tubule cells
Six affected Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre mice at age 20 days
were used for isolation of Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule
cells. Six cystic kidney tissues were aseptically excised
from polycystic kidneys and each of them was transferred
to a cell culture dish with DMEM medium, respectively.
The tissues were then rinsed in sterile PBS. Fatty tissues,
blood clots, and connective tissues were removed with
forceps and scissors. Cleaned cystic tissues were finely
minced into very small pieces in 0.25% trypsin-EDTA
with sterile scissors. Tissue pieces were disassociated
into small aggregates by vigorous pipetting. Heavier
pieces were removed through sedimentation by gravity.
Supernatant containing cell aggregates was transferred
into a 15-ml centrifuge tube and centrifuged for 10 min at
1000 rpm. Cells were washed twice in PBS and transferred
into a 25-cm2 flask and cultured in DMEM medium with
15% FBS. These cells were incubated at 37°C with 5%
CO2. Medium was changed every 3 days. The cells were
cultured for 35 passages.

Genotyping
Flcnflox/flox/Ksp-Cre cells were harvested by scraping
and collected in a 15-ml tube. After centrifugation, the cell
pellet was resuspended in a solution of SDS detergent and
proteinase K, and the mixture was incubated at 55°C for
one hour. The sample was then phenol extracted once with
32770

Oncotarget

a phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol solution, and the
aqueous layer was removed to a fresh microcentrifuge tube
after centrifugation. The DNA was ethanol precipitated,
resuspended in buffer, and then ethanol precipitated
a second time. Once the pellet was dried, buffer was
added and the DNA was re-suspended by incubation at
55°C overnight, after which the genomic DNA solution
was assayed by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Genotyping was performed by PCR according to the
previous report [31].

through intraperitoneal injection, depending on treatment
group . Mice in the vehicle control group were injected
with 100 μl vehicle solution (5% PEG-400, 4% ethanol,
and 5% Tween-80) each. All the mice were euthanized at
the end of treatment.

Immunohistochemistry
The antibodies used included mouse anti-FLCN
mAb (N-terminal peptide: PQGDGNEDSPGQGEQC,
produced at the Van Andel Research Institute),
anti-Phospho-AKT Rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling), antiPhospho-mTOR Rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling), antiPhospho-S6 Ribosomal Protein (Cell Signaling). AQP1
(sc-25287, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); PAX2 (2549-1,
Epitomics); CK7 (ab9021, Abcam; sc-80021, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology) to determine RCC subtypes.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed following
the manufacturers’ protocols.

Protein analysis
Whole-cell extracts were also prepared from these
cells by lysing in 1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4),
150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 15% glycerol, including
standard protease inhibitors. Protein extracts were size
separated by 8% SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF
membranes. For the analysis of Flcn expression, Flcn
was detected with an anti-FLCN monoclonal antibody at
a dilution of 1:500 and an enhanced chemiluminescence
detection system.

Acknowledgments AND FUNDING
The authors would like to thank the following core
facilities for their services: the Van Andel Research genetargeting core and the vivarium; and the University of
Rochester Medical Center vivarium.

Transplantation of Flcn-deficient renal cells into
athymic nude mouse
Mouse Flcn-deficient renal distal tubule cells
were maintained in DMEM medium with 10% FBS.
Cells were harvested after 35 passages. Cells were
washed with PBS and counted using a hemocytometer.
Approximately 5× 106 cells in 0.2 ml HBSS were
transplanted subcutaneously into the flank area of each
athymic nude mouse (B6.Cg-Foxn1nu/J, The Jackson
Laboratory, USA). In the same fashion, approximately
5 × 106 fast-growing human FLCN-deficient UOK
257-1 cells that were isolated from the original UOK
257 (gift from NCI) [35] were inoculated subcutaneously
into each of 30 athymic nude mice to generate a human
FLCN-deficient xenograft model. Fifteen mice were used
for each experimental group. Same amount of HEK-293
normal kidney cells were inoculated into nude mice as
control.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors’ contributions
Conception and design: J. Chen, BT Teh, G. Wu.
Development of methodology: J. Chen, S. Si, X.
Li, Y. Li.
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired
and managed patients, provided facilities, etc.): S. Si,
X. Li, Y. Li, J. Chen.
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g.,
statistical analysis, biostatistics, histology and
immunochemistry, PCR, Western blot, et. al): J. Chen,
S. Si, X. Li, Y. Li, M. Wu, G. Xiao, G. Wu.
Writing, review, and/or revision of the
manuscript: J. Chen, S. Schoen, G. Xiao, G. Wu.
Administrative, technical, or material support
(i.e. reporting or organizing data, constructing
databases): S. Si, X. Li, Y. Li, S. Schoen, J. Chen.
Study supervision: J. Chen, G. Wu.

Sirolimus treatment of allograft and
xenograft mice
For each treatment experiment, 30 allograft or 30
xenograft athymic nude mice were equally randomized to
one treatment group and one control group, with 15 mice
in each group. Treatment commenced when the mice
reached two months of age and tumors reached required
sizes (150 mm3, 200 mm3, and 500 mm3). Sirolimus
was formulated in a water solution containing 5% PEG400, 4% ethanol, and 5% Tween-80. Each mouse in the
treatment group received 7.5, 10, or 15 mg/kg bodyweight sirolimus in 100 μl solution every other day
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.
32771

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

15.	 da Silva NF, Gentle D, Hesson LB, Morton DG, Latif F,
Maher ER. Analysis of the Birt-Hogg-Dube (BHD)
tumour suppressor gene in sporadic renal cell carcinoma
and colorectal cancer. Journal of medical genetics. 2003;
40:820–4.

1.	 Manning BD, Cantley LC. AKT/PKB signaling: navigating
downstream. Cell. 2007; 129:1261–74.
2.	 Xu K, Liu P, Wei W. mTOR signaling in tumorigenesis.
Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2014; 1846:638–54.

16.	 Kahnoski K, Khoo SK, Nassif NT, Chen J, Lobo GP,
Segelov E, et al. Alterations of the Birt-Hogg-Dube gene
(BHD) in sporadic colorectal tumours. Journal of medical
genetics. 2003; 40:511–5.

3.	 Chiarini F, Evangelisti C, McCubrey JA, Martelli AM.
Current treatment strategies for inhibiting mTOR in
cancer. Trends in pharmacological sciences. 2015;
36:124–35.

17.	 Khoo SK, Kahnoski K, Sugimura J, Petillo D, Chen J,
Shockley K, et al. Inactivation of BHD in sporadic renal
tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:4583–7.

4.	 Zaytseva YY, Valentino JD, Gulhati P, Evers BM.
mTOR inhibitors in cancer therapy. Cancer letters. 2012;
319:1–7.

18.	 Shin JH, Shin YK, Ku JL, Jeong SY, Hong SH, Park SY,
et al. Mutations of the Birt-Hogg-Dube (BHD) gene in
sporadic colorectal carcinomas and colorectal carcinoma
cell lines with microsatellite instability. Journal of medical
genetics. 2003; 40:364–7.

5.	 Guba M, von Breitenbuch P, Steinbauer M, Koehl G,
Flegel S, Hornung M, et al. Rapamycin inhibits primary and
­metastatic tumor growth by antiangiogenesis: ­involvement
of vascular endothelial growth factor. Nature medicine.
2002; 8:128–35.

19.	 Warren MB, Torres-Cabala CA, Turner ML, Merino MJ,
Matrosova VY, Nickerson ML, et al. Expression of BirtHogg-Dube gene mRNA in normal and neoplastic human
tissues. Modern pathology : an official journal of the United
States and Canadian Academy of Pathology, Inc. 2004;
17:998–1011.

6.	 Luan FL, Ding R, Sharma VK, Chon WJ, Lagman M,
Suthanthiran M. Rapamycin is an effective inhibitor of
human renal cancer metastasis. Kidney international. 2003;
63:917–26.
7.	 Stallone G, Schena A, Infante B, Di Paolo S, Loverre A,
Maggio G, et al. Sirolimus for Kaposi’s sarcoma in
­renal-transplant recipients. The New England journal of
medicine. 2005; 352:1317–23.

20.	 Lamberti C, Schweiger N, Hartschuh W, Schulz T, BeckerWegerich P, Kuster W, et al. Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome:
germline mutation in the (C)8 mononucleotide tract of the
BHD gene in a German patient. Acta Derm Venereol. 2005;
85:172–3.

8.	 Nickerson ML, Warren MB, Toro JR, Matrosova V, Glenn
G, Turner ML, et al. Mutations in a novel gene lead to
­kidney tumors, lung wall defects, and benign tumors of the
hair follicle in patients with the Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome.
Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:157–64.

21.	 Painter JN, Tapanainen H, Somer M, Tukiainen P,
Aittomaki K. A 4-bp deletion in the Birt-Hogg-Dube gene
(FLCN) causes dominantly inherited spontaneous pneumothorax. Am J Hum Genet. 2005; 76:522–7.

9.	 Birt AR, Hogg GR, Dube WJ. Hereditary multiple
­fibrofolliculomas with trichodiscomas and acrochordons.
Arch Dermatol. 1977; 113:1674–7.

22.	 Schmidt LS, Nickerson ML, Warren MB, Glenn GM,
Toro JR, Merino MJ, et al. Germline BHD-mutation spectrum and phenotype analysis of a large cohort of families
with Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2005;
76:1023–33.

10.	 Pavlovich CP, Walther MM, Eyler RA, Hewitt SM, Zbar B,
Linehan WM, et al. Renal tumors in the Birt-Hogg-Dube
syndrome. Am J Surg Pathol. 2002; 26:1542–52.

23.	 Vocke CD, Yang Y, Pavlovich CP, Schmidt LS,
Nickerson ML, Torres-Cabala CA, et al. High frequency
of somatic frameshift BHD gene mutations in Birt-HoggDube-associated renal tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;
97:931–5.

11.	 Latif F, Tory K, Gnarra J, Yao M, Duh FM, Orcutt ML,
et al. Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor
suppressor gene. Science. 1993; 260:1317–20.
12.	 Franksson C, Bergstrand A, Ljungdahl I, Magnusson G,
Nordenstam H. Renal carcinoma (hypernephroma)
occurring in 5 siblings. The Journal of urology. 1972;
108:58–61.

24.	 Fujii H, Jiang W, Matsumoto T, Miyai K, Sashara K,
Ohtsuji N, et al. Birt-Hogg-Dube gene mutations in human
endometrial carcinomas with microsatellite instability. The
Journal of pathology. 2006; 209:328–35.

13.	 Launonen V, Vierimaa O, Kiuru M, Isola J, Roth S,
Pukkala  E, et al. Inherited susceptibility to uterine leiomyomas and renal cell cancer. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2001; 98:3387–92.

25.	 Gunji Y, Akiyoshi T, Sato T, Kurihara M, Tominaga S,
Takahashi K, et al. Mutations of the Birt Hogg Dube gene
in patients with multiple lung cysts and recurrent pneumothorax. Journal of medical genetics. 2007; 44:588–93.

14.	 Klomp JA, Petillo D, Niemi NM, Dykema KJ, Chen J,
Yang XJ, et al. Birt-Hogg-Dube renal tumors are genetically distinct from other renal neoplasias and are associated
with up-regulation of mitochondrial gene expression. BMC
medical genomics. 2010; 3:59.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Jiang W, Fujii H, Matsumoto T, Ohtsuji N, Tsurumaru M,
Hino O. Birt-Hogg-Dube (BHD) gene mutations in human
gastric cancer with high frequency microsatellite instability.
Cancer letters. 2007; 248:103–11.
32772

Oncotarget

27.	 Sundaram S, Tasker AD, Morrell NW. Familial spontaneous pneumothorax and lung cysts due to a Folliculin exon
10 mutation. Eur Respir J. 2009; 33:1510–2.

case report and review of the literature. Acta Urol Belg.
1997; 65:39–42.
37.	 Akhtar M, Tulbah A, Kardar AH, Ali MA. Sarcomatoid
renal cell carcinoma: the chromophobe connection. Am J
Surg Pathol. 1997; 21:1188–95.

28.	 Baba M, Hong SB, Sharma N, Warren MB, Nickerson ML,
Iwamatsu A, et al. Folliculin encoded by the BHD gene
interacts with a binding protein, FNIP1, and AMPK, and
is involved in AMPK and mTOR signaling. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2006; 103:15552–7.

38.	 Hirokawa M, Shimizu M, Sakurai T, Terayama K,
Manabe T. Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma with chromophobe cell foci. Report of a case. Apmis. 1998; 106:993–6.
39.	 Nagashima Y, Okudela K, Osawa A, Nakamura N,
Kawasaki C, Moriyama M, et al. Chromophobe renal cell
carcinoma with sarcomatoid change. A case report. Pathol
Res Pract. 2000; 196:647–51. discussion 52.

29.	 Singh SR, Zhen W, Zheng Z, Wang H, Oh SW, Liu W,
et al. The Drosophila homolog of the human tumor suppressor gene BHD interacts with the JAK-STAT and Dpp
signaling pathways in regulating male germline stem cell
maintenance. Oncogene. 2006; 25:5933–41.

40.	 Tardio JC. Chromophobe cell renal carcinomas with
­sarcomatoid areas. Histopathology. 2000; 36:184–5.

30.	 van Slegtenhorst M, Khabibullin D, Hartman TR,
Nicolas E, Kruger WD, Henske EP. The Birt-Hogg-Dube
and tuberous sclerosis complex homologs have opposing
roles in amino acid homeostasis in Schizosaccharomyces
pombe. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:24583–90.

41.	 Abrahams NA, Ayala AG, Czerniak B. Chromophobe renal
cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid transformation. Ann Diagn
Pathol. 2003; 7:296–9.
42.	 Parada D, Pena K, Moreira O. Sarcomatoid chromophobe
renal cell carcinoma. A case report and review of the
­literature. Arch Esp Urol. 2006; 59:209–14.

31.	 Chen J, Futami K, Petillo D, Peng J, Wang P, Knol J, et al.
Deficiency of FLCN in mouse kidney led to development
of polycystic kidneys and renal neoplasia. PLoS One. 2008;
3:e3581.

43.	 Brunelli M, Gobbo S, Cossu-Rocca P, Cheng L, Hes O,
Delahunt B, et al. Chromosomal gains in the sarcomatoid transformation of chromophobe renal cell carcinoma.
Modern pathology : an official journal of the United States
and Canadian Academy of Pathology, Inc. 2007; 20:303–9.

32.	 Baba M, Furihata M, Hong SB, Tessarollo L, Haines DC,
Southon E, et al. Kidney-targeted Birt-Hogg-Dube gene
inactivation in a mouse model: Erk1/2 and Akt-mTOR activation, cell hyperproliferation, and polycystic kidneys. J
Natl Cancer Inst. 2008; 100:140–54.

44.	 Guertin DA, Sabatini DM. The pharmacology of mTOR
inhibition. Science signaling. 2009; 2:e24.
45.	 Krymskaya VP, Goncharova EA. PI3K/mTORC1 activation
in hamartoma syndromes: therapeutic prospects. Cell Cycle.
2009; 8:403–13.

33.	 Hartman TR, Nicolas E, Klein-Szanto A, Al-Saleem T,
Cash TP, Simon MC, et al. The role of the Birt-HoggDube protein in mTOR activation and renal tumorigenesis.
Oncogene. 2009; 28:1594–604.

46.	 Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, Dutcher J, Figlin R,
Kapoor A, et al. Temsirolimus, interferon alfa, or both for
advanced renal-cell carcinoma. The New England journal
of medicine. 2007; 356:2271–81.

34.	 Hasumi Y, Baba M, Ajima R, Hasumi H, Valera VA,
Klein ME, et al. Homozygous loss of BHD causes early
embryonic lethality and kidney tumor development with
activation of mTORC1 and mTORC2. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2009; 106:18722–7.

47.	 Voss MH, Bastos DA, Karlo CA, Ajeti A, Hakimi AA,
Feldman DR, et al. Treatment outcome with mTOR inhibitors for metastatic renal cell carcinoma with nonclear and
sarcomatoid histologies. Annals of oncology : official journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology/ESMO.
2014; 25:663–8.

35.	 Yang Y, Padilla-Nash HM, Vira MA, Abu-Asab MS,
Val D, Worrell R, et al. The UOK 257 cell line: a novel
model for studies of the human Birt-Hogg-Dube gene pathway. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008; 180:100–9.

48.	 Chen J, Huang D, Rubera I, Futami K, Wang P, Zickert P,
et al. Disruption of tubular Flcn expression as a mouse model
for renal tumor induction. Kidney international. 2015.

36.	 Staelens L, Van Poppel H, Vanuytsel L, Van Oosterom A,
Van Damme B, Baert L. Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma:

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32773

Oncotarget

