173

The Needle in the Haystack: Application of Breast
Fine-needle Aspirate Samples to Quantitative Protein
Microarray Technology
Amy Rapkiewicz, MD1
Virginia Espina, MS, MT (ASCP)2
Jo Anne Zujewski, MD3
Peter F. Lebowitz, MD, PhD4
Armando Filie, MD1
Julia Wulfkuhle, PhD2
Kevin Camphausen, MD3
Emanuel F. Petricoin, III, PhD2
Lance A. Liotta, MD, PhD2
Andrea Abati, MD1

BACKGROUND. There is an unmet clinical need for economic, minimally invasive
procedures that use a limited number of cells for the molecular profiling of
tumors in individual patients. Reverse-phase protein microarray (RPPM) technology has been applied successfully to the quantitative analysis of breast, ovarian,
prostate, and colorectal cancers using frozen surgical specimens.

METHODS. For this report, the authors investigated the novel use of RPPM
technology for the analysis of both archival cytology aspirate smears and frozen
fine-needle aspiration (FNA) samples. RPPMs were printed with 63 breast FNA
samples that were obtained before, during, and after treatment from 21 patients
who were enrolled in a Phase II trial of neoadjuvant capecitabine and docetaxel
therapy for breast cancer.

Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.

RESULTS. Based on an MCF7 cell line model of breast adenocarcinoma, the

2

noted from 1.0 mg/mL to 7.8 ng/mL total protein/array spot (R2 ¼ 0.9887) for a

1

Center for Applied Proteomics and Molecular
Medicine, George Mason University, Manassas,
Virginia.

sensitivity of the RPPM detection method was in the femtomolar range with a
coefficient of variance <13.5% for the most dilute sample. Assay linearity was
membrane receptor protein (epidermal growth factor receptor; R2 ¼ 0.9935).

CONCLUSIONS. The results from this study indicated that low-abundance analytes

Clinical Investigations Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.

and phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated proteins in specimens that consist
of a few thousand cells obtained through FNA can be quantified with RPPM

4

before and after treatment potentially will augment the ability to design indivi-

3

Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC.

technology. The ability to monitor the in vivo state of cell-signaling proteins
dualized therapy regimens through the mapping of aberrant cell-signaling phenotypes. The mapping of these protein pathways will further the development of
rational drug targets. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2007;111:173–84. Published
2007 by the American Cancer Society.*

KEYWORDS: breast cancer, fine-needle aspiration, microarray, protein, proteomics.

T

Address for reprints: Amy Rapkiewicz, MD, New
York University-Bellevue Hospital, Room 4S17A,
462 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016; Fax:
(212) 263-7649; E-mail: rapkia01@med.nyu.edu
Received September 19, 2006; revision received
January 3, 2007; accepted January 23, 2007.
*This article is a US Government work and, as
such, is in the public domain in the United
States of America.

he molecular analysis of breast tumors for the purpose of making individualized therapy decisions is expanding beyond immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. Until recently, molecular
tumor characteristics have been based primarily on the immunohistochemical examination of tumor receptors, including estrogen, progesterone, and Her2/neu. However, evidence is emerging to support
the concept that each patient’s tumor has a unique complement of
pathogenic molecular derangements that may impart prognostic
significance.1–5 This concept was highlighted in genomic studies
that were performed using gene expression profiling of breast
tumors from young patients who were diagnosed with lymph nodenegative disease.2 The authors of those studies reported that tumors
not normally expected to produce poor outcomes based on clinical

Published 2007 by the American Cancer Society
DOI 10.1002/cncr.22686
Published online 8 May 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

174

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) June 25, 2007 / Volume 111 / Number 3

parameters, in fact, displayed poor prognostic genomic signatures. Conversely, women who would have
been eligible for systemic adjuvant chemotherapy
based on their clinical and histologic staging status,
based on these same prognostic genomic signatures,
were at low risk for the development of metastatic
disease. Using this ‘‘genomic’’ risk fingerprint, patients
in this subset had an excellent prognosis with a low
risk of recurrence; therefore, most of these patients
would not have benefited from adjuvant chemotherapy and would have been exposed to the toxicities
and risks of such treatment. These studies have illustrated the power of translational molecular medicine related to its impact not only on treatment
decisions but also on disease outcomes.2,6
The advances in treatment and early screening
programs have led to improvements in the prognosis
associated with a diagnosis of breast cancer, although,
clearly, additional improvements can be made. Once
a diagnosis of breast cancer is rendered, the patient’s
prognosis conventionally has been determined by a
host of clinical and histologic factors, including age,
lymph node status, tumor size, pathologic grade, and
histologic type.7 The process of diagnosing a palpable breast lesion may require a series of procedures:
fine-needle aspiration (FNA) to characterize the mass
and a core-needle biopsy or open biopsy for morphologic examination, including diagnosis confirmation, immunohistochemical analysis, grading, and
surgical resection of the tumor with additional histopathologic analysis.8,9 Realizing the new paradigm of
molecular profiling with individualized treatment
regimens hopefully will improve the treatment outcome for patients with breast cancer. The role of
cytology in the future of molecular profiling will be
significant only if the available technology is sensitive enough to work with small numbers of cells
obtained in a cytology specimen. The amount of tissue necessary for the performance of these tests has
decreased as ancillary studies and the molecular
profiling of tumors have gained increasing roles in
the individualized treatment of cancer. The role of a
minimally invasive, cost-effective tissue-procurement
and diagnostic procedure like FNA will play a huge
role in the diagnosis and treatment paradigms for
virgin, treated, and recurrent neoplasms such as
breast cancer.
Molecular profiling with gene arrays provides
insight into the levels of expression for genes involved
in oncogenesis; however, it is known that gene transcript levels often do not correlate with the phosphorylated or functional state of the transcribed
proteins.10 Posttranslational protein modifications,
such as phosphorylation events at specific tyrosine

(Tyr), threonine (Thr), and serine (ser) residues, play
a significant role in orchestrating cellular proteinprotein interactions. These finely tuned events are a
significant part of cell-signaling cascades, driving
cellular processes such as proliferation, apoptosis,
and migration. The analysis of the cellular proteome
with reverse-phase protein microarrays (RPPM) can
provide information regarding the protein-protein
interactions and the integrated state of cellular
circuitry.11 Protein microarray technology is an emerging asset to the field of functional proteomics,
because it provides the ability to investigate signaling
pathways and to construct a ‘‘circuit map’’ of the
normal and diseased state of the cellular proteome.11
In conjunction with laser-capture microdissection,
protein microarrays can be used to interrogate signaling pathways in distinct cell populations. This
approach is being used to study the in vivo state of
the phosphoproteome in prostate12 and ovarian cancers13 and in cultured cell lines. The ability to multiplex and quantify protein-protein interactions in a
parallel fashion with a single probe for multiple
patient samples will permit the elucidation of many
of the cell-signaling pathways that are believed to be
involved in breast cancer (Fig. 1).
It is becoming clear that the molecular profile of
a patient’s tumor may dictate both important prognostic information and information for treatment
selection. There is an unmet need in the medical
community for economic diagnostic and prognostic
assays that are able to provide molecular profiling
information while minimizing invasive procedures.
Currently, obtaining sufficient tissue from a patient’s
tumor can be a limiting factor in the analysis of protein biomarkers. Herein, we report the novel use of
protein microarray technology for the analysis of
archival cytology aspirate smears as well as frozen
FNA material obtained from patients with breast carcinoma both before and after treatment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
FNA Samples
Specimens and relevant clinical data were obtained
from patients who were enrolled in a National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Cancer Institute,
Institutional Review Board-approved clinical trial
with informed consent (NIH no. 00-C-0149). Details
of this study and the clinical results have been published.14 Breast FNA samples from 30 women with
newly diagnosed stage II or III breast cancer (median
age, 50 years) were collected and prepared between
1999 and 2003. Breast FNA samples were obtained
at various time points before, during, and after treat-

Proteomic Analysis of Breast FNA/Rapkiewicz et al.

175

FIGURE 1. These fine-needle aspirate (FNA) samples were analyzed with reverse-phase protein microarrays. (A) FNA samples were processed in 1 of 3
ways: stained with Papanicolaou, stained with Diff-Quik, or placed in RPMI and subsequently frozen. The archived Diff-Quik smear and the frozen samples were
evaluated for their applicability to reverse-phase protein microarrays. (B) Multiple lysates were immobilized on a nitrocellulose-coated slide using a robotic printing device. The lysates were printed in a 2-fold dilution series. Quality control of the protein printing and immunostaining processes was achieved by printing
cultured cell lysates and phosphopeptides on each array.

ment. Twenty-one patients had pretherapy and posttherapy pairs of FNA samples available for our analysis. In addition, 21 of 30 patients in this analysis had
both archival breast FNA smears and frozen FNA cell
pellets from aspirates collected before and after they
received neoadjuvant treatment with capecitabine
and docetaxel in addition to samples that were collected prior to surgery. In total, there were 63 frozen
cell aspirates. Fifty of these frozen aspirates were
positive for adenocarcinoma. Five samples did not
have adequate total protein and were not used for
analysis. Specimens were processed within minutes
of aspiration, and cell pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen.

FNA Cytologic Slides
At baseline, an FNA was performed on a palpable
breast mass by a board-certified cytopathologist (A.F.
or A.A.). Subsequent FNAs for the remaining time
points were obtained from the same anatomic location. If the previous core-biopsy sampling of the
lesion precluded direct palpation of the mass, then
the FNAs were performed using random sampling of
the general anatomic location where the mass had
been localized prior to biopsy.
An initial FNA using a 23-gauge needle was performed. A portion of this first sample was placed on
1 slide, which was air dried and then stained with

Diff-Quik for an immediate assessment of cellularity
and the confirmation of malignancy. Another small
portion of the sample was placed immediately into
95% ethanol for subsequent staining with the Papanicolaou stain (Fig. 1A).
The remainder of the sample was placed into a
15-mL polypropylene tube that contained 5.0 mL of
RPMI (American Type Culture Collection [ATCC],
Manassas, Va). One or 2 additional FNA passes of the
mass were performed with the sample placed in its
entirety into the 5 mL of RPMI. A single cytospin
was prepared from 150 mL of this pooled sample tumor suspension, which was reviewed again to confirm the malignant nature of the cells and to perform
an approximate cell count.
The RPMI/tumor cell suspension was centrifuged
at 1000g for 5 minutes until a pellet formed. The
supernatant was removed; then, the tumor pellet was
snap-frozen in dry ice for 5 minutes and stored immediately in a 808C freezer, remaining in the initial
15-mL polypropylene tube. Either A.A. or A.F.
screened both the Papanicolaou- and Diff-Quikstained slides. According to standard protocol, we
assumed that, because the aspirate Diff-Quik smear
was mostly tumor, the FNA that was obtained from
the same area also would be comprised mostly of tumor cells. The Diff-Quik-stained slides were estimated to contain >95% tumor cells and determined

176

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) June 25, 2007 / Volume 111 / Number 3

by prior studies to yield superior protein signals.27
The Papanicolaou-stained slides were retained for
cytologic evaluation.

Archival Smear Preparation for RPPM Analysis
The archived FNA slides (1 slide per patient per sample) were soaked in a Coplin jar that contained xylene (Mallinkrodt, St. Louis, Mo) for an average of 48
hours to remove the coverslips. The slides were laid
flat and air dried briefly. The cellular material was
solubilized directly on the slide with from 15 mL to
20 mL of protein-extraction buffer (2.5% solution of
2-mercaptoethanol [Sigma, St. Louis, Mo] in
2  sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS]/Tris-glycine loading buffer [Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif] and equal
volumes of T-PER [Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford,
Ill]). The solubilized contents of the slide were
scraped into a tube, boiled for 5 minutes at 1008C,
and spun at 14,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) for
3 minutes. The cell lysate supernatant was placed on
ice until further dilution for microarray printing.
Control Lysates
Lysates were prepared from cultured Jurkat cells
(clone E6-1; ATCC) that were treated with activating,
anti-Fas monoclonal antibody and epidermal growth
factor (EGF)-treated HeLa cells (ATCC).11 Fas ligandtreated Jurkat cells, EGF-treated HeLa cells, and
MCF7 cell lysates (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, Calif)
were printed on RPPMs as quality-control samples
for assessing sensitivity, precision, and system quality
control.
FNA Cellular Lysates
Frozen patient aspirate samples were allowed to
thaw on ice. The samples were spun at 14,000 rpm
for 1 minute, the supernatant was removed, and the
cell pellets were lysed immediately in protein-extraction buffer as described previously.11 Briefly, the cell
pellet was lysed in a 2.5% solution of 2-mercaptoethanol in 2  SDS/Tris-glycine loading buffer (Invitrogen) and equal volumes of T-PER (Pierce
Biotechnology) with the addition of a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Lysates were heated for 30 minutes at 708C. Next, the lysates were spun at 14,000
rpm for 3 minutes to pellet any cellular debris. The
whole cell lysate was stored at 808C until microarray printing. Prior to microarray printing, the samples were boiled at 1008C for 5 minutes.
RPPM Construction
Each sample or control lysate was printed in duplicate on glass-backed, nitrocellulose array slides
(FAST slides; Whatman, Florham Park, NJ) using a

GMS 417 arrayer (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, Calif)
equipped with 500-mm pins. Each lysate was printed
in a serial, 2-fold dilution curve (neat and at dilutions of 1:2, 1:4, 1:8, and 1:16) and a diluent control
using approximately 30.0 nL lysate per spot11 (Fig.
1B). Array slides either were stored with desiccant at
208C or were processed immediately for immunostaining. Multiple samples were printed on each
microarray, and each microarray slide comprised
samples that represented lysates from archival
smears, frozen aspirate material, controls, and reference peptides. The samples were printed randomly
to eliminate slide and positional bias, thus allowing
the comparison of samples across arrays.16

Immunostaining
The protein microarray slides were prepared for immunostaining by washing with 1  Reblot mild solution (Chemicon, Temecula, Calif) for 15 minutes
followed by 2 washes with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) without calcium or magnesium. Slides were
blocked with I-Block in PBS plus 0.5% Tween-20
(Applied Biosystems, Waltham, Mass) for a minimum
of 1 hour. Analysis of protein expression on the
arrays was assessed through a catalyzed signal-reporter system essentially as described previously.12,13,17 Briefly, the slides were placed on an
automated slide stainer (Autostainer; Dako, Carpinteria, Calif) and immunostained according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (CSA kit; Dako). A set of
specific, validated antibodies to phosphorylated or
cleaved proteins in the c-erbB2 and c-erbB1 signal
pathways was used to immunostain the RPPAs: EGF
receptor (EGFR) Tyr1148 (Biosource International,
Camarillo, Calif), EGFR Tyr1173, EGFR Tyr1068, protein kinase B (Akt) ser473, Akt Thr308, Bcl2 ser70,
erbB2, erbB2 Tyr1248, eIF4E ser209, estrogen receptor a (ERa), ERa ser118, 4E-binding protein 1
(4EBP1) Thr37/46, 4EBP1 ser65, phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN) ser380, cleaved caspases 3
and 9, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 Tyr705 (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, Mass). The negative control slide was incubated
with antibody diluent without primary antibody. The
secondary antibody probe was goat antirabbit immunoglobulin-G H&L chain (1:5000 dilution; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, Calif). Total protein per
microarray spot was determined with Sypro Ruby
protein blot stain (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Ore) or
colloidal gold protein stain (AuroDye Forte; Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) according to the
manufacturer’s directions and was imaged with a
charged-coupled device camera (Alpha Innotech, San
Leandro, Calif). The spot intensity was integrated

Proteomic Analysis of Breast FNA/Rapkiewicz et al.

177

over a fixed area as described previously.11 Each
array was scanned on an Epson flatbed scanner at
1200 dots per inch, the spot intensity was analyzed
(ImageQuant, version 5.2; Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, Calif), data were normalized to total protein,
and a standardized, single data value was generated
for each sample on the array. This single data point
was used for subsequent data analysis.

Statistical Analysis
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering (Ward method)
and Spearman r nonparametric chi-square correlations were performed with JMP software (version 5.1;
SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
FIGURE 2. This chart illustrates the assessment of total protein yield from

RESULTS

fine-needle aspirate (FNA) samples. Eight sample sets, consisting of cover-

Adequacy of Archival FNA Slide Samples
Previous studies of microdissected tissue samples
with the RPPM platform indicated that from 1.0 mg/
mL to 0.0625 mg/mL of total protein per spot is
required for total protein determinations with Sypro
Ruby protein blot stain or a colloidal gold
stain.13,17,18 In an initial assessment of the applicability of FNA material for RPPMs, we compared total
protein per spot for 8 cases, each of which consisted
of an archival smear, as well as pretreatment and
posttreatment frozen aspirate samples (Fig. 2). Semiquantitative cell counts performed at the time of
sample collection for 7 of 9 of the baseline samples
ranged from 1000 cells to 50,000 cells. Each sample
was solubilized in an appropriate volume of extraction buffer based on cell count (100 cells/1.0 mL).
Samples were printed in duplicate on 50 microarray
slides. For a quality control of protein loading on the
array, a Jurkat cell lysate of 2.0 mg/mL total protein
was printed in duplicate on the same array.
The mean total protein (n ¼ 8 samples) per spot
was from 2- to 3-fold greater in the frozen tissue
samples compared with the archival smears. The
protein content of these samples was sufficient for
protein quantitation with Sypro Ruby stain based on
the relative spot intensities. The large standard deviation noted for the frozen samples was because of the
variation in cell numbers in the frozen aspirate samples (range, 1000–50,000 cells). Thus, material obtained from archival cytology smears is adequate for
performing RPPM; however, the frozen material is
superior in terms of the relative intensity of the
measured protein signal.

slipped, archival, Diff-Quik-stained FNA slide smears and pretreatment and

RPPM Sensitivity and Precision
Paweletz et al. thoroughly evaluated the sensitivity
and precision of the RPPM using recombinant pros-

posttreatment frozen samples, were solubilized and printed on a reversephase protein microarray. Mean spot intensities were calculated from a
Sypro Ruby protein blot-stained array. The undiluted pretreatment (squares)
and posttreatment (triangles) frozen samples had total protein concentrations
equivalent to a 1.0 mg/mL Jurkat cell lysate (crosses), whereas the archival
smear sample (circles) had total protein concentrations 2- or 3-fold less. The
large standard deviation noted for the frozen samples is because of the variation in cell numbers in the frozen aspirate samples.

tate-specific antigen molecules (sensitivity, 5  1020
mol) and microdissected tissue samples (interslide
coefficient of variation [CV], 1.26–39.4%; intraslide
CV, 1.66–21.18% for 1/10,000 cell equivalents).19
Because variations in robotic printing devices will
affect microarray spot size and protein loading, all
FNA samples in this study were printed with a GMS
417 arrayer equipped with 500-mm pins. The sensitivity of any given antigen-antibody interaction is dependent on the detection system as well as the
relative abundance of the antigen-antibody species
and the relative binding affinities of the antibody.20
Although we were able to quantitate protein in the
archival smears with Sypro Ruby staining, more sensitive determinations of total protein were needed for
the analysis of low-abundance analytes within the
linear dynamic range of the assay.
Previous work in our laboratory indicated that a
sample with approximately 1.0 mg/mL to 2.0 mg/mL
total protein contained adequate total protein, when
diluted and arrayed on the RPPM, for detection with
a Sypro Ruby stain (manufacturer’s detection limits,
0.25–1.0 ng; Molecular Probes Sypro Ruby blot stain
product information sheet revision March 3, 2005).
Initial results comparing the relative mean spot
intensities between archival FNA smears and pre-

178

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) June 25, 2007 / Volume 111 / Number 3

FIGURE 3. The sensitivity of reverse-phase protein microarrays. (A) MCF7 cell lysates were printed in triplicate, 12-point, 2-fold dilution series and stained
with a colloidal gold total protein for determination of total protein sensitivity. EGF indicates epidermal growth factor. (B) The MCF7 lysate had a total protein linear correlation over 8 dilution series (correlation coefficient [R 2] ¼ 0.9887) with a limit of detection of 7.8 ng/mL. (C) The sensitivity represented as cell equivalents corresponded to 78 cells per mL lysate or as 1/10,000 cellular equivalents loaded per spot.

treatment and posttreatment frozen FNA samples
indicated the FNA samples were within the detectable range of the total protein assay (Fig. 2). Therefore, we determined the sensitivity and precision of
the RPPM with respect to total protein and cellular
equivalents from an MCF7 cell culture lysate as a
representative breast adenocarcinoma sample.
MCF7 lysates were printed in 12-point, 2-fold
dilution series (n ¼ 5) (Fig. 3A) and stained with colloidal gold for total protein determination. Total protein sensitivity was determined to be 7.8 ng/mL
(linear correlation [R2] ¼ 0.988) (Fig. 3B). Protein
concentration expressed as cellular equivalents on
the microarray were 78 cell equivalents/mL lysate or
1/10,000 cell equivalents loaded per spot (Fig. 3C).
To determine interslide precision, the MCF7 cell
line, which is known to overexpress the EGFR, was
used as a model. MCF7 lysates were printed in triplicate on 5 slides and immunostained with anti-EGFR
(1:100 dilution). Excellent linear correlations were
observed (R2 ¼ 0.9821, n ¼ 5) (Fig. 4A) across the
data set. The CV for interslide reproducibility ranged
from 5.1% for the undiluted spot, to 4.1% for the 1:2
dilution, and up to 13.5% for the 1:16 dilution (Fig.

4A). The greater variance noted in the undiluted spot
may have been caused by saturation of the antigen
binding sites at higher antigen concentrations for a
given antibody concentration. Intraslide variation
was <8.6% (n ¼ 12) for all dilution points analyzed
with good linearity of R2 ¼ 0.9957 (Fig. 4B).

Phosphoproteomic Kinase Analysis
of Frozen FNA Samples
RPPMs offer the promise of being able to coordinately investigate multiple phosphorylated kinases,
thus developing a proteomic molecular profile of cellular processes for individual patients. Therefore, we
immunostained the RPPMs with 17 antibodies,
which represented apoptotic and prosurvival cell-signaling pathways. In this feasibility study set, unsupervised Bayesian clustering analysis for 21 breast
FNA samples revealed heterogeneity between samples and treatment time points (Fig. 5A). The baseline samples appeared to be heterogeneous for the
protein endpoints measured and did not segregate
into distinct clusters. In contrast, for the 7 samples
for which there was a surgical sample available, 6 of
7 surgical samples were in the same cluster. These

Proteomic Analysis of Breast FNA/Rapkiewicz et al.

179

redesign therapy regimens without the need for
surgery.

DISCUSSION

FIGURE 4. The precision of reverse-phase protein microarrays. MCF7 cells
were used as a model lysate for epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor precision studies. (A) Arrays (n ¼ 5) that were immunostained with anti-EGF receptor had an interslide coefficient of variation (CV) for EGF receptor
concentrations ranging from 5.1% for the most concentrated spot to 13.5%
for the most dilute spot (R 2 ¼ 0.9821). (B) The CV for intraslide reproducibility for 5 slides (total number of spots at 15 per dilution point) ranged from
8.6% for the most concentrated spot to 5% for the most dilute spot
(R 2 ¼ 0.9957).

data compliment the results from previous studies of
human epithelial tumors in which heterogeneous signaling also was noted,18 suggesting that FNA material
indeed is an acceptable sample for phosphoproteomic analysis. Even though there was evident heterogeneity in the patient samples, there was significant
clustering of prosurvival proteins in the PTEN-Akt
and EGFR pathways to indicate common pathway
activation for many of these samples. In the entire
cohort of patients studied, as reported previously,
only 31% of the patients had a complete response to
therapy, suggesting that multiple prosurvival proteins
are activated, possibly through a variety of pathways,
for patients in whom therapy fails.14
Nonparametric Spearman P analysis for the
entire study set revealed significant correlations between PTEN ser380 and Akt Thr308 (P < .001;
R2 ¼ 0.9096) (Figs. 5B, 6A). Additional nonparametric
associations were noted for proteins that have been
related in breast tumors, again confirming the ability
to use FNA material for phosphoproteomic analysis
(Fig. 6B-D). These data suggest that FNA material
may be used to evaluate treatment effects and to

The application of transcriptional profiling to cytologic material obtained by FNA has been effective for
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of traditional,
single-gene markers, such as ER or HER-2.21,22 However, DNA and mRNA alterations may not necessarily
correlate with posttranslational protein modifications, such as phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, or glycosylation, which confer a variety of
biologic properties.23–25 Therefore, understanding the
protein-protein and/or protein-DNA interactions that
occur during tumorigenesis is necessary for the development of therapeutic intervention strategies targeted to an individual patient’s molecular profile.12,26
Proteomic analysis using surface-enhanced laser
desorption/ionization (SELDI) of FNA material has
been performed successfully on archival slide material and clinical samples.15,27 Despite the ability of
SELDI technology to generate a tumor-specific protein biosignature, the identification and quantification of proteins are limiting factors for the utility of
SELDI in the diagnostic arena. In contrast, RPPM
technology is a currently available proteomics tool
for examining the activation status of a number of
proteins that, it is believed, participate in oncogenesis and chemotherapy resistance; using this technology with FNA samples has important clinical
implications.
The ability to use in vivo, liquid-based FNA material and archival slide material to profile the activation state of specific proteins in known signaling
pathways has far-reaching clinical implications. We
have demonstrated that the presence of low-abundance proteins in specimens that consist of a few
thousand cells obtained by FNA can be assayed with
RPPM technology. The individual heterogeneity and
complexity of tumors has been established based
on proteomic and genomic studies.1,28 Microarrays
used to profile tumors at the DNA, RNA, and protein
levels have revealed disease-susceptibility genes that,
when mutated, can alter protein signaling networks,
which may vary between patients with similar tumors.1,11,28,29 Similar to the results demonstrated
with RPPM by Wulfkuhle et al. in ovarian cancer,13
there is considerable variation in the levels of activated proteins, such as EGFR and PTEN, both
between patients and during various treatment time
points for a single patient (Fig. 5A). The complex
cell-signaling activation that occurs during oncogenesis and treatment may be patient-specific rather

180

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) June 25, 2007 / Volume 111 / Number 3

FIGURE 5. Phosphoproteomic analysis of fine-needle aspiration (FNA) breast samples. (A) Unsupervised Bayesian clustering (Ward method) for pretreatment
and posttreatment frozen FNA samples. Each row represents an individual sample at a treatment time point, and each column represents a protein endpoint.
Relative protein expression is denoted as elevated (red) or decreased (blue). (B) Nonparametric Spearman r analysis revealed significant correlations for protein
nodes in the phosphatase and tensin homolog-protein kinase B (PTEN-Akt) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) prosurvival pathways.

than disease-specific, emphasizing the need for individual patient profiling.
There are several advantages to using FNA specimens for proteomic analysis. The utility of an FNA
performed by a skilled pathologist for the evaluation
of a palpable breast lesion is well established. FNA,
as a diagnostic procedure, when combined with the
other components of the ‘‘triple test’’ (ie, physical examination, FNA, and mammography), has a reported
sensitivity equivalent to an open biopsy, ranging
from 82% to 99%.30–34 The advantages of an FNA
over more invasive procedures, such as a core-needle
biopsy, include not only cost effectiveness35 but
more rapid diagnosis reporting and less trauma for
the patient. Furthermore, the tumor sample obtained
from an FNA contains a comparatively purer repre-

sentative sample of tumor cells than a core-needle
biopsy, which may contain larger numbers of tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes and stromal elements.21,36
Symmans et al. demonstrated that FNA material
obtained from breast carcinomas provided sufficient
material to perform combinational DNA microarray
gene-expression profiles with a total RNA yield similar to that of core-needle biopsy samples.36 The ability to obtain sufficient cells was substantiated by our
results, which indicated that both archival and frozen
FNA material contained ample amounts of protein
for RPPM analysis using either Sypro Ruby or colloidal gold assays (Figs. 2, 3). Although less total protein
was detected in archival smear preparations than in
frozen material, we were able to quantify individual
phosphoproteins with archival FNA samples (data

Proteomic Analysis of Breast FNA/Rapkiewicz et al.

181

FIGURE 6. Spearman r nonparametric correlation of prosurvival pathway protein endpoints. (A) A strong association (R 2 ¼ 0.9096) is observed between
the relative protein levels of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) serine 380 (ser380) and protein kinase B (AKT) threonine 308 (Thr308) for the pretreatment and posttreatment frozen fine-needle (FNA) samples (n ¼ 63). (B-D) Additional nonparametric correlations were not identified as significant (PTEN ser380
and epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 1178 [EGFR Y1178], R 2 ¼ 0.5998; PTEN ser380 and Her2, R 2 ¼ 0.638; AKT Thr308 and 4E-binding protein
1 Thr37/46, R 2 ¼ 0.5469).

not shown). Although serum, erythrocytes, and white
blood cells may contribute to the overall total
amount of protein per sample, this additional protein
should not skew relative differences in the data. The
total protein value is a scalar quantity, permitting
comparison of relative differences in phosphoprotein
levels in the background context of their total protein
matrix. Measurement of total protein on the actual
array spot, rather than measurement of a separate
aliquot of lysate, conserves precious sample and
allows each array spot to be normalized to total protein concentration. The smaller quantity of protein
on the archival smears may pose a limitation for this
methodology when attempting to detect very low
abundance proteins. It is not unexpected that archival samples would exhibit a lower yield of protein
extraction because of drying and the effects of storage temperature and time. Alternative detection
strategies, such as Quantum Dots (Invitrogen), currently are being used in our laboratory as a means of
increasing the sensitivity of the RPPM for archival
material.37
Cellular kinase concentrations exhibit a large,
dynamic range, necessitating the use of a detection

system that is capable of detecting low-abundance
kinases, such as transcription factors, and more
abundant cell-membrane receptors. Polymerase chain
reaction-style amplification chemistries do not exist
for protein; thus, the amplification method must be
linear, reproducible, and sufficiently sensitive to provide reliable, quantitative analysis and clinical utility.11 The total number of cells collected from an
FNA may vary from a few thousand cells to 1 million
cells. RPPMs incorporate sample dilution curves and
amplification chemistries to address the challenges
of linearity, sensitivity, and quantitation. Paweletz
et al. demonstrated sensitivity in the femtomolar
range with strong linearity and low CVs.19 Using an
MCF7 breast adenocarcinoma cell line, we demonstrated good linearity both for a membrane receptor
protein (EGFR; R2 ¼ 0.9935) (Fig. 3B) and for total
protein (R2 ¼ 0.9887) (Fig. 4A).
Both apoptotic and prosurvival pathways with
different subcellular pathways were probed in this
feasibility study set. It has been demonstrated that
apoptotic pathways involving Bcl-2, caspase-3, and
caspase-9 are modulated with chemotherapy. HER2
is a validated target in breast cancer, and growth

182

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) June 25, 2007 / Volume 111 / Number 3

factor receptors like EGFR are emerging as promising
molecular-targeted therapies.
In the current study, we demonstrated detectable
differences in the EGFR mitogenesis pathway (EGFR
Tyr1148, Akt Thr308, and PTEN ser308) after chemotherapy (Fig. 5B). Thus, FNA can be used successfully
to investigate the subcellular circuitry of a patient’s
cancer by providing both diagnostic material and a
representative tumor population. Direct, quantitative
measurements can be made from RPPMs at any
point on the dilution curve that is within the linear
dynamic range of the antibody-analyte interaction28
(Fig. 1B).
The small sample pool precluded our ability to
draw statistically significant correlations between
treatment and response. However, a number of interesting correlations were observed. Loss of the tumorsuppressor gene PTEN has been implicated in variety
of cancers, including endometrial, prostate, breast,
and colon cancers as well as glioblastoma.38–42 By
removing the phosphate group from phosphoinositide-3,4,5-triphosphate, PTEN inactivates Akt signaling. The down-regulation of Akt has a multitude of
downstream effects, including the promotion of
proapoptotic pathways and the inhibition of cell
cycle progression.43 The level of phosphorylation
and, subsequently, stability of PTEN may be influenced by hormones like estrogen and progesterone.
It is hypothesized that both PTEN and ERa are phosphorylated by the protein kinase casein kinase II,
which is under the influence of estrogen.44,45 In the
current study, we observed strong, nonparametric
correlations (Spearman P) between PTEN ser380 and
Akt Thr308 (P < 8.16  1016), between PTEN ser380
and EGFR Y1148 (P < 1.69  1013), between PTEN
ser380 and ErbB2 (P < 7.55  109), and between
Akt Thr308 and 4EBP1 (P < 4.77  107) (Fig. 6A-D).
It is believed that loss of PTEN activity in patients
with breast cancer confers resistance to trastuzumab
treatment.46 Zhou et al. reported increasing levels of
phosphorylation of Akt, mammalian target of rapamycin, and 4EBP1 as ductal epithelium progressed to
breast cancer, and those authors also reported a
positive correlation with ErbB2 overexpression.47
Although we were unable to demonstrate a significant correlation between ErbB2 and Akt or ERa and
PTEN, we detected changes in these proteins for
individual patients at various time points during
therapy (Fig. 5A). There is a clear need for novel
therapeutic strategies like combination therapy
aimed at specific targets within key prosurvival signaling pathways, such as PTEN, Akt, and 4EBP1.
The global scientific community is moving rapidly toward the goal of prioritizing molecular research

and development as an integral part of breast cancer
evaluation. The Danish Center for Translational
Breast Cancer Research has outlined the allocation of
a mastectomy specimen to include functional genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, immunohistochemistry, and 3-dimensional culturing48 with the
intention of advancing biomarker discovery as well
as understanding the molecular mechanisms of
oncogenesis for therapeutic applications. Overall, our
findings demonstrate the ability to obtain molecular
profiles from FNA samples by RPPM. Further studies
with larger numbers of patients are needed to determine in more detail how this technology can be used
to provide valuable information to impact patient
management. The allocation of patient samples,
including FNA material, may include sending a portion of patient material for genomic and proteomic
evaluation as translational molecular medicine
becomes more widely established.
The search for cancer biomarkers and unique
cell-signaling aberrations that may be targets for
individualized pharmacologic therapies now has
been set in motion. Commissions such as the National
Cancer Institute/Food and Drug Administration
Interagency Oncology Task Force are dedicated to
furthering the discovery of biomarkers and molecular
cancer targets. Minimally invasive FNA samples, as
part of this discovery process, appear to have adequate sensitivity, precision, and ease of use as an acceptable medium for translational research and
development. We have demonstrated that quantitative differences can be detected in a small number of
cells from an FNA sample and can be used to investigate hundreds of phosphorylated kinase-specific
endpoints. FNA samples potentially may be used to
address the following needs of translational research:
1) identification of patients for molecular-targeted
therapy, 2) understanding molecular interconnections in tumors that develop chemoresistance, 3) the
potential to develop molecular profiles of recurrent
tumors without surgery, and 4) the ability to redesign
therapy based on functionally significant pathways.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.

4.

Staudt LM. Gene expression profiling of lymphoid malignancies. Annu Rev Med. 2002;53:303–318.
van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van’t Veer LJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1999–2009.
Krishnamurthy S, Sneige N. Molecular and biologic markers
of premalignant lesions of human breast. Adv Anat Pathol.
2002;9:185–197.
Ramaswamy S, Perou CM. DNA microarrays in breast
cancer: the promise of personalised medicine. Lancet. 2003;
361:1576–1577.

Proteomic Analysis of Breast FNA/Rapkiewicz et al.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Wulfkuhle J, Espina V, Liotta L, Petricoin E. Genomic and
proteomic technologies for individualisation and improvement of cancer treatment. Eur J Cancer. 2004;40: 2623–
2632.
Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict
recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2817–2826.
Fitzgibbons PL, Page DL, Weaver D, et al. Prognostic factors
in breast cancer. College of American Pathologists Consensus
Statement 1999. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2000;124: 966–978.
Kerlikowske K, Smith-Bindman R, Ljung BM, Grady D. Evaluation of abnormal mammography results and palpable
breast abnormalities. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139:274–284.
Abati A, Simsir A. Breast fine needle aspiration biopsy:
prevailing recommendations and contemporary practices.
Clin Lab Med. 2005;25:631–654.
Hunter CP. Gene silencing: shrinking the black box of
RNAi. Curr Biol. 2000;10:R137–R140.
Liotta LA, Espina V, Mehta AI, et al. Protein microarrays:
meeting analytical challenges for clinical applications.
Cancer Cell. 2003;3:317–325.
Grubb RL, Calvert VS, Wulkuhle JD, et al. Signal pathway
profiling of prostate cancer using reverse phase protein
arrays. Proteomics. 2003;3:2142–2146.
Wulfkuhle JD, Aquino JA, Calvert VS, et al. Signal pathway
profiling of ovarian cancer from human tissue specimens
using reverse-phase protein microarrays. Proteomics. 2003;
3:2085–2090.
Lebowitz PF, Eng-Wong J, Swain SM, et al. A phase II trial
of neoadjuvant docetaxel and capecitabine for locally advanced breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:6764–6769.
Fowler LJ, Lovell MO, Izbicka E. Fine-needle aspiration in
PreservCyt: a novel and reproducible method for possible
ancillary proteomic pattern expression of breast neoplasms
by SELDI-TOF. Mod Pathol. 2004;17:1012–1020.
Nishizuka S, Charboneau L, Young L, et al. Proteomic
profiling of the NCI-60 cancer cell lines using new highdensity reverse-phase lysate microarrays. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2003;100:14229–14234.
Espina V, Mehta AI, Winters ME, et al. Protein microarrays:
molecular profiling technologies for clinical specimens.
Proteomics. 2003;3:2091–2100.
Petricoin EF 3rd, Bichsel VE, Calvert VS, et al. Mapping
molecular networks using proteomics: a vision for patienttailored combination therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:3614–
3621.
Paweletz CP, Charboneau L, Bichsel VE, et al. Reverse
phase protein microarrays which capture disease progression show activation of pro-survival pathways at the cancer
invasion front. Oncogene. 2001;20:1981–1989.
Sternberg MJ, Gabb HA, Jackson RM, Moont G. Proteinprotein docking. Generation and filtering of complexes.
Methods Mol Biol. 2000;143:399–415.
Pusztai L, Ayers M, Stec J, et al. Gene expression profiles
obtained from fine-needle aspirations of breast cancer reliably identify routine prognostic markers and reveal largescale molecular differences between estrogen-negative and
estrogen-positive tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:2406–
2415.
Rouzier R, Wagner P, Morandi P, Pusztai L. Gene expression
profiling of primary breast cancer. Curr Oncol Rep. 2005;7:
38–44.
Ducret C, Maira SM, Lutz Y, Wasylyk B. The ternary complex factor Net contains two distinct elements that mediate

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

183

different responses to MAP kinase signalling cascades.
Oncogene. 2000;19:5063–5072.
Steiner S, Witzmann FA. Proteomics: applications and
opportunities in preclinical drug development. Electrophoresis. 2000;21:2099–2104.
Celis JE, Gromov P, Cabezon T, et al. Proteomic characterization of the interstitial fluid perfusing the breast tumor
microenvironment: a novel resource for biomarker and
therapeutic target discovery. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2004;3:
327–344.
Wulfkuhle JD, McLean KC, Paweletz CP, et al. New approaches
to proteomic analysis of breast cancer. Proteomics. 2001;
1:1205–1215.
Fetsch PA, Simone NL, Bryant-Greenwood PK, et al. Proteomic evaluation of archival cytologic material using
SELDI affinity mass spectrometry: potential for diagnostic
applications. Am J Clin Pathol. 2002;118:870–876.
Petricoin EE, Paweletz CP, Liotta LA. Clinical applications
of proteomics: proteomic pattern diagnostics. J Mammary
Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2002;7:433–440.
Chen W, Reiss M, Foran DJ. A prototype for unsupervised
analysis of tissue microarrays for cancer research and diagnostics. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2004;8:89–96.
Steinberg JL, Trudeau ME, Ryder DE, et al. Combined fineneedle aspiration, physical examination and mammography in the diagnosis of palpable breast masses: their
relation to outcome for women with primary breast cancer.
Can J Surg. 1996;39:302–311.
Ljung BM, Drejet A, Chiampi N, et al. Diagnostic accuracy
of fine-needle aspiration biopsy is determined by physician
training in sampling technique. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol). 2001;93:263–268.
Silverman JF, Lannin DR, O’Brien K, Norris HT. The triage
role of fine needle aspiration biopsy of palpable breast
masses. Diagnostic accuracy and cost-effectiveness. Acta
Cytol. 1987;31:731–736.
Silverman JF, Masood S, Ducatman BS, Wang HH, Sneige
N. Can FNA biopsy separate atypical hyperplasia, carcinoma in situ, and invasive carcinoma of the breast? Cytomorphologic criteria and limitations in diagnosis. Diagn
Cytopathol. 1993;9:713–728.
Weier HU, Zitzelsberger HF, Hsieh HB, et al. Monitoring
signal transduction in cancer: tyrosine kinase gene expression profiling. J Histochem Cytochem. 2001;49:673–674.
Layfield LJ, Chrischilles EA, Cohen MB, Bottles K. The palpable breast nodule. A cost-effectiveness analysis of alternate diagnostic approaches. Cancer. 1993;72:1642–1651.
Symmans WF, Ayers M, Clark EA, et al. Total RNA yield and
microarray gene expression profiles from fine-needle
aspiration biopsy and core-needle biopsy samples of breast
carcinoma. Cancer. 2003;97:2960–2971.
Geho D, Lahar N, Gurnani P, et al. Pegylated, streptavidinconjugated quantum dots are effective detection elements
for reverse-phase protein microarrays. Bioconjug Chem.
2005;16:559–566.
Zhou YH, Tan F, Hess KR, Yung WK. The expression of
PAX6, PTEN, vascular endothelial growth factor, and epidermal growth factor receptor in gliomas: relationship to
tumor grade and survival. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:3369–
3375.
Uegaki K, Kanamori Y, Kigawa J, et al. PTEN-positive and
phosphorylated-Akt-negative expression is a predictor of
survival for patients with advanced endometrial carcinoma.
Oncol Rep. 2005;14:389–392.

184

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) June 25, 2007 / Volume 111 / Number 3

40. Shoman N, Klassen S, McFadden A, Bickis MG, Torlakovic
E, Chibbar R. Reduced PTEN expression predicts relapse in
patients with breast carcinoma treated by tamoxifen. Mod
Pathol. 2005;18:250–259.
41. Majumder PK, Sellers WR. Akt-regulated pathways in prostate cancer. Oncogene. 2005;24:7465–7474.
42. Goel A, Arnold CN, Niedzwiecki D, et al. Frequent inactivation of PTEN by promoter hypermethylation in microsatellite instability-high sporadic colorectal cancers. Cancer Res.
2004;64:3014–3021.
43. Leslie NR, Downes CP. PTEN: the down side of PI 3-kinase
signalling. Cell Signal. 2002;14:285–295.
44. Wang CC, Huang RP, Sommer M, et al. Array-based multiplexed screening and quantitation of human cytokines and
chemokines. J Proteome Res. 2002;1:337–343.

45. Arnold SF, Obourn JD, Jaffe H, Notides AC. Phosphorylation
of the human estrogen receptor by mitogen-activated
protein kinase and casein kinase II: consequence on
DNA binding. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1995;55:163–
172.
46. Pandolfi PP. Breast cancer—loss of PTEN predicts resistance to treatment. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2337–2338.
47. Zhou X, Tan M, Stone Hawthorne V, et al. Activation of the
Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin/4E-BP1 pathway by
ErbB2 overexpression predicts tumor progression in breast
cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:6779–6788.
48. Celis JE, Gromov P, Gromova I, et al. Integrating proteomic
and functional genomic technologies in discovery-driven
translational breast cancer research. Mol Cell Proteomics.
2003;2:369–377.

