Meeting Report

Derepression in the Desert: The Third Workshop on Clinical
Translation of Epigenetics in Cancer Therapeutics
1

1

1

2

3

Arthur Zelent, Kevin Petrie, Manuel Boix-Chornet, Ari M. Melnick, Samuel Waxman,
4
and Steven D. Gore
1

Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom; 2Albert Einstein School of Medicine; 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York; and 4Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland

Introduction
In the past decade, the scientific and medical community has
witnessed dramatic progress in epigenetics and has begun to
understand some of the epigenetic mechanisms that contribute to
human disease, particularly cancer. In January 2007, the third
biannual workshop on Clinical Translation of Epigenetics in
Cancer Therapeutics was held in Phoenix, Arizona. Its mission
was to discuss the basic epigenetic mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation and deregulation in cancer and evaluate the progress in
translating new research findings in this field into effective
anticancer therapies.

Cancer Epigenetics and New Drug Development
Epigenetics can be defined as the study of heritable changes in
chromatin function that occur without alterations in DNA
sequence. A growing body of evidence suggests that epigenetic
changes may provide a greater contribution to cancer development
and progression than genetic causes, and in some cases may be
solely responsible for tumorigenesis. From a clinical perspective,
this is potentially good news as the reversibility of epigenetic
changes makes these processes attractive therapeutic targets.
However, despite a growing number of recently identified chromatin modifying enzymes (see Supplementary Table S1 for histone
methyltransferases and demethylases), many of the processes
responsible for the establishment of aberrant epigenetic states in
cancer as well as epigenetic reprogramming during development
remain to be elucidated. If drugs that target epigenetic changes are
to be effective in treatment of cancer, such drugs would ideally
target malignant stem cells. However, the roles that epigenetic
modifications play in the maintenance of cancer stem cells need to
be defined.
Epigenetic changes greatly outnumber gene mutations in a colon
cancer model and therefore may constitute a more important
driving force in tumor development and progression. Stephen
Baylin (Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD; key speakers are identified in Supplementary data, Appendix A) emphasized the importance of
epigenetic changes in early carcinogenesis, particularly at the level
of the putative cancer stem cell where epigenetic therapies may

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
The workshop was supported by grants from the following corporations and
foundations: MGI Pharma, Pharmion, Merck, MDS Foundation, Novartis, Celgene,
Gloucester, CuraGen, and Syndax.
Requests for reprints: Steven D. Gore, Johns Hopkins University, 1650 Orleans
Street, Baltimore, MD 21231. Phone: 410-955-8781; Fax: 410-614-1005; E-mail:
gorest@jhmi.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6779

www.aacrjournals.org

very well be targeted in the future. Cancer cells seem to possess
‘‘bivalent’’ epigenetic chromatin states, present in normal stem
cells, reflecting both positive and negative histone modifications
associated with a given gene. These marks are presumed to hold
the cell poised for either transcription or silencing on activation of
a particular lineage commitment and/or differentiation pathway.
Following treatment with DNA-demethylating agents such as
decitabine (5-aza-2¶-deoxycytidine; see Supplementary Fig. S1),
cancer cells revert from being silenced to adopt this ‘‘bivalent’’
state. Aberrant methylation and gene repression may be effected
through the expression of alternative DNA methyltransferase
(DNMT) enzymes: cancer cell–specific DNMT3B transcripts encode
truncated isoforms lacking the COOH-terminal catalytic domain
(Lucy Godley, University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL). When the most frequently expressed aberrant
transcript, DNMT3B7, was expressed in cells changes in gene
expression were observed, which in some cases correlated with
altered DNA methylation of corresponding CpG islands.
New drug development targeting epigenetics has included
pharmacokinetic progress in DNMT inhibition. Currently available
DNMT inhibitors have extremely brief half-lives due to instability in
aqueous solution and rapid metabolism by cytidine deaminase.
These pharmacokinetic limitations may contribute to the difficulty
of successful application of these drugs in nonhematologic
neoplasms. Peter Jones (Norris Cancer Center, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA) described S110, an
azacytosine dinucleotide with a dramatic decrease in deamination
by cytidine deaminase (Supplementary Fig. S1). Newer approaches
to drug development use genomic techniques. Kimberly Stegmaier
(Dana-Farber Cancer Center, Boston, MA) described the application of DNA microarray gene expression signatures to drug
discovery and has developed ‘‘connectivity maps’’ for various Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved drugs, diseases, and
gene expression profiles. The use of such connectivity maps, which
are available via internet-based resources,5 can indicate a potential
therapeutic agent or combination for a given disease. Based on
differences between the gene expression profiles for normal and
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) stem cells, Monica Guzman
(University of Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, NY)
identified parthenolide, an inhibitor of NFjB that works by
targeting IjB kinase. Parthenolide was selective for AML and
chronic myelogenous leukemia stem cells and with little effect on
normal progenitor/stem cells in in vitro and in vivo assays. The
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor valproic acid (Supplementary
Fig. S1) enhanced the maintenance and clonogenic capacity of
both normal and leukemic progenitor cells in vitro (Gesine Bug,

4967

5

http://www.broad/mit

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Klinikum der J.W. Goethe-Universitaet, Frankfurt, Germany).
Although these data remain to be evaluated in vivo and the study
has yet to be extended to other HDAC inhibitors (HDACi), this
issue raises concerns about the treatment of AML with HDACi.
Some AML patients treated with valproic acid display effects that
are consistent with the results reported by Bug. However, some
patients also show short-lived hematopoietic improvement. This
may indicate that valproic acid has heterogeneous effects on
distinct leukemic cell populations; leukemic progenitor cells may be
expanded while more mature leukemic cells may be killed (Janice
Gabrilove, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY). These data
highlight the importance of defining cancer stem cells and studying
epigenetically targeted drugs specifically on these populations.

HDAC Inhibitors: Clinical Studies
A variety of protein deacetylase inhibitors may affect gene
expression through modification of chromatin conformation. These
drugs function as HDACi, thereby enabling the reacetylation of
histone lysine residues required for transcriptionally active
chromatin by histone acetyltransferases. These compounds have
undergone intensive early-stage clinical development in recent
years. Key questions include the molecular mechanisms underpinning clinical activity, whether such drugs can exhibit molecular
specificity, and whether such drugs should be targeted to specific
HDAC enzymes or specific classes of HDAC enzymes, rather than
acting as pan-HDACi. The FDA approval of vorinostat (Supplementary Fig. S1) for treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma set a
first clinical standard for HDACi performance. The meeting
focused on emerging clinical data on this and other HDACi.
Romidepsin (FK228, depsipeptide; Supplementary Fig. S1) is also
active in T-cell lymphomas; however, it remains unclear whether
romidepsin depsipeptide offers advantages over vorinostat (Susan
Bates, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD). Previous studies
had raised concerns about cardiac toxicity of this drug; current
data suggest that those concerns were likely overstated. Other
newer HDACi discussed included the hydroxamic acid belinostat
(PXD101; Supplementary Fig. S1) and the benzamides MGCD0103
(Supplementary Fig. S1) and MS-275 (now SDX-275; see Supplementary Fig. S1). The latter two structurally similar drugs
putatively possess class I HDAC selectivity. It is not yet clear
whether any of these agents offer clinical advantages over
vorinostat (Johann deBono, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton,
United Kingdom; Guillermo Garcia-Manero, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX; Steven Gore, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD).
Because fusion genes that involve core binding factor recruit
HDACs as part of a transcriptional corepression complex, AML
with core binding factor gene rearrangements have been
speculated to be particularly good targets for HDACi. Preliminary
data suggest that such patients may be more sensitive to
romidepsin than patients with normal karyotypes (Toyosi Odenike,
University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, IL).
Whereas these leukemias represent a minority of cases of AML and
are more likely to be cured by cytarabine-based chemotherapy than
other subsets of AML, these early data suggest that core binding
factor leukemias represent a fertile area for proof-of-concept
studies targeting such transcriptional repression complexes.
In advanced breast cancer, treatment with vorinostat resulted in
disease stabilization in 4 of 14 cases. Taking the view that
administering the drug in the preoperative stage would allow

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

investigation of pharmacodynamic effects in postresection specimens, Vered Stearns (Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD) described plans to
evaluate the safety and tolerability of vorinostat in women with
primary breast cancer before surgery. Such novel clinical trial
designs focus on the procurement of posttreatment tissue to help
elucidate the mechanisms of action of epigenetically targeted drugs.

HDAC Inhibitors: Mechanisms of Action
Whereas the focus of the meeting was the translation of
epigenetic science to the treatment of cancer, the ‘‘off-target’’
effects of drugs may be as important to study as the putative
‘‘specific’’ drug target. Steven Grant (Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA) emphasized that the so-called HDACs
in fact lead to the acetylation of many other proteins in addition
to histones. Killing of neoplastic cells by HDACi may require
generation of reactive oxygen species, activation of proapoptotic
gene expression, and inhibition of proteasome function. Inhibition
of IjB kinase via flavopiridol enhances cytotoxic effects of
vorinostat by inhibiting NFjB activity (Supplementary Fig. S2).
Other inhibitors of the NFjB pathway could also be useful in
enhancing the proapoptotic effects of vorinostat. Brian Gabrielli
(University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia) reported that tumor
cell sensitivity to another hydroxamate HDACi, LAQ824, was
associated with the loss of G2 checkpoint. He also reported that
HDACi-mediated induction of p21WAF/1CIP1 protected cells from
apoptosis, and inhibition of p21 potentiates the proapoptotic
effects of HDACi thereby enhancing HDACi antitumor activity,
consistent with Grant’s work on inhibition of p21 with flavopiridol.
Many of these studies are carried out using established cell lines
and the results remain to be validated in primary tumor cells or
in vivo models (Supplementary Fig. S2).
A number of studies over the past decade have indicated that
HDACi may act in a highly cell context–dependent manner. Ricky
Johnstone (The Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, Melbourne,
Australia) addressed the requirement of tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)–related apoptosis-inducing ligand and death receptor
signaling for apoptosis induction by vorinostat in a c-myc–driven
murine model of lymphoma. TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand and death receptor signaling were not required for
vorinostat-induced apoptosis; rather, the intrinsic mitochondrial
pathway was important because BID- and BIM-deficient mice had
lower response to HDACi. However, studies by Reuben Lotan’s
group (MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX) indicated that
both Fas death receptor–mediated and mitochondrial apoptotic
pathways are involved in mediating the effects of vorinostat and
valproic acid. Mechanism-based combinations entering clinical
trials based on in vitro synergy or gene expression data include
combinations of HDACi with proteosome inhibitors (Gail Eckhardt,
University of Colorado Cancer Center, Denver, CO) and HDACi with
all trans-retinoic acid and vascular endothelial growth factor
antagonists (Roberto Pili, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD).
Kapil Bhalla (Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA) discussed
the mechanisms of tumor cell death due to inhibition of HDAC6, a
deacetylase whose primary substrates are nonhistone cytoplasmic
proteins such as a-tubulin and heat shock protein 90 (Supplementary Fig. S3). By interfering with the proper balance of acetylation
of these proteins, inhibition of HDAC6 has been shown to interfere
with proteasomal function and aggresome formation. Thus, HDACi

4968

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Progress in Clinical Cancer Epigenetics

have been shown to synergize with both heat shock protein 90 and
proteasome inhibitors in cancers such as multiple myeloma that
accumulate a large amount of misfolded proteins. Use of these
drugs leads to cancer cell death due to unresolved misfolded
protein response (Supplementary Fig. S3).
HDACi may cause apoptosis by increasing DNA damage (Feyruz
Rassool, University of Maryland Greenebaun Cancer Center,
Baltimore, MD). HDACi may selectively kill leukemic cells by
enhancing misrepair of DNA double-stranded breaks and thus
indirectly causing apoptosis through activation of cellular response
to DNA damage. These results are consistent with data from Scott
Hiebert’s laboratory (Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN) showing that HDAC3-null cells accumulate DNA
damage and have impaired DNA repair and delayed cell cycle
progression. Thus, some of the effects observed with HDACi may
be specifically due to the inhibition of ubiquitously expressed
HDAC3. HDACi also lead to normalization of heterochromatin
surrounding translocation breakpoints (Mary Callanan, Institut
Albert Bonnoit, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France).
The data discussed confirm that HDACi constitute a class of
complex drugs with multiple molecular targets. Ongoing efforts in
in vitro and animal models as well as the ex vivo study of tissue from
treated patients will help identify the critical targets and enable
more rational development of this class of active anticancer agents.

DNA Methylation
DNMT inhibitors are clinically active in patients with hematologic malignancy. Both azacytosine analogues 5-azacytidine (azaCR) and 5-aza-2¶-deoxycytidine (decitabine) are approved in the
United States for the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome. As
previously noted, both drugs have short half-lives and are currently
only available as parenteral formulations. The extent to which their
clinical activity depends on the reversal of promoter methylation
remains an area of scientific uncertainty. A variety of phase I trials
have combined or sequenced DNMT inhibitors with HDACi in an
attempt to achieve synergistic expression of epigenetically silenced
genes. The DNMT inhibitor decitabine induces hematologic
recovery in AML and myelodysplastic syndrome patients, particularly those with a normal karyotype (Michael Lübbert, University
Medical Center, Freiberg, Germany); continuous treatment may be
superior to interrupted treatment. Trials of decitabine and aza-CR
with valproic acid (and in one study, all trans-retinoic acid as a
third drug) have been encouraging but have not suggested synergy
comparable to that seen in vitro for gene expression with these
drugs, potentially limited by the low potency of valproic acid as a
HDACi (Garcia-Manero). Sequential treatment of AML cells with
decitabine and HDACi leads to synergistic apoptosis, suggesting
that the synergy of this class of drugs may not be limited to
reexpression of epigenetically silenced genes (Gore). In a phase I
trial combining aza-CR and the HDACi MS-275, the best responses
developed in patients receiving low doses of the HDACi. After 3
days of aza-CR administration, some patients already showed an
induction of DNA damage–associated H2AXg (Gore). This
combination has entered a randomized phase II trial in the U.S.
Intergroup; this trial randomly assigns patients to a 10-day
schedule of aza-CR with or without the HDACi. This will be the
first trial directly comparing the effects of a DNMT inhibitor alone
and in combination with a HDACi.
Robert Brown (Glasgow University, Glasgow, United Kingdom)
observed that early trials with epigenetic therapy in solid tumors

www.aacrjournals.org

have been disappointing. It has been difficult in these studies to
establish the relationship between pharmacokinetics and target
pharmacodynamics, as well as biological and clinical response
(particularly in the tumor tissue). Decitabine has caused a dosedependent decrease in DNA methylation and an increase in fetal
hemoglobin expression. In ovarian cancer, patients treated with
chemotherapy acquire resistance, which correlates with promoter
hypermethylation of hMLH1. Reversal of this hypermethylation
using DNMT inhibitors leads to the reestablishment of chemosensitive disease. The pace of clinical investigation of DNMT
inhibitors in nonhematologic malignancies has lagged behind that
in hematologic malignancies, in part due to the known activity of
the azacytosine nucleoside analogues in myeloid malignancies, first
observed in 1989.

Detection of Biomarkers
Current translational approaches to epigenetically targeted
therapy have been hampered by the lack of reliable molecular
markers that predict response (Jonathan Licht, Lurie Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL). Bjoern Hackanson
(James Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH)
discussed Epityper and Bio-COBRA methods to accurately monitor
changes in DNA methylation. COBRA, a methylation-specific PCR–
based approach, is limited by specific primers. In contrast, Epityper
is based on mass spectrometry of bisulfite-converted DNA and can
provide quantitative assessment of multiple CpGs within DNA
sequences of up to 600 bp. A genomics-based methylation
assay (‘‘HELP’’) was discussed by Maria Eugenia Figueroa (Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY), which uses comparative
isoschizomer digestion of the genome with the HpaII and MspI
enzymes to create a quantitative representation of the methylation
level of CpGs throughout the genome in combination with
customized high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Using HELP,
they could discriminate a finer classification of AML than with
gene expression arrays alone, possibly due to a better sensitivity for
detecting locus-specific changes that result in mRNA levels too
small to be detected by expression arrays. The effective application
of (epi-)genomics-based assays will potentially facilitate the
identification of molecular targets associated with clinical
response, which will in turn guide the next generation of clinical
development of these approaches.

Targeting Protein-Protein Interactions
Current drugs that target epigenetic changes inhibit effector
proteins that are widely used in the epigenome. Such drugs may
have broad application but suboptimal specificity. Better specificity
could potentially be achieved by targeting interactions between
specific epigenetic marks and adaptor proteins. However, proteinprotein interactions have traditionally been considered to be
difficult, if not impossible, to affect pharmacologically. A number of
investigators discussed the targeting of protein-protein interactions as a therapeutic approach to inhibiting the function of
transcription factor oncogenes. Ari Melnick’s laboratory (Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY) disrupted the interaction
between the SMRT corepressor and the BTB/POZ domain of BCL6,
thus inhibiting transcriptionally repressive BCL6 activity. Peptide
inhibitors of BCL6 potently and specifically kill B-cell lymphoma
cells. This interaction is also the target of a peptide aptamer
approach (Paul Ko-Ferrigno, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre,
Cambridge, United Kingdom). John Bushweller (University of

4969

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA) described the
development of small-molecule inhibitors that disrupt the
interaction between AML1 (Runx1) and CBFb. These inhibitors
restore the ability of AML1-ETO–containing Kasumi cells to
differentiate in response to all trans-retinoic acid treatment.
Additionally, Jay Hess (University of Michigan School of Medicine,
Ann Arbor, MI) described peptides that interfere with the
interaction of MLL with menin, which is required for the
leukemogenic activity of MLL. Anders Näär (Harvard Medical
School and Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Charlestown, MA) described the use of a high-throughput
fluorescence polarization screen for compounds that disrupt KIX
domain–mediated interactions; however, the KIX domain is
present in many coactivators and it may be difficult to generate
specificity. This is a potential problem with other small-molecule
drugs directed at disrupting protein-protein interactions. Overall,
this session showed that such protein-protein interactions may
represent ‘‘druggable’’ targets, which could lead to treatments with
a high degree of specificity.

Summary of Findings and Recommendations for
Future Research
This meeting has reflected well the current status of epigenetic
cancer therapy and highlighted its promising future, which has
been underscored by the clinical success with FDA-approved
vorinostat, aza-CR, and decitabine, as well as encouraging results
from the use of nucleoside analogues in therapeutic trials of AML.
Nevertheless, there remain many major challenges for the future
basic and clinical research in this field.
Although much knowledge has been accumulated in clinical
epigenetics, particularly relating to the role of DNA methylation
patterns in cancer, the precise array and extent of epigenetic
modifications that distinguish particular cancer cell types (as well
as cancer stem cells), together with the mechanisms that are
responsible for their establishment, remain poorly understood.
There is a clear need for identification and validation of novel
therapeutic targets and development of drugs to modulate their
activities. Appropriate in vitro and in vivo model systems also need
to be developed for preclinical studies. Future clinical trials should
be mechanism driven and supported by strong preclinical data.
Therefore, effective communication and collaboration between
basic and clinical work is essential for rapid translation of acquired
knowledge into effective anticancer therapies. At present, there is a
wide range of HDACi in clinical trials despite a lack of clear
understanding of their mechanisms of action in a particular
disease. It is highly unlikely that these drugs solely act via
inhibition of histone acetylation, and potential off-target effects

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

should be investigated using appropriate in vitro or in vivo disease
models and gene knockout and/or knockdown technologies. The
expansion of structurally diverse HDACi and their use in a variety
of clinical trials without understanding their exact mechanisms of
action in a given disease have led to confusion in the field about the
suitability of these agents in a particular therapeutic strategy, the
most effective dosing, and schedules of administration. Exploring
all potential mechanisms of action of these compounds (epigenetic
and nonepigenetic), particularly in phase II trials when clinical
responses are expected, must remain a high priority to further the
rational development of this class of drugs and, to lead to further
rational development of epigenetic strategies.
In contrast to HDACi, there is a lack of drugs that would more
specifically act on other cancer-causing epigenetic modifications
such as DNA and histone methylation. Nucleoside analogues are
unstable and act through incorporation to DNA rather than directly
targeting DNMT enzymatic activities. Currently, there are no drugs
that inhibit histone methyltransferases or histone demethylases,
although there are some in development. The role of specific
histone methyltransferases and histone demethylases in cancer
also remains to be better explored. Additionally, clearly defined
clinical and molecular outcomes need to be established for each
drug or drug combinations to evaluate if these agents exert
desirable molecular effects in target cancer cells and whether these
effects correlate with clinical response. It is clear that rapid
progress in this highly promising field will not be accomplished
without a concerted effort by both the basic and clinical scientific
community. In this respect, this meeting has been invaluable in
bringing together leading investigators in this field. An important
take-home message is that clinical trials with these agents should
be based on strong molecular data and positive preclinical results
in appropriate animal cancer models, and, most importantly, it is
this basic and clinical work that should influence and guide the
pharmacologic development of ‘‘epi-drugs’’.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
S.D. Gore: honoraria, Pharmion, Celgene; consultant as chair of a Data Safety
Monitoring Board for a clinical trial, Gloucester; consultant on clinical trial
design, Syndax; consultant on scientific advisory board regarding trial design, MGI
Pharma; consultant as central reviewer of responses on a clinical trial, Celgene,
Pharmion. The other authors disclosed no potential conflicts of interests.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/4/2008; revised 3/13/2008; accepted 4/11/2008.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the many workshop participants for their outstanding contributions and
whose work could not be specifically cited due to space limitations.

4970

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Derepression in the Desert: The Third Workshop on Clinical
Translation of Epigenetics in Cancer Therapeutics
Arthur Zelent, Kevin Petrie, Manuel Boix-Chornet, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:4967-4970.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4967
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/07/02/68.13.4967.DC1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

