Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Combination of antibodies directed against different ErbB3
surface epitopes prevents the establishment of resistance to
BRAF/MEK inhibitors in melanoma
Luigi Fattore1,2, Debora Malpicci2,3, Emanuele Marra4, Francesca Belleudi5,6,
Alessia Noto1,2, Claudia De Vitis2,5, Maria Elena Pisanu2,3, Pierpaolo Coluccia2,
Rosa Camerlingo1, Giuseppe Roscilli4,5, Antoni Ribas7, Arianna Di Napoli5,8, Maria
Rosaria Torrisi5,6,8, Luigi Aurisicchio4, Paolo Antonio Ascierto1, Rita Mancini2,5,
Gennaro Ciliberto1
1

Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori “Fondazione G. Pascale”, Naples, Italy

2

Dipartimento di Chirurgia “P. Valdoni”, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy

3

Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università degli Studi di Catanzaro “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy

4

Takis S.r.l., Rome, Italy

5

Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy

6

I stituto Pasteur Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Sapienza Università di Roma,
Rome, Italy

7

 epartment of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles,
D
CA, USA

8

Azienda Ospedaliera S. Andrea, Rome, Italy

Correspondence to:
Gennaro Ciliberto, e-mail: g.ciliberto@istitutotumori.na.it
Keywords: melanoma, BRAF/MEK inhibitors, ErbB3 activation, Anti-ErbB3 antibodies, in vivo regrowth impairment
Received: March 16, 2015      Accepted: June 27, 2015      Published: July 07, 2015

ABSTRACT
Patients with metastatic melanoma bearing V600 mutations in BRAF oncogene
clinically benefit from the treatment with BRAF inhibitors alone or in combination with
MEK inhibitors. However, a limitation to such treatment is the occurrence of resistance.
Tackling the adaptive changes helping cells survive from drug treatment may offer new
therapeutic opportunities. Very recently the ErbB3 receptor has been shown to act as
a central node promoting survival of BRAF mutated melanoma. In this paper we first
demonstrate that ErbB3/AKT hyperphosphorylation occurs in BRAF mutated melanoma
cell lines following exposure to BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors. This strongly correlates with
increased transcriptional activation of its ligand neuregulin. Anti-ErbB3 antibodies impair
the establishment of de novo cell resistance to BRAF inhibition in vitro. In order to more
potently ablate ErbB3 activity we used a combination of two anti-ErbB3 antibodies directed
against distinct epitopes of its extracellular domain. These two antibodies in combo with
BRAF/MEK inhibitors potently inhibit in vitro cell growth and tumor regrowth after drug
withdrawal in an in vivo xenograft model. Importantly, residual tumor masses from
mice treated by the antibodies and BRAF/ERK inhibitors combo are characterized almost
exclusively by large necrotic areas with limited residual areas of tumor growth. Taken
together, our findings support the concept that triple therapy directed against BRAF/MEK/
ErbB3 may be able to provide durable control of BRAF mutated metastatic melanoma.

medical problem [1]. Although historical survival rates for
patients with metastatic melanoma have been low until
recently [2, 3], clinical management of this disease has
significantly improved over the last 3–4 years thanks to
the introduction of two classes of drugs: a) immunological

INTRODUCTION
Malignant melanoma is the most aggressive form
of skin cancer. Its incidence has dramatically increased
wordwide over the past decades, thus becoming a major
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24823

Oncotarget

checkpoint inhibitors such as monoclonal antibodies
against CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 [4]; b) small molecule
kinase inhibitors of the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway for
the approximately 50% of patients bearing mutations
of the BRAF oncogene [5]. BRAF mutations usually
affect the Valine 600 codon changing this aminoacid into
glutamic acid (V600E) in the majority of cases, but also,
less frequently, into other aminoacids (V600D, V600R)
[6]. These mutations cause the constitutive activation of the
BRAF kinase, which aberrantly induces MAPK/ERK kinases
[6]. Disease prognosis for melanoma patients bearing BRAF
V600 mutations has drastically improved in relation to the
introduction of BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) two of which,
vemurafenib and dabrafenib, have already been approved
by FDA [7, 8]. BRAF inhibitors are active only in tumors
where V600 BRAF mutations result in constitutively active
monomers, whereas the same inhibitors induce paradoxical
tumor promoting effects in RAS mutated melanomas
because of their ability to promote allosteric activation
through homo- or hetero-dimerization of wild type B RAF
isoforms [9, 10]. Although BRAFi induce unprecedented
objective responses in approximately 45 to 50% of treated
patients, virtually all responders undergo disease progression
within 5 to 6 months after initiation of treatment as a
consequence of the development of de novo drug resistance
[11, 12]. The mechanisms at the basis of acquired resistance
have been at the center of intensive investigations. These
have led to discover in the majority of cases a plethora of
mutations which cause reactivation of the RAS/RAF/MAPK
pathway, including NRAS or KRAS mutations, mutant
BRAF amplifications, alternative BRAF splicing, MAP2K1
activating mutations and CDKN2A losses [13–16].
The evidence that resistance to BRAFi is caused
by reactivation of the MAPK pathway has led to the
development of novel strategies directed to simultaneously
inhibit BRAF and the downstream MEK kinase in the
attempt to reduce the emergence of resistance. Indeed, MEK
inhibitors increase objective response rates, progression free
survival and, more recently, overall survival when delivered
in combination with a BRAF inhibitor as compared to
BRAF inhibitor monotherapy [17–20]. Thus combination
therapy is expected to become soon the standard of care for
this subset of patients. However also this approach is unable
to completely eradicate disease and disease progression
occurs after an average of approximately 10 months [21].
Alternative mechanisms of resistance are related to the
activation of signaling pathways redundant to MAPK,
for example overexpression of RTKs, such as PDGFR or
IGF1R, which promote activation of the PI3K-AKT axis
[22–24]. These mechanisms have been observed both
in melanoma cell cultures exposed in vitro to continuous
selection with BRAF inhibitors, and in post-relapse human
melanoma tumor samples [14].
An alternative approach to the study of drug
resistance is the analysis of early adaptive changes taking
place in cells shortly after drug exposure. We believe that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a better knowledge of these early events may help develop
new strategies aiming at circumventing the establishment
of drug resistance. Using this approach our laboratory as
well as others have recently shown that the ErbB3 receptor
is involved in the activation of an early feedback survival
loop soon after drug exposure which leads to increased
phosphorylation of the prosurvival AKT kinase [25–27]. A
distinguishing feature of our observations was that, upon
exposure to BRAF or MEK inhibitors, ErbB3 does not
undergo transcriptional activation but instead a selective
increase of its phosphorylation consequent to enhanced
autocrine production of its ligand neuregulin-1 (NRG1)
[27]. Also, we were the first to show that activation of the
ErbB3/AKT axis can be inhibited by co-treatment with
anti-ErbB3 mAbs [27] and that these antibodies synergize
with BRAF and MEK inhibitors in short term in vitro
clonogenic assays [27]. We had previosuly generated
a group of monoclonal antibodies directed against the
extracellular domain of human ErbB3 [28] and shown
that two of these antibodies, named A3 and A4, were
able to inhibit receptor phosphorylation and melanoma
cell growth mainly through the induction of receptor
internalization and degradation [29, 30].
In the present work we have addressed two important
questions. In first instance we have decided to assess
whether the ErbB3 autocrine survival loop induced by
treatment with BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors is a general
phenomenon using a larger panel of melanoma cell lines
and whether in vitro treatment with anti-ErbB3 antibodies
is capable of suppressing the establishment of resistance to
BRAFi. The second question we have addressed is whether
a combinatorial approach with two different antibodies
directed against distinct ErbB3 surface epitopes can better
inhibit receptor function in BRAF mutated melanomas.
Previous studies focusing on two other receptors of the
same family, namely EGFR and ErbB2, have shown that
a stronger inhibition of their protumorigenic signaling
activity was achieved with a combination of two antibodies
against different surface epitopes. This approach was more
powerful due to a pronounced ability to induce receptor
downmodulation and redirection into the lysosomal
degradative pathway [31]. Indeed here we show both
in vitro and in an in vivo xenograft model that combined
treatment with A3 and A4 antibodies is able to more
potently induce receptor degradation and as a result to more
potently sinergize with the BRAF/MEK inhibitors in tumor
growth impairment and induction of apoptosis.

RESULTS
ErbB3 receptor is rapidly phosphorylated in a
broad panel of BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines
upon exposure to a BRAF or to a MEK inhibitor
We and others have recently shown that the
ErbB3 receptor is involved in the activation of an early
24824

Oncotarget

feedback survival loop upon cell exposure to BRAF and/
or MEK inhibitors [25–27]. Two different mechanisms
have been postulated. In first instance Abel et al [26]
suggested that BRAF mutated melanoma cell lines,
when exposed to a BRAF inhibitor, undergo rapid
increase of ErbB3 mRNA transcription/translation
(1.5- to 3-fold) which makes cells more sensitive to
stimulation by exogenously added ligand Neuregulin-1
(HRG or NRG1). In contrast to this finding we observed
in three cell lines with different BRAF V600 mutations,
namely MST-L, LOX-IMVI and WM266, that cell
exposure to either vemurafenib as BRAF inhibitor or
trametinib as MEK inhibitor, does not lead to increase
ErbB3 protein expression but instead causes increased
spontaneous phosphorylation of ErbB3 (several-fold)
[27]. In one cell line we showed that this is consequent
to increased endogenous production of NRG1 and
activation of an autocrine loop [27].

In order to confirm and expand our previous
observations we conducted an extensive analysis of a
larger panel of 11 BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines
indicated in Table 1. In all cell lines we initially assessed
the level of expression of all ErbB receptors and found
that in all of them, ErbB3 was constantly expressed at
high levels with the exception of M263 cells. In contrast
all other ErbB receptors were expressed at variable
levels with ErbB1/EGFR and ErbB4 showing low or
undetectable levels in several cells.
Cell extracts of the 8 new melanoma cell lines M14,
A375, SK-Mel5, M262, M263, M229, M397 and WM115
exposed to vemurafenib and/or trametinib were prepared
and subjected to western blotting. The results, summarized
in Table 1, show that in the majority of cell lines ErbB3
undergoes a strong upregulation of its phosphorylation
in the absence of external addition of NRG1 upon
exposure to vemurafenib or trametinib or both drugs.

Table 1: ErbB3 receptor is phosphorylated in a panel of BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines upon
exposure to a vemurafenib and/or trametinib.
Cell line

ErbB1

ErbB2

ErbB3

ErbB4

0

70%

71%

47%

+ / 0.35 μM

+ / 0.21 μM

LOXIMVI
(V600E)

2%

42%

71%

78%

+ / 0.15 μM

+ / 0.11 μM

A375 (V600E)

70%

1%

1%

49%

+ / n.d.

+ / n.d.

SK Mel5
(V600E)

29%

38, 1%

42, 1%

93, 7%

+ / n.d.

− / n.d.

M262 (V600E)

2%

15%

47%

11%

+ / 0.2 μM

+ / n.d.

M263 (V600E)

0

1%

10%

0

− / n.d.

− / n.d.

M229 (V600E)

0

28%

97%

1%

+ / 0.3 μM

+ / n.d.

M397 (V600E)

0

7%

79%

0

+ / n.d.

+ / n.d.

WM266
(V600D)

33%

66%

68%

60%

+ / 0.16 μM

+ / 0.1 μM

WM115
(V600D)

9%

34%

51%

14%

+ / n.d.

+ / n.d.

MST-L (V600R)

1%

9%

39%

48%

+ / 0.26 μM

+ / 0.17

M14 (V600E)

Activation of
pErbB3 by
BRAFi and
vemurafenib
IC50

Activation of
pErbB3 by
MEKi and
trametinib
IC50

Flow cytometry analysis of ErbBs membrane expression in a panel of 11 melanoma cell lines. The percentage of positive
cells was determined by staining with the indicated primary antibodies and with the isotype-matched andibodies as
negative control. ErbB3 is constantly expressed at high levels with the exception of M263 cells. Cell extracts from
these cell lines exposed to vemurafenib and/or trametinib were prepared and subjected to western blotting. The results
summarized in this Table show that ErbB3 is activated in 10 out of 11 cell lines evaluated upon cells exposure to drugs.
The IC50 values relative to vemurafenib or trametinib was assessed through in vitro proliferation assays as described in the
materials and methods section.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24825

Oncotarget

Detailed results of three positive cell lines (A375, M229
and WM115) are shown in Figure 1. Notably, feedback
activation of pErbB3 is accompanied by strongly increased
phosphorylation of AKT (Figure 1). In summary, while
we observed upregulation of ErbB3 phosphorylation in 10
out of 11 cell lines, we did not observe any significant
increase in ErbB3 protein levels in agreement with our
previous report [27]. In order to further investigate this
aspect we carried out qPCR analysis of ErbB3 and NRG1
mRNA levels in the “positive” cell lines after exposure to
vemurafenib. The results (Supplementary Table S1) show
that ErbB3 mRNA levels remain substantially unchanged,
whereas NRG1 mRNA levels constantly increase from a
minimum of 1.7-fold to a maximum of 7-fold in all cells
analyzed. We also determined whether vemurafenib plus
trametinib is able to induce NRG1 transcription in the
three cell lines of Figure 1. The results (Supplementary
Figure S1), show that also the combination treatment
is able to induce autocrine NRG1 production albeit at
variable levels in the various cell lines. Incidentally, A375
cells present the highest amplitude of NRG1 induction and
also show the strongest degree of AKT phosphorylation.
It has been recently reported that EPHA2
is involved in the establishment of resistance to
vemurafenib via upregulation of its expression and
increased levels of S897 phosphorylation [32, 33].

EPHA2 S897 hyperphosphorylation in resistant cells
is mediated by AKT [32]. Hence, we decided to
assess whether also in sensitive cell lines AKT S473
hyperphosphorylation following short term treatment
with BRAFi and/or MEKi correlated with increased
levels of S897 EPHA2. Surprisingly, in sensitive cells
(Supplementary Figure S2) EPHA2 S897 is shut off at
the same time S473 AKT is upregulated. This finding
suggests that EPHA2 is not involved in the early adaptive
survival loop downstream to ErbB3.
In order to assess whether anti-ErbB3 monoclonal
antibodies are capable of inhibiting vemurafenib and
trametinib upregulation of pErbB3 and pAKT, cells were
simultaneously exposed to treatment combinations with
anti-ErbB3 antibody A3 and cell extracts subjected to
Western blotting. The results (Supplementary Figure S3)
show, as expected, that A3 is able to partially but
reproducibly decrease vemurafenib/trametinib-induced
activation of the pErbB3/pAKT pathway.

ErbB3 mAbs inhibit the establishment of
resistance and restore drug sensitivity to
vemurafenib resistant melanoma cells
A critical issue in the management of BRAF
mutated melanoma is the development of resistance to

Figure 1: Vemurafenib and/or Trametinib treatments induce selective ErbB3 phosporylation and AKT activation in
melanoma cells. A375, M229 and WM115 cells were serum starved for 24 h, treated or not with vemurafenib (0.3 μM), with trametinib

(0.15 μM) or with their combination for 24 h. Western blot analysis performed using the indicated antibodies shows that both vemurafenib
and trametinib induce a strong phosphorylation of ErbB3 (Y1289) and AKT (S473). For densitometric analysis results are expressed as
mean values from three independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24826

Oncotarget

Combination of two anti-ErbB3 mAbs
binding different surface epitopes strongly
inhibits melanoma cell growth and receptor
internalization and degradation

BRAF inhibitors [33]. In most cases resistance has been
linked to the reactivation of the MAPK/ERK pathway as
consequence to secondary mutations or altered protein
expression and it has been shown that these cells can still
be growth-impaired by MEK kinase inhibitors both in
vitro and in the clinic [17, 35].
We sought initially to generate cells resistant either
to vemurafenib or to the combination of vemurafenib
plus one of our anti-ErbB3 mAbs by exposing WM266
cells to growing concentrations of vemurafenib. As
shown in Figure 2A, while we were able to select cells
resistant to vemurafenib, long term co-treatment with
combination of vemurafenib (at the initial concentration
of 50 nM) and of the anti-ErbB3 antibody A3 (at the
concentration of 10 μg/ml) always resulted in a strong
decrease in cell viability and in visible stress-induced
changes in cell morphology (see Figure 2 rightmost
panel) which did not allow to continue the selection
process after 1–2 weeks of culture. Of notice, treatment
of cells with A3 alone did not induce any significant
effect on cell viability (data not shown). This experiment
was repeated at least three times also with a different
anti ErbB3 antibody with similar results. Hence we
can conclude that blocking ErbB3 together with BRAF
strongly affects the development of de novo resistance.
On the other hand, using growing concentrations
of vemurafenib up to 10 μM we were able to obtain a
population of cells resistant to this drug. We used these
cells to analyze ErbB3 expression and activation, and
whether anti-ErbB3 antibodies could still be able to
synegize with trametinib.
Total protein extracts of WM266 resistant
cells exposed to A3, vemurafenib and/or trametinib
were subjected to Western Blot analysis. The results
(Figure 2B) show that these cells maintain the ability to
undergo pErbB3 activation upon short term exposure to
trametinib and that this is abolished by co-treatment with
the A3 mAb. Importantly, A3 treatment in combination
vemurafenib and trametinib in resistant cells is able to
further reduce pERK activation.
In addition, in vitro colony formation assays were
carried out on WM266 resistant clones in the presence
of growing concentrations of vemurafenib alone or in
combination with A3 and/or trametinib. Our results clearly
show that, while treatment of vemurafenib resistant cells
with either trametinib (at a greater extent) or A3 (at a
lower extent) is able to partially restore cell sensitivity to
vemurafenib, only the co-treatment of the resistant clones
with both trametinib and A3 is able to fully restore cells
sensitivity to vemurafenib (Figure 2C, right panel). The
results described above led us to postulate that suppressing
the RAS-RAF-MAPK pathway at multiple levels in
combination with anti-ErbB3 mAbs is able to control and
reduce cancer growth for a longer time by inhibiting the
early and the long-term adaptive mechanisms centered
around ErbB3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

It has been previously shown that combining pairs
of anti-ErbB mAbs recognizing distinct epitopes in the
extracellular domain exerts a superior antitumor effect
compared to the use of individual antibodies because
of their ability to inhibit receptor recycling [31, 36].
We therefore assessed the effect of the two anti-ErbB3
antibodies A3 and A4. We have previously shown that
both antibodies inhibit NRG1 binding, NRG1-induced
pHER3 stimulation, ligand-induced signaling and
ligand-induced melanoma cell proliferation through
binding to different epitopes [29, 30], one of which (A3)
has been mapped to the ErbB3 heterodimerization loop
with other ErbBs.
For this purpose we used MST-L cells which
are known to be growth stimulated upon exposure
to exogenous NRG1. First of all we compared the
proliferative response of MST-L melanoma cells pretreated with each mAb alone or their combination and then
incubated with NRG1 (HRG) for 48, 72 and 96 h in the
presence of the mAbs. After incubation, cells were fixed
and stained with anti-Ki67 antibodies to identify cycling
cells. Quantitative analysis of the percentage of cells
presenting Ki67-positive nuclei indicated that the increase
of the proliferation rate, clearly evident upon 48, 72 and
96 h of NRG1 stimulation, was strongly and significantly
inhibited by the mAbs combination compared to single
treatment with either A3 or A4 mAbs individually.
Melanoma cell growth inhibition induced by mAbs
combination compared to single mAbs was particularly
pronounced after 96 h of treatment (Figure 3A).
In order to confirm these data, we performed in vitro
colony formation assays in the presence of growing
concentrations of A3 and A4 alone or in combination for
ten days. Remarkably A3 + A4 combination was able to
better inhibit MST-L melanoma cells growth compared to
the single treatments (Figure 3B).
Since we have previously demonstrated that A3 and
A4 mAbs are able to potently induce ErbB3 internalization
and degradation by inducing receptor relocalization to
the endocytic lysosomal degradative pathway [29], we
decided to investigate if mAbs combination might be more
effective compared to single treatments. In order to clarify
this aspect MST-L cells were treated with A3, A4 or with
A3 + A4 for 1 h at 37°C in the presence of LysoTrackerRed to identify the lysosomal compartment. Quantitative
immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated colocalization
of ErbB3-bound A3, A4 and A3 + A4 with the LysoTracker
marker in intracellular, perinuclear dots corresponding to
lysosomes, according to our previous data [29]. Moreover,
we clearly observed that the mAbs combination is able to
strongly accelerate receptor relocalization to the lysosomal
24827

Oncotarget

C

Figure 2: Anti-ErbB3 mAbs restore drug sensitivity to vemurafenib in resistant melanoma cells. WM266 human melanoma
cells were treated for about two months with increasing drug concentrations every two weeks (from 50 nM to 10 μM) in order to generate
vemurafenib resistant cells. A. Magnifications of cells show that the combination of vemurafenib (at the initial concentration of 50 nM)
with the anti-ErbB3 antibody A3 (at the concentration of 10 μg/ml) decreases cell viability compared to untreated (Unt) or vemurafenibtreated (Vem) after two week of treatment. The pictures shown are representative of three indipendent experiments. B. WM266 melanoma
cells resistant to vemurafenib (WM r) were serum starved and treated with vemurafenib (0.3 μM), with trametinib (0.15 μM) or with their
combination in presence or not of anti-ErbB3 mAb A3 (20 μg/ml) for 24 h. Western blot analysis shows that A3 mAb abrogate ErbB3
phosphotylation (Y1289) as well as the strong increase of pAKT (S473) induced by trametinib in vemurafenib resistant WM266 cells
(WM r). WM266 wild type cells (WM wt) were used as positive control. For densitometric analysis results are expressed as mean values
from three independent experiments. C. WM r cells were grown in the presence of different doses of vemurafenib and combined or not
with trametinib (0.15 μM), A3 mAb (20 μg/ml) or their combination for 10 day. Cells were stained with crystal violet and then dissolved
in a Methanol/SDS solution and the adsorbance (595 nm) was read using a microplate ELISA reader. Quantitative analysis for curve fitting
and for IC50 evaluation, performed by KaleidaGraph software, shows that either trametinib (at a greater extent) or A3 (at a lower extent)
are able to partially restore cell sensitivity to vemurafenib, but only the co-treatment of the resistant clones with both molecules is able to
fully restore cells sensitivity to vemurafenib. IC50 Vem WM wt = 0.16 μM; IC50 Vem WM r = 7 μM; IC50 Vem WM r + Tram = 0.77 μM;
IC50 Vem WM r + A3 = 3 μM; IC50 Vem WM r + Tram + A3 = 0.1 μM. p-values were calculated using Student’s t test and significance
level has been defined as p < 0.05. For IC50 Vem WM r + Tram + A3 p < 0.001 vs IC50 Vem WM r cells. For IC50 Vem WM r + Tram
p < 0.05 vs IC50 Vem WM r cells. For IC50 Vem WM r + A3 NS vs IC50 Vem WM r. WM wt were used as control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24828

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Combination of anti-ErbB3 mAbs is more effective in inhibiting melanoma cell growth compared to the single
treatments. A. MST-L cells were pre-treated with each mAb or their combination and then incubated with NRG1 (HRG) for 48, 72 and 96 h in

the presence of the antibodies, fixed and stained with anti-Ki67 antibodies to identify cycling cells. Quantitative analysis of the percentage of cells
presenting Ki67-positive nuclei was performed as reported in materials and methods and values are expressed as mean values ± standard errors
(SE). Student’s t test was performed and significance level has been defined as described in materials and methods. The increase of the proliferation
rate upon 48, 72 and 96 h of NRG1 stimulation is inhibited either by mAbs combination and A3/A4 individually. Cell growth inhibition induced
by mAbs combination is particularly pronounced after 96 h of treatment comapred to single mAbs. *p < 0.05 vs. the corresponding NRG1-treated
cells, **p < 0.001 vs. the corresponding HRG-treated cells. Bar = 10 μm. B. MST-L cells were grown in the presence of different doses A3 and A4
alone or in combination for 10 days. Cells were then fixed and stained with crystal violet (upper part). Cells were then dissolved in a Methanol/SDS
solution and the adsorbance (595 nm) was read using a microplate ELISA reader. Quantitative analysis for curve fitting and for IC50 evaluation,
performed by GraphPad software, shows that A3 and A4 combination is able to inhibit melanoma cell growth better than the single treatments.
EC50 A3 = 38 μg/mL; EC50 A4 = 35 μg/mL; EC50 A3 + A4 = 7 μg/mL. The Combination Index (CI) evaluation, performed by CalcuSyn
software as reported in materials and methods, indicate that A3 and A4 are synersistic drugs; CI = 0.7.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24829

Oncotarget

compartment compared to single mAbs, especially after
short treatments (Figure 4A, arrows). In order to verify
whether the accelerated ErbB3 redistribution to the
endocytic degradative pathway induced by A3 and A4
combination would actually correspond to more efficient
and rapid receptor degradation compared to single
treatments, we performed Western Blot analysis. Results
(Figure 4B) show a dramatic decrease of the ErbB3 signal
already after 30 minutes and 1 h of treatment with the A3
+ A4 combination compared to single treatments. It is of
interest to notice that also after 48 h only the combined
treatment with A3 + A4 is able to maintain persistent
downregulation of ErbB3.
Finally, in order to identify the mechanism
responsible for mAbs-induced ErbB3 internalization
we treated MST-L cells with NRG1, A3 or A4 for
different time points and subjected total protein extracts
to immunoprecipitations with an antibody directed
against the ErbB3 receptor. Western Blot analysis
using anti-UBI antibodies showed that A3 and A4
induce strong ErbB3 receptor ubiquitination after 30
minutes of treatment compared to NRG1 stimulation
(Supplementary Figure S4a). To further demonstrate
the involvement of the ubiquitination process in mAbsinduced receptor internalization we exposed MST-L cells
to the ubiquitination-inhibitor PYR-41 and then to A3,
A4 or NRG1. To evaluate the amount of ErbB3 receptors
that remained localized on the plasma membrane upon the
treatments described above, internalization experiments
were performed. The plasma membranes were visualized
by incubating the cells with the lipophilic tracer Vybrant
DiI at 4°C before fixation. Immunofluorescence analysis
showed that, PYR-41 pre-treatment was able to block
mAbs and ligand-induced receptor internalization
(Supplementary Figure S4b). Moreover, PYR-41 pretreatment inhibited mAbs-induced ErbB3 degradation
and ubiquitination as showed by Western Blot and
immunoprecipitation analysis in Supplementary Figure
S4c and S4d.

completely abrogate receptor activation and downstream
signaling. Notably, we observed that the triple combined
treatment leads to a complete abrogation of pERK.
In order to assess whether inhibition of pErbB3 and
pAKT could result in potentiation of the growth inhibitory
effects of vemurafenib, in vitro colony formation assays
were carried out in the presence of growing concentrations
of vemurafenib alone, in combination with A3 or A4 or
with both the mAbs. Treatment with both anti-ErbB3
mAbs vs single mAb treatment strongly potentiated
growth inhibition by vemurafenib (12-fold vs 3-fold)
at all doses of the BRAF inhibitor. The same findings
were confirmed in the WM266 melanoma cell line
(Supplementary Figure S5).
Since we have previously demonstrated that the
ErbB3-dependent feedback survival loop is activated
also by MEK inhibitors [27], we decided to test the antiErbB3 mAbs combination with trametinib. To this purpose
we performed Western Blot analysis and in vitro colony
formation assays as described above. As expected also the
mAbs combination with trametinib completely abrogated
MEK inhibitor-induced ErbB3 and AKT activation
(Figure 5b, left panel). Moreover the triple combinations
resulted had a stronger impact on melanoma cells growth
compared to double treatments (11-fold vs 3-fold).
Finally when cells were treated with suboptimal doses of
vemurafenib and trametinib, the addition of A3 and A4
mAbs combination was capable to provide a powerful
synergistic inhibition of cell growth (Figure 5c).
In order to provide further insights into the biological
effect of mAbs combination with vemurafenib or trametinib
we evaluated apoptosis induction by flow cytometry in M14
melanoma cells. Consistently, in cells treated with triple
combinations we observed an increased percentage of cells
undergoing apoptosis after 48 hours of treatment compared
to single and double treatments (Figure 6A and 6B, left
panels). Importantly when we treated M14 melanoma cells
with the quadruple combination (vemurafenib, trametinib,
A3 and A4) we observed a powerful synergistic apoptosis
induction (Figure 6c). Moreover, cell cycle analysis
showed that, while vemurafenib or trametinib treatments
were characterized by a G0/G1 arrest in line with previous
literature reports [37, 38], combination of A3 and A4 +
either vemurafenib or trametinib caused primarily a block
in S-phase (Figure 6A and 6B, right panels), suggestive of
the activation of a DNA damage checkpoint. In order to
investigate this aspect further, M14 melanoma cells exposed
to A3, A4 and vemurafenib alone or their combinations and
subjected to Western Blot analysis for a set of cell cycle
markers (Figure 6d). Results clearly showed that, while
treatment with vemurafenib was accompanied by strong
activation of p27 in line with the G0/G1 block, co-treatment
with vemurafenib and A3 + A4 caused a dramatic reduction
of CDK4 and Cyclin D1, while inducing a strong increase
of phosphorylated histone H3 and of gamma-H2AX
phosphorylation (pH2AX), thus confirming the occurrence

Anti-ErbB3 mAbs combination with
vemurafenib and/or trametinib inhibits
proliferation and induces apoptosis better than
single antibody treatments
We next assessed whether the combination of the
anti-ErbB3 antibodies A3 and A4 is more potent than
single antibody treatment to block vemurafenib-induced
activation of the pErbB3/pAKT axis and to synergize with
vemurafenib in the inhibition of melanoma cell growth.
Total protein extracts of M14 cells exposed to A3, A4
and vemurafenib individually or in combination were
subjected to Western Blot analysis. The results (Figure 5A,
left panel) clearly showed that while A3 and A4 alone
were able to partially inhibit vemurafenib-induced pErbB3
and pAKT activation, only their combination was able to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24830

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Combination of anti-ErbB3 mAbs is more effective in inducing receptor internalization and degradation.

A. MST-L cells were treated with A3, A4 or their combination for 30′ and 1 h at 37°C in the presence of LysoTracker-Red as reported in
materials and methods. Quantitative immunoflorescence analysis of the percentage of colocalization of signals and 3D reconstruction was
performed as described in materials and methods. Results are expressed as mean values ± SE (standard errors): the percentage of colocalization
was calculated analyzing a minimum of 50 cells for each treatment randomly taken from three independent experiments. Student’s t-test was
performed and significance level has been defined as described in materials and methods. A colocalization of ErbB3-bound A3, A4 and their
combination with the LysoTracker marker in intracellular, perinuclear dots corresponding to lysosomes is evident. mAbs combination strongly
accelerate receptor targeting to the lysosomal compartment compared to single treatments. **p < 0.001 vs. the corresponding A3 or A4-treated
cells; the slight increase of colocalization of combination compared to single treatments at 1 h is not significant. Bar = 10 μm. B. Western blot
analysis using anti-ErbB3 polyclonal antibodies in MST-L cells treated with A3, A4 or their combination at 37°C for the different time points
(0.5, 1, 48 h). A drastic decrease of the band corresponding to ErbB3 is evident after mAbs combination treatments compared to single mAbs.
The equal loading was assessed with anti-actin antibody and densitometric analysis was performed as described in materials and methods.

of DNA damage. Of note, similar results were obtained with
mAbs combination with trametinib.

Firstly we compared the efficacy of single treatment
with vemurafenib or with trametinib with that of the
combination of A3 + A4. Mice were injected s.c. with
1 × 106 M14 cells. When tumors reached the size of
100 mm3 mice were randomly divided into four different
groups of 6 mice and subjected to treatments for five
weeks. Tumor growth was measured once/weekly. Our
data (Supplementary Figure S6A and S6B) showed the
capability of the anti ErbB3 antibodies mAbs to partially
inhibit melanoma cells growth also in vivo.

Anti-ErbB3 mAbs combination strongly inhibits
“in vivo” melanoma cell growth and reduces
tumor relapse when combined with vemurafenib
and trametinib
We next assessed the effect of the anti-ErbB3
antibodies A3 and A4 on melanoma cell growth in vivo.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24831

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Anti-ErbB3 mAbs combination counteracts the increase of receptor phosphorylation and potentiate growth
inhibition induced by vemurafenib and trametinib better than the single mAbs. M14 melanoma cells serum starved and

treated with vemurafenib (0.3 μM) A. left part or trametinib (0.15 μM) B. left part) for 24 h were incubated with 20 μg/ml of anti-ErbB3
mAbs A3, A4 or their combination. Western blot analysis shows that only mAbs combination completely abrogates receptor phosphorylation
(Y1289) and ATK signaling (S473). For densitometric analysis results are expressed as mean values from three independent experiments.
M14 cells were grown in the presence of different doses of vemurafenib A. right part or trametinib B. right part alone or in combination
with 20 μg/ml of anti-ErbB3 mAbs A3, A4 or their combination for 10 days. Cells were then treated as described above. Quantitative
analysis, performed by KaleidaGraph software as described above, shows that the combination of A3 and A4 enhances the inhibitory effect
of vemurafenib and trametinib on cell growth better than the single mAbs. IC50 vem = 0.35 μM; IC50 vem + A3 = 0.11 μM; IC50 vem + A4
= 0.08 μM; IC50 vem + A3 + A4 = 0, 03 μM. IC50 tram = 0.21 μM; IC50 tram + A3 = 0.08 μM; IC50 tram + A4 = 0.07 μM; IC50 tram + A3
+ A4 = 0.02. Results are reported as mean values ± standard deviation (SD) from three independent experiments. p-values were calculated
using Student’s t test and significance level has been defined as p < 0, 05. For IC50 vem + A3, IC50 vem + A4, IC50 tram + A3 and IC50
tram + A4 p < 0, 001 vs IC50 vem and IC50 tram respectively. For IC50 vem + A3 + A4 and IC50 tram + A3 + A4 p < 0, 0001 vs IC50 vem
and IC50 tram respectively. C. Cells were treated with suboptimal doses of vemurafenib and/or trametinib alone or in combination with
A3 and/or A4 mAbs. The in vitro colony formation assay shows that the addition of mAbs combination inhibits cells growth better than the
single mAbs. *p < 0, 01 vs untreated cells; **p < 0, 001 vs untreated cells; NS vs untreated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24832

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Anti-ErbB3 mAbs combination induces melanoma cell apoptosis better than the single mAbs when combined
with vemurafenib and/or trametinib. M14 melanoma cells treated with vemurafenib (1 μM) A. left part or trametinib (0.5 μM)

B. left part for 48 h were incubated with 20 μg/ml of anti-ErbB3 mAbs A3, A4 or their combination. Apoptosis induction, evaluated by
FACS analysis, shows that the combination of A3 and A4 enhances the apoptotic effect of vemurafenib and trametinib better than the single
mAbs. *p < 0, 01 vs untreated cells; **p < 0, 005 vs untreated cells; ***p < 0, 001 vs untreated cells; NS vs untreated cells. M14 cells
treated as above for 24 h were assayed for cell cycle analysis by FACS. The results A and B. right parts show that combination of A3 and
A4 + either vemurafenib or trametinib causes primarily a block in S-phase. C. Cells were treated with suboptimal doses of vemurafenib
and/or trametinib alone or in combination with A3 and/or A4 mAbs for 48 h. The apoptosis induction, evaluated as above, shows that the
addition of mAbs combination enhances the apoptotic effect of the drugs better than the single mAbs. *p < 0, 01 vs untreated cells; **p <
0, 001 vs untreated cells; NS vs untreated cells. *p < 0, 01 vs untreated cells; **p < 0, 005 vs untreated cells; ***p < 0, 001 vs untreated
cells. D. M14 cells serum starved and treated with vemurafenib (1 μM) for 24 h were incubated with 20 μg/ml of anti-ErbB3 mAbs A3, A4
or their combination. Western blot analysis shows that co-treatment with vemurafenib and A3 + A4 causes a reduction of CDK4 and Cyclin
D1 and an increase of the phosphorylation of histone H3 and gamma-H2AX.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24833

Oncotarget

quadruple combination resulted in a strong inhibition of
pERK signaling and in the cleavage of PARP, a marker
of apoptosis (Figure 7C). Of note, we subjected the total
protein extracts from tumors treated with vehicle or
vemurafenib + trametinib to an RTK array to detect early
changes in the phosphorylation level of approximately
fifty RTKs. According to our previous data [27] we found
that, while the phosphorylation level of most receptors,
including also PDGFR and IGF1R remained unchanged or
underwent minor variations, ErbB3 phosphorylation was
prominently increased (Supplementary Figure S8). These
data strongly underline the role of ErbB3 in the rebound of
melanoma cell growth following vemurafenib/trametinib
treatments and pave the way for the use of anti-ErbB3
mAbs as adjuncts to current therapies in order to obtain a
durable control of tumor growth.

Gadiot et al [39] have recently compared the
efficacy in vivo of single treatment of mutant BRAF
melanoma with vemurafenib alone, trametinib alone or
the combination of vemurafenib and trametinib. While
vemurafenib alone was able to control tumor growth only
for a short period of 3–4 weeks after which relapses occur,
the combination of vemurafenib and trametinib was able
to control cancer growth for a longer time. However, also
in these cases, mice were not cured because tumors started
to regrow soon after discontinuation of treatment. This
mirrors exactly what happens in the clinic. We decided,
therefore, to evaluate if combination treatments using
anti-ErbB3 mAbs would be able to significantly improve
long term survival and better control disease relapse.
In order to investigate these aspects we carried out a
second in vivo study where we compared the efficacy of
the combination vemurafenib + trametinib, with that of
vemurafenib + trametinib + A3 and A4. The results are
shown in Figure 7A panel a. In both groups melanoma
cell growth was strongly impaired in a comparable
manner, even though the presence of the antibodies
showed a modest but not significant trend to superiority.
Interestingly, however, when we stopped treatments, while
the quadruple combination group showed an evident
and durable control of tumor growth, the vemurafenib/
trametinib group tumors grew up rapidly. In order to better
understand the mechanism at the basis of the differences
in the rate of tumor regrowth between these two groups
of mice pathology analysis was carried out. The results
(Figure 7B and Table 2) show that tumors from mice
treated by vemu + tram + A3 + A4 are characterized
almost exclusively by large necrotic areas (> 80%) with
small residual areas of tumor growth. In contrast in tumors
from mice treated by vemu + tram vital areas predominate.
Differences between the two groups are highly statistically
significant (p = 0.004). Furthermore the residual vital areas
in the quadruple treatment group show a lower degree of
proliferation.
Moreover the quadruple treatment with vemurafenib
+ trametinib + A3 + A4 did not induce higher toxicity over
the combination of vemurafenib + trametininb as shown
by serial body weight measurements over the course of the
study (see Supplementary Figure S7).
Finally to assess the short term effect of in vivo
treatments we carried out the following pharmacodynamic
study. Mice with M14 tumors grown subcutaneously up
to the size of 1 cm3 were treated with a single dose of
the vemurafenib + trametinib combination or with the
quadruple combination vemurafenib + trametinib +
A3/A4. After 24 hours mice were euthanized, tumor
collected total protein extracts analyzed by Western Blot.
The results shown in Figure 7C indicate that the strong
activation of pErbB3 and pAKT following vemurafenib/
trametinib treatments was evident also in vivo and was
completely abrogated by A3 and A4. Moreover the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
Therapy of patients with metastatic melanoma
has significantly improved over the past years thanks to
the introduction of several targeted terapies; however,
there is still need for substantial improvements. This is
particularly clear in the case of patients bearing mutations
in the BRAF oncogene where the initial introduction of
BRAF inhibitors, although capable of inducing impressive
objective responses in approximately 50% of patients,
extended progression free survival (PFS) only up to
5–6 months from the historical 2.5 months previously
obtained with dacarbazine [40]. In this set of patients
PFS has been further improved to reach approximately
10 months when a BRAF inhibitor is combined with a
MEK inhibitor [18–20]. However, disease relapses also
in these cases constantly occur because of the emergence
of drug resistance, a phenomenon that has been the object
of intensive speculations also in the case of other highly
selective oncogene kinase inhibitors [41]. Initial analysis
of the genetic lansdscape of mutations occurring in
patients exposed to both BRAF and MEK inhibitors, has
unveiled a highly complex scenario involving multiple
genes and factors responsible for the reactivation of
the MAPK pathway [42]. It is virtually impossibile to
envisage a therapy directed to inhibit all these targets
simultaneously. Hence we are far away from the complete
control of this aggressive disease and alternative strategies
are required to tackle this issue.
The present study is directed to provide an additional
option in this direction using a different approach. It has
been previously observed that in oncogene addicted
melanoma cells some important compensatory survival
pathways are being kept under check [9, 34, 42]. These
pathways are feedback-reactivated once cells are exposed
to inhibitors of the original oncogene, and their reactivation
heavily contributes to the failure of the initial therapy.
Identification of pivotal compensatory pathways and of

24834

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Anti-ErbB3 mAbs combination reduces tumor relapse when combined with vemurafenib and trametinib.

A. M14 melanoma cells were subcutaneously injected in immunodeficient mice at 1 × 106 cells/mouse. Treatments started when tumors
reached a 100 mm3 volume and mice were allocated six per group. Mice were treated with vehicle, vemurafenib (25 mg/kg) and trametinib
(0, 5 mg/kg) alone or in combination with A3 and A4 mAbs (10 + 10 mg/kg) for four weeks. Tumor growth was measured once/weekly.
The results show that the quadruple combination group is characterized by a durable control of tumor growth. *p < 0, 01 vs vehicle-treated
mice; **p < 0, 005 vs vehicle-treated mice. B. Rapresentative images of histology of Vem + Tram-treated mice (left panel) and Vem + Tram
+ A3 + A4-treated mice (right panel). The quadruple combination-treated ones show a lower percentage of viable areas (asterisk) within
the tumor mass and larger sheets of coagulative tumor cell necrosis compared to the Vem + Tram-treated tumors (A-B, H&E, original
magnification x 20) (C-D, insert, H&E, original magnification x 200). C. Mice with M14 tumors grown subcutaneously were treated with
a single dose of the vemurafenib/trametinib combination or with the quadruple combination vemurafenib + trametinib + A3/A4 for 24
h. Mice were then euthanized, tumor collected and total protein extracts analyzed by Western Blot. The results show that vemurafenib +
trametinib induce phosphorylation of ErbB3 (Y1289) and AKT (S473) that is abrogated by anti-ErbB3 mAbs also in vivo.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24835

Oncotarget

Table 2: Tumors treated with vemurafenib and trametinib show a lower tumor necrosis and tumor
higher Ki-67 expression compared to tumors treated with the quadruple combination.
Group

Necrosis (%)Mean Value

Ki-67 (%)Mean Value

Vem + Tram

61 ± 12.4

79 ± 2, 23

Vem + Tram + A3+A4

82 ± 5.7

71 ± 6, 5

The analysis of tumor necrosis percentage showed a significant difference (p = 0.004) between the tumors treated with Vem + Tram
(mean value ± standard deviation = 61 ± 12.4; range 40% to 70%) and the tumors treated with Vem + Tram + A3 + A4 (mean value
± standard deviation = 82 ± 5.7; range 75% to 90%). The mean percentage of Ki-67 expression was 79% (range 75% to 80%) in
the Vem + Tram-treated tumors and 71% (range 60% to 75%) in the Vem + Tram + A3 + A4 -treated tumors (p = 0.016).
their master regulators may offer tremendous opportunities
to prevent the development of drug resistance. We believe,
based on our data that one of these master regulators in
mutant BRAF melanomas, is indeed the ErbB3 receptor.
This conclusion stems from previous observations by our
group showing in RTK array studies in three different
cell lines that ErbB3 is the main RTK undergoing heavy
phosphorylation in response to exposure to a BRAF or a
MEK inhibitor [27], and is strengthened in this study in
which we show in 7 out of the 8 additional BRAF mutated
cell lines that the same degree of ErbB3 activation takes
place. Most importantly, also in an in vivo mouse xenograft
model with one of the new cell lines under study, we
observe a prominent ErbB3 hyperphosphorylation as
compared to all other receptors analyzed, which confirms
the previous in vitro findings. Interestingly, however, in the
in vivo model additional RTKs undergo phosphorylation
as compared to in vitro which we believe is the result of
the contribution of the tumor microenvironment. It has to
be stressed that in our experiments we do never observe
increased phosphorylation of other RTKs previously
reported to be involved in the activation of survival
pathways in melanoma cells, such as PDGFR and IGF1R
[11, 14]. We don’t have an easy explanation for this
discrepancy; a major difference in our experimental model
is that we analyze RTK changes taking place in the first
24–48 hours after drug exposure, and not after resistance has
occurred weeks after cells have been exposed to increasing
drug concentrations. Hence it is possible that indeed
ErbB3 is the principal receptor involved in early adaptive
responses of melanoma cells upon exposure to inhibitors of
the MAPK pathway. This evidence if further strengthened
by two other observations. The first being the difficulty to
generate cells double resistant to a BRAF inhibitor and an
anti-ErbB3 antibody, at least at the concentrations used in
this study. The second is the evidence that in cells resistant
to vemurafenib, the same ErbB3-induced survival loop is
still present but is activated in this case by a MEK inhibitor.
Most importantly, its inhibition with an anti-ErbB3 antibody
rescues completely sensitivity to kinase inhibitors.
What is the mechanism responsible for ErbB3
hyperphosphoryation? It has been previously proposed that
BRAF mutated cancer cells either of melanoma or of thyroid
or of colorectal origin, undergo increased ErbB3 protein
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

expression consequent to transcripional activation [25, 26].
Various transcriptional regulators have been postulated to
be responsible for this effect such as increased binding of
the positive factor FOXD3 in melanoma [26] or decrease
binding of the negative factor CTBP1 in thyroid cancer [25].
In contrast to previous observations our data show in 10/11
melanoma cell lines that ErbB3 protein levels do not increase
(both in vitro and in vivo) but that there is instead a selective
enhancement of its phosphorylation. Extensive RT-PCR
analysis does not show any detectable increase in ErbB3
mRNA levels in any of the cells analyzed in contrast with a
constant increase in the mRNA levels of its ligand neuregulin.
This finding strengthens our previous observations that
pointed to the activation of an autocrine survival loop,
and therefore to a modified tumor microenvironment. In
the future it will be important to unravel the mechanisms
at the basis of the increased transcriptional activation of
the neuregulin gene, because they may offer additional
opportunities for therapeutic intervention.
The ErbB3 receptor is a potent activator of donw­
stream signaling due to the presence of seven thyrosines in
its intracytoplasmic domain, which can serve as docking
sites for PI3K when phosphorylated [43]. ErbB3 activation
can occur in a variety of ways, which can be distinguished
in canonical, namely ligand-dependent heterodimerization
with other receptors of the same ErbB family, in particular
ErbB2 [44] and non canonical, i.e. through higher order
and often ligand independent receptor clustering with other
RTKs, such a cMet, and IGF1R [45, 46]. This complex
and heterogeneous pattern of activation makes the ErbB3
receptor particularly resilient to inhibition and challenging
from the therapeutic standpoint. Since the receptor lacks
potent intrinsic kinase activity, the most viable approach
to inhibit its function is through the use of monoclonal
antibodies [30]. However, also in this case a single
monoclonal antibody may not be able to fully abrogate
receptor activity and to exert the most potent therapeutic
effect. In this paper we use two anti-ErbB3 mAbs directed
against two different surface epitopes, one capable of
inhibiting ligand-dependent receptor activation, A3 [28],
the other, A4, capable of inhibiting both ligand-dependent
and ligand-independent receptor activation [29, 30]. The
two antibodies when combined together in vitro show
increased ability to internalize the receptor and to induce its
24836

Oncotarget

degradation. We believe the extent and duration of receptor
degradation is the most useful pharmacodynamic biomarker
of inhibition. Our results confirm for ErbB3 what has been
previously shown also for EGFR and ErbB2, i.e. that in
order to fully inhibit the activity of a receptor of the ErbB
family a single antibody is not enough and that a superior
efficacy is achieved both in vitro and in vivo by combining
two antibodies against distinct epitopes [36, 47, 48].
Although clinical translation of this concept is highly
challenging due to increasing costs of production and to the
complexity of clinical development, one has to be aware
that a single antibody for a given target will never be able
to achieve maximal therapeutic efficacy.
We have been the first to show that activation of
the ErbB3/AKT axis in melanoma can be inhibited by cotreatment with anti-ErbB3 mAbs and that these antibodies
synergize with BRAF and MEK inhibitors in short term in
vitro clonogenic assays [27]. This was also confirmed by
others [49]. In this paper we provide strong evidence both
in vitro and in vivo that addition of anti-ErbB3 antibodies to
the BRAF/MEK combination, suppresses the development
of resistance in vitro and potently mitigates disease
recurrence in vivo. This is in line with the finding that A3
and A4 also induce further inhibition of pERK, even when
combined with vemurafenib + trametinib. This finding has
important clinical implications because Bollag et al [50]
have demonstrated that profound inhibition of MAPK
transcriptional output correlates to maximal effectiveness of
therapy in melanoma patients. Interestingly, in vitro studies
show that the mechanism of action of anti-ErbB3 antibodies
differs from that of MEK and BRAF inhibitors and
dominates in the triple combination regimen. In fact, while
BRAF and MEK inhibitors block cell cycle progression
at the G0/G1 level, combination with anti-ErbB3 mAbs
arrests cells in the S-phase, which suggest the activation
of a DNA damage checkpoint, further confirmed in vivo
by strong PARP cleavage. This interesting observation
may open up to additional synergies with agents capable to
inhibit DNA repair and which so far have not been taken into
consideration in melanoma.
Several anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies are under
development and have been brought to clinical trials for a
variety of indications such as breast, colorectal and ovarian
cancers, given the known role of ErbB3 in resistance to
therapy [30, 51, 52]. In this context, our data warrant the
use of these antibodies in trials of triple combination with a
BRAF and a MEK inhibitor with the intent to further improve
response rates and achieve more durable disease control.

with 10% FBS. To evaluate ErbB3, AKT and ERK 1/2
signaling and neuregulin (HRG) expression melanoma
cells were serum starved for 24 h and treated with
vemurafenib and/or trametinib at different doses and timepoints and incubated or not with 20 μg/ml of anti-ErbB3
mAbs A4, A3 alone or in combination. To determine the
effects on melanoma proliferation, seeded at 1 * 105/ well,
cell lines were treated with increasing concentrations
(from 0, 002 to 1 μM) of vemurafenib and/or trametinib
alone or in combination with anti-ErbB3 mAbs for 10
days. To generate vemurafenib-resistant WM266 human
melanoma cells, they were treated for about two months
with increasing drug concentrations every two weeks (from
50 nM to 10 μM). To analyze the possible internalization
and degradation of ErbB3, cells were stimulated with
HRG at 100 ng/ml or incubated with A3, A4 alone or in
combination at 37°C for different time as indicated. For the
visualization of the cell surface, plasma membranes were
labeled with Vybrant DiL cell labeling solution for 1 h at
4°C before fixation. To induce LysoTracker internalization,
cells were incubated with LysoTracker-Red for 1 h at
37°C and then fixed. For proliferation assays, cells were
incubated with the anti-ErbB3 monoclonals for 1 h at 37°C
and then stimulated with 30 ng/ml HRG for 48 or 72 h.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Melanoma cells, grown on coverslips and incubated
with the monoclonals A3, A4 alone or in combination and/or
stimulated with HRG were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
in PBS for 30 min at 25°C followed by treatment with 0.1
M glycine for 20 min at 25°C and with 0.1% Triton X-100
for an additional 5 min at 25°C to allow permeabilization.
To evaluate cell proliferation, cells were then incubated for

Antibodies and reagents
Antibodies against AKT, ERK 1/2, phospho-ErbB3
(Y1289), phospho-AKT (S473), phospho-ERK 1/2
(T202/204), anti-pH2A.X, anti-pH3 and anti-cleaved-PARP
were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-ErbB3,
anti-P27, anti-Cyclin D1, anti-CDK4, anti-UBI and antiGAPDH were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antirabbit and anti-mouse were purchased from AbCam. Anti
ErbB3 antibodies A3 and A4 have been described previously
[28–30]. The two anti-ErbB3 antibodies are all of the IgG1
isotype (EM unpublished observation). Vemurafenib and
trametinib were obtained from Selleck Chemicals. TaqMan
probes for ErbB3, NRG1 and housekeeping gene 18S were
purchased from Applied Biosystems. The rabbit anti-Ki67
polyclonal antibodies were from Zymed Laboratories. FITCconjugated goat anti-mouse IgG was obtained from Cappel
Research Products. Texas Red-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG were from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories. DAPI
was purchased from Sigma. Vybrant DiI cell labeling solution
was from Invitrogen. LysoTracker-Red was obtained from
Molecular Probes.

Immunofluorescence analysis

Cell lines and treatments
Human melanoma cell lines MST-L, WM266, LOX
IMVI, M14, A375, MALME 3-M, M229, M262, M263,
M397, WM115 were cultured in RPMI supplemented
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24837

Oncotarget

1 h at 25°C with the rabbit anti-Ki67 polyclonal antibodies.
The primary antibodies were visualized using goat antimouse IgG-FITC and goat anti-rabbit IgG-Texas Red for 30
min at 25°C. To induce LysoTracker internalization, cells
were incubated with LysoTracker-Red for 1 h at 37°C and
then fixed. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Coverslips were
finally mounted with mowiol for observation. To assess
the extent of colocalization of fluorescence signals, cells
were scanned in a series of 0.5 μm sequential sections with
an ApoTome System (Zeiss) connected with an Axiovert
200 inverted microscope (Zeiss); image analysis was then
performed by the Axiovision software and 3D reconstruction
of a selection of three central out of the total number of the
serial optical sections was shown in each figure. Quantitative
analysis of the extent of colocalization was performed using
Zeiss KS300 3.0 Image Processing system. The mean ±
standard error (SE) percent of colocalization was calculated,
analyzing a minimum of 50 cells for each treatment randomly
taken from three independent experiments. Percentage of
Ki67-positive cells was obtained counting for each treatment
a total of 500 cells, randomly observed in 10 microscopic
fields from three different experiments. Results have been
expressed as mean values ± standard errors (SE). p-values
were calculated using Student t-test, and significance level
has been defined as p < 0.05.

0, 1% diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC)- treated water. Total
RNA was quantitated by spectrophotometry. Real TimePCR was assayed by TaqManW Gene Expression Assays
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). To normalize the
amount of source RNA, 18S transcript from the same
sample was measured and used as internal reference. Each
targeted transcript was validated using the comparative
Ct method for relative quantification (ΔΔCt) reference to
the amount of a common reference gene (18S). The fold
difference was calculated using the comparative ΔΔCt
and results were reported as mean values from three
independent experiments.

In vitro colony formation assay
Cells viability was determined by crystal violet
staining. Briefly, the cells were stained for 20 min at room
temperature with staining solution (0, 5% crystal violet
in 30% methanol), washed four times with water and
then dried. Cells were then dissolved in a Methanol/SDS
solution and the adsorbance (595 nm) was read using a
microplate ELISA reader.

Statistical analysis
Quantitative analyses for curve fitting and for
IC50 evaluation were performed by KaleidaGraph and
by GraphPad softwares. The evaluation of Combination
Index (CI) was performed by CalcuSyn software using
the median effect methods described by T-C Chou and P.
Talalay [53]. Briefly, two molecules are synergic if the CI
< 1, additive if CI = 1 and antagonist if CI > 1. p-values
were calculated using Student’s t test and significance
level has been defined as p < 0.05.

Western blot analysis
Melanoma cells were lysed with RIPA buffer;
50 μg of total protein were resolved under reducing
conditions by 8% SDS-PAGE and transferred to reinforced
nitrocellulose (BA-S 83, Schleider and Schuell, Keene,
NH, USA). The membranes were blocked with 5%
non fat dry milk in PBS 0.1% Tween 20, and incubated
with the different primary antibodies. The membranes
were rehydrated and probed again with anti-GAPDH, to
estimate the protein equal loading. Densitometric analysis
was performed using Quantity One Program (Bio-Rad
Laboratories GmbH) and results were expressed as mean
values from three independent experiments.

Annexin V binding assay
Annexin V binding assay was performed to quantify
apoptosis in cells treated with vemurafenib, trametinib, A3
and A4 alone or in combination. Briefly, 1 × 106 cells were
treated for 24 hrs with A3 and/or A4 at 20 μg/ ml and drugs
at variable concentration. After the incubation period, cells
were washed in PBS and stained with 5 μl of Annexin
V-FITC (Invitrogen) and PI at 5 μg/ ml (Invitrogen) for
15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Apoptosis
were determined using MACSquant cytofluorometer. Both
early (Annexin V-positive, PI negative) and late (Annexin
V-positive, PI positive) apoptotic cells were included in
cell death determination.

Phospho-RTK array
A human phospho-RTK array (R&D Systems)
was used to detect simultaneously the phosphorylation
status of RTKs (n = 49) in melanoma cells. Membranes
were incubated with cell lysates (100 μg) overnight
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After washing,
the membranes were incubated with a phosphotyrosine
antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase to allow
the detection of captured RTKs that are phosphorylated.
Duplicate dots in each corner are positive controls.

Cell cycle analysis
Cell cycle analysis was performed in cells treated
or not with A3, A4 alone or in combination at 20 μg/ml
and/or vemurafenib/trametinib at variable concentration.
The cell cycle kit, purchased from Millipore, was used
according to the manufactures’ instructions.

RNA extraction and real-time PCR analysis
RNA was extracted using TRIzol method (Invitrogen)
according to manufacturer’s instruction and eluted with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24838

Oncotarget

In vivo efficacy studies

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

All studies have been performed in accordance with
the “Directive 2010/63/UE” on the protection of animals
used for scientific purposes, made effective in Italy by the
Legislative Decree 4 March 2014, n.26, and applying the
principles of 3Rs, i.e. replace, reduce, refine. Mice were
purchased at Harlan Laboratories (Udine, Italy). After 1
week of acclimatization they were housed five to a plastic
cage and fed on basal diet (4RF24, Mucedola S.r.l.) with
water ad libitum, in an animal facility controlled at a
temperature of 23 ± 2°C, 60 ± 5% humidity, and with a
12 h light and dark cycle. All procedures performed on
the animals were approved by Animal Welfare Body and
authorized by the Italian Ministery of Health, 46/2014-PR.
At the end of the treatment period and before necropsy,
mice were euthanized by compressed CO2 gas in cylinder
as indicated in the AVMA (American Veterinary Medical
Association) Panel on Euthanasia and according to the
guidelines described in (UKCCR, 1998.). M14 melanoma
cells were subcutaneously injected in immunodeficient
mice at 1 × 106 cells/mouse. Cell were resuspended in
a 50% RGF matrigel (BD Biosciences) solution in PBS
and injected in the right flank of the mice in 100 μl
volume. Treatments started when tumors reached a 100
mm3 volume and mice were allocated six per group. Mice
were treated with vehicle (1%Tween80/1%beta-HPCD),
vemurafenib at 25 mg/kg, trametinib at 0, 5 mg/kg, A3
and A4 in PBS at 20 mg/kg, or combination of the four.
Vemurafenib and trametinib were dosed p.o., daily, 5 days/
week, while A3 and A4 antibodies were dosed i.p., once
per week and treatment lasted for 4 weeks. At the end of
the treatment mice were euthanized and, after harvesting,
tumor weight was determined and tumor masses used for
further analysis.

L.F., D.M., A.N., C.D.V., M.E.P., P.C., R.C., M.R.T.,
R.M., and G.C. declare no conflict of interest.
E.M., G.R. and L.A. are employees of Takis S.r.l.
A.R. served as consultant for Amgen, GenentechRoche, GSK, Merck, Novartis and Pierre Fabre with the
honoraria paid to UCLA. He has stock in Kite Pharma and
Compugen.
P.A.A. served as consultant/ for BMS, RocheGenentech, MSD, GSK, Ventana, Novartis, and Amgen.
He received research funds from BMS, Roche-Genentech,
Ventana.

REFERENCES
1.	 Tsao H, Chin L, Garraway LA, Fisher ED. Melanoma: from
mutations to medicine. Genes Dev. 2012; 26:1131–1155.
2.	 Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong SJ, Thompson JF.
Update on the melanoma staging system: the importance of
sentinel node staging and primary tumor mitotic rate. J Surg
Oncol. 2011; 104:379–85.
3.	 Korn EL, Liu PY, Lee SJ, Chapman JA, Niedzwiecki
D, Suman VJ, Moon J, Sondak VK, Atkins MB,
Eisenhauer  EA, Parulekar W, Markovic SN, Saxman S,
et al. Meta-analysis of phase II cooperative group trials in
metastatic stage IV melanoma to determine progression-free
and overall survival benchmarks for future phase II trials. J
Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:527–34.
4.	 Callahan MK, Wolchok JD. At the bedside: CTLA-4- and
PD-1-blocking antibodies in cancer immunotherapy. J
Leukoc Biol. 2013; 94:41–53.
5.	 Menzies AM, Long GV. Systemic treatment for BRAFmutant melanoma: where do we go next?. Lancet Oncol.
2014; 9:e371–81.

Histology and immunohistochemistry

6.	 Jang S, Atkins MB. Treatment of BRAF-mutant melanoma:
the role of vemurafenib and other therapies. Clin Pharmacol
Ther. 2014; 95:24–31.

Tumor samples from mice were frozen and
then formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE).
Haematoxylin and eosin slides were used to
evaluate the percentage of tumor necrosis.
Immunohistochemistry for Ki-67 (clone MIB-1,
Dako, Denmark) was carried out using the Dako
automated immunostainer (DAKO, Denmark). Tumor
proliferation index was assessed as the percentage of
Ki-67-positive tumor nuclei.

7.	 Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB, Ribas A, McArthur GA,
Sosman JA, O’Dwyer PJ, Lee RJ, Grippo JF, Nolop K,
Chapman PB. Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in
metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:809–19.
8.	 Flaherty KT. BRAF inhibitors and melanoma. Cancer J.
2011; 6:505–11.
9.	 Lito P, Pratilas CA, Joseph EW, Tadi M, Halilovic  E,
Zubrowski M, Huang A, Wong WL, Callahan MK,
Merghoub T, Wolchok JD, de Stanchina E, Chandarlapaty S,
et al. Relief of profound feedback inhibition of mitogenic
signaling by RAF inhibitors attenuates their activity in
BRAFV600E melanomas. Cancer Cell. 2012; 5:668–82.

FUNDINGS
This work has been supported by AIRC grants
IG10334 and IG15216 to Gennaro Ciliberto and grants
IG10272 and IG15858 to Maria Rosaria Torrisi. We are
grateful to “Fondazione Melanoma ONLUS” for the
financial support for this project.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10.	 Poulikakos PI, Zhang C, Bollag G Shokat KM, Rosen N.
RAF inhibitors transactivate RAF dimers and ERK signalling
in cells with wild-type BRAF. Nature. 2010; 7287:427–30.

24839

Oncotarget

11.	 Lo RS. Combinatorial therapies to overcome B-RAF inhibitor resistance in melanomas. Pharmacogenomics. 2012;
2:125–8.

22.	 Kwong LN, Davies MA. Targeted therapy for melanoma:
rational combinatorial approaches. Oncogene. 2013;
33:1–9.

12.	 Corcoran RB, Settleman J, Engelman JA. Potential
Therapeutic Strategies to Overcome Acquired Resistance
to BRAF or MEK Inhibitors in BRAF Mutant Cancers.
Oncotarget. 2011; 4:336–46.

23.	 Little AS, Smith PD, Cook SJ. Mechanisms of acquired
resistance to ERK1/2 pathway inhibitors. Oncogene. 2013;
32:1207–1215.
24.	 Villanueva J, Vultur A, Lee JT, Somasundaram R,
Fukunaga-Kalabis M, Cipolla AK, Wubbenhorst B, Xu X,
Gimotty PA, Kee D, Santiago-Walker AE, Letrero R,
D’Andrea K, et al. Acquired resistance to BRAF inhibitors
mediated by a RAF kinase switch in melanoma can be overcome by cotargeting MEK and IGF-1R/PI3K. Cancer Cell.
2010; 18:683–95.

13.	 Trunzer K, Pavlick AC, Schuchter L, Gonzalez R,
McArthur GA, Hutson TE, Moschos SJ, Flaherty KT,
Kim KB, Weber JS, Hersey P, Long GV, Lawrence D, et
al. Pharmacodynamic effects and mechanisms of resistance
to vemurafenib in patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2013; 10:1767–74.

25.	 Montero-Conde C, Ruiz-Llorente S, Dominguez JM,
Knauf JA, Viale A, Sherman EJ Ryder M, Ghossein RA,
Rosen N, Fagin JA. Relief of feedback inhibition of HER3
transcription by RAF and MEK inhibitors attenuates their
antitumor effects in BRAF-mutant thyroid carcinomas.
Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:520–533.

14.	 Nazarian R, Shi H, Wang Q, Kong X, Koya RC, Lee H,
Chen Z, Lee MK, Attar N, Sazegar H, Chodon T,
Nelson SF, McArthur G, et al. Melanomas acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS
upregulation. Nature. 2010; 7326:973–7.
15.	 Shi H, Hugo W, Kong X, Hong A, Koya RC, Moriceau G,
Chodon T, Guo R, Johnson DB, Dahlman KB, Kelley MC,
Kefford RF, Chmielowski B, et al. Acquired resistance and
clonal evolution in melanoma during BRAF inhibitor therapy. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:80–93.

26.	 Abel EV, Basile KJ, Kugel CH 3rd, Witkiewicz AK,
Le K, Amaravadi RK, Karakousis GC, Xu X, Xu W,
Schuchter LM, Lee JB, Ertel A, Fortina P, et al. Melanoma
adapts to RAF/MEK inhibitors through FOXD3-mediated
upregulation of ERBB3. J. Clin Invest. 2013; 123:2155–60.

16.	 Poulikakos PI, Persaud Y, Janakiraman M, Kong X,
Ng C, Moriceau G, Shi H, Atefi M, Titz B, Gabay MT,
Salton M, Dahlman KB, Tadi M, et al. RAF inhibitor resistance is mediated by dimerization of aberrantly spliced
BRAF(V600E). Nature. 2011; 480:387–390.

27.	 Fattore L, Marra E, Pisanu ME, Noto A, de Vitis C,
Belleudi  F, Aurisicchio L, Mancini R, Torrisi MR,
Ascierto PA, Ciliberto G. Activation of an early feedback
survival loop involving phospho-ErbB3 is a general response
of melanoma cells to RAF/MEK inhibition and is abrogated
by anti-ErbB3 antibodies. J. Transl Med. 2013; 11:180.

17.	 Flaherty KT, Infante JR, Daud A, Gonzalez R, Kefford RF,
Sosman J, Hamid O, Schuchter L, Cebon J, Ibrahim N,
Kudchadkar R, Burris HA, Falchook G, et al. Combined
BRAF and MEK inhibition in melanoma with BRAF V600
mutations. N Engl J Med. 2012; 18:1694–703.

28.	 Aurisicchio L, Marra E, Luberto L, Carlomosti F, De
Vitis C, Noto A, Gunes Z, Roscilli G, Mesiti G, Mancini R,
Alimandi M, Ciliberto G. Novel anti-ErbB3 monoclonal antibodies show therapeutic efficacy in xenografted
and spontaneous mouse tumors. J Cell Physiol. 2012;
227:3381–8.

18.	 Larkin J, Ascierto PA, Brigitte Dréno B, Atkinson  V,
Liszkay G, Maio M, Mandalà M, Demidov L,
Stroyakovskiy D, Thomas L, de la Cruz-Merino L, Dutriaux
C, Garbe C, et al. Combined vemurafenib and cobimetinib
in BRAF-mutated melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2014;
371:1867–76.

29.	 Belleudi F, Marra E, Mazzetta F, Fattore L, Giovagnoli MR,
Mancini R, Aurisicchio L, Torrisi MR, Ciliberto G.
Monoclonal antibody-induced ErbB3 receptor internalization and degradation inhibits growth and migration of
human melanoma cells. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:1455–67.

19.	 Long GV, Stroyakovskiy D, Gogas H, Levchenko E,
de Braud F, Larkin J, Garbe C, Jouary T, Hauschild A,
Grob  JJ, Chiarion Sileni V, Lebbe C, Mandalà M, et al.
Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition versus BRAF inhibition alone in melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2014; 371:1877–88.

30.	 Aurisicchio L, Marra E, Roscilli G, Mancini R, Ciliberto G.
The promise of anti-ErbB3 monoclonals as new cancer therapeutics. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:744–75833.
31.	 Demarest SJ, Hariharan K, Dong J. Emerging antibody
combinations in oncology. MAbs. 2011; 3:338–351.

20.	 Robert C, Karaszewska B, Schachter J, Rutkowski P,
Mackiewicz A, Stroiakovski D, Lichinitser M, Dummer R,
Grange F, Mortier L, Chiarion-Sileni V, Drucis K,
Krajsova I, et al. Improved overall survival in melanoma
with combined dabrafenib and trametinib. N Engl J Med.
2014; 372:30–9.

32.	 Paraiso KH, Das Thakur M, Fang B, Koomen JM,
Fedorenko IV, John JK, Tsao H, Flaherty KT, Sondak VK,
Messina JL, Pasquale EB, Villagra A, Rao UN, et al.
Ligand-independent EPHA2 signaling drives the adoption
of a targeted therapy-mediated metastatic melanoma phenotype. Cancer Discov. 2015; 5:264–73.

21.	 Chapman PB, Solit DB, Rosen N. Combination of RAF
and MEK Inhibition for the Treatment of BRAF-Mutated
Melanoma: Feedback Is Not Encouraged. Cancer Cell.
2014; 26:603–4.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Miao B, Ji Z, Tan L, Taylor M, Zhang J, Choi HG,
Frederick DT, Kumar R, Wargo JA, Flaherty KT, Gray NS,

24840

Oncotarget

Condeelis JS, Hynes NE, Segall JE. Phosphoinositide
3-kinase signaling is critical for ErbB3-driven breast
cancer cell motility and metastasis. Oncogene. 2011;
31:706–15.

Tsao H. EPHA2 is a mediator of vemurafenib resistance
and a novel therapeutic target in melanoma. Cancer Discov.
2015; 5:274–87.
34.	 Das Thakur M, Suart DD. Molecular pathways: response and
resistance to BRAF and MEK inhibitors in BRAF(V600E)
tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:1074–80.

44.	 Citri A, Skaria KB, Yarden Y. The deaf and the dumb:
the biology of ErbB-2 and ErbB-3. Exp Cell Res. 2003;
284:54–65.

35.	 Infante JR, Swanton C. Combined inhibition of BRAF
and MEK in melanoma patients. Lancet Oncol. 2014;
15:908–10.

45.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y,
Hyland  C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X,
Christensen J, Kosaka T, Holmes AJ, Rogers AM, et al.
MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung
cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007;
316:1039–43.

36.	 Spangler JB, Neil JR, Abramovitch S, Yarden Y,
White FM, Lauffenburger DA Wittrup KD. Combination
antibody treatment down-regulates epidermal growth factor
receptor by inhibiting endosomal recycling. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2010; 107:13252–7.

46.	 Xu AM, Huang PH. Receptor tyrosine kinase coactivation
networks in cancer. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:3857–60.

37.	 Niehr F, von Euw E, Attar N, Guo D, Matsunaga D,
Sazegar H, Ng C, Glaspy JA, Recio JA, Lo RS, Mischel PS,
Comin-Anduix B, Ribas A. Combination therapy with
vemurafenib (PLX4032/RG7204) and metformin in melanoma cell lines with distinct driver mutations. J Transl Med.
2011; 24:9–76.

47.	 Ben-Kasus T, Schechter B, Lavi S Yarden Y, Sela M.
Persistent elimination of ErbB-2/HER2-overexpressing
tumors using combinations of monoclonal antibodies: relevance of receptor endocytosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2009; 106:3294–9.

38.	 Wang J, Chen J, Miller DD, Li W. Synergistic combination of novel tubulin inhibitor ABI-274 and vemurafenib
overcome vemurafenib acquired resistance in BRAFV600E
melanoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:16–26.

48.	 Emde A, Pradeep C-R, Ferraro Ben-Chetrit DAN, Sela M,
Ribba B, Kam Z, Yarden Y. Combining epitope-distinct
antibodies to HER2: cooperative inhibitory effects on invasive growth. Oncogene. 2011; 30:1631–1642.

39.	 Gadiot J, Hooijkaas AI, Deken MA, Blank CU.
Synchronous BRAF(V600E) and MEK inhibition leads
to superior control of murine melanoma by limiting MEK
inhibitor induced skin toxicity. Onco Targets Ther. 2013;
6:1649–58.

49.	 Kugel CH 3rd, Hartsough EJ, Davies MA, Setiady YY,
Aplin AE. Function-blocking ERBB3 antibody inhibits
the adaptive response to RAF inhibitor. Cancer Res. 2014;
74:4122–32.
50.	 Bollag G, Hirth P, Tsai J, Zhang J, Ibrahim PN, Cho H,
Spevak W, Zhang C, Zhang Y, Habets G, Burton EA,
Wong B, Tsang G, et al. Clinical efficacy of a RAF inhibitor
needs broad target blockade in BRAF-mutant melanoma.
Nature. 2010; 467:596–9.

40.	 Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, Haanen JB,
Ascierto  P, Larkin J, Dummer R, Garbe C, Testori A,
Maio M, Hogg D, Lorigan P, Lebbe C, et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E
mutation. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2507–2516.

51.	 Ma J, Lyu H, Huang J, Liu B. Targeting of erbB3 receptor
to overcome resistance in cancer treatment. Mol Cancer.
2014; 13:105.

41.	 Blagosklonny MV. Leukemia. 2002; 16:570–2.
42.	 Wagle N, Van Allen EM, Treacy DJ, Frederick DT,
Cooper ZA, Taylor-Weiner A, Rosenberg M, Goetz EM,
Sullivan RJ, Farlow DN, Friedrich DC, Anderka K,
Perrin  D, et al. MAP kinase pathway alterations in
BRAF-mutant melanoma patients with acquired resistance to combined RAF/MEK inhibition. Cancer Discov.
2014; 1:61–8.

52.	 D’Souza JW, Reddy S, Goldsmith LE, Shchaveleva I,
Marks JD, Litwin S, Robinson MK. Combining antiERBB3 antibodies specific for domain I and domain III
enhances the anti-tumor activity over the individual monoclonal antibodies. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e112376.
53.	 Chou TC. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440–6.

43.	 Smirnova T, Zhou ZN, Flinn RJ, Wyckoff J, Boimel PJ,
Pozzuto M, Coniglio SJ, Backer JM, Bresnick AR,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24841

Oncotarget

