Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Involvement of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the mesenchymal
stem cells promote metastatic growth and chemoresistance of
cholangiocarcinoma
Weiwei Wang1,*, Wei Zhong1,*, Jiahui Yuan1, Congcong Yan1, Shaoping Hu1,
Yinping Tong1, Yubin Mao2, Tianhui Hu1, Bing Zhang2, Gang Song1
1

Cancer Research Center, Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China

2

Department of Basic Medicine, Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Gang Song, e-mail: gangsongsd@xmu.edu.cn
Keywords: cholangiocarcinoma, MSCs, metastasis, chemoresistance, β-catenin
Received: April 17, 2015 	

Accepted: October 02, 2015 	

Published: October 14, 2015

ABSTRACT
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multi-potent progenitor cells with ability to
differentiate into multiple lineages, including bone, cartilage, fat, and muscles. Recent
research indicates that MSCs can be efficiently recruited to tumor sites, modulating
tumor growth and metastasis. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are
not fully understood. Here, we first demonstrated that human umbilical cord-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs), when mixed with human cholangiocarcinoma
cell lines QBC939 in a xenograft tumor model, significantly increased the cancer cells
proliferation and metastatic potency. MSCs and their conditioned media (MSC-CM)
could improve the drug resistance of tumor when the compound K (CK) as an anticancer drug, a major intestinal bacterial metabolite of panaxoside, was administered
to xenograft tumor mice. Furthermore, MSCs greatly increased the colony formation
and invasion of cholangiocarcinoma cells QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1. Immunochemistry
studies of cholangiocarcinoma tissue chips and transplantation tumor from nude
mice showed that the expression of β-catenin was important for cholangiocarcinoma
development. We further demonstrated that MSCs and MSCs-CM could promote
proliferation and migration of cholangiocarcinoma cells through targeting the
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. hUC-MSCs or MSCs-CM stimulated Wnt activity
by promoting the nuclear translocation of β-catenin, and up-regulated Wnt target
genes MMPs family, cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Together, our studies highlight a critical
role for MSCs on cancer metastasis and indicate MSCs promote metastatic growth
and chemoresistance of cholangiocarcinoma cells via activation of Wnt/β-catenin
signaling.

is commonly diagnosed in the advanced stage of
the disease and has a dismal prognosis. Moreover,
cholangiocarcinoma can easily metastasize and cause
relapse. Surgical treatment is the preferred option for
all types of cholangiocarcinoma, but many factors,
such as the vascular structures and lymph nodes, needs
to be considered [4, 5]. The recurrence and metastasis
in cholangiocarcinoma has become a key point which
affecting the efficiency and obtaining long-term survival
in patients. Understanding of the cancer biology, the

INTRODUCTION
Cholangiocarcinoma is a malignancy originating
from the bile ducts with features of cholangiocyte
differentiation. Based on anatomical location, it can
be classified into intrahepatic, perihilar, and distal
cholangiocarcinoma [1]. It is the second most common
primary hepatic malignancy, after hepatocellular cancer,
and epidemiologic studies indicate that its incidence
is increasing worldwide [2, 3]. Cholangiocarcinoma
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42276

Oncotarget

Here, using multiple in vitro and in vivo models,
we examined the roles of hUC-MSCs in the progression
of cholangiocarcinoma development, and revealed the
cellular and molecular mechanisms by which MSCs
promote cholangiocarcinoma development. Our study
first demonstrated that MSCs or their CM significantly
increased cholangiocarcinoma cells proliferation,
metastatic potency and chemoresistance both in vitro
and in vivo. Furthermore, we found that metastasis of
cholangiocarcinoma is associated with the translocation
of β-catenin and upregulation of cyclinD1, c-Myc and
MMP2. Such findings indicated that MSCs played a
promoting role in cholangiocarcinoma cells progression
and metastasis.

mechanism of the metastasis, and its complex interaction
with the tumor microenvironment could lead to optimum
therapies with improvement in patient survival. In
recent years, a growing number of studies have reported
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have a close relationship
with tumor proliferation and metastasis. Study of MSCs
and tumor microenvironment has also become a hot spot
of cancer research.
MSCs are non-hematopoietic stem cells, which are
capable of differentiation at least into bone, cartilage,
muscle, and adipose tissues [6]. They reside primarily in
the bone marrow, and have the ability to recruit to their
destination in response to systemic signals emanating from
injured tissues, inflammatory sites or primary tumor sites
[7–9]. Many reports described that MSCs can home and
engraft to different types of solid tumors, such as breast
[10, 11], prostate [12], lung [13], and ovarian [14]. In
addition, MSCs are relatively nonimmunogenic and have
the ability to expand manifold in culture without lose its
multilineage potential. All these characters make MSCs
extremely attractive for targeted cancer therapy. On
one hand, MSCs may affect cancer progression through
secreted factors triggering activation of various cell
signaling pathways. On the other hand, they can be used
as cellular vehicles for cancer-targeted gene therapy [15].
MSCs and their secreted extracellular proteins are
crucial for establishing the tumor microenvironment.
Although the interactions of MSCs and many cancers have
been widely studied, the functional mechanisms of MSCs
on cholangiocarcinoma progression are poorly understood.
In the tumor microenvironment, upon with MSCs,
cancer cells may exhibit altered biological functions,
including proliferation ability, migration and drug
resistance. Drug resistance is one of the major obstacle
in cancer treatment. The mechanism of cancer cell
drug resistance include enhanced activity of positive
regulators of cell proliferation, inactivation of cell death
or enhancement of survival functions and activation of
telomerase [16]. Chen et al. demonstrated that MSCsecreted CM could induce doxorubicin resistance in
TNBC, which was mediated by IL-8 presented in
the MSC-CM [17]. MSCs also exhibited increased
chemosensitivity and induction of apoptosis in response
to doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil, reported by Lucia
group [18]. Xia et al. concluded that MSCs protected
leukemia cells from apoptosis, at least in part, through
c-Myc dependent mechanisms, but cell-cell contact is
required [19]. Considering the important role of MSCs on
cancer cell drug resistance, we extended our investigation
on the effect of stromal cells on drug responses in the
tumor cells, using compound K as an effective anticancer drug. compound K is one of the major intestinal
bacterial metabolite of protopanaxadiol-type saponins
formed from ginsenosides Rb1, Rb2, and Rc. Compound
K has received increasing attention because of its various
pharmacological activities including anti-tumor, antiinflammatory, and anti-diabetic effects [20–22].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
MSCs promote cholangiocarcinoma cells
proliferation and tumorigenesis
hUC-MSCs (hereafter referred to as MSCs) isolated
from Wharton’s jelly of umbilical cord and characterized
by flow cytometry with antibodies to cell surface markers.
Microscopy showed that cells with spindle shape spread
on cell culture plate, and the cells were positive for
CD29, CD44, CD90, and negative for CD34, CD45
(Supplementary Figure S1A and S1B). In addition, their
ability to differentiate into fat and bone were tested and
verified (Supplementary Figure S1C, S1D).
In order to determine whether MSCs exhibit tumor
supportive or inhibitory effect on cholangiocarcinoma
cells, we performed a co-culture experiment. QBC939
and Mz-ChA-1 cells were mixed with MSCs cells or
MSC-CM produced from corresponding amount of
MSCs. 24 hours later, proliferation ability was tested
by Edu assay. The MSCs-induced promotion effects
on cancer cell proliferation were significantly greater
than in controls. The conditioned medium from MSCs
also showed a remarkable effect (Figure 1A, 1B). To
investigate whether MSCs enhances the colony-forming
ability of QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells in vitro, we
seeded 500 cells in triplicate wells of six-well plates for
a colony-forming assay. After cell adherence, cells were
cultured with CK (5 μM) or MSC-CM for 12 hours.
2 weeks later, cells treated with MSC-CM formed clones
were more numerous and larger than in control groups
(Figure 1C). CK could inhibit the cholangiocarcinoma
cells tumorigenesis, while MSC-CM have the ability
to relieve the inhibiting effects of CK. Next, in order to
determine the effect of MSCs on tumor growth in vivo,
we established a xenograft model which QBC939 cells
were mixed with MSCs and injected subcutaneously
into immunocompromised mice. The growth kinetics of
the MSC-containing tumors were compared to those of
QBC939 injected alone over the 1–5 weeks. Besides, the
results of the tumor weight, histopathology of the tumors
42277

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The promotion effects of MSCs on cholangiocarcinoma. A and B. The Edu proliferation assay was performed

24 hours after QBC939 and Mz-chA-1 cells treated with MSCs or MSC-CM. A: representative image; B: ratio of EdU-positive cancer
cells. C. Representative images of colony-forming assay and its counting results. D. Nude mice were implanted with cell alone or mixedcell and treated with MSC-CM or RPMI 1640 via different ways. N = 5 mice per group; E and F. the statistical results of tumor volume and
weight. G. The H&E staining and Immunohistochemical analysis about expression of β-catenin, cyclin D1, Ki-67 in tumor tissue. Data are
reported as means ± S.D. of three separate experiments. * and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01compared with control group, respectively.
Abbreviations: MSC-CM, mesenchymal stem cell conditioned medium; CK, compound K; H&E, hematoxylin-eosin staining.

and in vivo metastasis. We initially performed migration
assay using co-culture, which the MSCs were seeded
into the bottom of a plate, and cholangiocarcinoma
cells were seeded into the up chamber. The results show
that the effect of the MSCs on QBC939 cell migration
was significantly higher than control cells. The MSCCM also significantly promoted the migration of the
cholangiocarcinoma cells, suggesting that soluble factors
secreted by the MSCs were responsible for the effects. The
QBC939 cells were replaced by Mz-ChA-1 cells to repeat
the experiments mentioned above, similar results were
obtained (Figure 2A).
From in vivo study, mice bearing the mixed
QBC939+MSCs tumors display a marked increase in
the number of macroscopic liver metastases (Figure 2B).
Recent studies described that MSCs can recruited to many
types of malignancy, such as gliomas, colon carcinomas,

were studied. As shown in Figure 1D, 1E, and 1F, The
tumor mean volume and weight of the mixed-cell group
and MSCs-treated group are dramatically higher than the
control group. The mixed-cell group showed the highest
record among all the groups. The expression of Ki67 in
cancer tissues was shown in Figure 1G. The Ki67-positive
cells exhibited brown punctate granules in the nucleus.
We can see a higher expression of Ki-67 when QBC939
mixed with MSCs or MSC-CM. These results revealed
that MSCs and MSC-CM promoted cholangiocarcinoma
growth and tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo.

MSCs significantly increased the metastasis of
cholangiocarcinoma
We next investigated the effects of the MSCs on
in vitro invasion ability of cholangiocarcinoma cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42278

Oncotarget

Figure 2: MSCs promote cholangiocarcinoma cancer metastasis. A. QBC939 cells and Mz-ChA-1 cells were planted into up

chamber of transwell with serum-free medium, MSC-CM or MSCs were in the down chamber, after 48 hours, the cells migrated to the
bottom chamber were visualized by staining. Quantification is shown at right. B. Liver migration in different groups, and the H&E staining
of each group. C. MSCs recruited to the tumor sites and metastatic livers of the tumor bearing nude mice. Data are reported as means ± S.D.
of three separate experiments, * and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01 compared with control group, respectively. Abbreviations: MSCs,
mesenchymal stem cell; MSC-CM, mesenchymal stem cells conditioned medium; CK, compound K.

melanomas and breast carcinomas [10, 23–25]. We infused
MSCs (labelled with CM-Dil) into the venous circulation
of mice bearing QBC939 or QBC939/MSCs cells. As
shown in Figure 2C, MSCs localized to the developing
tumors, and even to the metastatic liver.
Such findings indicated that MSCs could be
recruited by subcutaneous cholangiocarcinoma xenografts,
and the metastasis-promoting ability were a specific
property of admixed MSCs.

lines after being treated with different concentration
of CK. While treated with CK along with MSCs-CM,
cholangiocarcinoma cells viability partly elevated, and
CK-induced cell death cells decreased (Figure 3A).
Previously, our studies showed that CK can induce
apoptosis in liver cancer cells [22]. To determine whether
the proliferation inhibitory effect of CK on QBC939 and
Mz-ChA-1 cells was also associated with the process
of apoptosis, and the effects of MSCs on cancer cell
apoptosis, we did an annexin V/PI apoptosis assay.
After exposure to CK for 24 hours, the proportion of
apoptotic cells increased. However, MSCs conditioned
medium significantly inhibited QBC939 and Mz-chA-1
cell apoptosis compared to the CK group, especially CK
concentration was 7.5 μM or 10 μM (Figure 3B).
Furthermore, we investigated the effect of CK
and MSC-CM on the metastases of cholangiocarcinoma
in vivo. QBC939 and QBC939 mixed with MSCs were
injected subcutaneously into immunocompromised mice.
CK was injected by enterocoelia every other day at a
concentration of 10 mg/kg. Three weeks later, mice were
sacrificed (Figure 3C). From Figure 3D and 3E we can
concluded that MSCs promote QBC939 growth in nude
mice, whereas CK inhibit QBC939 growth. What’s more,

MSCs greatly increased cholangiocarcinoma cell
chemoresistance induced by compound K
CK, a ginsenoside metabolite, has been shown to
inhibit proliferation and induces apoptosis in a variety of
cancers by modulation of diverse signal pathways [20].
Since there has been limited evidence that CK could
suppress cholangiocarcinoma cell growth, we performed
experiments using QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells in vitro
and in vivo. Firstly, from the colony formation assay,
an apparent decrease of cell-colony formation was
observed in QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells treated with
CK (Figure  1C). For MTS assay, an inhibition of cell
viability was observed in two cholangiocarcinoma cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42279

Oncotarget

Figure 3: MSCs decrease the effects of Compound K on cholangiocarcinoma. A. QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1cells were treated

with different concentration of CK (0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, 10 μM), which were dissolved with MSC-CM or serum-free medium for 24 hours. Cells
were analyzed with MTS assy. Data are reported as means ± S.D. of three replicates. B. QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells were treated with
different concentration of CK (0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, 10 μM), at the same time, cells were treated with MSC-CM or serum-free medium for 24 hours
and analysis with Flow Cytometry. Statistical results are shown below. C. QBC939 cells were implanted into nude mice alone or mixed
with MSCs. After tumor emerges, mice were treated with CK (10 mg/kg) every other day. D–F. Tumor volume, weight and CK inhibit ratio
were analyzed (N = 4 mice of each group). Data are reported as means ± S.D.* and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, compared with control
group, respectively. Abbreviations: CK, compound K; MTS, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)2H-tetrazolium.

compared the inhibit ratio about MSCs group with control
group, we found that in MSCs group CK inhibit ratio is
lower than the control group (p < 0.05) (Figure 3F). These
result revealed that MSCs and their conditioned medium
could decrease the susceptibility of cancer cells to CK.

42 cholangiocarcinoma tissues to detect the expression
of β-catenin and c-Myc (Supplementary Figure S2).
Immunohistochemistry results showed that β-catenin
was related to Pathologic Tumor-Node-Metastasis
(PTNM) of cholangiocarcinoma (Tables 1, 2), which
indicated that β-catenin may play an important role on
cholangiocarcinoma development. Meanwhile, it provided
us a possible evidence to study the mechanism of MSCs
effect on cholangiocarcinoma.
So we examined whether MSCs affected
Wnt/β-catenin, which promotes the process of
cholangiocarcinoma progression, using double fluorescent
reporter gene analysis, immunofluorescence staining and
western blotting analysis. As shown in Figure 4A, MSCsCM promotes the activation of Wnt signaling significantly
(p < 0.01), meanwhile CK inhibited Wnt activation

MSCs increased β-catenin expression and
activated Wnt signaling
Accumulated evidence proved that Wnt signaling
pathway played an important role in cancer cell
progression, including proliferation and metastasis [28,
29]. Aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway
may lead to malignancy [30]. So we examined whether
cholangiocarcinoma progression was associated with
Wnt signaling. We used a tissue chip which contains
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42280

Oncotarget

Table 1: β-catenin and c-Myc expression in cholangiocarcinoma and para-carcinoma tissues
organization pattern

numbers

β-catenin

c-Myc

positive (%)

−

+

positive (%)

−

+

carcinoma tissue

42

9

33

78.6

25

17

40.5

para-carcinoma tissue

42

10

32

76.2

12

30

71.4

Table 2: β-catenin expression in different cholangiocarcinoma tissues
pathological factors

Numbers

β-catenin
−

+

positive (%)

X2

p

1.2727

>0.05

1.4141

>0.05

3.9269

<0.05

sex
 male

21

6

15

71.4

 female

21

3

18

85.7

  ≤60

27

5

25

83.3

  >60

15

4

8

66.7

 I

3

2

1

33.3

  II + III

39

7

32

82.1

age

PTNM

invasion assay results (Figure 5B, 5C) showed that MSCs
and MSCs-CM could promote cell invasion ability.
These results underscore the critical importance of the
Wnt/β-catenin signaling activation in enabling MSCs to
induce metastasis of the cholangiocarcinoma cells.
Taken together, these data suggest the
functional effects of hUC-MSCs in the promotion
of cholangiocarcinoma cell proliferation, metastatic
potency and chemoresistance, both in vitro and in vivo,
and revealed the cellular and molecular mechanisms by
which MSCs promote cholangiocarcinoma development.
Moreover, we found that metastasis of cholangiocarcinoma
is associated with the translocation of β-catenin and
upregulation of cyclinD1, c-Myc and MMP2. Such
findings indicated that MSCs played a promoting role in
cholangiocarcinoma cells progression and metastasis.

(p < 0.05). Western blotting results showed that MSCsCM significantly up-regulated β-catenin expression,
as well as the downstream proteins including c-Myc,
MMP2 and cyclin D1, compared with control group
(p < 0.05) (Figure 4B, 4C). β-catenin is a key mediator
in Wnt regulating multiple cellular functions. Activation
of Wnt signaling leads to cytoplasmic accumulation of
β-catenin and allows it translocate into the cell nucleus.
We examined the β-catenin expression in cytoplasm and
nucleus of QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells by western
blotting analysis. Nuclear β-catenin accumulated when
treated with MSCs-CM, at the same time, β-catenin
expression level was decreased after CK treatment (Figure
4D, 4E). The results of the immunofluorescence staining
assay were consistent with western blotting (Figure 4F).
These results suggest an important role of MSCs in
cholangiocarcinoma cell Wnt/β-catenin activation.

DISCUSSION

MSCs promoted cholangiocarcinoma cell
invasion through Wnt/β-catenin signaling

The discovery that MSCs have the ability to recruit
into tumors has led to a great deal of interest over the
past decade. Recent studies revealed that MSCs exert
multiple effects on tumor development and progression,
by increasing stemness of tumor cells, mediating
migration, promoting angiogenesis, suppressing immune
response and inducing drug resistance. Firstly, we isolated
and identified the hUC-MSCs. After that, we confirmed
that MSCs could also recruited to cholangiocarcinoma
and their metastatic livers in a xenograft tumor model
(Figure 2C).

To probe whether the observed MSCs-induced
cholangiocarcinoma cell metastasis required Wnt
activation, we increased or inhibited β-catenin expression
in QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells by LiCl and/or XAV939
(sellckchem, 20 μM) (XAV939, an inhibitor of Wnt/
β-catenin signaling), the expression level of β-catenin
and cell invasion ability were measured. From Figure 5A,
β-catenin expression level was unregulated by MSCs-CM
and LiCl, and remarkably inhibited by XAV939. The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42281

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effects of MSCs-CM on Wnt-related proteins in human cholangiocarcinoma cells. A. Effect of MSCs-CM and

CK on Wnt activation, cells were transfected with TOP-flash and TK-RL, 24 hours later, luciferase activity was measured. B. Total proteins
of QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 cells were analyzed by western blotting after treated with serum-free medium and MSCs-CM for 24 hours, and
C. is the statistical results. D and E. Expression of cytosolic and nuclear β-catenin in human cholangiocarcinoma cells with MSCs-CM
treatment. F. Immunofluorescence analysis of β-catenin expression incholangiocarcinoma cells. Scale bar = 20 μm. Abbreviations:MSCsCM, Mesenchymal stem cell conditioned medium; CK, compound K; MMP2, Matrix Metalloproteinase-2.

MSCs interact with tumor cells in a myriad of
ways, which have the potential to promote or suppress
tumor growth and metastasis. Some studies showed
that MSCs could promote tumor progression and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

metastasis [26–28]. While some investigators reported
that MSCs could inhibit cancer growth and or inhibit
cancer cell metastasis [25, 29, 30]. The study of MSCs
on cholangiocarcinoma progression are rarely reported.
42282

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effects of Wnt/β-catenin signaling on MSCs-mediated cholangiocarcinoma cells invasion. A. The protein levels

of β-catenin in different groups of QBC939 cells (with different treatment: MSC-CM, 20 mM XAV939 or 40 mM LiCl for 24 h) were
assayed by western blotting. β-tubulin was used as an internal control. B–E. The invasive abilities of the cells were analyzed by an invasion
assay using a Matrigel-coated chamber. Different groups of invasive QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1cells at same time point (24 h after cell
seeding) are shown. Data are reported as means ± S.D. of three separate experiments. * and ** indicate p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, and ***
indicates 0.001. Abbreviations: XAV939: an inhibitor of Wnt signaling; LiCl, lithium chloride.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42283

Oncotarget

Liu et al. recent research revealed that hUC-MSCs could
inhibit the growth of cholangiocarcinoma xenograft
tumors, and conditioned media from hUC-MSCs inhibited
proliferation and induced apoptosis of tumor cells in a
dose- and time-dependent manner [31]. On the contrary,
our study demonstrated a different view of the function
of MSCs in cholangiocarcinoma. We observed that both
MSCs and MSC-CM promoted the growth of human
cholangiocarcinoma cells, and increased the metastasis
ability of cancer cells (Figure 2). Multiple in vitro assay and
in vivo models revealed that MSCs and their conditioned
medium potently promote QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1
cells growth and increase subcutaneous tumor growth
(Figure  1). These results may be due to different cell
lines, tumor models, times and dose of MSCs were used,
culture methods, or other unknown factors. As we know,
MSCs could play a dual role on many cancer progression.
The soluble factors may be the key factor to lead these
difference. Thus, a thorough characterization of the MSCs
secreted cytokines in the tumor microenvironment should
be a important focus in future research.
Cholangiocarcinoma is an aggressive malignancy
originating from the bile duct epithelium. It is recognized
as a highly metastatic cancer. Cholangiocarcinoma patients
are mostly clinically silent and difficult to diagnose until
the metastatic stage, leading to a poor prognosis. A better
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the
metastasis of cholangiocarcinoma is needed. EpithelialMesenchymal Transition (EMT) is believed to be a major

mechanism by which cancer cells become migratory and
invasive [32]. Techasen et al. reported that E-cadherin can
act as a central modulator of tumor cell phenotype and is a
potential metastasis marker in cholangiocarcinoma [33]. In
this study, we also tested the EMT markers by Real-time
PCR, but we did not find the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal
Transition when cholangiocarcinoma cell lines treated
with MSC-CM (Supplementary Figure S3). The Wnt/
β-catenin signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the
regulation, differentiation, proliferation and cellular death
processes [34]. Abnormal regulation of Wnt/β-catenin
signaling is linked to a variety of human diseases, such as
malignancy [35]. Then, we measured β-catenin expression
in 42 cholangiocarcinoma samples, and investigated the
correlation between the expression pattern and clinic
pathologic factors (Supplementary Figure S2, Table 1).
Our results revealed that β-catenin was related to PTNM of
cholangiocarcinoma (Table 2), β-catenin and its target gene
c-myc expression level are higher in PTNM III than other
samples (Table 3). According to Keishi Sugimachi et al,
no β-catenin mutations have been reported for intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma, and reduced membranous expression
and nuclear translocation of β-catenin are involved in
cholangiocarcinogenesis, progression and invasion [36].
In addition, we investigated on β-catenin and β-cateninrelated molecules, including MMP-2, c-Myc, in human
cholangiocarcinoma cell lines QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1
when treated with MSCs or MSC-CM. We had observed
that β-catenin expression level was up-regulated and

Table 3: c-Myc expression in different cholangiocarcinoma tissues
pathological
factors

c-Myc

numbers
−

+

positive (%)

χ2

p

0.0988

>0.05

0.2711

>0.05

0.9198

>0.05

0.0036

>0.05

7.435

<0.05

sex
 male

21

13

8

38.1

 female

21

12

9

42.9

  ≤60

30

17

13

43.3

  > 60

12

8

4

33.3

 I

3

1

2

66.7

  II + III

39

24

15

38.5

  T1+T2

22

13

9

40.9

  T3+T4

20

12

8

37.5

 N0

32

5

12

37.5

 N1

10

12

5

50.0

age

PTNM

Infiltration
depth

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42284

Oncotarget

Cell lines

translocated to nucleus (Figure 4). These results suggest
that MSCs may promote cholangiocarcinoma cell
metastasis through Wnt/β-catenin pathway.
Currently, the standard chemotherapy for
cholangiocarcinoma includes oxaliplatin or cisplatin
[37]. But the tumors are resistant to these conventional
chemotherapy [38]. Inadequate response to therapy is
more likely as a result of the molecular and cellular
heterogeneity of the primary tumor, which moreover may
be linked to both malignant and recurrent disease. The
mechanism caused cancer cell drug resistance include
promoting cell proliferation, loss of tumor suppressor
gene function, inactivation of cell death or enhancement
of survival functions and activation of telomerase. There
is another mechanism, called environment mediateddrug resistance (EMDR), also played a vital role in drug
resistance. EMDR contains soluble factor-mediated drug
resistance and cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance
[16]. We exposed QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1 with CK in
presence or absence of MSC-CM, and then analyzed the
cell viability and the invasion ability. The results showed
that the proliferation and invasion ability were increased
compared with the CK treated group (Figures 2A, 3A).
That means the anti-tumor effect of CK was decreased
at the presence of MSCs-CM. From in vivo study, on
the condition of MSCs, the tumor inhibition rate of CK
was also decreased. These results showed that MSCs
promote the chemoresistance of cholangiocarcinoma,
and suggested that soluble factors, such as cytokines,
chemokines and growth factors secreted, may be the main
aspect inducing the drug resistance.
In conclusion, our present studies demonstrated
that MSCs and MSC-CM could both significantly
promote the proliferation and increased the metastasis in
human cholangiocarcinoma cells through Wnt/β-catenin
pathway. Additionally, MSCs may also be involved in
the chemoresistance of cholangiocarcinoma cell. The
elucidation of the mechanism of MSCs promoting tumor
cell growth and metastasis provides evidence of MSCs
on cancer progression. The tumor-promoting molecules
secreted by MSCs or the pathway activated by MSCs in
tumor cells needs to be studied deeply, which may enrich
the list of potential targets for molecular therapy.

Human umbilical cord blood samples were obtained
from the umbilical vein immediately after delivery with
the informed consent of the mother. Sample collection
was approved by the Xiamen Zhongshan Hospital. hUCMSCs were obtained and characterized as described
previously [39]. MSCs were cultured with MSC
medium (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, CA)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco,
Grand Island, NY) and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin.
The third to eighth passages of MSCs were used in the
following experiments. Human cholangiocarcinoma cell
lines QBC939 and Mz-ChA-1(kindly provided by the First
affiliated hospital of Xiamen university) were cultured in
RPMI 1640 (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented
with 10% FBS and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin
solution. All cells were maintained in a humidified 5%
CO2 environment at 37°C.

Identification of MSCs
MSCs were isolated from human umbilical cord
and characterized by flow cytometric analyses with
CD29, CD34, CD44, CD45 and CD90 antibodies. Cells
were cultured and harvested after they grow to 80% of the
dish. After been washed with phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) twice, MSCs were stained with antibodies against
CD29, CD34, CD44, CD45 and CD90, and IgG1 or IgG2b
added as the isotype. The samples were analyzed by Flow
cytometry (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).
For adipogenic and Osteogenic differentiation assay,
Human Umbilical Cord MSC Adipogenic Differentiation
Medium and Osteogenic differentiation Medium (cyagen,
Guangzhou, CHN) were used according to the protocol.

Preparation of MSCs conditioned media
(MSC-CM)
hUC-MSCs were cultured to 90% confluence.
Washed with PBS twice then add serum-free RPMI-1640
to each dish for 24 hours. The conditioned media were
filtered through the 0.22 mm pore sterile filter and stored
at –80°C until further use within one week.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Apoptosis and cell proliferation assay

Mice and ethics statement

Cholangiocarcinoma cells were cultured and treated
with different concentration of CK. After 24 hours,
cells were trypsinized and harvested. Centrifuged and
washed twice, the cells were resuspended and stained
for annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) as described
in the manufacturer’s instructions (Pharmingen, San
Diego, CA, USA). The samples were analyzed by Flow
cytometry (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).
For proliferation assay, cholangiocarcinoma cells were

Male BALB/c-nu/nu mice, at age of 3–5 weeks,
were purchased from Xiamen University Laboratory
Animal Center. All experimental mice were maintained
under SPF conditions and raised under standard conditions
(12-hour day-night rhythm). All animal procedures were
approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of
Xiamen University (license No: SYXK [Min] 2008–0003,
issued on May 6, 2008).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42285

Oncotarget

cultured in 96 well dished and cell proliferation assay
assessed by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTS) assay
(promega, Madison, WI, USA).

measured and normalized to the corresponding Renilla
activity using the dual-luciferase assay kit (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA).

EdU proliferation assay

Western blotting

QBC939 and Mz-chA-1 cells were seeded in
96-well plate. The cells were incubate under each
conditions for 24 hours. Cell proliferation was detected
using the incorporation of 5-ethynyl-29-deoxyuridine
(EdU) with the EdU Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Ruibo,
Guangzhou, China). The number of cells that incorporated
EdU was determined by fluorescence microscopy.

Samples were collected by lysing cells in RIPA
lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.1% SDS,
1% TritonX-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Each sample
was size-fractionated using SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) and electrotransferred onto
polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) transfer membranes
(Dupont, Boston, MA, U.S.A.). Blots were incubated for
1 h at room temperature in 5% skim milk for blocking, and
proteins were detected with primary antibodies overnight
at 4°C, and then blotted with horseradish peroxidase
conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 hour at room
temperature. The immunoblots were visualized using ECL
(GE Healthcare, Bucks, UK).

Colony-forming assay
Cells were seeded in six-well plates at a density
of 500 cells/well and maintained in complete medium
overnight. Then treated with MSC-CM, CK for 12 hours.
Cells were washed with PBS and cultured in complete
medium for about 2 weeks, after most of the colonies had
expanded to more than 50 cells, the cells were washed
with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min and
stained with crystal violet for 10 min. The colonies were
counted. Three independent experiments were carried out
for each assay.

Xenograft assays in nude mice
For xenograft experiments, QBC939 cells were
implanted alone (2 × 106/mice), or were mixed with MSCs
(3:1) [25] by subcutaneous injection into the right foreleg
of the mouse. Mice in control groups were given QBC939
or MSCs alone. Then 10 mg/kg CK or 200 μl MSC-CM
was administered to the mice by intraperitoneal injection
every other day for 30 days. Nude mice were used at
4–6weeks of age. Tumor volume was calculated as 1/2ab2.

Transwell assay
60 μl serum-free diluted Matrigel (0.8 mg/mL)
was added into the upper chamber (Corning, MA,
USA) using cooled pipet tips. Incubate the plates at
37°C for 2 hours before starting the invasion assay. The
cholangiocarcinoma cells (1 × 106 cells) were added into
the upper chamber and added FBS-free medium, MSCs,
MSC- CM,CK+MSC-CM and CK into the lower chamber.
48 hours later, remove the cell which were not migrated
to the the reverse side of the filters and washed with PBS.
Then 4% paraformaldehyde fixed the migration cells
that had invaded across the Matrigel and passed through
the transwell filter for 10 min and stained with Giemsa
stain and counted using bright-field microscopy (IX51,
Olympus Corporation, JPN).

Immunohistochemistry
Tumor tissue specimens were fixed in neutral
formalin and embedded in paraffin after collection
from the sacrificed mice. Tissue sections were cut and
dewaxed, then incubated with 0.01 M natrium citricum
for antigen retrieval. The slides were rinsed in phosphatebuffered saline and incubated overnight at 4°C with
diluted anti-cyclinD1, anti-c-Myc, anti-ki67 or anti-βcatenin antibodies. Following steps were performed using
the immunostaining kit (Maixin BIO, Fuzhou, China)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Dual-Glo™ luciferase assay
We use the TOPFLASH firefly luciferase and TK-RL
Renilla luciferase constructs to measure the activation of
the Wnt pathway after MSC-CM and CK treatment. Cells
grown on 24-well plates were transfected in quadruplicates
with cDNAs (20 ng/well) for TCF-luciferase reporter
(TOPflash) along with a control Renilla plasmid (TK-RL)
by Lipofectamine 2000 transfection Reagent (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). Twenty-four hours post-transfection,
the cells were treated with MSC-CM or CK, 24 hours
later the cells were lysed and the luciferase activity was

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescence staining
Immunofluorescence staining was performed as
previously [40]. Briefly, after CK or MSC-CM treatment,
cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100. Then, cells were
incubated with first antibodies (1:200) overnight at 4°C.
The cells were then washed and subsequently incubated
with Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies at a dilution
of 1:200 for 1 h at room temperature. After that, cells

42286

Oncotarget

were washed and DAPI was stained for 5 min at room
temperature. At last, cells were mounted in  ProLong
antifade solution onto glass slides and observed under
multi-photon laser scanning microscope (FV1000,
Olympus Corporation, JPN).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

In vivo imaging of homing ability to tumors

WW: conception and design, experiments
performing, data analysis; WZ: experiments performing
and manuscript writing; JH, CC, SH and YP: experiments
performing; YB, BZ and TH: data analysis. GS:
conception and design, data analysis, manuscript writing,
financial support, and final approval of manuscript.

The authors declare no conflict of interests.

Author contributions

We use Cell Tracer CM-Dill (Invitrogen Life
Technologies, CA, USA) to trace MSCs in vivo. CMDil working solution was prepared as the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, 1 mg CM-Dil/ml stock solution
in culture-grade DMSO, 8 μM solutions were made in
500 μl PBS, vortexed, and then combined with 2 × 106
hUC-MSCs in 500 μl PBS, to give 106 cells/ml in 4 μM
CM-Dil labeling solution. CM-Dil cell suspensions were
incubated for 30 min at 37°C and then for 15 min at 4°C.
After labeling, cells were washed three times with PBS
and resuspended in fresh medium. 24 hours after staining,
cells were injected into the cauda vein (106/cells) of tumorbearing mice or mixed MSCs tumor bearing mice, and
then optical bioluminescence imaging was conducted to
periodically trace the cells using a maestro in vivo imaging
system (CRI, MA, USA)

REFERENCES
1.	 Razumilava N, Gores GJ. Cholangiocarcinoma. Lancet.
2014; 383:2168–2179.
2.	 de Groen PC, Gores GJ, LaRusso NF, Gunderson LL,
Nagorney DM. Biliary tract cancers. The New England
journal of medicine. 1999; 341:1368–1378.
3.	 Blechacz B, Gores GJ. Cholangiocarcinoma: advances in
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. Hepatology. 2008;
48:308–321.
4.	 Dickson PV, Behrman SW. Distal cholangiocarcinoma. The
Surgical clinics of North America. 2014; 94:325–342.

Real-time qPCR

5.	 Zhang W, Yan LN. Perihilar cholangiocarcinoma: Current
therapy. World journal of gastrointestinal pathophysiology.
2014; 5:344–354.

Total cellular RNA was prepared using TRNzol
reagent (Tiangen, Beijing, CHN) and the expression
levels of E-cadherin, Vimentin, N-cadherin, Snai1, Slug,
ZEB1 and ZEB2 mRNAs were determined by real-time
reverse transcriptase–PCR using GoTaq® qPCR Master
Mix (promega, Madison, WI, USA). Data shown are
normalized to GAPDH expression and represent the
average of three repeated experiments. The primers for
specific genes were shown in Table S1.

6.	 Pittenger MF. Multilineage Potential of Adult Human
Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Science. 1999; 284:143–147.
7.	 Karp JM, Leng Teo GS. Mesenchymal stem cell homing:
the devil is in the details. Cell stem cell. 2009; 4:206–216.
8.	 G Chamberlain JF, B Ashton, J Middleton. Concise Review:
Mesenchymal Stem Cells: Their Phenotype, Differentiation
Capacity, Immunological Features, and Potential for
Homing. Stem cells. 2007; 25:2739–2749.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Spaeth E, Klopp A, Dembinski J, Andreeff M, Marini F.
Inflammation and tumor microenvironments: defining the
migratory itinerary of mesenchymal stem cells. Gene therapy. 2008; 15:730–738.

Data are presented as the means ± S.D. for at
least three separate determinations for each group. The
differences between the groups were examined for
statistical significance using the Student’s t-test with SPSS
software. Differences were considered significant when
the p < 0.05.

10.	 Karnoub AE, Dash AB, Vo AP, Sullivan A, Brooks MW,
Bell GW, Richardson AL, Polyak K, Tubo R, Weinberg RA.
Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote
breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2007; 449:557–563.
11.	 Rattigan Y, Hsu JM, Mishra PJ, Glod J, Banerjee D.
Interleukin 6 mediated recruitment of mesenchymal stem
cells to the hypoxic tumor milieu. Experimental cell
research. 2010; 316:3417–3424.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the grants from the
national natural science foundation of China (81272721,
81470793), Xiamen municipal science and technology
innovation fund project (3502Z20143014), and the special
fund for public welfare research institutes of Fujian
Province (2014R1036-3).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12.	 Jung Y, Kim JK, Shiozawa Y, Wang J, Mishra A, Joseph J,
Berry JE, McGee S, Lee E, Sun H, Wang J, Jin T, Zhang H,
Dai J, Krebsbach PH, Keller ET, et al. Recruitment of
mesenchymal stem cells into prostate tumours promotes
­metastasis. Nature communications. 2013; 4:1795.

42287

Oncotarget

13.	 Gutova M, Najbauer J, Frank RT, Kendall SE,
Gevorgyan  A, Metz MZ, Guevorkian M, Edmiston M,
Zhao  D, Glackin CA, Kim SU, Aboody KS. Urokinase
plasminogen activator and urokinase plasminogen activator receptor mediate human stem cell tropism to malignant
solid tumors. Stem cells. 2008; 26:1406–1413.

carcinoma model using the MHCC97-H cell line. Cancer
science. 2010; 101:2546–2553.
26.	 Klopp AH, Lacerda L, Gupta A, Debeb BG, Solley T,
Li L, Spaeth E, Xu W, Zhang X, Lewis MT, Reuben JM,
Krishnamurthy S, Ferrari M, Gaspar R, Buchholz TA,
Cristofanilli M, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells promote
mammosphere formation and decrease E-cadherin in normal and malignant breast cells. PloS one. 2010; 5:e12180.

14.	 Spaeth EL, Dembinski JL, Sasser AK, Watson K, Klopp A,
Hall B, Andreeff M, Marini F. Mesenchymal stem cell transition to tumor-associated fibroblasts contributes to fibrovascular network expansion and tumor progression. PloS
one. 2009; 4:e4992.

27.	 Song B, Kim B, Choi SH, Song KY, Chung YG, Lee YS,
Park G. Mesenchymal stromal cells promote tumor progression in fibrosarcoma and gastric cancer cells. Korean
­journal of pathology. 2014; 48:217–224.

15.	 Uchibori R, Tsukahara T, Ohmine K, Ozawa K. Cancer
gene therapy using mesenchymal stem cells. International
journal of hematology. 2014; 99:377–382.

28.	 Zhang C, Zhai W, Xie Y, Chen Q, Zhu W, Sun X.
Mesenchymal stem cells derived from breast cancer tissue
promote the proliferation and migration of the MCF-7 cell
line. Oncology letters. 2013; 6:1577–1582.

16.	 Guan J, Chen J. Mesenchymal stem cells in the tumor
microenvironment. Biomedical reports. 2013; 1:517–521.
17.	 Chen DR, Lu DY, Lin HY, Yeh WL. Mesenchymal stem
cell-induced doxorubicin resistance in triple negative breast
cancer. BioMed research international. 2014; 2014:532161.

29.	 Takahara K, Ii M, Inamoto T, Komura K, Ibuki N,
Minami  K, Uehara H, Hirano H, Nomi H, Kiyama S,
Asahi M, Azuma H. Adipose-derived stromal cells inhibit
prostate cancer cell proliferation inducing apoptosis.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications.
2014; 446:1102–1107.

18.	 Kucerova L, Skolekova S, Matuskova M, Bohac M,
Kozovska Z. Altered features and increased chemosensitivity of human breast cancer cells mediated by adipose
tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells. BMC cancer.
2013; 13:535.

30.	 Han I, Yun M, Kim EO, Kim B, Jung MH, Kim SH.
Umbilical cord tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells
induce apoptosis in PC-3 prostate cancer cells through activation of JNK and downregulation of PI3K/AKT signaling.
Stem cell research & therapy. 2014; 5:54.

19.	 Xia B, Tian C, Guo S, Zhang L, Zhao D, Qu F, Zhao W,
Wang Y, Wu X, Da W, Wei S, Zhang Y. c-Myc plays part
in drug resistance mediated by bone marrow stromal cells in
acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia research. 2015; 39:92–99.

31.	 Juan Liu GH, Hui Liu, Chengyong Qin. Suppression of
Cholangiocarcinoma Cell Growth by Human Umbilical
Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells: A Possible Role of Wnt
and Akt Signaling. PloS one. 2013; 8:e62844.

20.	 Nag SA, Qin JJ, Wang W, Wang MH, Wang H, Zhang R.
Ginsenosides as Anticancer Agents: In vitro and in vivo
Activities, Structure-Activity Relationships, and Molecular
Mechanisms of Action. Frontiers in pharmacology.
2012; 3:25.

32.	 Tse JC, Kalluri R. Mechanisms of metastasis: epithelialto-mesenchymal transition and contribution of tumor
microenvironment. Journal of cellular biochemistry. 2007;
101:816–829.

21.	 Yang XD, Yang YY, Ouyang DS, Yang GP. A review of
biotransformation and pharmacology of ginsenoside compound K. Fitoterapia. 2015; 100:208–220.
22.	 Ming Y, Chen Z, Chen L, Lin D, Tong Q, Zheng Z, Song G.
Ginsenoside compound K attenuates metastatic growth of
hepatocellular carcinoma, which is associated with the
translocation of nuclear factor-kappaB p65 and reduction
of matrix metalloproteinase-2/9. Planta medica. 2011;
77:428–433.

33.	 Techasen A, Loilome W, Namwat N, Khuntikeo N,
Puapairoj A, Jearanaikoon P, Saya H, Yongvanit P. Loss
of E-cadherin promotes migration and invasion of cholangiocarcinoma cells and serves as a potential marker of
metastasis. Tumour biology: the journal of the International
Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine.
2014; 35:8645–8652.

23.	 Uchibori R, Tsukahara T, Mizuguchi H, Saga Y, Urabe M,
Mizukami H, Kume A, Ozawa K. NF-kappaB activity regulates mesenchymal stem cell accumulation at tumor sites.
Cancer research. 2013; 73:364–372.

34.	 Ochoa-Hernandez AB, Juarez-Vazquez CI, RosalesReynoso MA, Barros-Nunez P. Wnt-beta-catenin signaling pathway and its relationship with cancer  [Article in
Spanish]. Cirugia y cirujanos. 2012; 80:389–398.

24.	 Doucette T, Rao G, Yang Y, Gumin J, Shinojima N,
Bekele  BN, Qiao W, Zhang W, Lang FF. Mesenchymal
stem cells display tumor-specific tropism in an RCAS/Ntv-a
glioma model. Neoplasia. 2011; 13:716–725.

35.	 Kim W, Kim M, Jho EH. Wnt/beta-catenin signalling: from
plasma membrane to nucleus. The Biochemical journal.
2013; 450:9–21.
36.	 Sugimachi K, Taguchi K, Aishima S, Tanaka S, Shimada M,
Kajiyama K, Sugimachi K, Tsuneyoshi M. Altered expression of beta-catenin without genetic mutation in intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma. Modern pathology. 2001; 14:900–905.

25.	 Li GC, Ye QH, Xue YH, Sun HJ, Zhou HJ, Ren N, Jia HL,
Shi J, Wu JC, Dai C, Dong QZ, Qin LX. Human mesenchymal stem cells inhibit metastasis of a hepatocellular

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42288

Oncotarget

37.	 Valle J, Wasan H, Palmer DH, Cunningham D, Anthoney A,
Maraveyas A, Madhusudan S, Iveson T, Hughes S,
Pereira  SP, Roughton M, Bridgewater J Investigators
ABCT. Cisplatin plus gemcitabine versus gemcitabine for
biliary tract cancer. The New England journal of medicine.
2010; 362:1273–1281.

39.	 Lu LL, Liu YJ, Yang SG, Zhao QJ, Wang X, Gong W,
Han ZB, Xu ZS, Lu YX, Liu D, Chen ZZ, Han ZC. Isolation
and characterization of human umbilical cord mesenchymal
stem cells with hematopoiesis-supportive function and other
potentials. Haematologica. 2006; 91:1017–1026.
40.	 Lin D, Zhong W, Li J, Zhang B, Song G, Hu T. Involvement
of BID translocation in glycyrrhetinic acid and 11-deoxy
glycyrrhetinic acid-induced attenuation of gastric cancer
growth. Nutrition and cancer. 2014; 66:463–473.

38.	 Khan SA, Davidson BR, Goldin RD, Heaton N, Karani J,
Pereira SP, Rosenberg WM, Tait P, Taylor-Robinson SD,
Thillainayagam AV, Thomas HC, Wasan H British
Society of G. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
­cholangiocarcinoma: an update. Gut. 2012; 61:1657–1669.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

42289

Oncotarget

