Correspondence

Risk of Mortality in Patients
With Cancer Who Experience
Febrile Neutropenia

Lyman et al.1 It is possible that FN may only be a confounder (an ‘‘innocent’’ bystander) of a causal relation
between an unmeasured factor at baseline (eg, performance status) and early mortality.

We read the article by Lyman et al with interest. The

REFERENCES

authors concluded that febrile neutropenia (FN) occurring in patients who received myelosuppressive chemotherapy impacts early mortality.1 Readers may interpret
this statement to mean a causal relation has been established between FN and early mortality, and may start
using primary prophylaxis with granulocyte colonystimulating factor (G-CSF) more liberally.
The use of propensity score matching in an observational study can help balance 2 nonrandomized treatment groups for measured confounders, but not for
unmeasured factors.2 In the study by Lyman et al,1 the
comparison groups were patients who developed FN
and those who did not. The development of FN is neither a treatment assigned by physicians nor a baseline
characteristic of patients. This raised concerns that
there may be unmeasured (and perhaps unmeasurable)
intrinsic patient factors leading to FN. The fact that
there was a significantly higher use of primary prophylaxis with G-CSF in the FN group is a clear indication
that this group was perceived by physicians to be at a
higher risk of chemotherapy complications at baseline.
It is impossible to determine whether the perceived
higher risk was restricted to FN or related to all other
chemotherapy complications. In this study, non-FN
chemotherapy complications were not measured. The
causes of death were unknown, and whether they were
likely linked to FN could not be determined. Therefore, the FN group could also have had higher rates of
non-FN complications or other unmeasured poor prognostic features (eg, poor performance status) and was at
a higher risk of mortality independent of the effect of
FN. Despite adjustment for the use of G-CSF in the
multivariable model, it remained impossible to adjust
for all underlying unmeasured factors that led to an
imbalance in the use of G-CSF in the first place.
In addition, the statistical methods used to assess for
the balance between the 2 propensity-matched groups
and to calculate the hazard ratio for early mortality did
not account for the dependence of the 2 groups induced
by matching.2
Therefore, we would like to respectfully suggest that
a causal relation between the development of FN and
higher mortality was not established by the study by

Cancer

November 15, 2011

1. Lyman GH, Michels SL, Reynolds MW, Barron R, Tomic
KS, Yu J. Risk of mortality in patients with cancer who experience febrile neutropenia. Cancer. 2010;116:5555-5563.
2. Austin PC. A critical appraisal of propensity-score matching
in the medical literature between 1996 and 2003. Stat Med.
2008;27:2037-2049.
Kelvin K. W. Chan, MD, MSc
Department of Medical Oncology
Department of Medicine
Faculty of Medicine
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

George Tomlinson, PhD
Department of Medicine
University of Health Network and
Mount Sinai Hospital
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26141, Published online: May 23, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Risk of Mortality in
Patients With Cancer Who
Experience Febrile Neutropenia
In response to Drs. Chan and Tomlinson and as stated in

our manuscript, our study1 cannot definitely assert causality. However, it was conducted as rigorously as was possible with the data available and supported by advanced
statistical methods to reduce the effects of confounding
factors. The results of the analysis do support a strong
association between the occurrence of febrile neutropenia
(FN) and early mortality.
Propensity score matching was used to maximize the
comparability of the populations based on characteristics for
the development of FN within each tumor type. All baseline
characteristics that were measured within the database were
used in the propensity score, including the diagnosis of metastatic cancer and immunosuppressive diseases. Patients
were balanced with regard to major risk factors for the development of FN as identified by National Comprehensive
Cancer Network guidelines.2 We agree with Drs. Chan and
Tomlinson that there may be unmeasured or unmeasurable
intrinsic patient factors leading to the development of FN.
As noted in our article, detailed cancer staging was not available and could have an unobserved impact on the

5245

Correspondence

comparability of FN and non-FN patients.1 However,
adjustment for the presence of metastatic disease (stage IV)
was possible and may have lessened the potential for confounding by stage. Greater prophylactic use of granulocyte–
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in those with FN likely
reflects clinicians’ judgment to administer prophylaxis to
patients who are at inherently higher risk for FN. The multivariate analyses across tumor types included both FN and
tumor type as variables to restore the matching. Pooled evidence summary data from randomized controlled trials of
prophylactic G-CSF have demonstrated a significant reduction in early mortality in patients receiving cancer chemotherapy.3 It is likewise clinically plausible that the
occurrence of FN may lead to increased mortality related to
both serious infectious complications as well as chemotherapy dose reductions and delays among patients who develop
FN, leading to earlier cancer recurrence and death.
It is possible that some residual confounding exists.
However, given the methods used to account for confounding variables and the clinical plausibility of the
observed effects, it is unlikely that unobserved clinical
characteristics would account for all of the observed effects
reported in our study.1 In fact, we believe that our point
estimate may actually be a very conservative one. The longitudinal nature of the data, use of propensity score
matching, control of known confounding factors, and the
clinical plausibility of the results together suggest that causality represents a likely possible explanation.

FUNDING SOURCES
This study was funded by Amgen.

5246

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Barron is an employee of and owns stock in Amgen. Dr
Lyman is Principal Investigator on a grant to Duke University
from Amgen. Dr. Michels works for the United BioSource Corporation and performed this work under contract with Amgen.

REFERENCES
1. Lyman GH, Michels SL, Reynolds MW, Barron R, Tomic
KS, Yu J. Risk of mortality in patients with cancer who experience febrile neutropenia. Cancer. 2010;116:5555-5563.
2. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Practice
Guidelines in Oncology: Myeloid Growth Factors. Fort
Washington, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
Accessed on May 10, 2007.
3. Kuderer NM, Dale DC, Crawford J, Lyman GH. Impact of
primary prophylaxis with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on febrile neutropenia and mortality in adult cancer
patients receiving chemotherapy: a systematic review. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25:3158-3167.
Gary H. Lyman, MD, MPH
Department of Medicine
Comparative Effectiveness and Outcomes Research
Duke University
Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center
Durham, North Carolina

Shannon L. Michels, MSPH
United BioSource Corporation
Lexington, Massachusetts

Rich Barron, MS
Global Health Economics
Amgen Corporation
Thousand Oaks, California
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26140, Published online: May 23, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

November 15, 2011

