Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Res. 2017 February 15; 77(4): 1008–1020. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-1982.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Sunitinib treatment enhances metastasis of innately drug
resistant breast tumors
Joseph W Wragg, Victoria L Heath, and Roy Bicknell*
Institutes of Cardiovascular Sciences and Biomedical Research, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK

Abstract

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Anti-angiogenic therapies have failed to confer survival benefits in patients with metastatic breast
cancer (mBC). However, to date there has not been an inquiry into roles for acquired versus innate
drug resistance in this setting. In this study, we report roles for these distinct phenotypes in
determining therapeutic response in a murine model of mBC resistance to the anti-angiogenic
tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib. Using tumor measurement and vascular patterning approaches,
we differentiated tumors displaying innate versus acquired resistance. Bioluminescent imaging of
tumor metastases to the liver, lungs and spleen revealed that sunitinib administration enhances
metastasis, but only in tumors displaying innate resistance to therapy. Transcriptomic analysis of
tumors displaying acquired versus innate resistance allowed the identification of specific
biomarkers, many of which have a role in angiogenesis. In particular, aquaporin-1 upregulation
occurred in acquired resistance, mTOR in innate resistance, and pleiotrophin in both settings,
suggesting their utility as candidate diagnostics to predict drug response or to design tactics to
circumvent resistance. Our results unravel specific features of antiangiogenic resistance, with
potential therapeutic implications.

Introduction
The use of antiangiogenic drugs to treat metastatic breast cancer has had limited success in
the clinic. The monoclonal anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab, when combined with various
chemotherapy regimens has delivered modest but significant progression free survival (PFS)
improvements in this setting, the IMELDA phase III clinical trial reporting a 7.6 and 15.3
month improvement in PFS and overall survival (OS) respectively (1), with other trials
showing more modest improvements (2–4). Antiangiogenic, small molecule oral receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (RTKIs), however, have failed completely in this setting (5–7) with
some reports linking their use with an adverse impact on patient survival (6). This may be in
part due to an increased frequency of adverse events, leading to more temporary
discontinuations of therapy. However, evidence is mounting to suggest that antiangiogenic
RTKIs could also promote metastasis following treatment, contributing to the failure of the
drugs to improve PFS or OS (8,9).

*

Corresponding author, r.bicknell@bham.ac.uk , Tel: +44 (0)121 414 4085.
The authors disclose no potential conflicts of interest.

Wragg et al.

Page 2

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

It has been suggested that anti-angiogenic RTKIs have failed as a treatment for breast cancer
due to a limited dependence on angiogenesis for tumour growth and possible angiogenic
growth factor redundancy in breast cancer, facilitating the rapid acquisition of resistance
(10). This resistance takes two forms. Some tumours show no objective response in terms of
tumour growth and are termed innately resistant, whilst others progress after a short period
of stasis or shrinkage. These tumours are termed as having acquired resistance (reviewed in
(11)). In order to investigate and compare the differences between these two forms of
resistance and the impact this has on metastasis, an in vivo model of metastatic breast cancer
resistance to the anti-angiogenic drug sunitinib, was developed.
Sunitinib malate is a multi-target oral tyrosine kinase receptor (RTK) inhibitor (12),
targeting both pro-angiogenic platelet derived growth factor receptors α and β (PDGFRα/β)
and vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) on endothelial cells as well as
some pro-tumourogenic growth factor receptors including the RET proto-oncogene. Despite
initially promising results in phase II clinical trials (13,14) sunitinib has thus far failed to
demonstrate utility in the metastatic and triple negative setting in phase III trials (15–17).
Efforts continue however, in clinical trials, to investigate its utility in breast cancer, in
combination with Crizotinib, Doxorubicin, or Cyclophophamide (Information retrieved
from: http://clinicaltrials.gov and http://www.cancer.gov [accessed: 02.11.2016]).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In this study, tumour growth patterns resembling clinically characterised acquired and innate
resistance were observed, after daily sunitinib treatment. Further analysis revealed that
tumours, displaying acquired or innate resistance, has distinct patterns of vascular and
metastasis formation and that sunitinib treatment does enhance metastasis, but only in the
innately resistant setting. Comparative transcriptomic analysis of these tumours and their
vasculature revealed that resistance was gained primarily via the utilisation of non-inhibited
angiogenic pathways and this process was mapped over time. A number of possible markers
of acquired and innate resistance were also identified.

Materials and Methods
Generation of a stable 4T1-Luc cell line
Phoenix-Ampho cells (see: https://web.stanford.edu/group/nolan/_OldWebsite/
retroviral_systems/phx.html) were transfected with MSCV-LUC plasmid DNA (18), using
lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and cultured to generate MSCV-LUC plasmid containing
retrovirus. The MSCV-LUC retroviral media was used to transduce 4T1 cells (ATCC),
which were positively selected using puromycin. The 4T1 cell line was obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), resuscitated from early passage liquid nitrogen
stocks, treated as described in (18) and used in this experiment less than 2 months after the
re-initiation of culture. Cells were tested negative for mycoplasma contamination. ATCC
uses morphology, karyotyping, and PCR based approaches to confirm the identity of human
cell lines.

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 3

Animal experiments

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Mice were handled and treated in accordance with British home office requirements
(Licence number, PPL. 40/3339). 2.5x105 4T1-Luc cells suspended in Optimem (Gibco) and
in a volume of 100 μL, were injected into the third mammary fat pad of anaesthetised 8week-old female Balb/C mice. After a 1-week tumour establishment period, mice received
either 40 mg sunitinib (Selleck Chemicals) per kg body weight in PBS and 3.72% DMSO or
the drug vehicle only. 2-3 times a week, tumour bearing mice were IP injected with 150
mg/Kg D-luciferin (PerkinElmer), left for 5 minutes, then imaged over a period of 30
minutes and the peak average radiance of bioluminescence reading for each region of
interest calculated. At the experimental endpoint the same procedure was used, but the mice
were culled after a 10 minute incubation. Selected organs were dissected and imaged using
the IVIS imaging system (PerkinElmer). Luminescent quantification was performed on the
two opposite sides of each organ and the results averaged. In order to avoid bioluminescence
crossover between experiments, In vivo and ex vivo imaging were not performed on the
same day, therefore final day tumour measurements were not taken by in vivo imaging.
Immunofluorescent staining
Immunofluorescent staining of frozen mouse tissue was performed using 2 μg/ml rabbit
polyclonal antisera to mouse AQP1 (Boster Immunoleader) and 75 ng/ml rat monoclonal
antisera to mouse PECAM-1 as primary antibodies. Antibody binding was then detected
using 4 μg/ml goat polyclonal antisera to rat IgGs conjugated to alexafluor 546 (A11081,
Invitrogen) and 4 μg/ml donkey polyclonal antisera to rabbit IgGs conjugated to alexafluor
488 (A21206, Invitrogen) and mounted in ProLong Gold mounting media containing DAPI
(Invitrogen). Quantification of fluorescence was conducted using the ImageJ software
package (19).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Quantitative real-time PCR
RNA isolation was performed using the miRNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and complementary
DNA generated using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Invitrogen).
Quantitative real time PCR was performed using the Exiqon universal probe system (Roche)
as previously described (20). Primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 1. The
Delta-Delta Ct method was used to compare the expression levels between samples and βactin was used to standardise expression unless otherwise stated.
Endothelial isolation using PECAM-1 conjugated magnetic beads
Tumour tissue was minced and digested in DMEM containing 2 mg ml-1 collagenase type V
(Sigma), 7.4 mg ml-1 actinomycin D (Sigma) and 30 kU ml-1 DNase I (Qiagen), shaking at
37°C for 1 hour. Endothelial cells were isolated from the digested single cell suspension by
positive magnetic selection using 1x107/g sheep anti-rat IgG coated M-280 Dynabeads®
(Invitrogen) conjugated to 2.5 μg rat anti-mouse PECAM-1 antibody (MEC13.3 clone, BD
Falcon).

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 4

Microarray and analysis

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

RNA was isolated from the magnetic bead isolated endothelium, reverse transcribed to
cDNA, transcribed, amplified and labelled with Cy3 (Low input quick amp labelling kit,
Agilent). Labelled cRNA samples were then hybridized to SurePrint G3 Mouse Gene
Expression v2 8x60K microarray chips (Agilent). The R programming language (Lucent
Technologies), marray (21) and the Limma (Bioconductor) plug-in were used to subtract
background, quantile normalize probe signal intensities and perform differential gene
expression analyses on the microarray data. Raw and processed data from this analysis are
deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository (accession number:
GSE84048).

Results
In order to investigate tumour responses to sunitinib, an orthotopic model of metastatic
breast cancer was set up using 4T1 cells engineered to express luciferase (4T1-luc). This
enabled tumour growth and metastasis to be tracked by bioluminescence. Briefly, 4T1-luc
cells were injected into the 3rd mammary fat pad of female Balb/c mice. The tumours were
grown for 7 days prior to the start of treatment with 40 mg/kg sunitinib, or vehicle only
control. Once tumours reached 1300 mm3 in size, mice were culled and tumours collected.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Daily caliper measurements were performed to track the development of these tumours. This
analysis revealed that whilst untreated tumours grew at a fairly linear rate throughout the
experiment, sunitinib treated tumours appeared to fall into two groups. Some showed no
response to sunitinib treatment and shared a similar growth profile with the untreated
tumours. These were classified as non-responsive. Others had retarded growth for the first 9
days, after which the tumours grew at a similar rate to the other two groups (Figure 1A). In
order to determine whether these two treated groups could be considered distinct, the
distribution of tumour sizes at day 8, the point of greatest disparity between responsive and
non-responsive tumour growth, was investigated for this and subsequent experiments (Figure
1B). This analysis showed that whilst the untreated tumours appeared to follow a close to
normal distribution, the treated group had two populations, one considerably smaller than
the majority of untreated tumours (responsive) and the other with similar tumour size and
distribution to the untreated group (non-responsive). The best point of distinction between
the two groups was determined to be whether they were larger or smaller than 250 mm3 at
day 8, therefore this cut-off point was selected. Of note, the term “responsive”, used here
and later in the manuscript, refers to the cohort from which the tumour is derived, based on
its growth pattern, not its current resistance status. Therefore “responsive” tumours collected
at 1300 mm3 display sunitinib resistant behaviour, but only after an initial sensitive phase.
In summary the experiment generated 3 cohorts of tumours, (i) naïve/ untreated, (ii) those
that showed no response to sunitinib, modelling innate resistance and (iii), those that after an
initial sensitive period became resistant to sunitinib growth inhibition, mirroring the
response pattern of acquired or adaptive resistance, encountered in the clinic.
In order to investigate this further, tumours were harvested at key time and size points for
analysis. The tumours of a cohort of 15 treated and 15 untreated mice were collected at day

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 5

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

9 (the end of the treatment sensitive period in the responsive group) and at 600 mm3 (a size
point at which all initially responsive tumours are growing at the same rate as their untreated
counterparts) (Figure 1D). Of note, in each experiment there was a roughly 60/40% split
between responsive and non-responsive tumours and by log-ranks statistical analysis it was
determined that sunitinib treatment had a significant effect on the time it took responsive
tumours to grow to both 600 mm3 and 1300mm3, versus non-responsive or untreated
tumours, confirming that sunitinib had a significant, if transient, effect on tumour growth,
restricted to the responsive group (Figures 1C and D). In order to reduce the impact of
transient environmental or mouse batch effects on results, the data from each time-point was
collated from three separate experiments, with results consistent between experiments
(Figures 1E).
Differential sunitinib mediated effects on tumour vascular patterning

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Tumours collected at either day 9, 600 mm3 or 1300 mm3 in size were assessed both macroand microscopically for effects of sunitinib treatment on vascular patterning (Figure 2). This
assessment revealed distinct patterns of vascularisation in each cohort. Untreated tumours
appeared macroscopically well vascularised throughout the experiment (Figure 2A) and
showed modest increases in vascularity (% of microscopic tumour area PECAM-1 positive)
(Figure 2B). Responsive sunitinib treated tumours were macroscopically avascular at day 9,
by 600mm3 they had an apparent avascular core, possibly derived from growth up to day 9,
around which was a crest of greater vascularity, which by 1300 mm3 had encompassed the
entire outside of the tumour. Of note, the yellow hue clearly observable on all responsive day
9 tumours, presumably from the accumulation of the yellow drug sunitinib in the tumour,
had disappeared by 600 mm3 in all but one tumour. This suggests that the drug had been
removed or could not gain entry to the core of the tumour at this time point, possibly
contributing to drug resistance (Figure 2A). Intriguingly the non-responsive cohort appeared
to split into two groups, one macroscopically resembling the responsive group (day 9 n=3,
600 mm3 n=2) and another macroscopically resembling the untreated group (day 9 n=3, 600
mm3 n=4). This hinted at a possible further subdivision of cohorts, in that some nonresponsive tumours did not respond to sunitinib at all and appeared to be untreated, whilst
others showed signs of sunitinib induced vascular inhibition but continued to grow
regardless, possibly due to support from their surrounding environment (Figure 2A).
Microscopic assessment of vascular density between the two non-responsive populations
corroborated these observations (Figure 2B). Assessment of the comparative level of
vascularity found in the outer and core regions of 600 mm3 tumours supported observations
made on the macroscopic level, in that untreated tumours had a consistent level of
vascularity, responsive tumours had a clear reduction of vascularity in the core of the tumour
and non-responsive tumours resembled one or the other of these groups (Figure 2C and D).
Sunitinib enhances metastasis in innately resistant tumours
Anti-angiogenic drugs have been reported to enhance tumour metastasis in certain
circumstances (11). The utility of ex vivo bioluminescent imaging of resected organs for
signs of metastasis was investigated as a reliable method for quantifying metastasis. Key
sites of 4T1 metastasis (the liver, lungs and spleen) were probed by both ex vivo
bioluminescent imaging and H&E staining (Figure 3A and B). The apparent metastatic
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 6

burden, from 10 mice where tumours had been harvested at 1300 mm3, was quantified by
each method and correlated. There was a good level of correlation of metastatic burden
between the two approaches on an individual organ level (Figure 3C).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

This analysis revealed that the liver and lungs of mice with non-responsive primary tumours
developed a significantly greater metastatic burden compared to those of both responsive
and untreated cohorts at 1300 mm3, whereas in the spleen the untreated cohort developed the
greatest metastatic burden (Figure 3D).
It is unclear from this analysis whether metastasis in the responsive group is curtailed by
retarded seeding at the sites of metastasis, or by sunitinib induced inhibition of growth once
seeded. A key unknown is the timing of metastasis seeding. In order to investigate this,
longitudinal measurements of primary and secondary lung tumour development were taken
by bioluminescent imaging of mice, where tumours were allowed to develop to 1300 mm3.
Analysis of the primary tumour revealed a similar growth pattern between cohorts to the
caliper measurements (Figure 3E). Assessment of bioluminescence emanating from the lung
area revealed that metastases reach a measurable level markedly earlier in the nonresponsive and untreated cohorts than the responsive cohort (day 14 vs. 18) and that
metastasis develops rapidly in these two cohorts, whereas in the responsive cohort metastasis
growth is slow even once detectable. This suggests that both metastasis seeding and growth
is retarded in the responsive group.
Sunitinib resistance inheritance

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

These metastasis findings beg the question as to whether sunitinib resistance in this model is
induced by environmental factors (as appears to be the case in the responsive group, where
tumours revert to a sensitive state once metastasised) or by the development or existence of
intrinsic drug resistance within the tumour cells themselves (as would be suggested by the
metastatic pattern of the non-responsive tumours). In order to investigate whether tumour
cells removed from their immediate environment maintain resistance, tumours from the
responsive and non-responsive cohorts were removed at 1300 mm3, minced and tumour cells
cultured for two weeks, prior to re-implantation in the mammary fat pad subjection to the
same experimental conditions as before. The resultant tumours derived from the responsive
tumour donor cells displayed an only slightly greater propensity to innate resistance than
tumours derived from naïve 4T1 cells (1/5 vs. 0/5), whereas those derived from an innately
resistant tumour displayed a markedly greater propensity (3/5) (Supplementary figure 1).
These finding could suggest that some level of resistance, intrinsic to the tumour is retained
even after re-implantation in innately resistant tumours, in agreement with the metastasis
data.
Murine tumour endothelial isolation and microarray analysis
In order to investigate the impact sunitinib therapy had on the tumour vessels, endothelium
was isolated from the untreated, responsive and non-responsive cohorts, using anti-PECAM
magnetic bead isolation (Supplementary figure 2A). PECAM-1 is also a marker of a small
subset of leukocytes, therefore RTqPCR was performed on the isolates to confirm specific
endothelial enrichment. Relative expression of markers of leukocytes (CD11b),

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 7

macrophages (CD68), epithelial cells (EPCAM), smooth muscle cells (PDGFRA) and
endothelium (PECAM), was assessed between matched endothelial isolates and endothelial
depleted fractions, by RTqPCR. This analysis confirmed that PECAM expression alone was
enriched 25-30 fold in the endothelial isolates, suggesting very good endothelial enrichment
(Supplementary figure 2B).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Two tumour bulk samples each, from the responsive and untreated cohorts harvested at day 9
and 600 mm3, along with four representative endothelial isolate samples and bulk samples
from each of the responsive, non-responsive and untreated cohorts taken at 1300 mm3, were
selected for microarray transcriptomic analysis (individual growth curves shown in
Supplementary figure 3).
The impact of sunitinib treatment on tumour and endothelial gene expression
Microarray analysis of the selected samples facilitated the transcriptional characterisation of
the tumour and associated endothelium, from naïve (untreated), innately resistant (nonresponsive) and adaptively resistant (responsive) tumours, at key stages of resistance
acquisition (day 9, 600 mm3 and 1300 mm3). This was done by the investigation of the
comparative expression profile between these cohorts, of genes known to be associated with
sunitinib response (Supplementary tables 2 and 3), metastasis (Supplementary tables 4 and
5), and endothelial migration (Supplementary table 6 and Table 1).
Comparative analysis of genes associated with sunitinib response

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

A list of genes associated with sunitinib response was compiled from the Ingenuity online
database and their expression analysed between arrays. This analysis revealed that at day 9,
tumours from the “responsive” cohort displayed an expression profile in line with that
predicted of response to sunitinib therapy, when compared to the untreated cohort. All seven
genes with expression >2 fold changed, were altered in line with predicted sunitinib
response (Supplementary table 2). This response profile was lost however, at later time
points, in line with the loss of sunitinib induced growth retardation in the responsive cohort,
discussed previously.
This analysis when applied to endothelial isolates from the responsive, non-responsive and
untreated cohorts, at 1300 mm3 agreed with the bulk tumour data, as regards the responsive
(but now having acquired resistance) cohort, showing no obvious sensitivity to sunitinib
treatment, in terms of gene expression (Supplementary table 3). Conversely, gene expression
of sunitinib target genes was reduced in the non-responsive cohort, relative to the responsive
cohort, suggesting that despite displaying innate resistance from the outset of the
experiment, in terms of growth profile, on the transcriptomic level the endothelium of this
cohort were more sensitive to sunitinib treatment than the responsive cohort (Supplementary
table 3).
Comparative analysis of genes associated with metastasis
Metastasis signalling in the responsive tumours appeared to be quite strongly inhibited at
day 9, when compared to the untreated cohort at the same time period (Supplementary table
4). Fifteen known or predicted pro-metastatic genes were >2 fold down-regulated by

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 8

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

sunitinib treatment at this stage. Five pro-metastatic genes were >2 fold up-regulated at this
stage in the treated tumours, however, the pattern of signalling was primarily inhibitory to
metastasis. This expression pattern was progressively reversed at subsequent harvesting
points, with a third of >2 fold altered pro-metastatic genes up-regulated at 600 mm3 and
three quarters at 1300 mm3. In the non-responsive cohort too the majority of pro-metastatic
genes >2 fold altered were up-regulated at 1300 mm3, when compared to the untreated
cohort (Supplementary table 5). A number of pro-metastatic genes are also downregulated in
this setting, suggesting the inhibition of certain metastatic pathways, possibly induced by
continued sunitinib sensitivity, in agreement with supplementary table 3. Intriguingly, when
comparing the two treated cohorts, it was the responsive group that displayed the slightly
more pro-metastatic profile, with five genes stimulatory to metastasis, up-regulated in the
responsive group, over the non-responsive cohort. This data overall agrees with the observed
metastatic profile of the tumours discussed previously, with sunitinib initially inhibiting
metastasis up to day 9, and even 600 mm3, but by 1300 mm3 metastasis and the signalling
for it, was enhanced by sunitinib treatment.
Comparative analysis of genes associated with endothelial migration

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In order to explore the effect sunitinib treatment had on pro-angiogenic gene expression over
the course of the experiment, a list of genes known to enhance endothelial migration (a key
component of angiogenesis) was compiled and their expression investigated. At day 9 proangiogenic gene expression was primarily inhibited in the responsive group versus the
untreated group, with the majority of >2 fold altered genes being down-regulated at this
stage, presumably in response to sunitinib angiogenesis inhibition (Supplementary table 6).
This pattern of inhibition was lost at later time points, with even a few pro-angiogenic genes
showing enhanced expression in the treated group. This data is in agreement with the
observed vascularisation patterns reported in Figure 2. At 1300 mm3 genes stimulatory to
endothelial migration were both up and down-regulated in the endothelium of nonresponsive tumours, versus the untreated cohort (Table 1).This suggests that despite the
observed similarity in tumour growth and vascularisation between the groups, the methods
of vascularisation could be quite distinct. Therefore, despite sensitivity to sunitinib
signalling inhibition potentially being maintained, as reported in Supplementary table 3, the
use of alternative angiogenic pathways permits the continued growth and vascularisation of
this cohort. The responsive group on the other-hand displayed an endothelial expression
pattern primarily stimulatory to endothelial migration with the expression of pro-angiogenic
molecules, such as endothelial cell specific adhesion molecule (ESAM), endothelin 1
(EDN1) and pleiotrophin (PTN) enhanced versus the untreated group. Endothelial migration
signalling appears to be enhanced in the responsive group at the 1300 mm3, beyond that
found in the other cohorts, but not via the same alternative pathways utilised by the nonresponsive group.
The selection and validation of acquired resistance markers
In order to investigate and validate this observed up-regulation of sunitinib targeted
pathways and angiogenesis in general, in the vessels of the initially responsive cohort, a
matrix comparing responsive tumour endothelium to untreated tumour endothelium was set
up. This analysis identified a strikingly large number of angiogenic genes >2 fold upCancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 9

regulated in the responsive group, including aquaporin 1 (AQP1) and angiopoietin 2
(ANGPT2) among others (Table 2). Interestingly the RET proto-oncogene and VEGF
receptor 2, targets of sunitinib inhibition were also both up-regulated in the responsive
group, possibly suggesting a mechanism of resistance by the up-regulation of the target
genes (Table 2).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In order to validate the differential expression of the 14 candidate genes arising from the
microarray analysis (Table 2), RTqPCR analysis comparing the expression level of each of
these genes between responsive EC and untreated EC, used for the microarray analysis, was
performed (Table 2). Genes warranting further investigation were selected based on fold
expression change, normalised to β-actin (per cell level) and PECAM-1 (per endothelial cell
level), as well as on gene expression level relative to β-actin. Genes identified by RTqPCR
analysis, with a fold enrichment of >3 times and expressed at >5% of the expression level of
β-actin, were taken forward (Table 2). This left ANGPT2, AQP1, DARC, MMRN2, PRLR
and VEGFR2, as the key genes of interest for further investigation.
Expression changes of candidate markers of acquired resistance over time
In order to investigate the expression of the candidate genes at key stages of tumour
development, in the full set of isolates of different cohorts, RTqPCR was performed on
endothelial isolates from day 9, 600 mm3 and 1300 mm3, in the responsive, non-responsive
and untreated cohorts (Figure 4A). This analysis revealed a significant shift in the expression
of all the candidate genes, except for PRLR, between the responsive and untreated tumour
endothelium at 1300 mm3. Aquaporin-1 alone had an additional significant shift in
expression between the responsive and non-responsive cohorts at 1300 mm3, marking it out
as a key distinguishing gene, enriched in the responsive cohort alone, at this time point.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In order to further validate aquaporin 1 as a specific marker of acquired resistance on the
protein level, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence was conducted, comparing
marker expression in sections cut from responsive, non-responsive and untreated cohort
tumours, harvested at day 9, 600 mm3 and 1300 mm3. The analysis compared the optical
density of marker fluorescence (green channel), normalised to the PECAM-1 fluorescence
(red channel), between the groups of tumour samples. In this way it was confirmed that
AQP1 was enriched in the vessels of responsive tumours specifically at the 1300 mm3 stage
(Figure 4B and C).

Discussion
4T1 tumour cells engineered to express luciferase were used to set up a model of breast
cancer tumour growth and metastasis. The effect daily sunitinib treatment had on these
tumours was investigated. This study identified 4T1 tumours responding to treatment in
three distinct manners. One group were initially sensitive to therapy, with retarded tumour
growth for the first 9 days of treatment, after which tumour growth followed the same rate as
the untreated cohort. These tumours displayed marked devascularisation during the period of
inhibition, and evidence of revascularisation once insensitive. This cohort additionally
displayed significantly reduced metastasis over the period of the experiment. Transcriptomic
analysis of this cohort showed the initial down-regulation of various signalling molecules

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 10

targeted by sunitinib inhibition, angiogenic and metastatic signalling molecule expression
was also reduced relative to the untreated cohort, but only up to day 9. After this point, at the
600 and 1300 mm3 size-points, the downregulation of these pathways was lost or even
reversed. This profile was suggestive of an acquired loss of sensitivity to sunitinib therapy
after day 9, in both tumour growth rate and signalling

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

A second cohort, showed insensitivity to the sunitinib treatment, with no growth retardation
relative to the untreated cohort. This cohort displayed significantly enhanced metastatic
growth in the liver and lungs. Transcriptomic analysis of this group however, showed the
down-regulation of certain signalling molecules in line with sunitinib induced inhibition.
This suggests that the tumours were still sensitive to sunitinib therapy at the 1300 mm3 size
point and that there was an innate redundancy for sunitinib targeted pathways in the growth
and vascularisation of these tumours. This cohort of tumours appeared to utilise a separate,
uninhibited mechanism for continued tumour growth and metastasis and therefore had an
innate resistance to sunitinib therapy which was shown to have some level of heritability
after being re-derived in culture, although greater n-numbers are required to definitively
show this.
The transcriptional profile of acquired and innate resistance

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The existence of a cohort of tumours displaying no response to sunitinib is well established
in the clinic. A recent phase III clinical trial investigating sunitinib in combination with
docetaxel as a treatment for advanced breast cancer, reported a response rate of only 55%
(17), while Barrios et al., 2010 (22) reported an objective response rate of 11% with
sunitinib used as a monotherapy in HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. The
identification of markers that will allow the prediction of which tumours are likely to
respond to sunitinib, has the potential to considerably improve the use and effectiveness of
this drug.
Innate resistance
The angiogenic profile of the non-responsive tumours appeared quite distinct from the
untreated and responsive cohorts. The expression of nine pro-angiogenic genes were at least
2 fold reduced in the non-responsive cohort, including leptin (LEP), the reduction of which,
significantly correlates with response to sunitinib in RCC and prostate cancer (23,24),
chemokine ligand-1 (CXCL1), the release of which is induced by VEGF signalling (25) and
S1P receptor 3, an endothelial mitogen receptor that operates synergistically with PDGFR-β
and is known to be down-regulated by sunitinib treatment in breast cancer (26). This profile
is suggestive of active sunitinib inhibition.
The expression of twelve other proangiogenic genes, were enhanced in the non-responsive
tumours, including pleiotrophin (PTN), an angiogenic cytokine, highly expressed in 60% of
breast cancers (27). Additionally the expression of PTN has been shown to be specifically
enhanced in response to VEGF signalling blockade, in three separate pre-clinical tumour
models (27), suggesting that it may form part of an adaptive response to VEGF targeted
therapies. Intriguingly PTN is additionally up-regulated in the vessels of initially responsive
tumours at 1300 mm3. This suggests that PTN may be playing an important role in

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 11

mediating the evasion of sunitinib angiogenic blockade in both cohorts, either as an acquired
resistance mechanism in the responsive group, or an innate one in the non-responsive group.
The role of PTN in breast cancer resistance to sunitinib warrants further investigation.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), a pro-angiogenic protein kinase, whose
phosphorylation is known to be inhibited by sunitinib (28), was also up-regulated in the nonresponsive cohort. MTOR is known to enhance pro-angiogenic hypoxia inducible factor
(HIF) signalling (29) and therefore may also be playing a role in mediating sunitinib
resistance. Likewise, FGF2, an angiogenic factor extensively associated with antiangiogenic
resistance (reviewed in (11)), was upregulated in the non-responsive cohort specifically.
FGF2 has been shown to directly stimulate endothelial proliferation and capillary tube
formation in the presence of sunitinib (30), suggesting that FGF could be playing a role in
mediating the treatment resistant vascularisation and tumour growth observed in the nonresponsive cohort.
Acquired resistance

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Whereas innately resistant tumours appeared to display a distinct angiogenic expression
profile, leading to insensitivity to sunitinib treatment, tumours that displayed acquired
resistance in this investigation, instead showed initial responsiveness, characterised by the
inhibition of key sunitinib targeted pathways, followed by a gradual reversal of this
inhibition. This resulted not in a transition to the alternate angiogenic profile of the nonresponsive cohort, but rather a loss of sensitivity in the targeted pathways to sunitinib
blockade, leading to constitutive activation. This cohort developed an expression profile
progressively more similar to the untreated cohort. This finding is not without precedent,
Sakai et al., 2013 (31) generated a sunitinib resistant RCC cell line, through prolonged
treatment with sunitinib. They found that the cells acquired resistance via the constitutive
activation of target signal transduction pathways. It is possible then that this phenomenon
was due to mutations in the target pathways, leaving them insensitive to sunitinib inhibition.
This offers a survival benefit to the cells effected and is propagated throughout the tumour.
This mechanism of acquired resistance has been observed in gastrointestinal tumours treated
with sunitinib, but only after approximately a year of response (32). It seems unlikely then
that 9 days would be sufficient time for tumours to acquire such mutations. Additionally,
when these tumours were re-implanted after two weeks in culture they formed treatment
sensitive tumours suggesting this form of resistance is unstable and reversible, in agreement
with (33–35). It is therefore unlikely to be induced by genetic mutations.
The loss of sunitinib signalling sensitivity was coupled in the tumour with the up-regulation
of pro-angiogenic genes. RTqPCR, IHC and IF validation of this profile, identified AQP1,
ANGPT2, DARC, MMRN2 and VEGFR2, to be significantly up-regulated at 1300 mm3, in
the responsive cohort alone and enhanced AQP1 expression to be a distinct marker of
acquired resistance in this experiment.
AQP1 is a widely expressed cell surface water channel, important for water transfer in the
kidney (36), but with a key function in many cells, including endothelium, of allowing the
rapid transit of water across the plasma membrane, facilitating the increase in cellular
volume critical for cell proliferation (37). Increased AQP1 expression has been reported in a
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 12

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

range of solid tumours (38), as well as being shown to correlate with microvessel density in
ovarian cancer (39). Hypoxia and increased hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activity has
been implicated as a key regulator of AQP1 expression in endothelial cells (40). The
responsive tumour specific expression of AQP1 as well as a number of other hypoxia
responsive genes, including ANGPT2 (41) and VEGFR2 (42), may suggest a heightened
level of hypoxia, in this cohort, caused by sunitinib induced vascular inhibition. Hypoxia
therefore, may have played a role in driving the pro-angiogenic profile of expression
observed in the responsive cohort. The role of hypoxia and AQP1 expression in driving the
acquisition of sunitinib resistance warrants further investigation.
The effect of sunitinib therapy on metastasis is dependent on initial tumour response
The presence of tumour metastases are one of the major risk factors for death in all cancers
and anti-angiogenic therapies, including sunitinib, have been implicated in increasing the
risk of this eventuality. Both Yin et al., 2014 (8) and Welti et al., 2012 (9), report enhanced
lung metastasis and tumour infiltration in models of breast cancer. Admittedly the tumour
cells in Welti et al., 2012 (9) were injected intravenously, therefore were already circulating
and did not have to escape the tumour. The observations detailed in this paper further our
understanding.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Metastasis to the liver and lungs was significantly enhanced by sunitinib treatment at the
1300 mm3 stage, but only in the innately resistant cohort. Unlike the responsive cohort,
where metastasis was either unchanged or reduced relative to the untreated cohort, the
majority of the non-responsive cohort displayed no devascularisation. This suggests that
where tumour cell escape is not curtailed by reduced vascularity, tumour cell seeding to
distant organs is enhanced by sunitinib. Some potential mechanisms by which might occur
have been reported including, the up-regulation of angiogenesis and metastasis associated
cytokines and growth factors in response to treatment (43), the mobilisation of bone-marrow
derived cells generating a pre-metastatic niche (44) and finally high dose treatment with
sunitinib has been reported to lead to pericyte depletion, likely through PDGF signalling
inhibition, in lung vasculature, which is correlated with enhanced breast tumour seeding
(45). This latter observation is supported by pericyte depletion studies in which they found
that loss of pericytes in advanced tumours, inhibited growth but enhanced lung metastasis
(46).
Upon seeding metastasis growth from innately resistant tumours also appears to be resistant
to sunitinib inhibition to a far greater level than those from acquired resistance tumours, as
shown by IVIS longitudinal measurements of lung metastasis. This partially agrees with
Guerin et al., 2013 (47), who showed sunitinib to be ineffective when treating established
visceral metastases, formed after removal of the primary tumour, even when the primary
tumours were treatment sensitive.
Intriguingly despite reduced physical metastasis from acquired resistant tumours, metastatic
gene expression was enhanced beyond the other two cohorts. It Is possible that in this
cohort, which shows by some distance the greatest treatment induced restriction on vascular
development, leading to retarded metastasis in the short term, adaption to a metastatic profile

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 13

of expression in strongly selected in the interest of survival and to achieve vascular
sufficiency as described in (11).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

This study describes an approach to investigate and compare different forms of sunitinib
resistance, by assigning treated tumours to groups based on the timing of resistance
acquisition. This allowed an investigation of the contrasting molecular mechanisms
governing innate and acquired resistance to sunitinib and the effect this has on metastasis
development. The broad pattern of the data was that where primary tumour growth was
retarded and vascular production inhibited, metastasis was slowed by sunitinib therapy. On
the other hand, when the primary tumour was non-responsive to treatment the presence of
sunitinib enhanced the tumour metastasis. This data further highlights the need for reliable
markers for the prediction of sunitinib response, as inappropriate treatment could potentially
not only waste resources, but also enhance metastasis.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Financial Support
All authors received funds from the University of Birmingham CRUK Cancer Center.

References

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

1. Gligorov, J., Doval, D., Bines, J., Alba, E., Cortes, P., Pierga, J-Y., et al. Lancet Oncol. Vol. 15.
Elsevier; 2014. Maintenance capecitabine and bevacizumab versus bevacizumab alone after initial
first-line bevacizumab and docetaxel for patients with HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer
(IMELDA): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial; p. 1351-60.
2. Patel NS, Li J-L, Generali D, Poulsom R, Cranston DW, Harris AL. Up-regulation of delta-like 4
ligand in human tumor vasculature and the role of basal expression in endothelial cell function.
Cancer Res. 2005; 65:8690–7. [PubMed: 16204037]
3. Ebos JML, Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: impact on invasion, disease progression, and
metastasis. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:210–21. [PubMed: 21364524]
4. Minckwitz von, G., Minckwitz von, G., Puglisi, F., Puglisi, F., Cortes, J., Cortes, J., et al. Lancet
Oncol. Vol. 15. Elsevier; 2014. Bevacizumab plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone as
second-line treatment for patients with HER2-negative locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer
after first-line treatment with bevacizumab plus chemotherapy (TANIA): an open-label, randomised
phase 3 trial; p. 1269-78.
5. Crown JP, Dieras V, Staroslawska E, Yardley DA, Bachelot T, Davidson N, et al. Phase III Trial of
Sunitinib in Combination With Capecitabine Versus Capecitabine Monotherapy for the Treatment of
Patients With Pretreated Metastatic Breast Cancer. JCO American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2013; 31:2870–8.
6. Barrios C, Liu M, Lee S, Vanlemmens L, Ferrero J, Tabei T, et al. Phase III Randomized Trial of
Sunitinib (SU) vs. Capecitabine (C) in Patients (Pts) with Previously Treated HER2-Negative
Advanced Breast Cancer (ABC). Cancer Res. American Association for Cancer Research. 2009;
69:46–6.
7. Pfizer. Pfizer Discontinues One Sunitinib Phase 3 Trial in Advanced Breast Cancer; Other Advanced
Breast Cancer Trials Continue [Internet]. Pfizer. Springer International Publishing; 2009. Available
from: http://link.springer.com/10.2165/00128415-201013000-00008 [cited 2015 Oct 23]
8. Yin, T., He, S., Ye, T., Shen, G., Wan, Y., Wang, Y. Translational Oncology. Vol. 7. Elsevier; 2014.
Antiangiogenic therapy using sunitinib combined with rapamycin retards tumor growth but
promotes metastasis; p. 221-9.
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 14

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

9. Welti JC, Powles T, Foo S, Gourlaouen M, Preece N, Foster J, et al. Contrasting effects of sunitinib
within in vivo models of metastasis. Angiogenesis. 2012; 15:623–41. [PubMed: 22843200]
10. Kerbel, RS. Breast. Vol. 20 Suppl 3. Elsevier; 2011. Reappraising antiangiogenic therapy for breast
cancer; p. S56-60.
11. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;
8:592–603. [PubMed: 18650835]
12. Roskoski R. Sunitinib: a VEGF and PDGF receptor protein kinase and angiogenesis inhibitor.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications. 2007; 356:323–8. [PubMed: 17367763]
13. Miller KD, Burstein HJ, Elias AD, Rugo HS, Cobleigh MA, Pegram MD, et al. Phase II study of
SU11248, a multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), in patients (pts) with previously
treated metastatic breast cancer (MBC). ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2005; 23:563.
14. Burstein HJ, Elias AD, Rugo HS, Cobleigh MA, Wolff AC, Eisenberg PD, et al. Phase II study of
sunitinib malate, an oral multitargeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in patients with metastatic breast
cancer previously treated with an anthracycline and a taxane. JCO. 2008; 26:1810–6.
15. Curigliano G, Pivot X, Cortés J, Elias A, Cesari R, Khosravan R, et al. Randomized phase II study
of sunitinib versus standard of care for patients with previously treated advanced triple-negative
breast cancer. The Breast. 2013; 22:650–6. [PubMed: 23958375]
16. Crown J, Dieras V, Staroslawska E, Yardley DA, Davidson N, Bachelot TD, et al. Phase III trial of
sunitinib (SU) in combination with capecitabine (C) versus C in previously treated advanced breast
cancer (ABC). ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2010; 28:LBA1011.
17. Bergh J, Bondarenko IM, Lichinitser MR, Liljegren A, Greil R, Voytko NL, et al. First-line
treatment of advanced breast cancer with sunitinib in combination with docetaxel versus docetaxel
alone: results of a prospective, randomized phase III study. JCO. 2012; 30:921–9.
18. Fang L, Lee VC, Cha E, Zhang H, Hwang ST. CCR7 regulates B16 murine melanoma cell
tumorigenesis in skin. Journal of Leukocyte Biology. 2008; 84:965–72. [PubMed: 18519742]
19. Schneider, CA., Rasband, WS., Eliceiri, KW. Nat Meth. Vol. 9. Nature Publishing Group; 2012.
NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis; p. 671-5.
20. Armstrong L-J, Heath VL, Sanderson S, Kaur S, Beesley JFJ, Herbert JMJ, et al. ECSM2, an
endothelial specific filamin a binding protein that mediates chemotaxis. Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology. 2008; 28:1640–6.
21. Yang, YH., Paquet, A., Dudoit, S. marray: Exploratory analysis for two-color spotted microarray
data [Internet]. 2009. R package version. Available from: http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/marray.html [cited 2015 Sep 11]
22. Barrios CH, Liu M-C, Lee SC, Vanlemmens L, Ferrero J-M, Tabei T, et al. Phase III randomized
trial of sunitinib versus capecitabine in patients with previously treated HER2-negative advanced
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010; 121:121–31. [PubMed: 20339913]
23. Ebos JML, Mastri M, Hudson JM, Lee CR, Tracz A, Attwood K, et al. Effect of the timing of
sunitinib administration on the predictive value of biomarkers in renal cell cancer (mRCC). ASCO
Meeting Abstracts. 2015; 33:11096.
24. Dror Michaelson M, Regan MM, Oh WK, Kaufman DS, Olivier K, Michaelson SZ, et al. Phase II
study of sunitinib in men with advanced prostate cancer. Annals of Oncology. 2009; 20:913–20.
[PubMed: 19403935]
25. Lo H-M, Shieh J-M, Chen C-L, Tsou C-J, Wu W-B. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Induces
CXCL1 Chemokine Release via JNK and PI-3K-Dependent Pathways in Human Lung Carcinoma
Epithelial Cells. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2013, Vol 14, Pages 10090–10106.
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 2013; 14:10090–106.
26. Mousseau Y, Mollard S, Faucher-Durand K, Richard L, Nizou A, Cook-Moreau J, et al.
Fingolimod potentiates the effects of sunitinib malate in a rat breast cancer model. Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2011; 134:31–40. [PubMed: 22160641]
27. Lynn KD, Roland CL, Brekken RA. VEGF and pleiotrophin modulate the immune profile of breast
cancer. Cancers (Basel). 2010; 2:970–88. [PubMed: 24281102]
28. Saito Y, Tanaka Y, Aita Y, Ishii KA, Ikeda T, Isobe K, et al. Sunitinib induces apoptosis in
pheochromocytoma tumor cells by inhibiting VEGFR2/Akt/mTOR/S6K1 pathways through
modulation of Bcl-2 and BAD. AJP: Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2012; 302:E615–25.

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 15

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

29. Radulovic S, Bjelogrlic SK. Sunitinib, sorafenib and mTOR inhibitors in renal cancer. J BUON.
2007; 12 Suppl 1:S151–62. [PubMed: 17935273]
30. Welti JC, Gourlaouen M, Powles T, Kudahetti SC, Wilson P, Berney DM, et al. Fibroblast growth
factor 2 regulates endothelial cell sensitivity to sunitinib. Oncogene. 2011; 30:1183–93. [PubMed:
21057538]
31. Sakai I, Miyake H, Fujisawa M. Acquired resistance to sunitinib in human renal cell carcinoma
cells is mediated by constitutive activation of signal transduction pathways associated with tumour
cell proliferation. BJU Int. 2013; 112:E211–20. [PubMed: 23305097]
32. Guo T, Hajdu M, Agaram NP, Shinoda H, Veach D, Clarkson BD, et al. Mechanisms of sunitinib
resistance in gastrointestinal stromal tumors harboring KITAY502-3ins mutation: an in vitro
mutagenesis screen for drug resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:6862–70. [PubMed: 19861442]
33. Tang TC, Man S, Xu P, Francia G, Hashimoto K, Emmenegger U, et al. Development of a
resistance-like phenotype to sorafenib by human hepatocellular carcinoma cells is reversible and
can be delayed by metronomic UFT chemotherapy. Neoplasia. 2010; 12:928–40. [PubMed:
21076618]
34. Zhang, L., Bhasin, M., Schor-Bardach, R., Wang, X., Collins, MP., Panka, D., et al. Resistance of
renal cell carcinoma to sorafenib is mediated by potentially reversible gene expression. In:
Chammas, R., editor. PLoS ONE. Vol. 6. Public Library of Science; 2011. p. e19144
35. Hammers HJ, Verheul HM, Salumbides B, Sharma R, Rudek M, Jaspers J, et al. Reversible
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and acquired resistance to sunitinib in patients with renal cell
carcinoma: evidence from a xenograft study. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:1525–35. [PubMed:
20501804]
36. Maunsbach AB, Marples D, Chin E, Ning G, Bondy C, Agre P, et al. Aquaporin-1 water channel
expression in human kidney. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1997; 8:1–14. [PubMed: 9013443]
37. Galán-Cobo A, Ramírez-Lorca R, Toledo-Aral JJ, Echevarría M. Aquaporin-1 Plays Important
Role in Proliferation by Affecting Cell Cycle Progression. J Cell Physiol. 2015
38. Mobasheri A, Airley R, Hewitt SM, Marples D. Heterogeneous expression of the aquaporin 1
(AQP1) water channel in tumors of the prostate, breast, ovary, colon and lung: a study using high
density multiple human tumor tissue microarrays. Int J Oncol. 2005; 26:1149–58. [PubMed:
15809704]
39. Yang JH, Shi YF, Chen XD, Qi WJ. The influence of aquaporin-1 and microvessel density on
ovarian carcinogenesis and ascites formation. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006; 16 Suppl 1:400–5.
[PubMed: 16515633]
40. Tanaka A, Sakurai K, Kaneko K, Ogino J, Yagui K, Ishikawa K, et al. The role of the hypoxiainducible factor 1 binding site in the induction of aquaporin-1 mRNA expression by hypoxia. DNA
Cell Biol. 2011; 30:539–44. [PubMed: 21612401]
41. Tsuzuki T, Okada H, Cho H, Shimoi K, Miyashiro H, Yasuda K, et al. Divergent regulation of
angiopoietin-1, angiopoietin-2, and vascular endothelial growth factor by hypoxia and female sex
steroids in human endometrial stromal cells. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2013; 168:95–
101. [PubMed: 23352606]
42. Collet G, Lamerant-Fayel N, Tertil M, Hafny-Rahbi El B, Stepniewski J, Guichard A, et al.
Hypoxia-regulated overexpression of soluble VEGFR2 controls angiogenesis and inhibits tumor
growth. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:165–78. [PubMed: 24170768]
43. Ebos JML, Lee CR, Christensen JG, Mutsaers AJ, Kerbel RS. Multiple circulating proangiogenic
factors induced by sunitinib malate are tumor-independent and correlate with antitumor efficacy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2007;
104:17069–74. [PubMed: 17942672]
44. Okazaki T, Ebihara S, Asada M, Kanda A, Sasaki H, Yamaya M. Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor promotes tumor angiogenesis via increasing circulating endothelial progenitor cells and
Gr1+CD11b+ cells in cancer animal models. Int Immunol. 2006; 18:1–9. [PubMed: 16352631]
45. Welti JC, Powles T, Foo S, Gourlaouen M, Preece N, Foster J, et al. Contrasting effects of sunitinib
within in vivo models of metastasis. Angiogenesis. 2012; 15:623–41. [PubMed: 22843200]

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 16

46. Keskin D, Kim J, Cooke VG, Wu C-C, Sugimoto H, Gu C, et al. Targeting vascular pericytes in
hypoxic tumors increases lung metastasis via angiopoietin-2. Cell Rep. 2015; 10:1066–81.
[PubMed: 25704811]
47. Guerin E, Man S, Xu P, Kerbel RS. A model of postsurgical advanced metastatic breast cancer
more accurately replicates the clinical efficacy of antiangiogenic drugs. Cancer Res. 2013;
73:2743–8. [PubMed: 23610448]

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 17

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 1. Sunitinib treated 4T1 tumours display both acquired and innate resistance.

A, Tumour growth curves from the initial sunitinib drug trials, with endpoint set at 1300
mm3 (mean ± SEM ). Measurements begin one week after tumour inoculation and on the
day sunitinib treatment began. Subsequent experimental endpoints were set based on these
growth curves and their intersections with this data are shown. B, histogram plot showing
the distribution of tumour sizes at day 8 of treatment. Sunitinib treated tumours exceeding
250 mm3 in size were identified as falling into the non-responsive cohort. Sunitinib
treatment significantly retards growth of responsive tumours. C & D, Kaplan-Meier

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 18

comparative analysis of time to endpoint of tumours grown to 600 mm3 and 1300 mm3. Log
ranks statistical analysis of significant results is shown. E, spider plot of the growth curves
of all tumours used in the experiment. Throughout this figure n-numbers are as shown and
tumour cohorts are coloured as follows (Responsive – blue, Non-responsive – red, Untreated
– green).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Sunitinib treatment reduces vascularity and impacts vascular patterning of 4T1
tumours.

A, representative images of tumours from each cohort and experimental endpoint, showing
macroscopic vascular patterning, not to scale. Avascular regions marked with arrows. B, bar
chart of vascular density of tumours from each cohort and experimental endpoint,
determined by the average percentage of PECAM immunofluorescent staining across 10
fields of view (mean ± SEM, Mann-Whitney, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, n-numbers: Day 9,
responsive (RE)=9, non-responsive 1 (NR 1)=3, non-responsive 2 (NR 2)=3, untreated
(UT)=15; 600mm3, RE=9, NR 1=2, NR 2=4, UT=15; 1300mm3, RE=13, NR=7, UT=18.).
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 20

C, representative images of immunofluorescent PECAM-1 staining in the core and outer
regions of tumours from each cohort of tumours, taken at 600 mm3. D, bar chart of vascular
density in the core and outer regions of tumours from each cohort, taken at 600 mm3,
determined by the average percentage of PECAM immunofluorescent staining across 5
fields of view (mean ± SEM, statistics and n-numbers as in B).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 21

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 3. Sunitinib treatment enhances 4T1 tumour metastasis, but only in the innately resistant
setting.

A, representative image of liver, spleen and lung whole organs undergoing bioluminescent
imaging by the IVIS (overlay of blue-green-red colouring represents bioluminescence of
increasing intensity. B, representative images of H&E staining of 4T1 tumour and metastasis
in spleen, lungs and liver (metastasis marked by white arrows). Scale bar = 100 μm. C,
correlation between metastatic burden, as determined by measurement of average metastatic
area across 10 fields of view, in organs stained by H&E and by whole organ bioluminescent
pixel density, in spleen, liver and lung tissues (mean ± SEM, n=10). D, distribution plots of
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 22

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

bioluminescence from each organ and cohort at the 1300 mm3 endpoint. Cohorts are
coloured as follows (Responsive – blue, Non-responsive – red, Untreated – green). The level
of background auto-fluorescence measured by imaging of organs from mice with no tumour
is also displayed (dashed line). Statistical analysis: Mann-Whitney, *** p<0.001, * p<0.05.
E, longitudinal bioluminescent quantification of primary and secondary lung tumour
development, generated by bioluminescent imaging of the whole mouse with regions of
interest drawn over the tumour and lung areas (mean ± SEM, n-numbers as displayed).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 23

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. Aquaporin is significantly enriched in the vessels of responsive tumours over those of
untreated and non-responsive tumours.

A, RTqPCR for the relative expression of the six genes of interest in endothelial isolates
from untreated, responsive and non-responsive tumours harvested at 9 days, 600 mm3 and
1300 mm3 (mean expression ±SEM, *** p<0.001, * p<0.05, NS – Not Significant, MannWhitney). B, representative images of AQP1 staining in untreated, responsive and nonresponsive tumours by immunofluorescence (IF). Black and white split channel and colour
merged channel images of tumours triple stained by IF for DAPI (nuclei, blue), PECAM-1
(vessels, red) and AQP1 (green). C, quantitation of pixel density of staining by IF for AQP1
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 24

standardised to PECAM-1 staining (mean ± SEM, *** p<0.001, * p<0.05, Mann-Whitney,
n-numbers: Day 9, responsive (R)=5, non-responsive (NR)=5, untreated (UT)=10; 600mm3,
R=4, NR=6, UT=10; 1300mm3, R=12, NR=7, UT=17, 10 fields of view each).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 25

Table 1

Expression change of genes that enhance endothelial migration in EC isolates from tumours harvested at 1300

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

mm3. Log2 fold change in gene expression shown.
Gene ID

Leptin

Gene symbol

GeneBank accession no.

Effect on
endothelial
migration

Nonresponsive
vs.
Untreated
EC

Responsive
vs.
Untreated
EC

Nonresponsive
vs.
Responsive
EC

LEP

NM_008493

Increased

-2.24

-0.11

-2.08

SH2D2A

NM_021309

Increased

-2.09

0.02

-1.96

Interleukin 17A

IL17A

NM_010552

Increased

-1.91

-0.54

-1.29

Colony stimulating factor 2

CSF2

NM_009969

Increased

-1.53

-0.90

-0.56

Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2

PTGS2

NM_011198

Increased

-1.42

-0.46

-0.97

Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1

CXCL1

NM_008176

Increased

-1.31

-0.39

-0.91

Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 3

S1PR3

NM_010101

Increased

-1.31

0.10

-1.41

Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12

CXCL12

NM_001012477

Increased

-1.28

0.86

-2.14

Hyaluronan synthase 3

HAS3

NM_008217

Increased

-1.16

0.04

-1.16

GATA binding protein 1

GATA1

NM_008089

Increased

-1.14

-0.78

-0.31

ELN

NM_007925

Increased

-1.07

0.02

-1.07

IGFBP3

NM_008343

Increased

-1.03

0.57

-1.60

SH2 domain protein 2A

Elastin
Insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 3
Thrombomodulin

THBD

NM_009378

Increased

-0.79

0.68

-1.49

PTP4A3

NM_008975

Increased

-0.78

0.22

-1.00

PLEKHG5

NM_001004156

Increased

-0.76

0.51

-1.27

Bone morphogenetic protein 6

BMP6

NM_007556

Increased

-0.70

0.49

-1.12

Phosphodiesterase 2A, cGMP-stimulated

PDE2A

NM_001143848

Increased

-0.64

0.52

-1.15

PGF

NM_008827

Increased

-0.61

0.39

-1.01

Melanoma cell adhesion molecule

MCAM

NM_023061

Increased

-0.37

0.69

-1.08

Endothelial cell-specific adhesion
molecule

ESAM

NM_027102

Increased

-0.35

1.07

-1.45

Endothelial-specific receptor tyrosine
kinase

TEK

NM_013690

Increased

-0.26

0.81

-1.14

Nitric oxide synthase 3, endothelial cell

NOS3

NM_008713

Increased

-0.22

0.78

-1.11

Phospholipase C, gamma 1

PLCG1

AK169695

Increased

0.06

1.05

-1.05

Endothelin 1

EDN1

NM_010104

Increased

0.07

1.02

-1.00

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 4a3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Pleckstrin homology domain containing,
G5

Placental growth factor

Gastrin releasing peptide

GRP

NM_175012

Increased

0.49

-0.73

1.05

MTOR

NM_020009

Increased

1.03

0.18

-0.01

Arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase

ALOX12

NM_007440

Increased

1.06

0.63

0.47

Nuclear factor of activated T cells C3

NFATC3

NM_010901

Increased

1.12

-0.14

1.40

Integrin alpha 4

ITGA4

NM_010576

Increased

1.12

-0.07

1.19

5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
receptor 7

HTR7

FM178516

Increased

1.15

0.03

1.10

Tenascin N

TNN

NM_177839

Increased

1.17

0.32

0.88

Mechanistic target of rapamycin

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Wragg et al.

Page 26

Gene ID

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Gene symbol

GeneBank accession no.

Effect on
endothelial
migration

Nonresponsive
vs.
Untreated
EC

Responsive
vs.
Untreated
EC

Nonresponsive
vs.
Responsive
EC

Activating transcription factor 2

ATF2

NM_001025093

Increased

1.18

-0.01

1.21

Heparanase

HPSE

NM_152803

Increased

1.19

0.43

0.74

Pleiotrophin

PTN

NM_008973

Increased

1.19

1.54

-0.45

CCBE1

NM_178793

Increased

1.22

-0.09

1.33

ID1

NM_010495

Increased

1.28

0.67

0.58

FGF2

AY027558

Increased

1.35

-0.02

1.33

TDGF1

NM_011562

Increased

1.89

-0.24

2.14

Collagen and calcium binding EGF
domains 1
Inhibitor of DNA binding 1
Fibroblast growth factor 2
Teratocarcinoma-derived growth factor 1

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
AQP1
RET

Aquaporin 1

Ret proto-oncogene

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.
ECSCR
TSPAN7
STC2
ESAM
MMRN2
VEGFR2

Endothelial cell surface expressed
chemotaxis regulator

Tetraspanin 7

Stanniocalcin 2

Endothelial cell-specific adhesion
molecule

Multimerin 2

Vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 2
EDN1

LEPR

Leptin receptor

Endothelin 1

DARC

Duffy blood group, chemokine
receptor

ANGPT2

PTN

Pleiotrophin

Angiopoietin 2

PRLR

Gene Symbol

Prolactin receptor

Gene ID

NM_010104

NM_010612

NM_153127

NM_027102

NM_011491

NM_019634

NM_001033141

NM_001122899

NM_010045

NM_007426

NM_001080780

NM_007472

NM_008973

NM_011169

GeneBank accession no.

2.03

2.06

2.06

2.1

2.12

2.25

2.25

2.3

2.3

2.34

2.4

2.76

2.91

4.32

Fold change

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.01

P-value

Microarray

3.04

4.69

3.23

2.49

27.22

0.5

1.86

5.44

6.79

5.75

9.02

4.93

2.25

9.81

β-actin vs. target
fold expression
change

2.41

3.49

2.59

1.74

18.02

0.64

1.7

3.75

5.66

3.57

7.85

4.19

2.72

10.2

PECAM vs. target
fold expression
change

RTqPCR

1.98

11.65

11.58

10.33

0.04

0.03

0.89

2.26

30.83

41.39

0.27

240.42

0.01

5.23

Expression level
relative to β-actin
(%)

VEGFR2

MMRN2

DARC

ANGPT2

AQP1

PRLR

Selected genes

Genes significantly enriched in the microarray analysis of endothelial isolates from responsive vs. untreated tumours harvested at 1300 mm3. RTqPCR
selection of genes of interest for further analysis is also shown. Gene expression was normalised to β-actin and PECAM (n=4). Selected genes exhibited
>3 fold enrichment in responsive tumours normalised to both β-actin and PECAM and had at least 5% of the expression of β-actin. Rejected genes are
highlighted in black.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Table 2
Wragg et al.
Page 27

