Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dietary pterostilbene is a novel MTA1-targeted chemopreventive
and therapeutic agent in prostate cancer
Swati Dhar1,*, Avinash Kumar1,*, Liangfen Zhang1,2, Agnes M. Rimando3, Janice M.
Lage2, Jack R. Lewin2, Azeddine Atfi1,4, Xu Zhang5, Anait S. Levenson1,2,6
1

Cancer Institute, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA

2

Department of Pathology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA

3

 nited States Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Natural Product Utilization Research Unit, University,
U
MS, USA

4

Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA

5

Center of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA

6

 urrent affiliation: Arnold and Marie  Schwartz College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Long Island University, Brooklyn,
C
NY, USA

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: A
 nait S. Levenson, e-mail: alevenson@umc.edu, anait.levenson@liu.edu
Keywords: pterostilbene, prostate cancer, chemoprevention, therapy, MTA1
Received: October 09, 2015	

Accepted: January 29, 2016	

Published: March 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Overexpression of the epigenetic modifier metastasis-associated protein 1
(MTA1) is associated with aggressive human prostate cancer. The purpose of this
study was to determine MTA1- targeted chemopreventive and therapeutic efficacy of
pterostilbene, a natural potent analog of resveratrol, in pre-clinical models of prostate
cancer. Here, we show that high levels of MTA1 expression in Pten-loss prostate
cooperate with key oncogenes, including c-Myc and Akt among others, to promote
prostate cancer progression. Loss-of-function studies using human prostate cancer
cells indicated direct involvement of MTA1 in inducing inflammation and epithelialto-mesenchymal transition. Importantly, pharmacological inhibition of MTA1 by
pterostilbene resulted in decreased proliferation and angiogenesis and increased
apoptosis. This restrained prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) formation in
prostate-specific Pten heterozygous mice and reduced tumor development and
progression in prostate-specific Pten-null mice. Our findings highlight MTA1 as a
key upstream regulator of prostate tumorigenesis and cancer progression. More
significantly, it offers pre-clinical proof for pterostilbene as a promising lead natural
agent for MTA1-targeted chemopreventive and therapeutic strategy to curb prostate
cancer.

INTRODUCTION

remodeler, metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) [4],
which correlates with higher grade tumor, recurrence,
metastasis and poor prognosis [5–11]. MTA1 acts as a part of
the NuRD co-repressor complex that is involved in histone
deacetylation and gene silencing [4]. Alterations in MTA1
expression or regulation leads to deregulated chromatin,
changes in gene transcription and/or inappropriate gene
silencing [12].
Increased nuclear expression of MTA1 is associated
with high Gleason score, aggressive disease, recurrence,
and bone metastasis in human prostate cancer [8–10]. Our
studies with prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts have

Besides the role of genetic alterations in cancer,
substantial data support the idea that dietary/lifestyle
factors affect cancer initiation, promotion and progression
through epigenetic alterations [1, 2]. Along these lines,
anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant epigenetic dietary
agents are of great interest for cancer prevention and
treatment, particularly for slow growing and age-related
prostate cancer, for which diet is a risk factor [3].
One of the known epigenetic alterations in various
cancers is overexpression of the master chromatin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18469

Oncotarget

highlighted the functional relevance of MTA1 in promoting
tumor growth, invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis [9, 13].
While the exact molecular mechanisms that govern MTA1
activity in cancer are poorly understood, our group and
others have showed that MTA1 can elicit anti-apoptotic
effects through p53 deacetylation [14, 15] or pro-angiogenic
actions via positive regulation of VEGF expression [9, 16].
In MTA1-expressing xenografts, we detected significantly
higher tumor growth in PTEN-deficient LNCaP mice compared to the PTEN-expressing DU145-xenografts
[9]. This observation coupled with our recent findings of
PTEN’s deacetylation by MTA1 [17] prompted speculation
that MTA1 might cooperate with PTEN loss for the
establishment and progression of prostate cancer.
Although the link between diet, cancer and
epigenetics is complex, epigenetic dietary agents are of
great interest for cancer prevention and treatment [18].
Previously, we have shown that dietary stilbenes, commonly
found in grapes and blueberries, inhibit MTA1 expression
and function in prostate cancer [9, 13, 15]. Pterostilbene
(PTER), a potent natural trans-3,5-dimethylether analog
of resveratrol, based on its superior pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties [13, 19–22] appears the
strongest candidate for clinical development.
In the current study, we evaluated the MTA1targeted efficacy of pterostilbene in autochthonous prostate
cancer pre-clinical models that harbor prostate-specific
Pten heterozygous (Pb-Cre4; Pten+/f, hereafter referred
as Pten+/f) and Pten knockout (Pb-Cre4; Ptenf/f, hereafter
referred as Ptenf/f), which represent chemoprevention and
intervention scenarios, respectively. We found that Pten
loss resulted in a marked increase in MTA1 expression
leading to activation of MTA1-dependent oncogenic and
tumor progression-related signaling pathways. Importantly,
pterostilbene both as dietary supplementation and
interventional daily injections, through targeting MTA1
and its tumor promoting network, inhibited inflammation,
proliferation and angiogenesis and induced apoptosis. These
actions of pterostilbene resulted in reduction of prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) lesions and adenocarcinomas
in precancerous Pten+/f and cancer-prone Ptenf/f models,
respectively. We believe that our present findings of
chemopreventive and therapeutic efficacy of an epigenetic
dietary agent pterostilbene as a novel MTA1-targeted
strategy, may have potential clinical applications in prostate
cancer management.

system. Based on our previous studies suggesting a
possible inverse relationship between MTA1 and PTEN
[9, 17], we hypothesized that MTA1-targeted therapy
would be effective for blocking Pten loss-driven prostate
tumor growth and progression.
To assess the possible involvement of MTA1 in
Pten loss-driven prostate tumorigenesis, we examined
MTA1 levels in prostate tissues from Pten+/f, which
exhibit precancerous PIN at 8-10 months of age [23]. We
found that loss of only one Pten allele was sufficient to
substantially increase MTA1 both at protein and mRNA
levels (Figure 1A–1C), suggesting that MTA1 may be
involved in the initiation stage of prostate cancer.
Given that MTA1 has transcriptional co-repressor
and co-activator functions [11, 24, 25], we hypothesized
that MTA1 upregulation could transcriptionally perturb
various genes and assist tumorigenesis promoting
pathways. Our MTA1 ChIP-Seq analysis using prostates
from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice identified 38,000 peaks,
including key oncogenes such as c-Myc, Akt1, Ets2,
Notch2, CyclinD1 and Hsp90 [26–31] (Supplementary
Table S1). Immunoblot analysis showed increased protein
expression for these molecules as well as an increase in
AR and TGFβ1 levels in the Pten+/f prostates compared to
normal prostates (Figure 1B). Quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) showing upregulation of Akt1, c-Myc, Ets2
and Hsp90 mRNA validated these genes as transcriptional
targets of MTA1 (Figure 1C).
In the Ptenf/f (Pten-null) mice, which mimic
stage-defined progression of human prostate cancer
[23], we found an age-dependent increase in MTA1
expression along with expected increased levels of p-Akt
as compared to their normal counterparts (Figure 1D
and 1E), suggesting a strong correlation with the
progression of prostate cancer. This notion has been
supported by our previous studies of human specimens,
in which MTA1 overexpression was correlated with
prostate cancer progression, aggressiveness and metastasis
[9, 10]. Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of the Ptennull prostates showed high MTA1 expression not only in
the multilayers of luminal epithelial cells but also in the
reactive stroma (Figure 1D). Since several factors and
cytokines, including NF-κB (p65), IL-1β, and Hsp90 have
been implicated either in MTA1 regulatory network or
induction of reactive stroma or both [32–34], we found
that concomitant with MTA1, the expression of these
proteins was increased with continued tumor development
(Figure 1E), suggesting a pro-inflammatory role for
MTA1 in both the tumor and reactive stroma. Moreover,
the expression of E-cadherin (an epithelial marker) was
downregulated along with upregulation of Vimentin
(a mesenchymal marker) (Figure 1E), indicating the
involvement of MTA1 in epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of prostate cancer cells. Importantly,
NF- κB (p65), IL-1β, Hsp90, E-cadherin and Vimentin
were among the target gene promoters identified in our
MTA1 ChIP-Seq analysis (Supplementary Table S1).

RESULTS
Pten loss-induced MTA1 upregulation promotes
prostate tumorigenesis and progression
We chose prostate-specific Pten-loss mouse models,
represented by Pten heterozygous (Pten+/f) and Pten-null
(Ptenf/f) mice that are most suitable for testing novel
chemopreventive and therapeutic options due to close
resemblance to the human disease and an intact immune
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18470

Oncotarget

To gain insights into the mechanistic basis for
the MTA1 upregulation in Pten loss-driven prostate
tumorigenesis and tumor progression, we studied the effects
of MTA1 knockdown in the human prostate cancer cell lines,
LNCaP and DU145. We found a reduction in NF-κB (p65),
IL-1β, and Vimentin and upregulation of E-cadherin protein
levels in MTA1 knockdown (shMTA1) prostate cancer cells
(Figure 2A and 2B), suggesting direct involvement of MTA1
in inflammation and EMT in prostate cancer. Likewise,
we detected a reduction in the levels of c-Myc, CyclinD1,
Notch2, Ets2, and Hsp90 both at protein and mRNA levels
in shMTA1 cells (Figure 2A and 2B), suggesting a role for
MTA1 upstream to the critical oncogenes c-Myc, Notch2
and Ets2. As expected, we found an activation of the Akt
survival signaling pathway [23], which was accompanied
by changes in AR levels in Pten+/f and Ptenf/f mice
(Figure 1A, 1B and 1D, 1E). The upregulation of Akt at both
mRNA and protein levels was concomitant with increased
MTA1 in the murine prostates (Figure 1B, 1C and 1E).
Since Akt1 was among the MTA1 target promoters in the
MTA1 ChIP-Seq analysis (Supplementary Table S1), we
hypothesized possible direct association between MTA1 and
Akt. Indeed, MTA1 depletion in Pten-deficient LNCaP cells
led to partial inactivation of Akt through downregulation of

Akt mRNA and protein (Figure 2B, top and 2C). Besides,
inhibition of the Akt pathway by phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002 led to reduced MTA1
protein and mRNA in PC3M cells (Figure 2D and 2E).
Akt pathway is known to promote the stability of c-Myc
protein [35], an identified transcriptional activator of MTA1
[36, 37]. We found that inhibition of Akt pathway led to a
reduction in c-Myc protein levels (Figure 2D) but not mRNA
(data not shown). On the other hand, the downregulation of
MTA1 by LY294002 was both at protein and mRNA levels
(Figure 2D and 2E), suggesting that the Akt may positively
regulate MTA1 at the transcriptional level by promoting
the stability of c-Myc protein (Figure 2F). Together, these
results suggest a direct positive crosstalk between MTA1
and Akt pathway independent of PTEN.
To ascertain the clinical significance of our findings,
we investigated the correlation between MTA1 and PTEN
in human prostate cancer by analyzing the expression of
MTA1 and PTEN mRNA in the GSE41967 dataset [38]
from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. We
observed a significant inverse correlation between MTA1
and PTEN that became stronger with severity of the disease
as evidenced by the increased Gleason scores (Figure 3A).
Moreover, as expected, we found a significant positive

Figure 1: MTA1 promotes the Pten loss-driven prostate tumorigenesis and cancer progression. (A) Comparison of H & E

and IHC of MTA1, p-Akt and PTEN in the prostates from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice and Cre-negative normal prostate (NP) controls. Scale
bars, 100 μm. (B) Immunoblots of MTA1, PTEN, p-Akt, Akt, AR, c-Myc, CyclinD1, TGFβ1, Notch2, Ets2, and Hsp90 and (C) qRT-PCR
analysis of MTA1, Akt1, c-Myc, Ets2 and Hsp90 mRNA levels in the prostate tissues from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice compared to NP
controls. (D) Comparison of H & E, MTA1, and p-Akt staining in the prostate tissues from 10-week-old Ptenf/f mice and NP controls. Scale
bars, 100 μm. (E) Immunoblots of MTA1, p-Akt, Akt, AR, NF-κB (p65), IL-1β, Hsp90, E-cadherin (E-cad) and Vimentin in the prostate
tissues from Ptenf/f mice compared to NP controls, isolated at the ages mentioned. Hsp70 was used as a loading control. qRT-PCR data
represent the mean ± SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05 (two-tailed, two-sample t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18471

Oncotarget

correlation between MTA1 and AKT1 (Figure 3B, top) and
no correlation between MTA1 and AR (Figure 3B, bottom)
in the same dataset.
Collectively, these data support a central role
of MTA1 and MTA1-dependent signaling, including
novel MTA1-Akt and MTA1-c-Myc feed-forward loops
(Figure 2F), as significant drivers of Pten-loss induced
prostate tumorigenesis and cancer progression suggesting
potential benefits of MTA1-targeting approaches.

PIN, however mice on PTER-diet showed 50% reduction
in the number of glands involved in PIN (Figure 4B
and Supplementary Table S2) and more favorable
histopathology with restored normal ductal structures
accompanied by higher PTEN protein expression, as evident
by H & E and PTEN staining (Figure 4C).
In the Pten-null model, by 10 weeks of age, 67%
of the Ptenf/f mice contained regions of pre-invasive
adenocarcinoma with enlarged, hardened prostates, which
progressed to invasive adenocarcinoma by 25–33 weeks of
age in all the mice examined but shrank upon pterostilbene
treatment as evident by gross anatomy (Figure 4D, top
and middle), ex vivo images of dissected prostatic lobes
(Figure 4D, bottom), and UGS weights (Figure 4E).
Overall, 64% of the vehicle-treated mice exhibited preinvasive or invasive adenocarcinoma whereas daily 10
mg/kg pterostilbene treatment reduced the incidence of
adenocarcinomas to 12% and halted the progression at PIN
stage (Figure 4F and 4G and Supplementary Table S3). As
seen in Figure 4G and Supplementary Figure S2, vehicletreated mice developed enlarged prostates characterized by
disorganized glandular structures, which contained regions
of cribriform carcinoma with signs of microinvasion (loss
of the basal layer (SMA) and CK8-positive luminal cells
that escaped into reactive stroma). In contrast, PTER-treated
mice mostly showed characteristics of PIN, which retained a
basal layer of SMA-positive cells and CK8-positive luminal
cells along with residual hypercellularity. We did not find

Pterostilbene diminishes prostate cancer
initiation, growth and progression in prostatespecific Pten loss mouse models
In chemoprevention modality, Pten+/f mice were
fed phytoestrogen-free AIN 76A diet supplemented with
pterostilbene (100 mg/kg diet) for 8–10 months while in
intervention modality Pten f/f mice were treated with daily
pterostilbene (10 mg/kg bw) i.p. injections and monitored
for prostate lesions at 6, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 33 weeks of age.
Gross anatomy (Figure 4A, top) and ex vivo images
(Figure 4A, middle) of urogenital system (UGS) as well as
dissected prostatic lobes (Figure 4A, bottom) from mice on
PTER-Diet clearly indicated smaller prostates relative to
controls while differences in food intake were not significant
and the pterostilbene supplemented diet did not have any
adverse effects on the mice (Supplementary Figure S1).
All mice by 8–10 months of age developed high grade

Figure 2: MTA1 directly regulates key molecular drivers of tumor promotion. (A) Immunoblots of MTA1, NF-κB (p65),

IL-1β, Hsp90, E-cadherin (E-cad), Vimentin, c-Myc, Cyclin D1, Notch2, and Ets2 in LNCaP (left) and DU145 (right) cells expressing
(EV) and silenced for MTA1 (shMTA1). (B) qRT-PCR of MTA1, Ets2, Akt1, Notch2, c-Myc, Cyclin D1 and Hsp90 mRNA levels in
LNCaP (top) and DU145 (bottom) EV and shMTA1 cells. (C) Immunoblot of MTA1, p-Akt and Akt in LNCaP EV and shMTA1 cells.
(D) Immunoblot of p-Akt, Akt, c-Myc and MTA1 and (E) qRT-PCR of MTA1 mRNA levels in PC3M cells treated with vehicle (DMSO)
and LY (LY294002). (F) Proposed mechanism involved in Pten loss-induced upregulation of MTA1, exhibiting the MTA1-Akt and MTA1c-Myc feed-forward signaling loops (blue arrows), putative Akt-MTA1 link (dotted arrow). β-actin was used as a loading control. qRT-PCR
data represent the mean ± SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 (two-tailed, two-sample t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18472

Oncotarget

any lymph node metastasis even in mice aged over one
year, by examining in total 34 renal and iliac lymph nodes
of control or treated mice (Supplementary Figure S3).
To determine whether pterostilbene reaches the
target tissue, we analyzed pterostilbene concentrations in
prostate tissues, as well as in the serum, from Pten+/f and
Ptenf/f mice. We found accumulation of pterostilbene in the
prostates from both mouse models, with apparent greater
accumulation when administered i.p. (Supplementary
Table S4), suggesting that high lipophilicity, membrane
permeability and metabolic stability of pterostilbene [19–21]
secure its potent biological activity in vivo.

analysis by qRT-PCR demonstrated elevated PTEN and
decreased MTA1 mRNA levels in the prostate tissues from
mice on PTER-diet (Figure 5C), suggesting transcriptional
regulation of MTA1 by pterostilbene with consequent
decreased MTA1 occupancy of PTEN promoter (Figure 5D
and Supplementary Table S1). This is consistent with
known MTA1-PTEN relationship [17, 39].
Since there is a direct relationship between MTA1
and Akt (Figure 1B and 1C and Figure 2A and 2B),
pterostilbene prevents the activation of Akt pathway, at
least in part, by targeting MTA1 and thereby decreasing
MTA1 occupancy of Akt1 promoter (Figure 5D). Moreover,
pterostilbene reverses the MTA1-associated perturbation of
key oncogenes as demonstrated by the decreased levels
of c-Myc, CyclinD1, Notch2, Ets2 and Hsp90 proteins
in the prostate tissues (Figure 4A) through decreased
MTA1 occupancy of these target promoters (Figure 5D
and Supplementary Table S1). In addition, prostates from
mice on PTER-Diet exhibited downregulation of TGFβ1, a
well-known upstream activator of MTA1 [40] (Figure 4A).
Interestingly, although independent from MTA1,
pterostilbene also downregulated the AR levels (Figure 5A
and 5B), further strengthening its potential as a suitable
chemopreventive agent to reduce the risk of prostate cancer.
To further investigate the lobe-specific differential
impact of pterostilbene treatment, we performed
immunoblot analysis using right anterior (APR), left

Pterostilbene targets Pten loss-induced MTA1
upregulation and its associated signaling
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible
for pterostilbene efficacy, we examined its effects on MTA1
expression in prostate tissues from Pten+/f and Ptenf/f mice.
We found downregulation of MTA1 protein levels in Pten+/f
prostates (Figure 5A and 5B). Remarkably, these prostate
tissues showed elevated levels of PTEN protein (Figure 5A
and Supplementary Figure S4C), highlighting the potential
of dietary epigenetic therapy to restore the expression as
well as the activity of the remaining PTEN allele, which
can be further gauged by decreased p-Akt levels (Figure 5A
and 5B). Additionally, PTEN and MTA1 gene expression

Figure 3: GEO analyses for correlation of MTA1 with PTEN, AKT1 and AR. GSE41967 study of human prostate tissues

(n = 639)[38] was used. Scatter plot depicting (A) strong negative correlation between MTA1 and PTEN (r = −0.349, whole cohort), which
becomes stronger with increased Gleason score (r = −0.299, Gleason < 7; r = −0.348, Gleason = 7; r = −0.433, Gleason > 7, p < 0.001);
(B) positive MTA1 correlation with AKT1 expression (r = 0.499, whole cohort, p < 0.001); and no correlation between MTA1 and AR
(r = 0.021, whole cohort. p = 0.592). p values were calculated using two-tailed one-sample z-test for a correlation coefficient.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18473

Oncotarget

anterior (APL) and dorso-latero-ventral (DLV) prostatic
lobes from Pten+/f mice on control and PTER diet along
with Cre-negative (NP) mice (Figure 5E and 5F). In normal
prostates, MTA1 was detected at very low levels in the
lobes. In contrast, MTA1 was highly expressed in all lobes
of Pten+/f with various intensities, the highest being detected
in APL. Importantly, the increase in MTA1 levels in all lobes
in Pten heterozygous mice was profoundly inhibited by
pterostilbene (Figure 5E and 5F). Pterostilbene treatment
also inhibited p-Akt and AR levels, with the effects most
evident in AP.
In the intervention strategy with cancer-prone
Pten-null mice, in which progressive increase in MTA1
levels were associated with age-related aggressiveness
of prostate cancer (Figure 1E), we found a substantial
decrease in MTA1 levels in response to pterostilbene
treatment at any ages examined by immunoblotting or
IHC (Figure 6A and 6C and Supplementary Figure S4).
Moreover, the downregulation of MTA1 by pterostilbene
significantly altered the MTA1-dependent expression of pro-

inflammatory IL-1β and Hsp90, and E-cadherin (Figure 6A),
possibly through decreased MTA1 occupancy of these
gene promoters (Figure 6B). Importantly, pterostilbene
intervention inhibited MTA1-associated maintenance
of already highly activated Akt pathway (Figure 6A and
Supplementary Figure S5). Here again, pterostilbene
treatment showed downregulation of AR levels (Figure 6A
and 6C). In the context of prostate lobes, once again, MTA1
was highly expressed in all lobes of Ptenf/f prostates with
various intensities, and the highest fold increase, compared
to normal prostates, was observed in the anterior lobes
(Figure 6D and Supplementary Figure S5). Age and
progression related increases in MTA1 were inhibited on an
average by 50% in all prostatic lobes of mice treated with
pterostilbene (Figure 6D and Supplementary Figure S5).
Pterostilbene had less consistent p-Akt-inhibitory
effects in different lobes; yet, remarkably the effect was
mostly evident in the APL, in which MTA1 inhibition by
pterostilbene was most significant. It is quite possible that
one of the mechanisms of pterostilbene inhibition of the

Figure 4: Pterostilbene reduces PIN formation in Pten+/f and blocks progression to adenocarcinoma in Ptenf/f mice.
(A) Gross anatomy (top) and ex vivo images (middle) of urogenital system (UGS) and dissected prostate lobes (APR, right anterior; APL,
left anterior, and DLV, dorso-latero-ventral) (bottom) of the representative prostates from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice on phytoestrogen
free AIN76 diet (Ctrl-Diet) and 100 mg/kg diet supplementation with pterostilbene (PTER-Diet). (B) Percentage of prostate glands from
10-month-old Pten+/f mice on Ctrl− (n = 6) and PTER-Diet (n = 7) involved in high grade mouse PIN (mPIN). p < 0.001 (Fisher’s exact test).
(C) Comparison of H & E prostate histology and PTEN staining in representative 10-month-old mice with NP and Pten+/f mice on Ctrl− and
PTER-Diet. Scale bars, 100 μm. (D) Gross anatomy of the representative UGS from 10-week-old (top) and 33-week-old (middle) Ptenf/f
mice treated with vehicle (DMSO) and 10 mg/kg bw PTER. Representative images of dissected prostate lobes of Ptenf/f mice (bottom).
(E) Comparison of UGS weights of vehicle or PTER treated Ptenf/f mice, isolated at the indicated ages (n = 3/group). *p < 0.05 (two-tailed,
two-sample t-test). (F) Incidence of mPIN, pre-invasive and invasive adenocarcinoma (AC) in Ptenf/f mice treated with vehicle (n = 19)
and PTER (n = 18). p < 0.01 (Fisher’s exact test). (G) Comparison of H & E, smooth muscle actin (SMA) and cytokeratin 8 (CK8) staining
from representative 6-, 10- and 25-week-old mice with NP and vehicle or PTER treated Ptenf/f mice. Arrows indicate loss of SMA staining
and CK8 positive luminal cells in the stroma of vehicle treated Ptenf/f mice as signs of invasiveness. Scale bars, 100 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18474

Oncotarget

Akt pathway in these mice is through MTA1. Finally, AR
levels were also markedly reduced in the prostates from
the pterostilbene-treated group compared to control mice
(Figure 6D and Supplementary Figure S5).
Altogether, diet with pterostilbene supplementation
or daily pterostilbene injections in Pten+/f and Ptenf/f
immunocompetent pre-clinical mouse models, respectively,
reduced the profoundly elevated MTA1 levels and inhibited
the coordinate expression of multiple components of
MTA1 tumor-promoting signaling, demonstrating the
in vivo efficacy of pterostilbene as a MTA1-targeted
chemopreventive and intervention strategy.

involve inhibition of proliferation and induction of
apoptosis. The number of Ki-67 positive tumor cells was
decreased by about three fold in mice on pterostilbene
diet (Figure 7A, top and 7B, left) and about three to five
fold in mice of different ages injected with pterostilbene
(Figure  8A and 8B, top and Supplementary Figure S6).
Moreover, immunostaining and immunoblot analyses for
cleaved Caspase-3 showed that apoptosis in prostate tissues
from mice on pterostilbene diet was substantially increased
(four to five-fold) (Figure 7A, bottom and 7B, right and 7C).
Notably, pterostilbene treatment in the Pten f/f mice also
exhibited a marked and an age-dependent increase in
cleaved Caspase-3 (Figure 8C and 8D), indicative of
prolonged treatment benefits.
Since we found p21 and p27, known key regulators
of proliferation and apoptosis [41–43] among the targets
identified from MTA1 ChIP-Seq analysis (Supplementary
Table S1), we demonstrated low levels of p21 and p27
in Pten+/f prostate tissues (Figure 7D, left), which was
rescued by pterostilbene diet (Figure 7D, right) due to a
decreased occupancy of MTA1 onto p21 and p27 promoter

Pterostilbene reduces MTA1-induced cellular
proliferation and angiogenesis, and promotes
MTA1-dependent apoptosis in Pten loss-driven
prostate cancer
The restoration of a more favorable histopathology by
pterostilbene in both Pten+/f and Ptenf/f mice through MTA1
targeting and its associated signaling may functionally

Figure 5: Inhibition of MTA1 and its associated signaling by pterostilbene (PTER) in Pten+/f mice. (A) Immunoblots of

MTA1, PTEN, p-Akt, Akt, AR, c-Myc, CyclinD1, TGFβ1, Notch2, Ets2, and Hsp90 of prostate tissues from representative 10-month-old
Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. Hsp70 was a loading control. (B) Comparison of MTA1, p-Akt and AR IHC staining of the prostate
sections from representative 10-month-old Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. NP, normal prostate. Scale bars, 100 μm. (C) qRT-PCR
of PTEN and MTA1 mRNA levels in prostate tissues from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. Data are mean ± SEM
(n = 3), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 (two-tailed, two-sample t-test). (D) Comparative analysis of MTA1 binding in the prostate tissues of Pten+/f
mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. Representative MTA1 ChIP-Seq tracks for Pten, Akt1, c-Myc, CyclinD1, Notch2, Ets2 and Hsp90 gene
loci at 10 kb resolution are shown. (E) Quantitation of MTA1, p-Akt/Akt and AR expression in prostate lobes of 10 month-old Pten+/f
mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet (see F). Data represent the mean ± SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 (two-tailed, two-sample t-test).
(F) Immunoblots of MTA1, p-Akt, Akt and AR in the dissected prostatic lobes (APR, right anterior; APL, left anterior, and DLV, dorsolatero-ventral) from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. Hsp70 was used as a loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18475

Oncotarget

(Figure 7E). Further, we validated the upregulation of these
molecules at protein and mRNA levels in MTA1 knockdown
human prostate cancer cells (Figure 7F and 7G).
We previously reported that resveratrol/pterostilbene
suppressed the MTA1-dependent decrease in acetylation
of p53, which led to decreased apoptosis in prostate cancer
[13, 15]. In Ptenf/f prostates, we found age-dependent increased
p53 acetylation together with induction of pro-apoptotic Bak
upon pterostilbene treatment (Figure 8E and 8F).
Finally, consistent with our previous reports
on the link between MTA1 and angiogenesis [9, 13]
and our current finding of VEGF-C as a MTA1 target
(Supplementary Table S1), pterostilbene treatment led
to decreased hemangiogenesis and lymhangiogenesis, as
evident by CD31 and VEGF-C immunostaining (Figure
8A, middle and bottom and 8B, bottom and Supplementary
Figure S6). In addition to the already observed direct link
between MTA1 and the pro-angiogenic factor IL-1β [44]
(Figure 1E and Figure 2A) and its reversal by pterostilbene
treatment (Figure 6A), ChIP-Seq analysis showed decreased
MTA1 occupancy of VEGF-C promoter upon pterostilbene
treatment (Figure 8G). Taken together, these results
demonstrate that pterostilbene treatment inhibits tumor cell

proliferation and angiogenesis and induces apoptosis in
Pten-loss prostate tumors, at least in part, due to inhibition
of MTA1.

DISCUSSION
Here, we report on a previously unknown
mechanism-based importance of the chromatin modifier
MTA1 in Pten loss-driven prostate tumors. Mechanistically,
we demonstrated that aberrant overexpression of MTA1
resulted in activation of MTA1-dependent transcriptional
signatures that promote proliferation, inflammation,
invasion and survival of cancer cells (Figure 9). Importantly,
we demonstrated that pharmacological inhibition of MTA1
and its associated network by a natural dietary compound
pterostilbene, exhibited chemopreventive and therapeutic
efficacy as evident by the decreased severity of PIN and
prevention of progression to carcinoma in pre-clinical Ptenloss mouse models of prostate cancer.
Our data appear highly clinically relevant because
they support the concept that patients with deregulated
PTEN/Akt pathway, which comprise 21–42% of prostate
cancer patients [45], most likely have overexpression of

Figure 6: Inhibition of MTA1 and its associated signaling by pterostilbene (PTER) in Ptenf/f mice. (A) Immunoblots of

MTA1, p-Akt, Akt, AR, IL-1β, Hsp90 and E-cadherin (E-cad) in the prostate tissues of vehicle and PTER treated Ptenf/f mice, isolated at
indicated ages. Hsp70 was a loading control. (B) Comparative analysis of MTA1 binding in the prostate tissues of Pten+/f mice on Ctrland PTER-Diet. Representative MTA1 ChIP-Seq tracks for IL-1β, E-cadherin and Vimentin gene loci at 10 kb resolution are shown.
(C) Comparison of IHC staining of MTA1, p-Akt and AR in the prostate sections with carcinoma lesions from representative 10-, 25- and
33-week old vehicle or PTER treated Ptenf/f mice and NP controls. Scale bars, 100 μm. (D) Immunoblots of MTA1, p-Akt, Akt and AR in
the dissected prostate lobes from vehicle or PTER-treated 10-, 15-, 20- and 25-week-old Ptenf/f mice. Hsp70 was used as a loading control.
For quantitation of MTA1, p-Akt/Akt and AR expression in prostate lobes of Ptenf/f mice at different ages (n =3/group) see Supplementary
Figure S5.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18476

Oncotarget

MTA1 and may benefit from MTA1-targeted therapy.
Moreover, since increased levels of MTA1 is associated
with increased Akt activity and PI3-kinase inhibitors also
target MTA1 (Figure 2D), combinatorial therapy using
pterostilbene and PI3-kinase inhibitors may be considerably
more effective.
Results from our ChIP-Seq analysis identified
oncogenic c-Myc, Cyclin D1, Ets2, Akt1 and Notch2, proinflammatory Hsp90, pro-lymphangiogenic VEGF-C, and
pro-apoptotic p27 as novel transcriptional targets of MTA1,
revealing its ability to simultaneously activate multiple
tumor-promoting pathways. The findings of the direct link
between MTA1 and pro-lymphangiogenic VEGF-C, which
promotes tumor metastasis to distant organs [46, 47], one
more time emphasizes the importance of MTA1 in the
promotion of prostate cancer metastasis to distant organs
such as bone [9, 13]. Results from ChIP-Seq analysis define
MTA1 as a key upstream epigenetic driver in prostate
cancer initiation and progression. Notably, pterostilbene
reduced MTA1 occupancy of all target promoters as evident
by resulting lower binding peaks.
We previously reported on the ability of MTA1 to
regulate activation of the PTEN/Akt pathway through
deacetylation of PTEN [17]. Others have reported MTA1

transcriptional repression of PTEN [39]. Here, we confirmed
the inverse relationship between MTA1 and PTEN on the
transcriptional level, and also identified MTA1 binding
to PTEN promoter by ChIP-Seq analysis. The rescue of
PTEN mRNA and protein expression in Pten+/f mice upon
pterostilbene-mediated downregulation of MTA1 conveys
the feasibility of therapeutically attractive approaches for
PTEN re-activation by epigenetic-targeted agents.
One of the most striking observations in our models
was that MTA1 levels were dramatically increased not
only in prostate epithelial cells but also in reactive stroma.
While there is a well-established association between
inflammation, reactive stroma and prostate cancer [48],
the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Our study
demonstrate the possible role of MTA1 in epithelial-stromal
interaction. Importantly, since the oncogenic potential of
MTA1 might also be linked to other cell types in the reactive
stroma, the anti-inflammatory effects of pterostilbene
mediated through MTA1-associated NF-ĸB, IL-1β, Hsp90
may play an important additive beneficiary role in its
antitumor activity.
Although both MTA1 and AR had similar patterns
of behavior, we did not find any direct evidence indicating
that overexpression of MTA1 could contribute to the

Figure 7: Pterostilbene significantly inhibits MTA1-dependent cell proliferation and induces MTA1-targeted apoptosis
in Pten+/f mice. (A) Representative Ki-67 (top) and cleaved Caspase-3 (bottom) staining of prostate tissues from 10-month-old Pten+/f

mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. Scale bars, 100 μm (Ki-67) and 50 μm (cleaved Caspase-3). (B) Quantitation of Ki-67 (left) and cleaved
Caspase-3 (right) positive cells of prostate tissues from 10-month-old Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet (n = 5/group). (C) Immunoblots
of total and cleaved Caspase-3 in prostate tissues of 10-month-old Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. (D) Immunoblots of p21 and p27 in
the prostate tissues of 10-month-old Pten+/f mice compared to NP controls (left) and mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet (right). (E) Comparative
analysis of MTA1 binding in the prostate tissues of Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet. Representative ChIP-Seq tracks for p21 and p27
gene loci at 10 kb resolution are shown. (F) Immunoblots of p21 and p27 in LNCaP (top) and DU145 (bottom) cells expressing (EV) and
silenced for MTA1 (shMTA1). (G) qRT-PCR of p21 and p27 mRNA levels in cells expressing MTA1 and silenced for MTA1 (shMTA1).
Data are mean ± SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 (two-tailed, two-sample t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18477

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Pterostilbene significantly inhibits MTA1-dependent cell proliferation and angiogenesis and induces MTA1targeted apoptosis in Ptenf/f mice. (A) Representative Ki-67 (top, each panel), CD31 (middle, each panel) and VEGF-C (bottom, each
panel) staining of the prostate tissues from Ptenf/f mice treated with vehicle and PTER, at indicated ages. Arrows indicate vessels. Scale
bars, 100 μm. (B) Quantitation of Ki-67 (top) and CD31 (bottom) positive cells of prostate tissues from mice treated with vehicle and PTER
(n = 5/group). (C) Representative images and (D) Quantitation of cleaved Caspase-3 staining at the indicated ages of vehicle and PTER
treated Ptenf/f mice (n = 5/group). Scale bars, 10 μm. Data are mean ± SEM (n = 3), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 (two-tailed, twosample t-test). (E) Immunoblots of MTA1, Ac-p53, p53 and Bak in the prostate tissues from vehicle and PTER treated Ptenf/f mice, isolated
at the indicated ages. NP, normal prostate. Hsp70 was used as loading controls from prostate tissues. (F) Densitometry of the Ac-p53/p53
ratio from the representative blot. (G) Comparative analysis of MTA1 binding in the prostate tissues of Pten+/f mice on Ctrl- and PTER-Diet.
Representative MTA1 ChIP-Seq tracks for Vegf-c gene locus at 10 kb resolution are shown.

Figure 9: Schematic representation of MTA1-targeted effects of pterostilbene in prostate cancer. Significantly increased

levels of MTA1, a key upstream epigenetic regulator, promote inflammation, tumorigenesis, EMT, angiogenesis, and survival signaling and
repress apoptosis. Pterostilbene (PTER) targets MTA1 and MTA1-guided molecular drivers of tumor promotion, thereby blocking the Pten
loss-driven prostate tumorigenesis and cancer progression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18478

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

activation of AR signaling. Importantly, the inhibitory
effects of pterostilbene on AR levels in both luminal cells
and reactive stroma represent additional beneficiary factor,
which potentially defines favorable histopathology of the
lesions upon pterostilbene exposure. Our studies in human
prostate cancer cells also demonstrated inhibitory effects
of pterostilbene on AR levels [49]. This data reason that
combined inhibition of MTA1 and AR by pterostilbene
provides for its maximal efficacy in Pten deficient tumors.
The concept of “epigenetic therapy” for cancer has
developed during the last two decades [50, 51], and efforts
were largely driven towards the development of inhibitors
of druggable epigenetic enzymes such as inhibitors of DNA
methylation or histone deacetylation [50]. Limited studies
are available on targeting other epigenetic regulators, such
as epigenetic readers and transcription factors [52]. Our
serendipitous finding of MTA1 as a new molecular target of
resveratrol and its analogs [13, 15] opened opportunities for
further pre-clinical validation of the efficacy of pterostilbene
as natural epigenetic therapy in prostate cancer. Others
have also demonstrated anticancer effects of pterostilbene
in prostate cancer through multiple mechanisms, which
include reduction of prostate-specific antigen, promotion
of apoptosis, alteration of cell cycle and inhibition of cell
growth [53–55]. While the improved bioavailability of
pterostilbene and its distribution in various tissues has
been reported [19–22], we, for the first time, detected
accumulation of pterostilbene in the prostate tissues,
providing evidence that pterostilbene reaches the target
organ. This finding may be clinically relevant since the
dosage we used both in diet and i.p. was roughly equivalent
to the reported non-toxic and effective doses in rodents
[20, 56, 57] and human [58, 59].
In summary, using clinically relevant disease models
of prostate cancer, we demonstrated the MTA1-targeted
chemopreventive and therapeutic efficacy of pterostilbene.
We also identified panel of MTA1-guided molecules that
are responsive to pterostilbene treatment and, therefore,
can be utilized not only as prognostic but also as predictive
biomarkers, with some of them having the feasibility of
being detected in the blood (IL-1β, VEGF). Our findings
offer a solid foundation to endorse chemopreventive
and interventional clinical trials with pterostilbene for
personalized targeted prostate cancer management. Thus,
it is likely that targeting MTA1 and MTA1-associated
molecular and cellular events by dietary pterostilbene in
the high-risk population and patients with early stages of
prostate cancer, i.e. patients on active surveillance with
deregulated MTA1, could be the most needed immediate
chemopreventive strategy. Moreover, in the future, as
other pharmacological inhibitors of MTA1 such as HDAC
inhibitors [15] or PI3-kinase inhibitors (Figure 2D)
are validated in vivo, combinatorial strategies with
pterostilbene can be considered for more effective but less
toxic therapeutic approaches in targeted patient population
with advanced disease.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Reagents
Phytoestrogen-free AIN 76A diet was obtained from
Research Diets, Inc. Pterostilbene was synthesized according
to protocol described previously [60]. The structure was
confirmed by spectroscopy. The purity of pterostilbene was
determined to be > 99. 9%. Pterostilbene powder was shipped
to Research Diets, Inc for formulation of pterostilbene
supplemented AIN 76A diet at a concentration of 100 mg/kg
diet. Upon receiving pterostilbene supplemented diet, it was
aliquoted into separate portions, sealed in aluminum foil and
kept at 4°C until use. For injections, pterostilbene (10 mg/kg
bw) was suspended in 10% DMSO, freshly every day and
kept in dark until use.

Cell culture
Human prostate cancer cells, LNCaP, DU145
(ATCC) and PC3M (a gift from Dr. Bergman, Northwestern
University) were cultured in RPMI1640 (Life Technologies)
containing 10% FBS and antibiotics at 37°C and 5% CO2.
Establishment of prostate cancer cell lines with stable
MTA1 knockdown (MTA1shRNA) has been described
and characterized previously [13, 15]. All cell lines were
last authenticated using short tandem repeat profiling at
Research Technology Support Facility, Michigan State
University in 2014. Cells were tested for mycoplasma using
the Universal Mycoplasma Detection Kit (ATCC).

Generation of prostate-specific Pten
heterozygous and knockout mice
Animal housing, care and treatments were in
accordance with approved protocol #1272A by Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee of UMMC. During the
study, animals were permitted free access to drinking
water and food, and were monitored daily for their general
health. C57BL/6J mouse homozygous for the “floxed”
allele of Pten gene (Pten f/f) was purchased from Jackson
Laboratories and bred with Pb-Cre4 male from the B6.Cg
genetic background (NCI mouse repository) that specifically
express Cre recombinase in the prostate epithelium [23].
Tail-genotyping was performed using the following primers:
PTEN geno olMR9554F:5′-CAA GCA CTC TGC GAA
CTG AG-3′; PTEN geno olMR9555R:5′-AAG TTT TTG
AAG GCA AGA TGC-3′ with wt band of 156 bp and mutant
band of 328 bp; and Cre F: 5′-TCG CGA TTA TCT TCT
ATA TCT TCA G-3′; Cre R: 5′-GCT CGA CCA GTT TAG
TTA CCC-3′ with a band of 393 bp. PCR was performed
on an Eppendorf thermocycler. We used male Pb-Cre4;
Pten+/f prostate-specific heterozygous mice (abbreviated as
Pten+/f in the text and figures) in experiments with dietary
supplementation of pterostilbene, and male Pb-Cre4; Ptenf/f
prostate-specific knockout mice (abbreviated as Ptenf/f in
18479

Oncotarget

the text and figures) in experiments with i.p. injections of
pterostilbene. Normal prostates (NP) from Cre-negative;
Pten+/f or Cre-negative; Ptenf/f were processed as normal
controls.

AP (APR) and the entire dorso-latero-ventral (DLV) lobe]
was done under dissecting microscope. Tissues were
homogenized, and protein lysates were made using RIPA
buffer. For histological analysis the urogenital system was
fixed with 10% neutral-buffered formalin (see below). For
visualization and isolation of lymph nodes, 15-week-old
mice and older were anesthetized with 2.0% isoflurane,
and 5% Evans Blue dye (Sigma-Aldrich) was injected
s.c. into the mouse hind footpad [63]. After 30 min, mice
were euthanized with CO2 and dissected to locate lymph
nodes of interest. The blue-labeled iliac and renal lymph
nodes were removed, washed in PBS and fixed with 10%
neutral-buffered formalin. To check for gross metastasis, a
laparotomy was performed. Necropsy notes were collected
for all animals with descriptions of the prostate, seminal
vesicles, bladder and other organs or tissues showing any
abnormalities. In addition, photographs were made of gross
anatomy of mice urogenital systems. At the end, blood was
collected and serum was obtained by centrifugation and
stored at −80°C.

Dose calculations
In our previous study with orthotopic prostate cancer
xenografts, we extrapolated the dose from resveratrol
chemopreventive studies in human colorectal cancer
[61] by using Body Surface Are (BSA) formula for dose
translation [62] and demonstrated that both resveratrol and
pterostilbene had anticancer and antimetastatic effects at
50 mg/kg/day, i.p. administration, with higher accumulation
of pterostilbene in serum. Bearing in mind known higher
bioavailability of pterostilbene and lower weight of pups
used in the current study, we finalized pterostilbene dose
at 10 mg/kg bw per day, i.p. for this study. In addition,
we accumulated circumstantial data with higher doses of
pterostilbene (25, 50 and 100 mg/kg bw). For the calculation
of concentration of pterostilbene in the diet, we used DD =
(SD × BW)/FI formula (Research Diets, Inc) where, DD is
Diet Dose (mg compound/kg Diet); SD is Single Dose (mg
compound/kg bw/day); BW is Body Weight (g bw/animal)
and FI is Daily Food Intake (g Diet/day). We finalized
pterosilbene dose at 100 mg/kg diet.

Histopathology and immunohistochemistry
Tissue paraffin embedding, sectioning and H & E
staining were performed by the Histology Core facility,
Department of Pathology, UMMC. Sections (4 µm) were
prepared from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissues and
mounted on slides. Histological sections were prepared by
hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining and were evaluated
independently by two pathologists (JML and JRL) who
were blinded to the treatment. Immunohistochemistry was
performed as described previously [9, 13] using antibodies
against Ki-67, CK8, SMA, MTA1, pAkt, PTEN, AR, CD31;
VEGF-C and cleaved caspase-3 (see “Antibodies” section),
the Vectastain ABC Elite Kit and the ImmPACT DAB kit
(Vector Laboratories). Images were viewed and recorded
on Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope. The ImageTool software
was used to count positively-stained cells in five randomly
selected fields.

Treatment
After series of carefully designed breeding strategies
and genotyping, we collected Pten+/f male mice, which
after simple randomization, were maintained on AIN 76A
(n = 21) and AIN 76A diet supplemented with pterostilbene
(n = 30) until sacrifice (chemoprevention design). For an
intervention study we procured a total of 64 Ptenf/f male
mice maintained on AIN76A diet and employed by simple
randomization with slightly larger allocation probability for
treatment group. Mice were treated five days per week i.p
with either 10% DMSO (vehicle control, n =31) or 10 mg/kg
bw of pterostilbene (n = 33). The animals were started on
treatment immediately after weaning for either 3 weeks
(6 week-old), 7 weeks (10 week-old), 12 weeks (15 weekold), 17 weeks (20 week-old), 22 weeks (25 week-old) or
30 weeks (33 week-old). As an overall control, an additional
group of littermates with Cre- negative Pten+/f or Ptenf/f
genotype, which possess normal prostates were also put on
AIN 76A diet. Necropsy was performed at 8–10 months for
Pten+/f and respective time points (3–30 weeks of treatment)
for Ptenf/f mice.

RNA analysis
Mouse prostates and cell pellets were harvested and
immediately stored in RNA later (Sigma-Aldrich) at −80°C
until analysis. Prostate tissues were homogenized, after
which total RNA fraction was isolated using the RNeasy
mini kit (Qiagen). The quality of the RNA was determined
on a Bio-Rad Experion analyzer. PCR was performed on a
CFX96 Real Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad) using
the primer sequences given in Supplementary Table S5, and
fold changes in gene expression was determined using the
2−ΔΔCt method [64].

Mouse procedures
At the time of sacrifice, an abdominal midline
incision was made and lower urogenital tract, including
prostate, seminal vesicles and bladder was removed en
bloc and washed with cold PBS. Dissection of different
lobes of each prostate [left anterior prostate (APL); right
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunoblot analysis
Lysates were prepared from homogenized prostate
tissues and the cell lines in the RIPA buffer containing
18480

Oncotarget

Tissue/serum analysis of PTER concentrations
by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry
(GC-MS)

protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher
Scientific). 70 μg of protein was loaded in 10–15% SDSPAGE and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride
(PVDF) membranes. Membranes were incubated in 5%
nonfat dry milk/TBST blocking buffer for 1 h at room
temperature, followed by an overnight incubation at 4°C in
the presence of corresponding antibodies (see “Antibodies”
section). Membranes were washed with TBST and incubated
in the presence of HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies.
Signal detection was carried out using SuperSignal West
Dura chemiluminescent substrate (ThermoFisher Scientific).
Signal quantitation was conducted with Image J software
(http://rsb.info.nih/gov/nih-image/).

Prostate tissues and serum samples were collected at
sacrifice, and kept at −80°C until analysis. Extraction of
pterostilbene from prostate tissues was performed following
method in Dias et al. [10]. Analysis of pterostilbene in the
extract was performed by GC-MS according to published
procedures [13]. Extraction and analysis of pterostilbene
in the serum was performed according to published
procedures [13].

ChIP-Seq experiments and analysis

Antibodies

Pten+/f mouse prostates were isolated as described
above and 200 mg of tissue was used to perform ChIP-Seq
with MTA1 Ab (Bethyl Laboratories, A300-911A, 4 μg)
at Active Motif. Reads were aligned to the mouse genome
(mm 10). Peak calling was performed using the SICER
algorithm at a cutoff of FDR1E-10. The numbers of peaks
identified was about 38,000 and 33,000 for MTA1 (Ctrl and
PTER, respectively). The ChIP- Seq profiles presented were
generated using the UCSC Genome browser.

Antibodies to the following markers were used
for IHC and Western blots: rabbit MTA1 (D40D1)
(Cell Signaling Technologies, #5647, 1:50 for IHC,
1:1000 for western blotting); rabbit p-Akt (D9E) (Cell
Signaling Technologies, #4060, 1:50 for IHC, 1:1000 for
western blotting); rabbit PTEN (D4.3) (Cell signaling
Technologies, #9188, 1: 125 for IHC, 1:1000 for western
blotting); rabbit AR (N-20) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies,
sc-816, 1:500 for IHC, 1:500 for western blotting);
rabbit cleaved caspase-3 (D175)(5A1E) (Cell Signaling
Technologies, #9664, 1:100 for IHC, 1:1000 for western
blotting); rabbit Ki-67 (SP6) ( Abcam, ab16667, 1:100 for
IHC); rabbit SMA (Abcam, ab5694, 1:800 for IHC); rabbit
CK8 (EP16284) (Abcam, ab53280, 1:800 for IHC), rabbit
CD31 (SP-38) (Novus Biologicals, NBP1-49805, 1:500
for IHC); rabbit VEGF-C (Novus Biologicals, NB11061022, 1:100 for IHC). The following antibodies were
used for western blot analysis: rabbit Akt (C67E7) (Cell
Signaling Technologies, #4691, 1:1000); rabbit Hsp70
(W27) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-24, 1:1000); rabbit
Hsp90 (H-114) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-7947,
1:1000); rabbit Ac-p53 (Abcam, ab61241, 1:100); mouse
p53 (3H2820) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-71821,
1:100); mouse Bak (G-23) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies,
sc-832, 1:100); rabbit Vimentin (D21H3) (Cell Signaling
Technologies, #5741, 1:1000), rabbit E-cadherin (24E10)
(Cell Signaling Technologies, #3195, 1:1000); goat IL1β (C-20) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-1250, 1:200),
rabbit NF-κB p65 (H-286) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies,
sc-7151, 1:200); rabbit p21 (C-19) (Santa Cruz
Biotechnologies, sc-397, 1:100); mouse p27 (F-8) (Santa
Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-1641, 1:100) , mouse Ets2 (E5) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-365666, 1:200); rabbit
TGF-β1 (V) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-146, 1:200);
rabbit c-Myc (N-262) (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, sc-764,
1:200), mouse hybridoma Notch2 (Developmental Studies
Hybridoma Bank, University of Iowa, C651.6DbHN,
1:1000) and mouse Cyclin D1(BD Bioscience, #554180,
1:500).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Echo MRI analysis
Pten+/f male mice on Ctrl-Diet (n = 21) and on
PTER-Diet (n = 30) were individually housed for weekly
determination of body weight and body composition
starting at 3 months of age until 12 months of age in order
to examine any effect of pterostilbene diet supplementation
on body weight regulation. Body composition was assessed
weekly using magnetic resonance imaging (EchoMRI900TM, Echo Medical System) to quantify lean mass, fat
mass, free water and total water content in conscious mice.

GEO database analysis
We downloaded the raw expression dataset,
GSE41967 [38] from GEO website. The base-2 logarithm
transformation was applied to the raw expression data.
The transformed expression data were further quantile
normalized. Each pair of the selected genes were depicted in
the scatter plots. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient
was used for correlation assessment to accommodate the
skewed distributions. The associated p value was calculated
based on the null hypothesis of no correlation. We used the
Bioconductor and the “normalize.quantiles” function in the
“preprocessCore” package to process the expression data.

Statistical analysis
The histograms were depicted to assess the normality
of continuous outcomes. The differences in continuous

18481

Oncotarget

outcomes between the control and experimental groups
were evaluated using the two-sample t-test, as well as
the Welch’s t-test when data exhibited unequal variances
between the two groups. The Fisher’s exact test was used
to evaluate the effect of pterostilbene on cancer incidence.
In power analysis it was determined that use of 18 mice
in each of the vehicle control and pterostilbene injected
groups would yield 86% power for confirming a significant
association, under the assumption that the vehicle control
and pterostilbene injection would be associated with 60%
and 10% of adenocarcinoma incidence rates, respectively.
Power analysis on mPIN incidence suggested that 7 mice
per group and 80 glands per mouse would yield 95% of
power for confirming a significant association, under the
assumption that glands in the control and pterostilbene
groups would be associated with 20% and 12% of mPIN
incidence rate, respectively. The experiment of comparing
the mRNA levels between the control and experimental
groups involved multiple genes. The p values were not
adjusted for multiple testing because our study of the
gene effects was exploratory in nature. All p values were
two-sided and p values less than 0.05 were considered as
significant.

methylation, epigenetics, and prostate cancer. Front Biosci.
2007; 12:4254–4266.
  3.	 Powell IJ, Meyskens FL, Jr. African American men and
hereditary/familial prostate cancer: Intermediate-risk
populations for chemoprevention trials. Urology. 2001;
57:178–181.
  4.	 Xue Y, Wong J, Moreno GT, Young MK, Cote J, Wang W.
NURD, a novel complex with both ATP-dependent
chromatin-remodeling and histone deacetylase activities.
Mol Cell. 1998; 2: 851–861.
  5.	 Jang KS, Paik SS, Chung H, Oh YH, Kong G. MTA1
overexpression correlates significantly with tumor grade
and angiogenesis in human breast cancers. Cancer Sci.
2006; 97:374–379.
  6.	 Toh Y, Kuwano H, Mori M, Nicolson GL, Sugimachi K.
Overexpression of metastasis-associated MTA1 mRNA
in invasive oesophageal carcinomas. Br J Cancer. 1999;
79:1723–1726.
  7.	 Sasaki H, Moriyama S, Nakashima Y, Kobayashi Y, Yukiue H,
Kaji M, Fukai I, Kiriyama M, Yamakawa Y, Fujii Y.
Expression of the MTA1 mRNA in advanced lung cancer.
Lung Cancer. 2002; 35:149–154.
  8.	 Hofer MD, Kuefer R, Varambally S, Li H, Ma J, Shapiro GI,
Gschwend JE, Hautmann RE, Sanda MG, Giehl K, Menke A,
Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA. The role of metastasis-associated
protein 1 in prostate cancer progression. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:825–829.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are thankful to Dr. Z. He (UMMC, Department
of Pathology) for preparing paraffin blocks and H & E
staining, Dr. J.M. Docarmo (UMMC, Department of
Biophysics and Physiology) for help with EchoMRI
studies, and Dr. P. Labhart (Active Motif, CA) for his
assistance in analyzing ChIP-Seq data. We would also
like to thank Dr. K. Xu (UMMC, Cancer Institute) for
insightful suggestions on mice breeding. We are grateful
to Dr. R. Summers (UMMC) for his continued support.

  9.	 Kai L, Wang J, Ivanovic M, Chung YT, Laskin WB, SchulzeHoepfner F, Mirochnik Y, Satcher RL, Jr., Levenson AS.
Targeting prostate cancer angiogenesis through metastasisassociated protein 1 (MTA1). Prostate. 2011; 71:268–280.
10.	 Dias SJ, Zhou X, Ivanovic M, Gailey MP, Dhar S, Zhang L,
He Z, Penman AD, Vijayakumar S, Levenson AS. Nuclear
MTA1 overexpression is associated with aggressive prostate
cancer, recurrence and metastasis in African Americans. Sci
Rep. 2013; 3:2331.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported in part by the Department
of Defense Prostate Cancer Research Program under
Award # W81XWH-13-1-0370 to AS Levenson. Views
and opinions of, and endorsements by the author(s) do not
reflect those of the US Army of the Department of Defense.

11.	 Levenson AS, Kumar A, Zhang X. MTA family of proteins
in prostate cancer: biology, significance, and therapeutic
opportunities. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2014; 33:929–942.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Li K, Dias SJ, Rimando AM, Dhar S, Mizuno CS, Penman AD,
Lewin JR, Levenson AS. Pterostilbene acts through
metastasis-associated protein 1 to inhibit tumor growth,
progression and metastasis in prostate cancer. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e57542.

12.	 Nair SS, Li DQ, Kumar R. A core chromatin remodeling
factor instructs global chromatin signaling through multivalent
reading of nucleosome codes. Mol Cell. 2013; 49:704–718.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest

REFERENCES

14.	 Moon HE, Cheon H, Lee MS. Metastasis-associated
protein 1 inhibits p53-induced apoptosis. Oncol Rep. 2007;
18:1311–1314.

  1.	 De Marzo AM, Platz EA, Sutcliffe S, Xu J, Gronberg H,
Drake CG, Nakai Y, Isaacs WB, Nelson WG. Inflammation
in prostate carcinogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:256–269.

15.	 Kai L, Samuel SK, Levenson AS. Resveratrol enhances p53
acetylation and apoptosis in prostate cancer by inhibiting
MTA1/NuRD complex. Int J Cancer. 2010; 126:1538–1548.

  2.	 Nelson WG, Yegnasubramanian S, Agoston AT, Bastian PJ,
Lee BH, Nakayama M, De Marzo AM. Abnormal DNA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18482

Oncotarget

16.	 Yoo YG, Kong G, Lee MO. Metastasis-associated protein
1 enhances stability of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
protein by recruiting histone deacetylase 1. EMBO J. 2006;
25:1231–1241.

32.	 Pakala SB, Bui-Nguyen TM, Reddy SD, Li DQ, Peng S,
Rayala SK, Behringer RR, Kumar R. Regulation of NFkappaB circuitry by a component of the nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase complex controls inflammatory
response homeostasis. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:23590–23597.

17.	 Dhar S, Kumar A, Li K, Tzivion G, Levenson AS. Resveratrol
regulates PTEN/Akt pathway through inhibition of MTA1/
HDAC unit of the NuRD complex in prostate cancer.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015; 1853:265–275.

33.	 Bui-Nguyen TM, Pakala SB, Sirigiri RD, Xia W, Hung MC,
Sarin SK, Kumar V, Slagle BL, Kumar R. NF-kappaB
signaling mediates the induction of MTA1 by hepatitis B virus
transactivator protein HBx. Oncogene. 2010; 29:1179–1189.

18.	 Ho E, Beaver LM, Williams DE, Dashwood RH. Dietary
factors and epigenetic regulation for prostate cancer
prevention. Adv Nutr. 2011; 2:497–510.

34.	 Bohonowych JE, Hance MW, Nolan KD, Defee M, Parsons CH,
Isaacs JS. Extracellular Hsp90 mediates an NF-kappaB
dependent inflammatory stromal program: implications
for the prostate tumor microenvironment. Prostate. 2014;
74:395–407.

19.	 Azzolini M, La Spina M, Mattarei A, Paradisi C, Zoratti M,
Biasutto L. Pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of
pterostilbene in the rat. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2014; 58:
2122–2132.

35.	 Sears R, Nuckolls F, Haura E, Taya Y, Tamai K, Nevins JR.
Multiple Ras-dependent phosphorylation pathways regulate
Myc protein stability. Genes Dev. 2000; 14:2501–2514.

20.	 Yeo SC, Ho PC, Lin HS. Pharmacokinetics of pterostilbene
in Sprague-Dawley rats: the impacts of aqueous solubility,
fasting, dose escalation, and dosing route on bioavailability.
Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013; 57:1015–1025.

36.	 Zhang XY, DeSalle LM, Patel JH, Capobianco AJ, Yu D,
Thomas-Tikhonenko A, McMahon SB. Metastasis-associated
protein 1 (MTA1) is an essential downstream effector of
the c-MYC oncoprotein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;
102:13968–13973.

21.	 Kapetanovic IM, Muzzio M, Huang Z, Thompson TN,
McCormick DL. Pharmacokinetics, oral bioavailability, and
metabolic profile of resveratrol and its dimethylether analog,
pterostilbene, in rats. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2011;
68:593–601.

37.	 Zhu W, Cai MY, Tong ZT, Dong SS, Mai SJ, Liao YJ,
Bian XW, Lin MC, Kung HF, Zeng YX, Guan XY, Xie D.
Overexpression of EIF5A2 promotes colorectal carcinoma
cell aggressiveness by upregulating MTA1 through C-myc
to induce epithelial-mesenchymaltransition. Gut. 2012;
61:562–575.

22.	 Dellinger RW, Garcia AM, Meyskens FL, Jr. Differences in
the glucuronidation of resveratrol and pterostilbene: altered
enzyme specificity and potential gender differences. Drug
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2014; 29:112–119.

38.	 Powell IJ, Dyson G, Land S, Ruterbusch J, Bock CH,
Lenk S, Herawi M, Everson R, Giroux CN, Schwartz AG,
Bollig-Fischer A. Genes associated with prostate cancer are
differentially expressed in African American and European
American men. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013;
22:891–897.
39.	 Reddy SD, Pakala SB, Molli PR, Sahni N, Karanam NK,
Mudvari P, Kumar R. Metastasis-associated protein 1/histone
deacetylase 4-nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase
complex regulates phosphatase and tensin homolog
gene expression and function. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:
27843–27850.
40.	 Pakala SB, Singh K, Reddy SD, Ohshiro K, Li DQ, Mishra L,
Kumar R. TGF-beta1 signaling targets metastasis-associated
protein 1, a new effector in epithelial cells. Oncogene. 2011;
30: 2230–2241.
41.	 Wong SC, Chan JK, Lee KC, Hsiao WL. Differential
expression of p16/p21/p27 and cyclin D1/D3, and their
relationships to cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumour
progression in invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast.
J Pathol. 2001; 194:35–42.
42.	 Xiong Y, Hannon GJ, Zhang H, Casso D, Kobayashi R,
Beach D. p21 is a universal inhibitor of cyclin kinases.
Nature. 1993; 366:701–704.
43.	 Gartel AL, Tyner AL. The role of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p21 in apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther. 2002;
1:639–649.

23.	 Wang S, Gao J, Lei Q, Rozengurt N, Pritchard C, Jiao J,
Thomas GV, Li G, Roy-Burman P, Nelson PS, Liu X, Wu H.
Prostate-specific deletion of the murine Pten tumor suppressor
gene leads to metastatic prostate cancer. Cancer Cell. 2003;
4:209–221.
24.	 Manavathi B, Kumar R. Metastasis tumor antigens, an
emerging family of multifaceted master coregulators. J Biol
Chem. 2007; 282:1529–1533.
25.	 Toh Y, Nicolson GL. The role of the MTA family and their
encoded proteins in human cancers: molecular functions
and clinical implications. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2009;
26:215–227.
26.	 Varmus HE. The molecular genetics of cellular oncogenes.
Annu Rev Genet. 1984; 18:553-612.
27.	 Testa JR, Bellacosa A. AKT plays a central role in
tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98:
10983–10985.
28.	 Radtke F, Raj K. The role of Notch in tumorigenesis:
oncogene or tumour suppressor? Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;
3:756–767.
29.	 Dhulipal PD. Ets oncogene family. Indian J Exp Biol. 1997;
35:315–322.
30.	 Neckers L. Chaperoning oncogenes: Hsp90 as a target of
geldanamycin. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2006; 259–277.
31.	 Bates S, Peters G. Cyclin D1 as a cellular proto-oncogene.
Semin Cancer Biol. 1995; 6:73–82.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18483

Oncotarget

44.	 Nicholson B, Schaefer G, Theodorescu D. Angiogenesis
in prostate cancer: biology and therapeutic opportunities.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2001; 20:297–319.

55.	 Wang TT, Schoene NW, Kim YS, Mizuno CS, Rimando AM.
Differential effects of resveratrol and its naturally occurring
methylether analogs on cell cycle and apoptosis in human
androgen-responsive LNCaP cancer cells. Mol Nutr Food
Res. 2010; 54:335–344.

45.	 Kinkade CW, Castillo-Martin M, Puzio-Kuter A, Yan J,
Foster TH, Gao H, Sun Y, Ouyang X, Gerald WL, CordonCardo C, Abate-Shen C. Targeting AKT/mTOR and ERK
MAPK signaling inhibits hormone-refractory prostate cancer
in a preclinical mouse model. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:
3051–3064.

56.	 Chang J, Rimando A, Pallas M, Camins A, Porquet D, Reeves J,
Shukitt-Hale B, Smith MA, Joseph JA, Casadesus G.
Low-dose pterostilbene, but not resveratrol, is a potent
neuromodulator in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol
Aging. 2012; 33:2062–2071.

46.	 Hirakawa S, Brown LF, Kodama S, Paavonen K, Alitalo K,
Detmar M. VEGF-C-induced lymphangiogenesis in sentinel
lymph nodes promotes tumor metastasis to distant sites.
Blood. 2007; 109:1010–1017.

57.	 Remsberg CM, Yanez JA, Ohgami Y, Vega-Villa KR,
Rimando AM, Davies NM. Pharmacometrics of pterostilbene:
preclinical pharmacokinetics and metabolism, anticancer,
antiinflammatory, antioxidant and analgesic activity.
Phytother Res. 2008; 22:169–179.

47.	 Cao R, Ji H, Feng N, Zhang Y, Yang X, Andersson P, Sun Y,
Tritsaris K, Hansen AJ, Dissing S, Cao Y. Collaborative
interplay between FGF-2 and VEGF-C promotes
lymphangiogenesis and metastasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2012; 109:15894–15899.

58.	 Riche DM, Riche KD, Blackshear CT, McEwen CL,
Sherman JJ, Wofford MR, Griswold ME. Pterostilbene on
metabolic parameters: a randomized, double-blind, and
placebo-controlled trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat
Med. 2014; 2014: 459165.

48.	 Sfanos KS, De Marzo AM. Prostate cancer and inflammation:
the evidence. Histopathology. 2012; 60:199–215.

59.	 Riche DM, McEwen CL, Riche KD, Sherman JJ, Wofford MR,
Deschamp D, Griswold M. Analysis of safety from a human
clinical trial with pterostilbene. J Toxicol. 2013; 2013: 463595.

49.	 Kumar A, Lin SY, Dhar S, Rimando AM, Levenson AS.
Stilbenes Inhibit Androgen Receptor Expression in
22Rv1 Castrate-resistant Prostate Cancer Cells. Journal of
Medicinally Active Plants. 2014; 3:1–8.

60.	 Joseph JA, Fisher DR, Cheng V, Rimando AM, Shukitt-Hale B.
Cellular and behavioral effects of stilbene resveratrol
analogues: implications for reducing the deleterious effects
of aging. J Agric Food Chem. 2008; 56:10544–10551.

50.	 Jones PA. At the tipping point for epigenetic therapies in
cancer. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:14–16.
51.	 Ahuja N, Easwaran H, Baylin SB. Harnessing the potential
of epigenetic therapy to target solid tumors. J Clin Invest.
2014; 124:56–63.

61.	 Patel KR, Brown VA, Jones DJ, Britton RG, Hemingway D,
Miller AS, West KP, Booth TD, Perloff M, Crowell JA,
Brenner DE, Steward WP, Gescher AJ, et al. Clinical
pharmacology of resveratrol and its metabolites in
colorectal cancer patients. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:
7392–7399.

52.	 Campbell RM, Tummino PJ. Cancer epigenetics drug
discovery and development: the challenge of hitting the
mark. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:64–69.
53.	 Lin VC, Tsai YC, Lin JN, Fan LL, Pan MH, Ho CT, Wu JY,
Way TD. Activation of AMPK by pterostilbene suppresses
lipogenesis and cell-cycle progression in p53 positive and
negative human prostate cancer cells. J Agric Food Chem.
2012; 60:6399–6407.

62.	 Reagan-Shaw S, Nihal M, Ahmad N. Dose translation
from animal to human studies revisited. FASEB J. 2008;
22:659–661.
63.	 Harrell MI, Iritani BM, Ruddell A. Lymph node mapping in
the mouse. J Immunol Methods. 2008; 332:170–174.

54.	 Chakraborty A, Gupta N, Ghosh K, Roy P. In vitro evaluation
of the cytotoxic, anti-proliferative and anti-oxidant properties
of pterostilbene isolated from Pterocarpus marsupium.
Toxicol In vitro. 2010; 24:1215–1228.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64.	 Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene
expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the
2(−ΔΔC(T)) Method. Methods. 2001; 25:402–408.

18484

Oncotarget

