Research Article

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) Ubiquitination as a
Mechanism of Acquired Resistance Escaping Treatment by
the Anti-EGFR Monoclonal Antibody Cetuximab
1

1

1

1

1

2

Yang Lu, Xinqun Li, Ke Liang, Rodney Luwor, Zahid H. Siddik, Gordon B. Mills,
1
1
John Mendelsohn, and Zhen Fan

Departments of 1Experimental Therapeutics and 2Systems Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Abstract
Cetuximab is an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)–
blocking antibody that has been approved for treatment of
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. In this study, we
investigated biochemical changes in signaling pathways of a
cetuximab-resistant subline of DiFi colorectal cancer cells
(DiFi5) that was developed by exposing the parental sensitive
cells to subeffective doses of cetuximab over an extended
period of time. Compared with parental DiFi cells that express
high levels of EGFR and in which cetuximab induces
apoptosis, the cetuximab-resistant DiFi5 cells showed markedly lower protein levels of EGFR, an increased association of
EGFR with Cbl, and an increased ubiquitination of EGFR.
DiFi5 cells also had a markedly higher level of Src-Y416
phosphorylation both at baseline and on EGF stimulation.
Although EGFR levels were low, DiFi5 cells responded to EGF
stimulation with robust phosphorylation of EGFR on Y845 and
strong phosphorylation of Akt and extracellular signal–
regulated kinase, comparable to those of parental cells. Most
importantly, inhibition of Src kinase activity with PP2
reversed the resistance of DiFi5 cells to cetuximab-induced
apoptosis without affecting the levels of EGFR in the cells. Our
results indicate that colorectal cancer cells may develop
acquired resistance to cetuximab via altering EGFR levels
through promotion of EGFR ubiquitination and degradation
and using Src kinase-mediated cell signaling to bypass their
dependency on EGFR for cell growth and survival. [Cancer Res
2007;67(17):8240–7]

Introduction
The complexity of signaling networks developed in cancer cells
frequently results in redundancy and overlap of cell survival and
proliferation pathways, potentially allowing cancer cells to
circumvent the therapeutic effects of targeting one single growth
or survival signaling pathway. This capability poses a great
challenge to the effectiveness of novel therapeutic agents rationally
designed to target specific cell-surface receptors known to play a
role in cancer initiation and progression, such as the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR; refs. 1, 2). The interacting or
complementing signaling networks may render cancer cells
inherently resistant to EGFR-targeted therapy, despite the expres-

Requests for reprints: Zhen Fan, Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit
036, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-745-3560; Fax: 713-745-3562; E-mail: zfan@
mdanderson.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0589

sion and functional role of EGFR in the growth and survival of the
cancer cells. Only in a small percentage of cancer patients, their
cancer cells rely on EGFR for growth and survival to a great extent
or even exclusively and, as a result, pharmacologic inhibition of
EGFR in these patients elicits positive therapeutic responses (1, 2).
The recent demonstration of objective antitumor activity in 10% to
20% patients from several pivotal clinical studies involving patients
with several different types of solid tumors, including colorectal
cancer, non–small cell lung cancer, and head and neck cancer,
has led to the regulatory approval of cetuximab and panitumumab
(3, 4),3 two monoclonal antibodies (mAb) that block ligand binding
to EGFR, and gefitinib and erlotinib (5–7), two small-molecule
inhibitors that are ATP analogues of the EGFR tyrosine kinase.
Many studies have explored the inherent resistance of tumors to
EGFR-targeted therapy, but little effort has been applied to whether
acquired resistance, presumably caused by target alteration and
subsequent activation of substitutive or alternative signaling
pathways, allows cancer cells to bypass the therapeutic effects of
EGFR inhibition. From a clinical practice point of view, acquired
resistance happens when a drug is initially effective in controlling
disease, decreasing tumor burden, or inhibiting tumor growth, but
the patient has a relapse and becomes insensitive to further
therapy. An earlier study reported phenotypic changes in variants
of A431 vulvar squamous carcinoma cells that were obtained from
recurrent tumor xenografts after two consecutive cycles of therapy
with one of three different anti-EGFR mAbs: mR3, hR3, or
cetuximab (8). Following initial response after a 2-week period of
treatment, which led to regression of the A431 xenografts, the
tumors reappeared at the site of injection after a prolonged latency
period, with most of the recurrent tumors being refractory to a
second round of the antibody therapy. Interestingly, the sublines
established from the relapsed tumors retained high levels of EGFR
expression, normal sensitivity to cetuximab treatment in culture,
and an unaltered growth rate, indicating that the direct drug target
(EGFR) was not modified on the tumor cells. However, the A431
cell variants exhibited an accelerated growth rate in vivo; five of the
six variant sublines contained higher levels of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) than did the parental cells (8). Another study
reported similar results obtained from GEO colorectal cancer cell
xenografts that recurred after an initial response to cetuximab and
gefitinib treatment (9). Resistant sublines established from the
recurrent xenografts exhibited marked increases in mitogenactivated protein kinase phosphorylation and increased expression
of cyclooxygenase-2 and VEGF. The cetuximab- or gefitinibresistant GEO cells were sensitive to ZD6474, an inhibitor of VEGF

3

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

8240

http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/NEWS/2006/NEW01468.html

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Mechanism of Acquired Resistance to Cetuximab

receptor (9). These previous in vivo studies provided experimental
evidence for a possible secondary ‘‘driving force’’ in cancers that
relapse after an initial response to EGFR-targeted therapy and are
important in developing clinically relevant strategies of novel
therapeutics aimed at overcoming or preventing acquired resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy.
It is not clear from these studies, however, whether acquired
resistance is a de novo process or represents selection of
preexisting subclones. Furthermore, it is not clear whether the
mechanisms are primarily mediated by the tumor or by tumorstromal interactions, particularly in the cases in which sublines
derived from the relapsed tumor cells remain sensitive to the antiEGFR agents in cell culture (8).
Previously, we reported that DiFi colorectal cancer cells rely
exclusively on EGFR-mediated cell signaling for growth and
survival; treatment of the cells with either EGFR-blocking antibodies or small-molecule receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors leads
to cell death by triggering programmed cell death via apoptosis
(10–14). To investigate potential mechanisms of acquired cetuximab resistance, we exposed DiFi colorectal cancer cells to
cetuximab at doses that killed 80% to 90% of the cells in the first
round of treatment and then maintained the surviving 10% to 20%
of the cells in long-term uninterrupted subculture with cetuximab,
gradually increasing the dose of cetuximab in cell culture. In this
study, we report the successful establishment of a subline of
cetuximab-resistant DiFi cells, termed DiFi5. In contrast to the
results from previous studies by other groups (8, 9), we found that
the resistant DiFi5 cells show marked biochemical changes,
including enhanced ubiquitination and degradation of EGFR and
an increased activity of Src kinase compared with parental DiFi
cells. We also explored approaches that may resensitize DiFi5 cells
to cetuximab, showing that the increased Src activity present in

DiFi5 plays a causal role in resistance to cetuximab. As inhibitors to
the EGFR are in clinical use and Src inhibitors are in clinical trials,
our results suggest a novel combinatorial therapy targeting either
concurrently or sequentially EGFR and Src for cancer treatment.

Materials and Methods
Materials. The human-mouse chimeric anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab
was provided by ImClone Systems, Inc. Antibodies directed against total
and phosphorylation-specific (S473) Akt and phosphorylation-specific
(T202/Y204) extracellular signal–regulated kinase (ERK) were obtained
from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. Anti-ERK antibody was from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. The anti-EGFR antibody used for Western blot
analysis was from Sigma-Aldrich Co. All other reagents were purchased
from Sigma Chemical unless otherwise specified.
Cells and cell culture. The parental DiFi colorectal adenocarcinoma cell
line has previously been described (10–14). The cetuximab-resistant DiFi
cells (DiFi5) were created by exposing the parental DiFi cells to 10 nmol/L
cetuximab, which killed >80% of the cells, followed by maintenance of the
surviving cells for an extended period in gradually increased concentrations
of cetuximab peaking at 100 nmol/L. The A431 vulvar squamous carcinoma
cell line and GEO colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line have previously been
described (15, 16). All cell lines were maintained in DMEM containing 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mmol/L glutamine, 100 units/mL penicillin, and
100 Ag/mL streptomycin and cultured in a humidified atmosphere of 95%
air and 5% CO2 at 37jC.
Cell survival and proliferation. Cell proliferation assays were done on
12- or 24-well culture plates. Absolute cell numbers were determined by
harvesting the cells by trypsinization and counting the cells with a Coulter
counter. Relative cell growth and survival were assessed with a colorimetric
assay by adding 50 AL of 10 mg/mL 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) to 0.5 mL of culture medium and
incubating the cells for 2 h at 37jC in a CO2 incubator; this was followed by
cell lysis overnight at 37jC with 500 AL of lysis buffer containing 20% SDS in
dimethyl formamide/H2O (1:1, v/v), pH 4.7. The absorbance of cell lysates

Figure 1. Growth and survival of DiFi and
DiFi5 cells in the presence and absence of
cetuximab. A, DiFi cells (1.1  104 per well)
and DiFi5 cells (1.4  104 per well) were
seeded into 12-well culture plates in 0.5%
FBS medium and cultured in the presence or
absence of 10 nmol/L cetuximab for 5 d.
Cells were counted on days 2 and 5 with a
Coulter counter after being harvested by
trypsinization. B, DiFi and DiFi5 cells were
cultured overnight (16 h) in 0.5% FBS
medium with or without 10 nmol/L cetuximab.
The cells were then harvested and subjected
to cell cycle distribution analysis by flow
cytometry, as described in Materials and
Methods. C, DiFi and DiFi5 cells were treated
as in (B ). After treatment, the cells were
lysed and a 10-Ag aliquot of cell lysate from
each group was used to measure the levels
of cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA
fragments by using an ELISA kit. D, DiFi and
DiFi5 cells seeded into 24-well culture
plates were exposed to the indicated
concentrations of cetuximab for 72 h in
medium containing 0.5% FBS. After the
treatment, cells were subjected to an MTT
colorimetric assay (incubation with the MTT
dye for 2 h at 37jC, followed by cell lysis with
an MTT lysis buffer overnight in a 37jC
oven). Relative cell growth and survival of the
cells were determined by comparing the
absorbance of the cell lysates in each
group after normalization to the absorbance
of the initial cells seeded. The data were
plotted against the concentrations of
cetuximab used.

www.aacrjournals.org

8241

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Decreased levels of total and
cell-surface EGFR in DiFi5 cells relative to parental
DiFi cells. A, total levels of EGFRs in DiFi and
DiFi5 cells were compared by subjecting the cell
lysates to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis
with anti-EGFR antibody. The level of h-actin was
used as a reference for cell lysate proteins loaded
in the Western blot analysis. B, cell-surface
EGFRs were measured by FACS with flow
cytometry. The cells were collected for FACS
analysis of the distribution of FITC-positive cells.
The data are plotted for cell numbers versus the
intensity of fluorescence. Total numbers of cells
counted in each cell line (stained respectively with
a control IgG and the anti-EGFR mAb 528) are
shown at the top. C, one aliquot (200 Ag) of DiFi
cell lysate was compared with incrementally
increased aliquots (up to four times) of DiFi5 cell
lysate for levels of EGFRs immunoprecipitated
by cetuximab. The immunoprecipitates were
subjected to Western blot analysis with an
anti-EGFR antibody as in (A).

was measured at a wavelength of 570 nm, and the absorbance values of
treated cells are presented as a percentage of the absorbance of untreated
cells.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis. Cells were lysed in a
lysis buffer containing 50 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.5%
NP40, 50 mmol/L NaF, 1 mmol/L Na3VO4, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, 25 Ag/mL leupeptin, and 25 Ag/mL aprotinin and clarified by
centrifugation (14,000  g for 30 min at 4jC). The protein concentration of
cell lysates was determined using the Bradford Coomassie blue method
(Pierce Chemical). For immunoprecipitation studies, cell lysates were
incubated with primary antibodies, and the resultant immune complexes
were precipitated with protein A-Sepharose beads (Amersham Biosciences).
Whole-cell lysates or immunoprecipitated proteins were then separated by
SDS-PAGE, transferred onto nitrocellulose by Western blotting, and probed
with various primary antibodies and horseradish peroxidase–labeled
secondary antibodies. The signals were visualized with an enhanced
chemiluminescence detection kit (Amersham Biosciences).
Quantification of apoptosis by ELISA. An apoptosis ELISA kit was
used to quantitatively measure the levels of histone-associated DNA
fragments (mononucleosomes and oligonucleosomes) in cytoplasm after
induced cell death. This colorimetric enzyme immunoassay was done
exactly according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Diagnostics).
Flow cytometric analysis. For cell cycle distribution analysis, cells
grown in 100-mm culture dishes (50–70% confluence) were harvested by
trypsinization, washed twice with cold PBS, and fixed with 70% ethanol. The
cells were stained for DNA with a solution containing 50 Ag/mL propidium
iodide and 100 Ag/mL RNase I in PBS for 30 min at 37jC. The cells were
filtered through a nylon mesh (50- to 70-Am pore size) to remove cell
clumps and then analyzed for cell cycle distribution with a FACScan flow
cytometer (Becton Dickinson). To measure levels of cell-surface EGFRs, cells
were harvested by trypsinization, resuspended into serum-free medium, and
then chilled on ice for 20 min before being incubated with a murine antiEGFR antibody (mAb 528) for 1 h on ice. After incubation, the cells were
washed gently with cold PBS thrice and then incubated with a FITC-labeled
rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody for an additional 1 h.
The cells were then collected for fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis of the distribution of FITC-positive cells. The data were plotted as
the number of cells versus the intensity of cell fluorescence.

Results
Characteristics of DiFi colorectal cancer cells with acquired
resistance to cetuximab. DiFi colorectal cancer cells behave as if
they are ‘‘addicted’’ to the EGFR; exposure of the cells to receptor-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

saturating concentrations of cetuximab was sufficient to induce
cell death via apoptosis (10–14). Figure 1 compares the growth and
survival of the parental DiFi cells and DiFi5 cells in cell culture in
the presence and absence of cetuximab. When cultured in regular
medium, DiFi5 cells proliferated slightly slower than the parental
cells (Fig. 1A). Flow cytometric analysis of cell cycle phase
distribution showed that a slightly higher percentage of DiFi5 cells
than parental DiFi cells (81.3% compared with 74.6%) were in the
G1 phase of the cell cycle, and exposure to cetuximab increased the
cell cycle distribution of DiFi5 cells only modestly ( from 81.3% to
83.4%), whereas the percentage of parental cells in the G1 phase
increased from 74.6% to 88.9% after exposure to cetuximab.
Furthermore, treatment of parental DiFi cells with cetuximab
resulted in cell death via apoptosis, as evidenced by an increased
percentage of pre-G1 phase cells (Fig. 1B), a higher level of histoneassociated DNA fragmentation in the cytoplasm (Fig. 1C), and a
reduction in the number of cells after 72 h of continuous exposure
to cetuximab starting at doses as low as 1.25 nmol/L (Fig. 1D). In
contrast, DiFi5 cells exhibited considerable resistance to cetuximab; despite being slightly growth inhibited compared with
untreated cells, they continued to proliferate in the presence of
cetuximab (up to 20 nmol/L) without loss of viable cells.
Posttranslational modification of EGFR in cetuximabresistant cells. To determine whether the resistance of DiFi5 cells
to cetuximab treatment was associated with alteration of EGFR
cell-surface protein level or receptor binding by cetuximab, we first
examined the total and cell-surface EGFR levels in DiFi5 cells
relative to parental cells. Western blot analysis showed that the
total level of EGFR in parental DiFi cells was comparable to that
in A431 cells, a cell line well known for overexpression of EGFR
(Fig. 2A). In contrast, the level of EGFR in DiFi5 cells, which was
revealed as a ‘‘slow-migrating’’ band, was much lower than that in
DiFi cells but still higher than that in GEO cells, another colon
cancer cell line known to be sensitive to cetuximab treatment but
with an EGFR level being barely detectable by conventional
Western blot analysis (16, 17). Consistent with the results of
Western blot analysis, FACS analysis with a different anti-EGFR
antibody (mAb 528) showed that the level of cell-surface EGFR in
DiFi5 cells was remarkably lower than that in parental DiFi cells or
A431 cells but still higher than that in GEO cells (Fig. 2B). To

8242

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Mechanism of Acquired Resistance to Cetuximab

eliminate the possibility of potential structural alteration of EGFR
in DiFi5 cells that would impair the recognition of the EGFR by
cetuximab, we subjected one aliquot (200 Ag) of DiFi cell lysate and
aliquots of DiFi5 cell lysates with incremental increases in protein
up to four times (800 Ag) to EGFR immunoprecipitation by
cetuximab and subsequent Western blot analysis with an EGFR
antibody that recognizes the intracellular carboxyl domain of
EGFR. We found that the total level of EGFR in DiFi5 cells was
f20% to 25% of that found in parental DiFi cells and the levels of
EGFR immunoprecipitated by cetuximab were proportional to the
amounts of cell lysates applied for the experiment, indicating that
the EGFR in DiFi5 cells is recognizable by cetuximab. Information
of the relative ratio (1:4 or 1:5) of EGFR contents in DiFi and DiFi5
cells was used in later studies when an adjustment of the EGFR
content was needed to compare the levels of EGFR-associated
proteins in DiFi and DiFi5 cells.
Slow-migrating forms of EGFR were previously reported in
glioma cells as being caused by tandem duplication of exons in the
extracellular or intracellular domains of EGFR (18–22). To
determine whether the slow-migrating form of EGFR in DiFi5 cells
may reflect EGFR mutation such as tandem duplication of exons,
we used reverse transcription-PCR to amplify EGFR cDNA from
DiFi and DiFi5 cells with three individual pairs of primers that
collectively cover the whole range of EGFR-coding sequences. We
found no difference between DiFi and DiFi5 cells in the size of the
PCR products amplified with these primers (Fig. 3A). Sequence
analysis of the PCR products did not reveal any mutation either
(data not shown).

Because EGFRs are glycoproteins, we next examined whether
the decreased electrophoretic mobility of EGFR in DiFi5 cells might
be caused by altered glycosylation of the protein during its
posttranslational maturation process. If this were indeed the case,
the nascent (nonglycosylated) EGFRs would migrate during
electrophoresis to the same position as that of EGFRs from
parental DiFi or A431 cells. Tunicamycin, an inhibitor of Nacetylglucosamine transferases, inhibits the glycosylation of EGFR
during its maturation process, leading to the appearance of two
EGFR bands (nonglycosylated and glycosylated) on Western blot
analysis (23). Figure 3B shows that in contrast to untreated DiFi,
DiFi5, and A431 cells, the tunicamycin-treated cells contained a
second, faster-migrating EGFR band, representing nascent EGFRs.
However, the nascent EGFRs in DiFi5 cells still migrated slower
than did the receptors in parental DiFi and A431 cells. These results
suggest that the slow-migrating EGFRs in DiFi5 cells are unlikely to
be a result of altered glycosylation of the receptor.
Another important posttranslational modification of proteins
that may lead to a higher apparent molecule weight is protein
ubiquitination due to the attachment of ubiquitin chains. Recent
studies have shown that the Cbl protein selectively targets several
protein tyrosine kinases, including EGFR, marking them for
polyubiquitination and degradation via RING finger–mediated
ubiquitin E2 and E3 activities (24). We then reasoned that the slowmigrating EGFRs may be caused by increased ubiquitination,
particularly as the appearance of the slow-migrating EGFR was
accompanied concomitantly by a reduced level of EGFR. Indeed,
we found that the total level of Cbl protein was higher in DiFi5 cells

Figure 3. Analysis of EGFR cDNA transcript sizes and posttranslational modifications of the receptor in DiFi5 cells relative to parental DiFi cells. A, three pairs of
primers selected to collectively span the whole range of the EGFR coding sequence were used for polychain reactions using the reverse transcription products from
DiFi and DiFi5 cells as the respective templates. The reaction products were resolved on a 1% agarose gel. B, DiFi and DiFi5 cells were left untreated or treated
with tunicamycin (2 mg/mL) overnight (16 h), along with A431 cells that served as a positive control. The cells were then harvested for Western blot analysis with an
anti-EGFR antibody. *, underglycosylated receptors in the cells. C, left, equal amounts of cell lysates from DiFi and DiFi5 cells were examined for the levels of
total EGFR and Cbl by SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis with respective antibodies. The level of h-actin served as a reference of protein loading. Right, one
aliquot (200 Ag) of DiFi cell lysate was used along with equal (1) and 4 amounts of DiFi5 cell lysates for immunoprecipitation of EGFRs with cetuximab, followed
by Western blot analysis with antibodies directed against EGFR, Cbl, or ubiquitin.

www.aacrjournals.org

8243

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Comparison of site-specific phosphorylation
of EGFR, Akt, and ERK in DiFi and DiFi5 cells following
EGF stimulation. DiFi and DiFi5 cells were stimulated
with 10 nmol/L EGF for 30 min in culture medium with
0.5% FBS. The cells were then lysed and equal amounts
of cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and
Western blot analysis with antibodies directed against
total and several site-specific tyrosine-phosphorylated
EGFRs, as indicated in (A ), or with antibodies directed
against total and site-specific phosphorylated Akt and
ERK, as indicated in (B).

than in DiFi cells (Fig. 3C). Because the total EGFR content in DiFi5
cells was only 20% to 25% of that in DiFi cells, we used two sample
sets of DiFi5 cell lysates, containing 1 and 4 the DiFi cell lysate
protein, respectively, for immunoprecipitation of EGFRs to
compare the levels of EGFR-associated Cbl protein in DiFi and
DiFi5 cells. Subsequently, Western blot analysis of the immunoprecipitates was done with antibodies directed against Cbl,
ubiquitin, and EGFR. Figure 3C shows that when the EGFR level
of the DiFi5 cell lysate was adjusted to be comparable to that of the
DiFi cell lysate, there was an increased amount of Cbl that was
found in the EGFR content–adjusted immunoprecipitates of DiFi5
cells, indicating there is indeed an increased association between
EGFR and Cbl protein in DiFi5 cells compared with DiFi.
Furthermore, this was accompanied by increased ubiquitination
of EGFR in DiFi5 cells. Taken together, our results indicate that the
slow migration of EGFR as well as the low EGFR levels found in
DiFi5 cells can be attributed, at least partially, to an increased level
of EGFR ubiquitination in these cells.
Altered responses to EGF-induced signal transduction in
DiFi5 cells relative to parental DiFi cells. Phosphorylation of
EGFR on specific tyrosine residues on its intracellular domain by
EGFR tyrosine kinase or other kinases such as Src is critical for
transducing EGF-induced signals to downstream signal mediators
and effector molecules as well as for functional regulation of the
receptor itself (25, 26). To identify potential changes in signal
transduction that may be associated with the acquired resistance
of DiFi5 cells to treatment with cetuximab, we compared the levels
of EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation in DiFi and DiFi5 cells at
baseline and on stimulation with EGF by Western blot analysis with
several antibodies that recognize EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation
on specific residues, including Y992 (phospholipase Cg binding
site), Y1068 (growth factor receptor binding protein-2 binding site),
Y845 (Src-dependent phosphorylation site), and Y1045 (Cbl binding
site). Figure 4A shows that, compared with parental DiFi cells,
DiFi5 cells had lower baseline levels of EGFR phosphorylation on
all four tyrosine residues examined, which apparently can be
attributed to the low total EGFR level in DiFi5 cells. However,
despite low levels of EGFR present, DiFi5 cells showed robust
phosphorylation on Y845 upon EGF stimulation compared with the
other three tyrosine residues (Y992, Y1045, and Y1068). In contrast,
all four EGFR tyrosine residues were highly phosphorylated on EGF
stimulation in DiFi cells. Thus, EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation
following EGF stimulation differs in DiFi and DiFi5 cells, with

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

efficient phosphorylation on Y845 (Src-dependent phosphorylation
site) in DiFi5 cells.
We next examined the levels of basal and EGF-induced
phosphorylation of downstream signal mediators that might be
differentially activated by EGF stimulation in DiFi and DiFi5 cells.
Figure 4B shows that despite the low levels of EGFR in DiF5 cells,
the basal and EGF-stimulated phosphorylation levels of ERK and
Akt were similar in DiFi and DiFi5 cells, suggesting that the EGFR
in DiFi5 cells was highly efficient in transducing signals to
downstream signal mediators. This could be due to threshold
effects, alterations in regulatory loops, and a balance of homeostatic effects that compensate for the reduced level of EGFR.
The Src nonreceptor kinase proto-oncogene is a well-known
cooperating partner for transformation of EGFR (27, 28). Figure 5A
shows the levels of phosphorylated Src and total Src kinase in
unstimulated and EGF-stimulated DiFi and DiFi5 cells in the
presence or absence of the Src kinase inhibitor PP2. We found that
DiFi5 cells contained a higher basal level of phosphorylation of
Src-Y416 (a positive regulatory site) and an enhanced response to
EGF stimulation. No remarkable differences were found between
DiFi5 and parental cells in phosphorylation of the Y527 autoinhibitory site at basal level or on EGF stimulation (29). Figure 5B
shows the effects of inhibiting Src kinase on the phosphorylation
levels of EGFR in DiFi and DiFi5 cells. In both parental and DiFi5
cells, PP2 decreased both the basal and EGF-stimulated levels of
EGFR phosphorylation on Y1068, Y1045, Y992, and Y845, although
it was more effective in decreasing the basal level than the EGFstimulated level. These results suggest that Src kinase activity is
involved in the tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR on cellular
stimulation with EGF. Strikingly, whereas PP2 decreased phosphorylation of Y845, a Src phosphorylation site (30–32), in DiFi
cells, PP2 induced twice as much inhibition in DiFi5 cells, suggesting a greater role for Src in phosphorylating the EGFR kinase in
DiFi5 cells than in DiFi cells. PP2 did not alter total EGFR levels,
suggesting that Src did not regulate ubiquitination and degradation
of EGFR over the time course treated.
We next examined the effect of inhibiting Src with PP2 on basal
and EGF-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and ERK in DiFi
and DiFi5 cells (Fig. 5C). Similar to the results shown in Figs. 4 and
5A and B, EGF induced comparable levels of activation-specific
phosphorylation of Akt and ERK in DiFi and DiFi5 cells despite a
lower level of EGFR in the latter. Interestingly, inhibition of Src with
PP2 elicited a very different effect on EGF-induced phosphorylation

8244

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Mechanism of Acquired Resistance to Cetuximab

of Akt and ERK in DiFi and DiFi5 cells. Stimulation of the cells with
EGF produced comparable levels of activation-specific phosphorylation of Akt, which was equally sensitive to PP2 treatment,
suggesting that Src plays an important role in EGF-stimulated
phosphorylation of Akt in both DiFi and DiFi5 cells. In contrast,
PP2 had no inhibitory effect on EGF-stimulated phosphorylation of
ERK in DiFi cells. The basal level of phosphorylated ERK was
slightly higher in DiFi5 cells than in DiFi cells. Treatment of the
DiFi5 cells with PP2 even led to increased ERK phosphorylation
both at the basal level and on EGF stimulation. This finding
suggests that in DiFi5 cells, Src is not only dispensable for EGFRinduced ERK phosphorylation but also exhibits a modest inhibitory
effect on ERK phosphorylation; inhibition of Src released the
inhibition and accordingly increased the level of ERK phosphorylation.
The higher level of Src activation-specific phosphorylation on
Y416 in DiFi5 cells suggests that Src may perform an enhanced role
in cell survival in collaboration with EGFR in DiFi5 cells. We
therefore examined whether inhibition of Src with PP2 would
reverse the resistance of DiFi5 cells to cetuximab treatment. We
found that, compared with DiFi cells, DiFi5 cells were resistant to
cetuximab-induced apoptosis but were equal or more sensitive to
PP2-induced apoptosis, as assessed by two independent apoptosis
assays, one measuring the levels of histone-associated DNA
fragmentation in the cytoplasm by ELISA (Fig. 6A) and the other
measuring poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) proteolytic cleavage levels (Fig. 6B). Treatment of DiFi5 cells with a combination of
cetuximab and PP2 substantially increased apoptosis. Compared
with the levels of activation-specific phosphorylation of Akt at S473
in DiFi cells after cetuximab and PP2 treatment, cetuximab had no
effect on the basal level of Akt phosphorylation in DiFi5 cells, but
PP2 had a stronger effect in DiFi5 cells than in DiFi cells.
Treatment of DiFi5 cells with a combination of cetuximab and PP2
inhibited Akt phosphorylation to a degree comparable to that in
DiFi cells treated with cetuximab alone (which is sufficient to
induce apoptosis). With regard to the activation-specific phosphorylation of ERK in DiFi cells, PP2 had no effect on or slightly
increased ERK phosphorylation compared with cetuximab, which
strongly inhibited ERK phosphorylation. Combination treatment
with PP2 and cetuximab led to a lesser decrease in ERK
phosphorylation than with cetuximab alone. The basal level of
ERK phosphorylation was modestly higher, and cetuximab
inhibited ERK phosphorylation to a lesser degree, if at all, in DiFi5
cells than in DiFi cells. Interestingly, PP2 treatment led to a higher
level of ERK phosphorylation than that in untreated DiFi5 cells,
but the combination of PP2 and cetuximab had an effect similar to
that in DiFi cells, except that overall ERK phosphorylation was at
a higher level in DiFi5 cells. Linking these results to the levels
of apoptosis induced by treatment with cetuximab, PP2, or the
combination, our findings suggest that the activity-specific
inhibition of Akt phosphorylation is more important than that of
ERK phosphorylation for the induction of apoptosis by cetuximab.
Because ubiquitination and degradation play a fundamental role
in the phenotypic changes of DiFi5 cells by reducing the level of
EGFR, we examined the effects of PP2 and cetuximab on cellular
levels of Cbl in DiFi and DiFi5 cells. We found that treatment of
DiFi cells with cetuximab led to a modest decrease in Cbl levels,
whereas PP2 elevated the level of Cbl in DiFi cells. The exposure of
DiFi cells to cetuximab and PP2 simultaneously offset their
respective effects on Cbl. DiFi5 cells contained a higher basal level
of Cbl, as shown in Fig. 2. Cetuximab had little or no effect on

www.aacrjournals.org

the level of Cbl protein, whereas PP2 decreased the level of Cbl
compared with untreated cells; this effect was abolished and
indeed modestly reversed when DiFi5 cells were simultaneously
exposed to both cetuximab and PP2. This result suggests that the
pathway(s) or mechanism(s) regulating the level of Cbl protein, an
important ubiquitin ligase to both EGFR and Src, is altered in DiFi5
cells compared with the parental cells.

Discussion
Acquired resistance commonly develops in cancer cells through
modification of the structure or functionality of the drug target.
The conventional approach to identifying structural or functional

Figure 5. Effects of the Src inhibitor PP2 on basal and EGF-stimulated
phosphorylation of Src, EGFR, Akt, and ERK in DiFi and DiFi5 cells. DiFi and
DiFi5 cells were left untreated or treated with 5 Amol/L PP2 overnight (16 h)
in culture medium with 0.5% FBS. Before harvesting, the PP2-treated and
untreated cells were either stimulated with 10 nmol/L EGF for 15 min or not.
The cells were then lysed and equal amounts of cell lysates were subjected to
SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis with various antibodies directed against
total or site-specific phosphorylation of EGFR, Src, Akt, and ERK, as shown.
Densitometric values of cell signaling are indicated with a group line underneath
selected gel pictures and shown as relative folds to untreated DiFi or DiFi5 cells.

8245

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Resensitization of DiFi5 cells by PP2 to cetuximab-induced apoptosis. A, DiFi and DiFi5 cells were left untreated or treated with 20 nmol/L cetuximab or
5 Amol/L PP2, alone or in combination, overnight (16 h) in culture medium with 0.5% FBS. After treatment, the cells were harvested and lysates were prepared
for quantification of the levels of histone-associated DNA fragmentation in the cytoplasm by ELISA. B, DiFi and DiFi5 cells received the same treatment as in (A)
and were examined by Western blot analysis for levels of PARP cleavage and changes in the phosphorylation levels of Akt and ERK and cellular level of Cbl
protein after treatment. Densitometric values of cell signaling are indicated with a group line underneath selected gel pictures and shown as relative folds to untreated
DiFi or DiFi5 cells.

changes associated with acquired resistance is to compare
congeneic sensitive cells with counterparts that are clinically or
experimentally induced to become resistant to the treatment. In
this study, we found increased ubiquitination and degradation of
EGFR in a cetuximab-resistant subline (DiFi5) of EGFR-overexpressing DiFi cells. We found that Src plays a critical role in
concert with EGFR to support the survival of DiFi5 cells on
cetuximab treatment and that inhibition of Src kinase with PP2
resensitized the resistant DiFi5 cells to cetuximab treatment.
Both Src and EGFR play important roles in human malignancies.
Oncogenic collaboration between Src and EGFR in cell transformation is well established (27, 28). Earlier studies have shown that
a high level of Src potentiated the mitogenic and tumorigenic
capacity of EGFR (25, 30). The kinase activity of Src is required for
both biological synergy with EGFR and phosphorylation of EGFR,
although kinase activity is not required for a physical association
between Src and EGFR (25). Src-dependent phosphorylation of
Y845 on EGFR is required for DNA synthesis induced not only by
EGF but also by several transactivating agonists of EGFR, such as
endothelin, lysophosphatidic acid, cytokines, and growth hormone,
all of which act through G-protein–coupled receptors (33).
Transient expression of the Y845F mutant of EGFR in murine
fibroblasts resulted in the ablation of DNA synthesis induced by
EGF or by transactivating agonists (25, 30, 33).
In the current study, we found that DiFi5 cells contain a higher
basal level of activation-specific phosphorylation on Src-Y416 and
an enhanced response to EGF-stimulated phosphorylation of SrcY416. The high level of Src-Y416 phosphorylation was accompanied
by a high level of Src-mediated Y845 phosphorylation of EGFR.
Indeed, the levels of Y845 phosphorylation were quite remarkable
when considering the low level of EGFR protein in DiFi5 cells. This
observation suggests that Src plays a more important role in
collaborating with EGFR in DiFi5 cells than in DiFi cells. We found
that in both DiFi and DiFi5 cells, the EGF-stimulated phosphor-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

ylation of Akt requires Src kinase activity because PP2 treatment
inhibited Akt phosphorylation in both cells. The basal level of Akt
phosphorylation was reduced by both cetuximab and PP2 in DiFi
cells but only by PP2 (to a greater extent) in DiFi5 cells, suggesting
a more important role for Src in Akt phosphorylation in DiFi5
cells. In contrast, neither basal nor EGF-stimulated ERK phosphorylation required Src kinase activity in the cells, and inhibition
of Src kinase with PP2 even led to higher levels of both basal and
EGF-stimulated ERK phosphorylation in DiFi5 cells. These results
may be due to PP2-mediated inhibition of Src with subsequent
inhibition of Akt activity, leading to an increase in ERK phosphorylation, owing to the known negative effect of Akt on ERK
phosphorylation via inhibition of Raf-1/B-Raf signaling (34, 35).
A recent study proposed a model through which Src collaborates
with EGFR in oncogenesis (36). Src may promote ubiquitination
and proteasomal degradation of Cbl by phosphorylating Cbl
proteins on tyrosine residues, through which Src reduces the
negative role of Cbl in EGFR stability (i.e., ubiquitination of EGFR
for sorting to the endosome; ref. 36). We found that whereas this
may be the case in DiFi cells, in which inhibition of Src with PP2
led to a higher level of Cbl protein, it does not seem to occur in the
cetuximab-resistant DiFi5 cells because inhibition of Src with PP2
down-regulated rather than up-regulated the Cbl protein level. In
addition, in contrast to this model, the increased activity of Src in
DiFi5 cells was associated with a higher basal level of Cbl, which
decreased EGFR stability in DiFi5 cells. Furthermore, PP2 did not
alter EGFR levels over the time course assessed. Thus, Src-induced
ubiquitination of Cbl and the subsequent down-regulation of Cbl
levels do not seem to account for altered levels of EGFR in DiFi5
cells. The increase of Cbl protein level in DiFi5 cells found in our
study is likely due to de novo synthesis, which warrants further
investigation.
In summary, cetuximab-resistant DiFi5 colorectal cancer cells
showed a remarkable decrease in the level of EGFR and an

8246

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Mechanism of Acquired Resistance to Cetuximab

enhanced role of Src kinase in collaboration with EGFR for
supporting cell growth and survival. Our results suggest that the
implementation of combination treatments targeting both EGFR
and Src kinases may result in better therapeutic outcomes for
patients with colorectal cancer.

References
1. Mendelsohn J, Baselga J. Status of epidermal growth
factor receptor antagonists in the biology and treatment
of cancer. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:2787–99.
2. Mendelsohn J, Baselga J. The EGF receptor family as
targets for cancer therapy. Oncogene 2000;19:6550–65.
3. New treatments for colorectal cancer. FDA Consum
2004;38:17.
4. Treatment for head and neck cancer. FDA Consum
2006;40:7.
5. Speedy approvals for new cancer treatments. FDA
Consum 2003;37:36.
6. Clinical trial of Iressa. FDA Consum 2005;39:4.
7. New drug to treat most common lung cancer. FDA
Consum 2005;39:3.
8. Viloria-Petit A, Crombet T, Jothy S, et al. Acquired
resistance to the antitumor effect of epidermal growth
factor receptor-blocking antibodies in vivo : a role for
altered tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2001;61:5090–101.
9. Ciardiello F, Bianco R, Caputo R, et al. Antitumor
activity of ZD6474, a vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in human
cancer cells with acquired resistance to antiepidermal
growth factor receptor therapy. Clin Cancer Res 2004;
10:784–93.
10. Wu X, Fan Z, Masui H, et al. Apoptosis induced by an
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal
antibody in a human colorectal carcinoma cell line
and its delay by insulin. J Clin Invest 1995;95:1897–905.
11. Wu X, Rubin M, Fan Z, et al. Involvement of p27KIP1
in G1 arrest mediated by an anti-epidermal growth
factor receptor monoclonal antibody. Oncogene 1996;12:
1397–403.
12. Liu B, Fang M, Schmidt M, et al. Induction of
apoptosis and activation of the caspase cascade by antiEGF receptor monoclonal antibodies in DiFi human
colon cancer cells do not involve the c-jun N-terminal
kinase activity. Br J Cancer 2000;82:1991–9.
13. Liu B, Fang M, Lu Y, et al. Fibroblast growth factor
and insulin-like growth factor differentially modulate
the apoptosis and G1 arrest induced by anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody. Oncogene
2001;20:1913–22.

www.aacrjournals.org

Acknowledgments
Received 2/14/2007; revised 4/3/2007; accepted 5/2/2007.
Grant support: An unrestricted grant from Bristol-Myers Squibb.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

14. Liu B, Fan Z. The monoclonal antibody 225 activates
caspase-8 and induces apoptosis through a tumor
necrosis factor receptor family-independent pathway.
Oncogene 2001;20:3726–34.
15. Fan Z, Baselga J, Masui H, et al. Antitumor effect of
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal
antibodies plus cis -diamminedichloroplatinum on well
established A431 cell xenografts. Cancer Res 1993;53:
4637–42.
16. Ciardiello F, Bianco R, Damiano V, et al. Antitumor
activity of sequential treatment with topotecan and
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal
antibody C225. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:909–16.
17. Ciardiello F, Bianco R, Damiano V, et al. Antiangiogenic and antitumor activity of anti-epidermal growth
factor receptor C225 monoclonal antibody in combination with vascular endothelial growth factor antisense
oligonucleotide in human GEO colon cancer cells. Clin
Cancer Res 2000;6:3739–47.
18. Steck PA, Lee P, Hung MC, et al. Expression of an
altered epidermal growth factor receptor by human
glioblastoma cells. Cancer Res 1988;48:5433–9.
19. Panneerselvam K, Kanakaraj P, Raj S, et al. Characterization of a novel epidermal-growth-factor-receptorrelated 200-kDa tyrosine kinase in tumor cells. Eur J
Biochem 1995;230:951–7.
20. Ciesielski MJ, Fenstermaker RA. Oncogenic epidermal growth factor receptor mutants with tandem
duplication: gene structure and effects on receptor
function. Oncogene 2000;19:810–20.
21. Fenstermaker RA, Ciesielski MJ. Deletion and tandem
duplication of exons 2-7 in the epidermal growth factor
receptor gene of a human malignant glioma. Oncogene
2000;19:4542–8.
22. Frederick L, Wang XY, Eley G, et al. Diversity and
frequency of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in human glioblastomas. Cancer Res 2000;60:
1383–7.
23. Soderquist AM, Carpenter G. Glycosylation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor in A-431 cells. The
contribution of carbohydrate to receptor function. J Biol
Chem 1984;259:12586–94.
24. Thien CB, Walker F, Langdon WY. RING finger
mutations that abolish c-Cbl-directed polyubiquitina-

8247

tion and down-regulation of the EGF receptor are
insufficient for cell transformation. Mol Cell 2001;7:
355–65.
25. Tice DA, Biscardi JS, Nickles AL, et al. Mechanism of
biological synergy between cellular Src and epidermal
growth factor receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;
96:1415–20.
26. Nagata Y, Lan KH, Zhou X, et al. PTEN activation
contributes to tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and
loss of PTEN predicts trastuzumab resistance in
patients. Cancer Cell 2004;6:117–27.
27. Parsons SJ, Parsons JT. Src family kinases, key
regulators of signal transduction. Oncogene 2004;23:
7906–9.
28. Ishizawar R, Parsons SJ. c-Src and cooperating
partners in human cancer. Cancer Cell 2004;6:209–14.
29. Hunter T. A tail of two src’s: mutatis mutandis. Cell
1987;49:1–4.
30. Biscardi JS, Maa MC, Tice DA, et al. c-Src-mediated
phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor on Tyr845 and Tyr1101 is associated with
modulation of receptor function. J Biol Chem 1999;
274:8335–43.
31. Sato K, Sato A, Aoto M, et al. c-Src phosphorylates
epidermal growth factor receptor on tyrosine 845.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995;215:1078–87.
32. Sato K, Nagao T, Iwasaki T, et al. Src-dependent
phosphorylation of the EGF receptor Tyr-845 mediates
Stat-p21waf1 pathway in A431 cells. Genes Cells 2003;8:
995–1003.
33. Boerner JL, Biscardi JS, Silva CM, et al. Transactivating agonists of the EGF receptor require Tyr 845
phosphorylation for induction of DNA synthesis. Mol
Carcinog 2005;44:262–73.
34. Zimmermann S, Moelling K. Phosphorylation and
regulation of Raf by Akt (protein kinase B). Science 1999;
286:1741–4.
35. Rommel C, Clarke BA, Zimmermann S, et al.
Differentiation stage-specific inhibition of the RafMEK-ERK pathway by Akt. Science 1999;286:1738–41.
36. Bao J, Gur G, Yarden Y. Src promotes destruction of
c-Cbl: implications for oncogenic synergy between Src
and growth factor receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:2438–43.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) Ubiquitination as
a Mechanism of Acquired Resistance Escaping Treatment by
the Anti-EGFR Monoclonal Antibody Cetuximab
Yang Lu, Xinqun Li, Ke Liang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:8240-8247.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8240

This article cites 36 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8240.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 24 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8240.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

