Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

ENT1 and treatment of viral diseases
Rajesh Panigrahi and Srikanta Dash
Ribavirin (RBV) is a synthetic nucleoside analogue
(1-b-D-ribofuranosyl-1,
2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide)
used for the treatment of a number of viral diseases.
RBV inhibits inosine 5’-phosphate dehydrogenase
(IMPDH), the enzyme required for synthesis of guanosine
monophosphate (GMS) as well as DNA and RNA
synthesis. Based on this mechanism of action, RBV is also
used in the treatment of solid tumors, lymphoproliferative
disease and some inflammatory diseases such as Crohn’s
disease. A number of nucleoside analogs including RBV
diffuse across cell membranes through a membrane
transporter protein called equilibrative nucleoside
transporter-1 (ENT1). Our recent publication demonstrated
that an autophagy response induced by hepatitis C virus
(HCV) in a cell culture reduces RBV uptake and antiviral
activity by diminishing the surface expression of ENT1
[1]. Moreover, our findings provide a potential mechanism
explaining how the expression of ENT1 is modulated by
clathrin heavy chain when cellular autophagy response
is increased. We showed that expression level of clathrin
heavy chain is decreased due to increased autophagy
response. Down regulation of clathrin heavy chain
by autophagy prevents ENT1 recycling to the plasma
membrane, forcing ENT1 to the lysosome for degradation
(Figure 1). We also showed that autophagy induction
by the small molecule inhibitor Torin 1 decreases the
expression of ENT1 on cell surface, indicating that an
increased autophagy response due to viral and non-viral
causes could modulate the expression of ENT1 on cell
membranes. We found that RBV antiviral activity against
HCV is enhanced when the cellular autophagy response
inhibited by using hydroxychloroquine. It is important
to mention that this study will have broader implications
for understanding the treatment response of other viral
diseases and cancers by using nucleoside analogues as
a drug target. We discussed how this finding could be
explored to improve the therapeutic response of RBV
against viral disease and cancer by inhibiting cellular
autophagy.
Human ENTs are the nucleoside transporter proteins
expressed on the cell membrane that occur as four
isoforms (ENT1-ENT4). These proteins play important
roles in transporting nucleosides- and nucleotides-based
small molecule drugs. The expression of ENT1 is critical
for salvage of natural nucleotides and nucleosides for
nucleic acid synthesis, neurotransmission, and regulation
of cardiovascular activity [2]. The expression of ENT1 is
used as a biomarker in the clinic for uptake of exogenous
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

nucleoside and nucleotide analogues used for the treatment
of viral disease and cancer. The ENT1 mRNA is translated
and protein is folded in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
then transported via Golgi apparatus to the plasma
membrane. In the plasma membrane the expression of
ENT1 is maintained by internalization and recycling
through clathrin-mediated endocytosis. The membrane
expression of ENT1 is linked to cellular endocytosis
and expression of the clathrin heavy chain. Recently two
publications demonstrated that clathrin heavy chain is
directly involved in the formation of autophagolysosomes
and autophagic lysosme reformation [3, 4]. These
invstigators showed that silencing clathrin heavy chain
decreases autophagolysosome formation. The clathrin
heavy chain level is decreased when cellular autophagy is
increased [1]. Autophagy is a highly conserved, lysosome
based degradation process. Since the cellular autophagy
response is increased in viral infection, cancer and also
during chemotherapy, we anticipate that the proposed
autophagy related mechanism that modulates the ENT1
expression on cell surface could play an important role in
drug response.
Taking into consideration the previously mentioned
autophagy related mechanism that regulates the expression
of ENT1, it is reasonable to speculate that cellular

Figure 1: Diagram summarizing how HCV induced
autophagy response decreases the cell surface expression
of nucleoside transporter-1 (ENT-1) through clathrin
mediated recycling. Loss of clathrin heavy chain due to
increased autophagy response impairs recycling of ENT1
forcing it for degradation in the autolysosome.

32281

Oncotarget

autophagy status could regulate the uptake and response
to nucleoside based treatment of viral infection or cancer.
RBV has been used for the treatment of a number of viral
infections with modest antiviral activity. The decreased
antiviral activity of RBV against virus disease could be
related to the degree of cellular autophagy response and
expression of ENT1. Based on our results, we propose
that inhibiting cellular autophagy response should
improve the RBV uptake and antiviral activity against
other viruses. One report showed that RBV has a potent
antitumor activity against metastatic breast cancer [5]. The
cellular uptake of a number of nucleotide analogs such
as mercaptopurine cytarabine, fludarabine, pentostatin,
cladribine, azacitinine, clofarabine, nelarabine, decitabine,
floxuridine, gemcitabine, capacitabine and 5-fluorouracil
(used for the treatment of lymphoproliferative disease,
solid tumors and pancreatic cancer) may be inflammed
by ENT1 expression in cancer cells. All of the above
nucleosides enter to cancer cells primarily via ENT1 are
metabolized intracellularly and incorporated into DNA
and RNA resulting in chain termination, apoptosis and
cell death. We also anticipate that the treatment of some
other cancers such as lymphoma and pancreatic cancer by
nucleoside analogs could be affected by the reduced ENT1
expression by autophagy. We postulate that decreased
expression of ENT1 due to increased autophagy response
could have a negative impact on chemotherapy response
of the above described nucleoside analogs.
The responses to gemcitabine treatment of
pancreatic cancer have been shown to be correlate
with reduced expression of ENT1 transporter. Over
expression of ENT1 enhances the gemcitabine response
in human pancreatic cancer, tumor cells lacking ENT1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

expression are highly resistant to gemcitabine [2]. This is
also supported by a number of clinical studies showing
that impaired expression of ENT1 correlates with drug
resistance in non-small cell lung cancer [2]. Significant
correlation has also been found between gemcitabine
chemotherapy and ENT1 expression in the treatment
of bladder cancer [2]. It remains to be tested whether
inhibiting autophagy response could restore ENT1
expression and improve gemcitabine chemotherapy. In
summary, our results, as well as the hypothesis presented
herein related to cellular autophagy regulation of clathrin
and ENT1 membrane expression will shed light on the
clinical implication and mechanism of treating of viral
infection and cancer with nucleoside analogs.
Srikanta Dash: Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, LA, USA
Correspondence to: Srikanta Dash, email sdash@tulane.edu
Keywords: autophagy, ENT1
Received: August 19, 2015
Published: September 28, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Panigrahi R, et al. J Virology. 2015; 89: 626-642.

2.	 Pastor-Anglada M and Perez-Torras S. Frontiers in
Pharmacology. 2015; 6:1-14.

32282

3.	

Ravikumar B, et al. Nature Cell Biology. 2010; 12:747-757.

4.	

Rong Y, et al. Nature Cell Biology. 2011; 14:924-934.

5.	

Pettersson F, et al. Cancer Research, 2015; 75:1102-1112.

Oncotarget

