NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2013 August 15; 154(4): 888–903. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.020.

Developmental Fate and Cellular Maturity Encoded in Human
Regulatory DNA Landscapes
Andrew B. Stergachis#1, Shane Neph#1, Alex Reynolds1, Richard Humbert1, Brady Miller1,5,
Sharon L. Paige2,3, Benjamin Vernot1, Jeffrey B. Cheng9, Robert E. Thurman1, Richard
Sandstrom1, Eric Haugen1, Shelly Heimfeld8, Charles E. Murry2,3,4,6, Joshua M. Akey1, and
John A. Stamatoyannopoulos1,7,*
1Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
2Department
3Institute

of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109,

USA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

4Department

of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

5Department

of Medicine, Division of Hematology University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,

USA
6Department

of Medicine, Division of Cardiology University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,

USA
7Department

of Medicine, Division of Oncology University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,

USA
8Clinical

Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

9Department

#

of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA

These authors contributed equally to this work.

SUMMARY

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cellular-state information between generations of developing cells may be propagated via
regulatory regions. We report consistent patterns of gain and loss of DNase I-hypersensitive sites
(DHSs) as cells progress from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to terminal fates. DHS patterns alone
convey rich information about cell fate and lineage relationships distinct from information
conveyed by gene expression. Developing cells share a proportion of their DHS landscapes with
ESCs; that proportion decreases continuously in each cell type as differentiation progresses,
providing a quantitative benchmark of developmental maturity. Developmentally stable DHSs
densely encode binding sites for transcription factors involved in autoregulatory feedback circuits.
In contrast to normal cells, cancer cells extensively reactivate silenced ESC DHSs and those from
developmental programs external to the cell lineage from which the malignancy derives. Our
results point to changes in regulatory DNA landscapes as quantitative indicators of cell-fate
transitions, lineage relationships, and dysfunction.

©2013 Elsevier Inc.
*

Correspondence: jstam@uw.edu.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, seven figures, and three tables and can be found with this
article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.020.

Stergachis et al.

Page 2

INTRODUCTION
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Under natural conditions, tissue and cellular differentiation along defined lineages is
characterized by an inexorably forward-moving process that terminates in highly specialized
cells. Waddington, following Morgan (Morgan, 1901), characterized the process of
development as essentially “epigenetic” (from “epigenesis”) (Waddington, 1939) and also
introduced the metaphor of an “epigenetic landscape” (Waddington, 1940), which he
depicted with a ball rolling down a hill of bifurcating valleys symbolizing the specification
of defined cell lineages and fates during the progress of differentiation (Waddington, 1939,
1957). It is notable that Waddington's usage of epigenetic to denote the origination and
propagation of information about cellular states during differentiation differs considerably
from its recent reformulation to mean “on the genome” and its association with chemical
modifications to DNA or chromatin (Ptashne, 2007). Here we employ the classical usage
throughout.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Waddington astutely reasoned that epigenesis is a “historical” process requiring a memory
“faculty” to keep directed lineage programs on track (Waddington, 1939). Indeed,
developing cells are frequently exposed to stimuli, whether exogenous (e.g., a morphogen)
or endogenous (e.g., a transcription factor [TF]), that can permanently alter cellular fate.
Whether or in what form cells in fact maintain information concerning prior developmental
fate decisions during epigenesis is currently unknown.
The epigenetic landscape paradigm has also been invoked to explain abnormal processes
such as oncogenesis (Pujadas and Feinberg, 2012). Cancer cells are widely described as
being “de-differentiated” compared with their normal counterparts, based on limited
analyses of metabolic (Warburg, 1956), histological (Gleason and Mellinger, 1974), geneactivity (Hirszfeld et al., 1932; Tatarinov, 1964), and proliferative and self-renewal
phenotypes (Beard, 1902; Waddington, 1935). However, quantifying this concept and
generalizing it beyond a few selected markers have proven difficult.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chromatin structure represents a highly plastic vehicle for specifying cellular regulatory
states and is a conceptually attractive template for recording and transmitting epigenetic
information (Bernstein et al., 2006; Hawkins et al., 2010; Paige et al., 2012; Wamstad et al.,
2012; Zhu et al., 2013). DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) represent focal alterations in
the primary structure of chromatin that result from engagement of sequence-specific
transcription factors in place of a canonical nucleosome (Gross and Garrard, 1988; Thurman
et al., 2012). In a classic experiment, Groudine and Weintraub demonstrated that induced
DHSs could be propagated to, and stably perpetuated by, daughter cells even after the
inducing stimulus had been withdrawn (Groudine and Weintraub, 1982). This result
suggests that newly arising DHSs created by TF occupancy of quiescent regulatory DNA
have the potential to encode cellular states and to perpetuate that information through
continued TF occupancy in daughter cells. Whether, or to what extent, such a mechanism
operates during normal development and differentiation, however, is currently unknown.
To explore the role of TF-driven chromatin structure at regulatory DNA in normal and
transformed cells during epigenesis, we analyzed genome-wide patterns of DHSs across a
wide array of cell types and states, including definitive adult primary cells, embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), cells undergoing directed lineage differentiation from ESCs to
cardiomyocytes, and diverse cancer cell types. Our findings, detailed below, are interpreted
to indicate four fundamental conclusions. First, patterns of DHSs in definitive cells encode
“memory” of early developmental fate decisions that establish lineage hierarchies. Second,
lineage differentiation couples the extensive activation of novel regulatory DNA
compartments with propagation and sequential restriction of the ES DHS landscape as a

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

function of cellular maturity. Third, developmentally stable DHSs chiefly encode binding
sites for self-regulating TFs, suggesting a mechanistic role for TF-encoded feedback circuits
in propagating developmental information. Finally, oncogenesis is accompanied by a
disordered retrograde remodeling of the regulatory DNA landscape in a fashion that defies
normal developmental pathways and departs fundamentally from the paradigm of the
epigenetic landscape. Together these findings indicate a central role for patterning and
propagation of regulatory DNA marked by DHSs in the genesis and proper maintenance of
developmental programs.

RESULTS
Lineage Programming of Human Regulatory DNA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Regulatory DNA landscapes defined by DHSs are both highly cell type specific and highly
stable (Thurman et al., 2012). We first sought to determine how the regulatory landscapes of
diverse definitive cells were related to one another and to the regulatory DNA of ESCs. To
address this, we collected genome-wide maps of DHSs from human ESCs plus 38 diverse
normal definitive primary cell types (Thurman et al., 2012) for which anatomical and
histological origins could be unambiguously verified. To expand the phenotypic range of
cell types and to deepen coverage of the well-characterized hematopoietic lineage, we
obtained nine additional definitive cell samples from adult donors, including B cells
(CD19+, CD20+), natural killer (NK) cells (CD56+), CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors
(three separate donors), and skin keratinocytes (three donors). The relative representation of
different major embryological lineages (mesoderm, ectoderm, endoderm) among these 49
cell types parallels that of recognized cell types (Bard et al., 2005), of which those of
mesodermal origin comprise the significant majority. We performed DNase Ihypersensitivity mapping on each of the 49 cell types using a common protocol and
delineated DHSs using a common algorithm that has been extensively validated for both
sensitivity and specificity (John et al., 2011; Thurman et al., 2012) (Experimental
Procedures), resulting in an average of 161,160 autosomal DHSs per cell type (at false
discovery rate [FDR] 1%, range 91,720 to 257,172; Table S1). Although most DHSs were
highly cell selective, preliminary inspection of the DNase I profiles suggested systematic
commonalities between major cell-type groups (Figures 1A, S1A, and S1B).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To visualize these relationships quantitatively, we considered each DHS to be either present
or absent within a given cell type (versus total DNase I signal, to avoid biasing toward
promoters, which display higher average DNase I sensitivity than distal elements) (Thurman
et al., 2012) and computed the Euclidean distance between all nonredundant pairs of cell
types. Rendering the results with simple unsupervised nearest-neighbor clustering (Figure
1B) produced an ab initio dendrogram that recapitulated known cell-lineage relationships
with remarkable detail, as well as broader features of embryological origin. On a gross level,
ESCs occupied the deepest root, and derivatives of the three germ layers (mesoderm,
ectoderm, and endoderm) were correctly partitioned into separate high-level clusters (Figure
1B). Mesodermal progeny were further partitioned into paraxial mesoderm, primitive
mesoderm, and hemangioblast derivatives. The common embryological origin of endothelia
and blood was clearly represented, as was the fine partitioning of the hematopoietic tree into
hematopoietic progenitors, lymphoid and myeloid cells, and the different subtypes of
lymphoid tissue, including B cells, T cells, NK cells, and more primitive lymphoblastoid
cells. Although relationships between the derivatives of paraxial mesoderm are less well
understood, we observed subgroups that were organized into anatomical units, such as
grouping of heart and great vessel stroma. The distinctiveness of these major cluster groups
was clearly evinced by displaying the aforementioned pairwise Euclidean distance measures
with a three-dimensional principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) (Figure 1C). This analysis

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 4

also revealed that the regulatory DNA landscape of ESCs occupies a central position relative
to all other cell types.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To confirm the robustness of the clustering, we performed bootstrap analysis, which
determined the nearly complete stability of all major branches (Figure S1C). The robustness
of the clustered cell relationships was further attested bythe strict cohesion of multiple
samples of the same cell type, including gingival fibroblasts (n = 2), cardiac fibroblasts (n =
2), hematopoietic progenitors (n = 3), and keratinocytes (n = 3), that were derived from
different individuals at different times. In addition, we prospectively tested the ability of the
dendrogram to classify eight additional cell types of diverse embryological origin (Figures
S1D–S1F). Importantly, clustering gene-expression patterns for the same cell types failed to
recover the fundamental lineage-branching relationships exposed by clustering DHS patterns
(Figures S3A and S3B), including rooting of the lineage tree in ESCs, and showed improper
high-level segregation of germ-layer derivatives and improper partitioning of mesodermal
derivatives. These results demonstrate that the dendrogram in Figure 1B is not driven by
functional convergence on gene-expression patterns.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The fact that the aforementioned lineage relationships—including representation of specific
primitive commitment events—can be derived from a simple clustering of the DHS
landscapes of terminally differentiated cells suggests that the linear patterning of regulatory
DNA along the genome encodes an imprint of prior cellular fate decisions. Given that ESCs
represent a common developmental ancestor to the other cell types, the centrality of ESCs
within the PCoA plot suggests that significant yet distinct components of the ESC regulatory
landscape are shared in each of the definitive cell types (see below).
An “Hourglass” Pattern of Conservation at Developmental Regulatory DNA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Next, we sought to determine whether the pattern of developmental maturity reflected in the
dendrogram was systematically paralleled by patterns of evolutionary constraint on
regulatory DNA. We first identified regulatory DNA stably arising at seven distinct inferred
developmental branch points (epiblast, mesoderm, hemangioblast, paraxial mesoderm,
endothelia, hematopoietic, and lymphoid) by identifying DHSs common to the
corresponding dependent branches of the dendrogram in Figure 1. We then used phyloP to
calculate the mean level of evolutionary constraint for each set of elements (Experimental
Procedures). This analysis revealed that regulatory DNA common to mesodermal
derivatives (and thus inferred to be stably arising during the onset of the mesodermal
lineage) is significantly more evolutionarily constrained than that arising during either early
embryogenesis or later lineage differentiation (Figure 1D). This pattern is compatible with
the “hourglass” model of development (Duboule, 1994; Raff, 1996) that has been variably
described using cross-species morphology (Von Baer, 1828), gene expression (Kalinka et
al., 2010), and gene conservation (Domazet-Lošo and Tautz, 2010).
Developmental Persistence of Chromatin Accessibility at Primitive Enhancers
We next asked whether enhancers active during early development could be persistently
marked by DHSs in definitive cells. Systematic studies of evolutionarily conserved human
DNA elements in transgenic mice have identified >700 early developmental enhancers
(Pennacchio et al., 2006), each of which displays consistent activity in one or more
embryonic tissues (Figure 2A). Of 721 nonpromoter human enhancers with reproducible
tissue-staining patterns in transgenic day 11.5 embryos, a surprising proportion—64%—
exhibit DNase I hypersensitivity in at least one definitive human cell type (Figure 2B). To
quantify the tissue activity spectra of these elements, we systematically collated images of
enhancer-driven lacZ expression in individual transgenic animals and related these with
cross-cell-type patterns of DNase I hypersensitivity at the same elements in definitive cells.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For example, an enhancer that is selectively active in embryonic heart tissue (Figure 2A, 1st
image) is DNase I hypersensitive selectively within cells derived from human heart and
great vessel structures (Figure 2C), and an enhancer that is selectively active in embryonic
blood vessels (Figure 2A, 3rd image) is DNase I hypersensitive selectively within
hemangioblast derivatives (endothelia and hematopoietic progenitors; Figure 2C). By
contrast, an enhancer with extremely broad tissue activity (Figure 2A, 4th image) is DNase I
hypersensitive in nearly all definitive cell types (Figure 2C).
These findings generalize across the spectrum of enhancers: 100% of enhancers active in
embryonic blood vessels are found to be DNase I hypersensitive in adult endothelial cells,
whereas only 30% of all other embryonic enhancers are DNase I hypersensitive in
endothelia (Figures S2A–S2C). Similarly, 73% of enhancers that are active in embryonic
heart tissue are DNase I hypersensitive within cells derived from human heart and great
vessel structures, whereas only 27% of all other embryonic enhancers are DNase I
hypersensitive in these cell types (Figure S2D).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We also found striking correlation between the number of primitive tissues in which
enhancer activity was detected and the number of definitive cell types in which a DHS was
detected at that enhancer (Figure 2D). Together, these results suggest both systematic
developmental persistence of DNase I hypersensitivity at a subset of early developmental
enhancers and a persistent imprint of enhancer functional spectra in the form of DHS
patterning across different definitive cell types.
Restriction versus Expansion of the Chromatin Landscape during Differentiation
The relationship between ESCs and definitive lineage derivatives in Figure 1, combined
with evidence for developmental persistence of individual DHSs, prompted us to analyze in
detail the relative gain and loss of DHSs along specific developmental clines. It is notable
that ESCs have the largest DHS complement of all cell types analyzed (n = 257,172
excluding ChrX/Y; Figure S3C and Table S1), of which 58% are shared with at least one
definitive cell type (Figure S3D).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Development along the hematopoietic lineage has been extensively characterized at both the
cellular and molecular levels (Orkin, 1995). During hematopoiesis, the accessible chromatin
landscape undergoes substantial reorganization that is dominated by the inactivation rather
than the de novo activation of DHSs (Figures 3A and 3B). Comparison of the DHS
landscape of ESCs to that of hematopoietic progenitors reveals a net loss of 119,032 DHSs,
achieved through the silencing of 202,412 ES DHSs and the de novo activation of 83,380
DHSs. As hematopoietic progenitors terminally differentiate into B or T cells, they
preferentially inactivate a common set of ~72,000 early developmental DHSs, while
activating an average of ~52,000 chiefly lineage-restricted DHSs along each terminal branch
(Figures 3C and 3D). Of note, roughly half of the regulatory DNA landscape of each
definitive lymphoid cell type is retained from hematopoietic progenitors and roughly onethird from ESCs (Figure 3B).
Fixed Contribution of ES Regulatory DNA to Terminal Regulatory Landscapes
We next asked how cells differ with respect to the proportion of their regulatory landscapes
shared with ESCs. The total number of autosomal DHSs in definitive cell types varied >2fold, from ~91.7K in Th1 cells to 225.6K in dermal fibroblasts. Surprisingly, within each
cell-type landscape, the proportion of DHSs shared with ESCs remained nearly constant,
averaging ~37% (Figure 3E). Of these, the vast majority were distal, nonpromoter elements
(Figure S3E). In total, across all cell types, approximately 56% of ES DHSs were retained in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 6

some definitive cells. (Figure 3F). However, the specific complement of ES DHSs
apportioned to each cell type was unique (Figure 3F).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Regulatory Landscape Dynamics during Directed Differentiation from ESCs
To analyze differentiating regulatory DNA landscape dynamics prospectively, we next
profiled DHSs during the controlled differentiation of ESCs along the cardiac axis (Yang et
al., 2008). During cardiac differentiation under defined conditions, committed cardiac
progenitors emerge at day 5 and beating cardiomyocytes at day 14 (Paige et al., 2012). We
produced DHS maps for each of these stages (Table S2), as well as from adult heart tissue
(as ES-derived cardiomyocytes do not reach full maturity and exhibit primitive features
similar to those of early-fetal-stage heart) (Paige et al., 2012).
During directed cardiac differentiation, we observed large-scale reorganization of the DHS
landscape (Figure 3G), including inactivation of early developmental elements, extensive
forward propagation of ESC and progenitor DHSs, and de novo activation of differentiationstage-selective elements (Figures 3H and 3I). The inactivation of ESC DHSs during
differentiation occurred in a progressive, nearly clock-like fashion, dropping from 71% at
day 5, to 49% at day 14, and 35% in adult heart tissue (Figure 3J). Notably, the proportion
of ESC DHSs in the terminally differentiated adult cardiac landscape (35%) closely matches
the average of other terminally differentiated cells (37%; Figure 3E).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Together, the above findings indicate that the process of lineage differentiation is
accompanied by three basic alterations to the regulatory DNA landscape: (1) pruning of ESC
DHSs as a function of developmental maturity (Figure 3K); (2) extensive forward
propagation of regulatory DNA from progenitors to more defined cells (Figure 3L); and (3)
de novo activation of a (generally smaller) number of lineage-restricted DHSs (Figure 3L).
Patterning of Regulatory DNA by Known and Novel Lineage Regulators

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We reasoned that uncovering the TFs that interact with developmentally dynamic (i.e., lost
or gained) regulatory DNA should facilitate identification of regulators of cellular identity.
During the transition from ESCs to hematopoietic progenitors, lost DHSs were significantly
enriched in recognition sequences for pluripotency factors (OCT4, SOX2, NANOG),
whereas gained DHSs were enriched in recognition sequences for hematopoietic master
regulators including PU.1 and ELF1 (Orkin, 1995) (Figure 4A). By contrast, the subsequent
transition from hematopoietic progenitors to T cells, B cells, or NK cells results in selective
loss of DHSs enriched in hematopoietic master-regulator recognition sequences and
selective gain of DHSs enriched in major T cell, B cell, or NK cell-lineage-regulator
recognition sites, respectively (Orkin, 1995) (Figures 4B and S4A). Notably, the presence of
TF recognition sequences in DHS peaks is highly predictive of occupancy of the cognate
TF, as measured using ChIP-seq or genomic footprinting (Neph et al., 2012c; Samstein et
al., 2012). These results indicate that the TFs critical for a given cell state can be identified
through analysis of both DHSs lost during transition away from that state and DHSs gained
during transition into that state.
Unlike hematopoietic development, few potent regulators of cardiac differentiation have
been characterized. Analysis of the differentiation of ESCs to early cardiac progenitors (d5)
revealed selective loss of DHSs enriched in recognition sites for pluripotency factors,
coupled with gain of DHSs enriched in motifs for both the well-described early cardiac
regulator PBX1 (Chang et al., 2008) and the novel cardiac regulator MEIS2 (Paige et al.,
2012) (Figure 4C, left). By contrast, the subsequent transition from cardiac progenitors (d5)
to early cardiomyocytes (d14) featured loss of DHSs enriched in PBX1 recognition sites and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 7

the appearance of DHSs enriched in binding elements for late cardiac regulators NKX2-5,
NKX2-6, and MEF2A (Lyons et al., 1995; Tanaka et al., 2001) (Figure 4C, right).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The above analyses further implicated previously unrecognized lineage-defining roles for
numerous other TFs (Figure S4B). For example, the binding landscape for RREB1 contracts
in every lineage except for hematopoietic progenitors, where it expands (Figure S4B),
indicating that this repressor may play an important yet uncharacterized role in
hematopoiesis. Together, these findings indicate that regulatory DNA dynamics during
specific developmental transitions reflect the actions of both known and novel lineageregulating TFs (Figure 4D).
Coordinated Deactivation of Alternative Regulatory Programs during Differentiation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We observed that recognition sites for TFs regulating a given lineage were selectively
enriched in the DHSs inactivated along other lineage paths. For example, the recognition
landscape for the NK cell master regulator NFIL3 (Gascoyne et al., 2009) remains largely
unchanged during NK differentiation but greatly contracts during T cell and B cell
development (Figure 4E). Similarly the regulatory landscape for the endothelial regulator
SOX17 (Liao et al., 2009) remains largely unchanged during endothelial development but
contracts during development of all other lineages (Figure 4F). Similar lineage-restricted
patterns were observed for many factors including PU.1, RREB1, and OCT4 (Figures 4F
and S4B). This suggests that (1) the regulatory DNA target landscape for certain lineagerestricted factors is largely prepositioned in progenitor cell types via DHSs that contain
cognate binding elements and (2) such DHSs are selectively inactivated along lineage paths
in which the lineage-relevant TF is lacking. Consequently, development according to a
specific lineage program combines the orchestrated activation of lineage-restricted
regulatory elements with programmed extinction of regulatory DNA associated with
alternative lineage fates (Figure 7D). The latter should in turn serve to passively reinforce
lineage commitment.
“Memory” DHSs Are Chiefly Occupied by TFs that Regulate Their Own Expression

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Many biological processes are perpetuated by reinforcing feedback loops. For example, TFs
involved in autoregulatory feedback loops can stabilize their expression during cell division
and development (Ptashne et al., 1980; Alon, 2006). We therefore asked whether
developmentally stable DHSs were occupied by TFs with autoregulatory features. Using TFregulatory network maps constructed from genomic footprinting of 23 of the cell types
studied here (Neph et al., 2012b), we identified, on average, 68 simple autoregulating TFs
per cell type (range 48–75) (Figure 5A). In every cell type analyzed, relative to
developmentally dynamic DHSs, developmentally stable DHSs were chiefly and
preferentially populated with recognition sites for these simple autoregulating TFs (Figures
5A, 5B, S5A, and S5C), as well as TFs involved in two-node directed and three-node
directed loop-network architectures (Figures 5C–5F, S5A, and S5C), which enable indirect
autoregulatory behavior. These findings were similar for both developmentally stable distal
and promoter-associated DHSs (Figures S5B and S5C).
Retrograde Remodeling of the Regulatory DNA Landscape during Oncogenesis
We next explored how the DHS landscape reorganizes during a major pathological
deviation. We produced DHS maps from 21 diverse cancer cell lines plus purified sorted
cells from two primary malignancies (two subtypes of acute myelogenous leukemia arising
in different unrelated individuals) (Figure 6A), yielding between 74,292 and 209,903
autosomal DHSs per cancer cell type (Table S3). We then used PCoA to compare the DHS
landscapes of cancer cells with those of normal cells. Whereas the regulatory DNA
landscapes of normal cell types are clearly separated (Figures 1C and 6B), cancer DHS
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

landscapes converged on those of ESCs (Figure 6B). Hematological malignancies were a
notable exception, forming a distinct group toward the ESC facing pole of the hematopoietic
lineage cluster (Figures 6B and S6A).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To quantify further the apparent retrograde remodeling of cancer regulatory DNA
landscapes, we focused our analysis on four malignancies for which DHS maps were
available from the presumed corresponding normal precursor cell type (melanocytes for
melanoma; mammary epithelium for breast cancer [two types]; and Th1 cells for T cell
leukemia). Compared with normal counterparts, all four cancer cell types exhibited
substantial reorganization of their DHS landscape in a largely cell-specific manner (Figures
6C, 6D, S6B, and S6C). This reorganization had three major components: (1) reactivation of
silenced ESC DHSs (Figure 6E); (2) ectopic activation of DHSs from lineage programs
different than that in which the malignancy arose; and (3) appearance of a small proportion
of novel DHSs not detected in any normal cell type. Overall, the vast majority (88%–97%)
of DHSs activated during oncogenesis were found in some other normal adult or fetal cell or
tissue type (Figure 6D). Notably, the regulatory DNA landscape activated during
oncogenesis differed substantially between different cancer cell types, with no DHS active
in all cancer cell types but no normal cell types (Figures 6C and S6C). Together these results
indicate that oncogenesis is characterized by the aberrant co-option of regulatory DNA from
ESCs and alternative lineage programs, with each cancer cell type activating a distinct set of
elements.
TF Drivers of Cancer Regulatory Landscapes
We next sought to identify TFs mediating reorganization of the regulatory DNA landscape
during oncogenesis. The ability of many TFs to function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors
is well known (Persson and Leder, 1984). Analysis of DHSs arising in cancers revealed
significant enrichment of recognition sites for known oncogenic TFs. By contrast, DHSs lost
during oncogenesis were significantly enriched in recognition sequences for known tumorsuppressor TFs. For example, the target landscape of FOXA1 specifically and significantly
expands in breast cancer cells compared with normal breast epithelium (Figure 7A),
consistent with the role of FOXA1 in mediating estrogen-receptor-dependent chromatin
remodeling in breast cancer (Carroll et al., 2005). Furthermore, the target landscape of
SOX9 specifically and significantly contracts in melanoma cells compared with normal
melanocytes, consistent with the role of SOX9 as a potent melanoma tumor suppressor
(Figure 7A) (Passeron et al., 2009). This analysis revealed a variety of TFs with similar
patterns of target landscape expansion or contraction in normal versus tumor cells (Figures
7A and S7A), exposing potential novel cell-selective oncogenic and tumor-suppressor roles
for such TFs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Functionally Distorted Memory of Normal Lineage Programs in Malignant Cells
Next we asked whether the transformed regulatory landscapes of cancer cells maintained
systematic memory of earlier developmental fate decisions, akin to normal cells (Figure 1).
Clustering 23 cancer cell types based on their DHS patterns yielded well-defined clusters
(Figure 7B). However, unlike those seen in Figure 1 for normal cells, cancer DHS clusters
were typified by functional characteristics of the cancers, rather than their developmental
origin For example, hormone-responsive cancers (LNCap, T-47D, and MCF-7) formed a
tight cluster, distinct from those of other adult and pediatric solid tumors, germ cell
neoplasms, and hematological malignancies. These findings suggest that oncogenic
transformation of the regulatory DNA landscape is accompanied by loss of developmental
information and can be dominated by selective activation of regulatory elements associated
with the derived phenotype of the cancer.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 9

Reduced Evolutionary Pressure on Cancer Regulatory Landscapes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Nucleotide diversity (pi) calculated with genomic sequence data from multiple unrelated
individuals provides a quantitative assessment of the extent of ongoing purifying selection at
DHSs within the human population (Vernot et al., 2012; Thurman et al., 2012; Neph et al.,
2012c). To investigate whether DHSs activated during oncogenesis exhibit levels of
selective constraint similar to normal developmentally patterned DHSs, we calculated pi for
these two classes of DHSs. Cancer cell DHSs gained during oncogenesis evinced
significantly higher nucleotide diversity compared with those retained from normal
development (Figures 7C, S7B, and S7C). Of note, similar numbers of DHSs are activated
during both normal development and oncogenesis (Figure 6D), yet elements activated
during oncogenesis are under less constraint, suggesting that cancer cells selectively recruit
regulatory elements that are active at other developmental stages yet may play secondary
roles in normal developmental processes. Such reactivation events are likely generated
through dysregulation of key developmental TFs (Figure 7A) and can have a large effect on
the expression of neighboring genes (Akhtar-Zaidi et al., 2012).

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The salient findings recounted above can be recapitulated as follows: First, developmental
fate and lineage relationships can be derived from the genomic patterning of DHSs in
definitive cells; this patterning is distinct from the information conveyed by gene expression.
Second, lineage differentiation is associated with three features: (1) extensive propagation of
DNase I hypersensitivity at regulatory DNA; (2) pruning of DHSs shared with ESCs as
development progresses; and (3) blossoming of a smaller number of lineage-restricted DHSs
—all resulting in a more restricted, specialized DHS landscape. Third, pruning of DHSs
shared with ESCs during differentiation is proportional to the size of a cell's DHS landscape,
with the result that the regulatory DNA landscapes of terminally differentiated cells retain a
nearly constant proportion of DHSs shared with ESCs. Fourth, developmentally stable DHSs
densely encode binding sites for self-regulating TFs. Finally, in contrast to normal cells,
cancer regulatory landscapes feature both extensive reactivation of silenced ESC DHSs and
ectopic activation of regulatory DNA from noncognate developmental lineages.
We interpret the above findings to signify a central role for DHS patterning in propagating
cellular state and fate information during development and abrogation of this role by
oncogenesis. Below we place these findings in historical context and consider both the
features of differentiation that Waddington presaged as well as a number of novel and telling
insights that our results afford into basic developmental mechanisms and strategies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

From Epigenesis to Epigenetics
The generation of consistent body plans by the sequential differentiation of totipotential
material is a foundational conceptual paradigm for development. First articulated by
Aristotle (De generatione animalium 739a), this concept was termed “epigenesis” (literally,
“moving toward coming into being”) by Harvey (Harvey, 1651) and was widely accepted by
the early 20th century (Patten, 1920). Waddington's enduring epigenetic landscape paradigm
crystallized this concept and added two important features (Waddington, 1940, 1957). The
first concerned the stability of cellular phenotypes, which Waddington depicted as the valley
walls within the epigenetic landscape; these valley walls act to guide the cell down a
particular “pathway of change that is equilibrated in the sense that the system tends to return
to it after disturbance” (Waddington, 1957). The second feature was mechanistic: the
proposition that the epigenetic landscape itself is controlled by a complex system of
“regulatory genes” that interact with one another in a combinatorial and temporally
coordinated fashion to shape the topography of epigenesis (Waddington, 1957).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In view of our results, Waddington's paradigm provides a remarkably prescient
schematization of the transformation of the regulatory DNA landscape during development,
indicating that global DHS maps provide a missing quantitative dimension for major facets
of epigenesis. The fact that proper lineage-branching relationships can be recovered from
DHS data but not from gene-expression data suggests that the DHS compartment contains
both elements involved in active cellular processes as well as “marker” or “memory” DHSs
that preserve information about prior developmental states. Such information is directly
evident in persistent DHSs at tissue-selective early developmental enhancers.
Role of TFs in Propagation of Active versus Repressive Chromatin States

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our data indicate that changes in the DHS landscape during development are orchestrated by
specific combinations of lineage-restricted TFs (Figure 4) and that developmentally stable
DHSs are chiefly occupied by autoregulatory TFs (Figure 5). These results emphasize the
central influence of the cellular TF-regulatory network on modeling the regulatory DNA
landscape during development (Figures 4D and 7D). It is notable that other examples of
“epigenetic memory” chiefly feature propagation of repressive chromatin states through
mechanisms such as CpG methylation (Bird, 2002; Kim et al., 2010), histone H3K9
trimethylation (Hathaway et al., 2012), or polycomb (Cavalli and Paro, 1998). Because TFs
rapidly reassociate with daughter DNA strands following replication and can bookmark
accessible regulatory DNA through mitosis (Egli et al., 2008), TF binding within DHSs is
mechanistically well-suited for the propagation of accessible chromatin to daughter cells
without invoking other modifications to the chromatin template.
Developmental Transformation of the Regulatory DNA Landscape
Development and differentiation, irrespective of lineage, balance the propagation,
extinction, and de novo activation of chromatin accessibility at regulatory DNA in a highly
formulaic manner. During development, the regulatory DNA landscape undergoes
progressive restriction that outstrips the de novo activation of lineage-restricted DHSs—
metaphorically, a narrowing of the epigenetic landscape's valley floors (Figures 3K and 3L).
Interestingly, this process appears to be recursive, operating anew from intermediate
pluripotential states such as hematopoietic stem cells in a manner reminiscent of classical
finite state automata (Turing, 1937). Critically, selective DHS pruning involves the
wholesale loss of DHSs associated with alternative fates (Figure 4), thus cementing or
“canalizing” a particular developmental pathway in lockstep with differentiation.
Temporal “Memory” of Cellular State and Fate

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A remarkable feature of the developmentally stable DHS compartment is its association with
cellular maturity. As cells differentiate, ESC-originated DHSs are pruned in a progressive,
almost clock-like fashion. Consequently, simply measuring the proportion of DHSs within a
cell's regulatory landscape that are shared with ESCs may provide a quantitative measure of
developmental maturity.
Relation to the Developmental Hourglass
The concept that developmental biology can provide insights into evolution was sparked by
Von Baer's observation that embryos from diverse organisms converge on a common form
during the pharyngula stage of mid-embryogenesis (Von Baer, 1828). This point of
convergence has been termed the “phylotypic” stage (Cohen, 1963) and coincides with the
activation of major developmental regulators such as Hox genes (Duboule, 1994). These
observations gave rise to an hourglass model of development (Duboule, 1994; Raff, 1996).
Our data in Figure 1D accord with this model and indicate that the hourglass phenomenon
may be grounded within discrete sets of regulatory DNA regions.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 11

Connecting Epigenesis and Oncogenesis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Oncogenesis is accompanied by the drastic remodeling of the DHS landscape, resulting in a
loss of developmental information, and reversion to a “pseudoprimitive” state that combines
regulatory DNA features of ESCs with those of other developing lineages (Figures 6 and 7).
This state is not truly de-differentiated—which implies walking back along a path
previously taken—but rather dys-differentiated, having aberrantly co-opted “normal”
regulatory elements from alternative lineage paths (Figure 7E). As such, cancer cells
encompass a multidimensional deviation from normal development and can no longer be
placed on Waddington's landscape. This feature may explain the long-standing observation
that oncogenesis is accompanied by the reappearance of fetal antigens (Hirszfeld et al.,
1932; Tatarinov, 1964). Notably, this finding is difficult to reconcile with models of
oncogenesis that posit cancer origins from developmental remnants. If cancer cells simply
arose from uncontrolled proliferation of a more primitive cell remnant, we would expect
cancer cells to retain strong lineage signatures; however, with the exception of
hematological malignancies, this is decidedly not the case.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The process of dys-differentiation appears to result from the misregulation of key
developmental TFs (Figure 7A). However, despite the growth and phenotypic advantages
bestowed by the transformed regulatory DNA landscape, malignant cells have likely lost
many of the beneficial regulatory redundancies and feedback mechanisms that are formed
during normal development and that maintain epigenetic stability in the face of
environmental and genetic stress (Figures 7D and 7E). It is tempting to speculate that this
patchwork reorganization of the chromatin landscape during oncogenesis may expose
exploitable vulnerabilities of the malignant state.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
DHS Mapping
All cell types were subjected to nuclear isolation, DNase I digestion, DNase I double-hit
fragment purification and library construction, and high-throughput sequencing, as described
previously (Thurman et al., 2012; John et al., 2011; Hesselberth et al., 2009). Data from
additional cell types were utilized from Thurman et al. (2012). DHSs were computed for
each cell type at an FDR of 1% as previously described (John et al., 2011).
DHS Clustering

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We used the BEDOPS suite to generate a reference multiset union of DHSs across all cell
types (Neph et al., 2012a). The Euclidean distance between two cell types was calculated
using binary peak calls for each DHS within the reference set for a given cell type. Pairwise
Euclidean distances between all cell types were clustered using the nearest-neighbor
algorithm. For cancer cell types, we utilized Euclidean distances and Ward clustering.
Comparison of Adult versus Embryonic Enhancer Activity
Data for tests of human enhancers in a mouse developmental model (Pennacchio et al.,
2006) were downloaded from http://enhancer.lbl.gov/.
Autoregulating TFs
Comprehensive maps of human TF-regulatory networks constructed with genome-wide
DNase I footprint maps were used to identify TFs that form autoregulatory loops (Neph et
al., 2012b). The occupancy of these autoregulatory TFs within developmentally stable and
developmentally gained DHSs was mapped using TF-binding elements contained within
DNase I footprints (Neph et al., 2012c).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 12

Human Nucleotide Diversity Measurements

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Human nucleotide diversity measurements (p) were calculated using whole-genome
sequences from 53 unrelated individuals as previously described (Vernot et al., 2012).

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants U54HG004592, U54HG007010, and U01ES017156 to J.A.S.; NIH grant
P30DK056465 to S.H.; and NIH grants P01GM081719, U01HL100405, P01HL094374, and R01HL084642 to
C.E.M. We thank many colleagues, particularly Joseph Costello (UCSF), for contributing cells for DNase I
mapping and expression profiling. A.B.S. was supported by grant FDK095678A from NIDDK. S.L.P. was
supported by NHLBI grant F30HL095343. We thank Rae Senarighi (UW) for expert assistance with graphic
design. All data from this study are available through the ENCODE data repository at UCSC (http://
www.encodeproject.org) and the Roadmap Epigenomics data repository at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
epigenomics). All data from this study are free to use and are not subject to consortium embargo dates.

REFERENCES
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Akhtar-Zaidi B, Cowper-Sal-lari R, Corradin O, Saiakhova A, Bartels CF, Balasubramanian D,
Myeroff L, Lutterbaugh J, Jarrar A, Kalady MF, et al. Epigenomic enhancer profiling defines a
signature of colon cancer. Science. 2012; 336:736–739. [PubMed: 22499810]
Alon, U. An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits. First Edition.
Chapman and Hall/CRC; London: 2006.
Bard J, Rhee SY, Ashburner M. An ontology for cell types. Genome Biol. 2005; 6:R21. [PubMed:
15693950]
Beard J. Embryological aspects and etiology of carcinoma. Lancet. 1902; 159:1758–1761.
Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B, Meissner A, Wernig M,
Plath K, et al. A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem
cells. Cell. 2006; 125:315–326. [PubMed: 16630819]
Bird A. DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes Dev. 2002; 16:6–21. [PubMed:
11782440]
Carroll JS, Liu XS, Brodsky AS, Li W, Meyer CA, Szary AJ, Eeckhoute J, Shao W, Hestermann EV,
Geistlinger TR, et al. Chromosome-wide mapping of estrogen receptor binding reveals long-range
regulation requiring the forkhead protein FoxA1. Cell. 2005; 122:33–43. [PubMed: 16009131]
Cavalli G, Paro R. The Drosophila Fab-7 chromosomal element conveys epigenetic inheritance during
mitosis and meiosis. Cell. 1998; 93:505–518. [PubMed: 9604927]
Chang C-P, Stankunas K, Shang C, Kao S-C, Twu KY, Cleary ML. Pbx1 functions in distinct
regulatory networks to pattern the great arteries and cardiac outflow tract. Development. 2008;
135:3577–3586. [PubMed: 18849531]
Cohen, J. Living Embryos: An Introduction to the Study of Animal Development. Pergamon Press;
New York: 1963.
Domazet-Lošo T, Tautz D. A phylogenetically based transcriptome age index mirrors ontogenetic
divergence patterns. Nature. 2010; 468:815–818. [PubMed: 21150997]
Duboule D. Temporal colinearity and the phylotypic progression: a basis for the stability of a
vertebrate Bauplan and the evolution of morphologies through heterochrony. Dev. Suppl. 1994;
1994:135–142. [PubMed: 7579514]
Egli D, Birkhoff G, Eggan K. Mediators of reprogramming: transcription factors and transitions
through mitosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2008; 9:505–516. [PubMed: 18568039]
Gascoyne DM, Long E, Veiga-Fernandes H, de Boer J, Williams O, Seddon B, Coles M, Kioussis D,
Brady HJM. The basic leucine zipper transcription factor E4BP4 is essential for natural killer cell
development. Nat. Immunol. 2009; 10:1118–1124. [PubMed: 19749763]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Gleason DF, Mellinger GT. Prediction of prognosis for prostatic adenocarcinoma by combined
histological grading and clinical staging. J. Urol. 1974; 111:58–64. [PubMed: 4813554]
Gross DS, Garrard WT. Nuclease hypersensitive sites in chromatin. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 1988;
57:159–197. [PubMed: 3052270]
Groudine M, Weintraub H. Propagation of globin DNAase I-hypersensitive sites in absence of factors
required for induction: a possible mechanism for determination. Cell. 1982; 30:131–139.
[PubMed: 6290075]
Harvey, W. Exercitationes de Generatione Animalium. Typis Du-Gardianis; Impensis O. Pulleyn;
London: 1651.
Hathaway NA, Bell O, Hodges C, Miller EL, Neel DS, Crabtree GR. Dynamics and memory of
heterochromatin in living cells. Cell. 2012; 149:1447–1460. [PubMed: 22704655]
Hawkins RD, Hon GC, Lee LK, Ngo Q, Lister R, Pelizzola M, Edsall LE, Kuan S, Luu Y, Klugman S,
et al. Distinct epigenomic landscapes of pluripotent and lineage-committed human cells. Cell Stem
Cell. 2010; 6:479–491. [PubMed: 20452322]
Hesselberth JR, Chen X, Zhang Z, Sabo PJ, Sandstrom R, Reynolds AP, Thurman RE, Neph S, Kuehn
MS, Noble WS, et al. Global mapping of protein-DNA interactions in vivo by digital genomic
footprinting. Nat. Methods. 2009; 6:283–289. [PubMed: 19305407]
Hirszfeld L, Halber W, Rosenblat J. Untersuchungen uber Verwandtschaftsreaktionen zwischen
embryonal und Krebsgewebe. II. Menschenembryo und Menschenkrebs. ZeitschriftfUr
Immunitatsforschung und Experimentelle Therapie. 1932; 75:209–216.
John S, Sabo PJ, Thurman RE, Sung M-HH, Biddie SC, Johnson TA, Hager GL, Stamatoyannopoulos
JA. Chromatin accessibility pre-determines glucocorticoid receptor binding patterns. Nat. Genet.
2011; 43:264–268. [PubMed: 21258342]
Kalinka AT, Varga KM, Gerrard DT, Preibisch S, Corcoran DL, Jarrells J, Ohler U, Bergman CM,
Tomancak P. Gene expression divergence recapitulates the developmental hourglass model.
Nature. 2010; 468:811–814. [PubMed: 21150996]
Kim K, Doi A, Wen B, Ng K, Zhao R, Cahan P, Kim J, Aryee MJ, Ji H, Ehrlich LIR, et al. Epigenetic
memory in induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature. 2010; 467:285–290. [PubMed: 20644535]
Liao WP, Uetzmann L, Burtscher I, Lickert H. Generation of a mouse line expressing Sox17-driven
Cre recombinase with specific activity in arteries. Genesis. 2009; 47:476–483. [PubMed:
19415628]
Lyons I, Parsons LM, Hartley L, Li R, Andrews JE, Robb L, Harvey RP. Myogenic and
morphogenetic defects in the heart tubes of murine embryos lacking the homeo box gene Nkx2-5.
Genes Dev. 1995; 9:1654–1666. [PubMed: 7628699]
Morgan TH. Regeneration in the egg, embryo, and adult. Am. Nat. 1901; 35:949–973.
Neph S, Kuehn MS, Reynolds AP, Haugen E, Thurman RE, Johnson AK, Rynes E, Maurano MT,
Vierstra J, Thomas S, et al. BEDOPS: high-performance genomic feature operations.
Bioinformatics. 2012a; 28:1919–1920. [PubMed: 22576172]
Neph S, Stergachis AB, Reynolds A, Sandstrom R, Borenstein E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA. Circuitry
and dynamics of human transcription factor regulatory networks. Cell. 2012b; 150:1274–1286.
[PubMed: 22959076]
Neph S, Vierstra J, Stergachis AB, Reynolds AP, Haugen E, Vernot B, Thurman RE, John S,
Sandstrom R, Johnson AK, et al. An expansive human regulatory lexicon encoded in transcription
factor footprints. Nature. 2012c; 489:83–90. [PubMed: 22955618]
Orkin SH. Transcription factors and hematopoietic development. J. Biol. Chem. 1995; 270:4955–4958.
[PubMed: 7890597]
Paige SL, Thomas S, Stoick-Cooper CL, Wang H, Maves L, Sand-strom R, Pabon L, Reinecke H,
Pratt G, Keller G, et al. A temporal chromatin signature in human embryonic stem cells identifies
regulators of cardiac development. Cell. 2012; 151:221–232. [PubMed: 22981225]
Passeron T, Valencia JC, Namiki T, Vieira WD, Passeron H, Miyamura Y, Hearing VJ. Upregulation
of SOX9 inhibits the growth of human and mouse melanomas and restores their sensitivity to
retinoic acid. J. Clin. Invest. 2009; 119:954–963. [PubMed: 19273910]
Patten, B. The Early Embryology of the Chick. P. Blakiston's Son & Co. Inc.; Philadelphia: 1920.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Pennacchio LA, Ahituv N, Moses AM, Prabhakar S, Nobrega MA, Shoukry M, Minovitsky S,
Dubchak I, Holt A, Lewis KD, et al. In vivo enhancer analysis of human conserved non-coding
sequences. Nature. 2006; 444:499–502. [PubMed: 17086198]
Persson H, Leder P. Nuclear localization and DNA binding properties of a protein expressed by human
c-myc oncogene. Science. 1984; 225:718–721. [PubMed: 6463648]
Ptashne M. On the use of the word ‘epigenetic’. Curr. Biol. 2007; 17:R233–R236. [PubMed:
17407749]
Ptashne M, Jeffrey A, Johnson AD, Maurer R, Meyer BJ, Pabo CO, Roberts TM, Sauer RT. How the
lambda repressor and cro work. Cell. 1980; 19:1–11. [PubMed: 6444544]
Pujadas E, Feinberg AP. Regulated noise in the epigenetic landscape of development and disease. Cell.
2012; 148:1123–1131. [PubMed: 22424224]
Raff, RA. The Shape of Life: Genes, Development, and the Evolution of Animal Form. University of
Chicago Press; Chicago, IL: 1996.
Samstein RM, Arvey A, Josefowicz SZ, Peng X, Reynolds A, Sand-strom R, Neph S, Sabo P, Kim
JM, Liao W, et al. Foxp3 exploits a pre-existent enhancer landscape for regulatory T cell lineage
specification. Cell. 2012; 151:153–166. [PubMed: 23021222]
Tanaka M, Schinke M, Liao HS, Yamasaki N, Izumo S. Nkx2.5 and Nkx2.6, homologs of Drosophila
tinman, are required for development of the pharynx. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2001; 21:4391–4398.
[PubMed: 11390666]
Tatarinov, IuS. Detection of embryo-specific alpha-globulin in the blood serum of a patient with
primary liver cancer. Vopr. Med. Khim. 1964; 10:90–91. [PubMed: 14207501]
Thurman RE, Rynes E, Humbert R, Vierstra J, Maurano MT, Haugen E, Sheffield NC, Stergachis AB,
Wang H, Vernot B, et al. The accessible chromatin landscape of the human genome. Nature. 2012;
489:75–82. [PubMed: 22955617]
Turing AM. On computable numbers, with an application to the entscheidungs problem. Proc. Lond.
Math. Soc. 1937; 42:230–265.
Vernot B, Stergachis AB, Maurano MT, Vierstra J, Neph S, Thurman RE, Stamatoyannopoulos JA,
Akey JM. Personal and population genomics of human regulatory variation. Genome Res. 2012;
22:1689–1697. [PubMed: 22955981]
Von Baer, KE. Über Entwicklungsgeschichte der Thiere. Beobachtung und Reflexion. Gebrüder
Bornträger; Königsberg: 1828.
Waddington CH. Cancer and the theory of organiser. Nature. 1935; 135:606–608.
Waddington, CH. An Introduction to Modern Genetics. The Macmillan Company; New York: 1939.
Waddington, CH. Organisers and Genes. Cambridge University Press; Cambridge, UK: 1940.
Waddington, CH. The Strategy of the Genes: A Discussion of Some Aspects of Theoretical Biology.
George Allen & Unwin; Sydney: 1957.
Wamstad JA, Alexander JM, Truty RM, Shrikumar A, Li F, Eilertson KE, Ding H, Wylie JN, Pico
AR, Capra JA, et al. Dynamic and coordinated epigenetic regulation of developmental transitions
in the cardiac lineage. Cell. 2012; 151:206–220. [PubMed: 22981692]
Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science. 1956; 123:309–314. [PubMed: 13298683]
Yang L, Soonpaa MH, Adler ED, Roepke TK, Kattman SJ, Kennedy M, Henckaerts E, Bonham K,
Abbott GW, Linden RM, et al. Human cardiovascular progenitor cells develop from a KDR+
embryonic-stem-cell-derived population. Nature. 2008; 453:524–528. [PubMed: 18432194]
Zhu J, Adli M, Zou JY, Verstappen G, Coyne M, Zhang X, Durham T, Miri M, Deshpande V, De
Jager PL, et al. Genome-wide chromatin state transitions associated with developmental and
environmental cues. Cell. 2013; 152:642–654. [PubMed: 23333102]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Lineage Programming of Human Regulatory DNA

(A) Evidence of lineage patterning in primary DHS data. DNase I cleavage-density profiles
for 24 exemplary primary human cell types and ESCs across an ~350 kb region along
chromosome 9. Cell types are colored according to their embryological derivation as
indicated in (B).
(B) Clustering DHS profiles recovers precise embryological relationships. Unbiased
clustering of the linear patterning of DHSs from 48 diverse, definitive cell types plus ESCs.
Branches and cell types are colored according to their embryological origin, with
embryological ancestors common to multiple cell types indicated on the right. Note the
rooting of the tree by ESCs and the partitioning of major branches corresponding to the
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

trilaminar embryo. Note also the demarcation of early fate decisions such as partitioning of
hemangioblast derivatives into endothelia and blood.
(C) PCoA of cell-type relationships. Shown is each cell type from (B) projected into a threedimensional principal coordinates space. Cell-type coloring is indicated above. Note the
centrality of ESCs and the spatial separation of major lineage groups.
(D) “Hourglass” pattern of regulatory DNA conservation across the developmental
spectrum. Shown is the mean evolutionary conservation (phyloP, x axis) of DHSs common
to the indicated lineage branches. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
See also Figure S1 and S3 and Tables S1 and S2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Developmental Persistence of Chromatin Accessibility at Primitive Enhancers

(A) Mouse day 11.5 embryonic tissue activity (blue lacZ staining) of five representative
transgenic human enhancer elements from the VISTA database. Shown below each image
are numbers of individual embryos with enhancer activity (staining) in the indicated
anatomical structure.
(B) Persistence of DNase I hypersensitivity at embryonic enhancers. The percentage of
embryonic enhancers from the VISTA database marked with DHSs in one or more definitive
cell types (top) or early human fetal tissues (~day 70–150) (bottom).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(C) DNase I hypersensitivity at five enhancer elements corresponding to (A) across 47
definitive cell types from Figure 1. Note the relationship between the anatomical staining
patterns in (A) and the cellular restriction (or lack thereof) of DNase I hypersensitivity.
(D) Embryonic enhancer tissue spectrum parallels DHS spectrum in definitive cells. The
number of embryonic tissues with an active enhancer by lacZ staining (x axis) is linearly
proportional (linear regression p value < 10–3) to the number of definitive cell types showing
DNase I hypersensitivity at the same enhancer (y axis).
See also Figure S2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Developmental Extinction, Maintenance, and De Novo Activation of Chromatin
Accessibility at Regulatory DNA

(A and B) Composition of developing hematopoietic regulatory landscapes. (A) Shown are
acquired (black) versus extinguished (red) DHSs during hematopoietic developmental
transitions. (B) Schematic illustrating the number of inherited versus acquired DHSs during
hematopoietic developmental transitions. The lymphoid DHS compartment colored blue
comprises a strict subset of the hematopoietic progenitor DHS compartment colored in blue.
(C and D) Preferential extinction of common early developmental DHSs during
development. (C) Comparison of DHSs lost (left) or acquired (right) during the
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors. (D) Shown is the enrichment of ESC DHSs
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

within lost versus gained DHS compartments. p values were calculated using the
hypergeometric test.
(E and F) Formulaic composition of terminal regulatory DNA landscapes. (E) Shown is the
proportion of the DHS landscape from each definitive cell type that is shared with ESCs.
This proportion remains nearly constant at ~37%. (F) Approximately 60% of the ESC DHS
landscape persists in varying combinations in definitive cell types (left), and each definitive
cell type appears to retain a different cohort of ESC DHSs (right).
(G–J) Regulatory DNA landscape of cardiac differentiation. (G) Acquired (black) versus
extinguished (red) DHSs during cardiac differentiation. (H) Schematic illustrating the
number of inherited versus gained DHSs during cardiac differentiation. (I) Enrichment of
ESC DHSs within lost versus gained DHS compartments. p value was calculated using the
hypergeometric test. (J) Clock-like extinction of ESC DHSs during cardiac differentiation.
(K and L) The epigenetic landscape valley floor. (K) Differentiation is accompanied by the
progressive restriction of the size of the accessible regulatory DNA landscape (e.g., a
narrowing of the epigenetic landscape's valley floors) (gold). (L) Schematic showing
restriction, perpetuation, and de novo activation that accompanies differentiation.
See also Figure S3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Selective Loss versus Gain of DHSs Targeted by Lineage Regulators

(A–C) Enrichment of lineage regulators in developmentally dynamic DHSs. Enrichment of
binding elements for three pluripotency TFs (blue), eight hematopoietic lineage and
sublineage TFs (red/purple), and five cardiac lineage TFs (brown) in DHSs lost versus
gained during (A) the differentiation of ESCs into hematopoietic progenitors, (B) the
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into Th1 T cells or B cells, and (C) the
differentiation of ESCs into cardiac progenitors and immature cardiomyocytes. p values
were calculated using the hypergeometric test.
(D) The “guy-ropes” modeling the epigenetic landscape. Sequential activation of
transcriptional regulators underpins the topology and trajectory of the epigenetic landscape
—paralleling Waddington's regulatory genes and “guy-ropes” (Waddington, 1957).
(E and F) Lineage-restricted TFs enable the selective retention of regulatory DNA. (E)
DHSs containing binding elements for the NK cell master regulator NFIL3 are selectively
retained by NK cells and lost in all other lineages. (F) Shown is enrichment of binding

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

elements for five lineage regulators in the DHSs gained versus lost during lineage
differentiation from ESCs.
See also Figure S4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 5. Epigenetically Stable DHSs Are Potentiated by TFs that Regulate Their Own
Expression

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Enrichment of DNase I-footprinted binding elements for simple autoregulating TFs in
developmentally stable (i.e., retained from ESCs) versus developmentally gained DHSs in
20 cell types with annotated regulatory networks (Neph et al., 2012b).
(B) Enrichment of DNase I-footprinted binding elements for simple autoregulating TFs in
developmentally stable DHSs retained from hematopoietic progenitors, excluding sites
retained from ESCs.
(C–F) Enrichment of DNase I-footprinted binding elements for TFs involved in two-node (C
and D) or three-node (E and F) autoregulatory loops in developmentally stable versus
developmentally gained DHSs. All enrichments shown are significant (p < 10–10,
hypergeometric distribution).
See also Figure S5.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Retrograde Remodeling of the Regulatory DNA Landscape during Oncogenesis

(A) Developmental origins of 21 cancer cell lines and 2 primary cancers analyzed with
genome-wide DNase I mapping.
(B) PCoA of normal versus malignant cell-type relationships. Shown are normal and cancer
cell types projected into a three-dimensional principal coordinates space. Cell-type coloring
is indicated above. Note the prominent clustering of cancer cell types around ESCs (inset 1).
(C) Cell selectivity of cancer cell DHSs. Distribution of the number of cancer cell types in
which (left) a DHS found in any cancer cell type is observed, (middle) a DHS that is unique
to cancer cell types and not found in any of the normal cell types is observed, and (right) a
DHS shared between a cancer cell type and ESCs is observed.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(D) Disordered retrograde remodeling of the accessible regulatory DNA landscape during
oncogenesis. (D) Shown is the contribution of DHSs found in nonmalignant predecessors to
the DHS landscape of each of four cancer cell types. Cancer DHS landscapes are partitioned
into DHSs originating in ESCs and maintained in nonmalignant predecessors (blue), DHSs
retained from nonmalignant predecessors but not present in ESCs (purple/brown/orange),
and DHSs arising during oncogenesis (gray). (Right) Proportion of DHSs arising during
oncogenesis that are reactivated (i.e., not inherited) ESC DHSs (light blue), ectopically
activated DHSs from alternative lineages (dark blue), or novel DHSs unique to each cancer
cell type (gray).
(E) Shown is the enrichmentof ESC DHSs within lost versus gained DHS compartments
duringoncogenesis. p values were calculated using the hypergeometric test. See also Figure
S6 and Table S3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 7. TF Drivers, Functional Organization, and Evolutionary Pressures on Cancer
Regulatory Landscapes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Oncogenic versus tumor-suppressor TF targets in DHSs gained versus lost during
oncogenesis. Shown is the enrichment of binding elements for four TF oncogenes and three
TF tumor suppressors in the DHSs lost versus gained during the oncogenic transformation of
mammary epithelium and melanocytes.
(B) Functional reorientation of the malignant regulatory DNA landscape. Clustering of
DHSs from 23 cancer cell types and three different ES lines. Note the predominance of
functional or phenotypic features over embryological origins.
(C) DHSs arising during oncogenesis show relaxed evolutionary constraint. Human
nucleotide diversity measurements (π, y axis) at DHSs retained from nonmalignant
predecessors but not present in ESCs (blue); DHSs arising during oncogenesis that are
ectopically activated from alternative lineages, excluding ESCs (purple); and DHSs arising
during oncogenesis that are novel to cancer (gray). Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.
(D and E) Models of normal development and oncogenesis. Shown are the actions of
different TF classes on the developing regulatory DNA landscape of hematopoietic
progenitors and endothelial cells (D) as well as the oncogenic transformation of mammary
epithelium (E).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

Stergachis et al.

Page 27

See also Figure S7.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 21.

