Original Article

Radiation Therapy Target Volume Reduction in Pediatric
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Implications for Patterns of Disease Recurrence and Overall Survival
Bree R. Eaton, MD1; Mark W. McDonald, MD1; Sungjin Kim, MS2; Robert B. Marcus, Jr, MD1; Anna L. Sutter, MS1;
Zhengjia Chen, PhD2; and Natia Esiashvili, MD1

BACKGROUND: The use of radiation therapy (RT) ‘‘cone-down’’ boost to reduce high-dose treatment volumes according to tumor
response to induction chemotherapy in patients with pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) may reduce treatment morbidity, yet the
impact on tumor control is unknown. METHODS: Fifty-five children, including 18 (33%) with parameningeal (PM) RMS and 37 (67%)
with non-PM RMS, who received definitive treatment with chemotherapy and RT from April 2000 through January 2010 were retrospectively reviewed. RESULTS: In total, 28 patients (51%) received a cone-down boost. The high-dose boost volume was reduced by a
median of 56% of the initial target volume (range, 5%-91%). The median time to initiating RT was 3 weeks for patients with PM RMS
and 16 weeks for patients with non-PM RMS (P < .001). After a median follow-up of 41 months, local failure occurred in 5 patients
(9%), including 2 patients who received a cone-down boost, and there were no marginal failures. Twelve patients (67%) with PM RMS
had intracranial tumor extension. In this subgroup, 4 patients (30%) who received a cone-down boost and had  3 weeks between
chemotherapy and RT initiation experienced leptomeningeal failure as their first site of disease progression, and a delayed time to RT
initiation was associated with decreased survival (P ¼ .055) CONCLUSIONS: A cone-down boost allowed for significant reductions in
high-dose RT treatment volume while maintaining excellent tumor control in most patients. However, in the subset of patients with
PM RMS and intracranial tumor extension, early RT initiation and wider margin RT to cover adjacent areas at high risk for meningeal
C 2012 American Cancer Society.
extension may be more important for adequate disease control. Cancer 2013;119:1578-85. V
KEYWORDS: radiation therapy, planning target volume, cone-down boost, rhabdomyosarcoma.

INTRODUCTION
Radiation therapy (RT) is a critical component of multimodality therapy for pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Induction chemotherapy followed by concurrent chemoradiation is the current standard of care for patients with unresected disease, those with microscopic or gross residual disease after surgery, and for all patients with alveolar histology based on
improvements in failure-free survival with the addition of RT in these groups.1,2 Despite the prominent role that RT plays
in the management of RMS, uncertainty remains regarding the optimal timing for the initiation of RT in relation to the
onset of chemotherapy and whether RT volumes may be modified in response to tumor shrinkage after induction
chemotherapy.
Early cooperative protocols by the International Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group (IRSG) used conventional RT
techniques with various timing of RT initiation. Retrospective analyses of data from IRSG studies as well as multiple singleinstitution series have assessed the impact of RT timing on local control (LC). Some studies suggest that early initiation of
RT is important for LC in patients with meningeal impingement,3 whereas other investigations have demonstrated that
delay of RT by 16 weeks or even longer may not compromise outcomes in patients with parameningeal (PM) RMS.4-6
More recently, the development of advanced RT techniques, such as diagnostic image fusion for target delineation
and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) with daily image guidance, have enabled the confident delivery of
more conformal treatments with the possibility of reduced margins for treatment uncertainties. Several institutions have
now reported promising clinical experience with IMRT for pediatric RMS.7-10 The impetus for IMRT is to improve the
Corresponding author: Bree R. Eaton, MD, 1365 Clifton Road NE, Building A, Suite CT 104, Atlanta, GA 30322. Fax: (404) 778-3643; brupper@emory.edu
1

Department of Radiation Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta Georgia; 2Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta Georgia

Mark McDonald’s current affiliation: Indiana University Health Proton Therapy Center, Bloomington, Indiana
Robert Marcus’ current affiliation: Gulf Region Radiation Oncology, Pensacola, Florida

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27934, Received: October 5, 2012; Revised: November 2, 2012; Accepted: November 6, 2012, Published online December 27, 2012 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1578

Cancer

April 15, 2013

RT Cone-Down Boost in Pediatric RMS/Eaton et al

conformality of the prescribed RT dose to the target volume, sparing more nontarget tissues from high-dose
radiation.
Even more normal tissue volume could be spared
from high-dose radiation by the implementation of a
response-based radiation treatment volume that targets
the prechemotherapy tumor volume to an intermediate
dose before ‘‘coning down’’ to boost the postchemotherapy tumor volume to full dose. With this technique,
delayed onset of RT allows for continued tumor response
to induction chemotherapy and facilitates further reduction in high-dose treatment volumes, which may reduce
acute and late toxicities of treatment.
The safety of implementing cone-down boost in
patients with PM RMS has been demonstrated in
previously published institutional series,8,11 yet data
addressing the impact of cone-down boost on disease control as it relates to other patient and treatment related variables, such as RT timing or primary disease site, is
limited. We sought to evaluate the influence of these
parameters in an expanded and updated analysis of
children with both PM and non-PM primary RMS who
were treated at our institution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Population

With institutional review board approval, children with
RMS who received treatment with chemotherapy and
RT with definitive intent at the Emory Clinic and
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta from April 2000
through January 2010 were identified for retrospective
analysis. Patients who had evidence of distant metastatic
disease at diagnosis were excluded. All patients had pathologic confirmation of their RMS diagnosis from our
institution based on biopsy or surgical specimens. The
staging evaluation included computed tomography (CT)
and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of the
primary site. CT scans of the chest or fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) studies,
technetium-99 bone scans, and bone marrow aspirates
were performed on all patients to evaluate for distant
metastasis. Cerebrospinal fluid cytology also was performed on patients who had PM primary sites. Patients
were assigned both a pretreatment stage according to the
International Union Against Cancer staging system used
by the IRSG12 and a postoperative group according to
the IRSG system.13 All patients received systemic chemotherapy after pathologic confirmation of their diagnosis
and completion of systemic workup and staging. All but
1 patient (98%) received intensive, multiagent, vincrisCancer

April 15, 2013

tine-based chemotherapy, either enrolled on or following
a specified risk-group based protocol, and 1 patient
received single-agent etoposide. RT was initiated at a
time set according to chemotherapy protocol or varied
based on patient referral, delays in chemotherapy, or
other social or patient-specific factors.
Radiation Therapy

CT simulation with immobilization specific to disease site
was used for treatment planning. Patients received general
anesthesia for simulation and daily treatment when necessary for immobilization. The initial and postinduction
chemotherapy diagnostic imaging studies, including MRI,
FDG-PET, and/or CT scans, were registered to the simulation CT for delineation of the target volume. The initial
gross tumor volume (GTV) was defined as the extent of
prechemotherapy gross soft tissue abnormality on contrastenhanced CT or MRI studies or the area of focal increased
FDG uptake on FDG-PET studies. For patients who
received a cone-down boost, a second boost GTV was created based on the extent of gross soft tissue abnormality as
defined by the postinduction chemotherapy diagnostic
imaging studies. The preinduction and postinduction
chemotherapy clinical tumor volumes (CTVs) were created by expansion of the corresponding GTV with a 0.5cm to 1.5-cm margin to account for potential microscopic
tumor extension. The margins were modified according to
the anatomic location of the tumor to respect natural barriers to tumor spread, such as bone. Initial and boost planning target volumes (PTVs) were created to account for
patient setup uncertainty and target motion by the addition of a 0.5-cm to 1-cm margin to the prechemotherapy
and postinduction chemotherapy CTVs, respectively.
The RT dose was specified according to pretreatment
stage and postoperative group and ranged from 36 gray
(Gy) to 54 Gy. For patients who received a cone-down
boost, the field reduction was made after delivery of an initial 36 Gy to 41.4 Gy to the prechemotherapy PTV, with
a boost volume dose ranging from 9 Gy to 19.8 Gy. RT
delivery included external-beam RT with photons of 6
MV using 3-dimenisonal conformal-field arrangements or
multifield IMRT. Electron-beam therapy and high-doserate brachytherapy also were used in selected patients. Contouring and treatment planning were done using Eclipse
software (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, Calif).
Data Collection

Primary tumors located in the nasal cavity, paranasal
sinuses, nasopharynx, pytergopalantine fossa, infratemporal fossa, mastoid region, and middle ear were classified as PM RMS. All patients who had radiographic
1579

Original Article

evidence of intracranial extension (ICE) or clinical signs
of neurologic deficit (eg cranial nerve palsy) indicating
ICE were classified as having ICE. Primary tumors in all
other locations were classified as non-PM RMS according to primary tumor site.
Time from the start of chemotherapy to the initiation of RT was recorded in weeks and days for each
patient. PTV initial and boost volumes were calculated
and recorded. Relative PTV reduction was calculated as
the percentage volume reduction from the initial PTV
volume to the boost PTV volume for all available patients.
Local failure was defined as tumor recurrence or
progression at the primary site, and distant failure was
defined as disease progression at any site distant from the
primary tumor, as evident by radiographic imaging or
physical examination. Diagnostic imaging at the time of
local failure was fused with an initial treatment planning
CT for evaluation of the spatial relation between the site
of disease failure and the initial and boost PTVs, if applicable. Central nervous system failure with leptomeningeal
metastasis was specifically labeled for independent analysis. Survival analysis was calculated from the time of
chemotherapy initiation until the first evidence of local
failure, distant failure, or death or was censored at date of
last follow-up for patients who remained alive with no evidence of local or distant relapse of RMS.
Statistical Analysis

Patient, disease, and treatment characteristics were summarized for patients with PM RMS and non-PM RMS.
The mean and standard deviation of the continuous variables, RT timing and relative PTV reduction, were compared using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Other categoric
variables, such as group, stage, histology, IMRT, ICE, and
PTV reduction, were compared using the chi-square test or
the Fisher exact test. Survival analysis included KaplanMeier estimates of LC, disease-free survival (DFS), freedom
from leptomeningeal failure (LMF), and overall survival
(OS). The effect of RT timing, PTV reduction, IMRT, tumor histology, stage, grade, and PM versus non-PM disease
site were assessed using a Cox proportional hazards model.
The significance levels were set at .05 for all tests. All statistical analyses were performed using the SAS statistical package (version 9.2; SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC).
RESULTS
Patient Population

Fifty-five consecutive patients with RMS who had no evidence of metastatic disease were evaluated, including 18
patients (33%) with PM RMS and 37 patients (67%) with
1580

non-PM RMS of both head and neck and nonhead and
neck sites. Of the 18 patients who had PM RMS, 12 (67%)
had evidence of ICE. Patient demographics and tumor variables are listed in Table 1. The majority of patients had
embryonal histology (64%) and group 3 disease (84%).
Radiation Therapy Variables

RT variables for the PM and non-PM groups are detailed
in Table 2. For the subgroup of patients with PM who
had ICE, the median RT timing was 3 weeks (range, 0-23
weeks), and a cone-down boost was received by 9 patients
(75%). Among all patients, a cone-down boost was
received by 28 (51%) with a median relative reduction in
PTV volume of 56% (range, 5%-91%). Figure 1 illustrates a plan and dose-volume histogram comparison for 2
patients who received a cone-down boost and the reduced
dose to critical structures by way of reducing the highdose treatment volume.
Overall Survival

After a median follow-up of 41 months, 49 patients (89%)
remained alive. The 3-year Kaplan-Meier OS rate for
patients with PM RMS was 76% (95% CI, 0.49%0.90%) compared with 96% (95% CI, 0.77%-0.99%)
for patients with non-PM RMS (P ¼ .01) (Fig. 2). No
association was observed between OS and RT timing or
the receipt of a cone-down boost among patients with
PM RMS or non-PM RMS. However, for the subset of
12 patients who had PM RMS with ICE, delayed RT
timing was associated with decreased OS (P ¼ .055).
There was no association between OS and the receipt of a
cone-down boost among patients who had PM RMS
with ICE (P ¼ .883).
Disease-Free Survival

The 3-year Kaplan-Meier estimates of DFS were 69%
(95% CI, 0.41%-0.86%) for the PM subgroup and 88%
(95% CI, 0.72%-0.95%) for the non-PM subgroup (Fig.
2). No significant association was observed between DFS
and RT timing or the receipt of a cone-down boost.
Among the 12 patients who had PM RMS and evidence of
ICE, 5 patients (42%) experienced disease progression,
including 1 patient (12%) with local failure and 4 patients
(30%) who had LMF as their first site of disease progression. Three of the 4 patients with LMF died at a median
of 2 months (range, 2-3 months) from LMF, and 1 patient
was lost to follow-up. All 4 patients with LMF had received
a cone down boost. The 3-year Kaplan-Meier estimate of
freedom from LMF was 50% (95% CI, 0.152%-0.775%)
for patients who had received a cone down boost, although
the association between LMF and cone-down boost was
not statistically significant (P ¼ .21) (Fig. 3). Among the 4
Cancer

April 15, 2013

RT Cone-Down Boost in Pediatric RMS/Eaton et al

TABLE 1. Patient and Tumor Characteristics
No. of Patients (%)
Characteristic

Total, N ¼ 55

PM, N ¼ 18

Non-PM, N ¼ 37

P

27
28
6 [1-18]

10
8
4 [1-18]

17
20
6 [1-16]

.391

Sex
Boys
Girls
Age: Median [range], y
Primary site
Nasopharynx
Nasal cavity/paranasal sinuses
Pytergopalatine/infratemporal fossa
Middle ear
Total PM
Head and neck, non-PM
Trunk/retroperitoneum/etc
Extremity
Bladder/prostate
GU: Nonbladder/nonprostate
Total non-PM
Histologic type
Embryonal
Alveolar
NOS
ISRG stage
I
II
III
ISRG group
2
3

8
4
4
2

.766

(44)
(22)
(22)
(11)

18 (33)
13 (35)
9 (24)
6 (16)
5 (14)
5 (14)

NA

37 (67)
35 (64)
18 (33)
2 (3)

12 (67)
5 (28)
1 (5)

23 (62)
13 (35)
1 (3)

.785

15 (27)
13 (24)
26 (49)

1 (6)
9 (50)
8 (44)

14 (38)
4 (11)
19 (51)

.002

9 (16)
46 (84)

2 (11)
16 (89)

7 (19)
30 (81)

.702
.702

Abbreviations: GU, genitourinary; IRSG, International Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group; NA, not applicable; NOS, not otherwise specified; PM,
parameningeal.

TABLE 2. Radiation Therapy Variables
Variable
RT timing: Median [range], wk
PTV cone-down boost: No. of patients (%)
Relative PTV reduction: Median [range], %a
IMRT: No. of patients (%)

PM RMS, N ¼ 18

Non-PM RMS, N ¼ 36

P

3.4 [0-23]
12 (67)
56 [5-81]
17 (94)

15.8 [1-43]
16 (43)
54.5 [21-91]
20 (54)

.0001
.103
.966
.003

Abbreviations: IMRT, intensity-modulated radiotherapy; PM-RMS, parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma; PTV, planning target volume; RT, radiotherapy.
a
The relative PTV volume reduction from the initial PTV to the boost PTV.

patients with LMF, 2 patients had embryonal histology
with RT timing of 3 weeks and 17 weeks, 1 patient had alveolar histology with RT timing of 3 weeks, and 1 patient
had RMS not otherwise specified with RT timing of 8
weeks. At the time of diagnosis, these patients had both a
diagnostic MRI that was negative for leptomeningeal
enhancement and a cerebrospinal fluid examination that
was negative for evidence of malignant cells.
Local Control

The 3-year Kaplan-Meier estimates of LC were 92%
(95% CI, 0.5%4-0.99%) for the PM subgroup and 91%
(95% CI, 0.75%-0.97%) for the non-PM subgroup (Fig.
2). In total, 5 local failures were observed, including 2
Cancer

April 15, 2013

patients (11%) with PM RMS and RT timing of 1 week
and 3 patients (8%) with non-PM RMS and RT timing
of 11 weeks, 13 weeks, and 14 weeks. All 5 of the local
failures occurred in patients with stage III, group 3 disease
at unfavorable sites, including tumors of the head and
neck with embryonal histology (2 patients), prostate with
embryonal histology (2 patients), and extremity with alveolar histology (1 patient). Local failure occurred in 2
patients (7%) who had received a cone-down boost and in
4 patients (11%) who had received IMRT. In both
patients who had received a cone-down boost and experienced local failure, the local failure occurred within the
boost PTV volume (Fig. 4). In the other 3 patients who
had local failure for which there was no cone-down boost,
1581

Original Article

Figure 1. Two plans for radiotherapy (RT) illustrate the reduced dose to nearby critical structures with the receipt of a conedown boost. (a) An RT plan without a cone-down boost (a1,b1; triangle) is compared with an RT plan that includes a cone-down
boost (a2,b2; square), indicating a reduced dose to the brain (pink), temporal lobe (light blue), hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis (orange), optic chiasm (hot pink), optic nerve (dark blue), right eye (green dash), and lacrimal gland (yellow) in a patient
with optic rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). (b) In a patient with prostate RMS, the plan with a cone-down boost reduced the dose to
the right and left femur (purple), bladder (yellow), and rectum (brown).

the local recurrence developed within the initial PTV. No
recurrences developed marginal to the treatment volumes.
No significant association was observed between LC and
RT timing or the receipt of a cone-down boost.
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this is the largest series to date assessing the effect of a PTV reduction by cone-down boost on
patterns of disease recurrence in patients with pediatric
RMS and is the first to include all primary disease sites.
We demonstrated excellent LC with no marginal failures,
although 50% of patients had received a cone-down boost
in response to tumor regression with induction chemotherapy. A local failure rate of 9% was observed, and all local
failures occurred in patients who had group 3 and stage III
disease of unfavorable sites, which is comparable to the 7%
to 19% local failure rate observed in the IRSG IV study
among similar patients.14 Thus, the receipt of a responsebased boost in conjunction with delayed RT timing in this
series had no discernible impact on LC and allowed for a
considerable reduction in the boost PTV volume.
The clinical impetus for using this strategy of adaptive treatment planning with highly conformal RT is to
reduce the volume of normal tissues exposed to the full
RT treatment dose, thereby reducing treatment-related
morbidity. Indeed, the prevalence of long-term sequelae
1582

in survivors of pediatric RMS who received treatment
with definitive RT is well recognized,15-17 and the dosedependent nature of such sequelae also has been demonstrated.18,19 Although toxicity data were not presented
here, and further investigation is needed to estimate the
clinical benefit of cone-down boost, reducing the highdose RT volume may be expected to reduce both acute
and late treatment toxicity in this vulnerable pediatric
population. Experience with the use of tight margin proton RT with a steep dose fall has demonstrated expected
clinical outcomes with favorable rates of late effects in pediatric RMS and further supports this assumption.20
The 3-year Kaplan-Meier estimates of LC and OS
among patients with PM RMS in our series were 92% and
76%, respectively, which are comparable to the results for
patients with PM RMS treated on prior IRSG studies.3 Both
DFS and OS were shorter among patients with PM RMS
than in those with non-PM RMS, as expected given the
known negative prognostic impact of PM primary sites.21,22
Although the use of a cone-down boost in conjunction with delayed RT timing was not associated with a
detriment to disease outcomes in all PM patients, among
the subgroup of patients who had PM RMS with ICE,
delayed RT timing was associated with decreased survival.
It is important to note that this association represents a
trend that was observed in a small subset of patients (n ¼
Cancer

April 15, 2013

RT Cone-Down Boost in Pediatric RMS/Eaton et al

Figure 3. This Kaplan-Meier curve illustrates freedom from
leptomeningeal failure and overall survival for patients with
parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma and intracranial extension
separated according to receipt (yes/no) of radiation therapy
with a cone-down boost to reduce the planning target volume (PTV).

Figure 2. These Kaplan-Meier curves illustrate overall survival,
disease-free survival, and local control for patients with parameningeal (red line) and nonparameningeal (blue line)
rhabdomyosarcoma.

12) and should be interpreted with caution. Four of the
12 patients with ICE (30%) developed LMF as their first
site of disease failure, and their median survival was 2
months from the time of disease progression. All 4
Cancer

April 15, 2013

patients who had LMF received a cone-down boost and
initiated RT at 3 weeks or more from the time of chemotherapy initiation. This represents an unexpected high
rate of LMF in a cohort of patients with PM RMS and
ICE who received treatment with a cone-down boost and
delayed RT timing.
In a comprehensive review of 595 patients with PM
RMS who received treatment on IRSG studies II, III, and
IV, Michalski and colleagues reported improved LC with
the early initiation of RT among patients with ICE (5year LC rate: 84% for 2 weeks vs 63% for >2 weeks; P
¼ .07) and a central nervous system failure rate of 9%.3
Compared with that review, our patient population consisted of a proportionately larger number of patients with
ICE (68% vs 38%) with a higher rate of central nervous
system failure (30% vs 9%). Although we did not observe
decreased LC with delayed RT, all patients with LMF had
RT timing >2 weeks; thus, our results similarly support
the use of early RT for this high-risk population. For the
patients with ICE who received treatment on IRSG studies II, III, and IV, margins from 2 cm to 5 cm around the
GTV were used to define the PTV, and some patients
received whole-brain RT. Although no decrease in central
nervous system failure was observed with the addition of
whole-brain RT, the GTV to PTV expansion margins
were larger than the margin expansions used in our
patients. The higher rate of LMF observed in our patients
who also had a response-based PTV reduction may suggest that larger volume coverage is necessary to control
1583

Original Article

Figure 4. Two local failures occurred in patients who received radiation therapy with a cone-down boost, including (Left) 1
patient with prostate rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) and (Right) 1 patient with nasopharyngeal RMS. In both patients, the local failure
(yellow) occurred within the boost planning target volume (PTV) (blue) and the corresponding 95% isodose line (red).

adjacent areas at high risk for meningeal tumor extension
in patients who have evidence of ICE.
The observed trend toward increased central nervous system failure with the receipt of a cone-down boost
and decreased survival with delayed RT timing among
patients with PM RMS and ICE, although they represent
a small subset, is nevertheless hypothesis-generating. Children with PM RMS who have ICE pose a unique challenge for disease control. Our data suggest that, in this
high-risk subset, early initiation of RT and wider margin
RT may be more important for adequate disease control
than in other primary sites. The importance of comprehensive RT may be related to the reduced efficacy of systemic therapy for targeting ICE of disease and may
warrant additional strategies for central nervous systemdirected therapy. Pending further investigation, we recommend maintaining coverage of adjacent areas at high
risk for meningeal extension within the boost PTV volume when this practice would not otherwise compromise
the recognized dose limitations of nearby critical
structures.
In addition to the relatively small patient numbers
and heterogeneous patient population included in the
current study, as with any retrospective series, interpretation of our data is limited by the possibility that additional, uncontrolled variables and biases may have
influenced outcomes. Patients with group 2 disease, for
whom the utility and benefit of cone-down boost may not
be applicable, were included in this study. However, it
1584

would be expected that the use of cone-down boost in the
higher risk subset of group 3 patients would then favor a
more conservative estimate of any ill effects from the
reduced volume technique and, thus, the inclusion of
group 2 patients does not alter our conclusion regarding
the safety of reducing high-dose treatment volume in
patients without ICE. Poor documentation of limited
patient follow-up has prevented analysis of toxicity data in
correlation with reduced volume RT, and any potential
benefit to reduced treatment toxicity with the use of conedown boost is not directly supported by the data presented here.
In conclusion, among patients with non-PM RMS,
delayed initiation of RT and use of a cone-down boost
allowed for significant reductions in treatment volumes
with no apparent compromise in LC or survival. However, among patients with PM RMS and radiographic or
clinical evidence of ICE, a high rate of intracranial progression with decreased survival was observed among the
patients who received a cone-down boost and who had
RT delayed. Further analysis is required to define the
potential clinical benefit from a cone-down boost in
patients with non-PM RMS and to assess the relation
between reduced PTV volumes and RT timing and the
risk of leptomeningeal dissemination in patients with PM
RMS and ICE.
FUNDING SOURCES
No specific funding was disclosed.

Cancer

April 15, 2013

RT Cone-Down Boost in Pediatric RMS/Eaton et al

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

11.

REFERENCES

12.

1. Wolden SL, Anderson JR, Crist WM, et al. Indications for radiotherapy and chemotherapy after complete resection in rhabdomyosarcoma: a report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Studies
I to III. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:3468-3475.
2. Regine WF, Fontanesi J, Kumar P, et al. Local tumor control in
rhabdomyosarcoma following low-dose irradiation: comparison of
group II and select group III patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
1995;31:485-491.
3. Michalski JM, Meza J, Breneman JC, et al. Influence of radiation
therapy parameters on outcome in children treated with radiation
therapy for localized parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma in Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group trials II through IV. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;59:1027-1038.
4. Douglas JG, Arndt CA, Hawkins DS. Delayed radiotherapy following dose intensive chemotherapy for parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma (PM-RMS) of childhood. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:1045-1050.
5. Smith SC, Lindsley SK, Felgenhauer J, Hawkins DS, Douglas JG.
Intensive induction chemotherapy and delayed irradiation in the
management of parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2003;25:774-779.
6. Eaton B, Katzenstein H, Sutter A, et al. Delayed radiation therapy
timing and use of intensity-modulated radiation therapy in nonhead and neck pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma [published online ahead
of print July 20, 2012]. J Radiat Oncol. 2012.
7. Lin C, Donaldson SS, Meza JL, et al. Effect of radiotherapy techniques (IMRT vs 3D-CRT) on outcome in patients with intermediate-risk rhabdomyosarcoma enrolled in COG D9803—a report
from the Children’s Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2012;82:1764-1770.
8. McDonald MW, Esiashvili N, George BA, et al. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy with use of cone-down boost for pediatric headand-neck rhabdomyosarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2008;72:884-891.
9. Wolden SL, Wexler LH, Kraus DH, Laquaglia MP, Lis E, Meyers
PA. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy for head-and-neck rhabdomyosarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;61:1432-1438.
10. Curtis AE, Okcu MF, Chintagumpala M, Teh BS, Paulino AC.
Local control after intensity-modulated radiotherapy for head-and-

Cancer

April 15, 2013

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.

neck rhabdomyosarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2009;73:173-177.
Chen C, Shu HK, Goldwein JW, Womer RB, Maity A. Volumetric
considerations in radiotherapy for pediatric parameningeal rhabdomyosarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;55:1294-1299.
Lawrence W Jr, Gehan EA, Hays DM, Beltangady M, Maurer
HM. Prognostic significance of staging factors of the UICC staging
system in childhood rhabdomyosarcoma: a report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study (IRS-II). J Clin Oncol. 1987;5:4654.
Maurer HM, Beltangady M, Gehan EA, et al. The Intergroup
Rhabdomyosarcoma Study-I. A final report. Cancer. 1988;61:209220.
Raney RB, Maurer HM, Anderson JR, et al. The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group (IRSG): major lessons from the IRS-I
through IRS-IV studies as background for the current IRS-V treatment protocols. Sarcoma. 2001;5:9-15.
Punyko JA, Mertens AC, Gurney JG, et al. Long-term medical
effects of childhood and adolescent rhabdomyosarcoma: a report
from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2005;44:643-653.
Raney RB, Asmar L, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, et al. Late complications of therapy in 213 children with localized, nonorbital soft-tissue sarcoma of the head and neck: a descriptive report from the
Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Studies (IRS)-II and IRS-III. IRS
Group of the Children’s Cancer Group and the Pediatric Oncology
Group. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1999;33:362-371.
Paulino AC, Simon JH, Zhen W, Wen BC. Long-term effects in
children treated with radiotherapy for head and neck rhabdomyosarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48:1489-1495.
Merchant TE, Goloubeva O, Pritchard DL, et al. Radiation dosevolume effects on growth hormone secretion. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2002;52:1264-1270.
Merchant TE, Rose SR, Bosley C, Wu S, Xiong X, Lustig RH.
Growth hormone secretion after conformal radiation therapy in pediatric patients with localized brain tumors. J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:4776-4780.
Childs SK, Kozak KR, Friedmann AM, et al. Proton radiotherapy
for parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma: clinical outcomes and late
effects. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:635-642.
Maurer HM, Gehan EA, Beltangady M, et al. The Intergroup
Rhabdomyosarcoma Study-II. Cancer. 1993;71:1904-1922.
Crist W, Gehan EA, Ragab AH, et al. The Third Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study. J Clin Oncol. 1995;13:610-630.

1585

