673

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Proceedings of the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Supplement to Cancer

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Summary Statement for the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Steven E. Come, MD1
Aman U. Buzdar, MD2
James N. Ingle, MD3
Stephen R. D. Johnston, MD, PhD, FRCP4
Angela M. Brodie, PhD5
R. Charles Coombes, MD6
William R. Miller, PhD, DSc7
Kathleen I. Pritchard, MD8
Eric P. Winer, MD9
Jo Anne Zujewski, MD10
Paul E. Goss, MD, PhD, FRCPC, FRCP11

1

Breast Cancer Program, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
2
Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
3
Division of Medical Oncology, The Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota.
4

Department of Medicine, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

The Sixth Cambridge Conference on Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of
Breast Cancer was convened in Cambridge, Massachusetts on April 30 and May
1, 2007. The purpose of this multidisciplinary meeting of leaders in clinical and
11

Breast Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
The symposium and educational proceedings
publications were supported by educational
grants provided by AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals,
Pfizer Inc, and Novartis Pharmaceuticals. Program
management and Continuing Medical Education
Sponsorship were provided by InforMEDical Communications, Inc, Carlisle, Massachusetts.
Dr. Come has acted as a consultant and member
of the Speakers’ Bureau and has received
research support from AstraZeneca. He has also
acted as a member of the Speakers’ Bureau for
Novartis and Pfizer.
Dr. Buzdar has received research funding from
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Genentech, Pfizer, and Taiho.
Dr. Ingle has acted as a consultant for Novartis.

5

Dr. Johnston has received research funding from
AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline, and has been a
member of the Speakers’ Bureau for GlaxoSmithKline.

6

Dr. Brodie is a member of the Advisory Board for
AstraZeneca and Pfizer, and has received
research support from AstraZeneca and Novartis.

Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
Department of Medicine, Breast Unit, Imperial College School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
7

Breast Research Group, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
8

Clinical Trials and Epidemiology, University of
Toronto at Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer
Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
9
Breast Oncology Center, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
10

Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

Dr. Coombes has received research support from
AstraZeneca and has received honoraria and
research support from Pfizer.
Dr. Miller has received honoraria and is a member of the Speakers’ Bureau for AstraZeneca,
Novartis, and Pfizer.
Dr. Pritchard has acted on the advisory committee
and received honoraria from Aefera; received
research funding from Amgen; acted on the advisory

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23194
Published online 10 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

board, acted as a consultant, provided expert testimony, and received honoraria and research funding
from AstraZeneca; acted as a consultant for Biomira;
received research funding from Bristol-Myers
Squibb; acted on the advisory committee, acted as a
consultant, and received honoraria from HoffmannLa Roche; received research funding from the
National Cancer Institute of Canada; acted on the
advisory board, acted as a consultant, and received
honoraria and research funding from Novartis; acted
on the advisory board, acted as a consultant, and
received research funding from Ortho-Biotech;
acted on the advisory committee, acted as a consultant, and received honoraria and research funding
from Pfizer; acted on the advisory committee, acted
as a consultant, provided expert testimony, and
received honoraria and research funding from
Sanofi-Aventis; and acted on the advisory committee, acted as a consultant, and received honoraria
and research funding from YM Biosciences.
Dr. Winer is a member of the advisory board for
AstraZeneca and Pfizer.
Dr. Goss is a member of the advisory board and
Speakers’ Bureau for AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, and Novartis.
Presented at Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer: Proceedings of the Sixth
Cambridge Conference, Cambridge, Massachusetts, April 30–May 1, 2007.
Address for reprints: Steven E. Come, MD, Breast
Cancer Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Room CC-913,
Boston, MA 02215; Fax: (617) 667-9919; E-mail:
scome@caregroup.harvard.edu
Received August 24, 2007; revision received
October 8, 2007; accepted October 11, 2007.

674

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3
basic research and patient treatment was to assess the most recent data in the
field, articulate current best practices, and identify the next steps to advance
both patient care and research. Topics included a review of data from major
recent and ongoing trials of endocrine treatment in patients with early breast
cancer and from studies combining endocrine therapy with other treatment. The
current status of breast cancer prevention efforts was examined. Preclinical models of response and resistance, initial efforts to profile tumor response and resistance during endocrine therapy in patients, and new developments in
pharmacogenomics were also highlighted. In this article, a synopsis of the key
issues discussed, conclusions, and recommendations are summarized; these are
presented at greater length in the individual articles and accompanying Open
Discussions that comprise the full conference proceedings. In the 2 years since
the Fifth Conference, we have gained valuable follow-up data from key trials in
early breast cancer, which have helped to clarify both the efficacy and safety and
tolerability of the available strategies for endocrine therapy. Observations using
endocrine agents in combination with other treatment have been similarly
extended. More detailed analysis of preclinical models has improved our understanding of resistance to endocrine therapy, and efforts to explore these and other
mechanisms in the clinic are now underway. All of this has and continues to contribute to a growing understanding of how to optimize the use of endocrine agents
in both treating and preventing breast cancer. Cancer 2008;112(3 suppl):673–78.
 2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: endocrine therapy, breast cancer, estrogen, aromatase inhibitors,
tamoxifen.

CLINICAL UPDATE
Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy in Postmenopausal Women
Hormone receptor-positive disease in postmenopausal women is the most common presentation of
early breast cancer. Trials of adjuvant endocrine
therapy comparing tamoxifen with aromatase inhibitors (AIs) or comparing 5 years of tamoxifen treatment with 2 to 3 years of initial tamoxifen followed
by a switch to an AI to complete 5 years of total
therapy have completed accrual and continue to
accumulate follow-up data.
For the 2 trials—Arimidex [anastrozole], Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination (ATAC) and Breast
International Group (BIG) 1–98—that directly compare monotherapy with tamoxifen with an AI, there
is an absolute improvement in disease-free survival
of approximately 3% for women receiving the AI.
However, there has been no difference noted with
regard to overall survival in either trial to date, with
a median follow-up of >90 months for ATAC
and >51 months for BIG 1–98. The previously
observed, statistically significant advantage in distant disease-free survival for letrozole versus tamoxifen in the BIG 1–98 trial was not present in the most
recent analysis, which has additional follow-up but
includes only women in the 2 monotherapy arms.
The trials that compare 5 years of tamoxifen
treatment with tamoxifen given for 2 to 3 years fol-

lowed by an AI to complete 5 years of therapy—the
Intergroup Exemestane Study (IES), the Austrian
Breast Cancer Study Group 8 trial (ABCSG 8), the
Arimidex [anastrozole]-Nolvadex [tamoxifen] 95
study (ARNO 95), and the Italian Tamoxifen Anastrozole trial (ITA)— also demonstrate a reduction in
disease recurrence of approximately 3% to 4% in the
AI-containing treatment arms. A borderline overall
survival advantage for the AI arm was observed in
the IES trial if only the patients with hormone receptor-positive disease and unknown hormone receptor status (>98% of the total enrollment) were
analyzed, and for the 3 smaller trials using anastrozole (ABCSG8, ARNO95, and ITA) when the results
were combined in a meta-analysis. Thus, at this
point, a best approach for initial adjuvant endocrine
therapy in postmenopausal women with hormone
receptor-positive tumors has not emerged. There
has been a slight overall reduction in early disease
recurrence for those women beginning treatment
with an AI, but in the ATAC study, for example, this
represents only 5 fewer distant recurrences per 1000
women during the first 2.5 years of treatment.
Because there has been no overall survival advantage to date and little data regarding late recurrences, it is unclear whether the long-term outcome
data will favor the initial use of an AI or some initial
tamoxifen before conversion to an AI. The first

Summary Statement/Come et al.

report on the 2 sequential arms of the BIG 1–98 trial
will likely occur in 2008 and will be compared with
the 2 monotherapy arms. However, the sequential
arms are relatively small, and may be underpowered
to resolve this issue. Currently, either monotherapy
with an AI or initial tamoxifen followed by an AI is
an acceptable strategy as is 5 years of tamoxifen
therapy for those women who have tolerance or financial issues that might preclude the use of an AI.
The initial use of an AI for the subset of women at
the highest risk of early disease recurrence (those
with larger tumors, positive lymph nodes, and possibly those who are HER-2/neu positive) could be considered pending additional data.

Extended Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy in
Postmenopausal Women
Women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer face a prolonged risk of disease recurrence; the
Oxford overview demonstrates that greater than half
of the recurrences in this population occur >5 years
after diagnosis.1 The majority of these events are distant metastases. The National Cancer Institute of
Canada (NCIC) MA.17 trial comparing 5 years of
letrozole therapy with placebo in postmenopausal
women who had completed 5 years of tamoxifen
treatment reported a 4.6% absolute reduction in recurrence in the AI arm.2 A significant improvement
for overall survival was observed for lymph nodepositive patients. This trial continues to yield important data with ongoing follow-up. The hazards ratio
for disease recurrence with letrozole versus placebo
declines progressively over time. By the fourth year
of letrozole therapy, there is an 81% reduction in the
rate of disease recurrence compared with the placebo arm. A new analysis has also demonstrated that
introducing an AI several years after tamoxifen therapy has been completed can still significantly lower
the risk of disease recurrence. The tolerability of
extended adjuvant endocrine therapy among patients
participating in the trial was good, although there is
likely a selection bias because women who had the
most difficulty with endocrine treatment during the
initial 5 years might be less likely to pursue extended
treatment. The NCIC MA.17 trial has set the precedent for longer endocrine therapy and spawned the
design and initiation of multiple trials to evaluate the
use of endocrine therapy for >5 years.
Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy in Premenopausal Women
Tamoxifen remains the standard of care for adjuvant
endocrine treatment in premenopausal women.
However, there are 2 ongoing National Cancer Institute (NCI)-Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program

675

(CTEP)-sponsored trials that have been designed to
evaluate the comparative efficacy of AIs and tamoxifen in this population: 1) a phase 3 trial with 3 treatment arms that compares tamoxifen alone with
tamoxifen combined with ovarian function suppression and with exemestane combined with ovarian
function suppression (the Suppression of Ovarian
Function Trial [SOFT trial]) and 2) a phase 3 trial of
2 treatment arms that compares tamoxifen plus ovarian function suppression with exemestane plus ovarian function suppression (the Tamoxifen and
Exemestane trial [TEXT trial]).

Safety of AIs in the Adjuvant Setting
Further follow-up in the adjuvant endocrine trials in
postmenopausal women and their substudies also
has provided some reassurance with regard to the
safety of AIs. Although excess bone loss and/or an
increased risk of fracture have been reported with AI
use in each of the adjuvant trials, it appears that the
greatest bone loss occurs primarily within the first
few years after the initiation of AI therapy. In the
ATAC trial, fracture risk curves separate initially but
converge during continuation of therapy and appear
to overlap after the discontinuation of anastrozole. In
the bone substudy of this trial, none of the 81 women
who had a normal bone mineral density (BMD) scan
at baseline and received anastrozole became osteoporotic during the 5 years of AI therapy. In the IES trial,
BMD declined 4% in the first 6 months of exemestane treatment (and after tamoxifen discontinuation)
and then approximately 1% per year thereafter. The
net bone density loss at 60 months was approximately 2% for the sequence of tamoxifen followed by
exemestane, which is comparable to the expected
normal postmenopausal bone loss of approximately
2% to 3% over 5 years. Further data are available
from the placebo-controlled NCIC MA.17 bone substudy, in which 226 patients (122 of whom received
letrozole and 104 of whom received placebo) were
enrolled. Patients’ baseline characteristics and the
median length of follow-up were similar in the 2
treatment groups. At 24 months, patients being treated with letrozole had a significant decrease from
baseline in total hip BMD (23.6% vs 20.71%;
P 5 .044) and lumbar spine BMD (25.35% vs
20.70%; P 5 .008). Letrozole was found to increase
the urine N-telopeptide at 6 months, 12 months, and
24 months (P 5 .054; P < .001; and P 5 .016, respectively). No patient went below the threshold for
osteoporosis in total hip BMD after baseline, but
more women became osteoporotic based on BMD in
the lumbar spine while receiving letrozole compared
with placebo (4.1% vs 0%; P 5 .064). It is interesting

676

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

to note that bisphosphonate use at the discretion of
the treating physician occurred more frequently in
the placebo arm compared with patients treated with
letrozole (10.6% vs 4.1%, respectively; P 5 .07).
Based on these data, women receiving an AI
alone or tamoxifen followed by an AI should have a
baseline BMD scan at the time an AI is initiated. If
the patient’s BMD is normal, it should be repeated
approximately every 2 years while the patient receives treatment. Women with osteopenia or osteoporosis should be followed annually with BMD and
receive appropriate therapy for bone loss. The presence of osteopenia or even osteoporosis is not an
absolute contraindication to AI use.
AIs have no estrogen agonist effect and therefore
do not stimulate the endometrium. Thus, in the randomized trials, tamoxifen, when compared with an
AI, is associated with an increase in vaginal discharge, vaginal bleeding, endometrial thickness, and
uterine cancer. An increase in the rate of hysterectomy has also been observed in women receiving tamoxifen, although the indications for the excess
procedures cannot be discerned from the trials. Vaginal dryness as a result of estrogen depletion is common in women using AIs. Vaginal estrogens, which
are often administered to treat this side effect, are
absorbed systemically to some extent, although it is
unclear whether this occurs at a level that could
interfere with the efficacy of treatment.
There has been a nonsignificant increase in cardiovascular events observed in AI users in several
trials. However, the event rate is extremely low overall. Lipid substudies have revealed a protective effect
of tamoxifen on serum lipids, with relatively flat cholesterol levels during AI therapy. In the NCIC MA.17
lipid substudy, women who had normal serum lipid
levels upon entering the trial maintained normal
levels during 36 months of treatment with letrozole.
Although these data support the safety of AI
therapy, these agents often prove more difficult
symptomatically for patients than is captured in the
initial clinical trial reports. Arthralgias and stiffness
are common and are usually easily managed with reassurance or mild analgesia. However, some patients
experience intolerable joint symptoms leading to the
discontinuation of therapy.

addressed the issue of concurrent versus sequential
use of endocrine and chemotherapies. Furthermore,
there is no comparable data available with regard to
the optimal schedule for combining AIs with chemotherapy. It is also unknown whether AIs should be
given concurrently with or after primary breast cancer radiation therapy.

Combining Endocrine Therapy with Other Standard
Treatments
Results of the Breast Intergroup 0100 trial suggest
that endocrine therapy, in this case tamoxifen,
should not be given concurrently with chemotherapy.
However, this conclusion remains tentative, and to
our knowledge no other trials to date have directly

THE BIOLOGY OF RESPONSE AND RESISTANCE

Prevention
Several completed randomized trials have compared
endocrine agents versus placebo for breast cancer
prevention. Ten-year data from the International
Breast Cancer Intervention Study (IBIS)-1 trial,
which, unlike the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast
and Bowel Project (NSABP) P-1 prevention study was
not unblinded, demonstrated a ‘‘carry over’’ effect for
tamoxifen. There is in fact a greater benefit observed
at 10 years than at the 5-year analysis. In the NSABP
P-2 (STAR) trial, raloxifene was found to be equal to
tamoxifen with regard to the reduction in invasive
cancers but was less effective in preventing noninvasive cancers. There were fewer uterine cancers noted
with the use of raloxifene than tamoxifen but the difference was not found to be significant. Prevention
studies have established a very favorable therapeutic
index for tamoxifen in women aged <50 years at the
time of the initiation of treatment. To our knowledge,
to date, raloxifene has not been studied in a randomized clinical trial for breast cancer prevention in
premenopausal women.
Each of the adjuvant endocrine trials in postmenopausal women demonstrates that AIs are more
effective than tamoxifen in reducing contralateral
cancers. The planned NSABP P-4 prevention trial of
letrozole versus raloxifene has not been approved by
the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI). The NCIC
MAP.3 and IBIS-2 trials compare exemestane and
anastrozole, respectively, with placebo; importantly,
the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials
Group (NCIC CTG) MAP.3 trial allows women who
have received prior selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) therapy to be enrolled in this trial based
on the observation of substantial contralateral breast
cancer prevention in the NCIC MA.17 trial in women
receiving letrozole after 5 years of tamoxifen therapy.

Preclinical Xenograft Studies
Human breast cancer cells expressing estrogen receptor (ER) and engineered to express aromatase
(MCF-7CA) grown as tumors in nude mice have
demonstrated early up-regulation of HER-2/neu signaling during letrozole therapy. This is considered an

Summary Statement/Come et al.

important mechanism of resistance to endocrine therapy; trastuzumab can reverse this acquired resistance
due to long-term letrozole treatment. The scheduling
of trastuzumab therapy is important in the xenograft
model. Trastuzumab was found to be very effective in
resistant tumors when introduced at the time of the
development of resistance and given in addition to
letrozole rather than instead of letrozole. This may
have important implications for clinical trial design.
Cross talk between the estrogen and growth factor pathways with up-regulation of HER-2/neu and
phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase in the MCF-7 xenograft model can be prevented if the ER-a is targeted with fulvestrant simultaneous to the initiation of letrozole therapy. This
preclinical observation is currently being evaluated
in 2 ongoing clinical trials, which will be discussed.

Combining Endocrine Therapy with Other Targeted
Treatment
A variety of clinical trials have been and are being
conducted to explore combinations of therapeutic
agents in an effort to abrogate resistance to endocrine therapy. Based on MCF-7 xenograft and cell
line data, the Fulvestrant and Anastrozole Clinical
Trial (FACT) and the Southwest Oncology Group
(SWOG) S0226 trials are evaluating the use of fulvestrant in combination with an AI in the first-line metastatic setting. The Study of Fulvestrant, Exemestane,
and Anastrozole (SoFEA) trial is addressing the
role of fulvestrant in combination with or without
continued estrogen suppression at the time of disease progression during nonsteroidal AI therapy.
Combinations of AIs with trastuzumab and with
lapatinib are addressing the association between the
up-regulation of HER-2/neu and endocrine resistance. Furthermore, there is the preliminary evidence
that ER might be expressed in some women with ERnegative, HER-2/neu amplified breast cancer after
treatment with trastuzumab, indicating the possibility that endocrine therapy could be a previously
unrecognized option for these patients. This potentially important observation also is supported by preclinical data.
To our knowledge to date, trials combining tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), farnesyl transferase
inhibitors (FTIs), or mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) inhibitors with endocrine therapy have been
disappointing. Issues of target and patient selection
and of trial design complicate the assessment of
these strategies and results. Furthermore, there is a
great deal of redundancy in many of these pathways.
Thus, even an approach with appropriate target and

677

patient selection might fail if the targeted pathway is
not completely inhibited by treatment.

Profiling Response and Resistance to AIs in Women
with Early Breast Cancer
The analysis of serial core needle biopsy specimens
from women with early breast cancer is enabling the
further investigation of preclinical findings and is
providing important new insights. Gene expression
arrays performed on tumor biopsies taken at baseline
and after 2 weeks of exposure in women receiving
neoadjuvant letrozole have revealed that numerous
genes are altered during this brief interval. Tumors
that ultimately manifest clinical resistance display
heterogeneous profile patterns, suggesting that resistance in human breast cancer many involve a variety of mechanisms. Furthermore, gene expression
changes that separate responding and nonresponding tumors do not appear to be those characteristically associated with estrogen dependence or with
proliferation in these preliminary studies.
Pharmacogenomics
Tamoxifen is converted to its active metabolite
endoxifen by the enzyme cytochrome P450 (CYP)
2D6. Recent investigation has revealed significant
genotypic variation in this enzyme, with variations
noted among races and among individuals. Prospective analysis of a retrospective trial has revealed significant differences in outcome between extensive
and poor metabolizers of tamoxifen. In addition,
many commonly used medications including the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline, and citalopram interfere
with this enzyme, as does celecoxib. This is of particular concern because SSRIs are frequently prescribed to counter the menopausal symptoms
associated with endocrine therapy. Potent and moderate CYP2D6 inhibitors should be avoided during tamoxifen therapy.
AIs act on the aromatase enzyme CYP19. Initial
trials are underway to evaluate AI pharmacogenomics. Although pharmacogenomics is an area of
investigation in endocrine therapy that is just beginning, it may contribute toward the better understanding of previously conducted trials. For example,
it is possible that differences in outcomes between
tamoxifen and AIs noted in early adjuvant trials
might reflect the proportion of tamoxifen recipients
who are poor metabolizers of that agent rather than
an absolute slight superiority of AIs as a therapeutic
class. Consideration must now be given to profiling
not only the tumor but also the patient.

678

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

UNRESOLVED ISSUES AND PRIORITIES FOR FUTURE
RESEARCH
Endocrine therapy has provided meaningful advances in breast cancer treatment and prevention,
but some patients continue to develop recurrence
and die of the disease. In the short term, more effort
is needed to optimize what we have already achieved
by reducing early attrition from endocrine therapy
and by applying the demonstrated benefits of
extended endocrine therapy to a greater proportion
of patients. The long duration of risk of disease recurrence in patients with hormone receptor-positive
breast cancer is increasingly recognized, but the side
effects and complications of the endocrine therapy
given to address this risk are also real. Thus, a mechanism to determine, with increased precision, which
patients might be spared endocrine therapy altogether and those who should receive prolonged endocrine therapy would be of great value. This is true
not only in the management of early breast cancer
but even more so in the prevention setting, in which
the ‘‘number needed to treat’’ is much greater. Sorting out these issues may be more important than
choosing between available agents because data
from existing trials suggest very similar levels of benefit.
More data are needed for premenopausal women
and for the integration of endocrine therapy with
other standard treatments as well as targeted biologic

agents. To properly assess targeted therapy, greater
emphasis must be placed on the selection of the target, confirming that the patient population to be studied has a tumor that expresses the target, and on
verification that the targeted pathway is effectively
inhibited by the treatment. The complexity of breast
cancer dictates a paradigm shift from empiricism toward translational research to identify the best designs
for the next generation of clinical trials. Although cell
lines and xenograft models have been extremely useful to date, an increasing emphasis on sampling
human tumors is needed to better understand the
apparent heterogeneity of hormone receptor-positive
human breast cancer and mechanisms of resistance.
Paired specimens prior to and after exposure to endocrine agents in neoadjuvant and preoperative nontherapeutic trials are of high value, as are biopsy
specimens from tumors that continue to progress during endocrine therapy in the metastatic setting.

REFERENCES
1. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Effects of
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy for early breast cancer
on recurrence and 15-year surival: an overview of the randomized trials. Lancet 2005;365:1687–1717.
2. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, Robert NJ, Muss HB, Piccart
MJ, et al. Randomized trial of letrozole following tamoxifen
as extended adjuvant therapy in receptor-positive breast
cancer: updated findings from NCIC CTG MA.17. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1262–1271.

