Cancer
Research

Review

Chloroquine in Cancer Therapy: A Double-Edged Sword of
Autophagy
Tomonori Kimura, Yoshitsugu Takabatake, Atsushi Takahashi, and Yoshitaka Isaka

Abstract
Autophagy is a homeostatic cellular recycling system that is responsible for degrading damaged or
unnecessary cellular organelles and proteins. Cancer cells are thought to use autophagy as a source of energy
in the unfavorable metastatic environment, and a number of clinical trials are now revealing the promising
role of chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor, as a novel antitumor drug. On the other hand, however, the
kidneys are highly vulnerable to chemotherapeutic agents. Recent studies have shown that autophagy plays a
protective role against acute kidney injury, including cisplatin-induced kidney injury, and thus, we suspect
that the use of chloroquine in combination with anticancer drugs may exacerbate kidney damage. Moreover,
organs in which autophagy also plays a homeostatic role, such as the neurons, liver, hematopoietic stem cells,
and heart, may be sensitive to the combined use of chloroquine and anticancer drugs. Here, we summarize
the functions of autophagy in cancer and kidney injury, especially focusing on the use of chloroquine to treat
cancer, and address the possible side effects in the combined use of chloroquine and anticancer drugs. Cancer
Res; 73(1); 3–7. Ó2012 AACR.

Introduction
Antimalarial drugs, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine,
are promising for cancer treatment (1–3). Several clinical trials
that have been conducted or are in progress have shown
favorable effects of chloroquine as a novel antitumor drug
(4). Although the precise mechanism remains to be determined, the anticancer effects of chloroquine may partially be
because of its inhibitory action on macroautophagy (hereafter
referred to as autophagy).

Autophagy
Autophagy is a major intracellular pathway for the degradation and recycling of long-lived proteins, lipid droplets,
protein aggregates, mature ribosomes, glycogen, and even
entire organelles such us the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, and Golgi apparatus (5–7). A schematic drawing of
the autophagy process is shown in Fig. 1A. Initially, parts of the
cytoplasm and cellular organelles are engulfed within a doublemembraned vesicle called the autophagosome. The autophagosome fuses with lysosomes to form an autolysosome, which
results in the degradation of the sequestered materials by
various lysosomal hydrolytic enzymes. Degradation is followed
by the generation of amino acids, sugars, fatty acids, and

Authors' Afﬁliation: Department of Geriatric Medicine and Nephrology,
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan
Corresponding Author: Yoshitaka Isaka, Department of Geriatric Medicine and Nephrology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Box
B6, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan 585-0871. Phone: 81-6-68793857; Fax: 81-6-6879-3857; E-mail: isaka@kid.med.osaka-u.ac.jp
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2464
Ó2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

nucleosides that are recycled for macromolecular synthesis
and energy production (6, 8). This recycling system is particularly important during starvation. Autophagy occurs at low
basal levels to maintain cellular homeostasis by eliminating
damaged proteins and organelles. Autophagy is also strongly
induced under starvation conditions to supply amino acids by
degrading proteins. In addition, autophagy is upregulated
when cells need to rid themselves of damaging cytoplasmic
components (6).
Autophagy is currently 1 of the hottest ﬁelds in science
because of recent genetic studies in mice. Because systemic
autophagy-knockout mice die within a day after birth (9),
tissue-speciﬁc autophagy-deﬁcient mice have been analyzed
to elucidate the role of autophagy in vivo (10). These studies
have highlighted the importance of autophagy in several
organs, including the brain, liver, heart, hematopoietic cells,
and kidney (11–17).

Autophagy in the Kidney
Autophagy has an important role in proximal tubular cells of
the kidney, the main target of chemotherapy-related kidney
injury. Proximal tubule-speciﬁc autophagy-deﬁcient mice
exhibit proximal tubular cell degeneration and accumulation
of abnormal protein with aging (16), indicating that autophagy
plays a critical homeostatic role in the proximal tubular cells
(18). Autophagy also plays a protective role against acute
kidney injury, such as ischemia–reperfusion and cisplatin
treatment-induced injury, which are more severe in proximal
tubule-speciﬁc autophagy-deﬁcient mice compared with
autophagy-competent mice (16, 17). Recently, quite similar
ﬁndings were also reported (19), and these data showed that
autophagy plays a protective role in proximal tubular cells of
the kidney against aging and acute kidney injury.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

3

Kimura et al.

A
Lysosome
Amino acids,
Fatty acids
Sugar,
etc.
Isolation membrane

Autolysosome

Autophagosome

B

Cisplatin ⴙ chloroquine

Cisplatin

ROS

ROS

ROS

ROS

Cancer cell

Kidney cell

Cancer cell

Kidney cell

Tolerated

Survival

Sensitive to cisplatin
effective treatment

Sensitive to cisplatin
acute kidney injury

DNA

Mitochondria

Autophagy

Figure 1. Combination of
chloroquine and
chemotherapeutic drugs
(i.e., cisplatin) could exert toxic
effect not only on cancer cells,
but also kidney cells, which
results in acute kidney injury.
A, the process of autophagy.
B, inhibition of autophagy by
chloroquine could sensitize not
only cancer cells, but also
kidney cells to chemotherapy,
resulting in DNA damage,
production of mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species, and
cell death.

ROS Reactive oxygen species

© 2012 American Association for Cancer Research

Autophagy and Cancer
Autophagy is considered to have 2 contrasting roles, promotion and suppression, in cancer cells. First, autophagy
provides an energy source for cancer cells, which can survive
in an environment that is unfavorable for normal cells. Cancer
cells can survive under hypoxic and acidic conditions despite
the lack of mature vessels. For energy production, cancer cells
depend mainly on the glycolysis pathway (the Warburg effect),
which is less efﬁcient than the tricarboxylic acid cycle pathway;
thus, cancer cells require more glucose uptake than normal
cells (20). Autophagy is assumed to provide energy for cancer
cells under such unfavorable conditions, and thereby, have a
cancer-promoting role.
On the other hand, autophagy also has a cancer-suppressing
role. Heterozygous disruption of Beclin 1, an autophagy-related
gene, increases the frequency of spontaneous malignancies (21,
22). Thus, Beclin 1 has cancer-suppressing activity. Liver-speciﬁc Atg7-deﬁcient mice and mice with systemic mosaic deletion of Atg5 develop benign liver adenomas (23, 24). Although
Beclin 1 has multiple functions, including endocytosis, these
observations suggest a cancer-suppressing role of autophagy. A

4

Cancer Res; 73(1) January 1, 2013

recent study suggested that autophagy is also necessary for
anti-immune responses. In response to chemotherapy, autophagy in dying cancer cells enables the release of ATP, which
attracts immune cells and triggers anti-immune responses
(25).
Therefore, autophagy may have different effects at different
stages of cancer. Further studies are necessary to understand
the precise role of autophagy in cancer cells.

Chloroquine and Cancer Treatment
Chloroquine has long been used to treat or prevent malaria.
Chloroquine is also used to treat autoimmune diseases in some
countries because of its immunosuppressive properties.
Although the precise mechanism underlying the antimalarial
effects of chloroquine remains unknown, chloroquine seems to
exert its effects through the weak-base lysosome-tropic feature
(26, 27). When chloroquine enters the lysosome, it becomes
protonated because of the low pH within the lysosome, and
accumulation of the protonated form of chloroquine within
the lysosome leads to less acidic conditions and, thereby,
decreased lysosomal function.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Chloroquine, Autophagy, and the Kidney

Accumulating evidences indicates that chloroquine sensitizes cancer cells to radiation and other anticancer drugs. On
the basis of the data from a number of clinical trials now in
process, it can be inferred that this drug may alter cancer
therapeutic strategies (1).
Although the precise mechanism by which chloroquine
exerts anticancer effects is unclear, 1 possible mechanism is
its antiautophagic activity. Autophagy is 1 of the physiologic
processes affected by chloroquine. Inhibition of lysosome
activity by chloroquine arrests the latter step of autophagy,
degradation of the autolysosome, which results in the failure to
provide energy through the autophagy pathway. Because
autophagy seems to contribute to promote cancer, chloroquine may sensitize cancer cells through inhibiting autophagy.
The dosage of chloroquine usually ranges between 100 and
500 mg/day. Side effects are minimal at low doses, while
many more toxic effects occur at higher doses, such as visual
disturbances, gastrointestinal upset, electrocardiographic
changes, headache, and pruritus.
In addition to chloroquine, other autophagy inhibitors, such
as baﬁlomycin A1, 3-methyladenine, and pepstain A, have been
studied as antitumor drugs. One notion is that these drugs,
including chloroquine and its derivatives, are not speciﬁc
modulators of autophagy activity, that is, these agents also
have some other effects on cellular functions, such as lysosomal function and endocytosis. Targeting more speciﬁc processes of autophagy is a more preferable approach in cancer
therapy, however, and is now under investigation (28).

Chloroquine in the Kidney, the Double-Edged
Sword of Autophagy
The use of chloroquine in combination with other chemotherapeutic reagents may enhance cancer treatment (8, 29),
but normal cells also use autophagy to maintain homeostasis,
and inhibition of autophagy by chloroquine may sensitize not
only cancer cells, but also normal organs to chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy causes a variety of acute and chronic organ
toxicities. The kidneys are highly vulnerable to chemotherapeutic agents because many chemotherapeutic agents and
their metabolites are excreted through the kidney tubular
epithelial cells (30). Chemotherapy could affect the kidney,
with clinical manifestations ranging from an asymptomatic
rise in serum creatinine levels to acute tubular injury requiring
dialysis therapy. Therefore, the use of chemotherapeutic drugs
is sometimes limited by their nephrotoxic side effects. Chemotherapy-related kidney injury often leads to an insufﬁcient
treatment of cancer because kidney dysfunction requires that
clinicians reduce the dose of chemotherapy to avoid further
kidney injury. Kidney damage also causes other unfavorable
complications, such as water and nitrogenous waste retention,
electrolyte disturbances, decreased immunity, etc. Indeed,
acute kidney injury is associated with poorer prognosis (31).
Chemotherapeutic drugs induce kidney damage through the
injury of the proximal tubules. Cisplatin is a frequently used
chemotherapeutic agent that often causes acute kidney injury.
The mechanism of cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity has not
been completely elucidated, but several mechanisms have been

www.aacrjournals.org

postulated, including (i) DNA damage, (ii) mitochondrial
damage, (iii) oxidative stress, and (iv) ischemic injury caused
by vascular damage (32).
Recently, a protective role of autophagy against cisplatininduced kidney injury was shown (17). Proximal tubule-speciﬁc autophagy-deﬁcient mice showed remarkably severe kidney damage after cisplatin treatment compared with wild-type
mice through several mechanisms. First, autophagy protects
proximal tubular cells from mitochondrial oxidative stress
(the clearance of mitochondria by autophagy is speciﬁcally
called 'mitophagy'). Second, autophagy also protects proximal
tubular cells from DNA damage. Third, autophagy protects
proximal tubular cells from abnormal protein accumulation.
In addition, autophagy protects proximal tubular cells from
ischemic injury (16).
Thus, chloroquine, which inhibits autophagy, may promote
chemotherapy-induced kidney injury through multiple pathways (Fig. 1B). Both cancer cells and kidney proximal tubular
cells tolerate cisplatin through the use of autophagy because
autophagy protects cells, not only from DNA damage, but also
from the mitochondrial reactive oxygen species induced by the
degradation of damaged mitochondria. The use of chloroquine
sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy and leads to anticancer effects through inhibiting autophagy. On the other hand,
the very effect of chloroquine to inhibit autophagy could also
sensitize kidney cells to chemotherapy, leading to acute kidney
injury. Consistent with this notion, chloroquine-treated mice
(60 mg/kg, daily) are more vulnerable to kidney injury from
ischemic–reperfusion injury than vehicle-treated mcie (33).
This study may indicate possible additional effect of chloroquine in chemotherapy-induced kidney injury.
The risk factors and preventive methods for combined
chemotherapy and chloroquine-induced kidney injury are
likely the same as those for chemotherapy-induced kidney
injury. For example, the risk factors for cisplatin-induced
kidney injury (such as decreased kidney function, high-dose
of cisplatin, concomitant administration of nephrotoxic drugs,
previous cisplatin chemotherapy, and older age; ref. 34) could
also be risk factors for combination therapy-induced kidney
injury. To avoid cisplatin-induced kidney injury, the dose of
cisplatin is lowered and saline is intravenously infused, and
these procedures should also be applied for combination
therapy-induced kidney injury. High-risk patients should be
prepared for the standard approach toward prevention with
close monitoring.
Even if acute kidney injury occurs in chloroquine-treated
patients because of the inhibition of autophagy, it may not
be possible to determine the precise cause and effect. Kidney
biopsy from patients with chloroquine-associated kidney
injury may not provide deﬁnitive information. Monitoring
autophagy in human biopsy specimens is often difﬁcult (35).
To observe autophagy-related structures by transmission
electron microscopy, perfusion ﬁxation of tissues is recommended, but it is usually feasible in biopsy specimens and
complete ﬁxation of these specimens is difﬁcult. Furthermore, correct identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of the autophagic compartments by electron microscopy is relatively
difﬁcult (35). Whether immunohistochemistry of autophagy-

Cancer Res; 73(1) January 1, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5

Kimura et al.

related gene products in the tissues corresponds to autophagic activity has not been clearly shown, and this area of
research requires further exploration. Methods of monitoring the activity of autophagy in human are currently unavailable and are under vigorous study.

Chloroquine in Other Organs
With regard to the autophagy-inhibiting effects, chloroquine and other autophagy inhibitors may accelerate
chemotherapy-related organ injuries in other organ besides
the kidney. Autophagy-deﬁciency exacerbates injuries in
organs such as the brain, liver, heart, and hematopoietic
cells (11–15); thus, the combination use of chemotherapy
with chloroquine may unexpectedly worsen the function of
these organs. For example, most chemotherapies often
cause bone marrow depression, and the addition of chloroquine may worsen this condition. Anthracycline antibiotics, such as doxorubicin and daunorubicin, cause cardiotoxicity in a dose-dependent manner, presumably through
DNA damage, and the addition of chloroquine to the
therapeutic regimen could worsen the cardiotoxicity. To
our knowledge, the sensitivity of organs other than the
kidney has not been fully examined under the conditions of
autophagy inhibition or ablation in tissue-speciﬁc autophagy-deﬁcient mice. Therefore, the adverse effects of
chloroquine in combination therapy are speculative, and
further studies are required.

Conclusion
Chloroquine is a promising drug for cancer therapy and
relatively safe, especially for a short period of time. Unexpected
side effects on organs, such as the kidney, however, could
occur, especially when combined with anticancer drugs, possibly through the inhibition of autophagy. Therefore, clinicians
in the ﬁeld of cancer and kidney therapy should be aware of this
possibility.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: Y. Isaka, T. Kimura
Development of methodology: T. Kimura
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): T. Kimura
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: Y. Isaka, T. Kimura, Y.
Takabatake
Study supervision: T. Kimura
Other: A. Takahashi

Grant Support

This work was ﬁnancially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research
from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan
(24591196 to Y. Takabatake, and 24659416 to Y. Isaka) and a Grant-in-Aid for
Progressive Renal Diseases Research, research on intractable disease, from the
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan.
Received June 24, 2012; revised October 3, 2012; accepted November 2, 2012;
published OnlineFirst January 2, 2013.

References
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

6

Amaravadi RK, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Yin XM, Weiss WA, Takebe N,
Timmer W, et al. Principles and current strategies for targeting autophagy for cancer treatment. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:654–66.
Rosenfeldt MT, Ryan KM. The multiple roles of autophagy in cancer.
Carcinogenesis 2011;32:955–63.
Janku F, McConkey DJ, Hong DS, Kurzrock R. Autophagy as a target
for anticancer therapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2011;8:528–39.
Sotelo J, Briceno E, Lopez-Gonzalez MA. Adding chloroquine to
conventional treatment for glioblastoma multiforme: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:
337–43.
Klionsky DJ, Emr SD. Autophagy as a regulated pathway of cellular
degradation. Science 2000;290:1717–21.
Mizushima N, Komatsu M. Autophagy: renovation of cells and tissues.
Cell 2011;147:728–41.
Singh R, Cuervo AM. Lipophagy: connecting autophagy and lipid
metabolism. Int J Cell Biol 2012;2012:282041.
Rabinowitz JD, White E. Autophagy and metabolism. Science
2010;330:1344–8.
Kuma A, Hatano M, Matsui M, Yamamoto A, Nakaya H, Yoshimori T,
et al. The role of autophagy during the early neonatal starvation period.
Nature 2004;432:1032–6.
Mizushima N, Yoshimori T, Levine B. Methods in mammalian autophagy research. Cell 2010;140:313–26.
Komatsu M, Waguri S, Chiba T, Murata S, Iwata J, Tanida I, et al. Loss
of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration
in mice. Nature 2006;441:880–4.
Hara T, Nakamura K, Matsui M, Yamamoto A, Nakahara Y, SuzukiMigishima R, et al. Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells
causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. Nature 2006;441:885–9.
Komatsu M, Waguri S, Ueno T, Iwata J, Murata S, Tanida I, et al.
Impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive autophagy in Atg7deﬁcient mice. J Cell Biol 2005;169:425–34.

Cancer Res; 73(1) January 1, 2013

14. Nakai A, Yamaguchi O, Takeda T, Higuchi Y, Hikoso S, Taniike M, et al.
The role of autophagy in cardiomyocytes in the basal state and in
response to hemodynamic stress. Nat Med 2007;13:619–24.
15. Mortensen M, Soilleux EJ, Djordjevic G, Tripp R, Lutteropp M, SadighiAkha E, et al. The autophagy protein Atg7 is essential for hematopoietic
stem cell maintenance. J Exp Med 2011;208:455–67.
16. Kimura T, Takabatake Y, Takahashi A, Kaimori JY, Matsui I, Namba T,
et al. Autophagy protects the proximal tubule from degeneration and
acute ischemic injury. J Am Soc Nephrol 2011;22:902–13.
17. Takahashi A, Kimura T, Takabatake Y, Namba T, Kaimori J, Kitamura H,
et al. Autophagy guards against cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury.
Am J Pathol 2012;180:517–25.
18. Isaka Y, Kimura T, Takabatake Y. The protective role of autophagy
against aging and acute ischemic injury in kidney proximal tubular
cells. Autophagy 2011;7:1085–7.
19. Liu S, Hartleben B, Kretz O, Wiech T, Igarashi P, Mizushima N, et al.
Autophagy plays a critical role in kidney tubule maintenance, aging and
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Autophagy 2012;8:826–37.
20. Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Understanding the
Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science 2009;324:1029–33.
21. Yue Z, Jin S, Yang C, Levine AJ, Heintz N. Beclin 1, an autophagy gene
essential for early embryonic development, is a haploinsufﬁcient tumor
suppressor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:15077–82.
22. Qu X, Yu J, Bhagat G, Furuya N, Hibshoosh H, Troxel A, et al.
Promotion of tumorigenesis by heterozygous disruption of the beclin
1 autophagy gene. J Clin Invest 2003;112:1809–20.
23. Takamura A, Komatsu M, Hara T, Sakamoto A, Kishi C, Waguri S, et al.
Autophagy-deﬁcient mice develop multiple liver tumors. Genes Dev
2011;25:795–800.
24. Inami Y, Waguri S, Sakamoto A, Kouno T, Nakada K, Hino O, et al.
Persistent activation of Nrf2 through p62 in hepatocellular carcinoma
cells. J Cell Biol 2011;193:275–84.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Chloroquine, Autophagy, and the Kidney

25. Michaud M, Martins I, Sukkurwala AQ, Adjemian S, Ma Y, Pellegatti P,
et al. Autophagy-dependent anticancer immune responses induced by
chemotherapeutic agents in mice. Science 2011;334:1573–7.
26. Homewood CA, Warhurst DC, Peters W, Baggaley VC. Lysosomes,
pH and the anti-malarial action of chloroquine. Nature 1972;235:
50–2.
27. Slater AF. Chloroquine: mechanism of drug action and resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum. Pharmacol Ther 1993;57:203–35.
28. Cheong H, Lu C, Lindsten T, Thompson CB. Therapeutic targets in
cancer cell metabolism and autophagy. Nat Biotechnol 2012;30:
671–8.
29. Sasaki K, Tsuno NH, Sunami E, Tsurita G, Kawai K, Okaji Y, et al.
Chloroquine potentiates the anti-cancer effect of 5-ﬂuorouracil on
colon cancer cells. BMC Cancer 2010;10:370.
30. de Jonge MJ, Verweij J. Renal toxicities of chemotherapy. Semin Oncol
2006;33:68–73.

www.aacrjournals.org

31. Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, Molitoris BA, Ronco C, Warnock DG,
et al. Acute Kidney Injury Network: report of an initiative to improve
outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;11:R31.
32. Pabla N, Dong Z. Cisplatin nephrotoxicity: mechanisms and renoprotective strategies. Kidney Int 2008;73:994–1007.
33. Periyasamy-Thandavan S, Jiang M, Wei Q, Smith R, Yin XM, Dong Z.
Autophagy is cytoprotective during cisplatin injury of renal proximal
tubular cells. Kidney Int 2008;74:631–40.
34. Launay-Vacher V, Rey JB, Isnard-Bagnis C, Deray G, Daouphars M.
Prevention of cisplatin nephrotoxicity: state of the art and recommendations from the European Society of Clinical Pharmacy Special Interest
Group on Cancer Care. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2008;61:
903–9.
35. Klionsky DJ, Abdalla FC, Abeliovich H, Abraham RT, Acevedo-Arozena
A, Adeli K, et al. Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays for
monitoring autophagy. Autophagy 2012;8:439–713.

Cancer Res; 73(1) January 1, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

7

Cancer
Research

Correction

Correction: Chloroquine in Cancer Therapy:
A Double-Edged Sword of Autophagy
In the printed version of this article (Cancer Res 2013;73:3–7), which was published
in the January 1, 2013 issue of Cancer Research (1), the OnlineFirst publication date of
December 27, 2012 was not included. The publisher regrets this error.

Reference
1. Kimura T, Takabatake Y, Takahashi A, Isaka Y. Chloroquine in cancer therapy: a double-edged
sword of autophagy. Cancer Res 2013;73:3–7.
Published online February 7, 2013.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0041
Ó2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

1446

Cancer Res; 73(4) February 15, 2013

Chloroquine in Cancer Therapy: A Double-Edged Sword of
Autophagy
Tomonori Kimura, Yoshitsugu Takabatake, Atsushi Takahashi, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:3-7.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/1/3

This article cites 35 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/1/3.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 13 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/1/3.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

