Original Article

Involvement and Targeted Intervention of Dysregulated
Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma
Winnie W. Lo, PhD1,2; Jay S. Wunder, MD2,3,4; Brendan C. Dickson, MD5; Veronica Campbell, BSc6;
Karen McGovern, PhD6; Benjamin A. Alman, MD4,7; and Irene L. Andrulis, PhD1,2

BACKGROUND: During development, the Hedgehog pathway plays important roles regulating the proliferation and differentiation of
chondrocytes, providing a template for growing bone. In this study, the authors investigated the components of dysregulated Hedgehog signaling as potential therapeutic targets for osteosarcoma. METHODS: Small-molecule agonists and antagonists that modulate
the Hedgehog pathway at different levels were used to investigate the mechanisms of dysregulation and the efficacy of Hedgehog
blockade in osteosarcoma cell lines. The inhibitory effect of a small-molecule Smoothened (SMO) antagonist, IPI-926 (saridegib), also
was examined in patient-derived xenograft models. RESULTS: An inverse correlation was identified in osteosarcoma cell lines
between endogenous glioma-associated oncogene 2 (GLI2) levels and Hedgehog pathway induction levels. Cells with high levels of
GLI2 were sensitive to GLI inhibition, but not SMO inhibition, suggesting that GLI2 overexpression may be a mechanism of ligandindependent activation. In contrast, cells that expressed high levels of the Hedgehog ligand gene Indian hedgehog (IHH) and the target genes patched 1 (PTCH1) and GLI1 were sensitive to modulation of both SMO and GLI, suggesting ligand-dependent activation. In
2 xenograft models, active autocrine and paracrine, ligand-dependent Hedgehog signaling was identified. IPI-926 inhibited the
Hedgehog signaling interactions between the tumor and the stroma and demonstrated antitumor efficacy in 1 of 2 ligand-dependent
models. CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicate that both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent Hedgehog dysregulation
may be involved in osteosarcoma. It is the first report to demonstrate Hedgehog signaling crosstalk between the tumor and the
stroma in osteosarcoma. The inhibitory effect of IPI-926 warrants additional research and raises the possibility of using Hedgehog
C 2013 American Canpathway inhibitors as targeted therapeutics to improve treatment for osteosarcoma. Cancer 2014;120:537–47. V
cer Society.
KEYWORDS: osteosarcoma, hedgehog signaling, ligand-dependent, IPI-926, microenvironment.

INTRODUCTION
Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone cancer in children and adolescents.1 Most osteosarcomas are high-grade
tumors and are associated with a poor prognosis. For the 10% to 20% of patients who have detectable metastases to the
lungs at diagnosis, few will be cured despite aggressive multimodal therapy.2 The combination of chemotherapy and surgery has significantly improved the long-term survival of patients with osteosarcoma who present with localized disease up
to 50% or 60%.2,3 However, survival has plateaued over the past 20 years because of a lack of treatment improvements.
No targeted therapy for osteosarcoma currently exists; hence, the objective of this study was to gain a better understanding
of its underlying molecular alterations to help identify superior therapeutic interventions.
The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway regulates the proliferation and differentiation of tissues and organs during development. Components of the Hh pathway are tightly regulated to control signaling.4,5 Among the Sonic (SHH), Indian

Corresponding author: Irene L. Andrulis, PhD, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
M5G 1X5; Fax: (416) 586-8663; andrulis@lunenfeld.ca
1
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 2Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; 3University Musculoskeletal Oncology Unit, Department of Surgery, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 4Department of Surgery, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 5Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 6Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts; 7Department of Developmental Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

We thank our colleagues in the Department of Surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital; Dr. Qingxia Wei, Chang Ye Yale Wang, and Heather Whetstone (Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children); Dr. Nalan Gokgoz (Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute) for technical support; and Marisa
Peluso (Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) for performing the SHH and IPI-926 treatments in MG-63.
Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Inc., provided saridegib, performed the GLI1 immunofluorescence assay and the Shh and IPI-926 treatments in MG-63 cells, interpreted
data, and was involved in preparation of the article. However, Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Inc., did not provide additional financial support beyond this and was not
involved in designing the studies, collecting samples, or drawing conclusions.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28439, Received: April 23, 2013; Revised: September 16, 2013; Accepted: September 18, 2013, Published online October 21, 2013 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

February 15, 2014

537

Original Article

(IHH), and Desert (DHH) Hh ligands in the vertebrate
system, the IHH ligands are the main ligands for endochondral ossification during long bone development.6,7
The Hh ligand signals through the patched (PTCH)
receptor to relieve its inhibition of the smoothened
(SMO) receptor, which, through a series of intracellular
signaling cascades, results in the activation of gliomaassociated oncogene (GLI) transcription regulators.4
Aberrant activation of the Hh pathway, through liganddependent or ligand-independent mechanisms, has been
reported in numerous cancers.5 Several small-molecule
antagonists of the Hh pathway are being explored clinically. The approval of an SMO antagonist, vismodegib,
for the treatment of locally advanced and metastatic basal
cell carcinomas brings promise for other cancers that have
dysregulated Hh signaling.8
We previously identified high levels of coexpression
of IHH and the Hh-regulated targets PTCH1 and GLI1
in a subset of osteosarcoma samples (Lo et al, unpublished
results). For the current study, we investigated the mechanisms of Hh pathway dysregulation in osteosarcoma and
the potential of Hh-inhibitory therapy for treatment.
Dysregulated Hh signaling was examined in osteosarcoma
cell lines and patient-derived xenograft models using
small-molecule modulators of the Hh pathway.9-12 The
efficacy of a small-molecule inhibitor of SMO, IPI-926
(saridegib),13-17 was studied in xenograft models, which
also provided the opportunity to characterize Hh signaling interactions between the tumor and its microenvironment, as demonstrated in other cancers.13,18-20
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture

Osteosarcoma cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Va) and were
cultured as recommended and authenticated by short tandem repeat profiling. Mouse embryonic mesoderm fibroblasts, C3H10T1=2 cells, and Ptch2=2 mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells were maintained in Dulbecco modified
Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS).
Hedgehog Pathway Agonist and Antagonist
Treatments

The following molecules were used for treatment: 2 lM
purmorphamine (Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corporation, San Diego, Calif) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 10
nM synthetic SMO agonist (SAG) (Alexis Biochemicals,
San Diego, Calif) in DMSO, 5 lM cyclopamine (BioMol,
Plymouth Meeting, Pa) in 100% ethanol (EtOH), and 5
538

lM GANT61 (Developmental Therapeutics Program,
National Cancer Institute=National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Md) in DMSO. Cells were treated for 48 hours
or 72 hours under serum-starved conditions (0.5% FBS).
Treatments were performed in duplicate and were thrice
repeated. To test the efficacy of IPI-926 in inhibiting Hh
signaling, MG-63 cells were treated with 10% Shhconditioned media (CM) either alone or in combination
with 500 nM IPI-926 in 0.5% FBS media after 5 days of
serum starvation. Shh-CM:293 EcR Shh (JHU-64) cells
were cultured in complete DMEM medium with
400 lg=mL G418 until they reached 80% confluence.
The medium was replaced with DMEM containing 2%
FBS for 24 hours, at which point the CM was collected
and filtered through a 0.22-lm filter.
Small-Interference Transfection

GLI1 expression was silenced in Saos-2 cells with GLI1
small-interference RNAs (siRNAs) (siRNA 115641 and
siRNA 115642; Ambion Inc., Austin, Tex) using the
reverse transfection method with siPORT Amine
(Ambion Inc.). Cell lysates were collected 48 hour posttransfection for protein quantification and 72 hour posttransfection for cell proliferation assays. Treatments were
performed in duplicate and were thrice repeated.
Cell Proliferation Assays

Cell proliferation assays were carried out using a dimethyl
thiazolyl diphenyl tetrazolium salt (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide [MTT]) colorimetric cell proliferation kit (Roche Diagnostics
Corporation, Indianapolis, Ind) or were fixed with
0.4% paraformaldehyde, stained with 40 ,6-diamidino-2phenylindole, and analyzed with the In Cell Analyzer
2000 (GE Healthcare, Rahway, NJ). Experiments were
performed in triplicate and were thrice repeated.
Western Blot Analysis

Membranes were blotted using GLI1 antibodies
(ab49314; Abcam plc, Cambridge, United Kingdom),
GLI2 antibodies (ab7195; Abcam plc), PTCH1 antibodies (sc-6149; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz,
Calif), and b-actin (Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis,
Mo) as a loading control, followed by secondary conjugates (horseradish peroxidase-donkey antibodies; Jackson
Immunochemicals, West Grove, Pa).
Patient-Derived Osteosarcoma Xenograft
Models and IPI-926 Treatment

This research was performed with the approval of the
appropriate human and animal ethics committees at our
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma/Lo et al

TABLE 1. Clinical and Pathologic Characteristics Associated With Patient-Derived Osteosarcoma Xenograft
Models
Characteristic
Systemic disease status
Tumor grade
Tumor site
Age at diagnosis, y
Sex
Patient status
Subtype

Xenograft Model A

Xenograft Model B

Xenograft Model C

Xenograft Model Da

Metastasis at diagnosis
III
Proximal femur
16
Male
Unknown
Chondroblastic

Localized disease at diagnosis
III
Mid-forearm
9
Female
ANED
Osteoblastic

Metastasis at diagnosis
III
Distal femur
9
Female
DOD
Osteoblastic

Localized disease at diagnosis
I
Proximal tibia
29
Male
ANED
Fibroblastic central

Abbreviations: ANED, alive with no evidence of disease; DOD, died of disease.
a
Xenograft model D was included because the tumor was resistant to conventional chemotherapy.

institutions. Patients provided a signed consent form
before study entry. Fresh samples that were collected
during open surgical biopsies were divided into equal
sizes (0.2 3 0.2 cm) and were bilaterally, subcutaneously
implanted into the flanks of immunodeficient nonobese
diabetic=severe combined immunodeficiency (NOD=SCID) mice to permit additional tumor growth for 6 to
8 weeks. Four independent xenograft models (models A,
B, C, and D) were generated from the primary tumors of
4 patients who had various clinical and pathologic characteristics (Table 1). Tissue samples from the site of
tumor implantation were collected from 4 nonengrafted
mice to determine basal levels of Hh signaling.
Once tumors were grossly visible in the mice (after
4-6 weeks), 5 mice received 40 mg=kg of IPI-926 orally,
and another 5 mice received the vehicle control. Xenograft A mice were treated 5 times a week. Eighteen treatments were administered by the endpoint, at which time
the tumor burden became overbearing for the mice.
Because of the aggressive nature of xenograft A, the subsequent xenografts received treatment 7 times a week.
Twenty treatments were administered to xenograft B
mice, 37 treatments were administered to xenograft C
mice, and 31 treatments were administered to xenograft
D mice. An external caliper was used to determine tumor
size weekly in mouse xenografts B, C, and D.
Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain
Reaction Analysis

Samples were snap-frozen immediately after harvesting.
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif). Complementary DNA was generated from
total RNA as previously described.21 Quantitative realtime polymerase chain reaction analysis was performed on
an ABI Prism 7000 Sequence Detector using SYBR Green
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif). The
absolute standard curve method was used for quantificaCancer

February 15, 2014

tion. Signal-transducing adaptor molecule 2 (STAM2),
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH),
and asparagine synthetase (ASNS) were used as housekeeping genes. Transcript levels were normalized to the
levels of the housekeeping gene.
Histology, Immunohistochemistry, and
Immunofluorescence Analyses

Tissue was stained using hematoxylin and eosin for routine morphologic analysis. Proliferation was assessed using
immunohistochemistry for Ki-67 (MIB-1; Dako, Carpenteria, Calif) at 1:200 dilution overnight at 4 C. The
3,30 -diaminobenzidine peroxidase substrate kit (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, Calif) was used for visualization. The Ki-67 proliferation index was assessed blindly
and was estimated based on the percentage of positive tumor cells in the tumor section. Apoptotic cells were evaluated by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick-end labeling (TUNEL) (EMD Millipore, Billerica,
Mass). Each section was assessed blindly, and the total
number of positive cells in 10 high-power fields of view
(3400 magnification; field diameter, 0.55 mm) was
counted. A sensitive human GLI1 rabbit monoclonal
antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Beverly,
Mass) was used to observe nuclear GLI1 in tissue sections
(1:200 dilution overnight at room temperature). Heatinduced epitope retrieval was carried out. A TSA-Cy5 kit
(Perkin Elmer, Waltham, Mass) was used to amplify and
observe the GLI1 signal. Images were captured at 340
magnification using the TissueFAXS system (TissueGnostics, Tarzana, Calif).
Statistical Analyses

All data are represented as mean 6 standard deviation values. Statistical calculations were performed in Microsoft
Excel (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Wash). Differences between groups were analyzed using Student t tests.
539

Original Article

Figure 1. Expression levels of Hedgehog pathway genes are illustrated in 6 osteosarcoma cell lines. Transcript levels of (A) Indian
hedgehog (IHH), (B) patched 1 (PTCH1), (C) glioma-associated oncogene 1 GLI1, (D) GLI2, and (E) smoothened (SMO) as well as
protein levels of (F) PTCH1, (G) GLI1, and (H) GLI2 are illustrated in osteosarcoma cell lines.

Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated using
Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, Mass).
RESULTS
Inverse Correlation Between Endogenous GLI2
mRNA Levels and Hedgehog Pathway Induction
Levels in Osteosarcoma Cell Lines

Variable levels of IHH, PTCH1, GLI1, GLI2, and SMO
were observed in osteosarcoma cell lines (Fig. 1A-E). A
positive correlation was observed between the levels of
Indian Hedgehog ligand, IHH, and the target genes
(PTCH1 and GLI1) as well as the Smoothened receptor,
SMO, with Saos-2 cells exhibiting the highest levels of
expression. Although both GLI1 and GLI2 function as
transcriptional activators of the Hh pathway, their
expression levels were not the same in all the cell lines
(Fig. 1C,D). Saos-2 cells expressed high levels of GLI1
but low levels of GLI2, whereas U2OS and HOS cells
expressed high levels of GLI2 but low levels of GLI1.
Western blot analysis revealed that the relative protein
expression of PTCH1 (Fig. 1F), GLI1 (Fig. 1G), and
GLI2 (Fig. 1H) was similar to the messenger RNA levels
in the cell lines.
GLI1 transcript levels are being used routinely to
determine Hh activities and for pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic analyses of Hh modulators. GLI1
amplifies Hh signaling at the transcript level, which makes
GLI1 messenger RNA levels the most reliable indicators
of pathway activity.22-24 In this study, GLI1 levels were
measured to examine the degree of Hh pathway activation
540

through the agonists purmorphamine and SAG in osteosarcoma cell lines. Upon treatment with 2 lM purmorphamine, Saos-2, KHOS, MNNG, and MG-63 cells
exhibited induction of GLI1 levels, and MG-63 cells had
the highest induction levels (from 3.5-fold to 4-fold)
(Fig. 2A). Similar results were observed at the protein level
(Fig. 2B) and when SAG was used (data not shown). It is
noteworthy that the cells with high endogenous levels of
GLI2, such as U2OS and HOS cells, were insensitive to
pathway induction. A strong inverse correlation
(r 5 20.89; P 5 .02) was observed between the levels of
GLI1 induction and endogenous GLI2 (Fig. 2C). These
results suggest that U2OS and HOS cells may have constitutive Hh signaling caused by high GLI2 levels and, thus,
are insensitive to Hh agonists that act upstream at the receptor level.
Inhibition of Activated Hedgehog Signaling in
Osteosarcoma Cell Lines

To determine whether aberrant Hh signaling can be
inhibited in osteosarcoma, an SMO antagonist, cyclopamine,9 and a GLI antagonist, GANT61,11 were used to
block Hh signaling in the osteosarcoma cell lines (Saos-2,
HOS, and U2OS) that displayed high levels of the GLI
activators GLI1 and=or GLI2. Decreased GLI1 transcript
and protein levels were observed only in 5 lM
cyclopamine-treated Saos-2 cells but not in U2OS or
HOS cells (Fig. 3A). A corresponding decrease in proliferation was observed in treated Saos-2 cells but not in
U2OS or HOS cells (Fig. 3B). Treatment with 5 lM
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma/Lo et al

Figure 2. Activation of the Hedgehog pathway by purmorphamine is illustrated in osteosarcoma cell lines. (A) The fold induction
of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) transcript levels in osteosarcoma cell lines by 2 lM purmorphamine is illustrated relative
to the transcript levels in their control counterparts. (B) GLI1 protein expression of cell lines after purmorphamine treatment is
illustrated. DMSO indicates dimethyl sulfoxide. (C) This chart illustrates the inverse correlation between endogenous GLI2 expression and GLI1 induction levels in osteosarcoma (OS) cell lines.

GANT61 resulted in decreased GLI1 levels in Saos-2 and
HOS cells but not in U2OS cells (Fig. 3C). A corresponding decrease in cell proliferation was observed in
GANT61-treated Saos-2 and HOS cells (Fig. 3D). To
validate the results produced with GANT61, siRNAs
were used to knockdown GLI1 expression in Saos-2 cells.
GLI1 siRNAs significantly decreased the endogenous
GLI1 protein expression in Saos-2 cells (Fig. 3E).
Decreased cell proliferation was also observed with GLI1
siRNA1 (Fig. 3F).
Saos-2 cells expressed high levels of IHH and the target genes PTCH1 and GLI1. The finding that Hh signaling could be effectively activated at the receptor level and
inhibited at the receptor and transcriptional levels provided further support that the dysregulation in Saos-2
cells is likely ligand-dependent. In contrast, HOS cells
exhibited high levels of GLI2 but low levels of IHH and
GLI1 and were sensitive only to inhibition at the transcript level but not at the receptor level. These data support the purmorphamine treatment data and suggest that
Hh dysregulation in HOS cells is likely ligandindependent, resulting from high levels of GLI2.
Although it has been demonstrated that cyclopamine inhibits Hh signaling and tumor growth of several
cancers, its nonspecificity and poor pharmacokinetic
properties have limited further clinical development of
Cancer

February 15, 2014

cyclopamine as a therapeutic agent.25 High concentrations (10 lM) of cyclopamine also caused non-Hh–
specific toxicity in HOS and U2OS cells (data not
shown). Therefore, we examined a semisynthetic analog
of cyclopamine, IPI-926, with improved structure and
superior potency and pharmacokinetic properties.14 To
test the efficacy of IPI-926 in inhibiting activated Hh signaling, MG-63 cells were treated with Shh-CM alone and
in combination with IPI-926. Activated Hh signaling, as
observed by increased GLI1 levels, was identified with
Shh-CM treatment, and this activation was abolished by
IPI-926 (Fig. 3G).

Active Ligand-Dependent Autocrine and
Paracrine Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma
Xenograft Models

Patient-derived osteosarcoma xenograft models allow for
the investigation of Hh pathway signaling interactions
between the human tumor compartments and the mouse
stromal compartments, which consist of endothelial cells,
pericytes, and fibroblasts and presumably could support
tumor growth. Although it would be preferable to use
models that demonstrate high levels of Hh activity,
because of limited tumor availability and xenograft
models, 4 independent models (xenografts A, B, C, and
541

Original Article

Figure 3. Inhibition of activated Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is illustrated in osteosarcoma cell lines. (A) Cyclopamine (Cyclo) (5 lM)
decreased glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) expression in Saos-2 cells, but not in U2OS or HOS cells, at both (Top) the transcript level and (Bottom) the protein level. EtOH indicates ethanol. (B) Decreased cell proliferation is illustrated in Saos-2 cells after cyclopamine treatment. (C) The GLI antagonist GANT61 (5 lM) decreased GLI1 levels in Saos-2 and HOS cells, but not in
U2OS cells, at both (Top) the transcript level and (Bottom) the protein level. DMSO indicates dimethyl sulfoxide. (D) Decreased
cell proliferation is illustrated in Saos-2 and HOS cells after GANT61 treatment. (E) GLI1 small-interference RNAs (siRNAs)
decreased the protein levels of GLI1 in Saos-2 cells. Ctrl indicates control. (F) Decreased cell growth is illustrated in GLI1-silenced
Saos-2 cells with siRNA1. A single asterisk indicates P <.05; double asterisks, P 5.01 (n 5 3). (G) MG-63 cells treated with Sonic
hedgehog (Shh)-conditioned media (CM) resulted in increased GLI1 levels, which were inhibited by IPI-926 (saridegib) treatment.

D) with differential levels of Hh activities and clinical
characteristics were used in this study (Table 1).
By using human-specific primers, variable levels of
IHH, PTCH1, and GLI1 were observed in the tumors
from the xenograft models (Fig. 4A). Coexpression of
IHH and the target genes PTCH1 and GLI1 was observed
in xenografts A and C, with xenograft A exhibiting the
highest levels of expression, suggesting autocrine liganddependent activation.
Mouse-specific primers were used to identify Hh activity in the tumor-associated mouse stroma (Fig. 4B). It is
noteworthy that the expression of IHH was identified
542

exclusively in the human tumor, whereas the expression of
Shh was identified exclusively in the mouse stroma. High
levels of Shh, Ptch1, and Gli1 also were identified in the
mouse stroma of xenografts A and C. The coexpression of
IHH=Shh and the targets PTCH1=Ptch1 and GLI1=Gli1
in both the tumor and the stroma of xenografts A and C
suggests autocrine ligand-dependent activation in both
compartments. Because the basal levels of Shh are low in
nonengrafted mice, the high levels of Shh in the mouse
stroma suggest that the elevated expression is likely caused
by paracrine Hh signaling. In contrast, xenograft B exhibited low levels of all genes, and xenograft D exhibited low
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma/Lo et al

Figure 4. Hedgehog pathway expression is illustrated in human tumor and mouse stroma from 4 independent osteosarcoma xenograft models (models A, B, C, and D). (A) Human-specific primers were used to quantify expression in human tumors. (B)
Mouse-specific primers were used to quantify expression in mouse stroma. Expression in the stroma was normalized to the
expression observed in muscles from nonengrafted nonobese diabetic=severe combined immunodeficiency mice. Downward
arrows represent minute values that cannot be observed in the graph.

levels of the positive regulators IHH and GLI1 in the tumor,
suggesting the absence of ligand-dependent signaling.
Specific Inhibition of the Ligand-Dependent
Hedgehog Pathway by IPI-926 in Osteosarcoma
Xenograft Models

We used IPI-926, a clinical candidate, to evaluate Hh
pathway inhibition as a possible therapeutic intervention
for osteosarcoma in our patient-derived xenograft models
and observed that IPI-926 was effective at inhibiting
ligand-dependent Hh pathway signaling in xenografts A
and C. IPI-926-treated xenografts A and C exhibited
decreased levels of GLI1 and PTCH1 in both the tumor
and the stroma (Fig. 5A). By using a human-specific
GLI1 antibody, decreased GLI1 protein expression also
was observed in the tumors of IPI-926-treated xenografts
A and C (Fig. 5B). In contrast, xenografts B and D, which
did not exhibit active ligand-dependent Hh signaling,
were unresponsive to IPI-926 treatment (data not shown).
Inhibition of Hedgehog Signaling by IPI-926 and
Antitumor Efficacy

Inhibition of Hh signaling by IPI-926 treatment resulted
in significantly decreased tumor weight and volume of
Cancer

February 15, 2014

xenograft C (Table 2). Weekly monitoring of tumor size
revealed that this was likely because of decreased tumor
growth (data not shown). A trend toward decreased tumor
weight was observed in treated xenograft A. The insensitivity of xenografts B and D to IPI-926 resulted in no
tumor volume or weight change.
Proliferation and Apoptosis Effects of
Hedgehog Signaling Inhibition by IPI-926 in
Osteosarcoma Xenograft Models

Each of the 4 osteosarcoma xenograft models had distinguishing morphologic attributes that resembled the parent primary tumor. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained
sections of the tumors were reviewed by a pathologist with
expertise in bone pathology (B.C.D.) who was blinded to
treatment to determine whether the inhibition of Hh signaling resulted in distinct morphologic changes. No
appreciable histologic differences were identified between
IPI-926-treated tumors and control-treated tumors in
terms of nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic activity, necrosis,
or extracellular matrix production (data not shown).
The Hh pathway is important for cellular processes,
such as apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation.6,26-28
Immunohistochemical staining of Ki-67 and TUNEL
543

Original Article

Figure 5. Specific inhibition of ligand-dependent Hedgehog (Hh) activity by IPI-926 (saridegib) was investigated in xenograft
tumors and stroma. (A) Xenografts A and C, which demonstrated ligand-dependent Hh signaling, were sensitive to IPI-926 treatment, as demonstrated by the decreased levels of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) and patched 1 (PTCH1) in tumor and
stroma. A single asterisk indicates P .003; double asterisks, P 5.05 (n 5 3). (B) Micrographs reveal staining by immunofluorescence for human GLI1 (green) with 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride-stained nuclei (blue) in control (Ctrl)-treated
versus IPI-926–treated tumors from xenografts A and C.

TABLE 2. Weight and Volume of IPI-926–Treated Tumors Versus Control-Treated Tumors From Xenograft
Models at the Treatment Endpoint
Xenograft Model A

Xenograft Model Ca

Xenograft Model B

Xenograft Model D

Variable

Ctrl

IPI-926

P

Ctrl

IPI-926

P

Ctrl

IPI-926

P

Ctrl

IPI

P

Weight, g
Volume, cm3

2.49
NA

1.8
NA

.23
—

4.09
6.61

3.76
6.4

.36
.43

3.34
5.19

2.05
2.95

.05
.04

0.54
0.59

0.41
0.37

.22
.13

Abbreviations: Ctrl, control; NA, not applicable.
a
Boldface P values indicate statistical significance.

544

Cancer

February 15, 2014

Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma/Lo et al

Figure 6. The effects of apoptosis and proliferation in xenograft models upon Hedgehog signaling inhibition by IPI-926 (saridegib) treatment are illustrated. (A) Top: The dot plot illustrates the distribution of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick-end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells in IPI-926–treated and control-treated tumors to evaluate apoptosis. Xenograft C
(upward triangles) exhibited a trend toward increased apoptosis in IPI-926–treated tumors. Bottom: Representative images of
cells indicate low versus high levels of TUNEL staining in xenograft C tumors (upward triangles). (B) Top: The dot plot illustrates
distribution according to the percentage of Ki-67–positive cells in IPI-926–treated and control-treated tumors to evaluate proliferation. A trend toward decreased proliferation was observed in xenograft models A (circles), B (squares), and C (upward triangles). Bottom: Representative images of cells indicate relative low versus high levels of Ki-67 staining in xenograft C tumors.
Downward triangles indicate xenograft model D.

were used to assess the effect on proliferation and apoptosis, respectively, by IPI-926. Semiquantitative analysis
suggested increased apoptosis in IPI-926-treated tumors
of xenograft C (Fig. 6A). A trend toward decreased proliferation was observed in IPI-926-treated xenografts A, B,
and C (Fig. 6B).
DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to characterize dysregulated
Hh signaling and evaluate the inhibition of constitutively
activated Hh signaling as a novel therapeutic target in
osteosarcoma. Using small-molecule agonists and antagonists that target different components of the Hh pathway,
Cancer

February 15, 2014

we observed not only that there are different mechanisms
of Hh dysregulation in osteosarcoma but that the microenvironment also plays a significant role in promoting
aberrant Hh signaling. Although the involvement of Hh
signaling has been implicated previously in osteosarcoma,29-33 to our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating Hh signaling interactions between the tumor
and its microenvironment.
Saos-2 cells, which exhibited high levels of IHH,
GLI1, and PTCH1, were sensitive to the modulation of
both SMO and GLI, suggesting that Saos-2 cells have
autocrine ligand-dependent Hh pathway activation. It
was also interesting to note that cells (eg, MG-63) with
low levels of Hh activities were sensitive to SMO agonists,
545

Original Article

suggesting that, if Hh ligands are present in the tumor
microenvironment, then the Hh ligands may activate signaling in the tumor in a reverse paracrine fashion, as
exemplified in B-cell lymphoma.34,35 Likewise, when activated, these cells can be inhibited by SMO antagonists.
Additional evidence of paracrine signaling comes from
the high levels of Shh expression in mouse stroma from
tumors with high IHH expression, suggesting that the Shh
expression may have been induced by Hh signaling in the
tumor. Together with IHH in the tumor, Shh in the
stroma may participate in the autocrine and paracrine Hh
crosstalk between the 2 compartments to promote and
amplify the signaling that sustains aberrant Hh activity.
The differential levels of GLI1 and GLI2 expression
in osteosarcoma cell lines suggest that GLI1 and GLI2
have nonredundant roles in osteosarcoma. By using SMO
agonists, we observed an inverse correlation between
endogenous GLI2 expression and Hh pathway induction
levels in osteosarcoma cell lines. The finding that Hh
pathway induction was solely dependent on GLI2 levels
suggests that GLI2 may function as the dominant transcriptional activator and that GLI2 alone may be sufficient to aberrantly activate Hh signaling in a ligandindependent manner. High levels of GLI2 also were
reported previously in a small cohort of osteosarcoma
samples and cell lines.31,32 Noncanonical activation of
GLI transcription factors mediated by other pathways (eg,
TGFb, EGF, and MAPK) has been reported.24,36 It
would be of interest to determine whether these pathways
contribute to the high levels of GLI2 observed in the
current study. HOS cells that exhibited GLI2 overexpression were sensitive only to GLI inhibition but not to
SMO inhibition. Because mutations in the Hh pathway
may not be common in osteosarcoma, the presence of
GLI2 overexpression may be used to determine which
patients have tumors with ligand-independent pathway
activation and would not be expected to benefit from
SMO antagonist therapies.
IPI-926 specifically blocked signaling in the xenograft models (A and C) that demonstrated liganddependent activation in both the tumor and the stroma,
thereby disrupting all Hh signaling in the tumor and its
microenvironment. Grossly, the antitumor efficacy of
IPI-926 was demonstrated in xenograft C but not in xenograft A, although both were responsive to treatment at the
molecular level. The number of treatments administered
in xenograft A was limited, so it is possible that the treatments may have been terminated before molecular
changes could be translated into phenotypic changes.
Alternatively, xenograft A may depend on additional
546

pathways for growth, such that inhibition of Hh signaling
alone may not be sufficient to abolish tumor growth.
Pathway inhibition by IPI-926 appeared to result in a
trend toward increased apoptosis in xenograft C and
decreased proliferation in xenografts A, B, and C; nevertheless, given the small sample size and the presence of tumor heterogeneity, larger studies will be necessary to
confirm these observations.
It is noteworthy that xenografts A and C, which
exhibited ligand-dependent activity and sensitivity to
IPI-926, were generated from tumors of patients who
presented with metastasis at diagnosis. In contrast, xenografts B and D, which exhibited inactive Hh activity and
insensitivity to IPI-926, were generated from tumors of
patients who presented with localized disease. Because of
the limited number of samples in this study, these findings
are observational but highlight the need to further investigate the relation of dysregulated Hh signaling to osteosarcoma subtypes and aggressive clinical characteristics.
In this study, we demonstrated that both autocrine
and paracrine ligand-dependent activation and ligandindependent activation contribute to aberrant Hh signaling in osteosarcoma and that the sensitivity of osteosarcoma cells to Hh antagonists corresponded with their Hh
activity. Because the inhibition of a single pathway is
unlikely to have dramatic phenotypic effects in tumors as
complex as osteosarcoma, further characterization of dysregulated Hh signaling and its interaction with other signaling pathways in larger sample sizes and appropriate
model systems will be necessary to develop multitargeted
therapeutic regimens to improve treatment for patients
with osteosarcoma.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Foundation
for Innovation and the Ontario Research Fund to J.S.W. and I.L.A.
W.W.L. received grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research Collaborative Training Program in Molecular Medicine.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Veronica Campbell and Karen McGovern are full-time employees
of Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which has a strategic relationship
with Purdue Pharmaceutical Products, LP, and Mundipharma
International Corporation Ltd.

REFERENCES
1. Fletcher CDM, Unni KK, Mertens F, eds. Pathology and Genetics
of Tumours of Soft Tissue and Bone. Lyon, France, IARC Press;
2002.
2. Geller DS, Gorlick R. Osteosarcoma: a review of diagnosis, management, and treatment strategies. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2010;8:
705-718.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

Hedgehog Signaling in Osteosarcoma/Lo et al

3. Bielack SS, Kempf-Bielack B, Delling G, et al. Prognostic factors in
high-grade osteosarcoma of the extremities or trunk: an analysis of
1702 patients treated on neoadjuvant cooperative osteosarcoma study
group protocols. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:776-790.
4. Ingham PW, Nakano Y, Seger C. Mechanisms and functions of
Hedgehog signalling across the metazoa. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;12:
393-406.
5. Jiang J, Hui CC. Hedgehog signaling in development and cancer.
Dev Cell. 2008;15:801-812.
6. St-Jacques B, Hammerschmidt M, McMahon AP. Indian hedgehog
signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes
and is essential for bone formation. Genes Dev. 1999;13:2072-2086.
7. Ehlen HW, Buelens LA, Vortkamp A. Hedgehog signaling in skeletal development. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2006;78:
267–279.
8. Sekulic A, Migden MR, Oro AE, et al. Efficacy and safety of vismodegib in advanced basal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:
2171-2179.
9. Taipale J, Chen JK, Cooper MK, et al. Effects of oncogenic mutations in Smoothened and Patched can be reversed by cyclopamine.
Nature. 2000;406:1005-1009.
10. Sinha S, Chen JK. Purmorphamine activates the Hedgehog pathway
by targeting Smoothened. Nat Chem Biol. 2006;2:29-30.
11. Lauth M, Bergstrom A, Shimokawa T, Toftgard R. Inhibition
of GLI-mediated transcription and tumor cell growth by smallmolecule antagonists. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:8455–
8460.
12. Chen JK, Taipale J, Young KE, Maiti T, Beachy PA. Small molecule
modulation of Smoothened activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;
99:14071-14076.
13. Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, et al. Inhibition of Hedgehog
signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse model of
pancreatic cancer. Science. 2009;324:1457-1461.
14. Tremblay MR, Lescarbeau A, Grogan MJ, et al. Discovery of a
potent and orally active hedgehog pathway antagonist (IPI-926).
J Med Chem. 2009;52:4400-4418.
15. Lin TL, Wang QH, Brown P, et al. Self-renewal of acute lymphocytic leukemia cells is limited by the Hedgehog pathway inhibitors
cyclopamine and IPI-926 [serial online]. PLoS One. 2010;5:e15262.
16. McCann CK, Growdon WB, Kulkarni-Datar K, et al. Inhibition of
Hedgehog signaling antagonizes serous ovarian cancer growth in a
primary xenograft model [serial online]. PLoS One. 2011;6:e28077.
17. Lee MJ, Hatton BA, Villavicencio EH, et al. Hedgehog pathway inhibitor saridegib (IPI-926) increases lifespan in a mouse medulloblastoma model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:7859-7864.
18. Yauch RL, Gould SE, Scales SJ, et al. A paracrine requirement for
hedgehog signalling in cancer. Nature. 2008;455:406-410.
19. Fan L, Pepicelli CV, Dibble CC, et al. Hedgehog signaling
promotes prostate xenograft tumor growth. Endocrinology. 2004;145:
3961-3970.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

20. Tian H, Callahan CA, DuPree KJ, et al. Hedgehog signaling is
restricted to the stromal compartment during pancreatic carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106:4254-4259.
21. Eppert K, Wunder JS, Aneliunas V, Tsui LC, Scherer SW, Andrulis
IL. Altered expression and deletion of RMO1 in osteosarcoma. Int J
Cancer. 2005;114:738-746.
22. Ng JM, Curran T. The Hedgehog’s tale: developing strategies for
targeting cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011;11:493-501.
23. Scales SJ, de Sauvage FJ. Mechanisms of Hedgehog pathway activation in cancer and implications for therapy. Trends Pharmacol Sci.
2009;30:303-312.
24. Stecca B, Ruiz I, Albata A. Context-dependent regulation of the GLI
code in cancer by HEDGEHOG and non-HEDGEHOG signals.
J Mol Cell Biol. 2010;2:84-95.
25. Lipinski RJ, Hutson PR, Hannam PW, et al. Dose- and routedependent teratogenicity, toxicity, and pharmacokinetic profiles of
the hedgehog signaling antagonist cyclopamine in the mouse. Toxicol
Sci. 2008;104:189-197.
26. Vortkamp A, Lee K, Lanske B, Segre GV, Kronenberg HM, Tabin
CJ. Regulation of rate of cartilage differentiation by Indian hedgehog
and PTH-related protein. Science. 1996;273:613-622.
27. Duman-Scheel M, Weng L, Xin S, Du W. Hedgehog regulates cell
growth and proliferation by inducing cyclin D and cyclin E. Nature.
2002;417:299-304.
28. Thibert C, Teillet MA, Lapointe F, Mazelin L, Le Douarin NM,
Mehlen P. Inhibition of neuroepithelial patched-induced apoptosis
by sonic hedgehog. Science. 2003;301:843-846.
29. Warzecha J, Gottig S, Chow KU, et al. Inhibition of osteosarcoma
cell proliferation by the Hedgehog-inhibitor cyclopamine. J Chemother. 2007;19:554-561.
30. Hirotsu M, Setoguchi T, Sasaki H, et al. Smoothened as a new therapeutic target for human osteosarcoma [serial online]. Mol Cancer.
2010;9:5.
31. Nagao H, Ijiri K, Hirotsu M, et al. Role of GLI2 in the growth of
human osteosarcoma. J Pathol. 2011;224:169-179.
32. Yang W, Liu X, Choy E, Mankin H, Hornicek FJ, Duan Z. Targeting hedgehog-GLI-2 pathway in osteosarcoma. J Orthop Res. 2013;
31:502-509.
33. Mohseny AB, Cai Y, Kuijjer M, et al. The activities of Smad and
Gli mediated signalling pathways in high-grade conventional osteosarcoma. Eur J Cancer. 2012;48:3429-3438.
34. Dierks C, Grbic J, Zirlik K, et al. Essential role of stromally induced
hedgehog signaling in B-cell malignancies. Nat Med. 2007;13:
944–951.
35. Hegde GV, Peterson KJ, Emanuel K, et al. Hedgehog-induced survival of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in a stromal cell
microenvironment: a potential new therapeutic target. Mol Cancer
Res. 2008;6:1928-1936.
36. Javelaud D, Pierrat MJ, Mauviel A. Crosstalk between TGF-beta
and hedgehog signaling in cancer. FEBS Lett. 2012;586:2016-2025.

547

