Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Head and neck cancer subtypes with biological and clinical
relevance: Meta-analysis of gene-expression data
Loris De Cecco1, Monica Nicolau2, Marco Giannoccaro1, Maria Grazia Daidone3,
Paolo Bossi4, Laura Locati4, Lisa Licitra4, Silvana Canevari1
1

unctional Genomics and Bioinformatics, Dept. of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
F
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

2

Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

3

Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

4

Head and Neck Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

Correspondence to:
Loris De Cecco, e-mail: loris.dececco@istitutotumori.mi.it
Silvana Canevari, e-mail: silvana.canevari@istitutotumori.mi.it
Keywords: tumor subtypes, gene expression, HNSCC, microarray, meta-analysis
Received: January 26, 2015 	

Accepted: February 08, 2015 	

Published: March 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a disease with heterogeneous
clinical behavior and response to therapies. Despite the introduction of multimodality
treatment, 40–50% of patients with advanced disease recur. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to improve the classification beyond the current parameters in clinical use
to better stratify patients and the therapeutic approaches. Following a meta-analysis
approach we built a large training set to whom we applied a Disease-Specific Genomic
Analysis (DSGA) to identify the disease component embedded into the tumor data.
Eleven independent microarray datasets were used as validation sets.
Six different HNSCC subtypes that summarize the aberrant alterations
occurring during tumor progression were identified. Based on their main biological
characteristics and de-regulated signaling pathways, the subtypes were designed as
immunoreactive, inflammatory, human papilloma virus (HPV)-like, classical, hypoxia
associated, and mesenchymal. Our findings highlighted a more aggressive behavior
for mesenchymal and hypoxia-associated subtypes. The Genomics Drug Sensitivity
Project was used to identify potential associations with drug sensitivity and significant
differences were observed among the six subtypes.
To conclude, we report a robust molecularly defined subtype classification in
HNSCC that can improve patient selection and pave the way to the development of
appropriate therapeutic strategies.

Advancements in genomic technologies have
allowed the identification of different genomic and
epigenomic alterations formed during transformation and
tumor progression. Eventually, the improvement in our
understanding of complex heterogeneity of human tumors
is expected to lead to more individualized therapies and
targeted drug design. An efficient way to decipher cancer
heterogeneity is to identify subtypes driven by molecular
patterns and develop a classifier to predict the subtype
membership of a new sample.

INTRODUCTION
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
is a heterogeneous set of distinct malignancies.
Recognized prognostic factors rely on clinical and
biological features, consisting mainly of stage, site of
disease, performance status, comorbidities, smoking
history and human papilloma virus (HPV) status [1].
However, patients clustered by these parameters still differ
in their clinical behavior and therapy response [2, 3].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9627

Oncotarget

subtypes. Our findings were validated in independent
datasets and our classification reveals the presence of six
subgroups with distinct biology and clinical outcome.

Microarray technology has allowed researches to
exploit the whole transcriptome landscape to define new
molecular cancer subtypes, undetected by the traditional
histopathological parameters. According to these
advancements, numerous studies have dissected gene
expression profiles to identify clusters of patients with
common molecular patterns in different tumor types. This
approach started in breast cancer by the pioneering work at
Stanford University [4] and after more than a decade it is
clear that at least five molecular subtypes showing clinical
relevance are present. In 2001, Sorlie and colleagues
defined subtype signatures in intrinsic genes identified by
analysis of before-and-after chemotherapy treatment and
obtained breast cancer molecular subtypes, which were
later validated in independent cohorts [5]. Subsequently,
the signature was refined [6] and its last version, PAM50,
added prognostic and predictive value to the traditional
pathologic, histological, and biological parameters [7].
After this first approach in breast cancer, the interest in
subtype discovery has continuously grown and, at present,
a number of different malignancies including lung [8],
colorectal [9], brain [10], gastric [11], and pancreatic
[12] cancer has been investigated. A typical workflow
involves some key steps such as the identification of
subtypes through appropriate bioinformatics methods,
the development of a classifier, and validation in external
datasets. Since it is unknown the number and the relative
occurrence of subtypes, the size of initial discovery cohort
has a paramount importance to be confident in identifying
even rare subtypes. As a consequence, the most recent work
includes a training set ranging from 500 to 1000 cases.
The integration of multiple datasets exploiting
a meta-analysis approach has been reported to offer
invaluable advantages, improving the reliability of results,
especially for HNSCC, for which few microarray datasets,
with frequently a limited number of cases, are publicly
available. In addition, through meta-analysis it is possible
to reach an adequate sample size allowing detection of rare
subtypes unlikely to be seen in small patient series. For
instance, the merger of gene-expression datasets in ovarian
cancer [13] in a meta-analysis of approximately 1500
cases derived from 16 studies enabled the identification of
five reliable subtypes with unique outcomes.
In the last decade, there has been a continuous
development in methods for data analysis leading
to innovative bioinformatics approaches for data
decomposition. Among them, Disease-Specific Genomic
Analysis (DSGA) [14] allows defining a Healthy State
Model (HSM) from the expression data of normal tissues
and based on that, the disease component is computed as
the residuals between the tumor and normal components.
Here, we report a genomic approach to dissect the
heterogeneity of HNSCC. We established a large-scale
meta-analysis approach followed by data decomposition
through DSGA to identify HNSCC unique molecular

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Figure 1 shows the outline of our study. A systematic
search in the PubMed database (http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed) (January 2000 to December 2013) for
studies on head and neck cancer reporting gene expression
data was performed. As selection criteria, we impose that
the studies include: (i) squamous cell carcinoma primary
lesions; (ii) tumor location including oral cavity, pharynx,
and larynx (salivary glands, thyroid, and eyes were
excluded); (iii) gene expression profiling of at least 15
samples. In this way we were able to select 30 studies.
Subsequently, among them we focused our attention on
those that reported: (i) MIAME [15] compliant datasets
including raw and/or processed microarray data deposited
on publicly accessible repositories and full gene annotation
(Gene Bank accession or EntrezID); (ii) clinical data
associated to microarray data. Based on these selection
criteria, 20 datasets (Table S1) were retrieved listing 1386
tumor samples and 138 normal tissue samples. Eight
datasets, profiled on Affymetrix HG-133_plus_2 arrays
were used to generate a meta-analysis training set and the
remaining 12 datasets served as validation sets.

Unsupervised analysis revealed six subtypes in
HNSCC
To analyze the molecular heterogeneity of HNSCC,
we established a large meta-analysis of publicly available
gene-expression datasets. The expression data of 527
tumor cases along with 138 normal cases belonging
to eight different datasets were integrated into a single
unified dataset, hereafter named MetaHNC-A.
First, we applied a data structure decomposition
approach through DSGA (Figure S1). The expression
microarray data of normal tissues allows definition of
the HSM, which reflects the healthy tissue. Based on
HSM, each tumor tissue is decomposed as the sum of
two components: (i) the normal component, its linear
model fit to the HSM; (ii) the disease component, vector
of residuals, assessing the extent to which each tumor
deviates from the normal state. The disease component
was used for the identification of the molecular subtypes.
Consensus unsupervised clustering was applied
to the disease component, taking into account the
most variant genes of the MetaHNC-A training set,
and revealed six clusters of samples (Figure 2A). The
consensus heatmap provided evidence that the six
clusters appeared well-defined. In our analysis, although
a different number of clusters (k) produced reasonable

9628

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Study outline.

epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), cell motility,
angiogenesis, and in the genes belonging to WNT and
Notch onco-signatures (Figure 3A and 3B). The Cl3
subgroup was showed enhancement in hypoxia, drug
metabolism pathways, and the genes belonging to betacatenin pathway (Figure 3A and 3B). Furthermore, both
the Cl2 and Cl3 subgroups, compared with the other
four, showed an up-regulation of genes belonging to
pathways involving tumor growth factor β (TGFβ),
rat sarcoma (RAS), epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), and Cyclin D1 (Figure 3B). The Cl4 subgroup
showed enrichment in the interferon response pathway
(Figure 3A), immune response (Figure 3A), and genes
belonging to ALK onco-signature (Figure 3B).The
Cl5 subgroup was mainly characterized by increased
expression of genes related to the smoking related pathway
(xenobiotic metabolism) (Figure 3A). The Cl6 subgroup
also expressed up-regulation of all of the immune system
related pathways and was specifically enriched in cellular
homeostasis and cellular markers specific of air way
epithelium (Figure 3A).
Based on the biological features, we defined the
six subtypes as: HPV-like (Cl1), Mesenchymal (Cl2),

stability, an increase in cluster stability was observed for
k ranging from 2 to 6 and the CDF becomes stable with
balanced partitions. When k was > 7, only marginal
gains were observed (Figure S2).
To assess the accuracy of our classification, a
Silhouette plot analysis was carried out. As shown in
Figure 2B, only a minimal number of tumors in the Cl3
and Cl4 subgroups were not assigned to the cluster,
indicating the robustness of the classification. This result
was also supported by cluster significance analysis through
SigClust (Table S2) and by evaluation of the sample size
adequacy that reaches enough power for the detection of
the six subtypes (Figure S3).

Functional annotation of HNSCC subtypes
The biological pathways related to each subtype
were investigated using gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA). The results are displayed in Figure 3 and
summarized in Table 1. In the C11 subgroup the up
regulated genes were related to HPV infection and cell
proliferation (Figure 3A). The Cl2 subgroup showed
marked enrichment of a number of pathways including

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9629

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Molecular classification in HNSCC. Results are produced by ConsensusClusterPlus for 527 cases on 4950 most variable
genes. A. Consensus matrix heatmap imposing six subtypes on the dataset: Cl1 (n = 89; 17%); Cl2 (n = 77; 15%); Cl3 (n = 154; 29%);
Cl4 (n = 79; 15%); Cl5 (n = 81; 15%); Cl6 (n = 47; 9%). The consensus values range from 0 (white, samples that never cluster together)
to 1 (blue, samples showing high clustering affinity). B. Silhouette plot analysis. Since the actual number of subtypes in HNSCC is not
known, we should take into account that the number of subtypes may be greater than six with some subtypes not sufficiently represented in
our dataset. To ascertain whether some samples are forced to belong to a certain cluster, silhouette plot analysis was carried out. The widths
indicate a strong similarity of the samples within their subgroup compared with the samples belonging to other subgroups.

subtypes. Furthermore, the atypical subtype proposed
by Walter et al. is split between our Cl1-HPV-like and
Cl6-immunoreactive subtypes, whereas the G3 subtype
proposed by Chung et al. corresponds to the Cl1-HPVlike cluster.

Hypoxia-associated (Cl3), Defense response (Cl4),
Classical (Cl5), and Immunoreactive (Cl6).

Comparison to previous molecular classifications
We investigated whether and to what extent the
molecular classification described in the present study
corresponded to those reported by the two previous
studies addressing this issue, Chung et al. [16] and
Walter et al. [17]. By Subclass Mapping, we assessed
the overall concordance comparing: (i) the classification
outlined above to that of Walter et al. (Figure 4A); (ii) he
classification outlined above to that of Chung et al. (Figure
4B). The subtyping scheme from the previous studies did
not show a one-to-one match with classification outlined
above (Figure 4C), providing evidence that our metaanalysis is able to add a finer distinction not achievable
with fewer samples (n = 60 for GSE686 and n = 138
for GSE39368). Whilst the Mesenchymal and Classical
classifications proposed by Walter et al. and the G2 and
G4 subtypes proposed by Chung et al. correspond to
our Cl2-Mesenchymal and Cl5-Classical, the Basal and
G1 subtypes proposed by Walter et al. and Chung et al.
respectively showed molecular patterns split between
our Cl3-Hypoxia associated and Cl4-Defense response

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Progression analysis of disease
We applied Mapper [18] a tool able to capture
topological and geometric shapes in complex
multidimensional data and included in PAD software, to
the DSGA-transformed data matrix computed on the 527
cases in our meta-analysis. Figure S4 shows the output of
PAD analysis. HNSCC tumors can be associated through a
linear progression starting from tumors displaying features
close to the normal state (blue bins) and ending with
tumors with large deviation from the normal state (red
bins), suggesting an increase in alterations accumulated
during different stages of tumor progression. Through PAD
analysis, 603 genes were found to significantly correlate
to tumor progression (Figure 5A). The genes negatively
correlated to PAD (i.e. up-regulated in tumors close to the
normal state) were enriched in chemokines and cytokine
indicating a huge communication among tumor cells and
stroma. As the disease progresses, tumors present genes

9630

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Heatmap of pathways enriched in the six subtypes. The molecular pathways and onco-signatures enriched in each

subtype as investigated through GSEA. A. The relative enrichment of 17 gene-ontology pathways related to biological processes. B. The
relative enrichment of 11 onco-signatures.

positively correlated to PAD and encode proteins related
to tumor plasticity, invasion, and metastasis. Functional
analysis of signaling pathways and network connections
were performed by IPA. The top molecular functions
(imposing a score > 30) are illustrated in Figure S5.
Since each tumor can occur in different bins within
PAD analysis, we established an average position for
all samples and compared the results to the six subtype
classification. The subtypes described here summarized
the tumor progression established by PAD with the Cl6
subtype displaying a molecular pattern close to the normal
state, while the Cl2 and Cl3 subtypes were the most distant
(Figure 5B).

nine datasets comprising a total of 358 samples were
profiled on different types of chips belonging to the
Affymetrix platform and were computationally integrated
through a meta-analysis approach to build a unique
independent validation set, hereafter named MetaHNC-B
(Figure 1). The subtype membership on these datasets was
predicted using PAM. First, we developed a prediction
algorithm based on PAM using 40 ‘core samples’ for each
subtype as established by Silhouette analysis. A total of
2843 genes entered into the classifier, yielding a crossvalidation mis-classification rate of 5%. Figure 6 shows
the heatmap of the classifier genes on MetaHNC-A,
providing evidence that each subtype has its own distinct
expression pattern. The list of genes, shrunken centroid
values for each subtype and the algorithm to classify a
new sample are reported in Table S3.
This classifier was applied to GSE39368, TCGA
and MetaHNC-B (Figure 1) datasets and the validation
sets clearly recapitulate the six cluster classification
(Figure S6A, S6C, and S6E). Through Subclass Mapping
we confirmed a good molecular correspondence (p < 0.05)

Validation of the subtypes across two
HNSCC datasets
Eleven independent datasets were retrieved
from public domains (GEO and TCGA). Two datasets,
GSE39368 and TCGA, were profiled on Agilent and
Illumina RNAseq platforms, respectively. The remaining

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9631

Oncotarget

Table 1: Summary of the main characteristics of the identified HNSCC subtypes
Association to:

HNSCC subtypes ordered according to progression of disease
Cluster 6

Functional
pathways

IFN response
Immune
response
Airway
epithelium
Cellular
Homeostasis
Xenobiotic met.

Cluster 4

IFN response
Immune
response

Cluster 1

Cluster 5

Cluster 3

Cluster 2

HPV infection
Cell
proliferation
Airway
epithelium

Cell motility
Xenobiotic
met.

Cell motility
Hypoxia
Cell motility
Drug
EMT
metabolism
Angiogenesis
Biotic response

Multiple:
TGF beta
EGFR
Ras
Cyclin D1

Multiple:
WNT
TGF beta
EGFR
Ras
NOTCH

BA, G1

MS, G2

Worst RFS
Worst OS

Onco-signatures ALK

ALK

None

Multiple:
WNT
E2F3
TGF beta

Previously
reported
subtypes

BA, G1

AT, G3

CL, G4

Clinicpathological
parameters

Oropharynx
cases

Smoking

Outcome

Best RFS
Best OS

Worst RFS
Worst OS

Previously
reported
classifiers

Best outcome

Worst outcome Worst outcome

Final
designation

AT

Immunoreactive

Defense
response

HPV-like

of our classification in the external datasets (Figure S6B,
S6D, and S6F).

Hypoxia

Mesenchymal

A recursive partitioning approach was applied to
ascertain to what extent the six subtypes can be predicted
by exploiting exclusively the data of known clinical and
pathological parameters. Gender, age, smoking history,
pathologic stage, and site of primary tumor were included
to build a classification tree on TCGA and GSE39368
datasets. The terminal nodes of the tree fail to identify
unequivocally the six subtypes (Figure S8). Nevertheless,
an increased occurrence in oropharynx tumors is
associated to the Cl1 subtype reflecting the high presence
of HPV positive cases. Altogether, this provides evidence
that our gene-expression based classification adds a new
layer of information not captured by the conventional
clinical/pathological parameters.

Association with clinicopathological parameters
The association between the six subtypes and
tumor characteristics was investigated in the GSE39368
and TCGA validation datasets that were considered
as reporting an appropriate number of cases and
representative of the population in clinical practice. We
assessed the proportion of cases within each subtype
in relation to: (i) gender; (ii) alcohol consumption;
(iii) smoking; (iv) pathologic stage; (v) pathologic T;
(vi) pathologic N; (vii) tumor site (Figure S7). In both
datasets, we found an association for tumor site and
smoking history. The Cl5 subtype showed a significant
presence of patients with heavy smoking history compared
to the other subtypes, consistent with the GSEA functional
analysis; the C11 subtype contained a greater number of
oropharynx cases (~70%) (Figure S7).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Classical

Prognostic value of the six-subtype classification
The clinical relevance of our classification was
investigated and associated to the outcome in the
three external validation datasets. We found that the
9632

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Comparison of genome-wide molecular pattern between our and previously reported subtype classification.

The analysis was performed using Subclass Mapping. A. MetaHNC-A is compared with the molecular subtypes defined by Walter et al.
((48); GSE39368). B. MetaHNC-A is compared to the subtypes reported by Chung et al. ((47); GSE686). Red color indicates high confidence
for correspondence (p < 0.05); blue color indicates lack of correspondence. BA, basal; MS, mesenchymal; AT, atypical; CL, classical subtypes
in the study by Walter et al.. G1, G2, G3, G4 refer to the four subtypes identified in the study by Chung et al. C. Table summarizing the
correspondence between our subtyping classification and those previously published for HNSCC by Chung et al. (47) and Walter et al. (48).

six subtype stratification provides useful prognostic
information. As a matter of fact, the prognostic value
of the six subtype classifications was significant in
the TCGA dataset, with better outcome for patients
belonging to Cl1 subtype and worse for Cl2 and Cl3
subtypes (Figure 7A) (p = 0.0006). On GSE39368,
although the prognosis of each of the six subtypes
differed, it failed to reach a significant value.
Nonetheless, we confirmed that patients belonging to
the Cl1 subtype showed a better outcome compared
with those belonging to the Cl2 or Cl3 subtypes
(Figure 7B) (2 years RFS proportion of 72.7% for the
Cl1 subtype compared with 48% and 42.1% for the Cl2
and Cl3 subtypes, respectively). A significant correlation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(p = 0.0312) was observed in the MetaHNC-B dataset for
a positive prognosis of the C11 subtype and a negative
prognosis for the C12 and C13 subtypes (Figure 7C).
In recent years several gene-expression
signatures have been reported as promising prognostic
models in HNSCC. The relationship between the six
subtypes and four classifiers (radiosensitivity index (RSI)
[19]; 15-gene hypoxia classifier [20]; 13-gene signature
for HPV-negative OSCC [21]; 172-gene model [22])
demonstrated a significant relationship of our stratification
to these molecular signatures (Figure S9). Specifically,
cases belonging to the Cl2 and Cl3 subtypes show the
highest predicted risk, whereas the Cl1 cases show the
better clinical outcome.
9633

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Progression analysis of disease. The average distance of each tumor from the normal state has been assessed. A. 603 genes
were identified associated to PAD. The upper bar illustrates to which subtype belongs each tumor sample. B. The box plots show the
distance from normal state of each tumor was in relation to the six subtypes. Y-axis represents the distance from normal state computed as
average bin-membership by PAD and depicted in Figure S4.

Drug sensitivity of the six subtypes

reported in Figure 8 strongly suggest that Cl3 subtype
shows greater sensitivity to Afatinib compared to the
others and those patients could benefit from the treatment
(Figure 8A). In addition, Figure 8 reports drug sensitivity
for Paclitaxel, Z-LLNle-CHO, Nutlin3a, and Rapamycin.
On this basis it may be predicted the drug potentially more
effective for each subtype: Paclitaxel for Cl1 subtype
(Figure 8B); Z-LLNle-CHO for Cl2 subtype (Figure 8C);
Nutlin3a for Cl4 and Cl6 subtypes (Figure  8D); and
Rapamycin for Cl5 subtype (Figure 8E).

The Genomics Drug Sensitivity Project [23]
includes gene-expression profiling data of hundreds of
cancer cell lines along with sensitivity data to 130 drugs.
We tested the possibility that each subtype might have
specific drug sensitivity, applying a phenotype prediction
machine learning tool matching cell line chemotherapeutic
response to baseline tumor gene expression [24]. As proof
of concept, we restricted our analysis to 46 cell lines
defined as ‘upper aerodigestive’ and to a list of drugs in
clinical use or under preclinical investigation in HNSCC
including Paclitaxel, Rapamycin, Afatinib, Nutlin3a, and
Z-LLNle-CHO. Our findings demonstrated a statistically
significant difference in drug sensitivity for patients
belonging to different subtypes. As example, EGFR
inhibitors have received great interest in HNSCC but at
present the response rate is less than 15% [25]. Our results
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
The workflow for cancer subtype identification
involves some key steps such as application of appropriate
bioinformatics methods, development of a classifier, and
validation on external datasets. By applying this workflow
9634

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Distribution of the PAM classifier genes in the HNSCC subtypes identified in the training dataset. Heatmap of

the expression values of the 2843 classifier genes.

Figure 7: Survival analysis by Kaplan-Meier for each subtype. The cases entering into the six subtypes identified on both
validation datasets were used for the Kaplan-Meier analysis. A. TCGA dataset: log rank p = 0.0006; B. GSE39368 dataset: log rank
p = 0.576; C. MetaHNC-B dataset: log rank p = 0.0312. OS, overall survival; RFS, relapse free survival.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9635

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Prediction drug sensitivity in HNSCC subtypes. Drug sensitivity was predicted for each case entering the MetaHNC-A
dataset. Five therapeutic agents were investigated: A. Afatinib; B. Paclitaxel; C. Z-LLNle-CHO; D. Nutlin 3a; E. Rapamycin. Box-plots
depict the predicted drug sensitivity in the six subtypes and the ROC curves estimate prediction accuracy of the more sensitive subtype
against the others. p = Kruskal-Wallis test; AUC, area under the curve.

enabled the assessment of the disease state computed
as the deviation of each tumor sample from the normal
phenotype allowing the identification of six subtypes
with sample size ensuring that at least 78% of genes
achieve 90% power. Furthermore, DSGA followed by
Mapper analysis (PAD analysis) revealed the topological
connections among samples as a function of the geneexpression data and it was found that the six molecular
subtypes summarize the continuous progression from
samples close (in the Cl6 and Cl4 subtypes) to samples
distant (in the Cl3 and Cl2 subtypes) to the normal state
and that 603 genes showed a significant correlation to
PAD analysis. Finally, the good performance of our
classification in the validation sets provided evidence
that our findings are not impaired by technical biases,
laboratory or sample collection procedures.
The importance in defining molecular subtypes in
HNSCC lies in their ability to provide new insights not
captured by the known clinical/pathological parameters

to a meta-analysis of gene expression microarray datasets
followed by data decomposition and throughout validation,
we were able to define a robust genomic classification
of HNSCC that could potentially identify targetable
biological pathways, relevant clinical parameters, and
eventually relate to clinical outcome.
Large datasets are required in order to characterize
tumor subtypes especially when present at low frequency,
but in malignancies like HNSCC accounting for about
5% of adult tumors, only a limited number of MIAME
complaint datasets are publicly available. In this context,
a meta-analysis approach combining multiple datasets
together might help to overcome the issue, improving the
reliability of results. Taking advantage of the availability of
expression profiles of the normal counterpart we applied a
data decomposition approach by DSGA, a proven method
to improve the understanding of the biology underlying
a pathologic process, to our training set. Our training
set, MetaHNC-A, built by a meta-analysis approach,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9636

Oncotarget

and to identify potentially targetable biological pathways.
Thus, following the disease progression identified here,
the main biological and clinical characteristics of each
subtype (Table 1) and their predicted sensitivity to selected
drugs under clinical evaluation in HNSCC (Figure 8) are
hereafter commented in the context of literature data and
of their potential therapeutic implications.
Cluster 6, the closest to the normal state according
to the PAD analysis, expressed similarity with the airway
epithelium and is the only one that maintains an active
cellular homeostasis. This subtype, at variance to all
the other ones, is characterized by activation of several
immune-related pathways and accordingly we gave it
‘immunoreactive’ as its final designation. Interestingly,
only the ALK onco-signature was activated compared
with the multiple onco-signature activation present in
the subtypes more distant to the normal state. Despite the
apparently limited alterations of signaling pathways, the
outcome of patients belonging to this cluster was not as
good as could be expected. Since the Cl6 subtype is the
smaller cluster and the only one not reaching 90% power
for all genes, the analysis of a larger case series is needed
to confirm the molecular features of this subtype.
Cluster 4, more distant from normal state compared
with Cl6, as highlighted not only by DSGA but also by
the loss of normal traits such as the pathways of airway
epithelium and cellular homeostasis, presented the highest
activation of the interferon response and high levels of
immune response and ALK onco-signature. On this basis
we assigned ‘defense response’ as its final designation.
The absence of association with known clinical parameters
and the different outcome of Cl4 patients observed in the
three datasets analyzed seem to indicate that this new
biologically distinct subtype required further molecular
characterization.
However, if the identified Cl6 and Cl4 molecular
portraits are confirmed, new immunotherapeutic
modalities and/or ALK targeted therapy [26] that have
never been analyzed in HNSCC, could be offered to
patients with high immunoreactivity (Cl6) or defense
response status and ALK activation (Cl4). Furthermore
the higher sensitivity to Nutlin 3a, in agreement with
the deactivated p53 onco-signature (Figure 3), suggests
considering the patients in these two subtypes as eligible
to combined treatment with Nutlin 3a as activator of p53mediated apoptosis.
Cluster 1 was the only one with activation of HPV
and proliferation signatures and no onco-signatures.
Furthermore, cluster 1 maintained the immune systems
active status and expressed similarity with the airway
epithelium. When a classification tree based on recursive
partitioning method was applied to the five available
clinical parameters (gender, age, smoking history,
pathologic stage, and site of primary tumor), Cl1 showed a
significant enrichment in oropharyngeal cases. Even if the
molecular identification of HPV infection in the analyzed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MetaHNC-A dataset was not available, altogether the
observed molecular portrait seemed to reflect a HPV
positive status therefore resulting in Cl1 being classified as
‘HPV-like’. In agreement with data related to HPV cases
[27], Cl1 showed the best outcome and was associated
with signatures indicating a good prognosis: high radiosensitivity [19], high similarity to the ‘less’ hypoxic group
[20], low 13-gene OSCC [21] and low 172-gene model
risk score [22]. Interestingly, even if we tested only one
conventional drug (Paclitaxel) to predict sensitivity,
the Cl1 subtype had the highest sensitivity (Figure 8),
consistent with the specific activation of the proliferation
pathway in this subtype.
Cluster 5 was identified by our approach
characterized by xenobiotic response associated to
smoking injury and moderate activation of cell motility,
WNT, and E2F3 onco-signatures. Compared with the
other subtypes, cluster 5 showed a significant presence
of patients with the heaviest smoking history. These data,
together with the high concordance of this subtype to the
previous classifications lead to us to classify cluster 5 as
‘Classical’ for its final designation. The medium level
of modification in WNT and E2F3 onco-signatures and
the highest predicted sensitivity to Rapamycin might
open the way to investigating at pre-clinical level the
potential therapeutic activity of new oncogene-inhibitors
and suggest the use of inhibitors of the mTOR pathway,
whose alteration has been associated to smoke injury [28],
in patients belonging to Cl5 subtype.
Cluster 3 was characterized by specific activation
of drug metabolism and hypoxia pathways and according
to its tumor progression association [29] shared with Cl2
cell motility; furthermore multiple onco-signatures were
activated as a result. According to the peculiar activation
of the hypoxia signature we gave it ‘Hypoxia’ as the final
designation.
Cluster 2, the most distant form the normal state
on the basis of PAD analysis, showed the highest cell
motility expression accompanied by activation of EMT,
angiogenesis and stem cell signatures. These data, together
with the high concordance of this subtype to the previous
classifications, brought us to ‘Mesenchymal’ as its final
designation.
Both Cl3 and Cl2 showed a poor outcome in
TCGA and MetaHNC-B datasets and, when analyzed
with signature/classifiers reflecting poor prognosis, both
resulted in high radio-resistance [19], showed similarity to
the ‘more’ hypoxic groups [20], presented a high 13-gene
OSCC score [21], and a high 172-gene model risk [22]
score. The continuum in the disease progression identified
by PAD analysis was demonstrated by the multiple
alterations observed in Cl3 and Cl2, including seven
out of 12 different members of the melanoma antigen
gene family A (MAGEA), previously reported to induce
growth by inhibition of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
[30]. Notably, similarly to MAGEAs, EGFR, an important
9637

Oncotarget

intended to precede any further analysis was applied to
the dataset. We used DSGA [14], unravelling the disease
features embedded to the expression data of tumor samples
(Figure S1); this method defines HSM from the expression
data of normal tissues through FLAT construction and
Principal Component Analysis [14]. This method permits
each tumor tissue to define a model for its own normal
component allowing modelling of the intrinsic diversity
of normal tissue. The data matrix corresponding to the
disease component was filtered in order to exclude the
genes whose variation is below the 75th percentile of
the median variance of all genes, yielding 4950 unique
EntrezIDs.
For validation purposes, 12 datasets profiled in
different platforms were used (Table S1). GSE39368
and TCGA, including 138 and 303 samples respectively,
were used to provide a molecular confirmation of our
subtype classification along with an evaluation of the
associations to clinical parameters. TCGA’s level 3 files
were downloaded along with the clinical annotations in
June 2013 from the TCGA website (http://cancergenome
.nih.gov/) and used for the analysis. For GSE39368 and
GSE686, the processed data matrices available on GEO
were retrieved and missing values present on GSE686
were imputed through the ImputeMissingValuesKNN
module present in GenePattern software (Broad Institute,
MIT, USA). The remaining nine datasets (GSE2379,
GSE2837, GSE3292, GSE3524, GSE6631, GSE9349,
GSE13601, GSE23036, and GSE27020) profiled
on different versions of Affymetrix array chips and
including a total of 358 tumor samples, were integrated
following a meta-analysis approach through virtualArray
R/BioConductor package [41]. These datasets were
annotated and redundant probe sets were collapsed by
EntrezID. Batch effects were removed using ComBat. The
resulting integrated dataset was named MetaHNC-B.

therapeutic target in HNSCC, is highly expressed in
tumors distant to the normal phenotype, defining the
groups of patients that could benefit from EGFR-inhibitors
[31]. The overall analysis for C2 and Cl3 clearly identified
specific molecular portraits and predicted drug sensitivity
that could in future be exploited for evaluating the
impact of specific targeted therapies. In particular for the
Cl3 subtype the presence of an EGFR activated pathway, in
line with the predicted high sensitivity to Afatinib and the
identification of altered hypoxia pathway, suggest the use
of EGFR-targeted therapies combined with anti-oxidant
agents and/or additional strategies exploiting hypoxia,
as already suggested some years ago [29]; regarding the
Cl2 subtype, the altered angiogenesis pathway and the
activation of NOTCH pathway, in line with the predicted
high sensitivity to Z-LLNle-CHO, supports the clinical
evaluation of angiogenesis-targeted therapies.
In conclusion, the application of DSGA for the
first time to pathology other than breast cancer enabled
the description of a robust transcriptome-based subtype
classification of HNSCC that improved the current
clinicopathological and genome-wide stratifications.
Notably, our meta-analysis study was able to disclose an
improved molecular stratification in not previously seen
subgroups characterized by distinct features.
Our comprehensive gene-expression classification
of HNSCC offers some groundwork to the scientific
community to improve the knowledge in the molecular
pathways de-regulated in this disease. Hopefully, upon
validation in prospective cohorts from clinical trials,
the new, further refined, classification may result in
personalized therapies for homogenous groups of patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data processing
Eight datasets profiled on the same array platform
were selected to build a uniform training set through
a meta-analysis approach (MetaHNC-A). Briefly,
raw microarray data were retrieved from NCBI Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database [21, 32–36],
ArrayExpress (The EMBL-European Bioinformatics
Institute, UK) [37], and MIAME-Vice [38] repositories.
See Table S1 for details regarding the datasets including
the accession numbers.
First, signal intensity was normalized within each
individual dataset using a Robust Multi-Array Average
(RMA) tool. To reduce the likelihood of systemic nonbiological technical experimental biases causing batch
effects, the normalizing algorithm ComBat was applied
[39]. The resulting dataset containing 665 samples was
used for the analysis. Redundancy of probes mapping
the same EntrezID was removed by selecting the probe
having highest variance across samples using collapse
Row R function [40]. Finally, a decomposition method
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Unsupervised subtype discovery
Unsupervised tumor subtype identification on  the
MetaHNC-A was performed using k-means clustering
of the most variant genes (n = 4950) and 1-Pearson
correlation as distance matrix. In addition, the
consensus unsupervised method as implemented in the
R package was used in tumor subtype identification.
ConsensusClusterPlus [42] has been applied to the data
through 1000 re-sampling interactions by randomly
selecting a fraction of the samples. We tested the existence
of 2 < k < 10 clusters. In order to identify the number
of clusters giving the maximum stability, empirical
cumulative distribution function (CDF) plots displaying
consensus distributions for each k was assessed. As
stated in Monti [43], the choice of the number of clusters
depends on the delta area plot and when the increase in
the CDF area becomes equal to zero. To estimate the
accuracy of the classification, Silhouette width values [44]
9638

Oncotarget

for all the samples were calculated (R-package: cluster).
Significance for each cluster was assessed in a pairwise
fashion (R-package: SigClust) and reported as p-values
[45]. An evaluation of sample size adequacy of the
training set [46] was assessed according to Warnes and
Liu (R-package: ssize) [47] and computed imposing type
I error rate (FDR), α = 0.05 and minimum effect size (log
fold-change), Δ = 1.

in each subtype between the training and the validations
dataset providing a p-value indicating the significance of
underlying molecular profiles.
Survival was analyzed in the GSE39368,
MetaHNC-B, and TCGA datasets according to
the Kaplan-Meier method and specific endpoints
reported in each study (relapse free for GSE39368
and overall survival for TCGA). Differences between
the six subtypes were assessed using log-rank test and
R package survival.
The potential association of subtypes to four geneexpression signatures: radio-sensitivity index (RSI) [19];
15-gene hypoxia classifier [20]; 13-gene signature for
HPV-negative oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
[21]; 172-gene model [22], was investigated. The genes
were mapped using EntrezID annotation and, applying
the algorithms described in De Cecco et al. [22], a value
for each case in the TCGA and GSE39368 datasets was
assessed and compared with the assigned six subtypes.
The association between clinical parameters and
subtype membership was assessed through the ctree
function present in party R package [54] using default
parameters. The analysis was performed on TCGA and
GSE39368 datasets.
Drug sensitivity was assessed through pRRophetic
R package [55], following the pipeline established by
the authors. This tool incorporates the public data from
the Cancer Genomic Project [23] including baseline
gene expression data and drug sensitivity on 700 cell
lines. The analysis was carried out selecting ‘upper
aerodigestive’ as tissue type. Microarray probes were
mapped to the official GeneSymbol, cell line and
MetaHNC-A datasets were homogenized using ComBat
function and 20% of genes with lowest variability were
removed. A linear ridge regression model was fitted to
the homogenized dataset, yielding a drug sensitivity
estimate for each tumor. ROC curves were estimated by
pROC R package [56].

Progression analysis of disease
In order to identify the relevant connections
among the data, we applied Progression Analysis of
Disease (PAD) [48], a tool able to unravel the topological
characteristics of the data. This approach is an application
of Mapper [18] that allows one to recognize local clusters
within the data and assess the relationships among these
small clusters. The output of the analysis collapses the
data into a simple, low dimensional shape that summarizes
the main features of the data.

Statistical and bioinformatics methods
Statistical analysis was performed using R [49],
version 2.15, BioConductor [50], release 2.10, and BrBArrayTool developed by Dr Richard Simon and the BRBArrayTools Development Team (v4.2.0; National Cancer
Institute, USA).
Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA 8.5,
Ingenuity Systems, Qiagen, USA) and genes set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) [51], we performed gene
functional characterization. Through the IPA tool, the
identified genes were associated with a canonical pathway
in Ingenuity’s Knowledge Base and used to analyze
the signaling pathways, cellular location, function, and
network connections. We performed GSEA with 2270
pathways including curated gene sets from pathway
databases, publications on PubMed, genes based on Gene
Ontology annotation and 179 oncogenic signatures present
on Molecular Signatures Database (Broad Institute, USA).
PAM (Prediction Analysis for Microarrays) [52]
was applied to identify a classifier in order to project our
classification to other datasets. The prediction rule was
computed on a selection of 40 core samples (the 40 cases
for each subtype with greater positive Silhouette values).
The classifier was applied to TCGA, GSE39368 and
MetaHNC-B.
Since GSE686 and GSE39368 report the
identification of potential molecular subtypes, these
datasets were used to investigate the correspondence
between their and our classification. To assess the degree
of molecular correspondence Subclass Mapping (SubMap
version 3, GenePattern Software; Broad Institute [53])
was applied on the genes entering into the PAM-classifier.
This algorithm calculates the gene expression enrichment

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Funding
AIRC 14750 to Silvana Canevari; Nanomax to
Maria Grazia Daidone.

ConflictS of interest
The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

9639

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

11.	 Lei Z, Tan IB, Das K, Deng N, Zouridis H, Pattison S,
Chua C, Feng Z, Guan YK, Ooi CH, Ivanova T, Zhang S,
Lee M, et al. Identification of molecular subtypes of gastric
cancer with different responses to PI3-kinase inhibitors and
5-fluorouracil. Gastroenterology. 2013; 145:554–565.

1.	 Grégoire V, Lefebvre JL, Licitra L, Felip E; EHNS-ESMOESTRO Guidelines Working Group. Squamous cell
­carcinoma of the head and neck: EHNS-ESMO-ESTRO
Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and
follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2010; 21.

12.	 Collisson EA, Sadanandam A, Olson P, Gibb WJ, Truitt M,
Gu S, Cooc J, Weinkle J, Kim GE, Jakkula L, Feiler HS,
Ko AH, Olshen AB, et al. Subtypes of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and their differing responses to therapy.
Nat Med. 2011; 17:500–503.

2.	 Carvalho AL, Nishimoto IN, Califano JA, Kowalski LP.
Trends in incidence and prognosis for head and neck cancer
in the United States: a site-specific analysis of the SEER
database. Int J Cancer. 2005; 114:806–816.

13.	 Tan TZ, Miow QH, Huang RY, Wong MK, Ye J, Lau JA,
Wu MC, Bin Abdul Hadi LH, Soong R, Choolani M,
Davidson B, Nesland JM, Wang LZ, et al. Functional
genomics identifies five distinct molecular subtypes
with clinical relevance and pathways for growth c­ ontrol
in ­epithelial ovarian cancer. EMBO Mol Med. 2013;
5:983–998.

3.	 Denaro N, Russi EG, Adamo V, Merlano MC. State-of-theart and emerging treatment options in the management of
head and neck cancer: news from 2013. Oncology. 2014;
86:212–229.
4.	 Sørlie T, Tibshirani R, Parker J, Hastie T, Marron JS,
Nobel  A, Deng S, Johnsen H, Pesich R, Geisler S,
Demeter J, Perou CM, Lønning PE, et al. Repeated observation of breast tumor subtypes in independent gene
expression data sets. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003;
100:8418–8423.

14.	 Nicolau M, Tibshirani R, Børresen-Dale AL, Jeffrey
SS. Disease-specific genomic analysis: identifying the
signature of pathologic biology. Bioinformatics. 2007;
23:957–965.

5.	 Sørlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, Aas T, Geisler S,
Johnsen H, Hastie T, Eisen MB, van de Rijn M, Jeffrey SS,
Thorsen T, Quist H, Matese JC, et al. Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses
with clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2001;
98:10869–10874.

15.	 Brazma A, Hingamp P, Quackenbush J, Sherlock G,
Spellman P, Stoeckert C, Aach J, Ansorge W, Ball CA,
Causton HC, Gaasterland T, Glenisson P, Holstege FC,
et al. Minimum information about a microarray experiment
(MIAME)-toward standards for microarray data. Nat Genet.
2001; 29:365–371.

6.	 Hu Z, Fan C, Oh DS, Marron JS, He X, Qaqish BF,
Livasy C, Carey LA, Reynolds E, Dressler L, Nobel A,
Parker J, Ewend MG, et al. The molecular portraits of breast
tumors are conserved across microarray platforms. BMC
Genomics. 2006; 7:96.

16.	 Chung CH, Parker JS, Karaca G, Wu J, Funkhouser WK,
Moore D, Butterfoss D, Xiang D, Zanation A, Yin X,
Shockley WW, Weissler MC, Dressler LG, et al. Molecular
classification of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
using patterns of gene expression. Cancer Cell. 2004;
5:489–500.

7.	 Parker JS, Mullins M, Cheang MC, Leung S,
Voduc D, Vickery T, Davies S, Fauron C, He X, Hu Z,
Quackenbush JF, Stijleman IJ, Palazzo J, et al. Supervised
risk predictor of breast cancer based on intrinsic subtypes.
J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:1160–1167.

17.	 Walter V, Yin X, Wilkerson MD, Cabanski CR, Zhao N,
Du Y, Ang MK, Hayward MC, Salazar AH, Hoadley KA,
Fritchie K, Sailey CJ, Weissler MC, et al. Molecular subtypes in head and neck cancer exhibit distinct patterns of
chromosomal gain and loss of canonical cancer genes. PLoS
One. 2013; 8:e56823.

8.	 Wilkerson MD1, Yin X, Hoadley KA, Liu Y, Hayward MC,
Cabanski CR, Muldrew K, Miller CR, Randell SH,
Socinski MA, Parsons AM, Funkhouser WK, Lee CB, et al.
Lung squamous cell carcinoma mRNA expression subtypes
are reproducible, clinically important, and correspond to
normal cell types. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:4864–4875.

18.	 Singh G, Memoli F, Carlsson G. Topological methods for
the analysis of high dimensional data sets and 3D object
recognition. (Botsch M, Pajarola R, eds). In Eurographics
Symposium on Point-Based Graphics. Eurographics
Association, Geneva; 2007:91–100.

9.	 Budinska E, Popovici V, Tejpar S, D’Ario G, Lapique N,
Sikora KO, Di Narzo AF, Yan P, Hodgson JG, Weinrich S,
Bosman F, Roth A, Delorenzi M. Gene expression patterns
unveil a new level of molecular heterogeneity in colorectal
cancer. J Pathol. 2013; 231:63–76.

19.	 Eschrich SA, Pramana J, Zhang H, Zhao H, Boulware D,
Lee JH, Bloom G, Rocha-Lima C, Kelley S, Calvin DP,
Yeatman TJ, Begg AC, Torres-Roca JF. A gene expression model of intrinsic tumor radiosensitivity: prediction of
response and prognosis after chemoradiation. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2009; 75:489–496.

10.	 Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y,
Wilkerson MD, Miller CR, Ding L, Golub T, Mesirov JP,
Alexe G, Lawrence M, O’Kelly M, al; Cancer Genome
Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic analysis identifies clinically relevant subtypes of glioblastoma characterized by abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and NF1.
Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:98–110.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20.	 Toustrup K, Sørensen BS, Nordsmark M, Busk M, Wiuf C,
Alsner J, Overgaard J. Development of a hypoxia gene
expression classifier with predictive impact for hypoxic
modification of radiotherapy in head and neck cancer.
Cancer Res. 2011; 71:5923–5931.
9640

Oncotarget

33.	 Ye H, Yu T, Temam S, Ziober BL, Wang J, Schwartz JL,
Mao L, Wong DT, Zhou X, et al. Transcriptomic dissection of tongue squamous cell carcinoma. BMC Genomics.
2008; 9:69.

21.	 Lohavanichbutr P, Méndez E, Holsinger FC, Rue TC,
Zhang Y, Houck J, Upton MP, Futran N, Schwartz SM,
Wang P, Chen C. A 13-gene signature prognostic of HPVnegative OSCC. discovery and external validation. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013; 19:1197–1203.
22.	 De Cecco L, Bossi P, Locati L, Canevari S, Licitra L.
Comprehensive gene expression meta-analysis of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma microarray data defines a
robust survival predictor. Ann Oncol. 2014; 25:1628–1635.

34.	 Cohen EE, Zhu H, Lingen MW, Martin LE, Kuo WL,
Choi EA, Kocherginsky M, Parker JS, Chung CH,
Rosner MR, et al. A feed-forward loop involving protein
kinase Calpha and microRNAs regulates tumor cell cycle.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69:65–74.

23.	 Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD,
Dastur A, Lau KW, Greninger P, Thompson IR, Luo X,
Soares J, Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D, et al. Systematic identification of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer
cells. Nature. 2012; 483:570–575.

35.	 Chen C, Méndez E, Houck J, Fan W, Lohavanichbutr P,
Doody D, Yueh B, Futran ND, Upton M, Farwell DG,
Schwartz SM, Zhao LP. Gene expression profiling identifies
genes predictive of oral squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008; 17:2152–2162.

24.	 Geeleher P, Cox NJ, Huang RS. Clinical drug response
can be predicted using baseline gene expression levels and
in vitro drug sensitivity in cell lines. Genome Biology.
2014; 15:R47.

36.	 Reis PP, Waldron L, Perez-Ordonez B, Pintilie M,
Galloni  NN, Xuan Y, Cervigne NK, Warner GC,
Makitie AA, Simpson C, Goldstein D, Brown D, Gilbert R,
et al. A gene signature in histologically normal surgical
margins is predictive of oral carcinoma recurrence. BMC
Cancer. 2011; 11:437.

25.	 Vermorken JB, Trigo J, Hitt R, Koralewski P,
­Diaz-Rubio E, Rolland F, Knecht R, Amellal N, Schueler A,
Baselga J. Open-label, uncontrolled, multicenter phase II
study to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of cetuximab as
a single agent in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck who failed
to respond to platinum-based therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
Jun 1; 25:2171–7.

37.	 Rickman DS, Millon R, De Reynies A, Thomas E,
Wasylyk C, Muller D, Abecassis J, Wasylyk B. Prediction
of future metastasis and molecular characterization of head
and neck squamous-cell carcinoma based on transcriptome
and genome analysis by microarrays. Oncogene. 2008;
27:6607–6622.

26.	 Bauman JE, Ferris RL. Integrating novel therapeutic monoclonal antibodies into the management of head and neck
cancer. Cancer. 2014; 120:624–632.

38.	 Thurlow JK, Peña Murillo CL, Hunter KD, Buffa FM,
Patiar S, Betts G, West CM, Harris AL, Parkinson EK,
Harrison PR, Ozanne BW, Partridge M, Kalna G. Spectral
clustering of microarray data elucidates the roles of microenvironment remodeling and immune responses in survival
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol.
2010; 28:2881–2888.

27.	 Leemans CR, Braakhuis BJ, Brakenhoff RH. The molecular
biology of head and neck cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011;
11:9–22.
28.	 Memmott RM, Dennis PA. The role of the Akt/mTOR pathway in tobacco carcinogen-induced lung tumourigenesis.
Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:4–10.

39.	 Johnson WE, Rabinovic A, Li C. Adjusting batch effects in
microarray expression data using Empirical Bayes methods.
Biostatistics. 2007; 8:118–127.

29.	 Blagosklonny MV. Antiangiogenic therapy and tumor progression. Cancer Cell. 2004; Jan 5:13–7.

40.	 Miller JA, Cai C, Langfelder P, Geschwind DH,
Kurian SM, Salomon DR, Horvath S. Strategies for aggregating gene expression data: the collapseRows R function.
BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12:322.

30.	 Bhan S, Chuang A, Negi SS, Glazer CA, Califano JA.
MAGEA4 induces growth in normal oral keratinocytes by
inhibiting growth arrest and apoptosis. Oncol Rep. 2012;
28:1498–1502.

41.	 Heider A, Alt R. virtualArray: a R/biocondactor package to
merge raw data from different microarray platforms. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2013; 14:75.

31.	 Cohen RB. Current challenges and clinical investigations
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)- and ErbB
family-targeted agents in the treatment of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Cancer Treat Rev.
2014; 40:567–577.

42.	 Wilkerson MD, Hayes DN. ConsensusClusterPlus: a class
discovery tool with confidence assessments and item tracking. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:1572–1573.
43.	 Monti S, Tamayo P, Mesirov J, Golub T. Consensus clustering: A re-sampling based method for class discovery and
visualization of gene expression microarray data. Machine
Learning. 2003; 52:91–118.

32.	 Pyeon D, Newton MA, Lambert PF, den Boon JA,
Sengupta S, Marsit CJ, Woodworth CD, Connor JP,
Haugen TH, Smith EM, Kelsey KT, Turek LP, Ahlquist P,
et al. Fundamental differences in cell cycle deregulation in
human papillomavirus-positive and human papillomavirusnegative head/neck and cervical cancers. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:4605–4619.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44.	 Rousseeuw PJ. ‘Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis’. Compu Appl
Math. 1987; 20:53–56.

9641

Oncotarget

Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment
analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
­
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2005; 102:15545–15550.

45.	 Liu Y, Hayes DN, Nobel A, Marron JS. Statistical
­significance of clustering for high-dimension, low-sample
size data. J Am Stat Assoc. 2008; 103:1281–1293.
46.	 Dobbin KK, Zhao Y, Simon RM. How large a training set
is needed to develop a classifier for microarray data? Clin
Cancer Res. 2008; 14:108–114.

52.	 Tibshirani R, Hastie T, Narasimhan B, Chu G. Diagnosis of
multiple cancer types by shrunken centroids of gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002; 99:6567–6572.

47.	 Warnes GR, Liu P, Li F. ssize: Estimate microarray sample
size. . R package version 1.38.02012; .

53.	 Hoshida Y, Brunet JP, Tamayo P, Golub TR, Mesirov JP.
Subclass mapping: Identifying common subtypes in independent disease data sets. PLoS ONE. 2007; 2:e1195.

48.	 Nicolau M, Levine AJ, Carlsson G. Topology based data
analysis identifies a subgroup of breast cancers with a
unique mutational profile and excellent survival. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:7265–7270.

54.	 Hothorn T, Hornik K, Zeileis A. Unbiased recursive partitioning: A conditional inference framework. J Comp Graph
Stat. 2006; 15:651–674.

49.	 R Development Core Team: R: A Language and
Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria:
R Foundation for Statistical Computing 2007; . http://www.
R-project.org.

55.	 Geeleher P, Cox N, Huang RS. pRRophetic: an R ­package
for prediction of clinical chemotherapeutic response
from tumor gene expression levels. PLoS ONE. 2014;
9:e107468.

50.	 Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B,
Dettling M, Dudoit S, Ellis B, Gautier L, Ge Y, Gentry J,
Hornik K, Hothorn T, Huber W, et al. Bioconductor: open
software development for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol. 2004; 5:R80.

56.	 Robin X, Turck N, Hainard A, Tiberti N, Lisacek F,
Sanchez JC, Müller M. pROC: an open-source package
for R and S+ to analyze and compare ROC curves. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2011; 12:77.

51.	 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee  S,
Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9642

Oncotarget

