HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 May 7; 521(7550): 94–98. doi:10.1038/nature14395.

Immunosuppressive plasma cells impede T cell-dependent
immunogenic chemotherapy
Shabnam Shalapour1,2, Joan Font-Burgada1,2, Giuseppe Di Caro1,2, Zhenyu Zhong1,2, Elsa
Sanchez-Lopez1,2, Debanjan Dhar1,2, Gerald Willimsky3, Massimo Ammirante1,2, Amy
Strasner1,2, Donna E. Hansel2, Christina Jamieson4, Christopher J. Kane4, Tobias Klatte5,
Peter Birner6, Lukas Kenner6,7, and Michael Karin1,2

Author Manuscript

1Laboratory

of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Department of Pharmacology,
University of California San Diego (UCSD), 9500 Gilman Drive, San Diego CA 92093
2Department

of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego (UCSD), 9500
Gilman Drive, San Diego CA 92093

3Institute

of Immunology, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Charité Campus Buch,
13125 Berlin, Germany

4Department

of Surgery, Urology Division, UCSD

5Department

of Urology, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria

6Department

of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria

Author Manuscript

7Clinical

Institute of Pathology, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Medical
University of Vienna, Unit of Pathology of Laboratory Animals (UPLA), University of Veterinary
Medicine Vienna, 1210 Vienna, Austria

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Cancer-associated genetic alterations induce expression of tumor antigens which can activate
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (CTL), but the microenvironment of established tumors promotes immune
tolerance through poorly understood mechanisms1,2. Recently developed therapeutics that
overcome tolerogenic mechanisms activate tumor-directed CTL and are effective in some human
cancers1. Immune mechanisms also affect treatment outcome and certain chemotherapeutic drugs
stimulate cancer-specific immune responses by inducing immunogenic cell death (ICD) and other
effector mechanisms3,4. Our previous studies revealed that B lymphocytes recruited by CXCL13
into prostate cancer (PC) promote castrate-resistant PC (CRPC) by producing lymphotoxin (LT)
which activates an IKKα-Bmi1 module in PC stem cells5,6. Since CRPC is refractory to most
therapies, we examined B cell involvement in acquisition of chemotherapy resistance. We focused

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Contributions: M.K. and S.S. conceived and designed the project. S.S. performed experiments. S.S. and M.K. analyzed data. J.F.B.,
Z.Z, D.D., M.A., G.W. and A.S. assisted with experiments and analysis. S.S., G.D.C., E.S.L. and D.E.H., performed
immunohistochemical analyses of human samples. G.W. performed Tag-specific ELISA. D.E.H, C.J., P.B., C.J.K, T.K., and L.K.
collected and provided human specimens. M.K. and S.S. wrote the manuscript, with all authors contributing to writing and providing
feedback.
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Shalapour et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

this study on oxaliplatin, an immunogenic chemotherapeutic3,4 that is effective in aggressive PC7.
We found that B cells modulate the response to low dose oxaliplatin, which by inducing ICD
promotes tumor-directed CTL activation. Three different mouse PC models were refractory to
oxaliplatin unless genetically or pharmacologically depleted of B cells. The critical
immunosuppressive B cells are plasmocytes that express IgA, IL-10 and PD-L1, whose
appearance depends on TGFβ-receptor (TGFβR) signaling. Elimination of these cells, which also
infiltrate human therapy-resistant PC, allows CTL-dependent eradication of oxaliplatin-treated
tumors.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Using the autochthonous TRAMP model of metastatic PC8, we examined how lymphocytes
affect the response to low dose (LD) oxaliplatin. Although early (≤ 0.2 g) tumors responded
to oxaliplatin regardless of B cell status (Extended Data Fig. 1a,b), upon reaching ≥ 0.7 g,
WT tumors became largely resistant to “late” chemotherapy (Fig. 1a). However, tumors
arising in B cell-deficient TRAMP;Jh-/- hybrid mice were oxaliplatin sensitive (Fig. 1a),
although B cells had little effect on tumor progression and histology (Extended Data Fig.
1c,d). CD8+cell-deficient TRAMP;Cd8a-/- mice bearing small tumors were less responsive
to oxaliplatin, but large tumors were treatment resistant (Fig. 1a; Extended Data Fig. 1b).
Similar results were obtained by s.c. transplantation of Myc-Cap (MC) cells9. Whereas small
MC tumors (≤100 mm3) were chemotherapy responsive in WT mice (Extended Data Fig.
1e,f), large MC tumors (≥350-400 mm3) shrank upon oxaliplatin treatment only in Jh-/- mice
(Fig. 1b-d). No response was observed in Cd8a-/- mice. Oxaliplatin responsiveness was
associated with enhanced caspase 3 activation, but the tumoral DNA damage response
measured by histone H2AX phosphorylation was similarly activated by oxaliplatin,
regardless of host genotype (Fig. 1e; Extended Data Fig. 1g-i). Oxaliplatin treatment
increased tumor-infiltrating CD45+ cells in WT and Jh-/- mice, but myofibroblast activation
and CD31 infiltration was more pronounced in WT mice (Extended Data Fig. 1j-l). LD
oxaliplatin enhanced TRAMP mouse survival in a manner dependent on CTL and inhibitable
by B cells (Extended Data Fig. 1m,n). B cell immunodepletion also enhanced oxaliplatininduced tumor regression and the effect was CTL-dependent (Fig. 1f).

Author Manuscript

Oxaliplatin stimulated CD8+ cell recruitment in TRAMP and TRAMP;Jh-/- mice, although
more tumoral CD8+ cells were found in the latter (Fig. 2a; Extended Data Fig. 2a). B cell
deficiency also enhanced oxaliplatin-induced CD8+ and CD4+ cell recruitment into MC
tumors and induction of perforin, γ interferon (IFNγ) and TNF in CD8+ cells (Fig. 2b-e;
Extended Data Fig. 2b-e). MC tumors in Jh-/- mice contained more CD8+ cells with
activated STAT1, more proliferative CD8a+CD44hiGrzB+Ki67+ cells and fewer
“exhausted”2 CD8+CD44+PD-1+Tim3+ and CD8+BTLAhi cells, whose presence in WT
tumors was elevated by oxaliplatin (Fig. 2f-h; Extended Data Fig. 2f-i). B cell
immunodepletion also enhanced tumoral CTL activation (Extended Data Fig. 2j-p).
Oxaliplatin treatment greatly increased the number of tumoral B220+CD19+ B cells (Fig. 3a,
Extended Data Fig. 3a,b). After 3-4 treatment cycles at least 40% of tumoral B cells were
CD20-/lowCD19+B220lowCD138+ plasma cells, 40-80% of which expressed IgA (Fig. 3b,c;
Extended Data Fig.3c-l). IgA+ B cells became detectable 48 hrs after first treatment cycle,
and their abundance increased to nearly 80% of B220low cells after additional cycles

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

(Extended Data Fig. 3g,l). When cultured ex vivo, tumoral IgA+ B cells released soluble IgA
(Extended Data Fig. 4a). Oxaliplatin also increased serum IgA in both TRAMP and MCtumor models, but had little effect on serum IgG (Extended Data Fig. 4b-e). Plasmocytic
IgA+ cells were found adjacent to α smooth muscle actin (αSMA)-expressing
myofibroblasts (Fig. 3d), which produce CXCL1310. Oxaliplatin-induced IgA+ B cells from
spleen and MC tumors expressed activation-induced cytidine deaminase (Extended Data
Fig. 4f,g), suggesting recent class-switch recombination (CSR).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The IgA CSR is mainly induced by TGFβ together with CD40L, IL-21, IL-10 or IL-611.
Indeed, oxaliplatin increased the proportion of tumoral B cells containing phosphorylated
SMAD2/3, and induced Tgfb1 mRNA in tumors (Fig. 3e; Extended Data Fig.4h-j).
Oxaliplatin also increased IL-21 expression and STAT3 phosphorylation in tumoral B cells
(Extended Data Fig. 4k,l), as well as Il10 mRNA in tumors, tumoral IL-10 producing B cells
and IL-10 content per B cell (Fig. 3f,g; Extended Data Fig. 4m). Nearly 50% of IgA+CD19+
plasmocytes contained IL-10 mRNA and protein (Fig. 3h-i; Extended Data Fig. 4n).
Oxaliplatin induced Fas ligand (Fas-L) and PD ligand 1 (PD-L1) in about 50% of IgA+
plasmocytes, 40% of which expressed both PD-L1 and IL-10 (Fig, 3j,k; Extended Data Fig.
3f-j). Most PD-L1+ cells expressed IgA and contained phosphorylated SMAD2/3 (Extended
Data Fig. 4j). However, LTα/β-producing B cells did not express IL-10 and their abundance
was barely increased by oxaliplatin (Extended Data Fig. 4o,p). Tumoral CD19+ cells did not
express CD5, a B regulatory (Breg) cell marker12 (Extended Data Fig. 4q). Oxaliplatin
induced other immunoregulatory molecules, including Nos2, Arg1, IL-12p35 and IL-12p40,
but no differences were observed between tumor-bearing WT and Jh-/- mice, although the
latter expressed higher amounts of IL-12 (Extended Data Fig. 5a-d). B cell deficiency or
depletion had no significant effect on tumoral NK cells, myeloid CD11b+Gr1+ cells,
macrophages or Treg (Extended Data Fig. 5e-i). Thus, unlike mouse skin cancer, where B
cells modulate therapeutic responsiveness through macrophages13, B cells in murine PC
impede immunogenic chemotherapy by suppressing CTL activation.

Author Manuscript

Human PC samples (n=110) were analyzed for CD8+ and CD20+ cells (Extended Data Fig.
6a,b). Comparison of matched normal and tumor tissues from 87 early stage PC (E-PC)
patients indicated higher CD8+ and CD20+ counts in tumors (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d).
Patients with therapy-resistant PC (TR-PC) or metastatic PC (M-PC) exhibited reduced
tumoral CD8+ cell density relative to E-PC patients, whose tumors contained fewer B cells
than TR-PC and M-PC, in which B cells were most abundant (Extended Data Fig. 6e,f). EPC specimens displayed higher CD8/CD20 ratio than TR-PC and M-PC (Extended Data Fig.
6g). Immunofluorescence (IF) and immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of human PC
specimens revealed IgA+ cells in a scattered formation, frequently next to αSMA+
myofibroblasts, especially in the high risk group (Fig. 3l; Extended Data Fig. 6h-j, and n).
CD20+ B cells were both scattered and clustered in lymphoid follicle-like16 areas (Extended
Data Fig. 6b,k). Human PC also contained IL-10-producing IgA+ CD138+ cells and some
IgA+ cells were adjacent to CD8+ T cells and expressed little CD20 (Extended Data Fig. 6ik). 25% of IgA+ cells in fresh prostatectomy specimens expressed IL-10 and were enriched
in the malignant tissue portion (Extended Data Fig. 6l,m). IgA+CD138+ plasmocytes
exhibited higher density in TR-PC and M-PC than E-PC and patients with higher

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

IgA+CD138+ cell counts showed lower CD8/CD20 ratio (Extended Data Fig. 6n-p).
Oncomine analysis of human IgA (IGHA1) mRNA revealed elevated IGHA1 mRNA in
malignant versus healthy prostates in 11 of 15 datasets. Of these, 5 showed a significant
increase (p < 0.05) and 3 showed a > 2-fold change. Results of one analysis14 are presented
(Extended Data Fig. 6q) and fit earlier findings in mice5,6,15, suggesting that tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes also control malignant progression and response to therapy in
human PC.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Consistent with prior knowledge11 and SMAD2/3 activation in PD-L1+ cells, TGFβR2
ablation in B cells (Tgfbr2ΔB) enhanced oxaliplatin-induced tumor regression, mildly
decreased tumor-infiltrating, but not splenic, B cells and inhibited oxaliplatin-induced IgA+
plasmocyte generation without affecting IgG1+ or IgG2a+ cells (Fig. 4a-c; Extended Data
Fig.7a-e). IgA ablation also potentiated oxaliplatin responsiveness without reducing tumoral
B cells (Fig. 4a,b). Both TGFβR2 and IgA ablations, prevented induction of tumoral PD-L1+
or IgA+IL-10+ B cells by oxaliplatin, but barely affected IL-10 in B220hiIgA- B cells
(Extended Data Fig. 7f,g). TGFβR2 ablation or IgA deficiency also increased tumoral CTL
density, IFNγ-production and surface CD107 a expression by CD8+ T cells of oxaliplatintreated mice (Fig. 4e,f). Suppressor B cells may attenuate T cell activation via PD-L116.
Treatment of mice bearing MC tumors with oxaliplatin plus anti-PD-L1, but not anti-PD-L1
alone, inhibited tumor growth, increased GrzB expression by effector T cells, downregulated
PD-L1 expressionon IgA+ cells, and reduced serum IgA, but not IgG (Extended Data Fig.
7h-m). Reconstitution of tumor-bearing Jh-/- hosts with B cells lacking either PD-L1 or
IL-10 failed to inhibit oxaliplatin-induced tumor regression (Fig. 4g; Extended Data Fig. 7np). PD-L1 ablation did not affect IL-10 expression and IL-10 ablation had no effect on PDL1 (Extended Data Fig. 10m,n), indicating that both molecules are needed for plasmocytemediated immunosuppression.
We used oxaliplatin because of its well-described immunogenic properties, which are not
exhibited by the related compound cisplatin3,4. Both oxaliplatin and cisplatin induced
apoptotic cell death but oxaliplatin was better in stimulating autophagy (Extended Data Fig.
8a,b). Importantly, only LD oxaliplatin induced regression of MC tumors in Jh-/- mice,
whereas LD cisplatin was ineffective, and only oxaliplatin increased the abundance of
tumoral CD8+ and CD4+ cells (Extended Data Fig. 8c-e). LD oxaliplatin did not increase
intestinal permeability and had no effect on IgA production and other immune parameters in
tumor-free WT or Tgfbr2ΔB mice (Extended Data Fig. 8f-k).

Author Manuscript

Immunogenic chemotherapy also potentiates the effectiveness of adoptively transferred T
cells (ATCT). Immunogenic TRAMP-C2 cells17 were inoculated into B cell-containing
Tcrβ-/- mice followed by oxaliplatin treatment and ATCT (Extended Data Fig. 9a). Bigger
tumors in Tcrβ-/- relative to WT mice confirmed TRAMP-C2 immunogenicity (Extended
Data Fig. 9b). However, despite successful T cell take and elevated CD8+ count after
oxaliplatin treatment, tumors were not rejected (Extended Data Fig. 9c-e). TRAMP-C2
tumors were also raised in Rag1-/-;OT-1 mice, which lack B cells and polyclonal T cells but
harbor CD8+ cells directed against chicken ovalbumin (Ova)18. Adoptively transferred
CD8+ cells expanded and expressed GrzB in Rag1-/-;OT-1 hosts, especially after oxaliplatin
treatment (Extended Data Fig. 9f-h). Consequently, tumor growth was inhibited by ATCT
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

combined with oxaliplatin (Extended Data Fig. 9i,j). More dramatic results were obtained in
TRAMP;Rag1-/- mice transplanted with CFSE-labeled splenocytes from either naïve WT (B
and T cell transfer) or Jh-/- (T cell transfer) mice (Extended Data Fig. 9k). CD8+ cell
proliferation in BM, spleens and prostates of transplanted mice indicated successful T cell
take (Extended Data Fig. 9l,m). Thirty days after lymphocyte transfer, prostate tumors were
analyzed. Oxaliplatin caused modest tumor shrinkage in mice receiving T and B cells, but in
mice receiving only T cells it induced complete regression (Fig. 5a,b). Transplantation with
T and B cells combined with oxaliplatin restored CD19+ cells in spleen and prostate and
serum IgA and IgG, including IgA and IgG directed against SV40 T antigen, the TRAMP
oncogene (Fig. 5c-e), indicating a tumor-specific humoral response. Transferred B cells
expressed TIM-1 (Extended Data Fig. 9o), a molecule involved in regulation of IL-10
expression and tolerance induction19. B and T cell co-transplantation led to appearance of
CD4+ and CD8+ cells in lymphoid organs, but T cell number was considerably lower in
prostate tumors (Fig. 5f; Extended Data Fig. 9p-r). However, transplantation with B celldeficient splenocytes caused robust T cell infiltration into prostate tumors (Fig. 5f; Extended
Data Fig. 9r). To confirm that IgA+ B cells attenuate the response to immunogenic
chemotherapy by inhibiting T cell activation, we raised MC tumors in Rag1-/- mice and
transplanted them with T cells from WT mice immunized with MC cell lysate, with or
without naïve B cells from WT or Tgfbr2ΔB spleens. In this case, oxaliplatin induced tumor
regression and CTL activation only in mice receiving T cells, or T cells + TGFβR2-deficient
B cells, which produced little IgA (Fig. 5g-i; Extended Data Fig. 10a-c). Hence, only B cells
that have undergone TGFβR signaling and IgA CSR suppress CTL activation.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Our results show that successful eradication of large prostate tumors by immunogenic
chemotherapy requires removal of immunosuppressive IgA+ plasmocytes that are present
both in mouse and human PC. Spontaneous and transplantable PC models contain IgA+
plasmocytes that strongly suppress CTL activation after treatment with oxaliplatin, an ICD
inducer4. Although oxaliplatin causes regression of small tumors, it does not activate CTL
or shrinks large prostate tumors, despite inducing DNA damage, unless tumor-infiltrating
immunosuppressive B cells are removed. These B cells are IgA-producing plasmocytes that
express PD-L1, IL-10 and Fas-L. Genetic analysis confirms that much of the
immunosuppressive activity derives from IgA+PD-L1+IL-10+ cells. Development of these
cells, which differ from the LT-producing CD20+ B cells that infiltrate androgen-deprived
prostate tumors and stimulate CRPC emergence through the IKKα-Bmi1 module5,6,
depends on TGFβR signaling. Nonetheless, CD20+LT+ B cells that are exposed to high
TGFβ concentrations and antigen in the PC microenvironment after oxaliplatin treatment
may eventually become IgA+ plasmocytes. A likely source of TGFβ are αSMA+
myofibroblasts that reside next to IgA+ cells in oxaliplatin-treated mouse tumors and human
PC samples10. Alternatively, LT-producing B cells may stimulate the IgA CSR, as signaling
via LTβ receptor on gut stromal cells is required for IgA production20. Although the antiinflammatory and regulatory activities of intestinal IgA-producing cells21, as well as other
plasmocytes22, are well known, this is the first time IgA+ plasmocytes were found to
suppress anti-tumor immunity.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

IgA+ plasmocytes within prostate tumors induce CD8+ cell exhaustion2 and suppress antitumor CTL responses through PD-L1 and IL-10, either of which can induce anergy or
exhaustion2,23. Yet, B cells may regulate anti-tumor immunity by other mechanisms24,25,
including indirect control of T cell infiltration via macrophages13 and IL-10 production by
Breg cells26, although the latter only affect CD4+ T helper cells24,25. Notably, IL-10expressing IgA+ cells are most abundant in therapy-resistant and metastatic human PC and
circulating IgA is a well-established adverse prognostic indicator in PC27. We therefore
suggest that elimination or inhibition of tumor infiltrating IgA+ plasmocytes may be the key
to successful immunotherapy of PC, as long as an immunogenic chemotherapeutic, such as
oxaliplatin, is also used. Immunogenic chemotherapy may also enhance response rates to
PD-1 or PD-L1 blockade in other malignancies, including bladder cancer and cutaneous
melanoma where only 35% of the patients exhibit a response28.

Author Manuscript

Methods
Animal models

Author Manuscript

C57BL/6 and FVB control mice were from Charles River Laboratories and CD45.1 mice29
were from the Jackson Laboratory, and all were bred at the University of California San
Diego (UCSD) animal facility. C57BL/6-Tg(TRAMP)8247Ng/J (TRAMP mice)30_were
backcrossed to the FVB strain for more than 10 generations. The median survival of
TRAMP-FVB mice was 23 weeks compared to 52 weeks for TRAMP-C57BL/6 mice.
TRAMP mice were crossed with B cell-deficient (Jh-/-) mice31, CTL-deficient (Cd8a-/-)
mice32 or Rag1-/- mice, which lack both B and T cells33, all in the FVB-background. OT-I
mice were obtained from Taconic18. Tgfbr2F/F (FVB-background) mice were obtained from
Dr. Hal Moses at Vanderbilt University34. Tcrb-/-, Cd19-Cre, Il10-/- and CD45.1 mice were
purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. IgA gene-deficient (Iga-/-) mice35 were obtained
from Baylor College of Medicine. Pdl1/2-/- mice were obtained from Genentech (San
Francisco, CA). Cd19-Cre and Iga-/- mice were backcrossed to the FVB strain for more than
10 generations. All mice were maintained in filter-topped cages on autoclaved food and
water at the UCSD animal facility and all experiments were performed in accordance with
UCSD and NIH guidelines and regulations.

Author Manuscript

Mouse treatment studies were “matched design control trials.” Accordingly, mice were
randomly chosen and paired based on sex (male), age (Extended Data Fig. 1a) and tumor
size. For transplanted tumor models, tumor size was defined by the median tumor volume
(e.g. 400 mm3, for late treatments, Extended Data Fig. 1a,e). For TRAMP transgenic tumor
models, treatment decisions were made based on age and mice were randomly chosen
including a control littermate. An identification code was assigned to each tumor-bearing
mouse both in the transplanted and transgenic models, and the investigators were blinded to
treatment allocation at the time of tumor volume measurement, autopsy and analysis.
The number of mice used in each experiment and the number of experiments are shown in
Supplementary Table 1.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 7

Flow cytometry and lymphocyte isolation

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For lymphocytes isolated from spleen and lymph nodes, standard protocols using filters have
been used. Lymphocytes were isolated from human blood using Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE
Healthcare Life Science) according to manufacturer's recommendations. For lymphocyte
isolation from tumors (mouse and human), tumors were cut into small pieces and incubated
in dissociation solution (RPMI medium supplemented with 5% FBS, collagenase type I (200
U/ml), collagenase type IV (200 U/ml), and DNase I (100 μg/ml) for 30 min at 37° C. After
incubation, cell suspensions were passed through a 50 μm cell strainer and washed twice.
For large tumors (≥ 0.7 g), hematopoietic cells were pre-enriched using density gradient
centrifugation (Percoll or Ficoll), and red blood cells were lysed (RBC Lysis buffer, multispecies; eBioscience). For blocking of Fc-mediated interactions, mouse cells were preincubated with 0.5-1 μg of purified anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (93) per 100 μl and human cells
were incubated with FcR blocking reagent (Miltenyi Biotec). Isolated cells were stained
with labeled antibodies in PBS with 2% FCS and 2 mM EDTA or cell staining buffer
(Biolegend). Dead cells were excluded based on staining with Live/Dead fixable dye
(eBioscience). For intracellular cytokine staining, cells were restimulated (Myc-Cap cell
lysate, PMA/ionomycin or PMA/ionomycin/LPS, as indicated) in the presence of a protein
transport inhibitor cocktail containing Brefeldin A and Monensin (eBioscience), as
indicated. For CD107, a staining antibody was added to the culture during the stimulation.
After 5 hrs, cells were fixed and permeabilized with BD™ Cytofix/Cytoperm reagent for
cytokine staining. BD™ transcription factor buffer was used for Foxp3 and T-bet staining
and BD™ Phosflow was used for p-SMAD2/3 and p-STAT staining (BD Biosciences)
according to manufacturer's recommendations. After fixation/permeabilization, cells were
stained with labeled antibodies of interest. Moreover, Il10 and β-actin mRNA expression
were analyzed on single cell level by flow cytometry in combination with CD45, IgA and
IL-10 protein staining, using FlowRNA II Assay kit (Affymetrix eBioscience) according to
manufacturer's protocols36. Cells were analyzed on a Beckman Coulter Cyan ADP flow
cytometer. Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Treestar). Immune cell analysis of
tumor-free mice of different genetic backgrounds (C57BL/6 and FVB) and different genetic
ablations are shown in Extended Data Fig. 10d-p. The gating strategies and isotype controls
for p-STAT1 and IL-10 staining are shown in Extended Data Fig. 10q-u.
Adoptive lymphocyte transfer

Author Manuscript

For adoptive T cell transfer (ATCT) CD8+ T cells were isolated from single cell
suspensions, prepared from spleens and lymph nodes as described above, using CD8αspecific microbeads and MACS-columns (both Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach,
Germany), and 5 × 106 CD8+ T cells were transferred intraperitoneally (i.p.; Extended Data
Fig. 9a-j). For adoptive B cell transfer (ABCT), B cells (B220+/CD19+) were isolated from
single cell suspensions prepared from spleens using CD19- and B220-specific microbeads
and MACS-columns, and 5 × 106 B cells were transferred i.p. (Fig. 4g, Extended Data Fig.
7n-p). For adoptive splenocytes transfer (ACT), single cell suspensions prepared from
spleens were transferred i.p., with one total spleen injected per mouse. Labelling with 5(and 6-) carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE; Molecular Probes, Eugene,
OR) was done according to manufacturer's protocol. 5 × 106 CD8+ T cells or 7 × 106 B cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

were transferred (equal to one spleen per mouse; Fig. 5a-f and Extended Data Fig. 9k-r). For
combined adoptive B and T cell transfer (Fig. 5jg-i, Extended Data Fig. 10a-c), T cells were
isolated from WT-FVB mice immunized with a Myc-Cap cell lysate as previously
described37. Specifically, Myc-Cap cells were incubated with oxaliplatin (40 μM) for 48 hrs.
The extent of cell death was determined by flow cytometry, showing that more than 90% of
cells were positive for Annexin V and PI. The dead cells were injected subcutaneously (s.c.)
into WT-FVB mice. Seven days later, T cells were isolated from single cell suspensions of
spleen and LN using a Pan T cell isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec). B cells were isolated from
spleens of naïve FVB-WT or FVB-Tgfbr2ΔB mice using a Pan B cell isolation kit (Miltenyi
Biotec). MC-tumor bearing Rag1-/- mice received 5 × 106 T cells with or without 5 × 106 B
cells (98% pure) from WT or Tgfbr2ΔB mice. Purity was analyzed on a Beckman Coulter
Cyan ADP flow cytometer and was always > 98%. Absolute numbers of particular immune
cells in spleen were calculated by multiplying the CD45+ cell number from one spleen by
the percentages of the particular cell type amongst CD45+ cells. Absolute numbers of
particular immune cells (e.g. CD8+ cells) in tumors were calculated by multiplying the cell
number in one tumor portion by the percentages of the corresponding cell type in vital tumor
cells divided by the weight of the analyzed tumor fragment.
Subcutaneous tumor models
2 × 106 Myc-Cap5 or 3 × 106 TRAMP-C217 cells (purchased from ATCC) were s.c. injected
into the right flank. Tumors were measured every 2-3 days using a caliper. Tumor volumes
were calculated as width2 × length/2.
Immune-mediated B cell depletion

Author Manuscript

B cells were depleted as previously described38. Mice were weekly injected (i.p.) with a
mixture of monoclonal antibodies, each at 150 μg/mouse: rat anti–mouse CD19 (clone 1D3),
rat anti–mouse B220 (clone RA36B2), and mouse anti–mouse CD22 (clone CY34). After 48
hrs, the mice were injected with a secondary antibody (mouse anti–rat kappa chain;
GeneTex) at 150 μg/mouse. In addition, mice were injected weekly, but not on the same day,
with 250 μg/mouse rat anti-mouse CD20 (Genentech). Rat anti-mouse IgG2a and IgG1 were
used as isotype controls. Mice were treated for 3 weeks in total (Fig. 1f; Extended Data Fig.
2j-p).
Oncomine data analysis

Author Manuscript

In silico analysis of human IgA (IGHA1) mRNA expression was performed using 15 PC
microarray gene datasets14,39-52 from the Oncomine database (Compendia Biosciences; Ann
Arbor, MI, USA; www.oncomine.org)53 comparing a combined 126 carcinoma/
adenocarcinoma specimens to 30 normal (either benign, disease-free normal and/or normal
adjacent) tissue specimens. Evaluation criteria were set as p < 0.05, fold change > 2.0, and
gene rank in the top 10%.
Analysis of human specimens
Paraffin-embedded specimens from a total of 110 PC patients were integrated into a tissue
microarray system (TMA) constructed at the Clinical Institute of Pathology at the Medical

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

University of Vienna (MUV). All of the human specimens used for TMA construction were
approved by the MUV Research Ethics Committee (1753/2014). The cohort included 87
patients with early PC (E-PC), 9 patients with therapy-resistant PC (TR-PC), and 15 patients
with metastatic PC (M-PC). Patients' demographic and histopathological features are shown
in Supplementary Table 2.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

TMA were designed to provide two cores of normal prostate tissue and four cores of PC
tissue from each E-PC patient, and 3-6 cores of tumor tissue for each TR-PC and M-PC
patient. Stained TMA slides were digitalized by virtual microscopy at 20 × magnification
with a fixed light intensity and resolution into a bright-field image using the Nanozoomer
(Hamamatsu) scanner. Computer-assisted image analysis of individual TMA core images
was used to quantify the percentage of CD8+ and CD20+ immune reactive area (IRA%) as a
proportion of the total digitized haematoxylin-stained region, as previously described54. For
each PC patient, the mean continuous values of CD8+ and CD20+ IRA% in TMA cores
without technical artifact for normal and tumor prostate tissue were calculated and used for
subsequent statistical analysis. The presence of CD138+ and IgA+ double immunoreactivity
for plasma cells in the stromal compartment or directly contacting a cancer cell was semiquantitatively scored in TMA cores for each patient by an investigator who was blinded to
the patients tumor features. A value of 0 was assigned to tissue cores without evidence of
stromal CD138+/IgA+ double immunoreactive cells and a value of 1 was recorded when
CD138+/IgA+ double immunoreactive cells were present in the stromal compartment.
Furthermore, after approval from the UCSD institutional review board (IRB), whole tissue
slides were subjected to immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of αSMA+/IgA, CD8+/IgA
and IL-10+/IgA double staining from a cohort of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
radical prostatectomy specimens. As previously described55, this cohort included up to 50
patients, which were selected based on known clinical outcome according to risk categories
of low-, intermediate- and high-risk groups based on the D'Amico risk classification56.
Anonymized fresh prostatectomy and blood samples from consented human subjects, and
de-identified clinical information were provided under the UCSD Moores Cancer Center
Biorepository and Tissue Technology IRB approved protocol and provided to investigators
(M.K., C.J.K., C.A.M.J., D.E.H.) with Cancer Sample Banking Committee approval. Fresh,
de-identified samples of human prostate tissue and blood in 10 ml EDTA-coated tubes were
collected from patients undergoing radical prostatectomy for clinically localized,
intermediate or high risk PC, Gleason grade 3+4 or higher. A board-certified genitourinary
pathologist (D.E.H.) collected samples of fresh prostate tumor and adjacent benign tissue,
within 1 hr of radical prostatectomy, that were 5-10 mm in diameter.

Author Manuscript

Immunostaining
Tissues were embedded in Tissue Tek OCT (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA)
compound and snap-frozen. Tissue sections were fixed in cold acetone/methanol or 3% PFA
for 3-10 min and washed with PBS. Slides were blocked with 1× PBS/1% normal donkey or
goat serum for surface staining or 0.2% gelatin (from cold water fish skin; SigmaAldrich)/PBS/1% normal donkey or goat serum for intracellular staining for 30 min.
Sections were incubated with primary antibodies for 1 or 12 hrs at RT or 4° C, respectively.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

After washing with PBS, secondary antibodies were added for 1 hr at RT. As negative
controls, samples were incubated with isotype-matched control antibodies or secondary
antibodies only. After staining with DAPI, sections were covered with Vectashield
Mounting Medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA USA). TMA tissue slides from
formalin-processed and paraffin-embedded tumor sections were processed for
immunohistochemistry. After de-paraffinization and rehydration, sections were immersed in
a pre-heated antigen retrieval water bath with a pH 6.1 citrate buffer, or Dako Target
Retrieval Solution for 20 minutes at 95-96°C. ImmPRESS™ Polymer System
Diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) peroxidase substrate-based chromogens were
used for single staining of CD8, CD20 and for IgA staining when combined with CD138
and for αSMA staining when combined with IgA for IHC of human samples. ImmPACT™
Vector® NovaRED™ peroxidase substrate-based chromogens were used for CD138
staining when combined with IgA for IHC of human samples. ImmPACT™ Vector® Red
Alkanine Phosphatase substrate-based chromogens were used for IgA staining when
combined with αSMA for IHC of human samples. All stainings were done according to the
manufacturer's protocols (Vector Laboratories). Nuclei were lightly counterstained with a
freshly made haematoxylin solution then further washed in water and mounted. Sections
were examined using an Axioplan 200 microscope with AxioVision Release 4.5 software
(Zeiss, Jena, Germany) or TCS SPE Leica confocal microscope (Leica, Germany).

Author Manuscript

Antibodies

Author Manuscript

Antibodies specific for the following antigens were used: mAb rabbit to cleaved Caspase 3
(# 9661) or p-γH2AX (Ser139; 20E3) (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, USA); pAb
rabbit to: CD3 (Dako, IS503); αSMA (Dako); Tim-3 (B8.2C12); Tim-1 (RMT1-4); pSMAD2/3 (D27F4); LC3B (D11) and CD138 (Syndecan-1) (anti-mouse Biolegend,; antihuman Dako Ml15); IgA (mA-6E1, m11-44-2, mRMA-1, anti-mouse eBioscience/
Biolegend; anti-human for IHC: Dako, A0262; for FACS: Miltenyi); AID (MAID-2); CD8a
(m53-6.7, human DAKO, C8/144B); CD45 (hOKT4); CD20 (AISB12, hL26); CD44 (IM7);
CD4(RM4-5); B220 (RA3-6B2); CD19 (m1D3, hHIB19); IgM (II/41); IgD (11-26c); TNF
(MP6-XT22); IFNγ (XMG1.2); GrzB (NGZB); CD107a (eBio1D48); PD-1 (J43); PD-L1
(MIH5); FAS-L1 (MFL3); Ki67 (SolA15); IgG2a (m2a-15F8); IgG1 (M1-14D12); IL-10
(mJES5-16E3; hJES3-9D7: IHC: hIL-10: AF-217-NA); CD69 (H1.2F3); FoxP3 (FJK/16s);
CD11c (N418); CD11b (M1/70); MHCII (M5/114.15.2); Gr-1 (1A8-l66g); F4/80 (BM8)
and NK1.1 (NKR.P1C) (all from eBioscience); CD31 (PECAM-1, MEC 13.3); CD45 (m30F11); p-STAT1 (pY701) and p-STAT3 (pY705) (BD Bioscience): and αSMA (anti-mouse
ab5694; anti-human: DAKO, 1A4). The following Alexa 594-, Alexa 647-, Alexa 488conjugated secondary antibodies were used: donkey anti-rat IgG, donkey anti-rabbit IgG,
donkey anti-goat IgG and goat anti-rat IgG (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen).

Author Manuscript

ELISA
Anti-SV40 Tag immunoglobulin ELISA was performed as described57. IgA and IgG ELISA
kits were purchased from eBioscience, and used according to manufacturer's protocols.
Tumoral single cell suspension has been prepared as described above in the flow cytometry
section, and was washed 2-3 times with 1×PBS/2mM EDTA/2% FCS, to remove soluble
IgA. Thereafter, about 3 × 106 cells/24-well were plated in either 10% FCS/DMEM or
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Hybridoma medium (Life Technology). After 24 hrs, the supernatants were analysed for IgA
content. Media without cells were used as controls.
Treatment with chemotherapy or antibodies
Oxaliplatin was diluted in 5% dextrose and i.p. injected weekly at 6 mg/kg as indicated.
Anti-PD-L1 antibody was i.v. injected at 10 mg/kg once, followed by 5 mg/kg bi-weekly.
Mice were treated for three weeks for a total of 7 doses/animal.
Q-RT-PCR analysis

Author Manuscript

Total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy Plus kit (Qiagen). RNA was reverse transcribed
using an IScript kit (Biorad). Q-RT-PCR was performed using Ssofast EvaGreens upermix
(Biorad) on a Biorad CFX96 machine. Primer sequences are listed below and generally were
obtained from the NIH qPrimerDepot (http://mouseprimerdepot.nci.nih.gov). The relative
expression levels of target genes were measured in triplicates and normalized against the
level of RPL32 expression. Fold-difference (as relative mRNA expression) was calculated
by the comparative CT method (2(Ct(RPL32–gene of interest))).
Name

primer 1

primer 2

IFNγ

TGAACGCTACACACTGCATCT

GACTCCTTTTCCGCTTCCTGA

TNF

GGTCTGGGCCATAGAACTGA

CAGCCTCTTCTCATTCCTGC

Author Manuscript

IL-10

GGTTGCCAAGCCTTATCGGA

ACCTGCTCCACTGCCTTGCT

Perforin

TGGAGGTTTTTGTACCAGGC

TAGCCAATTTTGCAGCTGAG

TGFβ1

AAGTTGGCATGGTAGCCCTT

GGAGAGCCCTGGATACCAAC

NOS2

TCCAGGGATTCTGGAACATT

GAAGAAAACCCCTTGTGCTG

Arginase 1

TTTTTCCAGCAGACCAGCTT

CATGAGCTCCAAGCCAAAGT

Granzyme B

CTCTCGAATAAGGAAGCCCC

CTGACCTTGTCTCTGGCCTC

RPL32

TTGTGAGCAATCTCAGCACA

GGGAGCAACAAGAAAACCAA

IL-21

CCC TTG TCT GTC TGG TAG TCA TCT T

GGA GGC GAT CTG GCC C

IL-12p35

GAGGACTTGAAGATGTACCAG

CTATCTGTGTGAGGAGGGC

IL-12p40

GAC CCT GCC CAT TGA ACT GGC

CAA CGT TGC ATC CTA GGA TCG

PD-L1

TGC TGC ATA ATC AGC TAC GG

CCA CGG AAA TTC TCT GGT TG

Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript

Data are presented either averages ± S.E.M or median of continuous values and were
analyzed by Students' t-test or Mann-Whitney-U, respectively, for comparison of two
groups. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare three or more groups. Long-rank (MantelCox) tests were used to compare survival curves. Fisher's exact Chi-square P values were
used to calculate statistical significance of categorical values between groups. Two tailed pvalues of ≤ 0.05 were considered significant. Unpaired t test-independent studies were used
to determine the minimum sample sizes (StatsDirect Version 2.8.0). GraphPad PRISM
software was used for statistical analyses.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Treatment schemes and characterization of tumors and mouse survival
before and after treatment

Author Manuscript

a, Early and late treatment schemes for TRAMP mice. b, TRAMP mice (n= 3-6/group) were
subjected to early oxaliplatin treatment as described in (a) and prostate weights were
determined at 14 weeks, one week after completion of 4 treatment cycles. Dashed red line
indicates prostate weight of tumor-free controls (n=33 in total). c-d, Histopathology of
TRAMP tumors. c, Representative images of H&E stained prostate sections from TRAMP
mice are shown. Magnification bars: 100 μm. PIN, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia; WD,
well differentiated adenocarcinoma; PD, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. d,
Histopathological assessment of early and late treated TRAMP tumors in WT and Jh-/- mice
without or with oxaliplatin treatment. The percentages of the different histotypes shown in
(c) are depicted (n=3-7/group). Fisher chi-square analysis was used to calculate statistical
significance. e, Early and late treatment schemes for mice bearing s.c. MC tumors. f, MC
cells were s.c. transplanted into WT and Jh-/- mice (n= 3-7/group) that were subjected to
early oxaliplatin treatment when tumor volume was 100 mm3. 48 hrs after completion of 3
treatment cycles, mice were sacrificed and tumor volumes (mm3) were measured (n=19 in
total). Prostate weight in (f) is shown in a Log 2 scale. g, MC tumors from indicated mice

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

were stained for CD45 (green) and cleaved caspase 3 (CC3; red) (n=4-6/group). h,i, MC
tumors (n=3-5/group) grown in WT, Jh-/- and Cd8a-/- mice were stained for CD45 (green)
and p-γH2AX (red), and the p-γH2AX+ foci in CD45- cells were enumerated (i).
Magnification bars: 100 μm. All results are means ± s.e.m. j, Representative images of s.c.
MC tumors (n=5-6/group) from WT and Jh-/- mice, with or without oxaliplatin treatment
stained for αSMA (green) and CD31 (red). k, l, Frequency of αSMA (k) and CD31 (l)
positive cells within tumors from (j). Shown are median values ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and
t tests were used to calculate statistical significance indicated by *P, 0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P,
0.001. m, TRAMP mice (WT, Cd8a-/- or Jh-/-; n=6-14/group) were treated weekly with lowdose oxaliplatin. Moribund mice were sacrificed, and survival was compared by KaplanMeyer analysis and significance was determined (WT: n.s.; Cd8a-/-: n.s.; Jh-/-; p<0.002;**).
n, Survival curves for the different TRAMP groups before and after oxaliplatin treatment.
Significant differences in survival times are indicated on the right. No statistically
significant differences in survival were found between WT and Jh-/- or Jh-/- and Cd8a-/mice without treatment. Significant differences in survival times were observed between all
three oxaliplatin-treated groups (WT, Cd8a-/- or Jh-/-; indicated on the right).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. B cells attenuate oxaliplatin-triggered CTL activation

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Flow cytometry of CD8+ T lymphocytes in prostates of 20 weeks old TRAMP mice after 4
cycles of oxaliplatin treatment (n=5-7/group) normalized to prostate weights. b, Late s.c.
MC tumors from WT and Jh-/- mice were stained for CD8 and analyzed by
immunofluorescent microscopy. In the upper left areas (white square), single CD8 staining
(green) without DAPI counterstain is shown. Tumoral CD8+ cells were counted in 3-4 HMF
(200×)/tumor (n=4-5 tumors/group). Magnification bars: 100 μm. c,d, Late s.c. MC tumors
were analyzed by flow cytometry for CD4+ lymphocytes in spleens (c) and tumors (d) after
3 oxaliplatin treatment cycles (n=4-7/group). The results show percentages of CD4+ cells in
the CD45+ population. e, Flow cytometric analysis of TNF and IFNγ expression by CD8+
cells in MC tumors from WT and Jh-/- mice treated as above (n=6-8) and re-stimulated in
vitro with tumor cell lysate. f, Flow cytometry of STAT1 phosphorylation in CD8+ cells
from MC tumors of treated and untreated WT, and Jh-/- mice (for isotype controls, see E.D.
Fig. 10u). The results are summarized in the right panel (n=3 mice/group). g, Expression of
GrzBand Ki-67in CD8+ T effector cells (CD8+CD44+) from spleens of MC inoculated mice
after oxaliplatin treatment. h,i, Flow cytometry of PD-1 and Tim-3 expression by CD8+
effector cells (CD8+CD44+ cells) in spleen (h) and MC tumors (i) as indicated with or
without oxaliplatin treatment. Shown are percentages of the corresponding CD8+ T cells in
the CD8+CD44+ population (n=3-5/group). j, The experimental scheme for B cell
immunodepletion in tumor-bearing mice. MC tumors were raised in WT or Cd8a-/- mice, 16
days after s.c. tumor cell inoculation. B cells were depleted by twice weekly administration
of antibodies directed against CD19, CD20, CD22 and B220. Four days after first antibody
treatment, mice were treated with oxaliplatin (n=4-7 mice/group, total: 44). After 3 weekly
chemotherapy cycles, mice were sacrificed. k, Flow cytometry analysis of tumor-infiltrating
CD45+CD8+ T cells stained for IFNγ (left) or IFNγ and TNF (right) after in vitro
restimulation with PMA/ionomycin (n=4-6 mice/group). l-n, Flow cytometry analysis of
CD19+ (l,m) and IgA+ (n) cells in spleens and tumors isolated from the WT mice described
above, confirming depletion of CD19+ B cells and oxaliplatin-induced IgA+ cells in spleen
and tumors. o, Serum IgA concentrations in the mice described in i (n=3-5/group). p, Flow
cytometry analyses of CD19+ B cells in tumors isolated from Cd8a-/- mice subjected to B
cell depletion or not, confirmed the efficient depletion of tumoral CD19+ B cells. All results
are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical significance
indicated by *P, 0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P, 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Immunogenic chemotherapy induces tumor infiltration by
immunosuppressive CD19+CD20lowB220lowIgA+ B cells

Author Manuscript

a,b, MC tumors (n=4-9/group) raised in WT mice without or with oxaliplatin treatment were
stained for B220 (a), and tumor-infiltrating B220+ cells per HMF were enumerated (b). In
panel a, single B220 staining (above) and combined staining B220/DAPI (below) are
shown. Magnification bars: 100 μm. c,d, The flow cytometry plots and gating strategy for
analysis of splenic B cell populations using CD19, IgA, B220, CD138 and CD20 antibodies.
Results from WT mice bearing MC tumors are shown in panel (c) and from oxaliplatintreated mice in panel (d) (n=8 mice/group). Oxaliplatin treatment modestly increased the
amount of splenic IgA+ cells. Splenic IgA+ cells expressed CD138 as expected and showed
lower levels of B220 and CD20, in either control or oxaliplatin-treated mice. e, The gating
strategies for analysis of tumoral B cells using CD19, IgA, B220 and CD138 antibodies.
Results from MC tumors in two representative oxaliplatin-treated WT mice are shown (n=8
mice/group), demonstrating the presence of IgA+ cells in oxaliplatin-treated tumors with a
typical CD138+B220low phenotype. f-i, Flow cytometry plots and gating strategies for
analysis of tumoral B cell populations using CD19, B220, CD138, IgA and PD-L1
antibodies. Results from WT mice bearing MC tumors without (f) or with oxaliplatin
treatment (g) (n=6 mice/group) and Iga-/- mice bearing MC tumors without (h) or with
oxaliplatin treatment (i) (n=6 mice/group) are shown. Oxaliplatin treatment increased the
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

amount of tumoral IgA+CD138+B220lowPD-L1+cells in WT mice. j, Flow cytometric
analysis of PD-L1 and IL-10 expression in IgA+B220- and B220+IgA- B cells from
oxaliplatin-treated TRAMP tumors (n=4). k, Flow cytometric analysis of IgA and CD138
expression by TRAMP tumor-infiltrating B cells. Shown are percentages of IgA+ cells
amongst all tumor-infiltrating CD19+CD138+ cells. l, WT mice bearing MC tumors were
treated with oxaliplatin as above. Two days after the first or last oxaliplatin cycle, mice were
sacrificed, tumors were isolated and analyzed by flow cytometry as indicated (n=6/group).
After dead cell exclusion, tumor-infiltrating B cells were stained with CD19, CD20, B220,
IgA and IgM antibodies. Shown are the results for control (left panels), one cycle (middle
panels), and 3 cycles (right panels) of oxaliplatin treatment, demonstrating the presence of
tumoral IgA+ cells with a CD19+CD20lowB220low IgA+ cell phenotype within 48 hrs after
oxaliplatin treatment.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Immunogenic chemotherapy induces tumoral and systemic IgA
production through class switch recombination

a, Ex vivo analysis of IgA released by tumor single cell suspension isolated from oxaliplatintreated TRAMP tumors. Single cell suspension from non-treated tumors and culture medium
without cells were used as controls. b,c, Serum IgA (b) and IgG (c) in treated and untreated
TRAMP mice and age-matched naïve FVB controls (n=7-14/group). d, Serum IgA amounts

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in control or oxaliplatin-treated mice bearing MC tumors (n=5-7/group) were determined
and compared to age-matched naïve FVB controls (n=7). e. Serum IgG amounts in control
or oxaliplatin-treated mice bearing MC tumors (n=5-7 mice/group) were determined and
compared to age-matched naïve FVB controls. a-e, Results are means ± s.e.m. MannWhitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical significance. f,g, Immunofluorescence
analysis of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID, green) and IgA (red) expression in
spleen (f, used as a positive control) and MC tumors from oxaliplatin-treated WT mice (g).
Magnification bars: 10 μm except in panel f (right) where it is 100 μm. Arrows point to
IgA+AID+ cells. Shown are representative results of spleens and tumors isolated from 4
mice/group. h, Q-RT-PCR analysis of Tgfb1 mRNA in MC tumors raised in WT or Jh-/mice without or with oxaliplatin treatment (n=3-7 mice/group). Results are means ± s.e.m. i,
Flow cytometry of SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in MC tumor-infiltrating B cells from WT
mice before and after oxaliplatin treatment (n=4/group). Shown are the mean fluorescence
intensities (MFI) and percentages (see Fig. 3e). j, Flow cytometry of SMAD2/3
phosphorylation and PD-L1 in MC tumor-infiltrating B cells from WT mice before and after
oxaliplatin treatment (n=4/group). Shown are the percentages of PD-L1+p-SMAD2/3+ cells
within CD45+CD19+ cells. k, Q-RT-PCR analysis of Il21 mRNA in MC tumors raised in
WT or Jh-/- mice without or with oxaliplatin treatment (n=4-7 mice/group). Chemotherapyinduced Il21 mRNA mainly in WT mice. l,m, Flow cytometry of tumor-infiltrating B cells
stained for phospho-STAT3 and IL-10 (n=5-6/group) before and after oxaliplatin treatment.
n, Flow cytometry analysis of β-actin mRNA, IL-10 protein and Il10 mRNA in MC tumorinfiltrating IgA+ cells using PrimeFlow™ RNA technology (pooled data of 4 mice/group,
after oxaliplatin treatment). Left panel: β-actin mRNA gated on CD45+ cells; middle panel:
Il10 mRNA and IL-10 protein expression after 1 hr stimulation with PMA/ion/LPS gated on
IgA+ cells, right panel: Il10 mRNA and IL-10 protein expression after 5 hrs stimulation with
PMA/ion/LPS, gated on IgA+ cells. o,p, Flow cytometric analysis of tumor-infiltrating B
cells in TRAMP mice (n=4-5/group) stained for CD19, B220, IL-10 and LTαβ (o). The
percentage of tumor-infiltrating LTαβ+ cells amongst all tumor-infiltrating B cells was
determined (p). q, Flow cytometric analyses of CD5 expression by B cells from spleen and
MC-tumor of WT mice after oxaliplatin treatment (n=4-5/group). Shown are means ± s.e.m.
Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical significance indicated by *P,
0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P, 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Immunogenic chemotherapy or B cell deficiency has marginal effects
on Tregs, NK and myeloid cells

Author Manuscript

a,b, Q-RT-PCR analyses of Nos2 (a) and Arg1 (b) mRNAcontent of MC tumors (n=4-7
mice/group). Chemotherapy induced Nos2 and Arg1 expression in WT and Jh-/- mice and no
significant and consistent differences were found between both groups. c,d, Q-RT-PCR
analyses of Il12p40 (c), Il12p35 (d) mRNAin MC tumors grown in WT and Jh-/- mice
(n=4-6 mice/group). e-i, Flow cytometry analyses of tumor-infiltrating or splenic
lymphocytes and monocytes: tumoral Nk1.1+ cells (e), tumoral CD11b+CD11c+ MHCII+
cells (f), tumoral CD11b+GR-1+ cells (g), CD4+FoxP3+ cells (splenic, h; tumoral, i). Cells
in panels e-i are from tumor-bearing mice subjected to oxaliplatin treatment and/or B cell
depletion as indicated (B cell depletion + oxaliplatin; n=4-6 mice/group). Results are means
± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical significance.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Analyses of B and T cells in human prostate cancer specimens

Author Manuscript

a-h, Tissue microarrays of tumor and non-tumor tissue from 110 PC patients were stained
for CD8 and CD20 (5-6 spots/patient = 3-4 tumor tissue + 2 non-tumor tissue). a,b,
Representative examples of CD8 (a) and CD20 (b) IHC of PC tissue microarrays (left).
Magnification bar: 200 μm. Right, computer assisted image analysis with ad hoc developed
image software. Tumor tissue is represented in yellow and CD8+ and CD20+ cells are
represented in red. The percentages of immune reactive area (IRA) occupied by CD8+ or
CD20+ cells are shown. Magnification bars: 200 μ. c,d, comparison of CD8 and CD20 IRAs
in matched non-tumor and tumor tissues from each early stage PC (E-PC) patient (n=87). eh, Patients were divided into three subgroups: E-PC (n=86); therapy-resistant-PC (TR-PC;
n=9), and metastatic-PC (M-PC; n=15). e, CD8+ cell infiltration into tumor tissues of the
different groups. f, CD20+ cell infiltration into tumor tissues of the different groups. g, The
CD8+/CD20+ ratio for the different groups. Each dot represents one patient. Line indicates
the median value. Mann-Whitney test was used to calculate statistical significance between
the two groups. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to calculate statistical significance between the
three groups. h, IHC analysis of low risk (n=5) and high risk (n=5) human PC specimens
using IgA (red) and αSMA (black). Nuclei were counterstained with hematoxylin.
Magnification bar: 100 μm i, IF analysis of human PC showing IL-10 (red) –expressing

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

IgA+ (green) CD138+ (turquoise) plasma cells (n=6). Representative images are shown.
White arrow indicates IL-10-expressing IgA+ cells. Magnification bars: 50 μm. j, Human
normal prostate (n=3-5), and human PC (n=5), were stained for IgA and CD8. Typical
images are shown. Red and green arrows indicate IgA+ and CD8+ cells, respectively.
Magnification bar: 100 μm. k, Human normal prostate (n=3), and human PC (n=5), were
stained for IgA (red arrow) and CD20 (green arrow). Magnification bar: 100 μm. l, Flow
cytometric analysis of human prostate tumor-infiltrating CD19+ B cells and IgA+ cells. The
percentages of IL-10-expressing B cells in CD19+IgA+ (2 different samples) and
CD19+IgA- B cells are shown. m, Summary of results obtained from human blood samples
taken from healthy donors (n=3) and PC patients (n=5) and prostate tissue specimens
(benign, malignant; n=4) analyzed by flow cytometry for IL-10 expression in CD19+IgAand CD19+IgA+ B cells. n,o, Tissue microarrays from 110 PC patients (described above)
were stained for IgA and CD138. Patients were divided into three subgroups: E-PC (n=86);
TR-PC (n=9), and M-PC (n=15). (n) Representative images of IgA (immunoperoxidase) and
CD138 (alkaline phosphatase) double staining of tumor tissues from each group. CD138+
and IgA+ double positive cells in the PC stroma are indicated by the white arrows
(hematoxylin counterstain). Magnification bar: 100 μm. o, Frequencies of IgA+ and CD138+
double positive cells in the tumor stroma of the different PC patient groups. p, PC patient
specimens were divided into two groups: IgA-/low (n=64) and IgA+/hi (n=46). Shown is the
CD8+/CD20+ ratio for each group. Each dot represents one patient. Line indicates the
median value. q, IgA mRNA expression (IGHA1) is significantly elevated in human PC
tissue relative to healthy or benign prostate tissue in 5 out of 15 studies evaluated via
Oncomine. Results from one significant study14 are presented. Chi square test and Fischer
exact test were used to calculate statistical significance shown by *P, 0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P,
0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Effects of TGFβR2, IgA, PD-L1 and IL-10 ablations on tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes

Author Manuscript

MC tumors were raised in WT, Tgfbr2ΔB or Iga-/- mice (n= 5-11/group). Mice were
subjected to 3 cycles of late oxaliplatin treatment after which splenic (Spl) and tumoral (Tu)
B cells were analyzed. After dead cell exclusion, splenic (a,b) and tumoral (c,d) B cells
were stained with CD19, B220, IgA, IgG2a and IgG1 antibodies and analyzed by flow
cytometry. e, Serum IgG concentrations in control or oxaliplatin-treated WT, Tgfbr2ΔB or
Iga-/- mice bearing MC tumors (n=5-9/group). f, Flow cytometry of tumor-infiltrating
CD19+ B cells from WT, Tgfbr2ΔB or Iga-/- MC tumor-bearing mice (n=4-7/group) analyzed
for PD-L1 expression, revealing lower PD-L1 surface expression on Tgfbr2Δ and Iga-/- B
cells after oxaliplatin treatment. g, Flow cytometry of tumor-infiltrating B220hi B cells (left)
and IgA+B220low B cells (right) from WT, Tgfbr2ΔB or Iga-/- MC tumor-bearing mice
(n=4-7/group) analyzed for IL-10 expression, revealing no difference in IL-10 expression by
B220hiIgA- B cells in the corresponding groups, and lower IL-10 expression by Tgfbr2Δ B
cells after oxaliplatin treatment compared to WT mice. Results are means ± s.e.m. MannWhitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical significance. h, The experimental
scheme. WT mice bearing MC tumors were divided into four treatment groups (n=7-8/
group): 1) isotype control (IgG2a); 2) oxaliplatin (weekly); 3) anti-PD-L1 (twice weekly); 4)
oxaliplatin plus anti-PD-L1 (weekly and twice weekly, respectively). After 3 treatment
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

cycles, mice were sacrificed and analyzed. i, Tumor growth curves of tumor-bearing mice
and gross appearance of untreated and treated mice. Significance was determined by MannWhitney and t tests. j, Flow cytometric analysis for GrzB expression by tumor-infiltrating
CD8+ T effector cells (CD8+CD44+) from MC tumor-bearing mice treated as described
above. Results are shown either as percentages of GrzB+ cells amongst CD8+ T cells
(black), or percentages of GrzB+CD8+CD44+ T cells amongst tumoral CD45+ cells (red). k,
Flow cytometry of PD-L1 expression on tumor-infiltrating IgA+ CD19+ B cells in the
different treatment groups. l,m, Serum IgA (l), and IgG (m) concentrations in the different
treatment groups described in panel h. n, The experimental scheme for the experiment
whose results are shown in Fig. 4g,h. B cells were isolated from WT, Pdl1/2-/- and Il10-/mice and 5 × 106 cells (purity 98%) were i.p. transferred into MC tumor-bearing Jh-/- mice
(16 days after MC cell inoculation). After 2 days (day 18), the mice were given 3 oxaliplatin
treatment cycles and analyzed. o, Flow cytometric analysis of splenocytes after staining with
CD45 and CD19 antibodies, confirming presence of B cells in the ABCT groups. Shown are
percentages and absolute B cell numbers in spleen. p, Tumor infiltrating CD8+ cells from
MC tumor-bearing Jh-/- mice transplanted with B cells and treated as above were restimulated for 4 hrs with PMA/ionomycin before flow cytometry (n=4-6 mice/group).
Results are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical
significance.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Low dose cisplatin treatment is devoid of immunogenic activity and low
dose oxaliplatin does not affect gut barrier function

Author Manuscript

a, Flow cytometry of MC cells stained with Annexin V and propidium iodide 24 hrs after
treatment with either oxaliplatin or cisplatin (both at 20 μM). b, Flow cytometry analysis of
MC cells treated as above and stained with antibody to the autophagy marker LC3A. c-e,
MC tumors were raised in WT and Jh-/- mice until 400 mm3 in size, after which the mice
were treated with either cisplatin or oxaliplatin at 6 mg/kg (n=4-5/group). After 3 weekly
chemotherapy cycles, mice were sacrificed. c, Tumor weights; left panel: WT mice; right
panel: Jh-/- mice. d, e, Flow cytometry of tumor-infiltrating CD8 (d) and CD4 (e) cells. Left
panel: WT mice, right panel: Jh-/- mice. f, Gut permeability was measured in WT mice
before and after low (LD) and high (HD) dose oxaliplatin treatment using orally
administered fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–dextran. Shown are FITC-dextran
concentrations in serum (μg/ml) (n=5 mice/group). g, Serum IgA concentrations in naïve
WT (FVB) and Tgfbr2ΔB mice before and after oxaliplatin treatment. h, IgA staining of
colon sections of untreated or LD oxaliplatin-treated WT mice. Magnification bars: 100 μm.
i-k, Flow cytometry of CD8+ (i), CD4+ (j) and Nk1.1+ (k) cells in spleens of naïve WT and
Tgfbr2Δ mice without or with oxaliplatin treatment. All results are means ± s.e.m. MannWhitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical significance shown as *P, 0.05; **P,
0.01; ***P, 0.001.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Immunogenic chemotherapy supports adoptive T cell transfer only in
the absence of B cells

Author Manuscript

a, The experimental scheme. Immunogenic TRAMP-C2 cells were s.c. inoculated into WT
or Tcrβ-/- mice. After 30 days, the mice were divided into 4 groups (n=4-5/group): 1)
control, 2) oxaliplatin (weekly), 3) ATCT, 4) ATCT plus oxaliplatin (weekly). The first
oxaliplatin cycle was given at day 31. Two days after the second cycle, CD8+ T cells from
CD45.1×CD45.2 WT mice (3 × 106 cells) were transferred into tumor-bearing mice and this
was followed by two more oxaliplatin cycles after which mice were sacrificed for analysis
on day 59. b, Tumor volumes (mm3) c,d, Flow cytometric analysis of spleen (c) and tumor
(d) cells after staining with CD45.1, CD45.2, CD8 and TCRαβ antibodies, confirming
expansion of adoptively transferred T cells. e, tumor growth curves. f, The experimental
scheme. Immunogenic TRAMP-C2 cells were s.c. inoculated into WT or Rag1-/- × OT-1
mice (no B cells), that harbor CD8+ T cells specific for chicken ovalbumin which is not
expressed by TRAMP-C2 cells. After 30 days, tumor-bearing Rag1-/- × OT-1 mice were
divided into 4 groups (n=3-4 mice per group): 1) control, 2) oxaliplatin treatment, 3) ATCT,
4) oxaliplatin treatment plus ATCT. The first oxaliplatin cycle was given at day 31. Two
days after the second oxaliplatin cycle, CD8+ T cells (3 × 106) from CD45.1×CD45.2 mice
were adoptively transferred into tumor-bearing mice, which were sacrificed on day 59 and
analyzed. g, Flow cytometric analysisof tumor-infiltrating cells stained with CD45.1,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

CD45.2, CD8 and TCRαβ antibodies, confirming infiltration of adoptively transferred T
cells. h, Flow cytometric analysis of GrzB expression in adoptively transferred, tumorinfiltrating, CD8+ effector cells (CD45.1+CD8+CD44+) from tumor-bearing mice treated as
above. i, Tumor volumes (mm3). j, tumor growth curves. k, The experimental scheme for
Fig. 5a-f. Sixteen weeks old TRAMP;Rag1-/- mice (no B and T cells) were treated with
oxaliplatin (weekly). One day after the 1st treatment cycle, CFSE-labeled splenocytes from
either WT (B and T cells, SP-WT) or Jh-/- (T but no B cells, SP-Jh-/-) mice were transferred
into the tumor-bearing mice (5 × 106 T cells per mouse; 4-5 mice per group). l, m, After 6
days, one mouse from each group was sacrificed, and the proliferation of CD8+ (l) and
CD4+ (m) T cells in bone marrow (BM), spleen and prostates was analyzed by CFSE
staining and flow cytometry. n-r, After 3 more oxaliplatin cycles (4 weeks in total), the mice
were sacrificed and analyzed. n, Frequency of adoptively transferred CD19+ cells amongst
CD45+ cells in spleens and prostates 30 days after ACT. o, Flow cytometric analyses of
CD19+ B lymphocytes for TIM-1 expression in spleens (left) and prostates (right) of
abovemice. p-r, Flow cytometric analyses of T lymphocytes. Percentages of CD8+ and
CD4+ T cells in LN (p); spleens (q); prostates (r) of above TRAMP;Rag1-/- mice.
Red:splenocytes from WT mice (T and B cell transfer), blue: splenocytes from Jh-/- mice (T
cell transfer). Results are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to calculate
statistical significance.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Immunogenic chemotherapy supports adoptive T cell transfer only in
the absence of B cells and analysis of lymphocytes and monocytes in tumor-free mice

Author Manuscript

a, The experimental scheme for Fig. 5g. MC tumor-bearing Rag1-/- mice (no B and T cells)
were treated with oxaliplatin (weekly). One day after 1st oxaliplatin treatment, 5 × 106 T
cells (negative selection) from WT mice immunized with MC cell lysate10 were adoptively
transferred into tumor-bearing mice (4-5 mice/group), alone or in combination with 5 × 106
B cells from WT or Tgfbr2ΔB mice (purity 98%). After 2 more oxaliplatin cycles (3 weeks
total), the mice were sacrificed and analyzed. b, Serum IgG analysis of above mice. c, Flow
cytometric analysis of splenocytes after staining with CD45 and CD19 antibodies. All
results are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to calculate statistical
significance. Statistical significance is given by *P, 0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P, 0.001. d-p, WT,
Jh-/-, Iga-/- and Tgfbr2ΔB mice in the FVB background and WT, Pdl1/2-/-, Il10-/- and Iga-/- in
the C57BL/6 background were analyzed for the distribution of immune markers. d, Spleen
weights of WT, Jh-/- and Tgfbr2ΔB mice in the FVB background. e, Flow cytometry of
splenocytes for the following markers: CD3 (left), CD8 (middle), CD4 (right), gated on the
splenic CD45+ population. f, Absolute cell numbers of splenic CD3+ (left), CD8+ (middle),
and CD4+ (right) cells are shown (percentage × cell count of whole spleen). g,h Flow
cytometry for TNF and IFNγ in CD8+ cells from tumor-free WT, Jh-/-, Tgfbr2ΔB and Iga-/mice (n=6-8) that were re-stimulated in vitro with PMA/ionomycin and the representative
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

flow cytometry panels (e). i,j, Flow cytometry of splenocytes from WT and Tgfbr2ΔB for:
CD19+IgM+ cells (i) and IgA (j) gated on the splenic CD45+ population. k-n, Flow
cytometry of splenocytes from WT, Pdl1/2-/- and Il10-/- mice for: CD45+CD19+IgM+ cells
(k), CD45+IgA+ cells (l), PD-L1 expression by CD19+IgM+ cells (m), and IL-10 expression
by CD19+ cells (n). o,p, Serum IgA and IgG concentrations were analyzed in WT, Pdl1/2-/and Il10-/- mice (n=4-5 mice/group). All results are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t
tests were used to calculate statistical significance shown as *P, 0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P,
0.001. The different gating strategies and staining controls are shown. q, Gating strategies
for tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes: lymphocyte gate, dead cell exclusion, doublets
exclusion, and gating on the CD45+ population. r, Flow cytometric analysis of IL-10 and
IgA expression, gated on the CD45+ population: 1) isotype control (no staining), 2) nonstimulated splenocytes: showing IgA staining, but not IL-10. 3) stimulated splenocytes from
Il10-/- mice showing IgA staining, but not IL-10. 4) stimulated splenocytes from WT mice
showing IgA and IL-10 staining. s, Flow cytometric analysis of IL-10 and CD19 expression,
gated on the CD19+B220+ population. left: stimulated cells from Il10-/- mice, showing B
cell staining, but not IL-10; right: stimulated cells from WT mice showing B cell staining
and IL-10 staining. t, Flow cytometric analysis of IL-10 and IgA expression, gated on the
IgA+ population: left: stimulated cells from Il10-/- mice, showing IgA cell staining, but not
IL-10; right: stimulated cells from WT mice showing IgA and IL-10 staining. These results
confirm IL-10 production by IgA+ cells. u, Flow cytometric analysis of p-STAT1 staining
with corresponding isotype control.

Supplementary material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We thank L. Bastian, K. Wang, A. Umemura, M.K. Kim, M. Susani, E. Gurnhofer and F. Grizzi, for discussions
and research materials. Antibodies and MACS-beads were gifts from eBioscience, Biolegends and Milteny iBiotec.
Anti-PD-L1 and Pdl1/2-/- mice were from Ira Mellman (Genentech). Research was supported by NIH (CA127923
and AI043477), DFG (TR36 to G.W.), the Genome Research-Austria project “Inflammobiota” (FWF and P26011
to L.K.) and postdoctoral research fellowships from the German Research Foundation (DFG, SH721/1-1 to S.S.);
Irvington-CRI (to S.S. and Z.Z.); CIRM (TG2-01154 to J.F.-B.) and FIRC/AIRC (to G.D.C.). M.K. is an ACS
Research Professor and holds the Ben and Wanda Hildyard Chair for Mitochondrial and Metabolic Diseases.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Chen DS, Mellman I. Oncology meets immunology: the cancer-immunity cycle. Immunity. 2013;
39:1–10. [PubMed: 23890059]
2. Schietinger A, Greenberg PD. Tolerance and exhaustion: defining mechanisms of T cell
dysfunction. Trends Immunol. 2014; 35:51–60. [PubMed: 24210163]
3. Zitvogel L, Galluzzi L, Smyth MJ, Kroemer G. Mechanism of action of conventional and targeted
anticancer therapies: reinstating immunosurveillance. Immunity. 2013; 39:74–88. [PubMed:
23890065]
4. Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Zitvogel L. Immunogenic cell death in cancer therapy. Annu Rev
Immunol. 2013; 31:51–72. [PubMed: 23157435]
5. Ammirante M, Luo JL, Grivennikov S, Nedospasov S, Karin M. B-cell-derived lymphotoxin
promotes castration-resistant prostate cancer. Nature. 2010; 464:302–305. [PubMed: 20220849]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

6. Ammirante M, et al. An IKKalpha-E2F1-BMI1 cascade activated by infiltrating B cells controls
prostate regeneration and tumor recurrence. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:1435–1440. [PubMed: 23796898]
7. Lee JL, et al. Gemcitabine-oxaliplatin plus prednisolone is active in patients with castration-resistant
prostate cancer for whom docetaxel-based chemotherapy failed. Br J Cancer. 2014; 110:2472–2478.
[PubMed: 24736579]
8. Kaplan-Lefko PJ, et al. Pathobiology of autochthonous prostate cancer in a pre-clinical transgenic
mouse model. Prostate. 2003; 55:219–237. [PubMed: 12692788]
9. Watson PA, et al. Context-dependent hormone-refractory progression revealed through
characterization of a novel murine prostate cancer cell line. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:11565–11571.
[PubMed: 16357166]
10. Ammirante M, Shalapour S, Kang Y, Jamieson CA, Karin M. Tissue injury and hypoxia promote
malignant progression of prostate cancer by inducing CXCL13 expression in tumor
myofibroblasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:14776–14781. [PubMed: 25267627]
11. Cerutti A. The regulation of IgA class switching. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:421–434. [PubMed:
18483500]
12. Yoshizaki A, et al. Regulatory B cells control T-cell autoimmunity through IL-21-dependent
cognate interactions. Nature. 2012; 491:264–268. [PubMed: 23064231]
13. Affara NI, et al. B cells regulate macrophage phenotype and response to chemotherapy in
squamous carcinomas. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:809–821. [PubMed: 24909985]
14. Yu YP, et al. Gene expression alterations in prostate cancer predicting tumor aggression and
preceding development of malignancy. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:2790–2799. [PubMed: 15254046]
15. Luo JL, et al. Nuclear cytokine-activated IKKalpha controls prostate cancer metastasis by
repressing Maspin. Nature. 2007; 446:690–694. [PubMed: 17377533]
16. Doi T, et al. IgA plasma cells express the negative regulatory co-stimulatory molecule
programmed cell death 1 ligand and have a potential tolerogenic role in the intestine. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2012; 425:918–923. [PubMed: 22906740]
17. Foster BA, Gingrich JR, Kwon ED, Madias C, Greenberg NM. Characterization of prostatic
epithelial cell lines derived from transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP)
model. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:3325–3330. [PubMed: 9269988]
18. Hogquist KA, et al. T cell receptor antagonist peptides induce positive selection. Cell. 1994;
76:17–27. [PubMed: 8287475]
19. Xiao S, et al. Defect in regulatory B-cell function and development of systemic autoimmunity in Tcell Ig mucin 1 (Tim-1) mucin domain-mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:12105–
12110. [PubMed: 22773818]
20. Kang HS, et al. Signaling via LTbetaR on the lamina propria stromal cells of the gut is required for
IgA production. Nat Immunol. 2002; 3:576–582. [PubMed: 12006975]
21. Feng T, Elson CO, Cong Y. Treg cell-IgA axis in maintenance of host immune homeostasis with
microbiota. Int Immunopharmacol. 2011; 11:589–592. [PubMed: 21111079]
22. Shen P, et al. IL-35-producing B cells are critical regulators of immunity during autoimmune and
infectious diseases. Nature. 2014; 507:366–370. [PubMed: 24572363]
23. Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer.
2012; 12:252–264. [PubMed: 22437870]
24. Qin Z, et al. B cells inhibit induction of T cell-dependent tumor immunity. Nat Med. 1998; 4:627–
630. [PubMed: 9585241]
25. Olkhanud PB, et al. Tumor-evoked regulatory B cells promote breast cancer metastasis by
converting resting CD4(+) T cells to T-regulatory cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:3505–3515.
[PubMed: 21444674]
26. Fremd C, Schuetz F, Sohn C, Beckhove P, Domschke C. B cell-regulated immune responses in
tumor models and cancer patients. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 2:e25443. [PubMed: 24073382]
27. Shah N. Diagnostic significance of levels of immunoglobulin A in seminal fluid of patients with
prostatic disease. Urology. 1976; 8:270–272. [PubMed: 969080]
28. Schumacher TN, Kesmir C, van Buuren MM. Biomarkers in cancer immunotherapy. Cancer Cell.
2015; 27:12–14. [PubMed: 25584891]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

29. Shen FW, et al. Cloning of Ly-5 cDNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985; 82:7360–7363.
[PubMed: 3864163]
30. Gingrich JR, et al. Metastatic prostate cancer in a transgenic mouse. Cancer Res. 1996; 56:4096–
4102. [PubMed: 8797572]
31. Chen J, et al. Immunoglobulin gene rearrangement in B cell deficient mice generated by targeted
deletion of the JH locus. Int Immunol. 1993; 5:647–656. [PubMed: 8347558]
32. Koh DR, et al. Less mortality but more relapses in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in
CD8-/- mice. Science. 1992; 256:1210–1213. [PubMed: 1589800]
33. Mombaerts P, et al. RAG-1-deficient mice have no mature B and T lymphocytes. Cell. 1992;
68:869–877. [PubMed: 1547488]
34. Forrester E, et al. Effect of conditional knockout of the type II TGF-beta receptor gene in
mammary epithelia on mammary gland development and polyomavirus middle T antigen induced
tumor formation and metastasis. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:2296–2302. [PubMed: 15781643]
35. Harriman GR, et al. Targeted deletion of the IgA constant region in mice leads to IgA deficiency
with alterations in expression of other Ig isotypes. J Immunol. 1999; 162:2521–2529. [PubMed:
10072491]
36. Porichis F, et al. High-throughput detection of miRNAs and gene-specific mRNA at the single-cell
level by flow cytometry. Nat Commun. 2014; 5
37. Michaud M, et al. Autophagy-dependent anticancer immune responses induced by
chemotherapeutic agents in mice. Science. 2011; 334:1573–1577. [PubMed: 22174255]
38. Keren Z, et al. B-cell depletion reactivates B lymphopoiesis in the BM and rejuvenates the B
lineage in aging. Blood. 2011; 117:3104–3112. [PubMed: 21228330]
39. Holzbeierlein J, et al. Gene expression analysis of human prostate carcinoma during hormonal
therapy identifies androgen-responsive genes and mechanisms of therapy resistance. Am J Pathol.
2004; 164:217–227. [PubMed: 14695335]
40. LaTulippe E, et al. Comprehensive gene expression analysis of prostate cancer reveals distinct
transcriptional programs associated with metastatic disease. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:4499–4506.
[PubMed: 12154061]
41. Singh D, et al. Gene expression correlates of clinical prostate cancer behavior. Cancer Cell. 2002;
1:203–209. [PubMed: 12086878]
42. Arredouani MS, et al. Identification of the transcription factor single-minded homologue 2 as a
potential biomarker and immunotherapy target in prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;
15:5794–5802. [PubMed: 19737960]
43. Liu P, et al. Sex-determining region Y box 4 is a transforming oncogene in human prostate cancer
cells. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:4011–4019. [PubMed: 16618720]
44. Grasso CS, et al. The mutational landscape of lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer. Nature.
2012; 487:239–243. [PubMed: 22722839]
45. Lapointe J, et al. Gene expression profiling identifies clinically relevant subtypes of prostate
cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:811–816. [PubMed: 14711987]
46. Tomlins SA, et al. Integrative molecular concept modeling of prostate cancer progression. Nat
Genet. 2007; 39:41–51. [PubMed: 17173048]
47. Welsh JB, et al. Analysis of gene expression identifies candidate markers and pharmacological
targets in prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:5974–5978. [PubMed: 11507037]
48. Varambally S, et al. Integrative genomic and proteomic analysis of prostate cancer reveals
signatures of metastatic progression. Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:393–406. [PubMed: 16286247]
49. Magee JA, et al. Expression profiling reveals hepsin overexpression in prostate cancer. Cancer
Res. 2001; 61:5692–5696. [PubMed: 11479199]
50. Wallace TA, et al. Tumor immunobiological differences in prostate cancer between AfricanAmerican and European-American men. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:927–936. [PubMed: 18245496]
51. Vanaja DK, Cheville JC, Iturria SJ, Young CY. Transcriptional silencing of zinc finger protein 185
identified by expression profiling is associated with prostate cancer progression. Cancer Res.
2003; 63:3877–3882. [PubMed: 12873976]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript

52. Luo JH, et al. Gene expression analysis of prostate cancers. Mol Carcinog. 2002; 33:25–35.
[PubMed: 11807955]
53. Rhodes DR, et al. ONCOMINE: a cancer microarray database and integrated data-mining
platform. Neoplasia. 2004; 6:1–6. [PubMed: 15068665]
54. Di Caro G, et al. Occurrence of tertiary lymphoid tissue is associated with T-cell infiltration and
predicts better prognosis in early-stage colorectal cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:2147–2158.
[PubMed: 24523438]
55. Woo JR, et al. Tumor infiltrating B-cells are increased in prostate cancer tissue. J Transl Med.
2014; 12:30. [PubMed: 24475900]
56. D'Amico AV, et al. Biochemical outcome after radical prostatectomy, external beam radiation
therapy, or interstitial radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer. JAMA. 1998;
280:969–974. [PubMed: 9749478]
57. Czeh M, et al. The immune response to sporadic colorectal cancer in a novel mouse model.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:6591–6602. [PubMed: 20818425]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. B cells inhibit oxaliplatin-induced tumor regression

Author Manuscript

a, TRAMP (FVB) mice (TR-WT, TR-Jh-/-, and TR-Cd8a-/-; n=7-15/group) received weekly
oxaliplatin (6 mg/kg), starting at week 16. After 4 weeks, prostate weights measured.
Dashed red line = prostate weight of naïve controls. b, Tumor growth in mice transplanted
with MC cells and treated with oxaliplatin as in Extended Data Fig. 1f (late treatment) or 5%
dextrose (n=7-11/group). c, Weights of MC tumors after oxaliplatin or vehicle treatment
(n=5-7/group). d, Mice of indicated genotypes bearing MC tumors (n=7-11/group) were
treated as above. After 3 cycles, tumor volumes (mm3) were determined. e, Numbers of
cleaved caspase 3 (CC3) CD45- cells per high magnification field (HMF; 200×) in tumors
from Extended Data Fig. 1g. f, MC tumors were inoculated into WT (left) or Cd8a-/- (right)
mice. After 16 days, B cells were depleted with antibodies against CD19, CD20, CD22 and
B220. Four days after first twice-weekly antibody treatment, mice received weekly
oxaliplatin (n=4-7/group, total: 42), and sacrificed 3 weeks later. Tumor volumes were
analyzed by Kruskal-Wallis test: P=0.007**. Results are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and
t tests were used to determine significance indicated as *P, 0.05; **P, 0.01; ***P, 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. B cells inhibit oxaliplatin-induced T cell activation

Author Manuscript

a, CD8+ cells in TRAMP prostates (WT, Jh-/-; n=4-6/group) from mice treated as in 1a,
enumerated by flow cytometry and normalized to CD45+ cells. b, Mice (n=6-8/group)
bearing MC tumors were analyzed as above for CD8+ cells in spleens and tumors after 3
chemotherapy cycles. c, d, Q-RT-PCR analysis of Perforin and Ifnγ mRNA in MC tumors
collected as in (b) (n=4-7). e, IFNγ expression by CD8+ cells from tumors (n=6-8) from (b)
after in vitro re-stimulation with tumor cell lysate. f-h, Expression of GrzB and Ki-67 (f),
PD-1and Tim-3 (g) and BTLA (h) in CD8+ T effector cells (CD8+CD44+; f,g) or total CD8+
cells (h) from tumors of MC inoculated mice (b). Results are percentages of positive cells in
tumoral CD8+ cells or mean fluorescence intensities (MFI) and are means ± s.e.m of 3
independent experiments (n=6-8 mice/group). Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to
determine significance shown as above.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Oxaliplatin induces tumor infiltration with IgA+PD-L1+IL-10-producing plasmocytes

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, B220+CD19+ B lymphocytes in 20 weeks old TRAMP prostates after 4 oxaliplatin cycles
(n=5-7/group) normalized to prostate weights. b,c, B220, CD19, CD138 and IgA expression
in tumoral B cells from (a). Values are % of tumoral CD45+ (b) or CD19+ (c) cells. d, MC
tumors (n=4-5/group) stained for αSMA (green) and IgA (red). Arrows: IgA+ cells whose
number per HMF is displayed on the bottom. e, p-SMAD2/3 in tumor-infiltrating B cells
(n=3-4/group). f, Il10 mRNAin MC tumors (n=5-6/group). g, Tumor-infiltrating
IL-10+CD19+B cells in MC-WT mice, as percentages of CD45+ cells. h, Percentages of
IL-10-producing cells in tumoral (MC-WT) CD19+IgA+ and CD19+IgA- cells i, IL-10
expression by tumoral (MC-WT) IgA+ and IgA- B cells (n=4-6/group). j, PD-L1 and FAS-L
expression in B cells from TRAMP tumors. k, Pdl1 mRNA in MC tumors (n=5-6/group). l,
Low (n=5) and high (n=5) risk human PC specimens stained with IgA (red) and αSMA
(green) antibodies. Arrows: IgA+ cells. All results are means ± s.e.m of at least three
independent experiments. Magnification bars: 100 μm. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used
to calculate statistical significance shown as above.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. TGFβR signaling and IgA CSR are required for immunosuppressive plasmocyte
development

Author Manuscript

a, WT, Tgfbr2ΔB or Iga-/- mice bearing late MC tumors were given 3 weekly oxaliplatin
cycles (n=5-11/group, total: 48), and tumor volumes at treatment end were analyzed
(Kruskal-Wallis test: P=0.0004***). b, c, Tumoral CD19+ (b) and IgA+ (c) cells, depicted as
percentages of tumoral CD45+ cells (b) or total vital cells (c) (n=4-7/group). d, Serum IgA
in MC-WT and MC-Tgfbr2ΔB mice (n=5-8/group). Tumor-free WT and Tgfbr2ΔB mice
served as controls. e, Frequency of tumoral CD8+ cells in mice from (a). f, CD8+ cells (5 ×
106/well) from (a) were re-stimulated with either MC lysate (left) or PMA/ionomycin (right)
and analyzed for indicated markers. Percentages of marker positive cells within tumoral
CD8+ cells are shown (n=4-7 mice/group). g, B cells (5 × 106; 98% pure) from WT,
Pdl1/2-/- and Il10-/- mice were transferred into MC tumor-bearing Jh-/- mice (16 days after
inoculation) that received oxaliplatin 2 days later. Tumor volumes were determined on day
30 (n=4-6 mice/group). Results are means ± s.e.m. Mann-Whitney and t tests were used to
calculate statistical significance.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

Shalapour et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Adoptively transferred B cells inhibit T cell-dependent tumor eradication

Author Manuscript

a,b TRAMP;Rag1-/- mice (16 weeks old) received weekly oxaliplatin. One day after 1st
treatment, CFSE-labeled splenocytes from WT or Jh-/- mice were adoptively transferred
(ACT) into tumor-bearing mice (4-5/group). After 3 more oxaliplatin cyclesthe prostates
were photographed (a) and tumor weight measured (b). c, Serum IgA in both ACT groups
and FVB-WT mice. d,e Serum anti-SV40-Tag IgA and IgG concentrations in indicated
strains with or without ACT and/or oxaliplatin treatment. f, Frequency of CD8+ cells
amongst CD45+ cells in TRAMP;Rag1-/- prostates after ACT and oxaliplatin treatment. g,
MC tumor-bearing Rag1-/- mice were oxaliplatin treated. One day later, mice (4-5/group)
received activated T cells from WT mice immunized with MC cell extract without or with B
cells from WT or Tgfbr2ΔB mice. After 2 more treatments, mice were sacrificed and tumor
volumes determined. h, IFNγ in tumoral CD8+ cells of above mice. Cells were re-stimulated
with PMA/ionomycin before determining percentages of IFNγ-expressing cells in total
CD8+ cells (n=5-8/group). j, Serum IgA in above mice. Results are means ± s.e.m. MannWhitney and t tests were used to determine significance. n.d. not detectable.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.

