Editorial

Intra-arterial Chemotherapy for Head and
Neck Cancer
Is There a Verdict?
K. Thomas Robbins, MD1; Stephen B. Howell, MD2; and James Scott Williams, MD, PhD3

In this issue of Cancer, the results of a long-awaited randomized trial comparing intra-arterial (IA) to intravenous (IV)
administration of cisplatin and concurrent radiation therapy are presented by Rasch et al. The trial was conducted in the
Netherlands between 2000 and 2004 for patients with unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive
tract. Unresectable was defined as either ‘‘anatomical’’ or ‘‘functional’’. Although 5 institutions participated, 67% of the
patients were treated at the Netherlands Cancer Institute. Despite encouraging phase 2 studies completed earlier by both
the same group and others,1,2,3 superiority for the high-dose IA infusion strategy could not be demonstrated in the current
trial.
For most oncologists who have limited experience with the IA method of drug delivery, and generally consider it to
be more complex and invasive than IV chemotherapy, the results as published will be accepted without further question.
For those of us who have experience with the IA approach, there remain some concerns that may have influenced the
results of this trial.
The most prominent concern relates to the technique used to deliver the IA infusions. The contemporary method
for IA infusions employs the transfemoral approach for the placement of microcatheters through which the chemotherapy
agent can be rapidly and selectively infused to the tumor bed. The determination of which artery or arteries to infuse and
whether to target the external carotid artery and its branches on the ipsilateral side versus additional infusions through the
contralateral carotid artery system is a judgment typically made by the interventional radiologist based on observed blood
flow and anatomical location of the primary disease.4 For the vast majority of patients, we have observed that the primary
tumor can be effectively treated simply by using the carotid artery system on the side ipsilateral to the side of the tumor,
even when the lesion has crossed the midline. We have noted that most tumors extending across the midline will continue
to receive arterial flow through the ipsilateral vessels. In our experience, the decision to perform an additional infusion
through the contralateral carotid artery is reserved only for a small number of patients whose primary disease substantially
encompasses the opposite side of the upper aerodigestive tract or who have angiographic evidence of a bilateral arterial supply. Furthermore, the proportion of the infusate delivered through the contralateral arterial system is virtually always
smaller. However, in the current study Rasch et al chose to employ bilateral infusions in the majority of patients (58 %)
receiving IA chemotherapy using the criteria of ‘‘more than 1 cm extension across the midline’’ and delivering 50% if the
infusate through the opposite vessels.
Inherent to the technique of bilateral IA infusions is the necessity to divide the total dose and, hence, diminish the
effect of the drug delivered. In the case of cisplatin infusion with sodium thiosulfate neutralization, an infusate that has
been divided may represent an amount that is disproportionate to the targeted tumor volume. As a consequence, not only
is the cisplatin more likely to be neutralized by the sodium thiosulfate, but also a suboptimal dose is delivered to the tumor
Corresponding author: K. Thomas Robbins, MD, Division of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, SimmonsCooper Cancer Institute at Southern Illinois
University, P.O. Box 19677, Springfield, IL 62794-9677; Fax: (217) 545-0057; trobbins@siumed.edu
1
Division of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, SimmonsCooper Cancer Institute, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine Springfield, Illinois; 2Department of Medicine, Moores UCSD Cancer Center University of California at San Diego, San Diego, California; 3Department of Radiology, Memphis Medical Center,
Veterans Administration, Memphis, Tennessee

See referenced original article on pages 2159-65, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24930, Received: August 27, 2009; Accepted: November 29, 2009, Published online February 22, 2010 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com)

2068

Cancer

May 1, 2010

IA Chemotherapy for Head and Neck Cancer/Robbins et al

being supplied by the dominant artery. The corollary is
that the majority of the cisplatin delivered through the
contralateral carotid system will not pass through the tumor bed and will be rapidly neutralized by the sodium thiosulfate circulating systemically.
We have previously demonstrated that IA cisplatin
infusions result in higher drug uptake and cisplatin adduct
formation in the tumor in comparison to historical data
for intravenous cisplatin infusions.5 More recently, Hoebers et al measured cisplatin adduct levels in patients with
head and neck cancer receiving either IV or IA cisplatin.6
Although the level of GG adduct formation was higher in
the IA group, this was not statistically significant; however, there were only 5 patients in the IA group and 7 in
the IV group. Furthermore, some of the subjects would
have received a reduced amount of the total drug infused
if they received a bilateral IA infusion.
A second confounding factor to be considered when
interpreting the results of the current trial is the potential
influence of human papilloma virus (HPV). It is now recognized that HPV infects tumor cells in a large portion of
patients with head and neck cancer, including the majority of those with oropharyngeal lesions.7,8 It is also welldocumented that the presence of HPV confers a better
prognosis.8,9,10 The expected higher survival rates for
HPV positive patients is relevant in this current trial,
because this subset is likely to have done just as well when
treated with the lower cisplatin dose intensity of IV chemoradiation compared with the higher cisplatin dose intensity of the IA arm. Further analysis would be
important to determine whether there was an equal distribution of HPV-positive patients in each arm of the trial as
well as to determine whether the outcomes were different
for the HPV-negative patients, a subset of worse prognosis, based of the route of drug delivery.
Oncologists continue to search for the optimal treatment for patients with advanced head and neck cancer.
To date, the efficacy of single agent cisplatin administered
concurrently with radiation therapy has not been surpassed by other regimens, including multiple chemotherapy agents given concurrently with radiation therapy11 or
in split courses.12 More recent approaches have included
the addition of doublet or triplet induction chemotherapy
followed by chemoradiation,13 and the incorporation of
biologic agents into existing regimens.14 Despite these
newer and potentially more intensive protocols, none has
yet proven to be more effective than concomitant singleagent IV cisplatin chemoradiation. On the surface, the
Dutch trial represents yet another attempt in which the

Cancer

May 1, 2010

challenger (IA cisplatin chemoradiation) has failed to
show superiority over the current standard of IV cisplatin
chemoradiation. However, digging deeper to address the
confounding issues of bilateral infusions and HPV infection, the data may not support the verdict put forth by the
authors. We believe the magnitude of these 2 issues had
the potential to change the outcome. If this is the case,
then we suggest that there is no verdict and the jury is still
out.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Robbins KT, Kumar P, Wong FSH, et al. Targeted chemoradiation for advanced head and neck cancer: analysis of
213 patients. Head Neck. 2000;22:687-693.
2. Robbins KT, Kumar P, Harris J, et al. Supradose intra-arterial cisplatin and concurrent radiation therapy for the treatment of stage IV head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is
feasible and efficacious in a multi-institutional setting:
results of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Trial 9615. J
Clin Oncol. 2005;23:1447-1454.
3. Balm AJM, Rasch CRN, Schornagel JH, et al. High-dose
superselective intra-arterial cisplatin and concomitant radiation (RADPLAT) for advanced head and neck cancer. Head
Neck. 2004;26:485-493.
4. Kerber CW, Wong WH, Howell SB, Hanchett C, Robbins
KT. An organ-preserving selective arterial chemotherapy
strategy for head and neck cancer. Am J Neuroradiol.
1998;19:935-941.
5. Los G, Blommaert FA, Barton R, et al. Selective intra-arterial infusion of high-dose cisplatin in patients with advanced
head and neck cancer resulting in high tumor platinum concentrations and cisplatin-DNA adduct formation. Cancer
Chemotherapy Pharmacology. 1995;37:150-154.
6. Hoebers FJP, Pluim D, Verheij M, et al. Prediction of treatment outcome by cisplatin-DNA adduct formation in
patients with stage III/IV head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, treated by concurrent cisplatin-radiation (RADPLAT). Int J Cancer. 2006;119:750-756.
7. D’Souza G, Kreimer AR, Viscidi R, et al. Case-control
study of human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1944-1956.
8. Mellin H, Friesland S, Lewensohn R, Dalianis T, MunckWikland E. Human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA in tonsillar
cancer: clinical correlates, risk of relapse, and survival. Int J
Cancer. 2009;89:300-304.
9. Schwartz SR, Yueh B, McDougall JK, Daling JR, Schwartz
SM. Human papillomavirus infection and survival in oral
squamous cell cancer: a population-based study. Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2001;125:1-9.
10. Sedaghat AR, Zhang Z, Begum S, et al. Prognostic significance of human papillomavirus in oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinomas. Laryngoscope. 2009;119:1542-1549.
11. Adelstein DJ, Li Y, Adams GL, et al. An intergroup phase
III comparison of standard radiation therapy and 2

2069

Editorial
schedules of concurrent chemoradiotherapy in patients with
unresectable squamous cell head and neck cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:92-98.
12. Vokes EE, Haraf DJ, Kies MS. The use of concurrent
chemotherapy and radiotherapy for locoregionally advanced
head and neck cancer. Semin Oncol. 2000;Aug;27(4 suppl
8):34-38.
13. Posner MR, Haddad RI, Wirth L, et al. Induction chemotherapy in locally advanced squamous cell cancer of the

2070

head and neck: evolution of the sequential treatment
approach. Semin Oncol. 2004;31:778-785.
14. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy plus
cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:567-578.
15. Rasch CRN, Hauptmann M, Schornagel J, et al. Intra-Arterial Versus Intravenous Chemoradiation for Advanced Head
and Neck Cancer: Results of a Randomized Phase 3 Trial.
Cancer. 2010;118:2159-2165.

Cancer

May 1, 2010

