Research Article

Sp1 Is Required for Transforming Growth Factor-B–Induced
Mesenchymal Transition and Migration in
Pancreatic Cancer Cells
1

1

1

1

Kerstin Jungert, Anita Buck, Götz von Wichert, Guido Adler, Alexander König,
2
1,2
1,2
Malte Buchholz, Thomas M. Gress, and Volker Ellenrieder

2

1

Department of Gastroenterology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany and 2Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology
and Endocrinology, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany

Abstract
Transition from a sessile epithelial phenotype to a migrating
mesenchymal phenotype is a crucial step in transforming
growth factor-B (TGF-B)–induced pancreatic cancer cell
migration and invasion. These profound morphologic and
functional alterations are associated with characteristic
changes in TGF-B–regulated gene expression, defined by
rapid repression of epithelial markers and a strong and
sustained transcriptional induction of mesenchymal markers
such as the intermediate filament vimentin. In this study,
we have analyzed the role of the transcription factor Sp1 in
TGF-B–induced and Smad-mediated gene regulation during
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and migration of
pancreatic cancer cells. Here, we show that Sp1 is required for
TGF-B–induced EMT, and that this function is especially
mediated through transcriptional induction of vimentin. Our
results emphasize the functional relevance of vimentin in
TGF-B–induced EMT because prevention of its induction
strongly reduces cell migration. Altogether, this study helps
to better understand the role of Sp1 in TGF-B–induced
progression of pancreatic cancer. It suggests that Sp1, via
transcriptional induction of vimentin, cooperates with activated Smad complexes in mesenchymal transition and
migration of pancreatic cancer cells upon TGF-B stimulation.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(4):1563–70]

Introduction
Transforming growth factor-h (TGF-h) is a pluripotent cytokine
that exhibits a dual character during tumorigenesis (1, 2). Although
in healthy epithelial cells and early tumor stages, TGF-h acts as a
strong inhibitor of cell growth, this ability is lost as the tumor
progresses. In late-stage cancer, TGF-h might then contribute to
tumor progression through enhanced cellular motility, invasiveness, and metastasis (1–3). In recent years, a growing number of
in vivo studies have shown that inhibition of TGF-h signaling and
transcription reduces the metastatic and/or invasive properties of
a variety of experimental cancers, presumably by preventing the
induction of an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
cancer cells (3, 4). By definition, EMT is an extreme and complex
manifestation of epithelial plasticity (5), which has been described
in three major physiologic and pathophysiologic contexts:

embryonic development and morphogenesis, chronic fibrotic
disorders, and cancer progression.
Oncogenic EMT is well documented in vivo and in vitro. It is
characterized by a reversible conversion of polarized epithelial
cells into highly motile fibroblastoid cells (6, 7). On the molecular
level, EMT is defined by the loss of cell-cell adhesion molecules
(e.g., E-cadherin), down-regulation of epithelial differentiation
markers, and transcriptional induction of mesenchymal markers,
such as vimentin and fibronectin. We have recently shown that
TGF-h-induced EMT in invasive growing pancreatic cancer cells
requires an intact Smad-signaling and transcription pathway (8).
In fact, mutational inactivation of the Smad-signaling cascade
prevents pancreatic cancer cells from TGF-h–induced EMT and
tumor cell migration, suggesting that Smads are essential players
in the transcriptional regulation of EMT-associated genes. In most
cases, however, the Smad proteins alone cannot sufficiently regulate target promoter gene regulation and, thus, need to cooperate
with other transcription factor proteins, including members of the
AP1 family, Runx1-3, the E2F family, and the Sp1/KLF-like zincfinger transcription factors (9–12).
Our laboratory investigates the roles of the Sp1/KLF-like
proteins in Smad-mediated target gene selection and regulation
in normal epithelial cells and in pancreatic cancer cells as well
(13, 14). We have recently characterized KLF11, a TGF-h–inducible
member of the Sp1/KLF-like family, as a strong tumor suppressor
that represses transcription of cell-cycle–promoting genes through
both Smad-dependent and Smad-independent mechanisms
(15–17). During pancreatic carcinogenesis, however, hyperactive
Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling prevents KLF11-Smad interactions and subsequently antagonizes the tumor suppressor activities of KLF11 in
late-stage pancreatic cancer (15). As a result of KLF11 inactivation,
Smad proteins might then partner with other Sp1/KLF-like
proteins and together promote pancreatic cancer progression via
transcriptional regulation of selected target genes. In this context,
Sp1 is of particular interest because recent studies have suggested
potential oncogenic functions of Sp1 in several aspects of tumor
progression, including those associated with angiogenesis, growth
control, and cell motility (18–20). In this study, we investigated
whether Sp1 participates in TGF-h–induced gene regulation
during EMT and whether this function contributes to increased
pancreatic cancer cell migration.

Materials and Methods
Requests for reprints: Volker Ellenrieder, Division of Gastroenterology and
Endocrinology, University of Marburg, Baldinger Strasse, 35043 Marburg, Germany.
Phone: 49-6421-28-66460; Fax: 49-6421-28-68922; E-mail: ellenrie@med.uni-marburg.de.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1670

www.aacrjournals.org

Cell culture and transient transfection. Panc-1 and IMIM-PC1 cells
were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified minimal essential medium (Life
Technologies, Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FCS.
Expression and reporter promoter plasmids were transfected using the

1563

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Transfast reagent (Promega, Madison, WI). Small interfering RNA (siRNA)
was transfected into Panc-1 cells with Transmessenger (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany) and into IMIM-PC-1 cells with X-tremeGene (Roche Applied
Science, Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
The sequences to silence the translation of Sp1 were 5¶-GGUAGCUCUAAGUUUUGAUtt-3¶ and 5¶-GGUCAUUUCUUUGCUUAUGtt-3¶ and, for vimentin,
5¶-GGCGAGGAGAGCAGGAUUUtt-3¶ (Ambion, Austin, TX). The scrambled
sequence Silencer Negative Control 2 RNAi (Ambion) was used as a negative
control.
Plasmid constructs and luciferase reporter gene assays. The
luciferase reporter plasmid vim-wt ( 1416 to +73) was obtained from
Dr. J.-M. Foidart (Laboratory of Tumor and Developmental Biology,
University of Liege, Liege, Belgium). The mutant vimentin reporter
plasmids (M1 to M5) were generated from the vim-wt reporter construct
by using the QuickChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La
Jolla, CA). Mutagenesis primers were as follows: Vim-M1: 5¶-GCCCGCGGGTCTCCCCGTTTGACCGCAGCCCCGAGG-3¶ and its complementary strand;
Vim-M2: 5¶-Ccctcaccgcgcgaccttgcctttttcagcaccc-3¶ and its complementary
strand; Vim-M3: 5¶-Ccagggtgagcccagcttacattatcatccggaaagccc-3¶ and its complementary strand; Vim-M4: 5¶-Cgagaagcggggagggtgaacgggtggggtggggg-3¶
and its complementary strand; Vim-M5: 5¶-Cagcgccctcaacggggtccagtcc-3¶
and its complementary strand.
For reporter gene assays, cells were seeded in 24-well tissue culture
dishes. Twenty-four hours later, cells were transfected with the indicated
constructs and/or treated with 5 ng/mL TGF-h (PromoCell GmbH,
Heidelberg, Germany). Luciferase assays were done with a DLReady
Luminometer (Berthold Technologies, Bad Wildbad, Germany) and the
Dual-Luciferase-Reporter Assay System (Promega). Firefly luciferase values
were normalized to Renilla luciferase activity and were either expressed as
relative luciferase activity or as mean ‘‘fold induction’’ with respect to empty
vector control. Mean F SD values are displayed.
Northern blot and Western blot analyses. For Western blotting, the
resulting immunoprecipitates or protein extracts from pancreatic cancer
cell lines were electrophoresed through a 6% or 10% SDS-polyacrylamide
gel and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride Immobilon-P membranes
(Millipore, Billerica, MA) as described previously (15). Polyvinylidene
difluoride membranes were probed with the following antibodies: antiSmad2/3 (Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, NY, and Transduction
Laboratories, San Diego, CA), anti-Smad4 (Upstate Biotechnology), antiSp1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, CA), anti-vimentin (SigmaAldrich, Saint Louis, MO), anti–phospho-Smad3 (Cell Signaling Technology,
Beverly, MA), anti-fibronectin (Biozol, Echingen, Germany), anti–collagen-1
(Biozol), anti–E-cadherin (BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany), and anti–
h-actin antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich). Membranes were washed in TBS buffer
and then incubated with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies.
Lumi-Light Western Blotting Substrate (Roche Applied Science) was used
for visualization. For Northern blot hybridization, RNA was extracted using
the RNeasy Midi Kit (Qiagen), as indicated by the manufacturer. Northern
blots with 20 Ag of total RNA per lane were prepared and hybridized with a
32
P-labeled probe for vimentin, as described previously (8).
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis. RNA was extracted using the
RNeasy Midi Kit (Qiagen), and first-strand cDNA was synthesized from
10 Ag total RNA using random primers and Superscript II reverse
transcriptase (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). The quantitative
PCR analysis was done using an ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detector System
and the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix kit (Applied Biosystems, Wellesley,
MA), according to the manufacturer’s suggestions. The quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR was done with sequence-specific primer pairs determined with the PrimerExpress program (Applied Biosystems). Cyclophilin A
was used as a housekeeping gene. The following primer pairs were used:
vimentin forward 5¶-gccatcaacaccgagttgaag-3¶, vimentin reverse 5¶-cgatgtagttggcgaagcg-3¶; fibronectin forward 5¶-gccatcaacaccgagttgaag-3¶, fibronectin
reverse 5¶-caacggcataatgggaaactg-3¶; COL1A1 forward 5¶-tgtcttgatgtgtcaccggg-3¶, COL1A1 reverse 5¶-caccccacccatcacatagat-3¶; E-cadherin forward
5¶-acagacatgagccactgcacc-3¶, E-cadherin reverse 5¶-cgatggagcgaaactgtctctta-3¶; cyclophilin A forward 5¶-atggtcaaccccaccgtgt-3¶ and cyclophilin A
reverse 5¶-tctgctgtctttgggaccttgtc-3¶.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Chromatin immunoprecipitation. The chromatin immunoprecipitation was done with Panc-1 cells treated with TGF-h for 3 h. Cells were
cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at 37jC, harvested in SDS
lysis buffer (Upstate Biotechnology), and DNA was shared to fragments of
500 bp by sonication. Antibodies against Smad3 and Sp1 were added to
each aliquot of precleared chromatin and incubated overnight. Protein G
agarose beads were added and incubated for 1.5 h at 4jC. After reversing
the cross-links, DNA was isolated and used for PCR reactions. The primer
set 5¶-CCCCCACCCCGCGTTCCAATCT-3¶ and 5¶-GCGCCTCGAGCCTTCCTG-3¶ were used to amplify a 357-bp region of the vimentin promoter
harboring the Smad binding element and putative GC-rich Sp1 sites.
Fluorescence microscopy. Panc-1 cells were grown on chambered
cover slips and were treated with TGF-h for 48 h. Cells were subsequently
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature for 20 min and
permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100. Cells were incubated with a
monoclonal anti-vimentin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h followed by
detection with Alexa Fluor 488–labeled secondary antibodies (Molecular
Probes, Leiden, Netherlands). Filamentous actin was visualized using Alexa
Fluor 488 phalloidin (Molecular Probes). Samples were further analyzed by
fluorescence microscopy (100, numerical aperature 1,4) on an Olympus
IX71 (Olympus Germany, Hamburg, Germany) equipped with an Orca IICCD camera (Hamamtsu Photonics, Hamamtsu, Japan). Images were
analyzed using ImageJ (1.30v).3
Migration assay. Migration of Panc-1 cells was examined in a twochamber assay as described previously (8, 21). For this purpose, 1  104 cells
that were transfected with RNAi were seeded on the upper side of 24-well
Falcon cell culture inserts (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany). Cells
were treated with 5 ng/mL TGF-h. After 48 h, cells on the upper side of the
membrane were wiped off, the membranes were fixed, and migrated cells
on the lower side of the membrane were either counted or stained with
CellTiterGlo (Promega) and measured with a DLReady Luminometer
(Berthold Technologies). All migration assays were done in triplicates in at
least three independent experiments. Values are expressed as fold induction.

Results
TGF-B stimulates EMT and cell migration in pancreatic
cancer. Because the pancreatic cancer cell lines Panc-1 and IMIMPC1 lack genetic alterations within the TGF-h-Smad signaling
pathway and express Sp1, we assumed that these cell lines serve as
ideal model systems to explore the role of Sp1 in TGF-h-induced
and Smad-mediated tumor progression (22). Figure 1A confirms the
expression of Sp1 and Smads in both cell lines and shows rapid
and sustained activation of receptor-Smad3 phosphorylation upon
TGF-h stimulation. In addition, neither the Smad nor the Sp1 expression levels were affected by TGF-h treatment, even 48 h postapplication. We then examined the potential of TGF-h to stimulate
pancreatic cancer cell migration by performing Boyden chamber
assays. Figure 1B illustrates the potential of TGF-h to stimulate
pancreatic cancer cell migration. It shows a 4-fold induction of
tumor cell migration in Panc-1 cells and an approximate 6-fold
induction in IMIM-PC1 cells by TGF-h, respectively.
Furthermore, TGF-h treatment for a period of 24 h induced
an epithelial mesenchymal transdifferentiation in both cell lines,
as illustrated by the acquisition of a fibroblast-like phenotype
(Fig. 1C). On the transcriptional level, TGF-h–induced EMT was
reflected by the altered expression of the EMT-marker genes
E-cadherin, vimentin, and collagen-1 on both the mRNA and protein
level (Fig. 1D). In contrast, the expression level of fibronectin
remained unaffected by TGF-h. This suggests that TGF-h contributes to increased pancreatic cancer cell migration via transcriptional induction of a gene program that leads to EMT.

1564

3

Available at: http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sp1 in TGF-b–Induced Pancreatic Cancer Cell Migration

Figure 1. TGF-h stimulates EMT and pancreatic cancer cell migration. A, analysis of Sp1, Smad proteins, and phospho-Smad3 expression in Panc-1 and IMIM-PC1
cells following TGF-h treatment over time. B, TGF-h–mediated pancreatic cancer cell migration was measured in modified two-chamber assays. Tumor cells were
seeded on the upper side of uncoated 24-well plates, serum starved, and finally treated with or without TGF-h (5 ng/mL). Forty-eight hours later, cells were countered,
and values were expressed as fold induction as compared with untreated controls. Bars, SD. C, phase-contrast photomicrographs documenting the effect of a
48-h TGF-h treatment on cell morphology of responsive Panc-1 and IMIM-PC1 cells. D, the effects of TGF-h on EMT marker gene expression levels in Panc-1 cells.
Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR was done, and expression levels were calculated relative to basal mRNA expression levels, which were arbitrarily set to 1 for
each experiment. TGF-h–mediated changes in mRNA expression levels are shown as fold induction (left ). Western blot analysis was done 24 h posttreatment (right ).
Cells were harvested, and protein levels of EMT markers were analyzed by using anti–E-cadherin, anti–collagen-1, anti-vimentin, and anti-fibronectin antibodies.
Protein loading was controlled using anti-actin antibodies.

Sp1 is required for TGF-B–induced EMT and cancer cell
migration. Next, we analyzed the role of Sp1 in TGF-h–induced
and Smad-mediated EMT and cancer cell migration and knocked
down endogenous Sp1 by RNA interference technology. Figure 2A
shows successful siRNA-mediated silencing of Sp1 in both cell lines.
Figure 2B summarizes the results of the migration assays and
shows that repression of endogenous Sp1 reduced cancer cell
migration under unstimulated conditions and strongly diminished
the stimulatory effects of TGF-h in both cell lines (Fig. 2B). To
control for the effects on cell proliferation, we carried out
thymidine assays under conditions identical to those used in the
migration assays. To our surprise, these control experiments did
not reveal significant effects of Sp1 silencing on TGF-h–mediated
cell growth control in pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). We
therefore assumed that the results obtained from Boyden chamber
assays cannot be ascribed to a change in cellular proliferation and,
instead, reflects altered migration properties of tumor cells upon
knockdown of Sp1. Furthermore, reduced cancer cell migration
was associated with reduced EMT, as shown on the morphologic
(Fig. 2C) and the expression level (Fig. 2D). More precisely, loss of
Sp1 expression lowered the ability of TGF-h to induce a spindlelike

www.aacrjournals.org

cell shape and prevented the induction of vimentin and, to a lesser
extent, collagen I. Interestingly, other TGF-h-regulated EMT marker
genes, e.g., E-cadherin, remained unaffected by Sp1 knockdown.
These findings were confirmed by Northern blot hybridization
experiments and Western blot analysis, which showed lowered
vimentin expression following gene silencing of Sp1 (Fig. 3A and B).
Moreover, a similar expression pattern of vimentin was found in
immunofluorescence microscopy analysis of Panc-1 cells (Fig. 3C).
In control cells, the induction of vimentin expression by TGF-h was
accompanied by stress fiber formation of actin filaments and loss
of cell-cell contacts, indicating the TGF-h-mediated onset of EMT.
In contrast, however, vimentin was either absent or only slightly
expressed in Sp1 knockdown Panc-1 cells, which also failed to
undergo EMT upon TGF-h. Altogether, these results suggest that
Sp1 participates in the transcriptional regulation of vimentin and,
thus, contributes to the acquisition of a mesenchymal and highly
migrating phenotype in pancreatic cancer.
Sp1 participates in vimentin promoter induction by TGF-B.
Sequence analysis of the human vimentin promoter revealed the
presence of several putative Sp1 binding elements and a
neighboring Smad binding element (Fig. 3D, top). To examine

1565

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

how TGF-h and Sp1 achieve the concerted expression of vimentin
in pancreatic cancer cells, we carried out reporter gene assays
using a luciferase reporter gene encoding for the proximal human
vimentin promoter (vim-wt; 1416 to +73). As shown in Fig. 3D
(bottom), treatment of Panc-1 cells with TGF-h led to a 4-fold
induction of the vimentin promoter activity, indicating that TGF-h
induces vimentin expression at least in part through increased
transcription from its proximal promoter region.
We then studied the role of the TGF-h–responsive Smad proteins in vimentin promoter regulation and cotransfected receptorSmad proteins (Smad2 and Smad3) either alone or in combination
with co-Smad4 into Panc-1 cells. As shown in Fig. 4A, the introduction of Smad3 alone, but not of Smad2, resulted in a significant
transcription from the proximal vimentin promoter in Panc-1 cells.
Furthermore, an additional increase in vimentin promoter transactivation was observed following a concomitant overexpression
of Smad3 and Smad4 in Panc-1 cells. Similarly, in IMIM-PC1 cells,
the vim-wt reporter construct was highly induced by Smad3/
Smad4 heteromeric complexes (data not shown), but remained
unaffected by overexpression of Smad2.
Subsequently, we studied whether Sp1 contributes to Smad3/
Smad4-mediated transactivation of the vimentin promoter. For
this purpose, we transfected pancreatic cancer cells with hetero-

meric Smad complexes and studied their potential to induce the
vimentin promoter depending on the presence or absence of Sp1.
Again, the introduction of Smad complexes already induced the
vimentin promoter approximately 3.5 times. Moreover, additional
transfection of Sp1 greatly increased Smad-mediated transactivation (Fig. 4B), whereas siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous
Sp1 significantly, although not completely, reduced Smad-mediated
induction of the vimentin promoter (Fig. 4C). In line with our
reporter gene assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
revealed constitutive binding of Sp1 to the human vimentin
promoter and suggested that this interaction was slightly increased
upon TGF-h. In addition, Smad3 binding to the vimentin promoter
was induced by TGF-h (Fig. 4D). We then went on to analyze the
functional significance of the putative Smad binding site and
individual GC-rich Sp1 boxes in more detail and did reporter gene
assays using vimentin promoter constructs in which either the
Smad binding element or the Sp1 binding sites were individually
mutated (Fig. 5A and B). These experiments revealed impaired
Smad-mediated transactivation of the human vimentin promoter
following mutational inactivation of either the Smad binding
element (vim-M3) or the neighboring GC-rich binding site
(vim-M4). Altogether, our results indicate that Sp1 participates in
TGF-h-induced and Smad-mediated transcription from the

Figure 2. Cells were transfected with either control siRNA or Sp1 siRNA to determine Sp1 dependency of TGF-h–induced EMT and cell migration. A, Western
blot analysis to show successful Sp1 knockdown in both pancreatic cancer cell lines. Anti–h-actin antibodies served as loading control. B, cells were seeded in 24-well
chambers before treatment with TGF-h for an additional 24 h. The number of migrated cancer cells was calculated relative to basal migration levels in control
siRNA-transfected cells, which were arbitrarily set to 1 for each experiment. Values are expressed as fold induction. C, Sp1 (Sp1 siRNA )-depleted Panc-1 cells and
control (control siRNA ) cells were allowed to grow as discrete colonies before treatment with or without TGF-h for additional 24 h. The effect of Sp1 knockdown on
TGF-h–induced mesenchymal transition was evaluated by phase contrast microscopy. D, Panc-1 cells were transfected with either control siRNA or Sp1 siRNA
before treatment with TGF-h for 24 h. cDNA was prepared and subjected to quantitative reverse transcription-PCR to determine the effect of Sp1 silencing on mRNA
expression of the EMT marker genes.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1566

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sp1 in TGF-b–Induced Pancreatic Cancer Cell Migration

Figure 3. Sp1 participates in TGF-h–induced expression of vimentin. Panc-1 cells were transfected either with Sp1-siRNA or with nonspecific control siRNA.
Twenty-four hours later, cells were harvested, and total RNA or proteins were extracted to determine the expression of endogenous vimentin on both the mRNA (A )
and the protein (B ) level. Northern blot analysis was conducted using a specific 32P-labeled cDNA probe to detect vimentin. Immunoblotting was done using
anti-vimentin antibodies. Anti–h-actin antibodies were used to control for loading. C, confocal microscopy of Sp1 siRNA-transfected Panc-1 cells cultured with (+) and
without ( ) TGF-h. Note that Sp1 silencing reduces TGF-h–induced acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype and diminishes induction of vimentin. D, schematic
representation of the vimentin (vim-wt ) reporter gene construct including putative Sp1 sites (GC boxes ) and a Smad binding element (SBE ; top ). Panc-1 cells were
transiently transfected with the vim-wt reporter gene construct ( 1416 to +73) and treated with or without TGF-h for 24 h. Luciferase activity was measured, and
induction of vim-wt reporter gene activity was expressed as fold induction. Columns, mean values calculated from three independent experiments; bars, SD (bottom ).

proximal vimentin promoter. On the other hand, these findings
also propose Sp1-independent effects because neither mutation of
Sp1 binding sites nor siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous
Sp1 expression completely prevented Smad-induced activation of
the vimentin promoter.
Vimentin plays a central role in TGF-B–induced and Sp1/
Smad-mediated cell migration. The intermediate filament
vimentin, primarily recognized for its role in cytoskeleton
formation, is commonly used as a mesenchymal marker gene
to show EMT in cancer cells (23, 24). Recent studies also suggest
that vimentin, via modulation of cytoskeleton configuration, plays
a direct role in tumor cell migration during EMT (25–27). To assess
the relevance of vimentin expression in pancreatic cancer cell migration by TGF-h, we decided to employ two different approaches.
First, we knocked down endogenous vimentin in Panc-1 cells by
RNA interference and determined the remaining potential of cancer cells to respond to TGF-h with increased migration. Second,
vimentin expression was rescued in Sp1 knockdown cells to
examine whether the loss of cancer cell migration can be restored
through specific induction of vimentin. Figure 6A and B shows
successful siRNA-mediated down-regulation of basal expression
and TGF-h–induced vimentin expression on both mRNA and
protein levels. Transfection of control siRNA into Panc-1 cells did
not significantly alter the potential of cells to respond to TGF-h

www.aacrjournals.org

with increased migration. In contrast, transfection of vimentin
siRNA strongly reduced the ability of pancreatic cancer cells to
migrate through transwell membranes and almost completely
prevented TGF-h–induced cell migration (Fig. 6C). These data
clearly supported previous findings that showed a direct link
between the level of vimentin expression and the migratory
potential of epithelial cancer cells. Moreover, these results further
suggested that reduced cell migration in Sp1 knockdown
pancreatic cancer cells might particularly be caused by the loss
of endogenous vimentin expression. This hypothesis was strongly
confirmed by the outcome of our rescue experiments (Fig. 6D),
demonstrating that reexpression of vimentin completely restores
basal and TGF-h–induced migration of pancreatic cancer cells,
even in the absence of Sp1.

Discussion
Cell-type–dependent interaction with partnering transcription
factors defines Smad target gene selection and, thus, determines
the functional response of a cell to TGF-h (28, 29). In normal
epithelial cells, numerous transcriptional binding partners
have been discovered that cooperate with the Smads to regulate
the transcription of specific target genes involved in cell
growth inhibition, apoptosis, and wound healing (28). During

1567

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Sp1 and Smads cooperate in
TGF-h–induced transcription from the
human vimentin promoter. A, Panc-1 cells
were individually or collectively transfected
with Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4
expression constructs together with the
vim-wt reporter construct. Luciferase
activity was measured, and induction of
vim-wt reporter gene activity was
expressed as fold induction. B, Panc-1
cells were cotransfected with heteromeric
Smad3-Smad4 complexes alone or in
combination with Sp1 together with the
Vim-wt reporter. C, Panc-1 cells were
transfected with either specific Sp1 siRNA
or nonspecific control siRNA. Twenty-four
hours later, cells were additionally
transfected with Smad3-Smad4
complexes, and the effect of Sp1 depletion
on Smad mediated vim-wt promoter
induction was determined. D, Panc-1 cells
were left untreated ( ) or treated (+)
with TGF-h for 3 h, chromatin
immunoprecipitations were done with
either anti-immunoglobulin G, anti-Smad3,
or anti-Sp1 antibodies, and PCR was done
with specific primers to amplify a 357-bp
region of the vimentin promoter harboring
the Smad binding element and putative
GC-rich Sp1 sites.

carcinogenesis, however, the set of active Smad transcriptional
partner proteins changes in a way that TGF-h target gene selection
is directed towards a promalignant outcome. Sp1, the founding
member of the Sp1/KLF-like family of zinc-finger transcription
factors, is appreciated as one such oncogenic Smad partner
protein involved in TGF-h–mediated gene expression during
cancer progression (13, 30–32). It has been shown, for instance,
that Sp1 and Smad proteins form transcriptional complexes at
specific promoter binding regions and together determine target
gene specificity during cell proliferation, survival, and angiogenesis
(31–34). This is also true for late-stage pancreatic cancer, where
highly expressed Sp1 interacts with activated Smad complexes to
regulate the expression levels of distinct tumor-promoting genes
(13). The motivation of this study has been to investigate whether
Sp1 participates in TGF-h–induced gene regulation during EMT,
a hallmark of cancer cell migration (35). We previously showed

that a functional Smad signaling pathway is required for TGF-h–
induced EMT, and that genetic inactivation of individual Smads
protects pancreatic cancer cells from the acquisition of a migrating
mesenchymal phenotype (8). Here, we show that, in addition to the
Smads, Sp1 is an essential player in this central aspect of TGF-h
tumor progression, and that functional cooperation between both
effector transcriptional regulators is required for sufficient induction of EMT and the resulting tumor cell migration. In particular,
we show here that siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous Sp1
prevents the acquisition of a spindle-shape cell morphology, stabilizes cell-cell contacts, and reduces migration of pancreatic cancer
cells upon TGF-h. These impressive effects of Sp1 knockdown on
cancer cell architecture and function are accompanied by profound changes in TGF-h–regulated gene expression. Although
TGF-h treatment of responsive pancreatic cancer cells induces
sustained activation of EMT-defining genes, silencing of Sp1

Figure 5. A, schematic representation of
the wild-type vimentin promoter (vim-wt)
and the mutation constructs (M1–M5)
used in reporter gene assays. The Smad
binding element and the GC-rich Sp1
boxes (A–D) of the proximal vimentin
promoter were individually mutated in the
context of the vimentin luciferase reporter
plasmid. B, Panc-1 cells were transiently
transfected with either the wild-type
vimentin promoter reporter construct
(vim-wt) or the mutants (M1–M5) and in the
presence or absence of Smads. Firefly
luciferase activity was measured 24 h
posttransfection and normalized to
Renilla luciferase controls. Basal levels in
the absence of Smad were arbitrarily set
to 1 for each experiment. Reporter gene
activities are expressed as fold activation
by the Smads relative to controls.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1568

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sp1 in TGF-b–Induced Pancreatic Cancer Cell Migration

Figure 6. Vimentin plays a central role in TGF-h–induced pancreatic cancer cell migration. Panc-1 cells were transiently transfected with nonspecific control siRNA or a
siRNA sequence directed against human vimentin. (A) Northern blot and (B ) Western blot hybridizations were done to confirm successful down-regulation of
endogenous vimentin in Panc-1 cells. C, controls and vimentin knockdown cells were seeded in 24-well Boyden chambers before treatment with TGF-h for an additional
24 h. The number of migrated cancer cells was calculated relative to basal migration levels in control siRNA-transfected cells, which were arbitrarily set to 1 for
each experiment. Note that down-regulation of vimentin significantly lowered the ability of pancreatic cancer cells to respond to TGF-h with increased migration.
D, expression of endogenous vimentin was restored in Sp1 knockdown cells to study the relevance of vimentin in Sp1-mediated cancer cell migration upon TGF-h.
For this purpose, control cells and Sp1-depleted cells were transfected with a vimentin expression vector before treatment with TGF-h. Twenty-four hours
posttreatment, migrated cells were countered, and values were calculated relative to basal migration levels of control siRNA-transfected Panc-1 cells. Vimentin
expression levels were monitored by Western blot analysis using anti-vimentin antibodies.

completely abolishes Smad-induced de novo expression of the
mesenchymal type III intermediate filament vimentin. Our biochemical and functional analyses indicate that TGF-h up-regulates
vimentin expression primarily on the level of promoter regulation,
and that maximal promoter stimulation by TGF-h requires
functional cooperation between Sp1 and activated Smad complexes.
Moreover, our studies further revealed that transcriptional induction of vimentin is a key step in TGF-h–induced pancreatic cancer
cell migration. In fact, whereas loss of vimentin expression in Sp1
knockdown cells is ultimately associated with reduced cell
migration, its reexpression causes complete restoration of pancreatic cancer cell motility, even in the absence of Sp1. Thus, induction
of vimentin is required for TGF-h–induced cell migration during
pancreatic carcinogenesis. In line with our findings, recent studies
also suggested a role for vimentin in tumor cell migration and, in
addition, provided first mechanistical insights (27, 36, 37). Most
interestingly, vimentin has been identified as a mechanical
transducer between cell surface integrins and the nucleus and,
thus, potentially controls cell migration through the regulation of
cell adhesion stability (38–43). Future work will be required to
elucidate whether this mechanism applies to TGF-h–induced cell
migration during pancreatic carcinogenesis.

www.aacrjournals.org

Altogether, our study proposes a model in which Sp1 partners
with Smads to induce vimentin expression during EMT and to
stimulate pancreatic cancer cell migration upon TGF-h. We were
able to show that (a) Sp1 is required for TGF-h–induced and Smadmediated EMT and the resulting ability of pancreatic cancer cells to
migrate; (b) Sp1 cooperates with activated Smad complexes in
TGF-h-induced expression of the EMT-associated marker gene
product vimentin; and (c) vimentin itself contributes to pancreatic
cancer cell migration upon TGF-h. Our study thus provides new
insights into the transcriptional regulation of TGF-h–induced EMT
and cancer cell migration and might help to better understand the
role of Sp1 in this central aspect of pancreatic cancer progression.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/8/2006; revised 9/23/2006; accepted 12/7/2006.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We gratefully thank J.M. Foidart for the vimentin reporter construct (Vim-wt),
Joan Massague (Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY) for the FLAG-Smad4
construct, R. Derynck (Department of Growth and Development and Department of
Anatomy, University of California–San Francisco, San Francisco, CA) for the FLAGSmad3 construct, and L. Choy (Department of Growth and Development Department
of Anatomy, University of California–San Francisco, San Francisco, CA) for the FLAGSmad2 construct.

1569

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

1. de Caestecker MP, Piek E, Roberts AB. Role of
transforming growth factor-h signaling in cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2001;92:1388–402.
2. Roberts AB, Wakefield LM. The two faces of transforming growth factor h in carcinogenesis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:8621–3.
3. Bates RC, Mercurio AM. The epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and colorectal cancer progression.
Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:365–70.
4. Zavadil J, Böttinger E. TGF-h and epithelial-tomesenchymal transitions. Oncogene 2005;24:5764–74.
5. Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in development and pathologies. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2003;15:
740–6.
6. Thiery JP, Sleemnan JP. Complex networks orchestrate
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2006;7:131–42.
7. Tarin D, Thompson EW, Newgreen DF. The fallacy of
epithelial mesenchymal transition in neoplasia. Cancer
Res 2005;65:5996–6000.
8. Ellenrieder V, Hendler S, Boeck W, et al. TGF-h
treatment leads to epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation of pancreatic cancer cells requiring extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 activation. Cancer Res
2001;15:4222–8.
9. Massague J, Seoane J, Wotton D. Smad transcription
factors. Genes Dev 2005;19:2783–810.
10. ten Dijke P, Hill CS. New insights into TGF-h-Smad
signalling. Trends Biochem Sci 2004;29:265–73.
11. Derynck R, Zhang YE. Smad-dependent and Smdindependent pathways in TGF-h family signalling.
Nature 2003;425:577–84.
12. Miyazono K, Maeda S, Imamura T. Coordinate
regulation of cell growth and differentiation by TGF-h
superfamily and Runx proteins. Oncogene 2004;23:
4232–7.
13. Jungert K, Buck A, Buchholz M, et al. Smad-Sp1
complexes mediate TGF-h-induced early transcription
of oncogenic Smad7 in pancreatic cancer cells. Carcinogenesis 2006 May 19. Epub ahead of print.
14. Ellenrieder V, Buck A, Gress TM. TGF-h regulated
transcriptional mechanisms in cancer. Int J Gastrointest
Cancer 2002;31:61–9.
15. Ellenrieder V, Buck A, Harth A, et al. KLF11 mediates
a critical mechanism in TGF-h signaling that is
inactivated by Erk-MAPK in pancreatic cancer cells.
Gastroenterology 2004;127:607–20.
16. Ellenrieder V, Zhang JS, Kaczynski J, Urrutia R.

Signaling disrupts mSin3A binding to the Mad1-like
Sin3-interacting domain of TIEG2, an Sp1-like repressor.
EMBO J 2002;21:2451–60.
17. Fernandez-Zapico ME, Mladek A, Ellenrieder V,
Folch-Puy E, Miller L, Urrutia R. An mSin3A interaction
domain links the transcriptional activity of KLF11 with
its role in growth regulation. EMBO J 2003;22:4748–58.
18. Safe S, Abdelrahim M. Sp transcription factor family
and its role in cancer. Eur J Cancer 2005;41:2438–48.
19. Black AR, Black JD, Azizkhan-Clifford J. Sp1 and
krüppel-like factor family of transcription factors in cell
growth regulation and cancer. J Cell Physiol 2001;188:
143–60.
20. Abdelrahim M, Smith R III, Burghardt R, Safe S. Role
of Sp proteins in regulation of vascular endothelial
growth factor expression and proliferation of pancreatic
cancer cells. Cancer Res 2004;64:6740–9.
21. Ellenrieder V, Hendler SF, Ruhland C, Boeck W, Adler
G, Gress TM. TGF-h–induced invasiveness of pancreatic
cancer cells is mediated by matrix metalloproteinase-2
and the urokinase plasminogen activator system. Int
J Cancer 2001;93:204–11.
22. Wenger C, Ellenrieder V, Alber B, et al. Expression
and differential regulation of connective tissue growth
factor in pancreatic cancer cells. Oncogene 1999;18:
1073–80.
23. Steinert PM, Steven AC, Roop DR. The molecular
biology of intermediate filaments. Cell 1985;42:411–20.
24. Hay ED. An overview of epithelial-mesenchymal
transformation. Acta Anat 1995;54:8–20.
25. Gilles C, Polette M, Zahm JM, et al. Vimentin
contributes to human mammary epithelial cell migration. J Cell Sci 1999;112:4615–25.
26. Sheng S, Carey J, Seftor EA, Dias L, Hendrix MJ, Sager
R. Role of intermediate filaments in migration, invasion
and metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev 1996;15:507–25.
27. Singh S, Sadacharan S, Su S, Belldegrun A, Persad S,
Singh G. Overexpression of vimentin: role in the invasive
phenotype in an androgen-independent model of
prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2003;63:2306–11.
28. Itoh S, Itoh F, Goumans MJ, Ten Dijke P. Signaling of
transforming growth factor-h family members through
Smad proteins. Eur J Biochem 2000;267:6954–67.
29. Massague J. How cells read TGF-h-signal. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2000;1:169–78.
30. Wagner K, Peters M, Scholz A, et al. Activin A stimulates vascular endothelial growth factor gene transcription in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Gastroenterology 2004;126:1828–43.
31. Moustakas A, Pardali K, Gaal A, Heldin CH.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1570

References

Mechanisms of TGF-h signalling in regulation of cell
growth and differentiation. Immunol Lett 2002;82:85–91.
32. Datta PK, Blake MC, Moses HL. Regulation of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 expression by transforming growth factor-h–induced physical and functional interactions between Smads and Sp1. J Biol Chem
2000;275:40014–9.
33. Benckert C, Lonas S, Cramer T, et al. TGF-h
stimulates VEGF transcription in human cholangiocellular carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 2003;63:1083–92.
34. Ishibashi H, Nakagawa K, Onimaru M, et al. Sp1
decoy transfected to carcinoma cells suppresses the
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor, transforming growth factor h1, and tissue factor and also cell
growth and invasion activities. Cancer Res 2000;60:
6531–6.
35. Kang Y, Massague J. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions: twist in development and metastasis. Cell 2004;
118:277–9.
36. Eckes B, Dogic D, Colucci-Guyon E, et al. Impaired
mechanical stability, migration and contractile capacity
in vimentin-deficient fibroblasts. J Cell Sci 1998;111:
1897–907.
37. Birchmeier C, Birchmeier W, Brand-Saberi B. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in cancer progression.
Acta Anat 1996;156:217–26.
38. Izmailova E, Wieczorek ES, Perkins EB, Zehner ZE.
A GC-box is required for expression of the human
vimentin gene. Gene 1999;235:69–75.
39. Zhang X, Diab IH, Zehner ZE. ZBP-89 represses
vimentin gene transcription by interacting with the
transcriptional activator, Sp1. Nucleic Acids Res 2003;31:
2900–14.
40. Ingber DE, Dike L, Hansen L, et al. Cellular
tensegrity: exploring how mechanical changes in the
cytoskeleton regulate cell growth, migration, and tissue
pattern during morphogenesis. Int Rev Cytol 1994;150:
173–224.
41. Eckes B, Dogic D, Aumailley M, et al. Impaired
mechanical stability, migration and contractile capacity
in vimentin-deficient fibroblasts. J Cell Sci 1998;111:
1897–907.
42. Seifert GJ, Lawson D, Wiche G. Immunolocalization
of the intermediate filament-associated protein plectin
at focal contacts and actin stress fibers. Eur J Cell Biol
1992;59:138–47.
43. Tsuruta D, Jones JC. The vimentin cytoskeleton
regulates focal contact size and adhesion of endothelial cells subjected to shear stress. J Cell Sci 2003;116:
4977–84.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sp1 Is Required for Transforming Growth Factor-β−Induced
Mesenchymal Transition and Migration in Pancreatic Cancer
Cells
Kerstin Jungert, Anita Buck, Götz von Wichert, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:1563-1570.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1563

This article cites 40 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1563.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 14 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1563.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

