Original Article

A Prospective Surveillance Model for Physical Rehabilitation of
Women With Breast Cancer*
Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy
Michael D. Stubblefield, MD1,2,3; Margaret L. McNeely, PT, PhD4; Catherine M. Alfano, PhD5;
and Deborah K. Mayer, PhD, RN, AOCN6

Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) results from damage to or dysfunction of the peripheral nerves. The development of CIPN is anticipated for the majority of breast cancer patients who receive neurotoxic chemotherapy, depending on the agent
used, dose, and schedule. Sensory symptoms often predominate and include numbness, tingling, and distal extremity pain. Weakness,
gait impairment, loss of functional abilities, and other deficits may develop with more severe CIPN. This article outlines a prospective
surveillance model for physical rehabilitation of women with breast cancer who develop CIPN. Rehabilitative efforts for CIPN start at
the time of breast cancer diagnosis and treatment planning. The prechemotherapy evaluation identifies patients with preexisting peripheral nervous system disorders that may place them at higher risk for the development of CIPN. This clinical evaluation should
include a history focusing on symptoms and functional activities as well as a physical examination that objectively assesses the
patient’s strength, sensation, reflexes, and gait. Ongoing surveillance following the initiation of a neurotoxic agent is important to
monitor for the development and progression of symptoms associated with CIPN, and to ensure its resolution over the long term.
CIPN is managed best by a multidisciplinary team approach. Early identification of symptoms will ensure appropriate referral and
timely symptom management. The prospective surveillance model promotes a patient-centered approach to care, from pretreatment
through survivorship and palliative care. In this way, the model offers promise in addressing and minimizing both the acute and longC 2012 American Cancer Society.
term morbidity associated with CIPN. Cancer 2012;118(8 suppl):2250–60. V
KEYWORDS: cancer, rehabilitation, survivorship, neuropathy, chemotherapy, radiculopathy, brachial plexopathy, breast cancer,
surveillance, pain, palliative care.

There are an estimated 2.8 million breast cancer survivors in the United States, representing by far the largest proportion
(44%) of female cancer survivors.1 With 41% of new cases diagnosed in women aged 65 and older, and overall 5-year survival rates nearing 90%, (98% for localized tumors), the number of breast cancer survivors is expected to increase dramatically in future years.1 Although the high rate of women surviving for years beyond their breast cancer is encouraging, it
also means that more of them are living with the chronic and late effects of cancer treatment or with advanced disease.
This article outlines a prospective surveillance model for physical rehabilitation of women with breast cancer who develop
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN). To adopt this model, it is imperative that clinicians understand
the importance of identifying patients with preexisting peripheral nervous system (PNS) disorders that may place them at
higher risk for the development of CIPN when challenged with neurotoxic chemotherapy and the other disorders that
mimic CIPN.
CIPN results from damage to or dysfunction of the peripheral nerves that connect the brain and spinal cord with the
rest of the body. These nerves include the motor, sensory, and autonomic nerves. The symptoms experienced by a breast
cancer survivor will vary depending on which of these types of nerves are affected and how severely. Many women present
Corresponding author: Michael D. Stubblefield, MD, Sillerman Center for Rehabilitation, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 515 Madison Avenue, 5th
Floor, New York, NY 10022; Fax: (646) 888-1910; stubblem@mskcc.org
1
Department of Neurology, Rehabilitation Medicine Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York; 2Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York; 3Sillerman Center for Rehabilitation, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York; 4Department of Physical Therapy and Oncology, University of Alberta and Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; 5Office of Cancer Survivorship, Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute/National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; 6School of Nursing, University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina

The articles in this supplement were commissioned based on presentations and deliberations at a Roundtable Meeting on a Prospective Model of Care for Breast
Cancer Rehabilitation, held February 24-25, 2011, at the American Cancer Society National Home Office, in Atlanta, Georgia.
The opinions or views expressed in this supplement are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or recommendations of the editors or
the American Cancer Society.
*A Prospective Surveillance Model for Rehabilitation for Women with Breast Cancer, Supplement to Cancer.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27463, Received: October 17, 2011; Revised: September 14, 2011; Accepted: November 7, 2011, Published online April 6, 2012 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2250

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Neuropathy in Breast Cancer/Stubblefield et al

with sensory symptoms such as numbness, tingling (one
type of paresthesia; a spontaneous or evoked abnormal
sensation that is not unpleasant or painful), cold sensitivity, or the sense that they are wearing gloves and stockings,
whereas others report varying degrees of pain. Pain often
includes dysesthesias (a spontaneous or evoked abnormal
unpleasant sensation) or allodynia (what should be normal
touch perceived as painful) and can be described as
burning, freezing, lancinating, shock-like, or electric in
nature.2 Autonomic nerve involvement can result in diarrhea or constipation, orthostatic symptoms, and irregular
heartbeat. Less commonly, women may report motor
problems including lower limb weakness, impaired proprioception, and functional impairments that compromise the ability to walk or carry items, increase falls,
interfere with activities of daily living (ADLs), and
decrease quality of life.2 In some cases, CIPN can be a
dose-limiting factor for certain chemotherapeutics or
delay treatment, thereby influencing survival.2,3
The incidence of CIPN in women receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer is not well-established, because
there is no gold standard method of assessment.4,5 The
neurotoxic chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in
the treatment of early stage or advanced breast cancer
include the taxanes (paclitaxel, docetaxel), the vinca alkaloids (vinorelbine), the platinum analogues (cisplatin, carboplatin), and the antimetabolites (capecitabine).3,6,7 At
present, taxanes are the only neurotoxic chemotherapeutic
routinely used in the neoadjuvant and adjuvant setting.
Ongoing investigation into the use of platinum-based regimens in the treatment of triple-negative breast cancers (a
subgroup that do not express the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, or human epidermal growth factor
receptor type 2) has shown promise.8,9 Otherwise, the
neurotoxins are relegated to the treatment of metastatic
breast cancer.
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network convened a task force to guide the management of neuropathy
in cancer.2 Their report reviews the incidence of CIPN
across studies; although these incidence estimates are
based on survivors of breast and other cancers, the magnitude of the difference in incidence among the agents is instructive. Among the taxanes, the incidence of CIPN
among those treated with paclitaxel is high (57%-83%
overall; 2%-33% severe), whereas estimates associated
with docetaxel are more variable (11%-64% overall; 3%14% severe). The incidence of CIPN among those treated
with vinca alkaloids ranges from 30% to 47%, whereas
the incidence among those treated with cisplatin ranges
from 28% to 100%. The risk of CIPN with administraCancer

April 15, 2012

tion of capecitabine alone is unknown; however, the incidence of CIPN associated with capecitabine in
combination with the microtubulin-targeting agent ixabepilone is 67% (21% severe).2 A combination of paclitaxel
and carboplatin caused CIPN in 67% of patients with
solid tumors in a small, prospective study.10
More research elucidating the risk factors for the development of CIPN is needed to aid clinicians in identifying those individuals at highest risk for acute and chronic
syndromes. Many cancer survivors may be predisposed to
the development of neuropathy or neuropathic symptoms
from non–cancer related PNS disorders. For example,
age, diabetes, alcohol use, and nonalcoholic liver disease
are associated with increased risk for neuropathy independent of cancer.11 Patients with the hereditary neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth are poorly tolerant of
neurotoxic chemotherapeutics including vincristine and
paclitaxel.12,13 Similarly, the presence of diabetes mellitus
has the potential to increase the risk not only of CIPN but
also autonomic neuropathy in patients who are challenged
with neurotoxic chemotherapy.14–17 A history of prior
exposure to neurotoxic chemotherapy also likely predisposes the patient to the development of neurotoxicity
when they are challenged with additional neurotoxic
chemotherapy.18–20 Although little supportive evidence is
available in the literature, degenerative disorders such as
nerve root compression from lumbar spinal stenosis and
carpal tunnel syndrome (median mononeuropathy at the
wrist) may manifest or worsen clinically when patients
are exposed to neurotoxic chemotherapeutics. To an
untrained clinician, such disorders can mimic a CIPN, or
a more severe neuropathy than the patient in fact has.
With taxane-based chemotherapy, the onset of
CIPN symptoms often involves acute tingling in the fingertips and toes occurring within 24 hours of infusion.21
The severity of neuropathy increases with the dose and
duration (number of cycles) of exposure.22 This pattern
is similar for vinca alkaloids with the exception of the
rare occurrence of coasting phenomenon, where the neuropathy can worsen weeks to months after exposure.3
The coasting phenomenon is more common with the
platinum analogues, particularly cisplatin.3 Capecitabine is associated with a small-fiber neuropathy.6 For
most cancer survivors, these symptoms subside in weeks
to months. Some patients, however, face long-term
problems related to CIPN. For example, in one study of
breast cancer survivors treated on average 9 years prior
with paclitaxel, 27% diagnosed with CIPN during treatment had progressed to have a posttreatment neuropathic pain syndrome.23
2251

Original Article

BREAST CANCER DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT PLANNING
Diagnosis of Neuropathy
Baseline assessment

Rehabilitative efforts start with breast cancer diagnosis and treatment planning. Figure 1 outlines a neuropathy assessment algorithm for assessment of breast cancer
patients before and during administration of neurotoxic
chemotherapy. Preexisting or subclinical neuromuscular
and other disorders that are likely to manifest or worsen
during the course of breast cancer treatment should be
identified. In those instances where the etiology of signs
and symptoms are not apparent, they should be clarified
with further investigation as appropriate. Patients should
be educated about any preexisting nerve dysfunction that
is identified and counseled on the possibility of their
developing nerve dysfunction with certain chemotherapeutic agents. Furthermore, they should be assured that
they will be followed closely for, among other things, the
development of CIPN.
The presence of PNS disorders such as polyneuropathy from diabetes or other causes, radiculopathy from
spinal stenosis, plexopathy, mononeuropathy (ie, carpal
tunnel syndrome, peroneal neuropathy), hereditary neuropathies, and so forth, should be identified prior to initiation of neurotoxic chemotherapy. These disorders often
have subtle or subclinical signs and symptoms that may
worsen significantly when challenged with neurotoxic
chemotherapy. Such knowledge may prompt the treating
oncologist to choose a neurotoxin-sparing regimen such
as cyclophosphamide/methotrexate/fluorouracil (CMF)
instead of docetaxel/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (TAC),
if they consider the oncologic outcome to be equivalent.7
Many of these disorders are quite common. Diabetic
peripheral neuropathy, for instance, may affect 50% of
people with diabetes mellitus and cause neuropathic pain
in 11%.24 Distal symmetric polyneuropathy has an overall prevalence of 2400 per 100,000 (2.4%) in the general population but rises to 8000 per 100,000 (8%) in
individuals older than 55 years of age.25,26 In one study,
the reported annual incidence of lumbar spinal stenosis
was approximately 5 cases per 100,000 with 58% of these
patients having claudication, 35% radicular pain, and 7%
mixed symptoms.27
The diagnosis of neuropathy and PNS starts with a
clinical evaluation that includes a baseline history and
physical evaluation. A major focus of the prechemotherapy assessment should be to identify PNS dysfunction. In
addition, determination of the etiology of PNS pathology
is critically important, because many disorders are treat2252

able (ie, diabetes mellitus, chronic idiopathic demyelinating polyneuropathy) or even potentially reversible (ie,
vitamin B12 deficiency).28–30 The basic components of
the baseline clinical evaluation, including a baseline history and physical examination, are outlined in Figure 1.
In the majority of cases, no evidence of PNS dysfunction will be present on baseline assessment, and
patients will receive chemotherapy at the discretion of
their treating oncologist. For patients who exhibit signs
and symptoms of PNS dysfunction, a comprehensive
assessment by a physician (neurologist or rehabilitation
medicine specialist/physiatrist) with specialized training
in neuromuscular medicine (ie, certified by the American
Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine) should be considered (Fig. 1). The combination of medical history, neurologic examination, electrodiagnostic studies, and basic
laboratory testing will yield an etiologic diagnosis in 74%
to 82% of patients with polyneuropathy.30 If other disorders are suspected, the neuromuscular specialist can
help guide additional laboratory testing, muscle or nerve
biopsy, and imaging as appropriate. In addition, the neuromuscular specialist may offer valuable insights and assistance in managing neurologic deficits should they worsen
during the course of therapy.
Assessment during chemotherapy

The development of mild to moderate signs and
symptoms of CIPN is an anticipated consequence of
exposure to neurotoxic chemotherapy for many, if not
most, breast cancer patients in the adjuvant and neoadjuvant setting based on the incidence data presented above
(57%-83% overall; 2%-33% severe for paclitaxel).2 Susceptibility and severity will depend on multiple factors
including the patients comorbidities, the specific agent
used, as well as the dose and schedule of administration.3
As with the prechemotherapy evaluation, a clinical evaluation by the treating oncologist or nurse practitioner that
includes a history focusing on symptoms (pain, numbness, paresthesias) and functional activities (gait, ADLs) as
well as a physical examination by a physical therapist that
objectively assesses the patient’s strength, sensation, reflexes,
gait, and so forth, should determine if CIPN is developing.
Such an assessment should be performed every 2 weeks or
prior to each cycle of chemotherapy during the course of
treatment if the patient reports symptoms of CIPN.
Many tools have been developed to assess CIPN.31
The current scales suffer from poor interobserver reliability and tend to underestimate and underreport the severity
and frequency of CIPN, particularly subjective symptoms
such as fatigue and numbness.31 The most commonly
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Neuropathy in Breast Cancer/Stubblefield et al

Figure 1. Diagram shows neuropathy assessment algorithm used before and during administration of neurotoxic chemotherapy
for breast cancer.

used tool to assess CIPN in clinical oncology is the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)
scale developed by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group and the National Cancer Institute. The most
recent version 4.03 was released in 2010 and is available
at http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html. The
CTCAE version 4.03 defines grade 1 paresthesias as mild
symptoms; grade 2 as moderate symptoms that limit
instrumental ADLs; and grade 3 as severe symptoms limiting self-care ADLs.32 Neurotoxic chemotherapy adjustments or delays may occur with the onset of grade 2
neurotoxicity. Table 1 lists the CTCAE version 4.03 definition and grading of peripheral motor and sensory neuropathy as well as radiculitis and brachial plexopathy. The
definitions of instrumental and self-care ADLs from the
document are also provided. Disorders of the nerve root
(radiculitis) and plexus (brachial plexopathy) are listed,
because these disorders, like others of the PNS, are prone
Cancer

April 15, 2012

to misdiagnosis as neuropathy by inexperienced observers,
and the definitions provided in CTCAE version 4.03 offer
little clarity. For instance, the definition of brachial plexopathy includes the terms ‘‘marked discomfort’’ and ‘‘limited movement in the arm or hand.’’ In fact, early brachial
plexopathy can present as vague paresthesias in the hand
that can present during treatment and mimic a CIPN,
save for its distribution.
Patients who develop mild (CTCAE version 4.03
grade 1) symptoms of CIPN generally require no special
treatment in terms of neuromuscular intervention or evaluation. Often, their symptoms will resolve in time, usually
within several weeks to months. Such patients should be
referred for an early rehabilitation assessment to initiate
an exercise program to prevent other morbidity such as
upper extremity range-of-motion deficits. By the CTCAE
version 4.03 definition, patients with grade 2 (moderate)
motor or sensory neuropathy have limitations in their
2253

Original Article
Table 1. Peripheral Nervous System Disorders and Their Definitions From the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events,
Version4.0312

Adverse Event

Paresthesia : A disorder characterized
by functional disturbances of
sensory neurons resulting in
abnormal cutaneous sensations of
tingling, numbness, pressure,
cold, and warmth that are
experienced in the absence
of a stimulus.
Peripheral motor neuropathy: A disorder
characterized by inflammation
or degeneration of the peripheral
motor nerves.
Peripheral sensory neuropathy:
A disorder characterized by
inflammation or degeneration
of the peripheral sensory nerves.
Radiculitis: A disorder characterized
by inflammation involving a nerve
root. Patients experience marked
discomfort radiating along a nerve
path because of spinal pressure
on the connecting nerve root.
Brachial plexopathy: A disorder
characterized by regional
paresthesia of the brachial plexus,
marked discomfort and muscle
weakness, and limited movement
in the arm or hand.

Grade
1

2

3

Mild symptoms

Moderate symptoms;
limiting instrumental
ADLs

Severe symptoms;
limiting self-care
ADLs

Asymptomatic; clinical or
diagnostic observations
only; intervention
not indicated
Asymptomatic; loss of
deep tendon reflexes
or paresthesia

Moderate symptoms;
limiting instrumental
ADLs

Severe symptoms;
limiting self-care
ADLs; assistive
device indicated
Severe pain; limiting
self-care ADLs

Moderate pain; limiting
instrumental ADLs

Mild symptoms

Moderate symptoms;
limiting instrumental
ADLs; medical
intervention indicated

Severe symptoms;
limiting self-care
ADLs

Asymptomatic; clinical or
diagnostic observations
only; intervention
not indicated

Moderate symptoms;
limiting instrumental
ADLs

Severe symptoms;
limiting self-care
ADLs

4

5

Life-threatening
consequences;
urgent intervention
indicated
Life-threatening
consequences;
urgent intervention
indicated
Life-threatening
consequences;
urgent intervention
indicated

Death

–

Death

Death

–

ADLs indicates activities of daily living.
Instrumental ADLs refer to preparing meals, shopping for groceries or clothes, using the telephone, managing money, and so forth.
Self-care ADLs refer to bathing, dressing, and undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking medications, and not bedridden.

instrumental ADLs (preparing meals, shopping for groceries or clothes, using the telephone, managing money).
Patients with grade 3 (severe) motor or sensory neuropathy have limitations in their self-care ADLs (bathing,
dressing and undressing, feeding self, toileting, taking
medications) but are not bedridden. Grade 2 and 3 CIPN
represent significant functional limitation and require
urgent rehabilitation intervention to address pain control
and functional restoration. It is our strong recommendation that any patient with pain or functional impairment
(decreased ADLs or self-care) should have their pain
addressed and be immediately referred for rehabilitation
services for functional restoration.

patients should be educated on early signs and symptoms
of CIPN and the need for reporting of symptoms to the
health care team.34 Education should also include counseling of strategies for managing symptoms of CIPN
(Table 2). An evidence-based review of interventions for
CIPN highlighted the importance of patient education to
reduce the risk of injury and falling.35 Recommendations
included teaching the importance of vision as a compensatory strategy to maintain balance, as well as providing
instruction in proper skin care, home modification to
improve safety, and strategies to minimize effects due to
autonomic dysfunction.35
Medication

Treatment of Neuropathy
Education

In patients undergoing neurotoxic cancer treatments, symptoms of CIPN may develop rapidly, leaving
the patient little time to adapt.33 Early detection and
timely intervention are paramount in maintaining a
patient’s safety and functional independence. Thus,
2254

Currently, there are no medications that can prevent
or reverse CIPN. Contemporary strategies target positive
symptoms (those occurring as a result of abnormal evoked
or spontaneous neural activity) such as paresthesias and
dysesthesia. These symptoms are often painful or uncomfortable for the patient. Negative neuropathic symptoms
such as numbness or weakness cannot be reversed by
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Neuropathy in Breast Cancer/Stubblefield et al

Table 2. Strategies for Managing Symptoms Associated With
Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy

Symptom

Strategy

Dizziness

 Change positions slowly to allow the body
time to adjust2,63
 Sit or lie down promptly if dizzy, get up
slowly once the dizziness goes away63
 Dangle feet over the edge of your bed for
about 20 to 30 seconds before getting up63
 Before standing up from sitting, wiggle
toes and perform ankle circles63
 Wait for a few seconds after standing up
before moving away from support or chair63
 Use vision to compensate for loss of
sensation in feet and hands35
 Wear good fitting, stable footwear with
good grip under surface35
 Pay close attention to walking surfaces35
 Balance and gait retraining by a
physical therapist2
 Inspect hands and feet daily for
wounds or blisters35
 Eat foods and beverages at room
temperature36
 Avoid drinks with ice cubes and cold
foods such as ice cream36
 Wear gloves or oven mitts when handling
items from the fridge or freezer36
 Wear appropriate winter clothing such as
warm socks, gloves, scarves, and caps36

Falls prevention

Skin protection
Cold-induced
sensitivity

medications but may improve spontaneously with time,
physical or occupational therapy, and other modalities
(Fig. 2). The primary pharmacological agents used to
manage neuropathic pain include anticonvulsants, antidepressants, opioids, and local anesthetics.36 The rationale
for the use of these agents has resulted primarily from
established efficacy in painful diabetic neuropathy
(PDN).37 Recent evidence-based guidelines systematically
reviewing the literature on the treatment of PDN from
1960 through August 2008 concluded that there was
high-level evidence establishing pregabalin as effective.38
Venlafaxine, duloxetine, amitriptyline, gabapentin, valproate, opioids (morphine sulfate, tramadol, and oxycodone controlled-release), and capsicine were considered
probably effective and should be considered for treatment
of PDN.3 In light of the complexity in managing pain and
symptoms associated with CIPN, a task force report on
neuropathy in cancer was published that includes recommendations on treatment strategies to guide clinicians.2
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation

Neuromuscular electrical stimulation modalities
such as transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(TENS) and electrical stimulation (ES) have shown some
benefit in managing pain related to diabetic peripheral
Cancer

April 15, 2012

neuropathy.39 In a meta-analysis of 3 randomized trials
including 78 patients with diabetic peripheral neuropathy, reductions in pain scores were found to be significantly better after treatment with TENS than with
placebo TENS.39 Although these results are promising,
there was considerable heterogeneity among the 3 studies
included in the meta-analysis; therefore, further randomized trials are needed to confirm this finding. In the only
study that examined patients with CIPN, a patient-specific
cutaneous ES device was found to reduce pain in a sample
of 16 patients with refractory CIPN.40 To date, the evidence supporting the use of TENS and ES for CIPN is limited; however, given their low cost and risk profile, they are
recommended as potential treatment options for patients
with CIPN who are refractory to pain medication.2,37
Physical functioning

The patient with sensory and motor effects from
CIPN may have difficulty carrying out ADLs and maintaining functional independence. Aspects of function that
are commonly impaired or compromised include balance
and coordination, muscle performance, and mobility.2,41
Interventions can be tailored to the patient’s needs and may
include therapeutic exercises and balance retraining, and
the provision of gait aids, orthotics, and assistive devices.35
Physical therapists, as experts in physical functioning, can provide therapeutic interventions to remediate or
compensate for deficits.34 Specific therapeutic exercises
may be prescribed to address pain as well as impairments
in range of motion, muscular strength, and balance. As an
example, exercises may include active and passive rangeof-motion exercises as well as targeted strengthening exercises for the distal extremities.42
The maintenance of an upright posture is highly
dependent on feedback from the somatosensory system;
therefore, sensory losses alone or in combination with
motor neuropathy can greatly impair balance, gait, and
overall function.41 CIPN in combination with postural
hypotension, poor posture, muscular weakness, and preexisting deficits in vision may place the patient at even
higher risk for loss of balance and falls.35,43 In a recent
study, risk of falling was associated with a number of factors, including higher doses of chemotherapy, more neuropathic symptoms, and more severe muscular weakness
and loss of balance.43
Balance retraining involves the manipulation of variables such as the base of support, stance configuration,
and walking surface to challenge the proprioceptive component of balance control.44 Balance retraining exercises
are often started in 2-legged stance and progress to
2255

Original Article

Figure 2. Procedures for chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy symptom management are shown.

tandem or single-leg stance. To further challenge balance,
exercises can be progressed from stable to unstable surfaces, and can involve perturbation training or multisensory
challenges (eg, eyes open or eyes closed).45 Balance
retraining has been shown to improve clinical measures of
balance in patients with peripheral neuropathy.46,47
Walking aids and assistive devices

The use of a gait aid such as a walking stick, walker,
or cane may be recommended to help with balance and to
address gait deficits.34 A brace such as an ankle-foot orthosis can compensate for lower extremity weakness deficits such as foot drop (dorsiflexion), protect an unstable
ankle (inversion and/or eversion), and improve alignment
and balance48 (Fig. 3). The use of gait aids and orthotics
has been shown to improve gait in conditions with low
lighting and uneven walking surfaces.47
2256

A variety of assistive devices are available to improve
function and efficiency when patients perform ADLs.
Occupational therapists (OT) are specially trained to
assess and treat upper extremity function, and an OT can
evaluate the need for assistive devices and adaptive equipment to help the patient compensate for difficulties with
tasks at home or work.49,50 This may include the provision of adaptive equipment such as built-up handles on
utensils, rubber nonslip handles, adaptive button hooks,
and bathroom aids.50 In addition, the OT can also educate the patient on strategies to optimize function and to
address safety in the home (Table 3).
Physical exercise

Exercise has been shown to have positive effects on
peripheral neuropathies of varying etiologies.51 Exercise
may improve or attenuate symptoms of CIPN through local
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Neuropathy in Breast Cancer/Stubblefield et al

Table 3. Protective Household Modification for Patients With
Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy

Household
Area

Recommended Modification
to Area

Living area

Keep floors free of clutter35
Remove or secure rugs that may be a
tripping hazard35,36
Ensure good lighting in and outside the home2,36
Consider use of a nightlight in bedroom or hallway36
Use pot holders and oven mitts to handle
both hot and cold items2,36
Wear rubber gloves for washing dishes36
Use caution when using sharp objects such as knives
Use a bathmat or nonslip surface for the bottom
of the tub or shower2
Consider use of a bathtub grab bar or bath seat
if balance or mobility are issues
Check water temperature with a thermometer or
body part with normal sensation before bathing2
Set water heater to below 120 degrees Fahrenheit35
Ensure adequate lighting on stairs36
Use or install handrails for support36

Kitchen

Bathroom

Stairs

Figure 3. The use of a gait aid, such as the ankle-foot orthosis
pictured, can help with balance and address gait deficits.

been proposed as a potential preventative intervention for
CIPN.51,52 In patients who are normally physically active,
symptoms associated with CIPN may represent barriers to
exercise participation. In these cases, a graded exercise test
can be performed to identify symptoms associated with
autonomic dysfunction and to rule out any contraindications to exercise. For issues such as sensory loss and
impaired balance, guidelines can be provided to reduce
risks associated with exercise participation.48,53
Complementary and alternative therapies

effects on peripheral nerves by reducing pain and improving
physical function.52,53 Exercise may include both resistance
(strength) training as well as aerobic exercise.
A resistance exercise training program can be developed by an exercise professional to address decreases in
muscular strength that may occur due to CIPN, cancer
treatments, or secondary to inactivity. In patients with
CIPN, specific resistance exercises can be prescribed to
address weakness in antigravity lower extremity muscles
that may be contributing to deficits in gait and function.2
In a Cochrane review examining the effect of resistance
exercise on functional ability, resistance exercise was
found to moderately improve muscle strength in individuals with peripheral neuropathy.54
Aerobic exercise, such as a cycling on a stationary
bike, can be prescribed to improve cardiorespiratory fitness and reduce symptoms of fatigue.55 Aerobic exercise
has been shown to preserve neurological function in
patients with diabetic neuropathy and more recently, has
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Complementary and alternative medicine therapies
include interventions such as meditation, dietary supplements and herbal remedies, massage therapy, and acupuncture. Of the potential complementary and alternative
medicine therapies, acupuncture has shown the most
promise with reported benefit for symptoms and objective
measures in patients with diabetic neuropathy.2 A single
case series examining the use of acupuncture in 5 patients
with CIPN found that acupuncture treatments provided
once per week over a 7- to 12-week period decreased
symptoms of pain, numbness, and tingling.56 Moreover,
no adverse effects from the treatments occurred, and
symptom benefits were sustained in 4 of the 5 patients at
6-month follow-up.56
PROSPECTIVE SURVEILLANCE MODEL
Screening and baseline assessment for CIPN should occur
prior to the initiation of neurotoxic chemotherapy in the
neoadjuvant, adjuvant, and metastatic disease settings.
2257

Original Article

Ongoing surveillance visits provide the clinician the
opportunity to assess for emerging signs and symptoms of
CIPN. Patients considered at high risk or who require
close surveillance may be thus identified. In terms of physical rehabilitation, the baseline visit can be used to provide
the patient with education on the need for early identification of CIPN and appropriate management strategies.
Ongoing surveillance following the initiation of a
neurotoxic agent is important to monitor for the development and progression of symptoms associated with CIPN
(Fig. 1). Patients are generally seen every 2 to 3 weeks by
their medical oncologist while receiving chemotherapy and
receive a history and physical examination. Comprehensive
screening for the presence of CIPN can thus be performed
prior to each cycle of chemotherapy. Early identification of
CIPN allows for prompt referral to a neuromuscular specialist for formal assessment. In addition, identification of
positive (ie, pain) and negative (ie, numbness) symptoms
will ensure appropriate referral and timely symptom management (Fig. 2). Ongoing surveillance provides a feedback
loop, so the efficacy of prescribed treatments for CIPN can
be assessed along with ongoing patient symptoms to ensure
each patient’s needs are being met.
CIPN is managed best by a multidisciplinary team
approach. Communication is key with shared care,
because there are differing perspectives as to which provider assumes responsibility for varying aspects of care.57
If the patient is being treated within the same health care
system, access to electronic health records facilitates this
communication.58 If treatment is in different health care
systems, attention to keeping all of the providers
informed becomes even more crucial. This is particularly
important when a variety of nononcologic providers,
such as physical therapists, OTs, neuromuscular specialists (ie, rehabilitation medicine, neurology), and others
involved in the management of CIPN are consulted or
provide treatment for the patient. Educating the patient
about who to see and for what issues is a component of survivorship care and should be included in the survivorship
care plan.59 Similar education should be a major component of all other phases of the cancer continuum as well,
including in the adjuvant and palliative settings. Patients
with residual peripheral neuropathies or other bothersome
symptoms should be empowered to request consultations
as needed.60
Following curative treatment, a history and physical
examination are routinely performed every 3 to 6 months
for the first 3 years, every 6 to 12 months for the next 2
years, and annually thereafter.61 Visits may be rotated
with the surgeon, medical oncologist, and radiation
2258

oncologists so that the patient is seeing each provider
approximately once per year. During those visits, patients
are monitored for disease recurrence, evaluated for resolution of treatment side effects, and screened for long-term
or late complications.62 In addition, CIPN, upper extremity dysfunction, fatigue, overall function, weight gain, and
other sequelae of breast cancer treatment should be
assessed and treated with specialty referrals for rehabilitation medicine and physical therapy as appropriate. Over
time, care shifts more to the primary care provider with
fewer visits to the oncology team. Screening for CIPN or
its resolution should occur during these visits if the patient
has received a neurotoxic agent.
SUMMARY
The prospective surveillance model for physical rehabilitation proposes a systematic approach to facilitate early identification and management of CIPN. The model promotes
a patient-centered approach to care from pretreatment
through survivorship and palliative care. In this way, the
model offers promise in addressing and minimizing both
the acute and long-term morbidity associated with CIPN.
FUNDING SOURCES
Support for this meeting and supplement were provided by the
American Cancer Society through The Longaberger CompanyV,
a direct selling company offering home products including handcrafted baskets made in Ohio, and the Longaberger Horizon of
HopeV Campaign, which provided a grant to the American
Cancer Society for breast cancer research and education.
R

R

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE
The authors made no disclosure.

REFERENCES
1. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics
Review, 1975–2008. National Cancer Institute: Bethesda, MD.
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2008/. Based on November 2010
SEER data submission, posted to the SEER Web site, 2011.
2. Stubblefield MD, Burstein HJ, Burton AW, et al. NCCN task force
report: management of neuropathy in cancer. J Natl Compr Canc
Netw. 2009;7(suppl 5):S1–S26.
3. Cavaletti G, Alberti P, Frigeni B, Piatti M, Susani E. Chemotherapyinduced neuropathy. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2011;13:180–190.
4. Dunlap B, Paice JA. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy:
a need for standardization in measurement. J Support Oncol. 2006;
4:398–399.
5. Paice JA. Clinical challenges: chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. Semin Oncol Nurs. 2009;25(2 suppl 1):S8–S19.
6. Stubblefield MD, Custodio CM, Kaufmann P, Dickler MN. Smallfiber neuropathy associated with capecitabine (Xeloda)-induced
hand-foot syndrome: a case report. J Clin Neuromuscul Dis. 2006;7:
128–132.
7. Carlson RW, Allred DC, Anderson BO, et al. Invasive breast cancer. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2011;9:136–222.
8. Bartsch R, Ziebermayr R, Zielinski CC, Steger GG. Triple-negative
breast cancer. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2010;160:174–181.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Neuropathy in Breast Cancer/Stubblefield et al

9. Rodler E, Korde L, Gralow J. Current treatment options in triple
negative breast cancer. Breast Dis. 2010;32:99–122.
10. Argyriou AA, Polychronopoulos P, Iconomou G, Koutras A, Kalofonos
HP, Chroni E. Paclitaxel plus carboplatin-induced peripheral neuropathy. A prospective clinical and electrophysiological study in patients
suffering from solid malignancies. J Neurol. 2005;252:1459–1464.
11. Italian General Practitioner Study Group (IGPSG). Chronic symmetric symptomatic polyneuropathy in the elderly: a field screening
investigation in two Italian regions. I. Prevalence and general characteristics of the sample. Neurology. 1995;45:1832–1836.
12. Weimer LH, Podwall D. Medication-induced exacerbation of neuropathy in Charcot Marie Tooth disease. J Neurol Sci. 2006;242:47–54.
13. Martino MA, Miller E, Grendys EC Jr. The administration of
chemotherapy in a patient with Charcot-Marie-Tooth and ovarian
cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2005;97:710–712.
14. Jerian SM, Sarosy GA, Link CJ Jr, Fingert HJ, Reed E, Kohn EC.
Incapacitating autonomic neuropathy precipitated by taxol. Gynecol
Oncol. 1993;51:277–280.
15. Chaudhry V, Rowinsky EK, Sartorius SE, Donehower RC, Cornblath DR. Peripheral neuropathy from taxol and cisplatin combination chemotherapy: clinical and electrophysiological studies. Ann
Neurol. 1994;35:304–311.
16. Wiernik PH, Schwartz EL, Einzig A, Strauman JJ, Lipton RB,
Dutcher JP. Phase I trial of taxol given as a 24-hour infusion every
21 days: responses observed in metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol.
1987;5:1232–1239.
17. Mollman JE, Glover DJ, Hogan WM, Furman RE. Cisplatin neuropathy. Risk factors, prognosis, and protection by WR-2721. Cancer. 1988;61:2192–2195.
18. Brown T, Havlin K, Weiss G, et al. A phase I trial of taxol given
by a 6-hour intravenous infusion. J Clin Oncol. 1991;9:1261–1267.
19. Sarosy G, Kohn E, Stone DA, et al. Phase I study of taxol and
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in patients with refractory
ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10:1165–1170.
20. Donehower RC, Rowinsky EK, Grochow LB, Longnecker SM,
Ettinger DS. Phase I trial of taxol in patients with advanced cancer.
Cancer Treat Rep. 1987;71:1171–1177.
21. Lee JJ, Swain SM. Peripheral neuropathy induced by microtubulestabilizing agents. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:1633–1642.
22. Carlson K, Ocean AJ. Peripheral neuropathy with microtubuletargeting agents: occurrence and management approach. Clin Breast
Cancer. 2011;11:73–81.
23. Reyes-Gibby CC, Morrow PK, Buzdar A, Shete S. Chemotherapyinduced peripheral neuropathy as a predictor of neuropathic pain in
breast cancer patients previously treated with paclitaxel. J Pain.
2009;10:1146–1150.
24. Argoff CE, Cole BE, Fishbain DA, Irving GA. Diabetic peripheral
neuropathic pain: clinical and quality-of-life issues. Mayo Clin Proc.
2006;81(4 suppl):S3–S11.
25. Martyn CN, Hughes RA. Epidemiology of peripheral neuropathy.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1997;62:310–318.
26. England JD, Asbury AK. Peripheral neuropathy. Lancet. 2004;363:
2151–2161.
27. Johnsson KE. Lumbar spinal stenosis. A retrospective study of 163
cases in southern Sweden. Acta Orthop Scand. 1995;66:403–405.
28. Saperstein DS, Barohn RJ. Peripheral neuropathy due to cobalamin
deficiency. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2002;4:197–201.
29. Lopate G, Pestronk A. Inflammatory demyelinating neuropathies.
Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2011;13:131–142.
30. England JD, Gronseth GS, Franklin G, et al; American Academy of
Neurology; American Association of Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine; American Academy of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation. Evaluation of distal symmetric polyneuropathy: the
role of laboratory and genetic testing (an evidence-based review).
Muscle Nerve. 2009;39:116–125.
31. Cavaletti G, Frigeni B, Lanzani F, et al. Chemotherapy-induced
peripheral neurotoxicity assessment: a critical revision of the currently available tools. Eur J Cancer. 2010;46:479–494.
32. National Cancer Institute. Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 4.0. http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/
CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010–06-14_QuickReference_8.5x11.pdf.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

33. Hile ES, Fitzgerald GK, Studenski SA. Persistent mobility disability
after neurotoxic chemotherapy. Phys Ther. 2010;90:1649–1657.
34. Visovsky C, Meyer RR, Roller J, Poppas M. Evaluation and management of peripheral neuropathy in diabetic patients with cancer.
Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2008;12:243–247.
35. Visovsky C, Collins M, Abbott L, Aschenbrenner J, Hart C. Putting
evidence into practice: evidence-based interventions for chemotherapyinduced peripheral neuropathy. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2007;11:901–913.
36. Wickham R. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy: a
review and implications for oncology nursing practice. Clin J Oncol
Nurs. 2007;11:361–376.
37. Stubblefield MD. Cancer rehabilitation. Semin Oncol. 2011;38:
386–393.
38. Bril V, England J, Franklin GM, et al; American Academy of Neurology; American Association of Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic Medicine; American Academy of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation. Evidence-based guideline: Treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy report of the American Academy of Neurology,
the American Association of Neuromuscular and Electrodiagnostic
Medicine, and the American Academy of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation. PM R. 2011;3:345–352.
39. Jin D, Xu Y, Geng DF, Yan TB. Effect of transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation on symptomatic diabetic peripheral neuropathy: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Res Clin
Pract. 2010;89:10–15.
40. Smith TJ, Coyne PJ, Parker GL, Dodson P, Ramakrishnan V. Pilot
trial of a patient-specific cutaneous electrostimulation device (MC5A CalmareV) for chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy.
J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010;40:883–891.
41. Wampler MA, Topp KS, Miaskowski C, Byl NN, Rugo HS,
Hamel K. Quantitative and clinical description of postural instability in women with breast cancer treated with taxane chemotherapy.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2007;88:1002–1008.
42. Bromberg MB, Smith AG. Handbook of Peripheral Neuropathy.
Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis Group; 2005.
43. Tofthagen C, Overcash J, Kip K. Falls in persons with chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. Support Care Cancer. 2012;20:
583–589.
44. Chmielewski TL, Hewett TE, Hurd WJ, Snyder-Mackler L. Principles of neuromuscular control for injury prevention and rehabilitation. In: Magee DJ, Zachazewski JE, Quillen WS, ed. Scientific
Foundations and Principles of Practice in Musculoskeletal Rehabilitation. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2007:375–387.
45. Wampler MA, Hamolsky D, Hamel K, Melisko M, Topp KS. Case
report: painful peripheral neuropathy following treatment with
docetaxel for breast cancer. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2005;9:189–193.
46. Richardson JK, Sandman D, Vela S. A focused exercise regimen
improves clinical measures of balance in patients with peripheral
neuropathy. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82:205–209.
47. Richardson JK, Thies SB, DeMott TK, Ashton-Miller JA. Interventions improve gait regularity in patients with peripheral neuropathy
while walking on an irregular surface under low light. J Am Geriatr
Soc. 2004;52:510–515.
48. Visovsky C. Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. Cancer
Invest. 2003;21:439–451.
49. Paice JA. Chronic treatment-related pain in cancer survivors. Pain.
2011;152(3 suppl):S84–S89.
50. Lemoignan J, Chasen M, Bhargava R. A retrospective study of the
role of an occupational therapist in the cancer nutrition rehabilitation program. Support Care Cancer. 2010;18:1589–1596.
51. Balducci S, Iacobellis G, Parisi L, et al. Exercise training can modify
the natural history of diabetic peripheral neuropathy. J Diabetes
Complications. 2006;20:216–223.
52. Wonders KY, Reigle BS, Drury DG. Treatment strategies for chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy: potential role of exercise.
Oncol Rev. 2010;4:117–125.
53. Pfefer MT. Peripheral neuropathy and neuropathic pain. In: Myers
J, Nieman D, eds. ACSM’s Resources for Clinical Exercise Physiology: Musculoskeletal, Neuromuscular, Neoplastic, Immunologic and
Hematologic Conditions, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Wolters Kluwer
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:104–112.
R

2259

Original Article
54. White CM, Pritchard J, Turner-Stokes L. Exercise for people with
peripheral neuropathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(4):
CD003904.
55. McNeely ML, Campbell KL, Rowe BH, Klassen TP, Mackey JR,
Courneya KS. Effects of exercise on breast cancer patients and survivors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2006;175:34–41.
56. Wong R, Sagar S. Acupuncture treatment for chemotherapyinduced peripheral neuropathy–a case series. Acupunct Med. 2006;
24:87–91.
57. Byler JM, Gil KM. Responsibility for long-term care of breast cancer survivors. Breast J. 2011;17:216–217.
58. Sada YH, Street RL Jr, Singh H, Shada RE, Naik AD. Primary care
and communication in shared cancer care: a qualitative study. Am J
Manag Care. 2011;17:259–265.

2260

59. Smith SL, Singh-Carlson S, Downie L, Payeur N, Wai ES. Survivors of breast cancer: patient perspectives on survivorship care planning. J Cancer Surviv. 2011;5:337–344.
60. Davies NJ, Batehup L. Towards a personalised approach to aftercare: a review of cancer follow-up in the UK. J Cancer Surviv. 2011;
5:142–151.
61. Khatcheressian JL, Wolff AC, Smith TJ, et al. American Society of
Clinical Oncology 2006 update of the breast cancer follow-up and
management guidelines in the adjuvant setting. J Clin Oncol. 2006;
24:5091–5097.
62. Brennan ME, Houssami N. Overview of long term care of breast
cancer survivors. Maturitas. 2011;69:106–112.
63. Lahrmann H, Cortelli P, Hilz M, Mathias CJ, Struhal W, Tassinari
M. EFNS guidelines on the diagnosis and management of orthostatic hypotension. Eur J Neurol. 2006;13:930–936.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

