Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 47

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Intracellular STING inactivation sensitizes breast cancer cells
to genotoxic agents
Julie Gaston1,2, Laura Cheradame1,2, Vanessa Yvonnet2, Olivier Deas2, MarieFrance Poupon2, Jean-Gabriel Judde2, Stefano Cairo2,3,*, Vincent Goffin1,*
1

Inserm, U1151, Institut Necker Enfants Malades (INEM), University Paris Descartes, Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France

2

XenTech, 4 rue Pierre Fontaine, 91000 Evry, France

3

LTTA Center, Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of Ferrara, Italy

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Vincent Goffin, email: vincent.goffin@inserm.fr
Keywords: interferon, STAT1, PARP12, recurrence
Received: April 25, 2016     Accepted: October 17, 2016     Published: October 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Activation of the IFN/STAT1 pathway is closely associated with drug response
and recurrence of breast cancer treated by chemotherapy. The aim of the current
study was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved upstream and downstream
of this pathway in order to identify distinct entities that might be manipulated
to improve treatment efficacy. Four breast cancer cell lines (T-47D, MCF7, MDAMB-231 and HBCx-19 established from the eponymous PDX) were treated in vitro
with mafosfamide, a DNA damage inducer. In two of these cell lines (MCF7 and
HBCx-19), genotoxic treatment upregulated type I IFN expression leading to paracrine
activation of IFN/STAT1 signaling pathway after 6–8 days. We show that STING, a
well-characterized inducer of IFN in immune cells, is rapidly triggered in MCF7 cells
under genotoxic stress and forms nuclear foci that co-localize with phosphorylated
IRF-3 and γH2AX. STING silencing abrogated chemotherapy-induced type I IFN
production and signaling and potentiated genotoxic treatment efficacy as it promoted
cell death extent and delayed cell colony regrowth. Similar results were obtained
after silencing PARP12, one selected gene of the IFN/STAT1 pathway fingerprint. In
summary, this study provides the first demonstration of STING activation in breast
cancer cells. Our data suggest that genotoxic-induced, STING-mediated type I IFN
signaling is a cell-intrinsic mechanism of breast cancer cell survival and regrowth.

INTRODUCTION

Using several breast cancer patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs), we were recently able to distinguish
xenografts which resisted de novo to chemotherapy, and
others which initially regressed under treatment, but
progressed with constant recurrences [2]. Furthermore,
the responses to chemotherapy were tightly related to
the activation of IFN/STAT1 signaling in post-treatment
residual cancer cells [2]. Indeed, the upregulation of
an IFN fingerprint covering 140 IFN-stimulated genes
(ISGs) was observed in responding tumors only [2].
This IFN-related response was correlated with STAT1
phosphorylation and massive DNA damage, as reflected
by very high prevalence of ɣH2AX. However, neither the
actual mechanisms by which chemotherapy triggered the
IFN/STAT1 pathway in these breast cancer PDXs nor the
actual contribution of the ISG fingerprint to the tumor

Chemotherapy is active in numerous cancers,
reducing tumor growth and lengthening patient survival.
However these benefits are not constant and frequently
transient, reflecting the ability of cancer cells to survive
to drug toxicity. Resistance to chemotherapy can be
observed de novo, as identified by the lack of tumor
response. Escape to treatment can occur after an initial
response, defining a process of drug-resistance differing
from the de novo resistance. Such an adaptive survival
is frequent and responsible for tumor recurrences after
response to chemotherapy. Thus, improving the efficacy
of treatment by prevention of cancer cell survival and
recurrence is currently an active area of research [1] and
of rational hope.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77205

Oncotarget

response were elucidated. Using human-specific molecular
tools, both type I (α, β) and II (ɣ) IFNs were detected in
tumor cells in response to treatment. Since breast cancer
cells have been shown to express IFN receptors [3], these
observations suggested that activation of the IFN/STAT1
pathway might be induced by an autocrine/paracrine
mechanism.
Both types I and II IFNs are typical cytokines
classically secreted by immune cells to induce immune
cell activation and differentiation in response to pathogen
aggression [4, 5]. Several studies have shown that the
presence of tumor infiltrating immune cells was a factor of
favorable prognosis in various human solid tumors [6–9].
The presence of IFNs in the tumor microenvironment has
been widely documented [for a review, 10] and they are
usually viewed as active contributors to the antitumor
processes mediated by the immune system. Furthermore,
a recent study suggested that cancer cell-intrinsic type I
IFN signaling may contribute to chemosensitization [11].
Otherwise, the transcriptomic profiling of biopsies from
women with locally advanced/high risk early stage breast
cancers receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy revealed that
increased ISG expression at the time of surgery (compared
to pre-treatment levels) was associated with early cancer
recurrence [12]. This finding nicely correlated the
observation that STAT1, the main downstream signaling
target of IFN receptors, was constitutively activated in
cancer cells surviving chronic treatments inducing DNA
damage [13, 14]. In agreement, an IFN-related DNA
damage resistance signature (IRDS) gathering STAT1
and 48 other genes was identified as a predictive marker
of recurrence after radiotherapy [15, 16]. Of note, the
IRDS signature showed only partial overlap with the
IFN/STAT1 fingerprint that we identified in PDXs [Ref.
2 and Table 1]. Taken together, these data underline the
functional complexity of IFNs secreted into the tumor
microenvironment, which may exert opposite actions on
tumor response to treatment depending on the nature of the
target cell (immune vs neoplastic) and on signal kinetics
(acute vs chronic).
In immune cells, it has been shown that type I IFN
production and downstream signaling was stimulated
by the STING pathway [17]. STING (stimulator
of IFN genes), also referred to as nuclear envelope
transmembrane protein (NET) 23 or transmembrane
protein 173 (TMEM173), is a transmembrane protein
reported to be located in the endoplasmic reticulum
[18–20]. One mechanism of STING activation has been
recently elucidated. In the presence of cytosolic double
stranded (ds) or single stranded (ss) DNA originating from
pathogens, the cytosolic DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP
synthase (cGAS) catalyzes the production of 2′3′ cyclic
GMP-AMP (cGAMP) which binds to and activates STING
[21–23]. Activated STING then relocalizes to perinuclear
regions and ultimately contributes to the activation of
type I IFN expression by triggering Tank-binding kinase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(TBK)-1-mediated phosphorylation of the transcription
factor IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)-3, leading to its nuclear
translocation [24–26]. As such, the STING/IFN pathway
plays a critical role in anti-microbial innate immunity [23,
26, 27]. Based on this evidence, the paradigm emerges
that increasing type I IFN expression within the tumor
microenvironment may potentiate the antitumor immune
response with expected therapeutic benefit [5]. One of the
strategies currently under investigation involves the use
of STING agonists which have been shown to induce IFN
production by tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and in
turn to promote rejection of established tumors in immunecompetent host mice [28].
In this context, and following up our recent findings
using breast cancer PDXs [2], the present study was
designed with the double aim to elucidate i) the molecular
mechanisms by which cell-intrinsic IFN signaling was
triggered in cancer cells in response to chemotherapy,
and ii) the ultimate contribution of the ISG fingerprint
to the tumor response to treatment. In order to avoid any
interference with biological responses induced by the
immune cells present in the tumor microenvironment
in vivo, we privileged an in vitro approach. We first
identified breast cancer cell lines mimicking in vitro the
drug-induced activation of the IFN/STAT1 signature
observed in vivo, then we used these models to decipher
both the upstream mechanisms and downstream
consequences of this IFN/STAT1 fingerprint. This study
provides the first evidence that chemotherapy used at
sub-lethal doses can trigger the STING/IFN pathway in
some cancer cells, which in turn contributes to survival
to treatment via specific IFN/STAT1 target genes. We
identified PARP12 as one such active contributor of this
pathway involved in post-chemotherapy survival and regrowth of breast cancer cells.

RESULTS
Induction and characterization of an IFN/STAT1
fingerprint in cancer cells under genomic stress
Preliminary screening of various breast cancer cell
models identified MCF7, T-47D and MDA-MB-231 cell
lines and HBCx-19, a primary cell line derived from the
eponymous PDX, as those exhibiting the most robust
molecular responses to genotoxic stress (see below).
These four cell lines reflect the breast cancer diversity
according to their estrogen receptor (ER) status, HER2/
Neu expression and p53 mutations (Table 2) [29]. A
proliferation test was performed in vitro to quantify
the effects of mafosfamide, the active metabolite of
cyclophosphamide used in vivo. We determined that the
total growth inhibition (TGI) concentration index, i.e.
the dose of drug at which the number of living seeded
cells remains unchanged after 3 or 6 days of treatment,
was for the four cell lines in the range of 17–18 µM and
77206

Oncotarget

Table 1 : IFN/STAT1 fingerprint induced in breast cancer PDXs after chemotherapy treatment
Gene name
BST2
IFI44
IFITM1
STAT1
MX1
IFIT1
DDX60
OAS1
OAS2
PARP12
PARP9
SAMD9L
STAT2
UBE2L3
IFI44L
IFI6
IFIT3
IRF9
LAMP3
ZNFX1
CLDN1

IFN/STAT1 fingerprint (selected 21 gene list)a
Full name
bone marrow stromal cell antigen 2
interferon-induced protein 44
interferon induced transmembrane protein 1 (9-27)
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
myxovirus (influenza virus) resistance 1, interferon-inducible protein p78 (mouse)
interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1
DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 60
2ʹ,5ʹ-oligoadenylate synthetase 1, 40/46 kDa
2ʹ-5ʹ-oligoadenylate synthetase 2, 69/71 kDa
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase family, member 12

IRDSb
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase family, member 9
sterile alpha motif domain containing 9-like
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2L 3
interferon-induced protein 44-like
interferon, alpha-inducible protein 6
interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 3
ring finger protein 31
lysosomal-associated membrane protein 3
zinc finger, NFX1-type containing 1
Claudin 1
a
Genes selected to represent the diversity of the IFN/STAT1 fingerprint induced in residual tumor cells after chemotherapy
in responder PDXs [2]. bGenes of the IFN/STAT1 fingerprint identified as IRDS [15].

Table 2: Characteristics of the four breast cancer cell lines used in this study [see Ref. 64]
Cell lines

Origin

ER status

p53 status

Her2 levels

+
+
−
+

WT
mutated
mutated
WT

very low
moderate
low
N.D.

MCF7
ATCC
T-47D
ATCC
MDA-MB-231
ATCC
HBCx-19
PDX
Abbreviations: N.D.: not determined.
4–12 µM, respectively (Figure 1A, 1B and Table 3). As
shown in Supplementary Figure S1 using MCF7 cells,
10 µM mafosfamide treatment blocked cells in G2/M
(Supplementary Figure S1A, S1B), induced progressive
cell death (Supplementary Figure S1C) and concomitantly
reduced proliferation as reflected by the decrease of Ki67 staining (Supplementary Figure S1D, S1E). According
to these data, the sub-lethal drug concentration of 10 µM
was chosen throughout this study to investigate the
consequence of genotoxic stress while maintaining a
sufficient number of living cells for performing molecular
analyses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The status of IFN/STAT1 signaling in response to
genotoxic stress was analyzed by western blot. In the
four cell lines, we monitored STAT1 phosphorylation
on both tyrosine (Y701) and serine (S727) residues and
the level of STAT1 expression, since the latter is per se a
transcriptional target of the IFN/STAT1 pathway [30]. In
HBCx-19 cells (Figure 1C, 1D) and MCF7 (Figure 1F, 1G)
cells, serine/tyrosine STAT1 phosphorylation and STAT1
protein up-regulation were detected 144 h after addition of
mafosfamide, and these effects persisted (MCF7) or even
increased (HBCx-19) until 192 h. Using qPCR analysis,
we detected  an increased expression of the majority of
77207

Oncotarget

Table 3: In vitro profile of several breast cancer cell lines to mafosfamide sensitivity
Day 3
GI50 ± SD (µM)

TGI ± SD (µM)

Day 6
GI50 ± SD (µM)
TGI ± SD (µM)

MCF7
T-47D
MDA-MB-231
HBCx-19

2.7 ± 0.7
18.0 ± 6.2
0.6 ± 0.2
11.2 ± 0.9
12.1 ± 1.5
17.5 ± 1.5
1.5 ± 0.3
12.1 ± 2.2
11.4 ± 5.2
17.2 ± 3.1
0.5 ± 0.3
11.0 ± 0.5
10.1 ± 2.8
18.13 ± 1.9
0.6 ± 0.6
4.1 ± 2.2
GI50 and TGI index concentrations were calculated 3 or 6 days after mafosfamide treatment (results are mean of at least
three independent experiments). GI50 was calculated as the drug concentration that reduced the number of cells to 50% of the
number of cells before drug addition. TGI is the drug concentration that achieved total growth inhibition of cells.
the IFN/STAT1 signature (21 genes) that we previously
identified as representative of the drug-induced ISGs in
breast cancer PDXs (Figure 1E, 1H) [2]. Based on these
observations, HBCx-19 and MCF7 were identified as
‘IFN-responsive’ cell lines, i.e. cells exhibiting STAT1
pathway activation and ISG upregulation in response to
genotoxic treatment. In contrast, MDA-MB-231 (Figure
1I–1K) and T-47D (Figure 1L–1N) were identified as
‘IFN-non responsive’ cell lines, as neither STAT1 pathway
activation nor ISG upregulation were observed in response
to genotoxic stress. The absence of response in IFN-non
responsive cells was not due to the lack of drug-induced
DNA damage since phosphorylated H2AX (referred to as
ɣH2AX) was similarly detected by western blot in the four
cell lines (Figure 1C, 1F, 1I, 1L) [31].
Induction of ISGs has been reported to occur during
cell senescence [32], therefore we addressed whether the
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) could
discriminate IFN-responsive versus IFN-non responsive
cell lines. Using MCF7 (IFN-responsive) and T47D (IFNnon responsive) as representative cell lines this was clearly
not the case (Supplementary Figure S2), suggesting that
expression of the IFN/STAT1 signature was not linked to
cell senescence.
Together these data indicate that in vitro and in the
absence of immune cells, genotoxic treatment can trigger
IFN signaling in some but not all breast cancer cell lines,
exactly as observed in vivo using PDXs [2].

then added respectively to naive MCF7 or HBCx-19
cells for 24 h. In HBCx-19, CMmafo markedly induced
STAT1 tyrosine/serine phosphorylation and total STAT1
up-regulation as efficiently as mafosfamide treatment
(Figure 2A, 2B). Similar effects were observed in MCF7
cells albeit with lower efficiency since only upregulation
of STAT1 tyrosine phosphorylation achieved significance
(Figure 2D, 2E). Together, these results indicate that short
time exposure to genotoxic drug is sufficient to induce
secretion of ligands able to trigger the STAT1 pathway via
a paracrine signaling.
Based on previous reports suggesting that type I
and type II IFNs are upregulated in PDXs treated with
genotoxics [2, 11], we focused on IFN ligands for further
investigations. First, we performed a time-course followup of type I and type II IFN mRNA expression in response
to mafosfamide treatment. In both IFN-responsive cell
lines (HBCx-19 and MCF7), a significant increase in type
I IFN expression was observed 144 h/192 h after treatment
(Figure 2C, 2F), which matched the detection of the IFN/
STAT1 signature at these time points (Figures 1E,H). Type
II IFN mRNAs were below the detection threshold in both
cell lines (not shown). By contrast, IFN-non responsive
cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and T-47D) failed to show
any significant upregulation overtime of type I or type
II IFN expression in response to mafosfamide treatment
(Figure 2G, 2I). Since activation of STAT1 pathway
could be observed when these cells were stimulated with
purified IFNs (Figure 2H, 2J), this strongly suggests
that the absence of IFN/STAT1 signaling in response to
mafosfamide treatment in IFN-non responsive models
(Figure 1I–1N) is linked to the lack of IFN escalation in
these experimental conditions.
Next, we aimed to assess whether functional IFNs
were actually secreted into the culture medium by cells
treated with mafosfamide. To do so, CMmafo or CMveh
obtained from MCF7 cells as described above were
used to stimulate HEK293 cells transiently transfected
with luciferase reporter gene constructs driven by the
IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) promoter
(see Material and Methods). As shown in Figure 2K, the
ISRE reporter construct could be activated by CMmafo
compared to CMveh. This effect was specific as it was

Cell-autonomous secretion of type I IFNs is
observed in response to genotoxic stress
Based on these results, we reasoned that the
activation of STAT1 pathway in tumor cells treated with
mafosfamide could result from cell-autonomous secretion
of cytokines, known to trigger this pathway. We used
a conditioned medium approach to address this issue
(Supplementary Figure S3). MCF7 and HBCx-19 cells
were incubated with mafosfamide (or vehicle) for 6 h, then
cells were washed and shifted to fresh, mafosfamide-free,
medium. Cell conditioned media (CMmafo or CMveh) were
collected 144 h (MCF7) or 192 h (HBCx-19) later (i.e.
the time to get maximal STAT1 activation, see Figure 1)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77208

Oncotarget

Figure 1: STAT1 phosphorylation and up-regulation of IFN-inducible genes is observed in some but not all breast
cancer cells in response to mafosfamide treatment. (A, B) Dose-response effect of mafosfamide on the in vitro proliferation
of HBCx-19, MCF7, MDA-MB-231 and T-47D cells 3 (A) or 6 (B) days after treatment. Results (n = 3 independent experiments) are
expressed as percentage of growth with respect to the increased cell density between day 0 and days 3 or 6 in the absence of treatment.
(C) Western blotting analysis of P-STAT1Y701, P-STAT1S727 and total STAT1 in HBCx-19 cells showing the time course induction of
the STAT1 pathway following mafosfamide treatment (added at T0). ɣH2AX reflects drug-induced DNA damage. (D) Quantification of
P-STAT1Y701, P-STAT1S727 and total STAT1 protein levels (normalized to actin levels, mean ± SD) in mafosfamide-treated (192 h) HBCx19 cells relative to untreated conditions (two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test). (E) qRT-PCR analysis of the
21 gene signature representative of the IFN/STAT1 fingerprint (Table 1) after 192 h mafosfamide treatment (mean ± SD, n = 3 per group
compared to cells treated with vehicle). The same analyses as described in C–E were performed for MCF7 cells (F–H), MDA-MB-231
(I–K) and T-47D (L–N) cells. Arrowheads below immunoblots separate noncontiguous parts of the same membrane.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77209

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Paracrine IFN signaling is induced by mafosfamide treatment. (A, B, D, E) HBCx-19 (A, B) and MCF7 (D, E)
cells were stimulated for 192 h with mafosfamide versus vehicle, or for 24 h with conditioned medium from cells that were stimulated
with mafosfamide (CMmafo, shown in duplicate) versus vehicle (CMveh), then P-STAT1Y701, P-STAT1S727 and total STAT1 were analyzed by
western blotting and quantified as described in the legend to Figure 1. Arrowheads below immunoblots separate noncontiguous parts of the
same membrane. (C, F, G, I) The time-course expression of IFNα2 and IFNβ in HBCx-19 (C), MCF7 (F), MDA-MB-231 (G) and T-47D
(I) cells treated with mafosfamide versus vehicle was performed by qRT-PCR (n = 3, mean ± SD, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s
multiple comparison test). (H, J) Western blot of total STAT1 and actin expression in MDA-MB-231 (H) and T47D (J) cells after 72 h
stimulation with 10 ng/ml IFNɣ. (K, L) Activation of ISRE-luciferase reporter plasmid by CMmafo with/without 50 µM AG490 (K) or 20
nM non targeted siRNA (siNT) versus siSTAT1 (L). For each condition the results are expressed relative to CMveh after normalization to
Renilla luciferase values (n = 3, mean ± SD, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77210

Oncotarget

significantly reduced by addition of the JAK inhibitor
AG490 (Figure 2K) as well as by expression of a siRNA
directed against STAT1 (Figure 2L).
Together, these data strongly suggest that breast
cancer cells treated with mafosfamide secrete functional
cytokines able to trigger paracrine STAT1 signaling,
among which type I IFNs appear to be relevant candidates.

Finally, we aimed to address whether the activation
of this pathway in response to mafosfamide treatment
could affect cell viability. Conditioned media generated
as described above were added to naive MCF7 cells and
cell viability was measured 3 and 6 days later (Figure 3E).
CMmafo (containing secreted cytokines) significantly
reduced cell viability compared to CMveh, which was
reminiscent of the widely described anti-proliferative
properties of IFNs [35]. Accordingly, the effect of CMmafo
could be mimicked by the addition of purified type I
IFNs (Figure 3F). These data suggest that the expression
of STAT1 pathway after genotoxic treatment via the
production of type I IFNs plays a key role in controlling
the cancer cell response.

IFNAR1 and STAT1 silencing effects the
genotoxic stress-induced molecular signature
Type I IFNs act on the common receptor, IFNAR,
which is composed of two subunits, IFNAR1 and
IFNAR2. Both are expressed in MCF7 cells [33]. Former
studies showed that IFNAR1 silencing was sufficient to
abolish type I IFN signaling [33], therefore we used this
strategy to further assess the involvement of paracrine
type I IFN signaling. As shown in Figure 3A, a siRNA
directed against IFNAR1 markedly decreased its
expression compared to a non-targeted siRNA (siNT).
Using the latter as a control, IFNAR1 silencing strongly
counteracted the ability of MCF7 to express the IFN/
STAT1 signature in response to mafosfamide treatment
(Figure 3B). Specifically, the induction of 6 out of the
21 genes analyzed (IFI6, IFIT1, OAS1, OAS2, SAMD9,
IFI44) was significantly altered, sometimes beyond their
level in mafosfamide-free condition. Ten other genes
were also decreased (DDX60, IFI44L, PARP9, MX1,
IRF9, PARP12, LAMP3, UBE2L6, IFITM1, BST2) but
this did not reach statistical significance probably due to
heterogeneous levels in the mafosfamide/siNT condition.
Finally, the expression level of five genes (ZNFX1,
CLDN1, ITIF3, STAT1, STAT2) was not affected. These
results confer a key role to IFNAR1, and by extension to
type I IFNs, in the induction of the IFN/STAT1 signature
observed in MCF7 in response to genotoxic treatment.
In agreement, STAT1 silencing (Figure 3C)
produced very similar effect and was even more efficient
since CLDN1, PARP9, STAT1, IRF9 and IFIT3 were
now significantly down-regulated as compared to the
mafosfamide/siNT condition (Figure 3D). This higher
efficiency could reflect the stronger inhibition of STAT1
(97.4 ± 1%) vs IFNAR1 (85.7 ± 2.3%) expression.
Alternatively, since many cytokines other than IFNs are also
able to activate the STAT1 pathway [34], other ligands could
also participate in the response observed (e.g. type II IFNs,
Interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, etc.). To address this hypothesis,
we performed a cytokine array involving several of these
cytokines (Supplementary Figure S4A and S4B). None of
them could be detected after 72 h, 96 h (not shown) or 144 h
(Supplementary Figure S4) mafosfamide treatment, further
supporting IFNs as the major trigger of STAT1 fingerprint
downstream of genotoxic stress. Taken together, these data
indicate that the type I IFNs/IFNAR1/STAT1 pathway plays
a critical role in mediating ISG upregulation in breast cancer
cells in response to genotoxic treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The STING pathway is triggered by
chemotherapy and contributes to type I IFN
production
We next aimed to address the potential involvement
of STING pathway in the molecular machinery leading
to type I IFN expression and signaling in breast cancer
cells under genotoxic stress. To that end, we first silenced
STING expression. The efficacy of siRNA directed against
STING (compared to siNT) was validated by monitoring
the down-regulation of STING expression at the mRNA
and protein levels (Figure 4A). As shown in Figure 4B,
STING knock-down reduced type I IFN upregulation
observed in response to treatment, an effect that appeared
to be more marked on IFNα than IFNβ. Although this
partial effect may reflect residual STING expression
(Figure 4A), it may also account for the participation of
alternative DNA sensors cooperating with STING such
as IFI16 [36], and/or pathways leading to IFN expression
in response to genotoxic stress e.g. IRF1 [37] or MYD88
[38], all of which were upregulated in MCF7 and HBCx-19
in response to mafosfamide treatment (Supplementary
Figure  S5A–S5C). Irrespective of such alternative
mechanisms, STING silencing experiments demonstrated
the functional involvement of this pathway in mafosfamideinduced IFN expression. To confirm these data, we
generated MCF7 cells stably expressing a dominantnegative (DN) isoform of STING [39] or, in control, a
HA-tagged version of active STING (Supplementary
Figure S5D). As shown in Figure 4C and 4D, expression
of STING-DN did not alter baseline expression of total
and phosphorylated STAT1. In contrast, it dramatically
attenuated the activation of STAT1 signaling in MCF7 cells
in response to mafosfamide, as assessed by the decrease
in serine-phosphorylated, tyrosine-phosphorylated and
total STAT1. Overexpression of STING-HA had no effect
compared to parental cells (Figure 4C, 4D), indicating that
a certain threshold of STING expression is necessary and
sufficient to stimulate the IFN pathway.
Together these results demonstrate that STING
pathway is involved in the transcriptional upregulation
77211

Oncotarget

of type I IFNs triggered by genotoxic treatment of breast
cancer cells, resulting in cell-autonomous activation of
IFN/STAT1 signaling. This cell-autonomous circuitry then
amplifies for several days.

ss/dsDNA release resulting from genotoxic-induced
DNA damage in breast cancer cells might have the same
effect. Accordingly, we observed that ss/dsDNA breaks
accumulated in the cytoplasm after genotoxic treatment of
MCF7 cells (white arrowheads on Figure 4E), providing a
potential source of STING activators. After sensing DNA
the canonical mechanism of STING pathway activation
involves the recruitment and activation of TBK1 which in
turn phosphorylates serine 396 of IRF-3, a key transcription
factor involved in IFN type I transcription [26]. To confirm
the activation of this pathway in response to genotoxic
stress, we assessed the presence of S396-phosphorylated
IRF-3. Using immunofluorescence, the latter was detected

STING resides in the nucleus, clusters and
co-localizes with IRF-3 and γH2AX upon
genotoxic stress
As stated in the Introduction, recent studies have
shown that ss/dsDNA present in the cytosol of immune
cells infected by pathogens could trigger the STING
pathway upstream of IFN production. We reasoned that

Figure 3: Silencing IFNAR1 or STAT1 gene expression in MCF7 cells impacts on expression of the IFN fingerprint and
on cell proliferation. (A, B) qRT-PCR showing the efficacy of IFNAR1 silencing using siIFNAR1 relative to siNT in MCF7 cells treated

for 6 days (144 h) with mafosfamide (n = 3, mean ± SD, t test) (A) and its resulting effect on the expression of the IFN/STAT1 signature (B)
(n = 3, mean ± SD, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test). (C, D) The same experiment as in panels A and B is
shown for STAT1 silencing. (E, F) MCF7 viability (Cell Titer-Glo luminescent assay) was measured after incubation in CMveh versus CMmafo
for 3 or 6 days (E) or in culture medium containing various doses of purified IFNα (F). In all panels results are expressed as mean ± SD, n =
3 independent experiments in triplicate per condition (two-way (E) or one-way (F) ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77212

Oncotarget

as foci in the nucleus at 48 h and 144 h timepoints after
mafosfamide treatment of MCF7 cells (Figure 4F).
Strikingly, STING displayed a very similar nuclear pattern
after genotoxic stress; in fact, STING nuclear foci (labelled
in red) largely overlapped with S396-phosphorylated IRF3 foci (labelled in green). The number of STING foci
significantly decreased upon STING silencing, confirming
the specificity of the nuclear staining (Supplementary
Figure S5E). Of note, the use of unmasking protocol also
displayed the expected location of STING outside of the
nucleus envelope (Supplementary Figure S5F).
To gain better knowledge on STING localization
within cell compartments, we performed cell fractionation
experiments. We noticed that in naive MCF7 cells,
endogenous STING was present in both the cytosol and
the nucleus (lanes 1 and 3 of Figure 4G). Fractionation
of MCF7 cells stably overexpressing HA-tagged STING
(see above) fully confirmed this result (Figure 4G, lanes
2 and 4). As nuclear STING foci were not detected in
basal conditions but accumulated with in 48 h after
mafosfamide treatment (Figures 4F and Supplementary
Figure S5G), we fractionated MCF7 cells at various
time points between 2  h and 48 h after mafosfamide
treatment to detect nuclear translocation of STING. As
shown in Figure 4H, the comparison of mafosfamide and
vehicle-treated cells did not provide obvious evidence
for a quantitative enrichment of nuclear STING linked to
genotoxic treatment. This analysis nevertheless confirmed
the presence of STING in the nucleus of MCF7 cells.
Together, these findings suggest that the formation of
STING foci might preferentially result from the clustering
of STING present in the nucleus before treatment.
As shown above using western blotting (Figure 1C),
γH2AX was detected as early as 24/48 h after
mafosfamide treatment, i.e. much before the induction
of STAT1 pathway could be detected. As shown by
immunofluorescence (Figure 4I), accumulation of γH2AX
as nuclear foci (green dots) at sites of DNA damage was
detected 48 h after treatment and increased in number
and staining intensity until 144 h. Strikingly, merging
immunofluorescence images revealed that γH2AX and
STING foci largely overlapped (yellow dots). Together,
these experiments suggest that under mafosfamide
treatment, STING clusters in the nucleus and co-localizes
with activated IRF-3 and γH2AX at DNA breaks.

stress. In order to address this hypothesis, we silenced the
expression of STING as the most upstream inducer of the
IFN production in response to mafosfamide. As expected,
STING silencing significantly potentiated mafosfamide
treatment efficacy as reflected by the marked decrease in
cell viability 6 days after treatment (Figure 5B).
After a single mafosfamide treatment (10 µM),
some cells survive but enter into a prolonged steadystate/senescence phase followed by re-growth as colonies
detectable between days 20 and 30 (Figure 5C–5E). To
address whether STING pathway impacted the tumor
recurrence phase, we silenced its expression in MCF7
cells 3 days after treatment and followed them up for the
next 50 days. Compared to the control condition (siNT),
STING silencing potentiated the efficacy of mafosfamide
treatment as reflected by delayed appearance of regrowing colonies of surviving cells.
Together these results suggest that cell-autonomous
activation of the STING/IFN pathway confers resistance
to treatment which ultimately favors tumor cell survival.

PARP12 as a novel target to reduce breast cancer
resistance to genotoxic stress
A recent study suggested that STING agonists may
be of clinical benefit to boost the immune system by
upregulating IFNβ and thereby contribute to initial tumor
regression [28]. Based on this rationale, we reasoned
that STING might be a tricky target in vivo contributing
to opposite effects in tumor cells (Figure 5) versus their
microenvironment. We therefore searched for potential
targets downstream of the STAT1 pathway. To that end,
we developed a lab-scale screening approach using a
custom library of siRNA targeting the genes of the IFN
fingerprint. In addition to the 21 gene listed in Table 1,
a dozen of candidates selected from the transcriptomic
analysis of residual PDXs [2] or from the literature (e.g.
IFI27, IFIT5, RNAseL, OASL, IFI16, IFIT2, BCL2L2)
were added to the analysis based on their potential
relevance in the context of interest. Candidate siRNAs
were tested individually or by pairs using 96 well plates
and cell viability 10 days after mafosfamide treatment was
used as the functional readout of gene silencing.
For the majority of the genes silencing resulted in
increased mafosfamide-induced cell death compared to
siNT, further supporting a role for the IFN fingerprint in
conferring cell resistance to treatment (Figure 6A). This
preliminary screening did not highlight significant effect of
STAT1/STAT2 and IFNAR1 silencing. We focused on the
most promising genes and we individually silenced those
initially analyzed by pairs (BCL2L1-BCL2L2; USP18ZNFX1; IFIT2-IFIT3) (not shown). Among all of them,
PARP12 appeared to be the gene whose transcriptional
inhibition most potently inhibited MCF7 cell viability
under genotoxic stress (Figure 6A). To validate this
result, we confirmed that the PARP12 siRNA used in

Cell intrinsic IFN signaling reduces the genotoxic
effects, its inhibition amplify them
While CMmafo (containing IFNs and cytokines)
reduced cancer cell proliferation (Figure 3E), MCF7
cells cultured for 6 days in CMmafo appeared to be more
resistant to mafosfamide treatment as compared to cells
cultured in CMveh (Figure 5A). This suggested that priming
breast cancer cells with IFNs/cytokines may contribute to
confer an increased survival potential to further genotoxic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77213

Oncotarget

Figure 4: STING pathway is activated and forms nuclear foci in MCF7 cells treated by mafosfamide. (A) The efficacy of

STING silencing using siSTING relative to siNT in MCF7 cells treated for 6 days with mafosfamide was assessed by qRT-PCR (top panel,
n = 3, mean ± SD, t test) and western blotting (bottom panel). (B) Expression of IFNα and IFNβ (qRT-PCR) in cells treated for 6 days
with mafosfamide in the presence of siNT versus siSTING (mean ± SD, n = 3 independent experiments in triplicate, two-way ANOVA and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77214

Oncotarget

post-hoc Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (C–D) Western blotting analysis (C) of P-STAT1Y701, P-STAT1S727 and total STAT1 after
mafosfamide treatment (144 h) of parental MCF7 cells or MCF7 stably expressing a dominant-negative isoform of STING (MCF7-DN) or
HA-tagged STING (MCF7-HA); (D) quantifications of the three targets normalized to actin levels are shown for the mafosfamide condition
(n = 3, mean ± SD, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test). (E) Immunofluorescence staining of ss/dsDNA
breaks in the cytoplasm (white arrowheads) after 6 day (144 h) treatment of cells with vehicle or mafosfamide. (F) Co-immunostaining of
STING (red) with P-IRF3S396 (green) in cells treated with vehicle or mafosfamide for 48 h or 144 h as indicated. (G–H) Western blotting
analysis of STING in cytosolic and nuclear fractions prepared from untreated MCF7 and MCF7-HA cells (G) and from MCF7 cells
treated by mafosfamide or vehicle for the times indicated (H). Lamin and α-tubulin were used as controls of cell fractionation. (I) Coimmunostaining of STING (red) with ɣH2AX (green) in cells treated with vehicle or mafosfamide for 48 h or 144 h as indicated. In F and
I, nuclei are shown in blue; images shown are representative of 3 independent experiments.

the screening experiment efficiently reduced PARP12
expression (Figure 6B) and actually affected MCF7 cell
viability when combined to mafosfamide (Figure 6C). A
FACS analysis discriminating live from dead cells showed
that inhibition of PARP12 combined to mafosfamide
induced more cell death than the drug alone, confirming
the results of the cell viability assay (Figure 6D).
Strikingly, PARP12 silencing had limited impact on T-47D
and MDA-MB-231 cell viability and on the percentage
of dead cells (FACS analysis) compared to mafosfamide
combined to siNT (Figure 6C and 6D), strengthening
former observations showing that these two models
do not trigger the IFN/STAT1 pathway in response to
genotoxic stress. We then performed a colony assay using
the MCF7 model in order to evaluate whether PARP12
silencing interfered with tumor survival and growth.
A very significant delay (~10  days) in cell re-growth
(colony formation) was observed when mafosfamide was
combined to siNT versus PARP12 siRNA (Figure 6E–6G).
Combining STING and PARP12 siRNA did not exhibit
additional or synergistic effect (Supplementary Figure
S6A, S6B), confirming that these two targets belong to
the same functional pathway.
Taken together, these data indicated that breast
cancer cell intrinsic IFN signaling induced by genotoxic
stress favors resistance to treatment in a PARP12dependent manner.

mediating the innate response to pathogen aggression
may also apply to tumor/host relationships [10, 40, 41].
Accordingly, a growing body of evidence argues that
tumor cells are under the control of the immune system as
highlighted by experimental studies showing that immune
activation potentiates the response to genotoxic therapy
in various syngeneic or xenograft models [Ref. 10 and
references therein, Ref. 42]. Here we pushed this concept
one step further by showing that the STING pathway,
which is a molecular mechanism typically activated in
immune cells in response to pathogen infection (see
Introduction), can also be mobilized in cancer cells
undergoing genotoxic stress. Activation of the canonical
STING pathway in MCF7 cells was assessed by i) IRF3 serine phosphorylation, ii) relocation of STING (see
discussion below), and at the functional level, iii) the
abolition of genotoxic-induced type I IFN production and
signaling upon STING loss-of-function (gene silencing
and expression of STING-DN). This is to our knowledge
the first report showing activation of this pathway in
neoplastic cells in response to genotoxic treatment.
Various mechanisms of STING activation have
been reported [43]. In the immune context, STING
can be triggered by cGAMP that is catalyzed by cGAS
from dsDNA or ssDNA provided by pathogens [21–23].
A similar mechanism may exist in cancer contexts as
we observed that STING pathway activation in MCF7
cells paralleled marked cytoplasmic enrichment in ss/
dsDNA following genotoxic stress. The exact nature
and origin of this cytosolic DNA are yet to be identified
but presumably involve dsDNA or ssDNA leaking from
nuclei undergoing DNA damage, in agreement with a
recent study showing that STING can be activated by
the accumulation of DNA damage due to ATM mutations
[27]. Also, it has been shown that cytosolic mitochondrial
DNA engaged cGAS and promoted the STING-IRF3
pathway resulting in ISG upregulation [44]. The release
of mitochondrial DNA under genotoxic stress may
potentially trigger a similar mechanism. Irrespective
of the nature and origin of the nucleotides that serve as
stimuli, STING activation can involve DNA sensors acting
as intermediate between STING and dsDNA, e.g. IFI16
[36]. Of interest, the latter was shown to be upregulated
in both IFN-responsive MCF7 and HBCx-19 cell lines
after mafosfamide treatment, which may contribute to
amplify STING pathway activation through enhancement
of cytosolic dsDNA detection. Moreover, cells can have in

DISCUSSION
This study enlightens several intriguing aspects
of response to chemotherapy of cancer cells and their
survival after genotoxic treatment. The genotoxic stress
triggers IFN production in breast cancer cells which
respond to chemotherapy and not in de novo resistant
tumors, irrespectively of their hormone receptor status and
p53 mutated type. Trigger of IFN effect is mediated by the
recruitment of STING pathway, providing a mechanism
to the recently reported chemotherapy-induced IFN
production by cancer cells [2, 11]. Moreover, the cellintrinsic STING/IFN/STAT1 pathway triggers a typical
ISG fingerprint that ultimately contributes to resistance
to treatment and favors tumor cell re-growth. Finally
this biological process might involves the cooperation of
various ISGs among which PARP12 was identified.
The ‘viral mimicry’ concept of cancers has
emerged based on the assumption that the mechanisms
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77215

Oncotarget

their endosomes dsDNA coming from dying cells in their
environment. In this case, DNA sensing could involve TLR
(present in the cytoplasmic or endosomal membranes)
via MYD88, an adapter protein shown to promote IFNα
production [38]. Of interest, MYD88 expression was also
increased in both IFN-responsive cell lines upon genotoxic
stress (Supplementary Figure S5C). Various intracellular
damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMPs) could
also be involved in STING activation. DAMPs include
signals (e.g. ssDNA, dsDNA, ssRNA, or dsRNA) that
dying cells use to alert the immune system [10]. Further
studies are obviously needed to elucidate the DNA sensing
circuitry that is mobilized upstream of STING pathway in
neoplastic cells undergoing genotoxic stress.

STING has been described to localize in the
endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi apparatus, perinuclear
and autophagic vesicles [18, 24, 45]. Here, we show that
STING can also be present in the nucleus. Whether this
is a specificity of (breast) cancer cells or a more general
event will have to be addressed in future studies. Of note,
similar observations were made using cells expressing
ectopic STING-HA which is frequently used in the field
due to technical issues for detecting endogenous STING
using commercial antibodies. Intriguingly, STING was
already present in the nucleus of MCF7 cells before
treatment. While STING nuclear foci peaked within
48  h of treatment, cell fractionation experiments over
the same timeline showed no concomitant enrichment of

Figure 5: STING silencing potentiates the efficacy of genotoxic treatment of MCF7 cells. (A) MCF7 cells cultured in CMveh

or CMmafo (see Supplementary Figure S3) were treated with mafosfamide then cell viability was assessed after 6 days using CellTiter-Glo
luminescent assay. Results are expressed relative to the condition without mafosfamide (mean ± SD, n = 3 independent experiments per
condition, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test). (B) The effect of mafosfamide combined with siSTING or
siNT was assessed by CellTiter-Glo luminescent assay 6 days after mafosfamide treatment. Results were relative to mafosfamide with
siNT (mean ± SD, n = 3 independent experiment per condition, t test). (C) The effect of mafosfamide on cell viability over 40 days in the
presence or the absence of siNT or siSTING was assessed by CellTiter-Glo luminescent assay (two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s
multiple comparison test). (D, E) Twenty to fifty days after mafosfamide treatment combined with siSTING or siNT the colonies appearing
from resistant cells were stained with crystal violet (D) and quantified (E) using ImageJ (mean ± SD, n = 3 at per condition, two-way
ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77216

Oncotarget

Figure 6: PARP12 silencing potentiates the efficacy of genotoxic treatment of MCF7 cells. (A) The effect of mafosfamide

combined with various siRNAs (tested individually or by pairs) targeting the genes of the IFN/STAT1 fingerprint was assessed by CellTiterGlo luminescent assay 10 days after mafosfamide treatment of MFC7 cells. Results are relative to mafosfamide with siNT (mean ±
SD, n = 3 independent experiments per condition, one-way ANOVA post-hoc Dunnett’s multiple comparison test). (B) The efficacy of
PARP12 silencing using siPARP12 relative to siNT in MCF7 cells treated for 10 days with mafosfamide was assessed by qRT-PCR
(mean ± SD, n = 3 per group, t test). (C) The effect of mafosfamide combined with siPARP12 or siNT on MCF7, T-47D and MDA-MB-231
cell viability was assessed by CellTiter-Glo luminescent assay 10 days after mafosfamide treatment. Results are relative to mafosfamide
with siNT (mean ± SD, n = 3 independent experiments per condition, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77217

Oncotarget

(D) The effect of mafosfamide combined with siPARP12 (20 nM) on MCF7, T-47D and MDA-MB-231 cell mortality was evaluated
by FACS analysis 10 days after mafosfamide treatment. The results represent the percentage of dead cells compared to mafosfamide
with siNT (mean ± SD, n = 3 independent experiments per condition, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
(E) The effect of mafosfamide on cell viability over 50 days in the presence or the absence of siNT or siPARP12 was assessed by CellTiterGlo luminescent assay (two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test). (F, G) Twenty to sixty days after mafosfamide
treatment combined with siPARP12 or siNT the colonies appearing from resistant cells were stained with crystal violet (F) and quantified
(G) using ImageJ (mean ± SD, n = 3 at per condition, two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Sidak’s multiple comparison test).

nuclear STING content compared to vehicle-treated cells
(Figure  4H). This argues against massive cytoplasmicnuclear translocation as a major mechanism underlying
STING foci formation. We may therefore speculate that
STING foci result, at least in part, from the clustering
of STING already located within the nucleus prior to
treatment. In-depth investigations are needed to assess
this hypothesis, as well as to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved in nuclear STING activation and the
actual consequences of STING clustering in the nucleus.
In this respect, we noticed that nuclear STING partly
co-localized with the phosphorylated histone ɣH2AX,
suggesting a new role of STING in response to DNA
damage. Although nuclear localization of STING had
not been described before, its potential role in chromatin
compaction in concert with other histones to potentiate
immune signaling has been suggested [46]. IFI16, another
DNA sensor commonly found in the cytosol, has been
reported to re-localize into the nucleus after DNA or virus
stimulation [47] and to associate with BRCA1 during DNA
damage repair [48]. Furthermore, Mre11, a well-known
protein involved in the MRN complex for double strand
breaks DNA repairs in the nucleus, has also been reported
to sense DNA in the cytosol [49]. Thus, against the early
dogma that the nucleus is protected from DNA detection
by DNA sensors [for a review, 43], our observation add
another example suggesting that some DNA sensors
may be able to sense DNA both in the cytosol and in
the nucleus. Elucidating the functional consequences of
STING subcellular localization with the DNA damage
marker ɣH2AX in breast cancer cells undergoing
genotoxic stress deserves further investigations.
Inhibition
of
STING
expression/activity
unambiguously showed that STING contributed to
chemotherapy-triggered type I IFN production (Figure 4B)
and signaling (Figure 4C) in MCF7 cells. Moreover,
direct inhibition of downstream IFNAR1/STAT1 pathway
identified the latter as a major regulator of the IFN fingerprint
(Figure 3). We noticed that the effect of STING knockdown
was more marked on IFNα than IFNβ. This may reflect the
concomitant upregulation of IRF1 upon genotoxic stress
(Supplementary Figure S5B) as this transcriptional regulator
was shown to induce IFNβ expression [37]. According to
the higher efficiency of STAT1 versus IFNAR1 silencing
to abolish the IFN/STAT1 fingerprint we cannot exclude
that other cytokines present in the chemotherapy-induced
MCF7 secretome may also participate in STAT1 activation,
though at a lower level than type I IFNs. There are in fact
many STAT1 activators [34] of which only a limited set
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

was covered by the cytokine array that we used. Of note,
we failed to detect IL-6 and IL-8 which were shown to be
upregulated in radioresistant cancer cells expressing the
IRDS signature [50], suggesting that distinct mechanisms
may be engaged. Other candidate ligands may involve
PDGF, EGF, VEGF, GH, or other interleukins such as IL-3,
IL-15 or IL-22 [34, 51].
Traditional chemotherapies require active cycling
cells to trigger cell death [52]. Cells that are quiescent or
slowly cycling are therefore less likely to be responsive to
these drugs [53]. After short-term chemotherapy exposure,
it has been shown that cancer cells enrich in slow cycling,
dormant, chemo-resistant cell sub-populations that
can resume growth after drug withdraw [54]. Even cell
lines established and grown in vitro for decades were
shown to contain such slow cycling cells [55]. In our
experiments, genotoxic treatment markedly disturbed
the progression through the cell cycle as confirmed by
dramatic reduction of Ki-67 positive cells (Supplementary
Figure S1). However, 20 days after treatment, some cells
which survived treatment were able to reenter the cell
cycle and form growing colonies. We show here that the
chemotherapy-induced MCF7 secretome acts as a survival
stimulus reducing cell death (Figure 5A). Remarkably,
this effect was blunted by STING down-regulation
(Figure 5B–5E), suggesting that the STING/IFN/STAT1
pathway acts as a cell-intrinsic mechanism of malignant
cell survival and re-growth. This finding is in agreement
with former reports suggesting that STAT1 over-signaling
in cancer cells confers resistance to DNA-damaging agents
[12–16]. However, in our cell system, not such an effect
on cell viability was observed upon silencing of IFNAR1
(Figure 6A). This unexpected result could reflect a role of
other cytokines as mentioned above. Alternatively, it may
reflect that some genes among the most efficient to reduce
cell viability (e.g. PARP12, ZNFX1, IFIT3; see Figure 6A)
were not significantly affected by IFNAR1 silencing
(see Figure 3B). Finally, although we clearly showed
that STING loss-of-function abrogated cell-autonomous
IFN signaling, STING may also contribute to maintain
the expression of some ISGs via IFN-independent
mechanisms [56]. Further investigations are needed to
provide convincing evidence for such a mechanism in our
cell model, which may help better understand why MCF7
cells die after STING inhibition.
In their elegant work, Sistigu et al used type I
IFN signaling-deficient (IFNAR1-/-) tumors allografted
in syngeneic host mice to demonstrate that malignant
cell-autonomous IFN signaling promoted anthracycline
77218

Oncotarget

efficacy by inducing immune responses possibly mediated
by CXCL10 [11]. The results we here provide integrate
well these findings that warn on the protective role
that some cytokines secreted by tumor cells subjected
to genotoxic injury may exert on the tumor itself by
stimulating the immune system. Accordingly, exogenous
supply of type I IFN [11] or induction of endogenous
IFN production using STING agonists [28] have been
proposed as promising strategies to potentiate antitumor
responses. Although STING agonists were shown to
promote regression of established tumors and distant
metastases in experimental models [28], we are not aware
that such compounds have been tested in combination
with chemotherapy. From our observations involving
in vitro and immune cell-free cancer models, we anticipate
that IFN enrichment in the tumor microenvironment
might lead to paradoxical effects combining antitumor
(immune cells) and resistance (neoplastic cells) properties.
Furthermore, the benefit of attracting more immune cells
to fight tumor cells should be carefully balanced with the
perverse effects of constitutive inflammation also shown
to promote resistance to treatment [57]. In this versatile
context, the identification of individual ISGs contributing
to tumor cell resistance downstream of the STING/IFN/
STAT1 pathway deserved to be investigated further.
Furthermore, as the IFN fingerprint induced by genotoxic
stress gathers proteins with very different and potentially
opposite functions, this strengthened the likelihood that
targeted inhibition of individual genes specifically in
tumor cells may be an efficient strategy to potentiate
chemotherapy.
Screening the IFN fingerprint identified PARP12 as
the most potent contributor to resistance to treatment. Of
interest, PARP12 was not identified among IRDS target
genes (Table 1). Together with PARP9 (Table 1) and
PARP14 [2] also found in the IFN fingerprint, PARP12 is
a member of the large family of ADP-ribosyl transferases
and is considered as a mono-ADP-ribose transferase like
PARP-3,-6,-7,-8,-10,-11,-14,-15, and -16. While the DNA
repair properties of canonical PARP members (PARPs 1
and 2) make them attractive targets for cancer therapy, the
actual role of other family members is less well (or not)
documented in breast cancer [58, 59]. PARP9 was shown
to be a member of the DNA damage response pathway
and to be part of a DNA repair complex [60]. Moreover,
it has been described to repress the anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic IFN/STAT1 axis in B-cell lymphoma [61].
PARP14 is involved in genomic stability [62]. Of note,
genetic inhibition of PARP9 and PARP14 was shown to
increase chemotherapy efficacy in prostate cancer cells
[63]. PARP12 is much less documented and was shown
to be involved in the control of protein translation and
inflammation [58]. This study is the first to suggest
its implication in cancer. We may speculate that when
combined with mafosfamide, PARP12 inhibition reduces
dormant cell survival leading to delayed cancer cell colony
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

regrowth. In agreement, using the Kaplan Meier Plotter
database (http://kmplot.com/analysis/), we found that ERpositive breast tumors that overexpressed PARP12 had a
worse outcome compared to those expressing low levels of
PARP12 (Supplementary Figure S6C). Obviously further
studies are required to elucidate its mechanism of action
in resistance to treatment.
Finally, this study identified two breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231 and T-47D) that were unable to
induce the typical IFN fingerprint in response to genotoxic
stress. Both cell lines failed to display the rise in IFN
production observed 6–8 days after treatment in the two
IFN-responsive cell lines, consistent with the absence
of STAT1 activation (Figure 1). Of interest, we noticed
that in contrast to IFN-responsive cell lines, both MDAMB-231 and T-47D harbored mutated p53 (Table 2).
A link between enrichment of JAK/STAT-regulated genes
after genotoxic stress and p53 status has been reported
[32]. A combination of 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
and distamycin A (DMA) was capable to induce IFN/
STAT1 pathway in cells with WT p53 while in cells with
mutated p53, the induction was virtually absent. However,
in both cases, cells were shown to undergo senescence. Our
findings that the four cell lines entered into senescence after
mafosfamide treatment irrespective of IFN/STAT1 signature
and type I IFN expression, suggests that the lack of IFN/
STAT1 signature in T-47D and MDA-MB-231 might be due
to alterations of cell cycling regulation as produced by p53
mutations [64, 65]. This point needs to be explored.
Interferons are well known to exert multiple,
complex and often opposite roles on cancerous and noncancerous cells of the tumor microenvironment [10].
This study adds a level of complexity by providing the
rationale for considering genotoxic-induced activation of
the STING/IFN/STAT1 pathway in breast cancer cells as
a cell-intrinsic mechanism of escape to treatment. This
finding is in agreement with our recent in vivo studies
showing that the IFN fingerprint is still present in residual
PDX tumor cells giving rise to tumor recurrence in the
context of immunodeficiency [2]. Therefore, we propose
that therapeutic promotion of IFN signaling in the tumor
microenvironment should take into account this tumor
cell-specific effect, and consider the potential benefit of
targeting downstream gene products. PARP12 has already
been identified as a candidate, deeper investigation of the
other genes of the IFN fingerprint is currently in progress.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture, genotoxic treatment and cell
harvesting
MCF7 (ATCC, HTB-22), T-47D (ATCC, HTB-133),
MDA-MB-231 (ATCC, HTB-26), HEK293 (ATCC, CRL1573) cells were grown at 37°C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium with nutrient mixture F-12
77219

Oncotarget

(DMEM/F12) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented
with fetal bovine serum (FBS) to a final concentration
of 10%. MCF7 cells stably overexpressing HA-tagged
STING (STING-HA) or a dominant-negative STING
isoform [39] were obtained by blasticidin (20 µg/mL)
selection of cells transfected with cognate plasmids
(pUNO1-hSTING-HA3x or pUNO1-hSTING-MRP,
respectively; InvivoGen) and maintained in the same culture
conditions including blasticidin addition. HBCx-19 was
dissociated with Tumor dissociation kit (human, 130-095929, Milteny) followed by MACS MicroBead Technology
(Milteny) to remove mouse fibroblasts. The primary
culture was grown at 37°C and 5% CO2 in Advanced
DMEM/F12 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented
with FBS to a final concentration of 10%. Mafosfamide
(D-17272, Niomech) was added once in cell culture media
at T0 of each time course experiment. At the end of each
experiment, cells were washed in PBS, incubated in trypsin
for 5 min/37°C, then collected with complete medium.
After centrifugation (500 g, 5 min), cells were washed in
PBS and kept at −80°C as dry pellet or lysed in a solution
containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1%
Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES, 1 mM NaF
anti-phosphatase, 2 mM NA3VO4 and proteases inhibitors.
For senescence assay, cells were stained according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (ab65351, Abcam).

Western blot

qRT-PCR

Cells were grown on sterile Lab-Tek Chamber
Slide system (Nalge Nune International). Following
mafosfamide treatment, cells were washed twice in PBS,
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), then washed in
PBS. To unmask epitopes (for STING only, as indicated),
cells were incubated for 10 min in 50 mM NH4Cl, washed
with PBS, then permeabilized in 0.1 % triton X-100
for 10 min at RT and washed 3 times in PBS. The cells
were then blocked in PBS with 0.1% Tween 20 and 3%
BSA 1 h at RT and incubated overnight at 4°C with the
primary antibodies: STING/TMEM173 (MAB7169,
R&D Systems 1/200), phospho-IRF-3 (ser396) (4947,
Cell signaling, 1/50), dsDNA (ab27156, Abcam, 1/100) ,
ɣH2AX (DR1017, Millipore, 1/600). The cells were then
washed three times in PBS-Tween and incubated with
fluorescent secondary antibodies (anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor
488, A-11070 Thermo Fisher Scientific and anti-mouse
Alexa Fluor 594, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and kept in the
dark. Finally, cells were washed in PBS-Tween, nucleus
stained by Hoechst 33342 (10 min, RT) and washed again
in PBS-Tween, then rapidly washed in distilled water and
covered with slides with fluorescent mounting medium.

Cell lysates were assayed using Micro BCA
Protein Assay kit (iNtRON Biotechnology). Thirty µg
of total proteins were loaded on 4–12% polyacrylamide
NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies)
and electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes.
Membranes were blocked in PBS with 0,1% of Tween
20 and 3% BSA (1 h, RT), then incubated 2 h at RT or
overnight at 4°C with the primary antibodies: STAT1
p84/p91 (sc-346, Santa Cruz, 1/1,000), phospho-STAT1
(tyr701) (sc-135648, Santa Cruz, 1/1,000), phosphoSTAT1 (ser727) (07-714, Cell signaling, 1/1,000), ɣH2AX
(DR1017, Millipore, 1/1,000) actin (A2066-.2ML,
Sigma, 1/1,000), STING/TMEM173/D2P2F (13647,
Cell Signaling, 1/1,000) , lamin (2032, Cell signaling,
1/1,000), and alpha-tubulin (T15168, Sigma, 1/1,000). The
membranes were then washed three times in PBS-Tween
and incubated with secondary antibodies (anti-rabbit
HRP, 7074 Cell signaling and anti-mouse HRP, NA931
Ge Healthcare). Membranes were revealed with suitable
horseradish peroxidase conjugates (Clarity ECL Western
Blotting Substrate, Biorad) and quantified by ImageJ
software.

Immunofluorescence

Total RNA extraction was performed with
NucleoSpin RNA XS (Macherey-Nagel) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA (1 µg from
each sample) was then reverse transcribed into cDNA
with High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit
(Applied biosystems). Expression of IFN-related genes
was analyzed with SYBR Select Master Mix (Life
Technologies). qRT-PCR data were invariably normalized
to the averaged expression levels of three housekeeping
genes:
GAPDH
(glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase), RPL13 (ribosomal protein L13) and
HPRT1 (hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1).

Cell fractionation
Cells were washed in PBS, incubated in trypsin for
5 min/37°C then collected with complete medium.
After centrifugation (500 g, 5 min), cells were
washed in 900 µl cold PBS and spin again. Cell pellets
were resuspended in 200 µl of PTG buffer with a protease
inhibitors (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 2 mM DTT, 10%
glycerol, 1 mM MgCl2). After 10 min on ice, 2 µl of
NP-40 were added to cell suspension and incubated for
3 min at room temperature under gentle stirring. Then the
cells were spin 5 min at 1,200 g at 4°C. The supernatant
was recovered and kept at -20°C. The pellet was
washed 3 times in 200 µl of PTG buffer and was finally
resuspended in classical lysis solution.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Transfection of siRNAs
Cells were treated 24 h post-seeding or later (as
indicated) with 10 µM mafosfamide or vehicle (water).
Using interferin reagent (Polyplus transfection), cells were
transfected with the following siRNA (GE Dharmacon):
siNonTargeted (ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool D-00181077220

Oncotarget

lysates was measured using a Mithras LB940 (Berthold)
and data were analyzed using the MicroWin2000 software.

10-05), siSTING (ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool
L-024333-02-0005),
siIFNAR1
(ON-TARGETplus
SMARTpool L-020209-00-0005), siSTAT1 (ONTARGETplus SMARTpool L-003543-00-0005). Using
cherry-pick RNAi libraries of Dharmacon, we screened 35
siRNAs (sequences available upon request) in combination
with mafosfamide. In brief, cells were seeded in 96-wellplates and treated with 10 µM mafosfamide 24 h later.
Three days after treatment, siRNAs were added, then
fresh medium was added to the cell three days after
siRNAs addition and the plate were analyzed 10 days after
mafosfamide treatment using cell viability test (see below).

Cell viability assay
Cell viability assays were performed in 96-well
plate using CellTiter-Glo Luminescent cell viability
assay reagent (Promega) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. To determine the total growth inhibition
(TGI) concentration of mafosfamide, optical density was
determined at day 0 versus days 3 or 6 (as indicated).
The luminescence was measured with a Mithras LB940
(Berthold).

Conditioned medium production

Colony assay

MCF7 or HBCx-19 cell lines were seeded in 6-well
plates. Twenty four hours later they were treated for 6 h
with 10 µM mafosfamide or vehicle, then media were
removed, cells were washed twice with PBS and fresh
culture medium (without drug) was added. After 144
or 192 h (as indicated), these conditioned media (CMveh
and CMmafo coming from cells treated with vehicule or
mafosfamide, respectively) were collected then added
(without dilution) on naïve MCF7, HBCx-19 or HEK293
cells (Supplementary Figure S3).

After 20, 30, 40 or 50 days of mafosfamide and
siRNAs treatment, the cells were washed, fixed with 4%
PFA 30 min at RT then washed again with PBS. Next,
cells were stained with crystal violet (0.1% crystal violet,
2% ethanol) for 20 min and washed with water. The plate
was dried upside-down. Quantification of the area was
performed using ImageJ software.

Statistics

Cytokine array

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism software. We used multiple t-test, one-way or twoway ANOVA as indicated in the legends to figures. One,
two and three symbols correspond to p value < 0.05,
< 0.01 and < 0.001, respectively.

Cytokines expressed by MCF7 cells after
mafosfamide (or vehicle) treatment were identified using
human cytokine array (panel A from R&D systems,
Minneapolis, MN, USA). Three hundred µg of total
protein lysates were incubated with the membrane
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Horseradish
peroxidase substrate (R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN,
USA) was used to detect protein expression. Arrays were
scanned using Geldoc apparatus (Biorad) and optical
density measurement was obtained with the Image J
software.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Myriam Lassalle,
Delphine Nicole, Sophie Banis, Enora LeVen, MarieEmmanuelle Legrier, Arnaud Beurdeley , Corinne Cordier,
Nicolas Goudin and Lucila Sackmann Sala, for technical
assistance and helpful discussions. The authors also wish
to thank Allan Zwart for kindly giving the ISRE luciferase
reporter plasmid.

Luciferase assay
Luciferase assay was performed in 96-well plate
using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System
(Promega) following the manufacturer’s instructions. In
brief, adherent HEK293 cells were transiently transfected
(lipofectamine, Invivogen) with the ISRE (interferon
sensitive responder element) luciferase responder plasmid
[66] and the Renilla plasmid used for normalization. For
experiments involving STAT1 silencing, siSTAT1 or
siNT were transiently transfected using interferin reagent
(Polyplus) 24 h before reporter plasmid transfection.
Twenty four hours later, cells were stimulated for 24 h
with CMveh or CMmafo, containing or not AG490 (50 µM)
or DMSO (vehicle). The luminescence activity in cell

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
None.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was funded by Xentech, Inserm and the
University Paris Descartes. JG and LC are recipient of a
CIFRE fellowship from the Association Nationale de la
Recherche et de la technologie (ANRT).

77221

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

disseminated tumor cells, and metastases in the MMTVPyMT breast cancer model. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e58183.

  1.	 Yardley DA. Drug resistance and the role of combination
chemotherapy in improving patient outcomes. Int J Breast
Cancer. 2013; 2013:137414.

15.	 Khodarev NN, Beckett M, Labay E, Darga T, Roizman B,
Weichselbaum RR. STAT1 is overexpressed in tumors
selected for radioresistance and confers protection from
radiation in transduced sensitive cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2004; 101:1714–1719.

  2.	 Legrier ME, Bieche I, Gaston J, Beurdeley A, Yvonnet V,
Deas O, Thuleau A, Chateau-Joubert S, Servely JL,
Vacher S, Lassalle M, Depil S, G CT, et al. Activation of
IFN/STAT1 signalling predicts response to chemotherapy
in oestrogen receptor-negative breast cancer. Br J Cancer.
2016; 114:177–187.

16.	 Weichselbaum RR, Ishwaran H, Yoon T, Nuyten DS,
Baker  SW, Khodarev N, Su AW, Shaikh AY, Roach P,
Kreike  B, Roizman B, Bergh J, Pawitan Y, et al. An
interferon-related gene signature for DNA damage
resistance is a predictive marker for chemotherapy and
radiation for breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;
105:18490–18495.

  3.	 Garcia-Tunon I, Ricote M, Ruiz AA, Fraile B, Paniagua R,
Royuela M. Influence of IFN-gamma and its receptors in
human breast cancer. BMC Cancer. 2007; 7:158.

17.	 Barker JR, Koestler BJ, Carpenter VK, Burdette DL,
Waters  CM, Vance RE, Valdivia RH. STING-dependent
recognition of cyclic di-AMP mediates type I interferon
responses during Chlamydia trachomatis infection. MBio.
2013; 4:e00018–00013.

  4.	 Le Page C, Genin P, Baines MG, Hiscott J. Interferon
activation and innate immunity. Rev Immunogenet. 2000;
2:374–386.
  5.	 Woo SR, Corrales L, Gajewski TF. The STING pathway
and the T cell-inflamed tumor microenvironment. Trends
Immunol. 2015; 36:250–256.

18.	 Ishikawa H, Barber GN. STING is an endoplasmic
reticulum adaptor that facilitates innate immune signalling.
Nature. 2008; 455:674–678.

  6.	 Mccoy JL, Rucker R, Petros JA. Cell-mediated immunity to
tumor-associated antigens is a better predictor of survival in
early stage breast cancer than stage, grade or lymph node
status. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2000; 60:227–234.

19.	 Sun W, Li Y, Chen L, Chen H, You F, Zhou X, Zhou Y,
Zhai Z, Chen D, Jiang Z. ERIS, an endoplasmic reticulum
IFN stimulator, activates innate immune signaling
through dimerization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;
106:8653–8658.

  7.	 Lee AH, Gillett CE, Ryder K, Fentiman IS, Miles DW,
Millis RR. Different patterns of inflammation and prognosis
in invasive carcinoma of the breast. Histopathology. 2006;
48:692–701.

20.	 Wang Q, Liu X, Zhou Q, Wang C. Cytosolic sensing
of aberrant DNA: arming STING on the endoplasmic
reticulum. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2015; 19:1397–1409.

  8.	 Andre F, Dieci MV, Dubsky P, Sotiriou C, Curigliano G,
Denkert C, Loi S. Molecular pathways: involvement of
immune pathways in the therapeutic response and outcome
in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:28–33.

21.	 Sun L, Wu J, Du F, Chen X, Chen ZJ. Cyclic GMP-AMP
synthase is a cytosolic DNA sensor that activates the type I
interferon pathway. Science. 2013; 339:786–791.

  9.	 Bindea G, Mlecnik B, Angell HK, Galon J. The immune
landscape of human tumors: Implications for cancer
immunotherapy. Oncoimmunology. 2014; 3:e27456.
10.	 Minn AJ. Interferons and the Immunogenic Effects of
Cancer Therapy. Trends Immunol. 2015; 36:725–737.

22.	 Wu J, Sun L, Chen X, Du F, Shi H, Chen C, Chen ZJ.
Cyclic GMP-AMP is an endogenous second messenger in
innate immune signaling by cytosolic DNA. Science. 2013;
339:826–830.

11.	 Sistigu A, Yamazaki T, Vacchelli E, Chaba K, Enot DP,
Adam J, Vitale I, Goubar A, Baracco EE, Remedios  C,
Fend  L, Hannani D, Aymeric L, et al. Cancer cellautonomous contribution of type I interferon signaling to the
efficacy of chemotherapy. Nat Med. 2014; 20:1301–1309.

23.	 Gentili M, Kowal J, Tkach M, Satoh T, Lahaye X,
Conrad C, Boyron M, Lombard B, Durand S, Kroemer G,
Loew D, Dalod M, Thery C, et al. Transmission of innate
immune signaling by packaging of cGAMP in viral
particles. Science. 2015; 349:1232–1236.

12.	 Magbanua MJ, Wolf DM, Yau C, Davis SE, Crothers J,
Au A, Haqq CM, Livasy C, Rugo HS, Esserman L, Park JW,
‘t Veer LJ. Serial expression analysis of breast tumors
during neoadjuvant chemotherapy reveals changes in cell
cycle and immune pathways associated with recurrence and
response. Breast Cancer Res. 2015; 17:73.

24.	 Ishikawa H, Ma Z, Barber GN. STING regulates
intracellular DNA-mediated, type I interferon-dependent
innate immunity. Nature. 2009; 461:788–792.
25.	 Abe T, Harashima A, Xia T, Konno H, Konno K, Morales A,
Ahn J, Gutman D, Barber GN. STING recognition of
cytoplasmic DNA instigates cellular defense. Mol Cell.
2013; 50:5–15.

13.	 Khodarev NN, Roizman B, Weichselbaum RR. Molecular
pathways: interferon/stat1 pathway: role in the tumor
resistance to genotoxic stress and aggressive growth. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:3015–3021.

26.	 Burdette DL, Vance RE. STING and the innate immune
response to nucleic acids in the cytosol. Nat Immunol.
2013; 14:19–26.

14.	 Franci C, Zhou J, Jiang Z, Modrusan Z, Good Z, Jackson E,
Kouros-Mehr H. Biomarkers of residual disease,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Hartlova A, Erttmann SF, Raffi FA, Schmalz AM, Resch U,
Anugula S, Lienenklaus S, Nilsson LM, Kroger  A,
77222

Oncotarget

Nilsson  JA, Ek T, Weiss S, Gekara NO. DNA damage
primes the type I interferon system via the cytosolic DNA
sensor STING to promote anti-microbial innate immunity.
Immunity. 2015; 42:332–343.

41.	 Vesely MD, Kershaw MH, Schreiber RD, Smyth MJ.
Natural innate and adaptive immunity to cancer. Annu Rev
Immunol. 2011; 29:235–271.
42.	 Agrawal N, Bettegowda C, Cheong I, Geschwind JF,
Drake CG, Hipkiss EL, Tatsumi M, Dang LH, Diaz LA,
Jr., Pomper M, Abusedera M, Wahl RL, et al. Bacteriolytic
therapy can generate a potent immune response against
experimental tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;
101:15172–15177.

28.	 Corrales L, Glickman LH, McWhirter SM, Kanne  DB,
Sivick KE, Katibah GE, Woo SR, Lemmens E,
Banda  T, Leong JJ, Metchette K, Dubensky TW, Jr.
Gajewski TF. Direct Activation of STING in the Tumor
Microenvironment Leads to Potent and Systemic Tumor
Regression and Immunity. Cell Rep. 2015; 11:1018–1030.
29.	 Schmitt CA, Fridman JS, Yang M, Lee S, Baranov E,
Hoffman RM, Lowe SW. A senescence program controlled
by p53 and p16INK4a contributes to the outcome of cancer
therapy. Cell. 2002; 109:335–346.
30.	 Ramana CV, Chatterjee-Kishore M, Nguyen H, Stark GR.
Complex roles of Stat1 in regulating gene expression.
Oncogene. 2000; 19:2619–2627.
31.	 Kuo LJ, Yang LX. Gamma-H2AX - A novel biomarker for
DNA double-strand breaks. In Vivo. 2008; 22:305–309.
32.	 Novakova Z, Hubackova S, Kosar M, JanderovaRossmeislova L, Dobrovolna J, Vasicova P, Vancurova M,
Horejsi Z, Hozak P, Bartek J, Hodny Z. Cytokine expression
and signaling in drug-induced cellular senescence.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:273–284.
33.	 Levin D, Harari D, Schreiber G. Stochastic receptor
expression determines cell fate upon interferon treatment.
Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 31:3252–3266.
34.	 Subramaniam PS, Torres BA, Johnson HM. So many
ligands, so few transcription factors: a new paradigm for
signaling through the STAT transcription factors. Cytokine.
2001; 15:175–187.
35.	 Bekisz J, Baron S, Balinsky C, Morrow A, Zoon KC.
Antiproliferative Properties of Type I and Type II Interferon.
Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2010; 3:994–1015.
36.	 Unterholzner L, Keating SE, Baran M, Horan KA,
Jensen SB, Sharma S, Sirois CM, Jin T, Latz E, Xiao TS,
Fitzgerald KA, Paludan SR, Bowie AG. IFI16 is an innate
immune sensor for intracellular DNA. Nat Immunol. 2010;
11:997–1004.
37.	 Miyamoto M, Fujita T, Kimura Y, Maruyama M, Harada H,
Sudo Y, Miyata T, Taniguchi T. Regulated expression of
a gene encoding a nuclear factor, IRF-1, that specifically
binds to IFN-beta gene regulatory elements. Cell. 1988;
54:903–913.
38.	 Sharma S, Fitzgerald KA. Innate immune sensing of DNA.
PLoS Pathog. 2011; 7:e1001310.
39.	 Chen H, Pei R, Zhu W, Zeng R, Wang Y, Wang Y,
Lu M, Chen X. An alternative splicing isoform of MITA
antagonizes MITA-mediated induction of type I IFNs.
J Immunol. 2014; 192:1162–1170.
40.	 Burkholder B, Huang RY, Burgess R, Luo S, Jones VS,
Zhang W, Lv ZQ, Gao CY, Wang BL, Zhang YM,
Huang  RP. Tumor-induced perturbations of cytokines
and immune cell networks. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1845:182–201.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43.	 Paludan SR, Bowie AG. Immune sensing of DNA.
Immunity. 2013; 38:870–880.
44.	 West AP, Khoury-Hanold W, Staron M, Tal MC, Pineda CM,
Lang SM, Bestwick M, Duguay BA, Raimundo  N,
MacDuff  DA, Kaech SM, Smiley JR, Means  RE, et al.
Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate
immune response. Nature. 2015; 520:553–557.
45.	 Saitoh T, Fujita N, Hayashi T, Takahara K, Satoh T,
Lee H, Matsunaga K, Kageyama S, Omori H, Noda T,
Yamamoto  N, Kawai T, Ishii K, et al. Atg9a controls
dsDNA-driven dynamic translocation of STING and the
innate immune response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;
106:20842–20846.
46.	 Malik P, Zuleger N, las Heras JI, Saiz-Ros N, Makarov AA,
Lazou V, Meinke P, Waterfall M, Kelly DA, Schirmer EC.
NET23/STING promotes chromatin compaction from the
nuclear envelope. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e111851.
47.	 Li T, Diner BA, Chen J, Cristea IM. Acetylation modulates
cellular distribution and DNA sensing ability of interferoninducible protein IFI16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;
109:10558–10563.
48.	 Aglipay JA, Lee SW, Okada S, Fujiuchi N, Ohtsuka T,
Kwak JC, Wang Y, Johnstone RW, Deng C, Qin J, Ouchi T.
A member of the Pyrin family, IFI16, is a novel BRCA1associated protein involved in the p53-mediated apoptosis
pathway. Oncogene. 2003; 22:8931–8938.
49.	 Kondo T, Kobayashi J, Saitoh T, Maruyama K, Ishii KJ,
Barber GN, Komatsu K, Akira S, Kawai T. DNA damage
sensor MRE11 recognizes cytosolic double-stranded
DNA and induces type I interferon by regulating STING
trafficking. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:2969–2974.
50.	 Efimova EV, Liang H, Pitroda SP, Labay E, Darga TE,
Levina V, Lokshin A, Roizman B, Weichselbaum RR,
Khodarev NN. Radioresistance of Stat1 over-expressing
tumour cells is associated with suppressed apoptotic
response to cytotoxic agents and increased IL6-IL8
signalling. Int J Radiat Biol. 2009; 85:421–431.
51.	 Vignais ML, Gilman M. Distinct mechanisms of activation
of Stat1 and Stat3 by platelet-derived growth factor receptor
in a cell-free system. Mol Cell Biol. 1999; 19:3727–3735.
52.	 Jung Y, Lippard SJ. Direct cellular responses to platinuminduced DNA damage. Chem Rev. 2007; 107:1387–1407.
53.	 Moore N, Houghton J, Lyle S. Slow-cycling therapyresistant cancer cells. Stem Cells Dev. 2012; 21:1822–1830.
77223

Oncotarget

54.	 Li S, Kennedy M, Payne S, Kennedy K, Seewaldt VL,
Pizzo  SV, Bachelder RE. Model of tumor dormancy/
recurrence after short-term chemotherapy. PLoS One. 2014;
9:e98021.

IFNgamma-STAT1-IRF1-p53 axis in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. J Cell Sci. 2013; 126:1969–1980.
62.	 Nicolae CM, Aho ER, Choe KN, Constantin D, Hu HJ,
Lee D, Myung K, Moldovan GL. A novel role for the monoADP-ribosyltransferase PARP14/ARTD8 in promoting
homologous recombination and protecting against
replication stress. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:3143–3153.

55.	 Fillmore CM, Kuperwasser C. Human breast cancer cell
lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew, give rise to
phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy.
Breast Cancer Res. 2008; 10:R25.

63.	 Bachmann SB, Frommel SC, Camicia R, Winkler HC,
Santoro R, Hassa PO. DTX3L and ARTD9 inhibit IRF1
expression and mediate in cooperation with ARTD8
survival and proliferation of metastatic prostate cancer cells.
Mol Cancer. 2014; 13:125.

56.	 Schoggins JW, MacDuff DA, Imanaka N, Gainey  MD,
Shrestha B, Eitson JL, Mar KB, Richardson RB,
Ratushny  AV, Litvak V, Dabelic R, Manicassamy B,
Aitchison JD, et al. Pan-viral specificity of IFN-induced
genes reveals new roles for cGAS in innate immunity.
Nature. 2014; 505:691–695.

64.	 Alami N, Paterson J, Belanger S, Juste S, Grieshaber CK,
Leyland-Jones B. Comparative analysis of xanafide
cytotoxicity in breast cancer cell lines. Br J Cancer. 2007;
97:58–64.

57.	 Cheon H, Borden EC, Stark GR. Interferons and their
stimulated genes in the tumor microenvironment. Semin
Oncol. 2014; 41:156–173.

65.	 Munoz-Fontela C, Macip S, Martinez-Sobrido L, Brown L,
Ashour J, Garcia-Sastre A, Lee SW, Aaronson SA.
Transcriptional role of p53 in interferon-mediated antiviral
immunity. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:1929–1938.

58.	 Javle M, Curtin NJ. The role of PARP in DNA repair and its
therapeutic exploitation. Br J Cancer. 2011; 105:1114–1122.
59.	 Vyas S, Chang P. New PARP targets for cancer therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:502–509.

66.	 Ning Y, Riggins RB, Mulla JE, Chung H, Zwart A, Clarke R.
IFNgamma restores breast cancer sensitivity to fulvestrant
by regulating STAT1, IFN regulatory factor 1, NF-kappaB,
BCL2 family members, and signaling to caspase-dependent
apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:1274–1285.

60.	 Yan Q, Xu R, Zhu L, Cheng X, Wang Z, Manis J,
Shipp MA. BAL1 and its partner E3 ligase, BBAP, link
Poly(ADP-ribose) activation, ubiquitylation, and doublestrand DNA repair independent of ATM, MDC1, and RNF8.
Mol Cell Biol. 2013; 33:845–857.
61.	 Camicia R, Bachmann SB, Winkler HC, Beer M,
Tinguely  M, Haralambieva E, Hassa PO. BAL1/ARTD9
represses the anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

77224

Oncotarget

