HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 March 10; 164(6): 1233–1247. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.049.

The Basis of OncoImmunology
A. Karolina Palucka1 and Lisa M Coussens2
A. Karolina Palucka: karolina.palucka@jax.org; Lisa M Coussens: coussenl@ohsu.edu
1The

Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA

2Department

Author Manuscript

of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health
and Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd, Mail Code L215, Rm 5508, Richard
Jones Hall, Portland, OR 97239-3098 USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Cancer heterogeneity, which enables clonal survival and treatment resistance, is shaped by active
immune responses. Antigen-specific T cells can control cancer, as revealed clinically by
immunotherapeutics such as adoptive T–cell transfer and checkpoint blockade. The host immune
system is thus a powerful tool that if better harnessed could significantly enhance the efficacy of
chemotherapeutics and improve outcomes for cancer sufferers. To realize this vision, however, a
number of research frontiers must be tackled. These include developing strategies for neutralizing
tumor-promoting inflammation, broadening T cell repertoires (via vaccination), and elucidating
the mechanisms by which immune cells organize tumor microenvironments to regulate T cell
activity. Such efforts will pave the way for identifying new targets for combination therapies that
overcome resistance to current treatments and promote long-term cancer control.

Keywords
cancer; inflammation; immunogenic cell death; leukocytes; dendritic cells; vaccine

Introduction

Author Manuscript

Cancer is an insidious disease traditionally classified by cell and tissue type of origin.
Cancer has historically been treated according to a “one size fits all” approach based on
broad pathologic criteria and involving various regimens of cytotoxic therapy. With the
advent of modern sequencing methodologies, however, we now appreciate that significant
genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenetic heterogeneity exists within individual tumor types;
this recognition has enabled subclassification of tumors of common origin. This in turn has
led to improved outcomes for some cancer types, as response rates to targeted and cytotoxic
therapies increase when patients are stratified based on the molecular characteristics of their
tumors. Examples include imatinib in chronic myelogenous leukemia (Druker et al., 2006),

Correspondence to: A. Karolina Palucka, karolina.palucka@jax.org; Lisa M Coussens, coussenl@ohsu.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 2

Author Manuscript

HER2-targeted therapies for HER2-positive breast cancer (Shepard et al., 1991), and
estrogen antagonists for estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancers (Heiser et al., 2012).
These molecular advances helped usher in a new era of precision medicine that is reshaping
clinical treatment across the cancer spectrum. However, there remain significant fractions of
patients that do not respond to “designer” therapies even when their tumors are classified
based on molecular and pathologic criteria. Additional tumor or systemic characteristic(s)
are thus unaccounted for that not only impact neoplastic growth and dissemination, but also
impact response to therapy.

Author Manuscript

Recent seminal in vivo studies revealed that neoplastic cells rely on the diversity of normal
resident and recruited accessory cells to support their evolution (Hanahan and Coussens,
2012). Accessory cells are now recognized as “neoplastic cell-extrinsic hallmarks of cancer”
and include those forming the hematogenous and lymphatic vasculature, tissue-specific
mesenchymal support cells and myeloid and lymphoid-lineage immune cells. Accessory
cells integrate with the dynamic soluble and insoluble matrices constituting the “tumor
stroma”; collectively, they fuel neoplastic evolution (Hanahan and Coussens, 2012). In other
words, reciprocal interactions between accessory cells, their mediators, structural
components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and genetically altered neoplastic cells
regulate all aspects of tumorigenicity. This realization fueled the development of anti-cancer
agents targeting the vasculature (Kerbel, 2011). However, it is now clear that some aspects
of the immune response accompanying tumor development, such as those that neutralize
tumor-promoting chronic inflammation and/or embolden or unleash the cytotoxic activities
of antigen-specific T cells, also represent tractable targets for anti-cancer therapy (Coussens
et al., 2013; Pardoll, 2012).

Author Manuscript

Indeed, cancer is visible to the immune system, i.e., immunogenic, during early neoplasia.
Classic studies from Schreiber and colleagues in mice with carcinogen-initiated sarcomas
revealed that the immune system could recognize and reject cancerous cells (Dunn et al.,
2004). The elimination can be explained by cytotoxicity by antigen-specific T cells
responding to relatively high mutational burdens induced by carcinogens and thus providing
neo-antigens for T cell priming; these findings established the principles of elimination,
equilibrium and eventually escape when neoplastic cells become invisible to the immune
system (Dunn et al., 2004). Neoplastic cells can also escape when tumor arises out of
chronically inflamed tissues – there, chronic infiltration of tissue by leukocytes (e.g., type 2
cytokine-activated myeloid cells and immune suppressive B, T and myeloid subsets) subvert
T cell-directed elimination and thus aid tissue-based programs, e.g., angiogenesis,
lymphangiogenesis, matrix remodeling, etc., supporting neoplastic progression (Coussens et
al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

Mounting observations in humans support the concept that cancer initiation and progression
is significantly impacted by altered or misled immune responses (Figure 1). Individuals
suffering from chronic inflammatory conditions are at increased risk for developing cancer
(Thun et al., 2004). Incidence of viral (DNA tumor virus) and carcinogen-associated cancers
is increased in immune-compromised individuals, even as the relative risk of cancer types
lacking viral or carcinogen etiology is diminished (reviewed in: (de Visser et al., 2006)).
Age-related immunosenescence likely plays a role in increased incidence of malignancy in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 3

Author Manuscript

aged individuals (Campisi et al., 2011). The advent of some biologic therapies impacting
how tissues activate and resolve inflammation, e.g., tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockade
(Bongartz et al., 2006), also skews cancer incidence metrics. However, the role(s) that
immune pathways play in driving malignancy remains to be clarified. How does the immune
system recognize tissue-specific mediators triggering and maintaining chronic inflammatory
responses? What oncogenic events and altered metabolic states lead to the generation of
neo-antigens that in turn induce T cell responses? What physiological mechanisms regulate
immune homeostasis such that (acute) inflammation can be resolved as rapidly as it is
activated (a critical control program to thwart autoimmunity)? What is the role of the host
microbiota in regulating systemic immune responses to neoplasia? How do neoplastic cells
survive immune attack by T cells?

Author Manuscript

A common feature of all cancers, regardless of origin, is prominent presence of diverse
assemblages of immune cells (Coussens et al., 2013). The consequences of such infiltrates
on the fate of cancerous cells are diverse. For example, under continual immune pressure,
i.e., antigen presentation to T cells, neoplastic cells become “immune-edited” to escape
immune surveillance (Dunn et al., 2004), and instead co-opt immune cells to favor their
sustained proliferation (Balkwill et al., 2005). Nonetheless, recent studies demonstrate that
the presence of lymphoid aggregates is linked with improved responses to cancer therapies,
for example standard cytotoxic therapies, vaccine-based treatments or immune checkpoint
blockade (Topalian et al., 2015). Such “hot” tumors are thus more amenable to control than
“cold” tumors, i.e., tumors with diminished T cell infiltrates, thus driving modern cancer
medicine to investigate how to reprogram the tumor microenvironment (TME) to attract the
right type of immune infiltrate. This topic, along with other open questions in the field of
oncoimmunology is discussed hereunder.

Author Manuscript

The makings of the immune response to cancer
Tumors are organized tissues with numerous reciprocal local and systemic connections with
immune cell populations of both the myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Here, we summarize
the key myeloid and lymphoid populations regulating the immune response to cancer, and
how the fundamental physiological processes they govern are harnessed for neoplastic
progression and tumor formation.
The myeloid compartment

Author Manuscript

Myeloid cells have multiple homeostatic functions that are coopted by evolving neoplasms;
these can be roughly summarized as i) antigen capture for degradation (macrophages) or
presentation (dendritic cells (DCs)); ii) tissue repair (macrophages), and iii) effector
functions (mast cells, monocytes and granulocytes). Neoplastic cells can alter the steadystate activity of all myeloid cells present in the TME, including tissue-resident and bloodderived cells, by secreting factors such as interleukin (IL)-6 or granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), that increase recruitment and proliferation of
immature myeloid cells atypical under physiological conditions (Gabrilovich et al., 2012).
An important feature of myeloid cells is their functional plasticity in response to
environmental signals. This property can dictate such opposite outcomes as antigen

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 4

Author Manuscript

degradation or antigen presentation when macrophages acquire DC capabilities (Banchereau
et al., 2000); tissue repair rather than inflammation when macrophages are polarized towards
type 2 states and protective or non-protective T cell immunity when programmed by cancerderived factors (Balkwill et al., 2005). Thus, plasticity and communication within the
myeloid compartment, and between myeloid and other immune cells and stromal
components, is critical for tumor formation.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer antigen presentation and dendritic cells—Cancer antigens are presented to
T cells either at tumor sites or in draining lymph nodes by DCs. Cancer antigens, soluble
and cell-borne, are transported to lymph nodes via lymphatic vessels. Soluble antigen is
captured by lymph-node-resident DCs while tissue-resident DCs capture antigen at tumor
sites; either population can present antigen locally or migrate through lymphatic vessels to
present in lymph nodes (Steinman, 2011). DCs display protein antigens in the context of
classical major histocompatibility (MHC) class I and MHC class II molecules, or lipid
antigens in the context of non-classical CD1 molecules that allow selection of rare antigenspecific T lymphocytes including CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, and NK T cells. Compared
with other antigen-presenting cells (APCs), DCs are extremely efficient in their ability to
induce antigen-specific T cell responses, justifying their name “professional APCs”
(Lanzavecchia and Sallusto, 2001). Naïve CD8+ T cells differentiate into cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) in lymphoid organs upon encounter with DCs presenting tumorderived peptides in the context of co-stimulation through CD80, CD70 and 4-1BB, as well
as through DC-derived cytokines such as IL-12, type I interferon and IL-15 (Steinman,
2012). The priming of new T cell repertoires during tumorigenesis may be critical for
clinical success of therapeutic agents aiming to unleash antigen-specific CTL activities.
Naive CD4+ T cells can give rise to helper cells with distinct cytokine profiles, or to FoxP3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) whose role is to dampen CTL activity and avoid autoimmune
responses (Zhu and Paul, 2008).
DCs express numerous pattern recognition receptors, including lectins, Toll-like receptors
(TLRs), NOD-like receptors (NLRs) and helicases, through which they can sense microbes
and tissue damage (cancer) such as increased pericellular nucleic acids (Pulendran, 2015). If
DCs do not receive maturation signals, such as when exposed to high levels of IL-10
(Ruffell et al., 2014), they remain immature and antigen presentation instead leads to T cell
suppression. DC plasticity in response to extrinsic signals, together with the existence of
discrete subsets with unique functions, empowers DCs as key initiators and regulators of the
immune response (Pulendran, 2015). We will illustrate this point briefly; mouse and human
DC subset biology was recently reviewed elsewhere (Merad et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

The diversity of human DC subsets was revealed by studies of blood and skin DCs. Three
main cell-surface markers distinguished human-blood-circulating DC subsets: CD303
(BDCA-2) on plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), CD1c (or BDCA-1) expressed on the majority of
circulating DCs, and CD141/BDCA-3 expressed on a small fraction (Merad et al., 2013).
Human CD141+CD1c− DCs uniquely express TLR3, produce IL-12 and efficiently crossprime CD8+ T cells when activated with poly I:C (Joffre et al., 2012). However other human
DCs, such as epidermal Langerhans cells and CD1c+ DCs, also cross-present antigens to
CD8+ T cells. Indeed, our studies have unraveled the basic principles by which human DC
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 5

Author Manuscript

subsets differentially regulate CD8+ T cells (Klechevsky et al., 2008). Thus, human
Langerhans cells are highly efficient at priming cytotoxic CD8+ T cells while CD14+ dermal
DCs prime type 2 cytokine-secreting CD8+ T cells (Klechevsky et al., 2008). Blood and
tissue-resident CD1c+ DCs, but not CD141+ DCs, exposed to live-attenuated influenza virus
promote CD103 (αE integrin) expression on CD8+ T cells and their accumulation in
epithelia (Yu et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

The lymphoid compartment in tumors includes natural killer (NK) cells, γδ T cells, NK T
cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and B cells. Their functional activity depends upon
expression of restriction elements, including peptide-MHC complexes (pMHC; for T cells),
the MHC class I molecule (for NK cells), or surface proteins (for B cell products, i.e.,
antibodies) that can be recognized in a specific manner. In addition, lymphoid cells can be
induced to secrete different types of cytokines based on effector functions. For example,
following an activating stimulus, TH1-polarized CD4+ T cells secrete IL-2, TNFα, and IFNγ; in conjunction with cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, they promote macrophage cytotoxic activity
(Stout and Bottomly, 1989) and can induce up-regulation of antigen processing and
expression of MHCI and II molecules in professional APCs (i.e., macrophages and DCs). In
contrast, expression of IL-4, -5, -6, -10 and -13 by TH2-polarized CD4+ T cells can induce T
cell anergy and loss of T cell-mediated cytotoxicity, enhance humoral immunity and
regulate the tumor-promoting activities of macrophages (DeNardo et al., 2009).

Author Manuscript

CD8+ T cells are considered the major anti-cancer effector cells as they can give rise to
CTLs that kill cancer cells presenting a specific pMHC complex (Appay et al., 2008). CTLs
can be generated through either the priming of naive T cells or reprogramming of memory T
cells. Naive CD8+ T cells differentiate into CTLs in lymphoid organs upon encounter with
APCs presenting tumor-derived peptides in the context of appropriate co-stimulation and
cytokine help. The ideal properties of anti-cancer CD8+ T cells include: high affinity for
pMHC on tumor cells; high levels of cytotoxic mediators, e.g., granzymes A and B and
perforin; expression of surface molecules allowing trafficking into the tumor; and extended
longevity and memory, thus enabling CTL generation upon antigen re-exposure (Appay et
al., 2008).

Author Manuscript

Memory T cells have long been described as two circulating populations: central memory T
cells that migrate between the secondary lymphoid organs and are capable of mounting
proliferative responses on pathogen re-encounter; and effector memory T cells that traffic
between blood and extralymphoid compartments for peripheral immune surveillance
(Mueller et al., 2012). Tissue-resident memory T cells are a third and phenotypically distinct
category. Studies in mice and humans have shown this latter population can be superior to
circulating central memory T cells at providing rapid long-term protection against reinfection (Sheridan and Lefrancois, 2011). Therefore, an active mechanism of peripheral T
cell retention likely exists not only to facilitate clearance of infected cells, but also to
promote accumulation at sites having cleared an infectious virus. CD103/β7 integrin endows
peripheral CD8+ T cells with a unique capacity to access epithelial compartments.
Expression of CD103 on CTLs mediates adherence to E-cadherin and appears to be
important in the final stages of neoplastic cell lysis and rejection (Le Floc’h et al., 2007).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 6

Author Manuscript

Indeed, for mucosal cancer vaccines, homing to and retention of CD8+ T cells in mucosa is
critical for efficacy (Sandoval et al., 2013).
Upon arrival in tumor beds, CD8+ T cells must confront numerous barriers including
intrinsic checkpoint regulators, such as CD28-CTLA-4, PD1-PD-L1, and ILTs (Pardoll,
2012); extrinsic checkpoint regulators, such as Treg cells (Fehervari and Sakaguchi, 2004)
or myeloid cells (Gabrilovich et al., 2012); a corrupted TME with protumor inflammation
(Coussens et al., 2013); antigen loss and immune evasion of tumor targets (Klebanoff et al.,
2011); and tissue-specific alterations, such as fatty cells in breast cancer or desmofibrosis in
pancreatic cancer stroma. Defining strategies for bypassing these obstacles and improving
the clinical efficacy of T cell therapies is the object of intense study.

Author Manuscript

An important concept recently proposed by Mellman and colleagues is the cancer-immunity
cycle (Chen and Mellman, 2013). It becomes apparent that any effective immune response
against cancer will generate resistance via physiological pathways that evolved to protect
tissue homeostasis. Hereunder, we discuss how this cycle is altered in cancer pathogenesis
and how it can be harnessed therapeutically. Clearly, combination therapies that intervene at
several distinct pathways within the cancer-immunity cycle are needed to achieve cancer
control.

Chronic inflammation and alterations of leukocyte compartments in cancer
Basic principles

Author Manuscript

Unabated inflammation is a hallmark of cancer and is mediated by immune cells attracted to
or residing at sites of neoplastic transformation (Balkwill et al., 2005). Indeed, immune cells
are selectively recruited into early neoplastic tissues, likely in response to hardwired
pathways utilized by all tissues to resist/repair damage caused by bacterial, viral or other
pathogenic assaults. When successful, “initiated” pre-neoplastic cells are purged by the
immune system (Dunn et al., 2004). When the immune system fails, neoplastic cells are
retained in “damaged” TMEs and provided a survival advantage resulting from abundant
bioavailable mediators liberated as a function of tissue remodeling (Hanahan and Coussens,
2012). Ensuing neoplastic progression requires sustained presence of select immune
subtypes that, combined with ongoing host-derived programs (angiogenesis, matrix and
tissue remodeling, etc.), contribute to cancer progression (Hanahan and Coussens, 2012)
(Figure 2).

Author Manuscript

The classic view that immune cells merely facilitate tumor rejection has been supplanted by
a more complex view of leukocytes having both tumor-promoting and tumor-inhibiting
properties (Coussens et al., 2013). This is best explained by the existence of (at least) two
types of inflammation with opposing effects on tumors: chronic inflammation, which
promotes neoplastic cell survival, angiogenesis, tissue remodeling and metastasis, and acute
inflammation that triggers neoplastic cell destruction. While chronic inflammation is often
linked with the presence of TH2 responses, acute inflammation associated with cancer
destruction is linked to TH1 responses.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

As neoplastic cells escape elimination, some become less immunogenic by down-regulating
MHC molecules; however, most if not all also activate intrinsic gene-expression programs
that are inherently T cell-suppressive and myelo-stimulatory, e.g., TH2 responses. Cytokines
implicated in these scenarios include transforming growth factor (TGF)β; IL-4, -13, -8, and
-10; thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP); and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)
(Coussens et al., 2013). This enables recruitment of FoxP3+CD4+ Treg cells, TH2-CD4+ T
cells, TH2-polarized macrophages and monocytes, and B regulatory cells (Bregs). In
response to TH2-mediated activation, myeloid cells commonly increase synthesis of
angiogenic (e.g., VEGF), growth and/or survival (e.g., EGF, TNFα) factors that directly
regulate epithelial cell proliferation, as well as tissue-remodeling enzymes (e.g., metallo-,
cysteine, and serine proteases). These activities are remarkably pro-tumorigenic in that they
nurture a TME favoring neoplastic cell survival and sustained proliferation (Balkwill et al.,
2005). Simultaneous TH2 activation of macrophages and monocytes also increases
expression of molecules, e.g., inducible nitric oxide synthase or Arginase 1, that directly and
indirectly suppress CD8+ T cell proliferation, and cytokines such as IL-10 that inhibit DC
maturation and antigen cross-presentation to T cells (Ruffell et al., 2014). Thus, TH2-type
immune microenvironments are both tumor-promoting and immune-suppressive. Notably, in
the colon, tumor-promoting immunity via IL-17 (TH17)-mediated activation of myeloid and
lymphoid cells has been reported (Wang et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2009).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tumor-promoting activities of the myeloid compartment—Owing to their
established role in wound healing, we investigated the ability of myeloid cells infiltrating
early benign tissues to foster malignancy. In mice prone to squamous carcinogenesis, mast
cells and macrophages activate pro-neoplastic angiogenic and tissue-remodeling programs
(Coussens et al., 1999). In other studies of mice bearing mammary carcinomas,
macrophages could regulate neoplastic cell dissemination and metastasis via EGF-mediated
paracrine interactions with neoplastic epithelial cells (Lin et al., 2001). In human cancers,
multiple studies have reported that the presence of macrophages in stroma correlates with
aggressive disease and outcome (Komohara et al., 2014). Macrophages are recruited into
tumors following activation of colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R) by either CSF1
or IL-34, two high-affinity ligands for CSF1R; the chemokine CCL2 may also facilitate
macrophage recruitment (Qian et al., 2011). A CSF1-response gene-expression signature has
been identified in 17–25% of breast cancers associated with decreased estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor expression (Beck et al., 2009); serum concentrations of CSF-1
correlate positively with breast tumor size and predict poor survival (Aharinejad et al.,
2013). In addition, in two independent breast cancer cohorts, intratumoral macrophage
presence was correlated with potentially prognostic tumor features (high grade, hormone
receptor-negativity, basal-like subtype, and increased risk of death) (Komohara et al., 2014).
Macrophages therefore serve as promising targets for novel therapeutic interventions,
particularly for patients with high-risk disease. Conversely, favorable prognosis has been
associated with some tumor types exhibiting increased macrophage infiltration, e.g., nonsmall-cell lung cancer, prostate, colorectal and gastric cancers (Komohara et al., 2014).
Whether these distinctions reflect true differences in macrophage biology and function or
arise due to discordant detection methodologies is unclear.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Neutrophils, on the other hand, are typically less abundant than macrophages in solid
tumors, but their presence correlates with reduced survival in head and neck and breast
cancers, and similar to macrophages, neutrophils develop polarized phenotypes that either
favor or restrict tumor progression (Fridlender and Albelda, 2012). Recent studies identified
granule products that suppress T cell function (Sippel et al., 2011). Neutrophil expansion in
mammary carcinomas of mice bearing mutant p53 alleles is driven by T cell-derived IL-17;
this results in systemic granulocyte colony-stimulating-factor (G-CSF)-dependent expansion
and polarization towards a T cell-suppressive phenotype that facilitates metastatic
dissemination and colonization (Coffelt et al., 2015). In contrast, neutrophils create a tumorrestrictive microenvironment in the lung that resists neoplastic progression and metastatic
dissemination (Fridlender and Albelda, 2012).

Author Manuscript

Eosinophils, like other myeloid lineage cells, can exert cytotoxic immune-effector activities.
Tumor-associated tissue eosinophilia (TATE) is associated with improved prognosis for a
number of malignancies, including gastrointestinal, bladder and prostate cancers; in contrast,
TATE is associated with poor outcome in Hodgkin’s lymphoma, cervical carcinoma, and
oral squamous-cell carcinoma (Davis and Rothenberg, 2014). Eosinophils have been
associated with degranulation and release of cytotoxic proteins that mediate tumor rejection;
recent results also reveal their role in normalizing the vasculature to improve CD8+ T cell
trafficking associated with tumor regression (Carretero et al., 2015).

Author Manuscript

Monocytes, once in tissues, can differentiate into macrophages and DCs. Two circulating
monocyte populations have been identified: classical inflammatory monocytes that are
CCR2HIGH, and non-classical patrolling monocytes that are CX3CR1HIGH (Geissmann et
al., 2003). Recruitment of inflammatory monocytes into tissues is normally guided by the
CCR2-CCL2 axis in response to parasitic or bacterial infections; in tumors, when
CCR2HIGH monocytes are recruited, they can promote neoplastic cell survival and
extravasation through VEGF and CSF1 production (Qian et al., 2011). CCR2HIGH
monocytes promote survival of metastatic cells through a CCL3-dependent mechanism
(Kitamura et al., 2015). CX3CR1HIGH monocytes instead patrol capillaries in response to
the CXC3R1-CX3CL1 axis; in these locales, they are positioned to scavenge particles and
debris, and thus are more likely to be found in wounds when inflammation is resolving. At
sites of metastasis, CX3CR1HIGH monocytes recruit NK cells that in turn kill metastatic
cells, thereby providing a potent survival advantage (Hanna et al., 2015). In pancreatic
adenocarcinomas, activation of the Ras oncogene leads to increased expression of GM-CSF
and recruitment of immature monocytes that subsequently suppress CD8+ T cell
proliferation to enhance tumor progression (Pylayeva-Gupta et al., 2012), analogous to other
tumor systems (Gabrilovich et al., 2012).

Author Manuscript

Mast cells, present in all vascularized tissues, respond to diverse stimuli by either secreting
or releasing (via degranulation) biologically active compounds, e.g., proteolytic enzymes,
heparin, histamine, prostaglandins, cytokines and chemokines. Mast cells are key for
maintaining tissue homeostasis and best known for their effector functions following IgEstimulated allergic responses and anaphylaxis (Metz et al., 2007). Mast cells have been
implicated in the vascularization of a multitude of solid human tumor types, likely owing to
their proteolytic products and high VEGF expression following activation (Coussens et al.,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 9

Author Manuscript

1999; Marichal et al., 2013) following CCL2-mediated recruitment where their bioactive
mediators promote neoplastic progression.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tissue-specificity of myeloid programing—While it is conceptually unclear how
some myeloid cells adopt a TH2-or protumorigenic state to support neoplastic progression,
some clues have emerged in recent genetic studies. Several groups revealed that
lymphocytes drive initial myeloid cell programming to foster chronic inflammation in a
tissue-specific manner. For example, during mammary branching morphogenesis and ductal
carcinogenesis, cytokines derived from TH2-CD4+ T cells, e.g., IL-4 and -13, activate
macrophages and monocytes infiltrating mammary tissue (DeNardo et al., 2009; Plaks et al.,
2015). In neoplastic scenarios, signaling downstream of IL-4 receptors on monocytes and
macrophages triggers protumorigenic TH2 gene-expression programs that activate tissueremodeling cascades, via expression and activation of cathepsin proteases, and immunesuppressive programs, via upregulation of IL-10 and immune-checkpoint molecules
(DeNardo et al., 2009; Gocheva et al., 2010; Mitchem et al., 2013; Ruffell et al., 2014). Mast
cells and macrophages (as well as other myeloid cell types) are TH2-programmed in early
squamous and pancreatic carcinomas by a diversity of pathways, which also include
activation of immunoglobulin receptors (FcγRs) by immune complexes (ICs) (Affara et al.,
2014; Andreu et al., 2010). ICs are composed of antigen-specific antibodies and complement
proteins that variably activate FcR and complement receptors depending on composition of
IC and status of the myeloid cell being activated (Karsten and Kohl, 2012). While these
humoral immune-regulated paracrine programs were known to shape outcomes in chronic
inflammatory diseases, recognition of their significance in solid tumors was paradigm
shifting, and highlighted the significance of hard-wired tissue-specific programs shaping
host response to disease. These data illustrate the diversity of pathways utilized by innate
immune cells to propel cancer by directly enhancing tissue-based programs favoring
survival of neoplastic cells, in concert with direct and indirect activation of programs to
extinguish cytotoxic immune responses aiding immune escape (Figure 2).

TH2-based targets for anti-cancer therapy

Author Manuscript

The collective evidence supports a protumorigenic role for chronic inflammation in cancer
but also suggests this inflammation is malleable, akin to the healing of acute wounds during
which immune cells toggle between TH1 and TH2 states. Thus, the hypothesis that TH2driven myeloid cells could be re-programmed, or at least neutralized, to reduce the presence
or immunosuppressive status of macrophages, trigger anti-tumor immunity, and/or suppress
tumor growth has been tested in several tissue-specific cancer models. We and others have
evaluated CSF1-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (αCSF1 mAB) and small-molecule
CSF1R inhibitors for their ability to suppress macrophage survival and/or presence in
tumors, in combination with chemotherapy (CTX) or radiation therapy (RT) (DeNardo et al.,
2011; Ruffell et al., 2014; Shiao et al., 2015). These studies reveal increased chemo-and
radiation sensitivity associated with anti-tumor immune responses directed by CD8+ T cell
infiltration of tumors, culminating in reduced primary tumor growth and metastasis with
increased survival. Other preclinical studies revealed that CSF1/CSF1R-blockade, as
monotherapy or combined with CTX/RT, improved outcomes for glioma, prostate and
pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and melanoma, where CSF1R-blockade improved antitumor
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 10

Author Manuscript

efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade and adoptive T cell therapy (reviewed in: (Ruffell
and Coussens, 2015)). Importantly, administration of RG7155, a CSF1R-activation-blocking
mAb, in patients with diffuse-type giant cell tumors reduced CSF1R+CD163+ macrophage
levels; this translated into objective clinical responses (Ries et al., 2014). Treatment of
tenosynovial giant-cell tumors with a small-molecule inhibitor of CSF1R kinase increased
progression-free survival and improved outcomes as a monotherapy (Tap et al., 2015). The
macrophage presence in tumors has also been therapeutically manipulated by targeting the
macrophage signaling protein acting through its transmembrane receptor kinase RON,
wherein activation of RON in macrophages favors conversion of micrometastatic lesions to
overt metastases by suppressing antitumor immune responses. Functional RON blockade in
preclinical models potentiates tumor-specific CD8+ T cell responses, indicating that RON
inhibitors may also improve outcomes for cancer patients (Eyob et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) is an attractive target as BTK is activated downstream of the
B-cell receptor and FcγR and PI3Kγ in some myeloid subsets (Smith et al., 2001). In vitro,
tumor cell challenge via co-culture with splenic cells from B-cell-deficient versus B-cellproficient mice revealed that IFNγ release from CD8+ and NK cells is increased when B
cells are absent, whereas presence of B cells or B-cell-derived IL-10 was associated with
reduced IFNγ (Inoue et al., 2006). Though these in vitro studies indicate that B cells can
direct T cell responses, the role of myeloid cells as mediators of these responses is now clear
and indicate that therapies targeting common pathways in B cells and/or myeloid cells, such
as SYK, BTK, PI3Kγ, may be efficacious in solid tumors, analogous to efficacy observed
for BTK and PI3Kδ inhibitors in B-cell malignancies (Hendriks et al., 2014). This concept
was recently validated preclinically, whereby BTK inhibition enhanced survival of mice
bearing pancreatic adenocarcinoma (Gunderson et al., 2016; Masso-Valles et al., 2015),
neuroendocrine cancers (Soucek et al., 2011), and other subcutaneous tumors (Sagiv-Barfi et
al., 2015) where a common feature was reduced inflammation and inflammatory
desmoplasia with evidence of macrophage repolarization.

Author Manuscript

If these preclinical findings are any indication, immune therapies targeting macrophages
and/or other protumorigenic immune cells could alter the human tumor immune
microenvironment in a way that fosters the cytotoxic properties of CD8+ T cells. As
immune-checkpoint inhibitors of pathways regulating T cell activity are proving efficacious
for subsets of cancer patients, we predict that combining these two immune-based
approaches represents a compelling clinical opportunity. However, it is likely that not all
tumors will respond; thus, identifying predictive biomarkers and correlates of therapeutic
response is a top priority. Based on preclinical data evaluating macrophage antagonists and
checkpoint inhibitors, we predict that biomarkers of response will also be reflected by
changes in peripheral blood. Such biomarkers will form the basis for simple, non-invasive
diagnostic and/or prognostic screens aiding early detection in susceptible populations
(Figure 4).
In preclinical models, regardless of tumor or approach, TH1 immunity emerges when
dominant TH2-driver pathways are attenuated; when concomitant with cytotoxic therapy,
tumor growth stalls or regresses by CD8+ T cell-dependent mechanisms. These findings
highlight the importance of neutralizing pro-tumor inflammation as a therapeutic strategy,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 11

Author Manuscript

and indicate that tumor-infiltrating CTLs can be mobilized in tumors with low mutational
burdens. These data also highlight the clinical need for biomarkers that identity tissuespecific programs driving TH2 immune responses; such data is needed to inform precision
medicine strategies employing TH2-blockade, in concert with other immune, targeted or
cytotoxic approaches (Figure 4).

Immune-targeted therapies focused on T cells
Basic principles

Author Manuscript

Cancer immunotherapy historically relied on two principal mechanisms of action: i)
“passive” immunotherapy via provision of anti-tumor antibodies, e.g., Trastuzumab (αHER2
mAB) or Rituximab (αCD20 mAB), or adoptive transfer of cytotoxic T and NK cells; and
ii) “active” immunotherapy that mobilizes the patient’s immune cells via checkpoint
blockade, i.e., administration of antibodies directed against immune-regulatory checkpoint
molecules expressed on T cells, or via vaccines that expand antigen-specific T cells. In all
circumstances, T cells are the drug—and we are learning that T cells have the ability to
clinically control some cancers (Postow et al., 2015). T cells can be targeted in three major
ways: 1) by being liberated by checkpoint inhibitors; 2) through adoptive transfer when T
cells are missing, as validated by the clinical success of genetically engineered T cell
therapies: and 3) through induction in vivo by vaccination or endogenous mechanisms
subsequent to other anti-cancer therapies (e.g., CTX, targeted therapies or anticancer
antibodies) (Palucka and Banchereau, 2013).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) can unleash the power of naturally occurring T cells by
eliminating negative signals that block T cell function (Pardoll, 2012). ICB has produced
durable clinical responses and improved survival across a variety of cancers (Topalian et al.,
2015). CTL expansion and function is carefully regulated by Cytotoxic T-lymphocyteassociated protein 4 (CTLA-4), Programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1) and other
molecules, so as to maintain a delicate balance between the resolution of infection,
elimination of infected cells, protection of tissue homeostasis and prevention of autoimmune
attack. CTLA-4 is a cell-surface receptor expressed by activated T cells with homology to
the T cell costimulatory molecule CD28. Although CD28 and CTLA-4 are both ligands for
B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86), they serve opposing roles in regulating T cell activation.
CD28 provides costimulatory signals required for T cell activation, whereas CTLA-4
negatively modulates T cell responses by raising the activation threshold for T cell priming;
thus, CTLA-4 is probably most important during priming. PD-1 binds programmed-deathligand 1 (PD-L1; a.k.a., B7-H1 or CD274) expressed by neoplastic cells, various immune
cells, mesenchymal support cells and vascular cells; this interaction negatively regulates T
cell activation when engaged with an APC and/or effector function when engaged with other
PD-L1-positive cells. Indeed, binding of PD-L1 to its receptors suppresses T cell migration,
proliferation and restricts cancer cell killing (Topalian et al., 2015); thus, PD-1 is probably
most important in regulating effector functions after CD8+ T cells are activated. PD-1 and
CTLA-4 regulate distinct phases of T cell differentiation and function and their inhibition
might need to be optimally phased for maximum efficacy. This concept needs to be
incorporated in the next generation of clinical trials of combination therapy regimens,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 12

Author Manuscript

especially when combined with vaccines or agents that reprogram myeloid cells to foster a
TH1-type activation state.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Indeed, combination therapies targeting the two checkpoints, i.e., CTLA-4 and PD-1, further
increase progression-free survival in patients with metastatic melanoma (Larkin et al.,
2015); however, in other cancers these responses are present in fewer patients. Resolving the
natural and acquired resistance to checkpoint inhibition therapy represents the next frontier
in basic research and clinical development (Figure 4). As the effector arm of checkpoint
inhibition, T cells could underpin the major resistance mechanisms for checkpoint blockade.
Thus, non-responding patients might actually lack naturally occurring T cells with
specificity against neoplasias, and/or their T cells could be held hostage and rendered
dysfunctional in TMEs via pathways other than checkpoints, such as immune-suppressive
microenvironments directed by TH2-activated myeloid, Treg or Breg cells (Coussens et al.,
2013). Links between treatment resistance and T cell shortage are supported by recent
findings that tumor-specific mutations generate neo-antigens that in turn may drive antitumor responses. Indeed, whole-exome sequencing of malignant melanomas from patients
treated with CTLA-4 blockers demonstrated an association between mutational load and
degree of clinical benefit (Snyder et al., 2015), however in other melanoma cohorts,
recurrent neo-antigen peptide sequences were not found to predict responder populations
(Van Allen et al., 2015). In non-small-cell lung cancers treated with αPD-1 mAb, higher
mutation burden in tumors was associated with durable clinical benefit and progression-free
survival (Rizvi et al., 2015). Neo-antigens arising as products of somatic mutations are not
presented in the thymus; thus, they can be recognized by the immune system as foreign
antigens, similar to viral antigens or organ transplants, because the T cells have not been
eliminated or tolerized. These concepts were put forward early (Srivastava, 2000), but
validated only recently (Schumacher and Schreiber, 2015), thanks to the availability of
massively parallel sequencing.
Cancer Vaccines
Patients may fail or resist checkpoint therapy owing to a lack of pre-existing T cell
infiltrates. Therefore, vaccination and adoptive transfer strategies to first induce and expand
the breadth of endogenous T cell responses could prove useful. Vaccines are composed of
antigens and adjuvants. Responses to vaccination and adjuvants involve DCs that capture
and present vaccine antigens, thereby facilitating differentiation of lymphocytes and
subsequent immunity (Figure 3). DCs also integrate the adjuvant signals and determine the
quality of induced immune responses.

Author Manuscript

Several phase III clinical trials testing various cancer vaccine platforms, including DC-based
and viral-vector-based vaccines, are ongoing. These exogenous vaccine platforms will need
to be accompanied by high-throughput genomics to incorporate personalized cancer-specific
mutations and candidate peptide antigens. Indeed, proof-of-concept trials in patients with
advanced melanoma demonstrated that naturally occurring neoantigen-specific immunity
was enhanced by vaccination with DCs loaded with patient-specific peptides (Carreno et al.,
2015). Another concept is endogenous vaccination based on antigen released upon standard
CTX/RT or oncolytic viruses (i.e., viruses that preferentially infect and kill cancer cells);

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 13

Author Manuscript

this however requires effective antigen presentation to generate therapeutic T cell immunity
(Palucka and Banchereau, 2013). DCs are skewed by tumors towards pro-tumor immunity;
thus, reprogramming to foster TH1-skewed mature functionality in vivo is critical for success
of endogenous vaccination. Our understanding of cancer genomics, the biology of antigen
presentation and T cell biology has advanced impressively and continues to increase; this
knowledge will feed into the development of the next-generation cancer vaccines that,
combined with checkpoint inhibitors, hold promise for improving outcomes for cancer
patients (Figure 4).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

DC vaccines can be exploited as anti-cancer therapeutics through various strategies,
including: non-targeted peptide/protein and nucleic-acids-based vaccines captured by DCs in
vivo; vaccines composed of antigens directly coupled to anti-DC-antibodies; or vaccines
composed of ex vivo–generated DCs loaded with tumor antigens (Palucka and Banchereau,
2013). DCs are also engaged in response to complex vaccine preparations such as GVAX®,
a tumor-cell-based vaccine in which cancer cells genetically modified to express GM-CSF
attract and activate DCs (Le et al., 2010). Other vaccine platforms are based on
recombinant-attenuated Listeria monocytogenes (Lm), an intracellular bacterium that targets
DCs in vivo and utilizes MHCI and II antigen-processing pathways (Le et al., 2012), as well
as intratumoral delivery of oncolytic viruses; these can be modified to express GM-CSF to
attract DCs and lymphocytes at the lysed tumor site (Russell et al., 2012). Finally,
pioneering studies from Ralph Steinman and Michel Nussenzweig demonstrated the
principle of targeting antigens to DCs in vivo through coupling of antigens to antibodies
specific to DC surface receptors such as DEC205 or DCIR (Bonifaz et al., 2002; Soares et
al., 2007). Importantly, in the absence of adjuvants, targeting antigens to DEC205+ DCs in
vivo induces antigen-specific tolerance (Hawiger et al., 2001). Administration of these
complex vaccines with DC activators such as TLR3, TLR7-8, or CD40 agonists enables
maturation of DCs and consequent establishment of immunity rather than tolerance (Bonifaz
et al., 2002; Soares et al., 2007). It remains to be seen which vaccine platform will be most
effective at priming and boosting T cells in patients; this clearly represents the next frontier
in research.

T cell-dependent nature of cytotoxic and targeted therapy

Author Manuscript

Cancer medicine evolved largely based on the principle that rapidly proliferating malignant
cells can be eradicated by cytotoxic regimens (CTX or RT) or by targeted drugs attacking
attributes of mutationally corrupted cells. As discussed above, the recent advent and
remarkable efficacy of immune-checkpoint inhibitors revealed the clinical potential of
harnessing endogenous mechanisms of anti-tumor immunity in tumors harboring significant
mutational burdens. Upon reflection, however, it is appreciated that conventional cytotoxic
approaches modulate the composition and functional bioactivity of intratumoral leukocytes,
in addition to effects on neoplastic cells (Galluzzi et al., 2015). Furthermore, in some
scenarios, the efficacy of neoadjuvant CTX correlates with increased presence of
intratumoral immune-effector T cells (Galluzzi et al., 2015). These correlations are not
limited to cytotoxic regimens—the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib also leads to increased
presence of CTLs and NK cells in gastrointestinal tumors in a manner that correlates with
disease outcome (Kroemer et al., 2013), while efficacy against chronic myelogenous
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 14

Author Manuscript

leukemia can be reversed by co-administration of type I IFN (Galluzzi et al., 2015). A recent
study in breast cancer also revealed that efficacy of transtuzumab emtansine is linked to
elicitation of anti-tumor immune responses (Muller et al., 2015).

Author Manuscript

Malignant cells can emit danger signals, albeit distinct from those of normal tissue that are
sensed by immune cells and thus are antigenic. Increased antigenicity is linked to either
mutational burden, where peptides from mutant proteins are presented by MHC molecules
(Gubin et al., 2014), or to ectopic expression of cancer testis or oncofetal antigens typically
only expressed during embryonic or fetal development (Whitehurst, 2014). The increased
adjuvanticity of neoplastic cells is linked to metabolic stress caused by their sustained
proliferation, and to their ability to adapt and survive in hypoxic TMEs (Krysko et al.,
2012). Furthermore, preclinical data have emerged supporting the proposition that tumors
treated with conventional CTX engage antigenic and adjuvant immune-mediated
mechanisms. In murine tumor models, the anti-neoplastic effects of anthracyclines are
significantly reduced when either γδ or CD8+ T cells are depleted, but not when B or NK
cells are absent, DC infiltration is blocked or corrupted, immune-stimulatory type I IFNs or
IL-17 are lacking, or DAMP-mediated recruitment and activation of effector cells is
thwarted (Kroemer et al., 2013). Cyclophosphamide, oxaliplatin and bortezomib similarly
rely on immune-mediated mechanisms for their efficacy; these commonly used cytotoxics
elicit effector cell activity via plasma membrane exposure of calreticulin and release of the
chromatin-binding protein high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1). This in turn fosters DC
maturation and TLR4 and RAGE activation (Apetoh et al., 2007), thus increasing
adjuvanticity of malignant cells.

Author Manuscript

Taxanes, broadly used microtubule inhibitors, and vinca alkaloids promote polyploidization
due to mitotic interference, thus leading to endoplasmic reticulum stress responses favoring
calreticulin exposure and immune-mediated elimination (Senovilla et al., 2012). Clinically,
docataxel, vinorelbine and cisplatin all lead to increased abundance of circulating CTLs, and
decreased presence of Treg cells and immature myeloid cells harboring T cell-suppressive
activity, this latter effect is also shared by gemcitabine, a common CTX for pancreatic
adenocarcinomas, and 5-fluoruracil. Interestingly, paclitaxel is also a TLR4 ligand and thus
enhances T cell priming by DCs (Pfannenstiel et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript

Cyclophosphamide also provokes relocalization of intestinal gram-positive bacteria to
secondary lymphoid organs, resulting in generation of TH17 cells secreting IL-17 and IFNγ
that promote anti-tumor immune responses (Viaud et al., 2013). In murine tumor models,
therapies targeting TH2-based programs (e.g., CSF1R or RON antagonists, BTK or SYK
inhibitors, B cell-depletion, αIL-4 or αIL-13 mAbs) enhance efficacy of either CTX or RT
by T cell-dependent mechanisms (Ruffell and Coussens, 2015). Perhaps the most
compelling evidence is that provided by recent data showing that immune-checkpoint
blockade, when combined with CTX, improves overall survival in several cancer types
beyond CTX alone (Topalian et al., 2015). The ability of these agents to activate adaptive
stress-response pathways and send danger signals operative as immunologic adjuvants
inherently increases the antigenicity of tumors even when mutational burden is low. These
untoward effects can be capitalized upon to improve outcomes for individuals with cancer.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 15

Author Manuscript

A role for the microbiome in regulating systemic cancer risk, and response
to therapy

Author Manuscript

If the precision medicine equation wasn’t sufficiently complicated by neoplastic cell
genomics, epigenomics, host immune responses and the TME, mounting evidence points to
an additional consideration when attempting to stratify patients and predict therapy
response: the host microbiome. The context and composition of common microorganisms
living in the gut not only shapes local immune responses but also regulates systemic
immunity, and thus impacts the risk of and progression to malignancy and the response to
anti-cancer therapies. Intra-abdominal infections and use of antibiotics has long been
associated with increased incidence of colorectal cancer (Wang et al., 2014). In mouse
models, attenuating or selectively altering the composition of gut microorganisms influences
both the incidence and progression of cancer (Zitvogel et al., 2015). Intestinal
microorganisms not only impact local risk of tumorigenesis, but also influence neoplastic
progression distally by altering inflammatory and metabolic circuitry. These experimental
results correlate with epidemiologic data revealing increased incidence of breast cancer in
women with significant history of antibiotic use (Zitvogel et al., 2015).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Gut microbiota composition is dramatically impacted by common anti-neoplastic drugs
including RT, allogeneic stem-cell transplantation and select CTXs, notably 5-fluorouracil
and irinotecan (Zitvogel et al., 2015). Along these lines, the gut microbiota affects the
amenability of some tumor types to therapy by impacting regulatory aspects of the immune
response. Examples include translocation of gut microbiota across the intestinal epithelium
in response to lymphodepleting irradiation where DCs are inadvertently activated, leading to
altered serum cytokines and improved responses to adoptively transferred CTLs; these
beneficial effects are abated by antibiotics (Paulos et al., 2007). Similarly,
cyclophosphamide alters composition of gut microbiota resulting in translocation of grampositive bacteria into secondary lymphoid organs wherein pathogenic TH17 and memory
TH1 cells are activated; tumors grown in germ-free mice or antibiotics tropic for grampositive bacteria exhibit reduced TH17 responses and tumor-resistance to cyclophosphamide
(Viaud et al., 2013). Antibiotic eradication of gram-positive bacteria also impairs the
efficacy of CpG-oligonucleotide immunotherapy and platinum CTX by altering the myeloid
cells within the TME (Iida et al., 2013). Bifidobacterium occupancy supports anti-tumor
immunity against melanoma and improves the efficacy of αPD-L1 and αCTLA-4 mAb
therapy by altering DC activity leading to improved antigen-specific CD8+ T cell function—
these effects were reduced by ampicillin, colistin or streptomycin, but enhanced by
vancomycin due to preferential enhancement of Bacteroidales colonization (Vetizou et al.,
2015). These data underscore the impact of gut commensals on therapeutic responsiveness.
Could selectively manipulating the gut microbiota impact risk of developing cancer, limit
incidence of select tumor types, and/or improve activity of some anti-cancer therapies?
Zitvogel and colleagues have proposed four distinct approaches for manipulating the gut
microbiota to boost cancer therapy: i) preferential use of antibiotics selective for untoward
bacterial species; ii) increased use of probiotics; iii) increased use of prebiotics to stimulate
healthy gut colonization; and iv) use of postbiotics, nonviable products of microbiota that

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 16

Author Manuscript

exert biological activities in hosts (Zitvogel et al., 2015). Prospective stool analysis and
monitoring in cancer patients receiving therapy will surely reveal biomarkers that, if
harnessed, could improve patient stratification and/or support new microbiota-based
strategies for boosting therapeutic responsiveness, e.g., fecal transplant of beneficial species.

Multi-modal tumor and systemic biomarkers for stratification and
resistance monitoring
A major clinical goal is to understand the multi-modal tissue-based and systemic pathways
regulating therapy responses so as to minimize resistance and maximize efficacy of cancer
medicine (Figure 4). Whether therapies target tumor-intrinsic pathways, host pathways or
commensal microbiota, it is clear that understanding non-genomic mechanisms of resistance
from an integrated standpoint is critical.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Understanding which immune cell types are present in and around a tumor currently
provides invaluable retrospective information regarding tumor ecology and/or tumor
response to therapy. However, we must improve our ability to integrate information on not
only the complexity of leukocytes in tumors, but also their geography in tumor nests and
stroma. Immune cells are scattered in tumor core and within tumor stroma, in invasive
margins and in organized lymphoid structures often distant from neoplastic cells.
Investigating the mechanisms governing formation of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs)
found in numerous cancers represents a new frontier for biomedical research. Such topology
has been reported by Galon and colleagues to be clinically important in colorectal cancer,
where a statistically significant correlation between immune cell density and patient
outcome was revealed (Galon et al., 2006). Moreover, development of TLS in individuals
with pancreatic adenocarcinoma treated with vaccines correlated with improved clinical
outcomes (Le et al., 2015). Furthermore, compared with single-region analysis, combined
analysis of the tumor core and invasive margins improved the accuracy of survival
prediction in different patient groups (Galon et al., 2006). These early results form the basis
for immune stratification of patients, or the so-called Immunoscore, and its coordinated
assessment in the clinic (Ascierto et al., 2013). An international consortium has been
initiated to validate and promote the Immunoscore in routine clinical settings (Ascierto et
al., 2013); results of this international effort may lead to implementation of the
Immunoscore as a new classification metric, designated TNM-I (TNM-Immune).

Author Manuscript

Will the Immunoscore provide enough additional information to prospectively predict
response to therapy? Likely not. We predict that integrating the Immunoscore with
additional metrics will be critical for guiding patient stratification and phasing of
combinatorial therapies. Such metrics will include genomic and exomic features of
neoplastic cells (through sequencing of neoplastic cells themselves or cell-free circulating
tumor DNA (ctDNA)), tracking the expansion of tumor-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
monitoring serum cytokine fluxes, and evaluating the composition and health of commensal
bacteria (Figure 4). Serum cytokines have long been enigmatic due to their labile nature and
the detection limitations of conventional methodologies. That said, serum biomarker
signatures are now able to discern asymptomatic early stage pancreatic cancer from healthy
controls with 96% accuracy (Ghatnekar et al., 2013), and can be used to monitor the
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 17

Author Manuscript

pharmacodynamics of CSF1R-targeted therapies (Butowski et al., 2015). Moreover,
transcriptional profiling of blood monocytes in renal cell carcinoma identifies biomarkers
correlating with tumor staging (Chittezhath et al., 2014), and mRNA sequencing of tumoreducated blood platelets distinguishes cancer patients from healthy individuals with 96%
accuracy (Best et al., 2015). Thus, multi-modal functional diagnostic strategies integrating
the tumor, host and commensals will likely forge the advent of next-generation precision
bioinformatics to match patients with appropriately combined and phased anti-cancer
therapies.

OncoImmunology treatment paradigm

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Future immunotherapies will be based on cycles of interventions designed to boost and
modulate anti-cancer immunity (Figure 4). Indeed, as we re-discover and refine the
fundamental principles of tumor immunology, it is increasingly clear that curing cancer
might not be a realistic goal. Rather, aiming for a continuum of treatment cycles designed
and based on mechanistic in vivo studies and in-depth analysis of each patient’s tumor will
be necessary for optimizing outcomes. Clinical trials with checkpoint inhibitors teach us that
in situ immune infiltration is critical for tumor regression; however, not all immune
infiltrates are equal and, as discussed throughout this article, the quality of immune response
is a critical factor for therapeutic success. This in turn is determined by underlying
inflammation, which we assert must become a staging parameter, along with classical
pathology-based schemas and the Immunescore. It will also need to be established to what
extent inflammation, which clearly plays a role in epithelial tumors, impacts other tumor
types, e.g., melanoma or sarcomas. Additional parameters pertain to the specificity of
infiltrating T cells against cancer antigens, as again, the infiltrate with passenger T cells
might not be therapeutically useful and should be tested. Eventually all patients will be
treated with checkpoint inhibitors, either directly or after interventions targeting
inflammation, by vaccination to boost T cell repertoires, or by adoptive T cell transfer. The
majority of patients will subsequently develop acquired resistance followed by immune
escape; this will lead to the next cycle of treatments incorporating multi-modal biomarkers
(e.g., based on microbiome phenotype, ctDNA, circulating cytokine levels) and perhaps NK
cells recognizing loss of MHC class I by neoplastic cells, thus rendering them invisible to T
cells. Cytotoxic treatments, such as with NK cells, standard CTX/RT or oncolytic viruses,
will release neo-antigens that can be used to generate the next round of effector T cells. To
this latter point, we must fully understand the rules of T cell priming in vivo in humans,
identify the most effective ways to utilize DCs for priming, and develop strategies for
mobilizing the naïve T cell repertoire from the thymus in adults (Sportes et al., 2008). In
later rounds of therapy, the scope of neo-antigens will likely be broadened as, in addition to
somatic mutations, neo-antigens can be generated via epigenetic and post-translational
regulation. Last but not least, the role of Tregs, so well established in murine cancer, will
need to be redefined in humans. Resolving all of these challenges will surely keep us busy
for a long while.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 18

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
The authors thank members of the Palucka and Coussens laboratories for critical insight and discussions, Drs.
Amanda Lund and Jeffrey Nolz for critical feedback, Dr. Anna Lisa Lucido for help with editing the manuscript
and all authors contributing to studies discussed herein, but not mentioned due to space consideration. AKP thanks
Dr. Jacques Banchereau, a long-time collaborator. The authors acknowledge support from the NIH/NCI and Susan
B. Komen Foundation (AKP and LMC), DOD BCRP Era of Hope Scholar Expansion Award, a Stand Up To
Cancer – Lustgarten Foundation Pancreatic Cancer Convergence Dream Team Translational Research Grant
(SU2C-AACR-DT14-14), and Brenden-Colson Center for Pancreatic Care (to LMC).

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Affara NI, Ruffell B, Medler TR, Gunderson AJ, Johansson M, Bornstein S, Bergsland E, Steinhoff M,
Li Y, Gong Q, et al. B cells regulate macrophage phenotype and response to chemotherapy in
squamous carcinomas. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:809–821. [PubMed: 24909985]
Aharinejad S, Salama M, Paulus P, Zins K, Berger A, Singer CF. Elevated CSF1 serum concentration
predicts poor overall survival in women with early breast cancer. Endocrine-related cancer. 2013;
20:777–783. [PubMed: 24016870]
Andreu P, Johansson M, Affara NI, Pucci F, Tan T, Junankar S, Korets L, Lam J, Tawfik D, DeNardo
DG, et al. FcRgamma activation regulates inflammationassociated squamous carcinogenesis.
Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:121–134. [PubMed: 20138013]
Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Tesniere A, Criollo A, Ortiz C, Lidereau R, Mariette C, Chaput N, Mira JP,
Delaloge S, et al. The interaction between HMGB1 and TLR4 dictates the outcome of anticancer
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Immunological reviews. 2007; 220:47–59. [PubMed: 17979839]
Appay V, Douek DC, Price DA. CD8+ T cell efficacy in vaccination and disease. Nat Med. 2008;
14:623–628. [PubMed: 18535580]
Ascierto PA, Capone M, Urba WJ, Bifulco CB, Botti G, Lugli A, Marincola FM, Ciliberto G, Galon J,
Fox BA. The additional facet of immunoscore: immunoprofiling as a possible predictive tool for
cancer treatment. J Transl Med. 2013; 11:54. [PubMed: 23452415]
Balkwill F, Charles KA, Mantovani A. Smoldering and polarized inflammation in the initiation and
promotion of malignant disease. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:211–217. [PubMed: 15766659]
Banchereau J, Briere F, Caux C, Davoust J, Lebecque S, Liu YJ, Pulendran B, Palucka K.
Immunobiology of dendritic cells. Annu Rev Immunol. 2000; 18:767–811. [PubMed: 10837075]
Beck AH, Espinosa I, Edris B, Li R, Montgomery K, Zhu S, Varma S, Marinelli RJ, van de Rijn M,
West RB. The macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 response signature in breast carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15:778–787. [PubMed: 19188147]
Best MG, Sol N, Kooi I, Tannous J, Westerman BA, Rustenburg F, Schellen P, Verschueren H, Post E,
Koster J, et al. RNA-Seq of Tumor-Educated Platelets Enables Blood-Based Pan-Cancer,
Multiclass, and Molecular Pathway Cancer Diagnostics. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:666–676.
[PubMed: 26525104]
Bongartz T, Sutton AJ, Sweeting MJ, Buchan I, Matteson EL, Montori V. Anti-TNF antibody therapy
in rheumatoid arthritis and the risk of serious infections and malignancies: systematic review and
meta-analysis of rare harmful effects in randomized controlled trials. JAMA. 2006; 295:2275–
2285. [PubMed: 16705109]
Bonifaz L, Bonnyay D, Mahnke K, Rivera M, Nussenzweig MC, Steinman RM. Efficient targeting of
protein antigen to the dendritic cell receptor DEC-205 in the steady state leads to antigen
presentation on major histocompatibility complex class I products and peripheral CD8+ T cell
tolerance. J Exp Med. 2002; 196:1627–1638. [PubMed: 12486105]
Butowski N, Colman H, De Groot JF, Omuro AM, Nayak L, Wen PY, Cloughesy TF, Marimuthu A,
Haidar S, Perry A, et al. Orally administered colony stimulating factor 1 receptor inhibitor
PLX3397 in recurrent glioblastoma: an Ivy Foundation Early Phase Clinical Trials Consortium
phase II study. Neuro Oncol. 2015
Campisi J, Andersen JK, Kapahi P, Melov S. Cellular senescence: a link between cancer and agerelated degenerative disease? Semin Cancer Biol. 2011; 21:354–359. [PubMed: 21925603]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Carreno BM, Magrini V, Becker-Hapak M, Kaabinejadian S, Hundal J, Petti AA, Ly A, Lie WR,
Hildebrand WH, Mardis ER, et al. Cancer immunotherapy. A dendritic cell vaccine increases the
breadth and diversity of melanoma neoantigenspecific T cells. Science. 2015; 348:803–808.
[PubMed: 25837513]
Carretero R, Sektioglu IM, Garbi N, Salgado OC, Beckhove P, Hammerling GJ. Eosinophils
orchestrate cancer rejection by normalizing tumor vessels and enhancing infiltration of CD8(+) T
cells. Nat Immunol. 2015; 16:609–617. [PubMed: 25915731]
Chen DS, Mellman I. Oncology meets immunology: the cancer-immunity cycle. Immunity. 2013;
39:1–10. [PubMed: 23890059]
Chittezhath M, Dhillon MK, Lim JY, Laoui D, Shalova IN, Teo YL, Chen J, Kamaraj R, Raman L,
Lum J, et al. Molecular profiling reveals a tumor-promoting phenotype of monocytes and
macrophages in human cancer progression. Immunity. 2014; 41:815–829. [PubMed: 25453823]
Coffelt SB, Kersten K, Doornebal CW, Weiden J, Vrijland K, Hau CS, Verstegen NJ, Ciampricotti M,
Hawinkels LJ, Jonkers J, et al. IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells and neutrophils conspire to
promote breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2015
Coussens LM, Raymond WW, Bergers G, Laig-Webster M, Behrendtsen O, Werb Z, Caughey GH,
Hanahan D. Inflammatory mast cells up-regulate angiogenesis during squamous epithelial
carcinogenesis. Genes & development. 1999; 13:1382–1397. [PubMed: 10364156]
Coussens LM, Zitvogel L, Palucka AK. Neutralizing tumor-promoting chronic inflammation: a magic
bullet? Science. 2013; 339:286–291. [PubMed: 23329041]
Davis BP, Rothenberg ME. Eosinophils and cancer. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014; 2:1–8. [PubMed:
24778159]
de Visser KE, Eichten A, Coussens LM. Paradoxical roles of the immune system during cancer
development. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:24–37. [PubMed: 16397525]
DeNardo DG, Barreto JB, Andreu P, Vasquez L, Tawfik D, Kolhatkar N, Coussens LM. CD4(+) T
cells regulate pulmonary metastasis of mammary carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of
macrophages. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:91–102. [PubMed: 19647220]
DeNardo DG, Brennan DJ, Rexhepaj E, Ruffell B, Shiao SL, Madden SF, Gallagher WM, Wadhwani
N, Keil SD, Junaid SA, et al. Leukocyte complexity predicts breast cancer survival and
functionally regulates response to chemotherapy. Cancer discovery. 2011; 1:54–67. [PubMed:
22039576]
Druker BJ, Guilhot F, O’Brien SG, Gathmann I, Kantarjian H, Gattermann N, Deininger MW, Silver
RT, Goldman JM, Stone RM, et al. Five-year follow-up of patients receiving imatinib for chronic
myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:2408–2417. [PubMed: 17151364]
Dunn GP, Old LJ, Schreiber RD. The three Es of cancer immunoediting. Annual review of
immunology. 2004; 22:329–360.
Eyob H, Ekiz HA, Derose YS, Waltz SE, Williams MA, Welm AL. Inhibition of ron kinase blocks
conversion of micrometastases to overt metastases by boosting antitumor immunity. Cancer
discovery. 2013; 3:751–760. [PubMed: 23612011]
Fehervari Z, Sakaguchi S. CD4+ Tregs and immune control. J Clin Invest. 2004; 114:1209–1217.
[PubMed: 15520849]
Fridlender ZG, Albelda SM. Tumor-associated neutrophils: friend or foe? Carcinogenesis. 2012;
33:949–955. [PubMed: 22425643]
Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V. Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by tumours.
Nat Rev Immunol. 2012; 12:253–268. [PubMed: 22437938]
Galluzzi L, Buque A, Kepp O, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. Immunological Effects of Conventional
Chemotherapy and Targeted Anticancer Agents. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:690–714. [PubMed:
26678337]
Galon J, Costes A, Sanchez-Cabo F, Kirilovsky A, Mlecnik B, Lagorce-Pages C, Tosolini M, Camus
M, Berger A, Wind P, et al. Type, density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal
tumors predict clinical outcome. Science. 2006; 313:1960–1964. [PubMed: 17008531]
Geissmann F, Jung S, Littman DR. Blood monocytes consist of two principal subsets with distinct
migratory properties. Immunity. 2003; 19:71–82. [PubMed: 12871640]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Ghatnekar O, Andersson R, Svensson M, Persson U, Ringdahl U, Zeilon P, Borrebaeck CA. Modelling
the benefits of early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer using a biomarker signature. International
journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2013; 133:2392–2397. [PubMed: 23649606]
Gocheva V, Wang HW, Gadea BB, Shree T, Hunter KE, Garfall AL, Berman T, Joyce JA. IL-4
induces cathepsin protease activity in tumor-associated macrophages to promote cancer growth
and invasion. Genes & development. 2010; 24:241–255. [PubMed: 20080943]
Gubin MM, Zhang X, Schuster H, Caron E, Ward JP, Noguchi T, Ivanova Y, Hundal J, Arthur CD,
Krebber WJ, et al. Checkpoint blockade cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-specific mutant
antigens. Nature. 2014; 515:577–581. [PubMed: 25428507]
Gunderson AJ, Kaneda MM, Tsujikawa T, Nguyen AV, Affara NI, Ruffell B, Gorjestani S, Liudahl
SM, Truitt M, Olson P, et al. Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK)- dependent immune cell crosstalk
drives pancreas cancer Cancer Discov. 2016 Published OnlineFirst December 29, 2015.
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0827
Hanahan D, Coussens LM. Accessories to the crime: functions of cells recruited to the tumor
microenvironment. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:309–322. [PubMed: 22439926]
Hanna RN, Cekic C, Sag D, Tacke R, Thomas GD, Nowyhed H, Herrley E, Rasquinha N, McArdle S,
Wu R, et al. Patrolling monocytes control tumor metastasis to the lung. Science. 2015; 350:985–
990. [PubMed: 26494174]
Hawiger D, Inaba K, Dorsett Y, Guo K, Mahnke K, Rivera M, Ravetch JV, Steinman RM,
Nussenzweig MC. Dendritic cells induce peripheral T cell unresponsiveness under steady state
conditions in vivo. J Exp Med. 2001; 194:769–780. [PubMed: 11560993]
Heiser LM, Sadanandam A, Kuo WL, Benz SC, Goldstein TC, Ng S, Gibb WJ, Wang NJ, Ziyad S,
Tong F, et al. Subtype and pathway specific responses to anticancer compounds in breast cancer.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:2724–2729. [PubMed: 22003129]
Hendriks RW, Yuvaraj S, Kil LP. Targeting Bruton’s tyrosine kinase in B cell malignancies. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2014; 14:219–232. [PubMed: 24658273]
Iida N, Dzutsev A, Stewart CA, Smith L, Bouladoux N, Weingarten RA, Molina DA, Salcedo R, Back
T, Cramer S, et al. Commensal bacteria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the
tumor microenvironment. Science. 2013; 342:967–970. [PubMed: 24264989]
Inoue S, Leitner WW, Golding B, Scott D. Inhibitory effects of B cells on antitumor immunity. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:7741–7747. [PubMed: 16885377]
Joffre OP, Segura E, Savina A, Amigorena S. Cross-presentation by dendritic cells. Nat Rev Immunol.
2012; 12:557–569. [PubMed: 22790179]
Karsten CM, Kohl J. The immunoglobulin, IgG Fc receptor and complement triangle in autoimmune
diseases. Immunobiology. 2012; 217:1067–1079. [PubMed: 22964232]
Kerbel R. Anti-angiogenesis in cancer; met and unmet goals - an interview with Robert Kerbel by
Francesco Bertolini. The International journal of developmental biology. 2011; 55:395–398.
[PubMed: 21858765]
Kitamura T, Qian BZ, Pollard JW. Immune cell promotion of metastasis. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015;
15:73–86. [PubMed: 25614318]
Klebanoff CA, Acquavella N, Yu Z, Restifo NP. Therapeutic cancer vaccines: are we there yet?
Immunological reviews. 2011; 239:27–44. [PubMed: 21198663]
Klechevsky E, Morita R, Liu M, Cao Y, Coquery S, Thompson-Snipes L, Briere F, Chaussabel D,
Zurawski G, Palucka AK, et al. Functional specializations of human epidermal Langerhans cells
and CD14+ dermal dendritic cells. Immunity. 2008; 29:497–510. [PubMed: 18789730]
Komohara Y, Jinushi M, Takeya M. Clinical significance of macrophage heterogeneity in human
malignant tumors. Cancer science. 2014; 105:1–8. [PubMed: 24168081]
Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Zitvogel L. Immunogenic cell death in cancer therapy. Annual
review of immunology. 2013; 31:51–72.
Krysko DV, Garg AD, Kaczmarek A, Krysko O, Agostinis P, Vandenabeele P. Immunogenic cell
death and DAMPs in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:860–875. [PubMed: 23151605]
Lanzavecchia A, Sallusto F. The instructive role of dendritic cells on T cell responses: lineages,
plasticity and kinetics. Curr Opin Immunol. 2001; 13:291–298. [PubMed: 11406360]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Larkin J, Chiarion-Sileni V, Gonzalez R, Grob JJ, Cowey CL, Lao CD, Schadendorf D, Dummer R,
Smylie M, Rutkowski P, et al. Combined Nivolumab and Ipilimumab or Monotherapy in
Untreated Melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373:23–34. [PubMed: 26027431]
Le DT, Dubenksy TW Jr, Brockstedt DG. Clinical development of Listeria monocytogenes-based
immunotherapies. Semin Oncol. 2012; 39:311–322. [PubMed: 22595054]
Le DT, Pardoll DM, Jaffee EM. Cellular vaccine approaches. Cancer journal. 2010; 16:304–310.
Le DT, Wang-Gillam A, Picozzi V, Greten TF, Crocenzi T, Springett G, Morse M, Zeh H, Cohen D,
Fine RL, et al. Safety and survival with GVAX pancreas prime and Listeria Monocytogenesexpressing mesothelin (CRS-207) boost vaccines for metastatic pancreatic cancer. Journal of
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2015; 33:1325–
1333. [PubMed: 25584002]
Le Floc’h A, Jalil A, Vergnon I, Le Maux Chansac B, Lazar V, Bismuth G, Chouaib S, Mami-Chouaib
F. Alpha E beta 7 integrin interaction with E-cadherin promotes antitumor CTL activity by
triggering lytic granule polarization and exocytosis. J Exp Med. 2007; 204:559–570. [PubMed:
17325197]
Lin EY, Nguyen AV, Russell RG, Pollard JW. Colony-stimulating factor 1 promotes progression of
mammary tumors to malignancy. J Exp Med. 2001; 193:727–740. [PubMed: 11257139]
Marichal T, Tsai M, Galli SJ. Mast cells: potential positive and negative roles in tumor biology.
Cancer Immunol Res. 2013; 1:269–279. [PubMed: 24777963]
Masso-Valles D, Jauset T, Serrano E, Sodir NM, Pedersen K, Affara NI, Whitfield JR, Beaulieu ME,
Evan GI, Elias L, et al. Ibrutinib exerts potent antifibrotic and Palucka and Coussens Inflammation
and Cancer 31 antitumor activities in mouse models of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res.
2015; 75:1675–1681. [PubMed: 25878147]
Merad M, Sathe P, Helft J, Miller J, Mortha A. The dendritic cell lineage: ontogeny and function of
dendritic cells and their subsets in the steady state and the inflamed setting. Annu Rev Immunol.
2013; 31:563–604. [PubMed: 23516985]
Metz M, Grimbaldeston MA, Nakae S, Piliponsky AM, Tsai M, Galli SJ. Mast cells in the promotion
and limitation of chronic inflammation. Immunological reviews. 2007; 217:304–328. [PubMed:
17498068]
Mitchem JB, Brennan DJ, Knolhoff BL, Belt BA, Zhu Y, Sanford DE, Belaygorod L, Carpenter D,
Collins L, Piwnica-Worms D, et al. Targeting tumor-infiltrating macrophages decreases tumorinitiating cells, relieves immunosuppression, and improves chemotherapeutic responses. Cancer
Res. 2013; 73:1128–1141. [PubMed: 23221383]
Mueller SN, Gebhardt T, Carbone FR, Heath WR. Memory T Cell Subsets, Migration Patterns, and
Tissue Residence. Annu Rev Immunol. 2012
Muller P, Kreuzaler M, Khan T, Thommen DS, Martin K, Glatz K, Savic S, Harbeck N, Nitz U, Gluz
O, et al. Trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) renders HER2+ breast cancer highly susceptible to
CTLA-4/PD-1 blockade. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:315ra188.
Palucka K, Banchereau J. Dendritic-cell-based therapeutic cancer vaccines. Immunity. 2013; 39:38–
48. [PubMed: 23890062]
Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;
12:252–264. [PubMed: 22437870]
Paulos CM, Wrzesinski C, Kaiser A, Hinrichs CS, Chieppa M, Cassard L, Palmer DC, Boni A,
Muranski P, Yu Z, et al. Microbial translocation augments the function of adoptively transferred
self/tumor-specific CD8+ T cells via TLR4 signaling. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:2197–2204.
[PubMed: 17657310]
Pfannenstiel LW, Lam SS, Emens LA, Jaffee EM, Armstrong TD. Paclitaxel enhances early dendritic
cell maturation and function through TLR4 signaling in mice. Cell Immunol. 2010; 263:79–87.
[PubMed: 20346445]
Plaks V, Boldajipour B, Linnemann JR, Nguyen NH, Kersten K, Wolf Y, Casbon AJ, Kong N, van
den Bijgaart RJ, Sheppard D, et al. Adaptive Immune Regulation of Mammary Postnatal
Organogenesis. Dev Cell. 2015; 34:493–504. [PubMed: 26321127]
Postow MA, Callahan MK, Wolchok JD. Immune Checkpoint Blockade in Cancer Therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2015; 33:1974–1982. [PubMed: 25605845]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Pulendran B. The varieties of immunological experience: of pathogens, stress, and dendritic cells.
Annu Rev Immunol. 2015; 33:563–606. [PubMed: 25665078]
Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Lee KE, Hajdu CH, Miller G, Bar-Sagi D. Oncogenic Kras- Induced GM-CSF
Production Promotes the Development of Pancreatic Neoplasia. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:836–847.
[PubMed: 22698407]
Qian BZ, Li J, Zhang H, Kitamura T, Zhang J, Campion LR, Kaiser EA, Snyder LA, Pollard JW.
CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate breasttumour metastasis. Nature. 2011;
475:222–225. [PubMed: 21654748]
Ries CH, Cannarile MA, Hoves S, Benz J, Wartha K, Runza V, Rey-Giraud F, Pradel LP, Feuerhake
F, Klaman I, et al. Targeting tumor-associated macrophages with anti-CSF-1R antibody reveals a
strategy for cancer therapy. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:846–859. [PubMed: 24898549]
Rizvi NA, Hellmann MD, Snyder A, Kvistborg P, Makarov V, Havel JJ, Lee W, Yuan J, Wong P, Ho
TS, et al. Cancer immunology. Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in
non-small cell lung cancer. Science. 2015; 348:124–128. [PubMed: 25765070]
Ruffell B, Chang-Strachan D, Chan V, Rosenbusch A, Ho CM, Pryer N, Daniel D, Hwang ES, Rugo
HS, Coussens LM. Macrophage IL-10 blocks CD8+ T cell-dependent responses to chemotherapy
by suppressing IL-12 expression in intratumoral dendritic cells. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:623–637.
[PubMed: 25446896]
Ruffell B, Coussens LM. Macrophages and therapeutic resistance in cancer. Cancer Cell. 2015;
27:462–472. [PubMed: 25858805]
Russell SJ, Peng KW, Bell JC. Oncolytic virotherapy. Nat Biotechnol. 2012; 30:658–670. [PubMed:
22781695]
Sagiv-Barfi I, Kohrt HE, Czerwinski DK, Ng PP, Chang BY, Levy R. Therapeutic antitumor immunity
by checkpoint blockade is enhanced by ibrutinib, an inhibitor of both BTK and ITK. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2015
Sandoval F, Terme M, Nizard M, Badoual C, Bureau MF, Freyburger L, Clement O, Marcheteau E,
Gey A, Fraisse G, et al. Mucosal Imprinting of Vaccine-Induced CD8+ T Cells Is Crucial to
Inhibit the Growth of Mucosal Tumors. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:172ra120.
Schumacher TN, Schreiber RD. Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy. Science. 2015; 348:69–74.
[PubMed: 25838375]
Senovilla L, Vitale I, Martins I, Tailler M, Pailleret C, Michaud M, Galluzzi L, Adjemian S, Kepp O,
Niso-Santano M, et al. An immunosurveillance mechanism controls cancer cell ploidy. Science.
2012; 337:1678–1684. [PubMed: 23019653]
Shepard HM, Lewis GD, Sarup JC, Fendly BM, Maneval D, Mordenti J, Figari I, Kotts CE, Palladino
MA Jr, Ullrich A, et al. Monoclonal antibody therapy of human cancer: taking the HER2
protooncogene to the clinic. J Clin Immunol. 1991; 11:117–127. [PubMed: 1679763]
Sheridan BS, Lefrancois L. Regional and mucosal memory T cells. Nat Immunol. 2011; 12:485–491.
[PubMed: 21739671]
Shiao SL, Ruffell B, DeNardo DG, Faddegon BA, Park CC, Coussens LM. TH2-Polarized CD4(+) T
Cells and Macrophages Limit Efficacy of Radiotherapy. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015; 3:518–525.
[PubMed: 25716473]
Sippel TR, White J, Nag K, Tsvankin V, Klaassen M, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Waziri A.
Neutrophil degranulation and immunosuppression in patients with GBM: restoration of cellular
immune function by targeting arginase I. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:6992–7002. [PubMed:
21948231]
Smith CI, Islam TC, Mattsson PT, Mohamed AJ, Nore BF, Vihinen M. The Tec family of cytoplasmic
tyrosine kinases: mammalian Btk, Bmx, Itk, Tec, Txk and homologs in other species. Bioessays.
2001; 23:436–446. [PubMed: 11340625]
Snyder A, Wolchok JD, Chan TA. Genetic basis for clinical response to CTLA- 4 blockade. N Engl J
Med. 2015; 372:783. [PubMed: 25693024]
Soares H, Waechter H, Glaichenhaus N, Mougneau E, Yagita H, Mizenina O, Dudziak D,
Nussenzweig MC, Steinman RM. A subset of dendritic cells induces CD4+ T cells to produce
IFN-{gamma} by an IL-12-independent but CD70-dependent mechanism in vivo. J Exp Med.
2007

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Soucek L, Buggy JJ, Kortlever R, Adimoolam S, Monclus HA, Allende MT, Swigart LB, Evan GI.
Modeling pharmacological inhibition of mast cell degranulation as a therapy for insulinoma.
Neoplasia. 2011; 13:1093–1100. [PubMed: 22131884]
Sportes C, Hakim FT, Memon SA, Zhang H, Chua KS, Brown MR, Fleisher TA, Krumlauf MC, Babb
RR, Chow CK, et al. Administration of rhIL-7 in humans increases in vivo TCR repertoire
diversity by preferential expansion of naive T cell subsets. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:1701–1714.
[PubMed: 18573906]
Srivastava P. Immunotherapy of human cancer: lessons from mice. Nat Immunol. 2000; 1:363–366.
[PubMed: 11062489]
Steinman R. Cancer therapeutics: time to swim downstream? The oncologist. 2011; 16:1479–1480.
[PubMed: 22016496]
Steinman RM. Decisions about dendritic cells: past, present, and future. Annual review of
immunology. 2012; 30:1–22.
Stout RD, Bottomly K. Antigen-specific activation of effector macrophages by IFN-gamma producing
(TH1) T cell clones. Failure of IL-4-producing (TH2) T cell clones to activate effector function in
macrophages. J Immunol. 1989; 142:760–765. [PubMed: 2464024]
Tap WD, Wainberg ZA, Anthony SP, Ibrahim PN, Zhang C, Healey JH, Chmielowski B, Staddon AP,
Cohn AL, Shapiro GI, et al. Structure-Guided Blockade of CSF1R Kinase in Tenosynovial
Giant-Cell Tumor. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373:428–437. [PubMed: 26222558]
Thun MJ, Henley SJ, Gansler T. Inflammation and cancer: an epidemiological perspective. Novartis
Found Symp. 2004; 256:6–21. [PubMed: 15027481]
Topalian SL, Drake CG, Pardoll DM. Immune Checkpoint Blockade: A Common Denominator
Approach to Cancer Therapy. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:450–461. [PubMed: 25858804]
Van Allen EM, Miao D, Schilling B, Shukla SA, Blank C, Zimmer L, Sucker A, Hillen U, Foppen
MH, Goldinger SM, et al. Genomic correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic
melanoma. Science. 2015; 350:207–211. [PubMed: 26359337]
Vetizou M, Pitt JM, Daillere R, Lepage P, Waldschmitt N, Flament C, Rusakiewicz S, Routy B,
Roberti MP, Duong CP, et al. Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut
microbiota. Science. 2015; 350:1079–1084. [PubMed: 26541610]
Viaud S, Saccheri F, Mignot G, Yamazaki T, Daillere R, Hannani D, Enot DP, Pfirschke C, Engblom
C, Pittet MJ, et al. The intestinal microbiota modulates the anticancer immune effects of
cyclophosphamide. Science. 2013; 342:971–976. [PubMed: 24264990]
Wang JL, Chang CH, Lin JW, Wu LC, Chuang LM, Lai MS. Infection, antibiotic therapy and risk of
colorectal cancer: a nationwide nested case-control study in patients with Type 2 diabetes
mellitus. International journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2014; 135:956–967.
[PubMed: 24470385]
Wang L, Yi T, Kortylewski M, Pardoll DM, Zeng D, Yu H. IL-17 can promote tumor growth through
an IL-6-Stat3 signaling pathway. J Exp Med. 2009; 206:1457–1464. [PubMed: 19564351]
Whitehurst AW. Cause and consequence of cancer/testis antigen activation in cancer. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014; 54:251–272. [PubMed: 24160706]
Wu S, Rhee KJ, Albesiano E, Rabizadeh S, Wu X, Yen HR, Huso DL, Brancati FL, Wick E,
McAllister F, et al. A human colonic commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of
T helper type 17 T cell responses. Nat Med. 2009; 15:1016–1022. [PubMed: 19701202]
Yu CI, Becker C, Wang Y, Marches F, Helft J, Leboeuf M, Anguiano E, Pourpe S, Goller K, Pascual
V, et al. Human CD1c(+) Dendritic Cells Drive the Differentiation of CD103(+) CD8(+)
Mucosal Effector T Cells via the Cytokine TGF-beta. Immunity. 2013; 38:818–830. [PubMed:
23562160]
Zhu J, Paul WE. CD4 T cells: fates, functions, and faults. Blood. 2008; 112:1557–1569. [PubMed:
18725574]
Zitvogel L, Galluzzi L, Viaud S, Vetizou M, Daillere R, Merad M, Kroemer G. Cancer and the gut
microbiota: an unexpected link. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:271ps271.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. The makings of tumor immunity

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The communication between cancer and the immune system is a dynamic process,
reminiscent of a balance. When immunity to cancer is ‘up’ and the suppressive processes are
‘down’, cancer is under control. However, a strong anti-tumor immune response will trigger
largely physiological processes designed to dampen effector T cells to prevent tissue
damage and maintain tissue homeostasis. Given that the immunity might have evolved
mainly to maintain self, to establish coexistence with environment and to occasionally
protect self from external threats, the suppression prevails. Multiple pathways of suppression
are at play in tumor microenvironments including cells such as TH2-polarized macrophages,
immature and suppressive monocytes, regulatory B cells and regulatory T cells, as well as
molecules such as check points that control T cell differentiation (for example CTLA-4 and
IDO) and effector function (such as PD-1). Pharmacological blockade of these inhibitory
pathways can tip the balance towards anti-cancer effector T cells. The latter ones can be
primed or boosted by antigen presenting cells (DCs) and/or by co-stimulatory signals (for
example CD137 ligands). Recent studies demonstrate that thymus-independent neo-antigens
generated in adult life by somatic mutation or post-translational regulation (for example
phosphorylation) might be more immunogenic (or perhaps linked with less suppression)
than shared tumor antigens. Neo-antigens can occur as random results of somatic mutation,
as well as a by-product of anticancer treatments, e.g., chemotherapy (CTX) or radiation
therapy (RT), or by targeting epigenetic control mechanisms or drugs intervening with DNA
repair pathways. They can be presented to T cells in exogenous vaccines, as well as
endogenously via DCs that captured dying neoplastic cells. When T cells specific to defined
antigens kill neoplastic cells, such process can enable generation of responses to other
antigens, so called epitope spreading. A critical factor in the balance between
immunogenicity and suppression is inflammation (which in turn is impacted by the

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 25

Author Manuscript

microbiome); indeed, the type of inflammation (tumor destructing TH1 or tumor promoting
TH2 and TH17) should become a part of TNM grading, along with pathology, microbiome
phenotype, and immune infiltrate assessment.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Immune-mediated landscape

Author Manuscript

The yin and yang implications of tumor-immune system communications form the basis for
disease pathophysiology, and at the same time, targets for therapeutic intervention. The
disease landscape emerging from these multi-factorial interactions is orchestrated by the
three compartments, i.e., the cancer, the immune system and the host. The outputs are
numerous and dramatically opposite, as well as both local and systemic, and include:
immunity that might control cancer; chronic inflammation which can be linked with tissue
remodeling processes and metabolic changes that support neoplastic cell survival and
primary tumor development; angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis that can also support
metastatic dissemination; as well as systemic consequences for the host including cachexia.
Clearly, therapy going forward will require a well-timed and orchestrated combination of
therapies, targeting multiple modes of communication and effect, to combat this multifactorial disease taking into account the patients’ steady-state commensal bacteria
complexity and load, and how that is impacted by therapy.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. The priming of cancer immunity

Author Manuscript

The cycle of anti-tumor immunity starts presumably with presentation of cancer antigens
liberated in the process of cell turn-over; this same pathway can be followed for vaccination
as illustrated herein. Antigens are sensed and captured either by tissue resident DCs or by
DCs in draining lymph nodes (LNs). DCs initiate an immune response by presenting
captured antigens, in the form of peptide–major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecule complexes, to naive (that is, antigen inexperienced) T cells in lymphoid tissues.
When compared with other APCs, such as macrophages, DCs are extremely efficient and
can elicit very low numbers of T cells to respond. Naïve CD8+ T cells differentiate into
CTLs in lymphoid organs upon encounter with DCs presenting tumor-derived peptides in
the context of co-stimulation through CD8, CD70 and 4-1BB, as well as DC-derived
cytokines such as IL-12 and IL-15. Naive CD4+ T cells can give rise to helper cells (e.g.,
TH) with distinct cytokine profiles, or to regulatory T cells (Treg) whose role is to dampen
the immune response. T cells migrate through blood and lymphatics. Upon arrival in tumor
beds, CD8+ T cells must confront numerous barriers including: i) intrinsic regulators, for
example CD28-CTLA-4, PD1-PDL1, and ILTs, as well as extrinsic regulators cells such as
Tregs, Bregs or myeloid cells; ii) a corrupted TME with pro-tumor inflammation; iii)
impaired cross presentation due to TME-based DC inhibition; iv) antigen loss and immune
evasion of tumor target; and v) tissue-specific alterations such as fatty cells in breast cancer
or desmofibrosis in pancreatic cancer stroma. Killing of tumor cells either via T cells or by
standard therapy can lead to endogenous antigen release and DC activation so called
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 28

Author Manuscript

“endogenous vaccination” thereby closing the cycle. Inevitable to this is the induction of
tissue resistance mechanisms, for example, expression of PD-L1 on neoplastic cells, as the
result of powerful effector immunity including actions of IFNγ. Thus, future immunotherapy
approaches will be based on combinations of different therapeutics targeting distinct
components of this cycle, for example, via intratumoral delivery of activating agents able to
reprogram the function of infiltrating leukocytes.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

Palucka and Coussens

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Multi-modal biomarker-based approach for optimal immune-mediated tumor control

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer medicine is evolving. Going forward, individuals with cancer will be evaluated for
biomarkers enabling stratification to determine most optimal combinations for therapy based
on tumor-based and systemic biomarkers. Eventually, all patients with cancer will be treated
with checkpoint inhibitors, either directly or after interventions targeting inflammation (for
example with TH2-blockade therapies, radiation therapy or epigenetic modulation), or
vaccination via DCs to boost T cell repertoires, or adoptive T cell transfer. Based on the
known tissue-embedded programs empowered to control auto-immunity, it is reasonable to
anticipate that a majority of patients will develop acquired resistance followed by immune
escape; this will lead to the next cycle of treatments incorporating multi-modal biomarkers
(e.g., based on microbiome phenotype, circulating free DNA (cfDNA), circulating cytokine
levels) and perhaps NK cells recognizing loss of MHC class I by neoplastic cells, thus
rendering them invisible to T cells. Cytotoxic treatments such as with NK cells or standard
cytotoxic therapy (CTX or RT), or oncolytic viruses will release neo-antigens that can be
used for generation of the next round of effector T cells. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of
tumor samples as well as cfDNA will yield information on mutational load that can in turn
be used as one class of neoantigens for vaccination and priming of new T cell repertoires. T
cell receptors (TCR) can be assessed using genomic approaches enabling sequencing of
TCRβ chains to assess repertoire diversity. Given the importance of T cell specificity for
relevant antigens, strategies enabling paired sequencing of α and β TCR chains will be
invaluable as well as high-throughput tetramer analysis. In addition, RNAseq and epigenetic
analysis of tumors and their infiltrates will enable assessment of the type and flavor of
inflammation. Future studies will incorporate metabolomics to this biomarker portfolio.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 10.

