Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Pretreatment with VEGF(R)-inhibitors reduces interstitial
fluid pressure, increases intraperitoneal chemotherapy drug
penetration, and impedes tumor growth in a mouse colorectal
carcinomatosis model
Félix Gremonprez1, Benedicte Descamps2, Andrei Izmer3, Christian Vanhove2,
Frank Vanhaecke3, Olivier De Wever4, Wim Ceelen1
1

Department of Surgery, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium

2

Infinity (iMinds-IBiTech-MEDISIP), Department of Electronics and Information Systems, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

3

Atomic and Mass Spectrometry, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

4

Department of Radiation Oncology and Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

Correspondence to:
Félix Gremonprez, e-mail: Felix.gremonprez@ugent.be
Keywords: peritoneal carcinomatosis, colorectal cancer, angiogenesis, oxaliplatin
Received: June 26, 2015      Accepted: August 26, 2015      Published: September 07, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cytoreductive surgery combined with intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IPC) is currently
the standard treatment for selected patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal
cancer. However, especially after incomplete cytoreduction, disease progression is
common and this is likely due to limited tissue penetration and efficacy of intraperitoneal
cytotoxic drugs. Tumor microenvironment-targeting drugs, such as VEGF(R) and PDGFR
inhibitors, can lower the heightened interstitial fluid pressure in tumors, a barrier to
drug delivery. Here, we investigated whether tumor microenvironment-targeting drugs
enhance the effectiveness of intraperitoneal chemotherapy. A mouse xenograft model
with two large peritoneal implants of colorectal cancer cells was developed to study
drug distribution and tumor physiology during intraperitoneal Oxaliplatin perfusion. Mice
were treated for six days with either Placebo, Imatinib (anti-PDGFR, daily), Bevacizumab
(anti-VEGF, twice) or Pazopanib (anti-PDGFR, -VEGFR; daily) followed by intraperitoneal
oxaliplatin chemotherapy. Bevacizumab and Pazopanib significantly lowered interstitial
fluid pressure, increased Oxaliplatin penetration (assessed by laser ablation inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry) and delayed tumor growth of peritoneal implants
(assessed by MRI). Our findings suggest that VEGF(R)-inhibition may improve the efficacy
of IPC, particularly for patients for whom a complete cytoreduction might not be feasible.

IPC utilizes a pharmacokinetic advantage conferred
by the presence of the peritoneal-plasma barrier,
which permits the use of high drug concentrations
intraperitoneally whilst systemic absorption (and resulting
toxicity) is limited [4]. Conversely, it may be assumed
that the diffusion, tissue penetration, and cytotoxic effects
are also limited. These aspects are mainly dependent
on the molecular characteristics of each drug and the
intraperitoneal pharmacokinetics have been described in
previous research [5].
However, the delivery of intraperitoneal drugs
is clearly also influenced by tumor type and its
microenvironment. Most tumors feature a markedly

INTRODUCTION
Cytoreductive surgery with intraperitoneal
chemotherapy (IPC) has been adopted by oncologic
centers worldwide in the treatment of peritoneally
metastasized cancer. Especially for colorectal and
appendiceal carcinoma, the overall and disease-free
survival of patients has improved with median overall
survival reaching 33 and 130 months respectively [1, 2].
Nevertheless, the prognosis is still grave. Only a small
fraction achieve five-year survival and those with an
incomplete resection receive little benefit of this extensive
procedure [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29889

Oncotarget

at 0.343 mg/mL (95% CI 0.069 to 1.707 mg/mL). In vivo
toxicity was evaluated by performing IPC with increasing
doses of Oxaliplatin, starting at approximately 1/4th of
the clinical dose (100 mg/m2) (Figure 1B, 1C). Major
toxicity and weight loss were noted in mice receiving
250 – 300 mg/m2 of Oxaliplatin and euthanasia was required.
Necropsy uncovered no plausible surgical complications
as the cause. At 200 mg/m2, initial dehydration, reduced
activity, and food intake were noted. Weight loss
and recuperation time were considered excessive. At
150 mg/m2 and lower doses, no major toxicity was noted
and mice recovered most lost weight within two weeks.
The experiment was repeated at 150 mg/m2 in three mice
with similar results. No further toxicity or mortality due to
Oxaliplatin was observed during the experiment.

raised interstitial fluid pressure (IFP) and this impedes the
penetration and uptake of cytotoxic drugs [6]. Recently,
experimental studies have demonstrated that reduction of
the IFP by anti-VEGF(R) and/or -PDGFR therapy leads
to improved delivery of systemic drugs [7]. The improved
delivery combined with the disruptive effect on important
tumor pathways may lead to synergistic, rather than
additive, effects on tumor cell kill and growth delay. Thus
far, it is unknown whether these effects could also enhance
the efficacy of intraperitoneally administered drugs.
Here, we investigated whether pretreatment with
anti-VEGF(R) and/or -PDGFR drugs enhances tumor
penetration and increases efficacy of intraperitoneal
Oxaliplatin perfusion in a mouse peritoneal carcinomatosis
model. We present detailed results of intratumoral
Oxaliplatin after IPC, pretreatment effect on tumor
microenvironment and tumor growth delay.

VEGF inhibition affects tumor IFP, oxygenation,
and vascularity, but has no impact on size or
proliferation index of HT29 xenografts

RESULTS

In the first experimental series, IPC was performed
in mice with two large peritoneal tumor nodules after
pretreatment with either Placebo, Imatinib, Pazopanib,
or Bevacizumab (Figure 1D). Intraoperatively measured
tumor IFP was significantly lower in the Bevacizumab
and Pazopanib groups (Figure 2A, p = 0.0008). Imatinib
did not differ from Placebo. All tumors had low values
of oxygenation. However, the hypoxic fraction was

Oxaliplatin inhibits HT29 cell growth in vitro
and is comparatively more toxic in mice
than in humans
To determine cancer cell line susceptibility to
Oxaliplatin, an MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium) assay was performed (Figure 1A).
The IC50 in HT29 cells after 1 h exposure was estimated

Figure 1: Oxaliplatin IPC model and experiment timeline. A. Cell viability by MTT assay after application of different
concentrations of Oxaliplatin with 1 h exposure (mean, standard deviation). B. Schematic representation of experimental set-up for
Oxaliplatin IPC in mice. The perfusate flows through silicone tubing past a peristaltic roller pump and a heat exchanger. Temperature is
recorded continuously and maintained around 37°C. Tumor IFP and oxygenation are monitored in vivo by intratumoral probes. C. Body
weight decrease after Oxaliplatin IPC at increasing doses. IPC at 150 mg/m2 was repeated in three more mice to confirm the maximum
tolerated dose. (Single values; 150 mg/m2: mean, standard deviation). D. Timeline of IPC experiments. The upper line shows the Oxaliplatin
tumor penetration experiment with tumors resected immediately after IPC for LA-ICP-MS mapping. The lower line shows the tumor
growth delay experiment in which mice underwent sequential MRI scans. N indicates the number of mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29890

Oncotarget

Figure 2: In vivo tumor measurements. A. Intratumoral IFP relative to atmosphere (p = 0.0008, single values, median). * Placebo

vs. Bevacizumab (p = 0.0028). *° Placebo vs. Pazopanib (p = 0.0407). B. Tumor hypoxic fraction (% < 5 mmHg pO2; p = 0.0257, single
values, median). * Placebo vs. Bevacizumab (p = 0.0279).

significantly increased in the Bevacizumab group
(Figure 2B, p = 0.0257). No statistical differences were
detected between the other groups. No toxicity due to
pretreatment was noted and mice appeared in good general
condition.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immediately after IPC, mice were euthanized
and samples collected. Macroscopically, the tumors
formed irregular large nodules averaging 124.85 mm3.
No significant difference in size was found between the
four groups (data not shown, p = 0.1656). Tumors grew
29891

Oncotarget

p = 0.0424) compared to Placebo. A similar trend was
identified in the Bevacizumab group (p = 0.0780). Pericyte
coverage analysis (% α-SMA+ vessels) did not reach
significance (p = 0.2446) and values had a large variance.
These findings suggest some vascular regression in the
Bevacizumab and Pazopanib groups, with little indication
of increased normalization.

invasive in the muscular abdominal wall and formed
nodules directed towards the peritoneal cavity. A few
tumors broke through the external layers of the abdominal
wall and showed partial invasion of the skin, but without
ulceration. Rarely, adhesion to the bowel wall was noted.
In the Bevacizumab group, some tumors contained small
central hematomas.
On H&E staining (Figure 3A, 3B), tumor cells were
invasive in the submesothelial and muscular layers of the
peritoneal wall. The mesothelium was absent from the
peritoneal tumor border in most samples, except around
the edges, but mice fibroblasts were visible throughout the
tumor. No inflammatory response (leukocyte infiltration)
could be observed in the athymic mice model. However,
some central necrosis was present in the larger tumors,
particularly in the Bevacizumab and Pazopanib groups.
The proliferation index (Ki-67) did not differ between
treatment groups (Figure 3C, 3D; p = 0.1482). On
CD105 / α-SMA slides, there was a significant difference
in the microvascular density (Figure 4; p = 0.0323).
Mice receiving Pazopanib had a lower average number
of vessels per medium power field (CD105+, 200x,

Oxaliplatin concentration is greater in tumors
with low IFP
With laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), color maps were created of
the Platinum (Pt) and Phosphorus (P) distribution in tumor
sections. These were then combined in Pt/P ratio maps to
compare Pt concentration across samples. In the peritoneal
border area (up to 1.68 mm), an increased Pt/P ratio was
detected in tumors with a low IFP (Bevacizumab and
Pazopanib) compared to those with a high IFP (Placebo
and Imatinib) (Figure 5; p = 0.0221, n = 15). Differences
in tumor centers could not be assessed because of irregular
tumor shapes and sizes. In those sections containing both

Figure 3: Microscopy overview and proliferation. A. H&E (100×). Overview of representative tumor section. Tumors were

sectioned according to their orientation so that each section showed both the peritoneal and the muscular border. M indicates muscle
and t tumor tissue. B. H&E (400×). Detail of tumor in which the mesothelium can still be identified along the peritoneal border (arrow).
C. KI-67 (400×). Average hot spot of tumor cell proliferation. D. Proliferation index (% KI67+ nuclei; p = 0.1482, single values, median).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29892

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Tumor vascularity. A. α-SMA (brown) & CD105 (red) (200×). Representative image of MVD and Pericyte coverage of

the Placebo and Imatinib groups. B. α-SMA & CD105 (200×). Representative image of the Bevacizumab and Pazopanib groups, mainly
showing reduced vascularity. C. Microvascular density (CD105+ vessels; p = 0.0323, single values, median). * Placebo vs. Pazopanib
(p = 0.0424). D. Pericyte coverage (% α-SMA+ vessels; p = 0.2446, single values, median).

normal tissue and tumor, the Pt maps showed a deeper
penetration and a higher concentration of Pt in normal
tissue compared to tumor.

analysis of maximum uptake slope did not reach statistical
significance (Figure 6D, 6E; p = 0.089). However, a trend
could be observed of decreased values for the Bevacizumab
and Pazopanib groups, corresponding to the IHC results.

Pretreatment with VEGF-inhibitors increases
tumor growth delay after IPC

DISCUSSION

In the second experimental series, tumor growth
delay was assessed on sequential MRI scans in four
groups as described previously and with an added Sham
(no Oxaliplatin) control group. Relative tumor growth
differed significantly between groups (Figure 6A, 6B;
p = 0.0006). Both Bevacizumab and Pazopanib groups
had slower tumor growth than the Sham group, but only
Bevacizumab reached statistical significance compared to
Placebo. Tumor doubling time was Sham 9.157 (95% CI;
6.687 to 14.52), Placebo 10.43 (95% CI; 8.123 to 14.56),
Imatinib 10.75 (95% CI; 6.172 to 41.51), Bevacizumab
14.90 (95% CI; 11.35 to 21.68), and Pazopanib 15.20
days (95% CI; 10.28 to 29.18). Additionally, DCE-MRI
was performed to assess tumor vascularity in vivo. Curve
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Here, we demonstrate for the first time that
anti-VEGF(R) treatment lowers IFP in peritoneal
CRC xenografts, that this facilitates the diffusion and
penetration of intraperitoneal Oxaliplatin, and that this
results in greater tumor growth delay. Complications in
this novel mouse IPC model were successfully managed
by slightly reducing the Oxaliplatin dose to 150 mg/m2 and
changing the perfusion fluid from glucose 5% to saline.
While contrary to manufacturer’s instructions, several
experimental and clinical reports confirm that Oxaliplatin
is sufficiently stable for IPC in a chloride-containing
solution when it is diluted shortly before perfusion [8, 9].
Oxaliplatin degrades into its active metabolite [Pt(dach)
Cl2] in the presence of chloride at a rate of less than 20%
29893

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Tumor oxaliplatin distribution. A. LA-ICP-MS color map of tumor P distribution (n = normal tissue, t = tumor). B. LAICP-MS color map of tumor Pt (of Oxaliplatin) distribution (n = normal tissue, t = tumor). C. Pt/P maps of a tumor with high IFP (h) and
one with low IFP (l). D. Average Pt/P intensity in the tumor peritoneal border region (p = 0.0221, single values, median).

in 120 min. Notably, the large nodule mouse model in this
study differs from most peritoneal carcinomatosis models
(IP injection of cancer cells) in that specific size-dependent
aspects of tumor biology such as oxygenation, perfusion,
and IFP may be evaluated more accurately. The tumors
are consistent in size, IFP, and macroscopic aspect with
intraperitoneal nodules of human CRC (completeness
of cytoreduction score CC-2) [10, 11]. Moreover, this
model allows the use of advanced in vivo (intraoperative
measurements, MRI) and ex vivo (LA-ICP-MS) techniques
to be used.
LA-ICP-MS confirms the hypothesis that the uptake
of Oxaliplatin in tumors is reduced compared to normal
tissue and that by decreasing the IFP, the diffusion of
Oxaliplatin can be improved. The IFP of normal tissue
is reported as −1 to −3 mmHg and this supports the
transcapillary exchange of solutes [12, 13]. In tumors,
the high IFP impedes this transport and likewise also
functions as a barrier to drug uptake for IPC [14]. Even
though tumors are in direct contact with the cytotoxic
solution, it is likely that only a minor part of the total drug
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

dose reaches its target. For small molecules, the large
surface area of the peritoneum assures a quick drug uptake
mainly through healthy tissues into the portal and systemic
circulation. The low IFP samples have more Oxaliplatin in
the border region, but still very little in the tumor center.
Previous attempts were made to increase cytotoxic drug
uptake after IPC, mostly by changing IPC parameters such
as temperature, perfusate or pressure [15]. Unfortunately,
few of these studies analyzed tumor samples.
It is thought that antiangiogenic therapy transiently
normalizes tumor vessels; e.g. decreases leakiness and
IFP, prunes small abnormal vessels, and increases tissue
perfusion as well as oxygenation [16]. However, this
effect appears very dependent on dose and timing of
therapy. Thus far, clinical evidence has been limited.
Nevertheless, neoadjuvant Bevacizumab has been shown
to normalize tumor vasculature in rectal cancer [17].
Here, both Bevacizumab and Pazopanib lower the IFP as
expected, but more hypoxia is noted in the former group.
Microvascular density is decreased, though pericyte
coverage appears unaffected. DCE-MRI reveals a trend of
29894

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Tumor growth delay and vascularity. A. Serial MRI images of mouse abdomen with bilateral tumor nodules (Placebo)

as indicated by arrows. B. Serial MRI images (Bevacizumab). C. Relative tumor growth delay after IPC (exponential growth curves;
p = 0.0006, mean, standard deviation). * Sham vs. Pazopanib (p < 0.05). *° Sham, Placebo vs. Bevacizumab (p < 0.05). D. Color
overlay image of DCE-MRI analysis of maximum uptake slope. E. Tumor maximum uptake slope (p = 0.0890, single values, median).

reduced maximum slope and this indicates antiangiogenic
effect, but does not correspond directly with a single
physiological parameter, rather it reflects a combination of
vascular density and permeability [18]. Jain et al. describe
the normalization window of antiangiogenic therapy
as very brief; i.e. 6 days in mice and up to a month in
man [16]. Furthermore, Tailor et al. state the possibility
that normalization of oxygenation, perfusion or pressure
are not necessarily concurrent [19]. These findings touch
on the issue of continuous treatment with antiangiogenic
therapy which is likely not ideal for every cancer and
every drug. Research concerning optimal treatment
windows could greatly impact current patient care [20].
Imatinib is unable to lower the IFP in HT29
tumors and subsequently does not differ from Placebo
in any of the tests. HT-29 lacks PDGFR, but is reported
to express PDGF and to induce the expression of PDGF
in neighboring stromal cells [21]. Unlike Bevacizumab,
which is quite specific for human VEGF-A, Imatinib
targets both human and mice PDGFRβ [22, 23].
PDGFRβ-inhibition is presumed to lower the IFP by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

reducing excessive matrix density caused by fibroblast
proliferation and contractility [13]. Its role in vascular
normalization is more ambiguous; both antiangiogenic
effects and inhibition of pericytes have been reported.
Pazopanib also targets PDGFR, but this activity cannot
be separately evaluated from its VEGFR-inhibition in
these experiments. Possibly, PDGF(R)-targeting drugs
could be more successful in a different cancer model or
treatment regimen [12, 13]. The PDGF(R) pathway plays
an important role in the tumor microenvironment and
should be included in future research [24].
Interestingly, Oxaliplatin itself barely affects tumor
growth in our experimental model. LA-ICP-MS reveals
only limited tumor penetration of Oxaliplatin. Conversely,
Klaver et al. demonstrated a clear impact of hyperthermic
IPC (HIPEC) on survival in rats, but this after complete
cytoreduction [25]. Prodige 7 (NCT00769405), an
ongoing randomized controlled trial, will hopefully
provide an answer on whether the addition of HIPEC to
cytoreductive surgery improves survival. Presumably,
IPC affects only small nodules and free floating cancer
29895

Oncotarget

cells. Most clinical studies identify the completeness of
cytoreduction as a clear prognostic indicator, with little
benefit of cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC for patients
with a suboptimal resection [3, 26]. Additional treatment
such as neoadjuvant therapy, perhaps with VEGF(R)inhibition, may increase resectability and improve
tumor susceptibility to IPC for this subgroup of patients.
The increased growth delay we observed is likely a
combination of increased Oxaliplatin cytotoxicity in the
peritoneal border and antiangiogenic growth inhibition.
However, VEGF(R)-inhibitors are usually not very
effective on their own [27, 28]. Pretreatment does not
decrease tumor size at the time of IPC and there is no
change in cell proliferation, but some central necrosis is
present. An alternative theory supporting the combination
of cytotoxic and antiangiogenic drugs presumes that there
may be enhanced retention of drugs by decreased vascular
clearance, which could be useful for IP therapy [22].
Importantly, the morbidity of added antiangiogenic
therapy cannot be evaluated in a xenograft experiment.
Bevacizumab has previously been linked to surgical
and non-surgical complications and is commonly
discontinued in the weeks leading up to surgery (4–8
weeks). Pazopanib may cause similar toxicity but has
the advantage of a much shorter half-life (30.9 h).
Nevertheless, several studies report that the possible
additional morbidity of neoadjuvant VEGF(R)-inhibitors
is not prohibitive, even for complex surgery [29, 30].
Moreover, Starlinger et al. demonstrated in a prospective
trial that six weeks after therapy cessation, VEGF
was still effectively blocked by Bevacizumab without
hindering wound-healing [31].
There are some limitations to this study. First, no
quantitative LA-ICP-MS mapping could be performed.
Other methods that determine drug concentration in whole
tissue samples would likely not have been sufficiently
sensitive to detect the changes in Oxaliplatin penetration.
Recent X-Ray Fluorescence pilot studies have successfully
provided a detailed analysis in a similar experimental setup (unpublished results). Future clinical trials in this center
will employ either quantitative LA-ICP-MS or X-Ray
Fluorescence. Secondly, no pharmacokinetic models could
be fitted to the DCE-MRI data mainly due to breathingrelated artefacts. Therefore, only semi-quantitative curve
analysis was possible [18]. A different experimental set-up
might reveal more therapy effect with DCE-MRI. Lastly,
tumor samples could not be evaluated for cytotoxicity
after IPC. For Oxaliplatin analysis, samples had to be
resected immediately. Future experiments could examine
tumors 24 to 72 h after IPC for the detection of apoptosis,
DNA strand breaks, and Oxaliplatin-DNA adducts. To our
knowledge, no antibody has been developed for the latter,
but several exist for Cisplatin-DNA adducts [32].
In conclusion, our findings suggest that neoadjuvant
therapy with VEGF(R)-inhibitors may improve the
efficacy of IPC, especially for patients for whom a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

complete cytoreduction might not be feasible. It remains
for clinical trials to determine optimal dosage and
especially treatment window to achieve the desired
effect. Likewise, morbidity should still be evaluated
comprehensively.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
All animal experiments were approved by the Animal
Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, Ghent
University, and were performed according to Belgian and
European legislature on animal welfare. Mice were fed
ad libitum and kept under standard conditions. All proce­
dures were performed under general anesthesia (IsoFlo,
Abbott, Belgium) and analgesia (Ketoprofen, 5 mg/kg;
Buprenorphin, 0.05 mg/kg). Mice were evaluated daily
for pain or discomfort and were given further analgesia up
to two days post-operatively. All procedures on animals
were performed in a laminated flow cabinet and standard
cytotoxic drug safety precautions were applied.

Cancer cell line
HT-29, a human colon cancer cell-line, was obtained
from the ATCC. The cells were cultured at 37°C in 5%
CO2 humidified atmosphere in McCoy’s SA medium
(Invitrogen, 26600-023) with Fungizone (Bristol Myers
Squibb B.V, 3440 AM Woerden), 10% fetal bovine serum
(Greiner Bio One, 758093), and penicillin-streptomycin
(Invitrogen, 15070-063). The HT29 cells were
authenticated by STR DNA profiling (ATCC, 25/02/14).
An MTT assay as described by De Smet et al.
was performed to evaluate Oxaliplatin cytotoxicity
in vitro [33]. Briefly, cells were seeded in 96-well plates
at a concentration of 8 × 104 cells/ml. After 24 h, 20 μL
medium is replaced by 20 μL of drug solution. Oxaliplatin
concentrations of 100 μg/mL, 50 μg/mL, 20 μg/mL,
10 μg/mL, 5 μg/mL, and 1 μg/mL were assessed. Eight
wells per concentration were used and all experiments
were repeated (3x). Next, the plates were incubated
for 60 min at 37°C and 10% CO2. Then, the oxaliplatin
solution was replaced by 200 μL fresh medium.
Afterwards, the cells were incubated for 24 h at 37°C and
10% CO2. Finally, the cytotoxicity of the formulations was
evaluated via MTT assay and measured by assessing the
optical density using an ELISA-plate reader (Paradigm
Detection Platform, Beckman Coulter, Suarleé, Belgium).

Xenograft model
1.5 × 106 HT-29 cells suspended in 40 μL Matrigel
(Corning BV, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) were
injected subperitoneally in the right and left side of the
anterolateral abdominal cavity of nude athymic mice
(8 WO male Foxn1nu, Harlan, Horst, the Netherlands).
The peritoneal layer covering the gelled nodules
29896

Oncotarget

was superficially incised to promote intraabdominal
expansion (Supplementary Figure S1). The abdomen was
closed in two layers with PDS 6/0 (Ethicon, Johnson &
Johnson Intl., Brussels, Belgium).

and 14 with 5 mg/kg Bevacizumab (Avastin®, Roche;
anti-VEGF (human)). The fourth, Pazopanib, received
daily oral gavage of 100 mg/kg Pazopanib hydrochloride
(Votrient®, GSK; anti-VEGFR, -PDGFR) in distilled water
(0.5% HMPC, 0.1% tween 80).

Intraperitoneal chemotherapy procedure

Intraperitoneal chemotherapy
IPC was performed on day 15 (after the last
pretreatment dose) with 150 mg/m2 Oxaliplatin for 60′
at 36–38°C as described previously. Immediately after
IPC, mice were euthanized by intracardiac puncture and
exsanguination. Blood and perfusate were preserved.
Left tumor nodules were excised and measured in three
dimensions with electronic calipers.

The intraperitoneal perfusion circuit was cons­
tructed out of silicon tubing (Pumpsil®, Watson-Marlow,
Zwijnaarde, Belgium), a peristaltic roller pump (520
U, Watson-Marlow, Zwijnaarde, Belgium), and a heat
exchanger (M3 Lauda, Lauda-Brinkman, NJ, USA)
(Figure 1B). Anesthetized mice were placed on a
heating pad and a midline laparotomy was performed.
The edges of the abdominal wall were sutured with
PDS 6/0 to a metal ring in a method similar to the open
(coliseum) IPC technique. Oxaliplatin (100–300 mg/
m2) was added to 2 L/m2 saline (NaCl 0.9%) and briefly
circulated and preheated in a closed circuit. Perforated
inflow and outflow catheters with attached temperature
probes were placed in the abdomen and the perfusate
was then circulated for exactly 60 min. Temperature was
continuously measured and registered by E-Val® 2.10
Software (ELLAB®, Roedovre, Denmark). Perfusion
rate and heat exchanger temperature were adjusted
intermittently by small increments to maintain the intraabdominal temperature between 36°C and 38°C. Special
care was taken to ensure that both tumor nodules were
fully submerged and no perfusate was spilled. After
60 min, the perfusate was evacuated by suction. The
abdomen was closed in two layers with PDS 6/0.

Intraoperative measurements
Tumor IFP was measured using a fine (0.36 mm)
glass fiber based on the Fabry Perot interferometer
(Samba Preclin®, Samba Sensors, Bioseb, Vitrolles,
France) according to the method described by Ozerdem
[34]. Briefly, the probe is placed in a perforated 30-gauge
catheter filled with gel (Duratears®, Alcon). The catheter is
then carefully introduced along a premade needle track into
the center of the right tumor nodule. Tumor IFP (relative
to the atmosphere, mmHg) was recorded for 5 to 8′
after achieving a stable value.
Tumor oxygenation was measured throughout the
nodule using a single fluorescence based fiberoptic pO2
‘Bare-Fibre’ sensor (OxyLite®, Oxford Optronix, Oxford,
UK) in a method similar to Ceelen et al [35]. In short, the
probe was fixed to a micromanipulator and guided through
the tumor along premade needle tracks. Measurements
were made every 200 μm for up to 30 data points.
Data was collected with Powerlab/8sp (ADInstruments,
Oxford, UK) and the hypoxic fraction (% <5 mmHg pO2)
was calculated.

Maximum tolerated dose
IPC with Oxaliplatin in increasing doses (100–300
mg/m2) was performed in five mice. Mice received pain
relief (see above) and were euthanized in case of clear
morbidity. The starting dose was defined as 1/4th of that
in humans relative to body surface area. The maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) was defined as the highest nonlethal dose without serious adverse effects (bodyweight
decrease <10% after 2 weeks) [33]. IPC with the same
dose was then repeated in three more mice to confirm the
MTD.

Tumor samples and histology
Tumors were placed for 24 h in formaldehyde 4%
and then conserved in PBS until processed and embedded
in paraffin. Sample slices (5 μm) were cut by microtome
for microscopic analysis (ColorView I, BX43F, Olympus,
Tokyo, Japan). Standard H&E and Ki-67 staining were
carried out for each tumor. Tumor regions were identified
on H&E and visually analyzed for invasion, necrosis
and uncommon features. Proliferation index (Ki-67) was
assessed by hot spot analysis (up to 6/slide) and quantified
using ImmunoRatio (Institute of Biomedical Technology,
University of Tampere). Additionally, double IHC for
α-SMA (pericytes) and CD105 (endothelial cells) was
performed. In brief, tissue slices were deparaffinized
in xylene, hydrated in ethanol and unmasked by citrate
buffer pH 6 at 95°C for 20′. Endogenous peroxidase was
blocked by 3% H2O2 in PBS and mouse IgG by M.O.M.
basic kit (BMK-2202, Vector Lab.). Slides were incubated
with α-SMA antibody (DAKO M0851, monoclonal
mouse anti-human/rat) 1/200 in MOM diluent at room

Oxaliplatin tumor penetration
Pretreatment
Mice were divided into four groups of seven
animals, each receiving a different pretreatment from day
10 to 15 after HT29 implantation. The first group, Placebo,
received either daily oral gavage of 0.15 mL PBS or IP
injections of 0.15 mL saline solution on day 10 and 14.
The second, Imatinib, received daily oral gavage of 50 mg/
kg Imatinib mesylate (Glivec®, Novartis; anti-PDGFR) in
PBS. The third, Bevacizumab, was injected on day 10
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29897

Oncotarget

MR acquisition and image analysis

temperature for 30′. MOM Biotinylated Anti-Mouse IgG
reagent was applied for 10 min at room temperature. ABC
kit (Vectastain Vector & PK-6100) was added and then
stained with DAB. Afterwards, a blocking buffer (10%
NRS, 1% BSA, and 0.2% Tween 20 in PBS) was applied
for 1 h. Slides were incubated overnight with Ab goat
anti-mouse Endoglin (CD105 R&D systems ref. AF1320)
1/50 in PBS + 1/10 blocking buffer. LSAB+ System-AP
kit (DAKO K0678) was used according to manufacturer’s
instructions and Fuchsin+ chromogen was added for 1′ at
room temperature. Finally, slides were counterstained with
haematoxylin. Microvascular density (CD105+ vessels)
and pericyte coverage (CD105+ & α-SMA+ vessels) were
assessed by hot spot analysis (up to 6/slide) using Fiji [36].

MR images were acquired at three time points (day
14, 19, and 26) on a 7T system (Bruker PharmaScan
70/16, Ettlingen, Germany) with a mouse body volume
coil. Mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane (5%
induction, 1.5% maintenance, 0.3 L/min) and warmed
with a water-based heating blanket. Anatomical
information was obtained with a T2-weighted sequence
(TurboRARE) with the following parameters: TR
3661 ms, TE 37.1 ms, 100 μm in-plane resolution, 30
contiguous slices of 600 μm, and acquisition time 9′1”.
Pre- and post-contrast T1-weighted images were obtained
with a RARE sequence with parameters TR 1464 ms,
TE 9.1 ms, 120 μm in-plane resolution, 30 contiguous
slices of 600 μm, and acquisition time 4′17”. Dynamic
contrast-enhanced MR images (DCE-MRI) were
acquired for a single slice using a FLASH sequence with
the following parameters: TR 12 ms, TE 3.4 ms, 268 μm
in-plane resolution, 550 repetitions, temporal resolution
1.344′’, and acquisition time 12′19”. The oblique slice
was rotated such that both tumors were covered. The
gadolinium-based contrast agent (Vistarem 50 mmol/kg,
Guerbet, Villepinte, France) was intravenously injected
1′ after start of the acquisition. Total acquisition time
per session was 35′. Tumor volume was measured sliceby-slice using Fiji by multiplying total surface area
with voxel thickness (0.6 mm). Relative tumor volume
was set as the measured volume divided by the initial
volume (day 14). Dynamic time series were analyzed
with MIStar version 3.2.62.03 (Apollo MIT, Melbourne,
Australia) using curve analysis. ROI of tumors were
manually selected and mean values were determined.

Platinum measurements
A New Wave Research UP193HE ArF* excimerbased laser ablation system (New Wave Research, CA,
USA) coupled to an Element XR (Thermo Scientific,
Braunschweig, Germany) double-focusing sector
field ICP-MS instrument was used to determine the
distribution of Pt within thin section of tissues (20 μm
paraffinated slices). This LA-unit was equipped with a
standard circular ablation cell with a diameter of 5 cm.
Thin sections of tissue were scanned with a laser beam
with a diameter of 80 μm. The scanning parameters were
selected such as to provide square pixels in the final
elemental map (80 × 80 μm). The material released from
the surface of the sample upon ablation was transported
using He as a carrier gas into the ICP ion source. Postablation, the He flow carrying the dry sample aerosol was
admixed with Ar prior to introduction into the ICP. Both
laser beam diameter and laser repetition frequency have
been selected carefully, taking into account the nature of
the sample and the concentration of the target element.
Also, the incident laser fluence has been optimized.
Color maps were created of Pt and P distribution and
of the Pt/P ratio. LA-ICP-MS settings are summarized
in Supplementary Table  S1. Pt/P maps were analyzed
using Fiji by identifying the peritoneal border region
(1.68 mm thickness) and calculating average Pt/P ratio
intensity values.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad
Prism 6 (Graphpad Software, Inc.; La Jolla, CA, USA).
Data was analyzed using non-parametric tests (MannWhitney-U, Kruskall-Wallis, Dunn’s method). Tumor
growth delay and MTT IC50 were determined using nonlinear regression analysis (exponential growth and doseresponse inhibition). Alpha was set at 0.05 for all tests.

Tumor growth delay

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Treatment

The authors would like to thank Natacha Rosseel
for the assistance with laboratory and animal procedures
and Lieselotte De Smet for the advice on experimental
procedures and pharmaceutical preparations.

Mice were divided into five groups of four animals.
Four groups received pretreatment as described previously,
while the fifth, Sham, received either daily oral gavage of
0.15 mL PBS or IP injections of 0.15 mL saline solution
on day 10 and 14, and underwent intraperitoneal perfusion
with saline (without Oxaliplatin). IPC was performed as
described previously on day 15 and mice were euthanized
on day 28.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.

29898

Oncotarget

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

10.	 Willett CG, Duda DG, di Tomaso E, Boucher Y,
Ancukiewicz M, Sahani DV, Lahdenranta J, Chung DC,
Fischman AJ, Lauwers GY, Shellito P, Czito BG, Wong TZ,
Paulson E, Poleski M, Vujaskovic Z, et al. Efficacy, safety,
and biomarkers of neoadjuvant bevacizumab, radiation therapy, and fluorouracil in rectal cancer: a multidisciplinary phase
II study. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2009; 27:3020–3026.

This work was supported by Ghent University.
Wim Ceelen is a Senior Clinical Investigator of the Fund
for Scientific Research — Flanders (FWO). Christian
Vanhove is supported by the GROUP-ID consortium of
Ghent University.

11.	 Jacquet P, Sugarbaker PH. Clinical research methodologies
in diagnosis and staging of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Cancer treatment and research. 1996; 82:359–374.

REFERENCES
1.	 Kuijpers AM, Mirck B, Aalbers AG, Nienhuijs SW, de
Hingh IH, Wiezer MJ, van Ramshorst B, van Ginkel RJ,
Havenga K, Bremers AJ, de Wilt JH, Te Velde EA,
Verwaal VJ. Cytoreduction and HIPEC in The Netherlands:
Nationwide Long-term Outcome Following the Dutch
Protocol. Annals of surgical oncology. 2013.

12.	 Pietras K, Ostman A, Sjoquist M, Buchdunger E, Reed RK,
Heldin CH, Rubin K. Inhibition of platelet-derived
growth factor receptors reduces interstitial hypertension
and increases transcapillary transport in tumors. Cancer
research. 2001; 61:2929–2934.

2.	 Verwaal VJ, van Ruth S, de Bree E, van Sloothen GW,
van Tinteren H, Boot H, Zoetmulder FA. Randomized
trial of cytoreduction and hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy versus systemic chemotherapy and palliative surgery in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis of
colorectal cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : official
journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2003; 21:3737–3743.

13.	 Fan Y, Du W, He B, Fu F, Yuan L, Wu H, Dai W, Zhang H,
Wang X, Wang J, Zhang X, Zhang Q. The reduction of
tumor interstitial fluid pressure by liposomal imatinib and
its effect on combination therapy with liposomal doxorubicin. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:2277–2288.

3.	 Verwaal VJ, Bruin S, Boot H, van Slooten G, van Tinteren H.
8-year follow-up of randomized trial: cytoreduction and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy versus systemic
chemotherapy in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis
of colorectal cancer. Annals of surgical oncology. 2008;
15:2426–2432.

15.	 Gremonprez F, Willaert W, Ceelen W. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IPC) for peritoneal carcinomatosis: Review of
animal models. Journal of surgical oncology. 2013.

14.	 Fukumura D, Jain RK. Tumor microvasculature and microenvironment: targets for anti-angiogenesis and normalization. Microvascular research. 2007; 74:72–84.

16.	 Jain RK. Normalizing tumor microenvironment to treat
cancer: bench to bedside to biomarkers. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2013; 31:2205–2218.

4.	 Ceelen WP, Flessner MF. Intraperitoneal therapy for peritoneal tumors: biophysics and clinical evidence. Nature
reviews Clinical oncology. 2010; 7:108–115.

17.	 Willett CG, Boucher Y, di Tomaso E, Duda DG, Munn LL,
Tong RT, Chung DC, Sahani DV, Kalva SP, Kozin SV, Mino M,
Cohen KS, Scadden DT, Hartford AC, Fischman AJ,
Clark JW, et al. Direct evidence that the VEGF-specific antibody bevacizumab has antivascular effects in human rectal
cancer. Nature medicine. 2004; 10:145–147.

5.	 Hasovits C, Clarke S. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of intraperitoneal cancer chemotherapeutics.
Clinical pharmacokinetics. 2012; 51:203–224.
6.	 Heldin CH, Rubin K, Pietras K, Ostman A. High interstitial fluid pressure - an obstacle in cancer therapy. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2004; 4:806–813.

18.	 Barnes SL, Whisenant JG, Loveless ME, Yankeelov TE.
Practical dynamic contrast enhanced MRI in small animal
models of cancer: data acquisition, data analysis, and interpretation. Pharmaceutics. 2012; 4:442–478.

7.	 Jain RK, Tong RT, Munn LL. Effect of vascular
­normalization by antiangiogenic therapy on interstitial
hypertension, peritumor edema, and lymphatic m
­ etastasis:
insights from a mathematical model. Cancer research.
2007; 67:2729–2735.

19.	 Tailor TD, Hanna G, Yarmolenko PS, Dreher MR, Betof AS,
Nixon AB, Spasojevic I, Dewhirst MW. Effect of pazopanib on tumor microenvironment and liposome delivery.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2010; 9:1798–1808.

8.	 Mehta AM, Van den Hoven JM, Rosing H, Hillebrand MJ,
Nuijen B, Huitema AD, Beijnen JH, Verwaal VJ. Stability
of oxaliplatin in chloride-containing carrier solutions used
in hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. International
journal of pharmaceutics. 2015; 479:23–27.

20.	 Chatterjee S, Wieczorek C, Schottle J, Siobal M, Hinze Y,
Franz T, Florin A, Adamczak J, Heukamp LC, Neumaier B,
Ullrich RT. Transient antiangiogenic treatment improves
delivery of cytotoxic compounds and therapeutic outcome
in lung cancer. Cancer research. 2014; 74:2816–2824.

9.	 Jerremalm E, Hedeland M, Wallin I, Bondesson U, Ehrsson H.
Oxaliplatin degradation in the presence of chloride: identification and cytotoxicity of the monochloro monooxalato
complex. Pharmaceutical research. 2004; 21:891–894.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Yu DC, Waby JS, Chirakkal H, Staton CA, Corfe
BM. Butyrate suppresses expression of neuropilin I in

29899

Oncotarget

colorectal cell lines through inhibition of Sp1 transactivation. Molecular cancer. 2010; 9:276.

Castelguidone E, Palaia R, Daniele G, Aloj L, Romano G,
Iaffaioli RV. Neoadjuvant FOLFIRI+bevacizumab in patients
with resectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a
phase 2 trial. British journal of cancer. 2013; 108:1566–1570.

22.	 Jain RK. Antiangiogenesis strategies revisited: from starving tumors to alleviating hypoxia. Cancer cell. 2014;
26:605–622.

30.	 Tamandl D, Gruenberger B, Klinger M, Herberger B,
Kaczirek K, Fleischmann E, Gruenberger T. Liver resection
remains a safe procedure after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
including bevacizumab: a case-controlled study. Annals of
surgery. 2010; 252:124–130.

23.	 Wolff NC, Randle DE, Egorin MJ, Minna JD, Ilaria RL Jr.
Imatinib mesylate efficiently achieves therapeutic intratumor concentrations in vivo but has limited activity in a
xenograft model of small cell lung cancer. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2004; 10:3528–3534.

31.	 Starlinger P, Alidzanovic L, Schauer D, Maier T, Nemeth C,
Perisanidis B, Tamandl D, Gruenberger B, Gruenberger T,
Brostjan C. Neoadjuvant bevacizumab persistently inactivates VEGF at the time of surgery despite preoperative cessation. British journal of cancer. 2012; 107:961–966.

24.	 Heldin C-H. Targeting the PDGF signaling pathway in tumor
treatment. Cell Communication and Signaling. 2013; 11:97.
25.	 Klaver YL, Hendriks T, Lomme RM, Rutten HJ, Bleichrodt RP,
de Hingh IH. Intraoperative hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy after cytoreductive surgery for peritoneal carcinomatosis in an experimental model. The British journal of
surgery. 2010; 97:1874–1880.

32.	 Liedert B, Pluim D, Schellens J, Thomale J. Adduct-specific
monoclonal antibodies for the measurement of cisplatininduced DNA lesions in individual cell nuclei. Nucleic
acids research. 2006; 34:e47.
33.	 De Smet L, Colin P, Ceelen W, Bracke M, Van Bocxlaer J,
Remon JP, Vervaet C. Development of a nanocrystalline
Paclitaxel formulation for HIPEC treatment. Pharmaceutical
research. 2012; 29:2398–2406.

26.	 Jimenez W, Sardi A, Nieroda C, Sittig M, Milovanov V,
Nunez M, Aydin N, Gushchin V. Predictive and prognostic
survival factors in peritoneal carcinomatosis from appendiceal cancer after cytoreductive surgery with hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Annals of surgical oncology.
2014; 21:4218–4225.

34.	 Ozerdem U. Measuring interstitial fluid pressure with fiberoptic pressure transducers. Microvascular research. 2009;
77:226–229.

27.	 Giantonio BJ, Catalano PJ, Meropol NJ, O’Dwyer PJ,
Mitchell EP, Alberts SR, Schwartz MA, Benson AB 3rd.
Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX4) for previously treated
metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200. Journal of
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society
of Clinical Oncology. 2007; 25:1539–1544.

35.	 Ceelen W, Smeets P, Backes W, Van Damme N, Boterberg T,
Demetter P, Bouckenooghe I, De Visschere M, Peeters M,
Pattyn P. Noninvasive monitoring of radiotherapy-induced
microvascular changes using dynamic contrast enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) in a colorectal
tumor model. International journal of radiation oncology,
biology, physics. 2006; 64:1188–1196.

28.	 Hackl C, Man S, Francia G, Milsom C, Xu P, Kerbel RS.
Metronomic oral topotecan prolongs survival and reduces
liver metastasis in improved preclinical orthotopic and adjuvant therapy colon cancer models. Gut. 2013; 62:259–271.

36.	 Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V,
Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden C, Saalfeld S,
Schmid B, Tinevez J-Y, White DJ, Hartenstein V, Eliceiri K,
Tomancak P, Cardona A. Fiji: an open-source platform for
biological-image analysis. Nat Meth. 2012; 9:676–682.

29.	 Nasti G, Piccirillo MC, Izzo F, Ottaiano A, Albino V, Delrio P,
Romano C, Giordano P, Lastoria S, Caraco C, de Lutio di

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29900

Oncotarget

