1275

E D I T O R I A L

Advanced Bladder Cancer:
So Many Drugs, So Little
Progress
What’s Wrong With This Picture?

Robert Dreicer,

MD

Department of Solid Tumor Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.

W

See referenced original article on pages 128493, this issue.
Address for reprints: Robert Dreicer, MD, Department of Solid Tumor Oncology, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, R35, 9500
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195; Fax: (216)
445-2360; E-mail: dreicer@ccf.org
Received April 9, 2008; accepted April 10, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

ith the recent paradigm-shifting developments in the management of advanced renal cell carcinoma, advanced bladder
(urothelial) cancer is now ofﬁcially the most depressing genitourinary neoplasm. The heady days of the mid-1980s saw impressive
and, in some cases, natural history-altering responses to cisplatinbased combination chemotherapy.1 Unfortunately, the management
of advanced bladder cancer has evolved over the past 20 years into
a small cell lung cancer paradigm, in which a host of cytotoxic
agents provide relatively high objective response rates, with only a
small subset of patients cured and limited utility of ‘‘salvage’’ therapy. In this issue of Cancer, Gallagher et al provide a perspective on
the initial systemic management options for patients with metastatic bladder cancer and an overview of the status of second-line
therapy.2
Urologic and medical oncologists have long expressed the opinion that bladder cancer presents an intriguing and perhaps unique
neoplasm in which to conduct clinical research. In 2008, it is estimated that there will be nearly 69,000 patients diagnosed with bladder cancer (superﬁcial plus advanced disease), with more than
14,000 deaths (essentially all from advanced disease).3 In patients
with superﬁcial and locally advanced disease, multiple assessments
(cystoscopy) with acquisition of tumor (for both pathologic assessment and translational science) are possible, and are in fact the
standard of care in the management of superﬁcial disease. In the
current era of ‘‘targeted’’ therapies, bladder cancer is known to be
inﬂuenced by a variety of molecular pathways that are amenable to
treatment with current agents, including overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor and vascular endothelial growth factor.4
In contrast to prostate cancer patients, standard Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria remain useful (at
least in trials of cytotoxic agents) in the majority of patients with
advanced urothelial cancer. To contrast the former with the stark
reality of current therapeutics, the last 2 agents to gain US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for use in superﬁcial blad-

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23690
Published online 9 July 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1276

CANCER September 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 6

der cancer (bacillus Calmette–Guerin and valrubicin)
were introduced a decade ago. The situation for
patients with advanced disease is even more distressing; cisplatin as a single agent was approved by
the FDA in 1993.
Gallagher et al touch brieﬂy on the challenges of
conducting clinical research in patients with advanced
urothelial cancer.2 In the ﬁrst decade after the introduction of cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy,
the cooperative groups and other US academic centers
successfully developed and completed phase 3 trials
in patients with advanced urothelial cancer. Studies
comparing the methotrextate, vinblastine, doxorubicin,
and cisplatin (M-VAC) regimen with cisplatin and
M-VAC versus cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and
doxorubicin combinations culminated in establishing
M-VAC as the standard of care.5,6 The Southwest Oncology Group completed a phase 3 trial of neoadjuvant M-VAC followed by cystectomy versus
cystectomy alone and demonstrated the survival beneﬁt of chemotherapy in this clinical setting.7
The second decade of the cisplatin era in
urothelial cancer saw a rather dramatic shift in the
phase 3 environment, with successful studies driven
by European investigators and major accrual challenges for US cooperative groups trials. Von der
Maase et al compared the M-VAC regimen with the
combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin (GC), leading to broad acceptance of the GC regimen as a
standard of care.8 Investigators from the Hellenic Cooperative Group compared the combination of docetaxel and cisplatin with M-VAC; 2 additional phase 3
trials have been completed by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, 1 of
which compared high-dose M-VAC with conventional-dose M-VAC and, most recently, a study comparing the combination of paclitaxel, cisplatin, and
gemcitabine with GC.9-11 In contrast to the European
experience, in the US, 2 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) phase 3 trials compared M-VAC
versus the combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel
(1 in the metastatic setting and 1 in the adjuvant setting), and a Cancer and Leukemia Group B adjuvant
phase 3 chemotherapy trial was closed prematurely
because of a lack of accrual.12
Approximately 2% of adult cancer patients in the
US are enrolled in clinical trials on an annual basis,
and although there are few data to evaluate, there is
no reason a priori to believe that patients with
urothelial cancer have intrinsic differences (eg, lack
of interest in research, distance from trial centers,
unwillingness to be randomized if a phase 3 trial is
offered) from other patients with a variety of neoplasms that would preclude trial participation. A

common theme that cuts across many solid tumors
is the dissemination of clinical experience into the
medical community. An example is the management
of the ‘‘unﬁt’’ patient with advanced urothelial cancer. Conventional chemotherapy regimens such as
GC or M-VAC have long been administered by community medical oncologists; however, given the average age and comorbidities of many patients with
advanced urothelial cancer, there was a widely
appreciated need to develop noncisplatin-based
therapies. In the mid-1990s, ECOG investigators conducted a phase 2 trial of paclitaxel and carboplatin
in patients with advanced urothelial cancer and renal dysfunction. This trial enrolled 42 patients over a
3-year period and demonstrated the modest clinical
activity and relative safety of this doublet in this
patient group.13 However, a follow-up ECOG phase 2
trial in the same patient population evaluating the
combination of carboplatin and gemcitabine was
closed (in 2003) secondary to poor accrual.
However, there are some unique issues facing
patients and physicians in the context of clinical
trials and the clinical management of advanced
urothelial cancer. Although not a rare disease,
advanced urothelial cancer represents a relatively
small component of most community medical oncology practice. Given the rapidly expanding knowledge base and therapeutic advances in the more
common epithelial cancers (eg, those of the breast,
colon, and lung), and the associated clinical trials
available either in community clinical oncology programs or via the National Cancer Institute–funded
Clinical Trials Support Unit, it would not be a stretch
to suggest that the ongoing trials in advanced
urothelial cancer might not be on the top of the list.
Attempts to study more novel approaches are tempered by the concern that altering the current therapy paradigm (ie, cisplatin-based combination
therapy) might negatively impact on potentially curative therapy for a small subset of patients. In addition, given the pressure that all centers face,
irrespective of size, regarding the costs associated
with opening and maintaining clinical trials, disease
sites less likely to accrue patients are increasingly
less likely to be opened. It is the latter point that
most likely represents the greatest challenge to clinical trial accrual in the current environment.
Gallagher et al provide a snapshot of the current
status of systemic management options in the second-line setting.2 Unfortunately, this entire area can
be summarized as follows: 1) there are many single
agents (cytotoxics) with objective response rates
demonstrated in phase 2 trials with overlapping conﬁdence intervals; and 2) to my knowledge there is no

Editorial/Dreicer

evidence that combination chemotherapy is either
‘‘better’’ than single agents, or that any therapy
improves survival and/or quality of life.
However, there is hope. Urologic oncologists need
only remind themselves of the therapy paradigm for
advanced renal cell carcinoma that existed just a few
years ago to believe that progress is possible. The review
by Gallagher et al covers the current status of moving
‘‘targeted’’ agents into the urothelial phase 2 setting.
Although the evaluation of novel agents in combination
with chemotherapy in the initial management of
patients with advanced urothelial cancer will still need
overall survival endpoints, lessons learned from the renal cell cancer experience suggest that study endpoints
for noncytotoxic agents in the second-line setting will
need to move from objective response to progressionfree survival (PFS) to lessen the chance of missing clinical activity.14 Novel trial designs, such as the University
of Michigan–led randomized phase 2 trial discussed by
the authors, are just 1 example of new approaches that
will be required to facilitate drug development in
patients with urothelial cancer. The second-line setting
remains a viable setting in which to study novel agents,
although as noted earlier, some of these agents (or combinations) will require PFS endpoints, the potential to
have a ‘‘ renal cancer-like sunitinib moment’’ie, the recognition of striking antitumor activity in a salvage setting) could also lead to the rapid movement of new
agents into early-stage clinical trials.
For more than the last 20 years, we have essentially squeezed out the maximum beneﬁt from conventional cytotoxics in the management of advanced
urothelial cancer. Going forward, the urologic oncology community will need to be more creative regarding the design of clinical trials, and we need to
rededicate ourselves to improving clinical trial
accrual. It is past time to move on.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Sternberg C, Yagoda A, Scher H, et al. Preliminary results
of M-VAC (methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin) for transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelium.
J Urol. 1985;133:403-404.
Gallagher DJ, Milowsky MI, Bajorin DF. Advanced bladder
cancer: status of ﬁrst-line chemotherapy and the search
for active agents in the second-line setting. Cancer. 2008;
113:1284-1293.

13.

14.

1277

Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:71-96.
Black P, Agarwal P, Dinney C. Targeted therapies in bladder
cancer: an update. Urol Oncol. 2007;25:433-438.
Loehrer P, Einhorn L, Elson P, et al. A randomized comparison of cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine, and doxorubicin in patients with
metastatic urothelial carcinoma: a cooperative group
study. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10:1066-1073.
Logothetis C, Dexeus F, Finn L, et al. A prospective randomized trial comparing MVAC and CISCA chemotherapy for
patients with metastatic urothelial tumors. J Clin Oncol.
1990;8:1050-1055.
Grossman H, Natale R, Tangen C, et al. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy
alone for locally advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:859-866.
von der Maase H, Hansen S, Roberts J, et al. Gemcitabine
and cisplatin versus methotrextate, vinblastine, doxorubicin,
and cisplatin in advanced or metastatic bladder cancer:
results of a large, randomized, multinational, multicenter,
phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3068-3077.
Sternberg C, de Mulder P, Schornagel J, et al. Randomized
phase III trial of high-dose-intensity methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (MVAC) chemotherapy and
recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
versus classic MVAC in advanced urothelial tract tumors:
European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer Protocol no. 30924. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:26382646.
Bamias A, Aravantinos G, Deliveliotis C, et al. Docetaxel
and cisplatin with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF) versus MVAC with G-CSF in advanced urothelial
carcinoma: a multicenter, randomized, Phase III study
from the Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin
Oncol. 2004;22:220-228.
Bellmunt J, von der Maase H, Mead G, et al. Randomized
phase III study comparing paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine
(PCG) and gemcitabine/cisplatin (GC) in patients with
locally advanced (LA) or metastatic (M) urothelial cancer
without prior systemic therapy; EORTC30987/Intergroup
Study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2007;25(18 suppl):
LBA5030.
Dreicer R, Manola J, Roth B, et al. Phase III trial of methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin versus carboplatin and paclitaxel in patients with advanced
carcinoma of the urothelium. Cancer. 2004;100:1639-1645.
Vaughn D, Manola J, Dreicer R, See W, Levitt R, Wilding G.
Phase II study of paclitaxel plus carboplatin in patients
with advanced carcinoma of the urothelium and renal dysfunction (E2896): a trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Cancer. 2002;95:1022-1027.
Gore M, Escudier B. Emerging efﬁcacy endpoints for targeted therapies in advanced renal cell carcinoma. Oncology (Williston Park). 2006;20:19-24.

