OPEN

Oncogene (2015) 34, 5317–5328
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/15
www.nature.com/onc

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of β-catenin-independent
tumor-suppressive cellular senescence in lung cancer
This article has been corrected since advance Online Publication and a corrigendum is also printed in this issue
RK Bikkavilli1,10, S Avasarala1,10, M Van Scoyk1, J Arcaroli2, C Brzezinski1, W Zhang3, MG Edwards4, MKK Rathinam1, T Zhou1, J Tauler1,
S Borowicz5, YA Lussier6, BA Parr7, CD Cool8 and RA Winn1,9
Cellular senescence is an initial barrier for carcinogenesis. However, the signaling mechanisms that trigger cellular senescence are
incompletely understood, particularly in vivo. Here we identify Wnt7a as a novel upstream inducer of cellular senescence. In two
different mouse strains (C57Bl/6J and FVB/NJ), we show that the loss of Wnt7a is a major contributing factor for increased lung
tumorigenesis owing to reduced cellular senescence, and not reduced apoptosis, or autophagy. Wnt7a-null mice under de novo
conditions and in both the strains display E-cadherin-to-N-cadherin switch, reduced expression of cellular senescence markers and
reduced expression of senescence-associated secretory phenotype, indicating a genetic predisposition of these mice to increased
carcinogen-induced lung tumorigenesis. Interestingly, Wnt7a induced an alternate senescence pathway, which was independent of
β-catenin, and distinct from that of classical oncogene-induced senescence mediated by the well-known p16INK4a and p19ARF
pathways. Mechanistically, Wnt7a induced cellular senescence via inactivation of S-phase kinase-associated protein 2, an important
alternate regulator of cellular senescence. Additionally, we identiﬁed Iloprost, a prostacyclin analog, which initiates downstream
signaling cascades similar to that of Wnt7a, as a novel inducer of cellular senescence, presenting potential future clinical
translational strategies. Thus pro-senescence therapies using either Wnt7a or its mimic, Iloprost, might represent a new class of
therapeutic treatments for lung cancer.
Oncogene (2015) 34, 5317–5328; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.2; published online 2 March 2015

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
the world for both men and women. Oncogenic stimuli trigger the
cells to escape from the normal constraints of cell growth, adopt
some, or all of the hallmarks of cancer,1 and undergo cellular
transformation and carcinogenesis. However, in response to
oncogenic stress cells activate protective mechanisms such as
cellular senescence, which acts as a barrier to cellular transformation and tumor progression.2–5 Cellular senescence is a process of
permanent cell cycle arrest, which halts proliferating cells in the
G1 phase of the cell cycle.6 Senescent cells are generally
characterized by a distinct and recognizable ﬂattened and
enlarged morphology with prominent nuclei and the accumulation of vacuoles.6 Currently, there is no single marker attributed to
senescent cells. Research over the past years has been successful
in identifying and characterizing several important characteristics
of a senescent cell, for example, increased senescence-associated
β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) activity,7 activation of the retinoblastoma
protein (hypophosphorylated-Rb) as a result of increased expression
of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors (p16INK4A, p19ARF and

p27KIP1),6,8 and the induction of a senescence-associated secretory
phenotype (SASP).8–10 These responses allow the cells to remain
static and unresponsive to mitogenic signals, and therefore protect
the cells from repeated oncogenic insults, and tumorigenesis.
Although elegant, the mechanisms driving tumor-protective cellular
senescence remains incompletely understood.
Wnts are secreted glycoproteins that bind to the members of the
seven transmembrane family of proteins called Frizzleds (Fzds).11–13
Wnts binding to Fzds initiates a complex network of events, which
are either dependent on β-catenin (canonical pathway)11,14 or
independent of β-catenin (non-canonical pathways).15–19 The
oncogenic potential of the Wnt pathway has been well established
in many cancers.20,21 Thus the components of Wnt/β-catenin
pathway are either mutated or de-regulated in many human
cancers and are known to be causal for tumorigenesis.20–22
Interestingly, unlike other Wnts, Wnt7a has been shown to have
an important tumor-protective role, particularly in the lung.18,19,23
Strikingly, Wnt7a is lost in many non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines and tissues, primarily via promoter
methylation24 and restoration of Wnt7a expression in NSCLC cell

1
Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, College of Medicine Research Building, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 2Division of Medical
Oncology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA; 3Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA; 4Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA;
5
Department of Hematology and Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 6University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA; 7Center
for functional genomics, University of Albany, Rensselaer, NY, USA; 8Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO,
USA and 9Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. Correspondence: Dr RA Winn, Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, College of
Medicine Research Building, University of Illinois at Chicago, Room 5160, 909 S. Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL 60630, USA.
E-mail: rwinn@uic.edu
10
These two authors are co-ﬁrst authors.
Received 17 June 2014; revised 18 September 2014; accepted 14 October 2014; published online 2 March 2015

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5318

Figure 1. Loss of Wnt7a leads to decrease in lung epithelial cell markers and increased lung tumorigenesis. Representative images of the
western blotting analysis of Wnt7a expression in lung lysates derived from wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice either in C57Bl/6J (a), or FVB/NJ (c)
strains. (b, d, e) Representative images of the histological sections of the lungs of the indicated genotypes that were stained with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) stain displaying no gross differences in the lung architectures among Wnt7a-null mice and wild-type littermate controls. Scale
bar: 100 μm. (f) Representative western blotting images of the lung lysates of wild-type (n = 3) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 3) displaying reduced
expression of epithelial cell marker (E-cadherin) and increased expression of mesenchymal cell marker (N-cadherin) in the Wnt7a-null mice.
(g) Histological sections of the lungs were ﬁxed and stained with either E-cadherin or N-cadherin antibodies, and the expression of E-cadherin
and N-cadherin were visualized by indirect immunoﬂuorescence and confocal microscopy. Representative images of Wnt7a-null mice and
wild-type littermate controls are displayed in the ﬁgure. Scale bar: 10 μm. (h, i) Wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice in C57Bl/6J (h) or FVB/NJ
(i) strains were given urethane as described in the Materials and methods section. The mice were later euthanized and dissected to assess lung
tumorigenesis. Box plots display the number of lung tumors developed in the wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice in response to urethane.
Statistical signiﬁcance was determined using Mann–Whitney non-parametric test. (j) Representative images of the lung tumors from wild-type
and Wnt7a-null mice. (k, l) Representative images of the histological sections of the lung tissues with tumors stained with H&E as detailed in
the Materials and methods section. The edges of the tumors were identiﬁed with a broken line. Although wild-type mice developed
adenomas with soft borders, majority of Wnt7a-null mice developed adenocarcinomas, as evidenced by spiculated borders. Scale bar: 100 μm.
(m) Wnt7a expression was lost in the majority of NSCLCs as determined from the Oncomine database search.

Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5319

Figure 1.

(Continued)

lines prompts cellular differentiation and reversal of the transformed phenotype.18,19 Given the importance of Wnt7a in tumor
suppression, we sought to deﬁne the mechanism/s through which
Wnt7a exerts its tumor-protective role.
Using genetic studies (loss-of-function) in mice combined with
whole transcriptome sequencing (RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)), we
deﬁne Wnt7a as a novel inducer of cellular senescence. We show
for the ﬁrst time that the increased lung tumorigenesis observed
in Wnt7a-null mice is directly due to reduced cellular senescence
and SASP. We also show that the Wnt7a-mediated cellular
senescence operate as an alternate senescence pathway, distinct
from that of the well-known and well-studied oncogene-induced
senescence (OIS). Thus compounds that can induce Wnt7a
expression, or function similarly to Wnt7a, would have a great
potential for pro-senescence therapy in lung cancer. Of note,
Iloprost, a prostacyclin analog and small-molecule Wnt7a mimic,
also induces cellular senescence. Thus Wnt7a appears to act as a
master regulator of cellular senescence, and Wnt7a-mediated
tumor-suppressive cellular senescence may represent a new class
of future therapeutic treatments of lung cancer.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

RESULTS
Loss of Wnt7a leads to increased lung tumorigenesis in an in vivo
lung cancer model
Previous studies have highlighted Wnt7a as a tumor suppressor in
a number of epithelial-cell-derived cancers.18,19,23 In the current
study, we utilized the Wnt7a germline null mouse as a
physiologically relevant model to evaluate the role of Wnt7a in
lung tumorigenesis25 (The Jackson laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME,
USA; stock number 004715). For these studies, we bred the Wnt7anull mice until they were congenic in both C57Bl/6J and FVB/NJ
strains. The absence of Wnt7a in these mice was conﬁrmed via
immunoblots with Wnt7a-speciﬁc antibodies (Figures 1a–c). The
Wnt7a-null mice are known to have mild limb deformities and
sterility in both homozygous males and females.25 Interestingly,
evaluation of the lung architecture of Wnt7a-null mice showed no
gross morphological or histological differences from their wildtype littermates (Figures 1b–d). Moreover, spontaneous lung
tumors were not observed in either the young (3 months, Figures
1b–d) or aged (18 months, Figure 1e) Wnt7a-null mice. However,
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5320
the lungs of the Wnt7a-null mice did show reduced expression of
the epithelial cell marker (E-cadherin) and elevated expression of
mesenchymal cell marker (N-cadherin) as determined by immunoblotting (Figure 1f) and by indirect immunoﬂuorescence
(Figure 1g), suggesting that Wnt7a expression is required for
normal epithelial gene expression in the adult lung. These ﬁndings
suggest that loss of Wnt7a expression is an important predisposing factor for the development of lung cancer.
To test this idea, we probed for the effects of urethane
(ethyl carbamate)-induced lung tumor formation in wild-type
and Wnt7a-null mice, a prototypical model to study lung
tumorigenesis.26–28 Urethane is a chemical carcinogen, which
causes activating mutations in K-Ras,27,28 leading to the formation
of lung tumors in mice. Several studies have highlighted a strainspeciﬁc response to urethane; for example, FVB/NJ strains are
susceptible to lung tumorigenesis, while C57Bl/6J, in contrast, are
more resistant.26–28 Therefore, in our studies, wild-type and
Wnt7a-null in FVB/NJ mice received the standard single dose of
1 mg/g body weight of urethane, while wild-type and Wnt7a-null
in C57Bl/6J mice received weekly injections of 1 mg/g body
weight of urethane for 6 weeks. The mice were euthanized and
dissected after 20 weeks (FVB/NJ strains) or 40 weeks (C57Bl/6J
strains) to assess the formation of lung tumors.
We observed that the Wnt7a-null mice developed more tumors
(42-fold) in both the C57Bl/6J (N = 8), and FVB/NJ (N = 17) strains,
in comparison to wild-type littermate controls (Figures 1h–j).
Furthermore, signiﬁcant differences were also observed upon
histological examination of the lungs of wild-type and Wnt7a-null
mice after urethane exposure. Although wild-type mice developed
adenomas (Figures 1k and l), majority of Wnt7a-null mice, in
contrast, developed adenocarcinomas, as illustrated by spiculated
borders29,30 (Figures 1k and l). Taken together, these data suggest
that Wnt7a has an important tumor-suppressive role in lung
carcinogenesis.
In strong support of our hypothesis, analysis of public
microarray data sets for Wnt7a expression revealed that: (1)

Wnt7a is predominantly expressed in epithelial cells (GEO proﬁles,
GDS1402/NM_004625.1_PROBE1/WNT7A), and (2) there is a
profound loss of Wnt7a expression in several human lung cancer
studies (Figure 1m). Considering that lung cancers are predominantly epithelial cell-derived, our data highlights the importance
of Wnt7a expression in the lung epithelium and its loss as a major
contributing factor for carcinogenesis.
The tumor-suppressor role of Wnt7a is independent
of β-catenin signaling
β-catenin is a well-established proto-oncogene, and mutations of
this gene are common in many cancers.20,21 Moreover, Wnts are
known regulators of β-catenin signaling.11–13 To determine
whether β-catenin signaling also had an important role in
Wnt7a-mediated lung tumorigenesis, we probed the expression
levels of β-catenin in the lungs of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice
(Figure 2). For these studies, total lung lysates of wild-type and
Wnt7a-null mice were subjected to immunoblotting with anti-βcatenin-speciﬁc antibodies (Figures 2a and b). When examined
before and after urethane treatment, the expression of β-catenin
was similar in Wnt7a-null mice and their wild-type littermates
(Figures 2a and b). Additionally, we tested the effects of Wnt7a on
the expression of Axin2, a well-characterized target of Wnt/βcatenin signaling that provides an accurate read-out of Wnt/βcatenin signaling activity in vivo.31 We bred Wnt7a heterozygotes
(Wnt7a+/ − ) to Axin2LacZ reporter mice in which one copy of the
Axin2 locus was replaced with a β-galactosidase gene. Consistent
with the effects of Wnt7a on β-catenin expression, lung tissue
sections of Wnt7a+/+/Axin2Lacz+/ − and Wnt7a− / −/Axin2Lacz+/ −
mice showed similar expression of β-galactosidase gene as
determined by β-galactosidase assays (Figure 2c). These data
strongly suggest that the tumor-suppressive effects of Wnt7a are
not inﬂuenced by β-catenin expression and/or β-catenin signaling
activity. Of note, stimulation of cultured NSCLC cell lines (that is,
A549 and H358) that are devoid of Wnt7a18 with recombinant

Figure 2. Tumor-suppressive effects of Wnt7a are independent of β-catenin signaling. Representative images of the western blotting analysis
of β-catenin expression in the lung lysates derived from wild-type (n = 5) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 5) in C57Bl/6J (a) or FVB/NJ (b) strains
treated with either saline or urethane. No apparent differences in β-catenin expression were observed among wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice.
(c) Representative images of the histological sections of mouse lungs derived from Wnt7a+/+/Axin2Lacz+/ − (n = 3) and Wnt7a− / −/Axin2Lacz+/ −
(n = 3) mice stained for the expression of β-galactosidase gene as described in the Materials and methods section. β-Galactosidase expression
was similar in the lungs of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice carrying Axin2Lacz+/ − allele. Human lung adenocarcinoma cells (A549, d) and human
bronchioalveolar carcinoma cell (H358, e) that are devoid of Wnt7a expression were stimulated with recombinant Wnt7a for the indicated
periods of time. The cells were later lysed, and β-catenin expression was determined by probing the blots with anti-β-catenin antibodies.
Representative blots from three independent highly reproducible experiments are displayed in the ﬁgure. Scale bar: 100 μm.
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

Wnt7a also failed to affect β-catenin expression (Figures 2d and e).
Therefore, by using several distinct approaches, we showed that
the tumor-suppressive effects of Wnt7a are independent of βcatenin.
Gene expression analysis in Wnt7a-null mice identiﬁed several
hallmarks of cancer
In order to identify the mechanism/s through which Wnt7a has a
tumor-suppressive role, we performed high-throughput RNA-seq
on the lung tissues of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice after
urethane treatment (n = 3). The RNA-seq analysis revealed strong
upregulation of cell proliferation-related genes (19%), oncogenes
(11%) and metastasis-related genes (23%) in the Wnt7a-null mice
(Figure 3a, see RNA-seq gene list in Supplementary Files).
Although oncogenic insults would result in the induction of host
defense mechanisms such as cell death (apoptosis or autophagy)
or cellular senescence, it was striking that 18% of the genes
affected by the loss of Wnt7a were associated with cellular
senescence (Figure 3a, Supplementary Table S1), whereas only 4%
of the genes affected by Wnt7a loss were associated with
apoptosis, and very few with autophagy (Figure 3a). Moreover,
genes required to induce cellular senescence were downregulated
in the Wnt7a-null mice, while the genes that block cellular
senescence, in strong contrast, were upregulated (Supplementary
Table). Furthermore, gene network analysis using Cytoscape
(http://www.cytoscape.org/) plug-in from the Reactome (http://
www.reactome.org/) also revealed that the identiﬁed genes (green
circles) were highly connected, indicating that there might be an
inherent co-ordination among the identiﬁed genes either through
similar biological function/s and/or correlated expression
(Figure 3b). Additionally, several genes that are known to regulate
epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) were also observed to be
de-regulated in the Wnt7a-null mice (Supplementary Table S2).
Based on these data, we hypothesize that the failure of the Wnt7anull mice to undergo cellular senescence is the critical predisposing
factor for increased carcinogen-induced lung tumorigenesis.
Wnt7a-null mice display reduced cellular senescence
Based on our RNA-seq data, we characterized the Wnt7a-null mice
for cellular senescence in greater detail by measuring SA-β-gal
activity, a hallmark of senescent cells.7 Histological analysis of the

5321
lung sections of the wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice showed no
difference in basal staining for SA-β-gal activity (Figure 4a).
However, a large number of SA-β-gal-positive cells, predominantly
in the tumor area, were observed in lung sections of the wild-type
mice after urethane treatment (Figures 4b and c), whereas Wnt7anull mice, on the contrary, showed reduced or no SA-β-gal
staining (Figures 4b and c). These data suggest that Wnt7a-null
mice indeed have reduced capabilities to undergo cellular
senescence in the lung.
We also evaluated the effects of Wnt7a loss on other cellular
tumor-suppressive mechanisms, such as apoptosis and autophagy.
Annexin V/propidium iodide staining of lung cells isolated from
wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 3) showed no signiﬁcant
changes in the percentages of Annexin V-positive cells (F4
quadrant) between wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice in both the
strains (Figure 4d). Consistent with the Annexin V staining, no
differences in Caspase3 activities were observed in the lung
lysates of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice treated with either saline
or urethane (Figures 4e and f). Furthermore, probing the lung
lysates with LC3 antibodies, an autophagosome marker, showed
only the LC3-I (18 KDa) form, not the active, autophagosome
membrane-bound LC3-II (16 KDa) form. These data suggest that
the tumor-suppressive effects of Wnt7a were not mediated via the
induction of autophagy (Figures 4g and h). Taken together, these
data strongly suggest that reduced cellular senescence, but not
apoptosis, or autophagy, is a major contributor to the increased
lung tumorigenesis seen in the Wnt7a-null mice.
Wnt7a regulates alternate cellular senescence via inactivation of
S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2)
CDK inhibitors (for example, p16INK4a/p19ARF/p27kip1) are critical
for the induction of cellular senescence via blocking the
phosphorylation of retinoblastoma tumor-suppressor protein
(Rb).6,8,32. In order to identify the CDK inhibitor/s regulated by
Wnt7a, we probed the lung lysates of wild-type and Wnt7a-null
mice for p16INK4a, p19ARF and p27kip1 protein levels via
immunoblotting. Interestingly, compared with wild-type littermate
controls, p27kip1 expression was reduced in both salineand posturethane-treated Wnt7a-null mice in both the strains
(Figures 5a–d, quantiﬁed blots are included in Supplementary
Figures S2 and S8). Notably, p16INK4a and p19ARF, well-known

Figure 3. Lung-speciﬁc gene expression in wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice. (a) Total RNA isolated from urethane-treated wild-type (n = 3) and
Wnt7a-null mice (n = 3) in C57Bl/6J strain were subjected to transcriptome analysis using RNA-seq. Genes that showed a false discovery rate of
o0.05, log2 fold-change of 41.3 and the number of mapped reads 410.4 were considered to be signiﬁcant. The gene list is manually
categorized by gene function integrated into the well-deﬁned hallmarks of cancer using NCBI resources (for example, UniGene, Pubmed and
so on). The percentage of genes in each category to the total number of genes identiﬁed are shown in the pie chart. (b) Gene network analysis
for the identiﬁed senescence-associated genes using Cytoscape plug-in from the Reactome predicted an inherent co-ordination among the
identiﬁed genes. The senescence-associated genes are identiﬁed in green circles, while the reference genes/proteins in the Cytoscape are
identiﬁed in yellow squares.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5322

Figure 4. Wnt7a-null mice display reduced cellular senescence. (a) Histological sections of the lungs of the indicated genotypes and in the
indicated strains were stained for SA-β-galactosidase activity as detailed in the Materials and methods section and are displayed in the ﬁgure.
The lung sections of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice showed no differences in the basal staining for SA-β-galactosidase activity. (b, c) Lung
sections of wild-type (n = 3) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 3) treated with urethane were stained for SA-β-galactosidase activity as detailed in the
Materials and methods section and are displayed in the ﬁgure. Lung sections of the Wnt7a-null mice showed reduced staining for SA-βgalactosidase activity in comparison to wild-type littermate controls. (d) Lungs of wild-type (n = 3) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 3) in C57Bl/6J and
FVB/NJ strains were harvested, and the cells were stained for Annexin V/propidium iodide double staining followed by ﬂow cytometry. No
differences in the percentage of Annexin V-positive cells were observed among wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice. (e, f) Representative images of
the western blotting analysis for Caspase 3 activity in the lung lysates of wild-type (n = 5) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 5) in C57Bl/6J (e) or FVB/NJ
(f) strains treated with either saline or urethane displayed no detectable cleaved Caspase 3 expression. (g, h) Representative images of the
western blotting analysis for LC3 expression in the lung lysates of wild-type (n = 5) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 5) in C57Bl/6J (g) or FVB/NJ (h)
strains treated with either saline or urethane displayed no detectable LC3-II band. Scale bar: 100 μm.

key regulators of OIS,33–37 were not regulated by Wnt7a
(Supplementary Figures S13 and S14). Moreover, the expression
of p21WAF1 and PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog), other
known regulators of cellular senescence,38,39 were also similar in
the Wnt7a-null mice and their wild-type littermate controls
(Figures 5e and f), suggesting that Wnt7a-induced cellular
senescence is not mediated by p16INK4a, p19ARF, p21WAF1 or PTEN.
On the contrary, SKP2, an alternative regulator of cell cycle
progression via ubiquitination-mediated degradation of p27kip1,40–43
was robustly upregulated in both the saline- and urethanetreated Wnt7a-null mice (Figures 5a–d, quantiﬁed blots are
included in Supplementary Figures S1 and S7). These data imply
that the downregulation of p27kip1 in Wnt7a-null mice was due to
the upregulation of SKP2 expression. Consistent with the changes
in SKP2 and p27kip1 expression, the levels of phosphorylated
(p-Rb-S780) retinoblastoma proteins in Wnt7a-null mice were
dramatically increased as well (Figures 5a–d, quantiﬁed blots are
included in Supplementary Figures S6 and S12). Cyclin D1,
which is critical for Ser780 phosphorylation of Rb (Figures 5a–d,
quantiﬁed blots are included in Supplementary Figures S5 and S11),
was also upregulated in Wnt7a-null mice, along with CDK2 and
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

CDK6, components of the CDK/cyclin complex (Figures 5a–d,
quantiﬁed blots are included in Supplementary Figures S3). Similar
results were obtained when using the lung lysates of wild-type
and Wnt7a-null in FVB/NJ mice (Figure 5c and d, quantiﬁed blots
are included in Supplementary Figures S7–S12). In sum, Wnt7a
inactivates SKP2 leading to the stabilization of p27kip1. Stabilized
p27kip1 subsequently blocks the phosphorylation of Rb by CDKs,
activating Rb to induce cellular senescence. Furthermore, these
data also suggest that Wnt7a regulates an alternate senescence
pathway, which is distinct from OIS, via the SKP2/p27kip1-mediated
regulation of Ser780 phosphorylation of Rb.
Consistent with the alterations in the expression of the alternate
senescence pathway in the Wnt7a-null mice, small interference
RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of Wnt7a in cultured nontransformed bronchial epithelial cells also showed reduced
expression of p27kip1 and increased Ser780 phosphorylation of
Rb (Figure 5g). In order to provide a direct evidence for Wnt7a
regulation of an alternative senescence pathway, we stimulated
NSCLC cells (that is, A549), which were deﬁcient in Wnt7a
expression, with recombinant Wnt7a (rWnt7a, Figures 5f and g).
Stimulation of cells with rWnt7a induced robust cellular
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5323

Figure 5. Wnt7a regulates Rb phosphorylation via inactivation of SKP2. (a–f) Representative images of the western blotting analysis for the
indicated proteins in the lung lysates of wild-type (n = 5) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 5) in C57Bl/6J, or FVB/NJ strains treated with either saline or
urethane. (g) Human bronchial epithelial cells (Beas2B) were treated with either control siRNA or Wnt7a siRNA for 48 h. The cell lysates were
later probed for the indicated proteins, and the representative images are displayed in the ﬁgure. (h–j) Human lung adenocarcinoma cells
(A549 or H358), which are devoid of Wnt7a expression, were stimulated with recombinant Wnt7a for the indicated periods of time. The cells
were later analyzed for SA-β-galactosidase activity (h) or the expression of indicated senescence markers (i, j) as described in the Materials and
methods section. Representative blots from three independent highly reproducible experiments are displayed in the ﬁgure. For SA-βgalactosidase staining, left panel indicates the number of SA-β-gal-positive cells/ﬁeld, and representative images are displayed to the right.
**P o0.01; versus control. Scale bar: 200 μm. (k, l) Human lung adenocarcinoma cells (A549), which are devoid of Wnt7a expression, were
treated with SKP2 siRNAs prior to the stimulation with recombinant Wnt7a for 24 h. The cells were later analyzed for SA-β-galactosidase
activity (k) or the expression of indicated senescence markers (l) as described in the Materials and methods section. Representative blots from
three independent highly reproducible experiments are displayed in the ﬁgure. For SA-β-galactosidase staining, left panel indicates the
number of SA-β-gal-positive cells/ﬁeld, and representative images are displayed to the right. **P o0.01; versus control.

senescence marked by an increase in SA-β-gal-positive cells, in a
time-dependent manner (Figure 5h). Remarkably, rWnt7a treatment also induced prominent changes in the cell morphology,
that is, ﬂattening of the cells and loss in cell–cell junctions, which
is typical for a senesce nt cell (Figure 5h). Moreover, rWnt7a
stimulation also induced a marked decrease in SKP2 expression
and a corresponding increase in p27kip1 expression, in a timedependent manner (Figure 5i). Furthermore, Wnt7a stimulation
also blocked the activities of CDKs as detected by the apparent
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

reduction in Ser780 phosphorylation of Rb (Figure 5i). Similar
results were obtained when H358 cells (p53-null NSCLC cell lines)
were stimulated with rWnt7a (Figure 5j), suggesting that the
Wnt7a-induced senescence is independent of p53 expression. In
order to provide additional evidence to support our hypothesis
that Wnt7a-induced senescence was mainly through modulation
of SKP2, we analyzed the effects of Wnt7a-mediated senescence in
SKP2 knockdown A549 cells. We observed an increase in the
number of SA-β-gal-positive cells in SKP2 knockdown A549 cells
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5324

Figure 6. Wnt7a regulates SASP. Equal amounts of protein lysates of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice in FVB/NJ strain were probed against a
mouse cytokine array (a) (ARY006, R&D) to proﬁle the relative levels of select cytokines and chemokines in wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice as
per the manufacturer’s recommendations. A representative image of the cytokine array identifying differentially expressed cytokines was
displayed in the image. (b, c). Total RNA isolated from wild-type (n = 3) and Wnt7a-null mice (n = 3) were used to generate cDNAs. The cDNAs
were later used to determine the expression of IL1α (b) and IL6 (c) via quantitative PCR. The expression of IL1α and IL6 were normalized to the
expression of 18S ribosomal RNA and are displayed in the ﬁgure. ##P o0.01; versus Wnt7a+/+.

(Figure 5k), an effect similar to that of Wnt7a treatment alone
(Figure 5k). Additionally, knock down of SKP2 enhanced the
effects of Wnt7a on cellular senescence (Figure 5k). Furthermore,
SKP2 knockdown also induced marked increase in p27kip1
expression, both in the absence and presence of Wnt7a
(Figure 5l). In sum, these ﬁndings demonstrate that Wnt7a is a
novel inducer of tumor-suppressive cellular senescence via the
modulation of the expression of SKP2-mediated alternate
senescence pathway.
Wnt7a regulates SASP
Senescent cells, in addition to withstanding oncogenic stress, can
also send distress signals alarming neighboring cells of potential
oncogenic threat via secreting a number of secretory factors, a
feature known as the SASP.8–10 Interestingly, probing lung protein
lysates of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice against antibody arrays
revealed several chemokines/cytokines, whose expression was
decreased in the Wnt7a-null mice (Figure 6a, interleukin 1α (IL1α),
IL16, macrophage colony-stimulating factor, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 9, regulated on
activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinase-1, and tumor necrosis factor-α).
Among the identiﬁed cytokines, IL1α was signiﬁcantly reduced in
the Wnt7a-null mice (Figure 6a). Expression of IL1α by the
senescent cells is considered to be a critical and early manifestation of SASP.9 Moreover, quantitative PCR analysis of lung total
RNA also revealed reduced expression of IL1α mRNA in the Wnt7anull mice (Figure 6b), further corroborating our antibody array
data (Figure 6a). As IL1α is an upstream regulator of senescenceassociated IL6/IL8 network,9 we also analyzed the expression of IL6
in the lungs of wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice by quantitative PCR
(Figure 6c). Consistent with the reduced expression of IL1α, IL6
expression was also reduced in Wnt7a-null mice (Figure 6c). In
total, these results strongly indicate that Wnt7a expression was
not only critical for the induction of cellular senescence but also
for a SASP.
Iloprost regulates cellular senescence
Iloprost, a synthetic analog of prostacyclin (PGI2), was shown to
reduce the tumor number in mice via receptor binding and
initiation of downstream signaling cascades similar to that of
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Wnt7a.44 Moreover, Iloprost was shown to improve endobronchial
dysplasia in former smokers in a recent clinical trial.45 As Iloprost
was shown to function as a Wnt7a mimic,44 we tested whether
Iloprost treatment of NSCLC cells could trigger cellular senescence
similar to Wnt7a (Figures 5f and g). Notably, treatment of A549
cells with Iloprost also induced robust cellular senescence in a
time-dependent manner, as revealed by an increase in the
number of SA-β-gal-positive cells with a ﬂattened cell morphology
(Figure 7a), an effect similar to that of Wnt7a treatment (Figure 5f).
Iloprost treatment also showed a strong induction of p27kip1
expression and a corresponding decrease in Rb phosphorylation,
hallmarks of cellular senescence (Figure 7b). Moreover, Iloprostinduced cellular senescence was blocked by secreted Frizzledrelated protein (sFRP1), a cysteine-rich domain containing protein
homologous to Fzds (Figures 7a and b), suggesting the speciﬁcity
of Iloprost for Fzd receptors. Therefore we identiﬁed a novel role
for Iloprost in regulating cellular senescence and as a potential
therapeutic pro-senescence therapy treatment for lung cancers.
DISCUSSION
For many years, cellular senescence had been considered a
phenomenon only observed in cell culture systems.46 Although
cellular senescence has been well appreciated in the aging
process, in recent years several groups have highlighted the
importance of cellular senescence in cancer.2–5,37,38 However, the
key players and their roles in driving the cells toward cellular
senescence remain incompletely understood. Importantly, the
signaling mechanisms that allow cells to decide whether or not to
senesce remain largely unknown. In this study, we identiﬁed
Wnt7a as a novel inducer of tumor-suppressive cellular senescence in the lung. The new knowledge garnered from this study
offers new and exciting therapeutic opportunities, which can be
tested both in culture and in vivo.
Our study has led to several important and novel ﬁndings. First,
we found that Wnt7a mediates a novel senescence pathway,
which is distinct from that of OIS. Our identiﬁcation of Wnt7a as a
novel inducer of cellular senescence has great therapeutic
implications, as compounds that can stimulate Wnt7a expression
and/or mimic its function will be able to drive cellular senescence
even in the absence of DNA damage and protect from
carcinogenesis.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5325

Figure 7. Iloprost stimulates cellular senescence. Human lung adenocarcinoma cells (A549), which are devoid of Wnt7a expression, were
stimulated with Ilprost (20 μM ) for the indicated periods of time either in the presence or absence of recombinant human sFRP1 (0.5 μg/ml).
The cells were later analyzed for SA-β-galactosidase activity (a) or the expression of the indicated senescence markers (b) as described in the
Materials and methods section. Representative blots from three independent highly reproducible experiments are displayed in the ﬁgure. For
SA-β-galactosidase staining, left panel indicates the number of SA-β-gal-positive cells/ﬁeld and the representative images are displayed in the
right panel. **Po 0.01; versus control.##P o0.01; versus rWnt7a. Scale bar: 200 μm. (c) Schematic representation of Wnt7a-mediated cellular
senescence and a SASP.

Second, Wnt7a-mediated cellular senescence is independent of
β-catenin. Although, increased expression and/or stabilizing
mutations of β-catenin have been found to be pro-tumorigenic
in several human cancers, particularly in colorectal cancers,20–22
the germline deletion of Wnt7a had no effect on β-catenin
expression in the lung (Figure 2). Moreover, mutations in the
components of the β-catenin-dependent pathway are not
common in lung cancers.47,48 Unlike other components of the
Wnt pathway, the expression of Wnt7a has been seen to be
reduced or lost in a signiﬁcant number of lung cancers
(Figure 1m).18 Additionally, Wnt7a has also been recently shown
to be downregulated in 88% of clear cell renal carcinomas.23
Interestingly, the Wnt7a gene is located on chromosome 3p21, a
‘hot spot’ where allelic deletions are frequently seen in many
cancers.49 In addition to gene deletions, the Wnt7a promoter is
hypermethylated, particularly in response to cigarette smoke
condensate, which was also shown to be an important mechanism
of Wnt7a inactivation.24 Taken together, we speculate that the
constant exposure of respiratory epithelia to cigarette smoke may
lead to increased lung tumorigenesis via inactivation of Wnt7a
expression.
Third, we showed that cellular senescence is signiﬁcantly
reduced in the Wnt7a-null mice and serves as the major
contributing factor for increased lung tumorigenesis. Detailed
biochemical, cell biology and histopathology studies revealed that
the loss of Wnt7a leads to reduced cellular senescence, as deﬁned
by the absence or reduced SA-β-gal-positive cells, altered
expression of senescence markers, and SASP (Figures 4). In the
current study, we have identiﬁed Wnt7a as a novel inducer of
cellular senescence. Our identiﬁcation of Wnt7a-mediated cellular
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

senescence was quite unique, as: (1) Wnt7a-induced senescent
cells displayed ﬂattened cell morphology (Figures 5h and 7a), (2)
Wnt7a-triggered cellular senescence was transduced via the
activation of an alternative SKP2/p27kip1/p-Rb pathway, and (3)
Wnt7a-mediated senescence was not mediated by p16INK4a,
p19ARF and p53/p21WAF1, which are important mediators of OIS.
Moreover, Wnt7a-induced senescence was also observed to be
independent of p53 expression (Figure 5j), indicating broader
translational value of our ﬁndings. Furthermore, Wnt7a-mediated
cellular senescence also was not mediated via PTEN regulation
(Figures 5e and f), another known inducer of a novel type of
cellular senescence.38
Fourth, we have identiﬁed Wnt7a as a novel regulator of SKP2.
SKP2 is frequently upregulated in cancers and is an important
regulator of CDK inhibitor p27kip1, critical for the induction of
cellular senescence.40,42,43 Earlier, Wnt antagonist, WIF1, was
shown to repress SKP2 expression in urinary bladder cancer
cells,50 and Wnt5a was shown to suppress epithelial ovarian
cancer via promoting cellular senescence51 in a β-catenindependent manner. As the anti-proliferative effects of Wnt7a
were independent of β-catenin (Figure 2), we have identiﬁed a
novel β-catenin-independent mechanism of regulation of SKP2
and cellular senescence by Wnt7a. Interestingly, the transcriptome
sequencing studies performed on Wnt7a-null mice also identiﬁed
forkhead box containing proteins (Supplementary Table) as
probable Wnt7a effector proteins regulating the expression of
SKP2 and p27kip1.52 In addition, Wnt7a regulation of cytokines
(C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 5, intercellular adhesion molecule
2, and IL2rg; Figure 6a), which are important for the induction of
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5326
SASP, also strengthens our hypothesis that Wnt7a is a novel
regulator of cellular senescence and SASP.
Fifth, Wnt7a-null mice under de novo conditions display an
E-cadherin-to-N-cadherin switch, reduced expression of cellular
senescence markers and reduced expression of SASP, indicating a
genetic predisposition of these mice to increased carcinogeninduced lung tumorigenesis. Although we have shown that the
loss of Wnt7a was an important predisposing factor for reduced
cellular senescence and increased lung tumorigenesis, several
questions still remain to be addressed: (1) Genetic deletion of
Wnt7a not only showed reduced expression of senescence
markers (Figure 5) but also induced an E-cadherin-to-N-cadherin
switch (Figures 1f and g). However, the role of E-cadherin-to-Ncadherin switch in the induction of cellular senescence remains
largely unknown. (2) Many of the genes that are known to
regulate the hallmarks of cancer were also de-regulated in the
Wnt7a-null mice. However, the association of these genes to
cellular senescence or vice versa also remains to be established
and is of potential therapeutic interest. (3) We have shown that
Wnt7a was a novel inducer of cellular senescence and SASP in the
lungs. As Wnt7a is predominantly expressed in the epithelium, it is
possible that the lung epithelium might have an important role in
the induction of cellular senescence. Therefore, future studies
should be focused on understanding the abilities of lung epithelial
cells, namely, clara, alveolar type II and/or alveolar type I cells to
induce cellular senescence. Considering the secretory nature of
Wnt7a, the effects of Wnt7a on the neighboring stroma and their
inﬂuence on cellular senescence also is a possibility. Additionally,
Wnt7a-null mouse model is an important tool not only for
understanding the mechanism of senescence per se but also for
testing the efﬁcacy of pro-senescence molecules.
Sixth, despite the effects of existing chemotherapy and several
select agents on inducing cellular senescence,53,54 the use of prosenescence therapies as a potential treatment for cancers has not
been fully adopted. In the current study, we have identiﬁed Wnt7a
as a novel inducer of cellular senescence. Although the clinical
utility of Wnt7a is very limited due to the unavailability of clinically
suitable recombinant Wnt7a protein, our identiﬁcation of Iloprost,
a prostacyclin analog and a Wnt7a mimic, as a novel regulator of
cellular senescence opens new opportunities for utilizing prosenescence therapy in lung cancers.
In summary, our ﬁndings identiﬁed Wnt7a as a novel inducer of
cellular senescence and SASP. Wnt7a inactivates SKP2 leading to
the stabilization of p27kip1. Stabilized p27kip1 subsequently blocks
the phosphorylation of Rb by CDKs, activating Rb to induce
cellular senescence (Figure 7c). Additionally, senescent cells,
although non-dividing, are metabolically active and can have
profound affects on neighboring cells via secreted factors such as
IL6, IL8 and other cytokines. Senescent cells upregulate the
expression of IL1α that binds to IL1 receptor in a juxtacrine
manner and activate the senescence-associated IL6/IL8 cytokine
network (Figure 7c),9 thereby amplifying the senescence phenotype. In total, these responses (cellular senescence and SASP) may
allow cells to withstand repeated oncogenic insults and prevent
tumor formation. Therefore, the present study not only identiﬁed
senescence as a beneﬁcial phenomenon but also identiﬁed
potential ways to induce cellular senescence clinically, via
manipulation of Wnt7a.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal studies
Ethics statement. Animal experiments were conducted in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The animals were
housed in RC2 vivarium, Anschutz Medical Campus, University of Colorado,
Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Aurora, CO, USA. The protocol (B-75611(06)1E) was approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Wnt7a− / − null mice. Wnt7a-null mice (Wnt7a− / −) and their wild-type
(Wnt7a+/+) littermates are inbred strains on B6/129 S1genetic background
(The Jackson Laboratory, stock number 004715). Parental stocks of
Wnt7a− / − and Wnt7a+/+ mice were a generous gift from Dr Brian A Parr
(Director, Mouse Transgenic Facility, Center for Functional Genomics, State
University of New York at Albany, Rensselaer, NY, USA). Wnt7a-null mice
were bred until congenic in both C57Bl/6J and FVB/NJ strains. As the
homozygous Wnt7a-null mice were sterile, we made use of heterozygotes
for colony maintenance. Genetic backgrounds of the mice were
determined using PCR of DNA from tail biopsies and western blotting
with Wnt7a antibody.
Wnt7a− / − / Axin2LacZ/+ mice. Axin2tm1Wbm/J mice (The Jackson Laboratory,
stock number 009120) harbor an Axin2LacZ (also called conductinLacZ)
mutation that abolishes endogenous Axin2 gene function and expresses
NLS-lacZ under the control of the endogenous Axin2 promoter/enhancer
regions. For generating Wnt7a− / −/Axin2LacZ/+ mice, Axin2tm1Wbm/J mice
were backcrossed with Wnt7a heterozygotes in C57Bl/6J strain. As Wnt7anull mice are sterile, generating Wnt7a-null mice homozygous for Axin2LacZ
is extremely difﬁcult. We therefore used wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice
with one allele of Axin2LacZ (Axin2LacZ/+) in our studies. Similar strategy was
used for understanding the role of Ror2 in Wnt5A signaling.55 The genetic
background of the mice was determined by PCR through DNA obtained
from tail biopsies.
Urethane treatment. Six-to-8-week-old mice were given intraperitoneal
injections of either 0.9% saline or urethane (1 mg/g body weight). Wildtype and Wnt7a-null mice in FVB/NJ strain received the standard single
dose of urethane, while the wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice in C57Bl/6J
strain received weekly injections of 1 mg/g body weight of urethane for
6 weeks. The control and experimental mice were weighed weekly to
observe any changes in body weight until they were euthanized. The mice
were euthanized and dissected after 20 weeks (FVB/NJ strains) or 40 weeks
(C57Bl/6J strains) to assess the formation of lung tumors. Lung tumors
were counted and measured using digital calipers (Fisher Scientiﬁc,
Waltham, MA, USA).

Cell culture
NSCLC cell lines A549 and human non-transformed lung epithelial cell line
(Beas2B) were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (10-040-CV, Cellgro,
Mediatech Inc., Manassas, VA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum in a humidiﬁed 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C. The cell lines were
cultured bi-weekly and stocks of cell lines were passaged no more than 10
times for use in experiments. Conﬂuent cell cultures were serum starved
for 2 h, followed by the stimulation with 100 ng/ ml of recombinant Wnt7a
(3008-WN, R&D systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) for the indicated
periods of time. For Iloprost studies, conﬂuent cell cultures were stimulated
with 10 μM of Iloprost (78918-13-8, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA).
In experiments involving shFRP1 (5396-SF, Cayman Chemical), conﬂuent
cell cultures were ﬁrst incubated with 0.5 μg/μl shFRP1 for 1 h, followed by
the stimulation with Iloprost.
For Wnt7a knockdown studies, Beas2B cells were seeded in a 100-mm
dish (2 × 106 cells), followed by incubation for 1 h at 37 oC. Wnt7a siRNAs
(5 nM) or SKP2 siRNAs (100 nM) diluted in 1 ml of serum-free medium
were mixed with 40 μl of Hiperfect Transfection reagent (Qiagen, Valencia,
CA, USA). After incubation of the siRNA complexes for 5 min at room
temperature, the siRNA complexes were added drop-wise onto the cells.
The cells were incubated for 48 h and analyzed for Wnt7a knockdown. The
control siRNAs (all stars negative control, no. 1027280) and Wnt7a siRNAs
(SI0006620) were obtained from Qiagen (Venlo, Limburg, the Netherlands).
SKP2 siRNAs (sc-36499) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA).

Western blotting analysis
Lung tissue protein extracts were obtained from mouse lungs homogenized in tissue protein extraction lysis buffer containing a cocktail of
1 M HEPES, 5 M NaCl, 10% Triton X-100, 1 M DTT, 0.5% EDTA, 20 mM NaVO3,
10 mM PMSF, 0.5 M Na-β-glycerophosphate and protease inhibitors using
Qiagen TissueLyser LT (Qiagen), while NSCLC cells were lysed in a lysis
buffer (MAP kinase lysis buffer), and the western blotting analysis was
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5327
carried out as previously described.18,19 Anti-β-actin (A3853) and anti-βcatenin (C2206) were purchased from SIGMA (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA).
Anti-Caspase 3 (9662S), anti-Skp2 (4313S), anti-p27kip (2552S), anti-Cdk6
(3136S), anti-CyclinD1 (2922S), anti-LC3A/B (4108S) anti-p-pRB (3590S)
were purchased from Cell Signaling (Cell Signaling Technology Inc.,
Danvers, MA, USA) and anti-Wnt7a (SC26360) was purchased from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology. Densitometric analysis was performed using the
ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). Band intensities were normalized to their corresponding controls and are represented in the ﬁgures.

Hematoxylin and eosin staining
Lungs were inﬂated in situ with 50:50 (phosphate-buffered saline (PBS):
Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound (M7148-4, Cardinal Health, Fisher HealthCare,
Houston, TX, USA) by intratracheal intubation, ﬂash frozen and embedded
in Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was
performed on 6-micron sections at the Histology and Tissue Imaging Core
of the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC, Chicago, IL, USA). Stained
sections of the whole lungs were later scanned using Aperio Scanscope
CS and its associated Spectrum image Management and Analysis
system (Leica Biosystems Inc, Buffalo Grove, IL, USA). Snapshot images
were captured at different magniﬁcations using the ImageScope software
(Leica Biosystems Inc., Richmond IL, USA).

primers, and PCRs were performed using the QuntiFast SYBR Green
PCR Kit (204050, Qiagen) and the Bio-Rad CFX real-time PCR detection
system (Hercules, CA, USA). The primers utilized in the PCR experiments
were as follows: IL1: F 5′-GGAGAGCCGGGTGACAGTATC-3′, R 5′-TCAGCCGT
CTCTTCTTCAGAATC-3′; and IL6: F 5′-CCACGGCCTTCCCTACTTC-3′, R 5′-TTG
GGAGTGGTATCCTCTGTGA-3′.

RNA sequencing and data analysis
After treatment with urethane, RNA was extracted from the lungs of wildtype (N = 3) and Wnt7a-null (N = 3) mice as described above. cDNA libraries
were constructed and sequenced on a HiSeq-2000 (Illumina, San Diego,
CA, USA) at the University of Colorado Genomics and Microarray core. On
an average, 50 million single-end 100 bp reads were obtained from each
sample. RNA-seq analysis was later performed using Cufﬂinks workﬂow. To
determine the differentially expressed genes, genes that showed a false
discovery rate of o0.05, log2 fold change of 41.3 and the number of
mapped reads 410.4 were considered to be signiﬁcant. The gene list was
later manually categorized by gene function integrated into the welldeﬁned hallmarks of cancer via NCBI resources, such as UniGene, UniProt,
Pubmed and so on. The percentage of genes in each category to the total
number of genes identiﬁed are shown in the pie chart. Gene network
analysis for the identiﬁed senescence-associated genes were obtained
using Cytoscape plug-in from the Reactome.

SA-β-gal staining
SA-β-gal staining was performed on the lung tissue sections and NSCLC
cells using the Senescence Detection Kit (K320-250, BioVision, Inc. Milpitas,
CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, 10-micron
lung tissue sections or NSCLC cells were ﬁxed with the ﬁxative solution for
10 min on ice, followed by overnight incubation with the staining solution.
The next day, lung sections and cells were washed with PBS. Stained lung
sections were later scanned using Aperio Scanscope CS and its associated
Spectrum image Management and Analysis system. The images of
NSCLC cells were captured using an inverted bright ﬁeld microscope
(Evos, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) equipped with the image
capture software. The number of SA-β-Gal positive cells in each ﬁled were
manually counted and are represented in the graphs. β-Galactosidase
assays were performed using the β-Galactosidase Staining Kit (K-802-250,
BioVision Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Indirect immunoﬂuorescence
Expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin were detected by using indirect
ﬂuorescence and confocal microscopy. Brieﬂy, 6-micron lung tissue
sections were ﬁxed with the ﬁxative solution for 15 min at room
temperature followed by 1 h incubation with 5% goat serum. The sections
were later incubated overnight with either anti-E-cadherin or N-cadherin
antibodies at 4 oC. The next day, lung sections were washed in PBS and
incubated with anti-mouse-Cy3-labeled secondary antibodies for 1 h at
room temperature. After extensive washes with PBS, the sections were
mounted with DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) containing mounting
medium. Indirect immunoﬂuorescence images were later captured with
Zeiss confocal microscope (Leica Biosystems) at the confocal microscopy
facility at research resources laboratory, UIC.

Annexin V/propidium iodide staining
For measuring apoptosis, ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate Annexin V Apoptosis
Detection Kit I was used (556547, BD Pharmingen, San Jose, CA, USA).
Brieﬂy, dissected lungs from wild-type and Wnt7a-null mice were digested
with 1 mg/ml Collagenase Type IV (LS004180, Worthington Biochemical
Corporation, Lakewood, NJ, USA) and 100 μg/μl DNase 1 (79254, Qiagen)
for 1 h at 37 °C to obtain single cells. Isolated single cells were washed
three times with PBS and red blood cells were lysed with ACK lysing buffer
(A10492-01, Life Technologies). Later, cells were stained with Annexin V
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Flow cytometry was performed
using a Beckman Coulter Gallios (Beckman Coulter, Pasadena, CA, USA)
ﬂow cytometer at the ﬂow cytometry core facility, Anschutz Medical
Campus, University of Colorado.

RNA isolation and real-time PCR
Total RNA from lung tissues and NSCLC cells were obtained using QIAzol
(Qiagen) as per the manufacturer’s recommendations. For quantitative
real-time PCR, 250 ng of total RNA was reverse transcribed using random
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Statistical analysis
To assess the statistical signiﬁcance of all the quantitative data, Student’s ttest, Mann–Whitney non-parametric tests or one-way analysis of variance
with Tukey’s multiple comparison were performed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are immensely grateful to Dr Judith Campisi (Buck Institute for Research on
Aging) for her critical reading of this manuscript. We thank Dr Bifeng Gao, Katrina
Diener and Dr Ken Jones of the Genomics and Microarray core, University of Colorado
Denver, for their expert help in RNA sequencing. We also thank Dr Meredith Tennis,
Dr Lora Wilson, Marybeth Sechler and Nicole Kelley for their helpful suggestions on
this manuscript. This study was supported by a Merit Award from the US Department
of Veterans Affairs and NIH grants R01CA138528 to RW.

REFERENCES
1 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 2011;
144: 646–674.
2 Campisi J. Suppressing cancer: the importance of being senescent. Science 2005;
309: 886–887.
3 Braig M, Lee S, Loddenkemper C, Rudolph C, Peters AH, Schlegelberger B et al.
Oncogene-induced senescence as an initial barrier in lymphoma development.
Nature 2005; 436: 660–665.
4 Collado M, Gil J, Efeyan A, Guerra C, Schuhmacher AJ, Barradas M et al. Tumour
biology: senescence in premalignant tumours. Nature 2005; 436: 642.
5 Campisi J. Aging, cellular senescence, and cancer. Annu Rev Physiol 2013; 75:
685–705.
6 Kuilman T, Michaloglou C, Mooi WJ, Peeper DS. The essence of senescence. Genes
Dev 2010; 24: 2463–2479.
7 Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, Acosta M, Scott G, Roskelley C et al. A biomarker that
identiﬁes senescent human cells in culture and in aging skin in vivo. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1995; 92: 9363–9367.
8 Rodier F, Campisi J. Four faces of cellular senescence. J Cell Biol 2011; 192:
547–556.
9 Orjalo AV, Bhaumik D, Gengler BK, Scott GK, Campisi J. Cell surface-bound
IL-1alpha is an upstream regulator of the senescence-associated IL-6/IL-8 cytokine
network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106: 17031–17036.
10 Rodier F. Detection of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP).
Methods Mol Biol 2013; 965: 165–173.
11 Angers S, Moon RT. Proximal events in Wnt signal transduction. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2009; 10: 468–477.
12 Malbon CC. Frizzleds: new members of the superfamily of G-protein-coupled
receptors. Front Biosci 2004; 9: 1048–1058.

Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

Wnt7a is a novel inducer of cellular senescence
RK Bikkavilli et al

5328
13 Malbon CC. G proteins in development. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005; 6: 689–701.
14 Widelitz R. Wnt signaling through canonical and non-canonical pathways: recent
progress. Growth Factors 2005; 23: 111–116.
15 Chang J, Sonoyama W, Wang Z, Jin Q, Zhang C, Krebsbach PH et al. Noncanonical
Wnt-4 signaling enhances bone regeneration of mesenchymal stem cells in
craniofacial defects through activation of p38 MAPK. J Biol Chem 2007; 282:
30938–30948.
16 Bikkavilli RK, Feigin ME, Malbon CC. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
regulates canonical Wnt-beta-catenin signaling by inactivation of GSK3beta. J Cell
Sci 2008; 121: 3598–3607.
17 Wang HY, Malbon CC. Wnt signaling, Ca2+, and cyclic GMP: visualizing Frizzled
functions. Science 2003; 300: 1529–1530.
18 Winn RA, Marek L, Han SY, Rodriguez K, Rodriguez N, Hammond M et al.
Restoration of Wnt-7a expression reverses non-small cell lung cancer cellular
transformation through frizzled-9-mediated growth inhibition and promotion of
cell differentiation. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 19625–19634.
19 Winn RA, Van Scoyk M, Hammond M, Rodriguez K, Crossno JT Jr., Heasley LE et al.
Antitumorigenic effect of Wnt 7a and Fzd 9 in non-small cell lung cancer cells is
mediated through ERK-5-dependent activation of peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor gamma. J Biol Chem 2006; 281: 26943–26950.
20 Polakis P. Wnt signaling and cancer. Genes Dev 2000; 14: 1837–1851.
21 Polakis P. The many ways of Wnt in cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2007; 17: 45–51.
22 Polakis P. The oncogenic activation of beta-catenin. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999; 9: 15–21.
23 Kondratov AG, Kvasha SM, Stoliar LA, Romanenko AM, Zgonnyk YM, Gordiyuk VV
et al. Alterations of the WNT7A gene in clear cell renal cell carcinomas. PLoS One
2012; 7: e47012.
24 Tennis MA, Vanscoyk MM, Wilson LA, Kelley N, Winn RA. Methylation of Wnt7a is
modulated by DNMT1 and cigarette smoke condensate in non-small cell
lung cancer. PLoS One 2012; 7: e32921.
25 Parr BA, Avery EJ, Cygan JA, McMahon AP. The classical mouse mutant postaxial
hemimelia results from a mutation in the Wnt 7a gene. Dev Biol 1998; 202: 228–234.
26 Vikis HG, Rymaszewski AL, Tichelaar JW. Mouse models of chemically-induced
lung carcinogenesis. Front Biosci (Elite Ed) 2013; 5: 939–946.
27 Keith RL, Karoor V, Mozer AB, Hudish TM, Le M, Miller YE. Chemoprevention of
murine lung cancer by geﬁtinib in combination with prostacyclin synthase
overexpression. Lung Cancer 2010; 70: 37–42.
28 Keith RL, Miller YE, Hudish TM, Girod CE, Sotto-Santiago S, Franklin WA et al.
Pulmonary prostacyclin synthase overexpression chemoprevents tobacco smoke
lung carcinogenesis in mice. Cancer Res 2004; 64: 5897–5904.
29 Mori M, Rao SK, Popper HH, Cagle PT, Fraire AE. Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia of the lung: a probable forerunner in the development of adenocarcinoma
of the lung. Mod Pathol 2001; 14: 72–84.
30 Nomori H, Horio H, Naruke T, Suemasu K, Morinaga S, Noguchi M. A case of
multiple atypical adenomatous hyperplasia of the lung detected by computed
tomography. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2001; 31: 514–516.
31 Jho EH, Zhang T, Domon C, Joo CK, Freund JN, Costantini F. Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf
signaling induces the transcription of Axin2, a negative regulator of the signaling
pathway. Mol Cell Biol 2002; 22: 1172–1183.
32 Bringold F, Serrano M. Tumor suppressors and oncogenes in cellular senescence.
Exp Gerontol 2000; 35: 317–329.
33 Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW. Oncogenic ras provokes
premature cell senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a.
Cell 1997; 88: 593–602.
34 Kamijo T, Zindy F, Roussel MF, Quelle DE, Downing JR, Ashmun RA et al. Tumor
suppression at the mouse INK4a locus mediated by the alternative reading frame
product p19ARF. Cell 1997; 91: 649–659.
35 Sharpless NE, Bardeesy N, Lee KH, Carrasco D, Castrillon DH, Aguirre AJ et al. Loss
of p16Ink4a with retention of p19Arf predisposes mice to tumorigenesis. Nature
2001; 413: 86–91.
36 Malumbres M, Perez De Castro I, Hernandez MI, Jimenez M, Corral T, Pellicer A.
Cellular response to oncogenic ras involves induction of the Cdk4 and Cdk6
inhibitor p15(INK4b). Mol Cell Biol 2000; 20: 2915–2925.
37 Baek KH, Bhang D, Zaslavsky A, Wang LC, Vachani A, Kim CF et al.
Thrombospondin-1 mediates oncogenic Ras-induced senescence in premalignant
lung tumors. J Clin Invest 2013; 123: 4375–4389.

38 Alimonti A, Nardella C, Chen Z, Clohessy JG, Carracedo A, Trotman LC et al.
A novel type of cellular senescence that can be enhanced in mouse models and
human tumor xenografts to suppress prostate tumorigenesis. J Clin Invest
2010; 120: 681–693.
39 Romanov VS, Abramova MV, Svetlikova SB, Bykova TV, Zubova SG, Aksenov ND
et al. p21(Waf1) is required for cellular senescence but not for cell cycle
arrest induced by the HDAC inhibitor sodium butyrate. Cell Cycle 2010; 9:
3945–3955.
40 Wang G, Chan CH, Gao Y, Lin HK. Novel roles of Skp2 E3 ligase in cellular
senescence, cancer progression, and metastasis. Chin J Cancer 2012; 31:
169–177.
41 Nakayama K, Nagahama H, Minamishima YA, Matsumoto M, Nakamichi I, Kitagawa K et al. Targeted disruption of Skp2 results in accumulation of cyclin E and
p27(Kip1), polyploidy and centrosome overduplication. EMBO J 2000; 19:
2069–2081.
42 Chan CH, Morrow JK, Li CF, Gao Y, Jin G, Moten A et al. Pharmacological
inactivation of Skp2 SCF ubiquitin ligase restricts cancer stem cell traits and
cancer progression. Cell 2013; 154: 556–568.
43 Chan CH, Morrow JK, Zhang S, Lin HK. Skp2: a dream target in the coming age of
cancer therapy. Cell Cycle 2014; 13: 679–680.
44 Tennis MA, Van Scoyk M, Heasley LE, Vandervest K, Weiser-Evans M, Freeman S
et al. Prostacyclin inhibits non-small cell lung cancer growth by a frizzled
9-dependent pathway that is blocked by secreted frizzled-related protein 1.
Neoplasia 2010; 12: 244–253.
45 Keith RL, Blatchford PJ, Kittelson J, Minna JD, Kelly K, Massion PP et al. Oral iloprost
improves endobronchial dysplasia in former smokers. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2011;
4: 793–802.
46 Hayﬂick L, Moorhead PS. The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains. Exp
Cell Res 1961; 25: 585–621.
47 Shigemitsu K, Sekido Y, Usami N, Mori S, Sato M, Horio Y et al. Genetic alteration
of the beta-catenin gene (CTNNB1) in human lung cancer and malignant
mesothelioma and identiﬁcation of a new 3p21.3 homozygous deletion.
Oncogene 2001; 20: 4249–4257.
48 Ueda M, Gemmill RM, West J, Winn R, Sugita M, Tanaka N et al. Mutations of the
beta- and gamma-catenin genes are uncommon in human lung, breast, kidney,
cervical and ovarian carcinomas. Br J Cancer 2001; 85: 64–68.
49 Ji L, Minna JD, Roth JA. 3p21.3 tumor suppressor cluster: prospects for translational applications. Future Oncol 2005; 1: 79–92.
50 Tang Y, Simoneau AR, Liao WX, Yi G, Hope C, Liu F et al. WIF1, a Wnt pathway
inhibitor, regulates SKP2 and c-myc expression leading to G1 arrest and growth
inhibition of human invasive urinary bladder cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2009; 8:
458–468.
51 Bitler BG, Nicodemus JP, Li H, Cai Q, Wu H, Hua X et al. Wnt5a suppresses
epithelial ovarian cancer by promoting cellular senescence. Cancer Res 2011; 71:
6184–6194.
52 Wang IC, Chen YJ, Hughes D, Petrovic V, Major ML, Park HJ et al. Forkhead box M1
regulates the transcriptional network of genes essential for mitotic progression
and genes encoding the SCF (Skp2-Cks1) ubiquitin ligase. Mol Cell Biol 2005; 25:
10875–10894.
53 Roberson RS, Kussick SJ, Vallieres E, Chen SY, Wu DY. Escape from therapyinduced accelerated cellular senescence in p53-null lung cancer cells and in
human lung cancers. Cancer Res 2005; 65: 2795–2803.
54 te Poele RH, Okorokov AL, Jardine L, Cummings J, Joel SP. DNA damage is able to
induce senescence in tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res 2002; 62:
1876–1883.
55 Mikels A, Minami Y, Nusse R. Ror2 receptor requires tyrosine kinase activity to
mediate Wnt5A signaling. J Biol Chem 2009; 284: 30167–30176.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Oncogene (2015) 5317 – 5328

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

