Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 8
9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibition of BRD4 attenuates tumor cell self-renewal and
suppresses stem cell signaling in MYC driven medulloblastoma
Sujatha Venkataraman1*, Irina Alimova1*, Ilango Balakrishnan1, Peter Harris1,
Diane K Birks2, Andrea Griesinger1, Vladimir Amani1, Brian Cristiano1, Marc Remke3,
Michael D Taylor3, Michael Handler2, Nicholas K Foreman1 and Rajeev Vibhakar1
1

Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA

3

Division of Neurosurgery, Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada

*

These two authors contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence:
Rajeev Vibhakar, e-mail: Rajeev.Vibhakar@ucdenver.edu
Running Title: Targeting MYC with JQ1 for medulloblastoma therapy
Keywords: Medulloblastoma, MYC, BRD4, JQ1, Senescence
Received: December 05, 2013	

Accepted: March 19, 2014	

Published: March 31, 2014

ABSTRACT
Medulloblastoma is a pediatric brain tumor with a variable prognosis due to
clinical and genomic heterogeneity. Among the 4 major genomic sub-groups, patients
with MYC amplified tumors have a particularly poor prognosis despite therapy with
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Targeting the MYC oncogene has traditionally
been problematic. Here we report that MYC driven medulloblastoma can be targeted
by inhibition of the bromodomain protein BRD4. We show that bromodomain inhibition
with JQ1 restricts c-MYC driven transcriptional programs in medulloblastoma,
suppresses medulloblastoma cell growth and induces a cell cycle arrest. Importantly
JQ1 suppresses stem cell associated signaling in medulloblastoma cells and inhibits
medulloblastoma tumor cell self-renewal. Additionally JQ1 also promotes senescence
in medulloblastoma cells by activating cell cycle kinase inhibitors and inhibiting
activity of E2F1. Furthermore BRD4 inhibition displayed an anti-proliferative, prosenescence effect in a medulloblastoma model in vivo. In clinical samples we found
that transcriptional programs suppressed by JQ1 are associated with adverse risk in
medulloblastoma patients. Our work indicates that BRD4 inhibition attenuates stem
cell signaling in MYC driven medulloblastoma and demonstrates the feasibility BET
domain inhibition as a therapeutic approach in vivo.

INTRODUCTION

(WNT) and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) respectively. The other
two groups are less well characterized (Group 3 and 4)[8].
Among these, Group 3 patients with high c-MYC do very
poorly with 5-year survival less than 30%[9, 10]. Thus, there
is a critical need for more effective therapies to combat this
disease, particularly in the high c-MYC expressing tumors.
MYC is a major regulatory factor of stem cell
maintenance and tumor cell proliferation[11]. Importantly
the c-MYC oncogene family is the most commonly
amplified gene set in medulloblastoma further emphasizing
the need to target these tumors[12]. While the concept of
c-MYC as a therapeutic target is well established, direct
targeting of c-MYC has remained problematic. For example

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain
tumor of children. Surgery, radiation and chemotherapy are
the cornerstones of medulloblastoma therapy, with outcomes
far from optimal[1]. Further, there is increasing evidence of
long-term morbidity such as neurocognitive deficits and
secondary tumors associated with current treatments[2].
Recent transcriptional profiling studies demonstrate that
medulloblastoma is a heterogeneous disease with 4 distinct
molecular subgroups characterized by unique genomic and
clinical features[3–7]. Two subgroups are associated with
specific abnormalities in developmental pathways; Wingless
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2355

Oncotarget

early studies using an inducible c-MYC model showed that
activation of c-MYC promoted lymphoma formation that
regressed upon removal of c-MYC expression[13]. More
recently, expressing a dominant-negative c-MYC allele in
a KRAS- dependent murine model of lung adenocarcinoma
further demonstrated the therapeutic benefit of c-MYC
inhibition[14]. Similarly using G quadraplex molecules
Shalaby et al demonstrated that inhibition of c-MYC was a
potent strategy for suppressing medulloblastoma[15].
Nevertheless, a therapeutic approach to target
c-MYC has remained elusive. The absence of a clear
ligand-binding domain has presented a daunting obstacle
toward direct inhibition of MYC. However because c-MYC
is a DNA binding transcriptional activator, targeting
c-MYC driven transcription provides an opportunity to
suppress c-MYC driven oncogenesis. Recently inhibition
of the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET)
protein BRD4 was shown to be a key mediator of MYC
driven transcriptional programs providing a therapeutic
target in c-MYC driven tumors[16, 17].
The bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET)
family is composed of four members; BRD2, BRD3,
BRD4, and BRDT. BET family proteins bind to acetylated
histones to influence transcription[18]. BET proteins are
attractive therapeutic targets given the recent description
of several small molecule inhibitors including JQ1 and
iBET [19–21]. Several hematologic malignancies, the
highly malignant NUT midline carcinoma and the pediatric
adrenal gland tumor neuroblastoma are responsive to
BRD4 inhibition in vitro and in mouse models [16, 17,
22–24]. Furthermore two recent reports also show the
utility of BRD4 inhibition in medulloblastoma[25, 26].
Here we show that BRD4 inhibition is a highly
effective strategy to inhibit MYC driven medulloblastoma.
We demonstrate that inhibition of BRD4 results in
suppression of tumor cell self-renewal, stem cell signaling,
and induction of senescence in vitro and in vivo.

Hospital Colorado and were conducted in accordance with
local and federal human research protection guidelines and
Institutional Review Board (IRB) regulations. Informed
consent was obtained for all specimens collected. Normal
brain tissue was collected from autopsy and purchased
from Ambion (Austin, TX), Stratagene (Santa Clara, CA)
and Clontech Laboratories, Inc. (Mountain View, CA).
JQ1 was a kind gift from the Bradner laboratory.

Gene expression microarray analysis
Ribonucleic acid from DMSO or JQ1 treated Daoy
cells was extracted using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia,
CA) and hybridized to HG-ST2.0 Gene Chips (Affymetrix,
Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions
and previously described by us. Data analysis was performed
in R (http://www.r-project.org/), using packages publicly
available through Bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor
.org). Hierarchical clustering was performed using the
normalized gene expression data. Heatmap visualization was
performed using GENE-E (http://www.broadinstitute.org/).
Functional annotation analysis of differentially expressed
genes was performed with the National Institutes of Health
Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated
Discovery (DAVID) Web tool (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.
gov/), using Biological Process Gene Ontology (GO) terms
and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathways. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used
to examine enrichment of genes in predefined reference sets
that are based on biological knowledge using tools available
from the Broad Institute (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/
msigdb) [27]. Unlike other approaches that examine only
genes meeting a predetermined cutoff, GSEA computes an
aggregate score for all genes in the reference set, based on
their relative ranking in the data[27]. K-Means clustering
was performed using R2 (http://hgserver1.amc.nl/cgi-bin/
r2/main.cgi) in a previously published gene expression
profiling cohort analyzing 199 primary medulloblastoma
samples[5]. Survival differences according to clusteringderived subgroups were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier
estimates and tested using Log-Rank test. P-values below
0.05 were considered to be significant.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and
and reagents

primary

patient

samples

Cell growth assays

The Daoy and D283 medulloblastoma cell lines
were purchased from American Type Cell Culture
(Rockville, MD). The ONS-76 medulloblastoma cell line
was kindly provided by Dr. James T. Rutka (University
of Toronto, Canada). D425 and D458 cell lines were
kindly provided by Dr. Darell D. Bigner (Duke University
Medical Center, NC). The UW228 cell line was provided
by Dr. John Silber, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
Cell lines were cultured in DMEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta
Biologicals, Lawrenceville, GA).
Primary patient samples were obtained from Children’s
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell growth was measured using the xCELLigence
system and E-Plate 96 well gold-coated plates (Roche/
ACEA). This system gives the real time measurement
of cell proliferation. Cells were plated on to an E-plate
(1000 cells/well) allowed to grown and treated with
DMSO or JQ1 24 hours later and cell growth was
measured over time. Cell numbers were measured using
the Viacount assay (Millipore) on a Guava Flow cytometer
per the manufacturers recommendation. Briefly, cells were
seeded in media and DMSO or JQ1 added 24 hours later.
Cells were cultured for a further 48 hours, and collected by
2356

Oncotarget

Luciferase reporter analysis

centrifugation. Cells were washed, Viacount reagent added
and cell counts measured on the cytometer.
For the colony formation assay, cells were transfected
with a shRNA for 48 hours and then plated at 500 cells
per well of a 6-well plate in triplicate. After seven days of
growth, the medium was aspirated, the wells were washed
with PBS, and the colonies were stained with 0.5% crystal
violet/25% methanol solution. The number of colonies per
well was counted using a dissecting microscope with a
threshold of 50 cells necessary to constitute a colony.
For methyl cellulose colony growth assays D283,
D425 and D458 (500 cells/well) cells were suspended in
DMEM having methyl cellulose (1.3% final) and containing
either JQ1 (150 or 300nM) or DMSO control. This
suspension was then plated in triplicate onto 6-well plates.
The colonies were allowed to form for 8–11 days. The
colonies were then stained with NBT (1mg/ml of nitro blue
tetrazolium ) and incubated for 24 hours at 37 °C. The blue
colonies with 50 or more cells in each colony were counted.
Pictures were taken with GelcountTM (Oxford Optronix).

Luciferase assays were performed using the Cignal
Pathway Reporter System (SA Biosciences) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were seeded into 24-well
plates and transfected with luciferase reporters using
Surefect transfection reagent; 8 hours later DMSO or JQ1
was added and cells incubated for an additional 24 hours.
Luciferase activity was measured using the Dual Luciferase
Assay system (Promega) on a Glomax multi luminometer
(Promega). Firefly luciferase served as the experimental
reporter and Renilla luciferase as the normalizing reporter.

In vivo xenograft analysis
This study was conducted at Washington Biosciences
Inc. at its AAALAC accredited facility. The study
was conducted following industry standards including
compliance to USDA and NIH animal care and use
guidelines. Athymic nude mice were selected for this study
because they have been used for similar tumor grafting
studies and have been well-characterized. Daoy cell
pellets were prepared using standard harvest procedures,
resuspended in PBS and 1.0 x 107 cells were injected
into the flank of each mouse in an approximately 200 uL
volume. Once tumors were palpable and measurable (mean
52 days post inoculation) treatment with JQ1 or control
vehicle of DMSO was begun.
DMSO or JQ1 (50mg/kg) was dosed for 5 days
a week for 4 weeks by intraperitoneal injection (n=10).
Each animal was tracked individually for tumor growth by
external caliper measurements of subcutaneous protruding
tumor and an approximate tumor volume was calculated
using the ellipsoid volume formula: π/6 x L x W x H.
Animals were also weighed 3 times a week for the duration
of the treatment.

Cell cycle assay
Flow cytometric analysis was performed to
define the cell cycle distribution. Cells were seeded in
6-well plates (1x105 cells/well) and 24 hours later were
treated with JQ1. Cells were harvested 48  hours later
by trypsinization and fixed with 70% ethanol overnight.
Collected cells were treated with 250µl cell cycle
reagent (Millipore) and evaluated per the manufacturer’s
recommendations.

Real-Time
Quantitative
Transcriptase PCR

Reverse

cDNA was generated as per the manufacturer’s
instructions via reverse transcription using mRNA and the
Mastercycler® personal (Eppendorf) thermal cycler. Realtime quantitative PCR was performed with the StepOne Plus
detection system (Applied Biosystems). Taqman reagents
(Applied Biosystems) were used per the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Gene expression was determined by the
ΔΔCt method. All assays were performed in triplicate.

Slice culture method for BrdU and cell viability
with LDH measurement
Slice cultures from primary tumor samples were
grown onto Millicell Culture insert (Millipore Cat#
PICM0RG50) according to manufacturer’s instruction.
Briefly, ~0.33cm chunks of primary tumor samples
were placed onto cell culture insert and were grown in
slice culture medium (Neurobasal A media containing
B27, glutamax, L-glutamine, HEPES and FGF) for
5 days. On day 5, cultures were treated with, DMSO, JQ1
(300nM) or mytomycin C (50ug/mL) and fresh media
with drugs was changed every day. Seven days after
drug treatment, BrdU (BrdU Flow kit: BD Pharmingen
Cat# 559619) was added. Two days after BrdU addition,
cells and media were collected for BrdU and LDH assay.
BrdU incorporation was analyzed by flow cytometry. For
cytotoxicity measurement and LDH assay, Cytoscan-LDH

Western Blotting
Protein lysates were obtained from samples using
RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) with
protease inhibitors added. Western blotting was performed
per standard methods. Antibodies for c-MYC and
Tubulin were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology
(Danvers, MA). Secondary antibodies conjugated to
horseradish-peroxidase were used in conjunction with a
chemiluminescent reagent to visualize protein bands.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2357

Oncotarget

Cytotoxicity Assay Kit- G Biosciences (Cat #786-210)
was used. Briefly, media was collected from every time we
changed the media on the culture and are stored at −80°C.
Media was thawed and followed manufacturer’s
protocol to measure LDH activity that was normalized
to mytomycin C treatment. Drug cytotoxicity and LDH
activity was measured calorimetrically.

new avenue[16, 28]. Importantly new chemical inhibitors
of BRD4 make this approach enticing[21]. Among these
inhibitors, JQ1 is the best studied because it has been made
freely available by the Bradner laboratory[20]. Because
c-MYC is a key driver of high risk medulloblastoma
we first asked whether BRD4 inhibition by JQ1 would
alter c-MYC driven signaling in medulloblastoma cells.
We evaluated the impact of 300nM JQ1 on c-MYC
signaling in a well-characterized medulloblastoma cell
line (Daoy) using genome wide transcriptional profiling.
The top 30 up and down regulated genes are depicted in
Figure 1A and the full list is presented in Supplementary
Table S1. Low dose (300nM) JQ1 treatment resulted in a
significant change in transcription with 1156 transcripts
down regulated by JQ1 (p < 0.05,FDR< 0.05 and fold
change < 0.67) and 635 transcripts up regulated by JQ1
(p < 0.05,FDR < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5). To more
specifically examine the impact of JQ1 on c-MYC driven

RESULTS
Bromodomain inhibition with JQ1 restricts
c-MYC driven transcriptional programs in
medulloblastoma
Recent studies have demonstrated that targeting
c-MYC signaling by inhibition of the Bromodomain and
extraterminal (BET) Domain 4 (BRD4) is a promising

Figure 1: Inhibition of MYC-Dependent Transcription by the Bromodomain Inhibitor JQ1 in medulloblastoma. (A) Heat

map depiction of the top 30 up and down regulated genes (p < 0.01, FDR < 0.05) following JQ1 treatment in Daoy medulloblastoma cells.
(B) GSEA of three MYC-dependent gene sets (Alfano et al., 2010, Zeller et al., 2003, Schuhmacher et al., 2001) in transcriptional profiles
of Daoy medulloblastoma cells treated (red) or untreated (blue) with JQ1.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2358

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (C) Expression of c-MYC mRNA in medulloblastoma cells treated with 300nM JQ1 or control DMSO treated. (D) Immunoblot
analysis demonstrates that JQ1 down regulates MYC protein expression in Daoy cells. (E) A luciferase based reporter assay demonstrates
that MYC responsive transcription is inhibited by JQ1 compared to DMSO control treated cells in a concentration and time dependent
fashion in Daoy cells.

transcriptional programs we queried the gene expression
data with unbiased gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA,
reference [27]) using 3 well-validated c-MYC dependent
gene signatures publically available from the Molecular
Signatures Database (MSigDB, http://www.broadinstitute
.org/gsea/msigdb). All three c-MYC related gene sets were
statistically enriched among genes down regulated by JQ1
(Figure 1B), suggesting that JQ1 supresses MYC driven
genomic programs in medulloblastoma.
Recent studies suggest that the activity of JQ1 is in
part due to direct regulation of c-MYC transcription[16].
Therefore we examined the expression of c-MYC in
JQ1 treated medulloblastoma cells. Treatment with

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

JQ1 potently decreased c-MYC transcripts (Figure 1C
and Supplementary Figure S1A). Immunoblotting
analysis confirmed that JQ1 decreased expression of the
c-MYC protein in medulloblastoma cells (Figure 1D and
Supplementary Figure S1B and C). To further confirm
that the JQ1 effects in medulloblastoma cells were a result
of suppressing c-MYC we sought to directly evaluate
MYC activity. Daoy cells were transfected with control or
c-MYC responsive luciferase vectors (SA Bioscience) and
treated with JQ1 for 48 hours followed by measurement
of luciferase activity as previously described by us[29].
Treatment with JQ1 strongly suppressed luciferase activity
in the Daoy cells transfected with c-MYC responsive

2359

Oncotarget

luciferase vector compared to the DMSO treated control
cells in a dose and time dependent manner (Figure 1E).
Expression of BRD4 is not increased in medulloblastoma
samples compared to normal cerebellum (Supplementary
Figure S2) further suggesting the activity of JQ1 is due to
BRD4 mediated, c-MYC driven signaling.
Taken together these data provide compelling
evidence that JQ1 down regulates c-MYC driven
transcription in medulloblastoma cell lines; these data
are consistent with activity observed in hematologic

malignancies and analogous to that seen in MYCN driven
neuroblastoma [16, 24].

BRD4 inhibition suppresses medulloblastoma cell
growth and induces a cell cycle arrest
To characterize the phenotypic consequences
of BRD4 inhibition on medulloblastoma cells we
first determined the impact of JQ1 treatment on

Figure 2: Inhibition of medulloblastoma cell growth by JQ1 in vitro. (A) Growth curves for Daoy cells treated with varying

concentrations of JQ1 measured by real time cell analysis., (B) Activity of JQ1 (300nM) against a panel of medulloblastoma cell lines
measured using the ViaCount assay. (C) Methyl cellulose assays showing inhibition of colony formation in the MYC amplified cell lines
D283, D425 and D458 by JQ1. (D) Quantification of colony formation shown in 2C demonstrating a statistically significant decrease in the
number of colonies in JQ1 treated medulloblastoma cells.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2360

Oncotarget

Figure 2: (E) Flow cytometry plots for Daoy and D425 cells show increased G1 cell cycle arrest in JQ1 (300nM) treated cells compared
to DMSO control. (F) Colony focus assay showing shRNA mediated depletion of BRD4 results in diminished colony formation in Daoy
and ONS-76 medulloblastoma cells.

medulloblastoma cell growth. JQ1 treatment potently
suppressed Daoy medulloblastoma cell growth in a dose
dependent manner as evaluated by the RTCA
xCELLigence system (ACEA Biotechnology) (Figure 2A).
Using a second flow-cytometry based method we confirmed
that JQ1 (300nM) effectively inhibits cell growth in a
panel of medulloblastoma cell lines (Figure 2B). Moreover
treatment with JQ1 significantly attenuated long-term
anchorage independent growth of multiple MYC driven
medulloblastoma cell lines (p < 0.005, Figure 2C and D).
Importantly 3 of the cell lines (D283, D425, D458) are
known to possess c-MYC translocations (M. Taylor,
personal communication) and all cell lines express c-MYC
at significantly higher levels than normal cerebellum
(Supplementary Figure S3). In concert with the growth
inhibition JQ1 treatment induced a G1 cell cycle arrest
accompanied by a decrease in the percentage of S-phase
cells as shown for Daoy and D425 medulloblastoma
cells (Figure 2E) and summarized for all cell lines in
Supplementary Table S2.
JQ1 effects in multiple myeloma and AML (acute
myeloid leukemia) are associated with inhibition of a
particular Bromodomain protein, BRD4[16, 28]. Hence we
sought to determine whether genetic inhibition of BRD4
could phenocopy JQ1 treatment. BRD4 was depleted in 2
medulloblastoma cell lines using shRNA (Supplementary
Figure S4A). There was a significant decrease in the
ability of medulloblastoma cells to form colonies in BRD4
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

depleted cells (Figure 2F). Furthermore BRD4 depleted
cells showed an associated decrease in c-MYC transcript
(Supplementary Figure S4B).

JQ1 treatment suppresses stem cell associated
signaling and inhibits medulloblastoma tumor cell
self-renewal
Medulloblastoma tumor cells are associated with the
ability for augmented self-renewal and limited terminal
neuronal differentiation[30]. We therefore examined
whether JQ1 influences the differentiation state of
medulloblastoma cells. We analyzed the JQ1 modulated
gene expression using The Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, http://
david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/)[31]. We found that genes
associated with neuronal differentiation processes were
poorly expressed in medulloblastoma cells and significantly
enriched in transcriptional programs upregulated by JQ1
(Figure 3A). To further investigate the impact of JQ1 on
medulloblastoma cell differentiation we performed gene
set enrichment analysis of JQ1 treated cells using stem
cell associated signatures from MSigDB. GSEA revealed
marked down regulation of stem cell associated genes
after JQ1 treatment including global ESC (embryonic
stem cells) signatures as well as transcriptional programs
regulated by SOX2, Nanog and OCT4 (Figure 3B and

2361

Oncotarget

Supplementary Figure S5). We next examined expression
of specific neuronal associated stem cell markers in control
versus JQ1 treated cells. Treatment with JQ1 strongly
suppressed expression of SOX2, Nestin and Nanog,

(Figure 3C) all genes associated with neural stem cells
and medulloblastoma[32, 33]. Conversely expression
of MAP2, a differentiation maker, in neural stem cells
and medulloblastoma was strongly induced by JQ1

Figure 3: JQ1 suppresses stem cell associated signaling and inhibits medulloblastoma tumor cell self-renewal. (A) Gene

ontology analysis of gene expression from JQ1 treated cells demonstrates induction of differentiation pathways. (B) GSEA of ES cell
associated gene set and SOX2 dependent gene set in transcriptional profiles of Daoy medulloblastoma cells treated (red) or untreated (blue)
with JQ1. (C) Expression of stem cell associated markers (Nestin, Nanog, SOX2) and differentiation marker (MAP2) in medulloblastoma
cells treated with 300nM JQ1 or control DMSO treated controls. (D) Light microscopy and Immunoflurescent images of SOX2 expression
in DMSO control or JQ1 treated D283 medulloblastoma cell neurospheres. (E) A luciferase based reporter assay demonstrates that SOX2
responsive transcription is inhibited by JQ1 compared to DMSO control treated cells.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2362

Oncotarget

Figure 3: (F) Limiting dilution assay of control (Blue line) or JQ1 (300nM) treated (red line) Daoy cells demonstrating significant

inhibition of colony formation by JQ1. (G) Limiting dilution assay of control or JQ1 (300nM) treated D283 cells demonstrating significant
inhibition of neurosphere formation by JQ1.

JQ1 promotes senescence in medulloblastoma cells

(Figure 3C and Supplementary Figure S6). To examine
the impact of JQ1 in further detail we treated c-MYC
translocated D283 medulloblastoma cells with JQ1 and
performed immunofluorescence for SOX2. JQ1 decreased
expression of SOX2 protein in medulloblastoma cells
grown under serum free neurosphere promoting culture
conditions (Figure 3D). Further the activity of SOX2 was
significantly attenuated by JQ1 (p < 0.01) as measured by a
SOX2 responsive luciferase reporter assay (Figure 3E). To
evaluate if JQ1 functionally impacted a stem cell phenotype
we next performed an in vitro limiting dilution tumor stem
cell assay. Daoy cells were grown as neurospheres in serum
free conditions for 48 hours and then dissociated and seeded
into 96-well plates in a limiting dilution from 1000 cells/
well to 1 cell/well. Cells were cultured in serum free
conditions for 7 days and colonies counted. The number
of neurospheres per well was plotted against the number
of cells seeded per well. JQ1 repressed the formation of
new neurospheres by Daoy cells indicating a suppression
of tumor cell self-renewal (Figure 3F). Similarly D283
formed significantly fewer neurospheres when treated by
JQ1 (Figure 3G). Further genetic inhibition of BRD4 with
shRNA phenocopied the JQ1 treatment and significantly
decreased neurosphere formation of medulloblastoma cells
(Supplementary Figure S7).
Together these findings indicate that BRD4 prevents
differentiation of medulloblastoma cells by enforcing a
stem cell transcriptional program and promoting tumor
cell self-renewal.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To further investigate the mechanism of JQ1 activity
in medulloblastoma we asked whether the G0–G1 arrest
we observed was associated with senescence given that
tumor cells often undergo senescence upon inhibition of
MYC[34]. First we treated Daoy medulloblastoma cells with
75 or 300nM JQ1 and measured activity of senescence
associated β-galactosidase after 7 days. JQ1 strongly
induced senescence- β-galactosidase staining (Figure 4A)
indicating increased senescence. To confirm these data we
measured expression of cell cycle related genes that are
known to be associated with c-MYC inactivation associated
senescence[34]. JQ1 increased expression of p16, p21
and p27 transcripts in medulloblastoma cells (Figure 4B).
Western blot analysis further revealed potent induction of
p21 and p27 with concomitant decrease in phosphorylated
RB protein (Figure 4C). Because MYC associated G1
cell cycle transitions are associated with activity of Rb
bound E2F1 we further measured activity of E2F1. MYC
drives E2F1 activity by promoting phosphorylation and
degradation of RB[11]. Treatment of medulloblastoma
cells with JQ1 potently suppressed E2F1 activity compared
to control treated cells as measured by a E2F1 responsive
luciferase reporter (Figure 4D).
These data further establish MYC inactivation
associated senescence as a key mechanism of BRD4
inhibition mediated suppression of medulloblastoma cell
growth.

2363

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Induction of senescence in medulloblastoma cells by JQ1. (A) Representative images of senescence associated

β-galactosidase in Daoy cells treated with DMSO and quantification of senescence associated β-galactosidase positive cells per high power
field. (B) Expression of senescence-associated marker (p16, p21, p27) mRNA in medulloblastoma cells treated with 300nM JQ1 or control
DMSO treated controls. (C) Immunoblot analysis of senescence associated proteins in JQ1 treated cells. (D) A luciferase based reporter
assay demonstrates that E2F1 activity is inhibited by JQ1 compared to DMSO control treated cells

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2364

Oncotarget

Figure 5: In vivo activity of JQ1 in medulloblastoma xenografts. (A) Tumor volume of medulloblastoma cell xenografts in DMSO

control (Red) or JQ1(blue) treated immunocompromised mice. (B) Representative images of H&E staining and Ki67 IHC in control treated
tumor (C2401) or JQ1 treated tumor (JQ2381). (C) Representative images and quantification of senescence associated β-galactosidase in
control treated tumor (C2401) or JQ1 treated tumor (JQ2381). (D) Immunofluoresence of SOX2 protien in in control treated tumor (C2401)
or JQ1 treated tumor (JQ2381). (E) Expression of SOX2 mRNA in control or JQ1 treated xenograft tumors (n = 3 each).

BRD4 inhibition displays anti-proliferative effects
in a medulloblastoma model in vivo

treated tumors (Figure 5B & C and Supplementary Figure
S9). Excitingly JQ1 was effective in depleting SOX2
positive tumor cells in vivo (Figure 5D) and in decreasing
SOX2 mRNA expression (Figure 5E) further confirming that
BRD4 inhibition suppresses the tumor stem cell phenotype
in medulloblastoma. These data demonstrate the significant
in vivo antitumor activity of JQ1 and establish a potential
therapeutic strategy for BET inhibition in medulloblastoma.

Based on our in vitro data we next evaluated the
therapeutic application of JQ1 in vivo. Daoy medulloblastoma
cells were grown s.c. in immunocompromised mice until
tumors were apparent (~150mm2). JQ1 was administered
at 50mg/kg i.p. 5 days a week for 4 weeks and tumor
size monitored for a further 20 days. Daoy tumors grew
significantly slower in JQ1 treated mice compared to DMSO
treated controls (Figure 5A). Importantly this dosing scheme
resulted in very little toxicity with no significant change
in animal weights over the study period (Supplementary
Figure S8). To further evaluate in vivo activity of JQ1, a
cohort of animals were sacrificed after a 5-day treatment
and tumors assessed for proliferation. JQ1 potently inhibited
proliferation as demonstrated by decreased Ki67 staining
compared to controls and strongly induced senescence in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

JQ1 diminishes tumor cell proliferation of patient
derived medulloblastoma ex-vivo
We next evaluated the activity of JQ1 in a slice
culture model of primary medulloblastoma. This model
allows tumor to grow intact with all the supporting cells
and microenvironment ex vivo. Tumor harvested from
a medulloblastoma patient was placed in cell culture
en block at time of surgery. Tissue was then sliced in

2365

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Analysis of BrdU incorporation, cell viability and LDH activity in a primary medulloblastoma patient tumor
slice culture with JQ1 (300nM) treatment or DMSO vehicle control. (A) Representative Bivariate distribution of cellular DNA
content and BrdU incorporation with JQ1 treatment (B) Quantitative analysis of BrdU incorporation in cells with JQ1. (C) Distribution of
cells in the cell cycle phase. (D) Cytotoxicity measurement of JQ1 from LDH assay.

to 0.33cm thick sections, placed on cell growth inserts
and cultured in slice culture medium. Five days after
initiation of the slice culture, DMSO or 300nM JQ1
was added to media and sections cultured for a further
7 days. BrdU was then added to sections and tissues
incubated for a further 2 days. Tissues were then
collected and evaluated for BrdU incorporation, cell
cycle analysis and cytotoxicity assays. JQ1 treated slice
cultures incorporated less BrdU compared to DMSO
(Figure 6A and B). Further JQ1 induced a significant
G1 cell cycle arrest in the primary medulloblastoma
cell culture (Figure 6C). However JQ1 did not induce
appreciable cytotoxicity in the slice culture model.
These data are consistent with our in vitro and in vivo
studies and further emphasize the utility of JQ1 in
medulloblastoma.

Early transcriptomic studies in medulloblastoma
identified gene signatures that are associated with
adverse or improved outcomes in medulloblastoma[35].
Using these signatures we performed GSEA on the
transcriptomic changes in JQ1 treated medulloblastoma
cells. Genes identified by Pomeroy et al, as adverse
markers of medulloblastoma outcomes (Pomeroy_
Medulloblastoma_Prognosis_Down) were significantly
suppressed by JQ1 treatment of Daoy cells (NES = −1.24,
FDR = 0.13, Figure 7A). Conversely genes associated
with improved outcomes in medulloblastoma (Pomeroy_
Medulloblastoma_Prognosis_Up) were significantly
enriched in the genomic program up-regulated by JQ1
(NES = +1.29, FDR = 0.08) as shown in Figure 7A. We
next performed leading edge analysis using MSigDB
to identify the genes specifically contributing to the
enrichment score. Using this method we identified a set
of 6 genes that contributed most to the Pomeroy adverse
gene set being negatively enriched in our JQ1 treated
gene signatures (list in Supplementary Figure  S10A).
These 6 genes are significantly suppressed by JQ1 in
medulloblastoma cells and were identified as part of
a larger gene set that is highly predictive of adverse
outcomes[35]. To further probe the clinical relevance

Transcriptional programs suppressed by JQ1 are
associated with adverse risk in medulloblastoma
patients
We next sought to determine the clinical relevance
of JQ1 mediated changes in transcriptional programs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2366

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Clinical implication of JQ1 suppressed transcriptional programs in medulloblastoma patients. (A) GSEA of

an adverse risk gene set and a good prognosis gene set in transcriptional profiles of Daoy medulloblastoma cells treated (red) or untreated
(blue) with JQ1. (B) k-means clustering and Kaplan-Meir analysis of a 6 gene signature by medulloblastoma genomic subgroups in a series
of 199 primary medulloblastoma samples.

DISCUSSION

of this gene signature we conducted k-means clustering
of the 6 genes using R2 (R2: microarray analysis and
visualization platform; http://r2.amc.nl) in a series of 199
primary medulloblastoma samples[5]. This clustering
analysis yielded separation of the 199-medulloblastoma
tumors in to 2 clear groups (Supplementary Figure S10B).
Kaplan-Meir survival analysis of these two groups did not
reveal any differences in outcomes in medulloblastoma
samples as a whole (Supplementary Figure S10C).
However when we examined the six-gene signature on
a subgroup basis we found that that this six-gene set was
predictive of outcomes in SHH (p = 0.045) and suggestive
of outcome prediction in Group3 tumors (p = 0.065)
but not associated with outcomes in Group 4 tumors
(Figure 7B). Not enough Wnt signaling tumors were
available for this analysis. These data suggest that BRD4
inhibition is a promising strategy for specific subgroups
of medulloblastoma patients.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Medulloblastoma is a clinically and genomically
heterogeneous disease that is frequently treated with a
“one size fits all” approach using surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy[7] . Unfortunately this approach results in
very poor outcomes for MYC driven tumors [8]. Here we
show that the BET domain protein BRD4 is a mediator of
medulloblastoma growth in the context of MYC pathway
activation. Chemical inhibition of BRD4 with JQ1 was
sufficient to inhibit growth of medulloblastoma cells in
vitro and in vivo. Moreover JQ1 suppressed genomic
programs of stem cell signaling and suppressed tumor cell
self-renewal. JQ1 induced a potent senescence phenotype
associated with induction of cell cycle inhibitory proteins.
These data suggest that BRD4 inhibition is a potential
therapeutic target in medulloblastoma.
BRD4 is a member of the BET family of
transcription regulators that function as epigenetic
readers[36]. BRD4 has two bromodomains, which

2367

Oncotarget

bind to acetylated lysine residues in histone H3 and
H4[37]. After binding to acetylated chromatin, BRD4
regulates transcription by recruiting chromatin modifiers,
nucleosome remodeling complexes, and transcriptional
co-activators[18]. BRD4 is also required for maintaining
cell-cycle progression and BRD4 knockout in murine
models is embryonic lethal [36]. BRD4’s role in cancer
was initially appreciated when the presence of a fusion
protein was identified in a very aggressive form of
squamous cell carcinoma[38]. Since then BRD4 has been
implicated in multiple myeloma as well as MYC driven
tumors such as AML and neuroblastoma. Importantly
these tumors types were responsive to BRD4 inhibition
by JQ1, a small molecule inhibitor of BRD4. JQ1 binds
to the bromodomain and displaces BRD4 from acetylated
lysines on chromatin[20]. Pursuing the rational that JQ1
would broadly affect other MYC driven tumors we tested
this hypothesis on a panel of medulloblastoma cells. The
JQ1 altered transcriptomic profile of medulloblastoma
cells was heavily enriched for c-MYC-dependent gene
signatures consistent with recent reports in multiple
myeloma and AML [16, 28]. Interestingly a recent
report also demonstrates that JQ1 alters MYCN driven
transcription in neuroblastoma suggesting the potential for
targeting of multiple MYC family members with JQ1[24].
We observed that JQ1 strongly curbed stem cell
associated genomic programs. Our data are consistent
with the concept that a MYC centered transcriptomic
program is critical for embryonic stem cell maintenance
and also accounts for the similarities between embryonic
stem cell and cancer cell transcriptional programs[39].
We confirmed the alterations in stem cell associated
genomic programs by showing that expression and
activity of critical stem cell genes, SOX2 and Nestin,
were attenuated by JQ1. SOX2 is a well-known marker
of highly pluripotent stem cells in the CNS[32]. Nestin is
a marker for Neural stem cells (NSC) and its expression
is lost as NSCs differentiate into lineage-restricted
neuronal and glial progenitors[32]. Recently SOX2 was
also directly implicated in medulloblastoma[40]. Ahlfeld
et al demonstrated that SHH-associated medulloblastoma
could be initiated from SOX2-positive cerebellar granule
cells (CGNP) and ablation of SOX2 in CGNP resulted in
significantly diminished capacity for proliferation[40].
Previous reports have also implicated the role of
Nestin-expressing progenitors in medulloblastoma
initiation[41]. Moreover a recent report demonstrates
that a rare population of Nestin-expressing progenitors
(NEPs) reside in the cerebellum and exhibit decreased
expression of DNA repair genes; upon aberrant activation
of SHH signaling these NEP give rise to medulloblastoma
tumors[42]. Further, multiple reports have demonstrated
that tumor stem cells exist in medulloblastoma and are
associated with resistance to conventional therapy[30,
43, 44]. We showed that JQ1 inhibited medulloblastoma

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tumor cell self-renewal and promoted a differentiation
phenotype. These findings are analogous to the
hematopoietic system where BRD4 inhibition promoted
a macrophage like differentiation of AML cells and
depleted the leukemia stem cell compartment [28, 45].
Together these data suggest that BRD4 inhibition can be
a highly effective strategy to target tumor stem cells in
medulloblastoma and other MYC driven tumors.
In the context of decreased expression of stem cell
markers we found that JQ1 mediated BRD4 inhibition
drives senescence in medulloblastoma cells with a
significant up regulation of cell cycle kinase inhibitors.
These data further highlight the role of MYC in cellular
senescence. Wu et al previously showed that cellular
senescence is a key mechanism of sustained tumor
regression in MYC driven tumors[34]. They demonstrated
that genetic suppression of MYC in MYC-induced
lymphoma resulted in increased senescence associated
acidic β - gal staining and heterochromatin formation[34].
Recently using an inducible c-MYC expression construct
Pei et al demonstrated that c-MYC was required for both
initiation and maintenance of tumors in a murine model of
MYC driven medulloblastoma. [46]. Similarly Swartling
et al demonstrated that MYCN was required for both
initiation and maintenance of medulloblastoma tumors
in an inducible murine model[47]. Together these studies
suggest that chronic inhibition of MYC with low dose
BET domain inhibitors may be the optimal approach to
treating these highly aggressive tumors.
JQ1 suppresses tumor growth of several tumor types
including AML and neuroblastoma in vivo[24, 28]. However
JQ1 is a first generation chemical inhibitor of BRD4 with
an in vivo half-life of only one hour in rodent models[20].
Work is underway to optimize JQ1. In addition several new
BET inhibitors have been described and are under clinical
development[48]. Remarkably our data show that JQ1 can
suppress growth of established medulloblastoma tumors
in mouse xenografts. The next step will be to evaluate
patient derived xenografts in an orthotopic model. Given
that JQ1 has excellent CNS penetration this approach
should be feasible[20]. Moreover it will be interesting
to evaluate BET inhibition in the context of a minimal
residual disease model, which is the most likely clinical
scenario in which such inhibitors will be used. Likewise
it will be important to examine whether BET inhibition
can co-operate with current therapeutic agents to further
increase efficacy of treating medulloblastoma. For example
BET inhibition may radio-sensitize medulloblastoma cells
in light of JQ1 activity at the G1-S cell cycle boundary.
Certainly recent reports implicating BRD4 in DNA damage
signaling that is independent of MYC activity suggests
such a strategy would be feasible[49]. Combining BET
inhibition with HDAC inhibition is another promising
avenue in medulloblastoma. HDAC inhibition is known to
inhibit medulloblastoma cell growth and induce expression

2368

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

of tumor suppressor genes[50, 51]. Targeting both erasers
and readers of acetyl histone modifications could modulate
transcriptional programs to drive medulloblastoma cells
towards a differentiated state.
Of note we identified a six-gene signature that is
associated with adverse prognosis in medulloblastoma
and whose expression is repressed by JQ1. Importantly
this signature identifies a subset of patients with adverse
outcomes in both SHH and Group 3 tumors but not in
Group 4 tumors. These findings highlight the diverse role of
MYC in a sub group context. It is no surprise that Group 3
tumors are associated with this signature given that c-MYC
amplification is a major genetic hallmark of this particular
subtype of medulloblastoma. Interestingly SHH tumors are
known to have increased expression and amplification of
MYCN, which may explain why SHH tumors also enrich
with our 6-gene signature. In addition one or more of the
proteins coded by the six-gene signature could represent a
viable biomarker for identifying medulloblastoma patients
likely to respond to BET domain inhibition.
In summary we establish the concept that MYC
driven medulloblastoma can be targeted with BET domain
inhibition and demonstrate the feasibility of this approach
in vivo. Excitingly, while this work was in preparation
two other reports demonstrated that BRD4 inhibition with
JQ1 can inhibit medulloblastoma cell growth in vitro and
in vivo[25, 26]. Henssen et al showed that JQ1 reduces
cell viability and proliferation and induces apoptosis in
human medulloblastoma cell lines in vitro and in vivo[25].
Bandopadhayay et al also showed that JQ1 reduced cell
proliferation and induced apoptosis in MYC-amplified
medulloblastoma in vitro and prolonged survival in
xenograft models[26]. Our data extend these findings by
demonstrating that BET inhibition targets tumor stem
cells and suppresses a genomic signature associated
with adverse outcomes in medulloblastoma. We are now
pursuing further studies to more clearly understand the role
of BRD4 function in medulloblastoma and the application
of BRD4 inhibition in clinically relevant models.

1.	 Dhall G. Medulloblastoma. J Child Neurol. 2009;
24(11):1418–1430.
2.	 Mulhern RK, Palmer SL, Merchant TE, Wallace D,
Kocak M, Brouwers P, Krull K, Chintagumpala M,
Stargatt R, Ashley DM, Tyc VL, Kun L, Boyett J and
Gajjar A. Neurocognitive consequences of risk-adapted
therapy for childhood medulloblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23(24):5511–5519.
3.	 Thompson MC, Fuller C, Hogg TL, Dalton J,
Finkelstein D, Lau CC, Chintagumpala M, Adesina A,
Ashley DM, Kellie SJ, Taylor MD, Curran T, Gajjar A
and Gilbertson RJ. Genomics identifies medulloblastoma
subgroups that are enriched for specific genetic alterations.
J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24(12):1924–1931.
4.	 Kool M, Koster J, Bunt J, Hasselt NE, Lakeman A, van
Sluis P, Troost D, Meeteren NS, Caron HN, Cloos J,
Mrsic A, Ylstra B, Grajkowska W, Hartmann W, Pietsch T,
Ellison D, et al. Integrated genomics identifies five
medulloblastoma subtypes with distinct genetic profiles,
pathway signatures and clinicopathological features. PloS
one. 2008; 3(8):e3088.
5.	 Cho YJ, Tsherniak A, Tamayo P, Santagata S, Ligon A,
Greulich H, Berhoukim R, Amani V, Goumnerova L,
Eberhart CG, Lau CC, Olson JM, Gilbertson RJ, Gajjar A,
Delattre O, Kool M, et al. Integrative genomic analysis of
medu­lloblastoma identifies a molecular subgroup that drives
poor clinical outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 29(11):1424–1430.
6.	 Northcott PA, Korshunov A, Witt H, Hielscher  T,
Eberhart CG, Mack S, Bouffet E, Clifford SC,
Hawkins CE, French P, Rutka JT, Pfister S and Taylor MD.
Medulloblastoma comprises four distinct molecular
variants. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29(11):1408–1414.
7.	 Northcott PA, Korshunov A, Pfister SM and Taylor MD.
The clinical implications of medulloblastoma subgroups.
Nat Rev Neurol. 2012; 8(6):340–351.
8.	 Kool M, Korshunov A, Remke M, Jones DT,
Schlanstein M, Northcott PA, Cho YJ, Koster J, Schoutenvan Meeteren A, van Vuurden D, Clifford SC, Pietsch T,
von Bueren AO, Rutkowski S, McCabe M, Collins  VP,
et al. Molecular subgroups of medulloblastoma: an
international meta-analysis of transcriptome, genetic
aberrations, and clinical data of WNT, SHH, Group 3, and
Group 4 medulloblastomas. Acta neuropathologica. 2012;
123(4):473–484.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr. J.Bradner for the gift of JQ1 for in vivo
studies. This work was supported by NIH-NINDS grant
K08NS059790 (RV), Childhood Brain Tumor Foundation
(RV), ACS IRG # IRG-57-001-53 (University of Colorado
Cancer Center to RV) and Morgan Adams Foundation
grants (RV and NKF). Imaging experiments were
performed in the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus Advance Light Microscopy Core supported in
part by NIH/NCRR Colorado CTSI Grant Number UL1
RR025780. We thank Eric Prince for assistance with
quantification of mouse tumor immunohistochemistry.

9.	 Ellison DW, Kocak M, Dalton J, Megahed H, Lusher ME,
Ryan SL, Zhao W, Nicholson SL, Taylor RE, Bailey S and
Clifford SC. Definition of disease-risk stratification groups
in childhood medulloblastoma using combined clinical,
pathologic, and molecular variables. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29(11):1400–1407.
10.	 Ryan SL, Schwalbe EC, Cole M, Lu Y, Lusher ME,
Megahed H, O’Toole K, Nicholson SL, Bognar L,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2369

Oncotarget

Garami  M, Hauser P, Korshunov A, Pfister SM,
Williamson D, Taylor RE, Ellison DW, et al. MYC family
amplification and clinical risk-factors interact to predict an
extremely poor prognosis in childhood medulloblastoma.
Acta neuropathologica. 2012; 123(4):501–513.

West N, et al. Selective inhibition of BET bromodomains.
Nature. 2010; 468(7327):1067–1073.
21.	 Chung CW. Small molecule bromodomain inhibitors:
extending the druggable genome. Progress in medicinal
chemistry. 2012; 51:1–55.

11.	 Swartling FJ. Myc proteins in brain tumor development
and maintenance. Upsala journal of medical sciences. 2012;
117(2):122–131.

22.	 Grayson AR, Walsh EM, Cameron MJ, Godec J,
Ashworth  T, Ambrose JM, Aserlind AB, Wang H,
Evan GI, Kluk MJ, Bradner JE, Aster JC and French CA.
MYC, a downstream target of BRD-NUT, is necessary and
sufficient for the blockade of differentiation in NUT midline
carcinoma. Oncogene. 2013.

12.	 Northcott PA, Shih DJ, Peacock J, Garzia L, Morrissy
AS, Zichner T, Stutz AM, Korshunov A, Reimand J,
Schumacher SE, Beroukhim R, Ellison DW, Marshall CR,
Lionel AC, Mack S, Dubuc A, et al. Subgroup-specific
structural variation across 1,000 medulloblastoma genomes.
Nature. 2012; 488(7409):49–56.

23.	 Ott CJ, Kopp N, Bird L, Paranal RM, Qi J, Bowman T,
Rodig SJ, Kung AL, Bradner JE and Weinstock DM. BET
bromodomain inhibition targets both c-Myc and IL7R in
high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2012;
120(14):2843–2852.

13.	 Felsher DW and Bishop JM. Reversible tumorigenesis by
MYC in hematopoietic lineages. Molecular cell. 1999;
4(2):199–207.

24.	 Puissant A, Frumm SM, Alexe G, Bassil CF, Qi J,
Chanthery YH, Nekritz EA, Zeid R, Gustafson WC,
Greninger P, Garnett MJ, McDermott U, Benes CH, Kung
AL, Weiss WA, Bradner JE, et al. Targeting MYCN in
neuroblastoma by BET bromodomain inhibition. Cancer
discovery. 2013; 3(3):308–323.

14.	 Fukazawa T, Maeda Y, Matsuoka J, Yamatsuji T,
Shigemitsu K, Morita I, Faiola F, Durbin ML, Soucek L and
Naomoto Y. Inhibition of Myc effectively targets KRAS
mutation-positive lung cancer expressing high levels of
Myc. Anticancer research. 2010; 30(10):4193–4200.
15.	 Shalaby T, von Bueren AO, Hurlimann ML, Fiaschetti G,
Castelletti D, Masayuki T, Nagasawa K, Arcaro A, Jelesarov I,
Shin-ya K and Grotzer M. Disabling c-Myc in childhood
medulloblastoma and atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor cells
by the potent G-quadruplex interactive agent S2T1-6OTD.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2010; 9(1):167–179.

25.	 Henssen A, Thor T, Odersky A, Heukamp L, El-Hindy N,
Beckers A, Speleman F, Althoff K, Schafers S, Schramm A,
Sure U, Fleischhack G, Eggert A and Schulte JH. BET
bromodomain protein inhibition is a therapeutic option for
medulloblastoma. Oncotarget. 2013; 4(11):2045–2056.
26.	 Bandopadhayay P, Bergthold G, Nguyen B, Schubert S,
Gholamin S, Tang Y, Bolin S, Schumacher SE, Zeid R,
Masoud S, Yu F, Vue N, Gibson WJ, Paolella BR, Mitra SS,
Cheshier SH, et al. BET Bromodomain Inhibition of MYCAmplified Medulloblastoma. Clinical cancer research: an
official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2014; 20(4):912–925.

16.	 Delmore JE, Issa GC, Lemieux ME, Rahl PB, Shi J,
Jacobs HM, Kastritis E, Gilpatrick T, Paranal RM, Qi J,
Chesi  M, Schinzel AC, McKeown MR, Heffernan TP,
Vakoc CR, Bergsagel PL, et al. BET bromodomain
inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target c-Myc. Cell.
2011; 146(6):904–917.
17.	 Mertz JA, Conery AR, Bryant BM, Sandy P,
Balasubramanian S, Mele DA, Bergeron L and Sims RJ,
3rd. Targeting MYC dependence in cancer by inhibiting
BET bromodomains. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2011;
108(40):16669–16674.

27.	 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S,
Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL,
Golub TR, Lander ES and Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment
analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2005; 102(43):15545–15550.

18.	 Wu SY and Chiang CM. The double bromodomaincontaining chromatin adaptor Brd4 and transcriptional
regulation. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2007;
282(18):13141–13145.

28.	 Zuber J, Shi J, Wang E, Rappaport AR, Herrmann H, Sison
EA, Magoon D, Qi J, Blatt K, Wunderlich M, Taylor MJ,
Johns C, Chicas A, Mulloy JC, Kogan SC, Brown P, et al.
RNAi screen identifies Brd4 as a therapeutic target in acute
myeloid leukaemia. Nature. 2011; 478(7370):524–528.

19.	 Chung CW, Coste H, White JH, Mirguet O, Wilde  J,
Gosmini RL, Delves C, Magny SM, Woodward R,
Hughes SA, Boursier EV, Flynn H, Bouillot AM,
Bamborough P, Brusq JM, Gellibert FJ, et al. Discovery
and characterization of small molecule inhibitors of the
BET family bromodomains. Journal of medicinal chemistry.
2011; 54(11):3827–3838.

29.	 Alimova I, Birks DK, Harris PS, Knipstein JA,
Venkataraman S, Marquez VE, Foreman NK and
Vibhakar R. Inhibition of EZH2 suppresses self-renewal
and induces radiation sensitivity in atypical rhabdoid
teratoid tumor cells. Neuro Oncol. 2013; 15(2):149–160.

20.	 Filippakopoulos P, Qi J, Picaud S, Shen Y, Smith WB,
Fedorov O, Morse EM, Keates T, Hickman TT, Felletar I,
Philpott M, Munro S, McKeown MR, Wang Y, Christie AL,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30.	 Manoranjan B, Venugopal C, McFarlane N, Doble BW,
Dunn SE, Scheinemann K and Singh SK. Medulloblastoma
stem cells: where development and cancer cross pathways.

2370

Oncotarget

Pediatric research. 2012; 71(4 Pt 2):516–522.

43.	 Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J,
Hide T, Henkelman RM, Cusimano MD and Dirks PB.
Identification of human brain tumour initiating cells.
Nature. 2004; 432(7015):396–401.

31.	 Huang da W, Sherman BT and Lempicki RA. Systematic
and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID
bioinformatics resources. Nature protocols. 2009; 4(1):44–57.

44.	 Sun L, Moritake T, Zheng YW, Suzuki K, Gerelchuluun A,
Hong Z, Zenkoh J, Taniguchi H and Tsuboi K. In vitro
stemness characterization of radio-resistant clones isolated
from a medulloblastoma cell line ONS-76. J Radiat Res.
2013; 54(1):61–69.

32.	 Swartling FJ, Bolin S, Phillips JJ and Persson AI. Signals
that regulate the oncogenic fate of neural stem cells and
progenitors. Experimental neurology. 2013.
33.	 Wechsler-Reya R and Scott MP. The developmental biology
of brain tumors. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2001; 24:385–428.

45.	 Herrmann H, Blatt K, Shi J, Gleixner KV, Cerny-Reiterer S,
Mullauer L, Vakoc CR, Sperr WR, Horny HP, Bradner JE,
Zuber J and Valent P. Small-molecule inhibition of BRD4
as a new potent approach to eliminate leukemic stemand progenitor cells in acute myeloid leukemia AML.
Oncotarget. 2012; 3(12):1588–1599.

34.	 Wu CH, van Riggelen J, Yetil A, Fan AC, Bachireddy P
and Felsher DW. Cellular senescence is an important
mechanism of tumor regression upon c-Myc inactivation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2007; 104(32):13028–13033.
35.	 Pomeroy SL, Tamayo P, Gaasenbeek M, Sturla LM,
Angelo M, McLaughlin ME, Kim JY, Goumnerova LC,
Black PM, Lau C, Allen JC, Zagzag D, Olson JM,
Curran T, Wetmore C, Biegel JA, et al. Prediction of central
nervous system embryonal tumour outcome based on gene
expression. Nature. 2002; 415(6870):436–442.

46.	 Pei Y, Moore CE, Wang J, Tewari AK, Eroshkin A, Cho YJ,
Witt H, Korshunov A, Read TA, Sun JL, Schmitt  EM,
Miller CR, Buckley AF, McLendon RE, Westbrook TF,
Northcott PA, et al. An animal model of MYC-driven
medulloblastoma. Cancer cell. 2012; 21(2):155–167.
47.	 Swartling FJ, Grimmer MR, Hackett CS, Northcott PA,
Fan QW, Goldenberg DD, Lau J, Masic S, Nguyen K,
Yakovenko S, Zhe XN, Gilmer HC, Collins R, Nagaoka M,
Phillips JJ, Jenkins RB, et al. Pleiotropic role for MYCN
in medulloblastoma. Genes & development. 2010;
24(10):1059–1072.

36.	 Belkina AC and Denis GV. BET domain co-regulators in
obesity, inflammation and cancer. Nature reviews Cancer.
2012; 12(7):465–477.
37.	 Filippakopoulos P, Picaud S, Mangos M, Keates T,
Lambert JP, Barsyte-Lovejoy D, Felletar I, Volkmer R,
Muller S, Pawson T, Gingras AC, Arrowsmith CH and
Knapp S. Histone recognition and large-scale structural
analysis of the human bromodomain family. Cell. 2012;
149(1):214–231.

48.	 Mirguet O, Gosmini R, Toum J, Clement CA, Barnathan M,
Brusq JM, Mordaunt JE, Grimes RM, Crowe M, Pineau O,
Ajakane M, Daugan A, Jeffrey P, Cutler L, Haynes AC,
Smithers NN, et al. Discovery of Epigenetic Regulator
I-BET762: Lead Optimization to Afford a Clinical
Candidate Inhibitor of the BET Bromodomains. Journal of
medicinal chemistry. 2013; 56(19):7501–7515.

38.	 French CA, Ramirez CL, Kolmakova J, Hickman TT,
Cameron MJ, Thyne ME, Kutok JL, Toretsky JA,
Tadavarthy AK, Kees UR, Fletcher JA and Aster JC.
BRD-NUT oncoproteins: a family of closely related
nuclear proteins that block epithelial differentiation and
maintain the growth of carcinoma cells. Oncogene. 2008;
27(15):2237–2242.

49.	 Floyd SR, Pacold ME, Huang Q, Clarke SM, Lam FC,
Cannell IG, Bryson BD, Rameseder J, Lee MJ, Blake EJ,
Fydrych A, Ho R, Greenberger BA, Chen GC, Maffa A,
Del Rosario AM, et al. The bromodomain protein Brd4
insulates chromatin from DNA damage signalling. Nature.
2013; 498(7453):246–250.

39.	 Kim J, Woo AJ, Chu J, Snow JW, Fujiwara Y, Kim CG,
Cantor AB and Orkin SH. A Myc network accounts for
similarities between embryonic stem and cancer cell
transcription programs. Cell. 2010; 143(2):313–324.

50.	 Vibhakar R, Foltz G, Yoon JG, Field L, Lee H, Ryu GY,
Pierson J, Davidson B and Madan A. Dickkopf-1 is an
epigenetically silenced candidate tumor suppressor gene in
medulloblastoma. Neuro Oncol. 2007; 9(2):135–144.

40.	 Ahlfeld J, Favaro R, Pagella P, Kretzschmar HA, Nicolis S
and Schuller U. Sox2 requirement in sonic hedgehogassociated medulloblastoma. Cancer research. 2013;
73(12):3796–3807.

51.	 Wegener D, Deubzer HE, Oehme I, Milde T, Hildmann C,
Schwienhorst A and Witt O. HKI 46F08, a novel potent
histone deacetylase inhibitor, exhibits antitumoral activity
against embryonic childhood cancer cells. Anti-cancer
drugs. 2008; 19(9):849–857.

41.	 Rao G, Pedone CA, Del Valle L, Reiss K, Holland EC and
Fults DW. Sonic hedgehog and insulin-like growth factor
signaling synergize to induce medulloblastoma formation
from nestin-expressing neural progenitors in mice.
Oncogene. 2004; 23(36):6156–6162.
42.	 Li P, Du F, Yuelling LW, Lin T, Muradimova RE,
Tricarico  R, Wang J, Enikolopov G, Bellacosa A,
Wechsler-Reya RJ and Yang ZJ. A population of Nestinexpressing progenitors in the cerebellum exhibits increased
tumorigenicity. Nature neuroscience. 2013.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2371

Oncotarget

