www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 6), pp: 9017-9020
Research Perspective: Autophagy

Metformin: a metabolic modulator
Federico Pietrocola1,2,3,4,5,6 and Guido Kroemer1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8
1

Gustave Roussy Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Villejuif, France

2

INSERM, U1138, Paris, France

3

Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France

4

Université Paris Descartes/Paris V, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France

5

Université Pierre et Marie Curie/Paris VI, Paris, France 

6

Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France

7

Pôle de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France

8

Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

Correspondence to: Guido Kroemer, email: kroemer@orange.fr
Keywords: aging, autophagy, biguanides, caloric restriction, cancer
Received: January 06, 2017	

Accepted: January 12, 2017	

Published: January 22, 2017

ABSTRACT
Recent findings have shed new light on the mechanisms of action through which
biguanides exert their anti-aging and cytostatic effects in Caenorhabditis elegans
and human cell lines. The drop in energy charge resulting from the metformin
mediated inhibition of mitochondrial activity affects the function of the nuclear pore
complex, blocks mTOR signaling and enhances the expression of ACAD10. Whether
the inhibition of this pathway is truly responsible for the anti-diabetic and cancer
effects of the drug in mammals remains to be established.

The old drug class of biguanides represents the gold
standard treatment for type-2 diabetes (T2D). The glucose
lowering and insulin sensitizing effects of these molecules
account for their therapeutic use in the context of metabolic
syndromes. However, the exact mode of action of these
drugs remains largely elusive at the molecular level.[1]
Of note, the growing interest of investigators towards a
full comprehension of the molecular mode of action of
metformin goes far beyond its anti-diabetic functions. In
the recent past, epidemiological and fundamental research
studies have indeed disclosed the therapeutic potential
of biguanides in the prevention and treatment of various
cancer types. [2] The hyperactivation of nutrient signaling
pathways (in particular the insulin/mTORC1 axis)
resulting from overfeeding or genetic aberrations sets the
metabolic grounds for accelerated aging and malignant
transformation.[3] Metformin administration partially
corrects these defects and additionally enhances healthand lifespan in different model organisms, while it reduces
the incidence of cancers in rodent models as well as in
patients.[3]
In their recent work, Wu and colleagues report
that metformin elicits a dose-dependent cytostatic effect
in C. elegans.[4] Through a genetic screening using a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

siRNA library targeting metabolic/bioenergetic genes, the
authors identified proteins involved in the sensitization
or resistance of worms to biguanides. As previously
described, metformin retains a primarily mitochondrial
tropism due to its inhibitory effects towards complex
I. Indeed, genes involved in metformin sensitization
encompassed a mitochondrial complex 1 subunit and the
main subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
that is responsible for the generation of mitochondrial
acetyl coenzyme A (CoA). This latter observation is
in line with the recently published observation that
metformin effectively reduces acetyl CoA biosynthesis
and consequently the acetylation of histone proteins.[5]
Conversely, the knockdown of the mitochondrial betaoxidation regulator ACAD10 conferred the highest degree
of resistance to high-dose metformin treated nematodes.
This enzyme, whose variants have been associated
with human T2D and insulin resistance [6] potentially
represents a hub of key cellular processes, as supported
by the fact that it co-immunoprecipitated with proteins
involved in ribosomal, mitochondrial and cell growth
functions; de facto, knockdown of ACAD10 abolished the
lifespan-extending effect of metformin in C. elegans.[4]
As an additional proof of a direct link between
9017

Oncotarget

the inhibition of mitochondrial function and ACAD10
expression, Soukas’ group demonstrated that silencing
of the mitochondrial respiration component gas-1 or
pharmacological inhibition of mitochondrial complex 1
by rotenone caused an increase in the cytoplasmic levels
of ACAD10 protein. Moreover, a comparable effect was
achieved upon treatment of nematodes with the mTORC1
inhibitor rapamycin but not with the AMPK activator
AICAR. [4] This result, along with the observation that
metformin retained the ability to elevate ACAD10 levels
upon AMPK silencing, corroborated the notion that
AMPK activation, resulting from reduced mitochondrial
ATP production, is dispensable for the lifespan extension
effect of biguanides [7] (Figure 1).
Noteworthy, a forward genetic screening revealed
that missense mutations in the nuclear pore complex
(NPC) components npp-3 and npp-21 (leading to
impaired NPC formation and to abnormal nucleocytosolic shuttling) rendered worms resistant to metformin
and rotenone-induced growth inhibition and ACAD10
downregulation. Conversely, rapamycin still retained
the capacity to elevate ACAD10 levels in these settings.

The ability of metformin and rotenone to limit mTORC1mediated phosphorylation of p70 ribosomal S6 kinase
also relied on an intact NPC. Altogether, these findings
delineate a novel hierarchic pathway in which inhibition
of the mitochondrial function exerted by biguanides is
epistatic to NPC, whereas mTORC1 acts downstream of
NPC to control ACAD10 expression.[4] Demonstrating
the probable evolutionary conservation of this route,
the authors showed that NPC inhibition and ACAD10
upregulation were both required for limiting growth of
human cancer cell lines treated with metformin. Although
this aspect deserves further characterization, Wu et. al.
showed that the reduction in energy charge, rather than
mitohormetic phenomena, represented the causal nexus
between mitochondrial complex I inhibition and NPC
function.[4]
Previous reports have shown that phenformin retains
the ability to reduce passive transport through NPC and
to inhibit mTORC1 in a manner that depends on Rag
GTPase (RAG) heterodimers.[1], [7] Wu and colleagues
hypothesized that phenformin limits mTORC1 activation
by restraining the nucleo-cytosolic transit of RAGs

Figure 1: AMPK-independent mechanisms underlying metformin-induced lifespan extension. A reduction in energy
charge, as consequence of the metformin-mediated inhibition of mitochondrial electron transfer (mETC) leads to the limited shuttling of
RAGA/RAGC complex trough the nuclear pore complex (NPC). The block of mTORC1 signaling unleashes the activity of SKN1/Nrf2,
a transcription factor that stimulates the expression of ACAD10. Alternatively, the reduction in Acetyl CoA levels (correlating with a
reduced activity of acetyltransferases, ATs) may promote a decrease in protein acetylation with consequent upregulation of autophagy and
epigenetic reprogramming of the cell.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9018

Oncotarget

through the NPC. To achieve the full capacity to activate
mTORC1 at the lysosomal surface, the RAG subunit
RAGA (in its GTP binding conformation) needs to form a
heterodimer with a GDP-binding RAGC.[8] The authors
revealed that the formation of a transient inactive RAGAGDP/RAGC-GTP heterodimer is required for the passive
translocation of RAGC through the NPC. Once in the
nucleus, RAGC acquired its GDP-binding state through
interaction with folliculin, a previously identified protein
with GTPase activating protein (GAP) activity towards
RAGC. Importantly, pretreatment with phenformin (or
expression of a 3xGFP-RAGC fusion protein that cannot
translocate through the NPC due to its elevated molecular
size) prevented nucleo-cytosolic shuttling and led to
mTORC1 inhibition and ACAD10 expression. [4]
According to a prior report, the transcription
factor Skn-1/Nrf-2, which regulates the transcription of
antioxidants/cytoprotective genes and is repressed by
mTORC1, is indispensable for the metformin-mediated
increase in lifespan observed in C. elegans.[9] Soukas’
group now provides evidence that ACAD10 expression
triggered by metformin was partially reduced upon Skn-1
silencing, explaining a possible role of this factor in the
pro-health effects of metformin. [4]
The unexpected link between the bioenergetic
crisis elicited by metformin-mediated inhibition of
mitochondrial activity and reduced nucleo-cytosolic
shuttling of cellular proteins opens exciting perspectives
on the mode of action of biguanides. It appears indeed
plausible that metformin leads to an overall, rather than
selective, reduction in the transit of proteins through
NPCs. The identification of proteins whose subcellular
localization is affected by metformin may lead to the
characterization of new therapeutic targets acting in the
pathway elicited by biguanides. Similarly, screening
of molecules able to mimic the ability of biguanides to
restrain passive shuttling through the NPC may prompt
the identification of new drugs with antidiabetic and
antineoplastic properties.
The direct consequence of mTORC1 inhibition is
the activation of cytoprotective autophagy, an event that
is sufficient to extend longevity in C. elegans and other
model organisms. [10],[11] Caloric restriction or treatment
with agents mimicking molecular features of dietary
restriction, so called ‘caloric restriction mimetics’ (CRMs)
prolongs lifespan of various model organisms depending
on autophagy activation.[11] The finding that metformin
reduced mitochondrial acetyl CoA production suggest that
this molecule acts as a CRM, knowing hat the unifying
principle of CRMs is that they reduce protein acetylation.
[11] However, it remains to be established whether the
mode of action of metformin (and that of its direct target
ACAD10) depends on the induction of bulk autophagy or
rather specific autophagic pathways such as mitophagy.
Whether the mTORC1/ACAD10 axis represents the
primary target of metformin in vivo remains to be explored.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In this context, the identification of confounding non-cell
autonomous effects is of cardinal importance to achieve a
full comprehension of the mode of action of biguanides.
As an example, the anti-aging role of metformin has
previously been correlated with modifications of the
composition of the gut microbiota.[12] Moreover, the
recent literature suggests that the anticancer properties
of metformin rely on the activation of immune system
and the extinction of protumorigenic inflammation.[13]
Hence, it will be important to establish the molecular links
between the cell-autonomous and organism-wide effects
of biguanides.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No author has any conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	

Barzilai N, Crandall JP, Kritchevsky SB and Espeland MA.
Metformin as a Tool to Target Aging. Cell Metab. 2016;
23(6):1060-1065.

2.	 Pryor R and Cabreiro F. Repurposing metformin: an old
drug with new tricks in its binding pockets. Biochem J.
2015; 471(3):307-322.
3.	

Lopez-Otin C, Galluzzi L, Freije JM, Madeo F and Kroemer
G. Metabolic Control of Longevity. Cell. 2016; 166(4):802821.

4.	

Wu L, Zhou B, Oshiro-Rapley N, Li M, Paulo JA, Webster
CM, Mou F, Kacergis MC, Talkowski ME, Carr CE,
Gygi SP, Zheng B and Soukas AA. An Ancient, Unified
Mechanism for Metformin Growth Inhibition in C. elegans
and Cancer. Cell. 2016; 167(7):1705-1718 e1713.

5.	 Cuyas E, Fernandez-Arroyo S, Joven J and Menendez
JA. Metformin targets histone acetylation in cancer-prone
epithelial cells. Cell Cycle. 2016:1-7.
6.	 Bian L, Hanson RL, Muller YL, Ma L, Investigators M,
Kobes S, Knowler WC, Bogardus C and Baier LJ. Variants
in ACAD10 are associated with type 2 diabetes, insulin
resistance and lipid oxidation in Pima Indians. Diabetologia.
2010; 53(7):1349-1353.
7.	

Kalender A, Selvaraj A, Kim SY, Gulati P, Brule S, Viollet
B, Kemp BE, Bardeesy N, Dennis P, Schlager JJ, Marette
A, Kozma SC and Thomas G. Metformin, independent
of AMPK, inhibits mTORC1 in a rag GTPase-dependent
manner. Cell Metab. 2010; 11(5):390-401.

8.	 Shimobayashi M and Hall MN. Making new contacts: the
mTOR network in metabolism and signalling crosstalk. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 15(3):155-162.
9.	 Robida-Stubbs S, Glover-Cutter K, Lamming DW,
Mizunuma M, Narasimhan SD, Neumann-Haefelin E,
Sabatini DM and Blackwell TK. TOR signaling and
rapamycin influence longevity by regulating SKN-1/Nrf
and DAF-16/FoxO. Cell Metab. 2012; 15(5):713-724.

9019

Oncotarget

10.	 Melendez A, Talloczy Z, Seaman M, Eskelinen EL, Hall
DH and Levine B. Autophagy genes are essential for dauer
development and life-span extension in C. elegans. Science.
2003; 301(5638):1387-1391.

13.	 Eikawa S, Nishida M, Mizukami S, Yamazaki C, Nakayama
E and Udono H. Immune-mediated antitumor effect by type
2 diabetes drug, metformin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2015; 112(6):1809-1814.

11.	 Madeo F, Pietrocola F, Eisenberg T and Kroemer G. Caloric
restriction mimetics: towards a molecular definition. Nat
Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13(10):727-740.
12.	 Cabreiro F, Au C, Leung KY, Vergara-Irigaray N, Cocheme
HM, Noori T, Weinkove D, Schuster E, Greene ND and
Gems D. Metformin retards aging in C. elegans by altering
microbial folate and methionine metabolism. Cell. 2013;
153(1):228-239.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9020

Oncotarget

