Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Multiple direct and indirect mechanisms drive estrogen-induced
tumor growth in high grade serous ovarian cancers
Alessandra Ciucci1, Gian Franco Zannoni2, Marianna Buttarelli1, Lucia Lisi3, Daniele
Travaglia1, Enrica Martinelli1, Giovanni Scambia1, Daniela Gallo1
1

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of The Sacred Heart, 00168 Rome, Italy

2

Department of Histopathology, Catholic University of The Sacred Heart, 00168 Rome, Italy

3

Institute of Pharmacology, Catholic University of The Sacred Heart, 00168 Rome, Italy

Correspondence to: Daniela Gallo, e-mail: daniela.gallo@unicatt.it
Keywords: ER, estradiol, ovary, tumor-associated macrophages, tumor microenvironment
Received: October 30, 2015      Accepted: January 10, 2016      Published: January 18, 2016

ABSTRACT
The notion that menopausal estrogen replacement therapy increases ovarian
cancer risk, but only for the two more common types (i.e. serous and endometrioid),
while possibly decreasing risk for clear cell tumors, is strongly suggestive of causality.
However, whether estradiol (E2) is tumorigenic or promotes development of occult
preexisting disease is unknown. The present study investigated molecular and
cellular mechanisms by which E2 modulates the growth of high grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSOC). Results showed that ERα expression was necessary and sufficient to
induce the growth of HGSOC cells in in vitro models. Conversely, in vivo experimental
studies demonstrated that increasing the levels of circulating estrogens resulted in a
significant growth acceleration of ERα-negative HGSOC xenografts, as well. Tumors
from E2-treated mice had significantly higher proliferation rate, angiogenesis, and
density of tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) compared to ovariectomized females.
Accordingly, immunohistochemical analysis of ERα-negative tissue specimens from
HGSOC patients showed a significantly greater TAM infiltration in premenopausal
compared to postmenopausal women. This study describes novel insights into the
impact of E2 on tumor microenvironment, independently of its direct effect on tumor
cell growth, thus supporting the idea that multiple direct and indirect mechanisms
drive estrogen-induced tumor growth in HGSOC.

surface epithelium (OSE) or the fallopian tube surface
epithelium [3]. Debulking surgery and platinum-based
chemotherapy is the standard treatment for HGSOCs and
75% of the women may not have any evidence of disease
at the end of this treatment. However, most tumors will
relapse within 18 to 28 months and only 20% to 40% of
all women will survive beyond five years [4]. Innovative
and more effective treatment strategies are thus required
to improve quality and duration of life for women with
this disease.
In this context, there are preclinical and clinical
evidences increasingly supporting a role of estrogenregulated pathways in the etiology and progression of
ovarian cancer [5], although comprehensive mechanistic
studies are lacking. Noteworthy, estrogen signaling appears
to operate differently in the distinct ovarian malignancy
subgroups, due to their intrinsic heterogeneity. Indeed,

INTRODUCTION
Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecologic
malignancy, with more than 140,000 women dying
from this cancer across the world in 2008 [1]. Over 90%
of ovarian malignancies are categorized as epithelial
ovarian cancers, and currently five main types are
identified: high-grade serous carcinoma (70%), lowgrade serous carcinoma (<5%), mucinous carcinoma
(3%), endometrioid carcinoma (10%), and clear-cell
carcinoma (10%). These types are essentially distinct
diseases, as indicated by differences in epidemiological
and genetic risk factors, precursor lesions, patterns of
spread, molecular events during oncogenesis, response to
chemotherapy, and prognosis [2]. The most common and
lethal of all ovarian cancer subtypes are the high grade
serous carcinomas (HGSOCs), arising within the ovarian
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8155

Oncotarget

RESULTS

a very recent meta-analysis of 52 epidemiological studies
demonstrated an increased ovarian cancer risk in hormonetherapy users, but only for the two more common types
(i.e. serous and endometrioid), while risk was possibly
decreased for clear cell tumors [6]. On the other hand, in
premenopausal years, the use of oral contraceptives has
been reported to decrease serous, endometrioid and clear
cell, but not mucinous tumors [7]. The reasons for these
findings are unclear, but these data are overall strongly
suggestive of causality.
It is known that biological actions of estrogens
are largely mediated by two distinct estrogen receptor
isoforms, namely ERα and ERβ, members of the nuclear
steroid receptor (NR) superfamily [8]. More recent studies
have revealed that estrogens also mediate rapid signaling
events traditionally associated with G protein-coupled
receptors, and the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor
GPER (formerly GPR30) has now become recognized as a
mediator of estrogen’s rapid cellular effects throughout the
body [9]. In the normal ovary, the levels of ERβ are high
and predominate over ERα, being ERβ1, -β2, and -β5 the
most represented isoforms [10,11], whereas an opposite
pattern characterizes the development of ovarian cancer
[8]. Besides, ERβ and its isoforms may have different
roles and be associated with distinct prognosis depending
on their cellular localization. Indeed, we recently showed
that in advanced HGSOC, high cytoplasmic ERβ2
expression may define patients with aggressive biology
and possibly resistant to chemotherapy, providing also in
vivo mechanistic evidence for an anti-apoptotic function
of mitochondrial ERβ2 [12, 13]. Finally, normal ovaries
also express GPER [14] while in ovarian cancer protein
overexpression predicts poor survival [15, 16].
Preclinical studies have indicated a promoting effect
of estrogens on ovarian cancer growth in cell cultures
and in vivo models, this effect being reported as mainly
mediated by ERα and GPER. Ligand-activated ERα
induces expression of genes involved in cell survival and
proliferation, while GPER-mediated proliferative effects
mostly involve the activation of growth factor receptor
transduction pathway; conversely, the function of ERβ1
has been found to be anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
[5, 8, 9, 17].
Despite all these clinical and experimental data
showing the importance of estrogens in the development
and progression of ovarian cancer, many questions still
remain and, among these, the contribution of 17β-estradiol
signaling through ERα, ERβ isoforms and GPER is likely
to be really complex and specific to particular cell types,
tissues, ligands and diseases, thus deserving additional
studies. The present study aimed at evaluating the impact
of 17β-estradiol on HGSOC, providing novel insights
into its functional role in promoting the growth of ERαnegative and ERα-positive cancers by induction of
dynamic changes in the composition and function of the
surrounding and supportive stroma.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Expression of steroid hormone receptors
in a panel of HGSOC cell lines
To the aim of the study, we selected 4 different
ovarian cancer cell lines among those indicated as really
representative of HGSOC lesions [18, 19] and evaluated
the expression of hormone receptors by RT-PCR and WB
analyses (Figure 1). MCF-7 cells were used as positive
control.
Results obtained showed ERα mRNA expression
in PEO1, and, at a very low levels, in NIH:OVCAR-3,
whereas COV318 and HEY cells were negative. On the
other hand, all cell lines were shown to express the three
ERβ transcript variants tested (i.e. ERβ1, ERβ2 and ERβ5),
and GPER as well (low levels). Progesterone receptor
mRNA was detected only in PEO1 and, to a lesser extent,
in COV318, while AR transcripts were shown in PEO1
and NIH:OVCAR-3 cells only. There was a concordance
between gene and protein expression for GPER and for the
three ERβ isoforms, these latter identified with the ERβ
H150 antibody, as previously reported [20]. Conversely,
ERα protein was detected only in PEO1, and PR was
undetectable in all ovarian cancer cell lines (Figure 1).
Finally, the androgen receptor protein was found in
all but HEY cells. In keeping with previous literature
[21–24], we found a lack of ERα and PR expression in
NIH:OVCAR-3, although other authors described this cell
line as steroid hormone-receptor positive [25–27], this
raising the possibility that different clones may have been
selected over time in different laboratories.
Overall these findings while reinforcing the
concept that mRNA levels cannot be used as surrogates
for corresponding protein levels without verification,
mostly important show that the hormone receptors status
varies among the different cell lines, thus reflecting the
considerable heterogeneity observed in clinical HGSOC
specimens [12, 28].

Regulation of HGSOC cell growth by selective
ligands
To enable us to relate ER status to estrogen
responsiveness, proliferation of HGSOC cells was
evaluated 120 hours following treatment with E2, selective
ERs/GPER agonists (i.e. PPT, DPN or G1) or, when
relevant, with the ER antagonist ICI 182,780. MCF-7 cells
were used as positive control.
None of the cell lines examined showed to be
estrogen-dependent for growth in vitro. However, while
PEO1 demonstrated estrogen-sensitivity (Figure 2A),
proliferation of NIH:OVCAR-3, COV318 and HEY
was not modulated by either the endogenous or the
selective synthetic ligands (Figure 2B). Specifically,
Figure 2A shows that the ERα-positive PEO1 cell line was
8156

Oncotarget

significantly growth-stimulated by E2 and PPT relative to a
control sample, cell proliferation being accompanied by an
increase in cyclin D1 and E levels, as shown by Western
blot analysis (Figure 2A). As expected, this E2-induced
stimulation of cell growth was competitively blocked by

ICI 182,780, which was also able to reverse the growth
stimulatory effect induced by the selective ERα-agonist,
PPT. The increased growth observed at 100 nM DPN was
considered to be compatible with the ERα-transactivation
when high dose of this ERβ-selective agonists are used

Figure 1: Expression of steroid hormone receptors in high grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOC) cell lines. PEO1,

NIH:OVCAR-3, COV318, and HEY cells were grown in complete culture medium and MCF-7 cells were used as positive control. A. The
relative mRNA expression of hormone receptors was evaluated by RT-PCR, utilizing a specific sets of primers (see Table I). All samples
were normalized to the housekeeping gene, GAPDH. The results are presented as fold change for each mRNA in HGSOC cell lines
compared to MCF-7 cells. B. Representative Western blot of hormone receptors expressions. Protein levels were determined by subjecting
60 μg of protein extract to SDS-gel electrophoresis, followed by Western blotting using specific antibodies. β-actin was used as a control
of equal sample loading.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8157

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effects of E2, the ERα-selective agonist PPT, the ERβ-selective agonist DPN, and the GPER-selective
agonist G1 on the growth of HGSOC cell lines (PEO1, HEY, COV318 and NIH:OVCAR-3). Cells were treated with

various concentrations of substances in phenol-red free medium supplemented with charcoal stripped FBS. Concentrations are expressed in
nanomolar. Control cells received the same amount of diluent. The medium was renewed after 48 hours. At 120 hours of incubation viable
cells were counted using Nucleocounter. All results are expressed as the mean ± SEM derived from at least three different experiments.
A. In PEO1 cells growth was modulated by E2 or selective agonist treatment, an effect reverted by the ER antagonist ICI 182,780 (10 and
100 nM) (*P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001). To confirm the E2-induced modulation of cell proliferation, cyclin D1 and cyclin E was
evaluated by western blot analysis after 120 hours treatment. Quantitated protein levels were normalized to β-actin (*P<0.05, **P<0.01).
B. The proliferation of NIH:OVCAR-3, COV318 and HEY was not modulated by either the endogenous or the selective synthetic ligands.
MCF-7 cells were used as positive control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8158

Oncotarget

[29], and was again reversed by ICI 182,780 (Figure 2A).
MCF-7 cells used as positive control gave results
consistent with literature data (Figure 2B) [30, 31].
Overall, these results indicate that ERα expression
is necessary and sufficient to induce the E2-stimulated
growth of HGSOC cells in in vitro models, while E2
treatment of ERα-negative cell lines determine a lack of
effect on cell proliferation.

ovariectomy and E2 replacement were successful. As shown
in Figure 4A, tumor histology was consistent with that of
poorly differentiated HGSOC. Noteworthy E2-treatment
increased HEY tumor growth rate in vivo, resulting in a
significant survival disadvantage compared to Ovx control
mice (P<0.05). Overall, the pattern of ERs expression was
similar to that observed in the NIH:OVCAR-3 study, with
the exception of an increase in nuclear ERβ2 levels shown
by E2-treated mice compared to Ovx control. (P<0.05)
(Figure 4B). GPER expression did not differ between
study groups (data not shown). Consistently with the
NIH:OVCAR-3 model, proliferation rate was increased in
Ovx+E2 females, although this difference did not achieve
statistical significance (Figure 4C).

In vivo-Effect of E2 treatment on ovarian
cancer growth
In vivo experiments using the NIH:OVCAR-3
and the HEY ovarian cancer models were carried out
to assess the role of estrogens on in vivo ovarian cancer
growth. Female mice were ovariectomized at 6 weeks
of age and divided into two different groups, i.e. Ovx
and Ovx+E2. Treatment with 17β-estradiol started one
week after ovariectomy and three days after, xenografts
were established by injecting either NIH:OVCAR-3 (s.c.
implantation) or HEY (i.p. implantation) cells into both
Ovx and E2-treated females.

Mechanistic studies
Overall, in vivo studies showed that increasing the
levels of circulating estrogens resulted in an accelerated
growth of ERα-negative HGSOC cells in nude mice.
The lack of consistency between in vitro and in vivo data
prompted us to investigate whether estrogens, besides
a direct role in tumor proliferation, could promote the
development and progression of ERα-negative tumors
by changing the composition and nature of the tumor
microenvironment. To this end, we assessed microvessel
density in xenografts using antibody against CD31, a
specific and sensitive endothelial marker for formalinfixed paraffin-embedded tissues [32]. Notably, results
demonstrated that estrogens indeed induced tumor
angiogenesis in both experimental models, promoting
a dense network of vessels with multiple branching
(Figure 5A). Specifically, in NIH:OVCAR-3 xenografts,
intratumoral MVD values of 7.2 ± 0.5 vs 2.9 ± 0.4 were
detected in E2-treated and Ovx females, respectively
(P< 0.001). Correspondingly, in HEY tumors values of 18.3
± 1.1 and 6.5 ± 1.7 vessels/HPF were found in E2- treated
and Ovx groups, respectively (P<0.001).
An extensive body of research has implicated
estrogens in promoting angiogenesis, but few recent
studies provide proof-of-concept data for a role of E2
in cancer pathogenesis by increasing the mobilization
and recruitment of a proangiogenic population of bone
marrow-derived cells (BMDCs). This results in enhanced
macrophages that home to the tumor and initiate
vasculogenesis and angiogenesis [33]. Macrophages
constitute an extremely heterogeneous population
which differentiate into distinct types, schematically
identified as M1 (or classically activated) and M2 (or
alternatively activated) [34]. “Classically activated” M1
macrophages contribute to tumor rejection through type
1 cytokine production and antigen presentation, whereas
“alternatively activated” M2 macrophages enhance
angiogenesis and remodeling, through type 2 cytokine
production. It is now generally accepted that tumorassociated macrophages (TAM) most closely resemble

NIH:OVCAR-3 study
Ovx females had significantly lower relative uterus
weight (0.7±0.04 mg/g body weight) than E2-treated group
(6.1±0.2 mg/g body weight, p<0.001), this confirming
that ovariectomy and E2 replacement were successful.
As shown in Figure 3A, E2-treated mice showed
significantly increased tumor growth rates than Ovx
(P<0.01), histology of NIH:OVCAR-3 xenografts being
consistent with that of poorly differentiated HGSOC. To
shed light on the mechanisms for a potential influence of
estrogens on in vivo growth of HGSOC cells we examined
by immunohistochemical analysis hormone receptor
expression profile in tumors from both groups. In line with
WB results on cellular extracts, we found no detectable
ERα and PR in epithelial malignant cells from both groups
(data not shown), whereas revealing ERα staining in
stromal cells. Expression of ERβ1 and ERβ5 was mainly
nuclear, while ERβ2 staining was also observed in the
cytoplasmic compartment, with no differences between
Ovx and Ovx+E2 mice (Figure 3B). Likewise, GPER
protein levels did not change following E2 treatment (data
not shown). Finally, immunohistochemical assessment of
proliferation rate showed that Ki67 positive cells were
significantly higher in Ovx+E2 females (35 ± 11%) than
in Ovx controls (6.5 ± 0.3%) (P<0.01, mean ± SEM,
Figure 3C).

HEY study
Ovx had significantly lower relative uterus weight
(0.5±0.1 mg/g body weight) than E2-treated group
(5.0±0.7 mg/g body weight, p<0.001), this confirming that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8159

Oncotarget

M2-polarized cells, creating an immunosuppressive
microenvironment and finally promoting tumor
invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis [34]. On the
basis of these findings we used two murine monocyte/
macrophages markers, CD11b (total macrophage
density), and Arginase I (M2-polarized macrophages)

[35–37] to clarify the possible relationship between
estrogen exposure and M2 polarization in mice-derived
xenografts. Notably, in the HEY model, we observed
a significant increase in intratumoral TAM density
expressed as Arg1/CD11b ratio in estrogen-treated
females compared to untreated Ovx (P<0.01, Figure 5B).

Figure 3: Effect of E2 on in vivo growth of NIH:OVCAR-3 in female BALB/c nude mice. A. E2 stimulated the s.c. growth

of NIH:OVCAR-3 compared to Ovx females (**P<0.01, n=8 mice/group). Histological features of the tumor (magnification 40x).
B. Immunohistochemical analysis did not show any treatment-related difference in expression of the three ERβ isoforms (n=8 tumors/
group). Nuc, nuclear and Cyt, cytoplasmic expression. C. Tumors in E2-treated females were characterized by a higher proliferative index
(**P<0.01, n=8 tumors/group). Representative images for Ki67 immunostaining of tumors from Ovx and Ovx+E2 mice (magnification 40x).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8160

Oncotarget

Human studies

TAM accumulation was mostly observed in hypoxic/
necrotic areas in tumors (Figure 5B). Similar data were
obtained in the NIH:OVCAR-3 model (data not shown).
Overall, our results suggest a role for endogenous
estrogens in mediating recruitment and/or activation of
macrophages at the tumor site.

To add translational value to our preclinical studies
suggesting a role for estrogens in inducing monocyte/
macrophage recruitment and polarization in HGSOC, we
assessed expression of CD68 and CD163 in surgically

Figure 4: Effect of E2 on in vivo growth of HEY cells in female BALB/c nude mice. A. E2 stimulated the i.p. growth of HEY
compared to Ovx females (*P<0.05, n=8 mice/group). Histological features of the tumor (magnification 40x). B. Immunohistochemical
analysis did not show any treatment-related difference in ERβ1 and ERβ5 expression, while nuclear ERβ2 was increased in E2-treated mice
(*P<0.05, n=8 tumors/group). Representative images for ERβ2 immunostaining from Ovx and Ovx+E2 tumors (magnification 40x). Nuc,
nuclear and Cyt, cytoplasmic expression. C. Immunostaining for Ki67 was higher in tumors of E2-treated than Ovx females, although this
difference was not statistically significant (n=8 tumors/group); representative stained section of tumors from Ovx and Ovx+E2 mice are
shown (magnification 40x).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8161

Oncotarget

collected human HGSOC specimens. Indeed, CD68 and
CD163 are both used to identify macrophages in tissue
section, but while CD68 is commonly used as a panmacrophage marker, CD163 is regarded as a highly
specific marker for M2-polarized macrophages in several
human tumors, including ovarian cancer [37–44]. To
the aim of the study, cases were stratified according to
menopausal status (pre- vs post-menopausal), and to the
absence or presence of the ERα protein in the epithelial
tumor compartment (ERα-negative vs ERα-positive).
Immunohistochemical data on ERα status of these
tumors were available from a previous study [28].
Tumors were dichotomized as ERα negative for a score
below or equal to 2, and as positive for a score higher

than 2  (see  Materials and Methods section for scoring
system), as previously reported [28, 45]. Eighteen patients
were premenopausal (median age 45, range 33-54) and
30 postmenopausal (median age 65, range 51-81). There
were 8 ERα-negative and 10 ERα-positive tumors in
premenopausal, and 5 ERα-negative and 25 ERα-positive
tumors in postmenopausal cases, respectively.
As shown in Figure 6A, and in line with our
preclinical findings and previous literature data, CD163positive cells were mainly located in hypoxic/necrotic areas
in tumors, a feature that has itself been linked to tumor
aggressiveness [46]. Results showed that in the subgroup
of ERα-negative tumors, a significantly higher TAM
infiltration (expressed as CD163/CD68 ratio) was found

Figure 5: Effect of E2 on tumor angiogenesis and intratumoral TAM densities in in vivo preclinical models of
ovarian cancer. A. Immunohistochemical analysis showed in both experimental models a significant higher MVD (Microvessel Density)
in E2-treated (***P<0.001, n=8 tumors/group) compared to Ovx females. Representative images for CD31 immunostaining of tumors
from Ovx and Ovx+E2 mice (magnification 40x). B. Representative pictures for immunohistochemical staining of Arginase I-positive
macrophages (Arg1) in HEY xenograft from E2-treated mice. Magnification 20x and 40x. Results obtained showed a significant increase of
the ratio Arg1/CD11b in E2-treated compared to untreated Ovx mice (**P<0.01, n=8 tumors/group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8162

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Densities of tumor associated macrophages (TAM) in 48 HGSOC tissue specimens. A. Representative pictures

for immunohistochemical staining of CD163+ macrophages in clinical samples of HGSOC. Magnification 20x and 40x. When considering
only ERα-negative tumors, premenopausal patients showed a significant higher CD163/CD68 ratio compared to postmenopausal ones
(*P<0.05; n=8 for pre-and n=5 for post-menopausal women). Notably, the highest levels of TAM infiltration were found in ERαpositive tumors irrespective of menopausal status (n=10 for pre-and n=25 for post-menopausal women). ***P<0.001. B. Pictures
showing immunolocalization of ERα and ERβ in intratumoral macrophages (indicated by arrows) in HGSOG specimens. Sections were
immunostained with the combination of anti-CD68 and anti-ERα/ERβtot antibodies. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Intratumoral
macrophages were identified by green fluorescence of the monocyte/macrophage marker CD68. Superimposed images demonstrated a
nuclear localization of ERα (red fluorescence) (pink coloration in Merge panel), while ERβ (red fluorescence) displayed mainly cytoplasmic
expression in macrophages (yellow coloration in Merge panel). C. Representative pictures for immunostaining of monocytes isolated from
human peripheral blood. Circulating monocytes, as confirmed by CD68 expression, showed a positive staining for ERα and ERβ.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8163

Oncotarget

in premenopausal compared to postmenopausal patients
(P<0.05, Figure 6A), this implying that systemic effects of
estrogens impact the tumor microenvironment, increasing
the population of locally activated macrophages. Notably,
however, data from clinical samples also showed that
ERα-positive tumors had the highest levels of intratumoral
TAM density, irrespective of menopausal status, statistical
analysis showing that the difference in the CD163/CD68
ratio between ERα-negative and ERα-positive specimens
achieved significance in postmenopausal patients only
(P<0.01, Figure 6A).
We then used immunofluorescence to evaluate the
expression of ERα and ERβ in human TAMs. As shown
in Figure 6B, analysis indeed demonstrated that ERα or
ERβ positive macrophages can be detected in clinical
samples of HGSOC. However, the limited number of
ERs+ macrophages observed in tumor specimens prompted
us to investigate whether human circulating monocytes
constitute a key target of systemic estrogens that, via
their receptors, can recruit bone marrow-derived cells to
the tumor site. To this end, monocytes were isolated from
human peripheral blood and subsequently stained for ERα
and ERβ expression, results showing that the majority of
circulating CD68+ monocytes indeed expressed both ERs
at similar levels (Figure 6C).

ERα expression, b) showed no differences between
experimental groups in either ERβ1, ERβ5 and GPER
protein level, and c) revealed an increased nuclear ERβ2
expression in E2-treated females (in the HEY model
only). This latter finding, along with our preliminary
data on A2780 tumors [12], supports the hypothesis that
estrogens may actually affect both levels and subcellular
distribution of ERβ2, that in turn appear to be associated
with cell survival and/or estrogen-response. In line with
this theory, emerging evidence suggests an oncogenic
role for ERβ2, in contrast to the tumor suppressive effects
of ERβ1 [13, 48, 49]. Despite of this, the discordance
between in vitro and in vivo E2 effects on cell proliferation
essentially indicates that circulating estrogens promote
the outgrowth of ERα-negative cancers by influencing
host cell types distinct from the epithelial ovarian cancer
cells. Since the induction of angiogenesis is a crucial
phase in the growth and progression of most solid
tumors we were then prompted to assess the microvessel
density (MVD) in xenografts using CD31, results indeed
showing a significantly higher intratumoral MVD in E2treated compared to Ovx females. Notably, in the last
years there have been suggestions about the association
between macrophages and tumors, with studies providing
proof that tumor-associated macrophages can indeed
promote angiogenesis (and tumor growth) through
multiple mechanisms [50–52]. We therefore studied the
density and distribution of macrophages in mice-derived
xenografts, showing that a rise in estrogen circulating
levels was associated with increased alternatively
activated macrophages (M2-like) density, and their
accumulation in hypoxic/necrotic areas in tumors.
Notably, previous studies have demonstrated that that
murine monocytes/macrophages express both ERs, with
ERα being greater than ERβ [33, 53]. To the best of our
knowledge, our data firstly demonstrate a central role
of estrogens on the growth and dissemination of ERαnegative ovarian cancer, by increasing the population
of locally activated macrophages at the tumor site, thus
ultimately fostering a microenvironment that drives tumor
progression. Our results are in line with recent data on
breast cancer, providing evidences for a role of estrogens
in promoting ER-negative tumor formation by influencing
the mobilization and recruitment of a pro-angiogenic
population of bone marrow-derived cells; a functional
ERα in the BMDCs has been deemed necessary for this
effect [33, 54].
To validate our preclinical results in a clinical setting,
we assessed local macrophage polarization state in a series
of HGSOC specimens stratified according to menopausal
status and ERα expression in the epithelial compartment of
tumor. Noteworthy, in keeping with preclinical data, in the
subgroup of ERα-negative tumors, a significantly higher
TAM infiltration was found in premenopausal compared
to postmenopausal patients, this confirming a role of
systemic estrogens in altering tumor microenvironment,

DISCUSSION
Here we report novel findings on the role of estrogen
signaling in the pathogenesis of HGSOC, demonstrating
that E2 may stimulate tumor growth throughout multiple
direct and indirect mechanisms. Indeed, although the role
of estrogens in the progression of ovarian cancer has been
classically related only to their mitogenic effects on ERαexpressing tumor cells [8, 47], we here demonstrated that
additional, tumor-promoting activity could involve host
tissue, thus ultimately inducing the growth acceleration of
ERα-negative ovarian cancer, as well.
In line with the recognized proliferative role of
ERα in ovarian cancer [8], our in vitro results actually
confirmed that ERα expression is necessary and sufficient
to induce the growth of HGSOC cells following estrogen
treatment, since only the ERα-positive PEO1 cell line was
growth-stimulated by E2 and PPT. On the other hand, no
changes occurred in the ERα-negative NIH:OVCAR-3,
COV318 and HEY cell lines after dosing with E2 or
selective synthetic ligands, this showing that the activation
of ERβ- or GPER-mediated signaling pathways does not
elicit any significant changes in HGSOC cell growth.
Unexpectedly, in vivo studies demonstrated that
increasing the levels of circulating estrogens resulted in
an accelerated growth of ERα-negative ovarian cancer,
as well. The analysis of estrogen receptor profile in
xenografts a) confirmed the lack of ERα expression in
the epithelial tumor component, thus indicating that
tumor formation in vivo was not the results of acquired
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8164

Oncotarget

independently of their direct effect on tumor cell growth.
Moreover, recent work has begun to characterize
expression and role of ERα and ERβ proteins in human
monocytes and macrophages demonstrating that ERα is
predominantly expressed in human macrophages [55],
and that this receptor is mainly involved in macrophage
polarization from a range of sources to an alternative
phenotype [53]. Our immunofluorescent analysis on
clinical specimens of HGSOCs confirmed the presence
of both ERs in TAMs, although only in a limited number,
the majority of them being negative for both proteins. On
the other hand, we found a relevant expression of ERα
and ERβ in circulating monocytes, which indeed could
represent a target population for circulating estrogens,
as suggested by previous studies [33, 54]. Besides, a role
of systemic estrogens in controlling the macrophagepolarizing signaling has been recently reported by Toniolo
[56] showing that M2-associated stimuli and activation is
markedly impaired in macrophages from postmenopausal
compared to premenopausal women.
Data from clinical samples also showed that ERαpositive tumors had the highest levels of intratumoral TAM
density, irrespective of menopausal status, thus adding
another layer of complexity to an already complicated
picture. While only slight changes were observed between
ERα-negative and ERα-positive tumors in premenopausal
patients (possibly due to a prevailing effect of circulating
estrogens on monocyte recruitment), in postmenopausal
patients the difference in TAM infiltration between the
two sub-populations reached statistical significance. These
results suggest that in ERα-positive ovarian cancer, local
estrogens may affect the communication between cancer
cells and the surrounding stroma, further promoting
TAM accumulation in the tumor microenvironment. Our
hypothesis is supported by evidence on local generation
of estrogens in ovarian cancer [5, 57], as well as by
experimental data in breast cancer models showing that
estrogens affect the communication between cancer
cells, macrophages, and tumor blood vessels leading to
increased cancer growth and metastasis [58]. Specifically,
Svensson and colleagues demonstrated that E2 and the
selective ERα agonist PPT were able to increase the
release of the monocyte-attracting chemokines CCL2
and CCL5 by the ERα-positive MCF-7 cells (an effect
not induced by treatment with DPN, a selective ERβ
agonist), while chemokine levels were unaffected when
the ERβ-positive MDA-MD-231 cells were treated with E2
or DPN. In in vivo models the increase in CCL2 and CCL5
was accompanied by a massive influx of macrophages and
by a protumorigenic activation of the macrophages [58].
Overall, our findings suggest that the cellular and
molecular mechanism for the generation of TAMs may be
more complicated than we expected and, certainly, further
research is needed to unravel the role of estrogens in this
process. In this context, in the last decade there have been
several reports showing that TAMs represent an important
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

component of the ovarian tumor microenvironment and the
most abundant infiltrating immune population in human
ovarian tumors and ascites [59]. Besides, mechanistic
investigations have shown that TAMs can promote the
invasiveness of ovarian tumor cells through multiple
mechanisms, and, in turn, ovarian cancer cells produce a
variety of factors that induce recruitment and differentiation
of macrophages with tumor-promoting functions [59]. In
line with these results, expression of specific M2-associated
markers in ovarian cancer indicates that TAMs can also
predict patient prognosis in specific histopathological
subtypes [59].
In conclusion, our data support the hypothesis that
multiple direct and indirect mechanisms drive estrogeninduced tumor growth in HGSOC, showing that estrogen
effect is not limited to ER-positive disease, but may largely
proceed indirectly through the recruitment and activation
of macrophages that have tumor-promoting functions
at the tumor site. Defining the underlying mechanisms
associated to estrogen exposure may have important
implications for disease risk assessment, diagnosis, and
treatment by refining antiestrogen-target drugs.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
The ovarian carcinoma cell lines COV318 and
PEO1 were purchased from the European Collection of
Cell Cultures (ECACC, Salisbury, UK); NIH:OVCAR-3
was purchased from the CLS Cell Lines Service GmbH
(Eppelheim, Germany); and HEY cells were donated
by Susan Horwitz (Albert Einstein Medical College,
USA). PEO1, HEY and NIH:OVCAR-3 were grown in
RPMI 1640 medium (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland), while
COV318 were cultured in Dulbeccoʼs modified Eagleʹs
medium (Lonza). The medium was supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Lonza), 2 mM glutamine
and antibiotics (100 mg/ml streptomycin and 100 IU/ml
penicillin) (Lonza). Insulin 0.01 mg/mL was also added
to NIH:OVCAR-3 medium. All cultures were maintained
at 37°C under a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and
95% air.

Western blot analysis
Whole-cell extracts were prepared after lysis in
buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.4 M NaCl, 1
mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% NP-40,
10% Glycerol, supplemented with phosphate and protease
inhibitors. Equal amounts of protein (60 μg/sample) were
separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(4-20%) (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA)
and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Immobilon-P
transfer membrane, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The
membranes were blocked for 1 hour with 5% (w/v) nonfat
8165

Oncotarget

dry milk (Bio-Rad Laboratories) in Tris Buffered Saline
containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST), and then incubated
with primary antibodies: anti-ERα (clone 6F11, Santa
Cruz, CA, USA); anti-ERβ total (clone H150, Santa Cruz);
anti-PR (clone 16, Leica Microsystems, Bannockburn,
IL, USA); anti-GPER (clone N-15, Santa Cruz); anti-AR
(clone AR441, Abcam, Cambridge, UK); anti-cyclin D1
(clone 92G2, Cell Signaling Technology, Leiden, The
Netherlands); anti-Cyclin E (clone M20, Santa Cruz); antiβ-actin (A5441, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at
4°C overnight. After washing three times with TBST, the
membranes were labeled with horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies for 1 hour at room
temperature. Specific proteins were detected by the ECL
Western blotting system according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA).
Immunoreactive bands were visualized using a VersaDoc
(Bio-Rad Laboratories) imaging system, and quantitation
was carried out using the Quantity One software program.
β-actin was used as loading control in western blot analysis.

pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl) trisphenol (PPT, a selective ERα
agonist, Tocris Bioscience, Ellisville, MO, USA); 2,3-bis(4hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN, a selective ERβ
agonist, Tocris Bioscience); or (±)-1-[(3aR*,4S*,9bS*)-4(6-Bromo-1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-3a,4,5,9b-tetrahydro-3Hcyclopenta[c]quinolin-8-yl]-ethanone (G1, a selective GPER
agonist, Tocris Bioscience). The ER antagonist 7α,17β-[9[(4,4,5,5,5-Pentafluoropentyl) sulfinyl]nonyl]estra-1,3,5(10)triene-3,17-diol (ICI 182,780, Tocris Bioscience) was used
in combination experiments when relevant. Substances were
dissolved in absolute ethanol or DMSO and diluted in the
appropriate culture medium immediately before use. Control
cells received the same amount of diluent. The medium
was renewed after 48 hours. At 120 hours of incubation,
cells were harvested by trypsinization, and viable cells
were counted using Nucleocounter (Chemometec, Allerod,
Denmark). All experiments were performed at least three
times in duplicate. To validate our experimental conditions,
the proliferation of MCF-7 cells (ECACC) was assessed
following treatment with E2, PPT, DPN, and G1.

Real time PCR

Mice and tumor induction

Total RNA was extracted using Total RNA isolation
NucleoSpin RNA II (Macherey-Nagel GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany) and was reverse-transcribed using RETROscript
kit (Ambion®, Life Technologies Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA), according to the manufacturerʼs protocol. To
evaluate hormone-receptor mRNA levels, each RT reaction
mixture was subjected to real time PCR (qPCR) using
SYBR® Green Master Mix (Bio-Rad Laboratories) in the
following cycling conditions: 40 cycles of denaturation at
95°C for 15 s; annealing and extension at 60°C for 45 s.
PCR reactions were carried out in a 25 µL reaction volume
in a Bio-Rad real time PCR machine (CFX Connect). The
PCR primers for detecting specific transcripts are reported
in Table 1. All samples were amplified in triplicate and
normalized to the housekeeping gene, GAPDH. Relative
mRNA concentrations were calculated from the takeoff point of reactions (threshold cycle, Ct) using the
comparative quantitation method performed by Bio-Rad
software, and based upon the -ΔΔCt method. In each assay,
the PCR efficiency was also calculated using serial dilution
of one experimental sample; efficiency values between 80
and 100% were found for each primer set and taken into
account for the comparative quantitation analysis.

Four-week-old female BALB/c nude mice were
obtained from Charles River S.r.l. (Lecco, Italy), and
housed under controlled conditions as previously described
[60]. The UKCCCR guidelines for the welfare of animals
in experimental neoplasia were followed [61]. Studies were
approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore (Rome, Italy), and
by the Italian Ministry of Health (Prot. CESA/A/3/2013).
Since previous studies in our Department already
demonstrated the tumorigenicity of both NIH:OVCAR-3
and HEY cells [62 and unpublished data], we firstly
evaluated whether PEO1 and COV318 cells were suitable
for development as murine xenografts. For characterization
of tumor growth, up to 1 × 107 cells were coinjected with
Matrigel either intraperitoneally (i.p.) or subcutaneously
(s.c.) into at least three female BALB/c nude mice and
disease progression monitored for at least 90 days. In our
hands, animals injected with either PEO1 or COV318 did
not develop any visible i.p./s.c. disease after this period
(data not shown). We thus assessed the role of estradiol in
in vivo growth of NIH:OVCAR-3 and HEY cells.
For each experimental model, at six weeks of
age, 16 female mice were anesthetized and bilaterally
ovariectomized (Ovx); the success of ovariectomy was
checked at necropsy by marked atrophy of the uterine
horns. One week after ovariectomy, a group of Ovx mice
(Ovx+E2; n=8) were implanted s.c. with 90-day release, 0.36
mg 17β-estradiol pellets (Innovative Research of America,
Sarasota, FL, USA); these pellets are designed to produce
100-200 pg/ml of serum estradiol (as indicated by the
supplier). The remaining Ovx females were left untreated
(n=8). Xenografts were established by injecting 8 × 106 cells
in phenol red-free medium s.c. and i.p. for NIH:OVCAR-3
and HEY, respectively. Inoculated animals were observed

Proliferation assay
COV318 (2.8 × 105 per well), NIH:OVCAR-3 (2.5
× 10 per well), HEY (2.5 × 105 per well) and PEO1 (5.0 ×
105 per well) cells were seeded in 6-well plates in complete
culture medium. After overnight incubation, the medium
was changed to phenol-free medium supplemented with
2% CS-FBS (charcoal-stripped serum, Life Technologies
Invitrogen) and containing various concentrations of
17β-estradiol (E2, Sigma-Aldrich); 4,4ʹ,4ʹʹ-(4-Propyl-[1H]5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8166

Oncotarget

Table 1: Oligonucleotide primer sequences for real-time PCR
Gene

Forward Primers (5’→3’)

Reverse Primers (5’→3’)

Expected size (bp)

ERα

CCACCAACCAGTGCACCATT

GGTCTTTTCGTATCCCACCTTTC

108

ERβ1

GTCAGGCATGCGAGTAACAA

GGGAGCCCTCTTTGCTTTTA

181

ERβ2

AGGCATGCGAGGGCAGAA

GGCCACCGAGTTGATTAGAGG

115

ERβ5

GATGCTTTGGTTTGGGTGAT

CCTCCGTGGAGCACATAATC

165

GPER

AAACTGCGGTCAGATGTGGCT

TGTGTGAGGAGTGCAAG

117

PR

TCAGTGGGCAGATGCTGTATTT

GCCACATGGTAAGGCATAATGA

96

AR

AAGACGCTTCTACCAGCTCACCAA TCCCAGAAAGGATCTTGGGCACTT

GAPDH

TCCCTGAGCTGAACGGGAAG

GGAGGAGTGGGTGTCGCTGT

218

Evaluation of immunohistochemical staining

daily. For the s.c. tumor model, growth was monitored by
measuring tumors using vernier calipers and tumor weight
was calculated from two dimensional measurements (mm):
Tumor weight = length x width2/2 [60, 63]. Upon health
decline (i.e., severe weight loss, paralysis, ruffling of fur,
inactivity) mice were euthanized and autopsied. At necropsy,
uteri were rapidly removed, freed of fat and weighted. All
tumors were also removed and fixed in 4% buffered formalin
for histology.

Scoring of ERs was evaluated as previously
reported [12]. Briefly, the mean percentage of stained
cells was categorized as follows: 0=negative, 1 = 1-10%,
2 = 11-33%, 3 = 34-66%, 4 = 67-100%. The intensity of
staining was also evaluated and graded from 1-3, where
1=weak staining, 2=moderate staining, and 3=strong
staining. The two values obtained were multiplied to
calculate an immunoreactive score (IRS, maximum value
12). Positivity for Ki67 was evaluated by considering the
number of cells exhibiting immunoreaction in a minimum
of 500 histologically identified neoplastic cells. For the
quantitative analysis of microvessel density, CD31positive intratumoral microvessels were counted blindly
under a microscope field (x400 objective magnification,
high-power field area = 0.24 mm2). A minimum of 3
tumor areas per section were evaluated. The microvascular
density (MVD) was expressed as mean number of vessel
per high-power field (MVD, vessels/HPF). Finally, tumorassociated macrophage (TAM) densities were assessed by
counting the number of intratumoral macrophages with
positive staining for the phenotype marker(s) in four
representative 400x high-power fields (total tumor surface:
1 mm2). Macrophage density was expressed as cells/mm2.
Immunohistochemical assessment was carried out by two
investigators blinded to groups.

Human studies
This retrospective study included 48 HGSOC
specimens obtained from the Department of Pathology,
School of Medicine, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart Rome, Italy. In our Institution a written informed
consent is routinely requested from patients for collection
of their clinical data, as well as paraffin embedded sections
for research use. Clinical information was obtained from
the existing medical records in accord with institutional
guidelines. All data were managed using anonymous
numerical codes.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical analysis was carried out
on 3-μm thick paraffin sections as described [12].
Antibodies used include: anti-ERα (clone 6F11, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, dilution 1:100); anti-ERβ1 (clone
PPG5/10, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark, dilution 1:50);
anti-ERβ2 (clone 57/3, Serotec Ltd, dilution 1:200); antiERβ5 (clone 5/25, Serotec Ltd, dilution 1:300); anti-PR
(clone 16SAN27, Leica Microsystems, dilution 1:100);
anti-GPER (clone N-15, Santa Cruz, dilution 1:100); antiKi67 (clone MIB-1, Dako, dilution 1:100); anti-CD31
(ab28364, Abcam, dilution 1:50), anti-CD11b (Thermo
Fisher scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, dilution 1:50);
anti-arginase I (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, dilution 1:50);
anti-CD68 (clone PG-M1, Dako, dilution 1:100) or anti
CD163 (clone10D6, Biocare Medical, Concord, CA, USA,
dilution 1:50).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

170

Immunofluorescence of fixed paraffin-embedded
ovarian tissue sections
Three-micrometer-thick paraffin sections were
mounted on Superfrost coated slides, and dried overnight.
The sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated
in graded solutions of ethanol and rinsed for 5 minutes
in distilled water. After antigen retrieval procedure
performed by microwave oven heating, the sections were
incubated with 20% normal goat serum for 30 min at room
temperature and then incubated at 4°C overnight with
primary antibody: anti-CD68 (clone PG-M1, Dako, dilution
1:100); anti-ERα (clone SP1, Ventana Medical Systems,
8167

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

Inc. Tucson, Arizona, USA, pre-diluted); and anti-ERβtot
(clone H150, Santa Cruz, 1:50). The optimal dilution of
primary antibody had been established before by immunoenzymatic staining. After overnight incubation, slides were
washed in TBS and incubated in the dark for 1 hour at
RT with secondary antibody anti-mouse Alexa Fluor-488
conjugate and anti-rabbit Texas Red (Life Technologies,
Inc). After washing in PBS (Dulbeccoʼs Phosphate Buffer
Saline, Lonza), tissues were stained with DAPI (1.5 µg/
ml) and mounted in Vectashield Mounting Medium (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, Ontario, Canada). Slides were
observed under the fluorescence microscope (Leica) using
a 100X oil immersion objective.

For the NIH:OVCAR-3 model, tumor growth data
were analyzed by repeated-measures ANOVA, followed
by the Bonferroni method as post-test. For the HEY
model, the Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was used,
followed by log rank test. The remaining data were
analyzed for homogeneity of variance using an F test.
If the variances were heterogeneous, log or reciprocal
transformations were made in an attempt to stabilize the
variances, followed by Studentʼs t-test. If the variances
remained heterogeneous, a non-parametric test such as
the Mann–Whitney U test was used. Data are reported as
mean ± SEM. P values are for two-sided tests; p values
≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Analyses
were performed using GraphPad Prism version 5.0 for
Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).

Isolation of monocytes from peripheral blood
Anonymous buffy coats from peripheral blood
(PB) donations were collected from healthy blood bank
donors (females, 18–65 years, n=3). Buffy coats were
diluted (1:3) with phosphate-buffered saline, PBS (Lonza),
layered over Ficoll-Hypaque (Sigma-Aldrich) density
gradient and centrifuged at 1,800 rpm for 20 minutes.
Freshly isolated mononuclear cells of PB (PBMC) were
counted and re-suspended in RPMI complete medium
containing 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 UI/ml
penicillin-streptomycin. 5 × 106 cells/ml were seeded
into chamber slides (Nunc® Lab-Tek® II Chamber Slide,
Nunc, Inc., Naperville, IL) and monocytes were separated
from lymphocytes by adherence to the surface after an
incubation of 24h at 37°C, 5% CO2. Non-adherent cells
were removed and adherent cells (>80% CD68+ by IHC)
were washed and used for immunostaining analysis.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest

REFERENCES
1.	 Ferlay J1, Shin HR, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin
DM. Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008:
GLOBOCAN 2008. International Journal of Cancer. 2010;
127: 2893-2917.
2.	 Prat J. New insights into ovarian cancer pathology. Annals
of Oncology. 2012; 23: 111-117.
3.	 Auersperg N. The origin of ovarian cancers-hypotheses and
controversies. Frontiers in Bioscience (Schol Ed). 2013;
5:709-719.

Immunocytochemistry

4.	 Mei L, Chen H, Wei DM, Fang F, Liu GJ, Xie HY,
Wang X, Zou J, Han X, Feng D. Maintenance chemotherapy for ovarian cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews. 2013; 6: CD007414.

Monocytes were washed twice with PBS,
fixed and permeabilzed with Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit
(BD Bioscences, Palo Alto, CA, USA), according to
manufacturer’s instructions. The endogenous peroxidase
was blocked with 3% H2O2 for 5 min. After washing
twice with PBS, cells were incubated with a blocking
solution containing 20% normal horse serum in PBS
for 30 min at room temperature. Excess blocking
solution was drained, and samples were incubated with
primary antibodies: anti-CD68 (clone PG-M1, Dako,
dilution 1:100); anti-ERα (clone SP1, Ventana Medical
Systems, Inc., pre-diluted); and anti-ERβ (clone 14C8,
Novus Biologicals, dilution 1:30) overnight at 4°C in a
humidified chamber. The samples were then rinsed three
times with PBS and incubated with secondary antibody,
EnVision System-HRP (Dako), for 30 min at room
temperature. The immunoreactivity was detected using the
3,3′-diaminobenzidine substrate (DAB substrate System,
Dako). The slides were counterstained with Mayer’s
Haematoxylin, dehydrated in ethanol and xylene, and
finally mounted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Mungenast F, Thalhammer T. Estrogen biosynthesis
and action in ovarian cancer. Frontiers in Endocrinology
(Lausanne). 2014; 5:192.
6.	 Collaborative Group On Epidemiological Studies Of
Ovarian Cancer. Menopausal hormone use and ovarian cancer risk: individual participant meta-analysis of
52 epidemiological studies. Lancet. 2015; doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(14)61687-1.
7.	 Collaborative Group on Epidemiological Studies of Ovarian
Cancer. Ovarian cancer and oral contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of data from 45 epidemiological studies
including 23 257 women with ovarian cancer and 87 303
controls. Lancet. 2008; 371: 303–314.
8.	 Gallo D, De Stefano I, Prisco MG, Scambia G,
Ferrandina G. Estrogen receptor beta in cancer: an attractive
target for therapy. Current Pharmaceutical Design. 2012; 18:
2734-2757.

8168

Oncotarget

9.	 Prossnitz ER, Barton M. Estrogen biology: new insights
into GPER function and clinical opportunities. Molecular
and Cellular Endocrinology. 2014; 389: 71-83.

21.	 OʼDonnell AJ, Macleod KG, Burns DJ, Smyth JF, Langdon
SP. Estrogen receptor-alpha mediates gene expression
changes and growth response in ovarian cancer cells
exposed to estrogen. Endocrine-Related Cancer. 2005; 12:
851-866.

10.	 Moore JT, McKee DD, Slentz-Kesler K, Moore LB, Jones
SA, Horne EL, Su JL, Kliewer SA, Lehmann JM, Willson
TM. Cloning and characterization of human estrogen receptor beta isoforms. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications. 1998; 247: 75-78

22.	 Halon A, Materna V, Drag-Zalesinska M, Nowak-Markwitz
E, Gansukh T, Donizy P, Spaczynski M, Zabel M, Dietel M,
Lage H, Surowiak P. Estrogen Receptor Alpha Expression
in Ovarian Cancer Predicts Longer Overall Survival.
Pathology and Oncology Research. 2011; 17: 511–518.

11.	 Suzuki F, Akahira J, Miura I, Suzuki T, Ito K, Hayashi
S, Sasano H, Yaegashi N. Loss of estrogen receptor
beta isoform expression and its correlation with aberrant DNA  methylation of the 5ʹ-untranslated region in
human ­epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Science
2008;99:2365-72.

23.	 Runnebaum IB, Brüning A. Glucocorticoids inhibit cell
death in ovarian cancer and up-regulate caspase inhibitor
cIAP2. Clinical Cancer Research. 2005; 11: 6325-6332.
24.	 Kolkova Z, Casslén V, Henic E, Ahmadi S, Ehinger A,
Jirström K, Casslén B. The G protein-coupled estrogen
receptor 1 (GPER/GPR30) does not predict survival in
patients with ovarian cancer. Journal of Ovarian Research.
2012; 18:5:9.

12.	 Ciucci A, Zannoni GF, Travaglia D, Petrillo M, Scambia
G, Gallo D. Prognostic significance of the estrogen receptor
beta (ERβ) isoforms ERβ1, ERβ2, and ERβ5 in advanced
serous ovarian cancer. Gynecologic Oncology. 2014;
132:351-359.
13.	 Ciucci A, Zannoni GF, Travaglia D, Scambia G, Gallo
D. Mitochondrial estrogen receptor β2 drives antiapoptotic pathways in advanced serous ovarian cancer. Human
Pathology. 2015; 46: 1138-1146.

25.	 Hamilton TC, Young RC, McKoy WM, Grotzinger KR,
Green JA, Chu EW, Whang-Peng J, Rogan AM, Green WR,
Ozols RF. Characterization of a human ovarian carcinoma
cell line (NIH:OVCAR-3) with androgen and estrogen
receptors. Cancer Research. 1983; 43: 5379-5389.

14.	 Heublein S1, Lenhard M, Vrekoussis T, Schoepfer J, Kuhn
C, Friese K, Makrigiannakis A, Mayr D, Jeschke U. The
G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) is expressed
in normal human ovaries and is upregulated in ovarian
­endometriosis and pelvic inflammatory disease involving
the ovary. Reproductive Sciences. 2012; 19:1197-1204

26.	 Mabuchi S1, Ohmichi M, Kimura A, Nishio Y, ArimotoIshida E, Yada-Hashimoto N, Tasaka K, Murata Y.
Estrogen inhibits paclitaxel-induced apoptosis via the
phosphorylation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 in
human ovarian cancer cell lines. Endocrinology. 2004; 145:
49-58.

15.	 Smith HO, Arias-Pulido H, Kuo DY, Howard T, Qualls
CR, Lee SJ, Verschraegen CF, Hathaway HJ, Joste NE,
Prossnitz ER. GPR30 predicts poor survival for ovarian
cancer. Gynecologic Oncology. 2009;114: 465-471

27.	 Bollmann J, Ortmann O, Treeck O. Expression of differentiation-associated gene icb-1 is estrogen-responsive
in ovarian and breast cancer cell lines. Journal of Steroid
Biochemestry and Molecular Biology. 2008; 109:16-21.

16.	 Fujiwara S, Terai Y, Kawaguchi H, Takai M, Yoo S,
Tanaka Y, Tanaka T, Tsunetoh S, Sasaki H, Kanemura M,
Tanabe A, Yamashita Y, Ohmichi M. GPR30 regulates the
EGFR-Akt cascade and predicts lower survival in patients
with ovarian cancer. Journal of Ovarian Research. 2012;
5: 35.

28.	 De Stefano I, Zannoni GF, Prisco MG, Fagotti A,
Tortorella L, Vizzielli G, Mencaglia L, Scambia G, Gallo D.
Cytoplasmic expression of estrogen receptor beta (ERβ)
predicts poor clinical outcome in advanced serous ovarian
cancer. Gynecologic Oncology. 2011;122: 573-579.
29.	 Escande A, Pillon A, Servant N, Cravedi JP, Larrea F,
Muhn P, Nicolas JC, Cavaillès V, Balaguer P. Evaluation of
ligand selectivity using reporter cell lines stably expressing
estrogen receptor alpha or beta. Biochemical Pharmacology.
2006; 71: 1459-1169.

17.	 Simpkins F, Garcia-Soto A, Slingerland J. New insights on
the role of hormonal therapy in ovarian cancer. Steroids.
2013;78: 530-537
18.	 Wang Y, Wu R, Cho KR, Shedden KA, Barder TJ, Lubman
DM. Classification of cancer cell lines using an automated
two-dimensional liquid mapping method with hierarchical
clustering techniques. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics.
2006; 5: 43-52.

30.	 Chen S, Zhou D, Okubo T, Kao YC, Yang C. Breast tumor
aromatase: functional role and transcriptional regulation.
Endocrine Related Cancer. 1999; 6: 149-156.
31.	 Ciucci A, Meco D, De Stefano I, Travaglia D, Zannoni GF,
Scambia G, Riccardi R, Saran A, Mancuso M, Gallo  D.
Gender effect in experimental models of human
­medulloblastoma: does the estrogen receptor β signaling
play a role? PLoS One. 2014; 9: e101623.

19.	 Domcke S, Sinha R, Levine DA, Sander C, Schultz N.
Evaluating cell lines as tumour models by comparison of
genomic profiles. Nature Communications. 2013; 4: 2126.
20.	 Leung YK, Mak P, Hassan S, Ho SM. Estrogen ­receptor
(ER)-beta isoforms: a key to understanding ER-beta
­signaling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2006; 103: 13162-13167

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Vermeulen PB, Gasparini G, Fox SB, Toi M, Martin L,
McCulloch P, Pezzella F, Viale G, Weidner N, Harris AL,
Dirix LY. Quantification of angiogenesis in solid human

8169

Oncotarget

tumours: an international consensus on the methodology
and criteria of evaluation. European Journal of Cancer.
1996; 32A: 2474-2484.

H, Jeschke U, Friese K, Mylonas I. Prognostic significance
of oestrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta),
progesterone receptor A (PR-A) and B (PR-B) in endometrial carcinomas. European Journal of Cancer. 2007; 43:
2434-2444.

33.	 Iyer V, Klebba I, McCready J, Arendt LM, BetancurBoissel M, Wu MF, Zhang X, Lewis MT, Kuperwasser C.
Estrogen promotes ER-negative tumor growth and angiogenesis through mobilization of bone marrow-derived
monocytes. Cancer Research. 2012; 72: 2705-2713.

46.	 Lewis C, Murdoch C. Macrophage responses to hypoxia:
implications for tumor progression and anti-cancer
therapies. The American Journal of Pathology. 2005;
167:627-635.

34.	 Solinas G, Germano G, Mantovani A, Allavena P. Tumorassociated macrophages (TAM) as major players of the
cancer-related inflammation. Journal of Leukocyte Biology.
2009; 86: 1065-1073.

47.	 Ribeiro JR, Freiman RN. Estrogen signaling crosstalk:
Implications for endocrine resistance in ovarian cancer. J
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Sep;143:160-73

35.	 Gordon S, Taylor PR. Monocyte and macrophage heterogeneity. Nature Reviews Immunology. 2005; 5: 953-964.

48.	 Dey P, Jonsson P, Hartman J, Williams C, Ström A,
Gustafsson Jå. Estrogen receptors β1 and β2 have opposing roles in regulating proliferation and bone metastasis genes in the prostate cancer cell line PC3. Molecular
Endocrinology. 2012; 26:1991-2003.

36.	 Fairweather D, Cihakova D. Alternatively activated
macrophages in infection and autoimmunity. Journal of
Autoimmunity. 2009; 33: 222-230.

49.	 Dey P, Velazquez-Villegas LA, Faria M, Turner A, Jonsson
P, Webb P, Williams C, Gustafsson Jå, Ström AM. Estrogen
Receptor β2 Induces Hypoxia Signature of Gene Expression
by Stabilizing HIF-1α in Prostate Cancer. PLoS One. 2015;
10: e0128239.

37.	 Biswas SK, Allavena P, Mantovani A. Tumor-associated
macrophages: functional diversity, clinical significance, and
open questions. Seminars in Immunopathology. 2013; 35:
585-600.
38.	 Shabo I, Stål O, Olsson H, Doré S, Svanvik J. Breast cancer
expression of CD163, a macrophage scavenger receptor,
is related to early distant recurrence and reduced patient
­survival. International Journal of Cancer. 2008; 123:
780-786

50.	 Rolny C, Mazzone M, Tugues S, Laoui D, Johansson I,
Coulon C, Squadrito ML, Segura I, Li X, Knevels E, Costa
S, Vinckier S, Dresselaer T, et al. HRG inhibits tumor
growth and metastasis by inducing macrophage polarization and vessel normalization through downregulation of
PlGF. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19: 31–44.

39.	 Shabo I, Olsson H, Sun X F, Svanvik J. Expression of the
macrophage antigen CD163 in rectal cancer cells is associated with early local recurrence and reduced survival time.
International Journal of Cancer. 2009; 125: 1826-1831.

51.	 Mantovani A, Locati M. Tumor-associated macrophages
as a paradigm of macrophage plasticity, diversity, and
polarization: lessons and open questions. Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology. 2013; 33:1478-1483.

40.	 Kawamura, K., Komohara, Y., Takaishi, K., Katabuchi,
H., Takeya, M. Detection of M2 macrophages and colonystimulating factor 1 expression in serous and mucinous
ovarian epithelial tumors. Pathology International. 2009;
59: 300-305.

52.	 Liu Y, Cao X. The origin and function of tumor-associated
macrophages. Cellular & Molecular Immunology. 2015; 12:
1–4.

41.	 Jensen TO, Schmidt H, Møller HJ, Høyer M, Maniecki MB,
Sjoegren P, Christensen IJ, Steiniche T. Macrophage markers in serum and tumor have prognostic impact in American
Joint Committee on Cancer stage I/II melanoma. Journal of
Clinical Oncology. 2009; 27: 3330-3337.

53.	 Campbell L, Emmerson E, Williams H, Saville CR, Krust
A, Chambon P, Mace KA, Hardman MJ. Estrogen receptoralpha promotes alternative macrophage activation during
cutaneous repair. Journal of Investigative Dermatology.
2014;134: 2447-2457.

42.	 Heusinkveld M, Van der Burg SH. Identification and
manipulation of tumor associated macrophages in human
cancers. Journal of Translational Medicine. 2011; 9: 216.

54.	 Gupta PB, Proia D, Cingoz O, Weremowicz J, Naber SP,
Weinberg RA, Kuperwasser C. Systemic stromal effects of
estrogen promote the growth of estrogen receptor-negative
cancers. Cancer Research. 2007; 67 :2062-2071.

43.	 Edin S, Wikberg ML, Dahlin AM, Rutegård J, öberg å,
Oldenborg PA, Palmqvist R. The distribution of macrophages with a M1 or M2 phenotype in relation to prognosis
and the molecular characteristics of colorectal cancer. PLoS
One. 2012; 7: e47045

55.	 Murphy AJ, Guyre PM, Wira CR, Pioli PA. Estradiol
Regulates Expression of Estrogen Receptor ERa46 in
Human Macrophages. PLoS One. 2009; 4: e5539.

44.	 Lan C, Huang X, Lin S, Huang H, Cai Q, Wan T, Lu J, Liu
J. Expression of M2-polarized macrophages is associated
with poor prognosis for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. Technology in Cancer Research & Treatment. 2013;
12: 259-267.

56.	 Toniolo A, Fadini GP, Tedesco S, Cappellari R, Vegeto E,
Maggi A, Avogaro A, Bolego C, Cignarella A. Alternative
activation of human macrophages is rescued by estrogen
treatment in vitro and impaired by menopausal status. The
Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2015;
100: E50-58.

45.	 Shabani N, Kuhn C, Kunze S, Schulze S, Mayr D, Dian
D, Gingelmaier A, Schindlbeck C, Willgeroth F, Sommer

57.	 Ren X, Wu X, Hillier SG, Fegan KS, Critchley HO, Mason
JI, Sarvi S, Harlow CR. Local estrogen metabolism in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8170

Oncotarget

GM, et al. Committee of the National Cancer Research
Institute. Guidelines for the welfare and use of animals
in cancer research. British Journal of Cancer. 2010; 102:
1555–1577.

epithelial ovarian cancer suggests novel targets for ­therapy.
The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology. 2015;150: 54-63.
58.	 Svensson S, Abrahamsson A, Rodriguez GV, Olsson AK,
Jensen L, Cao Y, Dabrosin C. CCL2 and CCL5 Are Novel
Therapeutic Targets for Estrogen-Dependent Breast Cancer.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2015; 21: 3794-3805.

62.	 De Stefano I, Battaglia A, Zannoni GF, Prisco MG,
Fattorossi A, Travaglia D, Baroni S, Renier D, Scambia
G, Ferlini C, Gallo D. Hyaluronic acid-paclitaxel: effects
of intraperitoneal administration against CD44(+) human
ovarian cancer xenografts. Cancer Chemotherapy and
Pharmacology. 2011; 68:107-116.

59.	 Colvin EK. Tumor-associated macrophages contribute to
tumor progression in ovarian cancer. Frontiers in Oncology.
2014; 4:137.

63.	 Corbett T, Valeriote F, LoRusso P, Polin L, Panchapor C,
Pugh S, White K, Knight J, Demchik L, Jones J, Jones L,
Lisow L. In vivo methods for screening and preclinical testing. Teicher BA (ed) Anticancer Drug Development Guide.
Humana Press, Totowa, New Jersey. 1997; 75-99.

60.	 Gallo D, Zannoni GF, De Stefano I, Mosca M, Ferlini C,
Mantuano E, Scambia G. Soy phytochemicals decrease
nonsmall cell lung cancer growth in female athymic mice.
Journal of Nutrition. 2008; 138:1360-1364.
61.	 Workman P, Aboagye EO, Balkwill F, Balmain A, Bruder
G, Chaplin DJ, Double JA, Everitt J, Farningham DA,
Glennie MJ, Kelland LR, Robinson V, Stratford IJ, Tozer

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8171

Oncotarget

