Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Cancer
Research

Review

Cancer Cell Lines for Drug Discovery and Development
Jennifer L. Wilding and Walter F. Bodmer

Abstract
Despite the millions of dollars spent on target validation and drug optimization in preclinical models, most
therapies still fail in phase III clinical trials. Our current model systems, or the way we interpret data from them,
clearly do not have sufﬁcient clinical predictive power. Current opinion suggests that this is because the cell lines
and xenografts that are commonly used are inadequate models that do not effectively mimic and predict human
responses. This has become such a widespread belief that it approaches dogma in the ﬁeld of drug discovery and
optimization and has spurred a surge in studies devoted to the development of more sophisticated animal models
such as orthotopic patient-derived xenografts in an attempt to obtain more accurate estimates of whether
particular cancers will respond to given treatments. Here, we explore the evidence that has led to the move away
from the use of in vitro cell lines and toward various forms of xenograft models for drug screening and
development. We review some of the pros and cons of each model and give an overview of ways in which the use
of cell lines could be modiﬁed to improve the predictive capacity of this well-deﬁned model. Cancer Res; 74(9);
2377–84. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
In the early 1990s, the National Cancer Institute (NCI;
Bethesda, MD) introduced a "disease-oriented" drug screening
approach using a panel of 60 human cancer cell lines derived
from nine different types of cancer (brain, colon, leukemia, lung,
melanoma, ovarian, renal, breast, and prostate; ref. 1). This
approach was designed to facilitate high-throughput screening
of large numbers of drugs with sufﬁcient discrimination such
that only a minority of drugs would be selected for further
preclinical assessment in xenograft models. The general failure
of this approach to identify the most promising candidate drugs
led to the use of the hollow ﬁber assay, with the NCI currently
using just 12 human cell lines as a routine preliminary in vivo
screen before more time-consuming and labor-intensive xenograft assays on only the most promising candidate drugs
(http://dtp.nci.nih.gov/branches/btb/hfa.html).
More recently, the lack of conﬁdence in preclinical models
has led to the concept of tailored drug response proﬁling using
patient-derived xenografts (PDX; reviewed in ref. 2–4). The
move away from cell lines and the focus on in vivo models are
generally defended by criticisms along the following lines:
1. Cell lines have changed in culture [genetic changes (5) as
well as mRNA (6, 7) changes have been reported]

Authors' Afﬁliation: Department of Oncology, Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom
Corresponding Author: Jennifer L. Wilding, University of Oxford, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington,
Oxfordshire OX3 9DS, United Kingdom. Phone: 44-1865-222432;
Fax: 44-1865-222431; E-mail: jenny.wilding@oncology.ox.ac.uk
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2. Cell lines no longer retain the tumor heterogeneity
present in the primary cancer
3. Cell lines do not contain the relevant components of the
tumor microenvironment
The assumption is that in vitro cell line responses have not
been able to predict human responses due to these failings in
the model. Much of the earlier, highly referenced evidence is,
however, restricted to relatively speciﬁc examples using small
numbers of cell lines and clinical samples. A serious problem
with the NCI panel is that it includes only a very limited number
of lines for any given cancer (only at most 6–7 lines for each
cancer type). This severely limits the possibility for identifying
responder subsets of a given type of cancer for any particular
drug. However, with emerging high-throughput data technologies, it is now becoming possible to make large-scale comparisons of gene mutation, structural and copy number
changes, and mRNA expression proﬁles between cell lines and
primary cancers for the same tissue type. For example, a recent
report describing the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE;
ref. 8) used massively parallel sequencing data and microarray
expression proﬁles from 947 human cancer cell lines, coupled
with drug responses for 24 anticancer drugs across 479 of the
cell lines. They also compared the genomic similarities
between the lines and large datasets of primary tumors from
publicly available databases and demonstrated strong correlations for DNA copy number changes, mRNA expression proﬁles, point mutation frequencies, and mutation proﬁles of
commonly mutated genes in each cancer type. Furthermore,
analysis of molecular correlates of drug sensitivity in the cell
lines identiﬁed multiple known features, including tissue
type (lineage), as top predictors of sensitivity to several
agents. The study concluded that the cell lines "may provide
representative genetic proxies for primary tumors in many
cancer types."

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2377

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Wilding and Bodmer

The Problem with Numbers
It is now clear that response to therapy, especially for
targeted drugs, is strongly dependent on a cancer's genetic
and epigenetic make up (9), which varies substantially between
different cancers even from the same tissue (10). Drug
responses must therefore be evaluated in relation to a cancer's
genotype/epigenotype, not only during the drug discovery
process, but also particularly for biomarker studies that aim
to identify the correlations that predict for response to individual therapies preclinically as well as for drugs that are
already in clinical use. Many drugs will fail simply because
the fact that they are effective on only a subset of cancers is not
initially recognized at the time the trial was designed, and the
trials are not large enough for the analysis of subsets.
In 2003, Voskoglou-Nomikos (11) compared published drug
activity for 31 cytotoxic cancer drugs where phase II trials,
human xenograft, and mouse allograft responses were available for comparison for breast, ovarian, non–small cell lung,
and colon cancers. They used data from the NCI Human Tumor
Cell Line Screen to calculate the drug in vitro preclinical activity
for each cancer type. They then analyzed the results from either
a disease-oriented approach (using one tumor type as a
predictor of overall activity in the other three types combined)
or a compound-oriented approach, or for all four tumor types
together. They concluded that the in vitro cell line model was
broadly predictive for non–small cell lung cancer under the
disease-oriented approach, for breast and ovarian cancers
under the compound-oriented approach, and for all four tumor
types together. The human xenograft model was not predictive
for breast or colon cancers, but was predictive for non–small
cell lung and ovarian cancers, but only when the analysis was
performed on a subset of drugs for which preclinical information on more than 100 human xenografts was available.
It is important to note that in this analysis, the predicted in
vitro preclinical activity was calculated using the NCI-60 panel
of cell lines, where each of the nine tumor types is represented
by approximately six or seven lines. Clearly, by using drug
responses for just six or seven lines of a cancer type to predict in
vitro response to a drug in that type of cancer, there is in most
cases not nearly enough statistical power to detect correlations
with even a single key relatively common difference, such as the
presence or absence of a KRAS mutation. Such correlations
with clinical responses will only be detected by using a larger
panel of cell lines, reﬂecting the molecular heterogeneity
within that cancer type. Similar arguments apply to xenograft
studies, where typically the numbers of cell lines or even PDXs
studied are small. It is therefore almost impossible for either
the NCI cell line–based or the typical xenograft-based models
to reliably predict human clinical response for a particular type
of cancer.
This problem becomes even more serious when considering
the importance of predicting responses to combination therapies. Even a cancer that is little more than a cubic centimeter
in size will contain the order of 109 cells. Given that mutation
rates are between 108 and 109 per base per cell division,
nearly every possible type of mutation is likely to be represented at least once in even a small cancer. It is therefore hardly

2378

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

surprising that resistance will nearly always develop to monotherapy. The only way to overcome this problem is to attack
different key pathways of the cancer process at the same time,
as then the probability of several resistance mutations arising
at the same time becomes vanishingly small even in large
cancers. If combinations of drugs are to be tested with a range
of concentrations for each drug, in combination with a range of
concentrations of other drugs needing to be tested, the number
of mice that would be required for any kind of in vivo approach
increases to impractical numbers.
In addition to the CCLE study, a cell line study from the
Sanger Institute (Hinxton, South Cambridgeshire; ref. 12)
assayed 130 drug responses in 639 human cancer lines.
Although both these studies used signiﬁcant numbers of cell
lines overall, the numbers for each type of cancer are still
relatively low. For example, the Sanger and CCLE studies
included only 34 and 23 colorectal cancer cell lines, respectively, in their drug screens. This means that, even assuming
that the cancer cell lines used represent the subtypes of a
particular cancer in the same proportions seen in patients,
response proﬁles in molecular subtypes less frequent than, for
example, 20%, are very likely to be missed.
The successful use of cell lines for evaluating drug responses
in relation to tumor properties clearly depends critically on the
use of a substantial cell line panel for adequate statistical
power or, where prior knowledge indicates, the maximum
number of lines with given characteristics. For example, a
10% sensitive subset of 100 lines that is associated with an OR
of 9 for the difference between resistant and sensitive lines can
be detected with a P value of 0.008, whereas a 20% subset for the
same OR would be detected with a P value of < 0.0001. Thus,
even with 100 lines, largish effects in relatively small subsets
can be signiﬁcantly detected, but the power for doing this
diminishes rapidly as the number of lines is reduced.

Cell Line Models: Colorectal Cancer as an
Example
The Bodmer laboratory has a panel of more than 120
colorectal cancer cell lines, probably one of the largest tissue-speciﬁc panels of cell lines held in academia. As such, it
provides a good example of how well cell lines reﬂect the wide
spectrum of subtypes of a particular cancer with respect to
mRNA expression proﬁles (13) and common mutations (14).
For colorectal cancer, these include mutations in the genes
APC, TP53, CTNNB1, BRAF, PIK3CA, and FBXW7, and the
mismatch repair genes, mainly MLH1 and MSH2. We have
taken two published datasets together with data from our cell
line panel and compared the frequency of mutations for these
commonly mutated genes with two sources of primary tumor
data (Fig. 1). The frequency spectrum of the mutations differs
somewhat between cell lines and primary tumors depending
on the source of the data. This may be, in part, due to
overrepresentation of mismatch repair deﬁciency (and thus
the mutations highly associated with this hypermutated subtype) in the cell line panels compared with primary cancers. It
is also possible that at the time most of the cell lines currently
in use were isolated, the chance of obtaining a cell line from a

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Cancer Cell Lines for Drug Discovery and Development

APC
Figure 1. Colorectal cancer as an
example of the correlation
between the frequencies of
commonly mutated genes in cell
lines versus primary cancers. Data
for primary cancers were extracted
from the TCGA publication (10)
and from the COSMIC online
database. Replication error
deﬁcient [RER; inferred for the
COSMIC, Barretina et al. (8), and
Garnett et al. (12) data by the
presence of an hMLH1 mutation;
RER status for Bodmer and TCGA
(10) is based on the presence of
microsatellite instability]. Note that
there is considerable overlap in
representation between the cell
line datasets. Thus, 78% of the cell
lines in the Barretina et al. (8)
dataset are also represented in the
Bodmer (10) dataset, and 94% of
the cell lines in the Garnett et al.
(12) dataset are also represented
in the Bodmer dataset.

P53
CTNNB1
KRAS
BRAF
PIK3CA

Garnett et al.; n = 34
Barretina et al.; n = 55 Cell lines
Bodmer lab; n = 103

FBXW7

TCGA; n = 224
COSMIC; n = 5958

RER
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Tumor

80

90

Mutation frequencies (%)
© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research

tumor was inﬂuenced by its genetic and epigenetic make-up.
Although there may be differences in the frequency spectrum
of key mutations between the cell lines and primary cancers, as
long as there are adequate numbers of cell lines to represent
each genetically deﬁned subtype that is present in primary
cancers, the differences in relative proportions of subtypes in
cell lines versus primary cancers should not pose any problems.
Using this colorectal cancer cell line panel, we have shown a
clear relationship between 5-ﬂuorouracil sensitivity and mismatch repair status in a subset of 77 cell lines using a relatively
high-throughput test procedure and an objective categorization of response (15). More recently, we have shown that for
cetuximab [an anti-EGF receptor (EGFR) antibody], direct
(nonimmune mediated) responses, in addition to being
wild-type (i.e., nonmutant) for KRAS, it is also necessary to be
wild-type for NRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA (16), as suggested by
recent clinical data (9).
Both these cell line studies closely parallel clinical data,
providing further evidence for the extent to which appropriately large panels of cell lines can be used to predict clinical
responses to targeted therapies in patients with similar molecular proﬁles.
Importantly, we have also demonstrated using cell line in
vitro studies that the immune-mediated effects of cetuximab
(largely through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity) correlate with EGFR levels and not with KRAS and other mutation
status (16). Such comparisons between cell line and clinical
data can only be made for treatments that are already in the
clinic, and when patient tumors have been characterized to the
same depth as the cell lines. Obviously, no novel treatment can

www.aacrjournals.org

ever be tried in the clinic unless there is adequate supporting
preclinical evaluation.
It is worth noting that if these studies had been done on
panels of cell lines that only contained seven to ten colorectal
cancer lines, such as used in the NCI screens or even more
recent publications [CCLE (8) and Sanger (12)] where up to
30 colorectal cancer lines were used, it is highly unlikely that
these genetic associations would have been detected at a
convincing level of signiﬁcance. For example, the genetic
association described above for cetuximab response in our
panel of 64 cell lines results in a power of 95%, but this would
drop to 70% if performed on a panel of 30 lines and just 20%
for a panel of seven cell lines (power calculations were derived
using G Power 3 software). This demonstrates how likely it is
that a false-negative response proﬁle would be obtained
through the use of inadequate numbers of cell lines.

Limitations of Mouse Models
Recent studies have suggested that PDX models might hold
great promise for testing novel drug candidates as well as to
identify rational combination therapies (17). Among the arguments made for PDX models is that they may be expected to
provide a better representation of within tumor heterogeneity
and also that they would reﬂect the relevant human components of the tumor microenvironment better (Table 1).
However, there is evidence that the range of mutations is
narrowed in engrafted tumors compared with their parental
cancers and that to capture tumor heterogeneity, several
implants of each tumor may be necessary (18–20). These
results suggest clonal selection from within the heterogeneous

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2379

an entire tissue

lines to represent

one or two cell

not to rely on just

In vivo
Possible—genetic

No—all tumors

tumor to capture

required for each

implants may be

Yes, but multiple

development of
tumors; no single
genetic model can be
representative of any
particular tissue type

development of

tumors; no single

genetic model can be

representative of any

particular tissue type

No—nonsynchronous Yes

No—nonsynchronous

models

of a tissue type

represent all cancers

background, cannot

common genetic

derived from a

Yes

Yes

present

of heterogeneity

related approaches the full spectrum

facilitated by

manipulation

needed

drugs still limited by

animals required

numbers used

CRISPR and

combinations of

numbers of

numbers of mice

Yes, but testing

No—prohibitive

is probably lost

in the primary cancer

needed

coexist within cell

Subclones can

heterogeneity present

Yes, if sufﬁcient

Yes

numbers of mice

numbers used

Yes, if sufﬁcient

lines, but most

Yes

Yes

present

heterogeneity

tumor to capture the

required for each

drugs still limited by

combinations of

GEM

PDXs

animals required

xenografts numbers of

Yes, but testing

related approaches full spectrum of

be considered

No—prohibitive

CRISPR and

possible should

cell populations

Cell line

facilitated by

tissue type as

effects on normal

expansion

biopsies may be

Yes, but multiple

prohibit unlimited

manipulation

a panel of a single

to quantify speciﬁc

slow growth rates

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

cell lines

probably lost

Not yet practical—

types of cancer

cultures

therapies on selected

Can also test targeted

tumor speciﬁc panels.

Yes, with large enough

given cancer type

heterogeneity for a

Between tumor

cultures

are retained in primary

long these components

Yes, but unclear how

immune response are

lost after 1–3

stromal components

background

from a common genetic

No—all tumors derived

of any cancer type

Yes

molecular heterogeneity passages

small to reﬂect the

are typically much to

To date, numbers used Yes, but human

components and
of any cancer type

differences

human vs. murine

Not completely—

missing

immune response are

components and

HUMAN stromal

genes associated with

Yes, but expression of

missing

HUMAN stromal
molecular heterogeneity

genes associated with

Yes, but expression of

Yes

are missing

and immune response

stromal components

genes associated with

Yes, but expression of

type?

cancers of same

match primary

methylation proﬁles

expression,

Genotype, mRNA

small to reﬂect the

are typically much too

To date, numbers used Yes, but not human

Yes

proﬁles

gene speciﬁc mutation

No, but can be added

components

Stromal and immune

Components of the models

from many tissue subsets on the basis of

can be isolated

subpopulations

stem cell

Yes—cancer

cells)

differentiated

primary cancer is

present in the

heterogeneity

lines, but most

coexist within cell

Subclones can

subclones)

(coexistence of

cells vs. more

(cancer stem

genetic
heterogeneity

heterogeneity

differentiation

Within tumor

Within tumor

Primary

Possible—as large

be considered

possible should

tissue type as

panel of a single

Yes—important

Possible—genetic

toxicity screening

be considered

Possible, but difﬁcult

for cell lineage

possible should

Not applicable

cell line counterparts

Yes—as large a

Biomarker discovery testing

type

hiPSC derived normal

Becoming possible—

tissue type as

Not applicable

Toxicity testing

panel of a single

Yes—as large a

target validation

discovery

mechanistic

Functional and

In vitro

Cell lines

In vivo preclinical

screening for drug

High-throughput

In vitro

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

In vivo

2380
Applications of the models

Table 1. Advantages and limitations of cell lines versus animal models for drug discovery and development

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Wilding and Bodmer

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Cancer Cell Lines for Drug Discovery and Development

population of implanted human cancer cells for those clones
that impart a selective advantage for growth in mice. The
problem of tumor heterogeneity applies equally to PDXs and to
cell lines. Genetic heterogeneity in an evolving cancer is to be
expected, as a newly developed advantageous clone does not
immediately replace all its predecessors. Any treatment of a
cancer with more than one clone must be based on attacking
all the clones present in the cancer as if they were separate
cancers. So long as the drug response proﬁle has been based on
a sufﬁcient number of cancers to be representative of the
variety of genetic and epigenetic combinations expected for
that type of cancer, identifying the genetic factors associated
with differential responses of heterogeneous subpopulations
should not pose any novel problems.
Several reports also describe the loss of human stromal cells
within the ﬁrst few passages after engraftment (17, 21), which
raises the question of the possibility of species incompatibility
with respect to human tumor–mouse microenvironment
interactions. This is emphasized by the results of Hylander
and colleagues (22), who showed that by the ﬁrst passage of
PDX tumors, the stroma and vessels supporting their growth
are of murine origin (22). Kinetic studies showed that replacement of human vessels and vascularization by host vessels
occurred within 3 weeks in a colon PDX and by 9 weeks in a
mesothelioma PDX.
The overall usefulness of the xenograft or PDX model may be
further hampered by relatively low engraftment rates in comparison with current success rates in growing cells in vitro from
primary tumor material (23–25) and the slow growth rates of
many engrafted primary cancers. Reported success rates for
establishing and serially propagating human solid tumors
range from 20% to 50% (2). Similarly, the use of genetically
engineered mouse models (GEM) in drug discovery and preclinical studies is hampered by the stochastic nature of spontaneous tumor outgrowth in these models (i.e., tumors do not
grow synchronously), making comparisons of drug responses
between mice difﬁcult.
Despite the shortcomings of animal models, they remain a
prerequisite step for target validation and toxicity studies of in
vitro validated compounds. Only through exploring improvements in standard tissue culture practices might we be able to
produce an in vitro model that more closely recapitulates the
human environment and drug responses.

Developing a Better In Vitro Model
There have been many recent improvements in cell culture
conditions that help to mimic more closely an in vivo growth
environment. These include growth in three-dimensional (3D)
matrices and coculture with normal cell counterparts such as
myoﬁbroblasts and immune cells. In addition, microﬂuidic
perfusion systems allow careful control of levels of speciﬁc
growth factors and additives.
There has also been a dramatic improvement in the success
rate of establishing primary cultures of many different types of
cancers. Slow growth rates still make large-scale studies difﬁcult and although there have been promising preliminary
studies, it is not yet clear whether these in vitro cultures

www.aacrjournals.org

represent better models of human cancer for drug response
proﬁling than well-established cell lines. The particular value of
successful short-term culturing of primary tumors will be that
it enables relatively rapid testing of whether proposed therapies for the particular cancer, based on its molecular properties, are in fact likely to be effective—the hallmark of personalized cancer treatment.
Growth in 3D environments
Growth of cancer cell lines in 3D matrices such as Matrigel
results in the development of multidimensional structures and
a range of phenotypic changes including cell morphology
(indicative of differentiation), gene expression proﬁles, proliferation rates, and drug resistance (reviewed in ref. 26). The
result is a model with properties that more closely resembles
the tumors from which they were derived. Crucially, there is
evidence that they respond to drug treatments differently compared with when grown in two-dimensional traditional tissue
culture ﬂasks (27), so growth in 3D may well be one of the most
signiﬁcant changes that can be implemented in in vitro drug
screening and in development to improve the capacity for the
cell line model to predict human drug responses.
Focusing on cancer stem cells
Using 3D gel culture systems has also improved our ability
to identify and study cell line-derived cancer stem cells and
their patterns of differentiation in vitro (24, 28–30). This
enables the direct study of drug effects on cancer stem cells
and their differentiation patterns. Part of the problem with
identifying successful new therapies is that our current
measure of efﬁcacy is almost always by tumor shrinkage in
vivo or by overall growth inhibition in short-term in vitro
assays. Unfortunately these responses often do not translate
into increased disease-free survival in patients. Any therapy
that targets more differentiated cells in a tumor while
sparing the cancer stem cells will give an initial measurement of efﬁcacy by these criteria. Only by isolating cancer
stem cells and identifying therapies that speciﬁcally kill this
population of a tumor are we likely to ﬁnd treatments that
result in improvements in patient survival.
Recreating the microenvironment
Clearly the effects of the microenvironment, largely determined by myoﬁbroblasts and some key cells of the immune
system, notably macrophages and their derivatives, (31, 32) are
important for the in vivo evolution of a tumor. Those effects are
likely one of the major causes for mRNA expression differences
between freshly derived tumor material and the cell cultures
obtained from them. However, just as we can create in vitro the
conditions required to facilitate immune-mediated antibody
killing of tumors by adding appropriate immune effector cells,
so can we also now create an appropriate stromal environment
by, for example, coculturing tumor-derived cell lines with
myoﬁbroblasts or macrophages. Studying these effects separately and together allows an assessment of their relative
importance for different drug responses. It will also enable
the study of cytokines and lymphokines that may be the
effectors of the stromal environment, and of factors that may

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2381

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Wilding and Bodmer

block myoﬁbroblast and macrophage tumor interactions that
are beneﬁcial for the growth of the tumor.
In vitro systems for toxicity testing, including
establishment of "normal" cell lines
Toxicity testing of any new treatments will, for the foreseeable future, eventually need to be done in animal models, as
that is currently the only way to assess organismal overall
toxicity. However, this needs only to be done with those drug
regimes that have proved successful in appropriate in vitro
cell line tests, possibly followed up by limited animal model
testing. General toxicity at the level of epithelial cells, for
example, can generally be excluded as long as not all the cell
lines tested are susceptible to the drug treatment. Toxicity to
other cell types can be evaluated by testing the drug regime on
a variety of other cell types for which cell lines are available,
including, for example, epithelial cells from other carcinomas,
ﬁbroblasts, and lymphoid cells. This may give some indication
of the selectivity of the drug treatment for the particular cancer
type being studied.
Until recently (at least for most carcinomas), there has
been no suitable source of in vitro normal cell cultures, but
now, with improved epithelial cell culture conditions and
the potential availability of suitable normal cells from
human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC), that is likely
to change. Thus, hiPSCs have been induced to differentiate
into various tissue-speciﬁc lineages that could provide normal cell counterparts that would broaden the ﬁeld of in vitro
toxicity testing at the normal cellular level (33). There are
commercially available sources of hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, hepatocytes, and neuronal cells.
However, there is still a need to improve the efﬁciency of
reprogramming somatic cells, optimizing differentiation
such that full maturation is achieved and improving ways
to manipulate the epigenetic state of the derived cells such
that they more closely match the tissue-speciﬁc epigenetic
proﬁles of normal human tissues. Perhaps, in due course,
whole organ systems such as for the liver and heart will
become available through these techniques and take us
closer to a situation where, at most, limited toxicity testing
in whole animals will remain necessary.
Harnessing CRISPR/Cas9 and TALENs for mechanistic
studies
Cell lines readily enable functional studies, for example, of
drug effects on signaling pathways or knocking in and out
candidate genes for investigating effects on drug responses.
Recent examples of such cell line studies that have led to novel
suggestions for treatment include the preclinical demonstration of the potential effectiveness of PARP inhibitors for the
treatment of triple-negative breast cancers and of Ewing
tumors with speciﬁc translocations, and the need to combine
anti-BRAF therapy with anti-EGFR therapy for treatment of
BRAF-mutant colorectal cancers (34–36).
Highly efﬁcient genome-editing technologies such as
CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats) and TALENs (transcription activator-like effector
nuclease; refs. 37–39) have revolutionized the ease with which

2382

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

it is now possible to generate isogenic cell lines with speciﬁc
genes inactivated or speciﬁc mutations inserted, enabling
target validation and mechanistic studies to be performed far
more efﬁciently and conceivably on larger panels of tissuespeciﬁc cancers. This is important because focusing on just one
or two cell lines for isogenic studies will not average sufﬁciently
over the inevitable variety of background differences that exist
between lines, so that the results may be biased by the
particular set of variations carried in the cell line chosen for
isogenic studies.

A Note on In Vitro Functional Assays on Small
Numbers of Cancer Cell Lines
Clearly, although we have made the argument for the use of
sufﬁcient numbers of cell lines for drug screening and genetic
associations that predict for responses, it is not always possible
to perform all types of in vitro studies on large panels of tissuespeciﬁc cell lines.
More in depth functional studies are often performed
using just one or two cell lines of a particular tissue type.
Clearly these types of studies cannot be performed using
large panels of cell lines, but great care should be taken in
the choice of cell line. Wherever possible, cell lines should be
selected that most closely resemble the genomic alterations
of the tumor subtype being studied. No individual cell line
can be representative of all cancers derived from a single
tissue and many commonly used cancer cell lines represent
highly speciﬁc molecularly deﬁned subtypes of a particular
cancer. For example, a recent genomic and transcriptome
analysis of 47 ovarian cell lines compared with more than
300 primary cancers showed that the most commonly used
ovarian cell lines (SK-OV-3, A2780, OVCAR-3, CAOV3, and
IGROV1) are probably not good models of high-grade serous
ovarian carcinoma, the most common human form of ovarian cancer (40). One of the cell lines (IGROV1) is hypermutated, and three of them have copy number and mutation
proﬁles that more closely match those obtained from lowgrade serous, endometrioid, clear cell, or mucinous ovarian
carcinomas. Similarly, in colorectal cancer studies, most of
the more commonly referenced cell lines are in fact mismatch repair deﬁcient (DLD1, RKO, HCT116, LOVO, LS174T,
SW48). It is likely that the majority of these studies were
functional investigations where the cell lines used were
considered to be representative of colorectal cancer as a
whole. Mismatch repair-deﬁcient cancers are a distinct
subgroup characterized by unique mutation and expression
proﬁles and may behave quite differently from most other
colorectal cancers.
The selection of both individual cell lines and PDX models in
research is often inﬂuenced by ease and speed of growth. PDXs
with higher engraftment rates are associated with clinically
aggressive tumors, and cell lines with higher doubling times are
often more tumorigenic in mice than their slower growing
counterparts. The bias toward exclusive use of models that are
easiest to use may signiﬁcantly reduce the overall representation of molecular heterogeneity for any cancer type in any
study.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Cancer Cell Lines for Drug Discovery and Development

The Importance of Cell Line Validation
Cell line authentication has become a serious problem in
scientiﬁc studies and many journals and funding bodies now
require regular validation of cell lines before publication or
awarding grants.
In 2007 in the United Kingdom, the BBC reported that "thousands of studies have been invalidated" and "millions of pounds
of charity donations and taxpayers' money have been wasted on
worthless cancer studies" as a result of cell line contamination
and lack of authentication (41). A separate report from the then
Secretary of the U. S. Department of Health and Human Services
estimated that as many as 20% of scientiﬁc publications using
cultured cells might be affected by this issue (42).
There are many commercially available services for validating cell lines. Although short tandem repeat (STR) proﬁling
is perhaps the most common, this service can cost between
£100 and £200 in the United Kingdom to validate each cell line.
By multiplexing up to 40 single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) PCRs, it is possible for many laboratories to perform
their own cell line validation at a vastly reduced cost (typically
around £20 per sample in the United Kingdom for 40 multiplexed SNPs).

Conclusions
Cell lines provide an unlimited supply of material that is
widely available, easy to propagate, and so form the basis for
relatively high-throughput assays. This makes cell line studies
on large numbers of drug combinations quite feasible. Many
cell lines have now already been exhaustively characterized
(8, 12, 13, 15, 16). They represent the spectrum of mutations
found in cancers, have similar patterns of chromosomal gains
and losses, methylation and mRNA expression, and show no
evidence of genetic changes in major driver mutations on longterm in vitro cultivation.

Thus, we believe there is a very strong case for appropriate
use of cell line panels for in vitro preclinical evaluation of
cancer drug regime responses in relation to the properties of
the cancer. It is important that a sufﬁcient number of cell
lines is used to give adequate power for detecting subset
responses, that these are shown to be representative of the
range of genetic and epigenetic variation for the cancer
being studied, and that cell lines are regularly revalidated
using a suitable SNP panel or other genotyping technology.
With the inevitable increase in the need for treatment using
combinations of existing and newer targeted drugs and
antibodies, extensive animal-based evaluation becomes
unrealistic. There are now many newer technologies, such
as growth in 3D, better culture conditions for primary tumor
outgrowth, and coculture with suitable cellular representatives of the tumor microenvironment that bring the in vitro
cell culture conditions closer to the in vivo situation. Other
newer approaches, such as the generation of hiPSCs, are
likely to improve substantially in vitro toxicology testing.
Genome modiﬁcation using CRISPR and related techniques
should make target validation and mechanistic studies
much more efﬁcient and evaluation of treatment responses
on isolated stem cell populations may ﬁnally help to change
the focus from treatments that simply result in temporary
growth inhibition and reduction in tumor bulk to those that
speciﬁcally target the stem cell population. Our increasing
ability to manipulate the in vitro tissue culture environment
signiﬁcantly enhances the value of cell lines for drug discovery and development.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received October 15, 2013; revised January 29, 2014; accepted February 9, 2014;
published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Monks A, Scudiero D, Skehan P, Shoemaker R, Paull K, Vistica D,
et al. Feasibility of a high-ﬂux anticancer drug screen using a diverse
panel of cultured human tumor cell lines. J Natl Cancer Inst 1991;
83:757–66.
Siolas D, Hannon GJ. Patient-derived tumor xenografts: transforming clinical samples into mouse models. Cancer Res 2013;73:
5315–9.
Tentler JJ, Tan AC, Weekes CD, Jimeno A, Leong S, Pitts TM, et al.
Patient-derived tumour xenografts as models for oncology drug development. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2012;9:338–50.
Williams SA, Anderson WC, Santaguida MT, Dylla SJ. Patientderived xenografts, the cancer stem cell paradigm, and
cancer pathobiology in the 21st century. Lab Invest 2013;93:
970–82.
Roschke AV, Tonon G, Gehlhaus KS, McTyre N, Bussey KJ, Lababidi
S, et al. Karyotypic complexity of the NCI-60 drug-screening panel.
Cancer Res 2003;63:8634–47.
Daniel VC, Marchionni L, Hierman JS, Rhodes JT, Devereux WL, Rudin
CM, et al. A primary xenograft model of small-cell lung cancer reveals
irreversible changes in gene expression imposed by culture in vitro.
Cancer Res 2009;69:3364–73.
Tveit KM, Pihl A. Do cell lines in vitro reﬂect the properties of the
tumours of origin? A study of lines derived from human melanoma
xenografts. Br J Cancer 1981;44:775–86.

www.aacrjournals.org

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim
S, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 2012;483:603–7.
De Roock W, De Vriendt V, Normanno N, Ciardiello F, Tejpar S.
KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN mutations: implications for targeted therapies in metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet Oncol 2011;
12:594–603.
Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature 2012;487:330–7.
Voskoglou-Nomikos T, Pater JL, Seymour L. Clinical predictive value
of the in vitro cell line, human xenograft, and mouse allograft preclinical
cancer models. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:4227–39.
Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau
KW, et al. Systematic identiﬁcation of genomic markers of drug
sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature 2012;483:570–5.
Wilding JL, McGowan S, Liu Y, Bodmer WF. Replication error deﬁcient
and proﬁcient colorectal cancer gene expression differences caused
by 30 UTR polyT sequence deletions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2010;107:21058–63.
Liu Y, Bodmer WF. Analysis of P53 mutations and their expression in 56
colorectal cancer cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:976–81.
Bracht K, Nicholls AM, Liu Y, Bodmer WF. 5-Fluorouracil response in a
large panel of colorectal cancer cell lines is associated with mismatch
repair deﬁciency. Br J Cancer 2010;103:340–6.

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

2383

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Wilding and Bodmer

16. Ashraf SQ, Nicholls AM, Wilding JL, Ntouroupi TG, Mortensen NJ,
Bodmer WF. Direct and immune mediated antibody targeting of ERBB
receptors in a colorectal cancer cell-line panel. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2012;109:21046–51.
17. Moro M, Bertolini G, Tortoreto M, Pastorino U, Sozzi G, Roz L. Patientderived xenografts of non small cell lung cancer: resurgence of an old
model for investigation of modern concepts of tailored therapy and
cancer stem cells. J Biomed Biotechnol 2012;2012:568567.
18. Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW, et al. Genome
remodelling in a basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft.
Nature 2010;464:999–1005.
19. Bergamaschi A, Hjortland GO, Triulzi T, Sorlie T, Johnsen H, Ree
AH, et al. Molecular proﬁling and characterization of luminal-like and
basal-like in vivo breast cancer xenograft models. Mol Oncol
2009;3:469–82.
20. Vick B, Schneider S, Ksienzyk B, Greif PA, Fiegl M, Subklewe M,
et al. Genetic proﬁling by targeted, deep resequencing conﬁrms that
a murine xenograft model of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) recapitulates the mutational landscape of the human disease and
provides evidence for clonal heterogeneity and clonal evolution.
Blood 2013;122:49.
21. Julien S, Merino-Trigo A, Lacroix L, Pocard M, Goere D, Mariani P, et al.
Characterization of a large panel of patient-derived tumor xenografts
representing the clinical heterogeneity of human colorectal cancer.
Clin Cancer Res 2012;18:5314–28.
22. Hylander BL, Punt N, Tang H, Hillman J, Vaughan M, Bshara W, et al.
Origin of the vasculature supporting growth of primary patient tumor
xenografts. J Transl Med 2013;11:110.
23. Sato T, Stange DE, Ferrante M, Vries RG, Van Es JH, Van den Brink S,
et al. Long-term expansion of epithelial organoids from human colon,
adenoma, adenocarcinoma, and Barrett's epithelium. Gastroenterology 2011;141:1762–72.
24. Ashley N, Yeung TM, Bodmer WF. Stem cell differentiation and lumen
formation in colorectal cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Cancer
Research 2013;73:5798–809.
25. Jung P, Sato T, Merlos-Suarez A, Barriga FM, Iglesias M, Rossell D,
et al. Isolation and in vitro expansion of human colonic stem cells. Nat
Med 2011;17:1225–7.
26. Biomatrix3D. White paper - 5 Reasons Cancer Researchers Adopt
3D Cell Culture: A Review of Recent Literature. Available from: https://
3dbiomatrix.com/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2013/06/5-ReasonsCancer-Researchers-Adopt-3D-Cell-Culture-White-Paper.pdf.
27. Aljitawi OS, Li D, Xiao Y, Zhang D, Ramachandran K, Stehno-Bittel L,
et al. A novel three-dimensional stromal-based model for in vitro
chemotherapy sensitivity testing of leukemia cells. Leuk Lymphoma
2014;55:378–9.

2384

Cancer Res; 74(9) May 1, 2014

28. Setoguchi T, Taga T, Kondo T. Cancer stem cells persist in many
cancer cell lines. Cell Cycle 2004;3:414–5.
29. Yeung TM, Gandhi SC, Wilding JL, Muschel R, Bodmer WF. Cancer
stem cells from colorectal cancer-derived cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2010;107:3722–7.
30. Lang SH, Smith J, Hyde C, Macintosh C, Stower M, Maitland NJ.
Differentiation of prostate epithelial cell cultures by matrigel/stromal
cell glandular reconstruction. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 2006;42:
273–80.
31. Zhao L, Lim SY, Gordon-Weeks AN, Tapmeier TT, Im JH, Cao Y, et al.
Recruitment of a myeloid cell subset (CD11b/Gr1 mid) via CCL2/CCR2
promotes the development of colorectal cancer liver metastasis.
Hepatology 2013;57:829–39.
32. Yeung TM, Buskens C, Wang LM, Mortensen NJ, Bodmer WF. Myoﬁbroblast activation in colorectal cancer lymph node metastases. Br J
Cancer 2013;108:2106–15.
33. Scott CW, Peters MF, Dragan YP. Human induced pluripotent stem
cells and their use in drug discovery for toxicity testing. Toxicol Lett
2013;219:49–58.
34. Alli E, Sharma VB, Sunderesakumar P, Ford JM. Defective repair of
oxidative dna damage in triple-negative breast cancer confers sensitivity to inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Cancer Res
2009;69:3589–96.
35. Brenner JC, Feng FY, Han S, Patel S, Goyal SV, Bou-Maroun LM, et al.
PARP-1 inhibition as a targeted strategy to treat Ewing's sarcoma.
Cancer Res 2012;72:1608–13.
36. Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D,
et al. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition
through feedback activation of EGFR. Nature 2012;483:100–3.
37. Mali P, Yang L, Esvelt KM, Aach J, Guell M, DiCarlo JE, et al. RNA-guided
human genome engineering via Cas9. Science 2013;339:823–6.
38. Gaj T, Gersbach CA, Barbas CF III. ZFN, TALEN, and CRISPR/Casbased methods for genome engineering. Trends Biotechnol 2013;31:
397–405.
39. Cong L, Ran FA, Cox D, Lin S, Barretto R, Habib N, et al. Multiplex
genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems. Science 2013;339:
819–23.
40. Domcke S, Sinha R, Levine DA, Sander C, Schultz N. Evaluating cell
lines as tumour models by comparison of genomic proﬁles. Nat
Commun 2013;4:2126.
41. BBC. Cancer studies 'wasted millions'. 2007. Available from: http://
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/ﬁle_on_4/7098882.stm.
42. Nardone RM. An Open Letter Regarding the Misidentiﬁcation and
Cross-Contamination of Cell Lines: Signiﬁcance and Recommendations for Correction. July 2007. Available from: http://www.phe-culturecollections.org.uk/media.aspx?pid=32195.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

Cancer Cell Lines for Drug Discovery and Development
Jennifer L. Wilding and Walter F. Bodmer
Cancer Res 2014;74:2377-2384. Published OnlineFirst April 9, 2014.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2971

This article cites 39 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/9/2377.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/9/2377.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

