Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Mouse Models of Human Cancer
€ ck1,2, Ulrike Stein3,4,5, Clemens A. Schmitt3,5,6, and Hellmut G. Augustin1,2,5
Barbara C. Bo

Abstract
The Helmholtz Alliance Preclinical Comprehensive Cancer Center (PCCC; www.helmholtz-pccc.de) hosted the
"1st International Kloster Seeon Meeting on Mouse Models of Human Cancer" in the Seeon monastery (Germany)
from March 8 to 11, 2014. The meeting focused on the development and application of novel mouse models in
tumor research and high-throughput technologies to overcome one of the most critical bottlenecks in
translational bench-to-bedside tumor biology research. Moreover, the participants discussed basic molecular
mechanisms underlying tumor initiation, progression, metastasis, and therapy resistance, which are the
prerequisite for the development of novel treatment strategies and clinical applications in cancer therapy.
Cancer Res; 74(17); 4671–5. Ó2014 AACR.

Introduction
The availability of advanced preclinical tumor models has
emerged as one of the most rate-limiting steps in the translation of basic tumor biology discoveries into diagnostic and
clinical applications. Therefore, the gap between basic and
clinical research needs to be bridged to cross what has been
called "the valley of death" (1), which separates basic researchers and clinicians. This ambitious goal can only be achieved by
bringing basic researchers and clinicians together to overcome
the translational gap. The Helmholtz Alliance Preclinical Comprehensive Cancer Center (PCCC; www.helmholtz-pccc.de)
has, in 2013, implemented a nationwide consortium, in which
basic and clinical researchers work closely together to establish
and validate novel preclinical cancer models. The units of the
consortium thereby aim at developing superior mouse models,
which truly mimic the natural course of human tumor initiation, growth, and metastatic dissemination. Focusing on the
key issues of contemporary basic and clinical oncology
research, such concerted effort holds great promise to substantially advance translational oncology research. In this
spirit, the "1st International Kloster Seeon Meeting on Mouse
Models of Human Cancer" was held in the Seeon monastery
1
Division of Vascular Oncology and Metastasis, German Cancer Research
Center Heidelberg (DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance), Heidelberg, Germany. 2Department of Vascular Biology and Tumor Angiogenesis (CBTM), Medical
Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany. 3Max€ck-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany. 4ExperDelbru
 University Medicine, Berlin,
imental and Clinical Research Center, Charite
Germany. 5German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK),

Heidelberg, Germany. 6Molecular Cancer Research Center (MKFZ), Charite
University Medical Hospital, Berlin, Germany.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Hellmut G. Augustin, Joint Research Division of
Vascular Biology Medical Faculty Mannheim (CBTM), Heidelberg University,
and German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg (DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Phone: 49-6221421500; Fax: 49-6221-421515; E-mail: augustin@angiogenese.de
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424
Ó2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

(Germany) in March 2014. A total of 100 senior and junior
scientists in the ﬁeld, selected on the basis of applications and
invitations, transformed the tranquil monastery for 4 days into
a tumor biology think tank with high-proﬁle plenary lectures
and plenty of room for informal scientiﬁc discussions in the bar
and in the bowling alley. The meeting combined the discussion
of novel tumor mouse models and the prerequisite for their
development and implementation, the understanding of the
basic principles and the molecular mechanisms of tumor
initiation, progression, and metastasis. Nineteen keynote
speakers highlighted the most urgent topics in the ﬁeld, and
numerous presentations by young investigators selected on the
basis of their submitted abstracts complemented the program
(see Supplementary Data). It would be beyond the scope of this
short meeting report to summarize all of the many exciting
presentations of the meeting. Moreover, a lot of unpublished
data were presented that would be inappropriate to spell out
here in detail. Instead, the following report brieﬂy summarizes
some of the presentations that coherently point toward major
overall development in the ﬁeld—related to (i) novel advanced
mouse models of human cancer, (ii) tumor cell heterogeneity,
(iii) the role of inﬂammation toward tumorigenesis and tumor
progression, and (iv) synthetic lethality and other novel technologic advances.

Next-Generation Preclinical Mouse Models of
Cancer
Preclinical drug development is limited by the restricted
availability of suitable animal tumor models that adequately
mimic the evolution, the growth kinetics, the molecular and
functional heterogeneity, and the overall functional and phenotypic properties of human tumors, including their response
to drug candidates. Available and emerging mouse models of
cancer can be hierarchically clustered into different stages of
development and sophistication (Fig. 1). First-generation
mouse models use xenotransplants or syngeneic transplants,
in which tumor cells are engrafted subcutaneously or orthotopically. The second generation of genetic mouse models
[genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM)] allows for

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4671

Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424

€ ck et al.
Bo

FIRST GENERATION: GRAFTED TUMOR CELLS
Xenotransplants or syngeneic transplants
Subcutaneous or orthotopic transplants

SECOND GENERATION: TRANSGENIC MODELS
Constitutive expression of oncogene
Conditional expression of oncogene

THIRD GENERATION: ADVANCED TRANSGENIC MODELS
Temporally and spatially controlled expression of oncogenic mutations
and combinations thereof

Figure 1. Development and
advancement of mouse models of
human cancer (see the text for
details).

FOURTH GENERATION
Spontaneous tumor models mimicking tumor evolution and heterogeneity
Patient-derived xenografts

FIFTH GENERATION
Advanced third- and fourth-generation models mimicking metastatic
progression (metastasis becoming rate limiting for tumor growth)
(High)-throughput tumor models for target validation (CrispR/Cas9, TALEN)

the constitutive or conditional expression of oncogenes or
shut down of tumor suppressors. The third generation offers
the possibility of a temporally and spatially controlled expression of oncogenic mutations, including the combinatorial
expression of different mutations. The fourth step marks the
development of spontaneous tumor and patient-derived xenografts (PDX) models. Next will be the development of ﬁfth
generation of mouse tumor models, which not only mimic the
natural cause of tumor evolution and heterogeneity, but also
the natural progression toward metastatic dissemination,
dormancy, and growth (preferably in a way that metastasis
becomes rate limiting for the course of the experiment).
Great effort is being made at implementing in vivo screening
techniques with higher throughput capacity for target validation purposes. Mariano Barbacid (CNIO, Madrid, Spain) demonstrated that genetic-based strategies have signiﬁcant advantages over classic pharmacologic approaches because the
observed effects are always mechanism based and avoid offtarget effects. Moreover, genetic models do not rely on the
quality of drugs or inhibitors. Thus, mechanism-based target
validation studies are an essential prerequisite for the development of targeted therapies. Advanced mouse models developed by the Barbacid laboratory have enabled the demonstration that K-Ras signaling in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and
lung adenocarcinoma proceeds through C-Raf and not equally
through all subtypes of Raf, as proposed earlier (2). A-Raf and BRaf are dispensable for this process, making C-Raf a suitable
therapeutic target for targeting K-Ras signaling. Investigation
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), an upstream
effector of Ras signaling, showed that EGFR targeting has no

4672

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

therapeutic value in K-Ras–driven lung adenocarcinoma and
intestinal tumors, but that it is essential for the initiation of
pancreatic tumors. This coincides with clinical observations. It
also demonstrates that every tumor entity underlies its own
mode of action. Mouse models of human cancer are, thus,
perfectly suited to dissect these pathways and their role during
tumorigenesis in different tumor entities.
Dissecting the multistep pathways of tumorigenesis is
important not only for the understanding of the causal pathogenesis of tumors but also to decipher the development
of therapy resistance. Inherited breast and ovarian cancer
are associated with the loss of BRCA1 or BRCA2. Jos Jonkers
(NKI, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) presented GEMM and
PDX models for BRCA1–deﬁcient triple-negative breast cancer (3). These mice develop breast tumors, which are characterized by genetic instability and hypersensitivity to DNAdamaging agents, as similarly observed in humans. In human
patients with tumor, platinum drugs and PARP inhibitors
are not curative. The tumors eventually relapses and acquires
drug resistance. Using the newly developed mouse models,
DNA methylation analysis and whole-genome sequencing
approaches demonstrated that the resistance to the PARP
inhibitor olaparib is induced by different mechanisms, including the upregulation of drug efﬂux transporters, genetic reversion of truncating mutations in BRCA1, rescue of DNA end
resection by loss of 53BP1, and hypermorphic BRCA1 activity.
These results clearly demonstrate that GEMM and PDX models
will improve accurate patient stratiﬁcation and help to develop
treatment strategies that counteract or prevent resistance to
PARP inhibitors.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424

Mouse Models of Human Cancer

David Tuveson (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York,
NY) emphasized the importance of novel mouse models for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer. These preclinical models will
help to uncover novel aspects of tumorigenesis. Pancreatic
stellate cells (PSC) play a key role in the development of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. PSCs are responsible for the
collagen- and glycosaminoglycan-rich extracellular matrix,
which results in vessel compression, eventually leading to
hypovascularization, a hallmark of pancreatic cancer and a
rate-limiting factor for drug delivery. Therefore, targeting the
extracellular matrix and reducing its stiffness may be a promising approach to increase the efﬁcacy of therapy. He showed
that FG-3019 promotes cleavage of connective tissue growth
factor, resulting in increased survival in combination with
gemcitabine, supporting the idea that targeting extracellular
matrix components may be a promising future therapeutic
intervention (4). The critical role of microenvironmental determinants for tumor growth was also emphasized by Andreas
Trumpp (DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany), who showed that the
exploitation of PDX models marks an important approach
toward the advancement of personalized oncology. The interplay between hematopoietic cells and their myeloid stem cells
(MSC) drives myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Using PDX
models, he could show that patient-derived hematopoietic
cells instruct healthy MSCs. These MSCs acquire MDS-like
features and in turn promote tumor progression (5). Therefore,
interfering with microenvironmental shaping and inhibiting
the interaction with the MSC niche may offer great therapeutic
intervention strategies.
Allan Bradley (Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom) and Gavin Thurston (Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, NY) presented humanized mouse tumor models, in
which the loci for the immunoglobulin heavy and light chain
were substituted by the corresponding human genes (6). These
mice provide not only a platform for therapeutic antibody
discovery, but they are also a valuable tool to test immunomodulatory therapeutics. A major step toward bench-to-bedside clinical translation was also presented by Andrea Lunardi
(Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA), who introduced the
"co-clinical trial project" (7). This initiative comprises studies
that are performed in several genetic mouse models conducted
in parallel with human patients enrolled in ongoing phase I and
II clinical trials. This platform improves the velocity and the
outcome of personalized treatments and helps to identify
genetic and molecular determinants mediating drug resistance. This approach will also signiﬁcantly contribute to
overcoming the current obstacle of therapy resistance and
enable oncologists to tailor novel, optimized combinatorial
therapies based on patient stratiﬁcation.

Tumor Heterogeneity and the Nature of the
Tumor-Initiating Cell
It is increasingly recognized that tumor heterogeneity plays
an important role in tumor progression and treatment resistance. Tumor heterogeneity marks the fact that the different
tumor cells within the tumor may genetically, phenotypically,
and functionally be vastly different, and that continuous tumor
evolution contributes to tumor heterogeneity and selection of

www.aacrjournals.org

clones with growth advantages (e.g., therapy resistance). Such
evolutionary processes contribute to malignancy and make
tumors an oftentimes treatment-escaping deadly disease.
Tumor heterogeneity may also originate from treatment-resistant cancer stem cells (CSC). Incorporating the understanding
and knowledge of tumor heterogeneity will, thus, help to guide
the development of more reﬁned treatment strategies to yield
better therapeutic outcome.
Lung cancer may grow as non–small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Although SCLC
compromises only 20% of the cases, it is among the most lethal
malignancies. This is due to the fact that it displays an early
high metastatic potential. Moreover, it exerts chemotherapy
resistance after relapse. Anton Berns (NKI, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands) and colleagues have developed a mouse model
for SCLC by inducible loss of p53 and Rb1. This model shares a
number of features with the human disease, including distinct
morphologic characteristics, marker expression proﬁle and
metastatic spread to speciﬁc organs. Using this model, they
asked to which extent the tumor heterogeneity affected the
overall tumor population and its properties. Toward this end,
loss of p53 and Rb1 was targeted to Clara, neuroendocrine, and
alveolar subtype II cells. Their work demonstrated that predominately neuroendocrine cells served as the cell of origin for
SCLC. In contrast, activated K-Ras drives alveolar and Clara
cells to serve as cell of origin for adenocarcinoma, an NSCLC
subtype, demonstrating that cell type–speciﬁc features and the
oncogenic lesion determine the tumor-initiating capacity of
progenitor cells and that the cell of origin determines the
malignant properties of a tumor (8).
Anton Berns' presentation in support of the clonal evolution model was complemented by Haikun Liu's lecture,
whose laboratory (DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany) studies in
novel mouse models the development of high-grade glioma
originating from CSCs. He introduced a mouse model of
high-grade glioma that allows stem cell–speciﬁc targeting
through the nuclear receptor tailless (Tlx), which is a neural
stem cell–speciﬁc transcription factor (9). Interestingly, tlxpositive cells in primary brain tumors are mostly quiescent,
but have the capacity to self-renew and give rise to tlxnegative tumor cells, suggesting that they are brain tumor
stem cells (BTSC). BTSC-speciﬁc loss of tlx in mice leads to
the loss of self-renewal capacity and to the activation of
signaling pathways, which induce cell-cycle arrest and neural differentiation or cell death. Moreover, the knockout
mice showed a prolonged survival. Tlx also serves as a new
prognostic marker for a reduced survival in high-grade
glioma and is a valuable therapeutic target for the treatment
of glioblastoma.
Luis Parada (University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX)
also emphasized that tumor heterogeneity opens the door for
new therapies. Conventional cancer therapy hardly qualiﬁes as
speciﬁc anticancer therapy, but merely acts as an antimitotic
therapy. On the premises that glioblastoma arises from CSCs,
these therapies are inefﬁcient because they do not target
nondividing cells such as quiescent CSCs. Thus, to develop an
efﬁcient therapy for glioblastoma, one needs to understand
which alterations occur in the cell of origin before tumor

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4673

Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424

€ ck et al.
Bo

initiation and how to single out these cells. The cell of origin
will determine the growth rate of the tumor, depending on
whether it originates from CSCs (fast growth) or from oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (slower growth). Therefore, understanding the origin of a tumor and its speciﬁc properties will
advance tumor therapy by speciﬁcally targeting the tumorinitiating cell type (10).

demands are unique for tumor cells and, therefore, glucose
deprivation or autophagy inhibition does not affect normal
body cells. Synthetic lethal therapy approaches will have a
great beneﬁt for patients with cancer not only by its increased
efﬁcacy but also by its reduced side effects. Synthetic lethal
approaches are certainly at the cutting edge between preclinical and clinical research.

Inﬂammation: Friend or Foe?

Emerging Technologic Advances

At ﬁrst glance, inﬂammation may be considered a beneﬁcial
and protective response of an organism toward pathogens.
Furthermore, it is also associated with regenerative processes,
for example, in the context of wound healing. In analogy,
tumors have been considered as "wounds that won't heal"
(11), and inﬂammation is one of the hallmarks of cancer (12).
Yinon Ben-Neriah (Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel) introduced the concept of senescence-inﬂammatory response. He
showed that this form of para-inﬂammation drives tumorigenesis in a mouse model of intestinal cancer and is comparable with observations made in human intestinal cancer (13).
Interestingly, the switch between tumor-promoting versus
tumor-inhibiting effects of para-inﬂammation depends on the
action of p53. Upon loss of p53, para-inﬂammation drives
tumorigenesis. Interestingly, this novel concept of senescence-inﬂammatory response has been included in the Cancer
Cell—Best of 2013 issue.
Raghu Kalluri's (MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX)
presentation shed new and unexpected insights into the role of
chronic inﬂammation on tumor progression. Tissue damage
causes a wound-healing response. However, chronic tissue
damage may lead to tumor growth. Myoﬁbroblasts, collagen
I, and other determinants of the extracellular matrix are
necessary for wound healing. Experiments in a mouse model
of genetically engineered myoﬁbroblast ablation resulted in
much more dedifferentiated tumors and, consequently, the
survival of mice was reduced compared with wild-type mice.
This is also observed in patients suffering from pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma, in whom a low number of myoﬁbroblasts correlates with poor prognosis. Therefore, the process of
wound healing and its associated components, myoﬁbroblasts
and collagen I, can be considered as negative regulators of
tumor progression (14).

Despite the mechanistic power of GEMMs, a critical limitation is their limited throughput capacity and the oftentimes
quite time-consuming procedures. Depending on the complexity of the genetic alterations, the establishment and validation of a novel GEMM may take years. Therefore, fast and
reliable animal models are urgently needed to test genes for
their oncogenic potential in a higher throughput manner
than is presently doable. The CRISPR/Cas9 system allows the
faster functional testing of candidate genes obtained from
whole-genome sequencing. Similarly, large-scale screening
approaches such as transposon-based insertional mutagenesis
applying sleeping beauty and/or PiggyBac technology (presentation by Roland Rad, Technical University, Munich, Germany;
ref. 16) or RNAi screens (presentation by Lars Zender, University of T€
ubingen, T€
ubingen, Germany; ref. 17) have advanced
the identiﬁcation of genetic networks of tumorigenesis. This
offers the possibility to study tumor initiation, progression, and
metastasis and treatment resistance in larger genome-wide
screens.

Synthetic Lethality: A Key to New Therapy
Approaches
Chemotherapy is mostly not curative, because it fails to
eliminate all tumor cells. Some tumor cells escape therapy by
undergoing cellular senescence. These cells may be considered
a "time bomb." First of all, senescent cells secrete high levels of
inﬂammatory proteins. Second, they can be reactivated and
cause tumor relapse. Clemens Schmitt (Charite & MDC, Berlin,
Germany) reported that senescent lymphoma cells have an
extremely high energy demand and heavily rely on glucose (15).
Moreover, they require an intact autophagy machinery to
digest the excessive amount of toxic proteins they produce.
By blocking either glucose utilization or autophagy, tumor
cells are selectively killed by apoptosis. The high metabolic

4674

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Bottlenecks and Perspectives
Taken together, the meeting clearly showed that advanced
preclinical mouse models have a central position in linking
basic discovery research on the molecular mechanisms of
tumor initiation, progression, and therapy resistance with
the translational development of novel therapeutic and
diagnostic procedures and strategies. In turn, the meeting
also revealed some limitations of contemporary mouse
tumor models, which heavily focus on the early-stage disease
and do not address the issue of clinical metastasis, which is
the major cause of human cancer–related morbidity. As
suggested in Fig. 1, the development of what may be considered ﬁfth-generation advanced mouse tumor models,
mimicking metastatic progression so that metastatic progression and not the primary tumor becomes rate-limiting
for tumor growth, is in tremendous need. Better preclinical
metastasis models will not just advance translational tumor
biology research, but hold great promise to fundamentally
advance basic metastasis research. On a different note, the
dramatic progress to map the landscape of mutations in
human tumors as pursued in the International Cancer
Genome Consortium (ICGC) is awaiting a corresponding
systematic approach in mouse tumor models. Systematic
mouse/human genomic comparison may not just contribute
to better discriminate between driver and passenger mutations, but will also be important for the overall validation of
preclinical mouse tumor models, particularly in implementing novel biologic therapies and immunotherapies.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424

Mouse Models of Human Cancer

In summary, unraveling the molecular mechanisms
underlying all aspects of cancer and better patient stratiﬁcation will aid the understanding of the unique characteristics of an individual tumor and will help to turn cancer
from a devastating deadly disease into a chronic disease.
Technologic developments in the ﬁeld will continue to
enable discovery research and speed of the translational
process. Therefore, the "2nd Kloster Seeon Meeting on
Mouse Models of Human Cancer" will accordingly be held
in May 2016.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support

This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Kloster Seeon Meetings "Mouse
Models of Human Cancer" and the nationwide mouse tumor model consortium
"Preclinical Comprehensive Cancer Center" (www.helmholtz-pccc.de) through
the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centers (Berlin) and the German
Cancer Research Center DKFZ (Heidelberg).
Received May 13, 2014; revised June 20, 2014; accepted June 23, 2014;
published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Butler D. Translational research: crossing the valley of death. Nature
2008;453:840–2.
Blasco RB, Francoz S, Santamaria D, Canamero M, Dubus P, Charron
J, et al. c-Raf, but not B-Raf, is essential for development of K-Ras
oncogene-driven non–small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer Cell 2011;
19:652–63.
Bouwman P, Jonkers J. Molecular pathways: how can BRCA-mutated
tumors become resistant to PARP inhibitors? Clin Can Res 2014;
20:540–7.
Neesse A, Frese KK, Bapiro TE, Nakagawa T, Sternlicht MD, Seeley
TW, et al. CTGF antagonism with mAb FG-3019 enhances chemotherapy response without increasing drug delivery in murine ductal
pancreas cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:12325–30.
Medyouf H, Mossner M, Jann JC, Nolte F, Raffel S, Herrmann C, et al.
Myelodysplastic cells in patients reprogram mesenchymal stromal
cells to establish a transplantable stem cell niche disease unit. Cell
Stem Cell 2014;14:824–37.
Lee EC, Liang Q, Ali H, Bayliss L, Beasley A, Bloomﬁeld-Gerdes T, et al.
Complete humanization of the mouse immunoglobulin loci enables
efﬁcient therapeutic antibody discovery. Nat Biotechnol 2014;32:
356–63.
Lunardi A, Ala U, Epping MT, Salmena L, Clohessy JG, Webster KA,
et al. A co-clinical approach identiﬁes mechanisms and potential
therapies for androgen deprivation resistance in prostate cancer. Nat
Genet 2013;45:747–55.
Sutherland KD, Song JY, Kwon MC, Proost N, Zevenhoven J,
Berns A. Multiple cells-of-origin of mutant K-Ras-induced mouse
lung adenocarcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:4952–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

Liu HK, Wang Y, Belz T, Bock D, Takacs A, Radlwimmer B, et al. The
nuclear receptor tailless induces long-term neural stem cell expansion
and brain tumor initiation. Genes Dev 2010;24:683–95.
Chen J, McKay RM, Parada LF. Malignant glioma: lessons
from genomics, mouse models, and stem cells. Cell 2012;149:
36–47.
Dvorak HF. Tumors: wounds that do not heal. Similarities between
tumor stroma generation and wound healing. N Engl J Med 1986;
315:1650–9.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation.
Cell 2011;144:646–74.
Pribluda A, Elyada E, Wiener Z, Hamza H, Goldstein RE, Biton M, et al.
A senescence-inﬂammatory switch from cancer-inhibitory to cancerpromoting mechanism. Cancer Cell 2013;24:242–56.
Ozdemir BC, Pentcheva-Hoang T, Carstens JL, Zheng X, Wu
CC, Simpson TR, et al. Depletion of carcinoma-associated ﬁbroblasts and ﬁbrosis induces immunosuppression and accelerates
pancreas cancer with reduced survival. Cancer Cell 2014;25:
719–34.
Dorr JR, Yu Y, Milanovic M, Beuster G, Zasada C, Dabritz JH, et al.
Synthetic lethal metabolic targeting of cellular senescence in cancer
therapy. Nature 2013;501:421–5.
Rad R, Rad L, Wang W, Cadinanos J, Vassiliou G, Rice S, et al.
PiggyBac transposon mutagenesis: a tool for cancer gene discovery
in mice. Science 2010;330:1104–7.
Wuestefeld T, Pesic M, Rudalska R, Dauch D, Longerich T, Kang T,
et al. A direct in vivo RNAi screen identiﬁes MKK4 as a key regulator of
liver regeneration. Cell 2013;153:389–401.

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4675

Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424

Mouse Models of Human Cancer
Barbara C. Böck, Ulrike Stein, Clemens A. Schmitt, et al.
Cancer Res 2014;74:4671-4675. Published OnlineFirst August 18, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/09/18/0008-5472.CAN-14-1424.DC1

Cited articles

This article cites 17 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/17/4671.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

