Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

About-face on the metabolic side effects of rapamycin
Adam B. Salmon
Rapamycin, an inhibitor of the mTOR pathway,
can extend lifespan and improve age-related functional
decline in mice, thereby providing the first proof of
principal that a pharmaceutical agent can slow the aging
process in mammals [1, 2]. These outcomes have proven
robust in repeated studies, however, their potential
translational relevance towards a means to slow aging or
prevent age-related disease in otherwise healthy humans
remains unclear. Part of the challenge in addressing the
potential of rapamycin (or its analogs) as a pro-longevity
therapeutic lies in its known clinical risks for adverse sideeffects. Primary amongst these are metabolic defects that
include hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, insulin resistance
and increased incidence of new-onset type 2 diabetes. In
healthy rodents, treatment with rapamycin also causes a
relatively rapid, dose-dependent impairment of markers
of glucose homeostasis [2]. The nature of the metabolic
effects/defects caused by rapamycin remain ambiguous in
regards to their role in longevity and healthy aging. Fang
et al. suggested the effects of rapamycin on metabolism
depend on the length of treatment with a detrimental
effect on glucose metabolism in the short-term whereas
mice treated chronically with rapamycin actually became
insulin-sensitive [3]. On the other hand, Blagosklonny
has proposed that the presumed metabolic impairments
caused by rapamycin may simply be a consequence of
its action as a “starvation-mimetic” and, further, may be
fundamentally required for its pro-longevity effect [4].
Clarifying these uncertain relationships could
pave the way to understanding how rapamycin, and thus
targeting mTOR, could be used in ways that maximize its
benefit during treatment. To this goal, several significant
questions may be raised, the first of which is the
molecular nature of the metabolic impairments imparted
by rapamycin. Several recent studies have elegantly
shown that chronic treatment with rapamycin inhibits
mTORC2 signaling which may be a primary culprit in its
alteration of glucose metabolism. Interestingly, Lamming
et al. show that metabolic effects of reduced mTORC2 are
independent of those on lifespan in mice with deletion of
Rictor [5]. Because rapamycin has now been shown to be
promiscuous in its inhibition of the mTOR complexes,
approaches that specifically target mTORC1 may help in
this regard.
A second question that has arisen is whether the
metabolic impairments caused by rapamycin can be
alleviated. These effects in mice are dose-dependent [2]

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

though until recently it has been unclear whether such
treatment with rapamycin causes a permanent alteration in
metabolic function. To better understand this question, we
designed a straightforward study, now published in Aging,
that tested whether the metabolic deficiencies that occur
in mice chronically treated with encapsulated rapamycin
are retained after the cessation of treatment [6]. We also
took this opportunity to test whether diet, genotype, and
time of treatment could alter the metabolic effects of
rapamycin treatment. In this study, glucose homeostasis,
as measured by glucose and insulin tolerance tests, was
significantly impaired by rapamycin in both inbred
(C57BL/6) and genetically heterogeneous (UT-HET3)
mice. This rapamycin-induced impairment occurred in
mice fed either low fat or high fat diets and, moreover, we
found no evidence that increasing the length of treatment
promoted any improvement in metabolic phenotypes as
has previously been suggested [3]. However, once we
ended the rapamycin treatment, all markers of glucose
homeostasis almost completely returned to normal; i.e.,
glucose homeostasis in previously rapamycin-treated mice
was no different from those never treated with rapamycin.
Perhaps most interestingly, this reversal occurred in a
relatively short period of time (1-2 weeks) even after long
term (4 months) rapamycin treatment, suggesting that
these metabolic side effects are a consequence of ongoing
use of this drug and are not permanent alterations to the
glucose homeostatic network.
Many of the pre-translational concerns regarding
the usefulness of targeting the mTOR pathway revolve
around discovering ways to mitigate its side effects while
still retaining the beneficial effects. Our finding that the
metabolic impairments caused by rapamycin can be
alleviated suggest that alternative treatment regimens
might be a feasible step towards this goal. One possibility
could be intermittent treatment with rapamycin; Leontieva
et al recently showed that a once-weekly treatment with
rapamycin extends lifespan in high fat-fed mice without
altering glucose or insulin levels [7]. A second possibility
might be pairing rapamycin with therapeutic treatment for
metabolic dysfunction. Rosiglitazone, an insulin sensitizer,
can partially improve the glucose impairments caused by
rapamycin when administered concurrently [8]. To test
the effects on lifespan of such an approach, the NIA’s
Intervention Testing Program is currently performing
longevity studies in which mice are treated concurrently
with rapamycin and the antidiabetic drug metformin.

2585

Oncotarget

These findings will be an important piece in solving the
puzzle regarding the complicated role of rapamycin (and
mTOR) in metabolism and longevity.
Adam B. Salmon: The Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for
Longevity and Aging Studies and Department of Molecular
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio and Geriatric Research, Education and
Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans Health Care System,
San Antonio, TX, USA
Correspondence: Adam B. Salmon, email salmona@uthscsa.edu
Received: February 13, 2015
Published: February 14, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Wilkinson JE et al. Aging Cell. 2012; 11(4):675-682.

2.	

Miller RA et al. Aging Cell. 2014; 13(3):468-477.

3.	

Fang Y et al. Cell Metabolism. 2013; 17(3):456-462.

4.	

Blagosklonny MV. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10(24):4217-4224.

5.	

Lamming DW et al. Aging Cell. 2014; 13(5):911-914.

6.	

Liu Y et al. Aging (Albany NY). 2014; 6(9):742-754.

7.	

Leontieva OV et al. Aging Cell. 2014; 13(4):616-622.

8.	

Festuccia WT et al. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014;
306(9):E1046-E1054.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2586

Oncotarget

