2832

CORRESPONDENCE

Lack of Reliability of CA125 Response
Criteria With Anti-VEGF Molecularly
Targeted Therapy

T

he conclusion, rather deﬁnitively stated in the title (‘‘Lack of
reliability of CA125 response criteria with anti-VEGF molecularly targeted therapy’’) of a recent Cancer article, must be challenged.1 The objection relates to the basic premise of the
analysis. The investigators clearly state: ‘‘Response by RECIST imaging criteria was deﬁned as the standard for response for this clinical study’’ (p. 1729). If the investigators had elected to deﬁne the
‘standard for response’ as the ‘Rustin CA-125 response criteria,’
an equally reasonable paradigm for monitoring therapeutic effect
in ovarian cancer,2 then would the title of the article have been
‘‘Lack of reliability of RECIST imaging criteria with anti-VEGF
molecularly targeted therapy’’?
Although allowable space does not permit a thorough discussion of the serious deﬁciencies of radiographic imaging in
evaluating response and progression in ovarian cancer, it is
well documented that there are major disagreements between
radiologists in their interpretation of abdominal CT scan ﬁndings in more than 25% of patients participating in antineoplastic drug trials in this malignancy.3 Furthermore, the recognized
substantial biologic heterogeneity within the multiple metastatic deposits in ovarian cancer is a rational explanation for
differences between a ‘measurable-mass–based’ view (radiographic imaging) versus what can be considered a more global
‘marker-based’ view of the status of the cancer in an individual
patient.4
It certainly can be argued rationally that a modest rise in CA125 in an otherwise ‘clinically stable’ ovarian cancer patient should
not be the sole reason for discontinuation of the individual’s current
therapy. However, the identical argument can be made for radiographic evidence of a modest increase in the size of a measurable
tumor mass.
One might have hoped the discussion and conclusion
within, and title of, this article more accurately reﬂected the
objective observation that there appear to be potentially clinically
relevant inconsistencies between ‘CA-125’ and ‘RECIST imaging’
response criteria (Response Criteria in Solid Tumors) when
molecularly targeted agents are administered in ovarian cancer.
Furthermore, the existing data can be most interpreted most
appropriately to raise at least as many questions regarding the
utility of RECIST imaging criteria as they do for employing bioª 2008 American Cancer Society

Correspondence

logic markers of efﬁcacy of molecularly targeted
agents in this malignancy.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.
4.

Azad NS, Annunziata CM, Steinberg SM, et al. Lack
of reliability of CA125 response criteria with anti-VEGF
molecularly targeted therapy. Cancer. 2008;112:17261732.
Vergote I, Rustin GJ, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors
(ovarian cancer). Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1534-1535.
Markman M. The myth of measurable disease in ovarian
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:3013-3015.
Markman M. Declining CA-125 in an ovarian cancer
patient with progression of measurable disease: a rational
hypothesis for discordant results. Gynecol Oncol. 2000;77:
321-322.

Maurie Markman, MD
Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23893
Published online 8 October 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

Reply to Lack of Reliability
of CA125 Response Criteria
With Anti-VEGF Molecularly
Targeted Therapy

W

e appreciate Dr. Markman’s thoughtful comments regarding our article, ‘‘Lack of reliability of CA125 response criteria with anti-VEGF
molecularly targeted therapy.’’1 We agree that
monitoring disease response in ovarian cancer is
problematic and controversial; various studies
have produced differing results regarding whether
changes in CA-125 concentrations or radiologic
measurements are better predictors of disease
behavior on a given therapy. However, multiple
studies have demonstrated that changes in CA125 concentrations do correlate well with changes

2833

in radiologic measurements when cytotoxic chemotherapeutics are employed. Taking these data
into consideration, the Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup has endorsed using the Rustin CA-125 criteria as secondary endpoints in ﬁrst-line therapy
randomized trials.2
The thrust of our article is that these CA-125
criteria have not been validated in treatment trials
of targeted agents. On the basis of the results from
our small sample, the same correlation between
CA-125 and radiologic response may not be present in targeted therapy trials—a phenomenon that
also has been described in the prostate (prostatespeciﬁc antigen) literature.3 Accordingly, we believe
that clinical trialists need to be cautious in designing trials for patients with ovarian cancer so that
patients are not removed prematurely from study
or, alternatively, kept on study well after clinical
beneﬁt has ceased. Dr. Markman’s points regarding
the common sense approach of not removing
patients from a treatment because of modest
increases in either tumor size on imaging or CA125 concentrations are well taken; however, clinical
trials may not allow such leeway if strict Rustin
CA-125 criteria are written into the study initially.
Had we written the Rustin criteria into our trial as
response criteria, as stated in our article, then 3 of
7 partial responders would have been taken off
study prematurely: One of those patients currently
remains on study 2 years after she would have had
to cease therapy. The objective of our article was
not to prove that changes in imaging parameters
are better assessors of disease behavior than CA125 concentrations. Rather, we emphasized that
the 2 parameters may not correlate with one
another in molecularly targeted therapies the way
they do in cytotoxic chemotherapy. Instead of arbitrarily choosing 1 method over the other, a better
alternative would be to test both CA-125 criteria
and imaging criteria in a prospective, properly
powered study of targeted therapy correlated with
patient outcome.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Azad NS, Annunziata CM, Steinberg SM, et al. Lack of
reliability of CA125 response criteria with anti-VEGF
molecularly targeted therapy. Cancer. 2008;112:17261732.
Vergote I, Rustin GJ, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors
(ovarian cancer). Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1534-1535.

2834
3.

Correspondence

Dahut WL, Scripture C, Posadas E, et al. A phase II clinical
trial of sorafenib in androgen-independent prostate cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:209-214.

Nilofer Azad, MD
Lori Minasian, MD
Elise Kohn, MD

National Cancer Institute
National Institutes of Health
Bethesda, Maryland
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23894
Published online 8 October 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

