Correspondence

Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Improves Survival in Patients
With American Joint Committee
on Cancer Stage II Colon Cancer
With great interest we read the article by McKenzie et al,1
who demonstrated a survival advantage for adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer/International Union Against Cancer (AJCC/UICC) stage
II colon cancer in a population-based analysis illustrating that
select patients with AJCC/UICC stage II disease should be
given adjuvant treatment. In the study by McKenzie et al,1
selection criteria for adjuvant treatment were not defined.
However, when grouped according to receipt of adjuvant
chemotherapy, patients who received chemotherapy were disproportionately younger, had larger tumors located more frequently in the descending or sigmoid colon, and were more
likely to have 12 lymph nodes examined.
In our opinion, the pathology report represents the
basis for risk stratification and consequently selection of
patients for adjuvant treatment. In our recent study published in this journal,2 we proved that venous invasion was
an independent prognostic variable in patients with
AJCC/UICC stage II disease. Inspired by the current publication, we enlarged our multivariable analysis.
Analyzing 108 patients with stage II colorectal cancer in a Cox regression model, T4 tumors (hazard ratio
[HR] 17.51; 95% confidence interval [CI], 4.04-75.80; P
< .001), venous invasion (HR, 8.46; 95% CI,2.03-35.12;
P ¼ .003), and examination of <12 lymph nodes (HR,
3.45; 95% CI, 1.09-10.26; P ¼ .035) were associated significantly with cancer-related death. No impact on outcome was noted for age, sex, tumor size and grade, or
lymphatic invasion. With respect to progression-free survival, similar results were obtained (data not shown).
Our data are well in line with the report by
McKenzie et al,1 in which sampling of >12 lymph nodes
was associated significantly with favorable outcome. Stocchi et al3 recently presented similar data indicating that
<12 examined lymph nodes and T4 tumors are independent predictors of poor patient outcome, yet they did
not include venous invasion in their analysis.
In conclusion, patients with AJCC/UICC stage II
disease who have tumors characterized by T4 classification, venous invasion, or <12 lymph nodes examined are
more likely to die from disease. Thus, these 3 markers,
which can be obtained easily during the routine pathologic work-up of cancer specimens, may well be used to
select patients for adjuvant therapy.

2184

REFERENCES
1. McKenzie S, Nelson R, Mailey B, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival in patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer stage II colon cancer [published online
ahead of print June 20, 2011]. Cancer. 2011.
2. Betge J, Pollheimer MJ, Lindtner RA, et al. Intramural and
extramural vascular invasion in colorectal cancer—prognostic
significance and quality of pathology reporting [published
online ahead of print July 12, 2011]. Cancer. 2011.
3. Stocchi L, Fazio VW, Lavery I, Hammel J. Individual surgeon,
pathologist, and other factors affecting lymph node harvest in
stage II colon carcinoma. Is a minimum of 12 examined lymph
nodes sufficient? Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18:405-412.
Johannes Betge
Cord Langer, MD
Institute of Pathology
Medical University of Graz
Graz, Austria

Peter Rehak, PhD
Department of Surgery
Research Unit for Biomedical Engineering and Computing
Medical University of Graz
Graz, Austria
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26493, Published online: August 31, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Adjuvant Chemotherapy
Improves Survival in Patients
With American Joint Committee
on Cancer Stage II Colon Cancer
We appreciate the interest in our article1 by Drs. Betge,
Rehak, and Langner. Their letter is a microcosm of the
great worldwide interest in defining the role for adjuvant
chemotherapy in patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage II colon cancer. Although we
could not identify specific factors that could be used to
select patients for adjuvant chemotherapy, our results
nevertheless demonstrate a survival benefit in patients
who receive it. The important issue of patient selection is
raised by Betge et al. In our article, we referred to current
National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines,
which suggest that lymph node number and poor prognostic
indicators (eg, T4 tumor depth and lymphovascular invasion)
must be taken into account when considering adjuvant
chemotherapy for these patients.1,2
Betge et al noted that the patients in our cohort who
received chemotherapy were more likely to have 12
lymph nodes examined. This association is interesting and

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Correspondence

perhaps counterintuitive given current guidelines to
consider adjuvant chemotherapy for patients who have
<12 lymph nodes examined. What this may suggest is
that no single factor alone dictates the administration of
adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with stage II disease
in current clinical practice. Several different factors
(eg, T classification, number of lymph nodes, lymphovascular invasion, and others) must be considered, as
Betge et al demonstrate.3 Taken together, our collective
findings indicate that clinicians must continue to use their
best judgment in selecting patients to receive adjuvant
therapy for stage II colon cancer.

2. Engstrom PF, Arnoletti JP, Benson AB 3rd, et al.; National
Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology: colon cancer. J Natl Compr Canc
Netw. 2009;7:778-831.
3. Betge J, Pollheimer MJ, Lindtner RA, et al. Intramural and
extramural vascular invasion in colorectal cancer—prognostic
significance and quality of pathology reporting [published
online ahead of print July 12, 2011]. Cancer. 2011.
Wendy Lee, BA
Joseph Kim, MD
Department of Surgery
City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center
Duarte, California

Vincent Chung, MD

REFERENCES
1. McKenzie S, Nelson R, Mailey B, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival in patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer stage II colon cancer [published online
ahead of print June 20, 2011]. Cancer. 2011.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

Department of Medical Oncology
City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center
Duarte, California

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26503, Published online: August 31, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2185

