Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 40

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/ 

Research Paper

Ibrutinib modifies the function of monocyte/macrophage
population in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Stefania Fiorcari1,*, Rossana Maffei1,*, Valentina Audrito2, Silvia Martinelli1, Elisa
ten Hacken3, Patrizia Zucchini1, Giulia Grisendi1, Leonardo Potenza1, Mario Luppi1,
Jan A. Burger3, Silvia Deaglio2, Roberto Marasca1
1

Hematology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy

2

Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin and Human Genetics Foundation, Turin, Italy

3

Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Roberto Marasca, email: roberto.marasca@unimore.it
Stefania Fiorcari, email: stefania.fiorcari@unimore.it
Keywords: CLL, ibrutinib, microenvironment, nurse-like cells, immune modulation
Received: June 08, 2016     Accepted: August 15, 2016     Published: September 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
In lymphoid organs, nurse-like cells (NLCs) show properties of tumor-associated
macrophages, playing a crucial role in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cell survival.
Ibrutinib, a potent inhibitor of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), is able to counteract
pro-survival signals in CLL cells. Since the effects on CLL cells have been studied in
the last years, less is known about the influence of ibrutinib on NLCs properties. We
sought to determine how ibrutinib modifies NLCs functions focusing on the balance
between immunosuppressive and inflammatory features. Our data show that ibrutinib
targets BTK expressed by NLCs modifying their phenotype and function. Treatment
with ibrutinib reduces the phagocytic ability and increases the immunosuppressive
profile of NLCs exacerbating the expression of M2 markers. Accordingly, ibrutinib
hampers LPS-mediated signaling, decreasing STAT1 phosphorylation, while allows
IL-4-mediated STAT6 phosphorylation. In addition, NLCs treated with ibrutinib
are able to protect CLL cells from drug-induced apoptosis partially through the
secretion of IL-10. Results from patient samples obtained prior and after 1 month
of treatment with ibrutinib show an accentuation of CD206, CD11b and Tie2 in the
monocytic population in the peripheral blood. Our study provides new insights into the
immunomodulatory action of ibrutinib on monocyte/macrophage population in CLL.

tissues, CLL cells form areas of larger proliferating cells,
known as pseudofollicles, establishing intimate contact
with accessory cells [3].
Nurse-like cells (NLCs) are round or fibroblastshaped adherent cells differentiated from peripheral bloodderived monocytes in vitro by high-mobility group protein
B-1 (HMGB1) release from CLL cells and also detected
in lymph nodes (LN) of CLL patients [4]. NLCs assume
a pivotal role in leukemic clone maintenance supporting
CLL survival, proliferation and protecting CLL from
drug-induced apoptosis [5]. Accordingly, macrophage
depletion was recently demonstrated as a promising
strategy to sensitize CLL cells to apoptosis and inhibit
disease progression in mouse model [6, 7]. Phenotypically,

INTRODUCTION
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the
most common hematologic malignancy in the Western
Countries. Despite several and important recent
therapeutic advances, CLL is still an incurable disease.
CLL is characterized by several clinical complications
related to alterations in the immune system, including
hypogammaglobulinemia, predisposition to infections
and increased incidence of autoimmune disorders [1].
In this scenario, CLL cells are not innocent bystanders,
but escape immunosurveillance and actively model the
surrounding microenvironment to aberrantly orchestrate
the function of immune effector cells [2]. In lymphatic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65968

Oncotarget

RESULTS

NLCs are considered as CLL-specific M2-skewed tumor
associated macrophages characterized by high CD11b,
CD163, CD206, HLA-DR, HGF and IDO expression
[8-12] and by dysregulation of genes involved in
immunocompetence [13]. Likewise, NLCs were reported
to promote T regulatory cell expansion and to sustain T
cell immune dysfunctions in CLL [6, 12].
Ibrutinib is a potent irreversible inhibitor of Bruton’s
tyrosin kinase (BTK) that has demonstrated exceptional
safety and efficacy as a monotherapy in CLL patients
[14, 15]. While durable clinical responses to single-agent
ibrutinib are common in CLL, few patients experience
a complete response. As consequence, in an effort to
improve the already impressive effects of ibrutinib, it is
currently investigated in combination with chemotherapy
and monoclonal antibodies to facilitate the clearing of CLL
cells and achieve deeper responses [16, 17]. Ibrutinib has
been demonstrated to disrupt B-cell receptor (BCR) and
NF-ĸB signaling pathways [18, 19], affecting lymphocytes
migration and adhesion and counteracting the pro-survival
signals derived from the microenvironment [20, 21].
However, ibrutinib is also a potent and clinically relevant
immunomodulatory drug. Ibrutinib irreversibly binds IL-2
inducible T cell kinase (ITK) leading to impairment of NK
function with decreased ADCC [22] and to inhibition of
Th2 cells activation upon TCR stimulation [23]. In treated
patients, ibrutinib was associated with a normalization
of CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ T cell count and Th17
cell count, a decrease in T cell activation, proliferation
and “pseudo-exhaustion” and a reduction of several
inflammatory cytokines [23]. Overall, ibrutinib seems
to correct the CLL-mediated chronic and dysfunctional
activation of T cells, thereby enhancing immunotherapeutic
strategies such as CAR-T cell therapy [24]. BTK is also
expressed by macrophages and is required for phagocytosis
and for macrophage lineage commitment to inflammatory
profile [25]. Ibrutinib was reported to counteract the
phagocytosis of rituximab-coated CLL cells by macrophages
[26]. In ibrutinib-treated patients, NLCs can be generated
in vitro and maintain their ability to rescue CLL cells
from apoptosis [27]. Conversely, ibrutinib was found to
disaggregate the interactions of macrophages and CLL cells
in bone marrow microenvironment in treated patients [28].
These evidences prompted us to investigate the
biological effects and mechanism mediated by ibrutinib on
NLCs in CLL. Specifically, we sought to determine how
ibrutinib modifies NLCs functions, focusing on the phagocytic
activity and the balance between immunosuppressive and
inflammatory features, and what are the consequences of
these effects in the CLL-NLCs crosstalk. We demonstrate
that treatment with ibrutinib targets BTK in NLCs, impairs
phagocytosis and improves immunosuppressive phenotype.
Overall, our study provides new insights into the effect of
ibrutinib treatment on the modulation of immune elements in
CLL tissue microenvironment, highlighting new mechanisms
that may impair CLL sensitivity to ibrutinib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

BTK protein is expressed and targeted in NLCs
by ibrutinib
Since the expression of BTK is not restricted to B
cells, but it is also present in myeloid cells like monocytes/
macrophages [29], we sought to determine the expression
profile and the activation status of BTK in NLCs. CLL cells
were completely removed with several washes and after
1 hour of incubation with ibrutinib NLCs were collected.
The purity of NLCs preparations was assessed by phasecontrast microscopy and by western blot with CD19
antibody as shown in Supplementary Figure S1. As shown
in Figure 1, NLCs revealed the expression of BTK with
two different sites of phosphorylation (Tyr551 and Tyr223).
We asked ourselves whether ibrutinib would interfere with
BTK activation in these cells. NLCs were treated with
ibrutinib 1 µM for 1 hour and BTK phosphorylation was
determined. Ibrutinib reduced the level of phosphorylated
BTK at both sites Tyr551 and Tyr223 as determined by
western blot (Figure 1A and Figure 1B n=5). This result
was also confirmed by flow cytometry (Figure 1C) and
immunofluorescence microscopy (Figure 1D). Moreover,
treatment with ibrutinib affected the activation of BTKdownstream signaling pathways in NLCs as the PI3K and
MAPK pathways leading to decreased AKT and ERK1/2
phosphorylation (Supplementary Figure S1). These results
imply that ibrutinib, targeting BTK in NLCs, may modify
the biological functions of NLCs. As consequence, in
the following experiments we explore the effects of
BTK inhibition on pivotal mechanisms of macrophage
functionality such as phagocytic capacity and M1 vs. M2
polarization.

Ibrutinib affects phagocytic activity of NLCs
We first observed that after ibrutinib treatment the
activation status and viability of NLCs was not affected
(Figure 2A) and the morphology of NLCs was preserved
(Supplementary Figure S2). In macrophages, BTK is
involved in cytoskeleton remodeling and is required
for optimal phagocytosis in the process of ingestion
and phagosomes formation [30]. In line with these
evidences, we investigated the ability of NLCs to engulf
and ingest particles after treatment with ibrutinib. We
treated NLCs with ibrutinib for 30 minutes or 1 hour
and uptake of FITC-dextran particles was quantified
by confocal microscopy. Ibrutinib decreased NLCs
phagocytic activity compared to control (n=6, P<0.01
for both time-points, Figure 2B). One of the main events
accompanying phagocytic cup formation is the activation
of MAC-1 (CD11b/CD18) [31]. Consistently, we also
found an impairment of MAC-1 (CD11b/CD18) mean
expression from 19% (±1%) to 13% (±1%) (n=6, P<0.05,
Figure 2C).
65969

Oncotarget

Ibrutinib enhances the immunosuppressive
features of NLCs

and IL-2 (P<0.01 for all) (Figure 3A). These data were
confirmed by an induction of the surface expression levels
of M2 polarization markers CD163 and CD206 compared
to untreated controls (n=7, P<0.01 for all) (Figure 3B and
3C). Of interest, we also detected the induction of NAMPT,
known to enhance the immunosuppressive profile of NLCs
[11] (Figure 3A and 3D).

BTK is involved in macrophages lineage commitment
to inflammatory profile [25]. Several evidences have shown
that NLCs are closely associated to tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM) with peculiar M2-skewed properties
[8, 10, 11]. We sought to determine whether treatment with
ibrutinib further stimulates the expression of M2 polarization
markers. After 24 hours of treatment, the transcriptional
signature of NLCs exposed to ibrutinib showed the
induction of M2 markers CD163 (P<0.01), IL10 (P<0.05),
MRC1 (CD206) (P<0.01), CCL18 (P<0.01) and PD-L1
(P<0.05) compared to control (n=8) and the concomitant
down-regulation of M1 macrophages markers IL-1, TNFα

Ibrutinib stimulates M2 signaling pathways
hampering a M1 profile in NLCs
M1 polarization is driven by IFNs and TLR
signaling via STAT1, whereas M2 polarization is driven
by IL-4 and IL-3 via STAT6 [32]. NLCs, treated for 1
hour with ibrutinib, displayed an impairment of STAT1

Figure 1: Ibrutinib specifically targets BTK in NLCs. NLCs (n=5) were treated or not with ibrutinib 1µM for 1h. Then, cell

lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting using anti-phosphoBTK Tyr551, Tyr223, total BTK and anti-actin antibodies. Three representative
samples are depicted in panel A. In panel B bar diagram represents densitometric quantification of bands relative to phospho-BTK Tyr551
and phospho-BTK Tyr223 normalized on β-actin. Data are presented as mean ± SEM of 5 different NLCs samples (**P<0.01). NLCs were
treated with ibrutinib for 1h before assessing expression of phospho-BTK Tyr551 and Tyr223 by flow cytometry C. and immunofluorescence
microscopy D. (n=5, *P<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65970

Oncotarget

IL-10 secreted by ibrutinib-treated NLCs exerts
protective effects on CLL cells

phosphorylation that was hampered also after LPS
stimulation for 3 hours compared to the corresponding
controls (Figure 4A and Supplementary Figure S3A).
Additionally, ibrutinib affected the levels of other
signaling pathways crucial for M1 commitment such as
phosphorylation of ERK, AKT and IĸB either in presence
or absence of LPS stimulation (Figure 4B). Consistent
with an impairment of M1 signaling pathways, we also
observed in ibrutinib-treated NLCs an induction of
STAT6 phosphorylation, that was also preserved upon
IL4 stimulation (Figure 4C and Supplementary Figure
S3B). In addition, treatment with ibrutinib enhanced
the expression of the anti-inflammatory protein SHIP1
(Figure 4D). These results indicate that inhibition of BTK
in NLCs induced by ibrutinib intensifies the expression of
M2-promoting properties counteracting the polarization
toward M1 phenotype.

Inside tissue microenvironments, NLCs establish
a bidirectional cross-talk with CLL cells, allowing their
protection from spontaneous and drug-induced apoptosis
[5, 33]. We exposed both CLL cells and NLCs to ibrutinib.
In presence of ibrutinib, CLL cells cultured without NLCs
were more sensitive to apoptosis if compared to CLL
cells cultured with NLCs. Indeed, as recently reported
also by others [27], we found that ibrutinib does not
decisively hamper the protective effect mediated by
NLCs on leukemic cells when both CLL cells and NLCs
were exposed to ibrutinib 1 µM (Figure 5A). This result
means that NLCs maintain the ability to nurture CLL
cells also in presence of ibrutinib, mediating signals that
partially rescue CLL cells from drug-induced apoptosis.

Figure 2: Ibrutinib impairs the phaghocytic activity of NLCs. A. Bar diagram represents the formazan release by metabolically

active NLCs treated with ibrutinib 1 µM for 24 hours compared to untreated control (n=6, ns). In the bottom panels, representative phasecontrast micrographs demonstrate NLCs activation (as insoluble formazan precipitate) after treatment with ibrutinib. B. Box-plots summarize
FITC-Dextran uptake by NLCs treated or not with ibrutinib 1 µM relative to 6 independent experiments (**P<0.01). In the bottom panels,
two representative NLCs samples show confocal staining of NLCs with FITC-dextran, phalloidin and DAPI. C. Bar diagram shows the
percentage of positive CD14+ NLCs stained for MAC-1 Ab or isotype control (n=6, P<0.05). Contour plots show a representative sample.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65971

Oncotarget

Given the importance of soluble factors on protecting
CLL cells from apoptosis in the microenvironment, we
next sought to investigate one of the possible cytokines
secreted by ibrutinib-treated NLCs that may be involved
in the maintenance of CLL cell survival. Because ibrutinib
further stimulated the gene expression level of IL-10 in
NLCs (Figure 3A), we explored its role in the cross-talk
between NLCs and CLL cells. First, we demonstrated that
ibrutinib was able to improve NLCs secretion of IL-10
(n=6, P<0.05) (Figure 5B). To better clarify the role of
IL-10 in mediating CLL survival, we then cultured CD19+
CLL cells stimulated with IL-10 in a dose escalation
experiment (from 0.1 ng/ml to 100 ng/ml) and we found
a moderate protection from apoptosis at different doses
(n=4, Supplementary Figure S4). We then analyzed the
ability of ibrutinib to abrogate the pro-survival signal
induced by IL-10 stimulation (1 ng/ml) in CLL cells
after 24-48 hours of culture. As shown in Figure 5C,
ibrutinib did not completely antagonize the ability of
IL-10 to protect CLL cells from apoptosis (n=7) and to

mediate signaling pathways through pSTAT3 and pERK
(Figure 5D). Altogether these findings demonstrate an
ibrutinib-mediated reinforcement of IL-10 production by
NLCs and the inability of ibrutinib to totally counteract
IL-10 signaling on CLL cells, suggesting that IL-10 may
be involved in the mechanism of ibrutinib-resistance
mediated by NLCs.

Ibrutinib alters the monocytic population in
treated CLL patients
To understand the in vivo alterations mediated by
ibrutinib, we analyzed the circulating CD14+ population
in peripheral blood samples of CLL patients before and
after one month of treatment with ibrutinib. The blood
monocytic population, selected with anti-CD14, displayed
a higher positivity for CD206 after treatment with ibrutinib
in all 5 CLL patients with an increase of MFI from 37 (±4)
to 49 (±45) (Figure 6A, upper panel, *P<0.05). Again, we
detected an induction of CD11b in the CD14+ monocytic

Figure 3: Exposure of NLCs to ibrutinib intensifies the expression of genes involved in M2 polarization. A. NLCs from 8

CLL patients were exposed to ibrutinib or vehicle (DMSO) for 24 hours. Transcriptional levels of CD163, IL-10, MRC1, NAMPT, CCL18
and PD-L1 (M2 polarization) and IL-1, TNFα, IL-2 (M1 polarization) were measured by quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (n=8,
*P<0.05, **P<0.01). B. Diagrams show CD163 fluorescence intensity of NLCs treated with ibrutinib for 24 hours. Values of untreated
and treated samples (n=7) are connected by lines (P<0.01). C. Bar diagram shows cumulative analysis of CD206 pixel intensity scoring at
least 10 different cells for 3 different samples (P<0.01). On the right one representative sample stained for CD206, DAPI and phalloidin.
D. NAMPT expression on NLCs, treated with ibrutinib 1 µM for the indicated time, was evaluated by confocal microscopy (n=6) using
anti-NAMPT and secondary Alexa-488-anti-rabbit antibodies. Phalloidin and DAPI were used to counterstain. Graph shows cumulative
data of green fluorescence pixel intensity (n=6, P<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65972

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

population by ibrutinib from 576 (±55) to 705 (±473)
(Figure 6A, lower panel, *P<0.05). Next, we evaluated
the extent of a population of circulating monocytes able
to express Tie2 receptor (TEM) and showing tumorpromoting properties [34]. In the CD14+ population, we
found a variable expression of Tie2+ monocytes ranging
from 3% to 62.8%, but in all patients analyzed we detected
an increased expression after treatment with ibrutinib
(Figure 6B, n=5, *P<0.05). Next, we cultured PBMCs
from ibrutinib-treated patients to evaluate the capacity
to generate NLCs. As shown in Figure 6C, ibrutinib did
not prevent NLCs formation in vitro. In addition, NLCs
viability as well as the capacity to support CLL cell
survival were preserved (data not shown). Altogether,
these results suggest that treatment with ibrutinib is able
to induce modifications of the CD14+ population in CLL
patients that may be evaluated in the complexity of the in
vivo situation.

Ibrutinib is a first-in-class potent inhibitor of BTK
that binds covalently to Cys-481 in the ATP-binding
domain of the kinase. Inhibition of BTK in CLL cells
determines a disruption of important signaling pathways
involved in survival, migration and adhesion of leukemic
cells [19, 35]. This peculiar effect leads to a substantial
delocalization of CLL cells from the protective tissue
compartment to the periphery interfering with pathogenetic
mechanisms of recirculation and homing. One question
that needs to be answered is whether ibrutinib may affect
the non-malignant cellular compartment by modifying the
nurturing and protective niches of CLL cells into tissue
microenvironments. Recent studies have demonstrated
off-target effects of ibrutinib that could actively contribute
to modulate the CLL microenvironment [22, 23, 26, 36].
Ibrutinib mainly targets ITK in T cells influencing Th1/

Figure 4: Ibrutinib supports M2 signaling pathways by interfering with M1 polarization. NLCs were treated for 1 hour with

ibrutinib 1 µM and then stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) or IL-4 (10 ng/ml) for 3 hours or 30 minutes respectively. Lysates were probed
for pSTAT1, tSTAT1 A. pERK, tERK, pIĸB, tIĸB, pAKT, tAKT and actin B. following LPS stimulation investigating M1 polarization.
C. PSTAT6, tSTAT6 and actin were determined after IL-4 stimulation for M2 polarization. D. NLCs were treated with ibrutinib and SHIP1
induction was monitored by western blot and by immunofluorescence. Bar diagram depicts densitometric quantification of bands relative
to pSTAT1, pSTAT6 and SHIP1, either in presence or absence of the corresponding stimulus, normalized on β-actin. Data are presented as
mean ± SEM of 5 different NLCs samples (*P<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65973

Oncotarget

Th2 polarization towards Th1 potentially modifying T
cell anergy in CLL patients [23]. Moreover, impairment
of NK function with decreased ADCC [22] and disruption
of phagocytosis of rituximab-coated CLL cells by
macrophages were related to ibrutinib treatment [26].
The ability of ibrutinib to effectively disrupt the
crosstalk between CLL cells and NLCs is still unclear
[18, 27, 28]. Our study provides new insights into the
biological effects of ibrutinib treatment, reporting for the
first time an extensive description of the molecular and
functional modifications induced by ibrutinib treatment
in NLCs. We demonstrate that ibrutinib is unable to
completely antagonize the protective and nurturing role of
NLCs allowing the protection of CLL cells from ibrutinib.
This conclusion is in line with a recent report indicating
that treatment with ibrutinib is not able to mobilize
NLCs from niches into the blood and also to interfere
with the pro-survival effects of NLCs [27]. Moreover,
NLCs obtained in vitro from ibrutinib-treated patients are

able to protect CLL cells as well as that of NLCs from
untreated patients [27]. Here, we add a new explanation
of this unwanted effect on NLCs. Ibrutinib targets BTK
in NLCs affecting the activation by Src kinase-induced
phosphorylation at Tyr551, autophosphorylation at Tyr223
[37] and the activation of downstream-related pathways.
The relevance of BTK expression in macrophages is
related to regulation of macrophage lineage commitment.
In accordance, BTK is involved in the induction of signals
driving M1 polarization, but it also functions as a negative
regulator of M2-polarizing signaling pathways [25].
The BTK inhibition mediated by ibrutinib potentiates
the M2-skewed features typical of NLCs. Specifically,
ibrutinib induces (i) inhibition of phagocytosis in line with
downregulation of MAC1 expression, (ii) up-regulation of
CD163 and CD206 known to be M2 macrophage markers
and (iii) modulation of a peculiar cluster of genes involved
in immune suppression. Of interest, in the M2 signature,
ibrutinib promotes the expression of NAMPT able to

Figure 5: IL-10 mediates pro-survival signals in CLL cells during treatment with ibrutinib. A. Viability of CLL cells

were investigated treating both CLL cells and NLCs with ibrutinib 1 µM. CLL were harvested and divided into two fractions, one was
placed back onto the autologous NLCs and the second was placed into wells without NLCs. Bar diagrams represent the mean relative CLL
cell viabilities after 24, 48, 72h (n=9, *P<0.05, **P<0.01). B. Box plots show the percentage of IL-10 secreting cells in CD14+ NLCs
population treated or not with ibrutinib for 1 hour relative to five independent experiments. C. Bar diagrams show the relative viability
of CD19+ CLL cells treated with ibrutinib for 1 hour and then stimulated for 48 hours with IL-10 compared to untreated control (n=7,
*P<0.05, **P<0.01). D. Western blot represents the activation of pro-survival signals induced by IL-10 either in presence or not of ibrutinib
in one representative CD19+ CLL sample. Blots display pSTAT3, tSTAT3, pERK 1/2, tERK and actin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65974

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Ibrutinib alters the circulating monocytes in CLL patients. A. Bar diagrams show cumulative analysis of CD206

(up) and CD11b (down) MFI for 5 different CLL patients in pre-treatment and after treatment samples. On the right, histograms show MFI
of CD206 (up) and CD11b (down) for 3 representative CLL samples calculated using the corresponding isotype in pre-treated and after
treatment samples. The blue histogram represents the post-treatment condition and the red shows the pre-treatment condition. B. Contour
plots show the percentage of CD14+ Tie2+ monocytes before and after treatment with ibrutinib. On the right, diagram represents the
percentage of positive CD14+ cells stained for Tie2 either before or after treatment with ibrutinib (n=5). C. Phase contrast photomicrographs
and May-Grunwald Giemsa staining document the morphology of NLCs before and after treatment with ibrutinib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65975

Oncotarget

enhance the immunosuppressive phenotype of NLCs as
well as their ability to protect CLL from apoptosis creating
a CLL supporting microenvironment [11].
BTK is recruited to the Toll like receptor-4, during
LPS stimulation, promoting phosphorylation of NFĸB and
STAT1 activation, further sustaining the rationale of an
involvement of BTK in M1 polarization [25]. When NLCs
were exposed to LPS stimulation, STAT1 and its related
signaling pathways were strongly activated. Treatment
with ibrutinib, before LPS stimulation, diminished the
activation of STAT1 arguing for a negative effect of
this agent on M1 signaling pathway. On the contrary,
the inhibition of BTK activity, promoted by ibrutinib,
increased the induction of STAT6 also in presence of IL-4
as mediator of M2 polarization. Again, ibrutinib induced
the expression of another M2 modulator, SHIP1, which
is an anti-inflammatory protein that turns-off PI3Kdependent signaling [38].
CLL is partially rescued by ibrutinib-induced death
by NLCs contact. We pointed our attention on IL-10, as a
survival factor that may be involved in this effect given (i)
ibrutinib intensely induces gene expression and secretion
of IL-10 in NLCs, (ii) CLL cells express IL-10 receptor
as previously demonstrated [39], (iii) elevated serum IL10 levels are associated with worse CLL patients survival
[40]. The role of IL-10 in mediating CLL survival is still
controversial, implying a possible involvement in CLL cell
maintenance or in cell death. In particular, IL-10 provokes
apoptosis decreasing Bcl-2 protein levels [41] or activating
STAT1 protein in CLL cells [42]. On the contrary, IL-10
enhances the survival of CLL cells acting as an autocrine
growth factor [43, 44] and it is able to reduce cell death
caused by hydrocortisone [39]. Here, IL-10 mediates
pro-survival signals in CLL cells through the activation
of STAT3, that is known to provide a survival advantage
activating transcription of anti-apoptotic genes and ERK
1/2 signaling pathway [45]. Treatment with ibrutinib is
not able to totally counteract the pro-survival effect of IL10 in CLL cells arguing for its possible involvement in
mediating resistance to ibrutinib.
Several studies demonstrate the considerable clinical
success of ibrutinib showing a good safety profile and a
promising clinical efficacy [14, 15]. Despite these exciting
results, it had been immediately clear the limited capacity
of this agent to induce a complete eradication of neoplastic
clone, even if an improvement in quality of responses is
seen when patients are treated for an extended period
[46]. Persistent disease in blood and inside tissues can
be detected in patients also after years of single-agent
therapy. Moreover, some patients relapse during treatment
and some patients fail to respond, sometimes developing a
significant resistance to the treatment. Ibrutinib resistance
is known in part to be related to acquired mutation in
BTK at its binding site with a cysteine to serine mutation
and others involving phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCγ2), an
important downstream effector of BTK [47]. Nevertheless,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the contribution of microenvironmental elements in CLL
protection to ibrutinib may be envisioned and warrants
further investigations in treated patients inside clinical
trials. Our analysis of blood samples collected from 5
patients before and after one month of treatment with
ibrutinib, illustrates modifications of the monocytic
population in the peripheral blood. In ibrutinib-treated
samples, we detected an increased expression of M2
markers as CD206 and CD11b and higher percentage of
a small subpopulation of circulating monocytes able to
express Tie2 receptor (TEM). The increased number of
Tie2 expressing monocytes is somehow a dismal result,
due to the peculiar pro-angiogenic activity and the tumorpromoting M2 phenotype of this monocytic subset.
Overall, our results are in line with the reported
observation by Boissard and colleagues that NLCs may
mediate ibrutinib resistance in vitro, but further provide
a mechanistic explanation for these undesired effects
[27]. On the other hand, a very recent analysis of CLLassociated macrophages in bone marrow biopsies obtained
from CLL patients during ibrutinib treatment suggests
that ibrutinib may disrupt CLL-macrophage interactions
on the basis of a significant decrease in CD68+ cellular
extension and a reduction of CXCL13 secretion [28]. It
has to be considered that direct contact with CLL cells
is essential for the supporting functions of NLCs. As
consequence, a possible explanation of the apparent
contradictory results may be that ibrutinib treatment in
patients reduces the CLL infiltration inside bone marrow,
probably interfering with the extent of CLL-NLCs contact
and perhaps compensating for direct immunosuppressive
effect of ibrutinib on NLCs. However, further evaluations
of markers related to M1/M2 polarization in macrophages
in bone marrow biopsies during ibrutinib treatment would
be of interest. Ibrutinib is remarkably effective in CLL, but
its mechanism of action inside the complexity of tumor
microenvironment is not fully elucidated. For this reason,
our results push for a more deep and accurate analysis of
the immunomodulatory effects of ibrutinib to optimize its
use and develop effective combination strategies. It could
be of interest the observation that lenalidomide counteracts
the pro-leukemia role and the immunodeficiency typical
of NLCs inducing properties of pro-inflammatory cells
[48]. The opposite effect exerted by lenalidomide and
ibrutinib on NLCs is intriguing, suggesting future studies
to understand whether lenalidomide may overcome the
immunosuppressive effect on NLCs mediated by ibrutinib.
In conclusion, we proposed a new mechanism
of action of ibrutinib that further miseducates NLCs,
suggesting that this drug not only has an effect on the
CLL clone but also extensively influences the cellular
components of the CLL microenvironment. Ibrutinib
supports the nurturing and protective behavior of NLCs
potentiating their immunosuppressive profile and leading
to secretion of unwanted survival factors. Our findings
leave open the issue of how ibrutinib effects on CLL cells
65976

Oncotarget

may be optimized by associating it with other agents in
order to combine its peculiar mechanism of action related
to disruption of survival signaling pathways, migration
and adhesion, with an effective disruption of protective
milieu in tissue microenvironment.

San Diego, CA, USA) after 24h, 48h and 72h. For IL10 stimulation, CD19+ CLL cells were pre-incubated in
complete RPMI with or without ibrutinib for 1h at 37 °C
and then stimulated by the addition of 0.1-100 ng/ml IL-10
(PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA). For viability assays,
we calculated the mean relative viabilities to account for
variability in spontaneous apoptosis rates in different
patients’ samples. We define the mean relative viability as
the mean CLL cell viability of a particular sample (treated
with ibrutinib in the presence or absence of NLCs at a
certain time point), divided by the mean cell viability of
the same sample at the same time point of control CLL
cells cultured in suspension culture [49].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and samples
Blood samples from untreated patients that matched
standard diagnostic criteria for CLL were obtained
from the Hematology Unit of Modena Hospital, Italy
with a protocol approved by the Institutional Review
Board. All patients provided written informed consent in
accordance with the declaration of Helsinki. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by
Ficoll density gradient centrifugation and used fresh or
cryopreserved in RPMI-1640 medium (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA), 50% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and
10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and stored in liquid
nitrogen until use. To enrich for CLL cells, PBMCs were
incubated with CD19 Microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec,
Germany) obtain a purity > 99%, as assessed by flow
cytometry. Ibrutinib was purchased from Selleckchem
and was dissolved in DMSO, which was used as a vehicle
control in all experiments. Ibrutinib was used at a dose of
1 µM as in previous studies [18, 20, 23].

FITC-DEXTRAN uptake and confocal
microscopy of NLCs
For confocal microscopy experiments with NLCs,
PBMCs from CLL patients were plated on glass coverslips
in 24-wells plate in complete medium to generate NLCs
as indicated. After 10 days, NLCs were treated with
ibrutinib for 30 minutes and 1 hour, then the coverslips
were transferred in new wells and incubated for 15
minutes at 37 °C in PBS 5% FCS with 1 mg/ml of FITCDEXTRAN (Sigma). Then, coverslips were fixed (4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at RT), permeabilized
(0.1% saponin for 20 minutes at RT), blocked with goat
serum (30 min at 4 °C) and incubated with anti-phalloidinAlexa 568 (Invitrogen Life Technologies, 1:100, 1 hour at
4 °C) followed by secondary antibody Goat anti-RabbitAlexa 594 (Invitrogen Life Technologies, 1:300, 1 hour at 4
°C). Samples were counter-stained with DAPI and mounted
in SlowFade Gold reagent (both from Invitrogen). Slides
were analyzed using a TCS SP5 laser scanning confocal
microscope equipped with 4 lasers (Leica Microsystems,
Milan, Italy), images acquired with the LAS AF software
and processed with Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, San
Jose, CA). Pixel intensity analyses were performed using
the ImageJ (downloadable at http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/) and
the LAS Application Suite (Leica Microsystems) softwares.
Mean pixel intensity was calculated by defining a region
of interest (ROI) and measuring green fluorescence pixel
intensity. Results are expressed as fold change compared to
untreated control [11].

Nurse-like cells generation and analyses
PBMCs from CLL patients were suspended in
RPMI with 10% FBS to a final concentration of 107/
ml, as previously published [5]. After 14 days, the nonadherent CLL cells were harvested vigorously pipetting
the contents of the well leaving untouched the adherent
cells. NLCs typical morphology and immunophenotype
were confirmed by microscopy and flow cytometry,
respectively.

Cell treatments and viability
For co-culture with NLCs, PBMCs were suspended
in medium to a concentration of 107/ml and incubated for
at least 10 days. To assess the impact of ibrutinib on CLL
cell viability, both CLL and NLCs were concomitantly
exposed to ibrutinib. In detail, CLL cells were removed
by thoroughly pipetting and divided into 2 fractions.
One was placed back onto the autologous NLCs and
the second fraction was placed into wells without NLCs
either. After 30 minutes, ibrutinib or DMSO was added
in the corresponding wells. For all these experiments,
ibrutinib was used at a dose of 1 µM. CLL cell viability
was determined collecting non-adherent cells in the
corresponding well and analyzed by flow cytometry using
annexin V-FITC and propidium (PI) staining (eBioscience,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MTT assay and viability
NLCs activation was monitored using a yellow
tetrazolium MTT assay (Trevigen, Gaithersburg,
MD, USA). In this assay, dehydrogenases expressed
by metabolically active cells convert MTT
(3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-dyphenyltetrazolium
bromide) into intracellular purple formazan. NLC cells
were cultured into a 96-well plate for 12 days and then
treated with ibrutinib for 24 hours. Cells were then
incubated with MTT at 37 °C for 24 hours, followed by a
65977

Oncotarget

4h-incubation with 100 µL detergent reagent. Absorbance
readings were performed at 570 nm in a microplate reader
(Infinite M200, Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland).
NLCs viability were tested by Annexin V-PI staining
and analyzed by flow cytometry.

3 hours, 10 ng/ml of IL4 (Peprotech) for 30 minutes.
CLL cells were stimulated with 1 ng/ml IL-10 after a pretreatment of 1h with ibrutinib.

Flow cytometry

To determine IL-10 secretion, NLCs were
cultured for 10 days and then treated with ibrutinib for
24 hours and analyzed using CSA for IL-10 according
to manufacturer’s instructions (CSA Detection kit;
Miltenyi Biotec). NLCs were immunostained with IL10 catch reagent and incubated for 2 hours at 37 °C
to allow cytokine secretion. After washes, cells were
labeled with IL-10 Detection antibody conjugated to PE
and CD14 APC Ab. An isotype control sample for each
condition was acquired to exclude autofluorescence
background.

Cytokine secretion assay (CSA)

To determine the abundance of NLCs surface
markers, after 10 days the floating cells were removed
by washes and the adherent cells were treated with
ibrutinib for 1 hour or 24 hours, then detaching NLCs
with PBS/EDTA solution. Cells were stained with the
following antibodies and corresponding isotype controls:
APC-conjugated CD14, CD163 (both BD Biosciences
Pharmingen, San Jose, CA, USA), PE-conjugated CD11b
CBRM 1/5 (the activated epitope of CD11b MAC-1)
(eBioscience), pBTK Tyr551 (GeneTex, USA), pBTK
Tyr223 (Novus Biological, Littleton CO, USA). Events
were acquired using a FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson,
San José, CA, USA) or FACSAria cytometers and then
analyzed by FlowJo Software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR,
USA). In all the experiments, an isotype control sample for
each condition was acquired to exclude autofluorescence
background.

Ex vivo flow cytometry analysis
Peripheral blood samples from CLL patients treated
with ibrutinib were collected pre-treatment and after one
month of treatment. PBMCs were stained with APCconjugated CD14, CD206, CD11b (BD Biosciences)
and Tie2 (R&D System). Events were acquired using
a FACSAria cytometer and then analyzed by FlowJo
Software.

Real time PCR
RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Plus Mini
kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). RNA (100ng)
was reverse transcribed using Transcription High
fidelity cDNA Synthesis kit (Roche Applied Science,
Penzeberg, Germany). All samples were analyzed in
real time on LightCycler 480v.2 (Roche) in duplicate.
Amplification of the sequence of interest was normalized
to an housekeeping reference gene (Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, GAPDH) and compared to
a calibrator sample (Universal Human Reference RNA;
Stratagene, Cedar Creek, TX). Primers are listed in
Supplementary Table S1.

Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS version 20.0 (SPSS,
Chicago, IL, USA). In some experiments, results were
normalized on control (100%) (vehicle-treated samples).
Normalization was performed by dividing the value of
a particular sample treated with ibrutinib to the value of
the corresponding sample treated with vehicle DMSO.
P values were calculated by Student t test (*P<0.05,
**P<0.01). Data are presented as mean and standard error
of the mean (SEM) is depicted as error bars.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Immunoblotting

R.Mar. received honoraria and research funding
from Janssen; J.A.B. is an advisory board member for
Janssen. The remaining authors declare no competing
financial interests.

Proteins (80 µg/lane) were electrophoresed on
SDS-polyacrylamide gradientgels (Biorad laboratories,
Hercules, CA, USA). Membranes were immunoblotted
with primary antibodies listed in Supplementary
Table S2 and incubated with species-specific horseradish
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody (diluted
1:50000; GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) for 1 hour
and developed using HRP conjugates WesternBright
Sirius (Advasta, Menlo Park, CA, USA). Images were
acquired and analyzed using Image Lab Software (Biorad
Laboratories). After 10 days of culture, CLL cells were
carefully removed by thoroughly pipetting, then NLCs
were pretreated with ibrutinib for 1h following to
stimulation with 100 ng/ml of LPS (Sigma-Aldrich) for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC
IG14376-R.Mar. and IG12754-S.D), and AIRC/
FIRC Italian Triennial fellowship (#16430-S.Fio. and
#15047-V.A.) and Ricerca Finalizzata Giovani Ricercatori
2011-2012, Ministero della Salute (GR-2011-02349282,
R.Maf.), Rome, Italy.
65978

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

13.	 Bhattacharya N, Diener S, Idler IS, Rauen J, Habe S,
Busch H, Habermann A, Zenz T, Dohner H, Stilgenbauer S,
Mertens D. Nurse-like cells show deregulated expression
of genes involved in immunocompetence. Br J Haematol.
2011; 154: 349-56.

1.	 Forconi F, Moss P. Perturbation of the normal immune
system in patients with CLL. Blood. 2015; 126: 573-81.
2.	 Cutucache CE. Tumor-induced host immunosuppression:
special focus on CLL. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013;
17: 35-41.

14.	 Byrd JC, OʼBrien S, James DF. Ibrutinib in relapsed chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369: 1278-9.
15.	 Burger JA, Tedeschi A, Barr PM, Robak T, Owen C, Ghia P,
Bairey O, Hillmen P, Bartlett NL, Li J, Simpson D, Grosicki
S, Devereux S, et al. Ibrutinib as Initial Therapy for Patients
with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2015;
373: 2425-37.

3.	 Burger JA, Ghia P, Rosenwald A, Caligaris-Cappio F. The
microenvironment in mature B-cell malignancies: a target
for new treatment strategies. Blood. 2009; 114: 3367-75.
4.	 Jia L, Clear A, Liu FT, Matthews J, Uddin N, McCarthy A,
Hoxha E, Durance C, Iqbal S, Gribben JG. Extracellular
HMGB1 promotes differentiation of nurse-like cells in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2014; 123: 1709-19.

16.	 Burger JA, Keating MJ, Wierda WG, Hartmann E,
Hoellenriegel J, Rosin NY, de Weerdt I, Jeyakumar G,
Ferrajoli A, Cardenas-Turanzas M, Lerner S, Jorgensen
JL, Nogueras-Gonzalez GM, et al. Safety and activity of
ibrutinib plus rituximab for patients with high-risk chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia: a single-arm, phase 2 study. Lancet
Oncol. 2014; 15: 1090-9.

5.	 Burger JA, Tsukada N, Burger M, Zvaifler NJ, DellʼAquila
M, Kipps TJ. Blood-derived nurse-like cells protect chronic
lymphocytic leukemia B cells from spontaneous apoptosis
through stromal cell-derived factor-1. Blood. 2000;
96: 2655-63.
6.	 Hanna BS, McClanahan F, Yazdanparast H, Zaborsky N,
Kalter V, Rossner PM, Benner A, Durr C, Egle A, Gribben
JG, Lichter P, Seiffert M. Depletion of CLL-associated
patrolling monocytes and macrophages controls disease
development and repairs immune dysfunction in vivo.
Leukemia. 2016; 30: 570-9.

17.	 Jaglowski SM, Jones JA, Nagar V, Flynn JM, Andritsos
LA, Maddocks KJ, Woyach JA, Blum KA, Grever MR,
Smucker K, Ruppert AS, Heerema NA, Lozanski G, et al.
Safety and activity of BTK inhibitor ibrutinib combined
with ofatumumab in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a phase
1b/2 study. Blood. 2015; 126: 842-50.

7.	 Galletti G, Scielzo C, Barbaglio F, Rodriguez TV, Riba
M, Lazarevic D, Cittaro D, Simonetti G, Ranghetti P,
Scarfo L, Ponzoni M, Rocchi M, Corti A, et al. Targeting
Macrophages Sensitizes Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
to Apoptosis and Inhibits Disease Progression. Cell Rep.
2016; 14: 1748-60.

18.	 Ponader S, Chen SS, Buggy JJ, Balakrishnan K, Gandhi V,
Wierda WG, Keating MJ, O᾽Brien S, Chiorazzi N, Burger
JA. The Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor PCI-32765 thwarts
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cell survival and tissue
homing in vitro and in vivo. Blood. 2012; 119: 1182-9.
19.	 Herman SE, Mustafa RZ, Gyamfi JA, Pittaluga S, Chang S,
Chang B, Farooqui M, Wiestner A. Ibrutinib inhibits BCR
and NF-kappaB signaling and reduces tumor proliferation
in tissue-resident cells of patients with CLL. Blood. 2014;
123: 3286-95.

8.	 Filip AA, Cisel B, Koczkodaj D, Wasik-Szczepanek E,
Piersiak T, Dmoszynska A. Circulating microenvironment
of CLL: are nurse-like cells related to tumor-associated
macrophages? Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2013; 50: 263-70.

20.	 de Rooij MF, Kuil A, Geest CR, Eldering E, Chang BY,
Buggy JJ, Pals ST, Spaargaren M. The clinically active
BTK inhibitor PCI-32765 targets B-cell receptor- and
chemokine-controlled adhesion and migration in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2012; 119: 2590-4.

9.	 Tsukada N, Burger JA, Zvaifler NJ, Kipps TJ. Distinctive
features of “nurselikeˮ cells that differentiate in the context
of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2002; 99: 1030-7.
10.	 Ysebaert L, Fournie JJ. Genomic and phenotypic
characterization of nurse-like cells that promote drug
resistance in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk
Lymphoma. 2011; 52: 1404-6.

21.	 de Rooij MF, Kuil A, Kater AP, Kersten MJ, Pals ST,
Spaargaren M. Ibrutinib and idelalisib synergistically target
BCR-controlled adhesion in MCL and CLL: a rationale for
combination therapy. Blood. 2015; 125: 2306-9.

11.	 Audrito V, Serra S, Brusa D, Mazzola F, Arruga F, Vaisitti
T, Coscia M, Maffei R, Rossi D, Wang T, Inghirami G,
Rizzi M, Gaidano G, et al. Extracellular nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) promotes M2
macrophage polarization in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Blood. 2015; 125: 111-23.

22.	 Kohrt HE, Sagiv-Barfi I, Rafiq S, Herman SE, Butchar
JP, Cheney C, Zhang X, Buggy JJ, Muthusamy N, Levy
R, Johnson AJ, Byrd JC. Ibrutinib antagonizes rituximabdependent NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Blood. 2014;
123: 1957-60.

12.	 Giannoni P, Pietra G, Travaini G, Quarto R, Shyti G,
Benelli R, Ottaggio L, Mingari MC, Zupo S, Cutrona G,
Pierri I, Balleari E, Pattarozzi A, et al. Chronic lymphocytic
leukemia nurse-like cells express hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (c-MET) and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase and
display features of immunosuppressive type 2 skewed
macrophages. Haematologica. 2014; 99: 1078-87.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Dubovsky JA, Beckwith KA, Natarajan G, Woyach JA,
Jaglowski S, Zhong Y, Hessler JD, Liu TM, Chang BY,
Larkin KM, Stefanovski MR, Chappell DL, Frissora FW,
et al. Ibrutinib is an irreversible molecular inhibitor of ITK
driving a Th1-selective pressure in T lymphocytes. Blood.
2013; 122: 2539-49.
65979

Oncotarget

24.	 Fraietta JA, Beckwith KA, Patel PR, Ruella M, Zheng Z,
Barrett DM, Lacey SF, Melenhorst JJ, McGettigan SE,
Cook DR, Zhang C, Xu J, Do P, et al. Ibrutinib enhances
chimeric antigen receptor T-cell engraftment and efficacy
in leukemia. Blood. 2016; 127: 1117-27.

35.	 Herman SE, Mustafa RZ, Jones J, Wong DH, Farooqui M,
Wiestner A. Treatment with Ibrutinib Inhibits BTK- and
VLA-4-Dependent Adhesion of Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia Cells In Vivo. Clin Cancer Res. 2015; 21: 4642-51.
36.	 Da Roit F, Engelberts PJ, Taylor RP, Breij EC, Gritti G,
Rambaldi A, Introna M, Parren PW, Beurskens FJ, Golay
J. Ibrutinib interferes with the cell-mediated anti-tumor
activities of therapeutic CD20 antibodies: implications for
combination therapy. Haematologica. 2015; 100: 77-86.

25.	 Ni Gabhann J, Hams E, Smith S, Wynne C, Byrne JC,
Brennan K, Spence S, Kissenpfennig A, Johnston JA,
Fallon PG, Jefferies CA. Btk regulates macrophage
polarization in response to lipopolysaccharide. PLoS One.
2014; 9: e85834.

37.	 Park H, Wahl MI, Afar DE, Turck CW, Rawlings DJ, Tam
C, Scharenberg AM, Kinet JP, Witte ON. Regulation of Btk
function by a major autophosphorylation site within the
SH3 domain. Immunity. 1996; 4: 515-25.

26.	 Borge M, Belen Almejun M, Podaza E, Colado A,
Fernandez Grecco H, Cabrejo M, Bezares RF, Giordano
M, Gamberale R. Ibrutinib impairs the phagocytosis of
rituximab-coated leukemic cells from chronic lymphocytic
leukemia patients by human macrophages. Haematologica.
2015; 100: e140-2.

38.	 An H, Xu H, Zhang M, Zhou J, Feng T, Qian C, Qi R,
Cao X. Src homology 2 domain-containing inositol-5phosphatase 1 (SHIP1) negatively regulates TLR4-mediated
LPS response primarily through a phosphatase activity- and
PI-3K-independent mechanism. Blood. 2005; 105: 4685-92.

27.	 Boissard F, Fournie JJ, Quillet-Mary A, Ysebaert L, Poupot
M. Nurse-like cells mediate ibrutinib resistance in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia patients. Blood Cancer J. 2015;
5: e355.

39.	 Jurlander J, Lai CF, Tan J, Chou CC, Geisler CH, Schriber
J, Blumenson LE, Narula SK, Baumann H, Caligiuri MA.
Characterization of interleukin-10 receptor expression on
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Blood. 1997;
89: 4146-52.

28.	 Niemann CU, Herman SE, Maric I, Gomez-Rodriguez
J, Biancotto A, Chang BY, Martyr S, Stetler-Stevenson
M, Yuan CM, Calvo KR, Braylan RC, Valdez J, Lee
YS, et al. Disruption of in vivo Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia Tumor-Microenvironment Interactions by
Ibrutinib - Findings from an Investigator-Initiated Phase II
Study. Clin Cancer Res. 2016; 22: 1572-82.

40.	 Fayad L, Keating MJ, Reuben JM, O᾽Brien S, Lee BN,
Lerner S, Kurzrock R. Interleukin-6 and interleukin-10 levels
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: correlation with phenotypic
characteristics and outcome. Blood. 2001; 97: 256-63.

29.	 Smith CI, Baskin B, Humire-Greiff P, Zhou JN, Olsson
PG, Maniar HS, Kjellen P, Lambris JD, Christensson
B, Hammarstrom L, et al. Expression of Bruton᾽s
agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase gene, BTK, is
selectively down-regulated in T lymphocytes and plasma
cells. J Immunol. 1994; 152: 557-65.

41.	 Fluckiger AC, Durand I, Banchereau J. Interleukin 10
induces apoptotic cell death of B-chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cells. J Exp Med. 1994; 179: 91-9.
42.	 Liang X, Moseman EA, Farrar MA, Bachanova V, Weisdorf
DJ, Blazar BR, Chen W. Toll-like receptor 9 signaling
by CpG-B oligodeoxynucleotides induces an apoptotic
pathway in human chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells.
Blood. 2010; 115: 5041-52.

30.	 Jongstra-Bilen J, Puig Cano A, Hasija M, Xiao H, Smith CI,
Cybulsky MI. Dual functions of Bruton᾽s tyrosine kinase
and Tec kinase during Fcgamma receptor-induced signaling
and phagocytosis. J Immunol. 2008; 181: 288-98.

43.	 Kitabayashi A, Hirokawa M, Miura AB. The role of
interleukin-10 (IL-10) in chronic B-lymphocytic leukemia:
IL-10 prevents leukemic cells from apoptotic cell death. Int
J Hematol. 1995; 62: 99-106.

31.	 Jongstra-Bilen J, Harrison R, Grinstein S. Fcgammareceptors induce Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) mobilization
and accumulation in the phagocytic cup for optimal
phagocytosis. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278: 45720-9.

44.	 Morabito F, Filangeri M, Sculli G, Oliva B. In vitro
modulation of bcl-2 protein expression, drug-induced
apoptosis and cytotoxicity by interleukin-10 in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Haematologica. 1998; 83: 1046-8.

32.	 Sica A, Mantovani A. Macrophage plasticity and
polarization: in vivo veritas. J Clin Invest. 2012;
122: 787-95.
33.	 Martinez-Lostao L, Briones J, Martinez-Gallo M, Forne
I, Sierra J, Rodriguez-Sanchez JL, Juarez C. Fludarabineinduced apoptosis in CD19+/CD5+B-CLL cells is a direct
and nurse-like-cell independent effect. Leuk Lymphoma.
2004; 45: 2307-14.

45.	 Rozovski U, Wu JY, Harris DM, Liu Z, Li P, Hazan-Halevy
I, Ferrajoli A, Burger JA, O'Brien S, Jain N, Verstovsek S,
Wierda WG, Keating MJ, et al. Stimulation of the B-cell
receptor activates the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Blood. 2014;
123: 3797-802.

34.	 Coffelt SB, Chen YY, Muthana M, Welford AF, Tal
AO, Scholz A, Plate KH, Reiss Y, Murdoch C, De
Palma M, Lewis CE. Angiopoietin 2 stimulates TIE2expressing monocytes to suppress T cell activation and to
promote regulatory T cell expansion. J Immunol. 2011;
186: 4183-90.

46.	 Byrd JC, Furman RR, Coutre SE, Burger JA, Blum KA,
Coleman M, Wierda WG, Jones JA, Zhao W, Heerema NA,
Johnson AJ, Shaw Y, Bilotti E, et al. Three-year follow-up
of treatment-naive and previously treated patients with CLL
and SLL receiving single-agent ibrutinib. Blood. 2015;
125: 2497-506.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65980

Oncotarget

47.	 Woyach JA, Johnson AJ. Targeted therapies in CLL:
mechanisms of resistance and strategies for management.
Blood. 2015; 126: 471-7.

49.	 Kurtova AV, Balakrishnan K, Chen R, Ding W, Schnabl
S, Quiroga MP, Sivina M, Wierda WG, Estrov Z, Keating
MJ, Shehata M, Jager U, Gandhi V, et al. Diverse marrow
stromal cells protect CLL cells from spontaneous and
drug-induced apoptosis: development of a reliable and
reproducible system to assess stromal cell adhesionmediated drug resistance. Blood. 2009; 114: 4441-50.

48.	 Fiorcari S, Martinelli S, Bulgarelli J, Audrito V, Zucchini P,
Colaci E, Potenza L, Narni F, Luppi M, Deaglio S, Marasca
R, Maffei R. Lenalidomide interferes with tumor-promoting
properties of nurse-like cells in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Haematologica. 2015; 100: 253-62.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65981

Oncotarget

