Original Article

The Role of the Gastrointestinal Microbiome in Infectious
Complications During Induction Chemotherapy for Acute
Myeloid Leukemia
~a, PhD1; Daniel P. Smith, PhD2; Pranoti Sahasrabhojane, MS1; Nadim J. Ajami, PhD2;
Jessica R. Galloway-Pen
W. Duncan Wadsworth, MS3,4; Naval G. Daver, MD5; Roy F. Chemaly, MD1; Lisa Marsh, MSN1; Shashank S. Ghantoji, PhD1;
Naveen Pemmaraju, MD5; Guillermo Garcia-Manero, MD5; Katayoun Rezvani, MD, PhD6; Amin M. Alousi, MD6;
Jennifer A. Wargo, MD7,8; Elizabeth J. Shpall, MD6; Phillip A. Futreal, PhD8; Michele Guindani, PhD3;
Joseph F. Petrosino, PhD2; Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis, MD, ScD1; and Samuel A. Shelburne, MD, PhD1,8

BACKGROUND: Despite increasing data on the impact of the microbiome on cancer, the dynamics and role of the microbiome in
infection during therapy for acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) are unknown. Therefore, the authors sought to determine correlations between microbiome composition and infectious outcomes in patients with AML who were receiving induction chemotherapy
(IC). METHODS: Buccal and fecal specimens (478 samples) were collected twice weekly from 34 patients with AML who were undergoing IC. Oral and stool microbiomes were characterized by 16S ribosomal RNA V4 sequencing using an Illumina MiSeq system. Microbial diversity and genera composition were associated with clinical outcomes. RESULTS: Baseline stool a-diversity was
significantly lower in patients who developed infections during IC compared with those who did not (P 5 .047). Significant decreases
in both oral and stool microbial a-diversity were observed over the course of IC, with a linear correlation between a-diversity change
at the 2 sites (P 5 .02). Loss of both oral and stool a-diversity was associated significantly with the receipt of a carbapenem
P < 0.001. Domination events by the majority of genera were transient (median duration, 1 sample), whereas the number of domination events by pathogenic genera increased significantly over the course of IC (P 5 .002). Moreover, patients who lost microbial diversity over the course of IC were significantly more likely to contract a microbiologically documented infection within the 90 days after
IC neutrophil recovery (P 5 .04). CONCLUSIONS: The current data present the largest longitudinal analyses to date of oral and stool
microbiomes in patients with AML and suggest that microbiome measurements could assist with the mitigation of infectious compliC 2016 American Cancer Society.
cations of AML therapy. Cancer 2016;122:2186-96. V
KEYWORDS: acute myeloid leukemia, gastrointestinal, induction chemotherapy, infectious complications, microbiome.

INTRODUCTION
With the advent of the Human Microbiome Project (HMP),1 numerous advances have been made in elucidating the critical roles played by commensal microbiota in human health, immune maintenance, and disease.2,3 Recent studies in animal models have highlighted the microbiome’s impact in areas such as malignancy development, chemotherapeutic
metabolism, and modulation of the immune response and tumor microenvironment.4-6 Because the majority of infections
in patients with cancer are caused by commensal bacteria,7 infection is a cancer care area likely to be profoundly influenced
by microbiome investigations.8 Recent examination of patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) have demonstrated that intestinal domination by pathogenic bacteria is associated with subsequent infection,9
and loss of intestinal microbial diversity post-HSCT is associated with a higher risk of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)
and overall mortality.10,11 However, outside of patients who undergo HSCT, serial determination of the microbiome in
patients who have received treatment for cancer is limited.12

Corresponding author: Samuel A. Shelburne, MD, PhD, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 1460, Houston, TX
77030; Fax: (713) 792-5381; sshelburne@manderson.org
1
Department of Infectious Disease, Infection Control, and Employee Health, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2The Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 3Department
of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 4Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston Texas; 5Department of
Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 6Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 7Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas;
8
Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30039, Received: September 1, 2015; Revised: February 8, 2016; Accepted: March 17, 2016, Published online May 3, 2016 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2186

Cancer

July 15, 2016

~a et al
Microbiome Analyses of Patients With AML/Galloway-Pen

Herein, we present longitudinal analyses of the oral
and stool microbiomes of 34 adults w were undergoing
induction chemotherapy (IC) for acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Patients receiving IC are highly susceptible
to infections resulting in routine utilization of antimicrobial prophylaxis.13 However, increasing antimicrobial resistance compromises the efficacy of universal
prophylaxis, indicating that more personalized medicine
approaches are needed to optimize infection prevention
and treatment.14 Moreover, there are minimal data
regarding the oral microbiome in treated cancer
patients.15 Because of the paucity of microbiome data in
this clinical scenario, investigations of both the oral and
stool microbiome are potentially valuable, because both
sites serve as portals of infection in immunocompromised
patients.16 Thus, we sought to test the hypothesis that
microbiome composition could be associated with infectious complications in patients with AML during IC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and Specimen Collection

Participants consisted of 34 patients with newly diagnosed
AML (aged >18 years) who were undergoing IC at The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
(MDACC) from September 2013 to May 2014. Buccal
and fecal specimens were collected from each patient
before they started chemotherapy, collection continued
every 96 hours, and it stopped when polymorphonuclear
cells returned to >500/lL. The study protocol was
approved by the MDACC Institutional Review Board
(PA13-0339) and was conducted in compliance with the
Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants before enrollment. Despite
the limited sample size, our prestudy power calculations
indicated that a sample size of 34 patients would allow us
to detect a medium Cohen effect size (f2) of at least 0.3
with 80% power or more, using a 1-way, repeated-measurements analysis of variance for the analysis of either the
buccal or fecal specimen and conservatively assuming a
within-subject correlation of 0.1 and at least 3 withinpatient observations over the study period (5% level of
significance).17
Specimen Processing, 16S Ribosomal RNA
Sequencing, and Microbiome Community
Analyses

DNA was extracted from patient samples, and the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) V4 region was amplified with polymerase chain reaction and sequenced on the Illumina
MiSeq platform (Illumina, Inc, San Diego, Calif) using a
Cancer

July 15, 2016

2 3 250 base-pair, paired-end protocol adapted from the
methods developed for the National Institutes of Health
HMP.1,18 16S rRNA gene sequences were assigned into
operational taxonomic units using the UPARSE pipeline
and alignment to the SILVA SSURef_NR99_119 database.19 Analyses and visualization of microbiome communities were conducted in the publically available
software R (version 3.2.2; R Core Team 2015)20 using
the Phyloseq package21 to import sample data, calculate
a-diversity and b-diversity metrics, and determine microbiome community profiles. The HMP sequencing reads
from the 16S V3 to V4 region were obtained online from
National Institutes of Health (available at: http://
hmpdacc.org/HMQCP; Accessed July 14, 2015),
trimmed to match the V4 region amplified by this study’s
primers, and processed as detailed above.
Clinical Definitions

Febrile neutropenia was defined according to Infectious
Diseases Society of America criteria,22 and episodes of febrile neutropenia were classified into 4 groups according to
guidelines for neutropenic fever in clinical trials23: 1)
microbiologically defined infection (MDI), 2) clinically
defined infection (CDI), 3) fever of unknown origin
(FUO), and 4) noninfectious fever (NIF). Subsequent infectious episodes were defined as MDIs that occurred
within 90 days of cessation of longitudinal sampling,
which typically occurred at the time of neutropenia resolution to >500 cells/lL after IC. Rates of complete remission (CR) and overall response were assessed using
standard defintions.24
Statistical Analyses

Microbial a-diversity was determined using the Shannon
diversity index unless otherwise indicated.25 The assumption of normality both overall and within patients was
graphically determined using Q-Q plots and histograms
and was confirmed using the Shapiro-Wilk test for normality. It was assumed that the Shannon diversity index generally was distributed normally; the Student t test was used to
assess differences in mean Shannon indices when data were
normally distributed, and Welch correction was used
because equal standard deviations were not assumed. The
Mann-Whitney U test was used to test for differences if the
normality assumption was not met. For changes in specific
genera, only mapped genera >1% in abundance were analyzed (a total of 29 genera). The Benjamin-Hochberg false
discovery rate was applied to account for multiple comparisons when testing changes in individual taxa. Correlations
were determined using the Pearson q value, and
2187

Original Article

significance was determined using standard rankcorrelation tests. Change over time was assessed by a linear
mixed-effects model with random slope and intercept
terms for each patient, using an unstructured covariance.
The model fit of fitted models versus alternatives (eg, with
respect to a random intercept linear mixed-effect model
with exponential covariance structure) was assessed using
residual Q-Q plots and scatterplots, inspecting the individual patients’ residual autocorrelation functions, and fitting
a simple linear regression between the fitted and observed
values and then calculating the correlation coefficient (R2)
of that regression.26 Statistical significance in the linear
mixed effects was determined by computing P values using
a Satterthwaite approximation for the degrees of freedom
as well as a bootstrap confidence interval (CI) for the grand
mean slope parameters across patient samples.27 Relations
between 2 categorical variables were analyzed using the chisquare test or the Fisher exact test in the case of 2 3 2 contingency tables. Statistical analyses were performed using
SPSS Statistics (version 22; IBM Corporation, Armonk,
NY), the R base package (R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna Austria),20 and GraphPad Prism 6
(GraphPad Software, Inc, La Jolla, Calif) for significance
testing and plotting. More specifically, the lme4 lmerTest
and bootstrap packages were used for linear mixed-effects
modeling.28 All tests of significance were 2-sided, and statistical significance was defined at P  .05. More detailed
descriptions of the patient population, specimen collection,
specimen processing, 16S rRNA sequencing, microbiome
community analyses, and clinical definitions are available
online (see online supporting information).
RESULTS
Patient Characteristics, Treatment, and
Response

Clinical characteristics, patient classifications, treatment information, and chemotherapeutic responses are listed in
Table 1. Ninety-one percent of patients were treated on
clinical protocols in which AML induction regimens differed among younger and older patients. Patients aged <60
years often received triplet chemotherapy with a purine analog (clofarabine, fludarabine, or cladribine) in combination
with idarubicin and cytarabine,29 whereas patients aged
60 years frequently received hypomethylator-based combinations (decitabine and azacytidine).30 Four patients had
core-binding factor AML and received treatment with fludarabine/idarubicin/cytarabine plus granulocyte-colony–
stimulating factor.31 The overall response rate was 82%,
and 41% of patients achieved morphologic CR.24 All
patients developed neutropenia (median duration, 28.5
2188

TABLE 1. Clinical Characteristics, Treatment, and
Classification of Patients With Acute Myeloid
Leukemia
Characteristic

No. of Patients (%)

Demographics
Age: Mean 6 standard deviation, y
Sex
Men
Women
Chemotherapy
Fludarabine/idarubicin/cytarabine
Clofarabine/idarubicin/cytarabine
Cladribine/low-dose cytarabine/decitabine
Fludarabine/idarubicin/cytarabine with G-CSF
Othera
Complete remission after IC
Overall response rateb
Neutropenia
Developed neutropenia
Median duration of neutropenia, d
Developed neutropenic fever
Febrile episode classificationc
Microbiologically defined infection
Clinically defined infection
Fever of unknown origin
Fever not related to infection
No febrile episode
Antimicrobial administration
Received antibacterial prophylaxis
Fluoroquinolone
Cephalosporin
Received antifungals
Azoles
Echinocandins
Amphotericin B
Received treatment antibioticsd
Carbapenem
Piperacillin/tazobactam
Cefepime

55 6 14
18 (53)
16 (47)
10
10
5
4
5
14
28

(29)
(29)
(15)
(12)
(15)
(41)
(82)

34 (100)
28.5
27 (79)
7 (21)
11 (32)
6(18)
3 (9)
7 (21)
34
29
5
34
32
30
6
31
20
9
13

(100)
(85)
(15)
(100)
(94)
(88)
(18)
(91)
(59)
(26)
(38)

Abbreviations: G-CSF, granulocyte-colony–stimulating factor; IC, induction
chemotherapy.
a
Other chemotherapies included: 1) vasoroxin in combination with decitabine (n 5 2), 2) azacytidine in combination with pracinostat (n 5 1), 3) decitabine alone (n 5 1), and 4) omacetaxine in combination with low-dose
cytarabine (n 5 1).
b
The overall response rate includes morphologic complete remission (CR),
CRi (CR with incomplete blood count recovery (CRi), and CR with incomplete platelet recovery (CRp) (see Viscoli et al23).
c
Specific data on microbiologically and clinically defined infections are
available online (see online supporting information).
d
These are antibiotic/antimicrobial-based therapies received for suspected
or proven infection (note that the numbers of individual antibiotics add up
to >100% because some patients received more than 1 of the listed antimicrobials during IC).

days) and received prophylactic antimicrobials during IC.
Seventy-nine percent of patients developed neutropenic
fever that was classified as a febrile episode and received
antibiotics, as indicated in Table 1.
Specimen Collection and Bacterial Sequences
Obtained

Two hundred seventy-six buccal swabs and 202 fecal samples were obtained for a total of 478 samples. The average
Cancer

July 15, 2016

~a et al
Microbiome Analyses of Patients With AML/Galloway-Pen

Figure 1. Baseline analyses of stool and oral samples are illustrated. (A) The Shannon diversity index was used to measure the
a-diversity of initial stool (green) and oral (red) samples from patients in the current cohort stratified by sample site. Also shown
are similarly processed data from the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) (data set 1) using stool (blue) and buccal swab (orange)
samples. Bars represent mean 6 standard deviation values. AML indicates acute myeloid leukemia. (B) Correlations of baseline
Shannon diversity index scores are illustrated in oral and stool samples from the current cohort (n 5 28). The Pearson correlation
(r) value and P value for correlation analysis also are indicated. (C,D) Genera composition of baseline (C) oral and (D) stool samples is stratified by patient with color coding, as indicated in the legend, and is ordered based on community similarity.

number of oral and stool samples per patient were 8.12
and 6.12, respectively. From these specimens, in total,
16,082,550 high-quality 16S rRNA-encoding sequences
were generated, for an average of 33,645 sequences per
specimen.

both sites (Pearson r 5 0.44; P 5 .02) (Fig. 1B). Similar
to the a-diversity analysis, the baseline oral and stool samples demonstrated marked heterogeneity of interpatient
b-diversity (Fig. 1C,D), analogous to the composition
variability previously observed in healthy adults.1

Characterization of Baseline Oral and Stool
Samples From Patients With AML

Baseline Stool Microbiome a-Diversity Is
Associated With Infections During IC

First, we determined the baseline a-diversity, which measures the number of different types of bacteria, of oral and
stool samples.25 We observed a wide range of a-diversity
among baseline samples, with a mean Shannon index of
2.1 (95% CI, 1.8-2.3; range, 0.5-3.9) for oral samples and
2.0 (95% CI, 1.7-2.4; range, 0.1-3.5) for stool samples
(Fig. 1A). We applied the same algorithm that was used
for our samples to buccal swab and stool sample data from
the HMP1 and observed a similar distribution of adiversity in the healthy HMP cohort (Fig. 1A). There was
a statistically significant correlation between the adiversity of the baseline oral and stool samples, suggesting
that similar factors affecting a-diversity were acting at

Because it is believed that a diverse microbiome protects
individuals from infection,9 we sought to test the hypothesis that patients with low baseline a-diversity would be at
increased risk for infectious complications during IC.
When patients were classified into 2 groups (the infection
group, which included patients with MDIs and CDIs;
and the noninfection group, which included patients with
FUO, NIF, and no infection/no fever), we observed that
the a-diversity of baseline stool samples from the infection
group was significantly lower than that in the noninfection group (P 5 .047) (Fig. 2A). To ensure that our findings were not limited to 1 measurement of a-diversity, we
repeated our analysis using 4 additional diversity

Cancer

July 15, 2016

2189

Original Article

Figure 2. Baseline a-diversity was associated with the development of infectious events during induction chemotherapy (IC) as
well as neutropenia before the initiation of IC. The data plotted in A through D are from individual samples; bars represent mean
6 standard deviation values, and P values were calculating using a 2-sample t test with Welch correction. (A) The baseline adiversity of stool samples was measured using the Shannon diversity index stratified according to the development of an infectious event during IC. (B) Data are the same as those illustrated in A, except that patients who had fever of unknown origin
(FUO) were moved to the microbiologically defined infection (MDI) plus clinically defined infection (CDI) group (MDI 1 CDI). NIF
indicates noninfectious fever. (C) The baseline a-diversity of oral samples was measured using the Shannon diversity index stratified according to the presence of neutropenia before the initiation of IC. (D) Data are the same as those illustrated in C but illustrate the baseline a-diversity of stool samples.

measurements and observed that the patients in the MDI
1 CDI group had statistically significantly lower initial
stool values compared with the noninfection group for 3
of the 4 indices (see online supporting information).
Because patients with FUO could be considered as having
an unrecognized infection, we also reclassified those
patients into the infection group and observed that a significant difference remained between these 2 groups in
terms of baseline a-diversity of the stool samples (P 5
.05) (Fig. 2B). Regardless of how patients were classified,
2190

no statistically significant relations were identified
between baseline a-diversity of the oral samples and subsequent infectious episodes (data not shown). It is noteworthy that neutropenia before the initiation of IC was
significantly associated with low baseline oral (P 5 .002)
and stool (P 5 .007) a-diversity (Fig. 2C,D). However,
neutropenia before IC was not an independent risk factor
for infection during IC (data not shown). In addition,
morphologic CR was not associated with baseline adiversity at either site (see online supporting information).
Cancer

July 15, 2016

~a et al
Microbiome Analyses of Patients With AML/Galloway-Pen

Thus, baseline a-diversity of the stool samples, but not the
oral samples, was associated with the development of infectious complications during IC.
A Subset of Patients With AML Experience a
Decrease in Gastrointestinal Microbial Diversity
During IC

Consistent with the data from patients who underwent
HSCT,9 there was an overall statistically significant
decrease in microbial diversity over the course of IC in
both the oral and stool samples (P 5 .004 and P 5 .045,
respectively) (Fig. 3A). Moreover, similar to the baseline
a-diversity data, when individual patients were analyzed,
there was a broad distribution of changes in a-diversity
over the course of IC (Fig. 3B). There was no statistically
significant difference in the change in a-diversity over the
course of IC between the 2 sites (Fig. 3B); however, there
was a statistically significant linear correlation between
the 2 sites in terms of change in a-diversity between the
baseline and final samples (P 5 .02) (Fig. 3C). When specific genera were analyzed, we observed statistically significant increases for Lactobacillus in both oral and stool
samples, and significant decreases were primarily observed
for anaerobic genera, such as Blautia, Prevotella, and
Leptotrichia (Fig. 3D,E).
Given the known correlation between broadspectrum antibiotic use and loss of microbial diversity,32
we examined the association between loss of a-diversity
and antibiotic administration and observed that patients
who had received a carbapenem antibiotic for over 72
hours were significantly more likely to have a decrease in
both oral and stool a-diversity over the course of IC compared with those who did not receive a carbapenem antibiotic (P < .001; chi-square analysis; see online supporting
information). Conversely, no significant differences were
observed in the percentage of patients who lost a-diversity
at both sites for those who did versus those who did not
receive either piperacillin-tazobactam (P 5 .67) or cefepime (P 5 .46).
Domination by Pathogenic-Associated Genera
Significantly Increased During IC

In patients who underwent HSCT, intestinal domination (defined as occupation of at least 30% of the microbiota by a single bacterial taxon) was predictive of
subsequent infectious episodes.9 Thus, we sought to
determine the frequency of domination among our
cohort and to delineate the genera involved. We
observed domination in 80% of samples, with no significant difference (P 5 .82) in the rates of domination
Cancer

July 15, 2016

among stool samples (79.2%) or oral samples (80.2%).
The duration of domination by any particular genera
was generally short-lived, because 73% of samples did
not maintain domination in the subsequent sample.
Nineteen genera accounted for 90% of the domination
events (Fig. 4A) and were divided into common causes
of bacteremia in neutropenic patients and typical commensal microbiota (see online supporting information).1,33 We removed Streptococcus spp. from this
analysis because of its common role as a commensal in
healthy hosts and as an invasive pathogen in neutropenic
patients.33 We discovered that the rates of domination
shifted such that, by the completion of IC, nearly 50%
of the domination events were caused by common causes
of bacteremia (eg, Staphylococcus, Enterobacter, Escherichia, etc) compared with approximately 20% before IC
or in the first week of IC (P 5 .002) (Fig. 4B).

The Use of Microbiome Measurements to
Predict Subsequent Infections

Because low baseline stool a-diversity was associated
with the development of infections during IC, we
sought to determine whether a-diversity at the completion of IC or a change in a-diversity over the course of
IC could predict subsequent MDI episodes during consolidation chemotherapy. Nine of 28 fully evaluable
patients developed an MDI (primarily bacteremia) in
the 90 days after longitudinal sampling (longitudinal
sampling typically ceased upon IC neutrophil recovery)
(see online supporting information). Although the
Shannon index was lower in both the final stool and oral
samples from the patients who subsequently developed
an MDI, the difference was not statistically significant
(P 5 .50 and P 5 .12, respectively) (Table 2). Similarly,
we observed a greater decrease in the Shannon index
between the initial and final stool and oral samples in
the patients who went on to develop an MDI, but the
difference was not statistically significant (P 5 .24 and
P 5 .45, respectively) (Table 2). Notably, patients who
had a decreased Shannon diversity index in both oral
and stool samples had a significantly higher rate of MDI
in the follow-up period compared with patients who did
not experience a decrease in diversity (P 5 .04) (Table
2). Given the known correlation between antibiotic
administration and loss of microbial diversity, we
analyzed and determined an association between the number of antibiotics administered during IC and the occurrence of infections in the 90 days after longitudinal
sampling (P 5 .02) (see online supporting information).
2191

Figure 3. Changes in oral and stool microbiome a-diversity are illustrated over the course of induction chemotherapy (IC). (A)
This is a linear mixed-effects model of Shannon diversity index measurements for samples according to the day of chemotherapy
administration stratified for each patient (gray lines). The black line represents the line of overall regression. When applying a linear mixed-effects model with patient-level random effects on both slope and intercept, the bootstrapped slope values are
20.012 for saliva (95% confidence interval, 20.023, 20.001) and 20.018 for stool (95% confidence interval, 20.036, 20.002). P
values were computed using the Satterthwaite approximation for degrees of freedom. (B) Changes in Shannon diversity index
measurements between the final and initial samples stratified by source are illustrated. Individual values are plotted, and bars
indicate mean 6 standard deviation values. The P value was calculated using a Student t test comparing stool and oral samples.
(C) This chart illustrates the correlation of changes in the Shannon diversity index between oral and stool samples. The Pearson
correlation (r) value and the derived P value also are shown. (D) Changes in the relative concentration of indicated genera are
illustrated between final and initial stool samples. (E) Changes in the relative concentration of indicated genera are illustrated
between final and initial oral samples. For D and E, the data plotted are mean 6 standard error of the mean. The Wilcoxon rank
test was used to test for differences among non-normally distributed data, and the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate was
applied to account for multiple comparisons.

~a et al
Microbiome Analyses of Patients With AML/Galloway-Pen

Figure 4. Domination of the gastrointestinal microbiome over the course of induction chemotherapy is illustrated. (A) Domination events stratified by genus and by site of domination (stool vs oral), as defined in the legend, are illustrated. The top 19 genera in terms of the number of domination events are graphed. (B) Data are graphed as the percentage of domination events that
were caused by a pathogen versus a commensal bacteria (a complete list of this classification is provided online; see online supporting information) stratified according to the week of chemotherapy. The blue line indicates the linear regression of the percentage over time with P value for the null hypothesis that the slope of the line is equal to 0.

TABLE 2. Associations of a-Diversity Microbiome Measurements With the Development of Microbiologically
Defined Infections in the 90 Days After Cessation of Longitudinal Sampling
Mean 6 Standard Deviation
MDI Within 90 Days,
n58

Characteristic
SDI of final stool sample
SDI of final oral sample
Change in SDI between final and initial stool sample
Change in SDI between final and initial oral sample
SDI change between final and initial sample in both stool and oral
Decreased in both
Did not decrease in either

1.45
1.40
20.81
20.64

6
6
6
6
6
2

0.58
0.83
0.92
1.26

No MDI Within 90 Days,
n 5 20
1.72
1.93
20.21
20.27

6
6
6
6

6
14

1.02
0.76
1.26
1.15

P
.50a
.12a
.24a
.45a

.04b

Abbreviations: MDI, microbiologically defined infection; SDI, Shannon diversity index.
a
This P value was calculated with an independent sample t test.
b
This P value was calculated with the Fisher exact test.

DISCUSSION
Herein, we report the largest longitudinal microbiome
dual-site sampling (stool and oral) to date of hematologic
malignancy patients during intensive treatment. One of
our key findings was that a low baseline a-diversity in
stool samples is associated with the development of infection during IC (Fig. 2). Similar to healthy adults, patients
entering into IC for leukemia have a wide range of adiversity, although the factors driving this variability are
not fully understood and may include previous antibiotic
exposure, diet, and genetics, among others. We did
Cancer

July 15, 2016

observe a significant correlation between pre-IC neutropenia and low baseline stool a-diversity, although neutropenia itself was not a risk factor for subsequent infectious
episodes in our cohort. Given that we do not have pre-IC
antibiotic administration data on these patients, because
they often were referred to our center, it is possible that
neutropenic patients were more likely to have received
antimicrobials, which could have lowered their adiversity, or the neutropenia itself may have affected the
microbiome given the close correlation between the
human immune system and the gastrointestinal flora. If
2193

Original Article

these results are corroborated with larger studies, then
baseline a-diversity could help delineate patients into
high-risk and low-risk infection groups, thereby facilitating the targeting of prophylactic and empiric
antimicrobials.
In concordance with the results from other stool
microbiome studies in patients who received treatment
for cancer,9-12,34 our cohort experienced a progressive
decrease in stool bacterial diversity over the course of
chemotherapy. We also noted that the overall oral microbiome a-diversity also decreased during leukemia treatment (Fig. 3A). However, the loss in diversity was not
universal, and some patients actually gained diversity during IC (Fig. 3B, top right). A statistically significant proportion of the patients who had a-diversity decreases in
both the oral and stool samples over the course of IC contracted MDIs in the 90 days after longitudinal sampling.
We also observed that greater numbers of antibiotics
received during IC were significantly associated with an
increased risk of infection after IC. Thus, an increased
understanding of the factors that allow patients to maintain microbial diversity during IC, such as diet or antibiotic exposure, could assist in designing interventions to
mitigate post-IC infections. Similarly, comparisons of
baseline and final a-diversity measurements may prove
useful in deciding the intensity of post-IC infection monitoring strategies.
A recent study in patients who underwent HSCT
indicated that increased microbial diversity and abundance of Blautia were associated with reduced GVHD
lethality and that loss of Blautia was associated with the
receipt of antianaerobic antimicrobials.34 It is noteworthy
that the 1 genera that had a statistically significant
decrease in stool samples over the course of IC was Blautia
(Fig. 3D). The mechanism by which Blautia might protect patients who undergo HSCT from GVHD is not currently known, but Blautia species are known to induce
regulatory T-cell proliferation, which, in turn, may assist
with limiting gastrointestinal epithelial inflammation.35,36 Nearly 60% of our cohort received a carbapenem, and receipt of a carbapenem was associated with a
significant percentage of patients losing a-diversity in
both stool and oral samples; however, a-diversity loss was
not statistically significant for those who received
pipericillin-tazobactam or cefepime. Because we did not
isolate a single infection-causing bacteria for which a carbapenem may offer increased activity compared with the
2 other major treatment antibiotics, these data provide
increasing impetus to better understand the trade-off
between broad-spectrum antimicrobial administration
2194

and the collateral damage on the microbiome caused by
such agents, especially in patients with hematologic malignancy, who are at prolonged risk for infection because of
multiple rounds of intensive chemotherapy or HSCT.
It is important to note the limitations of this study.
First, most of our patients were treated on clinical protocols; thus, the generalizability of our findings to other
AML treatment centers is unknown. In addition, low
numbers of bacteremias/other MDIs limited our ability
perform further statistical analyses of infections. However,
our study is strengthened by the large number of longitudinal samples (averaging 14 samples per patient), the sampling from 2 sites, and the depth of sequencing (average,
33,645 sequence reads per specimen), which facilitated an
improved ability to fully characterize the microbiome
compared with previous longitudinal studies in patients
who were treated for cancer. Because 16S rRNA sequencing is limited only to genera-based conclusions, specieslevel or functional analyses, such as RNAseq or metabolic
profiling, may be needed to fully elucidate the complex
relations between microbiota and the health of a patient
with cancer.
In summary, these data markedly extend current
understanding of the clinical impact of the microbiome
on infections during cancer treatment. Additional investigations of this type in larger cohorts and other cancer
types are needed to realize the potential impact that delineating, monitoring, and manipulating the microbiome
may have on the care of patients with cancer.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was supported by The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center AML MoonShot Knowledge Gap Project
(to Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis) and the Odyssey Program and CFP
Foundation at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center (to Jessica Galloway-Pe~
na). W. Duncan Wadsworth is supported by NIH Grant NCI T32 CA096520 at Rice University.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Nadim J. Ajami and Joseph F. Petrosino are the Project Director
and Founder/Chief Science Officer, respectively, of Diversgen. Roy
F. Chemaly reports grants from Chimerix, Merck, Gildad,
Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, and Ansun Pharmaceuticals and personal fees from Chimerix, Merck, ADMA Biologics, Oxford Immunotec, Astellas, and Gilead outside the submitted work. Naveen
Pemmaraju reports research support from Stemline, Novartis, and
Cellectis and consulting for Stemline, Novartis, Roche Diagnostics,
LFB, and Incyte outside the submitted work. Dimitrios P.
Kontoyiannis reports research support from Merck, Pfizer, and
Astellas; service on the Merck Advisory Board; acting as a consultant for Astellas and F2G; and honoraria from Gilead, T2 Biosystems, and Mylan, Inc, during the course of the study.

Cancer

July 15, 2016

~a et al
Microbiome Analyses of Patients With AML/Galloway-Pen

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Jessica Galloway-Pe~
na: Conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing–original
draft, writing–review and editing, visualization, project administration, and funding acquisition. Daniel P. Smith: Methodology,
software, validation, formal analysis, resources, data curation, writing–review and editing, visualization, and project administration.
Pranoti Sahasrabhojane: Methodology, investigation, resources,
and writing–review and editing. Nadim J. Ajami: Methodology,
software, validation, formal analysis, resources, data curation, writing–review and editing, visualization, and project administration.
W. Duncan Wadsworth: Methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, data curation, writing–review and editing, and visualization. Naval G. Daver: Investigation, resources, writing–review
and editing, and visualization. Roy F. Chemaly: Conceptualization, validation, investigation, writing–review and editing, and visualization. Lisa Marsh: Methodology, investigation, resources,
data curation, writing–review and editing, supervision, and project
administration. Shashank S. Ghantoji: Methodology, validation,
investigation, resources, writing–review and editing, and project
administration. Naveen Pemmaraju: Conceptualization, investigation, resources, writing–original draft, and writing–review and editing. Guillermo Garcia-Manero: Project administration.
Katayoun Rezvani: Conceptualization, methodology, writing–
review and editing, and funding acquisition. Amin M. Alousi:
Resources and writing–review and editing. Jennifer A. Wargo:
Conceptualization, resources, writing–review and editing, and
funding acquisition. Elizabeth J. Shpall: Conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, investigation, resources, data curation, writing–original draft, writing–review and
editing, visualization, supervision, project administration, and
funding acquisition. Phillip A. Futreal: Conceptualization, resources, writing–review and editing, and funding acquisition. Michele
Guindani: Methodology, software, validation, formal analysis,
data curation, writing–original draft, writing–review and editing,
and visualization. Joseph F. Petrosino: Software, validation, formal analysis, resources, data curation, writing–review and editing,
visualization, and project administration. Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis: Conceptualization, methodology, resources, writing–
original draft, writing–review and editing, and funding acquisition.
Samuel A. Shelburne: Conceptualization, methodology, formal
analysis, investigation, data curation, writing–review and editing,
visualization, supervision, project administration, and funding
acquisition.

REFERENCES
1. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. Structure, function and
diversity of the healthy human microbiome. Nature. 2012;486:
207-214.
2. Arpaia N, Campbell C, Fan X, et al. Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell generation.
Nature. 2013;504:451-455.
3. Pickard JM, Maurice CF, Kinnebrew MA, et al. Rapid fucosylation
of intestinal epithelium sustains host-commensal symbiosis in sickness. Nature. 2014;514:638-641.
4. Iida N, Dzutsev A, Stewart CA, et al. Commensal bacteria control
cancer response to therapy by modulating the tumor microenvironment. Science. 2013;342:967-970.
5. Schwabe RF, Jobin C. The microbiome and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2013;13:800-812.

Cancer

July 15, 2016

6. Viaud S, Saccheri F, Mignot G, et al. The intestinal microbiota
modulates the anticancer immune effects of cyclophosphamide. Science. 2013;342:971-976.
7. Montassier E, Batard E, Gastinne T, Potel G, de La Cochetiere MF.
Recent changes in bacteremia in patients with cancer: a systematic
review of epidemiology and antibiotic resistance. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2013;32:841-850.
8. Zitvogel L, Galluzzi L, Viaud S, et al. Cancer and the gut microbiota: an unexpected link [serial online]. Sci Transl Med. 2015;7:
271ps271.
9. Taur Y, Xavier JB, Lipuma L, et al. Intestinal domination and the
risk of bacteremia in patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55:905-914.
10. Taur Y, Jenq RR, Perales MA, et al. The effects of intestinal tract
bacterial diversity on mortality following allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Blood. 2014;124:1174-1182.
11. Holler E, Butzhammer P, Schmid K, et al. Metagenomic analysis of
the stool microbiome in patients receiving allogeneic stem cell transplantation: loss of diversity is associated with use of systemic antibiotics and more pronounced in gastrointestinal graft-versus-host
disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2014;20:640-645.
12. van Vliet MJ, Tissing WJ, Dun CA, et al. Chemotherapy treatment
in pediatric patients with acute myeloid leukemia receiving antimicrobial prophylaxis leads to a relative increase of colonization with
potentially pathogenic bacteria in the gut. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49:
262-270.
13. Bucaneve G, Micozzi A, Menichetti F, et al. Levofloxacin to prevent
bacterial infection in patients with cancer and neutropenia. N Engl J
Med. 2005;353:977-987.
14. Rangaraj G, Granwehr BP, Jiang Y, Hachem R, Raad I. Perils of
quinolone exposure in cancer patients: breakthrough bacteremia with
multidrug-resistant organisms. Cancer. 2010;116:967-973.
15. Wang Y, Xue J, Zhou X, et al. Oral microbiota distinguishes acute
lymphoblastic leukemia pediatric hosts from healthy populations [serial online]. PLoS One 9:e102116, 2014.
16. Gudiol C, Bodro M, Simonetti A, et al. Changing aetiology, clinical
features, antimicrobial resistance, and outcomes of bloodstream
infection in neutropenic cancer patients. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2012;
19:474-479.
17. Davis CS. Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Repeated Measurements. 1st ed. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2002.
18. Human Microbiome Project C. A framework for human microbiome research. Nature. 2012;486:215-221.
19. Quast C, Pruesse E, Yilmaz P, et al. The SILVA ribosomal RNA
gene database project: improved data processing and web-based
tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41:D590-D596.
20. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing;
2015. Available at: http://www.R-project.org/. Accessed July 23, 2015.
21. McMurdie PJ, Holmes S. Phyloseq: an R package for reproducible
interactive analysis and graphics of microbiome census data [serial
online]. PLoS One. 2013;8:e61217.
22. Freifeld AG, Bow EJ, Sepkowitz KA, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the use of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with
cancer: 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52:e56-e93.
23. Viscoli C, Bruzzi P, Glauser M. An approach to the design and
implementation of clinical trials of empirical antibiotic therapy in
febrile and neutropenic cancer patients. Eur J Cancer. 1995;31A:
2013-2022.
24. Cheson BD, Bennett JM, Kopecky KJ, et al. Revised recommendations of the International Working Group for Diagnosis, Standardization of Response Criteria, Treatment Outcomes, and Reporting
Standards for Therapeutic Trials in Acute Myeloid Leukemia. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:4642-4649.
25. Morgan XC, Huttenhower C. Chapter 12: human microbiome analysis [serial online]. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8:e1002808.
26. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH. Applied Longitudinal Analysis. 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2011.
27. Xu R. Measuring explained variation in linear mixed effects models.
Stat Med. 2003;22:3527-3541.

2195

Original Article
28. Bates D, Machler M, Bolker B, Walker S. Fitting linear mixed-effect
models Usinf lme4. J Stat Software. 2015;67:1-48.
29. Nazha A, Kantarjian H, Ravandi F, et al. Clofarabine, idarubicin,
and cytarabine (CIA) as frontline therapy for patients 60 years
with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia. Am J Hematol. 2013;
88:961-966.
30. Montalban-Bravo G, Garcia-Manero G. Novel drugs for older
patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia. 2015;29:760-769.
31. Kadia TM, Ravandi F, O’Brien S, Cortes J, Kantarjian HM. Progress in acute myeloid leukemia. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk.
2015;15:139-151.
32. Dethlefsen L, Relman DA. Incomplete recovery and individualized
responses of the human distal gut microbiota to repeated antibi-

2196

33.
34.
35.
36.

otic perturbation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(suppl 1):
4554-4561.
Klastersky J, Ameye L, Maertens J, et al. Bacteraemia in febrile neutropenic cancer patients. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2007;30(suppl 1):
S51-S59.
Jenq RR, Taur Y, Devlin SM, et al. Intestinal Blautia is associated
with reduced death from graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant. 2015;21:1371-1383.
Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Oshima K, et al. Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the human microbiota. Nature. 2013;500:232-236.
Furusawa Y, Obata Y, Fukuda S, et al. Commensal microbe-derived
butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic regulatory T cells. Nature. 2013;504:446-450.

Cancer

July 15, 2016

