Original Article

Autophagy and Enhanced Chemosensitivity in
Experimental Pancreatic Cancers Induced by
Noninvasive Radiofrequency Field Treatment
Nadezhda V. Koshkina, PhD1; Katrina Briggs1; Flavio Palalon1; and Steven A. Curley, MD1,2

BACKGROUND: Patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have limited therapeutic options and poor response to the
standard gemcitabine (GCB)-based chemotherapy. In the current study, the authors investigated the feasibility of noninvasive shortwave radiofrequency (RF) electric fields to improve the cytotoxic effect of GCB on PDAC cells and determined its mechanism of
action. METHODS: The cytotoxicity of RF alone and in combination with GCB was studied in vitro on normal pancreatic human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells and different PDAC cell lines by flow cytometry, and in vivo on ectopic and orthotopic human PDAC xenograft models in mice. The mechanism of RF activity was studied by Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry. Toxicity was
determined by histopathology. RESULTS: Exposure of different PDAC cells to 13.56-megahertz radio waves resulted in a substantial
cytotoxic effect, which was accompanied by the induction of autophagy but not apoptosis. These effects of RF were found to be
absent in normal cells. Excessive numbers of autophagosomes in cancer cells persisted 24 to 48 hours after RF exposure and then
declined. The addition of a subtoxic dose of GCB to RF treatment inhibited the recovery of cancer cells from the RF-induced autophagy and enhanced the cytotoxic effect of the latter on cancer cells. The treatment of PDAC in situ in mice with the combination of
noninvasive RF and GCB was found to have a superior antitumor effect compared with the use of RF or GCB alone, yet there was no
evidence of systemic toxicity. CONCLUSIONS: Noninvasive RF treatment induced autophagy but not apoptosis in cancer cells and
demonstrated potential as an enhancer of chemotherapy for treating patients with pancreatic cancer without toxicity to normal cells.
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2014;120:480–91. V
KEYWORDS: noninvasive radiofrequency, pancreatic cancer, autophagy, gemcitabine, chemotherapy enhancer.

INTRODUCTION
In addition to ionizing radiation, physicians have used other physical methods for cancer treatment such as hyperthermia,
cryotherapy, and radiofrequency ablation (RFA). However, their application is limited due to the invasive character of the
procedures and side effects. RFA is used, although not commonly, for the treatment of unresectable liver tumors1 and pancreatic cancer.2 This procedure requires image-guided surgery to insert the electrode probe directly into the tumor, which
limits its application for tumors that can be approached by sonographic guidance and excludes lesions that are invisible on
imaging or are unattainable, such as micrometastases. High-frequency alternating electrical currents generated by the RF
probe radiate in an area around the electrode and produce hyperthermia, leading to tumor necrosis. As the temperature
reaches 100 C and boiling occurs, increased impedance limits further deposition of the electrical current into the tissue.3
Excessive hyperthermia causes necrosis to the tumor and surrounding tissue that can induce inflammation and produce
complications. RFA provides the small zone of active heating around the electrode that makes it unreliable for use in
tumors measuring > 4 cm to 5 cm in diameter due to the enhanced possibility of leaving viable cancer cells.4
We have developed a novel, noninvasive, RF-based method of treating cancer. The parameters of the RF field used in
our studies is a 13.56-megahertz (MHz) frequency and generates power ranging from 100 to 900 watts (approximately 1 kiloelectron volt-20 kiloelectron volts/m2). Electromagnetic energy produced in shortwave frequencies has a low tissue-specific

Corresponding author: Nadezhda Koshkina, PhD, Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd,
Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 794-4830; nvkoshki@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials
Science, Rice University, Houston, Texas

We thank Warna Kaularachchi for flow cytometry analysis training and Kristine Ash and Rosalind Ramos for administrative assistance. We also thank the staff of
the institutional Veterinary Medicine and Small Animal Imaging Core Facility, Dr. Jared K. Burks for assistance with fluorescent microscopy, and Kenneth Dunner
Jr for assistance with electron microscopy.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28453, Received: July 11, 2013; Revised: September 10, 2013; Accepted: October 1, 2013, Published online October 25, 2013 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

480

Cancer

February 15, 2014

Noninvasive Radiofrequency for Cancer/Koshkina et al

absorption rate and therefore has excellent whole-body
penetration with documented safety in humans.5 However,
the question of what molecular changes RF treatment can
stimulate inside cells and whether they diverge between
normal and malignant cells remains poorly understood. To
the best of our knowledge, few studies to date have examined the ability of low-intensity electromagnetic fields to
cause structural changes in tubulin molecules6–8 or alter the
function of ion channels.9 However, mechanisms of RFinduced cell death remain unknown. We focused the current study on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
due to its having limited therapeutic options for its treatment and the lowest survival rates for patients. The mainstay drug for PDAC is gemcitabine (GCB). Clinical trials
have combined GCB with radiation and other therapeutic
modalities but to our knowledge have failed to substantially
improve the response rate or overall survival rate of patients
treated with GCB alone.10,11 In the current study, we evaluated the feasibility of combining our noninvasive RF
treatment with GCB to treat patients with PDAC in an
attempt to determine the molecular changes induced by the
RF field inside normal and malignant pancreatic cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents and Cell Culture

Human cancer cells were acquired from the American
Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Va). Normal human
pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells were obtained
from Dr. Craig Logsdon at The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center and maintained as described
elsewhere.12 GCB was obtained from Eli Lilly (Indianapolis, Ind).
RF Treatment

For in vitro studies, cells were seeded at 0.1 3 106 cells/
well in 2 mL of media into 12-well plates. GCB treatment
lasted for 24 hours and cells were then exposed to the RF
field at 600 to 900 watts at a frequency of 13.56 MHz
(Therm Med LLC, Erie, Pa).
In animal experiments, mice were sedated and
grounded to receiving plates with conducting copper tape
to prevent thermal injury as described previously.13 The
RF exposure at 600 watts with a 13.56-MHz frequency
lasted 10 minutes per mouse.
Apoptosis Measurement by Flow Cytometry

Cells were seeded and received the combination treatment
with GCB and RF as described above. After 24 hours, cells
were analyzed using the Annexin V(V)/propidium iodine
(PI) apoptosis kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif) on an
Cancer

February 15, 2014

fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) LSRII flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif).
Fluorescent Immunocytochemistry Analysis of
Autophagy and Apoptosis

Cells were seeded and treated with GCB and RF as
described above. After treatment, cells were returned to
the incubator for different times as specified below. At
designated time points, cells were fixed and stained with
primary antibodies against LC3B or cleaved caspase 3 proteins (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, Mass) followed by Alexa 647-conjugated secondary antibody (Cell
Signaling Technology). Fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-labeled phalloidin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
Mo) was used as a marker for the actin cytoskeleton and
nuclei were stained with 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI). Images of cells were taken using an Olympus
IX81 fluorescent microscope (Olympus Corporation,
Center Valley, Pa).
Western Blot Analysis

Protein lysates from cells were subjected to 15% sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gel,
blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane, and
probed with primary anti-human LC3B antibody (Cell
Signaling Technology) followed by Alexa Fluor 680conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen). Detection
was performed with Odyssey Infrared Imaging System
(Li-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, Neb).
Lentiviral Transduction

Transduction of PDAC cells was performed with LentiBright GFP (green fluorescent protein)-LC3 Lentiviral
Biosensor from Millipore (Billerica, Mass) encoding
GFP-tagged LC3 protein, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, lentiviral stock was added to
cells at a ratio of viral particles per cancer cell equal to 40.
Infected cells were incubated overnight, washed with fresh
medium, exposed for 4 minutes to the RF field, and examined under fluorescent microscope after 24 hours.
Animal Studies

SCID mice were purchased from the National Cancer
Institute Mouse Repository. Animals were maintained
under pathogen-free conditions and treated in accordance
with the recommendations in the National Institute of
Health’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Mice (10-13 per group) were injected with 2 3 106
Panc-1 cells suspended in 40 lL of Matrigel directly into
the pancreas or with 1 3 106 cells subcutaneously for
orthotopic and ectopic tumor models, respectively. The
481

Original Article

growth of orthotopic pancreatic cancer in mice was monitored by magnetic resonance imaging, and animals started
to receive treatment when the tumor size reached 2 mm to
4 mm in diameter. Subcutaneous tumors were measured
by width, length, and height and tumor volume was calculated as width 3 length 3 height. Animals started to
receive treatment when the average tumor volume reached
100 mm3. A GCB dose of 70 mg/kg was given intraperitoneally. The next day, RF exposure for 10 minutes was
performed as described above. Treatment was performed
once weekly in both cancer models. Each experiment was
repeated 3 times.
Measurement of Proliferation, Apoptosis,
Angiogenesis, and Autophagy in Orthotopic
Tumors

Sections of orthotopic Panc-1 tumors were stained with
the following primary antibodies: mouse monoclonal
anti-human Ki-67 antibody (Dako, Carpinteria, Calif),
polyclonal rabbit antibody against human cleaved caspase
3 protein (Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit polyclonal
anti-CD31 (Abcam, Cambridge, Mass), and anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, Calif) antibodies, and rabbit polyclonal anti-LC3B antibody (Abcam). Secondary horseradish
peroxidase -labeled immunoglobulin G antibodies were
used for diaminobenzidine color staining. Stained tissues
were examined under a Leica DMLA F1 microscope
(Leica, Allendale, NJ). Quantitation of diaminobenzidine
staining was performed on 5 random areas using the
Image-Pro software program (Media Cybernetics, Rockville, MD).
Statistical Analysis

Results from experiments are presented as means with
standard deviations from the mean. The 2-tailed Student t
test was used to measure differences between groups. For
analysis of tumor sizes, the second analysis of variance statistical method was applied. A P value < .05 was considered to be statistically significant.
RESULTS
Cytotoxic Effect of RF Treatment on PDAC Cells
But Not Normal Cells

Initially, we verified that exposure of PDAC cells to the
RF field causes cell death. As shown in Figure 1A, FACS
analysis with an V/PI apoptosis kit revealed that exposure
of Panc-1 and AsPC-1 PDAC cells for 8 minutes to the
RF field at 600 watts was toxic. The number of viable (V-/
PI-) cells declined from 90% to 95% in untreated control
482

cells to 40% after RF treatment. Approximately 50% of
cells after RF treatment were necrotic (V-/PI1) or dead
(V1/PI1) and 10% were apoptotic (V1/PI-). In contrast
to cancer cells, > 80% of normal HPDE cells remained
viable after RF exposure.
Microscopic analysis demonstrated that RF treatment induced changes in malignant but not normal pancreatic cells (Fig. 1B). The morphology of Panc-1 and
MiaPaCa-2 cancer cells began to change 1 hour after RF
exposure, followed by increased numbers of rounded cells,
reduced adherence of cells to the plate surface, and the formation of cell aggregates, which was most noticeable with
Panc-1 cells. Even 1 minute of RF exposure was sufficient
to induce these changes in cancer cells. In contrast, the
morphology of normal HPDE cells remained unchanged.
Induction of Autophagy But Not Apoptosis in
PDAC Cells

Gradual changes in the morphology and reduced viability
of PDAC cells after RF treatment indicate that this treatment can induce programmed cell death. The results
shown in Figure 1A demonstrate that apoptosis does not
appear to be the major mechanism of RF-induced cell
death. Therefore, we stained RF-treated cells for LC3B
protein, which is used as a hallmark of autophagy, another
type of programmed cell death.14 We observed extensive
LC3B-positive punctation in PDAC cells exposed to the
RF field, indicating the presence of autophagosomes in
cells (Fig. 2A). Two minutes of RF treatment was sufficient to detect autophagosomes in cancer cells and the
number of these structures increased progressively with
increasing time of RF exposure. Normal HPDE cells
demonstrated negligible levels of LC3B staining even after
5 minutes of RF treatment. Staining of cancer cells after
RF treatment for cleaved caspase 3 confirmed the lack of
apoptosis induction, in contrast to the treatment of these
cells with a cytotoxic dose of GCB, which induced substantial apoptosis (Fig. 2B).
To further verify the ability of RF treatment to trigger the de novo formation of autophagic vesicles, we performed analysis of LC3 protein turnover from its
cytoplasmic form (LC3-I) to its lipophilic derivative
(LC3-II), an essential component of the autophagosome
membrane, after RF treatment in the presence of autophagy inhibitor chloroquine (CQ). CQ prevents binding of
autophagosomes to lysosomes, thus inhibiting the degradation of autophagosomes in cells. Consequently, this
causes the accumulation of autophagosomes inside cells
and may be accompanied by an elevation in LC3-II
expression even after short (2 hours-3 hours) CQ
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Noninvasive Radiofrequency for Cancer/Koshkina et al

Figure 1. Radiofrequency (RF) treatment was toxic for pancreatic cancer cells but not normal cells in vitro. (A) Panc-1, AsPC-1,
and human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells were exposed to the RF field (600 watts, 13.56 megahertz) for 8 minutes
and analyzed on the following day by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis with an apoptosis kit. Annexin V (V)-/
propidium iodine (PI)- indicated viable cells; V1/PI1, dead cells; V1/PI-, apoptotic cells; and V-/PI1, necrotic cells. (B) Panc-1, MiaPaCa-2, and HPDE cells were treated for 1 to 5 minutes in the RF field, fixed 1 hour later, and examined under a microscope.

exposure, as shown in Figure 3A. In the absence of CQ,
RF treatment caused either an increase in LC3-II expression as shown in MiaPaCa-2 and AsPC-1 cells or did not
change its expression as shown in Panc-1 cells. The addition of CQ to RF treatment led to superior expression of
LC3-II compared with RF or CQ treatment alone in all
cell lines. This finding indicates that RF treatment causes
Cancer

February 15, 2014

the formation of new autophagosomes that accumulate
inside cancer cells because CQ prevents their degradation.
In addition, PDAC cancer cells transiently transduced with LC3-GFP plasmid demonstrated elevated levels of LC3-GFP protein expression and increased
numbers of fluorescent puncta, typical for autophagosome vesicles, in response to RF treatment (Fig. 3B).
483

Original Article

Figure 2. Radiofrequency (RF) treatment induced autophagy but not apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. Panc-1, MiaPaCa-2,
and human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells were treated with RF as described in Figure 1 for 1 to 5 minutes and stained
with (A) anti-LC3B antibody (red) to assess autophagy and (B) anti-cleaved caspase 3 antibody (red) to assess apoptosis. Treatment with gemcitabine (GCB) at a dose of 2 lM was used as a positive control for cleaved caspase 3. Cells were stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated phalloidin (green) as a cytoskeleton marker and with 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) (blue) as a nuclear marker. Phalloidin staining was not performed in panel 2B (magnification 3 60; scale bar is 10 lm).

Prevention of Pancreatic Cancer Cell Recovery
From RF-Induced Autophagy by Chemotherapy

To determine whether RF treatment can enhance the anticancer effect of chemotherapy in PDAC cells, we exposed
PDAC cells to the RF field with and without GCB treatment followed by FACS apoptosis analysis. When
MiaPaca-2 cells were used, nontoxic doses of RF and
GCB were not able to change the viability of cancer cells
(Fig. 4A), although the combination of these treatments
led to a significant reduction of viable and elevation of necrotic cells (P < .005). The number of apoptotic cells did
not change in response to any type of treatment.
Panc-1 cells treated with subtoxic doses of GCB at
0.3 lM and 0.8 lM demonstrated elevation of apoptotic
cells from 10% to 20%, respectively (Fig. 4B). Exposure
of Panc-1 cells to the RF field alone was followed by an
484

elevation of necrotic, not apoptotic, cells. The addition of
GCB treatment to RF caused a significant decline of viable cells followed by the accumulation of PI1 populations
of dead and necrotic cell populations when compared
with untreated cells or cells treated with either treatment
alone (P < .001). The amount of apoptotic cells in the RF
plus GCB combination group decreased when compared
with GCB treatment alone.
Staining of Panc-1 or MiaPaCa-2 cells with antibody for cleaved caspase 3 demonstrated that low doses of
GCB did not induce apoptosis in cells because they
remained negative for activated caspase 3 expression (Fig.
5). These doses of GCB were not able to stimulate LC3B
expression over the entire course of the experiment. In
contrast, RF treatment alone increased the number of
LC3B-positive puncta in cancer cells, which declined after
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Noninvasive Radiofrequency for Cancer/Koshkina et al

Figure 3. Radiofrequency (RF) treatment increases the LC3-II accumulation and the appearance of punctate green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-LC3 staining in pancreatic cancer cells after RF field treatment administration. (A) Due to the variable sensitivity of
cells to the duration of RF exposure, Panc-1, AsPC-1, and MiaPaCa-2 cancer cells were exposed for 6 minutes, 5 minutes, and 4
minutes, respectively, to the RF field (900 watts, 13.56 megahertz) and incubated for 24 hours. Chloroquine (CQ) at a concentration of 10 lM was added to cells for 3 hours before lysis. Cells treated with CQ alone were exposed to the drug for 3 hours. Cells
were then processed for immunoblotting using anti-human LC3B antibody to determine the levels of LC3-I and LC3-II expression
and antibody against b-actin to verify equal loading of total protein. (B) Cancer cells were transiently transduced with lentiviral
GFP-LC3 plasmid and treated with RF for 4 minutes. Images of GFP-LC3 expression in cells were taken 24 hours after RF exposure under a fluorescent microscope.

24 hours and 48 hours for Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2 cells,
respectively. The combination of GCB with RF treatment
produced a pattern of autophagy levels in cancer cells simCancer

February 15, 2014

ilar to that produced by RF alone, but the addition of
GCB extended the duration of RF-induced autophagy in
cancer cells and they remained positive for LC3B for
485

Original Article

Figure 4. Combination treatment with gemcitabine (GCB) and radiofrequency (RF) field exposure produced greater pancreatic
cancer cell death than either treatment alone. (A) MiaPaCa-2 cells or (B) Panc-1 cells were treated with GCB at the dosages
noted for 24 hours before RF exposure, which lasted for 4 minutes, and with the same dose of GCB alone or RF alone. Untreated
cells were used as controls. Cells were fixed and analyzed 24 hours after treatment by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis using an Annexin V (V) /propidium iodine (PI) kit, in which V-/PI- indicated viable cells; V1/PI1, dead cells; V1/PI-, apoptotic cells; and V-/PI1, necrotic cells.

96 hours after treatment. Expression of cleaved caspase 3
in the combination treatment group of both cell lines was
negligible during the entire course of the experiment.
Inhibition of Panc-1 Tumor Progression by
Combined RF and GCB-Based Treatment in
Ectopic and Orthotopic Cancer Models

To validate the feasibility of combining GCB chemotherapy with RF treatment in vivo, we used 2 types of Panc-1
xenograft animal models. We chose to use the Panc-1
model because it was reported to be resistant to GCB
treatment.15,16 The use of an ectopic cancer model
486

allowed us to adjust the schedule of treatment during tumor progression. Mice with ectopic Panc-1 tumors that
received 70 mg/kg of GCB followed by RF exposure for
10 minutes once weekly demonstrated complete tumor
growth arrest after 2 weeks of treatment (P < .001) when
compared with groups receiving either treatment alone
(Fig. 6A).
This treatment schedule was then studied in mice
with established orthotopic Panc-1 tumors. Tumor progression was found to be inhibited only in those mice
receiving a combination of GCB plus RF treatment
(P < .01) compared with the other groups (Fig. 6B).
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Noninvasive Radiofrequency for Cancer/Koshkina et al

Figure 5. Autophagy induction in pancreatic cancer cells after radiofrequency (RF) treatment was extended when combined
with gemcitabine (GCB). (A) Panc-1 cells and (B) MiaPaCa-2 cells were treated with 0.2 lM and 0.005 lM of GCB, respectively,
for 24 hours and then exposed to the RF field (900 watts, 13.56 megahertz) for 4 minutes. Cells were fixed 24 hours, 46 hours,
72 hours, or 96 hours after RF treatment and stained with antibodies against LC3B or cleaved caspase 3 (both red), phalloidin
(green), and 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue). Untreated cells and cells treated with RF or GCB alone were used as
controls.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

487

Original Article

Figure 6. The addition of gemcitabine (GCB)-based treatment to the radiofrequency (RF) field exposure stimulated
anticancer responses in mice with ectopic and orthotopic
pancreatic tumors. Panc-1 cells were injected (A) subcutaneously or (B) orthotopically into mice. When tumors were
established, mice started to receive 70 mg/kg of GCB via intraperitoneal injection and 10-minute RF treatment the following day once a week. (A) *P <.001 and (B) P <.01 for GCB
plus RF group compared with any other group.

Histological analysis of orthotopic tumor tissues
revealed a significant reduction of proliferating Ki-671 tumor cells only in the group of animals with orthotopic
tumors that received combination GCB plus RF treatment
(P < .05), whereas the number of Ki-671 cells in tumors
treated with either treatment alone did not differ from that
in the untreated control tumors (Fig. 7A and 7B).
Pathology analysis of vital organs (liver, kidneys,
lungs, heart, normal pancreas, and spleen) obtained from
mice 1 hour, 24 hours, and 48 hours after RF treatment
with and without GCB administration was negative.
Mild, infrequent (10%-20%), multifocal lymphoid
aggregates were detected in the pancreas from mice in all
treated groups after 1 hour of treatment, although this
percentage declined with time. Animals with tumors
undergoing the 40-day treatment course had good posture
and normal behavior during treatment.
Pancreatic Tumor Cell Death Followed by
Upregulation of LC3B Expression In Vivo After
Treatment With a Combination of RF and GCB

To determine the mechanism of tumor cell death caused
by treatment with GCB plus RF exposure in vivo, we
488

stained the orthotopic tumor samples from mice for apoptosis, angiogenesis, and autophagy markers. Staining for
apoptosis using antibody for cleaved caspase 3 demonstrated its induction in all treated groups but not in the
untreated control group (P < .05) (Figs. 7A and 7B). The
highest level of cleaved caspase 3 expression was recorded
in the tumors of mice receiving GCB alone (P < .02)
when compared with all other groups (Fig. 7B). Similar
levels of cleaved caspase 3 expression were determined in
tumors from mice that received RF alone and GCB plus
RF groups.
The structure and density of blood vessels in tumors
were similar in treated and untreated groups, as demonstrated by CD31 staining (Fig. 7A). Quantitation of
VEGF expression demonstrated slight, although statistically significant, elevation of its expression in all 3 treated
groups when compared with the untreated group
(P < .05) (Fig. 7B), but there was no difference in VEGF
expression noted between the treated groups.
Staining of tumor samples for autophagy revealed
higher expression of LC3B in the RF alone and GCB plus
RF groups compared with the GCB and untreated control
groups (P < .05) (Fig. 7A), with the highest LC3B expression noted in the combination GCB plus RF group (Fig.
7B).
DISCUSSION
The effect of RF energy on physiological functions in the
human body and its molecular mechanisms of action in
cells remains poorly understood. In the current study, we
were able to demonstrate that a few minutes of powerful
RF electrical field exposure alone was sufficient to kill cancer cells of pancreatic origin without affecting normal cells
in vitro. FACS analysis with an apoptosis kit and immunostaining of pancreatic cancer cells with anti-cleaved caspase 3 antibody revealed that the cytotoxic effect of the
RF field on malignant cells was not mediated by apoptosis
but rather by another type of cell death mechanism. The
use of apoptosis inhibitor z-VAD-FMK was not able to
rescue cancer cells from the RF-induced cell death. All
this demonstrates that apoptosis is not the major cell
death-inducing mechanism mediated by RF treatment in
cancer cells. Staining of cells with the autophagy marker
LC3B indicated that RF treatment resulted in an excessive
number of LC3B-positive autophagosomes in cancer, but
not normal pancreatic cells. Elevation of intracellular
expression of LC3 protein is not sufficient to verify the
induction of autophagy because the treatment of cells
with autophagy inhibitors, such as CQ, may be also followed by overexpression of LC3B due to intracellular
Cancer

February 15, 2014

Noninvasive Radiofrequency for Cancer/Koshkina et al

Figure 7. Immunohistochemical analysis of orthotopic Panc-1 tumors for proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and autophagy after treatment with gemcitabine (GCB) and radiofrequency (RF) alone and in combination is shown. Tumor sections were stained
with anti–Ki-67, anti-cleaved caspase 3, anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), anti-CD31, or anti-LC3B antibodies. Brown
staining indicated positivity for the appropriate antigen. Representative areas of tumors were (A) photographed under the
microscope or (B) quantified using computer software (magnification: Ki-67, cleaved caspase 3, and LC3B, 3 40; VEGF, 3 20;
and CD31, 3 10). *P <.05 for the treated groups compared with the untreated group; **P <.02 for the group treated with GCB
only compared with the other treatment groups and the untreated group; ***P <.008 for the group treated with GCB plus RF
compared with the other treatment groups and the untreated group.

accumulation of nondegraded autophagosomes.17,18
Analysis of LC3 protein turnover indicated that RF and
CQ treatments alone increase expression of the lipidated
form of LC3 protein, known as LC3-II, an essential component of the autophagosome membrane. Measurement
of LC3-II levels in all tested cells after RF treatment with
CQ demonstrated superior expression of LC3-II protein
compared with cells receiving any single type of treatment, indicating the ability of RF energy to stimulate the
Cancer

February 15, 2014

new formation of autophagosomes in PDAC cells, and
subsequent CQ-induced arrest of their binding with lysosomes was followed by excessive autophagosome accumulation. Moreover, studies of GFP-LC3 transduced
pancreatic cancer cells demonstrated that RF treatment
stimulated translation of the LC3 (atg8) gene that caused
elevation of GFP-positive LC3 puncta, thereby demonstrating the formation of new autophagosomes. The RFinduced autophagy in cancer cells was reversible because
489

Original Article

the number of LC3B-positive autophagosomes started to
decline 24 hours to 48 hours after RF exposure. The use
of subtoxic doses of GCB inhibited cancer cell recovery
from RF-induced autophagy and cells remained positive
for LC3B even 4 days after RF treatment. This demonstrates the ability of chemotherapy to extend the duration
of RF-induced autophagy in cancer cells and correlates
with the enhanced cytotoxic effect of RF plus GCB combination treatment noted in vitro. Recent reports indicate
the important role of autophagy in the biology of PDAC
cells.19 Therefore, disruption of the autophagy mechanism may affect pancreatic cancer cells and lead to their
death.
Human Panc-1 PDAC xenografts in mice were used
to study the anticancer effect of RF alone and in combination with low-dose chemotherapy in vivo. It is interesting
to note that we administered a dose of GCB of 70 mg/kg
once weekly, a dose that was not able to impair the growth
of Panc-1 tumors in mice. This correlates with previous
reports indicating the resistance of Panc-1 cells to
GCB.15,16 The combination of RF treatment with GCB
led to the significant inhibition of tumor progression not
only in ectopic but also orthotopic cancer models, whereas
RF or GCB treatments alone were ineffective. These results
confirm the ability of RF energy to reach the tumor in situ
and enhance the antitumor effect of chemotherapy. Histopathological analysis did not reveal any significant toxic
effects or pathological changes induced by RF treatment
alone or in combination with chemotherapy in vital organs
of mice. The treatment was well tolerated during the entire
course of treatment, which correlates with our in vitro finding concerning the safety of RF treatment in normal cells.
Analysis of orthotopic Panc-1 tumor tissues after
staining with Ki-67 antibody for proliferation further
confirmed that the number of dividing cells was significantly reduced only in those mice receiving the combination of RF plus GCB. Staining of these tumors to assess
autophagy revealed higher numbers of LC3B-positive
cells in both RF-treated groups compared with the group
treated with GCB alone and the untreated group, with the
highest number occurring in the combined GCB plus RF
group. Examination of anti-cleaved caspase 3 expression
in tumor samples demonstrated the highest level of apoptosis in tumor samples from the group of mice receiving
only GCB treatment, although it was not sufficient to
cause tumor regression in vivo. It is interesting to note
that, in orthotopic Panc-1 cancers treated with RF and
GCB, there was evidence of autophagy and apoptosis,
indicating that RF-induced autophagy potentially can
progress to apoptotic cell death pathways after multiple
490

treatments. Analysis of blood vessel structure and VEGF
levels of expression did not reveal any substantial changes
in tumors after treatment.
The role of autophagy in tumors is known to be controversial. Some studies have reported that cancer cells can
respond to drugs by the induction of autophagy, resulting
in cell death, particularly when the apoptotic pathway is
nonfunctional.20,21 Others have indicated that autophagy
helps tumor cells to circumvent stress induced by chemotherapy or environmental factors (hypoxia or nutrient
deficiency), and thus avoid apoptosis.22,23 We believe that
the fate of cancer cells in response to autophagy depends
on the intensity and duration of the autophagy. The data
from the current study indicate that RF treatment
induced the formation of excessive numbers of autophagosomes in PDAC cells. A significant extension of the
presence of autophagic vesicles in these cells became possible with the addition of GCB to the RF treatment. The
inability of cancer cells to recover from the RF-induced
autophagy due to the presence of GCB correlated with
higher levels of cancer cell death and indicated the important role of autophagy in this treatment. We noticed that
the levels of LC3-II do not always correlate with the levels
of toxicity in cells after RF treatment. Perhaps different
cell lines have different tolerances for autophagy; in some
cells, the addition of a few autophagosomes can be sufficient to induce the cell death mechanism, whereas for
others, even significant elevation of autophagosomes in
the cytoplasm is acceptable and does not lead to death.
Evaluation of details of the contributory role of autophagy
in RF treatment requires further investigation and will be
performed in a future study.
In conclusion, the results of the current study demonstrated the ability of a noninvasive RF field treatment to kill
malignant, but not normal, pancreatic cells and to enhance
the effect of GCB-based chemotherapy for patients with malignant pancreatic tumors in situ. We observed that exposure
of cancer cells to the RF field activated autophagy in PDAC
cells. This autophagy became irreversible when the RF treatment was combined with GCB administration, suggesting
that autophagy process drives the anticancer effect of this
combined treatment. With further investigation, RF treatment may become a new noninvasive therapeutic approach
in combination with standard chemotherapy or with other
agents for treating solid tumors at numerous locations in the
human body.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant
U54CA143837), National Institutes of Health University of Texas

Cancer

February 15, 2014

Noninvasive Radiofrequency for Cancer/Koshkina et al

MD Anderson Cancer Center Support Grant CA016672, and a
research grant from the Kanzius Cancer Research Foundation (to
Dr. Curley).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. McGahan JP, Browning PD, Brock JM, Tesluk H. Hepatic ablation
using radiofrequency electrocautery. Invest Radiol. 1990;25:267-270.
2. Matsui Y, Nakagawa A, Kamiyama Y, Yamamoto K, Kubo N, Nakase
Y. Selective thermocoagulation of unresectable pancreatic cancers by
using radiofrequency capacitive heating. Pancreas. 2000;20:14-20.
3. Goldberg SN, Gazelle GS, Compton CC, Mueller PR, McLoud
TC. Radio-frequency tissue ablation of VX2 tumor nodules in the
rabbit lung. Acad Radiol. 1996;3:929-935.
4. Abdalla EK, Vauthey JN, Ellis LM, et al. Recurrence and outcomes
following hepatic resection, radiofrequency ablation, and combined
resection/ablation for colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg. 2004;
239:818-825; discussion 825-827.
5. Adair ER, Blick DW, Allen SJ, Mylacraine KS, Ziriax JM, Scholl
DM. Thermophysiological responses of human volunteers to whole
body RF exposure at 220 MHz. Bioelectromagnetics. 2005;26:448461.
6. Kirson ED, Dbaly V, Tovarys F, et al. Alternating electric fields
arrest cell proliferation in animal tumor models and human brain
tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:10152-10157.
7. Taghi M, Gholamhosein R, Saeed RZ. Effect of electromagnetic
field on the polymerization of microtubules extracted from rat brain.
Recent Pat Endocr Metab Immune Drug Discov. 2012;6:251-254.
8. Zimmerman JW, Pennison MJ, Brezovich I, et al. Cancer cell proliferation is inhibited by specific modulation frequencies. Br J Cancer.
2012;106:307-313.
9. Marchionni I, Paffi A, Pellegrino M, et al. Comparison between
low-level 50 Hz and 900 MHz electromagnetic stimulation on single
channel ionic currents and on firing frequency in dorsal root ganglion isolated neurons. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006;1758:597-605.

Cancer

February 15, 2014

10. Renouf D, Moore M. Evolution of systemic therapy for advanced
pancreatic cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2010;10:529-540.
11. Philip PA, Benedetti J, Corless CL, et al. Phase III study comparing gemcitabine plus cetuximab versus gemcitabine in patients
with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma: Southwest Oncology
Group-directed intergroup trial S0205. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:
3605-3610.
12. Li M, Zhai Q, Bharadwaj U, et al. Cyclophilin A is overexpressed in
human pancreatic cancer cells and stimulates cell proliferation
through CD147. Cancer. 2006;106:2284-2294.
13. Glazer ES, Zhu C, Massey KL, et al. Noninvasive radiofrequency
field destruction of pancreatic adenocarcinoma xenografts treated
with targeted gold nanoparticles. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16:57125721.
14. Kabeya Y, Mizushima N, Ueno T, et al. LC3, a mammalian homologue of yeast Apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after processing. EMBO J. 2000;19:5720-5728.
15. Arumugam T, Ramachandran V, Logsdon CD. Effect of cromolyn
on S100P interactions with RAGE and pancreatic cancer growth and
invasion in mouse models. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:1806-1818.
16. Tang K, Zhang Z, Bai Z, Ma X, Guo W, Wang Y. Enhancement of
gemcitabine sensitivity in pancreatic cancer by co-regulation of dCK
and p8 expression. Oncol Rep. 2011;25:963-970.
17. Mizushima N, Yoshimori T. How to interpret LC3 immunoblotting. Autophagy. 2007;3:542-545.
18. Klionsky DJ, Abdalla FC, Abeliovich H, et al. Guidelines for the
use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy. Autophagy. 2012;8:445-544.
19. Yang S, Wang X, Contino G, et al. Pancreatic cancers require
autophagy for tumor growth. Genes Dev. 2011;25:717-729
20. Yu L, Lenardo MJ, Baehrecke EH. Autophagy and caspases: a new
cell death program. Cell Cycle. 2004;3:1124-1126.
21. Laane E, Tamm KP, Buentke E, et al. Cell death induced by dexamethasone in lymphoid leukemia is mediated through initiation of
autophagy. Cell Death Differ. 2009;16:1018-1029.
22. Abedin MJ, Wang D, McDonnell MA, Lehmann U, Kelekar A.
Autophagy delays apoptotic death in breast cancer cells following
DNA damage. Cell Death Differ. 2007;14:500-510.
23. Cuervo AM. Autophagy: in sickness and in health. Trends Cell Biol.
2004;14:70-77.

491

