www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 15775-15788
Research Paper

Stathmin decreases cholangiocarcinoma cell line sensitivity to
staurosporine-triggered apoptosis via the induction of ERK and
Akt signaling
Yueqi Wang1,*, Zhihui Gao2,*, Dexiang Zhang3,*, Xiaobo Bo1, Yaojie Wang1, Jiwen
Wang1, Sheng Shen1, Han Liu1, Tao Suo1, Hongtao Pan1, Zhilong Ai1, Houbao Liu1
1

Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

2

Department of General Surgery, Subei People's Hospital, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province, China

3

Department of General Surgery, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Houbao Liu, email: houbaoliu@aliyun.com
Keywords: cholangiocarcinoma, integrin β1, proteomics, Stathmin, staurosporine
Received: June 13, 2016     Accepted: January 03, 2017     Published: February 02, 2017

ABSTRACT
Cholangiocarcinoma is a rare, but highly fatal malignancy. However, the
intrinsic mechanism involved in its tumorigenesis remains obscure. An urgent need
remains for a promising target for cholangiocarcinoma biological therapies. Based
on comparative proteomical technologies, we found 253 and 231 different spots in
gallbladder tumor cell lines and cholangiocarcinoma cell lines, respectively, relative
to non-malignant cells. Using Mass Spectrometry (MS) and database searching, we
chose seven differentially expressed proteins. High Stathmin expression was found
in both cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder carcinoma cells. Stathmin expression
was validated using immunohistochemistry and western blot in cholangiocarcinoma
tissue samples and peritumoral tissue. It was further revealed that high Stathmin
expression was associated with the repression of staurosporine-induced apoptosis
in the cholangiocarcinoma cell. Moreover, we found that Stathmin promoted cancer
cell proliferation and inhibited its apoptosis through protein kinase B (Akt) and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling. Integrin, β1 appears to serve
as a partner of Stathmin induction of ERK and Akt signaling by inhibiting apoptosis
in the cholangiocarcinoma cell. Understanding the regulation of anti-apoptosis effect
by Stathmin might provide new insight into how to overcome therapeutic resistance
in cholangiocarcinoma.

the present study, we used 2-DE to screen the differential
proteins between the benign cell lines and malignant ones
in the human bile duct. By using MS and searching the
database, seven up-regulated protein spots were identified.
Stathmin was increased in the malignant cell lines of
human cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder carcinoma.
Cholangiocarcinoma is a rare and highly lethal cancer,
which is a malignancy arising from the epithelial cells
that line the biliary tract [5, 6]. The highly desmoplastic
nature of cholangiocarcinoma, its extensive support by
a rich tumor microenvironment, and profound genetic
heterogeneity, all contribute to its therapeutic resistance.
Understanding the tumor biology at the molecular level of
cholangiocarcinoma could lead to optimum therapies with

INTRODUCTION
Biliary tract neoplasms include tumors arising
from the gallbladder, bile duct, and ampulla of Vater
[1, 2]. Surgical treatment is the preferred option for
it, but the prognosis is poor. The search for effective
therapeutic targets is very urgent. The two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis (2-DE) system and matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF/MS) provides a useful tool for detecting
significant changes in protein expression [3]. With the
rapid progress in mass spectrometry (MS), bioinformatics
and analytical techniques, cancer biomarker discovery
has been greatly promoted using this approach [4]. In
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15775

Oncotarget

improvement in patient survival. Several studies have been
published in which the differentially expressed proteins in
cholangiocarcinoma have been identified, but they are few
in number, and most of the data have been generated from
single studies, and need further validation [7]. Therefore,
we explored the role of Stathmin in cholangiocarcinoma.
Stathmin, also known as p17, p18, p19, 19K,
metablastin, oncoprotein 18, LAP 18 and Op18, is a 19
kDa cytosolic protein [8, 9]. It was the first discovered
member of a family of phylogenetically related
microtubule-destabilizing
phosphoproteins,
which
serve as an intracellular substrate for a variety of signal
transduction pathways [10−12]. Stathmin is known to be
a microtubule-destabilizing agent, positively associated
with the survival outcomes of cancer patients [13]. It has
been reported that Stathmin plays an important role in cell
proliferation, and potentially exhibits the clinical features
of early metastasis and drug resistance [13−15]. However,
there are few reports on Stathmin in cholangiocarcinoma
[16]. The objective of our study was to validate the role
of Stathmin in cholangiocarcinoma by silencing the
cholangiocarcinoma cell line with RNA interference
technology.
Apoptosis is a type of programmed cell death in
controlling cell suicide and plays an essential role in
regulating normal development and homoeostasis in
multicellular organisms [17]. Staurosporine (STS), a
potent protein kinase C inhibitor with a broad spectrum
of activity, is used in vitro as an initiator of apoptosis in
a wide variety of cell types [18−20]. The induction of
apoptosis is considered to be testimony to the efficiency
of chemotherapy drugs. It would be much helpful for the
application of chemotherapy if the relationship between
the Stathmin expression level and the susceptibility of
tumor cells to chemotherapy drugs could be clarified.
Our study aimed to explore a previously
uncharacterized role of Stathmin in mediating
promoted cholangiocarcinoma cell proliferation. We
considered Stathmin could be a potential new target for
cholangiocarcinoma therapy.

was employed in the first dimension to resolve both acidic
and basic proteins. In Figure 1, the analytical 2-DE pattern
is visualized by silver staining. Total protein (320μg) was
applied to each IPG pH 3−10 strip. There were 489~508
protein spots detected on RBE, and 449~470 on HIBEpiC,
with a matching rate of 89%. There were 463~490
spots detected on GBC, and 436~453 on PHGE, with a
matching rate of 86%. A qualitative spot comparison
was then performed. There were 253 and 231 different
spots between RBE and HIBEpiC, GBC and PHGE,
respectively (p-values < 0.050, with at least a three folds
difference in percentage of the volume). 13 spots were
identified from the gallbladder carcinoma cell line and
their paired normal cells, 12 proteins were upregulated
and one spot is down-regulated in bile duct tumor cell.
12 spots were identified from bile duct tumor cell line and
their paired normal cells, 11 proteins were upregulated and
one spot is down-regulated in bile duct tumor cell line.
From these, we focused on the up-regulation three protein
of expression spots with higher protein scores in RBE,
compared with HIBEpiC, four protein of expression spots
in GBC, compared with PHGE.
We then cut these spots from silver-stained gels
to perform MS identification. The protein description,
coverage and scores of differentially expressed protein
spots are presented in Table 1. Spots 1−3 were three
up-regulated proteins in the cholangiocarcinoma cell
line, relative to normal bile duct cell line. They were
identified as Stathmin/oncoprotein 18; peroxiredoxin3,
isoform CRA_c and hCG1984476 isoform, CRA_b.
Spots 4−7 were the four up-regulated proteins in the
gallbladder tumor cell, relative to the normal human
gallbladder epithelium. They were identified as
Stathmin/oncoprotein 18; endoplasmic reticulum protein
29; putative peroxisomal antioxidant enzyme and chain
A of crystal structure of ABAD/HSD 10 with abound
inhibitor.

Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization timeof-flight mass spectrometry identification of the
differentially expressed proteins

RESULTS

The extracted peptides from the seven spots were
examined by MALDI-TOF-MS, to generate peptide mass
fingerprinting (PMF). For example, the identification of
spot1 by PMF and database searching is displayed in
Figure2. The mass of spot fingerprints was analyzed, as
described by Wu [4]. One of the proteins was increased
in both RBE and GBC, relative to HIBEpiC and PHGE
(Figure 1).MALDI-TOF-MS identified this protein
as Stathmin/oncoprotein 18 (Figure 2). The predicted
molecular weight/pI value for Stathmin is 19 kDa/6.75.
This is in concordance with the position of a spot on
the 2-DE gel. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis confirmed that
Stathmin exhibited a high protein score.

Proteomic analysis of differentially expressed
proteins between the malignant and normal cells
of the human biliary tract by two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis
In order to investigate the differential expression
profile of malignant cells and normal cells of the human
biliary tract, cholangiocarcinoma cell line (RBE) was
compared with human intrahepatic biliary epithelial
cells (HIBEpiC), and Gallbladder carcinoma cell line
(GBC) compared with human gallbladder epithelial cells
(PHGE), by 2-DE. A wide pH range (pH 3−10) of IPGs

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15776

Oncotarget

High Stathmin expression was validated in
cholangiocarcinoma specim ensusing the
Western blot and immunohistochemistry method

Stathmin expression was displayed in the tumor
specimens, than that displayed in the adjacent normal
tissue (Figure 3C). Stathmin was stained more in both the
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma tissues and extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma, than in the peritumoral tissues of
both of these. According to the immunohistochemistry
scoring method previously described, representative
images of high- and low-density Stathmin expression
in intratumoral and peritumoral tissue are illustrated
in Figure 3D. In extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma,
Stathmin expression was significantly higher than that in
the peritumoral tissues (p< 0.01)[Figure 3D (a) and 3D
(c)]. Meanwhile, Stathmin expression was significantly
higher in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma than that in the
peritumoral tissues (p< 0.01)[Figure 3D (b) and 3D (d)].
The results demonstrated that the expression of Stathmin
was significantly higher in tumor cell lines and tissues,
than in benign ones.

To further verify Stathmin up-regulated in the
biliary tract tumor cells by 2-DE, we evaluated Stathmin
expression levels using Western blot in the PHGE, GBC,
HIBEpiC and RBE cells. The Western blot results revealed
that Stathmin was highly expressed in RBE and GBC,
than which in HIBEpiC and PHGE (Figure 3A). Realtime PCR was employed to analyze the gene expression
profile of Stathmin in the HIBEpiC, RBE, PHGE and
GBC cells. The real-time PCR result revealed that the
Stathmin gene expression level was increases to a time
above in RBE and GBC, than it was in HIBEpiC and
PHGE (Figure 3B). A panel of 11cholangiocarcinoma
specimens and their peritumoral tissues were detected
using Western blotting. In almost all the cases, higher

Figure 1: A comparison of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis gel patterns between RBE and HIBEpiC, GBC and
PHGE. A. Nonlinear 2-D gel (pH 3−10 NL) maps of protein expression in the RBE and HIBEpiC cells. B. The same maps pertaining to

the GBC and PHGE cells. The circle in the images indicate the distribution of the successfully identified changed proteins. C. The seven
images represent the differentially expressed protein spots enlarged from A and B. The pictures marked 1−7M and 1−7N correspond to the
cycled protein spots 1−7 in images of malignant cell (M) and normal cell (N) groups from A and B, respectively. Spots 1-3 are the three
up-regulated proteins in the bile duct tumor cell line relative to normal bile duct cell line. Spots 4-7 are the four up-regulated proteins in the
gallbladder tumor cell relative to the normal human gallbladder epithelium. The differentially expressed protein spots are indicated with an
arrow and are marked with numbers.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15777

Oncotarget

Table 1: Proteins identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
Spot
numbera

Protein
molecular Protein Matched
Protein
weight
(pI)
peptides coverage(%)d
(kDa)

Protein
descriptionb

Accession
numberc

Protein
scoree

Protein
levelf

1

Stathmin/
oncoprotein 18

gi|122890670

19

6.75

4

32

121

↑

2

Peroxiredoxin3,
gi|119569783
isoform CRA_c

11

6.06

6

47

265

↑

3

hCG1984476,
gi|119607495
isoform CRA_b

14

6.29

8

32

103

↑

4

Stathmin/
oncoprotein 18

gi|122890670

19

6.75

9

69

219

↑

5

Endoplasmic
reticulum protein
29 isoform 1
precursor

gi|5803013

29

6.77

11

37

286

↑

6

Putative
peroxisomal
antioxidant
enzyme

gi|6563212

17

6.73

4

29

107

↑

7

Chain A of
crystal structure
of ABAD/HSD
10with abound
inhibitor

gi|55670219

27

8.45

6

27

112

↑

a: Spot numbers refer to Figure 1
b: Protein description in the IPI_HUMAN database
c: Accession number in the IPI_HUMAN database
d: Coverage of protein sequence by the peptides used for spot identification
e: Spots identified by mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry analysis and the Mascot score are indicated
f: Reference gels were the group of normal cells

High Stathmin expression repressed
staurosporine-induced apoptosis

RBE-siStathmin cells, than that in the RBE-siNS cells. As
shown in Figure 4D, annexin V/PI staining indicated that
the percentage of apoptotic cells was much higher in the
RBE-siStathmin cells than in the RBE-siNS cells after four
hours. Thereafter, the proteolytic cleavage of PARP and
caspase-3 were also examined by Western blot analysis.
Treatment of the cells with 1μM STS caused the timedependent proteolytic cleavage of PARP and caspase-3,
with the diminution, and even the disappearance, of fulllength PARP, and the appearance of large fragments. PARP
cleavage was observed in RBE transfected with StathminsiRNA observably, than in the RBE-siNS cells (Figure
4E). The quantification of pro-PARP-cleaved PARP
expression is shown in Figure 4F, and the quantification of
procaspase 3 expression by densitometric analysis(Figure
4G). This further substantiated Stathmin expression might
impair STS-induced apoptosis in RBE cells.

Firstly, double-stranded siRNA was used to knock
down Stathmin expression in cholangiocarcinoma cells.
RBE was transfected with non-sense control, siRNA or
Stathmin-siRNA. These cells were harvested for Western
blot and RT-PCR analysis 24 hours later. The protein level
of Stathminin RBE cells was reduced by approximately
70% when Stathmin was knocked down (Figure 4A).
The results of the quantitative analysis indicated that the
mRNA level of Stathmin in RBE cells was decreased
distinctly after transient transfection with Stathmin-siRNA
(Figure 4B). The nuclear fragmentation was more easily
observed in RBE transfected with Stathmin-siRNA, than
in RBE-siNS cells, as for the treatment (1μM STS, 4hours)
shown by DAPI staining(Figure 4C). Nuclear staining by
DAPI showed a much stronger apoptotic response in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15778

Oncotarget

High Stathmin expression interrupts apoptosis
by enhancing the Bax/Bcl-2ratio and dramatic
induction of ERK/Akt activation

reduced by approximately 40% after being transiently
transfected with Stathmin siRNA for four days (Figure
5C). The fact that the proliferation of the cells decreased
with Stathmin knockdown suggests that Stathmin could
promote cellular proliferation.
To explore the signaling mechanisms involved
in high Stathmin expression in cholangiocarcinoma,
we tested the Akt and ERK signaling pathways.
When Stathmin was knocked down in RBE, AKT
phosphorylation was downregulated in the RBE-siNS
cells, despite the fact that no significant changes in total
AKT levels were observed in these cells (Figure 5D).
When Stathmin interference plasmids were transfected,
RBE showed significantly decreased expression of
p-Stathminand p-ERK, compared to RBE transfected

Given that the interplay between Bax and Bcl-2 is
capable of controlling anti-cancer drug-induced apoptosis,
we examined the expression of Bax and Bcl-2. After
being transiently transfected with Stathmin-siRNAs,
the Bax/Bcl-2ratio was markedly decreased in the RBE
cells (Figure 5A). The data suggest that the Bax/Bcl2 protein might be the determinant factor in regulating
the chemosensitivity of Stathmin overexpression in the
RBE cells. The cell cycle regulatory protein, cyclinD1,
decreased after RBE was transiently transfected with
Stathmin siRNA(Figure 5B). RBE cell viability was

Figure 2: The result of the MALDI-TOF MS/MS analysis of the protein spot 1 MALDI-TOF-MS identified this protein
as Stathmin/oncoprotein 18. The predicted molecular weight/pI value for Stathmin was 19 kDa/6.75. This is in concordance with the
position of the spot on the 2-DE gel. MALDI-TOF-MS analysis confirmed that Stathmin exhibited a high protein score A. Peptide mass
fingerprint of the tryptic digest of spot 1. Peptide signals identified were marked with asterisks. B. MS/MS profile of the peptide with a mass
of 1388.8850 Da. y-ions resulting from fragmentation of the peptides and amino acids they represent are indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15779

Oncotarget

Integrin β1 serves as a partner of
Stathmin-regulated anti-apoptosis in
cholangiocarcinoma cells

with non-sense control, siRNA, even though the RBE
cell was treated with Akt activator, dbcAMP [21, 22]
(Figure 5E). Furthermore, sorafenib [23, 24], an
inhibitor of protein kinase, is likely to aggravate the
downregulated expression of p-ERK and p-Akt when
Stathmin is knocked down (Figure 5F). Then, TIC10 (an
inhibition of Akt and ERK) was employed to precipitate
the implication of ERK and AKT activity in Stathminregulated apoptosis. Western blotting against p-ERK and
p-Akt decreased in the common presence of TIC10 and
STS when Stathmin is knocked down(Figure 5G). These
results provide further evidence that Stathmin influences
cholangiocarcinoma cellular STS-triggered apoptosis
through Akt and ERK signaling pathways.

It has been reported that cell attachment, mediated
by the α5/β1integrin, promotes cell survival, which
is associated with the elevated expression of the antiapoptosis protein, Bcl-2 [25]. To further validate the
relationship between the upstream of Akt and ERK
signaling pathways and Stathmin, we evaluated
integrin expression levels using Western blotting in
RBE. When Stathmin was knocked down in RBE,
integrin α5 and β1were markedly decreased in the
RBE cells(Figure 6A). To explore whether or not
interplay existed between Stathmin and integrin β1, we

Figure 3: Comparative analysis of Stathmin expression in different cells and tissues. A. Western blotting of Stathmin

expression levels from the gallbladder carcinoma cell line (GBC) or bile duct tumor cell line (RBE), relative biological effectiveness and
their paired normal cells, PHGE or HIBEpiC. B. Relative Stathminm RNA expression levels in the different bile duct cells by real-time
PCR. The expression levels of Stathmin genes were standardized against those of the actin gene detected in the identical cDNA samples.
The normal cell, HIBEpiC, served as the control. All results were shown as means± SD, from at least three independent experiments. C.
The Stathmin expression levels of the protein specimens from 11cholangiocarcinoma tissues and theirperitumoral tissues. Scatter plots for
the relative Stathmin expression levels of paired intratumoral tissues (n=11) and peritumoral tissues (n =11) was showed on the right. D.
Immunohistochemistry detection and scoring of Stathmin expression: (a) Representative microphotographs of Stathmin expression in the
extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and peritumora ltissue. (b) Representative microphotographs of Stathmin expression in the intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma and peritumoral tissue. (c) Scatter plots for Stathmin staining scores for the unpaired extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
tissue (n = 38) and for the peritumoral tissue (n = 32)(upper). p<0.01. (d) Scatter plots for Stathmin staining scores for the unpaired
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma tissue (n = 78) and for the peritumoral tissue (n= 44)( lower). p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15780

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Stathmin decreased cholangiocarcinoma cell sensitivity to staurosporine. A. Stathmin-siRNA specifically

decreased Stathmin protein levels. B. Stathmin-siRNA specifically decreased Stathmin mRNA levels by RT-PCR. C. After the cells were
treated with 1μM STS for 4 hours, the nuclear condensation and fragmentation of the apoptotic cells was increased in the RBE-siStathmin
cells. The result shown is from three independent experiments. D. Evaluation of apoptosis of the RBE-siNS and RBE-siStathmincells
treated with different concentrations of STS using annexin V/PI staining. The cells were treated with various doses of STS for 4 hours, and
were double stained with annexin-V-FITC and PI. Apoptosis was analyzed by flow cytometry. The right chart is the quantification of the
data of Annecxin V analysis. E. The RBE-siNS and RBE-siStathmin cells were incubated with 1μM STS for different periods, and were
then examined using anti-PARP and caspase-3 antibodies. GAPDH was used as the loading control. F. The chart shows the analysis of the
quantitative ratios of pro-PARP and cleaved PARP, relative to the amount of GAPDH for the data mentioned. Each bar represents the mean
±SD of the three independent experiments. G. The chart shows the analysis of the quantitative ratios of caspase-3 relative to the amount of
GAPDH for the data mentioned. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15781

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Knockdown of Stathmin in RBE attenuated the Akt and ERK phosphorylation levels. A. Western blot analysis of Bax

and Bcl-2 expression in the RBE cells, transfected with 4μgStathmin-siRNA, or non-sense control, siRNA, as indicated. The right chart is the
quantification of the Bax/Bcl-2 expression ratio by densitometric analysis. B. Expression of cell cycle regulatory protein, cyclinD1, after the RBE
cell was transfected with Stathmin−siRNA, or non-sense control, siRNA, was detected by Western blotting. C. RBE cell viability was performed
using the Cell Counting Kit-8® assay continuously for 4 days transfected with Stathmin−siRNA, or non-sense control, siRNA. D. The activity
of Akt was inhibited in response to the RBE cells transfected with Stathmin-siRNA. E. dbcAMP was used to treat the RBE cells transfected
with Stathmin-siRNA or non-sense control, siRNA. Western blot analysis was used to determine the expression of p-ERK, ERK and p-Stathmin
(S16). F. Different concentrations of sorafenib-treated RBE cells were transfected with Stathmin-siRNA or non-sense control, siRNA. Western
blot analysis was used to determine the expression of p-ERK and ERK, p-Akt and Akt. G. TIC10 was used in inhibition of Akt and ERK. 1μM
STS was used for 4 hours after RBE-si NS and RBE-si Stathmin cells were treated with 2.5μM TIC10 for 36 h. Western blot was performed to
check the efficiency of ERK and Akt activity in Stathmin-regulated apoptosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15782

Oncotarget

performed immunoprecipitation with the integrin β1
antibody, and then staining with the Stathmin antibody.
The interplay between integrin β1 and Stathmin was
observed (Figure 6B). To better define the localization of
Stathmin and integrin β1, we examined the intracellular
distribution of Stathmin and integrin β1 under a confocal
immunofluorescence microscope. The co-localization
of Stathmin and integrin β1 was observed converged on
cytoplasm and cell membrane in RBE-siNS cells when
Stathmin and integrin β1 were dispersed in the cytoplasm
of the RBE cells transiently transfected with StathminsiRNAs (Figure 6C). Furthermore, immunoblotting of
the processed cell lysates under STS stimuli revealed that
integrin α5β1 specific adhesion to FN blocked apoptosis
in RBE-siNS cells (Figure 6D). We observed that the
suppression of functional integrin β1 with blocking
peptide could promote a stronger apoptotic effect in
RBE transfected with Stathmin-siRNA(Figure 6E).

Taken together, these data suggested the suppression
of functional integrin β1 with blocking peptide could
promote apoptosis when Stathmin is knocked down.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we investigated the differential profiles
of protein expression in tumor cells and in normal cells
of the human biliary tract by 2-DE. Our results revealed
four up-regulated proteins in the gallbladder tumor cell
relative to the normal human gallbladder epithelium, and
three up-regulated proteins in the cholangiocarcinoma
cell line relative to the normal bile duct cell line (Figure
1). Using MS and database searching, we identified the
seven differential proteins (Figure 2). High Stathmin
expression was found in both cholangiocarcinoma and
gallbladder carcinoma cells. We further validated Stathmin
expression using immunohistochemistry in unpaired

Figure 6: The suppression of functional integrin β1 and knockdown Stathmin could intensify apoptosis. A. The expression

of integrin α5 and β1 were inhibited in response to the RBE cells transfected with Stathmin-siRNA detected by Western blot analysis. B.
Total RBE cells were transfected with Stathmin-siRNA or non-sense cell extracts immunoprecipitated with integrin β1 antibodies and then
immunoblotted with Stathmin antibodies. C. Stathmin and integrin β1 converged on cytoplasm and cell membrane in RBE-si NS cells. D.
The acquired lysates from cells grown on FN-coated plates under 2.5 μM STS condition; extracts from cells plated in no FN-coated surfaces
performed as control samples (con). The total protein lysates probed with PARP and β-actin antibodies. E. Aliquots of cells suspension preincubated with the β peptide or control (nonsense peptide) 100μM as and incubated for 12 hrs before STS treatment at diverse time points;
Western blot was performed with PARP and β-actin antibodies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15783

Oncotarget

cholangiocarcinoma tissues samples and peritumoral
tissue. Stathmin expression was significantly higher in
the extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma cells than that in
the peritumoral tissue [Figure 3D (a) and 3D (c)], while
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma Stathmin expression
was significantly higher than that in the peritumoral tissue
[Figure 3D (b) and 3D (d)]. High Stathmin expression in
the protein and at mRNA level was shown in the tumor
cells by Western blot analysis and real-time PCR(Figure
3A and 3B). High Stathmin expression was shown in 10
of the 11 cholangiocarcinoma specimens, compared with
that in the peritumoral tissues, using Western blot analysis
(Figure 3C). Some studies found Stathmin was associated
with survival outcomes of breast cancer patients and lung
cancer patients, and considered Stathmin could be a poor
prognostic biomarker of some malignant tumors [13–15].
Our results demonstrated that no matter in tumor cell lines
or in tumor tissues, the expression of Stathmin was all
significantly higher than in normal ones. Whether Stathmin
could be a prognostic biomarker of cholangiocarcinoma?
Further studies are needed to demonstrate it.
Integrin as a cell adherent receptor represents
an intermediary in the physical link between the ECM
and the cell cytoskeleton. Interestingly, Stathmin as a
microtubule-destabilizing protein exerted a powerful
effect on many cytoskeletal proteins organization. Here,
in our study, we evaluated the relationship between
Stathmin and integrin β1 (Figure 6). We found that
Stathmin co-localized with integrin β1 beneath the
plasma membrane and cytoplasm in the RBE cells.
When Stathmin was knocked down, Stathmin and
integrin β1 were dispersed in the cytoplasm of the
RBE cells (Figure 6C). The immunoprecipitation assay
suggests that interplay existed between Stathmin and
integrin β1(Figure 6B). The interplay between Stathmin
and integrin β1 is directly or indirectly, which may need
further demonstration.
Akt and ERK signaling pathways were also related
to Stathmin-induced anti-apoptosis. Stathmin knockdown
inhibited both Thr308-P-Akt and Ser473-P-Akt. When
Stathmin was knocked down, RBE showed significantly
decreased expression of p-Stathmin and p-ERK, compared
to that in the RBE-siNS cells, even though the RBE cells
were treated with Akt activator, dbcAMP. Furthermore,
an inhibitor of protein kinase, sorafenib, attenuate the
phosphorylated ERK level in a dose-dependent manner
when Stathmin was knocked down (Figure 5F). As a
result of the presence of TIC10 and STS, a significant
decrease in the phosphorylated ERK and Akt level in the
RBE-siStathmin cells (Figure 5G). The result suggests that
Stathmin shows anti-apoptosis effect by induce Akt-ERK
signaling pathways.
High Stathmin expression has been associated
with human malignancies such as human breast cancer,
non-small cell lung cancer, human hepatoma and gastric
cancer, and confirms the notion that Stathmin contributes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to poor prognosis and cancer progression in tumor
patients [26−31]. As an important regulatory protein of
microtubule dynamics, Stathmin plays an important role
in cell behavior, such as cell invasion, growth and survival
[32, 33]. Therefore, understanding the significance of
Stathmin survival signaling on tumor progression could
contribute to the establishment of effective therapeutic
strategies in cholangiocarcinoma. The current work
was performed to evaluate if high Stathmin expression
would regulate anti-apoptotic signaling by enhancing
the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio; critical to cholangiocarcinoma cell
survival (Figure 4). In our study, Stathmin shows antiapoptosis effect by co-work with integrin β1 to induce
Akt-ERK signaling pathways. Stathmin/integrin β1
prevented apoptosis in cholangiocarcinoma cells, which
directly or indirectly antagonizes tumor sensitivity to the
chemotherapy drug.
In conclusion, proteomic techniques were used to
compare the proteins in the biliary tract tumor cell lines.
Distinct proteins were found, and in particular, Stathmin,
which may have potential value as a biomarker for
biliary tract neoplasms. In this study, we found Stathmin
shows anti-apoptosis effect by co-work with integrin β1
regulated cholangiocarcinoma cell line proliferation and
apoptosis through Akt and ERK signaling pathways.
This work confirms the chemoresistance function
of Stathmin. Therefore, it might contribute to the
establishment of effective therapeutic strategies in
cholangiocarcinoma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Samples, materials and reagents
This research was approved by the Ethics
Committee of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. Participants provided their written
informed consent to participate in this study. The ethics
committees approved the consent procedure. Fresh
tumor tissues and matched biliary tract tissues of the
patients were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen after
resection, and stored at −80°C, having been obtained at
surgery within a maximum of 30 minutes. A panel of
11cholangiocarcinoma specimens and their peritumoral
tissue was chosen for the study. Dibutyrylcyclic
adenosine monophosphate (dbcAMP, Sigma-Aldrich,
Germany), was dissolved in distilled water, to a stock
concentration of 0.1g/ml. Sorafenib((BAY-43-9006;
Cayman Chemical, Michigan, USA) was dissolved in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to a stock concentration
of 10 mM staurosporine (11055682001, Roche
Diagnostics, Meylan, France). TRAIL-inducing
compound 10 (TIC10) (Selleckchem, Houston, TX,
U.S.A.). fibronectin (FN) (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie,
Deisenhofen, Germany).

15784

Oncotarget

Cell lines and cell culture

focusing (IEF) system and Hoefer™ SE600
Ruby™(Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden).
Proteins (250 mg) were run in IEF using 13cm pH
3−10 NL IPG strips (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala,
Sweden). After 12hours of rehydration, focusing was
initiated at 100 V for one hour, 200 V for one hour,
500 V for one hour, 1000 V for 0.5 hours, and then
gradually increased to 8000 V for one hour and 8000
V for a total of 28000 voltage hoursin IPGphor™.
After IEF separation, the gel strip was equilibrated with
buffer III [6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS) and 1% DTT] followed by buffer IV (6 M
urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS and 2.5% iodoacetamide),
each for 15 minutes. The equilibrated gel strip was
placed on top of a 12.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) gel and sealed with 0.5%
agarose-containing bromophenol blue. SDS-PAGE was
performed for 40 minutes at a constant voltage of 50 V
per gel, and then 100 V per gel, until the bromophenol
blue reached the bottom of the gel. To analyze the
2-D gel map, the separated proteins were visualized
by silver diamine staining, as described according to
the manufacturer’s recommended 2-DE protocol. The
2-DE gels were then scanned using ImageScanner™
(Amersham Biosciences). Image data were analyzed
using ImageMaster™ 2-D Platinum 6.0 (Amersham
Biosciences).

Gallbladder carcinoma cell line (GBC) and
cholangiocarcinoma cell line (RBE) were purchased from
the Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. The normal bile duct cell
line [human intrahepaticbiliary epithelial cells (HIBEpiC)]
was purchased from ScienCell Research Laboratories
(San Diego, USA). The cell line, RBE, was cultured in
Gibco®RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA),
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37
°C with 5% CO2. The cell line, GBC, was cultured in
Gibco®Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM)
(Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C
with 5% CO2. The HIBEpiC was cultured in epithelial cell
medium (EpiCM) (ScienCell, San Diego, USA) at 37 °C, 5%
CO2. The resected human bile duct tissue was immediately
placed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) on ice, and
washed thoroughly three times. Primary culture of the
human gallbladder epithelial cells (PHGE) was performed,
as described by D.P. Oda [34]. Normal gallbladder tissue
was digested with type IVcollagenase, 0.2% trysin/0.1%
(ethylenedinitrilo) tetraacetic acid (EDTA) for 20 minutes
at 37°C. The intima of normal gallbladder tissue was then
gently scraped with a bistoury. The separated epithelial cells
were centrifuged, and then washed with EpiCM. These cells
were cultivated in EpiCM medium. When the cultured cells
reached 90% confluence, trypsin was added and the cells
were subcultured. Immunochemistry staining was used
to detect the expression level of cytokeratin19. β peptide
(DLYYLMDLSYSMK), a blocking peptide, derived from
a conserved sequence of the β subunit of integrins was used
to inhibit the functional β1 integrins; meanwhile, nonsense
peptide (MKGGDLYYLMDLS) was used as a control [35].

Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization timeof-flight mass spectrometry
Differentially expressed protein groups in fresh
silver diamine-stained gel were excised and plated into
a 96-well microtiter plate. Excised protein groups were
initially destained twice with 60 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3
and 50% acetonitrile, and then dried twice with 60 μl of
acetonitrile. Next, the dried gel pieces were incubated
in ice-cold digestion solution (trypsin 12.5 ng/μl and 20
mM NH4HCO3) for 20 minutes, and then transferred
into a 37°C incubator for digestion overnight. Finally,
peptides in the supernatant were collected after two
extraction steps with 60 μl extract solution (5% formic
acid in 50% acetonitrile). The peptide solution described
previously was dried under the protection of N2. The
0.8 μl volume of matrix solution, 5 mg/ml α-Cyano-4hydroxycinnamic acid, diluted in 0.1% trifluoroaceticacid
(TFA), 50% acetonitrile (ACN), was added to dissolve the
proteins. The mixture was then spotted on a MALDI target
plate (Applied Biosystems). MS peptide analysis was
performed using the Applied Biosystems 4700 Proteomics
Analyzer™ with tandem time-of-flight/time-of-flight
(TOF/TOF™) optics. The UV laser was operated using
a 200 Hz repetition rate, with a wavelength of 355 nm.
The accelerated voltage was operated at 20 kV, and mass
resolution was maximized at 1500 Da. Myoglobin digested
with trypsin was used to calibrate the mass instrument
internal calibration mode. All acquired spectra of samples

Sample preparation for two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis
Cells were harvested by treating them with 0.25%
trypsin and washing them three times with PBS by
centrifugation at 1000g for two minutes. The packed
cells were then lysed with a double volume of lysis buffer
[7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4%3-((3-Cholamidopropyl)
dimethylammonio)-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 40mM
Tris-Hcl, 65mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2% pharmalyte,
1mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)] (Sigma,
St Louis, MO, USA) for one hour at room temperature,
and centrifuged at 1000g for one hour at 4°C. Protein
concentrations were determined using the Bradford
protein assay. All of the samples were stored at−80°C prior
to electrophoresis.

Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, protein
visualization and image analysis
2-DE was performed, as described by Nan [4],
using the Ethan™IPGphor™integrated isoelectric
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15785

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

were processed using 4700 Explorer™ Software (Applied
Biosystems) in the default mode. The data were searched
by GPS Explorer™ (version 3.6) with the search engine,
Mascot (version 2.1). The search parameters were as
follows: database NCBI NR, taxonomy Homo sapiens
(human), protein molecular mass 700−3200 Da, trypsin
digest with one missing cleavage, MS tolerance of 100
ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da. Proteins with scores
≥ 66 or a best ion score (MS/MS) ≥ 30 were considered to
be significant (p <0.050).
This work was conducted in collaboration with the
technical platform of research center of proteome in Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

Immunohistochemistry staining was performed
according to the HRP-DAB®Cell& Tissue Staining Kit
(R&D Systems). Briefly, the slides were deparaffinized
with xylene and hydrated through a graded alcohol series,
before being placed in 0.3% H2O2PBS-blocking solution
to inhibit endogenous peroxidase activity. Then, the
slides were incubated with the Stathmin antibody at 4°C
overnight, and treated with the secondary antibody for 40
minutes at room temperature. The sections were developed
in diaminobenzidine solution under a microscope, and
counterstained with hematoxylin. Negative control
slides, on which the primary antibody was omitted, were
included in all the assays. The immunohistochemistry
scoring method: a semiquantitative score on a scale of 0
to 300 was calculated for each sample by multiplying the
staining intensity (0, no staining; 1, weak; 2, moderate;
and 3, strong) and the percentage of cells (0%−100%)
at each intensity level. Data obtained were expressed as
mean values ± SD.

Western blotting and immunoprecipitation
Equal amounts of proteins were separated by
SDS-PAGE, and then transferred onto polyvinylidene
membranes (Millipore, SaintQuentin enYvelines, Belgium)
by electrotransfer. Membranes were blocked with 5%
skim milk in PBS-T (containing 0.1% Tween-20), and
proteins of interest were visualized using specific AntiStathmin (Cell SignalingTechnology, Beverly, MA, USA),
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA, U.S.A.), integrin β1, and integrin α5(BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA), caspase-3 (Santa CruzBiotech,
CA, USA). Anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) antibody and secondary antibodies, conjugated
with horseradish peroxidase (HRP), were ordered from
KangChen Biotech (Shanghai, China).
For immunoprecipitation, the cells were lysed
inbuffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM
NaCl, 1% Nonidet™ P-40 (NP-40), 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM
ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, 15 mM MgCl2, 60 mM
β-glycerolphosphate, 0.1 mM sodiumorthovanadate, 0.1
mM NaF, 0.1 mM benzamide, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, 10 μg/
ml leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF. Twenty microliters of protein
A/Gagarose beads (BD Bioscience Pharmingen) were
added to the lysates for proper periods of incubation. The
beads were then washed and subjected to SDS-PAGE and
immunoblotting.

Immunofluorescence and confocal laser-scanning
microscopy
Cells were seeded on coverslips in 24-well dishes
and cultured overnight. The cells were then washed twice
with PBS and fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 20 minutes.
Thereafter, the cells were blocked with 3% bovine serum
albumin for two hours on ice, and stained with antibody
overnight at 4 °C. For secondary staining, Cy3-conjugated
anti-rabbit, fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate (FITC)conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody was used for
six hours at 4 °C. 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
was used for nucleus staining at room temperature for 30
minutes. Finally, the coverslips were mounted on glass
slips with the mounting solution. The fluorescence of the
cells was visualized by microscopy.

RT-PCR and real-time PCR
For RT-PCR, total RNA was extracted
using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s recommendations. The appropriate
primer pair specific for total Stathmin was forward
5’-ATGGCTTCTTCTGATATCCAG-3’
(109~129)
and reverse 5’- TTAGTCAGCTTCAGTCTCGTC -3’
(538~558). Primers for β-actin were used as the internal
control. For real-time PCR, total RNA, following the
manufacturer’s instructions, was isolated from the cells
using TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen). Briefly, the cells
were lysed in TRIzol® and then mixed with chloroform.
The lysate was centrifuged to separate the RNA, DNA
and protein. The total RNA was recovered, precipitated
with isopropanol, and washed in 75% ethanol to remove
impurities before being dissolved in water. Next, 2μg

Annexin V apoptosis assay
The Annexin V-FITC® Apoptosis Detection Kit
purchased from BeyotimeBiotechnology (Shanghai,
China) was used to detect apoptosis. According to the
manufacturer's instructions, the cells were washed twice
with cold PBS, and resuspended at a concentration of
1x105cells/ml. After the addition of 195 μl binding buffer,
5 μl Annexin V-FITC® was added, and the cells were
incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. After the
addition of 190 μl binding buffer, 10 μl propidium iodide
was added and the cells were placed on ice in the dark.
The samples were then analyzed by flow cytometry within
one hour.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15786

Oncotarget

RNA was sampled and treated with deoxyribonuclease to
remove contaminating DNA prior to reverse transcription
to cDNA using SYBR® PCR Kit (Takara). The Stathmin
primers were 5’-ACGCAAGTCCCATGAAGC-3’(F)
and 5’-GCAGCCATTTGTGCCTCT -3’ (R). Real-time
PCR was performed using iCycler®ThermalCycler (BioRad, Hercules, CA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The threshold cycle (CT) values were
determined by iCycler®software (Bio-Rad) and the
quantification data analyzed following the ΔΔCT method.
All data normalized to the internal control actin.

of China (no. 81502004, no. 81272728, no. 81272722 and
no. 81600630) and the Foundation of Shanghai Science
and Technology Committee(16411952000, 11JC1416202,
10411955500).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Hsing AW, Gao YT, Devesa SS, Jin F, Fraumeni JF Jr.
Rising incidence of biliary tract cancers in Shanghai, China.
Int J Cancer. 1998; 75:368–70.

RNA interference assay and transfection
We
designed
and
synthesized
doublestranded small interfering (si) RNAs in vitro for
the Stathmin gene. The RNA interference sequence
was
5’-GCAGAAGAAAGACGCAAGUTT-3’.
Anegative control comprised a scrambled sequence of
5’-UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUTT-3’. The StathminsiRNA, or the non-sense control, siRNA, was transfected
into the RBE cells with Lipofectamine® 2000 (ThermoFisher
Scientific). After 24 hours, the level of Stathmin was
examined by real-time PCR and Western blot.

2.	 Cha JM, Kim MH, Jang SJ. Early bile duct cancer. World J
Gastroenterol. 2007; 13:3409–16.
3.	 Paik YK, Kim H, Lee EY, Kwon MS, Cho SY. Overview
and introduction to clinical proteomics. Methods Mol Biol.
2008; 428:1–31.
4.	 Wu N, Zhang W, Yang Y, Liang YL, Wang LY, Jin JW, Cai
XM, Zha XL. Profilin 1 obtained by proteomic analysis in
all-trans retinoic acid-treated hepatocarcinoma cell lines is
involved in inhibition of cell proliferation and migration.
Proteomics. 2006; 6:6095–106.

Cell viability assay

5.	 Mosconi S, Beretta GD, Labianca R, Zampino MG, Gatta
G, Heinemann V. Cholangiocarcinoma. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol. 2009; 69:259–70.

The cells were cultured in a 96-well plate and
pre-treated with Latrunculin B®(Sigma-Aldrich) for one
hour. The cells were treated with STS (Roche, Basel,
Switzerland) from a DMSO stock (2.5 mM) or left
untreated, washed, and then submitted for cell viability
detection by Cell Counting Kit-8®(CCK-8®) (Dojindo
Molecular Technologies, Kumamoto), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The kit uses the unique,
water-soluble tetrazolium salts (WST-8) to measure
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced form)
production resulting from the dehydrogenase activity.
Absorbance was measured at 450 nm, using an enzymelinked immunosorbent assay reader (Bio-Tek, Houston,
TX, USA).

6.	 Lim YK, Kam MH, Eu KW. Carcinoembryonic antigen
screening: how far should we go? Singapore Med J. 2009;
50:862–65.
7.	 Juntermanns B, Radunz S, Heuer M, Hertel S, Reis H,
Neuhaus JP, Vernadakis S, Trarbach T, Paul A, Kaiser
GM. Tumor markers as a diagnostic key for hilar
cholangiocarcinoma. Eur J Med Res. 2010; 15:357–61.
8.	 Johnsen JI, Aurelio ON, Kwaja Z, Jörgensen GE, Pellegata
NS, Plattner R, Stanbridge EJ, Cajot JF. p53-mediated
negative regulation of stathmin/Op18 expression is
associated with G(2)/M cell-cycle arrest. Int J Cancer. 2000;
88:685–91.
9.	 Mistry SJ, Atweh GF. Therapeutic interactions between
stathmin inhibition and chemotherapeutic agents in prostate
cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006; 5:3248–57.

Statistical analysis
Two-tailed Student’s t test was used for comparisons
of two independent groups. All values included in the
figures represent mean ± SD. Error bars represent ±
SD for triplicate experiments. p < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

10.	 Wittmann T, Bokoch GM, Waterman-Storer CM. Regulation
of microtubule destabilizing activity of Op18/stathmin
downstream of Rac1. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:6196–203.
11.	 Wang X, Ren JH, Lin F, Wei JX, Long M, Yan L, Zhang HZ.
Stathmin is involved in arsenic trioxide-induced apoptosis
in human cervical cancer cell lines via PI3K linked signal
pathway. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010; 10:632–43.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

12.	 Belletti B, Nicoloso MS, Schiappacassi M, Berton S, Lovat
F, Wolf K, Canzonieri V, D’Andrea S, Zucchetto A, Friedl
P, Colombatti A, Baldassarre G. Stathmin activity influences
sarcoma cell shape, motility, and metastatic potential. Mol
Biol Cell. 2008; 19:2003–13.

We would like to thank Xinwen Zhou (the technical
platform of research center of proteome in Fudan
University) for the MS analysis. This study was supported
by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15787

Oncotarget

13.	 Kuang XY, Chen L, Zhang ZJ, Liu YR, Zheng YZ, Ling
H, Qiao F, Li S, Hu X, Shao ZM. Stathmin and phosphostathmin protein signature is associated with survival
outcomes of breast cancer patients. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:22227–38. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4276.

25.	 Zhang Z, Vuori K, Reed JC, Ruoslahti E. The alpha 5 beta
1 integrin supports survival of cells on fibronectin and
up-regulates Bcl-2 expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
1995; 92:6161–65.
26.	 Wei SH, Lin F, Wang X, Gao P, Zhang HZ. Prognostic
significance of stathmin expression in correlation with
metastasis and clinicopathological characteristics in human
ovarian carcinoma. Acta Histochem. 2008; 110:59–65.

14.	 Sun R, Liu Z, Wang L, Lv W, Liu J, Ding C, Yuan Y, Lei G,
Xu C. Overexpression of stathmin is resistant to paclitaxel
treatment in patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
Tumour Biol. 2015; 36:7195–204.

27.	 Balasubramani M, Nakao C, Uechi GT, Cardamone J,
Kamath K, Leslie KL, Balachandran R, Wilson L, Day BW,
Jordan MA. Characterization and detection of cellular and
proteomic alterations in stable stathmin-overexpressing,
taxol-resistant BT549 breast cancer cells using offgel IEF/
PAGE difference gel electrophoresis. Mutat Res. 2011;
722:154–64.

15.	 Nie W, Xu MD, Gan L, Huang H, Xiu Q, Li B.
Overexpression of stathmin 1 is a poor prognostic
biomarker in non-small cell lung cancer. Lab Invest. 2015;
95:56–64.
16.	 Watanabe A, Suzuki H, Yokobori T, Tsukagoshi M, Altan
B, Kubo N, Suzuki S, Araki K, Wada S, Kashiwabara
K, Hosouchi Y, Kuwano H. Stathmin1 regulates p27
expression, proliferation and drug resistance, resulting in
poor clinical prognosis in cholangiocarcinoma. Cancer Sci.
2014; 105:690–96.

28.	 Xu SG, Yan PJ, Shao ZM. Differential proteomic analysis
of a highly metastatic variant of human breast cancer cells
using two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis. J
Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010; 136:1545–56.

17.	 Fesus L, Davies PJ, Piacentini M. Apoptosis: molecular
mechanisms in programmed cell death. Eur J Cell Biol.
1991; 56:170–77.

29.	 Gan L, Guo K, Li Y, Kang X, Sun L, Shu H, Liu Y.
Up-regulated expression of stathmin may be associated with
hepatocarcinogenesis. Oncol Rep. 2010; 23:1037–43.

18.	 Wang Y, Yang H, Liu H, Huang J, Song X. Effect of
staurosporine on the mobility and invasiveness of lung
adenocarcinoma A549 cells: an in vitro study. BMC Cancer.
2009; 9:174.

30.	 Hsieh SY, Huang SF, Yu MC, Yeh TS, Chen TC, Lin
YJ, Chang CJ, Sung CM, Lee YL, Hsu CY. Stathmin1
overexpression associated with polyploidy, tumor-cell
invasion, early recurrence, and poor prognosis in human
hepatoma. Mol Carcinog. 2010; 49:476–87.

19.	 Gescher A. Analogs of staurosporine: potential anticancer
drugs? Gen Pharmacol. 1998; 31:721–28.

31.	 Jeon TY, Han ME, Lee YW, Lee YS, Kim GH, Song GA,
Hur GY, Kim JY, Kim HJ, Yoon S, Baek SY, Kim BS, Kim
JB, Oh SO. Overexpression of stathmin1 in the diffuse type
of gastric cancer and its roles in proliferation and migration
of gastric cancer cells. Br J Cancer. 2010; 102:710–18.

20.	 Zhang YX, Yu SB, Ou-Yang JP, Xia D, Wang M, Li JR.
Effect of protein kinase C alpha, caspase-3, and survivin
on apoptosis of oral cancer cells induced by staurosporine.
Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005; 26:1365–72.

32.	 Linder S, Hüfner K, Wintergerst U, Aepfelbacher M.
Microtubule-dependent formation of podosomal adhesion
structures in primary human macrophages. J Cell Sci. 2000;
113:4165–76.

21.	 Kubickova J, Hudecova S, Csaderova L, Soltysova A,
Lichvarova L, Lencesova L, Babula P, Krizanova O. Slow
sulfide donor GYY4137 differentiates NG108-15 neuronal
cells through different intracellular transporters than
dbcAMP. Neuroscience. 2016; 325:100–10.

33.	 Ezratty EJ, Partridge MA, Gundersen GG. Microtubuleinduced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin
and focal adhesion kinase. Nat Cell Biol. 2005; 7:581–90.

22.	 Lee JW, Lee J, Moon EY. HeLa human cervical cancer cell
migration is inhibited by treatment with dibutyryl-cAMP.
Anticancer Res. 2014; 34:3447–55.

34.	 Oda DP, Eng L, Savard CE, Newcomer M, Haigh WG, Lee
SP. Organotypic culture of human gallbladder epithelium.
Exp Mol Pathol. 1995; 63:16–22.

23.	 Archibald M, Pritchard T, Nehoff H, Rosengren RJ, Greish
K, Taurin S. A combination of sorafenib and nilotinib
reduces the growth of castrate-resistant prostate cancer. Int
J Nanomedicine. 2016; 11:179–200.

35.	 Wang L, Liang Y, Li Z, Cai X, Zhang W, Wu G, Jin J, Fang
Z, Yang Y, Zha X. Increase in beta1-6 GlcNAc branching
caused by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V directs
integrin beta1 stability in human hepatocellular carcinoma
cell line SMMC-7721. J Cell Biochem. 2007; 100:230–41.

24.	 Firtina Karagonlar Z, Koc D, Iscan E, Erdal E, Atabey N,
and FirtinaKaragonlar Z. Elevated hepatocyte growth factor
expression as an autocrine c-Met activation mechanism in
acquired resistance to sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma
cells. Cancer Sci. 2016; 107:407–16.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15788

Oncotarget

