NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2010 April 2; 141(1): 52–67. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.015.

Matrix Metalloproteinases: Regulators of the Tumor
Microenvironment
Kai Kessenbrock1, Vicki Plaks1, and Zena Werb1,*
1 Department of Anatomy and Biomedical Sciences Program, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0452, USA

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extracellular proteolysis mediates tissue homeostasis. In cancer, altered proteolysis leads to
unregulated tumor growth, tissue remodeling, inflammation, tissue invasion, and metastasis. The
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) represent the most prominent family of proteinases associated
with tumorigenesis. Recent technological developments have markedly advanced our understanding
of MMPs as modulators of the tumor microenvironment. In addition to their role in extracellular
matrix turnover and cancer cell migration, MMPs regulate signaling pathways that control cell
growth, inflammation, or angiogenesis and may even work in a nonproteolytic manner. These aspects
of MMP function are reorienting our approaches to cancer therapy.

Introduction
Cancer originates from mutations in genes that regulate essential pathways of cell function
leading to uncontrolled outgrowth of tissue cells (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). The resulting
tumors are complex structures of malignant cancer cells embedded in vasculature and
surrounded by a dynamic tumor stroma consisting of various nonmalignant cells, such as
fibroblasts and myeloid cells. The milieu of the tumor microenvironment is akin to the
inflammatory response in a healing wound, which promotes angiogenesis, turnover of the
extracellular matrix (ECM), and tumor cell motility (Coussens and Werb, 2002).
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of this complex interplay between malignant cancer
cells and the surrounding nonmalignant stroma represents one of the major challenges in cancer
research.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mounting evidence supports the view that extracellular proteinases, such as the matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), mediate many of the changes in the microenvironment during
tumor progression. These enzymes regulate a variety of physiological processes and signaling
events, and thus they represent key players in the molecular communication between tumor
and stroma. Here, we review the recent advances in our understanding of MMP-driven
regulation of the tumor microenvironment. Regarding the failure of MMP inhibitors as targets
for anticancer therapy in clinical trials, we critically discuss the new insights into the functions
of these extracellular proteinases in cancer, which, depending on the circumstances, may either
suppress or promote tumorigenesis, or even act independently of their proteolytic activity.

Characteristics of the MMP Family
MMPs are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases first described almost half a century ago
(Gross and Lapiere, 1962). They play a crucial role in various physiological processes including

*Correspondence: zena.werb@ucsf.edu.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

tissue remodeling and organ development (Page-McCaw et al., 2007), in the regulation of
inflammatory processes (Parks et al., 2004), and in diseases such as cancer (Egeblad and Werb,
2002). The 23 MMPs expressed in humans are categorized by their architectural features. The
general structural blueprint of MMPs shows three domains that are common to almost all
MMPs, the pro-peptide, the catalytic domain, and the hemopexin-like C-terminal domain that
is linked to the catalytic domain via a flexible hinge region (Figure 1A). MMPs are initially
expressed in an enzymatically inactive state due to the interaction of a cysteine residue of the
pro-domain with the zinc ion of the catalytic site. Only after disruption of this interaction by
a mechanism called cysteine switch, which is usually mediated by proteolytic removal of the
pro-domain or chemical modification of the cysteine residue, does the enzyme become
proteolytically active. The pro-domain contains a consensus sequence and requires proteolytic
cleavage by convertases, which, depending on the sequences, occurs intracellularly by furin
or extracellularly by other MMPs or serine proteinases such as plasmin (Sternlicht and Werb,
2001).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Closely related to the MMPs are the so-called ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase)
and ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) families of
metzincin proteinases. ADAMs fulfill a broad spectrum of functions with roles in fertilization,
development, and cancer (Edwards et al., 2008). Most ADAMs are membrane-anchored and
function in the pericellular space. Although all of them have a metalloproteinase domain, only
about half of them exhibit proteolytic activity, indicating that ADAMs function by shedding
interaction partners or by mediating the biological roles in a nonproteolytic manner. The
ADAMTS enzymes have a protease domain, an adjacent disintegrin domain, and one or more
thrombospondin domains and are generally secreted and soluble. They play roles in ECM
assembly, ovulation, and cancer. The role of these other metzincin proteinases in cancer has
recently been extensively discussed elsewhere (Murphy, 2008). This Review will only
highlight selected examples of their effects on the tumor microenvironment.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The function of MMPs in vivo depends on the local balance between them and their
physiological inhibitors. Substantial energy resources of the human body are allocated for the
prevention of unregulated extracellular proteolysis by MMPs and other proteinases. For
example, high concentrations of the proteinase inhibitors α2-macroglobulin (α2-MG), α1proteinase inhibitor (α1-PI), and α1-chymotrypsin (α1-CT) are produced in the liver and
released into the plasma, where these molecules efficiently bind to the active site of a variety
of proteinases (reviewed in Woessner and Nagase, 2000). The resulting proteinase-inhibitor
complexes are then recognized by a scavenger receptor and swiftly engulfed by macrophages.
The most important physiological inhibitors of MMP function are the tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which are also commonly expressed in tumor sites (Deryugina
and Quigley, 2006). TIMP-1, -2, -3, and 4 form 1:1 stochiometric complexes with active MMPs
leading to inhibition of proteolytic activity. Similar to MMPs, the proteolytic ADAM and
ADAMTS family members are inhibited by specific TIMPs (Murphy, 2008).
The expression of metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in the tumor microenvironment is
quite diverse. Although cancer cells from various tissues can express members of the MMP
and ADAM families as well as TIMPs, the major source of these proteinases is from stromal
cells infiltrating the tumor (Egeblad and Werb, 2002). The different types of stromal cells
produce a specific set of proteinases and proteinase inhibitors (Figure 1B), which are released
into the extracellular space and specifically alter the milieu around the tumor. The cellular
source of MMPs can therefore have important consequences on their function and activity; for
example, neutrophil-derived MMP-9, which does not have a bound TIMP-1 molecule, is more
readily activatable (Ardi et al., 2007).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 3

Regulation of MMP Activity
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The complexity of the tumor microenvironment allows for a variety of regulatory cascades that
determine the functions of the diverse MMPs expressed. Proteolytic activity of MMPs can be
regulated at different levels: gene expression, compartmentalization, conversion from
zymogen to active enzyme, and, finally, the presence of specific inhibitors. When judging the
pathophysiological relevance of increased expression of proteinases in tumor tissues, the
particular context is important, that is whether endogenous inhibitors or activating (converting)
enzymes in the microenvironment are present.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A key step in regulating MMP activity is the conversion of the zymogen into an active
proteolytic enzyme. There are several proteinases that mediate MMP activation, such as
plasmin, furin, or active MMPs (Sternlicht and Werb, 2001). Once activated, MMP-2, -3, -7,
-9, and -12 may launch a negative feedback signal, for example, by degrading plasminogen
and thus interfering with plasminogen conversion to active plasmin. This complex regulation
of MMP activity is necessary, given that unhampered proteinase activity released from
inflammatory cells may lead to tissue damage and the perpetuation of the inflammatory
response in chronic inflammatory diseases and cancer (Parks et al., 2004). An example of how
this process is controlled is shown by the observation that MMPs also degrade plasminsuppressing serpin proteinase inhibitors and therefore promote the conversion of pro-MMPs.
For example, MMP-3 is a potent inactivator of α2-AP (Lijnen et al., 2001), and several MMPs
inactivate other serpins such as α1-PI and α1-CT and thus prolong the catalytic activity of
extracellular proteinases that are normally inhibited by these molecules. A crucial interplay of
MMP-9, α1-PI, and neutrophil elastase occurs in skin blister formation, in which MMP-9
efficiently degrades α1-PI, a physiological serpin inhibitor of neutrophil elastase and other
serine proteinases. This promotes elastase-mediated matrix degradation that manifests in
dermal-epidermal separation and blister formation in vivo (Liu et al., 2000). This study nicely
illustrates the interaction between extracellular proteinases and their endogenous inhibitors as
may occur in normal physiological situations and in the course of disease (Figure 2).
The function of MMPs can also be influenced by reactive oxygen species (ROS). The
inflammatory response at the tumor site creates large amounts of ROS that are produced by
activated neutrophils and macrophages. These oxidants initially activate MMPs via oxidation
of the pro-domain cysteine (Weiss et al., 1985) but, eventually, in combination with the enzyme
myeloperoxidase contributed by inflammatory cells, inactivate MMPs by modification of
amino acids of the catalytic domain by hypochlorous acid (Fu et al., 2003).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The localization or compartmentalization of MMPs under physiological conditions often
dictates their biological function. Several MMPs interact with surface receptors such as
integrins or localize to specific areas of the ECM, which potentiates MMP activity by increasing
their local concentration and also may interfere with accessibility to endogenous inhibitors
(reviewed in Nagase et al., 2006). The binding of MMP-2 to integrin αvβ3 via its hemopexin
domain is crucial for mesenchymal cell invasive activity (Rupp et al., 2008). Likewise, high
local concentrations of active MMP-14 on the cell membrane of metastatic cancer cells play
important roles in cell migration (Friedl and Wolf, 2008; Sabeh et al., 2004, 2009; Wolf et al.,
2007). However, there may also be additional mechanisms to concentrate extracellular
proteinases in specific sites in the microenvironment. One new example relates to neutrophilic
granulocytes, which, upon cellular activation, spill out their nuclear chromatin to form socalled neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), web-like structures with highly concentrated
proteinases such as MMP-9 and leukocyte elastase localized on the extracellular chromatin
scaffold (Brinkmann et al., 2004). These NETs act primarily to fight off bacterial infections,
but they also contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases (Kessenbrock et al.,
2009). It remains to be determined if NETs are formed by neutrophils in the tumor

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 4

microenvironment, and whether these structures play a role in malignant diseases by
compartmentalizing and localizing proteinase activity to certain sites in the tumor.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mechanical forces contribute to tumor progression (Butcher et al., 2009), potentially by
modulating proteolysis of ECM components. These forces may unwind the conformation of
MMP substrate proteins, thus allowing recognition and cleavage by proteinases. Von
Willebrand factor (VWF), a major regulator of primary hemostasis and blood clotting, is
secreted as an ultralong chain composed of hundreds of VWF monomers. The large size of this
multimolecular complex renders it sensitive to high shear forces in the blood flow that are
typically found at sites of injury. These increased shear forces initiate a conformational change
of the complex, namely, unfolding of VWF domain 2 leading to the exposition of a cleavage
site targeted by ADAMTS-13, which then cleaves VWF into smaller pieces to initiate blood
clotting (Zhang et al., 2009). In a similar fashion, the ECM component fibronectin is also
unfolded by mechanical forces in the ECM of living cells (Smith et al., 2007). Given that
fibronectin is cleaved by several MMPs, the mechanotransduced unfolding of fibronectin might
promote proteolytic degradation of this MMP substrate. Tumor progression is frequently
characterized by increased tissue stiffness, elevated interstitial fluid pressure, and altered blood
flow conditions (Butcher et al., 2009). Thus, it is conceivable that similar mechanisms
involving mechanical force are regulatory factors for MMP function in the tumor
microenvironment.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Studying MMP Function In Vivo

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The physical location and the time frame of MMP enzymatic activity are fundamental to the
physiological role of these enzymes in tumor progression. However, for most cancers it still
remains rather elusive when and where these enzymes exhibit their proteolytic activity in the
tumor microenvironment. An emerging noninvasive technological approach to address these
questions utilizes the recently developed imaging probes based on MMP-specific activities.
This may help to overcome a number of technical hurdles of clinical importance, such as the
detection of early-stage tumors with increased sensitivity by exploiting the proteolytic activity
of MMPs, the identification of tumors that might benefit from the use of metalloproteinase
inhibitors (MPIs) as anticancer drugs, and the endpoint assessment of the efficacy of MPI
compounds to inhibit MMP activity in vivo. To date, imaging MMP activity has mostly
depended on fluorescent optical imaging modalities including fluorescent resonance energy
transfer (FRET), radiolabeled imaging such as positron emission tomography (PET), single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
(reviewed in Scherer et al., 2008a). Fluorogenic MMP substrates noninvasively show that
tumors have increased MMP activity compared to non-tumor-bearing animals (Littlepage et
al., 2010) and can assess the efficacy of MPIs on MMP activity in intact tumors in vivo directly
(Bremer et al., 2001).
Clinical imaging technologies such as PET and SPECT that are used for cancer diagnostics
and staging in the clinic also can be used to detect MMP activity in vivo. For example, PET
has been used to detect specific MMP activity in cancer using an 18F-labeled MMP-2 inhibitor
that accumulates in the tumor of a breast cancer model in mice (Furumoto et al., 2003).
Radiolabeled 123I-MMP inhibitors designed to recognize the active site of specific MMPs can
detect MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity using SPECT (Schafers et al., 2004). A
radiolabeled 99 mTc-anti-MMP-14 monoclonal antibody developed as a radiolabeled SPECT
probe in vivo detects malignant cells in rodents bearing breast tumors (Temma et al., 2009).
Gadolinium-based paramagnetic contrast agents that carry an MMP-sensitive probe become
less hydrophilic upon proteolytic cleavage resulting in a detectable contrast change that has
been used with MMP-2 (Jastrzebska et al., 2009). Given that MRI facilities are widely available

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 5

in clinical centers and are commonly utilized for detecting tumors, this methodology has
potential as a diagnostic tool for cancer patients.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Using higher-resolution probes, it is now possible to narrow down the sites in the tumor
microenvironment at which MMPs exert their activity. For example, cell-penetrating peptides,
which are activated by proteolysis and carry a fluorescent cargo that accumulates in cells that
are in the vicinity of active MMPs (Jiang et al., 2004), have been used successfully to visualize
MMP-2 and -9 activity in cell culture systems and in mouse xenograft models and show active
MMPs predominantly at the interface between tumor and stroma (Olson et al., 2009).
Fluorogenic substrates based on self-quenched and near-infrared FRET pairs, so-called
proteolytic beacons, created to reduce absorption and scattering and increase tissue penetration
have demonstrated specific increases in MMP activity at the tumor’s leading edge in models
of colon and pancreatic cancers (Scherer et al., 2008a). For example, optical imaging of MMP-7
activity in vivo using a specific near-infrared polymer-based proteolytic beacon can detect
tumors as small as 0.01 cm2 in mice (Scherer et al., 2008b). Moreover, such probes can be used
to image MMP activity at subcellular resolution during live-cell migration in extracellular
matrices in vitro. To this end, experiments using matrices derivatized with a fluorogenic probe
based on the peptide sequence present in interstitial collagen targeted by a variety of proteases
including MMP-2, -9, and -14 detect MMP activity predominantly at the leading edges of
migrating tumor cells (Packard et al., 2009). This new type of high-resolution probe provides
site-specific reporting of protease activity and insights into mechanisms by which cells migrate
through extracellular matrices.
Although in vivo imaging of MMP activity is a relatively young field of research with many
technological challenges ahead, it is a promising strategy, especially regarding the future of
MPIs as anticancer drugs. Given that the majority of clinical trials with MPIs have failed,
presumably due to treatment of advanced-stage tumors, imaging with sensitive MMP probes
will help to determine the adequate time window of MMP activity, in which MPI administration
is most likely to be effective. Further advances in noninvasive imaging of MMP activity may
be crucial to determine these therapy options.

New Insights into the Roles of MMPs in Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MMPs have been implicated in cancer for more than 40 years, and the notion that MMPmediated ECM degradation leads to cancer cell invasion and metastasis has been a guiding
principle in MMP research (Liotta et al., 1980). The discovery that inhibition of MMPs
suppresses the invasive potential of tumors in animal studies was swiftly implemented into
clinical trials. Yet, these failed to increase survival rate of the patients (Coussens et al.,
2002). It is now evident that MMP function is more complex than initially thought, given that
these enzymes do more than degrade physical barriers. Rather, they also affect multiple
signaling pathways that modulate the biology of the cell in normal physiological processes and
in disease. Moreover, members of the ADAM and ADAMTS families of proteinases, which
are also targeted by inhibitors with broad-spectrum anti-metzincin activity, are also associated
with tumor progression (Murphy, 2008). Although the current understanding is that
extracellular proteolysis is mostly implicated in cancer promotion, MMPs and other proteinases
do exhibit tumor-suppressing effects in several circumstances. In addition, MMPs mediate a
wide range of biological effects on their surrounding tissue. In the following sections, we
discuss the recent insights gained on the physiological or pathological processes modulated by
MMPs, which are likely to have significant consequences on the tumor microenvironment.
MMPs Affect Growth Signals
Unregulated proliferation is a common feature of cancer cells. There are two principal ways
in which the tumor achieves this condition: by acquiring self-sufficiency in growth-promoting
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

signals or by becoming insensitive to antigrowth signals. MMPs may be critically involved in
disrupting the balance between growth and antigrowth signals in the tumor microenvironment,
as they potently influence the bioavailability or functionality of multiple important factors that
regulate growth.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One fundamental signaling pathway with essential roles in tissue homeostasis is the
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) pathway. TGF-β normally exerts tumor-suppressive
effects by enforcing cytostasis and differentiation. However, as the tumor advances in
malignant progression, the genome often accumulates mutations in the TGF-β receptor system
that render the cancer cells unresponsive to TGF-β. Moreover, its multiple effects on
nonmalignant stromal cells, such as evasion of immune surveillance, can be exploited by the
tumor and hence turn TGF-β into a tumor-promoting factor that leads to increased invasion
and metastasis (Massague, 2008). Active TGF-β is derived from an inactive pro-form by
proteolytic conversion by furin or other proteinases, such as MMP-9, which is usually
expressed by inflammatory cells. MMP-9 is compartmentalized to the cell surface by docking
to the surface receptor CD44 and then proteolytically activates TGF-β (Yu and Stamenkovic,
2000). Similarly, MMP-14 and MMP-2 proteolytically activate TGF-β1 (Mu et al., 2002). On
the other hand, MMP-2 and MMP-9, as well as MMP-14, indirectly modulate TGF-β
bioactivity by cleaving the ECM component latent TGF-β-binding protein 1 (LTBP-1), thereby
solubilizing ECM-bound TGF-β (Dallas et al., 2002; Tatti et al., 2008). Given that tumor cells
often acquire nonresponsiveness to TGF-β, this suggests that proteolytic activation of TGF-β
by MMPs has tumor-promoting effects by selectively driving stroma-mediated invasion and
metastasis of the tumor.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ligands for the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are potent drivers of cell proliferation
and important regulators of tissue homeostasis. Malfunction of this system by genetic
mutations of the molecules involved is frequently observed in breast cancer and other malignant
diseases (Hynes and Lane, 2005). Evidence emerging from recent studies has revealed a
potential role of ADAM proteinases in the regulation of the EGFR pathway. For example,
ADAM-10 triggers the release of soluble EGF, whereas ADAM-17 is a major converter of
pro-forms of other EGFR ligands such as TGF-α and epiregulin. Activation of EGFR results
in the upregulation of MMP-9, which in turn degrades E-cadherin, a potent control element of
many cellular functions including cell-cell adhesion and differentiation. This association
between EGFR, MMP-9, and E-cadherin may play an important role in ovarian cancer and
metastasis, as activated EGFR and MMP-9 in these specimens colocalize with a region of
reduced E-cadherin (Cowden Dahl et al., 2008). The cleavage of E-cadherin by MMPs or
ADAM proteinases has an impact on cancer cell proliferation. Interestingly, ADAM-10
mediates the shedding of E-cadherin, which results in β-catenin translocation to the nucleus,
driving cell proliferation (Maretzky et al., 2005). Moreover, overexpression of MMP-3 in
mammary epithelium triggers a cascade of events including the cleavage of E-cadherin
resulting in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (Lochter et al., 1997; Radisky et al., 2005).
Combining an inhibitor of these metalloproteinases with a dual inhibitor of EGFR and HER-2/
neu kinases synergistically prevents the growth of human breast cancer xenografts (Witters et
al., 2008). These studies provide mechanistic insight into proteolytic acceleration of cell growth
and suggest that specific inhibition of these metalloproteinases may be utilized to interfere with
unregulated cell growth and proliferation in many tumors.
MMPs Regulate Apoptosis
Evading programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is another strategy that increases the cell number
and size of tumors. Apoptosis is normally initiated via extracellular receptors such as the Fas
receptors, which activate a proteolytic cascade of intracellular caspases once they encounter
Fas ligand, ultimately leading to the selective degradation of subcellular compartments and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

nuclear DNA. MMP function interferes with the induction of apoptosis in malignant cells,
which may involve the cleavage of ligands or receptors that transduce proapoptotic signals.
MMP-7 cleaves Fas ligand from the surface of doxorubicin-treated cancer cells (Mitsiades et
al., 2001), lowering the impact of chemotherapy on the tumor by abrogating apoptosis. Indeed,
MMP-7 expression may serve as a predictive marker for the resistance to chemotherapy in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (Liu et al., 2008a). Similarly, ADAM-10 may suppress
apoptosis induction by cytotoxic lymphocytes via the degradation of Fas ligand (Schulte et al.,
2007), thus interfering with Fas receptor-triggered cell death of target cells. The interaction
between MMP-7 and Fas ligand also may play a role in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, as
MMP-7 is expressed in human pancreatic cancer specimens and mice deficient in MMP-7 or
carrying a nonfunctional Fas ligand mutation show greatly reduced metaplasia during
pancreatic duct ligation (Crawford et al., 2002). Moreover, proteolytic shedding of tumorassociated major histocompatibility complex class I-related proteins MICA and MICB by
ADAM-17 can potently suppress NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity toward the cancer cells
(Waldhauer et al., 2008) and thereby potentially interfere with an antitumor-directed immune
response. It remains unknown whether MMPs can interfere in a similar manner with NK cellmediated tumor killing; however, the use of MMP inhibitors in combination with
interleukin-15 succeeded in overcoming the resistance of small-cell lung cancer cells to NK
cell killing (Le Maux Chansac et al., 2008). Hence, these examples suggest a tumor-promoting
role of these metalloproteinases by blocking receptor-transmitted or lymphocyte-mediated
apoptosis.
The Tumor Vasculature
The tumor vasculature is derived from sprouting of local blood vessels (angiogenesis) and
circulating vasculogenic progenitor cells derived from the bone marrow (vasculogenesis). The
new vessels are often irregular and leaky due to lack of the pericyte cover, with the result that
tumor cells can penetrate them more easily. As compared with blood capillaries, lymphatic
endothelial cells have even less developed junctions with frequently large interendothelial gaps
and impaired basement membranes. The invasive margin is a critical area for stimulation of
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in tumors, which contributes to tumor invasion and
metastasis (Padera et al., 2002). As discussed below, several lines of evidence support an
important function of MMPs in angiogenic or lymphangiogenic processes. The major MMPs
involved in tumor angiogenesis are MMP-2, -9, and -14, and to a lesser extent MMP-1 and -7.
Given that several MMPs are expressed in all tumors, it is now evident that each MMP can
contribute to distinct vascular events in the same tumor (Littlepage et al., 2010).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MMP-9 has a distinct role in tumor angiogenesis, mainly regulating the bioavailability of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the most potent inducer of tumor angiogenesis and
a major therapeutic target. MMP-9, conveyed by inflammatory cells, enables an angiogenic
switch by making sequestered VEGF bioavailable for its receptor VEGFR2 in pancreatic islet
tumors (Bergers et al., 2000). Angiogenic switching by MMP-9 involves a complex interplay
of interconnected factors. In a mouse model of glioblastoma, the hypoxia inducible factor-1α
(HIF-1α) induces recruitment of CD45-positive bone marrow-derived cells, as well as
endothelial and pericyte progenitor cells, to promote neovascularization. MMP-9 activity
provided by these CD45-positive myeloid cells is essential and sufficient for the angiogenic
switch by increasing VEGF bioavailability. This process induces angiogenesis but also
regulates tumor cell invasiveness. Interestingly, VEGF prevents tumor cell migration along
blood vessels, but it promotes perivascular tumor cell infiltration into the brain parenchyma
(Du et al., 2008). This action of VEGF as a brake on perivascular tumor cell migration is
surprising. In addition, the direct cleavage of matrix-bound VEGF by MMP-3, -7, -9, or -16
results in modified VEGF molecules with altered bioavailability, which changes the vascular
patterning of tumors in vivo (Lee et al., 2005).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to its role in regulating angiogenesis, MMP-9 is also implicated in vasculogenesis.
Tumors transplanted into tissue irradiated to prevent angiogenesis are unable to grow in
MMP-9-deficient mice. However, tumor growth is restored by transplanting CD11b-positive
myeloid cells from the bone marrow of MMP-9-sufficient mice, suggesting that MMP-9 is
required for tumor vasculogenesis (Ahn and Brown, 2008). MMP-9 could therefore be an
important target for adjunct therapy to enhance the response of tumors to radiotherapy.
A special role is attributed to MMP-9 delivered by neutrophilic granulocytes. In contrast to
other cell types, neutrophil-derived pro-MMP-9 is not complexed with TIMP-1 and therefore
is more readily activated to drive tumor angiogenesis (Ardi et al., 2007). The angiogenic
function of neutrophil MMP-9 requires both its active site and hemopexin domain and activates
the basic fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) pathway (Ardi et al., 2009). This highlights the
important effects of proteinase inhibitors on the function of MMPs and shows that MMPs
produced by different cell types may function in different ways. The release of TIMP-1-free
MMP-9 may be an important facet in the pro-angiogenic effects triggered by tumor-infiltrating
neutrophils. Indeed, elevated numbers of neutrophils present in patients with
myxofibrosarcoma correlate with microvessel density in the tumor (Mentzel et al., 2001), and
depleting neutrophils in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer markedly reduces angiogenic
switching in dysplasias (Nozawa et al., 2006). These findings support an important role of
infiltrating neutrophils in the induction of tumor angiogenesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The degradation of ECM components and other extracellular molecules may generate
fragments with new bioactivities that inhibit angiogenesis (Ribatti, 2009). For example,
biologically active endostatin is generated via cleavage of type XVIII collagen by MMP-3, -7,
-9, -13, and -20 (Heljasvaara et al., 2005). Moreover, the degradation of collagen IVα3 by
MMP-9 results in the generation of the monomeric NC1 domain, called tum-statin, a potent
suppressor of angiogenesis. This manifests in pathological vascularization and increased tumor
growth in MMP-9-deficient mice (Hamano et al., 2003). The degradation of plasminogen by
MMP-2, -9, and -12 can produce significant amounts of angiostatin, a cleavage product with
antiangiogenic function (Cornelius et al., 1998; Patterson and Sang, 1997). Angiostatin
production by MMP-12 may explain the suppressive effects of this MMP on outgrowth of lung
metastases (Houghton et al., 2006a). Taken together, MMPs can generate both angiogenesisinhibiting as well as -promoting signals. Depending on the time frame of MMP expression and
the availability of substrates, the effects of MMPs on angiogenesis might be diverse.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MMPs also regulate vascular stability and permeability. MMPs, particularly MMP-14, appear
to mediate the vascular response to tissue injury and tumor progression though activation of
TGF-β (Sounni et al., 2010). Use of MPIs or TGF-β signaling inhibitors potentially could
improve patient care as they may improve delivery of imaging agents or therapeutic tumor
tissues.
Lymphangiogenesis plays an important role in tumor biology, given that it is directly linked
with the formation of lymphatic metastases. MMPs certainly have a general impact on
lymphangiogenesis as supported by the use of broad-spectrum MMP inhibitors (Nakamura et
al., 2004). However, only a few reports directly link MMPs to the formation of new lymphatic
vessels. The modulation of VEGF bioavailability by MMPs, especially by MMP-9, may also
affect lymphangiogenesis and, in turn, promotes dissemination of metastases into the lymph.
The most direct proof for MMP involvement in lymphangiogenesis has come from experiments
modeling lymphangiogenesis in a three-dimensional culture system using mouse thoracic duct
fragments embedded in a collagen gel in which lumen-containing lymphatic capillaries form
(Bruyere et al., 2008). Increased expression of MMP-1, MMP-2 (Langenskiold et al., 2005)
and MMP-3 (Islekel et al., 2007) is linked with lymphatic invasion and lymph node metastases.
Inhibition of MMP-2, -9, and -14 attenuates both angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

reduces lymph node metastasis (Nakamura et al., 2004). The lymphatic vasculature, but not
aortic vasculature, is impaired by targeted deletion of MMP-2 (Bruyere et al., 2008). Future
studies are needed to clarify the specific pathways affected by MMPs in the regulation of
lymphangiogenesis.
Adipocyte Regulation Affects Tumor Progression
Adipocytes are a prominent part of the tumor stroma and contribute to cancer progression.
Unquestionably, there are consequences for the local paracrine crosstalk between the tumor
cells and adipocytes. White adipose tissue functions in energy storage and is an endocrine organ
made up of adipocytes, various stromal cells, resident and infiltrating immune cells, and an
extensive endothelial network. Adipose secretory products, collectively referred to as
adipokines, have been identified as contributors to the negative consequences of adipose tissue
expansion in cancer, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes (Rutkowski et al., 2009). Moreover,
adipokines such as leptin, regulate the expression and activation of MMPs; for example, leptin
induces the MMP-13 production in glioma cells leading to increased migration and tumor
invasion (Yeh et al., 2009). Human adipose tissue-derived stem cells cocultured with cancer
cells produce CCL5, which, in turn, promotes breast cancer cell invasion associated with
MMP-9 activity (Pinilla et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recent reports link MMPs or TIMPs to the interplay between adipose tissue and the epithelium
and subsequently to cancer transformation. MMPs affect the development of the adipose tissue,
which, in turn, may affect the epithelium. MMPs, especially MMP-3, determine the rate of
adipocyte differentiation during mammary gland remodeling during post-lactational
involution, when programmed cell death of the secretory epithelium takes place concomitant
with the repopulation of the mammary fat pad with adipocytes. Fibroblastic adipogenic
progenitor cells express very low levels of MMPs or TIMPs. The transcription of a number of
MMP and TIMP mRNAs (MMP-2, -3, -13, and -14 and TIMP-1, -2, and -3) is induced in
committed preadipocytes, and differentiated adipocytes express activated MMP-2. During
involution, mammary glands from transgenic mice that overexpress the tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases, TIMP-1, or mice carrying a targeted mutation in MMP-3 show accelerated
differentiation and hypertrophy of adipocytes (Alexander et al., 2001). MMP-14 also
contributes to the coordination of adipocyte differentiation, as the absence of MMP-14 aborts
white adipose tissue development resulting in lipodystrophic null mice (Chun et al., 2006).
This defect in MMP-14 null adipocytes only becomes evident when the cells are surrounded
by a three-dimensional (3D) ECM, but not in a 2D culture system. This suggests that MMP-14
acts as a 3D-specific modulator of adipogenesis by proteolytically regulating pericellular
collagen rigidity.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recent findings have identified a new member of the adipocyte “secretome” that functions to
enhance MMP-2 activity. Wdnm1-like (a distant member of the whey acidic protein/fourdisulfide core [WAP/4-DSC] family, which is a differentiation-dependent gene in white and
brown adipogenesis) may play a role in remodeling of the extracellular milieu in adipogenesis,
as well as in tumor microenvironments where adipocytes are key stromal components (Wu and
Smas, 2008).
To date, the only MMP induced by adipose tissue that directly affects cancer progression is
MMP-11. MMP-11 is expressed in adipose tissue as the tumor invades the surrounding
environment and negatively regulates adipogenesis by reducing preadipocyte differentiation
and reversing mature adipocyte differentiation. Adipocyte dedifferentiation leads to the
accumulation of nonmalignant peritumoral fibroblast-like cells, which favor cancer cell
survival and tumor progression. This MMP-11-mediated bidirectional crosstalk between
invading cancer cells and adjacent adipocytes/preadipocytes highlights its central role during

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 10

tumor desmoplasia and represents a molecular link between obesity and cancer (Motrescu and
Rio, 2008).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Initiation of Neoplastic Progression
The initial process of tumor invasion shares many characteristics with the epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) program during developmental processes including loss of
cell-cell adhesion and increased cellular mobility (Kalluri and Weinberg, 2009).
Overexpression of several MMPs, including MMP-3, -7, and -14 results in carcinoma
formation (reviewed in Egeblad and Werb, 2002). A plausible mechanism is suggested by
experiments showing that overexpression of MMP-3, a component of the tumor
microenvironment, causes EMT and induces genomic instability in cultured mammary
epithelial cells leading to all stages of neoplastic progression, malignant transformation, and
mammary carcinomas in transgenic mice (Lochter et al., 1997; Sternlicht et al., 1999). These
effects are linked with the expression of an alternative splice product of Rac1 that subsequently
induces the generation of reactive oxygen species by mitochondria, oxidative DNA damage,
and the expression of EMT-related transcription factor Snail (Radisky et al., 2005).
Tissue Invasion and Metastasis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The lethal outcome of the vast majority of all cancers is due to the dissemination of metastatic
tumor cells and the outgrowth of secondary tumors at distant sites. The initiation of metastasis
involves the invasion of the tumor into the peripheral tissue leading to intravasation of cancer
cells into blood or lymphatic vessels from where they disseminate into secondary organs.
Invasion and metastasis require the crossing of several physical barriers, such as the endothelial
basement membrane. As detailed above, MMPs may account for the pathological, metastasisprone vasculature often found in a growing tumor. Metastatic tumor cells can then enter the
circulation and spread out over the body. Recent findings suggest that metastatic tumor cells
specifically localize to receptive sites, called premetastatic niches, in a complex interplay with
inflammatory cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells (Kaplan et al., 2005).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An interesting mechanism of MMP-mediated signal transduction linked with increased
metastasis is observed in the presence of MMP-1. The proteinase-activated receptors (PARs),
a set of G protein-coupled receptors with distinct functions in thrombosis and inflammation,
can affect tumor invasion by inducing cancer cell migration upon proteolytic cleavage of the
receptor. PAR-1 expression is increased in a number of cancers including breast, colon, and
lung. A study using a xenograft model of breast carcinoma cells demonstrates a critical role
for MMP-1, derived from tumor-infiltrating fibroblasts, in the cleavage of PAR-1, which
appears to drive cancer cell migration and invasive behavior of the tumor (Boire et al., 2005).
This exemplifies an important role of stroma-derived proteinases in the progression of
tumorigenesis, carried out by specific signal transduction on cancer cells.
Bone is one of most common sites for metastasis, often leading to mortality. MMPs expressed
at the interface between tumor and stromal cells play an important role in osteolysis and
dissemination into bone tissue. MMP-7 expressed by osteoclasts at the tumor-bone interface
triggers osteolysis and subsequent bone metastasis in a rodent model of prostate cancer (Lynch
et al., 2005). The target of MMP-7 is the TNF family member RANKL (Receptor Activator
for Nuclear Factor κB Ligand). Normally, RANKL is expressed on activated osteoblasts, so
that the close contact between osteoclasts and osteoblasts enables binding of RANKL to its
receptor RANK on osteoclast progenitors leading to osteoclast differentiation. In this context,
cleavage by MMP-7 releases an active form of RANKL that promotes osteoclast activation
without osteoblasts in the close proximity. A similar effect has recently been elucidated for
MMP-1 and ADAMTS-1 by knocking down these proteases in a highly bone-metastatic clone
of the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 (Lu et al., 2009). Further analyses reveal

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

that ADAMTS-1 and MMP-1 proteolytically engage EGF-like ligands, resulting in activation
of the RANKL pathway, which in turn promotes osteolysis and metastasis to the bone. These
findings support the identification of the MMP-1 gene as part of the multigenic program that
mediates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells (Kang et al., 2003). Taken together, these
proteinases could serve as therapeutic targets to prevent metastasis to the bone in breast or
prostate cancer.
Although there is a wide range of biological functions of MMPs in cancer, a central role is the
degradation and remodeling of the ECM, paving the way through the peripheral tissue for
invasion and metastasis. Recent studies using high-resolution multimodal microscopy have
further corroborated the importance of ECM remodeling by MMP-14-driven pericellular
proteolysis, which potently patterns the tissue to facilitate single-cell and finally collectivecell migration and invasion (Wolf et al., 2007). A number of ECM degrading proteolytic
enzymes, such as MMP-1, -2, -13, and -14 and cathepsins B, K, and L have been implicated
in this process; however MMP-14 may be critical and rate limiting in collagen turnover (Friedl
and Wolf, 2008; Sabeh et al., 2004). A striking observation is that metastatic cancer cells can
switch from a protease-dependent to a protease-independent invasion program by utilizing an
amoeboid migration mode (Wolf et al., 2007). It remains a subject of ongoing debate whether
the amoeboid migration mode is only relevant under in vitro conditions when the surrounding
collagen network is devoid of covalent crosslinks (Sabeh et al., 2009).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mounting evidence from in vivo analyses support the view that motility of metastatic cancer
cells and their egress into the circulation occur in close cooperation with tumor-associated
macrophages (Wyckoff et al., 2004; see Review by B. Qian and J.W. Pollard on page 39 of
this issue). Proteolytic degradation of the endothelial basement membrane and other matrix
components has long been associated with immune cell extravasation during inflammatory
conditions and may be crucial for intravasation of tumor cells into the circulation. Indeed,
macrophage-derived MMP-2 and -9 are important mediators of immune cell migration into the
brain in a mouse model for auto-immune encephalitis, which involves degradation of the ECM
component dystroglycan (Agrawal et al., 2006). This suggests that MMPs delivered by tumorassociated macrophages might contribute to intravasation of cancer cells into the blood stream.
However, the significance of myeloid cell-derived MMPs in the intra- and extravasation of
metastatic cancer cells needs further examination, for example by high-resolution intravital
microscopy using specific MMP activity-based probes.
Metastatic Niche Formation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Certain organs such as lung, liver, or bone are the preferential sites for the formation of
metastases. Metastasis not only depends on features of the cancer cells disseminating from the
primary tumor but also requires the formation of a receptive environment, a metastatic niche,
that is specifically suited for the engraftment of tumor cells at the distant organ. It is likely that
MMPs and other proteinases are crucially involved in the formation of a metastatic niche
(Figure 3). Soluble factors released from the primary tumor appear to trigger the formation of
a metastatic niche that is induced initially by the expression of embryonic-type fibronectin,
which is most likely produced by fibroblasts at these sites (Kaplan et al., 2005). This event
takes place before disseminated tumor cells are detectable at these distant organs, hence the
authors name this process the formation of a “premetastatic niche.” Increased fibronectin
production at these sites allows for the infiltration of VEGFR1-positive, bone marrow-derived
progenitor cells, which then establish a metastasis-supporting microenvironment.
Recent studies have shed more light on the factors released by the primary tumor that initiate
the metastatic niche. VEGF-A, TGF-β, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) produced by
tumor cells trigger the expression of S100 chemokines by lung endothelium, which, in turn,
mediate the directed migration of myeloid cells to these distant sites (Hiratsuka et al., 2006).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Why these factors trigger the expression of chemokines at loci within specific tissues remains
to be investigated. In a follow-up study, the authors further identified serum amyloid A3
(SAA3) as a potential upstream regulator of S100 chemokines during this process.
Interestingly, the formation of a premetastatic niche depends on the inflammatory response by
infiltrating myeloid cells. It appears that SAA3 triggers toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling
in lung-infiltrating myeloid cells leading to activation of the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB)
pathway (Hiratsuka et al., 2008). Activation of the NF-κB pathway triggers substantial
production of MMPs by stromal cells (Bond et al., 1998), which then potentially contributes
to the microenvironmental changes by degrading ECM and releasing growth factors.
Indeed, MMP-9 turns out to be critical for the formation of the metastatic niche (Kaplan et al.,
2005), which is most likely linked with its ability to liberate VEGF and thereby support
angiogenesis (Bergers et al., 2000). MMP-9 releases soluble Kit-ligand to recruit stem and
progenitor cells from the bone marrow (Heissig et al., 2002), which may be of particular
significance in this context, given that the niche-forming progenitor cells express c-Kit (Kaplan
et al., 2005).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Lysyl oxidase (LOX) secreted by hypoxic breast cancer cells may contribute to setting up
metastatic sites because it cross-links proteins including collagen IV in basement membrane
structures. This results in the recruitment of myeloid cells to these sites (Erler et al., 2009),
possibly owing to altered tissue stiffness (Levental et al., 2009). These invading myeloid cells
release MMPs, which degrade collagen fibers and release peptides that may guide the homing
of bone marrow-derived cells and metastasizing tumor cells to these sites. Interestingly, the
production of MMPs, namely MMP-3 and -10, is upregulated together with the angiogenic
modulator angiopoietin 2 in premetastatic lung tissue even before myeloid cells are recruited
to these sites (Huang et al., 2009). Given that in vivo RNA interference of MMP-3, MMP-10,
and angiopoietin 2 markedly attenuates vascular permeability and infiltration of myeloid cells
into the lung, it is likely that these three factors synergize in the destabilization of the pulmonary
vasculature, thus promoting metastasis. These findings imply an important role of extracellular
proteolysis in premetastatic niche generation. Although future studies are needed to elucidate
the critical pathways modulated by these proteinases, it appears that the action of MMPs in
this instance critically involves the modulation of inflammatory processes.

MMPs Orchestrate Inflammation in Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There is increasing evidence implicating MMPs as major regulators of innate and acquired
immunity. The process of inflammation and production of cytokines by immune cells are in
many ways linked to cancer progression (Lin and Karin, 2007). In this section, we discuss how
MMPs modulate the function of cytokines and chemokines and what consequences this
immunoregulatory function may have on the tumor microenvironment.
There is strong evidence from studies in knockout mice that MMPs play an important role in
acute as well as chronic inflammation (Parks et al., 2004). One of the most important
proinflammatory cytokines is TNF-α, which is expressed as a membrane-bound precursor (proTNF-α) on a variety of cells including macrophages and T cells. Conversion of pro-TNF-α into
the soluble cytokinetic form requires proteolytic cleavage by ADAM-17, also known as TNF
converting enzyme (TACE), or by several MMPs including MMP-1, -2, -3, -9, -12, -14, -15,
and -17 (Manicone and McGuire, 2008). Although ADAM-17 is most likely the major TNFα-generating convertase, MMPs may be important TNF-α-converting mediators in specific
physiological or pathological circumstances, as described for MMP-7 in the regulation of
inflammation during resorption of herniated discs (Haro et al., 2000). Many tumors produce
abundant TNF-α, and it promotes cancer cell survival in an NF-κB-dependent manner (Luo et

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 13

al., 2004), suggesting that the conversion of TNF-α by MMPs and ADAM-17 might be a crucial
step in this tumor-promoting cascade.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A number of studies have shown the proteolytic alteration of chemokines by MMPs. Several
members of the CCL/monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP) family of chemokines are
cleaved by MMPs, which specifically renders them into non-activating receptor antagonists
with inflammation-dampening effects (McQuibban et al., 2002). For instance, CCL8/MCP-2
is processed by MMP-1 and MMP-3. Indeed, the proteolytic cleavage of CCL8 can counteract
the antitumor capacity of this chemokine in a melanoma model (Struyf et al., 2009). This study
shows that proteolytic cleavage of a chemokine can have great impact in a clinically relevant
setting of tumor development.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MMP-8, -9, and -12 also modulate the bioactivity of CXCL11/I-TAC, a potent Th1
lymphocyte-attracting chemokine (Cox et al., 2008). Although MMP-mediated N-terminal
truncation of CXCL11 leads to inactivation of the chemokine and creates a potent receptor
antagonist, further C-terminal cleavage abolishes the antagonist function and removes heparinbinding capacity of CXCL11, thereby solubilizing the chemokine from the ECM. These
findings implicate myeloid cell-derived MMPs in the regulation of T cell responses, which
may have important consequences on the adaptive antitumor immune response. CXCR7, the
chemokine receptor for CXCL11, is also expressed on many tumor cells and can transmit
growth- and survival-promoting signals (Burns et al., 2006). Modulation of CXCL11 by MMPs
might therefore reduce the antitumor immune response and thus have direct consequences on
tumor growth.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The classical function of MMPs, the degradation of ECM, may have secondary effects on the
immune system, as some of the proteolytic fragments of MMP-processed ECM components
exert chemotactic properties. Likewise, macrophage elastase MMP-12 produces neutrophilattracting peptides by degrading elastin (Houghton et al., 2006b). Moreover, ECM breakdown
during airway inflammation generates the fragment N-acetyl Pro-Gly-Pro (PGP), a tripeptide
with chemotactic activity through activation of CXC chemokine receptors on neutrophilic
granulocytes (Weathington et al., 2006). MMP-8 is involved in the generation of chemotactic
PGP and thus regulates neutrophil recruitment to the sites of inflammation (Rocks et al.,
2008), which may cause a delay in the wound-healing response and increase inflammation over
time, as observed previously in MMP-8-deficient mice (Gutierrez-Fernandez et al., 2007).
MMP-8 contributed by neutrophils also has a tumor-suppressing role in a mouse model of
carcinogen-induced skin cancer (Balbin et al., 2003). The defect in the resolution of
inflammation and the tendency to develop chronic inflammation in the absence of MMP-8 in
mice explain how loss-of-function mutations of MMP-8 contribute mechanistically to
increased susceptibility of skin adenocarcinoma and melanoma formation in humans (Palavalli
et al., 2009). However, expression of MMP-8 in tumor cells also tightens their adhesion to the
ECM and thereby may directly suppress metastatic behavior (Gutierrez-Fernandez et al.,
2008). Thus, interference with the tumor-suppressing function of MMP-8 should be regarded
as one of the unwanted effects of broad-spectrum MMP inhibitors.
The infiltration of neutrophils in the tumor microenvironment often correlates with poor
prognosis (de Visser et al., 2006). Neutrophils, like other inflammatory cells, sense the
concentration gradient of chemokines such as CXCL1/KC, a homolog of CXCL8 in mice,
which forms complexes with the heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-1 on interstitial cell
surfaces. MMP-7 indirectly modulates the bioactivity of CXCL1 by cleaving syndecan-1 from
cell surfaces and thereby releasing chemotactic complexes of syndecan-1 and CXCL1 (Li et
al., 2002). This efficiently leads to the generation of a concentration gradient of soluble
chemotactic CXCL1-syndecan-1 complexes. In a comparable manner, N-terminal processing
of neutrophil-attracting CXCL8/interleukin-8 (IL-8) by MMP-9 leads to 10-fold increased

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

chemotactic activity on neutrophils compared to full-length CXCL8 (Van den Steen et al.,
2000). Therefore, MMPs orchestrate the recruitment of leukocytes as an essential component
of tumor-associated inflammation (Figure 3).

Nonproteolytic Functions of MMPs
An emerging area of interest is the noncatalytic function of MMPs. The discovery of such
functions in MMPs is not so surprising, given that about half of all ADAMs show proteolytic
capacity, whereas the other half act in a nonproteolytic manner. The hemopexin domain of
MMPs plays an important role in the nonproteolytic function of MMPs. The first in vivo hint
for a crucial hemopexin-mediated function of MMPs was established with the observation that
TIMP-1 and -2 bind to several MMPs via their hemopexin domains. Indeed, activation of
MMP-2 requires TIMP-2 that is bound to one molecule of MMP-14 via its catalytic domain
and also is bound to pro-MMP-2 via its hemopexin domain. A second molecule of MMP-14
then catalytically activates MMP-2 (Strongin et al., 1995).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several members of the MMP family trigger immune or cancer cell migration; however, recent
evidence suggests that they mediate chemotaxis even without using their proteolytic domain.
Precursor forms of MMP-2 and -9 enhance cell migration in a transwell chamber assay. The
hemopexin domain of MMP-9, but not its proteolytic activity, is necessary for MMP-9mediated epithelial cell migration in this assay (Dufour et al., 2008). In this context, activation
of the MAP kinase and PI3 kinase pathways appear to be involved in this nonproteolytic
function of MMP-9; the distinct molecular pathway as well as the in vivo role of this function
yet remain elusive. Moreover, the cytoplasmic tail of MMP-14 carries out a migrationpromoting function on macrophages, as genetic depletion of the cytoplasmic tail but not of the
extracellular hemopexin or catalytic domain impairs the migration of macrophages during in
vitro migration through Matrigel (Sakamoto and Seiki, 2009).
Clear evidence for the physiological relevance of hemopexin domains of MMPs has come more
recently using genetic modification of one of the two Mmp genes of Drosophila
melanogaster (Glasheen et al., 2009). These investigations reveal that, although the catalytic
domain is required for all MMP functions, the hemopexin domain is specifically implicated in
tissue invasion during metamorphosis but not for tracheal remodeling.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A more direct nonproteolytic function has been recently elucidated for MMP-12. The
hemopexin domain, but not the catalytic site, of MMP-12 (macrophage elastase) plays an
essential role in the recently described antimicrobial function of this enzyme (Houghton et al.,
2009). Deleting MMP-12 genetically in mice results in impaired bacterial clearance and
increased mortality when infected with gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. The
antimicrobial properties of MMP-12 map to a unique four amino acid sequence within the
hemopexin-like C-terminal domain and do not require catalytic activity of the enzyme. It
remains to be determined whether similar nonproteolytic motifs are present in other MMPs
and whether these nonproteolytic modes of action are also implicated in cancer-related
functions of these enzymes.
Several MMPs may interact with other extracellular molecules without inducing proteolytic
cleavage. MMP-14 interacts with the C1q component of the complement system in a
nonproteolytic, receptor-ligand manner, without inducing C1qr and C1qs proteinase activity,
suggesting that this binding may inhibit activation of the complement proteinase cascade
(Rozanov et al., 2004). Further studies are yet required to address the biological relevance of
MMP-14-mediated inhibition of the complement system in tumorigenesis. MMPs also bind to
members of the integrin family of cell surface receptors. A recent study has now linked the
nonproteolytic interaction of pro-MMP-1 with α2β1 integrin on neurons with MMP-1-induced
neuronal cell death in cell culture (Conant et al., 2004). Reduced dephosphorylation of AKT
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

after MMP-1 incubation, which is inhibited by a blocking α2 integrin antibody, but not by
administration of Batimastat, an inhibitor of MMP activity, suggests that integrin binding,
rather than proteinase activity, is relevant for MMP-1-transmitted cytotoxicity. In chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, MMP-9 promotes B cell survival in a non-proteolytic fashion via its
hemopexin domain by docking to the surface receptors α4β1 and CD44v, which induce
intracellular signaling involving Lyn activation and STAT3 phosphorylation that prevents B
cell apoptosis (Redondo-Munoz et al., 2010).
Taken together, these data indicate that we are only beginning to understand nonproteolytic
functions of MMPs and that further studies are required to clarify this principle and evaluate
its role under in vivo conditions. However, it is tempting to speculate that nonproteolytic
functions of MMPs could explain why previous clinical trials using inhibitors of the MMP
catalytic domains failed as anticancer therapeutics.

Conclusions and Perspectives

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MMPs are associated with multiple human cancers; hence they were early considered as drug
targets to treat cancer. The first drug development programs based on the notion of blocking
MMP-mediated angiogenesis and metastasis were started about 25 years ago and led to a
number of small-molecule metalloproteinase inhibitor (MPI) drugs in phase III clinical trials.
The effects of MPIs in these trials turned out to be disappointing as they failed to increase the
survival rate of cancer patients. Possible reasons for the failure of MPIs have been extensively
discussed previously (Coussens et al., 2002). Indeed, the clinical studies were suboptimally
designed with respect to the stage of cancer, so the question remains whether MPIs might have
proven more effective when used in earlier stages of the disease.
Part of the rationale to use MPIs as anticancer drugs was to block interstitial migration of
metastatic cancer cells. However, recent analyses have shown that cancer cells can switch to
an amoeboid-like protease-independent migration mode by forming actin-rich protrusions and
“squeezing” through the ECM (Wolf et al., 2007). This would render MPIs impotent to inhibit
the migratory behavior of metastatic tumor cells. Whether this alternative migration mode is
actually relevant for cancer cell migration under in vivo conditions in the presence of a naturally
crosslinked collagen matrix currently remains questionable. Mounting evidence supports a
dominant role of MMP-14 in the migration and invasion of metastatic tumor cells; hence
MMP-14 remains a promising therapeutic target (Sabeh et al., 2009). This would support the
use of MPIs that specifically inhibit MMP-14 as anti-invasive drugs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The cytostatic potential attributed to MPIs is certainly in keeping with the numerous studies
describing MMP-mediated regulation of cell growth signals, such as the activation of TGF-β
by MMP-2, -9, and -14 (Dallas et al., 2002; Mu et al., 2002), the proteolytic release of soluble
EGFR ligands, or the degradation of E-cadherin by MMP-3 or -9 (Cowden Dahl et al., 2008;
Radisky et al., 2005). Moreover, MMPs interfere with apoptosis induction, especially after
chemotherapy, by cleaving Fas ligand from the surface of cancer cells as shown for MMP-7
(Mitsiades et al., 2001). In the clinical trials, MPIs were administered to patients with advanced
cancer, which was most likely too late to exert any beneficial effect on survival.
Interfering with the tumor vasculature is regarded as one of the most promising strategies to
inhibit tumor growth and has motivated the development of drugs like Bevacizumab (Avastin,
anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody), which has been FDA approved for the treatment of
metastatic cancers in combination with chemotherapy. Many studies also support a dominant
role of MMP-9 in the angiogenic switch by regulating the bio-availability of VEGF tumors
(e.g., Bergers et al., 2000), suggesting a beneficial effect of MPI on tumor angiogenesis.
However, in other cancer models, MMP-9 generates ECM fragments like tumstatin, a potent

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

suppressor of tumor vasculature formation, resulting in increased tumor growth in MMP-9deficient mice (Hamano et al., 2003). This illustrates that one MMP can have opposing effects
in different tumor types and highlights that the use of MPIs has to be carefully considered and
evaluated for each specific kind of cancer.
Most of the initial studies utilized cancer cell lines that over-express certain members of the
MMP family (reviewed in Egeblad and Werb, 2002). These studies may not recapitulate the
situation in vivo, where the major source of MMPs is nonmalignant stromal cells. In fact, the
cellular source of each MMP is of high significance, as the activity of the released enzyme
varies substantially between cell types. This should be taken into account when assessing the
expression patterns of MMPs in cancer types that should be considered for treatments with
MPIs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Certainly, the complexity of the mode of action of MMPs has expanded considerably from
proteinases that simply degrade the ECM, to specific modulators of angiogenesis as well as
fine-tuners of cell signaling pathways and the inflammatory response (Figure 4). One of the
major, recent advances in MMP research is the discovery of specific regulatory effects of
MMPs on the stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment. MMPs affect adipocyte function,
which is especially likely to be implicated in adipose-rich tumor sites such as breast. They also
regulate the course of the inflammatory reaction in multiple ways and facilitate the recruitment
of inflammatory cells by altering the function of chemokines and the bioavailability of
important proinflammatory cytokines. Regarding the link between inflammation and cancer
(Lin and Karin, 2007), the interference with MMP-mediated immunoregulatory functions
could prove beneficial for cancer patients. For example, given that TNF-α contributes to
progression of several sorts of cancer (Balkwill, 2009), inhibiting TNF-α activation using MPIs
might dampen the inflammatory milieu at the tumor microenvironment.
Effects of MMPs on myeloid cells may well be implicated in the generation of the premetastatic
niche. In fact, MMP-2, -3, and -9 have already been shown to contribute to the establishment
of metastasis-prone sites at tumor-distant organs (Erler et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2009; Kaplan
et al., 2005). These insights argue for the use of MPIs at early stages of malignant disease, prior
to the full initiation of tumor-associated inflammation and before the soil has been primed for
metastasis in distant organs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The tumor-suppressing functions of these MMPs is probably another reason for the failure of
broad-spectrum MPIs as anticancer drugs (Lopez-Otin and Matrisian, 2007). The
inflammation-suppressing function of MMPs accounts for increased incidence of cancer
development in MMP-8 knockout mice (Balbin et al., 2003) and for the link between MMP-8
loss-of-function mutations and melanoma in humans (Palavalli et al., 2009). Also, MMP-12
delivered by macrophages can suppress the growth of lung metastases, which appears to
involve regulation of the tumor vasculature (Houghton et al., 2006a). Apart from that, some
MMPs carry out biological functions other than proteolytic, mediated by specific binding to
certain target molecules, for instance via their hemopexin domain. Small-molecule MMP
inhibitors as used in clinical trials are certainly ineffective to interfere with a nonproteolytic
role of MMPs.
One of the major tasks for the future is the development of active site-directed inhibitors or
antibodies that are specific for single MMPs and show little or no cross-reaction with other
MMPs (Cuniasse et al., 2005). For example, a monoclonal antibody raised against the catalytic
domain of MMP-14 successfully inhibits the migration and invasion of endothelial cells in
collagen and fibrin gels (Galvez et al., 2001). Antibodies could also target functional
noncatalytic domains of MMPs. Moreover, MMP activity can be exploited to activate cytotoxic
agents such as anthrax toxin to target the tumor vasculature (Liu et al., 2008b). These agents

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

need to be validated for specificity using MMP-deficient animals and rigorously tested in
experimental cancer models. New activity-based imaging probes specific for MMPs will
facilitate monitoring the effect of MPIs on the function of MMPs in vivo. The combination of
these probes with minimal invasive imaging techniques will soon allow the improved endpoint
assessment for the efficacy of these compounds in inhibiting the target function in vivo.
Imaging activity of specific MMPs in vivo will further advance our understanding of the time
frame of MMP function during the progression of certain tumors. Like the development of
tailor-made therapies and medications based on individual oncogenic pathway signatures in
human cancers (Bild et al., 2006), expression patterns of MMPs in cancer patients could
facilitate a fully rational decision about when and in what combination MPIs and anti-cancer
drugs should be used in the future.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge support by grants (CA057621 and CA072006) from the National Cancer Institute and by fellowships
from the Susan G. Komen Foundation, the Israeli Science Foundation, and the Machiah Foundation.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Agrawal S, Anderson P, Durbeej M, van Rooijen N, Ivars F, Opdenakker G, Sorokin LM. Dystroglycan
is selectively cleaved at the parenchymal basement membrane at sites of leukocyte extravasation in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Exp Med 2006;203:1007–1019. [PubMed: 16585265]
Ahn GO, Brown JM. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 is required for tumor vasculogenesis but not for
angiogenesis: Role of bone marrow-derived myelomonocytic cells. Cancer Cell 2008;13:193–205.
[PubMed: 18328424]
Alexander CM, Selvarajan S, Mudgett J, Werb Z. Stromelysin-1 regulates adipogenesis during mammary
gland involution. J Cell Biol 2001;152:693–703. [PubMed: 11266461]
Ardi VC, Kupriyanova TA, Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Human neutrophils uniquely release TIMP-free
MMP-9 to provide a potent catalytic stimulator of angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007;104:20262–20267. [PubMed: 18077379]
Ardi VC, Van den Steen PE, Opdenakker G, Schweighofer B, Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Neutrophil
MMP-9 Proenzyme, unencumbered by TIMP-1, undergoes efficient activation in vivo and catalytically
induces angiogenesis via a basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2)/FGFR-2 pathway. J Biol Chem
2009;284:25854–25866. [PubMed: 19608737]
Balbin M, Fueyo A, Tester AM, Pendas AM, Pitiot AS, Astudillo A, Overall CM, Shapiro SD, LopezOtin C. Loss of collagenase-2 confers increased skin tumor susceptibility to male mice. Nat Genet
2003;35:252–257. [PubMed: 14517555]
Balkwill F. Tumour necrosis factor and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:361–371. [PubMed: 19343034]
Bergers G, Brekken R, McMahon G, Vu TH, Itoh T, Tamaki K, Tanzawa K, Thorpe P, Itohara S, Werb
Z, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 triggers the angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis. Nat Cell
Biol 2000;2:737–744. [PubMed: 11025665]
Bild AH, Yao G, Chang JT, Wang Q, Potti A, Chasse D, Joshi MB, Harpole D, Lancaster JM, Berchuck
A, et al. Oncogenic pathway signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted therapies. Nature
2006;439:353–357. [PubMed: 16273092]
Boire A, Covic L, Agarwal A, Jacques S, Sheriff S, Kuliopulos A. PAR1 is a matrix metalloprotease-1
receptor that promotes invasion and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells. Cell 2005;120:303–313.
[PubMed: 15707890]
Bond M, Fabunmi RP, Baker AH, Newby AC. Synergistic upregulation of metalloproteinase-9 by growth
factors and inflammatory cytokines: an absolute requirement for transcription factor NF-kappa B.
FEBS Lett 1998;435:29–34. [PubMed: 9755853]
Bremer C, Tung CH, Weissleder R. In vivo molecular target assessment of matrix metalloproteinase
inhibition. Nat Med 2001;7:743–748. [PubMed: 11385514]
Brinkmann V, Reichard U, Goosmann C, Fauler B, Uhlemann Y, Weiss DS, Weinrauch Y, Zychlinsky
A. Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science 2004;303:1532–1535. [PubMed: 15001782]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bruyere F, Melen-Lamalle L, Blacher S, Roland G, Thiry M, Moons L, Frankenne F, Carmeliet P, Alitalo
K, Libert C, et al. Modeling lymphangiogenesis in a three-dimensional culture system. Nat Methods
2008;5:431–437. [PubMed: 18425139]
Burns JM, Summers BC, Wang Y, Melikian A, Berahovich R, Miao Z, Penfold ME, Sunshine MJ,
Littman DR, Kuo CJ, et al. A novel chemokine receptor for SDF-1 and I-TAC involved in cell
survival, cell adhesion, and tumor development. J Exp Med 2006;203:2201–2213. [PubMed:
16940167]
Butcher DT, Alliston T, Weaver VM. A tense situation: forcing tumour progression. Nat Rev Cancer
2009;9:108–122. [PubMed: 19165226]
Chun TH, Hotary KB, Sabeh F, Saltiel AR, Allen ED, Weiss SJ. A pericellular collagenase directs the
3-dimensional development of white adipose tissue. Cell 2006;125:577–591. [PubMed: 16678100]
Conant K, St Hillaire C, Nagase H, Visse R, Gary D, Haughey N, Anderson C, Turchan J, Nath A. Matrix
metalloproteinase 1 interacts with neuronal integrins and stimulates dephosphorylation of Akt. J Biol
Chem 2004;279:8056–8062. [PubMed: 14679206]
Cornelius LA, Nehring LC, Harding E, Bolanowski M, Welgus HG, Kobayashi DK, Pierce RA, Shapiro
SD. Matrix metalloproteinases generate angiostatin: effects on neovascularization. J Immunol
1998;161:6845–6852. [PubMed: 9862716]
Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer. Nature 2002;420:860–867. [PubMed: 12490959]
Coussens LM, Fingleton B, Matrisian LM. Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors and cancer: trials and
tribulations. Science 2002;295:2387–2392. [PubMed: 11923519]
Cowden Dahl KD, Symowicz J, Ning Y, Gutierrez E, Fishman DA, Adley BP, Stack MS, Hudson LG.
Matrix metalloproteinase 9 is a mediator of epidermal growth factor-dependent e-cadherin loss in
ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 2008;68:4606–4613. [PubMed: 18559505]
Cox JH, Dean RA, Roberts CR, Overall CM. Matrix metalloproteinase processing of CXCL11/I-TAC
results in loss of chemoattractant activity and altered glycosaminoglycan binding. J Biol Chem
2008;283:19389–19399. [PubMed: 18411283]
Crawford HC, Scoggins CR, Washington MK, Matrisian LM, Leach SD. Matrix metalloproteinase-7 is
expressed by pancreatic cancer precursors and regulates acinar-to-ductal metaplasia in exocrine
pancreas. J Clin Invest 2002;109:1437–1444. [PubMed: 12045257]
Cuniasse P, Dev L, Makaritis A, Beau F, Georgiadis D, Matziari M, Yiotakis A, Dive V. Future challenges
facing the development of specific active-site-directed synthetic inhibitors of MMPs. Biochimie
2005;87:393–402. [PubMed: 15781327]
Dallas SL, Rosser JL, Mundy GR, Bonewald LF. Proteolysis of latent transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta)-binding protein-1 by osteoclasts. A cellular mechanism for release of TGF-beta from
bone matrix. J Biol Chem 2002;277:21352–21360. [PubMed: 11929865]
de Visser KE, Eichten A, Coussens LM. Paradoxical roles of the immune system during cancer
development. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:24–37. [PubMed: 16397525]
Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Matrix metalloproteinases and tumor metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev
2006;25:9–34. [PubMed: 16680569]
Du R, Lu KV, Petritsch C, Liu P, Ganss R, Passegue E, Song H, Vandenberg S, Johnson RS, Werb Z, et
al. HIF1alpha induces the recruitment of bone marrow-derived vascular modulatory cells to regulate
tumor angiogenesis and invasion. Cancer Cell 2008;13:206–220. [PubMed: 18328425]
Dufour A, Sampson NS, Zucker S, Cao J. Role of the hemopexin domain of matrix metalloproteinases
in cell migration. J Cell Physiol 2008;217:643–651. [PubMed: 18636552]
Edwards DR, Handsley MM, Pennington CJ. The ADAM metalloproteinases. Mol Aspects Med
2008;29:258–289. [PubMed: 18762209]
Egeblad M, Werb Z. New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression. Nat Rev
Cancer 2002;2:161–174. [PubMed: 11990853]
Egeblad M, Ewald AJ, Askautrud HA, Truitt ML, Welm BE, Bainbridge E, Peeters G, Krummel MF,
Werb Z. Visualizing stromal cell dynamics in different tumor microenvironments by spinning disk
confocal microscopy. Dis Model Mech 2008;1:155–167. [PubMed: 19048079]
Erler JT, Bennewith KL, Cox TR, Lang G, Bird D, Koong A, Le QT, Giaccia AJ. Hypoxia-induced lysyl
oxidase is a critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment to form the premetastatic niche. Cancer
Cell 2009;15:35–44. [PubMed: 19111879]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Friedl P, Wolf K. Tube travel: the role of proteases in individual and collective cancer cell invasion.
Cancer Res 2008;68:7247–7249. [PubMed: 18794108]
Fu X, Kassim SY, Parks WC, Heinecke JW. Hypochlorous acid generated by myeloperoxidase modifies
adjacent tryptophan and glycine residues in the catalytic domain of matrix metalloproteinase-7
(matrilysin): an oxidative mechanism for restraining proteolytic activity during inflammation. J Biol
Chem 2003;278:28403–28409. [PubMed: 12759346]
Furumoto S, Takashima K, Kubota K, Ido T, Iwata R, Fukuda H. Tumor detection using 18F-labeled
matrix metalloproteinase-2 inhibitor. Nucl Med Biol 2003;30:119–125. [PubMed: 12623110]
Galvez BG, Matias-Roman S, Albar JP, Sanchez-Madrid F, Arroyo AG. Membrane type 1-matrix
metalloproteinase is activated during migration of human endothelial cells and modulates endothelial
motility and matrix remodeling. J Biol Chem 2001;276:37491–37500. [PubMed: 11448964]
Glasheen BM, Kabra AT, Page-McCaw A. Distinct functions for the catalytic and hemopexin domains
of a Drosophila matrix metalloproteinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009;106:2659–2664. [PubMed:
19196956]
Gross J, Lapiere CM. Collagenolytic activity in amphibian tissues: a tissue culture assay. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1962;48:1014–1022. [PubMed: 13902219]
Gutierrez-Fernandez A, Inada M, Balbin M, Fueyo A, Pitiot AS, Astudillo A, Hirose K, Hirata M, Shapiro
SD, Noel A, et al. Increased inflammation delays wound healing in mice deficient in collagenase-2
(MMP-8). FASEB J 2007;21:2580–2591. [PubMed: 17392479]
Gutierrez-Fernandez A, Fueyo A, Folgueras AR, Garabaya C, Pennington CJ, Pilgrim S, Edwards DR,
Holliday DL, Jones JL, Span PN, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-8 functions as a metastasis
suppressor through modulation of tumor cell adhesion and invasion. Cancer Res 2008;68:2755–2763.
[PubMed: 18413742]
Hamano Y, Zeisberg M, Sugimoto H, Lively JC, Maeshima Y, Yang C, Hynes RO, Werb Z, Sudhakar
A, Kalluri R. Physiological levels of tumstatin, a fragment of collagen IV alpha3 chain, are generated
by MMP-9 proteolysis and suppress angiogenesis via alphaV beta3 integrin. Cancer Cell 2003;3:589–
601. [PubMed: 12842087]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 2000;100:57–70. [PubMed: 10647931]
Haro H, Crawford HC, Fingleton B, Shinomiya K, Spengler DM, Matrisian LM. Matrix
metalloproteinase-7-dependent release of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in a model of herniated disc
resorption. J Clin Invest 2000;105:143–150. [PubMed: 10642592]
Heissig B, Hattori K, Dias S, Friedrich M, Ferris B, Hackett NR, Crystal RG, Besmer P, Lyden D, Moore
MA, et al. Recruitment of stem and progenitor cells from the bone marrow niche requires MMP-9
mediated release of kit-ligand. Cell 2002;109:625–637. [PubMed: 12062105]
Heljasvaara R, Nyberg P, Luostarinen J, Parikka M, Heikkila P, Rehn M, Sorsa T, Salo T, Pihlajaniemi
T. Generation of biologically active endostatin fragments from human collagen XVIII by distinct
matrix metalloproteases. Exp Cell Res 2005;307:292–304. [PubMed: 15950618]
Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Maru Y. Tumour-mediated upregulation of chemoattractants and
recruitment of myeloid cells predetermines lung metastasis. Nat Cell Biol 2006;8:1369–1375.
[PubMed: 17128264]
Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Sakurai Y, Akashi-Takamura S, Ishibashi S, Miyake K, Shibuya M, Akira S,
Aburatani H, Maru Y. The S100A8-serum amyloid A3-TLR4 paracrine cascade establishes a premetastatic phase. Nat Cell Biol 2008;10:1349–1355. [PubMed: 18820689]
Houghton AM, Grisolano JL, Baumann ML, Kobayashi DK, Hautamaki RD, Nehring LC, Cornelius LA,
Shapiro SD. Macrophage elastase (matrix metalloproteinase-12) suppresses growth of lung
metastases. Cancer Res 2006a;66:6149–6155. [PubMed: 16778188]
Houghton AM, Quintero PA, Perkins DL, Kobayashi DK, Kelley DG, Marconcini LA, Mecham RP,
Senior RM, Shapiro SD. Elastin fragments drive disease progression in a murine model of
emphysema. J Clin Invest 2006b;116:753–759. [PubMed: 16470245]
Houghton AM, Hartzell WO, Robbins CS, Gomis-Ruth FX, Shapiro SD. Macrophage elastase kills
bacteria within murine macrophages. Nature 2009;460:637–641. [PubMed: 19536155]
Huang Y, Song N, Ding Y, Yuan S, Li X, Cai H, Shi H, Luo Y. Pulmonary vascular destabilization in
the premetastatic phase facilitates lung metastasis. Cancer Res 2009;69:7529–7537. [PubMed:
19773447]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hynes NE, Lane HA. ERBB receptors and cancer: the complexity of targeted inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer
2005;5:341–354. [PubMed: 15864276]
Islekel H, Oktay G, Terzi C, Canda AE, Fuzun M, Kupelioglu A. Matrix metalloproteinase-9,-3 and tissue
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 in colorectal cancer: relationship to clinicopathological
variables. Cell Biochem Funct 2007;25:433–441. [PubMed: 16615041]
Jastrzebska B, Lebel R, Therriault H, McIntyre JO, Escher E, Guerin B, Paquette B, Neugebauer WA,
Lepage M. New enzyme-activated solubility-switchable contrast agent for magnetic resonance
imaging: from synthesis to in vivo imaging. J Med Chem 2009;52:1576–1581. [PubMed: 19228016]
Jiang T, Olson ES, Nguyen QT, Roy M, Jennings PA, Tsien RY. Tumor imaging by means of proteolytic
activation of cell-penetrating peptides. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:17867–17872. [PubMed:
15601762]
Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Clin Invest 2009;119:1420–
1428. [PubMed: 19487818]
Kang Y, Siegel PM, Shu W, Drobnjak M, Kakonen SM, Cordon-Cardo C, Guise TA, Massague J. A
multigenic program mediating breast cancer metastasis to bone. Cancer Cell 2003;3:537–549.
[PubMed: 12842083]
Kaplan RN, Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH, Vincent L, Costa C, MacDonald DD, Jin DK, Shido
K, Kerns SA, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the premetastatic niche. Nature 2005;438:820–827. [PubMed: 16341007]
Kessenbrock K, Krumbholz M, Schonermarck U, Back W, Gross WL, Werb Z, Grone HJ, Brinkmann
V, Jenne DE. Netting neutrophils in autoimmune small-vessel vasculitis. Nat Med 2009;15:623–625.
[PubMed: 19448636]
Langenskiold M, Holmdahl L, Falk P, Ivarsson ML. Increased plasma MMP-2 protein expression in
lymph node-positive patients with colorectal cancer. Int J Colorectal Dis 2005;20:245–252.
[PubMed: 15592677]
Le Maux Chansac B, Misse D, Richon C, Vergnon I, Kubin M, Soria JC, Moretta A, Chouaib S, MamiChouaib F. Potentiation of NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity in human lung adenocarcinoma: role of
NK-G2D-dependent pathway. Int Immunol 2008;20:801–810. [PubMed: 18441340]
Lee S, Jilani SM, Nikolova GV, Carpizo D, Iruela-Arispe ML. Processing of VEGF-A by matrix
metalloproteinases regulates bioavailability and vascular patterning in tumors. J Cell Biol
2005;169:681–691. [PubMed: 15911882]
Levental KR, Yu H, Kass L, Lakins JN, Egeblad M, Erler JT, Fong SF, Csiszar K, Giaccia A, Weninger
W, et al. Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling. Cell
2009;139:891–906. [PubMed: 19931152]
Li Q, Park PW, Wilson CL, Parks WC. Matrilysin shedding of syndecan-1 regulates chemokine
mobilization and transepithelial efflux of neutrophils in acute lung injury. Cell 2002;111:635–646.
[PubMed: 12464176]
Lijnen HR, Van Hoef B, Collen D. Inactivation of the serpin alpha(2)-antiplasmin by stromelysin-1.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2001;1547:206–213. [PubMed: 11410276]
Lin WW, Karin M. A cytokine-mediated link between innate immunity, inflammation, and cancer. J Clin
Invest 2007;117:1175–1183. [PubMed: 17476347]
Liotta LA, Tryggvason K, Garbisa S, Hart I, Foltz CM, Shafie S. Metastatic potential correlates with
enzymatic degradation of basement membrane collagen. Nature 1980;284:67–68. [PubMed:
6243750]
Littlepage LE, Sternlicht MD, Rougier N, Phillips J, Gallo E, Yu Y, Williams K, Brenot A, Gordon JI,
Werb Z. Matrix metalloproteinases contribute distinct roles in neuroendocrine prostate
carcinogenesis, metastasis, and angiogenesis progression. Cancer Res 2010;70:2224–2234.
[PubMed: 20215503]
Liu H, Zhang T, Li X, Huang J, Wu B, Huang X, Zhou Y, Zhu J, Hou J. Predictive value of MMP-7
expression for response to chemotherapy and survival in patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Sci 2008a;99:2185–2192. [PubMed: 18823373]
Liu S, Wang H, Currie BM, Molinolo A, Leung HJ, Moayeri M, Basile JR, Alfano RW, Gutkind JS,
Frankel AE, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-activated anthrax lethal toxin demonstrates high potency
in targeting tumor vasculature. J Biol Chem 2008b;283:529–540. [PubMed: 17974567]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Liu Z, Zhou X, Shapiro SD, Shipley JM, Twining SS, Diaz LA, Senior RM, Werb Z. The serpin alpha1proteinase inhibitor is a critical substrate for gelatinase B/MMP-9 in vivo. Cell 2000;102:647–655.
[PubMed: 11007483]
Lochter A, Galosy S, Muschler J, Freedman N, Werb Z, Bissell MJ. Matrix metalloproteinase
stromelysin-1 triggers a cascade of molecular alterations that leads to stable epithelial-tomesenchymal conversion and a premalignant phenotype in mammary epithelial cells. J Cell Biol
1997;139:1861–1872. [PubMed: 9412478]
Lopez-Otin C, Matrisian LM. Emerging roles of proteases in tumour suppression. Nat Rev Cancer
2007;7:800–808. [PubMed: 17851543]
Lu X, Wang Q, Hu G, Van Poznak C, Fleisher M, Reiss M, Massague J, Kang Y. ADAMTS1 and MMP1
proteolytically engage EGF-like ligands in an osteolytic signaling cascade for bone metastasis. Genes
Dev 2009;23:1882–1894. [PubMed: 19608765]
Luo JL, Maeda S, Hsu LC, Yagita H, Karin M. Inhibition of NF-kappaB in cancer cells converts
inflammation-induced tumor growth mediated by TNFalpha to TRAIL-mediated tumor regression.
Cancer Cell 2004;6:297–305. [PubMed: 15380520]
Lynch CC, Hikosaka A, Acuff HB, Martin MD, Kawai N, Singh RK, Vargo-Gogola TC, Begtrup JL,
Peterson TE, Fingleton B, et al. MMP-7 promotes prostate cancer-induced osteolysis via the
solubilization of RANKL. Cancer Cell 2005;7:485–496. [PubMed: 15894268]
Manicone AM, McGuire JK. Matrix metalloproteinases as modulators of inflammation. Semin Cell Dev
Biol 2008;19:34–41. [PubMed: 17707664]
Maretzky T, Reiss K, Ludwig A, Buchholz J, Scholz F, Proksch E, de Strooper B, Hartmann D, Saftig
P. ADAM10 mediates E-cadherin shedding and regulates epithelial cell-cell adhesion, migration,
and beta-catenin translocation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:9182–9187. [PubMed: 15958533]
Massague J. TGFbeta in Cancer. Cell 2008;134:215–230. [PubMed: 18662538]
McQuibban GA, Gong JH, Wong JP, Wallace JL, Clark-Lewis I, Overall CM. Matrix metalloproteinase
processing of monocyte chemoattractant proteins generates CC chemokine receptor antagonists with
anti-inflammatory properties in vivo. Blood 2002;100:1160–1167. [PubMed: 12149192]
Mentzel T, Brown LF, Dvorak HF, Kuhnen C, Stiller KJ, Katenkamp D, Fletcher CD. The association
between tumour progression and vascularity in myxofibrosarcoma and myxoid/round cell
liposarcoma. Virchows Arch 2001;438:13–22. [PubMed: 11213831]
Mitsiades N, Yu WH, Poulaki V, Tsokos M, Stamenkovic I. Matrix metalloproteinase-7-mediated
cleavage of Fas ligand protects tumor cells from chemotherapeutic drug cytotoxicity. Cancer Res
2001;61:577–581. [PubMed: 11212252]
Motrescu ER, Rio MC. Cancer cells, adipocytes and matrix metalloproteinase 11: a vicious tumor
progression cycle. Biol Chem 2008;389:1037–1041. [PubMed: 18979628]
Mu D, Cambier S, Fjellbirkeland L, Baron JL, Munger JS, Kawakatsu H, Sheppard D, Broaddus VC,
Nishimura SL. The integrin alpha(v)beta8 mediates epithelial homeostasis through MT1-MMPdependent activation of TGF-beta1. J Cell Biol 2002;157:493–507. [PubMed: 11970960]
Murphy G. The ADAMs: signalling scissors in the tumour microenvironment. Nat Rev Cancer
2008;8:932–941.
Nagase H, Visse R, Murphy G. Structure and function of matrix metalloproteinases and TIMPs.
Cardiovasc Res 2006;69:562–573. [PubMed: 16405877]
Nakamura ES, Koizumi K, Kobayashi M, Saiki I. Inhibition of lymphangiogenesis-related properties of
murine lymphatic endothelial cells and lymph node metastasis of lung cancer by the matrix
metalloproteinase inhibitor MMI270. Cancer Sci 2004;95:25–31. [PubMed: 14720323]
Nozawa H, Chiu C, Hanahan D. Infiltrating neutrophils mediate the initial angiogenic switch in a mouse
model of multistage carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103:12493–12498. [PubMed:
16891410]
Olson ES, Aguilera AT, Jiang T, Ellies LG, Nguyen QT, Wong EH, Gross LA, Tsien RY. In vivo
characterization of activatable cell penetrating pepides for targeting protease activity in cancer.
Integrative Biol 2009;1:382–393.
Packard BZ, Artym VV, Komoriya A, Yamada KM. Direct visualization of protease activity on cells
migrating in three-dimensions. Matrix Biol 2009;28:3–10. [PubMed: 19010413]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Padera TP, Kadambi A, di Tomaso E, Carreira CM, Brown EB, Boucher Y, Choi NC, Mathisen D, Wain
J, Mark EJ, et al. Lymphatic metastasis in the absence of functional intratumor lymphatics. Science
2002;296:1883–1886. [PubMed: 11976409]
Page-McCaw A, Ewald AJ, Werb Z. Matrix metalloproteinases and the regulation of tissue remodelling.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007;8:221–233. [PubMed: 17318226]
Palavalli LH, Prickett TD, Wunderlich JR, Wei X, Burrell AS, Porter-Gill P, Davis S, Wang C, Cronin
JC, Agrawal NS, et al. Analysis of the matrix metalloproteinase family reveals that MMP8 is often
mutated in melanoma. Nat Genet 2009;41:518–520. [PubMed: 19330028]
Parks WC, Wilson CL, Lopez-Boado YS. Matrix metalloproteinases as modulators of inflammation and
innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 2004;4:617–629. [PubMed: 15286728]
Patterson BC, Sang QA. Angiostatin-converting enzyme activities of human matrilysin (MMP-7) and
gelatinase B/type IV collagenase (MMP-9). J Biol Chem 1997;272:28823–28825. [PubMed:
9360944]
Pinilla S, Alt E, Abdul Khalek FJ, Jotzu C, Muehlberg F, Beckmann C, Song YH. Tissue resident stem
cells produce CCL5 under the influence of cancer cells and thereby promote breast cancer cell
invasion. Cancer Lett 2009;284:80–85. [PubMed: 19427114]
Radisky DC, Levy DD, Littlepage LE, Liu H, Nelson CM, Fata JE, Leake D, Godden EL, Albertson DG,
Nieto MA, et al. Rac1b and reactive oxygen species mediate MMP-3-induced EMT and genomic
instability. Nature 2005;436:123–127. [PubMed: 16001073]
Redondo-Munoz J, Ugarte-Berzal E, Terol MJ, Van den Steen PE, Hernandez del Cerro M, Roderfeld
M, Roeb E, Opdenakker G, Garcia-Marco JA, Garcia-Pardo A. Matrix metalloproteinase-9
promotes chronic lymphocytic leukemia b cell survival through its hemopexin domain. Cancer Cell
2010;17:160–172. [PubMed: 20159608]
Ribatti D. Endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis: a historical review. Leuk Res 2009;33:638–644.
[PubMed: 19117606]
Rocks N, Paulissen G, Quesada-Calvo F, Munaut C, Gonzalez ML, Gueders M, Hacha J, Gilles C, Foidart
JM, Noel A, et al. AD-AMTS-1 metalloproteinase promotes tumor development through the
induction of a stromal reaction in vivo. Cancer Res 2008;68:9541–9550. [PubMed: 19010931]
Rozanov DV, Sikora S, Godzik A, Postnova TI, Golubkov V, Savinov A, Tomlinson S, Strongin AY.
Non-proteolytic, receptor/ligand interactions associate cellular membrane type-1 matrix
metalloproteinase with the complement component C1q. J Biol Chem 2004;279:50321–50328.
[PubMed: 15375167]
Rupp PA, Visconti RP, Czirok A, Cheresh DA, Little CD. Matrix metalloproteinase 2-integrin alpha(v)
beta3 binding is required for mesenchymal cell invasive activity but not epithelial locomotion: a
computational time-lapse study. Mol Biol Cell 2008;19:5529–5540. [PubMed: 18923152]
Rutkowski JM, Davis KE, Scherer PE. Mechanisms of obesity and related pathologies: the macro- and
microcirculation of adipose tissue. FEBS J 2009;276:5738–5746. [PubMed: 19754873]
Sabeh F, Ota I, Holmbeck K, Birkedal-Hansen H, Soloway P, Balbin M, Lopez-Otin C, Shapiro S, Inada
M, Krane S, et al. Tumor cell traffic through the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membraneanchored collagenase MT1-MMP. J Cell Biol 2004;167:769–781. [PubMed: 15557125]
Sabeh F, Shimizu-Hirota R, Weiss SJ. Protease-dependent versus -independent cancer cell invasion
programs: three-dimensional amoeboid movement revisited. J Cell Biol 2009;185:11–19. [PubMed:
19332889]
Sakamoto T, Seiki M. Cytoplasmic tail of MT1-MMP regulates macrophage motility independently from
its protease activity. Genes Cells 2009;14:617–626. [PubMed: 19371380]
Schafers M, Riemann B, Kopka K, Breyholz HJ, Wagner S, Schafers KP, Law MP, Schober O, Levkau
B. Scintigraphic imaging of matrix metalloproteinase activity in the arterial wall in vivo. Circulation
2004;109:2554–2559. [PubMed: 15123523]
Scherer RL, McIntyre JO, Matrisian LM. Imaging matrix metalloproteinases in cancer. Cancer Metastasis
Rev 2008a;27:679–690. [PubMed: 18465089]
Scherer RL, VanSaun MN, McIntyre JO, Matrisian LM. Optical imaging of matrix metalloproteinase-7
activity in vivo using a proteolytic nanobeacon. Mol Imaging 2008b;7:118–131. [PubMed:
19123982]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Schulte M, Reiss K, Lettau M, Maretzky T, Ludwig A, Hartmann D, de Strooper B, Janssen O, Saftig P.
ADAM10 regulates FasL cell surface expression and modulates FasL-induced cytotoxicity and
activation-induced cell death. Cell Death Differ 2007;14:1040–1049. [PubMed: 17290285]
Smith ML, Gourdon D, Little WC, Kubow KE, Eguiluz RA, Luna-Morris S, Vogel V. Force-induced
unfolding of fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of living cells. PLoS Biol 2007;5:e268. [PubMed:
17914904]
Sounni NE, Dehne K, van Kempen LLCL, Egeblad M, Affara N, Cuevas I, Wiesen J, Junankar J, Korets
L, Lee L, et al. Stromal regulation of vessel stability by MMP9 and TGFβ. Dis Model Mech. 2010
Published online March 11, 2010. 10.1242/dmm.00386.3
Sternlicht MD, Werb Z. How matrix metalloproteinases regulate cell behavior. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol
2001;17:463–516. [PubMed: 11687497]
Sternlicht MD, Lochter A, Sympson CJ, Huey B, Rougier JP, Gray JW, Pinkel D, Bissell MJ, Werb Z.
The stromal proteinase MMP3/stromelysin-1 promotes mammary carcinogenesis. Cell
1999;98:137–146. [PubMed: 10428026]
Strongin AY, Collier I, Bannikov G, Marmer BL, Grant GA, Goldberg GI. Mechanism of cell surface
activation of 72-kDa type IV collagenase. Isolation of the activated form of the membrane
metalloprotease. J Biol Chem 1995;270:5331–5338. [PubMed: 7890645]
Struyf S, Proost P, Vandercappellen J, Dempe S, Noyens B, Nelissen S, Gouwy M, Locati M, Opdenakker
G, Dinsart C, et al. Synergistic upregulation of MCP-2/CCL8 activity is counteracted by chemokine
cleavage, limiting its inflammatory and anti-tumoral effects. Eur J Immunol 2009;39:843–857.
[PubMed: 19224633]
Tatti O, Vehvilainen P, Lehti K, Keski-Oja J. MT1-MMP releases latent TGF-beta1 from endothelial cell
extracellular matrix via proteolytic processing of LTBP-1. Exp Cell Res 2008;314:2501–2514.
[PubMed: 18602101]
Temma T, Sano K, Kuge Y, Kamihashi J, Takai N, Ogawa Y, Saji H. Development of a radiolabeled
probe for detecting membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase on malignant tumors. Biol Pharm
Bull 2009;32:1272–1277. [PubMed: 19571397]
Van den Steen PE, Proost P, Wuyts A, Van Damme J, Opdenakker G. Neutrophil gelatinase B potentiates
interleukin-8 tenfold by amino-terminal processing, whereas it degrades CTAP-III, PF-4, and GROalpha and leaves RANTES and MCP-2 intact. Blood 2000;96:2673–2681. [PubMed: 11023497]
Waldhauer I, Goehlsdorf D, Gieseke F, Weinschenk T, Wittenbrink M, Ludwig A, Stevanovic S,
Rammensee HG, Steinle A. Tumor-associated MICA is shed by ADAM proteases. Cancer Res
2008;68:6368–6376. [PubMed: 18676862]
Weathington NM, van Houwelingen AH, Noerager BD, Jackson PL, Kraneveld AD, Galin FS, Folkerts
G, Nijkamp FP, Blalock JE. A novel peptide CXCR ligand derived from extracellular matrix
degradation during airway inflammation. Nat Med 2006;12:317–323. [PubMed: 16474398]
Weiss SJ, Peppin G, Ortiz X, Ragsdale C, Test ST. Oxidative autoactivation of latent collagenase by
human neutrophils. Science 1985;227:747–749. [PubMed: 2982211]
Witters L, Scherle P, Friedman S, Fridman J, Caulder E, Newton R, Lipton A. Synergistic inhibition with
a dual epidermal growth factor receptor/HER-2/neu tyrosine kinase inhibitor and a disintegrin and
metalloprotease inhibitor. Cancer Res 2008;68:7083–7089. [PubMed: 18757423]
Woessner, JF.; Nagase, H. Matrix Metalloproteinases and TIMPs. New York: Oxford University Press;
2000.
Wolf K, Wu YI, Liu Y, Geiger J, Tam E, Overall C, Stack MS, Friedl P. Multi-step pericellular proteolysis
controls the transition from individual to collective cancer cell invasion. Nat Cell Biol 2007;9:893–
904. [PubMed: 17618273]
Wu Y, Smas CM. Wdnm1-like, a new adipokine with a role in MMP-2 activation. Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab 2008;295:E205–E215. [PubMed: 18492766]
Wyckoff J, Wang W, Lin EY, Wang Y, Pixley F, Stanley ER, Graf T, Pollard JW, Segall J, Condeelis J.
A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is required for tumor cell migration in
mammary tumors. Cancer Res 2004;64:7022–7029. [PubMed: 15466195]
Yeh WL, Lu DY, Lee MJ, Fu WM. Leptin induces migration and invasion of glioma cells through
MMP-13 production. Glia 2009;57:454–464. [PubMed: 18814267]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Yu Q, Stamenkovic I. Cell surface-localized matrix metalloproteinase-9 proteolytically activates TGFbeta and promotes tumor invasion and angiogenesis. Genes Dev 2000;14:163–176. [PubMed:
10652271]
Zhang X, Halvorsen K, Zhang CZ, Wong WP, Springer TA. Mechanoenzymatic cleavage of the ultralarge
vascular protein von Willebrand factor. Science 2009;324:1330–1334. [PubMed: 19498171]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1. MMP Composition and Expression in the Stroma

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are comprised of different subdomains. All MMPs
have the “minimal domain” in common, which contains three principal regions: an aminoterminal signal sequence (Pre) to be cleaved by the signal peptidase during entry into the
endoplasmic reticulum, a pro-domain (Pro) containing a thiol-group (-SH) and a furin cleavage
site, and the catalytic domain with a zinc-binding site (Zn2+). Interaction of the -SH group of
the pro-domain with the zinc ion of the catalytic domain keeps the enzyme as an inactive
zymogen. Activation of the zymogen is often mediated by intracellular furin-like proteinases
that target the furin recognition motif (Fu) between the pro-domain and the catalytic domain.
In addition to the minimal domain, most MMPs possess a hemopexin-like region, a domain
composed of four repeats that resemble hemopexin and contain a disulfide bond (S-S) between
the first and the last subdomain, which is linked to the catalytic domain via a flexible hinge
region. Besides their differential domain structure, MMPs can be principally divided into
secreted (MMP-1, -2, -3, -7, -8, -9, -10, -11, -12, -13, -19, -20, -21, -22, -27, -28) and membraneanchored proteinases (MMP-14, -15, -16, -17, -23, -24, -25), the latter of which use either a
transmembrane domain (TM) with a cytoplasmic domain (Cy) attached to it, a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, or an amino-terminal signal anchor (SA), which
is only the case for MMP-23, as it is anchored in the plasma membrane. MMP-23 also contains
the unique cysteine array (CA) and an immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain. The gelatinases
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MMP-2 and -9 show gelatin-binding repeats that resemble the collagen-binding type II motif
of fibronectin (FN).
(B) Expression pattern of proteinases and their physiological inhibitors in non-malignant
stromal cells. Cells commonly found in the microenvironment of many cancers include
inflammatory cells (such as neutrophils, macrophages, dendritic cells, lymphocytes, and mast
cells), endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and hematopoietic progenitor cells. These cells express a
plethora of proteinases that are released into the extracellular space and influence multiple
events of tumor progression. Selected examples of proteinases and endogenous inhibitors
expressed by these cell types are shown.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Proteolytic Cascades Regulate MMP Function

MMPs are synthesized as inactive zymogens that need to be activated by proteolytic removal
of the pro-domain (for instance, as carried out by plasmin). Several MMPs exert an autocrine
feedback by degrading several physiological proteinase inhibitors that inhibit proteolytic
conversion of MMPs including α1-chymotrypsin (α1-CT), α1-proteinase inhibitor (α1-PI), and
α2-antiplasmin (α2-AP) (1). Some pro-MMPs can also be converted by other MMPs. Selected
examples for mutual MMP conversion are given (2). Another physiological inhibitor, α2macroglobulin (α2-MG), normally inhibits MMP activity but can also be degraded by several
MMPs, which then prolongs MMP function (3). Inflammatory cells frequently infiltrate the
tumor microenvironment and produce large amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
may promote MMP activation via oxidation of the pro-domain cysteine. Myeloperoxidase
(MPO) of infiltrating neutrophil catalyzes the transformation of ROS into hypochloric acid
(HOCl), which may interfere with MMP activity by chemical modification of crucial residues
of the catalytic domain (4). On the other hand, active MMPs may also launch a negative

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

feedback, for instance, by degrading plasminogen and therefore prohibiting the conversion into
MMP-activating plasmin (5). The complex interaction of proteinases and their inhibitors under
physiological circumstances happens upstream of the physiological functions of MMPs, such
as matrix remodeling, angiogenesis, cellular signaling, and cancer cell migration.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Multiple Functions of MMPs in the Tumor Microenvironment

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumor progression and metastasis involve different stages, all of which can be modulated by
MMPs and other extracellular proteinases. MMPs are mainly provided by nonmalignant,
infiltrating stromal cells such as neutrophils, macrophages, or endothelial cells. Selected
examples of proteinases and their target substrates in each of these steps are given in numbered
boxes. Tissue invasion of the tumor (1) and cancer cell intravasation into blood vessels (2)
require extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and downregulation of cellular adhesion.
MMPs, ADAMs, and other proteinases such as cathepsins (Cat)-B, -K, and -L are implicated
in the turnover of ECM components, but they also regulate cancer cell migration, for example
by cleaving proteinase-activated receptor (PAR)-1 or by degrading cell surface molecules that
mediate cellular adhesion, such as CD44 or E-cadherin. The egress of metastatic tumor cells
into the circulation is often directly accompanied by tumor-associated macrophages and may
exploit proteolytic functions that mediate leukocyte migration across the endothelium and the
endothelial basement membrane (EBM) under physiological conditions (2). Tumors are highly
vascularized tissues and the formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis; 3) can be triggered
by the release of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is mainly facilitated by
MMP-2 and -9. Moreover, MMPs may also regulate angiogenesis by the generation of
angiostatin-like peptides through the cleavage of plasminogen (Plg). MMPs are potent
regulators of inflammation (4), thus they are critically involved in the recruitment of
inflammatory cells to the tumor microenvironment, for example by converting TNF-α or
interleukin-8 (IL-8). They also generate chemotactic peptides such as PGP through the
degradation of collagen (col) and form chemotactic gradients by cleaving the ECM component
syndecan to release soluble gradients of CXCL1/KC, a potent neutrophil-attracting chemokine.
Some MMPs exert anti-inflammatory function, for example by degrading monocyte
chemotactic protein (MCP3/CCL7). Metastasis results in the dissemination of malignant cells
to secondary sites distant to the primary tumor. Recent findings indicate that these distant sites
may be primed for metastasis by inflammatory cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs)
that locate to these sites to form a so-called premetastatic niche (5). MMP-9 and MMP-2 are
involved in this process most likely by releasing factors such as VEGF and Kit ligand (Kit-L),
which recruits HPCs from the bone marrow (BM).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

Kessenbrock et al.

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Modulation of the Tumor Microenvironment by MMPs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Summary of the various processes that are modulated by MMPs in the tumor
microenvironment. The selected examples of MMPs and ADAMs promote (pro) or suppress
(anti) these processes. An intravital microscopy image of the mammary gland of MMTVPyMT mice that spontaneously develop mammary carcinoma was taken using a spinning disc
inverted confocal microscope (Egeblad et al., 2008). These mice also express enhanced cyan
fluorescent protein (CFP) under the control of the actin promoter (ACTB-ECFP) to enable
tumor cell labeling (blue) and enhanced green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression under the
control of a c-fms promoter (c-fms-EGFP) to label myeloid cells (green). These mice were
injected intravenously with 70 kDa rhodamine-dextran to visualize blood vessels (red). This
image illustrates the complexity of the tumor microenvironment, which is largely influenced
by nonmalignant cells, such as myeloid cells, all of which could be targets as well as sources
for MMPs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 2.

