HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 June 19; 510(7505): 402–406. doi:10.1038/nature13239.

PTEN action in leukemia dictated by the tissue
microenvironment
Cornelius Miething1,2,3, Claudio Scuoppo2, Benedikt Bosbach1, Iris Appelmann1,2, Joy
Nakitandwe4, Jing Ma4, Gang Wu4, Laura Lintault2,5, Martina Auer6, Prem K. Premsrirut2,
Julie Teruya-Feldstein1, James Hicks2, Helene Benveniste7, Michael R. Speicher6, James
R. Downing4, and Scott W. Lowe1,2,5

Author Manuscript

1Memorial
2Cold

Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA

Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA

4Department

of Pathology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA

5Howard

Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY 10065, USA

6Institute

of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, A-8010 Graz, Austria

7Departments

of Anesthesiology and Radiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794,

USA

Abstract
Author Manuscript

PTEN encodes a lipid phosphatase that is underexpressed in many cancers owing to deletions,
mutations or gene silencing1–3. PTEN dephosphorylates phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate
(PIP3), thereby opposing the activity of class I phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) that mediate
growth and survival factors signaling through PI3K effectors such as AKT and mTOR2. To
determine whether continued PTEN inactivation is required to maintain malignancy, we generated
an RNAi-based transgenic mouse model that allows tetracycline-dependent regulation of PTEN in

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Contact: Scott W. Lowe, Ph.D., Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Geoffrey Beene Chair for Cancer Biology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 415 E 68th Street, New York, NY 10065, Phone: 646-888-3342, Fax: 646-888-3347,
lowes@mskcc.org.
3Present address: Department of Medicine I, Medical Center – University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Author Manuscript

Author Contributions
C.M. and S.W.L. designed the study. C.M., C.S. P.K.P. and L.L. performed shRNA design and testing, targeting vector construction
and E.S. cell targeting. C.M., B.B., I.A., C.S. and L.L. performed mouse breeding, transplantation experiments and analysed data.
C.M. and I.A. performed in-vitro migration assays and analysed data. C.M. and H.B. ran the mouse MRI experiments and analysed
data. C.M. and B.B. performed the 18F-FDG-PET experiments and analysed data. J.H. performed CGH analysis, and J.H. and C.M.
analysed data. J.T-F. performed the histopathologic analysis of mouse and human tumors, and J.T-F. and C.M. analysed data. B.B. and
C.M. performed paraffin embedding, sectioning and IHC staining of mouse tissues and analysed data. C.M. performed flow
cytometry, immunoblotting and analysed data. J.N. and J.C. performed the RNAseq sample processing and J.N., J.M., J.R.D., C.S. and
C.M. analysed data. C.S. ran the GSEA analysis and comparison with human expression data. M.A. and M.R.S. performed the SKY
analysis of mouse tumors, and M.A., M.R.S. and C.M. analysed data. S.W.L. supervised the project. C.M., C.S., B.B. and S.W.L.
wrote the paper. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Reprints and permission information is available at www.nature.com/reprints/.
Datasets from RNAseq analysis were deposited at the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) at the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) with
the accession no. PRJEB5498.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Miething et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

a time- and tissue-specific manner. Postnatal PTEN knockdown in the hematopoietic compartment
produced highly disseminated T-cell leukemia (T-ALL). Surprisingly, reactivation of PTEN
mainly reduced T-ALL dissemination but had little effect on tumor load in hematopoietic organs.
Leukemia infiltration into the intestine was dependent on CCR9 G-protein coupled receptor
(GPCR) signaling, which was amplified by PTEN loss. Our results suggest that in the absence of
PTEN, GPCRs may play an unanticipated role in driving tumor growth and invasion in an
unsupportive environment. They further reveal that the role of PTEN loss in tumor maintenance is
not invariant and can be influenced by the tissue microenvironment, thereby producing a form of
intratumoral heterogeneity that is independent of cancer genotype.

Author Manuscript

Stable RNA interference using short-hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) provides a powerful approach
for studying tumor suppressor gene activity in vitro and in vivo4–6. To explore the role of
PTEN loss in tumor maintenance, we developed shRNA transgenic mouse lines targeting
Pten using miR30-based shRNAs expressed from an inducible tetracycline responsive
element (TRE) promoter6 (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1). Murine embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) obtained from E13.5 embryos of shPten;R26-rtTA2 double transgenic mice
displayed reversible knockdown of PTEN upon doxycycline (Dox) addition and withdrawal,
which correlated with increased AKT phosphorylation following insulin stimulation
(Extended Data Fig. 1c and Fig. 1b). As expected7,8, Dox-treated mice expressing shPten in
multiple tissues developed several tumor types including T cell malignancies (Extended
Data Fig. 1e–i).

Author Manuscript

Owing to the high frequency of T cell disease in the shPten mice and the frequent
inactivation of PTEN in human T-ALL9, we focused on the effects of PTEN suppression and
reactivation in the lymphoid compartment. We crossed shLuc and shPten mice to a Vav-tTA
transgenic line, which expresses a “tet-off” tet-transactivator in early B and T cells10 and
drives shRNA expression in a manner that is silenced upon Dox addition (Extended Data
Fig. 2 and data not shown). The Vav-tTA;shPten displayed thymic hyperplasia (Extended
Data Fig. 2a–d) and, by 16 weeks, a subset deteriorated and had to be euthanized (Fig. 1c),
whereas control animals remained healthy (P<0.001). Diseased mice showed massive
EGFP-positive tumors that consisted of Thy1.2+CD4+CD8+ double positive (DP) T-cells
filling the thoracic cavity and infiltrating spleen, lymph nodes as well as extrahematopoietic
organs like the liver, kidney and intestine (Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 2e+f, Ext. Data Fig.
3a and data not shown). shPten-expressing tumors demonstrated marked PTEN knockdown
and increased AKT phosphorylation comparable to Pten null T-cell malignancies [Fig. 1e,
see ref. 11].

Author Manuscript

Human T-ALL with PTEN loss often overexpress MYC and can harbor NOTCH1 and
CDKN2A mutations12. Analysis of murine shPten-expressing tumors by spectral
karyotyping, comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and sequencing of the T cell
receptor beta chain gene showed that most primary tumors were clonal and harbored the
same recurrent translocations between the Tcra locus and Myc observed in a Pten knockout
model and a small subset of human T-ALL (Extended Data Fig. 3b+c and Extended Data
Fig. 4a)13,14. One shPten T-ALL showed a Cdkn2a deletion by CGH and 6 out of 8 tumors
analyzed showed activating mutations in the Notch1 PEST domain (Fig. 1e, Extended Data

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Fig. 3c+d, Extended Data Fig. 4b). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of gene expression
profiles obtained from shPten leukemia demonstrated enrichment for a human PTEN
mutated T-ALL signature, whereas conversely profiles from human PTEN mutated T-ALLs
were enriched for a murine shPten signature (Extended Data Fig. 5a+b). Thus, although all
the T-cell leukemias were initiated by a Pten shRNA, they acquire molecular features
reminiscent of the human disease12,13,15.

Author Manuscript

The leukemia arising in shPten mice was highly malignant, and rapidly produced disease
when transplanted into recipient mice (Extended Data Fig. 6a). Of note, since the VavtTA;shPten transgenics were of a mixed genetic background, Rag1−/− recipients were used
to avoid graft rejection. These recipients succumbed to a highly disseminated form of TALL consisting of CD4/CD8 DP cells that rapidly took over the hematopoietic organs,
accumulated to high levels in the peripheral blood (PB), and spread to the liver, kidney and
intestine (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 6b). Remarkably, decreased PTEN levels were
associated with disease dissemination and lower survival in T-ALL patients (Fig. 1f and
Extended Data Fig. 6c), and were also linked with intestinal infiltration in patients with
peripheral T-cell lymphoma (Extended Data Fig. 6d+e). The association between PTEN loss
and disease dissemination in murine and human T cell malignancies underscores the
relevance of the model to human disease.

Author Manuscript

We reasoned that the transplanted leukemias described above would be ideal for our
experiments as they are highly malignant such that individual primary isolates can be
studied for their response to different perturbations in multiple secondary recipients.
Recipients were monitored for disease development by weekly analysis of peripheral blood
(PB) for the presence of EGFP+ (shPten expressing) cells. Upon disease manifestation, a
cohort of mice was given Dox to silence the shRNA and reactivate PTEN. Strikingly, Dox
treatment almost tripled the survival time of mice harboring Vav-tTA;shPten leukemia (Fig.
2a; P<0.0001) but had no effect on mice harboring Pten−/− leukemia (Extended Data Fig.
6f). Immunoblotting of leukemic cells harvested from mice indicated that the system worked
as expected: hence, Dox addition led to upregulation of Pten mRNA (data not shown),
silenced EGFP and reestablished PTEN to endogenous levels (Fig. 2b and Extended Data
Fig. 7d). Therefore, PTEN reactivation had a marked anticancer effect but was by no means
curative.

Author Manuscript

Leukemia-bearing mice showed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) signals in multiple
hematopoietic compartments, the liver, and intestine (Extended Data Fig. 6h+i and data not
shown). While PTEN reactivation had no overt effect on tumor growth in the lymph nodes
or spleen, it visibly decreased tumor infiltration into intestine and liver (Fig. 2c and
Extended Data Fig. 6g–i). These findings were corroborated by immunohistochemistry and
flow cytometric quantification of CD4+ leukemic cells (Fig. 2e,f). Notably, Dox treatment
had a minimal impact on the proliferation or apoptosis of leukemic cells residing in the
lymph nodes and spleen, but triggered apoptosis in leukemic cells that had disseminated into
the intestine (Fig. 2g and Extended Data Fig. 7e–g). Thus, the impact of Pten expression on
disease progression is dictated by the anatomical location of the leukemic cell.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

We next assessed the phosphorylation state of key PI3K effectors in tissue sections by IHC
and pathway functionality by positron emission tomography (PET) of 18F-fluorodeoxy
glucose (FDG) uptake into leukemia cells16. The heterogeneous responses correlated with
the ability of PTEN to effectively suppress aberrant PI3K signaling: whereas S6 and AKT
phosphorylation were reduced in disseminated leukemic cells obtained from the intestine, it
persisted in the leukemic cells harvested from the spleen of the same animal (Fig. 3a and
Extended Data Fig. 8). Similarly, mice displayed a marked reduction in FDG signal
stemming from the liver and intestine within 2 days of PTEN reactivation, an effect that
could not simply be accounted for by loss of leukemia burden (Fig. 3b+c). Conversely, the
FDG signal emanating from the spleen and bone marrow (BM) remained strong (Fig. 3b,d
and Suppl. Video 1+2). The divergent responses to PTEN activation in a clonal leukemia
imply that the control of the PI3K pathway can be dramatically affected by
microenvironmental factors.

Author Manuscript

Surprisingly, untreated NCR nude (NCR) mice transplanted with the same number of shPten
tumor cells survived as long as Rag1−/− recipient mice treated with Dox, and did not show a
survival advantage following Dox addition (Fig. 4a). The untreated NCR recipients
displayed vastly reduced intestinal dissemination of leukemic cells compared to normal and
thymectomized Rag1−/− recipients (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 9a,b,g,h), while spleen
and lymph nodes were strongly affected (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 9c+d). Apparently,
genetic differences between Rag1−/− and NCR mice contribute to variation in disease
aggressiveness and the response to PTEN reactivation.

Author Manuscript

Whereas Rag1−/− mice are defective in immunoglobulin and T cell receptor gene
rearrangement, NCR mice have mutations in Foxn1, a gene that controls terminal
differentiation of epithelial cells in the thymus and other organs17. Among other changes,
NCR mice show decreased expression of Ccl2518,19, which encodes a chemokine that is
mainly expressed by epithelial cells in the thymus and small intestine and acts as an
important chemoattractant for T-cells in the gut20,21. CCL25 acts through CCR9, a GPCR
that can signal through the PI3K pathway and is expressed on a subset of developing
thymocytes22,23. Signaling through a related receptor, CCR7, is important for leukemia
dissemination into the central nervous system24; moreover, the CCL25/CCR9 network is
required for T cell dissemination during inflammatory bowel disease, which can be
countered by CCR9 antagonists currently in clinical trials25,26. CCL25 levels were
decreased in the intestine of NCR mice (Extended Data Fig. 9e+f), while CCR9 was highly
expressed on the shPten leukemia cells (Fig. 4d). Notably, CCR9 expression was not
affected by PTEN reactivation as determined by FACS and RNAseq analysis (Extended
Data Fig. 9i and data not shown).

Author Manuscript

To test if PTEN influences T-ALL homing and survival in the intestine by modulating
CCL25 signaling, shPten T-cell leukemia isolates were treated with CCL25 (± Dox to
modulate PTEN), and cell signaling and motility was assessed in short-term culture.
Whereas CCL25 stimulation had little impact on PI3K signaling in the presence of PTEN,
PTEN knockdown sensitized cells to CCL25 induced AKT phosphorylation and, to a lesser
extent, S6 phosphorylation (Fig. 4e). Similar results were obtained with two human T-ALL
lines transduced with either shPTEN or a control shRNA (Fig. 4f and Extended Data Fig.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

9j). CCL25 addition also increased migration of murine shPten T-ALL cells in a transwell
assay, and the effect was largely abrogated by PTEN reactivation (Extended Data Fig. 9k).

Author Manuscript

Dual-color in vivo competition experiments were performed to assess the contribution of
CCR9 signaling to T-ALL dissemination (Fig. 4g). After identifying shRNAs efficient at
knocking down CCR9 expression (Extended Data Fig. 10a+b), EGFP+ shPten leukemic
cells were transduced with either shCcr9 or shRenilla control shRNAs coexpressing the
mCherry red-fluorescent protein (Fig. 4g and Extended Data Fig. 10d). Upon transplantation
and subsequent disease development, mice were euthanized and the fraction of EGFP/
mCherry+ cells vs. all EGFP+ cells was determined in various organs (Fig. 4g,h). shCcr9expressing T-ALL cells showed significantly decreased abundance in the intestine but not
the spleen or liver (Fig. 4h and Extended Data Fig. 10c+d). Mice transplanted with shPten
leukemic cells were also treated with a small molecule inhibitor for CCR9 that is in clinical
trials for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease26. Although the effects on survival
were modest, leukemia dissemination was reduced in the intestine, whereas cells in the
spleen and liver were unaffected (Extended Data Fig. 10e–h and data not shown). Hence, in
the intestine, PTEN suppression promotes leukemic cell dissemination and maintenance by
modulating CCL25-CCR9 signaling.

Author Manuscript

In human cancers, PTEN deletions often coincide with tumor expansion, metastasis, and a
generally worse prognosis9,27,28, results confirmed and extended for T cell disease in this
report. Using a powerful new mouse model enabling reversible suppression of endogenous
PTEN expression, we show that PTEN loss can promote tumor cell survival at distant sites
by amplifying weak environmental cues that enable tumor cells to survive in an otherwise
non-supportive microenvironment. Accordingly, the promiscuous yet passive ability of
PTEN to attenuate PI3K signaling2 may be influenced by the nature and intensity of PIP3
generating signals in different microenvironments, and targeting such tissue specific signals
might present a valid strategy to treat cancer spread. Still, the requirement for PTEN loss in
tumor maintenance is not absolute and can be influenced by genetic context29,30 and, as
shown here, the tumor microenvironment. These observations paint a more complex picture
of how PTEN inactivation drives tumor maintenance, and reveal an interplay between tumor
and microenvironment that would not be predicted from studies on cultured cells.
Nonetheless, this interplay produces a form of intratumoral heterogeneity that is independent
of genotype but can impact disease progression and perhaps the clinical response to
molecularly targeted therapies.

Additional Methods
Author Manuscript

Constructs and shRNAs
To identify potent shRNAs targeting murine and human Pten, various 97bp oligonucleotides
predicted from sensor-based and other shRNA design algorithms (Extended Data Figure 4c
and data not shown)31,32 were XhoI-EcoRI cloned into the miR30 cassette of the MLP
vector and tested as described previously (Extended Data Fig. 1a)33. The two most efficient
murine Pten shRNAs (Pten.1522 and Pten.2049) were cloned into a recombination-mediated
cassette exchange (RCME) vector (cTGM) targeting the Col1a1 locus (see Fig. 1a) 6,34. For
knock down of human PTEN, the Pten.1522 shRNA, which showed complete overlap with
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

the human PTEN sequence, was used. For knockdown of murine Ccr9, multiple shRNAs
were designed, cloned and tested as described above. The two most efficient shRNAs
shCcr9.904 (97-mer: 5′TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCAAGGATAAGAATGCCAAGCTATAGTGAAGCCACA
GAT GTATAGCTTGGCATTCTTATCCTTATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA-3′) and
shCcr9.2357 (97-mer: 5′TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCCCCAACAGTTTACAACCTTTATAGTGAAGCCA
CAGATGTATAAAGGTTGTAAACTGTTGGGATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA-3′) were
cloned into a LMN-cherry vector (MSCV-miR30-pgk-NeoR-IRES-mCherry) for dual-color
competition assays (see below).
ES cell targeting and generation of transgenic mice

Author Manuscript

Two potent shRNAs against murine Pten were cloned into a cassette that links EGFP and
shRNA expression downstream of TRE, and targeted into a defined locus downstream of the
collagen, type I, alpha 1 (Col1a1) gene in KH2 ES cells expressing the reverse
transactivator (rtTA2) from the Rosa26 promoter34 by recombination-mediated cassette
exchange (RMCE) (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a)6,34. Southern blotting showed
correct transgene insertion, and Dox-inducible knockdown of endogenous PTEN was
confirmed by Western blot analysis (Extended Data Fig. 1b).

Author Manuscript

Germline transgenic mice were generated by tetraploid embryo complementation. Murine
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were generated from d13.5 old embryos according to
standard protocols. Since both shRNAs caused a similar degree of Pten knockdown and
PI3K pathway activation and equally promoted tumorigenesis in in vivo transplantation
experiments (Extended Data Fig. 1c,d and data not shown), we focused subsequent analysis
on a single (shPten.1522) transgenic line.

Author Manuscript

Mice were bred to CMV-rtTA, CAGGS-rtTA and Vav-tTA transactivator lines 6,10,35 to
generate compound heterozygous or homozygous (e.g. shPten+/−;CMV-rtTA+/− or
shPten+/+;Vav-tTA+/+) double-transgenic mice using standard breeding techniques. To
induce shRNA expression, Pten and firefly luciferase (Luc) or Renilla luciferase (Ren)
shRNA mice bred to CMV-rtTA or CAGGS-rtTA mice were put on food containing
625mg/kg doxycycline (Harlan Teklad, IN, USA) immediately after weaning. As predicted
from knockout mice7,36, most double transgenic mice harboring the inducible shPten allele
together with the broadly expressing CMV-rtTA or the CAGGS-rtTA3 transactivator
strains6,35 developed tumors within 12 months of Dox addition (Extended Data Fig. 2; data
not shown). Dox food was also used to shut off shRNA expression in Vav-tTA transgenic
animals at different time points. For the Vav-tTA;shPten mice survival studies, a number of
Vav-tTA+;shPten+ mice (n=49) and controls (Vav-tTA+;shLuc+ (n=20), Vav-tTA+;shPten−
(n=68), Vav-tTA+;shPten+, +Dox (n=10)) were generated and analyzed. No difference in
phenotype was observed between heterozygous (shPten+/−;Vav-tTA+/−) and homozygous
mice (shPten+/+;Vav-tTA+/+). All mouse experiments were performed in accordance with
institutional and national guidelines and regulations and were approved by the Institution
Animal Care and Use Committee [IACUC#06-02-97-17 (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory)
and #11-06-017 (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center)].

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 7

Statistics and reagents

Author Manuscript

For all murine survival studies, a group size of at least 5 animals per condition was chosen,
which allowed the detection of two fold differences in survival with a power of 0.89,
assuming a two-sided test with a significance threshold α of 0.05 and a standard deviation of
less than 50% of the mean. For the primary animals, all mice with the correct genotype were
included in the analysis. For the transplantation experiments, all mice receiving similar
amounts of transplanted cells as determined by flow cytometric and/or whole-body
immunofluorescent evaluation 5–10 days after transplant were included in the analysis. For
the reactivation and treatment experiments, animals were assigned into different groups by
random picking from the non-selected transplanted group of mice 5–10 days after transplant.
Blinding of animals in the reactivation/inhibitor treatment studies was not feasible, because
of requirements by the local animal housing facility to mark cages if containing special
food/treatment.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Appropriate statistical tests were applied as indicated, including non-parametric tests for
experiments where sample size was too small to assess normal distribution. All t-tests and
derivatives were two-sided. For all tests, variation was calculated as standard deviation and
included in the graphs as error bars. To investigate if PTEN expression has an impact on
tumor dissemination in human T-ALL, we performed IHC staining for PTEN on bone
marrow (BM) sections from 31 patients with newly diagnosed T-ALL, for which clinical
data on disease dissemination was available. Due to the relatively low number of patient
specimens and because the variables were non-linear, we analyzed the data in a contingency
table using Fisher’s exact test. We also re-analyzed the contingency table using Berger’s
test, with similar results (Berger and Boos, Journal of the American Statistical Association
1994). For probing an association between PTEN expression status and intestinal infiltration
in human T-cell lymphoma patients, the same statistical tests were applied.
All antibodies used for Western blot analysis were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology (Danvers, MA) unless otherwise specified, including the antibodies against
PTEN (cat#9188), pAKT(S473, cat#4060), pAKT(T308, cat#2965), Akt (cat#4691),
S6(cat#2317), pS6(S235/236, cat#4858), cleaved Notch1 (cat#4147), Erk (p44/42 MAPK,
cat#4696), phospho-Erk1/2 (p-p44/42 MAPK (Thr202/Tyr204), cat#4370). For intracellular
flow cytometric analysis of pS6(S235/236), directly Pacific-Blue fluorescence-coupled
antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling (cat#8520).

Author Manuscript

Antibodies for flow cytometry were purchased from BioLegend (San Diego, CA) unless
otherwise specified. Mouse antibodies included CD3 (clone 145-2C11), CD4 (clone GK1.5),
CD8 (clone 53-6.7), Thy1.2 (clone 30-H12), CD45 (clone 30-F11), CCR9 (clone 9B1),
CD11b (clone M1-70), Gr-1 (clone RB6-8C5), CD44 (clone IM7), CD25 (clone PC61).
Human T-ALL cell lines HBP-ALL and TALL1 were a kind gift from Dr. I. Aifantis (Dept.
of Pathology, NYU, New York, NY). All cell lines were tested for absence of mycoplasma
and authenticated by flow cytometry and Western blotting.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 8

Transplantation experiments

Author Manuscript

For transplantation, single cell suspensions were generated from primary tumors and 1×105
cells were injected into sublethally (450 rad) irradiated recipient female Rag1−/− (on a
C57B6 background, cat#2216) or NCR nude mice (on an inbred albino background,
cat#2019) via tail vein injection. All mice used as transplant recipients were purchased from
Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA). Mice were monitored by serial flow
cytometric analysis of the peripheral blood. Once EGFP+ cells reached >5% of total
leukocytes, cohorts of mice were started on doxycycline containing food as indicated.
Analysis of human T-ALL and PTCL patient samples

Author Manuscript

For the analysis of survival of PTEN normal vs. PTEN altered patients with T-ALL,
published genomic and mRNA expression data on patients with T-ALL was used (accession
no. GSE28703)15. PTEN altered (n=20) include patients with PTEN deletion, mutation,
underexpression (<0.8 sigma after z scoring) and any combination of such alterations, PTEN
normal (n=62) include all other patients with available data. For IHC analysis, samples from
patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) were analyzed as individual
bone marrow biopsies. For the T-cell lymphoma samples, tissue microarrays were
constructed as previously published (Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487 (7406):244-8) using a fully
automated Beecher Instrument, ATA-27. The study cohort comprised 84 patients with T-cell
lymphomas and 31 patients with T-ALL, the T-cell lymphomas could be subdivided into
enteropathy associated t cell lymphoma (4) and peripheral t cell lymphoma involving bowel
or gastrointestinal tract (7), T/NK cell lymphoma (4), angioimmunoblastic t cell lymphoma
(9), anaplastic large cell lymphoma (14), and peripheral t cell lymphoma with non bowel or
gastrointestinal tract involvement (46). All samples were consecutively ascertained at the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) between 2001 and 2012. Use of tissue
samples were approved with an Institutional Review Board Waiver and the Human Biospecimen Utilization Committee. All biopsies were evaluated at MSKCC, and the
histological diagnosis was based on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. The PTEN
antibody, (Rabbit monoclonal antibody from Cell Signaling, 138G6, #9559, Danvers, MA)
was used at a 1:30 dilution. IHC analysis was performed on the Ventana Discovery XT
automated platform according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Tuscon, AZ). Results were
scored as 0, 1, 2 for PTEN with 0 = No staining of tumor cells, with endothelial cells and
macrophages positive; 1 = Weak staining of tumor cells, compared to endothelial cells and
macrophages positive; 2 = Strong staining of tumor cells, compared to endothelial cells and
macrophages positive. Representative images were taken using the Olympus BX41 model,
DP20 camera, at 60× objective.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

MRI
The mice were anesthetized with 2–3% isoflurane delivered in O2 and allowed to breathe
spontaneously during the imaging study. The mice were positioned supine in a custom-made
acrylic cradle fitted with a snout mask for continuous delivery of anesthesia. Non-invasive,
MRI compatible monitors (pulse-oximetry, respiratory rate and rectal temperature probe, SA
Instruments, Inc., Stony Brook, NY) were positioned for continuous monitoring of vital
signs while the animal underwent MRI imaging. During imaging, body temperature was

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

kept strictly within 36.5–37.5°C using a computer assisted air heating system (SA
Instruments, Inc., Stony Brook, NY). All imaging was performed on a 9.4T/20 MRI
instrument interfaced to a Bruker Advance console and controlled by Paravision 5.0
software (Bruker Biospin, Billerica, MA). A volume radio-frequency coil (diameter
11.2mm) used in transmit and receive mode were used for all imaging acquisitions.
Following localizer anatomical scout scans, a 2D multi-slice T2-weighted RARE sequence
along the coronal slice direction with fat suppression was obtained with the following
parameters: TR=12500ms, TE=40ms, RARE factor=8, NA=8, FOV=6.0×6.0 cm2 (256×256)
yielding an in plane resolution of 0.234 × 0.234 mm2, slice thickness=0.9mm total scanning
time = 10min 40sec.
18F-FDG-PET

analysis

Author Manuscript

For PET analysis, mice were fasted for 6h before i.v. injection of 0.5mCi 18F-FDG. Mice
were kept for 1h under isoflurane anesthesia and subsequently imaged on a Focus 120
microPET (Siemens, NY, USA) or in some cases an Inveon MicroPET/CT (Siemens, NY,
USA). Image normalization and analysis was performed using the ASI Pro MicroPET
analysis software and the Inveon Workplace software package (Siemens Medical Solutions
USA, PA, USA).
CGH
CGH experiments were performed using standard Agilent 244k mouse whole genome
arrays, and hybridizations were carried out according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Data processing, normalization and segmentation were carried out as
described 37.

Author Manuscript

Multiplex-FISH (M-FISH)/Spectral karyotyping analysis
Cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 with L-glutamine (PAA, Austria) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 50μM mercaptoethanole, 50
U/ml human interleucin 2 and 5μg/ml concanavalin A for 48 to 72 h at 37°C and 5% CO2.
To prepare metaphases, colcemid at a final concentration of 0.1μg/ml was added to the cells
for 120 min. Spinning at 300g for 8 minutes was followed by hypotonic treatment in prewarmed 0.075 M KCl for 20 min. at 37°C. Cells were fixed in cold ethanol / acetic acid
(3:1) and air-dried slides were prepared.

Author Manuscript

The M-FISH hybridization was performed with a panel of mouse M-FISH probes
(21XMouse mFISH probe kit, MetaSystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
In brief, the probes were denatured at 75°C for 5 min. and pre-annealed at 37°C for 30min.
Slides were incubated in 0.1xSSC for 1 min, denatured in 0.07N NaOH at room temperature
for 1 min., quenched in 0.1xSSC at 4°C and 2xSSC at 4°C for 1 min. each, dehydrated in an
ethanol series and air dried. M-FISH probe was applied onto the slides and hybridization
was performed for 48 h in a humidified chamber at 37°C. Following hybridization, the slides
were washed in 0.4xSSC at 72°C for 2 min., followed by a wash in 2xSSC, 0.05% Tween20
at room temperature for 2 min. Counterstaining was performed using DAPI (4′,6diamidino-2-phenylindole) and mounted with phenylene-diamine.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

Slides were visualized using a Leica DMRXA-RF8 epifluorescence microscope equipped
with special filter blocks (Chroma Technology, Brattleboro, VT). For image acquisition, a
Sensys CCD camera (Photometrics) with a Kodak KAF 1400 chip was used. Both the
camera and microscope were controlled with Leica Q-FISH software (Leica Microsystems
Imaging Solutions, Cambridge, UK). Images were analyzed using the Leica MCK-Software
package (Leica Microsystems Imaging Solutions, Cambridge, UK).
Western blotting, flow cytometry and antibodies

Author Manuscript

Western blotting was performed according to standard protocols. Briefly, tissues were either
snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized, or dissociated into single cells using 100
μm nylon mesh (CellStrainer, BD Falcon, NJ, USA). Protein was extracted using standard
protein lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1%
Triton, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-Glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4)
supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Roche Diagnostics, Penzberg,
Germany) and quantified using a Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Proteins
were separated on a polyacrylamide gel (ProteanIII, Bio-Rad, CA, USA) and transferred to a
PVDF membrane (Immobilon-F, Millipore, MA, USA). Protein bands were resolved using
fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies on an Odyssey scanner (Licor, NE, USA).
All Western blot experiments were replicated at least twice.

Author Manuscript

For the analysis of pAkt and pS6 induction after CCL25 stimulation, shPten T-ALL cells
derived from spleen tissues of tumor-bearing shPten mice and adapted to cell culture were
either left untreated or treated with Dox for 4 days to reactivate Pten, starved over night at
0.5% FBS and then treated with Ccl25 for the indicated time points. For the Ccl25
stimulation assay of the human T-ALL cell lines HBP-ALL and TALL1, the cells were
infected with a retroviral vector coexpressing a shPTEN.1522 or Renilla control shRNA and
a puromycin-resistance cassette linked to GFP. After selection with puromycin for a 5 days,
the cells were starved over night at 0.1% FBS and then treated with Ccl25 for 15 min before
harvesting for immunoblot analysis.

Author Manuscript

For flow cytometric analysis (fluorescence activated cell sorting, FACS), single cell
suspensions were brought to a concentration of 1×106 cells/ml in FACS-buffer (phosphatebuffered saline, pH 7.4, 1%BSA) and stained with the indicated antibodies as per the
manufacturer’s protocol. After washing, cells were measured on a Guava easyCyte
(Millipore, MA, USA) or LSRII (BectonDickinson, NJ, USA) FACS machine. Cell sorting
was performed on a BectonDickinson FACSAria II machine. For intracellular pS6
measurement, cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with methanol
before staining for pS6 as previously described 38.
Ccl25 expression
For quantification of Ccl25 chemokine levels in the intestine of Rag1−/− and NCR nude
mice, parts of the jejunum and ileum were dissected from euthanized animals, cleaned in
phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4), and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Tissues were
homogenized in T-PER Tissue Protein Extraction Buffer (Pierce Biotechnology, Inc,
Rockford, IL) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Roche

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Diagnostics, Penzberg, Germany) to prevent degradation of proteins during and after
homogenization. Protein extracts were centrifuged at 20,000 rcf, supernatants were
collected, and total protein content was assayed using the Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad,
CA, USA). Tissue homogenates were analyzed for Ccl25 protein levels by a 3-step
sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay as per the manufacturer’s instructions (R&D
Systems, MN, USA).
Transwell migration assay

Author Manuscript

For transwell migration assays, 5×105 cells with or without dox treatment were starved in
RPMI containing 1% serum for 12h over night and the next day 3×105 viable cells were
plated in 200μl in the upper part of a 24-well Boyden chamber insert with a membrane pore
size of 8μm (Greiner Bio-One, NC, USA). The lower part of the chamber was filled with
600μl medium containing 500ng/ml recombinant Ccl25 (R&D Systems, MN, USA).
Following a 4 hour incubation at 37°C and 7.5% CO2, migrating cells in the lower chamber
were counted using a Guava easyCyte cell counter (Millipore, MA, USA). Transwell
migration experiments were run in triplicate for each condition on two independent tumor
isolates.
Histology and IHC

Author Manuscript

Organ samples were fixed in fresh 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C overnight and further
subjected to routine histological procedures for embedding in paraffin. 5-μm sections of the
samples from at least three different animals per group were placed on microscopic slides
next to one another to enable cross-comparison within a slide after H&E staining or IHC
staining with the antibodies indicated. Antibodies used were GFP (D5.1) XP, PTEN (D4.3),
phospho (p)-AKT (S473) (D9E), p-ribosomal protein S6 (S235/236) (D57.2.2E), Cleaved
Caspase-3 (Asp175) (all: Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA), Ki67 (VP-K451,
Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and CD3 (A0452) (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark).
Stained slides were scanned with a Pannoramic Scan 250 Flash or MIDI system and images
acquired using Pannoramic Viewer 1.15.2 (both: 3DHistech, Budapest, Hungary).
Additional images were taken on a Zeiss Axio Imager.Z2 system.
shCcr9 hairpin design and competition experiments

Author Manuscript

shRNAs targeting Ccr9 were generated as previously described33 and cloned into a
retroviral vector coexpressing mCherry (LMN-C39). Knockdown of Ccr9 was quantified in a
murine TALL cell line by flow cytometry using an Alexa647-conjugated antibody against
murine CCR9 (clone 9B1, eBiosciences, San Diego, CA, USA). The two most efficient
shRNAs shCcr9.904 (97-mer: 5′TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCAAGGATAAGAATGCCAAGCTATAGTGAAGC
CACAGATGTATAGCTTGGCATTCTTATCCTTATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA-3′) and
shCcr9.2357 (97-mer: 5′TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCCCCAACAGTTTACAACCTTTAT
AGTGAAGCCACAGATGTATAAAGGTTGTAAACTGTTGGGATGCCTACTGCCTCG
GA-3′) were used for subsequent assays. For the infection of tumor cells, EGFP+ shPten TALL cells were grown on OP9-DL1 feeders in the presence of 10ng/ml mIL7 in Optimem

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Glutamax medium (Gibco/Life Technologies, CA, USA) and infected with either shCcr9 or
shRenilla control shRNAs. About 0.75 × 106 infected shPten cells (20–30% mCherry+) were
transplanted into recipient Rag1−/− mice irradiated with 450rad, and monitored for disease
development. Diseased mice were euthanized, and spleen, BM, liver, lung, small intestine
and kidney tissues were collected and minced to generate single cell suspensions for flow
cytometric measurement of EGFP and mCherry positive cell fractions. Relative mCherry
fractions from different organs were determined by normalizing to the spleen fraction as
100%.
CCR9 inhibitor treatment

Author Manuscript

The CCR9 inhibitor CCX8037 was kindly provided by Chemocentryx (CA, USA)25,40. For
cell culture treatment, different concentrations of CCX8037 were used as indicated. For in
vivo experiments, mice were treated with 30mg/kg inhibitor or vehicle (HPMC 1%)
administered via subcutaneous injection every 12h (CCX8037).
Clonality analysis of murine shPten tumors
Clonality analysis by PCR amplification and sequencing of murine TCRβ sequences was
performed as previously described41. Briefly, clonality was assayed at V-DJ and D-J
rearrangements in a mixure of 20 family-specific upstream primers located within Vβ gene
segments, consensus primers located 5′ of Dβ1 and Dβ2 gene segments and consensus
downstream primers located 3′ of Jβ1 and Jβ2 gene segments. PCR products were analyzed
by direct Sanger sequencing.
Profiling of Notch1 mutations by Sanger sequencing

Author Manuscript

Vav-tTA;shPten tumors were analyzed for Notch1 hotspot mutations located in Exon 26, 27
and 34 by Sanger sequencing as described previously (O’Neil et al., Activating Notch1
mutations in mouse models of T-ALL, Blood 2006 107:781–785), including one new
oligonucleotide primer pair: Ex34B-f: 5′-GCCAGTACAACCCACTACGG-3′; Ex34B-r: 5′CCTGAAGCACTGGAA-AGGAC-3′.
RNAseq data generation and Bioinformatic Analysis

Author Manuscript

Total RNA was extracted from shPten leukemic cells on/off Dox purified by sorting for
CD4 expression with magnetic beads using Trizol (Invitrogen, NY). RNA quality and
quantity were assessed using Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Chip (Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Santa Clara, CA) and Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Life Technologies, NY), respectively. RNAseq
libraries were prepared from 1 μg of total RNA per sample using the TruSeq RNA Sample
Preparation Kit v2 (Illumina, Inc. Santa Clara, CA) following the standard protocol with
slight modification (10 PCR cycles). RNAseq library quality and quantity were assessed
using the Agilent DNA 1000 Chip and Kappa Library qPCR kit (Kappa Biosystems, Inc,
Woburn, MA). Libraries were clustered on an Illumina cBot and sequenced on the
HiSeq2000 (2 × 100 bp reads) using Illumina chemistry (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA).
The RNA-Seq paired-end reads were mapped to the mouse mm9 genome and its
corresponding transcript sequences using an in-house mapping and quality assessment
pipeline15. Transcript expression levels were estimated as Fragments Per Kilobase of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

transcript per Million mapped reads (FPKM) and gene FPKMs were computed by summing
the transcript FPKMs for each gene using the Cuffdiff2 program42. We called a gene
“expressed” in a given sample if it had a FPKM value >= 0.5 based on the distribution of
FPKM gene expression levels and excluded genes that were not expressed in any sample
from the final gene expression data matrix for downstream analysis. Differentially expressed
genes were identified using LIMMA43 and false discovery rate was estimated by Benjamini
& Hochberg method44. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)45,46 and the Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID v6.7)47 were used to assess
pathway enrichment. All mouse RNAseq data sets are submitted to the European Nucleotide
Archive (ENA) and can be accessed under the accession no. PRJEB5498 at http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB5498.
Gene Signature Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To test for mouse shPten signature enrichment in PTEN-disrupted human T-ALL, we
established a shPten-dependent signature using the 100 most upregulated genes in shPten TALL samples (untreated, n=3) against PTEN-restored samples (Dox-treated, n=4) samples.
Publicly available human T-ALL gene expression profiles (GSE28703, n=47) were
processed using RMA (quantile normalization) and supervised for PTEN status (PTEN
disrupted including PTEN deletion, mutation or both, n=10; PTEN wild-type n=37)
according to the published sample genetic features annotation15. Statistical significance of
GSEA results was assessed using 1000 samples permutations. For enrichment of human
PTEN T-ALL signature in mouse shPten T-ALL (Dox-off) profiles against PTEN-restored
(Dox-on) profiles, a human PTEN-disrupted signature was generated by including the 100
most upregulated genes in PTEN-disrupted vs PTEN-wild type T-ALL samples. Mouse
genes were ranked by supervising untreated to Dox-treated shPten TALL. Statistical
significance of human PTEN-disrupted signature enrichment was assessed using 1000 gene
set permutations.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Pten shRNA-transgenic mice enable conditional expression of PTEN
and develop tumors after prolonged PTEN knockdown

a, Western blot (WB) analysis of PTEN protein knockdown in NIH 3T3 cells infected with
different Pten shRNAs at low multiplicity of infection. (s.e.: short exposure, l.e.: long
exposure). b, PTEN protein knockdown assessed by WB in ES cell clones targeted with two
different Pten shRNAs, either treated with doxycycline (Dox) or left untreated. c, MEFs
from Rosa26-rtTA;shPten.1522 transgenic mice, wild type control mice, or Pten+/− mice
were treated with Dox for the indicated times and analyzed for PTEN, GFP, and ACTB
expression by WB. d, Overall survival of mice receiving bone marrow cells from tTA-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

transgenic mice infected with an inducible TRE-GFP-miR30 (TGM) retroviral vector
expressing shPten.1522, shPten.2049 or control after irradiation with 600 rad. e,
Fluorescence image of a CAGGS-rtTA;shPten.1522 mouse on Dox for 5 days and a
CAGGS-rtTA only control mouse. f, Flow cytometric analysis of the peripheral blood of a
CAGGS-rtTA;shPten.1522 mouse on Dox and an off Dox control mouse for myeloid
(CD11b) and GFP marker expression 10 days after initiating Dox food. g, Overall survival
curve of CMV-rtTA;shPten.1522 double-transgenic and control mice (single transgenic
shPten.1522 or CMV-rtTA). Dox treatment for shRNA induction was started after weaning
(at ~4 weeks of age). h, Situs of a tumor-bearing CAGGS-rtTA;shPten.1522 doubletransgenic mouse. A large thymic tumor (full arrow), as well as enlarged lymph nodes
(dashed arrows) and spleen (arrowhead), are visible. i, Immunohistochemical staining of
kidney sections from a CAGGS-rtTA;shPten.1522 mouse for the indicated antigens. Arrows
highlight a tumor infiltrate around a kidney venule. Scale bars show 100 μm.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Vav-tTA;shPten transgenic mice with targeted shPten expression in the
hematopoietic lineage display thymic hyperplasia by 6 weeks, and a subset develops thymic
tumors infiltrating multiple peripheral organs

a, Brightfield (left) and fluorescence (right) images of spleen and thymus from VavtTA;shLuc (control) and Vav-tTA;shPten double-transgenic mice at 5 weeks. b, FACS
analysis of spleen and thymus single cell suspensions from Vav-tTA;shLuc/shPten mice for
CD4/CD8 expression. c, Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of thymic tissue from 6 week
old Vav-tTA;shLuc and Vav-tTA;shPten mice. Sections were stained with haematoxylin/
eosin (H/E), anti-GFP or anti-PTEN antibodies, showing heterogeneous GFP staining and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

correspondingly variable PTEN knockdown. Scale bars are 200 μm for H/E and GFP, and
100 μm for PTEN. The insets are 2× magnifications. d, Thymus weight of 6-week old VavtTA;shLuc and Vav-tTA;shPten mice (n=5 for both groups, P<0.006 by t-test). e, Brightfield
and GFP-fluorescence images of a Vav-tTA;shPten mouse with tumors. f, IHC staining of
spleen, liver, and kidney tissues from a Vav-tTA;shPten mouse with primary T-cell disease.
Sections were stained for H/E, GFP, PTEN and phospho-AKT(S473) as indicated, showing
heterogeneous staining due to variable tumor infiltration. Scale bars represent 100 μm (insets
25 μm).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Immunophenotype, chromosomal aberrations and Notch1 mutations
observed in murine shPten tumors

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

a, Flow cytometric analysis of organ infiltration by primary tumors in Vav-tTA;shPten.1522
transgenic mice. Single cell suspensions of indicated tissues were analyzed for EGFP,
Thy1.2, CD4 and CD8 expression. LN: lymph node, BM: bone marrow, PB: peripheral
blood. b, Spectral karyotyping analysis of a T-cell tumor arising in Vav-tTA;shPten.1522
mice, showing a t(14;15) translocation. c, Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
analysis of a Vav-tTA;shPten.1522 leukemia. Genomic tumor DNA was analyzed on
Affymetrix CGH SNP arrays and compared to normal skin tissue. X-axis indicates genomic
coordinate and y-axis represents log2(tumor/germline). d, Schematic of the murine
NOTCH1 protein generated using protein paint (http://
explore.pediatriccancergenomeproject.org/proteinPainter), highlighting the different
NOTCH1 protein domains and the mutations detected in the murine shPten T-ALL tumors.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 4. Summary of karyotyping and Notch1 sequencing of shPten TALL
tumors

Author Manuscript

a, Results from a multiplex FISH analysis of three different primary shPten induced T-ALL
tumors. At least 10 cells were analyzed for each sample, and chromosomal gains, deletions
or translocations are highlighted. b, Summary of Notch1 mutations identified in shPten and
Pten KO tumors. c, Sequence of all shRNAs targeting murine Pten that were tested in the
study. Sense and guide strand are highlighted in red.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis shows similar gene expression patterns
in human and mouse T-ALL lacking Pten

Author Manuscript

a, Gene Set Enrichment analysis (GSEA) of a mouse shPten signature in PTEN-altered
human T-ALL was tested after establishing the shPten-dependent signature using the 100
most upregulated genes in shPten T-ALL samples (untreated, n=3) against PTEN-restored
samples (Dox-treated, n=4) as determined by RNA-seq analysis (data not shown). Publicly
available human T-ALL gene expression profiles (GSE28703, n=47) were processed using
RMA (quantile normalization) and supervised for PTEN status (PTEN altered including
PTEN deletion, mutation or both, n=10; PTEN wild-type (WT), n=37) according to the
published sample annotation18. Statistical significance of GSEA results was assessed using
1000 samples permutations. b, For enrichment of human PTEN TALL signature in mouse
shPten knockdown (kd) T-ALL (Dox-off) profiles against Pten-restored (Dox-on) profiles, a
human PTEN-disrupted signature was generated by including the 100 most upregulated
genes in PTEN-disrupted vs PTEN-wild type T-ALL samples. Mouse genes were ranked by
supervising untreated to Dox-treated shPten T-ALLs. Statistical significance of human
PTEN-disrupted signature enrichment was assessed using 1000 gene set permutations.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Secondary recipients of shPten T-ALL cells display extensive intestinal
tumor infiltration similar to a subset of human patients characterized by peripheral T-cell
lymphoma and low PTEN expression

Author Manuscript

a, Overall survival of sublethally irradiated Rag1−/− mice transplanted with 1×105 T-ALL
cells from primary Vav-tTA;shPten.1522 mice compared to untransplanted mice (n=5 for
both groups, P<0.003). b, IHC staining for EGFP expression in the indicated tissues from
secondary T-ALL transplant recipients. Scale bars represent 400μm and 100 μm for insets. c,
Overall survival of PTEN normal (WT) vs. PTEN altered patients with T-ALL analyzed
from published data on patients with T-ALL15, P=0.02). PTEN altered (n=20) include
patients with PTEN deletion, mutation, underexpression (<0.8 sigma after z scoring) and any
combination of such alterations, PTEN normal (n=62) include all other patients with
available data. d, PTEN IHC staining of tissue micro-arrays of tumor sections from MSKCC
patients with peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCL). Examples of low (upper panel) and high
(lower panel) PTEN expression samples are shown. e, Contingency table showing a
significant association (p<0.003; Fisher Exact Test) between low expression of PTEN and
intestinal infiltration in PTCL patients. f, Overall survival of Rag1−/− mice transplanted with
T-ALL cells from Ptenfl/fl; Lck-Cre mice ±Dox (n=5 for each group). g, Weight of spleen

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

(n=4) and lymph nodes (n=8) in Rag1−/− mice transplanted with Vav-tTA;shPten leukemic
cells untreated or treated with Dox for 5 days. h, MRI of Rag1−/− mice transplanted with
Vav-tTA;shPten leukemic cells untreated or treated with Dox for 5 days, 14 days after
transplant. Arrows highlight lymph nodes (LN) and increased signals in the liver.
Representative images for one out of 3 analyzed mice per condition are shown. i, MRI
imaging of the intestine and liver of the same mice as in h are shown. Dashed arrows
highlight the liver, full arrows the intestine.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Pten reactivation affects multiple pathways and increases apoptosis in
tumor cells infiltrating the intestine, but not in the spleen

a, Heatmap of top 30 upregulated and b, downregulated genes after Pten reactivation as
determined by RNAseq on CD4-sorted leukemic samples isolated from the spleen. Three
mice with Pten knocked down and four mice with reactivated Pten were analyzed. Pten is
one of the top 50 upregulated genes after reactivation, but not included on the list. c,
Bubblegraph visualization of the most significantly affected pathways as determined by

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript

DAVID pathway analysis. Y-axis represents relative pathway enrichment in Pten reactivated
vs. Pten knockdown leukemic cells, and size of the bubble graph is inversely proportional to
p-value. d, IHC analysis for expression of GFP and PTEN in spleen, lymph node (LN) and
liver from shPten-tumor transplanted mice ±Dox treatment (5 days after start of Dox
treatment; n=3 per group). Representative sections are shown. Scale bars are 100 μm for full
images and 20 μm for insets. e, In vivo BrdU uptake in leukemic cells isolated from the
lymph nodes of mice transplanted with Vav-tTA;shPten primary T-ALL tumors ±Dox. n=3
for each group. f, TUNEL staining of spleen and intestinal sections of Rag1−/− mice serially
transplanted with Vav-tTA;shPten leukemia cells and either left untreated or treated with
Dox 24h before sectioning. Scale bars are 200μm (2.5×) and 50μm (10×). g, Quantification
of TUNEL stained sections from the intestinal sections in f. TUNEL positive cells from
three representative areas of 1 mm2 from two different intestine sections were counted for
each condition (P<0.01).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Akt and S6 protein phosphorylation is affected by PTEN reactivation in
the intestine

a, Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for phospho-S6 (pS235/236-S6) and phospho-AKT
(pS473AKT) of spleen sections from Rag1−/− mice transplanted with Vav-tTA;shPten tumor
cells from primary mice and either treated with Dox or left untreated two days after
treatment begin (n=3 per group). Scale bars are 100 μm, 20 μm for insets. Representative
images are shown. b, IHC staining for pS473-AKT (bottom) in the intestine, showing very

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

low pAKT signal in the intestinal epithelial cells independent of Dox treatment status
(arrows; bottom left and right panels), conversely strong staining for pAKT was detected in
some of the infiltrating tumor cells (arrow heads). The signal was reduced concomitantly
with the overall reduction of the Pten-shRNA linked GFP signal (top) after 36 h of Dox
treatment (+ Dox; right panels). c, Representative histogram of flow cytometric analysis for
intracellular pS6 signal in CD4+ cells isolated from spleen and intestine of Rag1−/− mice
transplanted with shPten tumor cells and either treated with Dox for 5 days or left untreated.
d, Flow cytometric quantification of pS6 signal in CD4+ cells isolated from the intestine and
e, spleens of Rag1−/− mice transplanted with primary shPten tumors and treated ±Dox for 5
days (n=4 for each condition, P<0.04 for the intestine and n.s. for the spleen by paired ttest). MFI: mean fluorescent intensity.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 9. NCR mice display a reduced intestinal tumor infiltration, which is not
dependent on the absence of the thymus

Author Manuscript

a, Brightfield pictures of the intestinal situs of Rag1−/− and NCR nude mice serially
transplanted with shPten tumors (upper four panels) and fluorescence images (FI) of cells
infiltrating the small intestine in these mice (lower four panels). Scale bars are 800 μm
(upper FI panels) and 100 μm (lower FI panels). Pictures were taken on a Nikon SMZ 1000
stereomicroscope. b, Quantification of the intestinal infiltration in transplanted Rag1−/− or
NCR mice by flow cytometry (P<0.03). c, Weight of lymph nodes (P<0.01) and d, spleens
(P=n.s.) in transplanted Rag1−/− and NCR mice. e, CCL25 expression in the small intestine
of Rag1−/− and NCR mice measured by ELISA. f, Western blot analysis of CCL25
expression in the small intestine of Rag1−/− and NCR mice. g, Overall survival of Rag1−/−

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

and thymectomized Rag1−/− mice after transplant with shPten T-ALL cells (n=5 per group).
h, H/E and immunohistochemical analysis of CD3 expression of spleen, liver and intestine
from Rag1−/−and thymectomized Rag1−/− mice transplanted with shPten T-ALL cells.
Scale bars represent 200 μm for spleen and liver and 100 μm for intestinal samples. i, Flow
cytometric measurement of CCR9 expression on shPten leukemia cells either in the absence
of Dox (Pten knocked down) or Dox treated (Pten reactivated). One representative analysis
out of four analyzed on/off Dox pairs is shown. A CCR9 negative B-cell line was used as
control. j, Immunoblot analysis of PTEN, phospho-AKT(S473) and ACTB expression in
human HBP-ALL T-ALL cells infected with either a control shRNA (shRenilla) or a shRNA
targeting PTEN, and either starved or stimulated for 15 min with 500 ng/ml CCL25. k,
shPten tumor cell migration across a Boyden chamber in the presence or absence of 1 μg/ml
Dox and 500 ng/ml CCL25. One representative experiment of two is shown, samples were
run in triplicate; ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001 by t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. CCR9 inactivation by shRNA knockdown or by pharmacologic
inhibition attenuates intestinal tumor infiltration

Author Manuscript

a, CCR9 expression on the surface of shPten tumor cells either infected with a control
shRNA against Renilla luciferase (left) or with a shRNA targeting Ccr9 (right) as measured
by flow cytometry, compared to uninfected cells respectively. b, Flow cytometry-based
quantification of CCR9 suppression in shCcr9 infected shPten T-ALL cells compared to
shRenilla-infected cells, n=5 for each cohort. c, Raw percentage of shRenilla/shCcr9
expressing shPten T-ALL cells in different tissue compartments of mice 12 days after
transplantation, determined by flow cytometry, n=5 for each cohort. p<0.0005 (intestine). d,
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis for mCherry (left: shRenilla-mCherry; right:shCcr9mCherry) expressing cells in tissue sections of mice from c. Spleen, liver and intestinal
sections of mice transplanted with shRenilla- or shCcr9-infected T-ALL cells were analyzed
for mCherry expression. Representative stains from one mouse out of three analyzed mice

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript

are shown. Scale bars represent 100 μm (insets 20 μm). e, IHC staining for EGFP expression
in representative sections of small intestine, liver and spleen of Vav-tTA;shPten tumor
bearing mice treated with vehicle or the CCR9 inhibitor CCX8037 (n=3). Scale bars are 400
μm for the 2.5× and 100 μm for the 10× images. f, Flow cytometric quantification of
intestinal tumor infiltration in Rag1−/− mice transplanted with Vav-tTA;shPten leukemia
cells and treated with vehicle (n=4) or a small molecule inhibitor of CCR9 (n=5). *P<0.05
by t-test. g, Immunoblot analysis of phospho-AKT expression 15 min after stimulation of
shPten leukemia cells with CCL25 in the absence or presence of indicated concentrations of
CCX8037. h, IHC analysis of EGFP and phospho-AKT signal in representative sections of
small intestine from Vav-tTA;shPten tumor bearing mice treated with vehicle or the CCR9
inhibitor CCX8037. Scale bars are 100 μm (25 μm for insets).

Supplementary Material
Author Manuscript

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments

Author Manuscript

We are grateful to Jacqueline Cappellani, Danielle Grace, Janelle Simon and Meredith Taylor for technical
assistance, Sang-Yong Kim for performing tetraploid embryo complementation, Jinjun Cheng for RNAseq analysis,
Michael Riggs for CGH array analysis, Mihaela Lupu and Carl Le for MRI imaging, Valerie Longo and Pat
Zanzonico for PET analysis, Janine Pichardo for data management, Louis Lopez and Avani Giri for tissue
microarray construction, Michael Saborowski for help with IHC staining, Alberto Roselló-Díez and Marina Asher
for expertise in antibody staining characterization and Charles Sherr for constructive comments and editorial
advice. We thank Juan Jaen, Mark Penfold and Matthew Walters from Chemocentryx (Mountain View, CA) for
providing the CCR9 small molecule inhibitor. C.M was supported by a fellowship from the DFG (Mi1210/1-1).
I.A. (DKH# 109902) received support by a fellowship from the Deutsche Krebshilfe. C.S. was supported by the
Angel Foundation with a Curt Engelhorn fellowship. This work was also supported by a program project grant from
the National Cancer Institute, a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Specialized Center of Research, and
philanthropic funds from the Don Monti Foundation. S.W.L. is supported by the Geoffrey Beene Foundation and is
an investigator in the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Li J, et al. PTEN, a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase gene mutated in human brain, breast, and
prostate cancer. Science. 1997; 275:1943–1947. [PubMed: 9072974]
2. Engelman JA, Luo J, Cantley LC. The evolution of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases as regulators of
growth and metabolism. Nat Rev Genet. 2006; 7:606–619.10.1038/nrg1879 [PubMed: 16847462]
3. Salmena L, Carracedo A, Pandolfi PP. Tenets of PTEN tumor suppression. Cell. 2008; 133:403–
414.10.1016/j.cell.2008.04.013 [PubMed: 18455982]
4. Dickins RA, et al. Probing tumor phenotypes using stable and regulated synthetic microRNA
precursors. Nature genetics. 2005; 37:1289–1295.10.1038/ng1651 [PubMed: 16200064]
5. Dickins RA, et al. Tissue-specific and reversible RNA interference in transgenic mice. Nat Genet.
2007; 39:914–921.10.1038/ng2045 [PubMed: 17572676]
6. Premsrirut PK, et al. A rapid and scalable system for studying gene function in mice using
conditional RNA interference. Cell. 2011; 145:145–158.10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.012 [PubMed:
21458673]
7. Di Cristofano A, Pesce B, Cordon-Cardo C, Pandolfi PP. Pten is essential for embryonic
development and tumour suppression. Nat Genet. 1998; 19:348–355.10.1038/1235 [PubMed:
9697695]
8. Stambolic V, et al. High incidence of breast and endometrial neoplasia resembling human Cowden
syndrome in pten+/− mice. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:3605–3611. [PubMed: 10910075]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

9. Gutierrez A, et al. High frequency of PTEN, PI3K, and AKT abnormalities in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2009; 114:647–650.10.1182/blood-2009-02-206722 [PubMed:
19458356]
10. Kim WI, Wiesner SM, Largaespada DA. Vav promoter-tTA conditional transgene expression
system for hematopoietic cells drives high level expression in developing B and T cells. Exp
Hematol. 2007; 35:1231–1239.10.1016/j.exphem.2007.04.012 [PubMed: 17560009]
11. Suzuki A, et al. T cell-specific loss of Pten leads to defects in central and peripheral tolerance.
Immunity. 2001; 14:523–534. [PubMed: 11371355]
12. Aifantis I, Raetz E, Buonamici S. Molecular pathogenesis of T-cell leukaemia and lymphoma. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:380–390.10.1038/nri2304 [PubMed: 18421304]
13. Guo W, et al. Multi-genetic events collaboratively contribute to Pten-null leukaemia stem-cell
formation. Nature. 2008; 453:529–533.10.1038/nature06933 [PubMed: 18463637]
14. Erikson J, et al. Deregulation of c-myc by translocation of the alpha-locus of the T-cell receptor in
T-cell leukemias. Science. 1986; 232:884–886. [PubMed: 3486470]
15. Zhang J, et al. The genetic basis of early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Nature.
2012; 481:157–163.10.1038/nature10725 [PubMed: 22237106]
16. Engelman JA, et al. Effective use of PI3K and MEK inhibitors to treat mutant Kras G12D and
PIK3CA H1047R murine lung cancers. Nat Med. 2008; 14:1351–1356.10.1038/nm.1890
[PubMed: 19029981]
17. Nehls M, et al. Two genetically separable steps in the differentiation of thymic epithelium.
Science. 1996; 272:886–889. [PubMed: 8629026]
18. Bleul CC, Boehm T. Chemokines define distinct microenvironments in the developing thymus. Eur
J Immunol. 2000; 30:3371–3379.10.1002/1521-4141(2000012)30:12<3371::AIDIMMU3371>3.0.CO;2-L [PubMed: 11093154]
19. Nowell CS, et al. Foxn1 regulates lineage progression in cortical and medullary thymic epithelial
cells but is dispensable for medullary sublineage divergence. PLoS Genet. 2011;
7:e1002348.10.1371/journal.pgen.1002348 [PubMed: 22072979]
20. Wurbel MA, et al. The chemokine TECK is expressed by thymic and intestinal epithelial cells and
attracts double- and single-positive thymocytes expressing the TECK receptor CCR9. Eur J
Immunol. 2000; 30:262–271.10.1002/1521-4141(200001)30:1<262::AID-IMMU262>3.0.CO;2-0
[PubMed: 10602049]
21. Campbell DJ, Butcher EC. Intestinal attraction: CCL25 functions in effector lymphocyte
recruitment to the small intestine. J Clin Invest. 2002; 110:1079–1081.10.1172/JCI16946
[PubMed: 12393843]
22. Youn BS, Kim CH, Smith FO, Broxmeyer HE. TECK, an efficacious chemoattractant for human
thymocytes, uses GPR-9-6/CCR9 as a specific receptor. Blood. 1999; 94:2533–2536. [PubMed:
10498628]
23. Uehara S, Grinberg A, Farber JM, Love PE. A role for CCR9 in T lymphocyte development and
migration. J Immunol. 2002; 168:2811–2819. [PubMed: 11884450]
24. Buonamici S, et al. CCR7 signalling as an essential regulator of CNS infiltration in T-cell
leukaemia. Nature. 2009; 459:1000–1004.10.1038/nature08020 [PubMed: 19536265]
25. Walters MJ, et al. Characterization of CCX282-B, an orally bioavailable antagonist of the CCR9
chemokine receptor, for treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010;
335:61–69.10.1124/jpet.110.169714 [PubMed: 20660125]
26. Eksteen B, Adams DH. GSK-1605786, a selective small-molecule antagonist of the CCR9
chemokine receptor for the treatment of Crohn’s disease. IDrugs. 2010; 13:472–781. [PubMed:
20582872]
27. Hollander MC, Blumenthal GM, Dennis PA. PTEN loss in the continuum of common cancers, rare
syndromes and mouse models. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:289–301.10.1038/nrc3037 [PubMed:
21430697]
28. Jotta PY, et al. Negative prognostic impact of PTEN mutation in pediatric T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia. 2010; 24:239–242.10.1038/leu.2009.209 [PubMed:
19829307]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

29. Muellner MK, et al. A chemical-genetic screen reveals a mechanism of resistance to PI3K
inhibitors in cancer. Nat Chem Biol. 2011; 7:787–793.10.1038/nchembio.695 [PubMed:
21946274]
30. Ilic N, Utermark T, Widlund HR, Roberts TM. PI3K-targeted therapy can be evaded by gene
amplification along the MYC-eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) axis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:E699–708.10.1073/pnas.1108237108 [PubMed: 21876152]
31. Huesken D, et al. Design of a genome-wide siRNA library using an artificial neural network. Nat
Biotechnol. 2005; 23:995–1001.10.1038/nbt1118 [PubMed: 16025102]
32. Fellmann C, et al. Functional identification of optimized RNAi triggers using a massively parallel
sensor assay. Mol Cell. 2011; 41:733–746.10.1016/j.molcel.2011.02.008 [PubMed: 21353615]
33. Dow LE, et al. A pipeline for the generation of shRNA transgenic mice. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:374–
393.10.1038/nprot.2011.446 [PubMed: 22301776]
34. Beard C, Hochedlinger K, Plath K, Wutz A, Jaenisch R. Efficient method to generate single-copy
transgenic mice by site-specific integration in embryonic stem cells. Genesis. 2006; 44:23–
28.10.1002/gene.20180 [PubMed: 16400644]
35. Kistner A, et al. Doxycycline-mediated quantitative and tissue-specific control of gene expression
in transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996; 93:10933–10938. [PubMed: 8855286]
36. Suzuki A, et al. High cancer susceptibility and embryonic lethality associated with mutation of the
PTEN tumor suppressor gene in mice. Curr Biol. 1998; 8:1169–1178. [PubMed: 9799734]
37. Lakshmi B, et al. Mouse genomic representational oligonucleotide microarray analysis: detection
of copy number variations in normal and tumor specimens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;
103:11234–11239.10.1073/pnas.0602984103 [PubMed: 16844783]
38. Zhao Z, et al. p53 loss promotes acute myeloid leukemia by enabling aberrant self-renewal. Genes
Dev. 2010; 24:1389–1402.10.1101/gad.1940710 [PubMed: 20595231]
39. Scuoppo C, et al. A tumour suppressor network relying on the polyamine-hypusine axis. Nature.
2012; 487:244–248.10.1038/nature11126 [PubMed: 22722845]
40. Tubo NJ, et al. A Systemically-Administered Small Molecule Antagonist of CCR9 Acts as a
Tissue-Selective Inhibitor of Lymphocyte Trafficking. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e50498.10.1371/
journal.pone.0050498 [PubMed: 23209760]
41. Gartner F, et al. Immature thymocytes employ distinct signaling pathways for allelic exclusion
versus differentiation and expansion. Immunity. 1999; 10:537–546. [PubMed: 10367899]
42. Trapnell C, et al. Differential analysis of gene regulation at transcript resolution with RNA-seq.
Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:46–53.10.1038/nbt.2450 [PubMed: 23222703]
43. Smyth GK. Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in
microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol. 2004; 3:Article3.10.2202/1544-6115.1027
[PubMed: 16646809]
44. Hochberg Y, Benjamini Y. More powerful procedures for multiple significance testing. Stat Med.
1990; 9:811–818. [PubMed: 2218183]
45. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:15545–15550.10.1073/
pnas.0506580102 [PubMed: 16199517]
46. Subramanian A, Kuehn H, Gould J, Tamayo P, Mesirov JP. GSEA-P: a desktop application for
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. Bioinformatics. 2007; 23:3251–3253.10.1093/bioinformatics/
btm369 [PubMed: 17644558]
47. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists
using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:44–57.10.1038/nprot.2008.211
[PubMed: 19131956]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Author Manuscript

Pten shRNA transgenic mice develop disseminated CD4/CD8 double-positive (DP) T-cell
leukemia. (A) Outline of the targeting construct and the ES cell targeting strategy. SA –
splice acceptor site. pA – polyadenylation site. TRE – tetracycline responsive element
promoter. EGFP – enhanced green fluorescent protein. PGK – phosphoglycerate kinase
promoter. ATG*-truncated ATG sequence. FRT – FLP recognition target. *Hygromycin –
ATG-less hygromycin cDNA. (B) Immunoblot (WB) analysis of murine embryonic
fibroblasts from shPten.1522;Rosa26-rtTA2 transgenic mice ±doxycycline (Dox) for 5 days
at indicated timepoints after stimulation with 100 nM insulin. (C) Overall survival of VavtTA;shPten mice (n=49) and controls (n=98, P<0.001 by log-rank). (D) Flow cytometric
analysis of a representative primary Vav-tTA;shPten tumor for EGFP, Thy1.2, CD4 and
CD8 (n=10). (E) WB analysis of T-cell tumors from Trp53−/−, Ptenfl/fl;Lck-Cre and VavtTA;shPten mice for the indicated proteins. (F) PTEN immunohistochemistry (IHC) of bone
marrow samples of 31 human patients with T-ALL categorized as positive (upper left panel)
or low/negative (lower left panel). Association of PTEN expression with status for
disseminated disease was calculated using a contingency table (Fisher’s Exact Test).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Author Manuscript

The impact of PTEN reactivation on leukemia viability is influenced by anatomical site. (A)
Overall survival of Rag1−/− mice transplanted with 1×105 cells from Vav-tTA;shPten
(shPten) tumors and treated with Dox (Pten on; n=14), or untreated controls (Pten off;
n=15), P<0.0001 by log-rank test. (B) WB analysis of splenic tumor cells from control,
untreated, and mice treated with Dox for 5d. (C) Brightfield and EGFP images of lymph
nodes and spleen from an untreated mouse (Pten off) and mouse treated with Dox for 5d
(Pten on) (n=10). (D) Flow cytometric analysis of CD4, EGFP and CD8 expression in tumor
cells from the peripheral blood of mice ±Dox for 5d (n=10). (E) IHC analysis for CD3
expression in the spleen, liver and small intestine from shPten T-ALL transplanted mice
±Dox for 5d (n=3 per group). Scale bars:100 μm (20 μm in insets). (F) Relative tumor
infiltration in the indicated organs of transplanted Rag1−/−mice off (n=7) and on (n=7) Dox,
quantified by flow cytometric analysis of CD4+ cells; * P<0.05, ** P<0.01 by t-test. (G)
IHC staining for cleaved caspase 3 in the spleen and intestine from mice 10d after transplant
with shPten T-ALL either treated with Dox for 36h or left untreated. Representative sections
from one of three mice per cohort are shown. Scale bars: 100 μm (20 μm in insets).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Author Manuscript

Tissue-dependent effects of PTEN reactivation on PI3K signaling. (A) Small intestinal
sections from shPten T-ALL transplanted mice ±Dox were stained with hematoxylin/eosin
(HE) or by IHC for the indicated molecules. Representative sections from one of three mice
per cohort are shown. Scale bars represent 100 μm (20 μm in insets). (B) Serial 18F-FDG
PET analysis of shPten T-ALL transplanted mice before and 2d after beginning of Dox
treatment. White arrows: BM, red arrow: spleen, green arrow: liver/intestine. Representative
images from two out of 12 analyzed mice are shown. (C) CD3 IHC staining of shPten tumor
infiltrations in the liver of mice ±Dox 4d after treatment initiation (n=3 per group). Arrows
highlight CD3+ tumor infiltrates. Scale bars represent 500 μm. (D) 18F-FDG PET/CT
analysis of shPten T-ALL transplanted mice ±Dox 4d after beginning of Dox treatment. Full
arrow: spleen, dashed arrow: liver/intestine. Representative images from two out of six
analyzed mice are shown.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Author Manuscript

CCL25-CCR9 chemokine signaling contributes to leukemia dissemination. (A) Overall
survival of Rag1−/− mice (n=9; −Dox, n=7; +Dox) and NCR mice (n=7; −Dox, n=7; +Dox)
transplanted with 1×105 shPten leukemia cells. Survival of Rag1−/−(−Dox) vs. NCR(−Dox)
mice; P<0.0001 by log-rank test. (B) IHC staining for EGFP in intestinal sections from
Rag1−/− and NCR mice transplanted with shPten leukemia (n=3 per cohort). Scale bars: 100
μm. Numbers show mean fraction (±SD) of infiltrating EGFP+ tumor cells of total viable
cells as determined by flow cytometry (P<0.03 by t-test). (C) Representative images of
lymph nodes and spleens from Rag1−/− and NCR mice (n=7). (D) CCR9 receptor expression
on shPten leukemia cells, normal CD4/CD8 double-positive and CD4 or CD8 singlepositive thymic T-cells measured by flow cytometry (n=3 per group). (E) WB analysis of
indicated proteins in shPten leukemic cells ±Dox after stimulation with 500 ng/ml CCL25
for the indicated time. (F) WB of indicated proteins in human T-ALL1 cells infected with

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

Miething et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript

either shRenilla control or shPTEN.1522 and ±stimulation with CCL25 for 15 min. (G)
Outline of competition experiment of untransduced vs. shCcr9-mCherry- or control
shRenilla-mCherry transduced EGFP+ shPten tumor cells. (H) Normalized ratio of
mCherry+;EGFP+ cells over all EGFP+ cells isolated from spleen, liver and intestine of 5
mice per cohort from 2 independent transplantations. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry
and normalized to the mCherry/EGFP ratio in the spleen to account for differences in
transduction rate.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 19.

