Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Cancer associated fibroblasts in hematological malignancies
Lizzia Raffaghello1, Angelo Vacca2, Vito Pistoia1, Domenico Ribatti3
1

Laboratorio di Oncologia, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy

2

Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, University of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy

3

Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sensory Organs, University of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy,
National Cancer Institute “Giovanni Paolo II”, Bari, Italy

Correspondence to:
Domenico Ribatti, e-mail: domenico.ribatti@uniba.it
Keywords: cancer associated fibroblasts, mesenchymal stromal cells, hematological malignancies, tumor microenvironment
Received: September 03, 2014          Accepted: October 27, 2014          Published: December 06, 2014

ABSTRACT
Tumor microenvironment plays an important role in cancer initiation and
progression. In hematological malignancies, the bone marrow represents the
paradigmatic anatomical site in which tumor microenvironment expresses its
morphofunctional features. Among the cells participating in the composition of this
microenvironment, cancer associated fibrobasts (CAFs) have received less attention in
hematopoietic tumors compared to solid cancers. In this review article, we discuss the
involvement of CAFs in progression of hematological malignancies and the potential
targeting of CAFs in a therapeutic perspective.

Tumor microenvironment

MSCs contribute to the formation of specialized
niches, and namely the endosteal niche closed to the
endosteum, and the vascular niche in proximity of the BM
vasculature [6]. Quiescent HSCs reside in the endosteal
niche, where their interactions is mediated by several
factors, including N-cadherins, integrins, Jagged-1, Notch,
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), transforming
growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1), angiopoietin-1 (Ang1), Wnt, and fibroblast growth factor-1 (FGF-1) [7–9].
The vascular niche is a site rich in blood vessels where
endothelial cells, pericytes, and smooth muscle cells create
a microenvironment that recruits endothelial precursor
cells (EPCs), MSCs and HSCs, and is important for stem
cell mobilization, proliferation, and differentiation [10–12].
Inflammatory cells in tumor microenvironment
communicate via a complex network of intercellular
signaling pathways, mediated by surface adhesion
molecules, cytokines, and their receptors [13] (Figure 1).
Immune cells cooperate with stromal cells as well as
malignant cells in stimulating tumor angiogenesis. The
latter represents a fundamental mechanism for tumor
development and metastatic spread by providing efficient
vascular supply.
Among inflammatory cells found in tumor
microenvironment, tumor associated macrophages and
mast cells support tumor growth and neovascularization

Tumor microenvironment plays an important role in
cancer initiation and progression [1]. Individuals affected
by chronic inflammatory disorders have an increased risk
of developing cancer [2], and, accordingly, treatment with
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduces tumor
incidence [3].
In hematological malignancies, the bone marrow
(BM) and the lymph nodes represent the paradigmatic
anatomical sites in which tumor microenvironment
expresses its morphofunctional features. The lymph
node microenvironment is discussed below. BM
microenvironment includes hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) and non-hematopoietic cells. HSCs give rise
to all the blood cell types of the erythroid, myeloid,
lymphoid and megakaryocytic lineages [4]. The nonhematopoietic cells include endothelial cells, pericytes,
fibroblasts, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, macrophages, mast
cells, and mesenchymal stem cells [5]. Although a small
subset of the latter cells is represented by self-renewing
stem cells, the majority of them are multipotential
progenitors that can differentiate into osteoblasts,
chondrocytes and adipocytes but do not self-renew. Both
mesenchymal stem cells and mesenchymal stromal cells
are indicated as MSCs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2589

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Tumor microenvironment: a complex network of intercellular interactions between tumor and inflammatory
cells. Cancer cells in primary tumors are surrounded by a complex microenvironment composed of tumor stroma, blood vessels and

infiltrating inflammatory cells. Different types of cells are found in the stroma, including fibroblasts, vascular smooth muscle, epithelial
and immune cells. The latter cells comprise effectors of both adaptive immunity, such as T and B lymphocytes, and innate immunity, i.e.
macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), neutrophils, mast cells, eosinophils and natural killer (NK) cells. Most of the stromal cells participate
in the promotion of the tumor growth. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and M2 like polarized macrophages (tumor associated
macrophages: TAMs), which can be induced by tumor-derived factors (for example, TGF-β, FGF or PDGF, among others), support tumor
growth, angiogenesis, extracellular matrix remodelling and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), by secreting a plethora of protumorigenic proteases, cytokines and growth factors. For example, EGF, secreted by TAMs, participates in a paracrine signaling loop through
tumor-secreted colony stimulating factor (CSF-1). VEGF, CXCL12, IL-8 secreted by CAFs or TAMs interact with their respective receptors
expressed by endothelial cells and promote tumor angiogenesis. As tumors grow, immune-suppressor cells, including myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory (TREG) cells infiltrate the tumor to disrupt immune surveillance through multiple mechanisms,
including inhibition of tumor-associated antigen presentation by DCs, T and B cell responses, NK cell cytotoxicity and blockade of M1
macrophage phenotype. Moreover, tumor progression is associated with the increase of TH2 cells secreting immunosuppressive molecules
such as IL-4, IL-10 and TGF–β. Mast cells, neutrophils and eosinophils are also recruited to the tumor site where they secrete proliferative
and pro-angiogenic factors.

Ontogeny of cancer associated fibroblasts

by production of a wide variety of angiogenic cytokines,
including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), TGF-β1,
FGF-2, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
platelet derived growth factor (PDGF), interleukin-8­
(IL-8), osteopontin and nerve growth factor (NGF). On
the contrary, macrophage- and mast cell-derived cytokines
that may participate in anti-tumor response include IL-1,
IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and interferon gamma (IFN-γ) [14]
(Figure 1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fibroblasts represent the most prominent cell type
of tumor stroma [15]. In the specific context of solid
tumors, fibroblasts are referred to as cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) and exhibit some similarities with
myofibroblasts, originally characterized in wound healing
and fibrosis [16, 17]. In breast, prostate, and pancreatic
carcinomas, CAFs correlate to high malignancy grade,

2590

Oncotarget

tumor progression, and poor prognosis [15, 18–20]; in
mouse xenografts, CAFs inoculated with carcinoma cells
promote tumor cell survival, proliferation and invasive
behaviour [21, 22].
The definition of CAFs encompasses a few
important features: i) these fibroblasts are in close
contact with cancer cells, ii) CAFs display peculiar
immunophenotypic and functional features that sharply
differentiate them from normal, resting fibroblasts located
in non-neoplastic environments, and iii) the properties
acquired by CAFs upon interaction with cancer cells
render them supportive of tumor growth and progression
through different mechanisms including extracellular
matrix remodelling, cell proliferation, angiogenesis and
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) [23]. CAF
activation is commonly accompanied by the acquisition
or upregulation of specific markers which can be classified
in four groups: i) the fibroblast activation markers, which
include fibroblast specific protein (FSP) and fibroblast
activation protein (FAP); ii) the aggressiveness markers
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), tenascin-C and stromelysin;
iii) the pro-angiogenic markers [desmin-1, FGF-2, alpha
smooth-muscle-actin (α-SMA) and VEGF]; and iv) the
growth factors that support tumor growth and inflammation
[Epidermal Growth factor (EGF), Hepatocyte Growth
Factor/Scatter Factor (HGF/SF), IL-6, FGF-2] [23, 24].
Moreover, CAFs express matrix-metalloproteinases-1
and -3 (MMP-1, MMP-3), produce collagens, and release
cytokines and pro-angiogenic growth factors, including
VEGF, HGF, FGF-2, Ang-1, IL-6, IL-8, monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), that have been identified
within in vitro secretome of adult tissue-derived MSCs
[25]. CAFs are a major source of VEGF in VEGF
transgenic mice [26], and CAF-derived VEGF enhances the
expression and activation of integrins [27]. CAFs release
angiogenic factors through proteolysis of the extracellular
matrix. In this respect, an elegant study demonstrated
that CAFs localized in invasive human breast carcinomas
promote tumor growth and angiogenesis through high level
secretion of Stromal-Derived-factor-1 (SDF-1)/CXCL12
[22]. Figure 2 summarizes the main features of CAFs and
the interactions between CAFs and cancer cells.
The heterogeneity in marker expression led to
hypothesize that CAFs could have multiple origins,
depending on the tumor histotype and the area of the
neoplastic lesion [28]. Indeed, it is now evident that CAFs
originate from local or distant reservoirs through different
types of transdifferentiation processes as depicted in
Figure 3. The primary source is represented by resident
fibroblast or pericytes, which differentiate into CAFs
through a mesenchymal-mesenchymal transition (MMT)
driven by specific cancer-derived factors such as TGF-β,
PDGF, FGF-2, and SDF-1 (ref. [29, 30]). In addition,
CAFs may originate from local normal or transformed
epithelial cells that transdifferentiate through an EMT into

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

activated fibroblasts [31, 32]. These findings were also
supported by the observation that stromal cells of breast
tumors shared genetic lesions with tumor epithelium
[33, 34]. Interestingly, EMT that gives origin to CAFs
often occurs in epithelial cells that acquire mutations
following oxidative stress [35]. In this regard, an elegant
study reported that MMP-3 promotes EMT by inducing
the expression of an alternatively spliced form of Rac1,
which causes an increase in cellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS), and consequently oxidative damage to
DNA and genomic instability [35]. On the contrary, other
studies demonstrated that somatic mutations can occur
exclusively in cancer cells and that CAF mutations are a
very rare event [36]. Similarly to EMT, CAFs may also
derive from local endothelial cells through an endothelial
mesenchymal transition (EndMT) mainly driven by tumorderived TGF-β. During this process, endothelial cells loose
the expression of CD31 and acquire that of mesenchymal
markers like α-SMA and FSP (ref. [37]).
BM and adipose tissue (AT) represent two distant
sites that significantly contribute to CAF generation [28].
In particular, cancer-derived soluble factors recruit BMand AT-derived MSCs to tumor sites, where the latter
cells acquire the expression of CAF-specific markers
such as α-SMA, FAP, tenascin-C and TSP-1 [38, 39].
More importantly, in tumor microenvironment MSCs
exhibit typical functional properties of CAFs, including
high expression of SDF-1 and the ability to promote
tumor cell growth both in in vitro models and in in vivo
coimplantation assays [40]. It is of note that most of the
studies regarding CAF origin were performed in mouse
tumors. In contrast, information from human tumors is
scarce.

Differences and similarities between CAFs
and MSCs
The definition of CAFs, that has become popular
for most solid tumors, is rarely utilized to indicate
stromal cells of mesenchymal origin found in the specific
microenvironments of hematopoietic malignancies, i.e.
BM and lymph nodes. In these disorders, such stromal
cells are often referred to as mesenchymal stromal
cells, that, in analogy to mesenchymal stem cells, are
indicated as MSCs. However, as it will be discussed
below, the few comparisons that have been done between
leukemia-associated MSCs and classical solid tumorrelated CAFs have demonstrated that these cell types
share many phenotypic and functional features. Thus, for
practical reasons, the terms CAF and MSC will be used
interchangeably, the latter indicating MSCs generated
following in vitro culture.
The primary functions of fibroblasts are the
synthesis and deposition of collagen that builds up the
scaffold of connective tissues [16, 23]. CAFs acquire a

2591

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Interaction between CAFs and cancer cells. Cancer-derived factors induce a Mesenchymal Mesenchymal Transition

(MMT) through which resident normal fibroblast are activated and acquire the expression of various markers such as tenascin, fibroblast
specific protein (FSP), fibroblast activation protein (FAP), thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) and pro-angiogenic molecules. In turn, CAFs secrete
various growth factors which sustain tumor progression by promoting Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), stemness, extracellular
matrix remodelling, proliferation and angiogenesis.

new functional polarization translating into production
and release of proteases that digest the extracellular
matrix (e.g. MMPs), pro-angiogenic factors that stimulate
microvessel formation and pro-metastatic molecules that
accelerate tumor cell dissemination to distant sites [23].
MSCs have a similar spectrum of activities but,
in contrast to fibroblasts, they have been extensively
investigated for their immunoregulatory properties
[41, 42]. In detail, MSCs selectively alter immune cell
functions by suppressing T cell activation or denditric
cells or by inhibiting the cytotoxic capacity of NK
cells. Nonetheless, the few studies that have addressed
the immumodulatory activities of classic fibroblasts of
mesodermal origin have shown that the latter behave
as MSCs [43, 44]. Moreover, MSCs may differentiate
along osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic lineages
[45]. Finally, MSCs express stromal cell markers (CD73,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CD105, CD44, CD 29, and CD90) in the absence of
hematopoietic and endothelial markers [46].

Fibroblasts and hematological malignancies
As mentioned in the introductory section of
this article, most of the published studies addressing
the role of stromal cells in leukemia and lymphoma
microenvironments have been carried out using MSCs
expanded in vitro for a few passages before being tested.
On the other hand, since MSCs are the precursors of
fibroblasts, it is conceivable that bone fide fibroblasts have
similar functional properties.
This conclusion is supported by the few
studies focused on BM fibroblasts from patients with
hematological malignancies. Frassanito and co-workers
isolated primary BM fibroblasts from multiple myeloma

2592

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Multiple origin of CAFs within tumor microenvironment. CAFs can derive from local cells residing in primary tumor,

including epithelial cells and carcinoma cells through Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT); resident fibroblasts and pericytes through
Mesenchymal Mesenchymal Transition (MMT); endothelial cells through Endothelial Mesenchymal Transition (endMT). Alternatively,
CAFs may originate from long distance bone marrow and adipose tissue mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) through an MMT transition.

(MM) patients (see below) and showed that these cells
have multiple features of CAFs and act to promote tumor
growth [47]. Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is a chronic B cell
malignancy characterized by a progressive fibrotic process
mainly due to the accumulation of fine argyrophilic
reticulin fibers that, in advanced stage patients, may coexist
with collagen fibers [48]. The glycoprotein fibronectin, that
is produced and assembled by HCL cells, contributes to
the fibrotic process in the BM of HCL patients, which is
enhanced by HCL cell-derived FGF-2 [49]. These findings
demonstrate that HCL-associated BM fibrosis results from
accumulation and assembly of collagenous (reticulin)
and non-collagenous (fibronectin) extracellular matrix
components. Fibroblastoid cells closely associated with
collagen fibers synthesize retic­ulin and collagen in HCL
BM, but no significant increase in fibroblast numbers
is observed at the latter site [50]. Collectively, these
observations suggest that BM fibroblasts are activated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

by the BM microenvironment to synthesize reticulin and
collagen rather than to proliferate and expand, as instead
occurs in the BM of MM patients. Indeed it was shown
that TGF-β1 produced predominantly by HCL cells
enhanced the production and deposition of reticulin and
collagen fibers by BM fibroblasts. TGF-β1 was detected at
high concentrations in BM, serum and plasma from HCL
patients, and active TGF-β1 correlated with the extent
of BM fibrosis and infiltration with HCL cells. Other
studies showed that adhesion of HCL cells to hyaluronan
stimulated their production of FGF-2 and fibronectin,
the  latter through the v3 isoform of CD44. Since HCL
cells express also the receptor for FGF-2, autocrine
production of the latter cytokine is the main responsible
for fibronectin production. Thus, FGF-2 plays a relevant
role in the pathogenesis of BM fibrosis, as also supported
by the immunohistochemical detection of large amounts of
­FGF-2 in fibrotic BM [51].
2593

Oncotarget

In conclusion, the above studies, performed a decade
or more ago, have demonstrated that BM fibroblasts are
activated by HCL cell-derived TGF-β1 and FGF-2 to
produce and deposit reticulin and collagen fibers, thus
causing the peculiar BM fibrosis of HCL. HCL cellactivated fibroblasts represent a typical example of CAF,
but this definition was not yet in use when these results
were published.
Before reviewing the relationships between MSCs
and tumor cells from specific hematological malignancies,
a few general considerations can be anticipated. First
of all, MSCs establish mutual interactions with cancer
cells whereby both cell types undergo profound changes
in their activation state, proliferative potential, proangiogenic and migratory activities, and extracellular
matrix remodeling ability. MSCs consistently support
survival of tumor cells and shield them from the cytotoxic
effects of chemotherapy by creating a protective niche.
MSCs may also stimulate the proliferation and expansion
of malignant cells. On the other hand, tumor cells modify
MSCs, for example by enhancing their proliferation and
chemokine production. Finally, tumor cell-conditioned
MSCs modulate the functions of other non-malignant
cells present in the tumor microenvironment shifting them
towards a tolerogenic and immunosuppressive phenotype.
The latter cells, in turn, may influence the phenotype and
function of MSCs. All of the above cell-to cell interactions
occur through both contact-dependent and soluble factordependent mechanisms. These interactions involve signal
transduction and metabolic pathways that vary in the
individual hematological malignancies and have been
characterized only partially. Elucidation of such pathways
may represent a promising avenue to the development of
novel therapeutic strategies targeting the mesenchymal
stroma in the tumor microenvironment.
A final general issue that deserves discussion is the
developmental relationship between MSCs and malignant
cells of hematopoietic lineage. Studies performed
predominantly with MSCs isolated from the BM of
patients with acute lymphoid or myeloid leukemias or
MM have demonstrated that MSCs are often genomically
unstable and carry cytogenetic alterations that may be
related or unrelated to those detected in autologous
tumor cells [52–54]. In the former case, the identity of
genetic abnormalities in cancer cells and paired MSCs
may be explained by the occurrence of cell fusion with
transfer of genetic material, the origin of tumor cells
and MSCs from a common progenitor/stem cell, or the
differentiation of a subset of tumor cells into MSCs [53,
54]. However, so far, none of the above hypotheses has
been experimentally proven. Occurrence in MSCs of
cytogenetic abnormalities unrelated to those found in
autologous tumor cells may be related to molecules
released in the tumor microenvironment capable of
damaging DNA, such as oxygen or nitrogen radicals. In

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

this respect, cytogenetically abnormal endothelial cells
have been detected in pre-clinical solid tumor models [55].
Box 1 contains a schematic definition of haematopoietic
malignancies reviewed below.

BM-MSCs in acute leukemia
BM-MSCs have been isolated and expanded in
vitro from patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia of
B cell lineage (B-ALL) or acute myeloblastic leukemia
(AML) before being characterized in different studies as
to functional and genetic features.
B-ALL cells, as their normal counterparts
represented by early-B cells, depend on close interactions
with the BM microenvironment for in vitro survival and
growth [56–61]. Some of the early studies performed on
this issue made use of mouse fibroblasts or fibroblast cell
lines as sources of stromal cells interacting with leukemia
cells.
BM-MSCs were shown to inhibit the in vitro
proliferation of acute leukemia cells by inducing the
transient arrest of malignant cells in the G1 phase of the
cell cycle. In contrast, when acute leukemia cells were
injected in immunodeficient mice in combination with
BM-MSCs, the latter cells were found to accelerate tumor
growth, possibly through the formation of a cancer stem
cell niche in which leukemic cell proliferation is supported
and stimulated [62].
BM-MSCs express the Notch ligands Jagged-1/2
and Delta ligands (DLL-1/4) that interact with Notch
receptors 1–4. Upon B-ALL cell co-culture with BMMSCs, inhibition of Notch signaling resulted into reduced
survival of leukemic cells. In particular, inhibition of
Notch-3 and -4 or Jagged -1/2 and DLL1 caused massive
apoptosis of cultured B-ALL cells, indicating that these
molecules are synergistically involved in the stromal cellmediated antiapoptotic effect [63].
The niche concept applies also to another property
of BM-MSCs that has been extensively characterized,
i.e. their ability to protect cancer cells from the effects of
anti-neoplastic drugs through different mechanisms and
therefore to exert a pro-survival effect.
One of the therapeutic strategies for B-ALL is the
administration of L-asparaginase that depletes leukemic
cell of asparagine, thus promoting death of malignant
cells. It was shown that co-culture of B-ALL cells with
MSCs protects the former cells from the cytotoxic effect
of L-asparaginase since MSCs synthesize high amounts of
L-asparagine (approximately 20 times higher than those
detected in B-ALL cells) and transfer this aminoacid to
tumor cells, rendering them resistant to the drug [64].
More recently, a mechanism involved in protection of ALL
cells from L-asparaginase and operated by adipocytes, i.e.
mature mesenchymal cells deriving from MSCs, has been
identified. It was shown that, in children treated for high

2594

Oncotarget

risk ALL, glutamine synthetase was strongly increased in
BM adipocytes after induction chemotherapy. Adipocytes
are a major source of glutamine; therefore they were coincubated in vitro with leukemic cells and found to protect
the latter cells from the toxic effects of L-asparaginase
through a glutamine-dependent mechanism [65].
MSC-driven protection of leukemic cells extends
to numerous chemotherapeutic agents. Examples of the
molecular interactions involved are represented by the
CXCR4/CXCL12 axis and the VLA-4/VCAM1/CD44
adhesion molecules.
Stromal cells produce CXCL12 that attracts
CXCR4+ leukemic cells and protects them from cytotoxic
agents by reducing the activation of caspase-3 and
enhancing the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins as
Bcl-XL. This has been elegantly demonstrated in chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML) cells exposed to imatinib in the
presence or absence of MSCs, leading to the proposition
of combination therapy with imatinib and the CXCR4
antagonist AMD3100 to overcome MSC-mediated
chemoresistance [66]. Another study focused on CML
cells demonstrated that imatinib induces up-regulation of
CXCR4 on leukemic cells, thus increasing their migration
to the BM stroma that produces CXCL12. The final result
of these cellular interactions is the increased survival of
quiescent CML cells [67].
Integrins trigger intracellular signaling pathways
by forming macromolecular complexes with numerous
plasma membrane proteins including ion channels. ALL
blasts, upon co-culture with BM-MSCs, upregulated
the expression of a molecular complex comprised of
hERG-1 channels, the β1 integrin subunit and CXCR4,
that activates the ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt signaling
pathways and promotes chemoresistance [68]. The Wnt
pathway has been shown to be involved in MSC-mediated
drug resistance of ALL cell lines. ALL cells, upon coculture with MSCs, up-regulated the expression of various
components of the Wnt pathway, and inhibition of the
latter sensitized leukemic cells to chemotherapy [69].
The MLL-AF4 gene fusion is a peculiar genetic
abnormality detected in infant acute pro B-ALL, that
is known to arise in utero [70]. It was shown that, out
of thirty eight B-ALL patients with different fusion
genes studied, only those cases carrying the MLL-AF4
fusion in leukemic blasts displayed the same genetic
translocation detected in autologous BM-MSCs. However,
at variance with leukemic blasts, BM-MSC did not
display monoclonal rearrangements of immunoglobulin
(Ig) genes. These findings rule out that the possibility
that leukemic blasts underwent cellular plasticity or
dedifferentiation to MLL-AF4+ MSCs, but are consistent
with the hypothesis that the tumor cells and MSCs
originated from a common mesodermal precursor.
Notably, MLL-AF4+ MSCs were euploid, thus precluding
the possibility of cell fusion, and did not show any
proliferative advantage in culture [53].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Different results were obtained in a smaller study
of ten B cell precursor ALL cases carrying three different
chromosomal translocations (TEL-AML1, E2A-PBX1 and
MLL rearrangement, respectively). In all cases, variable
proportions of BM-MSCs were found to display the same
chromosomal translocation as autologous leukemic blasts.
Furthermore, BM-MSCs from three patients displayed the
same monoclonal Ig rearrangement detected in autologous
tumor cells, indicating a clonal relationship between stromal
and leukemic cells. Two possible models can account for
such relationship, i) the existence of a common progenitor
cell carrying leukemia-specific chromosomal translocation
and monoclonal Ig gene rearrangement and capable of
differentiating into leukemic or stromal cells, and ii) the
de-differentiation of leukemic cells into MSCs displaying
the same genetic abnormality and Ig rearrangement [54].
More recently, BM-MSCs were isolated from 45
pediatric patients with ALL and subjected to genetic and
functional investigations. Reduced proliferative capacity
and ability to support in vitro hematopoiesis were observed
in BM-MSCs from leukemic patients compared to BMMSCs from control subjects. However, no cytogenetic
abnormality was ever detected in the former or the latter
cells [71]. Accordingly, BM-MSCs from ALL and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL, see below) patients had a
normal karyotype, and aneuploid BM-MSCs were detected
only in cases carrying chromosomal abnormalities [72].
Cytogenetic studies have been performed also with
BM-MSCs from patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPN) including myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), AML
and Philadelphia negative MPN. Blau and coworkers
reported that chromosomal aberrations were present in
15/94 MDS/AML patients tested; such abnormalities
were consistently different from those detected in paired
malignant hematopoietic cells, indicating the absence of
any clonal relationship between stromal and tumor cells.
These Authors identified a correlation between BM-MSC
genetic aberrations and overall survival in their cohort of
patients, but raised a note of caution since these aberrations
were detected only in cases with adverse prognosis and
therefore were not likely to represent an independent
prognostic factor [52]. Nonetheless, the possibility that
genetic instability of BM-MSCs may translate into the
support to MDS/AML growth is consistent with preclinical studies [73]. In this connection, an intriguing study
of two AML cases with MLL-ELL translocations showed
that non-adherent leukemic blasts, upon long-term culture,
transformed into myofibroblasts capable of supporting the
in vitro growth of autologous leukemic cells [74].
Avanzini et al. have recently reported that BM-MSC
from five MPN patients out the 23 tested displayed genetic
abnormalities unrelated to those detected in transformed
myeloid cells. In addition, patient BM-MSCs displayed
several functional defects when compared to BM-MSCs
from healthy donors that led the Authors to postulate a role
of abnormal stromal cells in leukemogenesis [75].
2595

Oncotarget

In conclusion, i) BM-MSCs from patients with
acute lymphoid or myeloid leukemia promote survival
and growth of tumor cells as well as chemoresistance, and
may be functionally abnormal and ii) genetic studies have
delineated complex developmental relationships between
BM-MSCs and acute leukemia cells, with heterogeneous
results from different studies that do not yet allow to
delineate a comprehensive model.

Finally, a biochemical mechanism for resistance of
CLL cells to forodesine has been identified. Leukemic
cell apoptosis induced by forodesine was significantly
inhibited in the presence of human or mouse MSCs.
Forodesine-induced dGTP depletion and GTP and ATP
accumulation in tumor cells were inhibited by MSCs
together with RNA and protein synthesis. Furthermore,
MSCs upregulated in leukemic cells the expression of the
anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 [81].

BM-MSCs in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL)

BM-MSCs and lymphoma
The role of MSCs/fibroblasts in the microenvironment of classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) and
follicular lymphoma (FL), two malignancies originating
from germinal center B cells, will be reviewed.
cHL is composed of mononuclear Hodgkin cells and
multinucleated Hodgkin and Reed- Sternberg (HRS) cells
embedded in an abundant microenvironment that is populated
by different non-neoplastic cell types, including B and T
cells, plasma cells, eosinophils, mast cells and histiocytes/
macrophages. Fibroblast-like cells and interdigitating
reticulum cells are present in large numbers in the collagen
bands of nodular sclerosis cHL, where they are frequently
associated with HRS cells [81].
Although recruitment of non-malignant cells to the
cHL microenvironment is largely mediated by tumor cells,
the former cells activated by the latter can contribute to
the phenomenon. Thus, for example, HRS cells, that do
not produce eotaxin, can induce in vitro production of this
chemokine by dermal fibroblasts through the release of
IL-13 and TNF [82].
cHL-derived fibroblasts express stem cell factor
(SCF) as both membrane and soluble molecules that
bind to c-kit expressed on HRS cells thereby activating
the latter cells in a paracrine way [83]. HRS growth and
survival are supported also by other molecules produced
by stromal cells such as IL-7 and CCL5. On the other
hand, HRS cells themselves produce IL-7 that induces
the synthesis of IL-6 in HL-derived fibroblasts [84].
Altogether, these studies demonstrate that fibroblasts/
stromal cells play a relevant role in cytokine-mediated
cross-talk among HRS and other cells types, culminating
in stimulation of tumor cell survival and growth.
The FL microenvironment contains different types
of immune cells (Treg cells, T follicular helper cells,
macrophages) admixed with cells MSCs. In normal lymph
node, three different subsets of MSCs have been identified
and characterized, i) fibroblastic reticular cells (FRC) that,
by producing CCL9, CCL21 and CXCL12, attract mature
dendritic cells, naïve T and B cells and promote their
interactions in the T cell zone, ii) follicular dendritic cells
(FDCs), that attract B cells in the light zone of the germinal
center by producing CXCL13 and participate in the selection
of high affinity B cells, and iii) marginal reticular cells,

Studies performed with BM-SCS from CLL patients
have generated results fully consistent with those obtained
in acute leukemia patients, i.e. stromal cells promote
survival, migration and chemoresistance of leukemic cells
[76, 77]. However, CLL studies have led to the identification
of novel and perhaps tumor cell-“specific” mechanisms of
interplay between malignant cells and stromal cells.
Ding et al have demonstrated that CLL cell
supernatants induce Akt activation and proliferation in
MSCs through PDGF receptors triggering. Accordingly,
two PDGFR ligands, i.e. PDGF and VEGF, were detected in
CLL supernatants, but PDGF only was found to be crucial
for MSC activation via a PI3K-dependent mechanism [78].
Primary CLL cells were shown to possess a limited
ability to transport cystine for glutathione synthesis due
to the low expression of the Xc transporter. BM-MSCs,
in contrast, are very efficient at importing cystine and
converting it to cystein, that is released in the tumor
microenvironment and uptaken by CLL cells to promote
glutathione synthesis. Availability of high concentrations
of the latter molecule promotes survival of CLL cells and
protects them from the toxicity of chemotherapeutic agents.
Inhibition of the stroma-driven protective mechanism
sensitized leukemic cells to cytotoxic drugs even in the
presence of stromal cells. Targeting this biochemical
pathway may represent a promising therapeutic avenue [79].
Another study has led to the identification of a novel
survival signaling pathway activated in stromal cells by
contact with primary CLL cells. It was shown that induced
expression of PKC-β in BM-MSCs was indispensable for
the capability of the latter cells to support CLL survival.
Mice knocked out for PKC-β expression were refractory
to CLL transplantation, highlighting the relevance of this
novel mechanism in vivo in the tumor microenvironment.
Two points are worth mentioning, i) part of the in vitro
experiments were carried out using the murine stromal cell
line EL08-1D2, that displayed the typical characteristics of
CAFs. Such experiments were then confirmed with BMMSCs isolated from CLL patients, that also displayed
most CAF features. ii) Expression of PKC-β was found
to be high in biopsies from CLL, ALL and mantle cell
lymphoma patients, pointing to a mechanism activated in
different lymphoid malignancies [80].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2596

Oncotarget

that deliver small antigens to B cells through follicular
conduits [85]. The FRC network appears to be activated in
FL lymph nodes [86] and FDCs display an undifferentiated
phenotype [87]. Both FRCs and FDCs contribute to establish
a protective niche for FL cells where the latter cells survive
and grow. A similar, ectopic niche develops in the BM, that
is often infiltrated by FL cells.
Stromal cells support FL cell recruitment and
growth by a combination of adhesion molecules (e.g.
VCAM-1) and chemokines/cytokines (e.g. CXCL-12,
CXCL-13, BAFF, HGF, IL-15). These processes are
favored by TNF and LTα1β2, that are overexpressed by FL
cells and promote lymphoid stromal cell differentiation.
FL-associated MSCs overexpress also the chemokine
CCL2, that attracts monocytes and stimulates their
polarization towards a tumor-associated macrophage
(TAM) phenotype. Finally, TFH cells overexpress TNF
and LTα1β2 that triggers differentiation of stromal cells
into FRCs. Similar mechanisms operate in LN and BM
from FL patients (as reviewed by Thomazy et al. [86]) and
FDCs display an undifferentiated phenotype [87].

coexist with MM cells. The CAF population was
heterogeneous since it expressed cell markers restricted
to endothelial cells, HSPCs, and MSCs, which implies
their multiple cell derivation. Moreover, Frassanito et al.
[47] demonstrated that MM activate fibroblasts and recruit
them via secretion of TGF-β. CAFs, in turn, transform
BM stroma by producing collagen and fibronectin, and by
secreting growth factors (TGF-β, HGF, IGF1), cytokines
(IL-1, IL-6) and chemokines (SDF-1α) [15]. TGF-β and
conditioned media from MM cells and active MM CAFs
converted patients’ MM endothelial cells and HSPCs into
CAF-like cells. Frassanito et al. [47] using the in vivo
xenograft MM 5T33 mouse model, demonstrated that
animals co-injected with active MM CAFs and MM cells
showed faster tumor growth than those injected with
MM cells alone. Finally, Frassanito et al. [47] found that
inhibition of the SDF1α/CXCR4 axis affects the MM cell
migration, adhesion and proliferation indicating that MM
CAFs recruit CXCR4+ MM cells via SDF1-α secretion.
In conclusion, BM-MSCs/CAFs promote growth,
survival and migration of cells derived from haematological
malignancies by different pathways as depicted in Figure 4.

CAFs and multiple myeloma

Therapeutic implications

Frassanito et al. [47] identified CAFs expressing
FSP1, αSMA, and FAP in BM samples of patients with
MM or monoclonal gammopathies of undetermined
significance (MGUS). The highest proportions of CAFs
were found in active MM patients. Immunohistochemistry
of patients’ BM confirmed that high numbers of CAFs

Given their relevant role in driving tumor progression,
CAFs have recently emerged as therapeutic targets by
various strategies. The interplay between CAFs and cancer
cells is characterized by a feed-forward loop in which
various growth factors/cytokines and their receptors play an

Figure 4: Models for the role of bone marrow-mesenchymal stromal cells and cancer activated fibroblasts in
hematological malignancies. Panel A depicts the interactions between bone marrow-mesenchymal stromal cells and acute lymphocytic
leukemia (ALL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. BM-MSCs promote migration, survival and chemoresistance of ALL/
CLL cells. Induction of survival by BM-MSCs is mediated by different pathway including Notch and PKC-β. BM-MSC protect ALL/
CLL cells from cytotoxic agents through various mechanisms such as the synthesis of L-asparagine and glutathione, and the involvement
of Wnt, ERK 1/2, PI3K/Akt signaling pathways and CXCR4/CXCL12 axis. Panel B shows the interactions between BM-MSCs and
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) and follicular lymphoma (FL) cells. BM-MSCs support the growth and survival of lymphoma cells by
different molecules including stem cell factor (SCF), IL-7, IL-15, CCL5, CXCL-12, CXCL-13, BAFF, Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF).
FL-associated MSCs overexpress CCL2 that attracts monocyte and stimulates their polarization towards a tumor-associated macrophage
(TAM) phenotype. Panel C depicts the interplay between multiple myeloma (MM) cells and CAFs. MM activate and recruit fibroblasts
via the secretion of TGF-β. In turn, CAFs secrete different growth factors and cytokines that stimulate growth and migration of MM cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2597

Oncotarget

important role in promoting tumor growth and progression.
If on one side tumor cells secrete a plethora of factors
such as TGF-β1, PDGF, VEGF, IL-6, FGF-2, IFN-γ, TNF,
MMPs involved in fibroblast activation, on the other side
CAFs produce the same molecules that in turn affect tumor
aggressiveness. In this context, several strategies have been
designed to target the growth factors and their receptors by
the use of antagonists or specific antibodies that, in some
cases, may act simultaneously on tumor cells and CAFs. For
example, the recent FDA approved pazopanib (Votrient), a
multi target receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) against
PDGFR α/β, VEGFR-1, -2, -3 and c-kit [88], as well as
MET/HGF inhibitors (monoclonal antibodies against HGF
and selective MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors) [89] and the
humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) against VEGF-A
Bevacizumab (Avastin) [90] have been validated to target the
same molecules expressed by both tumor cells and CAFs.
Particular interest has been focused on specific blockers of
PDGF and HGF receptor signaling in CAFs, that proved to
inhibit tumor growth and progression in preclinical tumor
models [91–93].
Another approach has been designed to target the
urokinase plasminogen activation (uPA) uPA/uPA receptor
(R) system that represents one of the key systems driving
tumor invasion and metastases [94]. uPAR, overexpression
in cancer cells and tumor-associated stromal cells such as

CAFs, is associated to poor prognosis and in some cases
is predictive of invasion and metastasis [95, 96]. Thus,
new uPAR-targeted therapies might be effective against
both tumor cells and cells of the tumor microenvironment.
Several therapeutic approaches aimed at inhibiting the
uPA/uPAR, such as selective inhibitors of uPA activity,
antagonist peptides, mAb able to prevent uPA binding to
uPAR and gene therapy techniques silencing uPA/uPAR
expression functions, have been shown to possess antitumor effects in xenograft models [97]. However, all these
strategies need definitive confirmation in humans as only
few uPA inhibitors entered clinical trial.
Another interesting approach concerns the use
of inhibitors of COX-2, an inflammatory molecule
overexpressed in both CAFs and tumor cells upon their
reciprocal interaction [98, 99]. COX-2 promotes tumor
progression by inducing EMT and stimulating VEGFmediated angiogenesis and MMP-14-driven invasion
[84, 100]. In this respect, preclinical and clinical trials
demonstrated that COX-2 inhibitors such as Celecoxib
(Celebrex) represent a promising strategy in the prevention
and treatment of solid tumors [101].
Given the relevant role of MMPs in promoting
tumor invasiveness and metastasis, great efforts have been
undertaken in order to develop specific MMP inhibitors
[102]. The most extensively studied classes of MMP

Box 1: Principal hematological malignancies
ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
Acute leukemias are hematological malignancies originating from early hematopoietic progenitors/precursors and
involving the myeloid (acute myeloid leukemia or AML) or the lymphoid (acute lymphoid leukemia or ALL) lineages.
Acute leukemias, that can be further subclassified according to cytogenetic, morphological or immunophenotypic criteria,
develop initially in the bone marrow, then invade the circulating compartment and metastasize to distant organs.
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (CLL)
CLL is a monoclonal expansion of CD19+, CD5+ B lymphocytes carrying either mutated or unmutated immunoglobulin
variable region (IgV) genes. Mutated cases have a better prognosis than unmutated cases, which are also characterized
by the expression of the CD38 and ZAP-70 markers. CLL, that often manifests as asymptomatic blood lymphocytosis,
develops in the lymph node and bone marrow microenvironments.
FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA (FL)
FL is a B cell malignancy that develops in secondary lymphoid follicles and contains centroblasts and centrocytes in
variable proportions. Tumor cells may invade the bone marrow and circulate in the peripheral blood. FL is an indolent
lymphoma characterized by the progressive infiltration of lymphoid follicles with tumor cells expressing constitutively
the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Invaded lymph nodes may retain for a long time remnants of their physiological
architecture.
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA (HL)
HL is a peculiar germinal-center derived B cell malignancy that does not express B cell markers and is characterized
by a paucity of tumor cells known as Reed-Sternberg cells. HL, that develops in the lymph node microenvironment, is
classified in two clinicopathologic entities, namely classical HL (∼95% of cases) and nodular lymphocyte predominant
HL (∼5% of cases). HL lymph nodes are enriched with various reactive cell types, such as eosinophils, neutrophils,
plasma cells and T cells.
MULTIPLE MYELOMA (MM)
MM is monoclonal plasma cell malignancy that develops and grows in the bone marrow, and metastasizes to the bone.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2598

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

inhibitors include Batimastat, Marimastat, Prinomastat
and Tanomastat that have been tested in clinical trials for
several malignant diseases [103].
FAP, a member of the serine protease family,
selectively expressed on CAFs and cancer cells, exerts
a proteolytic activity that supports tumor growth and
proliferation [104]. Thus, FAP has been considered as
an emerging therapeutic target in cancer. A humanized
anti-FAP antibody (mAb F19; sibrotuzumab) was well
tolerated [105] but failed to show any beneficial effect in a
phase II trial for metastatic colorectal cancer [106]. It was
reported that a monoclonal anti-FAP antibody conjugated
to maytansinoid induced a long-lasting inhibition of tumor
growth and complete regression in different experimental
tumor models, without signs of toxicity [107]. However,
further studies are required to determine the potential
clinical application of this molecule.
An interesting approach to target CAFs focuses on the
development of specific antibodies against integrins, that have
been found to be expressed by tumor cells and CAFs and to
be involved in cancer progression [108]. In particular, a recent
study demonstrated that integrin αvβ6 triggering leads to
CAFs proliferation, and consequently increases gastric cancer
metastasis [109]. Furthermore, a human therapeutic antibody
264RAD, which binds to αvβ6 and inhibits its function, has
been shown to delay tumor growth by preventing TGF-βmediated activation of CAFs, and by reducing the expression
of fibronectin and α-SMA on stromal fibroblasts [110].
Therefore, disruption of the expression of integrin αvβ6 may
be a new strategy for future cancer therapy.
Finally, curcumine can interfere with the dynamic
mutual interaction between CAFs and head and neck
tumor cells [111]. Specifically, curcumin reduced the
release of EMT-mediators by CAFs with consequent
reduction of cancer invasion. These data confirmed the
potential of curcumin in clinical application and underline
the need of improved formulation for in vivo delivery.

1.	 Balkwill F, Mantovani A. Inflammation and cancer: back to
Virchow? Lancet. 2001; 357:539–545.
2.	 Balkwill F, Charles KA, Mantovani A. Smoldering and
polarized inflammation in the initiation and promotion of
malignant disease. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:211–217.
3.	 Koehne C-H, Dubois RN. COX-2 inhibition and colorectal
cancer. Semin Oncol. 2004; 31:12–21.
4.	 Krause DS. Regulation of hematopoietic stem cell fate.
Oncogene. 2002; 21:3262–3269.
5.	 Kopp H-G, Avecilla ST, Hooper AT, Rafii S. The bone
marrow vascular niche: home of HSC differentiation and
mobilization. Physiology (Bethesda). 2005; 20:349–356.
6.	 Wilson A, Trumpp A. Bone-marrow haematopoieticstem-cell niches. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 6:93–9106.
7.	 Calvi LM, Adams GB, Weibrecht KW, Weber JM,
Olson DP, Knight MC, Martin RP, Schipani E, Divieti P,
­Bringhurst FR, Milner LA, Kronenberg HM, Scadden DT.
Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic stem cell
niche. Nature. 2003; 425:841–846.
8.	 Rizo A, Vellenga E, de Haan G, Schuringa JJ. Signaling
pathways in self-renewing hematopoietic and leukemic
stem cells: do all stem cells need a niche? Human molecular
genetics. 2006; 15:R210–219.
9.	 Zhang J, Niu C, Ye L, Huang H, He X, Tong WG, Ross J,
Haug J, Johnson T, Feng JQ, Harris S, Wiedemann LM,
Mishina Y, Li L. Identification of the haematopoietic stem
cell niche and control of the niche size. Nature. 2003;
425:836–841.
10.	 Abkowitz JL, Robinson AE, Kale S, Long MW, Chen J.
Mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells during
homeostasis and after cytokine exposure. Blood. 2003;
102:1249–1253.
11.	 Kopp HG, Avecilla ST, Hooper AT, Rafii S. The bone
marrow vascular niche: home of HSC differentiation and
mobilization. Physiology. 2005; 20:349–356.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

12.	 Yin T, Li L. The stem cell niches in bone. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2006; 116:1195–1201.

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Union Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n°278570 to DR and 278706 to AV and Associazione
Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (A.I.R.C.), grant 13013
to VP. Contributi del “Cinque per mille dell’IRPEF Finanziamento della ricerca sanitaria” e Finanziamento
Ricerca Corrente, Ministero Salute (contributo per la
ricerca intramurale).

13.	 Ribatti D, Nico B, Vacca A. Importance of the bone marrow
microenvironment in inducing the angiogenic response in
multiple myeloma. Oncogene. 2006; 25:4257–4266.
14.	 Ribatti D. Mast cells and macrophages exert beneficial and
detrimental effects on tumor progression and angiogenesis.
Immunol Lett. 2013; 152:83–88.
15.	 Kalluri R, Zeisberg M. Fibroblasts in cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2006; 6:392–401.
16.	 Gabbiani G, Ryan GB, Majne G. Presence of modified
fibroblasts in granulation tissue and their possible role in
wound contraction. Experientia. 1971; 27:549–550.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2599

Oncotarget

17.	 Madar S, Goldstein I, Rotter V. ‘Cancer associated
fibroblasts’–more than meets the eye. Trends Mol Med.
2013; 19:447–453.

32.	 Weber WA, Petersen V, Schmidt B, Tyndale-Hines L,
Link  T, Peschel C, Schwaiger M. Positron emission
tomography in non-small-cell lung cancer: prediction of
response to chemotherapy by quantitative assessment of
glucose use. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:2651–2657.

18.	 Franco OE, Shaw AK, Strand DW, Hayward SW. Cancer
associated fibroblasts in cancer pathogenesis. Semin Cell
Dev Biol. 2010; 21:33–39.

33.	 Kurose K, Gilley K, Matsumoto S, Watson PH, Zhou X-P,
Eng C. Frequent somatic mutations in PTEN and TP53 are
mutually exclusive in the stroma of breast carcinomas. Nat
Genet. 2002; 32:355–357.

19.	 Orimo A, Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts in cancer: a
novel tumor-promoting cell type. Cell Cycle. 2006; 5:
1597–1601.

34.	 Moinfar F, Man YG, Bratthauer GL, Ratschek M,
Tavassoli FA. Genetic abnormalities in mammary ductal
intraepithelial neoplasia-flat type (“clinging ductal
carcinoma in situ”): a simulator of normal mammary
epithelium. Cancer. 2000; 88:2072–2081.

20.	 Shimoda M, Mellody KT, Orimo A. Carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts are a rate-limiting determinant for tumour
progression. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2010; 21:19–25.
21.	 Erez N, Truitt M, Olson P, Arron ST, Hanahan D. CancerAssociated Fibroblasts Are Activated in Incipient Neoplasia
to Orchestrate Tumor-Promoting Inflammation in an NFkappaB-Dependent Manner. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:135–147.

35.	 Radisky DC, Levy DD, Littlepage LE, Liu H, Nelson CM,
Fata JE, Leake D, Godden EL, Albertson DG, Nieto MA,
Werb Z, Bissell MJ. Rac1b and reactive oxygen species
mediate MMP-3-induced EMT and genomic instability.
Nature. 2005; 436:123–127.

22.	 Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, Arenzana-Seisdedos  F,
Delaunay T, Naeem R, Carey VJ, Richardson AL,
Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts present in invasive
human breast carcinomas promote tumor growth and
angiogenesis through elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion.
Cell. 2005; 121:335–348.

36.	 Qiu W, Hu M, Sridhar A, Opeskin K, Fox S, Shipitsin M,
Trivett M, Thompson ER, Ramakrishna M, Gorringe KL,
Polyak K, Haviv I, Campbell IG. No evidence of clonal
somatic genetic alterations in cancer-associated fibroblasts
from human breast and ovarian carcinomas. Nat Genet.
2008; 40:650–655.

23.	 Cirri P, Chiarugi P. Cancer-associated-fibroblasts and
tumour cells: a diabolic liaison driving cancer progression.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31:195–208.

37.	 Zeisberg EM, Potenta S, Xie L, Zeisberg M, Kalluri R.
Discovery of endothelial to mesenchymal transition as a
source for carcinoma-associated fibroblasts. Cancer Res.
2007; 67:10123–10128.

24.	 Rasanen K, Vaheri A. Activation of fibroblasts in cancer
stroma. Exp Cell Res. 2010; 316:2713–2722.
25.	 Chen L, Tredget EE, Wu PYG, Wu Y. Paracrine factors
of mesenchymal stem cells recruit macrophages and
endothelial lineage cells and enhance wound healing. PLoS
One. 2008; 3.

38.	 Kidd S, Spaeth E, Watson K, Burks J, Lu H, Klopp  A,
Andreeff M, Marini FC. Origins of the tumor
microenvironment: quantitative assessment of adipose-derived
and bone marrow-derived stroma. PLoS One. 2012; 7.

26.	 Fukumura D, Xavier R, Sugiura T, Chen Y, Park EC, Lu N,
Selig M, Nielsen G, Taksir T, Jain RK, Seed B. Tumor
induction of VEGF promoter activity in stromal cells. Cell.
1998; 94:715–725.

39.	 Spaeth EL, Dembinski JL, Sasser AK, Watson K, Klopp
A, Hall B, Andreeff M, Marini F. Mesenchymal stem cell
transition to tumor-associated fibroblasts contributes to
fibrovascular network expansion and tumor progression.
PLoS One. 2009; 4.

27.	 Byzova TV, Goldman CK, Pampori N, Thomas KA,
Bett A, Shattil SJ, Plow EF. A mechanism for modulation
of cellular responses to VEGF: activation of the integrins.
Mol Cell. 2000; 6:851–860.

40.	 Mishra PJ, Mishra PJ, Humeniuk R, Medina DJ, Alexe G,
Mesirov JP, Ganesan S, Glod JW, Banerjee D. Carcinomaassociated fibroblast-like differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4331–4339.

28.	 De Wever O, Van Bockstal M, Mareel M, Hendrix
A, Bracke M. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts provide
operational flexibility in metastasis. Semin Cancer Biol.
2014; 25:33–46.

41.	 Barcellos-de-Souza P, Gori V, Bambi F, Chiarugi P. Tumor
microenvironment: bone marrow-mesenchymal stem cells as
key players. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1836:321–335.

29.	 Cirri P, Chiarugi P. Cancer associated fibroblasts: the dark
side of the coin. Am J Cancer Res. 2011; 1:482–497.

42.	 Uccelli A, Moretta L, Pistoia V. Mesenchymal stem cells
in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:726–736.

30.	 Kojima Y, Acar A, Eaton EN, Mellody KT, Scheel C, BenPorath I, Onder TT, Wang ZC, Richardson AL, Weinberg
RA, Orimo A. Autocrine TGF-beta and stromal cell-derived
factor-1 (SDF-1) signaling drives the evolution of tumorpromoting mammary stromal myofibroblasts. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:20009–20014.

43.	 Haniffa MA, Collin MP, Buckley CD, Dazzi F.
Mesenchymal stem cells: the fibroblasts’ new clothes?
Haematologica. 2009; 94:258–263.
44.	 Jones S, Horwood N, Cope A, Dazzi F. The antiproliferative
effect of mesenchymal stem cells is a fundamental property
shared by all stromal cells. J Immunol. 2007; 179:2824–
2831.

31.	 Radisky DC, Kenny PA, Bissell MJ. Fibrosis and cancer:
do myofibroblasts come also from epithelial cells via EMT?
J Cell Biochem. 2007; 101:830–839.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2600

Oncotarget

45.	 Tropel P, Noel D, Platet N, Legrand P, Benabid AL,
Berger F. Isolation and characterisation of mesenchymal
stem cells from adult mouse bone marrow. Experimental
cell research. 2004; 295:395–406.

Long-term proliferation of human leukemia cells induced
by mouse stroma. Exp Hemaol. 1989; 17:398–404.
57.	 Kumagai M, Manabe A, Pui CH, Behm FG, Raimondi SC,
Hancock ML, Mahmoud H, Crist WM, Campana D.
Stroma-supported culture in childhood B-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells predicts treatment outcome.
J Clin Invest. 1996; 97:755–760.

46.	 Dominici M, Le Blanc K, Mueller I, Slaper-Cortenbach I,
Marini F, Krause D, Deans R, Keating A, Prockop D,
Horwitz E. Minimal criteria for defining multipotent
mesenchymal stromal cells. The International Society for
Cellular Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy. 2006;
8:315–317.

58.	 Makrynikola V, Bradstock KF. Adhesion of precursor-B
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells to bone marrow
stromal proteins. Leukemia. 1993; 7:86–92.

47.	 Frassanito MA, Rao L, Moschetta M, Ria R, Di Marzo L,
De Luisi A, Racanelli V, Catacchio I, Berardi S, Basile A,
Menu E, Ruggieri S, Nico B, Ribatti D, Fumarulo R,
Dammacco F. Bone marrow fibroblasts parallel multiple
myeloma progression in patients and mice: in vitro and in
vivo studies. Leukemia. 2014; 28:904–916.

59.	 Manabe A, Coustan-Smith E, Behm FG, Raimondi SC,
Campana D. Bone marrow-derived stromal cells prevent
apoptotic cell death in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood. 1992; 79:2370–2377.
60.	 Nishigaki H, Ito C, Manabe A, Kumagai M, CoustanSmith E, Yanishevski Y, Behm FG, Raimondi SC, Pui CH,
Campana D. Prevalence and growth characteristics of
malignant stem cells in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood. 1997; 89:3735–3744.

48.	 Vykoupil KF, Thiele J, Georgii A. Hairy cell leukemia.
Bone marrow findings in 24 patients. Virchows Arch A
Pathol Anat Histol. 1976; 370:273–289.
49.	 Burthem J, Cawley JC. The bone marrow fibrosis of hairycell leukemia is caused by the synthesis and assembly of a
fibronectin matrix by the hairy cells. Blood. 1994; 83:497–504.

61.	 Umiel T, Friedman S, Zaizov R, Cohen IJ, Gozes Y,
Epstein N, Kobiler D, Zipori D. Long-term culture of infant
leukemia cells: dependence upon stromal cells from the
bone marrow and bilineage differentiation. Leuk Res. 1986;
10:1007–1013.

50.	 Shehata M, Schwarzmeier JD, Hilgarth M, Hubmann R,
Duechler M, Gisslinger H. TGF-beta1 induces bone marrow
reticulin fibrosis in hairy cell leukemia. J Clin Invest. 2004;
113:676–685.

62.	 Ramasamy R, Lam EWF, Soeiro I, Tisato V, Bonnet D,
Dazzi F. Mesenchymal stem cells inhibit proliferation and
apoptosis of tumor cells: impact on in vivo tumor growth.
Leukemia. 2007; 21:304–310.

51.	 Aziz KA, Till KJ, Chen H, Slupsky JR, Campbell F, Cawley
JC, Zuzel M. The role of autocrine FGF-2 in the distinctive
bone marrow fibrosis of hairy-cell leukemia (HCL). Blood.
2003; 102:1051–1056.

63.	 Nwabo Kamdje AH, Mosna F, Bifari F, Lisi V, Bassi
G, Malpeli G, Ricciardi M, Perbellini O, Scupoli MT,
Pizzolo G, Krampera M. Notch-3 and Notch-4 signaling
rescue from apoptosis human B-ALL cells in contact with
human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells.
Blood. 2011; 118:380–389.

52.	 Blau O, Baldus CD, Hofmann W-K, Thiel G, Nolte F,
Burmeister T, Turkmen S, Benlasfer O, Schumann E,
Sindram A, Molkentin M, Mundlos S, Keilholz U, Thiel E,
Blau IW. Mesenchymal stromal cells of myelodysplastic
syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia patients have distinct
genetic abnormalities compared with leukemic blasts.
Blood. 2011; 118:5583–5592.

64.	 Iwamoto S, Mihara K, Downing JR, Pui C-H, Campana D.
Mesenchymal cells regulate the response of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells to asparaginase. J Clin Invest.
2007; 117:1049–1057.

53.	 Menendez P, Catalina P, Rodriguez R, Melen GJ, Bueno C,
Arriero M, Garcia-Sanchez F, Lassaletta A, Garcia-Sanz
R, Garcia-Castro J. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
from infants with MLL-AF4+ acute leukemia harbor and
express the MLL-AF4 fusion gene. J Exp Med. 2009;
206:3131–3141.

65.	 Ehsanipour EA, Sheng X, Behan JW, Wang X, Butturini  A,
Avramis VI, Mittelman SD. Adipocytes cause leukemia
cell resistance to L-asparaginase via release of glutamine.
Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2998–3006.
66.	 Vianello F, Villanova F, Tisato V, Lymperi S, Ho K-K,
Gomes AR, Marin D, Bonnet D, Apperley J, Lam EWF,
Dazzi F. Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells nonselectively protect chronic myeloid leukemia cells from
imatinib-induced apoptosis via the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis.
Haematologica. 2010; 95:1081–1089.

54.	 Shalapour S, Eckert C, Seeger K, Pfau M, Prada J, Henze
G, Blankenstein T, Kammertoens T. Leukemia-associated
genetic aberrations in mesenchymal stem cells of children
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Mol Med. 2010;
88:249–265.
55.	 Hida K, Hida Y, Amin DN, Flint AF, Panigrahy D, Morton
CC, Klagsbrun M. Tumor-associated endothelial cells with
cytogenetic abnormalities. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:8249–8255.

67.	 Jin L, Tabe Y, Konoplev S, Xu Y, Leysath CE, Lu H,
Kimura S, Ohsaka A, Rios M-B, Calvert L, Kantarjian H,
Andreeff M, Konopleva M. CXCR4 up-regulation by
imatinib induces chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)
cell migration to bone marrow stroma and promotes

56.	 Gluck U, Zipori D, Wetzler M, Berrebi A, Shaklai M,
Drezen O, Zaizov R, Luria D, Marcelle C, Stark B.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2601

Oncotarget

survival of quiescent CML cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;
7:48–58.

78.	 Ding W, Knox TR, Tschumper RC, Wu W, Schwager
SM, Boysen JC, Jelinek DF, Kay NE. Platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF)-PDGF receptor interaction activates
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells derived
from chronic lymphocytic leukemia: implications for an
angiogenic switch. Blood. 2010; 116:2984–2993.

68.	 Pillozzi S, Masselli M, De Lorenzo E, Accordi B, Cilia E,
Crociani O, Amedei A, Veltroni M, D’Amico M, Basso G,
Becchetti A, Campana D, Arcangeli A. Chemotherapy
resistance in acute lymphoblastic leukemia requires hERG1
channels and is overcome by hERG1 blockers. Blood. 2011;
117:902–914.

79.	 Zhang W, Trachootham D, Liu J, Chen G, Pelicano H,
Garcia-Prieto C, Lu W, Burger JA, Croce CM, Plunkett W,
Keating MJ, Huang P. Stromal control of cystine
metabolism promotes cancer cell survival in chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia. Nat Cell Biol. 2012; 14:276–286.

69.	 Yang Y, Mallampati S, Sun B, Zhang J, Kim S-B, Lee
J-S, Gong Y, Cai Z, Sun X. Wnt pathway contributes to
the protection by bone marrow stromal cells of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells and is a potential therapeutic
target. Cancer Lett. 2013; 333:9–17.

80.	 Lutzny G, Kocher T, Schmidt-Supprian M, Rudelius
M, Klein-Hitpass L, Finch AJ, Durig J, Wagner M,
Haferlach  C, Kohlmann A, Schnittger S, Seifert M,
Wanninger S, Zaborsky N, Oostendorp R, Ruland J. Protein
kinase c-beta-dependent activation of NF-kappaB in stromal
cells is indispensable for the survival of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia B cells in vivo. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:77–92.

70.	 Greaves MF, Wiemels J. Origins of chromosome
translocations in childhood leukaemia. Nat Rev Cancer.
2003; 3:639–649.
71.	 Conforti A, Biagini S, Del Bufalo F, Sirleto P, Angioni
A, Starc N, Li Pira G, Moretta F, Proia A, Contoli B,
Genovese S, Ciardi C, Avanzini MA, Rosti V, LoCoco F, Locatelli F. Biological, functional and genetic
characterization of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stromal cells from pediatric patients affected by acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e76989.

81.	 Balakrishnan K, Burger JA, Quiroga MP, Henneberg M,
Ayres ML, Wierda WG, Ghi V. Influence of bone marrow
stromal microenvironment on forodesine-induced responses
in CLL primary cells. Blood. 2010; 116:1083–1091.
82.	 Jundt F, Anagnostopoulos I, Bommert K, Emmerich
F, Muller G, Foss HD, Royer HD, Stein H, Dorken B.
Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells induce fibroblasts to
secrete eotaxin, a potent chemoattractant for T cells and
eosinophils. Blood. 1999; 94:2065–2071.

72.	 Campioni D, Bardi MA, Cavazzini F, Tammiso E,
Pezzolo E, Pregnolato E, Volta E, Cuneo A, Lanza F.
Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic profile of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells in chronic and
acute lymphoproliferative disorders. Ann Hematol. 2012;
91:1563–1577.

83.	 Aldinucci D, Poletto D, Nanni P, Degan M, Gloghini A,
Di Francia R, Russo S, Carbone A, Pinto A, Gattei V.
Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells express functional
c-kit receptors and interact with primary fibroblasts from
Hodgkin’s disease-involved lymph nodes through soluble
and membrane-bound stem cell factor. Br J Haematol.
2002; 118:1055–1064.

73.	 Raaijmakers MHGP, Mukherjee S, Guo S, Zhang S,
Kobayashi T, Schoonmaker JA, Ebert BL, Al-Shahrour  F,
Hasserjian RP, Scadden EO, Aung Z, Matza M,
Merkenschlager M, Lin C, Rommens JM, Scadden DT.
Bone progenitor dysfunction induces myelodysplasia and
secondary leukaemia. Nature. 2010; 464:852–857.

84.	 Cattaruzza L, Gloghini A, Olivo K, Di Francia R, Lorenzon
D, De Filippi R, Carbone A, Colombatti A, Pinto A,
Aldinucci D. Functional coexpression of Interleukin (IL)-7
and its receptor (IL-7R) on Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg
cells: Involvement of IL-7 in tumor cell growth and
microenvironmental interactions of Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Int J Cancer. 2009; 125:1092–1101.

74.	 Tashiro H, Mizutani-Noguchi M, Shirasaki R, Shirafuji N.
Acute myelogenous leukemia cells with the MLL-ELL
translocation convert morphologically and functionally into
adherent myofibroblasts. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2010; 391:592–597.
75.	 Avanzini MA, Bernardo ME, Novara F, Mantelli M,
Poletto V, Villani L, Lenta E, Ingo DM, Achille V,
Bonetti E, Massa M, Campanelli R, Fois G, Catarsi P,
Gale RP, Moretta A. Functional and genetic aberrations
of in vitro-cultured marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal
cells of patients with classical Philadelphia-negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms. Leukemia. 2014.

85.	 Mueller SN, Germain RN. Stromal cell contributions to the
homeostasis and functionality of the immune system. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2009; 9:618–629.
86.	 Thomazy VA, Vega F, Medeiros LJ, Davies PJ, Jones D.
Phenotypic modulation of the stromal reticular network in
normal and neoplastic lymph nodes: tissue transglutaminase
reveals coordinate regulation of multiple cell types. Am J
Pathol. 2003; 163:165–174.

76.	 Lagneaux L, Delforge A, Bron D, De Bruyn C, Stryckmans P.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemic B cells but not normal B cells
are rescued from apoptosis by contact with normal bone marrow
stromal cells. Blood. 1998; 91:2387–2396.

87.	 Chang K-C, Huang X, Medeiros LJ, Jones D.
Germinal centre-like versus undifferentiated stromal
immunophenotypes in follicular lymphoma. J Pathol. 2003;
201:404–412.

77.	 Panayiotidis P, Jones D, Ganeshaguru K, Foroni L, Hoffbr
AV. Human bone marrow stromal cells prevent apoptosis
and support the survival of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
cells in vitro. Br J Haematol. 1996; 92:97–9103.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

88.	 Escudier B, Porta C, Bono P, Powles T, Eisen T,
Sternberg  CN, Gschwend JE, De Giorgi U, Parikh O,
2602

Oncotarget

Hawkins R, Sevin E, Negrier S, Khan S, Diaz J, Redhu S,
Mehmud F. Randomized, controlled, double-blind, crossover trial assessing treatment preference for pazopanib versus
sunitinib in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma:
PISCES Study. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:1412–1418.

epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stemness.
Cancer Res. 2010; 70:6945–6956.
101.	Ghosh N, Chaki R, Mandal V, Mandal SC. COX-2 as a
target for cancer chemotherapy. Pharmacol Rep. 2010;
62:233–244.

89.	 Rosen PJ, Sweeney CJ, Park DJ, Beaupre DM, Deng H,
Leitch IM, Shubhakar P, Zhu M, Oliner KS, Anderson A,
Yee LK. A phase Ib study of AMG 102 in combination with
bevacizumab or motesanib in patients with advanced solid
tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:2677–2687.

102.	Chen L, Tredget EE, Wu PY, Wu Y. Paracrine factors
of mesenchymal stem cells recruit macrophages and
endothelial lineage cells and enhance wound healing. PLoS
One. 2008; 3:e1886.
103.	Chaudhary AK, Singh M, Bharti AC, Asotra K,
Sundaram S, Mehrotra R. Genetic polymorphisms of
matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in potentially
malignant and malignant lesions of the head and neck.
J Biomed Sci. 2010; 17:10–10.

90.	 Ebos JML, Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: impact on
invasion, disease progression, and metastasis. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2011; 8:210–221.
91.	 Kim KJ, Wang L, Su Y-C, Gillespie GY, Salhotra A,
Lal B, Laterra J. Systemic anti-hepatocyte growth factor
monoclonal antibody therapy induces the regression of
intracranial glioma xenografts. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;
12:1292–1298.

104.	Liu R, Li H, Liu L, Yu J, Ren X. Fibroblast activation
protein: A potential therapeutic target in cancer. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2012; 13:123–129.
105.	Scott AM, Wiseman G, Welt S, Adjei A, Lee F-T,
Hopkins W, Divgi CR, Hanson LH, Mitchell P, Gansen DN,
Larson SM, Ingle JN, Hoffman EW, Tanswell P, Ritter G,
Cohen LS. A Phase I dose-escalation study of sibrotuzumab
in patients with advanced or metastatic fibroblast activation
protein-positive cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:1639–1647.

92.	 Pietras K, Pahler J, Bergers G, Hanahan D. Functions of
paracrine PDGF signaling in the proangiogenic tumor
stroma revealed by pharmacological targeting. PLoS Med.
2008; 5.
93.	 Wen J, Matsumoto K, Taniura N, Tomioka D, Nakamura  T.
Hepatic gene expression of NK4, an HGF-antagonist/
angiogenesis inhibitor, suppresses liver metastasis and
invasive growth of colon cancer in mice. Cancer Gene Ther.
2004; 11:419–430.

106.	Hofheinz RD, Weisser A, Willer A, Hehlmann R,
Hochhaus A. Treatment of a patient with advanced
esophageal cancer with a combination of mitomycin C and
capecitabine: activation of the thymidine phosphorylase as
active principle? Onkologie. 2003; 26:161–164.

94.	 Smith HW, Marshall CJ. Regulation of cell signalling by
uPAR. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11:23–36.

107.	Ostermann E, Garin-Chesa P, Heider KH, Kalat M,
Lamche H, Puri C, Kerjaschki D, Rettig WJ, Adolf GR.
Effective immunoconjugate therapy in cancer models
targeting a serine protease of tumor fibroblasts. Clin Cancer
Res. 2008; 14:4584–4592.

95.	 Bene MC, Castoldi G, Knapp W, Rigolin GM, Escribano L,
Lemez P, Ludwig WD, Matutes E, Orfao A, Lanza F, van’t
Veer M. CD87 (urokinase-type plasminogen activator
receptor), function and pathology in hematological
disorders: a review. Leukemia. 2004; 18:394–400.

108.	Desgrosellier JS, Cheresh DA. Integrins in cancer:
biological implications and therapeutic opportunities. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:9–22.

96.	 Jacobsen B, Ploug M. The urokinase receptor and its
structural homologue C4.4A in human cancer: expression,
prognosis and pharmacological inhibition. Curr Med Chem.
2008; 15:2559–2573.

109.	Zhuang Z, Zhou R, Xu X, Tian T, Liu Y, Liu Y, Lian P,
Wang J, Xu K. Clinical significance of integrin αvβ6
expression effects on gastric carcinoma invasiveness and
progression via cancer-associated fibroblasts. Med Oncol.
2013; 30:580–580.

97.	 Ulisse S, Baldini E, Sorrenti S, D’Armiento M. The
urokinase plasminogen activator system: a target for anticancer therapy. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2009; 9:32–71.
98.	 Greenhough A, Smartt HJM, Moore AE, Roberts HR,
Williams AC, Paraskeva C, Kaidi A. The COX-2/PGE2
pathway: key roles in the hallmarks of cancer and adaptation
to the tumour microenvironment. Carcinogenesis. 2009;
30:377–386.

110.	Eberlein C, Kendrew J, McDaid K, Alfred A, Kang JS,
Jacobs VN, Ross SJ, Rooney C, Smith NR, Rinkenberger  J,
Cao A, Churchman A, Marshall JF, Weir HM, Bedian V,
Blakey DC. A human monoclonal antibody 264RAD
targeting αvβ6 integrin reduces tumour growth and
metastasis, and modulates key biomarkers in vivo.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:4406–4416.

99.	 Sato N, Maehara N, Goggins M. Gene expression profiling
of tumor-stromal interactions between pancreatic cancer cells
and stromal fibroblasts. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:6950–6956.

111.	Dudas J, Fullar A, Romani A, Pritz C, Kovalszky I,
Hans Schartinger V, Mathias Sprinzl G, Riechelmann H.
Curcumin targets fibroblast-tumor cell interactions in oral
squamous cell carcinoma. Exp Cell Res. 2013; 319:800–809.

100.	Giannoni E, Bianchini F, Masieri L, Serni S, Torre E,
Calorini L, Chiarugi P. Reciprocal activation of prostate
cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts stimulates

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2603

Oncotarget

