Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 20

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

RB1 dual role in proliferation and apoptosis: Cell fate control
and implications for cancer therapy
Paola Indovina1,2, Francesca Pentimalli3, Nadia Casini2, Immacolata Vocca3,
Antonio Giordano1,2
1

Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology,
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
2

Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neuroscience, University of Siena and Istituto Toscano Tumori (ITT), Siena, Italy

3

Oncology Research Center of Mercogliano (CROM), Istituto Nazionale Tumori “Fodazione G. Pascale” – IRCCS, Naples, Italy

Correspondence to:
Antonio Giordano, e-mail: giordano@temple.edu
Keywords: RB family, apoptosis, E2F, cancer therapy, CDK inhibitors
Received: May 14, 2015 	Accepted: June 06, 2015 	Published: June 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
Inactivation of the retinoblastoma (RB1) tumor suppressor is one of the most
frequent and early recognized molecular hallmarks of cancer. RB1, although mainly
studied for its role in the regulation of cell cycle, emerged as a key regulator of many
biological processes. Among these, RB1 has been implicated in the regulation of
apoptosis, the alteration of which underlies both cancer development and resistance
to therapy. RB1 role in apoptosis, however, is still controversial because, depending
on the context, the apoptotic cues, and its own status, RB1 can act either by inhibiting
or promoting apoptosis. Moreover, the mechanisms whereby RB1 controls both
proliferation and apoptosis in a coordinated manner are only now beginning to be
unraveled. Here, by reviewing the main studies assessing the effect of RB1 status and
modulation on these processes, we provide an overview of the possible underlying
molecular mechanisms whereby RB1, and its family members, dictate cell fate in
various contexts. We also describe the current antitumoral strategies aimed at the
use of RB1 as predictive, prognostic and therapeutic target in cancer. A thorough
understanding of RB1 function in controlling cell fate determination is crucial for a
successful translation of RB1 status assessment in the clinical setting.

factors [6]. Indeed, the canonical model for the tumor
suppressive action of RB1, which emerged from these
early studies, is based on its ability to inhibit the G1-S
transition through the repression of E2F target genes
involved in DNA synthesis and cell cycle progression.
This function of RB1 is regulated through changes
in its phosphorylation status, which are mediated by
cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) complexes,
CDK inhibitors and phosphatase activity (for a review
see [7]). When RB1 is in its active hypophosphorylated
state, it represses E2F-mediated transcription by
binding and blocking the E2F transactivation domain
and forming complexes with E2Fs, together with their
heterodimerization partners DPs, at cell cycle gene
promoters. Conversely, RB1 phosphorylation, which is
initiated by cyclin D-CDK4/6 in response to mitogenic
signals, inactivates the RB1 repressive function

INTRODUCTION
Inactivation of the retinoblastoma (RB1) tumor
suppressor occurs with such a high frequency in cancer —
either directly, through mutations, or indirectly, through
the altered expression of RB1 regulators — to be proposed
as a fundamental event for tumor development [1].
Therefore, many efforts have been dedicated to investigate
RB1 mechanisms of action in order to shed light on key
events in cancer development.
Early studies identified RB1 and other cell cycle
regulatory proteins as intracellular targets of transforming
viruses [2–5]. So, initial studies on RB1 function focused
on its role as a cell cycle regulator and correlated its
oncosuppressive activity mainly with its capability to
negatively regulate cell cycle through the interaction
with members of the E2F family of transcription
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17873

Oncotarget

by dissociating the RB1-E2F-DP complexes. The
transcriptional repressive activity of RB1 also relies on its
ability to recruit chromatin remodelling enzymes to E2Fregulated promoters. However, the action of these enzymes
seems to be more related to chromatin changes associated
with a stable gene silencing during cell cycle exit rather
than to the negative control of the G1-S transition in
cycling cells [8].
RB1 belongs to a family of three proteins,
including also retinoblastoma-like 1 (RBL1/p107) and
retinoblastoma-like 2 (RBL2/p130) [7]. RBL2/p130
altered expression and delocalization was found in various
cancers, in which it functions as a valuable prognostic
marker [9–21]. Both RBL1/p107 and RBL2/p130 are
involved in the negative regulation of cell cycle by
interacting with E2F family members although in different
combinations with respect to RB1 [7]. Recently, it has
been shown that RBL2/p130, together with E2F4-DP and
the multi-vulval class B (MuvB) core component, form the
DREAM complex (DP, RB-like, E2F and MuvB), which
mediates cell cycle gene repression during quiescence and
coordinates periodic gene expression during the G1-S and
G2-M transitions by releasing RBL2/p130 and recruiting
different transcription factors [22].
However, although classically the tumor suppressive
function of the RB proteins has been mainly attributed
to their ability to arrest cell cycle by repressing E2F
target genes, these proteins can also control cell cycle
progression through E2F-independent mechanisms.
Indeed, both RB1 and RB-like proteins are able to
negatively regulate cell cycle by inhibiting CDK activity
through either indirect or direct mechanisms, respectively
[8, 23]. Moreover, beyond their function as G1 checkpoint
regulators, RB proteins are involved in many other cellular
processes, such as preservation of chromosomal stability,
induction and maintenance of senescence, regulation of
cellular differentiation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis, which
could all contribute to the RB oncosuppressive activity
[24, 25]. At the molecular level, RB1 is now viewed as a
platform for multiple protein interactions through which it
regulates different cellular pathways [8].
Given the central role of RB1 in regulating cellular
processes that are crucial for both defense against
tumor progression and response to cancer treatments,
a careful analysis of RB1 status could be critical to
guide therapeutic decisions. Furthermore, unleashing
RB1 oncosuppressive potential is an appealing strategy
for cancer therapy. Considering that the main goal of
most anticancer therapeutic interventions is to induce
apoptotic cell death or inhibit proliferation, a fundamental
requirement to exploit RB1 for therapeutic purposes is
to fully understand its role in these processes. However,
whereas the role of RB proteins as negative regulators of
cell proliferation is well-understood, their role in apoptosis
is still very controversial. Here, we provide an overview
of the main findings on the function of RB1 and the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

other family members in the apoptotic process and in the
coordinated control of cell death and proliferation in both
normal cells and preclinical cancer models. Moreover we
describe clinical studies exploring the possible utility of
RB1 as a predictive marker of response to both cytotoxic
and cytostatic treatments and studies investigating the
possible use of RB proteins as ultimate therapeutic targets.

RB family and apoptosis regulation
The role of RB1 in apoptosis control is still very
controversial and limited data are available for as concerns
the role of the other RB family members in this process.
The first observations indicated an antiapoptotic role of
RB1. However, emerging data now show a proapoptotic
role of RB1 in different cellular contexts and recent
advances in the understanding of RB1 mechanisms of
action in apoptosis suggest multifunctional roles for
this protein, which can be modulated by several posttranslational modifications [8].
Early findings revealing the antiapoptotic role of RB1
The ability to evade apoptosis is a hallmark of
cancer [26]. Consistently, alterations that inhibit apoptosis
can favor tumor progression and cause resistance to
treatments [27]. So, it was quite surprising when findings
from mouse studies first revealed an antiapoptotic role for
RB1, considering its well-established oncosuppressive
function. Indeed, studies with Rb1-null mice showed
that RB1 loss induced not only deregulated proliferation,
as expected, but also massive apoptosis in the nervous
system, lens and skeletal muscles (see [28] for a thorough
description of these studies).
Genetic crosses demonstrated that the RB1-binding
partners E2Fs have a crucial role in triggering apoptosis in
Rb1-null mice [28]. Indeed, as a consequence of RB1 loss,
the release and de-repression of the E2F1 transcription
factor, which among the E2F family members has a unique
role in apoptosis induction [29], can trigger cell death by
the activation of E2F1 target genes encoding proapoptotic
proteins, such as p73, caspases, apoptotic peptidase
activating factor-1 (APAF-1), and BCL-2 homology
3 (BH3)-only family members [30].
However, later it became clear that the apoptotic
phenotypes of Rb1-null mice are not entirely caused by
E2F deregulation but are also largely due to the defective
development of extra-embryonic tissues rather than only
to the lack of Rb1 cell autonomous function [31–33].
Moreover, RB1 is able to bind and inhibit proapoptotic
factors other than E2F1 [28].
The analysis of tissue-specific Rb1 mutant mouse
models showed that RB1 loss in some tissues induced
unscheduled proliferation without having effects on
apoptosis, whereas in other tissues (lens and myoblasts)
induced apoptosis, specifically in differentiating cells [34].
17874

Oncotarget

It has been suggested that RB1 loss can induce either
apoptosis or uncontrolled proliferation depending on
different cellular contexts: in cells committed to a specific
differentiation program RB1 deficiency triggers apoptosis,
whereas in cycling cells RB1 loss leads to uncontrolled
proliferation [35]. A possible explanation on how cells
lacking RB1 can proliferate rather than undergo apoptosis
is that mitogenic stimulation activates prosurvival factors
that counteract the proapoptotic gene induction resulting
from RB1 loss [28].

to maintain the antiapoptotic activity. Indeed, although
the commonly accepted model for RB1 function would
predict that phosphorylated RB1 releases its E2F partners
during G1-S cell cycle transition, it has been observed
that RB1-E2F1 complexes persist beyond the S phase,
regardless of RB1 hyperphosphorylation [37]. Moreover,
in proliferating cells RB1 and E2F1 occupy apoptotic gene
promoters, whereas are dissociated from cell cycle genes
[38]. The ability of RB1-E2F1 complexes to persist when
RB1 is phosphorylated during cell cycle progression seems
to rely on an E2F1-specific binding domain in the RB1
C-terminal region [8]. Therefore, a simplified model that
emerges from these observations is that phosphorylation of
RB1 by CDKs during G1-S transition causes the release of
most E2Fs to induce transcription of cell cycle genes, but
at least a fraction of RB1-E2F1 complexes remains stable
thanks to the unique interaction of these proteins and
persist at the promoters of apoptotic genes, thus repressing
their expression [8] (Fig. 1A).

Role of RB1 in the coordinated control of proliferation
and apoptosis
RB1 dual role as inhibitor of both cell division and
apoptosis raises the question of how normal cells can
inactivate RB1 to enable cell division without inducing
apoptosis. A possible mechanistic explanation is that the
RB1 reversible inhibition occurring during cell cycle
through phosphorylation is functionally different from
the RB1 complete loss that induces apoptosis in Rb1-null
mice [36]. Support for this hypothesis comes from the
observation that Cdkn2a-null animals, in which RB1 is
expected to be in a hyperphosphorylated state, do not show
the massive apoptosis observed in Rb1-null mice [36]. So,
the “inactive” hyperphosphorylated form of RB1 seems

RB1 antiapoptotic role and tumorigenesis
RB1 role in inhibiting apoptosis has important
implications for tumorigenesis. RB1 ability to
prevent apoptosis might seem inconsistent with its
oncosuppressive role, since apoptosis inhibition is more

Figure 1: Mechanisms of RB1 inactivation during normal cell proliferation and tumorigenesis and their effect
on transcription of cell cycle and apoptotic genes. A. In G1 phase, the active hypophosphorylated form of RB1 binds to E2F
transcription factors to repress the expression of cell cycle and apoptotic genes. In S phase, RB1 is inactivated by phosphorylation (P) and
releases most E2Fs to induce transcription of cell cycle genes. A fraction of RB1-E2F1 complexes persist at the promoters of apoptotic
genes, thus repressing their expression. B. In cancer, RB1 can be inactivated by either mutations or hyperphosphorylation. RB1 loss leads
to de-repression of both cell cycle and apoptotic genes, whereas hyperphosphorylation causes de-repression only of cell cycle genes. Thus,
in cells lacking RB1, tumorigenesis can occur only if survival pathways protect cells from RB1-loss induced apoptosis by limiting E2F1
proapoptotic activity or if a second alteration, such as the abrogation of the p53 proapoptotic pathway, occurs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17875

Oncotarget

likely to favor tumor growth. However, the induction
of apoptosis, which occurs as a consequence of RB1
loss, can represent a safeguard mechanism to hinder the
expansion of potentially malignant cells [39]. Indeed,
RB1 inhibition confers a proliferative advantage to cells,
which could favor tumor development, but the massive
apoptosis resulting from RB1 loss could overcome
the increased proliferative potential and hinder cancer
growth. This can explain why most sporadic cancers have
RB1 inactivated because of defects in the pathways that
regulate its phosphorylation rather than by mutations
[28]. In this way, tumors gain a proliferative advantage
and, at the same time, can be protected from apoptosis
by the hyperphosphorylated form of RB1, which
could preserve its antiapoptotic activity through the
same mechanism described above (Fig. 1B). Another
proposed mechanism whereby phosphorylated RB1
can protect cells from apoptosis is by directly binding
and inhibiting the proapoptotic factor ANP32A (acidic
nuclear phosphoprotein 32A) [40]. Therefore, RB1
phosphorylation can provide cancer cells with both
proliferative and survival advantages.
Conversely, following RB1 loss, cancer can develop
only if cells are intrinsically resistant to RB1-deficiencyinduced apoptosis, or if cell death is counteracted by
parallel activation of survival pathways, or, finally, if
a second alteration, such as the abrogation of the p53
proapoptotic pathway (Fig. 1B), occurs during tumor
development to allow cell expansion and cancer growth
[28]. A recently described mechanism of apoptosis
inhibition whereby RB1-deficient cells can undergo
malignant transformation involves the de-repression of
the S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2), which
suppresses apoptosis by limiting E2F1 activity [41].
A further mechanism of resistance to apoptosis that
could promote tumorigenesis following RB1 loss could
rely on the increased levels of the antiapoptotic protein
survivin. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that RB1 is
able to inhibit transcription of the gene encoding survivin
[42–44] and homozygous deletion of Rb1 in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) led to survivin induction
[42]. Consistently, high levels of survivin were found in
the RB1-null cancer retinoblastoma [45].
RB1 antiapoptotic
death inducers

role

in

response

to

to chemotherapy-induced cell death [51–53]. Analogously,
restoration of the wild-type RB1 protein in RB1-deficient
cells from several cancer types (osteosarcoma and different
carcinomas) inhibited apoptosis upon various apoptotic
stimuli, such as ionizing radiation, p53 overexpression,
ceramide, and interferon (IFN)-γ [54–57]. Therefore,
all these data point to a protective role of RB1 against
different cell death inducers in several cell types. Some
studies suggested that this protective action could be a
secondary consequence of RB1 ability to arrest cell cycle in
response to stress signals [52, 58, 59]. However, the ectopic
expression of a mutated form of RB1, which was unable to
induce growth arrest, protected RB1 deficient osteosarcoma
and breast cancer cells from DNA damage-induced
apoptosis [60]. Thus, RB1 can exert an antiapoptotic
activity independent of growth suppression, probably
mainly through the direct inhibition of apoptotic genes.
Role of RB1 dephosphorylation and caspase cleavage
during apoptosis
Apoptosis is often accompanied by a shift from
the hyperphosphorylated to the hypophosphorylated
form of RB1 [61–67]. Consistently, phosphatase activity
directed toward RB1 seems to be required for apoptosis
induction in cells from different cancer types [61, 65, 67,
68] and the antiapoptotic protein BCL2 can prevent RB1
dephosphorylation and apoptosis [63, 64]. Moreover,
RB1 hyperphosphorylation seems to be correlated with
resistance to apoptotic treatments [69, 70]. All these
studies suggest that RB1 dephosphorylation is required for
apoptosis to occur, and, in particular, it has been recently
reported that dephosphorylation at threonine-821 has a key
role in this process [71].
Studies conducted on promyelocytic leukemia and
breast cancer cell lines suggested that dephosphorylation of
RB1 during apoptosis could be necessary for its cleavage
by caspases and consequent degradation, which would
eliminate its antiapoptotic action and allow cells to undergo
death in response to apoptotic stimuli, such as DNA
damage [65, 67, 72, 73]. Indeed, RB1 dephosphorylation
seems to be a prerequisite for caspase cleavage, since
the hyperphosphorylated form of RB1 is a poor caspase
substrate [65], and different studies support the notion
that caspase cleavage is a crucial step for eliminating RB1
during apoptosis in various cell types [74–78].
So, it was tempting to speculate that, unlike the
promoters of cell cycle genes where RB1 activity is mostly
modulated through phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
processes, at the promoters of apoptotic genes RB1
degradation could play an important part [28] (Fig. 2).
However, although caspase-resistant forms of RB1
hindered apoptosis induced by tumor-necrosis factoralpha (TNF-a) in mouse fibroblasts [79, 80] and by
potassium deprivation in mouse cerebellar neurons [81],
the cleavage-resistant RB1 did not decrease cell death
triggered by DNA damage in mouse fibroblasts [80] and

cell

Several observations from RB1 knockdown and
overexpression studies confirmed the antiapoptotic role
of RB1 also in response to different apoptotic stimuli. In
particular, RB1 knockdown has been shown to enhance
the sensitivity to cell death induced by different anticancer
agents, such as DNA-damaging and microtubule
interfering agents, in cells from several cancer types,
including lymphoma, breast, lung, and prostate cancer, and
glioblastoma [46–50]. Similarly, RB1 ablation in mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblasts increased the sensitivity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17876

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Different mechanisms of regulation of RB1 activity at the promoters of cell cycle and apoptotic genes. At the
promoters of cell cycle genes, RB1 activity is modulated through phosphorylation (P)/dephosphorylation processes mediated by cyclin
dependent kinases (CDKs), CDK inhibitors (CDKIs), and protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). Conversely, phosphorylation by CDKs does not
affect the RB1 repressive action at promoters of apoptotic genes. A mechanism to prevent this inhibitory activity and induce apoptotic gene
expression consists in RB1 dephosphorylation and subsequent cleavage by caspases.

did not protect human T lymphocytes from apoptosis
induced by the ligation of FAS death receptor [79]. Thus,
RB1 cleavage by caspases is not an absolute prerequisite
for apoptosis, but it can be a crucial step for certain types
of apoptotic events, depending on both the cell type and
the nature of the death inducers.

role in apoptosis induction in some circumstances. Indeed,
accumulation of the active hypophosphorylated form of
RB1 seemed to be required for apoptosis induced by
matrix contact deprivation in prostate cancer cells [64].
Consistently, the induced expression of RB1 forms that
cannot be phosphorylated and/or degraded by caspases
stimulated the apoptotic response to TNF in Rat-16
cells [59]. Overall these data point to a proapoptotic role
of RB1 in some contexts, although the phosphorylation
resistant form of RB1 causes contrasting effects in
response to different apoptotic stimuli [59].
Support for the hypothesis of a proapoptotic role
of RB1 in some circumstances also comes from a study
reporting that RB1 knockdown reduced the toxicity of

Emerging data revealing a proapoptotic role for RB1
The RB1 dephosphorylation observed during
apoptosis is not always linked to a subsequent RB1
degradation, which, as described above, could serve to
eliminate its antiapoptotic action. Conversely, the active
hypophosphorylated form of RB1 seems to have a crucial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17877

Oncotarget

cell types used in the two studies (MEF and human breast
cancer cell, respectively) or by the different methods used
for manipulating phosphorylation, which might result in
differences in site-specific phosphorylation of RB1 [88].
In conclusion, all these observations indicate that
RB1 is a multifunctional protein, whose role in apoptosis
depends on both the cell type and the nature of the
death inducers and whose function can be modulated by
different combinations of phosphorylated sites and other
post-translational modifications.

histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors in colon cancer
cells [82]. Moreover, the restoration of wild-type RB1 in
RB1-deficient prostate cancer cells promoted apoptosis
after radiation or ceramide treatment [83, 84]. This is,
however, in sharp contrast with the aforementioned studies
showing apoptosis inhibition following the restoration of
wild-type RB1 in several RB1-deficient cell types upon
different treatments.
A molecular mechanism whereby RB1 can exert
a proapoptotic function in some cellular contexts in
response to apoptotic stimuli, such as DNA damage,
has been recently proposed [8, 34]. In response to DNA
damage, both RB1 and E2F1 undergo extensive posttranslational modifications: RB1 is dephosphorylated at
CDK target sites but is phosphorylated by checkpoint
kinase 1/2 (CHEK1/2), acetylated, and methylated; E2F1
is phosphorylated by ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
and CHEK2, as well as acetylated and demethylated
[8, 85]. Phosphorylated RB1 remains bound to E2F1 and
the recruitment of the histone acetyltransferase p300/CBPassociated factor (P/CAF; also known as KAT2B) leads
to the formation of a transcriptionally active complex,
which promotes the expression of pro-apoptotic genes
(Fig. 3). Consistently, a transcriptionally active complex
containing RB1, E2F1 and P/CAF has also been reported
to have a key role in the apoptotic response following
hepatocarcinoma cell treatment with transforming growth
factor-b1 (TGF-b1) [86].
Most of the findings on the role of RB1 in
apoptosis derived from studies on its activity as
transcriptional regulator. Conversely, in a recent
study RB1 was shown able to promote apoptosis in
response to apoptotic signals at mithocondria, by
directly interacting with BAX and conformationally
activating it to induce mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization and cytochrome c release [30, 87].
Moreover, hyperphosphorylated RB1 is still competent to
induce mitochondrial apoptosis. However, another study
showed that RB1 dephosphorylation caused RB1-BAX
complex dissociation and apoptosis induction [88]. These
incongruous results could be explained by the different

Role of the other RB family members in apoptosis
Although data on the function of RBL1/p107 and
RBL2/p130 in apoptosis are more limited than those
available for RB1, the picture that emerges is similarly
complex.
Studies with mutant mice suggested an antiapoptotic
role for RBL1/p107 and RBL2/p130. Indeed, although
Rbl1-null mice did not show increased cell death during
embryogenesis, mouse embryos lacking both Rb1 and
Rbl1 showed accelerated apoptosis in liver and central
nervous system with respect to embryos lacking only
Rb1 [89]. Therefore, RBL1/p107 seems to cooperate with
RB1 in protecting some cell types from apoptosis. Balb/cJ
mouse embryos lacking Rbl2 showed extensive apoptosis
in the neural tube, brain and dermomyotome, thus
suggesting an antiapoptotic role for RBL2/p130 at least in
this mouse strain [90]. Moreover, although the individual
loss of each Rb family member did not significantly affect
proliferation and survival of mouse pancreatic b cells
in vivo, the combined loss of Rb1 and Rbl2 resulted in
increased proliferation and cell death [91].
Consistent with a possible antiapoptotic role of
RBL2/p130, it has been observed that its overexpression
inhibits apoptosis in response to apoptotic stimuli in
neurons [92] and ovarian cancer cells [93].
At the molecular level, the RBL2/p130-E2F4
repressor complex has been shown to inhibit directly
the transcription of apoptotic genes in postmitotic
cardiomyocytes [94] and neurons [92]. Apoptotic stimuli

Figure 3: Formation of a transcriptionally active complex, consisting of phosphorylated (P) RB1, E2F1 and the histone
acetyltransferase p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF), at the promoters of apoptotic genes in response to apoptotic
stimuli.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17878

Oncotarget

can induce RBL2/p130 hyperphosphorylation, dissociation
of the RBL2/p130-E2F4 complex and de-repression
of apoptotic genes in neurons [92]. So, unlike the RB1
repressive activity at the apoptotic genes, which seems
to be maintained regardless of RB1 phosphorylation
(Fig. 1), the RBL2/p130 inhibitory action at these genes
can be inactivated through RBL2/p130 phosphorylation.
Consistently, the RB family members are inactivated
through different mechanisms during camptothecininduced apoptosis in B lymphocytes: RB1 is degraded,
in keeping with the above described role of RB1 caspase
cleavage during apoptosis in various cell types, whereas
RBL1/p107 and RBL2/p130 are phosphorylated, leading
to the release of E2F proteins [95]. Consistent with
this different regulation of RB protein activity during
apoptosis, the C-terminal caspase cleavage site of RB1 is
not conserved in RBL1/p107 and RBL2/p130 [74].
Although these observations indicate an
antiapoptotic role for RBL1/p107 and RBL2/p130, the
latter can also exert a proapoptotic activity in different
contexts. In particular, in marked contrast to what
observed in mouse pancreatic b cells lacking both Rb1 and
Rbl2 [91], the combined ablation of these two genes in the
mouse lung epithelium resulted in reduced apoptosis with
respect to that observed in lung epithelium lacking only
Rb1, thus suggesting a proapoptotic activity of RBL2/
p130 [96]. Consistently, the expression of RBL2/p130 was
correlated with high apoptotic indexes in retinoblastoma
samples [97]. Moreover, RBL2/p130 overexpression
induced apoptosis in Saos-2 osteosarcoma cells [97] and
marrow stromal cells committed toward a neuron-like
phenotype [98] and caused an increase in γ-radiationinduced apoptosis in hamster glioblastoma cells [99].
Interestingly, RBL2/p130 can be part of different
protein complexes with opposite functions at apoptotic gene
promoters. Indeed, it has been suggested that the difference
in apoptotic response to chemotherapeutic treatment
observed in drug-resistant osteosarcoma cells and their
parental cell line could be due to the presence of distinct
E2Fs–RBL2/p130 complexes on the p73 promoter: in the
parental cell line, p73 transcription is activated by an E2F1–
RBL2/p130–p300 complex, whereas, in the drug-resistant
cells, it is repressed by an E2F4–RBL2/p130–HDAC1
complex [100]. So, the involvement in functionally different
complexes provides a possible molecular explanation on
how RBL2/p130 can exert opposite functions in apoptosis
regulation in different circumstances. However, we are
still far from understanding the mechanisms whereby
RBL2/p130 can contribute to apoptosis control and further
research in this field is ongoing.

studies described above, suggests that RB1 could be a
crucial determinant of clinical response to therapies.
Therefore, a careful evaluation of its functional status and
context-dependent role in response to specific treatments
in different tumors might be fundamental to guide
therapeutic decisions. Indeed, several studies on patients
with different cancer types suggest that RB1 status affects
tumor sensitivity to treatments and clinical outcome
(Table 1). Therefore, RB1 might represent a predictive
marker of response to therapy for various tumor types.
In particular, consistent with the above reported
observation that RB1 knockdown enhances the sensitivity
to cell death induced by DNA-damaging agents in breast
cancer cells [47], the disruption of RB1 function was found
to be associated with improved response to adjuvant/
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and good clinical outcome
for patients with breast cancer [101–104]. Conversely,
RB1 pathway deregulation in breast cancers proved to be
associated with resistance to hormone therapy with the
antiestrogen tamoxifen and tumor recurrence [47, 105].
These observations are consistent with preclinical data
showing that RB1 knockdown or functional inactivation
in breast cancer cells prevents antiestrogen-induced
cell cycle arrest [47, 106], thus resulting in continued
proliferation and tumor xenograft growth [47]. Overall,
these studies indicate that the evaluation of RB1 status is
crucial for directing breast cancer therapy, suggesting, in
particular, that patients with RB1-negative breast cancers
might benefit from chemotherapeutic treatments, whereas
disruption of RB1 function is associated with failure of
hormone therapy.
Similar to breast cancer, also in prostate cancer
RB1 deficiency seems to be associated with a poor
response to hormone therapy (including surgical or
chemical castration to suppress androgen production
and/or administration of antiandrogens). Indeed, a
higher frequency of RB1 mRNA downregulation was
observed in recurrent prostate cancers from patients
who had undergone combined androgen blockade with
respect to cancers from untreated patients, suggesting
that RB1 inactivation might be associated with hormone
treatment resistance [107]. Also, RB1 loss in prostate
cancer samples was found to be associated with the
transition to the incurable castration-resistant status and
poor clinical outcome [108]. These results are consistent
with preclinical data showing that RB1 knockdown or
functional inactivation in prostate cancer cells inhibits
the androgen deprivation-induced proliferative stall [49,
109] and is sufficient to induce castration-resistant tumor
xenograft growth [108]. Conversely, as also reported
above, RB1 knockdown enhanced the sensitivity of
prostate cancer cell lines to cell death triggered by
antimicrotubule and DNA-damaging agents [49].
Therefore, RB1 status seems to have a key role in cellular
response to therapeutic interventions in prostate cancer
cells and could represent a marker for directing therapy
also in this tumor type.

RB1 as a predictive marker of response
to therapy
The key dual role of RB1 in arresting cell cycle
upon anti-proliferative signals and in apoptotic response to
various anticancer treatments, observed in the preclinical
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17879

Oncotarget

Table 1: Studies on the role of RB1 as a predictive marker of response to therapies
Cancer type

Treatments

RB1 status and
assessment method

No of
patients

Association between RB1 status References
and clinical response

32

RB1 hypophosphorylation
correlates with good
responsiveness to glucocorticoid
therapy.

[115]

98

Loss of RB1 expression is
associated with improved
response to radiation.

[110]

106

Loss of RB1 expression is
associated with improved
response to radiation and relapsefree survival.

[111]

Low expression
(IHC)

93

RB1 underexpression is
associated with nonresponse
to BCG +IFN-a treatment and
tumor recurrence.

[113]

Loss of expression or
overexpression (IHC)

27

RB1 altered expression predicts
recurrence and progression
following BCG treatment.

[114]

Breast cancer

Cyclophosphamide, Loss of expression
methotrexate, 5-FU (IHC)

518

Loss of RB1expression predicts
a good clinical outcome for
patients treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy.

[101]

Breast cancer

Paclitaxel, 5-FU,
LOH (analysis of
doxorubicin,
polymorphic markers
cyclophosphamide at RB1 locus)

133

RB1-LOH signature is associated
with a good response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

[102]

518

RB1 loss is higher in TNBCs than
in other subtypes. In patients with
TNBCs treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy, RB1 loss is
associated with a good prognosis.

[103]

98

RB1 pathway disruption is
associated with improved
response to multiple
chemotherapeutic regimens in
both ER+ and ER- breast cancers.

[104]

60

RB1 pathway deregulation
is associated with early
recurrence following tamoxifen
monotherapy in ER+ tumors.

[47]

500

Loss of RB1 function is
associated with tamoxifen
treatment resistance in ER+
tumors.

[105]

Hypophosphorylation
(HRE and WB)

Bladder cancer Radiation

Loss of expression
(IHC)

Bladder cancer Radiation

Loss of expression
(IHC)

Transurethral
resection and
Bladder cancer
intravesical BCG
+IFN-a
Transurethral
Bladder cancer resection and
intravesical BCG

ALL

Glucocorticoids

Breast cancer

Cyclophosphamide, Loss of expression
methotrexate, 5-FU (IHC)

Breast cancer

Three different
neoadjuvant
chemotherapy
regimens

Pathway disruption
(analysis of an RB1loss gene expression
signature)

Tamoxifen

Pathway disruption
(analysis of an RB1loss gene expression
signature)

Tamoxifen

Loss of function
(discrepancy between
RB1 phosphorylation
and cell proliferation)

Breast cancer

Breast cancer

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17880

Oncotarget

Cancer type

Ovarian
carcinoma

Prostate cancer

Treatments

RB1 status and
assessment method

No of
patients

Platinum and
paxlitaxel
High expression
chemotherapy
(IHC)
combinations after
radical surgery

Hormone
Prostate cancer
deprivation

High expression of RB1 is
associated with a poor prognosis
in patients who underwent
radical surgery and postoperative
chemotherapy.

[116]

A higher frequency of RB1
mRNA downregulation was
81 tumors observed in cancers from treated
patients with respect to those
from untreated patients.

[107]

300

Combined
Low mRNA levels
androgen blockade (RT-PCR)

Association between RB1 status References
and clinical response

Loss (RT-qPCR,
IHC, gene expression
signature, locus copy
number)

44

RB1 loss is associated with
the transition to the incurable
castration-resistant status and
poor clinical outcome.

[108]

ALL: acute lymphoblastic leukemia; BCG: bacillus Calmette-Guerin; ER: estrogen receptor; 5-FU: 5-fluorouracil; HRE:
high resolution electrophoresis; IFN-a: interferon-a; IHC: immunohistochemistry; LOH: loss of heterozygosity; RT-qPCR:
reverse transcription-quntitative PCR; TNBC: triple-negative breast cancer; WB: western blotting
Consistent with the putative antiapoptotic role
of RB1 in bladder cancer cells, as observed following
ceramide treatment in the aforementioned study by
McConkey [56], and in keeping with the above described
protective role of RB1 against DNA-damaging agents in
several cancer types, loss of RB1 expression was found
to be associated with improved response to radiation
and relapse-free survival in patients with bladder cancer
[110, 111]. Therefore, the analysis of RB1 status might
be useful to select patients with bladder cancer who
would benefit from a treatment schedule including
radiotherapy, which has been shown to induce ceramide
[112]. Conversely, RB1 altered expression seems to be
predictive of nonresponse to intravesical bacille CalmetteGuerin (BCG) +/- IFN-α treatment and tumor recurrence
in bladder cancer patients [113, 114].
Interestingly, RB1 hypophosphorylation occurring
upon treatment with glucocorticoids, the main
pharmacological agents used against childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), correlates with a good
responsiveness [115], suggesting that RB1 might represent
a possible surrogate endpoint of therapeutic response for
childhood ALL.
Finally, high RB1 expression was correlated with
a poor prognosis in ovarian carcinoma patients who had
undergone radical surgery and postoperative chemotherapy
[116] and also to be associated with vascular invasion
and recurrence in hepatocellular carcinoma patients
after surgical treatments [117]. These studies suggest
that high RB1 expression holds the potential to be a
good prognosticator of postoperative disease for these

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tumor types, and could be used to stratify patients for
postoperative treatment in certain instances.
In addition to affect cellular sensitivity to cytotoxic
and hormonal agents routinely used in the clinic, RB1
status also impacts cellular response to a number of
kinase inhibitors, which, although not yet in clinical use,
represent the basis for the development of promising
targeted therapies. In particular, similar to what described
for hormone therapy, RB1 deficiency seems to limit
the effectiveness of these agents that function through
cytostatic mechanisms [118].
Although the aforementioned studies point to
an important role of RB1 as a predictor of therapeutic
response, the evaluation of its status is not yet used to
guide therapeutic decisions in clinical practice. Indeed,
the major hurdle associated with the development of RB1
as a predictive marker of response to treatments is the lack
of standardized methods to assess its functional status in
tumor specimens [118] and several different approaches
have been used to detect the different mechanisms whereby
RB1 is functionally inactivated in cancer (Table 1).

Targeting RB1 for cancer therapy
Owing to RB1 involvement in many cellular
processes, all contributing to its oncosuppressive activity,
and considering that its pathway is altered in most human
cancers, RB1 represents an appealing target for cancer
therapy. Two main strategies have been conceived to
directly target RB1 for cancer treatment. The first aims
to exploit RB1 loss for therapeutic purposes, whereas the

17881

Oncotarget

second is intended to reactivate RB1 tumor suppressor
function [119].

Another strategy to reactivate RB1 function is
based on the use of CDK inhibitors that can prevent
RB1 phosphorylation (Fig. 4B). However, whether these
compounds exert their effects mainly acting on RB1
pathway remains an unanswered question, especially
considering that most of the available molecules target
multiple CDKs, including also transcription-related CDKs,
can have also other targets, and seem to act also through
mechanisms independent from cell cycle [128–132].
Nevertheless, a potent and highly selective inhibitor of
CDK4 and CDK6, called Palbociclib (PD-0332991),
recently proved to be dependent on the presence of
RB1 for its antiproliferative effect in several cancer cell
lines and xenograft models [133] and a Phase I trial of
PD-0332991 utilized RB1-deficiency as an exclusion
criterion [119]. In a Phase II trial, PD-0332991 treatment
was associated with a favorable progression-free rate
in patients with CDK4-amplified and RB-expressing
liposarcomas [134]. Moreover, in patients with mantle
cell lymphoma, the antiproliferative effect of PD-0332991
was significantly correlated with a marked decrease in the
percentage of phospho-RB1 positive cells in lymph node
biopsies [135]. The outcome of preclinical and clinical
trials based on the use of PD-0332991 have been recently
reviewed by Knudsen and colleagues [136].
Consistent with the above reported observations
that RB1 pathway disruption is correlated with
resistance to therapies that function through cytostatic
mechanisms, such as hormone therapy, reactivation of
the antiproliferative activity of RB1 through CDK4/6
inhibitors in combination with endocrine therapy have
shown promise in breast cancer clinical trials [137].
However, considering that highly selective CDK4/6
inhibitors, such as PD-0332991, act only as cytostatic
agents without inducing apoptosis [138–141], an
important issue is to establish whether these compounds
favor or antagonize apoptotic induction by the
commonly used cytotoxic agents. It has been reported
that G1 cell cycle arrest induced by pretreatment or
concurrent treatment with highly selective CDK4/6
inhibitors prevented apoptotic triggering by different
chemotherapeutics in RB1-positive breast cancer cells,
melanoma cells and immortalized fibroblasts, thus
suggesting that CDK4/6 inhibitors can antagonize
chemotherapy [137, 139, 141]. Conversely, contrasting
effects have been observed following combination
treatments with CDK4/6 inhibitors and ionizing
radiation. Indeed, pretreatment with highly selective
CDK4/6 inhibitors (PD-0332991 or 2BrIC) increased
radioresistance of RB1-positive melanoma cells and
immortalized fibroblasts [139], whereas combination
treatments with radiation administered either
concurrently or sequentially with PD-0332991 resulted
in increased anticancer activity in mice with RB1positive glioblastoma intracranial xenografts [140].
Moreover, PD-0332991 sensitized myeloma cells to
cell death induced by different cytotoxic agents, such

Exploiting RB1 deficiency to therapeutic purposes
Different approaches exploiting RB1 loss to kill
cancer cells have been designed (Fig. 4A). For instance,
oncolytic viruses carrying deletions in the E1A viral
protein, which render viral replication dependent on RB1
inactivation, were developed to selectively kill RB1defective tumor cells [120] (Fig. 4A). Moreover, other
oncolytic viruses were designed to exploit the deregulated
E2F transcriptional activity resulting from RB1 loss for
their replication and tumor cell killing [120]. Similarly,
another approach took advantage of deregulated E2F
transcriptional activity to activate a prodrug selectively
in cancer cells with inactive RB1 [121]. Furthermore,
chemical/genetics screen have been performed to identify
compounds or “synthetic lethal” genes to specifically kill
RB1-defective cells [122, 123].
Another strategy to selectively kill RB1-deficient
cells is based on agents able to release the latent E2F1
proapoptotic activity in these cells [118, 119]. Indeed, as
described above (Fig. 1B), in cancer cells lacking RB1, the
E2F1-mediated apoptosis resulting from RB1 deficiency is
suppressed through resistance mechanisms [28]. Different
cellular pathways that protect cells from RB1-loss-induced
apoptosis by limiting E2F1 proapoptotic activity have
been identified [41, 118, 119]. Therefore, inhibitors of
these survival pathways could be synthetically lethal with
RB1 deficiency and could represent the basis to develop
a therapeutic approach targeting RB1-defective cells
[118, 119] (Fig. 4A).
The E2F1 proapoptotic activity is interconnected
with that of p53 (see [124] for a thorough description
of this molecular crosstalk) and, as illustrated above
(Fig. 1B), the abrogation of p53 proapoptotic pathway
could be required to limit apoptosis downstream of RB1
loss in order to enable tumorigenesis [28]. For instance,
inhibition of p53 pathway is a crucial determinant in the
genesis of the RB1-null cancer retinoblastoma [125].
Thus, it has been shown that compounds reactivating p53
could be useful in the treatment of retinoblastoma and
other tumors lacking RB1, through the increase of E2F1mediated apoptosis [118, 119, 126] (Fig. 4A).
Restoring RB1 tumor suppressor function
Compared to other tumor suppressors, such as p53,
fewer studies aiming to restore RB1 function have been
reported. Restoration of wild-type RB1 protein through
gene-transfer approaches produced variable results on
tumor cell growth and showed deleterious effects on p53mediated apoptosis. Therefore, RB1 phosphorylation
mutants and truncated variants that remain in the
hypophosphorylated status have been used in preclinical
models to enhance RB1 tumor suppressor function
[120, 127] (Fig. 4B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17882

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Strategies targeting RB1 for cancer treatment. A. Approaches that exploit RB1 loss to therapeutic purposes (indicated

in orange boxes): use of oncolytic viruses that depend on RB1 inactivation for their replication and tumor cell killing; methods that exploit
the loss of RB1 and the consequent E2F1 activation to kill tumor cells through the use of agents, such as inhibitors of survival factors and
p53 reactivators, that enhance the E2F-1 mediated apoptosis. B. Approaches aiming to reactivate RB1 tumor suppressor function: genetransfer strategies to express truncated or mutated forms of RB1 that remain in the hypophosphorylated status; RB1 reactivation through the
use of cyclin dependent kinases inhibitors (CDKIs) to maintain an efficient transcriptional repression and induce cell cycle arrest.

as the glucocorticoid dexamethasone, the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib and the immunomodulatory agent
lenalidomide, as indicated by both preclinical studies
and clinical trials [138, 142–144]. Therefore, a thorough
understanding of the effects of CDK4/6 inhibition in
combination with different cytotoxic agents is required
to define the best treatment schedule in a clinical setting.
For instance, previous studies have shown that the “cell
cycle-mediated resistance” to chemotherapy can be
overcome by an appropriately scheduled administration
[136, 145].
Data on the possible use of the other RB family
members as targets in cancer therapy are very limited,
although retrovirus-mediated transfer of RBL2/p130
proved to be able to inhibit lung carcinoma cell growth
both in vitro and in a mouse model [11]. Moreover, we
developed a 39-residue peptide, called Spa310, derived
from the spacer region of RBL2/p130, which was able
to inhibit CDK2 activity and lung cancer proliferation
in xenotrasplanted nude mice, thus suggesting that this
peptide could represent the basis for the development of
new targeted therapeutic strategies [146–148].

it therapeutically. In particular, considering that the main
goal of most anticancer therapies is to inhibit proliferation
and induce apoptosis, a major focus of this research has
been to fully understand RB1 role in these processes both
in physiological conditions and in response to treatments.
Unlike the well-established function of RB1 as
a negative regulator of cell cycle, its role in apoptosis
is still very controversial. Early studies with Rb1-null
mice revealed an antiapoptotic role for RB1. Thus,
reconciling the seemingly incongruous functions of RB1
as a negative regulator of both proliferation and apoptosis
has represented a particularly tough challenge for many
years. However, recent studies have identified molecular
mechanisms, mainly based on the unique interaction
between phosphorylated RB1 and the proapoptotic factor
E2F1, able to explain RB1 function in the coordinated
control of proliferation and apoptosis both in normal cells
and during tumorigenesis.
RB1 has an antiapoptotic action also in response
to different death stimuli and, at least in some apoptotic
events, this action can be eliminated through RB1
dephosphorylation and subsequent caspase cleavage.
However, to further complicate matters, emerging data
have revealed that RB1 can exert a proapoptotic function
in some cell types upon different treatments. Thus,
RB1 is now viewed as a multifunctional protein, whose
role in apoptosis depends on both the cell type and the
nature of the death inducers and whose function can be
modulated by several post-translational modifications.
Therefore, a careful evaluation of its functional status and

CONCLUSIONS
Since its discovery as the first tumor suppressor
gene almost 30 years ago, RB1 has represented an
appealing target for cancer therapy. Indeed, decades
of research have been dedicated to investigate the
mechanisms of action of RB1 protein in order to exploit
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17883

Oncotarget

context-dependent role in response to specific treatments
in different tumors might be fundamental to guide
therapeutic decisions.
Several clinical studies suggest, indeed, that
RB1 might represent a predictive marker of response
to therapy for various tumor types. Overall, RB1 status
seems to have opposite effects on responses to cytotoxic
and cytostatic agents, respectively. In particular, RB1
deficiency seems to be associated with improved cytotoxic
response to DNA damaging agents, at least for some
cancer types. Conversely, the loss of RB1 function limits
the effectiveness of anti-proliferative signals and hormone
therapies, which function through cytostatic mechanisms.
Taken together, all these observations identify
RB1 as crucial target of tailored anticancer strategies.
Two main approaches have been conceived to exploit
RB1 therapeutically. The first aims to take advantage of
RB1 loss mainly through the research of synthetic lethal
interactions and the use of oncolytic viruses, which depend
on RB1 inactivation for their replication and tumor cell
killing. Conversely, the second is intended to reactivate
RB1 tumor suppressor function, principally through the
use of CDK4/6 inhibitors that have shown promise in
clinical trials.
Despite these promising results, to date a greater
understanding of RB1 functions is required to successfully
translate RB1-related research to the clinic. Indeed, the
importance of RB1 functional status in therapeutic
response has not yet been elucidated for many cancer
types. Moreover, the development of more rigorous,
standardized methods to assess RB1 status in tumor
specimens is required before RB1 can be used as a
predictive marker to guide therapeutic decisions in clinical
practice. Furthermore, a deep understanding of the specific
functions of different combinations of phosphorylations
and other post-translational modifications is necessary
to fully clarify the RB1 biological activity in different
contexts and to define the best therapeutic strategy.

inhibitor; CHEK1/2, checkpoint kinase 1/2; DREAM,
DP, RB like, E2F and MuvB; ER, estrogen receptor;
5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; HDAC, histone deacetylase;
HRE, high resolution electrophoresis; IFN-a,
interferon-a; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LOH: loss
of heterozygosity; MEFs, mouse embryonic fibroblasts;
MuvB, multi-vulval class B; P/CAF, p300/CBP-associated
factor; PP1: protein phosphatase 1; RB, retinoblastoma;
RBL, retinoblastoma-like; RT-qPCR, reverse transcriptionquntitative PCR; SKP2, S-phase kinase-associated
protein 2; TGF-b1, transforming growth factor-b1; TNBC,
triple-negative breast cancer; TNF-a, tumor-necrosis
factor-alpha; WB, western blotting.

REFERENCES
1.	 Sherr CJ. Cancer
274:1672–1677.

cycles.

Science.

1996;

2.	 Giordano A, Whyte P, Harlow E, Franza BR Jr, Beach D,
Draetta G. A 60 kd cdc2-associated polypeptide complexes
with the E1A proteins in adenovirus-infected cells. Cell.
1989; 58:981–990.
3.	 Giordano A, Lee JH, Scheppler JA, Herrmann C, Harlow E,
Deuschle U, Beach D, Franza BR Jr. Cell cycle regulation
of histone H1 kinase activity associated with the adenoviral
protein E1A. Science. 1991; 253:1271–1275.
4.	 Giordano A, McCall C, Whyte P, Franza BR Jr. Human
cyclin A and the retinoblastoma protein interact with similar
but distinguishable sequences in the adenovirus E1A gene
product. Oncogene. 1991; 6:481–485.
5.	 Mayol X, Grana X, Baldi A, Sang N, Hu Q, Giordano A.
Cloning of a new member of the retinoblastoma gene f­ amily
(pRb2) which binds to the E1A transforming domain.
Oncogene. 1993; 8:2561–2566.
6.	 Weinberg RA. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle
control. Cell. 1995; 81:323–330.
7.	 Giacinti C, Giordano A. RB and cell cycle progression.
Oncogene. 2006; 25:5220–5227.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Dick FA, Rubin SM. Molecular mechanisms ­underlying
RB protein function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;
14:297–306.

We are thankful to the Sbarro Health Research
Organization (http://www.shro.org), the Human
Health Foundation (http://www. hhfonlus.org), AIRCAssociazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro, IG
2014-15690 and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
their support Prof Giordano is the director of research line
3 at CROM, Istituto Nazionale Tumori ‘Fondazione G.
Pascale’-IRCCS, Naples, Italy.

9.	 Susini T, Baldi F, Howard CM, Baldi A, Taddei G, Massi D,
Rapi S, Savino L, Massi G, Giordano A. Expression of
the retinoblastoma-related gene Rb2/p130 correlates with
clinical outcome in endometrial cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1998;
16:1085–1093.
10.	 Massaro-Giordano M, Baldi G, De Luca A, Baldi A,
Giordano A. Differential expression of the retinoblastoma
gene family members in choroidal melanoma: prognostic
significance. Clin Cancer Res. 1999; 5:1455–1458.

Abbreviations
ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; ANP32A,
acidic nuclear phosphoprotein 32A; PAF-1, apoptotic
peptidase activating factor-1; ATM, ataxia-telangiectasia
mutated; BCG, bacillus Calmette-Guerin; BH3, BCL-2
homology 3; CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; CDKI, CDK
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cell

11.	 Claudio PP, Howard CM, Pacilio C, Cinti C, Romano
G, Minimo C, Maraldi NM, Minna JD, Gelbert L,
Leoncini L, Tosi GM, Hicheli P, Caputi M, Giordano
GG, Giordano A. Mutations in the retinoblastoma-related
17884

Oncotarget

gene RB2/p130 in lung tumors and suppression of tumor
growth in vivo by retrovirus-mediated gene transfer.
Cancer Res. 2000; 60:372–382.

22.	 Sadasivam S, DeCaprio JA. The DREAM complex: master
coordinator of cell cycle-dependent gene expression. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:585–595.

12.	 Cinti C, Claudio PP, Howard CM, Neri LM, Fu Y,
Leoncini L, Tosi GM, Maraldi NM, Giordano A.
Genetic alterations disrupting the nuclear localization
of the ­retinoblastoma-related gene RB2/p130 in human
tumor cell lines and primary tumors. Cancer Res. 2000;
60:383–389.

23.	 Macaluso M, Montanari M, Giordano A. Rb family proteins
as modulators of gene expression and new aspects ­regarding
the interaction with chromatin remodeling enzymes.
Oncogene. 2006; 25:5263–5267.
24.	 Indovina P, Marcelli E, Casini N, Rizzo V, Giordano A.
Emerging roles of RB family: new defense mechanisms against tumor progression. J Cell Physiol. 2012;
228:525–535.

13.	 Tanaka N, Odajima T, Mimura M, Ogi K, Dehari H,
Kimijima Y, Kohama G. Expression of Rb, pRb2/p130,
p53, and p16 proteins in malignant melanoma of oral
mucosa. Oral Oncol. 2001; 37:308–314.

25.	 Pentimalli F, Cito L, Giordano A. (2010). Dysfunction of
the RB Retinoblastoma Gene in Cancer: Humana Press.

14.	 Zamparelli A, Masciullo V, Bovicelli A, Santini D,
Ferrandina G, Minimo C, Terzano P, Costa S, Cinti C,
Ceccarelli C, Mancuso S, Scambia G, Bovicelli L,
Giordano A. Expression of cell-cycle-associated proteins
pRB2/p130 and p27kip in vulvar squamous cell carcinomas.
Hum Pathol. 2001; 32:4–9.

26.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell.
2000; 100:57–70.
27.	 Lowe SW, Lin AW. Apoptosis in cancer. Carcinogenesis.
2000; 21:485–495.
28.	 Chau BN, Wang JY. Coordinated regulation of life and
death by RB. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:130–138.

15.	 Milde-Langosch K, Goemann C, Methner C, Rieck G,
Bamberger AM, Loning T. Expression of Rb2/p130 in
breast and endometrial cancer: correlations with hormone
receptor status. Br J Cancer. 2001; 85:546–551.

29.	 DeGregori J, Leone G, Miron A, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.
Distinct roles for E2F proteins in cell growth control and
apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997; 94:7245–7250.
30.	 Attardi LD, Sage J. RB goes mitochondrial. Genes Dev.
2013; 27:975–979.

16.	 Caputi M, Groeger AM, Esposito V, De Luca A,
Masciullo V, Mancini A, Baldi F, Wolner E, Giordano A.
Loss of pRb2/p130 expression is associated with unfavorable clinical outcome in lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2002; 8:3850–3856.

31.	 Wu L, de Bruin A, Saavedra HI, Starovic M, Trimboli A,
Yang Y, Opavska J, Wilson P, Thompson JC,
Ostrowski MC, Rosol TJ, Woollett LA, Weinstein M,
Cross JC, Robinson ML, Leone G. Extra-embryonic function of Rb is essential for embryonic development and
­viability. Nature. 2003; 421:942–947.

17.	 Li Q, Sakurai Y, Ryu T, Azuma K, Yoshimura K,
Yamanouchi Y, Ikehara S, Kawamoto K. Expression of
Rb2/p130 protein correlates with the degree of malignancy
in gliomas. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2004; 21:121–125.

32.	 de Bruin A, Wu L, Saavedra HI, Wilson P, Yang Y,
Rosol TJ, Weinstein M, Robinson ML, Leone G. Rb function in extraembryonic lineages suppresses apoptosis in the
CNS of Rb-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:6546–6551.

18.	 D’Andrilli G, Masciullo V, Bagella L, Tonini T, Minimo C,
Zannoni GF, Giuntoli RL 2nd, Carlson JA Jr, Soprano DR,
Soprano KJ, Scambia G, Giordano A. Frequent loss of
pRb2/p130 in human ovarian carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res.
2004; 10:3098–3103.

33.	 Wenzel PL, Wu L, de Bruin A, Chong JL, Chen WY,
Dureska G, Sites E, Pan T, Sharma A, Huang K,
Ridgway R, Mosaliganti K, Sharp R, Machiraju R, Saltz J,
Yamamoto H, et al. Rb is critical in a mammalian tissue
stem cell population. Genes Dev. 2007; 21:85–97.

19.	 Russo G, Zamparelli A, Howard CM, Minimo C, Bellan C,
Carillo G, Califano L, Leoncini L, Giordano A, Claudio PP.
Expression of cell cycle-regulated proteins pRB2/p130,
p107, E2F4, p27, and pCNA in salivary gland tumors: prognostic and diagnostic implications. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:3265–3273.

34.	 Ianari A, Natale T, Calo E, Ferretti E, Alesse E, Screpanti I,
Haigis K, Gulino A, Lees JA. Proapoptotic function of
the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein. Cancer Cell.
2009; 15:184–194.

20.	 Masciullo V, Berardengo E, Boglione A, Sgambato A,
Bernardi A, Forni M, Linari A, Cito L, Scambia G,
Comandone A, Giordano A. The retinoblastoma family
member pRb2/p130 is an independent predictor of survival
in human soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;
14:4775–4779.

35.	 Khidr L, Chen PL. RB, the conductor that orchestrates life,
death and differentiation. Oncogene. 2006; 25:5210–5219.
36.	 Delston RB, Harbour JW. Rb at the interface between
cell cycle and apoptotic decisions. Curr Mol Med. 2006;
6:713–718.

21.	 Cito L, Indovina P, Forte IM, Pentimalli F, Di Marzo D,
Somma P, Barone D, Penon A, Penon D, Ceccherini E,
Micheli P, Saragoni L, Di Domenico M, Feola A,
Roviello F, Mattioli E, et al. pRb2/p130 localizes to the
cytoplasm in diffuse gastric cancer. J Cell Physiol. 2015;
230:802–805.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Wells J, Yan PS, Cechvala M, Huang T, Farnham PJ.
Identification of novel pRb binding sites using CpG
microarrays suggests that E2F recruits pRb to specific genomic sites during S phase. Oncogene. 2003;
22:1445–1460.
17885

Oncotarget

38.	 Young AP, Longmore GD. Differential regulation of apoptotic genes by Rb in human versus mouse cells. Oncogene.
2004; 23:2587–2599.

52.	 Knudsen KE, Booth D, Naderi S, Sever-Chroneos Z,
Fribourg AF, Hunton IC, Feramisco JR, Wang JY,
Knudsen ES. RB-dependent S-phase response to DNA
­damage. Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:7751–7763.

39.	 Evan G, Littlewood T. A matter of life and cell death.
Science. 1998; 281:1317–1322.

53.	 Mayhew CN, Perkin LM, Zhang X, Sage J, Jacks T,
Knudsen ES. Discrete signaling pathways participate in
RB-dependent responses to chemotherapeutic agents.
Oncogene. 2004; 23:4107–4120.

40.	 Adegbola O, Pasternack GR. Phosphorylated r­ etinoblastoma
protein complexes with pp32 and inhibits pp32-mediated
apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:15497–15502.

54.	 Haas-Kogan DA, Kogan SC, Levi D, Dazin P, T’Ang A,
Fung YK, Israel MA. Inhibition of apoptosis by the retinoblastoma gene product. EMBO J. 1995; 14:461–472.

41.	 Lu Z, Bauzon F, Fu H, Cui J, Zhao H, Nakayama K,
Nakayama KI, Zhu L. Skp2 suppresses apoptosis in
­Rb1-deficient tumours by limiting E2F1 activity. Nat
Commun. 2014; 5:3463.

55.	 Haupt Y, Rowan S, Oren M. p53-mediated apoptosis in
HeLa cells can be overcome by excess pRB. Oncogene.
1995; 10:1563–1571.

42.	 Jiang Y, Saavedra HI, Holloway MP, Leone G, Altura RA.
Aberrant regulation of survivin by the RB/E2F family of
proteins. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:40511–40520.

56.	 McConkey DJ, Goodrich D, Bucana C, Klostergaard J. The
human retinoblastoma gene product suppresses ceramideinduced apoptosis in human bladder tumor cells. Oncogene.
1996; 13:1693–1700.

43.	 Dasgupta P, Kinkade R, Joshi B, Decook C, Haura E,
Chellappan S. Nicotine inhibits apoptosis induced by
chemotherapeutic drugs by up-regulating XIAP and
­
­survivin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:6332–6337.

57.	 Berry DE, Lu Y, Schmidt B, Fallon PG, O’Connell
C, Hu SX, Xu HJ, Blanck G. Retinoblastoma protein
­inhibits IFN-gamma induced apoptosis. Oncogene. 1996;
12:1809–1819.

44.	 Raj D, Liu T, Samadashwily G, Li F, Grossman D. Survivin
repression by p53, Rb and E2F2 in normal human melanocytes. Carcinogenesis. 2008; 29:194–201.

58.	 Choi KS, Eom YW, Kang Y, Ha MJ, Rhee H, Yoon JW,
Kim SJ. Cdc2 and Cdk2 kinase activated by transforming
growth factor-beta1 trigger apoptosis through the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein in FaO hepatoma cells. J
Biol Chem. 1999; 274:31775–31783.

45.	 Shehata HH, Abou Ghalia AH, Elsayed EK, Ziko OO,
Mohamed SS. Detection of survivin protein in aqueous
humor and serum of retinoblastoma patients and its clinical
significance. Clin Biochem. 2009; 43:362–366.
46.	 Ishii H, Igarashi T, Saito T, Nakano T, Mori M, Ohyama H,
Miyamoto T, Saito Y, Oh H. Retinoblastoma protein
expressed in human non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells generates resistance against radiation-induced apoptosis. Am J
Hematol. 1997; 55:46–48.

59.	 Masselli A, Wang JY. Phosphorylation site mutated RB
exerts contrasting effects on apoptotic response to different
stimuli. Oncogene. 2006; 25:1290–1298.
60.	 Chau BN, Pan CW, Wang JY. Separation of anti-­
proliferation and anti-apoptotic functions of retinoblastoma
protein through targeted mutations of its A/B domain. PLoS
One. 2006; 1:e82.

47.	 Bosco EE, Wang Y, Xu H, Zilfou JT, Knudsen KE,
Aronow BJ, Lowe SW, Knudsen ES. The retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor modifies the therapeutic response of
breast cancer. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:218–228.
48.	 Zagorski WA, Knudsen ES, Reed MF. Retinoblastoma deficiency increases chemosensitivity in lung cancer. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67:8264–8273.

61.	 Dou QP, An B, Will PL. Induction of a retinoblastoma
phosphatase activity by anticancer drugs accompanies
p53-independent G1 arrest and apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 1995; 92:9019–9023.

49.	 Sharma A, Comstock CE, Knudsen ES, Cao KH,
Hess-Wilson JK, Morey LM, Barrera J, Knudsen KE.
Retinoblastoma tumor suppressor status is a critical determinant of therapeutic response in prostate cancer cells.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:6192–6203.

62.	 Morana SJ, Wolf CM, Li J, Reynolds JE, Brown MK,
Eastman A. The involvement of protein phosphatases in
the activation of ICE/CED-3 protease, intracellular acidification, DNA digestion, and apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271:18263–18271.

50.	 Biasoli D, Kahn SA, Cornelio TA, Furtado M, Campanati L,
Chneiweiss H, Moura-Neto V, Borges HL. Retinoblastoma
protein regulates the crosstalk between autophagy and
apoptosis, and favors glioblastoma resistance to etoposide.
Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e767.

63.	 Wang H, Grand RJ, Milner AE, Armitage RJ, Gordon J,
Gregory CD. Repression of apoptosis in human
B-lymphoma cells by CD40-ligand and Bcl-2: relationship to the cell-cycle and role of the retinoblastoma protein.
Oncogene. 1996; 13:373–379.

51.	 Almasan A, Yin Y, Kelly RE, Lee EY, Bradley A, Li W,
Bertino JR, Wahl GM. Deficiency of retinoblastoma ­protein
leads to inappropriate S-phase entry, activation of E2Fresponsive genes, and apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1995; 92:5436–5440.

64.	 Day ML, Foster RG, Day KC, Zhao X, Humphrey P,
Swanson P, Postigo AA, Zhang SH, Dean DC. Cell
anchorage regulates apoptosis through the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor/E2F pathway. J Biol Chem. 1997;
272:8125–8128.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17886

Oncotarget

65.	 Wang RH, Liu CW, Avramis VI, Berndt N. Protein
­phosphatase 1alpha-mediated stimulation of apoptosis is
associated with dephosphorylation of the retinoblastoma
protein. Oncogene. 2001; 20:6111–6122.

79.	 Tan X, Martin SJ, Green DR, Wang JY. Degradation of
retinoblastoma protein in tumor necrosis factor- and CD95induced cell death. J Biol Chem. 1997; 272:9613–9616.
80.	 Chau BN, Borges HL, Chen TT, Masselli A, Hunton IC,
Wang JY. Signal-dependent protection from apoptosis in
mice expressing caspase-resistant Rb. Nat Cell Biol. 2002;
4:757–765.

66.	 Glozak MA, Rogers MB. Retinoic acid- and bone morphogenetic protein 4-induced apoptosis in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells requires p27. Exp Cell Res. 2001; 268:128–138.
67.	 Popowski M, Ferguson HA, Sion AM, Koller E, Knudsen E,
Van Den Berg CL. Stress and IGF-I differentially control
cell fate through mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
and retinoblastoma protein (pRB). J Biol Chem. 2008;
283:28265–28273.

81.	 Boutillier AL, Trinh E, Loeffler JP. Caspase-dependent
cleavage of the retinoblastoma protein is an early step in
neuronal apoptosis. Oncogene. 2000; 19:2171–2178.
82.	 Wagner S, Roemer K. Retinoblastoma protein is required
for efficient colorectal carcinoma cell apoptosis by histone
deacetylase inhibitors in the absence of p21Waf. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2005; 69:1059–1067.

68.	 De Leon G, Sherry TC, Krucher NA. Reduced expression of
PNUTS leads to activation of Rb-phosphatase and caspasemediated apoptosis. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008; 7:833–841.

83.	 Bowen C, Spiegel S, Gelmann EP. Radiation-induced apoptosis mediated by retinoblastoma protein. Cancer Res. 1998;
58:3275–3281.

69.	 Dou QP, Lui VW. Failure to dephosphorylate retinoblastoma protein in drug-resistant cells. Cancer Res. 1995;
55:5222–5225.

84.	 Bowen C, Birrer M, Gelmann EP. Retinoblastoma proteinmediated apoptosis after gamma-irradiation. J Biol Chem.
2002; 277:44969–44979.

70.	 Wallace M, Coates PJ, Wright EG, Ball KL. Differential
post-translational modification of the tumour suppressor
proteins Rb and p53 modulate the rates of radiation-induced
apoptosis in vivo. Oncogene. 2001; 20:3597–3608.

85.	 Munro S, Carr SM, La Thangue NB. Diversity within
the pRb pathway: is there a code of conduct? Oncogene.
2012; 31:4343–4352.

71.	 Lentine B, Antonucci L, Hunce R, Edwards J, Marallano V,
Krucher NA. Dephosphorylation of threonine-821 of the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) is required
for apoptosis induced by UV and Cdk inhibition. Cell
Cycle. 2012; 11:3324–3330.

86.	 Korah J, Falah N, Lacerte A, Lebrun JJ. A transcriptionally active pRb-E2F1-P/CAF signaling pathway is central to
TGFbeta-mediated apoptosis. Cell Death Dis. 2012; 3:e407.
87.	 Hilgendorf KI, Leshchiner ES, Nedelcu S, Maynard MA,
Calo E, Ianari A, Walensky LD, Lees JA. The retinoblastoma protein induces apoptosis directly at the mitochondria.
Genes Dev. 2013; 27:1003–1015.

72.	 An B, Jin JR, Lin P, Dou QP. Failure to activate interleukin 1beta-converting enzyme-like proteases and to cleave
retinoblastoma protein in drug-resistant cells. FEBS Lett.
1996; 399:158–162.

88.	 Antonucci LA, Egger JV, Krucher NA. Phosphorylation of
the Retinoblastoma protein (Rb) on serine-807 is required
for association with Bax. Cell Cycle. 2014; 13:3611–3617.

73.	 An B, Dou QP. Cleavage of retinoblastoma protein during
apoptosis: an interleukin 1 beta-converting enzyme-like
protease as candidate. Cancer Res. 1996; 56:438–442.

89.	 Lee MH, Williams BO, Mulligan G, Mukai S, Bronson RT,
Dyson N, Harlow E, Jacks T. Targeted disruption of p107:
functional overlap between p107 and Rb. Genes Dev.
1996; 10:1621–1632.

74.	 Tan X, Wang JY. The caspase-RB connection in cell death.
Trends Cell Biol. 1998; 8:116–120.
75.	 Diederich L, Fotedar A, Fotedar R. Proteolytic cleavage
of retinoblastoma protein upon DNA damage and Fasmediated apoptosis. Cell Biol Toxicol. 1998; 14:133–140.

90.	 LeCouter JE, Kablar B, Whyte PF, Ying C, Rudnicki MA.
Strain-dependent embryonic lethality in mice lacking the
retinoblastoma-related p130 gene. Development. 1998;
125:4669–4679.

76.	 Browne SJ, MacFarlane M, Cohen GM, Paraskeva C.
The adenomatous polyposis coli protein and retinoblastoma protein are cleaved early in apoptosis and are
potential substrates for caspases. Cell Death Differ.
1998; 5:206–213.

91.	 Harb G, Vasavada RC, Cobrinik D, Stewart AF. The retinoblastoma protein and its homolog p130 regulate the
G1/S transition in pancreatic beta-cells. Diabetes. 2009;
58:1852–1862.

77.	 Fattman CL, Delach SM, Dou QP, Johnson DE. Sequential
two-step cleavage of the retinoblastoma protein by
caspase-3/-7 during etoposide-induced apoptosis.
­
Oncogene. 2001; 20:2918–2926.

92.	 Liu DX, Nath N, Chellappan SP, Greene LA. Regulation of
neuron survival and death by p130 and associated chromatin modifiers. Genes Dev. 2005; 19:719–732.

78.	 Katsuda K, Kataoka M, Uno F, Murakami T, Kondo T,
Roth JA, Tanaka N, Fujiwara T. Activation of caspase-3
and cleavage of Rb are associated with p16-mediated apoptosis in human non-small cell lung cancer cells. Oncogene.
2002; 21:2108–2113.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

93.	 Tonini T, Gabellini C, Bagella L, D’Andrilli G,
Masciullo V, Romano G, Scambia G, Zupi G, Giordano A.
pRb2/p130 decreases sensitivity to apoptosis induced by
camptothecin and doxorubicin but not by taxol. Clin Cancer
Res. 2004; 10:8085–8093.

17887

Oncotarget

94.	 Dingar D, Konecny F, Zou J, Sun X, von Harsdorf R.
­Anti-apoptotic function of the E2F transcription factor 4
(E2F4)/p130, a member of retinoblastoma gene family in
cardiac myocytes. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012; 53:820–828.

105.	 Lehn S, Ferno M, Jirstrom K, Ryden L, Landberg G.
A non-functional retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (RB)
pathway in premenopausal breast cancer is associated with
resistance to tamoxifen. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:956–962.

95.	 Fusaro G, Wang S, Chellappan S. Differential regulation
of Rb family proteins and prohibitin during camptothecininduced apoptosis. Oncogene. 2002; 21:4539–4548.

106.	 Varma H, Conrad SE. Reversal of an a­ ntiestrogen-mediated
cell cycle arrest of MCF-7 cells by viral tumor antigens
requires the retinoblastoma protein-binding domain.
Oncogene. 2000; 19:4746–4753.

96.	 Simpson DS, Mason-Richie NA, Gettler CA,
Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA. Retinoblastoma family
­
­proteins have d
­ istinct functions in pulmonary e­ pithelial
cells in vivo critical for suppressing cell growth and
­tumorigenesis. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:8733–8741.

107.	 Mack PC, Chi SG, Meyers FJ, Stewart SL, deVere
White RW, Gumerlock PH. Increased RB1 abnormalities
in human primary prostate cancer following combined
androgen blockade. Prostate. 1998; 34:145–151.

97.	 Bellan C, De Falco G, Tosi GM, Lazzi S, Ferrari F,
Morbini G, Bartolomei S, Toti P, Mangiavacchi P,
Cevenini G, Trimarchi C, Cinti C, Giordano A,
Leoncini L, Tosi P, Cottier H. Missing expression of
pRb2/p130 in human retinoblastomas is associated with
reduced apoptosis and lesser differentiation. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002; 43:3602–3608.

108.	 Sharma A, Yeow WS, Ertel A, Coleman I, Clegg N,
Thangavel C, Morrissey C, Zhang X, Comstock CE,
Witkiewicz AK, Gomella L, Knudsen ES, Nelson PS,
Knudsen KE. The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
controls androgen signaling and human prostate cancer
­progression. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:4478–4492.
109.	 Knudsen KE, Arden KC, Cavenee WK. Multiple G1
­regulatory elements control the androgen-dependent proliferation of prostatic carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem. 1998;
273:20213–20222.

98.	 Jori FP, Melone MA, Napolitano MA, Cipollaro M,
Cascino A, Giordano A, Galderisi U. RB and RB2/p130
genes demonstrate both specific and overlapping functions
during the early steps of in vitro neural differentiation
of marrow stromal stem cells. Cell Death Differ. 2005;
12:65–77.

110.	 Pollack A, Czerniak B, Zagars GK, Hu SX, Wu CS,
Dinney CP, Chyle V, Benedict WF. Retinoblastoma protein expression and radiation response in muscle-­invasive
bladder cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1997;
39:687–695.

99.	 Pucci B, Claudio PP, Masciullo V, Bellincampi L,
Terrinoni A, Khalili K, Melino G, Giordano A. pRb2/p130
promotes radiation-induced cell death in the glioblastoma
cell line HJC12 by p73 upregulation and Bcl-2 downregulation. Oncogene. 2002; 21:5897–5905.

111.	 Agerbaek M, Alsner J, Marcussen N, Lundbeck F, von der
Maase H. Retinoblastoma protein expression is an independent predictor of both radiation response and survival
in muscle-invasive bladder cancer. Br J Cancer. 2003;
89:298–304.

100.	 La Sala D, Macaluso M, Trimarchi C, Giordano A,
Cinti C. Triggering of p73-dependent apoptosis in osteosarcoma is under the control of E2Fs-pRb2/p130 complexes. Oncogene. 2003; 22:3518–3529.

112.	 Kolesnick R, Fuks Z. Radiation and ceramide-induced
apoptosis. Oncogene. 2003; 22:5897–5906.

101.	 Derenzini M, Donati G, Mazzini G, Montanaro L, Vici M,
Ceccarelli C, Santini D, Taffurelli M, Trere D. Loss of
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein makes human
breast cancer cells more sensitive to antimetabolite exposure. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:2199–2209.

113.	 Esuvaranathan K, Chiong E, Thamboo TP, Chan YH,
Kamaraj R, Mahendran R, Teh M. Predictive value of p53
and pRb expression in superficial bladder cancer patients
treated with BCG and interferon-alpha. Cancer. 2007;
109:1097–1105.

102.	 Herschkowitz JI, He X, Fan C, Perou CM. The functional
loss of the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor is a common event in basal-like and luminal B breast carcinomas.
Breast Cancer Res. 2008; 10:R75.

114.	 Cormio L, Tolve I, Annese P, Saracino A, Zamparese R,
Sanguedolce F, Bufo P, Battaglia M, Selvaggi FP,
Carrieri G. Altered p53 and pRb expression is predictive
of response to BCG treatment in T1G3 bladder cancer.
Anticancer Res. 2009; 29:4201–4204.

103.	 Trere D, Brighenti E, Donati G, Ceccarelli C, Santini D,
Taffurelli M, Montanaro L, Derenzini M. High prevalence of retinoblastoma protein loss in triple-negative
breast cancers and its association with a good prognosis in
patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. Ann Oncol.
2009; 20:1818–1823.

115.	 Addeo R, Casale F, Caraglia M, D’Angelo V, Crisci S,
Abbruzzese A, Di Tullio MT, Indolfi P. Glucocorticoids
induce G1 arrest of lymphoblastic cells through retinoblastoma protein Rb1 dephosphorylation in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in vivo. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004;
3:470–476.

104.	 Witkiewicz AK, Ertel A, McFalls J, Valsecchi ME,
Schwartz G, Knudsen ES. RB-pathway disruption is
associated with improved response to neoadjuvant
­chemotherapy in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18:5110–5122.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

116.	 Kommoss S, du Bois A, Ridder R, Trunk MJ, Schmidt D,
Pfisterer J, Kommoss F. Independent prognostic significance of cell cycle regulator proteins p16(INK4a) and
pRb in advanced-stage ovarian carcinoma including

17888

Oncotarget

optimally debulked patients: a translational research subprotocol of a randomised study of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft
Gynaekologische Onkologie Ovarian Cancer Study Group.
Br J Cancer. 2007; 96:306–313.

131.	 Esposito L, Indovina P, Magnotti F, Conti D, Giordano A.
Anticancer therapeutic strategies based on CDK inhibitors.
Curr Pharm Des. 2013; 19:5327–5332.
132.	 Abate AA, Pentimalli F, Esposito L, Giordano A.
­ATP-noncompetitive CDK inhibitors for cancer therapy: an
overview. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2013; 22:895–906.

117.	 Ramos E, Llado L, Serrano T, Figueras A, Lastra R,
Torras J, Figueras J, Rafecas A, Fabregat J. Utility of cellcycle modulators to predict vascular invasion and recurrence after surgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Transplantation. 2006; 82:753–758.

133.	 Musgrove EA, Caldon CE, Barraclough J, Stone A,
Sutherland RL. Cyclin D as a therapeutic target in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:558–572.

118.	 Knudsen ES, Knudsen KE. Tailoring to RB: tumour
suppressor status and therapeutic response. Nat Rev
­
Cancer. 2008; 8:714–724.

134.	 Dickson MA, Tap WD, Keohan ML, D’Angelo SP,
Gounder MM, Antonescu CR, Landa J, Qin LX,
Rathbone DD, Condy MM, Ustoyev Y, Crago AM,
Singer S, Schwartz GK. Phase II trial of the CDK4 inhibitor PD0332991 in patients with advanced CDK4-amplified
well-differentiated or dedifferentiated liposarcoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2013; 31:2024–2028.

119.	 Knudsen ES, Wang JY. Targeting the RB-pathway in
­cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:1094–1099.
120.	 McNeish IA, Bell SJ, Lemoine NR. Gene therapy progress
and prospects: cancer gene therapy using tumour suppressor genes. Gene Ther. 2004; 11:497–503.

135.	 Leonard JP, LaCasce AS, Smith MR, Noy A, Chirieac LR,
Rodig SJ, Yu JQ, Vallabhajosula S, Schoder H, English P,
Neuberg DS, Martin P, Millenson MM, Ely SA,
Courtney R, Shaik N, et al. Selective CDK4/6 inhibition
with tumor responses by PD0332991 in patients with
­mantle cell lymphoma. Blood. 2012; 119:4597–4607.

121.	 Lim MJ, Min SH, Lee JJ, Kim IC, Kim JT, Lee DC,
Kim NS, Jeong S, Kim MN, Kim KD, Lim JS, Han SB,
Kim HM, Heo DS, Yeom YI. Targeted therapy of DNA
tumor virus-associated cancers using virus-activated
­transcription factors. Mol Ther. 2006; 13:899–909.

136.	 Asghar U, Witkiewicz AK, Turner NC, Knudsen ES. The
history and future of targeting cyclin-dependent kinases in
cancer therapy. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015; 14:130–146.

122.	 Dolma S, Lessnick SL, Hahn WC, Stockwell BR.
Identification of genotype-selective antitumor agents using
synthetic lethal chemical screening in engineered human
tumor cells. Cancer Cell. 2003; 3:285–296.

137.	 Witkiewicz AK, Knudsen ES. Retinoblastoma tumor
­suppressor pathway in breast cancer: prognosis, precision
medicine, and therapeutic interventions. Breast Cancer
Res. 2014; 16:207.

123.	 Li B, Gordon GM, Du CH, Xu J, Du W. Specific killing of
Rb mutant cancer cells by inactivating TSC2. Cancer Cell.
2010; 17:469–480.

138.	 Baughn LB, Di Liberto M, Wu K, Toogood PL, Louie T,
Gottschalk R, Niesvizky R, Cho H, Ely S, Moore MA,
Chen-Kiang S. A novel orally active small molecule
potently induces G1 arrest in primary myeloma cells and
prevents tumor growth by specific inhibition of cyclindependent kinase 4/6. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:7661–7667.

124.	 Polager S, Ginsberg D. p53 and E2f: partners in life and
death. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:738–748.
125.	 Laurie NA, Donovan SL, Shih CS, Zhang J, Mills N,
Fuller C, Teunisse A, Lam S, Ramos Y, Mohan A,
Johnson D, Wilson M, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Quarto M,
Francoz S, Mendrysa SM, et al. Inactivation of the p53
pathway in retinoblastoma. Nature. 2006; 444:61–66.

139.	 Johnson SM, Torrice CD, Bell JF, Monahan KB, Jiang Q,
Wang Y, Ramsey MR, Jin J, Wong KK, Su L, Zhou D,
Sharpless NE. Mitigation of hematologic radiation toxicity
in mice through pharmacological quiescence induced by
CDK4/6 inhibition. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:2528–2536.

126.	 Kitagawa M, Aonuma M, Lee SH, Fukutake S,
McCormick F. E2F-1 transcriptional activity is a critical
determinant of Mdm2 antagonist-induced apoptosis in
human tumor cell lines. Oncogene. 2008; 27:5303–5314.

140.	 Michaud K, Solomon DA, Oermann E, Kim JS,
Zhong WZ, Prados MD, Ozawa T, James CD, Waldman T.
Pharmacologic inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases
4 and 6 arrests the growth of glioblastoma multiforme
intracranial xenografts. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:3228–3238.

127.	 Roig JM, Molina MA, Cascante A, Calbo J, Carbo N,
Wirtz U, Sreedharan S, Fillat C, Mazo A. Adenovirusmediated retinoblastoma 94 gene transfer induces human
pancreatic tumor regression in a mouse xenograft model.
Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:1454–1462.

141.	 Dean JL, McClendon AK, Knudsen ES. Modification
of the DNA damage response by therapeutic CDK4/6
­inhibition. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:29075–29087.

128.	 Pentimalli F, Giordano A. Promises and drawbacks of
targeting cell cycle kinases in cancer. Discov Med. 2009;
8:177–180.

142.	 Menu E, Garcia J, Huang X, Di Liberto M, Toogood PL,
Chen I, Vanderkerken K, Chen-Kiang S. A novel therapeutic combination using PD 0332991 and bortezomib:
study in the 5T33MM myeloma model. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:5519–5523.

129.	 Lapenna S, Giordano A. Cell cycle kinases as therapeutic
targets for cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009; 8:547–566.
130.	 Cirillo D, Pentimalli F, Giordano A. Peptides or small
molecules? Different approaches to develop more effective
CDK inhibitors. Curr Med Chem. 2011; 18:2854–2866.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17889

Oncotarget

143.	 Bose P, Simmons GL, Grant S. Cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor therapy for hematologic malignancies. Expert
Opin Investig Drugs. 2013; 22:723–738.

spacer domain as perspective candidates for cancer therapy.
J Cell Physiol. 2007; 213:403–406.
147.	Bagella L, Sun A, Tonini T, Abbadessa G, Cottone G,
Paggi MG, De Luca A, Claudio PP, Giordano A. A small
molecule based on the pRb2/p130 spacer domain leads
to inhibition of cdk2 activity, cell cycle arrest and tumor
growth reduction in vivo. Oncogene. 2007; 26:1829–1839.

144.	 Altenburg JD, Farag SS. The potential role of PD0332991
(Palbociclib) in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Expert
Opin Investig Drugs. 2014; 24:261–271.
145.	 Schwartz GK, Shah MA. Targeting the cell cycle: a
new approach to cancer therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:9408–9421.

148.	Giordano A, Bellacchio E, Bagella L, Paggi MG. Interaction
between the Cdk2/cyclin A complex and a small molecule
derived from the pRb2/p130 spacer domain: a theoretical
model. Cell Cycle. 2007; 6:2591–2593.

146.	Giordano A, Rossi A, Romano G, Bagella L. Tumor
­suppressor pRb2/p130 gene and its derived product Spa310

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17890

Oncotarget

