www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 10), pp: 16829-16842
Research Paper

Doxycycline directly targets PAR1 to suppress tumor progression
Weilong Zhong1,*, Shuang Chen2,*, Qiang Zhang1,*, Ting Xiao1,*, Yuan Qin1, Ju Gu1,
Bo Sun2, Yanrong Liu2, Xiangyan Jing1, Xuejiao Hu1, Peng Zhang1, Honggang
Zhou1,2, Tao Sun1,2, Cheng Yang1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300000, China

2

Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Tianjin International Joint Academy of Biomedicine, Tianjin, 300000,
China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Tao Sun, email: sunrockmia@hotmail.com
Cheng Yang, email: cheng.yang@nankai.edu.cn
Keywords: tumor, molecular target, GPCR, tumor progression, antibotics
Received: November 23, 2016     Accepted: January 24, 2017     Published: February 07, 2017

ABSTRACT
Doxycycline have been reported to exert anti-cancer activity and have been assessed
as anti-cancer agents in clinical trials. However, the direct targets of doxycycline in
cancer cells remain unclear. In this study, we used a chemical proteomics approach
to identify the Protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR1) as a specific target of inhibition
of doxycycline. Binding assays and single-molecule imaging assays were performed to
confirm the inhibition of doxycycline to PAR1. The effect of doxycycline on multi-omics
and cell functions were assessed based on a PAR1/thrombin model. Molecular docking
and molecular dynamic simulations revealed that doxycycline interacts with key amino
acids in PAR1. Mutation of PAR1 further confirmed the computation-based results.
Moreover, doxycycline provides highly selective inhibition of PAR1 signaling in tumors
in vitro and in vivo. Using pathological clinical samples co-stained for doxycycline and
PAR1, it was found that doxycycline fluorescence intensity and PAR1 expression shown
a clear positive correlation. Thus, doxycycline may be a useful targeted anti-cancer drug
that should be further investigated in clinical trials.

INTRODUCTION

also confirmed the interaction between doxycycline and
PAR1. This prediction was validated by biomolecular
interaction analysis (Biacore) and mutational analyses.
To verify the inhibitory capacity of doxycycline toward
cancer cells via PAR1, multi-omics was used to identify
critical pathways inhibited by doxycycline, and the
results of a multivariate analysis strongly suggested
that doxycycline inhibits PAR1 signaling pathways.
Additionally, doxycycline selectively inhibited the
progression of various types of cancer associated with
high PAR1 expression both in vitro and in vivo.

The anti-tumor activity of tetracyclines has been
verified in many tumor types, and doxycycline has
been subjected to evaluation in clinical trials [1–3].
Doxycycline has been shown to exert multipotent drug
activity inhibit angiogenesis, metastasis, ribosome
activity and mitochondrial function [4–7]. However, the
anti-tumor functions of doxycycline and the proteins that
mediate these molecular effects remain unknown.
Protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR1) is a member
of the Guanosine-binding protein coupled receptor family,
which has been implicated in metastatic and invasive
processes associated with cancers as well as vascular
biology and tissue remodeling [8]. A study by Kuliopulos
et al. showed evidence for a role for PAR1 as an MMP-1
receptor that promotes invasion and tumorigenesis in
breast cancers [9]. Here, we used a chemical proteomics
approach involving covalent modification to identify
PAR1 as a doxycycline-specific target protein. Molecular
docking results and molecular dynamic (MD) simulations
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Design, synthesis, activity assay and target
validation of doxycycline probes
As presented in Figure 1A, the doxycycline probe
(doxy-yne) was designed using two essential structural
components, the core unit (retains compound activity)
and the linker unit (covalently binds to the target protein)
16829

Oncotarget

[10, 11]. The synthesis of doxy-yne is shown in Figure 1A,
and details are provided in Supplementary Figure 1. The
linker unit (L1) was synthesized as previously described,
after which L1 was reacted with doxycycline to complete
the preparation of doxy-yne. To demonstrate the feasibility
for the application and activity of doxy-yne, an in vitro
inhibition assay was performed using A549 cell lines with
an IC50 value of 8.02 μM, which is similar to doxycycline
(Figure 1B). The results indicated that the inhibitory effect
of doxy-yne was retained.
Based on SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS results, we
confirmed PAR1 as a targeting protein with doxy-yne
(Figure 1C). To confirm PAR1 as a target protein of
doxycycline, forward and reverse doxy-yne pull-down
assays were conducted (Figure 1D and Figure 1E). In the
forward pull-down assay, the fluorescence values were
approximately 100 times higher than those of the control
sample (Figure 1D). Similarly, the experimental group
displayed 30-fold greater fluorescence intensity in the
reverse pull-down assay (Figure 1E). The Biacore results
for four different concentrations of doxycycline yielded
binding kinetics of Kd = 23 μM. The binding kinetics and
Kd value strongly suggest binding between doxycycline
and PAR1 [12]. Confocal immunofluorescence imaging
revealed a high proportion of PAR1 and doxycycline probe
co-localization, with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of
0.944 and a Mander’s overlap of 0.964 (Figure 1G). Using
a Super-Resolution Microscope System (N-STORM),
we observed doxycycline co-localization with PAR1 in
living cells on a nanoscale level [13]. Single-molecule
imaging and docking results further confirmed the binding
of doxycycline to the active site of PAR1 (Figure 1H
and  1I). All tetracyclines were computationally docked
with the active site of PAR1, and the models exhibited
similar binding modes (Supplementary Table  1).
Molecular docking analysis revealed the key amino acids
that participate in the interaction between PAR1 and
tetracyclines.

ion chelation, then it would observe no difference between
the inhibitory effects on calcium signals caused by PAR1
and inflammatory factors. However, whereas doxycycline
specifically inhibited calcium signaling caused by PAR1, it
incompletely inhibited calcium signaling induced by general
inflammatory factors, which includes thrombin (Figure 2D).
These results indicate that tetracyclines do not function
through the chelation of calcium ions but specifically inhibit
PAR1-dependent calcium influx. When the PAR1 was
knock down using CRISPR, the level of PAR1 expression
decreased, and the sensitivity of the cells to thrombin was
lost [15]. Doxycycline showed no inhibitory effect on PAR1negative cells (Figure 2E and  2F). Doxycycline treatment
also specifically inhibited thrombin-induced tumor cell
migration in control cells to a greater extent than PAR1 lowexpressing cells or PAR1-negative cells (Figure 2G and 2H
and Supplementary Figure 2). Cells treated with doxycycline
undergo significant changes in morphology, including
pseudopod disappearance and cell shrinking, as detected by
SEM (Figure 2I) [16]. In invasion assays, compared with
the control group, the invasion ability increased significantly
after the addition of thrombin. Additionally, doxycycline
significantly inhibited thrombin/PAR1 cells compared with
control cells but showed no effect on PAR1-negative cells.
Furthermore, The effects of doxycycline on the vascular
mimicry induced by PAR1 was examined. The tube
formation rate was extremely high in the thrombin treatment
group compared with the control group, and doxycycline
significantly inhibited tube formation specifically via PAR1
inhibition (Figure 2J).

Doxycycline occupies the active site and prevents
“tethered agonist” activation of PAR1
To identify key amino acids of PAR1 that binding
with doxycycline in vivo, we calculated the hydrogen
bond interactions between the ligand and the receptor
(Figure 3A). The hydrogen bond interactions of key
residues are listed in Supplementary Table 2. Based on
the molecular dynamic simulation results, the important
residues involved His164, Leu167, Asp165, His245 and
Tyr259. Six hydrogen bond formed during “tethered
agonist” binding to PAR1 [17]. Normally, agonists and
antagonists competitively bind to the active site of PAR1.
During doxycycline binding to PAR1, a situation in which
the number of hydrogen bond interactions was greater than
6, the antagonistic effect of doxycycline was greater than
the activating effects of the agonist, which results in the
suppression of PAR1. Consistent with the importance of
hydrogen bonding, PAR1 remained activated when fewer
than 6 hydrogen bond interactions were present between
doxycycline and PAR1. The green curve shows that as
the simulation time increased, the cumulative inhibition
rate gradually increased. The results of the comparison
between doxycycline and SFLLRN are presented in
Figure 3B and show that doxycycline inhibition of PAR1

Doxycycline specifically inhibits PAR1 through
physical and functional binding
PAR1 activation upon thrombin binding can induce
calcium influx. Therefore, a calcium flow inhibitory assay
was performed to measure the inhibition of calcium signaling
stimulated by PAR1 [14]. Figure 2A shows that all 6
tetracyclines efficiently inhibited calcium signaling stimulated
by thrombin, and doxycycline exhibited the strongest inhibitory
activity. Computational results demonstrated a strong correlation
between the docking scores and the corresponding inhibitory
assay results (Figure 2B). Doxycycline also inhibited calciumdependent signaling in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 2C).
To confirm that doxycycline inhibition of calcium
signaling was not caused directly by the chelation of calcium
ions, total inflammatory factors were used to activate cellular
calcium signals. If doxycycline treatment results in calcium
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16830

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Design of the doxycycline probe and confirmation of doxycycline binding to PAR1. (A) Structure of the doxycycline

probe used in this study. A portion of the doxycycline core unit and linker unit. (B) IC50 plots of doxycycline and doxycycline probe, as
determined by the MTT assay. (C) Doxy-yne labeling of live cells and PAR1 pull-down with confirmation by MS. (D) Positive pull-down
assays showing that the fluorescence of PAR1-Doxy was 100-fold greater than that of the control sample. (E) Reverse pull-down assays
showing that the binding of doxycycline to PAR1 was 30-fold greater than that of the control sample. (F) Biacore analysis of doxycycline
binding to PAR1 showing that doxycycline was captured by PAR1 with a Kd = 23 μM. (G) Confocal immunofluorescence imaging was
performed to visualize PAR1 and doxycycline. PAR1 and doxycycline co-localize, with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.944 and a
Mander’s overlap of 0.964. (H) N-STORM images of doxycycline bound to PAR1. These results show single molecules of doxycycline
bound to PAR1, and 360-degree rotation reveals the combination image. (I) Binding mode of tetracyclines docked in the active site of
PAR1. These results show that the entire tetracycline molecule occupies the binding pocket of PAR1 and that doxycycline demonstrates the
strongest binding affinity and the lowest binding energy. Every experiment was repeated three times. The error bars represent the standard
deviation (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also Supplementary Figure 1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16831

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Doxycycline inhibits PAR1 and effectively decreases cancer cell malignancy. (A) Calcium influx signals in

HEK-293-PAR1 cells treated with different tetracyclines (1 μM). All tetracyclines displayed inhibitory effects, among which doxycycline had
the strongest inhibitory effect. (B) Regression analysis of the inhibition ratio and docking scores. The correlation coefficient between these
two indexes was as high as 0.785 (P < 0.05). (C) Doxycycline inhibits calcium flow signals in a dose-dependent manner. (D) Doxycycline
partially inhibits calcium flow signals stimulated by seroperitoneum with 10 and 100 μM. These results indicate that tetracyclines do not
directly chelate calcium ions but rather inhibit PAR1 activity. (E, F) PAR1 knockdown by CRISPR and abrogates the sensitivity of cells to
thrombin. (G) Doxycycline inhibits cell migration induced by thrombin under 1.6 μM in 48 h. (H) The cells were treated with doxycycline
with 24 h under 1.6 μM and invasion ability were decreased. Invasion ability of PAR1(−/−) cells were decreased compared with normal
cells. (I) Cells were treated with 0.2 μM doxycycline for 24 h. Scanning electron microscopy revealed a reduction in lamellipodia and
filopodia compared with the control group. (J) Tube formation in thrombin-stimulated cells, doxycycline inhibit pipe formation ability with
1.6 μM. Results were obtained from three independent experiments, each performed in triplicate, and the error bars represent the standard
deviation (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also Supplementary Figure 2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16832

Oncotarget

was more effective than PAR1 activation by SFLLRN.
The calcium flow assay results were consistent with
this calculation (Figure 3C). Doxycycline markedly
inhibited 68% of calcium signaling activated by SFLLRN.
Doxycycline occupies the active site of PAR1 and
interacts with key amino acids thus preventing “tethered
agonist (SFLLRN)” activation of the receptor (Figure 3D).
Mutagenesis studies suggest that the mutation of residues
involved in doxycycline binding, including Val257Ala,
Leu258Ala, His336Ala, His164Ala, and Leu167Ala,
markedly reduces PAR1 inhibition by doxycycline.
The PAR1 His336Ala mutation impaired doxycycline
binding affinity by more than 85% (Figure 3E). His336
is a key amino acid in the formation of hydrogen bond
interactions with tetracyclines. Based on the above
analysis, doxycycline inhibits PAR1 and thus prevents
signal transduction.

Figure 5D provides a summary of the information related
to the PAR1 pathway; the proteins in the PAR1 pathway
that are differentially regulated by doxycycline treatment
and verified by LC-MS/MS are shown in green (downregulated), red (up-regulated) or yellow (no significant
change) [19]. The main pathways are associated with focal
adhesion assembly, actin polymerization in stress fibers,
actomyosin assembly for contraction, actin stabilization,
MAPK signaling, apoptosis and metabolism, all of which
are associated with PAR1. Focal adhesion assembly as a
locus of signal transduction activity plays a critical role in
regulating signal transduction and viability processes in
tumor cells. As shown in Figure 5D, the function of actin
polymerization in stress fibers was inhibited. Stress fibers
function in contraction and play an important role in cell
morphogenesis, cell differentiation and tissue formation,
and SEM analysis revealed similar results. Gene ontology
(GO) analysis also revealed that the cancer cells were
strongly influenced by the inhibit effect of doxycycline
on PAR1, and various PAR1 signaling pathways and
functions were inhibited (Supplementary Figure 3). All
these analyses suggest that doxycycline targets PAR1,
which hinders the progression of cancer cells. Western
blot analysis was used to confirm the expression levels of
key proteins and EMT markers in cancer cells (Figure 5E).

Principal component analysis of multi-omics data
reveals that doxycycline targets the PAR1 pathway
Proteomics assays were conducted to assess
the effects of doxycycline on cancer cells. As shown
in Figure  4A, the cells were lysed and digested, and
differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by
LC-MS/MS. STRING database was selected to examine
several types of interactions between the control and
doxycycline groups (Figure 4B and 4C) [18]. These
results showed that many functions are influenced by
doxycycline. The results of the protein-protein interaction
network data showed that doxycycline enhances protein
complex disassembly, mRNA splicing via the spliceosome
and apoptosis. We also found groups of interacting
proteins involved in the inhibition of adherens junctions,
proteasome, mRNA catabolic processes and cytoskeleton
dynamics in cells. Further analysis revealed a wide range
of doxycycline-dependent effects in apoptosis, adhesion,
cytoskeletal maintenance, migration, proliferation and
invasion (Figure 4D). These results have been validated
by several previous studies reporting on the anti-cancer
effects of doxycycline.
To identify pathways in cancer cell lines that are
inhibited by doxycycline, multi-omics level analyses
were performed. As shown in Figure 5A, PCA analysis
of the three omics revealed a significant separation
of clusters between the control (black points) and
doxycycline groups (red points). Among the differentially
expressed genes, proteins and metabolites, the majority
of influenced pathways were related to metabolism,
cell development, immune function, apoptosis and cellcell interactions (Figure 5B). Based on the multi-omics
analysis, the main pathways that were influenced by
doxycycline were identified, and the intersection of the
three omics is shown in a Venn diagram (Figure 5C).
The overlapping pathways identified by the three omics
indicated a PAR1-regulated signal transduction cascade.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Doxycycline specifically inhibits PAR1-positive
tumor cells in vitro and in vivo
In the present study, tetracyclines, especially
doxycycline, inhibit calcium influx caused by thrombinmediated activation of PAR1, which results in decreased
inhibition efficacy upon PAR1 knockdown (Figure 6A
and 6B). Doxycycline exhibited highly selective inhibition
of cancer cells with high expression levels of PAR1, and
regression analysis revealed that the correlation coefficient
between the IC50 and the expression level of PAR1
was 0.718 (P < 0.001) (Figure 6C and Supplementary
Figure 4). Doxycycline also had higher anti-tumor
activity toward cells with higher PAR1 expression in a
xenograft model, with a correlation coefficient of 0.768
(P = 0.0043). Compared with the untreated control
group, the tumor volume was significantly decreased
after doxycycline treatment. Moreover, the sensitivity
of tumors to doxycycline was associated with PAR1
expression in various cell lines (Figure 6E). For example,
the minimally invasive MCF-7 cells, which express
low levels of PAR1, were relatively insensitive to
doxycycline inhibition [9] (See Supplementary Figure 5).
These in vivo results strongly indicate that doxycycline
targets PAR1 to inhibit tumor growth. Figure 6G shows
immunohistochemical staining for EMT markers, invasive
biomarkers and doxycycline inhibited proteins. Based
on the immunohistochemical staining results, compared
with the untreated doxycycline groups, E-cadherin
and α-SMA exhibited high expression levels, whereas
16833

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Molecular dynamic simulation and schematic diagram of the inhibitory mechanism showing direct
interaction between doxycycline and PAR1. (A) Changes in the number of hydrogen bonds and typical conformations between

PAR1 and doxycycline in our model system. Red dots indicate that the number of hydrogen bonds was greater than six; blue dots indicate
that the number of hydrogen bonds was less than six. (B) Calculated results for the binding of doxycycline and SFLLRN to PAR1,
indicating that doxycycline inhibition of PAR1 is more effective than activation of PAR1 by SFLLRN. (C) Calcium signaling assay
for doxycycline and SFLLRN. These results reveal that doxycycline inhibits calcium influx caused by SFLLRN. (D) The mechanism
underlying doxycycline inhibition of PAR1. Doxycycline occupies the active site of PAR1 and prevents “tethered agonist” activation,
ultimately blocking signal transduction. (E) Mutation of PAR1 reveal key residues involved in doxycycline binding, which is consistent
with the MD results. Results were obtained from three independent experiments, each performed in triplicate, and the error bars represent
the standard deviation (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16834

Oncotarget

vimentin, MMP2 and MMP9 exhibited low expression in
tumor tissue. The expression levels of other proteins were
similar based on the three omics analyses and western
blot analysis (Figure 6F and 6G). In A549 cells in which
PAR1 was knocked down, the tumor formation rate and
degree of malignancy were reduced compared with those

of wild-type cells, and PAR1-deficient cells showed a loss
of sensitivity to doxycycline (Figure 6H).
Two hundred and twenty-eight cases of pathological
lung cancer specimens and 150 cases of pathological breast
cancer specimens were used to assess the co-localization
of doxycycline and PAR1. The staining intensity of

Figure 4: Differentially expressed proteins evaluated using multi-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry revealed key biological functions influenced by doxycycline. Among the 231 differentially expressed proteins,

101 were increased, and 130 were decreased. (A) Workflow of the proteomics analysis. (B, C). Protein-protein interaction networks of
differentially expressed proteins. Significantly changed proteins correlated with apoptosis, adherens junctions, the proteasome, mRNA
catabolic processes and the cytoskeleton. (D) Pathways perturbed in a doxycycline-dependent manner were associated with apoptosis,
adhesion, the cytoskeleton, migration, proliferation and invasion. Results were obtained from three independent experiments, each
performed in triplicate, and the error bars represent the standard deviation (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16835

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

doxycycline and PAR1 varied in different samples, but the
fluorescence intensity of doxycycline and PAR1 expression
showed a clear positive correlation (Figure 6I). These results
show that this method can be applied clinically to screen for
patients who are sensitive to doxycycline treatment.

Activated PAR1 promote metastatic and invasive
processes in various cancers [20, 21]. High expression
levels of PAR1 were detected in various cancer cell

Figure 5: Multi-omics data analysis reveal that doxycycline inhibits PAR1-regulated signaling pathways. (A) PCA
analysis of genomics, proteomics and metabolomics. These results revealed a significant separation of the clusters between the control and
doxycycline groups. (B) Statistical analysis of the pathways related to metabolism, cell growth, inflammation and apoptosis. (C) Unique
and mutual pathways identified based on genomics, proteomics and metabolomics. (D) Proteins in the PAR1-regulated pathway are shown
in green (down-regulated), red (up-regulated) or yellow (no significant change). The pathways that were influenced included those involved
in actin stress fiber polymerization, actomyosin assembly for contraction, focal adhesion and the MAPK signaling pathway. (E) Western
blotting was used to confirm the differential expression of proteins in the PAR1 pathway. Results were obtained from three independent
experiments, each performed in triplicate, and the error bars represent the standard deviation (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). Data are represented
as mean ± SEM. See also Supplementary Figure 3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16836

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Doxycycline shows stronger inhibition and anti-tumor activity on cells with higher PAR1 expression. (A, B)

Loss of sensitivity to doxycycline in PAR1 knockdown cells. (C) Liner regression analysis of the doxycycline inhibition rate and the
PAR1 expression level. These results showed a positive correlation between the two indexes. (D) Regression analysis of the doxycycline
anti-tumor rate and PAR1 expression levels; the correlation coefficient was 0.768. (E) Doxycycline treatment inhibits xenograft growth in
numerous models with dose of 15 and 30mg/kg. (F) Immunohistochemical staining to identify EMT biomarkers and doxycycline inhibited
proteins in treated and untreated cells. Doxycycline-treated cells display stronger E-cadherin and α-SMA staining but reduced vimentin,
MMP-2 and MMP-9 staining; the expression levels of other proteins were identical to those observed by western blotting. (G) Staining
indexes of EMT biomarkers and doxycycline inhibited proteins. (H) Tumor volume and sensitivity to doxycycline (30 mg/kg) in control
(PAR1+) and PAR1 knockdown (PAR1-) cell lines. These results suggest that PAR1- cell lines lost their sensitivity to doxycycline. (I) Costaining regression analysis of doxycycline and PAR1 in human tumor samples. These results show a clear positive correlation between
the fluorescence intensity of doxycycline and PAR1. The regression analysis of the doxycycline staining intensity and pathological grading
also showed a positive correlation. Results were obtained from three independent experiments, each performed in triplicate, and the error
bars represent the standard deviation (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also Supplementary Figure 4 and
Supplementary Figure 5.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16837

Oncotarget

with high PAR1 expression both in vitro and in vivo. Using
CRISPR, we knocked down PAR1 expression and found
that the inhibitory activity of doxycycline toward PAR1
was lost. These results strongly indicate that doxycycline
directly targets PAR1 to suppress tumor progression in
a dose-dependent manner, and these results provide an
explanation as to why doxycycline exerts anti-vascular
effects, which includes the inhibition of MMPs.
Based on immunohistochemical staining results in
tumor tissues, the difference in protein expression after
doxycycline treatment was highly consistent with that
of PAR1 repression. In A549 cells in which PAR1 was
knocked down, the tumor-formation rate and degree of
malignancy were reduced compared with PAR1 wild-type
cell lines. We used 228 pathological lung cancer specimens
and 150 pathological breast cancer specimens to perform
fluorescence co-localization analysis of doxycycline
and PAR1. The fluorescence intensity of doxycycline
and PAR1 displayed a clear positive correlation. These
results indicate that paraffin-embedded tumor tissues
could be used to evaluate drug sensitivity. Drugs can
show increased binding to the pockets of proteins after
formaldehyde fixation; however, doxycycline binding
to the pocket of PAR1 was not seriously suppressed by
fixation, dehydration, embedding or sectioning of the
tumor samples. In clinical trials, this method can provide
evidence for patients with tumors that are sensitive to
drugs such as doxycycline. In an animal tumor model,
samples that stained positively for both doxycycline and
PAR1 also showed a strong sensitivity to doxycycline.
In summary, the current work indicates that
doxycycline directly targets PAR1 and reveals that
the anti-tumor mechanism of doxycycline is mediated
through PAR1. According to the results of our molecular
experiments, our observed anti-tumor effects upon
doxycycline treatment and our pathological analysis
experiments, we further identified and characterized
a critical role for PAR1 in tumor cells, and we show
evidence that doxycycline should be treated as a targeted
drug for clinical applications. Our results support the use of
doxycycline as a lead compound for PAR1 inhibition and
pave the way for ongoing anti-tumor doxycycline therapy.

lines, including MDA-MB-231, A549, LLC, PC-7 and
HT-29 [22, 23]. Abundant experimental data and clinical
investigations have suggested that PAR1 is an important
target for cancer therapy [24, 25]. Here, we show that
the inhibitory effects of doxycycline on cancer cells are
mediated through PAR1.
In a previous study, doxycycline was found to
inhibit angiogenesis in chick chorioallantoic membrane
(CAM) samples by repressing the activity of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) [26, 27]. Until now,
doxycycline was still considered an anti-angiogenesis drug
that functions through the inhibition of MMPs. However, the
evidence was not strong enough to confirm that doxycycline
could directly inhibit MMPs. Although fourteen clinical
trials investigating the application of doxycycline in cancer
therapy are currently being conducted through the FDA, the
therapeutic effects of doxycycline are inferior to those of
targeted drugs (See Supplementary Table 3).
Patients with doxycycline-sensitive tumors could
show greater benefit if doxycycline is used as a targeted
therapeutic in clinical applications. The effects of
doxycycline are reflected by its multi-target profile, and
thus the major problem has been the identification of its
main target. In this study, we used “click” chemistry to
identify the target of doxycycline. Although non-specific
bands were observed, coomassie staining, western blotting
and mass spectrometry strongly confirmed the ion between
doxycycline and PAR1. Interestingly, doxy-yne cannot
capture internalized PAR1 when PAR1 is combined with
its natural ligand and internalized. This finding indicates
that doxycycline can interact with only PAR1 located on
the membrane and that doxycycline has the same binding
site as a natural ligand of PAR1 (Supplementary Figure 6).
Calcium ions are the second messenger of the PAR1
signaling pathway. The detection of calcium influx is a
standard model to screen for inhibitors of PAR1. The
results showed that tetracyclines, especially doxycycline,
inhibit the calcium influx elicited by PAR1. Compared
with a reported PAR1 inhibitor (Vorapaxar), which is a
virtually irreversible PAR1 antagonist, the inhibition
ability of doxycycline was 3-fold less [28]. Vorapaxar
and doxycycline exhibited the same binding mode at
the active site of PAR1, with docking scores of 8.2 and
6.7, respectively. Vorapaxar has been approved by the
FDA, but this drug is associated with an increased risk of
bleeding and calcium metabolic abnormalities. These side
effects are similar to those of doxycycline when used in
antibiotic therapy.
Multiple signal transduction pathways are inhibited
by PAR1, including cell growth, differentiation, migration,
and PAR1 especially influences the functions of endothelial
cells. Endothelial cells originate from the mesoderm and
have a similar origin and similar biomarkers to those of
melanoma, sarcoma, neurogenic tumors (oat cell cancer)
and triple-negative breast cancer [29]. Doxycycline was
found to inhibit cell progression and tumor growth of cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
General information
Doxycycline-HCl powder (purity 99.99%)
was
obtained
from
KAIFENG
YUGANG
PHARMACEUTICAL CO.,LTD (Henan, China) and
was dissolved in sterile 0.9% NaCl immediately before
use. The click chemistry catalyst ligand Tris [(1-benzyl1H- 1,2,3-triazol-4-yl) methyl] amine (TBTA) and Tris
(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. The antibody against PAR1 was
purchased from Abcam. All mutant assays were performed
16838

Oncotarget

according to the protocols provided by the manufacturer.
The QuickChange site-directed mutagenesis kit was used
to generate mutant derivatives from the corresponding
wild-type constructs.

with streptavidin magnespheres, and then streptavidin
magnesphere-Doxy was obtained. This complex was
added to the cell lysates. Using an ELISA assay, PAR1
was detected using a microplate reader. All steps were
performed at 4°C.

Cell culture

Biacore assay

The human carcinoma cell lines A549, HEK-293,
PLC-PRF-5, H446, LLC, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, HCT-116
and BL16F10 were obtained from KeyGen Biotech (Nanjing,
China). The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium
(Hyclone, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Hyclone, USA) and antibiotics (50 units/mL penicillin and
50 μg/mL streptomycin). All cultures were maintained at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2.

SPR experiments were performed using a Biacore
3000 instrument (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA).
PAR1 was purified from 293-PAR1 cell lines using
antibody-containing immunomagnetic beads. PAR1 was
immobilized on CM5 sensor chips using the Biacore
Amini Coupling Kit according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Doxycycline was diluted in running buffer
and then injected into PAR1-immobilized CM5 sensor
chips at concentrations of 20 μM, 40 μM and 80 μM.
The surface of the control chip was prepared in the same
manner and was used for data correction. Data analysis
was performed using BIAevaluation software.

Synthesis of the doxycycline probe doxy-yne
Doxy-yne synthesis was performed using
commercially available doxycycline as the raw material.
The terminal alkyne-containing doxy-yne probe was
obtained by coupling doxycycline to 5-hexynoic acid and
2-(3-but-3-ynyl-3H-diazirin-3-yl)-ethanol. The fluorescent
group rhodamine-N3 and biotin-N3 were synthesized using
previously published procedures.

Immunofluorescence staining and live cell
imaging
Adherent cells were seeded in dishes, grown to 80%
confluence and treated with 0.2 µM doxy-yne or DMSO
for 5 h, followed by UV irradiation (365 nm) for 30 min.
The cells were fixed for 15 min in 3.7% paraformaldehyde
and washed twice with PBS, after which they were treated
with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min. Non-specific binding
was blocked by incubation with 3% BSA for 30 min,
followed by two more washes with PBS and treatment
with a click chemistry reaction solution. The final
concentrations of the catalyst and dye were as follows:
1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP, 100 μM TBTA and 10 μM
rhodamine-N3 in PBS for 2 h at room temperature with
shaking. For the co-localization experiments with PAR1,
the primary antibody against PAR1 (1:100 dilution) was
added for 1 h at room temperature, and then the cells were
washed and incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (1:500) for 1 h.

MTT assay
Exponentially growing cells were seeded at 5×104
cells/mL in 96-well plates. Doxycycline was administered
at various concentrations, and then the plates were
incubated for 48 h before analysis. The optical density
(OD) values were determined by measuring the absorption
at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Multiskan™ FC,
Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

Labeling of A549 cells
The A549 cell line was seeded in 60-mm dishes at
80% confluence, after which doxy-yne was added to the
cells at the desired final concentration. After incubation
for 4 h at 37°C with 5% CO2, the cells were UV-irradiated
(365 nm) for 30 min. After cell lysis, 0.1 mM TBTA, 1
mM TCEP, 0.1 mM rhodamine-N3 and 1 mM CuSO4
were added to the samples. The reaction was then further
incubated for 2 h, and the proteins were precipitated with
acetone and further processed by SDS-PAGE and in-gel
fluorescence scanning. Fluorescent strips were cut out and
analyzed by mass spectrometry.

Sample preparation for single molecule
image co-localization using super-resolution
microscopy
A549 cells were seeded in 35-mm N-STORM superresolution microscope dishes and were grown to 60%
confluency. Next, 0.2 μM doxy-yne was added to the cells
and incubated for 4 h at 37°C in the presence of 5% CO2,
followed by UV irradiation (365 nm) for 30 min. The cells
were then fixed and permeabilized and 0.1 mM TBTA, 1
mM TCEP, 0.1 mM Alexa 647-conjugated azide (Thermo
Fisher, USA) and 1 mM CuSO4 were added to the cells
for 2 h for the click reaction. After the click reaction, the
cells were incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-PAR1
(CST, USA) in a humidified chamber overnight at 4°C and

Doxycycline probe pull-down assay
Positive pull-down: The cells were lysed and
protein A/G-PAR1 antibody was added to the lysates.
The lysates were further incubated with doxycycline
labeled with a fluorescent probe. Finally, the complex
was measured by ultraviolet spectrophotometry. Negative
pull-down: Doxycycline labeled with biotin was incubated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16839

Oncotarget

Wound healing assay

then were incubated with Cy3B-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
secondary antibody for 2 h at room temperature, followed
by seal slicing. The N-STORM super-resolution microscope
(Nikon, Japan) was used to measure doxycycline and PAR1
co-localization on the nanoscale level.

A549 and A549 PAR1(-/-) cells cultures grown to
90% confluency in 24-well culture plates were wounded
and then incubated with doxycycline and thrombin
respectively. Then, cell membrane red fluorescent dye (DiD,
KeyGEN BioTECH, Nan Jing, China) were incubated cells
and the wounds were photographed at 0, 24 and 48 h using
a fluorescence microscope in 561 nm (Nikon, Japan).

Scanning electron microscopy
Cells grown on climbing films (WHB, China) were
treated with or without doxycycline (0.2 or 1.6 μM). After
24 h of incubation, the cells were fixed and dehydrated
in acetone/isoamyl acetate (1:1), dried with a gradient
concentration of acetonitrile and finally coated with
gold. Images of the cells were obtained using a scanning
electron microscope (LEO 1530 VP, Germany).

Three-dimensional culture assay
Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate precoated with
Matrigel. The cells were then treated with thrombin or
thrombin-doxycycline separately for 24 h. Images of the
cells were obtained using a light microscope (Nikon, Japan).

Molecular docking

Molecular dynamic simulations

Molecular docking was performed using Sybyl X1.1
software. The crystal structure of PAR1 in a complex with
Vorapaxar was downloaded from the PDB database (PDB
code 3VW7). The Vorapaxar ligand of PAR1 was extracted
from the crystal structure as the location center of docking.

The Pmemd module of the Amber 14 package
was chosen to perform all energy minimizations and
molecular dynamic simulations. The entire MD system
was heated to 310 K to simulate the temperature of a
normal physiological reaction. We used periodic boundary
conditions in the NPT ensemble and the SHAKE algorithm
to constrain all covalent bonds containing hydrogen atoms.
For non-bonded interactions, the cutoff values were set at
10 Å. Finally, the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of
the initial structure from the simulated positions was used
to evaluate the stability of the entire simulation.

Inhibition of calcium influx assay
HEK-293 cells stably transfected with PAR1 were
seeded into blank-walled 384-well plates. After 12 h
of incubation to allow the cells to adhere to the plate,
the culture medium was aspirated, and the cells were
stimulated with thrombin (1 U/mL) or seroperitoneum
obtained from mice that had been injected with
Escherichia coli and then mixed with doxycycline and
other tetracyclines. The Calcium 5 kit was used for the
loading dye, and a FlexStation III device (Molecular
Devices, SMP500-19897-MILX) was used to evaluate
changes in fluorescence.

Multi-omics analysis
A549 cells were untreated or treated with doxycycline
for 24 h, after which the cells were lysed to isolate RNA,
protein and metabolites. Proteins were digested with
trypsin for 20 h at 37°C. The sample was evaporated and
resuspended in water/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS
analysis. The experiment was repeated three times. The
largest dataset selected was Swiss-Prot, Human, which
included 20,258 protein sequences. Data analysis was
performed to reveal critical pathways. Gene ontology (GO)
analysis was used to detect doxycycline-induced changes
in molecular functions, biological processes and cellular
components. The STRING database was used to analyze
protein-protein interactions, and KEGG pathway analysis
revealed that various signaling pathways were inhibited.

CRISPR/Cas9 system knockdown of PAR1
The clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-associated nuclease 9
(CRISPR/Cas9) system was used to knockdown PAR1 in
A549 and HEK-293 cells. One single guide RNA (sgRNA)
was designed to target the upstream genomic sequence of
the PAR1 and the downstream sequence. Knockdown cells
were evaluated by PCR and DNA sequencing. Monoclonal
cells lacking PAR1 were selected for further experiments.

Murine xenograft model

Matrigel invasion assay

Six-week-old female NIH BALB/c-null and
C57BL/6J mice were maintained in specific pathogen-free
animal facilities at Tianjin International Joint Academy
of Biomedicine. The mice were divided into 3 groups
randomly (n = 10/group). When the volume of the tumor
reached approximately 50 mm3, the model mice were

Using 24-transwell plates (Corning, America),
a total of 5 × 104 cells were placed on the top chamber
inserts coated with Matrigel (BD Biosciences, New Jersey,
America). After 48 h of incubation, the cells were stained
with 0.1% crystal violet and counted under a microscope.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16840

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

treated with 30 or 15 mg/kg of doxycycline or saline as
a control. The tumors were evaluated using the following
formula: V = ab2/2 (a = length of tumor, b = width of
tumor). All mice were euthanized after six weeks of
treatments, and tumor, lung and liver tissues were fixed for
further immunopathological studies. An equivalent number
of mice were grouped and injected with 1 × 107 cells via
the caudal vein to record the survival time of each mouse.

This study was supported by the National Natural
Science Funds of China [Grant nos. 81572838 and
81402973]; the Key Technologies R&D Program of
Tianjin [Grant 11ZCKFSY06900], Tianjin Natural Science
and Technology Fund [Grant 15JCYBJC26400], and
Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral
Dissertation of China [Grant 201482].

Immunohistochemical analysis

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

The tissues were incubated with xylene for
deparaffinization and decreasing concentrations of ethanol
for rehydration. Next, 3% hydrogen peroxide was applied
to block endogenous peroxidase activity. The microwave
antigen retrieval technique was utilized for antigen
retrieval. After blocking, the samples were incubated with
primary antibodies overnight at 4°C: rabbit polyclonal
anti-PAR1 (Affinity, ready-to-use), rabbit polyclonal antivimentin (Affinity, 1:50 dilution), rabbit polyclonal antiMMP-2 (Zhongshan, ready-to-use) and rabbit polyclonal
anti-MMP9 (Abcam, 1:100 dilution). Tumor cells with
brown-stained cytoplasm, nuclei or membranes were
considered positive and were scored as follows: none (0),
weak brown (1+), moderate brown (2+) and strong brown
(3+). The percentage of stained tumor cells was divided
into five classes: 0 for negative cells, 1 for 1–25%, 2 for
25–50%, 3 for 50–75% and 4 for > 75%.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Authors’ contributions
Y.C. and T.S. designed the experiments. W.Z., B.S.,
Y.Q performed experiments and data analysis. B.S., S.C.,
H.Z. and X.T. performed data analysis. P.Z., X.H. and X.J.
performed the synthesis of compounds. J. G., W.Z., S.C.,
Q.Z. and Y.L. wrote the manuscript, with contributions
from all authors.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Del Rosso JQ, Webster GF, Jackson M, Rendon M, Rich P,
Torok H, Bradshaw M. Two randomized phase III clinical
trials evaluating anti-inflammatory dose doxycycline (40-mg
doxycycline, USP capsules) administered once daily for
treatment of rosacea. Journal of the American Academy of
Dermatology. 2007; 56:791–802.
  2.	 Sapadin AN, Fleischmajer R. Tetracyclines: nonantibiotic
properties and their clinical implications. Journal of the
American Academy of Dermatology. 2006; 54:258–265.
  3.	 Smith K, Leyden JJ. Safety of doxycycline and minocycline:
a systematic review. Clin Ther. 2005; 27:1329–1342.
  4.	 Qin Y, Zhang Q, Lee S, Zhong W, Liu Y, Liu H, Zhao D,
Chen S, Xiao T, Meng J, Jing X, Wang J, Sun B, et al.
Doxycycline reverses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
and suppresses the proliferation and metastasis of lung
cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:40667–40679. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.5842.
  5.	 Fife RS, Sledge GW, Roth BJ, Proctor C. Effects of
doxycycline on human prostate cancer cells in vitro. Cancer
letters. 1998; 127:37–41.
  6.	 Moullan N, Mouchiroud L, Wang X, Ryu D, Williams EG,
Mottis A, Jovaisaite V, Frochaux MV, Quiros PM,
Deplancke B, Houtkooper RH, Auwerx J. Tetracyclines
disturb mitochondrial function across eukaryotic models: a
call for caution in biomedical research. Cell reports. 2015.
  7.	 Sun T, Zhao N, Ni CS, Zhao XL, Zhang WZ, Su X,
Zhang  DF, Gu Q, Sun BC. Doxycycline inhibits the
adhesion and migration of melanoma cells by inhibiting the
expression and phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase
(FAK). Cancer letters. 2009; 285:141–150.

Patient samples
The study group consisted of 228 cases of
pathological lung cancer specimens and 150 cases of
pathological breast cancer specimens included in tissue
microarrays, which were obtained from US Biomax
and subjected to immunofluorescence co-localization
analysis. Lung and breast cancer slides were assessed for
the pathological diagnosis by two pathologists based on
hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections. All samples were
associated with detailed pathological and clinical data,
including age, pathological stage, tumor diameter, nodal
status and lymph node metastasis. This information was
obtained from primary pathology reports. The histological
types and grades of all tissue spots were reviewed and
defined by more than two pathologists. All human
tissues were collected using HIPAA- and IRB-compliant
protocols, and all patients signed informed consent forms.

Statistical analysis
All data are expressed as the means ± standard
deviations (SD). After testing for normality and equal
variance across the groups, intergroup differences were
assessed using Student’s t-tests, ANOVA and multivariate
statistical analysis. Every experiment was repeated three
times. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16841

Oncotarget

  8.	 Zhang C, Srinivasan Y, Arlow DH, Fung JJ, Palmer D,
Zheng Y, Green HF, Pandey A, Dror RO, Shaw DE,
Weis  WI, Coughlin SR, Kobilka BK. High-resolution
crystal structure of human protease-activated receptor 1.
Nature. 2012; 492:387–392.

20.	 Even-Ram S, Uziely B, Cohen P, Grisaru-Granovsky S,
Maoz M, Ginzburg Y, Reich R, Vlodavsky I, Bar-Shavit R.
Thrombin receptor overexpression in malignant and
physiological invasion processes. Nature medicine. 1998;
4:909–914.

  9.	 Boire A, Covic L, Agarwal A, Jacques S, Sherifi S,
Kuliopulos A. PAR1 is a matrix metalloprotease-1 receptor
that promotes invasion and tumorigenesis of breast cancer
cells. Cell. 2005; 120:303–313.

21.	 Zain J, Huang YQ, Feng X, Nierodzik ML, Li JJ,
Karpatkin  S. Concentration-dependent dual effect of
thrombin on impaired growth/apoptosis or mitogenesis in
tumor cells. Blood. 2000; 95:3133–3138.

10.	 Shi H, Zhang CJ, Chen GY, Yao SQ. Cell-based proteome
profiling of potential dasatinib targets by use of affinitybased probes. Journal of the American Chemical Society.
2012; 134:3001–3014.

22.	 Albrektsen T, Sorensen BB, Hjorto GM, Fleckner J, Rao LV,
Petersen LC. Transcriptional program induced by factor
VIIa-tissue factor, PAR1 and PAR2 in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis. 2007; 5:1588–1597.

11.	 Wang Q, Chan TR, Hilgraf R, Fokin VV, Sharpless KB,
Finn MG. Bioconjugation by copper(I)-catalyzed azidealkyne [3 + 2] cycloaddition. Journal of the american
chemical society. 2003; 125:3192–3193.

23.	 Wu Z, Zeng Y, Zhong M, Wang B. Targeting A549
lung adenocarcinoma cell growth and invasion with
proteaseactivated receptor1 siRNA. Molecular medicine
reports. 2014; 9:1787–1793.

12.	 Nieba L, Nieba-Axmann SE, Persson A, Hamalainen M,
Edebratt F, Hansson A, Lidholm J, Magnusson K,
Karlsson AF, Pluckthun A. BIACORE analysis of histidinetagged proteins using a chelating NTA sensor chip.
Analytical biochemistry. 1997; 252:217–228.

24.	 Nguyen CH, Senfter D, Basilio J, Holzner S, Stadler S,
Krieger S, Huttary N, Milovanovic D, Viola K, SimonitschKlupp I, Jager W, de Martin R, Krupitza G. NF-kappaB
contributes to MMP1 expression in breast cancer spheroids
causing paracrine PAR1 activation and disintegrations in
the lymph endothelial barrier in vitro. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:39262–39275. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5741.

13.	 Dani A, Huang B, Bergan J, Dulac C, Zhuang X.
Superresolution imaging of chemical synapses in the brain.
Neuron. 2010; 68:843–856.

25.	 Sen P, Gopalakrishnan R, Kothari H, Keshava S, Clark CA,
Esmon CT, Pendurthi UR, Rao LV. Factor VIIa bound
to endothelial cell protein C receptor activates protease
activated receptor-1 and mediates cell signaling and barrier
protection. Blood. 2011; 117:3199–3208.

14.	 Vu TK, Hung DT, Wheaton VI, Coughlin SR. Molecular
cloning of a functional thrombin receptor reveals a novel
proteolytic mechanism of receptor activation. Cell. 1991;
64:1057–1068.

26.	 Wittig-Blaich SM, Kacprzyk LA, Eismann T, BewerungeHudler M, Kruse P, Winkler E, Strauss WS, Hibst  R,
Steiner  R, Schrader M, Mertens D, Sultmann H,
Wittig R. Matrix-dependent regulation of AKT in Hepsinoverexpressing PC3 prostate cancer cells. Neoplasia. 2011;
13:579–589.

15.	 Cong L, Ran FA, Cox D, Lin S, Barretto R, Habib N,
Hsu PD, Wu X, Jiang W, Marraffini LA, Zhang F. Multiplex
Genome Engineering Using CRISPR/Cas Systems. Science.
2013; 339:819–823.
16.	 Pham TT, Maenz S, Ludecke C, Schmerbauch C,
Settmacher U, Jandt KD, Bossert J, Zanow J. Quantitative
characterization of endothelial cell morphologies depending
on shear stress in different blood vessels of domestic pigs
using a focused ion beam and high resolution scanning
electron microscopy (FIB-SEM). Tissue & cell. 2015;
47:205–212.

27.	 Richardson M, Wong D, Lacroix S, Stanisz J, Singh G.
Inhibition by doxycycline of angiogenesis in the chicken
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM). Cancer chemotherapy
and pharmacology. 2005; 56:1–9.
28.	 Chackalamannil S, Wang Y, Greenlee WJ, Hu Z, Xia Y,
Ahn  HS, Boykow G, Hsieh Y, Palamanda J, AgansFantuzzi J, Kurowski S, Graziano M, Chintala M. Discovery
of a novel, orally active himbacine-based thrombin receptor
antagonist (SCH 530348) with potent antiplatelet activity.
Journal of medicinal chemistry. 2008; 51:3061–3064.

17.	 Arachiche A, de la Fuente M, Nieman MT. Platelet specific
promoters are insufficient to express protease activated
receptor 1 (PAR1) transgene in mouse platelets. PloS one.
2014; 9:e97724.
18.	 Franceschini A, Szklarczyk D, Frankild S, Kuhn M,
Simonovic M, Roth A, Lin J, Minguez P, Bork P, von
Mering C, Jensen LJ. STRING v9.1: protein-protein
interaction networks, with increased coverage and
integration. Nucleic acids research. 2013; 41:D808–815.

29.	 Fares M, Abedi-Valugerdi M, Hassan M, Potacova Z. DNA
damage, lysosomal degradation and Bcl-xL deamidation
in doxycycline- and minocycline-induced cell death in
the K562 leukemic cell line. Biochemical and biophysical
research communications. 2015; 463:268–274.

19.	 Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes
and genomes. Nucleic acids research. 2000; 28:27–30.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16842

Oncotarget

