Editorial

Where Does the Combination of Sorafenib
and Interferon in Renal Cell Carcinoma
Stand?
Keith T. Flaherty, MD

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted therapy and mammalian target of rapamycin-targeted therapy
clearly have demonstrated their value in the treatment of metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma as single agents. Conversely, sorafenib also has demonstrated its benefit as a single agent, albeit compared with placebo in cytokine-refractory
patients. A series of investigations has sought to assemble evidence regarding the possible value of a sorafenib/interferon
combination,
whereas the field is deconstructing the bevacizumab/interferon combination to distill the benefit of bevaci1
zumab. Simply put, it is clear that these 2 agents can be combined safely with interferon, but should the combination be
investigated further?
Before the report by Jonasch and colleagues in the current issue of Cancer,2 the only evidence generated in support of
the sorafenib/interferon combination came from 2 single-arm phase 2 trials.3,4 In those trials, more ‘‘conventional’’ doses
of interferon were administered 3 times weekly. At the dose and schedule used in those 2 trials, the true mechanism of
action of interferon remained unclear. However, there is a body of literature supporting the immunologic consequences of
interferon given in that way. Jonasch and colleagues chose an alternative dose and schedule of interferon, purportedly to
maximize the antivascular effects of interferon that have been described in preclinical models.2 Whether this is more
rational or less rational than combining sorafenib with more conventional interferon regimens is difficult to say, but it is
clear that it is a different strategy and, thus, one that cannot easily be compared. Therefore, the ‘‘negative’’ results from the
study by Jonasch et al do not necessarily provide insight into the potential value of sorafenib with conventional-dose/
schedule interferon.
The strength of the study by Jonasch et al is the use of randomization in comparing single-agent sorafenib with combined sorafenib/interferon. The authors rightly conclude that their sample size was adequate to rule out a ‘‘paradigm-shifting’’ effect of combining the agents. However, the authors conclude that ‘‘further study of the combination of sorafenib
plus interferon is not warranted.’’ Although this statement can be defended to some degree for the combination of sorafenib with low-dose, twice daily interferon, it cannot be extrapolated to the regimen of higher dose interferon 3 times weekly
combined with sorafenib. We still have the results from 2 uncontrolled trials suggesting that the response rate may be significantly higher than that observed with either agent alone in previously conducted trials. Should randomized trials be
done to sort out the value of sorafenib with conventional doses of interferon? Only bevacizumab has demonstrated efficacy
in combination with interferon in definitive phase 3 trials. The addition of temsirolimus to interferon offered no benefit
compared with interferon alone and clearly contributed to excess toxicity.5 The evidence from the 2 phase 3 trials that
compared the combination of bevacizumab and interferon with interferon alone clearly placed the bevacizumab/interferon regimen among the effective therapies recently tested in this disease.6,7 However, little evidence informs the

Corresponding author: Keith T. Flaherty, MD, Department of Developmental Theraupeutics, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, 55 Fruit Street,
Yawkey 9E, Boston, MA 02114; Fax: (617) 724-6898; kflaherty@partners.org
Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
See referenced original article on pages 57–65, this issue.
Keith T. Flaherty’s current address: Department of Developmental Theraupeutics, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24688, Received: April 20, 2009; Revised: July 6, 2009; Accepted: July 6, 2009, Published online November 4, 2009 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com)

4

Cancer

January 1, 2010

Editorial/Flaherty

interaction between the 2 drugs, and the field continues to
ponder whether single-agent bevacizumab might confer
similar benefits to the bevacizumab/interferon combination. Lacking comparative data between single-agent bevacizumab and interferon or a comparison of bevacizumab
with a bevacizumab/interferon regimen, it is not possible
to tease out single-agent bevacizumab as a standard therapy for renal cell carcinoma.
The mechanistic basis for combining sorafenib or
bevacizumab with interferon must be considered distinct
from the combinations of the newer ‘‘targeted’’ therapies
(eg, bevacizumab or sorafenib with temsirolimus). If lowdose interferon administered frequently is an antiangiogenic therapy, then it appears to be quite a weak one compared with the newer agents.8 Considered that way,
interferon would be chosen last among the available therapies in an attempt to assemble more effective antiangiogenic therapy. Compelling experimental evidence
supports an immunosuppressive effect of VEGF in the tumor microenvironment.9 Thus, inhibiting VEGF signaling seems to be a rational approach to augment the
immunologic effects of interferon to make it a better
immunotherapy. Along this line of reasoning, it is logical
to want to take advantage of the immunologic effects of
interferon, because it is a far more accessible therapy to
patients than, for example, high-dose interleukin-2. Bevacizumab clearly can be combined with interferon to
achieve an effective and reasonably safe regimen, but sorafenib cannot be considered as a simple substitution. Caution is warranted in light of the experience with
combining sunitinib with interferon.10 Sunitinib with
interferon, even at substantially reduced doses, cannot be
combined safely, and this probably is not simply a consequence of the VEGF signaling effects of the drug. Likewise, sorafenib may have too broad a spectrum of targets
to be combined cleanly with an immunotherapy. To this
point, there are data indicating that there is an immunosuppressive effect of sorafenib on lymphocytes ex vivo.11
This should give clinicians pause when considering the
first principles in combining sorafenib with interferon.
The field continues to regret the fact that a singleagent bevacizumab arm was not included in the bevacizumab phase 3 trials. After the 2 phase 3 trials were
launched, it was reported that bevacizumab was associated
with a 14% response rate and a median progression-free

Cancer

January 1, 2010

survival of 8.5 months among 53 treatment-naive patients
with clear cell patients who mostly had intermediate-risk
disease, suggesting that single-agent bevacizumab may be
a sufficiently active therapy to warrant evaluation in
randomized trials.12 The window of opportunity is now
closed for a comparative study versus interferon. To my
knowledge, the only trial that is exploring single-agent
bevacizumab further is the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group phase 2 trial E2804 (or BeST) in which bevacizumab serves a control arm compared with combinations of
targeted agents.
The objectives of therapy for metastatic renal cell
carcinoma are dichotomous. If the aim is to eradicate metastatic disease with high-dose interleukin-2, then the price
of short-term, severe toxicity is paid toward the payoff of a
cure. However, if the aim is to maximize the quality and
quantity of life with therapies that are given chronically,
then minimizing toxicity must be considered equally with
the gains made in life expectancy. This balance is on tenuous ground with current efforts to combine the available
therapies for renal cell carcinoma. However, this practice
rightly is confined to clinical trials in which the possibility
of synergistic interaction can be measured. Although
promising data have been produced for combinations of
bevacizumab with either temsirolimus or sorafenib, the
data from single-arm sorafenib/interferon trials do not
point so clearly toward a randomized trial.
Jonasch and colleagues conclude that the similar
response rates observed between their study arms and the
sorafenib/interferon trials that used higher doses of interferon 3 times weekly indicate that interferon has not
added to the activity of sorafenib. If such cross-trial comparisons were made so readily, then the renal cell carcinoma field would not have such difficulty in determining
which agent represents the standard, first-line therapy for
metastatic disease. The study reported by Ryan and colleagues was conducted in the cooperative group setting, a
patient population that hardly is comparable to a cohort
accrued at a single, large referral center. Furthermore, just
over 50% of the population enrolled in the study by Jonasch et al had favorable-risk disease according to the criteria published by Motzer et al.13 This is a significantly
higher proportion of such patients than what was accrued
to previously reported sorafenib or bevacizumab trials as
single agents or in combination with interferon. This may

5

Editorial

explain the unusually high objective response rate
observed in the single-agent sorafenib arm. It is possible
that, in a group with such a high response rate, there was
less room for improvement than there would be in a group
with more refractory disease.
With phase 3 data demonstrating superior outcomes
with sunitinib or temsirolimus compared with interferon,
the field largely had left single-agent interferon off the
standard therapy algorithm.14 With bevacizumab, interferon made a quick comeback. However, even in that
instance, it is not known whether the interferon component truly added value. In the temsirolimus phase 3 trial,
the temsirolimus/interferon combination arm proved to
be toxic and ineffective.5 Single-agent temsirolimus
improved survival compared with single-agent interferon,
which made interferon seem even more obsolete. The significant constitutional toxicities associated with interferon
make it a therapy that oncologists and patients gladly
would have left behind. The only current role for interferon in treatment is in combination with bevacizumab. If
the ongoing phase 3 trial comparing the combination of
bevacizumab and temsirolimus with bevacizumab and
interferon demonstrates a significant improvement in
progression-free survival for the bevacizumab/temsirolimus arm, then the field likely will move further away
from interferon-based combinations.
It is difficult to conduct a trial in the current era in
which patients would be assigned randomly to receive
interferon. The motivation of patients to put up with the
toxicities of interferon probably is less now than it was a
decade ago. If the conviction to take interferon at doses
that are truly immunomodulatory is lacking, then trials
that randomize patients to receive interferon in addition
to targeted therapy ultimately will not test the question.
Consequently, such trials would be underpowered to
detect a difference in outcome, as having a proportion of
combination therapy patient abandoning the treatment
will dilute any potential treatment effect.
Although a case can be made for the scientific importance of continuing investigations with VEGF-targeted
therapy and interferon, the era in which these investigations have high priority appears to be passing. The pace
with which novel targeted agents and targeted therapy
combinations are being evaluated in renal cell carcinoma
clinical trials is quickly moving the field to new questions.

6

The therapeutic potential of VEGF-targeted therapy combined with immunotherapy well may be revisited as
immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 or programmed death 1 blocking and
CD40 and CD137 agonist antibodies, mature in clinical
trials. For now, the momentum behind a combination of
interferon at any dose and schedule with sorafenib seems
insufficient to execute a definitive phase 3 trial.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The author made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. TARGET Study
Group. Sorafenib in advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma.
N Engl J Med. 2007;356:125-134 [erratum in N Engl J
Med. 2007;357:203].
2. Jonasch E, Corn P, Pagliaro, et al. Upfront, randomized,
phase 2 trial of sorafenib versus sorafenib and low-dose interferon alfa in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma: clinical and biomarker analysis. Cancer. 2010;116:57-65.
3. Ryan CW, Goldman BH, Lara PN Jr, et al; Southwest Oncology
Group. Sorafenib with interferon alfa-2b as first-line treatment of
advanced renal carcinoma: a phase II study of the Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3296-3301.
4. Gollob JA, Rathmell WK, Richmond TM, et al. Phase II
trial of sorafenib plus interferon alfa-2b as first- or secondline therapy in patients with metastatic renal cell cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3288-3295.
5. Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, et al; Global ARCC
Trial. Temsirolimus, interferon alfa, or both for advanced
renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2271-2281.
6. Escudier B, Pluzanska A, Koralewski P, et al. AVOREN
Trial Investigators. Bevacizumab plus interferon alfa-2a for
treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a randomised,
double-blind phase III trial. Lancet. 2007;370:2103-2111.
7. Rini BI, Halabi S, Rosenberg JE, et al. Bevacizumab plus
interferon alfa-2a for treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a randomised, double-blind phase III trial. J Clin
Oncol. 2008;26:5422-6528.
8. Tannir NM, Cohen L, Wang X, et al. Improved tolerability and
quality of life with maintained efficacy using twice-daily lowdose interferon-alpha-2b: results of a randomized phase II trial
of low-dose versus intermediate-dose interferon-alpha-2b in
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer.
2006;107:2254-2261.
9. Gabrilovich DI, Chen HL, Girgis KR, et al. Production of
vascular endothelial growth factor by human tumors inhibits
the functional maturation of dendritic cells. Nat Med.
1996;2:1096-1103 [erratum in Nat Med. 1996;2: 1267].
10. Motzer RJ, Hudes G, Wilding G, et al. Phase I trial of
sunitinib malate plus interferon-alpha for patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Clin Genitourin Cancer.
2009;7:28-33.

Cancer

January 1, 2010

Editorial/Flaherty

11. Zhao W, Gu YH, Song R, Qu BQ, Xu Q. Sorafenib inhibits activation of human peripheral blood T cells by targeting
LCK phosphorylation. Leukemia. 2008;22:1226-1233.
12. Bukowski RM, Kabbinavar FF, Figlin RA, et al. Randomized phase II study of erlotinib combined with bevacizumab
compared with bevacizumab alone in metastatic renal cell
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4536-4541.

Cancer

January 1, 2010

13. Motzer RJ, Bacik J, Murphy BA, Russo P, Mazumdar M.
Interferon-alfa as a comparative treatment for clinical trials
of new therapies against advanced renal cell carcinoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:289-296.
14. Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, et al. Sunitinib versus
interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2007;356:115-124.

7

