Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Nimotuzumab increases the anti-tumor effect of photodynamic
therapy in an oral tumor model
Ramaswamy Bhuvaneswari1, Qin Feng Ng1, Patricia S.P Thong1, Khee-Chee Soo1,2
1

National Cancer Centre Singapore, Division of Medical Sciences, Singapore 169610, Singapore

2

Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore 169857, Singapore

Correspondence to:
Ramaswamy Bhuvaneswari, e-mail: dmsram@nccs.com.sg
Keywords: photodynamic therapy, epidermal growth factor receptor, nimotuzumab, oral squamous cell carcinoma, angiogenesis
Received: October 20, 2014    Accepted: April 08, 2015    Published: April 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) represents 90% of all oral cancers and
is characterized with poor prognosis and low survival rate. Epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) is highly expressed in oral cancer and is a target for cancer therapy
and prevention. In this present work, we evaluate the efficacy of photodynamic
therapy (PDT) in combination with an EGFR inhibitor, nimotuzumab in oral cancer
cell lines and OSCC xenograft tumor model. PDT is a promising and minimally invasive
treatment modality that involves the interaction of a photosensitizer, molecular oxygen
and light to destroy tumors. We demonstrated that EGFR inhibitors nimotuzumab
and cetuximab exhibits anti-angiogenic properties by inhibiting the migration and
invasion of oral cancer cell lines and human endothelial cells. The EGFR inhibitors
also significantly reduced tube formation of endothelial cells. Chlorin e6-PDT in
combination with nimotuzumab and cetuximab reduced cell proliferation in different
oral cancer and endothelial cells. Furthermore, our in vivo studies showed that the
combination therapy of PDT and nimotuzumab synergistically delayed tumor growth
when compared with control and PDT treated tumors. Downregulation of EGFR, Ki67 and CD31 was observed in the tumors treated with combination therapy. Analysis
of the liver and kidney function markers showed no treatment related toxicity. In
conclusion, PDT outcome of oral cancer can be improved when combined with EGFR
inhibitor nimotuzumab.

since increased expression of EGFR is associated with poor
clinical outcome, that makes it a promising and attractive
therapeutic target [6]. In this study we investigate a targeted
approach by treating oral cancer with an anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody in combination with photodynamic
therapy (PDT).
There is significant interest in the use of PDT as
an alternative therapeutic modality to treat early head
and neck cancer. As oral cancer is highly aggressive and
recurrent in nature, PDT holds promise as it can be safely
repeated with no cumulative toxicity. It is minimally
invasive with short term side effects that include pain
especially during treatment, swelling and photosensitivity
[7]. Chlorin e6 (Ce6), a second-generation photosensitizer
was used to perform the PDT experiments. Ce6 has a high
quantum yield with a singlet oxygen production of 0.65
[8] and its amphiphilic structure allows easy penetration
through cell membrane, thus ensuring effective uptake

INTRODUCTION
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is not only
the sixth most prevalent malignancy worldwide but also has
the poorest clinical outcomes [1]. Conventional therapies
such as chemotherapy, radiation and surgery are effective
but side effects can be significant. In spite of advances in
various treatment modalities, oral cancer is still a disease
of high morbidity and mortality [2]. Therefore there is a
need for targeted therapy to minimize side effects and to
improve selective destruction of cancer cells. The epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been implicated in
OSCC carcinogenesis and is overexpressed in up to 90% of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) [3, 4].
Overexpression of EGFR is associated with aggressive
behaviour including increased proliferation, metastasis,
and therapeutic resistance in squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) of the oral cavity and oropharynx [5]. Therefore,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13487

Oncotarget

RESULTS

within cells [9]. PDT is a clinically approved minimally
invasive modality that involves the selective uptake of the
photosensitizer in the tumor tissue which is then irradiated
with light of specific wavelength. This interaction between
the drug and light causes the production of reactive
oxygen species that result in tumor cell destruction [10].
The results from a phase I/II trials conducted on head
and neck tumors strongly suggest that PDT could be an
effective primary and alternative treatment modality
for patients presenting with early head and neck tumors
[11]. In another study, a total of 30 regions in 25 patients
(18 with squamous cell carcinoma and 7 with epithelial
dysplasia with hyperkeratosis in the oral cavity) were
treated by PDT. Complete response was achieved in 24 of
the 25 patients (96%), with a partial response found in the
remaining patient [12].
Many studies have reported the major role of EGFR
in PDT response [13]. It has been noted that the ERK1/2 and
EGFR-PI3K-Akt pathways could be involved in cellular
survival after PDT. A recent study reported that BPDmediated PDT initiates nuclear signaling of EGFR and
STAT3 which results in decreased cancer cell cytotoxicity
following PDT. This suggests that EGFR inhibitors can
have potential synergistic effect when administered with
PDT, and this could be highly relevant for clinical use [14].
In fact, numerous studies have demonstrated that PDT
and EGFR inhibitors in combination act synergistically
in vitro and in vivo [15–19]. We have previously reported
that combined therapy with PDT and the EGFR inhibitor
cetuximab inhibited tumor growth in a bladder human
cancer model [20]. In this study we use nimotuzumab (also
mentioned as nimo in the figures) which is a humanized
IgG1 monoclonal antibody that binds to the extracellular
domain of the EGFR, thus inhibiting EGF binding. It also
has unique functional properties compared to other antiEGFR antibodies [21]. It selectively binds to cells that
express moderate to high EGFR levels, as it intrinsically
requires bivalent binding for stable attachment to the
cellular surface. As nimotuzumab has lesser affinity to low
EGFR expressing cells, it spares healthy tissues and avoids
the severe dose limiting toxicities seen in other anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies [22].
Nimotuzumab has shown potent antiproliferative,
antiangiogenic and proapoptotic activity in A431
squamous cell carcinoma cells [23]. In patients with
HNSCC, nimotuzumab treatment can lead to long-term
stable disease with a low toxicity profile, in contrast
to other anti-EGFR agents [24–26]. Nimotuzumab in
combination with irradiation or chemoradiation was safe
and tolerable for patients with SCC of the esophagus, and
yielded encouraging overall survival, progression free
survival and locoregional control [27]. In this study, the
combination of PDT and nimotuzumab has shown anticancer properties by decreasing angiogenesis, increasing
apoptosis and by delaying tumor growth in an oral cancer
tumor model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

OSCC, HSC-3 and SCC-25 cells overexpresses
EGFR
Immunofluorescence assay was performed to
assess the expression of EGFR in OSCC, HSC-3 and
SCC-25 cells (Figure 1A). An epidermoid carcinoma
cell line (A431) was used as the positive control as these
cells are known to overexpress EGFR. MCF-7, a breast
cancer cell line that expresses low levels of EGFR,
served as a negative control. In the immunofluorescence
study, Hoechst 33342 was used to stain the nucleus
(blue). Secondary antibody tagged with Texas red was
used to detect EGFR. Image analysis was performed by
quantifying the red and blue intensities of the images
and the red to blue fluorescence ratio was calculated.
Our results showed highly significant difference (p <
0.001) in the expression of EGFR in OSCC (3.5), HSC-3
(2.8) and SCC-25 (2.4) cells compared to MCF-7 (0.4)
cells. Significantly higher red to blue ratio was observed
for OSCC and HSC-3 cells compared to SCC-25 cells.
Expression of EGFR in all the cell lines was reconfirmed
using Western blotting (Figure 1B). The ratio of EGFR
intensity plotted against GAPDH was highest for OSCC
(1.3) compared to HSC-3 (0.9) and SCC-25 cells (0.6).

Nimotuzumab and cetuximab exhibit antiangiogenic properties
Cell migration, invasion and tube formation assays
were performed to investigate the anti-angiogenic
properties of nimotuzumab and cetuximab. For cell
migration and invasion assays, bevacizumab was used
as the negative control as it is a known anti-angiogenic
agent and VEGF and EGF were used as the positive
controls as they are known to promote angiogenesis.
Cetuximab is a humanized antibody that is directed
at the extracellular domain of the EGFR, preventing
ligand binding and thus promoting the activation of the
receptor. This blocks the downstream signaling of EGFR
resulting in impaired cell growth and proliferation. Cell
migration is a fundamental activity intrinsic for tumor
growth and development. Understanding the process of
cell migration to different sites is important in order to
block and prevent tumor progression. Migration of cells
in all the four cell lines was comparable. Cell migration
was significantly lower in nimotuzumab, cetuximab
and bevacizumab treated cells compared to control
(p < 0.001). Almost 2 to 3 fold increase in migration
was observed in the cells treated with proangiogenic
factors, VEGF and EGF. At higher concentration of
100 μg/ml lower number of cells migrated compared to
50 μg/ml, however this difference was not significant for
all the cell lines. No significant difference in migration
was observed between cells treated with nimotuzumab,
13488

Oncotarget

Figure 1: A. Representative immunofluorescence images show the expression of EGFR in A431 (positive control),
OSCC, HSC-3, SCC-25 and MCF-7 cells (negative control). Red fluorescence represents EGFR and the blue fluorescence depicts

nuclei, stained by Hoechst 33342. B. Western blotting analysis was performed to confirm the above results. The ratio of EGFR intensity was
plotted against GAPDH. Error bars represents standard error of the mean.

PDT and EGFR inhibitors reduce proliferation
of different oral cancer cells and HUVECs

cetuximab and bevacizumab (Figure 2). Similar trend
was observed in the invasion of the cells through
extracellular matrix (Figure 3). Invasion of cells was
significantly lower for all the inhibitor groups compared
to control in all the cell lines except OSCC. Endothelial
cells need to cross the basement membranes in order
to disseminate or to form new blood vessel, therefore
it is important to understand the effect of the EGFR
inhibitors on the invasion of endothelial barriers. In the
endothelial tube formation assay, endothelial cells were
plated on a gelled basement matrigel to form capillarylike structures with a lumen. Pro-angiogenic agents are
known to promote tube formation and anti-angiogenic
agents are known to inhibit the formation of endothelial
tubes. For this assay, VEGF was used as the positive
control as it is known to promote angiogenesis and
sulphophorane was used as the negative control as it
disrupts tube formation. Nimotuzumab and cetuximab
disrupted tube formation of endothelial cells and was
comparable to the negative control, sulphophorane.
With nimotuzumab and cetuximab the average length
of endothelial tubes was significantly lower at 5550 μm
and 5802 μm (p < 0.05) compared to control and VEGF
groups. For the control and VEGF treated endothelial
cells, increased tube formation lengths of approximately
8800 μm and 9300 μm were observed respectively
(Figure 4).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Both PDT and the combination of PDT and
nimotuzumab significantly increased tumor cell death in
all the cell lines. Treatment response in OSCC (Figure 5A)
and SCC (Figure 5C) cells was comparable with 22 to 27%
(p < 0.001) cell survival post PDT and significantly lower
cell viability of 2–14% (p < 0.001) in the combination
therapy groups of PDT + nimotuzumab and PDT +
cetuximab compared to control. In comparison lower cell
death was observed in HSC-3 cells (Figure 5B). 40–56%
cell survival was observed post PDT and variable range of
4.8 to 32% cell viability was observed in the combination
therapy groups of PDT + EGFR inhibitors compared to
control. We also observed that in HSC-3 cells the higher dose
of PDT (100 μM) + EGFR inhibitor (100 μg/ml) induced
significantly greater cell death compared to lower dose of
PDT (50 μM) + EGFR inhibitor (50 μg/ml). Surprisingly,
HUVEC cells responded well to the PDT treatment (Figure
5D). Around 13 to 19% (p < 0.001) cell survival was
observed post PDT and significantly lower cell viability of 4
to 7.5% (p < 0.001) was observed in the combination therapy
groups compared to control. In the control groups, for all
cell lines, cell viability of 63 to 86% was observed with light
treatment only and 74 to 95% cells were observed when
treated with EGFR inhibitors only compared to control.
13489

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Cell migration assay was performed to understand the anti-angiogenic effects of EGFR inhibitors,
nimotuzumab and cetuximab in OSCC A. HSC-3 B., SCC-25 C. and HUVEC D. cells. Migrated cell number was
determined by performing a fluorescent cell dose curve. Bevacizumab was used as the positive control and VEGF and EGF
were used as negative controls. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean, n = 6 wells.

PDT and EGFR inhibitors acts synergistically on
oral cancer cells

in athymic nude mice to investigate the long-term
effectiveness of PDT and nimotuzumab. Tumors
were allowed to grow to sizes of 6–7 mm in diameter
before PDT treatment was carried out and tumor were
measured three times a week for a 90-day period
(Figure 6A). For tumor regression experiments,
animals were sacrificed at day 32 when control tumors
reached the maximum tumor limit. Tumors treated
with the combination therapy of PDT + Nimotuzumab
exhibited significantly greater treatment response
compared to control, nimotuzumab and PDT treated
groups (p < 0.05). No significant difference in the
tumor growth of PDT alone and nimotuzumab alone
mono-therapy groups was observed. We also looked
at the percentage survival for the different treatment
groups. Kaplan–Meier survival curve was plotted for

For 2 different combinations of PDT and EGFR
inhibitors treatment (PDT-50 μM + inhibitor-50 μg/ml)
and (PDT-100 μM + inhibitor-100 μg/ml), the synergistic/
additive or antagonistic effects was statistically calculated
for all the 4 cells lines. Based on the difference in
logarithms (DL) and p values, it was determined that PDT +
nimotuzumab and PDT + cetuximab synergistically
induced cell death in all the cell lines (Table 1).

PDT and nimotuzumab delays in-vivo tumor
growth and survival rate
Based on the in vitro results we decided to use
OSCC cells to develop the tumor xenograft model
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13490

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Invasion of OSCC. A. HSC-3 B. SCC-25 C. and HUVEC D. cells through the extracellular matrix (ECM) was assessed
understand the anti-angiogenic effects of EGFR inhibitors, nimotuzumab and cetuximab. Number of invaded cells was determined by
performing a fluorescent cell dose curve. Bevacizumab acted as the positive control and VEGF and EGF were used as negative controls.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean, n = 6 wells.

various treatment groups. As EGFR is a membrane
protein, staining of the cell membrane was observed.
Increased EGFR expression was observed in the tumors
treated with PDT (22.6%) when compared to control
(17.8%) and nimotuzumab treated tumors (15.3%). Mild
EGFR staining (6%) was observed in the combination
therapy group of PDT + nimotuzumab. The nuclear
antigen Ki-67 is a proliferation marker expressed only
in cycling cells. Ki-67 staining was significantly lower
(p < 0.001) in the PDT + nimotuzumab treated tumors
(3%) compared to control (23%) and tumors treated with
PDT only (17.2) and nimotuzumab only (12). Cluster of
differentiation (CD31) staining was performed to assess
angiogenesis, which also predicts tumor recurrence. The
endothelial cells stained by CD31 in the tumor tissue
were not well organized and the vessels were fragmented
compared to normal blood vessels. Significantly lower
(p < 0.001) and more scattered microvessel staining

various treatment groups for 90 days (Figure 6B).
The percentage survival of 88% was observed in
animals treated with PDT + nimotuzumab which was
significantly greater compared to control (36%), PDT
alone (45%) and nimotuzumab alone (55%) treated
animals. Also we statistically determined that PDT +
nimotuzumab synergistically inhibits tumor growth
(p < 0.0199) (Table 1). The treatment modalities in
this study did not induce any signs of toxicity such
as excessive weight loss, diarrhoea or vomiting in the
animals. No treatment-related death occurred.

Assessment of EGFR, Ki-67 and CD31
expression in tumor tissue
Immunohistochemistry was performed on paraffin
embedded tumor tissue for all the 4 treatment groups
(Figure 7). EGFR expression was evaluated in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13491

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Representative images of tube formation using HUVEC cells. Nimotuzumab and cetuximab disrupted tube formation
compared to control. VEGF was used as the positive control and sulphophorane was used as the negative control. The length of endothelial
tube formation was measured in μm using Image Pro Plus 6.0 software.

Toxicity studies

(CD31) was observed in the PDT + nimotuzumab
(Microvessel density (MVD) 45.4/mm2) tumors
compared to control (MVD 67.4/mm2), PDT (MVD 77.8/
mm2) and nimotuzumab treated tumors (MVD 57/mm2).
However, open lumen vasculature were observed in the
combination therapy treated tumors which may suggest
vessel maturation and increased functionality of vessels.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Toxicity studies were performed by measuring
creatinine, urea nitrogen, aspartate aminotransferase
(AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels in
mouse serum to understand the kidney and liver function
following different therapies. The range for serum
13492

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Cell viability was measured quantitatively using a colorimetric detection kit in OSCC. A. HSC-3
B. SCC-25 C. and HUVEC D. for different treatment groups. Percentage cell viability was calculated against control. Combination of PDT
and EGFR inhibitors, nimotuzumab and cetuximab significantly (p < 0.05) increased tumor cell death in all the cell lines compared to the
PDT treatment alone. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean of triplicate experiments.
creatinine was 0.5 to 0.9 mg/dL in all the groups which
was within the normal range (0.1–2.1 mg/dL) (Figure 8A).
The range for urea nitrogen was 12 to 13.5 ug/ml in
the different groups which was within the normal range
(2–71 mg/dL) (Figure 8B). The urea nitrogen mildly
increased in the PDT + nimotuzumab (13.5 mg/dL) group
compared to control (12.4 mg/dL), PDT (12.8 mg/dL)
and nimotuzumab (13 mg/dL) treated animals. However,
there were no significant differences among the four
groups. AST levels were around 44–58 mU/ml which is
within the normal range of 37–329 mU/ml (Figure 8C).
ALT levels were around 0.5 to 17 mU/ml but the normal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

range is 7–227 mU/ml (Figure 8D). Some serum samples
from animals had ALT levels below the normal range.
Surprisingly a dip in aspartate aminotransferase (48 mU/ml)
and alanine aminotransferase (3 mU/ml) was observed in
the animals that were treated with nimotuzumab alone.
However, no significant difference was observed in AST
and ALT levels between the various groups.

DISCUSSION
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an effective
adjuvant to standard conventional treatments for the
13493

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Tumor volume was charted against days, to assess the tumor response in various treatment groups for 32
days. A. Tumors treated with the combination therapy of PDT + nimotuzumab exhibited significantly greater (p < 0.05) treatment response
compared to control, nimotuzumab and PDT treated groups. Each group represents the mean (bars, SE) of 10 animals. Kaplan–Meier
survival curve was also plotted for various treatment groups for 90 days B.

management of head and neck neoplasms. Important
advantages of PDT are that it is a localized treatment and
can be repeated as often as required, has low systemic
toxicity, provides excellent cosmetic outcome and lessens
morbidity. Despite its success, tumor recurrence has been
reported in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patients
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[29]. This could be due to certain limitations of PDT
that include lack of penetration depth of the activating
light and incomplete treatment of the margins compared
to the center of the tumor. The residual tumor cells can
then repopulate and grow aggressively, leading to tumor
recurrence. Recent studies suggest that overexpression
13494

Oncotarget

Table 1: The difference in logarithm (DL) values, Standard error (SE) of DL values, p values based
on t-test and the synergistic/additive or antagonistic effect of the different treatment combinations
in all the four cell lines and in vivo combination studies have been listed
Treatment

DL value
(mean)

Standard Error
(SE) of DL

p value

Synergistic/
additive or
antagonistic

OSCC

PDT (50 μM) + Nimo (50 μg/ml)

0.2348

0.03336

0.0009

Synergistic

OSCC

PDT (100 μM ) + Nimo (100 μg/ml)

0.2882

0.03500

0.0004

Synergistic

OSCC

PDT (50 μM) + Cetuximab (50 μg/ml)

0.3003

0.01797

< 0.0001

Synergistic

OSCC

PDT (100 μM ) + Cetuximab (100 μg/ml)

0.5812

0.03609

< 0.0001

Synergistic

HSC-3

PDT (50 μM) + Nimo (50 μg/ml)

0.5535

0.01455

< 0.0001

Synergistic

HSC-3

PDT (100 μM ) + Nimo (100 μg/ml)

0.5865

0.2002

0.0428

Synergistic

HSC-3

PDT (50 μM) + Cetuximab (50 μg/ml)

0.7602

0.1864

0.0151

Synergistic

HSC-3

PDT (100 μM ) + Cetuximab (100 μg/ml)

0.4358

0.04715

0.0008

Synergistic

SCC-25

PDT (50 μM) + Nimo (50 μg/ml)

0.3321

0.05054

0.0012

Synergistic

SCC-25

PDT (100 μM ) + Nimo (100 μg/ml)

1.475

0.1226

< 0.0001

Synergistic

SCC-25

PDT (50 μM) + Cetuximab (50 μg/ml)

1.187

0.3539

0.0202

Synergistic

SCC-25

PDT (100 μM ) + Cetuximab (100 μg/ml)

1.663

0.03313

< 0.0001

Synergistic

HUVEC

PDT (50 μM) + Nimo (50 μg/ml)

0.3881

< 0.0001

< 0.0001

Synergistic

HUVEC

PDT (100 μM ) + Nimo (100 μg/ml)

0.3240

0.0136

0.0136

Synergistic

HUVEC

PDT (50 μM) + Cetuximab (50 μg/ml)

0.5184

< 0.0001

< 0.0001

Synergistic

HUVEC

PDT (100 μM ) + Cetuximab (100 μg/ml)

0.4599

< 0.0001

< 0.0001

Synergistic

PDT (10 mg/kg) + Nimo (10 mg/kg)

0.4840

0.1290

0.0199

Synergistic

Cell lines

In-vivo
PDT with
OSCC cells

of EGFR results in poor prognosis in oral cancer and
its activation is associated with malignant phenotype,
inhibition of apoptosis and increased metastatic potential
[1]. Therefore, there is a need for targeted therapy to
improve the efficacy of PDT. Here, we investigate the
efficacy of EGFR inhibitor nimotuzumab in combination
with PDT to effectively treat oral tumor xenografts in vivo.
In this study, we first estimated the expression of
EGFR in OSCC, HSC-3 and SCC-25 cells. Since most oral
cancers are epithelial in origin, there is a high probability
of EGFR overexpression [6]. Both immunofluorescence
and western blotting results showed a substantial amount
of EGFR expression in oral cancer cells. However,
expression of EGFR was greater in OSCC and HSC-3
compared to SCC-25 cells. Based on these results we
decided to use the OSCC cell line to establish an oral
cancer xenograft tumor model for the in vivo regression
and survival studies. Overexpression of EGFR has been
observed in up to 90% of head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas. EGFR activation is known to be associated
with the malignant phenotype, angiogenesis, inhibition
of apoptosis as well as increased metastatic potential in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

oral cancer [30]. Therefore inhibition of EGFR and its
downstream signalling pathways presents a promising
strategy to prevent tumor progression.
Nimotuzumab is a potent EGFR inhibitor that
requires bivalent binding for stable attachment and
would therefore bind preferentially to tumor cells having
a medium to high surface density of EGFR protein. For
this reason, nimotuzumab exhibits a lower toxicity profile
compared to cetuximab that can bind to normal cells
with lower EGFR expression levels [31]. In this study,
we were interested in understanding the anti-angiogenic
effects of nimotuzumab on oral cancer and human
endothelial cells. Therefore we performed cell migration,
invasion and tube formation assays to assess the antiangiogenic properties of nimotuzumab and compared it
with cetuximab. Cetuximab is a chimeric human-murine
monoclonal antibody that competitively binds to the
accessible extracellular domain of EGFR and inhibits
dimerisation and subsequently inhibits cell proliferation,
tumor growth and metastasis [32]. Based on our results,
nimotuzumab could successfully prevent endothelial cell
migration, invasion and endothelial cell tube formation
13495

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Representative IHC images of paraffin embedded tumorsections post treatment. Percentage of EGFR and Ki-67
staining and microvessel density per mm3 measurement of CD31 was determined. EGFR staining was observed in the cell member and
Ki-67 stained the nuclei of proliferating cells. CD31 staining showed vessel damage in treated tumors compared to control. Open lumen
vasculature was observed in the combination therapy treated tumors.

and moreover its effects were comparable to cetuximab,
and bevacizumab which is a well-known anti-angiogenic
agent. Two different concentrations of the inhibitors were
tested and no significant difference in the migration or
invasion of cells was observed though the concentration
was doubled. This could be due to the fact that to begin
with the concentration of inhibitors was high at 50 μg/
ml, which already prevented substantial migration and
invasion of cells so doubling the concentration did not
make a difference. A 2–3 fold increase in migration and
invasion of cells was observed when treated with VEGF
and EGF proteins compared to control. Cell migration
and invasion are crucial steps that can lead to tumor
metastasis. In HNSCC, tumor cells attract monocytes
and macrophages to activate the secretion of growth
factors and cytokines that stimulate the production of
interleukin-8 (IL-8) and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) [23]. A recent study has reported that EGF-LikeDomain-7, a secreted angiogenic factor, is required for
VEGF-Induced Akt/ERK activation and vascular tube
formation [33]. Therefore, the role of nimotuzumab in
the prevention of angiogenesis in addition to EGFR
targeting would be an added advantage in controlling
the invasion of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Both nimotuzumab and cetuximab significantly disrupted
tube formation of endothelial cells. Earlier reports have
shown that nimotuzumab might possess a VEGF-mediated
anti-angiogenic component in their mechanism of action.
This hypothesis was reinforced by a study that reported
a significant 3-fold reduction in microvessel density
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[34], which occurs in parallel to the decrease in VEGF
expression following nimotuzumab treatment. Likewise,
a reduction in vessel size, which is often associated
with an anti-angiogenic response, is also evident in
nimotuzumab-treated tumors [35]. It is known that VEGF
promotes the survival of endothelial cells by preventing
apoptosis [35]. However, this effect can be reversed by
administering nimotuzumab which increases apoptosis
by reducing the production of VEGF, leading to reduced
neovascularity. In line with our study, previous reports
suggest that nimotuzumab is anti-angiogenic and could
serve as a targeted therapy against both endothelial cells
and tumor cells by disrupting the vascular endothelial
microenvironment [36].
Next we performed in vitro experiments to evaluate
cell viability post treatment on 3 different oral cell lines
and HUVECs. Based on statistical calculations, it was
noted that different dosages of both PDT + nimotuzumab
and PDT + cetuximab synergistically induced cell
death in all the cell lines. The fundamental rationale for
combination therapy is to use approaches that work by
different mechanisms of action. The combination effect
can be synergistic, additive or in some cases antagonistic.
Synergistic effects of different combinations of treatments
can significantly enhance therapeutic outcome. In order
to obtain synergistic effect, PDT can be combined with
agents that can counteract prosurvival signalling triggered
in tumor cells that can develop resistance to PDT [37].
Ce6-PDT significantly increased cell death in oral cancer
cells and nimotuzumab and cetuximab significantly
13496

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Toxicity studies were performed by measuring serum creatinine. A. urea nitrogen B. aspartate aminotransferase
C. and alanine aminotransferase levels D. in serum to understand the kidney and liver function in mice treated with different therapies.
The levels of all the enzymes were within the normal range. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean of triplicate experiments.
enhanced the anti-tumor effect of PDT. Similar to our
results, pheophorbide-a (Pa)-PDT in an oral cancer
cell line reduced cell viability by 50% and produced
reactive oxygen species (ROS) [38]. Compared to this,
Ce6-PDT reduced cell viability by around 70%. Ce6PDT predominantly causes apoptosis of tumor cells and
about 80% apoptosis was observed in colon carcinoma
CT-26 when treated with a light dose of 1 J/cm2 [39].
However, the percentage of apoptosis can always differ
based on the PDT dosage and type of tumor model
used. Our preliminary results using flow cytometry has
shown almost 50% apoptosis with combination therapy
of PDT and nimotuzumab compared to control (10%) at
24 hour time-point (Supplementary Figure 2A and 2B).
Photosensitization of human vascular smooth muscle cells
with Ce6 has also shown to result in the generation of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ROS, a decrease in cell membrane polarization, caspase-3
activation, as well as DNA-fragmentation [40]. Similar to
our results, the efficacy of Zn-BC-AM-PDT was increased
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells (NPC) through the
inhibition of EGFR/PI3K/Akt and EGFR/MEK/ERK
signaling pathways using an EGFR inhibitor AG1478
[41]. Both nimotuzumab and cetuximab by itself reduced
cell viability by only 10–40% in various cell lines because
even though it is highly tumor specific by itself it is low
in toxicity. No significant difference in cell death was
observed between the two cetuximab and nimotuzumab
doses of 50 μg/ml and 100 μg/ml. Though the results
for cetuximab and nimotuzumab are comparable, this
study mainly focused on the use of nimotuzumab in our
in-vivo experiments as it is known that nimotuzumab is
less toxic than cetuximab as it needs to bivalently bind
13497

Oncotarget

to EGFR molecules and therefore normal tissues that
express lower levels of EGFR are not affected [22].
Nimotuzumab targets EGFR and blocks the binding
of the ligand while permitting the conformation of the
active receptor. It has been reported that this antibody
can suppress cell proliferation in epithelial cancer by
causing cell cycle arrest. When the antibody binds to the
extracellular domain of EGFR, it can strongly inhibit
EGFR-dependent cellular transformation. Similar to our
results with PDT, nimotuzumab has shown to selectively
enhance anti-tumor effects of ionizing radiation of nonsmall-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines with high
EGFR expression [42]. Furthermore, combination of
nimotuzumab with radiation increased apoptosis and
G2/M phase arrest in human lung adenocarcinoma A549
cells [43]. Nimotuzumab also promoted radiosensitivity
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells by upregulating IGFBP-3 through EGFR-dependent pathway
[44]. Surprisingly, we noticed an enhanced effect of
PDT and PDT combination therapy on HUVEC cells
compared to other oral cancer cells. It has been widely
reported that vascular-targeting PDT can induce alterations
in the tumor vasculature leading to vasoconstriction,
microvascular shutdown and blood flow stasis [45].
Vascular photosensitization can permeabilize blood vessels
through the formation of endothelial intercellular gaps,
which are likely induced via endothelial cell microtubule
depolymerization. The loss of endothelial barrier function
can ultimately lead to tumor vascular shutdown and will
have significant implications in drug transport and tumor
cell metastasis [46]. Thus, modifying the PDT protocol
to target both the vasculature and cellular components in
the tumor microenvironment can substantially improve
treatment outcome.
In the in vivo tumor regression experiments, we
compared the tumor growth between the various treatment
groups. Nimotuzumab was used at a dosage of 10 mg/kg
based on our optimization experiments whereby 2 mg/
kg, 5mg/kg and 10mg/kg drug doses were tested with
Ce6-PDT. 10 mg/kg nimotuzumab with PDT (150 J/cm2
and 100 mW/cm2) exhibited increased tumor inhibition
compared to 2 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg nimotuzumab
(Supplementary Figure 1). As we have used Ce6-PDT
extensively in our previous studies, the drug-light
interval was optimized at 3 hours [47, 48]. We monitored
the tumors until 32 days as the control tumors had
reached the maximum ethical limit by then. Our in vivo
experiments showed that the combination therapy of PDT
and nimotuzumab significantly reduced tumor growth
compared to the monotherapy groups and control. The rate
of tumor growth in the monotherapy groups, PDT alone
and nimotuzumab alone, was comparable and lower than
the rate in untreated control tumors. The Kaplan Meier
survival curve that was charted for 90 days also showed
increased percentage of survival of animals treated with
the combination therapy compared to monotherapies
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

alone. In an earlier study we have also demonstrated that
targeting EGFR using cetuximab improved the efficacy
of PDT treatment in a human bladder cancer model.
Increased apoptosis and downregulation of EGFR target
genes cyclin D1 and c-myc was observed in tumors
treated with PDT and cetuximab [20]. Inhibition of
EGFR signalling can lead to increased PDT cytotoxicity
through a mechanism that involves increased apoptotic
cell death [14]. Similarly, PDT + C225, an EGFR
inhibitor, produced synergistic reductions in mean tumor
burden when compared with PDT only or C225. Median
survival was approximately threefold greater for mice in
the PDT + C225 group than for mice in the no-treatment
control group [16]. Inhibition of EGFR has been shown
to increase the antitumor activity of radiotherapy and
chemotherapy in preclinical and clinical studies [49, 50].
In an in vivo study on head and neck xenograft model
in nude mice, combination of PDT and chemotherapy
drug carboplatin reduced the tumor size. Though the
difference in the tumor size was not significant between
the PDT and combination therapy groups, a difference
in the expression of EGFR was observed between these
two groups [51]. In our studies we observed that PDT
and nimotuzumab synergistically delayed tumor growth.
Similarly, del Carmen and colleagues [16] also presented
evidence that intraperitoneal administration of C225
(cetuximab) and benzoporphyrin derivative monoacid-A
(BPD)-PDT act synergistically to prevent or inhibit
tumor cell growth and extend survival in a murine model
of ovarian cancer peritoneal metastasis. Another study
reported that ERK1/2 and EGFR-PI3K-Akt pathways
seem to be involved in cellular survival after PDT and
EGFR inhibitors and PDT act synergistically to reduce
malignant tumors effectively [52]. Treatment of U87MG
brain tumours with nimotuzumab and radiation has also
shown enhanced inhibition of EGFR-signalling activation
[53]. Such inhibition was not apparent for tumors treated
with radiation alone, suggesting a rationale for combined
treatment with anti-EGFR mAbs and radiotherapy.
Epidermal growth factor receptor is a receptor
tyrosine kinase that regulates important cellular functions
including cell cycle progression, cell survival and
proliferation, inhibition of apoptosis and induction of
angiogenesis. Our results show increased expression of
EGFR in PDT treated tumors. The effect of PDT on EGFR
remains controversial, some studies have indicated an
upregulation of EGFR expression [54] while others have
shown degradation of EGFR [13]. The reason for this
discrepancy is unclear, but may be due to photosensitizer
specific differences, since some of these studies were
performed with HPPH and ALA as photosensitizers [55,
56] as opposed to the BPD and porfimer sodium. In an
earlier study, we have shown upregulation of EGFR
signalling in hypericin mediated PDT of bladder tumors
[20]. Though, PDT treated tumors expressed greater
EGFR levels, the increase in tumor size was not as
13498

Oncotarget

significant as the control tumors. This could be due to
the fact that various other pro-survival molecules and
growth factors could play a role in the proliferation of
cancer cells. Downregulation of EGFR was observed
in the tumors treated with PDT and nimotuzumab.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tumour specimens from
head and neck cancer patients treated with the combination
of nimotuzumab and radiation also showed evidence of
antiproliferative and antiangiogenic effects [57]. It has
been reported that the potentiation of the antitumor activity
of radiation by nimotuzumab may be related more to the
level of EGFR expression at the cell surface rather than to
EGFR mutation [43]. EGFR overexpression is associated
with tumor progression and poor prognosis in many types
of cancers including head and neck cancers [58]. It has
been indicated that nimotuzumab has a better clinical
effect in tumors that overexpress EGFR. In a trial where
92 treatment-naïve patients with advanced head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma received standard therapy either
with or without nimotuzumab, EGFR expression showed
a significant correlation with patient survival in patients
treated with nimotuzumab and chemoradiation [25].
The proliferation marker Ki-67 was high in the
control tumors indicating aggressive growth. Ki-67
expression was significantly lower compared to tumors
treated with PDT and nimotuzumab only. Nimotuzumab
is known to be anti-proliferative and this effect increases
when combined with other conventional treatments. It
has been demonstrated that nimotuzumab-treated adenoid
cystic carcinoma cells were arrested in G1 phase and
showed decreased expression of Ki-67 [51]. We observed
that the combination of PDT + nimotuzumab decreased
CD31 vessel density compared to the control tumors.
However, open lumen vasculature was observed in the
combination therapy treated tumors which may suggest
vessel maturation and increased functionality of vessels.
One of the reasons could be the fact that though PDT
initially suppressed microvessel density, the effect could
have disappeared after a longer period (1 month post
PDT). Also open vasculature perhaps could have resulted
because of collapse or occlusion in feeding vessels or
flow cessation and clot formation [59]. The anticancer
properties of nimotuzumab have been associated with
potent antiproliferative, antiangiogenic and proapoptotic
activity. A431 subcutaneous tumors grown in SCID
mice exhibited a reduction in overall microvascular
density (MVD) and reduction in Ki-67 positive tumor
cell fraction with an elevated apoptotic index [23].
Immunohistochemical studies on biopsies of patients
with advanced HNSCC who received nimotuzumab has
shown a reduction in proliferation index (P = 0.012) and
Ki-67 was expression mainly in the infiltrating borders
of the tumors [24]. Similar to our results, nimotuzumab
in combination with radiotherapy produced a reduction
in the size of tumor blood vessels and the number of
proliferating cells in subcutaneous tumors [53].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Next, we tested the toxicity of nimotuzumab as
it was administered to the animals at a dosage of 10
mg/kg, 3 times a week for a 30 day period. We were
interested in understanding the effect of different
treatments on the liver and kidneys. The creatinine,
urea nitrogen (BUN), asparatate aminotransferase
(AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels in
serum were within the normal ranges and no significant
difference was observed between the four different
treatment groups. The normal range of these enzymes
in female nude mice has been reported in Lu et al. [60].
Though there was mild increase in AST and ALT in the
combination therapy group it was not significant. No
renal or hepatic toxicity was found in any of the animals
and there was no treatment related death. Nimotuzumab
has shown encouraging safety profiles in numerous
clinical trials [21]. Low adverse event and toxicity rates
were observed in phase I clinical trial of Nimotuzumab
combined with chemoradiation for esophageal SCC
[61]. Nimotuzumab is well tolerated and has lesser skin
toxicity as it is known to selectively bind to cells that
express moderate to high EGFR levels. Also though
nimotuzumab blocks ligand binding, it also allows the
receptor to adopt its active conformation, warranting the
basal level of signalling needed for the survival of nontumor cells [42].
In summary, we have shown that nimotuzumab
synergistically enhanced the antitumor efficacy of PDT
in vitro and in vivo. Our data suggest that the antitumor activity of this combination therapy involves the
reduced expression of EGFR, Ki-67 and CD31, therefore
demonstrating anti-proliferative and anti-antiangiogenic
effects with low toxicity. This provides a rationale for
future clinical investigations of the therapeutic efficacy of
nimotuzumab in combination with PDT.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines, culture, photosensitizer and inhibitors
Oral squamous carcinoma cell line (OSCC, CAL-27),
human squamous carcinoma cell line (HSC-3), squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC-25) and human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) were obtained from American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC, USA). The cells
were cultured as a monolayer in RPMI-1640 medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco,
USA), 1% non-essential amino acids (Gibco, USA), 1%
sodium pyruvate (Gibco, USA), 100 units/ml penicillin/
streptomycin (Gibco, USA) and incubated at 37°C, 95%
humidity and 5% CO2. The photosensitizer, Chlorin e6
was provided by ApoCare GmBH, Germany and the
EGFR inhibitor nimotuzumab was provided by Innogene
Kalbiotech Pte Ltd, Singapore. Erbitux (cetuximab) and
Avastin (bevacizumab) were purchased from Imclone
Systems and Genentech USA.
13499

Oncotarget

Immunofluorescence
OSCC, HSC-3, SCC-25, human epithelial carcinoma
cell line (A431) and human breast adenocarcinoma cell
line (MCF-7) cells were seeded at 25,000 cells per well
in 8 well chamber slides (Nunc Lab-Tek II chamber
slides, Thermo scientific, USA) and were allowed to
grow overnight at 37°C. A431 was used as the positive
control and MCF-7 was the negative control. The cells
were rinsed with PBS and blocking was performed with
1% BSA in PBS for 1 h at 37°C. After removing the
blocking buffer the cells were incubated with 1:50 EGFR
primary antibody (Rabbit mAb, CellSignaling Technology,
USA). After 1 hour incubation the chamber slides were
washed three times with PBS and incubated with 1:
100 secondary antibody (Goat polyclonal H&L (TR),
Abcam). The slides were then washed 3 times. Hoechst
33342 (PromoCellGmBH, Germany) was used to stain
the nucleus. After washing, vectashield mounting medium
was used to mount the chamber slides. A fluorescence
microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i, USA) was used to capture
the images. The fluorescence intensity was quantified
using Image Pro Plus 6.0 software.

and EGF protein were added at a concentration of 50 ng/
ml and 100 ng/ml. The plates were then incubated for 24
hours at 37°C in a CO2 incubator. The 8 mm pore-size of
the membrane ensured the minimization of non-specific
and random migration. Following incubation, the medium
was discarded from the top side of the insert by flipping
out the remaining cell suspension, and the migration
chamber plate was placed onto a new 96-well feeder
tray containing 150 μL of pre-warmed cell detachment
solution in the wells. 30 minutes after incubation, the
cells were allowed to dislodge completely from the
underside by gently tilting the migration chamber plate
back and forth several times during incubation. Next,
50 μL of lysis buffer/calcein AM solution was added
to each well of the feeder tray containing 150 μL cell
detachment solution with the cells that migrated through
the membrane. The plate was then allowed to incubate
for 15 minutes at room temperature. 150 μL of this
mixture was transfered to a new 96-well plate that was
suitable for fluorescence measurement. A fluorescence
plate reader (Glomax multi detection system, Promega
USA) using 480/520 nm filter set was used to perform
the measurements.

Western blot analysis

Extracellular matrix cell invasion assay

OSCC, HSC-3, SCC-25, A431 and MCF-7 cells
were lysed in mammalian lysate buffer (M-PER, Pierce,
IL, USA) with protease inhibitor (Complete Mini, Roche,
Germany). Fifty micrograms of total protein from each
cell lysate samples were then resolved on a 10% bis-tris
gel before transferring to a nitrocellulose membrane.
The membrane was then probed with 1:200 anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, USA)
and 1:400 horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibody
(Cell Signaling Technology, USA) using the iBind
Western System (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA). The
membrane was then incubated with chemiluminescent
substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) followed by
detection on traditional ECL film (Amersham Hyperfilm
ECL, GE Healthcare, USA). The intensity of the bands
was quantified using NIH Image J (1.41o, W. Rasband,
National Institute of Health, USA) software.

QCM ECMatrix cell invasion assay, 96-well
(Merck Millipore, USA) was used to perform this
assay. 150 μL of cell culture medium with 10% fetal
bovine serum was added to the wells of the feeder
tray (lower chamber) in a 96 well plate. OSCC, HSC3, SCC-25 and HUVEC cells were seeded at 5 × 104
cells in 100 μl/well to the cell culture insert. To these
wells either bevacizumab, nimotuzumab and cetuximab
were added at two different concentrations of 50 μg/
ml and 100 μg/ml and VEGF and EGF protein were
added at a concentration of 50 ng/ml and 100 ng/ml.
The plates were then incubated for 24 hours at 37°C
in a CO2 incubator to permit invasion. Following
incubation, the medium was discarded from the top
side of the insert by flipping out the remaining cell
suspension, and the migration chamber plate was
placed onto a new 96-well feeder tray containing
150 μL of pre-warmed cell detachment solution in the
wells. 30 minutes after incubation, the cells were allowed
to dislodge completely from the underside by gently
tilting the migration chamber plate back and forth several
times during incubation. Next, 50 μL of lysis buffer/
calcein AM solution was added to each well of the feeder
tray containing 150 μL cell detachment solution with the
cells that migrated through the membrane. The plate
was then allowed to incubate for 15 minutes at room
temperature. 150 μL of this mixture was transferred to
a new 96-well plate that was suitable for fluorescence
measurement. A fluorescence plate reader (Glomax multi
detection system, Promega USA) using 480/520 nm filter
set was used to perform the measurements.

Chemotaxis cell migration assay
QCM chemotaxis cell migration assay (Merck
Millipore, USA) was used to perform this experiment.
150 μL of cell culture medium with 10% fetal bovine
serum was added to the wells of the feeder tray (lower
chamber) in a 96 well plate. OSCC, HSC-3, SCC-25
and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
cells were seeded at 5 × 104 cells in 100 μl/well to the
cell culture insert. To these wells either bevacizumab,
nimotuzumab and cetuximab were added at two different
concentrations of 50 μg/ml and 100 μg/ml and human
recombinant vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13500

Oncotarget

Endothelial tube formation assay

performed. For the combination therapy groups, after
PDT the medium was removed and fresh medium with
nimotuzumab and cetuximab was added. 24 hours after
treatment 100 μl of CellTiter-Glo™ Reagent was added
to 100 μl of medium present in each well. The contents
were mixed for 2 minutes on an orbital shaker to induce
cell lysis. The plate was then allowed to incubate at room
temperature for 10 minutes to stabilize luminescence signal.
Luminescence was recorder with a plate reader (Glomax
multi detection system, Promega USA).

Endothelial cell tube formation assay (BD BioCoat™
Angiogenesis System, NJ, USA) was used to perform
this experiment. The 98-well plate coated with matrigel
was thawed overnight at 4°C and the matrigel matrix was
allowed to polymerize for 30 minutes at 37°C and 5% CO2
environment. 2 x 104 HUVEC cells in 50 μl of medium
was added to each well. At the same time EGFR inhibitors
nimotuzumab (50 μg/ml) and cetuximab (50 μg/ml) were
added to the medium. Angiogenesis promoter VEGF
(50 ng/ml) and negative control sulphophorane (100 μM)
were added separately to the cells. The plate was incubated
for 16 to 18 hours at 37°C, 5% CO2 atmosphere. Following
incubation, medium was carefully removed from the plates
and the cells were labelled with calcein AM. After 40 min
incubation, the cells were washed twice and tube formation
of HUVEC cells was captured using a fluorescence
microscope (Zeiss, Axiovert 200M). The length of the tubes
was measured using Image Pro Plus 6.0 software.

In vivo treatment protocol
Oral squamous carcinoma cells were cultured,
harvested and suspended in Hank’s balanced salt solution
(HBSS) (Gibco, USA). A cell suspension of 3 × 106
was prepared in 100 μl of HBSS and this was injected
subcutaneously into the flanks of 6–8 weeks Balb/c nude
mice. When the tumors reached 200 mm3 in diameter, the
animals were randomly assigned to 4 groups (10 animals
per group) for tumor regression and survival experiments,
(i) Control (mice with untreated tumors), (ii) PDT only,
(iii) nimotuzumab only and (iv) PDT + nimotuzumab.
PDT treatment involved the intravenous injection of
10 mg/kg chlorin e6, 3 hours later the tumor was irradiated
with a laser light source with a wavelength of 665 nm
(LVI Technology Inc, South Korea). A light dosage of
150 J/cm2 and fluence rate of 100 mW/cm2 was used
for PDT treatment. The animals were anesthetized with
isoflurane during PDT. Nimotuzumab was administered
intraperitonially (10 mg/kg) at time 0 (immediately after
light exposure), 24 h, 48 h and then 3 times a week for up
to 32 days post PDT for tumor regression experiments.
The tumor size was estimated using the formula, volume
= (π/6 × d1 × d2 × d3), where d1, d2 and d3 are tumor
dimensions in 3 orthogonal directions. For survival
studies, the animals were monitored for 90 days. Mice
were euthanized when either the tumor reached the 2 cm3
ethical limit or at the end of the 90-day monitoring period.
All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC), Singapore Health
Services Pte Ltd, and performed in accordance with
international standards.

Cell viability assay
CellTiter-Glo® luminescent cell viability assay
(Promega, USA) was used to perform the cell viability
assay. It is a homogeneous method to determine the number
of viable cells in culture based on quantitation of the
ATP present, which signals the presence of metabolically
active cells. OSCC HSC-3, SCC-25 and HUVEC cells
were seeded in 96-well (10,000 cells per well) opaquewalled plates. Control wells containing medium only
were used to subtract background luminescence. After
overnight incubation, the cells in the wells were treated
with the following combinations of treatment in triplicates:
(i) control (cells only), (ii) Chlorin e6 – 50 μM and 100
μM, (iii) Nimotuzumab – 50 μg/ml and 100 μg/ml, (iv)
Cetuximab – 50 μg/ml and 100 μg/ml, (v) Light irradiation
alone 1 J/cm2, (vi) PDT at 1 J/cm2 with Chlorin e6
concentrations of 50 μM and 100 μM (vii) Combination
of PDT and nimotuzumab (nimo) at four different dosages
for e.g. (a) PDT (50 μM)/nimotuzumab (50 μg/ml), (b)
PDT (50 μM)/nimotuzumab (100 μg/ml), (c) PDT (100
μM)/nimotuzumab (50 μg/ml) and (d) PDT (100 μM)/
nimotuzumab (100 μg/ml), (vii) Combination of PDT and
cetuximab at four different dosages for e.g. (a) PDT (50
μM)/cetuximab (50 μg/ml), (b) PDT (50 μM)/cetuximab
(100 μg/ml), (c) PDT (100 μM)/cetuximab (50 μg/ml) and
(d) PDT (100 μM)/cetuximab (100 μg/ml). Treatment was
performed using two 96 well plates. For the control plate
Ce6 alone, nimotuzumab and cetuximab alone was added
to the cells and incubated for 24 hours. The cells in the
treatment plate were treated with light only, PDT and the
combination therapies of PDT + nimotuzumab and PDT
+ cetuximab. For PDT treatment, chlorin e6 was added to
the medium with cells and incubated for 3 hours. Before
light irradiation, the cells were rinsed with PBS and chlorin
e6 was removed. Fresh medium was added and PDT was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical calculation of PDT response for
in vitro and in vivo treatment
A statistical model was used to assess synergistic,
additive and antagonistic effects of the combination
therapy based on Weyergang et al. [28]. Briefly, it
is assumed that the mechanistic action of PDT and
angiogenesis inhibitors can be distinct. The additive (add)
effect of two treatments is the product of the survival
fraction (SF) of each treatment which is SFadd = SFPDT ×
SFNimo. The SFs were calculated by dividing the number of
treated cells by the average number of untreated cells in
3 independent experiments. The calculated SFadd was then
13501

Oncotarget

compared to the observed SFcomb, which are the PDT +
nimotuzumab combination therapy groups. The calculated
SFadd was then compared to the observed SFcomb by the
synergy/antagonism parameter difference in logarithms
(DL), defined as the difference in logarithms between the
observed SFcomb and the calculated SFadd.

creatinine colorimetric kit (Arbor assay, USA) was used
to measure urea and creatinine levels in serum to assess
kidney toxicity. Briefly, for urea nitrogen, 50 μL of
serum was added to a 96 well plate. 50 μL of water was
added into duplicate wells as the Zero standard. 75 μL
of Color Reagent A followed by 75 μL of Color Reagent
B was added to each well. This was then incubated at
room temperature for 30 minutes. The optical density
was read at 450 nm.
For serum creatinine assay, 25 μL of mouse serum
was added to a 96 well plate. Water was used as blank
and standards were also included. 25 μL of Assay diluent
was later added to all the wells. After which, 100 μL of
the DetectX® Creatinine Reagent was added to each well.
After 1 min incubation at room temperature, the plate
was read at 490 nm. Again after 30 minutes, the optical
density was recorded at 490 nm. The average optical
density of the standards at 1 minute was subtracted from
the average optical density of the standards at 30 minutes
and the results were plotted against the creatinine
concentration of the standards. The concentration of
unknown samples was calculated based on the linear
regression line generated.
For the Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) assay, 5 μl
of serum was added to the assay diluent in a 96 well plate.
100 μl reactive mix consisting of AST Assay Buffer, AST
Enzyme Mix, Developer and AST Substrate was added to
each well containing the standards and samples. For Alanine
Aminotransferase (ALT) assay, 100 μl of reactive mix was
prepared by mixing ALT Assay Buffer 86 μl, OxiRed Probe
2 μl, ALT Enzyme Mix 2 μl and ALT Substrate 10 μl.
100 μl of the reaction mix was added to each well containing
the serum samples and standards. The optical density was
read at 10 min and 60 min post incubation.
AST and ALT activity in the test samples was then
be calculated by:

DL = logSFPDT + logSFNimo– logSFcomb;
Synergistic effects will result in positive DL values;
negative DL values will indicate antagonism while DL
equal to zero will indicate additive effect of the treatments.
Significant deviations of DL from zero were established
through t-tests based on a two-tailed significance level of
p = 0.05.

Detection of EGFR, Ki-67 and CD31 using
immunohistochemistry
Processing of the samples was done using tissue
processor (Leica TP 1020, Germany). Briefly the tissue
samples were fixed in 10% formalin for 24 h, and
then processed in an ascending series of ethanol and
subsequently cleared with xylene and embedded in paraffin.
The paraffin embedded samples of oral cancer xenograft
tumors were cut at a thickness of 4 μm using a microtome
(Leica RM 2135, Germany). The sections were mounted
on superfrost/plus slides (Fischer Scientific, USA) and
air-dried. On the day of staining the slides, the parafilm
was cleared in Neo-clear (Merck Millipore, USA) twice
for 10 min before rehydrating in ethanol series. Sections
were incubated with hydrogen peroxide for 10 min to
block endogenous peroxidase activity. After which, the
sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary
antibodies, i.e., EGFR and Ki-67 (1:100; Cell Signaling,
USA). For CD31 staining, chemicon blood vessel staining
kit (Millipore, USA) was used. To confirm the specificity
of binding, normal mouse serum IgG1 (1:500) was used as
a negative control. Following extensive washing, sections
were incubated for 30 min in the secondary biotinylated
antibody, rinsed and followed by DAB Chromogen (Vector
Laboratories, UK) for 10 min. Sections were then counterstained with Harris’s hematoxylin and dehydrated in
ascending grades of ethanol before clearing in xylene and
mounting under a cover slip. Images were captured using
imaging software (NIS Elements, Nikon). The images
were saved in TIFF format and NIH Image J (1.41o, W.
Rasband, National Institute of Health, USA) software was
used to analyze and quantify the expression of EGFR, Ki-67
and CD31. For EGFR and Ki-67, the percentage of staining
was calculated. For CD31, microvessel density (MVD) was
quantified per mm2 area.

AST/ALT Activity = B/T2-T1*V = nmol/min/ml =
mU/ml
where B is the pyruvate amount from pyruvate standard
curve (in nmol). T1 is the time of the first reading (in min).
T2 is the time of the second reading (in min). V is the original
sample volume added into the reaction well (in ml).

Statistical analysis
Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
Tukey’s multiple comparisons was performed to analyze
the tumor regression data using Prism 6.0 software
(Graphpad Prism, San Diego, CA). For all in vitro
studies ordinary one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple
comparisons was performed. A p value of < 0.05 was
considered to be significant. For synergistic measurements,
significant deviations of DL from zero were established
through t-tests based on a two-tailed significance level of
p = 0.05.

Assessment of toxicity
We assessed the kidney function of the animals
post treatment. Urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13502

Oncotarget

Acknowledgments

Wilson BC, et al. Photodynamic therapy of cancer: an
update. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011; 61:250–281.

This work was supported by funding from the
Singhealth foundation research (SHF/FG520S/2011)
and the National Medical Research Council (NMRC/
CIRG/1355/2013). The authors would also like to thank
Innogen Kalbiotech Singapore for providing the EGFR
inhibitor TheraCIM (nimotuzumab) and ApoCare GmBH
(Germany) for providing Chlorin e6.

12.	 Ikeda H, Tobita T, Ohba S, Uehara M, Asahina I. Treatment
outcome of Photofrin-based photodynamic therapy for
T1 and T2 oral squamous cell carcinoma and dysplasia.
Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2013; 10:229–235.
13.	 Ahmad N, Kalka K, Mukhtar H. In vitro and in vivo
­inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase pathway by photodynamic therapy. Oncogene. 2001;
20:2314–2317.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Edmonds C, Hagan S, Gallagher-Colombo SM, Busch TM,
Cengel KA. Photodynamic therapy activated signaling from
epidermal growth factor receptor and STAT3: Targeting
survival pathways to increase PDT efficacy in ovarian and
lung cancer. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012; 13:1463–1470.

The authors had no conflict of interest to declare in
relation to this article.

REFERENCES

15.	 Dimitroff CJ, Klohs W, Sharma A, Pera P, Driscoll D,
Veith J, Steinkampf R, Schroeder M, Klutchko S, Sumlin A,
Henderson B, Dougherty TJ, Bernacki RJ. Anti-angiogenic
activity of selected receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
PD166285 and PD3074: implications for combination treatment with photodynamic therapy. Invest New Drugs. 1999;
17:121–135.

1.	 Ribeiro FA, Noguti J, Oshima CT, Ribeiro DA. Effective
targeting of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
for treating oral cancer: a promising approach. Anticancer
Res. 2014; 34:1547–1552.
2.	 Lim AA, Wee TH, Wong RC. Epidemiology of oral cancer
diagnosed at a singapore tertiary healthcare institution. Ann
Acad Med Singapore. 2014; 43:96–101.

16.	 del Carmen MG, Rizvi I, Chang Y, Moor AC, Oliva E,
Sherwood M, Pogue B, Hasan T. Synergism of epidermal
growth factor receptor-targeted immunotherapy with photodynamic treatment of ovarian cancer in vivo. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2005; 97:1516–1524.

3.	 Rabinowits G, Haddad RI. Overcoming resistance to EGFR
inhibitor in head and neck cancer: a review of the literature.
Oral Oncol. 2012; 48:1085–1089.
4.	 Laimer K, Spizzo G, Gastl G, Obrist P, Brunhuber T,
Fong D, Barbieri V, Jank S, Doppler W, Rasse M, Norer B.
High EGFR expression predicts poor prognosis in patients
with squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity and oropharynx: a TMA-based immunohistochemical analysis.
Oral Oncol. 2007; 43:193–198.

17.	 Weyergang A, Kaalhus O, Berg K. Photodynamic targeting
of EGFR does not predict the treatment outcome in combination with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor Tyrphostin
AG148. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2008; 7:1032–1040.
18.	 Yip WL, Weyergang A, Berg K, Tonnesen HH, Selbo PK.
Targeted delivery and enhanced cytotoxicity of cetuximabsaporin by photochemical internalization in EGFR-positive
cancer cells. Mol Pharm. 2007; 4:241–251.

5.	 Shaib W, Kono S, Saba N. Antiepidermal growth factor
receptor therapy in squamous cell carcinoma of the head
and neck. J Oncol. 2012; 2012:521215.

19.	 Cengel KA, Hahn SM, Glatstein E. C225 and PDT combination therapy for ovarian cancer: the play's the thing. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:1488–1489.

6.	 Kalyankrishna S, Grandis JR. Epidermal growth factor
receptor biology in head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2006; 24:2666–2672.

20.	 Bhuvaneswari R, Gan YY, Soo KC, Olivo M. Targeting
EGFR with photodynamic therapy in combination with
Erbitux enhances in vivo bladder tumor response. Mol
Cancer. 2009; 8:94.

7.	 Green B, Cobb AR, Hopper C. Photodynamic therapy in
the management of lesions of the head and neck. Br J Oral
Maxillofac Surg. 2013; 51:283–287.
8.	 Fernandez JM, Bilgin MD, Grossweiner LI. Singlet oxygen
generation by photodynamic agent. J Photochem Photobiol
B Biol. 1997; 37:131–140.

21.	 Ramakrishnan MS, Eswaraiah A, Crombet T, Piedra P,
Saurez G, Iyer H, Arvind AS. Nimotuzumab, a promising
therapeutic monoclonal for treatment of tumors of epithelial
origin. MAbs. 2009; 1:41–48.

9.	 Cunderlikova B, Gangeskar L, Moan J. Acid-base
properties of chlorin e6: relation to cellular uptake.
J Photochem Photobiol B. 1999; 53:81–90.

22.	 Garrido G, Tikhomirov IA, Rabasa A, Yang E, Gracia E,
Iznaga N, Fernandez LE, Crombet T, Kerbel RS, Perez R.
Bivalent binding by intermediate affinity of nimotuzumab:
a contribution to explain antibody clinical profile. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2011; 11:373–382.

10.	 Palumbo G. Photodynamic therapy and cancer: a brief
sightseeing tour. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2007; 4:131–148.
11.	 Agostinis P, Berg K, Cengel KA, Foster TH, Girotti AW,
Gollnick SO, Hahn SM, Hamblin MR, Juzeniene A,
Kessel D, Korbelik M, Moan J, Mroz P, Nowis D, Piette J,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Crombet-Ramos T, Rak J, Perez R, Viloria-Petit A.
Antiproliferative, antiangiogenic and proapoptotic activity

13503

Oncotarget

of h-R3: A humanized anti-EGFR antibody. Int J Cancer.
2002; 101:567–575.

36.	 Diaz A, Blanco R, Lemm M, Fichtner I, Leon K,
Montero  E. Preclinical Efficacy of Nimotuzumab, an
­Anti-Egfr Monoclonal Antibody as a Single Agent Therapy
in Human GBM u87mg Xenografts. J Cancer Ther. 2012;
3:245–255.

24.	 Rojo F, Gracias E, Villena N, Cruz T, Corominas JM,
Corradino I, Cedeno M, Campas C, Osorio M, Iznaga N,
Bellosillo B, Rovira A, Marsoni S, Gascon P, Serrano S,
Sessa C, et al. Pharmacodynamic trial of nimotuzumab
in unresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck: a SENDO Foundation study. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:2474–2482.

37.	 Chiaviello A, Postiglione I, Palumbo G. Targets and mechanisms of photodynamic therapy in lung cancer cells: a brief
overview. Cancers (Basel). 3:1014–1041.
38.	 Ahn MY, Kwon SM, Kim YC, Ahn SG, Yoon JH.
Pheophorbide a-mediated photodynamic therapy induces
apoptotic cell death in murine oral squamous cell carcinoma
in vitro and in vivo. Oncol Rep. 2012; 27:1772–1778.

25.	 Basavaraj C, Sierra P, Shivu J, Melarkode R, Montero E,
Nair P. Nimotuzumab with chemoradiation confers a
survival advantage in treatment-naive head and neck
tumors over expressing EGFR. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010;
10:673–681.

39.	 Ali-Seyed M, Bhuvaneswari R, Soo KC, Olivo M.
Photolon —photosensitization induces apoptosis via ROSmediated cross-talk between mitochondria and lysosomes.
Int J Oncol. 39:821–831.

26.	 Allan DGP. Nimotuzumab: evidence of clinical benefit
without rash. Oncologist. 2005; 10:760–761.
27.	 Ma NY, Cai XW, Fu XL, Li Y, Zhou XY, Wu XH, Hu
XC, Fan M, Xiang JQ, Zhang YW, Chen HQ, Lai ST,
Jiang GL, Zhao KL. Safety and efficacy of nimotuzumab
in combination with radiotherapy for patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Int J Clin Oncol.
2014; 19:297–302.

40.	 Wawrzynska M, Kalas W, Bialy D, Ziolo E, Arkowski J,
Mazurek W, Strzadala L. In vitro photodynamic therapy
with chlorin e6 leads to apoptosis of human vascular
smooth muscle cells. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz).
2010; 58:67–75.
41.	 Koon HK, Chan PS, Wong RN, Wu ZG, Lung ML,
Chang  CK, Mak NK. Targeted inhibition of the EGFR
pathways enhances Zn-BC-AM PDT-induced apoptosis in
well-differentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. J Cell
Biochem. 2009; 108:1356–1363.

28.	 Weyergang A, Selbo PK, Berg K. Sustained ERK
[­corrected] inhibition by EGFR targeting therapies is a predictive factor for synergistic cytotoxicity with PDT as neoadjuvant therapy. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1830; :2659–2670.
29.	 Jerjes W, Upile T, Hamdoon Z, Alexander Mosse C,
Morcos M, Hopper C. Photodynamic therapy outcome for
T1/T2 N0 oral squamous cell carcinoma. Lasers Surg Med.
2011; 43:463–469.

42.	 Talavera A, Friemann R, Gomez-Puerta S, MartinezFleites C, Garrido G, Rabasa A, Lopez-Requena A,
Pupo A, Johansen RF, Sanchez O, Krengel U, Moreno E.
Nimotuzumab, an antitumor antibody that targets the
­epidermal growth factor receptor, blocks ligand binding
while permitting the active receptor conformation. Cancer
Res. 2009; 69:5851–5859.

30.	 Modjtahedi H, Essapen S. Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors in cancer treatment: advances, challenges and
opportunities. Anticancer Drugs. 2009; 20:851–855.

43.	 Akashi Y, Okamoto I, Iwasa T, Yoshida T, Suzuki M,
Hatashita E, Yamada Y, Satoh T, Fukuoka M, Ono  K,
Nakagawa K. Enhancement of the antitumor activity of ionising radiation by nimotuzumab, a humanised
­monoclonal antibody to the epidermal growth factor receptor, in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines of differing
­epidermal growth factor receptor status. Br J Cancer. 2008;
98:749–755.

31.	 Perez R, Crombet T, de Leon J, Moreno E. A view on
EGFR-targeted therapies from the oncogene-addiction perspective. Front Pharmacol. 2013; 4:53.
32.	 Harding J, Burtness B. Cetuximab: an epidermal growth
factor receptor chemeric human-murine monoclonal
­antibody. Drugs Today (Barc). 2005; 41:107–127.
33.	 Takeuchi K, Yanai R, Kumase F, Morizane Y, Suzuki J,
Kayama M, Brodowska K, Nakazawa M, Miller JW,
Connor KM, Vavvas DG. EGF-like-domain-7 is required
for VEGF-induced Akt/ERK activation and vascular tube
formation in an ex vivo angiogenesis assay. PLoS One.
9:e91849.
34.	 Viloria-Petit A, Crombet T, Jothy S, Hicklin D, Bohlen P,
Schlaeppi JM, Rak J, Kerbel RS. Acquired resistance to
the antitumor effect of epidermal growth factor receptor-­
blocking antibodies in vivo: a role for altered tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:5090–5101.
35.	 Pidgeon GP, Barr MP, Harmey JH, Foley DA, BouchierHayes DJ. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
upregulates BCL-2 and inhibits apoptosis in human and
murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells. Br J Cancer. 2001;
85:273–278.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44.	 Zhao L, He LR, Xi M, Cai MY, Shen JX, Li QQ, Liao YJ,
Qian D, Feng ZZ, Zeng YX, Xie D, Liu MZ. Nimotuzumab
promotes radiosensitivity of EGFR-overexpression
­esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells by upregulating
IGFBP-3. J Transl Med. 10:249.
45.	 Chen B, Pogue BW, Hoopes PJ, Hasan T. Vascular and cellular targeting for photodynamic therapy. Crit Rev Eukaryot
Gene Expr. 2006; 16:279–305.
46.	 Chen B, Pogue BW, Luna JM, Hardman RL, Hoopes PJ,
Hasan T. Tumor vascular permeabilization by vasculartargeting photosensitization: effects, mechanism, and therapeutic implications. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:917–923.
47.	 Chin WW, Heng PW, Bhuvaneswari R, Lau WK, Olivo M.
The potential application of chlorin e6-polyvinylpyrrolidone

13504

Oncotarget

formulation in photodynamic therapy. Photochem Photobiol
Sci. 2006; 5:1031–1037.

prognostic indicators of survival. Clin Cancer Res. 1998;
4:241–249.

48.	 Chin WW, Heng PW, Olivo M. Chlorin e6 polyvinylpyrrolidone mediated photosensitization is
­
­effective against human non-small cell lung carcinoma
compared to small cell lung carcinoma xenografts. BMC
Pharmacol. 2007; 7:15.

55.	 Wong TW, Tracy E, Oseroff AR, Baumann H.
Photodynamic therapy mediates immediate loss of cellular responsiveness to cytokines and growth factors. Cancer
Res. 2003; 63:3812–3818.
56.	 Liu W, Oseroff AR, Baumann H. Photodynamic therapy
causes cross-linking of signal transducer and activator
of transcription proteins and attenuation of interleukin-6
­cytokine responsiveness in epithelial cells. Cancer Res.
2004; 64:6579–6587.

49.	 Milas L, Mason K, Hunter N, Petersen S, Yamakawa M,
Ang K, Mendelsohn J, Fan Z. In vivo enhancement of tumor
radioresponse by C225 antiepidermal growth factor receptor
antibody. Clin Cancer Res. 2000; 6:701–708.
50.	 Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, Azarnia N, Shin DM,
Cohen RB, Jones CU, Sur R, Raben D, Jassem J, Ove R,
Kies MS, Baselga J, Youssoufian H, Amellal N, Rowinsky EK,
et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 2006; 354:567–578.

57.	 Crombet T, Osorio M, Cruz T, Roca C, del Castillo R,
Mon  R, Iznaga-Escobar N, Figueredo R, Koropatnick J,
Renginfo E, Fernandez E, Alvarez D, Torres O, Ramos M,
Leonard I, Perez R, et al. Use of the humanized anti-­
epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody
h-R3 in combination with radiotherapy in the treatment
of locally advanced head and neck cancer patients. J Clin
Oncol. 2004; 22:1646–1654.

51.	 Huang Y, Yu T, Fu X, Chen J, Liu Y, Li C, Xia Y, Zhang Z,
Li L. EGFR inhibition prevents in vitro tumor growth of salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma. BMC Cell Biol. 2013; 14:13.

58.	 Chang SS, Califano J. Current status of biomarkers in head
and neck cancer. J Surg Oncol. 2008; 97:640–643.

52.	 Martinez-Carpio PA, Trelles MA. The role of epidermal
growth factor receptor in photodynamic therapy: a review
of the literature and proposal for future investigation. Lasers
Med Sci. 2010; 25:767–771.

59.	 Chauhan VP, Stylianopoulos T, Boucher Y, Jain RK.
Delivery of molecular and nanoscale medicine to tumors:
transport barriers and strategies. Annu Rev Chem Biomol
Eng. 2:281–298.

53.	 Diaz Miqueli A, Rolff J, Lemm M, Fichtner I, Perez R,
Montero E. Radiosensitisation of U87MG brain tumours
by anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal
­antibodies. Br J Cancer. 2009; 100:950–958.

60.	 Lu J, Liong M, Li Z, Zink JI, Tamanoi F. Biocompatibility,
biodistribution, and drug-delivery efficiency of mesoporous
silica nanoparticles for cancer therapy in animals. Small.
2014; 6:1794–1805.

54.	 Fontanini G, De Laurentiis M, Vignati S, Chine S,
Lucchi M, Silvestri V, Mussi A, De Placido S, Tortora G,
Bianco AR, Gullick W, Angeletti CA, Bevilacqua G,
Ciardiello F. Evaluation of epidermal growth factor-related
growth factors and receptors and of neoangiogenesis in
completely resected stage I-IIIA non-small-cell lung ­cancer:
amphiregulin and microvessel count are independent

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61.	 Zhao KL, Hu XC, Wu XH, Fu XL, Fan M, Jiang GL.
A phase I dose escalation study of Nimotuzumab in
­combination with concurrent chemoradiation for patients
with locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of
­esophagus. Invest New Drugs. 30:1585–1590.

13505

Oncotarget

