www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 5), pp: 8436-8446
Research Paper

MRTF-A can activate Nrf2 to increase the resistance to
doxorubicin
Yao Xu1,*, Ying Luo1,*, Zhen-yu Wang1, Xi Li1, Peng Zheng1, Tong-cun Zhang1,2
1

Institute of Biology and Medicine, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430065, China

2

Key Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Ministry of Education and Tianjin City, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University
of Science and Technology, Tianjin, 300457, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Tong-cun Zhang, email: zhangtongcun@wust.edu.cn
Keywords: MRTF-A, Nrf2, hela, drug resistance
Received: June 21, 2016     Accepted: December 01, 2016     Published: December 27, 2016

ABSTRACT
Chemotherapeutic drugs resistance was considered to be the major obstacle for
cancer therapy. MRTF-A, co-activators of serum response factor (SRF), promoted tumor
cell invasion and metastasis in cancer. So far there has been no relevant reports about
MRTF-A’ role in tumor chemotherapy. Here, we reported that MRTF-A overexpression
conferred resistance to doxorubicin mediated apoptosis by significantly increasing the
expression of Nrf2 which was an important molecule associated with the resistance
of anticancer drugs. If MRTF-A was knocked down, could the corresponding results be
obtained? Moreover, we showed that overexpression MRTF-A had no remarkable effect
to doxorubicin mediated apoptosis in cancer cells when knocking down Nrf2. Further
studies showed that MRTF-A regulated the transcriptional activity of Nrf2 by forming
a complex with SRF binding to the CarG box which existed on Nrf2 promoter region.
On the whole, our study revealed a novel possible resistant pathway to doxorubicin.

chemoprevention of diseases, including cancer. In
addition, evidence has accumulated that Nrf2 can increase
the tolerance of tumor cells to anticancer drugs [6].
MRTF-A is always thought to be a transcription
factor that has a favorable effect on cancer cell migration.
While there is little research on the relationship between
MRTF-A and drug resistance. In addition, it is well known
that MRTF-A regulates the transcription by binding to
the CarG box in the promoter of the downstream target
gene. Fortunately, we find a CarG box in the promoter of
Nrf2. This may suggest that MRTF-A is likely to be able
to regulate Nrf2 and thus affect drug resistance. In this
paper, we focus on exploring the relationship between
MRTF-A and Nrf2, and how the two factors influence drug
resistance.

INTRODUCTION
Cervical cancer is one of the most frequent malignant
and also the third most common cancer tumors in women
with the 5-year survival rate is 69% [1]. Traditional
treatment strategies for locally advanced cervical cancer
include radical surgery and/or radiotherapy. However,
most patients with advanced or metastatic lesions are not
amenable to surgery or irradiation and can be treated only
by systemic chemotherapy. Chemotherapy, however, is
often prematurely discontinued because of drug toxicity
and related side effects. Moreover, the prognosis of
advanced or bulky tumors remains very poor [2–4].
Doxorubicin, due to its potency against solid tumors, is a
commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment
of cervical carcinoma. While drug tolerance is an
inevitable problem in recent years despite the application
of the combined medication [5]. This article focuses on the
possible drug resistance pathway to doxorubicin.
Nrf2, one important factor has an important role
in the protection of cell and tissue. Primarily defending
cells against metabolic, xenobiotic and oxidative
stress, Nrf2 is essential for maintaining tissue integrity.
So Nrf2 is regarded as a promising drug target in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
MRTF-A could promote the resistance to
doxorubicin and the expression of Nrf2
Five kinds of tumor cells were used to evaluate the
levels of endogenous MRTF-A, in which there were three
kinds of MRTF-A positive cells and two kinds of negative
8436

Oncotarget

cells being detected (Supplementary Figure 1A). And the
highest level of MRTF-A was expressed in hela cells in
this five kinds of tumor cells. To evaluate the relationship
between MRTF-A and drug resistance, the plasmids of
pcDNA3.1-MRTF-A, no target shRNA and three groups
of pLKO.1-shMRTF-A were constructed. The function
of these plasmids was tested in hela cells (Supplementary
Figure 1B-1C). Because of there was no difference in
protein expression in the group of no transfection cells
and cells transfected with plasmid skeleton or no target
shRNA. The group of no transfection cells could be used
as control. And the pLKO.1-shMRTF-A3 was chosen to
do the subsequent experiments (Supplementary Figure
1C). In Supplementary Figure 2, a surprising result
camed out that the resistance to doxorubicin in five kinds
of cancer cells was positively related to the MRTF-A level.
To illustrate whether Nrf2 was activated and the relation
between Nrf2 and MRTF-A in different tumor cells, we
made MRTF-A overexpress (MRTF-A group) and knock
down (shMRTF-A group). Within 24h of doxorubicin
hydrochloride (Dox) treatment, we used PCR and western
blot technology to test the mRNA level of Nrf2 as well
as protein. Interestingly, when the expression of MRTF-A
raised, we found the level of Nrf2 was significantly
increased compared with the control group (Figure 1).
However, when knocked down the endogenous MRTF-A,
PCR and western blots assay showed the expression of
Nrf2 was significantly decreased compared with the
control group (Figure 1). These results revealed that
MRTF-A can promote the resistance to doxorubicin and
the expression of Nrf2 in this five kinds of tumor cells.

2μM of Dox treatment, the total percentage of early and
late apoptotic cells were 25±0.9452% in case of hela cells
treated with pcDNA3.1-MRTF-A. And the control was
38.17±1.357%. When knocking down the expression of
MRTF-A, the total percentage of early and late apoptotic
cells were 50.87±1.167%. While the apoptosis rate in
the control was 34.40±0.7906%. Both of TUNEL assay
and Flow cytometry assay showed that the percentage of
apoptotic cells induced by Dox treatment was significantly
increased in the shMRTF-A group compared with control
group. While, the MRTF-A group did the opposite, the
number of apoptotic cells was decreased. These results
indicated that MRTF-A was resistant to the Dox-induced
apoptosis of hela cell. All the groups were treated with
2μM doxorubicin.

MRTF-A activated the expression of Nrf2 target
genes to prevented apoptosis
Nrf2 and some of its downstream target genes
formed a signaling pathway regulating drug resistance.
Functional activation or inhibition of this signaling
pathway with/without MRTF-A in response to doxorubicin
was evident and showed in Figure 3. As shown in Figure
3A, the mRNA expression of HO-1 and NQO1 was upregulated significantly in the MRTF-A group compared
with the control group. However, the shMRTF-A group
showed the opposite result. In contrast to the control
group, the mRNA level of HO-1 and NQO1 were
decreased. Then we investigated Bcl-2, Caspase-3 mRNA
and protein levels by PCR and western blot analysis. As
shown in Figure 3B-3D, Bcl-2 decreased significantly
in the MRTF-A group compared to those in the control
group. But the result of caspase-3 shows opposite. To
further confirmed anti-apoptotic effects of MRTF-A, we
conducted an immunofluorescence analysis for caspase-3.
The results of MRTF-A group and shMRTF-A group
compared to the control were consistent with the previous
(Figure 3E).

MRTF-A could inhibit the apoptosis induced by
doxorubicin
It was worth noting that, no matter in the positive
cells or the negative cells above showed a same trend in
the resistance to doxorubicin as well as the expression
of Nrf2 when MRTF-A overexpressed or knocked
down (Supplementary Figure 2). So we chose hela
cells as a representative to carry out the next phase of
the experiments, because it had the highest level of
MRTF-A in these five kinds of cells. All of the above
tests preliminarily showed that MRTF-A was positively
correlated with drug resistance to doxorubicin. In order
to further confirm this resistance, TUNEL assay and Flow
cytometry assay were used. The TUNEL assay showed a
lower apoptosis rate (24.4±2.2%) in the MRTF-A group
vs control (52.0±2.7%) after treated with Dox 24h. In
addition shMRTF-A group revealed a higher apoptosis
rate (71.5±3.2%) vs control (Figure 2A, 2B). At the same
time, flow cytometry with FITC-conjugated Annexin V
and PI staining was also used to detect the apoptotic cells
(Figure 2C). The AnnexinV positive/PI negative cells and
Annexin V positive/PI positive cells were considered as
early and late apoptotic cells, respectively. Within 24h of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MRTF-A affected resistance to the doxorubicin
by adjusting the Nrf2
The above results confirmed that MRTF-A could
activate Nrf2 and its downstream genes. Whether it
was true that MRTF-A affected resistance through the
regulation of Nrf2? The function of no target shRNA and
shNrf2 plasmids were tested in hela cells (Figure 4A4B). Because of there was no difference in mRNA and
protein expression in the group of no transfection cells
and cells transfected with plasmid skeleton or no target
shRNA. The group of no transfection cells could be used
as control. Firstly 2μg shNrf2 was tansfected to hela cells
(shNrf2 group). Then we tansfected 2μg MRTF-A to the
above hela cells and the normal hela cells as control.
Flow cytometry with FITC-conjugated Annexin V and
8437

Oncotarget

PI staining was used to detect the apoptotic cells (Figure
4C). Annexin-V/PI double staining assays showed the
percentage of apoptotic cells induced by doxorubicin
treatment had no significant difference between the two
groups (39.0±1.435% vs 43.12±0.8206%) (Figure 4D).
To further prove our conjecture, we used PCR technology

to test mRNA levels’ change of HO-1, NQO1, Bcl-2 and
Caspase-3. At the same time, western blot was also used
to detect the protein level of Bcl-2 and Caspase-3. The
results confirmed that, when the Nrf2 was knocked down,
MRTF-A can’t regulate the drug resistance in doxorubicin-

Figure 1: MRTF-A could promote the resistance to doxorubicin and the expression of Nrf2. Realtime RT-PCR was

performed to quantitatively measure the mRNA level of MRTF-A and Nrf2. n≥3; *, P < 0.05, **, P< 0.01 vs control cells A, D, G, J. and
M. Western blotting assay for MRTF-A and Nrf2 B, E, H, K. and N. The figure is representative of at least three independent experiments,
and the graphs C, F, I, L. and O. reveal the densitometric quantification of these experiments (*, P < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8438

Oncotarget

Figure 2: MRTF-A could inhibit the apoptosis induced by doxorubicin. A. Four different groups of hela cells (untreated group,

control group, MRTF-A group and shMRTF-A group) were detected by TUNEL assay treated with 2μM doxorubicin for 24h. The cells
in untreated group were normal hela cells without treated with doxorubicin and tansfection. B. The apoptosis rates of four different group
hela cells were calculated by TUNEL assay. C. The effect of MRTF-A on apoptosis of hela cells leading by doxorubicin was determined
via Annexin-V/PI double staining assays. The upper right quadrant and lower right quadrant indicated apoptosis cells. D. Analysis of
percentage of apoptotic cells in the flow cytometry experiment. The apoptosis ratio is presented as a result of early-stage and advanced
stage apoptosis. All experiments were repeated at three times, the reprentative images was chosen for presentation (*, p<0.05 compared
with control).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8439

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

treated hela cells (Figure 4E-4H). This is consistent with
results of previous Flow cytometry.

Chemotherapy was one of the important means
for the treatment of cancer. And resistance was a major
obstacle hindering the effect of chemotherapy, which
related to many kinds of cancer drugs used commonly in
the clinical. In recent years, the research progress in the
mechanism of multidrug resistance of cancer was more
concentrated in the aspects of drug transport pump and cell
apoptosis. However more important information should
be gained through the study of cancer drug resistance
mechanisms to help patients overcome drug resistance and
improve the effectiveness of cancer chemotherapy, while
helping to find more effective anti-cancer target molecules.
A large number of studies showed that Nrf2 was an
important molecule associated with the drug resistance of
anticancer drugs. In different cancer cells, the mutation
of Nrf2 and/or Nrf2-associated inhibitors Keap1 made the
increase of Nrf2 [7–10]. The mechanism of drug resistance
of Nrf2 was as follows: Nrf2 as a nuclear transcription
factor transported into the nucleus and binding to the
AREs sequence, activating the molecules downstream,

MRTF-A effected the Nrf2 expression through
binding to the CarG box of Nrf2 promoter
Previous reports had confirmed that MRTF-A
played a regulatory role on downstream target genes
through binding to the CarG box. Exactly there was one
potential CarG box on Nrf2 promoter region. Then the
effect of MRTF-A on the transcriptional activity of Nrf2
was analyzed by luciferase assay. The results prompted
that the transcriptional activity of Nrf2 promoter could
be up-regulated by MRTF-A (Figure 5A). However,
the Nrf2 transcriptional activity was not affected with a
mutated CarG box (Figure 5B). The results might indicate
MRTF-A affected the Nrf2 transcriptional activity through
binding to the CarG box. To further tested the mechanism
of this regulation, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) to investigate in normal hela cells. Datas showed
that MRTF-A could be combined with CarG box,
consistent with results of luciferase assay (Figure 5C).

Figure 3: MRTF-A activated the expression of Nrf2 target genes to prevented apoptosis. A, B. HO-1, NQO-1, Bcl-2

and Caspase-3 expression levels (relative to that of GAPDH) were individually determined by real-time RT-PCR. n≥3; *, P < 0.05 vs
control cells; Verification of Bcl-2 and Caspase-3 expression by Western blot C, D. The significantly change of HO-1, NQO-1, Bcl-2 and
Caspase-3 protein levels vs GAPDH. n≥3; *, P < 0.05 vs control cells; The expression and location of caspase-3 was detected by cellular
immunofluorescence E. All the control cells were no transfected cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8440

Oncotarget

Figure 4: MRTF-A affected resistance of hela to the doxorubicin by adjusting the Nrf2. A, B. The effection of shNrf2

was identified by real-time RT-PCR and Western blot. n≥3; *, P < 0.05 vs control cells; The speculation whether the role of MRTF-A
was achieved through the Nrf2 was proved by Flow cytometry C, D. real-time RT-PCR E, F. and Western blot G, H. (C) Flow cytometry
to detect the number of apoptotic cells; (D) was a quantitative analysis to the result of flow cytometry. n≥3; The levels of these markers
downstream were detected by real-time RT-PCR (E, F) and Western blot (G, H). n≥3. All the control cells were no transfected cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8441

Oncotarget

such as antioxidant molecules, detoxification protein and
inhibiting cell apoptosis (Bcl-2) and multidrug resistance
drug associated protein (MRP), and then participated in
the oxidative stress reaction to make cancer cells resistant
to drugs [11–13]. Nrf2 and drug resistance related studies
had been developed rapidly, but we knew little about
the relationship between MRTF-A and drug resistance.
MRTF-A was generally considered to have a wide range
of effects on cell growth, migration, differentiation, and
apoptosis [14–15]. It could form a complex with SRF
protein then regulated the transcription of downstream
target genes by binding to highly conserved cis regulatory
element CC (AT) 6GG (CarG box) in the promoters of
target genes [17–19]. According to this, we analyzed the
sequence of Nrf2 promoter. Luckily, we found a CarG
box. Then we performed MRTF-A over expression and
silence in hela cells, to observe the level of endogenous
Nrf2. It was exciting to find that the expression of Nrf2
was positively correlated with the level of MRTF-A. At
this point we had reason to believe that MRTF-A could

affect the drug resistance. And the following experiments
confirmed our speculation.
We found that the sensitivity of tumor cells
with MRTF-A over expression to doxorubicin was
significantly lower than that of normal tumor cells, and
the up-regulation of anti-apoptotic genes and genes about
drug resistance were also observed. However, when
MRTF-A was disturbed, the above tendency was the
opposite. All these showed that MRTF-A could increase
the resistance of tumor cells. While this effection of
MRTF-A was certainly achieved through regulating Nrf2?
Whether there also existed other factors downstream of
MRTF-A enhancing this resistance? So we conducted
a new experiment. We firstly silenced Nrf2 and then
transfected MRTF-A, observing the sensitivity of tumor
cells to doxorubicin. It was interesting that we found
MRTF-A induced drug resistance disappeared. This
showed that the drug tolerance caused by MRTF-A was
directly achieved through the regulation of Nrf2. To
address how MRTF-A regulated Nrf2 transcription, we

Figure 5: MRTF-A effected the Nrf2 expression through binding to the CarG box of Nrf2 promoter. The promoter region

of Nrf2 was inserted into pGL-3(Nrf2-luc), and point mutation of Nrf2 promoter region was constructed by circular PCR(mut-Nrf2-luc).
For transfection experiments, the Cos-7 cells were transfected with 0.8 μg MRTF-A and 0.2 μg Nrf2-luc or mut-Nrf2-luc. Luciferase assay
was performed (*, P<0.05, n=3) A. and B. The vector pcDNA3.1 alone was used as a negative control. C. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay was used to determine whether MRTF-A can change Nrf2 transcriptional activity through binding on CarG box.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8442

Oncotarget

Table 1: Real-time PCR primer sequences
Genes
GAPDH

Primers for qRT-RCR
F:TCAAGAAGGTGGTGAAGCAG
R:AGGTGGAGGAGTGGGTGTCG

Nrf2

F:AGTCAGCGACGGAAAGAGTA
R:CTGGGAGTAGTTGGCAGATC

MRTF-A

F:AAGGAACCACCTGGCTATGA
R:CTCCGCTCTGAATGAGAATGT

HO-1

F:TGACACCAAGGACCAGAGC
R:CATCGGAGAAGCGGAGC

NQO1

F:GAAGAAACGCCTGGAGAATA
R:CTGGTTGTCAGTTGGGATGG

Bcl-2

F: GCCTTCTTTGAGTTCG
R: CCCAGCCTCCGTTAT

Caspase-3

F: TGGTTCATCCAGTCGCTTTG
R: ATTCTGTTGCCACCTTTCG

constructed Nrf2 promoter luciferase reporter plasmid,
which contained CarG box, and investigated the effect of
MRTF-A on Nrf2 transcription. MRTF-A promoted target
genes transcription driven by serum response factor (SRF),
which recognizes CarG box DNA sequence in target genes
promoter. The results showed that MRTF-A enhanced
transcription of Nrf2. But when CarG box was mutated,
the effect was gone. This meant that MRTF-A regulated
the transcriptional activity of Nrf2 by complex with SRF
binding to the CarG box. Chip assay also confirmed the
above statement.
In summary, our study provided some evidence
that MRTF-A could significantly increase the tolerance
of tumor cells to doxorubicin. And this effect was
achieved by adjusting Nrf2. Loss of function of Nrf2
strongly inhibited MRTF-A increasing the tolerance to
doxorubicin. Furthermore, reporter assays with Nrf2
promoter indicated that MRTF-A could synergistically
activate Nrf2 transcription and enhance the mRNA level
of Nrf2. In addition, chip assay demonstrated MRTF-A
promoted the transactivity of Nrf2 by the formation of the
MRTF-A/SRF/CarG complex. These findings revealed a
new possible transcription factors signaling pathway of the
tolerance to doxorubicin. We hoped this work could be
useful to the future researches about tumor drug resistance.

(ATCC, Number HTB-26™), HepG2 (ATCC, Number
HB-8065™) and Hela (ATCC, Number PTA-5659)
were seeded in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s mediumhigh glucose (DMEM-HG, Hyclone Co.) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, GIBCO) at 37°C in
humified air with 5% CO2. HCT-116 (ATCC, Number
CCL-247™) and HT-29 (ATCC, Number HTB-38™) were
seeded in McCoy's 5a Medium (Boster) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, GIBCO) at 37°C in
humified air with 5% CO2. Cos-7 cells (ATCC, Number
CRL-1651) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium-low glucose (DMEM-LG, Hyclone Co.)
containing 10% FBS (GIBCO).

Cell transfection
For transfection experiments, the cancer cells
were cultured in growth medium without antibiotics at
60% confluence for 2 days, and then transfected with
transfection reagent (FuGENE® HD, Roche) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. After incubation for 6h, the
medium was removed and replaced with normal culture
medium for 24h. For immunocytochemistry assay, cancer
cells were cultured in 24-well plate and 2μg DNA was
added to each well of a 24-well plate. For qRT-PCR assay,
cancer cells were cultured in 6-well plate and 4μg DNA
was needed in each well. For western blotting, cancer cells
were cultured in 6-well plate and 4μg DNA is needed in
each well. Then, the immunocytochemistry assay, PCR,
luciferase analysis and western blotting were performed
as follows described.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
All tumor cells used in this study were obtained from
America Type Culture Collection. MDA-MB-231 cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8443

Oncotarget

Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and quantitative real-time RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR)

collected. The collected cells were washed with PBS,
resuspended in binding buffer, and stained with Annexin
V-PE (FITC) and 7-AAD (PI) for 15 minutes according
to the manufacturer’s protocol from Becton Dickinson.
Fluorescence was estimated with a Becton Dickinson flow
cytometer.

Total RNA was isolated from cells using Trizol
reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad/CA), and two microgram
of the sample were reverse-transcribed using M-MLV
reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison/WI). Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used
as an internal control to show equal loading of the cDNA
samples. Real-time PCR was performed in an Applied
Biosystems Step One™ Real-Time PCR System. Fast
SYBR® Green Master Mix was obtained from Applied
Biosystems. Data were shown as relative expression level
after being normalized by GAPDH. The primers for the
PCR analysis are listed in Table 1.

Immunocytochemistry assay
The cells after treatment were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 15 min and then blocked with
normal goat serum for 20 min at room temperature (RT).
After incubation with primary antibodies ( mouse anticaspase-3, Santa Cruz) in a humid chamber overnight,
cells were incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated goat antimouse IgG for 30 min at 37°C. mouse anti-caspase-3 IgG
diluted 1:200 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), whereas
FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG diluted 1:100 in
PBS. After washing with PBS, the samples were observed
under laser scanning confocal microscope (OLYMPUS,
Japan).

Protein extraction and western blotting
Proteins prepared were separated by SDS-PAGE and
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes
were immunoblotted with rabbit anti-MRTF-A(Santa cruz),
rabbit anti-Nrf2(Santa cruz), mouse anti-Bcl-2(Santa cruz),
mouse anti-caspase-3(Santa cruz) antibodies overnight at
4°C, and then incubated with IRDyeTM-800 conjugated
anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratories) for 30 min at RT. The
specific proteins were visualized by Odyssey Infrared
Imaging System (Gene Company Limited). GAPDH
expression was used as an internal control to show equal
loading of the protein samples.

Luciferase constructs, site-mutation, and
luciferase assay
Nrf2-luc: Nrf2 5'-flanking region (−2196/0) was
fused to pGL-3 luciferase coding sequence. Mut-Nrf2luc: equal to pGL-3-Nrf2, except that MRTF-A binding
CarG box site was mutated from TCATATTTGG to
TCATATTTAA. The cells (2 × 105/well) were plated in
twenty -four-well plates. Cos-7 cells were cotransfected
with MRTF-A expression plasmids (pcDNA3.1-MRTF-A)
or control vector (pcDNA3.1) in combination with Nrf2luc, or mut-Nrf2-luc. Cells were harvested 24 h after
transfection and luciferase activity was measured using the
Dual luciferase Assay System (Promega, Madison/WI).
Results were expressed as a fold induction relative to the
cells transfected with the control vector (pcDNA3.1) after
normalization to renilla activity. In the result of the dual
luciferaseassay, all columns represent the mean result of
three independent experiments and the error bars represent
the standard deviation.

MTT assay
Cell growth was estimated by a modified MTT assay.
As a measurement of cell growth, the cells were seeded
onto 96 well dish and grown in medium containing10%
FBS. After the cells were treated daily with Dox (0.1, 0.25,
0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32μM) for 24 h, the MTT reagent (2.5
mg/mL) was added and the optical density (570 nM) was
measured by ELISA reader.

Detection of DNA fragmentation by TUNEL
method
DNA fragmentation was detected by the DeadEnd™
Fluorometric TUNEL System (Promega) as described
previously [19]. The TUNEL reaction was performed
according to the manufacturer's instructions. For negative
controls, TdT enzyme was not included in the incubation
buffer. The apoptotic index was quantified by calculating
the number of positive TUNEL cells from 1000 cells in
five different microscopic fields.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
We used a commercial chip assay kit (Upstate
Biotechnology, Waltham, USA) by following the
manufacturer’s instructions. After the treatment, each
test team incubated with 1% formaldehyde to cross-link
DNA–protein complexes. After washing with ice-cold
PBS for three times, cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer.
Then lysate was sonicated to shear DNA to 200~1000
bp fragments. Then we use an anti-MRTF-A antibody
to immunoprecipitate the cross-linked protein at 4 °C
overnight. IgG acted as the negative control. The DNA

Annexin V assay of cell apoptosis
Cells were cultured in six-well plates and were
treated with the indicated compounds, trypsinized and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8444

Oncotarget

was used as a template for PCR and utilized the MRTF-A
binding sites. The PCR products were separated on 1%
agarose gel. The PCR primer sequences was as follow
: forward5′- GGAGCCTGTAAATCTGT -3′, reverse
5′-GACTGCATTCTGGACTAT -3′.

6.	 Claudia Geismann, Alexander Arlt, Susanne Sebens,
Heiner Schäfer. Cytoprotection “gone astray”: Nrf2
and its role in cancer. Onco Targets Therapy. 2014;
7:1497-1518.
7.	 Tsutomu Ohta,Kumiko Iijima, Mamiko Miyamoto,
Izumi Nakahara, Hiroshi Tanaka, Makiko Ohtsuji,
Takafumi Suzuki, Akira Kobayashi, Jun Yokota, Tokuki
Sakiyama,Tatsuhiro Shibata, Masayuki Yamamoto and
Setsuo Hirohashi. Loss of Keap1 function activates Nrf2
and provides advantages for lung cancer cell growth.
Cancer research. 2008; 68:1303-1309.

Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as mean ± SD, accompanied by
the number of experiments performed independently, and
analyzed by t-test. Differences at P<0.05 were considered
statistically significant.

8.	 Tatsuhiro Shibata, Tsutomu Ohta, Kit I. Tong, Akiko
Kokubu, Reiko Odogawa, Koji Tsuta, Hisao Asamura,
Masayuki Yamamoto, Setsuo Hirohashi. Cancer
related mutations in NRF2 impair its recognition
by Keap1-Cul3 E3 ligase and promote malignancy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2008;
105:13568-13573.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was financially supported by the
Wuhan University of Science, Technology school
fund (No.2015XZ050) and National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No.31570764).

9.	 Ian M. Copple, Adam Lister, Akua D. Obeng, Neil R.
Kitteringham, Rosalind E. Jenkins, Robert Layfield, Brian
J. Foster, Christopher E. Goldring, B. Kevin Park. Physical
and functional interaction of sequestosome 1 with Keap1
regulates the Keap1-Nrf2 cell defense pathway. Journal of
Biological Chemistry. 2010; 285:16782-16788.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

10.	 Hozumi Motohashi, Tania O'Connor, Fumiki Katsuoka,
James Douglas Engel, Masayuki Yamamoto. Integration and
diversity of the regulatory network composed of Maf and
CNC families of transcription factors. Gene. 2002; 294:1-12.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11-30.

11.	 Suryakant K. Niture, Anil K. Jaiswal. Nrf2-induced
antiapoptotic Bcl-xL protein enhances cell survival and
drug resistance. Free Radical Biology and Medicine. 2013;
57:119-131.

2.	 Gary L. Eddy, Brian N. Bundy, William T. Creasman,
Nick M. Spirtos, Robert S. Mannel, Edward Hannigan,
Dennis O’Connor. Treatment of (“bulky”) stage IB
cervical cancer with or without neoadjuvant vincristine
and cisplatin prior to radical hysterectomy and pelvic/
para-aortic lymphadenectomy:a phase III trial of the
gynecologic oncology group. Gynecologic oncology. 2007;
106:362-369.

12.	 Suryakant K. Niture, Anil K. Jaiswal. Nrf2 protein
up-regulates antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 and prevents
cellular apoptosis. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2012;
287:9873-9886.
13.	 Leah C. Young, Barbara G. Campling, Susan P.
C. Cole, Roger G. Deeley, James H. Gerlach. Multidrug
Resistance Proteins MRP3, MRP1, and MRP2 in Lung
Cancer Correlation of Protein Levels with Drug Response
and Messenger RNA Levels. Clinical Cancer Research.
2001; 7:1798-1804.

3.	 Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy for Locally Advanced
Cervical Cancer Meta-analysis Collaboration. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of individual patient
data from 21 randomised trials. European journal of cancer
(Oxford, England: 1990). 2003; 39:2470.

14.	 Da-Zhi Wang, Priscilla S. Chang, Zhigao Wang, Lillian
Sutherland, James A. Richardson, Eric Small, Paul A.
Krieg, Eric N. Olson. Activation of cardiac gene expression
by myocardin, a transcriptional cofactor for serum response
factor. Cell. 2001; 105:851-862.

4.	 Jeong-Hoon Bae, Sung-Jong Lee, Ahwon Lee, YongGyu Park, Seog-Nyeon Bae, Jong-Sup Park, Sung-Eun
Namkoong. Neoadjuvant cisplatin and etoposide followed
by radical hysterectomy for stage 1B–2B cervical cancer.
Gynecologic oncology. 2008; 111:444-448.

15.	 Bo Cen, Ahalya Selvaraj, Rebecca C. Burgess, Johann
K. Hitzler, Zhigui Ma, Stephan W. Morris, Ron Prywes.
Megakaryoblastic leukemia 1, a potent transcriptional
coactivator for serum response factor (SRF), is required for
serum induction of SRF target genes. Molecular and cellular
biology. 2003; 23:6597-6608.

5.	 Robert O. Dillman, Duane E. Johnson, Daniel L. Shawler,
James A. Koziol. Superiority of an acid-labile daunorubicinmonoclonal antibody immunoconjugate compared to free
drug. Cancer research. 1988; 48:6097-6102.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8445

Oncotarget

16.	 Kevin L. Du, Mary Chen, Jian Li, John J. Lepore, Patricia
Mericko, Michael S. Parmacek. Megakaryoblastic leukemia
factor-1 transduces cytoskeletal signals and induces
smooth muscle cell differentiation from undifferentiated
embryonic stem cells. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
2004; 279:17578-17586.

18.	 Francesc Miralles, Guido Posern, Alexia-Ileana
Zaromytidou, Richard Treisman. Actin dynamics control
SRF activity by regulation of its coactivator MAL. Cell.
2003; 113:329-342.
19.	 Y Gavrieli, Y Sherman, S A Ben-Sasson. Identification
of programmed cell death in situ via specific labeling of
nuclear DNA fragmentation. The Journal of cell biology.
1992; 119:493-501.

17.	 Ahalya Selvaraj, Ron Prywes. Megakaryoblastic
leukemia-1/2, a transcriptional co-activator of serum
response factor, is required for skeletal myogenic
differentiation. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2003;
278:41977-41987.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8446

Oncotarget

