But for every successful cancer drug, there are many more
promising drugs that ultimately fail. One recent example was
the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor iniparib. It
received some buzz” at the 2009 American Society of Clinical
Oncology meeting; however, although it showed promising
results in a phase 2 study of patients with triple-negative breast
cancer, it ultimately failed to do so in an expanded phase 3
study.3 Later, it failed to demonstrate signiﬁcant results in a
phase 3 trial of patients with squamous non-small cell lung
cancer and a phase 2 trial in patients with platinum-resistant
ovarian cancer.
Nevertheless, the pharmaceutical industry refers to such
disappointments as “so-called” failures. “Behind every medicine,
there are a lot of others that don’t make it, but we call them ‘socalled’ failures because they inform future studies and research
eﬀorts and lead to improved patient outcomes,” says Holly
Campbell, director of communications for the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA). “Scientists
learn something from every failure that they can take into future
trials of future medicines.” She points to a recent PhRMA report
showing that there are currently 771 cancer medicines in the
research pipeline, 80% of which have the potential to be “ﬁrstin-class” drugs as deﬁned by the FDA.
Although the pharmaceutical industry may view their
research process as “trial and error,” many patients and
physicians want to see faster, more substantial progress. Industry
is motivated to get as many drugs approved by the FDA and
onto the market as quickly as possible, whereas academia has
a diﬀerent focus, says Dr. Venook. “We need to have clinically
meaningful endpoints,” says Dr. Venook.
Other researchers agree. “You can have a result that is
statistically valid—a 1.4-month survival advantage—but
the overwhelming majority of patients will say that’s really
discouraging and disappointing,” says Antonio Tito Fojo, MD,
PhD, senior investigator of the genitourinary malignancies
branch of the National Cancer Institute.

Finding Solutions
Just as the reasons for failures of trials are complex, so are the
potential solutions. And there are glimmers of hope, experts say.
Dr. Amiri-Kordestani notes that in 2014, the FDA approved 41
new agents for all types of diseases compared with an average of
25 new agents per year over the past decade. Part of that increase
is due to new FDA programs, such as the breakthrough therapies
designation, which aims to get promising drugs approved sooner
based on encouraging results in phase 2 trials. “The traditional
phase 1, 2, 3 development strategy in oncology is becoming less

common,” she says, noting how targeted therapies are changing
the clinical trials landscape.
In 2012, the FDA published a draft guidance for industry
called “Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials” to support
approvals of drugs. Indeed, the research community is now
more focused on enriching patient populations that will clearly
respond to speciﬁc drugs as well as on adaptive trial designs, such
as the I-SPY 2 trial for breast cancer, that build on knowledge
learned along the way to develop drugs that are eﬀective in
speciﬁc populations.
One key solution in generating signiﬁcant results is to
undertake smaller trials with fewer patients, several scientists

It’s not that we don’t know how
to design the studies; we don’t
have good enough drugs, and we
need them to target good biomarkers.
We underestimate cancer.
—Alan Venook, MD
say. “In phase 3 trials with 600 to 700 patients enrolled, you’ll
be able to ﬁnd small beneﬁts,” says Dr. Fojo. “But to me, the
answer is very simple. You have to run smaller trials, and if there
is not a large diﬀerence, it will not be statistically valid, and you
can move on.”
He argues for randomized trials with 250 patients (125 in
each arm) in order to truly show a signiﬁcant beneﬁt of the drug.
Although pharmaceutical companies are unlikely to launch these
types of trials, a robust National Cancer Institute cooperative
group clinical trials system could take that lead, Dr. Fojo says.
Dr. Brufsky agrees, noting the importance of getting “a little
less restrictive” on exclusion criteria for speciﬁc patients while at
the same time making the trials biologically more restrictive to
conduct trials faster with smaller numbers of patients.
Focusing on conducting greater numbers of small trials
would be the way to “ferret out the winners and losers much,
much earlier,” Dr. Fojo adds. “Instead of 1 trial with 1500
patients, I’d rather have 6, 250-patient trials. That’s 6 shots on
goal rather than 1.”

References
1. Amiri-Kordestani L, Fojo T. Why do phase III clinical trials in oncology fail so
often? J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:568-569.
2. DiMasi JA, Reichert JM, Feldman L, Malins A. Clinical approval success rates
for investigational cancer drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;9:329-335.
3. Sinha G. Downfall of iniparib: a PARP inhibitor that doesn’t inhibit PARP after
all. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106:djt447.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28994

New Treatments Highlighted for Lymphoma and Multiple Myeloma

N

ew treatment combinations and targeted therapies for
lymphoma and multiple myeloma were unveiled in studies
presented at the American Society of Hematology Annual
Meeting and Exposition, held in San Francisco in December
2014. Here are a few highlights from the meeting.

1530

Maintenance drug therapy following stem cell
transplant. In a phase 3 study of brentuximab vedotin (BV)
in the treatment of patients at risk of disease progression after
autologous stem cell transplant for Hodgkin lymphoma,
BV, an antibody targeting the CD30 protein on Hodgkin

Cancer

May 15, 2015

lymphoma cells, was compared with a placebo
in 327 patients at risk of posttransplant disease
progression. All participants were either in remission or
were stable at the time of transplant.
Between 30 and 45 days after the stem cell transplant,
patients were randomized to receive either BV or placebo for
up to 1 year. After a median of 2 years of follow-up, the study
ﬁndings demonstrated that the patients who received BV had a
20% improvement without disease progression when compared
with the patients who received the placebo (65% vs. 45%). The
most common side eﬀects of BV included peripheral sensory
neuropathy, upper respiratory tract infection, and neutropenia.
Lead author Craig Moskowitz, MD, of Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center in New York City, said this study is the
ﬁrst in lymphoma to demonstrate that a maintenance drug after
transplant can markedly improve patient outcomes. He added
that he expects BV to soon become the standard of care for
patients with Hodgkin lymphoma who undergo an autologous
stem cell transplant.
Additional therapy for relapsed multiple myeloma. In
another phase 3 study presented at the meeting, researchers
enrolled 792 patients with recurrent multiple myeloma from 20
countries in a clinical trial and randomized them to receive the
standard combination of lenalidomide and dexamethasone (Rd)

or the combination along with carﬁlzomib (KRd). An interim
analysis demonstrated that the group treated with KRd had a
longer duration of response without disease progression (26.3
months) compared with the Rd-treated group (17.6 months).
In addition, the overall response rates between the 2 groups
were 87.4% in the KRd group and 66.9% in the Rd group.
Furthermore, the addition of carﬁlzomib did not lead to a
dramatic increase in toxicity, and the group that received this
drug also reported higher quality of life scores than the group
treated with Rd only, the researchers said.
Lead study author A. Keith Stewart, MB, ChB, of the Mayo
Clinic Arizona in Scottsdale, said that adding carﬁlzomib to
the gold standard in multiple myeloma therapy appears to lead
to an unprecedented duration of remission without additional
toxicity. He and his colleagues hope that the trial results will
lead to approval of this treatment combination in patients with
recurrent multiple myeloma worldwide.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29431

D

espite major decreases in smoking
rates, cigarettes continue to cause
approximately 3 in 10 cancer deaths
in the United States, according to the
results of a new study.1 For that reason,
eﬀorts to reduce smoking as rapidly as
possible should continue to be a top
priority, the authors say.
More than 30 years ago, researchers
Richard Doll and Richard Peto
calculated that 30% of all cancer deaths in the United States
were caused by smoking.2 Since then, no new estimates have
been published until the recent study. Although smoking rates
have declined signiﬁcantly during this time, new cancers caused
by smoking have been added to the list and lung cancer death
rates in women have increased.
For this recently published study, lead author Eric Jacobs,
PhD, of the American Cancer Society, and his colleagues analyzed
the most recent data on smoking rates from the National Health
Interview Survey and data on the risks of smoking derived from
epidemiologic studies. They then estimated the populationattributable fraction (PAF), which is the percentage of cancer
deaths in the population caused by smoking.
The study found that the PAF for active cigarette smoking
was 28.7% when estimated conservatively. That ﬁgure only
included deaths from the 12 cancers formally established by

the US Surgeon General as caused
by smoking. When estimated more
comprehensively by including excess
deaths from all cancers, the PAF was
31.7%. These estimates did not include
cancer deaths that potentially could
have been caused by environmental
tobacco smoke or cigars, pipes, and
smokeless tobacco.
Despite the declines in smoking
prevalence, the authors note that the estimated PAF for
smoking and cancer mortality in 2010 was similar to the 30%
estimated by Doll and Peto more than 30 years ago. They add
that although smoking declines likely have made an impact,
other factors have contributed to the increased PAF, including
the new additions to the list of cancers caused by smoking,
increases over time in death rates from lung cancer among
female smokers, and progress in reducing deaths from cancers
caused by factors other than smoking.

Reference
1. Jacobs EJ, Newton CC, Carter BD, et al. What proportion of cancer deaths
in the contemporary United States is attributable to cigarette smoking? Ann
Epidemiol. 2015;25:179-182.
2. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer: quantitative estimates of avoidable
risks of cancer in the United States today. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1981;66:11911308
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29432

© KAGENMI, PHOTOGRAPHEE.EU / FOTOLIA.COM

Smoking Still Causes Signiﬁcant Number of Cancer Deaths

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

May 15, 2015

1531

