Research Article

Inhibition of Cysteine Cathepsin Protease Activity Enhances
Chemotherapy Regimens by Decreasing Tumor Growth and
Invasiveness in a Mouse Model of Multistage Cancer
1

1

2

Katherine M. Bell-McGuinn, Alfred L. Garfall, Matthew Bogyo,
3
1
Douglas Hanahan, and Johanna A. Joyce
1

Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York;
Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford,
California; and 3Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Diabetes Center, and Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California

2

Abstract
Increases in protease expression and activity are associated
with malignant progression and poor patient prognosis in a
number of human cancers. Members of the papain family of
cysteine cathepsins are among the protease classes that have
been functionally implicated in cancer. Inhibition of the
cysteine cathepsin family using a pan-cathepsin inhibitor,
JPM-OEt, led to tumor regression in the RIP1-Tag2 (RT2)
mouse model of pancreatic islet cell tumorigenesis. The
present study was designed to determine whether this
cathepsin inhibitor, when used in combination with chemotherapy, would increase antitumor efficacy. RT2 mice were
treated in a late-stage regression trial with three different
chemotherapy regimens, alone or in combination with the
cathepsin inhibitor, JPM-OEt. Cyclophosphamide was administered in either a maximum tolerated dose (MTD) regimen,
a ‘‘metronomic’’ continuous low-dose regimen, or a ‘‘chemoswitch’’ regimen consisting of MTD followed by metronomic
dosing. Mice were sacrificed at a defined end point and
tumor burden was assessed followed by a detailed analysis of
cell proliferation, apoptosis, vascularization, and invasiveness in the treated and control lesions. An additional cohort
of mice was followed for survival analysis. The cathepsin
inhibitor plus the chemo-switch regimen of cyclophosphamide led to the most pronounced reduction in tumor burden
and greatest increase in overall survival. Cysteine cathepsin
inhibition resulted in a significant decrease in tumor
invasiveness, which was further augmented in combination
with each of the chemotherapy dosing regimens. These
results encourage the development and continuing evaluation of cysteine cathepsin inhibitors as cancer therapeutics.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(15):7378–85]

Introduction
Among the critical ‘‘hallmark capabilities’’ that cancers must
acquire in their progression to malignancy are the ability to switch
on angiogenesis, activate invasion, and promote metastasis (1).
Proteolysis is central to all of these processes. Controlled
degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and vascular or
epithelial basement membranes (BM) is necessary for angiogenesis

Requests for reprints: Johanna A. Joyce, Cancer Biology and Genetics Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Box 372, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY
10021. Phone: 646-888-2048; Fax: 646-422-0231; E-mail: joycej@mskcc.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0602

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

and invasion of tumor cells, both into the surrounding normal
tissue and the blood and lymphatic systems. BM/ECM remodeling
is mediated in an orchestrated manner by several families of
matrix-degrading enzymes, including proteases of the cysteine,
serine, and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) classes, as well as
endoglycosidases, such as heparanase. However, tumor cell growth,
invasion, and metastasis rely not only on capabilities intrinsic to
the cancerous cells but also on the ability of the tumor to
effectively interact with and modify the tissue microenvironment,
both locally and at distant metastatic sites. The tumor microenvironment consists of a multitude of cells including innate and
adaptive immune cells, stromal fibroblasts, and blood and
lymphatic vascular networks. Increasing awareness of the complex
and reciprocal interactions between cancerous and stromal cells
has broadened our understanding of how tumors develop and
progress (2, 3) and, in the case of the tumor-associated vasculature,
has already led to effective treatments (reviewed in ref. 4).
In many cases, it is the host stromal cells, rather than the cancer
cells, that produce proteolytic enzymes in the tumor microenvironment, and several studies in preclinical cancer models have
shown the critical importance of host-supplied proteases to tumor
progression (5–7). Furthermore, numerous clinical reports have
documented a significant association between the increased
expression and/or activity of several members of these proteolytic
enzyme families and poor prognosis (reviewed in refs. 8–10). Thus,
proteolytic enzymes produced by tumor cells and/or surrounding
tumor-associated stromal cells represent attractive candidates for
anticancer therapies. However, clinical trials of MMP inhibitors
were unsuccessful due to poor efficacy and toxicity (11), and
preclinical trials involving xenograft tumor models were equivocal.
More recent studies involving genetically engineered mouse models
of cancer suggest that MMP inhibitors could have utility, if
administered in the correct regimens and likely at early stages of
tumor development (12, 13), providing that toxicities associated
with MMP inhibition in normal tissues can be limited. Alternatively, the papain family of cysteine cathepsin proteases has been
reported recently as a new class with potentially broader
mechanistic efficacy and limited toxicity (14).
The human family of cysteine cathepsins includes 11 members
(cathepsins B, C, F, H, K, L, O, S, V, W, and X), which share a
conserved active site (15, 16). They primarily function as
intracellular proteases mediating terminal nonspecific bulk proteolysis in the acidic environment of lysosomes (15). However, in a
variety of malignant tumors, cysteine cathepsins are overexpressed
and have altered localization to the invasive tumor margin
(reviewed in ref. 16). Furthermore, their increased expression
correlates with more aggressive tumors and poorer prognoses for

7378

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cysteine Cathepsin Inhibition Decreases Tumor Invasion

patients (reviewed in ref. 8). In vitro studies have shown that
inhibition of cysteine cathepsin activity can reduce tumor cell
invasiveness and growth (17, 18). In addition, recent experiments
in which cathepsins B, L, or S were deleted in transgenic mouse
models of pancreatic islet or mammary cancer resulted in significant reductions in tumor burden (7, 19–21) and reduced invasiveness in the RIP1-Tag2 (RT2) model (19), thus validating these
proteases as critical targets of the broad-spectrum cysteine
cathepsin inhibitor, JPM-OEt. We showed previously that treatment
with JPM-OEt impaired tumor growth, vascularity, and invasiveness; there was, however, no significant effect on tumor cell
apoptosis (14). We hypothesized, therefore, that the addition of
cytotoxic chemotherapy to cysteine cathepsin inhibition might
improve antitumor efficacy by targeting these distinctive hallmark
capabilities.
Cytotoxic chemotherapy has classically been given in a maximum
tolerated dose (MTD) regimen. Large doses of chemotherapy are
given in episodic dosing schedules to allow for recovery from
cytotoxic effects on normal tissues, most notably in the rapidly
dividing hematopoietic and mucosal lining cells (22). Recently,
an alternative chemotherapeutic regimen, involving ‘‘metronomic’’
dosing, has been receiving increasing attention (23–25). Metronomic dosing provides a frequent, low dose of chemotherapy, typically
administered daily or continuously. This dosing regimen was
initially developed for its apoptotic effects on the tumor vasculature
(25), but it has also been shown to have tumoricidal effects (26, 27).
Prior studies showed that metronomic dosing of cyclophosphamide
is a safe and efficacious treatment option in the mouse model
of multistage cancer used in the present studies (28). Additional
experiments have shown that a combination ‘‘chemo-switch’’
regimen using MTD cyclophosphamide followed by metronomic
dose cyclophosphamide is more effective than either individual
dosing schedule at reducing tumor growth and increasing survival
in RT2 mice (29).
The RT2 transgenic mouse model of pancreatic islet cell
carcinogenesis provides a highly reproducible model of tumorigenesis that progresses through defined sequential stages, including
hyperplastic/dysplastic islets, angiogenic islets, and progressive
grades of carcinoma (30). This model has been used extensively in
preclinical trials to test the efficacy of various chemotherapeutic
and antiangiogenic regimens when given at defined windows
during the course of tumor progression (29, 31, 32). In the present
study, we have chosen to use the regression trial design with treatment between 12 and 16 weeks of age to focus our investigation on
well-established carcinomas. This situation is most comparable
with the clinical setting in which a patient presents for treatment
with a significant tumor burden. The chemotherapy regimen of
cyclophosphamide, although not typically used for pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, was chosen based on prior studies
showing efficacy of this agent in this model system (28, 29).
The cysteine cathepsin inhibitor JPM-OEt, which binds covalently
in the active site and irreversibly inhibits the cysteine cathepsin
family (14, 33), was used alone or in combination with the cyclophosphamide treatment regimens. In the present study, cathepsin
inhibition was investigated in combination with cyclophosphamide when given in MTD, metronomic, or chemo-switch dosing
regimens.

Materials and Methods
Experimental animals. The generation of RT2 mice as a model of
pancreatic islet cell carcinogenesis has been reported previously (30). Mice

www.aacrjournals.org

were maintained in accordance with institutional guidelines at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) and University of California at San
Francisco governing the care of laboratory animals. From 12 weeks of age,
all RT2 mice received 50% sugar food (Harlan Teklad) and 5% sugar water to
relieve hypoglycemia induced by the insulin-secreting tumors.
Drugs and treatments. The cysteine cathepsin inhibitor JPM-OEt was
synthesized (34) and administered as described previously (14). JPM-OEt
was administered in 20% DMSO/80% H2O twice daily by i.p. injection for a
total dose of 50 mg/kg/d. The MTD regimen of cyclophosphamide (Sigma)
was delivered as a previously reported 21-day cycle of 105 mg/kg
administered i.p. every other day for a total of three doses, followed by
2 weeks of rest (24). An additional three doses were given to complete the
4-week treatment period in the regression study. For the survival studies,
the 3-week cycle (1 week MTD, 2 weeks rest) was repeated as necessary. The
metronomic dosing of cyclophosphamide was administered via the drinking
water as reported previously (29), resulting in a dose of 10 mg/kg/d for each
mouse. For the survival studies, metronomic dosing was continued without
interruption. The chemo-switch regimen incorporated an initial three doses
of MTD treatment followed by metronomic dosing of cyclophosphamide for
the remainder of the 4-week treatment interval in the regression trial. For
the survival studies in the chemo-switch–treated mice, metronomic dosing
was continued without interruption after the initial MTD dosing in week 12.
Experimental trials and tumor burden analysis. Drug treatments
were started when mice reached the age of 12 weeks and continued until
mice were 16 weeks for the regression trials. For the survival trials, mice
were continuously monitored for signs of hypoglycemic shock or drug side
effects and were sacrificed if found moribund and cachexic or if body weight
loss exceeded 15%. Mice were anesthetized and underwent heart perfusion
using 10 mL PBS followed by 10 mL of 10% zinc-buffered formalin (Medical
Chemical Corp.). The pancreas and spleen of the mice were dissected and
macroscopic tumors (z1  1 mm) were excised and measured. Tumor
volume was calculated using the formula V = a  b 2  p / 6 where a and b
equal the longer and shorter diameter of the tumor, respectively. The
volumes of all tumors from each mouse were added to give the total
tumor burden per animal.
Tissue preparation and immunohistochemistry. Tissues were prepared as described previously for frozen and paraffin embedding (35).
FITC-lectin (36), bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) staining, and H&E grading
(35) were done as described previously. Microvasculature in mice not
perfused with FITC-lectin was visualized using a purified rat anti-mouse
pan-endothelial cell antigen monoclonal antibody (mAb; MECA-32, BD
PharMingen) and a donkey anti-rat Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibody
(Molecular Probes). Apoptotic cells were visualized using a rabbit anticleaved caspase-3 antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) and a goat antirabbit Alexa Fluor 568 secondary antibody (Molecular Probes). Tissues were
counterstained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole–containing mounting
medium (Vector Laboratories).
Analysis of cell proliferation, apoptosis, tumor vasculature, and
tumor invasion. In all histologic analyses, 16-week-old treated tumors were
compared with untreated controls at the 12-week-old starting point of the
regression trial because control RT2 mice do not survive to 16 weeks in the
absence of treatment. In mice bearing more than five tumors, five tumors
were selected at random for analysis. For mice with five tumors or less, all
tumors were analyzed. Cell proliferation was quantified as the percentage of
BrdUrd-positive cells out of the total number of tumor cells per high-power
(400) field. Tumors were analyzed from three to six mice per treatment
group with the exception of the metronomic treatment group for which
there was only one mouse available for BrdUrd analysis (total, 434 fields).
Tumor cell apoptosis was quantified by counting the number of cleaved
caspase-3–positive cells per high-power (400) field. Tumors were analyzed
from three to five mice per treatment group (total, 472 fields). Microvessel
density (MVD) was quantified by counting the total number of FITC-lectin–
positive or MECA-32–positive structures observed in each low-power
(200) field. Vessel branching was quantified by dividing the number of
vessel segments (defined as segments between successive branchpoints)
over the total vessel length, essentially as described previously (37). For
MVD and branching analyses, two comparisons were done: first, lesions of

7379

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
all sizes were analyzed and second, a subgroup of ‘larger’ tumors (defined
as area z 3 200 microscope fields, corresponding to f45% of all lesions
analyzed; tumor volume, z3 mm3) were separately analyzed. Tumors were
analyzed from two to six mice per treatment group, for a total of 344
microscope fields (200), using Volocity 4.0 imaging software (Improvision).
For analysis of tumor invasion, tissue sections were stained by H&E and
graded as described previously (35). All tumors in each of the treatment and
control groups were analyzed (total, 360 tumors). For all analyses, tumors
were scored and graded blindly by K.M.B.M, A.L.G., or J.A.J. and
subsequently decoded.
Statistical analysis. For analysis of tumor burden, cell proliferation,
apoptosis, MVD, and vessel branching, means and SEs were calculated for
all tumors from each treatment group using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed
by the Dunn’s multiple comparisons test (InStat, GraphPad Software, Inc.).
Statistical comparison of tumor grades was done using a cumulative logit
model (38) with generalized estimating equations to correct for correlations
within individual mice.

Results
Cathepsin inhibition in combination with a chemo-switch
regimen results in significant tumor regression and increased
overall survival. Treatment of RT2 mice was started at 12 weeks of
age, at a point when the mice had a substantial tumor burden, and

at best only a few weeks to live. Cohorts of control RT2 mice were
sacrificed at 12 weeks of age to determine the initial baseline tumor
burden at the starting point of the trial, and also at 13.5 weeks,
which is end stage in the absence of treatment (Fig. 1A). As shown
in Fig. 1A, tumors progress rapidly in untreated RT2 mice with the
mean tumor burden increasing from 30.23 to 82.46 mm3 in 1.5
weeks. We could not observe control RT2 mice beyond the 13.5week time point because they become ill from their tumor burden
and die shortly thereafter in the absence of treatment. Mice treated
with MTD chemotherapy showed a widely variable tumor burden
(Fig. 1A), as some tumors seemed to become resistant to this
treatment with time, whereas others continued to respond, as has
been reported previously in this model (29). This phenomenon is
also seen in the clinic as patients’ tumors become resistant to MTD
cytotoxic regimens and often recur aggressively over time.
Consistent with previously reported results, daily treatment with
the cysteine cathepsin inhibitor JPM-OEt reduced tumor burden
when compared with the 13.5-week controls (Fig. 1A). The
combination of JPM-OEt with the MTD regimen resulted in a more
consistent response from all tumors, compared with MTD
treatment alone, and a significant decline in tumor burden
compared with the 13.5-week controls (P < 0.05; Fig. 1A).

Figure 1. Effects of cathepsin inhibition combined
with distinct chemotherapy dosing regimens on tumor
burden and overall survival. A, tumor volume of
untreated RT2 mice at 12 wks (control; n = 15)
and 13.5 wks (control; n = 8) and mice at 16 wks
after 4 wks of treatment with the pan-cysteine
cathepsin inhibitor JPM-OEt (JPM ; n = 12), MTD
cyclophosphamide (MTD ; n = 17), JPM-OEt plus MTD
cyclophosphamide (JPM +MTD ; n = 12), metronomic
dose cyclophosphamide (Met; n = 11), JPM-OEt plus
metronomic dose cyclophosphamide (JPM+Met ;
n = 10), the chemo-switch regimen of MTD
cyclophosphamide followed by metronomic dose
cyclophosphamide (Switch; n = 12), or JPM-OEt
plus the chemo-switch regimen (JPM+Switch ; n = 13).
*, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001. B, survival of RT2 mice
after no treatment (control; n = 9) or after treatment
with the pan-cysteine cathepsin inhibitor JPM-OEt
(n = 7), MTD cyclophosphamide (n = 6), JPM-OEt plus
MTD cyclophosphamide (n = 7), the chemo-switch
regimen of MTD cyclophosphamide followed by
metronomic dose cyclophosphamide (n = 7), or
JPM-OEt plus the chemo-switch regimen (n = 8).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

7380

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cysteine Cathepsin Inhibition Decreases Tumor Invasion

Figure 2. Effects of cathepsin inhibition combined with distinct chemotherapy
dosing regimens on apoptosis. A, apoptotic cells were detected using an
antibody against cleaved caspase-3 and representative images are shown
for control 12-week-old RT2 mice (a) and 16-week-old RT2 mice treated
with JPM-OEt (b), MTD cyclophosphamide (c ), JPM-OEt plus MTD
cyclophosphamide (d), metronomic cyclophosphamide (e), JPM-OEt plus
metronomic cyclophosphamide (f ), chemo-switch cyclophosphamide (g), and
JPM-OEt plus chemo-switch cyclophosphamide (h ). Bar, 50 Am. B, the relative
numbers of apoptotic cells (cleaved caspase-3 positive) per high-power field
(400) in 16-week-old treated mice versus 12-week-old control mice.
Columns, mean; bars, SE. **, P < 0.01.

Metronomically dosed cyclophosphamide administered either
alone or in combination with JPM-OEt did not have a significant
effect on total tumor volume (Fig. 1A). The most pronounced decline
in tumor burden was observed in the chemo-switch groups (P <
0.001; Fig. 1A). These results indicate the initial MTD chemotherapy
is able to debulk the tumor, whereas the metronomic therapy
evidently reduces regrowth/relapse and tumor progression. Notably,
the addition of JPM-OEt to the chemo-switch regimen led to an even
further regression in tumor burden (P < 0.001; Fig. 1A).
Given the intriguing effects on reducing tumor volume following
the MTD and chemo-switch regimens in combination with cysteine

www.aacrjournals.org

cathepsin inhibition, further studies were done to analyze the
potential outcome of these treatments on overall survival. Whereas
the median overall survival was not significantly increased in mice
treated with JPM-OEt compared with controls, we observed a trend
toward increased survival when JPM-OEt was given in combination
with MTD cyclophosphamide, and the greatest improvement in
overall survival was seen in the chemo-switch plus JPM-OEt–
treated animals (Fig. 1B).
In addition to significant reductions in tumor burden and
increased overall survival in some of these treatment groups, it is
important to note that toxicity was minimal (as assessed by weight
loss, lethargy, cachexia, etc.) in the various treatment arms involving
metronomic or chemo-switch cyclophosphamide alone or in
combination with JPM-OEt. As expected, there was some toxicity
associated with the repeated MTD regimen when administered for
more than one cycle, either alone or in combination with JPM-OEt.
The combination of cyclophosphamide and the cathepsin
inhibitor, JPM-OEt, increased apoptosis compared with JPMOEt treatment alone. Previous studies using JPM-OEt in
regression trials in the RT2 model showed that, while reducing
cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and invasion, it did not increase the
frequency of tumor apoptosis (14). We hypothesized that the
addition of chemotherapy would lead to an increase in cell death
and thus further reduce tumor growth. In this histopathologic
analysis, as well as in those described below, we analyzed tumors
from all treatment arms at the defined end point of +4 weeks after
initiating treatment at 12 weeks of age. Consistent with prior
results (14), JPM-OEt treatment alone did not significantly affect
apoptosis in 16-week RT2 tumors when compared with 12-weekold control tumors (Fig. 2). A trend toward increased levels of
apoptosis was seen in the cyclophosphamide-treated groups (MTD,
metronomic, and chemo-switch regimens) when analyzed at the
defined 16-week end point, although the only statistically
significant difference was in the metronomic cyclophosphamidetreated animals when compared with the 12-week controls (2-fold
increase in apoptosis; P < 0.01; Fig. 2B). We anticipate that an
overall time course of the pathologic response and future analyses
of early time points in particular will reveal increased apoptosis for
those regimens involving high-dose chemotherapy. We found that
the addition of the cathepsin inhibitor to the MTD regimen or the
metronomic dose regimen actually resulted in a trend toward fewer
apoptotic cells when compared with the chemotherapy treatment
alone. Based on recent data showing that RT2 mice lacking
cathepsin B, S, or L had increased levels of tumor cell death (19),
this result may seem surprising. However, there are several reports
of cathepsins acting as effectors of apoptotic pathways (39, 40);
thus, it is possible that inhibiting certain members of the cysteine
cathepsin family may block apoptosis in some settings.
Cathepsin inhibition in combination with either MTD or
metronomic dosing of cyclophosphamide further reduces
tumor cell proliferation. The cysteine cathepsin inhibitor JPMOEt used as monotherapy has been shown previously to decrease
the proliferative capacity of tumor cells as measured by BrdUrd
incorporation (14). Therefore, we analyzed tumors from all groups
at the +4-week treatment end point for proliferation rates. The
current results with JPM-OEt alone (Fig. 3A, b) are consistent with
our previous study. Cyclophosphamide, when given in MTD
fashion, also reduced proliferation (P < 0.001; Fig. 3A, c), more so
than JPM-OEt alone. The combination was even more pronounced
(P < 0.001; Fig. 3A, d). Whereas metronomic cyclophosphamide
alone did not seem to affect proliferation (Fig. 3A, e), the

7381

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

combination of metronomic cyclophosphamide with JPM-OEt reduced proliferation further than JPM-OEt alone (P < 0.001; Fig. 3A,
f ). The chemo-switch (Fig. 3A, g ) and JPM-OEt plus chemo-switch
cyclophosphamide (Fig. 3A, h) regimens did not significantly alter
the proliferative capacity of the tumors evident at the +4-week
defined treatment end point when compared with control tumors
at the 12-week starting point (Fig. 3B). Several possible explanations may account for these apparently counterintuitive observations, which will be addressed further in the discussion.

Figure 3. Cell proliferation is reduced following JPM or MTD cyclophosphamide
administered alone or in combination. A, proliferating cells were detected
by BrdUrd incorporation and representative images are shown for control
12-week-old RT2 mice (a ) and 16-week-old RT2 mice treated with JPM-OEt
(b), MTD cyclophosphamide (c ), JPM-OEt plus MTD cyclophosphamide
(d), metronomic cyclophosphamide (e ), JPM-OEt plus metronomic
cyclophosphamide (f ), chemo-switch cyclophosphamide (g ), and JPM-OEt plus
chemo-switch cyclophosphamide (h ). Bar, 50 Am. B, the percentages of
proliferating (BrdUrd positive) cells per high-power field (400) in 16-week-old
treated mice versus 12-week-old control mice. Columns, mean; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Reduced tumor vascularity following cathepsin inhibition.
Next, the tumor vasculature was assessed among the various
treatment groups at the defined end point of the trial by
quantifying the MVD, as a measure of angiogenesis inhibition
(Fig. 4). Whereas the metronomic and chemo-switch dosing of
cyclophosphamide both alone and in combination with JPM-OEt
showed a trend toward declining numbers of vessels, there was
no change in the RT2 mice treated with combined MTD
cyclophosphamide plus JPM-OEt. In fact, only the JPM-OEt
treatment alone resulted in a statistically significant decline
in tumor vascularity (56% reduction; P < 0.01; Fig. 4B) when
compared with the 12-week control tumors, in an analysis that
included lesions of all sizes. However, as there is not necessarily a
linear correlation between tumor size and tumor vessel density
(41), and as the dependence on angiogenesis may occur only when
a tumor reaches a critical size, it is perhaps not surprising that
MVD is not substantially affected in several of these treatment
groups at the 16-week end point, as their tumor burden is
significantly reduced compared with controls. Indeed, when we
did the comparative analyses on ‘larger’ tumors only (tumor
volume, z3 mm3) in which there may be a greater dependency on
angiogenesis, the reduction in MVD was more pronounced in the
JPM-OEt plus metronomic and JPM-OEt plus switch chemotherapy treatment groups when compared with those chemotherapy
regimens in the absence of JPM-OEt (Fig. 4B).
In certain combinations, the addition of cyclophosphamide
seemed to abrogate the effect of cathepsin inhibition alone on
decreasing tumor microvasculature. In fact, JPM-OEt plus MTD
cyclophosphamide or MTD cyclophosphamide alone had the
greatest number of microvessels seen among the treatment groups
(Fig. 4B). One possible explanation for this result is that MTD
cyclophosphamide treatment has been shown previously to
enhance endothelial progenitor cell mobilization (42), which could
effectively interfere with the ability of JPM-OEt to inhibit tumor
vascularization. Alternatively, in other situations, the blood vessels
dictate tissue size by maintaining a fixed vascular density, whereby
reduced capability for angiogenesis restrains growth and size
without evidencing reduced vascularity (43).
We next asked whether, in addition to decreased MVD, the
tumor vessels in the different treatment groups showed any
evidence of ‘vessel normalization’. Tumor vessel normalization has
been observed following several antiangiogenic therapies and
proposed as a mechanism by which the efficacy of standard
chemotherapy or radiotherapy is increased when combined with
antiangiogenic agents, in part due to improved drug delivery (44).
Tumor vessels are typically leaky, chaotic, tortuous, and disorganized, and increased vessel branching is used as a hallmark of
abnormal vasculature (45). Thus, we analyzed vessel branching in
the different treatment groups compared with the control group
and found a decrease ranging from 22% to 31% (Fig. 4C). Again,
when vessel branching was compared in ‘larger’ tumors only, this
reduction was most pronounced in the JPM plus chemo-switch
treatment group (48% reduction; P < 0.001; Fig. 4C), the treatment
group in which tumor burden was also most significantly reduced
(Fig. 1A). It should be noted that whereas the treatment groups
that would be expected to be antiangiogenic (JPM-OEt, metronomic, and chemo-switch) all had decreased vessel branching, the
MTD-alone group did too, albeit with a smaller reduction than in
each of the other groups (Fig. 4C). This may reflect, in part, changes
in the vasculature that are secondary to effects on tumor cell
metabolism, as discussed by Hlatky et al. (41).

7382

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cysteine Cathepsin Inhibition Decreases Tumor Invasion

Figure 4. Tumor vascularity and vessel branching are reduced following cathepsin inhibition. A, the tumor vasculature was visualized by perfusion of mice with
FITC-lectin or by staining with a pan-endothelial cell antigen mAb (MECA-32). Representative images are shown for 12-week-old control mice (a) and 16-week-old mice
treated with JPM-OEt (b), MTD cyclophosphamide (c ), JPM-OEt plus MTD cyclophosphamide (d), metronomic cyclophosphamide (e ), JPM-OEt plus metronomic
cyclophosphamide (f ), chemo-switch cyclophosphamide (g), and JPM-OEt plus chemo-switch cyclophosphamide (h). Bar, 50 Am. B, MVD quantified per low-power
field (200) in 16-week-old treated mice versus 12-week-old control mice. Top, MVD in all lesions analyzed; bottom, the comparison for the subgroup of ‘larger’
tumors alone (defined as area z 3 200 microscope fields, corresponding to f45% of all lesions analyzed; tumor volume, z3 mm3). C, vessel branching quantified
per low-power field (200) by dividing the number of vessel segments (as defined between successive branchpoints) over the total vessel length in millimeters.
Top, vessel branching in all lesions analyzed; bottom, the comparison for the subgroup of ‘larger’ tumors alone. Columns, mean; bars, SE. *, P < 0.05;
**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.

Cathepsin inhibition is necessary and sufficient to reduce
tumor invasion. Tumor invasion was assessed by grading lesions
as encapsulated (Tum), microinvasive (IC1), or invasive (IC2), and
representative examples of each type of tumor are shown in Fig. 5A
(a–c). As graphed in Fig. 5B, the majority of tumors in the
untreated control animals were either microinvasive or invasive.
Cyclophosphamide had no effect on the prevalence of invasive
carcinomas, irrespective of the dosing regimen (MTD, metronomic,
chemo-switch). In contrast, and consistent with previous studies
involving JPM-OEt (14) or cathepsin gene knockouts (19), cathepsin inhibition significantly shifted the distribution of tumors to less
invasive types (P < 0.05; Fig. 5B). This effect was seen in all
treatment regimens containing JPM-OEt regardless of the dosing
schedule of cyclophosphamide that was given in combination with
the cathepsin inhibitor. Notably, the shift toward encapsulated
tumors was most pronounced in the JPM-OEt plus MTD
cyclophosphamide and the JPM-OEt plus chemo-switch regimen
groups (P < 0.001), the two treatment groups that also showed the
trend toward greatest overall survival (Fig. 1B).

Discussion
In this report, we show for the first time that a novel biological
targeting agent, an inhibitor of cysteine cathepsin protease activity,
has combinatorial efficacy with both traditional and experimental
chemotherapy regimens. We compared three dosing schedules for
the chemotherapeutic drug, cyclophosphamide, and found that the

www.aacrjournals.org

chemo-switch regimen (29) produced the best responses in terms
of reducing tumor size and malignancy, and increasing survival,
which may provide important insights into the design of future
clinical trials with these agents.
Whereas the combination regimen of chemo-switch cyclophosphamide and cathepsin inhibition was most effective in reducing
tumor burden and extending survival in this mouse model of
tumorigenesis, some of the effects of the regimen on apoptosis,
proliferation, and tumor vasculature at the 16-week end point were
not as pronounced compared with the other treatment arms of the
study that were less efficacious in reducing overall tumor burden.
This counterintuitive observation may reflect the defined time
point of the analyses after 4 weeks of treatment, which may not
reveal important but transitory effects occurring earlier in the
therapeutic regimen. Future studies are planned to assess these
parameters at earlier time points following the initiation of
treatment at 12 weeks to determine if the biological effects of
cathepsin inhibition in combination with chemo-switch chemotherapy are more pronounced initially. For example, it is possible
that there is an initial spike of increased apoptosis and decreased
cell proliferation, which debulks the tumor mass, perhaps inducing
those tumors to then enter a dormant state by the time they are
assessed histologically at the 16-week end point.
The ability of the cysteine cathepsin inhibitor JPM-OEt to
significantly reduce tumor invasiveness may ultimately be the
most important benefit of this targeted agent. Prior in vitro
studies showed inhibition of tumor cell invasiveness in the

7383

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

presence of antibody and small-molecule inhibitors targeting
cathepsins (17, 18) but did not assess potential targets. Conceivable
mechanisms of action of the inhibitor may include impairment
of cathepsin-dependent remodeling and hence structural maintenance of the ECM and BM components, preservation of E-cadherin
on cancer cells at the tumor border, perturbed cleavage of
additional proteins involved in the metastatic process, or inhibition
of tumor-associated macrophage function (20). Cathepsins have
been shown to degrade components of the ECM and BM (46, 47),
and it is likely that cathepsin inhibitors allow the local tissue
environment to retain structural integrity, thus impairing tumor cell
invasion.
Indeed, we have shown recently that certain cathepsins cleave
the cell adhesion protein, E-cadherin, in vitro and in vivo (19, 20).
Levels of E-cadherin were maintained in RT2 mice lacking
cathepsins B, L, or S, all of which had significant reductions in
tumor invasion (19). Further investigation is currently under way to
delineate the exact mechanism whereby cysteine cathepsin
inhibitors decrease the invasive potential of tumors in combination
with chemotherapy, a unique and important mode of action of
these agents. One explanation may be that combining chemotherapy with JPM-OEt simply further reduces the overall pool of tumor
cells that could ultimately develop invasive behavior when
compared with JPM-OEt alone. However, cathepsin inhibition is
clearly required for the reduction in invasiveness in the combined
treatment groups, as none of the three chemotherapy alone
regimens had any effect on tumor invasion.
Translational considerations. Recent pharmacokinetic studies
of the JPM-OEt inhibitor have revealed that this ostensibly cellpermeable ethyl ester is converted to the carboxylic acid form
in vivo by esterases in the serum (48) and therefore is not expected
to be cell permeable. Indeed, we infer that the relatively low toxicity
of JPM-OEt in treated mice can be attributed to its decreased

ability to enter cells and inhibit normal lysosomal cathepsin activity.
Moreover, we suspect that JPM-OEt is preferentially targeting cell
surface or secreted cathepsins in the tumor microenvironment,
effectively producing a ‘therapeutic window’ that maximizes
inhibition of aberrant (tumor promoting) extracellular cathepsin
activity while minimizing toxic side effects by limiting inhibition of
the normal lysosomal pool of cathepsin activity.
In addition to the development of novel targeted inhibitors,
such as JPM-OEt, changes in the dosing schedule of ‘traditional’
anticancer therapies, such as chemotherapy or radiation, have
been investigated as a means to improve their therapeutic
efficacy. For example, in recent years, metronomic dosing of
chemotherapeutic agents has gained increasing attention (25, 49).
Although the idea of a chronic low dose of chemotherapy that
would be relatively nontoxic to patients yet still effective against
tumor cells and tumor endothelium sounds promising, comparatively few patient responses have been seen with this type of
dosing schedule when given alone. Clinical trials using metronomic dose schedules have also rarely directly compared the
metronomic regimen with an alternative MTD regimen or with a
regimen combining the two, comparable with the chemo-switch
dosing in this study. In one ongoing trial, the Southwest Oncology
Group (SWOG) recently reported promising results using a
chemo-switch regimen design in the neoadjuvant treatment of
breast cancer patients (50). In this trial, patients were randomized
to receive the standard MTD Adriamycin and cyclophosphamide
followed by paclitaxel versus a chemo-switch regimen of weekly
Adriamycin and daily low-dose cyclophosphamide followed by
paclitaxel. Patients receiving the chemo-switch regimen had
significantly more pronounced pathologic responses in their
primary tumors and were more likely to have no lymph node
involvement at the time of surgery (50). A similar study in the
adjuvant setting is ongoing in the SWOG 0221 trial. Based on our

Figure 5. Cathepsin inhibition significantly
reduces tumor invasion. A, representative
images showing an encapsulated tumor
(a ), a microinvasive carcinoma (b ),
and an invasive carcinoma (c). Bar , 50 Am.
B, relative proportions of encapsulated
(Tum ), microinvasive (IC1), and
highly invasive (IC2) carcinomas in
12-week RT2 controls compared
with 16-week-old RT2 mice after
treatment with JPM-OEt (JPM), MTD
cyclophosphamide (MTD ), JPM-OEt plus
MTD cyclophosphamide (JPM +MTD ),
metronomic cyclophosphamide
(Met ), JPM-OEt plus metronomic
cyclophosphamide (JPM +Met ), chemoswitch cyclophosphamide (Switch ),
and JPM-OEt plus chemo-switch
cyclophosphamide (JPM +Switch ). Fewer
invasive tumors were seen in all treatment
groups receiving JPM-OEt. No decrease
in invasiveness was seen in any of the
cyclophosphamide treatment groups
alone, regardless of the dosing schedule.
*, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

7384

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cysteine Cathepsin Inhibition Decreases Tumor Invasion

results with a preclinical model in the present study, we would
encourage wider use of such chemo-switch regimen designs in
future clinical trials of anticancer agents to maximize therapeutic
efficacy.
In conclusion, we have shown that cysteine cathepsin inhibition
in combination with two distinct regimens of chemotherapy
administration (MTD or chemo-switch) results in tumor regression,
decreased tumor invasiveness, and increased survival. Ongoing
experiments in preclinical models of other tumor types should
reveal the general therapeutic feasibility of cathepsin inhibition,
alone and in combination with chemotherapy. We propose that the
addition of JPM-OEt to currently used cytotoxic chemotherapy
regimens in the clinic has the potential to add significant benefits
both in terms of a reduction in tumor burden and an increase in

References
1. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell 2000;100:57–70.
2. Bissell MJ, Radisky D. Putting tumours in context. Nat
Rev Cancer 2001;1:46–54.
3. Joyce JA. Therapeutic targeting of the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell 2005;7:513–20.
4. Ferrara N, Kerbel RS. Angiogenesis as a therapeutic
target. Nature 2005;438:967–74.
5. Coussens LM, Tinkle CL, Hanahan D, Werb Z. MMP-9
supplied by bone marrow-derived cells contributes to
skin carcinogenesis. Cell 2000;103:481–90.
6. Acuff HB, Carter KJ, Fingleton B, Gorden DL, Matrisian
LM. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 from bone marrowderived cells contributes to survival but not growth of
tumor cells in the lung microenvironment. Cancer Res
2006;66:259–66.
7. Vasiljeva O, Papazoglou A, Kruger A, et al. Tumor cellderived and macrophage-derived cathepsin B promotes
progression and lung metastasis of mammary cancer.
Cancer Res 2006;66:5242–50.
8. Berdowska I. Cysteine proteases as disease markers.
Clin Chim Acta 2004;342:41–69.
9. Laufs S, Schumacher J, Allgayer H. Urokinase-receptor
(u-PAR): an essential player in multiple games of cancer:
a review on its role in tumor progression, invasion,
metastasis, proliferation/dormancy, clinical outcome,
and minimal residual disease. Cell Cycle 2006;5:1760–71.
10. Overall CM, Kleifeld O. Tumour microenvironment—
opinion: validating matrix metalloproteinases as drug
targets and anti-targets for cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer 2006;6:227–39.
11. Overall CM, Kleifeld O. Towards third generation
matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors for cancer therapy.
Br J Cancer 2006;94:941–6.
12. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Combining antiangiogenic
agents with metronomic chemotherapy enhances efficacy against late-stage pancreatic islet carcinomas in mice.
Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2002;67:293–300.
13. Giraudo E, Inoue M, Hanahan D. An aminobisphosphonate targets MMP-9-expressing macrophages
and angiogenesis to impair cervical carcinogenesis.
J Clin Invest 2004;114:623–33.
14. Joyce JA, Baruch A, Chehade K, et al. Cathepsin
cysteine proteases are effectors of invasive growth and
angiogenesis during multistage tumorigenesis. Cancer
Cell 2004;5:443–53.
15. Turk V, Turk B, Turk D. Lysosomal cysteine proteases:
facts and opportunities. EMBO J 2001;20:4629–33.
16. Mohamed MM, Sloane BF. Cysteine cathepsins:
multifunctional enzymes in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2006;6:764–75.
17. Premzl A, Zavasnik-Bergant V, Turk V, Kos J. Intracellular and extracellular cathepsin B facilitate invasion of
MCF-10A neoT cells through reconstituted extracellular
matrix in vitro. Exp Cell Res 2003;283:206–14.
18. Sever N, Filipic M, Brzin J, Lah TT. Effect of cysteine
proteinase inhibitors on murine B16 melanoma cell
invasion in vitro . Biol Chem 2002;383:839–42.

www.aacrjournals.org

overall survival and that this may largely be mediated by the ability
of JPM-OEt to reduce the invasive capability of tumors.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/13/2007; revised 4/30/2007; accepted 5/17/2007.
Grant support: Sidney Kimmel Foundation for Cancer Research, V Foundation for
Cancer Research, and Society of MSKCC (J.A. Joyce); NIH T32 training grant (K.M. BellMcGuinn); the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Medical Research Training Program
(A.L. Garfall); NIH U54 RR020843 and NIH P01 CA072006 (M. Bogyo); and the U.S.
National Cancer Institute, the William F. Bowes Charitable Foundation, and an
American Cancer Society Professorship (D. Hanahan).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Jhoanna Berrocal, Danxia Ke, and Ehud Drori for excellent technical
assistance and Elyn Reidel (MSKCC Epidemiology and Biostatistics Department) for
excellent statistical analysis and advice.

19. Gocheva V, Zeng W, Ke D, et al. Distinct roles for
cysteine cathepsin genes in multistage tumorigenesis.
Genes Dev 2006;20:543–56.
20. Gocheva V, Joyce JA. Cysteine cathepsins and the
cutting edge of cancer invasion. Cell Cycle 2007;6:60–4.
21. Wang B, Sun J, Kitamoto S, et al. Cathepsin S controls
angiogenesis and tumor growth via matrix-derived
angiogenic factors. J Biol Chem 2006;281:6020–9.
22. Kaufman D, Chabner BA. Clinical strategies for
cancer treatment: the role of drugs. Chapter 1. 2nd ed.
In: Chabner BA, Longo D, editors. Cancer chemotherapy
and biotherapy principles and practice. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven Publishers; 1996.
23. Browder T, Butterfield CE, Kraling BM, et al.
Antiangiogenic scheduling of chemotherapy improves
efficacy against experimental drug-resistant cancer.
Cancer Res 2000;60:1878–86.
24. Klement G, Baruchel S, Rak J, et al. Continuous lowdose therapy with vinblastine and VEGF receptor-2
antibody induces sustained tumor regression without
overt toxicity. J Clin Invest 2000;105:R15–24.
25. Kerbel RS, Kamen BA. The anti-angiogenic basis of
metronomic chemotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:423–36.
26. Kim JT, Kim JS, Ko KW, et al. Metronomic treatment of
temozolomide inhibits tumor cell growth through
reduction of angiogenesis and augmentation of apoptosis
in orthotopic models of gliomas. Oncol Rep 2006;16:33–9.
27. Munoz R, Man S, Shaked Y, et al. Highly efficacious
nontoxic preclinical treatment for advanced metastatic
breast cancer using combination oral UFT-cyclophosphamide metronomic chemotherapy. Cancer Res 2006;
66:3386–91.
28. Man S, Bocci G, Francia G, et al. Antitumor effects in
mice of low-dose (metronomic) cyclophosphamide
administered continuously through the drinking water.
Cancer Res 2002;62:2731–5.
29. Pietras K, Hanahan D. A multitargeted, metronomic,
and maximum-tolerated dose ‘‘chemo-switch’’ regimen
is antiangiogenic, producing objective responses and
survival benefit in a mouse model of cancer. J Clin Oncol
2005;23:939–52.
30. Hanahan D. Heritable formation of pancreatic h-cell
tumours in transgenic mice expressing recombinant
insulin/simian virus 40 oncogenes. Nature 1985;315:115–22.
31. Bergers G, Javaherian K, Lo KM, Folkman J, Hanahan
D. Effects of angiogenesis inhibitors on multistage
carcinogenesis in mice. Science 1999;284:808–12.
32. Joyce JA, Freeman C, Meyer-Morse N, Parish CR,
Hanahan D. A functional heparan sulfate mimetic
implicates both heparanase and heparan sulfate in
tumor angiogenesis and invasion in a mouse model of
multistage cancer. Oncogene 2005;24:4037–51.
33. Meara JP, Rich DH. Mechanistic studies on the
inactivation of papain by epoxysuccinyl inhibitors. J
Med Chem 1996;39:3357–66.
34. Chehade KAH, Baruch A, Verhelst SHL, Bogyo M. An
improved preparation of the activity-based probe JPMOEt and in situ applications. Synthesis 2005;2:240–4.
35. Lopez T, Hanahan D. Elevated levels of IGF-1
receptor convey invasive and metastatic capability in a

7385

mouse model of pancreatic islet tumorigenesis. Cancer
Cell 2002;1:339–53.
36. Inoue M, Hager JH, Ferrara N, Gerber HP, Hanahan D.
VEGF-A has a critical, nonredundant role in angiogenic
switching and pancreatic h cell carcinogenesis. Cancer
Cell 2002;1:193–202.
37. Kashiwagi S, Izumi Y, Gohongi T, et al. NO mediates
mural cell recruitment and vessel morphogenesis in
murine melanomas and tissue-engineered blood vessels.
J Clin Invest 2005;115:1816–27.
38. McCullagh P. Regression models for ordinal data. J R
Stat Soc 1980;42:109–42.
39. Isahara K, Ohsawa Y, Kanamori S, et al. Regulation of
a novel pathway for cell death by lysosomal aspartic and
cysteine proteinases. Neuroscience 1999;91:233–49.
40. Guicciardi ME, Miyoshi H, Bronk SF, Gores GJ.
Cathepsin B knockout mice are resistant to tumor
necrosis factor-a-mediated hepatocyte apoptosis and
liver injury: implications for therapeutic applications.
Am J Pathol 2001;159:2045–54.
41. Hlatky L, Hahnfeldt P, Folkman J. Clinical application
of antiangiogenic therapy: microvessel density, what
it does and doesn’t tell us. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002;94:
883–93.
42. Bertolini F, Paul S, Mancuso P, et al. Maximum
tolerable dose and low-dose metronomic chemotherapy
have opposite effects on the mobilization and viability
of circulating endothelial progenitor cells. Cancer Res
2003;63:4342–6.
43. Rupnick MA, Panigrahy D, Zhang CY, et al. Adipose
tissue mass can be regulated through the vasculature.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:10730–5.
44. Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an
emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science
2005;307:58–62.
45. Jain RK. Molecular regulation of vessel maturation.
Nat Med 2003;9:685–93.
46. Buck MR, Karustis DG, Day NA, Honn KV, Sloane BF.
Degradation of extracellular-matrix proteins by human
cathepsin B from normal and tumour tissues. Biochem
J 1992;282:273–8.
47. Mai J, Sameni M, Mikkelsen T, Sloane BF. Degradation of extracellular matrix protein tenascin-C by
cathepsin B: an interaction involved in the progression
of gliomas. Biol Chem 2002;383:1407–13.
48. Sadaghiani AM, Verhelst SHL, Gocheva V, et al. Design,
synthesis and evaluation of in vivo potency and selectivity of epoxysuccinyl-based inhibitors of papain family
cysteine proteases. Chem Biol 2007;14:499–511.
49. Gasparini G. Metronomic scheduling: the future of
chemotherapy? Lancet Oncol 2001;2:733–40.
50. Ellis GK, Green SJ, Russell CA, Royce ME, Perez EA,
Livingston RB. SWOG 0012, a randomized phase III
comparison of standard doxorubicin (A) and cyclophosphamide (C) followed by weekly paclitaxel (T) versus
weekly doxorubicin and daily oral cyclophosphamide
plus G-CSF (G) followed by weekly paclitaxel as
neoadjuvant therapy for inflammatory and locally
advanced breast cancer [abstract LBA537]. J Clin Oncol
2006;24:LBA537.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Inhibition of Cysteine Cathepsin Protease Activity Enhances
Chemotherapy Regimens by Decreasing Tumor Growth and
Invasiveness in a Mouse Model of Multistage Cancer
Katherine M. Bell-McGuinn, Alfred L. Garfall, Matthew Bogyo, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:7378-7385.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7378

This article cites 49 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7378.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7378.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

