Correspondence

Progression-Free Survival: Does a
Correlation With Survival Justify
Its Role as a Surrogate Clinical
Endpoint?
We thank Becker et al1 for their thoughtful editorial on
our article2 describing progression-free survival (PFS) as a
surrogate endpoint for overall survival (OS) in renal cancer clinical trials. We agree that our data do not necessarily
support the use of PFS as a surrogate endpoint for OS
across the entire renal cancer therapeutic spectrum.2 We
further concur that additional work needs to be done to
establish PFS as a pragmatic endpoint for regulatory purposes. However, we disagree with Becker et al that it is
necessary to fulfill Prentice criteria to establish surrogacy.
More specifically, fulfilling Prentice’s third criterion that
the treatment effect on the surrogate (PFS) should capture
the full effect of treatment on the clinical endpoint (OS) is
an extremely high bar.3 Multiple authors have argued for
and suggested different approaches to the validation of the
surrogate.4-8 Although a full discussion is beyond the
scope of this correspondence, we would like to point out
that one alternative approach is the adjusted association
h.9 The adjusted association first estimates the dependency parameter within each treatment arm and then
aggregates the information by a weighted average. As we
demonstrated in our article,2 the adjusted association was
a highly statistically significant measure that strongly suggests that PFS is a surrogate endpoint for OS, at least
within the context of the trials analyzed.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.
REFERENCES
1. Becker A, Eichelberg C, Sun M. Progression-free survival: does a correlation with survival justify its role as a surrogate clinical endpoint?
Cancer. 2014;120:7-10.
2. Halabi S, Rini R, Escudier B, Stadler WM, Small EJ. Progression-free
survival as a surrogate endpoint of overall survival in patients with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer. 2014;120:52-60.
3. Prentice RL. Surrogate endpoints in clinical trials: definition and
operational criteria. Stat Med. 1989;8:431-440.
4. Freedman LS, Graubard BI, Schatzkin A, et al. Statistical validation of intermediate endpoints for chronic diseases. Stat Med. 1992;11:167-178.
5. Buyse M, Molenberghs G, Burzykowski T, Renard D, Geys H. The
validation of surrogate endpoints in meta-analyses of randomized
experiments. Biostatistics. 2000;1:49-67.

1906

6. Buyse M, Molenberghs G. Criteria for the validation of surrogate endpoints in randomized experiments. Biometrics. 1998;54:1014-1029.
7. Burzykowski T, Molenberghs G, Buyse M, et al. Validation of surrogate end points in multiple randomized clinical trials with failure
time endpoints. Appl Stat. 2001;50:405-422
8. Baker SG, Sargent DJ, Buyse M, Burzykowski T. Predicting treatment effect from surrogate endpoints and historical trials: an extrapolation involving probabilities of a binary outcome or survival to a
specific time. Biometrics. 2012;68:248-257.
9. Ghosh D. On assessing surrogacy in a single trial setting using a semicompeting risks paradigm. Biometrics. 2009;65:521-529.

Susan Halabi, PhD
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Duke University;
Alliance Statistical and Data Center
Duke University
Durham, North Carolina

Brian I. Rini, MD
Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute
Cleveland, Ohio

Bernard Escudier, MD
Department of Cancer Medicine
Institut Gustave Roussy
Villejuif, France
Walter M. Stadler, MD
Department of Medicine
University of Chicago Medical Center
Chicago, Illinois

Eric J. Small, MD
Department of Urology
University of California at San Francisco
San Francisco, California
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29252, Published online February 11, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Progression-Free
Survival: Does a Correlation
With Survival Justify Its Role as
a Surrogate Clinical Endpoint?
We thank Halabi et al for their expert comment on our
editorial,1 which referred to their previous article.2
Although we agree that, from a statistical perspective,
there is reason to believe that progression-free survival
(PFS) may represent an adequate surrogate endpoint for
overall survival (OS), we do not agree that this statistical
association is sufficient to officially accept PFS as the surrogate endpoint for OS. As noted in the IMPACT study,
which examined sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for patients
with castration-resistant prostate cancer, an improved OS
was not found to be associated with an improved PFS.3
Therefore, it would be difficult to justify the role of PFS as
a surrogate endpoint for OS if the 2 do not always correlate. Furthermore, pharmaceutical drugs may often perpetuate OS, independent of disease progression.
Cancer

June 1, 2015

Correspondence

Although it may be stipulated that Prentice’s third
criterion4 is considered a “high bar,” we argue that it
should be so. Our intention is not to completely reject the
possibility of attributing a higher importance to PFS
when interpreting results from ongoing and future clinical
trials, but rather we believe that the advancements made
in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma after
the era of targeted therapy have made it possible for physicians and patients to look forward to real improvements
in both OS and quality of life, and not merely to an
increased time to disease progression.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Becker A, Eichelberg C, Sun M. Progression-free survival: does a correlation with survival justify its role as a surrogate clinical endpoint?
Cancer. 2014;120:7-10.
2. Halabi S, Rini R, Escudier B, Stadler WM, Small EJ. Progression-free
survival as a surrogate endpoint of overall survival in patients with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Cancer. 2014;120:52-60.
3. Kantoff PW, Higano CS, Shore ND, et al; IMPACT Study Investigators. Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:411-422.
4. Prentice RL. Surrogate endpoints in clinical trials: definition and
operational criteria. Stat Med. 1989;8:431-440.

Andreas Becker, MD
Department of Urology
University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf;
Martini-Clinic
Prostate Cancer Center
Hamburg, Germany

Christian Eichelberg, MD
Department of Urology
Caritas-St. Josef Medical Center
University of Regensburg
Regensburg, Germany

Maxine Sun, BS
Cancer Prognostics and Health Outcomes Unit
Department of Urology
University of Montreal Health Centre
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29255, Published online February 11, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Critical Evaluation of the
Scientific Content in Clinical
Practice Guidelines
On behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology
(ESMO) Guidelines Committee, we thank Abdelsattar
Cancer

June 1, 2015

et al for their valuable comments, and would like to further comment on their article.1
This article assessed several practice-based clinical
guidelines concerning rectal cancer, including the ESMO
clinical practice guideline (ESMO CPG) published in
2013, using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research &
Evaluation (AGREE II) instrument.
The ESMO CPG on rectal cancer is one of many
ESMO CPGs that form part of a wider guidelines service
package released by ESMO to support the medical community, mainly medical oncologists. This package also includes
the ESMO Pocket Guidelines and mobile library application as handy formats, the much more extensive ESMO
consensus statements, and the ESMO guides for patients.
ESMO CPGs are practical, concise documents aimed at
providing essential information for the community served
by ESMO. In the article by Abdelsattar et al,1 only the CPG
publications were assessed, rather than the whole spectrum
of guideline publications from ESMO for colon and rectal
cancer. We believe that this has had an impact on some of
the scores reported using the AGREE II instrument:
 The ESMO consensus statements are complementary
to the ESMO CPG and include additional information.
They are structured in a defined evidence-based analytical format, generally in the form of specific questions
and evidence-based answers reached by consensus of an
expert panel. In 2012, ESMO published a comprehensive consensus statement regarding the management of
patients with colon and rectal cancer, and this initiative
was repeated in December 2014.2
 The ESMO CPG is a relatively brief summary of the
consensus statement, with new and (annually) updated
information regarding scientific developments.
 ESMO CPGs form the basis of the ESMO Pocket
Guidelines and mobile library application, which establish ESMO CPGs in a concise, clear format and aim to
improve their dissemination and applicability.
 ESMO patient guides are derived from ESMO CPGs
and are produced in collaboration with the Anticancer
Fund. The ESMO Cancer Patient Working Group is
involved in the production of all ESMO guides for
patients and includes representatives of several European patient advocacy organizations.
For each of these different formats of evidence analysis and presentation in guidelines, including CPGs,
ESMO has established methodological rules and standard
operating procedures. Methodology and content follow a
strict policy of guidelines definition and in-practice application, which is updated every 1 to 3 years. This
1907

