www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 50), pp: 82458-82472
Research Paper

Combinatorial effects of doxorubicin and retargeted tissue factor
by intratumoral entrapment of doxorubicin and proapoptotic
increase of tumor vascular infarction
Janine Stucke-Ring1,*, Julian Ronnacker1,*, Caroline Brand1, Carsten Höltke2, Christoph
Schliemann1, Torsten Kessler1, Lars Henning Schmidt1, Saliha Harrach1, Verena Mantke1,
Heike Hintelmann1, Wolfgang Hartmann3, Eva Wardelmann3, Georg Lenz1, Bernhard
Wünsch4, Carsten Müller-Tidow5, Rolf M. Mesters1, Christian Schwöppe1,#, Wolfgang E.
Berdel1,#
1

Department of Medicine A (Hematology, Hemostaseology, Oncology and Pneumology), University Hospital of Muenster,
Muenster, Germany

2

Department of Clinical Radiology, University Hospital of Muenster, Muenster, Germany

3

Gerhard-Domagk Institute for Pathology, University Hospital of Muenster, Muenster, Germany

4

Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Westfalian Wilhelms-University, Muenster, Germany

5

Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Halle, Halle, Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally and share first authorship

#

Senior authorship

Correspondence to: Wolfgang E. Berdel, email: berdel@uni-muenster.de
Keywords: retargeted tissue factor, vascular targeting, vascular infarction, doxorubicin tumor entrapment
Received: August 16, 2016     Accepted: October 04, 2016     Published: October 11, 2016

ABSTRACT
Truncated tissue factor (tTF), retargeted to tumor vasculature by GNGRAHA peptide
(tTF-NGR), and doxorubicin have therapeutic activity against a variety of tumors. We
report on combination experiments of both drugs using different schedules. We have
tested fluorescence- and HPLC-based intratumoral pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin, flow
cytometry for cellular phosphatidylserine (PS) expression, and tumor xenograft studies for
showing in vivo apoptosis, proliferation decrease, and tumor shrinkage upon combination
therapy with doxorubicin and induced tumor vascular infarction. tTF-NGR given before
doxorubicin inhibits the uptake of the drug into human fibrosarcoma xenografts in vivo.
Reverse sequence does not influence the uptake of doxorubicin into tumor, but significantly
inhibits the late wash-out phase, thus entrapping doxorubicin in tumor tissue by vascular
occlusion. Incubation of endothelial and tumor cells with doxorubicin in vitro increases
PS concentrations in the outer layer of the cell membrane as a sign of early apoptosis.
Cells expressing increased PS concentrations show comparatively higher procoagulatory
efficacy on the basis of equimolar tTF-NGR present in the Factor X assay. Experiments
using human M21 melanoma and HT1080 fibrosarcoma xenografts in athymic nude mice
indeed show a combinatorial tumor growth inhibition applying doxorubicin and tTF-NGR in
sequence over single drug treatment. Combination of cytotoxic drugs such as doxorubicin
with tTF-NGR-induced tumor vessel infarction can improve pharmacodynamics of the
drugs by new mechanisms, entrapping a cytotoxic molecule inside tumor tissue and
reciprocally improving procoagulatory activity of tTF-NGR in the tumor vasculature via
apoptosis induction in tumor endothelial and tumor cells.

INTRODUCTION

initiator of the extrinsic coagulation pathway, to induce
tumor vessel infarction was proposed by Huang et al. in
the Thorpe-lab [2]. Among a multitude of other target
molecules on tumor vessels, Pasqualini et al. [3] revealed
that small peptides containing the NGR motif (asparagine-

Denekamp et al. first proposed tumor vessels and
endothelial cells as a target for antitumor therapy [1]. Use
of tumor vascular targeted tissue factor (TF), a central
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82458

Oncotarget

glycine-arginine) bind to aminopeptidase N (APN;
CD13). CD13 is a cell surface molecule with up-regulated
expression on endothelial cells in tumors and tissues that
undergo angiogenesis.
We have constructed a series of fusion proteins
consisting of short NGR-peptide sequences coupled to
the C-terminal end of tTF [4–8]. Among others from this
series, tTF-NGR (HIStag-tTF1-218-GNGRAHA) as a model
fusion protein retains its procoagulatory activity in vitro,
binds to the respective targets on endothelial and tumor
cells, and upon intravenous infusion induces vascular
infarction in blood vessels of human tumors of various
histologies growing in athymic mice with subsequent
tumor growth retardation or regression. Tumor vascular
infarction induced by tTF-NGR can be impressively
visualized by different in vivo or ex vivo imaging
approaches [6, 8]. Intravenous infusion of tTF-NGR
in late-stage cancer patients at dose levels without side
effects was shown to reduce tumor blood flow in situ [5].
To further improve the therapeutic antitumor
efficacy of both compounds, we started experimental
combination therapy protocols of tTF-NGR with classical
cytotoxic drugs such as doxorubicin. Here we report on a
series of experiments examining new mechanistic aspects
of combining tumor vascular infarction induced by tTFNGR or random-PEGylated TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR and
the application of doxorubicin in vitro and in vivo. Our
results show that doxorubicin is effectively entrapped by
tTF-NGR-induced vascular infarction inside tumor tissues
leading to a longer exposure time of the tumor to the drug
with increased and prolonged tumor cell apoptosis. On the
other hand, doxorubicin-induced early apoptosis of tumor
endothelial and tumor cells with consecutive accumulation
of phosphatidylserine (PS) on the outer cell surface can
increase the procoagulatory milieu for tTF-NGR as
measured by a Factor X (FX) assay. Both mechanisms
lead to an improved therapeutic effect of the combination
over single drug treatment, completely stopping tumor
xenograft growth for the duration of experimental
observation, even when suboptimal doses and schedules
of tTF-NGR were applied. This observation contributes
to the design of randomized clinical trials with tTF-NGR
in the future.

be measured at 25–50 hours. We hypothesized that tumor
vessel occlusion with retargeted tissue factor tTF-NGR
will entrap this organic cytotoxic molecule inside tumor
tissue and thus prolong and amplify its antitumor effect.
For measuring intratumoral concentrations
of doxorubicin, we have taken advantage of the
autofluorescence of the molecule with excitation
wavelength of 479 nm and emission wavelength of 590 nm
[10]. To this end, we have used HT1080 human xenograft
tumors growing subcutaneously in CD-1 athymic mice,
treated the animals intravenously (i.v.) with 5 mg/kg body
weight (bw) doxorubicin at an approx. tumor size of 250
mm3, and excised the tumors at different time points after
injection. Tumor tissue was then subjected to doxorubicin
concentration measurement as described in Methods.
Intratumoral accumulation of doxorubicin occurred fast
after injection with high fluorescence levels already
measured at 1 hour after injection (Figure 1A,  1B).
Intratumoral Cmax (maximum concentration) values were
obtained approx. 6 hours after injection with a subsequent
slow monophasic decrease of intratumoral doxorubicin
concentrations and residual tissue levels still detectable
after 240 hours (Figure 1A, 1B). To establish plausibility
of the model for treatment sequences, we then combined
doxorubicin with tTF-NGR in a sequence applying
tTF-NGR or PEGylated TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR first,
subsequently followed by doxorubicin after short time
intervals (4 hours interval; application sequence: tTF-NGR
- doxorubicin). Experiments with this sequence showed
drastically decreased uptake of doxorubicin into tumor
tissue when compared with a doxorubicin - tTF-NGR
(fast application: 1st doxorubicin, 2nd tTF-NGR)
sequence (Figure 1C). This is easily explained by
tTF-NGR-induced tumor vascular occlusion before
doxorubicin is able to accumulate within the tumor. The
fluorescence microscopy findings of doxorubicin - tTFNGR versus tTF-NGR - doxorubicin sequences underline
these results (Figure 1D).
However, as shown in Figure 2, injecting tTF-NGR
6 hours after doxorubicin (at the intratumoral Cmax of
the drug) and iterating vascular occlusion by repeated
application of tTF-NGR over time significantly retarded
wash-out times of doxorubicin from the tumor. Besides,
it revealed prolonged high intratumoral drug levels in
the tumor tissue when compared to control sequences
of doxorubicin - saline. Non-PEGylated tTF-NGR had
a more pronounced effect than random-PEGylated
TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR. Thus, we could show significant
intratumoral entrapment of doxorubicin by tTF-NGRinduced tumor vascular occlusion.
Identical time points following doxorubicin - tTFNGR sequences were taken for comparative studies on
normal organ tissues. In normal tissues such as lung no
such entrapment of doxorubicin by tTF-NGR was observed
(Figure 3), indicating that doxorubicin distribution in normal
organs is not altered by this combination with tTF-NGR.

RESULTS
Kinetics of intra-tumoral and intra-organ
doxorubicin concentrations upon different
combination schedules with tTF-NGR
Doxorubicin is an anthracycline and among the
most widely used antitumor cytotoxic compounds.
Short intravenous infusions of doxorubicin are followed
by triphasic clearance kinetics from plasma [9]. Initial
distribution half-life is approx. 5–10 minutes, secondary
half-life is 1–3 hours, and terminal elimination half-life can
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82459

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Fluorescence- and HPLC-based quantification of doxorubicin content in tumor tissue. Doxorubicin was injected

at a dose of 5 mg/kg bw i.v. and the intratumoral concentration was determined over a time of up to 240 hours by spectrofluorometric
analysis (A) 1 h n = 3, 2 h n = 4, 6 h n = 2, 65 h n = 2, 120 h n = 5 and 240 h n = 2) and up to 120 hours by HPLC (B) 1 h n = 3, 2 h
n = 2, 4 h n = 3, 6 h n = 2, 65 h n = 3 and 120 h n = 3). The maximum fluorescence signal (tissue Cmax) was obtained at 6 hours (tmax) after
injection with a following slow monophasic decrease of intratumoral doxorubicin concentrations and remaining intratumoral levels still
detectable after 240 hours. tTF-NGR (1mg/kg bw i.v.) or PEGylated tTF-NGR (5 mg/kg bw i.v.) injection 4 hours before doxorubicin
yielded a decreased uptake of doxorubicin into tumor tissue in comparison to a fast opposite sequence (C). P-values showed significance
in uptake blockade (p = 0.0079, **, Mann-Whitney test). Furthermore, tumor fluorescence microscopy photographs (D) visualized the
decrease in autofluorescence of intratumoral doxorubicin injected after tTF-NGR (D, b) over the opposite sequence injecting tTF-NGR
after doxorubicin (D, a). AU, arbitrary units. All data are presented in means ± SEM.

Figure 2: Fluorescence-based quantification of doxorubicin wash-out kinetics upon combinatorial application of
doxorubicin and tTF-NGR or randomly PEGylated tTF-NGR, respectively. The HT1080 tumor-bearing mice were injected

with a 1st application of tTF-NGR or PEGylated tTF-NGR 6 hours after doxorubicin injection at intratumoral Cmax of doxorubicin, and
vascular occlusion was upheld by repeated application of tTF-NGR or randomly PEGylated tTF-NGR, respectively, over time. This
combinatorial protocol significantly retarded wash-out times of doxorubicin from the tumor with prolonged high intratumoral drug levels
in the tumor tissue after 65 and 120 hours upon doxorubicin - tTF-NGR sequences as compared to control sequences of doxorubicin - saline
(p = 0.0043 at 65 h, p = 0.0095 at 120 h; **Mann-Whitney test). Non-PEGylated tTF-NGR had a more pronounced effect than randomly
PEGylated tTF-NGR. Data are presented in means ± SEM. AU, arbitrary units.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82460

Oncotarget

Doxorubicin entrapped by tTF-NGR induces
higher levels of tumor cell apoptosis in situ

occlusion, we next performed experiments to test for
reciprocal cooperative interaction of both drugs. Ex vivo
testing had shown increased tumor cell apoptosis
following doxorubicin - tTF-NGR sequence. Thus, we
hypothesized that increasing phosphatidylserine (PS)
externalization to the outer cell surface of endothelial
and tumor cells induced by pro-apoptotic activity of
doxorubicin can lead to a better procoagulatory milieu
and consecutively to a more efficient FX activation by
tTF-NGR. Experiments reported before have shown
phospholipid/PS-dependency of the procoagulatory
state [11–13], increasing PS externalization to the
outer leaflet of the cellular phospholipid bilayer by proapoptotic maneuvers including cytotoxics [13–15], and
the consequence of both, i.e. increased procoagulatory
activity of endothelial cells by PS externalization [16–19].
Since in tumor vessels, the inner vascular cell layer is
not only built by endothelial cells but in addition also by
tumor cells in a process termed vascular mimicry [20], we
have also tested the procoagulatory behaviour of tumor
cells following induction of apoptosis by doxorubicin as
a further mechanism explaining the combinatorial effect.
APC Annexin V flow cytometry of HUVEC
(Figure  5) and HT1080 (Figure 6) or M21 (Figure 7)
tumor cells showed a doxorubicin-induced dose- and
time-dependent PS externalization to their outer surface
(HUVEC, Figure 5A, 5B; HT1080, Figure 6B; M21,
Figure 7B). As shown by FX activation kinetics, HUVEC
and HT1080 or M21 tumor cells showed a significantly
higher procoagulatory efficacy when used with equimolar
concentrations of tTF-NGR upon doxorubicin incubation
and higher PS externalization than identical numbers
of control cells with low PS externalization (Figures
5C, 6C, and 7C). For proof of a causal relation between
doxorubicin-induced PS externalization and procoagulant

To test for biological consequences of this
new method to accumulate doxorubicin in tumors by
entrapment following vascular occlusion, we next
subjected tumor tissues directly after excision to
fluorescence reflectance imaging (FRI) by injecting
Annexin-Vivo 750 as an apoptosis marker 96 h before
imaging. Combinatorial treatment with the doxorubicin tTF-NGR or - TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR sequences induced
significantly higher levels of tumor cell apoptosis
in situ than doxorubicin - saline control sequences
(Figure 4A a-d). Since the liver in contrast to other normal
organs also showed lower but visible signs of in situ
apoptosis upon administration of the doxorubicin - tTFNGR sequence (Figure 4B a-d), potential liver toxicity
should be closely monitored in clinical trials applying this
combination. While the heart represents the organ with
dose limiting cumulative toxicity (DLT) for doxorubicin,
liver represents an organ for potential DLT of tTF-NGR
in the safety pharmacology series of experiments for this
compound according to the ICH guidelines S6/9. Organs
such as the kidneys, which are operative in metabolism or
excretion of the fluorescence dye, or lungs were positive
in all assays without differences (details not shown).

Doxorubicin increases PS concentration on the
outer cell surface of endothelial and tumor cells
which leads to a higher procoagulatory state of
the cells
After we have demonstrated a higher and longer
intratumoral concentration of doxorubicin upon
entrapment in tumors by tTF-NGR-induced vascular

Figure 3: Fluorescence-based quantification of doxorubicin content in normal lung tissue. For details see Figures 1 and 2.

Identical time points following doxorubicin - tTF-NGR sequences were taken for comparative studies on normal organ tissues. In normal
tissues such as lung no entrapment of doxorubicin by tTF-NGR could be shown, indicating that doxorubicin organ toxicity should not be
altered by this combination with tTF-NGR. AU, arbitrary units. Data are shown as means ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82461

Oncotarget

fibrosarcoma xenografts in athymic mice in vivo. Drugs
and controls (saline) were slowly injected i.v. at the
doses and time intervals as shown in Figure 8A and  8B.
In Figure 8A, tumor volumes of three human M21
melanoma experiments, including two CD-1 and one
BALB/c nude mice trials are presented. Giving tTF-NGR
at therapeutically optimal doses (1.5 mg/kg bw, daily × 5)
and combining it with 5 mg/kg bw doxorubicin showed
better therapeutic efficacy than both drugs given alone
and completely stopped tumor xenograft growth for the
duration of experimental observation (Figure 8A). In
the human sarcoma HT1080 model, tTF-NGR (1 mg/kg
bw, 4 times every other day) and random-PEGylated
TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR (5 mg/kg bw, 4 times every
other day) were given at suboptimal doses starting 6 hours

behaviour of the cells, we could show that preincubation
with recombinant human Annexin V, binding and masking
PS, completely abolished this elevated procoagulatory
state of the cells (HUVEC, Figure 5C; HT1080, Figure
6C; M21, Figure 7C).

Therapeutic superiority of sequential application
of doxorubicin followed by tTF-NGR over both
compounds given alone against human tumor
xenografts
Subsequently, we have tested the combinatorial
effect of doxorubicin with subsequent tTF-NGR or
random-PEGylated tTF-NGR, respectively, versus saline
controls using human M21-melanoma and HT1080-

Figure 4: Fluorescence-based quantification of apoptosis in tumor and organ tissues in situ. Petri dish with tumors (2–3 weeks

after cell inoculation) or organs 98 hours post-injection of Annexin-Vivo 750 and 120 hours after start of treatment (A) color-coded fluorescence
reflectance images: (a) doxorubicin 5 mg/kg bw (day 0); (b) tTF-NGR 1 mg/kg bw (day 0, 2, 5); (c) doxorubicin 5 mg/kg bw (day 0) followed
by tTF-NGR 1 mg/kg bw (6 h after doxorubicin, and days 2, 5); (d) doxorubicin 5 mg/kg bw followed by PEGylated tTF-NGR 5 mg/kg bw
(6 h after doxorubicin, and days 2, 5). High fluorescence values are observed in the tumors (A, b-d). Semi-quantitative data showed significant
higher levels of tumor cell apoptosis in situ in mice, which received the doxorubicin - tTF-NGR than in mice receiving a doxorubicin - saline
control sequence (A) p = 0.0381, *, Mann-Whitney test), whereas doxorubicin - PEGylated tTF-NGR vs. doxorubicin (p  = 0.114) and
doxorubicin vs. doxorubicin – tTF-NGR (p = 0.610) showed a trend in favour of the combination, but no significant tTF-NGR differences
in fluorescence signal. (B) The liver and at lower levels the heart showed signs of in situ apoptosis in mice injected with tTF-NGR and
doxorubicin - tTF-NGR (B, a-d, liver), but there was no quantitative difference between tTF-NGR alone or the combination of doxorubicin tTF-NGR, respectively (B, right panel). CAVE: The absolute values cannot be compared between the single organs and tumors, since different
organ sizes interfere (e.g. liver size bigger than tumor size). AU, arbitrary units. All data are presented in means ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82462

Oncotarget

after the application of 5 mg/kg bw of doxorubicin on day 0
and then repeated on days 2, 4 and 7. In some experiments,
this protocol was repeated on days 9 and 11, however without
yielding better results (details not shown). With this “days 0,
2, 4, 7” schedule there was significant amplification of the
combinatorial therapeutic effect over the tTF-NGR single
drug treatment and a clear trend for better therapeutic outcome
of the combination when compared with doxorubicin given
alone. The combination yielded complete growth suppression
of the tumors or tumor remission for prolonged times
(Figure 8B). Only a non-significant trend in favour of the

combined application of doxorubicin and random-PEGylated
TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR over TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR
alone was detectable and no effect in favour of this
combination over doxorubicin alone.
However, in both tumor models reciprocal drug
activation leads to an improved therapeutic effect of the
combination of doxorubicin and retargeted tTF-NGR over
single drugs, completely stopping tumor xenograft growth
for the duration of experimental observation, in particular
when suboptimal doses and schedules of both tTF-NGR
forms were applied.

Figure 5: Doxorubicin-induced phosphatidylserine (PS) externalization on HUVEC enhances the procoagulatory
activity of tTF-NGR. APC Annexin V stains early apoptotic cells, which display PS on their surface, TOPRO3 iodide stains necrotic
cells (A and B). The amount of PS on the outer surface of HUVECs correlates with the dosage of and incubation time with doxorubicin.
Upon 16 hours treatment with 2 µM doxorubicin, the fraction of PS positive cells rises from 14% (non-treated cells) to 47%, whereas the
number of necrotic cells only increases moderately from 7% to 13% (A). For the chart in (B), the percentage of stained cells in R1 has been
reduced by the fraction of unstained cells in R1 (not shown). Doxorubicin concentrations of 2 µM and 20 µM display significant differences
to controls for all incubation times (2 µM: p8h = 0.0007, p16h = 0.0180, p24h = 0.0030 (**); 20 µM: p8h = 0.0022, p16h = 0.0198, p24h = 0,0028
(**); two-tailed t-test). For these concentrations, 24 h incubation leads to significantly (p < 0.05, *) elevated PS exposure when compared
to 8 hours. Lower concentrations do not show efficacy in terms of augmenting PS levels on the outer cell membrane (B). Data are shown
in means ± SEM. (C) After 16 h treatment with 2 µM doxorubicin, HUVECs showed significantly improved ability to activate FX in the
presence of tTF-NGR (p = 0.0015, **). This effect is due to additional PS on their surface and not to nonspecifc effects following necrosis,
since TOPRO3 iodide staining was below 10% and since the increased coagulability could be completely reverted by blocking surface
PS by Annexin V binding to PS as shown in the right bars (-doxorubicin, +annexin; +doxorubicin, +annexin, p = 0.00003; ***). Data are
represented in means ± SEM (one outlier has been excluded from analysis).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82463

Oncotarget

Morphology and proliferative capacity of
HT1080 tumors upon combinatorial treatment
with doxorubicin and tTF-NGR

(Figure 9B). As control bars for day 21 (only day 21 shown)
are identical with day 7, the combinatorial effect is much
deeper than the effect of each single drug even on day 21,
but comparable to the combination on day 7, which means
that the antiproliferative activity of the combination is
prolonged. Interestingly, doxorubicin alone cannot prevent
resumed proliferation of the tumors on day 21 at all. This is
in contrast to tTF-NGR and in particular to the combination,
which inhibits the proliferation of the tumors even on day 21.
These observations again underline the new
mechanisms described here for antitumor activity of
combinatorial application of a cytotoxic drug followed by
induced vascular occlusion via tTF-fusion proteins.

Macroscopically, the tumors in the combination
therapy group showed bluish coloration starting a few
hours after injections of tTF-NGR and later central necrotic
shrinking as shown in Figure 9A. To test for remaining
proliferative activity of the tumor cells following treatment,
single tumors were excised in some experiments after
treatment and subjected to histological studies. Ki67stained histology (Figure 9B) showed decrease of tumor
cell proliferative activity upon combined therapeutic
interventions over saline controls with more pronounced antiproliferative effects of the doxorubicin - tTF-NGR sequence
over single drugs. Moreover, tumors treated with doxorubicin
alone, resumed their proliferative capacity 21 days after
start of treatment, whereas tumors at this time remained
largely non-proliferative upon combination treatment

DISCUSSION
Aminopeptidase N (CD13) is a promising target for
delivering therapeutic moieties to tumor vessels and tumor
cells. The molecule is increasingly used for experimental

Figure 6: Doxorubicin-induced phosphatidylserine (PS) expression on HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells enhances the
procoagulatory activity of tTF-NGR. For experimental details see Figure 5. HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells are more susceptible to

doxorubicin treatment than HUVECs. Dosages of 0.2 µM doxorubicin yield considerably higher apoptosis levels than controls (0.2 µM:
p = 0.0559-0.4482; 2 µM: p8h = 0.1045, p16h = 0.0073, p24h = 0.0260 (*); 20 µM: p8h = 0.0981, p16h = 0.008, p24h = 0.0096 (**); (A and B). With
similar time and dose dependency as in HUVECs PS externalization exceeds HUVECs by up to 100% whereas necrosis (TOPRO3) remained
low. If necessary, different gates for APC Annexin V and TOPRO3-stained cells were set to account for distinct staining behaviour. (C)
As a result, Factor X activation assays show a proportionally increased procoagulatory effect of HT1080 cells upon doxorubicin treatment
(p = 0.0264, *), which is completely reversible upon PS inhibition by Annexin V (p = 0.0268, *). All values are shown in means ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82464

Oncotarget

in vivo imaging of tumors and other angiogenic tissues via
different methods [21–32]. Extensive protein expression
analysis has revealed a restricted expression of the molecule
in normal organs [33].
Our fusion proteins consist of small peptides
coupled to the C-terminus of tTF [4–8]. By connecting
the peptide to the C-terminus of tTF, the tTF moiety is
part of the tTF:VIIa complex adopting a physiological
orientation perpendicular to the phospholipid membrane
[34], and thus constitutes a potent initiator of coagulation.
Peptide-targeted tTF may combine certain advantages
over antibodies or larger antibody fragments as targeting
moieties for tTF, such as better tumor penetration [35],
low non-specific accumulation, low uptake in the
reticulohistiocytic system (RHS), and low immunogenicity
[36]. The thrombogenic activity of the model compound
tTF-NGR in tumor vasculature with subsequent tumor
infarction and growth delay could be shown in several
tumor mouse models. First-in-man experiences with

low doses of tTF-NGR (1–4 mg/m2 by i.v. infusion)
showed inhibition of tumor perfusion without any side
effects as “proof of principle” [5]. NGR-peptide targeting
is of further interest, since NGR peptides undergo a
non-enzymatic, slow asparagine deamidation to
isoaspartate-glycine-arginine (isoDGR) generating a
further ligand for alphaV integrins [37, 38], which are
also upregulated on tumor endothelial cells [37, 39–41].
Thus, antitumor payloads may be delivered to two target
molecules on tumor vasculature in sequence.
Although we could not find synergy of the
combination sequence as defined by significant differences
between the combination over both single drug in both
tumor models, there was combinatorial benefit of the
combination with mechanistical specificity for one selected
sequence of drugs. Combination effects of targeted tissue
factors with other treatment modalities including lowenergy ultrasound and liposomal cytotoxics have been
observed by us and others before [19, 42]. Doxorubicin

Figure 7: Doxorubicin-induced phosphatidylserine (PS) expression on M21-melanoma cells enhances the
procoagulatory activity of tTF-NGR. For experimental details see Figure 5. Experiments with M21-melanoma cells showed a clear
trend for doxorubicin to enhance PS externalization on the cell surface (A and B) with a higher degree of simultaneous necrosis than in
HUVECs (2 µM: p8 h = 0.2411, p16 h = 0.2040, p24 h = 0.0325 (*); 20 µM: p8 h = 0.8166, p16 h = 0.0013, p24 h = 0.0006 (***)). (C) Doxorubicin
treatment enhanced the procoagulatory effect of tTF-NGR in the presence of doxorubicin-treated M21 cells, which is entirely reversible
upon PS inhibition by Annexin V. Adherent and suspension cells were considered for analysis collectively. Asterisks denote statistical
significance (p < 0.05, *); all values are presented in means + SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82465

Oncotarget

represents an organic cytotoxic drug which is widely used
in clinical oncology. Here we have shown a completely
new mechanism by which tTF-NGR-induced tumor
vascular infarction entraps this molecule and potentiates
its activity in tumors of different histology. If classical
cytotoxic compounds can be captured and entrapped
inside tumors so easily and thereby potentiated in their
local antitumor activity, this observation possibly bears
general importance for the application of cytotoxic drugs
in oncology and should be further studied within a wider
scope. However, since the liver also showed low, though
visible signs of in situ apoptosis upon the combination
treatment with tTF-NGR and doxorubicin - tTF-NGR
combinations, potential liver toxicity should be closely
monitored in clinical trials. Interestingly, standard safety
pharmacology studies for tTF-NGR according to S6/S9
guideliness of the European Medicines Agency revealed
increase of bilirubin as a sign of liver toxicity in dogs.
We have performed the previous series of
experiments with the tumor vascular infarction approach

mainly in xenograft models of human tumors with
different histology [4–8], which provides a large data basis
for comparability of the results presented here. tTF-NGR
however, is active also in syngeneic metastasis models
such as in the B16 melanoma model (data not shown).
No convincing combinatorial effect of the combined
application of doxorubicin and the random-PEGylated
TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR was detectable. PEGylation
reflects a standard method for attempting improved
pharmacodynamic properties of a macromolecule such as
the tTF-NGR protein. We are working on a PEGylation
program with the objective to improve on the profile
of tTF-NGR for clinical application, However, the data
presented here show the limitation of this PEGylation
approach.
In conclusion, we present a new mechanism by
which two different antitumor molecules can reciprocally
enhance their respective antitumor activity. In particular,
we report tumor entrapment of doxorubicin by targeted
tTF-NGR-induced tumor vascular infarction and a

Figure 8: In vivo therapeutic activity against tumor xenografts of combinatorial application of doxorubicin - tTF-NGR
or - TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR. Drugs were applied intravenously at the doses and time points indicated. Data are presented as means +
SEM. Asterisks indicate statistical significance for the groups as indicated (p < 0.05, *; p < 0.001, **; p < 0.0001, ***; Mann-Whitney test).
(A) Therapeutic activity of doxorubicin (5 mg/kg bw, see arrow; n = 13), tTF-NGR at optimal dose (1.5 mg/kg bw, daily application, see 5
arrows; n = 16), or the combination of both drugs (n = 14) compared to the PBS control (n = 15) in a human M21 melanoma xenograft
model. Three experiments with CD-1- and BALB/c-nude mice were combined. Start of treatment: 35 days after tumor implantation (CD-1),
and 52 days (BALB/c), respectively. Tumor volumes are presented as percentage (start of the therapy = 100%; max. tumor size included
into the evaluations was 1.2 cm³ at the start of the therapy). In comparison to the PBS control, the therapies with doxorubicin, combination
of doxorubicin and tTF-NGR, and tTF-NGR alone revealed highly significant decrease in tumor volumes on day 7. Comparison of the
combination therapy versus doxorubicin alone indicates statistical significance (p = 0.026), while the comparison with tTF-NGR alone
reveals a non-significant trend in favor of the combination (p = 0.533). (B) Therapeutic activity of doxorubicin (5 mg/kg bw, see arrow;
n = 5), tTF-NGR (1 mg/kg bw; n = 5) or TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR (5 mg/kg bw; n = 4), respectively (both applied every other day, see 4
arrows), or the combination of both drugs (each n = 4) at identical doses in a HT1080-human fibrosarcoma xenograft model. In comparison
to the PBS control, the therapies with doxorubicin, doxorubicin followed by tTF-NGR, and tTF-NGR alone revealed a significant decrease
in tumor volume on day 21 (p = 0.0317, p = 0.0286, p = 0.0259, respectively); comparison of the combination schedule ‘doxorubicin
followed by tTF-NGR’ versus doxorubicin alone shows a non-significant trend in favor of the combination (p = 0.105), while comparison
of ‘doxorubicin followed by tTF-NGR’ versus tTF-NGR alone reveals statistical significance (p = 0.0489).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82466

Oncotarget

better procoagulatory environment for tTF-NGR or
random-PEGylated tTF-NGR to yield vascular infarction
by doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in situ. This observation
contributes to the design of randomized clinical trials with
tTF-NGR molecules in combination with cytotoxic drugs.

described before, again with only minor modifications [7].
Briefly, the protein (solved in phosphate buffered saline
(PBS)) was incubated for 2 h at 4°C with an 30-fold excess
of TMS(PEG)12, a trimethyl succinimidyl polyethylene
glycol ester (molecular weight: 2420.8 Da), which reacts
with primary amino groups (such as lysine) within the
tTF-NGR protein, releasing NHS. To remove the NHS
group and excess TMS(PEG)12, the reaction mixture with
the PEGylated protein TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR was purified
by a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)based gel filtration with Sephadex G-25 medium (GE
Healthcare, München, Germany). The final PEGylated
protein solution was stored at −25°C.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning, expression, purification, and
PEGylation of tTF-NGR
Cloning, expression and purification of tTF-NGR
was previously described and performed with only minor
modifications [4–6]. The expression vector pET-30a(+)
(Novagen, Schwalbach am Taunus, Germany), containing
the cDNA sequence encoding for the N-terminal HIStag, the
tTF-protein (amino acids 1–218 of TF), and the C-terminal
heptapeptide GNGRAHA was used. Random TMS(PEG)12
PEGylation of the tTF-NGR protein was performed as

Cell cultures
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
were purchased from PromoCell (Heidelberg, Germany)
in passage 1 and only used at low passage numbers. Cells

Figure 9: Tumor macroscopic appearance and proliferation as shown by Ki-67 staining. (A) Appearance of subcutaneous

HT1080 tumor after treatment with doxorubicin (5 mg/kg bw, i.v.) followed by tTF-NGR (1 mg/kg bw, i.v.). During the time of treatment
(5 days), the tumor collapsed with signs of necrosis. (B) Immunofluorescence staining of tumor sections (mean n = 2 per group) with antiKi67 antibody (green), indicating the proliferation rate in control mice after 21 days (a), in doxorubicin - tTF-NGR treated mice after 7 days
(b), in doxorubicin treated mice after 21 days (c), in tTF-NGR treated mice after 21 days (d) and in doxorubicin - tTF-NGR treated mice
after 21 days (e). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). The measured binary area fraction (4 sections of each tumor) showed significant
decrease of tumor cell proliferative activity in the doxorubicin - tTF-NGR sequence (b) on day 7 over saline control (a; **p = 0.008,
Mann-Whitney test). After 21 days proliferative capacity of the doxorubicin monotherapy tumors recovered completely (c), whereas
pronounced anti-proliferative effects of the doxorubicin - tTF-NGR sequence (e) over single drugs (c, d) was retained, however, without
reaching statistically significant differences comparing the combination vs. doxorubicin (p = 0.133) or tTF-NGR (p = 0.600) alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82467

Oncotarget

were cultured in MCDB 131 medium supplemented with
20% fetal calf serum (FCS), 2 mM glutamine (Gibco,
Eggenstein, Germany), 50 µg/ml endothelial cell growth
supplement (ECGS; Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany),
5  U/ml heparin (Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany), and
maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2 and high humidity. Cell
culture dishes were coated with 0.2% gelatine. The
human M21-melanoma cell line was kindly provided
by Dr. Siletti (University of California, San Diego, CA,
USA) and cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented
with 10% FCS and 2 mM glutamine. M21 cells grow
both adherent and in suspension. The human HT1080fibrosarcoma cell line was directly obtained from ATCC
(Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in Dulbecco´s medium
(Gibco) supplemented with 10% FCS. Cell line identity
was authenticated and confirmed by short tandem repeat
(STR) profiling before and after experiments.

modified the assay as follows. Briefly, 20 µl of the
following was added to each well in a microtiter plate:
(a) 50 nM recombinant FVIIa (Novo-Nordisc, Bagsværd,
Denmark) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.1%
bovine serum albumin (BSA); (b) 750 pM tTF-NGR
in TBS-BSA; (c) 25 mM CaCl2, and in place of
phospholipids (d) 10,000 doxorubicin-treated (2 µM, 16 h
incubation) or control cells. To inhibit PS on cell surfaces,
cells were incubated with 10 µg/105 cells of recombinant
human Annexin V (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA)
for 15 min before any reagents were added. After 10 min
at room temperature, the substrate FX (Enzyme Research
Laboratories, Swansea, UK) was added (final concentration
1 µM). After further 10 min, the reaction was stopped
in 100 mM EDTA and Spectrozyme FXa (American
Diagnostica, Greenwich, USA; final concentration 0.7 mM)
was added immediately prior to analysis on a microplate
reader (Bio-Rad, München, Germany). The rates of FXa
generation were monitored by the development of color
at 405 nm, the FX activation by tTF-NGR on cell surfaces
was calculated by increase in extinction. Procoagulatory
activity within the assay without addition of doxorubicin
and/or Annexin V was set as 100%.

Phosphatidylserine (PS) staining of endothelial
and tumor cells by flow cytometry
Cells were washed once with PBS, trypsinized and
harvested. After washing them twice with PBS, cells
were resuspended in 100 µl binding buffer according
to Schellenberger [43]. To detect early apoptotic cells,
one sample was stained with 5 µl APC Annexin V
(Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions and incubated for
10 minutes in the dark. APC Annexin V binds to cell
surface phosphatidylserine which is upregulated on cells
undergoing apoptosis. Afterwards, cells were washed
twice and finally resuspended in binding buffer. TOPRO3
iodide (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was
added to unstained samples immediately prior to
analysis (1 µl, diluted 1:1000) in order to determine the
amount of late apoptotic or necrotic cells. On average,
104 cells per sample were counted before apoptosis and
viability rates were calculated with BD CellQuest Pro
Software (Becton Dickinson). Solely single stains and
dyes with excitation by the red diode laser and detection
in the FL4 channel (Ex635nm/Em661nm) were used in
order to avoid interference with the autofluorescence of
doxorubicin. All experiments were conducted at least
three times.

Tumor xenograft models
All procedures on animals were performed in
agreement with German regulations (Tierversuchsgesetz
§8, Abs. 2) and specifically approved in form of a project
license. CD-1 nude mice were purchased from Charles
River Laboratories (Sulzfeld, Germany) and acclimated
to our animal-experiment facility for at least 1 week
before any experimentation. Mice were maintained
in individually-ventilated cages (IVC) on a 12:12 h
light:dark cycle in a low-stress environment (22°C,
50% humidity, low noise) and given food and water ad
libitum.
Single tumor cell suspensions were injected
subcutaneously (s.c.) into the right anterior flank of
female CD-1 or BALB/c nude mice (9–12 weeks old),
respectively. For therapeutic experiments, tumor growth
was allowed to a mean volume as indicated in the Results
section. Mice were randomly assigned to different
experimental groups. Doxorubicin, tTF-NGR, randomly
PEGylated TMS(PEG)12 tTF-NGR, or control 0.9% NaCl
solution were slowly applied intravenously (i.v.) via the
tail veins in the indicated doses and time schedules. Tumor
size was evaluated using a standard caliper measuring
tumor length and width; tumor volumes were calculated
using the standardized formula (length × width² × л/6).
According to our project license, animals had to be
sacrificed when tumors became too large, if mice lost too
much body weight, or at signs of pain. In this case, mice
were sacrificed by cervical dislocation in deep ketamine/
xylazine anesthesia in agreement with standard regulations
and the project license.

Factor X activation by tTF-NGR in the
presence of cells with different amounts of
phosphatidylserine (PS) on the surface
The ability of tTF-NGR to enhance the specific
proteolytic activation of Factor (F) X by FVIIa was
measured by FX activation analysis as basically described
by Ruf et al. [44]. In order to assess the differences in
the procoagulatory efficacy of tTF-NGR upon binding
to HUVECs and tumor cells (HT1080 and M21) with
different amounts of PS on their surfaces, we have
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82468

Oncotarget

Fluorescence-based quantification of
doxorubicin content in tumor and organ tissues

Germany) equipped with a 400 W halogen illuminator
with Cy 7 bandpass excitation (730 nm) and emission
filters (790 nm). Fluorescence signals were captured
with a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) camera.
Mice received 2 nmol Annexin vivo 750 (Perkin Elmer,
Waltham, MA, USA) via the tail vein. After 96 h, the
animals were sacrificed and the organs were removed
and placed on a Petri dish for fluorescence imaging.
Fluorescence images were coregistered with the anatomic
white light images and quantified using region of
interest (ROI) that includes the whole organ. The mean
fluorescence intensity of each sample was reported using
Bruker MI 7.1 software. Relative fluorescence signal
intensities were visualized in false colors and quantified
as AU. To eliminate nonspecific background fluorescence,
data from tissue extracts containing no doxorubicin were
subtracted.

After final treatment the subcutaneous tumors and
organs were excised. Half of each tumor was shockfrozen for fluorescence microscopy; the other half
was weighed, homogenized, resuspended in cold PBS
containing 1% Triton X-100 (1 ml per 0.1 g tumor tissue)
and incubated for 1 h on ice. Afterwards, the suspension
was homogenized using ultrasound and incubated with
acetonitrile (50% v/v) for 30 min at room temperature. The
homogenate was transferred to a 5 ml-centrifugation tube
and centrifuged at 3800 rcf for 10 min. The supernatant
was taken off and 500 µl of each probe was measured
using spectrofluorometric analysis.
Fluorometeric cuvettes are made of quartz glass
transparent on all sides. Excitation and emission
wavelengths were set according to doxorubicin
spectrophotometric properties (Ex470nm/Em580nm).
Relative fluorescence signal intensities were visualized
in false colors and quantified as arbitrary units (AU). To
eliminate nonspecific background fluorescence, data from
tissue extracts containing no doxorubicin were subtracted.

Histology examination and Ki67 staining
Histological analyses of xenograft tumor tissues
were performed with O.C.T.-embedded and cryoconserved tissues according to standard protocols. Briefly,
tissues were embedded in Tissue-TEK O.C.T. (Sakura,
Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands), snap-frozen in
liquid nitrogen, and stored at −85°C. Frozen samples were
cut to 5-µm sections and transferred onto glass slides.
For immunofluorescence staining, slides were dried
and sections fixated with acetone according to standard
protocols. After three washing steps with PBS, sections
were blocked with a 10% bovine serum albumin (BSA,
Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) solution in PBS
for 30 min, again followed by 3 washing steps with PBS.
Sections were then incubated with an anti-Ki67 antibody
(Abcam, Cambridge, UK; dilution 1:700) overnight
at 4°C in a humid chamber in the dark. After another
washing step with PBS, the sections were incubated
with a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labelled goat
anti rabbit-IgG antibody (Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L)
Secondary Antibody, Alexa Fluor® 488 conjugate,
Thermo Fisher, Dreieich, Germany; dilution 1:1000) at
room temperature for 90 minutes. Nuclei were stained
alongside using 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI;
Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany; dilution 1:1000).
The sections were mounted with Fluorescence Mounting
Medium (DAKO, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at 4°C.
To confirm the Ki67 staining performance,
HT1080 cells were used as a positive control. The cells
were seeded on 12-mm cover glasses for 4 days (about
85% confluence), followed by two washing steps
with PBS. Cells were fixated by incubation with 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA, pH 7.0; stabilized with methanol,
Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) for 10 minutes, followed
by 3 washing steps with PBS. The cover glasses were then
incubated with 0.2% Triton X-100 (Serva, Heidelberg,
Germany; diluted in PBS) for 3 min. Afterwards, the

HPLC-based quantification of doxorubicin
content in tumor and organ tissues
Doxorubicin content of extracted tissue samples
was determined by specific fluorescence and HPLC
analysis. A volume of 50 µl of each sample was injected
into a Knauer (Herbert Knauer GmbH, Berlin, Germany)
gradient reversed-phase (RP)-HPLC system, consisting of
two K-1800 pumps, an S-2500 UV detector, a Shimadzu
RF10AXL fluorescence detector, and analytical RP-HPLC
Nucleosil 100-5 C18 columns (250 mm × 4.6 mm). The
parameters were adjusted as follows: solvents (A: water
for injection cont. 0.1% TFA, B: acetonitrile, Sigma
HPLC-grade cont. 0.1% TFA); flow 1.2 ml per minute;
gradient 90% A 0–2 min, 90%–40% A 2–32 min, 40%
A 32–42 min, 40%–90% A 42–43 min, 90% 42–45 min.
The fluorescence detector was set to 482 nm and
550 nm excitation and emission, respectively, and a high
sensitivity with 4× gain. The doxorubicin fluorescence
was detected at 22–25 min; the relative signal intensities
were quantified as arbitrary units (AU). The recorded data
was processed (e.g. integrated) by ChromGate HPLC
software (Knauer). To eliminate nonspecific background
fluorescence, data from tissue extracts containing no
doxorubicin were subtracted.

Fluorescence-based quantification of apoptosis in
tumor and organ tissues in situ
Near-infrared fluorescence reflectance imaging
(FRI) was performed using the In Vivo FX Pro Imaging
System (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82469

Oncotarget

FUNDING

same immunofluorescence staining protocol as for frozen
sections (after fixation) has been applied.
5-µm cryo-sections of heart tissue were used as
a negative control of the staining performance. BSA
(1% in PBS) and normal rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz, Heidelberg,
Germany) were used as internal negative controls to prove
the specificity of the first and second antibody.
For Ki67, the slides were analyzed using NIS
Elements software. Images were acquired in 20× optical
zoom for single areas, and in 10× optical zoom for
quantitative analysis (binary area fraction) of the whole
tumor tissue.
The binary area fraction was calculated by dividing
the binary area (absolute content of green fluorescence
pixel) above the threshold set by the investigator to
measure only specific staining and remaining constant for
all sections by the whole tissue area (defined separately
by a manual region of interest (ROI) to only asses tissue)
presented as percentage.

J. Ronnacker was supported by the MedK program
of the Faculty of Medicine. This study was supported by
grants of the Deutsche Krebshilfe e.V. (110886 and 111004
to W.E. Berdel), the Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung
(2013_A284 to C. Schwöppe and W.E. Berdel), the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Cluster of Excellence:
Cells in Motion (EXC 1003 to B. Wünsch, G. Lenz, and
W.E. Berdel), and the Sybille-Hahne-Stiftung.

REFERENCES
1.	 Denekamp J: Endothelial cell proliferation as a novel
approach to targeting tumour therapy. Br J Cancer. 1982;
45:136–139.
2.	 Huang X, Molema G, King S, Watkins L, Edgington TS,
Thorpe PE. Tumor infarction in mice by antibody-directed
targeting of tissue factor to tumor vasculature. Science.
1997; 275:547–550.
3.	 Pasqualini R, Koivunen E, Kain R, Lahdenranta J,
Sakamoto M, Stryhn A, Ashmun RA, Shapiro LH, Arap W,
Ruoshlahti E. Aminopeptidase N is a receptor for tumorhoming peptides and a target for inhibiting angiogenesis.
Cancer Res. 2000; 60:722–727.
4.	 Kessler T, Schwöppe C, Liersch R, Schliemann C,
Hintelmann H, Bieker R, Berdel WE, Mesters RM.
Generation of fusion proteins for selective occlusion of
tumor vessels. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2008; 5:1–8.
5.	 Bieker R, Kessler T, Schwöppe C, Padró T, Persigehl
T, Bremer C, Dreischalück J, Kolkmeyer A, Heindel W,
Mesters RM, Berdel WE: Infarction of tumor vessels
by NGR-peptide directed targeting of tissue factor.
Experimental results and first-in-man experience. Blood.
2009; 113:5019–5027.
6.	 Schwöppe C, Kessler T, Persigehl T, Liersch R,
Hintelmann  H, Dreischalück J, Ring J, Bremer C,
Heindel W, Mesters RM, Berdel WE. Tissue-factor fusion
proteins induce occlusion of tumor vessels. Thrombosis
Res. 2010; 125:S143–S150.
7.	 Schwöppe C, Zerbst C, Fröhlich M, Schliemann C,
Kessler T, Liersch R, Overkamp L, Holtmeier R, Stypmann J,
Dreiling A, König S, Höltke C, Lücke M, et al. Anticancer
therapy by tumor vessel infarction with polyethylene glycol
conjugated tissue factor. J Med Chem. 2013; 56:2337–2347.
8.	 Persigehl T, Ring J, Bremer C, Heindel W, Holtmeier R,
Stypmann J, Claesener M, Hermann S, Schäfers M,
Zerbst C, Schliemann C, Mesters RM, Berdel WE, et al.
Non-invasive monitoring of tumor-vessel infarction by
retargeted truncated tissue factor tTF-NGR using multimodal imaging. Angiogenesis. 2014; 17:235–246.
9.	 Takimoto CH. Topoisomerase interactive agents. In: Cancer Principles Practice of Oncology (DeVita VT, Hellman S,
Rosenberg SA, eds.) Lippingcott, Philadelphia, 7th edition,
2005; 375–390.

Statistical analyses
Statistical significances of differences between the
different groups were tested by t-test or by Mann-Whitney
rank sum test for independent groups. Two-tailed P values
lower than 0.05 were considered as indicating significant
differences. All data are presented in means with SEM.

Abbreviations 
APC, allophycocyanin; APN, aminopeptidase  N;
AU, arbitrary units; bw, body weight; BSA, bovine
serum albumin; Cmax, maximum concentration
measured; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; ICH,
International Conference on Harmonisation of technical
requirements for registration of pharmaceuticals for
human use; IF, immunofluorescence; FRI, fluorescence
reflectance imaging; NGR, peptide GNGRAHA; NHS,
N-hydroxysuccinimid; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline;
PEG, polyethylene glycol; RHS, reticulohistiocytic
system; SEM, standard error mean; STR, short tandem
repeat; tTF, truncated tissue factor; TMS(PEG)12, trimethyl
succinimidyl polyethylene glycol ester; RT, room
temperature; TBS, Tris-based saline.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
J. Ronnacker contributed experiments in partial
fulfillment of the requirements to obtain a MD title.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
W.E. B. and R.M. M. share a patent on vascular
targeting with TF constructs. No potential conflict of
interest was declared by the other authors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82470

Oncotarget

10.	 Karuktsis KK, Thompson EHZ, Whiles JA, Rosenfeld RJ.
Deciphering the fluorescence of daunomycin and
doxorubicin. Biophys Chem. 1998; 73:249–263.
11.	 Dachary-Prigent J, Toti F, Satta N, Pasquet J-M, Uzan A,
Freyssinet J-M. Physiopathological significance of catalytic
phospholipids in the generation of thrombin. Semin Thromb
Hemost. 1996; 22:157–164.
12.	 Bach R, Gentry R, Nemerson Y: Factor VII binding to tissue
factor in reconstituted phospholipid vesicles: induction of
cooperativity by phosphatidylserine. Biochemistry. 1986;
25:4007–4020.
13.	 Blankenberg FG, Katsikis PD, Tait JF, Davis RE,
Naumovski L, Ohtsuki K, Kopiwoda S, Abrams MJ,
Darkes M, Robbins RC, Maecker HT, Strauss HW. In vivo
detection and imaging of phosphatidylserine expression
during programmed cell death. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
1998; 95:6349–6354.
14.	 Hu S, Kiesewetter DO, Zhu L, Guo N, Gao H, Liu G,
Hida N, Lang L, Niu G, Chen X. Longitudinal PET imaging
of doxorubicin-induced cell death with 18F-annexin V. Mol
Imaging Biol. 2012; 14:762–770.
15.	 He J, Luster TA, Thorpe PE. Radiation-enhanced vascular
targeting of human lung cancers in mice with a monoclonal
antibody that binds anionic phospholipids. Clin Cancer Res.
2007; 13:5211–5218.
16.	 Bombeli T, Karsan A, Tait JF, Harlan JM. Apoptotic
vascular endothelial cells become procoagulant. Blood.
1997; 89:2429–2442.
17.	 Swystun LL, Shin LYY, Beaudin S, Liaw PC.
Chemotherapeutic agents doxorubicin and epirubicin induce
procoagulant phenotype on endothelial cells and blood
monocytes. J Thromb Haemost. 2009; 7:619–626.
18.	 Lysov Z, Swyston LL, Kuruvilla S, Arnold A, Liaw PC. Lung
cancer chemotherapy agents increase procoagulant activity
via protein disulfide isomerase-dependent tssue factor
decryption. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2015; 26:36–45.
19.	 Brand C, Dencks S, Schmitz G, Mühlmeister M,
Stypmann  J, Ross R, Hintelmann H, Schliemann C,
Müller-Tidow C, Mesters RM, Berdel WE, Schwöppe C.
Low-energy ultrasound treatment improves regional tumor
vessel infarction by retargeted tissue factor. J Ultrasound
Med. 2015; 34:1227–1236.
20.	 Carmeliet P, Jain RK: Molecular mechanisms and clinical
applications of angiogenesis. Nature. 2011; 473:298–307.
21.	 Faintuch BL, Oliveira EA, Targino RC, Moro AM:
Radiolabeled NGR phage display peptide sequence for
tumor targeting. Appl Radiation Isotopes. 2014; 86:41–45.
22.	 Kim D-W, Kim WH, Kim MH, Kim CG: Synthesis and
evaluation of novel Tc-99m labeled NGR-containig
hexapeptides as tumor imaging agents. J Label Compd
Radiopharm. 2015; 58:30–35.
23.	 Li G, Wang X, Zong S, Wang J, Conti PS, Chen K:
MicroPET imaging of CD13 expression using a 64Culabeled dimeric NGR peptide based on sacophagine cage.
Mol Pharmaceutics. 2014; 11:3938–3946.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24.	 Ma W, Li G, Wang J, Yang W, Zhang Y, Conti PS, Chen K.
In vivo NIRF imaging-guided delivery of a novel NGRVEGI fusion protein for targeting tumor vasculature. Amino
Acids. 2014; 46:2721–2732.
25.	 Mate G, Kertesz I, Enyedi KN, Mezö G, Angyal J, Vasas N,
Kis A, Szabo E, Emri M, Biro T, Galuska L, Trencsenyi G.
In vivo imaging of aminopeptidase N (CD13) receptors
in experimental renal tumors using the novel radiotracer
68Ga-NOTA-c(NGR). Eur J Pharm Sci. 2015; 69:61–71.
26.	 Oostendorp M, Douma K, Hackeng TM, Dirksen A,
Post MJ, van Zandvoort MAMJ, Backes WH. Quantitative
molecular magnetic resonance imaging of tumor
angiogenesis using cNGR-labeled paramagnetic quantum
dots. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:7676–7683.
27.	 Shao Y, Liang W, Kang F, Yang W, Ma X, Li G, Zong S,
Chen K, Wang J. A direct comparison of tumor angiogenesis
with 68Ga-labeled NGR and RGD peptides in HT-1080
tumor xenografts using microPET imaging. Amino Acids.
2014; 46:2355–2364.
28.	 Shi J, Wang L, Zhang J, Ma R, Gao J, Liu Y, Zhang C,
Zhang Z. A tumor-targeting near-infrared laser-triggered
drug delivery system based on GO@Ag nanoparticles
for chemo-photothermal therapy and x-ray imaging.
Biomaterials. 2014; 35:5847–5861.
29.	 von Wallbrunn A, Waldeck J, Höltke C, Zühlsdorf M,
Mesters R, Heindel W, Schäfers M, Bremer C. In vivo
optical imaging of CD13/APN-expression in tumor
xenografts. J Biomedical Optics. 2008; 13:011007.
30.	 Zhang J, Lu X, Wan N, Hua Z, Wang Z, Huang H, Yang M,
Wang F. 68Ga-DOTA-NGR as a novel molecular probe for
APN-positive tumor imaging using MicroPET. Nucl Med
Biol. 2014; 41:268–275.
31.	 Pathuri G, Hedrick AF, Awasthi V, Ihnat MA, Gali H.
Evaluation of 99mTc-probestin for imaging APN expressing
tumors by SPECT. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013; 23:
5049–5052.
32.	 Oostendorp M, Douma K, Wagenaar A, Slenter JM,
Hackeng TM, van Zandvoort MA, Post MJ, Backes WH.
Molecular magnetic resonance imaging of myocardial
angiogenesis after acute myocardial infarction. Circulation.
2010; 121:775–783.
33.	 http://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000166825-ANPEP/tissue
34.	 Banner DW, D’Arcy A, Chène C, Winkler FK, Guha A,
Konigsberg WH, Nemerson Y, Kirchhofer D. The crystal
structure of the complex of blood coagulation factor VIIa
with soluble tissue factor. Nature. 1996; 380:41–46.
35.	 Dennis MS, Jin H, Dugger D, Yang R, McFarland L,
Ogasawara A, Williams S, Cole MJ, Ross S, Schwall R.
Imaging tumors with an albumin-binding Fab, a novel
tumor-targeting agent. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:254–261.
36.	 Di Matteo P, Curnis F, Longhi R, Colombo G, Sacchi
A, Crippa L, Protti MP, Ponzoni M, Toma S, Corti A.
Immunogenic and structural properties of the Asn-Gly-Arg
(NGR) tumor neovasculature-homing motif. Mol Immunol.
2008; 43:1509–1518.
82471

Oncotarget

37.	 Corti A, Curnis F, Arap W, Pasqualini R: The neovasculature
homing motif NGR. more than meets the eye. Blood. 2008;
112:2628–2635.

of tumor growth by RGD peptide-directed delivery of
truncated tissue factor to the tumor vasculature. Clin Cancer
Res. 2005; 11:6317–6324.

38.	 Curnis F, Longhi R, Crippa L, Cattaneo A, Dondossola E,
Bachi A, Corti A. Sponaneous formation of L-isoaspartate
and gain of function in fibronectin. J Biol Chem. 2006;
281:36466–36476.

42.	 Liu C, Huang H, Donate F, Dickinson C, Santucci R, ElSheikh A, Vessella R, Edgington TS. Prostate-specific
membrane antigen directed selective thrombotic infarction
of tumors. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:5470–5475.

39.	 Brooks PC, Clark RA, Cheresh DA. Requirement of
vascular Integrin alpha V beta 3 for angiogenesis. Science.
1994; 264:569–571.

43.	 Schellenberger EA, Bogdanov A, Petrovsky A, Ntziachristos
V, Weissleder R, Josephson L. Optical Imaging of Apoptosis
as a Biomarker of Tumor Response to Chemotherapy.
Neoplasia. 2003; 5:187–192.

40.	 Koivunen E, Wang B, Ruoslahti E. Phage libraries
displaying cyclic peptides with different ring sizes: ligand
specificities of the RGD-directed integrins. Biotechnology
(N Y). 1995; 13:265–270.

44.	 Ruf W, Rehemtulla A, Morrissey JH, Edgington TS.
Phospholipid-independent and -dependent interactions
required for tissue factor receptor and cofactor function. J
Biol Chem. 1991; 266:2158–2166, (erratum J Biol Chem
1991; 266:16256).

41.	 Kessler T, Bieker R, Padró T, Schwöppe C, Persigehl T,
Bremer C, Kreuter M, Berdel WE, Mesters RM. Inhibition

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82472

Oncotarget

