NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. ; 480(7378): 480–489. doi:10.1038/nature10673.

Cancer immunotherapy comes of age
Ira Mellman1, George Coukos2, and Glenn Dranoff3
1Genentech 1 DNA Way South San Francisco, California 94080
2Ovarian

Cancer Research Center University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104
3Department

of Medical Oncology and Cancer Vaccine Center Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School Boston, Massachusetts 02115

Abstract
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Activating the immune system for therapeutic benefit in cancer has long been a dream of some
immunologists, and even a few oncologists. After decades of disappointment, the tide has finally
changed due to the success of recent proof-of-concept clinical trials. Most notable has been the
ability of the anti-CTLA4 antibody ipilimumab to achieve significant increases in survival of
patients with metastatic melanoma, an indication where conventional therapies have failed.
Viewed in the context of advances in understanding of how tolerance, immunity, and
immunosuppression regulate anti-tumor immune responses together with the advent of targeted
therapies, these successes suggest that active immunotherapy represents a path forward to
obtaining durable, long-lasting responses in cancer patients.
The passive transfer of anti-cancer monoclonal antibodies and donor T cells in the context of
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation are effective treatments for a variety of hematologic
and solid malignancies 1. Although not always thought of as “immunotherapy”, the success
of these biotherapeutics likely reflects the ability of the donor cells or antibodies to induce
an immediate immune reaction against cancer, bypassing a requirement to activate
endogenous immunity. These immune treatments have been well established in oncology for
several decades, and continued advances in antibody and T cell engineering should further
enhance their clinical impact in the years to come (Box 1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast to these passive immunotherapy strategies, the active stimulation of specific and
durable anti-tumor immunity has proved elusive. In 1891, a young New York surgeon
named William Coley began intratumoral injections of live or inactivated Streptococcus
pyrogenes and Serratia marscescens in an effort to reproduce the spontaneous remissions of
sarcomas observed in rare cancer patients who had developed erysipelas 2. Given Elie
Metchnikoff’s contemporaneous work demonstrating the immune system’s ability to cause
inflammation and destroy invading bacteria, “Coley’s toxins” made sense by acting to
stimulate anti-bacterial phagocytes that might also kill bystander tumor cells. Some
significant responses were recorded over the ensuing 40 years, but successes were sporadic,
difficult to reproduce, and not obtained in a scientifically rigorous fashion. One notable
exception was in superficial bladder cancer, where the intravesical injection of live bacilli
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) after surgical resection was shown to prolong patient survival 3.
Other than this particular clinical setting, the approach was never embraced by oncologists
who, instead, continued to rely on surgery and increasingly on effective new methods such
as radiation therapy and ultimately chemotherapy. Coley’s strategy was further discounted

Address correspondence to: Ira Mellman Telephone: 650-467-9514 Telefax: 650-225-4000 mellman.ira@gene.com.

Mellman et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

due to the very real risks associated with the administration of infectious or at least
pyrogenic agents to already weakened cancer patients, ironic given the trauma associated
with the treatments that did come into common use. Thus began the history of cancer
immunotherapy. Before continuing with the story, however, it will be useful to summarize
what must happen to elicit protective immune responses to cancer, and why overcoming
these barriers has been so difficult.

Generating anti-cancer immunity: a multi-step challenge

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Based on our current understanding of the immune response, one can identify three distinct
steps that must be achieved, either spontaneously or therapeutically, in order to mount
effective anti-tumor immunity (Fig. 1). To initiate immunity, dendritic cells (DCs) must
sample antigens derived from the tumor, which can be ingested in situ or delivered
exogenously as part of a therapeutic vaccine. These antigens might reflect one or more of
the many mutated proteins typical of cancer, the products of non-mutated genes that are
preferentially expressed by cancer cells (eg cancer-testis antigens), or differentiation
antigens associated with the cancer’s tissue of origin but against which thymic or peripheral
tolerance has been incompletely established (eg melanosome-associated proteins in
melanoma) 4,5. Upon antigen encounter, the DCs would also have to receive a suitable
activation (“maturation”) signal, allowing them to differentiate extensively to promote
immunity as opposed to tolerance including enhanced processing and presentation of tumor
antigen-derived peptides 6,7. Activation signals could be therapeutically supplied
exogenously (eg Toll-like receptor ligands, agonist antibodies against activating receptors
such as CD40) or endogenously: dying or necrotic tumor cells release factors (eg high
mobility group proteins, ATP) thought to result in the immunogenic maturation of DCs. In
addition, tumor cells appear to ectopically express ER proteins on the plasma membrane (eg
calreticulin) that promote their phagocytosis, possibly enabling presentation of tumor
antigens on MHC class I and class II molecules. Some forms of chemotherapy or targeted
therapy may promote a more immunogenic phenotype 8.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Next, in lymphoid organs, tumor antigen-loaded DCs must generate protective T cell
responses 9. The precise type of T cell responses needed is unknown, but certainly they must
include the production of CD8+ effector T cells with cytotoxic potential. DCs may also
trigger antibody and NK/NKT cell responses, which may contribute to tumor immunity. The
lymph node is a second potential site for therapeutic intervention, providing agents that may
help guide the T cell response. However, the DCs are again key players as they must have
been matured by a stimulatory adjuvant in order to have a chance at eliciting the desired T
cells. Presentation of antigens by DCs at the steady state (i.e. DCs that have not received an
immunogenic maturation signal) promotes tolerance by regulatory T cell (Treg)
production 10-13, which would oppose an anti-tumor response.
Finally, cancer-specific T cells must enter the tumor bed to perform their function. Here,
there is the challenge of immune suppression (Box 2). Tumors may, presumably by skewing
DC maturation, prevent immunizaton, trigger the “wrong” immune response, or enable the
local accumulation or expansion of Tregs that would oppose the activity of effector T cells.
Indeed, infiltration of Tregs correlates with poor prognosis in a variety of epithelial tumor
types 14,15. Tumors may downregulate their expression of MHC class I molecules or their
expression of target tumor antigens and can also produce a variety of surface molecules (eg
PD-L1, -L2) that engage receptors on the surfaces of activated T cells (PD-1), causing T cell
anergy or exhaustion 16,17. Expression of such suppressive ligands can be associated with
oncogenic mutations seen in many cancers (eg PTEN loss) 18. Additionally, tumors can
release immunosuppressive molecules, such as indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) which
consumes tryptophan and limits T cell function 19,20. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells can

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

also be recruited into the tumor, and release additional T cell suppressors such as arginase
and nitrous oxide synthase 21. Hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment may promote the
generation of adenosine, which similarly inhibits effector T cell function 22. Hypoxia can
also lead to the production of CCL28, which attracts immigration of Tregs 23. Finally, tumor
stroma cells can also suppress the function of effector lymphocytes. For example,
mesenchymal stem cells block proliferation and function of effector T cells 24, while tumor
vascular cells can suppress T cell adhesion (to tumor endothelium) and prevent homing to
tumors, an effect in part mediated by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 25 as well
as by the endothelin-B receptor (ETBR, also known as EDNRB)26.
Thus, the deck appears stacked against the success of immunotherapy. Any approach would
have to overcome several significant barriers: the fact that tumor-associated antigens are
typically closely related or identical to self antigens, that it will be very difficult to separate
therapeutic responses from pathological autoimmune responses, that both central and
peripheral tolerance would have conspired to deplete or inactivate the relevant T cell
repertoire, and that the tumor microenvironment is inherent immunosuppressive. Yet, there
now appears to be a path to clinical success.

Cancer vaccines are finally showing early signals of activity
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Vaccines come in two formats: prophylactic and therapeutic 9. Prophylactic (or
preventative) vaccines have been used with considerable success in preventing cancers of
viral origin, such as HBV and HPV, where the etiologic agent is known. In contrast, the
development of therapeutic vaccines to treat existing disease has proved problematic. The
long history of failure has tainted the entire strategy of immunotherapy in the eyes of many
oncologists.
The idea of a therapeutic cancer vaccine originated with the discovery that patients can
harbor CD8+ and CD4+ T cells specific for cancer-testis or differentiation antigens
expressed in their tumors 4. Vaccination might reasonably be expected to amplify the
frequency and strength of these pre-existing responses or perhaps induce some de novo
reactions. Additionally, clinico-pathologic studies have demonstrated a strong association
between prolonged patient survival and the presence of intra-tumoral CD3+ or CD8+
cytotoxic T cells and an interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) gene signature 27,28. Thus, if vaccination
could trigger these types of T cell responses, then clinical benefit might be expected.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Unfortunately, the many initial attempts were compromised by a poor understanding of the
mechanism of immunization, specifically the role of DCs. Mostly conducted by academic
groups, thousands of patients were treated with vaccines consisting of short peptides, often
without an effective DC-activating adjuvant 29. Free peptides likely have poor
pharmacokinetic properties and may be rapidly cleared before being loaded onto DCs, where
their half-life may also be short. Without an adjuvant, the DCs might well remain in the
steady state and promote tolerance as much as immunity. As a result, there typically was
poor immunization, infrequent responses to the selected tumor antigens (assuming they were
even the correct ones), and minimal therapeutic benefits. Recently, however, the coadministration of IL-2 as an immune stimulant with a short peptide derived from gp100, a
melanocyte differentiation antigen, was shown under some conditions to augment tumor
responses and prolong progression-free survival compared to IL-2 alone in advanced
melanoma patients 30. These findings suggest that increasing immune activation with
peptide vaccines is a critical step for improving therapeutic efficacy.
Since the importance and function of DCs in stimulating T cell responses is now well
known, current vaccine trials are more rationally designed. One potentially promising

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

approach involves the use of peptides (~20-mer) that are somewhat longer than bind to
MHC class I molecules (10-12-mer). In the presence of a suitable DC-activating adjuvant,
these peptides are thought to be more efficient at generating effector T cells, perhaps
because some processing may be required. A recent study of peptides derived from the
HPV-16 E6 and E7 viral oncoproteins administered in incomplete Freund’s adjuvant showed
clinical responses in 15 of 19 women with vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia 31. Tumor
regressions were associated with the generation of HPV specific, IFN-γ producing CD4+
and CD8+ T cells. These favorable results might reflect in part the selection of viral gene
products for immunization, since these proteins might be more readily recognized as foreign
by the host. Indeed, a small trial of long peptides derived from p53, a tumor suppressor often
mutated in cancer, delivered in Montanide (an emulsion-adjuvant) induced a weaker IFN-γ
producing T cell response and no tumor regressions in advanced ovarian cancer patients,
indicating the need to further optimize these formulations or that p53 is simply not
sufficiently immunogenic in this setting; in contrast to viral antigens, p53 might also have to
break pre-existing tolerance to self 32.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Full-length proteins are also being explored as targets for cancer vaccinations, as they
contain a broader profile of epitopes that might be presented by DCs. Among these
approaches, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) is currently conducting a massive (>2500 patients)
randomized Phase III trial using a recombinant fusion protein encoding a single cancer-testis
antigen (MAGE-A3) in HLA-A2-positive NSCLC patients, together with their ASO2B
adjuvant consisting of a saponin/lipid-A emulsion combined with TLR4 and TLR9 agonists.
Initial read-outs from a Phase II trial (180 patients) showed some survival response (27%)
but this was not sufficient to reach statistical significance 33. Objective T cell responses
were not reported, nor were data on the level or homogeneity of MAGE-A3 expression in
the study group; this latter parameter might be especially important, since immune attack on
subpopulations of lung cancer cells that lack MAGE-A3 would require diversification of the
T cell response to additional cancer antigens.
Another target that has attracted some attention is the antigen receptor on B cell lymphomas
(idiotype), which is an example of a clonally expressed tumor-specific antigen. Three
randomized Phase III trials testing recombinant idiotypes (prepared individually for each
patient) administered with GM-CSF (to attract DCs) were undertaken. One trial in which
eligibility was restricted to subjects who first achieved a complete response to cytotoxic
chemotherapy suggested that vaccination might prolong progression-free survival. However,
the two other studies failed to reveal a clinical benefit, which might reflect differences in
patient populations, vaccine manufacturing methods, or that the approach is not sufficiently
robust 34.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Viral vectors encoding tumor antigens are another vaccine platform undergoing evaluation.
These strategies exploit the strong immune responses directed against viral components to
enhance reactivity against the cancer antigen. One such 125-patient Phase II trial, conducted
by Bavarian-Nordic and the US National Cancer Institute, involved an initial inoculation of
a recombinant vaccinia virus encoding prostate specific antigen (PSA) and the adhesion
molecules B7.1, ICAM-1, and LFA-3; a similarly configured fowlpox vector was
administered subsequently in a prime-boost strategy, and GM-CSF was administered with
the vectors for further immune stimulation (the entire vaccine product is termed
PROSTVAC). In addition to reactivity against the pox viral gene products, the introduction
of the adhesion molecules in the infected cells was intended to have them serve as surrogate
DCs, although the specializations of DCs for T cell stimulation extend well beyond these
three adhesion molecules. While there was no impact of vaccination on progression-free
survival, there was an overall survival benefit: 25.1 months vs 16.6 months in the control
group (patients treated with empty vector plus saline) 35. A larger Phase III trial is planned

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 5

using vector alone, vector plus GM-CSF (as a DC adjuvant or attractant), or empty vector
plus GM-CSF.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A variety of earlier stage trials are also in progress, using defined antigens that are delivered
to DCs by coupling to DC-targeted monoclonal antibodies (eg DEC-205) or further peptide
and viral vector trials, in conjunction with various adjuvants. The ability of these approaches
to facilitate durable anti-cancer immune responses particularly on their own, however,
remains to be demonstrated.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another strategy for vaccine therapy involves the use of cell-based approaches. One of the
ideas underlying this strategy is that an actual cancer cell would already harbor a wide range
of tumor-associated antigens (including mutant proteins), so that if used as a vaccine the
problem of antigen selection would be reduced. A meta-analysis of 173 published peerreviewed immunotherapy trials in various solid tumor types revealed that patients
immunized with whole tumor antigen had low but significantly higher rates of objective
clinical response (8.1%) than patients immunized with molecularly defined tumor antigens
(3.6%) 36. Although autologous tumor cells are the best choice of immunogen for this
approach, the complexities of vaccine manufacture for individual patients led to the
application of allogeneic tumor cell lines. Among these strategies, the one that progressed
farthest into clinical development was GVAX® for prostate cancer, advanced by the nowdefunct Cell Genesys. The vaccine product was comprised of two prostate cancer cell lines
that were stably engineered to secrete GM-CSF. After promising early hints, GVAX® failed
in Phase III trials due to lack of clinical efficacy 37; this failure might reflect a lack of
sufficient immunogenicity of the approach, alterations in preparation of the vaccine product
necessitated by commercial scale-up, or the inability of allogeneic tumor cell lines to
represent adequately the spectrum of antigens characteristic of individual prostate cancers in
patients.
There has also been considerable interest, particularly among academic groups, in
developing DC-based vaccines. In this approach, DCs are isolated from a cancer patient,
loaded with antigens (peptides or even tumor cell lysates) ex vivo, activated, and then reinfused back into the patient 9,38. Although there have been some promising hints of efficacy
and responses, as yet no clearly positive studies have been reported and the approach has not
gained broad support from the biotech-pharmaceutical industry, given the complexities of
cell isolation, ex vivo manipulation, and re-infusion. There is one notable exception,
however, as will be discussed shortly.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In general, the barriers to success, or at least to quantifying the success, of cancer vaccines
administered as “single agents” are many. First, the criteria for defining optimal tumor
antigens remain to be fully defined 39,40. Mere expression in the target tumor population
may be inadequate for predicting the ability to generate protective T cell responses.
Identification of peptides bound to MHC class I on the tumor by mass spectroscopy can
identify those antigens that yield potential targets 41, but these peptide-MHCI complexes
might still not be sufficiently immunogenic rejection antigens (ie able to generate effective T
cell responses). Moreover, antigen expression within a tumor bed can be heterogeneous.
Even the allogeneic tumor cell line based approaches are limited by the fact that a given
patient’s tumor is likely to harbor mutations that are not found in the vaccine product.
Second, the optimal adjuvant for producing anti-tumor CD8+ T cell responses that can be
used safely and effectively in humans is not yet clear. The desired adjuvant (or adjuvant
combination) will be one capable of triggering the maturation of DCs to a state where they
can facilitate the generation of tumor-reactive, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. Finally, although it
is likely that conditions for immunization will eventually be optimized, the effectiveness of
a tumor- specific T cell population may still be limited by the multiple mechanisms of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

immunosuppression used by tumors to guard against T cell killing. These are not reasons to
eliminate a vaccine arm from consideration as part of an immunotherapy, but rather to
highlight some of the difficulties in assessing success in the absence of other
immunomodulatory agents. Like with all forms of targeted therapy in cancer, the discovery
and application of predictive biomarkers or diagnostics, which could identify those patients
most likely to benefit from a given vaccine, will be an important challenge for future
development.

Provenge®: an efficacious cell-based vaccine for prostate cancer, but how
does it work?

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Questions of mechanism notwithstanding, a fact of drug development is that performance in
the clinic is the final arbiter of success. The first validation of active immunotherapy as a
viable approach to cancer treatment was the FDA approval in April 2010 of Provenge®
(sipuleucel-T) for advanced prostate cancer. What is Provenge®? Originally assumed to be
an autologous DC-based vaccine 42 (it was developed by the eponymously named company,
Dendreon), Provenge® actually comprises an incompletely characterized, complex mixture
of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) supplemented with a cytokine and tumorderived differentiation antigen. In the pivotal Phase III trial 43, total PBMC were collected
from patients by leukopheresis at weeks 0, 2, and 4 and then cultured for 36-44 hr at 37°C in
medium containing a fusion protein composed of prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP; a tumorassociated differentiation antigen) and GM-CSF prior to reinfusion. This was compared
against a placebo that was prepared by incubating one-third of the leukopheresis product for
36-44 hr at 2°C-8°C without exposure to the fusion protein (the remaining two-thirds were
cryopreserved to allow for subsequent vaccine manufacture in a salvage protocol). Thus, the
control not only lacked the presumptive immunizing antigen but was also processed
somewhat differently.
The clinical results showed little evidence of tumor shrinkage or delay in disease
progression. By standard RECIST criteria, only 1 of the 341 patients in the active arm
exhibited a partial response. 2.6% showed at least a 50% reduction in PSA levels on at least
two visits, vs 1.3% in the placebo group. Nevertheless, a 4.1 month improvement in median
survival was achieved (25.8 vs 21.7 months), deemed significant by the FDA in a patient
population that has few if any other effective therapeutic options.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While Provenge® is clearly a cell-based therapy, how does it work? Although a majority
(66%) of the survivors exhibited an antibody response to the fusion protein, the fraction of
patients producing antibodies that recognized endogenous PAP was much lower (28.5%).
Moreover, T cell responses to either the fusion protein or PAP were not associated with
survival. These discrepancies might reflect a limitation of monitoring anti-tumor immune
responses in the peripheral blood, as compared to the tumor microenvironment. However,
they also raise the possibility that other undefined factors in the cellular product may play an
important role. Further studies are required to understand the therapeutic mechanism of
Provenge®, and to define the impact of the different cell processing procedures on the
placebo product.
The lack of tumor shrinkage, long the sine qua non for gauging cancer therapy, in the face of
a survival benefit is surprising but perhaps not unexpected for immunotherapy. As seen preclinically, an effect on pre-existing tumors due to immune manipulations can be delayed
while an immune response develops 44,45. Furthermore, biopsies of metastases after
vaccination in some clinical trials revealed the presence of immune infiltrates that mediate
tumor destruction in association with extensive edema, which may be followed by
fibrosis 46. These histopathologic findings suggest that monitoring tumor size alone may be
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

inadequate for assessing the overall therapeutic effects of vaccination. As discussed below,
these considerations apply to the evaluation of CTLA-4 antibody blockade, highlighting the
need to modify tumor response criteria in light of new insights into the biology of
immunotherapy 44.

Adoptive lymphocyte therapy: A panacea?
Adoptive transfer of lymphocytes with tumoricidal properties can, in theory, bypass the
daunting task of breaking tolerance to tumor antigens and generating a high frequency of
high avidity effector T cells. The discovery that host lymphodepletion facilitates
engraftment of adoptively transferred T cells has enabled the successful transfer of ex vivo
expanded TILs from patients with melanoma, with dramatic clinical responses, some of
which are complete and durable 47,48.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Advances in T cell culturing methods and T cell engineering through retroviral vectors
carrying cloned T cell receptors (TCRs) or chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) enriched by
costimulatory signaling domains has expanded the opportunities for adoptive T cell therapy
beyond patients with resectable tumors harboring reactive T cells to a larger population with
solid tumors expressing the cognate target(s) 49. The advent of CARs bypasses also the need
for tumor cells to possess a functional antigen processing machinery and express antigen
through MHC class I or II molecules, as transduced T cells can recognize the intact surface
protein through the affinity domain (usually a scFv antibody) of the artificial CAR. Early
clinical results appear very promising 50,51 . However, safety issues surrounding the
selection of the target, the paucity of such targets, manufacturing complexities and costs,
and the lack of durable responses in many patients indicates that additional interventions are
required to properly direct and activate T cells in the tumor microenvironment.
A far more convenient approach to the same end may be the therapeutic use of bispecific
antibodies that engage both the TCR and an antigen on the tumor cell surface. In B cell
lymphoma and leukemia, this approach has been applied with impressive success in the
clinic by MicroMet 52. However, the platform has a number of liabilities including
neurotoxicity and the necessity for continuous pump-mediated infusion due to the very rapid
clearance of the antibody fragment. Nevertheless, such bispecific antibodies further
emphasize that it may prove possible to repurpose T cell specificity for therapeutic benefit.

Ipilimumab: from vaccination to immune modulation to effective therapy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The most important development for cancer immunotherapy, and hopefully for the benefit of
many cancer patients, was the recent readout of the ipilimumab Phase III trials in late stage
metastatic melanoma. Not only was a clear survival advantage observed for a patient group
with no other therapeutic options, but it was achieved with an agent whose mechanism of
action is virtually certain to involve the modulation of endogenous T cell responses. The
results were deemed significant enough that in March of 2011, the FDA granted broad
approval for patients with metastatic melanoma, either as initial therapy or after relapse.
Ipilimumab is a monoclonal antibody to CTLA4, whose role in regulating T cell function
has been well studied for many years by a number of groups, notably that of James Allison
and colleagues 53. CTLA4 is a key negative regulator, being recruited to the plasma
membrane upon T cell activation where it binds to members of the B7 family of accessory
molecules expressed by DCs and other antigen presenting cells (Fig. 2). CTLA4 ligation
effectively inhibits further activation and expansion, thereby controlling the progress of an
immune response and attenuating the chances for chronic autoimmune inflammation. The
negative regulation is overcome by use of a blocking antibody. The fundamental importance
of CTLA4 to controlling T cell function is well illustrated by the phenotype of CTLA4-/Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

mice, which die of an aggressive lymphoproliferative disorder at a young age 54,55.
Interestingly, CTLA4 ligation is also important for the immune suppressive function of
Tregs, further assisting to dampen T cell responses 56. Treg function is thus also thought to
be blocked by anti-CTLA4.
The rationale for using anti-CTLA4 in cancer therapy was to unrestrain pre-existing anticancer T cell responses and possibly trigger new responses. Indeed, it is well known for
melanoma (and other diseases) that tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) exist, and that
they can bear specificity for tumor antigens 4,57-59. Pre-clinical studies using mouse models
were promising, leading two companies (Pfizer and BMS/Medarex) to put two different
anti-CTLA4 antibodies into the clinic. Phase II trials failed to reach their endpoints of tumor
regressions, but BMS/Medarex felt there was sufficient potential for a long term benefit that
a lengthy randomized Phase III trial was initiated in relapsed-refractory metastatic
melanoma patients to determine overall survival. Their antibody, ipilimumab, was given to
one arm, antibody plus a short peptide (gp100) for a melanoma differentiation antigen to a
second arm, and the control arm received the short peptide alone. Although the KaplanMeier plots of survival were inseparable for the first several months, a two-fold survival
benefit was detected at 12-15 months in both antibody arms, which was durable out >2.5
years and included some complete responses (cures?) 60.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In a second BMS/Medarex randomized trial involving 502 patients with previously
untreated metastatic melanoma, the addition of ipilimumab to the standard therapy of
dacarbazine was shown to improve overall survival compared to dacarbazine alone (11.2
months versus 9.1 months); the combination treatment also significantly increased the
proportion of surviving patients with at least three years of follow-up (20.8% versus
12.2%) 61. Although only a relatively small fraction of patients derived clinical benefit,
these studies clearly establish ipilimumab as an active agent, which offers patients at what is
normally the terminal stage of this disease, clinically meaningful benefits and the possibility
for long-term survival. Furthermore, the results validate the idea that activating the T cell
compartment can on its own provide significant therapeutic effect.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The use of ipilimumab does present some clinical and scientific challenges. First is the
rather significant rate of on-target toxicities observed. Up to 23% of the ipilimumab-treated
patients developed serious (grade 3-4) adverse events including colitis and hypophysitis due
to induced inflammation (possibly autoimmune in nature), and in conjunction with
dacarbazine, ~20% showed significant elevations of liver function tests. Toxicity does not
accurately predict positive therapeutic outcome, however, indicating that many patients will
experience inflammatory pathology without benefiting from an anti-tumor effect. These
toxicities might be expected given the fact that the removal of CTLA4 from mice leads to
virulent inflammatory disease, as mentioned earlier. The different spectrum of toxicities
with ipilimumab compared to standard cancer treatments also means that practicing
oncologists will need to acquire additional expertise in the management of inflammatory
disorders.
A second clinical challenge with ipilimumab relates to the kinetics of the anti-tumor
response. In contrast to conventional cytotoxic therapies that may trigger rapid tumor
shrinkage due to direct killing of cancer cells, the stimulation of T cell responses with
ipilimumab may take several months to occur. Tumors may increase in size during this
period, and some component of this growth may reflect the consequences of an evolving
inflammatory reaction. Indeed, as many as 10% of patients treated with ipilimumab who
were scored with progressive disease using the modified WHO criteria for tumor size were
shown to achieve disease stabilization and prolonged survival 44,60. This unusual pattern of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 9

treatment response has led to the proposal of new immune-related criteria that may aid
clinical decision-making regarding continuation of therapy 62. [Box 3]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The rationale of ipilimumab monotherapy is that its use thus far assumes that tumor
protective T cells exist in the patient prior to therapy, and that these cells will exert antitumor activity if CTLA4 is blocked. The above clinical studies were carried out without
concomitant effective immunization. An uncoupled peptide to the melanoma differentiation
antigen epitope was included in some arms, but dosed without adjuvant or DC maturation
agent. Although CTLA4 would be expected to be induced on tumor-reactive T cells only
after immunization, clinical responses observed in the absence of prior exogenous
vaccination indicates that tumor reactive TILs expressing CTLA4 are responsive to
checkpoint blockade and acquire effective tumor rejecting functions. The notion of
exogenous versus endogenous vaccination will be further discussed below.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Despite these limitations, ipilimumab provides realistic hope for melanoma patients,
particularly those with late stage disease who otherwise had little if any hope at all. More
broadly, it provides clear clinical validation for cancer immunotherapy in general. The
results will also intensify the search for predictive biomarkers for positive responders. Other
applications of ipilimumab are already being vigorously pursued and, indeed, the door has
been opened for the development and investigation of a host of other potential
immunotherapeutic strategies, some of which may prove both more effective and safer than
targeting CTLA4. At long last, there is now also the prospect for combining with other
immunotherapeutic regimens, such as effective vaccination, which arguably should have
been considered much earlier in the >10 year clinical study history of anti-CTLA4.

Next generation T cell immunomodulators
The success of anti-CTLA4 in melanoma should create interest in evaluating other
antibodies that can be used to activate T cell responses. There are a number of known
receptors that could serve as targets for agonist antibodies, including 4-1BB, OX40, GITR,
CD27, and CD28 (Fig. 3). The latter, however, also introduces a cautionary note since in an
early clinical trial of an agonist anti-CD28 (TGN1412), severe toxicities and even deaths
resulted from unexpected cytokine release 63. These serious events emphasize the power of
the immune system and the need for extreme care and a conservative trial design when
employing any immune activator. The use of agents that clear more rapidly from the
circulation than intact IgG’s may help mitigate the potential for such toxicities, or at least
enable the more rapid removal of the inducing drug. The same consideration may apply to
anti-CTLA4 therapy, where alternative dosing strategies may serve to increase its
therapeutic index.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

LAG-3 is another T cell receptor that, like CTLA4, is largely suppressive. Less well studied
than CTLA4, LAG-3 appears similar in that it acts to limit the activity of CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells, and augment the activity of Tregs 64,65. There is also a significant intracellular pool of
LAG-3, like CTLA4 66. However, the functional consequences of its deletion are far less
dramatic in that it may have to work in concert with other regulatory molecules (eg, PDL1) 67. This situation suggests, however that antagonizing LAG-3 may provide an
alternative to antagonizing CTLA4, and perhaps with a better safety profile.
Another attractive approach that is also beginning to receive some clinical validation is
targeting immunosuppression in the tumor bed. Even if a vaccine or T cell modulation
therapy is successful, the ability of tumors to counteract immune effectors may act to limit
clinical benefit. Of current clinical interest is the PD-1/PD-L1(-L2) axis. PD-1 is expressed
by T cells, particularly activated T cells, and binds to its ligands PD-L1/L2 that can be
expressed by potential target cells, thereby rendering the T cell unresponsive or
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

“exhausted” 68. This axis is well characterized as limiting T cell responses in chronic virus
infection 69, but increasingly it is thought to play a role in limiting immune responses in
cancer as well 70. A variety of tumors, including melanoma, ovarian, renal, hepatocellular,
and glioblastoma, have been found to express PD-L1 (and occasionally PD-L2). Indeed, PDL1 expression has been found to correlate with poor prognosis 71,72, and also to be increased
upon activation of the oncogenic PI3K pathway (eg, by PTEN deletion) 18. Antibodies to
PD-1 have reached the clinic, and in early Phase I trials they have displayed good activity in
a variety of cancer types, and at least thus far, with a toxicity profile that appears safer than
ipilimumab 73. The reduced toxicity is consistent with the generally milder autoimmune
phenotype seen in PD-1−/− mice 68 as compared to CTLA4−/− mice. However, the lung
inflammation and cardiomyopathy observed in mice 74,75 may prove to be a concern in the
clinic. An important biologic and clinical question is whether the effector function of tumor
reactive TILs coexpressing multiple inhibitory receptors can be fully recovered by targeting
a single receptor or whether combinatorial checkpoint blockade is required for sustained
tumor protection.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other potential approaches to T cell immunosuppression would include targeting Tregs for
inactivation or depletion, since in many tumor beds, the infiltration of Tregs may act to
oppose effector T cell function as much as the presence of negative regulatory molecules on
the surface of effector cells (eg PD-1). While no specific surface marker of Tregs has yet
been identified, some proteins such as GITR and OX40 may be transiently expressed,
possibly enabling them as targets (although they are also expressed by activated effector T
cells in humans) 76,77. Anti-CD25 antibodies may preferentially deplete Treg, at least
following shortterm therapy, and may help increase the efficacy of active immunization 78.
Finally, low dose cyclophosphamide may preferentially target Treg and allow for
attenuation of Treg in the context of immunization protocols 79,80.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As mentioned earlier, tumor beds can produce a number of soluble mediators that counteract
T cell function such as IDO, arginase, and PGE2 81. To the extent that these agents can be
diagnostically demonstrated as predictive biomarkers, efforts to inhibit their activities with
either small molecule or antibody antagonists might also be useful additions to a portfolio of
cancer immunotherapeutics. Further, as knowledge on the immunoregulatory function of
tumor vasculature increases, therapeutic maneuvers “normalizing” the tumor vessels appear
interesting to combine with immunotherapy. Indeed, VEGF blockade has resulted in
increased T cell homing to tumors 82 and has enhanced the efficacy of immunotherapy in the
mouse 83. Lastly, the importance of tumor-promoting inflammatory pathways such as
STAT3 and NF-κB signaling, and cytokines including IL-6, IL-17, IL-23, and TNF-α has
been demonstrated 84. Inhibition of these circuits might not only antagonize tumor
progression, but also enhance the activity of immunotherapy.

Combination immunotherapy
The use of combinations of chemotherapeutic drugs has traditionally been a mainstay of
oncology. Even in the relatively recent age of molecularly targeted therapies, the
development of combinations is proving to be of benefit to broaden responses as well as to
treat resistance. The difference is that, in theory, combinations of targeted agents can be
combined rationally, in a scientifically guided fashion. There is no reason to believe that the
same will not hold true for immunotherapy.
In melanoma, there has been another recent success in the small molecule realm. For
patients bearing the V600E activating mutation of B-Raf, the Roche inhibitor vemurafenib
has been shown to yield dramatic responses in up >50% of patients 85. Yet, resistance
develops rapidly (<1 year) creating the necessity for an additional therapy. Although one

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

likely effective approach is to add a second small molecule inhibitor to MEK, to prevent the
tumor from activating a compensatory pathway, one might predict the tumor will circumvent
this strategy as well. Therefore, the prospect of generating long-lasting protective immunity
during the remission period is intensely attractive and trials combining ipilimumab with
vemurafinib are in the planning stages. Since the vemurafinib-induced death of the tumors
can be expected to release endogenous tumor antigens, it is possible that the small molecule
and immunotherapeutic approaches may synergize, with B-Raf inhibition acting to help
prime de novo T cell responses that can then be facilitated by the anti-CTLA4. Success,
however, makes the assumption that the B-Raf inhibitor is not suppressive of immune
responses under the conditions that the two agents would be combined in the clinic.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this and all other instances where immunotherapeutics are to be combined with targeted
or chemotherapeutic agents, it will be critical to assess the potential interactions of the
combination(s). Small molecule inhibitors, and cytotoxic chemotherapy alike, may act on
cells of the immune system to block DC or T cell function, or modify the tumor or tumor
microenvironment in a fashion that will antagonize the development of immunity.
Alternatively, conditions may be found where such inhibitors or cytotoxic drugs may be
immunostimulatory to T cells, as recently suggested for an IAP antagonist 86 or surprisingly
for the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin, which is normally used as an immunosuppressive
agent in the transplant setting 87. Similarly, although conventional wisdom viewed the
effects of chemotherapy as obligatorily deleterious to immune mechanisms, such effects are
rather drug-, dose- and/or schedule-dependent. Since the same agent may prove inhibitory,
benign, or even stimulatory depending on the stage of immune response being targeted, and
dose/schedule used 88,89, great care must be exercised when designing clinical protocols lest
an efficacious drug be dismissed due to negative interactions or sub-optimal dosing
schedules.
The effects of conventional chemotherapeutics on the immune system may be more nuanced
than previously believed. Evidence is emerging that tumor cells can die in multiple ways,
with some forms of (apoptotic) death actually leading to the enhancement of an immune
response to the tumor 90. So-called immunogenic cell death is characterized in part by the
release of ATP and high mobility group protein B1, which could activate local infiltrating
myeloid cells and DCs via a purinergic receptor or TLR4, respectively. Cytotoxic agents that
elicit this death fingerprint may have the ability to help induce anti-tumor immune responses
and therefore be better candidates for combination therapy with immunologically active
agents. Again, great care must be exercised to use such agents at doses and schedules that do
not suppress effector CTLs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, the prospect of combining immunotherapeutic agents themselves must also be
considered. To do this rationally, one must return again to the various steps of the immune
response that need to be addressed in order to generate anti-cancer immunity (Fig. 1),
consider the step(s) under the control of each agent, and assess the potential for overlapping
or synergistic toxicity that would decrease rather than increase therapeutic index. For
example, combining anti-CTLA4 with anti-PD1 makes sense biologically, as the two agents
remove the brakes from T cell activation at two distinct stages: proliferation (CTLA4) and
effector function (PD1). Yet, both might be expected to exhibit similar adverse events,
underscoring the need to define carefully the potential for serious toxicity.

Vaccines: there and back again.
Agents that act at the effector stage (eg anti-PD1, inhibitors of immunosuppression) can act
only be re-energizing the pre-existing T cells. Agents that act at the proliferation/activation
stage (eg ipilimumab) can probably enhance not only pre-existing responses but also de

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

novo responses. Thus, either could work well in conjunction with a vaccine approach, the
place where immunotherapy in cancer got its start. But would endogenous or exogenous
vaccines be preferable for this purpose?
Exogenous vaccines involve introducing pre-selected antigens on antibody delivery vehicles
targeted to DCs, encoded in viral vectors, or administered as peptides or proteins in a
suitable adjuvant and carrier. The approach has been highly effective in generating
prophylaxis and protective immunity against infectious agents 9. In fact, such vaccines
represent some of medicine’s greatest successes. That vaccines have been far less impressive
in cancer could reflect the use of poor platforms that fail to elicit optimal antigen processing
or presentation by DCs, sub-optimal adjuvants, or the absence of co-administered agents that
facilitate T cell responses or overcome immunosuppression in the tumor bed. In addition, the
antigens selected may have been poorly chosen, unable to generate protective T cells with
high affinity T cell receptors because the tolerance barrier was just too high or unable to
generate a sufficient quantity of T cell receptor ligands (peptide-MHC class I complexes) at
the tumor cell surface.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Endogenous vaccines involve mobilizing antigens from a patient’s own tumor, in situ. This
would have to be accomplished by inducing tumor cell death under conditions that favor the
ability of endogenous DCs to capture, process, and present tumor-derived antigens.
Although less controllable than the exogenous approach, endogenous vaccines have the
distinct advantage of potentially allowing the presentation of the dozens – or hundreds – of
mutations harbored by cancer cells 5. If even only a fraction of these can form MHC binding
peptides that serve as T cell epitopes, as neo-antigens they would certainly not have been
subject to suppression by central tolerance. Whether chemotherapy alone is sufficient to
induce such in situ vaccination however is unknown. Because of the powerful
immunosuppressive circuitries operating in the tumor microenvironment, additional signals
are likely required to properly polarize the tumor-infiltrating antigen presenting cells, which
can be now achieved by pathogen-derived signals or other DC maturation agents.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A recent attempt at endogenous vaccination involves the intratumoral injection of replication
conditional Herpes simplex viruses engineered to secrete GM-CSF. These oncolytic viruses
(OncoVex), which have entered Phase III testing in melanoma, cause lysis of tumor cells
upon infection, whereupon GM-CSF release may enhance DC function in the tumor
microenvironment to stimulate responses against autologous cancer antigens 91. A second
attractive approach involves the combination of cytotoxic therapies in conjunction with
agonistic antibodies to CD40. While this strategy might be predicted to augment DC
priming of anti-tumor T cells, an important role for macrophage-mediated killing was
instead implicated 92. Lastly, combinations of chemotherapy with Toll-like receptor (TLR)
agonists could provide the right ingredients of tumor antigen release and tumor APC
activation.

Perspectives
Despite its long if not always distinguished history, these are early days for a new science,
and clinical practice, of cancer immunotherapy. Nevertheless, as an exciting therapeutic
strategy that merits serious consideration by the biopharmaceutical industry and clinical
oncology community alike, recent results have indeed allowed cancer immunotherapy
finally to come of age. This transition coincides with another in the development of cancer
immunology as a field. In much of the 20th century, the focus was on cancer
“immunosurveillance” given the prominent view that the immune system plays a
homeostatic role in controlling cancer. Basically, when oncogenic or other mutations
occurred, the immune system was theorized to respond, thereby preventing the development

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

of a tumor, at least when the system was operating normally. This concept was refined by
“immunoediting”, which recognizes the complex and dynamic cross-talk between the tumor
and host throughout all stages of disease development, including the possibility of
tolerance 93. In the 21st century, however, we believe that the emerging pre-clinical and
clinical data has turned attention directly towards the primary role of “tolerance and immune
suppression”. Leaving aside the issue of whether the immune response plays a homeostatic
function in prevention, cancer develops and escapes control either because tumor cells are
too similar to their normal counterparts and therefore do not elicit sufficient immunity or
because they are famously adept at inducing peripheral tolerance. While ipilimumab might
work either to induce de novo responses or enhance pre-existing ones, the clinical activity of
anti-PD1 antibodies seems more closely associated with overcoming tolerance than with
generating an anti-cancer T cell repertoire.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer immunotherapy has come of age at just the right time. The advent of a cohort of
inhibitors that target oncogenic pathways with ever greater specificity is starting to reveal
significant and sometimes spectacular responses in several indications. Yet, even in
diagnostically defined populations, these responses can be transient or require continued
dosing. If such drug regimens can be matched to appropriate immunotherapies, activating a
patient’s immune system during a time of tumor reduction and remission may be the best
way to ensure that responses are converted to long-term, durable benefit. In addition to the
development of additional agents to prime and guide the immune response, appropriate
pharmacodynamic biomarkers will have to be implemented to determine if a given
immunotherapy is having the desired effect and appropriate diagnostics used to identify
which strategy to apply to which patient. Finally, scientists, drug developers, and
oncologists will have to work together to implement new metrics for evaluating the
effectiveness of immunotherapies. Their mechanism of action is so distinct, both
mechanistically and temporally, as compared to conventional cytotoxic drugs that they
cannot be expected to perform according to standards developed a generation ago, even
though the result may ultimately be curative.
Box 1
Established immune treatments

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Nine monoclonal antibodies targeting six cancer-associated proteins (Her2/neu, EGFR,
VEGF, CD20, CD52, and CD33) are approved for the treatment of solid and hematologic
malignancies. In addition to antagonizing oncogenic pathways, these biotherapeutics may
act by opsonizing tumor cells and triggering their death or removal by antibodydependent cellular cytotoxity or phagocytosis 94. Ongoing investigations in murine
models and patients raise the possibility that they may also stimulate adaptive immune
responses in some settings 95. Recently, the successful conjugation of toxins to antibodies
has been achieved, and these have induced clinical responses in patients refractory to the
naked antibody 96. The concurrent administration of immunostimulatory cytokines such
as IL-2 and GM-CSF may also enhance the efficacy of antibody therapy.
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation and the infusion of donor lymphocytes can be
highly effective therapy for some leukemias and lymphomas 24. The graft-versusleukemia effects involve direct killing of tumor cells by donor lymphocytes, together
with the subsequent induction of broader innate and adaptive reactions. Based on these
clinical benefits, many groups are exploring the use of adoptive T cell therapy in the
autologous setting. Promising strategies include the use of lymphodepletion prior to T
cell infusion, and the engineering of new T cell specificities with chimeric antigen
receptors 97.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Other immune treatments that have received FDA approval include recombinant
cytokines, such as interleukin-2 (IL-2, Proleukin®), which is used for melanoma and
renal cell cancer (RCC). Response rates are low (~15%) and the significant risk of
serious systemic inflammation requires administration as an in-patient. Interferon-alpha
is another agent that gained approval for “immunologic cancers” (ie melanoma, RCC).
Although also associated with low response rates and high dose toxicity, a small subset
of melanoma patients who are also pre-disposed to autoimmunity has been shown to
exhibit impressive responses in survival 98. It has been difficult to pre-identify these
patients, however, limiting the utility of the approach. Yet, when seen, responses are
durable, suggesting they reflect active anti-tumor immunity.

Box 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumors escape immune attack by a variety of complementary mechanisms of
immunosuppression, many of which operate in parallel. Among paracrine mediators,
adenosine, prostaglandin E2, TGF-β, and VEGF-A exert multiple direct and indirect
immunosuppressive activities. These mediators may function in the suppression of DCs,
indirectly inhibiting T cell penetration into the tumor bed, or directly suppressing effector
T cell activation while enhancing the function of Tregs. For example, adenosine, released
by tumour cells under hypoxia, contributes to the suppression T cell activation, and Treg
expansion. VEGF-A can also suppress proper T cell development and function: VEGF-A
treatment of mouse splenocytes during T cell stimulation was shown to induce IL-10
production from T cells while suppressing IFN-γ production 99. Tumor cells can also
directly escape T cell recognition by downregulating MHC class I or by disabling other
components of the antigen processing machinery. Shedding of soluble NKG2D ligands
such as MIC-A or MIC-B can severely compromise the ability of effector T cells to
function in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, tumor cells may upregulate surface
ligands, which mediate T cell anergy (or exhaustion), including PD-L1 and other ligands
to inhibitory T cell receptors. A variety of leukocyte subsets infiltrating tumors are able
to suppress T cell function as well. In addition to Tregs, accumulation of which in tumors
correlate with a poor prognostic outcome14, other suppressive lymphocyte subsets have
been reported including IL-10 producing B cells and B regulatory cells, type II NKT
cells, NK cells and γδ T cells. Myeloid lineage cells also promote immune suppression in
tumours. Chief among them are the poorly understood myeloid-derived suppressor cells
or MDSCs100. Their characterization is ultimately based on their ability to suppress T
and NK cell activation, likely through several mechanisms including nitric oxide (NO),
reactive oxidative species (ROS), arginase, interleukin 10 (IL-10) and transforming
growth factor beta (TGF-β); there are also reports that MDSCs may specifically induce
the expansion of Tregs. Finally, tumor stroma cells play important immune modulatory
role. The so-called cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) can promote the recruitment and
function of immunosuppressive cells through the secretion of CCL2 and CXCL12. In
addition, they can suppress T effector cells through secretion of TGF-β. Finally, myeloidderived mesenchymal stem cells exert important immunosuppressive functions by
blocking proliferation and function of T effector cells. Further study is needed to
determine which of these mechanisms are most important in general, and which
determine the immune status in individual patients.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 15

Box 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Clinical assessment of immunotherapy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Oncologists traditionally evaluate the activity of cancer therapies through measurements
of tumor area or volume. These standard metrics include the Response Evaluation in
Solid Tumors (RECIST) and modified World Health Organization (mWHO) criteria.
Clinical responses to cytotoxic treatments such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and
some targeted agents usually occur quickly (within a few weeks to months) because their
presumed mechanism of action involves a direct effect on tumor cells. Moreover, these
treatments generally result in a reduction in tumor size, as cancer cells undergo apoptosis
or other modes of programmed cell death. Although tumor regressions indicate a
beneficial impact of therapy, this may not always translate into improvements in survival
due to the potential emergence of lethal, drug resistant cells. Immunotherapy induced
tumor destruction, in contrast, may be delayed or even preceded by a period of apparent
tumor growth. In clinical trials of ipilimumab, 10-20% of patients showed an increase in
tumor size when evaluated three months after starting treatment, but subsequently
achieved prolonged tumor control or regression without any additional intervention.
These subjects demonstrated comparable long-term survival as those with more rapid
tumor regressions. The mechanisms underlying the delayed responses are not yet well
understood, but might include the effects of immune infiltrates in tumors or just the long
period of time required to generate sufficient T cells to accomplish tumor killing. This
distinctive biology has led to the proposal of immune-related response criteria (irRC)40,
which allow for greater flexibility in following increases in tumor size during
immunotherapy prior to declaring treatment failure.

Acknowledgments
This article is dedicated to the memory of our mentor, friend, and inspiration Ralph Steinman, whose scientific life
was dedicated to advancing the field of immunology in general and cancer immunotherapy in particular. Just before
learning of his Nobel Prize, Ralph fell victim to the disease that we hope will be more effectively treated by the
development of immunotherapeutic approaches based on the pioneering work reviewed here. We and many others
will dedicate ourselves to this effort on Ralph’s behalf, and on behalf of cancer patients throughout the world.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Dougan M, Dranoff G. Immune therapy for cancer. Annu Rev Immunol. 2009; 27:83–117. doi:
10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132544. [PubMed: 19007331]
2. Hall, SS. A commotion in the blood: life, death, and the immune system. Henry Holt; 1997.
3. Sylvester RJ. Bacillus Calmette-Guerin treatment of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. Int J Urol.
2011; 18:113–120. doi:10.1111/j.1442-2042.2010.02678.x. [PubMed: 21091799]
4. Boon T, Coulie PG, Van den Eynde BJ, van der Bruggen P. Human T cell responses against
melanoma. Annu Rev Immunol. 2006; 24:175–208. doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.
24.021605.090733. [PubMed: 16551247]
5. Segal NH, et al. Epitope landscape in breast and colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:889–892.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3095. [PubMed: 18245491]
6. Mellman I, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells: specialized and regulated antigen processing machines.
Cell. 2001; 106:255–258. [PubMed: 11509172]
7. Trombetta ES, Mellman I. Cell biology of antigen processing in vitro and in vivo. Annu Rev
Immunol. 2005; 23:975–1028. doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.22.012703.104538. [PubMed:
15771591]
8. Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. Anticancer immunochemotherapy using adjuvants with direct cytotoxic
effects. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:2127–2130. doi:10.1172/JCI39991. This paper reviews the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

argument for certain forms of apoptotic cell death as enhancing anti-tumor immune responses.
[PubMed: 19620780]
9. Palucka K, Banchereau J, Mellman I. Designing vaccines based on biology of human dendritic cell
subsets. Immunity. 2010; 33:464–478. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2010.10.007. [PubMed: 21029958]
10. Darrasse-Jeze G, et al. Feedback control of regulatory T cell homeostasis by dendritic cells in vivo.
J Exp Med. 2009; 206:1853–1862. doi:10.1084/jem.20090746. [PubMed: 19667061]
11. Jiang A, et al. Disruption of E-cadherin-mediated adhesion induces a functionally distinct pathway
of dendritic cell maturation. Immunity. 2007; 27:610–624. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2007.08.015.
[PubMed: 17936032]
12. Steinman RM, Turley S, Mellman I, Inaba K. The induction of tolerance by dendritic cells that
have captured apoptotic cells. J Exp Med. 2000; 191:411–416. [PubMed: 10662786]
13. Steinman RM, Hawiger D, Nussenzweig MC. Tolerogenic dendritic cells. Annu Rev Immunol.
2003; 21:685–711. doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.21.120601.141040. [PubMed: 12615891]
14. Curiel TJ, et al. Specific recruitment of regulatory T cells in ovarian carcinoma fosters immune
privilege and predicts reduced survival. 2004; 10:942–949. Nat Med.
15. Kono K, et al. CD4(+)CD25high regulatory T cells increase with tumor stage in patients with
gastric and esophageal cancers. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2006; 55:1064–1071. doi:10.1007/
s00262-005-0092-8. [PubMed: 16328385]
16. Kooi S, et al. HLA class I expression on human ovarian carcinoma cells correlates with T-cell
infiltration in vivo and T-cell expansion in vitro in low concentrations of recombinant
interleukin-2. Cell Immunol. 1996; 174:116–128. [PubMed: 8954611]
17. Hamanishi J, et al. Programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 and tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T lymphocytes
are prognostic factors of human ovarian cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:3360–3365.
[PubMed: 17360651]
18. Parsa AT, et al. Loss of tumor suppressor PTEN function increases B7-H1 expression and
immunoresistance in glioma. Nat Med. 2007; 13:84–88. doi:10.1038/nm1517. [PubMed:
17159987]
19. Mellor AL, Munn DH. IDO expression by dendritic cells: tolerance and tryptophan catabolism. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2004; 4:762–774. doi:10.1038/nri1457. [PubMed: 15459668]
20. Munn DH, Mellor AL. IDO and tolerance to tumors. Trends Mol Med. 2004; 10:15–18. [PubMed:
14720581]
21. Marigo I, Dolcetti L, Serafini P, Zanovello P, Bronte V. Tumor-induced tolerance and immune
suppression by myeloid derived suppressor cells. Immunol Rev. 2008; 222:162–179. doi:10.1111/
j.1600-065X.2008.00602.x. [PubMed: 18364001]
22. Ohta A, et al. A2A adenosine receptor protects tumors from antitumor T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2006; 103:13132–13137. doi:0605251103 [pii] 10.1073/pnas.0605251103. [PubMed:
16916931]
23. Facciabene A, et al. Tumour hypoxia promotes tolerance and angiogenesis via CCL28 and T(reg)
cells. Nature. 2011; 475:226–230. doi:10.1038/nature10169 nature10169 [pii]. [PubMed:
21753853]
24. Aggarwal S, Pittenger MF. Human mesenchymal stem cells modulate allogeneic immune cell
responses. Blood. 2005; 105:1815–1822. doi:2004-04-1559 [pii] 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1559.
[PubMed: 15494428]
25. Bouzin C, Brouet A, De Vriese J, Dewever J, Feron O. Effects of vascular endothelial growth
factor on the lymphocyte-endothelium interactions: identification of caveolin-1 and nitric oxide as
control points of endothelial cell anergy. J Immunol. 2007; 178:1505–1511. [PubMed: 17237399]
26. Buckanovich RJ, et al. Endothelin B receptor mediates the endothelial barrier to T cell homing to
tumors and disables immune therapy. Nat Med. 2008; 14:28–36. [PubMed: 18157142]
27. Zhang L, et al. Intratumoral T cells, recurrence, and survival in epithelial ovarian cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2003; 348:203–213. [PubMed: 12529460]
28. Galon J, et al. Type, density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal tumors predict
clinical outcome. Science. 2006; 313:1960–1964. [PubMed: 17008531]
29. Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Restifo NP. Cancer immunotherapy: moving beyond current vaccines.
Nat Med. 2004; 10:909–915. doi:10.1038/nm1100. [PubMed: 15340416]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

30. Schwartzentruber DJ, et al. gp100 peptide vaccine and interleukin-2 in patients with advanced
melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2119–2127. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1012863. [PubMed:
21631324]
31. Kenter GG, et al. Vaccination against HPV-16 oncoproteins for vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. N
Engl J Med. 2009; 361:1838–1847. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0810097. [PubMed: 19890126]
32. Leffers N, et al. Immunization with a P53 synthetic long peptide vaccine induces P53-specific
immune responses in ovarian cancer patients, a phase II trial. Int J Cancer. 2009; 125:2104–2113.
doi:10.1002/ijc.24597. [PubMed: 19621448]
33. Vansteenkiste J, et al. Final results of a multi-center, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
phase II study to assess the efficacy of MAGE-A3 immunotherapeutic as adjuvant therapy in stage
IB/II non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Journal of clinical oncology. 2007; 25 (18S), abstract,
7554.
34. Freedman A, et al. Placebo-controlled phase III trial of patient-specific immunotherapy with
mitumprotimut-T and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor after rituximab in
patients with follicular lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:3036–3043. doi:10.1200/JCO.
2008.19.8903. [PubMed: 19414675]
35. Kantoff PW, et al. Overall Survival Analysis of a Phase II Randomized Controlled Trial of a
Poxviral-Based PSA-Targeted Immunotherapy in Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:1099–1105. [PubMed: 20100959]
36. Neller MA, López JA, Schmidt CW. Antigens for cancer immunotherapy. Seminars in
Immunology. 2008; 20:286–295. [PubMed: 18951039]
37. Copier J, Dalgleish. Whole-cell vaccines: A failure or a success waiting to happen? Curr Opin Mol
Ther. 2010; 12:14–20. [PubMed: 20140812]
38. Schuler G. Dendritic cells in cancer immunotherapy. Eur J Immunol. 2010; 40:2123–2130. doi:
10.1002/eji.201040630. The authors summarizes the current state of the art in the use of
autologous dendritic cell vaccines. [PubMed: 20853498]
39. Neller MA, Lopez JA, Schmidt CW. Antigens for cancer immunotherapy. Semin Immunol. 2008;
20:286–295. doi:S1044-5323(08)00098-5 [pii] 10.1016/j.smim.2008.09.006. [PubMed: 18951039]
40. Cheever MA, et al. Translational Research Working Group developmental pathway for immune
response modifiers. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:5692–5699. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1266.
[PubMed: 18794077]
41. Rammensee HG, Weinschenk T, Gouttefangeas C, Stevanovic S. Towards patient-specific tumor
antigen selection for vaccination. Immunol Rev. 2002; 188:164–176. [PubMed: 12445290]
42. Small EJ, et al. Immunotherapy of hormone-refractory prostate cancer with antigen-loaded
dendritic cells. J Clin Oncol. 2000; 18:3894–3903. [PubMed: 11099318]
43. Kantoff PW, et al. Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2010; 363:411–422. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1001294. This paper describes the clinical trial
results that led to the FDA approval of Provenge for prostate cancer. [PubMed: 20818862]
44. Wolchok JD, et al. Guidelines for the evaluation of immune therapy activity in solid tumors:
immune-related response criteria. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:7412–7420. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1624. The authors summarize the argument for using a different set
of criteria to evaluate the efficacy of immunotherapies given the mechanistic differences from
conventional anti-cancer drugs. [PubMed: 19934295]
45. Leach DR, Krummel MF, Allison JP. Enhancement of antitumor immunity by CTLA-4 blockade.
Science. 1996; 271:1734–1736. [PubMed: 8596936]
46. Hodi FS, et al. Immunologic and clinical effects of antibody blockade of cytotoxic T lymphocyteassociated antigen 4 in previously vaccinated cancer patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:3005–3010. doi:10.1073/pnas.0712237105. [PubMed: 18287062]
47. Dudley ME, et al. Cancer regression and autoimmunity in patients after clonal repopulation with
antitumor lymphocytes. Science. 2002; 298:850–854. [PubMed: 12242449]
48. Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP, Yang JC, Morgan RA, Dudley ME. Adoptive cell transfer: a clinical
path to effective cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:299–308. [PubMed: 18354418]
49. June CH. Principles of adoptive T cell cancer therapy. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:1204–1212. doi:
10.1172/JCI31446. [PubMed: 17476350]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

50. Robbins PF, et al. Tumor regression in patients with metastatic synovial cell sarcoma and
melanoma using genetically engineered lymphocytes reactive with NY-ESO-1. J Clin Oncol.
2011; 29:917–924. doi:JCO.2010.32.2537 [pii] 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.2537. [PubMed: 21282551]
51. Kalos M, et al. T cells with chimeric antigen receptors have potent antitumor effects and can
establish memory in patients with advanced leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:95ra73. doi:
3/95/95ra73 [pii] 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002842.
52. Topp MS, et al. Targeted therapy with the T-cell-engaging antibody blinatumomab of
chemotherapy-refractory minimal residual disease in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia
patients results in high response rate and prolonged leukemia-free survival. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29:2493–2498. doi:JCO.2010.32.7270 [pii] 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.7270. This paper describes the
clinical results for an intriguing approach to tumor targeting of T cells using bispecific antibodies.
[PubMed: 21576633]
53. Chambers CA, Kuhns MS, Egen JG, Allison JP. CTLA-4-mediated inhibition in regulation of T
cell responses: mechanisms and manipulation in tumor immunotherapy. Annu Rev Immunol.
2001; 19:565–594. doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.565. A recent review describing current
understanding of the mechanism of action of CTLA-4. [PubMed: 11244047]
54. Waterhouse P, et al. Lymphoproliferative disorders with early lethality in mice deficient in Ctla-4.
Science. 1995; 270:985–988. [PubMed: 7481803]
55. Tivol EA, et al. Loss of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation and fatal multiorgan tissue
destruction, revealing a critical negative regulatory role of CTLA-4. Immunity. 1995; 3:541–547.
[PubMed: 7584144]
56. Wing K, et al. CTLA-4 control over Foxp3+ regulatory T cell function. Science. 2008; 322:271–
275. doi:10.1126/science.1160062. [PubMed: 18845758]
57. Cipponi A, Wieers G, van Baren N, Coulie PG. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes: apparently good
for melanoma patients. But why? 2011; 60:1153–1160. Cancer Immunol Immunother. doi:
10.1007/s00262-011-1026-2.
58. Disis ML, et al. High-titer HER-2/neu protein-specific antibody can be detected in patients with
early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1997; 15:3363–3367. [PubMed: 9363867]
59. Novellino L, Castelli C, Parmiani G. A listing of human tumor antigens recognized by T cells:
March 2004 update. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2005; 54:187–207. doi:10.1007/
s00262-004-0560-6. [PubMed: 15309328]
60. Hodi FS, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. N Engl J
Med. 2010; 363:711–723. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1003466. This paper reports the pivotal clinical
trial data that shortly thereafter led to the FDA approval of anti-CTLA4 for the treatment of
metastatic melanoma. [PubMed: 20525992]
61. Robert C, et al. Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously untreated metastatic melanoma. N
Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2517–2526. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1104621. [PubMed: 21639810]
62. Hoos A, et al. Improved endpoints for cancer immunotherapy trials. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;
102:1388–1397. doi:10.1093/jnci/djq310. [PubMed: 20826737]
63. Suntharalingam G, et al. Cytokine storm in a phase 1 trial of the anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody
TGN1412. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:1018–1028. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa063842. [PubMed:
16908486]
64. Workman CJ, Vignali DA. Negative regulation of T cell homeostasis by lymphocyte activation
gene-3 (CD223). J Immunol. 2005; 174:688–695. [PubMed: 15634887]
65. Huang CT, et al. Role of LAG-3 in regulatory T cells. Immunity. 2004; 21:503–513. doi:10.1016/
j.immuni.2004.08.010. [PubMed: 15485628]
66. Woo SR, et al. Differential subcellular localization of the regulatory T-cell protein LAG-3 and the
coreceptor CD4. Eur J Immunol. 2010; 40:1768–1777. doi:10.1002/eji.200939874. [PubMed:
20391435]
67. Okazaki T, et al. PD-1 and LAG-3 inhibitory co-receptors act synergistically to prevent
autoimmunity in mice. J Exp Med. 2011; 208:395–407. doi:10.1084/jem.20100466. [PubMed:
21300912]
68. Keir ME, Butte MJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. PD-1 and its ligands in tolerance and immunity.
Annu Rev Immunol. 2008; 26:677–704. doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.26.021607.090331. This

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

article reviews the evidence for immunosuppression by the induction of T cell exhaustion via
activation of PD1. [PubMed: 18173375]
69. Watanabe T, Bertoletti A, Tanoto TA. PD-1/PD-L1 pathway and T-cell exhaustion in chronic
hepatitis virus infection. J Viral Hepat. 2010; 17:453–458. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2893.2010.01313.x.
[PubMed: 20487259]
70. Sakuishi K, et al. Targeting Tim-3 and PD-1 pathways to reverse T cell exhaustion and restore
anti-tumor immunity. J Exp Med. 2010; 207:2187–2194. doi:10.1084/jem.20100643. [PubMed:
20819927]
71. Gadiot J, et al. Overall survival and PD-L1 expression in metastasized malignant melanoma.
Cancer. 2011; 117:2192–2201. doi:10.1002/cncr.25747. [PubMed: 21523733]
72. Gao Q, et al. Overexpression of PD-L1 significantly associates with tumor aggressiveness and
postoperative recurrence in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:971–979.
doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1608. [PubMed: 19188168]
73. Brahmer JR, et al. Phase I study of single-agent anti-programmed death-1 (MDX-1106) in
refractory solid tumors: safety, clinical activity, pharmacodynamics, and immunologic correlates. J
Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:3167–3175. doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.26.7609. [PubMed: 20516446]
74. Nishimura H, Nose M, Hiai H, Minato N, Honjo T. Development of lupus-like autoimmune
diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene encoding an ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor.
Immunity. 1999; 11:141–151. [PubMed: 10485649]
75. Nishimura H, et al. Autoimmune dilated cardiomyopathy in PD-1 receptor-deficient mice. Science.
2001; 291:319–322. doi:10.1126/science.291.5502.319. [PubMed: 11209085]
76. Ito T, et al. OX40 ligand shuts down IL-10-producing regulatory T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2006; 103:13138–13143. doi:10.1073/pnas.0603107103. [PubMed: 16924108]
77. Cohen AD, et al. Agonist anti-GITR monoclonal antibody induces melanoma tumor immunity in
mice by altering regulatory T cell stability and intra-tumor accumulation. PLoS One. 2010;
5:e10436. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010436. [PubMed: 20454651]
78. Golovina TN, Vonderheide RH. Regulatory T cells: overcoming suppression of T-cell immunity.
Cancer J. 2010; 16:342–347. doi:10.1097/PPO.0b013e3181eb336d 00130404-201007000-00009
[pii]. [PubMed: 20693845]
79. Emens LA, et al. Timed sequential treatment with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and an
allogeneic granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-secreting breast tumor vaccine: a
chemotherapy dose-ranging factorial study of safety and immune activation. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:5911–5918. doi:JCO.2009.23.3494 [pii] 10.1200/JCO.2009.23.3494. [PubMed: 19805669]
80. Ghiringhelli F, et al. Metronomic cyclophosphamide regimen selectively depletes CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells and restores T and NK effector functions in end stage cancer patients. Cancer
Immunol Immunother. 2007; 56:641–648. doi:10.1007/s00262-006-0225-8. [PubMed: 16960692]
81. Muller AJ, Scherle PA. Targeting the mechanisms of tumoral immune tolerance with smallmolecule inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:613–625. doi:10.1038/nrc1929. [PubMed:
16862192]
82. Manning EA, et al. A vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 inhibitor enhances antitumor
immunity through an immune-based mechanism. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:3951–3959. doi:
13/13/3951 [pii] 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-0374. [PubMed: 17606729]
83. Shrimali RK, et al. Antiangiogenic agents can increase lymphocyte infiltration into tumor and
enhance the effectiveness of adoptive immunotherapy of cancer. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:6171–6180.
doi:0008-5472.CAN-10-0153 [pii] 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0153. [PubMed: 20631075]
84. Wang L, et al. IL-17 can promote tumor growth through an IL-6-Stat3 signaling pathway. J Exp
Med. 2009; 206:1457–1464. doi:10.1084/jem.20090207. [PubMed: 19564351]
85. Chapman PB, et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E
mutation. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2507–2516. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1103782. [PubMed:
21639808]
86. Dougan M, et al. IAP inhibitors enhance co-stimulation to promote tumor immunity. J Exp Med.
2010; 207:2195–2206. doi:10.1084/jem.20101123. [PubMed: 20837698]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

87. Ferrer IR, et al. Cutting edge: Rapamycin augments pathogen-specific but not graft-reactive CD8+
T cell responses. J Immunol. 2010; 185:2004–2008. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1001176. [PubMed:
20631309]
88. Machiels JP, et al. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and paclitaxel enhance the antitumor immune
response of granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor-secreting whole-cell vaccines in
HER-2/neu tolerized mice. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:3689–3697. [PubMed: 11325840]
89. Alagkiozidis I, et al. Time-dependent cytotoxic drugs selectively cooperate with IL-18 for cancer
chemo-immunotherapy. J Transl Med. 2011; 9:77. doi:1479-5876-9-77 [pii]
10.1186/1479-5876-9-77. [PubMed: 21609494]
90. Obeid M, et al. Calreticulin exposure dictates the immunogenicity of cancer cell death. Nat Med.
2007; 13:54–61. [PubMed: 17187072]
91. Senzer NN, et al. Phase II clinical trial of a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factorencoding, second-generation oncolytic herpesvirus in patients with unresectable metastatic
melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:5763–5771. doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.24.3675. [PubMed:
19884534]
92. Beatty GL, et al. CD40 agonists alter tumor stroma and show efficacy against pancreatic carcinoma
in mice and humans. Science. 2011; 331:1612–1616. doi:10.1126/science.1198443. Although it is
unclear if activation of CD40 works by activating innate or adaptive immunity, the results reported
in this paper are impressive. [PubMed: 21436454]
93. Schreiber RD, Old LJ, Smyth MJ. Cancer immunoediting: integrating immunity's roles in cancer
suppression and promotion. Science. 2011; 331:1565–1570. doi:10.1126/science.1203486.
[PubMed: 21436444]
94. Nahta R, Esteva FJ. Herceptin: mechanisms of action and resistance. Cancer Lett. 2006; 232:123–
138. doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2005.01.041. [PubMed: 16458110]
95. Taylor C, et al. Augmented HER-2 specific immunity during treatment with trastuzumab and
chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:5133–5143. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-0507.
[PubMed: 17785568]
96. Lewis Phillips GD, et al. Targeting HER2-positive breast cancer with trastuzumab-DM1, an
antibody-cytotoxic drug conjugate. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:9280–9290. doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1776. [PubMed: 19010901]
97. Porter DL, Levine BL, Kalos M, Bagg A, June CH. Chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells in
chronic lymphoid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:725–733. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1103849. A
recent and clinically impressive attempt at adoptive T cell therapy using genetically altered,
patient-derived T cells. [PubMed: 21830940]
98. Gogas H, et al. Prognostic significance of autoimmunity during treatment of melanoma with
interferon. N Engl J Med. 2006; 354:709–718. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa053007. [PubMed: 16481638]
99. Shin JY, Yoon IH, Kim JS, Kim B, Park CG. Vascular endothelial growth factor-induced
chemotaxis and IL-10 from T cells. Cell Immunol. 2009; 256:72–78. doi:10.1016/j.cellimm.
2009.01.006. [PubMed: 19249018]
100. Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as regulators of the immune system.
Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 9:162–174. doi:nri2506 [pii] 10.1038/nri2506. [PubMed: 19197294]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Generation and regulation of anti-tumor immunity

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Understanding the events in generating and regulating anti-tumor immunity suggests at least
three sites for therapeutic intervention: promoting the antigen presentation functions of DCs,
promoting the production of protective T cell responses, and overcoming
immunosuppression in the tumor bed. Anti-tumor immune responses must begin with the
capture of tumor-associated antigens by DCs, either delivered exogenously or captured from
dead or dying tumor cells. The DCs process the captured antigen for presentation or crosspresentation on MHC class II and class I molecules (respectively) and migrate to draining
lymph nodes. If capture and presentation occurred in the presence of an immunogenic
maturation stimulus, DCs will elicit anti-cancer effector T cell responses in the lymph node;
if no such stimulus was received, DCs will instead induce tolerance leading to T cell
deletion, anergy, or the production of Tregs. In the lymph node, antigen presentation to T
cells will elicit responses depending on the type of DC maturation stimulus received and on
the interaction of T-cell costimulatory molecules with their surface receptors on DCs. Thus,
interaction of CD28 or OX40 with CD80/86 or OX40L will promote potentially protective T
cell responses, while interaction of CTLA4 with CD80/86 or PD-1 with PD-L1/PD-L2 will
suppress T cell responses, and possibly promote Treg formation. Antigen-educated T cells
(along with B cells and NK cells) will exit the lymph node and enter the tumor bed, where a
host of immunosuppressive defense mechanisms can be produced by tumors (or infiltrating
myeloid cells) that oppose effector T cell function. These include the upregulation of PDL1/L2 on the cancer cell surface, release of PGE2, arginase and IDO (all T cell suppressors),
and the release of VEGF (triggered in part by intratumoral hypoxia), which inhibits T cell
diapedesis from the vasculature and thus infiltration into the tumor bed.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Biologic activities of CTLA-4 antibody blockade

Upon encountering a dendritic cell presenting a cognate tumor antigen-derived peptide
epitope and expressing B7 costimulatory molecules (CD80, CD86), specific anti-tumor T
cells become activated through TCR and CD28 signaling. CTLA-4 is subsequently
upregulated and preferentially engages B7 to attenuate T cell responses. Ipilimumab blocks
CTLA-4 function, thereby allowing for enhanced T cell stimulation and more potent antitumor reactions. Ipilimumab may also antagonize CTLA-4 on regulatory T cells to limit
their ability to suppress anti-tumor T cell effector responses (not shown). CTLA-4 antibody
blockade compromises tolerance to some normal tissue antigens, provoking inflammatory
toxicities that can especially impact the skin, pituitary gland, and intestine in human
patients.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

Mellman et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. T cell targets for immunoregulatory antibody therapy

In addition to specific antigen recognition through the TCR, T cell activation is regulated
through a balance of positive and negative signals provided by costimulatory receptors.
These surface proteins are typically members of either the TNF receptor or B7
superfamilies. Agonistic antibodies directed against activating costimulatory molecules and
blocking antibodies against negative costimulatory molecules may enhance T cell
stimulation to promote tumor destruction.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 27.

