Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibition of Lon protease by triterpenoids alters mitochondria
and is associated to cell death in human cancer cells
Lara Gibellini1,*, Marcello Pinti2,*, Regina Bartolomeo1, Sara De Biasi1, Antonella
Cormio3, Clara Musicco4, Gianluca Carnevale1, Simone Pecorini1, Milena Nasi1,
Anto De Pol1, Andrea Cossarizza1
1

 epartment of Surgery, Medicine, Dentistry and Morphological Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
D
Modena, Italy

2

Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy

3

Department of Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari, Bari, Italy

4

CNR – Institute of Biomembranes and Bioenergetics, Bari, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Marcello Pinti, e-mail: marcello.pinti@unimore.it
Keywords: mitochondria, Lon, CDDO, CDDO-Me
Received: January 28, 2015      Accepted: July 03, 2015      Published: July 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Mitochondrial Lon protease (Lon) regulates several mitochondrial functions,
and is inhibited by the anticancer molecule triterpenoid 2-cyano-3, 12-dioxooleana1,9(11)-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO), or by its C-28 methyl ester derivative (CDDO-Me). To
analyze the mechanism of action of triterpenoids, we investigated intramitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial membrane potential, mitochondrial
mass, mitochondrial dynamics and morphology, and Lon proteolytic activity in
RKO human colon cancer cells, in HepG2 hepatocarcinoma cells and in MCF7
breast carcinoma cells. We found that CDDO and CDDO-Me are potent stressors for
mitochondria in cancer cells, rather than normal non-transformed cells. In particular,
they: i) cause depolarization; ii) increase mitochondrial ROS, iii) alter mitochondrial
morphology and proteins involved in mitochondrial dynamics; iv) affect the levels of
Lon and those of aconitase and human transcription factor A, which are targets of Lon
activity; v) increase level of protein carbonyls in mitochondria; vi) lead to intrinsic
apoptosis. The overexpression of Lon can rescue cells from cell death, providing an
additional evidence on the role of Lon in conditions of excessive stress load.

Among these proteins, a main role is played by
Lon protease (Lon), a molecule highly conserved from
bacteria to mammals, and that in eukarya is one of
the quality control proteins within mitochondria [4].
It is encoded in the nucleus and it localizes to
mitochondrial matrix, where controls mitochondrial
function, especially under oxidative, hypoxic and
metabolic-stress conditions. Lon recognizes damaged
and oxidized proteins and mediates their proteolysis,
acts as a chaperone, and is involved in mitochondrial
DNA maintenance [5]. Aconitase and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) are known substrates of
Lon proteolytic activity [6, 7].
Several lines of evidence support a role for Lon
as a non-oncogenic protein essential for cancer survival.
First, Lon expression increases in response to several

INTRODUCTION
The neoplastic transformation of normal
cells is a multistep process that is first initiated by
diverse genetic alterations, then enhanced by several
oncogenesis-associated cellular stresses, that can be
observed in many cancer cells [1, 2]. Cancer cells
develop in a microenvironment where stressors are
greater than those present in normal cells, and for
their survival have to activate several anti-stress
pathways and defense mechanisms. Such pathways
and mechanisms are sustained by a number of
nononcogenic proteins, i.e. molecules which do not
initiate tumorigenesis, but participate in the cell stress
response, and heighten the survival and proliferation
of cancer cells [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25466

Oncotarget

RESULTS

stressors. In hypoxic cells, Lon is up-regulated and
is responsible for degrading cytochrome c oxidase
4 subunit 1 (COX4-1) to optimize the efficiency of
respiration [8]. Similarly, when cells are challenged
with oxidative stress, Lon is involved in the degradation
of misfolded, oxidized and carbonylated proteins,
thereby preventing their accumulation [9, 10]. Second,
Lon plays a key role in the remodeling of respiratory
chain complexes during the metabolic reprogramming
triggered in mitochondria in many cancer cells [11].
Knock-down of Lon activates the AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), which is a crucial regulator of the
energy homeostasis under metabolic stress [12]. Third,
Lon down-regulation in cancer cells results in disruption
of mitochondrial function and structure, reduced
proliferation, and increased apoptotic cell death [13].
Finally, Lon overexpression correlates with cancer cell
aggressiveness, and indeed Lon is up-regulated in several
cancer cells, including RKO colon carcinoma, HepG2
hepatocarcinoma, large cell lymphoma cell lines, Granta
mantle cell lymphoma cell lines, and ex vivo specimens
obtained from colon carcinoma and bladder cancer [3, 11,
13–16]. How Lon expression and functions are regulated
is not well understood, but targeting its activity in cancer
cells could represent a novel and valuable therapeutic
strategy.
The synthetic triterpenoid 2-cyano-3, 12-dioxoo­
leana-1,9(11)-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO), and its C-28
methyl ester derivative (CDDO-Me), are molecules
with strong anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative
activity [17]. Several mechanisms have been proposed
for their anticancer effect, such as: i) the formation of
Michael adducts with reactive nucleophiles, including
free thiols on target proteins, ii) the inhibition of
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) [18],
iii) the induction of apoptosis through the mitochondrial
pathway [19], and iv) the inhibition of Lon proteolytic
activity [3]. Both CDDO and CDDO-Me interact
with Lon and form covalent Lon-CDDO adducts that
irreversibly inhibit Lon activity, thereby inducing
mitochondrial protein aggregation [3]. We recently
demonstrated that shRNA-mediated down-regulation of
Lon in the human colon carcinoma cells RKO leads to
impaired mitochondrial structure and function, causing
apoptotic cell death via mitochondria [13]. Thus, we
wondered whether treating different human cell lines,
such as RKO, HepG2 and MCF7, compared to normal
fibroblasts, with compounds that could have a potential
interest for cancer treatment, i.e. CDDO or its methyl
ester derivative, would provide the same effects found
by shRNA knockdown of Lon. Thus, in human cancer
cells, we characterized the effects of triterpenoids
on mitochondria, paying a particular attention to
membrane potential, mass, morphology, dynamics and
ROS content.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CDDO and CDDO-Me decrease proliferation,
induce apoptosis in cancer cells, and increase
mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide and
mitochondrial superoxide anion
We first analysed the effects of CDDO and CDDOMe on cell growth by culturing RKO, HepG2 and MCF7
cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of
these molecules for up to 72 hours. As shown in Figure
1A and in Supplementary Figure S1A, counting adherent
cells revealed that a time- and concentration-dependent
inhibition of cell proliferation was observed either for
CDDO or for CDDO-Me, for RKO, HepG2 and MCF7
cells. However, CDDO-Me was much stronger than
CDDO in inhibiting cell growth in all cell lines.
To investigate the inhibitory mechanisms induced
by these drugs, we analysed their effects on apoptosis,
and on mitochondrial functionality and morphology. First,
we analysed simultaneously apoptosis and production
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) at the single cell level
by multicolour flow cytometry. Cells were first loaded
with mitochondria peroxy yellow 1 (mitoPY1), which
specifically detects mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide
(mtH2O2), and then treated for up to 24 hours with
CDDO or CDDO-Me. Supernatants were collected and
cells stained with MitoSOX red superoxide indicator
(MitoSOX), and with annexin-V (AnxV), and TO-PRO-3
iodide (TOPRO). Early apoptotic cells were those positive
for AnxV and negative for TOPRO, whereas late apoptotic/
necrotic cells were positive for TOPRO, independently on
AnxV (Figure 1B). Also in this case, CDDO-Me was more
potent than CDDO in causing cell death for RKO, HepG2
and MCF7 cells (Figure 1C and 1D, and Supplementary
Figure S1B, and S1D): a slight increase in cell death was
observed after 6 hour incubation with CDDO and 1–2.5
μM CDDO-Me. In RKO cells, after 16 and 24 hours of
incubation, both CDDO and CDDO-Me led to a strong
increase in the percentage of early apoptotic cells (Figure
1C and 1D, left panels). Concerning HepG2 cells, higher
concentrations of CDDO and CDDO-Me were needed to
induce apoptosis (Supplementary Figure S1B and S1C). We
also investigated whether triterpenoids could affect viability
of normal cells. Thus, we obtained primary cultures of
human fibroblasts and we treated these cells with increasing
concentrations of CDDO and CDDO-Me for 6, 16 and 24
hours. We found that CDDO and CDDO-Me did not cause
apoptosis in human fibroblasts, except for the highest tested
concentration of CDDO-Me, and only after 16 and 24 hours
of incubation (Supplementary Figure S2A and S2B).
We next examined the effects of CDDO and
CDDO-Me on the activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3,
to understand if apoptotic cell death was mediated by the
intrinsic pathway. As shown in Figure 1E, we were able

25467

Oncotarget

Figure 1: CDDO and CDDO-Me are anti-proliferative and induce apoptosis in RKO cells. A. Growth curve of RKO cells

incubated with the indicated concentrations of CDDO (left panel) or CDDO-Me (right panel) for up to 72 hours; DMSO-treated cells
were considered as controls (Ctrl). B. Representative flow cytometric dot plots combining Annexin-V (AnxV) Alexa Fluor Pacific Blue
and TO-PRO-3 iodide (TOPRO) staining in RKO cells treated with DMSO (Ctrl), or with increasing concentrations of CDDO or CDDOMe for 24 hours. C. Percentage of early apoptotic cells (AnxV+/TOPRO- cells) and late apoptotic/necrotic cells (AnxV-/TOPRO+ and
AnxV+/TOPRO+ cells) after treatment with the indicated concentrations of CDDO for up to 24 hours. Values represent the mean ± SD of
five independent experiments, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl. D. Percentage of early apoptotic cells and late apoptotic/necrotic cells
after treatment with the indicated concentrations of CDDO-Me for up to 24 hours. Values represent the mean ± SD of five independent
experiments, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25468

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (Continued ) CDDO and CDDO-Me are anti-proliferative and induce apoptosis in RKO cells. E. Western blot

analyses showing caspase-9 activation in RKO cells after treatment with CDDO and CDDO-Me at the indicated concentrations. Cells
treated with 1 μM staurosporine (STS) for 4 hours were used as positive controls for caspase-9 activation. F. Representative histograms
showing MitoSOX Red Superoxide Indicator (mitoSOX) and Mitochondria Peroxy Yellow 1 (mitoPY1) to detect mitochondrial anion
superoxide and mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide in living cells (i.e., those that were AnxV-/TOPRO- cells, indicated by the square). H2O2
was used as positive control. G. Quantification of mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide (mtH2O2) and mitochondrial anion superoxide (mtO2−)
in RKO cells treated with CDDO up to 24 hours. Data are expressed as percentage of increase in median fluorescence intensity (MFI) and
represent the mean ± SD of four independent experiments; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl. H. Quantification of mtH2O2 and mtO2− in
RKO cells treated with CDDO-Me for up to 24 hours. Data are expressed as percentage of increase in MFI and represent the mean ± SD of
four independent experiments; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25469

Oncotarget

to detect both the activation of caspase-9, evidenced by
the presence of the band at 39 kDa, and the decreased
expression of the full length protein (47 kDa), at least after
24 hours of treatment with CDDO-Me. The concentration
of 2.5 μM CDDO or CDDO-Me led to the activation of
caspase-9, which occurred after 6-hours treatment in RKO
cells. As reported in Supplemetary Figure 3A, activated
caspase-3/7 was detected by flow cytometry and showed
a major increase after 16 and 24 hours of treatment, both
for CDDO and CDDO-Me (Supplementary Figure S3B).
Concerning ROS, the gating strategy is reported
in Figure 1F. Here, we reported a representative dot plot
showing AnxV and TOPRO fluorescences to discriminate
viable and dead cells, together with the histograms
showing mitoPY1 and mitoSOX fluorescences in AnxV-/
TOPRO- cells indicating the content of mtH2O2 and mtO2−
in living cells. In this figure, RKO cells were treated with
H2O2, a molecule known to induce oxidative stress. The
quantification of mitoPY1 and mitoSOX is reported in
Figure 1G and 1H for RKO cells, and in Supplementary
Figure S4A and S4B for HepG2 cells. In RKO cells, when
CDDO was used, an increase in mtH2O2 and mtO2− was
in part observed at 6 hours, but especially after 16 hours
of incubation (Figure 1G); when CDDO-Me was used,
mtH2O2 and mtO2− increased at 2.5 μM after 16 hours of
incubation (Figure 1H). A slight increase after 24 hours
of incubation was also observed. In HepG2 cells, CDDO
led to a two to five-fold increase in mtH2O2 after 6, 16
and 24 hours of treatment. A parallel increase in mtO2−
levels was observed after 6 and 16 hours of incubation
(Supplementary Figure S4A). When RKO cells were
treated with CDDO-Me, the increase of mtH2O2 and
mtO2− was not observed after 6 hours of treatment but
only after 16 hours in the presence of 2.5  μM CDDOMe (Figure 1G). No change of mtH2O2 and mtO2− was
observed in HepG2 cells treated with CDDO-Me
(Supplementary Figure S4B). We also investigated
whether triterpenoids could increase mitochondrial ROS
(mtROS) in non-transformed cells, i.e. primary fibroblasts,
and we found that CDDO and CDDO-Me induced ROS
generation but at lower levels compared to RKO and
HepG2 cells (Supplementary Figure S4C and S4D). While
in RKO and HepG2 cells after CDDO treatment, mtH2O2
had a 3- to 5-fold increase, in primary fibroblasts 10 μM
CDDO was the only concentration able to induce a 1.5fold increase of mtH2O2 (Supplementary Figure S4C, left
panel). A similar, or even lower, increase was observed for
mtO2− (Supplementary Figure S4C, right panel).

Figure 2B and Supplementary Figure S5A the quantification
of cells with depolarized mitochondria is reported for RKO
and HepG2 cells, respectively. When CDDO was used,
the concentration of 2.5 μM was sufficient to observe the
presence of RKO cells with depolarized mitochondria, but
higher concentrations were required to obtain a similar effect
in HepG2 cells. Also in this case, CDDO-Me was much
more potent, since the concentration of 1 μM was sufficient
to cause a significant increase of cells with depolarized
mitochondria both in RKO and in HepG2 cells. It is to note
that concentrations higher than 2.5 μM caused massive
cell death, so that the measure of mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP) had little meaning.
Changes in ROS production and MMP were
accompanied by alteration of mitochondrial morphology and
mitochondrial mass. Cells treated with CDDO and CDDOMe contained fragmented mitochondria, that were present
also at 1 μM concentration in all cell lines (Figure 3A and
Supplementary Figure S5B). The expression levels of
mitofusin-2 (Mfn2) and Dynamin related protein-1 (Drp1)
were measured by western blot in lysates of RKO cells
incubated with different concentrations of CDDO and CDDOMe for 6, 16 and 24 hours. In RKO cells incubated with CDDO
for 6 hours, Drp1 expression increased compared to untreated
cells (Figure 3B). This increase is statistically significant at
2.5 μM. On the contrary, Mfn2 expression decreased compared
to untreated cells especially at high drug concentrations
(5 and 10 μM; Figure 3B). After 16 and 24 hours of treatment
at high CDDO concentrations (5 and 10 µM), a significant
decrease of both Drp1 and Mfn2 expression compared to
untreated cells (Figure 3B) was found. A partial recovery
of Drp1 was observed at 10 µM concentration (Figure 3B).
As far as CDDO-Me treatment is concerned, after 16 and
24 hours of treatment, Drp1 and Mfn2 expression levels
decreased in particular at high drug concentrations (1 and
2.5 μM; Figure 3C).
Both drugs altered mitochondrial mass, in particular
after 16 and 24 hours of treatment with CDDO both in
RKO and in HepG2 cells (Figure 3D and Supplementary
Figure S5C). Slight modifications in mitochondrial mass
were observed with CDDO-Me. Similar alterations in
MMP and mitochondrial morphology were observed in
MCF7 cells (Supplementary Figure S6A and S6B).

CDDO and CDDO-Me alter the expression of
Lon targets, and Lon overexpression protect cells
from apoptosis induced by these molecules
We next examined whether and to what extent
the level of Lon and of two representative substrates,
namely human transcription factor A (TFAM) and
aconitase (Aco2) were modified after treatment with
CDDO or CDDO-Me. Lon protein levels remained
almost unchanged (Figure 4A and 4B, left panel);
a slight reduction of Lon mRNA was observed after
16 hours of treatment, which was maintained until

CDDO and CDDO-Me depolarize mitochondria
and alter mitochondrial morphology
We then quantified the amount of cells with depolarized
mitochondria after 24 hours of culture in the presence of
CDDO or CDDO-Me. In Figure 2A, representative dot
plots showing JC-1 fluorescence are reported, whereas in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25470

Oncotarget

Figure 2: CDDO and CDDO-Me alter mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). A. Representative dot plots showing JC-1

monomers and aggregates in cells treated with DMSO (Ctrl) and increasing concentrations of CDDO or CDDO-Me. Valinomycin (Val)
was used a positive control for mitochondrial depolarization. B. Quantification of cells with depolarized mitochondria. Values represent the
mean ± SD of five independent experiments, *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25471

Oncotarget

Figure 3: CDDO and CDDO-Me affect mitochondrial morphology and mitochondrial dynamics. A. Representative

immune-fluorescence images showing mitochondria in RKO cells treated with 1 μM and 2.5 μM CDDO and CDDO-Me. Red fluorescence
represents mitochondria labelled with anti-human mitochondrial protein and with goat anti-rabbit F(ab’)2 Alexa 647. Nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI. B. Representative western blot of mitofusin 2 (Mfn2) and dynamin related protein 1 (Drp1) in RKO cells treated
with CDDO up to 10 μM for up to 24 hours. Densitometric data are also reported; values represent the mean ± SD of three independent
experiments; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.05 vs. Ctrl (dashed lines). (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25472

Oncotarget

Figure 3: (Continued ) CDDO and CDDO-Me affect mitochondrial morphology and mitochondrial dynamics.

C. Representative western blot of Mfn2 and Drp1 in RKO cells treated with CDDO-Me up to 2.5 μM for up to 24 hours. Densitometries
are also reported; values represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl (dashed line).
D. Detection of mitochondrial mass in RKO treated with DMSO (Ctrl) and increasing concentrations of CDDO and CDDO-Me for up to 24
hours, as revealed by flow cytometry. Data are expressed as percentage of increase in median fluorescence intensity (MFI) in comparison
to Ctrl, set to 100%, and represent the mean ± SD of four independent experiments; **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl.

24 hours (Supplementary Figure S7). Concerning CDDO-Me,
Lon mRNA showed only a slight reduction after 16 hours of
treatment with 2.5 μM CDDO-Me. Aco2 protein levels slightly
decreased after 16 hours incubation with CDDO, whereas
TFAM protein levels increased after 6 hours of treatment
and then strongly decreased at the higher concentrations of
CDDO after 16 and 24 hours of treatment (Figure 4A and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4B). Similarly, when cells were treated with CDDO-Me, Aco2
levels did not change, whereas TFAM levels increased after 16
hours of treatment (Figure 4C and 4D).
Considering that Lon is a stress protein inducible by
multiple stressors, we asked whether Lon overexpression
could protect RKO cells from CDDO-induced cell death.
Thus, we generated a retroviral vector harbouring the
25473

Oncotarget

cDNA encoding for Lon protease (pMSCV-Lon), and
we used this to stably transduce RKO cells. We firstly
ascertained that cells transduced with pMSCV-Lon
had increased levels of Lon mRNA and Lon protein. In
pMSCV-Lon cells, a 3-fold increase and a 2-fold increase
was observed for Lon mRNA and Lon protein, respectively
(Figure 5A). We also confirmed that Lon was correctly
localized to mitochondria in these cells (Figure 5B). When
treated with CDDO and CDDO-Me, cells overexpressing
Lon were less prone to undergo apoptosis than control

cells (Figure 5C). Interestingly, also in this case CDDOMe was more effective than CDDO in causing cell death.

CDDO and CDDO-Me increase the levels of
mitochondrial protein carbonyls
As protein carbonylation is the main protein modification
that takes place as consequence of severe oxidative stress,
we investigated whether the increase in mtROS observed in
RKO cells treated with CDDO and CDDO-Me determined

Figure 4: Effects of CDDO and CDDO-Me on the expression of Lon protease and its proteolytic targets.
A. Representative western blots of Lon, human mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and aconitase (Aco2), and TOM20 in RKO
cells treated with increasing concentrations of CDDO for up to 24 hours. β-actin were used as loading control. B. Densitometric analysis
showing the levels of Lon, TFAM, Aco2 and TOM20 in CDDO-treated cells. Values represent the mean ± SD of three independent
experiments, *P < 0.05 vs. Ctrl. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25474

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (Continued ) Effects of CDDO and CDDO-Me on the expression of Lon protease and its proteolytic targets.

C. Representative western blots of Lon, TFAM, Aco2 and TOM20 in RKO cells treated with increasing concentrations of CDDO-Me for 6,
16 and 24 hours. D. Densitometric analysis showing the levels of Lon, TFAM, Aco2 and TOM20 in cells treated with CDDO-Me. Values
represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments, *P < 0.05 vs. Ctrl.

DISCUSSION

an increase in the levels of protein carbonyls in mitochondria.
Protein carbonylation was assessed in mitochondrial fractions
by derivatization of carbonyls with 2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine
(DNPH), followed by anti­body detection. In Figure 6A a
representative oxyblot performed on mitochondrial fractions
from RKO cells treated with 2.5 μM CDDO is reported.
As expected, the levels of protein carbonyls, as revealed by
colorimetric assay, were significantly increased (Figure 6B).
CDDO-Me led to a slight, but non significant increase at the
highest tested concentration (data not shown).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Our previous studies demonstrated that mito­
chondrial Lon protease plays a crucial role in maintaining
mitochondrial morphology and function in RKO colon
carcinoma cells [13]. We showed that Lon is up-regulated
in several cancer cell lines and in tissue samples from
colorectal carcinoma, and that in RKO cells Lon downregulation leads to impaired mitochondrial proteome,
reduced levels of mitochondrial RNAs, reduced oxygen
25475

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Overexpression of Lon protects cells from apoptotic cell death induced by CDDO and CDDO-Me. A. Expression

of Lon mRNA and Lon protein in control cells (pMSCV) and cells overexpressing Lon (pMSCV-Lon). Values represent the mean ± SD of
five independent experiments, **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl. B. Representative pseudocolour maps (upper panels; red indicates maximal expression)
obtained by confocal microscopy after immunostaining cells with anti-Lon antibody. In lower panels, representative confocal microscopy
images show that Lon is localized to mitochondria in pMSCV-Lon cells. Cells were immunostained with anti-Lon (red) and anti-human
mitochondria (hMit, green). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. C. Percentage of apoptotic cells after treatment with CDDO up to
10 μM, and CDDO-Me up to 2.5 μM. Values represent the mean ± SD of five independent experiments, *P < 0.05 vs. Ctrl.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25476

Oncotarget

Figure 6: CDDO and CDDO-Me increased mitochondrial protein carbonyls. A. Detection of protein carbonyls in mitochondrial
lysates, as revealed by oxyblotting by using a primary antibody against dinitrophenyl hydrazone (DNP). RKO cells were treated with
2.5 μM CDDO for 16 hours. B. Quantification of protein carbonyls in mitochondrial fractions from RKO cells treated with CDDO at
different concentrations for 16 hours, as revelaed by colorimetric assay. Values represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments,
*P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs. Ctrl. C. Schematic representation of the possible mechanisms linking CDDO and CDDO-Me to cell death.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25477

Oncotarget

consumption rate, increased ROS and fragmented shape
of mitochondrial network. In these cells, apoptotic cell
death occurred by the intrinsic pathway, with release of
cytochrome c in the cytosol, and activation of caspase-9
and PARP. These features potentially place Lon among
non-oncogenic proteins, that is those proteins which
do not initiate tumourigenesis, but are important for
cancer cell survival. For this reason, the current study
was aimed at determining the effects of two inhibitors
of Lon proteolytic activity, the triterpenoids CDDO and
CDDO-Me, in different cancer cells. In recent years, the
pharmacologic action of CDDO and CDDO-Me gained
increased attention, and several studies reported their
antiproliferative and anticancer activities. We confirmed
that CDDO and CDDO-Me inhibited cell growth in a
concentration-dependent manner and induced apoptosis
in RKO, HepG2 and MCF7 cells. In particular, the fact
that apoptosis mediated by CDDO and CDDO-Me was
identified by an increase in phosphatidylserine exposure,
and by the activation of caspase-3, together with the
activation of caspase-9, places these triterpenoids among
molecules able to exert toxic effects on mitochondria.
As previous studies have shown that triterpenoids
induce apoptosis as a consequence of ROS generation
[20, 21], we analysed mitochondrial redox state and
MMP. We found that CDDO leads to increased mtH2O2
and mtO2− production, particularly after 16 hours of
treatment, and determines an increase of carbonylated
mitochondrial proteins. The capability of this agent to
increase oxidative stress could be direct, for instance
through the interaction with electron transport chain
complexes, or indirect, through the inhibition of Lon,
which protects mitochondria from stresses and from the
accumulation of oxidized and carbonylated proteins.
Complexes I and III of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain are major sites where superoxide is
generated, either in the matrix (Complex I and III), or in
the intermembrane space (Complex III) [22]. Superoxide
can be partially converted into hydrogen peroxide, which
can be scavenged by antioxidant systems, including
catalase, peroxiredoxins and glutathione [23]. When ROS
accumulate, they can oxidize proteins in a process known
as protein carbonylation, which is the irreversible, metalcatalyzed oxidative attack on the side chains of precise
aminoacids [24]. If not degraded, carbonylated proteins
form high-molecular-weight cytotoxic aggregates. As Lon
is responsible for degradation of carbonylated proteins in
mitochondrial matrix, the increase of carbonylated proteins
could be likely due to the sum of two concomitant effects
of CDDO and CDDO-Me: the capability to increase the
levels of mtROS, which in turn determines mitochondrial
protein carbonylation, and the inhibition of Lon, which is
responsible for the degradation of carbonylated proteins.
Thus, the pro-apoptotic and cytotoxic activity of these
two triterpenoids can be due to the direct effect of ROS,
which are pro-apoptotic per se, to damage induced by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ROS on mt proteins, and to the inhibition of Lon that
lowers the removal of cytotoxic protein aggregates within
mitochondria.
Cancer cells produce higher levels of ROS than
normal cells [25, 26]. On the one hand, these ROS play
an important role in cancer progression by stimulating
cell growth and genetic instability. On the other, they
generate an intrinsic oxidative stress which renders cells
highly dependent on antioxidant systems and/or highly
sensitive to agents that dysregulate redox status. For
instance, the association of 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME),
which inhibits superoxide dismutase, to arsenic trioxide,
which causes ROS increase, has a strong cytotoxic activity
in leukemia cells [27]. Similarly, hydrogen peroxide and
2-ME can induce oxidative stress that leads to apoptotic
and autophagic cell death in transformed cells but not in
normal, non-transformed cells [28]; finally, β-phenylethyl
isothiocyanate selectively kills cancer cells through a
ROS-mediated mechanism [29]. Our data indicate that
CDDO and CDDO-Me exert a similar effect, as they
increase mitochondrial oxidative stress, which contributes
to apoptotic cell death in cancer cells, but fail to induce
mtROS increase and apoptosis in normal fibroblasts. We
observed that CDDO and CDDO-Me severely altered
mitochondria of RKO, HepG2 and MCF7 cells, without
deeply affecting the levels of Lon protein and mRNA, the
levels of the main substrates of Lon proteolytic activity
(except for TFAM), and the levels of proteins involved
in mitochondria fusion and fission, except for the highest
concentrations of CDDO and CDDO-Me.
Mitochondrial morphology is regulated by the
balance of two continuous antagonistic processes:
fusion and fission [30]. Under physiological conditions,
mitochondria are elongated and filamentous, but they
undergo extensive fragmentation during apoptosis.
It is generally believed that increased mitochondrial
fragmentation signals cellular damage and initiates
apoptotic death of the cell and that an unbroken fusion
process, on the other hand, may lead to uncontrolled
proliferation [31]. As vital determinants of fission-fusion
balance, Drp1 and Mfn2 share a reciprocal relationship.
Factors perturbing this balance are likely to also skew the
stoichiometric relationship between these two proteins
[32]. Apoptotic fission is associated with remodeling of
the cristae, which is characterized by the opening of their
tubular junction and release of proapoptotic factors, such
as cyt c, which is required in the cytosol for the activation
of downstream effector caspases [33]. In RKO cells, after
6 hours of treatment the Drp1/Mfn2 ratio increased and
this unbalance might promote mitochondrial fragmentation
and stimulate apoptotic death that is highlighted after
16 and 24 hours of treatment. After 16 hours of treatment
Drp1 and Mfn2 expression levels decreased in particular
at high drug concentrations (5 and 10 μM). Nevertheless,
Drp1/Mfn2 ratio remained unbalanced towards fission.
At 24 hours of treatment Drp1 and Mfn2 expression
25478

Oncotarget

decreased in particular at high concentrations of CDDO.
The reduced expression level of these proteins might
be the consequence of no more fully sustained de novo
protein synthesis at these high drug concentrations and
can explain the disruption of mitochondria in terms of
morphology. In fact, Mfn2 is essential for maintaining
mitochondrial shape and integrity and alteration of
protein synthesis of Drp1 may alter mitochondrial
turnover (mitophagy) [30]. A partial recovery of Drp1 was
observed at 10 μM concentration after 16 and 24 hours
of incubation. This result may be explained as the last
attempt of the cells to increase mitochondrial functionality
by activating mitochondrial fission and mitochondrial
turnover to remove mitochondrial cytotoxic protein
aggregates. High CDDO concentration (10 μM) may
inhibit Lon protease and increase protein aggregates. In the
presence of CDDO-Me, again, the reduced expression of
Drp1 and Mfn2 might be the consequence of no more fully
sustained de novo protein synthesis and can explain the
disruption of mitochondrial morphology. No increase of
Drp1 expression was observed in CDDO-Me treated cells.
It can be envisioned that mitochondrial fragmentation and
apoptosis in CDDO-Me treated cells might be activated
by a different mechanism such as the increase of another
fission protein like Fis1 [34] or the depletion of another
fusion protein like OPA1 [35].
Strong differences were observed in the effects
of CDDO and CDDO-Me on oxidative stress and
mitochondrial mass. In our models, CDDO induced
a burst of ROS specifically in mitochondria, which
resulted in mitochondrial damage, collapse of MMP,
mitochondrial mass increase and cell death by intrinsic
apoptosis. Conversely, CDDO-Me was not associated
with mtROS increase (at least not in a concentrationand time-dependent mechanisms as was for CDDO);
in any case, it induced mitochondrial damage, collapse
of MMP and apoptotic cell death without altering
mitochondrial mass. Interestingly, several reports show
that mitochondrial mass increases in the presence of
oxidative stress and that such increase depends on
MMP and protein synthesis in the cytoplasm [36, 37].
A similar increase has also been observed in different
cell types undergoing apoptotic cell death, including
HepG2, MCF7 and HeLa cells [38, 39]. The reasons
at the basis of the increase in mitochondrial mass are
scarcely known, but it is plausible that it could represent
a response to stress in order to enhance energy supply.
We have found that Lon inhibition by CDDO
and CDDO-Me alters mitochondrial morphology and
functionality, and in turn this impairment determines a
higher production of ROS in mitochondria, and oxidative
stress. The protein levels of Lon were not strongly
influenced by CDDO or CDDO-Me treatment whereas
the levels of TFAM and Aco2 were slightly modulated;
this indicates that high concentrations are likely able to
block Lon functions even when this protein is synthetized
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

at higher levels, and cells could not avoid loss of
mitochondrial functionality, accumulation of carbonylated,
cytotoxic proteins, and cell death.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that CDDO
and CDDO-Me act through a pathway that involves
mitochondria and mitochondria-specific oxidative stress;
such triterpenoids induce apoptosis in cancer cells, but
not in normal, non-transformed cells. The association
between their capability to increase mtROS production
and to inhibit Lon proteolytic activity probably renders
these agents good candidates for anticancer therapy
(Figure 6C). Finally, the fact that the overexpression of
Lon reduces apoptotic cell death induced by CDDO and
CDDO-Me indicates that Lon is a key non-oncogenic
molecule for the maintenance of mitochondria functions
in cancer cells.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
RKO cells were cultured in RPMI Glutamax
supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS)
and gentamycin. HepG2 cells were cultured in MEM
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% non essentials
aminoacids, 1% vitamins, 1% L-glutamine, and
gentamycin. MCF7 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) Glutamax
supplemented with 10% FBS and gentamycin. Human
fibroblasts were obtained after informed and signed
consent from 1 healthy subject (40 years old) and used
between 5th and 7th passages. Fibroblasts were isolated
and established in culture according to standard methods
[40]. Fibroblasts were grown in 75 cm2 flasks for 5 days
in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, until confluence.
Then, 1.2 × 105 cells were seeded in 6-well plate and
treated with CDDO or CDDO-Me when confluent. Cells
were maintained in 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C. CDDO
and CDDO-Me were purchased from Cayman Chemical
Company (Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA), were dissolved
in DMSO and were used at concentrations up to 10 μM.
All culture media and culture reagents were from Life
Technologies Corporation (Carlsbad, CA, USA).

Retroviral transduction
The pMSCV-Puro empty vector and the pMSCV
containing the cDNA encoding for Lon protease (pMSCVLon) were used to transiently transfect amphotrophic
Phoenix (phxA) cells, and the retroviral transduction has
been performed as follows. PhxA cells were seeded and
transfected. Transient transfection was performed by using
lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies Corporation) and
20 μg of pMSCV-Lon plus 0.9 μg of helper plasmid. PhxA
cells were maintained in the presence of transfection mix
for 16 hours, then switched to 20 mL of RKO medium
25479

Oncotarget

and placed in the incubator for 24 hours. At the end of
the incubation, the retroviral supernatant was collected,
filtered with 0.45 μm filter and supplemented with 8 μg/mL
hexadimethrine bromide, and used to stably transfect RKO
cells. RKO cells were seeded in 6-well plates at density of
0.5 × 105 cells/mL. Two mL of retroviral supernatants was
added to RKO cells that were then centrifuged at 1,800
rpm at 32°C for 45 minutes. Cells were then placed in the
32°C incubator. After 2 hours, medium was replaced with
fresh retroviral supernatants and centrifuged as indicated
before. Cells were then placed in the 32°C incubator for
4 hours. At the end of incubation, normal medium was
added to substitute retroviral supernatant, and cells
incubated overnight. The day after, normal medium
was removed and replaced with 4 mL of fresh retroviral
supernatant, and cells were centrifuged at 1,800 rpm at 32°C
for 45 minutes. Cells were then put at 32°C for 5 hours, and
retroviral supernatants was replaced with normal medium.
After 48 hours, 2 μg/mL puromycin was added to the cells.
RKO cells which survived the selection were maintained in
medium supplemented with 1 μg/mL puromycin.

Life Technologies Corporation) [42]. Briefly, cells were
stained with 2.5 μM JC-1 in complete medium, and
incubated for 10 minutes in the dark; valinomycin was
used as positive control [43]. Mitochondrial mass was
evaluated by staining cells with MitoTracker Green (Life
Technologies Corporation) [44]. Cells were incubated
with 200 nM MitoTracker Green in culture media for
30 minutes at 37°C, and then analysed.
The activation of caspase-3 was evaluated by using
the CellEvent Caspase-3/7 Green Detection Reagent
(CellEvent, Life Technologies Corporation), which
consists of a four amino acid peptide, which is intrinsically
non-fluorescent and emits fluorescence when cleaved by
caspase-3/7 in apoptotic cells. Briefly, cells were treated
with CDDO or CDDO-Me. Then, supernatants were
collected, cells were trypsinized, and stained with 5 μM
CellEvent for 30 minutes, and then analyzed.
All samples were analysed by using an Attune
Nxt Acoustic Focusing Cytometer (Life Technologies
Corporation). The instrument is equipped with a blue laser
(488 nm), a red laser (637 nm), a yellow laser (561 nm)
and a violet laser (405 nm) [45]. Data were acquired in
list mode using Attune Cytometric 2.1 software, and then
analysed by FlowJo 9.8.5 (Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR,
USA) under Mac OSX.

Flow cytometric analysis
The analysis of apoptosis, mitochondrial H2O2 and
mitochondrial O2− was performed by staining cells with
Annexin-V Alexa Fluor Pacific Blue conjugate (AnxV,
Life Technologies Corporation), TO-PRO-3 iodide
(TOPRO, Life Technologies Corporation), mitochondria
Peroxy Yellow 1 (mitoPY1, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA), and MitoSOX Red Superoxide Indicator
(MitoSOX, Life Technologies Corporation). Cells were
first loaded with 10 μM mitoPY1 in complete medium
for 60 minutes and then treated with CDDO or CDDOME for up to 24 hours [41]. As a positive control, cells
were treated with 1mM H2O2 for 1 hour. At the end of
the incubation, cells were washed with PBS and incubated
with 5 μM MitoSOX in complete medium, for 30 minutes
at 37°C. Then, cells were stained with AnxV in Annexin-V
binding buffer (10 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM
CaCl2, pH 7.4) for 10 minutes in the dark. TOPRO was
added before acquisition to assess membrane integrity
of cells. Samples were analyzed by flow cytometry. In
particular, cells were first gated on the basis of physical
parameters. Then, in living cells (AnxV-/TOPRO- cells)
the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of mitoPY1 and
MitoSOX was analysed. The MFI of the unstained sample
was subtracted to the MFI of the stained sample to avoid
any influence related to the eventual autofluorescence.
Then, the net MFI value obtained for control sample was
set to 100 and other samples calculated according the
following formula: Relative MFI level = (treated sample
net MFI / untreated sample net MFI)x100.
Mitochondrial membrane potential was analysed
by staining cells with 5,5′,6,6′-tetra-chloro-1,1′,3,
3′-tetraethylbenzimidazolyl-carbocyanine iodide (JC-1,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Western blot analysis
Total cellular proteins were obtained by lysing
cells with RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.1%
Nonidet P-40, 0.1% deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl,
4 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitors cocktail). Then,
10 to 50 μg of total cellular protein or mitochondrial
fraction, were subjected to SDS-PAGE in 4–12% or
12% precast gels (Life Technologies Corporation)
followed by transfer to the proteins onto a nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA)
and immunoblotting. The following antibodies were
used: anti-cleaved Caspase-9 (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA), anti-Lon (Primm, Milan, Italy),
anti-TFAM (Abnova Corporation, Taipei, Taiwan), antiAco2 (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-TOM20 (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA), anti-MFN2
(Abnova Corporation, Taipei City, Taiwan), anti-DNM1L
(Abnova Corporation), goat anti-rabbit IgG (Fc):HRP
(Serotec, Kidlington, UK). The blot was developed and
images were captured by using a Chemidoc MP (BioRad Laboratories). The densitometric analysis was
performed using ImageLab 5.2.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Oxyblot was performed by using the OxyBlot Protein
Oxidation Detection Kit (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA),
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells
were collected, washed with PBS and resuspended in a
cytosolic lysis buffer (250 mM sucrose, 70 mM KCl, 137
mM NaCl, 4.3 mM Na2HPO4, 1.4 mM KH2PO4 pH 7.2
and protease inhibitors) for 5 minutes on ice. Then cells
25480

Oncotarget

were centrifuged at 1,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and
the pellet was resuspended in mitochondrial lysis buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA,
2 mM EGTA, 0.2% Triton X-100, 0.03% NP40 and
protease inhibitors) for 5 minutes on ice. The suspension
was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the
supernatant was collected as the mitochondrial fraction.
Two aliquots (15 μg) of each mitochondrial lysate were
used: one was subjected to the derivatization reaction
and the other was incubated with derivatization-control
solution. Then, samples were loaded in a 4–15% precast
gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), and
an anti-DNP antibody was used for the detection of the
DNPH-derivatized proteins.

mitochondrial fraction were used to assay protein
carbonyls. The carbonyl content was calculated by
measuring the absorbance at 385 nm was normalized on
the basis of protein concentration at 280 nm.

Statistical analysis
The results are expressed as the mean ± SD.
Significance was determined by paired t test, and p < 0.05
was considered statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Associazione Italiana
Ricerca sul Cancro (grant 11341 to A.C.), and Ministero
Istruzione, Università, Ricerca (grant RBAP11S8C3
to A.C.) and grant RBNE08HWLZ_012 to C.M.).
Dr. Federica Boraldi is kindly acknowledged for providing
us primary cultures of fibroblasts.

Immunofluorescence analysis of mitochondrial
morphology
Cells were seeded at density of 2 × 105 cells/mL
on glass coverslips in 6-well plates. After treatment, cells
were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes
and permeabilised with 0.1% Triton X-100 in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) for 5 minutes, and blocked with
3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS for 30 minutes,
at room temperature. Samples were incubated with antihuman mitochondrial protein (Millipore) in PBS containing
3% BSA, for 1 hour at room temperature. After washing
in PBS containing 3% BSA, samples were incubated for
1 hour at RT with a goat anti-rabbit F(ab’)2 Alexa647 (Life
Technologies Corporation). After washing in PBS, samples
were stained with 1 μg/ml 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) in PBS for 1 minute, and then mounted with antifading medium (0.21 M 1,4-Diazabicyclo [2.2.2] octane
(DABCO) and 90% glycerol in 0.02 M Tris, pH 8.0).
Negative controls were samples not incubated with the
primary antibody. Then, samples were observed by a Nikon
A1 confocal laser scanning microscope equipped with 4
lasers: a 405 nm diode laser for DAPI, a 488 nm argon laser, a
543 nm HeNe laser and a 637 nm diode laser. The excitation
and the detection of the samples were carried out in sequential
mode to avoid overlapping of the two signals. Optical sections
were obtained at increments of 0.5 μm in the z-axis and were
digitized with a scanning mode format of 1024 × 1024 pixels
and 4096 gray levels. Spectral analysis was carried out to
exclude overlapping between multiple signals. The confocal
serial sections were processed with ImageJ software to obtain
three-dimensional projections and image rendering was
performed by Adobe Photoshop Software.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
2.	 Luo J, Solimini NL, Elledge SJ. Principles of cancer
­therapy: oncogene and non-oncogene addiction. Cell. 2009;
136:823–837.
3.	 Bernstein SH, Venkatesh S, Li M, Lee J, Lu B, Hilchey SP,
Morse KM, Metcalfe HM, Skalska J, Andreeff M,
Brookes PS, Suzuki CK. The mitochondrial ATP-dependent
Lon protease: a novel target in lymphoma death mediated
by the synthetic triterpenoid CDDO and its derivatives.
Blood. 2012; 119:3321–3329.
4.	 Rugarli EI, Langer T. Mitochondrial quality control:
a matter of life and death for neurons. EMBO J. 2012;
31:1336–1349.
5.	 Lu B, Yadav S, Shah PG, Liu T, Tian B, Pukszta S,
Villaluna N, Kutejova E, Newlon CS, Santos JH,
Suzuki CK. Roles for the human ATP-dependent Lon protease in mitochondrial DNA maintenance. J Biol Chem. 2007;
282:17363–17374.
6.	 Bota DA, Davies KJ. Lon protease preferentially degrades
oxidized mitochondrial aconitase by an ATP-stimulated
mechanism. Nat Cell Biol. 2002; 4:674–680.

Measurement of mitochondrial protein
carbonyls

7.	 Lu B, Lee J, Nie X, Li M, Morozov YI, Venkatesh S,
Bogenhagen DF, Temiakov D, Suzuki CK. Phosphorylation
of human TFAM in mitochondria impairs DNA binding and
promotes degradation by the AAA+ Lon protease. Mol Cell.
2013; 49:121–132.

Protein carbonyls were measured by using the
Protein Carbonyl Colorimetric Assay Kit (Cayman
Chemical Company, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) according
to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 400 μg of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25481

Oncotarget

8.	 Fukuda R, Zhang H, Kim JW, Shimoda L, Dang CV,
Semenza GL. HIF-1 regulates cytochrome oxidase subunits
to optimize efficiency of respiration in hypoxic cells. Cell.
2007; 129:111–122.

2-cyano-3,12-dioxoolean-1,9-dien-28-oic-acid and related
synthetic triterpenoids in prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:2927–2933.
20.	 Brookes PS, Morse K, Ray D, Tompkins A, Young SM,
Hilchey S, Salim S, Konopleva M, Andreeff M, Phipps R,
Bernstein SH. The triterpenoid 2-cyano-3, 12-dioxooleana1,9-dien-28-oic acid and its derivatives elicit human
­lymphoid cell apoptosis through a novel pathway involving
the unregulated mitochondrial permeability transition pore.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:1793–1802.

9.	 Ngo JK, Pomatto LC, Bota DA, Koop AL, Davies KJ.
Impairment of lon-induced protection against the
­accumulation of oxidized proteins in senescent wi-38 fibroblasts. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2011; 66:1178–1185.
10.	 Pinti M, Gibellini L, De Biasi S, Nasi M, Roat E,
O’Connor JE, Cossarizza A. Functional characterization of the promoter of the human Lon protease gene.
Mitochondrion. 2011; 11:200–206.

21.	 Ikeda T, Sporn M, Honda T, Gribble GW, Kufe D. The
novel triterpenoid CDDO and its derivatives induce apoptosis by disruption of intracellular redox balance. Cancer Res.
2003; 63:5551–5558.

11.	 Quiros PM, Espanol Y, Acin-Perez R, Rodriguez F,
Barcena C, Watanabe K, Calvo E, Loureiro M, FernandezGarcia MS, Fueyo A, Vazquez J, Enriquez JA, LopezOtin C. ATP-dependent Lon protease controls tumor
­bioenergetics by reprogramming mitochondrial activity.
Cell Rep. 2014; 8:542–556.

22.	 Lee S, Tak E, Lee J, Rashid MA, Murphy MP, Ha J,
Kim SS. Mitochondrial H2O2 generated from electron
transport chain complex I stimulates muscle differentiation.
Cell Res. 2011; 21:817–834.
23.	 Rhee SG, Yang KS, Kang SW, Woo HA, Chang TS.
Controlled elimination of intracellular H(2)O(2): regulation of peroxiredoxin, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase
via post-translational modification. Antioxid Redox Signal.
2005; 7:619–626.

12.	 Oakhill JS, Scott JW, Kemp BE. AMPK functions as
an adenylate charge-regulated protein kinase. Trends
Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 23:125–132.
13.	 Gibellini L, Pinti M, Boraldi F, Giorgio V, Bernardi P,
Bartolomeo R, Nasi M, De Biasi S, Missiroli S,
Carnevale G, Losi L, Tesei A, Pinton P, Quaglino D,
Cossarizza A. Silencing of mitochondrial Lon protease
deeply impairs mitochondrial proteome and function in
colon cancer cells. FASEB J. 2014; 28:5122–5135.

24.	 Nystrom T. Role of oxidative carbonylation in protein quality control and senescence. EMBO J. 2005; 24:1311–1317.
25.	 Gibellini L, Pinti M, Nasi M, De Biasi S, Roat E,
Bertoncelli L, Cossarizza A. Interfering with ROS
Metabolism in Cancer Cells: The Potential Role of
Quercetin. Cancers (Basel). 2010; 2:1288–1311.

14.	 Cheng CW, Kuo CY, Fan CC, Fang WC, Jiang SS, Lo YK,
Wang TY, Kao MC, Lee AY. Overexpression of Lon contributes to survival and aggressive phenotype of cancer cells
through mitochondrial complex I-mediated generation of
reactive oxygen species. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e681.

26.	 Pelicano H, Carney D, Huang P. ROS stress in cancer cells
and therapeutic implications. Drug Resist Updat. 2004;
7:97–110.
27.	 Zhou Y, Hileman EO, Plunkett W, Keating MJ, Huang P.
Free radical stress in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells
and its role in cellular sensitivity to ROS-generating
­anticancer agents. Blood. 2003; 101:4098–4104.

15.	 Liu Y, Lan L, Huang K, Wang R, Xu C, Shi Y, Wu X,
Wu Z, Zhang J, Chen L, Wang L, Yu X, Zhu H, Lu B.
Inhibition of Lon blocks cell proliferation, enhances chemosensitivity by promoting apoptosis and decreases cellular
bioenergetics of bladder cancer: potential roles of Lon as a
prognostic marker and therapeutic target in baldder cancer.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11209–11224.

28.	 Chen Y, McMillan-Ward E, Kong J, Israels SJ, Gibson SB.
Oxidative stress induces autophagic cell death independent
of apoptosis in transformed and cancer cells. Cell Death
Differ. 2008; 15:171–182.

16.	 Nie X, Li M, Lu B, Zhang Y, Lan L, Chen L, Lu J. Downregulating overexpressed human Lon in cervical cancer
suppresses cell proliferation and bioenergetics. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e81084.

29.	 Trachootham D, Zhou Y, Zhang H, Demizu Y, Chen Z,
Pelicano H, Chiao PJ, Achanta G, Arlinghaus RB, Liu J,
Huang P. Selective killing of oncogenically transformed
cells through a ROS-mediated mechanism by beta-­
phenylethyl isothiocyanate. Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:241–252.

17.	 Liby KT, Sporn MB. Synthetic oleanane triterpenoids:
multifunctional drugs with a broad range of applications
for prevention and treatment of chronic disease. Pharmacol
Rev. 2012; 64:972–1003.

30.	 Chan DC. Mitochondrial fusion and fission in mammals.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2006; 22:79–99.

18.	 Konopleva M, Contractor R, Kurinna SM, Chen W,
Andreeff M, Ruvolo PP. The novel triterpenoid CDDO-Me
suppresses MAPK pathways and promotes p38 activation in acute myeloid leukemia cells. Leukemia. 2005;
19:1350–1354.

31.	 Sheridan C, Martin SJ. Mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics and apoptosis. Mitochondrion. 2010; 10:640–648.
32.	 Karbowski M, Lee YJ, Gaume B, Jeong SY, Frank S,
Nechushtan A, Santel A, Fuller M, Smith CL, Youle RJ.
Spatial and temporal association of Bax with mitochondrial
fission sites, Drp1, and Mfn2 during apoptosis. J Cell Biol.
2002; 159:931–938.

19.	 Hyer ML, Shi R, Krajewska M, Meyer C, Lebedeva IV,
Fisher PB, Reed JC. Apoptotic activity and mechanism of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25482

Oncotarget

33.	 Youle RJ, Karbowski M. Mitochondrial fission in apoptosis.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005; 6:657–663.

40.	 Quaglino D, Boraldi F, Barbieri D, Croce A, Tiozzo R,
Pasquali Ronchetti I. Abnormal phenotype of in vitro dermal fibroblasts from patients with Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE). Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000; 1501:51–62.

34.	 Lee YJ, Jeong SY, Karbowski M, Smith CL, Youle RJ.
Roles of the mammalian mitochondrial fission and fusion
mediators Fis1, Drp1, and Opa1 in apoptosis. Mol Biol Cell.
2004; 15:5001–5011.

41.	 Dickinson BC, Lin VS, Chang CJ. Preparation and use of
MitoPY1 for imaging hydrogen peroxide in mitochondria of
live cells. Nat Protoc. 2013; 8:1249–1259.

35.	 Olichon A, Baricault L, Gas N, Guillou E, Valette A,
Belenguer P, Lenaers G. Loss of OPA1 perturbates the
mitochondrial inner membrane structure and integrity, leading to cytochrome c release and apoptosis. J Biol Chem.
2003; 278:7743–7746.

42.	 Cossarizza A, Baccarani-Contri M, Kalashnikova G,
Franceschi C. A new method for the cytofluorimetric
analysis of mitochondrial membrane potential using the
J-aggregate forming lipophilic cation 5,5′, ′-tetrachloro-1,
1′,3,3′-tetraethylbenzimidazolcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1).
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993; 197:40–45.

36.	 Lee HC, Wei YH. Mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial DNA maintenance of mammalian cells
under oxidative stress. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2005;
37:822–834.

43.	 Barbieri D, Abbracchio MP, Salvioli S, Monti D,
Cossarizza A, Ceruti S, Brambilla R, Cattabeni F,
Jacobson KA, Franceschi C. Apoptosis by 2-chloro2′-deoxy-adenosine and 2-chloro-adenosine in human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Neurochem Int. 1998;
32:493–504.

37.	 Lee HC, Yin PH, Chi CW, Wei YH. Increase in mitochondrial mass in human fibroblasts under oxidative stress and
during replicative cell senescence. J Biomed Sci. 2002;
9:517–526.

44.	 Salvioli S, Dobrucki J, Moretti L, Troiano L,
Fernandez MG, Pinti M, Pedrazzi J, Franceschi C,
Cossarizza A. Mitochondrial heterogeneity during staurosporine-induced apoptosis in HL60 cells: analysis at the
single cell and single organelle level. Cytometry. 2000;
40:189–197.

38.	 Apostolova N, Gomez-Sucerquia LJ, Moran A, Alvarez A,
Blas-Garcia A, Esplugues JV. Enhanced oxidative stress
and increased mitochondrial mass during efavirenz-induced
apoptosis in human hepatic cells. Br J Pharmacol. 2010;
160:2069–2084.
39.	 Kluza J, Marchetti P, Gallego MA, Lancel S, Fournier C,
Loyens A, Beauvillain JC, Bailly C. Mitochondrial proliferation during apoptosis induced by anticancer agents: effects
of doxorubicin and mitoxantrone on cancer and ­cardiac
cells. Oncogene. 2004; 23:7018–7030.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 De Biasi S, Gibellini L, Cossarizza A. Uncompensated
Polychromatic Analysis of Mitochondrial Membrane
Potential Using JC-1 and Multilaser Excitation. Curr Protoc
Cytom. 2015; 72:7.32.1–7.32.11.

25483

Oncotarget

