Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Understanding of tolerance in TRAIL-induced apoptosis and
cancelation of its machinery by a-mangostin, a xanthone
derivative
Minami Kumazaki1, Haruka Shinohara1, Kohei
Mayuko Nishi2, Akihide Ryo2, Yukihiro Akao1

Taniguchi1,

Hiroshi

Ueda1,

1

 nited Graduate School of Drug Discovery and Medical Information Sciences, Gifu University, Yanagido Gifu 501-1193,
U
Japan

2

Department of Microbiology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, Yokohama 236-0027, Japan

Correspondence to:
Minami Kumazaki, e-mail: t3501001@edu.gifu-u.ac.jp
Keywords: TRAIL-induced apoptosis, TRAIL-resistance, α-mangostin, miR-133b, cancer stem-like cell
Received: May 07, 2015 	

Accepted: July 03, 2015 	

Published: July 16, 2015

ABSTRACT
Tumor necrosis-factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a
member of the TNF-superfamily that selectively induces apoptosis through death
receptors (DRs) 4 and/or 5 in cancer cells. These receptors are expressed on the
cancer cell surface, without affecting normal cells. Unfortunately, many clinical
studies have shown that cancer cells acquire TRAIL-resistance and finally avoid
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. The detailed mechanisms of this resistance are not well
understood. In the current study, we established a TRAIL-resistant human colon
cancer DLD-1 cell line to clarify the mechanisms of TRAIL-resistance and developed
agents to cancel its machinery. Also, we found that cancer stem-like cells from
breast epithelial proliferating MCF10A cells were also sensitive to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. The enforced expression of DR5 in both TRAIL-resistant cells partially
recovered the sensitivity to the TRAIL ligand, which was judged by the activation
of caspase-8. As a result, we newly found that the mechanisms of TRAIL-resistance
comprised co-existence of a decrease in the expression level of DR5 along with
malfunction of its recruitment to the cell surface, as evidenced by Western blot and
immunocytological analysis, respectively. Interestingly, a-mangostin, which is a
xanthone derivative, canceled the resistance by increasing the expression level of DR5
through down-regulation of miR-133b and effectively induced the translocation of DR5
to the cancer cell surface membrane in TRAIL-resistant DLD-1 cells. These findings
indicate that a-mangostin functioned as a sensitizer of TRAIL-induced apoptosis and
may thus serve as a possible adjuvant compound for cytokine therapy to conquer
TRAIL-resistance.

the initiator caspase-8, resulting in the formation of
the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). The
recruited capase-8 undergoes autocatalytic cleavage
and activation to trigger the cascade that ultimately
leads to apoptosis [3]. With virtually no toxicity toward
normal cells, recombinant human TRAIL or agonistic
antibodies specifically targeting DR5 are currently being
tested in several clinical trials. Unfortunately, their
application for anticancer treatment is limited because
of resistance to the development to TRAIL-induced

INTRODUCTION
After its discovery in 1995, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL/Apo2L) was identified to be a member of the
TNF superfamily [1]. TRAIL is a type 2 trans-membrane
protein that functions in extracellular signaling by
acting through death receptors DR4 and/or DR5 [2].
Upon being stimulated by this ligand, DRs recruit
Fas-associated death domain (FADD) protein and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25828

Oncotarget

apoptosis and their short half-life in serum [4]. The
reason why cancer cells are resistant to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis is not yet known, but many clinical studies
have attributed TRAIL-resistance to the down-regulation
of TRAIL receptors [5] and to mutation of caspase-8
[6]. Recently, clinical trials of combination treatment
with anti-DR5 antibody and chemotherapeutics have
been under investigation; however, such an approach
seems hopeless because of hepatic dysfunction and
adverse effects [7]. So far, the use of phytochemicals
as anti-cancer agents has gained high importance for
chemoprevention and treatment, as indicated by many
studies [8]. We also reported that naturally occurring
chemo-preventive compounds such as resveratrol and
α-mangostin exhibit growth inhibition by inducing
apoptosis through a dual effect, i.e., the modulation
of intracellular signaling transduction pathways
involved in both apoptosis and proliferation [9].
α-Mangostin is a xanthone isolated from the pericarps
of the mangosteen fruit. It has been used as a traditional
medicine for treatment of skin infections and wounds
in Southeast Asia for many years. In this study, we
comprehensively examined the mechanisms underlying
TRAIL-resistance by using TRAIL-sensitive and
-resistant cell lines and developed natural compounds to
cancel this resistance. On the other hand, we also tried to
clarify whether cancer stem cells would be sensitive
to  TRAIL-apoptosis and show increased sensitivity
in the presence of α-mangostin. As a result, we newly
found that the mechanism of TRAIL-resistance
consisted of a decrease in the expression level of DR5
and malfunction of its recruitment to the cell surface.
Interestingly, α-mangostin canceled the resistance by
increasing the expression level of DR5 through downregulation of miR-133b and effectively induced the
translocation of DR5 to the cell surface in DLD-1 cells.
Also, α-mangostin enhanced the TRAIL-apoptosis in
cancer stem-like cells from MCF10A. These findings
altogether indicate that α-mangostin functioned as a
sensitizer of TRAIL-induced apoptosis and may be used
as a possible adjuvant compound for cytokine therapy to
conquer TRAIL-resistance.

DLD-1/TRAIL was approximately 25 ng/ml, which was
6 times higher than that for the parental DLD-1 cells
(Fig. 1A). Firstly, we sought to elucidate the mechanism
of this TRAIL-resistance by using both cell lines.
As shown in Fig. 1B, the activation of caspase-8
and appearance of the cleaved form of PARP-1 were
clearly observed at 48 h after the treatment of the
TRAIL-sensitive cells with rTRAIL. However, this
was not the case for the DLD-1/TRAIL cells. Many
clinical studies have attributed TRAIL-resistance to
the down-regulation of TRAIL receptors. Therefore,
we evaluated the steady-state expression levels of
DR5, DR4, procaspase-8 and adaptor molecule FADD
by performing Western blot analysis (Fig. 1C). DR5
was markedly down-regulated in DLD-1/TRAIL cells
compared with its expression in DLD-1 cells. On the
other hand, the expression levels of DR4 and FADD
were almost unchanged. Also, we confirmed that the
apoptosis induced by rTRAIL was due to the extrinsic
pathway via caspase-8 activation. Next, we examined
the oligomerization of DR5 on the cell surface from
the cytoplasm by performing immunofluorescence
staining (Fig. 1C Lower). As shown in this figure, the
intensity of immunofluorescence emitted from the cell
surface, indicating oligomerized DR5, was markedly
decreased in the TRAIL-resistant cells compared with
that for TRAIL-sensitive DLD-1 cells. Thus, the impaired
oligomerization of DR5 was also involved in the
mechanism of TRAIL-resistance. These results altogether
indicated that the mechanism of TRAIL-resistant was
due to the down-regulation of DR5 and the impaired
oligomerization of DR5 on the cell surface.

Growth inhibition by combined treatment with
α-mangostin and rTRAIL
Recently, a few clinical trials using combination
treatment with anti-DR5 antibody and chemotherapeutics
were undertaken; however, the results have been
discouraging because of hepatic dysfunction and other
adverse effects [7]. Much evidence has indicated
the use of phytochemicals to be beneficial for cancer
prevention. To explore the use of such compounds as
a possible adjuvant for cytokine therapy to conquer
TRAIL-resistance, we examined the anti-proliferative
effect of 5 representative phytochemicals, as judged
form their effect on cell viability assessed by use of the
trypan blue dye-exclusion test (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Among the compounds tested, α-mangostin enhanced
TRAIL-induced apoptosis the greatest. Therefore, we
focused on α-mangostin, a xanthone derivative, and
exhibited its effect on various types of cancer cells.
First, we examined the synergistic anti-proliferative
effects of α-mangostin and rTRAIL on DLD-1 and
DLD-1/TRAIL cells by incubating them for 48 h with

RESULTS
Mechanism of TRAIL-resistance in human colon
cancer cells
At the start of this study, we established a
TRAIL-resistant human colon cancer DLD-1 cell line
(DLD-1/TRAIL). We examined the anti-proliferative
effect of rTRAIL at various concentrations on human
colon cancer DLD-1 and DLD-1/TRAIL cells as judged
from the cell viability assessed by use of the trypan
blue dye-exclusion test. The IC50 value of rTRAIL for

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25829

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The mechanism of TRAIL-resistance was due to down-regulation of DR5 and malfunction of its
recruitment. A. TRAIL-sensitive DLD-1 and -resistant DLD-1 cells were treated with rTRAIL (2, 5, 7, 10, 30 ng/ml) for 24 h. The cell

viability was estimated at 24 h after the treatment. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. The cell viability of the control
(0; DMSO alone) is indicated as 100%. The growth inhibitory activity (IC50) of each compound is indicated in each panel. B. Western blot
analysis was performed to determine the expression levels of DR5, DR4, FADD, caspase-8, and PARP-1 after the treatment with rTRAIL
(5 and 7 ng/ml), with β-actin used as an internal control. C. Western blot analysis was performed to determine steady-state expression of
DR5, DR4, and adaptor molecule FADD. β-actin was used as an internal control. Also shown are the steady-state expression levels of DR5
mRNA as relative ratios with respect to the GAPDH expression level. The expression level of mRNA was calculated by the ∆∆Ct method.
Means (S.D. indicated by error bars are shown. Lower photomicrographs: The photomicrograph shows the results of immunofluorescence
staining for DR5 (anti-DR5) on the cell surface and in the cytosol of DLD-1 and DLD-1/TRAIL cells. Nuclei were counterstained in blue
with Hoechst33342.

various concentrations of α-mangostin (0, 2, 5, 7 μM)
and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) (Fig. 2). The growth was
significantly suppressed in a concentration-dependent
manner by the treatment with α-mangostin. The
IC50 value of α-mangostin for DLD-1/TRAIL cells
was approximate 7 μM, which was similar to that
in the parent TRAIL-sensitive DLD-1 cell line. For
the combination treatment with α-mangostin and
rTRAIL, the concentration of rTRAIL was fixed at 5
ng/ml, which did not exhibit the growth suppression
in DLD-1/TRAIL cells. As a result, the combination
treatment with α-mangostin and rTRAIL resulted in
synergistic growth suppression in DLD-1/TRAIL

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells. Also, α-mangostin dramatically up-regulated the
expression level of DR5 in the TRAIL-resistant cell
line. These results indicated that α-mangostin elevated
TRAIL-sensitivity by up-regulating the expression level
of DR5.

α-Mangostin effectively induced DR5
oligomerization on the cell surface membrane
It has been reported that high levels of basal
autophagosomes and DR5 co-localized with LC3-II in
these autophagosomes are the reason why the expression
of DR5 is down-regulated, which explanation has

25830

Oncotarget

A

Figure 2: α-Mangostin and rTRAIL significantly induced growth suppression by causing up-regulation of
DR5. TRAIL-sensitive and -resistant DLD-1 cells were treated with α-mangostin (2, 5, 7 μM) and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) for 48 h. The cell
viability was estimated at 48 h after the treatment. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. The cell viability of the control
(0; DMSO alone) is indicated as 100%. Western blot analysis was performed to determine the level of DR5 and activation of caspase-8.
β-actin was used as an internal control.

Up-regulation of DR5 by α-mangostin
contributed to the enhancement of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis

been validated in TRAIL-resistant breast cancer cell
lines [10]. In the case of DLD-1/TRAIL cells, the
transition from LC3-I to LC3-II was not observed
(Supplementary Fig. 2). So far, DR5 receptors were
found to be mislocalized in intracellular compartments
that are yet to be characterized. To visualize intracellular
and surface binding of anti-DR5 antibody in untreated or
α-mangostin (7 μM)- and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml)-treated
cells, we performed immunofluorescence staining
(Fig. 3) and observed increased binding of DR5
to the cell surface membrane of cells treated with
α-mangostin alone and to that of those incubated with
the combination of α-mangostin and rTRAIL. These
results were not observed when TRAIL alone was used.
As shown in the figure, the efficiency of oligomerization
in DLD-1/TRAIL cell was slightly lower than that in
the TRAIL-sensitive ones. These results indicated
that α-mangostin effectively induced the translocation
from the cytoplasm to the surface membrane of the
tumour cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In recent years, numerous chemotherapeutics,
natural products and newly synthesized molecules
have been screened for their ability to restore TRAIL
sensitivity in cancer cells. Among natural products,
polyphenols and a particular subgroup of flavonoids
constitute the major category of molecules used
in combination with TRAIL for the treatment of human
colon cancer cells. Food polyphenols sensitize human
colon cancer cells to TRAIL-driven cell death mainly
by increasing the expression of DR5 and to a lesser
extent that of DR4 [11]. To further confirm the role of
α-mangostin in DR5 up-regulation, we performed gene
silencing of DR5 by using its siRNA. DLD-1 cells
and DLD-1/TRAIL cells transfected with the control
miRNA or siRNA for DR5 (siR-DR5) were co-treated
with α-mangostin (7 μM) and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) for

25831

Oncotarget

Figure 3: α-Mangostin effectively induced DR5 oligomerization at the cell surface membrane. TRAIL-sensitive

and -resistant DLD-1 cells were treated with α-mangostin (7 μM) and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) for 48 h. The results of immunofluorescence
staining for anti-DR5 binding on the cell surface and in the cytosol of untreated (Control; DMSO) or α-mangostin and /or rTRAIL treated
cells are shown. Nuclei were counterstained in blue with Hoechst33342. Anti-DR5 bound to the cell surface is indicated by white arrows.

Figure 4: Gene silencing of DR5 suppressed growth inhibition induced by combined treatment with α-mangostin and
rTRAIL. A. TRAIL-sensitive and -resistant DLD-1 cells were transfected with control or DR5 siRNA (2 nM) plasmids for 48 h and then
treated with α-mangostin (7 μM) and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) for 48 h. Western blot analysis was performed to determine the expression of
DR5, and β-actin was used as an internal control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25832

Oncotarget

48 h (Fig. 4). As shown in the figure, the transfection of
DLD-1 or DLD-1/TRAIL cells with siR-DR5 resulted in a
complete suppression of DR5 expression even in the case
when the cells had been pre-treated with α-mangostin
compared with the expression in the cells transfected
with the control miRNA. Control miRNA-transfected
cells  showed about  60% growth suppression following
the treatment with α-mangostin; however, transfection
of the DLD-1/TRAIL cells with siR-DR5 decreased this
suppression to approximately 10%. In all cases, treatment
with siR-DR5 resulted in the higher cell viability, and the
difference in viability between the control miRNA and
siR-DR5 was significant in the α-mangostin plus rTRAIL
group. These results indicated that the up-regulation of
DR5 by α-mangostin contributed to the enhancement
of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in both DLD-1 and
DLD-1/TRAIL cells.

Furthermore, the activation of caspase-8 was impaired in
the miR-133b-transfected cells. Furthermore, we examined
the cancelling effect of miR-133b on the up-regulated
expression of DR5 after the treatment with α-mangostin to
validate the relationship between the up-regulation of DR5
by α-mangostin and the down-regulation by miR-133b.
As shown in Fig. 5D, 10 nM miR-133b clearly reversed
the up-regulation of DR5 induced by α-mangostin. All of
these results taken indicated that α-mangostin cancelled the
resistance to TRAIL by increasing the expression level of
DR5 through down-regulation of miR-133b.

Mechanism of TRAIL-resistance in human
mammary gland epithelial cells
In order to further validate the mechanism of
TRAIL-resistance in another cell line and to examine
the sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in breast
cancer stem-like cells (CSC-1 and -2), we performed
similar experiments by using these cells and their
parent non-cancerous human mammary gland epitherial
(MCF10A) cells [15]. The anti-proliferative effect of
rTRAIL at various concentrations on both paired cell lines
are shown in Fig. 6. The IC50 value of rTRAIL for MCF10A
cells was approximately 100 nM, which was 10 times
higher than that for the CSC-1 and -2 cells. We evaluated
the steady-state expression levels of DR5, DR4, and adaptor
molecule FADD by performing Western blot analysis
(Fig. 6 Lower blot). Similar expression profiles of DR5 were
found for both CSC-1 and -2 cell lines. The expression levels
of DR4 and FADD were almost unchanged. With regards
to the MCF10A cells, the upper band, which would be the
DR5 precursor, was faint. Thus, these 2 cancer stem-like cell
lines were sensitive to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Next, we
examined the oligomerization of DR5 on the cell surface
by performing immunofluorescence staining after rTRAIL
treatment of MCF10A and CSC-1 cells (Fig. 6 Lower
photomicrographs). As shown in this figure, the intensity
of fluorescence indicating DR5 on cell the surface was
markedly less in the MCF10A cell line. These results
altogether indicated that the main mechanism of TRAILresistant was the malfunction of DR5 recruitment to the cell
surface. Also, cancer stem cells would be induced to undergo
apoptosis by the TRAIL/DR5/caspase-8 signaling pathway.

Up-regulation of DR5 by α-mangostin was due to
down-regulation of miR-133b
So far, we previously reported that miR-143 is an
anti-oncogenic miRNA and that its expression level is
increased by α-mangostin [12]. Also, over 100 miRNAs,
involved in the control of different cellular processes
such as inflammation and apoptosis, were shown to be as
modulated by polyphenols [13]. According to the in-silico
prediction tools TargetScan, DR5 (TNFRSF10B) displays a
single miR-133b binding site in its 3′-UTR. More recently,
protumorigenic role of miR-133b was evidenced in
cervical cancer: miR-133b directly regulated anti-apoptotic
gene Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule (FAIM) [14]. In
order to validate the target gene of miR-133b as being
DR5, we performed a luciferase reporter assay (Fig. 5A).
The co-transfection with miR-133b and the pMIR sensor
vector, which included the candidate target region bound
by miR-133b, resulted in significant inhibition of the
luciferase activity compared with the co-transfection with
control miRNA, but not in the case of the pMIR sensor
vector that include the region without the binding site.
Furthermore, mutations of the DR5 3′-UTR binding site
significantly abolished the ability of miR-133b to decrease
the luciferase activity. The results of this assay demonstrated
that miR-133b targets DR5. When we examined the
intracellular level of miR-133b at 48 h after the treatment
with α-mangostin (Fig. 5B), we found that α-mangostin
significantly down-regulated the level of miR-133b in both
TRAIL-sensitive DLD-1 and DLD-1/TRAIL cell lines. We
further examined whether miR-133b was associated with
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. DLD-1 cells transfected with the
control miRNA or miR-133b were treated with α-mangostin
(7 μM) and/or rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) for 48 h. As shown in the
Fig. 5C, transfection of the cells with miR-133b resulted
in a significant cancellation of the growth suppression
induced by the combination of α-mangostin and rTRAIL.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Growth inhibition of cancer stem-like CSC
cells by combined treatment with α-mangostin
and rTRAIL
To explore a possible adjuvant compound for
cytokine therapy to induce sensitization to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in CSC cells, we examined the synergistic
anti-proliferative effects of α-mangostin and rTRAIL
by treating the cells with various concentrations of
α-mangostin (0, 2, 5, 7 μM), and/or TRAIL 7 ng/ml for

25833

Oncotarget

Figure 5: α-Mangostin cased a decrease in the expression level of miR-133b, which targets DR5. A. The vector with the

binding site for miR-133b is indicated as Wild (+) type; and that without it, as Mutant. B. Expression level of miR-133b in TRAIL-sensitive
and -resistant DLD-1 cells treated with α-mangostin (5, 7 μM), as evaluated by RT-qPCR. The expression levels were calculated by the
∆∆Ct method. C. DLD-1 cells were transfected with control or miR-133b (10 nM) for 48 h, and then exposed to α-mangostin (7 μM) and/or
rTRAIL (5 ng/ml) for 24 h. The cell viability was estimated at 48 h after the treatment. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments.
The cell viability of the control (0; DMSO alone) is indicated as 100%. Western blot analysis was performed to determine the expression
of DR5 and the active form of caspase-8, with β-actin use as an internal control. D. Control and miR-133b (10 nM) were transfected into
DLD-1 cells for 48 h, and the cells were then exposed to α-mangostin (5, 7 μM). Western blot analysis was performed to determine the
expression of DR5. β-actin was used as an internal control.

48 h (Fig. 7). Their growth was significantly suppressed in
a concentration-dependent manner by the treatment with
α-mangostin. The IC50 value of α-mangostin for CSC-1
cells was approximately 6 μM, which was similar to that
for the DLD-1 cell line. Upon the combination treatment
with α-mangostin and rTRAIL, the concentration of
rTRAIL was fixed at 7 ng/ml, which did not exhibit
the growth suppression of CSC-1 cells. As a result, the
combination treatment with α-mangostin and rTRAIL
resulted in synergistic growth suppression in these cells.
Also, the expression level of DR5 was up-regulated
by α-mangostin, and the activation of caspase-8 was
increased, by combination treatment with α-mangostin and
rTRAIL. Furthermore, α-mangostin increased the binding
of DR5 to the cell surface membrane of the CSC-1 cells
treated with α-mangostin alone or with the combination
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of α-mangostin and rTRAIL. These results altogether
indicated that α-mangostin functioned as a sensitizer of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis by up-regulating the expression
level of DR5 in, and affording efficient translocation
of DR5 from the cytoplasm to the tumor cell surface
membrane of, CSC-1 cells (Fig. 8)

Induction of TRAIL-sensitivity by
overexpression of DR5 in TRAIL-resistant
DLD-1/TRAIL and MCF10A cells
In order to confirm that the decreased expression of
DR5 was one of mechanisms involved in the resistance
to TRAIL, we examined whether overexpression of DR5
would induce sensitivity to rTRAIL in DLD-1/TRAIL
and MCF10A cells, both of which have characteristics of
25834

Oncotarget

Figure 6: TRAIL-resistance of human mammary gland epithelial cells was due to malfunction of its recruitment to
the cell surface membrane. Top graphs; Breast cancer stem-like CSC-1 and the parent MCF10A cells were treated with rTRAIL
(7, 10, 30, 50, 70, 100 ng/ml) for 24 h. The cell viability was estimated at 24 h after the treatment. Data were obtained from 3 independent
experiments. The cell viability of the control (0; DMSO alone) is indicated as 100%. The growth inhibitory activity (IC50) of each compound
is indicated in each panel. Lower blot: Western blot analysis was performed to determine the steady-state expression of DR5, β-actin as
the internal control.Lower photomicrographs: Oligomerization of DR5. Nuclei were counterstained in blue with Hoechst33342. Anti-DR5
bound to the cell surface is indicated by white arrows

TRAIL-resistance. The expression level of DR5 in these
cells after transfection with a DR5 expression vector was
estimated by Western blot analysis (Fig. 9A and B). Then,
we examined the anti-proliferative effect of rTRAIL at
various concentrations on the transfected cells as judged
from the cell viability assessed by the using trypan
blue dye-exclusion test (Fig. 9A and 9B). The cells
transfected with the control or DR5 expression vector
were treated  with rTRAIL for 24 h. Overexpression
of DR5 resulted in significant growth suppression on
rTRAIL-treated cells compared with the suppression
found for the cells transfected with the control vector.
The IC50 value of rTRAIL for each cell line shifted
to a slightly lower concentration compared with that
before the transfection. However, the level of apoptotic
response to TRAIL was not fully recovered to become
similar to that for each TRAIL-sensitive cell line.
Also, the activation of caspase-8 and caspase-3 were
significantly increased in the cells transfected with the
DR5 expression vector in MCF10A cells, but not in
the case of the DLD-1/TRAIL cells (Fig. 9C and 9D).
We concluded that the overexpression of DR5 did not
improve the impaired recruitment of DR5 to cell surface

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

membrane significantly. These results indicated that the
main mechanism of TRAIL-resistance was malfunction
of its recruitment on the cell surface.

Growth inhibition of 3-D tumour spheroids
by combined treatment with α-mangostin
and rTRAIL
In order to further estimate the growth inhibitory
effect of α-mangostin, we examined the synergistic
anti-proliferative effects of α-mangostin (30 μM) and
rTRAIL (100 ng/ml), on DLD-1/TRAIL cells cultured
as 3-D spheroids, instead of as evaluated by the in vivo
assay (Fig. 10). As a result, the combination treatment
with α-mangostin and rTRAIL resulted in synergistic
tumour growth suppression of these cells. The
formation of tumour spheroids by the cells treated with
α-mangostin and rTRAIL was significantly suppressed
from the surrounding compared with the formation by
the DLD-1/TRAIL cells treated with rTRAIL alone.
These results indicated that α-mangostin induced
TRAIL-sensitivity even in 3-D tumour spheroids as well
as in vitro.

25835

Oncotarget

Figure 7: α-Mangostin and rTRAIL induced significant growth suppression of CSC-1 and -2 cells by up-regulating
expression of DR5. Upper bar graphs: Breast cancer stem-like CSC-1 and CSC-2 cells were treated with α-mangostin (2, 5, 7 μM) and/or
rTRAIL (7 ng/ml) for 48 h. The cell viability was estimated at 48 h after the treatment. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments.
The cell viability of the control (0; DMSO alone) is indicated as 100%. Lower blot: Western blot analysis was performed to determine the
expression of DR5 and activation of caspase-8, with β-actin as the internal control.

DISCUSSION

mammary gland epithelial MCF10A cells, which have
characteristics of TRAIL-resistance (Fig. 6). When these
TRAIL-resistant cell lines were made to exogenously
overexpress DR5, sensitivity to TRAIL was not
fully recovered (Fig. 9A and 9B), which indicated
that both mechanisms co-existed to account for the
resistance. Based on these results, we propose that the
TRAIL-receptor DR4/5 was present, but at an extremely
low amount and also that the impaired oligomerization
could exist in normal cells (Fig. 11A). Therefore, TRAIL
would hardly bind to normal cells. In proliferating noncancerous cells such as MCF10A cells (Fig. 11B), the
amounts of the receptor molecules would be more than
those on normal cells, but TRAIL-binding would not be
frequent compared with that by cancer cells (Fig. 11C).
In cancerous cells, the amount of receptor molecules
would be abundant and oligomerization efficiently
performed in response to TRAIL exposure, leading to
frequent binding of TRAIL to its receptors (Fig. 11C).

The current study aimed at developing an
adjuvant compound for cytokine therapy to conquer
TRAIL-resistance, because TRAIL-receptors are
expressed on the tumour cell surface, without
affecting normal cells. The detailed mechanisms of
TRAIL-resistance are not well understood. So far,
many studies have reported that the main mechanism is
down-regulation of DR5, which is common to various
cancer cell types [11, 16]. In this study, we clarified
that the mechanism of TRAIL-resistance consisted
of not only a decrease in the expression level of DR5
and also malfunction of its recruitment to the cell
surface, as evidenced form the results obtained by using
TRAIL-resistant human colon cancer DLD-1 cells and
human mammary gland epithelial MCF10A cells and
their cancer stem-like cells (Fig. 1C). The malfunction
of DR5 recruitment was also observed in human

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25836

Oncotarget

Figure 8: α-Mangostin effectively induced DR5 oligomerization at the cell surface membrane of cancer stem-like
cell. Breast cancer stem like CSC-1 and the parent MCF10A cells were treated with α-mangostin (7 μM) and/or rTRAIL (7 ng/ml) for 48 h.
The results of immunofluorescence staining for DR5 bound on the cell surface and in the cytosol of untreated (Control; DMSO alone) or
α-mangostin- and/or rTRAIL-treated cells. Nuclei were counterstained in blue with Hoechst33342.

In DLD-1/TRAIL cells, decreased expression of the
receptors and dysfunction of oligomerization would
co-exist, leading to resistance to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis (Fig. 11D). Our data indicate that the main
mechanism of TRAIL-resistance was malfunction of its
recruitment to the cell surface membrane. On the other
hand, we did not find any malfunction of the caspase-8
activation machinery. Notably, α-mangostin cancelled
the 2 resistance machineries by increasing the expression
level of DR5 through down-regulation of miR-133b
and efficient recruitment of DR5 in DLD-1 and their
TRAIL-resistant cells (Figs. 2, 3, and 5B), but not in the
non-cancerous TRAIL-resistant MCF10A cells. These
findings strongly indicated that α-mangostin could
contribute to chemoprevention of cancer development
by cooperating with TRAIL.
We demonstrated that the level of intracellular
miR-133b was down-regulated after the treatment with
α-mangostin (Fig. 5B); whereas DR5, a target gene of
miR-133b, was clearly up-regulated (Figs. 2 and 5A).
The 3- to 4-fold decrease in the miR-133b level by
α-mangostin actually up-regulated DR5 (Fig. 5B).
Also, the gene silencing of DR5 suppressed apoptosis
significantly, which would have considerably contributed
to the TRAIL-induced apoptosis by α-mangostin
(Fig. 4), indicating that the apoptosis was at least in part
due to the up-regulation of DR5 by the down-regulation
of miR-133b. Hagiwara et al. reported that stilbene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

derivatives promote the expression of Argonaute2
(Ago2), resulting in the elevated expression of certain
miRNAs [17]. Therefore, it is also possible that such
natural compounds may have affected some miRNA
expression by modulating RNase  III family members
Drosha and Dicer. Additionally, α-mangostin effectively
induced the transfer of DR5 to the cancer cell surface
membrane and improved the DR5 oligomerization.
It has been reported that the down-regulation of
surface expression of DR5 may be attributed to the
co-localization with LC3-II in the autophagosomes of
TRAIL-resistant human breast cancer cell lines [10].
When we analyzed the steady-state expression level of
LC3-II, however, no difference was observed between
TRAIL-sensitive and -resistant DLD-1 cell lines
(Supplementary Fig. 2). Thomas et al. reported that
doxorubicin induces the translocation of DR5 from the
cytoplasm to the tumour cell surface [7]. The mechanism
of this translocation has not yet been established,
and there is concern about possible side effects. In
2003, it was reported that activated Cdc-42-associated
kinase (Ack1) is required for DR4 recruitment to lipid
rafts and for induction of TRAIL-induced cell death
[18]. We checked the steady-state expression level of
Ack1 between DLD-1 and DLD-1/TRAIL cell lines;
however, the expression level was similar in each cell
line (Supplementary Fig. 3). In addition, α-mangostin
did not affect the Ack1 level either cell line. Thus, the
25837

Oncotarget

mechanism of DR5 oligomerization is not yet clearly
understood. Based on the results of this study, we
emphasize the point that α-mangostin was a useful
compound against TRAIL-resistant cells as well as
cancer-stem like cells (Figs. 7 and 8). Cancer stem
cells are highly resistant to anti-cancer drugs, because
these cells show slow growth and are recruited into
the G0-phase of the cell cycle. Our study is the first to
show that cancer stem-like cells, which expressed the
CSC markers CD44 and ABCG2 as well as the stem-cell
marker SOX2 [19], exhibited significant sensitivity
to TRAIL-induced apoptosis and that α-mangostin
functioned as a sensitizer of TRAIL-induced apoptosis
by inducing recruitment of DR5 to the cancer cell
surface (Fig. 8) [15]. Therefore, these results indicated
that α-mangostin would be a useful compound for
immune-cytokine therapy. Recently, clinical trials
using combination treatment with anti-DR5 antibody

and chemotherapeutics have begun; however, hepatic
dysfunction and various adverse effects are a serious
problem [20]. Since chemotherapeutic drugs lead to
DNA damage in cells, combination treatment using
TRAIL with these cytotoxic agents, even at lower doses
than those used in conventional chemotherapy, can
result in severe side effects. Importantly, α-mangostin,
which is a naturally-occurring compound can prevent
these problems caused by chemotherapeutics.
In conclusion, we newly found that the mechanism
of TRAIL-resistance consisted of a decrease in the
expression level of DR5 and malfunction of its recruitment
to the cell surface. α-Mangostin, a xanthone derivative,
cancelled this resistance by increasing the expression
level of DR5 through down-regulation of miR-133b
and effectively inducing the transfer of DR5 from
the cytoplasm to the tumour cell surface membrane
(Fig. 11E). Further studies will be needed to elucidate

Figure 9: Overexpression of DR5 induced TRAIL sensitivity in TRAIL-resistant DLD-1/TRAIL and MCF10A
cells. A. Control and DR5 expression plasmid vectors (0.4 μg/ml) were used to transfect DLD-1/TRAIL cells for 24 h, and the cells were
then exposed to rTRAIL (5, 10, 25, 50 ng/ml) for 24 h. B. MCF10A cells were transfected with control or DR5 expression plasmid vectors
(0.4 μg/ml) for 24 h, and then exposed to rTRAIL (5, 10, 50, 100 ng/ml) for 24 h. The cell viability was estimated at 24 h after the treatment.
Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. The cell viability of the control (0; PBS alone) is indicated as 100%. C and D. Western
blot analysis was performed to determine the expression of DR5, activation of caspase-8 and caspase-3 with β-actin used as the internal
control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25838

Oncotarget

Figure 10: α-Mangostin and rTRAIL induced significant growth suppression of 3-D tumor spheroids. TRAIL-resistant
DLD-1 cells under conditions for spheroid formations were treated with α-mangostin (30 μM) and/or rTRAIL (100 ng/ml) for 24 h. The
absorbance at 570 nm was measured for each well, and the average and standard deviations were calculated for each sample. The control
was DMSO alone.

Quantitative reverse-transcriptase PCR using
real-time PCR

how α-mangostin induced DR5 oligomerization at the
tumour cell surface membrane. Our findings strongly
indicated that α-mangostin functioned as a sensitizer of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis and could become a possible
adjuvant compound for cytokine therapy to conquer
TRAIL-resistance in TRAIL-resistant cancer cells and in
cancer-stem cells.

Total RNA was extracted from cells by
TRIzol containing phenol/guanidium isothiocyanate
(Invitrogen) and then treated with DNase I. The RNA
was subsequently reverse-transcribed to cDNA by
using Super-Script III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In order to
examine the expression level of mature miR-133b in
detail, we performed TaqMan® MicroRNA Assays
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) using real-time
PCR [21]. The threshold cycle (Ct) is defined as the
fractional cycle number at which the fluorescence passes
a fixed threshold. The expression level of the miRNA
in each sample was measured and was normalized
to miR-21 expression, which was used as an internal
control. Calculation of the Ct value was done by using
the second-derivative maximum method, and relative
quantification was made by the comparative Ct method.
All reactions were run in triplicate. The PCR primer pairs
for miR-133b and -21 were obtained commercially from
Applied Biosystems.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and cell viability
Human colon cancer cell line DLD-1 and
TRAIL-resistant DLD-1 cell line, the latter of which
was obtained from DLD-1 cells after selection by
drug pressure, were grown in RPMI-1640 medium
supplemented with 5% (v/v) heat-inactivated FBS and
2 mM L-glutamine under an atmosphere of 95% air and
5% CO2 at 37°C. Human cancer stem-like cell lines,
iCSCL-10A1 and iCSCL-10A2 were established from
mammary gland epithelial cell line MCF10A as previously
reported [15]. In this paper, these cancer stem-like cell
lines were named as abbreviations, CSC-1 and CSC-2,
respectively. MCF10A cells were grown in MEBM
medium (Lonza, Tokyo, Japan); and CSC-1 and CSC-2
cells, in DMEM medium (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA,
USA). The number of viable cells was determined by
performing the trypan blue dye-exclusion test. TRAIL was
obtained from BioVision (Milpitas, California, USA). In
some experiments the cells were co-incubated with DMSO
or PBS alone as a control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Western blotting
Cells were homogenized in chilled lysis buffer
comprising 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), containing
1% NP-40, 0.1% deoxycholic acid, 0.1% SDS,
150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 1% Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail (Sigma, Tokyo, Japan) and stood for 20 min
on ice. After centrifugation at 13, 000 rpm for 20 min at

25839

Oncotarget

Figure 11: Schematic diagram of the TRAIL-resistance mechanism and machinery involved in the TRAIL-induced
apoptosis by α-mangostin. A, B, C and D. The mechanism of TRAIL-resistance consisted of not only a decrease in the expression level
of DR5 and also malfunction of its recruitment to the cell surface. E. The effects of a-mangostin are indicated by red arrows.

Immunocytochemistry

4°C, the supernatants were collected as protein samples.
Protein contents were measured with a DC Protein
assay kit (Biorad, Hercules, CA). Ten micrograms of
lysate protein for Western blotting was separated by
SDS-PAGE using a 7.5% or 10% polyacrylamide gel
and electroblotted onto a PVDF membrane (Amersham
Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). After blockage of
nonspecific binding sites for 1 h with 5% nonfat milk
in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20, the membrane
was incubated overnight at 4°C with various primary
antibodies. They included anti-PARP-1(Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), anti-human FADD
(MBL, Nagoya, Japan), anti-human cleaved caspase-8
(Cell Signaling Technology Inc.), and anti-human ß-actin
antibodies (Sigma). The membranes were then washed 3
times with PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20, incubated
further with HRP-conjugated sheep anti-mouse or
donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody (Cell Signaling
Technology Inc.) at room temperature, and then washed
3 times with PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20. The
immunoblots were visualized by use of an enhanced
chemiluminescence detection kit (PerkinElmer, Inc.,
Waltham, MA, USA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DLD-1 and DLD-1/TRAIL cells were seeded
into the wells of a Lab-Tek II Chamber Slide System
(Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA), each well
containing 1.0 ml of culture medium plus 10% (w/v)
fetal bovine serum. After 48 h of treatment, the cells
were immunostained with anti-DR5 antibody according
to the immunofluorescence protocol of Cell Signaling
Technology. The nuclei were stained with Hoechet33342,
and for actin labeling the cells were incubated with
the fluorescent F-actin probe Rhodamine Phalloidin
(Cytoskeleton, Denver, CO). The cells were observed with
a BIOREVO fluorescence microscope (Keyence, Osaka,
Japan).

Cell transfection with miRNA or siRNA
DLD-1
and
DLD-1/TRAIL
cells
were
seeded into 6-well plates at a concentration of
0.5–1.0 × 105/1ml/well on the day before the transfection.
The siRNA for DR5 (siR-DR5: 2 nM) was used for the
transfection of the cells, which was achieved by using

25840

Oncotarget

cationic liposomes, i.e., Lipofectamine RNAiMAX
(Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer’s
lipofection protocol. The sequence of miR-133b was
5′-UUUGGUCCCCUUCAACCAGCUA
-3′;
and
that of siRNA for DR5, 5′-GAAGACGGTAGAGAT
TGCATCTCCT -3′ (siR-DR5). We used non-specific
control (NC) Duplex VII (57% GC Content; Dharmacon
Research, Inc., Lafayette, CO, USA) as a control. The
effects manifested by the introduction of the mature
miRNA or siRNA into the cells were assayed at 48 or 72 h,
respectively, after the transfection.

formation plate. The plate was then centrifuged at 200 × g
for 3 minutes at room temperature, after which it was
incubated at 37°C in a tissue culture incubator for 48 hours
to promote spheroid formation. After 48 h, 50 μl of warm
cell culture medium containing the desired compound was
added; and the plate was then incubated at 37°C in the
tissue culture incubator for 2 days. After 48 h, a one-tenth
volume (10 μl/100 μl) of MTT reagent was added to each
well; and then the plate was transferred back to incubator
at 37°C for 24 hours. After 24 hours, an equal volume
(100 μl/100 μl) of warm detergent reagent at 37°C was
added to each well; and then the plate was placed back in
the incubator for 24 h to solubilize the cells and to release
the MTT crystals formed. The absorbance at 570 nm was
then read.

Assay for iuciferase activity
We constructed sensor vectors by joining the
region with or without a possible binding site from the
3′-UTR of human DR5 (No.4271–4650) with a luciferase
reporter pMIR-control vector (Ambion, Foster City, CA,
USA) to examine the target sequence of miR-133b. To
generate sensor vectors with 4 mutations in the binding
site of the 3′-UTR of human DR5 (No.4455–4463) for
miR-133b, we mutated seed regions from GGACCAAA to
GGCATGAA (mt-DR5, PrimeSTAR® Mutagenesis Basal
Kit; TaKaRa). The sensor vector with these mutations
was submitted to Life Science Research Center, Gifu
University, for DNA sequencing. The cells were seeded in
12-well plates at a concentration of 0.5 × 105/well the day
before the transfection. The sensor vector (concentration;
0.5 μg/well) and 10 nM miR-133b or nonspecific control
miRNA (Dharmacon) were used for the co-transfection of
the cells by using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen).
Forty-eight hours after the co-transfection, luciferase
activities were measured by using a Dual-Glo™ Luciferase
Assay System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. Firefly luciferase activity was
normalized to Renilla luciferase activity.

Statistics
Differences were statistically evaluated by one-way
ANOVA followed by the t-test. A p-value of less than 0.05
was considered to be statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
The work was supported by a grant-in-aid for
scientific research from the Ministry of Education,
Science, Sports, and Culture of Japan.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Wiley SR, Schooley K, Smolak PJ, Din WS, Huang CP,
Nicholl JK, Sutherland GR, Smith TD, Rauch C, Smith CA,
et al. Identification and characterization of a new member
of the TNF family that induces apoptosis. Immunity. 1995;
3:673–682.

Assay for DR5 overexpression
The DR5 expression vector was generated
by inserting the open reading frame of DR5 cDNA
into the SgfI and PmeI site of the pF5A-CMV neo
vector (Promega). DLD-1/TRAIL and MCF10A cells
were seeded into 6-well plates at a concentration of
0.5 × 105/well and transfected at 0.4 μg/well with the
control vector or pF5A-DR5 expression vector by
using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) at 24 h after
the transfection with rTRAIL. The effects manifested
by DR5 overexpression were assayed at 24 h after the
transfection with plasmids.

2.	 Griffith TS, Stokes B, Kucaba TA, Earel JK,
VanOosten RL, Brincks EL, Norian LA. TRAIL gene
­therapy: from ­preclinical development to clinical
­application. Curr Gene Ther. 2009; 9:9–19.
3.	 Kim SY, Kim JH, Song JJ. c-Cbl shRNA-expressing
­adenovirus sensitizes TRAIL-induced apoptosis in prostate
cancer DU-145 through increases of DR4/5. Cancer Gene
Ther. 2013; 20:82–87.
4.	 Yuan K, Sun Y, Zhou T, McDonald J, Chen Y. PARP-1
regulates resistance of pancreatic cancer to TRAIL therapy.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:4750–4759.

3-D spheroid colorimetric viability assay

5.	 Jung EM, Park JW, Choi KS, Park JW, Lee HI,
Lee KS, Kwon TK. Curcumin sensitizes tumor necrosis
­factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-mediated
apoptosis through CHOP-independent DR5 upregulation.
Carcinogenesis. 2006; 27:2008–2017.

DLD-1/TRAIL cells were seeded into a 96-well
plate at 3000 cells/well. Dispense 50 μl of single cell
suspension in 1 × Spheroid Formation ECM (Trevigen)
per well was dispensed into a 3D culture spheroid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25841

Oncotarget

6.	 Li C, Egloff AM, Sen M, Grandis JR, Johnson DE.
Caspase-8 mutations in head and neck cancer confer
­resistance to death receptor-mediated apoptosis and enhance
migration, ­invasion, and tumor growth. Mol Oncol. 2014;
8:1220–1230.

a­ ntiapoptotic genes and enhances death receptor-induced
apoptosis. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e35345.
15.	 Nishi M, Sakai Y, Akutsu H, Nagashima Y, Quinn G,
Masui S, Kimura H, Perrem K, Umezawa A, Yamamoto N,
Lee SW, Ryo A. Induction of cells with cancer stem cell
properties from nontumorigenic human mammary epithelial
cells by defined reprogramming factors. Oncogene. 2014;
33:643–652.

7.	 Weber TG, Poschinger T, Galban S, Rehemtulla A,
Scheuer W. Noninvasive monitoring of ­pharmacodynamics
and kinetics of a death receptor 5 antibody and its enhanced
apoptosis induction in sequential application with
­doxorubicin. Neoplasia. 2013; 15:863–874.

16.	 Trivedi R, Maurya R, Mishra D P. Medicarpin, a legume
phytoalexin sensitizes myeloid leukemia cells to TRAILinduced apoptosis through the induction of DR5 and activation of the ROS-JNK-CHOP pathway. Cell Death Dis
2014;5:e1465.

8.	 Lee JH, Khor TO, Shu L, Su ZY, Fuentes F, Kong AN.
Dietary phytochemicals and cancer prevention: Nrf2
­signaling, epigenetics, and cell death mechanisms in
­blocking cancer initiation and progression. Pharmacol Ther.
2013; 137:153–171.

17.	 Hagiwara K, Kosaka N, Yoshioka Y, Takahashi RU,
Takeshita F. Stilbene derivatives promote Ago2-dependent
tumour-suppressive microRNA activity. Sci Rep. 2012;
2:314.

9.	 Kumazaki M, Noguchi S, Yasui Y, Iwasaki J, Shinohara H,
Yamada N, Akao Y. Anti-cancer effects of naturally occurring compounds through modulation of signal transduction
and miRNA expression in human colon cancer cells. J Nutr
Biochem. 2013; 24:1849–1858.

18.	 Linderoth E, Pilia G, Mahajan NP, Ferby I. Activated
Cdc42-associated kinase 1 (Ack1) is required for tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
receptor recruitment to lipid rafts and induction of cell
death. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:32922–32931.

10.	 Di X, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Takeda K, Rivera Rosado LA,
Zhang B. Accumulation of autophagosomes in breast ­cancer
cells induces TRAIL resistance through downregulation of
surface expression of death receptors and 5. Oncotarget.
2013; 4:1349–1364.

19.	 Nishi M, Akutsu H, Kudoh A, Kimura H, Yamamoto N,
Umezawa A, Lee SW, Ryo A. Induced cancer stem-like
cells as a model for biological screening and discovery
of agents targeting phenotypic traits of cancer stem cell.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:8665–8680.

11.	 Stolfi C, Pallone F, Monteleone G. Molecular Targets of
TRAIL-Sensitizing Agents in Colorectal Cancer. Int J Mol
Sci. 2012; 13:7886–7901.

20.	 Wu XX, Ogawa O, Kakehi Y. TRAIL and ­chemotherapeutic
drugs in cancer therapy. Vitam Horm. 2004; 67:365–383.

12.	 Akao Y, Nakagawa Y, Iio A, Naoe T. Role of
microRNA-143 in Fas-mediated apoptosis in human T-cell
leukemia Jurkat cells. Leuk Res. 2009; 33:1530–1538.

21.	 Akao Y, Nakagawa Y, Hirata I, Iio A, Itoh T, Kojima K,
Nakashima R, Kitade Y, Naoe T. Role of anti-oncomirs
miR-143 and -145 in human colorectal tumors. Cancer
Gene Ther. 2010; 17:398–408.

13.	 Milenkovic D, Jude B, Morand C. miRNA as molecular
­target of polyphenols underlying their biological effects.
Free Radic Biol Med. 2013; 64:40–51.
14.	 Patron JP, Fendler A, Bild M, Jung U, Muller H,
Arntzen MO, Piso C, Stephan C, Thiede B, Mollenkopf HJ,
Jung K, Kaufmann SH, Schreiber J. MiR-133b targets

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25842

Oncotarget

