Research Article

Cross-talk between Paracrine-Acting Cytokine and
Chemokine Pathways Promotes Malignancy in
Benign Human Prostatic Epithelium
1

2

3

1

Mingfang Ao, Omar E. Franco, Dean Park, Dayanidhi Raman,
2
1,2,4
Karin Williams, and Simon W. Hayward

Departments of 1Cancer Biology and 2Urologic Surgery, 3Division of Hematology and Oncology, and 4The Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee

Abstract
The present study explores the mechanisms by which human
prostatic carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAF) induce tumorigenesis in initiated but nonmalignant human prostatic
epithelial cells (BPH-1). CAF express elevated levels of both
transforming growth factor-B1 (TGF-B1) and stromal cell–
derived factor-1 (SDF-1/CXCL12). TGF-B inhibits the growth of
BPH-1 cells in vitro, but was found to be necessary for the
tumorigenic response to CAF. This counterintuitive result
suggested that the TGF-B signaling system was involved in
other processes relating to tumorigenesis. The SDF-1 receptor,
CXCR4, is expressed at low levels in benign prostate tissue and
in BPH-1 cells in culture. However, CXCR4 levels increase
during prostate cancer progression. CXCR4 was found to be
induced and localized to the cell membrane in BPH1 cells by
CAF-conditioned medium and by CAF cells in tissue recombinants. TGF-B was both necessary and sufficient to allow the
detection of membrane-localized CXCR4 in BPH1 cells.
Suppression of epithelial cell CXCR4 expression abrogated
the tumorigenic response to CAF. SDF-1, secreted by CAF, acts
via the TGF-B–regulated CXCR4 to activate Akt in the epithelial
cells. This mechanism elicits tumorigenesis and obviates the
growth-inhibitory effects of TGF-B. Thus, tumor stroma can
contribute to carcinogenesis through synergism between TGFB, SDF-1, and CXCR4. These experiments suggest mechanisms
by which TGF-B can shift its role from an inhibitor to a
promoter of proliferation during tumor progression. Both the
TGF-B and SDF-1 pathways are targets of drug discovery
efforts; these data suggest potential benefits in the cotargeting
of these pathways. [Cancer Res 2007;67(9):4244–53]

Introduction
Because the bulk of human tumors are carcinomas, much
attention has been paid to the epithelial cell type. However,
inflammation and interactions with the surrounding stromal
microenvironment are critical for cancer initiation and progression
(1–3). Stromal alterations during tumorigenesis have been shown
in tumors, including breast, colon, lung, and prostate (4).
Compared with normal stroma, the tumor microenvironment
often exhibits an increased number of fibroblasts, enhanced
capillary density, and deposition of type I collagen and fibrin.

Requests for reprints: Simon W. Hayward, Department of Urologic Surgery, A1302
MCN, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232-2765. Phone: 615-3225823; Fax: 615-322-8990; E-mail: simon.hayward@vanderbilt.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3946

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

The fibroblasts within the tumor stroma commonly have a
myofibroblastic phenotype similar to the granulation tissue seen
in wound healing (5, 6) and have been designated as activated or
carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAF; refs. 7, 8). The presence of
a reactive stroma is most clearly evident, and generally best
described, in tumors such as breast cancer, where myofibroblastic
cells are not commonly seen in the normal stroma. Under these
circumstances, the initiation of smooth muscle actin expression
is obvious. In comparison, in an organ such as the prostate, the
normal stroma is fibromuscular, and therefore, comparable
changes are inherently less apparent. Despite these limitations,
human prostatic stroma has been shown to be activated in
response to cancer progression, resulting in the formation of a
reactive stroma the presence and nature of which has a prognostic
value (9–11).
Fibroblasts are recognized as prominent modifiers of cancer
progression (12, 13). Using tissue recombination and renal capsule
xenografting, Cunha’s group showed that human prostatic CAF
induced tumor formation from initiated but nontumorigenic
human prostatic epithelial cells, whereas normal prostatic
fibroblasts (NPF) did not, although the mechanisms involved were
unclear (7, 14).
Transforming growth factor-h (TGF-h) has been suggested to
play an important role in the generation of the reactive stroma
(9, 10). In prostatic CAF, TGF-h secretion is elevated compared
with NPF (15). In an orthotopic xenograft model to reconstruct
human mammary gland, Kuperwasser et al. (16) found that
overexpressing TGF-h in mouse fibroblasts could induce the
initiation of breast cancer from the normal human epithelium. A
conditional knock-out mouse, in which fibroblasts lose TGF-h
responsiveness by excision of TGF-h receptor II (ThRII) also
supports the importance of TGF-h signaling in carcinogenesis.
These animals exhibit elevated expression of mitogenic chemokines associated with intraepithelial neoplasia in the prostate and
carcinoma in the gastrointestinal tract (17). Additionally, in a
mammary tissue recombination model, fibroblasts from the same
ThRII knock-out mice expressed elevated stromal hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), macrophage-stimulating protein (MSP),
and TGF-a resulted in the activation of MET, RON, ERBb1, and
ERBb2 in the adjacent epithelium (18).
In normal adult tissues, TGF-h is generally seen as a tumor
suppressor, inhibiting cell growth and maintaining differentiation.
However, as cancer progresses, TGF-h takes on a tumorigenic role,
inducing angiogenesis, suppressing apoptotic activity, or enhancing
cell motility (19–22). Target cells respond to TGF-h through a
number of specific downstream signaling pathways. The overall
nature of the response is determined by cellular integration
incorporating data from different pathways, the cell context, and

4244

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Paracrine Promotion of Tumorigenesis

also the adjacent microenvironment (23). Our previous results
showed that TGF-h may stimulate invasion via the induction of
epithelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT) in tumorigenic
prostatic epithelial cells via phosphoinositide-3-kinase/Akt signaling (22). Collectively, these reports suggest that TGF-h plays an
important bidirectional role in the communication between the
epithelia and the stroma.
The present study aimed to investigate the mechanisms by
which CAF induce tumorigenesis. To approach this question, we
studied stromal-epithelial interactions in vivo and in vitro using a
model of prostate cancer progression. The data show that TGF-h
produced by CAF can induce tumorigenesis by modifying the
response of adjacent epithelial cells to other aspects of the tumor
microenvironment, specifically to elevated levels of stromal cell–
derived factor-1 (SDF-1). This work provides a model for prostate
cancer progression that fits well with previous observations of
clinical samples and gives a mechanistic explanation for the switch
from growth-inhibitory to growth-promoting effects of TGF-h,
which are commonly associated with carcinogenesis.

Materials and Methods
CAF and NPF cell generation. Human prostatic CAF and NPF were
prepared as previously described (7). For this study, CAFs and NPFs from
three separate patients were used to ensure consistency. Following
preparation, cells were qualified using a tissue recombination bioassay (7)
to confirm that the CAF cells elicit tumorigenesis, whereas the NPF cells do
not. Aliquots of CAF and NPF were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were used
at low passage (less than passage 10).
Cell proliferation assay in cell culture. A total of 3,000 cells per well
were seeded in 24-well plates in serum-free RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies).
After attachment and growth overnight, the culture medium was replaced,
and the cells were treated with reagents diluted in conditioned medium
(CM) collected from CAF or NPF cells or in serum-free RPMI. About
10 Ag/mL TGF-h (1,2,3) blocking Ab (Clone 2G7), 5 ng/mL TGF-h1 ligand
(R&D Systems, Inc.), and 100 ng/mL SDF-1 (Peprotech, Inc.) were added
as indicated in the figure legends.
Immunofluorescence staining. Paraffin-embedded tissue samples were
cut in 5-Am sections and then placed on glass slides. After deparaffinization
with Histoclear (National Diagnostics), the antigen was unmasked by
heating samples in unmasking solution (Vector Laboratories, Inc.), and the
reaction was quenched using 0.3% hydrogen peroxide and blocked with
Clean Vision (ImmunoVision Technologies). Samples were then incubated
with primary antibodies against human CXCR4 (R&D Systems), SV40
Tag (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), p-Smad2 (Cell Signaling Technology),
or Ku70 (Abcam). After washing in PBS, the slides were incubated in
FITC-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibodies (Sigma) or biotinylated
anti-rabbit secondary antibody (DAKO) for 1 h. After extensive washing,
the slides were mounted with Vectashield mounting medium with
propidium iodide (Vector) or 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). For
phosphorylated Smad2 staining, the slides were incubated in ABC solution
(Vector) to amplify the signals before visualizing with 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine
(DAB). Hoechst 33258 staining was done and visualized as previously
described.
To visualize CXCR4, cells were cultured serum-free with and without
TGF-h1 (5 ng/mL). Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room
temperature for 10 min, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton for 5 min at room
temperature, and blocked in 10% normal donkey serum. CXCR4 expression
was probed with mouse monoclonal antibody (MAb171, Clone 44708, R&D
Systems) and visualized with Cy2 donkey anti-mouse secondary antibody
(715-225-150, Jackson Immunoresearch). Confocal images were acquired
with an LSM 510 inverted confocal microscope at an optical slice thickness
of 0.5 Am.
Conditioned medium. CAF or NPF were seeded with 5% FCS in RPMI
1640 at a density of 500,000 per 75-cm2 flask, allowed to grow, and attached

www.aacrjournals.org

overnight. Medium was then replaced with serum-free RPMI. The cells were
incubated at 37jC for a further 24 h. The medium was collected, centrifuged,
passed through a 0.45-Am filter (Millipore), and stored at 80jC for later use.
ELISA for TGF-B1 and SDF-1. About 800,000 CAF or NPF were plated in
75-cm2 flasks, and after overnight attachment and growth, the cells were
washed thrice with PBS and fed with serum-free RPMI 1640. CM was
collected after 48 h, centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min to pellet debris,
and stored at 80jC. TGF-h1 and SDF-1 were assessed according to the
manufacturer’s protocol [human TGFh-1/SDF-1 Quantikine (R&D Systems,
Inc.)], and each experiment was done in triplicate.
Wound-healing assay. Cells were seeded in six-well plates (Falcon) in
RPMI 1640 with 5% FCS. After overnight attachment and growth, cells were
starved in serum-free RPMI medium for 24 h before incubation with CM
from CAF or NPF and, as appropriate, with or without 5 ng/mL TGF-h1,
1.5 Ag/mL TGF-h–neutralizing antibody 2G7 or 20 Ag/mL CXCR4
neutralizing antibody (clone 12G5, R&D Systems). When they attained a
confluent monolayer, the cell sheets were wounded with a plastic pipette
tip. This generated a gap in the monolayer, and the ability of cells to migrate
into the cleared section was observed and recorded photographically at
different times at fixed points in the wound (24). All the experiments were
done in triplicate.
Western blotting. Cells were detached by trypsinization after washing
with cold PBS, lysed with TNN buffer [50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 150 mmol/L
NaCl, 0.5% NP40 (pH, 7.4)] containing proteinase inhibitor (Roche) and
phosphatase inhibitor I and II (Sigma). The whole cell lysates were clarified
at 13,000 rpm for 20 min at 4jC, the total protein levels were quantified,
and lysates were stored for use. About 20 Ag proteins per well were loaded
and electrophoresed through 10% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and
electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes
were blocked for 1 h in PBS-T (PBS, 0.1% Tween 20) containing 5% nonfat
dry milk and incubated with primary antibody in PBS-T containing 4%
nonfat dry milk overnight at 4jC, washed 30 min in PBS-T, followed with
the horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (1:1,000; Amersham-GE Healthcare) diluted in PBS-T containing 2.5% nonfat dry milk for
1 h at room temperature. Amersham ECL plus detection reagent (GE
Healthcare) was used to visualize protein bands. Antibodies against CXCR4
(1 ng/mL; R&D Systems, clone 44708), P-Akt (1:500; Cell Signaling) were
used. h-actin (1:5000; Sigma) was used for loading control.
Reverse transcription-PCR. RNA was isolated using the RNeasy kit
(Qiagen) and reverse transcribed using Superscript II Reverse Transcriptase
(Invitrogen). Signal was amplified to detect CXCR4 using primer sets and
conditions as previously described (25).
Flow cytometry for CXCR4. Cells were harvested and resuspended in
L-15 medium (Sigma) at a concentration of 2  107/mL, and a 50-AL cell
suspension was incubated with 50 AL monoclonal mouse anti-human
CXCR4 (R&D Systems, Inc.; 10 Ag/mL dilution in L-15) for 1 h on ice. After
washing thrice, the cells were incubated with allophycocyanin (APC)labeled anti-mouse secondary antibody (BD PharMingen) for 30 min on ice,
washed thrice further, and analyzed using flow cytometry at the VanderbiltIngram Cancer Center Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting Core.
Retroviral and lentiviral infections. The BPH-1-DN cells were
generated essentially as described in ref. (22) using the dominant negative
ThRII (26, 27). Viral supernatant was generated, centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for
5 min, and passed through a 0.45-Am filter. Polybrene (Sigma) was added to
the viral suspension at 5 Ag/mL and used to infect target cells. Successive
rounds of infection over 5 days were employed. The infected cells were
selected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Following selection,
the activity of the dominant negative receptor construct was confirmed by
testing using a 3TP-luciferase reporter (28). The empty vector construct was
used to generate a negative control.
The shRNA-CXCR4 or shRNA-green fluorescent protein (GFP) control
plasmids (kindly provided by Dr. Robert Weinberg, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA) were engineered into BPH-1 cells by
lentivirus infection as described in ref. (29). Activity of the construct was
confirmed using Western blot analysis, which consistently showed a 73% to
76% reduction in CXCR4 expression compared with the levels seen in shGFP
control cells.

4245

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Tissue recombinants and kidney capsule xenograft. All work
involving animals was done under protocols reviewed and approved by
the Vanderbilt Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Rat urogenital
sinus mesenchyme (rUGM) was prepared from 18-day embryonic fetuses of
pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats (Harlan) as previously described (30). UGM
was then additionally reduced to single cells by a 90-min digestion at 37jC
with 187 units/mL collagenase (Life Technologies). After digestion, the cells
were washed extensively with RPMI 1640. Viable cells were then counted
using a hemacytometer.
To prepare tissue recombinants, rUGM or CAF cells were mixed with
BPH-1 cells at a ratio of 250,000 stromal cells to 100,000 BPH-1 cells in a
sterile microcentrifuge tube in RPMI 1640. The cell mixture was pelleted
and resuspended in 50 AL of rat-tail collagen (pretitrated to pH, 7.4). After
polymerization, the collagen was overlaid with growth medium. After
incubation at 37jC overnight, the tissue recombinant was grafted under the
renal capsule of intact male CB17Icr/Hsd-severe combined immune
deficient (SCID) mice (Harlan). Hosts were sacrificed either 6 weeks (2G7
blocking antibody studies) or 8 weeks (all other studies) postgrafting. The
kidneys were removed and imaged before processing for histology. The graft
dimensions were measured, and tumor volume was calculated by the
ellipsoidal formula: volume = width2  length  0.52. Note that this formula
underestimates the volume of invasive tumors, and thus, we tend to
underestimate the significance of size differences between small noninvasive and larger invasive tumors.
Treatment of the host mice with TGF-B neutralizing Antibody (2G7).
Host SCID mice were i.p. injected with mouse monoclonal 2G7 (300 Ag per
mouse) in a 0.2-mL volume via a 26-gauge needle (31), starting 1 day before
xenografting surgery and subsequently injected twice weekly at the same
dose until sacrifice.

To determine whether the observed effects of TGF-h on
proliferation and motility in vitro could contribute to tumorigenesis in vivo, we used tissue recombination approaches.
Consistent with our experience over many years, the take rate for
all grafts was extremely high in both test and control groups
[overall 97.5% (78/80) in this study].
First, as shown in Fig. 2A, BPH-1 cells were infected using
retroviruses containing either DNThRII or control empty vector
(EV). Following selection of cells expressing stably integrated
constructs, tissue recombinants were generated with CAF cells. In
a complementary experiment, shown in Fig. 2B, BPH-1 + CAF
recombinants were grafted into mice preloaded with a TGF-h
ligand blocking antibody (2G7). In both cases, the overall tumor

Results
TGF-B signaling is a critical component in the induction of a
tumorigenic response to carcinoma-associated fibroblasts.
Previous studies have shown that human prostatic CAF can elicit
malignant changes in initiated but nontumorigenic human
prostatic epithelium (7, 14). To investigate the mechanism
underlying this process, we compared the effects of CAF and
NPF populations on target epithelia in vitro. Initial studies (data
not shown) showed that cells grown in NPF CM proliferated faster
than cells grown in serum-free medium, and that proliferation was
further increased in CAF CM.
In wound-healing assays, BPH-1 cells were grown in CM from
either NPF or CAF until reaching confluence, the monolayers were
then wounded with a pipette tip, and the rate of wound closure was
recorded. In this case, wound closure was significantly faster in
CAF CM than in NPF CM (Fig. 1A).
We examined the effects of abrogation of TGF-h signaling in
these epithelial cells on wound healing. Cells expressing a
dominant negative ThRII (DNThRII) showed significantly reduced
wound closure rates when grown in CAF CM (Fig. 1A), suggesting a
role for TGF-h in this process. To confirm these data, we repeated
the experiment in the presence of blocking concentrations of the
antibody 2G7 to remove TGF-h ligand from the CM. Under these
conditions, wound closure rate in CAF CM was reduced to that
seen in NPF CM, whereas the rate in NPF CM was unaffected.
Addition of TGF-h ligand to the CM did not affect the rate of
wound closure in either NPF or CAF CM (Fig. 1B).
We examined the titer of secreted TGF-h1 in CM from CAF and
NPF cells using ELISA. CAF cells secrete elevated TGF-h1
compared with NPF (mean values, 937 ng/mL versus 327 ng/mL,
P < 0.01). This result is consistent in multiple groups of CAF and
NPF derived from different patients and confirms observations by
others (15).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Figure 1. TGF-h enhances wound healing by BPH-1 cells in vitro. A, BPH-1
cells grown in CAF CM for 3 d show enhanced migratory activity in a
wound-healing assay as compared with cells grown in NPF CM (P < 0.01).
Expression of a dominant negative TGF-h receptor in the epithelial cells
(BPH1-DN ) significantly reduces migration in CAF CM (P < 0.01), suggesting
that TGF-h plays a role in this process. Columns, mean of all experiments done
in triplicate, with significance determined using Student’s t test; bars, SD. B, to
further examine the effects of enhancing or blocking TGF-h signaling on the
ability of BPH-1 cells to migrate in a wound-healing assay, the wound-healing
closure rates were measured in the presence or absence of either the TGF-h
blocking antibody 2G7 or an excess of TGF-h1 ligand. Consistent with the data
shown in (A ), the blocking or enhancing TGF-h did not affect wound closure in
NPF CM. However, in CAF CM, whereas additional TGF-h did not enhance the
wound closure rate, blocking its action reduced the rate significantly to levels
similar to those seen in NPF. Columns, mean of all experiments done in
triplicate, with significance determined using Student’s t test; bars, SD.

4246

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Paracrine Promotion of Tumorigenesis

Figure 2. TGF-h is essential for CAF to
induce tumorigenesis in vivo. A, empty
vector (control; BPH1-EV ) or a dominant
negative TGF-h receptor (BPH1-DN )
construct was virally transduced into
BPH-1 cells. The epithelial cells were
recombined with CAF and grafted to SCID
mice for 8 wks. At the end of the growth
period, the tumor volume was calculated
using an ellipsoid formula. Whole mounts
of representative tumors growing on
kidneys and a graphical representation of
the mean F SD of the tumor volumes are
shown. Comparison using Student’s t test
shows that BPH1-DN epithelial cells form
significantly smaller tumors (P < 0.01,
n = 16 for both test and control).
Histologic examination showed that
empty vector controls form squamous to
adenosquamous tumors, which invade the
host kidney (*). In contrast, recombinants
involving BPH1-DN cells have a clearly
delineated interface between graft and
host kidney. No overtly malignant histology
was found. B, BPH-1 + CAF tissue
recombinants were grafted into SCID mice.
Treated animals were preloaded with
TGF-h neutralizing antibody (2G7) and
treated for 6 wks postgrafting until
sacrifice. Whole-mount pictures of the
resulting tumors, volume calculations,
and histology are shown. Control animals
produced tumors grossly and histologically
similar to previous studies and to the empty
vector controls in (A ). These tumors were
somewhat smaller than those seen in (A),
reflecting the shorter duration of this
experiment. Grafts in treated animals were
significantly smaller than those in controls
(P < 0.01, n = 12 for both test and control),
representative whole-mount images
shown. Histologically, the controls were
malignant, squamous to adenosquamous,
and invasive of host kidney (*). In the
2G7-treated animals, there was a clear
separation between grafts and host
kidney (*). The 2G7-treated grafts were
predominantly squamous with keratin
pearls.

volume was significantly reduced, and invasive malignant histology
ablated in situations where TGF-h signaling was suppressed (DN
and 2G7). This contrasted sharply to EV and untreated controls,
where (consistent with previous studies) rapidly growing tumors
were produced. H&E staining showed that the control tumors were
composed of poorly differentiated, irregular epithelia. In some
areas, epithelium formed small glandular nests, whereas in other
areas, epithelium appeared as single cells that were intermingled
within fibrous stroma. Ku70 (which, in our hands, is human
specific) and Hoechst 33258 staining confirmed that the majority of
the stromal cells in these tumors were of human origin, although
occasional host-derived stromal cells could also be seen (data not
shown). Most epithelia contained large, pleomorphic nuclei with
large nucleoli. These data were consistent with the in vitro
observations and showed that TGF-h signaling is necessary for
CAF-induced tumorigenesis in this model.

www.aacrjournals.org

We have previously shown that TGF-h acts upon BPH-1 cells to
inhibit proliferation, but does not otherwise alter the motility or
invasive potential of these cells (22, 32); however, the data
presented here suggest a role for TGF-h signaling in tumorigenesis.
This is consistent with previous observations of the role of this
pleiotropic growth factor, which is known to play both tumorsuppressive and tumor-promoting roles at different disease stages
(33). Our data clearly suggest that additional TGF-h–regulated
pathways play a role in this model of tumorigenesis.
Both CAF CM and TGF-B can affect epithelial CXCR4. A
preliminary analysis of pathways potentially regulated by TGF-h
involving paracrine-acting factors thought to be up-regulated in
CAF versus normal stroma suggested SDF-1 as a candidate for
investigation. SDF-1 signals through the G-protein coupled receptor
CXCR4. Induction of CXCR4 in prostatic epithelial cells has been
correlated with malignant progression in the prostate, with little or

4247

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

no expression in benign epithelium and elevated levels seen in cancer
and particularly in bony metastases (34–36). TGF-h has been shown
to play a role in the regulation of CXCR4 in macrophages and T cells
(37, 38). SDF-1 is elevated in human breast cancer stroma where
signaling through this pathway plays a role in tumor growth (8).
To determine whether a soluble factor could be involved in
inducing expression or changing localization of CXCR4, we grew
BPH-1 cells in CAF CM for 72 h. FACS analysis (which detects
protein at the cell surface) showed an approximately 5-fold
increase in CXCR4 under these conditions (Fig. 3A).

Given our suspicion that TGF-h might be sufficient to regulate
CXCR4 action, we examined the expression of CXCR4 on BPH-1
cells grown in serum-free medium containing 5 ng/mL TGF-h for 0,
24, 48, and 72 h. This resulted in a time-dependent elevation in
CXCR4 at the cell surface, as detected by FACS analysis, which was
similar to that seen in CAF CM (data not shown). Following 72 h of
TGF-h treatment, the percentage of cells expressing an empirically
determined high level of CXCR4 on their surface membrane (as
determined by FACS analysis) increased from <0.5% to nearly 14%
(Fig. 3B). However, further analysis determined that CXCR4 mRNA

Figure 3. Microenvironmental signals can
alter CXCR4 expression. A, CAF CM
elicits up-regulation of CXCR4 detection in
BPH-1 cells in vitro . FACS analysis shows
increased detection in CXCR4 at the
surface of BPH-1 cells following 72 h of
exposure to CM from three different CAF
populations. B, quantitation of the increase
in CXCR4 detection following 72 h of
TGF-h treatment showed that the
(empirically determined) population of
high CXCR4-expressing cells increased
approximately 27-fold over controls during
treatment. C, immunofluorescent staining
of CXCR4 expression in BPH-1 cells
cultured either in serum-free medium
with or without 5 ng/mL TGF-h1. In the
untreated cells, there is a diffuse low level
of CXCR4 detectable throughout the
cytoplasm. In the presence of TGF-h,
expression becomes more intense and
localizes to the cell membrane. D, Western
blot analysis of CXCR4 expression in
BPH-1 cells cultured in either CAF CM or
NPF CM in the presence or absence of the
TGF-h blocking antibody 2G7. Left, raw
data; right, quantitation. Overall levels of
the protein were found to be highest in
the CAF CM and were reduced by
approximately one-third by 2G7 to levels
similar to those seen in NPF CM. CXCR4
levels in cells grown in NPF CM were also
reduced further by 2G7.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

4248

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Paracrine Promotion of Tumorigenesis

Figure 4. CXCR4 requires TGF-h and
parallels malignancy in tissue
recombination models in vivo. A, tissue
recombinants of BPH-1 cells with either
rUGM or NPF. CXCR4 expression was
visualized using FITC, with nuclei marked
by propidium iodide (rUGM recombinant) or
DAPI (NPF recombinant). No widespread
expression of CXCR4 was detected in
these samples except in the host kidney
tissue (*). B, tissue recombinants of BPH-1
and CAF cells were grafted into host mice
with (right ) or without (left ) TGF-h blocking
antibody (2G7) treatment. Top, CXCR4
expression was visualized using FITC,
with nuclei marked by DAPI showing
localization in the treated samples
restricted to the host kidney (*). CXCR4
was seen throughout the epithelium of the
control recombinant but was not seen in
the presence of the TGF-h blocking
antibody (2G7). Bottom, phosphorylated
Smad2 staining confirmed a lack of
signaling downstream of the TGF-h
receptor in the 2G7-treated samples.

was detectable by reverse transcription-PCR analysis (data not
shown), and protein was seen to be present by Western blot
analysis.
Immunofluorescence analysis of BPH-1 cells in serum-free
culture revealed a low-level diffuse expression of CXCR4 (Fig. 3C).
This was consistent with our flow cytometry observations (which
measure only receptor on the cell surface; Fig. 3B, control). Cells
in serum-free culture in the presence of TGF-h had a slightly
smaller area than untreated cells and showed concentration of
stain along the cell membrane (Fig. 3C). This result was in
agreement with the FACS analysis, which showed increased levels
of the protein detected at the cell surface.
To examine whether TGF-h alters overall expression of CXCR4
mRNA and protein, we used RT-PCR and Western blot analysis.
These techniques showed that CXCR4 mRNA (data not shown) and
protein could be detected when BPH-1 cells were grown in the
either CAF or NPF CM (Fig. 3D). Culture of the epithelial cells in
CAF CM resulted in elevations of the total protein levels as
compared with culture in NPF CM, and further culture for 72 h in
the presence of the TGF-h blocking antibody 2G7 decreased the

www.aacrjournals.org

detectible amount of CXCR4 protein in either CM (Fig. 3D). Taken
together, these data suggest that whereas TGF-h can exert some
short-term effects on the quantity of CXCR4, it can also play a role
in regulating the localization of the protein and, thus, its biological
availability.
To examine whether CAF induce CXCR4 in vivo, we examined
tissue recombinants prepared using BPH-1 cells recombined with
CAF (malignant development) compared with either rUGM or NPF,
which induce benign prostatic cords reminiscent of developing
human prostate (7, 39). Immunofluorescence staining revealed
minimal expression of CXCR4 in epithelial cells of the benign
recombinants (Fig. 4A), in marked contrast to the widespread
expression seen in the malignant recombinants involving CAF
(Fig. 4B). These observations are consistent with published data
relating to human clinical samples (36).
TGF-B is necessary for continued epithelial CXCR4 expression. The in vitro experiments described above show that whereas
CXCR4 levels are decreased in the short-term absence of TGF-h,
the protein does not disappear. To examine whether the elevated
CXCR4 levels seen in recombinants with CAF is related to TGF-h

4249

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. SDF-1 expressed by CAF can
elicit tumorigenesis in BPH-1 cells.
A, ELISA was used to test SDF-1 in CAF
and NPF CM. CAF CM has significantly
elevated levels of SDF-1 compared with
NPF CM (P < 0.01). The experiments were
done in triplicate using three different CAF/
NPF sets. Columns, mean; bars, SD. B,
BPH-1 cells were cultured in CM collected
from CAF cells with or without the CXCR4
blocking antibody 12G5. The whole cell
lysate was probed with an antibody against
phosphorylated Akt; h-actin was used as
loading control. CAF CM induced Akt
phosphorylation in BPH-1 cells; this
induction increased with time and was
impaired by f50% when SDF-1/CXCR4
signaling was blocked by 12G5. C, shRNA
constructs targeting GFP (Control ) or
CXCR4 were retrovirally introduced into
BPH-1 cells, which were then selected and
used to generate tissue recombinants with
CAF. Grafts were harvested after 8 wks,
the tumor volumes were calculated, and
histology was examined. Gross images
show that the control tumors were well
vascularized compared with the whiter
appearing shCXCR4 tumors. Control
tumors were significantly larger (P < 0.01,
n = 11 for both test and control) than
shCXCR4 tumors. D, histologically,
the control tumors were invasive and
malignant, with a predominantly squamous
to adenosquamous phenotype, per
previous descriptions and the controls
shown in Fig. 2. In contrast, tumors
containing shCXCR4-expressing cells had
a well-defined noninvasive border with the
adjacent host kidney (*) and contained
small foci or cords of epithelium (arrows )
with no obviously malignant phenotype.

action, we did immunofluorescence staining in tissue recombinants from the 2G7-treated hosts described above. Under these
circumstances, TGF-h1, TGF-h2, and TGF-h3 ligands are blocked
by the neutralizing antibody. This experiment showed that in the
presence of 2G7, the immunodetection of CXCR4 in the human
epithelial cells was suppressed, although CXCR4 expression was
still observed in the adjacent host kidney tissue (Fig. 4B). This is
consistent with the in vitro data described above and suggests that
paracrine TGF-h signaling is necessary for long-term maintenance
of expression and membrane localization of CXCR4 in benign
human prostatic epithelial cells. Confirmation of the activity of the
2G7 antibody in vivo was provided using staining against
phosphorylated Smad2, which confirmed a lack of signaling
downstream of the TGF-h receptor in the human cells (Fig. 4B).
SDF-1 contributes to protumorigenic responses in epithelial
cells resulting from microenvironmental signaling. For SDF-1
to play a role in promoting carcinogenesis, it is reasonable to
expect that its expression would be elevated in tumor stroma. An
initial ELISA screen of CM showed that CAF CM contained
approximately 3.7 times more SDF-1 than did comparable prepared
NPF CM (Fig. 5A). As with all biomarkers, this elevation in CAF
cells was always present, but varied somewhat between cell strains
derived from different patients. This is consistent with previous
studies in clinical samples showing that CXCR4 protein expression

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

is significantly elevated in localized and metastatic prostate
cancers, breast cancer, and thyroid cancer (36, 40, 41).
Phosphorylation of Akt is a downstream consequence of the
activation of a number of chemokine and cytokine receptors,
including TGF-h receptors and CXCR4. Uncontrolled activation of
this pathway is linked to malignant changes. Specifically, in this
model, as well as in others, elevated P-Akt has been linked to EMT
and increased cellular invasion and to suppression of nuclear
localization of Smad3 and p21, potentially allowing cells to acquire
an ability to avoid the growth-inhibitory effects of TGF-h (22). CAF
express a number of growth factors that can activate Akt. To
determine whether SDF-1 signaling through CXCR4 contributes to
Akt activation, we used an antibody (12G5) to the external domain
of CXCR4 to block SDF-1 signaling. Following exposure to CAF CM,
there was a steady increase over a 72-h period in the level of Akt
activation (Fig. 5B). This is consistent with both immediate effects
resulting from the activation of receptors by ligands present in the
CM and by the activation of receptors, which are expressed and
activated as a result of the CM. Blocking of CXCR4 activity showed
that by 72 h, this receptor contributed f48% of the total activation
of Akt caused by the CM. Wound-healing assays showed that for
cells grown in CAF CM, there was a significant reduction in wound
closure rate in the presence of the 12G5 blocking antibody,
supporting the idea that signaling through CXCR4 plays a role in

4250

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Paracrine Promotion of Tumorigenesis

this process. This supports the contention that TGF-h in CM can
contribute to the activation of protumorigenic pathways (specifically by allowing CXCR4 activity), which can then contribute to
suppression of the growth-inhibitory activities of TGF-h itself.
SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling is required for CAF-induced tumorigenesis in vivo. To examine SDF-1/CXCR4 in CAF-induced
tumorigenesis, we used retroviral transduction of a shRNA
construct (8) to suppress CXCR4 expression in BPH-1 cells.
Western blot analysis showed that cells expressing the shRNA
construct expressed f25% of the CXCR4 seen in controls, FACS
studies confirmed that these cells did not express detectable levels
of membrane-localized CXCR4 following stimulation with either
CAF CM or TGF-h (data not shown). The shRNA-expressing BPH-1
cells and control cells expressing a shRNA designed to target GFP
were combined with CAFs and grafted to SCID mice. Two months
after xenografting, the siCXCR4 BPH-1 cells formed significantly
smaller grafts than controls (Fig. 5C). Histologic staining (Fig. 5D)
revealed that the control grafts formed the typical adenosquamous
tumors previously described. In marked contrast, there was no
tumorigenic response in the siCXCR4-expressing cells. These data
show that CXCR4 expression is required for CAF-induced
tumorigenesis in this model.

Discussion
The data presented here provide important insights into the
mechanisms by which paracrine signaling can promote tumorigenesis supporting the idea of TGF-h as a master regulator of
intercellular communication. Cross-talk between cytokine and
chemokine pathways can elicit stromally induced tumorigenic
responses in genetically initiated epithelial cells. One important
point is that the changes in protein concentrations and
localization, which elicit these profound effects, are not massive.
The combination of small alterations in a number of related
pathways rather than a massive overexpression or loss of a single
factor is important. The data also illuminate the change from
tumor-suppressive to tumor-promoting actions of TGF-h.
A number of chemokines and cytokines have been proposed to
play a role in the microenvironmental promotion of tumorigenesis.
Loss of TGF-h receptor function in stromal cells has been shown to
elicit malignant changes in some epithelial tissues (17), suggesting
that stroma may contribute to, or suppress, tumorigenesis through
paracrine interactions. We have shown that human prostatic CAF
can induce initiated but nontumorigenic human prostatic epithelial cells to form tumors (7), and that epithelial cells can be
permanently transformed by this process (42).
TGF-h has complex and often apparently contradictory effects
depending on dose and context. In many normal tissues, TGF-h
inhibits proliferation and enhances differentiation (43). In the
prostate, TGF-h inhibits the growth of many nontumorigenic
prostatic epithelial cell lines and is implicated in the differentiation
of prostatic smooth muscle, a key component of prostatic
development (22, 44). TGF-h also plays a key role in tumorigenesis
where signaling, especially through non-Smad pathways, has been
implicated in disease progression (3, 45, 46). We have recently
shown that, following transformation caused by exposure to CAF,
human prostatic epithelial cells can acquire an ability to ignore the
growth-inhibitory effects of TGF-h as a result of elevated activated
Akt, which inhibits nuclear translocation of p21 and Smad3 (22).
Other published data support the proposal that interactions
between Akt and Smad3 vary depending on the relative titers of

www.aacrjournals.org

these proteins. These interactions may be important in avoiding
growth inhibition by TGF-h either as a result of changes in Smad3
localization, degradation, or by the inhibition of Smad3 phosphorylation by mTOR-dependent mechanisms (47–49). Given the
pleiotropic nature of TGF-h signaling, it is possible, and indeed
likely, that the variations noted between these studies reflect the
specific details of the various models used.
Our initial findings of elevated expression of TGF-h by CAF were
consistent with observations by others working in this field (15)
and were of interest because of studies indicating the possible role
of TGF-h in enhancing tumor progression (22). The in vivo and
in vitro studies described here showed that TGF-h contributes
to oncogenic effects on BPH-1 cells. TGF-h was shown to be
necessary for CAF-induced tumor formation by BPH-1 cells.
However, TGF-h per se is not tumorigenic to these cells. Previous
studies showed that TGF-h acts upon BPH-1 cells to inhibit
proliferation (22, 32). These observations set up a familiar apparent
paradox mirroring that seen in a number of human tumors, where
TGF-h is growth inhibitory for normal cells and yet promotes
tumor progression (33).
SDF-1 is overexpressed in human breast (8) and prostate CAF
(Fig. 5A). SDF-1 can contribute to both tumor growth and
angiogenesis (8). We show here that TGF-h or CAF CM in vitro
and CAF cells in vivo were able to increase expression and
membrane localization of the SDF-1 receptor, CXCR4, by the
epithelial cells. TGF-h was shown to be both necessary and
sufficient for receptor expression in the nontumorigenic epithelial
cells.
Elevation of CXCR4 expression is observed in human prostate
cancer progression, with little expression in benign tissue and
elevated expression seen in tumors (36). Elevated CXCR4 is also
seen in other human tumors and is linked to increased tumor
growth and poor prognosis. In this study, we show that SDF-1/
CXCR4 signaling is required for CAF-induced tumorigenesis of
BPH-1 cells. This work extends previous observations by establishing links between the TGF-h and SDF-1 pathways. The data
presented here provide a mechanism by which epithelial cells can
use elevated levels of TGF-h found in tumor stromal cells as a
triggering mechanism to respond to the effects of elevated stromal
levels of SDF-1 found in CAF. As tumorigenesis progresses, tumor
epithelial cells tend to express increased levels of TGF-h. Indeed,
TGF-h secretion is elevated between 4- and 20-fold in the
tumorigenic lines derived from BPH1 as compared with the
parental cells.5 Such tumor cell–derived TGF-h could further
contribute, by an autocrine route, to the total exposure of tumor
cells from their microenvironment and, thus, enhance tumor
promotion. In the model used here, epithelial cell–derived TGF-h
would seem to be insufficient to trigger early malignant changes,
but could certainly contribute to the overall growth and later
progression of tumors.
Although BPH-1 cells show growth inhibition upon TGF-h
treatment, the tumorigenic derivative BPH-1CAFTD lines avoid such
inhibition via the effects of elevated levels of constitutively active
Akt expression, which blocks nuclear translocation of Smad3
and p21 (22). We show here that during malignant transformation,
SDF-1 signaling contributes significantly to the elevation of
phosphorylated Akt in the target epithelial cells. These observations (summarized in Fig. 6) show a potential feedback loop

4251

5

O. E. Franco and S. W. Hayward, unpublished observations.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Interactions of TGF-h and SDF-1 pathways in tumorigenesis and
tumor progression. This stylized and simplified diagram brings together data from
this and other studies and presents a model illustrating how the TGF-h and
SDF-1/CXCR4 pathways might interact initially to contribute to tumor formation
and to set up conditions that would predispose cells to further malignant
progression. In particular, this model suggests a mechanism by which TGF-h
could switch from a tumor-suppressive to a tumor-promoting role, via a large
increase in Akt activation brought about through TGF-h–induced CXCR4
activation. Activated Akt also inhibits Smad3 activity, allowing the cells to
sidestep growth-inhibitory responses to TGF-h while continuing to retain a
response to its growth-promoting activity.

between the TGF-h and SDF-1 pathways. Elevated stromal TGF-h
elicits epithelial CXCR4 expression, allowing stromal SDF-1 to
activate Akt in the epithelial cells. P-Akt can then contribute to a
loss of the growth-inhibitory response to TGF-h. Cells act as signal
integrating centers, and this combination of a cytokine and a

References
1. Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer.
Nature 2002;420:860–7.
2. Mueller MM, Fusenig NE. Friends or foes—bipolar
effects of the tumour stroma in cancer. Nat Rev 2004;4:
839–49.
3. Bierie B, Moses HL. Tumour microenvironment:
TGFh: the molecular Jekyll and Hyde of cancer. Nat
Rev 2006;6:506–20.
4. Micke P, Ostman A. Tumour-stroma interaction:
cancer-associated fibroblasts as novel targets in anticancer therapy? Lung Cancer 2004;45 Suppl 2:S163–75.
5. Ryan GB, Cliff WJ, Gabbiani G, et al. Myofibroblasts in
human granulation tissue. Hum Pathol 1974;5:55–67.
6. Barsky SH, Green WR, Grotendorst GR, Liotta LA.
Desmoplastic breast carcinoma as a source of human
myofibroblasts. Am J Pathol 1984;115:329–33.
7. Olumi AF, Grossfeld GD, Hayward SW, Carroll PR,
Tlsty TD, Cunha GR. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
direct tumor progression of initiated human prostatic
epithelium. Cancer Res 1999;59:5002–11.
8. Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, et al. Stromal fibroblasts
present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote
tumor growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell 2005;121:335–48.
9. Rowley DR. What might a stromal response mean to
prostate cancer progression? Cancer Metastasis Rev
1998;17:411–9.
10. Tuxhorn JA, Ayala GE, Smith MJ, Smith VC, Dang TD,
Rowley DR. Reactive stroma in human prostate cancer:
induction of myofibroblast phenotype and extracellular
matrix remodeling. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:2912–23.
11. McAlhany SJ, Ayala GE, Frolov A, et al. Decreased
stromal expression and increased epithelial expression of WFDC1/ps20 in prostate cancer is associated
with reduced recurrence-free survival. Prostate 2004;
61:182–91.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

chemokine acting in concert might be sufficient to push benign but
genetically initiated epithelial cells into a cycle of uncontrolled
proliferation which would predispose them to irreversible transformation. Such transformed cells would likely express elevated
levels of TGF-h, which could further contribute to the malignant
process.
In summary, these studies show that relatively small changes in
specific molecular signals can alter the manner in which cells see
and respond to their microenvironment. In this study, we highlight
links between the TGF-h and CXCL12/SDF-1 pathways and show
that both of these pathways are linked paracrine arbiters of
tumorigenesis in CAF-driven tumorigenesis in vivo. Efforts are
currently under way by a number of groups to target both TGF-h
and SDF-1 signaling using small molecules, and the data presented
here suggest the potential for synergistic links between these
approaches.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/25/2006; revised 2/16/2007; accepted 2/27/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants CA96403, CA126505, and DK067049 (to S.W. Hayward)
and a U.S. Department of Defense Prostate Cancer Research Program Predoctoral
Fellowship W81XWH-05-1-0583 (to M. Ao). We also thank the Frances Williams
Preston Laboratories of the TJ Martell Foundation for support. The Vanderbilt
University Medical Center Institutional Flow Cytometry Core was supported by the
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center (grant P30CA68485).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
The authors thank Drs. Akira Orimo and Robert Weinberg (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology) for supplying the CXCR4 shRNA construct, Dr. Rik Derynck (University
of California at San Francisco) for supplying the dominant negative ThRII construct,
and Dr. Carlos Arteaga for TGF-h ligand antibody. We are grateful to Dr. Ann
Richmond for help and advice with the CXCR4 staining.

12. Kalluri R, Zeisberg M. Fibroblasts in cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer 2006;6:392–401.
13. De Wever O, Mareel M. Role of tissue stroma in
cancer cell invasion. J Pathol 2003;200:429–47.
14. Barclay WW, Woodruff RD, Hall MC, Cramer SD. A
system for studying epithelial-stromal interactions
reveals distinct inductive abilities of stromal cells from
benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate cancer.
Endocrinology 2005;146:13–8.
15. San Francisco IF, DeWolf WC, Peehl DM, Olumi AF.
Expression of transforming growth factor-h1 and
growth in soft agar differentiate prostate carcinomaassociated fibroblasts from normal prostate fibroblasts.
Int J Cancer 2004;112:213–8.
16. Kuperwasser C, Chavarria T, Wu M, et al. Reconstruction of functionally normal and malignant human
breast tissues in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;
101:4966–71.
17. Bhowmick NA, Chytil A, Plieth D, et al. TGF-h
signaling in fibroblasts modulates the oncogenic
potential of adjacent epithelia. Science 2004;303:
848–51.
18. Cheng N, Bhowmick NA, Chytil A, et al. Loss of TGFh type II receptor in fibroblasts promotes mammary
carcinoma growth and invasion through upregulation of
TGF-a–, MSP- and HGF-mediated signaling networks.
Oncogene 2005;24:5053–68.
19. Wakefield LM, Piek E, Bottinger EP. TGF-h signaling
in mammary gland development and tumorigenesis.
J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2001;6:67–82.
20. Danielpour D. Functions and regulation of transforming growth factor-h (TGF-h) in the prostate. Eur J
Cancer 2005;41:846–57.
21. Bello-De Ocampo D, Tindall DJ. TGF-hl/Smad
signaling in prostate cancer. Curr Drug Targets 2003;4:
197–207.
22. Ao M, Williams K, Bhowmick NA, Hayward SW.
Transforming growth factor-h promotes invasion in

4252

tumorigenic but not in nontumorigenic human prostatic epithelial cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:8007–16.
23. Massague J. How cells read TGF-h signals. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2000;1:169–78.
24. Mochizuki H, Matsubara A, Teishima J, et al.
Interaction of ligand-receptor system between stromalcell–derived factor-1 and CXC chemokine receptor 4 in
human prostate cancer: a possible predictor of metastasis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004;320:656–63.
25. Porcile C, Bajetto A, Barbieri F, et al. Stromal cellderived factor–1a (SDF-1a/CXCL12) stimulates ovarian
cancer cell growth through the EGF receptor transactivation. Exp Cell Res 2005;308:241–53.
26. Bhowmick NA, Zent R, Ghiassi M, McDonnell M,
Moses HL. Integrin h1 signaling is necessary for
transforming growth factor-h activation of p38MAPK
and epithelial plasticity. J Biol Chem 2001;276:46707–13.
27. Dumont N, Arteaga CL. A kinase-inactive type II
TGFh receptor impairs BMP signaling in human breast
cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003;301:
108–12.
28. Wrana JL, Attisano L, Carcamo J, et al. TGFh signals
through a heteromeric protein kinase receptor complex.
Cell 1992;71:1003–14.
29. Stewart SA, Dykxhoorn DM, Palliser D, et al.
Lentivirus-delivered stable gene silencing by RNAi in
primary cells. RNA 2003;9:493–501.
30. Ishii K, Shappell SB, Matusik RJ, Hayward SW. Use of
tissue recombination to predict phenotypes of transgenic mouse models of prostate carcinoma. Lab Invest
2005;85:1086–103.
31. Arteaga CL, Carty-Dugger T, Moses HL, Hurd SD,
Pietenpol JA. Transforming growth factor h1 can induce
estrogen-independent tumorigenicity of human breast
cancer cells in athymic mice. Cell Growth Differ 1993;4:
193–201.
32. Hayward SW, Dahiya R, Cunha GR, Bartek J, Despande
N, Narayan P. Establishment and characterization of an

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Paracrine Promotion of Tumorigenesis
immortalized but non-tumorigenic human prostate
epithelial cell line: BPH-1. In Vitro 1995;31A:14–24.
33. Roberts AB, Wakefield LM. The two faces of transforming growth factor h in carcinogenesis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:8621–3.
34. Kang H, Watkins G, Douglas-Jones A, Mansel RE,
Jiang WG. The elevated level of CXCR4 is correlated with
nodal metastasis of human breast cancer. Breast 2005;
14:360–7.
35. Sun YX, Schneider A, Jung Y, et al. Skeletal
localization and neutralization of the SDF-1(CXCL12)/
CXCR4 axis blocks prostate cancer metastasis and
growth in osseous sites in vivo . J Bone Miner Res 2005;
20:318–29.
36. Sun YX, Wang J, Shelburne CE, et al. Expression of
CXCR4 and CXCL12 (SDF-1) in human prostate cancers
(PCa) in vivo . J Cell Biochem 2003;89:462–73.
37. Franitza S, Kollet O, Brill A, et al. TGF-h1 enhances
SDF-1a–induced chemotaxis and homing of naive T
cells by up-regulating CXCR4 expression and downstream cytoskeletal effector molecules. Eur J Immunol
2002;32:193–202.

www.aacrjournals.org

38. Chen S, Tuttle DL, Oshier JT, et al. Transforming
growth factor-h1 increases CXCR4 expression, stromal-derived factor-1a–stimulated signalling and human immunodeficiency virus-1 entry in human
monocyte-derived macrophages. Immunology 2005;
114:565–74.
39. Wang Y, Sudilovsky D, Zhang B, et al. A human
prostatic epithelial model of hormonal carcinogenesis.
Cancer Res 2001;61:6064–72.
40. Helbig G, Christopherson KW II, Bhat-Nakshatri P,
et al. NF-nB promotes breast cancer cell migration
and metastasis by inducing the expression of the
chemokine receptor CXCR4. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
21631–8.
41. Hwang JH, Chung HK, Kim DW, et al. CXC chemokine receptor 4 expression and function in human
anaplastic thyroid cancer cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2003;88:408–16.
42. Hayward SW, Wang Y, Cao M, et al. Malignant
transformation in a nontumorigenic human prostatic
epithelial cell line. Cancer Res 2001;61:8135–42.
43. Moustakas A, Pardali K, Gaal A, Heldin CH.

4253

Mechanisms of TGF-h signaling in regulation of cell
growth and differentiation. Immunol Lett 2002;82:85–91.
44. Peehl DM, Sellers RG. Induction of smooth muscle
cell phenotype in cultured human prostatic stromal
cells. Exp Cell Res 1997;232:208–15.
45. Wakefield LM, Roberts AB. TGF-h signaling: positive
and negative effects on tumorigenesis. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 2002;12:22–9.
46. Dumont N, Bakin AV, Arteaga CL. Autocrine transforming growth factor-h signaling mediates Smadindependent motility in human cancer cells. J Biol
Chem 2003;278:3275–85.
47. Remy I, Montmarquette A, Michnick SW. PKB/Akt
modulates TGF-h signalling through a direct interaction
with Smad3. Nat Cell Biol 2004;6:358–65.
48. Conery AR, Cao Y, Thompson EA, Townsend CM, Jr.,
Ko TC, Luo K. Akt interacts directly with Smad3 to
regulate the sensitivity to TGF-h induced apoptosis. Nat
Cell Biol 2004;6:366–72.
49. Song K, Wang H, Krebs TL, Danielpour D. Novel roles
of Akt and mTOR in suppressing TGF-h/ALK5-mediated
Smad3 activation. EMBO J 2006;25:58–69.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cross-talk between Paracrine-Acting Cytokine and
Chemokine Pathways Promotes Malignancy in Benign
Human Prostatic Epithelium
Mingfang Ao, Omar E. Franco, Dean Park, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:4244-4253.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/9/4244

This article cites 49 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/9/4244.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 25 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/9/4244.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

