www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 13), pp: 21650-21662
Research Paper

TGF-β–independent CTGF induction regulates cell adhesion
mediated drug resistance by increasing collagen I in HCC
Yeonhwa Song1,4, Jin-Sun Kim2, Eun Kyung Choi3, Joon Kim4, Kang Mo Kim2, Haeng
Ran Seo1
1

Cancer Biology Research Laboratory, Institut Pasteur Korea, Bundang-Gu, Seongnam-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, 13488, Korea

2

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, ASAN Medical Center, Seoul, 05505, Korea

3

Division of Radiation Oncology, ASAN Medical Center, Seoul, 05505, Korea

4

Laboratory of Biochemistry, Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, Korea

Correspondence to: Haeng Ran Seo, email: shr1261@ip-korea.org
Kang Mo Kim, email: kimkm70@amc.seoul.kr
Keywords: tumor spheroids, collagen 1A1, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance
(CAM-DR), hepatocellular carcinoma
Received: April 13, 2016     Accepted: January 29, 2017     Published: February 20, 2017

ABSTRACT
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is resistant to conventional chemotherapeutic
agents and remains an unmet medical need. Here, we demonstrate a mechanism of
cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance using a variety of HCC spheroid models to
overcome environment-mediated drug resistance in HCC. We classified spheroids
into two groups, tightly compacted and loosely compacted aggregates, based on
investigation of dynamics of spheroid formation. Our results show that compactness
of HCC spheroids correlated with fibroblast-like characteristics, collagen 1A1
(COL1A1) content, and capacity for chemoresistance. We also showed that ablation
of COL1A1 attenuated not only the capacity for compact-spheroid formation, but also
chemoresistance. Generally, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) acts downstream
of transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and promotes collagen I fiber deposition in
the tumor microenvironment. Importantly, we found that TGF-β–independent CTGF
is upregulated and regulates cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance by inducing
COL1A1 in tightly compacted HCC spheroids. Furthermore, losartan, which inhibits
collagen I synthesis, impaired the compactness of spheroids via disruption of cellcell contacts and increased the efficacy of anticancer therapeutics in HCC cell lineand HCC patient-derived tumor spheroids. These results strongly suggest functional
roles for CTGF-induced collagen I expression in formation of compact spheroids and
in evading anticancer therapies in HCC, and suggest that losartan, administered in
combination with conventional chemotherapy, might be an effective treatment for
liver cancer.

Importantly, most HCCs are resistant to
conventional chemotherapeutic agents [3]. Researchers
have attempted to identify novel target genes and drug
candidates for HCC; however, development of targeted
drugs has not yet significantly improved outcomes.
In view of all this, the concept of cancer biology
is changing from a focus on the genetics of tumor cells
alone to also exploring the complex interplay between
cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME). The
TME is the extracellular environment in which the tumor
exists, including surrounding blood vessels, immune cells,

INTRODUCTION
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most
common malignant tumor type and the second leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the world [1]. The
highest incidence occurs in Eastern Asia and sub-Saharan
Africa. The prognosis for this disease is very poor. Only
10%–20% of liver tumors can be removed surgically, and
the recurrence rate is approximately 80% after resection,
resulting in a high rate of mortality [2].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21650

Oncotarget

fibroblasts and other cells, signaling molecules, and the
extracellular matrix (ECM) [4–6]. Environment-mediated
drug resistance can be largely subdivided into two categories,
soluble factor-mediated drug resistance (SFM-DR) and cell
adhesion-mediated drug resistance (CAM-DR) [7].
In this study, we formed various HCC spheroids to
study CAM-DR, which is mediated by cell-cell and cellECM interactions, and determined the relationship between
the capacity for spheroid formation and chemoresistance.
To date, monolayer culture-based assay models have
dominated cancer biology and preclinical cancer drug
discovery efforts. However, these models fail to predict
in vivo efficacy, contributing to a lower success rate for
translating a new investigational drug to clinical approval.
Recently, scientists have highlighted the need for complex
3D cell-culture systems in oncology research because
tumor spheroids strikingly mirror the 3D in vivo context,
as well as therapeutically relevant pathophysiological
gradients of in vivo tumors such as pH, oxygen, nutrient,
and drug concentrations [8].
ECM proteins in the TME play important roles in liver
function in health and disease. Abnormal ECM composition
and structure in solid tumors are the major obstacles for
penetration of anticancer drugs. Collagens are the most
abundant structural ECM protein in liver. Disproportionate
levels of collagens result in altered cellular phenotypes and
architectural distortion with abnormal blood flow. Moreover,
among ECM proteins, elevated collagen level is a key
barrier to interstitial drug penetration and, thereby, reduces
the efficacy of chemotherapeutics [9, 10].
CAM-DR is facilitated by signaling cascades
initiated by growth factors present in the TME. In
particular, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF, also
known as CCN2) is preferentially produced by tumor
cells, and elevated CTGF expression in tumor cells
significantly correlates with poor clinical prognosis.
Because CTGF is overexpressed in fibrotic human liver,
it has been recognized as a key profibrogenic factor in that
organ [11]. CTGF has been isolated from other important
molecular targets in HCC, attesting to the potential
relevance of CTGF in HCC progression. Recently, CTGF
expression was reported to be elevated in HCC tissues, and
HCC patients with high serum CTGF levels show reduced
survival, supporting the potential relevance of CTGF in
HCC progression [12, 13]. In this study, we demonstrated
that high CTGF expression contributes to compactspheroid formation through elevation of COL1A1 and
enables evasion of anticancer therapies in HCC spheroids.

formation and sorafenib resistance. For analysis of
spheroid stiffness, we measured the size and observed the
morphology of each spheroid. Among the seven spheroid
types, Hep3B, Huh7, SNU449, and SNU475 cells
formed relatively tightly compacted spheroids, whereas
PLC/PRF/5, Huh6, and HepG2 cells exhibited loosely
compacted aggregates with less tightly associated cells
without cell death (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure 1,
and 2). Kinetics of the rate of spheroid assembly showed
that Hep3B, Huh7, SNU449, and SNU475 (tightly
compacted spheroid-forming cell lines) displayed strong
cohesion in short periods of time, whereas PLC/PRF/5,
Huh6, and HepG2 cells (loosely compacted aggregateforming cell lines) displayed limited ability to enhance
spheroid stiffness (Figure 1B, 1C).
To investigate CAM-DR, we determined the
relationship between the capacity for spheroid formation
and sorafenib resistance. To determine a correlation
between compactness of spheroids and sorafenib
resistance, the cytotoxic effect of sorafenib was analyzed
in the seven types of HCC spheroid. Interestingly,
each spheroid treated with 10 uM sorafenib displayed
a different cytotoxic effect. Most loosely compacted
aggregates displayed significant reduction in size in
response to sorafenib, whereas the form of tightly
compacted spheroids remained intact (Figure 2A).
This unexpected different sensitivity of HCC
spheroids to sorafenib was further confirmed by
resazurin assay of cell viability. Treatment with sorafenib
significantly decreased cell viability in loosely compacted
aggregates in a dose-dependent manner. On the other hand,
tightly compacted spheroids exhibited vigorous sorafenib
resistance relative to loosely compacted aggregates
(Figure 2B). Taken together, these results suggest that
resistance to sorafenib is consistent with strong cohesion
between the cancer cells in HCC spheroids.

Compactness of spheroids correlates with
fibroblast-like characteristics in HCC cell lines
Because compactness of spheroids is related to
sorafenib resistance, we investigated factors that might
be responsible for differences in spheroid compactness.
First, we compared the morphology of tightly
compacted spheroid-forming cell lines and loosely
compacted aggregate-forming cell lines in monolayer
culture and found that the morphology of the former
was markedly more fibroblast-like than that of the latter
(Figure 3A).
Generally, the ECM occupies a small percentage of
the volume of the normal liver, whereas many types of
HCC tissue show excessive ECM production or limited
ECM turnover. We examined mRNA expression of ECM
proteins in tightly compacted and loosely compacted
aggreagates. We found that the tightly compacted
spheroids expressed higher levels of fibrillar collagens,
collagen I and III, and collagen IV. In particular, elevated

RESULTS
Capacity for compacted spheroid formation is
consistent with sorafenib sensitivity
We determined the dynamics of HCC cell linederived spheroid formation using seven HCC cell lines to
investigate the relationship between capacity of spheroid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21651

Oncotarget

expression of collagen 1A1 (COL1A1) was observed in all
tightly compacted spheroids, whereas loosely compacted
aggregates showed expressed very low levels of COL1A1.
The pattern of expression of noncollagenous ECM
proteins, such as fibronectin, laminins, and fibrillin, did
not serve as predictors of spheroid compactness (Figure
3B, 3C).
We then estimated capacity of the more
physiologically relevant primary HCCs for compactspheroid formation. Similar to the HCC cell lines,
primary HCCs were also largely divided into two groups
dependent on their capacity for spheroid formation.
109981 and AMC-H2 cells showed strong spheroid
compactness, whereas 118965 and AMC-H1 cells did not
form rigid spheroids (Figure 4A). Even though AMC-H1
aggregates appeared solid, they could be easily dissociated
by mechanical force [data not shown].
In patient-derived primary HCCs, spheroid
compactness also correlated with fibroblast-like cell
morphology (Figure 4A). Fibrillar collagens were
also expressed at a higher level in tightly compacted
spheroids produced by patient-derived HCCs than in the
corresponding loosely compacted aggregates, similar to
the observations for HCC cell lines (Figure 4B).

Thus, these results suggest that fibroblast-like
morphology and high collagen expression level are
coincident with tightly compacted spheroid formation in
HCC.

Inhibition of COL1A1 expression induces
structural change and improves efficacy of
chemotherapeutic drugs in HCC spheroids
Because high COL1A1 expression was observed in
all tightly compacted spheroids, we used siRNA-mediated
knockdown of COL1A1. Using control and COL1A1deficient HCC cells, we compared the morphology of
HCC spheroids to investigate the effect of COL1A1depletion on spheroid compactness. Transfection of siRNA
targeting COL1A1 (siCOL1A1) efficiently inhibited
COL1A1 mRNA level in SUN475 and Huh7 cells,
whereas control siRNA (siCont) treatment did not (Figure
5A). We also investigated the spheroid formation capacity
in other collagen-related siRNA (siCOL1A2, siCOL3A1,
and siCOL4A3) transfected SNU475 and Huh7 cells,
however, they don’t show severe morphological change
compared to spheroid of COL1A1-deficient cells
(Supplementary Figure 3). As expected, COL1A1deficient SNU 475 and Huh7 cells, which normally

Figure 1: HCC cell lines differ in spheroid-forming capacity. A. Spheroid was formed for 3 days using HCC cell lines. B. HCC

cell lines were cultured in 96-well ultra-low attachment (ULA) plate for 96hr. Images of spheroids were obtained at indicated times. C.
Kinetic of spheroids formation was measured in bright-field images using Operetta analysis software. The Values were normalized to 3hr
of each cell lines. Data represent the mean values ± SD from three independent experiments. All bright-field images of spheroids were
obtained using the Operetta® High Content Screening System and a 10× objective. *P<0.05, **P<0.005. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21652

Oncotarget

express high levels of COL1A1 mRNA, did not form
tightly compacted spheroids (Figure 5B). Morphological
changes in HCC spheroids induced by depletion of
COL1A1 were associated with greater therapeutic efficacy
of the anticancer drugs sorafenib and cisplatin, compared
with spheroids produced by cells transfected with control
siRNA (Figure 5C-5D). Collectively, these results suggest
that COL1A1 plays a pivotal role in formation of rigid
tumor environments and thereby reduces the efficacy of
chemotherapeutics in HCC spheroids.

monolayer culture (Figure 3A, 6A). CTGF is strongly
induced by TGF-β and is tagged for secretion to the ECM
under physiological conditions, whereas, overexpression
of CTGF in tightly compacted HCC spheroids is induced
regardless of expression of TGF-β1 (Figure 6A).
RT-PCR and real-time PCR analysis revealed that
high expression of CTGF mRNA was similar among all
monolayer-cultured HCC cell lines but differed between
tightly compacted spheroids and loosely compacted
aggregates in HCC, similar to the findings for COL1A1
mRNA expression (Figure 6B, 6C). We evaluated whether
CTGF had an inhibitory effect on COL1A1 expression
in tightly compacted spheroids and observed that CTGF
knockdown significantly reduced COL1A1 synthesis
(Figure 6D), decreasing interaction between HCC cells
(Figure 6E) and resulting in greater therapeutic efficacy
of anticancer drugs, which are sorafenib and cisplatin, in
HCC spheroids (Figure 6F).

CTGF is overexpressed and regulates COL1A1
level in tightly compacted HCC spheroids
Next, we asked which growth factors might
facilitate tight cell adhesion by synthesis of COL1A1 in
tumor spheroids. After preparing lysates of HCCs cultured
under 2D and 3D conditions, we determined expression
levels of TGFβ1 and CTGF by western analysis.
Interestingly, CTGF expression was elevated in
tightly compacted HCC spheroids, but not in loosely
compacted aggregates. Additionally, a high level of CTGF
expression was only observed in 3D-cultured HCCs, not
in monolayer-cultured HCCs, even though Hep3B, Huh7,
and SNU475 cells have fibroblast-like characteristics in

Losartan attenuated the compactness of tumor
spheroids and markedly improved efficacy of
chemotherapeutic drugs in tumor spheroids
We then investigated the mechanism underlying
the effect of losartan on compactness of HCC spheroids.

Figure 2: Tightly compacted spheroids show strong resistance to sorafenib compared to loosely compacted aggregates.

A. HCC spheroids were formed for 3 days and treated with 10 μM of sorafenib for another 4 days. B. Cell viability was measured with
resazurin assay. After 5 hr of treatment with 50 μM resazurin, absorbance was measured using an Enspire plate reader. The values were
normalized to control (0.01% DMSO). Data represent the mean values ± SD from three independent experiments. All bright-field images
of spheroids were obtained at 7 days using the same method. *P<0.05, **P<0.005. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21653

Oncotarget

Losartan is widely used to treat hypertension as an
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1) antagonist with
noted antifibrotic activity and, therefore, might decrease
collagen I in in vivo tumors. We found that losartan
inhibited COL1A1 mRNA expression in tumor spheroids

(Figure 7A). Cell viability assays revealed that losartan
did not have a significant cytotoxic effect on Huh7 or
Hep3B cells (Figure 7B). EthD-1 staining to measure
cytotoxicity of losartan in HCC spheroids showed that
losartan induced severe cell death from a concentration

Figure 3: HCC cell lines, which form tightly compacted spheroids, show fibroblast-like morphology and express high
levels of ECM-related molecules. A. Morphology of HCC cell lines in monolayer culture. Bright-field images were obtained using

the same method with a 100× objective. B, C. Expression of mRNA encoding ECM-related molecules in seven HCC cell lines was
evaluated by RT-PCR (B) and real-time PCR (C). GAPDH served as a loading control, and values were normalized to GAPDH. Values
were normalized to GAPDH. In real-time PCR, values of PLC/PRF/5 were normalized to 1, and other experiment groups were normalized
to PLC/PRF/5. Data are shown as means ± SD from two independent experiments with duplicates. Scale bar = 50μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21654

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Collagen I expression and fibroblast-like morphology are correlated with compactness of spheroids generated
by patient-derived primary HCCs. A. Spheroid formation and 2D morphology of patient-derived primary HCCs. Spheroids were

formed for 3 days. Bright-field images were obtained using the same method with 10× objective for spheroids and 100× objective for
monolayer cells. B. Expression of mRNA encoding ECM-related molecules in patient-derived primary HCCs was evaluated by RTPCR. GAPDH served as a loading control. Data represent the mean values ± SD from two independent experiments. Scale bar = 200μm
(spheroid), 50μm (monolayer).

Figure 5: Drug sensitivity is increased in COL1A1 knockdown HCC cell lines. A. Collagen 1A1 mRNA expression in control

(siCont) and COL1A1 knockdown HCC cell lines (siCOL1A1). Expression of mRNA was evaluated by real-time PCR, and the values
were normalized to GAPDH. The values of siCOL1A1 were normalized to siCont. B. After transfection of HCC cell lines with siCont and
siCOL1A1, the capacity of spheroid formation was evaluated for 5 days. C, D. After 3 days of spheroid formation, Huh7 spheroids were
treated with sorafenib (C) or cisplatin (D) for another 4 days. On the final day of treatment (at 7days from cell seeding), spheroids were
stained with ethidium homodimer-1 (EthD-1) to evaluate the extent of cell death. After image acquisition, EthD-1 intensity was measured
using the same method. The values were normalized to control (0μM) of each group. Data represent the mean values ± SD from two
independent experiments. *p<0.05, **p<0.005. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21655

Oncotarget

of 300 μM treatment (Figure 7C). Interestingly, treatment
with 100 μM losartan significantly increased the size of
spheroids generated by Huh7 or Hep3B cells (Figure 7D)
without changing nuclear or cell size (Figure 7E). These
results show that losartan might regulate the interaction
between the tumor cells without an anticancer effect in
tumor spheroids.

Next, we investigated whether structural changes
in HCC spheroids induced by pretreatment with losartan
overcame chemoresistance in tightly compacted HCC
spheroids. Intensity of EthD-1 fluorescence and spheroid
size were measured following treatment with anticancer
drugs, sorafenib and cisplatin with or without pretreatment
with losartan in Huh7 spheroids. Losartan pretreatment

Figure 6: CTGF is overexpressed and regulates COL1A1 level in tightly compacted HCC spheroids. A. Lysates of

HCC cell lines cultured under 2D and 3D conditions were analyzed by western blotting with anti-CTGF, anti–TGFß-1, and anti–ß-actin
(control) antibodies. B, C. mRNA expression in HCC cell lines cultured under 2D and 3D conditions was evaluated by RT-PCR (B) and
real-time PCR (C). CTGF and TGFß-1 mRNA levels were examined, and GAPDH was served as a loading control. The values of Hep3B
were normalized to 1, and other experiment groups were normalized to Hep3B. D. COL1A1 and CTGF mRNA levels in control siRNA
transfected (siCont) and CTGF knockdown HCC cell lines (siCTGF) were examined by real-time PCR. In real-time PCR, all values were
normalized to GAPDH, and the values of siCTGF were normalized to siCont. E. Spheroid formation capacity was observed in SNU475siCont and SNU475-siCTGF for 6 days. Bright-field images were obtained using the same method. F. Drug sensitivity was measured
by EthD-1 (dead cell) intensity induced by sorafenib and cisplatin at indicated concentration in Huh7-siCont and Huh7-siCTGF after 4
days from drug treatment. The values were normalized to control (0μM) of each group. Data represent the mean values ± SD from three
independent experiments. *P<0.05, **p<0.005. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21656

Oncotarget

significantly enhanced sensitivity to anticancer drugs
in a dose-dependent manner in Huh7 spheroids (Figure
8A, 8B), whereas pretreatment did not have this effect in
monolayer cultures (Figure 8C, 8D).
We also investigated the effects of combination
treatment with losartan and sorafenib in primary HCC
tumors to provide better physiological relevance and
applicability, and found pronounced therapeutic efficacy in
tightly compacted spheroids when losartan was combined
with sorafenib to treat human primary HCC cells (Figure
8E, Table 1).
Taken together, our data suggest that treatment with
losartan might attenuate the strong cell-cell adhesion by
suppression of COL1A1 synthesis in tightly compacted
HCC spheroids, thereby facilitating the robust therapeutic
activity of combined losartan and anticancer therapies in
human liver carcinomas.

mechanisms of chemoresistance by the TME in HCC
and provide new insights into the biological functions of
CTGF-induced collagen I expression in CAM-DR using
the HCC spheroids.
We used the ultra-low attach (ULA) plate, which
let the cells interact each other during their aggregation
naturally without any treatment, for making the spheroids.
We allowed HCC spheroids to form in culture and
observed two groups, tightly compacted and loosely
compacted aggregates with health condition (Figure 1,
Supplementary Figure 1, and 2). We observed that 63.63%
of human primary HCC cells formed tightly compacted
spheroids (Table 1).
In practice, loosely compacted aggregates are not
the optimal in vitro models because they lack diffusion
barriers and have a stratified cellular composition, with
proliferating cells at the surface and quiescent and necrotic
cells in the core. On the other hand, tightly compacted
spheroids more closely resemble the 3D cellular context,
tumor complexity, and heterogeneity, as well as the
therapeutically relevant pathophysiological gradients of
in vivo tumors [14, 15].

DISCUSSION
In this study, we highlight the importance of 3D cellculture systems as a valuable methodology to understand

Figure 7: Losartan inhibits COL1A1 synthesis and attenuates the compactness of spheroids without cytotoxicity. A.

HCC spheroids were treated with 100 μM losartan for 3 days, and COL1A1 expression was evaluated by RT-PCR. GAPDH served as a
loading control. B. Huh7 and Hep3B cells were treated with losartan at the indicated concentrations for 48hr. After treatment, nuclei were
stained with Hoechst 33342 and counted. C. HCC spheroids were treated with losartan at the indicated concentrations for 3 days. Losartaninduced cell death was measured by staining with EthD-1. D. Huh7 and Hep3B spheroids were treated with 100 μM losartan for 3 days,
and spheroid morphology was examined. E. Huh7 cells in monolayer culture were treated with 100 μM losartan for 72hr and nuclei were
stained with Hoechst 33342. After image acquisition (left panel), nuclear volume was measured (right panel). Bright-field images were
obtained using the same method with 10× objective for spheroids and 200× objective for monolayer cells. Data represent the mean values
± SD from three independent experiments relative to the value for control. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21657

Oncotarget

Accordingly, growth in 3D culture has been
shown to have dramatic effects on cell polarity and
differentiation, as well as on signaling cascades and gene
expression profiles, compared to growth in monolayer
culture [16, 17]. In particular, liver cells preformed more
liver–cell-specific functions in 3D versus 2D culture [18–
20]. Therefore, 3D in vitro cell culture has been used in
HCC research as a model intermediate between in vitro
cancer cell line culture and in vivo tumor.
Here, we identified critical differences between
tightly compacted and loosely compacted HCC aggregates
in the presence or absence of fibroblast-like characteristics
and drug resistance (Figures 2-4). Generally, 90% of HCC
cases have a natural history of severe fibrosis (or cirrhosis)
[21] and are resistant to conventional chemotherapeutic
agents. Fibrolamellar HCC is characterized by laminated
fibrous layers and does not respond to chemotherapy [22,
23]. Based on these clinical results, we speculated that
the severely fibrotic HCC environment might contribute
to evasion of anticancer therapies in HCC. When HCC
progresses from fibrosis, the normal structure of liver
is lost, with the formation of increasingly dense fibrous
septae of fibronectin and collagens I, III, and V. In

Figures 3 and 4, we revealed that COL1A1, which is
regarded as the most important collagen in fibrosis, is
upregulated in all tightly compacted spheroids. Moreover,
COL1A1 knockdown improved the effect of therapeutics
via structural changes that cells were dissociated from
the center of spheroids and less compacted in the TME
(Figure 5, Supplementary Figure 3). Hence, HCC cells
with fibroblast-like characteristics facilitated rigid cellcell adhesion and cell-COL1A1 interaction and thereby
enhanced CAM-DR in tumor spheroids.
CAM-DR is rapidly induced by signaling events
that are initiated by growth factors present in the TME.
Here, we showed that overexpression of CTGF was
correlated with tendency of COL1A1 expression in tightly
compacted spheroids, and siRNA-mediated knockdown
of CTGF efficiently reduced COL1A1 expression.
Additionally, we found that CTGF knockdown resulted in
greater therapeutic efficacy of anticancer drugs through
induction of structural vulnerability in tightly compacted
spheroids (Figure 6). CTGF can increase collagen in the
human body [24–26] and has been investigated for its role
in various fibrotic and desmoplastic diseases, including
fibrotic skin disorder, organ fibrosis, and HCC [27–29].

Figure 8: Losartan attenuates resistance to anticancer drugs in HCC cell line- and patient-derived primary HCC
spheroids. HCC spheroids were treated with 100 μM losartan for 3 days and then with sorafenib A. or cisplatin B. at the indicated
concentrations for another 4 days. Then spheroids were stained with EthD-1 to detect cell death. HCCs in monolayer culture were treated
with sorafenib C. or cisplatin D. at the indicated concentrations for 48 h, and nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 and counted. E.
Patient-derived compacted spheroids (upper panel) and loosely compacted aggregates (lower panel) were treated with 100 μM losartan
for 3 days and then with 10 μM sorafenib for another 4 days, and then death was measured by staining with EthD-1. All bright-field and
fluorescence images were obtained using the same method. Data represent the mean values ± SD from three independent experiments
relative to the value for control. *P<0.05. Scale bar = 200μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21658

Oncotarget

Table 1: Combination effect between losartan and sorafenib in patient tissues-derived tumor spheroids
Type of Spheroid

Combination effect between Losartan
and Sorafenib

51532B

Loose spheroid

=

15s-81449

Loose spheroid

=

AMC-H1

Loose spheroid

+

14s-103030

Loose spheroid

+

48551

Compact spheroid

+

15s-25590

Compact spheroid

+

103209

Compact spheroid

+

109981

Compact spheroid

+

101509

Compact spheroid

+

103850

Compact spheroid

+

AMC-H2

Compact spheroid

+

Patient sample

*Values of combination effect were normalized to single treatment of 5μM sorafenib. The + represented enhancement of
anticancer effect, = represented nothing of significant change of anticancer effect by combination treatment 100μM losartan
and 5μM sorafenib.
Consequently, it is not surprising that CTGF expression
is increased in tightly compacted spheroids. However, the
most important point is that functional studies of CTGF
should be conducted using the HCC spheroid models,
because sufficient differences in CTGF expression
between HCC cell lines can be detected in 3D, but not in
monolayer, culture systems (Figure 6).
Generally, CTGF is transcriptionally activated
by TGF-β, and enhanced expression of TGF-β has been
demonstrated in monolayer-cultured HCC [30, 31].
Whereas, tightly compacted HCC spheroids exhibited
TGF-β–independent CTGF induction (Figure 6A).
Angiotensin II directly induced CTGF and collagen I
expression through a TGF-β-independent Smad signaling
pathway [32]. Losartan is an angiotensin II receptor
antagonist used mainly to treat high blood pressure
and potentiate chemotherapy through improvement of
drug delivery, nanotherapeutics in tumor [32, 33]. Here,
we determined the effect of losartan on Huh7 HCC
spheroids and patient-derived primary HCC spheroids.
An even more interesting fact is that losartan facilitates
dissociation of strong cell-cell interactions and increases
the therapeutic efficacy of conventional anticancer therapy
in tightly compacted spheroids, not in the monolayer
culture system (Figure 8, Table 1). To date, no single agent
or combination therapy has been demonstrated to have any
advantage in terms of both overall survival and quality of
life, representing an unmet need. Combination therapy has
not improved overall survival, but has nonetheless been
in wide use for many years because of its possible roles
in palliation. Thus, we herein suggest that combination
therapy with losartan and existing anticancer therapies
should be feasible for patients with HCC without imposing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

side effects, because losartan is already approved to treat
hypertension without safety issues [34].
In conclusion, our results provide clear evidence
that TGF-β–independent CTGF induction resulted in
a rigid TME through increased COL1A1 expression
and, thereby, plays a central role in CAM-DR in HCC.
Inhibition of COL1A1 expression by treatment with
losartan increased the therapeutic efficacy of anticancer
therapies in HCC spheroids via disruption of CAMDR. Therefore, our results suggest that a combination
of losartan and conventional chemotherapy might be a
promising approach to overcoming resistance to therapy
in liver cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and culture conditions
Huh7, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, SNU475, HepG2,
and SNU449 human HCC cell lines were obtained from
the Korean Cell Line Bank. Huh6 was kindly provided
by Dr. Ralf Bartenschlager (University of Heidelberg,
Germany). Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere of 5% CO2. All HCC cell lines were cultured
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Welgene,
Korea) supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) and
1× penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) (Complete media).

Primary culture of HCCs
Immediately after surgery, a portion of the tumor
was immersed in Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS;
21659

Oncotarget

Gibco) and transported from the operating room at 0°C
to the laboratory. The specimens were collected under
sterile conditions and rinsed 2-3 times with HBSS
free of calcium and magnesium to remove blood. After
removal of blood, the liver sample was excised, cut into
small fragments, gently dispersed and placed in HBSS
containing 0.03% pronase, 0.05% type IV collagenase, and
0.01% deoxyribonuclease (DNase, from bovine pancreas)
for 20 minutes at 37°C. The resultant was filtered through
a 100 μm-nylon filter (BD Falcon, Franklin Lakes, NJ,
USA) and centrifuged at 50x g for 2 minutes at 4°C to
obtain hepatocytes. The pellet was washed twice in HBSS
containing 0.005% DNase. The final cell suspensions were
cultured onto collagen-coated T25 flasks (BD Falcon) in
F12/DMEM (Gibco), supplemented with 20% FBS, 1%
NEAA, 1% glutamine, and 1% P/S at 37°C in a humidified
5% CO2 incubator. The medium was changed 24 hours
after seeding to remove dead cells and debris. When
confluence reached 70-80%, the cells were re-plated using
a 1:1 mixture of DMEM medium and F12/DMEM with
supplements. After five passages, the cells were grown
DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
P/S. Confluent cells were trypsinized, counted and split
1:3-1:5 at every passage. Once cell lines were maintained
over 30 passages, they were collected and stored in liquid
nitrogen.

in 4 μM EthD-1 in complete medium for 30 min in a
37°C incubator, and images were then obtained using a
fluorescence microscope.

Generation of tumor spheroids and drug
treatment

siRNA probes were designed by and purchased
from Bioneer (Daejeon, Korea), Huh7 and SNU475
cells were seeded and, when the cell density reached
40%–50%, medium was replaced with Opti-MEM
(Gibco) without FBS and antibiotics. The sequences of
si+COL1A1 and siCTGF were as follows: COL1A1
#sense, 5’-GUGCAUUCAACCUUACCAA-3’; COL1A1
#antisense, 5’-UUGGUAAGGUUGAAUGCAC-3’, CTGF
#sense, 5’-GAAAAGAUUCCCACCCAU-3’; #antisense,
5’-AUUGGGUGGGAAUCUUUUC-3’. Cells were
cotransfected with four siRNAs targeting COL1A1
(siCOL1A1), CTGF (siCTGF) and scramble (siCont) for
24 h using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen).

High content screening and imaging technology
All bright-field and fluorescence images were
obtained using the Operetta® High Content Screening
System (Perkin Elmer) with a 10× objective for spheroids
and a 40× objective for monolayers. The fluorescence
images were captured according to the optimal excitation
and emission wavelengths of each probe. To capture a
sufficient number of cells (>100) for analysis, five image
fields were collected from each well. Image analysis was
performed using Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen) staining of
live cell nuclei and EthD-1 staining to detect cell death.

Resazurin assay
Spheroids were generated as described above
and treated with losartan and sorafenib. Spheroids were
incubated in the presence of 50 μM resazurin (Sigma) for 5
h, and resazurin reduction was measured colorimetrically
(570/600 nm) using the Enspire (Perkin Elmer) plate
reader.

Short interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection

To generate spheroids, cells suspended in complete
media were seeded at a density of 6×103 cells/well in
96-well round-bottom ultra-low attachment (ULA)
microplates (Corning B.V. Life Sciences, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands). Plates were incubated for 3 days at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. To examine
tumor-spheroid kinetics, images of cultured spheroids
were obtained after 24hr later after plating and every
24hr after that. Spheroid diameter was measured using
Operetta® Harmony software (PerkinElmer, Waltham,
MA, USA). For drug treatment, cells were seeded with
or without 100μM of losartan (Sigma) for 3 days and then
with 1~10μM of sorafenib (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, CA, USA) or cisplatin (Sigma) for another
4 days. Seven days after cell seeding, the spheroids were
analyzed using the Operetta® High Content Screening
System (PerkinElmer).

Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and
western blot analysis
Cells were solubilized in lysis buffer (3M,
Maplewood, MN, USA), samples were boiled for 5
min, and equal amounts of protein (10~30 μg/well)
were separated on 10% or 12% SDS-PAGE gels.
After electrophoresis, proteins were transferred onto a
polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA) and blocked with 5% of skimmilk or bovine serum albumin (Santa cruz) (for CTGF)
for 30min at R.T. After blocking, PVDF membrane
was incubated with anti-CTGF (Abcam, Cambridge,
USA), anti-TGFβ1(Abcam), and β-actin (Sigma) for
16 hr at 4°C. After washing, blots were incubated with

Cell death detection in spheroids
Dead cell was detected using the cell-impermeant
viability indicator ethidium homodimer-1 (EthD-1;
Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA). EthD-1 is a highaffinity nucleic acid stain that fluoresces weakly until
binding to DNA and emits red fluorescence (excitation/
emission maxima ~528/617). Spheroids were incubated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21660

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody
(Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA)
diluted at 1:10000, and specific bands were visualized
by chemiluminescence (ECL; Thermo Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA). Chemiluminescence was recorded
onto X-Omat AR films (Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester,
NY, USA).

These authors declare no conflicts of interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C,
Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D, Bray F. Cancer incidence
and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and major
patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. International journal of
cancer. 2015; 136:E359-386.

Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and real-time polymerase chain
reaction (real-time PCR)

2.	 Chiaramonte M, Stroffolini T, Vian A, Stazi MA, Floreani
A, Lorenzoni U, Lobello S, Farinati F, Naccarato R. Rate
of incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with
compensated viral cirrhosis. Cancer. 1999; 85:2132-2137.

Total RNA was isolated from cells using TRIzol
(Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The reaction mixtures were
comprised of RT buffer (Bio Basic, Amherst, NY, USA),
dNTP solution (Bio Basic), RNasin® Inhibitor (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA), oligo (dT)15 primer (Bioneer), total
RNA, and M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen).
The reaction mixtures were incubated at 37°C for 1 h
and the transcription reaction was terminated by heating
the mixture to 95°C for 5 min and then rapidly cooling
it on ice. The number of PCR cycles used was 30 for
all reactions. The PCR products were then separated
by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis and visualized with
5× Loading Star (Dynebio, Seoul, Korea). For realtime PCR, the mixture composed of cDNA, SYBR
Green master mix (Applied Biosystems, Waltham,
MA, USA), primers and DEPC, were performed
using a StepOnePlus real-time PCR system (Applied
Biosystems). The reactions were incubated in a 96-well
optical plate at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles
of 95°C for 15s and 60° for 10 min. The threshold cycle
(CT) is defined as the fractional cycle number at which
the fluorescence passes the fixed threshold. CT values
were normalized to GAPDH, and calculated according
to the mathematical model R = 2−ΔΔCT, where Δ CT =
CTtarget gene − CTGAPDH, and ΔΔ CT = ΔCTtest − ΔCTcontrol.
All real-time PCR was performed in triplicates, and the
data are presented as the mean ± SD. All primers were
designed and purchased from Bioneer.
®

3.	 Tung-Ping Poon R, Fan ST, Wong J. Risk factors,
prevention, and management of postoperative recurrence
after resection of hepatocellular carcinoma. Annals of
surgery. 2000; 232:10-24.
4.	 Junttila MR, de Sauvage FJ. Influence of tumour microenvironment heterogeneity on therapeutic response. Nature.
2013; 501:346-354.
5.	 Wu SD, Ma YS, Fang Y, Liu LL, Fu D, Shen XZ. Role
of the microenvironment in hepatocellular carcinoma
development and progression. Cancer treatment reviews.
2012; 38:218-225.
6.	 Yang JD, Nakamura I, Roberts LR. The tumor
microenvironment in hepatocellular carcinoma: current
status and therapeutic targets. Seminars in cancer biology.
2011; 21:35-43.
7.	 Meads MB, Gatenby RA, Dalton WS. Environmentmediated drug resistance: a major contributor to minimal
residual disease. Nature reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:665-674.
8.	 Minchinton AI, Tannock IF. Drug penetration in solid
tumours. Nature reviews Cancer. 2006; 6:583-592.
9.	 Erikson A, Andersen HN, Naess SN, Sikorski P, Davies Cde
L. Physical and chemical modifications of collagen gels:
impact on diffusion. Biopolymers. 2008; 89:135-143.
10.	 Choi J, Credit K, Henderson K, Deverkadra R, He Z, Wiig
H, Vanpelt H, Flessner MF. Intraperitoneal immunotherapy
for metastatic ovarian carcinoma: Resistance of intratumoral
collagen to antibody penetration. Clinical cancer research.
2006; 12:1906-1912.

Statistical analysis
All experiments were performed at least three times.
The results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation
(SD). Statistical analysis was performed using Student’s
t-test.

11.	 Tong Z, Chen R, Alt DS, Kemper S, Perbal B, Brigstock
DR. Susceptibility to liver fibrosis in mice expressing a
connective tissue growth factor transgene in hepatocytes.
Hepatology. 2009; 50:939-947.
12.	 Zeng ZJ, Yang LY, Ding X, Wang W. Expressions of
cysteine-rich61, connective tissue growth factor and
Nov genes in hepatocellular carcinoma and their clinical
significance. World journal of gastroenterology. 2004;
10:3414-3418.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Research
Foundation,
Korea
(NRF2014K1A4A7A0107
4647&2015R1A2A1A05001823) and the Ministry of
Health & Welfare, Korea (grant number: HI15C0972).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Wang GB, Zhou XY, Yuan T, Xie J, Guo LP, Gao N, Wang
XQ. Significance of serum connective tissue growth factor
21661

Oncotarget

in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma and relationship
with angiogenesis. World journal of surgery. 2010;
34:2411-2417.

24.	 Duncan MR, Frazier KS, Abramson S, Williams S, Klapper
H, Huang X, Grotendorst GR. Connective tissue growth
factor mediates transforming growth factor beta-induced
collagen synthesis: down-regulation by cAMP. FASEB
journal. 1999; 13:1774-1786.

14.	 Minchinton AI, Wendt KR, Clow KA, Fryer KH.
Multilayers of cells growing on a permeable support. An
in vitro tumour model. Acta oncologica. 1997; 36:13-16.

25.	 Zhu X, Zhong J, Zhao Z, Sheng J, Wang J, Liu J, Cui
K, Chang J, Zhao H, Wong S. Epithelial derived CTGF
promotes breast tumor progression via inducing EMT and
collagen I fibers deposition. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:2532025338. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4659.

15.	 Hicks KO, Fleming Y, Siim BG, Koch CJ, Wilson WR.
Extravascular diffusion of tirapazamine: effect of metabolic
consumption assessed using the multicellular layer model.
International journal of radiation oncology, biology,
physics. 1998; 42:641-649.

26.	 Oliver N, Sternlicht M, Gerritsen K, Goldschmeding R.
Could aging human skin use a connective tissue growth
factor boost to increase collagen content? The Journal of
investigative dermatology. 2010; 130:338-341.

16.	 Quiros RM, Valianou M, Kwon Y, Brown KM, Godwin
AK, Cukierman E. Ovarian normal and tumor-associated
fibroblasts retain in vivo stromal characteristics in a 3-D
matrix-dependent manner. Gynecologic oncology. 2008;
110:99-109.

27.	 Wells JE, Howlett M, Cole CH, Kees UR. Deregulated
expression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/
CCN2) is linked to poor outcome in human cancer.
International journal of cancer. 2015; 137:504-511.

17.	 Weaver VM, Petersen OW, Wang F, Larabell CA, Briand
P, Damsky C, Bissell MJ. Reversion of the malignant
phenotype of human breast cells in three-dimensional
culture and in vivo by integrin blocking antibodies. The
Journal of cell biology. 1997; 137:231-245.

28.	 Mazzocca A, Fransvea E, Dituri F, Lupo L, Antonaci S,
Giannelli G. Down-regulation of connective tissue growth
factor by inhibition of transforming growth factor beta
blocks the tumor-stroma cross-talk and tumor progression
in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2010; 51:523-534.

18.	 Meng Q. Three-dimensional culture of hepatocytes for
prediction of drug-induced hepatotoxicity. Expert opinion
on drug metabolism & toxicology. 2010; 6:733-746.

29.	 Urtasun R, Latasa MU, Demartis MI, Balzani S, Goni S,
Garcia-Irigoyen O, Elizalde M, Azcona M, Pascale RM,
Feo F, Bioulac-Sage P, Balabaud C, Muntane J, Prieto J,
Berasain C, Avila MA. Connective tissue growth factor
autocriny in human hepatocellular carcinoma: oncogenic
role and regulation by epidermal growth factor receptor/
yes-associated protein-mediated activation. Hepatology.
2011; 54:2149-2158.

19.	 Tostoes RM, Leite SB, Serra M, Jensen J, Bjorquist
P, Carrondo MJ, Brito C, Alves PM. Human liver cell
spheroids in extended perfusion bioreactor culture
for repeated-dose drug testing. Hepatology. 2012;
55:1227-1236.
20.	 Fey SJ, Wrzesinski K. Determination of drug toxicity
using 3D spheroids constructed from an immortal human
hepatocyte cell line. Toxicological sciences. 2012;
127:403-411.

30.	 Gao R, Ball DK, Perbal B, Brigstock DR. Connective
tissue growth factor induces c-fos gene activation and
cell proliferation through p44/42 MAP kinase in primary
rat hepatic stellate cells. Journal of hepatology. 2004;
40:431-438.

21.	 De Minicis S, Marzioni M, Saccomanno S, Rychlicki C,
Agostinelli L, Trozzi L, Benedetti A, Svegliati-Baroni G.
Cellular and molecular mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis
leading to liver cancer. Translational Gastrointestinal
Cancer. 2011; 1:88-94.

31.	 Yang F, Chung AC, Huang XR, Lan HY. Angiotensin II
induces connective tissue growth factor and collagen I
expression via transforming growth factor-beta-dependent
and -independent Smad pathways: the role of Smad3.
Hypertension. 2009; 54:877-884.

22.	 Weeda VB, Murawski M, McCabe AJ, Maibach R,
Brugieres L, Roebuck D, Fabre M, Zimmermann A, Otte
JB, Sullivan M, Perilongo G, Childs M, Brock P, et al.
Fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular carcinoma does
not have a better survival than conventional hepatocellular
carcinoma--results and treatment recommendations
from the Childhood Liver Tumour Strategy Group
(SIOPEL) experience. European journal of cancer. 2013;
49:2698-2704.

32.	 Chauhan VP, Martin JD, Liu H, Lacorre DA, Jain SR, Kozin
SV, Stylianopoulos T, Mousa AS, Han X, Adstamongkonkul
P, Popovic Z, Huang P, Bawendi MG, Boucher Y, Jain
RK. Angiotensin inhibition enhances drug delivery and
potentiates chemotherapy by decompressing tumour blood
vessels. Nature communications. 2013; 4:2516.
33.	 Diop-Frimpong B, Chauhan VP, Krane S, Boucher Y, Jain
RK. Losartan inhibits collagen I synthesis and improves
the distribution and efficacy of nanotherapeutics in tumors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2011; 108:2909-2914.

23.	 Ang CS, Kelley RK, Choti MA, Cosgrove DP, Chou JF,
Klimstra D, Torbenson MS, Ferrell L, Pawlik TM, Fong
Y, O'Reilly EM, Ma J, McGuire J, et al. Clinicopathologic
characteristics and survival outcomes of patients with
fibrolamellar carcinoma: data from the fibrolamellar
carcinoma consortium. Gastrointestinal cancer research.
2013; 6:3-9.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34.	 Johnston CI. Angiotensin receptor antagonists: focus on
losartan. Lancet. 1995; 346:1403-1407.

21662

Oncotarget

