Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A subgroup of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is sensitive to the
5-aza-dC DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
Odile Gayet1, Celine Loncle1, Pauline Duconseil1, Marine Gilabert1, Maria Belen
Lopez1, Vincent Moutardier1,2, Olivier Turrini1,3, Ezequiel Calvo4, Jacques Ewald3,
Marc Giovannini3, Mohamed Gasmi5, Erwan Bories3, Marc Barthet5, Mehdi Ouaissi6,
Anthony Goncalves3, Flora Poizat3, Jean Luc Raoul3, Veronique Secq1,2, Stephane
Garcia1,2, Patrice Viens3, Nelson Dusetti1, Juan Iovanna1
1

 entre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (CRCM), INSERM U1068, CNRS UMR 7258, Aix-Marseille Université and
C
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Parc Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy, Marseille, France

2

Hôpital Nord, Marseille, France

3

Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France

4

Centre Génomique du Centre de recherche du CHUL Research Center, Quebec, Canada

5

Hôpital Nord, Département de Gastroentérologie, Marseille, France

6

Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France

Correspondence to:
Nelson Dusetti, e-mail: nelson.dusetti@inserm.fr
Juan Iovanna, e-mail: juan.iovanna@inserm.fr
Received: August 05, 2014	

Accepted: November 02, 2014	

Published: December 03, 2014

ABSTRACT
Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a disease with a great heterogeneity
in the response to treatments. To improve the responsiveness to treatments there
are two different approaches, the first one consist to develop new and more efficient
drugs that intent to cure all patients and the second one is to use already-approved
drugs, alone or in combination, but selecting beforehand the most sensitive patients.
In this work we explored the efficiency of the second possibility. We developed a
collection of 17 PDAC samples collected by Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided Fine-Needle
Aspiration (EUS-FNA) or surgery and preserved as xenografts and as primary cultures.
This collection was characterized at molecular level by a transcriptomic analysis
using an Affymetrix approach. In this paper we present data demonstrating that a
subgroup of PDAC responds to low doses of 5-aza-dC. These tumors show a specific
RNA expression profile that could serve as a marker, but there is no correlation with
Dnmt1, Dnmt3A or Dnmt3B expression. Responder tumors corresponded to welldifferentiated samples and longer survival patients. In conclusion, we present data
obtained with the well-known drug 5-aza-dC as a proof of concept that a drug that
seems to be inefficient in solid tumors in general could be applicable to a particular
subgroup of patients with PDAC.

number of patients with a PDAC will represent more than
a two-fold increase over the current rate in the occidental
world [1]. Based on these data the number of deaths
from PDAC will exceed those from breast and colorectal
cancer, and will be surpassed only by the loss of life from
lung cancer.
PDAC is one of the most intrinsically drugresistant tumors and resistance to chemotherapeutic
agents is a major cause of treatment failure. Gemcitabine
is the standard chemotherapeutic drug for patients

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth
leading cause of cancer death, with a median survival of 6
months and a dismal 5-year survival rate of less than 5%.
Importantly, PDAC could move up to the second place
as cause of cancer death as early as 2020 according to a
new report from the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network.
Moreover, using information from the Surveillance
Epidemiology and End Results database, in 2030 the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

746

Oncotarget

with advanced pancreatic cancer after a phase III trial
performed in 1997 that demonstrated a modest survival
advantage of this agent over 5-FU. Surprisingly, the
most important improvement associated to this treatment
was alleviation of disease-related symptoms [2]. More
recently, a polychemotherapy regimen combining 5-FU,
irinotecan, and oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX) was shown to
nearly double overall survival compared to gemcitabine,
at the expense of a manageable but increased toxicity,
limiting its use to good performance status patients.
Nevertheless, overall survival was less than 12 months
[3]. Therefore, there is a dire need for designing new and
targeted therapeutic strategies that can overcome the drugresistance and improve the clinical outcome for patients
diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.
Notably, the great heterogeneity in the response to
treatments between patients could be based not only on
the differences between hosts but also between PDAC
intrinsic characteristics, indicating the existence of many
PDAC sub-types. For example, the objective response rate
was 31.6% in the multidrug FOLFIRINOX protocol and
only 9.4% for patients treated with gemcitabine showing
that near to 70% and 90% of patients are not responders
respectively [3]. This responsiveness to the treatment is
not predictable except for the unresponsiveness to the
Gemcitabine treatment in the absence of the specific
transporter hENT1 expression [4, 5]. Two different and
opposite approaches could be developed to improve the
responsiveness to the treatments, the first one consists
in developing new and more efficient drugs intending to
cure all patients. This approach is extremely expensive and
the result uncertain. The second one is based on alreadyapproved drugs, used alone or in combination, selecting
beforehand the most sensitive patients. This option
presents many advantages including the fact that drugs
are easily available, low costs of treatment, toxicity is
well known, and the preclinical trials almost unnecessary.
In agreement with this second approach, we developed
a collection of 17 PDAC samples from 17 consecutive
patients of whom we have the complete clinical outcome.
The tumors were preserved as xenografts and as primary
cultures allowing the growth of cancerous epithelial cells
only. This collection, which was well characterized at the
molecular level, serves us to test the tumor sensitivity
to different known drugs and as an important source of
molecular markers.
DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that
maintains DNA transcriptionally quiescent causing gene
silencing. DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are the
enzymes that catalyze the addition of methyl groups to the
5’ carbon of the cytosine residues [6]. Several isoforms
of DNMTs are present in cells. DNMT1 is associated to
the maintenance of established patterns of methylated
DNA, while DNMT3A and DNMT3B seem to mediate
de novo DNA methylation patterns [7, 8]. Many different
DNMT inhibitors have been developed (nucleosides
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

analogues such as Azacitidine, Decitabine and Zebularine
or non-nucleosides analogues such as MG98, RG108 and
Procainamide) and multiple molecular mechanisms by
which DNMT inhibitors induce anti-cancer effects have
been identified, in most cases by the modulation of specific
genes involved in cellular processes such as apoptosis,
cytostasis, differentiation and tumor angiogenesis.
Therefore, it is not surprising that DNMT inhibitors are
emerging as promising class of drugs in cancer treatment,
especially in combination with other agents or with other
treatments.
5-aza-dC is a DNMT inhibitor incorporated into
DNA as a deoxycytidine analog that forms irreversible
covalent bonds with DNMT at cytosine sites targeted for
methylation [9]. 5-aza-dC demonstrates activity against
hematologic malignancy [10] and is used as first-line
of treatment in AML patients > 65 years who are not
candidates for intensive chemotherapy [11], whereas
its efficacy in solid tumors is very limited [12]. Clinical
responses appear to be exerted both by epigenetic
alterations and by induction of cell-cycle arrest and/
or apoptosis [13, 14]. In this paper we present data
demonstrating that a subgroup of PDAC responds to
low doses of 5-aza-dC, these tumors show a specific
RNA expression profile that could serve as a marker, but
there is no correlation with Dnmt1, Dnmt3A or Dnmt3B
expression. Responder tumors corresponded to welldifferentiated samples and longer survival patients. In
conclusion, we present the data obtained with the wellknown drug 5-aza-dC as a proof of concept that a drug that
seems to be inefficient in solid tumors in general could be
applicable to a particular subgroup of patients.

RESULTS
Chemogram to the 5-aza-dC compound
Primary cell cultures from patient’s pancreatic
tumors were submitted to increasing concentrations
(from 0 to 80 µM) of 5-aza-dC in order to study their
sensitivity and to obtain a dose-response curve. Using
this approach we were able to compare 17 different
PDAC-derived primary cultures estimating their relative
chemosensitivity. As shown in Figure 1A and Table 1, each
patient-derived primary culture shows a different pattern
of chemosensitivity. Whereas A-NOR (DL50 = 0.29 µM),
D-IPC (DL50 = 0.29 µM) and 01.030 (DL50 = 0.50 µM)
are the 3 most sensitive patient derived primary cultured
cells to 5-aza-dC; the Foie_8b (DL50 >80 µM), L-IPC
(DL50 = 41.0 µM) and H-NOR (DL50 = 33.0 µM) are the
most resistant to the 5-aza-dC compound. The sensitivity
of two resistant primary cultures (L-IPC and Foie-8b) and
two sensitive (HN-01 and B-TIM) were tested in vivo
and results showed in Figure 1B. To this end, four tumors
(100 mm3) corresponding to two sensitive (HN-01 and
B-TIM) and two resistant (L-IPC and Foie_8b) primary
747

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Sensitivity to the 5-aza-dC in vitro and in vivo. (A) Chemogram of 5-aza-dC. PDAC-derived cells were treated with

increasing concentrations of 5-aza-dC and the survival cells were measured after 72 h of treatment. (B) in vivo 5-aza-dC sensitivity. PDAC
xenografted mice were treated with 5-aza-dC and tumor measured weekly. Treatment starts at day 21 after implantation. In grey is marked
the length of the treatment. Error bars ± SEM; n = 3 per group.

cultures were xenografted in nude mice. Treatment with
5-aza-dC was started at day 21 after implantation and
for a period of 4 weeks. Tumor growth curves confirm
that L-IPC and Foie-8b xenografts are 5-aza-dC resistant
tumors whereas HN-01 and B-TIM xenografts are more
sensitive in agreement with data obtained in vitro.
Altogether, these results show that PDAC-derived
primary cultures present variable sensitivities to 5-azadC with DL50s ranging from 0.29 to > 80 µM which
is a range of more than 320 folds and that in vitro
experiments correlates with the in vivo treatments. This
strong variability encourages us to go forward with this
study trying to find molecular markers that may identify
sensitive patients.

of xenografted human PDAC by clustering tumors
according to their expression profiles. To our surprise,
the 5 more resistant PDAC (Foie_8b, L-IPC, H-NOR,
AO-IPC and 01.001) and the moderately resistant HN-03
(DL = 1.30 µM) appear in a relatively homogeneous group
of tumors whereas the other 12 more sensitive PDAC form
a relatively distant group of tumors as shown in Figure 2
and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2.
Among the transcripts identified in this phenotype, 326
corresponded to upregulated whereas 381 to downregulated
genes involved in several pathways. Among these data, we
observed that resistant tumors are undifferentiated or poorly
differentiated contrary to the sensitive tumors that are well
or middle differentiated. We observed that TGFB1 and its
target gene TGFBI are overexpressed in resistant tumors by
3.24 and 3.08 fold. Their strong involvement in epithelia
to mesenchymal transition process may explain the accrue
resistance to the treatment.
Altogether, these results suggest that a specific tumor
phenotype could be associated with resistance or sensitivity
to an anticancer drug which could be of clinical interest.

Correlation between transcriptome
and 5-aza-dC sensitivity in PDAC
To study whether or not there is a correlation
between 5-aza-dC response and transcriptome, we
performed a heatmap analysis on the transcriptome

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

748

Oncotarget

Table 1: DL50 values corresponding to 17
pancreatic cancer-derived cells
Cell

DL50

01.001

3.10

01.030

0.50

AD-IPC

1.80

AH-IPC

3.80

A-NOR

0.29

AO-IPC

3.90

B-Tim

0.90

C-NOR

1.26

D-IPC

0.29

E-NOR

1.83

Foie_8b

>80

H-N01

0.91

H-N03

1.30

H-N14

0.63

H-NOR

33.0

J-IPC

0.58

L-IPC

41.0

and DNMT1 expression in PDAC cells, we analyzed
the correlation between DNMT1 as well as DNMT3Aand DNMT3B-related enzymes with the sensitivity of
the cells to the treatment with 5-aza-dC. To this end we
measured the expression of all this three transcripts in
the RNA purified from the xenografts and we correlated
these data with the DL50 obtained on the xenograft
derived primary cultures. As shown in Figure 3, the R2
for DNMT1 is 0.0555, for DNMT3A is 0.0021 and for
DNMT3B is 0.0028 which are extremely low indicating
no correlation. These results strongly suggest that the
sensitivity to 5-aza-dC is independent of the DNMTs
expression levels and therefore measuring their levels is
clinically irrelevant.

Correlation between sensitivity to
the 5-aza-dC and the clinical outcome
From a histopathological point of view, we
observed that resistant tumors are undifferentiated or
poorly differentiated and that sensitive tumors are well
or moderately differentiated (Figure 4A). The sensitivity
curve to the 5-aza-dC treatment was obtained from
17 primary cultured cells derived from the xenografts and
a putative correlation with the clinical outcome of patients
was analyzed. Data presented in Figure 4B indicate a
modest correlation with the survival time of patients.
These results are in agreement with the fact that patients
with undifferentiated and poorly differentiated tumors
have a shorter survival time as presented in Figure 4C.
These observations suggest that patients with a well
differentiated PDAC should be more sensitive to the
treatment with 5-aza-dC and probably with other DNMTs
inhibitors. Altogether, our results suggest that because of

Sensitivity to 5-aza-dC in PDAC does not
correlate with expression of Dnmt1, Dnmt3A
or Dnmt3B
Because, on one hand, the 5-aza-dC is an inhibitor
of the DNMT1 activity and, on the other hand, it was
proposed a relationship between sensitivity to the drug

Figure 2: RNA expression analysis of PDAC. The Heatmap showing the RNA expression profile of PDAC sensitive and resistant
to the 5-aza-dC treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

749

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Correlation between sensitivity of the 5-aza-dC and expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B
transcripts. DL50 of 5-aza-dC was calculated for each xenograft-derived cell and correlated with expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A and
DNMT3B mRNAs. r2 is the correlation coefficient.

the heterogeneity of PDAC, a subgroup of patients with
well differentiated tumors, are more sensitive to 5-aza-dC
than undifferentiated tumors. An additional work
including a larger number of patients will be necessary to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

confirm this observation, however, these results validate
the concept according to which studying the sensitivity of
PDAC derived cells to a set of drugs could allow to define
a line of treatment more adapted to the patient.

750

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (A) Box and whiskers plot showing the distribution of DL50 for 5-aza-dC in a three point score of tumor
differentiation (well, moderately and poorly differentiated or undifferentiated). (B) Correlation between sensitivity of the
5-aza-dC and survival time of patients. DL50 of 5-aza-dC was calculated for each xenograft-derived cell and correlated with the time of
survival for each patient in months. r2 is the coefficient of correlation. (C) Box and whiskers plot showing the distribution of patient’s
survival time in a three point score of tumor differentiation.

DISCUSSION

islands and increased levels of methyltransferases activity
[15]. Moreover, aberrant hypermethylation of CpG islands
is associated with transcriptional silencing of genes,
which not only plays a role in tumorigenesis, but may also
influence response to anticancer agents [16, 17]. Therefore,
reversing gene methylation and epigenetic silencing
has the potential to influence tumor growth, sensitivity
to anticancer agents, and ultimately clinical outcome
[18]. Several studies have documented the relevance of
epigenetic alterations in pancreatic cancer and the effect
of 5-aza-dC on cell coming from this tumor [19–21].
In clinical trials, although the 5-aza-dC has shown an
objective response in some patients, its overall efficiency
remains relatively low. For these reason 5-aza-dC is not
used in the treatment of pancreatic cancers. This is a proof
of concept study that intent to demonstrate that drugs that

The main goal of this study was to define whether
there are differences in PDAC sensitivity to drugs and
in such case, if there is a possibility to identify the most
sensitive patients by using specific markers that arise
from the molecular characterization of their tumors. The
results presented in this paper suggest that there is a group
of tumors sensitive to the well-known drug 5-aza-dC.­
5-aza-dC is an interesting compound since its mechanism
of action is well known and several clinical trials have
been performed in patients with different tumors,
including several solid tumors.
The rational to use methyltransferases inhibitors
to treat tumors is that neoplastic cells exhibit global
hypomethylation with localized hypermethylation of CpG

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

751

Oncotarget

present an interest in a particular sub-group of patients
should be studied by identifying the sensitive tumors with
specific markers.
Surprisingly, there is no correlation between
sensitivity to 5-aza-dC and DNMT1, neither with
DNMT3A or DNMT3B, expression level but a
significant correlation was observed with an expression
profile specifically associated to sensitivity. In addition,
expression of other DNA methylation associated
molecules such as Mecp2 (methyl CpG binding protein 2)
or Polycomb-group proteins including SUZ12, Eed, Ezh1
and Ezh2 do not correlate with the 5-aza-dC sensitivity
(data not shown). These results are interesting and
original because they show that effect of the drug is
not dependent of its target level and they indicate that
sensitivity is dependent on other cellular mechanisms.
This is not surprising since there are no reports in the
literature associating efficiency of 5-aza-dC and levels of
DNMT1 expression in tumors except data obtained by Li
and colleagues which conclude that PDAC-derived cells
with low DNMT1 expression tend to be more sensitive
to low dose of 5-aza-dC [22]. Altogether, these results
strongly suggest that there is no correlation or if any it is
only small.
One of the most interesting points from this work
is the fact that we used an efficient strategy in which
PDAC tumors from 17 consecutive patients were collected
from surgical specimens and EUS-FNA biopsies by
xenografting in immunosuppressed mice. We studied
the RNA expression profile by a microarray approach
on these xenografts, rather than in the cultured cells,
since morphology and microenvironment, both playing
determinant effect on RNA expression, were closer to
the original human PDAC as recently confirmed [23].
Then, primary culture of cells obtained from xenografts
allowed us to analyze their relative sensitivity to 5-aza-dC
in vitro. All these data were used to detect a possible
correlation between drug responsiveness and RNA
expression profile. Surprisingly, we identified a profile of
genes which significantly correlates with the sensitivity
to the treatment suggesting that the profile of expression
can be used to identify tumors types and thereby establish
groups of tumors with more or less sensitivity to the drug.
We are aware that the number of genes we found defining
sensitivity to 5-aza-dC treatment is quite high but after
increasing the number of PDAC samples will probably
allow us to detect the most efficient and robust genes.
Therefore, we can expect that increasing the number of
patients will increase the sensitivity and specificity with a
more limited number of genes to constitute the signature
determining drug sensitivity and consequently patient
outcome.
Another interesting point to be noted is that
sensitivity to 5-aza-dC treatment correlates with the longterm survival patients carrying well- and moderatelydifferentiated tumors. This is in agreement with the fact that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

some genes typically expressed in poorly-differentiated
PDAC such as MUC3A (13.3 fold increase), MUC5AC
(9.76 fold increase), GATA6 (5.57 fold increase),
or HNF4A (4.43 fold increase) are differentially
overexpressed in sensitive compared to resistant PDACderived cells (Supplementary Table 2). This data strongly
suggest that 5-aza-dC treatment is more efficient against
well- and moderately-differentiated tumors than against
the poorly-differentiated ones. Interestingly several studies
have shown that after resection of pancreatic cancer, a
measure of the tumor differentiation degree is an important
prognostic indicator, in general, the more undifferentiated
the tumor, the more aggressive the malignant biology [24].
In conclusion, we showed in this work that
expression profiling of xenografts from PDAC patients is
able to discriminate sensitive from resistant tumors. This
fact should be used to aid to take decision to treat patients
with a PDAC.

METHODS
PDAC samples and cell culture
Consent’s forms of informed patients were collected
and registered in a central database. The tumor tissues
used for xenograft development was deemed excess to
that required for the patient’s diagnosis. Two types of
samples were obtained, namely Endoscopic UltrasoundGuided Fine-Needle Aspiration (EUS-FNA) biopsies from
patients with unresecable tumors, and tumor tissues from
patients undergoing surgery. PDAC samples were mixed
with 100 µl of Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and implanted
with a trocar (10 Gauge, Innovative Research of America,
Sarasota, FL) in the subcutaneous right upper flank of an
anesthetized and disinfected mouse. When tumors reached
1 cm3, mice were sacrificed and tumors were removed.
To obtain primary cell cultures of these tumors,
xenografts were splited into several small pieces and
processed in a biosafety chamber: after a fine mincing,
they were treated with collagenase type V (ref C9263;
Sigma) and trypsin/EDTA (ref 25200-056; Gibco, Life
Technologies) and suspended in DMEM supplemented
with 1% w/w Penicillin/Streptomycin (Gibco, Life
Technologies) and 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Lonza).
After centrifugation, cells were re-suspended in Serum
Free Ductal Media (SFDM) adapted from Schreiber et al.
[25] and incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator.

Gene expression microarrays
RNAs extraction was performed according to
Chirgwin’s protocol (Chirgwin et al., 1979). Total RNA
(1.0 µg) was reverse transcribed for hybridization to the
human oligonucleotide array Human Gene 2.0 (Genechip,
Affymetrix) as described previously [26]. Briefly, arrays
were processed using the Affymetrix GeneChip Fluidic
752

Oncotarget

Station 450 (protocol EukGE-WS2v5_450) and scanned
using a GeneChip Scanner 3000 G7 (Affymetrix). The
GeneChip Operating Software (Affymetrix GCOS v1.4)
was used to obtain chip images and for quality control.
Background substraction and normalization of probe set
intensities were performed using the method of Robust
Multiarray Analysis (RMA) [27]. All array data are available
at National Center for Biological Information (NCBI) Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) omnibus GSE55513.

treatments received, response to chemotherapy, date of
progression, metastasis occurrence and localization and
death date were analyzed. Progression-free survival and
overall survival were then calculated.

Differentiation score
PDAC xenograft score of differentiation was based
on the extent of glandular differentiation. If  > 95% of the
tumor is composed of glands then it is classified as being
well differentiated, 50%–95% is moderately differentiated,
and < 50% is poorly differentiated or undifferentiated.

Chemogram
Cells were screened for their chemosensitivity to
5-aza-dC (ref. A2385 Sigma Aldrich). These cells were
treated for 72 h with increasing concentrations of 5-aza-dC
ranging from 0 to 80 µM. Five thousand cells per well
were plated in 96-wells plates in SFDM medium. Twenty
four hours later the media was supplemented with
increasing concentrations of 5-aza-dC and incubated for
an additional 72 h period. Each experiment was done in
triplicate and repeated at least three times. Cell viability
was estimated after addition of PrestoBlue reagent (Life
Technologies) for 3 h following the PrestoBlue cell
viability reagent protocol provided by the supplier.

Conflict of interest
The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by La Ligue Contre le
Cancer, INCa, Canceropole PACA, SIRIC PACA-OUEST
and INSERM to JLI. MBL is supported by Fundación
Alfonso Martínez Escudero.

REFERENCES

RT-qPCR

1.	 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics,
2014. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2014; 64:9–29.

One µg RNA from xenografts was reversed
transcribed using the Go Script reagent (Promega)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time
quantitative PCR for DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B
mRNA was performed in a Stratagene cycler using Takara
reagents. Primers sequences are available upon request.

2.	 Burris HA, 3rd, Moore MJ, Andersen J, Green MR,
Rothenberg ML, Modiano MR, Cripps MC, Portenoy RK,
Storniolo AM, Tarassoff P, Nelson R, Dorr FA, Stephens CD,
Von Hoff DD. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients with
­advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. Journal of
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 1997; 15:2403–2413.

In vivo experiments
In vivo experiments were conducted in accordance
with institutional guidelines and were approved by the
“Plateforme of Stabulation et d’Expérimentation Animale”
(PSEA), Scientific Park of Luminy, Marseille. HumanPDAC xenografts were established by subcutaneous
implantation of human tumors in the upper right flank of
5- to 6-week-old nude mice nude mice (Swiss Nude Mouse
Crl: NU(lco)-Foxn1nu, Charles River Laboratories). Matrigel
(BD Biosciences) was added to tumors just before implantation
and tumors were maintained in mouse by splitting. For the
5-aza-dC (Sigma) treatment the drug was injected at 0.250 mg/
kg/daily intraperitoneally (150 μl per injection) starting at day
21 after implantation. A fragment of 100 mm3 was implanted
and the growing of tumors was measured weekly by caliper
and calculated as length x width x depth.

3.	 Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouche O,
Guimbaud R, Becouarn Y, Adenis A, Raoul JL,
Gourgou-Bourgade S, de la Fouchardiere C, Bennouna J,
Bachet JB, Khemissa-Akouz F, Pere-Verge D, Delbaldo C,
Assenat E, et al. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for
metastatic pancreatic cancer. The New England journal of
medicine. 2011; 364:1817–1825.
4.	 Marechal R, Bachet JB, Mackey JR, Dalban C, Demetter P,
Graham K, Couvelard A, Svrcek M, Bardier-Dupas A,
Hammel P, Sauvanet A, Louvet C, Paye F, Rougier P,
Penna C, Andre T, et al. Levels of gemcitabine transport and
metabolism proteins predict survival times of patients
treated with gemcitabine for pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Gastroenterology. 2012; 143:664–674:e661–666.
5.	 Farrell JJ, Elsaleh H, Garcia M, Lai R, Ammar A,
Regine WF, Abrams R, Benson AB, Macdonald J,
Cass CE, Dicker AP, Mackey JR. Human equilibrative
nucleoside transporter 1 levels predict response to gemcitabine in patients with pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology.
2009; 136:187–195.

Clinical outcome
The 17 patient’s clinical outcomes were recorded
in a prospective database, and data such as age, gender,
medical history, histopathological stage of differentiation,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

753

Oncotarget

6.	 Jones PA, Baylin SB. The fundamental role of
epigenetic events in cancer. Nature reviews G
­
­ enetics.
2002; 3:415–428.

18.	 Egger G, Liang G, Aparicio A, Jones PA. Epigenetics in
­human disease and prospects for epigenetic therapy. Nature.
2004; 429:457–463.

7.	 Okano M, Bell DW, Haber DA, Li E. DNA
­methyltransferases Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are essential for
de novo methylation and mammalian development. Cell.
1999; 99:247–257.

19.	 Omura N, Goggins M. Epigenetics and epigenetic
­alterations in pancreatic cancer. International journal of
clinical and experimental pathology. 2009; 2:310–326.
20.	 Wang X, Wang H, Jiang N, Lu W, Zhang XF,
Fang JY. Effect of inhibition of MEK pathway on
5-aza-deoxycytidine-suppressed
pancreatic
cancer
cell proliferation. Genetics and molecular research:
GMR. 2013; 12:5560–5573.

8.	 Bestor TH. The DNA methyltransferases of mammals.
Human molecular genetics. 2000; 9:2395–2402.
9.	 Issa JP. Decitabine. Current opinion in oncology.
2003; 15:446–451.

21.	 Yu J, Walter K, Omura N, Hong SM, Young A, Li A,
Vincent A, Goggins M. Unlike pancreatic cancer cells
pancreatic cancer associated fibroblasts display minimal
gene induction after 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine. PloS
one. 2012; 7:e43456.

10.	 Kantarjian H, Issa JP, Rosenfeld CS, Bennett JM,
Albitar M, DiPersio J, Klimek V, Slack J, de Castro C,
Ravandi F, Helmer R 3rd, Shen L, Nimer SD, Leavitt R,
Raza A, Saba H. Decitabine improves patient outcomes
in myelodysplastic syndromes: results of a phase III
randomized study. Cancer. 2006; 106:1794–1803.

22.	 Li A, Omura N, Hong SM, Goggins M. Pancreatic
cancer DNMT1 expression and sensitivity to DNMT1
­
inhibitors. Cancer biology & therapy. 2010; 9:321–329.

11.	 Blum W, Schwind S, Tarighat SS, Geyer S, Eisfeld AK, W
hitman S, Walker A, Klisovic R, Byrd JC, Santhanam R,
Wang H, Curfman JP, Devine SM, Jacob S, Garr C,
Kefauver C, et al. Clinical and pharmacodynamic activity of
bortezomib and decitabine in acute myeloid leukemia. Blood.
2012; 119:6025–6031.

23.	 Martinez-Garcia R, Juan D, Rausell A, Munoz M,
Banos N, Menendez C, Lopez-Casas PP, Rico D,
Valencia A, Hidalgo M. Transcriptional dissection
of pancreatic tumors engrafted in mice. Genome
medicine. 2014; 6:27.

12.	 Cowan LA, Talwar S, Yang AS. Will DNA methylation
inhibitors work in solid tumors? A review of the clinical
experience with azacitidine and decitabine in solid tumors.
Epigenomics. 2010; 2:71–86.

24.	 Wasif N, Ko CY, Farrell J, Wainberg Z, Hines OJ,
Reber H, Tomlinson JS. Impact of tumor grade on p­ rognosis
in pancreatic cancer: should we include grade in AJCC
staging? Annals of surgical ­oncology. 2010; 17:2312–2320.

13.	 Ghoshal K, Bai S. DNA methyltransferases as targets for
cancer therapy. Drugs of today. 2007; 43:395–422.

25.	 Schreiber FS, Deramaudt TB, Brunner TB, Boretti MI,
Gooch KJ, Stoffers DA, Bernhard EJ, Rustgi AK. Successful
growth and characterization of mouse pancreatic ductal cells:
functional p
­roperties of the Ki-RAS (G12V) oncogene.
Gastroenterology. 2004; 127:250–260.

14.	 Daskalakis M, Blagitko-Dorfs N, Hackanson B.
Decitabine. Recent results in cancer research Fortschritte
der Krebsforschung Progres dans les recherches sur le
­cancer. 2010; 184:131–157.

26.	 Hamidi T, Algul H, Cano CE, Sandi MJ, Molejon MI,
Riemann M, Calvo EL, Lomberk G, Dagorn JC, Weih F,
Urrutia R, Schmid RM, Iovanna JL. Nuclear protein 1
promotes pancreatic cancer development and protects cells
from stress by inhibiting apoptosis. The Journal of clinical
investigation. 2012; 122:2092–2103.

15.	 Ehrlich M. Cancer-linked DNA hypomethylation and
its relationship to hypermethylation. Current topics in
microbiology and immunology. 2006; 310:251–274.
16.	 Esteller M. Relevance of DNA methylation in the management
of cancer. The lancet oncology. 2003; 4:351–358.
17.	 Teodoridis JM, Strathdee G, Brown R. Epigenetic
silencing mediated by CpG island methylation: potential
as a therapeutic target and as a biomarker. Drug resistance
updates: reviews and commentaries in antimicrobial and
anticancer chemotherapy. 2004; 7:267–278.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, Beazer-Barclay YD,
Antonellis KJ, Scherf U, Speed TP. Exploration,
normalization, and summaries of high density oligonucleotide
array probe level data. Biostatistics. 2003; 4:249–264.

754

Oncotarget

