Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dichloroacetate, a selective mitochondria-targeting drug for oral
squamous cell carcinoma: a metabolic perspective of treatment
Vitalba Ruggieri1, Francesca Agriesti1, Rosella Scrima2, Ilaria Laurenzana1,
Donatella Perrone2, Tiziana Tataranni1, Carmela Mazzoccoli1, Lorenzo Lo Muzio2,
Nazzareno Capitanio2, Claudia Piccoli1,2
1

Laboratory of Pre-Clinical and Translational Research, IRCCS, CROB, Rionero in Vulture, Potenza, Italy

2

Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy

Correspondence to:
Nazzareno Capitanio, e-mail: nazzareno.capitanio@unifg.it
Claudia Piccoli, e-mail: claudia.piccoli@unifg.it
Keywords: oral squamous cell carcinoma, dichloroacetate, oxidative metabolism, mitochondria, reactive oxygen species
Received: August 31, 2014	

Accepted: November 11, 2014	

Published: December 08, 2014

ABSTRACT
Reprogramming of metabolism is a well-established property of cancer cells
that is receiving growing attention as potential therapeutic target. Oral squamous
cell carcinomas (OSCC) are aggressive and drugs-resistant human tumours
displaying wide metabolic heterogeneity depending on their malignant genotype
and stage of development. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is a specific inhibitor of the PDHregulator PDK proved to foster mitochondrial oxidation of pyruvate. In this study
we tested comparatively the effects of DCA on three different OSCC-derived cell
lines, HSC-2, HSC-3, PE15. Characterization of the three cell lines unveiled for HSC-2
and HSC-3 a glycolysis-reliant metabolism whereas PE15 accomplished an efficient
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. DCA treatment of the three OSCC cell
lines, at pharmacological concentrations, resulted in stimulation of the respiratory
activity and caused a remarkably distinctive pro-apoptotic/cytostatic effect on HSC-2
and HSC-3. This was accompanied with a large remodeling of the mitochondrial
network, never documented before, leading to organelle fragmentation and with
enhanced production of reactive oxygen species. The data here presented indicate
that the therapeutic efficacy of DCA may depend on the specific metabolic profile
adopted by the cancer cells with those exhibiting a deficient mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation resulting more sensitive to the drug treatment.

existing therapy as well as in the research of innovative
molecular targets for anti-cancer therapy [4, 5].
Interestingly, 1H NMR-based metabolic profiling of
different human OSCC cell lines recently delineated a
significant deregulation of various metabolic pathways,
including glycolysis [6]. Altered glucose metabolism is a
common property of invasive cancer cells that typically
show increased glycolysis and reduced mitochondrial
oxidation regardless of the availability of oxygen. This
metabolic reprogramming of transformed cells, known
as Warburg effect, constitutes an enormous advantage for
tumour growth, also contributing to the invasive/adaptive
properties of cancer cells and to resistance to common
anticancer agents. Even if the underlying biochemical and
molecular mechanisms of this phenomenon are extremely

INTRODUCTION
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the
eighth most frequent neoplasm worldwide, with over
300.000 new cases reported annually [1]. Environmental
hints, chronic inflammation and viral pathogens, as
well as accumulation of multiple genetic alterations and
epigenetic gene deregulation are possible etiopathogenic
factors [2–4]. Despite the advances of screening and early
diagnosis, the 5-years disease free survival in OSCC
patients is still poor, principally due to the aggressive
biology and refractariety of this tumour to conventional
therapies. The lack of an adequate understanding of the
cell biology of oral oncogenesis requires further efforts
in the field of prognostic and predictive biomarkers for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1217

Oncotarget

complex and poor understood, this metabolic abnormality
may be exploited as biochemical rationale to design
selective therapeutic treatment [7–10]. Pharmacological
inhibition of the Warburg effect with the pyruvate mimetic
dichloroacetate (DCA) has provided impressive results
in a wide spectrum of human cancers cells including
pancreatic [11], colon [12], breast [13], ovarian [14],
endometrial [15] neuroblastoma [16], glioblastoma
[17] and T-cell lymphoma cells [18]. DCA shifts cell
metabolism from glycolysis to mitochondrial glucose
oxidation by inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
(PDK), the selective inhibitor of pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) converting cytosolic pyruvate to mitochondrial
acetyl-CoA, the substrate for the Krebs cycle. The ensuing
reprogramming of the abnormal bioenergetic pattern in
cancer cells proved to induce selective citotoxicity thereof
[19]. Although glucose metabolism is a pivotal factor in
the progression of OSCC and the glycolytic phenotype
represents a significant negative biomarker of prognosis
and overall survival in OSCC patients [20], nevertheless,
to our knowledge, no experimental studies explicitly
focused on the correlation between the metabolic profile
of OSCC cells and on the possible effects of metabolic
drugs. Since the cellular heterogeneity and the metabolic
adaptation of tumours make the development of effective
therapies challenging, in this study we characterized the
metabolic phenotype of different OSCC-derived cell lines
showing, for the first time, a straight correlation between
the mitochondrial activity and the DCA sensitivity. This
could represent one of the major pre-clinical steps for the
use of selective metabolic drugs.

Complex I inhibitor rotenone, and therefore attributable
to the mitochondrial respiratory chain activity. The HSC-2
cell line displayed the lowest OCR when compared to the
HSC-3 and PE15 cell lines. In the presence of the FoF1ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin, the endogenous
OCR was depressed but at different extent in the three
OSCC samples (lighter colored columns in Fig. 1A). The
difference between the overall endogenous OCR and that
in the presence of oligomycin (darker colored columns in
Fig. 1A) provides a measure of the oxygen consumption
linked to the oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos)
(OCRATP) and indicate a different OxPhos efficiency
among the three OSCC cell lines in the sequence HSC-2<
HSC-3<PE15. The oligomycin-insensitive OCR is a
measure of the respiratory chain activity not linked to
the synthesis of ATP and controlled by dissipative proton
fluxes across the membrane also known as proton leaks
(OCRLEAK). To notice, the residual OCRLEAK displayed a
2–3 fold larger value in HSC-2 as compared with HSC-3
and P15 and the lowest OCRATP.
Consistently, the cellular content of NAD, which
regulates the oxidative metabolism (with mitochondria
segregating the major intracellular NAD pool), was
significantly higher in PE15 with respect to the HCS-2/3
cells (Fig. 1B). Conversely the NAD+/NADH ratio did not
show significant differences in the three cell lines.
Since the proton motive activity of the mitochondrial
electron transport chain is coupled to generation of a
mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), we measured
it by flow cytometry using the specific probe TMRE.
Surprisingly, the three OSCC cell lines, irrespective of
the observed differences in the respiratory capacity, did
not show significant differences in the uptake of the ΔΨmsensitive fluorescent probe (Fig. 1C). However, it has to
be considered that i) the ΔΨm can also be partly generated
by the reverse ATP-ase activity of the F1Fo-ATP synthase
utilizing glycolytic ATP and ii) that OCR and ΔΨm are not
linearly correlated.
The difference in the reported OxPhos efficiency
may reflect a specific bioenergetic adaptation of the HSC-2
cell line in which, despite normal oxygen conditions,
metabolism is more dependent on glycolysis, as described
in the Warburg effect [8]. Consistently, the measured flux
of lactate released in the medium was the highest in HSC-2
(+20% and +70% vs HSC-3 and PE15 respectively)
(Fig. 1D) and consequently the ratio between the OCRATP
and the lactate released (that can be taken as an indirect
measure of the OxPhos/Glycolysis metabolic flux) was
markedly reduced in HSC-2 as compared with the PE15
cell line with the HSC-3 resulting in an intermediate value
(Fig. 1E).
The endogenous mitochondrial respiratory activity
in intact cells is mainly controlled by the cytochrome c
oxidase (complex IV, CIV), depending on the prevailing
conditions [22]. The specific enzymatic activity of CIV
was measured and as shown in Fig. 1F resulted to be

RESULTS
HSC-2 and HSC-3 are human tumour cell lines
established from metastasised lymph nodes of a gingival
carcinoma with an invasive tendency more prominent in
HSC-2. Both exhibit a missense mutation of the tumour
suppressor p53 at codon 280Arg/Thr and codon 176Cys/Phe
respectively, and low mtDNA repair ability [21]. The
mutations in p53 of HSC-2/3 affect the expression of
the tumour suppressor at the post-transcriptional level. The
PE15 cell line, originated from a human dedifferentiated
OSCC of the tongue, displays epithelial characteristics
but, unlike HSC-2/3, expresses normal p53 (confirmed by
Western blotting in this study - data not shown).

Characterization of the mitochondrial OxPhos
activity in OSCC cell lines
Figure 1A shows the results of a comparative
analysis of the rates of endogenous respiration in intact
OSCC cells performed by high-performance oxymetry.
The oxygen consumption rates (OCRs) were normalized
to the cellular protein content and corrected for the
residual oxygen consumption after the addition of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1218

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Comparative analysis of the metabolic profiles of different OSSC-derived cell lines. (A) Graphical representation of

OCR values in intact cells measured by respirometric assay: light green columns represent the OCRLEAK values, obtained after addition of the FoF1ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin to intact cells; dark green columns indicate the OCRATP values calculated as the difference between the overall
endogenous OCR and the oligomycin-insensitive OCR. The values reported are mean (± SEM) of six independent experiments with the OCRs
normalized to the protein content. Statistical significance: (*) P < 0.05, (**) P < 0.01 for OCRLEAK; (#), P < 0.05, (##) P < 0.01 for OCRATP. (B)
Cellular content of NAD+ (empty columns), NADH (black columns) and of their ratio (grey columns) normalized to the protein content of each
sample, calculated from three independent experiments. (*) P < 0.05 as total NAD content. (C) Flow cytometric analysis of ΔΨm in OSCC stained
with the specific probe TMRE; 10,000 events for each sample were acquired and analyzed with the CellQuest software. (D) Measurement of
lactate in culture medium; 2x106 cells were plated and, after 24 h of incubation, the lactate released were determined as indicated in Material and
Methods and normalized to the cellular proteins. The data reported means (±SEM) of three independent experiments. (*) P < 0.05, (**) P < 0.01.
(E) Analysis of the OxPhos/Glycolysis metabolic flux ratio calculated as the ratio between the OCRATP (see panel A) and the lactate amounts
(see panel D). Statistical significance, (*) P < 0.05, (**) P < 0.005. (F) NADH dehydrogenase (CI) and cytochrome c oxidase (CIV) enzymatic
activities measured spectrophotometrically as detailed in Materials and Methods; the results are means (± SEM) of three independent experiments,
(*), P < 0.05. The inset shows the citrate synthase (CS) activity measured on the same samples. (G) Protein expression levels of the five OxPhos
complexes (CI to CV), determined by immunoblot assay on total cell lysates using a cocktail of specific antibodies; β-actin was used as loading
control. The blotting is representative of three independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1219

Oncotarget

Effect of DCA on the phosphorylation state of
the pyruvate dehydrogenase

significantly higher in PE15. The observed differences
held also when normalized to the citrate synthase activity,
which is used as an indicator of the cellular mitochondrial
mass (see inset of Fig. 1F). Conversely, measurement
of complex I activity did not result in major differences
among the three OSCC cell lines. Assessment of the
mitochondrial OxPhos complexes (CI to CV) using
a cocktail of specific antibodies did not result in major
differences in the expression of any of the respiratory
chain complexes neither of the F1Fo-ATP synthase with
the exception of the CIV-marker subunit II, which resulted
in a roughly 2-fold more intense immune-stained band in
PE15 (Fig. 1G and densitometric analysis not shown).

Before evaluating the effect of DCA on vital
parameters of the OSCC cell lines, the efficacy of the
compound to inhibit its recognized target pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) was assessed by Western
blotting using a specifici antibody recognizing the
phosphorylation state of the E1α subunit (residue S293)
of the PDH complex [23]. Figure 2A shows that the basal
level of both PDH and P-PDH-E1 were comparable
among the three OSCC cell lines and that following a 24
h-treatment with 10 mM DCA (an effective concentration

Figure 2: Effect of DCA on phosphorylation of the PDH-E1α subunit and cell growth and viability in OSCC. (A)

Western blot of the phospho-S293 E1α PDH and of the total enzyme subunit in OSCC cells following a 24 h incubation with vehicle and
10 mM DCA; GAPDH levels were used as loading control. The blot shown is representative of three independent experiments. Panel on
the right: quantitative analysis of phospho-S293 E1 α PDH expression relative to total PDH E1α normalized to GAPDH, carried out by
a densitometric analysis (“Image Lab” software, Biorad). The results are the means (± SEM) of three independent experiments. (*) P <
0.05. (B) Dose-dependent effect of DCA treatment on cell growth analysed by using an impedentiometric technique (xCELLigence RTCA
MP System, Roche, Germany). Continuous monitoring of cell adhesion and proliferation was carried out for 24 h after incubation of cells
with the indicated concentrations of DCA, and expressed as the percentage (%) of the cell index of untreated cells; means (± SEM) of
three repeats. (*): P < 0.05. (C) Dose-dependence effect of DCA treatment on cell viability. Cells were exposed for 24 h to the indicated
concentrations of DCA and viability determined with the MTS assay. Non-malignant human HEK 293 cells were used as representative of a
non tumor cell line. Cell viability is expressed as the percentage (%) of untreated cells. The data shown are means (± SEM) of 6 independent
experiments; (*) P < 0.05; (**) P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1220

Oncotarget

reported in literature [13–17]) a significant reduction in
the normalized level of P-PDH-E1 was observed with this
value resulting slightly lower in PE15 as compared with
HSC-2 and HSC-3 (45–50% vs. 20% inhibition).

assay confirming for HSC-2 and HSC-3 an even more
pronounced distinctive sensitivity to the drug (Fig. 2C).
Indeed at 10 mM DCA the viability of both HSC-2
and HSC-3 was around 30% whereas that of PE15 was
75–80% as compared to that of the representative non
tumor cell line HEK 293 (human embryonic kidney cells).

Effect of DCA on the cell growth and viability
Figure 2B shows the dose dependence of DCA on
the growth-rate of the OSCC cell lines measured by an
impedentiometric technique. The results obtained show
that the cell index of the OSCC cell lines was drugsensitive with HSC-2 and HSC-3 significantly more
depressed by DCA as compared with PE15. The effect
of DCA was then tested on the cell viability by the MTS

Effect of DCA treatment on mitochondrial
respiration and lactate production
Activation of PDH is expected to enhance the
metabolic flux through the tricarboxylic cycle fueling
the mitochondrial respiration [23]. Figure 3A shows that
4 mM DCA - a mildly cytotoxic concentration - caused,

Figure 3: Effect of DCA treatment on the metabolic profile of OSCC cells. (A) Endogenous respiratory activities; light and

dark blue bars show the OCRLEAK and the OCRATP respectively measured following exposure of OSCC cells to 4 mM DCA for 24 h. The
values reported are fold-change calculated as the ratio of the OCR values in DCA-treated versus untreated cells and are the mean (± SEM)
of three independent experiments. (**) P < 0.005, (***) P < 0.001 (#) P < 0.05 vs untreated. (B) Fold-changes of lactate release after
24 h-treatment with DCA; means (±SEM) of three independent experiments. (C) Fold-changes of the OxPhos/Glycolysis metabolic flux
ratio (see Fig. 1E for explanation) in DCA-treated OSCC cells; means (±SEM) of three independent preparations assayed in parallel for
OCRATP and lactate. (*) P < 0.05, (**) P < 0.01, (***) P < 0.005; (#) P <0.05, (##) P <0.01 vs untreated. (D) Fold-changes of the CIV
activity in OSCC cells following DCA-treatment. The data reported are the mean (±SEM) of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1221

Oncotarget

indeed, an increase of the resting endogenous OCR in all
the three OSCC cell lines. This was partly contributed
by enhanced OCRLEAK (light colored bars) and partly
by enhanced OCRATP (dark colored bars). However,
the relative largest effect of DCA was observed for the
OCRATP in HSC-2 while that on PE15 resulted of modest
entity. The impact of DCA treatment on lactate production
did not cause significant changes in any of the three OSCC
cell lines (Fig. 3B). Consequently, the OxPhos/Glycolysis
flux ratio increased largely in HSC-2 and scantly in
PE15 with an intermediate value for HSC-3 (Fig. 3C).
Importantly, the activity of CIV was not significantly
affected by the DCA treatment in any of the three OSCC
cell lines (Fig. 3D), as well as the CIV protein content
assessed by immunoblotting (not shown).
All together these results show that DCA-treatment
promotes a metabolic shift toward oxidative metabolism by
enhancing the flux of oxidizable intermediate metabolites.
However and most notably, this effect was of different
intensity depending on the metabolic profile of the cell
tested with those characterized by a prominent glycolytic
flux resulting more responsive to the drug.

fluorescent probe DCF by flow-cytometry. The results
presented in Fig. 5A show that 10 mM DCA treatment for
24 h caused a N-acetyl cysteine (NAC)-sensitive increase
of the mean fluorescence intensity in HSC-2 and HSC-3
cell lines (2–3 fold change as compared with the basal
ROS level). Conversely, DCA-treatment of the PE15 cell
line resulted in a less significant change of the DCF-related
fluorescence. These observations were confirmed at the
single cell level by confocal microscopy imaging using
the same probe (Fig. 5B).

Effect of DCA on apoptosis
Fragmentation of the mitochondrial network (i.e.
enhanced fission) as well as a pro-oxidative setting are
considered markers of cell stress, preluding to apoptosis,
therefore, we tested whether the cytotoxic effect of DCA
was linked to changes in apoptotic markers. Measurement
of apoptotic cells was performed by flow-cytometry
with the annexin-V/propidium iodide assay (Fig. 5C).
Consistent with the MTS assay, 20 mM DCA-treatment
for 48 h resulted in an increase in annexin V-positive cells
in HSC-2 and HSC-3, reflecting early apoptosis thereof.
On the contrary, any appreciable DCA-mediated proapoptotic effect was detectable in the PE15 cells. HEK
293 cells displayed a negligible change of the apoptotic
marker following identical DCA treatment (data not
shown). Interestingly, the amount of annexin V-propidium
iodine double stained cells in HSC-3 and PE15 was
somehow higher than in HSC-2, reflecting necrosis or later
stage apoptosis. However, no difference in the percentage
of necrotic cells was observed following DCA treatment.
Further we assessed the protein expression level
of two anti-apoptotic factors, Bcl-xL and survivin, by
Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 5D, the basal level of
Bcl-xL was significantly different among the three OSCC
cells with the PE15 exhibiting about 70% higher amount
than HSC-2 and HSC-3. Unlike Bcl-xL, the survivin
content was comparable in all the three OSCC cells. Most
notably, DCA treatment resulted in no significant change
in the level of Bcl-xL in HSC-2 and HSC-3 and in a slight
increase in PE15 whereas it caused a significant decrease
of the survivin content in all the OSCC cells, which was
larger in both HSC-2 and HSC-3 (–50%) than in PE15
(–25%).
Finally, to verify whether the DCA-induced
enhanced apoptosis was linked to the pro-oxidative state
elicited by the compound, OSCC cells were co-treated
with DCA and NAC, the latter under conditions proved
to prevent the DCA-induced overproduction of ROS
(Fig. 5A). Figure 5C shows that NAC largely prevented
or suppressed the DCA-mediated apoptosis in HSC-2
and HSC-3 respectively. Conversely, NAC did not cause
significant changes neither of apoptotic nor of necrotic
PE15 cells.

Effect of DCA on mitochondrial morphology
Changes in mitochondrial morphology are emerging
as a hallmark for different states of the cell physiology
[24]. Using TMRE, we carried out a morpho-functional
analysis of the mitochondrial compartment in OSCC cells
and the impact on it of DCA (Fig. 4). The results of this
analysis showed that the basal level of the ΔΨm-related
TMRE fluorescence was comparable among the three
OSCC cell lines confirming at the single cell level the
observations obtained by flow-cytometry (see Fig. 1C).
The morphology of the mitochondrial compartment was
characterized by a dense and highly interconnected tubular
network with any apparent significant difference among
the three OSCC cells lines. Following DCA treatment,
the mitochondrial network resulted largely fragmented in
HSC-2 cells and, to a lesser extent, in HSC-3 cells but
not in PE15 cells. The ΔΨm-related TMRE fluorescence
appeared, instead, not significantly affected by DCA
treatment in all the OSCC cell samples. Morphometric
analysis of the TMRE-related fluorescence signal
confirmed in HSC-2 and HSC-3 a significant DCAmediated decrease of the mitochondrial interconnectivity
and elongation.

Effect of DCA on the cellular redox state
Data from the literature suggest that the cytotoxic
effect of DCA on tumor cells might be caused by
unbalance of the cellular redox homeostasis [25]. To
verify this possibility we assessed the intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) with the peroxide-oxidizable

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1222

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of DCA on mitochondrial morpho-functional parameters. The upper panel shows a laser scanning confocal
microscopy analysis (LSCM) of the ΔΨm assessed by the fluorescent probe TMRE in live OSCC cells either untreated and incubated with
4 mM DCA for 24 h. An enlarged detail of the optical field (square) is shown aside of each picture and rendered in false colors to highlight
the morphology of the mitochondrial network. Imaging is representative of three different experiments yielding comparable results. The
graph bars in the bottom panel show the quantitative analysis of ΔΨm-related TMRE fluorescence and of the morphometric parameters,
mitochondrial interconnectivity and elongation, calculated as detailed in Materials and Methods. The data reported are means (± SEM) of
values referring to at least ten optical fields randomly selected for each condition and clustered from three independent cell preparations.
(*) P < 0.05, (**) P < 0.01 vs DCA-untreated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1223

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of DCA on intracellular ROS generation and apoptosis. (A) Cellular ROS production assayed by flow-cytometry

fluorescent probe DCF (upper panel). Cells were incubated for 24 h with 10 mM DCA ± 10 mM of the ROS scavenger NAC added 4 h before
the analysis. The bar histogram on the right shows the mean intensity of the DCF-related fluorescence (MFI) expressed as fold-change of
the untreated cells and are means ± SEM of three independent experiments. (*) P < 0.05; (#) < 0.05 vs DCA-untreated. (B) Representative
LSCM imaging of ROS production in living OSCC cells treated with DCA as in panel (A) and assessed by DCF. Magnification of selected
areas (indicated by the white frame) in DCA-treated cells are shown at the top of each panel. The images are representative of three different
preparations yielding similar results. The histogram below the images shows the quantitative analysis of the DCF-related fluorescence/cell; the
values are means ± SEM of three independent experiments under each condition wherein the digitalized fluorescence images from at least five
randomly selected optical fields (each containing about 25 cells) were analyzed. (C) Measurement of apoptotic and necrotic cells performed by
flow-cytometry after staining cells with annexin-V and propidium iodide. Cells were incubated with 20 mM DCA alone or co-incubated with
DCA and 10 mM NAC for 48 h. Data, expressed as percentage of total events analysed, are the means ± SEM of three independent experiments.
(*) P < 0.05. (D) Protein expression levels of the anti-apoptotic factors, Bcl-xL and survivin, assayed by Western blotting in untreated and 10
mM DCA-treated cells for 24 h (left panel); β-actin served as loading control. Graph bars on the right show the average (± SEM) of data resulting
from densitometric analysis of three independent blots. (*) P < 0.05, (**) P < 0.01 vs DCA-untreated; (#) P < 0.001 vs HSC-2 and HSC-3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1224

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

(i.e. proton leak) that lower the conversion of the oxidative
energy in ATP synthesis. Another plausible explanation
might rely on the differential expression of mitochondrial
carriers controlling the influx of respiratory metabolites/
substrates. Moreover, we cannot exclude that the mutated
p53 gene in HSC-2 and HSC-3, could account for their
less efficient OxPhos activity. p53 plays a pivotal role in
the regulation of energy-generating metabolic pathways
and its loss induces dramatic metabolic alterations toward
a glycolitic phenotype [34]. In particular, it has been
demonstrated that p53 directly regulates the synthesis of
cytochrome c oxidase 2 (SCO2), required for the assembly
of the cytochrome c oxidase complex [35]. Further studies
will shed lights on these issues.
Taken all together and in keeping the relatively low
efficiency of glycolysis in ATP production as compared
with the OxPhos system, our observations denote for
HSC-2 and HSC-3 cells a metabolic phenotype with a
poor bioenergetic competence.
DCA is a generic low-price drug, in use in humans
for more than 30 years, whose molecular mechanism of
action remains largely elusive. Impressive results in a wide
spectrum of human cancers cells including pancreatic,
colon, breast ovarian, endometrial, neuroblastoma and
glioblastoma cells were reported for DCA treatment
[11–18]. Recently, additive effects were also observed
in experimental studies with DCA used in combination
with radiation or other drugs [36, 37] and clinical trials
are currently testing the DCA anti-tumor effects on
different human cancers [38]. However, to the best of
our knowledge this is the first study addressed to test
the effect of the drug on oral squamous cells carcinomas
with the aim to correlate them with the cellular metabolic
phenotype. The results here presented clearly show that
under conditions promoting comparable significant
dephosphorylation of the E1-α subunit of PDH in the
three different OSCC cell types, DCA treatment caused
a distinctive and dramatic cytotoxic effect only on HSC-2
and HSC-3 whereas scarcely affected cell viability in
PE15 as well as in a non-tumoral cell line. Most notably
the mitochondria-related oxidative metabolism was
apparently up-regulated following DCA-treatment to a
significant extent only in HSC-2 and HSC-3 cell lines
with a minor if any effect on the lactate production. As a
consequence DCA was able to elicit a major shift in the
balance between the glycolytic vs respiratory metabolism
in HSC-2 and HSC-3 leaving almost unchanged that of
the PE15 cell line. Although the cytotoxic activity of DCA
has been attributed to PDK inhibition in solid tumor cell
models [19], the reported effective concentrations of DCA
in vitro (also used in this study) are several log greater
than the inhibition constant (Ki) of PDK, thereby implying
additional effects.
Our observations suggest that DCA treatment
causes an unbalance in the redox homeostasis, leading to

OSCC is the most frequent carcinoma of the oral
cavity [26] with poor survival due to its refractariety
to conventional therapy, thereby search of new
pharmacological approaches is pressing [27]. Over the
last few years, targeting of mitochondria has become
an attractive strategy in cancer chemotherapy [28, 29].
The underlying rationale is based on the belief that
reprogramming cancer cell metabolism toward an aerobic
phenotype might cause, in the contest of mitochondria
dysfunctions, a bioenergetic collapse promoting cell death.
However, it has to be considered that not all the cancer
cells share the “Warburg phenotype” [30]. Indeed several
exceptions have been described [31] and a reassessment of
the mitochondrial metabolism in the cancer cell physiology
is under evaluation [32]. Nevertheless, pinpointing cancer
subsets, specifically vulnerable to mitochondria-targeted
therapy, is a worthy challenge.
In the present study we characterized the
mitochondrial phenotype of three different OSCC-derived
cell lines and assessed their biological response to the
metabolic drug DCA.
In our investigation, the measurement of the
mitochondrial respiratory activity in intact OSCC cells
underscored the metabolic heterogeneity occurring
when dealing with different tumour cell lines. Indeed,
while the HSC-2 and HSC-3 displayed a relatively low
mitochondria-mediated OCR, the PE15 exhibited a twofold higher value. The overall activity of respiratory
chain is kinetically controlled by complex IV depending
on the membrane energy state [22]. Consistently, the
specific activity and protein content of complex IV was
significantly and specifically higher in the PE15 cells.
However, the catalytic activity of the complex has been
proved to be tuneable by post-translational covalent
modifications as well as by interactions with regulatory
factors [33]. The occurrence of differential modulatory
pathways controlling the activity of the respiratory chain
complexes in specific cancer cell types warrants further
investigations.
Importantly, the OCR sensitive to oligomycin, and
therefore involved in energy conversion, confirmed for
PE15 the highest OxPhos efficiency. Measurement of the
lactate flux released in the cell culture medium resulted
in significantly larger values for HSC-2 and HSC-3 cells
as compared with PE15, confirming more reliance on
glycolysis thereof.
The lower OxPhos efficiency in HSC-2 and
HSC-3 cells cannot be attributed to a different content of
mitochondria or expression of the OxPhos complexes. One
possible explanation for the attenuated OxPhos efficiency
in HSC-2 and HSC-3 might stem in the relatively
larger insensitivity of the OCR to oligomycin, which
is considered a measure of ΔΨm-dissipating activities

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1225

Oncotarget

overproduction of reactive species. This is accompanied
with a profound de-structuration of the mitochondrial
network in HSC-2 and HSC-3 resulting in an extensive
fragmentation likely derived from deregulation of the
organelle fusion/fission machinery [39, 40]. Accordingly,
preliminary results obtained by our group indicate a DCAmediated change in the expression of factors known to be
involved in the mitochondrial dynamics (i.e. up-regulation
of Drp1, down-regulation of OPA1 and Mfn1; manuscript
in preparation). Fragmentation of mitochondria is
considered a step preluding to processing of damaged
organelles by mitophagy, a specialized form of macroautophagy [41]. When removal of dysfunctioning
mitochondria overcomes the cell capacity for “quality
control”, the apoptotic program is activated. Consistently,
we found in HSC-2 and HSC-3 evidences of DCA-induced
proapoptotic priming.
It is tempting to speculate that unlike PE15, HSC-2
and HSC-3 being adapted or programmed to a lowregimen oxidative metabolism are not suited to cope
with an enhanced O2 metabolism. This might depend on
subtle dysfunctions in mitochondria, which, if tolerated
under conditions of low cell activity, become detrimental
once the cell is forced to rely on them for the bioenergetic
demand (see the schematic picture in Fig. 6).
In conclusion, our study demonstrates for the
first time the efficacy of DCA in producing remarkable
cytotoxic effect in cells derived from human oral
carcinomas. This effect appears to inversely correlate with
the mitochondrial respiratory capacity of the tumour cells
and provides a rationale to reconcile the heterogeneous
and sometimes conflicting outcomes of the reported DCAeffects in vitro. Further experiments focusing on in vivo
models will be needed to confirm the selective cytotoxic
effect of DCA on the tumor mass.
The easy accessibility of the oral cancers enables,
by a simple non-invasive biopsy, to isolate and test
primary tumour cells for their responsiveness to cytotoxic
assays. In case of positive outcome a local/topical
administration of DCA could be provided, thus limiting
the toxic effects of systemic treatment. This approach
might benefit of a newly developed potential drug, which
conjugates by a biodegradable linker DCA to the lipophilic
triphenylphosphonium cation allowing selective delivery
to mitochondria at locally high concentration [42]. This
innovative therapeutic strategy, associated to a predictive
test, might enable to develop new personalized treatment
for oral cancers.

cell lines, were maintained at sub-confluent conditions
in RPMI 1640 (HSC-2 and HSC-3) and DMEM (PE15)
media, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
L-glutamine (2 mM) and penicillin–streptomycin
(100 U/ml) at 37 ºC in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere.

Measurement of endogenous respiration rates in
intact cells
Cultured cells were gently detached from the dish by
trypsinization, washed in PBS, harvested by centrifugation,
and immediately assessed for O2 consumption by a Clarktype electrode (Hansatech) in a thermostated gas-tight
chamber equipped with a stirring device. Five-seven
x106 viable cells/ml were assayed in 50 mM KPi, 10 mM
Hepes, 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4) at 37°C; after attainment
of a stationary endogenous substrate-sustained respiratory
rate, 1 μg/ml of oligomycin and 400 nM carbonylcyanidep-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP) were added
sequentially within a 10-minute interval. The rates of O2
consumption (OCRs) were corrected for 1 μM rotenoneinsensitive respiration. The respiratory control ratio (RCR)
was obtained by dividing the rate of oxygen consumption
achieved before the addition of oligomycin by the
rate after the addition of oligomycin. The OCRs were
normalized to the cell number or to the cellular protein
concentration. The latter was determined by the Bradford
assay (Bio-Rad).

Measurement of NAD+ and NADH
Cells, collected by trypsinization and centrifugation,
after protein determination, were suspended in 15%
HClO4 (NAD+ extraction) or 0.2 M NaOH (NADH
extraction). After 10 min, the suspensions were
neutralized by adding 0.1 M KOH (NAD+ extraction) or
0.1 M HCl (NADH extraction). After centrifugation, the
supernatants were collected and assayed immediately.
NAD or NADH concentrations were measured by a cyclic
enzyme reaction system in which alcohol dehydrogenase
reduces dichlorophenol indolphenol (DCIPIP) through
the intermediation of phenazine methosulfate (PMS).
The reaction mixture consisted of 0.63 ml of 100 mM
phosphate Buffer (pH 7.5), 0.03 ml of 30 mM phenazine
methosulphate (PMS), 0.04 ml of 0.6 mM dichlorophenol
indolphenol (DCIPIP), 0.1 ml of 95% ethanol, 5 units
ADH. The reaction was started by the addition of 200300 μg of the sample. Reduction of the blue-colored
DCPIP to colorless DCPIPH2 was measured by recording
the decrease in absorbance at 600 nm. The concentration
of NADH and NAD+ in each extract was determined by
comparing sample values to standard curves generated
from samples containing known amounts of NADH and
NAD+ that had been cycled under identical conditions as
the samples.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents and cell culture
Reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise specified. Human OSCC

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1226

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Proposed mechanism of the differential effect of DCA on OSCC-derived cell lines. The proposed model

schematically illustrates how the metabolic profile can affect the cellular response to DCA and determine its cytotoxic potential on OSCC
cells. HSC-2 and HSC-3 cell lines, adapted to a relatively low oxidative metabolism and high glycolysis displayed a DCA-sensitive
respiratory activity. This metabolic feature may predispose cells to a major sensitivity to DCA-induced apoptosis, associated to oxidative
stress and mitochondrial fragmentation. On the contrary, PE15 cell line, in which the more efficient respiratory activity resulted to be DCAinsensitive, displays an intrinsic resistance to the detrimental DCA-induced effects.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1227

Oncotarget

Lactate measurements

(1,2500; Cell Signaling Technology); the signals were
developed using the enhanced chemiluminescence kit
(ClarityTM Western ECL Substrate, Bio-Rad) and the
ChemiDoc Imaging System XRS + (BioRad) and analysed
with the Image Lab 4.1 software.

A total of 2 x 106 cells were treated for 24 h
with 10 mM DCA and lactate was measured in culture
medium using a Lactate Colorimetric Assay Kit (Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA). Data were normalized to total
protein amounts in each sample.

Cell proliferation assays

Flow cytometric detection of mitochondrial
membrane potential and ROS

Cell proliferation was assessed by xCELLigence
RTCA MP System (Roche, Germany) that monitors
cellular events in real time by measuring impedancebased signals [43]. Cell-sensor impedance is expressed
as Cell Index (CI). Experimental results were
performed using RTCA Software 1.2 that calculated the
population doubling by fitting the curve to an exponential
equation.

To measure mitochondrial membrane potential
(ΔΨm) and ROS, cells were incubated, protected from
light, with 1 μM tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester
(TMRE) or with 2 μM 2,7-dichlorofluorescin diacetate
(DCFH-DA) (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), at 37°C for
15 min and analyzed by a FACScantoII flow cytometer,
(Becton Dickinson). The emitted fluorescent signal of
10,000 events for each sample was acquired and analyzed
with the CellQuest software.

Cell viability assays
Cells were seeded in a 96-well culture plate and
after 24 h of incubation with DCA, cell viability was
measured using solutions of a novel tetrazolium compound
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt; (CellTiter
96® AQueous MTS Reagent Powder, Promega) and the
electron coupling reagent, phenazine methosulfate, PMS.
MTS is bioreduced by cells into a formazan product that
is soluble in tissue culture medium. The absorbance of the
formazan at 490 nm was measured directly from 96-well
assay plates using the Plate Reader (das srl, Italy) with a
reference filter at 630 nm. Three independent measurements
were performed in triplicate for each assay.

Mitochondrial respiratory complexes activity
The specific activities of NADH: ubiquinone
oxidoreductase (complex I) and cytochrome c oxidase
(complex IV) were assayed spectrophotometrically on
frozen–thawn and ultrasound-treated cells in 10 mM Tris,
1 mg/ml serum albumin, pH 8.0. Complex I was assayed
(in the presence of 1 μg/ml of antymicin A plus 2 mM
KCN) by following the initial 2 μg/ml rotenone-sensitive
rate of 50 μM NADH oxidation (ε340nm = 6.22 mM–1
cm–1) in the presence of 200 μM decylubiquinone (dUQ) as
electron acceptor. CIV activity was assayed by following
(in the presence of antimycin A) the initial KCN-sensitive
rate of ferro-cytochrome c oxidation (ΔA at 550 nm, ɛ =
21.1 mM–1cm–1) under aerobic conditions.

Live cell imaging of ROS and mtΔΨ
Cells cultured at low density on fibronectin-coated
35-mm glass-bottom dishes were incubated for 20
minutes at 37°C with 2 μM TMRE or 10 μM DCFH-DA
(Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) to monitor mtΔΨ and
ROS respectively. Stained cells were washed with PBS
and examined by a Nikon TE 2000 microscope (images
collected using a 60X objective [1.4 NA]) coupled to a
Radiance 2100 dual-laser (4-line Argon-Krypton, singleline Helium-Neon) confocal laser scanning microscopy
system (Biorad). Acquisition, storage, and analysis of data
were performed with LaserSharp and LaserPix software
from Biorad or ImageJ1.48u (Wayne Rasband, NIH, USA,
http://imagej.nih.gov/ij).

Western blotting analysis
Cultured cells were lysed in 150 mM NaCl, 0,1%
SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton
X-100, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 and protease inhibitor cocktail
and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C to remove
cellular debris. The protein concentration was measured
using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). The proteins were
separated by 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
and transferred to a PVDF membrane (Bio-Rad). After
blocking with 5% skim milk for 1 hour, the membranes
were incubated with MitoProfile Total OXPHOS Human
WB Antibody cocktail (1:500; Abcam Cambridge, UK),
PDH-E1α (1:2,000; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), phosphoPDH-E1α (1:500; Abcam Cambridge, UK), Bcl-xl
(1:1,000; Cell Signaling Technology), survivin (1:1,000;
Cell Signaling Technology), GAPDH (1:2,500; Santa
Cruz Biotech) and β-actin (1:5,000; SIGMA), overnight
at 4°C. After incubation with corresponding suited 1:2.500
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Apoptosis assay
Apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry
(FACScantoII, Becton Dickinson) following staining of
cells for Annexin-V-FITC and PI (BD Biosciences), after
48 h of incubation with DCA (20 mM). Three independent
experiments were carried out. Ten thousand events were
collected per sample.
1228

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

associated with mitochondrial respiratory defect and
hypoxia. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:613–621.

The unpaired Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA
followed by Newman–Keuls tests were used to compare
continuous variables. All the data are expressed as the
mean ± standard error mean (SEM); a P value <0.05 was
accepted as statistically significant.

11.	 Chen Y, Cairns R, Papandreou I, Koong A, Denko NC.
Oxygen consumption can regulate the growth of tumors,
a new perspective on the Warburg effect. PLoS One.
2009; 4:e7033.
12.	 Sánchez-Aragó M, Chamorro M, Cuezva JM. Selection
of cancer cells with repressed mitochondria triggers colon
cancer progression. Carcinogenesis. 2010; 31:567–576.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

13.	 Sun RC, Fadia M, Dahlstrom JE, Parish CR, Board PG,
Blackburn AC. Reversal of the glycolytic phenotype
by dichloroacetate inhibits metastatic breast cancer cell
growth in vitro and in vivo. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010;
120:253–260.

This work was supported by Current Research
Funds, Italian Ministry of Health, to IRCCS-CROB,
Rionero in Vulture, Potenza, Italy.

Conflicts of interest

14.	 Saed GM, Fletcher NM, Jiang ZL, Abu-Soud HM, Diamond
MP. Dichloroacetate induces apoptosis of epithelial ovarian
cancer cells through a mechanism involving modulation of
oxidative stress. Reprod Sci. 2011; 18:1253–1261.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

REFERENCES

15.	 Wong JY, Huggins GS, Debidda M, Munshi NC, De Vivo I.
Dichloroacetate induces apoptosis in endometrial cancer
cells. Gynecol Oncol. 2008; 109:394–402.

1.	 Durr ML, Li D, Wang SJ. Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma in never smokers: Analysis of clinicopathologic characteristics and survival. Am J Otolaryngol. 2013; 34:388–393.

16.	 Vella S, Conti M, Tasso R, Cancedda R, Pagano A.
Dichloroacetate inhibits neuroblastoma growth by
specifically acting against malignant undifferentiated cells.
Int J Cancer. 2012; 130:1484–1493.

2.	 Markopoulos AK. Current aspects on oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Open Dent J. 2012; 6:126–130.
3.	 Jithesh PV, Risk JM, Schache AG, Dhanda J, Lane B,
Liloglou T, Shaw RJ. The epigenetic landscape of oral
squamous cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2013; 108:370–379.

17.	 Michelakis ED, Sutendra G, Dromparis P, Webster L,
Haromy A, Niven E, Maguire C, Gammer TL, Mackey
JR, Fulton D, Abdulkarim B, McMurtry MS, Petruk KC.
Metabolic modulation of glioblastoma with dichloroacetate.
Sci Transl Med. 2010; 2:31–34.

4.	 Pérez-Sayáns M, Somoza-Martín JM, Barros-Angueira F,
Reboiras-López MD, Gándara Rey JM, García-García A.
Genetic and molecular alterations associated with oral squamous cell cancer. Oncol Rep. 2009; 22:1277–1282.

18.	 Kumar A, Kant S, Singh SM. Novel molecular mechanisms
of antitumor action of dichloroacetate against T cell
lymphoma: Implication of altered glucose metabolism,
pH homeostasis and cell survival regulation. Chem Biol
Interact. 2012; 199:29–37.

5.	 Di Domenico M, Pierantoni GM, Feola A, Esposito F,
Laino L, DE Rosa A, Rullo R, Mazzotta M, Martano M,
Sanguedolce F, Perillo L, D’Angelo L, Papagerakis S,
et al. Prognostic significance of N-Cadherin expression
in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res. 2011;
31:4211–4218.

19.	 Sutendra G, Michelakis ED. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
as a novel therapeutic target in oncology. Front Oncol.
2013; 3:38.

6.	 Tripathi P, Kamarajan P, Somashekar BS, MacKinnon N,
Chinnaiyan AM, Kapila YL, Rajendiran TM, Ramamoorthy A.
Delineating metabolic signatures of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma: phospholipase A2, a potential therapeutic target. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012; 44:1852–1861.

20.	 Kunkel M, Reichert TE, Benz P, Lehr HA, Jeong JH,
Wieand S, Bartenstein P, Wagner W, Whiteside TL.
Overexpression of Glut-1 and increased glucose metabolism
in tumors are associated with a poor prognosis in patients
with oral squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer. 2003;
97:1015–1024.

7.	 Kroemer G. cancer’s Achilles’ heel. Cancer Cell. 2008;
13:472–482.

21.	 Yoneda K, Yamamoto T, Osaki T. p53- and p21independent apoptosis of squamous cell carcinoma cells
induced by 5-fluorouracil and radiation. Oral Oncology.
1998; 34:529–553.

8.	 Bensinger SJ, Christofk HR. New aspects of the Warburg
effect in cancer cell biology. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2012;
23:352–361.
9.	 Wallace DC. Mitochondria and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2012; 12:685–698.

22.	 Quarato G, Piccoli C, Scrima R, Capitanio N. Variation
of flux control coefficient of cytochrome c oxidase and of
the other respiratory chain complexes at different values
of protonmotive force occurs by a threshold mechanism.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 1807:1114–1124.

10.	 Xu RH, Pelicano H, Zhou Y, Carew JS, Feng L, Bhalla
KN, Keating MJ, Huang P. Inhibition of glycolysis in
cancer cells: a novel strategy to overcome drug resistance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1229

Oncotarget

23.	 McFate T, Mohyeldin A, Lu H, Thakar J, Henriques J,
Halim ND, Wu H, Schell MJ, Tsang TM, Teahan O,
Zhou S, Califano JA, Jeoung NH, et al. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex activity controls metabolic and
malignant phenotype in cancer cells. J Biol Chem. 2008;
283:22700–22708.

33.	 Popović DM. Current advances in research of cytochrome c
oxidase. Amino Acids. 2013; 45:1073–1087.
34.	 Bensaad K. new roles in metabolism. Trends Cell Biol.
2007; 17:286–291.
35.	 Matoba S, Kang JG, Patino WD, Wragg A, Boehm M,
Gavrilova O, Hurley PJ, Bunz F, Hwang PM. p53 regulates
mitochondrial respiration. Science. 2006; 312:1650–1653.

24.	 Campello S, Scorrano L. Mitochondrial shape changes:
orchestrating cell pathophysiology. EMBO Rep. 2010;
11:678–684.

36.	 Jha MK, Suk K. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase as a
potential therapeutic target for malignant gliomas. Brain
Tumor Res Treat. 2013; 1:57–63.

25.	 Sanchez WY, McGee SL, Connor T, Mottram B, Wilkinson
A, Whitehead JP, Vuckovic S, Catley L. Dichloroacetate
inhibits aerobic glycolysis in multiple myeloma cells and
increases sensitivity to bortezomib. Br J Cancer. 2013;
108:1624–1633.

37.	 Agnoletto C, Melloni E, Casciano F, Rigolin GM, Rimondi
E, Celeghini C, Brunelli L, Cuneo A, Secchiero P, Zauli G.
Sodium dichloroacetate exhibits anti-leukemic activity in
B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and synergizes
with the p53 activator Nutlin-3. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:4347–4360.

26.	 Lo Muzio L, Sartini D, Santarelli A, Rocchetti R,
Morganti S, Pozzi V, Rubini C, Bambini F, Emanuelli M.
Expression and prognostic significance of apoptotic genes
in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Mol Carcinog. 2014;
53:264–271.

38.	 Tennant DA, Durán RV, Gottlieb E. Targeting metabolic
transformation for cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010;
10:267–277.

27.	 Rivera C, Venegas B. Histological and molecular aspects
of oral squamous cell carcinoma. Oncol Lett. 2014; 8:7–11.

39.	 Palmer CS, Osellame LD, Stojanovski D, Ryan MT.
The regulation of mitochondrial morphology: intricate
mechanisms and dynamic machinery. Cell Signal. 2011;
23:1534–1545.

28.	 Zhao Y, Butler EB, Tan M. Targeting cellular metabolism
to improve cancer therapeutics. Cell Death Dis. 2013;
4:e532.

40.	 Scorrano L. Keeping mitochondria in shape: a matter of life
and death. Eur J Clin Invest. 2013; 43:886–893.

29.	 Wen S, Zhu D, Huang P. Targeting cancer cell mitochondria
as a therapeutic approach. Future Med Chem. 2013;
5:53–67.

41.	 Ashrafi G, Schwarz TL. The pathways of mitophagy for
quality control and clearance of mitochondria. Cell Death
Differ. 2013; 20:31–42.

30.	 Gatenby RA, Gillies RJ. Why do cancers have high aerobic
glycolysis? Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:891–899.
31.	 Moreno-Sánchez R, Rodríguez-Enríquez S, MarínHernández A, Saavedra E. Energy metabolism in tumor
cells. FEBS J. 2007; 274:1393–1418.

42.	 Pathak RK, Marrache S, Harn DA, Dhar S. Mito-DCA: a
mitochondria targeted molecular scaffold for efficacious
delivery of metabolic modulator dichloroacetate. ACS
Chem Biol. 2014; 9:1178–1187.

32.	 Jose C, Rossignol R. rationale for mitochondrial targeting
strategies in cancer bioenergetic therapies. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2013; 45:123–129.

43.	 Ke N, Wang X, Xu X, Abassi YA. The xCELLigence
system for real-time and label-free monitoring of cell
viability. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 1807:1114–1124.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1230

Oncotarget

