Original Article

Rare Incidence of Congestive Heart Failure
in Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor and
Other Sarcoma Patients Receiving
Imatinib Mesylate
Jonathan C. Trent, MD, PhD1; Shalin S. Patel2; Jianhu Zhang, PhD2; Dejka M. Araujo, MD1; Juan-Carlos Plana, MD2;
Daniel J. Lenihan, MD2; Dominic Fan, PhD3; Shreyaskumar R. Patel, MD1; Robert S. Benjamin, MD1;
and Aarif Y. Khakoo, MD2

BACKGROUND: The authors sought to determine the incidence and severity of cardiovascular toxicity caused by imatinib mesylate in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) and other sarcoma patients, and to explore cardiotoxicity
caused by imatinib mesylate using cell culture and in vitro models. METHODS: To determine the incidence and significance of serious cardiac adverse events in GIST and other sarcoma patients receiving imatinib mesylate, the authors
performed a retrospective analysis of 219 consecutive patients treated with imatinib mesylate. In vitro studies of imatinib mesylate on cultured cardiomyocytes and biochemical studies of cardiac lysates from mice treated with imatinib
mesylate were performed to define the potential cardiotoxic effects of imatinib mesylate. RESULTS: Grade 3 or 4
potentially cardiotoxic adverse events (mostly edema or effusions) occurred in 8.2% of patients, were manageable
with medical therapy, and infrequently required dose reduction or discontinuation of imatinib mesylate. Arrhythmias,
acute coronary syndromes, or heart failure were uncommon, occurring in <1% of treated patients. However, administration of imatinib in a mouse model system resulted in inhibition of activation of protein kinases that are known to
be important in the cardiac stress response. CONCLUSIONS: The authors concluded that imatinib is an uncommon
cause of cardiotoxicity, and that the cardiovascular adverse events that occur are manageable when recognized and
treated. Nevertheless, our preclinical findings suggest that imatinib remains a potential cardiotoxin. Furthermore, the
cardiac consequences of long-term imatinib therapy remain unknown. We therefore recommend treatment of risk factors for cardiovascular disease in imatinib-treated patients in accord with the American Heart Association guidelines
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
for the prevention and treatment of heart failure. Cancer 2010;116:184–92. V
KEYWORDS: imatinib, congestive heart failure, cardiotoxicity, sarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor.

The use of imatinib mesylate as a therapy targeting an essential signaling pathway (Abl kinase) in patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) represents a new paradigm in rational drug design, and has shown remarkable efficacy in
the treatment of patients with early chronic phase and advanced stage CML.1,2 Similarly, imatinib mesylate has been
shown to be extremely effective in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) through inhibition of
the tyrosine kinase c-kit.3 The promise of molecularly targeted cancer therapy is based on the premise that by specifically
inhibiting molecules associated with tumor growth, such therapies will be highly effective in treating cancer without
adversely affecting normal organs.
Although targeted cancer therapies are typically aimed at molecules that are aberrant in cancer cells, the fact remains
that many receptor tyrosine kinases are expressed in normal tissues, and these molecules may play a role in the normal
physiology of many organ systems, including the cardiovascular system. An example of this was seen in the treatment of

Corresponding author: Aarif Y. Khakoo, MD, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Cardiology, Unit 1451, 1515 West Holcombe,
Houston, TX 77030; Fax: 713-563-0462; aykhakoo@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Cardiology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

For studies conducted involving human subjects, informed consent was obtained from the subject(s) and/or guardian(s).
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24683, Received: January 9, 2009; Revised: March 27, 2009; Accepted: April 9, 2009, Published online November 2, 2009 in Wiley
InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

184

Cancer

January 1, 2010

HF Caused by Imatinib in GIST Patients/Trent et al

breast cancer patients with the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab, whose target is the receptor tyrosine kinase
ErbB2, the product of the HER-2/neu gene. Seven percent of patients treated with trastuzumab after anthracycline exposure developed cardiomyopathy, and 29% of
the patients treated concurrently with trastuzumab and
anthracycline developed cardiomyopathy.4 Subsequent
preclinical studies demonstrated the essential role of
ErbB2 signaling in normal cardiac development and in
the cardiac response to stress.5-7
Recent work has demonstrated that imatinib mesylate can cause significant cardiac dysfunction when
administered to mice at clinically relevant dosages.8,9 Imatinib-treated mice developed depressed cardiac function,
activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response
within the heart, and mitochondrial abnormalities. Similar mitochondrial abnormalities were also seen in cardiac
tissue obtained from patients treated with imatinib who
also developed cardiac dysfunction and heart failure (HF).
This study led to widespread concern about the
potential cardiotoxicity of imatinib mesylate and
prompted a revision of the drug label to include careful
monitoring of patients with cardiac disease or risk factors
for HF. Subsequently, multiple studies reported a low
incidence of clinically important HF in patients with both
CML10 and GIST11,12 treated with imatinib.
To further explore the effects of imatinib on cardiac
function of GIST patients, we performed a retrospective
analysis of our clinical trial database for analysis of potential cardiac adverse events. We found that adverse cardiac
events in GIST patients treated with imatinib mesylate
were uncommon and manageable and rarely required discontinuation of imatinib mesylate therapy. Consistent
with these clinical findings, we found that in contrast to
doxorubicin, imatinib did not cause apoptosis in cardiac
myocytes in vitro. However, whereas in vivo administration of imatinib to mice did not cause overt cardiac failure, it did result in inhibition of the protein kinases Akt
and Erk 1/2, both of which have been shown to play a cardioprotective role in the setting of vascular stress.13

Table 1. Demographic and Baseline Clinical Characteristics of
Patients (n ¼ 219)

Characteristic
Median age, y

Value (Range)
58 (16-92)

Sex
Male
Female

116
103

Race
Caucasian
African American
Hispanic
Asian
American Indian
Other
Median imatinib mesylate dose

169
22
19
7
1
1
600 (400-800)
mg daily

evaluated for the occurrence of grade 3 or 4 potential cardiac adverse events, including shortness of breath, dyspnea
on exertion, chest pain, edema, pleural effusion, ascites,
cardiac ischemia, and arrhythmia. The baseline characteristics of these patients are shown Table 1.
In patients with potential cardiac adverse events, the
clinical histories were reviewed in detail. Chest x-rays,
echocardiograms, electrocardiograms, and relevant laboratory studies were reviewed for each patient to determine
the possibility of cardiac toxicity. Signs and symptoms of
HF that were specifically searched for in the chart review
include orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and
jugular venous distention. Radiographic criteria used to
diagnose HF include pulmonary vascular congestion and
cardiac silhouette enlargement. Echocardiograms of all
patients with potential cardiac adverse events were examined in detail by a single cardiologist (J.-C.P.), who was
unaware of any clinical information.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cardiomyocyte Culture
HL-1 cardiomyocytes were used for in vitro studies and
were grown in Claycomb media (SAFC Biosciences,
Lenexa, Kan) as previously described,14 including 100
lM norepinephrine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo) and
10% fetal bovine serum (SAFC Biosciences).

Clinical Studies
We reviewed all sarcoma patients enrolled in clinical trials
with imatinib mesylate from December 27, 2000 to May
11, 2006, with institutional review board approval. From
these databases, 219 consecutively treated patients were

In Vitro Apoptosis Assay
Hl-1 cardiomyocytes were serum starved and treated with
imatinib mesylate (Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) or vehicle control overnight. Cells pretreated with imatinib or

Cancer

January 1, 2010

185

Original Article

control were exposed to doxorubicin (Sigma-Aldrich) for
2 hours in serum-free media. Lysates from drug-exposed
cells were harvested, and caspase activity was measured as
an index of cardiomyocyte apoptosis as previously
described.15 Caspase activity was measured using the Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay System (Promega, Madison, Wis).
In Vivo Imatinib Administration
Imatinib mesylate was administered to mice at 50 mg/kg
daily for a period of up to 6 weeks. All animal work was
done according to animal protocols approved by the institutional animal care and use committee. Imatinib was dissolved in saline and administered by gavage. Control mice
were administered identical amounts of vehicle control by
gavage. Forty-eight hours after the final dosage of imatinib, mice were sacrificed, and hearts and lungs were immediately harvested for weighing. Hearts were then flash
frozen in liquid nitrogen until ready to be used for biochemical analysis.
Western Blotting
Protein lysates isolated from murine left ventricles were
isolated using cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, Mass) with phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were
separated by gel electrophoresis and blotted using the
Novex system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif). Blots were
probed with antibodies directed against phosphorylated
Akt (Ser473), phosphorylated Erk 1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204),
total Akt, and total Erk 1/2 (Cell Signaling Technology).
Probing with an antiglyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) was also performed to
control for equal protein loading.

RESULTS
Of the 219 patients evaluated, 18 (8.2%) were identified
as having a grade 3 or 4 potential cardiac adverse event.
The specific characteristics, along with lists of the established risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) of
these 18 patients, are shown in Table 2. Notably, the median age of patients with grade 3 or 4 potential cardiac
adverse events was 65 years (range, 21-88 years). In total,
13 (72%) had metastatic disease, and 10 (56%) had a history of hypertension. The median imatinib mesylate dose
in patients with potential cardiac adverse events was 600
mg (range, 400-800 mg) daily. The median number of
days the patient was on imatinib mesylate before potential
cardiac adverse event was 174 (range, 17-1588 days).

186

None of these features was significantly different from
those seen in the overall patient population.
Of the 219 patients that we studied, 7 (3.2%) manifested grade 3 or 4 dependent edema or effusion, 5 (2.3%)
had objective evidence of cardiac ischemia or chest pain, 2
(0.9%) had documented arrhythmias, 2 (0.9%) had grade
3 or 4 dyspnea, 1 (0.4%) had objective left ventricular
(LV) dysfunction by echocardiography, and 1 (0.4%)
went into cardiac arrest.
Of the 7 (3.2%) patients who manifested edema or
effusion, 2 (0.9%) had a pleural effusion, 4 (1.8%) had ascites, all 7 had lower extremity edema, and none had
objective LV dysfunction or any signs, symptoms, or radiographic evidence of HF. Of the 4 (1.8%) patients who
had echocardiograms after development of the potential
cardiac adverse event, all had normal cardiac ejection fractions (EF >55%). Interventions in these 7 patients included
diuretics for 6 (2.8%), angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors and beta blockers for 2 (0.9%), thoracentesis and paracentesis for 5 (2.3%), a continued, unchanged
imatinib mesylate dose for 3 (1.4%), a continued, reduced
imatinib mesylate dose for 3 (1.4%), and discontinuation of
imatinib mesylate for 1 patient (0.5%). This final patient
had imatinib mesylate discontinued because of the combination of grade 3/4 edema and progression of disease while on
800 mg imatinib mesylate daily.
Of the 5 (2.3%) patients who had chest pain or possible cardiac ischemia, electrocardiograms revealed that 1
(0.5%) had new Q waves or ST-segment elevation, and 1
(0.5%) had new ST-segment depression or T-wave inversion. Two (0.9%) patients had elevated cardiac injury biomarkers. One (0.5%) patient had a positive stress test.
Three (1.4%) patients required cardiac catheterization.
Two (0.9%) patients had developed flow-limiting CAD.
An ST-segment elevation and Q-wave myocardial infarction occurred in 1 patient in the postoperative period after
neoadjuvant therapy with imatinib mesylate for GIST.
This patient was diabetic, and had a history of hyperlipidemia. Another patient with multiple risk factors for CAD
had a positive stress test 10 days after starting neoadjuvant
imatinib mesylate as part of a preoperative evaluation.
The patient had no symptoms. The patient was found to
have severe flow-limiting CAD and had multiple coronary
stents placed. All 5 (2.3%) patients above continued on
imatinib mesylate without dose reduction.
We were able to identify only 1 (0.5%) patient who
clearly developed HF associated with severe morbidity
and mortality while on imatinib mesylate. The patient
was a 61-year-old woman who was started on 400 mg

Cancer

January 1, 2010

HF Caused by Imatinib in GIST Patients/Trent et al

Table 2. Characteristics of Imatinib Mesylate-Treated Patients With Potentially Cardiotoxic Adverse Events

Patient Age Race Sex Tumor
No.
Stage

Maximum Duration of CAD/CAD
Dose
Rx Before
Risk
of Imatinib AE, d
Factors

Potential
Cardiac AE

1
2
3
4
5
6

32
70
57
54
57
54

W
B
B
B
B
W

M
F
F
M
M
M

Metastatic
Metastatic
Metastatic
Primary
Primary
Primary

800
600
400
800
600
600

55
1588
91
11
57
17

Lower extremity edema
Left ventricular dysfunction
Chest pain
Lower extremity edema
Acute coronary syndrome
Stable angina

7
8

77
21

B
W

F
F

400
800

338
56

9
10
11
12
13

73
41
61
71
88

H
W
W
W
W

M
M
F
M
M

Primary
Metastatic
osteosarcoma
Metastatic
Metastatic
Metastatic
Metastatic
Metastatic

800
400
400
400
400

115
303
756
843
320

14
15
16
17
18

71
74
81
76
37

W
W
W
A
W

F
F
M
M
M

Metastatic
Metastatic
Metastatic
Metastatic
Primary

400
400
400
400
600

232
31
1138
1517
88

CAD, HTN, CABG
HTN
HTN
DM, hyperlipidemia
CAD, PTCA, DM,
hyperlipidemia, HTN
DM, HTN, atrial fibrillation

HTN
DM, HTN
HTN
PVD
HTN
HTN, hyperlipidemia, PVD

Atrial fibrillation
Pleural effusion
Ascites
Pulmonary edema
Lower extremity edema
Acute coronary syndrome
Pulmonary edema,
lower extremity edema
Pulmonary edema
Lower extremity edema
Carotid stenosis
Lower extremity edema
Pleural effusion

Rx indicates treatment; AE, adverse event; CAD, coronary artery disease; W, white; M, male; B, black; F, female; HTN, hypertension; CABG, coronary artery
bypass graft; DM, diabetes mellitus; PTCA, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty; PVD, peripheral vascular disease.

imatinib mesylate daily for metastatic GIST. The patient’s
prior history included 2-vessel coronary artery bypass surgery but no history of HF or left ventricular dysfunction.
After 2 years of imatinib mesylate therapy, the patient
underwent surgical resection of the metastatic GIST. Preoperative evaluation revealed normal LV function and
only mild anterior wall ischemia on stress testing. Postoperatively there was steady progression of the disease over a
2-year time period, which resulted in the subsequent
increase in the imatinib mesylate dose to 800 mg daily.
After further disease progression on imatinib mesylate,
perifosine, an antiproliferative and proapoptotic agent
under investigation, was added to the patient’s treatment
regimen. In hundreds of patients treated with perifosine,
there has been no association with a decrease in cardiac
function alone or in combination with kinase inhibitors.
One month later, the patient presented with orthopnea,
severe fatigue, and dyspnea. Echocardiography at the time
of presentation with symptoms of congestive HF confirmed profound decrease in LV function (EF < 20%)
compared with the preoperative echocardiography performed 2 years earlier (Fig. 1). Electrocardiogram revealed
no evidence of new ischemic changes, troponin I levels
were <0.1 and brain natriuretic peptide levels were 2399
pg/mL (normal < 50 pg/mL). After further progression
Cancer

January 1, 2010

of both GIST and congestive HF (CHF), the patient was
treated with a regimen of diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and
beta blockers with concurrent discontinuation of imatinib
mesylate and perifosine therapy. The patient died several
months later from progression of disease.
Our clinical data suggest that clinically apparent,
imatinib mesylate-associated cardiac abnormalities are
uncommon in GIST patients. However, this clinical observation does not exclude subclinical or delayed cardiovascular effects of imatinib. To further explore the
cardiotoxic effects of imatinib, we used the HL-1 cardiomyocyte cell line as a model system. HL-1 cells are beating
cardiomyocytes derived from a primary atrial tumor
whose use as a model system for in vitro studies has been
well validated.14 As has been described previously,16 we
observed a dose-dependent increase in apoptosis, assayed
by caspase 3/7 activation, in cardiomyocytes treated with
doxorubicin (Fig. 2A). In contrast, treatment with imatinib mesylate over a broad concentration range had no
effect on cardiomyocyte apoptosis in vitro (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, we did not observe enhancement of doxorubicin-mediated apoptosis by imatinib over a broad dose
range (Fig. 2C). These findings importantly contrast the
cardiotoxicity of imatinib with the well-established proapoptotic effects of anthracycline-based chemotherapy.17

187

Original Article

Figure 1. New left ventricular dysfunction in a patient treated with imatinib mesylate is shown. Long axis echocardiographic
images shown at end diastole (top panels) and end systole (bottom panels) demonstrate profound changes in cardiac function
in a patient who developed heart failure while undergoing therapy with imatinib. In contrast to the normal systolic myocardial
contraction seen in June, 2003 (Pre Imatinib), before imatinib therapy, cardiac systolic function was markedly reduced at the
time of presentation with heart failure in December, 2005 (Post Imatinib), at which time the calculated left ventricular ejection
fraction was 20% to 25%.

To study the functional and biochemical effects of
imatinib mesylate in the heart in the in vivo setting, we
treated mice with imatinib mesylate in at 50 mg/kg/d for
a period of 4 weeks; a dosage regimen similar to those
used previously in vivo cancer efficacy studies.18-20 In
imatinib-treated mice, we saw no evidence of overt cardiac
dysfunction as measured by heart weight to body weight
ratios (Fig. 3A) or lung weight to body weight ratios (not
shown), an index of pulmonary edema. To further explore
the effects of imatinib on the heart, we analyzed cardiac
lysates from hearts of imatinib-treated mice for activation
of established downstream targets of tyrosine kinases that
are known to be cardioprotective under conditions of
stress. Strikingly, we saw a marked reduction in levels of
phosphorylated Akt (Fig. 3B) in cardiac tissue from imatinib-treated mice compared with controls. Multiple studies from a variety of mouse models implicate Akt as a
central regulator of maintenance of cardiac eutrophy and
as a regulator of the cardiac response to physiologic
stress.21 In addition, we found a marked reduction in
phosphorylation of the Erk 1/2 branch of the mitogen-

188

activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway in
imatinib-treated hearts compared with controls (Fig. 3C),
obtaining a significant 50% decrease in the ratio of phosphorylated to total Erk 1/2 (Fig. 3D). Like Akt, Erk 1/2
activation has been shown to be critical for maintenance
of cardiac function under conditions of stress.22 Notably,
imatinib did not alter phosphorylation of the p38 branch
of the MAPK signaling cascade (data not shown), whose
role in cardiac protection is less well established.23 These
findings suggest that although imatinib does not cause
overt cardiac failure, it does affect signaling cascades that
may predispose to the development of cardiac failure
under conditions of physiologic stress.

DISCUSSION
In patients with GIST treated with imatinib mesylate, cardiac dysfunction does not appear to be causally related to
development of severe edema or effusion in most cases.
Overt CHF with new LV dysfunction during imatinib
mesylate treatment in GIST patients occurred in 1 of 219
Cancer

January 1, 2010

HF Caused by Imatinib in GIST Patients/Trent et al

Figure 2. Imatinib mesylate (IM) does not contribute to cardiomyocyte apoptosis alone or in combination with doxorubicin
(Dox). HL-1 cardiac myocytes were treated with doxorubicin (A), imatinib mesylate (B), or both drugs (C) overnight at the indicated concentrations. The following day, cell lysates were harvested and assayed for activity of caspase 3/7, a marker of cellular
apoptosis. Whereas doxorubicin showed a prominent, dose-dependent increase in caspase 3/7 activity (A), imatinib mesylate
alone had a minimal effect on caspase activity (B), and increasing concentrations of imatinib did not substantially increase caspase activity in cells treated with doxorubicin at 0.2 or 1.0 lM (C). Results shown are mean values of triplicate independent treatments, and are representative of 2 independent experiments.

(0.4%) patients, and the causal relationship of imatinib or
perifosine to the development of CHF in that case is not
clear. GIST patients with preexisting heart disease or multiple risk factors for CAD were more likely to experience
cardiac adverse events while being treated with imatinib
mesylate than those with no history of cardiac disease.
Because this study does not include a placebo arm for
comparison, it is not possible to know whether this is any
higher than the population of patients not treated with
imatinib. Potential cardiac adverse events caused by imatinib mesylate in GIST patients are uncommon, manageable, and rarely require imatinib mesylate or other therapy
to be discontinued or dose-reduced.
Furthermore, we used an in vitro assay to show that
the effects of imatinib on cardiomyocytes are distinct
from the established proapoptotic effects of doxorubicin.
However, although administration of imatinib at clinically relevant dosages did not alter mouse cardiac function
in vivo, we found that pathways that are known to be
critical to the cardiac stress response are strongly inhibited
after several weeks of imatinib therapy. Such findings suggest that imatinib treatment may increase the likelihood
of development of cardiac dysfunction under conditions
of stress. Alternatively, it is possible that compensatory
mechanisms independent of activation of Akt and Erk 1/2
may minimize cardiac toxicity caused by imatinib under
conditions of stress. Studies designed to investigate the
effects of imatinib on the cardiac response to vascular
stress are part of the ongoing work in our laboratory.
The effects on cardiac Akt and Erk 1/2 phosphorylation caused by imatinib are distinct but are possibly additive to the effects of imatinib on the cardiac evoked stress

Cancer

January 1, 2010

response that have been previously reported.8 The upstream
targets of imatinib that result in blockade of activation Akt
and Erk 1/2 are of great interest. Several reports suggest that
Abl kinase is a critical target of imatinib in the cardiomyocyte.8,9 Although the MAPK and Akt pathways are putative
effectors of Abl kinase signaling, a direct effect on this signaling pathway in cardiac myocytes caused by imatinib has not
previously been described.
Another possibility is that imatinib exerts its effects
on the heart via inhibition of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor signaling. PDGF receptor is an
established target of imatinib,24 and both the Akt and
MAPK pathways are key effectors of PDGF receptor signaling.25 Although the role of PDGF receptor signaling in
the heart is largely unexplored, recent work suggests that
activation of PDGF receptor in the cardiomyocyte may
exert a cardioprotective role through effects on Akt signaling.26 The relative contributions of inhibition of Abl,
PDGF receptor, or other targets to the effects of imatinib
on the MAPK and Akt pathways in cardiomyocytes are
the subject of intense study in our laboratory.
Our preclinical findings highlight several important
points about the clinical cardiovascular effects of imatinib
that are worthy of mention. First of all, previous reports
and our clinical findings suggest that patients with underlying cardiovascular disease may be at greater risk for
developing the cardiovascular abnormalities associated
with imatinib therapy.8,10 It should be noted that there is
as yet no conclusive evidence that these adverse events are
indicative of drug toxicity. One weakness of our study is
that it did not include careful evaluation of a control
group with similar cardiac histories but without GIST or

189

Original Article

Figure 3. Imatinib mesylate treatment blocks activation of the kinases Akt and Erk 1/2 in the heart. Mice were treated with imatinib mesylate at a dosage of 50 mg/kg/d for a total of 4 weeks. (A) Heart weight/body weight ratios were unchanged in imatinib-treated mice. (B) Phosphorylation of the protein kinase Akt was markedly reduced in the hearts of imatinib-treated mice
compared with control mice, whereas total Akt levels were unchanged. Results are representative of data from 5 pairs of mice.
(C) Phosphorylation of the protein kinase Erk 1/2 was also significantly reduced in hearts from imatinib-treated mice compared
with controls. (D) Quantitative densitometry reveals a 40% decrease in phosphorylated/total Erk 1/2 levels from hearts of imatinib-treated mice compared with controls (n ¼ 5 in each group, P < .005). GAPDH indicates glyceraldehyde phosphate
dehydrogenase.

imatinib treatment. Another weakness of our study and of
other studies that have determined the incidence of potential cardiac adverse events putatively caused by imatinib
and other tyrosine kinase inhibitors is that these studies
have been retrospective in nature, and have not relied on
careful, prospectively defined measurements of cardiac
function. The clinical diagnosis of HF in cancer patients
can be enormously challenging to make without the use of
prospective, well-defined endpoints, because of the overlap of the cardinal symptoms of HF—dyspnea, fatigue,
and edema—which are very common in cancer patients,
including GIST patients treated with imatinib. Thus, the
reported incidence of HF caused by imatinib therapy, particularly when mild and subclinical, may be underestimated by our study and others. Furthermore, little is
known about the effects of long-term administration of
imatinib and other tyrosine kinase inhibitors on cardiac
function. Prospective studies with cardiac monitoring will
be required to answer these questions, and based on our
preclinical findings, we believe that such studies are
warranted.

190

Although we await such studies, we believe that the
wealth of evidence suggests that cardiac complications in
patients treated with imatinib are manageable and should
not be a reason to withhold imatinib therapy from cancer
patients who would derive benefit. At the same time, in light
of the current mechanistic studies and clinical observations,
a practical approach to preventing potential cardiac complications of imatinib is needed. One such approach that seems
to be applicable to patients treated with imatinib is based on
the recently published guidelines from the American Heart
Association for the management of CHF (Fig. 4). In this
classification scheme, a new area of focus is the so-called
stage A patient, a patient without clinical evidence of cardiac
dysfunction but at risk for HF. Management of such
patients involves modification of risk factors that may predispose the patient to HF, including treatment of blood
pressure and hypercholesterolemia and encouragement of
smoking cessation (Fig. 4).
Recently, the US Food and Drug Administration has
approved the adjuvant use of imatinib for patients who have

Cancer

January 1, 2010

HF Caused by Imatinib in GIST Patients/Trent et al

Figure 4. American Heart Association guidelines for the classification and treatment of congestive heart failure are shown.
Stages in the development of heart failure/recommended therapy by stage. GIST patients treated with imatinib may be at risk for
the development of heart failure, and thus, may be treated according to the treatment recommendations for Stage A patients.
Reprinted with permission from the American Heart Association. HF indicates heart failure; FHx CM, family history of cardiomyopathy; MI, myocardial infarction; LV, left ventricular; LVH LV hypertrophy; EF, ejection fraction; ACEI, angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker. Reprinted with permission. ACC/AHA 2005 Guideline Update for Diagnosis
C 2005, American Heart Association, Inc.
and Management of Chronic Heart in the Adult. V

had their GIST resected without specifying the duration of
therapy. Although these patients may be cured of their
GIST, they may be taking imatinib for many years. Early
detection and management of HF of any etiology is important in this patient population. Therefore, based on its
potential cardiotoxicity, chronic administration, and longterm patient survival, we believe that patients treated with
imatinib can be thought of as stage A patients (at risk for
HF), and that application of the American Heart Association guidelines for the stage A patient is a reasonable
approach to prevent long-term cardiac complications that
occur in patients treated with this remarkable drug.

Cancer

January 1, 2010

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
This work was supported by an institutional Physician-Scientist
Award (J.C.T., A.Y.K.), National Institutes of Health/National
Cancer Institute grant 1K23CA109060-05 (J.C.T.), and the
Amschwand Sarcoma Cancer Foundation (J.C.T.).

REFERENCES
1. Druker BJ, Guilhot F, O’Brien SG, et al. Five-year followup of patients receiving imatinib for chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2408-2417.
2. O’Brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, et al. Imatinib compared with interferon and low-dose cytarabine for newly
diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl
J Med. 2003;348:994-1004.

191

Original Article
3. Verweij J, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, et al. Progression-free survival in gastrointestinal stromal tumours with high-dose
imatinib: randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;364:1127-1134.
4. Seidman A, Hudis C, Pierri MK, et al. Cardiac dysfunction
in the trastuzumab clinical trials experience. J Clin Oncol.
2002;20:1215-1221.
5. Crone SA, Zhao YY, Fan L, et al. ErbB2 is essential in the
prevention of dilated cardiomyopathy. Nat Med. 2002;
8:459-465.
6. Negro A, Brar BK, Gu Y, Peterson KL, Vale W, Lee KF.
erbB2 is required for G protein-coupled receptor signaling in
the heart. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006;103:15889-15893.
7. Ozcelik C, Erdmann B, Pilz B, et al. Conditional mutation
of the ErbB2 (HER2) receptor in cardiomyocytes leads to
dilated cardiomyopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:
8880-8885.
8. Kerkela R, Grazette L, Yacobi R, et al. Cardiotoxicity of the
cancer therapeutic agent imatinib mesylate. Nat Med.
2006;12:908-916.
9. Fernandez A, Sanguino A, Peng Z, et al. An anticancer CKit kinase inhibitor is reengineered to make it more active
and less cardiotoxic. J Clin Invest. 2007;117:4044-4054.
10. Atallah E, Durand JB, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Congestive
heart failure is a rare event in patients receiving imatinib
therapy. Blood. 2007;110:1233-1237.
11. Verweij J, Casali PG, Kotasek D, et al. Imatinib does not
induce cardiac left ventricular failure in gastrointestinal stromal tumours patients: analysis of EORTC-ISG-AGITG
study 62005. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:974-978.
12. Perik PJ, Rikhof B, de Jong FA, Verweij J, Gietema JA, van
der Graaf WT. Results of plasma N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide and cardiac troponin monitoring in GIST
patients do not support the existence of imatinib-induced
cardiotoxicity. Ann Oncol. 2008;19:359-361.
13. Dorn GW II, Force T. Protein kinase cascades in the regulation of cardiac hypertrophy. J Clin Invest. 2005;115:527537.
14. White SM, Constantin PE, Claycomb WC. Cardiac physiology at the cellular level: use of cultured HL-1 cardiomyocytes
for studies of cardiac muscle cell structure and function. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004;286:H823-H829.

192

15. Communal C, Sumandea M, de Tombe P, Narula J, Solaro
RJ, Hajjar RJ. Functional consequences of caspase activation in
cardiac myocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:6252-6256.
16. Andrieu-Abadie N, Jaffrezou JP, Hatem S, Laurent G,
Levade T, Mercadier JJ. L-carnitine prevents doxorubicininduced apoptosis of cardiac myocytes: role of inhibition of
ceramide generation. FASEB J. 1999;13:1501-1510.
17. Zhang J, Clark JR Jr, Herman EH, Ferrans VJ. Doxorubicininduced apoptosis in spontaneously hypertensive rats: differential effects in heart, kidney and intestine, and inhibition by
ICRF-187. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1996;28:1931-1943.
18. Druker BJ, Tamura S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a
selective inhibitor of the Abl tyrosine kinase on the growth
of Bcr-Abl positive cells. Nat Med. 1996;2:561-566.
19. Wolff NC, Ilaria RL Jr. Establishment of a murine model for
therapy-treated chronic myelogenous leukemia using the tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571. Blood. 2001;98:2808-2816.
20. Hwang RF, Yokoi K, Bucana CD, et al. Inhibition of platelet-derived growth factor receptor phosphorylation by
STI571 (Gleevec) reduces growth and metastasis of human
pancreatic carcinoma in an orthotopic nude mouse model.
Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:6534-6544.
21. Clerk A, Cullingford TE, Fuller SJ, et al. Signaling pathways
mediating cardiac myocyte gene expression in physiological
and stress responses. J Cell Physiol. 2007;212:311-322.
22. Purcell NH, Wilkins BJ, York A, et al. Genetic inhibition of cardiac ERK1/2 promotes stress-induced apoptosis
and heart failure but has no effect on hypertrophy in
vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:14074-14079.
23. Bassi R, Heads R, Marber MS, Clark JE. Targeting p38MAPK in the ischaemic heart: kill or cure? Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2008;8:141-146.
24. Savage DG, Antman KH. Imatinib mesylate—a new oral
targeted therapy. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:683-693.
25. Heldin CH, Ostman A, Ronnstrand L. Signal transduction
via platelet-derived growth factor receptors. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 1998;1378:F79-F113.
26. Hsieh PC, Davis ME, Gannon J, MacGillivray C, Lee RT.
Controlled delivery of PDGF-BB for myocardial protection
using injectable self-assembling peptide nanofibers. J Clin
Invest. 2006;116:237-248.

Cancer

January 1, 2010

