1877

E D I T O R I A L

Renal Sparing Surgery for
Children With Bilateral
Wilms Tumor
Michael Ritchey,

MD

Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Scottsdale, Arizona.

I

See referenced original article on pages 2060
70, this issue.
Address of reprints: Michael Ritchey, MD, Pediatric Urology Associates, 1920 East Cambridge
Avenue, Suite 302, Phoenix, AZ 85006; Fax: (602)
264-0461; E-mail: michael.ritchey@gmail.com
Received January 7, 2008; accepted January 11,
2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

n the current issue of Cancer, Davidoff et al. have reported on a consecutive series of patients with bilateral Wilms tumor (BWT) in which
they attempted to perform bilateral renal-sparing surgery in all patients.1
Those authors are to be commended on their ability to perform either
partial nephrectomy or enucleation in such a high percentage of kidneys, including many patients with large, centrally located tumors.
Many children with a similar burden of disease frequently undergo nephrectomy. Davidoff et al. note that data from prior National Wilms
Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) studies have indicated that only 20% of
patients with BWT were managed with bilateral renal-sparing surgery. In
NWTS-4, 58% of children had at least 1 kidney removed.
There are many reasons why renal-sparing surgery is not performed more often. The surgeon may have the impression that the
involved kidney has little salvageable renal parenchyma. The normal
renal parenchyma often is compressed by these large tumors and is
not replaced completely by tumor, as demonstrated in the study by
Davidoff et al. Once the tumor is removed, the kidney volume can
appear remarkably normal as these patients are followed over time.
Experience and familiarity of the surgeon with renal-sparing surgical
procedures may play a role. There are only approximately 25 cases of
BWT annually in the U.S.; therefore, few centers have the experience
that can be collected at a comprehensive cancer center.
In their study, Davidoff et al. administered 3 drugs (dactinomycin, vincristine, and doxorubicin) routinely to all patients.1 This
strategy was based on an earlier report from their institution that
demonstrated improved local tumor control and deceased relapse
in patients with BWT. It is not certain that this regimen produces
improved response rates, ie, tumor shrinkage that would facilitate
renal-sparing surgery. There are some data from the International
Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) group suggesting that using 3
drugs does increase the percentage of tumors that have complete
tumor necrosis.2 However, to my knowledge, there are no published
data indicating that the actual percentage tumor shrinkage after 3
drugs is greater than that after 2 drugs (dactinomycin and vincristine; the standard preoperative chemotherapy used in the SIOP clinical trials). No data are provided by Davidoff et al. in their report on
the reduction in tumor volume. In the bilateral tumor protocol
that is being developed by the Children’s Oncology Group, a 3-drug

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23387
Published online 7 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1878

CANCER May 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 9

regimen is being considered at diagnosis for patients
with BWT. The rationale is to decrease the time
interval from diagnosis to deﬁnitive surgery in these
patients. In many patients, these tumors do not
respond well in terms of reduced volume, and the
treating institution will opt to intensify therapy
before proceeding with surgery. The expectation is
that intensiﬁcation of therapy will reduce tumor size
further, allowing the patient to undergo renal-sparing
surgery. However, the amount of additional reduction in tumor burden with added therapy has not
been documented. It has been noted that the change
in therapy can lead to a prolonged course of preoperative therapy before the patient undergoes deﬁnitive surgical resection. There is concern that some of
these patients have unfavorable histology, eg anaplasia, and these patients would be served better
with early surgery for local tumor control.3 Starting
therapy with 3 drugs could eliminate some of the
delay.
The SIOP group has considerable experience
with preoperative chemotherapy before nephrectomy. They reported on the pathologic response of
the tumors to therapy, and their data may be useful
when evaluating patients with BWT. Differentiation
of the tumor can occur after chemotherapy. Epithelial and stromal-predominant tumors are much more
common after preoperative therapy. SIOP has
reported these patterns in 14% of patients after preoperative therapy.4 In patients who undergo immediate nephrectomy without preoperative therapy, these
patterns are observed in only 1.6% of patients. It has
been noted that children with these differentiated
tumors have less reduction in tumor volume at
chemotherapy. However, these tumors have an excellent prognosis and low rates of relapse if they are
excised completely. It is noteworthy that these data
are based on patients who have undergone complete
nephrectomy for unilateral tumors. Such data need
to be collected prospectively in children with BWT
who undergo renal-sparing surgical procedures.
In their report, Davidoff et al. point out that a main
concern regarding renal-sparing surgery is the increased rate of positive margins and, thus, the increased risk of local recurrence. One problem in
patients with bilateral tumors is trying to determine
whether new tumors are the result of residual disease
or de novo tumors that have developed from other
sites. These patients have multifocal disease and a high
incidence of nephrogenic rests. Not all of these rests
are eradicated with chemotherapy, and late occurrence
of new tumors has been observed in this patient population. There are several factors that can decrease tumor recurrence. Complete resection of tumor, of

course, is the objective; however, not all tumors can be
managed with resection that includes a margin of normal kidney. Large, centrally located tumors can be
managed only with enucleation if the kidney is to be
spared. The use of a 3-drug chemotherapy regimen
may improve local control. Radiotherapy also can
reduce tumor recurrences. In reviews of NWTSG studies, it has been demonstrated that the use of 20 grays
(Gy) is more effective in preventing local tumor recurrence than the use of 10 Gy.5 However, the lower dose
is used because of concern regarding the potential detrimental effect on renal function. In the report by
Davidoff et al., there were 2 local recurrences, and 1 of
the 2 patients had received postoperative irradiation. In
the end, it really is a balance that has to be achieved
between the intensity of therapy to prevent local recurrence versus avoiding increased therapy for most
patients and treating recurrences as they arise.
Clearly, we need to have long-term follow-up of
this cohort of patients in terms of renal function.
One concern in the report by Davidoff et al. is that
many of the patients are on antihypertensive medications. This may lead to a higher incidence of late
development of end-stage renal disease. One child
developed renal failure with relatively short followup in their report. The NWTSG continues to maintain a late effects study for patients who are treated
on their clinical trials, but the percentage of patients
who are in active follow-up at 20 years is small.
Although they have not noted a large number of
patients developing late renal failure, there are likely
few patients treated for BWT with good long-term
data. This information is needed to ascertain
whether more aggressive bilateral renal-sparing surgery will lead to a decreased rate of renal failure.

REFERENCES
1. Davidoff AM, Giel DW, Jones DP, et al. The feasibility and
outcome of nephron-sparing surgery for children with bilateral Wilms tumor: the St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital
experience: 1999–2006. Cancer. 2008;112:2060–2070.
2. Boccon-Gibod L, Rey A, Sandstedt B, et al. Complete necrosis induced by preoperative chemotherapy in Wilms tumor
as an indicator of low risk: report of the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) Nephroblastoma Trial and
Study 9. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2000;34:183–190.
3. Hamilton TE, Green DM, Perlman EJ, et al. Bilateral Wilms’
tumor with anaplasia: lessons from the National Wilms’ Tumor Study. J Pediatr Surg. 2006;41:1641–1644.
4. Weirich A, Leuschner I, Harms D, et al. Clinical impact of
histologic subtypes in localized non-anaplastic nephroblastoma treated according to the trial and study SIOP-9/GPOH.
Ann Oncol. 2001;12:311–319.
5. Breslow NE, Beckwith JB, Haase GM, et al. Radiation therapy
for favorable histology Wilms tumor: prevention of ﬂank recurrence did not improve survival on National Wilms Tumor
Studies 3 and 4. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;65:203–209.

