Editorial

Twenty Years of Controversy
Surrounding Combined Androgen
Blockade for Advanced Prostate Cancer
Judd W. Moul, MD

It has been 20 years since Crawford and colleagues published the first large randomized trial related to
combined androgen blockade (CAB) in 1989.1 I was a urologic oncology fellow at the time, and my professional career has been marked by ‘‘the CAB debate.’’ Although I suspect that academic debate surrounds
most common and uncommon diseases in medicine, debates around the diagnosis, staging, and management of prostate cancer seem to be more controversial, intense, and long-lasting. Those in and outside of
the field attribute this to the lack of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) addressing many of the important
issues. Although this may be true for many prostate debates, it is not true for the CAB issue. In fact, we
have had more RCTs and even multiple meta-analyses to try to address this debate; yet, after 20 years, we
are still at it! Despite all these evidence-based, high-level data, we still are in a quandary regarding prescribing CAB for our patients.
In this issue of Cancer, Akaza and colleagues present a well written and very important follow-up
of CAB using bicalutamide (80 mg daily) versus lutenizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH)
monotherapy in Japanese men with locally advanced and metastatic prostate cancer.2 At a median follow-up of 5.2 years, there was an overall survival advantage for the men who received CAB. A nonprotocol-specified subgroup analysis by stage revealed that the survival benefit for CAB was observed only
in the men who had stage C/D1 disease. However, that finding as well as the cause-specific survival
data must be interpreted with caution because of small patient numbers/inadequate power. The
authors also analyzed CAB versus LH-RH alone by prostate-specific antigen (PSA) nadir groupings
and demonstrated that the men who received CAB had a much better chance of achieving PSA <1.0
ng/mL. Furthermore, this robust PSA nadir also was associated with improved overall survival for
men in both arms. Finally, the authors reported that the safety and tolerability of CAB with bicalutamide did not differ significantly from those of LH-RH alone.
For those who favor CAB and who are CAB advocates, this article by Akaza et al will be further
proof to support its continued or expanded use in their patients. Supporters of CAB will point to this
Corresponding author: Judd W. Moul, MD, Division of Urologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke Prostate Cancer, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710; Fax: (919) 684-8794; judd.moul@duke.edu
Division of Urologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke Prostate Cancer, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
See referenced original article on pages 3437–45, this issue.
Received: January 5, 2009; Accepted: January 12, 2009
C 2009 American Cancer Society
Published online: May 29, 2009 V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24393, www.interscience.wiley.com

3376

Cancer

August 1, 2009

Editorial/Moul

article to confirm the results of Klotz et al, who suggested that bicalutamide (50 mg daily) as part of CAB
was associated with a 20% survival benefit over LHRH or orchiectomy alone.3 Supporters of CAB also
will use the article by Akaza et al to justify using CAB
in men who have locally advanced or pelvic lymph
node-positive only (stage D1) disease. In this case, if a
clinician followed the doctrine offered by Messing et al
of early hormone therapy for stage D1 disease after radical prostatectomy,4 then he or she would use CAB
rather than LH-RH alone. Even more intriguing is the
extrapolation of the findings of Akaza et al to those
who support early hormone therapy for PSA recurrence. For example, Moul et al demonstrated that early
hormone therapy was beneficial for high-risk PSA recurrence in patients who had Gleason scores of 8 to 10
or PSA doubling times <12 months.5 If a clinician
believes that these patients with high-risk PSA recurrence are similar to patients with stage C/D1 disease,
then he or she would contend that CAB with bicalutamide is superior to LH-RH alone. For the patient with
traditional stage D2 disease, supporters of CAB will
ignore the article by Akaza et al based on small patient
numbers and still will rely on the Prostate Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group meta-analysis6 and the latest
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) guidelines7 to support the use of CAB.
However, for those who are not or never were fans
of CAB, this latest article may not quell their skepticism.
Probably, their primary arguments will be that the study
is too small, the follow-up still is too short, the benefit of
CAB was not observed in D2 disease, the results may not
apply to patients in other countries. and no disease-specific survival benefit was observed. Furthermore, the dose
of bicalutamide (80 mg daily) used by Akaza et al differed
from what is used and approved in most countries (50 mg
daily). Despite the small numbers, detractors of CAB will
use the article, which demonstrated no survival benefit for
D2 disease. to justify LH-RH monotherapy.
We must put the latest findings for CAB from this
article in the context of the current prostate cancer milieu
in many countries where widespread screening has now
resulted in stage migration. For example, in the United
States, <5% of men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer
have metastases at first presentation.8 Compared with the
start of the CAB era in 1989, this is a drastic difference.
Cancer

August 1, 2009

Back in the day, between 20% and 25% of newly diagnosed men had D2 disease at presentation, and CAB
versus castration or LH-RH alone was a commonplace decision for physicians and patients. Now, a ‘‘new D2’’
patient walking through the door is an ‘‘interesting teaching case’’ for my residents and junior faculty colleagues,
and some may not even be up to date with the basics of
hormone therapy management, much less the intricacies
of the CAB debate! Furthermore, intermittent hormone
therapy, peripheral androgen blockade, and the hormone
therapy side-effect debate were not even on the radar
screen in 1989 when CAB first was introduced.9 Where
CAB stands in relation to the application in intermittent
hormone therapy or compared with peripheral androgen
blockade is not addressed in the study by Akaza et al or in
any of the CAB literature.
Finally, where do we place the CAB debate in the
context of pure LH-RH antagonist medications?
Although abarelix was the first pure LH-RH antagonist to
be developed and studied, it was withdrawn from the market because of concerns regarding anaphylaxis.10 At the
end of 2008, the US Food and Drug Administration
approved degarelix as the latest generation, pure LH-RH
antagonist.11 One of the key arguments for using LH-RH
antagonists is their lack of testosterone surge or flare in the
first few weeks of administration. Proponents of these
agents will contend that oral antiandrogens are unnecessary to block the flare, and the implication is that a pure
LH-RH antagonist eliminates the need for CAB. Whether
this is true remains to be studied. A pure LH-RH antagonist proponent probably would say that the only benefit
of bicalutamide in the study (or in any other CAB trial) is
because of the LH-RH agonist flare protection. In particular, Azaka et al used monthly LH-RH agonist agents,
which may be associated with more frequent flare, resulting in a magnified benefit of bicalutamide. Again,
whether this is true or not is unknown. However, if degarelix becomes a popular hormone therapy agent, it will be
interesting to see how many clinicians still use CAB with
it versus a monotherapy pathway.
Several other issues of context for this latest article
are in order. In January 2006, the US government,
through the Medicare Modernization Act of 2005, began
to reimburse for oral antiandrogens through Medicare
Part D. Bicalutamide use, at least in 1 large US healthcare
system, increased after that time, when the cost of drugs
3377

Editorial

was less of a consideration for many patients.12 Conversely, bicalutamide lost US patent protection in March
2009 and became available as a generic. Thus, no pure
‘‘branded’’ nonsteroidal antiandrogen will remain available, and the pharmaceutical marketing of this class of
drugs will stop. It will be interesting to continue to track
the market volumes in this class of drugs in this new light.
Ironically, between this article, the data reported by Klotz
et al,3 and the relatively new ASCO guidelines,7 the support for CAB (and for bicalutamide in particular) is stronger than ever. However, the lack of antiandrogen
marketing as well as the advent of safe LH-RH antagonists
may render the CAB debate a somewhat moot point.
In summary, Akaza and colleagues are to be congratulated for presenting a clear and concise long-term follow-up
RCT favoring CAB with bicalutamide in men with
advanced prostate cancer. The 20-year debate continues!

3.

Klotz L, Schellhammer P, Carroll K. A re-assessment of the
role of combined androgen blockade for advanced prostate
cancer [review]. BJU Int. 2004;93:1177-1182.

4.

Messing EM, Manola J, Sarosdy M, Wilding G, Crawford
ED, Trump D. Immediate hormonal therapy compared
with observation after radical prostatectomy and pelvic
lymphadenectomy in men with node-positive prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1781-1788.

5.

Moul JW, Wu H, Sun L, et al. Early versus delayed hormonal therapy for prostate specific antigen only recurrence
of prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy. J Urol. 2004;
171:1141-1147.

6.

[No authors listed] Maximum androgen blockade in
advanced prostate cancer: an overview of the randomised
trials. Prostate Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Lancet. 2000;355:1491-1498.

7.

Loblaw DA, Virgo KS, Nam R, et al; American Society of
Clinical Oncology. Initial hormonal management of androgen-sensitive metastatic, recurrent, or progressive prostate
cancer: 2006 update of an American Society of Clinical
Oncology practice guideline [review]. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
20:25:1596-1605.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures

8.

Over the last 5 years, the author has consulted with honoraria
for AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, TAP Pharmaceutical Products,
Sanofi-Aventis, GSK (GlaxoSmithKline), and Ferring Pharmaceuticals related to various aspects of hormone therapy treatment
for prostate cancer.

Ryan CJ, Elkin EP, Small EJ, Duchane J, Carroll P.
Reduced incidence of bony metastasis at initial prostate
cancer diagnosis: data from CaPSURE. Urol Oncol.
2006;24:396-402.

9.

Isbarn H, Boccon-Gibod L, Carroll PR, et al. Androgen
deprivation therapy for the treatment of prostate cancer:
consider both benefits and risks. Eur Urol. 2008 Oct 14.
[Epub ahead of print].

References

10. Debruyne F, Bhat G, Garnick MB. Abarelix for injectable
suspension: first-in-class gonadotropin-releasing hormone
antagonist for prostate cancer [review]. Future Oncol.
2006;2:677-696.

1.

2.

Crawford ED, Eisenberger MA, McLeod DG, et al. A controlled trial of leuprolide with and without flutamide in
prostatic carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1989;321:419-424.
Akaza H, Hinotsu S, Usami M, et al. Study Group for the
Combined Androgen Blockade Therapy of Prostate Cancer.
Combined androgen blockade with bicalutamide for
advanced prostate cancer: long-term follow-up of a phase 3,
double-blind, randomized study for survival. Cancer.
2009;115:3437-3445.

3378

11. Klotz L, Boccon-Gibod L, Shore ND, et al. The efficacy
and safety of degarelix: a 12-month, comparative, randomized,open-label, parallel-group phase III study in patients
with prostate cancer. BJU Int. 2008;102:1531-1538.
12. Moul JW, Wiederkehr D, Sendersky V, Connolly M, Stern L,
Onel E. The influence of Medicare reform on the utilization
of anti-androgens in a cohort of patients with prostate cancer
in the United States. J Urol. 2008;179(suppl):30. Abstract 84.

Cancer

August 1, 2009

