Editorial

Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 Receptor Inhibitors
Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?
Bartosz Chmielowski, MD, PhD

The story of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) inhibitors exemplifies the excitement and disappointment in
the development of new targeted therapies in oncology. IGF-1R is a part of a complicated system of the insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)=insulin family of growth factors comprising of 3 receptors, 3 ligands, and 6 circulating IGF-binding
proteins; the IGF-1R part of the system appears to be responsible for the control of apoptosis, cell growth, and differentiation.1 It is a cell membrane-bound receptor, and it gets activated upon binding of the ligands to the extracellular part; this
process leads to the autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues located within the intracellular kinase domain of the receptor
and further activation of 2 main signaling cascades: the phosphoinositide 3-kinase=Akt=mammalian target of rapamycin
(PI3K=Akt=mTOR) pathway and the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway.2 Activation of both pathways is
heavily regulated; however, when activation is dysregulated, as in many cancers, it can lead to uncontrollable cell proliferation, decreased apoptosis, and increased cell survival.
More than 25 years ago, it was reported that the tumor cells from surgically removed primary breast and colon cancers contained specific IGF-1 binding sites and that monoclonal antibodies that blocked the binding domain of IGF-1
inhibited the growth of breast cancer cell lines both in vitro and in vivo, and that was the first suggestion of the importance
of this pathway in cancer biology.3,4 Despite the aforementioned findings, there was limited interest in translating these
basic research results into clinical practice until the early 2000s.5 Since then, myriad different molecules have been tested
in multiple clinical trials and in multiple types of malignancies. This development was supported by encouraging findings
of the preclinical research. The drugs generally can be grouped into 3 categories: monoclonal antibodies blocking the
extracellular ligand binding domain of IGF-1R, small molecules serving as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the intracellular domain, and monoclonal antibodies targeting the IGF ligands.1,6 The first group has been studied in the clinic
most extensively. The list of tested anti-IGF-1R antibodies includes: AMG-479 (ganitumab; Amgen, Thousand Oaks,
Calif), CP-751871 (figitumumab; Pfizer, New York, NY); IMC-A12 (cixutumumab; ImClone, Bridgewater, NJ), MK0648 (dalotuzumab; Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ), R1507 (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), and Sch-717454 (ScheringPlough, Kenilworth, NJ). BMS-754807 (Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY) and OSI-906 (linsitinib; Astellas
Pharma, Tokyo, Japan) are small-molecule TKIs. Finally, MEDI-573 (MedImmune, Gaithersburg, Md [a subsidiary of
AstraZeneca, London, United Kingdom]) and BI836845 (Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim, Germany) block the ligands.
Thus, as pharmaceutical companies embarked on a journey through the “dangerous seas” of IGF-1R pathway inhibition
testing, the bad news on the clinical activity has been coming: ganitumab produced disappointing activity in patients with
breast and pancreatic cancer, and likewise with figitumumab in lung cancer and Ewing sarcoma, dalotuzumab in colorectal cancer, cixutumumab in sarcomas and colorectal cancer, and R1507 in Ewing sarcoma. Based on these results Pfizer,
Roche, Amgen, and Bristol-Myers Squibb halted further development of their products.6,7 We are still awaiting the results
from trials of OSI-906, MEDI-573, and BI836845.
In this issue of Cancer, Pappo et al present results from a phase 2 trial of the IGF-1R blocking antibody R1507 in
patients with rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and other soft tissue sarcomas.8 In the category of sarcoma clinical trials, it was a large study that enrolled 163 patients. The response rate by World Health Organization
criteria was the primary endpoint of the study; and, unfortunately, the treatment with R1507 resulted in a

Corresponding author: Bartosz Chmielowski, MD, PhD, Division of Hematology-Medical Oncology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California
Los Angeles, 2825 Santa Monica Boulevard, Suite 200, Santa Monica, CA 90404; Fax: (310) 443-0477; bchmielowski@mednet.ucla.edu
Division of Hematology-Medical Oncology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
See related original on pages 2448-56, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28727, Received: January 25, 2014; Revised: February 17, 2014; Accepted: February 18, 2014, Published online May 2, 2014 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2384

Cancer

August 15, 2014

IGF-1R Inhibitors/Chmielowski

disappointing response rate of 2.5%; that is, only 4
patients (2 with osteosarcoma, 1 with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, and 1 with alveolar soft part sarcoma)
responded to the therapy. In addition, the benefit was
short lived, with a median response duration of 12
weeks. The treatment was not associated with significant
side effects. These results supported Roche’s decision not
to continue the development of R1507.
The study was run by the Sarcoma Alliance for
Research through Collaboration (SARC), which is a
nonprofit organization established by a group of sarcoma physicians who recognized that clinical trials in
patients with rare diseases like sarcoma would be successful only when multiple institutions joined their
efforts. SARC has served for the last 10 years as a forum
in which the new ideas of clinical trials can be introduced, and SARC has also had stronger negotiating
power when it comes to discussing drug development
with pharmaceutical companies. SARC should be congratulated on conducting this clinical trial, which, after
including the Ewing sarcoma part, enrolled 272 patients
in less than 2 years, and also on reporting the negative
results that hopefully will stimulate further basic
research on the IGF-1R pathway and will initiate a discussion on the conduct of trials in sarcoma patients in
the era of targeted therapy.
The currently discussed trial is not the only negative
trial in patients with sarcoma. A study of figitumumab in
107 patients with Ewing sarcoma demonstrated a
response rate of 14.2%9; a study of ganitumab in 38
patients with Ewing sarcoma or desmoplastic small round
cell tumor demonstrated a response rate of 6%10; a study
of cixutumumab in 113 patients with a variety of sarcomas demonstrated a response rate of 0.2%11 and, when
cixutumumab was used in combination with temsirolimus, (174 patients) of 5%.12
It is unavoidable that such several negative clinical
trials with IGF-1R–blocking antibodies must raise several
questions. Did we not have enough preclinical and early
clinical evidence of the activity of these drugs before
launching large clinical trials in sarcoma? To the contrary,
we have strong laboratory evidence of the importance of
the pathway. Although mutated IGF-1R has not been
identified in any cancer, IGF-1R does appear to be upregulated in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, its signaling is
required for survival of Ewing sarcoma cell lines, and the
growth of osteosarcomas and desmoplastic small round
cell tumors can be inhibited by IGF-1R blockade.13
Why were all trials with IGF-1R antibodies negative
despite strong basic research evidence of the importance
Cancer

August 15, 2014

of this pathway in cancer biology? It is well known that
the trials of targeted therapy were successful when a reliable biomarker existed. Had we not been able to identify
amplification of her-2=neu in patients with breast cancer
as a biomarker, most probably trastuzumab, a breakthrough development in oncology, would have never been
approved and available for these patients. The level of
expression of IFG-1R intuitively would appear to be the
most feasible biomarker, but the level of IGF-1R was not
measured in the trial of R1507. At the same time, other
clinical trials attempted to stratify patients based on the
presence of IGF-1R in the pretreatment samples, and it
did not appear that the level of expression detected by
immunohistochemistry correlated with the degree of
response.12 The trial of dalotuzumab included only
patients whose tumor samples expressed IGF-1R, and
such preselection did not lead to increased efficacy.14 The
trial of R1507, as well as other studies, demonstrated that
serum levels of both IGF-1 and insulin increase gradually
upon blocking IGF-1R,1,6 and this theoretically can lead
to increased signaling through the alternate receptors,
such as heterodimers of IGF-1R and insulin receptor or
currently unknown receptors of negligent biologic activity
in the presence of unblocked IGF-1R, but plays an important rescue role when the traditional receptor is blocked.
What can we learn from nonrandomized clinical trials? For the last few decades, the development of new anticancer medications has followed the same pathway,
starting from dose-finding phase 1 trials, through signalfinding phase 2 trials, and ending with the efficacyproving randomized phase 3 trials. Traditionally, an
improvement in overall survival has been the most meaningful endpoint of registrational clinical trials; a lot of
phase 2 trials have concentrated on measuring a response
rate. The new targeted therapies frequently do not result
in a significant decrease in the size of measureable tumors;
rather, they stop or slow down tumor growth. Therefore,
progression-free survival (PFS) has been used more frequently; and new meaningful endpoints like the clinical
benefit rate have emerged.15 In sarcoma, a PFS rate of
30% at 12 weeks has been considered as a benchmark,1
and the current study of R1507 produced a PFS rate of
only 17%. PFS and the clinical benefit rate are heavily
influenced by the natural history of the disease and patient
selection, and they can be meaningful only when an
appropriate control group exists. It is doubtful that the
use of historic controls in such a heterogeneous malignancy as sarcoma is appropriate, and a control arm, even
in phase 2 trials, should be mandated. In addition, the
control arm would allow us to identify a changed toxicity
2385

Editorial

profile. No significant toxicities have been associated with
the use of IGF-1R inhibitors, but the results from at least
2 clinical trials demonstrating their detrimental effect on
overall survival must not be disregarded.16,17
Does nobody benefit from the therapy with IGF-1R
inhibitors? A small number of patients experience significant tumor shrinkage and remain on the therapy for a prolonged time. The study of R1507 by Pappo et al revealed
that 22 patients were alive more than 2 years after enrollment, and 1 patient was receiving the treatment for at least
175 weeks. Similar results were observed with cixutumumab, figitumumab, and ganitumab.10,11,18 Tumor histology, expression of IGF-1R, and serum levels of IGF-1 did
not predict for the benefit. These findings underscore the
importance not only of pharmacokinetic analyses, which
were performed very diligently, but also of pharmacodynamic testing and the essential need for tumor tissue analysis upon the drug exposure. The limitations of the
currently available tissue testing originate from concentrating on the analysis of isolated signaling pathways and
not on system biology. No future studies of IGF-1R
inhibitors should be planned unless the currently available
tissue biopsies are carefully examined in the basic research
laboratories and possible predictors for response have
been identified.
The experience with the clinical research of IGF-1R
inhibitors is also a lesson about how new drugs should not
be developed. At least 4 different anti-IGF-1R antibodies
(figitumumab, cixutumumab, ganitumab, and R1507)
were tested in larger clinical trials devoted only to sarcoma
patients.9,11,12 Those trials enrolled a total of more than
700 patients, ie, more than 700 patients were exposed to
inactive (or sporadically active) therapy, the trials did not
result in the emergence of new therapies for sarcoma
patients, and, moreover, we cannot even predict how to
identify rare responders. Several factors influence such
random plans for clinical drug development. Multiple
pharmaceutical companies develop drugs with the same
mechanism of action simultaneously, and certainly there
would be a significant incentive for them if their product
were approved first. Clinical investigators who enroll
patients in trials, provide excellent care, and follow all
Good Clinical Practice requirements but are only mentioned in the acknowledgment section do not get any academic credit, which is so important for their
advancement. They may be tempted to open smaller clinical trials, which may have a lower chance for success; however, even if the results are negative, they will have a
stronger impact on their career. Basic research scientists
try to justify development of another compound with the
2386

same mechanism of action by pointing out minimal differences and predicting a significant clinical impact.
Finally, patients who learn quickly of anecdotal responses
of other individuals with the same type of cancer to a new
drug apply pressure on clinicians to get access to new,
unproven therapies. Can we change it? I believe we can. I
know that clinicians, scientists, pharmaceutical companies, and the US Food and Drug Administration work
devotedly to improve patients’ well being, but they have
different tools and different points of view. Therefore, all
groups must communicate with each other transparently,
exchange ideas selflessly, allow access to their data to other
scientists, and encourage patients to contribute their cancer tissue to a repository that has broad access for researchers. Thus, as we develop more targeted therapies based on
a deeper understanding of complex oncogenic events and
harnessing the system biology that describes crosstalk
among multiple biologic pathways, we will have to change
the design of our clinical research: the trials will enroll
fewer patients, the population of patients will be more homogeneous, and the endpoints for clinical benefit will be
different. We will witness more and more drugs approved
without large, randomized, phase 3 clinical trials. This
approach can only be successful if we spend enough time
at the bench before we take it to the bedside; and, if we see
that we are not successful at the bedside, then we must
return to the bench immediately. We also will have to
simplify the conduct of clinical research in such a way that
we do not jeopardize patients’ health and do not spend all
of our energy on regulatory requirements.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Chmielowski reports personal fees from Genentech, BristolMyers Squibb, CytRx, Merck, Prometheus, and GlaxoSmithKline
outside the submitted work.

REFERENCES
1. Arcaro A. Targeting the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor in
human cancer [serial online]. Front Pharmacol. 2013;4:30.
2. Pollak M. Insulin and insulin-like growth factor signalling in neoplasia. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;8:915-928.
3. Pollak MN, Perdue JF, Margolese RG, Baer K, Richard M. Presence
of somatomedin receptors on primary human breast and colon carcinomas. Cancer Lett. 1987;38:223-230.
4. Arteaga CL, Kitten LJ, Coronado EB, et al. Blockade of the type I
somatomedin receptor inhibits growth of human breast cancer cells
in athymic mice. J Clin Invest. 1989;84:1418-1423.
5. Osborne R. Commercial interest waxes for IGF-1 blockers. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26:719-720.
6. Guha M. Anticancer IGF1R classes take more knocks [serial online].
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013;12:250.

Cancer

August 15, 2014

IGF-1R Inhibitors/Chmielowski

7. Allison M. Clinical setbacks reduce IGF-1 inhibitors to cocktail
mixers. Nat Biotechnol. 2012;30:906-907.
8. Pappo A, Vassal G, Crowley J, et al. A phase 2 trial of R1507, a
monoclonal antibody to the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R) in patients with recurrent or refractory rhabdomyosarcoma,
osteosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and other soft tissue sarcomas: results
of a Sarcoma Alliance for Research Through Collaboration study.
Cancer. 2014;120:2448-2456.
9. Juergens H, Daw NC, Geoerger B, et al. Preliminary efficacy of the
anti-insulin-like growth factor type 1 receptor antibody figitumumab
in patients with refractory Ewing sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:
4534-4540.
10. Tap WD, Demetri G, Barnette P, et al. Phase II study of ganitumab, a fully human anti-type-1 insulin-like growth factor receptor
antibody, in patients with metastatic Ewing family tumors or desmoplastic small round cell tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1849-1856.
11. Schoffski P, Adkins D, Blay JY, et al. An open-label, phase 2 study evaluating the efficacy and safety of the anti-IGF-1R antibody cixutumumab
in patients with previously treated advanced or metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma or Ewing family of tumours. Eur J Cancer. 2013;49:3219-3228.
12. Schwartz GK, Tap WD, Qin LX, et al. Cixutumumab and temsirolimus for patients with bone and soft-tissue sarcoma: a multicentre,
open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:371-382.

Cancer

August 15, 2014

13. Maki RG. Small is beautiful: insulin-like growth factors and their
role in growth, development, and cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:
4985-4995.
14. Atzori F, Tabernero J, Cervantes A, et al. A phase I pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic study of dalotuzumab (MK-0646), an antiinsulin-like growth factor-1 receptor monoclonal antibody, in
patients with advanced solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:63046312.
15. Chmielowski B, Federman N, Tap WD. Clinical trial end points for
assessing efficacy of novel therapies for soft-tissue sarcomas. Expert
Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012;12:1217-1228.
16. Robertson JF, Ferrero JM, Bourgeois H, et al. Ganitumab with either exemestane or fulvestrant for postmenopausal women with
advanced, hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer: a randomised,
controlled, double-blind, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:228235.
17. Fidler MJ, Shersher DD, Borgia JA, Bonomi P. Targeting the
insulin-like growth factor receptor pathway in lung cancer: problems
and pitfalls. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2012;4:51-60.
18. Olmos D, Postel-Vinay S, Molife LR, et al. Safety, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary activity of the anti-IGF-1R antibody figitumumab (CP-751,871) in patients with sarcoma and Ewing’s
sarcoma: a phase 1 expansion cohort study. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11:
129-135.

2387

