Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial Material

Targeting leukemia stem cells: in vitro veritas?
Heather M. Bond, Maria Mesuraca, Giovanni Morrone
Commentary on: Niche-based screening identifies small-molecule inhibitors of leukemia stem cells.” by K. Hartwell et al

microenvironment. Murine myeloid progenitors
expressing the fluorescent protein dsRed, transduced
with the MLL-AF9 oncogene, were serially transplanted
in irradiated hosts where they generated leukemias with
increasingly short latency; LSCs were isolated from the
bone marrow of quaternary recipients and co-cultured
with stromal cells expressing GFP. To identify compounds
selectively inhibiting LSCs but not normal HSPCs, the
authors used as a readout the formation of cobblestone
areas (CAs). These are clusters of small, round and phasedark hematopoietic cells embedded in the stromal layer,
derived from immature progenitors (cobblestone areaforming cells, CAFCs) that migrate and settle beneath
the stroma and - after a variable latency that depends
on their immaturity - begin to proliferate and generate
structures that resemble cobblestones (Fig. 1). In addition
to normal HSPCs, also leukemic or oncogene-transformed
early progenitors can form cobblestone areas [5-6], and
this property was exploited by Hartwell et al. to identify
compounds with inhibitory activity on leukemic, but not

In the past two decades it has become increasingly
recognized that, in several types of cancer, only a fraction
of the neoplastic cells is capable of propagating tumors
upon transplantation whereas the majority of tumor cells
lacks this capacity. This is particularly true for myeloid
leukemias, where a minute subset of the leukemic cell
population – termed leukemia stem cells (LSCs) or
leukemia-initiating cells (L-ICs) - is believed to drive
leukemia development and, when these cells escape
chemotherapy, to cause the occurrence of relapses.
The therapeutic challenges posed by this model of
leukemogenesis have spurred the active quest for novel
strategies for the eradication of the LSC compartment.
Diverse approaches have been proposed, aimed at
targeting LSCs through their surface-membrane
molecules, interfering with their cell-cycle regulation,
signalling pathways, DNA damage response, metabolic
properties, genetic or epigenetic features, interactions with
the microenvironment [1]. Such strategies have indeed led
to the discovery of several candidate therapeutic agents
[1-3], some of which are currently being tested in clinical
trials.
Systematic high-throughput screenings of
collections of small molecules with therapeutic potential
hold promise to yield novel effective drugs to target
L-ICs, but have rarely been pursued thus far. One main
limitation for this approach is the difficulty of obtaining,
and propagating in culture, adequate amounts of L-ICs.
This obstacle may be circumvented using experimental
models of myeloid leukemogenesis based on the retroor lentiviral transduction of normal hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cells (HSPCs) with leukemia-associated
oncogenes. The enforced expression of these oncogenes,
alone or in combination, confers on the transduced cells
features similar to those of L-ICs (including extended
self-renewal and limited differentiation potential), thereby
generating transformed cell lines enriched in leukemia
stem-like cells.
A recently-published report [4] illustrates an
extensive screening carried out in the framework of a
multi-institutional collaboration among the laboratories
of Malcolm Moore, David Scadden, Stuart Schreiber,
Benjamin Ebert and Todd Golub. This team devised
a sophisticated strategy to assess the effects of almost
15,000 synthetic small molecules on the most primitive
leukemic cells within the context of the bone marrow

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Figure 1: Cobblestone area. Phase-contrast picture of a

co-culture of human cord blood-derived CD34+ cells with the
mouse stromal cell line, MS-5. In addition to the cluster of
small round cells constituting the cobblestone and to the stromal
cells (some of which undergoing adipocytic differentiation),
refrangent hematopoietic cells in suspension can be observed
575

Oncotarget

normal CAFCs. As scoring CAs is extremely laborious,
an automated image analysis system, trained for CA
recognition, was developed to enumerate the dsRedpositive CAs in the GFP-expressing stromal monolayers.
Through multiple screenings, 155 compounds were found
to effectively inhibit leukemic, but not normal CAFCs,
several of which with an EC50 in the low sub-micromolar
range, thereby providing a pool of potentially effective
anti-L-IC agents for future studies. Some of these were
already known to target LSCs, like the sesquiterpene
lactone, parthenolide [1]; some compounds acted
exclusively on CAFCs, others exerted their inhibitory
effects both through cell-intrinsic and extrinsic (stromamediated) mechanisms. One of the most potent and
selective compounds identified was lovastatin, that was
further assayed on six primary LSC-enriched human AML
samples harboring different genetic aberrations. Lovastatin
inhibited CAFC formation in all these samples, with an
EC50 (<250nM) similar to that observed with mouse LSCs.
Other statins also displayed LSC-inhibitory activity, that
appeared to depend strictly on the inhibition of the HMGCoA reductase. Ex-vivo pretreatment with lovastatin
of co-cultured LSCs and normal HSPCs effectively
prevented leukemia development, but not hematopoietic
reconstitution when the cells were co-transplanted in
irradiated host.
Thus, inhibitors of mevalonate synthesis may
represent new weapons against chemotherapy-resistant
LSCs, although their mechanism of action remains to be
fully clarified and new formulations should be studied
to ensure effective concentrations in plasma and bone
marrow. The panel of new molecules identified in this
study may be further expanded using other models of
AMLs driven by different oncogenes (or combinations
thereof) that are already available: one could envision
that in the near future extensive arrays of validated
compounds may become available, to assess the sensitivity
of individual relapsed or refractory AMLs. But beyond
its finding, albeit translationally relevant, the study of
Hartwell et al. demonstrates that a complex in vitro
system, that faithfully mimics the interactions occurring
in vivo between malignant stem cells and stromal
microenvironment, can be successfully exploited for the
high-throughput discovery of novel antineoplastic agents
to target the elusive cancer- (and/or metastasis-) initiating
cells compartment.

Giovanni Morrone: Dept. of Experimental and Clinical
Medicine - Laboratory of Molecular Haematopoiesis and
Stem Cell Biology - University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro,
Italy
Correspondence: Giovanni Morrone, email morrone@unicz.
it
Received: January 23, 2014;
Published: February 14, 2014;

REFERENCES
1.	 Konopleva MY, Jordan CT. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:591599.
2.	

Herrmann H, et al. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:1588-1599.

3.	

Velu CS, et al. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:222-236.

4.	

Hartwell KA, et al. Nat Chem Biol. 2013; 9:840-848.

5.	

Chung KY, , et al. Blood 2005; 105:77-84.

6.	

Chung KY,. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:11781-11791.

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Work on this subject carried out in the authors’
laboratory have been supported by Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

576

Oncotarget

