Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Azathioprine induction of tumors with microsatellite instability:
Risk evaluation using a mouse model
Sahra Bodo1,2, Magali Svrcek1,2,3, Isabelle Sourrouille1,2, Peggy Cuillières-Dartigues4,
Tatiana Ledent1,2, Sylvie Dumont2,5, Laetitia Dinard1,2, Philippe Lafitte1,2, Camille
Capel1,2, Ada Collura1,2, Olivier Buhard1,2, Kristell Wanherdrick1,2, Alexandra
Chalastanis1,2, Virginie Penard-Lacronique6, Bettina Fabiani3, Jean-François
Fléjou1,2,3, Nicole Brousse7, Laurent Beaugerie2,8, Alex Duval1,2, Martine Muleris1,2
1

I NSERM, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, Equipe « Instabilité des Microsatellites et Cancer », Equipe labellisée par la Ligue
Nationale contre le Cancer, F-75012, Paris, France

2

Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, F-75012 Paris, France

3

AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, F-75012 Paris, France

4

AP-HP, Institut Gustave Roussy, Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, F-94805 Villejuif, France

5

IFR 65, F-75012 Paris, France

6

INSERM, U985, Institut Gustave Roussy, F-94805 Villejuif, France

7

AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, F-75015 Paris, France

8

AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Service de Gastroentérologie, F-75012 Paris, France

Correspondence to:
Martine Muleris, e-mail: martine.muleris@inserm.fr
Keywords: pharmacogenetics, iatrogenic cancer, microsatellite instability, thiopurine tolerance, azathioprine
Received: March 20, 2015      Accepted: August 07, 2015      Published: August 17, 2015

ABSTRACT
Mismatch-repair (MMR)-deficient cells show increased in vitro tolerance to
thiopurines because they escape apoptosis resulting from MMR-dependent signaling of
drug-induced DNA damage. Prolonged treatment with immunosuppressants including
azathioprine (Aza), a thiopurine prodrug, has been suggested as a risk factor for
the development of late onset leukemias/lymphomas displaying a microsatellite
instability (MSI) phenotype, the hallmark of a defective MMR system. We performed
a dose effect study in mice to investigate the development of MSI lymphomas
associated with long term Aza treatment. Over two years, Aza was administered to
mice that were wild type, null or heterozygous for the MMR gene Msh2. Ciclosporin A,
an immunosuppressant with an MMR-independent signaling, was also administered
to Msh2wt mice as controls. Survival, lymphoma incidence and MSI tumor phenotype
were investigated. Msh2+/- mice were found more tolerant than Msh2wt mice to the
cytotoxicity of Aza. In Msh2+/- mice, Aza induced a high incidence of MSI lymphomas
in a dose-dependent manner. In Msh2wt mice, a substantial lifespan was only observed
at the lowest Aza dose. It was associated with the development of lymphomas, one of
which displayed the MSI phenotype, unlike the CsA-induced lymphomas. Our findings
define Aza as a risk factor for an MSI-driven lymphomagenesis process.

azathioprine (Aza) and its metabolite 6-mercaptopurine.
Aza is widely used as an immunosuppressive agent
for the prevention of transplant graft rejection and for
autoimmune diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) and autoimmune hepatitis. 6-mercaptopurine
is commonly used as part of maintenance therapy in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Aza is classified
as a human carcinogen but the specific mechanisms that

INTRODUCTION
Substantial clinical progress in immunosuppression
and anticancer chemotherapy has improved the overall
survival of patients. Unfortunately, the survival benefits
conferred by some long-term treatments such as thiopurine
are also associated with an increased risk of develop­
ing therapy-related cancers. Thiopurine drugs comprise
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24969

Oncotarget

underlie its in vivo carcinogenicity following thiopurine
therapy remain unclear.
Interestingly, several clinical studies have reported
an association between the use of prolonged thiopurine
regimens and the occurrence of tumors displaying
microsatellite instability (MSI). The MSI tumor phenotype
is the hallmark of a defective DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) system, the major function of which is to edit
errors produced during replication. Inactivation of the
MMR system greatly increases spontaneous mutation
rates. This is observed as MSI and manifests as frequent
deletion mutations in DNA regions comprising mostly
of long mono- or dinucleotide tracts. In vitro studies
have demonstrated that MMR also plays an important
role in thiopurine-mediated cytotoxicity, as evidenced
by the increased tolerance of MMR-deficient cells to
thiopurine exposure. The major cytotoxic effects of
thiopurine drugs occur following incorporation of thioguanine (TG) into DNA and subsequent misincorporation
of thymidine opposite TG during DNA replication.
The aberrant processing of these DNA base pairs by
MMR generates potentially lethal DNA lesions. MMR–
deficient cells are unable to initiate lethal processing of
the TG-containing base pairs and escape cytotoxicity.
Owing to this resistance conferred by defective MMR,
known as thiopurine tolerance, it has been suggested that
thiopurines may constitute a risk factor for development
of human cancer via selection of MMR-defective cells
that subsequently undergo neoplastic cell transformation
following the accumulation of genetic mutations caused
by MSI (for review [1]).
Despite in vitro functional data suggesting a putative
causal role for thiopurine therapy in the development
of MSI cancers, the clinical evidence to date is mixed
and hence this remains to be established conclusively.
An MSI phenotype was observed in acute myeloid
leukemia/myelodysplastic syndromes that developed
after organ transplantation and were associated with
immunosuppression by Aza therapy [2]. Previous studies
from our group [3, 4] also reported a low frequency of
the MSI phenotype in immunodeficiency-related nonHodgkin lymphomas arising in transplant patients who
received Aza as part of their immunosuppressive regimen
(13/143 vs 0/500 in immunocompetent patients). However,
some patients with MSI tumors of suspected iatrogenic
origin did not receive thiopurine therapy [4]. Interpretation
of these findings is further complicated by the fact that
immunosuppressive regimens in transplant patients
often combine Aza with other drugs such as steroids and
ciclosporin A (CsA). Additionally, the MSI phenotype was
not detected in immunodeficiency-related skin cancers
and no significant association was observed between Aza
intake and MSI in intestinal neoplasias arising in patients
with IBD [5–8]. Thus, the clinical association between
thiopurine treatment-related cancer and MMR defects
remains uncertain and requires further investigation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Here we describe results using an animal model
to address whether thiopurine tolerance is the putative
oncogenic mechanism that underlies the emergence of MSI
tumors. In an earlier proof of concept study we demonstrated
that Aza induced massive and early development of MSI
lymphomas in Msh2+/– mice carrying a germline mutation
in the MMR gene Msh2 [9]. In contrast, untreated Msh2+/–
mice developed MSI lymphomas at a very low frequency.
This work established the Msh2 mouse model, the murine
equivalent of Lynch syndrome in humans, as relevant
for the investigation of thiopurine tolerance as a causal
mechanism for MSI cancers. However, the substantial
toxicity of Aza in Msh2 wild type (Msh2wt) mice prevented
us from investigating the ability of this agent to induce MSIdriven malignancy in mice without a genetic predisposition
to MMR defects. Moreover, we did not investigate other
immunosuppressants whose action is independent of
MMR. In the present work we have therefore performed
a dose effect study using wild type, null or heterozygous
mice for the Msh2 gene and identified appropriate longterm treatment conditions for Aza, thus avoiding the major
cytotoxic effects encountered previously. We hypothesized
that an Aza dosage that enables a substantial survival would
allow the development of lymphomas, a small proportion of
which would be of MSI phenotype, as observed in humans.
To evaluate whether the observed effects could be attributed
specifically to Aza, we also investigated CsA, another
frequently prescribed immunosuppressant that inhibits the
transcription of cytokines, leading to reduced functional
ability of effector T-cells.

RESULTS
Impact of azathioprine on Msh2+/– and Msh2ko mice
We first specified the way Aza treatment could
trigger MSI lymphomagenesis in the context of a genetic
predisposition to MSI tumor development (i.e. Msh2+/–).
A dose-response relationship was observed for Msh2+/–
mice, with median survival of 164, 220 and 575 days
for Aza 50, 30 and 10 mg/L treatment, respectively
(P < .0001; Log-rank test) (Figure 1A). Aza50-treated
Msh2+/– mice systematically developed early onset, MSI
lymphomas (22/22 vs 1/10 for untreated Msh2+/– animals)
(Figure 1B). The onset of tumors was significantly
delayed at lower Aza doses, with a mean age of onset
of 154, 255 and 539 days for Aza50, Aza30 and Aza10,
respectively (P < .0001; ANOVA test). The incidence of
the MSI phenotype was also significantly reduced with the
lowest Aza dose (21/23 and 6/18 for Aza30 and Aza10,
respectively P < .0001; Fisher’s exact test) (Figure 1C).
Compared to untreated Msh2+/– mice, Aza10-treated
mice showed a slightly shorter median survival (575
vs 625 days, respectively; P = .020; Log-rank test) but
comparable median age of lymphoma onset (539 vs 576
days, respectively; P = .59; Student’s t test).
24970

Oncotarget

As expected, all control Msh2ko mice, whether
treated or not, were sacrificed before the age of 11 months.
The median survival of Msh2ko mice was 117 days for
untreated animals, 113 days with Aza30 and 109 days with
Aza10 (P = .039; Log-rank test) (Figure 1A). As expected,
all Msh2ko mice developed patent tumor syndromes, i.e.
abnormal enlargement of the thymus, spleen or liver and
massive and diffuse proliferation of lymphoma cells, that
displayed MSI (Figure 1B).

The single Msh2wt mouse that developed an MSI
tumor syndrome was sacrificed at the age of 315 days
because of posterior leg paralysis. At autopsy, it presented
an enlarged spleen and lymph nodes. Histological
examination revealed massive (>90%) infiltration of
the spleen, thymus and lymph node tissues by medium
to large size lymphoid cells. Examination of tumor
DNA from the splenic tissue with three microsatellite
markers revealed a change in length of all three loci
compared with normal tissue DNA from the same mouse
(Figures 3A and 3C).

Impact of azathioprine and ciclosporin A on
Msh2wt mice

Molecular mechanism underlying
MMR-deficiency due to thiopurine
tolerance in tumor cells

Similar to Msh2+/– mice, a dose-response relationship
was observed between Aza treatment and the survival of
Msh2wt mice. The lowest Aza dose was associated with a
significantly longer lifespan, with median survival of 78,123
and 568 days for Aza50, Aza30, and Aza10, respectively
(P < .0001; Log-rank test) (Figure 2A). Whereas Aza10
was the only dose compatible with a substantial survival
of animals, it still demonstrated a significant impact upon
lifespan (568 vs 652 days for untreated mice; P = .007;
Log-rank test). A patent tumor syndrome was observed in
a substantial proportion of the Aza10 cohort (7/23, 30.5%)
(Figures 2B and 2C). Msh2wt mice exposed to higher Aza
doses (Aza30 and Aza50) were sacrificed within several
months of birth due to poor tolerance to therapy. Consistent
with our previous results [9], micro-lymphoproliferations
were frequently observed during histological examination of
these animals (Figures 2B, 2C). Microscopic foci comprised
of medium-to-large neoplastic lymphoid cells were restricted
to the spleen area located under the capsule.
CsA-treated Msh2wt mice also showed significantly
shorter survival compared to untreated mice (345 vs 652
days, respectively; P = .002; Log-rank test) (Figure 2A).
Aza10- and CsA- treated Msh2wt mice showed comparable
survival (median of 568 vs 345 days, respectively; P = .045;
Log-rank test) and both groups showed the presence
of lymphomas in about one third of cases (7/23 vs 6/21,
respectively; P = .9; Chi2 test) (Figures 2B and 2C).

PCR-based genotyping was performed on all MSI
tumors that developed in Msh2+/− mice following an
immunosuppressive regimen. In the majority of cases
(22/26, including 19/21 Aza30- and 3/5 Aza10-treated
Msh2+/– mice), inactivation of the MMR system resulted
from somatic loss of the remaining wild type Msh2 allele
(i.e. loss of heterozygosity), as previously reported [9].
cDNA sequencing of Msh2 was performed in the tumor
from the single Msh2wt mouse that displayed an MSI
lymphoma following Aza treatment, however no somatic
mutation was detected. Immunohistochemical analysis
of Msh2, Mlh1, Msh6 and Pms2 expression was then
performed to further investigate the mechanism underlying
loss of MMR function in the tumor from this Msh2wt
mouse. As shown in Figure 3B, the tumor cells stained
positively for these four major MMR proteins.

DISCUSSION
In the present study we investigated the ability of
Aza, an immunosuppressant from the thiopurine family,
to trigger MSI lymphomagenesis in mice. Aza induces
apoptosis of MMR-proficient cells via the MMR–
dependent signaling of Aza-induced DNA damage.
Aza also has immunosuppressive properties due to
induction of apoptosis in T cells [10] and inhibition of
de novo purine biosynthesis which hampers cell division
especially in lymphocytes, which unlike other cell types
cannot use the salvage pathway of purine synthesis [11].
Importantly, the two latter effects are not dependent on
MMR status. We previously observed considerably more
toxicity at the higher dose of Aza (50 mg/L) in Msh2wt
mice compared to Msh2+/− mice [9] and confirmed here
that heterozygous mice are more tolerant to the cytotoxic
effects of Aza (Supplementary Figure S1). These
observations are consistent with an earlier report using
another MMR murine model (Mlh1 mice) that showed
Mlh1+/– mice were less sensitive to the lethal effects of a
methylating agent than Mlh1wt control mice (thiopurines
and methylating agents share a common MMR

MSI status of azathioprine- and ciclosporin
A-induced lymphomas in Msh2wt mice
Microsatellite genotyping was performed in all Msh2wt
mice that developed patent tumor syndrome. As described
above, these had mostly been treated with Aza10 or CsA.
A diffuse MMR-deficient lymphoma due to proliferation
of MSI tumor cells was found in 1/7 Aza10-treated Msh2wt
mice. At contrast, all tumor DNAs from the 6 CsA-treated
mice with lymphoma were non-MSI (Figure 2D). Two
Aza30-treated mice that had not been sacrificed at a young
age, showed a late onset lymphoma syndrome that was also
non-MSI. Tumor cells obtained by laser microdissection from
splenic microproliferations in four Aza50-treated Msh2wt mice
also failed to show MSI. Results of microsatellite instability
analysis are detailed in the Supplementary Table S1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24971

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of azathioprine treatment on survival, lymphoma incidence and MSI tumor phenotype in Msh2+/–
and  Msh2ko mice. A. Evidence for a dose-response relationship between azathioprine treatment and the survival of Msh2+/– mice:

Kaplan–Meier survival analysis of untreated and azathioprine-treated Msh2+/– mice (left) and Msh2ko mice (right). Survival curves for
Msh2+/– mice after Aza50 treatment are from our previous study [9]. All P values are two-sided. Log-rank test. B. Lymphoma occurrence
and delay of onset in the different mice cohorts according to Msh2+/– (left) or Msh2ko (right) genotype. Mean age of lymphoma onset and
standard error of the mean are indicated. C. Evidence for a dose-response relationship between azathioprine treatment and incidence of MSI
phenotype in lymphomas of Msh2+/– mice. Aza10 = azathioprine 10 mg/L; Aza30 = azathioprine 30 mg/L; Aza50 = azathioprine 50 mg/L.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24972

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of azathioprine and ciclosporin A treatments on survival, lymphoma incidence and MSI tumor
phenotype in Msh2wt mice. A. Evidence for a dose-response relationship between immunosuppressive treatment and the survival of
Msh2wt mice: Kaplan–Meier survival analysis of untreated, azathioprine- and ciclosporin A-treated Msh2wt mice. All P values are two-sided.
Log-rank test. B. Occurrence of lymphoproliferations and delay of onset in the different cohorts of Msh2wt mice. C. Lymphoma incidence.
Fisher’s exact test; ns=not significant. D. Incidence of MSI phenotype in lymphomas. Aza10 = azathioprine 10 mg/L; Aza30 = azathioprine
30 mg/L; Aza50 = azathioprine 50 mg/L; CsA = ciclosporin A 300 mg/L.

processing mechanism for converting damaged DNA
bases into lethal lesion) [12]. Our results also concur
with in vitro experiments showing that immortalized
lymphoblasts from Lynch patients who are heterozygous
at the MSH2 locus were more tolerant to the methylating
agent temozolomide than MSH2wt cells [13].
Together, these observations suggest the overall
clinical impact of Aza results from a combination of
factors such as Msh2 genotype, drug dosage and the
balance between the cytotoxic and oncogenic properties
of this drug. To account for the observed survival and
tumor phenotypes in drug-treated mice with different
Msh2 genotype status, we propose the following
explanations. First, all Msh2ko mice (untreated and
Aza-treated) exhibited the characteristic development
of MSI diffuse lymphomas that ultimately resulted
in their early death. Whereas untreated Msh2+/– mice
only rarely develop spontaneous MSI neoplasms, Aza
induced a high incidence of MSI lymphomas in a dosedependent manner in these animals. This is likely to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

be related to the burden of induced thiopurine DNA
lesions and the resulting selective pressure to escape
cell apoptosis through MMR inactivation. In most
Msh2+/– mice, this inactivation occurs via somatic
loss of the remaining wild type Msh2 allele. In Azatreated Msh2wt mice, a balance was observed between
the cytotoxic and oncogenic properties of the drug.
Survival and incidence of diffuse lymphomas were
inversely proportional to the dose of azathioprine.
We hypothesize that the microproliferations of
lymphoma cells, which were mostly observed in
Aza50- and Aza30-treated Msh2wt mice, did not lead
to lymphoma because either their progression has
been efficiently prevented by the immunosuppressive
effect of Aza treatment or the mice died prematurely
from organ failure related to the high drug cytotoxicity
at this dosage. Aza10 and CsA treatments resulted in
similar survival times and induction of lymphomas
in a substantial and comparable proportion of Msh2wt
mice. This mirrors the situation in humans where
24973

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Characterization of the MSI lymphoma syndrome arising in Aza10-treated Msh2wt mouse. A. Histological

characterization showing hematoxylin–eosin staining of splenic lymphoma. T indicates tumor cells; NT indicates normal lymphocytes.
B. Immunohistochemistry of spleen tissue sections. Tumor cells (black arrows) stained positively. Normal lymphocytes (white arrows)
showed less pronounced staining of MMR proteins due to their lower proliferative rate. Antibodies against Mlh1 and Pms2 provided less
intense IHC staining however positive staining was retained in tumor cells (black arrows). An IHC picture of a non-MSI / MMR-proficient
splenic lymphoma can be seen in the Supplementary Figure S2 to illustrate that technical point. C. Allelic profiles of the three noncoding
microsatellite markers (A24, T40 and A22) displaying shorter alleles (arrows) for the three markers in tumor (spleen) compared to control
(muscle) tissue. Dashed vertical lines indicate the predominant allele size observed in control DNA. Predominant allele size (in base pair)
is indicated in the box below each profile.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24974

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

the development of lymphomas is a known adverse
effect of immunosuppressive treatment, although the
incidence of iatrogenic lymphomas is much higher in
mice. An MSI tumor phenotype was observed in one
Msh2wt mouse following Aza10 treatment. At contrast,
none was observed in the CsA treated Msh2wt mice
and we found that CsA treatment did not result in a
significant induction of MSI lymphomas in Msh2+/–
mice (data not shown). All together, our data support
a causal role for Aza treatment, but not CsA treatment,
in triggering MSI-driven lymphomagenesis in Msh2wt
or Msh2+/– mice.
Considering that the risk of lymphoproliferative
disorder (LPD) was five times higher in IBD patients
treated with thiopurines than in those never exposed to
these drugs [14], we searched for MSI phenotype in a
series of 13 IBD-related LPD and found one case, which
interestingly developed after thiopurine (imurel) therapy
(Supplementary Table S2). Thus, this observation
broadens the clinical contexts of thiopurine-associated
lymphoproliferative disorders with MSI phenotype.
Interestingly, as with the lymphoma that developed in
the Aza10-treated Msh2wt mouse, the tumor cells from
this MSI case were shown by immunohistochemistry
to retain expression of the 4 MMR proteins
(Supplementary Figure S3). This was also the case in
about one third (3/8) of the immunodeficiency-related
non-Hodgkin lymphomas with a MSI phenotype that
develop in transplant patients treated with Aza, that we
previously reported [4]. These findings suggest that new
mechanisms for inactivation of MMR, which remain to
be determined, are associated with clinical contexts of
thiopurine treatment.
In summary, our study allows an estimation of
the clinical risk associated with prolonged Aza intake
based upon the development of iatrogenic tumors with
MSI in a mouse model. Our data clearly demonstrate
the ability of Aza to trigger lymphomagenesis through
an MSI-driven process in vivo in the absence of genetic
predisposition to MMR defects. The limitation of this
study is the small number of Msh2wt mice that developed
iatrogenic lymphoma with MSI but increasing the
number of treated Msh2wt mice was not feasible from
an ethical point of view. However, based upon posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders in humans, such
event was expected to be rare (9%) [3, 4]. Together, our
findings could have important clinical implications for
patients receiving azathioprine therapy and more broadly
thiopurines. Therefore, we recommend systematic
screening for MSI in lymphomas and other neoplasms
that arise in patients treated with thiopurine drugs.
Such screening could be particularly important because
tumors with MSI usually have a different prognosis and
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents compared with
tumors that lack MSI, as has been shown for colorectal
carcinomas [15].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Mice and treatments
Msh2+/– mice on an FVB background [16] were
intercrossed to obtain animals that were null, heterozygous,
or wild type for the Msh2 gene. Mice genotypes were
determined by PCR analysis [17]. Aza was given orally via
the drinking water using Imurel 50 mg (GlaxoSmithKline,
Marly-le-Roi, France) to prepare a 50 mg/L, 30 mg/L or
10 mg/L drinking water solution (referred to as Aza50,
Aza30 and Aza10 treatment in the text). The dose of
azathioprine administered through the Aza50 treatment
was estimated at 6–20 mg/kg body weight per day
which corresponds to a human dose equivalent of 0.5–
1.6 mg/kg body weight per day [18] and lies within the
therapeutic range [19, 20]. Groups of mice received
Aza10 (14 Msh2ko, 33 Msh2+/– and 30 Msh2wt) or Aza30
(15 Msh2ko, 28 Msh2+/– and 30 Msh2wt) and a group
of 30 Msh2wt mice also received Aza50. Control mice
(30 Msh2ko, 22 Msh2+/– and 29 Msh2wt mice) received
only water to drink. A final group of 30  Msh2wt mice
received drinking water that contained 300 mg/L
ciclosporin A (CsA) (Neoral 100 mg/mL, Novartis
Pharma SAS, Rueil-Malmaison, France). The dose of
CsA administered to mice was estimated at 40–120 mg/kg
body weight per day i.e. a human dose equivalent of
6.48–9.72 mg/kg body weight per day, which lies in the
upper limit of the maintenance treatment administered to
human transplant patients (i.e. 2 to 6 mg/kg according to
Novartis recommendations). Food and drinking were ad
libitum. All treatments were administered from the age of
6 weeks. Mice were kept in a pathogen-free environment
and health was monitored daily. Animals that displayed
signs of poor health, including breath insufficiency
and posterior leg paralysis were sacrificed by cervical
dislocation. The spleen, liver, thymus, lymph nodes and
gut were removed for examination together with muscle
(as source of germinal DNA). Since Msh2wt mice on
FVB background are prone to develop lymphomas of
late occurrence, analysis was not continued beyond
24 months. All animal experiments were conducted in
accordance with the regulations controlling procedures
in live animals (approval Ce5/2010/065 of the Ethical
Committee for Laboratory Animal Care Charles Darwin
France).

Histopathological studies
Tissues were formalin fixed, embedded in
paraffin and sectioned for histological analysis with
hematoxylin–eosin staining. Mice were categorized
into three classes: (i) with patent diffuse lymphoma,
(ii) with microproliferation of lymphoma cells limited
to the spleen, and (iii) with no histological evidence of
lymphoma.
24975

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemical studies

Kaplan-Meier survival curves and statistical
analysis

Immunohistochemical staining for Mlh1, Msh2,
Msh6 and Pms2 proteins was performed in lymphoma
cells from the single Msh2wt mouse that displayed an MSI
lymphoma following Aza treatment. Briefly, 4 μm sections
were incubated with monoclonal antibodies against
MLH1 (1/20 dilution, clone G168–728, Pharmingen,
San Diego, CA), MSH2 (1/25 dilution, clone FE11,
Calbiochem, Oncogene Research Products, Cambridge,
MA), MSH6 (1/25 dilution, clone 44, Becton Dickinson,
Lexington, NC) and PMS2 (1/20 dilution, clone A16–4,
BD PharMingen, Le Pont de Claix, France).

Time of death was recorded for each mouse that was
found dead or had been sacrificed. Kaplan-Meier survival
curves were generated using Graphpad Prism software
(version 5, San Diego, CA). All statistical tests were twosided.

Characterization of lymphoproliferative
disorders (LPD) in patients with inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD)
A total of 19,486 patients were enrolled in the
CESAME cohort, a French nationwide prospective
observational cohort spanning May 2004 to June 2005 to
assess the risk of LPD in patients with IBD treated with
thiopurines [14]. MSI status was evaluated in 13 cases of
LPD from paraffin material using a fluorescent multiplex
system comprising 5 quasimonomorphic mononucleotide
repeats (BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24 and NR-27)
[21] and expression of MMR proteins was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry [4]. LPD were classified according
to the WHO classification 2001 and tested for Epstein Barr
virus by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization.

Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis
Normal (muscle) and tumor DNA were extracted
for Msh2 genotype analysis (DNA extraction kit Qiagen,
Courtaboeuf, France). PCR products were resolved on
agarose gels to assess loss of heterozygosity of the Msh2
allele [9].

Microdissection of mouse tumor tissue
The tumor cell component from four Aza50-treated
Msh2wt mice was collected from 10 hematoxylin-eosinstained 7-μm tissue sections with a laser-capture
microdissection system (PALM Laser, Zeiss, LePecq,
France).

FUNDING
This work was partly supported by grants to Martine
Muleris from the “Association pour la Recherche contre
le Cancer” (ARC 5079). Sahra Bodo is a recipient of
the “Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la
Recherche“ and the ”Association pour la Recherche contre
le Cancer” fellowship.

Msh2 gene sequencing
Total RNA from the single Aza-treated Msh2wt
that displayed an MSI lymphoma tissue sample (two
tumor sites and the corresponding normal tissue) was
analyzed. Reverse transcription–PCR and sequencing
were performed as previously reported [9], except that
electrophoresis was performed for each amplified fragment
and this was extracted specifically with a Gel Extraction
Kit (Qiagen, Redwood City, USA). A second amplification
was performed on these fragments according to the same
PCR protocol in order to magnify the sequence signal and
reduce noise.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no conflicts.

REFERENCES
1.	 Karran P. Thiopurines, DNA damage, DNA repair and
therapy-related cancer. British medical bulletin. 2006;
79-80:153–170.

MSI testing

2.	 Offman J, Opelz G, Doehler B, Cummins D, Halil O, Banner
NR, Burke MM, Sullivan D, Macpherson P, Karran P.
Defective DNA mismatch repair in acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome after organ transplantation.
Blood. 2004; 104:822–828.

Polymerase chain reaction analysis of three
noncoding mononucleotide repeats (A22, A24, T40) was
used to determine the MSI status of tumor tissues [9].
Amplified PCR products were separated by capillary
electrophoresis on an ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyzer
and analyzed using GeneMapper software (version 3.7,
Aplera). Tumors were scored as MSI if the length of at
least one mononucleotide repeat marker in tumor DNA
differed from that observed in normal tissue DNA obtained
from the same animal.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Duval A, Raphael M, Brennetot C, Poirel H, Buhard O,
Aubry A, Martin A, Krimi A, Leblond V, Gabarre J, Davi F,
Charlotte F, Berger F, Gaidano G, Capello D, Canioni D, et al.
The mutator pathway is a feature of immunodeficiency-related
lymphomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:5002–5007.

24976

Oncotarget

4.	 Borie C, Colas C, Dartigues P, Lazure T, Rince P, Buhard
O, Folliot P, Chalastanis A, Muleris M, Hamelin R, Mercier
D, Oliveira C, Seruca R, Chadburn A, Leblond V, Barete
S, et al. The mechanisms underlying MMR deficiency in
immunodeficiency-related non-Hodgkin lymphomas are
different from those in other sporadic microsatellite instable
neoplasms. Int J Cancer. 2009; 125:2360–2366.

12.	 Kawate H, Itoh R, Sakumi K, Nakabeppu Y, Tsuzuki T, Ide
F, Ishikawa T, Noda T, Nawata H, Sekiguchi M. A defect
in a single allele of the Mlh1 gene causes dissociation of the
killing and tumorigenic actions of an alkylating carcinogen
in methyltransferase-deficient mice. Carcinogenesis. 2000;
21:301–305.
13.	 Marra G, D’Atri S, Corti C, Bonmassar L, Cattaruzza MS,
Schweizer P, Heinimann K, Bartosova Z, Nystrom-Lahti M,
Jiricny J. Tolerance of human MSH2+/– lymphoblastoid cells
to the methylating agent temozolomide. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2001; 98:7164–7169.

5.	 Borie C, Euvrard S, Verola O, Buhard O, Barete S, Molina
JM, Kanitakis J, Kerob D, Lebbe C, Duval A. No evidence
for microsatellite instability in immunodeficiency-related
skin cancers. Am J Transplant. 2010; 10:192–193.
6.	 Perrett CM, Harwood CA, McGregor JM, Warwick J, Cerio
R, Karran P. Expression of DNA mismatch repair proteins
and MSH2 polymorphisms in nonmelanoma skin cancers of
organ transplant recipients. The British journal of dermatology. 2010; 162:732–742.

14.	 Beaugerie L, Brousse N, Bouvier AM, Colombel JF,
Lemann M, Cosnes J, Hebuterne X, Cortot A, Bouhnik Y,
Gendre JP, Simon T, Maynadie M, Hermine O, Faivre J,
Carrat F. Lymphoproliferative disorders in patients
receiving thiopurines for inflammatory bowel disease:
a prospective observational cohort study. Lancet. 2009;
374:1617–1625.

7.	 Wisgerhof HC, Hameetman L, Tensen CP, Morreau H,
de Fijter JW, Bouwes Bavinck JN, Willemze R, de Gruijl
FR. Azathioprine-induced microsatellite instability is not
observed in skin carcinomas of organ transplant recipients. The Journal of investigative dermatology. 2009;
129:1307–1309.

15.	 Popat S, Hubner R, Houlston RS. Systematic review of microsatellite instability and colorectal cancer prognosis. J Clin
Oncol. 2005; 23:609–618.
16.	 de Wind N, Dekker M, Berns A, Radman M, te Riele H.
Inactivation of the mouse Msh2 gene results in mismatch
repair deficiency, methylation tolerance, hyperrecombination, and predisposition to cancer. Cell. 1995; 82:321–330.

8.	 Svrcek M, El-Bchiri J, Chalastanis A, Capel E, Dumont S,
Buhard O, Oliveira C, Seruca R, Bossard C, Mosnier JF,
Berger F, Leteurtre E, Lavergne-Slove A, Chenard MP,
Hamelin R, Cosnes J, et al. Specific clinical and biological
features characterize inflammatory bowel disease associated
colorectal cancers showing microsatellite instability. J Clin
Oncol. 2007; 25:4231–4238.

17.	 Toft NJ, Winton DJ, Kelly J, Howard LA, Dekker M, te
Riele H, Arends MJ, Wyllie AH, Margison GP, Clarke AR.
Msh2 status modulates both apoptosis and mutation frequency in the murine small intestine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 1999; 96:3911–3915.

9.	 Chalastanis A, Penard-Lacronique V, Svrcek M,
Defaweux V, Antoine N, Buhard O, Dumont S, Fabiani B,
Renault I, Tubacher E, Flejou JF, Te Riele H, Duval A,
Muleris M. Azathioprine-induced carcinogenesis in mice
according to Msh2 genotype. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;
102:1731–1740.

18.	 Reagan-Shaw S, Nihal M, Ahmad N. Dose translation
from animal to human studies revisited. Faseb J. 2008;
22:659–661.
19.	 Yip JS, Woodward M, Abreu MT, Sparrow MP. How
are Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine dosed by gastroenterologists? Results of a survey of clinical practice.
Inflammatory bowel diseases. 2008; 14:514–518.

10.	 Tiede I, Fritz G, Strand S, Poppe D, Dvorsky R, Strand
D, Lehr HA, Wirtz S, Becker C, Atreya R, Mudter
J, Hildner K, Bartsch B, Holtmann M, Blumberg R,
Walczak H, et al. CD28-dependent Rac1 activation is
the molecular target of azathioprine in primary human
CD4+ T lymphocytes. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2003; 111:1133–1145.

20.	 Opelz G, Dohler B. Critical threshold of azathioprine dosage for maintenance immunosuppression in kidney graft
recipients. Collaborative Transplant Study. Transplantation.
2000; 69:818–821.
21.	 Suraweera N, Duval A, Reperant M, Vaury C, Furlan D,
Leroy K, Seruca R, Iacopetta B, Hamelin R. Evaluation
of tumor microsatellite instability using five quasimonomorphic mononucleotide repeats and pentaplex PCR.
Gastroenterology. 2002; 123:1804–1811.

11.	 Quemeneur L, Gerland LM, Flacher M, Ffrench M,
Revillard JP, Genestier L. Differential control of cell cycle,
proliferation, and survival of primary T lymphocytes by
purine and pyrimidine nucleotides. J Immunol. 2003;
170:4986–4995.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24977

Oncotarget

