Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Leptin as a mediator of tumor-stromal interactions promotes
breast cancer stem cell activity
Cinzia Giordano1,*, Francesca Chemi2,*, Salvatore Panza2,*, Ines Barone2,
Daniela Bonofiglio2, Marilena Lanzino2, Angela Cordella3, Antonella Campana2,
Adnan Hashim4,5, Pietro Rizza2, Antonella Leggio2, Balázs Győrffy7,8,9, Bruno M.
Simões6, Robert B. Clarke6, Alessandro Weisz4, Stefania Catalano2,**, Sebastiano
Andò1,2,**
1

Centro Sanitario, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy

2

Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy

3

IRCCS SDN (Istituto di Ricerca Diagnostica e Nucleare), Napoli, Italy

4

Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Genomics, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Baronissi,
Italy

5

Norwegian Centre for Molecular Medicine (NCMM), University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

6

Breast Cancer Now Research Unit, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University Manchester, Manchester, UK

7

MTA TTK Lendület Cancer Biomarker Research Group, Budapest, Hungary

8

2nd Dept. of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary

9

MTA-SE Pediatrics and Nephrology Research Group, Budapest, Hungary

*

These authors have equally contributed to this work

**

Joint senior authors

Correspondence to:
Sebastiano Andò, e-mail: sebastiano.ando@unical.it
Stefania Catalano, e-mail: stefcatalano@libero.it
Keywords: breast cancer, leptin, microenvironment, CAFs, breast cancer stem cells
Received: July 08, 2015      Accepted: October 06, 2015      Published: October 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) play crucial roles in tumor initiation, metastasis
and therapeutic resistance. A strict dependency between BCSCs and stromal cell
components of tumor microenvironment exists. Thus, novel therapeutic strategies
aimed to target the crosstalk between activated microenvironment and BCSCs have
the potential to improve clinical outcome. Here, we investigated how leptin, as a
mediator of tumor-stromal interactions, may affect BCSC activity using patientderived samples (n = 16) and breast cancer cell lines, and determined the potential
benefit of targeting leptin signaling in these model systems. Conditioned media (CM)
from cancer-associated fibroblasts and breast adipocytes significantly increased
mammosphere formation in breast cancer cells and depletion of leptin from CM
completely abrogated this effect. Mammosphere cultures exhibited increased leptin
receptor (OBR) expression and leptin exposure enhanced mammosphere formation.
Microarray analyses revealed a similar expression profile of genes involved in stem
cell biology among mammospheres treated with CM and leptin. Interestingly, leptin
increased mammosphere formation in metastatic breast cancers and expression of
OBR as well as HSP90, a target of leptin signaling, were directly correlated with
mammosphere formation in metastatic samples (r = 0.68/p = 0.05; r = 0.71/p =
0.036, respectively). Kaplan–Meier survival curves indicated that OBR and HSP90
expression were associated with reduced overall survival in breast cancer patients
(HR = 1.9/p = 0.022; HR = 2.2/p = 0.00017, respectively). Furthermore, blocking
leptin signaling by using a full leptin receptor antagonist significantly reduced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1262

Oncotarget

mammosphere formation in breast cancer cell lines and patient-derived samples.
Our results suggest that leptin/leptin receptor signaling may represent a potential
therapeutic target that can block the stromal-tumor interactions driving BCSCmediated disease progression.

protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT) [10]. Leptin and both short
and long OBR isoforms are overexpressed in breast cancer,
especially in higher grade tumors and are associated
with distant metastases [11, 12]. It has been extensively
demonstrated that this cytokine, acting in an autocrine,
endocrine and paracrine manner, may modulate many
aspects of breast tumorigenesis from initiation and primary
tumor growth to metastatic progression [13–15]. Besides,
crosstalk with other different signaling molecules such
as estrogens, growth factors and inflammatory cytokines
further increases leptin impact on breast tumor progression
[16–21]. Moreover, leptin is able to shape the tumor
microenvironment within the mammary gland by inducing
multiple concurrent events such as migration of endothelial
cells, angiogenesis and recruitment of macrophages and
monocytes [13–15, 22]. Interestingly, recent studies have
also reported that leptin signaling may be involved in the
promotion of CSC phenotype [23–25] and that inhibition of
STAT3 suppresses leptin-induced CSC activity and cancer
progression in diet-induced obese rats [26].
The aim of the current study was to evaluate the role
of leptin, as a mediator of the tumor-stroma interaction,
in regulating breast CSC activity using breast cancer cell
lines and patient-derived breast cancer cells isolated from
metastatic ascites and pleural effusions. Particularly, we
investigated: i) the impact of CAFs and adipocytes isolated
from stromal breast tissues on mammosphere formation
and self-renewal in breast cancer cells; ii) the specific
role of leptin and its receptor in influencing breast CSC
phenotype in the context of the tumor microenvironment;
iii) the effect of inhibiting leptin signaling as potential
therapeutic target to reduce breast CSC activity in in vitro
and ex vivo models.

INTRODUCTION
Carcinoma of the breast is the most common
malignancy and the leading cause of cancer-related
death in women worldwide [1]. Despite improvements in
diagnosis and treatment, metastatic or recurrent disease
and resistance to therapy remain the principal causes of
death for breast cancer patients.
In the last years, multiple reports have shown that
a subpopulation of cancer cells displaying stem cell
properties and named as cancer stem cells (CSCs) plays
a crucial role in sustaining tumor growth and progression.
These cells are characterized by their ability to undergo
self-renewal, a process that drives tumorigenesis, and
to differentiate into the non-self-renewing cells forming
the tumor bulk [2, 3]. From a clinical point of view, the
main concern with CSCs is related to their resistance to
conventional treatments (e.g. endocrine-, chemo- and
radio-therapy), a feature that might be the underlying
cause of tumor recurrence and metastases [4–6]. Similar
to embryonic and somatic stem cells, the self-renewal
and differentiation of CSCs are regulated by both
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways whose dysregulation
may be a key event initiating carcinogenesis. Among
the intrinsic pathways, an important role is displayed by
developmental signals such as Wnt, Hedgehog, Janus
kinase 2-signal transducer and activator of transcription
3 (JAK2-STAT3) and Notch pathways that are frequently
deranged in cancers [7]. Extrinsic signals that regulate
stem cell behaviour originate in the surrounding stem
cell microenvironment, termed as cancer stem niche.
This niche contains a number of cell types, including
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs), adipocytes, endothelial and immune
cells, all of which, through networks of cytokines and
growth factors, have been shown to influence tumor
growth and metastasis [8]. Thus, strategies aimed to
specifically target the interaction between CSCs and their
microenvironment may represent an important approach to
improve patient outcome.
Adipocytes and CAFs are the major components
in breast cancer microenvironment, and along with their
secreted factors represent key players in stroma-epithelial
cell interactions. As an important paracrine mediator, the
adipocyte-derived cytokine leptin, that we have recently
demonstrated to be also secreted by CAFs [9], has been
correlated with breast cancer occurrence. Leptin exerts its
biologic function through binding to its receptor (OBR)
which activates multiple downstream signaling pathways
such as those involving JAK2-STAT3, mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
CAFs and adipocytes induce mammosphere
formation in breast cancer cells through leptin
secretion
To assess the ability of stromal cells to affect CSC
activity in breast cancer cells we performed co-culture
experiments. As experimental models for breast CSCs
(BCSCs), we used estrogen receptor (ER)-α-positive
MCF-7 cells grown as mammospheres. This culture
system has been used to characterize, enrich and propagate
breast cancer cells with stem-like phenotype, relying on
the feature of stem cells to escape anoikis and grow as
spheroids in anchorage-independent conditions [27].
MCF-7 mammosphere cells were characterized by flow
1263

Oncotarget

cytometric analysis that revealed an enrichment of CD44+/
CD24− subpopulation compared to MCF-7 monolayer
cells (Supplementary Figure S1A). In addition, real-time
PCR further revealed that genes associated with stem
cell phenotype, including OCT4, N-CAD, BMI1, SOX4,
were expressed in mammosphere cells at higher levels
than in monolayer cells (Supplementary Figure S1B).
Moreover, MCF-7 mammosphere cells were also analyzed
for the expression of ERα (Supplementary Figure S1C
and 1D). As stromal cells, we used either CAFs isolated
from biopsies of primary breast tumors or human breast
adipocytes obtained after preadipocyte differentiation.
CAFs possessed the basic fibroblast characteristics
with long and spindle-shaped morphology and highly
expressed alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), vimentin,
and fibroblast activation protein (FAP) (Supplementary
Figure 2A and 2B). Adipocytes displayed a classical
morphological phenotype characterized by accumulation
of lipid droplets associated with the expression of specific

markers as PPARγ and leptin (OB) (Supplementary
Figure S2C). Using co-culture experiments, we examined
mammosphere formation from MCF-7 cells in the
presence or absence of conditioned media (CM) harvested
from CAFs and adipocytes. Compared to the cells
cultured alone, MCF-7 cells co-cultured with CAF- or
adipocyte-derived CM showed a significant enhancement
in mammosphere forming efficiency (MFE) (Figure 1A).
Stem cells are maintained in the primary mammospheres
through self-renewal, and are able to give rise to secondary
mammospheres when cells from the primary spheres are
dissociated and allowed to grow in anchorage-independent
conditions. Therefore, we carried out secondary
mammosphere cultures to examine the effects of CM
on BCSC self-renewal. Our experiments demonstrated
an increased self-renewal in MCF-7 cells treated with
CAF- and adipocyte-derived CM in the first generation
compared with the untreated spheres (Figure 1B and 1C).
These data suggest that BCSC activity is influenced by

Figure 1: Leptin mediates the effects of stromal cell-CM on breast cancer cell mammosphere formation. Mammosphere
Forming Efficiency (MFE) evaluated in MCF-7-M1 (A) and MCF-7-M2 (B) in the presence or absence (−) of CAF- and Adipocyte-derived
Conditioned Media (CAF-CM and Adipo-CM, respectively). MFE was calculated by dividing the number of mammospheres (colonies >
50 μm) formed by the number of the cells plated and expressed as fold change compared to untreated cells (−). (C) Representative phasecontrast images of mammospheres treated as in panel (B) are shown. MFE evaluated in MCF-7-M1 (D) and MCF-7-M2 (E) in the presence
or absence (−) of leptin-immunodepleted CAF-CM and Adipo-CM (-Lep). IgG: CM immunodepleted with nonspecific antibody. The
values represent the means ± s.d. of three different experiments each performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1264

Oncotarget

soluble factors secreted from stromal cells. Thus, given
the role of leptin as an important cytokine secreted by both
CAFs and adipocytes, we assessed the impact of leptin
in the context of the heterotypic signaling working in
BCSC–stromal interactions. First, ELISA measurement in
CM from stromal cells showed that leptin levels were 2,4
± 0,12 ng/mg protein and 20,32 ± 2 ng/mg protein in CAFand adipocyte-derived CM, respectively. Leptin was then
immunodepleted from CAF- and adipocyte-derived CM
using a specific leptin antibody, and resulting media were
tested for the ability to induce mammosphere formation in
breast cancer cells. AS shown in Figure 1D and 1E, leptin
depletion significantly decreased the MFE/self-renewal
promoted by stromal cell-derived CM.

have previously shown that this peptide inhibits leptininduced breast cancer growth in vitro and exhibits antineoplastic activities in vivo [28]. Our data demonstrated
that treatment with peptide LDFI significantly reduced
MFE/self-renewal promoted by stromal cell-derived CM
in MCF-7 cells (Figure 2A). To extend the results obtained,
we have grown the ERα-negative MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells as mammospheres and evaluated the effects
of CAF- or adipocyte-CM in the presence or absence of
peptide LDFI. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 mammosphere
cultures with CAF- or adipocyte-derived CM significantly
increased MFE/self-renewal and the addition of the OBR
antagonist LDFI strongly reduced these effects (Figure
2B), confirming that leptin/leptin receptor may play a
crucial role in maintaining the BCSC traits mediated by
stromal cells in different cellular backgrounds.

Targeting leptin signaling reduces stem cell
activity mediated by stromal cells

Leptin signaling regulates mammosphere
formation/self-renewal activity of breast cancer
cells

Our previous experiments indicate that leptin may
represent an important paracrine molecule that mediates
the interaction between stromal cells and BCSCs. To
support this observation, we tested the effect of a full leptin
receptor antagonist, peptide LDFI, on BCSC activity. We

Having shown that stromal cells regulate BCSC
activity through secretion of leptin, we next investigated

Figure 2: Effects of a selective leptin receptor antagonist on breast cancer stem cell activity. MFE evaluated in MCF-7-M1
and MCF-7-M2 (A) and in MDA-MB-231-M1 and MDA-MB-231-M2 (B) treated with CAF-CM and Adipo-CM with/without peptide
LDFI (1 μg/ml). The values represent the means ± s.d. of three different experiments each performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1265

Oncotarget

the direct involvement of this cytokine in the regulation
of mammosphere formation/self-renewal in MCF-7
cells. In agreement with previous data demonstrating
that leptin receptor plays a crucial role in maintaining
cancers in a stem cell-like state [23–26], we found that
MCF-7 mammosphere cultures exhibited increased
OBR mRNA expression and in a greater extent the long
isoform, compared to monolayer cells (Figure 3A).
Accordingly, leptin treatment of mammosphere cultures
resulted in a significant increase in MFE/self-renewal and
in an enhanced percentage of CD44+/CD24− population
compared with untreated cells (Figure 3B, 3C and 3D).
Accordingly, in MDA-MB-231 mammosphere cultures,
we observed a significant increase in the long isoform
of OBR mRNA expression compared to monolayer cells,
and an enhanced MFE/self-renewal after leptin exposure
(Supplementary Figure S3), demonstrating that this
cytokine can directly regulate BCSC activity.

Since BCSCs display increased cell motility and
invasion, we tested the effects of leptin on the migratory
potential of MCF-7 mammospheres. Our data clearly showed
that leptin exposure increased the number of migrated cells
suggesting that this cytokine can facilitate the invasive
behavior of BCSCs (Figure 3E). Next, OBR expression
was stably knocked-down using lentiviral delivered short
hairpin RNA (OBR sh) in MCF-7 cells (Figure 3F, left
panel). Suppression of OBR expression led to a significant
inhibition of MFE (Figure 3F, right panel), implying that this
gene is necessary for maintaining cancer stem-like properties
in breast cancer cells. In addition, we observed that leptin
treatment induced the phosphorylation of specific OBR
downstream signaling molecules such as STAT3, Akt and
p42/44 MAPK (Figure 3G). As expected, the increase in
MFE induced by leptin was reversed by the JAK2-STAT3
inhibitor AG490, the MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 and the
PI3K/AKT inhibitor LY294002 (Figure 3H), suggesting

Figure 3: Leptin induces MFE in breast cancer cells. A. Leptin receptor long (OBRL) and short (OBRS) isoform mRNA levels,
evaluated by real time RT-PCR, in MCF-7, MCF-7-M1 and MCF-7-M2 cells. Each sample was normalized to its GAPDH mRNA content.
B. MFE in MCF-7-M1 and MCF-7-M2 in the presence or absence (−) of leptin 500 ng/ml (Lep). C. Representative phase-contrast
images of mammospheres treated as in panel (B) are shown. D. CD44+/CD24− population in MCF-7-M2 cells treated or not (−) with Lep.
E. Transmigration assays in MCF-7-M1 and MCF-7-M2-derived cells treated or not (−) with Lep. F. MCF-7 cells were stably transfected
with either a scrambled shRNA (control-sh) or OBR shRNA (OBR-sh). OBRL mRNA content was evaluated by real time RT-PCR
(left panel). Each sample was normalized to its GAPDH mRNA content. MFE in MCF-7-M1 derived from either control-sh or OBR-sh
clones (right panel). G. Immunoblotting of phosphorylated (p), STAT3 (Tyr705), Akt (Ser473), and MAPK (Thr202/Tyr204) at the indicated
residues measured in cellular extracts from MCF-7-M1 cells treated or not (−) with Lep. GAPDH, loading control. H. MFE in MCF-7-M1
treated with Lep and AG490 (AG-20 μmol/L), PD98059 (PD-10 μmol/L) or LY294002 (LY-10 μmol/L). The values represent the means ±
s.d. of three different experiments each performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1266

Oncotarget

that leptin promotes stem cell properties via activation of
classical leptin signaling pathways. In agreement with
these observations, we also found an up-regulation of
well-known leptin target genes as OBR and the heat shock
protein 90 (HSP90) [20] in MCF-7 cells treated with leptin
(Supplementary Figure S4A and 4B)

those genes that are unique and in common among the
three treatments (Figure 4A). A total of 2270 transcripts
were commonly regulated in all treated samples (808
up- and 1462 down-regulated transcripts, respectively).
It should be noted that the global overlap among genes
expressed in treated samples includes a number of genes
known to play a role in stem cell biology such as BMI1,
SUZ12, YES1, SOX4 (Figure 4B, left panel, Supplementary
Table S2). Similar trends were also observed for the
expression of other genes involved in cell cycle control
(Figure 4B, middle panel, Supplementary Table S3).
Moreover, treated samples displayed up-regulation
of some transcripts related to the heat shock protein
family, that recently have been suggested to be crucial
in sustaining proliferation and self-renewal of stem cells
[29] (Figure 4B, right panel, Supplementary Table S4).
To validate our microarray study MCF-7 mammospheres
treated with leptin were evaluated for the expression of a

Gene expression profiling in leptin or stromal
cm-treated mammosphere-derived cells
To determine whether leptin, CAF- and adipocyteCM may similarly affect gene expression profile in
mammosphere-derived cells, we performed gene
expression profiling analysis on total RNA extracted
from the second generation spheres. Microarray results
highlighted several RNAs differentially expressed in
treated vs untreated MCF-7 mammospheres. Venn diagram
analysis was used to compare the gene lists and to identify

Figure 4: Gene expression profiling in mammosphere cultures treated with stromal cell-CM or leptin. A. Venn diagram

of up-(left panel) and down-(right panel) regulated transcript identified by microarray analysis in MCF-7-M2 cells treated with CAF-CM,
Adipo-CM or Lep compared to untreated samples. B. Heat-maps of stemness related-genes, cell cycle related-genes and HSP family genes
from microarray data. Gene expression changes were calculated in treated cells with respect to the untreated controls. Transcript showing a
DiffScore ≤ − 30 and ≥ 30, corresponding to a p-value of 0.001, and significant fold change in treated vs untreated ≥ 1.5 were considered.
C. Real-time RT-PCR validation of a subset of genes in MCF-7-M2 cells treated or not (−) with Lep. Each sample was normalized to its
GAPDH mRNA content. The values represent the means ± s.d. of three different experiments each performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05 vs
untreated (−) sample.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1267

Oncotarget

panel of genes by using real-time PCR (Figure 4C). Taken
together, gene expression profile analyses strongly support
the role of leptin as a crucial paracrine molecule able to
mediate the microenvironment effects on BCSC activity.

Then, to investigate the direct involvement of OBR
in the regulation of mammosphere formation, OBR
gene expression was analyzed in cells from metastatic
ascites and pleural effusion fluids using microarray data.
There was a significant direct correlation between the
expression of OBR mRNA in cells from the metastatic
fluids and MFE (r = 0.68; p = 0.05, Figure 5D). In
agreement with the microarray data obtained in MCF7 mammospheres, a significant correlation between
MFE and HSP90 gene expression in the same metastatic
patient-derived samples (r = 0.71; p = 0.036) was also
observed (Figure 5E). These data suggest that patients
with higher levels of OBR and HSP90 mRNAs in cells of
metastatic fluids have greater ex vivo CSC activity.

Leptin increases patient-derived mammosphere
formation/self-renewal activity
The role of leptin in the regulation of BCSC
activity was then evaluated by using patient-derived
breast cancer cells isolated from metastatic ascites or
pleural effusions. Tumor histology, grade, hormone
receptors and HER2 status of the primary tumors were
reported in Table 1. Mammosphere cultures treated with
leptin resulted in a significant increase in MFE compared
to untreated samples (n = 10, Figure 5A). Secondary
mammosphere formation was observed only in four
samples and treatment with leptin significantly increased
self-renewal in three of them (Figure 5B). Besides, four
human metastatic samples taken from patients with
breast cancer were also treated with peptide LDFI. MFE
induced by leptin was significantly decreased with the
addition of LDFI (Figure 5C). Interestingly, treatment
with peptide LDFI alone reduced the mammosphere
formation, underlying how this peptide negatively
interferes with leptin autocrine loop (Figure 5C).

OBR expression correlates with reduced overall
survival in breast carcinomas
To investigate the clinical significance of OBR gene
expression in human breast cancers the relationship between
OBR levels and overall survival (OS) of breast cancer
patients (n = 781) was estimated by Kaplan–Meier analysis.
Survival curves indicated that women with high OBR
expression exhibited a lower rate of OS than those with
low OBR expression (HR = 1.9, p = 0.022) (Figure 6A).
Similarly, breast carcinoma patients with high HSP90

Table 1: Summary of metastatic patients-derived cancers
SAMPLE ID

AGE

SOURCE

Histology

GRADE

ER

PR

HER2

BB3RC29

70

ASC

UN

UN

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC46

68

ASC

ILC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC50

46

ASC

IDC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC59

69

ASC

ILC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC60

66

ASC

ILC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC65

62

ASC

ILC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC66

69

ASC

ILC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC70

62

ASC

ILC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC71

48

PE

UN

3

POS

POS

POS

BB3RC79

UN

PE

IDC

3

NEG

NEG

NEG

BB3RC81

55

ASC

IDC

2

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC84

UN

PE

UN

3

NEG

NEG

NEG

BB3RC90

66

PE

IDC/ILC

2

P0S

POS

NEG

BB3RC92

61

ASC

IDC

1

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC93

UN

ASC

UN

UN

POS

POS

NEG

BB3RC94

41

ASC

UN

UN

POS

POS

NEG

1

2
1
2

These samples were obtained at different time points from the same patients
Sixteen patient-derived breast cancer samples were used in this study. Tumor histology and grade for metastatic samples
(ASC and PE) relates to the primary cancer. Abbreviation: UN unknown, PE pleural effusion, ASC ascites sample, ILC
invasive lobular carcinoma , IDC invasive ductal carcinoma, POS positive, NEG negative, ER Estrogen Receptor, PR
Progesterone Receptor, HER2, epidermal growth factor receptor 2.
1, 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1268

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Leptin enhances mammospheres formation/self-renewal activity in patient-derived metastatic cells. 10 metastatic
fluid samples obtained from breast cancer patients (BB3RC59/BB3RC66/BB3RC71–94) undergoing palliative drainage of symptomatic
ascites or pleural effusions were used (Table 1). MFE in metastatic patient-derived cells grown as primary (Metastatic samples M1) (A) or
secondary (Metastatic samples M2) (B) mammospheres in the presence or absence (−) of Lep. (C) MFE in 4 Metastatic sample M1 untreated
(−) or treated with Lep, peptide LDFI (1 μg/ml), and Lep+LDFI. The values represent the means ± s.d. of three different experiments each
performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05. n.s.:nonsignificant. Correlation between OBR (D) or HSP90 mRNA expression (E) in cells of the metastatic
fluids and MFE (8 patients/BB3RC29–70) (Pearson correlation coefficient, r = 0.68, p = 0.05; r = 0.71, p = 0.036, respectively).
expression had decreased OS compared with those with low
HSP90 expression (HR = 2.2, p = 0.00017) (Figure 6B).
Basal-like breast cancer is an aggressive tumor
subtype, composed by primitive undifferentiated cells.
Indeed, basal-like breast tumors, which are enriched for
CD44+/CD24− cells, exhibit epithelial–mesenchymal
transition features and express high levels of stem cellregulatory genes [30–34]. In agreement with these
observations, the results of the Kaplan-Meier analysis
indicated a more relevant discrimination in terms of
overall survival between high and low expression of OBR
and HSP90 in basal breast cancer patients (n = 143) (HR =
4.4, p = 0.011; HR = 5.2, p = 0.013 respectively) (Figure
6C and 6D).

cells through either the secretion of soluble molecules or
cell–cell communication [35, 36]. Particularly, in the case
of breast carcinoma, it has been reported that various types
of stromal cells via growth factors and cytokines may
enhance the proliferation and survival of BCSCs, induce
angiogenesis, and recruit tumor-associated macrophages
and other immune cells, which in turn secrete additional
factors promoting tumor cell invasion and metastasis [8].
Here we demonstrated, for the first time, that leptin
and its receptor play a crucial role in mediating the
interaction between stromal cells (CAFs and adipocytes)
and BCSCs. The initial conditioned media experiments
indicated that the entire complement of secretory proteins
released by CAFs and adipocytes significantly increase
MFE/self-renewal in breast cancer cells. An important
role is played by leptin as a fundamental environmental
regulator of CSCs in the cancer stem niche. Indeed,
either leptin immunodepletion from CAF- and adipocytederived CM or inhibition of leptin signaling by using
peptide LDFI, a small-molecule that acts as a full leptin

DISCUSSION
The heterotypic signals arising in the tumorassociated stroma have been shown to be important in
inducing and maintaining a stem-like state in the tumor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1269

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Correlation between OBR and HSP90 mRNA levels and overall survival in breast cancer. Kaplan–Meier
survival analysis in breast carcinoma patients (n = 781) with high and low OBR (A) or HSP90 (B) expression analyzed as described in
Materials and Methods. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis in basal breast cancer patients (n = 143) with high and low OBR (C) or HSP90
(D) expression. Kaplan-Meier survival graph, and hazard ratio (HR) with 95% confidence intervals and logrank P value.
receptor antagonist [28], reduced the effects of CM on
mammosphere formation. Gene expression profiling
revealed a significant overlap of regulated genes in
mammosphere cells following treatment with CAF-,
adipocyte-derived CM or leptin. Of particular interest
was the observation that genes commonly expressed in
all treated-samples include several of those involved
in stemness. Among these, the polycomb gene BMI1,
which has been reported to play an important role in
self-renewal of stem cells and has a positive correlation
with clinical grade/stage and poor prognosis [37], was
one of the most highly induced in all treated cells. One
of the features of CSCs is the uncontrolled proliferation,
perhaps due to a reduced responsiveness to negative
growth regulators or to the loss of contact inhibition
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and gap junction intercellular communication [38]. Our
results clearly evidenced that a number of genes involved
in cell cycle control showed a similar expression profile
upon treatment with stromal-CM and leptin. Another
family of genes, crucial in sustaining self-renewal of
stem cells [29], is the heat shock protein family. We
have previously demonstrated that the HSP90, a main
functional component of this chaperone complex, is a
target of leptin in breast cancer cells [20]. Our microarray
data showed that some transcripts of the HSP family were
upregulated in stromal-CM and leptin-treated samples.
Thus, since the expression pattern of genes regulated by
leptin and involved in stem cell biology closely mirrors
those modulated by stromal cells, it is reasonable to
speculate that leptin may represent a critical paracrine
1270

Oncotarget

formation in metastatic breast cancer patient-derived
cells, suggesting that strategies aimed at inhibiting leptin
signaling represent a rationale therapeutic approach to
target cancer stem cells.
In conclusion, our findings identify, for the first
time, leptin as an important paracrine molecule that
mediates the interaction between stromal cells and BCSCs,
providing novel insights into understanding how BCSCs
are influenced by the tumor microenvironment. As clinical
implications, these data suggest that targeting leptin/leptin
receptor signaling generated in the microenvironment
may be useful for BCSC eradication and eventually to
prevent recurrence and metastasis in patients with breast
carcinoma.

molecule in mediating the microenvironment effects on
BCSC activity.
The expression of the leptin receptor is a
characteristic feature of CSCs and of a broad array of
embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells, which
exhibit an increased response to leptin including
phosphorylation and activation of STAT3 and induction
of stem cell markers, as OCT4 and SOX2 [23].
Leptin receptor has also been reported as a marker
for identification and in vivo fate of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) [39] and leptin signaling
represents an essential step for the enhanced survival,
chemotaxis and therapeutic properties of MSCs induced
by hypoxia [40, 41]. Moreover, it has been reported that
leptin is able to regulate and activate several signaling
pathways and oncogenes which are critically implicated
in BCSCs [42–46] and leptin deficiency in MMTV-Wnt-1
transgenic mice results in functional depletion of BCSCs
leading to less tumor outgrowth [24]. More recently, it
has also been demonstrated that OBR is necessary for
maintaining a CSC-like state in TNBC cells [25] and high
OBR expression induced by the adiposity-leptin enriched
environment generates a population with enhanced CSC
properties and tumorigenic capacity [26]. Our studies
extended these previous findings by demonstrating a
direct involvement of leptin in sustaining breast cancer
stem cell behavior using both breast cancer cell lines
and metastatic breast cancer patient-derived cells. We
found that MCF-7 mammospheres exhibited increased
OBR mRNA expression, while OBR silencing caused a
significant reduction in the sphere-forming efficiency.
Treatment with leptin induced an increase in MFE, selfrenewal and an enhanced percentage of CD44+/CD24−
cell population, through the activation of the classical
signaling pathways. Importantly, we also showed that
leptin is able to increase the mammosphere formation
and self-renewal activity in metastatic breast cancer cells
isolated from patients. Moreover, OBR mRNA expression,
analyzed in cells from metastatic fluids, was directly
correlated with mammosphere formation activity ex vivo.
In agreement with our data of gene expression profile, a
significant positive correlation between MFE and HSP90
mRNA expression in the same metastatic patient-derived
samples was observed.
It has been previously reported that high-grade
tumors associated with poor prognosis display an
enrichment of BCSCs [47, 48]. Here, using Kaplan-Meier
analysis we found that OBR expression, which is crucial
in maintaining stem cell phenotype, was associated with
reduced overall survival in breast carcinomas suggesting
its potential role as a prognostic factor. Interestingly,
in basal-like breast cancer patients, a more relevant
discrimination in terms of overall survival between high
and low OBR expression could be observed. Finally, we
demonstrated that blocking leptin signaling by using
the peptide LDFI significantly reduced mammosphere
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer epithelial cells were acquired in 2010 and 2015
respectively, from American Type Culture Collection
where they were authenticated, stored according to
supplier’s instructions, and used within 4 months after
frozen aliquots recovery. Breast subcutaneous human
female preadipocytes (Lot.#:BR071812B; BR070810)
were from Zen-Bio. Adipocytes, obtained following
differentiation procedure, were routinely maintained
in Adipocyte maintenance medium (Zen-Bio). Every 4
months, cells were authenticated by single tandem repeat
analysis at our Sequencing Core; morphology, doubling
times, estrogen sensitivity, and mycoplasma negativity
were tested (MycoAlert, Lonza).

Cancer associated fibroblast (CAF) isolation
Human breast cancer specimens were collected
in 2013 from primary tumors of patients who signed
informed consent following the procedures previously
described [9]. Briefly, small pieces of fresh tumor
excision were digested (500 IU collagenase in
Hank’s balanced salt solution; Sigma; 37°C for 2 h).
After differential centrifugation (90 g for 2 min), the
supernatant containing CAFs was centrifuged (500 g
for 8 min), resuspended, and cultured in RPMI-1640
medium supplemented with 15% FBS and antibiotics.
The fibroblastic nature of the isolated cells was confirmed
by microscopic determination of morphology, and
characterization by αSMA, vimentin, pan-Cytokeratin
and fibroblast activation protein (FAP) expression. CAFs
between 4 and 10 passages were used.

Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence assay was performed as
described [9] using anti-α-SMA or ERα antibodies and
1271

Oncotarget

protocol. Flow cytometric analysis was performed on
a FACScan and acquisition was performed with WinDI
software (Becton Dickinson).

fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated secondary antibody
(Santa Cruz Biothecnology).

Conditioned medium (CM) and leptinimmunodepleted CM

Reverse transcription and real-time reverse
transcriptase PCR assays

CM from CAFs and adipocytes and leptinimmunodepleted CM were obtained as described [9].
Leptin levels were measured by ELISA (LDN).

PPARγ/OB/FAP/36B4 mRNA expression was
evaluated by the RT–PCR method as described [50]. Realtime RT-PCR was assessed using SYBR Green Universal
PCR Master Mix (Biorad). Each sample was normalized
on its GAPDH mRNA content. Relative gene expression
levels were calculated as previously described [50].
Primers in Supplementary Table S1.

Metastatic breast cancer patient-derived cells
Pleural effusion and ascites samples were
obtained from patients with metastatic breast cancer
undergoing palliative drainage at The Christie Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust Manchester (UK). Metastatic
breast sample details in Table 1. Ascites and pleural
effusions were centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min at 4°C
and suspended in PBS. Erythrocytes and leucocytes were
removed by centrifugation through Lymphoprep solution
(Axis Shield), followed by removal of CD45-positive cells
using anti-CD45 magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Single
cell suspension of breast cancer epithelial cells was then
used to perform mammosphere assay.

Immunoblot analysis
Protein extracts were subjected to SDS-PAGE as
described [50]. Immunoblots show a single representative
of 3 separate experiments.

Transmigration assays
Mammosphere derived MCF-7 cells were placed
in the upper compartments of Boyden chamber (8-μm
membranes/Corning Costar) and transmigration assay was
performed as described [9].

Mammosphere culture
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 monolayer cells
were enzymatically and manually disaggregated to
obtain single-cell suspension. Single cells were plated
in ultralow attachment plates (Corning) at a density
of 500 cells/cm2 in a serum-free Human mammary
epithelial cell growth medium (HUMEC), supplemented
with B27, 20 ng/mL human epidermal growth factor
(EGF), 4 μg/mL heparin, 5 μg/ml insulin, 1 ng/ml
hydrocortisone, 1 mg/ml penicillin-streptomycin and
0,25 μg/ml amphotericin B (Life Technologies). Growth
factors and treatments (leptin, Life Technologies; AG490
Sigma; PD98059/LY294002 Calbiochem) were added
to the mammosphere cultures every 3 days. After 7 days
mammospheres > 50 μm (primary mammospheres-M1)
were counted using a microscope (x40 magnification),
collected, enzymatically dissociated, plated at the same
seeding density used in the primary generation to obtain
secondary mammospheres-M2. Mammosphere cultures
from metastatic breast patient-derived cells was assessed
as described [49]. Mammospheres forming efficiency
(MFE) was calculated as number of mammospheres per
well/number of cells seeded per well and reported as fold
versus control.

Lentiviral transfection
We established stable OBR sh MCF-7 cell line using
the lentiviral expression system (GeneCopoeia; lentiviral
plasmid sh-clone #HSH010584). 48 h after transfection
with packaging plasmids and pLentiviral plasmids of
target gene in HEK293 cells, supernatants containing
lentiviral particles were filtered (0.45 μm PES), mixed
with polybrene (8 μg/ml) and used to infect MCF-7 cells.
24 h after infection, cells were selected with 2 μg/mL
puromycin overtime to eliminate un-infected cells. OBR
mRNA expression in stable MCF-7 clones was evaluated
by real-time RT-PCR.

Microarray and data analysis
Microarray analyses were carried out on total RNA
from MCF-7-M2 mammosphere-derived cells treated
with CAF-CM, Adipocyte-CM or Leptin by pooling
equal amounts of nucleic acids extracted from three
independent cell cultures. Gene expression profiling was
performed in triplicate using 500ng of each RNA pool as
described [51], cRNAs were hybridized for 18 h at 55°C
on Illumina HumanHT-12 v4.0 BeadChips (Illumina Inc.)
and scanned with an Illumina iSCAN. Data analyses were
performed with GenomeStudio software version 2011.1
(Illumina Inc.). Data were normalized with the quantile
algorithm and genes were considered if the detection pvalue was < 0.01. Statistical significance was calculated

Flow cytometry
Mammospheres were dispersed to obtain single-cell
suspension. Cells were washed in PBS with 2,5% BSA and
stained with FITC anti-human CD44 and PE anti-human
CD24 (BD Biosciences), according to the supplier’s
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1272

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

with the Illumina DiffScore, a proprietary algorithm
that uses the bead standard deviation to build an error
model. Transcripts showing a DiffScore ≤− 30 and ≥ 30,
corresponding to a p-value of 0.001 and significant fold
change in treated vs untreated ≥ 1.5 were considered.
Venn diagram was generated using Venny 2.0 software.
Heat-maps were generated with the Multiexperiment
Viewer 4.9 software after performing one way hierarchical
clustering of transcripts with the average linkage method
and Euclidian distance.
Raw microarray data have been deposited, in a
format complying with the Minimum Information About
a Microarray Gene Experiment (MIAME) guidelines of
the Microarray Gene Expression Data Society (MGED),
in the EBI ArrayExpress database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
arrayexpress) with Accession Number: E-MTAB-3641.
Total RNA from 8 different metastatic breast
cancer samples was extracted using the RNeasy Plus
Mini Kit (QIAGEN). The Exon Gene Array ST1 platform
(Affimetrix) was used to assess gene expression. Data
obtained were analysed using Bioconductor R Software.
The mean of log2 gene expression values was calculated
across all 8 patient derived samples for each individual
gene.

This work was supported by PRIN-MIUR
(Programmi di Ricerca Scientifica di Rilevante Interesse
Nazionale-Ministero dell’Istruzione dell’Università
della Ricerca) 2010–2011 and Associazione Italiana per
la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) grants: IG-11595 and IG13176. European Commission/FSE/Regione Calabria to
FC and SP and Lilli Funaro foundation to SP.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E. Cancer statistics, 2010.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010; 60:277–300.
2.	 Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ. Cancer stem cells in solid
tumours: accumulating evidence and unresolved questions.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:755–768.
3.	 Clarke MF, Dick JE, Dirks PB, Eaves CJ, Jamieson CH,
Jones DL, Visvader J, Weissman IL, Wahl GM. Cancer
stem cells—perspectives on current status and future directions: AACR Workshop on cancer stem cells. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:9339–9344.
4.	 Li X, Lewis MT, Huang J, Gutierrez C, Osborne CK, Wu
MF, Hilsenbeck SG, Pavlick A, Zhang X, Chamness GC,
Wong H, Rosen J, Chang JC. Intrinsic resistance of tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2008; 100:672–679.

Construction of RNA-seq database
RNA-seq data was obtained from the TCGA
depository. We transferred the pre-processed level 3 data
generated by the Illumina HiSeq 2000 RNA Sequencing
Version 2 platform. Expression levels for these samples
were computed using a combination of MapSplice and
RSEM. Individual patient files were merged into a single
database using the plyr R package [52].

5.	 Phillips TM, McBride WH, Pajonk F. The response of
CD24(-/low)/CD44+ breast cancer-initiating cells to radiation. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:1777–1785.
6.	 Kakarala M, Wicha MS. Implications of the cancer stemcell hypothesis for breast cancer prevention and therapy.
J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:2813–2820.
7.	 Liu S, Dontu G, Wicha MS. Mammary stem cells, selfrenewal pathways, and carcinogenesis. Breast Cancer Res.
2005; 7:86–95.

Statistical analyses
Each datum point represents the mean ± s.d. of three
different experiments. Data were analyzed by Student’s
t test using the GraphPad Prism 4 software. P < 0.05 was
considered as statistically significant. Pearson correlation
coefficient (r) was used to measure the correlation
between OBR or Heat Shock Protein 90 (HSP90)
gene expression of 8 metastatic breast cancer samples
and mean MFE; a 2-tailed p ≤ 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed as described
[53]. Kaplan-Meier survival graph, and hazard ratio
with 95% confidence intervals and logrank P value
were calculated and plotted in R using Bioconductor
packages.

8.	 Korkaya H, Liu S, Wicha MS. Breast cancer stem cells,
cytokine networks, and the tumor microenvironment. J Clin
Invest. 2011; 121:3804–3809.
9.	 Barone I, Catalano S, Gelsomino L, Marsico S, Giordano C,
Panza S, Bonofiglio D, Bossi G, Covington KR, Fuqua SA,
Andò S. Leptin mediates tumor-stromal interactions that
promote the invasive growth of breast cancer cells. Cancer
Res. 2012; 72:1416–1427.
10.	 Cirillo D, Rachiglio AM, la Montagna R, Giordano A,
Normanno N. Leptin signaling in breast cancer: an overview. J Cell Biochem. 2008; 105:956–964.
11.	 Ishikawa M, Kitayama J, Nagawa H. Enhanced expression
of leptin and leptin receptor (OB-R) in human breast cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:4325–4331.

CONFLICTs OF INTEREST

12.	 Miyoshi Y, Funahashi T, Tanaka S, Taguchi T, Tamaki Y,
Shimomura I, Noguchi S. High expression of leptin receptor
mRNA in breast cancer tissue predicts poor prognosis for

The authors declare they have no conflict of interest.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1273

Oncotarget

25.	 Zheng Q, Banaszak L, Fracci S, Basali D, Dunlap SM,
Hursting SD, Rich JN, Hjlemeland AB, Vasanji A, Berger
NA, Lathia JD, Reizes O. Leptin receptor maintains cancer
stem-like properties in triple negative breast cancer cells.
Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013; 20:797–808.

patients with high, but not low, serum leptin levels. Int J
Cancer. 2006; 118:1414–1419.
13.	 Andò S, Barone I, Giordano C, Bonofiglio D, Catalano S.
The Multifaceted Mechanism of Leptin Signaling within
Tumor Microenvironment in Driving Breast Cancer Growth
and Progression. Front Oncol. 2014; 4:340.

26.	 Chang CC, Wu MJ, Yang JY, Camarillo IG, Chang CJ.
Leptin-STAT3-G9a Signaling Promotes Obesity-Mediated
Breast Cancer Progression. Cancer Res. 2015; .

14.	 Andò S, Catalano S. The multifactorial role of leptin in
driving the breast cancer microenvironment. Nat Rev
Endocrinol. 2011; 8:263–275.

27.	 Dontu G, Abdallah WM, Foley JM, Jackson KW, Clarke
MF, Kawamura MJ, Wicha MS. In vitro propagation and
transcriptional profiling of human mammary stem/progenitor cells. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:1253–1270.

15.	 Saxena NK, Sharma D. Multifaceted leptin network: the
molecular connection between obesity and breast cancer. J
Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2013; 18:309–320.
16.	 Catalano S, Marsico S, Giordano C, Mauro L, Rizza P,
Panno ML, Andò S. Leptin enhances, via AP-1, expression
of aromatase in the MCF-7 cell line. J Biol Chem. 2003;
278:28668–28676.

28.	 Catalano S, Leggio A, Barone I, De Marco R, Gelsomino L,
Campana A, Malivindi R, Panza S, Giordano C, Liguori A,
Bonofiglio D, Liguori A, Andò S. A novel leptin antagonist
peptide inhibits breast cancer growth in vitro and in vivo.
J Cell Mol Med. 2015; 19:1122–1132.

17.	 Catalano S, Mauro L, Marsico S, Giordano C, Rizza P,
Rago V, Montanaro D, Maggiolini M, Panno ML, Andò
S. Leptin induces, via ERK1/ERK2 signal, functional activation of estrogen receptor alpha in MCF-7 cells. J Biol
Chem. 2004; 279:19908–19915.

29.	 Isolani ME, Conte M, Deri P, Batistoni R. Stem cell protection mechanisms in planarians: the role of some heat shock
genes. Int J Dev Biol. 2012; 56:127–133.
30.	 May CD, Sphyris N, Evans KW, Werden SJ, Guo W, Mani
SA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem
cells: a dangerously dynamic duo in breast cancer progression. Breast Cancer Res. 2011; 13:202.

18.	 Fiorio E, Mercanti A, Terrasi M, Micciolo R, Remo A,
Auriemma A, Molino A, Parolin V, Di Stefano B, Bonetti
F, Giordano A, Cetto GL, Surmacz E. Leptin/HER2 crosstalk in breast cancer: in vitro study and preliminary in vivo
analysis. BMC Cancer. 2008; 8:305.

31.	 Ben-Porath I, Thomson MW, Carey VJ, Ge R, Bell GW,
Regev A, Weinberg RA. An embryonic stem cell-like gene
expression signature in poorly differentiated aggressive
human tumors. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:499–507.

19.	 Soma D, Kitayama J, Yamashita H, Miyato H, Ishikawa
M, Nagawa H. Leptin augments proliferation of breast cancer cells via transactivation of HER2. J Surg Res. 2008;
149:9–14.

32.	 Honeth G, Bendahl PO, Ringner M, Saal LH, GruvbergerSaal SK, Lovgren K, Grabau D, Ferno M, Borg A, Hegardt
C. The CD44+/CD24- phenotype is enriched in basal-like
breast tumors. Breast Cancer Res. 2008; 10:R53.

20.	 Giordano C, Vizza D, Panza S, Barone I, Bonofiglio D,
Lanzino M, Sisci D, De Amicis F, Fuqua SA, Catalano S,
Andò S. Leptin increases HER2 protein levels through a
STAT3-mediated up-regulation of Hsp90 in breast cancer
cells. Mol Oncol. 2013; 7:379–391.

33.	 Park SY, Lee HE, Li H, Shipitsin M, Gelman R, Polyak
K. Heterogeneity for stem cell-related markers according
to tumor subtype and histologic stage in breast cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2010; 16:876–887.

21.	 Saxena NK, Taliaferro-Smith L, Knight BB, Merlin D,
Anania FA, O’Regan RM, Sharma D. Bidirectional crosstalk between leptin and insulin-like growth factor-I signaling promotes invasion and migration of breast cancer cells
via transactivation of epidermal growth factor receptor.
Cancer Res. 2008; 68:9712–9722.

34.	 Sarrio D, Rodriguez-Pinilla SM, Hardisson D, Cano A,
Moreno-Bueno G, Palacios J. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer relates to the basal-like phenotype.
Cancer Res. 2008; 68:989–997.
35.	 Pattabiraman DR, Weinberg RA. Tackling the cancer
stem cells - what challenges do they pose?. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2014; 13:497–512.

22.	 Newman G, Gonzalez-Perez RR. Leptin-cytokine crosstalk
in breast cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014; 382:570–582.
23.	 Feldman DE, Chen C, Punj V, Tsukamoto H, Machida K.
Pluripotency factor-mediated expression of the leptin receptor (OB-R) links obesity to oncogenesis through tumorinitiating stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;
109:829–834.

36.	 Beck B, Blanpain C. Unravelling cancer stem cell potential.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:727–738.
37.	 Siddique HR, Saleem M. Role of BMI1, a stem cell
factor, in cancer recurrence and chemoresistance:
preclinical and clinical evidences. Stem Cells. 2012;
30:372–378.

24.	 Zheng Q, Dunlap SM, Zhu J, Downs-Kelly E, Rich J,
Hursting SD, Berger NA, Reizes O. Leptin deficiency suppresses MMTV-Wnt-1 mammary tumor growth in obese
mice and abrogates tumor initiating cell survival. Endocr
Relat Cancer. 2011; 18:491–503.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38.	 Trosko JE, Chang CC, Upham BL, Tai MH. Ignored hallmarks of carcinogenesis: stem cells and cell-cell communication. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004; 1028:192–201.

1274

Oncotarget

signaling in breast cancer and cancer stem cells. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2012; 1825:207–222.

39.	 Zhou BO, Yue R, Murphy MM, 1 Peyer JG, Morrison S J.
Leptin-Receptor-Expressing Mesenchymal Stromal Cells
Represent the Main Source of Bone Formed by Adult Bone
Marrow. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 15:154–168.

47.	 Farnie G, Clarke RB, Spence K, Pinnock N, Brennan K,
Anderson NG, Bundred NJ. Novel cell culture technique
for primary ductal carcinoma in situ: role of Notch and epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathways. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2007; 99:616–627.

40.	 Hu X, Wu R, Jiang Z, Wang L, Chen P, Zhang L, Yang L,
Wu Y, Chen H, Chen H, Xu Y, Zhou Y, Huang X, Webster
KA, Yu H, Wang J. Leptin signaling is required for augmented therapeutic properties of mesenchymal stem cells
conferred by hypoxia preconditioning. Stem Cells. 2014;
10:2702–13.

48.	 Pece S, Tosoni D, Confalonieri S, Mazzarol G, Vecchi M,
Ronzoni S, Bernard L, Viale G, Pelicci PG, Di Fiore PP.
Biological and molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers
correlates with their cancer stem cell content. Cell. 2010;
140:62–73.

41.	 Chen P, Wu R, Zhu W, Jiang Z, Xu Y, Chen H, Zhang
Z, Chen H, Zhang L, Yu H, Wang J, Hu X. Hypoxia
Preconditioned Mesenchymal Stem Cells Prevent Cardiac
Fibroblast Activation and Collagen Production via Leptin.
PloS ONE. 2014; 9:e103587.

49.	 Shaw FL, Harrison H, Spence K, Ablett MP, Simoes BM,
Farnie G, Clarke RB. A detailed mammosphere assay protocol for the quantification of breast stem cell activity. J
Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2012; 17:111–117.

42.	 Zhou J, Wulfkuhle J, Zhang H, Gu P, Yang Y, Deng
J, Margolick JB, Liotta LA, Petricoin E 3rd, Zhang Y.
Activation of the PTEN/mTOR/STAT3 pathway in breast
cancer stem-like cells is required for viability and maintenance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:16158–16163.

50.	 Catalano S, Malivindi R, Giordano C, Gu G, Panza S,
Bonofiglio D, Lanzino M, Sisci D, Panno ML, Andò S.
Farnesoid X receptor, through the binding with steroidogenic factor 1-responsive element, inhibits aromatase
expression in tumor Leydig cells. J Biol Chem. 2010;
285:5581–5593.

43.	 Pratt MA, Tibbo E, Robertson SJ, Jansson D, Hurst
K, Perez-Iratxeta C, Lau R, Niu MY. The canonical
NF-kappaB pathway is required for formation of luminal
mammary neoplasias and is activated in the mammary progenitor population. Oncogene. 2009; 28:2710–2722.

51.	 Nassa G, Tarallo R, Giurato G, De Filippo MR, Ravo M,
Rizzo F, Stellato C, Ambrosino C, Baumann M, Lietzen
N, Nyman TA, Weisz A. Post-transcriptional regulation of
human breast cancer cell proteome by unliganded estrogen
receptor beta via microRNAs. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014;
13:1076–1090.

44.	 Guo S, Gonzalez-Perez RR. Notch, IL-1 and leptin crosstalk
outcome (NILCO) is critical for leptin-induced proliferation, migration and VEGF/VEGFR-2 expression in breast
cancer. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e21467.

52.	 Wickham . The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data
Analysis. J Stat Softw. 2011; 40:1–29.

45.	 Knight BB, Oprea-Ilies GM, Nagalingam A, Yang L, Cohen
C, Saxena NK, Sharma D. Survivin upregulation, dependent
on leptin-EGFR-Notch1 axis, is essential for leptin-induced
migration of breast carcinoma cells. Endocr Relat Cancer.
2011; 18:413–428.

53.	 Gyorffy B, Lanczky A, Eklund AC, Denkert C, Budczies J,
Li Q, Szallasi Z. An online survival analysis tool to rapidly
assess the effect of 22,277 genes on breast cancer prognosis
using microarray data of 1,809 patients. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2010; 123:725–731.

46.	 Guo S, Liu M, Wang G, Torroella-Kouri M, GonzalezPerez RR. Oncogenic role and therapeutic target of leptin

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1275

Oncotarget

