Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

iPSC-MSCs and islet allograft tolerance
Tong-Song Wang, Pan-Pan Cheng and Zhong-Quan Qi
The immunosuppressive effect and low
immunogenicity of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
make them ideal candidates for immunosuppressive
strategies. Adult MSCs have been applied widely in
organ transplantation. However, their limited accessibility
limits their application in the clinic. Furthermore,
successive passages slow the proliferation rate, reduce the
multipotency and lower the immunosuppressive activity of
adult MSCs in culture.
Induced pluripotent stem cells-derived MSCs (iPSCMSCs) may provide an alternative source of MSCs. iPSCMSCs have the same characteristics as adult MSCs and
exhibit great immunomodulatory properties. For example,
iPSC-MSCs displayed significant inhibition of NK cell
proliferation and cytolytic function [1]. iPSC-MSCs
modulated T-cell phenotypes towards Th2 suppression
and induced T regulatory cell (Treg) expansion in the
peripheral blood from allergic rhinitis patients [2]. And
the similar therapeutic effects on Th2 cytokines were
observed in a mouse model of ovalbumin-induced allergic
inflammation [3].
Given the great immunomodulatory properties
of the iPSC-MSCs, we speculated that iPSC-MSCs
could be a promising strategy for preventing transplant
rejection. Indeed, we found that iPSC-MSCs combined
with low-dose rapamycin (Rapa, 0.1 mg/kg/d, i.p., from
day 0 to day 9) significantly prolonged islet allograft
survival in the diabetic mice, and even induced immune
tolerance in 50% recipients, though iPSC-MSCs alone
was inefficient in preventing rejection [4]. We also found
that production of interleukin-2 and interferon-γ was
reduced, which indicated iPSC-MSCs + Rapa treatment
reduces Th1 inflammatory cytokines and may modulate
T-cell phenotypes towards Th1 suppression. However,
the iPSC-MSCs modulated T-cell phenotypes towards
Th2 suppression in allergic rhinitis patients and animal
models [2, 3]. These results indicate that iPSC-MSCs
maybe exerts different effects and activities in different
pathological conditions. It allows the iPSC-MSCs to
rectify the imbalance of the immune responses in different
environments.
Previous studies have verified that adult MSCs
alone, or combined with immunosuppressive drugs,
induce allograft immune tolerance through Treg induction
in vivo. Berman et al. first reported that infusions of donor
or third-party MSCs prolonged islet function, which was
associated with increased numbers of Tregs in peripheral

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

blood [5]. We speculated that iPSC-MSCs exert the
therapeutic effect possibly through the induction of Tregs,
acting like adult MSCs. Since TGF-β is the perpetrator
of immune suppression via regulatory T cells [6], we
examined TGF-β expression in the islet grafts and sera of
the recipient mice. The results showed that iPSC-MSCs +
Rapa treatment increased sera TGF-β concentrations, and
graft TGF-β mRNA levels, compared with Rapa treatment.
Flow cytometry results also showed that the number of T
regulatory cells was increased in spleen and lymph nodes
in the iPSC-MSCs+ Rapa group compared with Rapa
group. These results support our hypothesis.
In addition to 2,3-dioxygenase, prostaglandin-E2,
nitric oxide, TGF-β, and hepatocyte growth factor,
IL-10 has been reported to induce MSC-mediated
immunosuppressive effects. IL-10 induced by CD11b(+)
cells and IL-10-activated regulatory T cells played
important roles in immune modulation of mesenchymal
stem cells in rat islet allografts [7]. In our research, iPSCMSCs alone or in the combination with Rapa increased
IL-10 secretion in sera, and IL-10 mRNA levels in the
graft, whereas Rapa alone did not. Further research is
still required to determine whether IL-10 mediates the
immunosuppressive effect of iPSC-MSCs + Rapa on
T cells. In addition, transwell separation significantly
weakened the immunosuppressive effects of iPSC-MSCs
on the proliferation of Con A-treated splenic T cells,
which revealed that the combined treatment exerts its
immunosuppressive effects though cell-cell contact and
the regulation of cytokines production.
Anti-aging and anti-cancer benefits of low-dose
rapamycin were recently discussed [8]. The synergistic
immunomodulatory effects of iPSC-MSCs and lowdose Rapa in islet transplantation suggest a promising
strategy for inducing immune tolerance, not only in
allogeneic islets transplantation, but also in other solid
organ transplantation. There may be differences in
immunosuppressive effects and mechanisms between
iPSC-MSCs and MSCs from other sources. And the origin
of the cell sources and the long-term effects of iPSCMSCs also need to be investigated.
Pan-Pan Cheng: Qingdao Municipal Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Qingdao, Shandong, PR China
Correspondence to: Pan-Pan Cheng, email pansycheng@
hotmail.com

10669

Oncotarget

Received: April 20, 2015
Published: May 10, 2015

References
1.	

Giuliani M, et al. Blood. 2011; 118: 3254-3262.

2.	

Fu QL, et al. Allergy. 2012; 67: 1215-1222.

3.	

Sun YQ, et al. Stem Cells. 2012.

4.	

Cheng PP, et al. Stem Cells Dev. 2015.

5.	

Berman DM, et al. Diabetes. 2010; 59: 2558-2568.

6.	

Wahl SM, et al. J Leukoc Biol. 2004; 76: 15-24.

7.	

Kim YH, et al. Mol Med. 2011; 17: 697-708.

8.	

Kondratov RV, et al. Aging (Albany NY). 2014; 6:158-159.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10670

Oncotarget

