Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification and validation of the dopamine agonist
bromocriptine as a novel therapy for high-risk myelodysplastic
syndromes and secondary acute myeloid leukemia
Fabio Giuseppe Liberante1, Tara Pouryahya1, Mary-Frances McMullin1, Shu-Dong
Zhang1,*, Kenneth Ian Mills1,*
1

Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Fabio Giuseppe Liberante, e-mail: fliberante01@qub.ac.uk
Keywords: m
 yelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), bromocriptine, re-purposed, therapy
Received: July 03, 2015	

Accepted: November 28, 2015	

Published: December 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) represent a broad spectrum of diseases
characterized by their clinical manifestation as one or more cytopenias, or a reduction
in circulating blood cells. MDS is predominantly a disease of the elderly, with a
median age in the UK of around 75. Approximately one third of MDS patients will
develop secondary acute myeloid leukemia (sAML) that has a very poor prognosis.
Unfortunately, most standard cytotoxic agents are often too toxic for older patients.
This means there is a pressing unmet need for novel therapies that have fewer side
effects to assist this vulnerable group. This challenge was tackled using bioinformatic
analysis of available transcriptomic data to establish a gene-based signature of
the development and progression of MDS. This signature was then used to identify
novel therapeutic compounds via statistically-significant connectivity mapping.
This approach suggested re-purposing an existing and widely-prescribed drug,
bromocriptine as a novel potential therapy in these disease settings. This drug has
shown selectivity for leukemic cells as well as synergy with current therapies.

INTRODUCTION

[3, 4]. However, remission and relapse rates are still
poor. Traditional drug discovery approaches have been
financially and temporally burdensome; relying on either
clinical trials in humans or large tissue culture-based drug
screening schemes. In recent years, the pharmaceutical
world has come to recognize that these methodologies are
very inefficient in realizing successful new therapies. This
has led to an increase in drug re-purposing strategies that
seek to improve the chances of success, by eliminating
the pitfalls of first-in-man trials and unpredicted
toxicity [5, 6]. One such approach is connectivity mapping
(cMAP). First developed by Lamb, et al., it is based on
the empirical observation that a transcriptome reflects the
state of a cell in a given condition [7, 8]. On this basis, it
theorizes that a pattern of transcriptional change induced
in one state may be reversed by the opposite pattern of
change observed in another state. By example, a cancer
cell with a characteristic change in transcription from
normal may be phenotypically ‘normalized’ by a drug

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a set of
diseases related by their clinical features and underlying
etiology and considered a disease of the elderly, with a
median age of around 75 [1]. Despite the initial cytopenias
caused by dysplastic or failing bone marrow, roughly one
third of MDS patients will develop a neoplastic secondary
acute myeloid leukemia (sAML) that has a very poor
prognosis. Those with high-risk MDS, defined by more
severe clinical symptoms and certain cytogenetic features,
are most in danger of progression [2]. Unfortunately, most
gold-standard chemotherapies elicit excessive toxicity in
this relatively frail, older patient group. This has driven
research into trying to identify novel therapies, which
have fewer side effects, to assist this vulnerable group.
Low dose Cytarabine has already been trailed in the
elderly population in treating more aggressive myeloid
malignancies and successfully reduced disease burden

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6609

Oncotarget

RESULTS

which triggers an opposite change in the expression of
those genes. The two major benefits of this approach are
that the initial screen is done in silico and that it can allow
for re-purposing of existing pharmaceutical agents, as
the transcriptional response to many existing agents has
already been profiled and made publically available.
This research has applied a statistically significant
variant of cMAP, sscMap, [9] to the task of identifying new
therapies for MDS and AML (Figure 1A). This approach
has revealed a novel potential therapy in re-purposing an
existing and widely-prescribed drug, bromocriptine. The
drug has shown selectivity for the leukaemic cell as well
as synergy with current therapies.

Identification of gene signature of MDS
development and progression
The gene expression dataset employed in this study
was derived from two published datasets listed on the
GEO repository as GSE13159 [10] and GSE15061 [11].
The derived sample set included healthy donors (70) and
patients with MDS (229) or AML (224, including all
risk groups). However, all those AML patients that had
cytogenetic rearrangements that typically preclude prior
undetected MDS were excluded from analysis, such as

Figure 1: (A) Overview of analytical approach (B) Kaplan-Meier for probability of AML transformation (C) Heatmap of expression

for 50–50 gene signature (D) sscMap drug-signature connections. (A) Flowchart of analysis pipeline used to generate gene signature
and identify compounds using sscMap (B) A Kaplan-Meier plot illustrating the stratification of a subset of MDS patient gene expression
profiles between the prognostic classes and their risk of leukemic transformation (low, medium & high risk of transformation) (C)
Hierarchical cluster of patient and donor gene expression profiles based on the identified 50–50 gene signature. Colored bars indicate
patient or donor status. The model cell lines included in the screen are also represented in the heatmap and are connected to the heatmap
to highlight their positioning. The expression values are presented as absolute microarray intensity values with yellow representing
high expression and blue low expression. The grey and black bars underneath delineate the four clusters in the dendrogram, which are
further discussed in the text. (D) A volcano plot of the connection scores and p-values generated by the sscMap tool between the gene
expression signature and the broad institute perturbagen library. Each point represents a derived gene signature to perturbagen/cell line
connection. The red line represents the threshold of statistical significance (~3.573, p-value = ~2.675 × 10–4) for the sscMap algorithm.
There were 8 significant connections across all the signatures, all of which had a negative score and represented 4 drugs. The drugs with ≥ 2
connections are in bold.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6610

Oncotarget

t (8;21) or inv (16). Mills, et al. previously developed a
prognostic classifier (PC) that would stratify MDS patients
by time to AML transformation based on their gene
expression profiles [11].The MDS sample profiles were
classified using the PC as either, low (n = 146), medium
(n = 44) or high risk (n = 39) of transformation (PC-Risk).
Out of the 229 MDS gene expression profiles our group
had access to linked survival and progression to AML
times for 115. This subset of samples showed a similar
Kaplan-Meier pattern between the risk group assigned by
the PC and time to AML transformation (Figure 1B) to
that shown in the original publication [11].
The gene expression profiles were imported as raw
CEL files and normalized using the appropriate Brainarray
Chip Definition File (CDF) providing a more concise
and accurate group of probe sets based on up-to-date
genome information [12]. Statistical analysis by ANOVA
of the microarray data across the groups (normal, low,
medium, high PC-Risk & AML) yielded a large list of
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) meeting an FDRadjusted p-value threshold of 0.05. Of these DEGs, 1, 303
showed a positive (700) or negative (603) fold-change for
every pairwise comparison, i.e. consistently increasing
or decreasing, comprising a signature of development
and progression. However, only 928 DEGs have a probe
set on all the U133A platforms used for connectivity
mapping. Coincidentally, there were 464 increasing and
464 decreasing genes that could be used to interrogate the
sscMap database. The top 50, ranked by p-value, of each
of these lists (increasing and decreasing genes) formed
the basis of a progression gene signature (50–50 gene list)
(Supplementary Table 1).
In order to visualize the effectiveness of the 50–50
gene list in categorizing patients we then performed
complete linkage clustering of both the samples and
the changes in individual gene expression creating the
heatmap seen in Figure 1C. Four clusters were identifiable;
the leftmost black cluster (1) holds the majority of the
AML samples and only a few high-risk MDS samples
together with the model cell lines, representing a highrisk MDS (MDS-L) and AML (OCI/AML-3) in duplicate.
The next cluster (2) is also predominated by AML samples
and high-risk MDS samples. However, there are a few
low-risk MDS and healthy samples. The third cluster
(3) is predominated by healthy and low-risk MDS
samples, including only a single AML sample. The final
grey cluster (4) is more heterogeneous, but is also mostly
healthy and low-risk MDS samples. Interestingly, the
medium-risk MDS samples are distributed throughout all
clusters, highlighting the heterogeneity of this group.

to the Broad Institute cmap02 perturbagen database.
Those compounds with a negative connection score
(potential ‘inhibitors’ of development/progression) that
were identified as significant by at least two signatures
were considered of interest. Of the four drugs identified
only 3 compounds (in bold) met the stricter criteria
(Figure 1D). Importantly, all the significant connections
in every comparison were for the leukemic cell line HL-60
in the cmap02 database. The compounds were buspirone,
bromocriptine, and tretinoin (ATRA). Tretinoin (ATRA)
has already proven successful in a number of clinical trials
for MDS and AML [13, 14]. Its molecular action triggers
greater cell differentiation and appears to lead to an
increase in terminally-differentiated hematopoietic cells in
patients when used in combination with other agents, such
as EPO or epigenetic modifiers [15, 16]. The other two
compounds belonging to the neuroleptic class of drugs,
however, have never, to the knowledge of the authors,
been trailed in the context of treating hematological
malignancies.

Screening of novel compounds
In light of the wealth of data surrounding
tretinoin, only buspirone and bromocriptine were taken
forward for initial screening in the MDS-L and OCI/
AML-3 cells, representing high-risk MDS and AML,
respectively. Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist, was
shown to be considerably toxic against both cell lines,
and significantly more so than buspirone (Figure  2A).
In order to assess whether bromocriptine’s toxicity was
common to other dopamine modulating agents, a panel of
similar compounds were screened against the model cell
lines, including some other neuroleptic class compounds
(Figure 2B and 2C).
The expression of this neuroleptic class of receptors
in the model cell lines was investigated in RMAnormalized microarray data. Only three (DRD2, DRD4,
HTR3C) of the twenty possible dopamine / serotonin
receptors demonstrated above background expression ( > 4
log2 intensity value – red line) in all the cell line samples
studied (Supplementary Figure 1A) — with even these
exhibiting very modest (< 5.5 log2 intensity value – blue
line) compared to overall probe set intensity distribution
(Supplementary Figure 1B). This would suggest that
it is unlikely that the cells are sensitive to signaling via
the dopamine / serotonin receptors. The dopamine and
serotonin family of receptors have many members and
each compound tested showed different affinities for
each. The panel included dopamine agonists against all
5 dopamine subtypes and those serotonin receptors for
which bromocriptine has been shown to have affinity
(Ki < 100 nM) [17] (Bold genes in Supplementary
Figure 1A).
However, only one of the compounds tested
elicited a viability response of similar magnitude as
seen with bromocriptine: Dihydrexidine which is a

Discovery of drug connections via sscMap
The top 50, 40, 30, 20 or 10 genes from the
increasing and decreasing gene lists were combined to
form 5 derivative gene signatures of 100, 80, 60, 40 and
20 genes; these 5 signatures were connected by sscMap
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6611

Oncotarget

To better predict in vivo effectiveness and
investigate whether bromocriptine may have any effects
on colony forming ability, methylcellulose assays were
performed. MDS-L cells were pre-treated for 18 h with
bromocriptine at various doses (0, 1, 10 µM) and seeded
into cytokine supplemented methylcellulose. Equal cell
numbers were used at the time of plating to correct for any
cell death in the first 18h to specifically select for defects
colony in formation. There was a very significant decrease
in colony formation following bromocriptine treatment at
10 µM (Figure 3C).

dopamine 1 agonist, an activity which bromocriptine also
possesses to some degree. However, it has an unfavorable
pharmacokinetic profile, which limited its clinical utility,
as it led to profound hypotension in the clinic [18].
Furthermore, it seems to have a very limited therapeutic
window as its response profile has a much steeper curve.
Two further model cell lines, SKM-1 and OCI/AML-2,
were treated with bromocriptine eliciting a similar
reduction in viability (Figure 2D).

Bromocriptine induces apoptosis and decreases
colony formation

Synergy with standard agents and selectivity for
the leukemic cell

Cleavage of Poly ADP Ribose Phoshorylase
(PARP), a commonly-employed marker of the final
stages of apoptosis, was used to identify the mode of cell
death elicited by bromocriptine. While PARP cleavage at
48 h was marginal, by 72 h it was substantial, following
treatment with bromocriptine (Figure 3A) with doses close
to the 72 h IC50 as estimated during the initial screen.
Caspase 3 is upstream of PARP in the apoptotic cascade
and is one of the enzymes that catalyze its cleavage.
This protein is itself cleaved relatively early in apoptosis
signaling; as seen in Figure  3A; there is demonstrable
Caspase 3 cleavage by 24 h prior to any detectable PARP
cleavage. Caspase 3 cleavage was also seen using a
substrate-based assay (Figure 3B) and was seen equally in
both the MDS-L and OCI/AML-3 cell lines.

The identification of bromocriptine via sscMap
implied that it interferes with the specific transcriptional
programs involved in MDS development and
progression however its actual selectivity is not assured.
To address this issue, mobilized peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from two healthy donors, who had
been conditioned using G-CSF together with three
primary diagnostic AML samples were collected and
their individual sensitivity to bromocriptine assessed.
The results demonstrate a therapeutic window between
the leukaemic and the healthy cells (Figure 4A). This
infers that the action of bromocriptine is selective for
the leukemic cell.

Figure 2: Drug dose-response in cell lines. Cell viability measured via ATP-based high-throughput assay normalized to vehicletreated control. Drug doses are represented as logarithm base 10 of Molarity. Points represent averages from 3 replicates and error bars
represent SEM. (A) Bromocriptine & Buspirone screened against MDS-L and OCI/AML-3 (B) Neuroleptic compound screen against
MDS-L (C) Neuroleptic compound screen against OCI/AML-3 (D) Bromocriptine-treated SKM-1 & OCI/AML-2 cell lines.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6612

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

In order to assess the interaction of bromocriptine
with routine leukemia therapeutics, synergy was
evaluated by treating cells with combinations of
bromocriptine and cytarabine. The cells were treated in
liquid culture at 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1 and 2 × the 72H IC50 doses
of each drug combinatorially, i.e. 25 (5 × 5) individual
treatments (Figure 4B and Supplementary Figure 2).
The Combination Index values were calculated using the
CalcuSyn software according to the method previously
reported by Chou-Talalay et al [19]. The OCI/AML-3 cell
line exhibited synergism (CI < 1) at all doses tested. The
MDS-L cell line showed synergism at the higher doses,
with lower doses eliciting an additive effect (CI ≈ 1) and
still lower doses implying mild antagonism (CI > 1).
However, this low-dose antagonism is likely a limitation
of the algorithm itself and is a common finding for anticancer drugs [20, 21].

Several studies have reported alterations in
the transcriptional program of cells in MDS patients
both in relation to healthy cells and across severity of
disease [22, 23]. This study has sought to harness these
changes during the development and progression of the
disease to identify potential novel therapeutic agents.
This approach has uncovered a gene signature which
showed a consistent increasing or decreasing trend in
expression across the disease spectrum from normal
bone marrow, MDS patients with low, intermediate and
high risk of transformation and de novo AML. Clustering
of the patient transcriptomes by these genes led to a
number of distinct clusters, chiefly around the expected
groups, reinforcing the suitability of the gene signature.
Interestingly, the medium-risk MDS samples are

Figure 3: (A) Caspase/PARP cleavage (B) Caspase activity assay. (C) Methylcellulose colony assay. (A) Western blots of cell lysates

probed for Caspase 3 (C3) and poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) and their cleaved forms at the labelled time points post bromocriptine
treatment of OCI/AML-3 cells. Images are representative of westerns replicated three times. Arrowheads indicate cleaved PARP (B) Caspase
3/7 activity 24 h after bromocriptine treatment; measured via luminescent DEVD peptide-cleavage assay. Values represent averages from
duplicates and error bars represent standard error of the mean. (C) Methylcellulose-based colony-forming assay for MDS-L cell line with
representative image.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6613

Oncotarget

distributed throughout all clusters. This perhaps reflects
the clinical heterogeneity in those MDS patients that are
neither indolent nor AML-like.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the gene signature itself
contains many genes with established roles in MDS and
AML. For example, 7 members of the HOX genes, a
gene family known to be important in both normal and
malignant hematopoiesis, are included [24]. Moreover,
WT1, CDK6 and FLT3, well-established drivers of
leukemogenesis, [25–27] also form part of the increasing
component. The presence of these genes in the signature
may indicate value in its investigation as a mechanism of
monitoring disease progression. However, the principal
goal of this research was to leverage this signature to
identify new and re-purposed therapies for MDS using
sscMap, without the need to screen a multitude of
individual targets. The other benefit of the connectivity
mapping approach is that re-purposed drugs are three
times more likely to be approved than novel agents [5, 6].
The potential of connectivity mapping has been
shown many times before [28–32], but we believe that
this is its first reported use in identifying drugs to repurpose for the treatment of MDS and AML. The use of
the improved statistically-significant approach together
with multiple gene signatures [29] and the updated, and
more robust, chip definition file (CDF) microarray probemapping [12] had increased the chances of a successful
hit. Indeed, the identification of ATRA by the sscMap
algorithm added significant authority to and validation

of the process. sscMap identified two other compounds
with potential anti-leukemic effects, with bromocriptine
proving itself worthy of further in vivo and clinical
investigation given our positive pre-clinical results.
In terms of drug re-purposing, a compound which
shows an additive or synergistic effect with established
therapies is more likely to be accepted by both physicians
and patients themselves. The current gold-standard in the
treatment of high-risk MDS and AML is cytarabine. Of
particular relevance is the apparent success of low doses
of this compound in treating elderly MDS/AML patients
unable to undergo more aggressive regimens [33–35]. In
these cases any compound that enhances effectiveness
without significant side-effect would be of huge benefit
to these patients.
Bromocriptine shows synergy with cytarabine in
the more proliferative OCI/AML-3 cell line at all doses
tested. Its effect on the MDS-L cell line is less dramatic,
but many doses do show synergy and the rest are mostly
additive in their effect. This suggests that bromocriptine
is more active in combination with cytarabine on more
proliferative cells; selectivity that most chemotherapies
aim for.
Bromocriptine as a therapeutic agent is non-toxic
and has been widely-prescribed for decades with minimal
side-effects. It is traditionally prescribed to treat pituitaryrelated syndromes, such as hyperprolactinemia, but
it has also more recently found use in the management
of Parkinson’s symptoms. While at the highest dose

Figure  4: (A) Primary mononuclear cell response to bromocriptine (B) Synergy of Bromocriptine and cytarabine.
(A) Dose-response curve using ATP-based viability assay normalized to vehicle-treated cells. Samples represent peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from diagnostic AML samples or mobilized bone marrow donors. Points represent averages from 3 replicates
and error bars represent SEM. (B) CalcuSyn synergy plots illustrating Combination Indices for doses of cytarabine and bromocriptine at
and around the individual drug 72 h IC50 values. Values at 1.0 represent additive effect, whereas values below 1.0 suggest synergistic effect.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6614

Oncotarget

used in this study it could be associated with increased
side-effects in patients, these should be manageable in
a combination setting, especially when compared to
highly-toxic chemotherapy-only regimens. We have now
shown it to possess efficacy against both leukemic and
myelodysplastic cell lines. The exact mode-of-action of
bromocriptine in achieving this remains unknown. Given
the ineffectiveness of a host of other pharmacologically
similar compounds in the same assay; its activity appears
to be unrelated to its main action as a dopamine agonist.
For the same reason, neither does it appear to concern its
weaker engagement of other targets, such as serotonin
receptors or excitatory amino acid transporters. These
findings tally well with the lack of significant expression
of this class of receptors on the model cell lines, in
contrast to many solid tumours, [36] some of which
show a proliferative response [37]. Furthermore, the
compounds tested included Cabergoline, which is now
superseding bromocriptine in the clinic [38], both of which
are hypothesized to inhibit prolactin production [39].
The ineffectiveness of Cabergoline in our screens
suggests it is unlikely that the prolactin inhibitory
effect of bromocriptine explains it value. This suggests
that bromocriptine has an as yet unknown molecular
effect that triggers apoptosis in leukaemic cells.
This is not the only case of a dopamine modulator
demonstrating an anti-cancer effect, suggesting that
this class of compounds is worth further investigation
[40]. Indeed, there is a case study dating from
1981 of a diabetic patient on chronic bromocriptine
therapy demonstrating marked leukopenia [41].
Interestingly, this unexplored territory may explain the
growing correlative evidence that patients with certain
unrelated diseases, including Parkinson’s, for which
bromocriptine is a therapy, have lower than expected rates
of certain cancers [42].
Beyond its anti-proliferative and cytotoxic effects,
bromocriptine demonstrates a preference for proliferative
leukemic cells and appears to alter colony formation.
These are key qualities in any hopeful treatment for bone
marrow disease. All of these virtues, combined with its
synergy with the gold-standard therapy make it a very
exciting drug. It has the potential to improve the quality
of life and longer-term outcome for those MDS and AML
patients for whom high-intensity chemotherapy regimens
are not an option.

both bone marrow and peripheral blood samples, whereas
GSE15061 contains exclusively bone marrow. Only those
profiles from normal or complex karyotype AML, MDS
or healthy donor samples were included in this study. The
OCI/AML-3 and MDS-L cell lines were also profiled inhouse on the Affymetrix platform using the same protocol
and arrays as that published in the original MILE study
mentioned above (GSE13159).

Prognostic classification stratification
The prognostic classifier (PC) algorithm previously
published and described by Mills et al [11] was developed
from a data set comprising samples from healthy donors,
a range of MDS subtypes and AML. This classifier was
robustly shown to be able to stratify patients into one
of 3 groups (low, medium and high) based on their risk
of transformation to AML. The MDS gene expression
profiles from the combined datasets of 229 samples used
in this study were stratified using this algorithm to classify
each raw CEL file. This stratification was subsequently
incorporated in further statistical analyses (as PC-Risk).

Identification of gene signature
The 229 original CEL files were downloaded and
decompressed from the GEO online repository. The raw
CEL files were imported into Partek Genomics Suite
(PGS, version 6, St. Louis, Missouri 63005 U.S.A.). The
data were normalized using RMA background correction
with probe GC-content correction, quantile-normalization
and median polish probe set summarization. During the
import procedure the HGU133Plus2 Brainarray Chip
Definition File (ENTREZG CDF version 16) was used to
provide a more concise and accurate group of probe sets
based on up-to-date probe sequence to NCBI Entrez Gene
alignments [12]. The ANOVA algorithm in PGS was used
to generate p-values for each ENTREZ-based probe set to
identify significantly varying gene expression across the
5 groups (normal, low/medium/high PC-Risk & AML).
The following comparisons were also included as separate
one-way ANOVAs to generate fold changes via leastsquares means of each group (LS-means). Any p-values
generated were moderated using Benjamini-Hochberg
false discovery rate (FDR) [43].
Normal vs Low PC-Risk MDS
Low PC-Risk MDS vs Medium PC-Risk MDS
Medium PC-Risk MDS vs High PC-Risk MDS
High PC-Risk MDS vs AML

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Gene expression datasets

sscMap identification of perturbagens

The gene expression dataset employed in this study
was derived from two published datasets listed on the
GEO repository as GSE13159 [10] and GSE15061 [11].
Both contain Affymetrix array data from mononuclear cell
fraction transcriptomes. GSE13159 contains a mixture of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The sscMap algorithm depends on a reference
set of gene expression profiles that represent various
perturbagen-treated cells. The Broad Institute cmap02
profiles were used in this study. They consist of 3730
6615

Oncotarget

individual reference profiles from a panel of ~1000
compounds applied at various doses to the PC3, MCF7
and HL-60 cell lines. The raw CEL files were downloaded
and normalized using the Affymetrix-power-tools RMAsketch algorithm and the platform-appropriate Brainarray
ENTREZG v16 CDF file, similarly to the study dataset.
The reference data were from 3 separate platforms and
therefore normalized in 3 batches. During the build of the
“refset”, required by the sscMap tool, only those probe
sets common to all platforms were included.
The previously identified gene signatures were
formatted into tab-delimited tables of Probe IDs and
positive or negative integers representing their ranks and
up or down-regulation. These tables were then loaded
into the sscMap tool. The algorithm was run, whereby it
additionally generated 10, 000 random signatures of length
corresponding to each signature and compared each with
the Broad Institute “refset”. The tool then returned a list of
positive or negative connection scores for each compound
against each signature and a p-value based on the random
permutation test. The p-value significance cut-off was
based on an accepted false-positive rate of 1 per analysis,
in other words 1/N where N = the number of comparisons,
in this case 3730 reference profiles therefore ~0.00027.
This p-value in the form −log10 (p-value) is equivalent to
3.572.

(GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Buckinghamshire, UK).
After 30 minutes of centrifugation at 400 × g the buffy
coat containing mononuclear cells was removed and
washed twice with RPMI1640. Cells were then counted
and cryogenically frozen in freezing medium (10%
DMSO, 50% RPMI1640, 40% FBS). When required, cells
were thawed at 37°C, washed once with RPMI-1640 and
re-suspended in 10% FBS in RPMI1640 before treatment.

Cell lines and primary material

Viability assay and synergy calculation

All cell lines were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2
and cultured in RPMI1640+NaHCO3+L-Glut (SigmaAldrich Company Ltd., Dorset, UK) supplemented
with at least 10% FBS Superior (Biochrom AG) and
1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. The OCI/AML-3 and
OCI/AML-2 cell lines were sourced from DSMZ. The
MDS-L cell line was a kind gift from Taoru Kohyama
at the Kawasaki Medical School, Japan [44]. Its media
was further supplemented with 1 mM UltraGlutamine I
(Lonza Cologne GmbH, Köln, Germany), 10 mM HEPES
(Cell Culture Grade, Sigma-Aldrich), 20 ng/mL hGMCSF (Cell Guidance Systems Ltd., Cambridge, UK) and
10 IU/mL hIL-3 (CellGenix GmbH, Freiburg, Germany).
The SKM-1 cell line was a kind gift from Stefan Fröhling
(Nationales Centrum für Tumorerkrankungen, Heidelberg,
Germany). Both the SKM-1 and MDS-L cell lines were
validated using STR analysis as unique and pure (LGC
Standards, Middlesex, UK). The SKM-1 STR markers
matched those recorded in the DSMZ library. The MDS-L
cell line, as it is not available from cell banks, was shown
by karyotyping to have monosomy 7 and del (5q) as cited
in the originating paper (Supplementary Figure 3) [44].
Ficolled bone marrow or peripheral blood samples
from AML patients, obtained with consent, at diagnosis
(Northern Ireland Ethical Approval: 08/NIR01/9) were
diluted one in two with phosphate-buffered saline and
then layered over one-third volume of Ficoll Paque Plus

Cell viability post drug treatment was measured
using the ViaLight™ ATP-based assay (Lonza), typically
at 72 hours, unless otherwise stated. Relative Luminescent
Units were normalized as a percentage of time-matched
vehicle-treated control samples. Synergy was assessed by
treating cells with the various combinations of 0.25, 0.5,
1 and 2 × the 72H IC50 doses of both bromocriptine and
cytarabine. The Combination Index values were calculated
using the CalcuSyn software according to the method of
Chou-Talalay et al [19, 45].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Screening compounds
Bromocriptine and Busprione were purchased
from Tocris Bioscience (Bristol, UK) as mesylate and
hydrochloride salts respectively.

Other dopamine and serotonin agonists
All other screening compounds, except m-CPP
(Sigma-Aldrich) were from Tocris Bioscience: Sumanirole
(D2 agonist), Spiperone (5-HT2A serotonin and selective
D2-like dopamine receptor antagonist), Lisuride (D2~4
agonist), Pramipexole (D2~4 agonist), BW723C86
(5-HT2B receptor agonist), m-CPP (Pan-serotonin agonist),
Dihydrexidine (full agonist at the dopamine D1 and D5
receptors), Cabergoline (D2~4 agonist, possible prolactin
inhibitor), DL-TBOA (EAAT blocker)

Western blotting
Cell lysates post-treatment were prepared using
ProteoJET Cell Lysis Reagent (Fermentas, Vilnius,
Lithuania) supplemented with Pierce Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK)
and 10 mM Sodium Fluoride and 20 mM Sodium
Orthovanadate (Sigma-Aldrich). Lysates were then
denatured at 70°C for 10 minutes in Bolt™ LDSbased loading buffer supplemented with DTT (Life
Technologies, Paisley, UK). The denatured samples were
run on Bolt™ 12% Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) and
transferred using standard Towbin Western transfer to
0.2 μm Immobilon PVDF membranes (Millipore, Watford,
UK). Antibodies were used at 1:1000: Cleaved Caspase
3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Leiden, Netherlands),
6616

Oncotarget

Caspase 3 (CST), PARP (C-2–10, Enzo Life Sciences,
Exeter, UK) & β-actin (A5441, Sigma-Aldrich).
Appropriate secondary antibodies (Dako, Ely, UK) were
used at half the primary antibody concentration and
developed using WesternBright ECL Reagent (Advansta,
Menlo Park, USA).

myelodysplastic syndromes: azacitidine compared with low
dose ara-C. Br J Haematol. 2010; 149:244–9.
  4.	 Burnett AK, Milligan D, Prentice AG, Goldstone AH,
McMullin MF, Hills RK, Wheatley K. A comparison of
low-dose cytarabine and hydroxyurea with or without
all-trans retinoic acid for acute myeloid leukemia and
high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome in patients not
considered fit for intensive treatment. Cancer. 2007;
109:1114–24.

Ex vivo methylcellulose
Cells were treated for 18 hours in liquid culture
and counted. Subsequently 2 × 104 cells per mL were
thoroughly mixed with pre-supplemented Methylcellulose
media, without drug (HSC003, R & D Systems) and
seeded into a 12-well plate at 250 µL per well. After
9 days colonies were stained with 25 µL of 8 mg/mL
Iodonitrotetrazolium (Sigma-Aldrich) solution in pure
ethanol. After overnight staining, colonies were imaged
and counted using the GelCount system (Oxford Optronix,
Abingdon, UK) using consistent settings for all plates.

 5.	 Jin G, Wong STC. Toward better drug repositioning:
prioritizing and integrating existing methods into efficient
pipelines. Drug Discov Today. 2014; 19:637–44.
  6.	 Institute of Medicine. Genomics-Enabled Drug Repurposing
and Repositioning: A Workshop. In: Roundtable on
Translating Genomic-Based Research for Health.
Washington, DC, 2013http://www.iom.edu/Activities/
Research/GenomicBasedResearch/2013-JUN-24.aspx.
 7.	 Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, Modell JW, Blat IC,
Wrobel MJ, Lerner J, Brunet J-P, Subramanian A, Ross KN,
Reich M, Hieronymus H, et al. The Connectivity Map: using
gene-expression signatures to connect small molecules,
genes, and disease. Science. 2006; 313:1929–35.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Taoru Kohyama at the Kawasaki Medical
School, Japan for gifting the MDS-L cell line. Thanks to
Kienan I. Savage for critical review of the manuscript.

  8.	 Lamb J. The Connectivity Map: a new tool for biomedical
research. Nat Rev Cancer 2007; 7:54–60.
  9.	 Zhang S-D, Gant TW. sscMap: an extensible Java application
for connecting small-molecule drugs using gene-expression
signatures. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009; 10:236.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Kohlmann A, Kipps TJ, Rassenti LZ, Downing JR,
Shurtleff SA, Mills KI, Gilkes AF, Hofmann W-K, Basso G,
Dell’orto MC, Foà R, Chiaretti S, et al. An international
standardization programme towards the application of gene
expression profiling in routine leukaemia diagnostics: the
Microarray Innovations in LEukemia study prephase. Br J
Haematol. 2008; 142:802–7.

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of
interest in relation to this work.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by The McClay Trust,
Leukaemia & Lymphoma NI (R2536CNR) and the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(BBSRC, UK) grant BB/I009051/1.

11.	 Mills K, Kohlmann A, Williams P. Microarray-based
classifiers and prognosis models identify subgroups
with distinct clinical outcomes and high risk of AML
transformation of myelodysplastic syndrome. Blood. 2009;
114:1063–1072.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Smith A, Roman E, Howell D, Jones R, Patmore R, Jack A.
The Haematological Malignancy Research Network
(HMRN): a new information strategy for population based
epidemiology and health service research. Br J Haematol.
2010; 148:739–53.

12.	 Dai M, Wang P, Boyd AD, Kostov G, Athey B, Jones EG,
Bunney WE, Myers RM, Speed TP, Akil H, Watson SJ,
Meng F. Evolving gene/transcript definitions significantly
alter the interpretation of GeneChip data. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2005; 33:e175.

 2.	 Greenberg PL, Tuechler H, Schanz J, Sanz G, GarciaManero G, Solé F, Bennett JM, Bowen D, Fenaux P,
Dreyfus F, Kantarjian H, Kuendgen A, et al. Revised
International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS-R) for
myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 2012. doi:10.1182/
blood–2012–03–420489.

13.	Stasi R. Sustained response to recombinant human
erythropoietin and intermittent all-trans retinoic acid in
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 2002; 99:
1578–1584.
14.	 Kuendgen A, Knipp S, Fox F, Strupp C, Hildebrandt B,
Steidl C, Germing U, Haas R, Gattermann N. Results of a
phase 2 study of valproic acid alone or in combination with
all-trans retinoic acid in 75 patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome and relapsed or refractory acute myeloid
leukemia. Ann Hematol. 2005; 84: 61–6.

 3.	Fenaux P, Gattermann N, Seymour JF, HellströmLindberg E, Mufti GJ, Duehrsen U, Gore SD, Ramos F,
Beyne-Rauzy O, List A, McKenzie D, Backstrom J, et al.
Prolonged survival with improved tolerability in higher-risk

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6617

Oncotarget

15.	 Fathi AT, Abdel-Wahab O. Mutations in epigenetic modifiers
in myeloid malignancies and the prospect of novel epigenetictargeted therapy. Adv Hematol. 2012; 2012:469592.

Krasinska K, Riess JW, et al. A Drug Repositioning
Approach Identifies Tricyclic Antidepressants as Inhibitors
of Small Cell Lung Cancer and Other Neuroendocrine
Tumors. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:1364–77.

16.	 Hellström-Lindberg E, Malcovati L. Supportive care,
growth factors, and new therapies in myelodysplastic
syndromes. Blood Rev. 2008; 22:75–91.

29.	 McArt D. Identification of Candidate Small-Molecule
Therapeutics to Cancer by Gene-Signature Perturbation in
Connectivity Mapping. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e16382.

17.	 Roth BL, Lopez E, Patel S, Kroeze WK. The Multiplicity
of Serotonin Receptors: Uselessly Diverse Molecules or an
Embarrassment of Riches? Neurosci. 2000; 6:252–262.

30.	 Qu X a, Rajpal DK. Applications of Connectivity Map in
drug discovery and development. Drug Discov Today. 2012;
17:1289–98.

18.	 Blanchet PJ, Fang J, Gillespie M, Sabounjian L, Locke KW,
Gammans R, Mouradian MM, Chase TN. Effects of the full
dopamine D1 receptor agonist dihydrexidine in Parkinson’s
disease. Clin Neuropharmacol. 21:339–43.
19.	 Chou T-C. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440–6.

31.	 Pojo M, Gonçalves CS, Xavier-Magalhães A, Oliveira AI,
Gonçalves T, Correia S, Rodrigues AJ, Costa S, Pinto L, Pinto
AA, Lopes JM, Reis RM, et al. A transcriptomic signature
mediated by HOXA9 promotes human glioblastoma
initiation, aggressiveness and resistance to temozolomide.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:7657–74. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.3150.

20.	 Reynolds CP, Maurer BJ. Evaluating response to antineoplastic
drug combinations in tissue culture models. Methods Mol
Med. 2005; 110:173–183.

32.	 Caiment F, Tsamou M, Jennen D, Kleinjans J. Assessing
compound carcinogenicity in vitro using connectivity
mapping. Carcinogenesis. 2014; 35:201–7.

21.	 Chou T-C. Drug Combination and Dose-Effect Analysis. In:
American Association for Cancer Research Annual Meeting.
Denver, CO, 2009http://www.combosyn.com/video.html.

33.	 Lübbert M, Suciu S, Baila L, Rüter BH, Platzbecker U,
Giagounidis A, Selleslag D, Labar B, Germing U, Salih HR,
Beeldens F, Muus P et al. Low-dose decitabine versus best
supportive care in elderly patients with intermediate- or
high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) ineligible for
intensive chemotherapy: final results of the randomized
phase III study of the European Organisation for Rese. J
Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:1987–96.

22.	 Pellagatti A, Cazzola M, Giagounidis A, Perry J, Malcovati L,
Della Porta MG, Jädersten M, Killick S, Verma A, Norbury CJ,
Hellström-Lindberg E, Wainscoat JS, et al. Deregulated
gene expression pathways in myelodysplastic syndrome
hematopoietic stem cells. Leukemia. 2010; 24:756–764.

34.	 Stauder R. The challenge of individualised risk assessment
and therapy planning in elderly high-risk myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) patients. Ann Hematol. 2012; 91:1333–43.

23.	 Gerstung M, Pellagatti A, Malcovati L, Giagounidis A,
Porta MG Della, Jädersten M, Dolatshad H, Verma A,
Cross NCP, Vyas P, Killick S, Hellström-Lindberg E,
et al. Combining gene mutation with gene expression
data improves outcome prediction in myelodysplastic
syndromes. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:5901.

35.	Sperr WR, Wimazal F, Kundi M, Baumgartner C,
Nösslinger T, Makrai A, Stauder R, Krieger O, Pfeilstöcker M,
Valent P. Comorbidity as prognostic variable in MDS:
comparative evaluation of the HCT-CI and CCI in a core
dataset of 419 patients of the Austrian MDS Study Group.
Ann Oncol. 2010; 21:114–9.

24.	 Alharbi RA, Pettengell R, Pandha HS, Morgan R. The role
of HOX genes in normal hematopoiesis and acute leukemia.
Leukemia. 2013; 27:1000–8.

36.	 Borcherding DC, Tong W, Hugo ER, Barnard DF, Fox S,
LaSance K, Shaughnessy E, Ben-Jonathan N. Expression
and therapeutic targeting of dopamine receptor-1 (D1R) in
breast cancer. Oncogene. 2015. doi:10.1038/onc.2015.369.

25.	 Renneville A, Roumier C, Biggio V, Nibourel O, Boissel N,
Fenaux P, Preudhomme C. Cooperating gene mutations
in acute myeloid leukemia: a review of the literature.
Leukemia. 2008; 22:915–31.

37. 	 Peters MAM, Walenkamp AME, Kema IP, Meijer C, de
Vries EGE, Oosting SF. Dopamine and serotonin regulate
tumor behavior by affecting angiogenesis. Drug Resist
Updat. 17:96–104.

26.	 Rocquain J, Carbuccia N, Trouplin V, Raynaud S, Murati A,
Nezri M, Tadrist Z, Olschwang S, Vey N, Birnbaum D,
Gelsi-Boyer V, Mozziconacci M-J. Combined mutations of
ASXL1, CBL, FLT3, IDH1, IDH2, JAK2, KRAS, NPM1,
NRAS, RUNX1, TET2 and WT1 genes in myelodysplastic
syndromes and acute myeloid leukemias. BMC Cancer.
2010; 10:401.

38.	Dos Santos Nunes V, El Dib R, Boguszewski CL,
Nogueira CR. Cabergoline versus bromocriptine in the
treatment of hyperprolactinemia: A systematic review of
randomized controlled trials and meta-analysis. Pituitary.
2011; 14:259–265.

27.	 Placke T, Faber K, Nonami A, Putwain SL, Salih HR,
Heidel FH, Krämer A, Root DE, Barbie DA, Krivtsov A V,
Armstrong SA, Hahn WC, et al. Requirement for CDK6
in MLL-rearranged acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2014;
124:13–23.

39.	 Fitzgerald P, Dinan TG. Prolactin and dopamine: what is
the connection? A review article. J Psychopharmacol. 2008;
22:12–9.
40.	 Sachlos E, Risueño RM, Laronde S, Shapovalova Z,
Lee J-H, Russell J, Malig M, McNicol JD, Fiebig-Comyn A,

28.	 Jahchan NS, Dudley JT, Mazur PK, Flores N, Yang D,
Palmerton A, Zmoos A-F, Vaka D, Tran KQT, Zhou  M,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6618

Oncotarget

Graham M, Levadoux-Martin M, Lee JB, et al.
Identification of Drugs Including a Dopamine Receptor
Antagonist that Selectively Target Cancer Stem Cells. Cell.
2012:1–14.

43.	 Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery
Rate: a Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple
Testing. J R Stat Soc. 1995; 57:289–300.
44.	 Tohyama K, Tsutani H, Ueda T, Nakamura T, Yoshida Y.
Establishment and characterization of a novel myeloid
cell line from the bone marrow of a patient with the
myelodysplastic syndrome. Br J Haematol. 1994; 87:235–42.

41.	 Giampietro O, Ferdeghini M, Petrini M. Severe leukopenia
and mild thrombocytopenia after chronic bromocriptine
(CB-154) administration. Am J Med Sci. 1981; 281:169–72.
42.	 Tabarés-Seisdedos R, Dumont N, Baudot A, Valderas JM,
Climent J, Valencia A, Crespo-Facorro B, Vieta E, GómezBeneyto M, Martínez S, Rubenstein JL. No paradox, no
progress: inverse cancer comorbidity in people with other
complex diseases. Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12: 604–8.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Chou T-C, Talalay P. Analysis of combined drug effects:
a new look at a very old problem. Trends Pharmacol Sci.
1983; 4:450–454.

6619

Oncotarget

