Priority Report

Epigenetic Enhancement of Antigen Processing and Presentation
Promotes Immune Recognition of Tumors
1,2,3

1,2,5

1

1,2,3

A. Francesca Setiadi, Kyla Omilusik, Muriel D. David, Robyn P. Seipp,
1,2,5
1,2,3,4,5
1,2,3,4,5
Jennifer Hartikainen, Rayshad Gopaul,
Kyung Bok Choi,
1,2,3,4,5
and Wilfred A. Jefferies

1
Biomedical Research Centre, 2Michael Smith Laboratories, Departments of 3Zoology and 4Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, and 5Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Abstract
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have been hailed as a
powerful new class of anticancer drugs. The HDACi, trichostatin A (TSA), is thought to interfere with epigenetic control of
cell cycle progression in G1 and G2-M phase, resulting in
growth arrest, differentiation, or apoptosis. Here, we describe
a novel mechanism of action of HDACis in promoting immune
responses against tumors. We report that treatment of
carcinoma cells with TSA increases the expression of many
components of the antigen processing machinery, including
TAP-1, TAP-2, LMP-2, and Tapasin. Consistent with this result,
we found that treatment of metastatic carcinoma cells with
TSA also results in an increase in MHC class I expression on
the cell surface that functionally translates into an enhanced
susceptibility to killing by antigen-specific CTLs. Finally, we
observed that TSA treatment suppresses tumor growth and
increases tap-1 promoter activity in TAP-deficient tumor cells
in vivo. Intriguingly, this in vivo anti-tumoral effect of TSA is
entirely mediated by an increase in immunogenicity of the
tumor cells, as it does not occur in immunodeficient
mice. These novel insights into the molecular mechanisms
controlling tumor immune escape may help revise immunotherapeutic modalities for eradicating cancers. [Cancer Res
2008;68(23):9601–7]

correlated with disease progression and metastasis (1–4). A
prominent feature of metastatic cells is deficiency in TAP-1
expression, resulting from deletions within the tap-1 gene,
decreases in TAP-1 mRNA stability or, more frequently, decreases
in TAP-1 promoter activity (3–6). Interestingly, impaired TAP-1
expression leads to additional defects in the expression or
functionality of other APM components (3, 7). Consistent with
this notion, stable transfer of the tap-1 gene in carcinoma cells
that are deficient in multiple APM components is sufficient to
restore MHC I surface expression and antigen presentation,
although this is not the case when LMP-2 or TAP-2 alone are reexpressed (3, 7, 8).
Deregulation of genes involved in the modulation of chromatin
structure has been closely linked to immune evasion, uncontrolled
cell growth, and development of tumors (5, 9–11). Trichostatin A
(TSA), an inhibitor of histone deacetylases activity (HDACi),
confers anti-tumor effects in vitro and in vivo (12, 13). Although
TSA was shown to selectively alter transcription of f2% of the
genes (12), the mechanism underlying its effect on tumor antigen
presentation is unknown. To date, the effects of HDACi on tumor
growth in vivo have been linked to their ability to induce growth
arrest and apoptosis (12, 13). Here, we provide a novel, alternative
explanation for their antitumoral activity.

Materials and Methods
Introduction
In antigen-presenting cells, peptides processed by the proteasome are transported by the transporters of antigen processing
(TAP-1 and TAP-2) into the endoplasmic reticulum, where they are
loaded onto MHC class I. Stabilized peptides/MHC I complexes
translocate to the cell surface for presentation to CD8+ CTLs. Only
MHC molecules loaded with peptides derived from tumorassociated antigens expressed by malignant cells, or peptides
derived from foreign pathogens, activate CTLs. Thus, cellular
immunity can function as an effective tumor detection and
elimination system (1).
In a wide variety of human carcinomas, loss of expression of
antigen-processing machinery (APM) components is strongly

Note: A.F. Setiadi, K. Omilusik, and M.D. David contributed equally to this work.
Current address for M.D. David: Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche
Medicale U749, Faculté de Pharmacie-Université Paris-Sud, #5 rue Jean Baptiste
Clement, 92296 CHATENAY-MALABRY Cedex, France.
Requests for reprints: Wilfred A. Jefferies, Biomedical Research Centre, 2222
Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada. Phone:
604-822-6961; Fax: 604-822-6780; E-mail: wilf@brc.ubc.ca.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5270

www.aacrjournals.org

Cell lines, plasmids, cell transfection, and Luciferase assays. The
TC-1, D11, A9, PA, LMD, B16F10, and B16F10/rTAP-1 cell lines were
cultured as previously described (5, 8). When indicated, cells were treated
with 100 ng/mL TSA (Sigma) for 24 h (PA, LMD, B16F10, and B16F10/rTAP1 cells) or 48 h (TC-1, D11, and A9 cells), or with 50 ng/mL IFN-g for 48 h.
Transfection of cells with the pTAP1-Luc construct and selection of stable
transfectants were performed as previously described (5). Luciferase activity
in stable transfectants was assessed by Bright-Glo luciferase assay
(Promega), and the resulting values were normalized to the copy numbers
of genome-integrated plasmids as previously described (5).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Five micrograms of anti-RNA
pol II (N-20, sc-899; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) or anti–acetyl-histone
H3 (Upstate Biotechnology, Inc.) antibodies were used for immunoprecipitation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments were done as
previously described (5).
Reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Total cellular RNAs were
extracted using Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen), treated with DNase 1
(Ambion, Inc.), and reverse transcribed using the SSII RT kit from
Invitrogen. The resulting cDNAs were used as a template for PCR using
the following primers (written 5¶ to 3¶): TGGCTCGTTGGCACCCTCAAA
and TCAGTCTGCAGGAGCCGCAAGA for TAP-1; GCTGTGGGGACTGCTAAAAG and TATTGGCATTGAAAGGGAGC for TAP-2; CGACAGCCCTTTACCATCG and TCACTCATCGTAGAATTTTGGCAG for LMP-2;
ATGGCTCGCTCGGTGACC and TCACATGTCTCGATCCCAGTAGA for

9601

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Treatment of TAP-deficient
cells with TSA enhances expression
of multiple APM components.
TAP-expressing (TC-1 and PA) and
TAP-deficient (D11, A9, and LMD) cells
were treated with TSA or IFN-g, or left
untreated. A, levels of TAP-1, TAP-2,
LMP-2, Tapasin, and h2m mRNA were
monitored by reverse transcription-PCR.
TAP-1 protein levels were assessed by
Western Blot. To confirm equal loading,
expression of h-actin was assessed in
each sample. Data are representative
of three independent experiments.
B, TAP-expressing (TC-1 and PA) and
TAP-deficient (D11, A9, and LMD) cells
stably transfected with the pTAP1-Luc
construct were treated with TSA or
left untreated. Levels of TAP-1
promoter activity in these cells were
determined as described in Materials
and Methods. Values [expressed in
relative luciferase activities (RLA)]
represent the average of three to six
independent experiments F SEM.
*, statistically significant differences
in RLA between TSA-treated and
untreated cells (Student’s t test, P < 0.05).
C and D, the levels of RNA Pol II (C )
or acetyl-histone H3 (D ) at the TAP-1
promoter locus were assessed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation using
anti-RNA pol II or anti–acetyl-histone
H3 antibody, respectively. *, P < 0.05
compared with untreated cells (Student’s
t test). Results indicate that TSA-mediated
increase in TAP-1 promoter activity
correlates with an increase in RNA pol II
to the TAP-1 promoter, in the absence of
modification of the Histone H3 acetylation
level at this locus.

h2M; ATGGATGACGATATCGCTGC and TTCTCCAGGGAGGAAGAGGAT
for h-actin. All PCR reagents were obtained from Invitrogen and
Fermentas (Burlington, ON).
Western blots. Protein were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to
nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad). Blots were incubated sequentially with
the rabbit anti-mouse TAP-1 antibody (8) and the horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Laboratories) and then were developed using Lumi-light ECL reagents
(Pierce). Anti–h-actin mouse antibody (Sigma) and the HRP-conjugated
goat anti-mouse antibody (Pierce) were used for loading controls.
Flow cytometry. H-2Kb expression was assessed by staining with PEconjugated anti–H-2Kb mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb; BD Pharmingen), followed by analysis on a FACScan cytometer (Becton Dickinson), as
previously described (6).

9602

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACi Treatment Enhances Immune Recognition of Tumors
Cytotoxicity assays. The target cells were treated for 24 h with IFN-g
(50 ng/mL) or TSA (100 ng/mL), or left untreated. The CTL assay was
performed as previously described (8). The specific 51Cr release was
calculated as follows: [(CTL-mediated release background release)/(total
release background release)]  100%.
Injection of tumor cells in mice and in vivo treatment with TSA.
Four hundred thousand TC-1 or A9 or 1.5  105 B16F10 or B16F10/rTAP-1
cells in PBS were injected s.c. into C57BL/6 syngeneic mice. From the
seventh day after injection of the tumor cells, mice were subjected to
daily i.p. injections with TSA (500 Ag/kg) or DMSO (vehicle control) for 20 d.

TC-1-, A9-, B16F10-, and B16F10/rTAP-1–derived tumors were measured
every 2 to 4 d. Tumor volume was calculated using the formula: tumor
volume = length  width  height  k/6. All procedures were performed in
compliance with the guidelines of the University of British Columbia and
the Canadian Council on Animal Care.
Measurement of TAP-1 promoter activity in A9 tumor cells isolated
from mice. The in vivo experiment described above was also performed
with A9 cells stably transfected with the pTAP1-Luc construct. Mice were
sacrificed 26 d after tumor injection and the tumors were removed. Tumor
tissues were treated with 1 mg/mL collagenase D (Roche Applied Science)

Figure 2. Treatment of TAP-deficient cells
with TSA increases MHC class I antigen
presentation and promotes killing of tumor
cells by specific CTLs. A, TAP-expressing
(TC-1 and PA) and TAP-deficient (D11, A9,
LMD, and B16F10) cells were treated with
TSA or IFN-g, or left untreated. Levels of
MHC I at the surface of untreated cells
(shaded areas ), TSA-treated cells (black
lines), and IFN-g–treated cells (gray lines)
were assessed by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) using a PE-conjugated
anti–H-2Kb mAb. Data are representative
of three independent experiments. B, to
assess the effect of TSA treatment on the
ability of cells to present antigen in the
context of MHC class I, TC-1, D11, and A9
cells treated with TSA or IFN-g for 24 h or
left untreated were infected with VSV at a
multiplicity of infection of 7.5 for 16 h, and
then subjected to CTL assays using
effector/target ratios of 1:1 to 200:1.
Representative data using the 22:1
effector/target ratio are shown in this figure.
Columns, mean (expressed in % killing
of target cells) of three independent
experiments; bars, SE. *, statistically
significant differences in % killing between
untreated cells and TSA-treated or IFN-g
treated cells (Student’s t test, P < 0.05).

www.aacrjournals.org

9603

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
for 40 min at 37jC. Luciferase activity was measured by Bright-Glo
luciferase assay (Promega).

Results and Discussion
Treatment of TAP-deficient metastatic carcinomas cells
with TSA increases expression of TAP-1 as well as many other
components of the APM. Down-regulation of TAP-1 in metastatic

carcinoma cells leads to deficiency in presentation of tumorspecific antigens and escape from immune surveillance. As we
had previously shown, the existence of epigenetic control of TAP1 expression (5), we hypothesized that TSA could restore TAP-1
expression in TAP-deficient metastatic cells. For our studies, we
used two experimental models. The first model consisted of the
TAP-expressing cell line (TC-1), derived from murine lung cells

Figure 3. TSA treatment in vivo suppresses growth of tumors derived from TAP-deficient cells. A, TAP-deficient, A9 cells were treated with TSA or IFN-g, as
indicated. Forty eight hours later (day 0), cells were washed and cultured in the absence of TSA and IFN-g for 2 to 4 additional d. Levels of MHC I at the surface of
untreated cells (thick dark lines ), cells treated with TSA or IFN-g for 48 h (day 0; dotted lines ), cells cultured for 2 d after TSA and IFN-g withdrawal (day 2; thin lines)
and cells cultured for 4 d after TSA and IFN-g withdrawal (day 4; thick gray lines ) were assessed by FACS using a PE-conjugated anti–H-2Kb mAb. These experiments
indicate that the restoration of MHC I surface expression in TAP-deficient tumor cells treated with TSA or IFN-g is a reversible phenomenon. B, four hundred
thousand TAP-deficient (A9) or TAP-expressing (TC-1) cells were injected s.c. into C57BL/6 syngeneic mice. From the 7th day after cell injection, mice were subjected
to daily i.p. injections with TSA (500 Ag/kg) or DMSO (vehicle control) for 20 d. TC-1– and A9-derived tumors were measured every 4 d. Points, mean volume of eight
tumors per group (A9 cells/DMSO-treated mice; A9 cells/TSA-treated mice; TC-1 cells/DMSO-treated mice) over the indicated periods of time after tumor cells injection;
bars, SE. This experiment indicated that the TAP-expressing (TC-1) cells are less tumorigenic than the TAP-deficient (A9) cells, and that daily treatment of mice
with TSA hampers A9-derived tumor progression. C, The effect of in vivo treatment with TSA on the rate at which A9-derived tumors grew was further assessed
by calculating the tumor volume doubling times in each mouse individually. Before this analysis, we determined the period of time over which tumors grew exponentially
with a constant growth rate (i.e., the natural log of tumor volume (V) was a linear function of time (t): V = Voekt, with k being the growth rate constant). We found
that the rates of exponential growth of all tumors remained constant between day 6 and day 20 after the first administration of TSA. Therefore, the corresponding growth
rate constants were used to calculate the tumor volume doubling times (Td), according to the formula: Td = ln(2)/k. Columns, mean Td of eight tumors per group
(A9 cells/DMSO-treated mice; A9 cells/TSA-treated mice); bars, SEM. *, statistically significant difference in tumor volume doubling times between TSA-treated mice
and DMSO-treated mice (Student’s t test, P < 0.05). D, tumors from TSA-treated or DMSO-treated mice that had been injected with TAP-deficient A9 cells stably
transfected with the pTAP1-Luc construct were isolated. RLAs in the A9-derived tumor cells were assessed as described in Materials and Methods. Columns, mean
of four independent experiments; bars, SEM. *, statistically significant difference in RLA between cells from TSA-treated mice and cells from untreated mice
(Student’s t test, P < 0.05).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

9604

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACi Treatment Enhances Immune Recognition of Tumors

Figure 4. The inhibitory effect of TSA administration on growth of tumors derived from TAP-deficient cells does not occur in immunodeficient Rag / mice.
A, C57BL/6 and Rag / mice were injected s.c. with four hundred thousand TAP-deficient A9 cells and subjected to daily i.p. injections with TSA or DMSO for 20 d,
as described in Fig. 3. Points, mean tumor volume (A9 cells/DMSO-treated C57BL/6 mice; A9 cells/TSA-treated C57BL/6 mice; A9 cells/DMSO-treated Rag /
mice; A9 cells/TSA-treated Rag / mice); bars, SEM. B, columns, mean tumor volume doubling time of the tumors shown in A; bars, SEM. *, statistically significant
difference in tumor volume doubling times between TSA-treated C57BL/6 mice and DMSO-treated C57BL/6 mice (n = 4; Student’s t test, P < 0.05). In contrast,
TSA administration to Rag / mice did not induce significant changes in tumor volume doubling times. C, the effect of in vivo TSA treatment on the growth
rate of B16F10- or B16F10/rTAP-1–derived tumor was assessed as described in Fig. 3. Points, mean LN (tumor volume) of four tumors per group (B16F10
tumor/DMSO-treated C57BL/6 mice; B16F10 tumor/TSA-treated C57BL/6 mice; B16F10/rTAP-1 tumor/DMSO-treated C57BL/6 mice; B16F10/rTAP-1
tumor/TSA-treated C57BL/6 mice); bars, SE. D , TAP-deficient B16F10 cells genetically reconstituted with TAP-1 (B16/rTAP-1) were treated with TSA or IFN-g,
or left untreated. Levels of MHC I at the surface of untreated cells (shaded areas ), TSA-treated cells (black lines ), and IFN-g–treated cells (gray lines ) were assessed
by FACS using a PE-conjugated anti–H-2Kb mAb. Data are representative of three independent experiments. These results indicate that the TSA-mediated
increase in TAP-1 expression is not the sole mechanism underlying the antitumoral effect of TSA.

transformed with HPV16, and two of its TAP-deficient, metastatic
derivatives: D11 and A9 (14). The second model consisted of the
TAP-expressing cell line (PA) derived from a murine primary
prostate tumor and its TAP-deficient, metastatic derivative (LMD;
ref. 15). Expression levels of h2-microglobulin (h2m) were not
impaired in the A9 and D11 TAP-deficient cells (Fig. 1A).
However, these cells displayed down-regulated levels of TAP-1,
LMP-2, and TAP-2. Indeed, levels of TAP-1, LMP-2, and TAP-2

www.aacrjournals.org

mRNA were low in A9 cells, moderate in D11 cells, and the
highest in TC-1 cells (Fig. 1A). We observed that treatment of the
A9 and D11 TAP-deficient cells with TSA increased the levels of
TAP-1 mRNA and protein, as well as the levels of LMP-2, TAP-2,
and Tapasin mRNA (Fig. 1A). The TSA-induced increase in
expression of TAP-1 mRNA and protein was also observed in
TAP-deficient prostate tumor (LMD; Fig. 1A), murine lung
carcinoma (CMT.64; data not shown) and melanoma (B16F10)

9605

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

cells. In all experimental models, TAP-1 protein expression in
TSA-treated TAP-deficient cells was nevertheless lower than in
naturally TAP-expressing control cells (Fig. 1A). Thus, treatment
of TAP-deficient cells with TSA increases expression of components of the APM.
TSA increases the expression of TAP-1 by enhancing
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the TAP-1 promoter.
We observed that treatment of the TAP-deficient cells with TSA
in vitro fully restored TAP-1 promoter activity to levels observed in
TAP-expressing cells (Fig. 1B). The fact that levels of TAP-1 protein
in TSA-treated, TAP-deficient cells were lower than those in
TAP-expressing cells, despite full restoration of TAP-1 promoter
activity, may reflect posttranscriptional defects in TAP-deficient
cells that specifically impair TAP-1 expression. In line with this
notion, we and others reported that the stability of TAP-1 mRNA is
often decreased in TAP-deficient cells (6, 16).
We previously reported that, in metastatic cancer cells, a defect
in histone acetylation resulting from a decrease in CBP recruitment
to the TAP-1 promoter leads to a compact nucleosome structure
that acts as a physical barrier to prevent access of RNA pol II to the
TAP-1 promoter (5). To test the hypothesis that the TSA-induced
up-regulation of TAP-1 promoter activity occurs via enhancement
of histone H3 acetylation and RNA pol II recruitment to the TAP-1
promoter, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
We found that treatment of TAP-deficient cells with TSA enhanced
the recruitment of RNA pol II complex to the TAP-1 promoter to
levels similar to those in TAP-expressing cells (Fig. 1C). Based on
our observation that levels of histone H3 acetylation at the TAP-1
promoter correlated with TAP-1 expression in physiologic conditions and that an increase in acetyl-H3 at the TAP-1 promoter
locus accompanied IFN-g–induced TAP-1 expression (5), it seemed
likely that the effect of TSA on TAP-1 promoter activity occurred
via an increase in histone H3 acetylation. However, we observed
that TSA treatment did not significantly alter the levels of acetylhistone H3 in TAP-1 promoter in any of the cell lines tested
(Fig. 1D). Thus, although TSA-induced relaxation of the chromatin
structure allowed recruitment of RNA pol II to the TAP-1 promoter,
this phenomenon did not involve an increase in histone H3
acetylation. We also failed to detect increases in acetyl-H4 levels
upon IFN-g or TSA treatment (data not shown). Histone H3 and H4
are not the only core histone whose modification has been shown
to influence gene expression (17, 18). Additional experimentation
has yet to identify a histone modification in the TAP-1 promoter
region that is directly modified by TSA. It is also entirely feasible
that yet to be identified nonchromatin organization proteins,
which are themselves acetylated, may be altered by TSA treatment,
and play a role in the regulation of TAP-1 promoter activity. These
observations are tantalizing and further investigation will be
required to delineate the exact mechanism underlying the effect of
TSA on TAP-1 promoter activity.
Treatment of TAP-deficient metastatic cells with TSA
enhances surface expression of MHC I and susceptibility to
CTL-mediated killing. We tested whether the TSA-induced
increase in expression of antigen processing components would
result in an increase in surface MHC I expression on the metastatic
carcinoma cells. Flow cytometric analysis showed that TSA
treatment increased H-2Kb surface expression by f10-fold in
TAP-deficient cells, whereas the levels were unchanged in PA and
TC-1 cells that naturally express high levels of surface H-2Kb
(Fig. 2A, thick lines). Similar induction of MHC I expression by TSA
was also observed in the TAP-deficient CMT.64 and B16F10 cell

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

lines (data not shown; Fig. 2A). IFN-g treatment increased the
surface H-2Kb expression in all cell lines.
To test whether the TSA-induced increase in H-2Kb surface
expression would improve antigen presentation and increase cell
susceptibility to antigen-specific CTLs, we infected the TAPexpressing TC-1 and the TAP-deficient D11 and A9 cells with
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and assessed the efficiency of
recognition and killing by VSV-specific CTLs. As expected, D11 and
A9 cells, which express lower surface H-2Kb than the TC-1, were
less susceptible to killing by the CTLs (Fig. 2B). Treatment of all VSVinfected cell lines with TSA or IFN-g enhanced the CTL-mediated
killing. However, this increase was much more drastic with TAPdeficient D11 and A9 cells than with TAP-expressing TC-1 cells
(f10-fold in D11 and A9, versus 1.5-fold in TC-1; Fig. 2B). Similar
trends were also observed using VSV-infected TAP-deficient CMT.64
and B16F10 cells as targets (data not shown). Infection with VSV
itself was not sufficient to increase CTL-mediated killing of the
TAP-deficient tumor cell lines we used (data not shown).
The fact that treatment of VSV-infected TAP-expressing cell lines
with TSA or IFN-g enhanced the CTL-mediated killing despite the
apparent lack of increase in MHC I surface expression suggests that
mechanisms other than TAP-1/MHC I up-regulation may be
involved. It was shown that treatment of lung cancer cells with
TSA resulted in a significant increase in Fas and a decrease in
expression of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL proteins (19). In
addition, TSA was shown to render genetically-transformed mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) cells less tumorigenic in vivo, through
a mechanism involving an increase in Fas levels on the MEF (20).
Of note, untreated MEF already displayed MHC I at their surface,
and TSA did not further increase cell surface expression of MHC I
(alike the TAP-expressing TC-1 cells we used in our study).
Taken together, these results indicated that the TSA-mediated
increase in expression of APM components functionally translates
into enhancement of CTL-mediated recognition of virus-infected
TAP-deficient carcinoma cells. These findings suggested that
treatment of TAP-deficient carcinoma cells with TSA would
result in decreased growth rate of TAP-deficient–derived tumors
in vivo.
Administration of TSA in vivo suppresses the growth of TAPdeficient tumors in syngenic mice and correlates with an
increase in TAP-1 promoter activity in vivo. As a prerequisite to
test whether TSA-induced increase in MHC I surface expression and
increase in CTL-mediated killing of TAP-deficient cells could
contribute to the antitumoral effect of TSA in vivo, we investigated
whether TSA-induced MHC I expression was sustained even after
TSA withdrawal. We found that the restoration of MHC I surface
expression in TAP-deficient tumor cells treated with TSA (or IFN-g)
was a reversible phenomenon. Indeed, upon TSA withdrawal, TAP-1
expression level (and thus cell-surface expression of MHC I) was
sustained for 2 days but decreased back to background level by 4 days
after TSA withdrawal (Fig. 3A). These observations indicated that the
regulation of TAP-1 expression is a dynamic process. Therefore, our
protocol of in vivo tumor growth assay was designed so that daily
injection of TSA would allow sustained MHC I surface expression.
We found that the TAP-expressing TC-1 cells were significantly
less tumorigenic than the TAP-deficient A9 cells. This was shown
by the low occurrence of tumor formation when TC-1 cells
were injected s.c. into mice (only four of nine mice injected with
TC-1 cells developed tumors, whereas all mice injected with
TAP-deficient A9 cells did), as well as by the relatively small size of
the TC-1–derived tumors (Fig. 3B). Using this experimental model,

9606

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACi Treatment Enhances Immune Recognition of Tumors

we observed that daily treatment of mice with TSA hindered
A9-derived tumor progression (Fig. 3B and C).
To assess whether treatment of mice with TSA enhanced TAP-1
promoter activity in tumor cells, we also performed this in vivo
experiment using A9 cells stably transfected with a reporter
construct in which the transcription of a luciferase gene was under
the control of the TAP-1 promoter (pTAP1-Luc). We found that the
decrease in A9-derived tumor growth observed in TSA-treated mice
correlated with a significant increase in TAP-1 promoter activity
(Fig. 3D). These observations supported our hypothesis that
the mechanism underlying the anticancer effect of TSA involves
up-regulation of TAP-1 expression in cancer cells.
The antitumor growth effect of TSA results from an increase
in immunogenicity of the tumor. We found that TSA no longer
dampened tumor growth when TAP-deficient cells were inoculated
into RAG1 / B6 mice (Fig. 4A and B). The fact that the TSA effect
in vivo disappeared in mice lacking T cells formally shows that the
effect of TSA on tumor growth is entirely mediated through
increased tumor immunogenicity rather than through a direct
TSA-induced apoptosis of TAP-deficient cells or through inhibition
of cellular proliferation. This is a departure from the explanations
given in the literature for the action of HDACis and therefore provide
a new framework for understanding the action of these drugs.
Genes or other factors in addition to TAP-1, TAP-2, and
Tapasin contribute to the immuno-therapeutic effect of TSA.
Finally, we investigated whether the TSA-induced up-regulation of
TAP-1 was the sole mechanism underlying the antitumor growth
effect of TSA or whether other TSA-induced events also
contributed to this phenomenon. We showed previously that
restoration of TAP1 expression in TAP-deficient cells (by transfecting B16F10 cells with a plasmid encoding TAP-1) was sufficient
to increase expression or stabilization of TAP-2 and Tapasin
expression to the levels observed in TAP-expressing cells, resulting
in increased MHC I surface expression, enhanced CTL-mediated
cell killing, and subsequently, decreased tumor growth in vivo (8).

References
1. Lankat-Buttgereit B, Tampe R. The transporter
associated with antigen processing: function and
implications in human diseases. Physiol Rev 2002;82:
187–204.
2. Abele R, Tampe R. Modulation of the antigen
transport machinery TAP by friends and enemies. FEBS
Lett 2006;580:1156–63.
3. Seliger B, Ritz U, Abele R, et al. Immune escape of
melanoma: first evidence of structural alterations in two
distinct components of the MHC class I antigen
processing pathway. Cancer Res 2001;61:8647–50.
4. Lou Y, Vitalis TZ, Basha G, et al. Restoration of the
expression of transporters associated with antigen
processing in lung carcinoma increases tumor-specific
immune responses and survival. Cancer Res 2005;65:
7926–33.
5. Setiadi AF, David MD, Seipp RP, et al. Epigenetic
control of the immune escape mechanisms in malignant
carcinomas. Mol Cell Biol 2007;27:7886–94.
6. Setiadi AF, David MD, Chen SS, Hiscott J, Jefferies WA.
Identification of mechanisms underlying transporter
associated with antigen processing deficiency in metastatic murine carcinomas. Cancer Res 2005;65:7485–92.

www.aacrjournals.org

In the current study, we used the same cellular model to investigate
whether TSA was capable of further increasing immunogenicity of
TAP-deficient cells genetically reconstituted with TAP-1. In
accordance with our previous study, restoration of TAP-1
expression in B16F10 cells was sufficient to decrease the in vivo
tumor growth rate (Fig. 4C). We observed, however, that injection
of TSA in vivo further enhanced immune recognition of syngeneic
tumors that were genetically reconstituted with TAP-1. This was
correlated with the ability of TSA to further increase cell surface
expression of MHC I on TAP-deficient cells reconstituted with TAP1 (Fig. 4D). This shows that genes/factors in addition to TAP-1 are
induced by TSA and that these significantly contribute to reducing
tumor growth by promoting immune responses against the tumor.
In contrast to genetic etiology of cancer, the possibility of reversing
epigenetic codes may provide new targets for immuno-therapeutic
intervention in cancer. This study should guide oncologists in
reassessing and reformulating their approaches for effective
anticancer immunotherapy.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
A.F. Setiadi, K. Omilusik, M.D. David, R.P. Seipp, J. Hartikainen, R. Gopaul, K.B. Choi,
W.A. Jefferies: The University of British Columbia has filed a PCT application based on
the information described in this manuscript.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/12/2007; revised 8/15/2008; accepted 9/22/2008.
Grant support: William and Dorothy Gilbert Graduate Scholarship in Biomedical
Sciences (A.F. Setiadi), fellowships from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada and the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research
(R.P. Seipp), and grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the
Prostate Cancer Research Foundation of Canada (W.A. Jefferies).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. T.C. Wu, Dr. M. Smahel, and Dr. T. C. Thompson for providing cell
lines used in this study, Tim Vitalis and Dr. Karl-Erik Hellstrom for their helpful
suggestions, and Dr. Cheryl Pfeifer for editorial support.

7. Singal DP, Ye M, Qiu X. Molecular basis for lack of
expression of HLA class I antigens in human small-cell
lung carcinoma cell lines. Int J Cancer 1996;68:629–36.
8. Zhang QJ, Seipp RP, Chen SS, et al. TAP expression
reduces IL-10 expressing tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
and restores immunosurveillance against melanoma. Int
J Cancer 2007;120:1935–41.
9. Lund AH, van Lohuizen M. Epigenetics and cancer.
Genes Dev 2004;18:2315–35.
10. Klenova EM, Morse HC III, Ohlsson R, Lobanenkov
VV. The novel BORIS + CTCF gene family is uniquely
involved in the epigenetics of normal biology and
cancer. Semin Cancer Biol 2002;12:399–414.
11. Maio M, Coral S, Fratta E, Altomonte M, Sigalotti L.
Epigenetic targets for immune intervention in human
malignancies. Oncogene 2003;22:6484–8.
12. Marks PA, Richon VM, Breslow R, Rifkind RA.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors as new cancer drugs.
Curr Opin Oncol 2001;13:477–83.
13. Mukhopadhyay NK, Weisberg E, Gilchrist D, et al.
Effectiveness of trichostatin A as a potential candidate
for anticancer therapy in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Ann Thorac Surg 2006;81:1034–42.
14. Smahel M, Sima P, Ludvikova V, et al. Immunisation
with modified HPV16 E7 genes against mouse onco-

9607

genic TC-1 cell sublines with downregulated expression
of MHC class I molecules. Vaccine 2003;21:1125–36.
15. Lee HM, Timme TL, Thompson TC. Resistance to
lysis by cytotoxic T cells: a dominant effect in
metastatic mouse prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res
2000;60:1927–33.
16. Yang T, McNally BA, Ferrone S, Liu Y, Zheng P. A
single-nucleotide deletion leads to rapid degradation of
TAP-1 mRNA in a melanoma cell line. J Biol Chem 2003;
278:15291–6.
17. Berger SL. Histone modifications in transcriptional
regulation. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2002;12:142–8.
18. Keen JC, Garrett-Mayer E, Pettit C, et al. Epigenetic
regulation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), lymphotactin (XCL1) and estrogen receptor a (ER) expression
in human breast cancer cells. Cancer Biol Ther 2004;3:
1304–12.
19. Kim HR, Kim EJ, Yang SH, et al. Trichostatin A
induces apoptosis in lung cancer cells via simultaneous
activation of the death receptor-mediated and mitochondrial pathway? Exp Mol Med 2006;38:616–24.
20. Maecker HL, Yun Z, Maecker HT, Giaccia, AJ.
Epigenetic changes in tumor Fas levels determine
immune escape and response to therapy. Cancer Cell
2002;2:139–48.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Epigenetic Enhancement of Antigen Processing and
Presentation Promotes Immune Recognition of Tumors
A. Francesca Setiadi, Kyla Omilusik, Muriel D. David, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:9601-9607.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9601

This article cites 20 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9601.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9601.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

