Oncotarget, July 2010, Vol. 1, No 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Phosphatidylcholine Metabolic Transformation and Progression
Signature as a Pharmacodynamic Biomarker
Eric O. Aboagye
Comprehensive Cancer Imaging Centre, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK
Correspondence to: Eric Aboagye, email: eric.aboagye@imperial.ac.uk
Key words: Hsp90, PTPS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, melanoma, pharmacodynamic biomarker
Received: June 24, 2010,
Accepted: July13, 2010,
Published: July 14, 2010

distant sites [11]. Growth factor receptor→Ras→Erk
signal transduction can increase PC levels in cells [2,
12, 13]. Two non-invasive approaches can be used to
assess PTPS, namely magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) and PET. PET imaging approaches measure the
biosynthesis of PC [11, 12, 14], while MRS-based
approaches measure PC derived from both biosynthesis
and degradation of phosphatidylcholine; it could be
argued, however, that majority of PC results from
biosynthesis during cell growth. Hence both nuclear
and MRS approaches have the ability to detect the
effects of drugs that alter tumor PTPS through
inhibition of cell signalling mechanisms or
proliferation, the endpoint being a reduction in PC
(Figure). Other characteristics of the PTPS are related
to increases in GPC levels, and indeed, an early event
of transformation is a switch from high GPC/PC ratio
to low GPC/PC. High GPC, which may result from the
actions of phospholipase A1 and A2 and
lysophospholipase, could be considered a reduced
malignant phenotype. This latter signature may also
result from increased cell death or induction of
differentiation, the endpoint being increases in GPC
and related free fatty acids (Figure).
The work presented by Beloueche-Babari et al in
this issue accords with the prevailing view on
exploitation of PTPS for assessing drug effects. They
examined the metabolic response of melanoma cells to
inhibition of cell growth by a heat shock protein 90
(Hsp90) inhibitor. Using MRS, they provide proof that,
concomitant with growth inhibition and induction of
differentiation, the hsp90 inhibitor, 17-AAG, alters the
PTPS of melanoma cells in a predictable manner,
leading to no changes in PC and increases in GPC, free
fatty acyl chains and cytoplasmic lipid droplets. These
biochemical changes are consistent with normalization
of PTPS. It is often unclear if cellular effects are

The value of biomarkers that report on the effects
of drugs at the target site – largely noninvasive/imaging biomarkers - is increasingly being
recognised. Such biomarkers can inform whether the
drug modulates the target in the desired manner, as
well as the magnitude and duration of target
modulation and recovery dynamics. Correlative
investigations with dynamic contrast-enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) and
[18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
(PET) are routinely employed during first-in-human
studies of antiangiogenic/antivascular therapies. There
is a broad range of non-invasive imaging/spectroscopic
methodologies
capable
of
reporting
drug
pharmacodynamics at the tumour site [1]. Whereas
some imaging/spectroscopic approaches are specific to
the biological target protein, others report changes in
signalling pathway activity or indeed phenotype.
The ‘phosphatidylcholine transformation and
progression signature’ (PTPS) is one such phenotype
that can be exploited to assess target drug effect. This
signature, which is fairly generic in tumours, has been
described extensively for breast cancer [2-7], and to a
lesser extent brain [8], prostate [9], ovarian [10] and
other cancers. In these cancers, PTPS is characterized
by high phosphocholine (PC) levels relative to
glycerophosphocholine (GPC), resulting primarily
from increased choline kinase activity [4]. PC levels
increase in the order senescent mortal cells < cells
exhibiting immortalized anchorage-dependent growth
< cells exhibiting immortalized anchorage-independent
growth < tumorigenic low metastaticity cells <
tumorigenic high metastaticity cells; this is analogous
to the transformation and progression of normal cells to
benign hyperplasia followed by atypical hyperplasia,
which progresses to carcinoma in situ and finally to
infiltrating carcinoma with or without metastasis to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

163

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 163-166

chemotype-specific (related to the specific structure of
drug) or target-specific. In this context they examined a
structurally dissimilar Hsp90 inhibitor and showed that
the effect was independent of specific Hsp90 inhibitor.
Imaging and spectroscopic methods that exploit the
PTPS may have clinical value as target-tissue
pharmacodynamic biomarkers in melanoma and other
solid tumors. Activating mutations in BRAF occur in
~7% of all human cancers including melanoma,
papillary thyroid and colon cancer; the V600E
mutation is the most common mutation occurring in
approximately 70% of melanoma patients [15].
Activated mutant BRAF binds to an Hsp90-cdc37
complex, which is required for its stability and
function. Hsp90 inhibitors disrupt protein stability and,
hence, cognate biochemical processes such as MAP
kinase signaling. Due to the ability of Hsp90 inhibitors
to target several oncogenic proteins, melanomas with
activating BRAF mutations, as well as those with WT
BRAF activated by NRAS alike are sensitive to
inhibitors like 17AAG [16, 17]. Hence, this is a patient
population in which drug pharmacology can be
objectively assessed and non-responders can be readily
identified for alternative therapy. The work by
Beloueche-Babari et al offers several insights into the
potential role of exploiting tumor PTPS normalization
as a non-invasive biomarker of anticancer drug effect
in general, and specifically, potential use of these
methods in melanoma patients for assessing response
to Hsp90 inhibitors, as well as other agents like MEK
inhibitors that target associated pathways [18, 19]. The
study also raises a number of questions around the in
vivo application of PTPS normalization as a noninvasive biomarker that require further investigation.
Standard 31P-MRS methods do not sufficiently resolve
individual choline metabolite resonances. Instead
composite peaks: phosphomonoesters (comprising PC
and phosphoethanolamine) and phosphodiesters
(comprising GPC and glycerophosphoethanolamine),
are detected in humans MRS measurements [20].
Further studies are, therefore, warranted to determine
whether the composite phosphomonoester and
phosphodiester resonances are altered with Hsp90
inhibition in melanoma, since these are more clinically
assessable measures; the methods have been
standardized and reproducibility has been determined
in the multi-institutional setting [20]. Alternatively,
1H-decoupled 31P-MRS has shown promise for
resolving the metabolite resonances depending on
target tissue homogeneity and could be explored for
measurement of PTPS normalization [20]. 1H-MRS

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fig: Normalization of the ‘phosphatidylcholine
transformation and progression signature’ (PTPS) as a
pharmacodynamic biomarker of target tissue drug
inhibition. As normal cells transform and progress
towards a more malignant phenotype, levels of
phosphatidylcholine
biosynthetic
product,
phosphocholine (PC) increases . Proliferation and
mitogenic signaling events also increase PC. In contrast,
cell death and differentiation, promote degradation of
phosphatidylcholine leading increases in the metabolites,
glycerophosphocholine (GPC) and associated free fatty
acids (detectable as free fatty acyl chains). This
phenotype is opposite to an early event in transformation
that involves conversion of high GPC/PC ratio to low
GPC/PC ratio. Hence drugs that inhibit proliferation,
inhibit cell signaling, induce differentiation, or induce
cell death could be hypothesized to alter PTPS. In this
edition of the Journal, the role of PTPS normalization as
a biomarker of Hsp90 inhibition has been investigated by
Beloueche-Babari and co-workers.
can be used to assess the tissue levels of CH2-free fatty
acyl chains that give rise to the MR-visible mobile
lipids [21, 22]. Beloueche-Babari et al provide a body
of evidence, including inhibition of calciumindependent phospholipase A2, to support assessment
of these lipid resonances as biomarkers of drug effect.
It will be interesting to demonstrate how the free fatty
acyl chain resonances change with Hsp90 inhibition in
vivo in animal models of melanoma and in patients.
Beloueche-Babari et al demonstrate that the timedependent evolution of the drug-related changes on
growth mirror changes in the biomarker signature. This
is important in assigning pharmacological relevance to
the biomarker signature. Investigation of the dosedependence of these PTPS readouts will further support
the pharmacological relevance of the biomarker. In this
context it will be useful to know whether the
spectroscopic readout evolves as all-or-nothing
phenomena or are indeed dose-related; the latter will be

164

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 163-166

11. Contractor KB, Kenny LM, Stebbing J, Al-Nahhas A,
Palmieri C, Sinnett D, Lewis JS, Hogben K, Osman S,
Shousha S, Lowdell C, Coombes RC, Aboagye EO.
[11C]choline positron emission tomography in estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res
2009;15:5503-10.
12. Liu D, Hutchinson OC, Osman S, Price P, Workman P,
Aboagye EO. Use of radiolabelled choline as a
pharmacodynamic marker for the signal transduction
inhibitor geldanamycin. Br J Cancer 2002;87:783-9.
13. Ratnam S, Kent C. Early increase in choline kinase activity
upon induction of the H-ras oncogene in mouse fibroblast
cell lines. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1995;323:313-322.
14. Leyton J, Smith G, Zhao Y, Perumal M, Nguyen QD,
Robins E, Arstad E, Aboagye EO. [18F]fluoromethyl-[1,22H4]-choline: a novel radiotracer for imaging choline
metabolism in tumors by positron emission tomography.
Cancer Res 2009;69:7721-8.
15. Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S,
Clegg S, Teague J, Woffendin H, Garnett MJ, Bottomley
W, Davis N, Dicks E, Ewing R, Floyd Y, Gray K, Hall S,
Hawes R, Hughes J, Kosmidou V, Menzies A, Mould C,
Parker A, Stevens C, Watt S, Hooper S, Wilson R,
Jayatilake H, Gusterson BA, Cooper C, Shipley J,
Hargrave D, Pritchard-Jones K, Maitland N, ChenevixTrench G, Riggins GJ, Bigner DD, Palmieri G, Cossu A,
Flanagan A, Nicholson A, Ho JW, Leung SY, Yuen ST,
Weber BL, Seigler HF, Darrow TL, Paterson H, Marais R,
Marshall CJ, Wooster R, Stratton MR, Futreal PA.
Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature
2002;417:949-54.
16. da Rocha Dias S, Friedlos F, Light Y, Springer C,
Workman P, Marais R. Activated B-RAF is an Hsp90
client protein that is targeted by the anticancer drug 17allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamicin.
Cancer
Res
2005;65:10686-10691.
17. Grbovic OM, Basso AD, Sawai A, Ye Q, Friedlander P,
Solit D, Rosen N. V600E B-Raf requires the Hsp90
chaperone for stability and is degraded in response to
Hsp90 inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:5762.
18. Chung YL, Troy H, Banerji U, Jackson LE, Walton MI,
Stubbs M, Griffiths JR, Judson IR, Leach MO, Workman
P, Ronen SM. Magnetic resonance spectroscopic
pharmacodynamic markers of the heat shock protein 90
inhibitor
17-allylamino,17-demethoxygeldanamycin
(17AAG) in human colon cancer models. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2003;95:1624-33.
19. Solit DB, Garraway LA, Pratilas CA, Sawai A, Getz G,
Basso A, Ye Q, Lobo JM, She Y, Osman I, Golub TR,
Sebolt-Leopold J, Sellers WR, Rosen N. BRAF mutation
predicts sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Nature
2006;439:358-62.
20. Arias-Mendoza F, Payne GS, Zakian KL, Schwarz AJ,
Stubbs M, Stoyanova R, Ballon D, Howe FA, Koutcher
JA, Leach MO, Griffiths JR, Heerschap A, Glickson JD,
Nelson SJ, Evelhoch JL, Charles HC, Brown TR. In vivo

amenable to investigation of drug effects in early
clinical trials of future inhibitors.
In summary, normalization of tumor PTPS appears
to be a realistic biomarker for non-invasive monitoring
of the pharmacological action of Hsp90 inhibitors. The
potential value of this biomarker should be tested in
vivo.
REFERENCES
1.

Workman P, Aboagye EO, Chung YL, Griffiths JR, Hart
R, Leach MO, Maxwell RJ, McSheehy PM, Price PM,
Zweit J. Minimally invasive pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic technologies in hypothesis-testing
clinical trials of innovative therapies. J Natl Cancer Inst
2006;98:580-98.
2. Aboagye EO, Bhujwalla ZM. Malignant transformation
alters membrane choline phospholipid metabolism of
human mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Res 1999;59:804.
3. Bhujwalla ZM, Aboagye EO, Gillies RJ, Chacko VP,
Mendola CE, Backer JM. Nm23-transfected MDA-MB435 human breast carcinoma cells form tumors with
altered phospholipid metabolism and pH: a 31P nuclear
magnetic resonance study in vivo and in vitro. Magn
Reson Med 1999;41:897-903.
4. Glunde K, Jie C, Bhujwalla ZM. Molecular causes of the
aberrant choline phospholipid metabolism in breast cancer.
Cancer Res 2004;64:4270-6.
5. Glunde K, Raman V, Mori N, Bhujwalla ZM. RNA
interference-mediated choline kinase suppression in breast
cancer cells induces differentiation and reduces
proliferation. Cancer Res 2005;65:11034-43.
6. Natarajan K, Mori N, Artemov D, Aboagye EO, Chacko
VP, Bhujwalla ZM. Phospholipid profiles of invasive
human breast cancer cells are altered towards a less
invasive phospholipid profile by the anti-inflammatory
agent indomethacin. Adv Enzyme Regul 2000;40:271-84.
7. Nimmagadda S, Glunde K, Pomper MG, Bhujwalla ZM.
Pharmacodynamic markers for choline kinase downregulation in breast cancer cells. Neoplasia 2009;11:47784.
8. Bhakoo KK, Williams SR, Florian CL, Land H, Noble
MD. Immortalization and transformation are associated
with specific alterations in choline metabolism. Cancer Res
1996;56:4630-5.
9. Ackerstaff E, Pflug BR, Nelson JB, Bhujwalla ZM.
Detection of increased choline compounds with proton
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy subsequent to
malignant transformation of human prostatic epithelial
cells. Cancer Res 2001;61:3599-603.
10. Iorio E, Ricci A, Bagnoli M, Pisanu ME, Castellano G, Di
Vito M, Venturini E, Glunde K, Bhujwalla ZM,
Mezzanzanica D, Canevari S, Podo F. Activation of
phosphatidylcholine cycle enzymes in human epithelial
ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res;70:2126-35.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

165

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 163-166

31P MR spectral patterns and reproducibility in cancer
patients studied in a multi-institutional trial. NMR Biomed
2006;19:504-12.
21. Barba I, Cabanas ME, Arus C. The relationship between
nuclear magnetic resonance-visible lipids, lipid droplets,
and cell proliferation in cultured C6 cells. Cancer Res
1999;59:1861-8.
22. Podo F. Tumour phospholipid metabolism. NMR Biomed
1999;12:413-39.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

166

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 163-166

