Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Heightened BTK-dependent cell proliferation in unmutated chronic
lymphocytic leukemia confers increased sensitivity to ibrutinib
Ailin Guo1,*, Pin Lu1,*, Natalie Galanina2, Chadi Nabhan2, Sonali M. Smith2, Morton
Coleman3, Y. Lynn Wang1
1

Division of Genomic and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

2

Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology and Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

3

Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA

*

These author contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Y. Lynn Wang, e-mail: ylwang@bsd.uchicago.edu
Keywords: BTK, ibrutinib, CLL proliferation, BCR pathway, IGHV mutational status
Received: June 27, 2015	

Accepted: November 25, 2015	

Published: December 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), patients with unmutated immunoglobulin
heavy chain variable region gene (UM-CLL) have worse outcomes than mutated CLL
(M-CLL) following chemotherapy or chemoimmunotherapy. However, in the era of
BCR-targeted therapies, the adverse prognostic impact of unmutated IGHV seems to be
diminishing, and there are clinical datasets showing unexpected improved responses
in UM-CLL. We investigated the biological differences of BTK activity between these
subgroups and further compared the impact of ibrutinib on molecular and cellular
behaviors. Immunoblotting analysis revealed that phosphorylated active BTK is
significantly higher in UM-CLL. Moreover, UM-CLL, compared to M-CLL, displayed a
much higher proliferative capacity that was correlated with higher phospho-BTK and
greater sensitivity to ibrutinib. In addition, BTK depletion with siRNA led to a more
prominent reduction in the proliferation of UM-CLL, suggesting that elevated BTK
activity is responsible for increased cell proliferation. Further, cell signaling activity
by multiple measurements was consistently higher in UM-CLL accompanied by a
higher sensitivity to ibrutinib. These studies link UM-CLL to elevated BCR signaling,
heightened BTK-dependent cell proliferation and increased sensitivity to ibrutinib.
The prognostic significance of IGHV mutation should be reevaluated in the era of new
therapies targeting BCR signaling.

INTRODUCTION

an inferior clinical course compared to mutated IGHV
(< 98% homology) [2, 3]. On multivariate analyses,
IGHV mutation stands as an independent prognostic
factor that predicts time-to-treatment and overall survival
[1, 4]. Patients with unmutated IGHV, in general, have
a more aggressive disease course requiring earlier
therapeutic intervention while those with mutated IGHV
have much slower disease progression [2, 3]. The median
overall survival for early stage patients with unmutated
IGHV is 12.6 years as opposed to 23.3 years in those with
mutated IGHV [4]. For patients receiving chemotherapy
or chemoimmunotherapy, unmutated IGHV remains
an inferior prognostic indicator. [5–7]. A long-term
analysis showed significant differences between UMCLL and M-CLL in terms of progression-free survival
(33 months vs. 52 months, p = 0.01) and overall survival
(78 months vs. not reached, p = 0.01) following

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the
most common leukemia in Western countries and
is characterized by the accumulation of CD5+
monoclonal B cells in peripheral blood and secondary
lymphoid tissues. Although the morphology and
immunophenotypical features are shared among CLL
tumor cells, the clinical course of the disease varies
from indolent to aggressive related to a variety of
established prognostic factors such as age, Rai stage,
chromosomal abnormalities, mutational status of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene variable region
(IGHV), ZAP70 and CD38 expression [1]. Among these,
IGHV mutational status is of particular importance.
Unmutated IGHV, defined as > 98% match in DNA
sequences to the germline sequences, is associated with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4598

Oncotarget

fludarabine and rituximab chemoimmunotherapy [5].
Thus, IGHV mutation status is a clinically relevant
prognostic marker in CLL.
Functionally, the IGH chain is a key component
of the multimeric B-cell receptor (BCR) complex that
is responsible for antigenic recognition at the surface of
normal B cells. Antigen binding and BCR cross-linking
triggers the activation of proximal tyrosine kinases
LYN, SYK, and subsequently BTK and PI3K. The BCR
signaling cascade leads to intracellular calcium release,
activation of AKT and MAP kinase pathways, and
nuclear translocation of NF-κB. These signaling activities
culminate in increased B cell survival, proliferation and
differentiation [8].
BCR signaling activity is aberrantly higher in CLL
than that of normal mature B cells [9], and deregulated
BCR-signaling is considered a critical driving pathologic
mechanism leading to CLL development, disease
progression and relapse. Several BCR-targeted agents,
including inhibitors of BTK (ibrutinib), PI3Kδ (idelalisib)
and SYK (R406/fostamatinib) have demonstrated not only
promising preclinical activities [9–18] but also remarkable
clinical efficacy against CLL in large clinical trials
[19–23]. These data led to recent accelerated FDA
approval of both ibrutinib and idelalisib for the treatment
of relapsed and refractory CLL, and ibrutinib in
17p-deleted high-risk CLL in both treatment-naïve and
relapsed settings.
Interestingly, between the two CLL subgroups
with distinct IGHV mutational status, in vitro responses
to surface Ig ligation and subsequent BCR signaling
capacity are different. The majority of UM-CLL cases
respond to B-cell receptor ligation while most M-CLL
show no response as demonstrated by several groups with
multiple different assays including global protein tyrosine
phosphorylation, gene expression profiling, cellular
metabolic activity, apoptotic response and proliferative
activity [24–27].
Based on these in vitro findings, it is reasonable to
speculate that CLL patients with UM IGHV would respond
well to BCR-targeted therapy. Data presented in several
recent clinical studies suggest that, in patients treated
with ibrutinib or idelalisib, the gaps in progression free
and overall survival between UM and M subgroups have
diminished [20, 28]. In contrast to chemoimmunotherapy
trials, the outcomes of UM-CLL and M-CLL show nearly
overlapping outcomes.
In addition to narrowed differences in survival,
there are even suggestions that UM-CLL may be more
responsive than M-CLL to the newer therapies by
certain measures. The pivotal trial leading to ibrutinib’s
approval for clinical use in the relapsed and refractory
CLL population showed an overall ibrutinib response
rate of 70% (with 20% additional patients achieving a
partial response with peripheral lymphocytosis). Notably,
in subset analyses, responses did not differ based on
age, initial Rai stage, previous number of chemotherapy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

regimens, presence of del (17p)/del (11q) and levels
of serum b2-microglobulin. However, patients with
unmutated IGHV displayed a significantly higher overall
response rate (77%) than patients with mutated IGHV
(33%, p = 0.005) [20]. This clinical observation was
preserved in a subsequent study of ibrutinib in the elderly
patients where the overall response rate in unmutated
group was 86.7% vs 56.3% in mutated [23]. Additionally,
in the study comparing idelalisib + rituximab vs rituximab,
it was shown that the unmutated group has a hazard ratio
(HR) of 0.13 for disease progression/death versus an HR of
0.25 in the mutated group, suggesting the UM-CLL group
has a lower risk of disease progression [22]. Moreover,
after 3 years of treatment, the quality of response appears
remarkably higher in treatment-naïve patients with
UM-CLL (40% complete remission) compared to 6% in
M-CLL. ([29], Supplementary Table 3). These findings
have suggested that the UM group may no longer do worse
than M-CLL, although not by all clinical measurements.
As ibrutinib and other BCR-directed therapies are being
rapidly incorporated into CLL treatment armamentarium,
understanding how UM and M-CLL differ biologically
and whether ibrutinib perturbs these cells in similar or
different manners may be clinically relevant.

RESULTS
Unmutated CLL has higher BTK activity (p-BTK)
than mutated CLL
Based on our previous observation that the active
phosphorylated form of BTK (Y223), but not total
BTK, was significantly higher in CLL B-cells than in
normal B cells [9], we conjectured that greater BTK
activity may underlie the better clinical responses of
UM-CLL subgroup to ibrutinib. To test this hypothesis,
we compared the levels of p-BTK (Y223) in UM-CLL
(n = 18) versus M-CLL (n = 18). By immunoblot analyses,
Figure 1A showed that the p-BTK (Y223) levels were
higher in UM-CLL samples than those in M-CLL, while
the amount of total-BTK was comparable between the two
groups. The levels of p-BTK (Y223) and total BTK were
quantified and normalized (Figure 1B), the difference in
p-BTK (Y223) between the two groups was statistically
significant while no difference was observed with respect
to total BTK.

UM-CLL is more proliferative than M-CLL in
two different in vitro CLL proliferation models
Our group and others have demonstrated that CLL
proliferation plays an important role in the pathogenesis
of CLL [10, 25, 30, 31]; changes in CLL proliferation
directly correlate with patient’s disease activity; and
anti-proliferation is one of the major therapeutic effects
of ibrutinib [9, 10, 32, 33]. CLL proliferation diminishes
during remission and increases with disease progression
4599

Oncotarget

[9, 32, 33]. We thus postulated that UM-CLL has higher
proliferative capacity than M-CLL. To demonstrate this,
we assessed CLL proliferation in two in vitro proliferation
models. In the first model, CLL cells were stimulated
with TLR9 agonist CpG and CD40L [34–36] followed
by measurements of BrdU incorporation after an 8-day
culture to assess cell proliferative capacity. In Figure
2A, two representative cases are shown from each of the
UM-CLL and M-CLL subgroups and aggregate data of
patient cohorts (12 UM and 11 M) are shown in Figure 2B.
The results demonstrate that the proliferation of UM-CLL
subgroup is significantly higher than that of M-CLL upon
CpG + CD40L stimulation.
The second in-vitro proliferation assay utilized
the stromal co-culture system described previously
[9, 33]. CLL cells were cultured in the presence of stromal
NKTert cells and the cell proliferation was assayed after
20-day culture. Figure 2C shows two representative cases

from each of the UM-CLL and M-CLL subgroups and
aggregate data of patient cohorts (5 UM and 5 M) were
shown in Figure 2D. Collectively, these data consistently
show that the proliferation in the UM-CLL was higher as
compared to the M-CLL subgroup. Taken together, we
conclude that UM-CLL cells have higher proliferative
capacity than M-CLL.

UM-CLL is more sensitive to ibrutinib than
M-CLL in two in vitro proliferation models
We have previously shown that BTK inhibition by
ibrutinib targets in vivo CLL proliferation [9]. We aimed
to investigate whether the intrinsic high proliferative
capacity makes UM-CLL more vulnerable to ibrutinib
treatment. We exposed CpG + CD40L-stimulated
CLL cells [34] to various doses of ibrutinb. Figure 3A
shows BrdU incorporation in two representative cases

Figure 1: Unmutated CLL has higher levels of phosphorylated BTK than mutated CLL. CD5+/CD19+ CLL-B cells

were isolated from unmutated CLL patients (N = 18) and mutated CLL patients (N = 18). (A) The whole cell lysates were analyzed by
immunoblotting with antibodies against either total BTK or phosphorylated BTK (pY223). DLBCL cell line HBL1 was used as a control
for the expression of t-BTK and p-BTK. (B) The amounts of protein were quantified with grayscale scan. Total BTK was used to normalize
p-BTK and GAPDH was used to normalize total BTK. Paired t test was used to analyze the data and results are shown as mean ± SEM.
UM, unmutated CLL; M, mutated CLL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4600

Oncotarget

from each subgroup and Figure 3B shows data for the
cohorts (12 UM and 11 M-CLL). Figure 3B demonstrates
a steeper response of UM-CLL to increasing doses of
ibrutinib compared with the response of M-CLL. In
both subgroups, proliferation was inhibited to the
similar low levels at higher concentrations of ibrutinib
(≥ 250 nM). These results were validated in the second
NKTert stromal coculture model using five UM and
five M-CLL (Figure 3C and 3D). In addition, we
analyzed these data for relative changes in which the
baseline cell proliferation without ibrutinib treatment
was normalized to 100%. Figure 3E showed that under
the condition of CPG + CD40L stimulation, UM-CLL
was significantly more inhibited by 100 and 250 nM
of ibrutinib than M-CLL. At a high concentration of
500 nM, cell proliferation was inhibited to a level below
6%, then the differences between UM and M-CLL
became insignificant as expected. The same trend was
identified with the NKTert model, however, statistical
significance was not reached perhaps relating to small
number of cases used for this study (Figure 3F). Together,
these results confirm our previous observation that BTK
inhibition with ibrutinib impairs CLL proliferation [9].
Further, the results suggest that heightened proliferation

of UM-CLL makes this group more vulnerable to
ibrutinib’s action (Also see below).

The apoptosis effect of ibrutinib does not differ
between UM-CLL and M-CLL
Several studies suggested that ibrutinib induces
apoptosis in CLL, but the effects are minimal to modest
[10–12, 37]. We compared apoptotic response of CLL
to ibrutinib in UM-CLL versus M-CLL. We measured
Annexin V and 7-AAD staining in CLL cells that were treated
with increasing doses of ibrutinb. The amount of apoptosis
was minimal, less than 10%, both in UM-CLL and M-CLL,
even with as high as 500 nM ibrutinib (Figure 4A–4D).
The maximal plasma concentration achievable in patients
is 408 nM according to a previous pharmacokinetics study
[38, 39]. As shown in Figure 4B and 4D, the response curves
of UM-CLL versus M-CLL appeared to run in parallel and
no discernable differences were observed. The cell viability
was also determined in the setting of cell proliferation
models with either CpG + CD40L stimulation or NKTert
stromal coculture. Again, cell death induced by 500 nM of
ibrutinib was minimal suggesting apoptosis induction is not
the primary action of ibrutinib (Figure 4E and 4F).

Figure 2: UM-CLL is more proliferative than M-CLL in both CpG + CD40L and NKTert stromal coculture models.

(A and B) CpG + CD40L-induced proliferation in CLL. BrdU incorporation was measured following 8 days of culture. (A) Two
representative UM-CLL and M-CLL cases are shown. (B) Analysis of the aggregate data of 12 UM-CLL and 11 M-CLL cases. (C and D)
Stroma coculture-induced proliferation in CLL. BrdU incorporation was measured following 20 days of culture. (C) Two representative
UM-CLL and M-CLL cases are shown. (D) Analysis of the aggregate data of 5 UM-CLL and 5 M-CLL cases. Paired t test was used to
analyze the data. Values in bar graphs represent means ± SEM. UM, unmutated CLL. M, mutated CLL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4601

Oncotarget

Heightened proliferation in UM-CLL subgroup is
BTK-dependent

for cases that have sufficient number of cells for the
conduction of both assays. We found a significant linear
correlation between p-BTK levels and proliferation
capacity (Figure 5A). Moreover, it becomes apparent that
UM-CLL (n = 9) has higher p-BTK associated with higher
cell proliferation compared to M-CLL (n = 8).
To further determine whether CLL cell proliferation
depends on BTK, we employed RNA interference
technology to knock down BTK. UM-CLL (n = 4)

We have demonstrated that UM-CLL, as a group,
has higher BTK activity and higher proliferation capacity
than M-CLL. We then analyzed whether BTK activity is
correlated with CLL proliferation. We plotted ratios of
p-BTK/total BTK (Figure 1) against cell proliferation in
the absence of ibrutinib treatment (Figure 3A, column 2)

Figure 3: UM-CLL is more sensitive to ibrutinib than M-CLL in both CpG + CD40L and NKTert stromal coculture
models. (A, B and E) CpG + CD40L-induced CLL proliferation. BrdU incorporation was measured following 8 days of CpG + CD40L
stimulation with or without ibrutinib at indicated concentrations. (C, D and F) Stroma coculture-induced CLL proliferation. BrdU
incorporation was measured following 20 days of ibrutinib treatment at indicated concentrations. (A) Two representative UM-CLL and
M-CLL cases are shown. (B) Analysis of the aggregate data of 12 UM-CLL and 11 M-CLL cases. (C) Two representative UM-CLL and
M-CLL cases are shown. (D) Analysis of the aggregate data of 5 UM-CLL and 5 M-CLL cases. (E) Relative inhibition of proliferation
by ibrutinib under the condition of CpG + CD40L stimulation. Baseline cell proliferation without ibrutinib treatment was normalized to
100%. Analysis was based on raw data presented in Figure 3B. (F) Relative inhibition of proliferation by ibrutinib under the condition
of NKTert coculture. Baseline cell proliferation without ibrutinib treatment was normalized to 100%. Analysis was based on raw data
presented in Figure 3D. Values in line graphs represent means ± SEM. UM, unmutated CLL. M, mutated CLL. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and
***P < 0.001; ns, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4602

Oncotarget

degree in both UM- and M-CLL groups (Figure 5D).
Cell proliferation was then determined at day 8 post
transfection. Figure 5E shows that BTK knock down by
siRNA reduced cell proliferation in all cases. Analysis of
UM-CLL and M-CLL showed that the reduction in cell
proliferation was much more pronounced in UM-CLL
than in M-CLL, due to the higher baseline proliferation
in UM-CLL (Figure 5E and 5F). These results are entirely

and M-CLL (n = 4) cells were transfected with either
siRNA targeting BTK or scrambled control under the
condition of CpG + CD40L stimulation. At day 4 of
siRNA transfection, the efficiency of siRNA knock-down
was evaluated first with immunoblotting in two cases
(Figure  5B) and subsequently with flow cytometry in
additional cases (Figure 5C). Significant reduction in total
BTK levels was achieved in all samples and to a similar

Figure 4: The apoptosis effect of ibrutinib does not differ between UM-CLL and M-CLL. Apoptosis of CLL cells was

measured using annexin V/7AAD assay following 48 hours of ibrutinib treatment at indicated concentrations. (A) Two representative
UM-CLL cases are shown. The percentages of viable annexin-V− and 7AAD− cells in the bottom left quadrant were indicated. (B) Analysis
of the aggregate data of 10 UM-CLL cases. (C) Two representative M-CLL cases are shown. The percentages of viable annexin-V− and
7AAD− cells in the bottom left quadrant were indicated. (D) Analysis of the aggregate data of 10 M-CLL cases. UM, unmutated CLL.
M, mutated CLL. (E) Viability of CpG + CD40L stimulated CLL cells at day 8 of culture in the presence or absence of 500 nM of ibrutinib.
(F) Viability of NKTert-co-cultured CLL cells at day 20 in the presence or absence of 500 nM of ibrutinib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4603

Oncotarget

consistent with those obtained with drug inhibition of
BTK by ibrutinib (Figure 3). Further, the data indicated
that higher BTK activity is one of the major drivers
responsible for the higher proliferation in UM-CLL.

subgroup were treated with varying doses of ibrutinib
under the condition of CpG + CD40L stimulation. As
shown in Figure 6A and 6B, compared to M-CLL, the
baseline level of p-BTK in UM-CLL is higher and p-BTK
decreased more rapidly with increasing concentrations of
ibrutinib. Response kinetics of p-BTK to ibrutinib in UMCLL and M-CLL thus are similar to response kinetics of
cell proliferation to ibrutinib (Figure 3), providing another
link between BTK activity and cellular proliferation.
To further understand the differential response
to ibrutinib between the UM-CLL and M-CLL, we
investigated the activities of downstream kinases in the
BCR signaling pathways, including PLCγ2, ERK, and

Kinases in the BCR signaling pathways show
higher activities and greater ibrutinib responses
in UM-CLL compared to M-CLL
Having established that UM-CLL cells have higher
p-BTK levels than M-CLL, we also sought to determine
whether higher p-BTK translates into greater sensitivity
to ibrutinib inhibition. Four CLL samples from each

Figure 5: Heightened proliferation in UM-CLL subgroup is BTK-dependent. (A) Correlation between p-BTK and CLL
proliferation. Linear regression of total and statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism 6. (B) Efficiency of BTK knockdown assayed by immunoblotting. CLL cells were transfected with either siBTK or scrambled control siRNAs (N = 2). Amounts of BTK
were analyzed after 4 days of transfection. (C) Efficiency of BTK knock-down assayed by flow cytometry (N = 8). Amounts of total BTK
were analyzed with anti-BTK antibody after 4 days of transfection. (D) Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of total BTK were plotted for
unmutated (N = 4) and mutated CLL patients (N = 4). (E) Proliferative responses of siBTK- and scrambled RNA-transfected UM- and
M-CLL were measured by 7-AAD/BrdU incorporation after 8 days of transfection (n = 8). (F) Proliferative responses were analyzed with
Paired t test to compare unmutated and mutated CLL subgroups. Scr, scrambled control siRNAs. siBTK, siRNA against BTK. P-values
are indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4604

Oncotarget

AKT. Our group has shown previously that p-PLCγ2,
p-ERK and p-AKT were coordinately down-regulated
in patients over the course of ibrutinib treatment [9].
We treated UM-CLL (n = 12) and M-CLL (n = 10) with
ibrutinib in the presence or absence of CpG + CD40L
stimulation. With phospho-specific flow cytometry, Figure
6C shows four examples in which phosphorylation of
PLCγ2, AKT and ERK were up-regulated by the CpG
+ CD40L stimulation (blue) and down-regulated upon
ibrutinib treatment (red). Aggregate data of all samples
are shown in Figure 6D. While CpG + CD40L stimulates
phosphorylation of PLCγ2, ERK, and AKT in both groups,
UM-CLL had a greater response than M-CLL. Further, these
elevated kinase activities in UM-CLL subgroup showed a
steeper response to ibrutinib inhibition (Figure 6D).
We next studied whether the reduction in kinase
phosphorylation correlated with the reduction in cellular
proliferation in ibrutinib-treated cells. We analyzed the
quantitative relationship between the degree of p-PLCγ2,
p-AKT and p-ERK inhibition and percent reduction in
cell proliferation as assayed in Figure 3. These analyses
revealed a very significant linear correlation of cell
proliferation with p-PLCγ2 and with p-ERK, but not
with p-AKT, in all 22 CLL cases (Figure 6E). These
data suggest that both PLCγ2 and ERK play a key role
in mediating the inhibitory effects of ibrutinib on cell
proliferation.

strengthen a linkage between BCR signaling, cell
proliferation, and sensitivity to ibrutinib. As opposed to
cell proliferation, the results in the current study showed
no difference in the rate of apoptosis between UM and
M-CLL. These findings extended our recent investigations
with both ibrutinib responsive patients and resistant
patient showing that ibrutinib acts primarily upon cell
proliferation [9, 32–33].
The higher sensitivity of UM-CLL to ibrutinib
reported here reflects an inherent greater reliance on BCR
signaling for UM-CLL. Using a variety of techniques,
several other groups have demonstrated that UM-CLL
has higher BCR activity than M-CLL in vitro [24–27] that
are consistent with our findings showing phosphorylation
levels of BTK, PLCγ2, AKT and ERK are uniformly
higher in UM-CLL than M-CLL (Figures 5 and 6). Further
supporting the differential reliance on BCR signaling are
the observations that differential antitumor activity against
UM- and M-CLL appears to be commonly shared among
several other BCR-directed inhibitors besides ibrutinib.
Veldurthy et al. [40] and our group [41] have both reported
that dasatinib (primarily targeting LYN) generated a better
in vitro apoptotic response in UM-CLL than M-CLL.
Buchner reported that R408, a SYK inhibitor, also has
preferential in vitro anti-tumor activity in UM-CLL.[17] In
contrast to these studies, only one recent report did not find
a correlation between the extent of BCR inhibition and
IGVH mutation status in ibrutinib-treated CLL patients.
[10] The reason for this discrepant finding is unclear at the
present time and warrants further investigation. It remains
to be determined whether the BCR-targeted therapies act
in clinical trials generating similar or differential responses
between the two IGHV subgroups.
Our investigations have several potential
limitations. The data were primarily derived from in vitro
CLL proliferation models. This model was previously
validated against an in vivo analysis employing samples
obtained from ibrutinib-treated patients without in vitro
culturing [9]. CLL proliferation measured with the
model correlates well with patient’s clinical sensitivity
[9] and clinical resistance to ibrutinib [32, 33]. However,
whether the model is valid read-out of CLL proliferation
or drug sensitivity in broader settings needs continued
investigation. Although data presented here help explain
the difference in the overall response rate between UMCLL and M-CLL, they do not explain why differences
between the two groups are lost when partial response
with lymphocytosis is added to the response. [20]
Based on the previous literature, we suspect that the
biological underpinning for peripheral lymphocytosis
is more related to the role of BTK in cell adhesion,
migration and cytokine signaling [42], and less to its
function in BCR signaling as persistent lymphocytes do
not show significant up-regulation of BCR-controlled
gene expression. [43] Nonetheless, cell adhesion and

DISCUSSION
The introduction of ibrutinib has significantly
improved outcomes for patients with relapsed and
refractory CLL, with a majority of patients responding to
this well-tolerated oral agent. While mutation status of the
IGHV has long been accepted as an important prognostic
variable, in the era of ibrutinib and other BCR-targeted
therapies, it is unclear whether IGHV will continue to
be prognostically relevant. Our investigation sought to
compare the differences in molecular/cellular behaviors
and pharmacological responses between UM-CLL and
M-CLL and explain clinical observations. Our key findings
include the following: 1) BTK activity, as reflected by
BTK phosphorylation, is significantly higher in UMCLL than M-CLL; 2) UM-CLL has higher proliferative
capacity than M-CLL as demonstrated with two separate
in vitro models of CLL proliferation; 3) Higher cellular
proliferation in UM-CLL made them particularly sensitive
to BTK inhibition by ibrutinib; 4) Apoptotic responses to
ibrutinib, in contrast, were not different between UM-CLL
and M-CLL; 5) Cell proliferation not only correlates
with but depends on BTK as demonstrated with BTK
depletion using siRNA; 6) Higher BTK activity (p-BTK)
in UM-CLL confers greater sensitivity to ibrutinib;
Lastly, 7) Higher activities of BCR downstream kinases
in UM-CLL render them more sensitive to ibrutinib than
M-CLL. These data reinforce each other, and collectively
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4605

Oncotarget

migration is another important cellular process inhibited
by ibrutinib [42, 44, 45]. It cannot not be excluded that
the differences between UM and M groups observed here
were secondary to their differential expression of CD49d,
for example [46].
These investigations have potential clinical
implications. With regards to overall response rate to

ibrutinib, our mechanistic studies presented here provide
molecular insights to explain the differential responses
between UM-CLL and M-CLL. In terms of progressionfree survival and overall survival, it is questionable
whether patients with unmutated IGHV will continue to
do worse. The prognostic significance of IGHV mutational
status may need to be reevaluated for newer BCR-targeted

Figure 6: Kinases in the BCR signaling pathways show higher activities and greater ibrutinib responses in UM-CLL
compared to M-CLL. (A) Immunoblotting analysis of p-BTK and t-BTK in CLL cells collected after one hour of ibrutinib treatment
at indicated concentrations. GAPDH was used as the loading control. (B) Ratios of p-BTK/t-BTK in ibrutinib-treated CLL cells. Band
intensities of p-BTK were normalized to the t-BTK signals. One-way Anova was used to analyze the dose responses and t tests were used
to analyze the difference between UM and M-CLL subgroups. Error bars indicate SEM. *P < 0.05. (C) Phosphoflow analysis. CLL cells
were stimulated with CpG + CD40L for one hour and treated with or without 500 nM of ibrutinib. Simultaneous phospho-flow analyses
of p-PLCγ2 (left column), p-AKT (middle column), and p-ERK1/2 (right column) were conducted. Flow analyses of 4 of 22 CLL samples
are shown. Iso, isotype control. Unsti, unstimulated cells. Sti, cells stimulated with CpG + CD40L. Sti+Ibr, stimulated cells exposed to 500
nM ibrutinib. (D) Mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) of p-PLCγ2, p-AKT, and p-ERK1/2 for each indicated condition were plotted. Twelve
unmutated and ten mutated CLL were included in the analyses. (E) Percent inhibition of p-PLCγ2, p-AKT and p-ERK1/2 are linearly
correlated with the percent inhibition of CLL proliferation. Percent inhibition of protein phosphorylation is defined as [(Funtreated − Ftreated)/
Funtreated] × 100%, where F denotes mean fluorescence intensity of 10,000 events. Inhibition of CLL proliferation is defined as the difference
between the proliferation rate of untreated cells and the proliferation rate of 500 nM ibrutinib-treated cells (see Figure 3). Data were
analyzed using Spearman correlation. P values and correlation coefficients are indicated. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4606

Oncotarget

therapies including, but not limited to SRC, SYK, PI3K
and mTOR and other BTK inhibitors.

then cultured in RPMI-1640 with 15% fetal bovine serum
(Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA), penicillin (100 IU), and
streptomycin (100 mg/mL), at a density of 1 × 107 cells/
mL in the presence or absence of 2.5 mg/mL CpG plus
500 ng/mL CD40L for various length of time. CLLNKTert co-culture was conducted as described previously
[9, 33].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and healthy donor samples
Peripheral blood samples were collected from
58 CLL patients whose disease diagnosis was based on
the clinical and immunophenotypic criteria outlined
by IWCLL criteria [47]. Clinical and pathological
characteristics of the patients are shown in Supplementary
Table 1. These samples were used in various assays
described in Figure 1 to Figure 6 based on sample
availability. Informed patient consents for the study were
obtained according to the Declaration of Helsinki and
these studies were approved by the Institutional Review
Boards of the University of Chicago and Weill Cornell
Medical College. None of the investigated patients had
received treatment for at least 3 months prior to sample
collection.  Progressive and stable disease was defined
according to the IWCLL criteria. Among 58 patient
samples, 36 were from treatment naïve patients (18 UMCLL and 18 M-CLL) and these were used to determine the
levels of BTK protein expression and phosphorylation in
order to avoid any potential impact of prior drug treatment
on these measurements (Figure 1).

Immunoblotting
Whole-cell extracts were prepared by lysing the
fresh cells of normal B or CLL cells in RIPA buffer
(50 mM  Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM  NaCl, 1%  Triton
X-100, 0.5%  sodium deoxycholate, 0.5%  SDS,
2 mM  EDTA, 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail II and III
and 1 × phosphatase inhibitor). Proteins were separated
on 4–12% NuPAGE gel and transferred onto PVDF
membranes, incubated with the appropriate primary and
secondary antibodies (See Reagents), and subsequently
visualized with LI-COR imager (LI-COR biosciences,
Lincoln, NE, USA).

Apoptosis and cell proliferation assays
The cell viability was determined by flow cytometry
using the Annexin V/7-AAD Apoptosis Detection
Kit I (BD Biosciences) on freshly isolated CLL cells.
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation was analyzed
using the FITC BrdU Flow kit (BD Biosciences) following
manufacturer’s instructions.

Reagents
Ibrutinib was purchased from Selleckchem
(Houston, TX, USA), CpG (ODN2006, stimulatory
CpG-ODN type B, human specific) was purchased from
Invivogen (San Diego, CA, USA), rhIL-4 was ordered
from R & D (Minneapolis, MN, USA) and CD40L was
obtained from PeproTech (Rock Hill, NJ, USA). Antiphosphorylated BTK (p-BTK) (Y223) was purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA);
both anti-total BTK antibody and PE-anti-CD38 (clone
HIT2) were ordered from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA,
USA) and the GAPDH antibody was procured from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); FITC-antiCD19 (clone HIB19), and PE-anti-CD5 (clone UCHT2)
were all purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA,
USA). Alexa Fluor® 647-anti-phospho-AKT (S473), Alexa
Fluor® 488 anti-phospho-p44/42 MAPK (ERK1/2) (T202/
Y204) from Cell signaling, or PE-anti-phospho-PLCγ2
(Y759) from BD Bioscience.

Flow cytometry
Cell staining for FACS analysis was done with
optimized amount of fluorochrome-conjugated mAbs as
described previously [9, 41, 48]. Briefly, after washing
twice with washing buffer (PBS 0.15 M, 0.5% BSA, 0.1%
NaN3), 1 × 106 cells were suspended in 100 ml of washing
buffer and stained with fluorochrome-conjugated mAbs
followed by incubation at 4°C in the dark for 45 minutes.
Cells were then washed twice in Perm/Wash buffer before
flow cytometric analysis. For intracellular phosphoflow
analysis, freshly isolated CLL cells were immediately
fixed with 2–4% paraformaldehyde and stored at −80°C.
The cryopreserved cells from different CLL samples
were simultaneously thawed at room temperature and
permeated with 50% methanol on ice for 4 hr following by
the staining with specific antibodies. Flow cytometry was
conducted using LSR2 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA), and the data were analyzed using FlowJo
software (Flowjo LLC, Ashland, OR, USA).

Isolation and in vitro culture of CLL cells
CLL cells were purified by using Human B cell
Enrichment cocktail Kit from Stemcell Technologies
(Vancouver, BC, Canada). The purity of the negatively
selected CLL cells exceeded 95% by flow cytometry with
CD5+/CD19+ double staining. Isolated CLL cells were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

siRNA transfection
siRNA against human BTK was customarily
designed and purchased from Thermo Scientific (Waltham,
4607

Oncotarget

MA, USA). The sense strand sequence of BTK siRNA
was: 5′-GUAUGAGUAUGACUUUGAAUU-3′, antisense
sequence was: 5′-UUCAAAGUCAUACUCAUAGUU-3′.
A non-targeting scrambled siRNA (Scr) was included as
the negative control. The siRNA was transfected into CLL
cells by using Amaxa cell line Nucleofactor kit V (Lonza,
Allendale, NJ, USA). A total of 1 × 107 CLL cells were
mixed with 100 µL of Amaxa B-cell nucleofector solution
and 2 mg of siRNA. Program X-05 was applied for the
electroporation [49].

Chemoimmunotherapy with fludarabine and rituximab
produces extended overall survival and progression-free
survival in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: long-term
follow-up of CALGB study 9712. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29:1349–1355.
  6.	 Stilgenbauer S, Schnaiter A, Paschka P, Zenz T, Rossi M,
Dohner K, Buhler A, Bottcher S, Ritgen M, Kneba M,
Winkler D, Tausch E, Hoth P, et al. Gene mutations and
treatment outcome in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: results
from the CLL8 trial. Blood. 2014; 123:3247–3254.
  7.	 Lucas DM, Ruppert AS, Lozanski G, Dewald GW,
Lozanski  A, Claus R, Plass C, Flinn IW, Neuberg DS,
Paietta EM, Bennett JM, Jelinek DF, Gribben JG, et al.
Cytogenetic prioritization with inclusion of molecular
markers predicts outcome in previously untreated patients
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with fludarabine
or fludarabine plus cyclophosphamide: a long-term followup study of the US intergroup phase III trial E2997. Leuk
Lymphoma. 2015:1–7.

Statistical analysis
Student’s paired  t-test or one-way ANOVA
was performed to analyze the statistical significance
between the groups. Correlations were analyzed using
Spearman correlation Method. These statistical analyses
were conducted and graphed using Graphpad Prism 6
(GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA). P values of less than 0.05
were considered significant.

  8.	 Harwood NE, Batista FD. New insights into the early
molecular events underlying B cell activation. Immunity.
2008; 28:609–619.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

  9.	 Cheng S, Ma J, Guo A, Lu P, Leonard JP, Coleman M,
Liu M, Buggy JJ, Furman RR, Wang YL. BTK inhibition
targets in vivo CLL proliferation through its effects on B-cell
receptor signaling activity. Leukemia. 2014; 28:649–657.

The study was supported by funding from the
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society (LLS 6364-13) to YLW.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Herman SE, Mustafa RZ, Gyamfi JA, Pittaluga S, Chang S,
Chang B, Farooqui M, Wiestner A. Ibrutinib inhibits BCR,
NF-kappaB signaling and reduces tumor proliferation in
tissue-resident cells of patients with CLL. Blood. 2014;
123:3286–3295.

Authors declare no competing financial interest.

REFERENCES

11.	 Ponader S, Chen SS, Buggy JJ, Balakrishnan K, Gandhi V,
Wierda WG, Keating MJ, O'Brien S, Chiorazzi N, Burger JA.
The Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor PCI-32765 thwarts
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cell survival and tissue
homing in vitro and in vivo. Blood. 2012; 119:1182–1189.

  1.	 Pflug N, Bahlo J, Shanafelt TD, Eichhorst BF, Bergmann MA,
Elter T, Bauer K, Malchau G, Rabe  KG, Stilgenbauer S,
Dohner H, Jager U, Eckart MJ, et al. Development of a
comprehensive prognostic index for patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2014; 124:49–62.

12.	 Wodarz D, Garg N, Komarova NL, Benjamini O,
Keating MJ, Wierda WG, Kantarjian H, James D, O'Brien S,
Burger JA. Kinetics of CLL cells in tissues and blood during
therapy with the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib. Blood. 2014;
123:4132–4135.

  2.	 Damle RN, Wasil T, Fais F, Ghiotto F, Valetto A,
Allen SL, Buchbinder A, Budman D, Dittmar K, Kolitz J,
Lichtman SM, Schulman P, Vinciguerra VP, et al. Ig V gene
mutation status and CD38 expression as novel prognostic
indicators in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 1999;
94:1840–1847.

13.	 Herman SE, Gordon AL, Wagner AJ, Heerema NA, Zhao W,
Flynn JM, Jones J, Andritsos L, Puri KD, Lannutti  BJ,
Giese  NA, Zhang X, Wei L, et al. Phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-delta inhibitor CAL-101 shows promising
preclinical activity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia by
antagonizing intrinsic and extrinsic cellular survival signals.
Blood. 2010; 116:2078–2088.

  3.	 Hamblin TJ, Davis Z, Gardiner A, Oscier DG, Stevenson FK.
Unmutated Ig V(H) genes are associated with a more
aggressive form of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood.
1999; 94:1848–1854.
  4.	 Pepper C, Majid A, Lin TT, Hewamana S, Pratt G,
Walewska R, Gesk S, Siebert R, Wagner S, Kennedy  B,
Miall F, Davis ZA, Tracy I, et al. Defining the prognosis
of early stage chronic lymphocytic leukaemia patients. Br J
Haematol. 2012; 156:499–507.

14.	 Hoellenriegel J, Meadows SA, Sivina M, Wierda WG,
Kantarjian H, Keating MJ, Giese N, O'Brien S, Yu A,
Miller LL, Lannutti BJ, Burger JA. The phosphoinositide
3′-kinase delta inhibitor, CAL-101, inhibits B-cell receptor
signaling and chemokine networks in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Blood. 2011; 118:3603–3612.

  5.	 Woyach JA, Ruppert AS, Heerema NA, Peterson BL,
Gribben JG, Morrison VA, Rai KR, Larson RA, Byrd JC.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4608

Oncotarget

15.	 Davids MS, Deng J, Wiestner A, Lannutti BJ, Wang  L,
Wu CJ, Wilson WH, Brown JR, Letai A. Decreased
mitochondrial apoptotic priming underlies stroma-mediated
treatment resistance in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Blood. 2012; 120:3501–3509.

25.	 Herishanu Y, Perez-Galan P, Liu D, Biancotto A,
Pittaluga  S, Vire B, Gibellini F, Njuguna N, Lee E,
Stennett L, Raghavachari N, Liu P, McCoy JP, et al. The
lymph node microenvironment promotes B-cell receptor
signaling, NF-kappaB activation, and tumor proliferation in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2011; 117:563–574.

16.	 Burger JA, Quiroga MP, Hartmann E, Burkle A,
Wierda  WG, Keating MJ, Rosenwald A. High-level
expression of the T-cell chemokines CCL3 and CCL4
by chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells in nurselike
cell cocultures and after BCR stimulation. Blood. 2009;
113:3050–3058.

26.	 Deglesne PA, Chevallier N, Letestu R, Baran-Marszak F,
Beitar T, Salanoubat C, Sanhes L, Nataf J, Roger C, VarinBlank N, Ajchenbaum-Cymbalista F. Survival response
to B-cell receptor ligation is restricted to progressive
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells irrespective of Zap70
expression. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:7158–7166.

17.	 Buchner M, Fuchs S, Prinz G, Pfeifer D, Bartholome K,
Burger M, Chevalier N, Vallat L, Timmer J, Gribben JG,
Jumaa H, Veelken H, Dierks C, et al. Spleen tyrosine kinase
is overexpressed and represents a potential therapeutic
target in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:5424–5432.

27.	 Guarini A, Chiaretti S, Tavolaro S, Maggio R, Peragine N,
Citarella F, Ricciardi MR, Santangelo S, Marinelli M, De
Propris MS, Messina M, Mauro FR, Del Giudice I, et al. BCR
ligation induced by IgM stimulation results in gene expression
and functional changes only in IgV H unmutated chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. Blood. 2008; 112:782–792.

18.	 Buchner M, Baer C, Prinz G, Dierks C, Burger M, Zenz T,
Stilgenbauer S, Jumaa H, Veelken H, Zirlik K. Spleen
tyrosine kinase inhibition prevents chemokine- and integrinmediated stromal protective effects in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Blood. 2010; 115:4497–4506.

28.	 Sharman JP, Coutre SE, Furman RR, Cheson BD,
Pagel  JM, Hillmen P, Barrientos JC, Zelenetz AD,
Kipps TJ, Flinn IW, Ghia P, Hallek M, Coiffier B, et al.
Second Interim Analysis of a Phase 3 Study of Idelalisib
(ZYDELIG®) Plus Rituximab (R) for Relapsed Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL): Efficacy Analysis in
Patient Subpopulations with Del (17p) and Other Adverse
Prognostic Factors. Blood. 2014; 124:330

19.	 Byrd JC, Brown JR, O'Brien S, Barrientos JC, Kay NE,
Reddy NM, Coutre S, Tam CS, Mulligan SP, Jaeger U,
Devereux S, Barr PM, Furman RR, et al. Ibrutinib versus
ofatumumab in previously treated chronic lymphoid
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2014; 371:213-223.
20.	 Byrd JC, Furman RR, Coutre SE, Flinn IW, Burger  JA,
Blum KA, Grant B, Sharman JP, Coleman M, Wierda WG,
Jones JA, Zhao W, Heerema NA, et al. Targeting BTK with
ibrutinib in relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl
J Med. 2013; 369:32–42.

29.	 Byrd JC, Furman RR, Coutre SE, Burger JA, Blum KA,
Coleman M, Wierda WG, Jones JA, Zhao W, Heerema NA,
Johnson AJ, Shaw Y, Bilotti E, et al. Three-year followup of treatment-naive and previously treated patients with
CLL and SLL receiving single-agent ibrutinib. Blood. 2015;
125:2497–2506.

21.	 Brown JR, Byrd JC, Coutre SE, Benson DM, Flinn IW,
Wagner-Johnston ND, Spurgeon SE, Kahl BS, Bello C,
Webb HK, Johnson DM, Peterman S, Li D, et al. Idelalisib,
an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase p110delta, for
relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood.
2014; 123:3390–3397.

30.	 Messmer BT, Messmer D, Allen SL, Kolitz JE,
Kudalkar P, Cesar D, Murphy EJ, Koduru P, Ferrarini M,
Zupo S, Cutrona G, Damle RN, Wasil T, et al. In vivo
measurements document the dynamic cellular kinetics of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells. J Clin Invest. 2005;
115:755–764.

22.	 Furman RR, Sharman JP, Coutre SE, Cheson BD, Pagel JM,
Hillmen P, Barrientos JC, Zelenetz AD, Kipps TJ, Flinn I,
Ghia P, Eradat H, Ervin T, et al. Idelalisib and rituximab
in relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med.
2014; 370:997–1007.

31.	 Ghia P, Chiorazzi N, Stamatopoulos K. Microenvironmental
influences in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia: the role of
antigen stimulation. J Intern Med. 2008; 264:549–562.
32.	 Furman RR, Cheng S, Lu P, Setty M, Perez AR, Guo A,
Racchumi J, Xu G, Wu H, Ma J, Steggerda SM, Coleman M,
Leslie C, et al. Ibrutinib resistance in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370:2352–2354.

23.	 O'Brien S, Furman RR, Coutre SE, Sharman JP, Burger JA,
Blum KA, Grant B, Richards DA, Coleman M, Wierda WG,
Jones JA, Zhao W, Heerema NA, et al. Ibrutinib as initial
therapy for elderly patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia or small lymphocytic lymphoma: an open-label,
multicentre, phase 1b/2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:48–58.

33.	 Cheng S, Guo A, Lu P, Ma J, Coleman M, Wang YL.
Functional characterization of BTK(C481S) mutation that
confers ibrutinib resistance: exploration of alternative
kinase inhibitors. Leukemia. 2015; 29:895–900.

24.	 Lanham S, Hamblin T, Oscier D, Ibbotson R, Stevenson F,
Packham G. Differential signaling via surface IgM is
associated with VH gene mutational status and CD38
expression in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2003;
101:1087–1093.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34.	 Decker T, Schneller F, Sparwasser T, Tretter T,
Lipford GB, Wagner H, Peschel C. Immunostimulatory
CpG- 
oligonucleotides cause proliferation, cytokine
production, and an immunogenic phenotype in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia B cells. Blood. 2000; 95:999–1006.

4609

Oncotarget

35.	 Tromp JM, Tonino SH, Elias JA, Jaspers A, Luijks DM,
Kater AP, van Lier RA, van Oers MH, Eldering E.
Dichotomy in NF-kappaB signaling and chemoresistance
in immunoglobulin variable heavy-chain-mutated versus
unmutated CLL cells upon CD40/TLR9 triggering.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:5071–5082.

43.	 Woyach JA, Smucker K, Smith LL, Lozanski A, Zhong Y,
Ruppert AS, Lucas D, Williams K, Zhao W, Rassenti L,
Ghia E, Kipps TJ, Mantel R, et al. Prolonged lymphocytosis
during ibrutinib therapy is associated with distinct
molecular characteristics and does not indicate a suboptimal
response to therapy. Blood. 2014; 123:1810–1817.

36.	 Jourdan M, Caraux A, De Vos J, Fiol G, Larroque M,
Cognot C, Bret C, Duperray C, Hose D, Klein B. An in vitro
model of differentiation of memory B cells into plasmablasts
and plasma cells including detailed phenotypic and
molecular characterization. Blood. 2009; 114:5173–5181.

44.	 Pepper C, Buggins AG, Jones CH, Walsby EJ, Forconi F,
Pratt G, Devereux S, Stevenson FK, Fegan C. Phenotypic
heterogeneity in IGHV-mutated CLL patients has prognostic
impact and identifies a subset with increased sensitivity to
BTK and PI3Kdelta inhibition. Leukemia. 2015; 29:744–747.

37.	 Herman SE, Gordon AL, Hertlein E, Ramanunni A,
Zhang X, Jaglowski S, Flynn J, Jones J, Blum KA, Buggy JJ,
Hamdy A, Johnson AJ, Byrd JC. Bruton tyrosine kinase
represents a promising therapeutic target for treatment of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is effectively targeted by
PCI-32765. Blood. 2011; 117:6287–6296.

45.	 de Gorter DJ, Beuling EA, Kersseboom R, Middendorp S,
van Gils JM, Hendriks RW, Pals ST, Spaargaren M.
Bruton's tyrosine kinase and phospholipase Cgamma2
mediate chemokine-controlled B cell migration and homing.
Immunity. 2007; 26:93–104.
46.	 Gattei V, Bulian P, Del Principe MI, Zucchetto A,
Maurillo L, Buccisano F, Bomben R, Dal-Bo M, Luciano F,
Rossi FM, Degan M, Amadori S, Del Poeta G. Relevance
of CD49d protein expression as overall survival and
progressive disease prognosticator in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Blood. 2008; 111:865–873.

38.	 Advani RH, Buggy JJ, Sharman JP, Smith SM, Boyd TE,
Grant B, Kolibaba KS, Furman RR, Rodriguez S,
Chang  BY, Sukbuntherng J, Izumi R, Hamdy A, et al.
Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor ibrutinib (PCI-32765) has
significant activity in patients with relapsed/refractory B-cell
malignancies. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:88–94.

47.	 Hallek M, Cheson BD, Catovsky D, Caligaris-Cappio F,
Dighiero G, Dohner H, Hillmen P, Keating MJ,
Montserrat E, Rai KR, Kipps TJ and International Workshop
on Chronic Lymphocytic L. Guidelines for the diagnosis
and treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a report
from the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia updating the National Cancer Institute-Working
Group 1996 guidelines. Blood. 2008; 111:5446–5456.

39.	 Marostica E, Sukbuntherng J, Loury D, de Jong J, de
Trixhe XW, Vermeulen A, De Nicolao G, O'Brien S,
Byrd  JC, Advani R, McGreivy J, Poggesi I. Population
pharmacokinetic model of ibrutinib, a Bruton tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, in patients with B cell malignancies.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014.
40.	 Veldurthy A, Patz M, Hagist S, Pallasch CP, Wendtner CM,
Hallek M, Krause G. The kinase inhibitor dasatinib induces
apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in vitro
with preference for a subgroup of patients with unmutated
IgVH genes. Blood. 2008; 112:1443–1452.

48.	 Cheng S, Coffey G, Zhang XH, Shaknovich R, Song Z,
Lu P, Pandey A, Melnick AM, Sinha U, Wang YL. SYK
inhibition and response prediction in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. Blood. 2011; 118:6342–6352.

41.	 Song Z, Lu P, Furman RR, Leonard JP, Martin P, Tyrell L,
Lee FY, Knowles DM, Coleman M, Wang YL. Activities of
SYK and PLCgamma2 predict apoptotic response of CLL
cells to SRC tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib. Clin Cancer
Res. 2010; 16:587–599.

49.	 Ma J, Lu P, Guo A, Cheng S, Zong H, Martin P, Coleman M,
Wang YL. Characterization of ibrutinib-sensitive and
-resistant mantle lymphoma cells. Br J Haematol. 2014;
166:849–861.

42.	 de Rooij MF, Kuil A, Geest CR, Eldering E, Chang BY,
Buggy JJ, Pals ST, Spaargaren M. The clinically active
BTK inhibitor PCI-32765 targets B-cell receptor- and
chemokine-controlled adhesion and migration in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2012; 119:2590–2594.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4610

Oncotarget

