3349

Management of Malignant Gliomas During Pregnancy
A Case Series

Deborah T. Blumenthal, MD1,2,3
Mary Grace H. Parreño, MD2
Julia Batten, ANP3
Marc C. Chamberlain, MD4

BACKGROUND. Limited data are available on the management of glioma in pregnant women. Therefore, the aim of the current article was to describe the outcome of women with malignant gliomas who were exposed to chemotherapy
early in the gestation period of their pregnancies.

METHODS. The authors presented a case series of 6 women with malignant
1
Department of Oncology, Neuro-oncology Service, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv,
Israel.
2

Department of Neurosurgery, Tel Aviv Sourasky
Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
3
Department of Medicine, Neuro-oncology Service, Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
4

Department of Neurology and Neurological
Surgery, Division of Neuro-oncology, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington.

gliomas who during glioma-directed treatment were discovered to have an
unplanned pregnancy. All patients elected to discontinue chemotherapy and
carry their pregnancy to term.

RESULTS. All women had uneventful pregnancies with no glioma-related complications. All women delivered healthy newborns without evidence of congenital
malformations despite exposure to cytotoxic chemotherapy and anticonvulsant
medications.

CONCLUSIONS. Management of malignant glioma during pregnancy is challenging; however, normal delivery and healthy live birth is possible. Cancer
2008;113:3349–54.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: malignant glioma, brain tumor, pregnancy, chemotherapy exposure,
teratogenicity.

T

The first and second authors contributed equally
to this article.
Address for reprints: Deborah T. Blumenthal, MD,
Neuro-oncology Service, Tel Aviv Medical Center,
6 Weizmann Street, Tel Aviv, Israel 64239; Fax:
(011) 972 36974789; E-mail: dvorab@tasmc.
health.gov.il
Received April 22, 2008; revision received July
2, 2008; accepted July 25, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

he subject of pregnancy in patients with malignant gliomas is
multifaceted and presents several clinical challenges.1-4 Because
of the relative paucity of reported cases of gliomas diagnosed and
treated during pregnancy, the literature comprises only case reports
and small series.4-9 The majority of reports address diagnosis and
surgical management of glioma but not adjuvant medical treatment.1,10,11 Consequently, there is limited literature on radiation
treatment of malignant gliomas during pregnancy, and there are no
reports to our knowledge of pregnant glioma patients treated with
chemotherapy.11,12 Furthermore, prospective studies of adjuvant glioma therapies in pregnant patients are not feasible because of ethical considerations. Therefore, there are no guidelines for the
adjuvant administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy or the
ideal timing of neurosurgical or obstetrical intervention in pregnant
women. The difficulty in establishing guidelines for therapeutic strategies is further complicated by a variety of clinical and social factors including the estimated gestational age (EGA) of the fetus,
medical condition of the mother, risks of teratogenicity from antiepileptic drugs and chemotherapy, religious and philosophical beliefs
of the patient, the stance of her family and medical providers concerning her option for pregnancy termination, and the natural
history of malignant glioma.13
Given the paucity of information in the literature, we describe
our experience with and the outcomes of a series of women with

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23973
Published online 5 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

3350

CANCER

December 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 12

malignant glioma who were exposed to chemotherapy in early pregnancy. This case series comprises 6
patients with previously diagnosed malignant gliomas who, while undergoing postradiation chemotherapy, discovered that they were pregnant. Despite
the unintentional chemotherapeutic exposure, all
patients elected to proceed with their pregnancies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Six women previously diagnosed with malignant glioma were receiving chemotherapy treatment and
discovered during treatment that they were pregnant
(Table 1). Data for these patients was collected from
5 centers (Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University of Utah; University of California, San Diego; Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Baldwin Park, Calif;
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif;
and the Moffitt Cancer Center, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Fla) contributed by 2 neuro-oncologists (DTB and MCC).

RESULTS
(See Table 1 for results.) Pathological diagnoses
included 2 anaplastic astrocytomas and 1 each of
anaplastic oligodendroglioma, glioblastoma, oligodendroglioma, and oligoastrocytoma. Five patients
underwent subtotal resection (STR) at diagnosis
(before pregnancy). One patient with oligodendroglioma underwent biopsy only at diagnosis. The
mean age of the mothers at the time of pregnancy
was 28 years (range, 24 years to 33 years) with parity
ranging from 1 to 3 (1: n 5 2; 2: n 5 3; 3: n 5 1).
Four mothers were receiving chemotherapy for first
tumor recurrence, and 2 mothers were receiving
chemotherapy as part of first-line therapy.
All cases of chemotherapeutic drug exposure
occurred during the first trimester. Two of the
mothers were exposed during the second week of
estimated gestational age (EGA), 1 during the third
week, and another 3 during the fourth week. Three
patients were receiving PCV (procarbazine, CCNU
[lomustine], and vincristine) during their second,
third, and fourth cycles of chemotherapy, and 3
patients were being treated with temozolomide
(TMZ) during their second, fifth, and ninth cycles,
respectively.
Four patients underwent normal spontaneous
vaginal delivery (1, 3, 4 and 5 hours of labor). Two
underwent repeat elective Caesarean sections. The
neonatal outcomes included 6 healthy full-term
infants with birth weights of 3.3-3.7 kg (mean 5 3.5),
all of whom had normal Apgar scores and uneventful
courses in the neonatal care unit.

Postnatally, 1 mother opted not to breastfeed,
and 5 mothers breast fed their infants. All of the
newborns are alive and well with no evidence of congenital malformations.
Disease recurrence after parturition occurred in
5 patients at a median time after pregnancy of 13
months (range, 11 months to 18 months). Two
patients underwent reresection for recurrent tumor
followed by 6 and 8 cycles of cyclophosphamide.
Two patients were treated with 4 and 6 cycles,
respectively, of CPT-11, and 1 patient received 2
cycles of temozolomide followed by 4 cycles of bevacizumab. Median survival after disease recurrence
after delivery was 8 months (range, 6 months to 10
months).
The surviving patient with anaplastic astrocytoma is disease free 4 years after delivery and has
not required further treatment after pregnancy.
Five of the 6 mothers died within 30 months
after delivery, all from progression of glioma. All
mothers with disease recurrence were treated either
with reresection2 or salvage chemotherapy.5 One
mother with newly diagnosed anaplastic astrocytoma
remains alive and disease free more than 4 years
after completing treatment.

DISCUSSION
The administration of chemotherapy during pregnancy, in particular during the first trimester of pregnancy, may induce harmful effects both in the fetus
and in the expectant mother. For the fetus, these detrimental effects include congenital malformations,
potential carcinogenesis, organ toxicity, prematurity,
impaired fetal weight gain, growth retardation, and
developmental delay. For the mother, chemotherapyassociated risks include stillbirth, spontaneous abortion, and maternal sterility.14,15
Procarbazine is a potent teratogen and carcinogen in animal models and, in such models, can cross
the placenta in sufficient concentration to cause fetal
death or malformation, particularly when the exposure is in early gestation.16 Four case reports have
described the use of procarbazine in Hodgkin-disease
patients with unplanned pregnancies. All opted to
continue with their pregnancy. In 3 cases, chemotherapy was discontinued when the patient was
known to be pregnant. In 1 infant, the only detectable abnormality was an erythematous hemangioma
on the forearm.17 In the second case, the infant was
born with respiratory distress syndrome and an atrial
septal defect.18 In the third case, a child was delivered at 24 weeks with orthopedic abnormalities (talipes, hypoplastic tibia) and a cerebral hemorrhage.19

Time of death

na

No
Full cycle 6 wk
3.7
Repeat elective Caesarean
section
na
0
Breast-fed without
complications

None
2y
10/94
Resection and
cyclophosphamide X 8
11/95

Did not breast feed

Phenytoin
2y
11/90
Resection and
cyclophosphamide X 6
9/91

4th Cycle of PCV

26
G2 P2 A0
Anaplastic astrocytoma
Dx 4/90/STR
RT 1 PCV
Recurrent
11/93
4

3

No
Full cycle (6 weeks)
3.4
Normal spontaneous vaginal
delivery
1
0

2nd Cycle of PCV

5th Cycle of TMZ

No
Full cycle (5/28 days)
3.7
Normal spontaneous vaginal
delivery
Hours of labor
3
Still birth/low birth weight/immediate 0
complications
Breast feeding status
Early cessation of milk
production which did not
occur in 2 previous
pregnancies
Antiepileptic medication
None- (Phenytoin was
stopped 10/03)
Duration of follow-up
4 y and alive, disease free
Date of recurrence (after parturition) na
Salvage therapy after parturition
na

28
G1 P1 A0
Anaplastic oligodendroglioma
Dx 9/87/STR
RT 1 PCV
Adjuvant
9/89
4

33
G3 P3 A0
Anaplastic astrocytoma
Dx 5/03/STR
RT
Recurrent
12/03
2

Mother’s age at exposure, y
Gravida and parity
Pathology of tumor/date of diagnosis/
extent of resection
Adjuvant treatment
Indication of treatment
Date of delivery
Estimated gestational age at discovery,
wk
Chemotherapeutic agent and dose
regimen
Fertility difficulty
Period of exposure to the drug
Fetal weight at delivery, kg
Method of delivery

2

1

Case No

TABLE 1
Data From Patient Cases

7/00

1 y& 6 mo
1/00
CPT-11 X 4

Levetiracetam

Breast-fed without
complications

No
Full cycle 6 wk
3.3
Normal spontaneous vaginal
delivery
5
0

3rd Cycle of PCV

24
G3 P2 A1
Oligodendroglioma
Dx 3/93/Biopsy
RT
Recurrent
1/99
2

4

2/05

1 y & 6 mo
8/04
CPT-11 X 6

Levetiracetam

Breast-fed without
complications

No
Full cycle 5/28 d
3.5
Repeat elective Caesarean
section
na
0

9th Cycle of TMZ

29
G2 P2 A0
Oligoastrocytoma
Dx 4/97/STR
RT
Recurrent
2/03
3

5

6/07

1 y 1&6 mo
10/06
TMZ X 2; bevacizumab x5

Levetiracetam

Breast-fed without
complications

No
Full cycle 5/28 d
3.5
Normal spontaneous vaginal
delivery
4
0

2nd Cycle of ZTM

28
G1 P0 A0
Glioblastoma
Dx/STR8/04
RT 1 TMZ
Adjuvant
9/05
6

6

Glioma Management During Pregnancy/Blumenthal et al
3351

3352

CANCER

December 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 12

In the fourth case, procarbazine and carmustine
were given to the mother for 5 months before conception and throughout the first and second trimesters, and streptozotocin was given throughout the
third trimester. She delivered a low birth-weight,
male infant who was otherwise normal.20 By contrast
in this case series, no malformations were observed
among the 6 live-born neonates.
The treatment of malignant gliomas requires a
multidisciplinary approach. Current standards of
practice for treating newly diagnosed high-grade
glioma include maximal safe resection followed by
radiotherapy, and, in the instance of newly diagnosed
glioblastoma, adjuvant TMZ chemotherapy. The role
of adjuvant chemotherapy in other grades of malignant gliomas remains controversial.
In this case series, all patients were exposed to
alkylator-based chemotherapy (either PCV or TMZ)
during the first trimester of their pregnancy when fetal
organogenesis is most active. Three patients received
PCV, as, at that time, this drug combination was
widely used as a first-line chemotherapy regimen.21,22
The commonly observed toxicities of PCV are myelosuppressive (thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, and anemia), neurologic (cognitive or mood change and
peripheral or autonomic neuropathy), and gastrointestinal (nausea and vomiting); fatigue and allergic
reaction also occur. Temozolomide (TMZ) is a novel
imidazotetrazine that has become the standard of
care for newly diagnosed glioblastoma and recurrent
anaplastic gliomas.23 The commonly observed toxicities of TMZ are mild myelosuppression, typically
easily controlled gastrointestinal upset (nausea and
vomiting), fatigue, and anorexia.24
Although the use of carmustine wafers (Gliadel)
in pregnancy has not been specifically reported, studies have shown virtually undetectable amounts of
carmustine in the systemic circulation. This modality
has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for newly diagnosed and recurrent glioblastoma and may be presumed to be relatively safe for
use in pregnant patients with malignant glioma who
are candidates for surgical resection.1,25
It is recognized that all alkylator-based chemotherapy crosses the placenta and, therefore, fetal toxicity depends upon gestational age and duration of
exposure.26 In most cases, toxic effects of chemotherapy on the fetus have been reported when treatment
was given during embryogenesis or in the first trimester and less often when administered during later trimesters. In the instance of fetal PCV exposure, the
estimated risk of malformation when exposed during
the first trimester is 1 in 3. Considering any chemotherapy exposure during pregnancy, the rate of

chemotherapy-associated fetal malformation is 12.7%
to 17% and that of low birth weight is 40%.20 By comparison, the rate of severe congenital malformations
in the general population is approximately 1% to 3%,
and low birth weight is 10% to 15%.10,27 There are several reports from the breast cancer literature on experience with chemotherapy for the treatment of
women with breast cancer during the second and
third trimesters of pregnancy. Chemotherapy agents
have included anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, doxorubicin, and fluorouracil. These
experiences suggest no significantly increased incidence of adverse short-term fetal or pediatric events
when chemotherapy is administered for breast cancer
in the second or third trimester.28,29 The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines advocate the use of chemotherapy for treatment of breast
cancer in the second and third, but not the first, trimester of pregnancy, whereas radiation and hormonal
therapies for breast cancer are recommended to be
avoided throughout the pregnancy. Most available data
on teratogenicity of chemotherapy are based on case
reports and small series. Long-term studies are needed
to evaluate the effects of chemotherapy on the mother,
the fetus, and the neonate.
Although all of the patients in our series had
uneventful deliveries (4 vaginal and 2 elective repeat
Caesarian sections), delivery in a pregnant mother may
be complicated by residual intracranial tumor.
Increased intracranial pressure can occur from the
added effects of pressure from the exertions of labor
upon the tumor and associated peritumoral edema.
This scenario is more of a concern in an undiagnosed,
untreated patient. In the case of a symptomatic tumor,
an elective Caesarean section should be encouraged.
It is not known whether TMZ or PCV pass into
breast milk.24,30 As a general admonition, mothers
are advised not to take these drugs while breastfeeding because of the possibility of serious harm to the
infant. In this case series, all chemotherapy was
stopped after discovery of pregnancy and several
months before delivery. Five mothers attempted to
breast feed, although 1 mother experienced early cessation of the breast milk production, which had not
happened in previous pregnancies. One patient
chose not to breast feed.
Concerning radiotherapy, no prospective, randomized studies have been undertaken with respect to
administration of radiotherapy for newly diagnosed
malignant gliomas in pregnancy because of the paucity of cases as well as ethical considerations as
mentioned above. There appears to be a correlation
between fetal radiation dose and fetal viability with
<10 cGy having no major effect and >300 cGy lead-

Glioma Management During Pregnancy/Blumenthal et al

ing to abortion. A dose of >50 cGy poses a risk of
damage during all trimesters.11,14 However, in cases
where radiotherapy is required, an estimation of fetal
risk could be made by using phantom measurements
to assess the likely fetal dose.11 Abdominal shielding
devices have been proposed and proven acceptable
for protecting the fetus when treating the mother
with radiotherapy to the brain. A total fetal doseexposure of approximately 1 cGy achievable with
shielding devices is within the radiation-dose limits
suggested by the American Association of Physics in
Medicine. Therefore, pregnant patients may receive
cranial radiotherapy for newly diagnosed malignant
gliomas with abdominal shielding that provides
minimal fetal exposure.
Several theories have been advanced to account
for the exacerbation of brain tumor-related maternal
symptoms that may occur during pregnancy, including steroid hormone-mediated growth (meningiomas)
and hemodynamic changes (increased systemic and
cerebral blood volume).5,6 A potential mechanism
that could result in clinical deterioration in expectant
mothers with malignant gliomas is an increase in intracranial mass effect from increased tumor blood
volume caused by hemodynamic changes inherent to
pregnancy. However, in the current case series, there
did not appear to be an increase of glioma mass effect
due to pregnancy, likely a result of prior resection and
application of radiotherapy resulting in residual
small-volume disease. In addition, it is during the latter half of the second trimester and in the early third
trimester, when maternal intravascular volume peaks,
that the majority of newly diagnosed brain tumors
present in pregnant patients.5 During this time in
pregnancy, fluid retention and increased intravascular
volume may exacerbate intracranial mass effect, both
by increasing peritumoral edema and absolute tumor
blood volume resulting in discovery of the underlying
glioma. Pregnancy has not convincingly been shown
to accelerate glioma growth.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferable imaging technique for following a patient with a
known brain tumor. MRI uses gadolinium-based contrast agents that are paramagnetic and do not contain
iodine. These agents have a far better margin of safety
compared with computed tomography (CT) contrast
agents, as allergic reactions are relatively rare (an
occurrence of approximately 1 in 350,000), and there
is a minimal chance of nephrotoxicity in patients with
normal renal function.31 Gadolinium-containing
agents readily cross the placenta but have not been
shown to cause birth defects at conventional dosages.
Although there are no documented instances of gadolinium teratogenicity, the majority of radiologists

3353

prefer MRI without contrast for imaging during pregnancy, as was performed in this case series.
Another problem confronting physicians who are
treating pregnant patients for glioma is use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). It is recognized that use of
AEDs during pregnancy may be teratogenic and may
increase the risk of major congenital abnormalities
by at least 2-fold. In many women with either established or newly diagnosed gliomas, AEDs cannot be
discontinued because of the risk of seizures during
pregnancy, which can be harmful to both mother
and fetus. The current American Academy of Neurology guidelines state that physicians should optimize
treatment before conception, use monotherapy if
possible, choose the most effective AED for seizure
type and syndrome, use the lowest effective dose,
give the mother supplemental folic acid, and treat
the child with vitamin K at birth and possibly the
mother late in pregnancy if she is using AEDs that
interfere with vitamin K absorption.30
At the time of the discovery of unplanned pregnancy, 4 patients in this case series were receiving
AEDs (1 phenytoin and 3 levetiracetam). All AEDs in
this series were continued on the basis of a history
of recent tumor-related epilepsy; however, no apparent side effects were noted either in the mothers or
in their newborns albeit with limited follow-up. In
addition, all mothers received supplemental folic
acid throughout pregnancy. At discovery of pregnancy, all mothers consulted with high-risk obstetricians and were followed with periodic fetal
ultrasounds. The long-term outcome of the infants
delivered in this case series appears normal; however,
the majority of children are not yet school aged, and,
therefore, their neurocognitive outcome is uncertain.
In addition, it is too early to rule out the possibility
of future secondary malignancies in these children.
Five of the 6 patients in this series died within or
shortly after 2 years after giving birth. At this time,
only 1 patient survives with inactive disease. Due to
the natural history of malignant gliomas, life expectancy of the mother is unfortunately short. Consequently, in early childhood, the child is at very high
risk of losing the mother and will likely be reared by
either the father or relatives. This may have an impact
on the child’s growth and development that is difficult
to quantify. Moreover, while she is providing care for
her infant or very young child, the mother may need
intensive medical treatment for her malignant glioma.
Thus, there will be an additional burden on the immediate family. Upon discovery of malignant glioma in a
pregnant woman, physicians should mention these
sensitive issues to the patient’s family during discussions of glioma treatment and probable outcome.

3354

CANCER

December 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 12

In conclusion, this case series illustrates that for
women with malignant gliomas and unplanned pregnancies complicated by chemotherapy exposure, the
outcome most often results in an uncomplicated
pregnancy and healthy live birth. Although we do
not advocate that pregnant mothers intentionally be
exposed to chemotherapy, we report a series of cases
that illustrates favorable outcomes. A serious limitation of this series is the short follow-up of the infants
exposed to chemotherapy during their fetal development. Consequently, the risk of late effects has not
been established. Nonetheless, these cases lend anecdotal support for a normal pregnancy, delivery,
and outcome in cases of unintentional early fetal
chemotherapy exposure.

REFERENCES
1.

Stevenson C, Thompson R. The clinical management of intracranial neoplasms in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol.
2005;48:24-37.
2. Isla A, Alvarez F, Gonzales A, Garcia-Grande A, PerezAlvarez M, Garcia-Blazquez M. Brain tumor and pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol. 1997;89:19-23.
3. Pennell PB. Using current evidence in selecting antiepileptic drugs for use during pregnancy. Epilepsy Curr. 2005;
5:45-51.
4. Ducray P, Colin S, Cartalat-Carel I, et al. Management of
malignant gliomas diagnosed during pregnancy. Rev Neurol. 2006;162:322-329.
5. Tewari K, Cappuccini F, Asrat T, et al. Obstetric emergencies precipitated by malignant brain tumors. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 2000;182:1215-1221.
6. Vougioukas V, Kyroussis G, Glasker S, Tatagiba M, Scheuffler K. Neurosurgical interventions during pregnancy and
the puerperium: clinical considerations and management.
Acta Neurochir. 2004;146:1287-1292.
7. Chaudhuri P, Wallenburg HC. Brain tumors and pregnancy.
Presentation of a case and review of the literature. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1980;11:109-114.
8. Depret-Mosser S, Jomin M, Monnier JC, et al. Cerebral
tumors and pregnancy. Apropos of 8 cases. J Gynecol Obstet
Biol Reprod. 1993;22:71-80.
9. Mackenzie A, Levine G, Garry D, Figueroa R. Glioblastoma
multiforme in pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med.
2005;17:81-83.
10. Doll DC, Ringenberg QS, Yarbro JW. Antineoplastic agents
and pregnancy. Semin Oncol. 1989;16:337-346.
11. Haba Y, Twyman N, Thomas S, Overton C, Dendy P, Burnet
N. Radiotherapy for glioma during pregnancy: fetal dose
estimates, risk assessment and clinical management, case
report. Clin Oncol. 2004;16:210-214.
12. Sharp C, Shrimpton JA, Bury RF. Diagnostic medical exposures. Advice on exposure to ionising radiation during
pregnancy. Joint guidance from the National Radiological
Protection Board, College of Radiographers and Royal College of Radiologists. National Radiological Protection
Board, College of Radiographers and Royal College of Radiologists. Available at:http://www.hpa.org.uk/radiation/publications/misc_publications/advice_during_pregnancy.pdf
[Accessed 1998]

13. Stupp R, Hegi M, van den Bent M, et al. Changing paradigms—an update on the multidisciplinary management of
malignant glioma. Oncologist. 2006;11:165-180.
14. Pavlidis N. Coexistence of Pregnancy and Malignancy.
Oncologist. 2002;7:279-287.
15. Peres RM, Sanseverino MTV, Guimaraes JLM, et al. Assessment of fetal risk associated with exposure to cancer
chemotherapy during pregnancy: a multicenter study. Braz
J Med Biol Res. 2001;34:1551-1559.
16. Schmid BP, Trippmacher A, Bianchi A. Teratogenicity
induced in cultured rat embryos by the serum of procarbazine treated rats. Toxicology. 1982;25:53-60.
17. Wells JH, Marshall JR, Carbone PP. Procarbazine therapy for
Hodgkin’s disease in early pregnancy. JAMA. 1968;205:935-937.
18. Thomas PRM, Peckham MJ. The investigation and management of Hodgkin’s disease in the pregnant patient.
Cancer. 1976;38:1443-1451.
19. Garrett MJ. Letter: Teratogenic effects of combination
chemotherapy. Ann Intern Med. 1974;80:667.
20. Schapira DV, Chudley AE. Successful pregnancy following
continuous treatment with combination chemotherapy
before conception and throughout pregnancy. Cancer. 1984;
54:800-803.
21. Schmidt F, Fischer J, Herrlinger U, Dietz K, Dichgans J,
Weller M. PCV chemotherapy for recurrent glioblastoma.
Neurology. 2006;66:587-589.
22. [No authors listed] Medical Research Council Brain
Tumour Working Party. Randomized trial of procarbazine,
lomustine and vincristine in the adjuvant treatment of
high grade astrocytoma: a Medical Research Council trial.
J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:509-518.
23. Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, et al. European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Brain
Tumor and Radiotherapy Groups; National Cancer Institute
of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N
Engl J Med. 2005;352:987.
24. Newlands ES, Blackledge GR, Slack JA, et al. Phase I trial of
temozolomide. Br J Cancer. 1992;65:287-291.
25. Westphal M, Hilt DC, Bortey E, et al. A phase 3 trial
of local chemotherapy with biodegradable carmustine
(BCNU) wafers (Gliadel wafers) in patients with primary
malignant glioma. Neuro Oncol. 2003;5:79-88.
26. Pautier P, Lhomme C, Morice P. Cancer and pregnancy: the
medical oncologist’s point of view. J Gynecol Obstet Biol
Reprod. 2004;33:523-522.
27. Sweet DL Jr, Kinzie J. Consequences of radiotherapy and
antineoplastic therapy for the fetus. J Reprod Med. 1976;17:
241-246.
28. Ring AE, Smith IE, Jones A, Shannon C, Galani E, Ellis PA.
Chemotherapy for breast cancer during pregnancy: an 18year experience from 5 London teaching hospitals. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23:4192-4197.
29. Hahn KM, Johnson PH, Gordon N, Kuerer H, Middleton L,
Ramirez M, Yang W, Perkins G, Hortobagyi GN, Theriault
RL. Treatment of pregnant breast cancer patients and
outcomes of children exposed to chemotherapy in utero.
Cancer. 2006;107:1219-1226.
30. Edelman RR, Warach S. Magnetic resonance imaging.
N Engl J Med. 1993;328:708-716.
31. [No authors listed] Practice parameter: management issues
for women with epilepsy (summary statement). Report of
the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 1998;51:944-948.

