Research Article

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Induce Premature Sister
Chromatid Separation and Override the Mitotic
Spindle Assembly Checkpoint
Laura Magnaghi-Jaulin, Grégory Eot-Houllier, Géraldine Fulcrand, and Christian Jaulin
INSERM EMI 229, CRLC Val d’Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, and Université MONTPELLIER1, Montpellier, France

Abstract
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI) are powerful antiproliferative drugs, and are currently undergoing clinical
trials as antitumor agents. It would be valuable for both
cancer therapy and our knowledge of basic cellular processes
to understand the mechanisms by which HDACIs block cell
proliferation. Most current models postulate that HDACIs
allow the reexpression of tumor suppressor genes silenced
in cancer cells. However, other mechanisms, distinct from
transcription regulation, may participate in HDACI antiproliferative properties. We report that HDACI treatment induces
premature sister chromatid separation in cells in which the
mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) has already been
activated. This effect was transcription-independent. In
addition, HDACI-treated mitotic cells displayed SAC inactivation characteristics, including anaphase-promoting complex/
cyclosome target degradation, cyclin-dependent kinase 1
inactivation, histone H3 dephosphorylation, and loss of the
SAC component MAD2 from the kinetochore. Thus, HDAC
inhibition renders the SAC ineffective. Our findings help
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of proliferative cell death
induced by HDACI treatment and may allow new HDACI-based
preclinical and clinical trial protocols to be redesigned so as
to target mitosis. [Cancer Res 2007;67(13):6360–7]

Introduction
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACI) exhibit antiproliferative activity against a variety of human cancers. They are
currently undergoing clinical trials and the outlook is promising.
However, the molecular basis of their antitumor properties remains
poorly understood (1, 2). It was first suggested that HDAC
inhibition induces the reexpression of silenced tumor suppressor
genes by affecting the chromatin structure of their promoters (3).
For example, treatment of cells with HDACI often induces
the expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor
p21WAF1/CIP1 in a p53-independent manner (4, 5). The expression of
a number of genes other than cell cycle regulator genes is also
altered by HDACI treatment: they include genes involved in the
induction of apoptosis, the activation of the immune response, and
the inhibition of angiogenesis (6). However, gene profiling studies
showed that the expression of a surprisingly small fraction of genes
is affected by HDACI treatments and it remains uncertain whether
these particular genes are sufficient to drive cancer cells towards

Requests for reprints: Christian Jaulin, INSERM EMI 229, CRLC Val d’Aurelle-Paul
Lamarque, Parc Euromédecine, 34298 Montpellier Cedex 5, France. Phone: 33-467613751; Fax: 33-46761-3787; E-mail: cjaulin@valdorel.fnclcc.fr.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3012

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

differentiation, apoptosis, or growth arrest pathways (7–10).
Therefore, it has been suggested that nontranscriptional targets
may be equally important for HDACI antitumor activity (11–13).
One potential nontranscriptional target is the centromere/kinetochore structure. Indeed, low-dose trichostatin A (TSA) treatment
destabilizes the higher-order structure of pericentric heterochromatin, and leads to HP1 spreading and centromere subnuclear
localization (14). Pericentric heterochromatin plays an important
role in centromere function, and HDACI treatments may lead to
kinetochore defects and aberrant mitosis. Accordingly, several
studies report that HDACI treatment increases chromosomal
instability characterized by chromatin bridges, chromosome
breaks, and segregation defects (14–16). These features suggest
that the nontranscriptional targets of HDACI include mitosis and
the mechanisms that regulate its accuracy. Segregation deficiency
is a common characteristic of HDACI-treated cells and of mitotic
spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) defects. We therefore examined
whether HDACIs can target the SAC.
The SAC is a cellular mechanism that ensures faithful sister
chromatid segregation during mitosis by delaying anaphase until
all kinetochores have been attached to spindle microtubules (17).
A defect in this function results in unbalanced chromosome
segregation, and consequently, aneuploid daughter cells. Unattached kinetochores generate an inhibitory signal acting on the
anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), a multiprotein
complex whose ubiquitin ligase activity is required to target
mitosis-specific factors (such as cyclin B1 and securin) to
proteasome-dependent degradation. The attachment of the last
free kinetochore abrogates the inhibitory signal and thus permits
the transition from metaphase to anaphase and subsequent exit
from mitosis. Inhibition of the SAC by mutation of its components,
haploinsufficiency, or down-regulation of one of its elements
results in premature sister chromatid separation (PSCS) and APC/
C target degradation despite of SAC activation conditions (18–21).
Furthermore, long-term total SAC inhibition is not viable. Null
mutations of the SAC component MAD2 is lethal (22) and
extended inhibition of SAC by RNA interference affecting key SAC
elements leads to cell death within a few generations (23). The
most likely explanation for this lethality is the accumulation of
nonviable aneuploid cells due to premature anaphase entry.
Consequently, because the cell toxicity resulting from SAC
inhibition is expected to be restricted to proliferating cells, the
SAC is a putative therapeutic target for anticancer treatments (24).
However, the only SAC down-regulation techniques currently
known are genetic and, in the foreseeable future, unsuitable for
application to human therapy.
To determine whether HDACIs can be used as pharmacologic
tools to target the SAC, we investigated mitosis exit in HDACItreated cells in which the SAC was activated. We found that HDACI
treatment triggers transcription-independent mitosis exit in a large

6360

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACIs Override the Spindle Checkpoint

proportion of prometaphase-arrested cells. We monitored SAC
inhibition by detection of the major mitosis exit markers, including
sister chromatid separation and proteasome-dependent degradation of key APC/C targets.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and drug treatment. HeLa cells (human cervical
carcinoma, obtained from American Type Culture Collection) were cultured
in DMEM (Life Technologies) supplemented with L-glutamine, antibiotics,
and 10% heat-decomplemented FCS (Invitrogen). In all experiments,
growing cells were incubated in nocodazole (500 ng/mL) for 8 h and
accumulated mitotic cells were harvested by mitotic shake-off (MSO) prior
to other treatments. Nocodazole was permanently maintained in the
medium when HDACIs or other drugs were added. For transcription
inhibition and proteasome inhibition assays, a-amanitin (2 Ag/mL) or
MG132 (3 Amol/L) were added 1 h before TSA treatment; a-amanitin or
MG132 were maintained in the culture medium after the addition of TSA.
Unless otherwise stated, the TSA concentration was 200 ng/mL. All reagents
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, except for MG132 (Biomol Int.).
Chromosome spreads. Metaphase spreads were done essentially as
described (25) and DNA was stained with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI; 100 ng/mL) using Mowiol as the mounting medium. At least 500
cells were scored for each experimental point. All experiments were done at
least in duplicate.
Immunoblotting. Cells were harvested, counted, lysed directly in
Laemmli buffer and boiled for 5 min. Samples corresponding to 6  104
cells were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Hybond-C Extra, Amersham); the membranes were probed with

monoclonal anti–cyclin B1 antibodies (Santa Cruz), polyclonal anti-securin
antibodies (Zymed), or anti-actin antibodies (Sigma) according to standard
procedures. Western Lighting Chemiluminescence Plus (Perkin-Elmer) was
used to visualize binding, according to the instructions of the supplier.
Cdk1 kinase assays and immunoprecipitation. Cdk1 immunoprecipitation followed by cdk1 kinase assays were as previously described (26).
Assays were analyzed by autoradiography, and kinase activity was
determined using a Phosphoimager (BAS-5000, FUJI). Cdk1 immunoprecipitates were analyzed by immunoblotting using a monoclonal anti-cdk1
antibody (Santa Cruz).
Immunofluorescence microscopy. Chromosome spread slides (Fig. 6B)
were washed twice in PBS for 10 min, incubated with 0.1% Triton X-100,
washed thrice in PBS, blocked with 5% FCS, and stained with rabbit
polyclonal anti-H3 serine 10 phosphorylated antibodies (UBI) overnight
at 4jC. Goat anti-rabbit conjugated-FITC antibodies (Biosource International) were used for secondary staining for 1 h at room temperature.
For whole cell immunofluorescence (Figs. 5B and 6A), cells were grown on
polylysine-treated coverslips, fixed in 3% formaldehyde, washed in PBS,
incubated for 15 min with 100 mmol/L of glycine (pH 7), permeabilized
with 0.1% Triton X-100, washed in PBS, blocked with 5% FCS, and incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-lamin A/C antibodies (Cell Signaling),
human CREST serum (a kind gift from Dr. C. Johanet, Hôpital SaintAntoine, Paris), or rabbit polyclonal anti-MAD2 antibodies (Covance).
Goat anti-rabbit conjugated-FITC antibodies (Biosource International)
and goat anti-human conjugated-TRITC antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) were used as secondary antibodies. In all experiments, DNA was
stained with DAPI (100 ng/mL) and Mowiol was used as the mounting
medium. Samples were examined under an epifluorescence microscope
(Leica DMRM).

Figure 1. TSA treatment induces both
PSCS and partially decondensed
chromosomes in nocodazole-arrested
mitotic cells. Top, experimental outline.
Cells were incubated with nocodazole for
8 h, and mitotic cells were collected by
MSO and were incubated with nocodazole
in the presence or absence of TSA for 16 h.
A, chromosome spreads from control
mitotic nocodazole (left ) or nocodazole/
TSA–treated (200 ng/mL, 16 h) HeLa cells
(right ). Brackets, incompletely condensed
sister chromatids lying separated and
adjacent to each other. B, the frequency of
PSCS is TSA-dose dependent. Various
doses of TSA (0, 80, 200, or 500 ng/mL)
were added to nocodazole-arrested
mitotic HeLa cells. C, increasing TSA
dose decreases the mitotic index in
nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

6361

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. The effect of TSA on other cells.
Top, experimental outline (see legend
to Fig. 1). A, TSA-induced PCSC in
nocodazole-arrested MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cell line (MDA ) and human
untransformed fibroblasts (HDF ). B, TSA
treatment of nocodazole-arrested
MDA-MB-231 and HDF cells results in
mitotic index decrease. Columns, means
from at least two independent experiments;
bars, SD.

Results
Prometaphase-arrested cells undergo HDACI-induced PSCS
in a transcription independent manner. In all experiments,
mitotic SAC was activated by pretreatment with the microtubuledestabilizing agent nocodazole. Nocodazole treatment activates the
SAC by preventing microtubule-kinetochore interaction. Once the
SAC is activated, cells accumulate in prometaphase and, depending
on the cell type and the nocodazole concentration, remain arrested
between a few hours and several days. Under our culture
conditions, >60% of HeLa cells were arrested in prometaphase
following an 8-h nocodazole treatment and remained stably
blocked in prometaphase for the following 24 h without significant
mitosis exit or cell death. HeLa cells were treated with nocodazole
for 8 h and mitosis-arrested cells were collected by MSO. Then, the
cells were incubated with TSA, a powerful HDACI, for 16 h.
Nocodazole was present in the culture medium during TSA
treatment. A proportion of chromosome spreads from nocodazole/
TSA–treated cells displayed a characteristic PSCS phenotype
(Fig. 1A): sister chromatids were no longer attached at the
centromere and the constriction point was not visible anymore.
In addition, despite the extended nocodazole treatment (which is
known to overcondense metaphasic chromosomes), chromosome
arms in nocodazole/TSA–treated cells displaying PSCS seemed to
be longer and less tightly condensed than in the controls. This
PSCS phenomenon, also called ‘‘precocious anaphase,’’ was
observed in f25% of nocodazole/TSA–treated cells, and all
chromosomes in any one cell displayed an identical phenotype.
No PSCS was detected in control nocodazole-treated HeLa cells.
TSA-induced PSCS was dose-dependent (Fig. 1B). In addition,
the mitotic index of control nocodazole-treated cells was >80%,
whereas that of TSA-treated cells declined in a TSA dosedependent manner to <40% (Fig. 1C). Cell viability was assessed
by trypan blue exclusion and cell counting. Under these treatment
conditions, a few apoptotic cells (condensed fragmented nuclei as
depicted on Fig. 5B, cells labeled ‘‘ap’’) were detected although cell

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

mortality was <5%. Therefore, specific mitotic cell mortality cannot
account for the observed decrease in the mitotic index.
PSCS increase and mitotic index decrease induced by TSA were
also observed in a human breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231)
and in human primary fibroblasts and, thus, are not specific to the
transformed HeLa cell line (Fig. 2).
To determine if the effects described above were specific for TSA
or are found with other HDACIs, nocodazole-treated cells were
incubated with various different HDACIs belonging to three
different classes (Fig. 3A). Sodium butyrate and valproic acid are
short-chain fatty acids, TSA is a hydroxamic acid and apicidin
belongs to the cyclic tetrapeptide class of HDACIs (1). Sodium
butyrate and apicidin induced PSCS (although to a lesser extent
than TSA) but valproic acid did not (Fig. 3A, top); however, all
HDACIs tested decreased the mitotic index of nocodazole-treated
cells (Fig. 3A, bottom). This suggests that HDAC inhibition in SACactivated mitotic cells causes abnormal mitosis exit.
Although gene transcription in metaphase-arrested cells is
almost completely silenced (27), it is possible that HDACI induced
aberrant mitotic transcription. To determine whether the TSAinduced PSCS was due to the reactivation of transcription at loci
normally silenced during mitosis, nocodazole-treated cells were
incubated with a-amanitin (at a concentration known to
completely inhibit transcription by RNA polymerase II) prior to
TSA treatment (28). This inhibition of transcription had no effect
on TSA-induced PSCS (Fig. 3B, top), or on the mitotic index
(Fig. 3B, bottom). These results suggest that HDAC inhibition
overrides the prometaphase block in mitotic SAC-activated cells in
a transcription-independent manner.
Key targets of APC/C are degraded in a proteasomedependent manner following TSA treatment. SAC activation
inhibits the ubiquitin ligase complex APC/C. Activation of APC/C
at the metaphase-anaphase transition leads to polyubiquitination
of cyclin B1 and securin, such that they are targeted to a
proteasome-dependent degradation pathway. These two proteins

6362

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACIs Override the Spindle Checkpoint

are believed to be the only essential APC/C targets (29). Under
conditions of sustained SAC activation (i.e., nocodazole treatment),
APC/C targets accumulate and reach a high stable concentration.
To determine whether APC/C activity was affected by TSA
treatment, the stability of APC/C targets was assessed by Western
blotting using anti-cyclin B1 and anti-securin antibodies as probes.
Cyclin B1 accumulated, as expected, in nocodazole-treated cells
(Fig. 4, lane 2). TSA treatment of nocodazole-arrested cells resulted
in a sharp decrease in the abundance of cyclin B1 (lane 3). Pretreatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 prevented this
TSA-induced decrease (lane 4). Similar results were obtained for
securin. The amount of cyclin B1 or securin detected in TSAtreated cells was intermediate between those observed in untreated
and nocodazole-treated cells. These data show that TSA treatment
induces a proteasome-dependent degradation of major APC/C
targets.
TSA treatment induces classical mitosis exit markers. Our
data suggests that HDAC inhibition leads to SAC dysfunction. To
confirm that prometaphase-arrested cells indeed exit mitosis in the
presence of HDACI, we examined classical markers of mitosis exit

including cdk1 inactivation, histone H3 serine 10 dephosphorylation, nuclear membrane reformation, and release of SAC components from the kinetochore.
To determine whether TSA-induced degradation of cyclin B1 led
to a decrease of cdk1 activity, cdk1 was immunoprecipitated and
its kinase activity was measured with histone H1 as a substrate.
TSA treatment induced a substantial decrease in the cdk1 activity
in nocodazole-treated cells, although the amounts of cdk1 protein
recovered in the immunoprecipitates from treated and untreated
samples were comparable (Fig. 5A). Coomassie staining of the gel
showed that reduced H1 phosphorylation signal following TSA
treatment was not due to reduced amounts of histone H1
recovered in the assay (Fig. 5A, ‘‘H1 Total’’). Proteasome inhibition
in nocodazole/TSA–treated cells did not rescue the cdk1 activity
(Fig. 5A), although the addition of MG132 blocked TSA-induced
cyclin B1 degradation (Fig. 4). This can be explained by the finding
that cdk1 and polyubiquitinated cyclin B1 were dissociated by a
nonproteolytic function of the proteasome (30). Thus, in the
presence of MG132, polyubiquitinated cyclin B1 is not degraded
and can be detected by immunoblotting, but is not associated with

Figure 3. Different unrelated HDACIs cause PSCS and decrease the mitotic index. TSA-induced PSCS and the mitotic index decrease do not require transcription.
Top, experimental outline (see legend to Fig. 1). A, PSCS frequency and decreased mitotic index in the presence of various HDACIs. Nocodazole-arrested
mitotic HeLa cells were treated for 16 h with TSA (200 ng/mL), sodium butyrate (NaB ; 100 mmol/L), apicidin (Api ; 5 Ag/mL), or valproic acid (VPA; 30 mmol/L).
Columns, percentage of PSCS (top ) and mitotic index (bottom ) observed in chromosome spreads. B, TSA-induced PSCS frequency and decreased mitotic index
do not involve transcription. Nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells were treated or not treated with 2 Ag/mL of a-amanitin for 1 h, then treated with 200 ng/mL of
TSA for 16 h, without removing the nocodazole or a-amanitin. Columns, percentage of PSCS (top ) and mitotic index (bottom ) observed in chromosome spreads.
Columns, means from at least two independent experiments; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

6363

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

cdk1. Quantification experiments showed that cdk1 activity was
three times higher in control nocodazole-treated cells than in
nocodazole/TSA–treated cells (Fig. 5A, bottom).
Mitotic index measurements (Fig. 1C) showed that TSA
treatment was associated with more nuclei-like figures displaying decondensed chromatin but were unable to indicate whether
a nuclear envelope was reformed around the chromatin. To
resolve this question, nocodazole/TSA–treated cells and control
(nocodazole alone) cells were immunolabeled for lamin A/C
(Fig. 5B). Most TSA-treated nuclei-like figures were positive for
lamin A/C, indicating that a nuclear envelope had reformed in
these cells.
SAC inhibition and subsequent anaphase entry are characterized
by the release of SAC components from the kinetochores. We
examined kinetochore localization of MAD2, a major downstream
SAC effector, by immunofluorescence. Kinetochores were labeled
with a human CREST autoimmune serum, which recognizes the
kinetochore proteins CENP-A, CENP-B, and CENP-C, whereas
MAD2 was detected with a specific antibody. Characteristic CRESTpositive kinetochore dots were observed in both control and
nocodazole/TSA–treated mitotic cells, indicating that TSA treatment does not lead to major kinetochore damage, although MAD2
was found to be displaced from kinetochores in approximately one
third of nocodazole/TSA–treated mitotic cells (Fig. 6A). MAD2
antibodies failed to label chromosome spreads, so we could not
determine whether the mitotic cells that had lost MAD2 from
kinetochores were the same as those displaying PSCS. Nevertheless,
the respective proportions of cells exhibiting these phenomena
were similar enough to assume that this was indeed the case.
We also tested the loss of histone H3 serine 10 (H3S10)
phosphorylation. During normal mitosis, H3S10 becomes phosphorylated in prophase and remains phosphorylated until early
anaphase. In metaphase-arrested cells (SAC activated), this
phosphorylation was maintained. Chromosome spreads from
control (nocodazole alone) and nocodazole/TSA–treated cells were
immunostained for H3S10 phosphorylation (Fig. 6B). All chromosome spreads from nocodazole-treated control cells were positive
for H3S10 labeling. In contrast, in nocodazole/TSA–treated cells,
chromosome spreads displaying a normal phenotype (i.e., attached
sister chromatids) were labeled by the H3S10-specific antibody,
whereas chromosome spreads displaying PSCS were negative for
H3S10 labeling. Figure 6B shows one normal, H3S10-positive,
spread and, within the same microscope field, a H3S10-negative
spread displaying a TSA-induced PSCS (arrow). Loss of H3S10
phosphorylation following TSA treatment has been previously
reported using immunoblot techniques (31). However, our
chromosome spread immunostaining approach allowed us to
show that cells which displayed reduced TSA-induced H3S10
phosphorylation were the same as those which displayed PSCS.
This indicates that cells presenting a TSA-induced PSCS are
engaged into exit from mitosis. Taken together, our findings show
that HDAC inhibition renders the SAC ineffective.

Discussion
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of the antiproliferative properties of HDACIs is a major issue both in terms of
anticancer therapy and in our knowledge of basic cellular
functions. We investigated the integrity of the mitotic SAC in cells
treated with HDACIs and found that HDAC inhibition results in
SAC being overridden.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Figure 4. HDAC inhibition by TSA in nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells
induces proteasome-dependent degradation of APC/C target proteins. Top,
experimental outline (see legend to Fig. 1). Immunoblot analysis of total cellular
protein extract obtained from control untreated cycling HeLa cells (lane 1) and
nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells (lanes 2–5 ), treated with 3 Amol/L of
MG132 for 1 h (lanes 4 and 5), and then with 200 ng/mL of TSA for 16 h
(lanes 3 and 4 ), without removing the nocodazole or MG132. Actin was used as
an immunoblot loading control.

Previous reports suggest a role for HDACs in SAC regulation but
the various studies led to apparently contradictory conclusions. For
example, it has been reported that HDAC inhibition in mitosis
prevented sister chromatid centromere separation, suggesting that
HDACIs trigger the SAC abnormally (15). In contrast, other authors
reported that HDACIs induced a down-regulation of cyclin B1–
dependent kinase activity (32), suggesting that HDACI treatment
leads to checkpoint inhibition. Accordingly, Dowling et al.
described premature mitosis exit, H3S10 dephosphorylation, and
diminished BUBR1 kinetochore localization following TSA treatment (31). These results clearly plead in favor of the existence of a
TSA-induced SAC defect. However, recent data show that a slow
but continuous degradation of cyclin B induces an apparent
mitosis exit in spite of the presence of a functional and active SAC
(33). In this particular situation, other APC/C targets are not
degraded and MAD2 and BUBR1 remain attached to kinetochores.
With the noteworthy exception of BUBR1 partial loss from
kinetochores, data reported in ref. (31) could be attributed to a
TSA-induced cyclin B degradation alone. BUBR1 delocalization
described in ref. (31) is incomplete, and thus, it is not clear whether
the remaining kinetochore-bound BUBR1 was sufficient to
maintain the SAC or not. Conflicting reports exist on the amount
of BUBR1 required to activate the SAC. One study reported that
25% of the normal amount of BUBR1 led to SAC defects (34),
although in another study, heterozygous mice expressing only 29%
of the normal amount of BUBR1 showed no SAC malfunction (35).
Therefore, although the data reported by Dowling et al. represent
the strongest evidence of a TSA-induced SAC malfunction to date,
one cannot formally exclude that TSA induced cyclin B depletion–
like defects and diminished BUBR1 kinetochore localization
without inactivating the SAC. The finding by Cimini et al. (15)
that TSA treatment induces persistent sister chromatid cohesion in
anaphase would support this hypothesis. Thus, the primary
consequences of SAC inhibition being the activation of APC/C
and the subsequent proteasome-dependent degradation of its only
known essential targets: cyclin B and securin, it seems essential to
examine sister chromatin cohesion and securin status in order to

6364

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACIs Override the Spindle Checkpoint

assess definitively whether or not SAC function is altered. Our
results show that TSA treatment induces securin degradation and
sister chromatid separation. Therefore, the abnormal persistent
chromatid cohesion observed in ref. (15) following TSA treatment
was more likely the consequence of a TSA-induced impaired
chromatin topological organization (chromatid entanglement)
rather than a failure to cleave cohesins.
We found that when nocodazole-treated cells (to induce SAC
activation) were subsequently treated with TSA, 25% of the mitotic
cells displayed a characteristic PSCS phenotype which resembles
that observed when the SAC is inhibited by antibody injection (18),
RNA interference (20, 21), or by genetic means (19). Sister
chromatids that have separated prematurely are considered a
hallmark of a defective checkpoint (19). We also showed that TSA
treatment induced the proteasome-dependent degradation of
cyclin B1 and securin, two essential APC/C targets. Finally, we
monitored exit from mitosis by different and independent means
including testing for loss of cdk1 activity, histone H3 serine 10
dephosphorylation, reformation of the nuclear envelope, and
MAD2 release from kinetochores. All tests done indicated that
TSA treatment induced exit from mitosis in SAC-activated cells.
Thus, our results show that HDAC inhibition overrides the SAC.
In every experiment done, HDACI treatment induced PSCS in
only part of the cell population. Immunostaining experiments in
nocodazole/TSA–treated cells with an antibody specific for a

hyperacetylated form of histone H3 showed that histone H3 was
hyperacetylated in all cells, ruling out the possibility that TSA did
not act on a particular cell subpopulation (data not shown).
However, this ‘‘partial’’ effect is consistent with the finding that TSA
treatment led to only partial proteasome degradation of APC/C key
targets. Although the reason for this heterogeneous response is not
clear, a similarly incomplete response has also been observed in
other SAC inhibition studies. For example, MAD2 knockdown in
HeLa and HaCat cells induces PCSC in f50% of the cells (20).
Similarly, mutations of the gene encoding the SAC component
BUBR1 in the mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome (36) leads to
PSCS in only a fraction of the cells (37).
Not all HDACI were as effective in inducing PSCS. TSA was the
best inducer, sodium butyrate and apicidin were intermediate, and
valproic acid did not induce PSCS. However, all HDACI induced a
similar decrease in the mitotic index in nocodazole-treated cells.
This apparent discrepancy may be due to the differences in the
spectra of action of these drugs. Although little is known about the
potential for each drug to inhibit a given subset of HDACs, TSA is
one of the most potent HDACIs and is believed to act on both class
I and class II HDACs. Thus, we propose that at least two distinct
HDACs are required in mitosis: one necessary to maintain the SAC
and sensitive to all the drugs tested, and the other required for
anaphase progression and sensitive to TSA but insensitive to
valproic acid (and partially sensitive to the two other drugs tested).

Figure 5. Decreased cyclin B1–associated cdk1 kinase activity and nucleus formation in nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells following TSA treatment. Top,
experimental outline (see legend to Fig. 1). A, cdk1 kinase activity against a histone H1 substrate from nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells treated with TSA,
MG132, and TSA, or neither (nocodazole alone). Top, histone H1 phosphorylation by cdk1 kinase activity (H1 32P ), Coomassie staining of the gel showing H1 recovery
in the assay (H1 Total ), and control immunoblot of immunoprecipitated cdk1 kinase (IP cdk1 ). Bottom, quantification of cdk1 kinase activity. Columns, means from four
independent experiments; bars, SD. B, reformation of nuclear envelope induced by TSA. Immunofluorescence microscopy showing nocodazole-arrested mitotic
HeLa cells treated or not treated with TSA for 16 h, in the persistent presence of nocodazole. DAPI staining (DNA) and lamin A/C immunostaining. N, nuclei; m, mitotic
figure; ap, apoptotic cell. Nuclear envelope–positive cells are more frequent in the mitotic TSA-treated samples than in the controls.

www.aacrjournals.org

6365

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Loss of mitosis markers from chromosomes in nocodazole-arrested HeLa cells exposed to TSA. Top, experimental outline (see legend to Fig. 1).
A, immunofluorescence microscopy showing DAPI, CREST, and MAD2 staining on nocodazole-arrested mitotic HeLa cells treated or not treated with TSA. B,
chromosome spread stained with DAPI and with antihistone H3 phosphorylated on serine 10. Arrow, cell with a PSCS phenotype that has lost H3S10 phosphorylation.

Under this hypothesis, nocodazole/TSA–treated cells escape SAC
activation, but a proportion remains blocked in anaphase, allowing
the observation of PSCS. Conversely, nocodazole/valproic acid–
treated cells would exit mitosis without pausing in anaphase. In
this case, PSCS would not be observed but the mitotic index would
decrease, in accordance with our observations.
In addition to PSCS, TSA treatment led to partial decondensation of mitotic chromosomes. This finding was restricted to cells
displaying PSCS suggesting that the observed decondensation is a
consequence of mitosis exit rather than a direct effect of chromatin
hyperacetylation. Similar chromosome morphologic changes have
been observed in HeLa and HaCat cells in which the key SAC
component MAD2 has been knocked down (20). Thus, this
incomplete decondensation phenotype is likely to be a direct
consequence of TSA-induced SAC overriding.
The precise nature of the antiproliferative mechanism(s) of
HDACIs remains a subject of debate. Sustained SAC inhibition leads
to the death of proliferative cells within a few generations (23) and
our results show that HDAC inhibition results in SAC inhibition
making HDACIs the only clinically validated pharmacologic SAC
inhibitors known thus far. We propose that this SAC-inhibiting
activity may contribute to the antiproliferative properties of

References
1. Yoo CB, Jones PA. Epigenetic therapy of cancer: past,
present and future. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:37–50.
2. Carey N, La Thangue NB. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors: gathering pace. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2006;
6:369–75.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

HDACIs. Histone acetylation is involved in transcription, so it is
plausible that HDAC inhibition leads to the reexpression of
antiproliferative genes silenced in tumor cells. However, a number
of nonhistone proteins are regulated by acetylation and the
possibility of an HDACI antiproliferative mechanism independent
from transcription has emerged (11–13). Our results show that
HDACI-driven SAC inhibition is transcription-independent, and
thus, raise the possibility that the targets of HDACIs in anticancer
therapy could be, at least in part, nontranscriptional.

Acknowledgments
Received 8/14/2006; revised 2/26/2007; accepted 4/19/2007.
Grant support: Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer (grant no. 4466),
Ligue Contre le Cancer (Comités Départementaux de l’Hérault and de l’Aveyron and
Comité Régional du Languedoc-Roussillon), and GEFLUC (Languedoc-Roussillon).
G. Eot-Houllier is supported by a Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer fellowship.
G. Fulcrand is supported by a Ligue Régionale Contre le Cancer Research Ph.D.
scholarship (Comité du Languedoc Roussillon). L. Magnaghi-Jaulin is an investigator
of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank C. Johanet and J. Piette for the gift of reagents and J.M. Vanacker,
J.M. Brondello, and J. Piette for discussions and critical reading of the manuscript.

3. Marks P, Rifkind RA, Richon VM, Breslow R, Miller T,
Kelly WK. Histone deacetylases and cancer: causes and
therapies. Nat Rev Cancer 2001;1:194–202.
4. Richon VM, Sandhoff TW, Rifkind RA, Marks PA.
Histone deacetylase inhibitor selectively induces
p21WAF1 expression and gene-associated histone acetylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:10014–9.

6366

5. Rocchi P, Tonelli R, Camerin C, et al. p21Waf1/Cip1 is a
common target induced by short-chain fatty acid HDAC
inhibitors (valproic acid, tributyrin and sodium butyrate)
in neuroblastoma cells. Oncol Rep 2005;13:1139–44.
6. Johnstone RW. Histone-deacetylase inhibitors: novel
drugs for the treatment of cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2002;1:287–99.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

HDACIs Override the Spindle Checkpoint
7. Mariadason JM, Corner GA, Augenlicht LH. Genetic
reprogramming in pathways of colonic cell maturation
induced by short chain fatty acids: comparison with
trichostatin A, sulindac, and curcumin and implications
for chemoprevention of colon cancer. Cancer Res 2000;
60:4561–72.
8. Glaser KB, Staver MJ, Waring JF, Stender J, Ulrich RG,
Davidsen SK. Gene expression profiling of multiple
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors: defining a
common gene set produced by HDAC inhibition in
T24 and MDA carcinoma cell lines. Mol Cancer Ther
2003;2:151–63.
9. Chiba T, Yokosuka O, Fukai K, et al. Cell growth
inhibition and gene expression induced by the histone
deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, on human hepatoma cells. Oncology 2004;66:481–91.
10. Lee HS, Park MH, Yang S, et al. Gene expression
analysis in human gastric cancer cell line treated with
trichostatin A and S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine using
cDNA microarray. Biol Pharm Bull 2004;27:1497–503.
11. Johnstone RW, Licht JD. Histone deacetylase inhibitors in cancer therapy: is transcription the primary
target? Cancer Cell 2003;4:13–8.
12. Marks PA, Richon VM, Miller T. Kelly WK. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors. Adv Cancer Res 2004;91:137–68.
13. Taddei A, Roche D, Bickmore WA, Almouzni G. The
effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors on heterochromatin: implications for anticancer therapy? EMBO Rep
2005;6:520–4.
14. Taddei A, Maison C, Roche D, Almouzni G. Reversible
disruption of pericentric heterochromatin and centromere function by inhibiting deacetylases. Nat Cell Biol
2001;3:114–20.
15. Cimini D, Mattiuzzo M, Torosantucci L, Degrassi F.
Histone hyperacetylation in mitosis prevents sister
chromatid separation and produces chromosome segregation defects. Mol Biol Cell 2003;14:3821–33.
16. Xu WS, Perez G, Ngo L, Gui CY, Marks PA. Induction
of polyploidy by histone deacetylase inhibitor: a

www.aacrjournals.org

pathway for antitumor effects. Cancer Res 2005;65:
7832–9.
17. Cleveland DW, Mao Y, Sullivan KF. Centromeres and
kinetochores: from epigenetics to mitotic checkpoint
signaling. Cell 2003;112:407–21.
18. Gorbsky GJ, Chen RH, Murray AW. Microinjection of
antibody to Mad2 protein into mammalian cells in
mitosis induces premature anaphase. J Cell Biol 1998;
141:1193–205.
19. Michel LS, Liberal V, Chatterjee A, et al. MAD2 haploinsufficiency causes premature anaphase and chromosome instability in mammalian cells. Nature 2001;409:
355–9.
20. Michel L, Diaz-Rodriguez E, Narayan G, Hernando E,
Murty VV, Benezra R. Complete loss of the tumor
suppressor MAD2 causes premature cyclin B degradation and mitotic failure in human somatic cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:4459–64.
21. Kienitz A, Vogel C, Morales I, Muller R, Bastians H.
Partial downregulation of MAD1 causes spindle checkpoint inactivation and aneuploidy, but does not confer
resistance towards taxol. Oncogene 2005;24:4301–10.
22. Dobles M, Liberal V, Scott ML, Benezra R, Sorger PK.
Chromosome missegregation and apoptosis in mice
lacking the mitotic checkpoint protein Mad2. Cell 2000;
101:635–45.
23. Kops GJ, Foltz DR, Cleveland DW. Lethality to human
cancer cells through massive chromosome loss by
inhibition of the mitotic checkpoint. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2004;101:8699–704.
24. Kops GJ, Weaver BA, Cleveland DW. On the road to
cancer: aneuploidy and the mitotic checkpoint. Nat Rev
Cancer 2005;5:773–85.
25. Verma R, Babu A. Human chromosomes: principles
and techniques. New York: McGraw Hill; 1995.
26. Bayart E, Grigorieva O, Leibovitch S, Onclercq-Delic
R, Amor-Gueret M. A major role for mitotic CDC2
kinase inactivation in the establishment of the mitotic
DNA damage checkpoint. Cancer Res 2004;64:8954–9.

6367

27. Gottesfeld JM, Forbes DJ. Mitotic repression of the
transcriptional machinery. Trends Biochem Sci 1997;22:
197–202.
28. Lee Y, Kim M, Han J, et al. MicroRNA genes are
transcribed by RNA polymerase II. EMBO J 2004;23:
4051–60.
29. Thornton BR, Toczyski DP. Securin and B-cyclin/
CDK are the only essential targets of the APC. Nat Cell
Biol 2003;5:1090–4.
30. Nishiyama A, Tachibana K, Igarashi Y, et al. A
nonproteolytic function of the proteasome is required
for the dissociation of Cdc2 and cyclin B at the end of M
phase. Genes Dev 2000;14:2344–57.
31. Dowling M, Voong KR, Kim M, Keutmann MK, Harris
E, Kao GD. Mitotic spindle checkpoint inactivation by
trichostatin A defines a mechanism for increasing
cancer cell killing by microtubule-disrupting agents.
Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:197–206.
32. Warrener R, Beamish H, Burgess A, et al. Tumor cellselective cytotoxicity by targeting cell cycle checkpoints.
FASEB J 2003;17:1550–2.
33. Brito DA, Rieder CL. Mitotic checkpoint slippage
in humans occurs via cyclin B destruction in the
presence of an active checkpoint. Curr Biol 2006;16:
1194–200.
34. Dai W, Wang Q, Liu T, et al. Slippage of mitotic arrest
and enhanced tumor development in mice with BubR1
haploinsufficiency. Cancer Res 2004;64:440–5.
35. Baker DJ, Jeganathan KB, Cameron JD, et al. BubR1
insufficiency causes early onset of aging-associated
phenotypes and infertility in mice. Nat Genet 2006;36:
744–9.
36. Hanks S, Coleman K, Reid S, et al. Constitutional
aneuploidy and cancer predisposition caused by biallelic
mutations in BUB1B. Nat Genet 2004;36:1159–61.
37. Kajii T, Ikeuchi T, Yang ZQ, et al. Cancer-prone
syndrome of mosaic variegated aneuploidy and total
premature chromatid separation: report of five infants.
Am J Med Genet 2001;104:57–64.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Induce Premature Sister
Chromatid Separation and Override the Mitotic Spindle
Assembly Checkpoint
Laura Magnaghi-Jaulin, Grégory Eot-Houllier, Géraldine Fulcrand, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:6360-6367.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/13/6360

This article cites 36 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/13/6360.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 11 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/13/6360.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

