Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 31

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Small molecule inhibition of the CHFR-PARP1 interaction as novel
approach to overcome intrinsic taxane resistance in cancer
Seth A. Brodie1,3,*, Ge Li1,3,*, Donald Harvey1,3, Fadlo R. Khuri1,3, Paula M. Vertino2,3,
Johann C. Brandes1,3,4
1

Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

2

Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

3

Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

4

Tennessee Oncology, Nashville, TN, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Johann C. Brandes, e-mail: johann.brandes@emory.edu
Keywords: taxanes, chemoresistance, lung cancer, CHFR, mitotic checkpoint
Received: February 18, 2015      Accepted: August 20, 2015      Published: September 01, 2015

ABSTRACT
The mitotic checkpoint protein CHFR has emerged as a major mediator of taxane
resistance in cancer. Here we show that CHFR’s PAR-binding zinc finger domain (PBZ)
mediates a protein interaction with poly-ADP ribosylated PARP1 leading to stabilization of
CHFR. Disruption of the CHFR-PARP1 interaction through either PARP1 shRNA-mediated
knockdown or overexpression of a PBZ domain peptide induces loss of CHFR protein
expression. In an attempt to exploit this observation therapeutically, and to develop
compounds with synthetic lethality in combination with taxanes, we performed a highthroughput computational screen of 5,256,508 chemical structures against the published
crystal structure of the CHFR PBZ domain to identify candidate small molecule CHFR
protein-protein interaction inhibitors. The 10 compounds with the best docking scores
(< –9.7) were used for further in vitro testing. One lead compound in particular, termed
‘A3’, completely disrupted the protein-protein interaction between CHFR and PARP1,
resulting in the inhibition of mitotic checkpoint function, and led to therapeutic synergy
with docetaxel in cell viability and colony formation assays. In mouse xenografts, i.p.
administration of ‘A3’ led to a significant reduction in nuclear CHFR protein expression with
a maximal effect 4 hours after administration, confirming relevant pharmacodynamics
following the peak of ‘A3’ plasma concentration in vivo. Furthermore, combination of
A3 and taxane led to significant reduction of implanted tumor size without increase in
hematological, hepatic or renal toxicity. These findings provide a proof-of-principle that
small molecule inhibition of CHFR PBZ domain interaction is a novel potential therapeutic
approach to increase the efficacy of taxane -based chemotherapy in cancer.

therapies in various different cancer types including
gastric-[1], colon-[2, 3], endometrial-,[4, 5] and lung
cancer [6]. Epigenetic silencing of CHFR by promoter
hypermethylation or reduced protein expression have been
described as predictive biomarkers for taxane sensitivity.
We have previously reported that advanced lung cancer
patients with CHFR deficient lung cancers have remarkably
high clinical benefits rates following taxane-based first line
chemotherapy (81% vs 48%, p = 0.03) and significantly
improved overall-survival (HR = 0.24; 95% CI, 0.1–0.58%;
P = 0.002) suggesting that in this setting, taxanes can be

INTRODUCTION
Microtubular-targeted chemotherapy agents such as
taxanes are among the most widely prescribed first- and
second- line chemotherapy choices for patients with the
most common malignancies including lung-, breast-, and
prostate cancer. Unfortunately, primary resistance to taxanes
is common and poses an important clinical problem. The
mitotic checkpoint gene “checkpoint with forkhead and
ringfinger domains” (CHFR) has recently emerged as a
critical mediator of resistance against microtubular-targeted
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30773

Oncotarget

considered targeted therapy against CHFR-low expressing
tumors [6]. CHFR expression is reduced in tumors that are
driven by EGFR mutations in exons 19 or 21, but EGFR
mutations do not account for all cases of reduced CHFR
expression [7].
CHFR is an antephase checkpoint gene that functions
to delay cell cycle entry into metaphase in response to
mitotic stress [8], allowing for subsequent repair of taxane
induced microtubular damage. Cells that are deficient in
this checkpoint undergo mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis,
explaining the increased sensitivity of CHFR negative
tumors towards microtubular targeted therapies.
CHFR has an N-terminal forkhead domain, a
RING domain which functions as an E3-ubiqutin ligase,
and a cysteine-rich C terminal domain, which mediates
interactions with other proteins. CHFR controls the
activity of the aurora-kinase A [9] and polo-like kinase 1
[10] and can exclude cyclin B1 from the nucleus
[11]. Mice deficient in CHFR develop spontaneous
malignancies and are more susceptible to chemical
carcinogenesis [9].
Recently, a poly-ADP ribose binding zinc-finger
(PBZ) motif was identified in the C-terminal region of
CHFR [12], which was shown to mediate a protein-protein
interaction with PARP-1. The functional importance of this
interaction between PARP1 and CHFR is two-fold: First,
it allows CHFR to be recruited to areas of DNA damage,
where together with RNF3 it co-facilitates ubiquitination of
histone proteins, leading to a more relaxed chromatin pattern
thus allowing ATM to initiate a DNA damage response
[13, 14]. Secondly, through CHFR-mediated ubiquitination
of PARP-1 and its subsequent proteosomal degradation, it
acts to remove PARP-1 from damaged chromatin once the
DNA repair machinery has been initiated [15]. Mutations
in the PBZ domain lead to a loss of CHFR’s mitotic
checkpoint function, even though the role of PARP1 in
response to microtubular damage is so far unclear.
Given the facts that reduced CHFR expression or
epigenetic silencing is clearly associated with better clinical
responses and even more importantly, improved overall
survival following taxane based therapy in a variety of
cancers and that the CHFR’s PBZ domain is essential for
its checkpoint function, we hypothesized that targeting the
protein-protein interactions mediated by the CHFR PBZ
domain could be exploited as a strategy to increase taxane
sensitivity in tumors with high CHFR expression. The
goal of this study was to indentify and characterize small
molecule inhibitors against the CHFR PDZ domain..

checkpoint leading to a pre-mitotic cell cycle arrest
after taxane challenge and ultimately to confer de-novo
resistance to taxanes [8]. In Hela cells, it was suggested
that full length, but not PBZ-mutant CHFR has similar
cell cycle effects [12]. To determine the functional
relevance of the PBZ domain on taxane resistance in
NSCLC, we transfected CHFR deficient CALU-6 cells
either with full-length CHFR (pDEST40-wt-CHFR)
or PBZ mutant CHFR (pDEST40-CHFR-PBZ*). Cell
viability assays showed that only transfection of wtCHFR confers resistance to taxanes when compared
to both transfection of empty vector or the PBZ
mutant variant (Figure 1A). These findings highlight
the importance of an intact PBZ domain for an intact
checkpoint function and CHFR mediated taxane
resistance, since the CHFR-PBZ* construct did not affect
taxane sensitivity compared to empty vector. CHFR
protein levels are shown in Supplementary Figure S1A.

The CHFR PBZ domain mediates interactions
with parylated PARP1
To determine possible interactions between CHFR
and other proteins that depend on an intact PBZ domain,
we transfected the empty pDEST40 vector, pDEST40wt-CHFR or pDEST40-CHFR-PBZ* vectors into
HEK293 cells and performed immunoprecipitation for
V5-tagged CHFR. Western blot analysis for poly ADP
ribosylated (PAR) proteins revealed one prominent band
at ~130kDA interacting only with wt-CHFR but not
CHFR-PBZ*, suggesting an interaction with one major
species of PARylated protein. Given that the molecular
weight of parylated PARP1 is approximately 130
kDA, we performed a western blot for PARP1, which
confirmed an interaction between CHFR and PARP1
(Figure 1B). Since protein expression of a PBZ mutant
CHFR construct is unstable, we transfected either wtCHFR or CHFR-PBZ constructs with an additional
deletion of the RING domain. These constructs show
preserved and equal protein expression. Mutation of the
CHFR-PBZ domain abolished the interaction between
CHFR and PARP1, indicating that the interaction
requires an intact PBZ domain (Figure 1C). The
reciprocal interaction between PARP-1 and CHFR was
also detected in HEK 293 cells expressing GST tagged
wt-PARP-1 (Figure 1D). To determine if the interaction
between CHFR and PARP1 is parylation dependent or
independent, we generated a catalytically dead mutant
of PARP1 (E988K), which completely lacks the ability
to synthesize PAR [20]. Only wt-PARP1 showed an
interaction with CHFR (Figure 1D), suggesting that the
interaction between these two proteins is parylationdependent. Taken together, these data indicate that
CHFR preferentially interacts with the parylated form
of PARP-1, and that this interaction is mediated by the
CHFR PBZ domain.

RESULTS
PBZ mutant CHFR fails to induce taxane
resistance in CHFR deficient NSCLC cell lines
Transfection of wt-CHFR into CHFR deficient
cells has previously been shown to restore the antephase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30774

Oncotarget

Figure 1: A. pDEST40-wt-CHFR, pDEST40-CHFR-PBZ* (mutated PBZ domain) and empty pDEST40 vector were transfected into CHFR

deficient Calu-6 NSCLC cells. The effect of Docetaxel after 72 hours was established by XTT assay. Stable transfection of wt-CHFR increases
taxane resistance over empty vector and over CHFR-PBZ* (*p < 0.05 for CHFR-wt vs empty vector; **p < 0.05 for CHFR-wt vs CHFR-PBZ).
B. pDEST40-wt-CHFR and p40-CHFR-PBZ* was transfected into HEK293 cells. After immunoprecipitation with an anti-V5 antibody, an
interaction only between wt-CHFR and PAR and PARP1 was demonstrated C. pDEST27-∆R-CHFR and pDEST27-∆R-CHFR-PBZ* were
stably transfected into HEK293 cells. Deletion of the RING domain stabilized and equalized protein levels of both constructs. After affinity
purification with a gluthatione resin, only the CHFR mutant with an intact PBZ domain (-∆R-CHFR) interacted with PARP1. Mutation in
the PBZ domain (-∆R-CHFR-PBZ*) completely abrogated this interaction. D. pDEST27-PARP1 and enzymatically deficient pDEST27PARP1-E988K were transfected into HEK293 cells. After glutathione-affinity purification, an interaction with CHFR was only demonstrated
for the catalytically intact wt-PARP1, suggesting that auto-parylation of PARP1 is required for the interaction with CHFR. E. stable shRNA
knockdown of CHFR in A549 cells leads to a reduction in PARP1 protein levels compared to scrambled shRNA; (number indicates stable
cell line annotation) F. stable shRNA knockdown of PARP1 in A549 cells leads to a reduction in CHFR protein levels compared to luciferase
targeted shRNA (number indicates stable cell line annotation) G. Native CHFR protein levels in A549 cells are reduced by overexpression of
a FLAG tagged PBZ-domain peptide as competitor for parylated-PARP1. H. While stable transfection of CHFR-PBZ* in Calu-6 cells leads to
only low levels of expression, proteasomal inhibition with MG-132 increases CHFR-PBZ* protein levels. Treatment with the PARP-inhibitor
ABT-888 does not have a significant impact on either wt-CHFR or CHFR-PBZ* levels. I. A mutation in the RING domain (CHFR-∆R-PBZ*)
leads to protein levels comparable to those of wt-CHFR, indicating that auto-ubiquitination and –degradation of CHFR are responsible for the
low expression of CHFR-PBZ*EV, empty vector; PBZ*, PBZ mutated CHFR; ∆R, Ring domain mutated CHFR.

The interaction with PARP1 stabilizes
CHFR protein

attributed to the decrease in proteasomal degradation of
PARP1. Conversely and interestingly, PARP1 knockdown
led to a significant reduction in CHFR protein expression
(Figure 1F). These findings suggest that the interaction
with PARP1 stabilizes the CHFR protein, possibly by
protecting it from degradation. If the interaction with
PARP1 protects CHFR from degradation, then CHFR
protein levels should be reduced by competing for this

We next determined the impact of CHFR on PARP1
stability and vice versa. shRNAs were used to generate
stable knockdowns in HEK293 cells. CHFR knockdown
led to an increase in PARP-1 protein expression
(Figure  1E). This phenomenon has previously been
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30775

Oncotarget

interaction. To test this hypothesis, we overexpressed a
Flag-tagged PBZ domain alone in HEK293 cells. Indeed,
CHFR protein levels were reduced in cells expressing the
PBZ domain as compared to those transfected with empty
vector (Figure 1G), supporting the above hypothesis.
Together, these results demonstrate that CHFR protein is
indeed stabilized by its interaction with PARP1 which is
mediated by CHFR’s PBZ domain.

PARP1 deficient cells also showed increased sensitivity
to docetaxel (Figure 2D), likely due to the reduction in
CHFR expression that accompanies PARP1 knockdown
(Figure 1G). These findings show that not only CHFR
is required for a functional mitotic checkpoint, but that
additionally PARP1 is also an important mediator of
taxane resistance.

CHFR degradation in PBZ mutant CHFR is
mediated by autoubiquitination

PARP-inhibition fails to induce synergistic
cytotoxicity in CHFR expressing lung
cancer cell lines

Regulation of CHFR protein levels has previously
been shown to be at least in part dependent on
autoubiquitination mediated by its RING domain [21]. To
determine if disruption of the CHFR-PARP1 interaction
forces CHFR degradation by auto-ubiquitination and
subsequent proteasomal degradation, we expressed wildtype and the CHFR-PBZ mutant in the presence and
absence of the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 (Figure 1H) or
after the additional deletion of the RING domain (Figure 1I)
in Calu-6 cells. While the CHFR PBZ mutant protein is
only expressed at very low levels, both inhibition of the
proteasome or deletion of the RING domain restored PBZ
mutated CHFR expression to levels that were comparable
to those of the wt-CHFR. These data are consistent with the
interpretation that disruption of the CHFR-PARP interaction
results in auto-ubiquitination and degradation of CHFR.
Pharmacologic inhibition of PARP1’s polymerase activity
by the PARP-inhibitor ABT-888 did not result in altered
CHFR protein levels (Figure 1H).

Hypothesizing that PARP-inhibition could induce
synergistic cytotoxicity in CHFR expressing lung cancer
cell lines, we performed cytotoxicity assays in seven lung
cancer cell lines (A549, EKVX, H596, H522, Hop-62,
H460 and H2023) using docetaxel and the PARP-inhibitor
ABT-888 either alone or in combination. Synergy was
not observed in any of the cell lines. Also, combination
of docetaxel with a dose of ABT-888 (20 uM), which
achieves PARP inhibition in vitro, did not lead to enhanced
cytostasis (data not shown). In vitro, ABT-888 did not
reduce CHFR protein expression (Figure 1H) nor did it
disrupt the interaction between CHFR and PARP-1 (not
shown), suggesting that PARP-1 inhibition is insufficient
to force CHFR into auto-degradation. We therefore
hypothesized that the development of a pharmacologic
strategy that mimics the effects of a PBZ domain mutation
and completely inhibits the binding of parylated proteins
in the PBZ domain may be superior to PARP-1 inhibition
in the sensitization against taxanes.

The CHFR-PARP1 interaction is cell cycle
dependent and enhanced by docataxel
induced mitotic stress

High-throughput computational screening
identifies a small molecule inhibitor of the
CHFR/PARP1 interaction

We next sought to determine the functional
significance of the interaction between CHFR and
PARP1 in antephase checkpoint control and taxane
sensitivity, HEK293 cells were transfected with a GSTtagged PARP1, synchronized with aphidocholin, and the
interaction between GST-tagged PARP1 and CHFR was
analyzed at various stages of the cell cycle (Figure 2A,
2B, Supplementary Figure S3). The interaction between
PARP1 and CHFR was limited to the G2/M phase of
the cell cycle and was further enhanced by additional
exposure to mitotic stress, suggesting a specific role
of this interaction in the control of mitotic entry. To
determine the effect on taxane sensitivity, we performed
XTT assays in A549 cells stably transfected with either
shRNAs specifically targeting CHFR or PARP1 or
control shRNAs (scrambled or luciferase targeting
respectively, (Supplementary Figure S1B and S1C)).
As expected, CHFR- deficient A549 cells showed an
increased sensitivity to docetaxel relative to A549 cells
expressing a scrambled control (Figure 2C). Interestingly,

In an attempt to generate possible lead compounds
for the pharmacologic inhibition of the CHFRPARP1 interaction, we performed a high throughput
computational screen of 5,256,508 chemical structures in
the MCULE database of purchasable compounds using
the AutoDockVina algorithm against the published crystal
structure of the CHFR-PBZ domain. The 10 most promising
‘hits’ based on Autodock Vina docking scores (< –9.7)
were selected for further characterization (Supplementary
Figure S2). One compound (A9) failed to synthesize. We
tested the 9 available compounds for their impact on nuclear
CHFR levels (Figure 3A). Several compounds, including
‘A2’, ‘A3’, ‘A4’ and ‘A6’ decreased CHFR levels assayed
by western blotting of whole cell extracts. We determined
the impact of the above referenced compounds on the
PARP1/CHFR interaction. HEK293 cells were transfected
with GST tagged PARP1 and the interaction with CHFR
determined in pull down assays for those 4 compounds.
Only ‘A3’ completely prevented the PARP1-CHFR
interaction at 10 uM concentration (Figure 3B). Further

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30776

Oncotarget

Figure 2: A. and B. In aphidocholin synchronized A549 cells, an interaction between GST-tagged PARP1 and CHFR is predominantly
observed in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Induction of microtubular damage with docetaxel further enhances this interaction, suggesting
a central role in mediating the antephase checkpoint. Stable knockdown of both C. CHFR and D. PARP1 sensitizes stably transfected A549
cells to docetaxel compared to scrambled control shRNA.

studies therefore focused on ‘A3’. Chemical structures
are shown in Figure 3C and 3D. In contrast to treatment
with ABT-888, ‘A3’ completely disrupted the interaction
between GST-tagged PARP-1 and CHFR (Figure 3B).
Importantly, In vitro parylation studies showed that ‘A3’
has no impact on PARP1 auto-parylation, indicating that
the disruption of the PARP1/CHFR interaction by ‘A3’
is not dependent on de-parylation of PARP1, but rather
the interaction between CHFR and parylated PARP1
(Supplementary Figure S4). Since it is possible that the
co-immunoprecipitation between PARP-1 and CHFR after
‘A3’ treatment was negative due to the fact that CHFR was
degraded, we repeated the experiment after transfection
with the Ring-domain deleted ∆R-CHFR construct, which
maintained both stable CHFR and PARP1 levels even after
treatment with ‘A3’. However, ‘A3’ treatment resulted in a
dose dependent inhibition of the interaction between CHFR
and PARP1, suggesting a specific inhibitory effect of ‘A3’
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

on this protein interaction (Figure 3E). These observations
were confirmed by data that show a dose dependent
regulation of CHFR protein levels by ‘A3’ (Figure 3F).
Interestingly, however, at low concentrations of ‘A3’
an initial increase in CHFR protein levels was observed,
followed by complete disappearance of CHFR at the 10 uM
concentration. Since CHFR’s mitotic checkpoint function is
predominantly executed in the nucleus, we next studied the
effects of ‘A3’ treatment on nuclear localization of CHFR.
‘A3’ in combination with MG-132 lead to a depletion of
nuclear CHFR and accumulation of cytoplasmic CHFR,
suggesting the possibility that ‘A3’ may indeed be capable
of disrupting the antephase checkpoint (Figure 3G).
Cell cycle arrest at G2/M in response to microtubular
damage is a hallmark of a functional antephase checkpoint.
To test the functional relevance of our newly discovered
CHFR small molecule inhibitor ‘A3’, we exposed
unsynchronized A549 cells for 12 hours to docetaxel (50 nM)
30777

Oncotarget

Figure 3: A high-throughput computational screen of 5,256,508 chemical structures against the published crystal
structure of CHFR’s PBZ domain was performed. The 10 compounds with the highest docking scores were tested for their ability to

regulate CHFR expression levels. A. Several compounds, termed ‘A2’,‘A3’, ‘A4’ and ‘A6’ reduced CHFR expression after 24 hours at 10 uM
in A549 cells. B. Hek293 cells with stable expression of pDEST27-PARP1, were treated with either DMSO or ‘A3’ at 10 uM, or ABT-888
10 uM for 16 hours and subjected to gluthatione affinity purification for GST tagged PARP1. Only A3 completely inhibited an interaction
between PARP1 and CHFR. Chemical structure and predicted binding into the PBZ-domain pocket are shown in C. and D. E. HEK293 cells
were stably transfected with the pDEST27—∆R-CHFR construct. Deletion of the RING domain in this construct leads to both stable CHFR
and PARP1 expression that is unaltered by treatment with increasing concentrations of ‘A3’ for 16 hours. Nonetheless, the interaction between
glutathione-affinity purified CHFR-∆R and PARP1 was decreased by ‘A3’ in a dose dependent fashion. F. A549 nuclear extracts treated with
vehicle (dmso) or indicated A3 concentration for 16 hrs, CHFR is lost from the nuclear extract at 10 uM A3 G. A549 cells were incubated
for 16.5 hrs with MG132 and indicated A3 concentration for 16 hrs. At 10 uM A3 concentration CHFR staining is diminished in the nucleus
Cells are stained with CHFR(488 green) and Nuclear (DAPI blue) H. Co-exposure of unsynchronized cells to docetaxel and ‘A3’ for 24 hours
prevents the docetaxel induced cell cycle arrest, suggesting functional disruption of the antephase checkpoint.

with or without ‘A3’ (10 uM) and analyzed the cell cycle
stages by flow-cytometry (Figure 3H and Supplementary
Figure S5). ‘A3’ exposure prevented docetaxel induced cell
cycle arrest, suggesting that ‘A3’ functionally disrupted the
antephase checkpoint. This is an important finding since it
validates the proposed mechanism of action for ‘A3’.

cells, ‘A3’ and docetaxel showed synergistic growth
inhibitory functions in cell viability assays as demonstrated
by a Combination index (CI) < 1 (Figure 4A and 4B).
To determine if the synergistic effects of A3 are indeed
dependent on an interaction between CHFR and PARP1,
we performed colony formation assays in A549 cells
transfected with shRNA which was either scrambled or
directed against CHFR or PARP1. Synergy between A3
and docetaxel was maintained only in the A549 scramble
cell line, but not after CHFR or PARP1 knockdown,
suggesting that ‘A3’s effects are mainly through its ontarget effects on the CHFR-PARP1 interaction (Figure 4D).
Finally, we performed colony formation assays on a panel

Exposure to ‘A3’ has synergistic growth
inhibitory activity that correlates with
CHFR expression
Similarly to the previous experiments in which
CHFR knockdown increased taxane sensitivity in A549
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30778

Oncotarget

Figure 4: A. Cell viability experiments were performed after exposure to ‘A3’ (5–20 uM), docetaxel (5–20 nM) or the combination of both

compounds for 72 hours. At the 10 and 20 nM concentrations, there was statistically significantly decreased viability in the combination
treated cells. (*= p < 0.01). B. The combination index was calculated according to the method of Chou-Talaley. ‘A3’ and docetaxel exert
synergistic effects at the 10 and 20 uM/nM concentrations B) stable shRNA knockdown of PARP1 or CHFR reverses synergy between
A3 and docetaxel in A549 cells in colony formation assays compared with scramble shRNA control (* = p < 0.05). C–E. The interaction
between docetaxel and ‘A3’ was further studied in colony formation assays. Various cell lines of different tissues of origin and with different
CHFR expression status were exposed to 1 hour of docetaxel and 72 hours of ‘A3’. Effects were defined as 1- colony count (treatment)/
colony count (control). The nature of the interaction between the two compounds was analyzed by the Bliss additivity method. C) A
representative example of the colony formation assays is shown in the CHFR expressing cell line H460 where strong synergy between ‘A3’
and docetaxel is observed. For subsequent colony formation assays, cell lines were characterized into CHFR expressing vs. CHFR deficient
cell lines by Western-Blot. D) knock-down of either CHFR or PARP1 in A549 cells alleviates the synergy that is observed in A549 cells
transfected with scrambled shRNA. (*= synergy) D) synergistic effects of A3 and docetaxel in colony formation assays are mostly observed
in CHFR expressing cell lines regardless of tumor type. (*= synergy).

CHFR and PARP1 in vitro, leading to a depletion of CHFR
expression and to sensitization towards the cytotoxic
effects of taxanes. We next examined the impact of ‘A3’
administration on lung tumor xenografts. A549 NSCLC
cells were injected into the flank of nude mice and allowed
to establish for approximately 14 days. Once tumors
had reached a volume about 100 mm3, mice received a
single ip injection of ‘A3’ at 10 mg/kg. Mice were then
euthanized at 1,2,4 and 24 hours after and CHFR in the
xenografts was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
(Figure 5A). Significant suppression of nuclear CHFR
expression was observed after 4 hours, but was restored to
baseline levels at the 24 hr time point.

of cell lines of different cancer types such as lung-, breast-,
and colon cancer. With the exemption of the EKVX
NSCLC cell lines, synergy between ‘A3’ and docetaxel
was observed for all other CHFR expressing cell lines
regardless of tumor type supporting the possibility that
CHFR targeted therapy may have a wide range of possible
applications in those cancer types in which taxanes are
frequently used (Figure 4C and 4E).

In vivo characterization of A3 levels and activity
In the previous section we have demonstrated that
‘A3’ is capable of disrupting the interaction between
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30779

Oncotarget

Figure 5: A. A 549 cell tumor xenografts in nude mice were analyzed for CHFR expression at various time points after ‘A3’ injection.

4 hrs after i.p. injection a significant reduction in nuclear CHFR staining was observed, indicating a in vivo reproducible pharmacodynamic
effect of ‘A3’. B. Pharmacokinetics of A3 were performed at various time points after iv and oral administration of a single dose of ‘A3’ at
10 mg/kg. C. 2.5 × 105 H460 cells were transplanted into the flank of nude mice were. 5 days after transplant, I.P. injection of DMSO, A3,
docetaxel, or combination commenced. Tumor size was measured bi-dimensionally and volumes were calculated by volume = (smallest
dimension)2 × (largest dimension). While ‘A3’ treatment alone did not have a discernable anti-tumor effect, combination treatment with
‘A3’ and docetaxel, proved superior to treatment with docetaxel alone. D. Explanted tumors are smallest in mice that were treated with
combination therapy.

We next sought to characterize the in vivo properties
of ‘A3’. We first determined the pharmacokinetics of ‘A3’
after a single oral (25 mg/kg) and intravenous (10 mg/kg)
dose of in CD1 mice. Plasma was obtained at pre-specified
time points (15 min to 24 hours) and ‘A3’ concentrations
were determined by LC/MS/MS. These data indicated
that ‘A3’ was rapidly and widely distributed following
intravenous dosing, and the relative bioavailability of
‘A3’ from dose normalized AUC values was calculated
as 19.5% (Figure 5B). Oral bioavailability of ‘A3’
was insignificant. The time-point of maximal CHFR
suppression at 4 hrs follow the peak in A3 plasma levels
with some delay.
Based on these pharmacodynamics and pharm­
acokinetic properties of ‘A3’, we analyzed the in-vivo
effects of ‘A3’, docetaxel and the combination on tumor
growth in mouse xenografts, who were previously
injected with the H460 cell line. Pre-treatment with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

either DMSO or ‘A3’ was given 4 hours prior to
docetaxel injection, when CHFR expression levels
are expected to be the lowest based on the above
pharmacodynamic experiments. ‘A3’ treatment alone
did not have a discernable effect on tumor growth when
compared to DMSO alone. However, in combination
with docetaxel, ‘A3’ significantly decreased tumor
size compared to docetaxel alone, demonstrating that
pharmacologic targeting of the CHFR/PARP interaction
may indeed be a promising strategy to improve taxane
sensitivity in lung cancer.
Importantly, combination treatment with ‘A3’
was not associated with a significant increase in
hematologic (Figure 6A), hepatic (Figure 6B) and
renal toxicity (Figure  6C) 10 days after treatment.
Representative H&E stained sections of liver and
kidneys did not show any toxicity in any of the four
treatment arms (Figure 6D).
30780

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Nude mice were treated with a one-time dose of docetaxel either in combination with ‘A3’ (10 mg/kg),
or with equal volumes of DMSO. No significant increase in A. hematologic B. hepatic or C. renal toxicity was observed with
combination treatment. H&E staining of mouse kidney and liver samples treated with indicated compounds are unremarkable.

DISCUSSION

molecule. Our data provide several lines of evidence to
demonstrate specific target inhibition: First, we show that
A3 inhibits the biochemical interaction between PARP1
and CHFR. Second, we find that ‘A3’ treatment leads to
the functional disruption of the docataxel-induced mitotic
checkpoint, a point in the cell cycle in which the CHFRPARP1 interaction is greatest. Third, we establish that
‘A3’ synergizes with docetaxel only in CHFR expressing
cell lines. Finally, we demonstrate that ‘A3’ administration
results in a pharmacodynamic reduction in CHFR
expression in vivo in human tumor xenograft models.
Our data show clearly that unlike ‘A3’, the PARP1
inhibitor ABT-888 is not capable of disrupting the
interaction between CHFR and PARP1. This is surprising
since the enzymatically inactive PARP1-E988K mutant
does not interact with CHFR. This observation may
be explained by the fact that pharmacologic PARP1
inhibition prevents previously un-parylated PARP-1 from
autoparylation and may prevent a future interaction with
CHFR. Previously parylated PARP-1 however may remain
bound to CHFR and PARP inhibition unlike direct small
molecule targeting of the PBZ domain will do nothing to
force it out of this interaction.

We have shown in this study, that the interaction
between CHFR and parylated PARP1 stabilizes CHFR
protein levels. We furthermore show that this interaction
is mediated by CHFR’s PBZ domain and that its
disruption either by mutation of the PBZ domain or
PARP1 knockdown leads to auto-ubiquitination and
subsequent proteasomal degradation of CHFR. Together
with previously published results that reduced CHFR
expression in lung cancer is associated with improved
survival following platinum taxane based therapy [6]
and that taxane sensitivity is increased in gastric [1]-,
colon [2]- and cervical cancers [22] in which CHFR is
silenced epigenetically, we proposed a model in which
pharmacologic inhibition of the CHFR-PARP1 interaction
with subsequent loss of CHFR and disruption of antephase
checkpoint function helps to overcome intrinsic taxane
resistance across a wide spectrum of different tumor types
(Figure 7).
This is the first report to demonstrate the feasibility
of inhibiting the mitotic checkpoint by targeting the
interaction between CHFR and PARP1 with a small
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30781

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Our findings support a model, by which the interaction between CHFR and PARP1 control expression
of both proteins. When an interaction is present CHFR targets parylated-PARP1 for proteasomal degradation. PARP1 levels increase

with CHFR knockdown. Conversely, a disruption of the interaction between PARP1 and CHFR by the small molecule A3 induces autoubiquitination and ultimately destruction of CHFR protein. This in turn leads to disruption of the antephase checkpoint and ultimately
mitotic catastrophe in response to taxane challenge.

The finding that CHFR protein levels initially
increase at low concentrations of ‘A3’ is of potential
relevance. The exact explanation for this observation
is not entirely clear, but it is interesting to note that this
finding was only observed in experiments where CHFR
was amendable to proteasomal degradation. Moreover,
we did also observe that ‘A3’ exposure enhanced cell
proliferation in several lung cancer cell lines including
A549 cells. Since CHFR protein is stabilized in G2, we
hypothesize that two competing mechanisms are involved
in response to ‘A3’: At lower concentrations, a cell cycle
mediated increased interaction with PARP-1 may protect
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CHFR from proteasomal degradation, while at higher
concentrations, ‘A3’ completely disrupts the interaction
between CHFR and PARP1 leading to loss of CHFR
protein expression.
In the development of targeted therapies several
aspects deserve consideration: First of all, the functional
importance of the molecular target itself needs to be firmly
established in order to avoid failure at the clinical stage.
The wealth of functional and preclinical data about the
role of CHFR in the control of the mitotic checkpoint,
as well as the clinical data showing improved response
and survival following taxane based therapy in patients
30782

Oncotarget

with reduced or epigenetically silenced CHFR expression
firmly establish CHFR as a promising molecular target
in cancer. Our data here show that the pharmacologic
targeting of CHFR with a small molecule inhibitor indeed
yields synergistic growth inhibitory effects in combination
with taxanes.
A second concern is the role of the molecular target
in the prevention of treatment related toxicities. In the
clinical setting the two major dose limiting toxicities of
taxanes are neuropathy and hematotoxicity. If CHFR
was integrally involved in preventing these, targeted
therapy against CHFR in combination with taxanes could
be doomed due to unacceptable toxicities, even if it
produced a synergistic anticancer effect. Our data clearly
demonstrate that ‘A3’ in combination with docetaxel does
not significantly increase hematologic, hepatic or renal
toxicities when compared to docetaxel alone. We speculate
that hematopoietic precursors may be less susceptible to
pharmacologic CHFR inhibition than epithelial or tumor
tissues based on analysis of CHFR expression in the
Tissue-specific Gene Expression and Regulation (TiGER)
database, which reveals that CHFR expression in bone
marrow is significantly lower than in epithelial tissues
[23]. Taxane induced neurotoxicity is mostly mediated by
interference with of the axonal transport, which in turn
results in demyelination and axonal degeneration. Since
this is a cell cycle independent process it is unlikely that
CHFR has a protective function against taxane induced
neuropathy.
The third area of concern in successful drug
development pertains to the chemical and biochemical
properties of the lead compound itself. Our data suggest
specificity of ‘A3’ towards CHFR. Its pharmacodynamic
properties are promising, but structural variations will
be necessary to further improve binding characteristics,
bioavailability and elimination half life, while maintaining
specificity. Lead optimization should be undertaken before
larger scale co-clinical trials in xenografts are performed
to assess in vivo synergy and toxicity in combination with
docetaxel.
In summary, our study represents a novel paradigm
to improve taxane sensitivity in cancer therapy by
targeting a central mediator of taxane resistance. This
study proves the feasibility and specificity of this
approach. Refinements in the chemical structure of ‘A3’
will be necessary prior to more extensive in vivo studies.

Technology, Grand Island, NY). The following mutants
were generated using the Quickchange mutagenesis kit
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA): 1) CHFR-PBZ*
(C623A C629A), 2) CHFR-∆R (del 305-351), 3) CHFR∆R-PBZ* , 4) PARP1-E988K. 5) A FLAG-tagged CRPBZ-peptide (del 1-406) of CHFR was PCR generated.
Using Gateway recombinase kits (Life Technologies,
Grand Island, NY), the individual cDNAs were inserted
into pDEST26, pDEST27, pDEST40 and pDEST51
vectors, respectively. shRNA against CHFR or scrambled
sequence control in pGFP-V-RS vectors were obtained
from Origene (Rockville, MD), while shRNA against
PARP-1 and luciferase controls were a gift from Dr.
Kraus (UT Southwestern). Vectors were transfected using
Lipofectamine-2000 (Life Technologies, Grand Island,
NY) and stably transfected clones were selected after
treatment with G418 or blasticydine or puromycin.

Cell lines
Cell lines were either purchased directly from
ATCC (Manassas, VA) (A549 cells). Other cell lines were
a gift from Dr. Vertino. These lines were genotypically
validated by STR analysis (Biosynthesis Inc.; Lewisville,
TX). All cell lines were cultured in the appropriate media,
supplemented with 10% FCS.

Cell viability assay
2,000 cells/well were seeded in 96 well flat bottom
plates. 24 hours later, cells were exposed to either
docetaxel alone (1 nM–1000 nM), ‘A3’ alone (1 uM–
100 uM) or a combination of those. Mock treated wells
received DMSO only. After 48–72 hours, cell viability
was analyzed using XTT reagent (Trevigen, Gaithersburg,
MD) as colorimetric method. Absorbance was read at 488
nM on a plate reader. Results were plotted using Prism5
software (GraphPad, LaJolla, CA).

Colony formation assay
Cell lines were seeded at a density of 1,000 cells /
well into 6 well dishes. After 24 hrs. cells were treated
with either docetaxel (between 50–100 nM) alone or in
combination with A3 (10 uM) for 1 hour. After this media
was removed, cells were washed in PBS x1 and fresh
media was added back. In A3 treated cells, A3 was added
back for a total exposure of 72 hours. Equal concentrations
of DMSO were added as mock where appropriate. When
colonies were visible with the naked eye, cells were fixed
in 4% formaldehyde, stained with 0.5% crystal violet and
image particles were counted using the ImageJ software.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Constructs and transfection
Full length CHFR cDNAs was obtained in pENTR
vector from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY). Full
length PARP-1 was cloned by RT-PCR from cDNA
obtained from immortalized bronchial epithelial cells
(HBEC-3KT) and cloned into pENTR vectors (Life
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Analysis of combination-drug effects
The effects of combined exposure to docetaxel and
A3 was compared to single drug exposure in both XTT
30783

Oncotarget

assays and colony formation assays using the Chou-Talaley
method [16]. For effects that were statistically significantly
different, a combination index (CI) was calculated using
CalcuSyn Software (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK), where a CI
< 1 indicates synergistic, a CI = 1 additive and a CI > 1
antagonistic drug effects of the combination. Experiments
with single drug concentrations were analyzed using the
Bliss additivity method [17], where an additive effect is
calculated according to the formula C = A + B – A * B.
Effects greater than C are considered synergistic, while
effects smaller than C are antagonistic.

structure of CHFR’s PBZ domain (PDB ID: 2XOC)[18]
using Autodock Vina algorithms on http://www.mcule.
com [19]. The top 10 compounds with the best docking
scores (< –9.7) were selected and ordered for further
study.

In vivo pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics of A3 (5 mg/ml in DMSO)
after iv (10 mg/kg) and oral (25 mg/kg) administration
were performed in 7 week old male CD-1 mice (Charles
River, Raleigh, NC) by the Southern Research Institute
(Birmingham, AL). Mice were held in standard housing
with maximal 3 mice/cage and fed a standard rodent diet
(Harlan, Madison, WI). 4 groups of 3 mice were treated
both for iv. and oral dosing schedules. Blood was drawn
at various time points (group A: 0.083, 1 hrs.; group B:
0.25, 4 hrs.; group C: 0.5, 8 hrs.; group D: 2, 12 hrs.)
and analyzed by HPLC/MS/MS. Mean plasma drug
concentration versus time data for both IV bolus and
oral dosing were analyzed using the sparse sampling
function of non-compartmental analysis with Phoenix®
WinNonlin® Version 6.4 (Pharsight Corp.; Cary, NC).
Parameters including maximum concentration (Cmax),
time to maximum concentration (tmax), half-life (t1/2), and
area under the concentration-time curve extrapolated to
infinity (AUC0-∞), among others, were assessed for both
routes, and bioavailability was calculated from dosenormalized values.

Protein precipitations
Cells expressing H6-tagged and GST-tagged CHFR
were lysed in NTA lysis buffer (50 mM Sodium Phosphate,
300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Imidizole, 0.05% Tween-20 pH8)
containing PMSF, protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After
sonication and clarification by centrifugation, CHFR was
affinity purified using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (NiNTA)
magnetic agarose (Qiagen). Cells expressing V5-tagged
proteins were lysed in cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling, cat
#: 9803) containing PMSF and complete protease inhibitors.
GST-tagged proteins were isolated using a glutathione
sepharose resin (GE healthcare) while V5-tagged constructs
were immunoprecipitated using V5 antibodies (Invitrogen)
and eluted with V5 peptide (Alpha Diagnostic).

Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed in 1x cell lysis buffer (Cell
Signaling), containing Complete protease inhibitor and
Phostop (Roche) and 1 mM PMSF. Cells were sonicated
briefly and lysates clarified by centrifugation. Following
SDS-PAGE and semi-dry transfer the following antibodies
were used: CHFR (Sigma), PARP-1 (Calbiochem), PAR
(Tulip), GST (Cell Signaling), V5(Life technologies). In
addition, Beta Actin and Beta Tubulin (Sigma) GAPDH
(Cell Signaling) were used as loading controls depending
on the application and molecular weights of target proteins
in the experiment.

In vivo pharmacodynamics
All in vivo experiments were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
of Emory University and performed according to federal
guidelines. Mice were housed in pathogen-free animal
facilities of the Winship Cancer Institute and fed a standard
rodent diet with water at libitum. 9 week old female nude
mice (Harlan laboratories) were xenografted with either
A549 or H460 cell lines. When tumors reached a size
of about 100 mm3, mice were injected with ‘A3’ intraperitoneally at a concentration of 10 mg/kg or an equal
volume of DMSO. Mice were euthanized at predefined
time points after injection (0 h, 1 h, 4 h, 24 h). Tumors
were explanted, imbedded in OCT media and immediately
snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Sections of fresh frozen
tissue were prepared at 5 uM thickness and stained for
CHFR as described in the immunohistochemistry section.

Flow cytometry
Cells were synchronized with 5 uM aphidocholine
for 24 hrs, released for the indicated time (0, 6, 12, 24
hrs) and fixed in 70% ice cold Ethanol. Cells were stained
with 7-Aminoactinomycin D (7AAD) 250 ng/mL in the
presence of 100 ug/mL RNase A. Cells were counted on
a BD-FACSCANTO II instrument and analyzed on DIVA
and FLOW-Jo software.

In vivo efficacy
9 week old female nude mice (Harlan laboratories)
were xenografted with H460 cells at a concentration of
2.5 × 105 cells. 5 days after inoculation, mice were randomly
divided into four groups of 10 mice to receive the following
treatment: A) DMSO at 0 h and 2 h B) ‘A3’ (10 mg/kg) at 0
h and 2 h, C) DMSO at 0 h and 2 h and Docetaxel 15 mg/kg

High throughput computational screen for small
molecule inhibitors of CHFR’s PBZ domain
5,256,508 chemical structures of purchasable
compounds were screened against the published crystal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30784

Oncotarget

at 2 h, D) ‘A3’ (10 mg/kg) at 0 h and 4 h and Docetaxel 15
mg/kg at 4 h. Treatment was given intra-peritoneally every
Monday and Thursday for 2 consecutive weeks. Tumor size
was measured tri-dimensionally every 2 days using calipers.
When tumor burden scores (defined by http://www.iacuc.
emory.edu/documents/tumor_burden_scoring.pdf) exceeded
14, euthanasia was performed with CO2 narcosis. Tumors
were immediately explanted, photographed, weighted and
frozen in liquid nitrogen.

The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of
the National Institutes of Health or the Department of
Veterans Affairs.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no potential conflicts of
interest.

In vitro auto-parylation

REFERENCES

PARP1 HSA (trevigen) was incubated in the
presence or absence of A3, ABT888, or equal volume of
DMSO at indicated concentrations in PARylation buffer
(20 mM Tris 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10
mM ZnCl2, 10% Glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mg/ml ssDNA
(Sigma), 300 uM B-NAD (Amresco)) for 30′ at 30 degrees
C. Negative control reactions are performed in the absence
of B-NAD. 2x SDS PAGE sample buffer stops the reaction
and sample is loaded on SDS-PAGE for subsequent
western-blotting for PAR and PARP1.

1.	 Satoh A, Toyota M, Itoh F, Sasaki Y, Suzuki H, Ogi K,
et al. Epigenetic inactivation of CHFR and sensitivity to
microtubule inhibitors in gastric cancer. Cancer research.
2003; 63:8606–13.
2.	 Pelosof L, Yerram SR, Ahuja N, Delmas A, Danilova L,
Herman JG, et al. CHFR silencing or microsatellite instability is associated with increased antitumor activity of
docetaxel or gemcitabine in colorectal cancer. International
journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2014;
134:596–605.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)

3.	 Brandes JC, van Engeland M, Wouters KA,
Weijenberg MP, Herman JG. CHFR promoter hypermethylation in colon cancer correlates with the microsatellite
instability phenotype. Carcinogenesis. 2005; 26:1152–6.

OCT media imbedded snap frozen tissue was
sectioned on a microtome at 5 uM thickness. IHC was
performed using the following antibodies and dilutions:
CHFR (1:100) (CellSignaling). After washing and
scavenging for free peroxidases, biotin conjugated antirabbit antibody was used in 1:500 dilution. Subsequent
staining by DAB was performed using a Strep-HRP
conjugate and DAB staining kit (vector labs). Slides were
imaged on a Zeiss Axioplan2 microscope.

4.	 Wang X, Yang Y, Xu C, Xiao L, Shen H, Zhang X, et al.
CHFR suppression by hypermethylation sensitizes endometrial cancer cells to paclitaxel. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2011;
21:996–1003.
5.	 Yanokura M, Banno K, Kawaguchi M, Hirao N,
Hirasawa  A, Susumu N, et al. Relationship of aberrant
DNA hypermethylation of CHFR with sensitivity to taxanes
in endometrial cancer. Oncol Rep. 2007; 17:41–8.

Statistics

6.	 Pillai RN, Brodie SA, Sica GL, Shaojin Y, Li G,
Nickleach  DC, et al. CHFR protein expression predicts
outcomes to taxane-based first line therapy in metastatic
NSCLC. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of
the American Association for Cancer Research. 2013;
19:1603–11.

Differences between continuous variables were
analyzed by Student’s t-test.

GRANT SUPPORT

7.	 Brodie SA, Li G, Brandes JC. Molecular characteristics of
non-small cell lung cancer with reduced CHFR expression
in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. Respiratory
medicine. 2015; 109:131–6.

Veterans’ Health Administration Career Development
Award 7-IK2BX001283-03 to JCB; NCI- 5 P50
CA128613-02 Career Development Project to JCB; NCIP30CA138292 pilot grant to JCB. CHEST Foundation /
Lungevity Foundation Clinical Lung Cancer Research
Award to JCB. Uniting against Lung Cancer/Lungevity
Foundation Research Award to JCB; SunTrust Scholar
Award to JCB; Cohen Family Scholar Award to JCB; Elsa
U Pardee Foundation Research Award to JCB. This research
project was supported in part by the Emory University
Integrated Cellular Imaging Microscopy Core of the
Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University under award
number P30CA138292.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8.	 Scolnick DM, Halazonetis TD. Chfr defines a mitotic stress
checkpoint that delays entry into metaphase. Nature. 2000;
406:430–5.
9.	 Yu X, Minter-Dykhouse K, Malureanu L, Zhao WM,
Zhang D, Merkle CJ, et al. Chfr is required for tumor suppression and Aurora A regulation. Nature genetics. 2005;
37:401–6.
10.	 Kang D, Chen J, Wong J, Fang G. The checkpoint protein
Chfr is a ligase that ubiquitinates Plk1 and inhibits Cdc2 at

30785

Oncotarget

the G2 to M transition. The Journal of cell biology. 2002;
156:249–59.

18.	 Oberoi J, Richards MW, Crumpler S, Brown N, Blagg J,
Bayliss R. Structural basis of poly(ADP-ribose) recognition by the multizinc binding domain of checkpoint with
forkhead-associated and RING Domains (CHFR). J Biol
Chem. 2010; 285:39348–58.

11.	 Summers MK, Bothos J, Halazonetis TD. The CHFR
mitotic checkpoint protein delays cell cycle progression by
excluding Cyclin B1 from the nucleus. Oncogene. 2005;
24:2589–98.

19.	 Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed
and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J Comput Chem.
2010; 31:455–61.

12.	 Ahel I, Ahel D, Matsusaka T, Clark AJ, Pines J, Boulton SJ,
et al. Poly(ADP-ribose)-binding zinc finger motifs in DNA
repair/checkpoint proteins. Nature. 2008; 451:81–5.

20.	 Patel AG, Flatten KS, Schneider PA, Dai NT, McDonald JS,
Poirier GG, et al. Enhanced killing of cancer cells by
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors and topoisomerase
I inhibitors reflects poisoning of both enzymes. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2012; 287:4198–210.

13.	 Wu J, Chen Y, Lu LY, Wu Y, Paulsen MT, Ljungman M,
et al. Chfr and RNF8 synergistically regulate ATM activation. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011; 18:761–8.
14.	 Liu C, Wu J, Paudyal SC, You Z, Yu X. CHFR is important
for the first wave of ubiquitination at DNA damage sites.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:1698–710.

21.	 Chaturvedi P, Sudakin V, Bobiak ML, Fisher PW,
Mattern MR, Jablonski SA, et al. Chfr regulates a mitotic
stress pathway through its RING-finger domain with ubiquitin ligase activity. Cancer research. 2002; 62:1797–801.

15.	 Kashima L, Idogawa M, Mita H, Shitashige M, Yamada T,
Ogi K, et al. CHFR protein regulates mitotic checkpoint
by targeting PARP-1 protein for ubiquitination and degradation. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2012;
287:12975–84.
16.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Regul. 1984; 22:27–55.

22.	 Banno K, Yanokura M, Kawaguchi M, Kuwabara Y,
Akiyoshi J, Kobayashi Y, et al. Epigenetic inactivation of
the CHFR gene in cervical cancer contributes to sensitivity to taxanes. International journal of oncology. 2007;
31:713–20.

17.	 Borisy AA, Elliott PJ, Hurst NW, Lee MS, Lehar J,
Price ER, et al. Systematic discovery of multicomponent
therapeutics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:7977–82.

23.	 Liu X, Yu X, Zack DJ, Zhu H, Qian J. TiGER: a database
for tissue-specific gene expression and regulation. BMC
bioinformatics. 2008; 9:271.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30786

Oncotarget

