CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
Special Lecture

Glutathione-Associated Enzymes In Anticancer
Drug Resistance
Kenneth D. Tew

See related article by Tew, Cancer Res 1994;54:4313–20.
In the 1980s and 1990s, cancer drug resistance was a popular
subdiscipline that permeated many therapeutic areas of oncology
research. Numerous meetings and symposia were dedicated to the
topic, wherein the proceedings and speakers were frequently
heavily weighted towards the multidrug-resistant phenotype
(MDR) and various allied topics surrounding the p-glycoprotein.
A small contingent of us believed that there was more to resistance
than membrane pumps, an opinion benignly tolerated (though
not necessarily encouraged) by our friends and colleagues in the
resistance ﬁeld. As such, redox pathways were gamely presented as
contributory determinants of drug response and these were
exploited for the design and development of new drugs, particularly those that targeted glutathione pathways. Partly as a consequence, this perspective formed a platform for the (now)
featured article that appeared in the August 15, 1994 issue of
Cancer Research, "Glutathione-Associated Enzymes In Anticancer
Drug-Resistance" (1). Scopus shows that it has been cited approximately 750 times. Since that time, the redox ﬁeld has grown,
spawning a number of dedicated journals and continuing to bring
relevance to cancer and drug resistance. Indeed, partly because
cancer cells grow and divide so rapidly, they are exposed to levels
of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS, respectively) that are higher than their normal cell counterparts and it is
generally recognized that aberrant redox homeostasis is an important property of the cancer phenotype. In this regard, metabolic
pathways that inﬂuence oxygen and sulfur are inﬂuential in
imprinting the cancer phenotype.
Life on Earth has evolved within our biosphere such that
higher eukaryotes derive much of their energy requirements
through oxidative metabolism, to date the most biologically
efﬁcient means of generating ATP. During the Precambrian
epoch, oxygen was present at trace levels, but has increased
and decreased at given points in an evolving geology, reaching a
maximum of 35% during the Carboniferous period. Obviously,
life has adapted (and presumably continues) to such signiﬁcant
deviations in oxygen availability. Given that oxygen is now an
obligate requirement in mammals, paradoxically, its metabolism incurs considerable toxicities. Chemical and biological
conversion of oxygen or nitrogen can lead to the production
of ROS or RNS, families of chemically active molecules that
contain free radicals that signiﬁcantly impact cellular redox
homeostasis (2). The yin and yang of oxygen and sulfur biochemistry inﬂuence many signaling pathways and can contribute to control the fate of mammalian cells. Co-opted during the
evolutionary process, threshold effects of, for example, hydroMedical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.
Corresponding Author: Kenneth D. Tew, Medical University of South
Carolina, 173 Ashley Avenue, P.O. Box 250505, Charleston, SC 29425. Phone:
843-792-2514; Fax: 843-792-2475; E-mail: tewk@musc.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3143
Ó2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

gen peroxide can serve as critical growth signaling molecules
performing through creation of various oxidation states of
important cysteine residues in select target proteins (3). A
variety of biochemical pathways are essential in maintaining
cellular redox homeostasis and as a consequence of their biological importance, a great deal of functional complexity has
evolved. An adequate balance between the formation and
elimination of ROS/RNS is maintained in cells via pro-oxidant
and antioxidant enzyme pathways. Certain endogenous factors
regulate generation of ROS/RNS, which, in turn, contribute to
cell physiology by inﬂuencing such events as proliferation,
differentiation, proteostasis, apoptosis, autophagy, and senescence. The difference between too much and too little ROS will
be subtle and yet can determine the fate of many pathways
critical to cell survival. Many of the complex pathways that
underlie redox homeostasis are evolutionarily well conserved,
occurring in organisms from most representative phyla. The
variable valence and nucleophilic nature of sulfur provides
valuable biological ﬂexibility, particularly when sulfur appears
in the thiol groups of cysteine. There are approximately 200,000
cysteines encoded by the human genome, making it one of the
least commonly used amino acids (4). However, this sparing
usage does not infer restricted functionality, but instead implies
evolutionary importance and, indeed, cladistics analyses of total
cellular cysteine contents yield correlations with a degree of
biological complexity (5). The ﬂexibility of the thiol group of
cysteine predicates that a number (more than a dozen) of
different types of posttranslational modiﬁcation can occur on
this residue (6). In recent years, S-glutathionylation of cysteine
has been described as a cyclical posttranslational modiﬁcation,
shown to be important in a number of biological settings,
especially cancer. It is worth reﬂecting (particularly in the
context of essentially equivalent millimolar levels of both
phosphate and glutathione in cells) that this cycle has the
potential to provide cells ﬂexibility in a number of signaling
pathways and might bear comparison with phosphorylation/
dephosphorylation. In fact, a signiﬁcant number of both kinases
and phosphatases are themselves subject to redox-dependent
regulation by S-glutathionylation (7). As our understanding of
this posttranslational modiﬁcation matures, bioinformatics
approaches are now beginning to help in predicting predisposition of individual proteins to S-glutathionylation (8).
A further emphasis of the earlier Cancer Research article was
glutathione S-transferases (GST), part of a family of phase II
detoxiﬁcation enzymes, the understanding of which has grown
substantially over the last two decades. GST isozymes were originally described for their roles in detoxiﬁcation and linkage of
their expression levels with elevated cancer drug resistance was
thought to reﬂect enhanced capabilities in breaking down drugs to
noncytotoxic metabolites (9, 10). One speciﬁc isozyme, GSTP, is
ubiquitous in mammals and is expressed at high levels in many
types of tumor and drug-resistant cancers (7). In the two decades
following the publication, much work has ascribed other functions to this protein, including a glutathionylase activity for the

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

7

CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
forward reaction of the S-glutathionylation cycle (11) and other
noncatalytic activities such as chaperone-like properties
that regulate kinases such as c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK; ref. 12).
To some degree, GSTP can be said to be acting as a switch in the
control of stress mediated kinase signaling, providing a further
link between redox and phosphorylation. On reﬂection, the
ubiquitous expression of GSTP in non-hepatic tissues and its
abundant levels in many cancer cells should have implied functionalities that are unrelated to detoxiﬁcation. Indeed, growing
evidence shows that GSTP forms complexes with a signiﬁcant
number of intracellular proteins, perhaps reﬂecting a required
step in the forward S-glutathionylation reaction or as a reversible
ligand binding temporarily shielding critical amino acid residues
(7). Whatever the reasons for the afﬁnity of GSTP for such
proteins, there is likely to be important implications for the
formation of such protein complexes in cancer.
Whereas cancer cells produce more ROS and generally express
high levels of glutathione and associated enzymes, equally
demonstrable is that certain normal tissues are intrinsically sensitive to changes in cellular redox potential. For example, rates of
myeloproliferation through the bone marrow compartment are
inﬂuenced by oxygen and redox gradients. Over a half-century
ago, cystine and cysteine were shown to be important for the
maintenance of the required balance between hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) quiescence, self-renewal, and lineage commitment in the human bone marrow compartment (13). HSCs give
rise to all differentiated hematopoietic cell lineages and normal
hematopoiesis operates optimally when the marrow compartment is between 1% and 3% oxygen (14), but hypoxic niches and
gradients are required for HSC maintenance. A hypoxic environment in the osteoblastic niche encourages quiescence in HSCs
and movement to the more oxygenated vascular niche promotes
HSC differentiation (15). Regions of low oxygen may protect
quiescent HSCs from toxic oxygen radicals and ROS gradients
may synchronize HSC–niche interactions. Redox active drugs that
modulate thiol pathways impact myeloproliferation. For example, N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) reverses ROS suppression of Ncadherin–mediated HSC adhesion to osteoblasts, inducing cell
migration within the marrow compartment (16). Gradients of
ROS affect elements of the niche structure and serve to regulate
HSCs within this microenvironment. Redox modulation can
serve as a regulator of cell self-renewal and differentiation in
glial cells, where cysteine pro-drugs alter extracellular redox and
enhance self-renewal of progenitor cells, whereas buthionine
sulfoximine, by depleting glutathione, promotes differentiation.
These types of observations support the principle that redox
gradients and their pharmacological manipulation have a role
in inﬂuencing HSC migration, differentiation, and myeloproliferation. It seems likely that pharmacological manipulation of
redox conditions might be harnessed in inﬂuencing myelopro-

liferative pathways and clinical testing of a variety of redox active
agents has been attempted. In fact, Telintra is a GSTP inhibitor
and is presently in clinical trial for the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome (17). Details of such drugs are contained in a
variety of reviews (18) and undoubtedly future opportunities
remain for further drug discovery and development.
Discussion of redox homeostasis would not be complete without reference to antioxidants. In various guises, antioxidants have
a distinct following as dietary supplements and have also been
quite extensively studied in chemoprevention settings. Most
Western diets are replete with a sufﬁciency of antioxidants and
supplementation could be viewed as rarely advantageous.
Although not all antioxidants are equal, a variety of cancer
chemoprevention clinical trials (with, e.g., selenium or vitamin
E supplementation) have uniformly yielded negative results. Such
trials are notoriously difﬁcult to design and implement because
endpoints require long-term follow-up. Perhaps there are ways to
redesign and revisit prevention trials; however, somewhat contentiously there is growing evidence that antioxidants may in fact
worsen cancer prognosis and survival. In this regard, animal
studies using a genetically engineered mouse model that mimics
early non–small cell lung cancer showed that antioxidants were
harmful, not beneﬁcial (19). With either NAC or derivatives of
vitamin E, they reported that these antioxidants increased cancer
burden and mortality in a dose-dependent manner. There are even
reports that antioxidants can accelerate metastatic spread in
mouse models of melanoma (20). Thus, with an existing burden
of cancer cells, it may be detrimental to provide additional sources
of antioxidant molecules and perhaps this is not the same in precancerous situations. Nevertheless, an explanation for such results
may lie in the earlier observations that cancer cells frequently
deviate from the normal redox threshold and as such their
buffering capacities are anomalous. Provision of additional reducing equivalents could serve to stimulate growth and encourage
survival. In perspective, care should be demonstrated in the simple
interpretation that antioxidants are uniformly advantageous.
In conclusion, perhaps this earlier Cancer Research article
appealed to an audience who were interested in the importance
of glutathione pathways in a cancer setting. Even today, redox
anomalies appear to be associated with a range of human pathologies and there is every reason to believe that their continued
appreciation will present research opportunities that will further
our understanding of the cancer phenotype.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received November 13, 2015; accepted November 18, 2015; published
online January 4, 2016.

References
1. Tew KD. Glutathione-associated enzymes in anticancer drug resistance.
Cancer Res 1994;54:4313–20.
2. Zhang Y, Du Y, Le W, Wang K, Kieffer N, Zhang J. Redox control of the
survival of healthy and diseased cells. Antioxid Redox Signal 2011;15:
2867–908.
3. Go YM, Jones DP. Thiol/disulﬁde redox states in signaling and sensing. Crit
Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2013;48:173–81.
4. Jones DP. Radical-free biology of oxidative stress. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
2008;295:C849–68.

8 Cancer Res; 76(1) January 1, 2016

5. Miseta A, Csutora P. Relationship between the occurrence of cysteine in
proteins and the complexity of organisms. Mol Biol Evol 2000;17:1232–9.
6. Grek CL, Zhang J, Manevich Y, Townsend DM, Tew KD. Causes and
consequences of cysteine S-glutathionylation. J Biol Chem 2013;288:
26497–504.
7. Tew KD, Manevich Y, Grek C, Xiong Y, Uys J, Townsend DM.
The role of glutathione S-transferase P in signaling pathways
and S-glutathionylation in cancer. Free Radic Biol Med 2011;51:
299–313.

Cancer Research Commentary

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Research 75th Anniversary Commentary

8. Sun C, Shi ZZ, Zhou X, Chen L, Zhao XM. Prediction of S-glutathionylation sites based on protein sequences. PLoS One 2013;8:e55512.
9. Wang AL, Tew KD. Increased glutathione-S-transferase activity in a cell line
with acquired resistance to nitrogen mustards. Cancer Treat Rep 1985;
69:677–82.
10. Batist G, Tulpule A, Sinha BK, Katki AG, Myers CE, Cowan KH.
Overexpression of a novel anionic glutathione transferase in multidrug-resistant human breast cancer cells. J Biol Chem 1986;261:
15544–9.
11. Townsend DM, Manevich Y, He L, Hutchens S, Pazoles CJ, Tew KD.
Novel role for glutathione S-transferase pi. Regulator of protein SGlutathionylation following oxidative and nitrosative stress. J Biol
Chem 2009;284:436–45.
12. Adler V, Yin Z, Fuchs SY, Benezra M, Rosario L, Tew KD, et al. Regulation of
JNK signaling by GSTp. EMBO J 1999;18:1321–34.
13. Baldini M, Sacchetti C. Effect of cystine and cysteine on human bone
marrow cultured in medium deﬁcient in amino acids. Rev Hematol
1953;8:3–19.
14. Cipolleschi MG, Dello Sbarba P, Olivotto M. The role of hypoxia in the
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells. Blood 1993;82:2031–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

15. Iwasaki H, Suda T. Cancer stem cells and their niche. Cancer Sci 2009;
100:1166–72.
16. Hosokawa K, Arai F, Yoshihara H, Nakamura Y, Gomei Y, Iwasaki H,
et al. Function of oxidative stress in the regulation of hematopoietic
stem cell-niche interaction. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007;363:
578–83.
17. Lyons RM, Wilks ST, Young S, Brown GL. Oral ezatiostat HCl (Telintra(R),
TLK199) and Idiopathic Chronic Neutropenia (ICN): A case report of
complete response of a patient with G-CSF resistant ICN following teatment with ezatiostat, a glutathione S-transferase P1-1 (GSTP1-1) inhibitor.
J Hematol Oncol 2011;4:43.
18. Grek CL, Townsend DM, Tew KD. The impact of redox and thiol status on
the bone marrow: Pharmacological intervention strategies. Pharmacol
Ther 2011;129:172–84.
19. Sayin VI, Ibrahim MX, Larsson E, Nilsson JA, Lindahl P, Bergo MO.
Antioxidants accelerate lung cancer progression in mice. Sci Transl Med
2014;6:221ra15.
20. Le Gal K, Ibrahim MX, Wiel C, Sayin VI, Akula MK, Karlsson C, et al.
Antioxidants can increase melanoma metastasis in mice. Sci Transl Med
2015;7:308re8.

Cancer Res; 76(1) January 1, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

9

Glutathione-Associated Enzymes In Anticancer Drug Resistance
Kenneth D. Tew
Cancer Res 2016;76:7-9.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/1/7

Cited articles

This article cites 20 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/1/7.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

