the tobacco industry or threats citing international trade and
investment agreements are:
• Graphic warnings in the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and
Thailand.
• Plain packaging in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
• Pack-size restrictions in Peru.
• A ban on ﬂavorings and additives in Brazil.
• The Tobacco Products Directive from the European
Commission.
• Retail display bans in Norway and Scotland.
• Tobacco marketing bans in the Philippines and South
Africa.
• Smoke-free laws in Pakistan and the Philippines.
• Bans on sales of tobacco products near educational
establishments in India.
• A health law in Indonesia.
“One of the problems with the international trade
agreement system is that these decisions don’t have any legal
precedent, so even if Philip Morris loses in the Uruguay case,
technically there is nothing that can stop them from bringing
another case along the same lines,” Myers says. “A company
with virtually unlimited resources like Philip Morris can
continue to use these cases to threaten and intimidate countries
even if they’re likely to lose.”
The fund will show these countries they have an ally and
demonstrate to the tobacco industry that the Bloomberg
Philanthropies and The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation are
prepared to “go toe to toe with the industry,” Myers adds.
In addition to providing ﬁnancial and legal assistance to
low-income and middle-income countries facing legal action,
the Anti-Tobacco Trade Litigation Fund will support:
• Technical assistance in legislative drafting and documentation to avoid legal challenges and trade disputes.
• Coordinated eﬀorts to document industry wrongdoing.
• Communications support to educate the public about
industry challenges to tobacco control policy and abuse
of the trade system.
• Assistance in accessing knowledgeable tobacco control
experts and mobilizing support among the global public
health community.
• Creation of a network of senior lawyers experienced in
trade litigation to support countries.

David Versus Goliath?
Tobacco control advocates note the importance of enacting
strong antitobacco laws in developing countries that are
increasingly being targeted by the industry. There currently are
1 billion smokers worldwide, according to The Tobacco Atlas,
produced by the American Cancer Society and the World
Lung Foundation, which was unveiled earlier this year (www.
tobaccoatlas.org). The Atlas also notes that although 90% of
the world’s population live in countries that have ratiﬁed the
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, only 10% are
covered by comprehensive tobacco advertising, promotion, and
sponsorship bans, and only 16% by comprehensive smoke-free
laws.

Sovereign countries should be
able to initiate public health laws
and defend them on the basis of
their public health merit.
—Kenneth Michael Cummings,
PhD, MPH
Kenneth Michael Cummings, PhD, MPH, a tobacco policy
expert at the Hollings Cancer Center of the Medical University
of South Carolina in Charleston, calls the Anti-Tobacco Trade
Litigation Fund helpful, but says he is not sure it is enough to
ﬁght Big Tobacco, which has been known to spend $10 million
on a single legal case. “Four million is a good start, but it’s like
putting a quarter on the table as a tip,” he adds. “Others should
be contributing to the fund, and higher-income countries
should be helping lower-income countries.”
Dr. Cummings likens the ongoing battle by individuals,
lawmakers, and the public health community against the
tobacco industry to a true “David versus Goliath” story. He
references the “Patton letter,” a 1988 letter by an attorney for R.
J. Reynolds Tobacco Company paraphrasing General George S.
Patton by stating that the industry wins lawsuits not by spending
all their money but by forcing their opponents to spend all of
theirs. “Sovereign countries should be able to initiate public
health laws and defend them on the basis of their public health
merit,” he says. “We need to keep ﬁghting for policies that make
it impossible for tobacco companies to do business as usual.”
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28998

ASCO Report Highlights Challenges in Delivering High-Quality Care

A

s the numbers of patients with cancer and survivors of
the disease continue to grow along with rising health
care costs, oncology practices must examine how they can
transform themselves to deal with these pressures, according
to a new study by the American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO).1 “The State of Cancer Care in America: 2015” report,
published in the Journal of Oncology Practice and presented
at a Congressional brieﬁng, describes trends in the oncology
workforce and practice environment that impact patient care
and access.
2292

Positive developments cited in the report include the fact
that in 2014, the US Food and Drug Administration added 10
new treatments to its list of more than 170 approved anticancer
agents while also approving 4 new medical devices and tests that
may improve early cancer detection. At the same time, more
than 770 therapies currently are in the research and development
pipeline, including therapies that are demonstrating dramatic
results.
Nevertheless, the report outlines a number of challenges
in delivering high-quality care, including growing cancer

Cancer

July 15, 2015

Majority of Survivors of
Childhood Cancer Experience
Comorbidities

E

care demand, disparities in access to cancer care, an oncology
workforce that remains constant but may soon be outpaced by
growing demand, an aging oncology workforce, gaps in racial
and ethnic workforce diversity, poor coverage in rural America,
and increasing professional burnout.
At the same time, oncology practices are continuing to
experience extreme volatility, dealing with issues such as:
• Financial instability and changing payment models. For
example, 72% of practices report continuing to work
in a fee-for-service payment system. Medicare recently
announced plans to dramatically change 85% of that
system based on a quality-based model by 2016 and 90%
by 2018.
• Continuing practice consolidation. Approximately onequarter of all community-based oncology practices report
that they are likely to aﬃliate with a hospital over the next
year.
• Major concerns over preauthorization. The administrative
burden imposed on insurance companies is reducing time
for patient care.
Peter Yu, MD, past-president of ASCO, says that patients
need providers to ﬁnd better ways to pay for and incentivize
quality, value-based care. Toward that end, ASCO is developing
and testing an alternative payment approach.

Congress Can Help

© ROB HILL / FOTOLIA.COM

The report also makes a series of recommendations, including
the following to Congress:
• As the 21st Century Cures initiative moves forward in
the House and the “Innovation for Healthier Americans”
initiative progresses in the Senate, Congress must ensure
interoperability of medical records and provide resources
for patients to track and report quality measures.
• Support continued breakthroughs in cancer therapies by
increasing the budgets of the National Institutes of Health
and the National Cancer Institute.

Reference
1. American Society of Clinical Oncology. The state of cancer care in America,
2015: a report by the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Oncol Pract.
2015;11:79-113.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29539

stimates indicate that although the number of survivors of
childhood cancers is increasing, the majority of those who
have survived for 5 years or longer have at least 1 chronic health
condition, according to new data.1
Researchers, led by Siobhan Phillips, PhD, MPH, assistant
professor of preventive medicine at Northwestern University
in Chicago, Illinois, estimated the number of survivors of
childhood cancer in the United States to be 388,501, an
increase of 59,849 from a 2005 estimate by investigators at the
NCI. Among the survivors, approximately 84% survived for 5
or more years after diagnosis.
The researchers evaluated cancer incidence and survival
data recorded between 1975 and 2011 from 9 Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results registries (SEER) in the United
States and data from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study
cohort. The studies provided information regarding adverse and
late eﬀects of cancer treatment from more than 14,000 longterm survivors of childhood cancers at 26 cancer centers across
the United States and Canada. Using the probability of each
measure of morbidity from the Childhood Cancer Survivor
Study, investigators then multiplied these estimates by the
relevant estimate number of US survivors from the SEER data.
Dr. Phillips and her colleagues, in collaboration with the
NCI and St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, found that an
estimated 70% of childhood cancer survivors had a mild or
moderate chronic condition, whereas an estimated 32% had a
severe, disabling, or life-threatening chronic condition.

“Profound” Burden of Disease
The ﬁndings demonstrate that a singular focus on curing
cancer does not oﬀer a complete picture of cancer survivorship,
Dr. Phillips says, adding that the burden of these chronic
conditions is “profound, both in occurrence and severity.” As
a result, she urges the cancer community to focus on how to
eﬀectively decrease the morbidity burden and develop care and
rehabilitation models that optimize longevity and well-being
among survivors of childhood cancer.
Dr. Phillips says many of the morbidities are somewhat
modiﬁable in the general population; however, the same
prevention guidelines may not apply to survivors of childhood
cancers. Among the preventive factors that health care
researchers and providers need to better understand are physical
activity, diet, and the treatment of characteristics that may make
survivors more susceptible to these morbidities, she says.

Reference
1. Phillips SM, Alfano CM, Perna FM, Glasgow RE. Accelerating translation
of physical activity and cancer survivorship research into practice:
recommendations for a more integrated and collaborative approach. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014;23:687-699.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29540

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

July 15, 2015

2293

