Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 31

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sub-apoptotic dosages of pro-oxidant vitamin cocktails sensitize
human melanoma cells to NK cell lysis
Elisa Tremante1, Lory Santarelli2, Elisa Lo Monaco1, Camilla Sampaoli1,
Tiziano Ingegnere1, Roberto Guerrieri3, Marco Tomasetti2,*, Patrizio Giacomini1,*
1

Laboratory of Immunology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, 00144 Rome, Italy

2

Department of Clinical and Molecular Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, 60020 Ancona, Italy

3

Center of Excellence on Electronic Systems (ARCES), University of Bologna, 40123 Bologna, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Patrizio Giacomini, e-mail: giacomini@ifo.it
Keywords: melanoma, autoschizis, oxidative stress, NKG2D, Natural Cytotoxicity Receptors (NCR)
Received: April 23, 2015 	Accepted: August 24, 2015 	Published: September 05, 2015

ABSTRACT
Alpha-tocopheryl succinate (αTOS), vitamin K3 (VK3) and vitamin C (ascorbic
acid, AA) were previously shown to synergistically promote different death pathways
in carcinoma cells, depending on their concentrations and combinations. Similar
effects were observed herein in melanoma cells, although αTOS behaved as an
antagonist. Interestingly, suboptimal cell death-inducing concentrations (1.5 μM
αTOS/20 μM AA/0.2 μM VK3) effectively up-regulated activating Natural Killer (NK)
cell ligands, including MICA (the stress-signaling ligand of the NKG2D receptor), and/
or the ligands of at least one of the natural cytotoxicity receptors (NKp30, NKp44
and NKp46) in 5/6 melanoma cell lines. Only an isolated MICA down-regulation was
seen. HLA class I, HLA class II, ULBP1, ULBP2, ULBP3, Nectin-2, and PVR displayed
little, if any, change in expression. Ligand up-regulation resulted in improved lysis by
polyclonal NK cells armed with the corresponding activating receptors. These results
provide the first evidence for concerted induction of cell death by cell-autonomous
and extrinsic (immune) mechanisms. Alarming the immune system much below
the cell damage threshold may have evolved as a sensitive readout of neoplastic
transformation and oxidative stress. Cocktails of vitamin analogues at slightly
supra-physiological dosages may find application as mild complements of melanoma
treatment, and in chemoprevention.

combinations of αTOS, VK3 and AA is a convenient
pharmacological strategy to tune oxidative stress, and
selectively trigger distinct pathways of cell death.
One may then hypothesize that the αTOS/VK3/AA
cocktail might be effective even below its death-induction
threshold. At these ultra-low dosages, the cocktail may no
longer induce direct cell death, but may trigger systemic
sensors of cellular stress such as Natural Killer (NK) cells,
that are programmed to recognize and kill target cells
expressing stress ligands [6–9].
Immune ligands that directly determine lytic
outcomes include: (a) classical Major Histocompatibility
Complex class I molecules (MHC I), that are both
activating and inhibitory; (b) non-classical MHC I
molecules such as the activating MHC I-Related Chain

INTRODUCTION
The triad apoptosis, autophagy, and necrosis
recapitulates the major accepted pathways of cell death
[1]. Alpha-tocopheryl succinate (αTOS, a redox-silent
analogue of vitamin E), vitamin K3 (VK3) and vitamin C
(ascorbic acid, AA) induce apoptotic cell death through
oxidative stress and mitochondrial destabilization. Of
interest, these compounds retain biological activity even
at subapoptotic concentrations. For instance, VK3 and
AA induce a caspase 3-independent cell death termed
autoschizis [2, 3], known to be intermediate between
apoptosis and necrosis [4]. Death-inducing dosages may
be further lowered by combining αTOS, VK3 and AA in
a ‘cocktail’ [5]. Thus, changing the concentrations and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31039

Oncotarget

A (MICA), UL40 Binding Protein (ULBP) 1, ULBP2
and ULBP3; and (c) non-MHC ligands such as Nectin 2
(CD112) and PolyoVirus Receptor (PVR, CD155). MICA
and ULBPs bind the triggering receptor NKG2D; Nectin 2
and PVR bind DNAX accessory molecule 1 (DNAM-1;
CD226). Other activating ligands, mostly unknown, bind
the Natural Cytototoxicity Receptors (NCRs) NKp30,
NKp44 and NKp46 [10, 11]. To our knowledge, none of
these ligand:receptor systems has been implicated in prooxidant treatment.
A combination of cDNA arrays, immunohisto­
chemistry, serology and immunological methods recently
identified a combined overexpression signature of MICA,
ULBPs and PVR in early-passage melanoma cells as
compared to autologous normal melanocytes from the
surrounding, intact skin of melanoma patients [12]. On this
basis, a panel comprising continuous and early-passage
melanoma cells was selected for treatment at sub-apoptosis
and sub-autoschizis dosages with a cocktail containing
αTOS, VK3 and AA. These cells were assessed for the
expression of immune ligands and their susceptibility to NK
cell lysis.
To our knowledge, this is the first study addressing
the existence of a direct link between two different, and
possibly convergent, programs leading to tumor cell death:
the classical, hard-wired, high-dose program sustained
by cell-autonomous mechanisms, and a novel putative
program, preliminarily described herein, that is low-dose,
soft-wired, extrinsic, and electively immune in nature.

checkpoint in prostate carcinoma [5, 13]. F0-1-β2m
melanoma cells were treated with αTOS alone, AA/VK3,
or αTOS/AA/VK3 at concentrations (30 μM αTOS,
400 μM AA, and 4 μM VK3; standard low dose hereafter)
that efficiently induce cell death upon combination
treatment (see Fig. 2D). Marked antagonistic effects
of αTOS were observed on both ROS formation and
AIF translocation induced by the AA/VK3 combination
(Fig. 3A and 3B). These observations account for the
peculiar antagonistic effects of αTOS in melanoma.
However, as shown in Fig. 3C, agonistic (AA/VK3)
as well as antagonistic (αTOS) effects were  no  longer
appreciable when the cocktail was diluted 20-fold (1.5
μM αTOS, 20 μM AA, 0.2 μM VK3; ultra-low dosage
hereafter). In summary, αTOS does not appreciably
interfere with AA and VK3 at ultra-low cocktail dosages,
e.g. when concentration drops below a critical deathinducing threshold.

Identification of a subliminal death-inducing
dosage of the αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail
Based on the above results, F0-1-β2m and
9  additional melanoma cell lines were tested at three
dosages: the standard low dosage, its 20-fold dilution
(ultra-low dosage), and an intermediate 15-fold dilution.
All the tested cells were sensitive to the cocktail, but to
different extents, as shown by propidium iodide uptake
in 5 representative cell lines (Fig. 4A). Four continuous
melanoma cell lines (F0-1-β2m, SK-MEL 37, SK-MEL 93
and M10) were the least sensitive. They were efficiently
killed at both the standard low dosage and at the
intermediate 15-fold dilution, but a slight further dilution
(20-fold, coinciding with the ultra-low dosage) resulted in
a sharp, partial recovery in cell viability, with propidium
iodide uptake decreasing below 20% (Fig. 4A). A similar
recovery was seen in 2 early-passage cell lines (Mel 11
and Mel 24; not shown), but not in another patient-derived
cell line (MNT-1), that remained extremely sensitive
even at the ultra-low cocktail dosage, propidium iodide
uptake exceeding 90% at all dosages (Fig. 4A). Finally,
the remaining early-passage cell lines (Mel 3, Mel 23, and
Mel 35) were the most sensitive, in that they displayed
> 80% propidium iodide uptake even at dosages 5 times
lower than the ultra-low dosage (not shown). As expected,
the typical autoschizis genomic DNA smearing was
exclusively visible at the standard low dosage in the
resistant, continuous cell lines (representative results in
Fig. 4B and 4C).
In summary, the αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail
induces overt cell death in 10 melanoma cells, but 6 of
them display a sharp cytotoxic threshold between the
intermediate and the ultra-low dosages. These 6 cell
lines were selected to assess changes in the expression
of immune ligands at subliminal (right below threshold)
death-inducing regimens. MNT-1 cells were included as

RESULTS
Cell death induction by αTOS, AA and VK3 in
melanoma: Dose-dependence and mechanisms
In previous studies, some of us reported that αTOS,
AA and VK3 act both individually and synergistically to
induce prostate carcinoma cell death [5, 13]. In partial
analogy with prostate carcinoma, single-agent treatment
with αTOS and AA induced death in 4 melanoma cell
lines at 80–100 μM and 400–2000 μM respectively,
whereas VK3 had a negligible effect over a wide range of
concentrations (Fig. 1).
Next, synergistic interactions were assessed in a
representative melanoma cell line (F0-1-β2m) treated with
αTOS and/or AA and/or VK3. VK3 remained essentially
ineffective in combination with αTOS (Fig. 2A), but it did
synergize with AA (Fig. 2B). In contrast, and surprisingly,
αTOS did not increase, but rather suppressed, cell death
induced by either AA alone (Fig. 2C) or the optimal VK3/
AA combination (Fig. 2D).
To understand why αTOS acts as a pure agonist
in prostate carcinoma but behaves as an antagonist in
melanoma, we assessed Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)
and nuclear translocation of the Apoptosis Inducing
Factor (AIF). The latter is a crucial cell death induction
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31040

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Induction of cell death in melanoma cell lines treated with αTOS, AA and VK3. The indicated cell lines were
seeded into 96-well tissue culture plates at 3 × 104 per well, and were treated for 24 h with increasing concentration of αTOS, VK3, and AA.
Their viability was assessed by crystal violet.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31041

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Synergistic induction of cell death with αTOS, AA and VK3. F0-1-β2m melanoma cells were treated with αTOS, AA
and VK3 (alone and in combination) at the indicated concentrations. Cell death was assessed by crystal violet, and was expressed in the
form of a Combination Index (CI), calculated as described in Materials and Methods. Synergistic (CI < 1), additive (CI = 1) or antagonistic
(CI > 1) effects of sets of two A–C. and three D. drugs are expressed as the mean ± SD of the percentage variation with respect to the control
(untreated cells) of 3 independent experiments carried out in duplicate.

a control, whereas the remaining early-passage cell lines
were not further tested in light of their extreme sensitivity
to the cocktail and lack of a threshold effect in the selected
dosage range.

DNAM-1 ligands and the ligands of NKp30, NKp44, and
NKp46. Treatment at the ultra-low dosage induced surface
up-regulation in continuous F0-1-β2m, SK-MEL 37, and
M10  cells in 3 separate experiments,  one  of which is
shown in Fig. 5. MICA was variably up-regulated.
Ligands for at least one of the NKp30, NKp44 and
NKp46 receptors were up-regulated in F0-1-β2m and
SK-MEL 37, but not in M10 cells. Occasionally, ULBP2
was very slightly decreased, whereas minimal or no
effects were seen on ULBP1, ULBP3, Nectin-2 and PVR.
Accordingly, binding of DNAM-1 Ig fusion proteins
remained essentially unchanged, or was very slightly
enhanced. Identical experiments with early-passage Mel
11 and Mel 24 cells demonstrated similar and strong
up-regulation of either or both NKp44 and NKp46, and
also revealed a slight down-regulation of MICA in Mel
24 only (Fig.  S2). In contrast, SK-MEL 93 cells were
reproducibly unresponsive (not shown).
It may be concluded that 5 out of 6 melanoma cell
lines respond to the αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail with moderate
up-regulation, and occasionally slight down-regulation, of

Immunophenotypic up-regulation of activating
NK cell ligands
MHC class I (HLA-A, -B, -C in humans) and MHC
class II (HLA-DR, -DQ, -DP) molecules were tested
first. We found that the intermediate dosage induces flow
cytometry artifacts, particularly in the cocktail-sensitive
MNT-1 cells, whereas the ultra-low dosage induces
neither artifacts nor changes in surface MHC expression
in F0-1-β2m, SK-MEL 37, SK-MEL 93 and M10 (Fig. S1).
The ultra-low dosage was therefore selected for further
studies on activating NK cell ligands.
NKG2D ligands (MICA, ULBP-1, ULBP-2, and
ULBP-3) and DNAM-1 ligands (Nectin-2 and PVR)
were assessed by flow cytometry with specific mAbs. Ig
fusion constructs were employed to cumulatively detect
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31042

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of αTOS on the formation of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) and the nuclear translocation of
Apoptosis Inducing Factor (AIF). A. F0-1-β2m cells were treated as indicated, and ROS were assessed in a time course experiment
by measuring the oxidation of 2′7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate to 2′7′-dichlorofluorescein (DCF). B and C. F0-1-β2m cells were treated
for 180 minutes as indicated, and AIF was assessed in organelle (org), and nuclear (nucl) fractions by Western blotting. Densitometric
values of specific bands was normalized to actin (AIForg) and laminin (AIFnucl), and displayed as mean values ±SD of three independent
experiments. Comparisons among groups were determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc analysis; asterisks mark significant
differences between treated and untreated cells (p < 0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31043

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Identification of a subliminal death-inducing dosage of the αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail. A. melanoma cell lines were

treated for 16 h at the indicated dosages of the cocktail (refer to the top panel for bar colors), and assessed for propidium iodide exclusion
(% of viable cells) in a flow cytometer (Becton & Dickinson, Mountain View, CA). B and C. genomic DNAs from cells treated as in A at the
indicated (refer to top panel) concentrations were electrophoresed under native conditions and visualized by EtBr staining. ULD, Ultra-Low
Dosage; ID, intermediate Dosage; STD, Standard Dosage.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31044

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of the αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail on the surface expression of activating ligands of NK cells. Melanoma cell
lines were either left untreated, or treated for 16 h at the indicated concentrations of the cocktail, and tested by flow cytometry with mAbs
or Ig fusion proteins, as indicated. An IgG2a/b isotype mix and an irrelevant Ig fusion protein were used as negative controls.

activating NK cell ligands. Use of VK3/AA combinations
not containing αTOS had very similar effects as compared
to the three-component cocktail in continuous cell lines
(supplemental Table S1). Therefore, ultra-low dosages
of AA/VK3 induce immunophenotypic up-regulation in
melanoma cells resistant to the death-inducing effects of
the cocktail, and the inclusion of αTOS does not detectably
influence immunophenotype (Fig. 5), AIF translocation
(Fig. 3C), or cell viability (Fig. 2).

readout that possibly more closely reflects physiological
NK cell activity. Polyclonal NK cells were tested as
effectors in microcytotoxicity assays using the F0-1-β2m,
SK-MEL 37, SK-MEL 93 and M10 melanoma cell
lines as targets. Early-passage Mel 11 and Mel 24 cells
were not tested, since they non-specifically release 51Cr,
presumably because these cell lines are poorly adapted to
cell culture and become damaged upon detachment from
plastic dishes. The αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail enhanced
the susceptibility to lysis of F0-1-β2m, SK-MEL 37
and M10, e.g. the three continuous cell lines in which
NK cell ligands are up-regulated, and this effect was
substantially blocked by antibodies or Ig fusion proteins
to NKG2D and NCRs, as expected (Fig. 6). In contrast,
lysis was not detectably enhanced in SK-MEL 93 cells
(not shown) in which NK cell ligands are not detectably
up-regulated. Thus, treatment with αTOS/VK3/AA at
dosages insufficient to induce overt oxidative stress and
cell death does enhance the susceptibility of melanoma
cell lines to immune lysis by NK cells.

The αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail enhances NK cell
lysis of melanoma cells
To assess the functional consequences of
the up-regulation of NK cell ligands, polyclonal
NK cells (>98%  CD56+/CD3-) were obtained
by immunomagnetic sorting from the PBMCs of
healthy donors in the absence of Interleukin-2
(IL-2). These  effectors lyse less efficiently than
in vitro IL-2-activated NK cells [14], providing a lytic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31045

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of treatment with the αTOS/VK3/AA cocktail on the susceptibility of melanoma cells to lysis by NK
cells. Target melanoma cells treated with the cocktail at the ultra-low dosage for 16 h were compared to untreated cells in a standard
Cr release assay, using polyclonal NK cells from a healthy donor as effectors, at the indicated Effector:Target (E:T) ratios. Effectors
were pre-incubated either with a control mAb to CD56 that binds NK cells but does not significantly influence cytotoxicity [12, 14], or
with blocking antibodies/Ig fusion proteins to DNAM-1, NKG2D, and Natural Cytotoxicity Receptors (NCRs; a mix of Ig fusions to
NKp30, NKp44 and NKp46). Asterisks identify significant (t-test) differences (p < 0.04) at each E:T ratio, as follows. * cocktail-treated vs
untreated target melanoma cells. ** DNAM-1, NKG2D, or NCR blockade vs CD56 control in the same graph.
51

DISCUSSION

considered in view of its known favorable in vivo effects
on the innate immune system [15, 16].
Of interest, all (4/4) the continuous melanoma cell
lines, but only some (2/6) of the early/medium-passaged
cell lines resisted death induction to an extent sufficient
to reveal immunophenotypic up-regulation. In contrast,
sub-liminal death-inducing dosages could not be identified
in the 4 remaining early-/medium-passaged cell lines,
presumably because limited adaption to growth in culture
and/or other unknown factors exacerbated cocktail toxicity.
Whatever the interpretation, in 6 resistant melanoma cell
lines a similar threshold dosage was identified that does
not depend on in vitro passaging: above and below this
dosage, autoschizis and phenotypic up-regulation reveal
the existence of two alternative but most likely integrated
death pathways.
This is not surprising, since several immune functions
have become integrated into general housekeeping functions
during evolution. For instance, peptide antigens resulting
from the proteasomal degradation of cellular proteins are
re-cycled by the immune system as peptide antigens, and
nascent proteins not destined for disposal are forcefully
degraded to promptly alert the immune system for damaged,
infected or transformed cells [17]. Likewise, the same

Sub-lethal concentrations of VK3 and AA, together
with αTOS at a sub-apoptotic dosage, have previously
been shown to efficiently induce prostate carcinoma
cell death as a result of DNA fragmentation, lysosomal/
mitochondrial perturbation, and cytochrome c release, but
in the absence of appreciable caspase activation [5, 13].
In the present study, we show that cell death/autoschizis
may also be induced in melanoma cells at a standard
low dosage, but with a major difference: in melanoma
αTOS behaves as an antagonist of VK3/AA, since it
inhibits nuclear translocation of the Apoptosis Inducing
Factor (AIF).
Although this argues against the inclusion of
αTOS in a death-inducing cocktail, at 20-fold cocktail
dilutions (ultra-low dosage) αTOS no longer exerts
antagonistic effects of any kind, whereas VK3 and AA
concentrations are sufficient to up-regulate activating
NK cell ligands. Thus, at least under the present
experimental  conditions,  and with regard to the tested
ligands, two- and three-component cocktails may be
equally effective. The inclusion of αTOS, although
unnecessary for immunophenotypic modulation, may be
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31046

Oncotarget

promiscuous chaperones that act as monomers to assist
in the folding of generic cellular glycoproteins have been
incorporated in a single supramolecular complex, termed the
peptide loading complex, that also contains MHC-I-specific
chaperones [18, 19]. Integration between housekeeping
functions and the immune system may also be exploited
for therapy, as exemplified by bortezomid, a first-in-class
proteasome inhibitor and anticancer drug that has become a
standard treatment for myeloma primarily due to its ability
to impair growth and survival while exerting a variety of
less understood effects on the immune system [20].
Likewise, protection from cellular (oxidative) stress
involves intracellular sensors inducing programmed
cell death, as shown previously by many groups, and
surface ligands alerting NK cells, as shown herein for the
first time. As also shown herein, cell-autonomous death
programs and extrinsic immune mechanisms operate at
dosages differing from 100-fold to 20-fold, depending on
the cell line. NK cells may thus be alerted much before a
harmful toxic threshold is reached. Like in proteasomal
degradation and chaperone-assisted peptide loading onto
MHC molecules, immunity may be viewed as the ultimate,
specialized add-on that complements generic self-defense
mechanisms.
All the cocktail-responsive NK cell ligands tested
herein (particularly MICA, but also the ligands of the
NKp30, NKp44 and NKp46 receptors) signal stress to
NK cells [6, 8, 21]. Application of oxidative stress taking
advantage of relatively non-toxic natural compounds such
as vitamin K, vitamin C, and an analogue of vitamin E,
may have applicative interest. Other types of cellular
stress (e.g. heat shock, ER stress response etc.) may be
more difficult to induce, control and exploit.
Whereas activation appears to be the prevalent NK
cell response to the αTOS/VK3/AA cocktail, in 2/6 cell
lines we also observed down-regulation of activating
ligands, particularly MICA in an early-passage cell line.
This suggests caution, since self-inhibitory and negative
feedback mechanisms may limit the potential benefit of
direct NK cell activation. For instance, oxidative stress
has been shown to up-regulate PVR on the surface of T
lymphocytes, resulting in NK cell suppression of T cell
responses [22]. Therefore, the response to oxidative stress
is not one way, but dual, e.g. it is the result of integration
between activation and inhibition. This is not surprising:
the immune system has built-in internal balances, and NK
cell activation is often mirrored by reduced T cell function,
as recently reviewed by us [23]. Also of relevance, chronic
exposure to activating ligands has long been known to
tolerize NK cells [24], and lymphoid stress responses to
activating NK ligands show high inter-individual variation
and are tuned to individual dose bandwidths [25]. In spite
of the above limitations, the αTOS/AA/VK3 cocktail
employed herein has several favorable features, including
an extremely low inherent toxicity (at ultra-low dosages),
and the possibility of intermittent administration. These
may help thwarting oxidative stress against the tumor,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

preventing chronic stimulation, and minimizing negative
feedbacks.
Vitamins and vitamin analogues have been shown to
sensitize tumor cells to chemotherapy [26]. If predominant
NK cell activation will be confirmed by further studies,
αTOS, VK3 and AA should be sufficiently safe to be
used for intermittent chemoprevention and long-term/
low-toxicity adjuvant (immuno)-therapy of melanoma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and biochemicals
Characteristics and identity verification of
continuous (F-01-β2m, M10, SK-MEL 37 and SK-MEL
93), early-passage (Mel 3, Mel 11, Mel 23, Mel 24, and
Mel 35) and medium-term passaged (MNT-1) melanoma
cell lines have been described [27, 28]. For further details
on establishment, passaging and identity verification see
Supplemental Materials and Methods. αTOS, VK3 and AA
were obtained from Sigma (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA).
Genomic DNA was extracted by phenol/chlorophorm, and
electrophoresed on a standard agarose (0.8%) gel.

Cell viability and drug combination analysis
Melanoma cell lines were plated in 96-well
flat-bottom tissue culture plates at 3.0 × 104 per well,
and allowed to attach overnight. Then, they were incubated
for 24 hrs with αTOS (10–100 μM), VK3 (1–7 μM), and
AA (100–2000 μM), alone or in combination. Cell viability
was determined by the crystal violet assay (2%  crystal
violet in 2% ethanol). Absorbance was read at 570 nm
in an ELISA plate reader, and control absorbance was
normalized to 100%. Survival curves were generated and
the IC50 values determined. The effect of single drugs and
their combinations was assessed by plotting the percentage
of dead cells after treatment, and by the combination index
(CI), using the CalcuSyn1 software. CI is a quantitative
measure of the degree of pharmacological interaction
between different drugs. CI  =  1.0 denotes additivity;
CI > 1.0 denotes antagonism; CI values between 1.0 and
0.7, 0.7 and 0.3, and < 0.3 denote slight, moderate and
strong synergism, respectively. Results are expressed
as the mean ±SD of three independent experiments
performed in eight replicate wells for each experimental
point. Intracellular hydrogen peroxide levels were assessed
using the fluorescent dye 2′7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate
(DCFDA; oxidized by hydrogen peroxide to DCF), as
described in Supporting Information.

Subcellular fractionation and western blotting
Cells were permeabilized and fractionated
into cytosolic, organelle and nuclear fractions
by permeabilization, centrifugation, and Dounce
31047

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

homogenization, as described in Supporting Information.
The fractions were electrophoresed and blotted onto
nitrocellulose filters for antibody staining.

Rocco Fraioli and Maria Vincenza Sarcone
are gratefully acknowledged for skillful technical
assistance, and for secretarial support, respectively.
Dr.  Marco  Colonna, Washington University, St. Louis
MO, generously provided antibodies to PVR.

Flow cytometry
Melanoma cells were stained on ice with
either fluorochrome-labeled antibodies, or with a
predetermined, optimal (10 μg/ml) concentration
of primary antibody/chimeric Ig. In the latter case,
primary antibody binding was revealed by FITClabeled rabbit antibodies to either mouse or human Ig
(Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). Isotype-matched control
antibodies, or a chimeric Ig of irrelevant specificity
were included as negative controls. Specifically bound
fluorescence was immediately analyzed without fixation
by a FACScan flow cytometer (Beckton & Dickinson,
Mountain View, CA). mAbs W6/32 [29] to MHC-I is
secreted by a hybridoma obtained from ATCC. The
pan class II HLA molecules mAb KUL-01 has been
described [30]. Antibodies to MICA (159227), ULBP1
(170818), ULBP2 (165903), ULBP3 (166510), and
recombinant human Fc chimeras bearing the binding
site of immune receptors DNAM-1-Ig, NKp30-Ig,
NKp44-Ig and NKp46-Ig, were from R&D Systems
(Minneapolis, MN).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
Supported by Associazione Italiana Ricerca
sul Cancro (AIRC) IG 14204 grant (PG). C.S. is the
recipient of a post-doctoral Fellowship (year 2015) from
Fondazione Umberto Veronesi.

REFERENCES
1.	 Galluzzi L, Vitale I, Abrams JM, Alnemri ES,
Baehrecke  EH, Blagosklonny MV, Dawson TM,
Dawson VL, El-Deiry WS, Fulda S, Gottlieb E, Green DR,
Hengartner MO, Kepp O, Knight RA, Kumar S, et al.
Molecular definitions of cell death subroutines: recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death. Cell
Death Differ. 2012; 19:107–120.

NK cells and functional assays

2.	 Stapelberg M, Gellert N, Swettenham E, Tomasetti M,
Witting PK, Procopio A, Neuzil J. Alpha-tocopheryl
succinate inhibits malignant mesothelioma by disrupting the fibroblast growth factor autocrine loop: mechanism and the role of oxidative stress. J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:25369–25376.

Polyclonal NK cells (>98% CD3-/CD56+, as
assessed by flow cytometry with antibodies UCHT1
and MOC-1 from Dako, Denmark) were established by
culturing healthy donor PBMCs in vitro for 10 to 12
days on feeder layers of RPMI 8866 cells, as described
[14]. Microcytotoxicity was measured by a standard
4 h 51Cr release assay, at the indicated E:T ratios, using
as targets 5 × 103 melanoma cells per microplate well
in triplicate, as described [12]. Antibody SKII.4 to the
PolyoVirus Receptor (PVR, CD155) from Dr. Marco
Colonna, and antibodies to Nectin-2 (BD Pharmingen),
NKp30, NKp44 and NKp46 (R&D Systems) were used
in receptor-blockade experiments. NK cells were preincubated with antibodies and Ig fusion proteins
(10 μg/ml) at room temperature for 15 min, and then
dispensed into the 96 well microplates containing target
cells for the 51Cr release assay.

3.	 Neuzil J, Wang XF, Dong LF, Low P, Ralph SJ. Molecular
mechanism of ‘mitocan’-induced apoptosis in cancer cells
epitomizes the multiple roles of reactive oxygen species and
Bcl-2 family proteins. FEBS Lett. 2006; 580:5125–5129.
4.	 Jamison JM, Gilloteaux J, Taper HS, Calderon PB,
Summers JL. Autoschizis: a novel cell death. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2002; 63:1773–1783.
5.	 Tomasetti M, Strafella E, Staffolani S, Santarelli L,
Neuzil  J, Guerrieri R. alpha-Tocopheryl succinate
promotes selective cell death induced by vitamin K3
in combination with ascorbate. Br J Cancer. 2010;
102:1224–1234.
6.	 Gleimer M, Parham P. Stress management: MHC class I
and class I-like molecules as reporters of cellular stress.
Immunity. 2003; 19:469–477.

Statistical analysis
Comparisons among groups were determined
by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc analysis.
Differences with p < 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. All the data generated in this study were
analyzed using the SPSS software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	 Bauer S, Groh V, Wu J, Steinle A, Phillips JH, Lanier LL,
Spies T. Activation of NK cells and T cells by NKG2D,
a receptor for stress-inducible MICA. Science. 1999;
285:727–729.
31048

Oncotarget

8.	 Diefenbach A, Raulet DH. Natural killer cells: Stress out,
turn on, tune in. Curr Biol. 1999; 9:R851–R853.

glycosylation selectively regulates the generic folding of
HLA-Cw1. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:16469–16476.

9.	 Chan CJ, Smyth MJ, Martinet L. Molecular mechanisms of
natural killer cell activation in response to cellular stress.
Cell Death Differ. 2014; 21:5–14.

20.	 Mohty M, Brissot E, Savani BN, Gaugler B. Effects of
­bortezomib on the immune system: a focus on immune
regulation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2013;
19:1416–1420.

10.	 Lanier LL. NK cell recognition. Annu Rev Immunol. 2005;
23:225–274.

21.	 Horton NC, Mathew PA. NKp44 and Natural Cytotoxicity
Receptors as Damage-Associated Molecular Pattern
Recognition Receptors. Front Immunol. 2015; 6:31.

11.	 Vivier E, Raulet DH, Moretta A, Caligiuri MA, Zitvogel L,
Lanier LL, Yokoyama WM, Ugolini S. Innate or adaptive
immunity? The example of natural killer cells. Science.
2011; 331:44–49.

22.	 Ardolino M, Zingoni A, Cerboni C, Cecere F, Soriani A,
Iannitto ML, Santoni A. DNAM-1 ligand expression
on Ag-stimulated T lymphocytes is mediated by ROSdependent activation of DNA-damage response: relevance
for NK-T cell interaction. Blood. 2011; 117:4778–4786.

12.	 Tremante E, Ginebri A, Lo Monaco E, Benassi B,
Frascione  P, Grammatico P, Cappellacci S, Catricala C,
Arcelli D, Natali PG, Di Filippo F, Mottolese M, Visca P,
Benevolo M, Giacomini P. A melanoma immune response
signature including Human Leukocyte Antigen-E. Pigment
Cell Melanoma Res. 2014; 27:103–112.

23.	 Fruci D, Lo Monaco E, Cifaldi L, Locatelli F, Tremante E,
Benevolo M, Giacomini P. T and NK cells: two sides of
tumor immunoevasion. J Transl Med. 2013; 11:30.

13.	 Tomasetti M, Nocchi L, Neuzil J, Goodwin J, Nguyen M,
Dong L, Manzella N, Staffolani S, Milanese C,
Garrone B, Alleva R, Borghi B, Santarelli L, Guerrieri R.
Alpha-tocopheryl succinate inhibits autophagic survival of
prostate cancer cells induced by vitamin K3 and ascorbate
to trigger cell death. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e52263.

24.	 Orr MT, Lanier LL. Natural killer cell education and tolerance. Cell. 2010; 142:847–856.

14.	 Lo Monaco E, Tremante E, Cerboni C, Melucci E, Sibilio L,
Zingoni A, Nicotra MR, Natali PG, Giacomini P. Human
Leukocyte Antigen E contributes to protect tumor cells from
lysis by natural killer cells. Neoplasia. 2011; 13:822–830.

26.	 Kassouf W, Highshaw R, Nelkin GM, Dinney CP,
Kamat AM. Vitamins C and K3 sensitize human urothelial
tumors to gemcitabine. J Urol. 2006; 176:1642–1647.

25.	 Shafi S, Vantourout P, Wallace G, Antoun A, Vaughan R,
Stanford M, Hayday A. An NKG2D-mediated human lymphoid stress surveillance response with high interindividual
variation. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:113ra124.

27.	 Giacomini P, Giorda E, Pera C, Ferrara GB. An ID card
for tumour cell lines: HLA typing can help. Lancet Oncol.
2001; 2:658.

15.	 Tomasetti M, Rippo MR, Alleva R, Moretti S, Andera L,
Neuzil J, Procopio A. Alpha-tocopheryl succinate and
TRAIL selectively synergise in induction of apoptosis in
human malignant mesothelioma cells. Br J Cancer. 2004;
90:1644–1653.

28.	 Giorda E, Sibilio L, Martayan A, Moretti S, Venturo I,
Mottolese M, Ferrara GB, Cappellacci S, Eibenschutz L,
Catricalà C, Grammatico P, Giacomini P. The antigen processing machinery of Human Leukocyte Antigens: linked
patterns of gene expression in neoplastic cells. Cancer Res.
2003; 63:4119–4127.

16.	 Tomasetti M, Andera L, Alleva R, Borghi B, Neuzil J,
Procopio A. Alpha-tocopheryl succinate induces DR4 and
DR5 expression by a p53-dependent route: implication for
sensitisation of resistant cancer cells to TRAIL apoptosis.
FEBS Lett. 2006; 580:1925–1931.

29.	 Parham P, Barnstable CJ, Bodmer WF. Use of monoclonal antibody (W6/32) in structural studies of
HLA-A,B,C antigens. J Immunol. 1979; 23:342–349.

17.	 Yewdell JW, Bennink JR. Cut and trim: generating
MHC class I peptide ligands. Curr Opin Immunol. 2001;
13:13–18.

30.	 Giacomini P, Tecce R, Nicotra MR, Cohen BB,
Mazzilli MC, Natali PG. mAb KUL/05 identifies a denaturation-resistant determinant shared by class II MHC products
DR, DQ and DP. J Immunogen. 1989; 16:203–216.

18.	 Cresswell P, Ackerman AL, Giodini A, Peaper DR,
Wearsch PA. Mechanisms of MHC class I-restricted antigen processing and cross-presentation. Immunol Rev. 2005;
207:145–157.
19.	 Martayan A, Sibilio L, Setini A, Lo Monaco E,
Tremante E, Fruci D, Colonna M, Giacomini P. N-linked

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31049

Oncotarget

