Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Ruxolitinib synergizes with DMF to kill via BIM+BAD-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction and via reduced SOD2/TRX
expression and ROS
Mehrad Tavallai1, Laurence Booth1, Jane L. Roberts1, William P. McGuire2, Andrew
Poklepovic2 and Paul Dent1
1

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA

2

Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA

Correspondence to: Paul Dent, email: pdent@vcu.edu
Keywords: ruxolitinib, JAK-STAT, DMF, tecfidera, ROS
Received: January 28, 2016	

Accepted: February 29, 2016	

Published: March 15, 2016

ABSTRACT
We determined whether the myelofibrosis drug ruxolitinib, an inhibitor of
Janus kinases 1/2 (JAK1 and JAK2), could interact with the multiple sclerosis drug
dimethyl-fumarate (DMF) to kill tumor cells; studies used the in vivo active form of
the drug, mono-methyl fumarate (MMF). Ruxolitinib interacted with MMF to kill brain,
breast, lung and ovarian cancer cells, and enhanced the lethality of standard of care
therapies such as paclitaxel and temozolomide. MMF also interacted with other FDA
approved drugs to kill tumor cells including Celebrex® and Gilenya®. The combination
of [ruxolitinib + MMF] inactivated ERK1/2, AKT, STAT3 and STAT5; reduced expression
of MCL-1, BCL-XL, SOD2 and TRX; increased BIM expression; decreased BAD S112
S136 phosphorylation; and enhanced pro-caspase 3 cleavage. Expression of activated
forms of STAT3, MEK1 or AKT each significantly reduced drug combination lethality;
prevented BAD S112 S136 dephosphorylation and decreased BIM expression; and
preserved TRX, SOD2, MCL-1 and BCL-XL expression. The drug combination increased
the levels of reactive oxygen species in cells, and over-expression of TRX or SOD2
prevented drug combination tumor cell killing. Over-expression of BCL-XL or knock
down of BAX, BIM, BAD or apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) protected tumor cells. The
drug combination increased AIF : HSP70 co-localization in the cytosol but this event
did not prevent AIF : eIF3A association in the nucleus.

INTRODUCTION

transcription factors on tyrosine resulting in factor
dimerization and nuclear localization, and eventually
activation of various target genes [6-10]. Thus mutated
active forms of Janus kinases or the actions of mutated
activated growth factor receptors through autocrine loops
cause constitutive activation of the STAT1 / STAT3 /
STAT5 transcription factors that promote the malignant
phenotype. Growth factor receptors such as ERBB1
and c-MET also have been shown to phosphorylate
STAT factors on tyrosine residues thereby promoting
dimerization and activation [11, 12]. Cyto-protective
genes activated by STAT transcription factors are many
and include those coding for: anti-apoptotic genes such
as MCL-1, BCL-XL, BCL-2, survivin, HSP90, HSP70;
proliferation regulatory genes such as Cyclin D1, Cyclin
B, c-Jun, c-Fos; and angiogenesis promoting genes such
as HIF1α, and growth factors such as IL-6, FGF, EGF and

Immune cell activation in general and particularly
during rheumatoid arthritis progression requires signaling
by Janus kinases (JAK1, JAK2, JAK3). Thus drug
companies, attacking these kinases as drugable targets,
have developed several FDA approved agents in the hope
of reducing the negative sequelae of arthritis as well as
myelo-proliferative disorders: Jakafi and Xeljanz [1-4].
Jakafi (ruxolitinib) inhibits JAK1 and JAK2 whereas
Xeljanz (tofacitinib) inhibits JAK3 and to a lesser
extent JAK1. In the field of cancer research and therapy
ruxolitinib has been used, logically based its immune cell
actions, in the treatment of myelo-proliferative disorders,
myelogenous neoplasms and auto-immune diseases such
as psoriasis [5]. The Janus kinases phosphorylate Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STAT)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17290

Oncotarget

RESULTS

VEGF [13-20].
It is well known that in the majority of tumor
cell isolates from all malignancies, i.e. cells which
are generally not addicted to a specific single driving
oncogene, that in order to kill the tumor cell effectively
in vitro and in vivo requires the combinatorial use of two
or more modulators of signal transduction pathways. For
example, published studies from this laboratory combining
[MEK1/2 inhibitors + CHK1 inhibitors]; [sorafenib
/ regorafenib + PI3K/AKT inhibitors]; [sorafenib/
regorafenib + ERBB1/2 inhibitors]; [PARP1 inhibitors
+ CHK1 inhibitors]; [SRC family inhibitors + CHK1
inhibitors]; [ERBB1/2 inhibitors + CDK inhibitors];
and [HSP90 inhibitors + MEK1/2 inhibitors] are a good
illustration of this dual pathway inhibition to kill concept
[21-27].
More recent studies from this laboratory have
extended the dual pathway inhibition killing concept
by the use of multiplex assays on drug treated tumors
which permit analyses of plasma cytokine levels and the
activity status of multiple signal transduction parameters
in tumors / tumor cells surviving the dual pathway
inhibition treatment. For example, in 2011 we published
that the drugs pemetrexed and sorafenib interacted in a
synergistic fashion to kill tumor cells in vitro and in vivo
and recently very encouraging data from a phase I trial
combining these agents was presented at the 2015 ASCO
meeting (NCT01450384). Based on multiplex assays of
plasma and tumor material from additional rodent studies
we discovered that [pemetrexed + sorafenib] treatment
caused a compensatory activation of ERBB1/2 in the
tumor cells surviving two drug treatment. And, in vitro
and in vivo, the combination of an ERBB1/2 inhibitor with
[pemetrexed + sorafenib] significantly reduced tumor cell
viability and tumor growth [28]. Very recently a new phase
I trial has opened combining [regorafenib + sildenafil] for
all solid tumor patients (NCT02466802). Again, based
on multiplex assays of plasma and tumor material from
additional rodent studies we discovered that [regorafenib
+ sildenafil] treatment caused a compensatory activation
of AKT, with phosphorylation downstream of GSK3,
which correlated with increased plasma levels of bFGF
and PDGFbb. Inhibition of PI3K/AKT signaling strongly
enhanced [regorafenib + sildenafil] lethality across
multiple tumor cell lines [29]. This data is also consistent
with the findings in one of our prior studies combining
sorafenib/regorafenib with PI3K/AKT inhibitors.
These studies were performed to determine whether
the myelo-proliferative disease drug ruxolitinib could be
repurposed for use in cancer therapy, specifically whether
it would interact with the multiple sclerosis drug dimethylfumarate (DMF). The in vitro studies in the present
manuscript use ruxolitinib at a concentration of 2.5 µM
or less to reflect the probable safe achievable level of
bioactive drug in a patient.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

All prior publications examining the biological
actions DMF have used the drug at > > 15 µM which
is above the safe physiologically achievable plasma
level of the actual biologically active in vivo breakdown product of DMF, mono-methyl fumarate MMF,
and as a consequence the key target(s) of MMF in cells,
transformed or otherwise, are presently unknown. For
example, at 5 µM MMF, the in vitro changes in expression
of a previously claimed DMF target, Nrf2, are almost
unperceivable (data not shown). Initial studies determined
whether MMF interacted with the JAK1/2 inhibitor
ruxolitinib to kill lung cancer cells. Established lung
cancer cell lines and the July 2015 PDX model ADOR
and January 2016 PDX model NSCLC1 were killed by
the combination of ruxolitinib and MMF (Figure 1A).
[Ruxolitinib + MMF] killed GBM5 and GBM6 cells and
enhanced the killing potential of Temozolomide (Figure
1B). The killing power of histone deacetylase inhibitors
and of paclitaxel were also enhanced by [ruxolitinib +
MMF] (Figure 1C and 1D).
The NSAID drug celecoxib has been investigated
in the Dent laboratory as a possible anti-cancer agent in
combination with a range of drugs. Celecoxib enhanced
the killing power of MMF in non-small cell lung cancer
cells that express a double mutated active ERBB1 protein
(the H1975 cell line) (Figure 2A). The ability of [MMF +
celecoxib] treatment to kill H1975 cells and to sensitize
these cells to standard of care Taxane drugs was increased
in afatinib resistant H1975 cells (5 control; 5 resistant
clones shown). In the PDX tumor cell isolate ADOR
(NSCLC) the cell isolate was very effectively killed by
either [celecoxib + MMF] or by paclitaxel (Figure 2A,
lower). In the PDX isolates from ovarian cancer (Spiky,
N1, W2) [celecoxib + MMF] to a variable extent enhanced
the killing potential of docetaxel and paclitaxel (Figure
2B). The established OVCAR cell line was almost
completely killed by the combination of [celecoxib +
MMF + paclitaxel]. In addition to MMF, another drug
has recently been approved for the treatment of remittent
relapsing multiple sclerosis: FTY720 (Fingolimod,
Gilenya). MMF and FTY720 interacted to kill multiple
fresh PDX models of glioblastoma (Figure 2C). FTY720
and MMF also combined to kill breast cancer cells
and PDX models of ovarian cancer, lung cancer and a
November 2015 PDX model of osteo-sarcoma (Figure
2D).
Ruxolitinib and MMF have the potential to
modulate the functions and activities of many intracellular
signal transduction pathways, and we next explored the
impact our ruxolitinib based drug combination had on
cell signaling processes. In mammary and brain cancer
cells [MMF + ruxolitinib] significantly inhibited the
phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT5 after 12h of
treatment by > 50%, as would be expected based on the
17291

Oncotarget

declared kinase specificity of ruxolitinib (Figure 3A, p <
0.05). [Ruxolitinib + MMF] only transiently inhibited p65
NFκB phosphorylation at 6h after treatment but did cause
in combination together a significantly more prolonged
> 50% inhibition of ERK1/2, AKT and mTOR activity
(Figure 3B, not shown, p < 0.05). Both ruxolitinib and
MMF as single agents caused activation of JNK1/2, with
no obvious positive or negative interaction between the
drugs (data not shown). The drug combination significantly
reduced expression of the anti-apoptotic mitochondrial and
endoplasmic reticulum protective proteins BCL-XL and
MCL-1 after 12h of treatment by > 50%, which correlated
with increased pro-caspase 3 cleavage, i.e. activation of
pro-caspase 3 (Figure 3B, p < 0.05). In SUM149 triple

negative breast cancer cells and in BT474 ERBB2+ breast
cancer cells expression of an activated form of STAT3;
an activated form of AKT; or an activated form of MEK1
inhibited the lethality of [ruxolitinib + MMF] treatment
(Figure 4A, p < 0.05). The [ruxolitinib + MMF] drug
combination reduced BCL-XL and MCL-1 expression
by over 50% and reduced the expression of super-oxide
dismutase 2 (SOD2) and thioredoxin (TRX) by over 75%
(Figure 4B, p < 0.05). Expression of activated STAT3 or
activated AKT or activated MEK1 to very similar extents
maintained MCL-1, BCL-XL, SOD2 and TRX expression
in the face of [ruxolitinib + MMF] exposure. Unlike the
other tested proteins, [ruxolitinib + MMF] treatment had
very modest effects at inhibiting the expression of the

Figure 1: Ruxolitinib synergizes with MMF to kill brain, lung and triple negative breast cancer cells. A. Non-small cell

lung cancer cells were treated with vehicle control, ruxolitinib-phosphate (2.5 µM), MMF (5.0 µM) or the drugs in combination. Twenty
four h later cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification (n = 3 +/- SEM). B.
GBM5 and GBM6 cells were treated with vehicle control, Temozolomide (TMZ, 50 nM), [ruxolitinib (1 µM) + MMF (5 µM)], or the three
drugs in combination. Twelve hours later, cells were isolated and processed. Cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes
WiScan microscope at 10X magnification (n = 3 +/- SEM). C. Upper: GBM6, GBM12, SUM149 and BT474 cells GBM6, GBM12 and
SUM149 cells were treated for 12h with vehicle control or with ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM) in the presence of vehicle control
or with the HDAC inhibitor AR-42 (0.3 µM). Twelve h after drug exposure cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes
WiScan microscope at 10X magnification. Lower; GBM6 and GBM12 cells were treated for 12h with vehicle control or with ruxolitinib
(1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM) in the presence of vehicle control or with the HDAC inhibitor Sodium valproate (0.75 µM). Twelve h after
drug exposure cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification. D. H1975 cells
were treated with vehicle control, [ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM), paclitaxel (10 nM) or the drugs in combination. Twelve h after
drug exposure cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification. E. SUM149 cells
were plated (250-1,000) cells per well of a six well plate and 12h after plating were treated with vehicle, ruxolitinib (0.5-2.5 µM), MMF
(4-20 µM) or in combination at a constant ratio for 24h, as indicated. The media was removed, cells were washed with drug free media,
and the cells cultured for another 10 days in drug free media. Cell colonies were fixed, stained and groups of cells > 50 were counted as
colonies. The combination index (CI) for synergy was calculated using the Calcusyn for Windows program using the Cho and Tallalay
Method (n = 2; 12 individual wells per data point +/- SEM). A combination index of less than 0.70 indicates a strong level of tumor-killing
synergy between the drugs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17292

Oncotarget

chaperone proteins HSP90 and HSP70 (data not shown).
Treatment of SUM149 cells with [ruxolitinib + MMF]
increased the protein expression of the toxic BH3 domain
protein BIM by > 400% and reduced the phosphorylation
of the toxic BH3 domain protein BAD at S112/S136 by >
50% (Figure 4C, p < 0.05). Expression of activated forms
of AKT and MEK1 together prevented [ruxolitinib +
MMF] from increasing BIM levels or causing BAD S112/
S136 dephosphorylation.
Based on our immuno-fluorescence data in Figure
4, caspase 3 was being cleaved (activated) after drug
combination treatment, and we next investigated the
molecular mechanisms by which [ruxolitinib + MMF]
treatment was killing tumor cells. Inhibition of caspase 8
/ death receptor signaling by over-expression of c-FLIP-s
did not significantly reduce the lethality of [ruxolitinib
+ lapatinib] treatment (Figure 5A, p < 0.05). Overexpression of BCL-XL or to a lesser extent inhibition
of caspase signaling downstream of mitochondria by

expression of dominant negative caspase 9 significantly
reduced drug combination killing by > 50% (Figure 5A,
p < 0.05). Knock down of the toxic BH3 domain protein
BAX and to a much lesser extent NOXA, but not knock
down of BID or PUMA, abolished drug combination
lethality and the anti-proliferative effect of the drug
combination (Figure 5B, p < 0.05). Knock down of AIF,
BAD and BIM, but not BIK or BAK, also significantly
reduced [ruxolitinib + MMF] lethality (Figure 5C, p <
0.05). Nota bene: compare the protective effects of BAD
and BIM knock down in Figure 5 to the regulation of
BIM/BAD expression/activity in Figure 4 by [ruxolitinib
+ MMF] and activated AKT/MEK. Control knock down /
over-expression immuno-blots are presented in Figure 5D
for SUM149 cells which are near identical to previously
published data for BT474 and GBM cells.
In Figure 4 we discovered that [ruxolitinib + MMF]
treatment decreased expression of the reactive oxygen
species de-toxifying enzymes SOD2 and TRX. Thus we

Figure 2: MMF can be used in combination with many different FDA approved drugs to kill tumor cells. A. H1975

NSCLC cells (5 vehicle control clones; 5 afatinib resistant clones) were treated with vehicle control; paclitaxel (taxol, 10 nM); [MMF 5
µM + celecoxib 5 µM]; or the drugs in combination for 24h. Twenty four hours after these treatments / irradiation, cells were isolated and
processed. Cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification. B. Ovarian cancer
cells (OVCAR, Spiky, N1, W2) were treated with vehicle control; paclitaxel (taxol, 10 nM) or docetaxol (10 nM); [MMF 5 µM + celecoxib
5 µM]; or the drugs in combination for 24h. Twenty four hours after these treatments / irradiation, cells were isolated and processed. Cell
viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification. C. Four primary PDX isolates of
primary human glioblastoma were treated with vehicle control, MMF (5 µM), FTY720 (100 nM) or the drugs in combination. Twenty
four hours after these treatments cells were isolated and processed. Cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan
microscope at 10X magnification. D. Established mammary carcinoma cell lines (SUM149, SUM190, BT474, BT549) and PDX isolates of
human cancer (Spiky - ovarian; ADOR - NSCLC; OSCR-1 - osteosarcoma) were treated with vehicle control, MMF (5 µM), FTY720 (100
nM) or the drugs in combination. Twenty four hours after these treatments cells were isolated and processed. Cell viability was assessed
using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17293

Oncotarget

Figure 3: [MMF + Ruxolitinib] interact to cause a prolonged suppression of STAT3, STAT5, ERK1/2, AKT and mTOR
phosphorylation. A..-B. BT474 and GBM12 cells were treated with vehicle control, ruxolitinib (1.0 µM), MMF (5.0 µM) or the drugs
in combination for 6h and for 12h, as indicated. At each time point cells were fixed in place and permeabilized using 0.5% Triton X100.
Immuno-fluorescence was performed to detect the phosphorylation levels of STAT3, STAT5, ERK1/2, AKT and mTOR, as well as the
expression of BCL-XL and MCL-1 and the cleavage status of caspase 3. The arrows show the increase or decrease in expression/function
of each protein at the 6h and 12h time points (n = 3 +/- SEM).

Figure 4: Activation of STAT3, AKT or MEK1 protects cells from [ruxolitinib + MMF], maintains SOD2, TRX,
BCL-XL and MCL-1 expression and prevents expression/activation of BIM and BAD. A. SUM149 and BT474 cells were

transfected with an empty vector plasmid (CMV) or with plasmids to express: activated STAT3; activated AKT; or activated MEK1.
Twenty four h after transfection cells were treated with vehicle control or with ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM) in combination
for 24h. Twenty four h later cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification (n
= 3 +/- SEM). B. SUM149 cells were transfected with an empty vector plasmid (CMV) or with plasmids to express: activated STAT3;
activated AKT; or activated MEK1. Twenty four h after transfection cells were treated with vehicle control or with ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and
MMF (5.0 µM) in combination for 12h. Cells were fixed in place and permeabilized using 0.5% Triton X100. Immuno-fluorescence was
performed to detect the expression of SOD2, TRX, BCL-XL and MCL-1 at 10X magnification in the Hermes WiScan machine (n = 3 +/SEM). C. SUM149 cells were transfected with an empty vector plasmid or with plasmids together to express activated AKT and to express
activated MEK1. Twenty four h after transfection cells were treated with vehicle control or with ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM) in
combination for 12h. Cells were fixed in place and permeabilized using 0.5% Triton X100. Immuno-fluorescence was performed to detect
the expression of BIM and the S112 S136 phosphorylation of BAD (n = 3 +/- SEM).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17294

Oncotarget

next determined whether [ruxolitinib + MMF] treatment
altered the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
in tumor cells and whether the over-expression of SOD2
or TRX could suppress drug combination toxicity.
Ruxolitinib and MMF interacted in a greater than additive
fashion to increase ROS levels over the 12h following
drug combination exposure (Figure 6A). Over-expression
of either SOD2 or TRX significantly reduced the lethality
of [ruxolitinib + MMF] (Figure 6B, p < 0.05). Note: at
2.5X the image intensity of the over-expression data, basal
SOD2 and TRX levels are observed. Treatment of cells
with [ruxolitinib + MMF] caused the co-localization of
apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) with both the cytosolic
protein HSP70 and the nucleo-protein eIF3a (Figure 6C).
i.e. HSP70 was unable to sequester all of the AIF released
from the mitochondrion in the cytoplasm, and thus prevent
it from entering the nucleus. Thus [ruxolitinib + MMF]
treatment kills tumor cells through prolonged inactivation
of multiple upstream protective signaling pathways

which leads to lower levels of protective BH3 domain
proteins (BCL-XL, MCL-1) and to higher levels of toxic
activated BH3 domain proteins (BIM, BAD) which
promotes mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS generation.
Inactivation of the protective signaling pathways also
lowers the expression of the detoxification enzymes
SOD2 and TRX which additionally facilitates sustained
high levels of toxic ROS, all collectively leading to tumor
cell death.

DISCUSSION
The present studies were undertaken to determine
whether the myelo-proliferative disorder medication and
JAK1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib could be re-purposed as a
cancer therapeutic against solid tumors. We discovered that
ruxolitinib at clinically relevant free drug concentrations
synergized with the multiple sclerosis drug MMF to kill a
wide variety of solid tumor cell types, particularly breast

Figure 5: BAX, BAD and BIM signaling play important roles in [ruxolitinib + MMF] lethality. A. BT474 and GBM6 cells

were transfected with an empty vector plasmid or plasmids to express: c-FLIP-s; BCL-XL; or dominant negative caspase 9. Twenty four
h after transfection the cells were treated with vehicle control or ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM) in combination for 24h. After
24h cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification (n = 3 +/- SEM). B. BT474
cells were transfected with a scrambled nonsense siRNA control or with siRNA molecules to knock down the expression of: BAX, BID,
NOXA, or PUMA. Twenty four h after transfection the cells were treated with vehicle control or ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM)
in combination for 24h. After 24h cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X magnification
(n = 3 +/- SEM). C. BT474 cells were transfected with a scrambled nonsense siRNA control or with siRNA molecules to knock down the
expression of: AIF, BAD, BIM, BAK or BIK. Twenty four h after transfection the cells were treated with vehicle control or ruxolitinib
(1.0 µM) and MMF (5.0 µM) in combination for 24h. After 24h cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan
microscope at 10X magnification (n = 3 +/- SEM). D. SUM149 cells were transfected with a scrambled siRNA or siRNA molecules to
knock down a wide variety of indicated proteins. SUM149 cells were transfected with an empty vector plasmid or with plasmids to express
a wide variety of indicated proteins. These images are presented as control data for our knock down and over-expression studies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17295

Oncotarget

and brain tumor cells, including those cells expressing
mutated active RAS or ERBB1 proteins, or lacking the
tumor suppressor PTEN.
Killing by [ruxolitinib + MMF] occurred in a wide
variety of tumor cell types, including triple negative breast
cancer cells isolated from inflammatory breast cancer
patients and multiple PDX models of glioblastoma, and
lung cancer. In both BT474 and in SUM149 mammary
carcinoma cells, constitutively active forms of STAT3,
AKT and MEK1 were each shown to be a key protective
molecular signal to suppress [ruxolitinib + MMF] -induced
killing. In part, each of these activated proteins was
protecting cells because individually they increased the
basal expression of the mitochondrial protective proteins
MCL-1 and BCL-XL and the reactive oxygen species detoxifying enzymes SOD2 and TRX. That (MCL-1 and
BCL-XL) and (TRX and SOD2) are negatively regulated
by [ruxolitinib + MMF] treatment is in agreement with
the mode of cell killing; intrinsic pathway activation in
parallel with AIF translocation to the nucleus. That any

one of three signaling pathways can maintain expression
of these proteins in the face of the drug combination
argues that it is the ability of [ruxolitinib + MMF] to
simultaneously inhibit the STAT3, AKT and MEK-ERK
pathways which is crucial in promoting tumor cell killing.
In addition to modulating the expression of antiapoptotic proteins, [ruxolitinib + MMF] also controlled
the expression and phosphorylation of pro-apoptotic
toxic BH3 domain proteins. [Ruxolitinib + MMF]
treatment increased the expression of BIM and decreased
the S112+S136 phosphorylation of BAD within 6h;
both events would be predicted to cause mitochondrial
dysfunction. Maintained signaling through the ERK1/2
and AKT pathways by molecular interventions prevented
the drug combination -induced expression of BIM or the
dephosphorylation of BAD. Hence, it is the combination
of reduced BCL-XL / MCL-1 expression and enhanced
pro-apoptotic signaling through BIM / BAD / BAX which
facilitates AIF release into the cytosol.
In addition to the [ruxolitinib + MMF] two drug

Figure 6: [Ruxolitinib + MMF] exposure increases ROS levels and causes release of AIF into the cytosol and AIF
localization in the nucleus. A. SUM149 cells were treated with vehicle control or with, ruxolitinib (1.0 µM), MMF (5.0 µM)] or in
combination for 6h and 12h. Fifteen minutes before each time point cells are incubated with diacetate ester dichlorofluorescin (DCFH),
5 µM. The conversion of DCFH to DCF by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species is measured in sextuplicate in a Vector 3 plate reader
(n = 3 +/- SEM).B. SUM149 cells were transfected with empty vector control (CMV) or with plasmids to express super-oxide dismutase
2 (SOD2) or thioredoxin (TRX). Twenty four h after transfection cells were treated with vehicle control or with, ruxolitinib (1.0 µM),
MMF (5.0 µM)] or in combination for 36h. Cell viability was assessed using a live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan microscope at 10X
magnification (n = 3 +/- SEM). C. Upper: GBM12 cells were treated with vehicle control or with [ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) + MMF (5.0 µM)]
for 6h. After 6h cells were fixed in place and permeabilized using 0.5% Triton X100. Immuno-fluorescence was performed to detect the
expression of AIF (red fluorescent stain); eIF3A (green fluorescent stain) with images at 60X magnification. Lower: GBM12 cells were
treated with vehicle control or with [ruxolitinib (1.0 µM) + MMF (5.0 µM)] for 6h. After 6h cells were fixed in place and permeabilized
using 0.5% Triton X100. Immuno-fluorescence was performed to detect the expression of AIF (red fluorescent stain) and HSP70 (green
fluorescent stain). The co-localization of AIF with HSP70 was determined by merging the images in Adobe Photoshop CS6 at 9999 dpi.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17296

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

combination we also determined whether clinically
relevant standard of care agents for other cancers could
enhance the lethality of the two drug combination.
Treatment of breast and brain cancer cells with [MMF +
ruxolitinib] for 12h resulted in tumor cell killing; treatment
of these tumor cells with [MMF + ruxolitinib] together
with either Temozolomide, paclitaxel or with HDAC
inhibitors further enhanced the lethality of the initial
two drug combination. As the use of sodium valproate
as a standard of care agent for glioblastoma in some
cohorts of patients predicts for a better survival outcome,
e.g. in Dundee, Scotland and Richmond VA USA, the
combination of [MMF + ruxolitinib + valproate] also
could represent a viable relatively cheap novel approach
to treat recurrent GBM.
Over the past 18 months the Dent laboratory has
published several manuscripts which demonstrate the
usefulness of the NSAID drug and COX2 inhibitor
celecoxib, at low clinically relevant concentrations, as a
dose-response modifier for other established and novel
anti-cancer agents. Unlike the celecoxib derivative drug
OSU-03012 (AR12), celecoxib does not inhibit the
chaperone ATPase activities of either HSP90 or of HSP70,
yet was shown competent to cause an endoplasmic
reticulum stress response indicative that the chaperone
activities of GRP78 and other chaperone proteins had been
disrupted. Celecoxib and MMF interacted to kill tumor
cells, including PDX isolates, and furthermore, enhanced
the ability of paclitaxel (Taxol) and docetaxel (Taxotere)
to kill lung and ovarian cancer cells [30-33]. As mentioned
previously, the majority of published studies using MMF,
as well as celecoxib, have used both drugs at many times
their safe achievable doses in a patient. Further detailed
mechanistic studies will be required to understand how
celecoxib and MMF interact to kill, and how they in
combination enhance the lethality of Taxane drugs against
standard of care tumor types.
As noted previously in this manuscript, many
published studies using MMF (actually DMF) and
ruxolitinib use the drugs at > > 15 µM and as such, the
additional novel key targets beyond those described in
this manuscript using much lower drug concentrations are
unclear. Hence studies beyond the scope of the present
paper will be required to more completely understand how
[ruxolitinib + MMF] interact to kill and, based on the cost
of translation into the clinic, whether [MMF + ruxolitinib]
is a drug combination that can translate into the clinic for
solid tumor or specifically GBM patients.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Materials
Ruxolitinib phosphate was purchased from
Selleckchem (Houston, TX). Trypsin-EDTA, DMEM,
RPMI, penicillin-streptomycin were purchased from
GIBCOBRL (GIBCOBRL Life Technologies, Grand
Island, NY). Cells were purchased from the ATCC and
were not further validated beyond that claimed by ATCC.
Cells were re-purchased every ~6 months. Primary human
glioblastoma (GBM) cells, developed by Dr. C.D. James
when at the Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN) has been
described previously. ADOR non-small cell lung cancer
cells are personal a donation from the patient to the Dent
laboratory. De novo cisplatin resistant “Spiky” ovarian
cancer cells, a patient derived explant (PDX) model,
were kindly provided by Dr. Karen Paz (Champions
Oncology, NJ). The plasmids to express thioredoxin
(TRX) and mutant thioredoxin (mTRX) were a kind gift
from Dr. David Gius (Radiobiology Branch, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD). The other plasmids in
these studies were purchased from Addgene (Cambridge,
MA). Commercially available validated short hairpin RNA
molecules to knock down RNA / protein levels were from
Qiagen (Valencia, CA) or were supplied by collaborators.
Reagents and performance of experimental procedures
were described in refs: [21-29, 30, 31, 32].

Methods
Culture and in vitro exposure of cells to drugs
All cell lines were cultured at 37 oC (5% (v/v CO2)
in vitro using RPMI supplemented with dialyzed 5%
(v/v) fetal calf serum and 10% (v/v) Non-essential amino
acids. In vitro drug treatments were from 100 mM stock
solutions of each drug and the maximal concentration of
Vehicle (DMSO) in media was 0.02% (v/v). Cells were
not cultured in reduced serum media during any study in
this manuscript.
Transfection of cells with siRNA or with plasmids
For plasmids
Cells were plated and 24h after plating, transfected.
Plasmids expressing a specific mRNA (or siRNA) or
appropriate vector control plasmid DNA was diluted in
50μl serum-free and antibiotic-free medium (1 portion
for each sample). Concurrently, 2μl Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen), was diluted into 50μl of serum-free
and antibiotic-free medium (1 portion for each sample).
Diluted DNA was added to the diluted Lipofectamine
2000 for each sample and incubated at room temperature
for 30 min. This mixture was added to each well / dish
17297

Oncotarget

of cells containing 200μl serum-free and antibiotic-free
medium for a total volume of 300 μl, and the cells were
incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. An equal volume of 2x medium
was then added to each well. Cells were incubated for 24h,
then treated with drugs.

cells are fixed in place and permeabilized using ice cold
PBS containing 0.4% paraformaldehyde and 0.5% Triton
X-100. After 30 min the cells are washed three times with
ice cold PBS and cells are pre-blocked with rat serum for
3h. Cells are then incubated with a primary antibody to
detect the expression/phosphorylation of a protein (usually
at 1:100 dilution from a commercial vendor) overnight at
37oC. Cells are washed three times with PBS followed
by application of the secondary antibody containing an
associated fluorescent red or green chemical tag. After
3h of incubation the antibody is removed and the cells
washed again. The cells are visualized at either 10X or
60X in the Hermes machine for imaging assessments. All
immunofluorescent images for each individual protein /
phospho-protein are taken using the identical machine
settings so that the levels of signal in each image can be
directly compared to the level of signal in the cells treated
with drugs. Similarly, for presentation, the enhancement
of image brightness/contrast using PhotoShop CS6 is
simultaneously performed for each individual set of
protein/phospho-protein to permit direct comparison of
the image intensity between treatments.
For SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting, cells were
plated at 5 × 105 cells/cm2 and treated with drugs at
the indicated concentrations and after the indicated
time of treatment, lysed in whole-cell lysis buffer
(0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 1%
β-mercaptoethanol, 0.02% bromophenol blue), and the
samples were boiled for 30 minutes. The boiled samples
were loaded onto 10-14% SDS-PAGE and electrophoresis
was run overnight (10-100 μg/lane based on the gel size).
Proteins were electrophoretically transferred onto 0.22-μm
nitrocellulose, and immunoblotted with various primary
antibodies against different proteins. Antibodies used
include: All immunoblots were initially visualized at 75
dpi using an Odyssey infrared imager (Li-Cor, Lincoln,
NE), then processed at 9999 dpi using Adobe Photoshop
CS6. For presentation, immunoblots were digitally
assessed using the provided Odyssey imager software.
Images have their color removed and labeled figures
generated in Microsoft PowerPoint.

Transfection for siRNA
Cells from a fresh culture growing in log phase as
described above, and 24h after plating transfected. Prior
to transfection, the medium was aspirated and serum-free
medium was added to each plate. For transfection, 10 nM
of the annealed siRNA, the positive sense control doubled
stranded siRNA targeting GAPDH or the negative control
(a “scrambled” sequence with no significant homology
to any known gene sequences from mouse, rat or human
cell lines) were used. Ten nM siRNA (scrambled or
experimental) was diluted in serum-free media. Four μl
Hiperfect (Qiagen) was added to this mixture and the
solution was mixed by pipetting up and down several
times. This solution was incubated at room temp for 10
min, then added drop-wise to each dish. The medium in
each dish was swirled gently to mix, then incubated at 37
o
C for 2h. Serum-containing medium was added to each
plate, and cells were incubated at 37 oC for 24h before
then treated with drugs (0-24h). Additional immunofluorescence / live-dead analyses were performed at the
indicated time points.

Detection of cell viability, protein expression and
protein phosphorylation by immuno-fluorescence
using a hermes wiScan machine
http://www.idea-bio.com/, Cells (4 x 103) are plated
into each well of a 96 well plate, and cells permitted to
attach and grow for the next 18h. Based on the experiment,
after 18h, cells are then either genetically manipulated,
or are treated with drugs. For genetic manipulation,
cells are transfected with plasmids or siRNA molecules
and incubated for an additional 24h. Cells are treated
with vehicle control or with drugs at the indicated final
concentrations, alone or in combination. Cells are then
isolated for processing at various times following drug
exposure. The 96 well plate is centrifuged / cyto-spun to
associate dead cells (for live-dead assays) with the base
of each well. For live dead assays, after centrifugation,
the media is removed and cells treated with live-dead
reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA) and
after 10 min this is removed and the cells in each well are
visualized in the Hermes instrument at 10X magnification.
Green cells  =  viable; yellow/red cells  =  dying/dead. The
numbers of viable and dead cells were counted manually
from three images taken from each well combined with
data from another two wells of separately treated cells
(i.e. the data is the mean cell dead from 9 data points
from three separate exposures). For immuno-fluorescence
studies, after centrifugation, the media is removed and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Animal studies
For studies to generate afatinib resistant H1975 cells,
pre-existing tumors as above were treated with afatinib (50
mg/kg) BID for 4 days. This reduced tumor volume of all
clones to 0 for approximately 7 days after which tumors
began to slowly re-grow. Recurrent tumors were isolated
on Day 25, portions were snap-frozen or were digested to
release individual tumor cells, and cells from each tumor
clone maintained separately. Of significant note for clonal
characterization, the isolated afatinib treated tumor cells
were only growth inhibited by afatinib in vitro with daily
supplementation at concentrations > > 2 µM, and as such
these cells were routinely passaged in a pulsatile fashion
17298

Oncotarget

between experiments in growth media containing only 1
µM afatinib to maintain the phenotype but not to promote
further selective pressure on drug resistance.

Transduction Research. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to report. Thanks to Dr. H.F. Young (Neurosurgery,
VCU) and the Betts family fund for support in the
purchase of the Hermes Wiscan instrument. PD wishes to
thank Mr. Daniel Leon (VCU personnel, Dent laboratory)
for assistance during these studies.

Assessment of ROS generation
Cancer cells were plated in 96 well plates.
Cells were treated with the drugs and 15 min prior to
the indicated time point the media was removed and
cells incubated with diacetate dihydro-DCF (5 µM).
Fluorescence measurements were obtained 15 minutes
after DCFH addition with a Vector 3 plate reader. Data
are presented corrected for basal fluorescence of vehicletreated cells at each time point and expressed as the
arbitrary units provided by the plate reader / the increase
in ROS levels.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declared no potential financial conflicts
of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	

2.	 Gäbler K, Behrmann I, Haan C. JAK2 mutants (e.g.,
JAK2V617F) and their importance as drug targets in
myeloproliferative neoplasms. JAKSTAT. 2013; 2:e25025.

Data analysis

3.	 Gunerka P, Dymek B, Stanczak A, Bujak A, Grygielewicz
P, Turowski P, Dzwonek K, Lamparska-Przybysz M,
Pietrucha T, Wieczorek M. Differences in gene expression
and alterations in cell cycle of acute myeloid leukemia cell
lines after treatment with JAK inhibitors. Eur J Pharmacol.
2015; 765:188-197.

Comparison of the effects of various treatments was
performed using one way analysis of variance and a two
tailed Student’s t-test. Statistical examination of in vivo
animal survival data utilized log rank statistical analyses
between the different treatment groups. Differences with a
p-value of < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Experiments shown are the means of multiple individual
points from multiple experiments (± SEM).

4.	 Tanaka Y. Recent progress and perspective in JAK
inhibitors for rheumatoid arthritis: from bench to bedside. J
Biochem. 2015; 158:173-9.
5.	 Mascarenhas J, Hoffman R. Ruxolitinib: the first FDA
approved therapy for the treatment of myelofibrosis. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:3008-14.

Abbreviations
ERK: extracellular regulated kinase; MEK:
mitogen activated extracellular regulated kinase; PI3K:
phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase; ca: constitutively active;
dn: dominant negative; ER: endoplasmic reticulum;
mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin; JAK: Janus
Kinase; STAT: Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription; MAPK: mitogen activated protein kinase;
PTEN: phosphatase and tensin homologue on chromosome
ten; ROS: reactive oxygen species; CMV: empty vector
plasmid or virus; si: small interfering; SCR: scrambled;
IP: immunoprecipitation; Ad: adenovirus; VEH: vehicle.

6.	 Buchert M, Burns CJ, Ernst M. Targeting JAK kinase
in solid tumors: emerging opportunities and challenges.
Oncogene. 2015; May 18. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015;.150.
7.	 Haricharan S, Li Y. STAT signaling in mammary gland
differentiation, cell survival and tumorigenesis. Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2014; 382:560-9.
8.	 Walker SR, Xiang M, Frank DA. Distinct roles of STAT3
and STAT5 in the pathogenesis and targeted therapy of
breast cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014; 382:616-21.
9.	 Wagner KU, Schmidt JW. The two faces of Janus kinases
and their respective STATs in mammary gland development
and cancer. J Carcinog. 2011; 10:32.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Nelson EA, Sharma SV, Settleman J, Frank DA. A chemical
biology approach to developing STAT inhibitors: molecular
strategies for accelerating clinical translation. Oncotarget.
2011; 2:518-24. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.296.

Support for the present study was funded by
philanthropic monies supplied by Massey Cancer Center
(to PD), and was also funded from PHS grants from the
National Institutes of Health [R01-CA141704, R01CA150214, R01-DK52825, R01-CA192613]. Services
in support of the research project were provided by the
VCU Massey Cancer Center Tissue and Data Acquisition
and Analysis Core, supported, in part, with funding from
NIH-NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA016059.
PD is the holder of the Universal Inc. Chair in Signal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Plosker GL. Ruxolitinib: a review of its use in patients with
myelofibrosis. Drugs. 2015; 75:297-308.

11.	 Yuan T, Wang Y, Zhao ZJ, Gu H. Protein-tyrosine
phosphatase PTPN9 negatively regulates ErbB2 and
epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in breast cancer
cells. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:14861-70.
12.	 Barrow-McGee R, Kermorgant S. Met endosomal
signalling: in the right place, at the right time. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2014; 49:69-74.
17299

Oncotarget

13.	 Yue P, Lopez-Tapia F, Paladino D, Li Y, Chen CH, Hilliard
T, Chen Y, Tius MA, Turkson J. Hydroxamic acid and
benzoic acid-based Stat3 inhibitors suppress human glioma
and breast cancer phenotypes in vitro and in vivo. Cancer
Res. 2015; Jun 18. pii: canres.3558.2014.

23.	 Hamed HA, Tavallai S, Grant S, Poklepovic A, Dent P.
Sorafenib/regorafenib and lapatinib interact to kill CNS
tumor cells. J Cell Physiol. 2015; 230:131-9.
24.	 Sajithlal GB, Hamed HA, Cruickshanks N, Booth L,
Tavallai S, Syed J, Grant S, Poklepovic A, Dent P.
Sorafenib/regorafenib and phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase/
thymoma viral proto-oncogene inhibition interact to kill
tumor cells. Mol Pharmacol. 2013; 84:562-71.

14.	 Cheng Y, Holloway MP, Nguyen K, McCauley D,
Landesman Y, Kauffman MG, Shacham S, Altura RA.
XPO1 (CRM1) inhibition represses STAT3 activation
to drive asurvivin-dependent oncogenic switch in triplenegative breast cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:675-86.

25.	 Dent P, Tang Y, Yacoub A, Dai Y, Fisher PB, Grant S.
CHK1 inhibitors in combination chemotherapy: thinking
beyond the cell cycle. Mol Interv. 2011; 11:133-40.

15.	 Abdulghani J, Allen JE, Dicker DT, Liu YY, Goldenberg
D, Smith CD, Humphreys R, El-Deiry WS. Sorafenib
sensitizes solid tumors to Apo2L/TRAIL and Apo2L/
TRAIL receptor agonist antibodies by the Jak2-Stat3-Mcl1
axis. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e75414.

26.	 Mitchell C, Yacoub A, Hossein H, Martin AP, Bareford
MD, Eulitt P, Yang C, Nephew KP, Dent P. Inhibition of
MCL-1 in breast cancer cells promotes cell death in vitro
and in vivo. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010; 10: 903-17.

16.	 Lin C, Wang L, Wang H, Yang L, Guo H, Wang
X.Tanshinone IIA inhibits breast cancer stem cells growth
in vitro and in vivo through attenuation of IL-6/STAT3/NFkB signaling pathways. J Cell Biochem. 2013; 114:2061-70.

27.	 Walker T, Mitchell C, Park MA, Yacoub A, Rahmani M,
Häussinger D, Reinehr R, Voelkel-Johnson C, Fisher PB,
Grant S,Dent P. 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin
and MEK1/2 inhibitors kill GI tumor cells via Ca2+dependent suppression of GRP78/BiP and induction of
ceramide and reactive oxygen species. Mol Cancer Ther.
2010; 9:1378-95.

17.	 Tkach M, Rosemblit C, Rivas MA, Proietti CJ, Díaz Flaqué
MC, Mercogliano MF, Beguelin W, Maronna E, Guzmán
P, Gercovich FG, Deza EG, Elizalde PV, Schillaci R. p42/
p44 MAPK-mediated Stat3Ser727 phosphorylation is
required for progestin-induced full activation of Stat3 and
breastcancer growth. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013; 20:197212.

28.	 Bareford MD, Park MA, Yacoub A, Hamed HA, Tang
Y, Cruickshanks N, Eulitt P, Hubbard N, Tye G, Burow
ME, Fisher PB, Moran RG, Nephew KP, Grant S, Dent P.
Sorafenib enhances pemetrexed cytotoxicity through an
autophagy-dependent mechanism in cancer cells. Cancer
Res. 2011; 71:4955-67.

18.	 Rodriguez-Barrueco R, Yu J, Saucedo-Cuevas LP, Olivan
M, Llobet-Navas D, Putcha P, Castro V, Murga-Penas EM,
Collazo-Lorduy A, Castillo-Martin M, Alvarez M, CordonCardo C, Kalinsky K, Maurer M, Califano A, Silva JM.
Inhibition of the autocrine IL-6-JAK2-STAT3-calprotectin
axis as targeted therapy for HR-/HER2+ breast cancers.
Genes Dev. 2015; 29:1631-48.

29.	 Tavallai M, Hamed HA, Roberts JL, Cruickshanks N,
Chuckalovcak J, Poklepovic A, Booth L, Dent P. Nexavar/
Stivarga and viagra interact to kill tumor cells. J Cell
Physiol. 2015; 230:2281-98.
30.	 Booth L, Cruickshanks N, Tavallai S, Roberts JL, Peery
M, Poklepovic A, Dent P. Regulation of dimethyl-fumarate
toxicity by proteasome inhibitors. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;
15:1646-57.

19.	 Deshmukh SK, Srivastava SK, Bhardwaj A, Singh AP,
Tyagi N, Marimuthu S, Dyess DL, Dal Zotto V, Carter JE,
Singh S. Resistin and interleukin-6 exhibit racially-disparate
expression in breast cancer patients, display molecular
association and promote growth and aggressiveness of
tumor cells throughSTAT3 activation. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:11231-41. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3591.

31.	 Booth L, Shuch B, Albers T, Roberts JL, Tavallai M,
Proniuk S, Zukiwski A, Wang D, Chen CS, Bottaro D,
Ecroyd H, Lebedyeva IO, Dent P. Multi-kinase inhibitors
can associate with heat shock proteins through their
NH2-termini by which they suppress chaperone function.
Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.18632/ oncotarget.7349.

20.	 Zhao D, Pan C, Sun J, Gilbert C, Drews-Elger K, Azzam DJ,
Picon-Ruiz M, Kim M, Ullmer W, El-Ashry D, Creighton
CJ, Slingerland JM. VEGF drives cancer-initiating stem
cells through VEGFR-2/Stat3signaling to upregulate Myc
and Sox2. Oncogene. 2015; 34:3107-19.

32.	 Booth L, Roberts JL, Tavallai M, Webb T, Leon D, Chen J,
McGuire WP, Poklepovic A, Dent P. The afatinib resistance
of in vivo generated H1975 lung cancer cell clones is
mediated by SRC / ERBB3 / c-KIT / c-MET compensatory
survival signaling. Oncotarget. 2016. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7746.

21.	 Tang Y, Hamed HA, Poklepovic A, Dai Y, Grant S, Dent
P. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 modulates the lethality
of CHK1inhibitors in mammary tumors. Mol Pharmacol.
2012; 82:322-32.

33.	 Booth L, Roberts JL, Tavallai M, Chuckalovcak J, Stringer
DK, Koromilas AE, Boone DL, McGuire WP, Poklepovic
A, Dent P. [Pemetrexed + Sorafenib] lethality is increased
by inhibition of ERBB1/2/3-PI3K-NF?B compensatory
survival signaling. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.8281.

22.	 Mitchell C, Hamed HA, Cruickshanks N, Tang Y, Bareford
MD, Hubbard N, Tye G, Yacoub A, Dai Y, Grant S, Dent P.
Simultaneous exposure of transformed cells to SRC family
inhibitors and CHK1 inhibitors causes cell death. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2011; 12:215-28.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17300

Oncotarget

