HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 April 16; 520(7547): 363–367. doi:10.1038/nature14363.

SHMT2 drives glioma cell survival in the tumor
microenvironment but imposes a dependence on glycine
clearance

Author Manuscript

Dohoon Kim1,2,3,4,5, Brian P. Fiske3,4,5, Kivanc Birsoy1,2,3,4,5, Elizaveta Freinkman1,2,3,4,5,
Kenjiro Kami6, Richard Possemato1,2,3,4,5, Yakov Chudnovsky1,2,3,4,5, Michael E.
Pacold1,2,3,4,5,11, Walter W. Chen1,2,3,4,5, Jason R. Cantor1,2,3,4,5, Laura M. Shelton7, Dan Y.
Gui3,4,5, Manjae Kwon1,4, Shakti H. Ramkissoon8,9,10, Keith L. Ligon8,9,10, Seong Woo
Kang1,2,3,4,5, Matija Snuderl11, Matthew G. Vander Heiden3,4,5,10, and David M.
Sabatini1,2,3,4,5
1Whitehead

Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142,

USA
2Howard

Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

3The

David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence: sabatini@wi.mit.edu.
Supplementary Information
The following supplementary files are provided:
Supplementary Methods
Supplemental Table 1. List of genes whose loss causes toxicity in the developing brain, and the associated disorder, targeted organs,
and other relevant information.
Supplemental Table 2. Data from oncomine-based gene expression studies comparing glioma vs. normal brain, and list of metabolic
genes that are highly overexpressed in gliomas in each study.
Supplemental Table 3. Data summary for gene expression omnibus microarray-based studies comparing expression of select genes in
neural stem cells versus differentiated controls.
Supplemental Table 4. List of individual shRNAs used and abundance scores for each shRNA under each pool condition.
Supplemental Table 5. Data for all metabolites in LN229 cells expressing shGFP or shSHMT2_1 as measured using CE-MS based,
quantitative metabolite profiling.
Supplemental Table 6. List of metabolites identified through LC-MS based, untargeted discovery using Progenesis software, in
positive mode.
Supplemental Table 7. List of metabolites identified through LC-MS based, untargeted discovery using Progenesis software, in
negative mode.
Supplemental Table 8. Methods and data for 13-C labeled species in the labeling rate analyses shown in Fig. 4e–g and Extended Fig.
5c–d.
Supplemental Table 9. Plots for 13-C labeled species abundance over time for the labeling rate analyses shown in Fig. 4e–g and
Extended Fig. 5c–d.
Author contributions
D.K. and D.M.S. conceived the study and designed most of the experiments. D.K. performed most of the experiments (cell viability
and proliferation, western blotting, immunohistochemistry, xenografts) with assistance from K.B., R.L.P., Y.C., W.W.C., S.K., and
M.K. B.P.F. and M.G.V.H. designed, carried out, and analyzed pyruvate kinase activity and LC-MS based experiments with input and
assistance from E.F., M.E.P., and D.Y.G. E.F., D.K., and J.C. designed and carried out LC-MS based derivatization experiments
measuring aminoacetone levels. K.K. and L.M.S. conducted and analyzed CE-MS metabolite profiling. M.S. provided GBM sections
and conducted analyses and imaging of IHC. S.H.R. and K.L.R. assisted with neurosphere forming cell characterizations. D.K. and
D.M.S. wrote and all authors edited the manuscript.

Kim et al.

Page 2

4Department

of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02139,

Author Manuscript

USA
5Broad

Institute of Harvard and MIT, Seven Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

6Human

Metabolome Technologies, Inc., Tsuruoka, Japan

7Human

Metabolome Technologies America, Inc., Boston, MA 02134, USA

8Department

of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA

9Department

of Pathology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA

10Dana-Farber
11Department

Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215

of Pathology, NYU Langone Medical Center and Medical School, New York, NY

10016, USA

Author Manuscript

SUMMARY

Author Manuscript

Cancer cells adapt their metabolic processes to support rapid proliferation, but less is known about
how cancer cells alter metabolism to promote cell survival in a poorly vascularized tumor
microenvironment1–3. Here, we identify a key role for serine and glycine metabolism in the
survival of brain cancer cells within the ischemic zones of gliomas. In human glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM), mitochondrial serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT2) and glycine
decarboxylase (GLDC) are highly expressed in the pseudopalisading cells that surround necrotic
foci. We find that SHMT2 activity limits that of pyruvate kinase (PKM2) and reduces oxygen
consumption, eliciting a metabolic state that confers a profound survival advantage to cells in
poorly vascularized tumor regions. GLDC inhibition impairs cells with high SHMT2 levels as the
excess glycine not metabolized by GLDC can be converted to the toxic molecules aminoacetone
and methylglyoxal. Thus, SHMT2 is required for cancer cells to adapt to the tumor environment,
but also renders these cells sensitive to glycine cleavage system inhibition.

Author Manuscript

Many inborn disorders of amino acid metabolism lead to severe impairment of the
developing nervous system, at least in part through toxic effects on neural stem cells4,5. As
brain cancer cells with high tumorigenic potential share characteristics with neural stem
cells6, we wondered whether they might have similar metabolic vulnerabilities. To begin to
test this idea, we identified a set of amino acid catabolism genes whose loss causes
developmental brain toxicity (Supplemental Table 1) and identified those with elevated
expression in glioma compared to normal brain (Supplemental Table 2). This analysis
yielded seven genes (Fig. 1a), and we focused on glycine decarboxylase (GLDC) because its
expression was also highly enriched in neural stem cells (Fig. 1a). Previous work shows that
elevated GLDC expression in non-small cell lung cancer tumor initiating cells promotes
oncogenesis by upregulating pyrimidine biosynthesis7. GLDC encodes the central
component of a four-protein complex (glycine cleavage complex) that catalyzes the
degradation of glycine into ammonia, carbon dioxide, and a methylene group that enters the
folate pool, and its loss causes nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH), a disorder that severely
affects the developing brain5,8.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Consistent with the bioinformatic analysis, GLDC protein was highly expressed in
tumorigenic9,10 glioblastoma-derived neurosphere-forming cell lines BT145 and 0308, but
not in their differentiated, non-tumorigenic counterparts (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). RNAimediated inhibition of GLDC caused loss of viability and breakdown of neurospheres, but
did not affect the differentiated cells (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1d and e). GLDC
suppression was also toxic to LN229 cells, an adherent GBM cell line. Thus, loss of GLDC
function has toxic consequences on a subset of GBM cell lines in culture.

Author Manuscript

We hypothesized that loss of GLDC may lead to the accumulation of toxic amounts of
glycine. Indeed, in LN229 cells GLDC suppression raised the levels of intracellular glycine
(Fig. 1c), as has been observed in the plasma in NKH5. Interestingly, esterified glycine,
which readily crosses cellular membranes and is processed into glycine11, caused dose
dependent toxicity to the cells while other esterified amino acids did not (Fig. 1d), and this
toxicity was reduced by overexpression of GLDC (Extended Data Fig. 1f).

Author Manuscript

To understand why excess glycine may be toxic to cells, we considered possible alternative
fates for glycine not degraded by GLDC, its primary route of catabolism. Based on the
KEGG database, there are at least 17 metabolic enzymes that process glycine, and thus we
examined whether disruption of any of these other metabolic routes may affect cell
sensitivity to GLDC suppression, using a pooled shRNA approach (Extended Data Fig. 2a–
c). We found that suppression of glycine C-acetyltransferase (GCAT) protects against the
toxicity of GLDC knockdown (Fig. 1f, Extended Data Fig. 2c and d). GCAT is part of a
pathway that interconverts glycine and threonine in the mitochondria12,13 (Fig. 1e) via 2amino-3-ketobutyrate, an unstable intermediate that is spontaneously decarboxylated to form
the toxic pro-oxidant metabolite aminoacetone14, which itself is readily metabolized to
methylglyoxal, a toxic, highly reactive aldehyde implicated in the pathology of diabetes and
other disorders15.

Author Manuscript

This raised the possibility that the glycine that is metabolized by GCAT, instead of GLDC,
can be converted to aminoacetone and methylglyoxal. Indeed, GLDC knockdown or
esterified glycine overload led to aminoacetone formation in LN229 cells grown in culture
or as a xenografted tumor (Fig. 1g–i, Extended Data Fig. 2e and f). GLDC knockdown also
increased methylglyoxal levels, as indicated by increases in argpyrimidine, a methylglyoxalderived advanced glycation end product (Fig. 1j, Extended Data Fig. 2g). Importantly, these
changes were suppressed by silencing of GCAT (Fig. 1k, Extended Data Fig. 2i). Thus,
glycine accumulation is deleterious, at least in part, because it is converted via GCAT to
aminoacetone and methylglyoxal when not sufficiently catabolized by GLDC. Recent work
shows that in the absence of serine large quantities of glycine can be toxic by causing a
depletion of the one-carbon pool that is rescued by formate supplementation16. Formate
does not rescue glycine toxicity under our conditions (data not shown), arguing that
additional toxicities from excess glycine beyond depletion of one-carbon units contribute to
the deleterious effects of GLDC inhibition in these cells.
To more rigorously test the idea that GLDC inhibition impairs cell viability by causing the
accumulation of glycine, we suppressed the upstream enzyme serine
hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT2) (Extended Data Fig. 3a). While SHMT2 is a

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

mitochondrial enzyme that converts serine to glycine and acts as a key source of glycine in
proliferating cells, the cytoplasmic SHMT1 enzyme does not significantly contribute to
glycine production17,18. Consistent with SHMT2 functioning upstream of GLDC,
suppression of SHMT2 (Extended Data Fig. 1g) decreased both net serine consumption and
glycine production in LN229 cells (Fig. 2a) and completely prevented glycine cleavage
activity in isolated mitochondria as measured by 14C-CO2 release (Extended Data Fig. 3a
and b). Importantly, the preemptive knockdown of SHMT2 protected BT145, LN229, and
U251 (a GBM line) cells against the detrimental effects of GLDC knockdown (Fig. 2b and
c, Extended Data Fig. 3d–f). These results strongly suggest that the toxicity caused by
GLDC suppression is due to an accumulation of the GLDC substrate glycine instead of the
depletion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (5,10-MTF) and NADH, metabolites produced
by the glycine cleavage reaction (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Furthermore, this may explain
why the differentiated BT145 and 0308 cells, which express low levels of SHMT2
(Extended Data Fig. 1h and i), are insensitive to suppression of GLDC. In a panel of cancer
cell lines, we found a striking correlation between SHMT2 expression levels and sensitivity
to GLDC silencing (Fig. 2d and e and Extended Data Fig. 3g–i), a pattern that also matched
their intracellular glycine accumulation (Fig. 2f). Collectively, these findings reveal a
conditionally lethal relationship between SHMT2 and GLDC, in which SHMT2-mediated
production of glycine necessitates its clearance by GLDC so as to prevent its conversion to
toxic metabolites such as aminoacetone and methylglyoxal (Fig. 2g). As seen in the panel of
cell lines, this relationship is likely relevant across multiple cancer cell types and is not
limited to GBM cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In contrast to the toxic effects GLDC knockdown, that of SHMT2 did not affect the
proliferation or survival of multiple cell lines under normal culture conditions (Extended
Data Fig. 3i). Furthermore, SHMT2 was not necessary for the proliferation or self-renewal
of neurosphere forming cells (Extended Data Fig.1 j–l). As it seemed unlikely that cancer
cells would obtain high SHMT2 expression if it did not provide a benefit, we considered that
SHMT2 might have a context-dependent role and examined SHMT2 and GLDC expression
in sections of human GBM tumors. In normal brains SHMT2 and GLDC expression was not
detected in most cells but was at low levels in astrocytes and vessels (Fig. 3a, Extended Data
Fig. 4a,d,e). In GBM tumors, however, both SHMT2 and GLDC were expressed at high
levels (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 4a,d, and e) that even allowed the detection of individual
cancer cells migrating into the brain parenchyma (Extended Data Fig. 4b and c).
Interestingly, the highest levels of SHMT2 and GLDC expression were distinct bands
surrounding necrotic and acellular regions, highlighting cells of what is referred to as the
pseudopalisading necrosis (Fig. 3a–c, Extended Data Fig. 4a,f, and g). This feature, which is
unique to glioblastomas, consists of a dense layer of “pseudopalisading” viable cells that
outline an ischemic tumor region that is thought to form upon the collapse or occlusion of an
intratumoral vessel19.
The expression of SHMT2 in ischemic tumor zones suggested that it might have a key role
in cells in environments with limited oxygen or nutrient levels. Indeed, under hypoxic
conditions (0.5% oxygen), SHMT2 suppression impaired and SHMT2 overexpression
enhanced LN229 cell proliferation (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig. 4i). As these effects were
relatively modest, we set out to more closely recapitulate conditions of tumor ischemia by
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

using a previously described rapid xenograft model20. In this heterotopic model, a large
bolus of cells is injected subcutaneously and the tumor collected prior to angiogenesis. Thus,
the tumor core experiences oxygen and nutrient deprivation, which frequently results in
extensive cell death, while the outermost regions of the tumor receive sufficient oxygen and
nutrients and are completely viable (Fig. 3e). In such xenografts, LN229 cells, which
express high levels of SHMT2 (Fig. 2d), formed a tumor with a heterogeneous central
region that contained both dying cells (labeled by cleaved-PARP) and numerous ‘islands’ of
viable cells lacking cleaved PARP (Fig. 3f and g). On the other hand, tumors formed from
LN229 cells expressing a SHMT2 shRNA had a uniformly barren, cleaved-PARP
immunoreactive central region that was almost completely devoid of any surviving cells.
Importantly, overexpression of an RNAi-resistant SHMT2 cDNA not only rescued the
effects of SHMT2 knockdown but also had a strong protective effect, in some cases
resulting in central tumor regions that were almost entirely viable (Fig. 3f and g). While this
model does not directly mimic pseudopalisading necroses, it indicates that SHMT2
expression is an important determinant of cancer cell survival within an ischemic tumor
context.

Author Manuscript

To begin to understand why this might be, we surveyed the metabolic consequences of
SHMT2 suppression in LN229 cells. Quantitative central carbon metabolism profiling
revealed that in addition to the expected accumulation of serine and depletion of glycine,
SHMT2 suppression increased the levels of TCA cycle intermediates and decreased those of
the pentose phosphate pathway (Extended Data Fig. 5a). SHMT2 suppression also increased
cellular oxygen consumption (Extended Data Fig. 5b), which may reflect increased TCA
cycle activity driving NADH into the oxidative phosphorylation pathway. Furthermore,
untargeted metabolite profiling identified AICAR, SAICAR, and fructose bisphosphate
(FBP) as amongst the most highly elevated metabolites (Fig 4a and Supplemental Tables 6
and 7). The increase in the sequential intermediates SAICAR and AICAR can be explained
because 10-formyl-THF, a downstream product of SHMT2 and SHMT1 activity, is required
for the conversion of AICAR to FAICAR during de novo purine biosynthesis (Extended
Data Fig. 5d). While a link between SHMT2 and FBP is less clear, we nonetheless noted
that the suppression of SHMT2 significantly increases levels of all three known activators of
pyruvate kinase isoform M2 (PKM2) –serine, FBP, and SAICAR21–23– raising the
possibility that SHMT2 antagonizes PKM2 activity by decreasing the levels of its activators.

Author Manuscript

Pyruvate kinase catalyzes the conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate in glycolysis,
and PKM2 is the isoform associated with proliferating cells1,2. PKM2 has regulated activity,
unlike the constitutively active PKM1. Decreasing PKM2 activity can allow redistribution
of glycolytic carbons in a manner advantageous for cancer cell proliferation in tumors3,24,25,
and either pharmacological PKM2 activation or PKM1 expression can impair tumor
growth25,26. Consistent with the increase in metabolites known to activate PKM2 (Fig. 2a
and 4a), PKM2 activity was significantly increased in cells with suppressed SHMT2, despite
no change in PKM2 protein levels (Fig. 4b, Extended Data Fig. 5c). To determine whether
SHMT2 silencing induces changes in central carbon metabolism that are consistent with
increased pyruvate kinase (PK) activity, we measured kinetic flux through glycolysis in live
cells using 13C-stable isotope labeled glucose (U-13C-glucose) (Fig. 4c–d, Extended Data
Fig. 5e–h, Supplemental Table 8 and 9). The 13C labeling rate of pyruvate, the product of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

PKM2, was elevated in cells with suppressed SHMT2, indicating increased PKM2 activity,
which was also confirmed in cells overexpressing PKM2 (Fig. 4c). By calculating the sum
13C labeling of lactate, citrate, and alanine, the major downstream fates of pyruvate27, we
estimate that the total pyruvate kinase flux is increased by ~70% following SHMT2
knockdown (Extended Data Fig. 5e–g). Furthermore, these changes as well as changes in
metabolite levels and oxygen consumption were suppressed by overexpression of an RNAiresistant SHMT2 cDNA (Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 5e), arguing against off-target RNAi
effects. These results support a model in which SHMT2 suppression leads to increased
pyruvate kinase activity and carbon flux into the TCA cycle, while cells that express high
levels of SHMT2 limit PKM2 activity and flux into the TCA cycle (Fig. 4d). This may
confer a survival benefit in ischemic tumor contexts, as it has been shown that limiting
pyruvate entry into TCA cycle, and thus limiting oxygen consumption, provides a survival
advantage under hypoxia28.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

If the effects of SHMT2 on oxygen consumption and survival within an ischemic
microenvironment occur via suppression of PKM2 activity, then forced activation of PKM2
should antagonize these effects. Indeed, either overexpression of PKM2 or the addition of
the PKM2 product pyruvate to the media increased the oxygen consumption rate in LN229
cells to the equivalent levels observed following SHMT2 knockdown (Fig. 4e and Extended
Data Fig. 5i). Thus, pyruvate kinase activity may be a determinant of oxygen consumption
in these cells. Furthermore, overexpression of PKM2, or the pharmacological activation of
PKM2 using TEPP-46 or DASA-5826 reduced LN229 survival in 0.5% hypoxia to a similar
extent as SHMT2 suppression (Extended Data Fig. 5j). Finally, in the rapid xenograft model,
PKM2 overexpression, like SHMT2 loss, reduced the survival of LN229 cells (Fig. 4f and
g). These findings support a model in which high SHMT2 expression rewires metabolism to
suppress PKM2 activity and promote survival in the ischemic tumor environment (Extended
Data Fig. 5k).
In summary, we identified toxic glycine accumulation following loss of GLDC as a
metabolic liability in cells expressing high levels of SHMT2. Thus, in nonketotic
hyperglycinemia, preventing endogenous glycine production via SHMT2 inhibition may be
the desired route of therapy, as current treatment options targeting exogenous glycine, such
as dietary restriction or plasma glycine conjugation, are largely ineffective5.

Author Manuscript

On the other hand, SHMT2 is elevated in a subset of cancer cells and promotes changes in
metabolism that allow cells to survive in an ischemic tumor microenvironment. It is
observed that hypoxia/ischemia selects for cancer cells with increased tumorigenicity and
therapy-resistance, and manifestations of tumor ischemia, such as pseudopalisading
necrosis, are associated with poor prognoses29. Thus, our findings raise the possibility that
GLDC inhibition may be exploited to specifically target malignant and refractory
subpopulations of cells expressing high levels of SHMT2.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

METHODS
Materials
The following antibodies were used: antibodies to GLDC (HPA002318), SHMT2
(HPA020549) from Sigma; antibodies to actin (sc-1616), SHMT1 (sc-100849), and
GCAT(sc-86466) from Santa Cruz; anti-GCSH (H00002653-A01)from Abnova; anti-SOX-2
(MAB2018) from R & D systems; anti-GFAP (IF03L) from Calbiochem; anti-cleavedPARP (19F4) and anti-PKM2 (D78A4) from Cell Signaling Technologies; anti-GCAT
(ab85202) from Abcam; anti-methylglyoxal antibody (MMG-030) from Genox; HRPconjugated anti-mouse, anti-rabbit, and anti-goat secondary antibodies from Santa-Cruz
Biotechnology.

Author Manuscript

The following cell culture reagents were used: Neurobasal medium, N-2 and B-27
supplements from Invitrogen; Recombinant Human FGF basic (4114-TC) and EGF (236EG) from R & D systems; DMEM and RPMI-1640 media, doxycycline (D9891) from
Sigma; Leucine ethyl ester hydrochloride (61850), Arginine ethyl ester hydrochloride
(A2883), Alanine ethyl ester hydrochloride (855669), Valine ethyl ester hydrochloride
(220698), Lysine ethyl ester dihydrochloride (62880), Ethylamine (395064) from Sigma;
Glycine ethyl ester hydrochloride (sc-295020) and Polybrene (sc-134220) from Santa Cruz.
Additional materials used: formalin from VWR; Borg Decloaker RTU solution and
pressurized Decloaking Chamber from Biocare Medical; Prolong Gold Antifade reagent
from Invitrogen; CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Assay from Promega; U14C-Serine from MP
Biomedicals; Matrigel (356230) from BD Biosciences.
Cell lines, tissue culture, and media

Author Manuscript

The neurosphere forming lines lines 0308, BT145, and BT112 were established as
described10,30,31, kindly provided by Howard Fine and Keith Ligon, and maintained as
tumorigenic neural stem cell-like neurospheres in NBE medium (Neurobasal medium
containing N-2 and B-27 supplements, Epidermal Growth Factor, basic fibroblast growth
factor, L-glutamine, and Penicillin-Streptomycin) as described10. When passaging, spheres
were manually broken into smaller spheres and single cells by trypsinization and pipetting.
For differentiation experiments, neurospheres were broken into single cells and grown in
DMEM (containing 10% inactivated fetal bovine serum and Penicillin-Streptomycin) for at
least 1 week.

Author Manuscript

All other cell lines (LN229, ACHN, A2058, U251, T47D, MCF7, HMC-1–8, U87,
DoTc2-4510, and PC3) were obtained from Broad Institute Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia,
and cultured as adherent cell lines in DMEM with exceptions noted below. Cell lines were
verified to be free of mycoplasma contamination. Cell line origins are as follows: 0308,
BT145, BT112, LN229, U251, U87 (glioblastoma), ACHN (renal cell adenocarcinoma),
A2058 (melanoma), T47D (breast ductal carcinoma), MCF7 (breast pleural effusion),
HMC-1–8 (breast pleural effusion), DoTc2-4510 (cervical carcinoma), PC3 (prostate
adenocarcinoma).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

For experiments measuring oxygen consumption and for untargeted metabolite profiling
experiments, RPMI was used, which does not contain the PKM2 product pyruvate.
Subcutaneous xenograft experiments

Author Manuscript

For regular subcutaneous xenograft studies, LN229 cells were transduced to stably express
shRNAs (shGLDCdox, shGFP via puromycin selection for 3 days) and then cDNAs (empty
vector or RNAi-resistant GLDC cDNA via blastocidin selection for 3 days) then further
amplified. Xenografts were initiated with 3 million cells injected subcutaneously per site,
with 30% matrigel, 100 µl injection volume in the left and right flanks of female, 6–8 week
old NCr nude mice (Taconic). Tumors were allowed to form for two weeks, and at this point
the first caliper measurements were taken, and induction started by addition of doxycycline
at 2 g/L to drinking water. Tumor volume was calculated using the modified ellipsoid
formula ½ (Length × Width2) and expressed as relative fold change to the initial volume of
each tumor at the start of doxycycline induction.
For rapid tumor xenograft studies to form ischemic tumor cores, LN229 cells were
transduced to stably express both cDNAs (empty vector, RNAi-resistant SHMT2 cDNA, or
PKM2 cDNA via blastocidin selection) and shRNAs (via puromycin selection). Xenografts
were initiated with 8 million cells injected subcutaneously per site in the left and right flanks
of female, 6–8 week old NCr nude mice (Taconic). Tumors were removed at 48 hours postinjection and fixed in 10% formalin.

Author Manuscript

For the quantification of viable and nonviable regions in the ischemic region, fixed tumors
were embedded and sections prepared. Sections were immunostained for SHMT2 and
cleaved PARP, and images of the central tumor regions were obtained using a Zeiss
Axiovert 200M inverted fluorescent microscope and AxioVision Software. All images were
acquired and processed under the same parameters across the entire set. The image labels
were scrambled so that analyses could be carried out in a blinded manner, and the Red
channel (cPARP) and Blue channel (Hoechst 33342) was analyzed. Using Adobe
Photoshop, the entire central necrotic region, labeled by cleaved PARP, was manually
outlined with the Lasso tool. Within this tumor region, the total area counts (in pixels) of the
dead (cPARP positive and Hoechst positive) and viable (cPARP negative and Hoechst
positive) regions were obtained to calculate the percentage of viable region within the
central necrotic zone.
Analyses of oncogenomic and other microarray data

Author Manuscript

We had previously classified a set of 2,752 metabolic enzymes and transporters32. To obtain
a list of metabolic genes and transporters that have increased expression in gliomas, we
analyzed the 9 expression studies deposited in Oncomine33 that profiled gene expression
normal brain tissue and gliomas. For each dataset, the top 10% of genes overexpressed in the
glioma relative to normal brain was obtained, and cross referenced with our gene set, which
yielded a list of 367 genes which placed within the top 10% of overexpressed genes in at
least two separate studies.
To determine the expression of selected metabolic genes in the context of neural stem cells,
we analyzed a set of 5 microarray datasets deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus in which
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

neural stem cells are compared with differentiated controls (GSE36484, GSE10721,
GSE15209, and two comparison groups in GSE11508). A summary of the datasets and fold
change in expression of each gene in each study is provided in Supplemental Table 3.
shRNA expressing lentivirus generation and sequences

Author Manuscript

For each gene of interest (GLDC, SHMT2, GCAT, GCSH), 5 lentiviral shRNA constructs
were obtained from The RNAi Consortium (TRC) and recombinant lentivirus containing
supernatant was produced using a transient transfection protocol34. Each lentivirus was
separately transduced into LN229 by overnight incubation of virus in trypsin dissociated
cells (20,000 cells per ml, 2 ml into each well of a 6-well plate) in the presence of polybrene.
Lentiviral expression of shGFP and shLacZ served as negative controls for gene
knockdown, and noninfected cells served as negative controls for transduction. Cells were
selected with puromycin for 3 days to ensure transduction, and for each gene, the two (or
three) most effective shRNAs, in terms of knockdown of protein expression by western blot,
were chosen for use in our experiments.
The following shRNA sequences were used:
shGFP: TRCN0000072186, target sequence: TGCCCGACAACCACTACCTGA
shLacZ: TRCN0000072235, target sequence: CCGTCATAGCGATAACGAGTT
shGLDC_1: TRCN0000036599, target sequence: CGAGCCTACTTAAACCAGAAA
shGLDC_2: TRCN0000036603, target sequence: GAAGTTTATGAGTCTCCATTT
shGLDCdox: target sequence same as shGLDC_2, cloned into dox-inducible vector
(pLKO_GC11)

Author Manuscript

shSHMT2_1: TRCN0000238795, target sequence: CGGAGAGTTGTGGACTTTATA
shSHMT2_2: TRCN0000034804, target sequence: CCGGAGAGTTGTGGACTTTAT
shSHMT2_3: TRCN0000234657, target sequence: GTCTGACGTCAAGCGGATATC
shGCSH_1: TRCN0000083395, target sequence: GTGAACTCTATTCTCCTTTAT
shGCSH_2: TRCN0000428788, target sequence: TGAGGAACACCACTATCTTAA
shGCAT_1: TRCN0000034579, target sequence: CCTTAACTTCTGTGCCAACAA
shGCAT_2: TRCN0000034580, target sequence: CCAGAGGTTCCGTAGTAAGAT
shNOTCH2_1: TRCN0000004896, target sequence:
CCAGGATGAATGATGGTACTA

Author Manuscript

shNOTCH2_2: TRCN0000004897, target sequence:
CCACACAACAACATGCAGGTT
Cell viability assays with shRNA transduction
For cell viability experiments involving transduction of a single shRNA (e.g. shGLDCs),
cell lines (neurosphere forming cell lines, LN229, ACHN, A2058, U251, T47D, MCF7,
HMC-1-8, U87, DoTc2-4510, and PC3) were seeded in 96-wells at 3,500 to 5,000 cells per

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

well. The next day, neurosphere forming lines were infected with lentivirus and polybrene
via 30-minute spin at 2,250 rpm followed by incubation for 1 hour prior to a media change
(due to neurosphere forming cell line sensitivity to prolonged incubation with virus and
polybrene), while all the non neurosphere cell lines were infected via overnight incubation
of virus and polybrene prior to a media change. For all non-neurosphere cell lines,
puromycin selection was started 24h after infection, while for the neurosphere lines it was
started 48h after infection (because of their sensitive nature). Cells were incubated for 4–6
additional days as indicated, and overall cell viability was quantified using the Cell Titer Glo
(CTG) reagent (Promega) and measuring luminescence. As doubling times and
luminescence values per viable cell differ between different cell lines, values are normalized
to the same cells transduced in parallel with innocuous shGFP hairpins as indicated.

Author Manuscript

When comparing sensitivity to GLDC (or GCSH, SHMT2) knockdown across different cell
lines, two identical sets of experiments, one which receives puromycin selection and one
which does not, were carried out in parallel. Comparing the two ensures that the toxicity
observed in the ‘sensitive’ cell lines is due to GLDC knockdown and not due to selection of
nontransduced cells, because identical toxicity is also seen in the nonselected plate.
Conversely, we can ensure that low toxicity observed in the ‘insensitive’ cell lines is not an
artifact of poor transduction because if they had been poorly transduced, then toxicity would
be observed in the puromycin selected plate. In this manner, we verified full transduction of
cells that we have examined for GLDC effects on viability.

Author Manuscript

For some experiments, cells are transduced with more than one shRNA and this was carried
out in a sequential manner. Cells were infected with the first lentivirus expressing an shRNA
(shGFP, shSHMT2_1, or shSHMT2_2, shGCAT_1, shGCAT_2) as described, then selected
in puromycin for 3 days, and expanded for 2–5 more days. Equal numbers of each stable cell
line were infected with the second lentivirus (shGFP, shGLDC_1, or shGLDC_2), seeded in
96-well plates, and at 5 days following infection, cell viability was measured. Because in
some cases (e.g. shGCAT hairpins) the primary transduction itself moderately impairs cell
proliferation, viability values for the cells secondarily transduced with shGLDCs are always
expressed as relative to the same primary transduced cells, processed in parallel, which are
secondarily infected with a control hairpin (shGFP). Because the secondary transduction
cannot be selected for (since the cells are already puromycin resistant from the first round of
transduction), effective knockdown of the second gene was verified by Western blot.
For cell proliferation experiments, cell counts were determined using a Coulter Counter
(Beckman).

Author Manuscript

CRISPR /Cas9 mediated gene knockdown
In some of our experiments, effective gene knockdown was achieved via CRISPR/Cas-9
mediated genome editing. We utilized pLENTICRISPR, in which both single guide RNA,
directed against a target of interest, and the Cas9 endonuclease are both delivered to cells via
lentivirus35 in an analogous manner to the TRC shRNA experiments. Three target site
sequences, selected based on best scores as previously calculated for all genes36, were
cloned into pLENTICRISPR. As described for TRC shRNA transduction, lentiviruses were
produced and transduced into trypsin dissociated LN229 cells, via overnight incubation with
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

polybrene. Following media change and puromycin selection, cells were harvested 7 days
following infection, and gene knockdown determined by Western blotting. The two most
effective target guide sequences, in terms of knockdown of protein expression by western
blot, were chosen for use in our experiments.
The following target site sequences, transduced via pLENTICRISPR, were used:
sgGFP: TGAACCGCATCGAGCTGAAG (plus strand)
sgGLDC_1: CGGGACAGCAGCAGTGGCGG (minus strand)
sgGLDC_2: ATTTGGGGTAGACATCGCCC (minus strand)
sgGCAT_1: CCAGCGCTGACTGTGCGCGG (minus strand)
sgGCAT_2: GAAGCATCGGCTGCGCCTGG (plus strand)

Author Manuscript

Pooled shRNA screening

Author Manuscript

pLKO.1 lentiviral plasmids encoding shRNAs targeting glycine metabolizing enzymes,
metabolic enzymes for other amino acids, as well as nontargeting controls were obtained
and combined to form a pool as described in Extended Figure 2. This pool was used to
generate a pool or lentiviruses as described34. LN229 cells were infected with the pooled
virus at a low titer (multiplicity of infection of 0.7) to ensure that each cell contained only
one viral integrant. After cells were selected for 3 days with puromycin, pooled cells were
dissociated, divided, and subjected to a secondary infection with either shGFP, shGLDC_1,
or shGLDC_2. After 6 days following the secondary infection, a time point corresponding to
moderate toxicity as determined by decreased proliferation and moderate changes cell
morphology compared to shGFP infected cells, cells were collected to obtain genomic DNA.
As previously described32, the shRNAs encoded in the genomic DNA were amplified and
analyzed by high throughput sequencing (Illumina) using the following primers:
Barcoded Forward Primer (‘N’s indicate location of sample-specific barcode sequence):
AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGAAAGTATTTCGATTTCTTGGCTTTATATATC
TTGTG
GAANNGACGAAAC
Common Reverse Primer:
CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGCTCTTCCGATCTTGTGGATGAATACTGCC
ATTTG

Author Manuscript

TCTCGAGGTC
Illumina Sequencing Primer:
AGTATTTCGATTTCTTGGCTTTATATATCTTGTGGAA
Sequencing reads were deconvoluted using GNU Octave software as described. For each
shRNA, Abundance was defined as (number of reads / total number of all reads of pooled
cells in either shGFP or shGLDC). Enrichment was defined as (abundance in shGLDC /
abundance in shGFP), thus an enrichment score of 2.0 would indicate that an shRNA is
twice as abundant in the shGLDC infected pool as it was in the shGFP infected pool. “Fold
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

change” is defined as the enrichment score of an shRNA relative to the mean enrichment
score of all 11 nontargeting control shRNAs. For a given gene, the mean fold change
(shGLDC_1/shGFP and shGLDC_2/shGFP) was calculated from all shRNAs targeting that
gene.
Clonogenic neurosphere formation assay
0308 cells were stably transduced with shRNAs as indicated, and seeded at single cell-perwell density in Poly-D-Lysine coated 384-well plates (Becton Dickinson). Wells containing
a single cell were marked and two weeks later, the marked wells containing spheres were
counted.
Histology and immunohistochemistry

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Immunohistochemical analyses were performed on discarded archival biopsy (7) and
autopsy (7) specimens of glioblastoma, World Health Organization Grade IV, seen at the
Departments of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and NYU Langone Medical
Center, from 2010 to 2013. Approval from respective Institutional Review Board was
obtained, and because we used discarded tissue only, a waiver of informed consent was
received. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded brain biopsy tissues were stained with routine
hematoxylin and eosin stain (H&E), and cases were reviewed by a neuropathologist (M.S.)
to select the most representative block/s for immunohistochemical analysis. Paraffin sections
of GBM tumors and normal brains, fixed in 10% formalin, were subjected to
deparaffinization and antigen retrieval with Borg Decloaker RTU solution pressurized
Decloaking Chamber (Biocare Medical). Antibodies were diluted in in 4% horse serum and
0.1% tween in PBS, which was also used for blocking. Vectastain ABC immunoperoxidase
detection kit (Vector Labs) and DAB+ substrate kit (Dako) was used for chromogenic
labeling. It was noted that antigen presentation for SHMT2 was much weaker in autopsy
sections compared to tumor biopsy sections, likely a result of postmortem interval, and thus
a more concentrated primary antibody incubation and longer chromogenic development was
required for these sections to get comparable signal to the biopsy sections.

Author Manuscript

Images were acquired using an Olympus BX41microscope and CellSensR software. For
immunofluorescence staining of GBM tumors and normal brains, as well as rapid tumor
xenografts, fixed in 10% formalin, the same deparaffinization, antigen retrieval, and
blocking/antibody incubation steps were used as above. Immunoreactivity was detected
using Alexa-fluor 488 and 568 antibodies and nuclei labeled with Hoechst 33352 (Life
Technologies), and ProlongR Gold antifade reagent (Life Technologies) was used as
mounting medium. Images were acquired using a Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted fluorescent
microscope and AxioVision Software. For all image-based data, acquisition and processing
steps were carried out using the same parameters across the entire set, aside from the
increased antibody concentration and longer chromogenic development for the set of
autopsy sections for SHMT2 immunostaining as described.
Amino acid analyses
Intracellular amino acids were extracted by hot water extraction, and proteins were removed
with sulfosalicylic acid. The amino acids were separated by high-resolution ion-exchange

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

chromatography and derivatized with ninhydrin, and analyzed on a Hitachi L-8800 amino
acid analyzer37. Amino acids were normalized by wet pellet weight of the cells prior to
extraction.
Quantitative CE-MS based metabolite profiling
Capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry-based targeted quantitative analysis was
performed on stably transduced LN229 cells, as previously described38. A total of 116
metabolites involved in glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, tricarboxylic acid (TCA)
cycle, urea cycle, and polyamine, creatine, purine, glutathione, nicotinamide, choline, and
amino acid metabolism were analyzed and listed in Table 3.
Metabolite extraction and LC-MS analysis

Author Manuscript

Untargeted metabolite profiling, flux experiments, and amino acetone measurements were
performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography
system coupled to a Q Exactive benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer, which was equipped
with an Ion Max source and a HESI II probe (Thermo Fisher Scientific). External mass
calibration was performed every 7 days.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For untargeted metabolite profiling and flux experiments, polar metabolites were extracted
from cells growing in a 6-well dish using 400 µL of ice cold 80% methanol with 20 ng/mL
valine-d8 as an internal extraction standard. After scraping the cells, 400 µL of chloroform
was added before vortexing for 10 min at 4°C, centrifugation for 10 min at 4°C at 16,000×g,
and drying 150 µL of the upper methanol/water phase under nitrogen gas. Dried samples
were stored at −80°C then resuspended in 40 µL 50% acetonitrile/50% water immediately
before analysis. Cells were usually left plated for 24–48 h after a media change before
extraction in order to allow for media conditioning. Accordingly, U-13C-glucose labelling of
cells was achieved by adding a concentrated stock to a final concentration of 11.1 mM after
24 h of media conditioning. Chromatographic separation was achieved by injecting 10 µL of
sample on a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC Polymeric column (2.1×150 mm 5 uM, EMD Millipore).
Flow rate was set to 100 µL/min, column compartment was set to 25°C, and autosampler
sample tray was set to 4°C. Mobile Phase A consisted of 20 mM ammonium carbonate,
0.1% ammonium hydroxide. Mobile Phase B was 100% acetonitrile. The mobile phase
gradient (%B) was as follows: 0 min 80%, 5 min 80%, 30 min 20%, 31 min 80%, 42 min
80%. All mobile phase was introduced into the ionization source set with the following
parameters: sheath gas = 40, auxiliary gas = 15, sweep gas = 1, spray voltage = −3.1kV or
+3.0kV, capillary temperature = 275°C, S-lens RF level = 40, probe temperature = 350°C. In
experiments to measure steady-state levels, metabolites were monitored using a polarityswitching full-scan method. In experiments utilizing U-13C-glucose tracing, metabolites
were monitored using a targeted selected ion monitoring (tSIM) method in negative mode
with the quadrupole centered on the M-H ion m+1.5, m+2.5, or m+3.5 mass with a 8 amu
isolation window, depending on the number of carbons in the target metabolite. Resolution
was set to 70,000, full-scan AGC target was set to 106 ions, and tSIM AGC target was set to
105 ions. For tracing experiments, samples were collected at various time points as
indicated. Labeling rate was calculated from counts at 6 minutes, and detailed methods for
determining the labeling rate and overall flux are provided in the first three worksheets of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Supplemental Table 8. Data were acquired and analyzed using Xcalibur v2.2 software
(Thermo Fisher Scientific).Full-scan untargeted data was analyzed using Progenesis CoMet
v2.0 software (Nonlinear Dynamics) to identify differential peaks (Supplemental Table 4
and 5) and the identified metabolites with greatest predicted change were further analyzed
with Xcalibur. Retention times for selected metabolites appearing in the untargeted analyses
(AICAR and SAICAR) were confirmed by running a standard. All standards were obtained
commercially, except for SAICAR, which was synthesized enzymatically from AICAR and
purified by ion-exchange chromatography as described23.
Derivatization and LC-MS detection of aminoacetone

Author Manuscript

The protocol for aminoacetone derivatization with fluorenylmethyl chloroformate (FMOCCl) and subsequent detection via LC-MS was adapted from previous studies39,40. LN229
cells grown in 6cm plates were quickly washed in cold PBS, then extracted with scraping in
500 µl acetonitrile containing 1 µM ethylamine as an internal control for sample recovery
and derivatization efficiency. Following vortexing, centrifugation, and transfer of
supernatant to eliminate insoluble material, potassium borate buffer at pH 10.4 (final
concentration 33 µM) and FMOC-Cl (final concentration 400 µg/ml) were added. Samples
were completely dried, 100 µl of water added followed by addition of 800 µl hexane.
Following vortexing and centrifugation, the upper phase was transferred to a new tube,
dried, and the pellet extracted in acetonitrile.

Author Manuscript

For LC separation, 10 µL of each biological sample was injected onto an Ascentis Express
C18 2.1×150 mm (2.7 µm particle size) column (Sigma-Aldrich). Mobile phase A was 0.1%
formic acid and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The chromatographic
gradient was as follows, all at a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min.: 0–2 min.: hold at 5% B; 2–20
min.: increase linearly to 75% B; 20–20.1 min.: increase linearly to 95% B; 20.1–24 min.:
hold at 95% B; 24–24.1 min.: decrease linearly to 5% B; 24.1–28 min.: hold at 5% B. The
autosampler was held at 4°C and the column compartment was held at 35°C. To minimize
carryover, blank injections were performed after every six analytical runs.
All mobile phase was introduced into the ionization source with the spray voltage set to +3.0
kV and the same temperature and gas parameter settings as described in the previous
section. The MS data acquisition was performed by tSIM of aminoacetone-FMOC and
ethylamine-FMOC (internal standard) with the resolution set at 70,000, the AGC target at
105, the maximum injection time at 150 msec, and the isolation window at 1.0 m/z. The full
scan range was 150–2000 m/z. Quantitation of the data was performed with Xcalibur v2.2
using a 5 ppm mass tolerance by a researcher (E.F.) blinded to the identity of the samples.

Author Manuscript

Peak areas for aminoacetone-FMOC were normalized to peak areas for ethylamine-FMOC
from the same sample, and further normalized to total protein (µg) and expressed relative to
the control sample.
Oxygen consumption measurements
Oxygen consumption of LN229 cells was measured using an XF24 Extracellular Flux
Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience). 60,000 cells were plated per well the night before the
experiments, and RPMI 8226 media (US Biological #9011) containing 2 mM glutamine and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)-linked pyruvate kinase activity assay

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial isolation and glycine cleavage assay

Author Manuscript

10 mM glucose without serum was used as the assay media. Oxygen consumption
measurements were normalized based on protein concentration obtained from the same plate
used for the assay.

Statistics and animal models

Concentrated (5–10 mg/mL) hypotonic lysate was prepared from cells by swelling on ice for
10min in one equivalent of 1xHypotonic Lysis Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 5 mM KCl, 1
mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, 1 tablet/10mL Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche)),
then passing through a 26 gauge needle 3×, then spinning 10min at 4C at 16,000×g.
Concentrated lysate was diluted 1:100 in 1xHypotonic Lysis Buffer and immediately
assayed with 500 µM final PEP, 600 µM final ATP, 180 µM final NADH, and 0.16mg/mL
LDH in 1xReaction Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT) in 100 µL total.
Decrease in NADH fluorescence was followed in a Tecan plate reader and a regression on
the slope of the decrease was taken as the activity. Bradford assay was performed on the
concentrated lysate and activities were normalized to total protein.

Intact mitochondria were isolated from mechanically lysed cells using differential
centrifugation as described41, and the intact state of mitochondria verified using the JC-1
dye. Equal quantities of isolated mitochondria were resuspended in a buffer to support
glycine cleavage activity as described42 (100 mM KCl, 50 mM mannitol, 20 mM sucrose,
10 mM KH2PO4, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.175 mM pyridoxal phosphate, 1 mM
ADP, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) with the addition of 1 µM NAD+, 2 µM tetrahydrofolate, and
10 µM beta-mercaptoethanol. Upon addition of U-14C serine, the reaction mixture
containing mitochondria were incubated for 40 min at 37°C, and CO2 produced by the
reactions were collected in phenylethylamine-coated paper overnight at 30°C, and the 14C
content was measured using a scintillation counter.

Author Manuscript

All experiments reported in Figs 1,2,3,4 were repeated at least three times, except 1f, 1k, 2b,
and 4c, which were repeated twice; 1c, 2a, 2f, and 4a were performed once. In addition,
histological analyses experiments (3c) and xenograft based experiments (1h–j, 3g, 4g) were
performed once, with n’s indicating the number of individual patient-based tumors or
xenograft tumors. All center values shown in graphs refer to the mean. t-tests were
heteroscedastic to allow for unequal variance and distributions assumed to follow a
Student’s t distribution, and these assumptions are not contradicted by the data. No samples
or animals were excluded from analysis, and sample size estimates were not used. Animals
were randomly assigned to groups. Studies were not conducted blind with the exception of
Fig 3g and 4g. All experiments involving mice were carried out with approval from the
Committee for Animal Care at MIT and under supervision of the Department of
Comparative Medicine at MIT.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. GLDC and SHMT2 expression and function in neurosphere forming
cells

a, Micrographs of cells (0308 cell line) cultured under neurosphere forming conditions (top
panel) or differentiated into their non-tumorigenic counterparts (bottom panel). b,
Immunoblots from neurosphere forming cells maintained in the neurosphere state or
differentiated by serum treatment for 1 week, with SOX-2 as a marker for the neural stem
cell-like state. c, Immunoblots from neurosphere forming cells transduced with control
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

shRNA (shGFP), or NOTCH2 shRNAs which induce differentiation, for 1 week. d,
Immunoblot showing suppression of GLDC expression in BT145 cells transduced with the
indicated shRNAs for 5 days. e, Micrographs from undifferentiated or serum-differentiated
BT145 cells expressing shGFP or GLDC shRNAs for 6 days.
f. Viability of LN229 cells overexpressing blank vector or mouse GLDC, either untreated or
treated with 1 mM esterified glycine for 3.5 days as indicated. Values are relative to that of
the same cells left untreated. g, Immunoblot showing suppression of SHMT2 expression in
BT145 cells transduced with the indicated shRNAs for 5 days. h, Immunoblots for SHMT2
expression in cells maintained in the neurosphere forming state or induced to differentiate by
serum treatment, which are from the same blot as shown in Fig. 1b. i, Immunoblots for
SHMT2 expression in neurosphere forming cells transduced with control (shGFP) or
NOTCH2 shRNAs, which induce differentiation, for 1 week, and are from the same blot as
shown in Fig. 1c. j, Micrographs showing morphology of BT145 cells transduced with the
indicated shRNAs for 6 days. k, Cell viability of 0308 cells transduced with the indicated
shRNAs for 6 days. Values are normalized to the viability of shGFP transduced cells. l,
Clonogenic sphere formation in 0308 cells transduced with the indicated shRNAs and then
plated as single cells. The proportion of wells containing single cells that were able to form
spheres are shown as values relative to shGFP- transduced cells. For l, n=2 independent
biological replicates. For f and k, n=3 independent biological replicates; error bars are SD.
*P<0.05 (student’s t test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Identification of GCAT as a mediator of toxicity caused by GLDC
suppression

a, Schematic presentation of pooled shRNA screen carried out in LN229 cells. Detailed
procedures are provided in Methods. b, Table of a subset of genes examined in the pooled
screen, the average fold change increase in relative abundance of all shRNAs for each gene
in GLDC-suppressed conditions (shGLDC_1 and shGLDC_2) compared to the set of
nontargeting control shRNAs, as described in Supplemental methods. Genes are sorted by
ascending p value; the top 15 out of the 25 genes are shown. Asterisks indicate metabolic

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

genes which do not function in glycine metabolism, included as additional controls. All
shRNAs used and their abundance in each condition are shown in Supplemental Table 4. c,
Relative representation, in the shGLDC infected pool, of each shRNA against non-targeting
controls, SHMT2, and GCAT. A value of 1.0 indicates the average for all hairpins in the
screen. Representation in both shGLDC_1 and shGLDC_2 are shown, so each hairpin is
represented twice in the plot. Bars are mean±SEM. *P<0.05 (student’s t test). d,
Immunoblots of LN229 cells transduced with shRNAs against GCAT as indicated. e,
Extracted ion chromatogram showing peaks from FMOC derivatized aminoacetone and
ethylamine (an internal standard spiked into each sample as a control for efficiency of
derivatization, and recovery and detection) from pure standards (lower graph) and from a
representative LN229 xenograft tumor sample (upper graph), showing a match between
predicted and observed m/z values and retention times. f, Aminoacetone levels in control (no
shRNA) cells, cells transduced with shGLDCdox, and cells with shGLDCdox plus shRNAresistant mouse GLDC, which were all induced with dox for 5 days; n=3 independent
biological replicates; error bars are SD. *P<0.05 (student’s t test). g, Methylglyoxal levels
(argpyrimidine antibody) in LN229 cells transduced with Cas9 and single guide RNAs
against GLDC for 7 days. h, Expression of GCAT in cells transduced with Cas9 and single
guide RNAs against GCAT for 7 days. i, Methylglyoxal levels (argpyrimidine antibody) in
LN229 cells transduced with Cas9 and the indicated single guide RNAs for 7 days, then
secondarily transduced with shGLDC_2 for 5 days.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Effects of glycine cleavage system inhibition on cells with high or low
SHMT2 expression levels

a, Overview of the serine hydroxymethyltransferase and glycine cleavage reactions
mediated by SHMT2 and GLDC, respectively. Asterisks indicate metabolites that are
labeled with 13C during mitochondrial metabolism of U-13C serine. Only upon completion
of both reactions will 13C-labeled CO2 be formed, which is captured and detected by
scintillation as described in Methods. b, Measurement of 13CO2 production, a readout of
sequential SHMT2 and GLDC activity on [U-13C]-serine, in intact mitochondria isolated

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

from LN229s expressing shGFP or shSHMT2_1, as described in Methods. c, Table
indicating cell viability in various cell lines following transduction of GLDC shRNAs for 6–
7 days. Values are relative to the CTG signal of the same cells secondarily transduced with
shGFP and grown in parallel. d, SHMT2 and GLDC expression in LN229 cells stably
transduced with shSHMT2_1 or shGFP, then secondarily transduced shGLDC or shGFP as
indicated. e, Viability of LN229 cells first transduced with control or SHMT2 shRNAs, then
transduced with shGFP or GLDC shRNAs for 5 days. Values are relative to that of cells
secondarily transduced with shGFP. f, Viability of U251 cells first transduced with control
or SHMT2 shRNAs, then transduced with shGFP or GLDC shRNAs for 7 days. Values are
relative to that of cells secondarily transduced with shGFP. g,h,i, Viability of various cell
lines transduced with shRNAs targeting (g) GLDC, (h) GCSH (glycine cleavage system
protein H, another integral component of the glycine cleavage system), or (i) SHMT2.
Values are relative to those of the cells expressing shGFP, which were grown in parallel. For
b,c, and e–i, n=3 independent biological replicates; error bars are SD. *P<0.05 (student’s t
test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. GLDC and SHMT2 expression in GBM tumors

a, SHMT2 and GLDC expression across GBM and normal brain regions as examined in
autopsy sections. A whole coronal section is shown, with the GBM bulk tumor outlined in
white. Insets indicate magnified micrographs from the regions, indicated by the small red
squares, from the same brain. For the bulk tumor insets, cells around the pseudopalisading
necroses are shown. Additional GBM and normal brain are shown in Extended Data Figure
4. Scale bar for whole coronal section = 1 cm, and for insets = 100 µm. b, SHMT2
expression at the GBM-normal brain interface, showing SHMT2-immunoreactivity in

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

migrating cells. Scale bar = 100 µm. c, Magnified image of the boxed region in b. d and e,
High magnification micrographs of SHMT2 and GLDC expression, respectively, in 1)
perinecrotic GBM tumor, 2) non-ischemic bulk tumor, 3) frontal cortex, 4) temporal white
matter, and 5) striatum from autopsy cases. Scale bar = 100 µm. f, Semi-quantitative scoring
of GLDC staining intensity by neuropathologist (M.S.) on 7 tumor biopsy cases (left) and 7
autopsy cases (right). g, Semi-quantitative scoring of SHMT2 staining intensity by
neuropathologist (M.S.) on 7 tumor biopsy cases (left) and 7 autopsy cases (right). h,
Viability of LN229 cells expressing an empty vector control or mouse GLDC cDNA and
cultured in 0.5% hypoxia for 8 days. Values are relative to that of the same cells cultured in
parallel in normoxia. i, Cell number counts from LN229 cells expressing an empty vector
control or SHMT2 cDNA and cultured in 0.5% hypoxia for 8 days. Values are relative to the
counts of the same cells cultured in parallel in normoxia. j. Viability of U251 cells
expressing shRNA or cDNAs as indicated and cultured in 0.5% hypoxia for 6 days. Values
are relative to that of the same cells cultured in parallel in normoxia. For f and g, bars
indicate the mean. For h,i, and j, n=3 independent biological replicates; error bars are SD.
*P<0.05 (student’s t test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Effects of SHMT2 expression on PKM2 activity and cell metabolism

a, Absolute quantitative CE-MS measurement of intracellular metabolites from LN229 cells
stably expressing indicated shRNAs without media change for 84 hours. The metabolites
with the greatest fold change are listed, in units of pmol/106 cells. All metabolites listed are
changed in a statistically significant manner (student’s t test, P<0.05). Data for all 116
metabolites in the analysis are in Supplementary Table 4. b, Oxygen consumption in LN229
cells (in RPMI media) transduced with indicated shRNAs and cDNAs. Error bars are SD
(n=4 technical replicates). c, Pyruvate kinase activity assay from lysates of U251 cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

transduced with indicated shRNAs or cDNAs. d, Proposed mechanism by which SHMT2
inhibition could lead to an increase in AICAR and SAICAR. In cells with high SHMT2
expression, 10-formyl-THF, which is a downstream product of SHMT2 activity, serves as a
cofactor for cytosolic 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase
(ATIC) in the conversion of AICAR to FAICAR during purine biosynthesis. In the absence
of SHMT2, a lack 10-formyl-THF production could lead to accumulation of AICAR and
SAICAR. As indicated by the asterisk, the contribution of SHMT2 to cytosolic 10-formylTHF formation may be direct, occur via export of formate from the mitochondria, or occur
indirectly by changing serine/glycine levels and thereby altering SHMT1 activity. e, 13C
labeling rates of pyruvate and its downstream metabolites in cells from e. Labeling rates are
relative and expressed as fold changes in cells transduced with shSHMT2_1 versus cells
transduced with shGFP, with or without RNAi-resistant SHMT2 cDNA. Estimated PK flux
is the calculated total flux to the four product species in moles of 13C per unit time. Plots for
individual labeled species over time are shown in Extended Data Figure 5d and
Supplementary Table 9. f, Scheme for calculating total PK flux by measuring the net molar
labeling of [U-13C]-glucose derived, PK product species. Estimated PK flux is the calculated
total flux to the four product species in moles of 13C per unit time. g, Plots of glucosederived labeled species abundance over time for shGFP, shSHMT2, and shGFP plus PKM2
cDNA expressing LN229 cells shown in Fig. 4e–g. Raw data, calculations and plots for all
stable cell lines are shown in Supplemental data tables 8 and 9. h, SHMT2 and PKM2
expression in LN229 cells transduced with shRNAs and cDNAs as indicated. Asterisk
indicates the overexpressed PKM2, which shows higher migration due to Flag tag. i,
Oxygen consumption in LN229 cells expressing shGFP or shSHMT2_1 in RPMI media
with or without 1 mM pyruvate. Error bars are SD (n=4 technical replicates). j, Viability of
LN229 cells transduced with shRNAs or cDNAs as indicated, and also treated with vehicle
or 50 uM of TEPP-46 or DASA-58 as indicated, then subjected to hypoxia for 6 days.
Values are relative to the same cells grown in parallel in normoxia. k, Overview of effects of
SHMT2 expression on cell metabolism, tumor cell survival, and liability to toxic glycine
accumulation. Red arrow indicates upregulation, and blue arrow indicates downregulation.
Gray bar indicates the inhibitory effect of SHMT2 activity on PKM2 activity. Depiction of
pseudopalisading necrosis is adapted from a previous review (Brat and Meir, Laboratory
Investigation 84(4):397–405). Illustration by Mica Duran. For a,c,e,g, and j, n=3
independent biological replicates; error bars are SD. *P<0.05 (student’s t test).

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Sabatini lab for assistance and feedback, in particular Yoav Shaul, Tim Wang, Shuyu
Wang, and Omer Yilmaz. Authors would like to thank Dr. Jennie Taylor (Massachusetts General Hospital) with
GBM sample collection, and Tom DiCesare with illustrations. This work was supported by a Basic Research
Fellowship from the American Brain Tumor Association to D.K.; MIT School of Science Fellowship in Cancer
Research and NIH T32GM007287 to B.P.F., fellowships from the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund and
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society to K.B.; a grant from the NIH (K99 CA168940) to R.P.; an American Cancer
Society fellowship and an American Brain Tumor Association Discovery Grant to Y.C.; a fellowship from the US
National Institute of Aging to W.W.C.; NIH (K08-NS087118) to S.H.R.; support from NIH (R01CA168653,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

5P30CA14051), the Smith Family Foundation, the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, the Damon Runyon Cancer
Research Foundation, and the Stern family to M.G.V.H.; DOD CDMRP Discovery Award, grants from the David
H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, The Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust Fund, and
NIH (CA103866, CA129105, and AI07389) to D.M.S. D.M.S. is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute.

REFERENCES

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Cantor JR, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: one hallmark, many faces. Cancer Discov. 2012;
2:881–898. [PubMed: 23009760]
2. Tennant DA, Duran RV, Gottlieb E. Targeting metabolic transformation for cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2010; 10:267–277. [PubMed: 20300106]
3. Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033. [PubMed: 19460998]
4. Mattson MP, Shea TB. Folate and homocysteine metabolism in neural plasticity and
neurodegenerative disorders. Trends Neurosci. 2003; 26:137–146. doi:S0166-2236(03)00032-8 [pii]
10.1016/S0166-2236(03)00032-8. [PubMed: 12591216]
5. Saudubray, JM.; Van den Berghe, G.; Walter, J. Inborn metabolic diseases : diagnosis and
treatment. 5th edn. Springer; 2012.
6. Reya T, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF, Weissman IL. Stem cells, cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature.
2001; 414:105–111. [PubMed: 11689955]
7. Zhang WC, et al. Glycine decarboxylase activity drives non-small cell lung cancer tumor-initiating
cells and tumorigenesis. Cell. 2012; 148:259–272. [PubMed: 22225612]
8. Tibbetts AS, Appling DR. Compartmentalization of Mammalian folate-mediated one-carbon
metabolism. Annu Rev Nutr. 2010; 30:57–81. [PubMed: 20645850]
9. Chen J, McKay RM, Parada LF. Malignant glioma: lessons from genomics, mouse models, and
stem cells. Cell. 2012; 149:36–47. [PubMed: 22464322]
10. Lee J, et al. Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas cultured in bFGF and EGF more closely
mirror the phenotype and genotype of primary tumors than do serum-cultured cell lines. Cancer
Cell. 2006; 9:391–403. doi:S1535-6108(06)00117-6 [pii] 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.03.030. [PubMed:
16697959]
11. Shikano N, et al. Stimulation of 125I-3-iodo-alpha-methyl-L-tyrosine uptake in Chinese hamster
ovary (CHO-K1) cells by tyrosine esters. Nucl Med Biol. 2010; 37:189–196. [PubMed: 20152718]
12. Dale RA. Catabolism of threonine in mammals by coupling of L-threonine 3-dehydrogenase with
2-amino-3-oxobutyrate-CoA ligase. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1978; 544:496–503. [PubMed:
728468]
13. Tressel T, Thompson R, Zieske LR, Menendez MI, Davis L. Interaction between L-threonine
dehydrogenase and aminoacetone synthetase and mechanism of aminoacetone production. J Biol
Chem. 1986; 261:16428–16437. [PubMed: 3536927]
14. Sartori A, et al. Aminoacetone, a putative endogenous source of methylglyoxal, causes oxidative
stress and death to insulin-producing RINm5f cells. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008; 21:1841–1850.
[PubMed: 18729331]
15. Kalapos MP. Methylglyoxal in living organisms: chemistry, biochemistry, toxicology and
biological implications. Toxicol Lett. 1999; 110:145–175. doi:S0378427499001605 [pii].
[PubMed: 10597025]
16. Labuschagne CF, van den Broek NJ, Mackay GM, Vousden KH, Maddocks OD. Serine, but not
glycine, supports one-carbon metabolism and proliferation of cancer cells. Cell Rep. 2014;
7:1248–1258. [PubMed: 24813884]
17. Jain M, et al. Metabolite profiling identifies a key role for glycine in rapid cancer cell proliferation.
Science. 2012; 336:1040–1044. [PubMed: 22628656]
18. Narkewicz MR, Sauls SD, Tjoa SS, Teng C, Fennessey PV. Evidence for intracellular partitioning
of serine and glycine metabolism in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biochem J. 1996; 313(Pt 3):991–
996. [PubMed: 8611185]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

19. Rong Y, Durden DL, Van Meir EG, Brat DJ. 'Pseudopalisading' necrosis in glioblastoma: a
familiar morphologic feature that links vascular pathology, hypoxia, and angiogenesis. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006; 65:529–539. doi:00005072-200606000-00001 [pii]. [PubMed:
16783163]
20. Nelson DA, et al. Hypoxia and defective apoptosis drive genomic instability and tumorigenesis.
Genes Dev. 2004; 18:2095–2107. [PubMed: 15314031]
21. Chaneton B, et al. Serine is a natural ligand and allosteric activator of pyruvate kinase M2. Nature.
2012; 491:458–462. [PubMed: 23064226]
22. Gui DY, Lewis CA, Vander Heiden MG. Allosteric regulation of PKM2 allows cellular adaptation
to different physiological states. Sci Signal. 2013; 6:pe7. [PubMed: 23423437]
23. Keller KE, Tan IS, Lee YS. SAICAR stimulates pyruvate kinase isoform M2 and promotes cancer
cell survival in glucose-limited conditions. Science. 2012; 338:1069–1072. [PubMed: 23086999]
24. Anastasiou D, et al. Inhibition of pyruvate kinase M2 by reactive oxygen species contributes to
cellular antioxidant responses. Science. 2011; 334:1278–1283. [PubMed: 22052977]
25. Christofk HR, et al. The M2 splice isoform of pyruvate kinase is important for cancer metabolism
and tumour growth. Nature. 2008; 452:230–233. [PubMed: 18337823]
26. Anastasiou D, et al. Pyruvate kinase M2 activators promote tetramer formation and suppress
tumorigenesis. Nat Chem Biol. 2012; 8:839–847. doi:nchembio.1060 [pii] 10.1038/nchembio.
1060. [PubMed: 22922757]
27. Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis: meeting the metabolic requirements of cell
proliferation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:441–464. [PubMed: 21985671]
28. Papandreou I, Cairns RA, Fontana L, Lim AL, Denko NC. HIF-1 mediates adaptation to hypoxia
by actively downregulating mitochondrial oxygen consumption. Cell Metab. 2006; 3:187–197.
doi:S1550-4131(06)00060-X [pii] 10.1016/j.cmet.2006.01.012. [PubMed: 16517406]
29. Brown JM, Wilson WR. Exploiting tumour hypoxia in cancer treatment. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;
4:437–447. [PubMed: 15170446]

Supplementary References
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

30. Mehta S, et al. The central nervous system-restricted transcription factor Olig2 opposes p53
responses to genotoxic damage in neural progenitors and malignant glioma. Cancer Cell. 2011;
19:359–371. [PubMed: 21397859]
31. Chudnovsky Y, et al. ZFHX4 Interacts with the NuRD Core Member CHD4 and Regulates the
Glioblastoma Tumor-Initiating Cell State. Cell Rep. 2014; 6:313–324. [PubMed: 24440720]
32. Possemato R, et al. Functional genomics reveal that the serine synthesis pathway is essential in
breast cancer. Nature. 2011; 476:346–350. [PubMed: 21760589]
33. Rhodes DR, et al. ONCOMINE: a cancer microarray database and integrated data-mining
platform. Neoplasia. 2004; 6:1–6. [PubMed: 15068665]
34. Luo B, et al. Highly parallel identification of essential genes in cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 2008; 105:20380–20385. [PubMed: 19091943]
35. Shalem O, et al. Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening in human cells. Science. 2014;
343:84–87. [PubMed: 24336571]
36. Wang T, Wei JJ, Sabatini DM, Lander ES. Genetic screens in human cells using the CRISPR-Cas9
system. Science. 2014; 343:80–84. [PubMed: 24336569]
37. Ptolemy AS, et al. A 9-month-old boy with seizures and discrepant urine tryptophan
concentrations. Clin Chem. 2011; 57:545–548. [PubMed: 21444738]
38. Kami K, et al. Metabolomic profiling of lung and prostate tumor tissues by capillary
electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Metabolomics. 2013; 9:444–453. [PubMed:
23543897]
39. Xiao S, Yu PH. A fluorometric high-performance liquid chromatography procedure for
simultaneous determination of methylamine and aminoacetone in blood and tissues. Anal
Biochem. 2009; 384:20–26. [PubMed: 18845121]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript

40. Kazachkov M, Yu PH. A novel HPLC procedure for detection and quantification of aminoacetone,
a precursor of methylglyoxal, in biological samples. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life
Sci. 2005; 824:116–122. doi:S1570-0232(05)00465-4 [pii] 10.1016/j.jchromb.2005.07.006.
41. Rotem R, et al. Jasmonates: novel anticancer agents acting directly and selectively on human
cancer cell mitochondria. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:1984–1993. doi:65/5/1984 [pii]
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3091. [PubMed: 15753398]
42. Jois M, Hall B, Fewer K, Brosnan JT. Regulation of hepatic glycine catabolism by glucagon. J Biol
Chem. 1989; 264:3347–3351. [PubMed: 2536745]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. GLDC is required to prevent glycine accumulation and its conversion to aminoacetone
and methylglyoxal

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Candidate gene identification scheme. Each asterisk in the “NSC enrichment” column
indicates that the given gene was significantly overexpressed (over 2-fold, p < 0.05) in
neural stem cells compared to differentiated controls (Methods; total of 5 microarray
studies). b, Viability of cells expressing the indicated shRNAs for 6 days. Values are relative
to that of cells expressing shGFP. c, Amino acid analysis of LN229 cells with or without
doxycycline induction of shGLDCdox for 5 days. d, Cell numbers following treatment with
indicated doses of esterified amino acids for 5 days. Values are relative to the cell number
counts of untreated controls. e, Diagram depicting glycine/threonine interconversion. f,
Viability of LN229 cells first transduced with control (shGFP) or GCAT shRNAs, then
transduced with shGLDC_2 shRNA for 5 days. Values are relative to that of the same cells
secondarily transduced with shGFP instead of shGLDC_2. g, Aminoacetone levels in
LN229 cells treated with 1 mM esterified leucine or glycine for 3 days. h, Volumes of
xenografts formed from LN229 cells expressing shGFP (n=5), shGLDCdox (n=8), or
shGLDCdox plus shRNA-resistant GLDC (n=8). Tumors were allowed to form for two
weeks prior to dox induction (Methods). Volumes are shown as relative to the starting
volume (at beginning of induction) for each tumor. Error bars are SE. i, Aminoacetone
levels, normalized to tumor weight, from xenograft tumors shown in h, n=4 per group. j,
Immunoblots from xenograft tumors shown in h. Methylglyoxal levels are indicated by
argpyrimidine antibody which recognizes proteins modified by methylglyoxal. k,
Aminoacetone levels in cells stably transduced with Cas9 and single guide RNA against
GCAT or control (GFP), and treated (4 days and 2 days prior to collection) with 1 mM
esterified leucine or glycine. For b,c,d,f,g, and k, n=3 independent biological replicates;
error bars are SD. For h, and i, each n is a xenograft tumor; error bars are SD. For all panels,
*P<0.05 (student’s t test).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. SHMT2 activity renders cells liable to toxic accumulation of glycine upon GLDC loss

a, Changes in serine, glycine, and total amino acid levels over 84 hours in media of LN229
cells expressing shGFP or shSHMT2_1, measured using absolute quantitative CE-MS
(Methods). Positive values (right of the y axis) indicate a net accumulation in the media,
while negative values indicate net consumption from the media. b, Viability of BT145 cells
first transduced with shGFP or SHMT2 shRNAs, then with shGFP or GLDC shRNAs for 5
days. Values are relative to that of cells secondarily transduced with shGFP. c,
Representative micrographs of b. d, Immunoblots in a panel of cell lines with high or low

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript

SHMT2 expression. e, Viability of cell lines in the high and low expression groups
expressing shGLDC_1 and shGLDC_2 for 6–7 days. Values are relative to the viability of
the same cells secondarily transduced with shGFP; individual results shown in Extended
Data Fig. 3a. f, Glycine levels upon doxycycline-induced expression of shGLDC_2 for 5
days in different cell lines; values are relative to cells without induction; 1.0 indicates no
change. g, Schematic of serine/glycine metabolism and cell survival in cancer cells. For a,b,
and f, n=3 independent biological replicates; error bars are SD. For e, each point (n=6)
represents a single cell line from g. Bars are mean ± SEM. For all panels, *P<0.05 (student’s
t test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. SHMT2 expression provides a survival advantage in the ischemic tumor
microenvironment

a, SHMT2 and GLDC expression in normal human brains and GBM tumors. Insets are 5×
fold magnifications. Representative images are shown; comprehensive histological analyses
are in Extended Data Figure 5. Scale bar = 200 µm. b, SHMT2 immunofluorescence in the
cells in the pseudopalisades (PP) and in the non-pseudopalisade GBM regions. Glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a general GBM cell marker, does not show increased signal
in pseudopalisades. c, Quantification of SHMT2 expression, measured as fluorescence

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

intensity per cell, in normal brain regions, non-pseudopalisade GBM regions, and
pseudopalisade regions (n=5 patient samples per group). Error bars are SD. d, Cell number
counts from LN229 cells expressing shRNAs against GFP or SHMT2 and cultured in 0.5%
hypoxia for 8 days. Values are relative to the counts of the same cells cultured in parallel in
normoxia; n=3 independent biological replicates; error bars are SD. e, Schematic of
experimental design for rapid xenograft model. f, Representative micrographs of rapid
xenograft tumors formed by LN229 cells transduced with indicated shRNAs and cDNAs,
and immunostained for SHMT2 and cleaved PARP. Bottom row shows 8× magnified,
merged images of the central tumor region, displayed without DAPI channel for clarity.
Scale bar = 200 µm. g, Quantification of the percentage of cleaved PARP-negative, viable
area within the central necrotic region of xenografts of as shown in f. Error bars are SEM
(shGFP, n=10; shSHMT2_1, n=9; shGFP+SHMT2rescDNA, n=8; shSHMT2_1
+SHMT2rescDNA, n=8; each n is a xenograft tumor). For all panels, *P<0.05 (student’s t
test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. SHMT2 elicits a PKM2-dependent metabolic rewiring that is advantageous to cancer
cells in an ischemic environment

a, Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based, untargeted discovery of
metabolites that change in abundance following SHMT2 knockdown in LN229 cells. GARglycineamideribotide; FBP – fructose bisphosphate (either 1,6 or 2,6; cannot be
distinguished by LC-MS); PE- phosphoethanolamine. Differential peaks were identified and
quantified as described in the Methods, and the metabolites with largest change are listed.
Metabolite levels are relative and are expressed as fold change in cells transduced with
shSHMT2_1 versus cells transduced with shGFP, with or without the RNAi-resistant
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

Kim et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

SHMT2 cDNA. All differences in first column are significant (P<0.05). b, Pyruvate kinase
activity assay from lysates of LN229 cells transduced with indicated shRNAs. c, m3pyruvate labeling rates in LN229 cells transduced with shRNAs and cDNAs as indicated,
and fed [U-13C]-glucose media. d, Summary diagram of labeling rate changes seen as a
result of SHMT2 silencing. Colored arrows indicate increased flux according to the heat
map, while gray arrows indicate non-determined labeling rates. Detailed analyses are in
Extended Data Fig. 5. e, Oxygen consumption in LN229 cells (in RPMI) expressing shGFP
or shSHMT2_1 with or without PKM2 cDNA. Error bars are SD (n=5 technical replicates).
f, Representative micrographs of rapid xenograft tumors formed from LN229 cells stably
expressing indicated shRNAs and cDNAs, and immunostained for SHMT2 and cleaved
PARP. Viable regions are oriented on the left, and the central ischemic regions on the right.
Scale bar = 100 µm. g, Quantification of the percentage of cleaved PARP-negative, viable
area within the central necrotic region of xenografts of as shown in f. Error bars are SEM
(shGFP, n=10; shSHMT2_1, n=8; shGFP+PKM2 cDNA, n=10; shSHMT2_1 + PKM2
cDNA, n=6; each n is a xenograft tumor). For a,b, and c, n=3 independent biological
replicates; error bars are SD. For all panels, *P<0.05 (student’s t test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 October 16.

