Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Integrated Systems and Technologies: Mathematical Oncology

Cancer
Research

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation in Human
Prostate Cancer Cells: An Integrated Approach
Marianna Cerasuolo1, Debora Paris2, Fabio A. Iannotti2, Dominique Melck2,
Roberta Verde2, Enrico Mazzarella2, Andrea Motta2, and Alessia Ligresti2

Abstract
Prostate cancer is highly sensitive to hormone therapy because
androgens are essential for prostate cancer cell growth. However,
with the nearly invariable progression of this disease to androgen
independence, endocrine therapy ultimately fails to control prostate cancer in most patients. Androgen-independent acquisition
may involve neuroendocrine transdifferentiation, but there is
little knowledge about this process, which is presently controversial. In this study, we investigated this question in a novel model
of human androgen-dependent LNCaP cells cultured for long
periods in hormone-deprived conditions. Strikingly, characterization of the neuroendocrine phenotype by transcriptomic, metabolomic, and other statistically integrated analyses showed how

Major Findings
Our integrated approach merging mathematical modeling
with experimental data examines androgen-dependent prostate cancer response to long-term/sustained hormonedeprived conditions and the role of neuroendocrine in the
progression to hormone-refractory status. Using the tools of
applied mathematics, we demonstrated that the nonmalignant neuroendocrine phenotype, achievable under permanent
androgen deprivation conditions, over time paradoxically
contributes to the sustainment of undetectable androgendependent malignant cells.

Introduction
Neuroendocrine cells are highly specialized neuron-like cells
with peculiar secretory functions, which are widely scattered
throughout the human body including non-neuroendocrine
1

University of Portsmouth, Department of Mathematics, Hampshire,
United Kingdom. 2Endocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry, National Research Council of Italy, Pozzuoli, Italy.
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
M. Cerasuolo and D. Paris equally contributed to this article.
Corresponding Author: Alessia Ligresti, Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry,
National Research Council of Italy, Via Campi Flegrei 34, Pozzuoli (NA) 80078,
Italy. Phone: 39-081-8675093; Fax: 39-081-8675340; E-mail: aligresti@icb.cnr.it
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

hormone-deprived LNCaP cells could transdifferentiate to a
nonmalignant neuroendocrine phenotype. Notably, conditioned
media from neuroendocrine-like cells affected LNCaP cell proliferation. Predictive in silico models illustrated how after an initial
period, when LNCaP cell survival was compromised by an arising
population of neuroendocrine-like cells, a sudden trend reversal
occurred in which the neuroendocrine-like cells functioned to
sustain the remaining androgen-dependent LNCaP cells. Our
ﬁndings provide direct biologic and molecular support for the
concept that neuroendocrine transdifferentiation in prostate cancer cell populations inﬂuences the progression to androgen independence. Cancer Res; 75(15); 2975–86. 2015 AACR.

glands like prostate. In normal prostatic parenchyma, neuroendocrine cells are part of a diffuse system that contributes to the
homeostasis of the surrounding epithelial population (6). The
neuroendocrine system acts through its secreted products such as
calcitonin, parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), chromogranins (CgA, CgB), neuron-speciﬁc enolase (NSE), neurotensin, serotonin, bombesin, and somatostatin (7). These peptide
hormones and biogenic amines can either be released into the
bloodstream or act locally by paracrine or autocrine signaling in
an androgen-independent way (7). Neuroendocrine cells and the
associated neuropeptides play also a crucial role in sustaining
both growth and progression of many, if not all, conventional
prostate adenocarcinomas (8, 9) with a wide preclinical and
clinical evidence of a poor prognosis correlation (10). However,
the nature and the origin of neuroendocrine cells in prostate
tumor lesions and their underlying molecular mechanisms are
still controversial. Most likely, this is due to the complex heterogeneity and the multifaceted way in which neuroendocrine cells
are linked to tumor progression. The ability of neuroendocrine
cell to induce an early onset of a hormone-refractory status is very
intriguing and clinically relevant. The transition from hormonesensitive to hormone-insensitive status is one of the most critical
issues in prostate cancer research as the conventional primary
androgen deprivation therapy is only transiently successful. Over
a period of 16 to 18 months, the tumor progresses to a hormoneindependent status also known as castrate-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC). One emerging aspect of CRPC is that the androgen
receptor signaling remains persistent. On the basis of the overall
survival advantages, the U.S. FDA recently approved the "secondary" hormone therapy when patients develop CRPC (11). The
mechanisms that upregulate intracellular androgens and/or androgen receptor, leading to ongoing androgen receptor–directed cancer growth despite a castrate level of serum androgens are not
understood yet. It is widely believed that transdifferentiation from

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2975

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Cerasuolo et al.

Quick Guide to Equations and Assumptions
Here, we present a nonlinear system of delay differential equations describing the interaction between malignant LNCaP and
nonmalignant transdifferentiated neuroendocrine-like cell populations. The system in ﬁrst approximation mimics experiments on
cells growing in a Petri dish in androgen-deprived conditions and builds mainly off previous works by Adimy and colleagues (1, 2),
adapting their model for cell cycle in hematopoiesis to our case. Furthermore, the model acknowledges previous works on prostate
cancer development in single patients (3, 4), where most of the models consider two populations of cancer cells: one population
androgen-dependent and the other population androgen-independent (3). These studies describe in vivo conditions, and both
androgen-dependent and androgen-independent cells are able to proliferate. In our model, we also consider two cell populations,
one androgen-sensitive (LNCaP) and the other androgen-insensitive (neuroendocrine-like), with sizes at time t represented by L(t)
and N(t), respectively. We assume that neuroendocrine-like cells are postmitotic and are produced through transdifferentiation by
the ﬁrst population. In addition, we consider that LNCaP cells go through asymmetrical cell division, generating both undifferentiated and differentiated daughter cells. Finally, the model describes the dynamics of androgen concentration by referring to the
percentage of charcoal-stripped serum introduced in the medium [A(t)]. As the serum was the only exogenous source of androgen in
the experiments, and as there is a direct proportionality between serum and androgen content, from now on we refer in an equivalent
way to charcoal-stripped serum and androgen levels. The following system represents the dynamics of the three introduced quantities:
dAðtÞ
¼ ’AðtÞ þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
dt ﬄ}
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄ
Androgen

dLðtÞ
¼ dLðtÞ  kt aðAðtÞÞLðtÞ 
|ﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄ}
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
dt
|ﬄ{zﬄ}
LnCaP

cell death

Differentiation to NE

A depletion

ðA:1Þ

kNðtÞ
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄ}
feedback from NE to A



þ 2 1  kp aðAðt  t 1 ÞÞ edt1 bðLðt  t 1 Þ; Aðt  t1 ÞÞLðt  t 1 Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}

bðLðtÞ; AðtÞÞLðtÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
resting cells become proliferating

newly born cells generated by asymmetric cell division

dNðtÞ
¼  mNðtÞ þ 2kp aðAðt  t 1 ÞÞedt1 bðLðt  t 1 Þ; Aðt  t 1 ÞÞLðt  t 1 Þ þ kt edt2 aðAðt  t 2 ÞÞLðt  t 2 Þ
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄ} |ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ} |ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
dt
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄ}
NE-like cells

cell death

ðA:2Þ

ðA:3Þ

Differentiation from L

NE generated by asymmetric cell division

LNCaP cells have a constant per capita mortality rate d and can differentiate into neuroendocrine-like cells with an androgendependent rate kt a(A), where kt represents the differentiation efﬁciency. Experiments proved that LNCaP transdifferentiation only
occurs for low androgen levels. To capture this evidence, we represented the dependence of differentiation on the androgen with the
Ricker function:
að AÞ ¼ rAeaA ;
ðBÞ
which is a standard choice for bell-shaped patterns skewed to the right. The positive constants r and a, respectively, deﬁne the slope
with which the differentiation rate increases and the inverse of the differentiation rate maximum point (1/a). Experimental
evidences suggested that the differentiation induced by androgen deprivation is delayed. We therefore assumed that differentiating
cells need a time t2 to perform all processes necessary to fully transdifferentiate in neuroendocrine-like cells. The equation for
transdifferentiating cells can be written as
dTðtÞ

¼  dTðtÞ þ
|ﬄ{zﬄ}

dt ﬄ}
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄ
differentiating cells

cell death

 edt2 kt aðAðt  t2 ÞÞLðt  t 2 Þ ;
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}

kt aðAðtÞÞLðtÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
resting cells becoming differentiated

ðA:4Þ

cells fully differentiated

where T(t) is the population size at time t. From Eq. A.4, we can write
Z
TðtÞ ¼

t

edðtsÞ aðAðsÞÞLðsÞds:

tt 2

We also assumed that the LNCaP cells population is divided into proliferating and quiescent/mature cells. LNCaP cells need a time t 1
to perform all processes required for cell division by mitosis, for example, t 1 is the duration of cell cycle. The proliferating cells mortality
rate was g and, by the end of the mitotic phase, each cell had divided into two cells, which either were LNCaP entering in the quiescent
phase or differentiated neuroendocrine-like cells as previously reported (1). The equation for proliferating cells can be written as
dPðtÞ
dt
|ﬄ{zﬄ}
poliferating cells

2976 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

¼  gPðtÞ þ
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄ}
cell death

bðLðtÞ; AðtÞÞLðtÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
resting cells becoming proliferating

 egt1 bðLðt  t 1 Þ; Aðt  t 1 ÞÞLðt  t 1 Þ ;
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}

ðA:5Þ

proliferating cells
entering the resting phase

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation and Prostate Cancer

where P(t) is the population size at time t. From Eq. A.5, it follows that the proliferating cell population can be explicitly calculated as
Z t
PðtÞ ¼
eg ðtsÞ bðLðsÞ; AðsÞÞLðsÞds:
tt 1

The asymmetric cell division occurs at low androgen levels as described by Eq. B, with kp representing its efﬁciency. The rate at
which resting cells enter the proliferating phase depends both on level of androgen in the medium and on cell density. We assumed
that a high level of androgen aids proliferation of LNCaP cells (5), whereas a high cell density inhibits it. The model describing the
resting-to-proliferative phase rate ½bðL; AÞ consists of a continuous function that is zero in the absence of androgen in the medium
½ðbðL; 0Þ ¼ 0, increases as the androgen concentration increases, and decreases as the LNCaP cell concentration increases (1, 2):
bðL; AÞ ¼ b0

n
n þ Ln
|ﬄﬄﬄ
ﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄ}

A
:
b|ﬄﬄþ
{zﬄﬄA}

ðCÞ

inhibition
androgen
by cell density dependence

On the right hand side of Eq. C, the ﬁrst term represents the inhibition of the mitotic reentry rate [b, from L(t) into P(t)] due to cell
concentration and is described by a Hill function. The two positive constants u and n have similar roles to the Hill coefﬁcients, and
together they deﬁne the response to cell concentration changes. The second term is a Michaelis–Menten function, where b describes
the androgen level at which b is half. Finally, the positive constant b0 represents the maximum rate of cell movement from the resting
phase into proliferation, which is achieved in the absence of the inhibition caused by low androgen levels or high cell concentrations.
The differentiated cells are postmitotic and die with a mortality rate m. Androgen is assumed homogeneously distributed in the
whole medium, and we do not differentiate between the intracellular and extracellular one. The exponent w controls the decay of
androgen concentration in the medium, and neuroendocrine-like cells secrete A-like factors with a constant rate k.
Other authors such as Morken and colleagues (3) and Portz and colleagues (4) assumed that proliferation of prostate cancer cells
is androgen-dependent, but none of the existing models considered cell differentiation and its dependence on the androgen content,
nor the possibility that differentiated cells could play an active role in sustaining the tumor in androgen-deprived conditions. We
could therefore consider these as the major novelties of this model.

an epithelial-like phenotype to an neuroendocrine-like phenotype
is due to the decrease of androgen levels and the block of steroid
hormone action (6). This treatment-related neuroendocrine prostate cancer is a resistance mechanism promoted by the hormonal
therapy itself. The molecular processes, associated with the treatment-related neuroendocrine prostate cancer pathogenesis, are
different from those observed in pure small-cell/neuroendocrine
prostate cancer proving the existence of different types of neuroendocrine cells (12, 13). The incidence of neuroendocrine transdifferentiation can be related to the duration of treatments. No
relevant clonal propagation of neuroendocrine cells has been
reported after a short-term neoadjuvant androgen deprivation
therapy (14), whereas signiﬁcant increase of neuroendocrine status
was found in some of the patients who went through a long-term
hormone-based treatment (15, 16).
The application of "omics" sciences and mathematics to biological systems is the approach we propose to investigate how
neuroendocrine transdifferentiation contributes to tumor progression and hormone therapy failure in prostate cancer. We cultured
androgen-dependent LNCaP cells in long-term hormone-deprived
conditions to allow the permanent transdifferentiation into a
neuroendocrine phenotype. We applied hierarchical clustering
and multivariate statistical algorithms, including orthogonal projection to latent structure (O2PLS), to explore the effect of longterm hormone deprivation on transcripts and metabolites. We
applied multivariate statistical analysis to ﬁnd the correlations
existing between metabolites and mRNA transcript levels in relation with cell phenotype. Finally, with a mathematical predictive
model, we investigated the intrinsic relationship between the two
phenotypes under prolonged low hormone conditions.

www.aacrjournals.org

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and neuroendocrine transdifferentiation
The human prostate carcinoma cell line LNCaP (clone FGC;
CRL-1740; passage number 10–40) was obtained from ATCC in
2013. Morphology check by microscope and cell growth curves
was performed routinely. Cells were cultured in RPMI medium
supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco-Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer's instructions in 37 C in a 5%
CO2-enriched humidiﬁed air atmosphere. In experiments assessing LNCaP neuroendocrine transdifferentiation protocol, cells
were seeded at 4  105 cells per 100-mm dishes and left for 24
hours in regular media containing 10% heat-inactivated FBS
before switching to various differentiation media (RPMI medium
supplemented with different percentages of dextran-coated charcoal-stripped FBS, dcc-str, FBS; Sigma). Cells were maintained in
those conditions until they started elongating their shape and
activating a neuron-like morphology characterized by a progressive and sustained expression of neuroendocrine markers up to 14
days. For the parameterization of the mathematical model, we
differentiated LNCaP in 1% dcc-str FBS (n ¼ 4) and counted cells
(days 3, 6, 10, and 14) either with Burker chamber or with
Millipore's Scepter automated handheld cell counter.
NMR and PCR data integration
1
H-NMR and PCR data were pretreated with centering and unit
variance scaling, respectively. Then, we scaled the corresponding
matrices to an equal total sum of squares to avoid the dominance
of any of them. We integrated datasets by Orthogonal Projections
to Latent Structures (O2PLS) to implement a bilinear statistical

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2977

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Cerasuolo et al.

model and reveal joined variation. The inﬂuence of the original
variables on the OPLS model was interpreted by inspection
of the predictive regression coefﬁcients, which are related to
how each variable inﬂuences the model for prediction of the
response variables. We derived O2PLS models from both polar
and lipophilic NMR data in correlation with PCR data. To
identify the subset of most responsible metabolites and transcripts characterizing the transdifferentiation process, variables
were selected using a combination of VIP (variable inﬂuence in
projection) value >1 and correlation loadings pq[corr] >0.8 for
the polar model. We also generated a correlation map with
hierarchical clustering by combining transcript values and
selected polar metabolite buckets where we considered Euclidean distance for the metrics and WARD method for clustering
criterion.
Pathway analysis
Pathway topology and biomarker analysis on selected and
more representative metabolites in class separation were applied
to the pathway topology search tool in Metaboanalyst 2.0 (17,
18). We calculated the centrality through the Pathway Impact, a
combination of the centrality and pathway enrichment results.
Metabolites were selected by evaluating both VIP values >1 in class
discrimination and correlation values j pq[corr] j > 0.8. Homo
sapiens pathway library was chosen and analyzed using the Fisher
exact test for overrepresentation and relative-betweenness centrality for pathway topology analysis.
Formulation of the mathematical model
The mathematical model introduced in the Quick Guide was
used to describe laboratory experiments on the interaction
between the human prostatic cancer cells LNCaP and the
transdifferentiated neuroendocrine-like cell population. Most
of the mathematical models for prostate cancer analyze the
effects of continuous (19) or intermittent (20–25) androgen
deprivation treatments on cancer progression. Prostatic tumor
cells are usually divided in androgen-dependent and androgenindependent, with androgen-dependent transforming in androgen-independent in a reversible or irreversible way (25). In
some models, the mutation rate is considered directly dependent on the androgen concentration (4, 19, 21, 25), whereas in
others, the switch rate depends on a cell quota of bound
androgen receptor (3, 4). All these studies investigate the
well-known mechanism of androgen-independent relapse and
do not consider cell transdifferentiation as such. Also, differently from the mathematical approach followed in other
types of tumors, for example, colonic crypt and colorectal cancer
(26–28), in the case of prostate cancer the well-established
theory of cancer stem cells, which assumes an asymmetrical
cell division (29), has not been considered in the representation
of tumor growth (1, 30). In our model (A1–A3) according with
the cancer stem cell theory, we assumed that LNCaP mitosis
leads to the formation of both undifferentiated and differentiated cells. The differentiation, which is driven by environmental
factors (i.e., prolonged hormone depletion), is considered irreversible and differentiated cells apoptotic, as our experiments
did not show any reversibility or proliferation of neuroendocrine-like cells. The model also represents androgen dynamics.
The experiments were run considering different percentages of
charcoal-stripped serum; however, given the direct proportionality between the serum and its androgen content in the model,

2978 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

we directly refer to androgen levels. Processes such as proliferation and transdifferentiation depend on the androgen level.
Parameterization of the mathematical model
The model was parameterized from data on the basis of the
experiments described above, and with values and ranges taken
from the suitable literature when experimental data were not able
to provide the required information. We took from the literature
values for LNCaP and neuroendocrine-like cell death rates d and
m, for the androgen degradation rate w (3), and for the Hill
parameter n (5). To parameterize the Ricker function, representing
the relationship between androgen levels and transdifferentiation
(Eq. B), we designed an experiment that would provide the
maximum differentiation rate at different androgen levels. The
nonlinear regression of these data provided the following parameter values r ¼ 3  2 day1 and a ¼ 1.3  0.3 (Supplementary Fig.
S1). The proliferation parameters b0 ¼ 1.8  0.2 day1 and u ¼
0.9  0.1 cells were estimated from empirical data of LNCaP
grown in regular growth medium.
According to the manufacturer, the value for LNCaP cell-cycle
duration t 1 was set equal to 1.43 day, whereas the value of the
delay in the differentiation process t 2 ¼ 7 days was estimated from
the progressive expression of neurotensin over time (Fig. 1). The
value of the Michaelis–Menten half-saturation constant b ¼ 0.2
was based on the observation that even at very low levels of
androgen LNCaP cells are still able to proliferate (Fig. 2). Finally,
the ﬁt of 14-day experiments of LNCaP growth in androgendeprived conditions provided values for the differentiation efﬁciency kt ¼ 0.6  0.2, and the asymmetrical division parameter
kp ¼ 0.5  0.2. Values for the parameter k were considered in the
range of 0.003 to 0.03 day1. Numerical simulations and parameterization were performed with MATLAB R2014a.

Results
Acquisition of neuroendocrine phenotype with
antiproliferative action on parental LNCaP cells
To investigate the role of neuroendocrine cells during androgenindependent acquisition, we cultured androgen-dependent LNCaP
cells in long-term hormone-deprived conditions. Different culture
conditions (from 0% to 5% dcc-srt FBS) were tested. Morphologic
and transcriptional data analyzed all over the 14-day experimental
period indicated the best differentiation medium for the study. Lowandrogen content rather than complete androgen depletion
appeared to be crucial, as the 1% rate was an exclusive condition
for the occurrence of this cellular phenomenon. Only when hormone content was kept at 1% dcc-str FBS, cells started elongating
their shape and showing a neuronal-like morphology. From day 1 to
day 3, cells retained the typical LNCaP morphology, a spindle shape
with occasional pseudopodium-like extensions. Starting from days
8 to 10, cells presented an elongation of their shape that resolved
(day 14) in the development of long-branched neuritic-like processes with small cell bodies (Fig. 1A–H). The elongating shapes
were characterized by a progressive and sustained expression of
neuroendocrine markers up to 14 days (i.e., NSE, neurotensin; Fig. 1I
and J). To investigate paracrine interactions between the two cellular
phenotypes, we determined the effect of neuroendocrine conditioned media on LNCaP cell growth by means of [3H]-thymidine
incorporation. LNCaP cells were exposed (48 hours) to various
conditioned media collected during neuroendocrine transdifferentiation at different time points (see scheme in Fig. 2). DNA synthesis

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation and Prostate Cancer

Figure 1.
Representative micrographs acquired by differential interference contrast showing cell morphology changes during transdifferentiation process. From day 1
(A and higher magniﬁcation in B) to day 3 (C and higher magniﬁcation in D), cells retained typical LNCaP morphology with spindle shape and occasional
pseudopodium-like extensions. From day 8 (E and high magniﬁcation in F) to day 14 (G and high magniﬁcation in H), cells exhibited an elongation of their
shape characterized by the development of long-branched neuritic-like processes with small cell bodies. Scale bar, 20 mm in A, C, E, G and 10 mm in
B, D, F, H. The acquisition of neurite-like morphology was characterized by a progressive and sustained expression of neuroendocrine markers (NSE and
neurotensin, NT) up to 14 days.

of LNCaP cells was signiﬁcantly (P < 0.001) affected by the complete
deprivation of serum (nonserum medium), whereas nonconditioned differentiation medium showed no per se effect when compared with regular growth medium (Fig. 2A). Already after 3 days,
we observed that conditioned differentiation medium signiﬁcantly
(P < 0.01) inhibited [3H]-thymidine incorporation of LNCaP cells
(Fig. 2B).
NMR- and PCR-based prostate cancer discriminates classes
revealing a nonmalignant phenotype
NMR and PCR analyses were performed in parallel on LNCaP
(day 0) and neuroendocrine-like cells (day 14). Conspicuous
differences were found in their metabolic proﬁles. In particular,

www.aacrjournals.org

some hydrophilic signals, commonly identiﬁed as prostate
cancer biomarkers (31), such as creatine and phosphocreatine
(Cr þ PCr), glycine (Gly), and alanine (Ala), were mostly
prominent in LNCaP compared with neuroendocrine-like samples (Fig. 3A). Also, the hydrophobic fraction denoted a different and phenotype-based distribution of total cholesterol
content (Fig. 3B). Free cholesterol was more pronounced in
neuroendocrine cells, whereas the form prevailing in LNCaP
cells was the esteriﬁed one (Fig. 3C and D), recently related to
prostate cancer aggressiveness (32). Differences were also
found in the relative quantiﬁcation of selected gene expression.
The applied prolonged hormone-deprived conditions led to a
signiﬁcant upregulation of common neuroendocrine secretory

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2979

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Cerasuolo et al.

Figure 2.
Schematic representation of LNCaP neuroendocrine transdifferentiation. Neuroendocrine (NE)-conditioned media were pooled all along the differentiation
3
protocol and later used to grow LNCaP cells in presence of [ H]-thymidine. A, effect of various media on LNCaP cell proliferation. NSM, nonserum media. B, effect of
neuroendocrine conditioned media on LNCaP cell proliferation. Data are reported as mean  SD of two experiments in quadruplicate. DM, differentiation medium;
GM, regular growth medium.   ,P < 0.001 vs. regular growth medium;   , P < 0.01 vs. differentiation medium; one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett multiple
comparison test, n ¼ 8.

products (i.e., NSE, neurotensin, and CgA). While other hormone-related targets (i.e., estrogen receptor GPER and androgen-regulated channel TRPM8) were upregulated in neuroendocrine-like cells, the expression of the prostatic tumor biomarker a-methyl-acyl-CoA racemase (AMACR) was strongly
reduced in respect to LNCaP cells (Fig. 4). Also, mRNA levels
of a common indicator of prostate cancer [i.e., prostate-speciﬁc
antigen (PSA)] were signiﬁcantly mislaid in neuroendocrine
transdifferentiated cells when compared with parental malignant cells. The transdifferentiation process (Fig. 4) did not
affect gene expression of androgen receptor. Both, NMR-based
metabolic proﬁles and PCR-based analysis of relevant genes
indicated that androgen deprivation drove the development to
a less-malignant neuroendocrine phenotype. Accordingly, principal component analysis applied both to NMR and to PCR
data smoothly discriminated androgen-dependent LNCaP cells
from their relative transdifferentiated neuroendocrine-like
cells. The complete separation between classes was achieved
with an unsupervised analysis (Supplementary Fig. S2).
Data integration and joint systematic variation suggests the use
of healthy neuroendocrine biomarkers as putative indicators of
androgen-independent prostate cancer
Once we established a clear discrimination between the two
phenotypes, we explored the shared variance between NMR

2980 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

and PCR values via O2PLS. In this way, we pointed out those
variations that consistently and concurrently occurred during
the transdifferentiation process (Fig. 5A). The joint predictive
structure showed that 95% of the variation in the polar NMR
block (66% for lipid dataset) correlates with 96% of the
variation in the transcript block (72% for lipid dataset), which
is a substantial overlap. This approach produced a functional
model for interchangeable predictions between NMR and PCR
data. Class discrimination was achieved by considering the
shared variation between transcripts and metabolites. We
found a close linking between the two biologic information
sets (see regression coefﬁcients in Supplementary Fig. S3) via
O2PLS analysis that displays sample scores and variable loadings in a joint predictive model (leave-one-out classiﬁcation
approach showed that only 3 of 10 samples were outliers). This
model allows projecting the transcripts and metabolites on a
common two-dimensional plane (Fig. 5A), where the positions
describe the cell phenotype and the proximity between transcripts and metabolites relates with the correspondence of their
changes. The analysis revealed that both PSA and AMACR,
highly expressed in LNCaP cells, positively correlated with Cr
þ PCr, Gln, Pro, and Ala. These transcripts also positively
correlated with fatty acids and phospholipidic compound (PC
and PE) in LNCaP cells. We found minor positive correlations
for choline and ethanolamine moieties (PE and GPC) and

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation and Prostate Cancer

Figure 3.
1
13
NMR-based metabolome analysis. A, representative H-NMR spectra of LNCaP and neuroendocrine (NE) cells polar extracts. B, representative C-NMR spectra of
LNCaP and neuroendocrine cells lipid extracts. C and D, bucket variations relative to free cholesterol (C) and esteriﬁed cholesterol (D) content in LNCaP and
neuroendocrine lipophilic fractions. Bin values were normalized to the total spectral area intensity. Ac, acetate; Ala, alanine; Leu, leucine; Chol, free cholesterol;
Chol E, esteriﬁed cholesterol; Cr/PCr, creatine/phosphocreatine; Gln, glutamine; Glu, glutamate; Lac, lactate; Gly, glycine; MI, myo-inositol; Pro, proline; SFA,
saturated fatty acid; Tau, taurine; Val, valine.

nucleoside derivatives (ribose and UDPG). Moreover, all
the genes upregulated in neuroendocrine-like population (i.e.,
TRPM8, CgA, and GPER) correlated with Gln, myo-inositol (myoIns), and citrate (Cit). We observed different correlations for the 2
genes associated with the neuroendocrine phenotype. Individually, NSE appeared correlated to PE/PC, Gln, and GSH, whereas
neurotensin was mostly inﬂuenced by myo-Ins and acetate (Ace).
Interestingly, neuroendocrine-like cell population appeared
mainly characterized by the joint variation of neurotensin and
GPER with free cholesterol. We used a correlation matrix–based
hierarchical clustering (CMBHC) for visualization purposes. The
results of hierarchical clustering were then visualized as a tree
structure plot (dendogram), which clearly classiﬁed the two cell
populations based on transcripts and metabolites correlation
coefﬁcients (Fig. 5B). As a ﬁnal point, we applied Metabolite Set

www.aacrjournals.org

Enrichment Analysis (MSEA) to draw biologic inferences about
selected metabolites and to identify their relevance in signiﬁcant
metabolic pathways. The applied selection showed that at least 30
major metabolic pathways were involved (Supplementary Table
S1). Among these, alanine/aspartate/glutamate (P ¼ 1.81 E4,
impact ¼ 0.52); glutamine/glutamate (P ¼ 1.22 E03, impact ¼
0.35); glutathione (P ¼ 1.45 E02, impact ¼ 0.24); glycine/serine/
threonine (P ¼ 1.44 E03, impact ¼ 0.19); and arginine/proline
(P ¼ 3.95 E4, impact ¼ 0.13) metabolisms emerged. Considering
both Holm P values and the False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction, we focused on alanine/aspartate/glutamate metabolism
(Holm P ¼ 1.39 E02, FDR ¼ 3.62 E03), which appeared to be
the most affected between cell populations, with glutamine/
glutamate metabolism (Holm P ¼ 9.17 E02, FDR ¼ 1.63 E02)
to a minor extent (Fig. 6).

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2981

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Cerasuolo et al.

Figure 4.
Transcript levels of androgen receptor (AR), NSE, G-protein–coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER), AMACR, transient receptor melastatin 8 (TRPM8), glycoprotein
hormones a (CgA), neuron-speciﬁc enolase, neurotensin (NT), and prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) in parental LNCaP (day 0) and neuroendocrine (NE) cells (day 14).
All qPCR analyses were performed in triplicate for at least three different biologic preparations. Data are expressed using the 2DCt formula.

Mathematical modeling of neuroendocrine
transdifferentiation supports a self-sustaining mechanism for
LNCaP cells
On the basis of the experimental evidence, we developed a
mathematical model of LNCaP cells dynamics and transdifferentiation. We assumed a mechanism of androgen production by
neuroendocrine-like cells and lack of androgen sources external to
the system (see Eqs. A.1–A.3). Two types of analyses were applied,
one to describe the cell growth dynamics (descriptive) and the other
to forecast future behaviors (predictive). The descriptive analysis
well represented all the outcomes of the in vitro experiments. The
obtained growth curve resembled the increase in cell numbers
(from 3  105 cells at day 0 to 2.5  106 cells at day 16) measured
as described above (Fig. 7A). Figure 7B shows the gradual acquisition of a neuroendocrine phenotype over time as we obtained
from both morphologic and transcriptomic analyses. The predictive
analysis allowed a comparison between the outcome of the model
and the results of a continuous androgen deprivation therapy.
Keeping the same parameter values tuned on data from the 14day experiment (Supplementary Table S2), we ran a simulation for
400 days (Fig. 7C and D). After a ﬁrst period of approximately 150
days, during which LNCaP cells almost appeared extinguished,
whereas neuroendocrine-like cells were nearly constant in number,

2982 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

the system behavior suddenly changed and neuroendocrine-like
cell population density started increasing followed by an increase of
LNCaP cells (Fig. 7D). Both populations reached a steady state after
further 150 days. The simulations showed how LNCaP cells selfsustain by enhancing a concentration of neuroendocrine-like cells
sufﬁcient to produce enough A-like factor to allow androgendependent cell proliferation (Fig. 7C).

Discussion
Despite the advances in early detection due to a widespread use
of PSA-based screening, a high rate of patients still present locally
advanced prostate cancer when diagnosed. Furthermore, most of
the patients who successfully go through endocrine therapy are
often at high risk of recurrence. This unfavorable prognosis is due to
the progression of primarily androgen-independent cancer cells
that escape hormonal ablation. Neuroendocrine transdifferentiation is one of the hallmarks of this phenomenon; nonetheless,
the clinical signiﬁcance of the coexistence of neuroendocrine phenotype in the context of classic prostate cancer is still controversial.
The approach we proposed in this study is based on the use of
"omics" sciences and mathematics to investigate how neuroendocrine transdifferentiation contributes to tumor progression and

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation and Prostate Cancer

Figure 5.
O2PLS and HMCB analysis for data integration. A, O2PLS correlation plot displaying sample scores and variable loadings in a joint predictive model. Sample
positions on the horizontal axis provide class separation. The proximity of variables (metabolites and transcripts) measures their mutual inﬂuence (covariation).
Only the most inﬂuent variables [VIP > 1 and pq[1]corr > 0.8] are labeled with their chemical shifts (metabolites) or names (transcripts). B, correlation map
based on Pearson correlation coefﬁcients between metabolites and transcripts. Rows and columns are rearranged according to the WARD-based correlation
matrix–based hierarchical clustering (CMBHC). Blue tone colored areas indicate positive correlations between NMR and PCR variables, whereas red tones indicate
negative correlations between the same variables.

hormone therapy failure. A growing body of literature describes
neuroendocrine transdifferentiation from LNCaP cells as a result of
short-term (72 hours) androgen withdrawal, or a dramatic increase
of c-AMP levels, or a cytokine-based induction. Those cells were
described as cancerous terminally transdifferentiated neuroendocrine cells lacking of androgen receptor and PSA expression. Herein,
differently from previously described in vitro protocols (33, 34), we
cultured androgen-dependent LNCaP cells in a long-term (up to 14
days) hormone-deprived conditions. Such conditions led to a
possibly closer "human-like" model of androgen resistance. Unexpectedly, metabolic proﬁles revealed that LNCaP cells transdifferentiated into a nonmalignant neuroendocrine phenotype, resembling a clinically positive response to primary androgen deprivation
therapy. Experiments also showed that some environmental factors
(i.e., minimal androgen content rather than its depletion) are
crucial for this particular transdifferentiation process. Neuroendocrine conditioned media (collected at various days of the transdifferentiation process) affected LNCaP cell proliferation. However,
further investigations are needed to clarify if the reduction of LNCaP
cells is only due the androgen-depleted conditions or if there is a
concurrent neuroendocrine-mediated anti-mitogenic effect.
Metabolome analysis described the dynamic changes in the
pattern of malignancy observed during the considered experimental period. LNCaP cells (day0) were characterized by Ala, Glu,
Cr, and Gly (the precursor of sarcosine) previously described as

www.aacrjournals.org

prostate cancer metabolic biomarkers (35–37). In agreement with
the well-known Warburg effect (38), these cells showed an
increased rate of energetic expenditure, as the relevance of metabolic-related nucleosides (i.e., AMP, NADP, NAD, ATP, UDP)
indicates. Prostate cancer generally presents a high glucose oxidation and low levels of myo-inositol (39, 40), so the increase in
glutathione (in its reduced form, GSH), Gln, and myo-inositol
signals observed in neuroendocrine-like cells at day 14 is a further
conﬁrmation of their nonmalignant phenotype. Neuroendocrine
cells exhibited high levels of cholesterol, the precursor of the entire
androgen synthesis cascade. Very recently, it has been reported
that an aberrant accumulation of its esteriﬁed form is related to
prostate cancer aggressiveness (32). However, the abundance of
cholesterol in day 14 cells was mostly due to its free and not
esteriﬁed form, which instead resulted more pronounced in
LNCaP day0 cells. Moreover, enriched pathway analysis showed
that the alanine/aspartate/glutamate metabolism was the most
profoundly affected during transdifferentiation. In particular, we
found that androgen deprivation produced a downregulation of
L-Asp in neuroendocrine-like cells. This ﬁnding is in agreement
with the reported evidence that in prostate epithelial cells, L-Asp is
an important source for citrate synthesis via oxaloacetate through
testosterone positively regulated L-Asp transporter (41). The two
cell populations under study showed distinct transcripts related to
their phenotypes (upregulation of PSA and AMACR in day 0 cells

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2983

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Cerasuolo et al.

Figure 6.
A, topology-based pathway analysis showing metabolic networks potentially affected during neuroendocrine (NE) transdifferentiation. The most impacted
metabolic pathways are speciﬁed by the volume and the color of the spheres (yellow, least relevant; red, most relevant) according to their statistical relevance P and
impact value. B, metabolic scheme reporting alanine, aspartate, and glutamate pathway potentially affected during the neuroendocrine transdifferentiation process.

and upregulation of NSE, neurotensin, and CgA in day 14 cells,
respectively). Furthermore, under low serum condition, nonmalignant neuroendocrine-like cells exhibited a higher content of
hormone-related targets (GPER and TRPM8) that could be related
with the induction of androgen independence in adjacent malignant phenotype. TRPM8, in fact, is positively regulated by androgens, and we showed how neuroendocrine cells under persistent
low levels of hormones can increase the production of free
cholesterol, precursor of testosterone. We did not observe a
parallel reduction of AR expression in transdifferentiated neuroendocrine day 14 cells. This can be explained assuming that the
abundance of free cholesterol found in neuroendocrine cells
sustains the expression of AR even in low androgen conditions.
We applied a descriptive in silico analysis to represent the
transdifferentiation process and to further investigate the possible
role of nonmalignant camouﬂaged neuroendocrine cells on
potential prostate cancer relapse. The mathematical model we
developed combined all information provided by experiments
and statistical analysis, and the numerical simulations well represented the outcomes of the 14-day experiments. Predictive analyses provided a possible explanation to the reason why tumorigenic LNCaP cells differentiate into nonmalignant neuroendocrine-like cells. In fact, long-term simulations showed a peculiar
ability of neuroendocrine cells in sustaining the system. Numerical results also provided a possible reason why most patients, but
not all, develop androgen-resistant prostate cancer, as the simu-

2984 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

lated outcome depended on the initial size of LNCaP cell population and on an eventual minimum size for the neuroendocrine-like cell population. The key assumption for the model
behavior is that neuroendocrine-like cells have a putative role in
hormonally treated cancers by releasing paracrine factors that
promote residual prostate cancer cell growth and progression
(neuroendocrine-based feeding support).
Given the in silico results, we can assert that malignant androgen-dependent LNCaP cells react to hormone deprivation by
favoring the establishment of a nonmalignant neuroendocrine
cell population. We can consider these neuroendocrine cells as
"hidden" androgen-resistant clones coexisting with scattered
malignant cells. This apparent positive response to early hormone-based therapy leads to the increase of neuroendocrine
components, which, over time, show their "evil-side" by thrusting
the recovery of malignant LNCaP proliferation through a paracrine mechanism.
In conclusion, we produced an original in vitro model to
investigate the pathophysiology of neuroendocrine cells in hormone-refractory transition of prostate cancer. The nonmalignant
phenotype achieved in our model represents an intriguing link
between neuroendocrine cell differentiation and the occurrence
of hormone-refractory prostate cancer status. These androgenindependent cells are able to recover the proliferation index of
surrounding non-neuroendocrine phenotype cancer cells by
the secretion of neuroendocrine products through a paracrine

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation and Prostate Cancer

Figure 7.
Mathematical simulations of cell behavior over time. A, total cell number plotted against experimental counting. B, numerical simulation of LNCaP
transdifferentiation into neuroendocrine cells, as reported from the experimental outcome. C, predictive simulation of androgen-like factor over a time interval of
400 days. D, predictive simulation of LNCaP/neuroendocrine cell system over a time interval of 400 days.

mechanism. The predictive forecasts of the mathematical model
support the notion that, also in a clinical setting, treatment-related
neuroendocrine cells generate tardive inductive stimuli on quiescent/undetectable tumor cells. The statistical analyses provided
a link between transcripts and metabolites that were highly coresponsible for class distinction. All the found correlations are
important for the future development of new diagnostic tools for
androgen-independent prostate cancer. Translated into a clinical
setting this bidirectional model could be used for predictions in
both directions between NMR and PCR data matrices, offering
new possibilities of monitoring the response of patients with
prostate cancer to treatments. Further in vivo analyses are required
(i) to validate new putative biomarker candidates during the
follow-up of treated prostate cancer and (ii) to elucidate the
feasibility of this complex functional network between epithelial
PSA secretory cells and "dual face" neuroendocrine cells. The
understanding of the biologic duality of these neuroendocrine
cells, with a nonmalignant phenotype that "sneakily" sustains
hormone-dependent tumor cells, will be clinically relevant in the
management of advanced, relapsing, and castration-resistant
prostate cancer as well as in the development of new strategies
for targeted therapies and/or diagnostic biomarkers.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: A. Ligresti
Development of methodology: M. Cerasuolo, D. Paris, A. Ligresti
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): D. Melck, A. Motta, A. Ligresti
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): M. Cerasuolo, D. Paris, F.A. Iannotti, D. Melck,
A. Motta, A. Ligresti
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: M. Cerasuolo, D. Paris,
D. Melck, A. Motta, A. Ligresti
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): R. Verde, E. Mazzarella
Study supervision: A. Ligresti
Other (performed part of experiments): F.A. Iannotti
Other (performed in vitro analyses): R. Verde

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Luigia Cristino and Roberta Imperatore for their expert
technical assistance in microscopic image acquisition and Pierangelo Orlando
for the help provided in some of the molecular biology analyses herein
presented.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

Received December 30, 2014; revised May 26, 2015; accepted June 2, 2015;
published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015.

References
1. Adimy M, Crauste F, Marquet C. Asymptotic behavior and stability switch
for a mature–immature model of cell differentiation. Nonlinear Anal: Real
World Appl 2010;11:2913–29.

www.aacrjournals.org

2. Adimy M, Crauste F, Ruan S. Modelling hematopoiesis mediated by growth
factors with applications to periodic hematological diseases. Bull Math Biol
2006;68:2321–51.

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2985

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Cerasuolo et al.

3. Morken JD, Packer A, Everett RA, Nagy JD, Kuang Y. Mechanisms of
resistance to intermittent androgen deprivation in patients with prostate
cancer identiﬁed by a novel computational method. Cancer Res 2014;74:
3673–83.
4. Portz T, Kuang Y, Nagy J. A clinical data validated mathematical model of
prostate cancer growth under intermittent androgen suppression therapy.
AIP Adv 2012;2:1–14.
5. Eikenberry SE, Nagy JD, Kuang Y. The evolutionary impact of androgen
levels on prostate cancer in a multi-scale mathematical model. Biol Direct
2010;5:24.
6. Terry S, Beltran H. The many faces of neuroendocrine differentiation in
prostate cancer progression. Front Oncol 2014;4:1–9.
7. Perrot V. Neuroendocrine differentiation in the progression of prostate
cancer: an update on recent developments. Open J Urol 2012;2:173–82.
8. Bonkhoff H. Neuroendocrine differentiation in human prostate cancer.
Morphogenesis, proliferation and androgen receptor status. Ann Oncol
2001;12 Suppl 2:S141–4.
9. Hansson J, Abrahamsson PA. Neuroendocrine pathogenesis in adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Ann Oncol 2001;12 Suppl 2:S145–52.
10. Berruti A, Vignani F, Russo L, Bertaglia V, Tullio M, Tucci M, et al. Prognostic
role of neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer, putting together
the pieces of the puzzle. Open Access J Urol 2010;2:109–24.
11. Taplin ME. Secondary hormone therapy for castration-resistant prostate
cancer. Oncology (Williston Park) 2013;27:371–2.
12. Beltran H, Tagawa ST, Park K, MacDonald T, Milowsky MI, Mosquera JM,
et al. Challenges in recognizing treatment-related neuroendocrine prostate
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2012;30:e386–9.
13. Knudsen KE, Scher HI. Starving the addiction: new opportunities for
durable suppression of AR signaling in prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res
2009;15:4792–8.
14. Kollermann J, Helpap B. Neuroendocrine differentiation and short-term
neoadjuvant hormonal treatment of prostatic carcinoma with special
regard to tumor regression. Eur Urol 2001;40:313–7.
15. Jiborn T, Bjartell A, Abrahamsson P. Neuroendocrine differentiation in
prostatic carcinoma during hormonal treatment. Urology 1998;51:585–9.
16. Hirano D, Okada Y, Minei S, Takimoto Y, Nemoto N. Neuroendocrine
differentiation in hormone refractory prostate cancer following androgen
deprivation therapy. Eur Urol 2004;45:586–92; discussion 592.
17. Xia J, Mandal R, Sinelnikov IV, Broadhurst D, Wishart DS. MetaboAnalyst
2.0–a comprehensive server for metabolomic data analysis. Nucleic Acids
Res 2012;40 (Web Server issue):W127–33.
18. Xia J, Psychogios N, Young N, Wishart DS. MetaboAnalyst: a web server for
metabolomic data analysis and interpretation. Nucleic Acids Res 2009;37
(Web Server issue):W652–60.
19. Jackson T. A mathematical model of prostate tumor growth and androgenindependent relapse. Discrete Continuous Dynam Syst Ser B 2004;4:
187–202.
20. Tao Y, Guo Q, Aihara K. A partial differential equation model and its
reduction to an ordinary differential equation model for prostate tumor
growth under intermittent hormone therapy. J Math Biol 2014;69:817–38.
21. Ideta A, Tanaka G, Takeuchi T, Aihara K. A mathematical model of
intermittent androgen suppression for prostate cancer. J Nonlinear Sci
2008;18:593–613.
22. Hirata Y, Bruchovsky N, Aihara K. Development of a mathematical model
that predicts the outcome of hormone therapy for prostate cancer. J Theor
Biol 2010;264:517–27.

2986 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

23. Tao Y, Guo Q, Aihara K. A model at the macroscopic scale of prostate tumor
growth under intermittent androgen suppression. Math Models Methods
Appl Sci 2009;19:2177–201.
24. Guo Q, Tao Y, Aihara K. Mathematical modeling of prostate tumor growth
under intermittent androgen suppression with partial differential equations. Int J Bifurc Chaos 2008;18:3789–96.
25. Tanaka G, Hirata Y, Goldenberg S, Bruchovsky N, Aihara K. Mathematical
modelling of prostate cancer growth and its application to hormone
therapy. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci 2010;368:5029–44.
26. Di Garbo A, Johnston M, Chapman S, Maini P. Variable renewal rate and
growth properties of cell populations in colon crypts. Phys Rev E Stat
Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2010;104:4008–13.
27. d'Onofrio A, Tomlinson I. A nonlinear mathematical model of cell turnover differentiation and tumorigenesis in the intestinal crypt. J Theor Biol
2007;244:367–74.
28. Johnston M, Edwards C, Bodmer W, Maini P, Chapman S. Mathematical
modeling of cell population dynamics in the colonic crypt and in colorectal
cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:4008–18.
29. Sottoriva A, Sloot P, Medema J, Vermeulen L. Exploring cancer stem cell
niche directed tumor growth. Cell Cycle 2010;9:1472–9.
30. Quinn T, Sinkala Z. Dynamics of prostate cancer stem cells with diffusion
and organism response. Biosystems 2009;96:69–79.
31. McDunn JE, Li Z, Adam KP, Neri BP, Wolfert RL, Milburn MV, et al.
Metabolomic signatures of aggressive prostate cancer. Prostate 2013;73:
1547–60.
32. Yue S, Li J, Lee SY, Lee HJ, Shao T, Song B, et al. Cholesteryl ester
accumulation induced by PTEN loss and PI3K/AKT activation underlies
human prostate cancer aggressiveness. Cell Metab 2014;19:393–406.
33. Wang Q, Horiatis D, Pinski J. Inhibitory effect of IL-6-induced neuroendocrine cells on prostate cancer cell proliferation. Prostate 2004;61:
253–9.
34. Yuan TC, Veeramani S, Lin MF. Neuroendocrine-like prostate cancer cells:
neuroendocrine transdifferentiation of prostate adenocarcinoma cells.
Endocr Relat Cancer 2007;14:531–47.
35. Tessem M, Swanson M, Keshari K, Albers M, Joun D, Tabatabai Z, et al.
Evaluation of lactate and alanine as metabolic biomarkers of prostate
cancer using 1H HR-MAS spectroscopy of biopsy tissues. Magn Reson Med
2008;60:510–6.
36. Weinstein SJ, Mackrain K, Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ, Selhub J, Virtamo J,
Albanes D. Serum creatinine and prostate cancer risk in a prospective study.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2009;18:2643–9.
37. Khan AP, Rajendiran TM, Ateeq B, Asangani IA, Athanikar JN, Yocum AK,
et al. The role of sarcosine metabolism in prostate cancer progression.
Neoplasia 2013;15:491–501.
38. Munoz-Pinedo C, El Mjiyad N, Ricci JE. Cancer metabolism: current
perspectives and future directions. Cell Death Dis 2012;3:e248.
39. Serkova NJ, Gamito EJ, Jones RH, O'Donnell C, Brown JL, Green S, et al. The
metabolites citrate, myo-inositol, and spermine are potential age-independent markers of prostate cancer in human expressed prostatic secretions. Prostate 2008;68:620–8.
40. Traverso N, Ricciarelli R, Nitti M, Marengo B, Furfaro AL, Pronzato MA,
et al. Role of glutathione in cancer progression and chemoresistance.
Oxid Med Cell Longev 2013;2013:972913.
41. Lao L, Franklin RB, Costello LC. High-afﬁnity L-aspartate transporter in
prostate epithelial cells that is regulated by testosterone. Prostate 1993;
22:53–63.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830

Neuroendocrine Transdifferentiation in Human Prostate Cancer
Cells: An Integrated Approach
Marianna Cerasuolo, Debora Paris, Fabio A. Iannotti, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:2975-2986. Published OnlineFirst June 11, 2015.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/06/12/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830.DC2
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/06/11/0008-5472.CAN-14-3830.DC1

This article cites 41 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/15/2975.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/15/2975.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

