Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Blockade of telomerase reverse transcriptase enhances
chemo­sensitivity in head and neck cancers through inhibition of
AKT/ ERK signaling pathways
Tengda Zhao1,2, Fengchun Hu1,3, Xingguang Liu1, Qian Tao1
1

 epartment of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen
D
University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

2

Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China

3

 epartment of Stomatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou,
D
Guangdong, China

Correspondence to:
Qian Tao, e-mail: taoqian@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Keywords: TERT, HNSCC, AKT, ERK, chemosensitivity
Received: April 10, 2015      Accepted: October 06, 2015      Published: October 16, 2015

ABSTRACT
Head and Neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), characterized by the
high frequency of local recurrence and distant metastases, is mostly related to
highly malignant and resistant to apoptosis, resulting in significant insensitivity to
chemotherapy. Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), as the catalytic subunit
of telomerase, was implicated in the telomerase-mediated cellular transformation,
proliferation, stemness and cell survival. Moreover, overexpression of human TERT
(hTERT) is reported to be correlated with advanced invasive stage of the tumor
progression and poor prognosis. Here, we show that hTERT potentially mediated the
apoptotic resistance and blockade of telomerase reverse transcriptase could enhance
chemosensitivity in head and neck cancers. Mechanistically, hTERT interacts with the
phosphorylation of AKT and ERK to suppress the expression of p53, ultimately, leading
to modulation of the cellular sensitivity to chemotherapy. Thus, these findings suggest
that hTERT targeting could be an attractive approach in combination with conventional
chemotherapies for patients suffering from chemoinsensitivity or refractory HNSCC.

transcriptase (TERT), as the catalytic subunit of
telomerase, has the capacity to limit the activity of
telomerase to avoid the erosion of telomere. Several
studies have demonstrated that human TERT (hTERT)
was implicated in the telomerase-mediated cellular
transformation [6], proliferation [7], stemness [8] and
cell survival [9]. It is well established that introduction of
hTERT into fibroblasts and some epithelial cells confers
cellular immortalization [10–12], and hTERT reactivation
is a critical step for transformed cells during malignant
transformation. Moreover, overexpression of hTERT is
reported to be correlated with advanced invasive stage of
the tumor progression and poor prognosis [13–16].
Cancer cells tend to survive despite violating
rules of normal cellular behavior that ordinarily provoke
apoptosis. Accumulating studies reported that hTERT
positively impacts mitochondrial function to modulate cell

INTRODUCTION
Head and Neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCC), which arise in the oral cavity, larynx and
pharynx, ranks as the sixth most prevalent cancer with
approximately 500,000 new cases per year worldwide
[1]. Despite advances in treatment, HNSCC patients often
present with advanced-stage tumors and the five-year
survival rate is less than 50% [2, 3], this poor prognosis
is mostly related to high malignancy and resistance
to apoptosis, resulting in significant insensitivity to
chemotherapy [4]. Therefore, investigation of the potential
key mediators that regulate chemosensitivity may help
to further uncover the biological basis of HNSCC and
improve clinical therapy.
Telomerase is an enzyme best known for its
role in telomere maintenance [5]. Telomerase reverse

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35908

Oncotarget

survival in response to apoptotic stimuli. Furthermore, a
recent study has showed that hTERT overexpression
alleviated intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production and inhibited ROS-mediated apoptosis [17].
These properties suggest that hTERT might influence the
sensitivity of chemotherapy in cancer cells, although the
precisely molecular mechanisms are still largely unknown.
Recent studies have significantly increased our
understanding that the p53 family and various pathways
played a major role in DNA-damage responses [18].
Another report also revealed that AKT mediated cisplatin
resistance by modulation of p53 action on caspasedependent mitochondrial death pathway in ovarian cancer
[19]. However, it remains to be established how these
various pathways are differentially activated and how they
might be interconnected during chemotherapy.
In the present study, we demonstrated that
hTERT potentially mediated the apoptotic resistance
and blockade of telomerase reverse transcriptase could
enhance chemosensitivity in head and neck cancers. Most
importantly, we found the mechanism that hTERT interacts
with the phosphorylation of AKT and ERK to suppress the
expression of p53, ultimately, leading to modulation of the
cellular sensitivity to chemotherapy. Taken together, our
results suggest that the AKT/ERK-p53-bcl-2 axis might
constitute a signaling cascade that mediates the antitumor
treatment in HNSCC cells, and hTERT targeting could be
an attractive approach in combination with conventional
chemotherapies for patients suffering from chemoinsensitivity or refractory HNSCC.

modulate the cancer cell survival upon chemotherapy, then
the changes of hTERT were tested in two HNSCC cells
treated with cisplatin at different concentrations, as shown
in Figure 1B, the expression of hTERT increased in a dosedependent manner at certain range of concentration, which
suggested that hTERT might be an essential determinant
for tumor cells escape from death.
Next, to observe the effect of hTERT on cellular
self-protection to chemotherapeutic drugs clinically,
immunohistochemical staining was performed to detect
the expression of hTERT in HNSCC tissues treated with
or without induction chemotherapy. Compared to the
patients without treatment, we found that the expression
of hTERT significantly increased in patients who had
received chemotherapy. For HNSCC samples without
treatment, moderate to strong cytoplasmic and nuclear
hTERT staining was exhibited in nearly all epithelial
cells, while more marked cytoplasmic and nuclear
hTERT staining was observed in HNSCC treated with
drugs. In addition, cells from central parts of the nests
from well to moderately-differentiated squamous tumors
showed the same uptrend between them. Representative
microphotographs of hTERT staining for HNSCC with or
without induction chemotherapy are shown in Figure 1C
and 1D. The mean cytoplasmic hTERT LSs in epitheliums
and central nests separately increased significantly from
HNSCC control group (187.65% ± 10.698%, 163.47% ±
11.193%, 191.60% ± 30.835%) to HNSCC samples with
chemotherapy (267.23% ± 18.910%, 205.64% ± 37.272%,
276.00% ± 20.236%) (Table 1). The mean nuclear
hTERT LSs also increased from (200.65% ± 32.843%,
154.00% ± 13.130%, 202.60% ± 40.072%) to (258.00%
± 10.882%, 204.00% ± 38.508%, 263.4% ± 15.060%),
there was a significant difference in the mean cytoplasmic
and nuclear hTERT LSs before and after chemotherapy
(P < 0.05). Collectively, these results suggest that hTERT
plays an important role in cell survival when receiving
death stimuli.

RESULTS
hTERT is activated to modulate cells survival in
response to dead signal
High levels of TERT expression and telomerase
activation have been reported in many cancer cells
[20, 21]. Our previous study also demonstrated that
hTERT is overexpressed in oral epithelial dysplasia
and oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissues and
correlates with clinical aggressiveness of OSCC patients.
Further detection by Western blot was performed to find
that hTERT expression was significantly upregulated
in frequently utilized HNSCC cells compared with
the immortalized normal keratinocyte cell line (NOK)
(Figure 1A), suggesting hTERT might act as a strong
promoter in malignant development of HNSCC.
It is known that hTERT expression and telomerase
activity are often very low or undetectable in somatic cells
in vivo. However, our results showed that hTERT was
expressed at a high level in primary human oral epithelial
cells (HOE) in vitro (Figure 1A), which enlightened us
that hTERT might confer protective activity to resist
deadly damage. We further speculated that hTERT might
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hTERT potentially activates p53-mitochondrial
pathway to contribute to death escape
To better clarify the biological function of
hTERT in response to cell death, we established stably
hTERT-expressing cells using the HOE cells to exclude
the involvement of other mutant genes. As shown in
Figure 2A, we observed that the adherent cells showed
a typical small cobblestone-like epithelial morphology
in an early phase. However, with the later process of
serial passages, HOE cells infected with the control
lentivirus underwent senescence and represented
flatten morphology, while hTERT-overexpressing cells
remained remarkably unchanged. Cell-cycle analysis
was performed to determine these cells’ status. Indeed,
the percentage of control vector cells in S phase (16.989%
35909

Oncotarget

Figure 1: hTERT is activated in cells undergoing apoptotic stimuli and primary human HNSCC tissues treated with
induction chemotherapy. A. Western blot analysis of hTERT expression in primary cell line HOE, immortalized normal cell line

NOK and various HNSCC cell lines using anti-hTERT antibodies. Anti-GAPDH served as loading control. B. Expression of hTERT in
HNSCC cell lines Cal27 a. and SCC25 cells b. were analyzed in the presence of a range of different concentrations of chemotherapy drugs
by Western blot analysis. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control. C, D. Immunohistochemical staining of hTERT expression in oral
epithelium (C) and well to moderately-differentiated squamous tumor nests (D) of HNSCC tissues treated with or without chemotherapy.

± 1.689%) was lower compared to hTERT-overexpressing
cells (24.776% ± 1.142%)(Figure 2B). This was further
supported by detection of the SA–ß galactosidase
activity (Figure 2C). In addition, mitochondrion, the key
mediator of apoptosis, is activated upon dead signal to
resist cell death, we then evaluated the effect of hTERToverexpressing on mitochondrial activation using
MitoTracker® Red dye. As shown in Figure 2D, active
labeled mitochondria were frequently observed in HOE
cells that overexpressed hTERT, which suggested that
hTERT could affect mitochondrial pathway to protect
cells from senescence.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Increasing evidence implicated that p53 is a central
factor in the cellular response to damaging stimuli to
regulate cell apoptosis through mitochondria [22]. We
previously determined the expression of p53 by western
blot analysis and found it significantly reduced in hTERToverexpressing HOE cells [23], these results indicate
that hTERT could activate p53-mitochondrial pathway to
promote mitochondrial function, which helps to prevent
cell death. Collectively, according to the previous two
parts of results, we deduced that hTERT might play
a crucial role in modulating the cellular sensitivity to
chemotherapy.

35910

Oncotarget

Table 1: The mean hTERT LS in HNSCC samples treated with or without chemotherapy
Groups

Mean cytoplasmic
hTERT LS ± SD (%)

P-value

Mean nuclear
hTERT LS ± SD (%)

P-value

Epithelium
  Control

187.65 ± 10.698

  Treated

267.23 ± 18.910

200.65 ± 32.843
0.000

258.00 ± 10.882

0.000

Nest
WD HNSCC
  Control

163.47 ± 11.193

  Treated

205.64 ± 37.272

154.00 ± 13.130
0.001

204.00 ± 38.508

0.000

MD HNSCC
  Control

191.60 ± 30.835

  Treated

276.00 ± 20.236

202.60 ± 40.072
0.001

263.4 ± 15.060

0.024

Comparison between groups was performed by Student’s t-test. A significant difference in the mean cytoplasmic and
nuclearhTERT LS was found in epithelium and nest between OSCC control and chemotherapy treated groups (P < 0.05).
Labeling scores (LS); Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC); WD = well-differentiated, MD = moderatelydifferentiated.

Ectopic expression of hTERT enhances
chemoresistance by activating AKT and ERK
signaling pathways in cancer cells

As we have found that hTERT downregulated p53
in HOE cells, we next examined whether hTERT has
the same effect in tumor cells. As shown in Figure 3E,
ectopic expression of hTERT also markedly reduced
p53 expression. Since the regulation effect of hTERT
on p53 and meanwhile they mainly co-localized in
the nucleoplasm, we thus asked whether existed the
physical interaction between hTERT and p53. However,
we failed to find the endogenous interaction by Coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) analysis, which suggested
that hTERT indirectly regulated p53 through other
signaling pathways. We next analyzed the activity of
phosphorylated AKT and ERK, upstream molecules of p53
[25–27]. Strikingly, as shown in Figure 3F, overexpression
of hTERT clearly increased the phosphorylation of
AKT and ERK in Cal27 cells as well as in HOE cells
(Supplementary Figure S1). Moreover, endogenous
p-AKT and p-ERK bound to endogenous hTERT could
be detected in hTERT precipitates by co-IP assays
(Figure 3G), suggesting that activation of AKT and ERK
was involved in hTERT-induced downregulation of p53
upon death stimuli.

Escape from apoptosis is an almost systematic
hallmark of cancer cells that contributes to tumor
progression and drug insensitivity [24]. The discovery
of hTERT-mediated self-protection enlightened us that
hTERT overexpression might endow cancer cells with
a survival advantage by blunting apoptotic signals and
consequently affected the sensitivity of cancer cells to
chemotherapy. To characterize the impact of hTERT on
anti-apoptosis effect, we chose cisplatin, one of the most
effective anticancer drugs used in the treatment of HNSCC,
and cisplatin-sensitive HNSCC cell line Cal27 which had
a low background of hTERT. Next, ectopic hTERT was
stably expressed in Cal27 cells (Figure 3A) and the impact
of hTERT upregulation on cytotoxic reagent-induced cell
apoptosis was evaluated by exposing these cells to cisplatin.
As shown in Figure 3B, Cal27 cells expressing ectopic
hTERT showed lower degree of cytotoxicity response
to various concentration of cisplatin compared with the
vector control cells. Annexin-V-APC/7-AAD apoptosis
detection was performed by flow cytometry to detect the
apoptotic difference. As shown in Figure 3C, the proportion
of vector control cells undergoing early and late apoptosis
were significantly higher than that of the apoptotic hTERTexpressing cells (44.51% ± 3.510% vs 23.21% ± 2.895%)
after cisplatin (6.25 μM) treatment. Expression of bcl-2
and cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP protein critical for
cell apoptosis were detected to further demonstrate our
observation. As shown in Figure 3D, Cal27 cells expressing
ectopic hTERT showed lower levels of cleavages of both
pro-caspase-3 and PARP and increased bcl-2 expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hTERT suppresses the apoptotic sensitivity
of cancer cells in vivo
To further confirm whether ectopic expression
of hTERT suppressed the sensitivity to chemotherapy
in vivo, we next examined effects of hTERT on Cal27
cell line using the nude mouse xenograft model. As
shown in Figure 4A–4C, the tumors derived from hTERToverexpressing Cal27 cells grew more rapidly and were
larger in size in contrast to the tumors derived from
control vector cells. Moreover, the tumors established
35911

Oncotarget

Figure 2: hTERT promotes cells survival and improves mitochondrial function in primary HOE cells. A. The cellular

morphology of HOE cells expressing either the control vector pCMV or pCMV/hTERT at the early and late passages (passage 15 and 25,
respectively) was shown by phase contrast micrography, flattened morphology are indicative of senescence. Scale bar: 200 μm. B. Effect
of hTERT on the viability status of HOE cells expressing either the control vector pCMV or pCMV/hTERT was measured by cell-cycle
analysis. *P < 0.05 as compared with the control vector cells. C. The SA–ß galactosidase activity was tested in the early (passage 17) and
later (passage 32) stages to determine the senescent conditions of pCMV vector or pCMV/hTERT HOE cells. Blue-stained cells were
identified as senescent cells. Scale bar: 50 μm. D. Identification was examined by confocal microscopy, red-positive staining of mitochondria
in the HOE cytoplasm, while the blue signal signifies nuclear DNA staining with DAPI. Scale bar: 10 μm.

using hTERT-overexpressing Cal27 cells were more
resistant to apoptosis and formed larger tumors than
control cells in mice treated with cisplatin, H & E staining
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

also confirmed this result (Figure 4D). Furthermore,
immunohistochemistry (IHC) of tumor biopsies showed
increased hTERT expression in tumor xenografts,
35912

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Ectopic expression of hTERT suppresses drug sensitivity by activating AKT and ERK signaling pathways
in cancer cells. A. Ectopic expression of hTERT in Cal27 cell line. Total cell lysates of control (pCMV) and hTERT-overexpressing

(pCMV/hTERT) cells were analyzed by Western blot analysis using anti-hTERT antibodies. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control.
B. hTERT expression prevents cisplatin-induced cell death. 48 h after treatment with cisplatin, cell viability was assessed by MTT method.
Bars represent the average percentages of survival cells compared with the untreated control cells; *P < 0.05. C. uantification of Annexin
V-APC/7-AAD cells after the indicated cells were treatment with cisplatin (6.25 μM) for 48 h. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of
three independent experiments; *P < 0.05. D. hTERT expression inhibits cisplatin-induced proteolysis of pro-caspase-3 and PARP and
induced bcl-2 expression. The Cal27 cells treated with cisplatin (6.25 μM) for 48 h and the total cell lysates were analyzed for proteolysis
cleavage of pro-caspase-3, PARP (left) and expression of bcl-2 (right) by Western blot analysis. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control.
E.Repression of p53 pathway in hTERT-overexpressing Cal27 cells and control vector Cal27 cells without cisplatin treatment were analyzed
by Western blot analysis using antibodies against p53. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control. F. Ectopic expression of hTERT activates
the AKT/ERK pathway. The total cell lysates were analyzed for phosphorylated AKT, total AKT, phosphorylated ERK and total ERK levels
by Western blot analysis. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control. G. hTERT interacts with p-AKT and p-ERK to regulate the expression
of p53. Endogenous phosphorylationof AKT and ERK bound to hTERT immunoprecipitates were analyzed by immunoprecipitation (IP)
assays. hTERT immunoprecipitation was done from whole cell lysates of Cal27 cells. IgG served as control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35913

Oncotarget

Figure 4: hTERT suppresses the cisplatin sensitivity of cancer cells in vivo. A total of 1 × 107 control vector or hTERT-

overexpressing Cal27 cells were injected subcutaneously into the right flank of each mouse, two different kinds of tumor bearing mice
were randomized respectively into two groups after 10 days, and treated by intraperitoneal injection (ip) with cisplatin (2 mg/kg) or control
diluent every day. A. Xenograft tumor volumes from the mice treated with or without cisplatin were measured on the indicated days;
*P < 0.05. B. Mean tumor weights for each group; *P < 0.05. C. Representative low magnification histological sections from each group.
Scale bars: 1 mm. D. Representative histological sections of tumor xenografs staining by H & E (Original magnification, 200X) and
immunohistochemistry of hTERT, p53, bcl-2, cleaved-caspase-3 each group (Original magnification, 400X).

Depletion of hTERT sensitizes cancer cells
to chemotherapy and inhibited AKT/ ERK
signaling pathways

resulting in decreased level of p53 and upregulation of
bcl-2 expression, subsequently suppression of cleavages
of pro-caspase-3. Importantly, this trend was more
remarkable in hTERT-overexpressing Cal27 cells with
cisplatin treatment as compared with control vector
cells (Figure 4D). Collectively, these results indicate the
critical role of hTERT in conferring resistance ability to
chemotherapy in vivo.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Since the remarkable influence of hTERT to
chemosensitivity, we thus considered whether inhibition
of hTERT could enhance the chemosensitivity in
hTERT-overexpressing cancer cells. We firstly knocked

35914

Oncotarget

down endogenous hTERT in HNSCC cell line SCC25
that normally expressed high level of hTERT and was
insensitive to treatment with cisplatin, then examined the
sensitivity of the modified cells to apoptosis. As shown
in Figure 5A, one shRNA targeting hTERT had high
efficiency to specifically knock down endogenous hTERT
protein in SCC25 cells. When the modified cells were
treated with 6.25 μM cisplatin, enhanced sensitivity to
these apoptotic inducers were found in cells depleted in
hTERT compared with vector control cells (Figure 5B).
The apoptotic nature of induced cell death was also
confirmed by Annexin-V-APC/7-AAD apoptosis detection
on hTERT-depleted cells (39.89% ± 2.935%) and control
cells (20.54% ± 2.571%) treated with 6.25 μM cisplatin
(Figure 5C). In addition, inhibition of hTERT markedly
induced cleavage of PARP and pro-caspase-3 and
attenuated expression of bcl-2 (Figure 5D). Furthermore,
silencing endogenous hTERT decreased the level of
phosphorylation of AKT and ERK (Figure 5E), while
up-regulated the expression of p53 (Figure 5F), suggesting
that silencing endogenous hTERT induced upregulation
of p53 through inhibition of AKT and ERK signaling
pathways to enhance sensitivity to chemotherapy. Taken
together, these results suggest that cellular depletion of
hTERT improves the chemotherapy and could be a target
in the treatment of chemoinsensitive cancers.

to the significant chemoresistance of HNSCC cells. In the
present study, we found that ectopic expression of hTERT
increased chemoresistance to cisplatin-induced death and
contributed to lower rates of apoptosis, whereas cellular
depletion of hTERT substantially sensitized cancer cells
and caused higher rates of apoptosis. Our data also showed
that hTERT protects cells from death through triggering
the AKT/ERK-p53-bcl-2 cascades to inhibit the expression
of proteolytic cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP in vitro.
More importantly, overexpression of hTERT promoted
the growth and tumorigenicity of Cal27 cells, significantly
impaired the antitumor effect of cisplatin in mouse model
and caused altered expression of downstream signaling
molecules. Thus, our findings provided a new insight into
a possible mechanism that by which hTERT modulated
chemosensitivity of HNSCC cells.
Recent study has shown that wide-type p53 exerts
distinct functions to promote apoptosis in the context
of damage stimuli and suppress the tumorigenesis [34].
There is an evidence also showed increased expression
of wild-type p53 could use distinct pathways to repress
telomerase activity through inhibition of c-Myc or E-box/
E2F pathways in human and mouse cells, respectively
[35]. Despite the mutant p53 lost its effect of tumor
suppression and obtained oncogenic function in cancer
cells, it still retained the ability to drive apoptosis when
receiving death stimuli. However, in the present study, our
data showed that ectopic hTERT significantly reduced the
level of p53 to protect cells from apoptosis, while silencing
hTERT represented a reverse trend, identifying p53 as a
mediator to regulate the expression of bcl-2, suggesting a
close bidirectional regulation exists between hTERT and
p53. Thus, targeting TERT could be as a potential strategy
to negatively regulate the expression of p53 and induce
apoptosis in cancer cells.
It is reported that multiple genetic and epigenetic
alterations converge on the persistent activation of JAK/
STAT3 [36], PI3K/AKT [37], MEK/ ERK [38], Wnt [39]
signaling in most cancer lesions. In our current study, our
results showed activated phosphorylation of AKT and
ERK in hTERT-overexpressing cells, as well as AKT
and ERK inactivation in hTERT-depleted cancer cells.
Furthermore, we detected that endogenous p-AKT and
p-ERK rather than p53 could physically interact with
endogenous hTERT in hTERT precipitates by co-IP assays
in Cal27 cells. Conclusively, these results demonstrate
that upregulated hTERT activates AKT/ERK signaling
pathways and supports cell survival through modulation
of p53 in HNSCC (Figure 6).
In summary, for the first time, this study reveals
a mechanism by which blockade of telomerase reverse
transcriptase could enhance chemosensitivity through
inhibition of AKT/ERK-p53 signaling pathways. These
results provide new insights into the mediators of apoptotic
response in HNSCC, which will enable the development

DISCUSSION
HNSCC, characterized by the high frequency of
local recurrence and distant metastases, is mostly related
to highly malignant and resistance to apoptosis, resulting
in significant insensitivity to chemotherapy. Therefore,
improving the sensitivity of the advanced-stage patients
to chemotherapy drugs is an important strategy in HNSCC
treatment.
The properties of hTERT were correlated with
advanced invasive stage of the tumor progression and
poor prognosis [15, 16, 28]. Ectopic expression of hTERT
has been reported in various types of tumors including
lung cancer [29], gastric cancer [30], hepatocellular
cancer [31] and breast cancer [32]. In HNSCC, our data of
ectopic hTERT expression in clinical samples and cancer
cells extended these findings, suggesting that hTERT
played a critical role in HNSCC malignant advances.
Importantly, in our study, we found that upregulation
of hTERT positively conferred protective activity in
response to dead signal in normal and cancer cells, which
indicated an essential role of hTERT for cell survival upon
chemotherapeutic stimuli in cancer cells.
Evasion of apoptosis is a hallmark of most human
tumors and constitutes an important clinical problem [33].
Multiple chemotherapeutic agents including cisplatin act
against cancers through inducing apoptosis; however,
these agents only provide limited survival advantages due

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35915

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Silencing endogenous hTERT expression sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy and inhibited AKT/ ERK
signaling pathways. A. Knockdown of hTERT in shRNA-stably-transduced SCC25 cell line. Total cell lysates of control scramble
vector and hTERT-RNAi cells were analyzed by Western blot analysis using anti-hTERT antibodies. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading
control. B. Knockdown of hTERT enhances the sensitivity to cisplatin-induced cell death. 72 h after treatment with cisplatin (6.25 μM),
cell viability was assessed by MTT method. Bars represent the average percentages of survival cells compared with the untreated control
cells; *P < 0.05. C. Quantification of Annexin V-APC/7-AAD cells after the indicated cells were treatment with cisplatin (6.25 μM) for
72 h. Each bar represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments; *P < 0.05. D. Depletion of hTERT promotes cisplatin-induced
proteolysis of pro-caspase-3 and PARP and decreased bcl-2 expression. The Cal27 cells treated with cisplatin (6.25 μM) for 72 h and the
total cell lysates were analyzed for proteolysis cleavage of pro-caspase-3, PARP (left) and expression of bcl-2 (right) by Western blot
analysis. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control. E. Depletion of hTERT inhibits the AKT/ERK pathway. The total cell lysates were
analyzed for phosphorylated AKT, total AKT, phosphorylated ERK and total ERK levels by Western blot analysis. Anti-GAPDH was used
as loading control. F. Activation of p53 pathway in hTERT-silencing Cal27 cells and control scramble vector Cal27 cells without cisplatin
treatment were analyzed by Western blot analysis using antibodies against p53. Anti-GAPDH was used as loading control.

of novel antitumor strategies. In this context, targeting
hTERT to enhance chemosensitivity in combination of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

conventional chemotherapies might represent new and
promising strategies in head and neck cancers.
35916

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Schematic representation of the anti-apoptosis molecular mechanism of hTERT in regulation the sensitivity
of cancer cells to chemotherapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell cultures, plasmids, stable transfection and
reagents

Clinical samples and clinical staging system

Two HNSCC cell lines (Cal27, SCC25) were
purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, USA). Cal27 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (Gibco) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone, USA); SCC25
cells were maintained in 1:1mixture of Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium and Ham F12 medium
(Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 400 ng/ml
hydrocortisone (Sigma, USA). Primary cell culture of
human oral epithelial cells (HOE) were established as
described previously [23]. Briefly, fresh biopsies were
obtained from a healthy human adult undergoing third
molar extraction. Following by incubation with 2 μg/ml
Dispase solution (Roche, Germany) overnight at 4°C, the
epidermis were gently separated from the dermis and cut
into small pieces, then trpsinized for 5 minutes at 37°C in
0.125% trypsin/0.01 mM EDTA. After vigorous pipetting,
the cell suspension was centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 g
and the cell pellet was resuspended in keratinocyte serumfree medium (K-SFM, Gibco).

A total of 57 paraffin-embedded HNSCC samples
were obtained from the archives of the Department of
Pathology of the Hospital of Stomatology, Sun Yatsen University, Guangzhou, China. Of the 57 HNSCC
samples, we divided them into two independent sets of
groups for the experiments. Control group contained 32
well- and 5 moderately-differentiated HNSCCs from 37
patients who did not take any preoperative treatments
including chemoradiotherapy, while treated group was
comprised of 15 well- and 5 moderately-differentiated
paraffin-embedded HNSCCs tumor tissues from 20
patients receiving induction chemotherapy before
surgery. All of the samples were treated by surgical
excision. For the use of these clinical materials for
research purposes, prior patient’s consent and approval
from the Institute Research Ethics Committee was
obtained. The disease stages of all the patients were
classified according to Union for International Cancer
Control (UICC 2010).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35917

Oncotarget

The pCMV and pCMV/hTERT constructs have
been previously described [23]. The hTERT gene was
introduced into HOE or Cal27 cells by infecting cells
with a lentiviral vector pCMV-hTERT. Control cells were
infected with the empty lentiviral vector pCMV. Infected
cells were subcultured and subjected to drug selection
(0.5 and 1 μg/ml puromycin) for 3–5 days, respectively.
For depletion of hTERT, the pSIH-H1-puro-construct
(System Bioscience, SBI) containing hTERT short hairpin
RNAs(shRNA) was generated by cloning the following
hTERT-specific RNAi target sequences into pSIHF-H1:
hTERT shRNA: 5-GACGGTGTGCACCAACATCTA-3.
Briefly, SCC25 cells silencing hTERT were generated by
infection with hTERT shRNA lentiviruses, and selected
by treatment with 0.5 μg/ml puromycin for 10 days,
beginning from 48 h after infection. cisplatin (Sigma,
USA) was dissolved in Dimethylformamide (DMF,
Sigma, USA), was used to treat cells at indicated final
concentrations and times.

mean cytoplasmic and nuclear hTERT staining intensity
(SI; 0, no staining; 1, weak; 2, moderate; 3, strong), labeling
indices (LIs, defined as the percentage of positive cells in
total cells), and mean labeling scores (LSs, defined as LI ×
SI) in HNSCC samples with or without chemotherapy were
calculated and compared between them.

Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis
Cell-cycle status was analyzed using DNA content
quantitation assay (KeyGEN, China). The cells were
washed with PBS thrice, fixed in 70% ethanol at 4°C
overnight and stained for total DNA content with RNase
A and propidium iodide staining buffer (BD, San Diego,
CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
A minimum of 10000 cells were acquired per sample and
cell cycle distribution was analyzed using a flow cytometer
(Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA) and ModFit
software V3.0 (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME,
USA). The experiments were repeated for three times.
For apoptosis analysis, quantification of apoptotic
cells was performed with Annexin-V-APC/7-AADApoptosis
Detection Kit (KeyGEN, China). HNSCC cells were
treated with cisplatin (6.25 μM) for required times
(48 h–72 h). The cells were collected and stained according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. The apoptosis data
acquisition and analysis was performed by a FACSCalibur
flow cytometer. Basal apoptosis were identically determined
on control cells. All of the samples assayed were in
triplicates.

SA-ß-galactosidase assay
For the SA-ß–galactosidase assay, the senescence
detection kit (Beyotime, China) was used to stain the
different passages of pCMV vector or pCMV/hTERT
overexpressing HOE cells and determined the SA-ßgalactosidase activity. Cells were seeded in a 6-well plate
and grown for 48 h, then washed with PBS, fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at room temperature.
The cells were washed again with PBS twice and
immersed overnight in the staining solution at 37°C.
Senescent cells were identified as blue-stained cells under
an IX71 inverted microscope (Olympus, Japan) according
to the manufacturer’s instruction.

Intracellular mitochondria-labeled detection
Live pCMV vector or pCMV/hTERT overexpressing
HOE cells were labeled with probes for mitochondria
using MitoTracker® Red CM-H2XRos (Invitrogen),
which is a red-fluorescent dye (Ex/Em ~579/599 nm) that
stains mitochondria in live cells and its accumulation is
dependent upon membrane potential. Cells were seeded
onto the glass slides for 24 h, then added prewarmed
staining solution and incubated at 37°C for 45 minutes,
washed with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for
20 minutes and permeabilized with 0.3% TritonX-100,
nuclear was stained with DAPI. Immunofluorescence was
detected by confocal laser microscope (Olympus, Japan).

Cell survival assay
Cell survival was determined using MTT assay to
assess the sensitivity of cells to anticancer drugs. Cells
were seeded at a density of 5 × 103 cells per well in 96well culture plates, incubated overnight to allow for cell
attachment, then cisplatin was added at a concentration
range of 0–100 μM. Cells were treated at required times
(48 h–72 h) and incubated with MTT reagent (Sigma,
USA). The absorbance was measured in each well with
the Microplate Reader at a wavelength of 570 nm. Each
experimental point was determined in triplicate.

Western blot analysis
Total cellular proteins were extracted with
RIPA lysis buffer. BCA method was used for protein
quantification. The aliquots were separated on SDSPAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane. The
following primary antibodies were used: rabbit antihTERT (1:1000, Abcam, MA, USA); mouse anti-p53,
rabbit anti-AKT, rabbit anti-p-AKT(Ser473), rabbit antiERK1/2, rabbit anti-p-ERK1/2, rabbit anti-PARP, rabbit

Immunohistochemical analysis
Immunohistochemistry was done to examine hTERT
expression in 57 human HNSCC tissue specimens, hTERT
was detected using a rabbit polyclonal antibody against
hTERT (1:25, Santa Cruz, USA). The IHC procedure
was as previously described [23]. Interpretation of IHC
was made independently by two specialists and the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35918

Oncotarget

anti-bcl-2 (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology, USA);
mouse anti-capase-3 (1:1000, Santa Cruz, USA); antiGAPDH (1:2000, KangChen Bio-tech, MA, China). The
protein-antibody complexes were detected by horseradishconjugated secondary antibodies followed by the enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL) western blotting detection
reagents (Pierce, Rockford, USA).

15.0 software to determine their significant differences.
*P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Co-Immunoprecipitation assay

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (grant no.81072227)

Total cell lysates were prepared in ice-cold IP
lysis buffer (Beyotime, China), and the supernatant of
cell lysate corresponding to 1 mg of total protein was
precleared by Protein G Plus/Protein A-agarose beads
(Millipore, USA) to minimize nonspecific binding. Then
the precleared supernatant was divided into three parts,
two of which were incubated with 2 μg of anti-hTERT
antibody or anti-IgG antibody at 4°C for 1 h separately,
followed by incubation with protein G Plus/ Protein Aagarose beads overnight at 4°C under gentle agitation. The
bound proteins were washed thrice with lysis buffer and
dissociated with the beads via boiling and centrifugation.
The collected proteins were suspended in 60 μl 1 × SDS
loading buffer. The expression of p-AKT, p-ERK and p53
proteins was then analyzed by standard immunoblotting.

The authors declared no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D.
Global cancer statistics. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians.
2011; 61:69–90.
2.	 Siegel R, Ward E, Brawley O, Jemal A. Cancer statistics,
2011: the impact of eliminating socioeconomic and racial
disparities on premature cancer deaths. CA: a cancer journal
for clinicians. 2011; 61:212–236.
3.	 Haddad R, O’Neill A, Rabinowits G, Tishler R, Khuri F,
Adkins D, Clark J, Sarlis N, Lorch J, Beitler JJ, Limaye S,
Riley S, Posner M. Induction chemotherapy followed by
concurrent chemoradiotherapy (sequential chemoradiotherapy) versus concurrent chemoradiotherapy alone in locally
advanced head and neck cancer (PARADIGM): a randomised
phase 3 trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2013; 14:257–264.

Mice xenograft studies
Six-week-old female BALB/c nude mice were
purchased from the Center of Experimental Animal of
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine (Guangzhou,
China). All experimental procedures were approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Sun
Yat-sen University. To establish tumor xenografts, the
BALB/c nude mice were subcutaneously injection of
Cal27/Vector or Cal27/hTERT cells (1 × 107) into the right
flank. Xenograft tumors were examined once every three
days. After 10 days, two different kinds of tumor bearing
mice were randomized respectively into two groups (six
mice per group), and treated by intraperitoneal injection
(ip) with cisplatin (2 mg/kg) or control diluent every
day. Tumor size was measured using a slide caliper and
tumor volume was determined by the formula (L × W2)/2
(L indicates the length-diameter and W the width-diameter
of the tumor). 10 days after injection, animals were killed
at the indicated time points, and tumors were isolated
for histologic and immunohistochemical evaluation, as
described previously. The following primary antibodies
were used for IHC: rabbit anti-hTERT (1:200, Abcam,
MA, USA), mouse anti-p53 and mouse anti-bcl-2 (ZSGBBIO, China), rabbit anti-cleaved caspase-3 (1:2000, Cell
Signaling Technology, USA).

4.	 Mao L, Hong WK, Papadimitrakopoulou VA. Focus on
head and neck cancer. Cancer cell. 2004; 5:311–316.
5.	 Liu JP, Chen SM, Cong YS, Nicholls C, Zhou SF, Tao
ZZ, Li H. Regulation of telomerase activity by apparently
opposing elements. Ageing Res Rev. 2010; 9:245–256.
6.	 Stewart SA, Hahn WC, O’Connor BF, Banner EN,
Lundberg AS, Modha P, Mizuno H, Brooks MW, Fleming
M, Zimonjic DB, Popescu NC, Weinberg RA. Telomerase
contributes to tumorigenesis by a telomere length-independent mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;
99:12606–12611.
7.	 Smith LL, Coller HA, Roberts JM. Telomerase modulates
expression of growth-controlling genes and enhances cell
proliferation. Nat Cell Biol. 2003; 5:474–479.
8.	 Yang C, Przyborski S, Cooke MJ, Zhang X, Stewart R,
Anyfantis G, Atkinson SP, Saretzki G, Armstrong L, Lako
M. A key role for telomerase reverse transcriptase unit in
modulating human embryonic stem cell proliferation, cell
cycle dynamics, and in vitro differentiation. Stem Cells.
2008; 26:850–863.
9.	 Lee J, Sung YH, Cheong C, Choi YS, Jeon HK, Sun W,
Hahn WC, Ishikawa F, Lee HW. TERT promotes cellular and organismal survival independently of telomerase
­activity. Oncogene. 2008; 27:3754–3760.

Statistical analysis
Data are represented as Mean ± SD. The data
were analyzed by the Student’s t test using the SPSS
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10.	 Shay JW, Wright WE. Hallmarks of telomeres in ageing
research. The Journal of pathology. 2007; 211:114–123.
35919

Oncotarget

11.	 Kapanadze B, Morris E, Smith E, Trojanowska M.
Establishment and characterization of scleroderma fibroblast clonal cell lines by introduction of the hTERT gene.
J Cell Mol Med. 2010; 14:1156–1165.

24.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
25.	 Chen CS, Ho DR, Chen FY, Chen CR, Ke YD, Su JG.
AKT mediates actinomycin D-induced p53 expression.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:693–703.

12.	 Wieser M, Stadler G, Jennings P, Streubel B, Pfaller W,
Ambros P, Riedl C, Katinger H, Grillari J, Grillari-Voglauer
R. hTERT alone immortalizes epithelial cells of renal proximal tubules without changing their functional characteristics. Am J Physiol-Renal. 2008; 295:F1365–F1375.

26.	 Hamilton G, Abraham AG, Morton J, Sampson O, Pefani
DE, Khoronenkova S, Grawenda A, Papaspyropoulos A,
Jamieson N, McKay C, Sansom O, Dianov GL, O’Neill
E. AKT regulates NPM dependent ARF localization and
p53mut stability in tumors. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:6142–6167.

13.	 Bertorelle R, Briarava M, Rampazzo E, Biasini L, Agostini
M, Maretto I, Lonardi S, Friso ML, Mescoli C, Zagonel V,
Nitti D, De Rossi A, Pucciarelli S. Telomerase is an independent prognostic marker of overall survival in patients
with colorectal cancer. British Journal of Cancer. 2013;
108:278–284.

27.	 Bhardwaj V, Noto JM, Wei J, Andl C, El-Rifai W, Peek
RM, Zaika AI. Helicobacter pylori bacteria alter the p53
stress response via ERK-HDM2 pathway. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:1531–1543.

14.	 Eid MM, Helmy NA, Omar IM, Mohamed AA, El Sewefy D,
Fadel IM, Helal RA. Clinical significance of telomerase
genes (hTERC and hTERT) amplification in patients with
acute myeloid leukemia. Gulf J Oncolog. 2013; 1:51–60.

28.	 Bertorelle R, Briarava M, Rampazzo E, Biasini L, Agostini
M, Maretto I, Lonardi S, Friso ML, Mescoli C, Zagonel V,
Nitti D, De Rossi A, Pucciarelli S. Telomerase is an independent prognostic marker of overall survival in patients
with colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2013; 108:278–284.

15.	 Lotsch D, Ghanim B, Laaber M, Wurm G, Weis S, Lenz
S, Webersinke G, Pichler J, Berger W, Spiegl-Kreinecker
S. Prognostic significance of telomerase-associated parameters in glioblastoma: effect of patient age. Neuro-oncology.
2013; 15:423–432.

29.	 Pelosi G, Schianchi E, Dell’Orto P, Veronesi G, Spaggiari
L, Pasini F, Sozzi G, Brambilla E, Griso C, Viale G.
Detecting cell-free circulating hTERT mRNA in the plasma
may identify a subset of nonsmall cell lung cancer patients.
Virchows Arch. 2006; 448:7–15.

16.	 Nakashima A, Murakami Y, Uemura K, Hayashidani Y,
Sudo T, Hashimoto Y, Ohge H, Oda M, Sueda T, Hiyama E.
Usefulness of Human Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase in
Pancreatic Juice as a Biomarker of Pancreatic Malignancy.
Pancreas. 2009; 38:527–533.

30.	 Gigek CO, Leal MF, Silva PN, Lisboa LC, Lima EM,
Calcagno DQ, Assumpcao PP, Burbano RR, Smith Mde
A. hTERT methylation and expression in gastric cancer.
Biomarkers. 2009; 14:630–636.
31.	 Saini N, Srinivasan R, Chawla Y, Sharma S, Chakraborti
A, Rajwanshi A. Telomerase activity, telomere length and
human telomerase reverse transcriptase expression in hepatocellular carcinoma is independent of hepatitis virus status.
Liver Int. 2009; 29:1162–1170.

17.	 Indran IR, Hande MP, Pervaiz S. hTERT overexpression
alleviates intracellular ROS production, improves mitochondrial function, and inhibits ROS-mediated apoptosis in
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:266–276.
18.	 Sahin E, DePinho RA. Axis of ageing: telomeres, p53 and
mitochondria. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2012;
13:397–404.

32.	 Divella R, Tommasi S, Lacalamita R, Daniele A, Abbate I,
Garrisi VM, Savino E, Coviello M, Rubini V, Simone G,
Paradiso A, Quaranta M. Circulating hTERT DNA in early
breast cancer. Anticancer Res. 2009; 29:2845–2849.

19.	 Yang X, Fraser M, Moll UM, Basak A, Tsang BK. Aktmediated cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer: modulation
of p53 action on caspase-dependent mitochondrial death
pathway. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:3126–3136.

33.	 Yang K, Fu LW. Mechanisms of resistance to BCR-ABL
TKIs and the therapeutic strategies: A review. Critical
reviews in oncology/hematology. 2015; 93:277–292.

20.	 Horn S, Figl A, Rachakonda PS, Fischer C, Sucker A, Gast
A, Kadel S, Moll I, Nagore E, Hemminki K, Schadendorf
D, Kumar R. TERT promoter mutations in familial and sporadic melanoma. Science. 2013; 339:959–961.

34.	 Brady CA, Jiang D, Mello SS, Johnson TM, Jarvis LA,
Kozak MM, Kenzelmann Broz D, Basak S, Park EJ,
McLaughlin ME, Karnezis AN, Attardi LD. Distinct
p53 transcriptional programs dictate acute DNAdamage responses and tumor suppression. Cell. 2011;
145:571–583.

21.	 Shay JW, Bacchetti S. A survey of telomerase activity in
human cancer. Eur J Cancer. 1997; 33:787–791.
22.	 Dashzeveg N, Yoshida K. Cell death decision by p53 via control of the mitochondrial membrane. Cancer letters. 2015; .

35.	 Yao Y, Bellon M, Shelton SN, Nicot C. Tumor suppressors p53, p63TAalpha, p63TAy, p73alpha, and p73beta use
distinct pathways to repress telomerase expression. J Biol
Chem. 2012; 287:20737–20747.

23.	 Zhao T, Hu F, Qiao B, Chen Z, Tao Q. Telomerase reverse
transcriptase potentially promotes the progression of oral
squamous cell carcinoma through induction of epithelialmesenchymal transition. International journal of oncology.
2015; 46:2205–2215.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Gritsina G, Xiao F, O’Brien SW, Gabbasov R, Maglaty MA,
Xu RH, Thapa RJ, Zhou Y, Nicolas E, Litwin S,
Balachandran S, Sigal LJ, Huszar D, Connolly DC. Targeted

35920

Oncotarget

Blockade of JAK/STAT3 Signaling Inhibits Ovarian
Carcinoma Growth. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2015;
14:1035–1047.

38.	 Buonato JM, Lazzara MJ. ERK1/2 Blockade Prevents
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in Lung Cancer Cells
and Promotes Their Sensitivity to EGFR Inhibition. Cancer
Res. 2014; 74:309–319.

37.	 Wang ZY, Martin D, Molinolo AA, Patel V, IglesiasBartolome R, Degese MS, Vitale-Cross L, Chen QM,
Gutkind JS. mTOR Co-Targeting in Cetuximab Resistance
in Head and Neck Cancers Harboring PIK3CA and RAS
Mutations. Jnci-J Natl Cancer I. 2014; 106.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39.	 Hoffmeyer K RA, Rudloff S, Anton R, Hierholzer A, Del
Valle I, Hein K, Vogt R, Kemler R. Wntβ-catenin signaling
regulates telomerase in stem cells and cancer cells. Science.
2012; 336:6.

35921

Oncotarget

