Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Neoadjuvant tamoxifen synchronizes ERα binding and gene
expression profiles related to outcome and proliferation
Tesa M. Severson1, Ekaterina Nevedomskaya1,2, Justine Peeters3, Thomas
Kuilman4, Oscar Krijgsman4, Annelot van Rossum1, Marjolein Droog1, Yongsoo
Kim1,2, Rutger Koornstra5, Inès Beumer3, Annuska M. Glas3, Daniel Peeper4, Jelle
Wesseling1, Iris M. Simon3, Lodewyk Wessels2, Sabine C. Linn1,6,7 and Wilbert
Zwart1
1

Division of Molecular Pathology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, CX, The Netherlands

2

Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, CX, The Netherlands

3

Agendia NV, Amsterdam, XH, The Netherlands

4

Division of Molecular Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, CX, The Netherlands

5

Department of Medical Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, GA, The Netherlands

6

Division of Medical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, CX, The Netherlands

7

Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, CX, The Netherlands

Correspondence to: Wilbert Zwart, email: w.zwart@nki.nl
Correspondence to: Sabine C. Linn, email: s.linn@nki.nl
Keywords: ChIP-seq, estrogen receptor, endocrine therapy, neoadjuvant therapy, gene expression analysis
Received: April 07, 2016	

Accepted: April 13, 2016	

Published: April 25, 2016

Abstract
Estrogen receptor alpha (ERα)-positive breast cancers are frequently treated with
tamoxifen, but resistance is common. It remains elusive how tamoxifen resistance
occurs and predictive biomarkers for treatment outcome are needed. Because most
biomarker discovery studies are performed using pre-treatment surgical resections,
the effects of tamoxifen therapy directly on the tumor cell in vivo remain unexamined.
In this study, we assessed DNA copy number, gene expression profiles and ERα/
chromatin binding landscapes on breast tumor specimens, both before and after
neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment. We observed neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment
synchronized ERα/chromatin interactions and downstream gene expression, indicating
that hormonal therapy reduces inter-tumor molecular variability. ERα-synchronized
sites are associated with dynamic FOXA1 action at these sites, which is under control
of growth factor signaling. Genes associated with tamoxifen-synchronized sites are
capable of differentiating patients for tamoxifen benefit. Due to the direct effects of
therapeutics on ERα behavior and transcriptional output, our study highlights the
added value of biomarker discovery studies after neoadjuvant drug exposure.

INTRODUCTION

molecular subtypes of breast cancer can be identified. [2
9]. The major subtype—estrogen receptor alpha (ERα)positive luminal breast cancer—is clinically defined
by nucleic protein levels of ERα [10]. ERα is a liganddependent transcription factor, activated by the natural
hormone estradiol. Ligand-bound ERα can bind the DNA
and recruit co-factors that form the foundations of the
transcription complex, ultimately affecting target gene
expression and driving tumor cell proliferation [11]. ERα-

Breast cancer is the most common cancer among
women in the world. In 2012 over 1.6 million women
were diagnosed with breast cancer worldwide. In the same
year, around 520,000 women died from breast cancer
[1]. The inter-patient heterogeneous nature of breast
cancer is evident and clinically relevant histological and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33901

Oncotarget

RESULTS

positive breast cancer has specific clinicopathological
characteristics including a favorable prognosis compared
with ERα negative disease, particularly in the first few
years following diagnosis [12] and more often low tumor
grade in comparison with other breast cancer subtypes [4].
Patients with ERα-positive breast cancer make up over
70% of the total breast cancer population worldwide [13].
Since ERα is the major driver in luminal breast
cancers, endocrine therapies have been developed to
limit its transcriptional potency, including tamoxifen
and aromatase inhibitors [14]. Tamoxifen is aimed to
competitively bind the ERα, which prevents co-factor
recruitment and disrupts the transcriptional complex
formation [15]. Through this mechanism, tamoxifen
blocks ERα-responsive gene expression and inhibits ERαpositive tumor cell proliferation [16]. Aromatase inhibitors
inhibit the production of estrogen and consequently inhibit
tumor cell proliferation [17]. Although these endocrine
therapies are successful agents, resistance to treatment
is common. However, after developing a relapse despite
tamoxifen treatment, 50% of patients still do respond
to aromatase inhibitors [18]. Analogous to this, 50% of
patients with acquired resistance to aromatase inhibitors
still respond to tamoxifen [18]. This study and other
reports [13] illustrate the heterogeneous response to
first and second line endocrine therapy in ERα-positive
breast cancer. Critically, these studies also exemplify
that development of reliable predictive biomarkers for
selective treatment efficacy is an urgent medical need.
From a clinical perspective, identification of
patients most likely to benefit from specific endocrine
treatments in the early ERα-positive breast cancer setting
is paramount. Currently, biomarker discovery is guided by
data (e.g. gene expression signatures) collected from the
untreated primary tumor samples obtained during surgery.
However, the prediction of longitudinal therapy response
may be more reliable when data are available from
samples after drug exposure. In the endocrine therapy
setting, neoadjuvant studies have been used successfully
to determine response [19, 20], indicating the potential of
molecular data taken from post-treatment samples to gain
clinical knowledge. Here, we present the first combined
characterization of transcriptomic, epigenomic, genomic
and clinical data analyzed from ERα-positive breast
cancers both before and after 2-6 weeks of neoadjuvant
tamoxifen treatment. By integrating these genomic datastreams from different time points, we aimed to examine
drug-induced differences at the genetic, epigenetic
and transcriptional level with the goal to identify novel
predictive biomarkers for tamoxifen-response.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AFTER study and patient characteristics
Forty-eight ERα-positive patients were enrolled
at two hospitals in the Netherlands and sample material
was taken from 28 tamoxifen-treated patients for further
analysis (Figure 1A, Supplemental Figure 1A, 1B). Patient
characteristics and collection data can be found in Table
I. Patient treatment details can be found in Supplemental
Table I. We collected immunohistochemistry (IHC) data
for ERα and PR for both pre- and post-treatment samples
of 26 of 28 patients (Supplemental Figure 1A). No tumors
were HER2-positive. Clinical marker levels (ERα and
PR) did not differ between sample origin hospitals. We
found no significant differences between pre- and posttamoxifen treatment ERα levels (Wilcoxon rank-sum, P
= 0.26) (Figure 1B, 1C). A trend was identified for higher
PR levels after tamoxifen treatment, however it was not
significant (Wilcoxon rank-sum, P = 0.08) (Figure 1B,
1C). Gene expression levels for the corresponding coding
genes, Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and progesterone
receptor (PGR) were also not significantly different
between pre- and post-treatment samples (data not
shown). When investigating the cell proliferation marker
Ki67 (MIB1), post-treatment samples had significantly
lower gene expression (MKI67) levels (Wilcoxon ranksum, P < 0.01) (Figure 1D). A similar significant trend
was found when measuring Ki67 at the protein level
with IHC (data not shown). Because IHC Ki67 score
is difficult to interpret with substantial inter-observer
variation [43], we chose to examine microarray gene
expression levels of MKI67 as they are less subjective.
In addition, we classified all our samples for two known
molecular classifiers with links to outcome, MammaPrint
and IntClust (Supplemental File 1).

Tamoxifen reprograms ERα binding in tumors
Since tamoxifen is aimed to directly target ERα
action, ERα functioning may also be affected on the
genomic level by drug treatment. Therefore, we analyzed
the chromatin binding profiles of ERα in 6 pre- and 8
post-treatment samples (4 treatment pairs) using ERα
ChIP-seq (Figure 2A; Supplemental Figure 1A). We
identified ERα bound genomic regions, as exemplified for
two typical ERα regions in the human genome found at
the enhancer regions proximal to the RARA and IGFBP4
loci (Supplemental Figure 2A). As expected, the top DNA
binding motifs identified in both pre- and post-treatment
were found to be the hormone nuclear receptor family with
ESR1 as the top factor (Supplemental Figure 2B).
A relocation of ERα chromatin interactions to other
33902

Oncotarget

sites was observed after tamoxifen treatment (Figure 2B,
Supplemental File 2). Our laboratory [44] and others [26]
previously reported ERα chromatin interaction profiles
as highly heterogeneous between tumors. Consistent
with previous findings, we found limited overlap of
ERα binding patterns between two tumors prior to
therapy (Figure 2C). Importantly, the pattern overlap
was substantially increased after neoadjuvant tamoxifen
therapy in treatment pairs (Figure 2C). To investigate this
further in a quantitative fashion, the percent of overlapping
ERα bound genomic regions between all samples of
the total ERα bound genomic regions was calculated in
each possible sample combination (within pre- or posttreatment condition) (Figure 2D). The average percent
overlap in pre- and post-treatment samples increased from
3.0 to 7.9 with data ranging from 0.01% to 13% overlap
among pre-treatment samples and 0.8% to 21% overlap

among post-treatment samples. We identified a significant
(Wilcoxon signed rank, P < 0.001) increase in overlap in
genomic regions in the post-treatment group compared
with the pre-treatment group.
Next, we characterized the genomic regions of
the tamoxifen-induced synchronized sites (I) and pretreatment unique sites (II) (Supplemental Figure 2C). In
genomic location for both, the sites are typical of what is
known of ERα binding in that they are found mostly in
distal intergenic and intronic regions (Supplemental Figure
2D) [45]. In addition, the most common sequence motifs
associated with both groups of sites were ESR1 and ESR2
(Supplemental Figure 2E). Similar findings are observed
for pre-treatment unique sites. Next, we determined the
nearest gene for each of the 126 ERα bound sites (I) within
20kb [46]. Using this definition, 96 genes are associated
with these tamoxifen-synchronized sites. When examining

Figure 1: Study collection and clinical marker values. A., Schematic representation of the AFTER study patient and material
collection. B., Violin plots with boxplot overlay of IHC scores (Y-axis) for ERα (left panel) and PR (right panel) in pre- and post-treatment
samples. N.S. indicates a p-value that is not significant at 0.05 level. C., Example of IHC staining of ERα and PR in a pre- and posttreatment sample. Black bar indicates 400μm. D., Violin plots with boxplot overlay of MKI67 gene expression values in pre- and posttreatment samples. ** indicates P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33903

Oncotarget

Figure 2: ERα binding events before and after neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment. A., Schematic representation of ChIP-seq

process. ERα bound to the DNA is depicted as green ovals; regulatory regions are depicted above the DNA strand as grey triangles. B., Venn
diagrams depicting the overlap of ERα bound regions (peaks) in both pre-(red) and post-(blue) treatment pairs. Heatmaps on the right show
ERα binding events at the center of the peak and the surrounding ±5kb for the pre-treatment sample only peaks (top), overlapping peaks
(middle) and post-treatment sample only peaks (bottom). C., Venn diagrams depicting all overlapping peaks for pre- and post-treatment pair
samples separately. D., Matrix to visualize percent of overlapping peaks (of total peaks in each pair combination) for both pre- and posttreatment samples separately. Vertical colored side bars indicate patient menopausal-status (sample) and ERα IHC, PR IHC, Ki67 IHC and
MKI67 values respectively. Patient menopausal-status is shown in yellow (post-menopausal), green (pre-menopausal) and purple (male).
Separate scale bars are shown below the plot for expression levels corresponding to sidebars. IHC expression scale bar for both panels
indicates percentage staining nuclei. Gene expression scale bar for both panels indicates normalized gene expression values.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33904

Oncotarget

these genes using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen),
we find these genes involved in drug and lipid metabolism,
estrogen receptor signaling and notably, EGF was
identified as a potential upstream regulator. (Supplemental
Figure 2F).

the Lupien EGF data [52] at the tamoxifen synchronized
and pre-treatment unique sites. The mitogen cocktail
significantly induced FOXA1 binding at these sites
(Wilcoxon signed rank, P < 0.0001). (Figure 4A, 4B). In
ERα binding data where estradiol, TNFα or a combination
of the two were added, we observed no increased FOXA1
binding by TNFα (Figure 4C, 4D). Combined, these
data rule out TNFα alone as a key regulator of FOXA1
dynamics at these sites, leading us to investigate EGF as
it was implicated in our own Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
results. ChIP-chip data of EGF-stimulated ERα binding
sites show high overlap (60%) with our tamoxifen induced
sites (Figure 4E, Supplemental File 3). We found the
enrichment for these sites within the pre-defined universe
of known ERα binding sites to be significant (Fisher’s
hypergeometric test, P < 1.10E-15) (Supplemental File
3) indicating the high proportion of overlap of tamoxifen
induced sites are biologically significant. In addition, we
observed comparable results when looking at the overlap
of the tamoxifen induced sites with serine 118 ERα DNA
binding sites induced by estradiol (Figure 4F) [55].
Cumulatively, these data implicate EGF as a potential
upstream regulator of FOXA1-induced chromatin binding
at the 126 sites, facilitating ERα action at these sites in
tumors post tamoxifen exposure.

ERα, PR and FOXA1 binding profiles in tumors
and MCF7 cells reveal dynamic FOXA1 binding
ERα binding and activity in breast cancer is
regulated and controlled by various other factors such
as FOXA1, a pioneering factor required for binding of
ERα [47 52] and PR, a modulator of ERα action in breast
cancer [53]. When examining the 126 ERα bound sites
synchronized by tamoxifen (Figure 3A (I)) in publicly
available ChIP-seq data for tumors, we found the average
relative signal intensity at these sites is higher in metastatic
samples compared with primary tumors samples (ERα/PR
positive) (Figure 3B, 3C). A similar pattern is seen in the
unique pre-treatment sites (Figure 3A (II)) but with much
less overall signal intensity (Figure 3B, 3C). In addition,
in MCF7 cells we observed a similar pattern in response
to tamoxifen or estradiol in ERα binding at these sites
(Figure 4D, 4E). No PR binding was observed (Figure
3D, 3E) under full medium conditions for either the 126
synchronized sites or the unique pre-treatment sites.
FOXA1 chromatin binding is described as independent
of ERα action and irresponsive to hormonal stimuli [50,
51]. However, FOXA1 chromatin binding at these 126
sites was clearly induced by both tamoxifen and estradiol,
accompanied by ERα binding. These data imply a unique
feature of the 126 tamoxifen-synchronized ERα sites,
hallmarked by dynamic FOXA1 action at these sites.

DNA copy number profiling and alternate allele
frequency analysis reveal little variation between
replicates and/or treatment condition
We observed ERα binds to different sites after
neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment (Figure 2D). We
questioned if the change in ERα binding is due to genomic
changes within the tumor population or re-targeting of
ERα. Notably, interaction profiles [56] and overall library
read numbers [23] have been shown to be reproducible
within replicate tumor samples. To determine the potential
impact of intra-tumor genomic variability, we examined
DNA copy number profiles (example in Supplemental
Figure 3A) of 3 pairs of replicate tumor samples that were
ChIP-sequenced twice. Replicate samples were sectioned
from the same tumor at a different time with at least 5
cell layers (25 to 50μm) between replicates. DNA copy
number data were obtained from the off-target read in
ChIP-seq experiments using the CopywriteR method [30]
(Supplemental Figure 1A) and data were subsequently
segmented with circular binary segmentation. We did not
identify any substantial changes in the DNA copy number
profiles between sample replicates. (Supplemental Figure
3B). Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis on all the
copy number data (20kb region bins, non-segmented)
found most replicates cluster together with the exception
of sample pair D (n = 12) (Supplemental Figure 3C). To
quantify this further we calculated p-values (100 indicates

ERα, FOXA1 binding profiles in MCF7 cells
reveal potential mechanistic players
To better understand a possible mechanism of ERα
and FOXA1 reprogramming to these sites after addition
of tamoxifen, we investigated publically available ERα
and FOXA1 ChIP-seq data from MCF7 cells treated
with specific mitogens and/or growth factors [50]. Data
from Hurtado and colleagues indicate the overlap of ERα
binding sites for both estradiol and tamoxifen treated
MCF7 cells is substantial. Furthermore, the proportion
of tamoxifen only binding sites is very small (7%) [50].
Within our paired tumor data, we show that on average
56.3% of the total sites are post-tamoxifen treatment only
binding sites (Figure 2B).
To examine a potential mechanism involved
in synchronizing ERα to these sites based on known
regulators of ERα binding, we investigated the RossInnes mitogen cocktail data, which contains EGF, IGF1, TNFα and IL-6 [26], the Franco TNFα data [54] and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33905

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Binding profiles of 126 tamoxifen-synchronized regions (I) and unique pre-treatment regions (II). A., Venn
diagrams depicting overlapping peaks (paired samples) for both post-treatment tamoxifen synchronized sites (I) and unique pre-treatment
sites (II). B., Heatmap showing binding peak intensity for ERα binding events in I and II sites (± 5kb) in primary tumors (green) and
metastases (purple).C., Normalized average signal intensity of ERα binding events from panel B. Line colors match B. D., Heatmap
showing binding peak intensity for C for ERα binding events in I and II sites (± 5kb) in MCF7 cell lines deprived of hormones for three days
and then given vehicle (grey), estradiol ((E2), brown), tamoxifen ((TAM), blue) and full medium ((ER.full), red). PR binding in MCR7 cell
lines deprived of hormones for three days and then given full medium is shown in orange (PR.full). TAMR cell lines deprived of hormones
for three days and then given vehicle (green) and TAM (purple) are also depicted. E., Normalized average signal intensity of ERα binding
events from D. Line colors match D. F., Heatmap showing binding peak intensity for ERα and FOXA1 binding events in I and II sites (±
5kb) in MCF7 cell lines deprived of hormones for three days and then given vehicle (blue), E2 (red) and TAM (green). G., H., Normalized
average signal intensity of ERα (left) and FOXA1 (right) binding events from panel F. Line colors match F.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33906

Oncotarget

Pre- and
expression

a p-value < 0.00001) for the clustering based on multiscale
bootstrap resampling and bootstrap resampling using the R
package ‘pvclust’. (Supplemental Figure 3D) The p-values
indicate the cluster analysis is highly supported by the data
illustrating the low intra-tumor genomic variability of the
samples as measured by DNA copy number. In addition,
in our tumor ChIP-seq replicate data, we observed high
correlation of read counts in known ERα binding regions
[26] (Spearman’s rho 0.40 and 0.41) within replicate
sample pairs and low correlation in 3 un-related samples
to one of the replicate samples (Spearman’s rho, < 0.10)
(Supplemental Figure 3E).
To examine whether there is evidence that
neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment selects for a specific
tumor sub-clone we also analyzed the copy number
profiles of 4 treatment pairs, both pre- and post-treatment
(Supplemental Figure 1A). Interestingly, we found no
major differences in the copy number profiles between
sample timing (Supplemental Figure 3F) suggesting
treatment does not affect the overall DNA makeup in our
samples. Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of all
the copy number data (non-segmented 20kb region bins)
showed pre- and post-treatment samples cluster together,
supporting the conclusion that neoadjuvant tamoxifen
treatment does not confer DNA copy number changes
in the samples (n = 8) (Supplemental Figure 3F, 3G) or
select for a small sub-clone with a different DNA copy
number pattern. The resultant p-values indicate our cluster
analysis is strongly supported by the data (Supplemental
Figure 3H).
To quantitatively investigate the relative
contribution of tumor DNA between treatment groups we
called heterozygous single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in
both pre- and post-treatment ChIP-seq pairs. Assuming
100% tumor DNA in our samples, each heterozygous
SNV should have a ratio of 50/50 for alternate/reference
reads (alternate allele frequency). Changes in the tumor
content between treatment conditions should be evident
in alternate allele frequency. We required each SNV to
have at least 10 reads covering the alternate and reference
allele for analysis. A scatterplot shows the alternate and
reference allele counts in each SNV called (Supplemental
Figure 3I). The distribution of alternate allele frequency
between treatment groups was not significantly different
(Wilcoxon signed rank, P = 0.76). Furthermore, we
observed no significant difference (Wilcoxon rank sum,
P = 0.37) between pre- and post-treatment alternate allele
frequency in paired analysis taking into account only
variants identified in both cases of the treatment pair
(Supplemental Figure 3J). These findings support our
conclusions from unsupervised hierarchical clustering of
DNA copy number that pre- and post-treatment changes
are not detectable at the level of DNA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

post-treatment

differential

gene

Since ERα is a transcriptional regulator, we next
examined differences between pre- and post-treatment
samples at the gene expression level for 20 pre-treatment
and 26 post-treatment samples (19 treatment pairs) using
microarray technology on FFPE samples (Supplemental
Figure 1A). We used ANOVA analysis to determine the
most differentially expressed genes between the two
classes, pre- and post-treatment, and visualized the results
with unsupervised hierarchical clustering (Supplemental
Figure 4A). Using the top variable genes from the dataset
(variance > 1 across samples) we found 189 genes to be
differentially expressed (FDR < 0.001 and fold-change >
2, Supplemental Figure 4A). To identify key biological
processes regulated by the differentially expressed
genes, we used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. The most
upregulated genes in post-treatment samples are found in
the adipogenesis pathway and are involved in LXR/RXR
activation and include FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral
oncogene homolog (FOS), nuclear receptor subfamily
4, group A, member 1 (NR4A1; NUR77) and dual
specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1) (Supplemental Figure
4B, Supplemental File 4). Diseases such as cancer and
neurological/cardiovascular disease along with biological
functions such as cellular movement and apoptosis
were associated closely with the genes upregulated after
treatment (Supplemental Figure 4B). Interestingly, the
most downregulated genes in post-treatment samples
compared with pre-treatment samples were associated
with immune response, such as REX1 RNA exonuclease
1 homolog (REXO1L1P) (Supplemental Figure 4B,
Supplemental File 4). Genes that were downregulated
after treatment were also associated with diseases such as
cancer, endocrine system disorders and breast carcinoma.
In addition, we found MKI67 gene expression
was significantly reduced in the post-treatment samples
(Wilcoxon rank-sum, P = 0.003) (Figure 1D). To examine
the relationship between MKI67 levels and proliferation
we determined the gene expression proliferation module
scores based on published modules AURKA and CIN70
[34] and calculated the percent change as described in
the module score between pre- and post-treatment. The
percent change in known proliferation modules is highly
correlated with percent change in MKI67 in our cohort
(Supplemental Figure 4C, 4D). Notably, we found the pretreatment gene expression of proliferation module genes
was significantly more variable than in the post-treatment
condition (Wilcoxon rank-sum, P < 0.001), suggesting
expression changes in proliferation module genes are
driven by the tamoxifen treatment (Supplemental Figure
4E).

33907

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Binding profiles of 126 tamoxifen synchronized regions (I) and unique pre-treatment regions (II) under
mitogen conditions. A., Heatmap showing binding peak intensity for ERα/FOXA1 binding events in I and II sites (± 5kb) in MCF7 cells,
cultured under control conditions (blue) or in presence of a mitogen cocktail containing EGF, IGF-1, TNFα and IL-6 (brown for ERα and
pink for FOXA1). B., Normalized average signal intensity of ERα/FOXA1 binding events from panel B. Line colors match B. C., Heatmap
showing binding peak intensity for ERα binding events in I and II sites (± 5kb) in MCF7 cell lines deprived of hormones for three days and
then given vehicle (brown), E2 (green), TNFα (burgundy), or the combination of both (orange). D., Normalized average signal intensity of
ERα binding events from panel C. Line colors match D. E., Venn diagram depicting overlap of the 126 tamoxifen-induced bindings sites
with EGF-induced ERα sites. F., Venn diagram depicting the overlap of tamoxifen-induced binding sites with estradiol induced S118-ER
sites.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33908

Oncotarget

Genes associated with 126 tamoxifen induced
synchronized sites differentiate patient outcome

found no evidence that treatment induces differences at
the copy number or single nucleotide level suggesting that
tamoxifen treatment did not select for certain sub-clones,
defined by copy number aberrations and alternate allele
frequency. Moreover, when examining the gene expression
data alone (Mammaprint, Supplemental File 1) [7] and the
integrated DNA copy number and gene expression data
using IntClust classifications (Supplemental Data File
1) [36, 37] we found few changes between classes and
an enrichment for the Luminal/ERα-positive subtypes.
We are unable to rule out the possibility that there are
differences in the DNA at the global level of single
nucleotide variations with these data.
When examining the 126 tamoxifen-induced ERα
bound sites in additional datasets we found a higher level
of binding in metastatic samples compared with primary
tumor samples from breast cancer patients. The metastatic
patients from this series (Ross-Innes et al. 2012), failed to
respond to endocrine therapy so we can categorize these
samples as comparable to the post-treatment situation in
our series. In this respect, our findings recapitulate the
original observation of higher ERα binding site signal
intensity in metastases relative to primary tumors. In
addition, we found in MCF7 cells that PR binding is
not present in the 126 tamoxifen synchronized sites
indicating the binding at these regions is not modulated
by PR. As expected, tamoxifen, estradiol and full medium
conditions resulted in more binding at these sites than
vehicle conditions. Interestingly, FOXA1 binding at these
sites had a similar pattern in response to tamoxifen and
estradiol as ERα, showing FOXA1 is dynamic at these
sites while the vast majority of FOXA1 sites are not [50].
Dynamic FOXA1 sites are indicative of outcome [26] and
affected by growth factors [26, 52, 54].
It has been previously reported that tamoxifen
treatment induces ERα chromatin binding in MCF7
luminal breast cancer models at the same genomic sites
as estradiol treatment [50]. Importantly, these data are
not in line with our observation in vivo in 4 independent
tumors treatment pairs, where tamoxifen treatment
resulted in a relocation of ERα chromatin interactions to
other sites. The overlap of ERα binding sites of estradiol
and tamoxifen conditions for MCF7 cells is substantial
[50]. We observed in our paired tumor data a far greater
proportion of post-tamoxifen treatment only sites (56.3%)
in contrast to what is known from cell-line data (7%).
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis indicated EGF to be an
upstream regulator of relocation of ERα to these sites.
We found a substantial proportion of overlap of these
synchronized sites with EGF-induced sites in MCF7 cells
further implicating EGF as a regulator by which ERα is
relocated to these sites after tamoxifen. Importantly, we
also observed at these sites that FOXA1 is responsive to
tamoxifen and estradiol in tumors. With this, we suggest
a possible mechanism by which ERα and FOXA1 are
reprogrammed to these sites after tamoxifen mediated by

After identifying the 96 genes associated with the
126 tamoxifen-induced sites (±20kb from the nearest
transcription start site) (Figure 5A), we first determined
these genes strongly separate pre- and post-treatment
samples (Figure 5B). Next, we wished to examine
their capacity to predict patient outcome using distant
metastasis free survival (DMFS). For this, we used
publically available gene expression and clinical data
from two data sources, (i) tamoxifen treated [38, 39], n =
250, n = 134, respectively (ii) and non-endocrine therapy
treated [40, 41], n = 209, n = 158, respectively (Figure
5A, 5B). For tamoxifen-treated patients (n = 250, [38]),
the 96 genes are capable of differentiating good versus
poor outcome for the unsupervised hierarchically defined
groups using DMFS (hazard ratio (HR) = 0.49, P = 0.006).
This result was validated in a second cohort (HR = 0.44,
P = 0.003; n = 134, [39]). Based on these 96 genes, no
significant differential outcome was found in the two ERα
positive cohorts of non-endocrine therapy treated patients
[40, 41] (HR = 1.01, P = 0.961; HR = 1.69, P = 0.385,
respectively), indicating the genes are not prognostic in
nature (Figure 5B).

DISCUSSION
In breast cancer, biomarker discovery is classically
performed on treatment-naive tissue samples from surgery.
While this is a logical choice from a clinical perspective, it
may not be the most ideal setting for predicting response to
therapy. This notion was stressed by the recent discovery
of specific ESR1 (the gene that encodes for ERα)
mutations in relapsed tumor tissue, after having received
adjuvant tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor therapy
[57, 58]. These findings illustrate that ESR1 mutations
do occur in breast cancer and that, more importantly,
clinically relevant data may only be discovered when the
clinicopathological or molecular assessment is performed
after treatment pressure has occurred.
Inter-tumor heterogeneity of breast cancer, both
histopathological and molecular, is well documented [2 9]
and recent findings indicate the tumor itself is frequently
genomically heterogeneous [59, 60]. Using DNA copy
number profiling we did not observe substantial differences
in biological replicates from the same tumor as Wang et al.
also previously reported using single cell whole genome
sequencing [61]. When analyzing biological replicate
ChIP-seq samples we found a high correlation within
pairs with respect to read count in known ERα binding
regions compared with un-related samples indicating
the changes observed in ERα binding are induced by
neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment and not inherent to
intra-tumor variability in ERα binding. In addition, we
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33909

Oncotarget

Figure 5: 96 genes survival analyses. A., Venn diagram depicting overlapping peaks (paired samples) for post-treatment tamoxifen
synchronized sites (I) and an unsupervised hierarchical clustering heatmap depicting gene expression in our series of those genes. Top
row indicates pre-treatment samples (red) and post-treatment samples (blue). B., Kaplan Meier survival curves of distant metastasis-free
survival for tamoxifen treated datasets (left panels) and non-endocrine therapy treated datasets (right panels).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33910

Oncotarget

Table I: Patient characteristics

Variable
Year of diagnosis
Mean
Range
Age at diagnosis
Mean
Range
Treatment duration
(days)
Mean
Range
Tumor size by ultrasound
(mm)
Mean
Range
Lymph node status
micrometastasis
positive
negative
other
Tumor histological grade
1
2
3
Tumor histology
IDC
ILC
IDC + invasive
carcinoma

Male

Premenopausal

Postmenopausal

N=2

N = 14

N = 12

No. (%)

No. (%)

No. (%)

2011
2011 - 2011

2012
2011 - 2013

2010
2008 - 2012

63
52 - 73

47
41 - 54

62
52 - 79

P*
0.004a

<0.001a

0.189a
26
25 - 26

22
9 - 45

18
8 - 35
0.954a

20
18 - 22

13.6
0 - 27

13.8
0 - 30

0 (0.0)
1 (3.6)
1 (3.6)
0 (0.0)

3 (10.7)
0 (0.0)
11 (39.3)
0 (0.0)

1 (3.6)
3 (10.7)
7 (25.0)
1 (3.6)

1 (3.6)
0 (0.0)
1 (3.6)

5 (17.9)
5 (17.9)
4 (14.3)

4 (14.3)
8 (28.6)
0 (0.0)

2 (7.1)
0 (0.0)

11 (39.3)
3 (10.7)

11 (39.3)
0 (0.0)

0 (0.0)

0 (0.0)

1 (3.6)

0.108b

0.125b

0.209b

P*Tests are performed only on premenopausal and postmenopausal data; aWilcoxon-rank-sum-test; bPearson’s chi-squared
test
EGF. Also, our findings that FOXA1 is dynamic in these
regions suggest that this specific subset of FOXA1 binding
sites may be dependent on ERα.
Interestingly, our findings in both tamoxifen
treated cohorts indicate genes associated with tamoxifeninduced ERα-synchronization are capable of specifically
identifying breast cancer patients, who may not benefit
from tamoxifen treatment. Furthermore, the observations
from non-endocrine therapy treated cohorts suggest
these genes are not associated with prognosis. These
data are highly clinically relevant as around 50% of
patients that receive tamoxifen experience a recurrence.
With the 96-gene classifier reported here, 57% and 63%
of patients are predicted to be tamoxifen resistant in the
two tamoxifen-treated cohorts examined. Although these
findings were reproducible between multiple publically
available cohorts, they must be validated in the context of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a prospective randomized clinical trial in order to examine
the robustness of the gene set’s capacity to predict
tamoxifen benefit. In addition, one would like to adjust the
hazard ratios reported in this study for standard prognostic
factors, such as age, histological grade etc. Unfortunately,
for all datasets these additional clinico-pathological data
are not publicly available.
A portion of ERα-positive breast cancers also
express EGFR (see review by Osborne and Schiff and
references therein) [62, 63]. We have observed in our own
data an indication that EGF is an upstream regulator at the
126 tamoxifen-synchronized sites. From our exploration of
genes associated with these sites, we determined a subset
of patients do not respond well to tamoxifen treatment.
These patients may benefit from a combined therapy of
tamoxifen and cetuximab, an anti-EGFR antibody, or an
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Two studies in metastatic
33911

Oncotarget

breast cancer patients explored either tamoxifen [64]
or anastrozole [65] with or without gefitinib and found
a numerical advantage for the addition of gefinitib to
endocrine therapy regarding clinical benefit rate and
progression-free survival, but only in endocrine-therapy
naïve patients, or patients who had come off adjuvant
tamoxifen at least 12 months before recurrence [64, 65].
In the neoadjuvant setting postmenopausal patients with
EGFR-positive, and ERα-positive breast cancer were
randomized for gefitinib (EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor)
alone or gefitinib plus anastrazole, an aromatase inhibitor.
Both the single and combination agents reduced tumor
size [63], and induced Ki67 downregulation as well as
phospho-EGFR. Taken together, these data all support the
existence of a subgroup of ERα-positive breast cancers
that become endocrine therapy resistant through activation
of the EGFR signaling pathway, which may be mediated
by a dynamic FOXA1 DNA binding landscape. The
current data will help to further define those patients that
will derive benefit from the addition of an EGFR inhibitor
to endocrine therapy.
Although neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment times in
this study were relatively short and varied (Table I), we
did observe similar trends in transcriptomic changes in the
7 patients treated less than 2 weeks (Supplemental Figure
5A, 5B). We did not examine the DNA copy number or
ChIP-seq data for these samples as only one patient in
this short-treatment subgroup had paired data available.
Overall, we observed a significant synchronization in
the ERα/chromatin binding regions in the post-treatment
samples compared with pre-treatment samples.
ERα is a key transcription factor in cellular
proliferation and importantly we found gene expression
proliferation module signatures are significantly less
variable in the post-treatment samples indicating a
synchronization of the gene expression after treatment.
In addition, changes in gene expression modules are
significantly correlated with changes in MKI67 levels
indicating the power of MKI67 levels to detect changes in
proliferation. The gene expression changes coupled with
the overall stability of the DNA copy number profiles
between treatment conditions suggests transcriptional
alterations are mediated by ERα/chromatin binding
induced changes conferred by neoadjuvant tamoxifen
treatment.
We present the first comprehensive assessment of
DNA copy number, gene expression patterns and ERα/
chromatin profiles at two different time points of breast
cancer therapy: before and after neoadjuvant tamoxifen
treatment. The patient series investigated in this work is
relatively small, however utilizing the power of paired
treatment samples we are able to determine molecular
changes conferred by neoadjuvant tamoxifen treatment.
Large-scale alterations of ERα action were observed due to
therapy, resulting in a substantial synchronization of ERα/
chromatin binding and gene expression patterns between
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

patients. We uncovered evidence these synchronized
sites may be important in breast cancer outcome as they
show more binding in metastatic samples versus primary
tumor samples. In addition, we found FOXA1 binding
at these sites to be dynamic in response to estradiol and
tamoxifen. Binding profiles at these sites implicate EGF
as a potential regulator of these sites. FOXA1 dynamic
binding is linked to outcome and critically, we identify
genes associated with tamoxifen-induced sites to be
capable of differentiating patients for tamoxifen benefit.
With this, we illustrate that hormonal therapy in
breast cancer reprograms the genomic behavior of the
drug target, ERα, and consequently affects downstream
proliferation gene programs linked to patient outcome.
Due to the direct effects of therapeutics on transcription
factor behavior and transcriptional output, biomarker
discovery studies may be further facilitated by performing
such studies after neoadjuvant drug exposure.

MATERIALs AND METHODS
Patients and characteristics
ERα-positive breast cancer patients were recruited
as part of the ongoing AFTER study (Anastrozole,
Fulvestrant or Tamoxifen Exposure Response in
molecular profile, ClinicalTrials.gov #NCT00738777)
at two Dutch hospitals (Netherlands Cancer InstituteAntoni van Leeuwenhoek (NKI-AVL; Amsterdam) and
Radboud University Medical Center (RadboudUMC;
Nijmegen). Patient accrual occurred between August
2008 and February 2013. Local medical ethical authorities
at both centers approved of the collection protocols.
Pre-menopausal and male patients were treated with
tamoxifen. Post-menopausal patients were assigned
randomly to tamoxifen, anastrozole or fulvestrant therapy.
Among them, only data from tamoxifen treated patients
were analyzed (Supplemental Figure 1B). Patients were
eligible if they had invasive, non-inflammatory breast
cancer and were treated with hormonal therapy if the tumor
was hormone receptor-positive by immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining at diagnosis. Patients were excluded if they
had multi-centric or metastatic breast cancer or if they
received hormone replacement therapy in the previous
12 months. Patients were treated during the time between
core-needle biopsy for diagnosis and surgery (typically
2-6 weeks). In a normal setting tamoxifen can take up to
8 weeks to reach therapeutic, steady-state levels in the
blood plasma [21, 22]. Based on pharmacokinetics studies
by Fabian et al, we chose a loading dose of 40mg orally,
twice daily during 7 days with follow-up standard dosage
of 20mg orally once daily to be able to reach steady state
levels within 2 weeks [21].
We attempted to collect both pre-treatment and post33912

Oncotarget

treatment fresh-frozen (FF) and formalin-fixed, paraffinembedded (FFPE) material for each patient (Supplemental
Figure 1A). Sample fixation for each assay is listed in the
methods details below. Ten serial sections of 5μm each
were taken from both the core-needle biopsy (14 gauge)
and primary tumor FFPE material for analyses. Pretreatment FF material was in the form of core-needle
biopsy made up of 10-15 serial sections of 30μm each.
Post-treatment FF material was sectioned in 30 serial
sections of 30μm each from the primary tumor taken at
the time of surgery. All replicate experiments are from
additional sections taken from the same tumor.

Indexed DNA from 9 11 samples was equimolarly pooled
sequenced on a single Illumina HiSeq2000 flowcell lane.
Single-end 50bp reads were generated for each sample.
Raw sequence data were aligned to the human genome
(Ensembl 37) using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA)
(mapping quality ≥ 20, duplicate reads removed). As
control, input chromatin was used. For each treatment
category, 6-10 control samples were pooled equimolarly
together to create a meta-pool of control input material.
This meta-pool material was used as a reference sample
for further analysis.

Analysis of ChIP-sequencing

Immunohistochemical staining and assessment

To identify enriched genomic regions we used
two peak callers, MACS [24] and DFilter [25]. We ran
MACS using the default parameters with the exception
of a more significant p-value threshold at 1.00e-7. DFilter
settings were default for transcription factor detection.
The intersection of the peaks from both peak callers was
used for the final list of enriched regions (peaks) for each
sample. Treatment conditions were analyzed separately
for peaks where the corresponding treatment control input
was used as reference.
We used the R Bioconductor ‘DiffBind’ package
[26] to generate Venn diagrams of peaks for samples to
determine a core set of binding events (identified in at
least 2 of the samples in the set). This core set of binding
events was used to identify the top DNA binding motifs
using SeqPos from the Galaxy Cistrome package (http://
cistrome.org/ap/) with z-score threshold set at -3.09, which
corresponds to a p-value of 0.001 [27]. Other binding
events were analyzed for DNA binding motifs using
SeqPos from the Galaxy Cistrome package in the same
manner. In addition, CEAS analysis was used from the
Galaxy Cistrome package to characterize the genomic
regions at binding sites.
To determine the intra-sample reproducibility of
the ChIP-seq data we performed ERα ChIP-seq replicates
on the same tumor sample using the same conditions.
Additional data were analyzed for 3 supplementary ERα
positive samples (not in the AFTER study) of similar
overall read number. Read counts in 2,262 known nonoverlapping ERα binding regions [26] were determined
from the ChIP-seq alignment files using BEDTools
coverageBed [28]. A correlation matrix of the read count
data for all 5 samples (2 replicate pairs, 3 un-related) was
then generated using the ‘cor’ function in R version 3.1.2.
To determine the alternate allele frequency of variants in
ChIP-seq data variants were called in ChIP-seq data of
4 treatment pairs using BWA, BCFTools and SAMTools.
Only heterozygous single nucleotide variants with ≥10
alternate reads and ≥10 reference reads were chosen for
further analysis. Alternate allele frequency is defined as
the DP4 (SAMTools) alternate allele count divided by the
DP4 total reads count at each SNV.

Immunohistochemistry of samples was performed
on a BenchMark Ultra autostainer (Ventana Medical
Systems) for ERα, Progesterone Receptor (PR) and
Receptor Tyrosine-Protein Kinase erbB2 (HER2). Briefly,
paraffin sections were cut at 3μm, heated at 75°C for 28
minutes and deparaffinized in the instrument with EZ
prep solution (Ventana Medical Systems). Heat-induced
antigen retrieval was carried out using Cell Conditioning
1 (CC1, Ventana Medical Systems) for 36 minutes at
950C (ERα, PR and HER2) or 32 minutes at 950C (Ki67). ERα was detected using clone SP1 (ready-to-use
dispenser, 32 minutes room temperature (RT), Roche), PR
with clone 1E2 (ready-to-use dispenser, 32 minutes RT,
Roche), HER2 with clone 4B5 (ready-to-use dispenser,
12 minutes RT, Roche) and Ki67 detection using clone
MIB1 (1:250 dilution, 32 minutes RT, DAKO). Bound
antibody (ERα, PR and HER2) was detected using
the UltraView Universal DAB Detection Kit (Ventana
Medical Systems), while detection for Ki67 was visualized
using the OptiView DAB Detection Kit (Ventana Medical
Systems). Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin.
ERα/PR/HER2/Ki67 scoring was performed on whole
slides by a single pathologist (JW) blinded to patient
status. For ERα, PR and Ki67 the percent of positive
tumor nuclei was determined. For ERα/PR, 10% was
used as a cut-off for positive according to current standard
European guidelines. HER2 scoring was performed on a
0 to 3+ intensity scale examined in the nuclei (0, negative
staining; 1+, weak staining; 2+ moderate staining, 3+,
strong staining). There were no ≥ 2+ HER2 samples in
the cohort.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing
Chromatin immunoprecipitations (ChIP) were
carried out on FF material as previously described
[23] using 5μg of ERα antibody (SC-543; SantaCruz
Biotechnology) and 50μl Dynabeads. Subsequently,
Illumina-indexed libraries were constructed for each
sample using the ERα ChIP DNA (ChIP-seq) (Figure 2A).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33913

Oncotarget

For analysis of public ChIP-seq datasets, raw
sequence data were downloaded from GEO (GSE25315,
GSE25316, GSE32222, GSE68355) and aligned and MQ
filtered as above. We used SeqMINER version 1.3.3 [29]
to visualize the aligned data at regions of interest (bed
format).

In addition, MammaPrint® scores were calculated [35].

DNA copy
integration

and

gene

expression

We used the R package ‘iC10’ to implement the
classifier, IntClust to integrate and classify the samples
into the 10 IntClust groups using DNA copy number and
gene expression data [36, 37]. Classification was carried
out as described previously using default settings [36].

DNA copy number profiling
We employed the CopywriteR method [30] to
detect DNA copy number from ‘off-target’ sequence reads
taken from the ChIP-seq data without a reference sample.
Circular binary segmentation was used to segment the data
as previously described [30, 31].

Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were carried out in R version
3.1.2 (http://www.R-project.org) including all patients
(pre-/post-menopausal and male) unless otherwise noted.
Strength of associations between continuous variables was
calculated with the Wilcoxon test, either Wilcoxon-rank
sum (paired data) or Wilcoxon signed rank (non-paired
data). For statistical analysis of categorical IntClust data,
Pearson’s chi-square test was used with simulated p-value
based on 2000 replicates. For examining the uncertainty
in DNA copy number hierarchical analysis we used the
R package ‘pvclust’ (distance = correlation, clustering =
Ward; number of iterations = 1000). Briefly, p-values were
calculated via two methods, AU (approximately unbiased)
and BP (Bootstrap probability). The AU method computes
using multiscale bootstrap resampling and the BP method
computes by normal bootstrap resampling. The resultant
clusters were depicted visually as dendrograms with AU
and BP values shown above the branch. To examine the
relationship between the percent change in MKI67 gene
expression and gene expression module percent change
Spearman’s rho was calculated. In addition, ChIP-seq
sample replicate correlation using read counts in known
ERα binding regions [26] was examined by Spearman’s
rho.
For survival analysis, normalized gene expression
datasets were downloaded from GEO: GSE6532 [38],
GSE22219 [39], GSE2034 [40] and GSE1121 [41]. From
the tamoxifen treated datasets [38, 39], ERα positive,
tamoxifen treated patients were selected, respectively (n =
250, n = 134). From the non-endocrine datasets [40, 41],
ERα positive untreated patients were selected, respectively
(n = 209, n = 158). ERα status for the Schmidt et al.
dataset was determined as described previously [42]. For
each dataset, we selected all probes matching the 96
genes associated with 126 tamoxifen-synchronized sites
(disregarding genes not present on the array). The patients
were then stratified into two groups with the selected gene
expression data using unsupervised hierarchical Ward
linkage clustering with Pearson correlation distance.
Following that we calculated the hazard ratio to determine
significant difference in distant metastasis-free survival
(DMFS) between the two groups and Kaplan Meier graphs

RNA isolations, microarray hybridization and
analysis
Total RNA was isolated from formalin fixed
paraffin embedded tissue as described previously [32].
After DNase treatment samples were purified using the
Qiagen RNeasy FFPE kit. Total RNA (50ng) was reversed
transcribed, amplified (Rubicon; C-WTA kit C) labeled
with Cy3 (Genomic DNA enzymatic Labeling kit; Agilent
Technologies) and subsequently purified (Amicon ultra
30kDa filters). Cy3-labeled cDNA was hybridized to
custom full genome arrays—array design based on Agilent
Catalog #G2514F—at 65°C for 17 hours and subsequently
washed. Arrays were scanned with a dual laser scanner
(Agilent Technologies). Image analysis of the scanned
arrays was performed to quantify fluorescent intensities
using Feature Extraction software version 9.5 (Agilent
Technologies).
Feature signal intensities were processed,
imputation of missing values and summarization of all
genes with multiple probes was performed as previously
described [33]. Visualization of the data was performed
with Partek Genomics Suite (Partek) using Hierarchical
Clustering (Pearson Dissimilarity, average linkage) with
centered data. Top variable genes were selected based on
variance across samples ( > 1). An ANOVA analysis was
used to determine differentially expressed genes between
treatment conditions of the top variable genes (Partek).
Significant genes were selected univariately with FDR <
0.001 and the log2 space with fold change > 2.
To examine the relationship between published
proliferation gene expression module scores and MKI67
gene expression levels we calculated the AURKA and
CIN70 proliferation gene expression module scores
(containing proliferation-associated genes (PAGs))
as described in the work by Martin and Dowsett and
colleagues [34]. The percent change as described
previously [34] between pre- and post-treatment gene
expression module scores and MKI67 gene expression
values were calculated and visualized with a scatterplot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

number

33914

Oncotarget

were constructed to visualize the data.

11;98:10869-74.
6.	 Stingl J, Caldas C. Molecular heterogeneity of breast
carcinomas and the cancer stem cell hypothesis. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2007 Oct;7(10):791-9.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all patients who contributed to this
study. We also thank all the hospital staff at both centers,
RadboudUMC and the Netherlands Cancer Institute
(NKI). The authors would also like to acknowledge the
effort and support of the NKI Genomics Core Facility and
the NKI Core Facility Molecular Pathology & Biobanking
(CFMPB) for supplying NKI Biobank material and /or lab
support.

7.	 van ’t Veer LJ, Dai H, van de Vijver MJ, He YD, Hart
AAM, Mao M, Peterse HL, van der Kooy K, Marton MJ,
Witteveen AT, Schreiber GJ, Kerkhoven RM, Roberts C, et
al. Gene expression profiling predicts clinical outcome of
breast cancer. Nature. 2002 Jan 31;415:530-6.
8.	 van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van’t Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart
AAM, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts
C, Marton MJ, Parrish M, Atsma D, Witteveen A, et al.
A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2002 Dec 19;347:1999-2009.

GRANT SUPPORT

9.	 West M, Blanchette C, Dressman H, Huang E, Ishida S,
Spang R, Zuzan H, Olson JA Jr, Marks JR, Nevins JR.
Predicting the clinical status of human breast cancer by
using gene expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2001 Sep 25;98:11462-7.

This work was supported by A Sister’s Hope; and
partially funded by a TI-Pharma Value Creation grant [T3502]. Funding for open access charge: A Sister’s Hope.

Conflicts of interest

10.	 Colleoni M, Rotmensz N, Maisonneuve P, Mastropasqua
MG, Luini A, Veronesi P, Intra M, Montagna E, Cancello
G, Cardillo A, Mazza M, Perri G, Iorfida M, et al. Outcome
of special types of luminal breast cancer. Ann Oncol Off J
Eur Soc Med Oncol ESMO. 2012 Jun;23:1428-36.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Editorial note

11.	 Droog M, Beelen K, Linn S, Zwart W. Tamoxifen
resistance: from bench to bedside. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013
Oct 5;717:47-57.

This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

12.	 Dunnwald LK, Rossing MA, Li CI. Hormone receptor
status, tumor characteristics, and prognosis: a prospective
cohort of breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res BCR.
2007;9:R6.

REFERENCES

13.	 Ignatiadis M, Sotiriou C. Luminal breast cancer: from
biology to treatment. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep;10:494506.

1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C,
Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D, Bray F. Cancer incidence
and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and major
patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer J Int Cancer.
2015 Mar 1;136:E359-86.

14.	 Orlando L, Schiavone P, Fedele P, Calvani N, Nacci A,
Rizzo P, Marino A, D’Amico M, Sponziello F, Mazzoni E,
Cinefra M, Fazio N, Maiello E, et al. Molecularly targeted
endocrine therapies for breast cancer. Cancer Treat Rev.
2010 Nov;36 Suppl 3:S67-71.

2.	 Fox MS. On the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer.
JAMA J Am Med Assoc. 1979 Feb 2;241:489-94.
3.	

15.	 Shiau AK, Barstad D, Loria PM, Cheng L, Kushner PJ,
Agard DA, Greene GL. The structural basis of estrogen
receptor/coactivator recognition and the antagonism of this
interaction by tamoxifen. Cell. 1998 Dec 23;95:927-37.

Hedenfalk I, Duggan D, Chen Y, Radmacher M, Bittner M,
Simon R, Meltzer P, Gusterson B, Esteller M, Kallioniemi
OP, Wilfond B, Borg A, Trent J, et al. Gene-expression
profiles in hereditary breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2001
Feb 22;344:539-48.

16.	 Osborne CK. Tamoxifen in the treatment of breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 1998 Nov 26;339:1609-18.

4.	 Perou CM, Sørlie T, Eisen MB, van de Rijn M, Jeffrey SS,
Rees CA, Pollack JR, Ross DT, Johnsen H, Akslen LA,
Fluge O, Pergamenschikov A, Williams C, et al. Molecular
portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2000 Aug
17;406:747-52.
5.	

17.	 Amaral C, Varela C, Borges M, Tavares da Silva E, Roleira
FMF, Correia-da-Silva G, Teixeira N. Steroidal aromatase
inhibitors inhibit growth of hormone-dependent breast
cancer cells by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Apoptosis Int J Program Cell Death. 2013 Nov;:1426-36.

Sørlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, Aas T, Geisler S, Johnsen
H, Hastie T, Eisen MB, van de Rijn M, Jeffrey SS, Thorsen
T, Quist H, Matese JC, et al. Gene expression patterns
of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses with
clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Thürlimann B, Robertson JFR, Nabholtz JM, Buzdar
A, Bonneterre J, Arimidex Study Group. Efficacy of
tamoxifen following anastrozole (’Arimidex’) compared
with anastrozole following tamoxifen as first-line treatment
33915

Oncotarget

for advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women. Eur
J Cancer Oxf Engl 1990. 2003 Nov;39:2310-7.

binary segmentation for the analysis of array-based DNA
copy number data. Biostat Oxf Engl. 2004 Oct;5:557-72.

19.	 Ellis MJ, Tao Y, Luo J, A’Hern R, Evans DB, Bhatnagar
AS, Chaudri Ross HA, von Kameke A, Miller WR, Smith I,
Eiermann W, Dowsett M. Outcome prediction for estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer based on postneoadjuvant
endocrine therapy tumor characteristics. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2008 Oct 1;100:1380-8.

32.	 Sapino A, Roepman P, Linn SC, Snel MHJ, Delahaye
LJMJ, van den Akker J, Glas AM, Simon IM, Barth N,
de Snoo FA, van ’t Veer LJ, Molinaro L, Berns EMJJ,
et al. MammaPrint molecular diagnostics on formalinfixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. J Mol Diagn JMD. 2014
Mar;16:190-7.

20.	 Goncalves R, Ma C, Luo J, Suman V, Ellis MJ. Use of
neoadjuvant data to design adjuvant endocrine therapy trials
for breast cancer. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Apr;9:223-9.

33.	 Severson TM, Peeters J, Majewski I, Michaut M, Bosma
A, Schouten PC, Chin S-F, Pereira B, Goldgraben MA,
Bismeijer T, Kluin RJC, Muris JJF, Jirström K, et al.
BRCA1-like signature in triple negative breast cancer:
Molecular and clinical characterization reveals subgroups
with therapeutic potential. Mol Oncol. 2015 May 7;

21.	 Fabian C, Sternson L, Barnett M. Clinical pharmacology
of tamoxifen in patients with breast cancer: comparison of
traditional and loading dose schedules. Cancer Treat Rep.
1980 Jul;64:765-73.

34.	 Gao Q, Patani N, Dunbier AK, Ghazoui Z, Zvelebil M,
Martin L-A, Dowsett M. Effect of aromatase inhibition on
functional gene modules in estrogen receptor-positive breast
cancer and their relationship with antiproliferative response.
Clin Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res. 2014 May
1;20:2485-94.

22.	 Spooner D, Fairlamb D, Fermont D. A multicentre trial to
compare a loading dose regimen of tamoxifen (’Nolvadex’)
with conventional dosing in the treatment of advanced
breast cancer. The British Tamoxifen Study Group. Clin
Oncol R Coll Radiol G B. 1991 May;3:133-6.

35.	 Glas AM, Floore A, Delahaye LJMJ, Witteveen AT, Pover
RCF, Bakx N, Lahti-Domenici JST, Bruinsma TJ, Warmoes
MO, Bernards R, Wessels LFA, Van’t Veer LJ. Converting
a breast cancer microarray signature into a high-throughput
diagnostic test. BMC Genomics. 2006;7:278.

23.	 Zwart W, Koornstra R, Wesseling J, Rutgers E, Linn S,
Carroll JS. A carrier-assisted ChIP-seq method for estrogen
receptor-chromatin interactions from breast cancer core
needle biopsy samples. BMC Genomics. 2013;14:232.
24.	 Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS,
Bernstein BE, Nusbaum C, Myers RM, Brown M, Li W,
Liu XS. Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS).
Genome Biol. 2008;9:R137.

36.	 Ali HR, Rueda OM, Chin S-F, Curtis C, Dunning MJ,
Aparicio SA, Caldas C. Genome-driven integrated
classification of breast cancer validated in over 7,500
samples. Genome Biol. 2014;15:431.

25.	 Kumar V, Muratani M, Rayan NA, Kraus P, Lufkin T,
Ng HH, Prabhakar S. Uniform, optimal signal processing
of mapped deep-sequencing data. Nat Biotechnol. 2013
Jul;31:615-22.

37.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa S, Yuan
Y, Gräf S, Ha G, Haffari G, et al. The genomic and
transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals
novel subgroups. Nature. 2012 Jun 21;486:346-52.

26.	 Ross-Innes CS, Stark R, Teschendorff AE, Holmes KA, Ali
HR, Dunning MJ, Brown GD, Gojis O, Ellis IO, Green AR,
Ali S, Chin S-F, Palmieri C, et al. Differential oestrogen
receptor binding is associated with clinical outcome in
breast cancer. Nature. 2012 Jan 19;481:389-93.

38.	 Loi S, Haibe-Kains B, Desmedt C, Lallemand F, Tutt AM,
Gillet C, Ellis P, Harris A, Bergh J, Foekens JA, Klijn
JGM, Larsimont D, Buyse M, et al. Definition of clinically
distinct molecular subtypes in estrogen receptor-positive
breast carcinomas through genomic grade. J Clin Oncol Off
J Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 1;25:1239-46.

27.	 Liu T, Ortiz JA, Taing L, Meyer CA, Lee B, Zhang Y, Shin
H, Wong SS, Ma J, Lei Y, Pape UJ, Poidinger M, Chen Y,
et al. Cistrome: an integrative platform for transcriptional
regulation studies. Genome Biol. 2011;12(8):R83.

39.	 Buffa FM, Camps C, Winchester L, Snell CE, Gee HE,
Sheldon H, Taylor M, Harris AL, Ragoussis J. microRNAassociated progression pathways and potential therapeutic
targets identified by integrated mRNA and microRNA
expression profiling in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2011 Sep
1;71:5635-45.

28.	 Quinlan AR. BEDTools: The Swiss-Army Tool for Genome
Feature Analysis. Curr Protoc Bioinforma Ed Board
Andreas Baxevanis Al. 2014;47:11.12.1-11.12.34.
29.	 Ye T, Krebs AR, Choukrallah M-A, Keime C, Plewniak
F, Davidson I, Tora L. seqMINER: an integrated ChIPseq data interpretation platform. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011
Mar;39:e35.

40.	 Wang Y, Klijn JGM, Zhang Y, Sieuwerts AM, Look MP,
Yang F, Talantov D, Timmermans M, Meijer-van Gelder
ME, Yu J, Jatkoe T, Berns EMJJ, Atkins D, et al. Geneexpression profiles to predict distant metastasis of lymphnode-negative primary breast cancer. Lancet. 2005 Feb
19;365:671-9.

30.	 Kuilman T, Velds A, Kemper K, Ranzani M, Bombardelli
L, Hoogstraat M, Nevedomskaya E, Xu G, de Ruiter J,
Lolkema MP, Ylstra B, Jonkers J, Rottenberg S, et al.
CopywriteR: DNA copy number detection from off-target
sequence data. Genome Biol. 2015;16:49.

41.	 Schmidt M, Böhm D, von Törne C, Steiner E, Puhl A,
Pilch H, Lehr H-A, Hengstler JG, Kölbl H, Gehrmann M.
The humoral immune system has a key prognostic impact

31.	 Olshen AB, Venkatraman ES, Lucito R, Wigler M. Circular
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33916

Oncotarget

in node-negative breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul
1;68:5405-13.

53.	 Mohammed H, Russell IA, Stark R, Rueda OM, Hickey TE,
Tarulli GA, Serandour AA, Serandour AAA, Birrell SN,
Bruna A, Saadi A, Menon S, Hadfield J, et al. Progesterone
receptor modulates ERα action in breast cancer. Nature.
2015 Jul 16;523:313-7.

42.	 Oosterkamp HM, Hijmans EM, Brummelkamp TR,
Canisius S, Wessels LFA, Zwart W, Bernards R. USP9X
downregulation renders breast cancer cells resistant to
tamoxifen. Cancer Res. 2014 Jul 15;74:3810-20.

54.	 Franco HL, Nagari A, Kraus WL. TNFα signaling exposes
latent estrogen receptor binding sites to alter the breast
cancer cell transcriptome. Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 2;58:21-34.

43.	 Polley M-YC, Leung SCY, McShane LM, Gao D, Hugh JC,
Mastropasqua MG, Viale G, Zabaglo LA, Penault-Llorca F,
Bartlett JMS, Gown AM, Symmans WF, Piper T, et al. An
international Ki67 reproducibility study. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2013 Dec 18;105:1897-906.

55.	 Liu Z, Merkurjev D, Yang F, Li W, Oh S, Friedman JM,
Song X, Zhang F, Ma Z, Ohgi KA, Krones A and Rosenfeld
MG. Enhancer activation requires trans-recruitment
of a mega transcription factor complex. Cell 2014 Oct
9;159(2):358-73.

44.	 Jansen MPHM, Knijnenburg T, Reijm EA, Simon I,
Kerkhoven R, Droog M, Velds A, van Laere S, Dirix L,
Alexi X, Foekens JA, Wessels L, Linn SC, et al. Hallmarks
of aromatase inhibitor drug resistance revealed by
epigenetic profiling in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2013 Nov
15;73:6632-41.

56.	 Stelloo S, Nevedomskaya E, van der Poel HG, de Jong J,
van Leenders GJ, Jenster G, Wessels LF, Bergman AM,
Zwart W. Androgen receptor profiling predicts prostate
cancer outcome. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Sep 27;

45.	 Carroll JS, Meyer CA, Song J, Li W, Geistlinger TR,
Eeckhoute J, Brodsky AS, Keeton EK, Fertuck KC,
Hall GF, Wang Q, Bekiranov S, Sementchenko V, et al.
Genome-wide analysis of estrogen receptor binding sites.
Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38:1289-97.

57.	 Robinson DR, Wu Y-M, Vats P, Su F, Lonigro RJ, Cao
X, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Wang R, Ning Y, Hodges L,
Gursky A, Siddiqui J, Tomlins SA, et al. Activating ESR1
mutations in hormone-resistant metastatic breast cancer.
Nat Genet. 2013 Dec;45:1446-51.

46.	 Fullwood MJ, Liu MH, Pan YF, Liu J, Xu H, Mohamed
YB, Orlov YL, Velkov S, Ho A, Mei PH, Chew EGY,
Huang PYH, Welboren W-J, et al. An oestrogen-receptoralpha-bound human chromatin interactome. Nature. 2009
Nov 5;462:58-64.

58.	 Toy W, Shen Y, Won H, Green B, Sakr RA, Will M, Li Z,
Gala K, Fanning S, King TA, Hudis C, Chen D, Taran T,
et al. ESR1 ligand-binding domain mutations in hormoneresistant breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2013 Dec;45:1439-45.
59.	 Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder
D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N, Stewart
A, Tarpey P, Varela I, Phillimore B, Begum S, et al.
Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed
by multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med. 2012 Mar
8;366:883-92.

47.	 Carroll JS, Liu XS, Brodsky AS, Li W, Meyer CA, Szary
AJ, Eeckhoute J, Shao W, Hestermann EV, Geistlinger TR,
Fox EA, Silver PA, Brown M. Chromosome-wide mapping
of estrogen receptor binding reveals long-range regulation
requiring the forkhead protein FoxA1. Cell. 2005 Jul
15;122:33-43.

60.	 Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y,
Turashvili G, Ding J, Tse K, Haffari G, Bashashati A,
Prentice LM, Khattra J, et al. The clonal and mutational
evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast
cancers. Nature. 2012 Jun 21;486:395-9.

48.	 Cirillo LA, McPherson CE, Bossard P, Stevens K, Cherian
S, Shim EY, Clark KL, Burley SK, Zaret KS. Binding of the
winged-helix transcription factor HNF3 to a linker histone
site on the nucleosome. EMBO J. 1998 Jan 2;17:244-54.
49.	 Cirillo LA, Lin FR, Cuesta I, Friedman D, Jarnik M,
Zaret KS. Opening of compacted chromatin by early
developmental transcription factors HNF3 (FoxA) and
GATA-4. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9:279-89.

61.	 Wang Y, Waters J, Leung ML, Unruh A, Roh W, Shi X,
Chen K, Scheet P, Vattathil S, Liang H, Multani A, Zhang
H, Zhao R, et al. Clonal evolution in breast cancer revealed
by single nucleus genome sequencing. Nature. 2014 Aug
14;512:155-60.

50.	 Hurtado A, Holmes KA, Ross-Innes CS, Schmidt D,
Carroll JS. FOXA1 is a key determinant of estrogen
receptor function and endocrine response. Nat Genet. 2011
Jan;43:27-33.

62.	 Osborne CK, Schiff R. Mechanisms of endocrine resistance
in breast cancer. Annu Rev Med. 2011;62:233-47.
63.	 Polychronis A, Sinnett HD, Hadjiminas D, Singhal H,
Mansi JL, Shivapatham D, Shousha S, Jiang J, Peston D,
Barrett N, Vigushin D, Morrison K, Beresford E, et al.
Preoperative gefitinib versus gefitinib and anastrozole in
postmenopausal patients with oestrogen-receptor positive
and epidermal-growth-factor-receptor-positive primary
breast cancer: a double-blind placebo-controlled phase II
randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2005 Jun;6:383-91.

51.	 Laganière J, Deblois G, Lefebvre C, Bataille AR, Robert F,
Giguère V. From the Cover: Location analysis of estrogen
receptor alpha target promoters reveals that FOXA1 defines
a domain of the estrogen response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2005 Aug 16;102:11651-6.
52.	 Lupien M, Eeckhoute J, Meyer CA, Wang Q, Zhang Y,
Li W, Carroll JS, Liu XS, Brown M. FoxA1 translates
epigenetic signatures into enhancer-driven lineage-specific
transcription. Cell. 2008 Mar 21;132:958-70.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

64.	 Osborne CK, Neven P, Dirix LY, Mackey JR, Robert
J, Underhill C, Schiff R, Gutierrez C, Migliaccio I,

33917

Oncotarget

Anagnostou VK, Rimm DL, Magill P, Sellers M. Gefitinib
or placebo in combination with tamoxifen in patients
with hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer:
a randomized phase II study. Clin Cancer Res Off J Am
Assoc Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 1;17:1147-59.
65.	 Cristofanilli M, Valero V, Mangalik A, Royce M,
Rabinowitz I, Arena FP, Kroener JF, Curcio E, Watkins
C, Bacus S, Cora EM, Anderson E, Magill PJ. Phase II,
randomized trial to compare anastrozole combined with
gefitinib or placebo in postmenopausal women with
hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer.
Clin Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res. 2010 Mar
15;16:1904-14.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33918

Oncotarget

